
      
         
            
            
            A TRIAL OF THE ROMISH CLERGIES TITLE TO THE CHVRCH: By way of anſwer to a Popiſh Pamphlet written by one A. D. and entituled A Treatiſe of Faith, wherein is briefly and plainly ſhewed a direct way, by which euery man may reſolue and ſettle his mind in all doubts, queſtions and controuerſies, concerning matters of Faith.
            
            By ANTONIE WOTTON.
            In the end you haue three Tables: one of the texts of Scripture expounded or alledged in this booke: another of the Teſtimonies of ancient and later Writers, with a Chronologie of the times in which they liued: a third of the chiefe matters contained in the Treatiſe and Anſwer.
            
               A. D.
               
                  Eſai. 30. 
                  Haec eſt via, ambulate in ea.
This is the way, walke in it.
            
            
               A. W.
               
                  2. Tim. 3. 15. 
                  The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wiſe to ſaluation.
               
            
            
               LONDON▪
                Printed for Elizabeth Burby Widow, and are to be ſold at the ſigne of the Swan in Pauls Churchyard, 1608.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               IT ſtandeth not either with my occaſions or my liking, to make a long preface to that diſcourſe, which of it ſelfe ſeemeth to me ouerlong. Onely giue me leaue to informe the vnlearned of ſome few things, which may further him in the vnderſtanding of it. The manner of my anſwer is ſuch, as I haue vſed in my former writings. Firſt I ſet downe the Papiſts Treatiſe word forword: then I draw it into a right forme of reaſoning, that the truth may more euidently appeare: Laſtly, I frame as direct and plaine an anſwer to it, as conueniently I can with ſhortneſſe. If thou deſire fully to conceiue the whole courſe of this kind of anſwering, I muſt intreate thee to haue recourſe to the Preface, which I ſet before my anſwer to the 12 Articles; where the matter is deliuered largely and plainly enough. For the vnderſtanding of this preſent anſwer, it may ſuffice thee to know what is the meaning of certaine words of Art, as we call them, which I am inforced to vſe very often. Firſt then, a Syllogiſme is a certaine forme of reaſoning, which conſiſteth of three ſentences, whereof the ſecond is drawne out of the firſt, and the third ariſeth as a concluſion

from them both. The firſt of theſe three, is called the Propoſition or Maior: the ſecond the Aſſumption or Minor; both of them ioyntly together are named the Antecedent: the third is termed the Conſequent or Concluſion. Therefore if I denie the Antecedent of a Syllogiſme, I meane to ſignifie that both the Propoſition and the Aſſumption are falſe: ſo must you conceiue ſeuerally, that which ſoeuer of the three ſentences I deny, that I take to be falſe. The conſequence is the dependance of one vpon another: ſo that when I ſay, I deny the Conſequence, my meaning is, that the latter part doth not follow vpon the former: for example, pag. 47. you haue this Syllogiſme:

                  
                     Antecedent. 
                     Propoſ. If faith cannot be one vnleſſe it be entire, then it muſt be entire.
                  
                     Antecedent. 
                     Aſsūp. But faith cannot be one, vnleſſe it be entire.
                  
                     Conſequent. 
                     Concl. Therefore it muſt be entire.
               
            
            My anſwer to this Syllogiſme is, I deny the conſequence of your Propoſition, that is, I ſay, it doth not follow that faith muſt be entire, if it cannot be one, vnleſſe it be entire.
            There is alſo another forme of reaſoning, called an Enthymeme, which indeed is nothing elſe but an vnperfect Syllogiſme, conſiſting of either part of the Antecedent, and of the Conſequent. To this I anſwer, by denying either the Antecedent or the Conſequence. For example, pag. 177.
               
                  Our Sauiour himſelfe citeth ſome words out of that Chapter, and expoundeth them to be fulfilled in himſelfe.
                  Therefore that Chapter is to be vnderſtood of our Sauiour Chriſt and his Church.
               
To this Enthymeme I anſwer thus: this Conſequent doth not follow vpon that Antecedent, which is all one, as if I ſhould

haue ſaid, I deny the Conſequence, that is, I ſay, that Chapter is not therefore to be vnderſtood of our Sauiour Chriſt and his Church, becauſe our Sauiour citeth ſome words out of it, and expoundeth them to be fulfilled in himſelfe. An example where the Antecedent is denied, though the Enthymeme be not plainly ſet downe, you haue pag. 327.

                  The Pope is Peters ſucceſſor:
                  Therefore he cannot erre.
               
Here I deny the Antecedent, that is, I ſay it is falſe, that the Pope is Peters ſucceſſor. And this may ſerue for ſufficient inſtruction to the vnlearned, that they may be able to vnderſtand and iudge both of the reaſons and the anſwers to them. It remaineth that I cōmend thee Chriſtian Reader, whoſoeuer thou art, that vnfainedly deſireſt the aduancing of Gods glorie by thine owne ſaluation, to the gracious direction of the holy Spirit, that he may teach thee to vnderſtand and beleeue to the praiſe of his name, and thy preſent and euerlasting comfort, through Ieſus Chriſt our onely Lord and Sauiour. Amen.
            
               From my houſe on the Tower hill. Ianuary 20. 1607.
                  
               
               Thine aſſured in the Lord Ieſus,
Antony Wotton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  A TREATISE OF FAITH, WHEREIN IS BRIEFLY AND PLAINLY SHEWED, A DIRECT WAY, by which euery man may reſolue, & ſettle his mind, in all doubts, queſtions, or controuerſies, concerning matters of Faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     THis Title is like the Apothecaries boxes & pots; which promiſe goodly matters by the inſcriptions, but within haue either nothing, or ſome ordinarie drugs. A treatiſe of faith, ſhewing a direct way, by which euery man may reſolue, and ſettle his mind, in all doubts, queſtions, or controuerſies, concerning matters of faith: makes ſhew of inſtructing him, that ſhall reade it, what faith is, what kinds of faith there are; and (aboue all) what a iuſtifying faith is; how to be attained vnto; how vſed, to the obtaining of euerlaſting life. Theſe principally, and many more like theſe are required in a Treatiſe of faith; of neuer a one whereof there is any one Chapter, or peece of a Chapter, in this whole Diſcourſe.
                  Neither hath he done that litle he hath done, either briefly; as the heaping vp of vnneceſſarie teſtimonies, in matters not doubtfull, in the verie firſt Chapter, euidently proues; or plainly; becauſe, though in his Preface he ſets down what he meanes to proue, yet it is verie hard for a man to apply his ſeuerall Chapters to the generall matter propounded by him, as the handling of them will ſhew.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     A Table or briefe ſummary of the whole treatiſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Chap. 1. 
                        That faith is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 2. 
                        That this faith is but one.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 3. 
                        That this one faith muſt be infallible.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 4. 
                        That this one infallible faith muſt be entire.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 5. 
                        That Almighty God hath prouided ſome ſufficient meanes
                        
                        whereby all ſorts of men, may at all times, learne this one infallible, and entire faith.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 6. 
                        What conditions or properties are requiſite, in this rule or meanes, prouided by Almighty God.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 7. 
                        That Scripture alone, cannot be this rule or meanes.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 8. 
                        That no naturall wit of man, or humane learning, either by interpreting Scripture or otherwiſe, can be this rule of faith.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 9. 
                        That priuate ſpirit cannot be this rule.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 10. 
                        That the doctrine or teaching of the true Church of Chriſt, is the rule or meanes, wherby all men muſt learne the true faith.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 11. 
                        That this true Church of Chriſt, of which we muſt learne the true faith, is alwayes to continue, without interruption, vntill the worlds end.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 12. 
                        That this ſame Church muſt alwayes be viſible.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 13. 
                        How we ſhould diſcerne or know, which company of men is this true viſible Church, of which we muſt learne true faith.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 14. 
                        That thoſe Notes or markes which heretikes aſſigne: to wit, true doctrine of faith, and right vſe of Sacraments, be not ſufficient.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 15. 
                        That theſe foure, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apoſtolica, One, Holy, Catholique, Apoſtolique, be good markes, whereby men may diſcerne, which is the true Church.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 16. 
                        That theſe foure markes, agree onely to the Romane Church. That is to ſay, to that company of men, which agreeth in profeſſion of faith, with the Church of Rome.
                        
                           
                              §. 1. 
                              That the Romane Church onely is One.
                           
                              §. 2. 
                              That the Romane Church onely is Holy.
                           
                              §. 3. 
                              That the Romane Church is onely Catholique.
                           
                              §. 4. 
                              That the Romane Church is onely Apoſtolique.
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 17. 
                        The concluſion of the whole diſcourſe: viz. That the Romane Church is the onely true Church of Chriſt, of which, all men muſt learne, the one, infallible, entire faith, which is neceſſary to ſaluation. And that the Proteſtants Congregations cannot be this true Church.
                     
                  
                  
                     
THE PREFACE.
                  
                     BEing moued by ſome friends, to conferre with one of indifferent good iudgement, and of no ill diſpoſition of nature; though verie earneſt in thaet religion which he did profeſſe: I was deſirous to do my beſt endeuors, to let him plainely ſee, that the Catholique Romane faith was the onely right.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Being requeſted by ſome friends to maintaine the truth of Chriſtian religion profeſſed amongſt vs, againſt the antichriſtian cauils of this popiſh proctor; I thought it my beſt courſe, firſt to anſwer in generall to the whole ſubſtance of his booke; and then to examine euerie particular Chapter. In the former, I firſt conſider his drift and ſcope: then how he proues that which he intends. His drift is to ſhew, That the Catholique Romane faith is the onely right: wherein he craftily begs that which is in queſtion; That the Romane faith is the Catholique faith; & which himſelfe propounds, as the ſecond thing to be proued by him: That thoſe onely which profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Catholique Church. Neither can it be auouched by the authority of anie ancient writer, or by any good reaſon, that it is lawfull or fit to ioyne the terme Catholique (as Papiſts take it) to any particular Church whatſoeuer. There was great ſtrife about the Catholike Church vpon earth in Auſtins time, which the Donatiſts 
                        Auguſt. ad Bonif. Epiſt. 50. ad Honor. Ep. 161. de Agone Chriſtian. c. 29. would haue confined to Affrica: but the true Chriſtians freed it from that bondage, and bounded it with no other limits then the compaſſe of the whole world. Let the Papiſts ſhew, if they can, that in this whole cōtrouerſie, the Catholique Church was euer reſtrained or coupled to anie one Citie, Dioces, Prouince, or Nation, as it is now by them to Rome. If they cannot, let them acknowledge, and renounce this their noueltie.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     For which purpoſe, I did chuſe to let paſſe diſputes about particular points, and in generall to ſhew; Firſt, that it is neceſſary to admit an infallible authoritie in the true Cathòlique Church: by reaſon whereof, euery one is to learne of it onely, which is the true faith of Chriſt. Secondly, that thoſe onely which profeſſe the Románe faith, are the true Catholique Church. The which hauing proued, I did conſequently conclude; that the faith and beliefe which the authority of the Romane Church doth cōmend vnto vs, ought, without doubt,
                     
                     to be holden for the true faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Indeed the beſt, and onely way to auow the doctrine of the Romiſh Church, is to leade men hoodwinckt in ignorance of the particular points it holds, many whereof are ſo palpably falſe, that he that knowes them, will eaſily be perſwaded to abhorre them. But let vs ſee what you ſhew in generall.
                  Thus you diſpute: The generall ſyllogiſme.
                     
                        The faith, which the authoritie of the true Catholique Church commends vnto vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
                        But the faith, which the authoritie of the Church of Rome commends vnto vs, is the faith which the authoritie of the true Catholique Church commends vnto vs.
                        Therfore the faith, which the authoritie of the Church of Rome commends vnto vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
                     
The concluſion of this ſyllogiſme is ſet downe by you in plaine words, there; The which hauing proued, I did conſequently cōclude, that the faith, &c. The propoſition, or major is not expreſt; no more is the aſſumption or minor; but inſtead of them you haue deliuered the proofes of them, thus to be concluded. Firſt for the propoſition; at thoſe words: That it is neceſſary to admit an infallible, &c. 
                     Proofe of the propoſition.
                     
                        If it be neceſſary to admit an infallible authoritie in the true Catholique Church, by reaſon whereof euery one is to learne of it onely, which is the true faith of Chriſt: then the faith, which the authoritie of the true Catholique Church commends vnto vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
                        But it is neceſſarie to admit ſuch an authoritie in the true Catholike Church.
                        Therefore the faith, which the authoritie of the true Catholike Church commends vnto vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
                     
Onely the aſſumption of this ſyllogiſme is propounded, the reſt omitted. The proofe of your principall aſſumption is at thoſe words: That thoſe only which profeſſe the Romane, &c. And (as in

the former ſyllogiſme) the aſſumption onely is expreſt, the reſt vnderſtood. Thus: Proofe of the Aſſumption.
                     
                        If thoſe onely which profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Catholike Church, then the faith which the authoritie of the Church of Rome commends vnto vs, is the faith which the authoritie of the true Catholike Church commends vnto vs.
                        But thoſe onely which profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Catholique Church.
                        Therefore the faith which the authoritie of the Church of Rome commends vnto vs, is the faith, which the authoritie of the true Catholique Church commends vnto vs.
                     
We ſee now what his drift is; how he proues that he intends: and by what reaſon he confirmes his proofe. It remaines that we conſider in general, to what part of his proofe, or confirmation thereof, euery Chapter in his Diſcourſe appertaineth.
                  In the 4. firſt Chapters he layeth certaine grounds concerning faith: in the 13. following he diſputeth the matter propounded.
                  Firſt he ſhewes the neceſſitie of faith, Chap. 1. then he deliuereth three properties required to true faith. That it is one, Ch. 2. That it is infallible, Chap. 3. That it is entire, Chap. 4. In his diſpute, the twelue former Chapters, from the beginning of the fifth to the end of the ſixteenth, containe the antecedent, or firſt part of his reaſon, and the proofes thereof. The ſeuenteenth addeth and enforceth the maine concluſion.
                  The aſſumption of the ſecond ſyllogiſme: That it is neceſſary to admit, &c. is handled from the fourth Chapter to the tenth.
                  The propoſition of the firſt ſyllogiſme: That the faith which the authoritie of the true Catholique Church commendeth to vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith: is proued by another reaſon, from the ninth Chapter to the thirteenth.
                  The aſſumption of the third ſyllogiſme: That thoſe onely which profeſſe the Romane faith; are the true Catholique Church: is debated from the twelfth Chapter to the ſeuenteenth.
                  This is the generall frame of the whole Treatiſe, as farre as I am able to conceiue of it. Now let vs examine the truth therof. Wherein that I may proceed the more orderly and plainely, I wil firſt ſpeake a word or 2. of ſome matters that ſeeme fit to be

vnderſtood, ere I anſwer particularly to the ſeueral propoſitiōs.
                  What the diuerſe ſignifications of this word faith are, and how many ſorts of faith there be, I will inquire (as farre as it is needfull for this Treatiſe) in my anſwer to the firſt Chapter: onely we are now to know, that by faith and beliefe, this Papiſt vnderſtands the matter or doctrine which is to be beleeued. This appeares in the reſt of this Preface, and namely at theſe words: Fourthly becauſe theſe few plaine points, &c, as alſo euery where in his Treatiſe; though ſometimes (as I will ſhew in due place) he take it otherwiſe. The like I ſay of the word Church: which being diuerſly taken in Scripture, is here to be reſtrained to a certaine cōpany of men vpon earth, as this Author himſelf ſhewes in this Preface, at the place aforenamed.
                  Now then to anſwer directly to his principall ſyllogiſme; I deny the whole antecedent therof. Becauſe it takes ſome things To the principall ſyllogiſme. for a knowne truth, which are either falſe, or, at leaſt, full of doubt. As for example, that the true Catholique Church is a company of men vpon earth: whereas who knowes not, that the ſaints, that haue bene, are, and ſhalbe in all ages, are members of the true Catholique Church, which conſiſts of them all ioyntly? That all the ſeuerall congregations, which hold the true doctrine of the Goſpell, are one and the ſame Church. A doctrine (in his meaning) without anie warrant of Scripture, as it ſhall be ſhewed hereafter. That there is authoritie in a certaine company of men vpō earth, to require, that whatſoeuer they deliuer, be held for an vndoubted truth, vnder paine of damnation to all that wil not ſo beleeue them: whereas God vſeth not the authoritie of men, but their miniſterie, to the begetting of faith in them that ſhall be ſaued.
                  In particular I denie the propoſition; becauſe all the Churches To the propoſition. in the world may erre, either in ſome one point not fundamentall; or ſome in one, ſome in another. And therefore ſome things may be propounded by the true Church of Chriſt, which notwithſtanding are not, vpon any authoritie of theirs, to be held for true.
                  To the proofe of the propoſition ſet downe in the ſecond ſyllogiſme I anſwer, by denying the aſſumption: That it is neceſſary 
                     To the proof of the propoſition. 
                     to admit ſuch authoritie in the Church. The reaſons of my

deniall are: 1: That God hath giuen no ſuch authoritie to anie companie of men, ſince the Apoſtles, or beſides them; who had it ſeuerally, euery one in his owne perſon. 2. That there is no neceſſitie of anie ſuch authoritie, for the ſaluation of the elect, or damnation of the reprobate. 3. That the Scriptures are left vnto vs for an abſolute rule, whereby all things that are to be beleeued muſt be tried.
                  I denie alſo the aſſumption of the firſt principall ſyllogiſme; To the Aſſumption, and the proofe thereof. and to the proofe of it, contained in the third ſyllogiſme, I ſay further, that they which profeſſe the doctrine that the Church of Rome now teacheth in many points, are members of the Church of Antichriſt, vnder the Pope the head thereof. But if, as you ſay, Thoſe that profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Catholique Church, how ignorantly and abſurdly do your Monkes 
                        In fidei profeſſ. anno 1585. art. 60. of Bourdeaux write, in their ſolemne profeſſion of religion; where they ſay, that the holy, viſible, catholique, and Apostolike Church diſperſed ouer the whole world, hath communion in faith & manners with the Church of Rome? If the Catholique Church haue communion with the Church of Rome, ſure the Catholique Church and the Church of Rome are not all one.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     
                        Ʋpon which points, when he had heard my diſcourſe, he deſired me, for his better remembrance, to ſet downe in writing, what I had ſaid. The which I had firſt thought to haue done briefly, and to haue imparted it onely to him: but by ſome other friends it was wiſhed, that I ſhould handle the matter more at large; they intending (as it ſeemed) that it might not only do good to him, but to others alſo, that ſhould haue need of it, as well as he. Of which ſort of men ſtanding in this need, as I could not (conſidering their miſerable caſe) but take great pitie: ſo I was eaſily moued, eſpecially at my friends requeſt, to be willing to do my endeuour, which might be for their reliefe and ſuccour: and to take any courſe which might turne to their helpe and profite.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The title of your booke profeſſeth breuitie; here you ſay, that you had thought to ſet downe your diſcourſe briefly, but haue handled the matter more at large. Either your Title or your Preface is to blame. Your Title is iuſtified afterward, where you ſay, that your courſe of writing is very briefe and compendious.
                  
                  
                     
Papiſts talke of pitie, who, without mercie or conſcience wold haue murdred ſo many thouſāds by treaſon, & (as they thought) haue ſent them almoſt quicke to hell, ſoules and bodies together? It is not anie pitie of vs, but your ſlauery to the Pope, and proud conceit of (I know not what) merite, with hope of making your part ſtrong for rebellion or maſſacre, that drawe from you theſe goodly treatiſes.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Now of all other courſes, which haue bene, and might be vndertaken; that, which in my ſpeech I did chuſe as moſt expedient for him with whom I did conferre, ſeemed beſt alſo for me to proſequute in this my writing, for the benefite of him and others, and this for foure reaſons.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  I know not what he was, with whom (as you ſay) you did conferre, but I am ſure his iudgement was (at the moſt) but indifferent good, if ſuch a courſe as begs the queſtion, would be any way liked of him. You vndertake to ſhew, That it is neceſſary to admit an infallible authority in the true Catholique Church: which you expound to be, A companie of men vpon earth. VVhat Proteſtant is there of any knowledge, but vnderſtands, that by Catholique Church we meane ordinarily, not any companie in this world, but the whole ſocietie of the faithful, from time to time? But theſe gay ſhewes of Catholike Church, Ʋniuerſalitie, antiquitie, vnitie, ſucceſſion, and ſuch like, are fit to deceiue the ignorant; for which purpoſe your diſcourſes are written, & with whō they preuaile, by the iuſt iudgement of God, who ſends them 
                     2. Theſ. 2. 9. 10 
                     ſtrong deluſions, that they may beleeue lyes, becauſe they haue not embraced the loue of the truth, that they might be ſaued.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Firſt, becauſe it is very briefe, and compendious; and conſequently ſuch, as euery one might haue leyſure, and ſhould not be much weary to reade it.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  You deale in your corrupt writings, as leud men do in ſlanderous reports: who ſpeake anie thing, at aduenture, though neuer ſo vntrue, or vnlikely. It is hard but ſome men will either beleeue, or make doubt of it, at the leaſt. So all men reade your writings, you care not. Though they, that are of knowledge, and iudgement, diſcerne your falſhood: yet it is twentie to one, but ſome ignorant fellow will light on them, that may be ſeduced.

And this practiſe you follow the rather, becauſe you are, for the moſt part, out of feare of being ſhamed by confutation; for that you are vnknowne, and know well inough, that our anſwers to you, are commonly, and many times muſt be ſo large, that one amongſt manie can hardly find leiſure to reade them. Whereas if the authors of your treatiſes were knowne amongſt vs, and our anſwers applied ſhortly, and plainely to the verie point of the argument, that being diſrobed of the idle ornaments you cloath it withall, and laid naked to the view of true reaſon, we ſhould haue as few of your diſcourſes, as we haue now of your replies, to our refutations of your treatiſes; which are ſo few, that, in many yeares, it is rare to haue anie ſecond charge by you; vnleſſe it be in ſuch a fight, as requires no more but a brauado, without coming to handie blowes.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  
                     Secondly, becauſe, it, ſtanding onely vpon few, but moſt certaine concluſions, and grounds; is free from many cauils of the captious, which more ample diſcourſes are ſubiect vnto.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  To ſpeake truly, and properly, there is but one concluſion in your whole Treatiſe, as I haue ſhewed out of this your Preface. Againſt which we alſo oppoſe one as briefe, and more certaine then yours. Your concluſion is, That the faith, and beliefe, which the authority of the Romane Church doth commend vnto vs, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith. Ours, That the faith which the Scripture teacheth vs, is the onely true faith. If you ſpeake of the ſeuerall cōcluſions belonging to the proofe of the generall, there are (at the leaſt) as many as there are Chapters. But if you meane the three grounds, which you ſignifie before, and repeate afterwards, they are ſo farre from being certaine, that there is neuer a one of them true, as you vnderſtand them.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 8.
                  
                     Thirdly, becauſe, the matter handled in it, is not very high nor hard, but common, eaſie, and plaine: and ſuch, as may be vnderſtood of any, who, hauing but a reaſonable wit, or vnderſtanding, wil carefully read it (as the importance of the matter requireth) with iudgement, deliberation, and (which is chiefe) with prayer to God, and a reſolute good will to follow that, which he ſhall find to be right.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The matter is as hard, by your handling of it, as ſophiſtrie 

can well make it; as high, as the deepe foundation of religion. Yet I denie not, but it may be vnderſtood by a man of ſuch parts, and paines, as you require: and adde farther, that the like may be auowed of the true grounds of religion, as they are contained in the Scripture: to the reading, and meditation whereof the Lord himſelf hath promiſed ſuch a bleſſing, as your treatiſes, Pſal. 1. 1. 2. Ioan. 5. 39. if they were neuer ſo true, could not looke for. Is not the fountaine better then the chanell?
               
               
                  A. D. §. 9.
                  
                     Fourthly, becauſe, theſe fewe plaine points, which are here ſet downe, include all other: and whoſoeuer ſhall, by the helpe of Gods grace, and the force of theſe, or other reaſons, yeeld aſſent to the points proued in this diſcourſe: muſt by conſequence, without further diſputing or difficultie, yeeld to all particular points, which the aforeſaid Church commendeth for points of faith, and will be moued to ſettle himſelfe in the ſtedfaſt beliefe of all. For if he once admit, that there is a Church, or company of men, on earth, infallibly taught by the holy Ghoſt, what is the true faith in all points: and that this Church is, by Gods appointment, to teach all men in all matters of faith, which is the infallible truth: and further, that this Church, which is thus taught, and muſt teach vs, is no other but that viſible company, which profeſſeth the Romane faith: then he ſhall not need to ſtraine his wits in ſtudying, or to waſt words in wrangling, about particular points of controuerſies, or to vſe any ſuch troubleſome and vncertaine meanes to find out the truth: but may eaſily, and moſt certainly be inſtructed in all, by onely enquiring and finding out (which all ſorts of men may eaſily do) what is generally holdē by the Church, for truth, in all particular points, whereof they doubt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  If theſe few points be ſo conuenient, becauſe in thē all other are included; why ſhould not our doctrine of the Scripture be as conuenient, by the ſame reaſon? Let vs compare our aſſertions together. The firſt of yours is, That a man muſt admit, that there is a company of men on earth, infallibly taught by the holy Ghoſt, what is the true faith, in all points. The firſt of ours, That a man muſt beleeue, that there is a written word of God, wherein the holy Ghoſt hath certainely taught, whatſoeuer is needfull to be knowne to ſaluation. Your ſecond is: That this company of men is, by Gods appointment to teach all men, in all matters of faith, which is the infallible
                     
                     truth. Our ſecond: That this written word of God is appointed by him to teach all men in all matters of faith, what is true, what falſe. Your third: That this company of men is no other, but the viſible company, which profeſſeth the Romane faith. Our third: That this written word is no other, but the bookes of the old and new Teſtament. The proofe of your poſitions, and the exceptions, you take againſt ours, ſhalbe handled (if it pleaſe God) in their due places; in the meane time, if any mā be troubled with thoſe ordinarie doubts, which you haue buzzed into the common peoples eares, concerning the vncertainty and hardneſſe of the Scriptures, let me intreat him to ſtay himſelfe a while vpon theſe conſiderations. Firſt that the bookes of the old and new Teſtament acknowledged by vs, are alſo confeſſed by you to be the verie word of God; in the penning whereof 
                     
                        Bellar. de Concil. lib. 2. cap. 12. §. Dicuntur.
                      
                     the penners were ſo directed by the holy Ghoſt, that they could not erre. Therefore whatſoeuer the meanes be, whereby we come to aſſurance, that theſe bookes are the word of God, let it ſuffice all men, that both we, and you agree, they are ſo. But I pray tell me: Are the determinations of the Church any more certaine? What ground haue I, but the word of ſome men, that the Church hath ſo determined? It is not a matter ſo agreed vpon betwixt vs, as the bookes of Scripture are. Out of queſtion the ods is on our ſide. It is doubtfull, whether you Romaniſtes are the Church or no: it is out of doubt, theſe bookes are the infallible word of God. But you will ſay, the Scriptures are hard to be vnderſtood; as well becauſe they are written in Hebrew, and Greeke, as alſo for the kind of writing. Are not all the Decrees of your Councels, and determinations of your Popes Conſiſtorie, written either in Greeke, or Latin, or in the Italian language; in none of which one man among ten thouſand hath any skill? And is there not as great reaſon to thinke, the Scriptures are rightly tranſlated, as your Decrees, Decretals, and Determinations? Eſpecially when as we (commonly) alledge the interpretations of the ancient Fathers, and learned Papiſts for the auowing of our tranſlations. But the Scriptures are hard to be vnderſtood, though a man be skilfull in the tongues. And are the Decrees of your Councels ſo eaſie, that euery man may vnderſtād them, who knowes the language

they are written in? Doth not 
                        Bellar. tom. 3 de Sacram. paſſim: & vbique.
                      Bellarmine condemne, and confute our writers, Caluin, Chemnitius, and other, for not vnderſtanding the Decrees of your Councell of Trent written in Latine; which language they were as skilfull in, as himſelfe? If they be ſo eaſie, how chance 
                        Dominic. Sotus in Apol. contra Cathar. cap. 2. Biſhop Catharin and Frier Soto, that were both preſent at the Councell, and heard the debating of matters, can not agree about the doctrine of it, concerning aſſurance of ſaluation? which (as Vbi ſupra. Soto affirmes) was the longest and moſt troubleſome diſputation of all in the Councell: and therefore ſhould haue bene beſt vnderſtood, and plainlieſt deliuered. Yet is it ſo propounded by the holy fathers, the authors of it, that Vbi ſupra. Catharin ſaith boldly, 
                        Ambroſ. Catharin. tract. 1. Verba decreti aliter pleroſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            accepturos, quā fuerat mens ſancte Synodi.
                      
                     he foreſaw, that moſt men would vnderſtand the words of the Decree otherwiſe then the holy Synod meant them. Was there not great contention within theſe very few yeares, betwixt Chriſtophor. de Cap ſont, archiepiſc. Caeſarienſ
                           •
                         de neceſſat. correct. theologie ſcholast. Archbiſhop Chriſtophor. de Capite fontium and many other Diuines, about the meanes of tranſſubſtantiating the bread, though in his iudgement the Councel of Trent makes manifeſtly for him? I forbeare to ſay, that ſome points ſeeme to haue bene craftily ſet downe of purpoſe, like the oracles of Apollo, that which way ſoeuer they be taken, the Church may not ſeeme to haue erred. Neither will I adde, that 
                        Bellar. de Concil. lib. 2. c. 12. §. Quartum.
                      
                     diuerſe matters are deliuered by Councels, not as points of faith, but as probable coniectures: which yet may be, and are taken by ſome of your owne Clement. Vnic. de ſumma Trinit. & fide catholica. learned writers, as if they were reſolutely determined for certaine truth. Theſe things conſidered, I ſee no ſufficient reaſon, why it ſhould not be as fit, and ſafe to learne of the Scripture, 
                        Canus loc. com. lib. 5. q. 4. cap. 5. which is the infallible truth, as of any companie of men whatſoeuer.
                  But you labour to commend to vs this reſting on the authoritie of the Romiſh Church by ſome eſpeciall commodities, that ſhall enſue thereupon. The firſt wherof is eaſe: the 2. certaintie of knowledge. He ſhall not need (ſay you) to ſtraine his wits in ſtudying &c. If eaſe were not too much delighted in by men of your profeſſion, there would not be ſuch ſwarms of idle Monks, Fryers, Nuns, nonreſident Biſhops and Prieſts amongſt you. But true Chriſtians vnderſtand, that it was not Gods purpoſe to prouide ſo much for their eaſe, by giuing them leaue to beleeue

at aduenture, hand ouer head, whatſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe men to enioyne thē; but that it is his good pleaſure, that 
                        Pſal. 1. 2. 
                           •
                         119. per tot.
                      all men ſhould carefully and painfully exerciſe themſelues, night and day, in reading and meditating of the Scriptures. He is too nice and dainty a profeſſor of religion, that is loth to ſtraine his wits to the vttermoſt, in the ſtudy of any thing reuealed by God in Scripture. What ſhall I ſay of him, that cals conference and diſputation about, euen the greateſt points of faith and iuſtification, waſting of words in wrangling: 
                     
                        Ouid. Metamor. lib. 13. 
                     Nec ſe magnanimo maledicere ſentit Achilli? It is ſtrange you ſhould not haue the wit to perceiue, that, by this cenſure, you condemne Lombard, Thomas, and all your ſchoole men: yea the Pope, and generall councels, 
                        Bellar de pontif. Rom. lib. 4. cap. 7. ad obiect. 2. who are bound to vſe ſuch meanes, for the finding out of the truth: and (as 
                        Sotus. Apol. contra. Cathar. cap. 2. 
                     Sotus ſaith) did vſe them in a long and troubleſome diſputation, yet forſooth neither the one, nor the other, at 
                        Cap. 16. ſect 1. poſt. med.
                      leaſt both together cannot erre. No man then ought to refuſe ſtudy, or diſputation of controuerſies in diuinitie, becauſe they are troubleſome. Therefore, to mend the matter, you adde that they are alſo vncertaine: what can be certain, but only reuelation, if the true vſe of reaſon can breed nothing but vncertainty? How idly and vainly did your ſchoolemen imploy themſelues: if all their ſtudy and labour muſt end in vncertainty? What vſe is there of Councels for finding out of the truth, ſince the helpe to be had of them, is debating of matters by reaſoning? Do we not find in daily experience, that as flint and ſteele ſtricken together bring forth fire: ſo truth is, as it were, beaten out by diſputation? It is reported you make great ſhewes of deſiring a diſputation. I maruaile to what end: If, when all comes to all, your auditors ſhall ſtill remaine vncertaine what is true. Shall I go yet farther? You tell vs the Church cannot erre; we beleeue you not: you alledge ſome places of Scripture to proue it to vs: we ſay they proue no ſuch matter: what courſe will you take? It is in vaine to diſpute of it: that is, (as you ſay) to waſt words in wrangling about it. 
                     See 12. Art. part. 1. art. 5. 
                     For that is but an vncertaine meanes to findout the truth. Haue you not brought matters to a good paſſe, thinke you, when you profeſſe that there is no meanes to diſcern certainlie whether the Church can erre or no, but onely to take

her own word for it? Yea no meanes left to know that ſhe is the Church. For if you will againe fly to the Scriptures; you run into the former difficulties, and end as before in vncertainty. Who would haue to do with ſuch vnreaſonable men?
                  But that you may not ſeeme to leaue vs in vncertainty; you tel vs, that we may moſt certainly be inſtructed in all particular points of controuerſies, by onely enquiring and finding out what is holden generally by the Church for truth, &c. You ſend vs to the faith of the Church, and namely of the Church of Rome. Which (ſay we) is onely ſo farre forth to be yeelded vnto, as it is agreeable to the Scriptures. Neither do we ſay ſo onely, but 
                        Ambroſ. in Lucam. lib. 6. cap. 9. 
                     Ambroſe, long before our time, hath ſaid the like. We are commanded (ſaith Ambroſe) to enquire after the faith of the Church, and that 
                     In primis quaerenda. 
                     eſpecially: in which Church if Chriſt be a dweller, 
                     Haud dubiè legenda. 
                     it is doubtleſſe to be made choiſe of. But if the people be vnfaithful, if an heretical teacher deforme the dwelling; the communion of heretickes is to be auoided, the congregation muſt be ſhunned. And a little after: If there be any Church that refuſeth the faith, and 
                     Poſſideat. 
                     holds not the foundation of the Apoſtles preaching, it is to be left, leſt it taint vs with ſome ſpot of 
                     Perfidiae. 
                     vnbeliefe, or vnfaithfulneſſe. Neither will it ſerue the turne; that you referre vs to that which is generally holden by the Church: for both the generall faith depends vpon the particular beliefe of the Church, or Pope of Rome; and is not to be taken for truth, becauſe it is generally receiued, but becauſe it agrees with the Romane faith; as we learned before of your 
                        Profeſſ fidei art. 60. Monkes of Bourdeaux, who make the Catholique Church to haue communion with the Church of Rome, as the fountaine of truth; and of greater authoritie, in their iudgement, then the Catholicke Church. But let vs admit that you deſire, of beleeuing whatſoeuer is generally holden by the Church: I am half afraid, this conceit, be it neuer ſo ſtrong, wil not procure the quietnes you promiſe vs. The cauſes of my feare are theſe two. Firſt, I may doubt of ſuch a point, as is not yet determined by the Church; for example, I make queſtion of the Popes authority aboue Councels, or theirs aboue him. How ſhall I moſt certainly be inſtructed in the truth of this queſtion? Enquire (ſay you) and find what is generally holden by the Church. What if the

Doctors of your Church cannot agree about this point? That they cannot, it appeares by your owne doubting; Chap. 16. Sect. 1. where you make it queſtionable, whether the Pope alone or the Pope with a general Councell be free from error. And 
                        Bellar. de Concil. autor. lib. 2. c. 13. 14. 15 16. 17. Bellarmine is faine to take a great deale of paines, in anſwering the arguments of diuers Papiſts, 
                        Nicol. Cuſan. Concor. cathol. li 2. cap. 4. 12. Panorm. in c. ſignificaſti. extra. de electio.
                      ſome of them equall to himſelfe for learning, iudgement, and authoritie, who make the Pope ſubiect to generall Councels. But of this in due place. Say it were generally agreed on: Could I thereby be moſt certainly inſtructed what is truth in this point? May not all ſaue the Pope be deceiued? and perhaps he to; without the aduice and aſſent of a general Councell: at leaſt, if he haue not in his conſiſtory, vpon good deliberation, 
                        Abulenſ. in Math. 18. q. 108 & alij apud Bellar. vbi ſupra. Chriſtop. de Capite fontium de neceſsar. correct theol. ſchol. fol. 53. b.
                      reſolued of the matter? What ſhall it auaile me then to know, that (generally) it is thought the Pope is aboue any Councell? Suppoſing this point were generally held to be true, though indeed, as I ſaid before, it is denyed both by priuate men & by 2. councels; that of 
                        Concil. Baſil. ſeſſ 2. &
                      Baſil, & the other of 
                        Concil. Constant. ſeſſ. 4. Conſtance which depoſed two Popes, Iohn the three and twentieth and Benedict the thirteenth. And 
                        Bellar. de Concil. autor. l. 2. ca. 13. §. Deinde.
                      Bellarmine ſaith, that to this day it remaines in queſtion, euen among the Catholikes. Well, put caſe all men thought, as Bellarmine, and all ſuch Popiſh paraſites would haue it, what were I the nearer, as long as there can be no certainty of truth, (in your opinion) where nothing is iudicially determined by a Pope, & Coūcell? The ſecond reſō of my doubt is, that I know not how to find out, either eaſily, as you ſay euery man may, or certainly, though with ſome paines, what is generally holdē by the Church for truth, in al particular points, wherof I doubt. Shall I looke into the confeſſions of ſeuerall Churches? Where are they to be found? Shall I trauail into euery particular country, to learne what they hold of this, or that poynt? What aſſurance can I get hereby, but from ſome ſpeciall men? And it is a venture, but they will not all agree in euery point. What remaines? Forſooth that which is all in all; I muſt beleeue, Watſō, or Clarke, or Blackwel the archprieſt, or if al theſe will not content me, Gerrard, Teſmond, Hall, or, without all doubting, Garnet the ſuperior of the Ieſuites, who queſtionleſſe is as void of error, as the Pope himſelfe. Haue I not,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
trow you, a ſound foundation, to build my faith vpon, when I haue the word of theſe equiuocating traitours, Prieſts and Ieſuits? And yet this is the moſt I can haue in this caſe, if I be a man vnlearned, eſpecially vnable to reade. Is it poſſible, any man ſhould be ſo ſenſleſſe as to hazzard his euerlaſting ſaluation, vpon ſuch an vncertainty, to beleeue he knowes not what, becauſe a Prieſt, or a Ieſuit tels him, that the Church generally doth ſo beleeue? But what if it fall out, as it may do, that the Prieſts perſwade him the Church holds one thing; and the Ieſuites affirme it maintaines the contrary; how ſhall a poore ſoule either ſettle his iudgement, or quiet his conſcience? Quid ſequar, aut quem? Were it not a directer, and certainer courſe, to hold nothing for truth in religion, but that which is proued to vs by plaine teſtimonies of Scripture, or certaine conſequence of reaſon, drawne from principles euidently expreſt, or apparētly contained in the knowne word of God? The difficulties of tranſlation and interpretation ſhal be handled in their places; See 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 3. & 5. which alſo, as I ſhewed ere while, accompany al your writings of priuate men, Popes or Councels. Now then if their be many particular points of cō
                     trouerſies, whereof I may doubt, which are not reſolued of by any iudgement of the Church, nor agreed vpon by the learned of your owne ſide; if I cannot certainly know what is generally held for truth, by the Church, but as I giue credit to the report of a Prieſt, or Ieſuit, whom I know to be partiall in the matter, becauſe he is one of the Popes vaſſals; ſubiect to erre, becauſe he is a priuate man; likely enough to lye becauſe he maintaines equiuocation; what madneſſe were it for me to forbeare ſearching and ſtudying of the Scriptures, where I am ſure the truth of God is to be found, and to loſe my time, and labour in ſeeking what the Church generally holds, and that of thoſe men who perhaps vnderſtand not what is held, but as they haue bene informed by others, who may themſelues haue miſtaken the true meaning of the Church in that it holds?
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 10.
                  
                     Of which points alſo, (If they be deſirous) they may haue ſufficient authority and reaſon yeelded, by the learned of the ſame Church; though they ſhould not ſo deſire reaſon to be yeelded, that without reaſon be giuen, they would not beleeue at all, or as grounding their
                     
                     faith vpon the reaſon giuen: ſith Chriſtian beliefe ought onely to be grounded, vpon the authoritie of God, ſpeaking by the mouth of the Church, who ought to be beleeued in all matters, without giuing any reaſon.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  There is no ſufficient authoritie for a man to ground his faith vpon, but the truth of God reuealed. 
                        Hieron. ad Math. cap. 23. 
                     Whatſoeuer is taught without that authoritie, is as eaſily contēned as alleadged. Therfore 
                        Iuſtin. contra Trypho. p. 207. Iuſtine wils him, that would be ſetled in the truth, to flie to the Scriptures. And 
                        Tertullian de carne Chriſti. cap. 7. Tertullian reiects that which is brought, if it be not in the Scriptures. 
                     
                        Origen in Cantic. hom. 3. Origen ſaith, Chriſt is no where to be ſought, but in the mountaines of the law and the Prophets. Yea 
                        Hieron. in Mich. lib. 1. c. 1. Ierome makes the Scriptures the bounds of the church beyond which ſhe may not go. Are you able to ſhew this authority in all particuler points of Controuerſie, whereof a man may doubt? Are you not faine in many particulars, to deny the ſufficiency of the Scriptures, and to run a madding after traditions? What talke you then of ſhewing ſufficient authority? The beſtauthority you can alleadge for many matters, is the Popes will, who cannot erre, as you ridiculouſly imagine. And this authoritie is all the reaſon you haue in diuers points; except ſuch ſtuffe as Durandus in Ration. Diuinor. officior. paſſim. Durād brings in his Rationale diuinorum officiorum; wherof many of your own men are aſhamed.
                  I had thought your Friers vow of obedience to their ſuperiours, or, at leaſt, the 
                        Conſtitut. Ieſuit. par. 3. cap. 1. Maffae. lib. 3. cap. 7. Ieſuit. Catech. lib. 2, cap. 17. Ieſuits ſpecial vow of blind fold obedience, head bene the height of all perfection in this life: but I perceiue now, that there is a greater opinion of holineſſe in theſe vowes, then there is cauſe why. For you tye the obedience of euery Chriſtian in ſuch ſort to the authoritie of the Church, and indeed, of his particular paſtor, yea of euery Prieſt, or Ieſuite, that comes licenced by Blackwell, or ſome new Garnet, that be muſt beleeue, without enquiring any reaſō, whatſoeuer ſuch a fellow ſhall deliuer to him for truth. This is the obedience, one of your Cardinals ſpeakes of. Obedience without reaſon (ſaith 
                        Nicol. Cuſanus. excitat. lib. 6. vbi eccleſia.
                      Cuſan) is full and perfit obedience, namely when a man yeelds obedience, without requiring any reaſon; as 
                     Iumentum. 
                     a beaſt (horſe or other) obeies his maiſter. So doth your Popiſh Clergie vſe the people, as men do their Aſſes; make them beare, and do what they liſt, yea euen to

the attempting of moſt horrible and incredible treaſons againſt their Soueraigne and countrey. I will not now diſpute what agreement there is betwixt faith and reaſon; nor whether of them is the former; nor, in what caſe, a man may require reaſon; onely that no man may conceiue amiſſe of our doctrine, concerning our demanding of proofe for that we are enioyned to beleeue; he is to vnderſtand, that we aske no farther proofe, but to be perſwaded that the point deliuered to vs, is warranted by Scripture. Let it be neuer ſo much in (ſeeming) contrary to reaſon, if it be agreeable to Scripture, we hold our ſelues bound in conſcience to take it for truth, though we be no way able to anſwer ſuch reaſons, as we know are brought againſt it. Neither yet do we reſt ſatisfied, as ſoone as ſome place of Scripture is alledged in a doubtfull matter; but, here indeed we hearken after reaſon. Yet not to prooue that true, which we find affirmed in Scripture; but to make vs perceiue, that ſuch, and ſuch is the meaning of the Scripture. Whatſoeuer the Scripture ſaith, we acknowledge to be abſolutely true, ſo farre as it is deliuered for true by the holy Ghoſt. But what the ſenſe of the Scripture is, we thinke it muſt be prooued by the true vſe of reaſon, according to the certain principles of diuinitie, and ſuch helps, as obſeruation of circūſtances, vnderſtanding of the tongs, conference of like places, & logical diſcourſe, with ſuch other helps, reaſonably affoord vs. But why ſhould you find fault with demanding reaſon, or not be moſt willing & ready to ioyne it to your authority, ſince (as 
                        Nicol. Cuſan. Excitat. lib. 3. Serm. perfectus omnis eris.
                      Cuſan ſaith) faith is not abaſed by reaſon, but exalted: euen as water in a veſſell ſupports and lifts vp oyle. As for your proofe, that therfore we may not demand a reaſon, nor ſo much as enquire, whether the points that are taught vs, be ſutable to the Scripture or no, becauſe Chriſtian beliefe muſt onely be grounded vpon the authority of God ſpeaking by the mouth of the Church: we ſay that you auouch that which is not true. For Chriſtian faith muſt be grounded vpon the authoritie of God, ſpeaking by the pens of his Apoſtles, and Prophets in the Scripture; not vpon the authoritie of any company of men liuing, from time to time, in the world. The Church you dreame of, will, I doubt not, in another part of my anſwer be ſhewed to be nothing, but

a fancy, and a gay word to deceiue the ſimple; when as by it you meane no more, but your clergie, or perhaps your Bb. onely aſſembled in a Councell, or the Pope himſelfe alone, who can with no more reaſon be called the Church, then See 12. Art. part. 1. art. 5. pag. 63. the head may be tearmed the body, or the whole man, if I ſhould grant you, that he is the head, which is both Reynald. confer. with Hart. Clamierus de Oecumen. Pontif. lib. 2. arg. 1. falſe and abſurd. The Lord vſeth not the authoritie of men, to enioyne what they liſt for a matter of faith, but their miniſtery, to beget faith (by declaring what he hath reuealed in the Scripture) through euidence of truth, and power of exhortation, teſtified and made effectuall by the mightie grace of the holy Ghoſt in the hearts of them that ſhall be ſaued.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 11
                  
                     The which briefe and compendious reſolution of faith, whoſoeuer will (as euery one may ſecurely, and (as in the diſcourſe following ſhall be declared) muſt neceſſarily embrace: beſide the eaſe, he ſhall alſo reape this commoditie, that, cutting off all occaſions of needleſſe and fruitleſſe doubts, queſtions and diſputes, concerning matters of faith: wherin vnſettled minds ſpend their time and ſpirit, he ſhall haue good leiſure, and better liking, then ordinarily ſuch vnquiet mindes can haue, to employ his endeuours more fruitfully otherwayes; to wit, in building vpon the firme foundation of ſtedfaſt faith, the gold and pretious ſtones, of Gods loue, and other vertues, in practiſe whereof conſiſteth that good life, which maketh a man become the liuing temple of almightie God: the which temple, Gods ſpirit will not onely viſite, with holy inspirations and bleſſings oftentimes, in this life, but he wil alſo inhabite and dwell continually in it, both by grace, here, and by glory, in the other moſt happy, and euerlaſting life.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The ſecuritie, that ariſeth from reſting vpon the authoritie of the Church, is freeneſſe, not from danger, but frō care. This latter, I confeſſe, will eaſily be wrought by this perſwaſion in the heart of a careleſſe worldling, or a man ſuperſtitiouſly ignorant, if he can be ſenſleſly obſtinate inough, in keeping his eyes and eares from ſeeing and hearing the truth of God, in the Scripture: for to ſuch men 2. Theſſ. 2. 9. 10. 
                     God ſends ſtrong deluſions to beleeue lyes, that they may be damned which haue not receiued the loue of the truth, that they might be ſaued. But alas! what ſhall this eaſe aduantage them, but onely that they may 
                        Prou. 7. 22. go laughing to deſtruction,

as a foole doth to the ſtocks and whip? What neceſſitie can there then be, of embracing ſuch a dāgerous reſolution?
                  Beſides the eaſe, you tell vs now of another commodity, that may be reapt by embracing that compendious reſolution of faith. Which before I examine, let me here againe put you in minde, that you condemne the greateſt part of all your Schoolemens writings, as needleſſe and fruitleſſe doubts, queſtions and diſputes; and call them vnſetled minds, that ſpend their time, and ſpirits in ſuch matters. And ſurely ſuch were many of the points they handled, hauing nothing in them but vanitie and vexation of ſpirit: as may appeare (to name one for all) by their articles and queſtions vpon 
                        In 4. ſenten. diſt. 8. Lombard and 
                        In 3. Thom. q. 73. &c. Vide Chriſtop. de cap fontium vbi ſupra.
                      Thomas, about the Maſſe. But is anie man to be found ſo ſhameleſſe, as that he dare call it a needleſſe and fruitleſſe labour, 
                        Ioan. 5. 39. to ſearch the Scripture, for the finding out of the truth, in ſuch matters as are neceſſarily to be beleeued for the attaining to ſaluation? Doth the neglect of this dutie bring a man good leiſure and liking, to build himſelfe vp in the loue of God? What loue of God can there be, where there is no delight in his word? 
                        Pſal. 1. 2. & 119. 103. 127. Dauid makes it his meditation day and night: and preferres the ſweetneſſe he finds in it, and the account he makes of it, before honie and the honie combe, fine gold and all maner of riches. But what ſhould I heape vp vnneceſſarie teſtimonies, in a caſe not doubtfull? Is it poſſible they ſhould be Chriſtians, that make ſo ſmall reckoning of the teſtament of Ieſus Chriſt? Can he be ſaid truly to loue his father, that neuer cares to ſee what his fathers loue to him is; but contents himſelfe with ſo much knowledge of it, as men liſt to impart to him; yea that knowes not whether he had ſuch a father or no, but onely, as other men haue told him? We ſay not, that euery man is bound vpon hazzard of his ſaluation, to know euery point of difference betwixt you and vs, or to vnderſtand the ſenſe of euery place of Scripture; but that all true Chriſtians muſt labour for as much knowledge, as, by diligent hearing, reading and meditating of the Scirptures, they can attaine to. Neither ſhall they, by this ſtudy and endeuour, either abate their loue to God, or depriue themſelues of the ſenſe of his loue to them. Nay rather both the one and the other ſhalbe increaſed

when a man ſhall feele the work of Gods ſpirit in his heart, kindling in him a deſire to vnderſtand the myſtery of his redemption by Ieſus Chriſt, to comprehend the infiniteneſſe of the loue of God the Father, and enlightning him to conceiue that, which, by his owne skill, he neuer were able to diſcerne. But they that follow your reſolution, neuer come rightly to vnderſtant what the loue of God to them is: but if they will conſider things aduiſedly, muſt needes thinke God hath dealt hardly with them, as with ſeruants, not with ſonnes; whom he ſhuts out from the knowledge of his will, and view of his wiſdome & maieſtie, manifeſted in the writings of the old and new Teſtament; affoording them no more of that heauenly Manna, but ſuch chippings and parings, as their idle and prowd prelates will vouchſafe to caſt them. He, that finds the loue of God toward him, in opening to him the true ſenſe of the Scripture, in matters concerning his euerlaſting ſaluation, doth beare more true loue to God for it, then any Papiſt can do, that glorieth in his blind obedience to men, & maketh the end of his louing God the deſeruing of euerlaſting life, by his ignorance of the Scriptures. As for true holineſſe of life, whence doth it ariſe, but from the feeling of Gods loue to vs; whereby the ſpirit of God which dwels in vs, inflames our hearts with the affections of kind children to ſo louing a father? Can you imagine, that he, who hath at moſt, but a kind of perſwaſion, of I know not what holy inſpirations & bleſſings of Gods ſpirit, vpon ſome Prieſts or Ieſuits word, can loue God as truely, and feruently, as he, that knowes by the truth of God in the Scripture, 
                        Rom. 8. 9. Gal 4. 6. that the ſpirit of God dwels in all Gods children, 
                        Rom. 8. 16. one of whom the ſame ſpirit aſſures him he is? Your Papiſt muſt liue holily, that he may become the temple of God; a true Chriſtian knowes he cannot liue holily, but by the holy Ghoſts dwelling in him, and making him the temple of God. And can it be a queſtion, whether of theſe two loueth God more deatly? But I haue bene too long in your Preface. Now to the Treatiſe it ſelfe.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A. D.
                  A TREATISE OF FAITH, CHAP. I.
                  
                     That true faith is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  TRue faith, whether we take it for an aſſent to the truth of that which God hath reuealed, or for beleeuing in God, is abſolutely neceſſary onely for thoſe which are come to yeares of diſcretion, not for them that die in their infancie. Which I deliuer, not by way of confutation, but of explication, becauſe I am perſwaded you and I agree in this point.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Whoſoeuer hath a true deſire to pleaſe God, and an earneſt care to ſaue his owne ſoule, (the which ſhould be the chiefest deſire, and care of euery Christian man) muſt firſt reſolue, and ſettle himſelfe in a ſound beliefe of matters of faith: holding it for a moſt aſſured ground, That there is a faith, which, whoſoeuer wanteth, cannot poſſibly pleaſe God (nor conſequently be ſaued, ſith none are ſaued that do not pleaſe God.)
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Faith being ſo diuerſly taken, both in Scripture and other writings, it had bin fit for him, that profeſſeth plainneſſe, either to haue ſet downe the ſeuerall ſignifications of the word, or to haue ſhewed in what ſenſe, he himſelfe vſeth it, in this treatiſe. 
                        Bellar. de Iuſtif. lib. 1. cap. 4. §. Iam verò.
                      Bellarmine giues it foure ſignifications. 
                        Sander. de Iuſtif. lib. 2. cap. 2. pag. 174. Sanders, ſix. 
                        Andr. Vega qq. 15. q. 1. Vega nine. Yea this author himſelfe (as it ſhall appeare) taketh it not alwayes in one and the ſame ſenſe, but diuerſly, as it beſt fitteth his preſent purpoſe: eſpecially in one of theſe two ſignificatiōs, either for the habit, or quality of faith, whereby we are enabled to beleeue; or for the obiect of the ſame faith, that is, for the things that are to be beleeued. Example we haue of both in this firſt Chapter. Matters of faith, are ſuch points as we are bound to beleeue. That faith, which, whoſoeuer wanteth, cannot pleaſe God, is the qualitie of faith in the ſoule. And theſe diuers vſes of the word, are within the compaſſe of three lines. To which I may adde a third ſenſe out of this ſame chapter: where by faith, actuall beleeuing is vnderſtood; as in the places of Scripture alledged.

For i. is not the hauing, but the vſing of faith, that iuſtifieth. So thē where he ſaith, that 
                        Chap. 3. è Baſilio. cap. 15. p. 85. 
                     true faith is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation, his meaning is, that no man can be ſaued, vnleſſe he do aſſent to the truth of thoſe matters which God hath enioyned all men to beleeue: or, that there are certaine points to be beleeued, without aſſent to the truth whereof, no man can be ſaued. But what need was there of this diſcourſe, ſince both parties that were to conferre, agreed about this point without any doubting? Or if there were any doubt, it was on the Papiſts ſide, rather then on ours, becauſe 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 cap. 10. ad obiect. 1. they require not true faith to make a man a member of the Church, but onely the outward profeſſion of beleefe. Yea 
                        Melchior Canus. loc. com. lib. 6. cap. 8. pag. 418. 
                     the Pope may be head of the Church, though he beleeue not with his heart. And therfore it may not ſeeme ſtrange to vs, that a Ieſuited Prieſt in Wisbich caſtle ſhould affirme, 
                        Declar. mot. inter Ieſuit. & ſacerdot. pag. 29. 
                     That 
                     Homo non Chriſtianin. 
                     one that was no Chriſtian, might be Pope of Rome. But ſuch a glorious title of the neceſſitie of faith, maketh a goodly ſhew to the ignorant; yet let no man deceiue himſelfe herewithall. For this faith, which the Papiſts in words ſo magnifie, is not that beleef in Ieſus Chriſt, whereby a Chriſtian man, reſting on him for pardon of his ſinne, is iuſtified: but onely an agreeing to the truth of Scripture. So that a man may be full of this their, faith, and 
                        Bellar de Sacr. Bap. lib. 1 cap. 14. §. Quod antem.
                      yet be euerlaſtingly damned.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     This ground is ſet downe by S. Paul himſelfe, who ſaith, Sine fide impoſſibile eſt placere Deo: without faith it is vnpoſſible to
                           Heb. 11. Ser. 38. de Tempore.
                         pleaſe God. The ſame is confirmed by S. Auguſtine who ſaith, Conſtat, neminem ad veram poſſe peruenire beatitudinem, niſi Deo placeat: & Deo neminem placere poſſe, niſi per ſidem. Fides namue eſt bonorum omnium fundamentum. Fides eſt humanae ſalutis initium. Sine hac, nemo ad filiorum Dei conſortium peruenire poteſt; quia ſine ipfa, nec in hoc ſeculo, quiſ quam iuſtificationis conſequitur gratiam, nec in futuro, vitam poſſide bit aeternam. It is certaine, that none can come to true hap pineſſe, vnleſſe he pleaſe God: and that none can pleaſe God, but by faith. For faith is the foundation of all good things. Faith is the beginning of mans ſaluation. Without this, none can come to the fellowſhip of the children of God: becauſe without this, neither doth any, in this world, obtaine the grace of iuſtification, neither ſhall 
                           •
                        e, in the next, poſſeſſe
                     
                     eternall life. Thus ſaith S. Auſten.
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Well might this whole chapter haue bene ſpared; eſpecially ſince your proofe is no more direct for your purpoſe. For 
                        Heb. 11. 6. Saint Paule, in that place, ſpeaketh of Defence of Refor. Catho. pag. 202. a true iuſtifying faith, which preſuppoſeth a beleefe of all things, knowne to be reuealed by God, and requireth, that a man ſhould not onely acknowledge God to be a rewarder of them, that come vnto him, that is, 
                     
                        Ioan. 6. 35. 
                     beleeue in him, but alſo, that he ſhould reſt vpon him, as vpon ſuch a one: without which, queſtionleſſe no man can pleaſe God, though he aſſent neuer ſo ſtedfaſtly to the truth of thoſe, and ſuch like points. But if you will needs expound the Apoſtle of aſſent onely, I muſt put you in mind, that by this place you can proue neceſſitie of faith no farther, then for the beleeuing of thoſe two points he ſpecifieth, That God is, and That he is a rewarder of them, that come vnto him. Indeed whoſoeuer doubts of theſe particulars thus declared in Scripture, can neither be ſaued, nor pleaſe God: but it doth not follow hereupon, that therefore there is a neceſſitie of faith, to the beleeuing of other matters, many whereof haue no dependance vpon either of theſe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     And the ſame might be confirmed out of other 
                     Rom. 2. Gal. 3. Eph. 2. 
                     Scriptures and 
                     Conc. Milev. Can. 4. Concil. Trid. ſeſſ. 6. cap. 7. 8. Iren. l. 5. cap. 29. Chryſoſt. hom. 32. in Ioan. & ſerm. de Fide & Char. Cyril. Alex. in Ioan. lib. 4. 
                     Fathers, but that the matter is cleare enough.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The firſt of theſe places Rom. 3. 22. Rom. 2. is (I take it) miſquoted by the Printer, 2. for 3. In the ſecond there is not one word of faith: the Apoſtle there labouring to conuince both Gentiles and Iewes of ſin againſt God, by the breach of the law of nature, & Moſes. Gal. 2. 16. Epheſ. 2. 8. The other two are to be vnderſtood of true iuſtifying faith, which muſt needs be more then aſſenting to the truth of that which God ſpeaketh; as the very phraſe of beleeuing in Ieſus Chriſt proueth: which cannot with any likelihood of reaſon, be takē for giuing credit to thoſe things which are ſpoken by, or of our Sauiour Chriſt. It is one thing to beleeue that God is, Credere Deum, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : another thing to beleeue in God, Credere in Deū, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : though the latter alwayes

imply the former, and the former ſometimes the latter. 
                        Iren. lib. 5. cap. 29. Irenaeus hath not a ſyllable of the neceſſitie of faith, in the place which you quote: and 
                        Lib. 4. cap. 10. 14. where he ſpeakes of it, he onely ſhewes, it was neceſſary that God ſhould reueale his truth by his Word, which was his Sonne; becauſe, by the light of naturall reaſon, all things neceſſary to ſaluation could not be found out. This knowledge Irenaeus tyeth to the Scriptures. Had it not bene better for you to haue ſpared theſe needleſſe allegations, in a matter that was out of queſtion?
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Onely this I will adde, that when the Scriptures do require faith, as a thing abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation; the common tradition of Councels and Fathers do interprete, not onely that there is a poſitiue precept of faith, (for if it were but a poſitiue precept, ignorance might excuſe in ſome caſe) but that at leaſt ſome kind of faith is neceſſaria neceſſitate medij, that is to ſay, is ordained as a neceſſary means, without which, no man can attaine ſaluation in any caſe: and that in this matter, ſi quis ignorat, ignorabitur, if any man by ignorance do not know, he ſhall not be knowne, as S. Paul ſpeaketh. 
                     1. Cor. 14.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This interpretation of the Scriptures meaning, in requiring faith as a thing abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation, is altogether vnneceſſary. For who knowes not, that there can be no ſaluation without that which is abſolutely neceſſary therunto? Therefore it was more then enough to name the common tradition of Councels and Fathers. But ſuch gay termes make a goodly ſhew in the eies of the ſimple. But I pray tel me, what haue you got by this learned interpretation? Is there any Chriſtian man ſo ignorant, as to deny, that ſome kind of faith is ordained as a neceſſary meanes, without which men cannot attaine to ſaluation in any caſe? Sure, this can neither hurt vs, who acknowledge faith to be neceſſary, and (if you ſpeake of iuſtifying faith) altogether ſufficient to iuſtification: nor helpe you, who allow no faith, but that which depends vpon the authoritie of the Church. But the Councels and Fathers ſay, that kind of faith is neceſſary. What of that? Do they therefore hold it neceſſary to ſaluation for a man to beleeue whatſoeuer the Church ſhall teach, though without the warrant of Scripture? Can a man in no caſe attaine to ſaluation, without this faith? May not the very reading of

Scripture, without any miniſtery of man, be a meanes, by the worke of Gods ſpirit in his heart, to breed true faith to iuſtification and ſaluation? The neceſſitie of faith is double. Firſt concerning faith, as you take it, for an aſſent; it is not poſſible for any man to be ſaued, that doth not certainly beleeue, that 
                        Act. 4, 12. 
                     there is no name vnder heauen, by which he may be ſaued, but the name of Ieſus; and that in him there is ſaluation: yet may a man attaine to ſaluation, that is not reſolued of many points, which are determined by the Church, that is, by any company of men whatſoeuer. Secondly, faith is neceſſary to ſaluation, becauſe no man can be ſaued that doth not beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt: that is, that doth not wholy renounce himſelfe, and reſt vpon Ieſus Chriſt to be iuſtified by his obedience and ſacrifice. But the Lord hath not ſo tied his owne hands, that he cannot worke both theſe in the heart of whō he wil, without ſome man to tell him by word of mouth, that he muſt thus beleeue. 1. Cor. 14. 38. The proofe you bring out of the Apoſtle, is vtterly falſe, both for the tranſlation and application. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The word vſed by the Apoſtle, is no where to be found either in the paſsiue or middle voyce, as it muſt needs be, if it ſhould ſignifie ſhall not be knowne; but is meerly actiue, the firſt preſent tenſe of the Imperatiue moode, or (as Ramus cals it) the firſt future infect: and is as much in Engliſh, as let him be ignorant: ſo do the learned of your owne ſide tranſlate it, Ignoret. Vatablus. Vatablus, Ignarus eſto Pagnin. Pagninus, Ignorabitur: pro ignoret. Caietan. Caietan, 
                        Alionſ. Salm. cōment. in Euang. proſeg: 10 quinquag. 2. can. 17. Salmero; ſo do they expoūd it: as if he ſhould ſay (quoth 
                        Vatablus. ad 1. Cor. 14. Vatablus) If any man will not know theſe things, and will be ignorant, let him be ignorant, at his owne peril. I will not ſtriue (ſaith Cardinal Caietan. ibid. Caietan, with thē that know not theſe to be the Lords cōmandemēts: but if any man be ignorāt, let him be ignorāt. The ſame ſenſe giue 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 1. Cor. hom. 37. Chryſoſtom, Theoph. ibid. Theophylact and Oecumen ibi. Oecumenius. As if the Apoſtle by a kind of ironicall conceſſion ſhould (as it were) leaue euery man to himſelf, to think and do in thoſe matters as ſhould pleaſe him. And therefore Chryſoſtome expounds it by that, 1. Cor. 11. 16 
                     If any man list to be contentious, we haue no ſuch cuſtom, nor the Churches of God. As if he ſhould ſay, let him that will, refuſe to be ruled by me, in theſe caſes: it is enough for vs, that the Churches of God and we Apoſtles haue no ſuch cuſtome. It is further to be obſerued, that the Apoſtle

ſpeaks not of ſuch points, as by their being vnknown, might endanger a mans ſaluatiō, but of matters of leſſe momēt, cōcerning the orderly and decent cariage of things in the publick congregation. This Chryſ. vbi ſup. Chryſoſtome notes, ſaying that the Apoſtle doth not vſe thus kind of reproofe euery where, but 
                     Quoties nō magna peccata ſunt. 
                     when the faults are not great. But it is an exceeding great fault for a man not to acknowledge the truth of thoſe points, without beleefe whereof he cannot be ſaued. Therefore in Chryſoſtome his iudgement, the Apoſtle ſpeaks not in that place of the want of ſuch a faith, as is ſo neceſſary a means to ſaluation, as that without it, a man cannot attaine thereunto.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. II. That this faith neceſſary to ſaluation, is but one.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  If the plainneſſe, pretended in the title of this booke, had bene truly intended, and performed, we ſhould not haue had the contents of this chapter ſo obſcurely deliuered. This faith neceſſarie to ſaluation is but one. VVhat ſhould a man make of theſe words? An ordinarie Reader would thinke, you meant, that there is but one kinde of faith neceſſarie to ſaluation; how eaſie had it bene for you to haue ſaid ſo plainely, to the capacitie of the ſimpleſt? But it is a humor in men (commonly) to wonder at the depth of that, they vnderſtand not; and theſe great ſchollers may not abaſe themſelues, to ſpeake like vs of the meaner ſort: and yet 
                        Ariſtot. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 2. a wiſe Philoſopher ſaid, That a man ſhould thinke as the wiſe doe, but ſpeake as the people doe. But we muſt remember, that in poperie there is moſt deuotion, where there is leaſt vnderſtanding. Well, let vs take the words as they are; once his meaning is, as himſelfe afterwards expreſſeth it, that 
                        Bellar. de Roman. Pont. lib. 1. ca. 9. §. 8. 
                     the beleefe of one man differeth not from the beleefe of another: and that 
                        Bellar. de Iuſtif. lib. 1. ca. 5. §. Sed iſta.
                      
                     euerie faithfull man beleeueth euerie point, for one and the ſame reaſon.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     This faith (which I haue ſhewed to be abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation) is but One onely. This is plainly prooued out of Saint Paul, who ſaith, Vnus Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptiſma, ſignifying, that, like as there is but one Lord and one Baptiſme: ſo there is but One faith.
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     Faith (as I ſhewed before) is taken ſometimes for the habit,
                     
                     vertue, gift, grace, qualitie, (call it what you will) whereby we haue power to beleeue: ſometimes for the points that are to be beleeued. Here the queſtion is of the former, as any man would gather, both by the title, and by ſome of the proofes. The firſt whereof is a place of Scripture, 
                        Epheſ. 4. 5. 
                     There is one Lord, one faith, one baptiſme: of which I ſay firſt, as of the whole Chapter, that it might well haue bene ſpared, conſidering that we acknowledge the truth of the matter in the ſame ſenſe, in which himſelfe propoūds it: Secondly, I think it had bin a point of good iudgement to haue forborne the allegation of a text ſo inſufficient for the purpoſe: for the Apoſtle hath no meaning to ſhew by thoſe words one faith, that one mans beliefe (taking faith for the inward quality) differeth not from another mans; but that all the beleeuing Epheſians, and ſo all true Chriſtians, profeſſe one and the ſame religion, as they worſhip the ſame Lord, and receiue the ſame baptiſme: and therefore ought to agree in peace one with another, and not 
                        Hieron. ad Eph. 4. to make the gifts of God diuerſly beſtowed vpon diuers men, an occaſion of ſchiſme and diuiſion. This might you haue learned of 
                        Salmer. in Euang. prolegom. 14. formul. 8. Alphonſus Salmero a Ieſuite, who brings this place to proue, that nownes, that ſignifie qualities or habits, are taken alſo for the obiects to which they appertaine: as faith ſignifieth (ſaith he) the articles which are beleeued by faith, according to that of Paul: There is one faith. The like hath 
                        Bellar. de Iuſtiſ lib. 1. ca. 4. §. Iam vero.
                      Bellarmine. By the name of faith (ſaith he, ſpeaking of this place) the obiect of faith ſeemes to be noted out. So that the ſenſe is, we all beleeue the ſame thing, as we haue bene all baptized after the ſame manner. One faith (ſaith 
                        Catharin. ad Eph. 4. 5. Catharin) becauſe we beleeue one thing. And this interpretation is acknowledged for good, by 
                        Lombard, Thomas, Caiet. ad Eph. 4. Lombard, Thomas, and Caietane; though they allow of the other alſo: which notwithſtanding I am the bolder to refuſe, becauſe the places you bring out of the fathers, agree better to the former expoſition.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     The ſame is confirmed, with the authoritie of the ancient Fathers.
                     
                        Ser. 4. in natiu. Dom.
                      Niſi vna eſt (ſaith S. Leo) Fides non eſt, dicente Apoſtolo,  Vnus Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptiſma. 
                        Ʋnleſſe it be one, it is not faith, ſith the Apoſtle ſaith, one Lord one faith, one Baptiſme.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  
                     Eides integra magnit praeſidium. 
                     Faith that is ſound (ſaith 
                        Leo 1. ſer. 4. in N
                              •
                           ti
                              •
                           . ca. 5. In qua nec quicquam augeri poteſt.
                      Leo) faith that is true, is a ſtrong bulwarke; to which faith nothing may be added by any man, from which nothing may be taken; becauſe vnleſſe it be one, it is not faith: ſith the Apoſtle ſaith, one Lord, one faith, one baptiſme. Is it not euident, that he ſpeakes of the points of faith that are to be beleeued? For to them may a man adde, (I ſpeake of power, not of lawfulneſſe) from them may he take; wheras the qualitie of faith ſeated in the ſoule, is free from all ſuch danger. The learned father had found by experience, that hereticks from time to time tooke vpon them to diminiſh and augment the faith of the Church: that is, the articles of religion; and therefore denieth them to haue any faith, that hold not firmly and onely the truth of doctrine, according to the faith of the Church, agreeable to Scripture.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  Omni ſtudio (ſaith S. Hierome) Laborandum eſt, primùm  
                        In cap 4 ad Eph.
                      ocurrere in fidei vnitatem. We must labour with all diligence, firſt to meete, in the vnitie of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     
                        Hieron. ad Eph. 4. 13. Ieroms teſtimonie (wherein either the printer, or you reade vnitatem for vnitate, which is alſo the word in the text) is to the ſame purpoſe, that Leos was. There are (ſaith Ierome) many winds of doctrine, and by their blaſt, when the waues are raiſed, men are caried hither and thither in an vncertaine courſe, and with 
                     Vario errore. 
                     diuers errors; then follow the words you alledge. Therefore we muſt labour with all diligence, firſt to meete 
                     In vnitate. 
                     in the vnitie of faith then in the ſame vnitie to haue the knowledge of the ſonne of God. Which laſt point is added; becauſe 
                        Vide Hieron. ibi ad v. 5. 11. of Sabellius, who denied the diſtinction of the perſons, and againſt whom Ierome ſpeaketh profeſſedly in that chapter, as alſo againſt Arius, Macedonius, and Eunomius about the holy Ghoſt, and our Sauiour Chriſt.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  Hanc fidem (ſaith Irenaeus) eccleſia in vniuerſum mundum diſſeminata diligenter cuſtodit, quaſi vnam domum inhabitans: & ſimiliter credit ijs, quaſi vnam animam habens & vnum cor: & conſonanter haec praedicat, & docet, & cradit, quaſi vnum poſſidens os. Nam quamuis in mundo diſſimiles ſint loquelae, tamen virtus traditionis vna & eadem eſt. This faith, the Church ſpread ouer the whole world, doth diligently keepe, as dwelling in one
                     
                     houſe: and doth belieue in one like manner thoſe things, (to wit, which are propoſed for points of faith) as hauing one ſoule and one heart: and doth preach, and teach, and deliuer by tradition thoſe things, after one vniforme manner, as poſſeſſing one mouth. For although there be diuers and different languages in the world, yet the vertue of tradition is One and the ſame. Thus ſaith this Father. By whoſe words we may vnderſtand, not onely, that there is but one faith, but alſo, how it is ſaid to be one; which might ſeeme not to be one, conſidering there are ſo many points or articles, which we beleeue by our faith; and ſo many ſeuerall men, who haue in them this faith; yet One (ſaith this Father) it is, becauſe the whole Church doth beleeue thoſe points in one like manner. That is to ſay, becauſe the beliefe of one man, is in all points like, and nothing different from the beliefe of another: or, becauſe euery faithfull man beleeueth euery point or article, for one and the like cauſe, or for mall reaſon: to wit, becauſe God hath reuealed it; and deliuered it to vs, by his Catholicke Church, to be beleeued, For which reaſon euery one ſhould beleeue, whatſoeuer he beleeueth as a point of Chriſtian faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     
                        Iren. li. 1. 6. 3. Irenaeus (as the two former) ſpeaketh of the articles of religion, many wherof he had recited in 
                        Cap. 2. the next chapter before: whereupon he infers the words, you ſet downe. The Church (ſaith he) hauing receiued this doctrine, or preaching of this faith, 
                     Et quidem in vniuerſum mundum. 
                     though it be ſpread ouer the whole world, keepes it diligently, &c. And this your ſelfe acknowledge in theſe words, To wit, which are propoſed for points of faith; whereby you expound that which Irenaeus ſaid, The Church beleeues thoſe things; which is all one with his former words in ſenſe. This faith the Church holds. So doth 
                        Fevard. ad Iren. lib. 1. cap. 3. annot. 1. Feuardentius one of your learnedſt Fryers vnderſtand Irenaeus, telling vs, that he ſets the conſent of all Churches, as a braſen wall that cannot be ouerthrowne, againſt hereticks. Of the ſame things (ſaith Feuardentius) they thinke, beleeue, write and teach the ſame.
                  
                  By this place it is manifeſt that you take faith as it is a qualitie: becauſe you diſtinguiſh the points we beleeue, from our faith, by which we beleeue: and ſo ſpeaking of faith in that ſenſe, neuer a one of your proofes is either plaine or certaine. But let vs ſee

how you interprete Irenaeus. He ſaith, The whole Church doth beleeue 
                     Similiter. 
                     alike: meaning that all beleeue the ſame things; not that the habit by which they beleeue, is of like force & like ſtrength in euery particular Church or man: which neither belongs to his purpoſe, nor is true. Intentio cumulatior. 
                     The intention or inward ſtrength euen of the Catholick faith may be greater in one mā
                      (ſaith 
                        Sotus Apol. contra Cathar. cap. 2. Domingo à Soto) then in another: and according to that increaſe, our faith. Therefore your former reaſon which you giue, why faith is ſaid to be one, namely becauſe the beleefe of one man is in all points like the beleefe of another, muſt be vnderſtood of likeneſſe, in regard of the articles they beleeue, not of any equalitie in the habit or qualitie it ſelfe: and in that ſenſe onely doth Irenaeus ſay that faith is one. Which (ſaith he) no man by his eloquence maketh greater, no man by his weaknes in ſpeaking of it, leſſe. We ſee (ſaith 
                        Feuardent. vbi ſupra. annot. 11. Feuardentius) that Irenaeus vehemently vrgeth the vnitie of doctrine and conſent of faith, which we affirmed to be one of the notes of the true Church. Therefore whereas you ſaid of Irenaeus, that he affirmes faith to be one, becauſe the whole Church doth beleeue thoſe things (points of faith) in one like manner: you miſtake his meaning, and auow that which is vntrue. It is great pitie, but that ſuch as you are, coming in the name, and by the authority of the Church, ſhould haue abſolute credit giuen to that you teach, without doubting or examining it at all.
                  Your ſecond reaſon, why faith is ſaid to be one, neither agrees with Irenaeus meaning, as appeares by that which hath bene alreadie ſaid, and in the latter part is falſe too: for both it is a fanſie of yours, that God hath deliuered it to vs by the Catholicke Church, ſince the Prophets, Apoſtles and Miniſters are not the Catholicke Church, but members of it: the laſt, all of them ſeuerally and ioyntly ſubiect to many errors though not fundamentall. And 
                        Bellar. de Iuſtif. lib. 1. cap. 5. §. Denique quod.
                      the reaſon of beleeuing, is ſimply and onely the authoritie and will of God made knowne to vs by the miniſterie of men, the holy Ghoſt enlightening our vnderſtanding, and enclining our hearts to beleeue. But of this matter we muſt ſpeake more at large hereafter.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. III. That this one faith neceſſarie to ſaluation, is infallible.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  If you had bene deſirous, that euery man ſhould vnderſtand you, inſtead of infallible, you would rather haue ſaid certaine, or without doubting: eſpecially ſince your ſelfe diuers times vſed the word in the paſſiue ſignification, for that which may not be doubted of, as being moſt certainly true. In this ſenſe you ſay afterward, in this Chapter, that the word of Christ is abſolutely infallible: and againe in the end of the Chapter, that we muſt account the word of faith abſolutely infallible.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     This one faith, without which we cannot be ſaued, muſt be infallible, and moſt certaine. This is cleare, becauſe faith is that credit or inward aſſents of minde, which we giue to that which God (who is the prime or firſt veritie, which neither can deceiue, nor be deceiued) hath reuealed vnto vs by meanes of the preaching or teaching of the true Church: as we may gather out of S. Paul, when he ſaith: Quomodo credent ei, quem non audierunt? quomodo audient, ſine praedicante? quomodo praedicabunt niſi mittantur? &c. 
                        Rom. 10 ergo fides ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum Chriſti. The ſenſe of which words is that, ſith we cannot beleeue vnleſſe we heare: nor beare, vnleſſe ſome lawfully ſent do preach vnto vs: faith is bred in vs by hearing, and yeelding aſſent or credit to the word of Christ made knowne vnto vs by the preaching of the true Church, which onely is lawfully ſent of God: wherefore like as the word of Chriſt, being God, is abſolutely infallible, ſo alſo the credit giuen to this word (which is our faith) muſt needs be alſo moſt certaine and infallible.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The title and beginning of the Chapter ſpeake of faith, as it is a grace or qualitie; but the concluſion of the Chapter is concerning the infallibilitie or certaintie of the word of faith, as you call it, that is, the thing to be beleeued: ſo do you run from one thing to another. But I may ſay of this Chapter, as I haue done in part of the former, that we acknowledge the truth of both theſe points, and thinke your labour in prouing them, altogether vnneceſſary: only in the former there may be ſome doubt. For though it be out of queſtion, that we are to endeuor for the perfection, as of all other graces of God, ſo of that faith, wherby we aſſent to the truth of that which God hath reuealed: yet it comes to paſſe, ſometimes by our infirmitie, that our faith is

accompanied with doubting. And this (as we heard before) 
                        Sotus Apol. contra. Cathar. cap. 2. Sotus grants to be true of a Catholicke faith: and prooues it by the prayer of the Apoſtles, 
                        Luc. 17. 5. 
                     Lord increaſe our faith: to which I may adde the like requeſt of him, that crying with teares ſaid, 
                        Mark. 9. 24. 
                     Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbeleefe. But if any man deſire to ſee a liuely patterne of this doubting, let him looke vpon Dauid, as he deſcribes himſelfe in the Pſalme; 
                        Pſal. 73. 13. 
                     Certainly I haue cleanſed my heart in vaine, and waſhed my hands in innocency &c. Then thought I to know this, but it was too painfull for me. And afterward; 
                        Verſ. 16. 
                     ſo fooliſh was I and ignorant, I was a beaſt before thee. And yet the point he ſpeaks of, is a rulde caſe in Diuinitie, propounded 
                        Verſ. 22. by him in the beginning of the Pſalme: namely that the prouidence of God watcheth ouer the righteous for their good, and that he will be auenged of the wicked.
                  
                  That faith which ſome Diuines call hiſtoricall, is indeed ſuch an aſſent, & goeth alwaies before iuſtifying faith; at the leaſt, for the beleeuing of ſo much, as is neceſſarie to iuſtification. Which I note by the way, that no man may be deceiued with an opinion, that iuſtifying faith is an aſſent to the truth of Gods word: whereas it is quite of another nature, and hath place in the will, rather then in the vnderſtanding. If you had ſaid, that God hath reuealed his truth to vs by the preaching of them that were in the true Church, you had ſpokē more plainely and truely. But how the true Church, or any Church at all, ſhould be ſaid to preach, I profeſſe, I vnderſtand not. Neither can any ſuch thing be gathered out of 
                        Rom. 10. 14. Saint Paule, who ſpeakes not a word of the Church, true or falſe. And to ſay the truth, what a ſtrange kind of ſpeech is it to ſay, The Church is ſent to preach, when as onely the Miniſters preach, and not the Church: vnleſſe perhaps Iohn Baptiſt only for a time, was the Church: whē he preached alone, before our Sauiour was baptiſed. But this ſame Church is a goodly faire word, and couers a great many foule errours, with the very name of it: The Apoſtles who were they that God employed at the firſt beginning of the Goſpell, both in preaching and writing, were vndoubtedly of the true Church, both in reſpect of their election to euerlaſting life, and of the truth of the doctrine they held. It is alſo true that God ordinarily

begetteth faith in the hearts of men, by the miniſters of the true Church. But it is not true that ſuch an aſſent as you ſpeake of, cannot be wrought in a man by the miniſtery of Schiſmaticks or Hereticks, though they be perhaps, in neither reſpect, any members of the true Church. Did not Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Neſtorius, and many other wretched hereticks aſſent in generall, to the truth of God in Scriptures, becauſe they held it to be the very true word of God? And might not men by their preaching be brought to the ſame faith? For our parts, we make no doubt, but that, in the middeſt of ignorance and ſuperſtition, many came to this faith by the preaching of your Antichriſtian Prieſts, and ſo do at this day; yea we adde further, that we doubt not, many haue (wee are ſure they might and may) attaine to the ſame faith (what if I ſay to iuſtifying faith too) without any preaching, by the reading of the Scriptures. For ſince it is partly the matter, that muſt argue the Scripture to be the word of God, partly the maieſty which any man may diſcerne in the manner of writing: vnleſſe it can be poooued out of the Scripture, that the holy Ghoſt will not worke by theſe vpō the heart of him that readeth, but only of him, that heareth a man expound this word vnto him, I ſee no ſufficient reaſon, why faith may not be had by reading, where Gods ordinance of preaching is onely wanting, and not wilfully neglected.
                  But you will ſay, the Apoſtle tyeth faith to hearing. Firſt, this is little aduantage for you Papiſts, amongſt whom (til ſhame & emulation draue you to it, within theſe laſt fiftie or threeſcore yeares) no man could ordinarily heare the word of God in any tongue, that he vnderſtood; and ſo all your hearing was to no purpoſe. Secondly, if hearing be ſufficient, where there is nothing but reading, without any expoſition of that, which is read; giue me ſome reaſon, why reading ſhould not be more ſufficiēt; ſince he that readeth, may eaſier vnderſtand, and better weigh that, he readeth, then he that doth onely heare an other reade. But of this point I ſhall haue occaſion to ſay more 
                        Chap. 9. hereafter.
                  Now for the ſecond point, that we cannot heare, vnleſſe ſome lawfully ſent, that is (as you vnderſtand it) vnleſſe ſome ſent by

the authority of the Church, do preach vnto vs; firſt how ſhal this warrant the Apoſtles preaching, of which S. Paul here ſpeaketh? For who knowes not, that 
                        Matt.. 28. 19 they were ſent immediatly by our Sauiour, & not by any ordinary courſe in the Church? Secondly it ſeemes you fortet, what is written in 
                        Ruffin. hiſtor. eccleſ. lib. 1. cap. 10. the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtories of a captiue maid, that conuerted the queene of Iberia, ſhe the king, & he his countrey. 
                        Theodorct. lib. 1. hiſtor. eccleſ. cap. 22. What is recorded of Aedeſius & Frumentius, by whom the Indians were brought to the knowledge of the Goſpell. How 
                        Euſebius hiſt. eccle. lib. 6 cap. 19. Alexander Biſhop of Ieruſalem, and Theoctiſtus Biſhop of Caeſarea defend Origens preaching publickly, when as yet he was not allowed by the Church for a miniſter. Which fact of his they maintaine by the like examples of Euelpis, Paulinus, and Theodorus, who had preached without any ordinarie ſending: And it is verie likely (ſay they) that the ſame hath beene done in other places, though we know it not.
                  
                  How little care you had of writing plainely, any man may gueſſe by this one ſentence; wherein this needleſſe word infallible is vſed in two diuers ſenſes: for certainty of truth, where you ſpeake of that we are to beleeue; for aſſurance of beleefe, without doubting, where you meane faith it ſelfe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  Fides (ſaith S. Baſile) eſt, eorum quae dicta ſunt, aſſentiens approbatio, ſine vlla haeſitatione, cum animi perſuaſione de eorum 
                        Ser de Fidei confeſsione.
                      veritate, quae Dermunere praedicata ſunt. Faith is a conſenting approbation of thoſe things, which are ſaid; & an vndoubted perſwaſion of minde, of the truth of thoſe things, which are preached by the gift of God. Fides, (ſaith Saint Chryſoſtome) dici non poteſt, niſi circa ea quae non videntur, ampliùs quàm circa ea 
                        Hom. 12. in epiſt. ad Hebraeos.
                      quae videntur, certitudinem quis habeat. It cannot be called faith, vnleſſe one be more certaine of thoſe things which are not ſeene, then of thoſe things which are ſeene. The reaſon whereof, the ſame Saint 
                     
                        Hom. 83. in Matth.
                      
                     Chryſoſtom declareth in an other place, ſaying: Superet ſenſum & rationem noſtram ſermo ipſius (Dei:) nam verbis eius fraudari non poſſumus: ſenſus verò noſter deceptu facillimus eſt. Let Gods word (ſaith he) ſurmount our ſenſe and reaſon: for we can not be deceiued by his words, but our ſenſe is moſt eaſily deceiued.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  Theſe teſtimonies are more for oſtentation to ſhew your learning, then for neceſſitie to confirme a matter not doubted of. Yet I muſt put you in minde, that theſe deſcriptions and commendations of faith are not brought by the authors to condemne all as caſt-awaies, that ſometimes doubt, but to declare what faith is in it owne nature.
               
               
                  A. D. § 3.
                  
                     Sith, therefore, our faith is grounded on the word of God, reuealed to vs by Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, ſpeaking by the mouth of the Church, as he ſaith himſelfe, 
                     
                        Luc. 10. Qui vos audit, me audit: he that heareth you, heareth me: we ought to receiue the word of faith preached by the true Church, 1. Theſ 2. 
                     not as the word of man, but, as it is truely, the word of God; and conſequently, we muſt account it a thing moſt certaine, and abſolutely infallible.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Our Sauiour Chriſt doth no farther ſpeake by the mouth of the Church, then the Church ſpeakes according to the Scripture, whom ſo ſpeaking, whoſoeuer heareth, without doubt he heareth God; both becauſe it is the word of God that is ſpoken, and becauſe God hath commaunded vs to heare them that ſo ſpeake. But here againe for a ſhew, the name Church is brought in, whereas 
                        Luc. 10. 16. the teſtimonie belongs onely to the Apoſtles (if you take it for them, that muſt abſolutely be heard, without all doubting of that, they deliuer) and to 
                        Bellor. de Roman. pontif lib. 4 cap 16. § Quae verba.
                      euery one of them ſeuerally, who doubtleſſe is not the Church; or elſe to all Miniſters of the goſpell from time to time, but not without that reſtraint, I mentioned before, of ſpeaking agreably to the word. If you will ſtretch the place to other beſide the Apoſtles, in that point of being abſolutely heard, ſhew ſome reaſon why euery Paſtor and licenſed Preacher may not claime the ſame priuiledge of being heard and beleeued, whatſoeuer he teach. But that this is abſord, it may appeare. becauſe 
                        Mat. 24. 24. our Sauiour Chriſt foretold, that there ſhould come falſe prophets, who alwaies are to be diſcerned by their 
                        Mat. 7. 16. doctrine. And who is ignorant, that the greateſt hereticks, had (many of them) lawfull calling in the Churches, and yet ranne into monſtrous hereſies? Doth not 
                        Mat. 23. 3. our Sauiour alſo will the Iewes to heare the Scribes and Phariſies? what? abſolutely? If they will teach their owne deuiſes (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. ad 100. tract. 46. Auſtin) heare them not, do not as they ſay.
                     
But what name I Auſten? Doth not Chriſt himſelfe giue the ſame charge? 
                        Mat. 16. 6. Verſ. 12. 
                     Take heed and beware of the leuen of the Scribes and Phariſes. And what is their leuen but their doctrine, by the holy Ghoſts owne expoſition? 
                        Ianſenius in concor. E
                              •
                            
                           
                              ••
                           ang. cap. 80. Ianſenius Biſhop of Gant expounds the place of the Apoſtles; and though he gather from thence the power of the Eccleſiaſticall gouernours, yet he reſtraineth it to their inioyning of that which is right. Wee are to note (ſaith he) how great the authoritie of Eccleſiaſticall gouernours is; ſince we muſt obey them, no otherwiſe then we muſt Chriſt, 
                     Recta praeci. pientions. 
                     when they commaund thoſe things, that are right. Doe you not ſee your owne Biſhops limitation vpon this verie place, you alleage? The 
                        Cyrillus apud Thomam in Catena. Irenaeus lib. 3. in praef
                              ••
                           .
                      ancient writers expound the place of the Apoſtles. Your 
                        Lyra ad Luc. 10. 16. gloſſe requires deuotion and reuerence to the hearing of Chriſts Diſciples, for the reuerence of God, whoſe doctrine principally it is, which they deliuer: So that they, which preach not Chriſts doctrine, cannot looke for ſo much as reuerence. There fore true doctrine is alwaies to be receiued, whoſoeuer deliuer it, whether he be lawfully ſent or no, and falſe doctrine neuer, though it be preached by a Pope; who being no Apoſtle, can ſhew no charter for his being kept from error, though his priue, and your flatterie, exalt him aboue all ſaue Peter.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. IIII. That this one infallible faith neceſſary to ſaluation, must alſo be entire.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Whereas you ſay obſcurely in your title, Faith muſt be entire, your meaning is, that a Chriſtian muſt beleeue all things appointed by God, & propoūded by the Church to be beleeued. Wold you not haue ſaid ſo, if you had loued plainneſſe? What if I ſhould ask you a reaſon, why the title of this Chapter is not ſet downe in the ſame forme the reſt are? Faith is neceſſary, Chap. 1. is one, Chap. 2. is infallible, Chap. 3. But in this 4. Chap. muſt be entire. Can you giue me a ſufficient reaſon of this difference?
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     This one infallible faith, without which we cannot pleaſe God, muſt alſo be entire, whole and ſound in all points: and it is not ſufficient to beleeue ſtedfaſtly ſome points, miſbeleeuing or not beleeuing obſtinately other ſome, or any one.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  There are two things to be conſidered in your propounding of this queſtiō, concerning the entireneſſe of faith: in what ſenſe all points muſt be beleeued, and what it is to miſbeleeue, or obſtinately not to beleeue. Whatſoeuer is deliuered in Scriptures, is a matter of faith, becauſe it is the word of God, who can neither deceiue, nor be deceiued, and hath propounded it to men for a truth to be beleeued. But yet there is a great difference betwixt things ſet downe in Scripture: and that difference is in 2. reſpects. For neither are all points therein true, in the like ſenſe, 
                        Thom. opuſ. 3. in compend. Theol. cap. 1. Holcot. in 1. q. 1. ad 6. argum. princip. et in 3. q. 1. art. 6. prim.
                      neither is there like neceſſitie of beleeuing euery particular. Concerning the former, the generall reaſon why all things in the Scriptures are true, is this, becauſe all things therein are recorded, & deliuered by God for true; therfore queſtionles they are true: yet (as once before I noted) onely ſo farre forth true, as they are intended to be held for true by the holy Ghoſt, the author of the Scripture. Whatſoeuer is regiſtred therein by vvay of report, as a ſtory, is to be taken as true, onely in reſpect of ſtory, that we may not doubt whether ſuch or ſuch things were done and ſaid, or no. There is no doubt to be made, but that the fiue bookes of Moſes, the bookes of Ioſua, Iudges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, &c. containe a true and certaine ſtory of thoſe things whereof they intreate. But in theſe bookes we haue ſome worthy and holy ſpeeches of godly men: ſome leud and blaſphemous words of profane wretches. The former are to be acknowledged for the truth of God euery way. As for example, it is true that 
                        Gen. 49. 1. 2. &c.
                      Iacob vttered thoſe propheſies of the twelue Patriarks his ſonnes; and it is alſo true, that thoſe propheſies of his, were the very truth of God. It is as true, that 2. Reg. 18. 30 & 19. 4. 6. Rabſhaketh deliuered thoſe blaſphemous threanings againſt the Lord and his people; but it is not true, that thoſe words came from God, as Iacobs did: ſo Iacobs were to be taken as euery way true; Rabſhakeths onely as truly reported from his mouth.
                  Now that all points are not alike neceſſary to ſaluation, no man can make any queſtion, if he remember that a man may be ſaued, though he haue neuer heard of many things that are recorded in the Scripture: which is the caſe generally of the greateſt part both of Proteſtants and Papiſts, and hath alwayes bene

the caſe of Chriſtians in all ages. As for miſbeleeuing, or not beleeuing obſtinately, one of theſe differs a great deale from the other, and the latter of the two was needleſſe, if the former can be proued. For if miſtaking ſome point of doctrine be damnable, it is out of doubt that obſtinate refuſing to beleeue the ſame point, muſt needs make a man much more liable to damnation.
                  But indeed miſbeleeuing is not in all points ſo dangerous, though of it ſelfe as a ſinne, it is ſubiect to be puniſhed 
                        Rom. 6. 23. with the eternall wrath of God in hell fire. To make plaine that I ſay, A man may miſunderſtand diuers places of Scripture, and thereupon hold that to be true which is falſe, and yet be ſaued for all this error. For example, that I may giue inſtāce in a matter of no ſmall importance. How many Chriſtians, yea how many great Diuines haue bin deceiued, in the vnderſtanding of 
                        Mat. 1. 1. 2. &c. Luk. 3. 23. our Sauior Chriſts genealogie, and by their miſconceiuing of the Euangeliſts, haue fallen into no ſmal error, that Salomon was the father of the Meſſiah? By which opinion (to omit many other things that I may not be too long) the truth of a propheſie vttered by 
                        Ier. 17. 29. 30 Ieremy, which makes Ieconiah childleſſe, hath bin ouerthrown; from whom our Sauiour muſt needs haue deſcended, if he had bene the ſonne of Salomon, as ſome erroneouſly gather out of Saint Mathew; and not of 
                        Luk. 3. 31. Nathan, as it is manifeſt by S. Luke, he was. Shall I exemplifie this matter in another point? The Apoſtles themſelues for a long time, euen 
                        Act. 1. 6. til after the aſcenſion of our Sauiour into heauen, and 
                        & 2. 2. 3. till the comming of the holy Ghoſt vpō them, looked for the eſtabliſhing of an earthly kingdome in this world by their Lord and maiſter. Did they not ſlip into this error by misbeleeuing the 
                        Pſal. 72. 17. Dan. 2. 44. propheſies of the old teſtament, concerning the Meſſiahs kingdome? yet were they out of danger of damnation, and in the ſtate of grace all that time, becauſe 
                        Ioan. 1. 29. & 6. 68. 69. they reſted on our Sauiour Chriſt, as the ſpirituall Sauiour of their ſoules, that ſhould tak away their ſinnes, and bring them to euerlaſting life in heauen, though they erroneouſly hoped for a temporall kingdome alſo. The other branch of this diſtribution, which concernes obſtinately not beleeuing, though it be a farre greater ſinne, then the former: yet it is not ſuch, that it doth abſolutely cut a man off from ſaluation.

This obſtinate refuſall to beleeue, is either of ignorance, or of wilfulneſſe: if a Chriſtian ſtand ſtifly in ſome falſe opinion, which he certainly holdeth to be true, in his error; the fault of his iudgement may continue, without the damnation of his ſoule. If wilfully he refuſe to beleeue that truth of God, which he diſcerneth, no man can promiſe him any hope of ſaluation, without true repentance. This I ſpeake vpon a ſuppoſition, that it is poſſible for a man not to beleeue that, which he perceiueth to be true, though indeed there is a contradiction implied herein. For to beleeue is to aſſent to the truth; which a man cannot chuſe but do, that ſees it: that is, no man can think the ſame thing, in the ſame reſpects, true and falſe. But this not beleeuing in ſuch a caſe, is a frowardneſſe of the heart, not yeelding to acknowledge that he knowes, rather then a falſe opinion in the braine, by which a man is miſled. We are further to obſerue, that there is a ſecond difference in this point, in regard of the matter, which is not beleeued. If a man in his ignorance deny to beleeue, that there is but one God, that there are three perſons, that Ieſus is the Meſſiah, that we are redeemed by him, that we are iuſtified by faith without workes, or any other fundamentall point of religion; he doth thereby ſhut himſelfe out from all poſſibilitie of ſaluation, as long as he continues in theſe errors, or any of them. But other points there are, and thoſe many more in 
                        Thomas opuſc. comp. Theol. c. 1 number, which a man, by reaſon of his ignorance, may obſtinately refuſe to beleeue, and yet not be excluded out of heauen for ſuch his error. Let the former examples ſerue for breuities ſake: I haue bene longer then I would or meant to be; but I was deſirous to ſpeake plaine, in a matter of ſuch weight. The concluſion is, that howſoeuer it is indeed a ſinne, and ſo (in it ſelfe) damnable, to miſbeleeue, or not beleeue all and euery thing which God hath reuealed; yet a man may be in the ſtate of grace and ſaluation, though he misbeleeue, or (through ignorance) obſtinately not beleeue ſomething ſo reuealed. In a word, Not right beleeuing is neuer able to depriue a man of ſaluation, but when that we beleeue amiſſe, is a maine point of ſaluation: obſtinately not beleeuing onely then ſhuts vp heauen againſt vs, when either the points we will not beleeue, are fundamentall,

or our refuſing to beleeue, is againſt our owne iudgement and conſcience. If you had no further reach in this Chapter, we were of the ſame mind with you: but in propounding the reaſon of your aſſertion, you bewray a further matter, then at the firſt a man would imagine.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     The reaſon of this is, becauſe euery point of doctrine, yea euery word that almightie God hath reuealed, and by his Church propounded vnto vs to be beleeued, muſt, vnder paine of damnation be beleeued: as we may gather out of Saint Marke; where when 
                     
                        Mark. 16. 
                     our Sauiour had giuen charge to his Diſciples, to preach the Goſpell to euery creature (the which charge he alſo gaue in Saint Mathew, ſaying: Docete omnes gentes, &c. docentes eos ſeruare omnia 
                        Math. 28. quaecunque mandaui vobis: Teach all nations, &c. teaching them to obſerue all things whatſoeuer I haue commaunded you,) he pronounceth indefinitely, Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur: He that ſhall not beleeue, ſhall be condemned: not excepting, or diſtinguiſhing any one point of doctrine, as needleſſe to be beleeued, or which a man might at his pleaſure miſbeleeue, or doubt of without danger.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Your firſt reaſon lieth thus:

                        If euery point and word reuealed by God, and propounded by his Church to be beleeued, muſt, vnder paine of damnation, be beleeued, then faith muſt be entire.
                        But euery word ſo reuealed and propounded, muſt, vnder paine of damnation be beleeued.
                        Therefore faith muſt be entire.
                     
                  
                  The concluſion of this Syllogiſme is acknowledged by vs for a certaine truth, Faith muſt be entire: but the premiſſes ſeeme liable to iuſt exception. For firſt, the antecedent and the conſequent To the Propoſition. of the propoſition are all one; and ſo the proofe, and that which is proued, differ not. What is it to ſay, euery word reuealed by God, must be beleeued, but to affirme, that faith must be entire? Indeed if the queſtiō were of faith as it is a quality, then the conſequent might be inferred vpon the antecedent: but ſince we ſpeake of the things to be beleeued, both are one. If euery ſuch word muſt be beleeued, then we muſt beleeue euery ſuch word. It is the ſame faith, by which all, and by which ſome is beleeued:

but as the obiect or things beleeued make a difference, which reacheth not to the faith it ſelfe within the ſoule.
                  Secondly the Aſſumption, though it be true, yet doth it containe ſomething that had need to be warily conſidered. Firſt To the Aſſumption. you ſo couple the reuealing by God, and the propounding of a thing to be beleeued by the church, as if the latter were no leſſe neceſſary then the former, to make a matter of faith: wheras al things that God hath reuealed, ought to be beleeued, whether the Church propoūd them for ſuch or no. For the reaſon why they are to be beleeued, is, that they proceed from God, who muſt needs be credited in whatſoeuer he ſhal ſay; in reſpect both of his truth in ſpeaking, and his authoritie in commaunding obedience. But 
                        Stapl. contra Whitak. de autorit. ſcript. cap. 1. ſect. 1. 2. you Papiſts make the authoritie of the Church, the very foundation of our beleefe. The Scripture (you ſay) is in it ſelfe the word of God, and ſo worthy of all credit; but to vs it is not ſo, but by the authoritie of the Church; vpon the credit whereof we take it for the word of God. Yea farther, you limit faith in particular points, by the determination of the Church, ſo that no man ſhall be bound to beleeue, as a point of faith, any doctrine neuer ſo certainly proued out of Scripture, vnleſſe the Church haue reſolued of it, that it is true: and whatſoeuer is by the Church concluded for true, muſt be acknowledged for ſuch by faith, though it be beſide or againſt the Scripture, which (as 
                        Cuſan. ad Bohem. epiſt. 2. Cardinall Cuſan is not aſhamed, nor afraid to ſay) is fitted for the time, and diuerſly vnderſtood. So that it may at one time be expounded one way, according to the generall current order of the Church, and the ſame order being changed, the Scripture alſo is changed. And why ſhould it not, if (as Syl
                           ••
                        est. Prierias cont. Luth. another Papiſt ſaith) the holy Scripture take ſtrength and authoritie from the doctrine of the Church and Biſhop of Rome? The Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Pigh. Hier. lib. 1. cap. 2. Pighius) haue written certaine things, not that their writings ſhould be aboue our faith, but that they ſhould be vnder it. But what ſhould I ſtand to recite your blaſphemies in this kind, which are many and monſtrous? That which is not to day a point of faith, ſhall be one to morrow, if it pleaſe the Pope to propound it to be beleeued.
                  It is farther to be conſidered in your Aſſumption, that although whatſoeuer God reuealeth is to be beleeued, vpō paine

of damnation: yet a man may be ſaued without beleeuing euery thing ſo reuealed; alwayes prouided that he do not againſt his conſcience obſtinately refuſe to acknowledge any truth.
                  
                     If our Sauiour haue ſaid, that he which beleeueth not all that his Apoſtles teach ſhall be condemned; then euery word ſo reuealed and propounded, muſt be beleeued, vnder paine of damnation.
                     But our Sauiour hath ſaid ſo:
                     Therefore euery word ſo propounded muſt be beleeued, vnder paine of damnation.
                  
                  This is a proofe of your Aſſumption; wherein for the conſequence To the Propoſition. of your propoſition, I would haue all men vnderſtand, that although you craftily imply therein a compariſon of equalitie, betwixt the charge of beleeuing the Apoſtles, and all other Miniſters allowed by you, whom you call by the name of the Church, to deceiue ſimple people with ſo glorious a title: yet the truth of that propoſition depends not thereupon, but onely vpon the neceſſitie of beleeuing that which God hath reuealed. It is a certaine truth, that God is to be beleeued in all things he hath reuealed, by whom ſoeuer he propound it: & in this reſpect the conſequence of your propoſition is true: That if it were damnable not to beleeue the Apoſtles deliuering that which God had reuealed, it is alſo damnable not to giue credit to Miniſters now, when they propound that to be beleeued, which God hath reuealed; becauſe the reaſon of beleeuing is, that God hath reuealed the things that are deliuered. But yet here are two differences to be obſerued: firſt, that it is leſſe ſinne to doubt of that, which any man, beſides the Apoſtles, deliuers, though it be the word of God, then to make queſtion of the ſame matter vttered by the Apoſtles: becauſe they ſpake immediatly by the direction of the ſpirit, and therefore could not poſſibly erre in any point; whereas all other men are ſubiect to error, and their doctrine to examination, ere it need be credited. Secondly, we muſt remember, it doth not follow, that if our Sauiour ſaid, whoſoeuer beleeued not the Apoſtles, ſhould be damned; then he that beleeues not the Miniſters now, in all they propound to be beleeued, ſhould be therefore

liable to condemnatiō. I haue ſtood the more vpon this propoſition, becauſe the conſequence being true, may breed an error in the conceit of many, if the reaſon of it be not truly vnderſtood.
                  Your Aſſumption or minor is thus to be limited, according To the Aſſumption. to that which I before deliuered, He that beleeues the Apoſtles ſpake immediatly by the inſpiration of the ſpirit of God, and yet doubts of the truth of ſome things they preached, cannot without reforming this error be ſaued; becauſe he holds that the holy Ghoſt may inſpire an vntruth. No more can he that doth not beleeue they ſpake by ſuch inſpiration. For of them our Sauiour hath abſolutely ſaid, 
                        Luk. 10. 16. He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. The ſecond limitation is about the things themſelues. The ignorance of ſome points deliuered by the Apoſtles, vtterly excludes a man out of heauen: ſome other again may be vnknowne, and a man, notwithſtanding that his ignorance, be ſaued. Therefore though our Sauiour except no point, nor diſtinguiſh betwixt matters of doctrine, yet the not beleeuing of ſome, is no farther damnable, then a man doth wilfully refuſe to beleeue that, which he confeſſeth to be truth in his heart; or at the leaſt, in which he thinkes the Apoſtles were deceiued, or which he deſpiſeth as needleſſe, and ſo condemnes the wiſedome of God, in propounding it to be beleeued.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     And this not without reaſon: for not to beleeue any one point whatſoeuer, which God by reuealing it, doth teſtifie to bee true, and which, by his Church, he hath commaunded vs to beleeue, must needs be damnable, as being a notable iniurie to Gods veritie, and a great diſobedience to his will. But all points of faith are thus teſtified by God, and commaunded to be beleeued; otherwiſe they be not points of faith, but of opinion, or ſome other kinde of knowledge. Therefore all points of faith muſt vnder paine of damnation, be beleeued; beleeued (I ſay) eyther expreſly and actually, as learned men may doe: or implicite and virtually as vnlearned Catholicks commonly doe: who beleeuing expreſly thoſe articles, which euerie one is bound particularly to know, doe not in the reſt, obſtinately doubt, or hold ſome errour againſt the Church, but haue a minde
                     
                     prepared to ſubmit themſelues in all things, to the authoritie of the Church, (which they are ſure is taught and directed by the ſpirit of God) and doe in generall hold for vndoubted truth, whatſoeuer the Catholicke or vniuerſall Church doth beleeue.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Now followeth the ſecond proofe of your aſſumption, in this manner:

                        Euerie notable iniurie to Gods veritie, and diſobedience to his will, is damnable.
                        But miſbeleeuing, or abſolutely not beleeuing any one point reuealed by God, and propounded by his Church to be beleeued, is a notable iniurie to Gods veritie, and a great diſobedience to his will.
                        Therefore miſbeleeuing or obſtinately not beleeuing any one point reuealed by God, and propounded by his Church to be beleeued, is damnable.
                     
                  
                  To let paſſe this craftie conueyance, whereby you ſtill ſhuffle in the Church, whereas without it, the matter is as true, and To the aſſumption. the propoſition as perfect: I anſwer to your aſſumption; that all miſbeleeuing, or obſtinately not beleeuing is not a notable iniurie to Gods truth, nor a great diſobedience to his will: where it proceeds ſimply of ignorance, and not of wilfulneſſe; except in ſuch caſes as I ſhewed in the end of the laſt ſection: which I ſpeake, not to excuſe any man, as if he did not ſinne, in misbeleeuing, or as if there were ſome ſinne not deadly, according to your erroneous conceit: but onely to diſtinguiſh notable iniuries, and great diſobedience from ſome kinde of misbeleeuing.
                  The concluſion is thus to be conceiued: That miſbeleeuing is in it ſelfe damnable, not, that no man can be ſaued, which miſbeleeueth. 
                     Of the concluſion.
                  
                  This diſtinction of beleeuing expreſly, and implicitly, as you terme it, confirmes part of that, which I haue hitherto ſaid: for by your confeſſion, there are ſome points, to the beleefe whereof a general faith will not ſerue the turne, but a man muſt know the particulars, and aſſent actually to the truth of them. For example, it is not enough for a man to beleeue in groſſe, that he muſt be ſaued by ſuch meanes onely, as God hath reuealed; and
                     
                     the Church hath propounded to be beleeued; but it is abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation, that he know what the Church holdeth in this caſe, concerning redemption by our Sauiour Chriſt; and in his heart acknowledge the truth thereof. Againe, there are many other points, which, ſo a man neglect not the meanes to know them, may be vnknowne, and beleeued onely in generall, without danger of damnation, by reaſon of ſuch ignorance. Now this generall beleefe, is not (as you falſely ſay) to be folded vp in the faith of the Church; but to be tied to the Scripture; all things wherein I acknowledge to be moſt true, and beleeue all points whatſoeuer, as they are eyther expreſſed, or contained in Scripture: howſoeuer I be ignorant what is true, touching, (perhaps) very many particulars.
                  To the authoritie of the Church, I willingly ſubmit my ſelfe thus farre, as that I hold it a ſinfull preſumption for me, or any man, eyther to compare my priuate opinion, with the generall iudgement of other Chriſtians, eſpecially Miniſters, or to condemne, or ſuſpect that of falſhood, which they deliuer, vnleſſe I haue apparent proofe for the one, and great likelihood for the other. In which caſes I ſet not my owne conceit, againſt the doctrine of the Church, but preferre the truth of God before the opinions of men. As for any infallible authoritie in the Church, vpon ſuppoſall of ſuch a certaine direction by the ſpirit of God, I hold it neither for true, nor probable, as ſhall appeare hereafter. In the meane while, I deſire the Reader to conſider theſe few teſtimonies cōcerning the authority of men. Other writers (ſaith 
                        August. ad Hieron. Epiſt. 19. Auſtin) I reade with this prouiſo, that, be their learning or holineſſe neuer ſo great, I will not thinke a matter true, becauſe they haue thought ſo; but becauſe they haue bene able to perſwade me, eyther by other Canonicall writers, or by ſome likely reaſon. In 
                        Aug. de vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 10. an other place, We may not conſent to Biſhops, though they be Catholicke, if at any time they be deceiued, ſo that they iudge contrarie to the Canonicall Scripture of God. Of neceſſitie (ſaith 
                        Origen. in Ier. Hom. 1. Origen) muſt we call for the teſtimonie of the Scriptures; for our ſenſes and declarations, without them, as witneſſes, haue no credit. And this charge 
                        Baſil. in moral. Reg. 72. Baſil layeth vpon vs, that, when we heare, we examine the points that are deliuered by our teachers,
                     
                     and receiue thoſe that are agreeable to the Scriptures, and reiect thoſe that are diuers from them. 
                     
                        Hieron. ad Ierem. cap. 7. 
                     Other things that men inuent of their owne head (ſaith Ierome) as it were by Apoſtolicall tradition, without the authoritie and witneſſe of the Scriptures, the word of God ſmiteth.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Secondly, that man which beleeuing ſome points, ſhould denie others: cannot while he doth thus, haue one and the ſame faith, which other Chriſtians haue. Sith he doth not (as Irenaeus requireth to the vnitie of faith) beleeeue the points of faith in a like; but in a different manner from other Chriſtians. That is to ſay. Neither doth he beleeue all the points which they doe: neither doth he beleeue thoſe points wherein he doth agree with them, for the ſame reaſon that they doe; that is to ſay: He doth not beleeue thoſe points which he ſeemeth to beleeue preciſely, for that God hath reuealed them, and by his Church propounded them: for if he did, ſith this reaſon is common to all points of faith, he ſhould aſſoone beleeue all, as any one. He hath not, therefore (I ſay) one and the ſame faith, which other Chriſtians haue, (who notwithſtanding haue the true faith.) And ſith as S. Leo ſaid, Niſi vna eſt, fides non eſt: If it be not one faith, it is no faith at all: It followeth that he, that beleeueth not entirely all points of faith, hath no faith at all: and conſequently, ſith one that hath no faith, can no way be ſaued: it is euident that he that beleeuing ſome articles, doth obſtinately denie others cannot be ſaued.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Your ſecond reaſon, to prooue that faith muſt be entire, is thus to be framed.
                  
                     If faith cannot be one, vnleſſe it be entire, then it muſt be entire.
                     But faith cannot be one, vnleſſe it be entire.
                     Therefore faith muſt be entire.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your propoſition. For it is not To the propoſition. abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation, that faith ſhould be one, in ſuch ſort as you imagine. There is indeed an abſolute neceſſitie, that all men ſhould agree in the beleefe of certaine points, without the beleefe whereof, there can poſſibly be no ſaluation. But that there ſhould be ſuch an agreement in all points, though it be neceſſarie poſitiuely, to ſpeake as you doe, becauſe

Gods truth is in euery particular to be beleeued; yet it is not required as a meanes, without which a man cannot be ſaued, as I haue already ſhewed.
                  I grant the aſſumption in that ſenſe you vnderſtand being one; otherwiſe I denie it. Faith may be one in all points neceſſary to 
                     To the aſſumption. 
                     ſaluation, and yet not entire in beleeuing all things that God hath reuealed.
                  
                  To your allegation out of 
                        Irē. li. 1. ca. 3 Irenaeus, I anſwered Chap. 1. ſect. 5. before: the expoſition you make of it, as I then ſignified, in regard of the latter part thereof, cannot be drawne out of Irenaeus, who ſpeakes not a word of the reaſon whereupon men beleeue, but onely of the principall articles of faith euery where beleeued; in regard whereof there was, as he ſaith, an vnitie of beleefe.
                  Neither is your proofe ſufficient, if we grant your expoſition. For a man may beleeue that which he doth beleeue, becauſe God hath reuealed it, and in that reſpect haue one faith with other Chriſtians, and yet doubt of, or denie ſome other points which are commonly held; becauſe he cannot perſwade himſelfe that they are reuealed by God: though it be generally ſo beleeued. I may ſay the like of matters propounded alſo by the Church, becauſe the decrees thereof are not ſo plaine, but that they may admit diuers ſenſes. But I reſpect not that clauſe, as being a point foiſted in by you, without any warrant of Scripture or reaſon.
                  Though it be no great matter what you build vpon ſo ſlipperie a foundation: becauſe it cannot long ſtand: yet perhaps it is not amiſſe to puſh it downe preſently, that it may not continue to make a ſhew. Thus you build.
                  
                     He, that hath no faith at all, cannot be ſaued.
                     But he, that beleeues not entirely all points of faith, hath no faith at all.
                     Therefore he that beleeuing ſome articles, doth obſtinately denie any others, cannot be ſaued.
                  
                  I denie your aſſumption. A man may doubt of, and denie To the aſſumption. many points as I haue ſhewed, and yet both haue faith, and be ſaued. Your proofe to the contrarie out of Leo was anſwered 
                        Chap. 2. ſect. 3. before.
                  
                     
Your concluſion is not ſo large as it ſhould be. For you reſtraine Of the concluſion. it to obſtinately not beleeuing: which cannot barre a man from ſaluation, but in thoſe points alone, which are neceſſarie as meanes, to bring him to euerlaſting life.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Thirdly, to beleeue ſome points of faith, and to denie others, or any one, is hereſie: as to denie all, is abſolute Infidelitie. But it is ſure, euen out of Scripture, that Heretickes ſhall not be ſaued, no more then Infidels. For as it is ſaid Q
                        •
                     i non credit, iam indicatus eſt, he that beleeueth not, is alreadie iudged: ſo the Apoſile Saint 
                     
                        Ioan. 3. In the Greeke text, Haireſeis Gal. 5. Paule reckoneth hereſies among the works of the fleſh; of all which he doth pronounce. Qui talia agunt, regnum Dei non conſequentur. Thoſe which doe ſuch like things, ſhall not attaine the kingdome of God.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     Hereticall faith is liable to damnation.
                     That faith which is not entire, is hereticall. 
                     Therefore, that faith which is not entire, is liable to damnation.
                  
                  I muſt intreate the Reader to call to minde, what I anſwered To the propoſition. 
                     Sect. 1. before in generall concerning this point, about liableneſſe to damnation. There is no hereſie nor error in matter of Religion, but it is a ſinne: and being ſo, makes the partie that doth erre, liable to damnation. But yet many errors and hereſies are of ſo ſmall moment in compariſon of other, that hee which holdeth them, may, notwithſtanding ſuch his error or hereſie, be ſaued. I gaue examples before, and will not ſtand to repeate them. So then the propoſition is thus farre true, and no farther: Hereticall faith in matters neceſſarie to ſaluation, is ſimply damnable: ſo that he which continueth in ſuch an eſtate, cannot poſſibly be ſaued.
                  Againe, Hereticall faith in any point of Gods truth whatſoeuer, of it ſelfe deſerueth damnation: yet he that doth erre in ſome points, may be ſaued: elſe I thinke there are fewe men liuing, or euer haue bene, that could haue come, or ſhall come to heauen. As for the authoritie of the Church, it is not of force to make that ſimply damnable, which in it ſelfe is not ſo: though it much increaſe the ſinne, whenſoeuer it determineth truly of any point in queſtion. You will ſay 
                        Gal. 5. 20, 21 Saint Paule reckoneth hereſie amongſt the works of the fleſh. So doth he contentions &c.
                     
yet may a man in ignorance be contentious, thinking he doth well, and 
                        Iud. verſ. 3. contends for the true faith, as he ought to do; and for all this contention, not depriue himſelfe of the intereſt he hath to the kingdome of heauen in Ieſus Chriſt. I deny your aſſumption. To the aſſumption. Chap. 1. ſect. 5. A man may be excuſed, in your iudgement, by ignorance, concerning any poſitiue commaundement of God: but out of doubt, there are many points of truth reuealed by God, onely as poſitiue, not as ſuch meanes to ſaluation, that without the beleefe of them a man cannot be ſaued. Adde hereunto, that a Chriſtian may be ignorant of many points held by the Church, and that by negatiue ignorance, becauſe he could neuer come where he might heare, that the Church beleeued ſuch and ſuch things. It is therefore an vnreaſonable thing, to condemne all ignorance for hereſie: and a moſt vncharitable conceit to caſt all into hell fire that beleeue not in euery point, as the Church generally doth, yea though they know what the Church mainteines, & be of a contrarie mind. Your proofe, which is a compariſon of likeneſſe or equality betwixt infidelitie in denying all Chriſtian religion, and hereſie in not beleeuing ſome points of it, is a great deale too weake. Similitudes argue indeed, but rather by way of illuſtration then proofe. And there is no equalitie betwixt denying all, and doubting of ſome. The former abſolutely ouerthrowes true religion: the latter onely miſconceiues ſome points, leauing the grounds of truth vntouched and beleeuing them as moſt certaine.
               
               
                  A. D. § 6.
                  
                     Fourthly, I may confirme the ſame, with the teſtimonie of the ancient Fathers. Firſt of S. Athanaſius in his creed, which is commonly
                     
                        Athanaſ. in Symb.
                      
                     knowne and approoued of all. Quicunque (ſaith he) vult ſaluus eſſe, ante omnia opus eſt, vt teneat Catholicam fidem: quam niſi quiſque integram, inuiolatamque ſeruauerit, abſque dubio in aeternum peribit. Whoſoeuer will be ſaued, before all things it is needfull that he hold the Catholicke faith: which vnleſſe euerie one doe keepe entire and vnviolate, without doubt he ſhall periſh euerlaſtingly.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  If the ancient writers ſhould affirme a thing ſo vnreaſonable, there were good reaſon for a man to looke for ſome proofe of it, out of the Scriptures. But (no doubt) we ſhall finde your

citations of their writings as much to the purpoſe, as we haue done your former arguments. The firſt you alleadge is Athanaſius in his Creed; to which I anſwer, that See my anſwer to 12. Art part. 1. art. 4. Athanaſius ſpeaks not of all points reuealed by God, but of thoſe ſubſtantiall matters, which are there ſet downe by him, and namely, of the Trinitie of perſons, and Godhead of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. This appeares by the laſt verſe of the ſame Creed, where he thus concludeth: This is the Catholicke faith, which except a man beleeue faithfully, he cannot be ſaued. But Athan
                        •
                     ſiu
                        •
                      hath not comprehended all points of religion in that Creed, (for he leaueth out the buriall of our Sauiour Chriſt, vnleſſe you will ſay he put his going downe into hell for it,) neither doth he require, in that place any other point, as neceſſary to be beleeued to ſaluation, but thoſe onely, that he there reciteth, which muſt be kept entire and vnuiolate of euery man that will be ſaued.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  Qui ſunt in ſacris literis eruditi, (ſaith Saint Baſil) ne vnam 
                        Teſte Theodoreto lib. 4. Eccleſ. hiſtor. cap. 17. quidem ſillabam diuinorum dogmatum prodi ſinunt: ſed pro iſtius defenſione, ſi opus eſt, nullum non mortis genus libenter amplectuntur. Thoſe that are well inſtructed in holy Writ, doe not ſuffer one ſillable of diuine doctrine to be betraied or yeelded vp: but for the defence thereof, if need be, doe willingly embrace any kinde of death.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  That of 
                        Baſil apud Theodoret. hiſt. lib. 4. cap. 17. Baſil is leſſe to the purpoſe. For firſt, he ſaith nothing of any doctrine propounded by the Church, or of your vnwritten traditiōs, but only of the Scriptures. And how makes this for the beleeuing whatſoeuer the Church wil deliuer, without which, in your iudgement, faith cannot be one, or entire? Secondly, he ſpeakes not of all ignorant men, whoſe faith, vpon paine of damnation, you will haue entire, concerning euery point; but of thoſe onely that are learned in the holy Scriptures, or at the moſt, ſo farre as they are learned in them. I aſtly, what ſaith he of theſe, but that which we alwaies require, that a chriſtian ſhould not ſuffer any ſillable of true doctrine to be betraied? This makes againſt you, who reſt wholly vpon Popes and Councils, and by that meanes oftentimes betray the truth of God manifeſted in the Scripture; yea ſo farre are you from mainteining euery ſillable of it, with hazard of your liues, that

you doe what you can for ſhame, to deſtroy it all. 
                        Azorius Moral. inſtit. lib. 8 cap 26. § Quaeres.
                      You Papiſts depriue the people of them altogether, at leaſt for their priuate reading; howſoeuer your Pope Pius 4. makes a ſhew of permitting it. You haue thruſt out the 
                        Concil. Trid. ſeſſ 4. de edit. & vſu ſac. liter.
                      Authenticall copies of Hebrew and Greeke, and, in ſteed of them authoriſed a corrupt Latine tranſlation, which no man may refuſe, vpon any pretence; though it haue 8000 places (as Iſidorus Clarius praef. in Biblia. Iſidorus Clarius a great learned man of your owne affirmeth) in which, the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt is changed: yea Cardinal Hoſius contr. Brent. prolegom Hoſius bluſheth not to write: That it were better for the Church, if there were no written Goſpell extant. I omit your blaſphemies againſt the Scriptures, whereof I haue ſpoken otherwhere.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 8.
                  Nihil periculoſius (ſaith Nazianzen) his haereticis eſſe poteſt, qui cum integrè per omnia decurrant; vno tamen verbo, quaſi 
                        Greg. Nazian. tract. de Fid.
                      veneni gutta, veram illam ac ſimplicem fidem dominicam inficiunt. Nothing can be more perilous then theſe heretickes, who, when they runne vprightly through all the reſt, yet with one word, as with a drop of poyſon, doe infect that true and ſincere faith of our Lord.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  What if Nazianzen. de Fide. Gregorie Nazianzen complaine, that heretickes which held moſt points ſoundly, according to truth, as Arius, Eutyches, Macedonius, Neſtorius, and diuers other did, were very pernitious to the Church, becauſe they did more eaſily and ſecretly poyſon the truth of doctrine by their hereſies? Will it follow hereupon, that therefore a man cannot be ſaued, vnleſſe he beleeue euerie point of truth reuealed by God? or that a man hath no faith, becauſe his beleefe agrees not in euery ſmall matter with other Chriſtians? Remember I pray you, we denie not that faith ſhould be entire, but that it cannot be auaileable to ſaluation, if in any one point it misbeleeue. Thus haue I examined the firſt part of this your Treatiſe of Faith, which I know not how I ſhould apply to your maine ſyllogiſme, implied in your preface: when you ſhew the vſe of it in any part thereof, I will giue you anſwer accordingly.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. V. That there muſt be ſome means prouided by almighty God, by which all ſorts of men may learne this faith, which is ſo neceſſary to ſaluatiō.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  The title of this Chapter is ſo propounded, that your meaning may eaſily be miſtaken. There muſt be (ſay you) ſome meanes prouided: May not a man gather by theſe words, that as yet there are no ſuch meanes prouided? where as you would haue vs beleeue, that God hath already made prouiſion of fit meanes to that purpoſe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     As this one, infallible and entire faith is neceſſary to ſaluation, to all ſorts of men, as well vnlearned, as learned: ſo we muſt ſay, that almightie 
                     1. Tim. 2. 
                     God, Qui vult omnes homines ſaluos fieri, & ad agnitionem veritatis venire, who would haue all men to be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of truth, hath (for proofe that this, of his part, is a true will) prouided ſome rule or means, whereby euery man learned and vnlearned, may ſufficiently in all points, queſtions or doubts of faith, be infallibly inſtructed, what is to be holden for the true faith: and that the onely cauſe, why any man miſſeth of the true faith, is either becauſe he doth not ſeeke out and find this rule and meanes; or hauing found it, he will not vſe it, and in all points (ſubmitting his owne ſenſe, ſelfe opinion, and proper iudgement) obediently yeeld aſſent vnto it; as the nature of diuine faith, and the dutie of euery Chriſtian bindeth him to do. This is proued, becauſe if Almightie 
                     1. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3. Aug. lib. de Sp. & lit. c. 33. Proſper. lib. 2. de vocat. gent. cap. 23. 25. 28. D. Ambroſ. ſer. 8. in Pſal. 118. Jren. l. 4. ca. 71. 
                     God hath a true will, of his part, to leade all men to this happie end of eternall ſaluation, (as it may be plainly proued that he hath, out of Scripture and Fathers) he muſt needs prouide them ſufficient meanes, by which it may at leaſt be poſſible for them to attaine that end. For we neuer ſay, that God hath a will to do any thing, vnleſſe he do either abſolutely worke the thing, or at leaſt prouide meanes ſufficient, by which it is poſſible to be done. But vnleſſe there be ſuch a rule or meanes prouided, by which euery one learned and vnlearned, may attaine to this one, infallible and entire faith, of which I haue ſpoken before, there are not ſufficient meanes prouided, by which it is poſſible for all men to come to ſaluation; ſith (as I proued) without that faith it is vnpoſſible for any one to come to ſaluation. Therefore we muſt needs ſay, that Almightie God hath prouided this rule or meanes, by which euery man, euen the moſt vnlearned, may ſufficiently be inſtructed in matters of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Whether your compariſon, by which you propound this point, be of likeneſſe or equalitie, I ſee not what agreement the

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
one part can haue with the other. But to let that paſſe, becauſe it is of no great moment; I am now earneſtly to requeſt all men, Proteſtants and Papiſts, who will vouchſafe to reade my anſwer, that they would giue me leaue to examine this treatiſe by the light of true reaſon, and themſelues take a little paines, more then ordinary in the vnderſtanding of it. We are then firſt of all to remember, that the ſumme of this treatiſe was propounded by the author himſelfe in his preface, to this effect: That the faith which the authoritie of the true Catholick Church commendeth to vs, is, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith: and that the faith which the authoritie of the Church of Rome commendeth to vs, is that faith. Now then theſe two points being proued, that which was intended, is diſpatched; and either of theſe failing, the matter is ſtill in queſtion. For proofe of the former propoſition or ſentence, he diſputeth on this maner: That we muſt needs admit an infallible authoritie in the Catholicke Church, by reaſon whereof euery one muſt learne of it onely what is the true faith. Now he addreſſeth himſelfe to the proofe of this laſt propoſition, which, as I ſhewed in my anſwer to the Preface, is the aſſumption of his ſecond Syllogiſme: and thus he reaſoneth:

                        If God haue not prouided ſome rule or means, whereby euery man learned and vnlearned, may ſufficiently in all points, queſtions or doubts of faith, be infallibly inſtructed, what is to be holden for the true faith, vnleſſe we admit ſuch an authority, then we muſt needs admit it.
                        But God hath not prouided any rule or meanes, vnleſſe we admit ſuch an authoritie.
                        Therefore we muſt needs admit ſuch an authoritie in the Catholicke Church.
                     
                  
                  The ground of the propoſition, or maior, is this, that God will 
                     The Propoſition. 
                     haue all, as well vnlearned as learned to be ſaued. Which being vnderſtood, I anſwer concerning the conſequence of the propoſition, that it is falſe. I will be as plaine as I can, that euery one may vnderſtand me. If his meaning be, that we muſt admit ſuch an authoritie in the Catholicke Church, becauſe without it there are no ſufficient meanes of ſaluation for euery particular learned and vnlearned man. I deny the conſequence of his propoſition.

For neither is it neceſſary to ſaluation, that a man ſhould be infallibly inſtructed in all points, queſtions, & doubts of faith, and God neuer had any purpoſe, that euery particular man ſhould be affoorded that meanes of ſaluation. I will not ſpend time nor labor in this point: it may be proued ſufficiently by this his argument. For theſe means, he imagineth of a viſible Church alwayes continuing, are not ſuch, but that before the comming of our Sauiour, and ſince alſo, many thouſands haue liued and died, which could neuer haue any ſuſpition or thought of ſuch a Church. Till it pleaſed our Sauiour 
                        Mat. 28. 19. to ſend his Apoſtles with a generall commiſſion, the knowledge of him was ſhut vp within 
                        Mat. 10. 5. & 15. 24. the land of Iewry, or at the moſt, was heard of but in the countries neare adioyning. After the commiſſion giuen, it asked ſome time for the Apoſtles to diſperſe themſelues ouer the world; and in that time many thouſands muſt needs die, without the knowledge of our Sauiour Chriſt. But what ſpeake I of the beginnings of the Goſpell? How many countries are there, in which no ſteps of the Goſpell haue bene, to which no little ſound of it hath come for many hundred yeares? 
                        Auguſt. de vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 14. Auſtin ſayth, that in his time there were many nations, to whom the Gospell had not then bene preached: yea it 
                        Auguſt. Ser. Dom. in monte. lib. 2. Origē. ad Mat. homil. 28. was commonly held amongſt the auncient writers, that the day of iudgement ſhould ſpeedily enſue, after the Goſpell had bene preached in all the world.
                  If you vrge that 1. Tim. 2. 3. place of Timothie, that God wil haue all men to be ſaued: you ſhall be anſwered by one of your owne ſide; that 
                        Luc Brugen. ad Mat. 22. 
                     (all) ſignifies all kind of men, not euery man of euery kind: of euery kind many. They are called all (ſaith 
                        Fulgent. de incar. cap. 31. 
                     Fulgentius) becauſe God ſaueth them out of euery nation, condition, age: out of euery prouince, of euery language. So doth 
                        Auguſt. En. chir. ad Lauren. cap. 103. De correp. & grat. cap. 14. Auſtin expound that text in diuers places, though hee bring alſo ſome other interpretations, but all againſt the conceits of men, that would haue all taken for euery one. The like expoſition he giueth of that in the Goſpell, 
                        Auguſt. in Joan. tract. 52. Holk. in 2. q. 1. ad 4. princip. art. 1. 
                     I wil draw all to me: All kinds of men, in all languages, in all ages, in all degrees of honor, in all diuerſities of diſpoſitions and wits, in all profeſſions of arts lawful and profitable, &c. Holkot not the meaneſt of your ſchool-men, maketh this ſenſe of thoſe words, God will haue all men to be ſaued: that is ſaith he,

                     God hath made all men capable of ſaluation, and giuen commandements, which if all men ſhould obſerue, they ſhould be ſaued. But what need I be long in this matter, when as your ſelfe (as it ſhould ſeeme) ſo vnderſtood it? In the title you ſay, All ſorts of men, in the Chapter you repeate thoſe ſame words, and adde two ſorts, learned and vnlearned; which alſo you do afterward. It may therefore ſeeme ſtrange (perhaps) to ſome man, that I trouble my ſelf and the reader with this exception againſt your propoſition. But I do it not without iuſt cauſe. For although both title and chapter make profeſſion as it were, of that meaning: yet within halfe a dozē lines after, you giue me occaſiō to ſuſpect the other ſenſe: where you ſay, God hath prouided meanes whereby euery man learned and vnlearned may ſufficiently be inſtructed. And indeed, whereto elſe tendeth that diſcourſe of the viſibilitie of the Church, ſo much magnified and vrged by you? In that ſenſe then I denie the conſequence of the propoſition. But if you vnderſtand it according to the plaine words, not of euery man, but of all ſorts of men. I ſtill denie the conſequence. For though it be out of doubt, that God hath appointed as wel vnlearned as learned to euerlaſting life; yet it is falſe, that there needeth any ſuch rule or meanes, as of neceſſitie to ſaluation.
                  I denie your aſſumption. For God hath prouided a rule, To the Aſſumption. whereby a man may be inſtructed in all points and queſtions of faith. Let them that would attaine to ſaluation (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 1. Cor. hom. 6. Chryſoſtom) beſtow their time in the Scriptures. And againe, 
                        Ad Joan. homil. 52. 
                     If we ſearch the Scriptures diligently, we ſhall attaine to ſaluation. We are not commaunded (ſaith Iuſtin. in dialog. cū Tryphon. Iuſtin the martyr) by Chriſt to giue credit to the doctrines of men, but to thoſe which the holy Prophets haue publiſhed, and Chriſt hath taught. Therefore doth 
                        Tertul. contra Hermog. cap. 22. Tertullian call Hermogenes to the Scripture, and adore the ſufficiency thereof. By which onely (as 
                        Opus imperf. in Mat. homil. 49. one ſaith) after hereſie once hath poſſeſt the Churches, the true Church of Chriſt is to be found. A little after, He that would know which is the true Church of Chriſt, how ſhall he know it, but only by the Scriptures? From, and in which only, 
                     Firmitatem. 
                     aſſurance of faith is to be had, as he ſaith preſently after.
                  God hath a true will (which alſo certainly taketh effect) that

ſome mē of al ſorts ſhold be ſaued, but not that euery particular man ſhould: as I proued before by your reaſon, becauſe he hath not vouchſafed euery one the means. Cōcerning 1. Tim. 2. 3. the firſt place alledged by you, the Apoſtles owne interpretation ſeemeth to allow that which I brought before out of Auſtin, of the diuers conditions and ſorts of men. For ſo himſelfe ſpeaketh. I will 
                     
                        ver. 1. 2. 
                     that prayers, ſupplications and interceſſions be made for all men: for Kings, and for all that are in authoritie. He ſheweth in theſe laſt words what he meaneth by all men, All ſorts of men. The reaſon why he nameth Kings and magiſtrates, is, becauſe they were at that time, not onely heathen, but alſo enemies and perſecutors: ſo that no ſuch doctrine can be certainly and neceſſarily concluded out of this text, that God would haue euery particular man to be ſaued. For the auowing of the former expoſition, we muſt vnderſtand, that the word all is often vſed in Scripture for euery kind. 
                     
                        Mat. 4. 23. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Ieſus healed euery ſickneſſe and euery diſeaſe: not euery particular, but all kind of diſeaſes. 
                        Mat. 12. 31. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Euery ſinne and blaſphemy ſhal be forgiuen: not euery particular ſinne, but euery kind of ſin, ſaue onely that againſt the holy Ghoſt. We heard before that of Iohn, 
                        Ioan. 11. 32. 
                     I wil draw all to me: and 
                        August. tract. 52. Saint Auſtins iudgement thereupon. And if it were true, that God had (as you ſpeak) a true wil, that all men ſhould be ſaued, how can that be true, which not we onely, but the learnedſt of your Papiſts hold, according to the Scriptures, that he appointed ſome to damnation, as wel as other ſome to ſaluation; and that there can be no reaſon giuē why this man in particular is vouchſafed faith and ſaluation, that man is not, but onely the wil of God. As it is euidently proued by 
                        Thomas ad Rom. 9. in. qq. diſp. de praedeſt. q. 6. art. 2. 1. q. 23. art. 5. in 1. diſt. 41. q. 1. ar. 3. Lombard. 1. diſt. 41. & ibi Petr. de Aliac. Joan. Capreo. & alij.
                      Thomas of Aquin, Rom. 9. and long before him, by S. Auſtin in many places. Ad Simplician. lib. 1. q. 2. de praedeſt. & grat. cap. 46. Enchir. ad Laurent, cap. 32. 99. Epiſt. 105, ad Sixtū: you therfore do Auſtin wrong, who alledge him in your margin, as if he thought that God wold haue euery particular mā to be ſaued; againſt which his doctrine 
                        Auguſt. de ſpir. et. lit. c. 33. De correp. & grat. cap. 14. in ſo many places is direct, and which (as I ſhewed before) he purpoſely refuteth. Proſp. epiſt. ad Auguſt. & in reſp. ad excerpt. Genue. Proſper alſo is of the ſame opinion, as hauing defended that doctrine of Auſtin, againſt his aduerſaries: which alſo is the title & matter of a whole chapter 
                        Prosp. de voc. gent. lib. 1. c. 12. Lib. 2. ca. 2. 25. 28. cap. 19. in one of his bookes: That the ſaying of the Apoſtle, God wil haue
                     
                     all men to be ſaued, is meant of all kind of men. Therfore the place you bring muſt be vnderſtood according to the courſe of Proſpers writings in the ſame treatiſe, that God hath not barred any nation, nor kept back any man from hearing & beleeuing the Goſpel. And farther, hath by his general prouidence and beneſiles affoorded meanes to ſtir vp all to ſeeke God: as himſelf ſpeakes in two of the places you bring, and in ſome other. In Proſper. de lib. arbitr. ad Ruſſia. one place when he had ſaid, that many infants are dead, who certainly haue no part in the citie of God; he addeth: And where is that, which by ſome that vnderſtand it not, is obiected to vs, as contrary hereunto, that God wil haue all men to be ſaued, and come to the knowledge of his truth? Are not they to be reckoned among thoſe All men, who heretofore from time to time haue periſhed without the knowledge of God? This might ſerue for anſwer to you in this point, concerning Gods will to haue all men ſaued. But for your better ſatisfactiō, or if that will not be, for the cloſer ſtopping of your mouth, I will adde that ſolution, which your great Cardinall Bellarmine giues to theſe three places of Scripture that you alledge, though in another queſtion. Theſe places (ſaith 
                        Bellar. de grat. et lib. arb. lib. 2. ca. 3. §. 8. Bellarmine) only ſignifie that God hindereth no man from ſaluation, yea that he hath appointed remedies and helps in common, and that he would haue the preaching of the word and the ſacraments to be common to all. In the ſame ſenſe is God ſaid to be 
                     1. Tim. 4. 10. 
                     the Sauiour of all, becauſe by his generall prouidence he hath care of all, and hath left no man vntoucht, but either by the Goſpell, or by the law, or by nature it ſelfe hath moued him to ſeeke after God; as 
                        Proſper. de voc. gent. lib. 2. cap. 25. & ad cap. Gallor. cap. 8. De voc. gent. lib. 2. c. 10 Proſper ſaith: yea hath affoorded meanes whereby euery man may be ſaued. This place (as 
                        Bellar. de grat. & lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 5. §. Illud item.
                      Bellarmine ſaith) can hardly haue any other expoſition, then that latter. 
                     
                        Gloſſinterli. ad 1. Tim. 2. 3. Your Gloſſe expoundeth it of Gods goodnes to all men in reſpect of outward bleſſings, who makes his Sun to ſhine (ſaith it) vpon good and bad.
                  
                  The other place of 2. Pet. 3. 9. Peter (as we heard 
                        Bellar. de gr. & lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 3. Bellarmine ſay) ſignifieth no more, but that God keepes no man from being ſaued, but hath vouchſafed the word and ſacraments in common to all. Your 
                        Gloſſ. interl. ad 2. Pet. 3. Gloſſe reſtraines that Any to them that are to be conuerted, that is to the elect. That other which are to be conuerted, may be conuertea. 
                     
                        Thomas ad 2. Pet. 3. Holk. in 2. q. 1. ad 4. princip. 
                              •
                           t. 1. Thomas and Holkot interprete it de voluntate ſigni:
                     
of that wil of God, which we may gather by the ſignes he ſheweth: as for example, God calleth all men from danger of damnation, by precepts, counſels, threatnings, rewards. Theſe are ſignes to vs, that God would haue all men to be ſaued: but there is another will called volunt as beneplaciti, the good pleaſure of God, which is indeed truly that which God intendeth. Thomas addeth alſo a ſecond expoſition out of Damaſcen, but it can proue nothing, becauſe it cannot be neceſſarily enforced out of the text, rather then the other, which is alſo more warrantable for the truth of it, as I will ſhew another time, vpon more iuſt occaſion, if it pleaſe God. 
                        Caietan. ad 2. Pet. 3. Caietan alledgeth three ſeuerall interpretations, that of Damaſcens, a ſecond of All kind of men, whereof before, and a third of the elect, which alſo he doth exemplifie in the perſon of Peter. Thus I haue ſhewed, that the maine foundation you build vpon, is but weak, wanting ground of warrant from the word of God. But admit it were neuer ſo true, that God would haue euery man to be ſaued; which in ſome ſenſe, as I haue ſaid, indeed is moſt true; yet were not the conſequence of your propoſition proued. For there might be ſufficient meanes for euery mans ſaluation, though there were no meanes to bring him to that ſame one, infallible, entire faith, which you conceit; but onely to ſo much faith and knowledge as is neceſſary to ſaluation, by which he might be ſufficiently inſtructed in matters of faith: which is all that you craftily ſeeme to require in the concluſion of this ſection; whereas before, in your propoſition, no leſſe would ſerue the turne, then infallible instruction in all points, queſtions, and doubts of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     To this purpoſe ſaith S. Auſtin: Si Dei prouidentia praeſidet 
                        Lib. de vtil. credendi.
                      rebus humanis, non eſt deſperandum, ab eodem ipſo Deo auctoritatem aliquam conſtitutam eſſe, qua, velut certo gradu, nitentes attollamur in Deum. If Gods prouidence (ſaith he) rule and gouerne humane matters, (as he proueth that it doth) we may not deſpaire, but that there is a certain authoritie appointed by the ſame God, vpon which ſtaying our ſelues as vpon a ſure ſtep, we may be lifted vp to God. Saint Auſtin therefore doth acknowledge ſome authoritie to be needfull, as a meanes whereby we may be lifted vp to
                     
                     God. The which lifting vp to God, is first begun by true faith. And becauſe this authoritie is ſo needfull a meanes, he would not haue vs doubt, but that God, whoſe prouidence ſtretcheth it ſelfe to all humane matters, hath not failed to prouide this meanes for vs, it being a principal matter, and ſo principall, as vpon which (according to the ordinary courſe) dependeth the ſumme of our ſaluation. We are not therefore (I ſay) to doubt, but that Almghtie God hath prouided a meanes whereby Animalis homo qui non percipit ea que ſunt ſpiritus Dei, a ſenſuall man who hath no vnderſtanding of 
                     1. Cor. 2. 
                     the diuine myſteries of faith, may come to know them by a firme and infallible beleefe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  To what purpoſe doth 
                        Auguſt de vtil credon. cap. 16. Saint Auſtine bring this? To proue that God hath appointed a rule, by which all men may come to your infallible faith? Nothing leſſe: but to ſhew that where truth is not euident, as to men ordinarily it is not, there God hath prouided meanes to ſtirre them vp to a diligent enquiry after it; or rather (as he plainly affirmeth) to a ridding of themſelues of the cares and pleaſures of this life, which he cals purging of the ſoule, that ſo they may be fit to embrace the truth. Authoritie (ſaith Auguſt. ibid. Auſtin) is at hand for a man that is not able to diſcerne the truth, that he may be fitted to it, and ſuffer himſelfe to be purged. What is this authoritie? what is the vſe of it? Miracles & multitude make vp this authoritie: whereby men not able to ſee truth, in it ſelf, are moued to a reuerend reſpect of the Church, & ſo to an examination of the doctrine, which vpon triall is found true. Thus doth the wiſedome of God prouide for mens ignorance, that authoritie of miracles and multitude may draw them to a conſideration of the truth: which, whenſoeuer it ſhewes it ſelfe ſo plainly that it cannot be doubted of, is to be preferred before all other meanes of perſwading a man to beleeue, or holding him in beleefe whatſoeuer; as the ſame 
                        Auguſt. cont. epiſt. Fundam. cap. 4. Auſtin ſaith: we denie not theſe to be good helpes and ſtrong meanes to the ſearching and finding of the truth, but to be ſufficient and infallible grounds of religion, that a man ſhould relie vpon them, without trying the doctrine by the truth of God reuealed in the Scriptures.
                  It is indeed out of doubt among Chriſtians, that God hath prouided ſome meanes, by which a naturall man (whom you

abſurdly call ſenſuall) whereas 
                        Rom. 8. 6. Epheſ. 4. 18. the Apoſtle meaneth a man in his beſt natural eſtate ſince his fal) who cānot diſcerne of Gods truth, nor admit of it, may come to the knowledge thereof. Becauſe it was impoſſible (ſaith 
                        Iren. lib. 4. cap. 77. Irenaeus) to learne God without God, he teacheth men by his word (his ſonne) to know God. It is he, that hath vouchſafed vs this knowledge by the miniſtery of men, & worke of the ſpirit in their hearts, that beleeue according to the word of God in the Scriptures. Let vs not heare (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 3. Auſtin) This I ſay, This thou ſayeſt, but let vs heare, This ſaith the Lord; there are the Lords bookes extant, to the authoritie whereof both of vs conſent, both of vs giue credit, both of vs obey: there let vs ſeeke the Church, there let vs diſcuſſe our queſtion. Other meanes of triall, then by the Scripture 
                        Auguſt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6. 
                     he accounteth, and calleth deceitfull. The Scriptures are 
                        Hieron. ad Mich. li. 1. ca. 1 the bounds of the Church, beyond which ſhe may not wander. 
                        Ad Pſal. 86. 
                     Whatſoeuer any man ſince the Apoſtles hath ſeene without warrant of Scripture, let him be neuer ſo holy, neuer ſo eloquent, it is of no authoritie: but onely to mooue vs to a conſideration of that he ſaith.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Onely the queſtion is, what manner of thing this meanes muſt be; and where euerie man muſt ſeeke and finde it, that hauing found it he may (as S. Auſten ſpeaketh) ſtay himſelfe vpon it, as vpon a ſure ſtep, thereby to be lifted vp to a true faith, and by faith to God. The which queſtion being of ſo great conſequence, that it being well determined, a man need neuer make more queſtion in matters of faith; I wil (God willing) in the chapters following, endeuor to reſolue it as clearely as I can. And this I purpoſe to do, firſt by ſetting downe what cōditions or properties this rule of faith muſt haue: afterwards by proouing particularly, that neither Scripture alone: not any natural wit or humane lerning: nor priuat ſpirit, can be this rule of faith. And finally that this rule which all mē may ſafely, & muſt neceſſarily follow, can be no other, but the teaching of the Catholicke Church.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  It is onely thus farre agreed betwixt vs, that there muſt needs be meanes appointed by Almightie God, whereby all ſorts of men may come to ſuch a meaſure of knowledge, and faith, as is neceſſarie to ſaluation, not wherby euery man may be infalliblie inſtructed in all points of religion, that he need neuer make more queſtion in any matter of faith: though we grant that

there is ſuch a meanes prouided by God, howſoeuer we in our weakneſſe cannot make ſuch vſe of it.
                  But that we may vnderſtand matters aright, as we go forward; I muſt intreate the Reader to remember, that if all things to come in this your Treatiſe be ſufficiently prooued; yet you faile much of your maine purpoſe. For this laſt Syllogiſme is the foundation of all yet behinde, concerning one of the principall points which you propoūded in the beginning, viz. That it was neceſſarie to admit ſuch an infallible authoritie in the Catholicke Church. Now the propoſition of this Syllogiſme I haue denied, and refuted. Therefore if the aſſumption therof were moſt certainly true, as it is vndoubtedly falſe, yet could your concluſion be nothing ſure: becauſe the ſyllogiſme failes in the propoſition: but let vs ſee how you prooue the aſſumtion:

                        If neither the Scripture alone, nor naturall wit or learning, nor a priuate ſpirit, can be ſuch a rule, then God hath prouided no ſuch rule, vnleſſe we admit an infallible authority in the Catholicke Church.
                        But neither the Scripture alone, nor naturall wit or learning, nor a priuate ſpirit can be ſuch a rule.
                        Therefore God hath prouided no ſuch rule, vnleſſe we admit an infallible authority in the Catholicke Church.
                     
                  
                  This propoſition is not ſet downe by you in plaine termes, but neceſſarily and certainly gathered out of the courſe you hold in the fiue next chapters: wherein the aſſumption and concluſion are manifeſtly contained; that in the foure former; this in the tenth.
                  The conſequence of your propoſition is verie weake: For, To the Propoſition. what if none of theſe (ſeuerally) be ſuch a rule? may not all theſe together be? Sure there is nothing brought by you to the contrary. But if all theſe faile, what can you ſay to the contrarie, why a generall Councell without the Popes authority, ſhould not be ſuch a rule? Or, to goe farther, doe you not thinke that the Pope alone may ſerue the turne? And yet, in your opinion: neither the Councell nor the Pope (ſeuerally conſidered) are the Church. Therefore it ſeemes there may be ſuch a

rule, though there be no companie of men, that hath any ſuch authoritie as you ſpeake of.
                  Secondly, your conſequence is but feeble in an other reſpect. For it preſumeth, that if there be ſuch an authoritie, there is ſuch a rule. Whereas many thouſands in the world may be vtterly without meanes of knowing that there is ſuch an authoritie, and ſo the meanes, as in regard of them, inſufficient. Adde hereunto, that although it were poſſible, and eaſie for euery man to know and ſee the Church: yet the meanes might be inſufficient: becauſe there is no certaine reaſon to perſwade them, that they muſt beleeue this Church in all things: ſo that ſtill, according to your doctrine, the Lord muſt needs haue failed much in his prouidence, though he haue giuen this authority to the Church: becauſe he hath prouided no meanes whereby euery man may certainly be perſwaded, that the Church hath ſuch authoritie. Will you ſay, He hath appointed that all men ſhould beleeue the Church? What can that helpe, when he hath not prouided meanes, for all men to know, that they muſt beleeue her? Muſt we not come now to a priuate ſpirit, that is, to the teaching of Gods ſpirit in the hearts of particular men? And if this muſt needs be in this one caſe, how prooue you, it may not be ſo in other? To anſwer, we muſt beleeue the Church, is to beg the queſtion, againſt all reaſon.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. VI. VVhat conditions or properties muſt be found in the rule of Faith.
                  
                  
                     THis rule, which Almightie God hath prouided, as a ſufficient meanes to direct men to the knowledge of true faith, neceſſarie to ſaluation; muſt haue three conditions or properties.
                  
                  
                     Firſt it muſt be certaine and infallible; for otherwiſe it cannot be a ſufficient foundation, whereupon to build faith, which (as is proued before) is abſolutely infallible.
                  
                  
                     Secondly it muſt be ſuch, as may be certainly, and plainly knowne of all ſorts of men. For if to any ſort, it could not be knowen, or not certainly knowen, it could not be to them a rule or meanes, whereby
                     
                     they might direct themſelues, to the certaine knowledge of the true faith.
                  
                  
                     Thirdly it muſt be vniuerſall, that it may not onely make vs know certainly, what is the true faith in ſome one or two, or moe points, but abſolutely in all points of faith. For otherwiſe it were not a ſufficient meanes, whereby we may attaine to an entire faith: which integritie of faith is neceſſarie to ſaluation, in ſuch wiſe, as hath bene declared and prooued before.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Your aſſumption had three points, and, as it were parts, making three ſeueral ſentences or propoſitions, which for the more To the aſſumption. plainneſſe I will handle ſeuerally, as you haue done. Firſt of the Scripture.
                  
                     The rule of faith muſt be certaine, and infallible, certainly and plainly knowen, and vniuerſall.
                     The Scripture alone is not ſo.
                     Therefore the Scripture alone is not the rule of faith.
                  
                  Ere I come to anſwer your Syllogiſme, giue me leaue to ſhew how obſcurely and doubtfully theſe properties are deliuered by you. Firſt infallible is taken in two diuers ſenſes. Faith muſt be infallible. The rule muſt be infallible. In the former we muſt needs expound infallible, not being deceiued by holding any errour, or nor doubting of that which it beleeueth. In the latter, what can infallible ſignifie, but either that, which is certainly true, or that, which may not be doubted of? Is it plaine dealing to ſpeake ſo doubtfully? Or is it a good kinde of reaſoning to runne the ring, and to diſpute in a circle, as they ſpeake in the Schooles? Chap. 3. Sect. 3. Before, you would prooue the infallibility of faith, by the infallibility of the word of God, which it muſt beleeue: now you conclude the infallibility of the rule, from the infallibility of faith. Is not this to trifle, rather then to reaſon? Would you not laugh at vs, if we ſhould diſpute thus? The elect cannot fall away, becauſe the holy Ghoſt, that vpholds them, is true God. The holy Ghoſt is true God, becauſe the elect, whom he vpholds, cannot fall away. View your ſelfe in this glaſſe.
                  Secondly, what would a reaſonable man conceiue by theſe words, The rule muſt be certainly and plainly knowen: but that

euerie man muſt be able to perceiue that this, or that is the rule? What is your meaning? That Chap. 7. Sect. 2. 
                     the rule muſt not be hard to be vnderſtood.
                  
                  Thirdly, your terme of vniuerſalitie is not ſo plaine, as it might haue bene; becauſe it is commonly, I thinke euery where in this Treatiſe, ſaue in this one chapter, taken for that which belongs to all perſons, times and places: no where for all points of doctrine, no not there, Chap. 4. where you ſpeake of the entireneſſe of faith. And I pray you tell me, why, as you apply infallibilitie to faith and the rule, you do not in like ſort deale with entireneſſe, and ſay that the rule muſt be entire, becauſe faith muſt be entire.
                  
                  I come now to your propoſition, which I denie: becauſe it To the propoſition. is not neceſſarie, that the rule of faith ſhould be ſuch, as may be certainly and plainly knowen, that is vnderſtood in euery point. It is ſufficient, if it may be vnderſtood in thoſe points, that are neceſſarie to ſaluatiō. Who would ſay, that he, which is to meaſure out timber in length, had not a perfect rule to that purpoſe, hauing an ordinarie Carpenters rule, becauſe there are vpon the rule ſome figures, circles, triangles, ſquares and ſuch like, the vſe wherof he vnderſtandeth not? If you runne backe to the entireneſſe of faith, I will follow you for a refutation of my anſwer thereunto, and a founder proofe of that your conceit.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. VII. That Scripture alone cannot be this rule of Faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The title of this chapter, as it ſhall appeare by and by, agreeth not with the diſcourſe in the chapter; and beſides, propoundeth very craftily a matter, which is no way in queſtion betwixt vs and the Papiſts. For there is no Proteſtant diuine, that thinks the Scripture alone, that is, without the miniſterie of man, a ſufficient meanes for the ſaluation or inſtruction of all men, to which the fond example of this Author tendeth, where he talketh of locking vp an vnlearned man that cannot read, alone, without any helpe but a Bible.
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Out of theſe former grounds foure concluſions.
                  
                   The firſt concluſion is, that Scripture alone, eſpecially as it is by Proteſtants tranſlated into the Engliſh tongue; cannot be this rule of faith.
                  
                  This I prooue.
                  
                     Firſt, for that theſe tranſlations faile in the firſt condition; that is to ſay, they are not infallible (as the rule of faith muſt be); for neither were the Scriptures written in this language, immediately by the holy Ghoſt: neither were the tranſlators aſſiſted by the ſame holy Ghoſt infallibly. Infallibly (I ſay) that is, in ſuch ſort, as it were vnpoſſible that they ſhould erre in any point. Sith, therefore, the tranſlators, as being but men, may erre. (To ſay nothing of that which by Gregory Martin is prooued: and by the often changes of new and variable tranſlations is ſhewed that ſome haue erred) how can a man, (and eſpecially an vnlearned man, who hath not ſufficient meanes, learning, nor leiſure to compare the tranſlations with the prime authenticall originall) how can (I ſay) ſuch a man be infallibly ſure, that this particular tranſlation, which he hath, doth not erre? And if in ſome places it erre; how can he be infallibly ſure, that in thoſe places, which do ſeeme to fauour that ſect, which he followeth, it doth not erre? vnleſſe he wil admit an vnfallible authoritie in the Church, to aſſure vs, that ſuch, or ſuch a tranſlation doth not erre, in any point; of which authoritie, I ſhall ſpeake more hereafter.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The Scripture is, in it ſelfe, ſuch a rule or meanes, and (no doubt) ſo made effectuall to ſome by reading, without any other outward helpe of man: but this is not the ordinarie courſe, that God hath appointed, for the inſtruction of the people, in the knowledge of his truth. Therefore, if at any time we ſay, that the Scripture alone, is the rule of faith, by Alone, we ſeuer it from the traditions and authoritie of men, not from their miniſterie: and aſcribe vnto it ſufficiencie in reſpect of the matter to be beleeued, not ſimply of the meanes to bring men to beleefe.
                  The aſſumption, which you ſhould prooue (as alſo the title of your chapter profeſſeth) is this, That the ſcripture alone, cannot be the rule of faith. By what reaſon do you prooue it? Truly

by none at all: but leauing the queſtion, you diſpute againſt the Engliſh tranſlation. Wherefore I take it for granted, that, in your conſcience, you acknowledge the ſufficiency of the Scripture, to direct vs in all matters and queſtions of faith. And thereupon I inferre, that the infallible authoritie, which you would tie to the Church, is needleſſe; becauſe, without it, there is a ſufficient rule of faith prouided by Almightie God, whereby euerie man, learned and vnlearned, may be inſtructed in all points of faith, what is to be holden for true. Hence it followeth, that the firſt of your maine points, ſet downe in the preface is falſe, and ſo your whole Treatiſe void & vntrue. You tell vs indeed afterward, that ſome of your reaſons againſt the Engliſh tranſlation haue alſo force to prooue, that the Scripture alone, in what language ſoeuer, is no ſufficient meanes: but you neither ſhew vs, which thoſe reaſons are, nor are there any of ſufficient weight to that purpoſe. Let them iudge, that will read my anſwer. But firſt I will propound certaine teſtimonies of the Fathers concerning the infallibility & ſufficiency of the Scriptures. VVhen hereſie (ſaith 
                        Opus imperf. in Mat. 24. hom. 49. one) hath once gotten footing in the Church, there can be no refuge for Christians, which deſire to know the true faith, but onely to the Scriptures. And afterward, Chriſt commaunds, that they, that deſire to haue certaintie of faith, flie to no other thing but to the Scriptures. In the ſame place, three ſeuerall times in one halfe page, he aſſureth all men, that in the moſt dangerous daies of Antichriſt, there will be no way to know the true Church of Chriſt, 
                     Niſi tantū
                        modo per ſcripturas. 
                     but onely by the Scriptures. If certaintie of faith, & knowledge of the true Church may be had from the Scriptures, & in time of hereſie, cannot elſe where be had: out of doubt the Scripture is certaine and infallible, and ſo conſequently the rule of faith. 
                        Irenaeus li. 3. cap 1. Irenaeus tels vs, that the Goſpell is left to vs in the Scriptures, to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. 
                     
                        Tertul. cont. Hermog. cap. 22. Tertullian cals to Hermogenes for proofe of that he ſaid, out of the Scriptures, and warneth him and his complices to beware of the woe, that is threatned againſt them, which adde to, or take from the Scriptures, If they bring any doctrine, that is not written therein. 
                     
                        Origen. ad Ierem. hom. 1. ad Rom. lib. 3. ad cap. 3. Origen is ours euery where in this queſtion, allowing not any expoſitions or ſenſes, but thoſe that are warranted
                     
                     by the Scriptures: requiring of vs, to bring not our owne, but the ſayings of the holy Ghoſt, when we teach. This was the rule, which 
                        Theodoret. hiſt. eccle. lib. 1. ca 7 Conſtantine the Emperour enioyned the Fathers of that firſt famous Councell of Nice to follow, and which they accordingly followed. The bookes of the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles, and the Oracles of the old prophets, plainly inſtruct vs (quoth that worthie Emperour) what we are to iudge of matters 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . de diuina voluntate vel lege, ut Caſſiodorus. Triport. 
                     concerning God. Therefore laying aſide all enemie-like diſcord, let vs debate ad determine the points in queſtion, by the teſtimonies of the Scriptures inſpired by God. Theſe, as we heard before, 
                        Hieron. ad Mich. li. 1. ca: 1. Ierome makes the bounds of the Church, within which ſhe muſt keepe her ſelfe; and 
                        Proclus. de Fide ad Armen. Anno. 430. Proclus Archbiſhop of Conſtantinople confineth faith to the ſame place. Faith (ſaith he) muſt abide within the Euangelicall, and Apoſtolicall bounds. 
                     
                        Paſchaſius cō
                           tra Macedon. lib. 1. cap. 1. Anno. 500. Paſchaſius a Cardinall of your Church (as you ſay) many yeares ſince, tied Macedonius the hereticke to the Scriptures equiring him, either to ſhew by euident teſtimonies of the word of God, that we muſt beleeue in the Church, or elſe to vrge the point no further. For (as 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 2. Tim. homil. 9. Chryſoſtome truly affirmeth) If there be any thing needfull to be knowen, we ſhall learne it in the Scriptures. I mightfil whole ſides with teſtimonies out of the Fathers, to this purpoſe, but I let them paſſe as needleſſe: eſpecially ſince your ſelfe before confeſſed, that the word of God is infallible, and therefore, in that reſpect, ſufficient to be the rule of faith. Now to your concluſion.
                  The firſt part of this firſt concluſion is falſe, in regard of the infallibilitie of Scripture: which it ſhould ſeeme you ſaw well enough, and therefore balkt that matter, and deuiſed an other point, concerning our tranſlation, to play withall. For what is it but trifling, when a man leaues the thing in queſtion, and buſies him ſelfe about the refuting of that, which beſides himſelfe, no man euer dreamed of? What Engliſh proteſtant euer affirmed, that our tranſlation was infallible, that is, ſuch as had no error in it, or might not be doubted of? Or who euer tooke it for the rule of faith? You make babies, which you beate as you liſt. Againſt the Scriptures being the rule of faith, which we affirme, you ſay nothing. Againſt

the infallibilitie of our tranſlation, which we grant not to be the rule of faith, you diſcourſe at large; wherein I intreate the Reader to conſider theſe few things with me. That which he ſpeakes in diſgrace of our tranſlation, makes no more againſt it, then againſt all other whatſoeuer. For neither is any tranſlation the language in which the Scripture was written; and no tranſlators euer had any ſuch infallible aſſiſtance by the holy Ghoſt. Remember the 8000. places Chap. 4. ſect. 10. Sure the author of the vulgar Latin tranſlation had not ſuch help as the Hebrew and Greek originals, which the tranſlations of all the learned Papiſts themſelues declare; Pegnm, Vatablus, Iſidorus, Clarius. Pagnin, Vatablus, Iſidorus, Clarius, &c.
                  As for Martin was ſet out 1582. Fulks anſwer 1583. Gregory Martins cauils, they were anſwered long ſince by D. Fulke: and I maruell that you can name them without bluſhing, ſeeing neuer a one of you durſt vndertake the defence of them, for the ſpace of theſe 23. yeares. Nay, which is worſe, you were not aſhamed, in Printed at Antwerp. 1600. the ſecond edition of your Rhemiſh Teſtament, to bleare your blind followers eyes, with a table of hereticall corruptions in tranſlating the Scriptures, as if you had propounded ſome new matter, whereas they were all taken out of that booke of Martins, and had long before bene iuſtified by D. Fulke, without any reply on your parts.
                  You demaund, how any vnlearned man can be infallibly ſure, that in thoſe places which do ſeeme to fauour our ſect, our tranſlation doth not erre. I anſwer, that there are better meanes of aſſurance for vnlearned Proteſtants, concerning the truth of our tranſlation, then any Papiſt can haue by your imagined authoritie, for your vulgar Latin. Firſt, it is no ſlender perſwaſion to any reaſonable man, that thoſe places you ſpeake of, if not wholy, yet for the moſt part are tranſlated with the ſame ſenſe in other toungs which they haue in ours; as in Spaniſh, French, Italian, Flemiſh, Dutch. Secondly, it is a great confirmation of the truth, that many of thoſe texts which ſeeme moſt to fauor vs, are the ſame in your vulgar and Rhemiſh editions, that they are in ours. Thirdly, the truth of ours is yet more cleare, becauſe euery man may ſee, that in bookes of controuerſie betwixt vs, our tranſlations are ſeldome denied by the learned of your ſide, though you condemne our expoſitions. Fourthly, who may not eaſily

diſcerne how much more faithfull our tranſlation of thoſe places, & all others is, then yours; ſeeing we are readie to make triall of it by the originals, the learned on your ſides being iudges: you are afraid of nothing more, then to haue yours examined by the Hebrew and Greeke? Fiftly, in the places you ſpeake of, our tranſlations deſerue the more credit, becauſe we labour to make them plaine for euery mans vnderſtanding, and ſhew how they agree with the reſt of the booke and chapter: wheras your Rhemiſh Teſtament is ſo handled, that an Engliſh man of good vnderſtanding can hardly tell what to make of it, for the very words themſelues in many places, as if you auoided nothing more then plainneſſe. Sixtly, we perſwade all men, as much as we can, to labour for the knowledge of the originall tongues, that ſo they may be able to iudge of our tranſlation: you do all you can to keepe men in the miſt of ignorance, becauſe you are afraid to haue your corruptions diſcouered. Seuenthly, though we allow not our miniſters ſuch an infinite authoritie as you giue your Cleargie: yet we teach, that it becoms Chriſtian charitie and modeſtie, neither to ſuſpect a tranſlation where the analogie of faith is kept, and the plaine meaning of the holy Ghoſt not manifeſtly altered; nor to reſt vpon priuate conceit, againſt the generall iudgement of the learned, without very euident proofe of error. Theſe, amongſt other, are reaſonable grounds for a Chriſtian to build vpon, that he may haue ſome good aſſurance of the truth of our tranſlation. Now let vs examine yours.
                  
                     We muſt (ſay you) admit an infallible authoritie in the Church, to aſſure vs that ſuch or ſuch a tranſlation doth not erre in any point. Firſt, this is more then neeeds. For if that authoritie can aſſure vs, that the tranſlation erreth not in any point needfull to ſaluation in regard of the ſenſe, it may be a ſufficient ground for vs to build our faith vpon, though it ſhould miſtake ſome words in many points, and the ſenſe too, in matters of leſſe importance. Secondly, though we do admit ſuch an authoritie in the Church, yet may we be farre enough from any ſuch aſſurance. For how ſhall I be ſure, that the Church hath ſo affirmed of this, or that tranſlation? How ſhal I know, what the

Church is? A company (you ſay) of men vpon earth, infallibly taught by the holy Ghoſt, what is the true faith in al points. Is this teaching cōmon to euery one of this company ſeuerally, or only annexed to them all ioyntly when they are together? What if all, what if the greater part aſſemble not? Is this companie of Clergie men onely, or of Lay men alſo? If of them, then belike theſe are none of the Church. But let vs grant that, which (as it ſhal appeare in due place) is neither true nor probable, that the Clergie onely is the church, howſoeuer they may be ſo repreſentatiuely. What aſſurance can any man haue, who liueth not in the time of this aſſembly (I might ſay, in the place too, where it is) that there was any ſuch aſſembly? that the greateſt part agreed to the approouing of ſuch a tranſlation? that this is the tranſlation they agreed to? Eſpecially ſeeing two Bellū Papate Popes, ſince the laſt Conuenticle of Trent, haue ſet out your authentical tranſlation diuerſly. Whether of theſe two was agreed on? How ſhall I be infallibly aſſured, that theſe Popes altered nothing in the tranſlation allowed by the Councel? Shall I ſay more? What if this Councell vſed not the meanes of examining this tranſlation by the originals? What if moſt of them (as it is moſt certaine) had no skil in the originals? and ſo did but leape after ſome few, like ſheepe, not vnderſtanding what they did? yet the ſhoot Anchor holds: the Pope allowed of their iudgement. What if his skil were but indifferent? He could not erre, you will ſay. What was the reaſon, why he allowed that tranſlation? becauſe the Councel examined and approued it. But without him, al they might erre, eſpecially if they did not vſe all good meanes to find out the truth. VVho aſſured him they did? Shall we haue the holy Ghoſt like Mahomets doue, to come and certifie the Pope of this doubt? This is a matter of fact; and in things of ſuch nature the Pope may erre, euen iudicially. Well, I will deale bountifully with you. Put caſe all this be true. How ſhal I attaine to infallible aſſurance hereof? Forſooth ſome Prieſt or Frier, Ieſuite or other, telleth me, that things ſo paſſed, and therefore I am bound to beleeue it. Then my faith reſteth not vpon the authority of the Church, but vpō the credit of him that ſaith, he is ſent by the Church to make ſuch report. Thus it cometh to paſſe, that the beleefe of vnlearned

Papiſts is nothing elſe but a perſwaſion they haue, that ſuch a prieſt knoweth what is true, and will not deceiue them with any falſe informations. Tell me not of other Prieſts and Ieſuits conſenting with him, that was thy ſpirituall father: for all theſe together, if there were ten times as many of them, are not the Church, in which onely this infallible authoritie is to be found. And ſo there can be no ſuch aſſurance in any vnlearned Papiſt of the truth of your vulgar, or any other tranſlation. I confeſſe it is againſt both Charitie and Ciuilitie to ſuſpect a man of vntruth, without iuſt cauſe of ſuſpition: but ſuch fruites grow vpon ſuch rootes of Poperie, that a man muſt needs be either vnciuill in giuing credit to nothing, though vpon neuer ſo good reaſon; or elſe ridiculouſly credulous in beleeuing euery thing that ſhal be told him, though neuer ſo much againſt reaſon. But the ſpirit of God teacheth and perſwadeth men to beleeue the Church. Are you they that mocke at priuate ſpirits, and yet are glad to flie to that helpe? Is it not as likely the ſpirit ſhould teach men which is the Scripture, as which is the Church? And aſſure them of a tranſlation, as of this or that mans ordination and prieſthood? If ſuch proofes, as I haue ſpoken of before, will ſerue, wee are nothing inferiour to you, but as well for weight as number, ſuperiour. If you ſay, the Scriptures enioyne vs to beleeue the church: How ſhall I be aſſured that they are not in thoſe places that ſeeme to enioyne ſuch a beleefe falſly tranſlated? Becauſe the Church ſaith, they are true in all points. What if the Church be deceiued? It cannot be. Who ſaith ſo? The Scripture. Who tels you the Scripture ſaith ſo? The Church. What is to be ridiculous, if this be not? It might ſeeme exceeding ſtrange, that euer any reaſonable man ſhould be ledde away with ſuch fopperies: if the holy Ghoſt had not foretold vs of it, that 2. Theſſ. 2. 11, 12. 
                     God would ſend men ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lies, that all they might be damned vvhich beleeued not the truth, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe. Theſe deluſions poore ignorant Papiſts truſt to, and to none more then to thoſe which are the mayneſt of all, the authoritie of the Church, and impoſſibilitie of the Popes erring: to which whoſoeuer firmely cleaueth, can neuer be good Chriſtian or faithfull ſubiect in any Church or ſtate whatſoeuer.
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     Secondly, they faile in the ſecond condition or propertie, which the rule of faith ſhould haue. For the Scriptures themſelues alone, in what language ſoeuer, be obſcure, and hard to be vnderstood, at least to vnlearned men, who cannot reade them; and therefore the Scriptures alone cannot be vnto vnlearned men, a ſufficient rule to instruct them in all points of faith; as is plaine. For locke vp an vnlettered man, and an Engliſh Bible, for a time in a ſtudie, and hee will come forth (I warrant you) as ignorant in matters of faith as he went in, if wee adde no other meanes to instruct him but the bare written word, which hee cannot reade. And yet vnlearned men may be ſaued; and ſaued they cannot be, without an entire and vnfallible faith: and this they cannot haue, vnleſſe there be ſome certaine rule and vnfallible meanes prouided by Almightie God, meet for their capacitie, to teach them this faith: and Scripture alone (as is now proued) is not a rule meete for the capacitie of vnlearned men, or apt to instruct them ſufficiently in all points of faith. But what ſpeake I onely of vnlearned men? ſith alſo learned men cannot by onely reading the Scriptures, be vnfallibly ſure, that they doe rightly vnderstand them. For while they vnderſtand one way, perhaps they ought to vnderstand another way: that which they vnderstand plainly and literally, ought perhaps to be vnderſtood figuratiuely and myſtically; and contrarie, that which they vnderſtand figuratiuely, ought perhaps to be vnderſtood properly. And ſeeing that it is most certaine, that all doe not expound right, ſith the expoſition of one, is contrarie to the expoſition of another; (as right is neuer contrarie to right) how ſhould one be vnfallibly ſure, that hee onely expoundeth right; hauing nothing to aſſure him, but the ſeeming of his owne ſenſe and reaſon, which is as vncertaine and fallible, as the iudgements and perſwaſions of other men, who ſeeme to themſelues to haue attained as wel as he, the right interpretation or ſenſe. Moreouer there be many things required to the perfect vnderſtanding of Scripture, which are found but in very few: and thoſe alſo in whom thoſe gifts are, are not vnfallibly ſure, that they are ſo guided by thoſe gifts, but that both they and others may prudently doubt, lest ſometimes
                     
                     in their priuate expoſitions, as men, they erre. And conſequently, their priuate expoſitions cannot be that rule of faith, which we ſeeke for; which muſt on the one ſide be determinately and plainly vnderstood: and on the other ſide it muſt be vnfallible, certaine, and ſuch as cannot erre.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  That ſecond condition of eaſineſſe to be vnderſtood, is no propertie neceſſarily belonging to the rule of faith: vnleſſe perhaps you imagine that God failes in his prouidence, if a man may not come to the knowledge of the truth, and euerlaſting life, without any paines. Is it not enough that the rule is ſuch, as may be vnderſtood of euery one, vnleſſe a man may know it by dreaming of it? Is not the knowledge of the meanes of ſaluatiō worthy of ſome care and labour?
                  Are the Scriptures obſcure and hard, that they cannot be vnderſtood? How then ſaith the holy Ghoſt, that 
                        Pſal. 19. 8. 
                     they giue wiſedome vnto the ſimple, and light to the eyes: that 
                        & 119. 105. ver. 13. 
                     they are a lanterne to our feet, and a light to our paths: that the entrance into them ſheweth light, and giueth vnderſtanding to the ſimple? Why doth the Apoſtle call them 2. Pet. 1. 19. 
                     a light ſhining in a darke place? And yet all this is ſpoken of the Scriptures of the old Teſtament, which, in compariſon of the new, are indeed obſcure. Your Gloſſe expounds that place, 
                        Gloſſa ad Pſal. 119. 
                     Thy word is a lanterne, of all the holy Scriptures. Your Cardinall 
                        Joan. de Turrecrem. ad Pſa. 18. & ad Pſal. 118. verſ. 130. Turrecremata ſeeing the plainneſſe and clearneſſe of the word of God, ſo directly and expreſly commended, applieth thoſe places to the new Teſtament, which (as he ſaid) is bright and cleere, which enlightens our darkneſſe, and giues vnderſtanding to the humble. And who can doubt that the Scriptures are ſuch, as may be vnderſtood by all men, ſeeing the Lord writ them for the inſtruction of all men: and our Sauiour Chriſt in the Goſpell commendeth the Iewes for ſearching the Scriptures, affirming that 
                        Ioan. 5. 39. 
                     in them there is proofe of his nature and office? But to what purpoſe were this ſearch, if nothing could be found by it? So cleare is this truth, that the auncient writers auow it without any doubting.
                  
                     Clem. Alexā. orat. ad gentes. 
                     Hearken ye that be farre off, hearken ye that be neare: The word of God is hid from no man, it ſhineth to all men; there is no great darkneſſe in the word. The Scriptures (ſaith 
                        Jren. lib. 1. cap. 31. Irenaeus) are plaine,
                     
                     and without doubtfulneſſe: and may be heard alike of all men. Giue heed (ſaith Iuſtin. contra Tryph. Iuſtin the martyr) to thoſe things that I wil rehearſe out of the Scriptures, which are ſuch as need hearing onely, and not any expounding. This, as the Greek ſheweth, is to be vnderſtood not onely of thoſe places which he was then to deliuer, but generally of the Scriptures: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                        Cyrill. Alex. contra Iulian, lib. 7. 
                     That the Scriptures might be knowne to all men great and litle, they are profitably commended to vs in a familiar ſpeech, ſo that they are not aboue any mans capacitie. Yea there is nothing in them hard (ſaith 
                        Lib. 9. the ſame author) to them that are conuerſant in them, as they ought to be, though euery ſentence be obſcure to Iulian and his complices. The like hath 
                        Epiph. haereſ. 79. Epiphanius: All things are cleare in the Scriptures to them who will bring to the vnderſtanding of the word of God, a religious kind of diſcourſe. Where that ſame 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which Epiphanius requireth, ſeemeth to be nothing els but a reuerend examining of the Scripture, according to the holy Ghoſts manner of ſpeaking and reaſoning in the Scripture. 
                        Haereſ. 69. In another place he ſaith, that Al things are cleare & plaine in the holy Scriptures. So alſo ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 2. Theſs. hom. 3. Chryſoſtom. And a litle after, he teacheth vs how to reſtraine thoſe All things. All things (ſaith he) that are neceſſary, are open and manifeſt. 
                     
                        Chryſoſt. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
                      In another place comparing the Apoſtles with the Philoſophers, he ſaith, that the Philoſophers indeed writ obſcurely, that they might be had in admiration for their eloquence and learning; but the Apoſtles and Prophets take a contrary courſe, deliuering all things plainly and cleerly to all men, as being the common teachers of al the world; that euery one by himſelfe might be able to learne thoſe things that were taught, euen by the onely reading of them. He ſaith yet further, that 
                        In Mat. hom. 1. 
                     the Scriptures are eaſie to be vnderſtood, of ſeruants, of countrey people, of widowes, of children, yea and of him that is very vnskilful. I could be large in this matter: a few more teſtimonies ſhall ſuffice. God (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. ad Pſal. 8. Auſtin) hath applied the Scriptures to the vnderſtanding of infants and ſucklings. Therefore 
                        Contra Iulian. lib. 1. cap. 5. Auguſt. de peccat. mer. & remiſſ. lib. 2. cap. 36. he iuſtly reproueth Iulian, who (as you Papiſts do now) layd out with many words the hardneſſe of the Scripture: yet is it not to be denied, that the Scriptures are hard: but as hard as they are, enough may be learned out of them, euen by the ſimpleſt, for his ſaluation. There is
                     
                     meate for ſtrong men (ſaith Fulgent. in ſerm. de Confeſſor. Fulgentius) and milke for babes. There hath God altogether prouided for the ſaluation of all, whō he vouchſafeth to ſaue. Euery man (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de vtil. eredendi. cap. 6. Auſtin) may draw from thence as much as is ſufficient for him. But is this knowledge to be had with idleneſſe and careleſneſſe? Nothing leſſe. If you wil perſwade your ſelues (ſaith Chryſoſt. in Prologad Roman. Chryſoſtome) to beſtow paines and diligence in reading, ſurely nothing ſhal be wanting for your vnderſtanding of the Scriptures. There are indeed (as 
                        Auguſt. de doct. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 6. 9. Auſtin ſaith) hard places in the Scripture: yet no other, then are other where in plaine termes expounded. There is great obſcuritie (ſaith 
                        Ambroſ. ad Pſal. 118. ſer. 8. Ambroſe) in the writings of the Prophets: but if thou knocke at the gate of the Scriptures with a certain hand of thy mind, and diligently examine thoſe things which are hidden, by little and little thou ſhalt begin to gather the ſenſe of that which is ſpoker, and it ſhal be opened to thee by no other but by the word of God. For it is the order of the Scriptures (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Eſai. cap. 9. Ierome) to hard things, to ioyne other that are plaine. The circumſtance of the Scripture (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. qq. 83 q. 69. Auſtin) doth giue light to the ſenſe of it. The fewer (ſaith Tertull. cont. Praxeam. Tertullian) muſt be vnderſtood by the more. That rule of 
                        Auguſt. de vtil. cred. cap. 6. Auſtins muſt alwayes be remembred, that we come with deuout and religious affection to the reading of the Scriptures, as true religion requireth. And (as Chryſoſt. in. Prolog. ad Roman. Chryſoſtome ſaith) we must ſeeke, namely by prayer, if we wil find the ſenſe of the Scripture. For (as 
                        Origen. in Exod. hom. 9. Origen ſaith vpon the like occaſion) it is hidden from them that are negligent, but opened to them that knock, and found of them that ſeeke. The reaſon why God hath ſo tempered all things in ſcripture, writing ſome where plainly, ſome where obſcurely, is giuen by 
                        Auguſt. de doct. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 6. Auſtin: That it is done by Gods prouident care, that by labour he might beate downe our pride, and draw away our minds from lothing: things eaſily attained to ſeem of litle worth. Gloriouſly therefore (as 
                        Cap. 9. he ſaith) and wholſomly hath the holy Ghoſt ſo tempered the Scriptures, that by plaine and eaſie places he might prouide for the ſatisfying of our hunger, and by hard and darke, take away lothing. But (as 
                        Cap. 9. he addeth) in thoſe places which are plaine in the Scriptures, all thoſe matters are found which containe faith and good manners: that is, hope and charitie. This is that which 
                        Marſil. Patauin. de fenſ. pacis. part. 1. cap. 9. Marſilius of Padua, aboue 800 years ſince, diſputed againſt the Pope, That the Goſpel was very ſufficient, perfect & cleare of it ſelf, that
                     
                     by it we may be directed immediatly, concerning, and in all things, which belong to a mans obteyning of euerlaſting life, and auoiding miſerie.
                  
                  As in the former propertie, hauing propounded your matter againſt the Scripture, you reaſon only againſt the Engliſh tranſlation; ſo in this, that one may be ſome what ſutable to the other, being to ſpeake of the obſcuritie of the Scripture, you ſhew that it is hard to one kinde onely, viz vnlearned men: though you helpe the matter a little, afterward, by auouching the hardneſſe of it, euen to the learned alſo. The Scriptures (ſay you) are not the rule of faith. Why ſo? Becauſe they are hard to be vnderſtood of thoſe vnlearned mē, that cannot reade them. Is not the teaching of the Church, whereto you aſcribe ſo much, vnpoſſible to be vnderſtood by them, that cannot heare? Is it therefore no ſufficient rule? But the Scripture is not ſo hard, as you imagine: no not to them that cannot reade, as long as they may heare it read, and haue care to vnderſtand, and remember what they heare. Yea there are many in England, that know neuer a letter on the booke, who notwithſtanding are able to giue a better ſenſe of many places of Scripture, then ſome of your Maſſe-prieſts, that can read their whole Portuiſe & Seruice booke. Idle therefore and ridiculous is your example of a man lockt vp with a Bible: ſince by hearing it read, though himſelfe cannot read, he may attaine to more knowledge, then many of your blinde guides haue: who for all their skill in reading, vnderſtand neuer a word of their Epiſtles & Goſpels, which they daily ſay at Maſſe, like prating parrots.
                  Now for your concluſions inferred hereupon; the firſt, as I haue ſhewed, is falſe, that any ſuch entire and infallible faith is neceſſarie, ſo that without it a man cannot be ſaued: the ſecond, of the meanes without which, ſuch a faith cannot be had, is ordinarily true; the third, which denies the Scripture alone to be ſuch a meanes, is either falſe, and not prooued by you, or nothing to the purpoſe. Can any man truely ſay, that God hath not prouided ſufficient meanes for euerie mans ſaluation, becauſe ſome men are vnable to reade the Scriptures, which are thoſe meanes? Hath not God done his part, in making all men capable

to reade, though many neglect to learne? Therefore if the Scripture be ſufficient for all mens inſtruction, as I haue prooued it to be, for all your ſuppoſed obſcurity: God cannot be charged with want of care, becauſe men are careleſſe to vſe the meanes of their owne ſaluation. But if by Scripture alone, you meane Scripture without any helpe of man; all you ſay is beſides the matter. For no man euer was ſo fooliſh, as to make Scripture alone, in that ſenſe, either the rule of faith, or a meanes of any good whatſoeuer: vnleſſe perhaps you Papiſts, according to the reſt of your ſuperſtition in Agnus Deis, hallowed Granes, and ſuch like, may haue a conceit, as thoſe prieſts (of whom 
                        Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 43. an ancient writer ſpeaketh) had, that a part of the Goſpell hung about ones necke, may be a preſeruatiue againſt I know not what bodily or ghoſtly danger.
                  
                  You haue vndertaken to prooue, that the ſcriptures are not the rule of faith, becauſe they are hard to be vnderſtood. Their hardneſſe, in reſpect of the ignorant, was auowed by you onely againſt thoſe, that cannot reade. Now for the learned you tel vs, that they cannot, by onely reading the Scriptures, be infallibly ſure, that they rightly vnderſtand them. What then? Therefore can they not at all be ſure? Becauſe reading onely will not aſſure them: therefore is there no meanes, whereby they may be aſſured? Call to minde what I alledged before, out of Ambroſe, Origen, Chryſoſtome, and Auſtin: who doubt not to aſſure men, that they may come to the vnderſtanding of the Scripture, if they will vſe the meanes of praier and diligence. Whom ſhall we beleeue? Theſe worthies of the Church, ſpeaking alſo vpon manifold experience; or you, whom we know not ſo much as by ſight or name? If you can ſo farre bewitch any of your owne poore ignorant ſoules, yet ſure ther is no man of any indifferent good iudgment, that will be carried away with this your ſimple authoritie, againſt the ioynt conſent of thoſe famous Diuines.
                  But you will adde reaſon to your authoritie: let vs heare it. It may be (ſay you) they ought to be vnderſtood otherwiſe. Therefore they cannot be ſure, they rightly vnderſtand. Tell me, I pray you, for my better inſtruction, whether you make this doubt of

all places of ſcripture, or of ſome onely. It will not ſinke into my head, that you doe ſo much condemne the ſcripture of obſcuritie, that you thinke no one place of it, can be certainely vnderſtood. Nay it is vnpoſſible you ſhould ſo deſpiſe the iudgment of thoſe, I named er while, or condemne your owne capacitie, as to denie, that 
                        Canus loc. Thcol. lib. 3. c. 2 many texts of ſcripture are ſo euident, that a childe cannot miſtake the meaning of them. Then, that antecedent, It may be they ought to vnderſtand otherwiſe, in ſome places of ſcripture can haue no place. Let vs limit it, that the truth may appeare. Some places of ſcripture are ſo hard, that a man may vnderſtand them otherwiſe, then, in truth, they are to be vnderſtood. This propoſition is out of all queſtion: what wil you conclude hereupon? That men cannot be ſure they rightly vnderſtand theſe places. I grant this too. Therefore theſe doubtfull places are not to be made the foundation of our faith: but (as Auguſt. ad Marcel. de Baptiſ. paruulo. Auſtin ſaith) We muſt reſt vpon thoſe places of ſcripture, which are verie manifeſt, that by them the harder may be expounded. But admit there were diuers texts of ſcripture, which can by no meanes be certainly vnderſtood (which yet for my part, ſauing other mens better iudgement, I do not thinke to be true, becauſe God hath appointed euerie ſyllable of the ſcripture for our inſtruction in this life) but admit (I ſay) there were ſuch places; yet would it not follow hereupon, that becauſe thoſe texts cannot be vnderſtood, therefore the ſcripture is ſo obſcure, that it cannot be the rule of faith. For there may be ſufficient means of ſaluation plainly diſcouered in the ſcriptures, though theſe places be not vnderſtood: yea it may be, and it is verie likely, that the verie ſame things which in theſe places are ſignified, are otherwhere in ſcripture apparently ſet downe. You will ſay, this prooueth that the ſcripture is obſcure in ſome places. VVho euer denied it? But this doth not prooue, that it is hard to be vnderſtood in thoſe points; that are neceſſary to ſaluation. Remember, I denied that ſecond property of your rule, when I anſwered to your propoſition. A man may be ſaued, though he vnderſtand not the true ſenſe of euery verſe in the Bible; ſo he do not acknowledge it to be the word of God, and withall denie it to be true. But if it be ſo hard to vnderſtand

the Scripture aright, is it good dealing in you to vrge the expoſitions of men, with ſuch perē ptorineſſe, as if it were an hainous ſinne not to giue credit to euery interpretation of the Fathers? We See my anſwer to 12. art. part 1. art. 5. acknowledge their learning and pietie: but we remember they are men, and therefore may be deceiued. Where they bring reaſon for their expoſitions, we conſider of it with reuerence to them: where they bring none, we trie whether we can bring any proofe of their interpretation. If we finde none, we labour to expound the text ſo, as true reaſon (ſo farre as we can iudge) ſhewes that we ought to doe. Where our weakeneſſe affoords no proofe for our interpretation, nor againſt theirs, we are willing and readie to giue more credit to them, then to our ſelues. But it is no diſgrace to them, that proceſſe of time, by Gods bleſſing vpon mens endeauours, ſhould bring ſomewhat to light now, which in former ages hath not bene vnderſtood. It cannot be hidden from any man (ſaith your 
                        Ioan. Roffenſ. cont. Luth. art. 18. Biſhop of Rocheſter) that many things are now more cleerely beaten out and vnderſtood, as well in other things, as in the Goſpell, then heretofore; becauſe the ancient writers had not the Ice broken before them, neither did their time ſuffice to ſound the deepth of Scripture in all places. VVe may adde hereunto another reaſon, obſerued by 
                        Stella in Luc. 10. confiteor tibi pater.
                      Stella, that, though of our ſelues we were but Pigmees or dwarfes, yet being carried vpon the ſhoulders of them, as it were vpon Giants, we may ſee farther then they could. VVhich is the reaſon, why 
                        Salmero ad Rom. 5. diſp. 51 an other of your writers doubts not to affirme, that the latter doctrines or expoſitions are the quicker ſighted.
                  
                  But diuers men (you ſay) expound diuerſly: and thereupon you demaund, how any man can be ſure he expounds truly, hauing nothing to aſſure him, but the ſeeming of his owne ſenſe and reaſon. VVhen I read this obiection, me thought I ſaw one of Cicero in Acad. the old Academicks or Scepticks, ſweating to prooue, that there is no truth in any thing to be knowen, but that we muſt be content to reſt vpon likelihood. I pray you anſwer me, in good earneſt: Are you perſwaded of your ſelfe (I ſpeake to a Scholler) that you vnderſtand not the true meaning of any one place in Ariſtotles Phyſicks, with the commentaries vpon

him expounding diuerſly? Surely if your ignorance had bene ſo great, I preſume neither Rome, Rhemes, Doway, nor any other Vniuerſitie or Colledge would haue vouchſafed you the degree of a Batcheler in Arts. And yet Ariſt. in Epiſt. ad Alexan. Ariſtotle himſelfe profeſſeth of that booke, that he ſet it out, as if he had not ſet it out; becauſe no bodie (for ſooth) could vnderſtand it, but he, that had, or ſhould heare him teach by word of mouth; as you ſpeake of the preaching of the Church. If then it be poſſible to vnderſtand Ariſtotles meaning, and that certainly, for all the diuers interpretations of his expoſitors, and his owne intended obſcuritie: giue vs leaue to thinke, that the Lord God purpoſing to reueale his will by the ſcriptures, hath written in ſuch ſort, that man his creature, to whom (as 
                        Gregor. 1. Epistola. 84. Gregorie ſaith) he writ them, may without any iuſt cauſe of doubting, vnderſtand ſo much at the leaſt, as is neceſſarie for his ſaluation; 
                        Ioan. 20. 31: which was Gods end in writing. But euerie interpreter thinks that himſelfe hath attained to the right ſenſe. What of that? Therefore, is there no meanes to diſcerne, which interpretation is true, which falſe? Doth not this doubt accompanie the writings of the Philoſophers, as well as the ſcriptures? Neuer go about to perſwade vs to ſuch an iniurious and vnthankfull conceit towards God, as to imagine, that he hath vouchſafed vs the vſe of reaſon, and the treaſure of his word, to ſo little purpoſe. If it be vnpoſſible to know, whē we haue the true ſenſe of the ſcripture it had bene farre better, that no ſcripture had bene written, but all left to the direction of your Pope, frō time to time. Such blaſphemies, as I haue ſhewed, ſome of your ſide vtter: but a true Chriſtiā is ſo throughly perſwaded of Gods wiſdom, that by his giuing the ſcripture, he ſeeth al theſe your cauils & ſhifts refuted.
                  Now in the laſt place you tell vs, that there be many things required to the perfect vnderſtanding of ſcripture, which are found in very few; If by perfect vnderſtanding you meane an exact knowledge of all places: that you ſay is true, but not much to the purpoſe. For there is no ſuch knowledge neceſſary, but that the ſcripture may be the rule of faith, though euery text in it cannot be certainly vnderſtood. But conſider a little, that if there be means of attaining to a perfect vnderſtāding of ſcripture, thogh

they be many, yet by your confeſſion they may be had: elſe are they in vaine, if neither any man, nor all men can attaine vnto them: ſome to one, ſome to more, as it pleaſeth God to beſtow his gifts ſeuerally. If you meane, that many things are required to a perfect vnderſtanding of points neceſſarie to ſaluation: ſee how much you differ from the iudgement of the ancient Fathers. The truth is not hid (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. in Math. hom. 24. Chryſoſtom) but from thē, that will not ſeeke it. And in 
                        In Gen. hom. 3 an other place; The Scripture expoundeth it ſelfe, & ſuffereth no man to erre. Let him that hath an heart (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de doctr. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 6. Auſtin) read thoſe things, that go before, and thoſe that follow, and he ſhall finde the ſenſe. For (as 
                        Hieron. in Pſal. 86: Ierome truly ſaith) the Lord hath ſpoken by his Goſpell, not that a few ſhould vnderſtand him, but that all ſhould. 
                     
                        Auguſt. de doctr. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 6. Auſtin gaue vs the reaſon before, why he ſpeakes plaine in ſome places and not in all; To feed our hunger, and to keepe our queaſie ſtomacks from loathing our meate.
                  
                  But you require I know not what infallible aſſurance, that they which haue theſe gifts, may be ſure, they neuer erre, in any of their priuate expoſitions. What aſſurance looke you for? No reuelation I hope. They may be ſure not to erre, if they deliuer no expoſitions, but ſuch, as they can euidently prooue to be true. For other places, where the ſenſe is hard, let them vſe all the diligence they can, and if it prooue not verie plaine and certaine, let thē leaue it y vncertain, til it pleaſe God ſome other man may finde the true meaning of it, and ſo make it knowen to men for the rule of faith, in that point it concerneth, as it is alwaies in it ſelfe. Are youe afraid, leſt it ſhould come to paſſe hereby, that many matters of faith ſhould be vnknowen? The ignorance of theſe things, cannot hinder a mans ſaluation, and this inconuenience followeth the preaching of your Church, as well as the reading of the ſcripture: For how many points of doctrine are there, not yet decreed of by your Church? How many thouſand places of ſcripture, not yet expounded by it? If then it be no hindrance to ſaluation, for a man to be ignorant of the truth, in many points and places of ſcripture, may not the written word of God be the rule of faith, though diuers things in it be not certainly vnderſtood?
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Thirdly, they faile in the third condition. For the Scriptures are 
                     
                     not ſo vniuerſall, as the rule of faith had need to be. For this rule ought to be ſo vniuerſall, that it may be able, abſolutely to reſolue and determine all doubts and queſtions of faith, which eyther haue bene, or may hereafter be in controuerſie; for otherwiſe there were not ſufficient meanes prouided, by which, ſchiſme and hereſies might be auoided: vnitie of faith, (ſo neceſſarie to ſaluation) might be conſerued among Chriſtian men.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The laſt imperfection, you note in the Scripture, whereby you would make it inſufficient to be the rule of faith, is the ſcantneſſe of it, that it conteineth not all things neceſſarie to be beleeued: which you go about to prooue thus.
                  
                     The rule of faith muſt be able abſolutely to reſolue all doubts of faith, that haue bene, or may be.
                     The Scripture is not able abſolutely to reſolue all ſuch doubts.
                     Therefore the Scripture is not the rule of faith.
                  
                  I ſhould haue let your propoſition paſſe, without any queſtion, To the propoſition. but that I am ſo vſed to your craft in ſpeaking doubtfully. For feare whereof I would faine vnderſtand, what the reaſon is, why you put in abſolutely. If your intent be to ſignifie, that the reſolution muſt be certainly true, you might haue ſpoken plainly, as you meant. But it may be you vnderſtand by reſoluing abſolutely, ſuch a kinde of reſolution, as ſhall take away all outward contention, which ſometimes is indeed brought to paſſe by the Decrees of your Popes, no man daring, for feare of his life, once to open his mouth againſt them: Such a reſolution the ſcripture cannot giue, neither is it to be looked for, that the rule of faith ſhould be of that nature. It is enough that it ſhew plainly and certainly, what is true in all matters of faith. Secondly, the controuerſies of faith, you ſpeake of, muſt be indeed matters, that require beleefe, otherwiſe the rule of faith is not to meddle with them. To ſpeake more plaine; It is not to be held as a duetie of the rule of faith, that it ſhould be able to determine of euerie idle queſtion, that curious and contentious heads can deuiſe. For example, if any man will make queſtion of the Virgin Marie, whether ſhe were (as 
                     Ladie Hungerfords meditations vpō the Beades, 
                     you teach) fifteene yeare old, or, perhaps eighteene or nineteen when our Sauiour Chriſt her Sonne was borne; whether ſhe
                     
                     were threeſcore & three whē ſhe died, or more or leſſe. In theſe, & a thouſād ſuch matters, deliuered as points of faith by your Prieſts and Ieſuits, it is not to be expected that the rule of faith ſhould affoord any reſolution. We grant that infinite queſtions of your ſchoolemen, & poſitiōs of your Diuines, cannot be determined by the rule of faith: but only thus, that they may be cōuinced to be no matters of beleefe, that a Chriſtian muſt needs think thus or thus of thē; becauſe they cannot be prooued, either one way, or other by ſcripture: your propoſition therefore is true onely of thoſe things, that are needfull to be beleeued, all which may be certainly reſolued by it. What cannot, is not of neceſſitie to be held by faith.
                  Your propoſition you prooue, as you thinke, by this reaſon.
                  
                     If there be no ſufficient meanes prouided, by which ſchiſmes and Proofe of the propoſition. hereſies may be auoided, and vnitie among Chriſtians conſerued, vnleſſe the rule of faith be able to reſolue all ſuch doubts, then it muſt be able to reſolue them.
                     But there is no ſufficient meanes prouided, whereby ſchiſmes and hereſies may be auoided, and vnitic conſerued, vnleſſe the rule be able to reſolue all ſuch doubts.
                     Therefore the rule of faith muſt be able to reſolue them.
                  
                  If the propoſition be taken in that ſenſe, which the former may ſeeme to haue, as I ſhewed, then I denie the conſequence To the propoſition. therof; that is, I ſay it doth not follow, that if there be no ſufficiēt means prouided, whereby ſchiſmes and hereſies ſhall de facto, and in euēt be auoided, vnleſſe the rule of faith be able to ſhew what is true, what falſe in all queſtions, that any man will mooue, then the rule muſt be able ſo to doe. The reaſon of my deniall is, that, as before I anſwered, it is ſufficient for the rule to ſhew what is true, in matters of faith; and let vs know, that thoſe are not needfull to be beleeued, of the truth whereof it ſaith nothing anie way.
                  The aſſumption alſo is falſe, though you ſpeak not of actuall To the aſſumption. auoiding of hereſie and ſchiſme. For there is ſufficient meanes prouided for the auoiding of ſchiſme; becauſe nothing muſt be held for certain truth, which cannot be prooued to be according to the rule, which is the onely meaſure of true vnitie among Chriſtians.
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     But the Scriptures be not thus vniuerſall. For there be diuers queſtions or doubts moued now a dayes, and thoſe alſo touching very ſubſtantiall matters, which are not expreſly ſet downe, nor determined by onely Scripture. For where haue we any expreſſe Scripture, to proue, that all thoſe, and onely thoſe bookes which Catholickes or Proteſtants hold for Scripture, are indeed Gods word, and true Scripure? This we ſhall not find expreſly ſet downe in a part of Scripture. This point therefore, whereupon dependeth the certaintie of euery point, proued out of Scripture, cannot be made certaine to our knowledge or beliefe, vnleſſe we admit ſome other infallible rule or authoritie, wherupon we may ground an vnfallible beleefe: which infallible rule if we admit, to aſſure vs, that there is at all any Scripture; and that thoſe bookes and no other be Canonicall Scripture; why ſhould we not admit the ſame to aſſure vs vnfallibly, which is the true ſenſe and meaning of the ſame Scripture? Hereupon S. Auſtin 
                     
                        Lib. de vtilit. credend. cap. 4. 
                     ſaith very well, Cur non apud eos diligentiſſimè requiram, quid Chriſtus praeceperit, quorum auctoritate commotus, Chriſtum aliquid praecepiſſe iam credidi? Tune mihi meliùs expoſiturus es, quid ille dixerit? &c. Why ſhold I not moſt diligently ask or learne of thoſe (he meaneth of the Catholicke Church) what Chriſt hath commanded, by whoſe authoritie I was moued to beleeue, that Chriſt commanded any thing at all? What, wilt thou expound vnto me better, what he hath ſaid? that is to ſay, the meaning of his words: Quae Ibidem. 
                     (ſaith he) iſta tanta dementia eſt, illis crede Chriſto eſſe credendum, & à nobis diſce quid ille dixerit? multo facilius mihi perſuaderem, Chriſto non eſſe credendum: quàm de illo quidquam, niſi ab ijs, per quos ei credidiſſem, diſcendum. What a madneſſe is this in thee, to ſay, beleeue them (to wit the Catholickes) that we muſt beleeue Chriſt (and the Scriptures to be his word), yet learne of vs what Chriſt ſaid? that is to ſay, what is the meaning of his word. I ſhould (ſaith S. Auſtin) much more eaſily perſwade my ſelf that I ought not to beleeue Chriſt at all, then that I muſt learne any thing concerning him of any, except of thoſe of whom I haue already learned to beleeue in him.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  I denie your principall Aſſumption, wherein you denie the ſufficiencie of the Scripture for the determining of all matters of 
                     To the principal aſſumptiō. 
                     faith. For if the Scripture were not ſufficient to this purpoſe, it

might be lawfull for men to adde to the word of God, that which is wanting: but 
                        Deut. 4. 2. that God hath preciſely forbiddē all mē; Ye ſhall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither ſhall you take any thing from it: out of which, Cardinall 
                        Caietan. ad Deut. 4. Caietane ſaith, we may gather that the law of God is perfect. But of this place I haue ſaid more Defence of the Reform. Cath. pa. 405. &c. other where; and our Diuines are large and plentifull in this argument. 
                        Act. 26. 12. The Apoſtle Paul affirmeth of him ſelfe, that he preached nothing but that which had bin ſpoken by Moſes and the Prophets: yea our Sauiour euery where auoucheth his doctrine by the writings of the old Teſtament. Indeed of whom ſhould we know the will of God, but of God himſelfe? who doubtleſſe hath not deliuered it ſo ſparingly, in ſo many ſeuerall bookes, but that it containeth whatſoeuer is needfull to ſaluation. All things indeed that our Lord did, are not written, but thoſe (ſaith 
                        Cyril. Alexā. in Joan. lib. 12 cap. 68. Cyril) that the writers thought to be ſufficient for manners and doctrine. I could ouerwhelme you with teſtimonies of the Fathers in this matter. A few ſhall ſerue. The Canonicall Scripture (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de peccat. mer. lib. 3. cap. 7. Auſtin) is the rule of all. The letters of Bb. are reprehended by ſome other of grauer authoritie. 
                     Plenaria. 
                     Generall Councels correct prouinciall, and the former are amended by the latter. Let the Scripture be iudge (ſaith 
                        Baſil. epiſt. 8. another) and let thoſe doctrines be held for true that agree with it. For the law of God or Scripture (as 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 2 Cor. hom. 13. Chryſoſtom ſaith) is a moſt exact ballance, ſquare, and rule. Therefore let vs paſſe by that which he or he thinkes, and let vs enquire all things of the Scriptures. 
                     Athanaſ. con. gentes, vel idola. 
                     The holy Scriptures inſpired by God, are ſufficient to ſhew the truth. And therfore (as 
                        Hilar. de Trin. lib. 3. Hilary ſaith wiſely and religiouſly) It were well we would content our ſelues with thoſe things that are written. If we will not, this is Baſil. de vera ac pia fide. Baſils cenſure of vs, that we are without faith, and proud. It is a manifeſt argument of infidelitie (ſaith Baſil) and a certaine ſigne of pride, if any man reiect ought that is written, or attempt to bring in any thing that is not written. Therefore 
                        Ioan. Damaſ. orth. fid. lib. 1. cap. 1. Damaſcen ſaith, that the Church receiueth, acknowledgeth and reuerenceth all things that are deliuered by the law, the Prophets, the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, and further ſeeketh not for any thing. I pray you ſhew me ſome reaſon, if you can, why the Lord that doth not omit neceſſary matters, & repeateth thoſe that are leſſe needful to be known, ſhould fil ſo

many bookes of Scripture with the ſame hiſtories and points of doctrine oftentimes rehearſed, and quite leaue out many things of farre greater importance, then ſome of thoſe are which he hath cauſed to be written. Without the knowledge of many things recorded in the Scriptures, a man may be ſaued; but you denie ſaluation to all men that beleeue not whatſoeuer you teach them (and there is no end of your deuices) though it haue no warrant in any part of Scripture. Is it not better then to reſt only vpon that which both you and we acknowledge to be the word of God, then to giue an infinite libertie to men of deuiſing what they wil; & to lay a grieuous burthē vpon our ſelues, to beleeue vnder pain of damnation, whatſoeuer they wil father vpō, I know not what impoſſibilitie of erring? Let him that hath eyes ſee, though the blind delight in blindneſſe.
                  The weakneſſe of your principall Aſſumption, concerning the inſufficiencie of the Scriptures, you ſtriue to fortifie with this ſlender reaſon.
                  
                     If there be diuers queſtions moued now a dayes, touching ſubſtantiall Proofe of the principall aſſumption. matters, which are not expreſly ſet downe, nor determined by onely expreſſe Scripture, then the Scripture is not able to reſolue all ſuch doubts.
                     But there are diuers ſuch queſtions.
                     Therefore the Scripture is not able to reſolue all ſuch doubts.
                  
                  Ere I anſwer directly to your ſyllogiſme, I muſt note two To the Propoſition. things in the propounding of it. Firſt, by whom the queſtions you ſpeake of, are moued. If by Papiſts, it is the ſhame and ſinne of your Church, to ſuffer idle and needleſſe queſtions to be moued, of which there can be no determination but by a Councel, to be held, no man knoweth how many yeares hence, euer or neuer. If you ſay, theſe queſtions are ſet on foote by vs; all the world may diſcerne your vntruth. For we are certainly perſwaded, that it is not lawfull to accept any doctrine, as a point of faith, which cannot be proued by the Scriptures. But you will ſay, We thinke they are determinable by Scripture, though indeed they be not. At the leaſt then, anſwer the proofes we bring out of Scripture, and on our part the controuerſie is ended. You wil reply, that we will not be anſwered, but interprete Scripture as we
                     
                     liſt. Who ſees not that this is a meere ſlander, ſince we ſtand not vpon any priuate reuelations, but on thoſe rules of interpretation, which the fathers, according to the light of true reaſon, haue left vs, as it were by legacy? But this reply is alſo otherwiſe inſufficient. For whereas you yeeld, as appeares by this reaſon, that ſome things may be determined by Scripture; this obiection denies that any point of doctrine whatſoeuer can be reſolued of by it; becauſe if that you ſay, be true, we wil in all caſes interprete Scripture as we pleaſe. Secondly, I obſerue another point, in reſpect of the time. If the queſtions you meane be ſuch, as were neuer moued till now, and the Scripture neuer failed in any former doubts, which ſeems to be implied in that ſpeech Now a dayes: me thinkes there is no ſhew of reaſon to imagine, that ſo many and ſo capitall hereſies, for the ſpace of 1500 years ſhould be refuted and ouerthrowne by Scriptures; and now at the laſt, matters of leſſe importance, and yet as you ſay, very ſubſtantiall, ſhould haue no meanes of ſatisfaction by the like courſe. Doubtleſſe if the Scripture hath hitherto bene ſufficient, it is no ſmall wrong to ſuſpect and accuſe it now of inſufficiencie, eſpecially in very ſubſtantiall matters, neceſſary to be beleeued.
                  
                  Now concerning your ſyllogiſme, I denie the conſequence To the propoſition. of your propoſitiō. What? is the Scripture ſo poore and weake, that it can determine nothing which is not expreſly ſet downe therein? What art, what writing of any man is ſo bare? Are the Scriptures onely, that come immediatly from the author of true reaſon, to be barred of that priuiledge, which all other writings iuſtly challenge? Is not a neceſſary conſequence, according to the rules of logicke and reaſon, to be allowed of in Diuinitie as well as in the Mathematicks, where conſectaries are as certainly true, as the theoremes, out of which they are drawne? Is it not as certaine by Scripture, that there are three perſons diſtinct each from other, and all three but one God, as if theſe verie words had bin expreſly ſet downe? But we muſt beare with you in this matter, who learned this ſhift of your great Cardinal Bellarmine. We ſay (quoth 
                        Bellarm. de verb Dei non ſcript. lib. 4. c. 3 in princip.
                      Bellarmine, where he deliuereth the opinion of your Church) that the whole doctrine of faith and
                     
                     manners, is not expreſly contained in the Scriptures. Expreſly contained? To be expreſſed, and to be contained, are (at the leaſt) diuers, if not contrary. But I pray you, who ſaith otherwiſe? Not the Proteſtants doubtleſſe: whoſe opinion he propoundeth preſently, after this ſort. They preach (ſaith Vbiſuprae. Bellarmine, ſpeaking of vs) that all things neceſſary to faith and manners, are contained in the Scriptures. What is become now of expreſly? For pure ſhame he was glad to leaue out that word, though he had craftily ſtolen it in before. Well, this may ſerue to make good my deniall of your propoſition. A thing may be determinable by Scripture, though the determination be not expreſly ſet downe therein. Take not aduantage of my words, becauſe I ſay determinable, and you determined. For the queſtion is not what is determined, that is, ſet downe in plaine words; but it is ſufficient if the Scripture affoord vs the determination of matters by certain conſequēce, vpon truth therein deliuered. Therefore whereas you adde, by onely expreſſe Scripture: onely and expreſſe are but meere ſhifts, nothing at all againſt that we affirme: who require beſides onely expreſſe words of Scripture, the miniſtery and induſtry of man, to gather and conclude points of doctrine out of that which is written in the Scripture.
                  Your aſſumption is true, that there are diuers queſtions not determinable 
                     To the proof of the aſſumption. 
                     by expreſſe Scripture, and yet (as I haue ſhewed) the Scripture is ſufficient for the determining of all points of faith neceſſary to ſaluation. Concerning the particular queſtion, you bring for the proofe of your aſſumption. Firſt you ſeeme to grant (and that grant is as much as we require) that it may be gathered out of the Scripture by conſequence, that thoſe books which we and you acknowledge to be the word of God, are ſo indeed: otherwiſe, why ſay you, that we ſhall not find it expreſly ſet downe in a part of Scripture? Secondly, I demaund, as before, who moueth this queſtion? Not the Proteſtants, who account it a kind of blaſphemie to denie it, and of infidelitie to doubt of it. Your holy Church of Rome is ſhe that hath buzzed this matter into Chriſtian mens eares, ſo that religion is thereby become a ſcorne to Atheiſts, while you make no conſcience of diſcrediting the word of God, ſo you may by any meanes increaſe

the reputation of your Apoſtaticall ſea. The truth is, that this opinion is not a matter now a dayes firſt ſet abroach: for Atheiſts (ſuch as 
                        Auguſt. cont. Fauſt. lib. 32. cap. 21. Iulian) haue from time to time obiected it; therefore might you haue ſpared to mention it, as a queſtion now a dayes moued. But it is new and ſtrange, yea almoſt incredible, that Chriſtians, and thoſe Diuines, yea ſuch as thinke religion reſteth on their ſhoulders, as the Poets faine heauen doth vpon Atlas, ſhould make a queſtion whether the Scriptures be the word of God or no, and ſo giue men occaſion to doubt thereof.
                  Thirdly, if this matter cannot be reſolued of by the Scripture, we ſhall be little the nearer for the infallible authoritie you haue deuiſed. Chriſtians need it not, who are already perſwaded, that the bookes of the old and new Teſtament are the vndoubted word of God: and with Chriſtians onely, to ſpeake truly and properly, hath the Church to do, ordinarily. But it falleth out ſometimes, that amongſt thoſe which make profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, there are ſome found who are in doubt of this point. If this doubt ariſe in the heart of a man that maketh conſcience of religion, he is to be taught, that it is but a tentation of Satan, and therefore not to be hearkened to. Further, we muſt demaund the reaſons of his doubting, 
                        Auguſt. confeſſ. lib. 6. ca. 5. De morib. Eccleſ. Cathol. cap 29. ſhewing him how abſurd and vnreaſonable a matter it is, to make queſtion of that, which generally both Proteſtants and Papiſts hold, and which hath bene held by the ſpace of 1500. yeares, vnleſſe he be able to giue very ſufficient cauſe why he may doubt. His arguments, if he bring any, muſt be anſwered, and the Scriptures auowed by the matter and manner of writing; which is ſuch, as will certainly, if not conuert, yet 
                        Agrippa de vanit. ſcient, cap. 100. conuince any man in the world, that man is not the deuiſer of thoſe bookes. If he be an Atheiſt, that derideth religion, and withall ſo vnreaſonable, that the former and many other important proofes will not perſwade him, what remaines, but that the magiſtrate whom God hath appointed to ſee true religion eſtabliſhed, cut off ſo corrupt a member by lawfull authoritie? Where this courſe is not taken, what meanes haue you to helpe the matter? Will you tell him of an infallible authoritie in the Church? He will laugh

at your folly, who inſtead of prouing beg the queſtion. I doe not beleeue (ſaith he) there is any ſuch Church or authoritie. If I doubt of the Scripture, you proue it by the Church: if I beleeue there is not any ſuch Church, or authoritie in the Church, you will perſwade me by Scripture. To ſay the truth, who can be ſo patient, or fooliſh rather, as to ſuffer himſelfe to be led vp & downe in a ring, as it were a doore turning vpon hinges, ſtill in the ſame place? The authoritie of the Church is an argument of ſuch waight, as that he is not to be counted either a Chriſtiā, or a man of reaſon, that is not much moued therewithall: yea ſo much, as that he will not diſſent from the continuall iudgement of it, vnleſſe he be driuen to it by certaine reaſon: but yet this authoritie is not infallible. Chriſt euermore iudgeth truly (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. cont. Creſc. lib. 2. cap. 21. Auſtin) but the Eccleſiasticall iudges, as being men, are very often deceiued. And therefore he ſaith 
                        De nat. & grat. cap. 61. in another place, that he is not bound to giue his conſent, without libertie to refuſe, to any thing but the Canonicall Scriptures. And in 
                        Epiſt. 19. ad Hier. & ad Paulin. epist. 112. cap. 1. an Epiſtle to Ierome, I haue learned (ſaith he) to giue this reuerence and honour onely to thoſe bookes that are called Canonicall, that I conſtantly beleeue that no writer of any of them hath erred.
                  
                  But to make an end of this needleſſe queſtion, where both ſides are agreed, let vs heare Saint Auſtin ſpeake to the Manichees: If you aske vs (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. cont. Fauſt. lib. 32. cap. 21. he) how we know that theſe be the Apoſtles writings, we make you this ſhort anſwer, Thence we know theſe to be the Apoſtles, whence you know that Manicheus was the author of yours. And 
                        Confeſs. lib. 6 cap. 5. in his Confeſſions he ſetteth out the matter more at large, that when he conſidered how many things we are faine to beleeue, for which we haue no certaine proofe, it pleaſed God, at the laſt to perſwade him, that they were worthy of iust reproofe, which would not giue credit to thoſe bookes of God, which he had eſtabliſhed almoſt in all countries with ſuch authoritie: and that they were (at no hand) to be hearkened vnto, who would aske him how he knew that thoſe bookes were vouchſafed to mankind by the ſpirit of the onely true God. This (as 
                        Greg. de Valent. Analyſ. fid. lib. 1. c. 15. Valentia ſaith) may be knowne by the admirable effect theſe bookes worke in the hearts of men, in ſtirring them vp to vertue, without any ſuch eloquence and perſwaſions, as other writers ſtuffe their books withall,
                     
                     and yet neuer moue vs as theſe do. The like hath 
                        Staple. de autorit. ſcript. lib. 2. cap. 5. Stapleton, where he ſpeakes of the meanes which the Church vſeth to diſcerne of the Scriptures. It is not our meaning to ſhut out the holy Ghoſt, who is the teacher of the children of God, as in other points, ſo alſo in this, but to ſtop the mouthes of Atheiſts and importunate men, who obiect ſo vnreaſonably againſt the iudgement of the whole Chriſtian world, without authoritie or reaſon. But of the ſpirit, and teaching thereof, hereafter.
                  Whatſoeuer you gather vpon the former point, it muſt needs be of ſmal ſtrength, becauſe that hath need of better proof. But let vs grant that it is true: doth it therefore ſeeme neceſſary or reaſonable to you, that we ſhould admit the interpretatiō of the Church, as you ſpeake, without any triall; becauſe by the authoritie thereof we beleeue that the Scriptures are the word of God? What if God gaue the Church no further authoritie, but onely to aſſure vs of the Scripture? It doth not follow that we muſt giue credit to whatſoeuer a man will ſay, becauſe in ſome one point he muſt be beleeued. We may not in reaſon doubt, but that the records which we find in an office, are true, becauſe they are auouched ſo to be by the clearke and maiſter of the office. But what of that? may we therefore take them for competent iudges, ſo that we muſt of neceſſitie hold that to be the meaning of the record, which they deliuer to vs as ſuch? I am perſwaded no man of any vnderſtanding will ſay ſo.
                  Yet do we acknowledge that Auguſt. ad Honor. de vtil. creden. contra Manich. Auſtin ſpeaketh with verie great reaſon. For where ſhould an ignorant man enquire of the ſenſe of the Scripture, rather then there, where be learned it was ſcripture? He ſhall not deale either kindly or reaſonably, if he refuſe their iudgement, other things being alike, for any mans elſe whatſoeuer; and therefore I pray you be not offended, if we, that liued not in the times of Popiſh ignorance, doe giue credit to our owne Church, by which we haue bene perſwaded, that theſe are the ſcriptures of God, rather then to your Prieſts and Cleargie, from whom we haue not receiued this perſwaſion. But the caſe, in Saint Auſtins time, was farre otherwiſe. The Manichees againſt whom he wrote that Treatiſe,

would not ſuffer a man to beleeue any thing, though it were writtē in ſcripture, vnleſſe it were proued true by reaſon: and yet themſelues, as 
                        Cap. 14. Auſtin ſheweth in the chapter you alledge, were driuen to allow faith without reaſon: and to lay this for a ground, that a man muſt beleeue Chriſt, that is, he muſt beleeue that there was ſuch a man, though he haue no proofe for it, but report generally continued a long time: which Auſtin confeſſeth to haue bene the authoritie, that firſt moued him to beleeue. Now the Manichees acknowledging thus much of Chriſt, and that onely vpon beleefe, without reaſon, brought in monſtrous opinions of their owne: which could in no ſort agree with the ſcriptures. Therefore being preſſed hard by the Diuines of that age, with ſcripture, they denied all authoritie thereunto; farther then they in their ignorance and hereſie, could make it ſerue for their vnreaſonable conceits. Yea Auguſt. contra epiſt. fundament. Manich. they made ſmall or no reckoning of the ſcriptures, in compariſon of their fundamentall Epiſtle, and ſuch other blaſphemies written by Manes their founder, and ſome of his followers. Had not Auſtin great reaſon then, to anſwer as he doth? not concerning the ſenſe of ſcripture, to which you falſely apply his words, but touching thoſe bookes of theirs, 
                        Auguſt. de haer. cap. 46. wherein they had written horrible and ſenſeleſſe abſurdities againſt religion and reaſon. Surely (ſaith Auguſt. contra epiſt. fund. Auſtin) ſince by their authoritie I haue bene brought to beleeue, that there was ſuch an one as Chriſt, becauſe it was ſo generally held, time out of minde; I will neuer runne to a few of yours, who learned of them, that Chriſt was, to know what I muſt beleeue of him. Why ſhould I not rather beleeue them, that the ſcriptures teach, what is to be held of Chriſt, then you, that, in your writings onely is the truth: ſince in this matter you can bring no reaſon, why I ſhould beleeue you rather then them? For ſince by them (ſaith Auſtin) I haue beleeued, being mooued, by the authoritie of their generall conſent: if they ſhould faile, and could teach nothing (which words you craftily leaue out) I ſhould eaſlier perſwade my ſelfe, not to beleeue Chriſt, then to beleeue any thing of him, by any mans report but by theirs, who firſt made me beleeue in him. Your gloſſe, of beleeuing the ſcriptures to be his word, and what is the meaning of his word, agree not eyther with the place

you alleadge (as may appeare euidently to him that will reade it) or 
                        Auguſt. de haereſ. cap. 46. Epiphan. lib. 2. hareſ. 66. with their hereſie; but of both I haue ſpoken ſufficiently.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Thus I haue prooued, that thoſe Engliſh tranſlations, whereupon Proteſtants commonly build their faith, cannot be a ſufficient rule of true Chriſtian faith. Firſt becauſe they are not infallibly free from error. Secondly, for that all men cannot reade them; neither can any by onely reading, be ſure to attaine the right ſenſe, without which to haue the words of Scripture, is to haue them, as Auſtin ſaith, ad ſpeciem, non ad ſalutem, for a ſhew, but not to ſaluation. Laſtly, for that all points of doctrine, which appertaine to true Chriſtian faith, are not expreſly ſet downe in ſcripture, as, beſide my proofe Saint Auſtin, Saint Baſil, and Epiphanius do affirme. Some of 
                     
                        Aug. l. 5. de bap. con. donat. c. 23 Baſil. lib. de Sp. cap. 29. Epiph. haer. 61. 
                     which reaſons haue alſo force to prooue, that ſcripture alone, in what language ſoeuer, is not a fit meanes, to inſtruct ſufficiently, all ſorts of men in all matters of faith. Wherefore I may abſolutely conclude, that Scripture alone cannot be that rule of faith, which we ſeeke for.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Thus in ſteed of diſputing againſt the ſcriptures being the rule of faith, which was the matter you propounded, you haue made a diſcourſe againſt our tranſlations, hauing fancied to your ſelfe a conceit, which beſides your ſelfe, I thinke no man euer dreamed of; viz. that we commonly build our faith vpon our Engliſh tranſlation. So that the Scripture may well be the rule of faith, for ought that you haue ſaid againſt it, concerning the firſt propertie of certaine truth, which it were blaſphemie to denie of the ſcripture. For the ſecond, that the rule muſt be eaſie to vnderſtand: I haue ſhewed, that there is no neceſſitie of that condition, and that the ſcripture is eaſie in matters neceſſary to ſaluation. In the laſt point, of the ſcriptures defect, touching many things, that muſt needs be beleeued, you do both wrong God, in making his word writtē ſo vnperfect, and by a fooliſh craft, inſteed of proouing, that the ſcripture containeth not all matters of faith needfull to ſaluation, vndertake to ſhew (that which no man denieth) that all points of beleefe are not expreſly ſet down and determined by ſcripture. And leſt we ſhould forget your ſhuffling, in this point, you offer new proofe of a needleſſe matter,

from the authoritie of Auſtin, Baſil, and Epiphanius: whoſe teſtimonies I alledged before, to prooue the ſufficiencie of the ſcripture, in all matters neceſſarie to ſaluation. The places by you alledged are not of ſuch matters, neither ſpeake of things not expreſly contained, but onely ſhew, that for matters of fact & ceremonie, the Apoſtles haue not determined al particulars. The Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Aug. de baptiſ. contra Donat. lib. 5. ca. 23 Auſtin) haue commaunded nothing, touching not rebaptiſing them, which haue bene baptiſed by hereticks, but the cuſtome which was pleaded againſt Cyprian, is to be beleeued to haue had beginning from their tradition: as there are many things, which the Church euery where holdeth, that we wel beleeue therefore to haue beene enioyned by the Apoſtles, though they are not found written. What is this to prooue, that there are matters neceſſarie to be beleeued to ſaluation, which are not expreſt in the ſcriptures? Baſil. de ſpirſancto. Baſil was not the the author of that Treatiſe, at the leaſt of the latter part of it, from about the 17. chapter, and ſo forward. That appeareth firſt, by obſeruing the difference of ſtyle, being neither like Baſils writing, nor in one place like an other, as Eraſm. in praef ad illum librū
                      Eraſmus hath truly obſerued, who tranſlated it. Secondly, by the fond diſcourſe he maketh, propounding one thing, handling an other, and concluding a third, which not onely Baſil would neuer haue done, but no man of any diſcretion. Laſt of all, he 
                        Cap. 27. 29. bewraieth himſelfe to be a counterfeit, by ſpeaking of Meletius, as one dead long before, who liued in his time, & ouerliued him, as it is manifeſt by 
                        Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26. & lib. 5. cap. 8. the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie. But admit the booke were Baſils: what is there in it to proue, that all points of doctrine, which appertaine to true Chriſtian faith, are not expreſly ſet downe in Scripture? This Author ſaith, that we muſt beleeue oraditions. VVhat? In matters of doctrine? There is no ſuch word in him. He ſpeaketh of outward carriage in ceremonies and phraſes of ſpeech. The queſtion, 
                        Cap. 25. 27. 29. in that part of his Treatiſe, is of the prepoſition with, that is (to ſpeake that euery man may vnderſtand) whether it be lawfull to ſay in the Church ſeruice, and otherwiſe, Glorie be to the Father, and to the Sonne, with the holy Ghoſt; or whether we muſt needs ſay, and to the holy Ghoſt, not with. For this ſpeech that author pleades tradition. Do we denie any ſuch matter?

Or do we not acknowledge the libertie and authoritie of the Churches, in ſuch matters? Who ſees not, that our cuſtome now is to ſay, Glory be to the Father, to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghoſt? Not that thereby we condemne the other kind of ſpeech, but becauſe in matters left to our libertie, we take that which ſeemeth fitteſt. 
                        Epiphan. li. 2 cap. 61. Epiphanius ſpeaking of praier for the dead, which hath no warrant of Scripture, is glad to helpe himſelfe with the authoritie of tradition: telling vs, that ſome things muſt be held by tradition, and not all taken out of the ſcriptures. But Epiphanius doth not ſay, that this is a doctrine, or action neceſſarie to ſaluation.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Some obiect againſt this concluſion, that place of S. Paul. Omnis Scriptura diuinitùs inſpirata, vtilis eſt ad docendum &c. vt perfectus ſit homo, &c. But this place prooueth nothing againſt that which I haue ſaid. For it ſaith not, that ſcripture alone is ſufficient to inſtruct a man to perfection, but that it is profitable for this purpoſe, as it is indeed; and the rather, becauſe, it commendeth vnto vs the authoritie of the Church, which (as I ſhall afterwards proue) is ſufficient. Now it is certaine, that to be profitable, and to be of it ſelfe alone ſufficient, be farre different things. Stones and Timber be profitable to the building of an houſe: yet they alone, without a worke-man to ſquare them, and ſet them in order, be not ſufficient for this purpoſe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     2. Tim. 3. 16 17. Of this place I haue ſpoken ſufficiently Defence of the reformed Catholicke. page. 416. otherwhere, and ſhewed that the Scriptures are able to make vs wiſe to ſaluation, and therefore ſufficient to that purpoſe, Now the Apoſtle hauing giuen that commendation to the ſcripture, verſ. 15. proceedeth in the next to exemplifie that in particular, which he had before ſaid in generall, It is able to make thee wiſe to ſaluation, it is able to fit thee to teaching, reproouing, correcting, inſtructing. Can any reaſonable man thinke, that the Apoſtle, deliuering (by way of amplification) his former commendation of the ſcripture, that he might the rather ſtirre vp Timothie to the ſtudie of it, would ſay leſſe, then he had done before? But it is a great deale leſſe, to ſay no more, but the ſcripture is profitable to ſuch purpoſes, then to commend it, as able to make a man wiſe to ſaluation. Therefore, though the word indeed doe not expreſly

ſignifie ſufficiencie: yet it cannot be doubted, but the profit 
                        Hugo Cardinalis ad 2. Tim. 3 mentioned implieth ſuch a ſufficiencie; eſpecially ſince he addeth perfection, which muſt ariſe from this word of God. And ſo (as Defence of the reformed Cathol. pag. 416. I haue ſhewed elſewhere) do 
                        Chryſoſt. & Theophyl. ad 2. Tim. 3. 16. Chryſoſtome and Theophylact vnderſtand it, who make the Apoſtle ſpeake to Timothie to this effect, that he being now to be offred vp, leaueth the ſcriptures in his ſteed of which he may in all things take aduiſe, and counſell, as if the Apostle himſelfe were preſent with him.
                  
                  But you forſooth would make vs beleeue, that the ſcripture is indeed profitable to this end, but not ſufficient. Is not the knowledge of arts & tongues, philoſophy and hiſtory, of verie good vſe alſo to this purpoſe? Slender then, & too ſlender is the commendation our Apoſtle giueth the ſcriptures, if it be of no greater excellēcy then theſe humane furtherances, but only in a certain degree of profit. To helpe the matter you propound one particular, for which the ſcripture is profitable: namely to commend vnto vs the authority of the Church. But neither doth it cōmend to vs any ſuch authority, as you imagin, &, if that be the rule of the ſcripture, one ſentēce had bin as good & better then the whole volume of the Bible: which to ſay, were no leſſe thē blaſphemy. But I am afraid the ſcriptures, that Paul there ſpeaks of, which were the books of the old Teſtamēt, are rather vnprofitable, thē profitable to that purpoſe. For they often amplify & magnify the word of God written, in ſo plaine termes, that eueuery man may vnderſtand them: as for the authority, you fancy to your ſelfe, they ſpeake either nothing, or little, and that very obſcurely thereof. But we ſhall ſee, in the reſt of your Treatiſe, what proofe you can finde of this authoritie in Moſes and the Prophets, and the writers of the olde Teſtament.
                  Now at the laſt, you remember your ſelfe againe, and returne to your old ſhift of Scripture alone. Which you deuiſed of your owne head, that you might haue ſomewhat to confute. It is not all one (ſay you) to be profitable, and to be of it ſelfe alone ſufficient. And you tel vs, This is certaine. Who euer denied it? Or who but he, that wanted matter to replie againſt, would caſt ſuch doubts? Eſpecially who would haue waſted time and paper to prooue or declare a thing ſo certaine and cleare, by a needleſſe

compariſon? The ſcripture without any doctrines of men (call them what you will, & imagine what aſſiſtance of the ſpirit you liſt) is ſufficient to teach all men the true & certaine way to ſaluation. This is that we affirme, not as you ridiculouſly ſlander vs, that there needs no miniſterie of man, for the inſtructing of any one in the vnderſtanding of any place of ſcripture, or knowledge of any point of religion. Theſe are your owne fancies, or mōſters rather, with which like bugbeares, you ſcare your poore ſeduced followers, and bleare the eies of the ignorant, that they may not enquire, what we teach indeed, but hate our doctrine, before they any way vnderſtand it. But they that haue any care of their owne ſaluation, will not ſuffer themſelues to be led by you hoodwinkt to deſtruction: if any man will needs be wilfully ignorant, the Lord ſhall require his blood at his owne hands: we haue done our duetie in teaching and proouing the truth.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. VIII. That no naturall wit or learning can be the rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  If you had beſtowed that paines and time in confirming your propoſition, which you waſte needleſly in proouing that, which no man denieth: you might perhaps haue ſpoken ſomewhat more to the purpoſe, but it is loſt labour to go about the refutatiō of that, which beſides your ſelfe, no body euer thought on. That naturall wit or learning ſhould be the rule of faith, is a conceit, amongſt Chriſtians neuer heard of, yet this haue you propounded for to exerciſe your ſtrength vpon.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     The ſecond concluſion is, that no one mans naturall wit and learning; neither any company of men neuer ſo learned (onely as they are learned men, not infallibly aſſiſted by the holy Spirit of God) can, either by interpreting Scripture, or otherwiſe, be this rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Here you ſet out the former propoſition more at large, in reſpect of the Antecedent, or firſt part of it. Neither any one mans naturall wit, nor many mens ioyned together, whatſoeuer their learning be, or what courſe ſoeuer they take, as naturall men, can be the rule of faith: either for any doctrine, they ſhal deliuer, or for any
                     
                     interpretation, they ſhall make of Scripture. But what needeth all this adoe? you do but fight with your owne ſhadow, yet let vs ſe how you haue beſtirred your ſelfe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     This I prooue. Becauſe all this wit and learning, be it neuer ſo exquiſite or rare, is humane, naturall, and fallible: and therefore it cannot be a ſufficient foundation, whereupon to build a diuine, ſupernaturall, and infallible faith.
                  
                  
                     This reaſon I confirme. Becauſe whatſoeuer a man, neuer ſo wittie and learned propoundeth to others, to be beleeued, vpon the onely credit of his word, wit, or humane ſtudie and learning: it can haue no more certaintie, then is this his word, wit, and learning. But theſe being all naturall and humane, are ſubiect to errour, and deceit. For Omnis homo mendax, there is no man, but he may, 
                     
                        Rom. 3. 4. 
                     both deceiue, and be deceiued: and may (if he haue no other helpe, but of nature, and induſtrie) both be deceiued, in thinking that to be Gods word, which is not: or that to be the true meaning, and ſenſe of Gods word, which is not: and may alſo deceiue others, whileſt being too confident of his wit and learning, he preſumeth to teach others, theſe his erroneous opinions. Therefore the beleefe which ſhall be built vpon ſuch a mans word, and teaching, is, or may be a falſe beleefe: and alwaies is vncertaine and fallible: and therefore can neuer be a true Diuine and Chriſtian faith, which alwaies is moſt certaine and infallible. And this which I haue ſaid of the wit and learning of one particular man: may alſo be applied, to prooue againſt the wit and learning of any companie of men, hauing no aſſiſtance, but their owne naturall gifts, and induſtrie of ſtudie or reading.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     No humane, naturall, and fallible thing can be the rule of faith.
                     Naturall wit and learning, though neuer ſo exquiſite, are humane, naturall, and fallible.
                     Therefore no humane wit nor learning can be the rule of faith.
                  
                  I grant this reaſon and concluſion to be ſound and true: onely in the confirmation of it, I finde ſome occaſion to note one thing for the better vnderſtanding of the matter, we haue in hand. If any man would ſpeake for naturall wit, and

learning in this queſtion, he would not ſay, as the matter is here propounded, that any mans wit or learning were the rule of faith, but that the wit and learning of man might finde out ſomewhat at leaſt in the Scripture, whereupon faith might ſafely be grounded. For example (as I ſaid once before) though it be not written any where in the Scripture, that there are three perſons diſtinct each from other, and all theſe three but one God: yet may a man by naturall wit and learning gather this out of the Scripture, and confirme it thence ſo plainely, and certainly, that any Chriſtian may holde thoſe points as Articles of faith. Not that they are to be taken for ſuch, vpon the onely credit of his word, (which is a ſecond thing, wherein you miſtake the matter) but becauſe, though euerie man be a lier; yet a man may ſee and ſhew a truth, which cannot, nor may be ſuſpected of falſhood or errour. And a beleefe, builded vpon Doctrine ſo taught, ſhall be free from poſſibilitie of erring, and as you ſpeake, infallible. This I thought good to obſerue by occaſion of your confirmation, where you ſuppoſe, that a man deliuereth matters to be beleeued, vpon the bare credit of his word, by reaſon of his wit and learning. In this ſenſe it is out of all queſtion, that no naturall wit or learning of any, many, or all the men in the world, can be the rule of faith, but that, which a man deduceth by neceſſarie and certaine conſequence, through his wit and learning, out of the Scriptures, is as ſtrong and ſure a foundation of faith, as that, which is expreſſed there in plaine termes. VVe may ſee by this, it was not for nothing, that 
                        Bellar. de verb. Dei non ſcript. lib. 4. cap. 3. Bellarmine, and you by his example, foyſt in expreſſely into the queſtion, which is betwixt vs, concerning the ſufficiencie of the Scriptures to be the rule of faith. But of this enough.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     This ſame reaſon I confirme yet againe more ſtrongly. For the rule of faith muſt be able to propoſe to vs vnfallibly, not onely the letters and ſeeming ſenſe, but the true ſenſe of Gods word, and the ſenſe intended by the holy Spirit of God, the author of this word; otherwiſe it cannot be a ſufficient meanes to breed in vs an infallible Christian faith and beleefe, which is onely grounded vpon the true ſenſe
                     
                     intended by Almightie God, the prime or firſt veritie, the ſpeaker of this word. But no man, nor no companie of men can by their natural wit and learning tel vnfallibly what (eſpecially in all points of faith) is the true intended ſenſe of Gods word. For as S. Paul ſaith, Quis cognouit ſenſum Domini? Who hath knowne (to wit, by nature, art or learning) the ſenſe of our Lord? Quae Dei ſunt (ſaith the ſame S. Paul) nemo cognouit niſi ſpiritus Dei: thoſe things which are of God, no man hath knowne, but the ſpirit of God. And therefore that knowledge which himſelfe had of diuine matters, came not from any naturall wit of man, but (as he plainly affirmeth) from the ſpirit of God: Nobis reuelauit Deus per Spiritum ſuum: God hath reuealed vnto vs (ſaith he) by his Spirit. Therefore we may well conclude, That no one man, nor no companie of men (without the aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit) can either by interpreting Scripture, or otherwiſe be the rule of faith.
               
               
                  A. W.
                  It ſeemeth the former reaſon did not fully ſatisfie your ſelfe, becauſe you make profeſſion of a more ſtrong confirmation thereof: which lieth thus:

                        The rule of faith muſt be able to propoſe infallibly to vs the true ſence of the word of God, intended by the holy Ghoſt.
                        But no naturall wit or learning is able to propoſe infallibly that ſence.
                        Therefore no naturall wit or learning can be the rule of faith.
                     
                  
                  I haue made bold to alter your propoſition or maior a little, To the Propoſition. as I perſwade my ſelfe not without reaſon. You make a kind of difference betwixt the true ſenſe of Gods word, and the ſenſe intended by the holy Ghoſt. Theſe two in my poore opinion are all one: for there is no ſenſe of any peece of Scripture to be accoūted true, but that vvhich deliuereth the holy Ghoſts meaning in that place. The reaſon is, for that the vſe of interpretatiō is nothing elſe but to make vs vnderſtand what the Lord meant to teach vs, or to ſay to vs by thoſe words. I deny not, that a man may deliuer true and ſound diuinitie, though he miſconceiue & miſinterprete a text of Scriptures but this is that I ſay, that howſoeuer he teach true doctrine by his expoſition, yet he doth not giue vs the true ſenſe of that word of God, if he propound nor the ſenſe which was there intended by the holy Ghoſt; euerie

truth of God, is not the true ſenſe of euery place of Scripture.
                  I will not except againſt your Syllogiſme, though you put ſomewhat more into the Aſſumption, then you propounded in To the Aſſumption. the maior: yet let me put you in mind, that both naturall wit and learning can ſhew the true ſenſe of Gods word in very many places; and alſo that by your confeſſion this may be done. Whence it will follow, that in all likelihood of reaſon, many points of faith are ſo deliuered in Scripture, that there needeth no infallible authoritie of the Church to teach vs what is true in thoſe points, what falſe. To anſwer more directly to the Aſſumption; I ſee no ſufficient reaſon, why a man by wit and learning may not be able to vnderſtand, and that infallibly, what is true according to the letter of the Scripture, in matters neceſſary to ſaluation. I think I may truly ſay, that many a man attaineth to this knowledge, without any infallible aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt, whoſe principall office it is, ſo to ſanctifie, direct, and preſerue the children of God, that they neuer fall away by any ſuch opinion as ſhal make them loſe their intereſt they haue to the kingdome of heauen.
                  Your proofe, if it be ſufficient, ſheweth your exception, eſpecially in all points, to haue bin altogether needleſſe. For if the 1. Cor. 2. 16. Apoſtle in the place alledged, ſpeake of vnderſtanding the true ſenſe of the Scripture, no one place can be vnderſtood by any natural wit or learning. Who hath knowne the ſenſe of our Lord? Is not this ſpeech generall, as well of one place as of another? But it is euident, that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of vnderſtanding any or all places of Scripture. For the ſpirituall man he ſpeaketh of, attaineth not to that height of knowledge, no not in your owne iudgement, vnleſſe perhaps no man be ſpirituall but your Pope. And yet a man may well doubt, whether he be able to vnderſtand the meaning of the holy Ghoſt in euery place or no, though it be granted he cannot erre iudicially. But Saint Paul thinketh not in that place of interpreting ſcripture. Of what then? Surely of acknowledging or aſſenting to the truth of the Goſpell, concerning ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Hugo Cardin. ad 1. Cor. 2. 
                     The things that God hath prepared for them that loue him (viz. the meanes of ſaluation and glory by Chriſt) are ſuch as eye hath not ſeen, nor eare
                     
                     heard, yea ſuch as neuer entred into any mans heart. For who was able to haue deuiſed by any experience and obſeruation (to which the eye and eare are eſpeciall helpes) or by any diſcourſe of reaſon (wherein the heart is exerciſed) that the Sonne of God ſhould take our nature, and procure forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and inheritance 
                     
                        verſ. 16. 
                     of heauen for all them that would beleeue in him? This was onely Gods will and counſell, which no man was priuie to, no man could inſtruct him in, or perſwade him to. Theſe things God only knew, theſe he reuealed by his ſpirit to the Patriarks, 
                        verſ. 10. Prophets and Apoſtles, who without ſuch reuelation, could neuer haue ſuſpected any ſuch matter. Now the queſtion is not in the Apoſtles courſe of writing, whether a man without reuelation can vnderſtand the meaning of the Scripture; but whether he could of himſelfe know, that there muſt be ſuch a means of ſaluation, or acknowledge the doctrine thereof to be true, without the teaching of the holy Ghoſt. The naturall man 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     receiueth not theſe things for true, or if you will, perceiueth not that there are ſuch meanes of his ſaluation. As for vnderſtanding of Scripture, ſince it is more then manifeſt, that a meere natural man may find the true ſenſe intēded by the holy Ghoſt, at the leaſt in many places, it cannot be the Apoſtles meaning, that no man knoweth the ſenſe of our Lord in the Scripture. But the more you miſtake the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt in Scripture, the better you proue your opinion, that no naturall wit or learning can bring a man to the vnderſtanding thereof: onely you muſt take heed of ouerweening your owne wit and learning, and ſo of erring, by drawing a generall concluſion againſt all men from your owne defect: which alſo perhaps is not ſo much for want of wit or learning, as for lacke of paines taking, and becauſe of a preiudicate conceit againſt the truth.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Hence I inferre that thoſe, who, for matters of faith, relie wholy, either vpon their owne priuate opinion or iudgement, of the ſenſe and meaning of Scripture, or vpon the learning and iudgement of others, who are but men, not infallibly aſſiſted by the holy Ghoſt, nor by him vnfallibly preſerued from errour: (as many, or rather all Proteſtants do) thoſe (I ſay) cannot haue diuine and Chriſtian faith, but onely fallible opinion and humane faith.
                  
               
               
                  
                  As before I granted your concluſion, that naturall wit and learning cannot be the rule of faith: ſo I now acknowledge the truth of your illation, which you bring in thereupon, that he which relieth wholly vpon his owne priuate opinion, or any other mans iudgement, can haue no true faith. Yet muſt I again remember, that to rely vpon ſuch opinion or iudgement, is to take that for truth, which is taught barely vpon the credit of the teacher. For otherwiſe, a man may haue a true faith, that is a certain and infallible aſſent to the truth, though he beleeue vpon euident reaſon thoſe points & interpretations, which are proued to him by men, without any infallible authoritie of the Church. But whereas you charge many, or rather all Proteſtants to rely ſo vpon the iudgement of men, I hope you do it without the authoritie of your Church that cannot erre; for I am ſure you do it without any ſhew of truth. No Proteſtant of any diſcretion (not onely not all) beleeueth the doctrine of the Goſpell in generall, or any one particular interpretation as a matter of faith, vpon any mans credit whatſoeuer. This reuerence indeed we giue to our teachers, that we rather truſt their iudgement then our owne, and dare not diſſent from them, but where we haue great likelihood of reaſon, at leaſt to the contrary. Howſoeuer, we ground no point of faith vpon any interpretation, which is not plaine and euident to any man that will take paines to examine it according to true reaſon.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. IX. That a priuate ſpirit cannot be the rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  A man may eaſily perceiue that you chuſe to ſay any thing, rather then nothing: and therefore you make your ſelfe worke, Chapter after Chapter. I ſhall not need to repeate that which I haue noted before; this Chapter giueth ſufficient euidence of that I ſay. What a ſtrange kind of ſpeech is this, that a priuate ſpirit is the rule of faith? No ſpirit, neither priuate nor publick, is ordinarily the rule of faith, no not the moſt holy ſpirit of God, but onely as he ſpeaketh in the Scripture, who alwayes teacheth one and the ſame truth publickly and priuately.
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     The third concluſion is, that no priuate man, who perſwadeth himſelfe to be ſingularly instructed by the ſpirit, can be this rule of faith; eſpecially ſo farre forth as he beleeueth or teacheth, contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This is the interpretation of the title of your Chapter: No priuate ſpirit, that is, no priuate man, who perſwadeth himſelfe to be ſingularly inſtructed by the ſpirit, &c. I cannot tel whether I ſhold thinke you haue forgotten to ſpeake Engliſh, or purpoſely affect, as ſtrange doctrine, ſo ſtrange ſpeech alſo. To be ſingularly inſtructed, with vs plaine Engliſhmen, is to be taught in rare and excellent ſort; not to be apart, or ſeuerally alone inſtructed, which is your meaning. I grant mens priuat opinions are called ſingular, and the men themſelues, that haue ſuch conceits, are alſo ſo termed; but he that profeſſeth plainneſſe to teach all kind of men, ſhould labour to ſpeake ſo, that all might vnderſtand him. But to the matter. Whoſe opinion is it, that any ſuch man as you conceit, or any man at all, can be the rule of faith? Sure not ours; who (as it hath often bene ſaid) giue this honour only to the word of God. If any man hold that opinion (vnleſſe perhaps the ſenſleſſe Anabaptiſts, with whom we haue nothing to do) you are they, who as it ſeemeth by the exception you adde, grant that with limitation, a man may be the rule of faith. For you ſay, he cannot be the rule of faith, eſpecially ſo farre forth as he beleeueth or teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church. Do you not imply in this ſpeech, that ſo farre forth as he agreeth with the doctrine of the Catholick Church, he may be the rule of faith? But I obſerue one rare thing in your courſe of diſputing; that you ordinarily propound your matter in ſuch ſort, that you are faine preſently after to make one exception or other. Chap. 7. 
                     Scripture alone (ſay you) cannot be the rule of faith: is this all you meane? No: a limitation followeth: Especially as it is tranſlated by Proteſtants into Engliſh. 
                     Chap. 8. 
                     No naturall wit or learning can be the rule of faith. What? by no meanes? except they be infallibly aſſisted by the holy ſpirit of God. In this Chapter we haue the like courſe held by you. But leaue we this, and be take our ſelues to conſider your proofe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     This I proue: first becauſe Saint Paul ſaith, Si quis vobis euangelizauerit 
                        Gal. 1. 8.
                     
praeter id quod accepiſtis, Anathemaſit: pronouncing generally, that whoſoeuer teacheth or preacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, ſhould be held Anathematized or accurſed.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Your reaſon is thus to be framed. 
                  
                     He that must be accurſed for his teaching, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     But a priuate ſpirit, that teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, muſt be accurſed for his teaching.
                     Therefore a priuate ſpirit that teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, cannot be the rule of faith.
                  
                  Firſt, I deſire all men to obſerue, that this argument of yours doth not proue that a priuate ſpirit cannot be the rule of faith, but onely ſo farre forth as he doth diſagree from the doctrine of the Church; otherwiſe, for all this reaſon, he may be. Wherein you ſpeake abſurdly and falſly. Abſurdly, in propounding ſuch a queſtion to refute, as neither we whom you profeſſe to refute, nor any reaſonable man would euer once imagne, viz. that a priuate ſpirit teaching an vntruth, might be the rule of faith. For, how can that be but an vntruth, which is contrary to that the Apoſtle deliuered by his preaching and writing? Further, it is falſe, that a priuate ſpirit agreeing with the Catholicke Church in doctrine, can be in that point of agreement, the rule of faith. For although the doctrine he teacheth be true, yet is it not the rule of faith (much leſſe is he himſelfe) becauſe of his authoritie; but either as you ſay, by reaſon of the authoritie of the Church, or indeed, as we truly affirme, for that it is agreeable to the word of God in the Scripture, called canonical, becauſe it is 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . A rule. To the Aſſumption. the rule of faith and manners.
                  Now for anſwer to your Syllogiſme; I ſay your Aſſumption is not ſimply true, but onely ſo farre forth as the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church (I ſpeake as you do) agreeth with the truth in the Scripture reuealed. Neither doth 
                        Gal. 1. 8. Saint Paul ſpeake of whatſoeuer doctrine receiued by your imagined Catholicke Church of Rome; but of that which he himſelfe

or ſome other of the Apoſtles had taught the Galatians, to whom he writeth that Epiſtle. This it ſhould ſeeme you ſaw well enough, and therefore in your craſtie diſcretion, for bare to tranſlate the Apoſtles words, which for the moſt part you ſet downe alwayes as well in Engliſh as in Latine. The reaſon lieth thus:

                        He that teacheth contrary to the doctrine which the Galatians had receiued of the Apoſtles, is to be accurſed for his preaching ſo.
                        But a priuate ſpirit that teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, teacheth contrary to the doctrine which the Galatians had receiued by the Apostles.
                        Therefore a priuate ſpirit teaching contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, is to be accurſed for his preaching ſo.
                     
                  
                  Who ſeeth not, that the truth of this Aſſumption dependeth vpon this point, that the Catholicke Church hath receiued no other doctrine then that which the Apoſtles taught the Galatians? But this hath as much need of ſound proofe, as that, for the proofe whereof it is brought: and therefore to diſpute thus againſt any man that would hold a priuate ſpirit to be the rule of faith, were to giue him occaſion to laugh at you, for begging the queſtion in ſtead of prouing it. But to make all men ſee, how ſmall force there is in this your reaſon, for the keeping of a priuate ſpirit from being the rule of faith, I will frame two other ſyllogiſmes againſt a publick ſpirit or Councel, and againſt the Pope.
                  
                     1.
                     
                        He that muſt be accurſed for his teaching, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     
                     
                        But a publicke ſpirit or Councell, that teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholick Church, muſt be accurſed for his teaching.
                     
                     
                        Therefore a publicke ſpirit or Councell, that teacheth contrary to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     
                  
                  
                     2.
                     
                        He that muſt be accurſed for his teaching, cannot be the rule
                        
                        of faith.
                     
                     
                        But the Pope that teacheth contrarie to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, muſt be accurſed for his teaching.
                     
                     
                        Therefore the Pope that teacheth contrarie to the receiued doctrine of the Catholicke Church, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     
                  
                  Haue you not ſpun a faire threed (thinke you) to choake the Popes and the Councels authoritie withall? Call your wits about you, and deuiſe ſome cleanly ſhift for the matter, or I can tel you, all wil be naught. For your Religion is no more able to hold vp head, if the Popes authoritie be caſt downe, then a man that hath neuer a leg, is able to ſtand vpright. It will go the harder with you in this matter, becauſe if I grant that the Pope cannot erre, you are neuer a whit the nearer, for the anſwering of my ſyllogiſme: as you may perceiue, if you will but aſſay to apply that point for anſwer to either part thereof. There is no other way, but to giue ouer this your firſt reaſon againſt a priuate ſpirit, and to make amends for it in the ſecond, if you can.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Secondly, the rule of faith muſt be infallible, plainly knowne to all ſorts of men, and vniuerſall; that is to ſay, ſuch as may ſufficiently inſtruct all men in all points of faith, without danger of errour: (as hath bene proued before.) But this priuate ſpirit is not ſuch. For first, that man himſelfe cannot be vnfallibly ſure, that he in particular is taught by the holy ſpirit. For neither is there any promiſe in Scripture, to aſſure him infallibly that he in particular is thus taught: neither is there any other ſufficient reaſon to perſwade the ſame. For ſuppoſe he haue ſuch extraordinarie motions, feelings or illuſtrations, which he thinketh cannot come of himſelfe, but from ſome ſpirit; yet he cannot in reaſon ſtraightwayes conclude, that he is thus moued and taught by the ſpirit of God. For ſure it is, that euery ſpirit is not the Spirit of God. As there is the ſpirit of truth: ſo there is a ſpirit of errour. As there is an Angell of light: ſo there is a Prince of darkneſſe. Yea ſometimes Ipſe Sathanas transfigurat ſe in Angelum lucis: Sathan himſelfe doth 
                     2. Cor. 11. 
                     transfigure himſelfe into an Angell of light. Wherefore he had need
                     
                     very carefully to put in practiſe, the aduiſe of Saint Iohn, who ſaith. Nolite credere omni ſpiritui, ſed probate ſpiritus, ſi ex Deo ſint, 1. Iohn. 4. 
                     Doe not beleeue euerie ſpirit, but prooue and trie them, whether they be of God or no. Neither doth it ſeeme ſufficient, that a priuate man trie them, onely by his owne iudgement; or by thoſe motions, feelings or illuminations, which in his priuate conceit, are conformable to Scripture; becauſe all this triall is verie vncertaine, and ſubiect to errour; by reaſon that our owne iudgement (eſpecially in our own matters) is verie eaſily deceiued: and that Sathan can ſo cunningly couer himſelfe vnder the ſhape of a good Angell; and ſo colour his wicked deſignements with pretenſe of good; and ſo gild his darke and groſſe errours, with the gliſtering light of the words, and ſeeming ſenſe of ſcripture, that hardly, or not at all, he ſhall be perceiued. VVherefore the ſafeſt way were to trie theſe ſpirits, by the touchſtone, of the true Paſtours of the Catholicke Church, who may ſay with S. Paul. Nō ignoramus cogitationes Satanae, we are not ignorant of the cogitations of Sathan: and who may alſo ſay with 
                     2. Co. 2. 11. S. Iohn. Nos ex Deo ſumus, qui nouit Deum, audit nos: qui non 1. Iohn. 4. 6. eſt ex Deo, non audit nos. In hoc cognoſcimus ſpiritum veritatis, & ſpiritum erroris. VVe are of God, he that knoweth God, heareth vs: he that is not of God, doth not heare vs. In this we know the ſpirit of truth, and the ſpirit of errour. Now, if any will not admit this manner of trying, & diſcerning the ſpirit of truth, from the ſpirit of errour, but will truſt their owne iudgement alone, in this matter: feare they may iuſtly, nay rather they may be ſure (as Caſſian ſaith) 
                     
                        Collat. 61. c. 11 
                     that they ſhall worſhip in their thoughts, the Angell of darkneſſe for the Angel of light, to their exceeding great harme. And, at leaſt, how ſoeuer their priuate affection & ſelfe-loue encline them to think well of themſelues, and of that ſpirit, which they permit to teach them thoſe ſinguler points of new & ſtrange doctrine: yet ſure it is, that this their perſwaſion of the goodneſſe of their ſpirit, is not infallible, as the rule of faith muſt be: ſith diuers now adaies, perſwade themſelues in the ſame manner to be taught by the holy ſpirit: and yet (one of them teaching againſt another) it is not poſſible, that all, that thus perſwade themſelues, ſhould be taught by this ſpirit; ſith this ſpirit doth neuer teach contrarie to it ſelfe. And therefore ſome in this their perſwaſion, muſt needs be deceiued. And therefore
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     who, hauing no teſtimonie of euident miracle, or ſome other vndoubted proofe, dare arrogantly affirme, that he onely is not deceiued, eſpecially in ſuch ſort, as to condemne all other, and to propoſe himſelfe to himſelfe and others, as the onely ſufficient rule of faith, conſidering that others, who preſume, & perſwade themſelues altogether in like manner, are in this their perſwaſion, deceiued.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  I muſt againe put the Reader in minde, that no Proteſtant maintaines, that a priuate ſpirit is the rule of faith; neither will I vndertake the defence of any ſuch matter: but onely examine his reaſons againſt it, as I haue done in the former chapters, in the like caſe. His reaſon is thus to be concluded.
                  
                     The rule of faith muſt be infallible, plaine, knowne to all ſorts of men, and vniuerſall.
                     A priuate ſpirit is not ſuch.
                     Therefore a priuate ſpirit is not the rule of faith.
                  
                  Of the propoſition, I ſpake at the ſixth chapter, and ſhewed b Chap. 6. the fault of it, in reſpect of the ſecond propertie, which is eaſineſſe 
                     c Chap. 7. 
                     to be vnderſtood of all men, as it is expounded by your ſelfe. All the doubt now is in the aſſumption, of the three points, wherin you go about to prooue but only the firſt, of infallibility. It ſhould ſeeme your ſtomacke is greater againſt the ſcripture, then againſt either natural wit & learning or priuate ſpirit. For you diſprooue the abilitie of theſe two, but in reſpect of one property, namely the firſt, as if for the other two, they or either of them were ſufficient enough. But you allow the Scripture neuer a one of the three, you condemne it of obſcuritie, you accuſe it of defect for wanting diuers points neceſſarie to ſaluation. And although you do not ſimply denie the infallibilitie of it, yet you make all knowledge, that can be had out of our Engliſh tranſlation, verie vncertaine; ſo that none of our people can haue any benefite by the ſcripture, as by the rule of faith, or word of God, but onely ſome few, that vnderſtand Hebrew or Greeke. But I perceiue you were more afraid that the ſcripture would be taken for the rule of faith, then you were, that either of the other would. Let vs ſee how you proue your aſſumption, ſince you wil needs put your ſelfe to more paines then was looked for.
                  
                     
                     
                        He (ſay you) that cannot aſſure himſelfe, and other men, that he is taught by the holy Ghoſt, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     
                     
                        But a priuate ſpirit cannot aſſure himſelfe, and other men, that he is ſo taught.
                     
                     
                        Therefore a priuate ſpirit, cannot be the rule of faith.
                     
                  
                  There is ſome cauſe to doubt of your maior. For it is not neceſſarie, To the propoſition. that the rule of faith ſhould know it ſelfe to be the rule. The Pope, you thinke, is the rule of faith: Put caſe that ſome Pope ſhould doubt, whether himſelfe were infallibly directed in all his determinations by the holy Ghoſt or no: ſhould he, by reaſon of this doubting, ceaſe to be the rule of faith? I dare ſay, you thinke not ſo. Neuer vrge me with the impoſſibilitie of this matter. For both it is poſſible, if 
                        Declarat. mot. VVisbic. pag. 29. 
                     he, that is no Chriſtian may be Pope of Rome, If Iohn the 22 doubted of the immortalitie of the ſoule, if Leo 10. counted the hiſtory of our Sauiour Chriſt a fable: and it is all one to my anſwer whether it may be or no; it is enough for me, if the Pope may be the rule, though he ſhould ſo doubt.
                  You ſhould haue done well, if you had kept your former To the aſſumption. warie courſe of adding ſome exception to your aſſumption. It had not bene altogether without need. For out of queſtion, a priuate ſpirit may be ſo aſſured by reuelation, as the Prophets and Apoſtles were. And by ſuch meanes a man may come to aſſurance, for all the ſubtiltie of Sathan; the Lord being able to make the motions of his ſpirit knowen to whom he pleaſe, what ſhift ſoeuer Sathan vſe to the contrarie. The Minor therefore 
                        Holkot. in 2. q. 4. ad 7. arg. princip.
                      without this exception be either expreſſed or vnderſtood, is vntrue, otherwiſe it is true.
                  As for the triall you propound, by the touchſtone of the true paſtors of the Catholicke Church, it is vtterly inſufficient in this caſe. It may be, and is indeed a meanes of great authoritie, and vſe to direct a man in finding out, and holding the truth: but it is no certaine proofe, that a man hath found, or doth hold the truth in all points, becauſe 
                        Bellar. de. Concil. lib. 2. cap. 11. thoſe paſtors (as in due place ſhall appeare) may all be deceiued, without the Popes eſpeciall direction. But admit their iudgement or authoritie were, in the matter, infallible: yet could no man thereby

be aſſured, that himſelfe is taught particularly by the holy Ghoſt. For many men hold the truth of God, as the true Church doth, and yet haue no ſuch teaching by the ſpirit: ſince it is certaine, a man may deliuer truth, and he himſelfe not beleeue. Of your teſtimonies out of ſcripture, touching the Paſtors of the Church, I will ſay onely thus much by the way; that the Paſtors can ſpeake neither of thoſe ſentences truely of themſelues, but in a meaſure. 2. Cor. 2. 11. 
                     They know the deuiſes of Sathan, but in part, not wholy. 
                     1. Iohn. 4. 6. 
                     He that knoweth God, heareth them, not ſimply in all points; for he that knoweth God, may doubt of ſome point deliuered by the true Paſtors of the Church, who alſo are no farther to be heard, then they can ſhew that, they ſpeake, to be from God. The Apoſtles, euerie one of them ſeuerally, knew all things, which the Lord thought fit to make knowen to men, and were to be heard, without any doubting of that, they deliuered: with them that priuiledge died, and all men now are tied to the triall of their doctrine by the ſcriptures.
                  The concluſion of this diſcourſe concerneth either no man in the world, or if any, the Pope of Rome, 
                        Extra. Ioa. 22 de verb. ſignif. cap. quum inter.
                      
                     your Lord God. For the Anabaptiſts themſelues, are not ſo abſurd and ſhameleſſe, as to make any one of their ſect the onely ſufficient rule of all mens faith: but euerie man claimeth (though falſly and lewdly) a priuiledge of not erring, for himſelfe. Onely your inſolent Pope will haue all men to depend vpon his iudgement, and in compariſon of himſelfe, diſdaineth all writers, and all Councils whatſoeuer. What promiſes he hath, whereupon he beareth himſelfe ſo high and ſtout, I make no doubt but we ſhal heare of you in this Treatiſe; till when I forbeare to ſay anie more.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     But ſuppoſe one could aſſure himſelfe, that he were taught by Gods Spirit immediately, what is the true faith in all points, in ſuch ſort, that he could erre in none, (as it is not the manner of Almightie God, to teach men immediately by himſelfe alone, or by an Angell; but rather as the Scripture telleth vs, Fides ex auditu. Faith is bred in vs by hearing: and is to be required ex ore Sacerdotis 
                        Rom. 10. 17. 
                     out of the mouth of the Prieſt: and is to be learned of Paſtors 
                     
                        Mal. 2. 7.
                     
                     and Doctors, whom God hath appointed in his Church, of purpoſe, to inſtruct vs, and continue vs in the ancient faith. But ſuppoſe (I ſay) that one could aſſuredly perſwade himſelfe, to be immediatly taught of God, what is the truth in all points: how ſhould he, without teſtimonie of miracle, giue aſſurance to others, that he is thus taught? Eſpecially when he teacheth quite contrarie to the Catholicke Church, which, by plaine promiſes and teſtimonies of Scripture, we know to be taught of God.
                  
               
               
                  A. W:
                  Hitherto you haue prooued, that a man cannot aſſure himſelfe, that he is infallibly inſtructed by the holy Ghoſt. Now you are to ſhew, that howſoeuer the point might be cleere to him, yet he hath no meanes to perſwade other men thereof, but that ſtill there will be cauſe of doubting, whether he be ſo taught or no. But by the way, you tell vs, that it is not Gods manner to teach vs immediatly by himſelfe alone, or by an Angel, but rather, as the ſcripture telleth vs, faith is bred in vs by hearing. For the generall, that God teacheth not immediately, we are wholy of your opinion, and that the ordinarie meanes of faith is preaching: but we ſee no ſufficient reaſon to diſable the word of God in the ſcripture, as if it were not of force to bring forth the ſame effect, where Gods ordinance of preaching cannot be had, or is not neglected. For ſince the matter deliuered in true preaching, and reading the ſcripture, is all one, vnleſſe it be verie apparent that the holy Ghoſt wil not giue a bleſſing to him that readeth, hauing not opportunitie to heare; out of queſtion faith may come by reading. Faith (ſaith 
                        Bellar de ſacr. Bapt li. 1. cap. 11. §. Tertio.
                      Bellarmine) cannot ariſe in the heart, but by diuine reuelation, which is either immediately from God alone, or by the inſtrument of the word preached, or read. And whereas the Apoſtle ſpeaketh 
                        Rom. 10. 14. in that place of preaching and hearing, it is not his purpoſe to diſable the word read, but to ſhew partly, (as 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10. otherwhere) that the meanes of ſaluation, were not, nor could be deuiſed by man, but proceed wholy from God: partly, that no man may excuſe himſelfe by ignorance, becauſe God hath ſent his ſeruants 
                        Mat. 28. 19. into all parts of the world, to giue notice of the way of ſaluation, without which commaundement of his, no man might haue vndertaken the office of preaching the Goſpell, either by word of mouth or

                     1. Pet. 1. 25. writing; and without the Goſpell had bene publiſhed, no man could haue beleeued. For as it is in the ſame chapter, a little before. 
                        Rom. 10. 14. verſ. 18. 
                     How ſhall they beleeue in him, of whom they haue not heard? and how ſhall they heare, without a preacher? And how ſhall they preach, except they be ſent? Faith then is by hearing, that is, 
                        VVhitaker. de Script. q. 5. cap. 8. arg. 2. as one rightly expoundeth it, by the ſenſe of the ſcripture truly vnderſtood. I do not equall reading to preaching, nor promiſe any bleſſing, but rather threaten a curſe, where men refuſe to heare the Paſtors and Miniſters of the ſeuerall congregations, wherein they liue; or any other, that by lawfull authoritie preach truly and faithfully: but I would haue no man, by any conceit, weaken the power of God, ſpeaking in his word, to all that can, and will reade and heare. Now to your argument.
                  
                     He that hath not teſtimonie of miracles, cannot giue aſſurance to others, that he is infallibly taught by the Spirit of God.
                     But a priuate ſpirit hath not teſtimonie of miracles.
                     Therefore he cannot giue aſſurance to others, that he is infallibly ſo taught.
                  
                  Firſt, I note two things in the propounding of this reaſon: the one that you adde an exception, according to your cuſtome, the other that you ſeeme to giue ouer great force to miracles. Your exception is, that he can giue no aſſurance, if he teach contrarie to the Catholicke Church: why ſo? Becauſe we know that ſhe is taught of God. Suppoſe that to be true, yet may he giue aſſurance to them, that know no ſuch thing of the Church, and ſo be to them the rule of faith.
                  But it is worth the marking, that you preferre miracles before the authoritie of the Church. For by them, a man (in your opinion) may haue aſſurance to others, that he is taught by the holy Ghoſt, though he teach quite contrarie to the Catholicke Church. But 
                        Gal. 1. 8. the Apoſtle hath accurſed them, that receiue any other doctrine, then he taught, though it be preached by an Angell from heauen. What will become of the faith of ſuch men, when 2. Theſ. 2. 9. Antichriſt comes with ſignes and lying wonders? But why ſhould I aske that queſtion? Your ſelfe and the reſt of your popiſh brood haue anſwered it alreadie. For you are 
                        Apoc. 17 2. made drunke with the

cup of fornication of the whore of Babylon, and bewitched with the miracles of that great Antichriſt the Pope of Rome, to 2. Theſſ. 2. 11 beleeue lies, againſt the manifeſt truth of God in ſcripture. But 2. Pet. 1. 19. 
                     we haue a moſt ſure word of the Prophets, confirmed, & expounded by the Apoſtles, contrarie to which, or without warrant of which, we will beleeue nothing, as neceſſarie to ſaluation, for all the miracles that your Antichriſt, or the Diuel himſelfe can worke. For mine owne part (vnder correction I ſpeake it) I am not perſwaded, that euer any true miracle was, or ſhall be wrought, for confirmation of falſe doctrine, how ſoeuer the Diuel may ſerue his turne, by a ſhew of ſuch matters. But it is all one to the moouing of a man, whether the thing done, be in truth a miracle, or onely ſuch in his opinion. Be it neuer ſo true, it may bring no credit to any point of doctrine contrarie to the word of God, in the ſcripture. Yet ſince falſe ſhewes will worke the ſame effect in their hearts, whom God hath giuen ouer to the beleeuing of lies, that true miracles will, me thinkes I ſee no ſufficient cauſe to imagine, that God will employ his infinite power to the countenācing of any vntruth, where no ſuch thing is needfull.
                  I ſay then, for your propoſition, that no aſſurance can be Of the propoſition. giuen either without, or with neuer ſo many miracles, if a mans doctrine be contrarie to the teaching of the Church, when the Church teacheth according to the Scripture. But in thoſe points, wherein the Church ſhall faile of her dutie, the expoſition of the word may giue aſſurance of truth ſpoken by him, that deliuereth the contrarie. But this I ſpeake by way of explication, not of refutation. For I grant your propoſition: So reuelation be excepted, as before. To the aſſumption.
                  
                  If you meane, that euerie priuate ſpirit, hath not miracles to teſtifie of him, or that none hath true miracles to avow falſe doctrine by, I grant your Minor. But if you wold haue vs beleeue, that no man hath power by the diuels aſſiſtance, to make ſhew of ſuch matters, as cannot by man be diſcerned from true miracles, I denie your aſſumption: and refute it by that former inſtance of Antichriſt, VVhoſe 
                     2. Theſ. 2. 9. 
                     comming is by the effectuall
                     
                     working of Sathan, with all power and ſignes, and lying wonders.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Perhaps he will alledge that generall promiſe of ſcripture, Omnis 
                        Math. 7. qui petit, accipit, aſſuring them thereby, that euerie one that praieth for any thing, receiueth it: and that he hath earneſtly praied for the ſpirit, therefore he muſt needes haue it. But to this argument, we may eaſily anſwer; that this promiſe of our Sauiour, is not ſo vniuerſally to be vnderſtood, as though euerie one that praieth for a thing, ſhall infallibly obtaine it, without any condition (at leaſt in the manner of praying) required of our part. For we reade, euen in Scripture, Petitis, & non accipitis, eo quòd malè petatis. You aske or pray, and receiue not (the thing requeſted) becauſe you aske amiſſe. By 
                     
                        Iacob. 4. 
                     which place we learne, that to obtaine any thing by praier, requireth a condition of praying well, or in ſuch ſort, as is fit, the which condition, doth (as learned men obſerue) include many circumſtances, for fault of the due obſeruance whereof, it may and doth often happen, that our praier is not well made, nor in ſuch ſort as is fit: and is conſequently fruſtrate of the efficacie, which otherwiſe by the promiſe of our Sauiour it ſhould haue had. Now theſe circumſtances being many, and diuers of them verie inward, it is not verie eaſie for any man, to be abſolutely ſure, that he hath obſerued them, in ſuch ſort, as is fit: and therefore he cannot be abſolutely ſure, that his praier hath taken effect; and therefore it is not ſufficient proofe, whereby one may perſwade others, that he hath the Spirit of God, to ſay, he hath praied for it; eſpecially conſidering, that we may finde very many moſt contrarie, in religion, one to another, who notwithſtanding will ſay, that they daily pray for the holy Spirit: and I doubt not, but many of them in ſome ſort, yea earnestly, after their manner, doe pray for it: yet ſure it is, that all theſe (being thus contrarie) haue it not. How ſhall we then be aſſured, that this or that man, who, preſuming vpon the aſſiſtance of this Spirit, (which he thinketh he hath obtained by praier) ſetteth abroach a ſingular and new inuented doctrine, how ſhall we be ſure (I ſay) that ſuch a man hath the Spirit of God indeed?
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  This obiection you make, is ſo void of all likelihood, that I perſwade my ſelfe, no man would euer be ſo fooliſh as to alledge it in this queſtion. For who can chuſe but ſee at the very firſt reading of it, that if it may be had by praier, one may haue it as well as another? and therefore there is little reaſon, why all ſhould rely vpon any one in ſuch a matter. Beſides, what a ridiculous thing is it for me to imagine that euery body wil beleeue me on my word, when I tell them that I haue prayed earneſtly for the ſpirit, and therefore muſt needs haue it? Wherefore your obiection and anſwer are not worth the conſidering or reading.
                  Onely of the place you alledge, in a word, thus much may be ſaid, that our Sauiour by it 
                        Mat. 7. 7. encourageth and perſwadeth vs to pray, aſſuring vs of gracious acceptance by God his Father in all our petitions, ſo farre forth as the obtaining of them ſhall make for his glory, the good of his Church, and our owne ſpirituall and bodily comfort. And though it be moſt true, that we can neuer pray as we ought, yet may we be aſſured to haue our requeſts granted (the former conditions remembred) whenſoeuer we pray for any thing belonging to the generall eſtate of Chriſtians, or our particular callings, with a true acknowledgement of Gods power, feeling of our owne wants, and reſting vpon his promiſe to vs in Ieſus Chriſt. Particularly, concerning the vnderſtanding of Scripture: for any thing belonging to the generall eſtate of Chriſtians, or our particular callings, which belongeth to the queſtion we haue in hand, thus ſpeaketh Chryſoſt. in praef. ad Rom. Chryſoſtome of this place. If you will perſwade your ſelues (ſaith he) to reade the Scriptures diligently and carefully, there is nothing farther to be required of you for the vnderſtanding of thē. His reaſō followeth: For Chriſt hath truly ſaid, Seeke and you ſhall find, knock and it ſhall be opened to you.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Some will perchance ſay, that we may ſafely beleeue them, becauſe they preach nothing but pure Scripture, while as for euery point of their doctrine, they cite ſtill ſentences of Scripture. But this anſwer will not ſerue. Firſt, becauſe for and in the name of Scripture they bring forth their falſe and corrupt tranſlations, which do differ in ſome places, euen in words, from true Scripture. Secondly, ſuppoſing
                     
                     that they did alwayes cite the true words of Scripture, yet they may eaſily apply them to a wrong ſenſe or meaning; to wit to that which they falſly imagine (being ſeduced by their owne appetite, or by their owne former error) to be the true ſenſe. For as Saint Auſtin ſaith, Ad imagines phantaſmatum ſuorum carnalls anima conuertit 
                        Lib. 3. de bapt. cont. Donatiſt. cap. 19. omnia ſacramenta & verba librorum, ſanctorum: a carnall and ſenſuall mind (ſuch as hereticks are not without, ſith hereſie it ſelfe is accounted by Saint Paul a work of the fleſh) doth conuert or turne all the myſteries and words of holy books vnto his owne imaginations and fantaſies. Whereupon it commeth to paſſe, that as the ſame Saint Auſtin ſaith: Omnes haeretici, qui in authoritate Scripturas recipiunt, 
                        Ep. 222. & tract. 18. in Ioan.
                      ipſas ſibi videntur ſectari, cum ſuos ſectentur errores. All heretickes that receiue and admit the authoritie of the Scriptures, ſeeme to themſelues to follow the onely Scriptures, when they follow their owne errors. And as they may ſeeme to themſelues to follow onely the Scriptures, when they follow their owne errors: ſo they may ſeeme, eſpecially to the ſimple people; or to thoſe, who being ſeduced by them, wholy build their beleefe vpon them, to preach nothing but pure Scripture, when indeed they preach their owne erroneous opinions, coloured and painted with words of Scripture; as it is the manner of euery ſect maiſter to confirme his errour with words of Scripture: yea the diuell himſelfe doth ſometime for his purpoſe alledge words of Scripture.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  It appeareth by this ſecond obiection, that this diſcourſe was intended againſt vs, who call you for the triall of all queſtions of Religion, to the Scripture of God. But how iniuriouſly you deale with vs herein, a blind man may ſee. For we neither claime any ſuch priuiledge of being free from errour in citing and vnderſtanding Scripture, nor deſire to be any farther beleeued for tranſlation or interpretation, then we can approue them by euident reaſon. And this you knew well enough, and are ready with the reſt of your complices, to accuſe vs of referring all to euery mans priuate ſpirit. But malice is as wel without ſight, as without ſhame.
                  That of Saint Auſtin we acknowledge to be moſt true, and find it verified by your Rhemiſh tranſlation, and the applicatiō of Scripture in your Canon law, and Schoole-mens writings:

out of which it is eaſie to bring a cloud of witneſſes to this purpoſe.
                  For the other place of Auſtin, you quote two treatiſes, his 18. tract vpon Iohn, and his 222. epiſtle to Conſentius. In the former whereof, there is no ſuch word to be found, nor any ſuch epiſtle either in the Baſil, or 1523. the old Paris print. But in your 1586. late edition of Auſtin at Paris, both the epiſtle and the words are, wherein Auſtin maketh the miſunderſtanding of the Scriptures the occaſion of hereſie. Who denieth it? This may ſerue vs to proue, that 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     the ignorance of the Scriptures is exceeding dangerous; euen as 
                        Chryſoſt. ad Coloſſ bom. 19. Chryſoſtome ſaith, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     the cauſe of all euils. In another place the 
                        Auguſt. de Gen. ad lit. lib. 7. cap. 9. ſame Auſtin telleth vs, that men are for nothing elſe hereticks, but becauſe not rightly vnderſtanding the Scriptures, they obſtinately maintaine their owne opinions againſt the truth of them. And 
                        Tertul. de reſur. carnis. cap. 63. Tertullian goeth ſomewhat further, ſhewing that hereſies durst not peepe vp without ſome occaſion taken by the Scriptures. But he addes, that thoſe very hereſies may be conuinced by the Scriptures. If we miſinterprete the Scriptures, why do not you great Clearkes, that haue the ſpirit tied to your Church, refute our falſe interpretations by the Scriptures? Do we refuſe this triall? Is it not that we ſtil vrge, to haue all things examined by the Scriptures? or is there any thing you more feare, then to be confined to the Scriptures? What though the diuell and hereticks alledge them? Did not our Sauiour himſelfe ſay ſo too? 
                        Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 48. What plea can you make, wherein ſome heretickes haue not gone before you? Will you brag of the Church? Hereticks alſo both thinke and ſay they are of the Church: yea they are in all things ſo like true profeſſors, that in Antichriſts time (as 
                        Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 49. an ancient author ſpeaketh) there is no meanes of triall left but the Scripture. If you vrge tradition, ſo do heretickes too, running vp and downe (right like you Papiſts) 
                        Jren. lib. 3. cap. 1. 2. from tradition to Scripture, and from Scripture to tradition. They pleade Councels as well as you. The 
                        Auguſt. cont. Maxim. lib. 1. Arians obiect diuers againſt Auſtin and other writers. As for the Fathers: was not 
                        De bapt. con. Donat. lib. 3. cap. 2. Auſtin preſt by the Donatiſts with Agrippin and Cyprian? Did not the heretick Dioſcorus cry out 
                        Concil. Chaiced. Actio 1. in the Councel of Chalcedon, I haue the teſtimonies of the holy Fathers, Athanaſius, Gregorie, Cyrill.
                     
                     I vary not from them in any point, I am caſt out with the Fathers, I defend the fathers doctrine, I haue their iudgement extant in their bookes.
                  
                  Neither may we reſt vpon miracles. To let paſſe what before I ſaid of that point, remember what 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract. 13. Auſtin ſaith, Pontius (ſay the Manichees) did a miracle, Donat prayed, and God anſwered him from heauen. The Scripture onely is the true touchſtone in theſe caſes, if it be hard, Let him that hath an heart (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de doct. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 6. Auſtin) reade thoſe things that go before, and thoſe that follow, and he ſhall find the ſenſe.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §: 7.
                  
                     Wherefore there is no reaſon, whereby we may be aſſured, that ſuch men haue the ſpirit of God: but we may find many reaſons to conuince that they haue not this ſpirit. And to omit, for breuitic ſake, the ſeeking out of any other, euen the ſingularitie or priuatneſſe of their ſpirit, is ſufficient not onely to moue vs to ſuspect it, but alſo to condemne it, and to aſſure vs, that it cannot be the ſpirit of truth: as it is very well ſignified by Saint Auſtin, who ſaith, Veritas tua, 
                        Lib. 12. Confeſ. cap. 25. Domine, nec mea eſt, nec illius, ſed omnium quos ad eius communionem publicè vocas; terribiliter admonens nos, ne eam habere velimus priuatam, ne priuemur ea. Nam quiſquis id quod tu ad fruendū omnibus proponis, ſibi propriè vendicat, & ſuum eſſe vult, quod omniū eſt, à communi propellitur ad ſua, id eſt, à veritate ad mendaciū. Thy truth (O Lord) is neither proper to me, nor him, but common to all, whom thou doeſt publikly call to the common partaking of it; warning vs terribly to take heed, that we will not haue it priuate to our ſelfe, leaſt we be depriued of it. For whoſoeuer doth challenge that to himſelfe priuatly, which thou doeſt propoſe publickly to be enioyed of all, and will haue that his owne, which is common to all, he is driuen from the common to his owne, that is to ſay, from the truth to a lie.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  To refute this conceit of a priuate ſpirit (which was not worth this ado) you argue from the ſingularitie or priuateneſſe of it; as if it could not be true, becauſe it is not agreeable to the common opinion. And ſurely he that ſhall be ſo arrogant and ſhameleſſe, as to denie all the points of Religion commonly held, vpon a preſumption that himſelfe onely hath the ſpirit of God, is fitter to be cut off by the Magiſtrates ſword, then confuted

by the word of Scripture. But it is very poſſible, that in ſome points and places, ſome one man, without any reuelation, by diligent ſearching and prayer, may finde out that, which no other man yet knoweth, at leaſt for interpretation of Scripture, as it falleth out euery day amongſt both Proteſtants and Papiſts. Therefore your Caietan. praef. in lib. Moſis. Cardinall Caietan doubteth not to ſay, that God hath not tied the expoſition of the Scriptures to the ſenſes of the Fathers: and therefore asketh no more then reaſon, when he willeth the Reader not to be offended or miſlike it, if ſometimes himſelfe hit vpon a new ſenſe agreeable to the text, though it go againſt the ſtreame of the fathers. For which, though 
                        Canus loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 3. Canus reproue him without cauſe, 
                        Andrad. defenſ. fid. Trid. lib 2. Andradius iuſtly defendeth him. And why ſhould he not? ſince, as Domingo a Soto witneſſeth, one mans authoritie and learning draweth numbers after him to his opinion. By reaſon of a ſaying of Saint Auſtins, (ſaith 
                        Sotus de nat. & grat. l. 3. c. 4. Soto) all the fathers after his time, and all the Diuines, with one conſent haue worthily affirmed, that the glorious Ʋirgin neuer committed any actual ſinne, for all Chryſoſtome, auncienter then he, thought the contrary. Yet was Auſtins iudgement in this caſe, but priuate, and for truth, inferiour to Chryſoſtomes. If publickneſſe or generall conſent ſhould cary the matter, how chance 
                        Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23. Paphnutius withſtood all the reſt of the famous Councel of Nice, and preuailed? We ought (ſaith Picus in quaeſ. An Papa ſit ſupra Concilium. Picus Earle of Mirandula) to beleeue a ſimple huſbandman, a child, or an old woman, rather then the Pope, and a thouſand Bb. if theſe ſpeake againſt the Goſpell, and the other with it. Then belike a priuate man may ſee ſome truth, which is not generally diſcerned.
                  The place of 
                        Auguſt. conf. lib. 12. cap. 25. Auſtin you bring, doth not condemne all interpretations or opinions, which ſome one man findeth out, and holdeth, but onely reproueth them, who in expounding the places of Scripture, which wil beare a diuers ſenſe, vrge one onely, not becauſe it is truth, but becauſe they like it beſt. His example is out of Geneſis concerning the ſenſe of thoſe words: 
                        Gen. 1. 1. 
                     In the beginning God created heauen and earth. They know not which of thoſe diuers ſenſes that may be, Moſes did intend (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. vbi ſupra. cap. 11. 12 Auſtin) but they loue their owne opinion, not becauſe it is true, but becauſe it is their owne. What doth this concerne vs? who, as we

giue euery man of iudgement leaue to propound his interpretation to be examined: ſo permit no man to thruſt any expoſition vpon the Church, which he cannot make euident proofe of, by ſound reaſon. Neither is it then taken as his priuate conceit, but acknowledged as the truth of God, manifeſted by his induſtrie. In doubtfull places we follow the likelieſt ſenſe, without any reſolute determining what is true, what falſe: & therefore See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 5. cannot with any ſhew of reaſon be charged to appropriate the knowledge of Gods truth to our ſelues, where it hath pleaſed his Maieſtie ſo to propound it, that of diuers ſenſes a man cannot certainly affirme, that this or that is true.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. X. That the doctrine and teaching of the true Church, is the rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  If you had mentioned nothing but the doctrine of the true Church, we might haue vnderſtood you, without any cauſe of doubting: but now you ad teaching to doctrine, we are enforced to enquire farther into your meaning. For we are vncertaine, whether by thoſe words you meane one and the ſame thing, or no. The doctrine of the Church, is that which the Church propoundeth to be beleeued, whether by word of mouth, or in writing. Teaching, if we make it differ from doctrine, is that onely which is deliuered by voice to the eare. If we vnderſtand you in the former ſenſe for teaching by writing, as well as by word of mouth, the latter word was needleſſe; if in the latter of writing onely, then the ſame doctrine written, is not the rule of faith, which vttered by a teacher will become ſuch a rule; not becauſe it is true, but becauſe it is taught by authoritie.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     The fourth concluſion is, that this infallible rule, which euery one ought to follow in all points of faith, is the doctrine and teaching of the true Church, or companie of the true faithfull of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  That we may the better vnderſtand what you ſay, and how you proue your ſaying, there are a few things to be conſidered in this fourth condition. Firſt, by the faithfull of Chriſt, you

muſt meane thoſe that profeſſe Chriſtian Religion, whether they beleeue as they profeſſe, or no; as I haue ſhewed out of 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10. Bellarmine, who doubtleſſe knoweth what the Church is, as well as you. If you be of any other opinion, by Chap. 
                           •
                        . your owne rule we may reiect it, for the priuatneſſe thereof.
                  Secondly, where you ſay the true faithfull, it is not your purpoſe to ſpeake as we, for whom you writ this, commonly doe, of them that haue a true iuſtifying faith; but of them that profeſſe the doctrine of the Goſpell, according to the true ſenſe and meaning of it, whether they haue any iuſtifying faith or no.
                  Thirdly, by this companie or Church, whom vnderſtand you? If the whole number of the beleeuers, as well Laitie as Cleargie, I oppoſe the iudgement of your owne Doctours againſt you, who ſpeaking of the Churches doctrine and teaching, reſtraine the word onely to the Pope and Biſhops. The ſpirit (ſaith 
                        Bellar. de verb. Dei. lib. 3. cap. 3. §. Tota igitur.
                      Bellarmine) is certainly found in the Church, that is, in a Councell of Biſhops, confirmed by the chiefe Pastor of the whole Church, or in the chiefe Pastor with a Councell of the other Pastors. If you follow Bellarmine, I demaund whether your Laity be none of the true faithfull of Chriſt, nor parts of the Church. But to leaue this doubt, wee are thus to conceiue your meaning, that the doctrine which the Pope and other Paſtors of the Church, namely Bb. deliuer in a Councell, is the rule of faith.
                  Now let vs propound your reaſon, and examine it; but firſt I confeſſe, that I dare not reſolutely determine whether it be brought in by you, for a proofe of any thing that hitherto hath bene ſpoken, or intended onely, as a diſcourſe concerning the authoritie of the Church. If we apply it to any matter alreadie paſt, as farre as I am able to conceiue, it muſt be a ſecond proofe of the propoſition or maior of your maine Syllogiſme in this manner.
                  
                     If the doctrine and teaching of the true Church be the infallible rule which all men ought to follow, then the faith which the authority of the true Church commends to vs, is to be holden for the true faith.
                     
                        
But the doctrine and teaching of the true church, is the infallible rule, that all men ought to follow.
                     Therfore the faith which the authoritie of the true Church commendeth to vs, is to be holden for the true faith.
                  
                  This reaſonable coherence we may make betwixt this Chapter and your former courſe, without changing or weakning any part or point of your proofe, which is applied to the confirming of this laſt minor, the argument of this Chapter.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     This I proue by this reaſon. If our Sauiour Christ hath promiſed to any company of men, the preſence of himſelfe, and the aſſiſtance of his holy ſpirit, of purpoſe to inſtruct and teach them all truth: giuing withall peculiar charge and commiſſion to them, to teach all nations, and to preach to euery creature: giuing alſo warrant to all, that they may ſafely heare them: giuing alſo commandement, whereby he bindeth all, to do in all things according to their ſaying: and threatning greatly thoſe who will not heare and beleeue them: then certainly the doctrine and teaching of theſe men, is in all points most true and infallible; and ſuch, as (if the other conditions required in the rule of faith be not, as they are not, wanting) may well be propoſed to all ſorts as an aſſured ground, whereupon they may ſafely build an infallible Christian faith. For looke what our Sauiour Chriſt hath promiſed, muſt needs be performed; and whatſoeuer he warranteth or commandeth, may ſafely and without danger of error be done, nay muſt of neceſſitie be done, eſpecially when he threatneth thoſe that will not do it: and conſequently if he haue promiſed to ſend his holy Spirit to teach any companie of men all truth; it is not to be doubted, but that he ſendeth this his holy Spirit, and by it teacheth them all truth: and fith the teaching of his Spirit is vnfallible, we are not to doubt but that this companie is in all points infallibly taught the truth. If alſo the ſame our Sauiour gaue warrant and commandement, that they ſhould teach vs, and that we ſhould heare them, and do in all things according to their ſaying: we may not likewiſe doubt, but that they ſhall be able to teach all ſorts of men, in all points, the infallible truth; and that all ſorts of men may, if they will, learne of that companie, what in all points is the infallible truth. For otherwiſe by this generall commaundement of hearing them, and doing according to their ſaying, we ſhould be bound ſomtime to heare and beleeue an vntruth,
                     
                     and to doe that, which were not vpright and good: which without blaſphemie to Chriſt his veritie and goodneſſe can no way be thought.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     1 If our Sauiour Chriſt (ſay you) hath promiſed to any companie his preſence and aſſiſtance of his ſpirit, of purpoſe to inſtruct and teach them all truth.
                     2 If he haue giuen them charge and commiſſion to preach to euerie creature.
                     3 If he haue giuen warrant to all, that they may ſafely heare them.
                     4 If he haue giuen commaundement to all, to doe in all things, according to their ſaying.
                     5 If he haue threatned them, who will not heare and beleeue them.
                     6 If the other conditions required in the rule of faith be not wanting, then the doctrine and teaching of the true Church is the rule, that all men ought to follow.
                  
                  But our Sauiour Chriſt hath ſo 1. promiſed, 2. charged, 3. warranted, 4. commaunded, 5. threatned, and 6. the other conditions required, are not wanting.
                  Therefore the doctrine and teaching of the true Church is the rule that all men ought to follow.
                  I haue propounded this Syllogiſme, as your ſelfe haue ſet it Of the propoſition. downe, ſaue onely that I haue endeuored to make it ſomewhat ſhorter, keeping your ſenſe whole and full. Now for the propoſition, I grant the conſequence, vpon all thoſe conditions ioyntly conſidered, to be ſound and good: Howſoeuer ſome of them might well haue bene omitted: for example.
                  1 If our Sauiour haue promiſed his preſence and aſſistance of his ſpirit, of purpoſe to teach a certaine companie of men all truth, then the doctrine of the Church is the rule of faith.
                  
                  This conſequence is but weake: for Chriſt may affoord ſuch preſence and aſſiſtance to ſuch a purpoſe, and yet the effect not enſue, by reaſon that thoſe men faile in ſome duties required on their part. Do not you affirme Chap. 5. in this Treatiſe, that God hath appointed meanes of ſaluation for all men, with a

true will to haue them ſaued; and yet verie many, yea the greateſt part are not ſaued?
                  2 If he haue giuen them charge and commiſſion to preach to euerie creature, then their preaching is the rule of faith.
                  
                  Their commiſſion is not ſimply to teach, but to teach 
                        Math. 28. 20. thoſe things, that our Sauiour himſelfe commaunded, and therefore their doctrine can be no farther the rule of faith, then they preach according to their commiſſion. If I, or an Angell from heauen (ſaith 
                        Gal. 1. 8. the Apoſtle) preach vnto you, otherwiſe, then that you haue receiued, let him be accurſed.
                  
                  The ſame may be obiected againſt the third, and the fifth points: It doth not follow that their doctrine is the rule of faith, becauſe all men haue warrant to heare them ſafely: or becauſe, they are threatned, who will not heare and beleeue them. For firſt, they may be free from danger of erring, and yet not know all points of faith, 
                        Chap. 6. which is made by you one condition of the rule. Secondly, vnleſſe you enlarge the warrant, as farre as the commaundement, in the fourth point, (which is in a manner to confound them) ſo that they may ſafely heare them in all things, your conſequence will ſtill be naught. Thirdly, they may heare them ſafely, though the other may erre, if they haue means affoorded to examine that they deliuer, & skill and care to vſe thoſe meanes. Fourthly, the threatning, for not beleeuing, is to be reſtrained to their teaching, as they ought. Are not they threatned 
                        Luc. 10. 16. by our Sauiour, who beleeue not any Miniſter lawfully authoriſed, and preaching the truth? Yet doth it not follow hereupon, that they cannot erre, or that their preaching is ſimply the rule of faith.
                  But theſe feeble conſequences might all haue bene omitted by you, and your matter as fully prooued, if you had ſet downe none, but the fourth and ſixth points thus.
                  
                     If God haue commaunded all men to doe, in all things, as the Church teacheth, and the other conditions required in the rule be not wanting, then their preaching is the rule, that all men ought to follow.
                  
                  This conſequence is true, and ſufficient for your purpoſe;

the other ſerue for number to make a ſhew, rather then for ſubſtance of weight. But of your Maior this may be ſufficient, eſpecially ſince I acknowledge the truth thereof.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     But ſo it is, that Chriſt our Sauiour hath in holy Scripture promiſed, giuen commiſſion, warranted, commaunded, and threatned in manner aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     Therefore we cannot doubt, but that there is a certaine company (the which is called the true Church of Chriſt) which both is, in all points of faith, infallibly taught, by the holy Spirit; and is likewiſe to teach all ſorts of men, in all points of faith, what is the infallible truth: and therefore the teaching of this companie, may well be aſſigned, and propoſed to all men, as an vndoubted, ſufficient rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  I denie your Minor, firſt in generall; becauſe our Sauiour did To the aſſumption. not ſo promiſe, charge, warrant, commaund, threaten, in regard of any companie of men, as if there had bene ſome ioynt teaching appointed by him: but in reſpect of his Apoſtles, and Miniſters ſeuerally, who, in their proportion, haue as much authoritie, for neceſſitie of being beleeued, ſeuerally one by one, as iointly all together; though ſuch a ioynt conſent is the more to be reuerenced, and reſpected. Secondly, I denie it alſo, in the fourth point, which is the ſtrength of it. There neuer was ſince the Apoſtles, any man, or any companie of men, according to whoſe ſaying we were commaunded to doe in all things. Laſtly, I ſay the conditions required in the rule of faith, are wanting in the teaching you vnderſtand.
                  This concluſion of yours giueth me occaſion to ſpeake ſomewhat Of the concluſion. at large of the Church, with the name whereof applied 
                        Heruaeus de poteſt Papae. cap. 23. to your Pope alone, or Pope and Cleargie, you daily ſeduce many vnſetled and ignorant people. The word Church in our Engliſh tongue ſeemeth firſt of all to haue bene applied to the Temple, or place of Gods ſeruice, as if it were called Kyrke, of the Greeke 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as you would ſay the Lords houſe. But the Hebrew & Greek words, which muſt be the Iudges in this matter, ſignifie a Companie, Congregation, or Aſſemblie. The Hebrew 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      words are two, the Greeke as many; the Latin, beſides the two Greeke made Latin, are diuers, Populi, people: Coetus, companie,

                     congregatio, congregation: multitudo, multitude: turba, troope: concio, aſſembly: exercitus, armie. But the two Greeke words are beſt knowne, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Eccleſia and Synagôga: the former whereof commeth of the Hebrew, retaining almoſt the ſignification, and ſound thereof. In this, they all agree, that they note vnto vs a companie or aſſembly. But becauſe the Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is the word, that moſt of all concerneth this queſtion, let vs enquire of that the more diligently. The word, for the nature of it, ſignifieth any companie called together; generally any aſſembly lawfully or vnlawfully, orderly or diſorderly aſſembled. Of lawful aſſemblies there is no queſtion, of vnlawfull we haue an example 
                        Act. 19. 25. 29. 40. 41. in the Scripture, where the people of Epheſus, tumultuouſly ranne together againſt Paul and Apollos. So doth the Hebrew word ſignifie in the Pſalmes, where 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         & eccleſiam.
                      the Greeke and Latine tranſlate by the ſame word: 
                        Pſal. 25. 5. 
                     I haue hated the aſſembly of the wicked. But in the new teſtament, except that one place of the Acts, it is alwaies applied to them, that make profeſſion of religion. In which ſenſe it is ſometimes vſed indefinitely, 1. Cor. 12. 28. 
                     God hath ordained ſome in the Church, firſt Apoſtles &c. So the Apoſtle Paul ſaith, that 
                        & 15. 9. Phil. 3. 6. 
                     he had perſecuted the Church of God. Thus may we alſo vnderſtād that, 1. Tim. 3. 15. 
                     The houſe of God, which is the Church of the liuing God: If we conceiue that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to Timothie, as to an Euangeliſt, and not as to the Paſtor or Biſhop of Epheſus. Hitherto may thoſe places be referred, 
                        Act. 2. 47. 
                     The Lord added to the Church from day to day: And 
                        & 5. 11. 
                     great feare came on all the Church. Herode ſtretched forth his hand to vexe certaine of the Church: and ſuch like, though they may alſo be vnderſtood of the beleeuers, at thoſe times ordinarily abiding in Ieruſalem, and aſſembling themſelues together in one, or (which is the likelier) in diuers congregations, for exerciſe of religion. More particularly, and vſually, the Church is taken for anie one congregation aſſembled about matters of religion: 
                        Act. 15. 22. 
                     It ſeemed good to the Apoſtles and Elders with the whole Church. Not as if the Apoſtles and Elders had bene no members of that Church, but the principall being firſt named, the generall terme is added, which comprehended all: as if they ſhould haue ſaid: The Apoſtles and Elders, and all the
                     
                     reſt of the Church at Ieruſalem: whereof, as it was a particular congregation, the Apoſtles, at that time were not members. And in this meaning may a Councell of diuers pariſhes, prouinces, or nations be called by the name of a Church; and in the like ſort may we call the aſſemblies & congregations in Rome, Coriath, Epheſus, the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Epheſus: becauſe of ſome common ſynod, or becauſe by the terme Church, the beleeuers are ſignified. Moſt vſually, the ſeuerall congregations in any countrie or Citie are called Churches, becauſe of their ordinarie aſſembling. 
                        Act. 9. 31. 
                     Then had the Churches reſt, through all Iudea. 
                     
                        & 14. 23. 
                     When they had ordained them Elders by election in euery Church. 
                     1. Cor. 11. 16 
                     VVe haue no ſuch cuſtome, nor the Churches of God. When the title is applied to particular families, it hath no other meaning, as I take it, then to note them for Chriſtians or beleeuers. 
                        Rom. 16. 5. Philem. ver. 2. 
                     Greet the Church (that is the beleeuers) which are in their houſe. And thus much of the Church, as it ſignifieth generally Beleeuers.
                  
                  The word Church, is vſed in the ſcriptures, and that verie often, not for all, but onely for ſome beleeuers, namely, for ſuch as are indeed true beleeuers, in reſpect of true faith in Ieſus Chriſt: and theſe are alwaies of the elect: who are then called the Church, when they are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to Iuſtifying faith: Therefore when we ſay that the Church ſignifieth the elect, or predeſtinate, we meane onely ſuch of the elect, as by faith are members of our Sauiours bodie, he being the head. For howſoeuer, in the ſecret Counſell of God, many not yet borne, be predeſtinate to euerlaſting life; yet they are not to be accounted of this Church, before it hath pleaſed God to call them to beleeue in Chriſt.
                  Examples of the Church thus taken, amongſt many are theſe. 
                        Mat. 16. 18. 
                     Vpon this rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile against it. 
                     
                        Eph. 1. 22. & 5. 23. 
                     God hath giuen Christ aboue all, the head of the Church. So 
                        Col. 1. 24. 
                     the Church is called Chriſts bodie. This may ſerue, concerning the meaning of the wotd: out of which I obſerue this point, that ſince the terme Church is ſo diuerſly taken in the ſcripture, no argument from any place of Scripture can be of force to prooue any queſtion, till the

ſignification of the word, in that place, be euident and certaine. And therefore it is not enough, for proofe of a matter in controuerſie betwixt vs, to alledge a text of Scripture, where ſuch a thing is ſpoken of the Church, but it ſtands vs vpon to prooue, that in the place we alledge, by Church, the companie we intend, is ſignified. This being vnderſtood and remembred, I come now to the ſeuerall points in your Minor.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     The promiſe of our Sauiour Chriſt we haue firſt in the Goſpell of 
                     
                        Mat. cap. 28. 
                     Saint Matthew: Ego vobiſcum ſum omnibus diebus, vſque ad conſummationem ſeculi: I am with you all the daies, vntill the end of the world: in which words is promiſed the continuall preſence of Chriſt himſelfe, (who is veritas the truth it ſelfe) with his Church; not for a while then, or for a while now; but, all the daies vntill the end of the world. Secondly, we haue an other promiſe in the Goſpell of Saint Iohn: Ego rogabo Patrem, & alium paracletum 
                        Joan. 14. dabit vobis, vt maneat vobiſcum in aeternum, Spiritum veritatis. I will aske my Father, and he will giue you an other paraclite, the ſpirit of truth, that he may remaine with you (not onely for 600. yeares) but for euer. And againe (in the ſame Saint Iohn) to ſhew vs, for what purpoſe he would haue his holy Spirit remaine among vs for euer; he ſaith, Paracletus quem mittet Pater in nomine 
                        Ioan. 14. meo, ille vos docebit omnia, & ſuggeret vobis omnia, quaecunque dixero vobis. The paraclite, whom my Father will ſend in my name, ſhall teach you all things, and ſhall put you in minde of all things whatſoeuer I ſhall ſay vnto you. And againe, Cum venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos omnem veritatem. 
                        Ioan. 16. 
                     When that ſpirit of truth ſhall come, he ſhall teach you all truth.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The firſt point of your Minor is, that Chriſt promiſeth his preſence, and the aſſiſtance of his ſpirit, to teach them all truth. Firſt I demaund, whether our Sauiours preſence be for the teaching of all truth, or no: or whether that be onely the office of the ſpirit? If the former, to what purpoſe is the ſpirit promiſed, whom our Sauiour hath appointed his vicegerent, as it were, in that matter; as the other places you alledge prooue? If it belong to the ſpirit, how is the preſence of Chriſt applied therunto? But to anſwer directly to the place, thus you diſpute.
                  
                     
                     
                        If Chriſt haue promiſed to be with a companie of men, till the end of the world: then he hath promiſed it, that he might teach the Church all truth.
                     
                     
                        But he hath promiſed to be with a companie of men, till the end of the world.
                     
                     
                        Therefore he hath promiſed it, that he might teach them all truth.
                     
                  
                  Admit all this were granted: yet would it not follow hereupon, To the whole Syllogiſme. that the Church therefore could not erre: becauſe, as I anſwered before, perhaps they would not haue care to learne and remember all, though our Sauiour were readie to teach them all.
                  I denie the conſequence of your propoſition. Firſt, becauſe To the propoſition. they, to whom our Sauiour maketh this promiſe, are not the Church, as you vnderſtand the Church, that is, the Cleargie, of whoſe teaching you wholy ſpeake, but the faithfull ioyntly, and ſeuerally, as well hearers as teachers, as well euery one, as all together. This appeareth by the text, 
                        Mat. 28. 19. 20. 
                     Go teach all nations &c. and behold I am with you, till the end of the world. With whom? With you that teach only? Nay rather with al beleeuers, 
                        Ioan. 17. 20. for all which he praied, as well as for the teachers. So haue the ancient writers expounded and vnderſtood this place. He doth not ſay, he will be with them onely (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. in Math. hom. 91. Chryſoſtome) but alſo with all, that ſhall beleeue after them. For the Apoſtles were not to continue to the end of the world, but he ſpeaketh to the faithfull, as to one bodie. Chriſt ſheweth (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Matth. 28. Jerome) that he will neuer depart from them that beleeue. So doth 
                        Cyprian. epiſtola. 81. §. 1. ad Serg. Rogat. & caeteros.
                      Cyprian make it common to all beleeuers, that confeſſe the truth of God in time of triall. So doth 
                        Leo. ſer. de reſurrec. 2. Leo, to all, that are adopted. He that is gone vp into Heauen (ſaith Leo) doth not forſake them, that are adopted. So 
                        Beda apud Thoan Cate. ad Mat. 28. Beda, he remaineth with his elect in this world protecting thē. To which purpoſe 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract. 50. S. Auſtin ſaith, that this promiſe is fulfilled by our Sauiour, in that he is preſent, according to his maieſtie, according to his prouidence, according to his vnſpeakable, and inuiſible grace. With all that beleeue, (ſaith Gaudent. ad Neophyt. de promiſ. Paracl. Gaudentius) I will be with you that is (ſaith 
                        Dionyſ. Carthuſ. ad Mat. 28 Denys the Charterhouſe monke) with you, and your ſucceſſors, and with all the faithfull, or militant Church. And

thereupon he gathereth, that the faith ſhall neuer wholy faile, but Chriſtian religion ſhall continue in ſome till the end of the world. The like collection 
                        Raban. Maur. ad Math. 28. Rabanus maketh, Hereby (ſaith he) it is vnderſtood, that there ſhall neuer be ſome wanting, till the ende of the world, who ſhall be worthie, or fit for God to dwell in. The Councell of Vienna (as 
                        Gregor. de Val. de praeſent. Chriſt. in Eucbar. cap. 11 Gregorie de Valentia ſaith) expounded the place of Chriſt being preſent in the Sacrament: which is common to all beleeuers, lib. 3. Clement de reli
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & vener. ſanctorum c. ſi Dominum.
                  
                  Secondly, the conſequence is naught, becauſe the ende of Chriſts preſence is not to teach the Church all truth, but to protect and defend them by his power, in the profeſſion of the truth. So it is applied, as we heard before, by 
                        Cyprian. epiſtola 81. §. 1. Cyprian to the comfort of the Chriſtians then impriſoned for religion. So doth 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract 50. Auſtin take it, that he is preſent by his prouidence and diuine Maieſtie. The ſame is 
                        Haymo. in homil. fer. 6. poſt paſch.
                      Haymo his iudgement and expoſition. But 
                        Martial. ad Toloſ. cap. 25. Martialis is moſt plaine, who by this promiſe exhorteth thē of Tholouſe in France to perſeuere in the profeſſion of religion, becauſe our Sauiour Chriſt will neuer leaue thē, but alwaies be preſent with them. He confirmeth and encourageth them (ſaith 
                        Theoph. ad Mat. 28. & Chryſoſt. ibid.
                      Theophylact) becauſe he ſent them to the Gentiles, into dangers and hazards of their liues: And 
                        Chryſoſt. ad. Mat. 28. Chryſoſtome thinketh (wherein alſo Theophyl. ſecondeth him) that our Sauiour mentioneth the end of the world, becauſe he would haue them with more patience and conſtancy, endure what ſoeuer hard meaſure for a time vpon earth, in regard of the ioyes whereof they ſhould be made partakers in the world to come. If then this promiſe of our Sauiour, belong to all & euery true beleeuer, if it be vttered for the comfort of all ſuch, that they may reſt vpon his mighty protection, who ſeeth not that an impoſſibilitie of your Cleargies erring cannot be concluded from it?
                  1 The places of Iohn are thus to be concluded.
                  
                     If our Sauiour haue promiſed the ſpirit of truth to a certain company of men, to abide with thē for euer, & teach thē all truth, then the teaching of theſe men is an aſſured ground of faith.
                     But Chriſt hath promiſed the ſpirit ſo to a certain cōpany of men.
                     Therfore the teaching of theſe men is an aſſured ground of faith.
                  
                  
                     
Firſt I anſwer, that your concluſion proueth not the point in queſtion; becauſe this companie, to which the promiſe is made, is not the Church from time to time, but that promiſe belongeth to the Apoſtles, either onely, or at the leaſt principally, in ſuch a meaſure of being taught. The former may thus appeare, becauſe our Sauiour ſpeaketh of another comforter, in reſpect of his owne bodily departure from them, which cannot belong to the Church now, with which Chriſt was neuer preſent in that ſort. Secondly, this ſpirit promiſed, was to bring all things that Chriſt had taught, to their remembrance, whom he ſhould teach. But this cannot belong to the preſent Church, nor to any Church ſince the Apoſtles. Thirdly, this ſending of the ſpirit was performed 
                        Act. 2. 3. 4. when the holy Ghoſt came vpon the Apoſtles; which doth not befall the Church now a dayes. Fourthly, the ſame ſpirit was to ſhew them the things to come, either concerning themſelues in particular, or by giuing them the gift of propheſie, which now the Church hath not. Thus do 
                        Tertul. de praeſcrip. cap. 8. Tertullian and 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract. 75. Auſtin vnderſtand theſe places, applying them to the Apoſtles: ſo doth 
                        Ianſen harm. cap. 134. Ianſenius biſhop of Gaunt; ſo 
                        Chryſoſt. in Ioan. hom. 74. Chryſoſtome and 
                        Theophyl. in Ioan 14. Theophylact; ſo your ordinary Gloſſes and Lyra. And whereas this interpretation may ſeeme to be refuted by the place it ſelfe, becauſe the ſpirit muſt abide with them, to whom he is promiſed, for euer: that is expounded by Neque poſt mortem abit. Chryſ. vbi ſupr. Chryſoſtome, to ſignifie his continuance with them, euen after death alſo. Which 
                        Hugo Cardin. ad Ioan. 14. Theoph. vbi ſupra.
                      Theophylact ſets out more at large. His companie with you (ſaith our Sauiour) ſhall not be for a time, as mine; but ſhall continue for euer: neither ſhall it faile when you are dead, but ſhall remaine with you, and ſhall make you more glorious. He promiſeth (ſaith 
                        Gloſs. ordin. ad Joan. 16. your Gloſſe) that the ſpirit ſhall do all; not that all is fulfilled in this life. This Comforter (ſaith 
                        Lyra ad Joa. 14. Lyra) ſhall not be taken from you, as my humane nature is drawne away by death: but ſhall be with you eternally, here by grace, but in the world to come by glorie. We may (perhaps) conceiue our Sauiours meaning to be no more, but that the ſpirit which hee would ſend, ſhould not leaue them as he was to do, but ſhould abide with them to the very end of their liues, for their inſtruction and comfort: neither of which are needfull any longer then while we are in this world.
                  
                     
They that apply theſe promiſes to all the elect alſo (for to any viſible companie of men, I thinke beſides you Papiſts, no man doth) neither make for your opinion; becauſe they tie them not to any companie, but giue euery true Chriſtian his like part in the priuiledge of this ſpirit, and (as we heard ere while out of your Gloſs. ordin. vti ſupra. ordinary Gloſſe) leaue ſome truth to be reuealed in the life to come. I do not thinke (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. ad Ioan. tract. 96. Auſtin) that in this life the promiſe of being taught all truth, can be fulfilled in any mans mind. For who liuing in this bodie which is corrupted, and preſſeth downe the ſoule, can know all truth; when the Apoſtle ſaith, We know in part. By which it is alſo apparent, that according to Auſtins iudgement, for euer, may be vnderſtood of continuing after this life.
                  Secondly, if theſe places proue, that the Church is a ſure foundation or rule of faith; it muſt follow, that euery particular Of the Aſſumption. teacher is ſo. For eueryone of them, to whom our Sauior made theſe promiſes, was ſeuerally according thereunto taught all truth, and not all ioyntly; as if they might haue erred being ſeuered, which you confeſſe of your Church: and therefore this teaching appertaineth not to it.
                  Of the ſeuerall places I ſay further, that 
                        Ioan. 14. 17. in the firſt of them there is no mention of teaching all truth, but onely of ſending the ſpirit of truth. That is (ſaith 
                        
                           Theophyl. ad Ioan. 14.
                        
                           Hugo Cardin. ibi.
                        
                      Theophylact) the ſpirit, not of the old Teſtament (for that was a figure and a ſhadow) but of the new, which is the truth. The ſpirit of truth (ſaith Lyra. ibi. Lyra) becauſe he is eſſentially the truth, and teacheth the truth. He calleth him the ſpirit of truth (ſaith 
                        Ianſen. harm. cap. 134. Ianſenius) becauſe he is the author of all truth, and the only giuer of pure and ſound truth. For he onely teacheth the truth, without mixture of any falſhood or error: Alſo he only teacheth the truth, wherein the ſaluation of man conſiſteth.
                  
                  
                     
                        Joan. 14. 26. In the ſecond place you haue followed the vulgar Latine againſt the truth of the Greeke and ſenſe of the text. The Greek is, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     All that I haue told you: not as you tranſlare it, All that I ſhall ſay vnto you. It is the praeter tenſe (ſaith your B. Ianſen. vti ſupra. Ianſenius) not the future, in the Greeke. So do Pagnin, Vatablus, and Montanus tranſlate it. The holy Ghoſt (ſaith 
                        Theophyl. ad Joan. 14. Theophylact) ſhall make you vnderſtand thoſe things that are obſcure and hard. For thoſe things that ſeeme hard vnto you, I told you when I remained with you.
                     
Your interlined Gloſſe referreth teaching to the vnderſtanding, and putting in mind to the will. He ſhall teach you (ſaith the Gloſſ. interl. ibi. Gloſſe) that you may know; and 
                     Suggerit, vt velitis. 
                     ſuggeſt, that you may will. Tell me then, why I may not gather from hence, that the Church ſhal not erre in manners; or at leaſt ſhall haue true faith in heart, not onely in profeſſion? But it is certain, that it is poſſible, the greater part of a Councell, yea and the Pope himſelfe may be without true faith: and it is enough to make a man a member of your church, 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10. that he profeſſe outwardly.
                  
                     By all truth 
                     
                        Ioan. 16. 13. 
                     our Sauiour meaneth all truth neceſſary to ſaluation, ſaith 
                        Ianſen harm. cap. 134. Ianſenius. Gloſſ. ordin. ibi. So your Gloſſe. 
                        
                           Theophyl. ad Joan. 16.
                        
                           Hugo Cardin. ad Ioan. 16.
                      Theophylact referreth it to the truth of thoſe things which were ſhadowed out in the law: and by the diſcouerie of the truth to be aboliſhed. Hugo reſtraineth it to all truth, concerning Chriſt himſelfe. But let vs take all truth as largely as you can reaſonably conceiue it. Wil it follow therupō trow you, that therefore the teaching of the Church is the rule of faith? May not the Church be taught all truth by the holy Ghoſt, and yet teach ſome deuice of her owne which ſhe neuer learned of him? It is one thing to teach a man all truth, and another to keepe him ſo, that he ſhal deliuer nothing but that truth. Your Minor therefore is falſe, becauſe this firſt part of it is ſo.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     The charge and commiſſion is plaine in S. Mathew: Euntes docete omnes gentes: Going teach all nations. And in S. Marke: Euntes 
                        Math. 28. Mark 16. in mundum vniuerſum, praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae: Going into the whole world, preach the Gospell to euery creature.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The charge which 
                        Math. 28. 19 our Sauior gaue for preaching the Goſpell to all nations, was no commaundement to his Church, that is, to the companie of the beleeuers, or to the Cleargie, as you ſpeake, in all ages; but a commiſſion to the Apoſtles and firſt Diſciples, for the performance of that dutie. The reaſon, why it is deliuered ſo at large, may be gathered out of 
                        Mat. 10. 5. Mathew 10. ch. where at their firſt ſending they were limited to the lost ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael, and barred from going to the Gentiles. Go not (ſaith our Sauiour) into the way of the Gentiles, and into the cities of the Samaritans enter not: but go rather to the loſt ſheepe of the
                     
                     houſe of Iſrael. And that this charge belongeth not to men now a dayes, it is euident, becauſe neither doth our Sauiour beſtow the gift of tongues to that purpoſe, as 
                        Act 2. 5. he did on thoſe whom he ſent to that worke; neither can we haue any calling to ſuch a purpoſe, hauing no gifts for it: yet do not we denie but that it is lawfull for Princes, who haue by conqueſt or otherwiſe the gouernment of ſtrange nations, to ſee that they be inſtructed in the faith; yea we thinke this lieth vpon them, as a neceſſary dutie. Neither do we barre any man of taking whatſoeuer oportunitie God ſhall giue, to preach the Goſpell to any people. 
                        Ruſſin. hiſt. lib. 1. cap. 10. A captiue maide was by the bleſſing of God made the meanes of conuerting the Iberians from heatheniſme to Chriſtianitie: the King of that people (as the hiſtorie ſaith) becoming the Apoſtle of his nation. 
                     
                        Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 23. Frumentius and Aedeſius being caried into India when they were yong, were afterward employed by God for the inſtructing of the Indians in true religion. But your minor is not proued by that commiſſion. Chriſt commanded his Apoſtles and Diſciples in the beginning of the Church, to preach to all nations: therefore the Church hath commiſſion to do the like now. Beſides, this charge was layd vpon euery one of the Apoſtles and all the diſciples ſo furniſhed with the gift of tongues, according as the Apoſtles thought it meete to employ them. Doth this commandement bind your church, that is, either your Pope who wil not preach at home, much leſſe will he go abroade to all quarters of the world; or your Councels, who ſeuerall are not the church? And this charge lay vpon them, to whom it was giuen, ſeuerally, and was not a matter to be performed by all together in one place. Therefore your minor is falſe alſo in the ſecond part of it, concerning the charge, which (you ſay) is giuen to the Church, to preach to all nations. For your Church is (as I haue ſaid) your Bb. aſſembled in Councel, not your Clergie men ſeuerally one by one. And it is not our Sauiors meaning to haue ſuch a kind of teaching.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     The warrant we haue in S. Luke: Qui vos audit, me audit: He 
                     
                        Luk. 10. 
                     that heareth you, heareth me. By which words appeareth plainly, that our Sauior Chriſt would haue vs to heare and giue credit to his church, no leſſe then to himſelfe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W:
                  Our Sauiour 
                        Luk. 10. 16. by this place hath warranted all men to heare them that teach thoſe things which hee commaunded to be taught; beſides which, if any man teach his owne fancies for matters of faith, that of the Apoſtle belongeth to him, 
                        Gal. 1. 8. 
                     Let him be accurſed. The Apoſtles were abſolutely to be heard, without exceptiō, as Chriſt himſelf: all other teachers, only ſo far as they ſpeake according to the word of God. He teacheth by this (ſaith Cyril. Alexā. a pud Thom. in catena. Cyril) that whatſoeuer the holy Apostles deliuer, is to be receiued: becauſe he that heareth them, heareth Chriſt. Our Sauiour addeth this in the end (ſaith 
                        Lyra ad Luc. 10. 16. Lyra) to ſhew that the doctrine of his diſciples is deuoutly and reuerently to be heard, at the leaſt for reuerence of God, whoſe principally that doctrine is. But what doth this concerne the church? Surely, if it may be enforced to make vs heare any beſides the Apoſtles, without limiting of our hearing, we are bound ſo to heare at the leaſt euery B. Theſe words (ſaith 
                        Bellar. de Pontif. Rom. lib. 4. cap. 16. §. Quae verba.
                      Bellarmine) belong properly to the Apoſtles and to their ſucceſſors: neither may it be ſaid that this was ſpoken to all of them ioyntly, and not to euery one ſeuerally. Now if it be abſurd, and worſe, to hold that we haue warrant to heare euery B. whatſoeuer he teach, doubtleſſe this place proueth nothing for hearing the Church. For by vertue of this ſpeech, the Apoſtles were to be heard, without any exception. If then it belong to their ſucceſſors, which are (as you ſay) Bb. as fully as to them, euery B. muſt be heard and beleeued, teach he what he wil. I wil yet ſay more: our Sauior ſpeaketh this of the 72. diſciples, and 
                        Luc. 10. of euery two of them at the leaſt. Now your opinion is, that your ordinary Prieſts ſucceed them, as Biſhops do the Apoſtles. Hence it will follow, that whatſoeuer any two Prieſts preach, that muſt be holden for as certaine a truth, as if Chriſt himſelfe had ſpoken it. Do you not ſee then, that this muſt needs be reſtrained either to the Apoſtles, or to the doctrine taught? He that heareth you, preaching that which I haue charged you to preach, heareth me. So doth 
                        Gloſſ. interl. ad Luc. 10. your Gloſſe limit the latter part of the ſentence, He that despiſeth you, that is, He that will not beleeue in Chriſt. Indeed he that refuſeth to beleeue in Chriſt, by the miniſterie of men, refuſeth Chriſt himſelfe, whoſe doctrine it is, that we ſhould beleeue in him. Therfore your minor is falſe alſo

in regard of the third part thereof: We haue no warrant to heare any man, the Apoſtles being dead, but ſo farre onely as he agreeth with the Scriptures.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  
                     The commandement is expreſſed in S. Mathew: Super Cathedram 
                        Mat. 23. Moyſi ſederunt Scribae & Phariſaei. Omnia ergo quaecunque dixerint vobis, ſeruate & facite. The Scribes and Phariſies haue ſitten vpon the chaire of Moſes, All things therefore whatſoeuer they ſhall ſay vnto you, obſerue and do. Out of which words we may gather, that we are bound in all points to do according to the doctrine of the Prelates of the Catholicke Church, yea, although it ſhould happen that their liues were not laudable but bad. For although our Sauiour in this place doth onely in expreſſe words make mention of the chaire of Moſes, in which the Prieſts of the old Law did ſit: yet he is to be vnderſtood to ſpeake alſo of the chaire of S. Peter, his owne Vicegerent, in which the Prieſts of the new law do ſucceed. And this à fortiori, becauſe we haue greater reaſon to thinke that our Sauiour intended in his doctrine to giue rules to the Prieſts and people of his new law, which was preſently to begin, and to continue till the worlds end, then onely to giue documents to thoſe of the old Law, conſidering he knew that it ſhould ſo ſhortly ceaſe. Wherefore the auncient fathers do vnderſtand that place to be meant of the Priests of the new Law, and namely S. Auguſtine, who ſaith thus: In illum ordinem Epiſcoporum, qui ducitur ab ipſo Petro ad 
                        Epiſt. 165. Anaſtaſium, qui nunc in eadem Cathedra ſedet, etiamſi quiſquam traditor per illa tempora ſubrepſiſſet, nihil praeiudicaret Eccleſiae, & innocentibus Chriſtianis; quibus prouidens, Dominus ait, de praepoſitis malis: quae dicunt, facite; quae faciunt, facere nolite. Into that order of Biſhops, which is deriued from S. Peter himſelfe vnto Anaſtaſius, who now ſitteth vpon the ſame chaire, although ſome traitor had crept in, in thoſe times, he ſhould nothing hurt the Church and the innocent Chriſtians, for whom our Lord prouiding, ſaith of euill Prelates: What they ſay, do; what they do, do not.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This is the only point, which is able to make good the conſequence of your propoſition: and therefore if you faile in the proofe of this, all is naught. But out of doubt, you faile here exceedingly, and ſo your reaſon comes to nothing.
                  
                     
                     
                        He that commaunds the Iewes to do whatſoeuer the Scribes and Phariſies who ſit vpon Moſes chaire ſay, bindeth all to do in all things according to the ſaying of the Church.
                     
                     
                        But 
                        
                           Mat. 23. 2. 
                        our Sauiour ſo commandeth the Iewes.
                     
                     
                        Therefore he bindeth all to do in all things according to the ſaying of the Church.
                     
                  
                  Firſt I ſay of this ſyllogiſme as of the two laſt points, that if it giue any authoritie to your Church, it giueth the ſame to euery particular teacher. For the Scribes and Phariſes did expound the law of Moſes, not in Councels onely, but euery one ſeuerally in the ſynagogues where they were appointed to teach. Therefore if it be abſurd to conclude vpon this text, that euery Scribe and Phariſey was then, and euery Preacher lawfully called is now to be heard, whatſoeuer he teach, ſure no ſuch matter can be wrung out of this place for the Church.
                  Secondly, this reaſon maketh the Scribes and Phariſes the Church, ſhutting out the high Prieſt himſelfe, and all other prieſts that were not either Scribes or Phariſes: yea it preſumeth (which is vtterly falſe) that the Scribes and Phariſes were ſucceſſors to Moſes in an ordinarie courſe of authoritie, as you ſay your Church, that is your Pope and Bb. ſucceed Peter and the reſt of the Apoſtles. Can ſuch an argument proue a matter of ſuch importance and doubt?
                  Your propoſition implieth, that our Sauiour intended to giue rules concerning Saint Peters authoritie, whom you call Of the propoſition. his Vicegerent. Who wold trifle ſo, in a queſtiō of ſuch weight? Firſt proue his office, and your Popes right to it; and then frame ſuch arguments: otherwiſe any man of neuer ſo little iudgment may find more cauſe to pity or diſdaine your proofe or preſumption, then to ſtagger at the force of your reaſon. All things in the Scripture were indeed writtē for our learning, and therfore belong to vs ſo far as the general doctrine reacheth, & the particular circumſtances are alike. Wherefore I grant your propoſition, not becauſe of any ſucceſſion, which could not be in thoſe Scribes and Phariſes, being of diuers tribes, and (as your 
                        Genebrard. chron. lib. 2. Genebrard ſaith) hauing thruſt themſelues into the chaire of Moſes being empty: but becauſe they expoūded the law of Moſes

among the Iewes, as the Miniſters of Chriſt do the Goſpell, at this day to the Chriſtians.
                  Ere I anſwer to your Aſſumption, I muſt ſpeake a word of To the Aſſumption. your tranſlation, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     haue ſitten. The Greeke indeed is ſo, but (as Vatablus ibi. Vatablus noteth) the praeter tenſe is put for the preſent tenſe. Therefore Pagnin. ibi. Pagnine doubteth not ſo to tranſlate it, ſedent, ſit. Which muſt needs be our Sauiours meaning. For how were it agreeable to reaſon, that he ſhould charge vs to heare the Scribes and the Phariſes, becauſe they did ſometimes ſit vpon Moſes chaire, if now they ſit beſide it? It is our Sauiours purpoſe to ſignifie, that the expoſitions of the former Phariſies, and of thoſe that taught in his time, were not to be reiected: or rather, it is al one, as if he had ſaid, 
                        Alfonſ. Salm. prolegom. 15. Reg. 3. ſederūt. i. e. ſedent.
                      
                     do ſit. But let vs reade the place which way we liſt, it is all one to your minor; which I denie. To the proofe of it out of the text, I anſwer: Firſt, the ſitting vpon Moſes chaire, ſignifieth not ſucceſſion, but teaching the law of Moſes. For 
                        Exod. 3. 10. & 19. 20. & 21. 1. Moſes calling was altogether extraordinarie from God, both for gouerning and teaching. In the former, Ioſua and the Iudges ſucceeded him, 1. Sam. 8. 7. till the people were wearie of Gods ruling of them. The other part of his office was to be diſcharged ordinarily by the Prieſts and Leuits. 
                        Leuit. 10. 11. Deut. 31. 9. 19: 
                     That ye may teach the children of Iſrael all the ſtatutes which the Lord hath commaunded them by the hand of Moſes. 
                     
                        Mal. 2. 7. 
                     The Prieſts lips ſhould preſerue knowledge, and they ſhould ſeeke the Law at his mouth. 
                     
                        Neh. 8. 8. 9. 
                     Ieſhua and Bani, &c. and the Leuites cauſed the people to vnderſtand the law. And they read in the booke of the Law of God diſtinctly, and gaue the ſenſe, and cauſed them to vnderſtand the reading. It was one thing to ſucceed Aaron, another to ſit on Moſes chaire. The chaire of Moſes (ſaith 
                        Cyril. Hieroſ. catech. 12. Cyril) ſignifieth power of doctrine. They ſit in Moſes chaire (ſaith 
                        Orige. in Mat. hom. 24. Origen) which interprete Moſes ſayings well, and according to reaſon. And a little after: The Scribes and Phariſes ſit naughtily vpon Moſes chaire: they ſat wel, that well vnderſtood the law. What is the meaning of that (ſaith 
                        Ambr. enar. in Pſal. 43. Ambroſe) The Scribes ſat; but becauſe letters are written? whereupon the Scribes in Greeke are called 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         in Greeke is a letter. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , following the interpretation of the letter, not the ſenſe of the ſpirit. And afterward: Therefore they teaching thoſe things that Moſes wrote, &c.
                     
So doth 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 23. Theophylact expound it. They that ſit in Moſes chaire: that is, that teach the things, that are in the law. And immediately before. They that exhort to euill life, do not then teach out of Moſes chaire, nor out of the Law. Therefore to ſit vpon Moſes chaire, is nothing elſe, but to haue authoritie to expound Moſes Law, as he himſelfe did expound it. So the Miniſters of the Goſpell may be ſaid to ſit vpon the Apoſtles chaire, becauſe they haue authority to interpret the Goſpel, which the Apoſtles themſelues preached.
                  Secondly, I denie that our Sauiour commanded the Iewes, or doth now charge vs, to beleeue whatſoeuer, they that haue authority to teach vs, deliuer, or to do whatſoeuer they enioyne. This is apparent, becauſe himſelfe refuteth & condemneth their interpretations and doctrines many times: as Mat. 5. In many points of which, that one is moſt cleare, 
                        Mat. 5. 43 44 
                     Ye haue heard, that it hath bene ſaid, thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour, & hate thine enemie: but I ſay vnto you, loue your enemies &c. 
                     
                        Mat. 15. 11. 
                     In vaine do they worſhip me, teaching for doctrines mens traditions. And in the ſame place, he calleth them blinde leaders of the blind: and addeth further, that if the blinde lead the blinde, both fall into the ditch. Now 
                        verſ. 14. can any man be ſo impious, I might ſay blaſphemous, as to ſay, that our Sauiour commaunded the Iewes to take ſuch a courſe, as ſhould certainely bring them to deſtruction? Nay rather he warneth them to take heed of their doctrine. 
                        Mat. 16. 6 
                     Take heed and beware, (he doubleth his admonition to make them more carefull) of the leauen of the Phariſes: And what was this leauen? 
                        verſ. 12. 
                     The doctrine of the Phariſes, ſaith the Euangeliſt. But what need we go out of this chapter for the point in queſtion? Doth he not afterwards call them 
                        Mat. 23. 16. 
                     blinde guides, verſ. 16. 24. fooles & blind, verſ. 17. 19? Doth he not in the ſame places, condemne and confute their abſurd and lewde doctrine of ſwearing? A man would wonder, that euer any man profeſſing himſelfe a ſcholler or teacher, ſhould bring ſuch miſerable proofes in matters of ſo great weight. But alaſſe we muſt beare with you, you bring ſuch as you haue; if you knew any better, we ſhould be ſure to haue them. But theſe ſerue to deceiue your deuoted followers; who wilfully ſhut their eies againſt the

truth. The iudgements of God are paſt ſearching out, and his mercie in opening our eies to ſee your groſſneſſe, greater then we are able to conceiue.
                  Well, yet perhaps you haue ſome colour from antiquitie to countenance your expoſition withall. You quote Auſtin: what? None but Auſtin in a matter of ſo great doubt? But let vs ſee why you quote him. If to prooue that the Phariſies were to be heard and obeyed in all things, there is no ſuch word in his ſentence alledged by you. For he ſaith no more, then we grant, that 
                        Auguſt. epiſtola. 165. 
                     Our Sauiour prouided before hand, that we ſhould not refuſe good doctrine, becauſe it was deliuered by wicked men. Indeed that was the verie purpoſe of our Sauiour, and to that doth 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract. 46. Auſtin apply it otherwhere, according to the true ſenſe of it. What ſaith he elſe, but heare the voice of the ſheepheard, though by hirelings? ſuch as Auſtin in that place ſaith the Pharifies and Scribes were: and ſuch as 
                        Mat. 23. 5. 6. 13. 14. 23. our Sauiour proueth them to be by their hypocriſie, ambition, & couetouſneſſe. The Apostle ſheweth (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 11. Auſtin in an other place) that men without charitie may teach ſomewhat, that is wholſome: of ſuch our Lord ſpeaketh, They ſit vpon Moſes chaire &c. Whereupon alſo the Apoſtle ſpeaking of enuious and malitious men, yet ſuch as preached ſaluation by Chriſt, ſaith; 
                     
                        Phil. 1. 18. 
                     Whether by occaſion, or in truth Chriſt be preached, Ireioice. And 
                        Auguſt. de dect. Chriſt. lib. 4. cap. 27. in a third place, He that ſpeaketh wiſely and eloquently, but liueth wickedly, teacheth many that are deſirous to learne, but is vnprofitable to his own ſoule, as it is written. The Scribes and Phariſies ſit in Moſes chaire, do that they ſay, but do not that they do. For they ſay & do not, to which he addeth that to the Philippians, as in the other place. But yet Auſtin was ſo farre from tying either the Iewes, becauſe of our Sauiours ſpeech, or any men, vpon any pretence, to beleeue whatſoeuer ſhould be taught them, though by men lawfully authoriſed, that he forbids all to heare, when men preach their owne deuiſes. By ſitting on Moſes chaire (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan tract. 46. he) they teach the Law of God, therefore God teacheth by them. But if they will teach their owne ſayings (obſerue that Auſtin thinks it is poſſible they ſhould) heare them not, do not. An euill man (ſaith 
                        Auguſt cont. liter. Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 6. the ſame author) out of the euill treaſure of his heart, bringeth forth euill
                     
                     things. But when he preacheth the word of God, when he miniſtreth the Sacraments, he preacheth not, nor miniſtreth not of his owne, if he be a wicked man, but is to be counted among them, of whom it is ſaid, do that they ſay, but do not that they do. For as we heard before out of 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 23. Theophylact, he that exhorteth to euill life, ſpeaketh neither from Moſes chaire, nor from the Law. Therefore (as it followeth in him) they that teach the Law of God, are to be heard, though they do it not. So doth 
                        Chryſoſt. ad Hebr. hom. 34. Chryſoſtome vnderſtand and apply this text, What then will ſome men ſay? ſhall we obey our Prelates, when they are euill? How meane you euill? If it be in a point of faith, ſlie and auoid him, not onely if he be a man, but if an Angel come downe from heauen. But if you meane, that he is euill in his behauiour, be not curious. Neither ſpeake I this of my ſelfe, but of the Scripture. For 
                     
                        Mat. 23. 2. 
                     Chriſt ſaith, the Scribes and Phariſies ſit on Moſes Chaire. And when firſt he had recited many euil things of them, then he faith: They ſit vpon Moſes chaire, All things, that they ſay vnto you, do; but do not, as they do: They are to be reuerenced (ſaith he) though they be of a wicked life: but heed you not their liuing, but their preaching. For concerning their manners, no man can be hurt by thē. How ſo? Becauſe that they do, is manifeſt to all, and though they ſhould come to the height of iniquitie, they could not teach other men that their euill. But when a point of faith is in queſtion, neither doth euerie bodie perceiue manifeſtly that which is ſpoken, neither will a lewde fellow be afraid to teach contrarie to truth. For whereas as it is faid, 
                     
                        Mat. 7. 1. 
                     Iudge not, that ye be not iudged, that is ſpoken of life, not of faith. This is Chryſoſtomes iudgement, and that where he expoundeth 
                        Heb. 13. 17. one of the principall places, which you bring to ſupport your vnreaſonable authoritie. The Scribes and Phariſes (ſaith 
                        O pus imperf. in Mat. homil. 43. another) ſit on Moſes chaire: that is, there are many Prieſts, and few prieſts; many in name, few in deed. Take heed therefore how you ſit vpon that ſeate: for the ſeate maketh not the prieſt, but the prieſt the ſeate: the place ſanctifieth not the man, but the man the place. Your owne writers are of the ſame opiniō, cōcerning this place. Two things (ſaith 
                        Ianſe. harm. cap. 120. Ianſenius) are here ſignified: firſt that obedience is due to thē which teach and command by authoritie, not in reſpect of their life, but of their authority, which they haue, and becauſe of God, whoſe
                     
                     Embaſſadors they are. Secondly that we muſt not obey them, if they commaund or teach any thing wickedly. For if they are to be obeied, becauſe they ſit in Moſes chaire, thē are they not to be obeied, when they teach or commaund any thing againſt that chaire. The Lord ſaith abſolutely, All, and whatſoeuer, that he might ſhew, that they muſt be perfectly obeied; but yet with ſuch an obediēce, as layeth this for a ground, that we muſt obey God, rather thē man: as 
                     
                        Col. 3. 20. 
                     the Apoſtle Paul ſaith. Children obey your parēts in all things. Chriſt (ſaith 
                        Montanus elucid. in Mat. 23. Arias Montanus) taught his Diſciples to obſerue, and doe whatſoeuer the Scribes and Phariſies commaunded, by the preſcript of the Law, that is out of Moſes chaire. Chriſt did not meane (ſaith 
                        Ioan. Ferus in Math. lib. 3. Ferus) that they ſhould obſerue all the decrees of the Phariſies, but ſo farre forth as they agreed with the Law. As farre as they teach thoſe things, which Moſes taught in the chaire, they are to be beard, otherwiſe to be taken heed of, as ſaith 
                        Stella. ad Luc. cap. 12 Stella. The Lord (ſaith 
                        Maldonat. ad Math. 23. one of your famous Ieſuits) by the chaire of Moſes, doth not vnderſtand the doctrine of the Phariſies, but the doctrine of Moſes Law: For it is all one, as if he had ſaid, All that the Law and Moſes ſay to you. Chriſt (ſaith 
                        Caſſander conſult. art. 7. See Dionyſ. Carthuſian. ad Mat. 23. Caſſander) commaundeth vs to heare the Phariſies, yet ſo, that we muſt take heede of the leauen of the Phariſies, that is corruptions of their life and doctrine.
                  
                  But you will ſay 
                        Auguſt. epiſt. 165. ad Generoſum.
                      Auſtin telleth vs, that it ſhould nothing haue hurt the Church, and innocent Chriſtians, if ſome traitor had crept into that ſea. What elſe haue we ſhewed all this while, but that the wickedneſſe of euill Prelates muſt not make their doctrine, as long as it is true, leſſe regarded? Auſtin, in that Epiſtle, anſwers a certaine Donatiſts letter, who bragged of ſucceſſion from Donatus the author of that ſect: againſt whoſe brag he ſetteth that Catalogue of the Biſhops of Rome, amongſt whom there was neuer a Donatiſt; but if there had bene, yet ſhould not that haue preiudiced the Church, or the innocent Chriſtians: as if the doctrine, they held, were not true, becauſe ſome lewd or hereticall reacher, had ſometime bene Biſhop of that Citie. 
                        Auguſt. epiſt. 265. 160. & contra lit Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 14. 23. We know it was vſuall with the Donatiſts, to crie out againſt the true Catholicke Biſhops, for their conuerſation, which they alſo ſlaundered: therefore had Auſtin good reaſon

to ſpeake, as he did, that no man might be caried away from the truth of then doctrine, by the ſuppoſed wickednes of their liues. I haue bene ſomewhat the longer in this point, becauſe (as I ſignified) it is the onely proofe of this controuerſie. Now I leaue the conſideration of it to all reaſonable men, that they bethinke themſelues, whether it be not meere ſimplicitie, or rather wilfull ignorance, to be drawne away from the truth of the Goſpell vpon a pretence of hearing the Church, when there is not a ſyllable, nor a letter, in the ſcripture, to tie a man to ſuch blind obedience, whereupon nothing can enſue, but deſtruction.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 8.
                  
                     The threats we may gather firſt out of Saint Luke, when our Sauiour 
                           Luc. 10.ſaith, Qui vos ſpernit, me ſpernit. He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. Signifying, that looke what ſinne it were, not to heare, but to deſpiſe our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, that we ſhould account it the ſame, to deſpiſe, and not to giue eare, and credit, to the Catholicke Church. Inſinuating thereby, that the like puniſhment is to he expected, for the ſaid contempt. Secondly, in Saint Mathew, the ſame our Sauiour expreſly ſaith; Si Eccleſiam non audierit, ſit tibi 
                        Matth. 18. ſicut Ethnicus & publicanus, If he will not heare the Church, let him be to thee like an Ethnicke and a Publican. Finally, in Saint Marke, after he had giuen charge and commiſſion to preach the Goſpell to euerie creature, he pronounceth this threat to thoſe that will not beleeue, ſaying: Qui non crediderit 
                        Mark. 16. condemnabitur, He that will not beleeue, ſhall be condemned.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This is the laſt point in your Aſſumption, and thus it is to be concluded.
                  
                     He, that deſpiſeth our Sauiour, that is to be accounted as an heathen or Publican, that ſhall be condemned, is greatly threatned in Scripture.
                     But he that will not heare the Church, and doe in all things according to the ſaying thereof, deſpiſeth our Sauiour, &c.
                     Therefore he that will not heare the Church, and doe in all things according to the ſaying thereof, is greatly threatned in Scripture.
                  
                  
                     
I denie your Minor: and will anſwer to the ſeuerall proofes To the aſaſſumption. of it. To 
                        Luc. 10. 16. the firſt whereof I ſhall need to ſay little, becauſe I ſpake ſufficiently of the former part of that text, at the third point. The ſumme is, that this threatning (as the warrant) is not vttered, in reſpect of any Church, or companie, but of ſeuerall teachers, and preachers; and therefore, if we may not conclude from hence, that he, which heareth not euery miniſter, and doth in all things according to his ſaying, is guiltie of theſe crimes; no more is he, that performeth not the like dutie to a cōpany of Paſtors or biſhops aſſembled together. Secondly, if it were ſpokē of the Church, yet were not any man to be held faulty in ſuch a meaſure, but he onely, that refuſeth the miniſterie of the Goſpell, and embraceth not the doctrine thereof, as the onely way of ſaluation. Therefore ſaid our Sauiour in the ſame chapter and matter: 
                        Luc. 10. 10. 11 
                     Into whatſoeuer Citie ye ſhall enter, if they will not receiue you, go your waies out into the ſtreets of the ſame, and ſay, euen the verie dust, which cleaueth on vs of your Citie, we wipe off againſt you. So did 
                        Act. 13. 51. the Apoſtles againſt the Iewes of Antioch in Piſidia, for their contempt of the Goſpell. They ſhooke off the duſt of their feet againſt them. Thus (as I ſignified before,) 
                     
                        Gloſſ. interl. ad Luc. 10. your gloſſe vnderſtandeth it: He that deſpiſeth you, ſo that he will not beleeue in Chriſt. Is it all one to deſpiſe a man, and not to aſſent to the truth of whatſoeuer he ſpeaketh? This may proceed, and doth ordinarily, from an error of iudgement; that commeth alwaies from a reſolute determination of the will. Thirdly, as hearing, ſo deſpiſing muſt be vnderſtood, not ſimply but when the parties to be heard or deſpiſed, preach the truth of Ieſus Chriſt, according to his word. For there is no commaundement, as I ſhewed in handling of the laſt point, that bindeth vs any farther to obedience, or makes vs liable to puniſhment, then the things deliuered are agreeable to the word of God: vnleſſe we do againſt our conſcience. Therefore your ſpeech of your Catholicke Church, is but idle, there being no ſpeech, nor thought of it in this place, but onely a charge to heare the Apoſtles ſimply, becauſe they could not erre: other teachers iointly, or ſeuerally, though the latter be properly intended, ſo farre forth, as they ſpeake agreeably to the

Scriptures, and ſo do not erre.
                  Firſt, I ſay 
                        Mat. 1
                           •
                        . 17. this place is not to purpoſe, becauſe it ſpeaketh of a man alreadie in the Church, a beleeuer by profeſſion: whereas your queſtion is of him, that is no Chriſtian, but to be made a beleeuer by giuing credit to that, which ſhall be preached to him. That it is to be vnderſtood of beleeuers onely, the text it ſelfe ſpeaketh. If thy brother: 
                     1. Cor. 5. 11. 
                     If anie man that is called a brother. Thy brother: that is a Chriſtian (ſaith 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 18. Theophylact) For our Lord hath appointed no ſuch courſe to be taken (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. in Mat. hom. 62. Chryſoſtome) with them, that are out of the Church. But this is meant of him, that vnder the name of a beleeuer (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Mat. 18. Ierome) plaieth the Infidell. A brother (ſaith 
                        Ianſen. harm. cap. 72. Ianſenius) is here vnderſtood not to be euerie neighbour, or euerie man, but he, that is a Christian of the ſame religion with vs. His reaſons are, firſt, becauſe our Sauiour ſaith, Tell the Church; but the Church hath nothing to doe, in ſuch caſes, with thoſe that are not members of it: What haue I to do (ſaith 
                     1. Cor. 5. 12. 
                     Paul) to iudge them, that are without? Secondly, becauſe an Heathen and Publican are alreadie out of the Church, and ſo the cenſure here appointed cannot concerne them.
                  
                  Secondly, by not hearing the Church, our Sauiour doth not meane, not beleeuing all points of doctrine, the Church deliuereth, (of which there was no occaſion for him to ſpeake, at that time) but refuſing to be ordered by the Church, and deſpiſing the admonition thereof. So is hearing and not hearing there to be vnderſtood. If he heare thee: what is that? If he beleeue the doctrine thou teacheſt? No ſuch matter. But if he take thy admonition in good part, and accordingly reforme himſelfe. So afterwards: If he refuſe to heare the witneſſes. This refuſall hath a kinde of contempt ioyned with it. If he contemne the Church, ſaith 
                        Cyprian. epiſt. 76. ad Magnum. §. 1. Cyprian. Deſpiſing the commaundement of his prelate: ſaith 
                        Lyra. ad Math. 18. Lyra.
                  Thirdly, by Church, no man in this place can reaſonably vnderſtand a generall Councell, either without, or with the Pope. For queſtionleſſe our Sauiour would neuer ſpeak ſo obſcurely to the Iewes, for whom it was impoſſible to vnderſtand his meaning, and whom that matter did not concerne. But he ſpeaketh either of the gouernours of ſeuerall Churches, or of

the congregatiōs & gouernors, which are properly the Church 
                        Rhem. teſt. in the marginall notes Mat. 18. in thoſe places where they liue. In the former ſenſe do 
                        Chryſoſt. in Mat. hom. 62. Chryſoſtome and 
                        Theophylact. ad Mat. 18. Theophylact take it, and your Rhemiſts by Chryſoſtomes authority: Tell the Prelates and gouernours. Tell them (ſaith 
                        Bellar de Pontif. Rom. lib. 1. cap. 6. Bellarmine) that are publicke perſons in the Church. And in an other place: 
                        De verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 5. 
                     Euerie mans Prelate, or a companie of Prelates is meant. The latter opinion your 
                        Ianſe. harm. cap. 72. Biſhop Ianſenius maintaines: He ſaith, tell the Church, not tell the Biſhops and gouernours of the Church, though they eſpecially are to be told, & the Church is not to be told, but in their preſence: as a company of beleeuers, is not to be called a Church, if the gouernours thereof be not preſent. He ſaith, tell the Church, that he may reuerence the agreement of the multitude. 
                     Gloſſa. interl. ibi. 
                     That the reproofe by many may correct him. To this purpoſe 
                        Hieron. ad Mat cap. 18. Ierome ſaith, It muſt be told to many. And therefore if any man thinke, that by telling the Church, it is meant we ſhould tell the Pope: beſides the abſurdity of the interpretation, the Pope being but one, and the Church (by your owne definition) a Company, both our Sauiour Chriſts courſe is peruerted, Tell him alone, thē with one or two witneſſes; & laſtly, tel one againe: & Ianſenins, & Ierom are profeſſedly againſt him.
                  Fourthly, it may be, that by the Church our Sauiour vnderſtandeth, according to the cuſtome of the Iewes in thoſe daies, not any aſſemblie of the Cleargie, about Church cauſes, but generally the Councell of the Elders, which had power to end diuers matters betwixt parties of their owne nation. After which example 1. Cor. 6. 4. 5. the Apoſtle willeth the Corinthians to appoint Iudges amongſt themſelues, that they might not diſhonor God, & the profeſſiō of chriſtianity, by going to law one with another vnder infidels. If this courſe take not effect, then, ſaith our Sauiour, deale with him as thou wouldeſt & mightſt deale with an heathen, or Publican, by following the Law againſt him in what Court thou thinkeſt beſt for thy aduantage. And this expoſition (as farre as I can yet ſee) ſeemeth agreeable to the text it ſelfe, & the purpoſe of our Sauiour, who ſeemeth to ſpeake onely or eſpecially of priuat abuſes and quarrels: as might be ſhewed by diuers reaſons, and in part hath bene by 
                        Bilſon. perpet. gouern. cap. 4. pag. 29. &c.
                      a learned writer, to whom I referre the Reader in this point.
                  
                     
Fiftly, it is more then manifeſt, that our Sauiour ſpeaketh not of hearing or not hearing the word, but of ſome quarell, or ſinfull action at the moſt: which alſo is to be determined or corrected in each ſeuerall congregatiō: as the teſtimonies of Vbi ſupra. Chryſoſtome, Theophylact, Ianſenius and Bellarmine declare. Tell the Church, not the vniuerſall Church ſpread ouer the face of the earth; but that particular Church, in which euery man liueth, and to which he is ſubiect, ſaith 
                        Luc. Brugenſ. ad Math. 18. Lucas of Bruges. There is 
                        De 12. abuſ. ſaecul. cap. 10. a treatiſe that goes vnder Cyprians name, wherein the author out of this place concludeth, that euery man must ſeeke to his owne Biſhop. All theſe things conſidered, let euery one iudge, whether this peece of ſcripture be fitly applied by you to proue that we muſt beleeue without doubting, whatſoeuer the Church deliuereth. But I wil propound the reaſon, that all men may vnderſtand, and conſider it.
                  
                     If he that being proceeded withall firſt by admonition of one man alone, then by the like with one or two witneſſes, laſtly by the gouerners of the Church, concerning ſome quarrell or matter of fact, will not obey the voyce of the Church, muſt be to vs as an heathen or a Publican: then whoſoeuer wil not beleeue whatſoeuer the Church teacheth, is greatly threatned in the Scripture.
                     But he that being ſo proceeded againſt, in ſuch a matter, will not obey, is ſo to be accounted of.
                     Therefore he that will not beleeue whatſoeuer the Church teacheth, is greatly threatned in the Scripture.
                  
                  I haue framed this Syllogiſme, as euery man may ſee, with the greateſt aduantage that can reaſonably be taken by this place to your purpoſe; whereas I needed not haue allowed the interpretation, on which the reaſon is grounded Al which notwithſtanding, who diſcerneth not the weakneſſe of the conſequence in the propoſition? What if ſuch a man be ſo to be accounted of? doth it follow therupon, that euery one who beleeueth not the Church in all points, is threatned? Firſt, vnleſſe the ſame courſe of proceeding be held, why ſhould the partie be threatned, becauſe where ſuch a courſe is taken, there a man is to be ſo reckoned of? Secondly, how doth it follow, that if in iudgement

concerning a matter of fact, the Church muſt be hearkned to for reformation, then in all matters whatſoeuer, it is abſolutely to be heard by all men? Such are your proofes in points of greateſt importance.
                  I refer the Reader to that which I anſwered before, concerning 
                        Mark. 16. 16. Chap 4. ſect. 2 this place; to which I adde vpon the preſent occaſion, that 
                        Mat. 28. 19. our Sauiour ſending forth his Miniſters to preach the Goſpell, chargeth them to ſquare their doctrine according to thoſe things which they had receiued in commiſſion from him: 
                        Luc. Brugen. ad Marc. 16. therfore are they no farther to be obeyed, then their preaching is warrantable for the particulars out of our Sauiours inſtructions giuen them; which the Apoſtles directed by Gods ſpirit, truly and faithfully deliuered, firſt by word of mouth, and after by writing, to be the pillar (as 
                        Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Irenaeus ſaith) and foundation of our faith. And if this place conuey any ſuch authoritie to the Church, it giueth the ſame to euery ſeuerall teacher, as it did to euery one of the Apoſtles ſeuerally; and ſo euery prieſt ſecular or regular, muſt be heard and beleeued whatſoeuer he teach.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 9.
                  
                     Thus you ſee our Sauiour Christ hath promiſed to his Church the continuall preſence of himſelfe and of his holy Spirit, to teach that companie all truth. Whereof followeth, that it is infallibly taught all truth. Moreouer, he hath giuen charge and commiſſion to that Church to teach vs, and hath warranted and commaunded vs, in all points to heare and do according to the ſaying of this Church: which proueth, that it appertaineth to this church to inſtruct vs in all points of faith, and that we ought to learne of it, in all matters of religion, what is the infallible truth: and conſequently, that the doctrine of this Church is the rule of faith.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Neither we nor you can ſee any ſuch thing, if we looke no farther then the holy Ghoſt directeth vs: who aſſureth vs of no more but that the Apoſtles ſhould be ſo inſtructed and guided, that they ſhould not erre in their teaching, either by word of mouth or by writing, by reaſon of ignorance, or any other peruerſe affection; and that all the childrē of God ſhall be ſo taught and protected, that they ſhall neuer fall away from ſaluation by Chriſt. As for your Church or certaine companie, that is your Cleargie and Pope aſſembled in a generall Councell, neither

thoſe places of Scripture you haue brought, nor any other you can bring, once make mention of any ſuch promiſe to them. Therefore haue we no warrant to heare and doe in all points according to the ſaying of any Church, (not onely not of yours) but ſo far as that Church teacheth according to the doctrine of our Sauiour Chriſt in the Scripture, which is the rule of faith.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 10.
                  
                     Worthily therefore doth S. Paul call this Church columnam & 1. Tim. 3. Lib. 1. cot. Creſcon. cap. 33. firmamentū veritatis, the pillar and ground of truth. Worthily alſo ſaith S. Austin: Scripturarum à nobis tenetur veritas, cum id facimus, quod vniuerſae placet Eccleſiae, quam earundem Scripturarum commendat authoritas: vt quoniam Scriptura ſancta fallere non poteſt, quiſquis falli metuit huius obſcuritate quaeſtionis, Eccleſiam de illa conſulat, quam ſine vlla ambiguitate, Scriptura ſancta demonſtrat. The truth of the Scriptures is holden of vs, when we do that which pleaſeth the vniuerſall or whole Church, the which is commended by the authoritie of the Scriptures themſelues; that becauſe the holy Scripture cannot deceiue, whoſoeuer feareth to be deceiued with the obſcuritie of this queſtion, let him require the iudgement of the Church, which without any ambiguitie, the holy Scripture doth demonſtrate: by which words he ſheweth plainly, that the ſentence of the Church is of infallible and vndoubted truth, and that the way not to be deceiued in an obſcure queſtion, is to aske and follow the iudgement of the Church. Wherefore worthily alſo do we all ſay, Credo Eccleſiam Catholicam: I beleeue the Catholicke Church: and worthily alſo may I conclude, that neither Scripture alone, nor naturall wit and learning, nor priuate ſpirit, nor any other thing, but onely the teaching of the true Church of Chriſt, is that ordinarie meanes which Almightie God hath prouided, whereby all men may learne that one, infallible, entire faith, which I proued to be neceſſarie to ſaluation.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     1. Tim. 3. 15. Saint Paul doth worthily call the Church, the pillar and ground of truth: but not (as you would haue vs beleeue) becauſe it is the rule of faith. 
                        Oecumen. ad 1. Tim. 3. 15. è Chryſoſt.
                      The Greeke Scholiaſt taketh that ſpeech of the Apoſtle to be vttered by way of compariſon, betwixt the Church of Chriſt and the Iewiſh Temple. Not as the Iewiſh Temple (ſaith Oecumenius) but the pillar and ground of truth:
                     
                     for the Temple was the ground of the ſhadowes of the truth. Out of which we may gather, that as the Iewiſh ſynagogue was the pillar and ground of thoſe ſhadowes of the truth: ſo is the Church of Chriſt the pillar and ground of the truth it ſelfe. But that ſynagogue was not the rule of faith in that point, becauſe whatſoeuer it taught, was to be held for infallible truth; but for that 
                        Rom. 3. 2. to it were committed the oracles of God, and the knowledge and vſe of thoſe ceremonies: ſo hath the Church of Chriſt the truth of doctrine in the ſcripture, and the exerciſes of Gods worſhip and religion. Therfore is it called the pillar and ground of it, becauſe it conſtantly maintaineth that truth, preaching and profeſſing it, in deſpight of all the practiſes and power of Satan, and tyrants of the world. As the thighs (ſaith 
                        Philo epiſc. Carpath, in Cantic cap. 4. circa ann. 410. an ancient writer) ſuſtaine and beare vp the weight of the whole bodie: ſo alſo the Apoſtles like pilars, valiantly carry the vniuerſall Church of Christians ouer the whole world; being for the value of their inuincible courage and ſtedfaſtneſſe of their holy purpoſe, called marble pillars. And a litle after: They preached the Gospell with ſuch wiſedome and conſtancie, that as if they had bene of marble or adamant, they were afraid of no violence nor aduerſitie, but always continuing firme and inuincible againſt all the forces of men and diuels, ſhining as it were in the darke, by that light of their wiſedome, by preaching, admoniſhing, teaching and gliſtering with miracles, at the last they moſt happily became conquerors. To this effect ſpeake 
                        Lyra ad 1. Tim. cap. 3. your Gloſſes: The ground of the truth of the Goſpell, which the Church conſtantly maintained euen in the greateſt perſecutions. Well vpholding the truth in it ſelf (ſaith Gloſs. ordin. ibi. another Gloſſe.) Ne corruat. 
                     That it may not fall to the ground, though it be afflicted, ſaith Lombar. ibi. Lombard. But let vs bring your reaſon into due frame.
                  
                     The pillar and ground of truth is the rule of faith.
                     The Church is the pillar and ground of truth.
                     Therefore the Church is the rule of faith.
                  
                  Your propoſition or maior is falſe, vnleſſe you reſtraine it, as To the propoſition. I haue often ſaid, to the truth; and then it is ſo far the rule of faith, as it is the pillar and ground of truth. Whatſoeuer it holdeth truly, according to the ſcripture, is the rule of faith for thoſe points: not becauſe of the Churches authoritie, but for the truth

of the doctrine. Yet may it eaſily come to paſſe, that a Church maintaining the generall truth of the Goſpell, and all particulars neceſſary to ſoluation, may faile in many other points of great importance, and for all that, continue both a true Church, and the pillar and ground of truth, though not the rule of faith.
                  Your minor alſo (as you vnderſtand it) is vntrue. Firſt becauſe To the Aſſumption. the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of any ſuch companie as you imagine, Pope, Biſhop, Councell; but either of the Church of Epheſus, in which Timothie, to whom he writeth, then abode; or indefinitely of any and euery Church whatſoeuer, where the true Religion of our Sauiour is or ſhall be profeſſed, according to the Goſpell. If Timothie were (as you will not denie) Biſhop of Epheſus, then it is apparent, that the Apoſtle calleth the Church of Epheſus, wherein Timothy liued, taught and gouerned, the pillar and ground of truth: yet was it not the rule of faith; for then had the rule of faith periſhed long ſince with that Church of Epheſus. If he ſpeake to him as to an Euangeliſt, who was to follow him from place to place, and to eſtabliſh the Churches which the Apoſtle had planted, then muſt euery one of thoſe Churches, wherein Timothy was to behaue himſelfe, as he had done in Epheſus, be vnderſtood to be the pillar and ground of truth: and yet neither any, nor all of them were the rule of faith, which elſe muſt haue bene loſt with them. What remaines then? Shall we expound it of all beleeuers in generall? I grant it reacheth to all the faithfull: but as to them conſidered in their ſeuerall Churches, becauſe among them ſo diſpoſed of, was Timothy to performe that dutie which the Apoſtle there enioyneth him. But let vs ſo conceiue of the Church. What ſhall it auaile you, or endamage vs? All beleeuers are not the companie you pleade for, but onely the Pope and your Biſhops, whom you would haue taken for the rule of faith.
                  Secondly, I denie your minor, in reſpect of the ſenſe you giue of thoſe words, the pillar and ground of truth. For you ſo vnderſtand them, as if the truth of God depended vpon the verdict of the Church, ſo that nothing may be held for truth, but what the Church deliuereth for ſuch; and whatſoeuer ſhe ſo

propoundeth, muſt ſo be receiued vpon paine of certaine damnation. How contrary are you in this interpretation and doctrine to the auncient fathers? The Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Irenaeus) left vs the Scriptures to be the pillar and ground of our faith. Nay (ſay you) they left vs the Church to be the pillar and ground of the Scriptures. The Goſpell and ſpirit of life (ſaith 
                        Cap. 11. the ſame father in the ſame booke) is the pillar and ground of the Church. Nay, by your leaue (reply you) the Church is the pillar and ground of the Goſpell. But 
                        Chryſoſt. ad 1. Tim. hom. 11. Chryſoſtome handling this place of the Apoſtle, is not afraid to affirme, that the truth is the pillar and ground of the Church: not as if he would denie that which the Apoſtle ſaith: for the Church indeed is the vpholder of the truth; but to ſhew, that although the Church maintaine and auow the truth, yet it is built and founded vpon the truth, which (as Hicron. ibi. Ierome ſaith) vpholds the building. Therfore to make ſhort, whē the Apoſtle ſaith, that the Church is the pillar and ground of truth: his meaning is, that amongſt Chriſtians, and among no other ſort of men, the truth is to be found; and amongſt, and by them it is conſtantly and worthily maintained. The Philoſophers indeed (as 
                        Thom. ad 1. Tim. cap. 3. lect. 3. Thomas ſaith) had a kind of notion of ſome points thereof, but they had no certaintie: as well becauſe they were corrupted with errors, as for that very few of them are found to haue agreed in the ſame truth. But in the Church is certaine knowledge and truth. Which (as 
                        Caiet. ad 1. Tim. 3. Caietan ſaith) is vpheld aloft in it, becauſe it is auowed, reuerenced and honored aboue all things: and it is ſo founded in the Church, that out of it, it is not to be found. This is the reaſon (as they truly ſay) why the Church is called a pillar. Thomas vbi ſupra. Thomas addeth that it is termed the ground in reſpect of others, becauſe men cannot be confirmed in the truth, but by the ſacraments of the Church.
                  
                  
                     
                        Auguſt. cont. Creſcon. Lib. 1. cap. 33. This teſtimonie of Auſtine is alledged by you otherwiſe, then it was written by him. For whereas he ſpake of that which had then alreadie bene reſolued of by the whole Church: you make him ſpeake indefinitely of any thing that pleaſeth the Church, turning iam placuit into placet. But we muſt vnderſtand, that he writing in that place concerning the rebaptizing of heretickes, which queſtion had bene agreed vpon

(as he ſaith 
                        Cap. 32. in the former chapter) before the hatching of Donatus hereſie, ſaith, that the iudgement of the Church in that caſe is to be held as agreeable to the Scripture. This might the Reader haue ſeene in his words, if you had not changed the tenſe in placet, and left out etiam in hac re, in the beginning of the ſentence: The truth of the Scriptures (ſaith Auſtin) is held by vs euen in this thing. If you reply farther, that the reaſon which Auſtin vſeth, is generall for all queſtions whatſoeuer, namely the authoritie of the Church, commended by the Scriptures, which cannot erre: I anſwer you, firſt that we haue ſeene Auſtins iudgement directly to the contrary, viz. that whatſoeuer is of neceſſitie to ſaluation, is plainly deliuered in the Scriptures, and that the authoritie of men without Scripture, is inſufficient to propound any doctrine as a matter of faith: and therefore if he ſhould write otherwiſe in this place, we might with good reaſon make queſtion of his authoritie. Secondly, I anſwer, that Auſtine ſpeaketh here of thoſe points onely which are not determinable by Scripture, ſuch as he taketh the queſtion of rebaptizing heretickes to be, as it appeareth in the words immediatly before thoſe you alledge, being alſo a peece of the ſentence by you omitted. Although (ſaith Auſtin) there be no example to be brought out of the Scriptures concerning this matter, yet the truth of the ſame Scriptures is (euen in this matter) alſo held by vs, when we do that which hath now alreadie pleaſed the whole Church, &c. Now in ſuch caſes as cannot by Scripture be decided, who would or may be ſo preſumptuous, as to withſtand or miſlike the practiſe of the church in all places? Surely 1. Cor. 11. 16. the authoritie of the church is ſo far commended in the Scriptures, that it ought in all things of ſuch nature to ouerweigh our iudgement, and incline our affection to the liking of that which is agreed on by ſo generall a conſent of ſo many churches in all nations. Therefore that which you gather out of Auſtins words, of following the iudgement of the church in an obſcure queſtion, is to be reſtrained to ſuch queſtions as cannot be determined by the Scriptures (and thoſe are few or none of any importance, of neceſſitie to ſaluation none at all) or elſe your conſequence will be nothing worth. Auſtin ſaith, that in queſtions not determinable by Scripture,

we muſt follow the iudgement of the church. Therefore we muſt follow it in all obſcure queſtions whatſoeuer. Auſtins foundation will not beare your building. Is it a good reaſon to ſay, In caſes not prouided for by law, custome muſt beare ſway: therfore it muſt be followed in all caſes? So, and ſo weakly do you diſpute.
                  It is not enough for you to teach vs new diuinitie, but you will driue vs to learne new Latin too: Caeſar could make men free of Rome, but not words. Credere Eccleſiam Catholicam, to beleeue the Catholicke Church, in ordinary Latin, is to beleeue that there is a Catholicke Church. Credo (eſſe) I beleeue there is: but you would make the ignorant beleeue, that credo Eccleſiam and credo Eccleſiae is all one. For how elſe can this ſentence reaſonably depend vpon the former: We muſt follow the iudgement of the Church: Therfore worthily alſo do we all ſay, Credo Eccleſiam Catholicam? What can you meane by this, but I beleeue, that is, I giue credit to the Catholick Church: that is, I beleeue that to be true which the Catholicke Church teacheth? But the article of the Creed hath no ſuch ſenſe, as it may appeare by the other that follow, all being alike in reſpect of our beleefe. I beleeue the communion of Saints, the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, the reſurrection of the bodie, and life euerlaſting: To which of theſe foure dowe giue any ſuch credit? But we beleeue that there is a Church of Chriſt, to which all theſe priuiledges belong. He that tranſlated Epiphanius into Latin, more curiouſly then truly made a difference betwixt beleeuing the church and the other articles. We beleeue (ſaith Ianus Corua. in tranſl. Anchorat. Epiph. in extremo. he) one holy Catholicke and Apoſtolicke Church, we confeſſe one baptiſme for the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and looke for the reſurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. But the Greeke which Epiph. reciteth out of the Nicene creed, is alike in all the articles, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      in the Church, in the baptiſme of repentance, in the reſurrection of the dead. And 
                        Paſchaſ. diac. Rom. Eccleſ. contra Maced. lib. 1. cap. 1. Paſchaſius doubteth not to ſay, that the ignorance of ſome drew the prepoſition 
                     In praefat. ibi. in from the former ſentence concerning beleefe in the holy Ghoſt, into the article of the church: yet (as he ſheweth) credere Deum, & in Deum greatly differ. That there is a God, the Apoſtle ſaith, the diuel beleeueth: but no mā is held to beleeue in God, but he that 
                     Piè in cum ſperauerit. 
                     religiouſly puts
                     
                     his truſt in him. 
                     
                        Cyril. Hierof. catceh. 18. Cyril alſo reciteth the articles after the ſame manner, without any difference in the particulars, yet with In, to euerie one of them, and in that ſenſe, in which we take them. 
                        Ruffin. in ſym. Apoſt. ſect. 35. Ruffin (as Paſchaſius before) denieth that the Creed ſaith: In the holy Church, in the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, in the reſurrection of the fleſh. Becauſe that were to equall our beleefe of theſe points, with our beleeuing in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghoſt. But of theſe articles we are to beleeue, that they are true, that there is a Church, gathered vnto God, that there is a remiſſion of ſinnes, that there is a reſurrection of the fleſh. So doth 
                        Auguſt. Serm. de tempore. 115 Auſtin (if thoſe Sermons be his) read and vnderſtand it. I beleeue the Catholicke Church &c. We muſt beleeue, that God will vouchſafe the reſurrection of bodies, and the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. And whereas 
                        Serm. 119. in an other Sermon, he ſaith in the Church, ſo doth he alſo, in the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and the meaning is all one. And 
                        Serm. 131. in a third Sermon he giueth vs this caueat: we muſt know (ſaith he) that we muſt beleeue the Church, not beleeue in the Church, that is, muſt beleeue there is a Church. So then, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Credere Eccleſiam. Heb. 11. 6. 
                     To beleeue the Catholicke Church, is not to beleeue all that the Church ſaith (which neither the Greeke nor the Latin will beare) but to beleeue there is a Church; 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Credo eſſe Eccleſiam: which in the phraſe of the new Teſtament, for the Greeke, might be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Which is word for word, I beleeue that there is a Church. Now if any man ſhall demaūd of me, what the meaning of this article is, or what we beleeue, by beleeuing there is a Church, and what that Church is, to which ſo many gracious promiſes are made, and of which ſo many glorious things are ſpokē in the ſcripture; I will indeuor to ſatisfie him, as briefly as I can with plainneſſe. Firſt then (leauing the holineſſe and catholickneſſe of this church to be diſcuſſed 
                        Chap. 15. in due place) I ſay, that by beleeuing the Church, we beleeue that there is a company of men called to true faith in Ieſus Chriſt, and to the participation of thoſe priuiledges, which belong to all the true members of his myſticall bodie, ſome of the principall whereof are recited in the articles following. But we may not imagine, as the Papiſts doe, without any likelihood of true reaſon, that this company is their

Pope and Biſhops aſſembled in a generall councel, or that they of this companie make one viſible congregation, but that they are all one Church in regard of the common meanes of ſaluation, which they embrace, and their dependance vpon on myſticall head Ieſus Chriſt, of whoſe bodie they are all members. So that by Church in the Creed, we vnderſtand ſuch of the elect, as are by faith liuely members of our Sauiours bodie, or at the leaſt, are by the baptiſme of the ſpirit and water in corporated into that bodie, howſoeuer as yet they haue not faith. I denie not that all the elect, euen thoſe, which are yet vnborne, belong to the Church of Chriſt, but I thinke the Creed doth not ſtretch ſo farre, but onely to them, that are actually members of Chriſt, not to all, that are ſo in Gods euerlaſting predeſtination. In this ſenſe, namely for the liuing members of Chriſts bodie, the word Church is often vſed in the Scripture. 
                        Mat. 16. 18. 
                     
                        Ʋpon this rocke will I build my Church. 
                     
                        Act. 20. 28. 
                     The Church, which he hath purchaſed with his blood. 
                     
                        Eph. 1. 21. 22. 
                     God hath giuen Chriſt ouer all things to be the head of the Church, which is his bodie, the fulneſſe of him, that filleth all in all things. 
                     
                        & 5. 23. 
                     Chriſt is the head of the Church, and the ſame is the Sauiour of his bodie. So is it taken in the ſame chapter diuers times. 
                        verſ. 25. 27. 29. 32. 
                     He is the head of the bodie of the Church. Thus doe the ancient writers ſpeake of the Church. 
                        Auguſt. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27. Auſtin denieth, that he dares take any for the Church of Christ, but thoſe that are iuſt, and holy, no though they haue bene baptiſed: For (as he ſaith 
                        Cont. Creſc. lib. 2. cap. 21. in another place) they that are condemned by Chriſt, are not now in his bodie, which is the Church: becauſe Chriſt cannot haue members condemned. As for the reprobate (ſaith 
                        De bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap, 17. the ſame Author) whether they ſeeme to be within the Church, or be apparantly out of it, they are alwaies diuided from the vnitie of the Church, which is without ſpot or wrincle. The Church (ſaith 
                        Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 7. Clement of Alexandria) is the company of the elect. Therefore ſaith 
                        Cyprian. epiſt. 49. Sect. 2. ad Cornel.
                      Cyprian, that the vnitie of Chriſt and the Church is coupled together with indiuiſible links. For (as he ſaith 
                        & epiſt. 55. Sect. 8 ad eund. Cornel.
                      otherwhere) the Church that beleeueth in Chriſt, and holds that which once it hath receiued, neuer departeth wholy frō him: they are the Church, that cōtinue in the houſe of God: but they are not a planting planted by God, who are not ſetled with the faſtneſſe and ſoundneſſe
                     
                     of wheat, but are ſcattered like chaffe by the breath of the enemie Sathan. The Church ſtandeth on the right hand (ſaith 
                        Hieron. epiſt. 140. Ierome) and hath nothing in it, belonging to them, on the left hand. And 
                        Hieron. ad Epheſ. 5. againe: He that is a ſinner, and defiled with any filthineſſe, cannot be called one of Chriſts Church, nor be ſaid to be ſubiect to Chriſt. There are many ſuch ſayings in the writings of the Fathers, grounded vpon the booke of Canticles; which all men know intreateth of the true church. There is no doubt (ſaith 
                        Bernard. in cant. ſer. 78. Bernard vpon the Canticles) but the elect are the Church of God. But the reprobat (as one of your 
                        Ioan. de Turrecremata lib. 4 ſum. part. 2. cap. 20 Cardinals ſaith) are not truly mēbers of the Church. Of many beleeuers purged from their ſinnes, there is made one Church, ſaith 
                        Albert. in Math. cap. 26. Albertus magnus, Thomas his maſter. 
                        Thomas in Apoc. cap. 3. Thomas himſelfe expounding that place of the Reuelation, In the Temple of my God, ſaith, that by the temple of God, the Church of the faithfull is vnderſtood, which is the ſpeciall temple of God: and to that purpoſe he alledgeth that of the Apoſtle: 1. Cor. 3. 17. 
                     The temple of God is holy, which you are. And in 
                        Thomas ad Rom. cap. 12, an other place he ſaith, that the myſticall bodie of Chriſt is the Church. Now the vnion of this myſtical bodie is ſpiritual, by which, through faith and charitie, they are vnited to God, and one to another. As the godly, or they that are holy, are the members of Chriſt, ſo the wicked (ſaith 
                        Ambroſ. in Pſalm. 35. Guliel. Altiſſ. in ſum. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. q. 5. 
                     Ambroſe) are the members of the Diuell. The congregation of them that beleeue aright, is the Church, ſaith Altiſſiodorenſis. Who can reaſonably doubt whether this be the Church ſpoken of in the Creed, or no?
                  As for the promiſes, and commendations giuen to the Church in the Scripture, to what other Church ſhould they appertaine? The Doue, and the perfect one praiſed in the Canticles, is (as 
                        Epiphan. hareſ. 35. Epiphanius truly ſaith) the holy ſpouſe and Catholicke Church. Whereas, the Church in the Canticles (ſaith 
                        Auguſt, de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27. Auſtin) is deſcribed to be a garden incloſed, a fountain ſealed vp, a wel of liuing water &c. I dare not vnderſtand this, but of the holy and righteous, not of couetous men, not of deceiuers, extortioners, vſurers, drunkards, enuious perſons, although they haue receiued the ſame baptiſme, but haue not the ſame charitie, or ſanctifying grace. The promiſes & praiſes belong either ſeuerally to euery one of the elect called; as that 
                        Mat. 16. 18. & Theophyl. ad cum locum.
                      
                     the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt the Church: that
                     
                     
                        Ephe. 5. 23. 25 
                     the Church is loued and cheriſhed by Chriſt her huſband & head: or to the congregations of beleeuers, in regard of the elect amongſt them. Once this I dare boldly affirme (let any Papiſt diſproue it if he can) that the Church is no where in all the Scripture taken for one companie through the world, in reſpect of any outward gouernment or dependance: which is the foundation of all your doctrine, touching the Church: but in regard of the common meanes of ſaluation by faith in Chriſt. And here I might well make an end of anſwering to this treatiſe, becauſe I haue ouerthrowne the maine ſtrength of your diſcourſe, and diſcouered to all men that will not be wilfully blind, the weakneſſe of your reaſon: but for the better ſatisfaction of the vnlearned, I will follow you from Chapter to Chapter, that the truth may the more eaſily be diſcerned.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XI. That the Church, whoſe doctrine muſt be to vs the rule of faith, muſt alwayes continue without interruption, from Chriſt his time, till the worlds end.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  That there alwayes hath bene, ſince the beginning of the world (excepting perhaps the time betwixt the fall of our firſt parents, and their faith in the Meſſiah) that there is, and alwaies ſhal be a Church, viz. certaine men that are predeſtinate to life, and actually beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, it neuer came into any of our minds to be doubted of: that there ſhould be ſuch a companie as you conceipt, all the Papiſts in the world cannot proue.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Conſidering what hath bene proued in the former Chapter, about the infallible authoritie of the doctrine of the true Church: I hope no Chriſtian will deny, but that ſo long as this Church doth continue, we haue of it a ſure pillar and a firme foundation, whereupon we may ſafely build our beleef. For either a man muſt deny, that euer our Sauiour did make any ſuch promiſe, gaue ſuch charge and commiſſion, left any ſuch warrant, ſet forth ſuch a commaundement, or thundred out any ſuch threats, as before is rehearſed: which were to denie the Scriptures, which ſcriptures are generally receiued by all Chriſtians,
                     
                     no otherwiſe then (as they are) the vndoubted word of God: or elſe he muſt wreſt the interpretation thereof, both from that which the words, of themſelues, naturally yeeld, and alſo from the common ſenſe and vnderſtanding, either of all, or the moſt learned, and almoſt of the vnlearned alſo, of the whole Chriſtian world: or elſe he ſhall be forced to confeſſe that, which, not I, but Saint Paul hath 
                     1. Tim. 3. 
                     ſaid: Eccleſia eſt columna & firmamentum veritatis: the Church is the pillar and ground of truth. Onely it may perchance ſeeme to ſome (of thoſe, that doe, at this day oppoſe themſelues againſt the authority of the Church,) that this was true, for Saint Pauls time, and perhaps for ſome three, foure, fiue, or ſix hundred yeares after: but not to be preſumed vpon in latter times, and namely when Luther began his reformation (as they tearme it) or now adaies.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Conſidering how weake your proofes haue bene, as in the former Chapters, ſo namely in the laſt, about the infallible authoritie of the doctrine of the true Church: I hope there is no reaſonable man, not only no Chriſtian, that will build his faith and ſaluation vpon ſo tottering a pillar, and ſo ſlipperie a foundation. But becauſe you ſeeme to dote ſo much vpon your laſt Chapter, I wil once againe be content to examine the ſubſtance of it, as it is here repeated by you, with ſome litle alteration.
                  
                     Either we must denie that our Sauiour, hath ſo promiſed, charged, warranted, threatned, or we muſt falſely interprete the ſcriptures; or elſe we muſt grant, that the authoritie of the Church is a ſure pillar, and firme foundation, whereupon we may ſafely build our faith.
                     But we neither may denie that our Sauiour hath ſo promiſed, charged, warranted, commaunded, threatned, neither may we falſely interpret the Scriptures.
                     Therefore we muſt grant, that the authoritie of the Church is a ſure pillar and firme foundation, whereupon we may ſafely build our beleefe,
                  
                  Firſt in general for your whole ſyllogiſme, if the cōcluſion you To the ſyllogiſme. intend, were no other, thē that you pretēd & propoūd, that the Church is the pillar & groūd of truth, as S. Paul ſaith, there would be no queſtion in this matter betwixt vs. For we haue learned

to acknowledge the truth of all and euerie part of the ſcripture. But the beginning of this Chapter ſheweth, that you meane, by the Churches being the pillar and ground of truth, that we may ſafely build our beleefe vpon the Churches authority: which, as I prooued in my anſwer to that Chapter, is no part of the Apoſtles meaning. In this ſenſe muſt we take your concluſion.
                  Secondly, in particular, I denie your Maior; becauſe your diſiunction To the propoſition. is naught: preſuming a neceſſitie, where there is none: For neither we need to denie that our Sauiour hath ſo promiſed, charged, warranted, commanded, threatned; neither is there any cauſe why we ſhould falſely interprete the Scriptures: and yet we haue no reaſon to grant, that our faith may ſafely be built vpon the authoritie of the Church. No ſuch thing (as I haue ſhewed) can follow vpon the words of ſcripture alledged by you. Therefore we need not denie the promiſes, charge, warrant, commandement, or threatning of our Sauiour, or elſe grant the Church, ſuch an vnlimited authority. Neither will the true ſenſe of thoſe Scriptures, either enforce or beare any ſuch illation or concluſion, touching the infallible authoritie of the Church.
                  And whereas you thinke to face out the matter, with naming the common ſenſe and vnderſtanding, either of all, or the moſt learned, and almoſt of the vnlearned alſo of the whole Chriſtian world: my anſwer propounding the iudgement of many excellently learned, and ancient writers of thoſe places, prooueth that to be but a vaine popiſh brag, without all likelihood of truth, eſpecially ſince you, that Chap. 1. ſpare not to heape vp teſtimonies of Fathers, when they are needleſſe, and Chap. 14. to quote their bookes and chapters, ſometimes for a bare phraſe, alledge not ſo much as the name of any one author, for the proofe of your interpretation of twelue ſeuerall places of ſcripture.
                  Your proffered ſeruice, in helping vs with this diſtinction, hath more ſhew of kindneſſe, then good meaning. For it is not brought in, to confirme our anſwer, but to giue your ſelfe occaſion of vttering that, which you are taught to vrge for proofe of this queſtion. But we neither need your aide, and haue good

cauſe to ſuſpect your fauours. In a word, your diſtinction is ſuch as none of vs euer brought, or would bring to anſwer thoſe places of ſcripture. We confeſſe, that whatſoeuer was promiſed to the Church in thoſe texts, was promiſed for continuance to the end of the world: but we ſay, that the firſt promiſe was not concerning the Churches not erring, the three laſt are particular to the Apoſtles, at leaſt for ſuch a meaſure of teaching. But what ſhould I repeat that, which was deliuered in the verie laſt Chapter? The thing you harpe vpon, though vntunably, is, that your Romiſh church, or rather the Church of the Eaſt & Weſt, were indeed the pillar and ground of truth, for the ſpace of ſome 600. yeares after Chriſt, but afterwards fell away from that ſoundneſſe of doctrine, which before it had cleaued vnto. Such a matter there is acknowledged by our Diuines; yet no man ſaith, either that the Church erred not, in any point, during that time (for all men know it erred in diuers though not fundamentall, if we may geſſe by the writings of the learned in thoſe ages) or that the Church hath, or ſhall want the performance of Chriſts promiſe, at any time, for a moment. But what is all this to the matter we haue in hand? Well: Let vs ſee yet, what you ſay.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     Againſt theſe men I ſet downe this aſſertion. The true Church of Chriſt (which the forenamed teſtimonies of Scripture do commend) was, and is to continue, without interruption, till the worlds end. This I prooue: Firſt, out of the verie words of thoſe promiſes which I cited out of Saint Matthew, and Saint Iohn. For how can Chriſt our Sauiour, or his holy Spirit, be with his Church, in ſuch ſort, as there is promiſed; to wit till the worlds end, and for euer: and eſpecially, as is ſaid in Saint Matthew: Omnibus diebus vſque ad conſummationem ſeculi: All the daies, euen to the end of the 
                     
                        Matth. cap. 28. 
                     world; vnleſſe the Church alſo be all the daies, vntill the end of the world? For if the Church for any time, daies, monthes, or years doe ceaſe to be: Chriſt cannot for theſe yeares, moneths, and daies, be truly ſaid, to be with his Church (ſith he cannot be with that which is not) and conſequently he cannot be ſaid, to haue fulfilled his promiſe, wherein he ſaid, he would be with his Church, all the daies, vntill the end of the world.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  The men, againſt whom you ſet downe this Aſſertion, are of your owne making, that you might haue, againſt whom to ſhew your valour: once it cannot concerne vs, who acknowledge the continuance of Chriſts Church, without interruption, till the worlds end. As long as theſe times ſhall run on (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. in Pſalm. 71. Auſtin) the Church of God, that is, the bodie of Chriſt, ſhall not be wanting vpon earth. This is the Church, ſpoken of in as many of theſe teſtimonies, as are not peculiar to the Apoſtles, namely the elect, from time to time: not your Romiſh ſynagogue, wherein 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 cap. 7. per lot.
                      many of the reprobate alſo are included, and that as members of your congregation, who cannot without diſhonour of our Sauiour Chriſt, be accounted parts of his glorious bodie.
                  The truth of your Aſſertion needeth no proofe, and the weakneſſe of your proofe is a diſgrace to your Aſſertion. Chriſt will be with his Church, at all times whenſoeuer there are any that beleeue in him, not onely whileſt the Apoſtles liue: therefore there ſhall alwaies be ſome in the world without interruption, that ſhall beleeue in him. This is but a looſe conſequence: I grant the concluſion, or conſequent, that there ſhall be a Church alwaies: but I denie that therefore there ſhall alwaies be one, becauſe our Sauiour promiſeth to be with it, whenſoeuer it is. Put caſe our Sauiour had thus ſpoken; I will be with you, in your perſecution, all the daies, euen to the end of the world: might a man reaſonably conclude from hence, that therfore the Church ſhall be alwaies perſecuted, without any interruption, or eaſe one day from perſecution? Such is your conſequence, and as ſuch, inſufficient to prooue your Aſſertion.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Secondly, I prooue the ſame, out of an other promiſe, or propheſie of our Sauiour Chriſt, to his Church, wherein he ſaith: Portae inferninon praeualebunt aduerſus eam: the gates of hell ſhall not 
                     
                        Mathew. 16. 
                     preuaile againſt it. For how was it true, that the gates of hel ſhall not preuaile, if they haue preuailed ſo much, as vtterly to aboliſh the Church, or at leaſt, to baniſh it quite out of the world, for ſo long a time? Granting therfore (which euery Chriſtiā muſt needs grant) that the propheſies & promiſes of our Sauiour, are alwaies fulfilled, and
                     
                     that they are vnfallibly true; we may not doubt, but that the church hath euer bene ſince Chriſt his time, and ſhal neuer ceaſe to be in the world.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This proofe is little or nothing better then the former: thus you conclude.
                  
                     If Christ haue promiſed, that the gates of hell ſhal not preuaile againſt his Church, then it muſt continue without interruption till the worlds end.
                     But Chriſt hath promiſed, that the gates of hell ſhal not preuaile againſt it.
                     Therefore it muſt continue without interruption, till the worlds end.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your maior: firſt becauſe the To the propoſition. Church in this place doth not ſignifie ſuch a companie of men as you by that name vnderſtand; but the congregation of the elect, who by true faith confeſſe, as Peter did, and being built vpon our Sauiour the rocke, ſhal neuer be remoued and periſh. And this promiſe is made not onely to all ioyntly, but to euery one ſeuerally, as it was to Peter and all the reſt of the Apoſtles. If there be any (ſaith 
                        Origen. in Mat. cap. 16. Origen) against whom the gates of hell ſhall preuaile, ſuch a one is neither the rocke vpon which Christ buildeth, nor the Church, which is built by Chriſt vpon the rocke. 
                     Petra eſt omnis. 
                     Euerie one (ſaith 
                        Apud Thom. in caten. ad Mat 16. the ſame Origen) that is a follower of Chriſt by imitation, is a rocke or ſtone. But he, againſt whom the gates of hell preuaile, is neither to be counted a rocke nor the Church, nor part of the Church, which Chriſt builds vpon the rocke. Againe, whoſoeuer is Chriſts diſciple (ſaith 
                        Ad Mat. 16. the ſame author) is a rocke: but many are called, and few choſen. As if he ſhould haue ſaid, that the Church, againſt which the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile, is euery one of the elect; and that he againſt whom thoſe gates do preuaile, is none of the elect or church, to which that promiſe of our Sauiour was made. 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 16. Theophylact, though he expound the place of the Church ſomewhat generally, yet hee doubteth not to adde, that euery one of vs alſo is the church, which is the houſe of God: if therefore we be confirmed in the confeſſion of Chriſt, the gates of hell, that is, ſinnes, ſhall not preuaile againſt vs. The gates of hell (ſaith 
                        Gloſſ. ordin. ad Mat. 16. your Gloſſe) are ſinnes, threatnings, flatterings, hereſies,
                     
                     whereby they that are weake, runne into deſtruction: who are not to be thought to haue built the houſe of their profeſſion of beleeuing ſoundly vpon the rocke, but vpon the ſand: that is, to follow Chriſt with a ſimple and true intent, but to haue made a ſhew for ſome earthly reſpect. For he that receiueth the faith of Chriſt with the inward loue of his heart, eaſily ouercometh whatſoeuer outwardly befalleth him. 
                     Lyra ibi. Lyra ſaith, that the church here ſpoken of, conſiſteth of thoſe perſons, in whō there is true knowledge & confeſſiō of the faith & truth; & not of any men, in reſpect of their power or dignity eccleſiaſticall or ciuill; becauſe many Princes, Popes, and other inferiour Chriſtians, are found to haue made Apoſtaſie from the faith. 
                     Lucas Brugenſ. ibi. Luke of Bruges, though he will not haue this promiſe of victorie belong to euery particular member of the church, yet he granteth that euery liuing member thereof, ſtedfaſtly cleauing vnto it, may conceiue good hope of triumphing ouer all Satans forces. I thinke (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Mat. 16. Ierome) the gates of hell are vices and ſinnes, or ſurely the doctrines of heretickes, by which men being entiſed are led to hell. Doth any of theſe writers expound this place of ſuch a companie as you dreame of? Nay, doth not our Sauiour himſelf reſtraine it to the elect, and yet apply it to euery one of them? For who beſide them, is built vpon the rocke? or which of them in his due time, is not ſo built? 
                        Ioan. 6. 37. 
                     All that the Father giueth me, ſhall come vnto me: and him that commeth to me, I cast not away. And againe, 
                        Ver. 40. 
                     This is the Fathers will that ſent me, that of all which he hath giuen me, I ſhould loſe nothing, but ſhould raiſe it vp againe at the laſt day.
                  
                  Secondly, the conſequence of your maior is yet more weake, becauſe you miſinterprete the text: as if our Sauiour meant to promiſe a perpetual continuance of his Church vpon earth, by ſaying that the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it. For hereby it muſt needs be granted, that the gates of hell do preuaile againſt all ſuch Chriſtians, as by perſecution or any violence are taken out of the world. Yea Peter himſelfe, and his fellow Apoſtles, to whom this promiſe was firſt made, found not the true performance of it in their owne perſons, but were ouercome by the gates of hell. Do you magnifie our Sauiours promiſes, that make them faile ſo notoriouſly, euen to the

Apoſtles themſelues? The gates of hell (ſaith 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 16. Theophylact) are temporall perſecutors, who endeuor to ſend Chriſtians to hell. Heretickes alſo are gates leading to hell. The Church therefore hath preuailed againſt many heretickes and perſecutors. The gates of hell (ſaith Gloſſ. interl. ibi. your Gloſſe) ſhall not ſeparate the Church from my loue and faith. Perſecutions of tyrants (ſaith Lyra ibi. Lyra) aſſaults and tentations of wicked ſpirits ſhall not preuaile, by ſubuerting the Church from the true faith. 
                     Luc Brugenſ. ibi. Brugenſis ſpeaketh yet more plainly: The gates of hell ſhal not preuaile (ſaith he) ſo that the Church ſhal be ouerthrowne, that is, ſeparated from Chriſt, or 
                     Salute in Chriſto excidere, aut fruſtrati 
                     fall away from ſaluation by Chriſt, or faile of it. The Apoſtles and other holy Martyrs and Chriſtians, were ouercome in regard of their continuance vpō earth; but not ſeparated frō Chriſt: nay rather they are more nearly ioyned to him. It is one thing to ſay the Church, that is, they that truly beleeue in Chriſt, ſhall by no power of Satan and his inſtruments, either inward or outward, be ſeuered from Chriſt, or faile of ſaluation by him: another to affirme that there ſhall alwayes be ſome on earth that ſhall beleeue and make profeſſion of the Goſpell. 
                        Bellar. de Concil. lib 2. cap. 2. §. Secunda claſsis.
                      Bellarmine applies this text one while to the generall Councels approued by the Pope, which (as he ſaith) by reaſon of this promiſe cannot erre, either in beleeuing or in teaching: 
                     
                        De Pont. Rom. lib. 1. c. 9. §. Quinta.
                      another while to the vniuerſall Church and to the ſea of Rome, which abſurdly and falſly he maketh the rocke, vpon which the vniuerſal Church is built: ſo that by the Church, according to Bellarmine, Rome, or Peters ſeate (as he calleth it) muſt be meant firſt and principally, from which at the ſecond hand, the vniuerſall Church muſt haue her perpetuall ſtabilitie. But what ſhould I ſtand any longer vpon this place, hauing ſhewed that the promiſe is not of the Churches continuance, without interruption, but of the certaintie of their ſaluation, that beleeue truly in our Sauiour Chriſt, and ſo being built vpon the 
                        Math 7. 25. Ioan. 10. 28, To the Aſſumption. rocke, cannot be ſhaken downe or ouerthrowne by any ſtorme.
                  In this ſenſe I grant the minor: our Sauiour hath made a promiſe, that no one member of his ſhall periſh, though the gates of hell ſend out and employ all their forces againſt him. He that confeſſeth and beleeueth with Saint Peter, ſhall be ſaued with

Saint Peter. But I denie the minor, according to the ſenſe you make of it, concerning the perpetuall continuance of a certaine companie, without interruption or error: and yet I beleeue the Catholicke Church; and that at all times there are ſome true members thereof vpon earth, choſen to life, and iuſtified by faith in Chriſt.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Thirdly, I may confirme the ſame out of other Scriptures, where the perpetuitie of the church is either affirmed or promiſed: of which kind of teſtimonies, being very many, I wil onely rehearſe ſome few. Of the Church (if we wil beleeue S. Auſtin his expoſition) it is ſaid, Deus fundauit eam in aeternum: God hath eſtabliſhed it for euer. And of it, ſignified by the name of the kingdome of Chriſt, the Prophet 
                     
                        Pſal. 47. 
                     Daniel ſaith: Suſcitabit Deus coeli regnum, quod in aeternum non diſſipabitur: The God of heauen ſhal raiſe vp a kingdom, 
                     
                        Dan. 2. 
                     which ſhal not be broken in peeces for euer. As is alſo ſaid in S. Luke: Regni eius non erit finis: there ſhall be no end of his kingdome. 
                     
                        Luc. 1.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Theſe few are more then need, for the proofe of that, wherof no man doubteth: but if they were twice as many, their weight would be too ſmall for the matter you vndertake to proue by them: as it wil appeare by the weighing of them in the ballance of true reaſon.
                  
                     That (ſay you) which God hath eſtabliſhed for euer, ſo that there ſhal be no end of it, muſt alwayes continue without interruption, till the worlds end.
                     But God hath ſo eſtabliſhed the Church, that there ſhalbe no end of it.
                     Therefore the Church muſt alwayes continue without interruption, till the worlds end.
                  
                  That the Church ſhall continue in all times and ages, as I haue often ſaid, we grant and maintaine: that ſuch a Church To the propoſition. as you fancie to your ſelues, either ſhall be alwayes, or euer was in the world, ſince the Apoſtles, we vtterly denie. Farther, I ſay your propoſition is falſe: becauſe the continuance of the church dependeth not vpon her being in the world, but vpon her being ioyned to Chriſt. And if the Church ſhal remaine euen after this world is ended, and then eſpecially flouriſh; what folly is it

to thinke it continueth not, vnleſſe it be vpon the earth? May I not certainly conclude, that it ſhall continue after this world, becauſe it is eſtabliſhed for euer? How then doe you gather hereupon, that it ceaſeth to be, if it be not in this world at all times without interruption? Was not this ſpoken of the Church of the Iewes alſo? Is not the like affirmed of the ceremonies? And yet neither of theſe hath continued, nor did continue without interruption, while they ſtood, before the time of their aboliſhing. That 
                        Pſal. 48. 1. the Pſalme was written either wholy or principally of Ieruſalem, and of the Church of the Iewes belonging thereunto, both the courſe of it manifeſtly ſheweth, and he that conſidereth the expoſitions of it by 
                        Hieron. & Auguſt ad Pſa. 47. per tot.
                      Ierome and Auſtine, and what ado they haue to fit the ſeuerall verſes thereof to the Church of Chriſt, will eaſily be perſwaded. But what Church meane they, thinke you? Such a companie of men as you talke of? Let 
                        Hieron. ibi. ad ver. 1. Hierome ſpeake. If you would know of him, what that citie of our God is: he anſwereth, that it is Anima ſancta. 
                     An holy ſoule: and by the citizens and houſholders of it, he vnderſtandeth Boni actus. 
                     good actions. Againe: What is the Lords holy mountaine? 
                     Aſſump. dom. homin. corpus. 
                     The nature of man, which our Lord tooke vpon him. I might go forward with the reſt of the Pſalme in like ſort, but it is enough that I haue giuen a taſt of this expoſition. The like difficulties may be obſerued in Auguſtines interpretation; beſides the great difference betwixt him and Hierome, in their commentaries vpon this Pſalme. Now that the people, and worſhip of God among the Iewes had the like ſayd of them, it may appeare by theſe places. 
                        Pſal. 111. 9. 
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Hee hath commaunded his couenant for euer. 
                     133. 3. 
                     There, that is, vpon the mountaines of Sion, the Lord promiſed his bleſſing and life for euer. 
                     132. 13. 14. 
                     The Lord hath choſen Sion, and loued to dwell in it, ſaying, This is my rest for euer, here will I dwell, for I haue a delight therein. If then, for all theſe promiſes and commendations, the Church and ſeruice of God be periſhed from among the Iewes; how can you from this onely conclude, that the Church of Chriſt ſhall continue without interruption?
                  Your minor alſo is falſe, vnderſtanding by Church (as you do) To the Aſſumption.
                     
a certaine companie of men, infallibly taught in all points of faith, and infallibly to be beleeued by all men. To the proofes of it I anſwer, that they are all inſufficient; which I will ſhew in particular. 
                        Pſal. 48. 8. The Pſalme (as I haue ſhewed) belongeth to the citie of Ieruſalem, to the Temple and Church of the lewes. The phraſe doth not neceſſarily require any ſuch continuance, without interruption. 
                        Pſal. 105. 8. 
                     The Lord (ſaith another Pſalme) remembred his couenant for euer. The Prophet ſpeaketh of the performance of that point of Gods promiſe to Abraham, which concerned the outward proſperous eſtate of the Iewes: ſo it is expounded in the next verſe: 
                        verſ. 9. 
                     The couenant that he made with Abraham, and the oath that he ſware to Iſaac: yet did the Lord puniſh them oftentimes himſelfe, and giue them vp into the hands of their enemies, 
                        Pſal. 106. 40 41. 42. 43. as the hiſtory of the Scripture ſheweth, from time to time. So ſpeaketh the Prophet 
                        Iſai. 63. 9. Eſay alſo of his kindneſſe toward them: In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angell of his preſence ſaued them: in his loue and in his mercie he redeemed them, and he bare them, and caried them alwayes continually; yet was not this without interruption, either in the wilderneſſe, or in the land of Iewry. Therefore 
                        Gloſſ. interl. ad Pſal. 47. your Gloſſe expoundeth for euer, 
                     Stabiliter. 
                     ſtedfaſtly: and Gloſs. ordin. ibi. another Gloſſe taketh it as ſpoken in compariſon of the ceremoniall Law: not for an houre or ſhort time, as (before) the tabernacle of Moſes was: ſignifying that there was no change in religion to ſucceed the Goſpell of Chriſt, as the Goſpel was to ſucceed the law of Moſes. What is this to continuing without interruption?
                  Firſt I oppoſe to your bare word, whereby you ſo peremptorily affirme, that by the name of 
                        Dan. 2. 44. 
                     the kingdome of Chriſt, the Church is ſignified, the authoritie of 
                        Theodoret. ad Dan. 2. 44. Theodoret, who vnderſtandeth it of our Sauiours eternall gouernement: The Prophet ſheweth (ſaith Theodoret) the end of things preſent, and the kingdome of heauen without end. And whereas you wil haue his kingdome in this world to be meant, he refuteth that conceit by this reaſon: If they ſtand vpon it, that our Sauiours former comming is ſignified by theſe words, let them ſhew (ſaith that ancient Father) that the Romane Empire periſhed, as ſoone as our Sauiour appeared. And afterward: At his ſecond comming he ſhall ſtrike the image
                     
                     vpon his feete of Iron and clay, &c. and hauing destroyed all kingdomes, and made them as it were to be forgotten, he ſhall beſtow his kingdome vpon them that are worthie of it. The kingdome of Chriſt (ſaith Lyra ibi. Lyra) is eſpecially in heauen, where the citizens are immortall. Hitherto belongeth that in 
                        Apud Iren. in arg. lib. 5. c. 26 Irenaeus, in the argument of a chapter, that Iohn and Daniel foretold the diſſolution & deſolation of the Romane Empire, which ſhould go before the end of the world, and our Sauiour Chriſts euerlaſting kingdome. So doth Barradius expound 
                        Num. 24. 17. that prophecie of Balaam, concerning our Sauiours deſtroying of Moab and Sheth: Chriſt (ſaith 
                        Sebaſt. Barra. in cōcor. Euan. lib. 9. cap 9. he) ſhall ſmite the captains of Moab, and deſtroy all the ſonnes of Sheth at the laſt day of iudgement. I doubt not, but in any reaſonable mans iudgement, the authoritie of theſe writers is of weight enough to cruſh your bare affirmation to powder, that, for ought you haue ſaid, we may interprete theſe places of our Sauiours kingdome in heauen. But that I may anſwer the place to the full, I grant that the prophecie belongeth to the kingdome of Chriſt, euen in reſpect of this world alſo; as it is plaine by the time the Prophet ſpeaketh of, namely the deſtroying of the kingdomes of Syria and Aegypt, the remaines of Alexanders conqueſt. And ſo Theodoret is anſwered, who grounded his expoſition concerning Chriſts ſecond coming, vpō a miſtaking of Daniels image, as if that belonged to the Empire of Rome, which was propheſied of the Syrian and Egyptian kingdomes. I ſay then, firſt, that this kingdome of Chriſt is not any outward ſtate of the true Church, which ſhould continue without all maner of interruption. For who knoweth not, that diuers hereſies haue for a time mightily preuailed againſt the Church outwardly, ſo that they ſeemed to haue gotten the vpper hand? Who hath not heard, that Hieron. dialo. contra. Luciſer. 
                     the whole Chriſtian world ſometimes wondred at it ſelfe, that it was become an Arian? Was it not almoſt foure hundred yeares, before the Church came to be of ſo great account in the world? Is it not prophecied in the 
                        Apoc. 12. 6 Reuelation, that ſhe ſhould be forced to flie into the wildernes for the ſpace of 1260. daies? How then ſhould the outward kingdom of Chriſt be ſaid to continue (ſimply) without interruption? Some ſubiects of the kingdome might liue ſcattered here and there, but out of queſtion the

kingdome was not in thoſe times to be found, if we meaſure it by any outward ſtate. I ſay therefore ſecondly, that by the kingdome of Chriſt in Daniel and Luke, the ſpirituall gouernment of our Sauiour is ſignified, whereby he ruleth in the hearts of his choſen; ſo that no force of Satan or his inſtruments can diſpoſſeſſe him of this kingdome, but that it ſhall alwaies continue in diſpight of the gates of hell. This appeareth in that place of 
                        Luk. 2. 32. 33 Luke more manifeſtly. For what is the throne of Dauid, what is the houſe of Iacob, but the elect of God among the Iewes and Gentiles? All are not Iſrael (ſaith the 
                        Rom. 9. 6. 7. Apoſtle) that are of Iſrael: neither are they all children, becauſe they are the ſeed of Abraham: but in Iſaac ſhall thy ſeed be called. The kingdome of Chriſt is ouer 
                        Gal. 6. 16. 
                     the Iſrael of God, and they are that houſe of Iacob, of which the Angell ſpeaketh to the virgin Mary, concerning our Sauiours kingdome, which ſhall haue no end.
               
               
                  A. D. §, 5.
                  
                     Laſtly, I might confirme the ſame with the teſtimonie of the ancient Fathers, Origen, Saint Chryſoſtome, S. Bernard, and eſpecially of S. Auſtin, who diſputing againſt the Donatists, ſaith thus, as rehearſing 
                     
                        In Pſal. 101. 
                     one of their ſpeeches: Sed illa Eccleſia, quae fuit omnium gentium, iam non eſt, perijt: That Church, which was of all nations, 
                     
                        Conc. 2. 
                     is not now, it is periſhed. Vnto which their ſpeech, he anſwereth; O impudentem vocem! Accounting it great impudencie to ſay, the Church is periſhed. And in the ſame place he bringeth in the Church, as ſpeaking perſonally thus: Quam diu ero in hoc ſeculo? Ibidem. annuncia mihi propter illos qui dicunt: Fuit, & iam non eſt: apoſtatauit, & perijt Eccleſia ab omnibus gentibus. Et annunciauit, nec vacua fuit vox iſta. Quis annunciauit mihi niſi ipſa via? quando annunciauit? Ecce ego vobiſcum ſum omnibus diebus vſque ad conſummationem ſeculi. How long ſhall I be in this world? tell me in regard of them who ſay, the Church indeed was, but it is not now: it is become apoſtata, and is periſhed out of all nations. And he told me, neither was this word in vaine: who told me but the way it ſelfe? (to wit Chriſt, who ſaith, I am the way:) when did he tell? Behold I am with you vntill the end of the world.
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Here is a flouriſh of names to little purpoſe, eſpecially ſince theſe authors you mentiō, agree with vs about the true Church, that conſiſteth only of the elect, & not (as you teach) of all ſorts

good and bad, elect and reprobate, ſo they make an outward profeſſion of beleeuing: But Auſtin condemneth the Donatiſts of impudencie, for ſaying that the Church was in their time periſhed out of the world, ſaue that it remained in a part of Africa amongſt them that held with Donatus. So would he crie out againſt you Papiſts, if he liued at this day, and heard you complaine, that there is no Church in the world, but only in Rome, & in thoſe countries, which depēd vpon the Church of Rome. Onely Donatus his part (as 
                        Auguſt. ad Pſal. 101. concio. 2. Auſtin calleth it) was the Church with them: and onely the Popes part is the Church with you. You are not indeed as yet come ſo farre, as they were, becauſe ſome other countries, beſides Italy, are content to be ruled by your Pope: but when it ſhal pleaſe God to leaue that ſtrumpet, the Church of Rome deſtitute of friends (as her wound is vnrecouerable, and ſhe draweth euerie day nearer and nearer to her end;) Auguſt. contra part. Donat then will you take vp the verie ſame complaint, that the Donatiſts vſed, and there ſhall be no Church at all but in Rome, or where the Pope ſhall lurke, in ſome other corner of the world. We denie not that the Church, 
                        Mat. 28. 20. to whom our Sauiour maketh that promiſe, ſhall continue till the end of the world, and we deteſt Donatus hereſie, in affirming, that it was then to be found onely in Africa. But (as I ſaid before) what maketh this for the continuance of ſuch a Church, as you imagine? This rather belongeth to the viſibilitie and famouſneſſe of the Church, whereof in the next chapter.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XII. That this Church, which muſt be to vs the rule of faith, as it muſt alwaies continue, ſo it muſt alſo alwaies be viſible.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  It is yet to prooue, and alwaies will be, that there is any ſuch Church, as muſt be to vs the rule of faith: what ſhould we then ſtriue about the continuance and viſibilitie thereof? But you muſt needs be anſwered, according to the counſell of Salomon, Leſt you be wiſe in your owne conceit, to the hurt 
                        
                           •
                         
                        Prou. 26. 5. of other.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Now hauing prooued that the true Church of Chriſt muſt alwaies continue, without interruption, till the worlds end: it remaineth that I ſhew alſo in what manner it is to continue; to wit, whether it ſhall alwaies be viſible. That is to ſay, whether, in all ages, it was, and ſhall be a companie of men, who may be ſeene, and in ſome ſort, plainely knowen to be that companie, which men are to beleeue, by faith, to be the true Church of Chriſt: or that it ſhall be, ſometime at leaſt, inuiſible; that no man can ſee thoſe men, nor know them to be that companie, which we muſt beleeue, to be the true Church of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  That the Church of Chriſt muſt alwaies continue, is a point that needeth no proofe: that it is to continue without interruption, if we did not beleeue alreadie, we ſhould neuer be driuen or perſwaded to it by your weake reaſons. But (as me thinks, I muſt be faine to tell you oftner) the continuance of the true Church without interruption makes nothing at all for that imaginarie Church of your deuiſing, of the viſibilitie whereof you intreat in this Chapter. Wherein, firſt you goe about to propound, and expound the queſtion; then you make a ſhew of proouing it, according to the conceit, you haue of it. In the propounding of the queſtion, for the readers better vnderſtanding, I muſt let him know, that howſoeuer your words, ſhall alwaies be viſible, ſeeme to tie the queſtion onely to the time hereafter to come, yet your meaning is to enquire, whether the Church of Chriſt haue not alwaies, ſince his firſt comming, and ſhall not alwaies, till his ſecond comming, be apparent and viſible. This is manifeſt by your expoſition, In all ages it was, and ſhall be: and by your proofes, which at the leaſt in your opinion, concerne the whole Church of Chriſt, euer ſince his comming in the fleſh.
                  Your expoſition rather darkens, then cleares the State of the queſtion. For who would not thinke, by your words, that one part of the controuerſie betwixt you and vs, is, whether the men, the companie of whom is the church, may at all times be ſeene or no; as if we were ſo voide of ſenſe as to imagine, that men could be at any time (except by miracle) inuiſible? Do not your words imply thus much? I pray you conſider them

a little with me. The queſtion is (ſay you) whether the Church be alwaies a companie of men, that may be ſeene. If you anſwer, that I muſt adde that, which followeth, And in ſome ſort plainly knowen to be that companie: I replie, that your ſelfe afterward make thoſe two diſtinct parts of the queſtion, when you expound what is meant by Inuiſible, that no man (ſay you) can ſee thoſe men, nor know them to be that companie; wherein you may reaſonably be thought, firſt to ſpeake of thoſe mens being ſeene, and ſecondly of their being knowen to be ſuch a companie.
                  But to make ſhort, and to ſpeake plaine withall; the queſtion of the Churches inuiſibleneſſe is double. Firſt whether a man by his bodily ſight can diſcerne, who they are, that be members of Chriſts myſticall bodie or no? that is, who be elect, and who be not. This we ſay (& herein you agree with vs) is vnpoſſible: becauſe God doth not reueale this point to men, neither are they able to iudge, who are truly iuſtified and ſanctified, and who are not. Secondly the queſtion is, whether the catholicke Church, ſpokē off in the Creed, can be diſcerned by the ſame bodily ſight, or no: we ſay it cannot, becauſe it containeth none but the elect; you ſay it can, 
                     
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3. cap. 2. Turrian. de Eccleſ. & ordin. miniſtr.
                      becauſe it conſiſteth of all them that make profeſſion of chriſtian Religion, vnder the abſolute gouernment of the Pope of Rome. The onely true meanes to make a full end of this controuerſie, is to ſhew what the Church is, of which the Creed & the Scriptures ſpeak ſo many, and ſo glorious matters. This point you haue not once touched, but either ignorantly, or craftily concealed that difference betwixt vs, and alledge that for the definition of the Church, which if it were true, as it is euidently falſe, yet is but one priuiledge of the Church, and expreſſeth not the nature of it. But let vs leaue theſe matters, and conſider what it is, that according to your former diſcourſe, you are to prooue. Now, that is (ſay I), that there alwaies hath bene, ſince our Sauiours comming, is, and ſhall be, to the end of the world, a companie of men famous, and viſible in the world, ſo that all men, at all times, may diſcerne, that they are the true Church of Ieſus Christ. For (that I may, in part, vſe your owne words, as they follow in this

chapter) if at any time it could not be knowen, then the men, that liued in that time, wanted neceſſarie meanes, whereby they might attaine to the knowledge of true faith, and conſequently, whereby they might come to ſaluation. Giue me leaue to apply that to all men, which you ſpeake of all times. If there euer were, are, or ſhall be any men, to whoſe ſight the Church was not ſo viſible, that they might diſcerne and know it; then thoſe men wanted neceſſary means whereby they might attaine to ſaluation: which if it were ſo (ſay you) how is it vniuerſally true, which is vniuerſally ſaid in Scripture, God would haue all men to be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth? Do you not perceiue that your reaſon neceſſarily requireth to haue it prooued, that the Church is viſible, as at all times, ſo to all men? For if it faile in either of theſe reſpects, your conſequence will follow, that ſome men haue wanted neceſſarie meanes of ſaluation, and ſo God would not haue all men ſaued. Therefore you propound the queſtion verie inſufficiently, when you ſay, We inquire, whether the Church at any time be inuiſible, ſo that no man can ſee thoſe men &c. For though at all times ſome men may ſee and know it; yet vnleſſe all men, at all times may, you haue prooued nothing to purpoſe in this whole Treatiſe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     In which matter my Aſſertion is, that the Church of Chriſt (of which the places of Scripture afore cited do ſpeake) muſt alwaies be viſible.
                  
                  
                     This I prooue: firſt by that plaine Propheſie of Iſaias in the 61. Chapter. (Which Chapter to be vnderſtood of our Sauiour 
                     
                        Iſa. cap. 61. 
                     Chriſt and his Church, we may gather out of Saint Luke, where our Sauiour himſelfe citeth ſome words out of that Chapter, and 
                     
                        Luc. 4. 
                     expoundeth them to be fulfilled in himſelfe.) The words of the Propheſie are theſe. Foedus perpetuum feriam eis, & ſcietur in gentibus 
                        Iſa. 61. ſemen eorum: Omnes qui viderint eos, cognoſcentillos, quoniam iſti ſunt ſemen cui benedixit Dominus. I will make a perpetuall couenant or league with them, and their ſeede ſhall be knowen among Nations: all that ſhall ſee them, ſhall know them, that they are the ſeede, which our Lord hath bleſſed. How could he more plainely haue foretolde the viſibleneſſe of the Church?
                  
               
               
                  
                  The places of Scripture afore cited ſpeake not all alike: ſome of them concerne the Apoſtles onely, and that not onely as they are a companie, but as they are ſeuerall teachers authoriſed by our Sauiour Chriſt, with ſo high and abſolute a commiſſion: ſome belong to all true chriſtians, as well ſeuerally conſidered one by one, as taken iointly all together. Some appertaine to all Miniſters, ſome reach to all profeſſors of the truth of the goſpell. How then can you truly ſay, that the true Church of Chriſt (of which the places of Scripture afore recited doe ſpeake) muſt alwaies be viſible? The Apoſtles haue not bene viſible theſe 1500 yeares. The elect, that is the Church, built vpon a rocke, neuer was, nor euer ſhall be viſible in this world. All Miniſters were not, nor can be viſible to all men. All profeſſors neither are the true Church of Chriſt, nor can by any meanes poſſible be ſeene of all mē, as one church, but with the eies of the mind. Particulars are ſubiect to ſenſe, but vniuerſals are diſcerned onely by vnderſtanding. Your aſſertion then is falſe: but we will take it, as it is ſet downe by you, ſuppoſing that thoſe places of Scripture ſpeake of the Church in generall. Yet we may not forget that the ſecond point muſt needs be added, concerning all men; and ſo your aſſertion muſt be this, The true Church of Chriſt must alwaies be viſible, to all men liuing.
                  
                  To make way to your argument out of this propheſie, you go about to prooue that the 
                     
                        Iſai. 61. 8. 9. 
                     Chapter is to be vnderſtood of our Sauiour Chriſt & his Church: your proofe lieth thus.
                  
                     Our Sauiour himſelfe citeth ſome words out of that Chapter, & expoundeth them to be fulfilled in himſelfe.
                     Therefore that Chapter is to be vnderſtood of our Sauiour Chriſt and his Church.
                  
                  This conſequent doth not follow vpon that Antecedent Firſt becauſe the whole chapter may be written of our Sauiour himſelfe, and yet not of his Church alſo. Secondly becauſe ſome part of it may be of our Sauiour, and yet not thoſe words you alledge. For who is he that knoweth not, that one and the ſame Chapter often times, conteineth diuers propheſies, belonging to diuers matters and parties? But though your proofe be naught, your opinion is true. For thoſe words & that

whole chapter concerne our Sauiour, and his Church. Let vs ſee how you reaſon.
                  
                     If our Sauiour promiſe to make a perpetuall couenant with his Church, and that their ſeede ſhall be knowen among nations, and that all that ſhall ſee them, ſhall know them that they are the ſeed, which our Lord hath bleſſed, then the Church muſt alwaies be viſible to all men liuing.
                     But our Sauiour hath promiſed to make a perpetuall couenant with his Church, & that their ſeed ſhall be knowen among nations, and that all that ſhall ſee them, ſhall know them, that they are the ſeed which our Lord hath bleſſed.
                     Therefore the Church muſt alwaies be viſible to all men liuing.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your Maior: Though our Sauiuiour To the propoſition. made ſuch a promiſe, and indeed hath, and doth daily performe it; yet it doth not follow thereupon, that the Church muſt alwaies be viſible to all men. Shall the promiſe of our Sauiour faile, if the Church at ſome time be not Apoc. 12. 6. apparent to all men? 12. Art. part. Take heed we giue not the Atheiſts of the world occaſion to ſay, that his promiſe was neuer fulfilled, becauſe the 1. art. 1. Church was neuer knowen to all men liuing at any one time. The Lord by this prophecie foretelleth the enlarging of the Church amongſt the Gentiles, not the viſibleneſſe of it, at all times, to all men. But the couenant (y you will ſay) is perpetuall. True: that is (ſaith Gloſſ. ordin. ad Eſai. 61. your gloſſe) not as the old Teſtament, to which the new hath ſucceeded; and therefore he expoundeth the perpetuall couenant, to be Euangelium aeternum. the eternall Goſpell, which ſhall neuer be aboliſhed for anie other, as the ceremoniall Law was, by the ſacrifice of our Sauiour Chriſt. Gloſ. inter l. ibi. An other of your Gloſſes calleth it a perpetuall couenant, becauſe it ſhall be certainly performed, applying to that purpoſe, the place of Matthew. Mat. 5. 18. Heauen and Earth ſhall paſſe, but one iot or title of the Law ſhall not paſſe, till all things be fulfilled. The other clauſe is as little to your purpoſe. The Prophet ſaith not that all men, at all times ſhall, or may ſee the Church, but that all, which ſhall ſee it, ſhall know it. Neither is that ſight an outward beholding of thoſe men, that are members of the Church, but a diſcerning ſpirit giuen by

God to them, whom he hath appointed to euerlaſting life, by faith in Chriſt. For if we ſtrictly preſſe the words, who ſeeth not, that this promiſe hath failed, ſince there haue bene many in all ages, yea in our Sauiours owne daies, who for all his powerfull miracles, diuine doctrine, and vnſpotted conuerſation, acknowledged neither his Church nor himſelfe? Say not, they might haue done. For that is not the queſtion. The Propher ſaith, All that ſee them, ſhall know them, not may know them. Gloſſ. ordin. Your ordinarie gloſſe applieth this to Apoſtolos & eorum imitatores. the Apoſtles, and their followers, or thoſe that imitate their workes. So doth Vatablus, opera eorum. Vatablus expound them, their workes. And Lyra, operibus miraculoſis, & virtuoſis. Lyra more particularly ſheweth what works are meant. They (ſaith Lyra) that ſhal ſee them diſtinguiſhed from other men, by their miraculous and powerfull works, wherein the Apoſtles, and other their ſucceſſors excelled the common people, and yet excell them in many things. Now the Apoſtles themſelues, for all their many, and ſtrange miracles, might haue bene, and had bene vnknowen, I will not ſay to many men, but to many nations, and the farre greateſt part of the world, if they had not, Math. 28. 19. according to their commiſſion, trauelled from place to place, and ſo into diuers countries brought the firſt tidings of themſelues. How can it be then, that at all times ſince the death of the Apoſtles, the Church hath bene viſible to all men, ſeeing there hath bene neither charge, nor warrant, nor practiſe of any ſuch vniuerſall miniſterie? If any man had rather vnderſtand this Prophecie of the knowledge, that the vnbeleeuers haue of the Church, the meaning Oſ
                           •
                        rius in Eſa. lib. 5. ad ca. 61. is, that the Lord will beſtow ſuch graces of Sanctification vpon his children, that euen their verie enemies, amongſt whom they liue, ſhall be driuen to acknowledge them for the people of God. But what is this to the viſibleneſſe of the Church, to all men at all times?
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  Secondly our Sauiour hath ordained this his Church to be the light of the world; according as he ſaith, Vos eſtis lux mundi, Matth. 5. you are the light of the world: and to be a rule or meanes, by which all men, at all times, may come to the knowledge of that One, infallible, entire faith, which is neceſſarie to ſaluation, as hath bene prooued. But how can it be the light of the world, if it ſelfe

be inuiſible? (Nemo accendit lucernam, & ponit eam ſub modio. No man lighteth a candle, and when he hath done, ſetteth it vnder a buſhell, where it cannot be ſeene.) And how can it be a meanes, by which, at all times the infallible truth may be made knowen, to all ſorts of men; if it ſelfe at any time, could not be knowen of men? Or if you ſay, that ſometimes it could neither be knowen it ſelfe, nor be a meanes, by which the true faith might be made knowen; then, ſith that I prooued that it is a neceſſarie meanes, and ſo neceſſarie, that without it, according to the ordinarie courſe, there is not ſufficient meanes prouided by Almightie God to inſtruct all men infallibly in all points of faith: Then (I ſay) men, that liued at that time, wanted neceſſarie meanes, whereby they might attaine to the knowledge of true faith, and conſequenly, whereby they might come to ſaluation. Which if it were ſo, how is it vniuerſally true, which is vniuerſally ſaid in Scripture? Deus vult omnes homines ſaluos fieri, & ad agnitionem veritatis venire. God would haue men to be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of 1 Tim. 2. the truth. For how can he be ſaid, to haue a true will to ſaue all men, If he haue not, at all times, prouided meanes ſufficient, wherby, all men may come to the knowledge of true faith, and thereby, by degrees, to ſaluation? Sith eſpecially, he hath power to prouide theſe meanes: and knoweth, that without theſe means prouided, it is vnpoſſible for men to attaine true faith, and eternall ſaluation. For knowing it vnpoſſible, he cannot be ſaid to will it; ſith no wiſe man willeth that, which he knoweth perfectly to be altogether vnpoſſible; and much leſſe may Almightie God be ſaid, to will any thing, which is abſolutely vnpoſſible, conſidering that his wiſedome is infinite, and that his will is alwaies ioyned with ſome worke or effect, by which worke or effect, that which he willeth, at leaſt, is made poſſible to be done. VVherefore to verifie that Almightie God would haue all men ſaued, we muſt needs ſay, that he hath prouided, for all men, theſe meanes, which be neceſſarie, and without which, it is vnpoſſible for them, to come to the knowledge of true faith, and thereby to ſaluation: One of which meanes, is a viſible Church, of which they muſt heare and learne the true faith; which is the firſt, and a neceſſarie ſtep to ſaluation. The Church therefore muſt needs be alwaies viſible.
               
               
                  
                  This your ſecond reaſon is thus to be framed:

                        If the Church be not viſible to all men, at all times, then it is not ordained by our Sauiour to be the light of the world, and a rule or means by which all men at all times may come to faith and ſaluation.
                        But it is ordained by our Sauiour to be ſuch a light, and ſuch a rule or meanes.
                        Therefore it is viſible to all men at all times.
                     
                  
                  That I may be the more eaſily vnderſtood by the ordinarie Reader, I wil apply my anſwer to the courſe that you haue takē in ſetting downe your reaſon: where in the firſt place we haue your minor, and one proofe of it; another followeth after your propoſition, and there ſhall be examined.
                  Concerning your Aſſumption, I ſay it is falſe. The Church is 
                     To the Aſſumption. 
                     not ordained to be ſuch a light, rule and meanes: To 
                        Math. 5. 14. your proofe touching the light, I anſwer, with diuers of the auncient, that our Sauior ſpeaketh to, and of the Apoſtles, not of the Church in ſucceſſion from time to time. All the Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. ad Pſal. 38. Chryſoſtome) are the light, to whō he ſaid, Ye are the light of the world. Theſe were the light of the eyes of the two teſtaments, the Law and the Gospel. For they by the light of our Lord, 
                     Illuminant nobis. 
                     enlightened for vs the old and new teſtaments. He that reproueth thoſe things that are done ſecretly, is the light (quoth 
                        Theophyl. ad Math. 5. Theophylact.) For all that maketh any thing manifeſt, is light. But they (the Apoſtles) enlightned not one nation, but the world. So doth 
                        Aug. in Ioan. tract. 23. & De Sanctis. ſer. 43. Auſtin ſomtimes expound it. So 
                        Hieron. ad Math. 5. Ierom, 
                        Hilar. a pud Thom. in caten. ad Math 5. Hilary, & Remigius. 
                        Luc. Brugen. ad Math. 5. Lucas Brugenſis a learned Papiſt, not onely applieth this text to the Apoſtles, but alſo affoords vs a ſecond anſwer. You are, that is (ſaith he) you muſt be, or ought to be the light of the world, that you may carry the light of the Goſpel into the world, he ſet round about with darkneſſe. And thus in a manner do Auſtin and Hilary expound it.
                  But let vs vnderſtand it of all teachers, that they are the light of the world, as indeed they are, in a certaine proportion. What then? Will it follow hereupon, that therefore the Church is at all times viſible to al men? The Apoſtles themſelues, whom this doth eſpecially concerne, were not ſo. For many thouſands in the world died, after 
                        Mark. 16. 15: the generall commiſſion giuen to the

Apoſtles, before it was any way poſſible for them to take any knowledge of ſuch Preachers, or of the Goſpell. Your great Cardinall 
                        Bellar. de verb Dei ſcrip. lib. 3 cap. 2. ad arg 3. Bellarmine will needs haue the place expounded, not of the Apoſtles doctrine, but of their conuerſation: which is not ſo eaſie and readie to be knowne as their preaching was. Tertullian applieth it to the behauiour of all Chriſtians. Why hath our Lord (ſaith 
                        Tert. de cultu foemina. cap. 13. he) compared vs to a light, and a hill, if we ſhine not in the midſt of the darknes, if we hold not vp our heads in the middle of them that lie drowned? But out of queſtion, this holineſſe of true Chriſtians, is not alwayes viſible to all men, neither can it belong to your Church, the 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 cap. 2. §. Atque hoc.
                      members whereof may be vtterly void of true faith and loue, ſaue onely in the outward profeſſion. Take it how you will, for doctrine or manners, or both, you are neuer a whit the nearer. If I would preſſe the words, I could ſay, that our Sauiour requires no more in this place of the light, but that it giue light 
                     
                        Mat. 5. 15. 
                     to all them that are in the houſe: that is, to all in the Church, or at the moſt, to them that are neare neighbours thereunto. For what 
                        Apoc. 1. 12. 20. & 2. 5. candle is there ſo bright, that the light of it can be ſeene ouer all the world? What though our Sauiour call his Apoſtles the light of the world? doth he meaue, that they all ioyntly together conſidered, as a companie, are ſo; or that euery one of them (ſeuerally) is the light of the world? If you will haue it ſpoken of them as the Church (and elſe it cannot ſerue your turne to proue the perpetuall viſibleneſſe of the Church) I doubt how you will be able to ſhew, that they were the light of the world. For they did not enlighten the world by any ioynt act of them all together, but by their ſeuerall preaching in ſeuerall places. Neither did they perſwade men to beleeue, becauſe they were ſuch, or ſuch a company; but euery one of them taught the doctrine of the Goſpell, and was of himſelfe without relation to all, or any of the reſt, the light of the world in that part, where it pleaſed God to bleſſe his labours, to the begetting of faith. If you ſay, that euery one of them was the light of the world (as doubtleſſe euery one was) then will it not follow, that becauſe the Church is the light of the world, therefore it muſt be at all times viſible to all men. For neuer any one of the Apoſtles was ſo; no nor all of them, as I ſaid before, many

thouſands being taken out of the world, after the Apoſtles began to preach, ere they could poſſibly haue any glimpſe of ſuch a light. To conclude, the Apoſtles were, and the Miniſters (in ſome ſort) now are the light of the world, becauſe by their preaching, it pleaſeth Almightie God to open the eyes of worldly men, that 
                        Act. 26. 18. 
                     they may turne from darknes to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receiue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and inheritance among them which are ſanctified by faith in Chriſt: not as if any, or all theſe muſt at all times be viſible to all men; but that there may be meanes for the ſaluation of thoſe whom the Lord (of his infinite loue) hath choſen out of the world, to be heires of his endleſſe glory.
                  By all men, we may vnderſtand either euery particular man, or Of the propoſition. 
                     all ſorts of mē. If you wold proue that which you vndertake, you muſt meane euery particular man, as I haue ſhewed in anſwering the fifth Chapter; and as it is apparent in this afterward, where you repeate that which before you had deliuered concerning Gods will to haue euery man ſaued, one and other. But I know not how, in the proofe of your propoſition, you ſeeme to expound all men by all ſorts of men. How can it be a meanes (ſay you) by which at all times the infallible truth may be made knowne to all ſorts of men, if it ſelfe at any time could not be knowne of men? In this ſenſe, if I ſhould grant your whole fyllogiſme, yet would the point in queſtion remaine ſtill vnproued. For the Church may be ordained for the light of the world, and for a rule or means whereby all ſorts of men may come to faith and ſaluation: and yet at no time be viſible to euery particular man. To ſpeake more plaine; your propoſition may be vnderſtood two ſeueral ways; firſt thus, that all men ſhall be taken in the one part of it, namely in the antecedent or former part, for euery particular man; in the other for all ſorts of men. If it be thus vnderſtood, I ſay the conſequence is naught. Secondly, thoſe words All men, may haue the ſame ſignification in both parts of the propoſition, yet in two diuers ſenſes. For they may be taken either for Al ſorts of men, and then, as I haue ſhewed, the ſyllogiſme proueth not that which is in queſtion: or for euery particular man, in which ſenſe onely I allow of the propoſition, as true and to the purpoſe.

It had bin better therefore that you had ſpared the proofe of it, eſpecially vnleſſe you could haue done it better. 
                        Math. 5. 15. 
                     The light which is not put vnder a buſhel, is not the church, but the apoſtles. He teacheth them (ſaith Theophyl ibi. Theophylact) to endure the trial, and to haue great care of their conuerſation, as they 
                     Aſpectabiles eritis. 
                     on whom al men gaze. Thinke not therefore (ſaith our Sauiour) that ye ſhal lie hid in a corner: Ye ſhal be the light of the world: and therefore ſee that you liue vnblameably, and become not an offence to other men. Who can gather from hence the conſequence of your propoſition; If the Church be not viſible to all men at all times, it is not ordained by our Sauiour to be the light of the world?
                  
                  Your ſecond proofe, concerning the rule and meanes, is no leſſe inſufficient. If the Church at any time could not be knowne of men, (you muſt needs meane of euery particular man, if you will ſpeake to the purpoſe) it cannot at all times be a meanes, by which the truth may be knowne to all ſorts of men. This is the conſequence I denied before, either brought by you for a new proofe, or repeated idly within 3. or 4. lines after it was firſt deliuered.
                  Here you returne to your minor, and to proue the latter part To the proof of the latter part of the aſſumption. of it, propound the ſecond time your maine reaſon, anſwered at large in the fifth Chapter. It would be tedious, and loſſe of time and labour, to repeate all that was then ſaid: I wil therfore content my ſelfe to draw it into forme, as it lieth, and to denie the falſe propoſitions, without any more adoe, vnleſſe I meete with ſomewhat by the way, which was not in your former diſcourſe. Thus you reaſon.
                  
                     If the Church be not ordained by our Sauiour, to be a rule or meanes, by which all men, at all times, may attaine to faith and ſaluation; then ſome men, at ſome time, haue wanted one neceſſary meanes to that purpoſe.
                     But no man at any time hath wanted any neceſſary meanes to that purpoſe.
                     Therefore the Church is ordained by our Sauiour to be a rule or means, by which all men at all times may attaine to faith and ſaluation.
                  
                  I denie your Aſſumption; which you endeuour to proue

in this ſort:

                        If any man at any time hath wanted any neceſſary meanes, then it is not vniuerſally true, that God hath a true will to haue all men ſaued, and come to the knowledge of his truth.
                        But it is vniuerſally true, that God hath a true will to haue all men ſaued, and come to the knowledge of his truth.
                        Therefore no man, at any time, hath wanted any neceſſarie meanes.
                     
                  
                  Againe I denie your minor, referring the Reader, for the true ſenſe of 1. Tim. 2. 4. that Scripture, to my anſwer in the fift Chapter. The proofe of your conſequence, about which you labor like a man that claps plaiſter vpon plaiſter on a ſound place, is altogether needleſſe, and not worth the examining; ſaue onely that in the laſt clauſe thereof, you confidently harp vpon the former ſtring, which ſoundeth nothing but the neceſſitie of a viſible Church to ſaluation. But the Apoſtle, 
                        Rom. 10. 14. 15. where he ſheweth what is of neceſſitie to faith, neither mentioneth, nor any way implieth a viſible Church, but only requireth a ſending of ſome to preach: and that may be from God immediatly, not by ſucceſſion, 
                        Gal. 1. 1. in and by men. Did not our Sauiour Chriſts preaching bring many to faith in him, and ſo to ſaluation? Did not Peter 
                        Act. 2. 41. conuert 3000. at one Sermon? Did not the Apoſtle Paul plant many Churches? Was any of theſe a viſible Church? or did the people to whom they preached, either ſeeke to them, as to a viſible Church, or beleeue that they deliuered, becauſe they were ſent by a viſible Church? It is true, that no man (ordinarily) can beleeue, vnleſſe he heare; no man can heare, vnleſſe there be one to preach to him: no man can preach, vnleſſe he be ſent. But what is all this to the neceſſitie of a viſible Church? Looke through the whole hiſtory of the new Teſtament, and ſee how many examples you can finde of any, that were but ſo much as occaſioned to beleeue, by the meanes of a viſible Church. The ſame of our Sauiours miracles drew many to the hearing of him, not the knowledge of any viſible Church. 
                        Act. 10. 3. 5. Cornelius a deuout man, and one that feared God, liuing neare to the places where the Goſpell was preached, was not moued by the viſible Church, but by a viſion from heauen, to ſend for Peter,

that he might heare and beleeue. I might ſhew the like in diuers other examples, that the Apoſtles were faine ſeuerally to go from place to place to preach the Goſpell, and not to ſtay, till the fame of them, or a viſible Church ſhould moue people to enquire after them. I denie not, that 1. Cor. 14. 23 25. occaſion may be giuen to men to hearken after the Goſpell, by reaſon of ſome viſible Church, whereof they may by diuers meanes haue vnderſtanding: but, that it is vnpoſſible for men to come to the knowledge of true faith, and hereby to ſaluation, without a viſible Church; or that a viſible Church is alwayes the firſt ſtep to ſaluation, though ſometimes it may be the firſt occaſion of hearing and beleeuing.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Thirdly, if the vniuerſall Church of Christ, ſhould for any ſpace of time be inuiſible: it ſhould for that ſpace ceaſe to profeſſe outwardly that faith, which in heart it did beleeue. For if it did outwardly profeſſe, how ſhould it not by this profeſſion be made viſible and knowne? But if the vniuerſall Church ſhould for ſuch a time faile to profeſſe the faith, hell gates (contrarie to Christs promiſe) did mightily preuaile against it. For, were it not a mightie preuailing, that the whole Church ſhould faile in a thing ſo neceſſarie to ſaluation, as we know, outward profeſſion of faith to be neceſſarie, both by that of our Sauiour: Qui negauerit me coram hominibus, 
                        Math. 10. ego negabo illum coram Patre meo: He that ſhall denie me before men, I wil denie him before my Father? And, Qui 
                        Luk. 9. me erubuerit & ſermones meos, hunc Filius hominis erubeſcet: He that ſhal be aſhamed of me and of my words, him the Sonne of man wil be aſhamed of. And by that of S. Paule: Corde creditur ad iuſtitiam, ore fit confeſſio ad ſalutem: With heart we beleeue 
                     
                        Rom. 10. 
                     to iuſtice, with mouth we confeſſe to ſaluation. Which place learned men interprete to ſignifie, that profeſſion of faith is ſometimes neceſſarie to ſaluation: and they ſay further, that this ſometimes is ſo oft, as either the glorie of God, or the profite of our neighbour, doth of neceſſitie require it: the which caſes of neceſſitie do happen verie often; and great maruell it were (or rather vnpoſſible) that they ſhould neuer haue happened, for ſo long a time as the Proteſtants would haue their Church to haue beene inuiſible.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     
                     
                        If the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt (ſay you) ſhould for any ſpace of time be inuiſible, it ſhould for that ſpace ceaſe to profeſſe outwardly that faith which in heart it did beleeue.
                     
                     
                        But it may not for any ſpace ceaſe to profeſſe that faith.
                     
                     
                        Therefore it may not for any ſpace of time be inuiſible.
                     
                  
                  To omit that fancie, that there is one ſuch vniuerſall Church To the propoſition. of Chriſt vpon earth (whereof hereafter, when I come to ſpeake of the Catholicke Church,) I denie the conſequence of your propoſition. For it is poſſible, that al the Churches in the world ſhould gloriouſly profeſſe the true faith, and yet many thouſands be vtterly ignorant, that there are any ſuch Churches. Was not your Church of Rome (which hath bene famous enough for outward ſtate) altogether vnknowne (at the leaſt a long time) in the Indies and America, till within theſe 100. yeares, or thereabouts? And yet do you aske, If it did outwardly profeſſe, how it ſhould not by this profeſſion be made viſible and knowne? Hath not the kingdome of China, if we beleeue the report of your Ieſuites and other Friers, bene a mightie and rich eſtate many hundred yeares; and yet not heard of till of late, in moſt parts of Chriſtendome? If you reply, that the Churches muſt needs be knowne to them, amongſt, or neare whom they are: I anſwer, that this proueth not their viſibilitie to all men at all times; no nor to them, in the midſt of whom they dwell, vnleſſe the Churches be ſetled in ſome outward peace, that the members thereof may freely ſhew themſelues.
                  Your minor is falſe: it may come to paſſe, that the Church 
                     To the Aſſumption. 
                     may ceaſe for a ſpace to make open profeſſion of that faith, which in hart it doth beleeue: elſe how could 1. Reg. 19. 18. Eliah, liuing in the kingdom of Iſrael, haue bene ignorant, that there were 7000. true worſhippers of God in that countrey? Your proofe is inſufficient.
                  
                     
                        If it might come to paſſe (ſay you) that the Church ſhould ceaſe to profeſſe outwardly, then ſhould the gates of hell mightily preuaile againſt it, contrary to our Sauiours promiſe.
                     
                     
                        But the gates of hell ſhal not mightily preuaile againſt it, contrary to his promiſe.
                     
                     
                        Therefore it may not come to paſſe, that the Church ſhould ceaſe ſo to profeſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
The conſequence of your maior is too weake. Our Sauiours promiſe is neither to the whole Church, conſidered as a companie ioyntly together, but to euery true beleeuer, as I ſhewed before; nor concerning outward profeſſion, againſt which Peter (the head of the Church, as you dreame) grieuouſly ſinned: but of continuing ioyned to Ieſus Chriſt, as the head, by a true iuſtifying faith, reſting on him for ſaluation. In which eſtate Peter alwayes was preſerued by our Sauiour, though 
                        Mat. 26. 70 72. 74. the diuel preuailed againſt him to the deniall of his Lord and Maſter, for feate of death. But let vs ſee your proofe.
                  
                     If outward profeſſion be a thing neceſſary to ſaluation, then if the church faile in that, the gates of hell mightily preuaile againſt it, contrary to our Sauiours promiſe.
                     But outward profeſſion is a thing neceſſary to ſaluation.
                     Therfore if the Church faile in outward profeſſion, the gates of hell mightily preuaile againſt it, contrarie to our Sauiours promiſe.
                  
                  I denie your minor. Such outward profeſſion as you meane, is not 
                     To the Aſſumption. 
                     neceſſary to ſaluation.
                  
                  For the better clearing whereof, we muſt a little examine what it is, for a thing to be neceſſary to ſaluation; then, what profeſſion may be counted neceſſary. For the former: that is neceſſary to the ſaluation of a man, without which he cannot poſſibly be ſaued. Now theſe things are either ſimply neceſſarie, ſo that the abſence of them ſhuts a man out of heauen; or neceſſarie onely in ſome ſort. Simply neceſſarie, on mans part (for in that ſenſe we ſpeake now of things neceſſarie) are, acknowledgement of ſinne, faith in Ieſus Christ, and repentance: whereſoeuer any of theſe is wanting, there is no poſſibilitie of ſaluation, ſo long as they are wanting. Other things there are onely ſo far neceſſarie, as that the contempt or neglect of them, ba
                        •
                     s a man of ſaluation. Such are the Sacraments and outward profeſſion: both in generall, by becoming a member of ſome true viſible Church, and in particular, by witneſſing the truth, as oft as the Lord ſhall miniſter iuſt occaſion. Concerning this latter kinde of things neceſſarie, we are to know that if we truly repent our contempt and neglect of theſe duties,

and beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, there is mercie for vs with God, though for want of oportunitie we can neuer come to the performance of them.
                  Touching the latter point of outward profeſſion, it is (as I ſignified ere while) of two ſorts: either a ioyning of our ſelues to ſome Church profeſſing true Religion, or a bearing witneſſe of the truth of God, which we profeſſe. To this latter eſpecially belong the two former places of Scripture alledged by you. To the former, that text which you ſet in the laſt place, as it ſhal appeare by and by. You will aske me perchance, whether of theſe two, is the profeſſion you ſpeake of. Surely to ſpeake plainly and properly, neither of them. For it is a conceit of your owne deuiſing, without any authoritie or warrant of Scripture; and namely of thoſe places you bring for proofe of it: yet may it in ſome ſort be referred to the latter, as being a meanes whereby we may auouch the truth of God, whereof we are profeſſors. So then the anſwer is, firſt, that no kinde of outward profeſſion is ſimply neceſſary to ſaluation, as if the abſence of it, were in it ſelfe damnable, though the contempt or neglect of the dutie, not repented of, brings certaine damnation. Secondly, that it is not neceſſary to ſaluation, either ſimply, or in any ſort, that a whole Church ſhould at all times make open profeſſion to the world of that Religion which they hold, and ſecretly practiſe. This is that outward profeſſion, which is meant in your minor: by which conceit you ſhut out of heauen all Churches, that is, all aſſemblies of the faithfull, which at any time haue for borne to caſt themſelues wilfully into the mouthes of the bloud-thirſtie and rauening perſecutors, by proclaiming openly their faith in Chriſt. It is too true, that an ouer-great zeale of martyrdome caried 
                        Ignatius ad Rom. Cyprian. de Martyr. Ioan. 4. 1. 2, 3., & 8. 59. & 9. 39. Act 8. 1. & 9. 24. 25. ſome men, now and then, farther then they ſhould haue gone, to the endangering and loſing of their liues. But it is as true, that our Sauiour, his Apoſtles, and the Churches, from time to time, haue beene carefull to hide themſelues from the ſight of Tyrants, when the Goſpell was perſecuted, as farre as their callings, and other occaſions would giue them leaue. Indeede they

they neuer would (neither is it lawfull) denie the truth of God, or themſelues to be profeſſors of it, if they were called in queſtion for it: yet did they conceale, as much as they could, from the perſecutors, their times and places of meeting, and alſo the ſeuerall members of their Churches. To denie Chriſt, or the truth of his religion is alwaies damnable, and without repentance, bringeth damnation vnauoideably; not to make publicke profeſſion of religion is not alwaies ſo; but then onely, when the Lord, by ſome ſpeciall occaſion, according to the generall dutie of a Chriſtian, or a mans particular calling, thruſteth or draweth him foorth to giue teſtimonie to the truth, by maintaining it, or ſuffering for it. Which your ſelfe alſo afterward acknowledge, by the iudgement of the learned, who teach that profeſſion of faith is ſometimes neceſſarie to ſaluation.
                  Now for anſwer to your proofes, I ſay (as before) that the two former concerne eſpecially, the denying either of religion in generall, or ſome ſpeciall truth in queſtion, when the Lord, as it were, calleth vs out to profeſſe and auouch it: as he did the Apoſtles 
                        Mat. 10. 5. in that place, by ſending them abroad to preach the Goſpell. If you (ſaith our Sauiour in effect) or any other miniſter ſhall forbeare to diſcharge your duties, by preaching my truth, and maintaining it, if you be called in queſtion for it, I will neuer acknowledge you for mine, in the kingdome of heauen. 
                        Mat. 28. 19. Act. 10. 42. The Apoſtles calling neceſſarily required preaching of the word, and for them to haue failed in that dutie, for feare or ſhame, or otherwiſe, had bene to denie their Lord and maſter. Yet were they not ſo tied to this dutie, that they muſt needs continue their publicke preaching, in thoſe places, where perſecution was raiſed againſt them, but 
                        Mat. 10. 23. they might flee from one Citie to another: and yet not be counted to denie the Lord Ieſus. As for the Churches, that were gathered by the Apoſtles preaching, there is neither charge, nor reaſon to be ſhewed why they ſhould bewray themſelues to their perſecutors, by open practiſe of religion in the eies of the world. Indeed the worſhip of God is not to be neglected, though we cannot performe it without manifeſt daunger of our liues; but there is no

neceſſitie to worſhip God publickly, where the truth is perſecuted. Therefore did the anciēt Chriſtiās, in ſuch places aſſemble as ſecretly as they could, neither leauing the exerciſes of religion for feare, nor by an incōſiderate zeal, hazarding their own liues. To denie Chriſt is not to conceale himſelfe frō perſecutors, but being found by them, to renounce his profeſſion: and ſo is the place ordinarily applied by 
                        Cyprian. epiſt. 56. ad Thibar. Sect 3. Cyprian, 
                        Clerus Romā, ad Cyprian. epiſt. 30. 31. Cypria. epiſt. 55. ad Corncl. ſect. 13. Delapſis. ſect. 14 Ad Nouatian. haer. ſect. 7. the Clergie of Rome, and 
                        Tertul. in Scor. cap 10. 11. Tertullian, men enough fauouring martyrdome. Yea 
                        De fuga in perſec. cap. 14. Tertullian in that verie booke, wherein he labours to prooue, that it is not lawfull for a man to flie in time of perſecution: yet aduiſeth men to hold their aſſemblies for the exerciſes of religion, in the night time, if they cannot haue them conueniently in the day. 
                     
                        Theophyl. ad Math. 10. Theophylact expoundeth this confeſſion and deniall, of acknowledging, or denying Chriſt to be God. 
                     Luc. Brugen. ibi. Brugenſis ſomewhat more particularly, He that denieth me to be his Lord and Sauiour, that he beleeueth in me, that he ſticketh faſt to me, and my doctrine. So doth 
                        Ianſe. harm. cap. 55. Ianſenius vnderſtandit, though he ſtretch it alſo to the denying of Chriſt, by wicked conuerſation. The denying of Chriſts name (ſaith 
                        Lyra. ad Mat 10. 33. Lyra) is alwaies a mortall ſinne, Not to confeſſe or be ſilent (concerning it) is ſometimes a mortall ſinne: As if a man be ſilent, when he is asked of it; If he profeſſe it, being not asked, it is a worke of ſupererogation. Doth any of theſe, or any man elſe, conclude the viſibilitie of the Church from theſe, or the like places of Scripture? No man is to denie our Sauiour, nor to be aſhamed of his truth. What then? Therefore muſt they that beleeue in Chriſt, openly make profeſſion thereof, at all times, without 
                        Mat. 10. 16. any wiſedome of the Serpent, for their owne preſeruation: or elſe can they not be ſaued? A cruell and fooliſh conceit.
                  This proofe is to as little purpoſe as the former. Confeſſion by mouth is required to ſaluation: therefore outward profeſſion of faith 
                     
                        Rom. 10. 10. 
                     is at all times neceſſarie. Who ſees not the weakneſſe of this cōſequence? Doth not he confeſſe with mouth, that ioynes himſelfe to ſome knowen Church of Chriſt, and communicates with them (ordinarily) in the outward worſhip of God: though all the world know not there are any ſuch beleeuers & profeſſors; yea though the people, among whom they liue, be not priuie

to their meetings and profeſſion? There may be occaſion for a man, or a Church to manifeſt themſelues vnto the world: and they that in ſuch a time ſhall faile, can looke for no mercie at the hands of God, without true and earneſt repentance. But this prooues not, that therefore the Churches muſt make ſuch publicke profeſſion, that they may at all times be knowen to all men. To perſwade vs of the former (wherein there is no doubt) you tell vs that Learned men (autors in the aire, as D. B. P. againſt the reformed Catholicke. pag. 677. one of your ſide ſaith, in the like caſe) interprete this place, to ſignifie that profeſſion of faith is ſometimes neceſſarie. Who euer denied it? But doth any learned man ſay, that therefore the Church muſt alwaies make ſuch profeſſion? That is the point in queſtion: and of that you are as dumbe as a fiſh: yea do you not perceiue, that Lombard. & Gloſſ. Ordin. & interlin. ibi. 
                     your learned men, refute that conceit? Doth not he, that expoundeth that place of neceſſitie at ſometimes, denie that it requireth ſuch neceſſitie at all times? It is neceſſarie (ſaith Frier 
                        Dominic. Sotus ad Rom. 10. Soto) for a righteous man, that he may obtaine euerlaſting life, to confeſſe his faith with his mouth, whereſoeuer the time 
                     Neceſſarium praecepti tempus. 
                     neceſſarily required by this precept offers it ſelfe. Catharin your Biſhop ſpeaketh yet more plaine: Ambroſ. Catharin. ibi. 
                     Such confeſſion (namely, that a man confeſſe with his mouth, that which he beleeueth in his heart, as he expounded himſelfe a little before) is not alwaies required, but (as Thomas ſaith) according to the time and place. 
                     h Thomas. ibi. vide Thom. 2. 2 q. 3. art. 2. And indeed ſo Thomas ſaith, adding withall, that Praecepta affirmatiua obligant ſemper, ſcel non ad ſemper. 
                     Affirmatiue commaundements binde at all times, but require not performance at all times. Your interlinear and ordinarie Gloſſes, and Lombard reſtraine it to the time of perſecution: or at leaſt, when the truth is called in queſtion. Caietan makes this Caietan. ibi. 
                     when more generall, but ſignifieth, that this confeſſion is not at all times neceſſarie.
                  
                  As for the times, when it is to be held for neceſſarie, your learned men do ſomewhat more particularly deliuer the point, then you report it. Confeſſion of Gods truth (quoth 
                        Sotus ad Rom. 10. Sotus, and therein he followth Thomas. ibi. Thomas) is neceſſarie vpon paine of loſing ſaluation, either when it is required by a perſecutor of the faith, which confeſſion the martyrs made with their bloud: or when it is neceſſarie for thoſe 
                     Subditis 
                     that belong to our charge, by danger of hereſie
                     
                     likely to enſue: which dutie of confeſsion properly concerneth Prelates, &c. Theſe occaſions haue many times bene offered, and accordingly See Acts & monumēts of the Church. many profeſſors of that truth which wee now maintaine, haue, with the ſhedding of their bloud, giuen teſtimonie of the Goſpell, againſt the errours and tyrannie of your Antichriſtian Prelates. Thoſe holy martyrs, who from time to time haue bene butchered by your Synagogue of Sathan, were of the ſame Church with vs, howſoeuer they ſaw not the truth of God in many points ſo clearely as it hath pleaſed him to reueale it to vs by the miniſterie of his ſeruants in theſe latter dayes. If they vſed their beſt diſcretion and endeuours, to hide themſelues (as much as might be) from your furie, they did no more then the light of nature and Scripture warrant, to preſerue life, without denying their faith in the Lord Ieſus, or refraining to performe true worſhip to him, though they did it ſecretly. And thus much of your argument.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Fourthly if the Church were not viſible, we could not fulfill that 
                           Math. 18.commaundement of our Sauiour, wherein he ſaid: Dic Eccleſiae: Tell the Church. For how can wee tell the Church any thing, if we cannot tell where to ſeeke it: neither if we did by chance meete it, could we know it to be the Church?
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     If the Church (ſay you) be not viſible to al men, at all times, then can we not tell the Church, according to our Sauiours commaundement.
                     But we muſt tell the Church, according to his commaundement.
                     Therefore the Church muſt be viſible to all men, at all times.
                  
                  That I may anſwer directly and plainly to your Syllogiſme, To the Propoſition. I muſt vnderſtand what you meane by Church and we. The Church may ſignifie in this place, either the whole companie of the faithfull, or ſeuerally euerie particular congregation, which yet properly is not the Church, but a Church. So may the other word We be taken for All men whatſoeuer, or onely for ſuch as make profeſſion of Religion. Taking Church in

the former ſenſe, I denie the conſequence of your Maior. We muſt fulfill that commaundement of our Sauiour, though the whole companie of the faithfull be not at all viſible. For the charge is not to tell the whole company, but the ſeuerall Churches whereof we are members. I haue ſhewed this before: I wil onely put you in mind of a learned Papiſts expoſition, formerly alledged. We are not willed (ſaith 
                        Lue. Brugenſ. ad Mat. 18. 17. Brugenſis) to tell the vniuerſall Church ſpread ouer the earth, but that particular Church, 
                     Cui conuiuit & ſubiect. &c. 
                     to which euery man is ſubiect, and wherein he liues. If by we, you meane none but profeſſors of Religion, as our Sauiour Chriſt doth, and as See Chap. 10 ſect. 8. Brugenſis, and all other interpreters vnderſtand it; then howſoeuer you take the Church for the whole companie, or the ſeuerall congregations, I denie your conſequence in that reſpect alſo. The faithfull may tell their particular Churches, whereof they are members, though the Church be not viſible to all men, at all times. It is enough if euery man know his owne Church, to which he belongeth, though he know not of any other in the world.
                  Your minor is vtterly falſe, if (as you muſt needs do, according To the Aſſumption. to that you intend) you meane either all men, or the whole Church. For as I ſaid before, our Sauiours charge is neither to all men, but only to Profeſſors of Religion: nor concerning the whole Church, but particular congregations. And ſo your fourth reaſon proouing the viſibilitie of the Church, at all times to all men, by our Sauiours commaundement, to tell the Church, is of as ſmall force as the former. It is ſufficient, as I noted ere while, for the fulfilling of this charge, that euerie man know the Church, of which himſelfe is a member, and which he is to tell: and in this ſort the Churches are alwayes viſible.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Fiftly, it is certaine, that once the true Church of Chriſt was viſible, to wit, when it firſt began in Ieruſalem, in the Apoſtles and Diſciples of our Sauiour Chriſt, and that companie, which by their preaching was conuerted to the faith. But there can no reaſon be ſhewed, why it ſhould be viſible then, and not now. If it were needfull
                     
                     to be viſible then, becauſe otherwiſe it could not be a Church, that is, A Societie of men lincked together, in the profeſſion of one faith: in the vſe of the ſame Sacraments: vnder the gouernment of lawfull Paſtours: for the ſame reaſon, it muſt needs be viſible now; becauſe, (as in the laſt Chapter is prooued) there must be a Church now: and therefore it muſt be a ſocietie of men, profeſſing the ſame faith: vſing the ſame Sacraments: liuing vnder the gouernment of lawfull Paſtours. For all this pertaineth to the verie eſſence of the Church.
                  
                  
                     If alſo it were needfull to be viſible then, that thoſe offices and functiōs, which muſt be done in the Church, might be wel performed: to wit, as there were in the Church ſome Paſtors, & ſome ſheepe, (as Saint Gregory Nazianzene ſaith) ſome to commaund, ſome to obey: ſome to teach, ſome to be taught: ſome to feed the flocke of 
                     Oratione de moderat. in diſput. habenda. 
                     Chriſt, ſome to be fed: ſo (that euerie one of theſe, might do what pertained properly to his dutie;) it was needfull, that the Paſtors muſt know their ſheepe, and the ſheepe their Paſtours, and that thoſe that ſhould teach, and rule, and miniſter the Sacraments, muſt ſee, and know them, whom they were to teach and rule, and to whom they were to giue the Sacraments. And on the contrarie ſide, the other had need to haue knowen thoſe, of whom they must be taught, whom they muſt obey, & from whom they were to receiue the wholſome food of the holy Sacraments. If (I ſay) this reaſon prooue, that it was needfull then, that the Church ſhould be viſible and knowen: for the ſame reaſon, it will be alſo needfull to ſay, that the Church muſt be viſible, now, and at all times. For, at all times, there muſt be Paſtours and ſheepe in the Church, being the ſheepefold of Chriſt. And at all times theſe Paſtours muſt gouerne, inſtruct, and miniſter the holy Sacraments: and the other muſt receiue gouernement, inſtruction, and the foode of the holy Sacraments, at their hands. And conſequently, there had need be ſome viſible tokens, at all times, by which the Paſtours may know their ſheepe, leſt for want of this knowledge, they may vnawares, Dare ſanctū canibus, & proijcere margaritas ante porcos, Giue that which is holy to dogs, and 
                     
                        Matth. 7. 
                     caſt margarites before hogs, which our Sauiour commandeth them not to do. And on the other ſide, there had need be ſome viſible markes, by which the ſheepe may know and diſcerne their lawfull
                     
                     Paſtors, and true preachers, from falſe teachers, and intruding vſurpers. For otherwiſe, they could not tell, whom to heare & obey, and whom to repaire to for the Sacraments: and contrarie, whom to take heed of, as of falſe Prophets: whoſe voice to neglect, as of ſtrangers: and whoſe poiſoned food of polluted Sacraments to reiect, no leſſe then a baite laid to kill them by theeues and robbers; as it importeth greatly euery one to do.
                  
                  
                     If laſtly it were needfull to be viſible then, that thoſe, which were out of it, might ioyne themſelues vnto it, and become members of it; thereby to participate the graces and benedictions, which Chriſt our Lord communicated onely to it; and to eſcape the deluge of eternall damnation, wherewith all was ſure to be drowned, that were found out of it, as it were, out of another Noe his Arke: this reaſon alſo requireth and vrgeth, that the Church muſt be viſible now, and at all other times. For if, at any time, it were not viſible; how could men, that were out of it, come vnto it? Or how could they attaine ſaluation, if they did not enter into it? Sith at all times, the merits and fruits of Chriſts paſſion are incloſed in it: and the means of ſaluation, and to eſcape eternall damnation, are onely found in it. The Church therefore is viſible at all times. For at all times, that prophecy of Iſaias muſt be true, wherein our Lord ſpeaketh thus to the Church: Aperiētur portae tuae iugiter, die ac nocte non claudentur; vt afferatur ad te fortitudo gentium, & reges earū adducantur; 
                        Iſa. 60. Gens enim & regnū quod non ſeruierit tibi, peribit. Thy gates ſhal be cōtinually opened, day & night they ſhall not be ſhut, that the ſtrength of nations & the kings therof may be brought vnto thee; for the nation & kingdome which ſhal not ſerue thee, ſhall periſh.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This is your fift argument, wherein you haue waſted more paper, then in all the former. Let vs ſee if your paines be not to as little purpoſe.
                  
                     If the true Church (ſay you) was once viſible (you ſhould adde, to all men) and no reaſon can be ſhewed, why it ſhould be ſo then, and not now, then it is ſo now.
                     But the true Church was once viſible, and no reaſon can be ſhewed why it ſhould be ſo then, and not now.
                     Therefore the true Church is now viſible.
                  
                  
                     
Who denies this concluſion? or what do you get by it? The To the Syllogiſme. queſtion is, whether the Church of Chriſt be alwayes viſible to all men, or no. You conclude, that it is now viſible, ſpeaking neither of all men, nor of all times; in which two points the whole controuerſie betwixt vs lieth: ſaue that we alſo denie that there is any ſuch one Church, as you fondly ſuppoſe, without any ſhew of proofe. But that I may let nothing paſſe which is worth the anſwering, I will apply this argument of yours, as directly to the queſtion as I can. To ſpeake plaine to euery mans vnderſtanding: the doubt is, whether there be not at all times ſome one companie of Chriſtians or other, that maketh publicke profeſſion of religion, ſo that all men whatſoeuer and whereſoeuer, may take notice of them, as the true Church of Chriſt, or no. In this queſtion we differ from you in two points. Firſt we ſay, that there neuer was any ſuch companie in the world, that could be knowne to all men. Secondly we adde farther, that euery true Church may be ſo oppreſt and driuen into a corner, that it can be diſcerned by none but the members of it; and yet may continue in the practiſe of religion by the miniſtery of the word, ſacraments and cenſures. Now then, I thus frame your reaſon, for proofe of the queſtion.
                  
                     If at any time there were a company of mē viſible to all the world, and no reaſon can be ſhewed why there ſhould at that time be ſuch a companie, and not at all other times alſo; then there hath bene alwayes, is now, and ſhall be for euer ſuch a companie viſible to all men.
                     But there was once ſuch a companie viſible to all men, and no reaſon can be ſhewed, why there ſhould be at any time, and not at all times.
                     Therefore there alwayes hath bene, is, and ſhal be ſuch a company viſible to all men.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your maior; though there had To the propoſition. bin ſometime ſuch a company, and no man were able to ſhew ſufficient reaſon, why there ſhould be ſuch a companie then, and not alwayes; yet I ſay, it doth not follow, that therefore there muſt at all times be ſuch a companie. The ground of my deniall, is, that God hath not reuealed to men the reaſon of all

his decrees and actions. Your Pope himſelfe (as preſumptuous as he is) I thinke, dares not vndertake to declare or determine, why many things fall out, which we ſee dayly come to paſſe. I preſume all this while, that you denie this poſſibilitie of giuing a reaſon, to men onely, not to God alſo: for elſe your minor wil want little of blaſphemie.
                  Your minor hath two parts, and it is falſe in both. For neither To the Aſſumption. was the Church (as you ſpeake) in the Apoſtles time viſible to all men; and there may be ſome reaſon, why though it had bin ſo then, yet it ſhould not continue ſo alwayes. Of the former I haue ſaid enough heretofore; and it is a conceit without truth or likelihood, that all the world might take knowledge of the Church, when it began in Ieruſalem. For the other point, though I might ſtand vpon it, and put you to proue, that there can no reaſon be giuen; yet will I endeuour for your better ſatisfaction, if it may be, to ſhew ſome reaſons why it muſt needs be viſible in the beginning (yet was it not then viſible to all mē) and need not be ſo at all times. But firſt let vs examine your proofe. I will propound your reaſon in a ſyllogiſme, and then anſwer to it.
                  
                     
                        If the Church were in the Apoſtles time to be viſible, 1. becauſe otherwiſe it could not be a Church: 2. the offices and functions of the Church could not elſe be well performed: 3. elſe men could not ioyne themſelues vnto it: and theſe reaſons, why it ſhould be viſible, ſtill continue; then no reaſon can be ſhewed, why it ſhould then be viſible, and not alwayes.
                     
                     
                        But it was then to be viſible for thoſe reaſons, and they alwayes continue.
                     
                     
                        Therefore no reaſon can be ſhewed, why it ſhould then be ſo viſible, and not alwayes.
                     
                  
                  I do purpoſely omit the former part of the Aſſumption, that the Church was viſible to all men, becauſe I ſpake ſufficiently of it before, and it wil but hinder the examining of this ſyllogiſme. To which that I may anſwer orderly and plainly, I deny To the propoſition. the conſequence of the maior. Although theſe three had bin ſome of the reaſons (whether they be or no, we will conſider in the Aſſumption) why the Church at the firſt muſt needs be

viſible: and theſe reaſons ſtill continue: yet would it not follow, that then no reaſon can be ſhewed, why it ſhould be viſible then, and not ſo alwayes. For there may and ſhall be other reaſons giuen of the neceſſitie of viſibilitie in thoſe times.
                  Your minor alſo is falſe. Neuer a one of the three alledged To the Aſſumption. by you, is any neceſſary reaſon of the Churches viſibilitie in the Apoſtles times; as ſhal appeare in the handling of them. Wherein firſt I muſt ſpeake a word or two of the definition of the Church, as it is propounded in this place. In the whole courſe of your treatiſe, as I haue noted in my anſwer here and there, you meane by the Church nothing elſe but your Clergie, or rather your Bb. aſſembled together in a generall Councell. Here (belike vpon better aduice) you are content to allow the people alſo for parts of the Church. But to let that paſſe: the firſt fault in your definition is, that you fancie to your ſelfe one viſible vniuerſall Church, conſiſting of all ſuch as you account true Chriſtians throughout the world: whereas you are not able to bring any place of Scripture, in which the holy Ghoſt ſo ſpeaketh of the church. I deny not, that all Chriſtians agreeing in one profeſſion, may in ſome ſort be ſaid to be of one church: but that the Church whereof the Scripture ſpeaks, and of which we therefore muſt ſpeake, if we will ſpeake to any purpoſe, is to be conceiued as any one ſuch ſocietie. The ſame word, the ſame ſacraments, the ſame kind of gouerners may be in diuers churches, and yet not all theſe be one ſocietie. We may imagine the like in common wealths or kingdomes, that ſeuerall ſtates may haue the ſame kind of lawes, cuſtomes and magiſtrates, and yet not be all one kingdome or common wealth. Your ſecond fault is, that vndertaking to define the true church, you content your ſelfe with the ſame faith, and the ſame ſacraments: whereas no company nor man can be of that church, but they that hold the true faith of Chriſt, and the right vſe of the ſacraments. The third thing I will obſerue, is rather by way of explication, then of refutation: you require the gouernment of lawfull paſtors, as a thing eſſentiall to the church. If you ſpeake of that church, to which our Sauiour makes thoſe goodly promiſes 
                        Mat. 16. 16. & 28. 20. in the Goſpell, it may be for a time without ſuch gouerners: the promiſes

themſelues not concerning the whole bodie, in reſpect of their lawfull Paſtors, but euery particular, in regard of his faith in Ieſus Chriſt. And indeed, howſoeuer it be true, that to the being of a Church, as it is commonly taken, it is neceſſary that there be both a paſtor and a people: yet a people depriued of their paſtors by what meanes ſoeuer, and hauing no dependance vpon any other congregation, doth not ceaſe to be ſuch a Church as our Sauiour promiſeth to protect from ſpiritual and bodily enemies: yea a people ſo deſtitute, hath power to chuſe a paſtor for themſelues, and therefore are ſtill in ſome ſort a Church, becauſe that power is no where out of a Church, but is appropriated to the companies of beleeuers, who make ſeueral Churches, though not properly and fully Churches, for want of lawfull gouerners. In the laſt place, I may not omit to note your craft, in adding to your definition of the Church, the gouernment of lawfull Paſtors; as if you would haue the ignorant imagine, that there were certaine Paſtors who had ſome ioynt gouernment of the Church: for example, perhaps your Pope, and his Councell of Cardinals, or a Councel of Biſhops aſſembled by his authoritie, and gouerned by his direction. In this ſenſe we vtterly denie, that any gouernment of Paſtors is neceſſary to the being of a Church; though we gladly embrace the helpes of Synodall, prouinciall, nationall and generall Councels. All true Churches properly ſo called, are gouerned by their ſeuerall Paſtors: but this makes them not one church, as long as there are not more, or at the leaſt one, gouerner cōmō to thē al. This 
                        
                           Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 cap. 2.
                        
                           Turrian. de Eccleſ. & ordin. miniſtr.
                        
                        
                           Stapl. princip. doct. controu. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3.
                      the learned of your ſide diſcerning (though you cannot or wil not ſee it) neuer define the Church without relation to one generall paſtor, the Pope of Rome. As for the ſeuerall paſtors, be they neuer ſo lawful, they do no more make their congregations one Church, in reſpect of their gouernment, then the Companies of London, becauſe they are gouerned by their Maiſter and Wardens, (ſeuerally) make one bodie, without reſpect of their common ſubiection to the Lord Mayor of that citie. You wil then perhaps demand of me, whether the Church be not a meere ſound onely, hauing nothing truly anſwerable thereunto indeed? I anſwer to this queſtion, that the Church
                     
is more then a meere ſound, and hath a thing in nature truly anſwerable to the name, and that in two reſpects. For the Church may be taken for the whole multitude of them, that in all places of the world profeſſe the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt: and in this ſenſe it containes all, ſaue the Iewes and the heathen. Secondly, the Church truly and properly is the companie of the elect, that are called to true faith in Ieſus Chriſt. More particularly it ſignifieth ſuch of the elect beleeuers, as are liuing in the world. And this is that Church, to which thoſe glorious and comfortable promiſes of our Sauiour do appertaine: though there be alſo ſome promiſes of outward bleſſings, which are common to all Churches and profeſſors of Chriſtian Religion. Now theſe elect thus called, are truly a Church, becauſe they are a companie linked together in the ſound profeſſion of the ſame true faith, and members of the ſame mysticall bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, vnder the gouernment of the holy Ghoſt his Ʋicegerent. I do not take vpon me exactly to define the Church, but onely to ſhew in groſſe, what is neceſſary to the being of it; nor perhaps all that, but the eſpeciall point, where in you haue failed, which is ſubiection to one and the ſame Lieutenant and Soueraigne, not to diuers of the like kind ſeuerally, as your definition ſeemeth to require. But of this matter enough.
                  Now I anſwer to your minor, that there was no neceſſitie of the Churches viſibilitie, that it might be ſuch a ſocietie as you imagine. For there haue bin, and eaſily may be ſuch ſocieties, which may be, and haue bin hid from all the world, ſaue thoſe of their owne companie. Conſider I pray, what ſhould hinder this. Is it not poſſible for a companie of men to profeſſe the ſame religion, but other men muſt needs be priue to that their profeſſion? It is like enough, that ſuch a company growing to a great multitude, and ordinarily. holding the exerciſes of their Religion, will in time be diſcouered: as it fell out with the true Chriſtians in the late perſecution vnder Queene Marie. But this proueth not, that therefore there cannot be any ſuch ſocietie, but the world muſt needs take knowledge of it. Could your deteſtable traitors band them ſelues together in that monſtrous plot of treaſon and murder by gunpowder, yea and aſſemble

ſo often, and worke ſo hard in the diuels ſeruice, without being deſcried: and cannot God by his prouidence keepe his ſeruants, meeting together for his worſhip, but that Satan ſhall certainly diſcouer them? It is more then manifeſt (how long or ſhort a while ſoeuer they may keepe themſelues vnknowne) that they may be ſuch a companie, and not by and by be knowne.
                  The ſecond point in the firſt part of your minor is this, and thus concluded.
                  
                     If the Pastors were to know the ſheepe, and the ſheepe the Paſtors, and this could not be, vnleſſe the Church were viſible; then was this one reaſon of the Churches being viſible.
                     But the Paſtors were to know the ſheepe, and the ſheepe the Paſtors, and this could not be vnleſſe the Church were viſible.
                     Therefore this is one reaſon of the Churches being viſible.
                  
                  I may graunt you the whole Syllogiſme, in the termes it is To the Syllogiſme. propounded by you, and yet neither I loſe, nor you get any thing. For there is no more concluded by it, but that the church muſt be viſible to the members of it: the Paſtor muſt know the ſheepe, and the ſheepe the Paſtor: Which of vs euer denied this viſibilitie? or what is this to proue, that the Church in the beginning of the Goſpell was to be famouſly viſible in the eies of all the world?
                  In a word then to your propoſitions ſeuerally: you muſt adde To the propoſition. to your maior, one of theſe two clauſes, either to the members of it, ſignifying that the Paſtors and ſheepe could not know one another, vnleſſe the Church were then viſible to the members of it; or to all men, meaning that there could not be ſuch mutuall knowledge betwixt the Paſtor and the ſheepe, vnles the church were viſible to all men. In the former ſenſe your propoſition is true, but altogether wide from the marke you ayme at. In the latter you ſhoote right, but a great deale ouer. For though your conſequence by this meanes wil proue true, and to the purpoſe; yet your minor wil be ouerlarge, and your queſtion ſtil remaine vnproued. For it is ridiculous to imagine, not onely to affirme, To the Aſſumption. that the Paſtor and flocke cannot know each other, except all

the world know them too. Why may not the like be ſaid of the husband and the wife, the father and the children, the maiſter and the ſeruants? May there not be gouerning and obeying, but where all men ſee theſe actions performed? But I dwell too long vpon ſo cleare a matter. Onely I was deſirous to ſuite my anſwer ſomewhat like to your argument, for the length of it, leſt ſhortneſſe might make your followers thinke it not well anſwered.
                  We are now come to the third point of the former part, which you conclude thus.
                  
                     If men, that were out of the church, were to come into it for ſaluation, and this could not be vnles it were viſible, then was this one reaſon of the viſibilitie thereof.
                     But men out of it, were to come into it for ſaluation, and this could not be, vnleſſe it were viſible.
                     Therefore this is one reaſon of the Churches viſibilitie.
                  
                  This is the onely argument of the three, that hath any ſhew To the Aſſumption. of reaſon in it: and yet this alſo is far from any neceſſary proofe. For if in your minor you meane, that all and euery man was to come into the Church for ſaluation, as if God had intended the ſaluation of euery particular man by the publiſhing of the Goſpell: your ſaid minor is in that reſpect falſe. For our Sauiour himſelfe 
                        Luk. 10. 21. 
                     giueth his Father thankes, that he had hid the myſteries of the Goſpell, euen there where it was publikly preached, from the wiſe and men of vnderſtanding, and reuealed it to babes or ſimple men. Yea he profeſſeth, that there was an eſpeciall act of God his Father required 
                        Ioh. 6. 44. 65. 
                     to the drawing of men to beleefe, euen there where himſelfe preached moſt powerfully, and that ſome only and not all, were ſo drawne by God. Neither doth the difference in this caſe proceed from man, but from God; leſt that man, which makes the difference betwixt himſelfe and another, ſhould haue iuſt cauſe to boaſt, as if he were more beholding to himſelfe, of whom he had the very act of being willing to be ſaued, then to God, who onely gaue him power to be willing. Therefore 
                        Thom. ad Rom. 9. See Chap. 5. ſect. 1. C. your glorious and Angelicall Dr. Thomas ſaith, that there can no more reaſon be giuen why God intendeth the ſaluation of this man, and not of that man, then why the Maſon layeth
                     
                     this ſtone aboue, and that below, each of them hauing a like fitneſſe to each place. But if by men, you vnderſtand thoſe men that were choſen of God to euerlaſting life, 
                        Act. 13. 48. to whom onely the preaching of the Goſpell was effectuall to true faith and ſaluation, then I denie your minor in regard of the latter part alſo. For there was no neceſſitie of the viſibilitie of the Church to that purpoſe, as if God could not otherwiſe haue procured that they ſhould beleeue and be ſaued: I adde farther, that the meanes which it pleaſed God to vſe, for the conuerting of thoſe that were then to be ſaued, and ordinarily for publiſhing the glad tidings of the Goſpell, was not the viſibleneſſe of the Church, but the preaching of his Apoſtles. So that (as I ſignified before) the greateſt natiōs of the world embraced the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, not becauſe they ſaw ſome viſible Church, to which they might adioyne themſelues, but for the euidence of the truth which ſome one man or other preached to them, without any reference or reſpect to any viſible Church whatſoeuer. 
                        Act. 8. 4. The diſſoluing of the viſible Church at Ieruſalem, was the occaſion of preaching the Goſpell through the world.
                  Hauing thus examined your ſeuerall proofes, I returne now to your principal aſſumption; for the farther confuting wherof, I muſt ſhew, that there may be ſome reaſon giuen, why it might pleaſe God to haue the Churches viſible in the beginning, and not alwayes. To which purpoſe I muſt firſt intreate all men to vnderſtand, that I do not vndertake preciſely to ſet downe the reaſons why God wil haue his churches ſomtimes famouſly knowen, ſometimes hidden from the knowledge of the world. For his counſels are vnſearchable, and his wayes paſt finding out. Farther, I acknowledge in all truth and humbleneſſe, that I hold the reuealed will of God for a ſufficient reaſon of any thing which he doth will, though I could in my ignorance obiect ſomthing againſt it, which might affoord ſome cauſe of doubting. With this proteſtation I ſay, theſe might be ſome reaſons. Firſt, wheras the means of ſaluation had bin, for a long time, ſhut vp in the land of Iurie, and in a manner, made proper to the Iewes; now the partition wall being broken downe,

the Gentiles alſo were to be receiued into the Couenant; which (to our reaſon at leaſt) could not conueniently haue bene done, vnleſſe the profeſſion of the truth had bene famous and viſible. But when once by this meanes the ſound of it was gone ouer the world, there was no ſuch neceſſitie of continuing viſible Churches. Secondly, this viſibilitie was at the firſt the more neceſſarie, becauſe otherwiſe the Iewes, 
                        Act. 2. 38. to whom firſt the Goſpel appertained, being diſperſed in many nations, could not ſo eaſily take knowledge of it: now 
                        & 13. 46. they haue iudged themſelues vnworthie of it, and the Lord hath giuen it to vs Gentiles. Thirdly, it was no ſmall proofe of the truth of the Goſpell, and the power of God working by the miniſtery of the word, that ſo great multitudes ſhould ſo ſpeedily be conuerted by ſo weake meanes: there is not alwaies the like vſe of the Churches viſibleneſſe. Fourthly, though the Lord in his mercie, would haue the Goſpell publiſhed to the world, yet when it became generally abuſed to wantonneſſe, that mens eares itched after new doctrines, and eſteemed more of their owne deuiſes, then of the true worſhip of God, appointed by himſelfe; it pleaſed his maieſtie to leaue men to their owne blindneſſe, and preſumption, reſeruing to himſelfe a ſmall companie here and there, whom he kept, as the 7000 in Elias time. Laſtly it was requiſite that the prophecies in 2. Theſ. 2. 10. Paul and 
                        Reuel. 17. 1. Iohn, concerning Antichriſt, and his tyrannie, and vniuerſall Apoſtacie, ſhould be fulfilled; which could not haue come to the iuſt height of extremitie, if any Churches, at leaſt in thoſe parts where Antichriſt preuailed, had continued viſible. Theſe are a few of thoſe reaſons, which in the blind iudgement of man, not able to ſound the depth of Gods ſecrets, might be an occaſion of making the Churches of Chriſt ceaſe to be famous, and of keeping the true profeſſors 
                        Reuel. 12. 6. ſhut vp in the wilderneſſe; till the time appointed by God for Antichriſts decay and ruine approached. Yet did not the Lord all this time, leaue himſelfe and his truth without witneſſe, but from time to time, ſtirred vp the ſpirits of his children, to make the world ſearch the Scriptures, and diſcerne, if they would, that your Church of Rome ſo famous & viſible, was corrupted with many errors, and become

the verie ſeat of Antichriſt. Thus I haue anſwered your fift reaſon, in the concluſion whereof you adde a teſtimonie of Scripture, to confirme the neceſſitie of the Churches perpetuall viſibleneſſe to all men.
                  
                     
                        If (ſay you) 
                        
                           Eſai. 60. 11. 
                        that prophecie of Eſay (Thy gates ſhall be continually open) muſt at all times be true, then the Church is viſible at all times, to all men.
                     
                     
                        But that Prophecie muſt be true at all times.
                     
                     
                        Therefore the Church, is viſible at all times, to all men.
                     
                  
                  Though you ordinarily leaue out that clauſe of the Churches To the ſyllogiſme. viſibleneſſe to all men, yet I make bold to ſupply it; becauſe I am deſirous to perſwade my ſelfe, that you doe ſo, rather for ſhortneſſe ſake, then in a craftie purpoſe to deceiue the Reader.
                  I denie the conſequence of your Maior: firſt, becauſe that prophecy may be alwaies true, and yet the Church not alwaies To the propoſition. viſible. For all prophecies in Scripture are alwaies true, as being from God, and yet doth it not follow hereupon, that therefore whatſoeuer is prophecied muſt alwaies be true. It was prophecied by God himſelfe, that 
                        Gen. 15. 13. 
                     the children of Iſraell ſhould be ſeruants in Aegypt: May I then ſay as you do If this prophecie muſt alwaies be true, they muſt alwaies be ſeruants in Aegypt? I trow not. Prophecies are alwaies true; but true onely, according to the meaning of them: that ſuch or ſuch things muſt be, at the time, and in the manner ſignified by them. If you ſay, your meaning is no more, but that if that prophecie be true, then the Church is alwaies viſible to all men; I anſwer, that At all times was put in without cauſe, and might as you ſee, breed a queſtion in your propoſition.
                  Secondly, taking your Maior in that ſenſe, I ſtill denie the conſequence of it. For the gates of the Church may be open at all times, & yet all men neither ſee thē alwaies open, nor know that there are any ſuch gates, or Church. Might not the gates of Mexico, or ſome Citie in the Eaſt Indies, China, or America be alwaies open, and yet none in theſe weſterne parts euer heare of any ſuch Citie? You will ſay perhaps, that the Prophet by the gates being open, ſignifieth the viſibilitie of the

Church. It is not enough to ſay ſo, vnleſſe you prooue it too. But that I may yeeld ſomewhat of my right in this caſe, and not put you to your proofes in ſo hard a matter: I anſwer with 
                        Auguſt. de ciuit. dei lib. 20 cap. 68. Auſtin ſpeaking of ſuch prophecies and promiſes, that this place belongeth properly to the Church of the elect, into which, without any restraint, many of the Gentiles do enter continually from day to day, by their actuall beleeuing truly in Ieſus Chriſt. Which anſwer may the better appeare to be true, if we conſider that this promiſe is made to the Iewes, whoſe Churchgates muſt alwaies ſtand opē to entertain the Gentiles coming vnto it. But this can no way be true of the outward Church of the Iewes, which then floriſhed in Ieruſalem, & was vtterly deſtroyed ſome fortie yeares after our Sauiours aſcenſion. Therefore it muſt belong to that remnant of Iſrael, 
                        Rom. 9. 6. 7. & 11. 2. 7. 
                     which is according to the election of grace. Do not replie to this anſwer, that the gates of this Church were alwaies open, euen before our Sauiours coming. For this Church, in reſpect of the Gentiles, had not a gate then, but a little wicket, which ſtood not alwaies open, but was opened now and then, vpon occaſion, when it pleaſed God, to bring ſome one or other of the heathen, extraordinarily to ſaluation, by the acknowledging of the Meſſiah to come. Theſe gates are now, & haue bene this 1500 yeares and vpward ſhut vp againſt the Iewes: as 
                        Rom. 9. & 10 the Apoſtle lamentably coplaines, not, as ſome imagine, becauſe the viſible Church was tranſlated frō the Iewes to the Gentils, which Paul would neuer ſo ambitiouſly haue affected, as in reſpect of that 
                        Rom. 9. 3. 
                     To be contented to become Anathema, that his countrimen might enioy the glorious ſmoke of ſuch an outward priuiledge (I ſpeake in compariſon of election to euerlaſting life:) but for that the Lord would giue ouer his people the Iewes, and not chooſe (ordinarily) out of them, heires of his heauenly kingdome, as before he had done. We ſee, and reioyce at the ſight, that the Lord of his great mercie, calleth out ſome few from amongſt that deſperate multitude of the Iewes, as before he did out of the Gentiles, but the gates are now ſet open, for the Gentiles, and a ſmall poſterne for the Iewes.
                  But what if I ſhould grant you, that this prophecie may alſo

be expounded of the outward profeſſion of Religion, muſt the Church then needs be viſible at all times to all men? The maine reaſon of the gates continuall ſtanding open, is ſignified by the Prophet to be this: That the ſtrength of the nations, and their kings may come into the Church. But this was long ago fulfilled, by the iudgement of your owne writers. The ſtrength of the nations, that is the moſt warlike nations ſaith Vatablus: which (ſaith 
                        Vatabl. ad Eſay. 60. 11. he) was fulfilled; when the Romanes were added to the Church. The opening of the gates, Lyra. ibi. Lyra referreth to Conſtantines time, and therefore in his iudgement, they were ſhut more then 300. yeares after Chriſt. And ſo farre is he from once thinking on the viſibilitie of the Church, prophecied of in this place, that he brings three other interpretations, and not mentions your conceit. The gates ſhall be open: becauſe (ſaith Lyra) Conſtantine commaunded, that the Church gates ſhould be opened, which before were ſhut, and that new Churches ſhould be built. This alſo may be expounded (ſaith he) of ſpirituall opening, becauſe the Church is alwaies open, to receiue them, that repent. And becauſe, ſince Constantines time, men began to flocke to the Church of Chriſt without feare. The ſtrength of the nations was brought, becauſe (ſaith the ſame Author) by the example of Constantine, many Potentates and kings came to the faith of Chriſt. The gates of the Church (ſaid 
                        Hieron. ad Eſay. 60 li. 17. Ierome, before Poperie was hatched) ſhall alwaies be open to them, that deſire to be ſaued, that entrance may not be denied, either in proſperitie or aduerſity, to them that will beleeue. Thus this place of Eſay will not prooue the viſibilitie of the Church, to all men at all times.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  
                     Sixtly, the onely reaſon and ground, by which heretickes hold the Church to be inuiſible, is, becauſe they imagine the Church to conſiſt onely of the elect, or onely of the good. But this is a falſe ground, as appeareth by the name of Church in Greeke Eccleſia, which euen by the Etymology of the word, doth ſignifie the companie of men called: now ſure it is, that moe are called then elected, as our Sauiour ſaith, Multi vocati, pauci electi. Againe, this ground is ſhewed to be falſe, by thoſe parables, in which the Church is compared to a 
                     
                        Math. 20. Math. 3. Math. 23. Math. 13. 
                     floare, wherein wheat and chaffe are mixed. And to a mariage, to which came good and bad. And to a net, wherein are gathered all
                     
                     ſorts of fiſhes good and bad. And to ten Ʋirgins, wherof fiue were fooliſh, and excluded from the celeſtiall mariage. This ground is 
                     
                        Mat. 25. 
                     alſo ſhewed to be falſe out of Saint Paule, who commaundeth the Corinthians, to expell an inceſtuous perſon out of the Church. Ergo, 1. Cor. 5. 
                     before this expulſion, there was ſuch a perſon in the Church, and therefore the Church doth not conſiſt, onely of thoſe, that be good.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Becauſe your owne reaſons are not ſtrong enough, to proue the point in queſtion, you thinke to helpe the matter by ouerthrowing the ground, whereupon onely, as you confidently auouch, we build our deniall of the Churches viſibility at all times. But neither is that our onely ground, and if it were, you are not able to ſhake it. Concerning the former, we denie the viſibilitie of the Church, as it is vnderſtood in thoſe places, where our Sauiour promiſeth ſpirituall graces to it, and as it is taken in the Creed; becauſe that Church is the myſticall bodie of Chriſt, and therefore can conſiſt of none but thoſe, that are truly iuſtified and ſanctified, as none but the elect are. But we farther denie the ſame viſibilitie, becauſe you would haue vs beleeue that the Catholicke Church is viſible. To which we anſwer, that this Catholickneſſe (let the Church be what it will) maketh it inuiſible: becauſe Ariſtot. & omnes logici. that which is Catholicke, is generall, conſiſting of many particulars: and we haue learned, that vniuerſals are not ſubiect to ſenſe, but onely to be conceiued by the minde, as hauing no outward ſhape, which can be ſeene or knowen by any of the fiue ſenſes. Moreouer, if we take the queſtion, in the moſt reaſonable ſort that may be, (and ſo it is verie ſeldome handled by you) Whether there muſt alwaies be ſome one or other companie of men, that may be famouſly knowen of all the world, to be a true Church of Chriſt: Still we continue in denying that viſibilitie. Firſt, as it is propounded by you, for an Article of Faith, and an eſſentiall propertie of the, or a true Church. Secondly, becauſe we are taught in the Scriptures, that the true Church, that is, the profeſſours of Chriſts true Religion, ſhall be faine to flie into the wilderneſſe, and ſo muſt needes be out of the ſight of (at leaſt) the greateſt part of the world. I am

loth to repeate theſe things ſo often, but you driue me to it: my helpe is to do it, as ſhortly as I can.
                  All the forces you bring to ouerturne the ground, vpon which our denial of the Churches viſibilitie ſtādeth, are diuided by you into two bands, with the former whereof, thus you ſet vpon vs.
                  
                     The companie of men called, conſiſteth not of the elect onely.
                     The Church is the companie of men called.
                     Therefore the Church conſiſteth not of the elect onely.
                  
                  I denie your Minor: many men are called, that are not of the To the aſſumption. Church, which conſiſteth of ſuch onely, as being called, are alſo elect. It is true that the word Church is ſometimes ſo generally taken, that it compriſeth all ſuch, as make profeſſion of faith in Chriſt, but this is not the Church, of which the Creed ſpeaketh, and to which our Sauiours promiſes apppertaine: yea beſides this Church, there is the true Church of Chriſt, whereof he is head, whoſe bodie hath neuer a rotten or dead member, ſuch as ouer many, perhaps the greateſt part of them, that make profeſſion of beleefe, commonly are. In a word, the whole courſe of your Treatiſe failes in this point, that whereas the word Church is diuerſly taken, you apply that to it, in the generall meaning of the word, which was ſpoken of it by our Sauiour, the Prophets and Apoſtles, in that ſpeciall ſignification, by which it containeth none but the elect.
                  To your proofe I anſwer farther. Firſt that the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in the verie nature of it, doth not ſignifie The companie, that is any certaine companie called, but generally a company, that is any ſuch companie whatſoeuer. Secondly I adde, that the word is alſo ſometimes taken for a companie, whether called or not called: as, 
                        Pſal. 26. 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     I haue hated the companie of the wicked. Where the Prophet ſpeaketh not of any companie called together, but abſolutely of the wicked, howſoeuer aſſembled, or not aſſembled. Thirdly, I ſay it is enough, in reſpect of the nature, and Etymology of the word, that the Church be a companie of men called, neither can it any way be enforced from the ſignification of it in Greeke, that the Church muſt needs comprehend all, that are in any ſort called. Indeed the elect onely may 
                        Rom. 8. 30.
                     
truly be ſaid to be called, in an eſpeciall manner: becauſe they haue beſides the outward ſound of the preacher, the inward voice of the ſpirit, and are not onely called to beleeue the truth of the Goſpell, but alſo to beleeue truly in Ieſus Chriſt to ſaluation:
                  This is your rereward, with which you charge vs afreſh, and that as it were, both with foote and horſe. Firſt you throng together many places of Scripture, as if your confidence were greater in your number, then in vour valour: Let vs encounter you.
                  
                     That, which is compared to a floare, wherein wheat and chaffe are mixed.
                     To a mariage, to which come good and bad.
                     To a net, wherein are gathered all ſorts of fiſhes, good and bad.
                     To ten virgins, whereof fiue were fooliſh and ſhut out from the coeleſtiall mariage, conſiſteth not of the elect onely.
                     The Church is compared to ſuch a floare, marriage, net, virgins.
                     Therefore the Church conſiſteth not of the elect onely.
                  
                  A verie hot aſſault: but your bullets fall a great way ſhort of To the ſyllogiſme. the marke, you do, or ſhould aime at. For all you prooue by this reaſon is onely this, that the Church, taken for the whole companie of them, that make profeſſion of the Goſpell, conſiſteth not onely of the elect. Who euer dreamed it did? You are ſo farre from ouerturning our ground, that you neuer once come neare it, for all this braue ſhew you make.
                  In particular, I denie your Minor. The Church we ſpeake To the aſſumption. of, is not compared to any ſuch things. The Church (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. epiſt. 48. ad Vincent.
                      Auſtin) which groweth in all natiōs, is preſerued in the lords wheat, and ſhall be ſo preſerued to the end, till it haue taken poſſeſſion of all, yea euen the moſt barbarous nations. The floare (in Auguſt. vbi ſupra. Auſtins iudgement) is not the Church, but the place rather, in which the Church is kept: for that (as he truly ſaith) is the wheat. And in the ſame Epiſtle he ſpeaketh yet more plaine of an other of your parables. That is the Church, (ſaith Vbi ſupra. Auſtin) which ſwimmeth in the Lords net with naughtie fiſhes, from which in heart and behauiour, it alwaies is ſeparated. Could any thing be ſpoken more direct? The floare and the net are, in a generall

ſenſe, the Church; but the true Church indeed is, in the one the wheat, not the chaffe, in the other, the good fiſhes, that ſwimme among the naughtie ones. I may alſo farther except againſt theſe Parables, becauſe they are otherwiſe applied, then they are intended by our Sauiour; who neuer meant, by any one of them to teach, that the Church conſiſteth not of the elect onely. Who (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. ad Vincent. epiſt. 48. Auſtin) can, without great impudencie, go about to prooue anything for his purpoſe, by interpretation of any Allegorie, vnleſſe he haue manifeſt teſtimonies, whereby thoſe matters, that are obſcure in it, be cleared?
                  
                  This is your laſt charge, to as ſmall purpoſe, as either of the former.
                  
                     If there may be an inceſtuous perſon (ſay you) in the Church, then it conſiſteth not onely of thoſe, that be good.
                     But there may be an inceſtuous perſon in the Church.
                     Therefore the Church conſiſteth not onely of thoſe, that be good.
                  
                  It is apparent that by good, you vnderſtand thoſe, that cannot be charged with any groſſe outward ſinne, as Inceſt, or ſuch To the ſyllogiſme. like. In which ſenſe, I ſay your concluſion is nothing to the purpoſe. For we do not affirme, that no man is of the Church, which by any occaſion falleth into ſome grieuous ſinne: ſo ſhould we exclude Peter, 
                        Mat. 26 70. when he denied his maſter; Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. 9. when he committed adulterie and murther; Noe, 
                        Gen. 9. 21. when he was drunke; Abraham, 
                        Gen. 12. 23. & 20. 5. when he lied, and many other: who for all theſe ſinnes, held faſt their faith in the Meſſiah, and continued true members of Ieſus Chriſt, according to Gods election, howſoeuer thoſe ſinnes of theirs deſerued ſeparation from Chriſt, and damnation. The Church may conſiſt of ſome, who for the preſent, are in regard of ſome great ſin, not good, and yet conſiſt of the elect only, as the former examples ſhew.
                  Farther, I denie the conſequence of your Maior. It is not To the propoſition. all one to be in the Church, and of the Church, that is, to be an outward profeſſor, and to be a true beleeuer. And that the Church is the companie of the elect, in the iudgement of the ancient writers, theſe teſtimonies ſhew. 
                        Ambroſ. ad Eph. 3. Ambroſe maketh the

Church, the people, whom God hath vouchſafed to adopt. Whereas the Church (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27. & lib. 6. cap. 3. Auſtin) is ſo deſcribed in the Canticles, that it is called a fenced garden, my ſiſter, ſpouſe, a fountaine ſealed vp, a well of liuing water, a paradiſe with fruite; I dare not vnderſtand this but of the holy and righteous. The holy Church (quoth 
                        Greg. in Cant. & in Iob 28. cap. 9. Gregory) is a garden, becauſe when it begets many to the faith, it ſends forth faire flowers, like a good ground. And it is well called a fenced garden, becauſe it is fortified round about with the trench of charitie, that no reprobate may come into the number of the elect. If the ſpouſe of Chriſt, which is the Church, be a fenced garden (ſaith 
                        Cyprian. ad Mag. epiſt. 76. ſect. 2. Cyprian) being ſhut vp, it cannot lie open to the prophane and ſtrangers. But what ſhould I recite ſeuerall teſtimonies? Looke 
                        Origen. & Bernar. in can. ſerm. 78. 
                     Origen, Bernard, and other writers vpon the Canticles, and you ſhall eaſily ſee, that the ſpouſe of Chriſt is the companie of the elect.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 8.
                  
                     Laſtly, the ancient Fathers did teach, that the Church is viſible. 
                     
                        Hom. 30. in Mat.
                      
                     Origen ſaith, Eccleſia plena eſt fulgore ab oriente vſque ad occidentem: The Church is full of brightneſſe from the East to the Weſt. Eccleſia (ſaith S. Cyprian) Domini luce perſuſa, radios ſuos per orbem ſpargit: The Church being bright with the light 
                     Lib. de Vnitate Eccleſ. 
                     of our Lord, doth ſpread her beames throughout the world. Facilius eſt (ſaith S. Chryſoſtome) ſolem extingui quàm Eccleſiam obſcurari: 
                        Lib. 4. in cap. 6 Iſa.
                      
                     It is more eaſie that the Sunne ſhould be extinguiſhed, then that the Church ſhould be obſcured, that is to ſay, darkened and quite without light. Saint Auguſtine alſo alluding to (or rather expounding) thoſe words of our Sauiour, Non poteſt ciuitas abſcondi ſupra montem poſita, ſaith, Eccleſia ſupra montem conſtituta, 
                        Lib. 3. cōtr. epi. Parm. cap. 4. abſcondi non poteſt: The Church being built vpon a mountaine, cannot be hid. And againe in another place he ſaith, Quid amplius dicturus ſum quàm caecos, qui tam magnum montem non vident, 
                        Troct. 2. in ep. Ioan.
                      qui contra lucernam in candelabro poſitam, oculos claudunt? What ſhall I ſay more, but that they are blind who do not ſee ſo great a mountaine, who ſhut their eyes at the candle ſet vpon the candleſticke?
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches of the Fathers, were vttered by them for the moſt part, concerning the Church, as it flouriſhed in their dayes; and not of the perpetuall eſtate therof, from time

to time. Neither ſpeake they properly of the Church, which is indeed the ſpouſe of our Sauiour the bridegroome: but of the multitude of them, who hold the truth of doctrine againſt all cauils and oppoſitions of hereticks; amongſt whom only the Church of the elect ordinarily was preſerued. Your reaſon then is little worth.
                  
                     The Fathers ſay, the Church is viſible.
                     Therefore it is alwayes viſible to all men.
                  
                  The conſequēce of your Enthymem is naught, as wel becauſe it might be viſible in thoſe times, and not always; as alſo for that it is not all one to ſay it is viſible, and it is viſible to all men at all times. Now to the particulars.
                  Firſt I anſwer to 
                        Origen. in Mat. hom. 30. Origens teſtimonie, that he ſpeakes not of the Churches viſibilitie, but affirmes that the truth (which is the brightneſſe or light he mentions) is in the Churches euery where, East and Weſt. That this is his meaning, it is plaine by the beginning of that homily, and the whole courſe of it, to the very place you alledge. Origen expounds there that place of the Goſpell, As the lightning cometh out of the Eaſt. This expoſition begins thus. We must know (ſaith Origen) that the brightneſſe of the truth doth not appeare in one place of Scripture, and cannot be defended by another, but that it may be maintained out of all parts of Scripture, the Law, the Prophets, the Gospels, and the Apoſtles writings. And this truth ariſing from the Eaſt, that is, the beginnings of Chriſt, ſhineth to the very time of his paſſion, in which was his ſetting or fall. A little after: We may alſo thus vnderſtand it, that Chriſt appeared to be the word, and the truth, and wiſedome, frō the beginning of the creatiō of the world, to the laſt writing of the Apoſtles, that is from Geneſis to the Apoſtles books; after which there are none of like authoritie or beleef. Or thus, that the Law and the Prophets continued till Iohn, in whom the brightneſſe of truth was. The East was the Law: the Weſt, Iohn, the end of the Law. Now onely the Church neither takes away the word and ſenſe of this brightneſſe, nor addes any thing elſe as propheticall. The place you bring, lieth thus: Euery doctrine profeſſing it ſelfe to be truth, when it is not truth, either among the Gentiles, or among the Barbarians, is in ſome ſort Antichrist, going about to ſeduce, as truth, and to ſeuer
                     
                     vs from him that ſaid, I am the truth. Therefore we muſt not giue eare to them which ſay, Behold here is Chriſt; but do not ſhew him in the Church, which is full of brightneſſe from the Eaſt to the Weſt, which is full of the true light, which is the pillar and ground of truth, in which whole Church, the whole comming of the Sonne of man is. Now the comming of the Sonne of man, is before expounded by him to be the word of truth. Doubtleſſe if you had not taken this proofe vpon 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 c. 12. §. Vltim
                              •
                           
                        
                      Bellarmines, or ſome other mans credit, you would neuer haue brought it to proue the viſibilitie of the Church to all men at all times.
                  
                  What ſaith 
                        Cyprian. de vnit. eccle. §. 4. Cyprian in the place alledged, but that the Church is diſperſed ouer the whole world? Doth this proue, that it is at all times viſible to all men? Or hath Cyprian any ſuch purpoſe in that place? Is not his whole drift to ſhew, that there is but one Church, becauſe the truth they profeſſe is but one? The title of his booke, is Of the vnitie of the Church. The place you bring, concludes, that howſoeuer the beames are ſcattered or ſpread here and there, yet the light is but one. The Church, that is true beleeuers, were in this land in the dayes of perſecutiō, and is now in Spaine, Italy; and perhaps in Rome it ſelfe. This proues not a perpetuall viſibilitie.
                  What need we any other anſwer to this teſtimonie of Chryſoſtome, then that which your owne expoſition affoords vs? Chryſoſtoms meaning is, that the Church cannot be quite without light, ſay you. What thē? Muſt it needs be viſible then to al men? The Moone is neuer wholy darkened, no not in the greateſt eclipſe, nor in the change, but is alwayes in the one halfe light: and yet he were mad that would conclude hereupon, that therefore it may be ſeene at all times of all men. Indeed Chryſoſtome ſpeaketh of the continuance of the Church, not of the viſibleneſſe thereof. That may appeare by his ſaying, that the Church hath her roote in heauen rather then in the earth. This argues ſtabilitie, not viſibilitie. And what Church hath rooting in heauen, but onely the Church of the elect? The Church (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. in cap. 6. Eſai. homil. 4. Chryſoſtome in the ſame place) is more honorable then heauen, becauſe heauen is made for it, not it for heauen. Is heauen made for any Church, but that of the elect? Beſides, it was not the
                     
                     viſibility, but the being of the Church, againſt which thoſe tyrants whom Chryſoſtome there mentioneth, ſo mightily laboured; which yet continued in deſpight of them all.
                  Theſe and ſuch like places of Auſtin, ſhew the flouriſhing eſtate of the Churches in thoſe times, and conuince the Donatiſts, againſt whom Auguſtine writ, of wofull blindneſſe, who would ſee no church, but their owne heretical aſſembly in a part of Africa. But they neither were intended, not can with any reaſon be applied to proue that the church is alwayes viſible to all men. 
                        Auguſt. con. epiſt. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 5. The former of the two places, as I ſhewed before, is interpreted by the Fathers, of the Apoſtles: That the Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Math. 5. Ierome) ſhould not hide themſelues for feare, but freely ſhew themſelues, he teacheth them to preach boldly, when he ſaith, A citie ſet vpon an hill, cannot be hid. But let vs take it to be meant of the Church. It muſt needs be a monſtrous hill, that can ſhew a citie ſet vpon it to the whole world. A citie ſtanding on a hill, is the eaſier and the farther to be ſeene; but there is no hill high enough to be ſeene ouer the whole world. I would farther know, whether euery particular Church be not a citie vpon an hill or no. And yet is no ſuch Church to be ſeene of all men.
                  Concerning 
                        Auguſt. in 1. loan tract. 2. the latter place, Auſtin worthily cals them blind, that could not, or rather (as he truly ſaith) would not ſee that great mountaine, vpon which the Church then ſtood, but would ſhut their eyes againſt the light that ſhined vpon them. Yet who is ſo ignorant, that he knowes not, or ſo ſhameleſſe, that he will not cōfeſſe, that there were many aliue at that very time, which had no knowledge, that there was any Church in the world? But there neither were, nor could be any ſuch among the Donatiſts, or other like heretickes, who forſooke the Church to follow their owne fantaſies. 
                        Reuel. 1. 20. & 2. 5. 
                     The candle is the Miniſter or the word, ſhining by his miniſtery; the candleſticke is the particular Church, where that miniſtery is: if any liuing in or neare the place where ſuch a candle burneth bright, will not ſee the light of it, he may well be called wilfully blind. So may not they which are ſo far, that the beames of the light cannot ſhine vnto them.
                  
                     
Now the ſumme of that which hath bene anſwered, concerning the perpetuall continuance and viſibleneſſe of the church, is this: that the church, to which that continuance is promiſed, is the number of the elect, and not any one outward companie of men, ſucceeding one another in a famous and viſible profeſſion of Chriſtian Religion. Yea farther, though we do not vndertake to affirme, that there hath not bin at all times ſome one companie or other of true Chriſtians knowne to them, among whom they liued, to be profeſſors of the Goſpell: yet we doubt not to ſay, that there can be no ſufficient proofe brought out of the Scriptures, that there muſt of neceſſitie be alwayes ſuch a company: as if our Sauior Chriſts promiſes to his church were not performed, vnleſſe the world might at all times perceiue where ſuch a companie were to be found.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XIII. How we ſhould diſcerne and know which is the true viſible Church of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  It may perhaps ſeeme needleſſe that I ſhould proceed any further in the confutation of this treatiſe, becauſe ſtill the maine point, that there is ſuch a Church, is preſuppoſed, and not proued. But howſoeuer it be true, that there is indeed no one viſible church of Chriſt, which may challenge or beare the name of the whole church; yet it will be worth the doing, to finde out the markes or ſignes, by which we may diſcerne which congregation is a true church of Chriſt, and which is not. Let vs therefore proceede in examining this diſcourſe.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Hitherto I haue ſhewed that the rule of faith (which all men ought to ſeeke, that by it they may learne true faith) is the doctrine of the Church of Chriſt: and that this Church doth continue, and is alwayes viſible, that is to ſay, ſuch as may be found out and knowne. Now the greateſt question is (ſith there are diuers companies of them that beleeue in Chriſt; euery one of which, challenge to themſelues the title of the true Church) how euery man
                     
                     may come to know aſſuredly, and in particular, which companie is indeed the true viſible Church of Chriſt, whoſe doctrine we muſt in all points beleeue and follow.
                  
                  
                     To this queſtion I anſwer, that euery companie which hath the name of Chriſtians, or which challenge to themſelues the name of the Church, are not alwayes the true Church. For of heretickes we may well ſay, as S. Auſtin doth: Non quia Eccleſiae Chriſti videntur habere nomen, idcirco pertinent ad eius conſecrationem: They doe not therefore pertaine to the conſecration of the Church of Chriſt, becauſe they ſeeme to carry the name of the Church of Christ. For (as the ſame S. Auſtin ſaith in another 
                     
                        Lib. contr. epiſt. Parm. cap. 7. 
                     place) heretickes are onely whited ouer with the name of Chriſtians; when indeed Si haeretici ſunt (as Tertullian ſayth) Chriſtiani eſſe non poſſunt: If they be heretickes, the cannot be true Christians. 
                     Lib. de praeſcrip. 
                     The reaſon whereof, the ſame Tertullian inſinuateth to be, becauſe they follow not that faith which came from Chriſt (to his Apoſtles and Diſciples, and which was deliuered by them, from hand to hand to our forefathers, and ſo to vs) but they follow that faith which they choſe to themſelues: of which election or choiſe, the name of hereticke and hereſie did ariſe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Hitherto you haue laboured to proue the maior of your maine ſyllogiſme, propounded in your preface, namely that the faith, which the authoritie of the true Catholick Church commends vnto vs, is to be held for the true faith. What ſucceſſe you haue had in this proofe, let them ſay that haue compared your arguments and my anſwers together. Now you are to proceed to the proofe of your maine aſſumption, that they onely are the true Church, which make profeſſion of the Romane faith. Your ſyllogiſme is thus framed.
                  
                     They onely are the true Church, to whom the certaine marks, by which the Church is to be knowne, belong.
                     But they that profeſſe the Romane faith, are they to whom thoſe markes belong.
                     Therefore they onely that profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Church.
                  
                  The propoſition or maior of this Syllogiſme is not expreſt by you, but neceſſarily implied in this thirteenth Chapter:

where you ſay, that the way to diſcerne which is the true Church, is firſt to ſet downe, which be the certain marks whereby all men may eaſily know the Church. The aſſumption or minor you endeuour to proue in the fiue Chapters following by a Syllogiſme thus concluded.
                  
                     They onely who are one, holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church, are they to whom the certaine markes of the true Church belong.
                     But they that profeſſe the Romane religion, are they who are one, holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church.
                     Therefore, they onely that profeſſe the Romane faith, are they to whom the certaine markes of the true Church belong.
                  
                  Your propoſition or maior is in the two next Chapters; your aſſumption or minor in the ſixteenth. In handling the propoſition, firſt you labour to diſproue the markes of a true church, which we aſſigne: and that in Chapt. 14. then you aſſay to propound and confirme other of your owne; as we ſhall ſee hereafter, if God will, when we come to Chap. 15.
                  Whereas you expound what you meane by a viſible Church, viz. ſuch a one as may be found out and knowne: you ſtraighten the queſtion, and auow that which no man denieth. For the queſtion betwixt vs, is not whether the Church may be found out or no, but whether it be ſo viſible and famous a congregation, that it may at all times be knowne of all men. If this be not that you ſhould proue, what will become of your grand reaſon, that therefore Cha. 5. & 12 
                     there muſt alwayes be a knowne Church, the doctrine whereof euery must rest vpon in all matters of faith, becauſe otherwiſe it cannot be vniuerſally true, that God will haue all men to be ſaued?
                  
                  It is indeed a matter worth the enquiring, which companies of them that profeſſe Chriſtian Religion, are the true Churches of Chriſt. For that all are not, it is apparent by your Antichriſtian Synagogue: and that all true Chriſtians are bound (as much as lieth in them) to become members of ſome true church of Chriſt, it is manifeſt, becauſe elſe they cannot ordinarily performe the duties of his true outward worſhip, which

are no where done but in his true churches.
                  If the choiſe of any doctrine not receiued from Chriſt, be ſufficient to make men heretickes, and churches hereticall; what may the world thinke of your ſynagogue, which is not aſhamed openly to profeſſe, that ſhe holdeth many points of doctrine, which haue not proofe out of the written word of God? For whereas to ſhift off the matter, you come in with deliuerie of I know not what, from hand to hand by the Apoſtles and your forefathers: who ſees not that this conceit of yours both condemneth the Scriptures of inſufficiencie, and maketh the reports of men the rule of the true faith, and openeth a wide gate to let in all deuices of mans corruption? What auailes it, to know, that all doctrine is hereſie, which comes not from our Sauiour Chriſt, if we muſt beleeue that all came from him, which your Pope and his Councell tell vs, they haue receiued by tradition? why ſhould we not rather hearken to 
                        Occham in opere 90. dierū
                        
                      your Occham, who truly affirmed that hereſy is an opinion choſen by a man, contrary to the holy Scripture? Surely there is great cauſe to ſuſpect them of hereſie, who refuſe to make triall of their doctrine by Scripture, whatſoeuer they talke of tradition from the Apoſtles by their forefathers.
                  
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     The way therefore to diſcerne which is the true Church, is irſt to ſet downe, which be the certaine markes, by which all men may eaſily know the Church: and then to examine to whom theſe markes doe agree. The which, that I may the better performe in the Chapter following, here I thinke good, firſt briefly to note what belongeth to the nature of a good and ſufficient marke.
                  
                  
                     Note therefore that two things are required in euery ſufficient marke. The firſt is, that it be not common to many, but proper, and onely agreeing to the thing, whereof it is a marke. As for example, it is no good marke whereby to know any particular man, to ſay he hath two hands or two eares, becauſe this is common to many, and therefore no ſufficient note or marke whereby one may be diſtinguiſhed or knowne from all other. But a marke, whereby we may diſcerne one ſpeciall man from all other, muſt be ſome one thing, or moe, which hee hath, and others haue not. As if hee
                     
                     were longer, larger, or fairer then the reſt; or if ſome others were 
                     Taller, bigger Tall. Faire. 
                     as long, and other ſome as faire, yet none were long, and faire both, but onely he. The ſecond thing, required in a good marke, is, that it be more apparent, and eaſie to be knowen, then the thing. For example, If I were to deſcribe and make knowen a certaine man, who were otherwiſe vnknowen. I muſt not thinke it ſufficient to giue the definition of his eſſence, or to aſſigne the ſecret diſpoſition of his heart, liuer, and other inward parts, which are commonly harder to be knowen, then the man himſelfe. But I must declare ſome apparent thing in his face, hands, or ſome outward part of his bodie: or in his voice, apparell, behauiour, or ſuch like; which agreeing onely to that man; and being eaſie to be knowen, may be a meanes to make vs know the man we ſeeke for.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  He that profeſſeth to ſet downe certaine markes, whereby all men may eaſily know the true Church, that is, which Church indeed holdeth the true religion of Ieſus Chriſt: vndertaketh that, which he will neuer be able to performe. For it is a matter not eaſily to be diſcerned by naturall men, no though we ſhould admit thoſe for ſufficient markes of it, which are falſely propounded by you, to that purpoſe.
                  
                     
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. mil. lib. 4. cap. 5. Bellarmine, from whom you tooke this, as (in a manner) all the reſt of your Treatiſe, aſſignes three properties of your markes: thoſe two, that you name, and a third, that they muſt be inſeparable from the true Church. Now ſuch plaine men, as we are, haue conceiued by the firſt and laſt properties, that no marke is to be taken for a note of the true Church, but that, which cannot be common to it, with any other Church, But you hauing learned of 
                        Gregor. de Valent. Analy. fid. lib. 6. cap. 7. Gregorie de Valentia, or diſcerned your ſelfe, that the foure marks you giue, are not ſuch, if we conſider them ſeuerally; tell vs here afore hand, that we muſt take them altogether, or elſe we marre all. So that, whereas afterward you ſeeme to make a ſhew of teaching vs Chap. 15. foure certaine markes, to know the true Church by, when all commeth to all, we haue but one marke made of thoſe foure botched vp together.
                  
                     
But let vs take a view of theſe two things, that you require, in euerie ſufficient marke; the former whereof is, that it be proper to the thing, of which it is a marke.
                  
                  This, you ſay is true, but not ſufficient: For ſome marke may caſually be proper to a thing at this time, which an other time may neither be proper to it, nor belōg to it at all. Witneſſe your long and faire man, who may loſe his legs, and his beautie, or be ouergrowen by ſome other, and ſo can by no meanes be knowen, for the longeſt and faireſt. Perſecution was ſometimes a marke, whereby the true Church might be diſcerned: for it was proper to it; no men but Chriſtians being killed or puniſhed for religion. Yet I thinke no man would giue this for a marke to know the true Church by. Once 
                        Bellar. de notis Eccleſ. lib 4. cap. 18. your Cardinall Bellarmine, is ſo farre from it, that he maketh the outward proſperitie of the Church, one of his fifteene notes, 
                        Lib. 4. cap. 3. whereby he would haue the true Church diſcerned. Therefore euerie ſufficient marke of the Church muſt be ſuch, as is alwaies to be had in the Church, not now preſent, an other time abſent. Generally, to make a marke truly proper to a thing, it is required: firſt that it alwaies agree to the thing: Secondly, that it neuer agree to any other thing whatſoeuer.
                  This ſecond property of a marke, that it muſt be more apparent, and eaſier to be knowen then the thing, I acknowledge to be true: ſo you tie not this alwaies to outward ſenſe, whereof you bring example. For that greater apperancie to ſenſe, is there onely required, where the thing we ſeeke for, is to be iudged by ſenſe: but it is not requiſite, that in matters which we can not know by any outward token, the marke, whereby they are to be knowen, ſhould be outwardly more apparent: it is ſufficient, if by ſearch, and diſcourſe it may more eaſily be diſcerned.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Wherefore, when we will aſſigne ſome good markes, by which, all ſorts of men may, in ſome ſort, diſcerne, which particular companie of men is the true Church, we muſt haue ſpeciall regard to aſſigne thoſe things, which in ſome matters may be apparent to all ſorts of men; ſith all ſorts of men had need to ſeeke out, and according to their capacitie diſcerne which is the true Church: we muſt alſo
                     
                     aſſigne thoſe things, which agree to no other companie, but that which is the true Church; to the intent that when a man ſhall ſee all thoſe things, which be aſſigned as marks, to agree to any companie, he may ſtraightwaies conclude, that companie to be the true Church: as on the contrarie ſide, if he perceiue, either all, or any one of them to be wanting, in any company, he may be ſure, that, that companie is not the true Church.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  In the former part of this chapter, you told vs, that the way to diſcerne, which is the true Church, was to ſet downe, which be the certaine markes, by which all men may eaſily know the Church. Here in the concluſion, you mince the matter, I know not how, that All ſorts of men may in ſome ſort diſcerne, and in ſome matters, may be apparent to all ſorts of men. If it be enough to diſcerne in ſome ſort, that is, to giue a blind geſſe, which is the true Church, what ſhould certaine marks need: or why may not ſome common ſignes ſerue the turne? Neither will it fit your purpoſe, that the notes be ſuch, as that all ſorts of men may by them diſcerne the Church: but they muſt be ſo apparent, by your doctrine, that euerie man of euerie ſort may eaſily, and as it were, with playing, be able to iudge which is the true Church. Your laſt clauſe, that the markes in ſome matters, muſt be apparent to all ſorts of men (that I may freely profeſſe my dulneſſe) paſſeth my vnderſtanding. What is the meaning of theſe words, in ſome matters? If they ſignifie no more, but in ſome ſort: it had bene good, you had ſpoken plaine, and not vexed your Readers with a needleſſe labour of geſſing at your meaning. Eſpecially ſince (for all your faire promiſe of I wote not what eaſineſſe in diſcerning, which is the true Church) all men may ſee, they muſt be driuen to beſtow much time and paines, in examining the markes, you will ſet downe: becauſe they are ſuch as do not ſingly euerie one by it ſelfe, ſhew which is the true Church, but muſt all be ioyned together to breede this knowledge:
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XIIII. That thoſe markes of the Church, which Hereticke aſſigne, be not good markes.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This is a verie generall title, implying, as a man would

geſſe, by the words, that you meant to refute all marks, that euer were ſet downe by any Heretickes. But if we ſhould take your meaning, in that ſenſe, your diſcourſe would not anſwer our expectation. Beſides, if all markes aſſigned by heretickes be naught, yours cannot poſſibly be good, which are brought by the grand hereticks of the world, the vowed vaſſals of the great Antichriſt, the Pope of Rome.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Out of that which in the former chapter, I briefely noted, about the nature of a good marke, we may eaſily gather, that thoſe markes, which ſome heretickes aſſigne, to wit, the true doctrine of faith: and the right vſe of the Sacraments, are no good markes, by which all ſorts of men may come to know, which is the true Church, but are meanes (as Heretickes vſe them) to cast a miſt ouer the whole matter, when as they know, that they can, moſt eaſily, conuert all the Sacraments, and holy words of Scripture, Ad imagines phantaſmatum ſuorum, vnto their owne imaginations and phantaſticall opinions (as out of Saint Auſtin we may gather, that the manner of heretickes is,) eſpecially when the authoritie of the Church, (which ſhould correct thoſe deprauations and falſe expoſitions) is not firſt, by other markes, knowen and admitted.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  You would ſeeme to haue an eſpeciall gift of making things eaſie: by your markes the Church may eaſily be diſcerned: out of the former Chapter we may eaſily gather. But I thinke it wil prooue to be ſo eaſily gathered, that a weake man may eaſily make you loſe your labour in gathering.
                  That place of Auſtin doth ſo fit you Papiſts, as if he had ſpoken it of you by name. For to go no farther, then the matter in hand, who euer wreſted the Scriptures, more to their phantaſies, then you Papiſts, who are not aſhamed nor afraid to apply the moſt gracious and comfortable promiſes of our Sauiour Chriſt to his myſtical bodie the Church, to an heape of prophane misbeleeuers, ſo 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ mil. lib 3. cap. 10. they make outward profeſſion of the Goſpel in obedience to the Pope of Rome? It is enough, by your doctrine, to make a man a true member of the myſticall bodie of the Sonne of God, if he profeſſe, as I before ſaid, though he haue no part of the life of Ieſus Chriſt in him.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     The doctrine of faith, therefore (I ſay) and the right vſe of 
                     
                     Sacraments, be not good markes, whereby men may diſcerne which is the true Church.
                  
                  
                     This I prooue. Firſt, for that by the true doctrine of faith (which they aſſigne for a marke of the Church) either they meane, true doctrine in ſome points onely, or in all. True doctrine in ſome points onely, is no good marke, becauſe the heretickes teach the truth in ſome points. This therefore being not proper to the Church, but agreeing rather to heretickes, can be no good marke of the true Church: becauſe it wanteth the firſt condition of a marke, which is, to be proper, and agreeing onely to the thing, whereof it is a marke. True doctrine alſo in all points, although it be proper (if we ioyne to it the right vſe of Sacraments, with obedience to lawfull Paſtors) and agree onely to the true Church, yet it is no good marke: becauſe it faileth in the ſecond condition, which is requred in a good marke, that is to ſay, it is not apparent or eaſie to be knowen of all thoſe, who ſhould ſeeke out the true Church. As I may eaſily prooue, becauſe to know which companie teacheth the truth in all points, requireth first learning, whereby one may vnderſtand the tearmes, and ſtate of the queſtion, or controuerſie: beſides, iudgement to diſcuſſe and weigh prudently the worth and ſufficiencie of the authorities and reaſons of both parts, that vpon this pondering of reaſons, he may prudently conclude which is the better part. Moreouer one had need to haue a ſupernaturall light of Gods grace and aſſiſtance of his ſpirit, whereby he may diſcerne and ſee thoſe things, which be aboue all naturall rules and reaſons. Ad haec quis idoneus? Who can ſay that himſelfe is ſufficiently furniſhed with theſe helpes? Who can be infallibly ſure, that he hath all theſe, in ſuch ſort, as is requiſite, for obtaining, by his owne induſtrie, true and infallible faith, in all points? Surely, at leaſt, the vnlearned muſt needs confeſſe, that in diuers myſteries, they do not ſo much as vnderſtand the tearmes & ſtate of the queſtion: & much leſſe are they able, to examine ſufficiētly the worth of euery reaſon: neither are all ſuch as can perſwade themſelues, that they are ſingularly inlightened, and immediately taught of Gods ſpirit: neither, if they did thus perſwade themſelues, could they be vnfallibly ſure, that in this their perſwaſion they were not deceiued; ſith it is certaine, that ſome of them, that moſt ſtrongly perſwade themſelues to be thus taught, are in this their perſwaſion
                     
                     deceiued: neither can the vnlearned ſufficiently know the truth, in euerie particular point, by giuing credit to ſome one, or other learned man, or any companie of the learned: vnleſſe that company be firſt knowen, to be of the Church, and conſequently to be guided in their teaching, by the holy Ghoſt, as I prooued before. So that it is moſt hard or rather vnpoſſible for a man, and eſpecially for an vnlearned man, in all points, Liquidam à tot erroribus diſcernere 
                        Li. 3. con. Fauſt. cap. 13. veritatem, to diſcerne the plaine truth from ſo many errours, as S. Auſtin ſaith. It is alſo moſt hard for a man of himſelfe to iudge, which vſe of Sacraments is right, if he be not firſt taught by the Church: ſub this is a principall point of the true doctrine of faith, which is (as I ſaid) verie hard or rather vnpoſſible to be perfectly knowen by a mans owne ſelfe. But to know, firſt, which companie is the true Church: and then, by giuing credit to it, to learne which is the true faith, and which vſe of Sacraments is right, there are not ſo many things required, nor any great difficultie, as ſhall be declared. For the Church is that direct way, which Iſaias ſpeaketh of, when he ſaith: Haec erit vobis directa via, ita vt ſtulti non errent per eam. 
                        Iſa. cap. 35. 
                     This ſhall be to you a direct way, ſo that euen fooles, (to wit ſimple and vnlearned men) may not erre in it.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Theſe are the two onely marks, whereby the true Church may be knowen, or to ſpeake more plainely, whereby we may iudge of any companie of men profeſſing Chriſtian Religion, whether they be a true Church of Chriſt or no. For the better vnderſtanding whereof, we muſt know, that howſoeuer we ioyne the Sacraments with the word, in this matter: yet we do not thinke them to be abſolutely of equall neceſſitie with it, to the being of a true Church. The true preaching of the word is ſo ſimply neceſſarie, that wherſoeuer it is, it maketh the Church, in which it is, a true Church of Chriſt: and wherſoeuer it is not, there is no true viſible Church. We denie not, that in time of perſecution, many true Chriſtians may be without opportunitie of meeting together, for the true worſhip of God in hearing his word, and calling vpon his name, which alwaies accompanieth true preaching, and yet ſtill continue true members of Chriſts myſticall bodie the Church. But we ſay, that theſe men cannot be truly called ſuch a viſible Church of Chriſt

as we now ſeeke for. Yet if theſe men ſhall ordinarily aſſemble themſelues together, to offer vp praier to God, and by mutuall conference to edifie each other in knowledge and obedience: thogh they haue no certaine miniſter appointed for the performance of theſe duties: there can no reaſon be alledgd, why they ſhould not be held for a true Church, though not perfect & complete; or why men ſhould not ioine with them, hauing no means to become members of any complete congregation, properly being a Church. The word then, in our opinion, is ſimply neceſſarie: and of it ſelfe ſufficient, (as Luther. de Concil. & eccl. Luther truly ſaith) where no other ſigne of a Church can be diſcerned, to conuince a mans conſcience, that there is a true Church, where he findeth the word truly preached. Now the adminiſtration of the Sacraments is not ſo neceſſarie, but that there may be a true Church without it, vpon occaſion: as 
                        Ioſ. 5. 5. the Iewes had no circumciſion amongſt them, all the fortie yeares, when they trauelled through the wilderneſſe. The reaſon of this difference is aſſigned to be this: that the word is as it were, the cauſe efficient of the Church, ſo that without it, there can be no Church: but the Sacraments are only ſeals of Gods mercies, and helps for the increaſing of thoſe graces, which are receiued by the miniſterie of the word. Now theſe ſeales and helpes are not requiſite ſimply, to the being of that they ſeale & helpe vs in, but onely to the better being, and increaſe of them. But if I may be bold, with reuerence of other mens iudgement, to ſpeake my poore opinion, I think this reaſon ſheweth the different neceſſitie of the word, and the Sacraments, rather to the making of particular men true Chriſtians, thē to the giuing of this or that companie the true being of a viſible Church. And therefore (vnder correction) I would rather ſay, that the truth of doctrine deliuered in the miniſtery of the word, and praier are abſolutely neceſſary, & the adminiſtration of the Sacraments not ſo altogether: becauſe the former are ſuch parts of Gods ſeruice, as may and muſt alwaies be performed, when the Church is aſſembled, but the Sacraments, neither can alwaies, nor need, at all ſuch meetings, to be adminiſtred. Which we ſpeake not, as if the true vſe of the Sacraments, were not a neceſſarie part of Gods ſeruice, to be done,

vpon all opportunities, with reuerence and willingneſſe; but for that (as before I noted) there cannot be (at all times) ſuch opportunitie. Yea it may fall out, that in ſome true Church of Chriſt, there ſhall be no occaſion to adminiſter the Sacrament of Baptiſme in many yeares. This then is that, which we hold concerning the markes of a true Church: Firſt, that whereſoeuer we ſee the word of God truly taught, and the Sacraments truly adminiſtred, there we may be ſure, there is a true Church of Chriſt: Secondly, that whereſoeuer the former of theſe is wanting, there is no true Church, whatſoeuer ſhew, or marke otherwiſe there be. Thirdly, that whereſoeuer the word of God is truly preached, and accordingly profeſſed, there is a true Church, though the Sacraments vpon occaſion as is aforeſaid, be not there adminiſtred: ſo that they be not neglected, vpon any contempt, or erroneous conceit of their not being neceſſarie.
                  To diſprooue our doctrine, concerning the markes of the, or rather of a Church, you bring this reaſon.
                  
                     If true doctrine be a marke of a true Church, then either true doctrine in ſome pointes, or true doctrine in all.
                     But neither true doctrine in ſome points, nor true doctrine in all, is a marke.
                     Therefore true Doctrine, is not at all a marke of a true Church.
                  
                  I denie you Minor. True doctrine in all points is ſo certaine a To the aſſumption. marke of a true Church, that whereſoeuer we finde that, we may be ſure there is a true Church. But becauſe we enquire after ſuch a marke, as may not onely aſſure vs, which is a true Church, but alſo teach vs to know euerie true Church: I anſwer more particularly, that true doctrine in ſome pointes, viz. ſuch as are fundamentall, is ſo neceſſarie a marke, as that there is no where any true Church, but where there is ſuch true doctrine; and that there is vndoubtedly a true Church, whereſoeuer that truth is taught and held.
                  Your Minor you prooue thus, firſt, that true doctrine in ſome points is no good marke.
                  
                     
                     
                        That which is not proper to the true Church, but agrees rather 
                        Proofe of the Aſſumption. 
                        to heretickes, is no good marke of the true Church.
                     
                     
                        But true doctrine in ſome points onely, is not proper to the true Church, but agreeth rather to heretickes.
                     
                     
                        Therefore true doctrine in ſome points onely, is no good marke of the true Church.
                     
                  
                  Againe I denie your minor, taking it in the beſt ſenſe: for if I To the Aſſumption. ſhould take it in the worſt, your whole ſyllogiſme would be nothing to the purpoſe. My anſwer ſhall (I truſt) make both theſe points plaine to euery man. I ſay then, that true doctrine in all the fundamentall points of religion, is proper to the Church: ſo that no hereticks hold all ſuch points, though ſome haue held many of them. Or if any companie do hold them all, and yet for ſome error in other points of leſſe moment, be counted, and be hereticall, their hereſie is not ſuch as may make them ceaſe to be members of a true Church, Thus much of your aſſumption in the beſt ſenſe.
                  By true doctrine in ſome points onely, you may meane that it is not a propertie belonging to the true Church, to beleeue truly ſome points onely, and not all: and this indeed is rather proper to heretickes, then the true Church, becauſe it is the dutie of all true Churches to beleeue all things that the Lord hath taught in the holy Scriptures; whereas hereticks take vp conceits of their owne, which they mingle with the truth of God, either ignorantly or deceitfully. I haue reaſon to ſuſpect this meaning, becauſe you thruſt in this word onely. In this ſenſe your concluſion fighteth with a ſhadow. For we do not make it a marke of a true Church to beleeue ſome points onely, but ſay it may be, and is a true Church, though it erre in ſome points, ſo it hold the fundamentall points ſoundly and truly.
                  This is the proofe of the ſecond part of your minor, that true doctrine in all points is not a good marke of the true Church: and it is thus concluded.
                  
                     Euery good marke of the true Church is apparent, or eaſie to be knowne of all thoſe who ſhould ſeeke out the true Church.
                     But true doctrine in all points is not apparent or eaſie to be known of all ſuch as ſhould ſeeke out the true Church.
                     
                        
Therefore true doctrine in all points, is no good marke of the true Church.
                  
                  Your maior is falſe. It is not required that euery good marke be 
                     To the propoſition. 
                     apparent or eaſie: if it may be at all found, though with difficulty and labour, that hardneſſe cannot hinder it from being a good marke. Do not your ſelfe acknowledge afterward, that there is ſome difficultie in learning to know which cōpanie is the true church, and which vſe of ſacraments is right? What elſe meane you, when you ſay, there are not ſo many things required, nor any great difficultie? Indeed (as I doubt not but to make it appeare) there is neuer a one of thoſe foure markes you aſſigne, but asketh great labour, and requires many things to the true and perfect knowledge of it. How then ſhould all foure be apparent or eaſie to be knowne? Yea, I will ſay more; ſome of them are ſuch, if not euery one of them, that a man can neuer come to the certaine knowledge of them by any labour whatſoeuer. And therefore if this be a ſufficient exception againſt the doctrine and ſacraments, why they may not be markes, either you muſt deuiſe ſome eaſier and plainer markes then you haue yet propounded, or do propound any where in this treatiſe, or elſe there will be no certaine meanes to know which is a true church of Chriſt, and which is not.
                  The reſt of your long diſcourſe concerning this firſt proofe, To the Aſſumption. is ſpent in prouing that which no man euer denied, viz. in confirming your minor, that true doctrine in all points is not eaſie to be knowne: which we all grant, and ſo paſſe ouer to the next point of the ſacraments.
                  
                     It is moſt hard (ſay you) for a man of himſelfe to iudge, which vſe of ſacraments is right. What meane you by ſaying of himſelfe? If he be not first taught by the Church: what needs this by the Church? It is hard indeed for a man of himſelf, without any teaching, to iudge of any ſuch matter: but it is not hard for any man of reaſonable vnderſtanding, to diſcerne by a little teaching, what is right in this point, what wrong. For he may eaſily learne with ſmall helpe, the inſtitution of both the Sacraments out of the Scriptures, wherein all things are ſet downe which belong neceſſarily to the right adminiſtration of them. As for matters

of circumſtance, which appertaine not to the being of the ſacraments, a man ſhall not need to make any ſo great queſtion, whether they be rightly adminiſtred or no, as long as he ſeeth the ſubſtance kept whole & ſound, according to our Sauiors inſtitution: as if the ſacraments were not truly ſacramēts, and ſuch as may be taken, though ſome matters in the adminiſtration of them, be not ſo well ordered as they might and ought to be. That the ſacraments be in all ſubſtantiall points rightly adminiſtred, it is a matter of neceſſitie, whenſoeuer they be adminiſtred: and that may be iudged of, without giuing credit to whatſoeuer the church will teach in that behalfe: which is your teaching by the Church, and on which you ſtill harpe, though very vntuneably.
                  You fall now from ſimple diſprouing of our marke, by reaſon of the hardneſſe to know what is true doctrine in all points, to procure a diſlike of it, by comparing it with the eaſineſſe of yours: but of this I ſpake ſomewhat before, and muſt ſay more when I come to examine your marks, ſo much commended. In the meane while, I may not forget to ſhew the pooreneſſe of the proofe you alledge for this ſurmiſed eaſineſſe. The matter you vndertake to proue, is, that to know firſt which company is the true Church, and then by giuing credit to it, to learne which is the true faith, and which vſe of ſacraments is right, is a point of no great difficultie. This you would proue by that place of Iſay: This ſhal 
                     c Iſa. 35. 8. 
                     be to you a direct way, ſo that euen fooles ſhall not erre in it. But what a weake proofe is this? Firſt, how ſhal I know that the Prophet ſpeaketh here of the Church? You ſay ſo. Would any man diſpute ſo looſly?
                  
                     If the Church (ſay you) be that direct way I ſay ſpeaketh of, then to know firſt which companie of men is the true Church, and by giuing credit to them, to learne what doctrine, and what vſe of the ſacraments is right, is a point of no great difficultie.
                     But the Church is that way he ſpeaketh of.
                     Therefore to know firſt which company of men is the true church, is a point of no great difficultie. To the propoſition.
                     
                  
                  Firſt I denie the conſequence of your propoſition. For though

the Church were that way the Prophet ſpeaketh of, yet might it ſtill be an hard matter to know where that way lieth. Put caſe I cannot miſſe when I am in the way; will it follow hereupon, that therefore it is a point of no difficultie to find it?
                  Secondly I denie your minor alſo: The Church is not that way. 
                     To the aſſumption. Was it not meere you ſhould haue proued a matter of ſo great importance? Your bare word is a poore proofe; and yet that is all you bring vs. I omit the error of the tranſlation, and the varietie of tranſlations. There is a note Edit. vulgar. apud Vatabl. in the margine of your vulgar edition, as it is printed with Vatablus, that expoundeth the way to be Chriſt. Is not this interpretation of as great credite as your word? Vatablus ſpeaketh much to the ſame purpoſe. The way (ſaith 
                        Vatabl. ad Iſa. 35. he) that leadeth to God by Chriſt, ſhall be ſo certain, that euen they who haue no skill in trauelling, ſhall not ſtray out of it. Your Gloſſ. interl. ibi. Gloſſe, by the way, vnderſtands the faith of Chriſt. And ſo doth 
                        Tertul cont. Marcion. lib. 4 cap. 24. Tertullian, who alſo in the tranſlation differeth much from your vulgar. The meaning is (as theſe interpreters haue truly ſaid) that the doctrine of the Goſpell is a ſure and plaine way to life euerlaſting: in which way the ſimpleſt ſoule that beleeueth in Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall be ſafely conducted by God ſpiritually into heauen: as the Iſraelites (to which ſtory the Prophet ſeemes to allude) were guided by him corporally into the land of Canaan. This is that which the ſame Prophet ſpeaketh of in 
                        Iſa. 30. 21. an other place: Thine eares ſhal heare a word behind thee, ſaying, This is the way, walk ye in it. Whereby the gracious direction of God is ſignified, teaching his children by that ſpirit 
                        Ier. 31. 31. which he giues them, to go forward in the right way that leadeth to euerlaſting life. Who euer expounded theſe places of the Church?
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     Secondly I proue the ſame, becauſe when we ſeeke for the true Church, we ſeeke it principally for this end, that by it, as by a neceſſarie and infallible meanes, we may heare and learne of it the true faith in all points, which otherwiſe in itſelfe is hidden, obſcure and vnknowne to vs: according to that of S. Paul: Animalis homonon 1 Cor. 2. percipit ea quae ſunt Spiritus Dei: The ſenſuall man doth not perceiue thoſe things which are of the Spirit of God. For ſith none by the onely power of naturall wit (which in vnderſtanding vſeth the helpe of outward ſenſes) can obtaine the ſupernaturall knowledge
                     
                     of diuine myſteries, which we beleeue by our faith: neither doth the Spirit of God (who as the principall cauſe, infuſeth this gift of faith into our ſoules) ordinarily inſtruct any man in the knowledge of true faith, immediatly by himſelfe alone, or by an Angell ſent from heauen: we muſt needs if we will haue true faith, ſeeke firſt for that which it pleaſeth Almightie God to vſe, as the ordinarie inſtrument and as a neceſſary meanes by which men may learne true faith; the which is no other but the preaching and teaching of the true church, according to that ſaying of S. Paul: Quomodo credent ei quem non audierint? quomodo audient ſine praedicante? quomodo 
                        Rom. 10. praedicabunt niſi mittantur? How ſhall they beleeue him, whom they haue not heard? how ſhall they heare without a Preacher? how ſhall they preach, vnleſſe they be ſent? Therefore the true Church, which only hath preachers truly ſent of God, muſt first be found out, that by it we may heare and know which is the true faith. Therefore of the two, the true Church is rather a mark, whereby we may know the true preaching, and conſequently the true doctrine of faith, then contrarie, that (as heretickes ſay) the doctrine ſhould be a marke, whereby all men muſt know, which is the true Church.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Belike, as you had good cauſe, you ſuſpected your abilitie, to proue ſimply, that the true preaching of the word in all matters fundamentall, and the right adminiſtration of the ſacraments, are not a good marke of a true Church. And therefore you rather choſe to proue, by way of compariſon, that the true church is rather a marke to know true doctrine, then true doctrine a marke to know the true Church by. For ſo runs your concluſion directly.
                  
                     If the end of ſeeking the true Church (ſay you) be principally, that we may by it, as a neceſſarie and infallible meanes, learne true doctrine in all points, to which otherwiſe we cannot attaine, then the true Church is rather a marke to know true doctrine, then true doctrine a marke to know the true Church by.
                     But the end of ſeeking the true Church, is principally that we may by it, as a neceſſarie and infallible meanes, learne true doctrine in all points, which otherwiſe wee cannot attaine to.
                     
                        
Therefore the true Church is rather a marke to know true doctrine, then true doctrine a marke to know the Church by.
                  
                  Though the concluſion as I ſaid, be not directly to the queſtion, To the Syllogiſme. which is not comparatiue but ſimple, whether true doctrine be a good mark to diſcerne a true Church by, or no: yet I will take it as it is, and anſwer to the parts of it.
                  Your maior in the antecedent may haue a double meaning: Firſt, that we cannot in any point learne true doctrine but by To the propoſition. the Church; and then I denie the conſequence. For true doctrine in the fundamentall points of Religion may be a good marke of the true Church, though we ſeeke the true Church, becauſe there are many points which we cannot learne without it.
                  But howſoeuer you vnderſtand the maior, the minor is euidently To the Aſſumption. falſe. Firſt, becauſe the principall end of ſeeking the true Church, is, that we may truly worſhip God in the aſſembly of his children, to his greater glorie, and our farther aſſurance of his loue to vs; as we may ſee 
                        Pſal. 42. 1. 2. & 47. 5. 6. & 48. 8. 9. & 84. 1. 2. 10. euery where in the booke of the Pſalmes. Secondly, becauſe we are not to learne of the true Church, as a neceſſarie and infallible meanes, but of the miniſters thereof, who are appointed by God to giue vs knowledge of the meanes of ſaluation, by expounding the word of God to vs; not to binde vs to beleefe, by their authoritie.
                  Your minor you offer to proue in this maner.
                  
                     If no man without faith can obtaine the ſupernaturall knowledge of diuine mysteries, and faith be not to be had, but by the teaching of the true Church; then the end of ſeeking the true Church, is principally that we may learne by it, as a neceſſarie and infallible meanes, true doctrine in all points, to which otherwiſe we cannot attaine.
                     But no man without faith can obtaine the ſupernaturall knowledge of diuine myſteries: nor faith be had, but by the teaching of the true Church.
                     Therefore the end of ſeeking the true Church, is principally that we may by it, as a neceſſary and infallible meanes, learne the true faith in all points, to which otherwiſe we cannot attaine.
                  
                  
                     
The conſequence of your maior is naught. It doth not follow, To the propoſition. that we ſeeke the true Church, to learne of it as a neceſſary and infallible meanes; becauſe we cannot know the myſteries of Religion without faith, which commeth by the teaching of the true Church: For there may well be teaching and learning, without any ſuch authoritie in the Church that teacheth.
                  Your minor is very doubtfull, as I will ſhew in anſwering ſeuerally To the Aſſumption. to the parts of it.
                  Firſt then, whereas you ſay, that no man without faith can obtaine the ſupernaturall knowledge of diuine myſteries: if you meane that a man cannot acknowledge the truth of ſuch myſteries without faith, your minor in that part is true: but if your meaning be, that a man cannot vnderſtand what the meanes of ſaluation appointed by God, are, without faith; I take your minor to be falſe. For though thoſe meanes be indeed ſuch, as no diſcourſe of man euer could deuiſe or thinke on, being vtterly ſupernaturall, yet it is poſſible for a meere naturall man to learne what they are out of the Scriptures, and that without faith: becauſe the Scriptures may be vnderſtood by ſuch helpes of the tongues and arts as humane learning doth affoord vs; though to the ſauing knowledge thereof, the eſpeciall grace of God be abſolutely neceſſarie.
                  The other point, that faith cannot be found but by the teaching of the true Church, may alſo haue a double ſenſe. The firſt, that faith cannot be wrought in any mans heart but by the preaching of ſome man authorized to that purpoſe by the true Church: and this as I ſhewed before, is not alwayes true: for faith may be, and hath bene begotten in ſome by Chap. 3. the reading of the Scriptures, where the miniſtery of the word was not to be had; and by the teaching of ordinarie Chriſtians, not ſet apart to preach the Goſpell. The other meaning is this, that faith cannot be attained to, but by our hearkning to the voyce of ſuch a Preacher as we alreadie know to be ſent by the true Church. And this indeed ſpecially fits your purpoſe, but hath no likelihood of truth in it. For they that came to faith by the Apoſtles preaching, did not beleeue them as men autorized for their inſtruction by the true church,

but as being conuinced in their conſciences by the euidence of the truth they deliuered, without any regard or knowledge of their being ſent by the true Church.
                  This weake minor of yours is vnderpropt in each part with a pillar of the holy Scripture: the former thus.
                  
                     No ſenſuall man can obtaine the knowledge of diuine mysteries.
                     Euery man without faith is a ſenſuall man.
                     Therefore no man without faith can obtaine the knowledge of diuine myſteries.
                  
                  If by obtaining the knowledge of diuine myſteries, you meane aſſenting 
                     To the ſyllogiſme. 
                     to the truth of God concerning ſaluation, I grant your whole ſyllogiſme: and in this ſenſe it was needleſſe to proue that part of your minor.
                  In the other ſenſe, that a man cannot attaine to the knowledge of them but by faith, which the words manifeſtly import, I denie To the propoſition. the maior, for the reaſon before alledged: but whatſoeuer your meaning be, the 1. Cor. 2. 14. Anſelmus. ibi.
                      Apoſtle ſaith no more, but that a naturall man, without the grace of God, can neither once imagine any ſuch meanes of ſaluation (and other there is none) nor acknowledge thoſe meanes as true and ſufficient. Of the former, the Apoſtle ſpeakes in the ninth verſe, affirming that the means of ſaluation prepared by God for men, are ſuch as neither eye 
                     
                        verſ. 9. 
                     hath ſeen, nor eare hath heard, nor euer entred into any mans heart. Of the latter is the place alledged by you, where the word ſignifieth 
                        verſ. 14. rather an approuing and 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     receiuing, then a perceiuing: and the ſpirituall man, whom he there oppoſeth to the naturall, is ſaid to diſcerne of ſpirituall things, rather by acknowledging the 
                        verſ. 15. truth of them, then by vnderſtanding the meaning of the word preached concerning them.
                  Your tranſlation (which I touched before) where you terme hominem animalem, a ſenſuall man, is ſenſleſſe. For who knowes not, that by a ſenſuall man, we meane a voluptuous man, giuen vp to his pleaſures and ſenſualitie? But the Apoſtle ſpeakes not of ſuch onely, but euen of the wiſeſt and moſt vertuous that euer were amongſt men, without grace: ſo that in his meaning, as well temperate Xenocrates and learned Ariſtotle (called for his knowledge Naturae genius. 
                     natures darling) vertuous

Socrates and wiſe Solon, as Sardanapalus, Therſites, Nero, and ſuch like, are naturall men: that is, ſuch as haue no grace of God, but that ſhadow of it, which remaineth in all men, by nature; and is helped by education and humane learning. It is true, that 
                        Fernel. Phyſiol. lib. 4. c
                              •
                           . 7. 
                     Animalis & naturalis, is not all one in nature: yet doth Naturall better expreſſe the Apoſtles meaning, then ſenſuall; and generally, Auguſt. de nat. & gra. Sotus de nat. & gra. all writers haue made an oppoſition, in this ſenſe, betwixt Nature and Grace, not betwixt Senſualneſſe and Grace: as you may ſee throughout Auſtins, Proſpers, Ieromes, and your owne Schoolemens writings. Neither will it helpe the matter to ſay (as you doe) that Naturall wit in vnderſtanding vſeth the helpe of outward ſenſes. For ſenſuall ſignifieth not him that vſeth his ſenſes, to the vnderſtanding of this or that, but him that is drowned in Senſualitie. Beſides, naturall wit doth not vſe the helpe of the outward ſenſes, alwaies in vnderſtanding; yea, there are many, and the moſt excellent pointes of Philoſophie, in which, Senſe hath nothing to doe, as in the diſcourſe of Reaſon, and the knowledge of Logicke; with all thoſe hard, and worthie Queſtions of the Soule, and of God himſelfe, as farre as they are to be conceiued of, by the light of nature. If you will ſay, that we learne theſe things, partly by reading and hearing: I aunſwer, both that we finde out many things in Philoſophie, of our ſelues by ſtudie, without anie helpe of Senſe (which rather is an hinderance to the ſoule in the ſearch of ſuch pointes,) and alſo, that the knowledge we haue of diuine myſteries, is firſt brought to vs, and continually increaſed in vs, by the ſame Senſes of ſeeing and hearing: elſe were your Church as good be without thoſe preachers you ſo much brag of.
                  The other part of your Minor, that faith cannot be had, but by the teaching of the true Church, you prooue, or rather endeauour to prooue in this ſort.
                  
                     If no man can beleeue without he heare, nor heare without one preach, and no man can preach except he be ſent, then Faith cannot be had, but by the teaching of the true Church.
                     
                        
But no man can beleeue, without he heare, nor heare without one preach, and no man can preach, without he be ſent.
                     Therefore faith cannot be had, but by the teaching of the true Church.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your Maior, and affirme that faith may be had without the teaching of the true Church, though To the propoſition. no man can beleeue without he heare, &c. For Chap. 3. I haue ſhewed that ſome countries haue bene brought to beleefe without any ſuch teaching by authoritie from the true Church. I alſo referre the Reader to my anſwer to your Minor.
                  That place of the Apoſtle concerneth not the ordinarie miniſterie To the Aſſumption. of the word, but the knowledge of the means of ſaluation: which (as 
                        Rom. 10. 14. the Apoſtle truly ſaith) could neuer haue bene thought on by any man, if it had not pleaſed God, to giue notice thereof to the world, by men appointed and authoriſed to that purpoſe by himſelfe. But of this place and matter I ſpake ſufficiently before, in this, and Chap. 3. in a former chapter.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     Thirdly, true faith is included in the true Church, and as it were encloſed in her belly; as Saint Auſtin ſaith, vpon thoſe words of the Pſalme, Errauerunt ab vtero, loquuti ſunt falſa. In ventre Eccleſiae 
                        In Pſal. 57. 
                     (ſaith he) veritas manet; quiſquis ab hoc ventre ſeparatus fuerit, neceſſe eſt, vt falſa loquatur. Truth remaineth in the belly of the Church, whoſoeuer is ſeparated (to wit by difference in doctrine) from this belly of the Church, muſt needs ſpeake falſe. Therefore like as, if a man had Gold in his belly, we muſt firſt finde the man, before we can come to ſee the gold it ſelfe: ſo we must firſt by other markes, finde out the true Church, which hath the gold of true faith, hidden in her belly, before we come to ſee the gold of true faith it ſelfe. Sith eſpecially, we cannot ſee it, vnleſſe ſhe open her mouth, and deliuer it vnto vs, and that we cannot (being ſpiritually blinde) certainely know it to be true, and not counterfeit, but by giuing credit to her teſtimonie of it. According as the ſame Saint Auſtin ſaith, Euangelio non crederem, niſi me Eccleſiae authoritas commouerer. I ſhould not beleeue the Goſpell 
                     
                        Lib. con. Ep. Fund. cap. 5. 
                     it ſelfe, vnleſſe I were mooued by the authoritie of the Church. For if we had not the teſtimonie of the Church, how ſhould
                     
                     we haue bene infallibly ſure, that there were any Goſpell at all? Or how ſhould we haue knowen, that thoſe bookes, which 
                           •
                        eare title of the Goſpell, according to Saint Mathew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn, are true Canonicall Scripture; rather then thoſe bookes, which are written in the name of Nicodemus, and Saint Thomas, bearing the ſame title or inſcription of Goſpell?
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Your third reaſon is thus to be framed.
                  
                     That which is ſhut vp in the belly of the Church, ſo that we cannot ſee it, vnleſſe ſhe open her mouth, and deliuer it to vs, nor certainely know it to be true, but by giuing credit to her teſtimonie of it, is not a good marke to know the true Church by.
                     But true doctrine is ſo ſhut vp in the belly of the Church, that we cannot ſee it, vnleſſe ſhe open her mouth, and deliuer it to vs, nor certainly know it to be true, but by giuing credit to her teſtimonie of it.
                     Therefore true doctrine is no good marke to know the true Church by.
                  
                  Your Minor is falſe, in both parts of it. Firſt, it is vntrue, To the Aſſumption. Part. 1. that true doctrine is ſo ſhut vp in the belly of the Church: yea many a true Church may hold ſome errors, and many an hereticall Church ſome truth; onely the fundamentall points are neceſſarie to the being of a true Church. Secondly though true doctrine be in the belly of the Church, as indeed there is no true Church, in which it is not: yet is it not ſo ſhut vp in it, as you imagine. For it is firſt and principally in the Scriptures, where it may be found without any ſuch authoritie of the Church, as you dreame of: yea I haue ſhewed, that the Apoſtles themſelues did not beget faith in the hearts of them, to whom they preached, by any authoritie of the Church, but by euidence of the truth it ſelfe, which they taught. Concerning your proofe from 
                        Auguſt. in Pſalm. 57. Auſtins authoritie; I firſt anſwer, that he expoundeth not that place according to the literal meaning of the Prophet, who ſpeaketh not of any belly of the Church, but ſaith that thoſe lewd men, of whom he ſpeaketh, haue alwaies bene giuen to naughtineſſe, from their mothers wombe. Theſe wicked ones 
                     Vatablus ibi, (ſaith Vatablus) haue gone aſtray euer ſince, they came forth of the womb, they
                     
                     they haue erred, euer ſince they were borne. Yea Auſtin himſelfe, as your Auguſt. in Gloſſ. interlin. Gloſſe ſaith, ſometimes expoundeth it otherwiſe then here: God (ſaith Auſtin (foreknew ſinners, euen from the wombe: as he ſaid to Rebecca. So doth 
                        Hieron. ad Pſal. 57. &
                      Ierome alſo vnderſtand it; ſo Theodoret. ibi. Theodoret. But let vs take it, as Saint Auſtin doth here myſtically expound it: what will you prooue by it? That truth is ſo ſhut vp in the belly of the Church, that we cannot ſee it, vnleſſe ſhe deliuer it by her mouth? There is no ſuch word in him, no ſuch thing to be gathered out of him. His concluſion is, that therefore they, which differ from the true Church in doctrine, are in error: which is certainly true, concerning fundamentall points, and verie probable, in all other points whatſoeuer.
                  The other part of your Minor is, that true doctrine is ſo ſhut vp 
                     2. Part.
                      
                     within the Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giuing credit to her teſtimonie of it. For the diſproouing whereof, it ſhall be ſufficient, to call to minde that, which I haue often anſwered, concerning thoſe who beleeued by the Apoſtles miniſterie, without any conſideration or thought of their being ſent by the true Church: but onely being conuinced by the manifeſt truth of that which they deliuered, concerning forgiueneſſe of ſinne by our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Your proofe out of Auſtin is inſufficient, as it may appeare in this ſort.
                  
                     If Auſtin ſay, that he ſhould not beleeue the Goſpell, vnleſſe he were mooued by the authoritie of the Church, then true doctrine is ſo ſhut vp within the Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giuing credit to her teſtimonie of it.
                     But Auſtin ſaith ſo.
                     Therefore true doctrine is ſo ſhut vp in the Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giuing credit to her testimonie of it.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of your Maior. Firſt, becauſe (as To the propoſition. 
                     
                        Auguſt. cont. Creſcon. lib. 2. cap. 31. Auſtin himſelfe ſaith of Cyprian) we are not bound by the authoritie of Auſtins iudgement, as if his writings were Canonicall. We do Cyprian no wrong (ſaith Auſtin) when we diſtinguiſh his
                     
                     writings whatſoeuer they be, from the Canonicall authoritie of the diuine Scriptures. And againe, I take not Cyprians writings for Canonicall, but conſider of them according to the Canonicall: and allow of that, with his commendation, which agreeth to Scripture, but, by his leaue, refuſe that which diſagreeth from Scripture. This minde carried 
                     
                        Auguſt. ad Fortun. epiſt. 111. 
                     Auſtin to other mens writings, this minde he deſired other men ſhould carrie to his. Secondly, I denie the ſame conſequence, becauſe Auſtin might be mooued, by the authoritie of the Church, to acknowledge the Goſpell for true, and yet, without the ſame authoritie, learne out of the Goſpell ſo acknowledged, which is true doctrine, which falſe.
                  Concerning Auſtins teſtimonie, firſt, it is manifeſt, that he To the Aſſumption. deliuereth not a rule, for all men to follow, as if by ſhould not beleeue he meant, that a man ought not to beleeue the Goſpell; nor ſheweth an impoſſibilitie of beleeuing it, vnleſſe a man be moued, by the authoritie of the Church: but at the moſt, declareth, that the authoritie of the Church, preuailed with him ſo farre, as to make him acknowledge the Goſpell for true, which elſe he had either not knowne, or doubted of. Secondly, it is obſerued according to the reſt of his writings, that the Latine word he vſeth, in the African dialect, ſignifieth Had not beleeued: ſo that the ſenſe is, I had not beleeued the Goſpell, as the truth of God, if the authoritie of the Church, had not moued me thereunto. The firſt motiue was the authoritie, that is, the learning, conſent, holineſſe of ſo many worthie men, as from time to time had held, and did hold the Goſpell, to be the truth of God. Vpon this ground Auſtin gaue himſelfe to the ſtudie of the Scriptures, and by the euidence of truth deliuered in it, diſcerned that it was the word of God, according to the report and reputation commonly held of it. This ſenſe agreeth with Auſtins purpoſe, who to refute the Manichees, that tooke their maſter Manes for the Apoſtle of Chriſt, thus reaſoneth againſt them. I beleeue not (ſaith Auſtin) that he is Chriſts Apoſtle, and then demaundeth of the Manichee what courſe he would take to prooue it to him. Perhaps (ſaith he) you will read the Goſpell to me, and aſſay to prooue Manichaeus perſon out of it: But what
                     
                     if you ſhould light vpon one, that doth not yet beleeue the Goſpell? Then follow the words alledged by you, I truly had not beleeued the Goſpell, if the authoritie of the Church had not moued me. This is yet more cleare, by that which Auſtin writeth afterward. Firſt (ſaith he) we beleeue, that which yet we cannot diſcerne, that being made ſtronger in faith, we may attaine to the vnderſtanding of that we do beleeue, not men now, but God himſelfe, confirming & enlightening our minde within. But howſoeuer we vnderſtand it, Auſtin ſpeaketh not of true doctrine ſhut vp in the Church, ſo that it cannot be knowne to be true, but by giuing credit to the Churches teſtimonie, which is the point in queſtion: but onely of acknowledging the Goſpell, to be the word of God. Now the ſame Church, or partie, which aſſureth vs, that the Goſpell is true, may notwithſtanding erre in the meaning of ſome points in it; and a man may diſcerne theſe errours, by the light, which ſhineth in the Scriptures, thus acknowledged.
                  Firſt it is here confeſſed by your ſelfe, that Auſtins ſpeach is not of all fundamentall points of true doctrine, but onely, (as I ſaid) of knowing the Scripture to be the word of God: for ſo onely you reaſon out of it, and thereby ſhew plainly to all, that will ſee, that it cannot prooue the matter, for which you brought it. Secondly you proceed farther to prooue the point by an other reaſon, but faultie like the former.
                  
                     
                        If (ſay you) without the teſtimonie of the Church, we could not haue bene infallibly ſure, that there is any Goſpell at all, nor haue knowne that the Goſpels of Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn, are true Canonicall Scripture, rather then thoſe of Nicodemus and Saint Thomas; then we cannot know true doctrine to be true, but by giuing credit to the Churches teſtimonie of it.
                     
                     
                        But we could not haue knowne thoſe things without the teſtimonie of the Church.
                     
                     
                        Therefore we cannot know true doctrine to be true, but by giuing credit to the Churches teſtimonie of it.
                     
                  
                  A man that is ſo full of his compound ſyllogiſmes, as you To the propoſition. are, might learne to make better conſequences in his Maior,

then you commonly bring vs. Let vs grant you, that we could not know that there is any Goſpell, or which is the Goſpell, without the teſtimonie of the Church. All that will follow thereupon, is this, that we cannot know theſe two points of doctrine to be true, without giuing credit to the teſtimonie of the Church. Yea if I were diſpoſed to trouble you, I would yet farther denie your ſaid conſequence, becauſe though we cannot know theſe matters, without the Churches teſtimonie: yet we might know them without reſting vpon the Churches authoritie. For the teſtimonie of the Church may be had by the miniſterie thereof, without any ſuch abſolute authoritie of enioyning beleefe, or giuing credit to that ſhe affirmeth, as an vndoubted truth.
                  This Minor, as the former in this chapter, conſiſteth of two To the aſſumption. Part. 1. parts, and is falſe in both of them, as I will ſhew particularly. Firſt you ſay, that without the teſtimonie of the Church, we could not haue bene infallibly ſure, that there is any Goſpell. Your meaning is, that we could not haue knowne this certainely, but by giuing credit to the report of the Church, as a certaine truth. Firſt, for the doctrine of the Goſpell to ſaluation, it hath bene had, and may be had without any teſtimonie of the Church at all: taking the teſtimonie of the Church as you do, for the preaching of men publickly authoriſed to this dutie, by a companie of men ſo qualified, as you before deſcribe your Church. I ſhall need no better proofe, then to put you in minde againe of thoſe nations, many and great, who attained to faith and ſaluation, by the teaching of the Apoſtles ſeuerally, without any ſuch argument of the Churches abſolute authority. Secondly taking the Goſpell, for the 4. bookes of the Euangeliſts, I anſwer, that there may be true faith & true Churches, without the knowledge of thoſe bookes, yea without the verie being of them: as it is manifeſt by the former example, many thouſands being conuerted, and many Churches ſetled, without the knowledge, and before the publiſhing, or penning of them. But to come to the verie point, I anſwer further, that it is a groſſe abſurditie to make men beleeue, that there can be no certaine knowledge had, that there is any Goſpell, but by giuing credit to the

Church: whereas no man can know, that there is any ſuch authoritie in the Church, or any Church at all, but by the authoritie of the Scripture. It is more then ridiculous for me to beleeue, that there is a companie of men infallibly taught of God, which is the truth, with authority to enioyne obedience to all men, in whatſoeuer they will teach, if I haue no better proofe of it, then their owne word. For ſince God hath indued man with reaſon, it is both ſimpleneſſe and ſinne for him, to beleeue that, which is vtterly againſt the light of reaſon, if he haue no warrant from God ſo to do. But warrant he can haue none, to beleeue ſuch a conceit of any company, but from the ſcriptures; as it is euident by your own Chap. 5. courſe, who make a place of ſcripture the ground of your whole diſputation. Therefore whereas you teach men firſt to know the Church, and then by the Church, the Scriptures; we ſay this courſe is vtterly vnwarrantable, hauing no foundation, either in reaſon or reuelation. Yea contrariwiſe we truly affirme, that the Scripture muſt firſt be knowne, at the leaſt in that point, of the authoritie of the Church; and then the Church by the Scripture. And this is Auſtins iudgement directly. Let vs not heare (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 3. he) this I ſay, this you ſay, but let vs heare, this ſaith the Lord. There are the Lords bookes, to the authoritie of which both of vs conſent, both of vs giue credit, both of vs yeeld obedience: there let vs ſeek the Church, there let vs diſcuſſe our question. And afterward, I will not haue the Church to be ſhewed by mens doctrines, but by the Oracles of God. And againe, Chap. 16. 
                     Let vs ſeeke the Church in the Canonicall Scriptures. The like ſpeeches are euerie where in that booke. Whether we be ſchiſmaticks, or you (ſaith the ſame 
                        Auguſt. cont. lib. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 85. Auſtin) let neither you, nor me, but Chriſt be asked, that he may ſhew vs his Church. But where ſhall we know, what our Sauiour ſaith concerning his Church, and how he would haue it knowne, but in the Scriptures? Yet I denie not that the miniſterie of men is neceſſarie to giue notice, that there are certaine bookes, in which it hath pleaſed God, to reueale the meanes of ſaluation to mankinde; though I acknowledge not any authority in the Church, whereby men ſhould be bound to beleeue this their report, when as yet they are ignorant, that there is any ſuch Church.

You will ſay then, what ſhall we doe? or how ſhall we know that there is any Goſpell? If you will giue me leaue, I will ſhew you what courſe is to be takē. When you vnderſtand that there hath bin, and is ſtill an opinion, that there are certaine bookes written by Gods authoritie and appointment, to teach men the way to ſaluation, do as any reaſonable man would do, in a matter of ſuch importance. Get the bookes, reade and ſtudie them, with a true deſire to ſee whether they be ſuch as they are reported to be, or no. And becauſe thou knoweſt by nature that there is a God, and that he onely is all-ſufficient to diſcouer the truth of his owne purpoſe, touching the eſtate of his creature, call vpon him, though in ignorance and weakneſſe, that it would pleaſe him to direct thee in this enquiry after the means of thy ſaluation or happineſſe. This done, thou ſhalt be ſure to find, by the euidence of truth manifeſted in thoſe bookes, that they are ſent from God, and not deuiſed by man. If thou liue in ſuch a place as affoordeth the interpretation of theſe bookes by the miniſtery of men, vſe that ſingular bleſſing of God with reuerence and care to vnderſtand, and thou ſhalt by the mercifull teaching of God, acknowledge theſe books to be the word of God, ordained for the ſaluation of thy ſelfe and other. This (will ſome man ſay) may perhaps breed a perſwaſion, that theſe bookes are from God, but how ſhall we come to be infallibly ſure of it? How elſe, but by the worke of the ſpirit of God in thy heart? What (ſay you) muſt we runne to reuelations? 1. Cor. 2. 10. 
                     Who knowes the ſecrets of God, but the ſpirit of God? The truth it ſelfe diſcerned by that light which the ſpirit kindleth in our hearts, worketh aſſurance of beleefe; to which the teſtimonie of the ſpirit is added for our further confirmation. Neither is this any other reuelation, then you Papiſts require in this caſe. For according to your doctrine, no man can be perſwaded infallibly of the truth of the Scripture, either for the text, or the interpretation, but by the eſpeciall teaching of the ſpirit: otherwiſe he hath not faith, but opinion of theſe matters. See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 3. Onely herein ſtands the difference betwixt vs, that you ſay, the argument whereby the ſpirit perſwades vs to acknowledge the Scripture, is the authoritie of the Church: we affirme it is the euidence of truth,
                     
                     which he makes vs to diſcerne, by our vnderſtanding enlightened, and to approue by our will thereto inclined, through his mightie and gracious worke vpon our ſoules.
                  
                  The ſecond part of your minor, is, that we could not haue 
                     Part. 2. 
                     knowne the Gospels of the foure Euangeliſts to be canonicall Scripture, rather then thoſe of Nicodemus and Thomas, if we had not the teſtimonie of the Church. Of the falſneſſe of which opinion, I ſhall need to ſay little, becauſe it is refuted in my anſwer to the former part. For this knowledge is not bred in vs by reſting vpon the Churches authoritie, but by yeelding to the euidence of the truth, diſcouered to our hearts by the teaching of the holy Ghoſt. Concerning the authoritie of the Church in this point, it were a preſumptuous and vnreaſonable thing for any man (without very good proof, or great likelihood of reaſon) to deny or doubt of that which hath bin auouched ſo many yeares by the whole Chriſtian world. But to make queſtion of the bookes of Scripture, whether they be the word of God or no, and to denie that there is any meanes to know them for ſuch, but the authoritie of the Church, is the next way to open a gap to Atheiſme, & to lay open Religion to the ſcorne of the world. Can I not know the Scripture to be of God, but by the authoritie of the Church? How ſhal I then know it at all, ſince it is not reaſonable to beleeue there is any Church that hath ſuch authoritie, but by the warrant of the Scripture? They do all they can, to turne reaſonable creatures into beaſts, who teach vs, that we muſt beleeue the Church cannot erre, becauſe the Scripture ſaith ſo: and yet denie that we can know there is any Scripture but by beleeuing it, becauſe the Church ſaith ſo. This is to dance in a circle, as if a man were coniured, that he could not get out of it. How ſhall I know there is a Church? by the Scripture. How ſhall I know there are any Scriptures? by the Church. Would your proud Clergie thus make fooles of Chriſtian men, if they did not deſpiſe them, as voyd of all reaſon? I wonder how your Pope, Cardinals, Biſhops, and the reſt of your Cleargie, can for beare laughing when they looke one vpon another, and remember how they coſen, and (if I may vſe the word in a matter of ſuch importance) gull the world with ſuch palpable

fooleries. But 
                        Reuel. 17. 2 your ſtrumpet of Babylon hath made the Kings of the earth, and all nations drunke with the cup of her fornications, exalting her ſelfe aboue all that is called God, and making her ſelfe 
                        Gloſs. ad extra. Ioan. 22. de verb. ſignif. cap. quum inter.
                      the God of her ſlauiſh vaſſals. But the Lord is iuſt, who (according to 2. Theſſ 2. a 1 the Apoſtles prophefie) hath ſent the world ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lies, that all they might be damned which beleeued not the truth, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe. And certainly if there were not a great meaſure of 12. blindneſſe and ſottiſhneſſe in the hearts of men, that Gods purpoſe might take effect, it were vnpoſſible that reaſonable men ſhould ſo be lead by the noſe to errour and deſtruction.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     Fourthly, if the true doctrine of faith, in all particular points, muſt be foreknowne as a marke, whereby to know the true Church, then (contrarie to that which hath bin proued) the authoritie of the Church ſhould not be a neceſſarie meanes whereby men muſt come to the knowledge of the true faith. For if before we come to know which is the true Church, we muſt by an other meanes, haue knowne which is the true faith; what need then is there, for getting true faith already had, to ſeeke or bring in the authoritie of the ſame Church?
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This fourth reaſon and the next, labour to proue that part of your firſt aſſumptiō in this Chapter, which we deny not, that the true doctrine of faith in euery particular point, is not a good marke of the Church. It would therefore be but loſt labour to ſpend much time in the examining of them; yet ſomewhat I muſt ſay, and firſt to the former.
                  
                     If the true doctrine of faith in all particular points, muſt be foreknowne, as a marke to know the true Church by: then is not the autoritie of the true Church a neceſſary meanes to know the true doctrine of faith by.
                     But the authoritie of the true Church is a neceſſary meanes to know the true faith by.
                     Therefore the true doctrine of faith muſt not be foreknowne in all particular points, as a marke to know the true Church by.
                  
                  Your concluſion is no more then we grant; the conſequence To the Syllogiſme.
                     
of your maior, about which you take ſome paines, needs not your helpe for the proofe of it. Your minor is falſe. That which you brought before to prooue it, before was anſwered.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Fiftly, if before we giue abſolute and vndoubted credit to the true Church, we muſt examine and iudge whether euery particular point of doctrine which it holdeth, be the truth, with authoritie to accept that onely which we like, or which ſeemeth in our conceit right and conformable to Scripture, and to reiect whatſoeuer we miſlike, or which in our priuate iudgement ſeemeth not ſo right and conformable: then we make our ſelues examiners and iudges ouer the church; and conſequently we preferre our liking or diſliking, our iudgement and cenſure of the interpretation and ſenſe of Scripture, before the iudgement and cenſure of the Church of God. But it is abſurd both in reaſon and religion, to preferre the iudgement of any priuate man (be he neuer ſo wittie and learned, or neuer ſo ſtrongly perſwaded in his owne minde, that he is taught by the Spirit) before the iudgement and definitiue ſentence of the Church of God; the which is a companie of men, many of which, both are, and alwayes haue bene, vertuous, wiſe and learned, and (which is chiefe) is ſuch a companie, as according to the abſolute and infallible promiſes of our Sauiour, hath vndoubtedly the holy ſpirit among them, guiding them and teaching them all truth, and not permitting them to erre, as before hath bin proued.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  There is the ſame fault in this fift argument which was in the former, that it is brought to proue a propoſition, which we denie not.
                  
                     If before we giue abſolute credit to the Church, we must iudge whether euery particular point it holdeth be true or no, then we may make our ſelues iudges ouer the true Church.
                     But we may not make our ſelues iudges ouer the true Church.
                     Therefore we muſt not iudge whether euery particular point the Church holdeth, be true or no, before we giue abſolute credit to the Church.
                  
                  This concluſion ſuppoſeth that which can neuer be proued, To the ſyllogiſme. that we are, firſt or laſt, to giue abſolute credit to the Church: whereof in this Chapter there is no queſtion. The point

you vndertake to diſproue, is, that the true doctrine of faith, in euery particular point, is a good marke of a true Church. This therfore you ſhould haue concluded, though indeed it make nothing againſt our opinion, who require not for a marke of the true Church, truth of doctrine in euery point, but in all points fundamentall.
                  
                  Your propoſition is deceitfully propounded, as if we granted Of the ſyllogiſme. a companie to be the true Church, and yet would take vpon vs to receiue and reiect what we liſt: whereas we hold that we cannot acknowledge any true Church, but we muſt withall yeeld, that it maintaineth all ſubſtantiall points of Religion, from which we may not vary. Secondly, for a man to make himſelfe iudge ouer the Church, is to take authoritie vpon him to cenſure, reproue and condemne the Church: wheras all that we deſire, is, that it may be free for vs to diſcerne that the doctrine held by this or that Church, is agreeable to the Scriptures, before we acknowledge it to be a true Church.
                  It is meere abſurd and vnreaſonable, to prefer any priuate To the Aſſumption. mans iudgement before the definitiue ſentence of the church of God. But it is agreeable both to reaſon and Religion, that euery priuate man, whoſe ſaluation lieth vpon his true or falſe beleeuing, ſhould conſider whether that which he is enioyned by men to beleeue, be warrantable by the word of God or no. 
                        Mat. 15. 14. The Scribes and Phariſes were the leaders of the people in the matters of Religion, yet were they blinde guides: and the blind people, by depending vpon their iudgement, were caried headlong into the ſame pit of deſtruction with them. Were not the men of Beroea commended 
                        Act. 17. 11. by the holy Ghoſt, for ſearching the Scriptures, that they might ſee whether the doctrine deliuered by Paul were agreeable thereto or no? And yet ſhall it be a fault in vs to enquire of the ſame Scripture, concerning the doctrine of your Apoſtaticall ſynagogue? I ſay farther, it is againſt reaſon and Religion, to prefer any one mans iudgement before the definitiue ſentence of many wiſe, vertuous and learned men; ſuch as the Church hath vſually ſome amongſt the members thereof. But it is moſt reaſonable and religious, to prefer the truth of God manifeſted by one ſimple man,

before the contrary determination of all that euer haue bin, or ſhal be of the Church, though neuer ſo wiſe, vertuous and learned. This is that which we teach concerning this matter: Firſt, that no man is bound to take any thing for a matter of faith, but that which is proued to him by the Scriptures, the rule of faith. Secondly, that no man is to condemne any thing held by the Church, vnleſſe he haue euident proofe on his ſide out of the Scriptures. Thirdly, that euery man, in matters not determinable by Scripture (none of which are neceſſarie to ſaluation) ſhould yeeld to the iudgement of the Church, whereof he is a member; and euery Church to the iudgement of the Chriſtian Churches other where, vnleſſe there be ſome good reaſon to the contrary. It is very poſſible for wiſe, vertuous and learned men to erre (for your priuiledge of not erring hath bin found to be counterfait) who oftentimes follow the opinion of ſome one man, whoſe learning and pietie they cannot chuſe but admire. 
                        Sotus de nat. & grat. lib. 3. cap. 4. Domingo à Soto affoords vs an example of this matter, where hauing alledged a ſentence out of Auſtin, he addeth theſe words: By reaſon of this ſaying of Auſtin (quoth Soto) all the Fathers afterward, and the whole multitude of Diuines haue by good right deliuered it as a truth, that the glorious Ʋirgin neuer committed any actuall ſinne; though Chryſostome, auncienter then he, were of another opinion. Let it be then vnlawfull, as it is, for a priuate man to prefer his owne opinion before the iudgement of a whole Church; and in this ſenſe I graunt your minor: yet is it not vnlawfull for him to examine what any or all Churches teach, or to diſſent from it, if he haue the Scripture for his warrant.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  
                     But you may perhaps ſay, that in Scripture we are willed, not to 
                     1. Iohn. 4. 
                     beleeue euery priuate ſpirit, but to trie ſpirits, whether they be of God or no: and that therefore we muſt examine and trie the spirit of the Church, by looking into euery particular point of doctrine which it teacheth.
                  
                  
                     I anſwer: that in that place of Scripture, it is not meant, that it belongeth to euery particular man to trie all ſpirits; but in generall the Scripture giueth the Church warning, not to accept euery one that boaſteth himſelfe to haue the Spirit, and willeth that they
                     
                     ſhould trie thoſe ſpirits: not that euery ſimple or priuate man ſhould take vpon him to trie them, but that thoſe of the Church, to whom the office of trying ſpirits doth appertaine, to wit, the Doctors and Paſtors, which Almightie God hath put in his Church of purpoſe, Vt non circumferamur omni vento doctrinae, that we may not 
                     
                        Epheſ. 4. 
                     be caried away with euery wind of doctrine: and Vt non ſimus paruuli fluctuantes, that we may not be little ones, wauering with euerie blaſt of thoſe that boaſt themſelues to be ſingularly taught by the ſpirit. So that this trying of ſpirits, is onely meant of thoſe ſpirits, of which men may well doubt, whether they be of God or no: and then alſo this triall belongeth to the Paſtors of the true church. But when it is certaine that the ſpirit is of God, we neither neede, nor ought doubtfully to examine, or preſumptuouſly to iudge of it, but ſubmitting obediently the iudgement of our owne ſenſe and reaſon, we must beleeue the teaching of it in euery point. Now it is moſt certaine, that the ſpirit of the true viſible Church, is of God, as out of holy Scripture hath bene moſt euidently prooued. And therefore our onely care ſhould be to ſeeke out thoſe markes, by which all men may know, which particular companie of men is the true Church of Chriſt: whoſe doctrine, we neither need, nor lawfully may examine and trie in doubtfull manner, but muſt obediently and vndoubtfully in all points beleeue, as the onely aſſured and infallible truth.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  For the better ſtrengthening of your minor, you aſſay to make, and anſwer an argument, which our Diuines vſe to alledge againſt it: and this it is.
                  
                     They that are willed in Scripture not to beleeue euery ſpirit, but to trie the ſpirits, whether they be of God or no, may iudge whether euery particular point the Church holdeth, be true or no.
                     But euery Chriſtian is willed in Scripture not to beleeue euerie ſpirit, but to trie the ſpirits, whether they be of God or no.
                     Therefore euery Chriſtian may iudge whether euery particular point the Church holdeth, be true or no.
                  
                  The Aſſumption of this Syllogiſme, we proue by 1. Ioh. 4. 1. that place of Iohn, Dearly beloued, beleeue not euery ſpirit, but trie the ſpirits
                     
                     whether they are of God. To this our proofe, you anſwer two wayes: Firſt concerning the ſpirits to be tried; then concerning them that are to make triall. Of the former, your anſwer is, that this trying of ſpirits is onely meant of thoſe ſpirits, of which men may well doubt whether they be of God or no. Firſt, this anſwer cannot be warranted by the text, which is generall: Trie the ſpirits, that is, all ſpirits that come to preach vnto you, if we apply it to the teachers, rather then to the doctrine they deliuer. And ſurely if the Apoſtle had meant as you expound him, he would not haue ſaid, Trie the ſpirits, but trie ſome of them. Beleeue not euery ſpirit, but trie thoſe of which you may well doubt: but he ſaith generally the ſpirits. Secondly, what may we imagine to be a cauſe of doubting? If want of lawfull ſending, which is the great point you alwayes vrge; either we muſt know the ſpirits we may doubt of, to be vnlawfully ſent, and then (by your doctrine) we muſt vtterly reiect them without any farther triall: or elſe the triall we are to make, if we doubt, is whether they be lawfully ſent or no: for till that appeare, we may not heare them. But our Apoſtle appointeth vs to make triall by their doctrine. Thirdly, the reaſon and end of this exhortation, is, that we might take heede of falſe Prophets and falſe Apoſtles, which were crept into the Church. Many falſe Prophets were ſtirred vp by the diuell, faining that they had Apoſtolicall doctrine to deliuer. Therefore (ſaith 
                        Didym. Alex. ad 1. Ioan. 4. Didymus) the gift of diſcerning ſpirits is neceſſary. Now theſe falſe apoſtles were not ſuch as came without any calling; for the diuell muſt needs haue knowne, if he had bene then acquainted with your doctrine, that it was not poſſible for him to preuaile by men not authoriſed by the Church; but as the Apoſtle teacheth vs, they were ſuch, as had gone frō amongſt the true Chriſtiās, not by ſchiſme, in refuſing communion with them, ſo much as by hereſie, in departing from the truth of doctrine, in maine points of religion. Fourthly, falſe teachers do ſo nearely reſemble true, and 
                        Mat. 7. 15. come (many times) with ſuch ſhew of holineſſe, that a man cannot tell whom he ſhould truſt or ſuſpect, but as he findes his doctrine to be ſutable, or contrarie to the word of God. Therefore Ferus a writer of your owne, and one of no

meane account, vnderſtandeth by ſpirit, doctrine. The Apoſtle warnes vs (ſaith 
                        Ferus ad 1. Ioan 4. 1. Ferus) that we beleeue not euery ſpirit, that is, euery doctrine and perſwaſion. To which purpoſe he alledgeth alſo that of Saint Paul, 1. Theſs 5. 21 
                     Trie all things, hold faſt that which is good: alledged by 
                        Thomas ad 1. Ioan. 4. Thomas, in the ſame matter. To make this your anſwer the more likely, you tell vs, that when it is certaine that the ſpirit is of God, we neither need, nor ought doubtfully to examine, or preſumptuouſly to iudge of it: as if we thought any ſuch doubtfull or preſumptuous courſe lawfull. Yet in this caſe there is a difference to be obſerued: If we know the preacher to be ſent of God, in ſuch ſort, as the Apoſtles were, that he cannot erre, then euery leaſt doubt of that which he deliuereth, is preſumption and ſinne. But otherwiſe, though it appeare to vs, that he be authoriſed by God, we may ſafely take liberty to examine whatſoeuer he teacheth, without any preſumption to iudge, or needleſſe doubting of that he deliuereth. In a word, if we heare ſuch a man, it is our dutie not to ſuſpect his doctrine, but where we haue ſome good apparence of Scripture for our ſuſpicion. In which caſe we are to ſearch the word of God, and to open our doubts to him, that we may be ſatisfied. If the matter be ſuch, as we cannot clearely prooue to be falſe by Scripture, we are with all reuerence and humilitie, to ſuſpect our owne iudgement, rather then his, whom God hath appointed and authoriſed to be our teacher: ſo farre muſt we be from preſumption.
                  Your ſecond exception is againſt them, that are to trie the ſpirits, who are not (ſay you) euerie ſimple or priuate man, but the Paſtors of the Church, to whom the office of trying ſpirits doth appertaine; as being put by God in his Church of purpoſe, that we may not be carried away with euerie winde of doctrine. That this exhortation belongeth to all Chriſtians, it may appeare by theſe reaſons. Firſt, we haue the like generall admonitions in other places of Scripture to all Chriſtians, not onely to Paſtors and Doctors. 
                        Mat. 7. 15. 
                     Beware of falſe Prophets (ſaith our Sauiour to all men) which come to you in ſheeps cloathing. Trie all things (ſaith 1. Theſſ. 5. 21 the Apoſtle) and hold faſt that which is good: which latter place, as before I noted, is brought by Vhi ſupra. Thomas of Aquin

and Ferus, to expound this text of Saint Iohn. Secondly, the whole Epiſtle is written to all in generall, without any particular inſtruction, or exhortation to this or that kinde of Chriſtians, as teachers, learners, maſters, ſeruants, or ſuch like. Thirdly, it is 1. Pet. 2. 18. & 3. 1. 7 Epheſ. 5. 22. 25 Col. 3. 18. 19. the courſe of the Apoſtles, where they deſcend from generals to particulars, to giue ſome ſpeciall notice of that change by naming ſeuerally the eſtates, to which they ſpeake, and not continuing onely the common titles of beloued or brethren, as the Apoſtle in this place doth. Fourthly, himſelfe profeſſeth, that his Epiſtle is written in generall to all men, yea euen to young men and babes in Chriſt. Neither doth he, in this exhortation, reſtraine his words to them, that are teachers. Fiftly, if it be not lawfull for priuate men to trie the ſpirits, then are they to receiue whatſoeuer is taught by any particular Doctor or Paſtor; and ſo be bound to beleeue meere contradictions, if it fall out, as ſometimes it doth, that one man preach contrarie to that, which an other hath taught. Sixtly, the Lord hath imparted the ſcriptures, and enioyned the ſearch of them, as well to priuate men, as to Paſtors and Doctors. Seuenthly, and laſt, blinde people ſhall periſh euerlaſtingly, with their blinde guides: and therefore it cannot be, but that God hath giuen 
                        Holkot. in 2. q. 4. ad r. arg. princip.
                      them libertie to trie the ſpirits, that they that will not, may haue no excuſe for their erring, but be iuſtly damned.
                  The place you bring out of the epiſtle to the 
                        Epheſ. 4. 14. Epheſians, doth not prooue that Paſtors & Doctors only are to examine ſpirits, though this belong in ſpeciall ſort to them, 
                        Act. 20. 28. whom the holy Ghoſt hath made ouerſeers of the flocke of Chriſt. Gods end, in appointing them, is, that we ſhould not be carried away with euery blaſt of doctrine: but we muſt needs be ſo carried, if we receiue without choiſe, whatſoeuer is deliuered. They are helpers of our faith, not Lords ouer it. Their dutie it is, to teach vs, how to diſcerne of true doctrine, and to perſwade vs to embrace it, not to enforce vs to giue credit to all they ſay. Thus haue I anſwered all thoſe arguments, that you thought good to propound: all which notwithſtanding, our concluſion ſtandeth ſound and firme, that true doctrine in points fundamentall, is a certaine, and neceſſarie marke of a true Church of Chriſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XV. That theſe foure, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apoſtolica, that is to ſay, One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, are good markes, by which men may know, which is the true Church.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The ſecond maine part of your whole treatiſe is this, that they which profeſſe the Romane faith, are the true Church. Your proofe is, that To them onely, the certaine markes, whereby the Church is to be knowne, belong. Which that you might make cleare vnto vs, you reaſon in this ſort.
                  
                     They onely, who are One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church, are they to whom the markes, by which the true Church may be knowne, belong.
                     But they onely that profeſſe the Romane Religion, are they who are One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church.
                     Therefore they onely, that profeſſe the Romane Religion, are they to whom the markes, by which the true Church is to be knowne, belong.
                  
                  The Maior of this ſyllogiſme you ſeeke to prooue, in this Chapter by ſhewing, that theſe properties are good markes to know the true Church by. Now properties, if we ſhall ſpeake properly according to Logicke, are Accidents or Adiuncts agreeing to euery particular of that kinde, wherof they are properties, and that alwaies: neuer at any time, to any thing of any other kind. Therefore the properties of a true Church, muſt be ſuch, as agree to euerie true Church at all times, & at no time to any other Church or thing, but to a true Church only. Theſe the Logicians call Propria adiuncta, or propria quarto modo. Whether theſe foure alledged by you be ſuch or no, taking thē according to your ſenſe, we ſhal ſee in examining your proofe. That in ſome ſenſe they are certaine markes of a true Church, we make no queſtion.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Sith our Sauiour Chriſt hath thought good to plant a viſible Church vpon earth, which he would haue to continue, vntill the worlds end, for this ſpeciall intent and purpoſe, that all men in all ages, by meanes of it, may learne the doctrine of the true faith: the
                     
                     true worſhip of God: the right vſe of the Sacraments: the wholſome lawes of good life: and generally all good things that appertaine to the glorie of God, and the ſaluation of our ſoules; we haue not any reaſon to doubt, but that the ſame our Sauiour (for the exceeding loue, which, of his part, without exception or reſpect of perſons, he beareth to all mankind) hath ordained ſome markes or notes, by which all ſorts, and conſequently euen ſimple men may ſufficiently diſcerne which companie (among many which challenge to themſelues the title of the true Church) is indeed the true Church. For ſith, he would haue euerie one to heare, and learne things neceſſarie to ſaluation, onely of the true Church: we muſt needs thinke his wiſedome and goodneſſe to haue marked this his Church with ſuch manifeſt ſignes and properties, that all men may eaſily know it, and diſcerne it from others, whom he knew would take vpon them (though falſely) the title and profeſſion of the true Church.
                  
                  
                     This ſeemeth to haue bene expreſly foretold by the prophet Iſaias, when he ſaith: Scietur in gentibus ſemē eorum, & germen eorum in medio populorū. Omnes qui viderint eos, cognoſcentillos, 
                        Iſay. cap. 61. quia iſti ſunt ſemen, cui benedixit Dominus. Their ſeed ſhall be knowne in the nations, and their of spring in the midſt of the people; all that ſhall ſee thē ſhall know them, becauſe theſe are that ſeed, which our Lord hath bleſſed. Which is as much, as if he ſhould ſay, that the Church ſhall haue ſuch manifeſt markes, that it ſhall be eaſie for euerie one to know them to be the true Church.
                  
                  
                     Some of theſe markes are ſet downe by Saint Auſtin, who calleth them bands or chaines, which do hold a faithfull man in the Catholicke 
                     
                        lib. con. Ep. Fund. cap. 4. 
                     Church; although for the ſlowneſſe of his wit, or for ſome other cauſe, he doth not euidently ſee the truth of the doctrine in it ſelfe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Ere you come to prooue that which you haue propounded, you fall into an vnneceſſary diſcourſe, about the marks of the Church: wherein firſt you prooue, as you can, that our Sauiour hath left certaine markes, whereby all men in all ages may know the true Church. Secondly you ſet downe ſome names of theſe markes, giuen them according to the effects they worke in men.
                  The proofe of your former point lieth thus.
                  
                     
                     
                        If our Sauior haue planted a viſible Church vpon earth, to the end that all mē in all ages, might learne of it only all good things appertaining to the glory of God, & their own ſaluatiō, thē he hath ordained marks, by which euery mā may know the true Church.
                     
                     
                        But our Sauiour hath to that end, planted a viſible Church.
                     
                     
                        Therfore he hath giuē marks, by which euery mā may know &c.
                     
                  
                  Though there be nothing in this proofe, which hath not bene anſwered already yet I mull be faine to ſay ſomething to it. I To the Minor. denie the Minor, hauing ſhewed in anſwer to Chap. 5. the fift chapter, that it neuer was Gods purpoſe to haue euery particular man partaker of ſaluatiō by Ieſus Chriſt. Now it is needleſſe to adde that our Sauiour being 
                        Mat. 3. 17. Ioan. 5. 30. & 6. 38. ſent by God, with perfect knowledge of his purpoſe, would not intend any thing contrarie to the will of his Father, or otherwiſe then he was directed by his commiſſion. 
                        Ioan. 17. 9. 
                     I pray not for the world, but for them, that thou haſt giuen me out of the world. 
                     
                        Rom. 11. 5. 
                     All this preſent time there is a remnant, according to the election of grace. Therefore viſible Churches (for to dreame of any one vniuerſall viſible Church is againſt reaſon, not only againſt Scripture) were ordained properly (as the miniſtery of the word, & 
                        Heb. 2. 14. the ſeruice of Angels) for their ſakes that are to be ſaued, according to the election of God. Secondly, and as it were accidentally, for the hardening of them, that will not beleeue, to leaue them without excuſe. To make your matter the more likely, you tell vs of our Sauiours loue to mankind, which in your diuinity is without exception, or reſpect of perſons. How then can it ſute with the purpoſe of God his Father, 
                        Rom. 9. 11. l Tit. 2. 4. who hath choſen ſome to glory, & refuſed other, meerly of his owne iuſt will, without reſpect of difference in the parties ſo choſen & refuſed? As for I that loue of mankind, wherupon ſome men conclude, that either all, or the greateſt part of men are loued by God to eternal life, it is not to be vnderſtood by compariſon of men to men, but partly of men to the Angels that fell; in which reſpect the Apoſtle amplifies the mercy of God to vs, 
                        Heb. 2. 16. 
                     He tooke not the Angels, but he tooke the ſeed of Abraham: partly of men, to all other creatures; none of which, beſides man, is vouchſafed the honour to be ioyned in vnity of perſon with the Sonne of God, and ſo to be made heire of euerlaſting glory.
                  
                     
It is needleſſe to repeat what I anſwered before to this place of Iſay, onely I will ſay thus much of your expoſition, that though all, that ſee the Church, may know it: yet it doth not follow, that therefore all men may ſee it: which you make the end of planting a viſible Church, that euerie man may learne how to be ſaued. We denie not, that the markes of the Church, are ſuch as that any man, who hath the meanes, and will vſe them with conſcience and diligence, may come (by the grace of God) to the acknowledging of it, and by the miniſterie of it, to ſaluation. Such is the truth of doctrine, wherein euerie man may be inſtructed, who will ſubmit his reaſon to the euidence of truth conteined in the holy Scriptures, and not wilfully reſiſt, or careleſly neglect the worke of the ſpirit in the miniſterie of the word.
                  
                     The bands and chaines, 
                     
                        Auguſt. cont. epiſt. Fundam. cap. 4. Auſtin ſpeaketh of, are not ſaid to draw a man out of the world vnto the Church, but to hold him in it, that is in already. And ſurely he were vnreaſonably abſurd, that being borne in the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, or by any other occaſion, brought to ioyne himſelfe vnto this or that Church, would not cōtinue his beleefe vpon thoſe groūds, that Auſtin there mentions, as long as there could be no ſufficiēt reaſon brought to the contrarie, yea though he could not diſcerne the truth of many points, which he held as he had bene taught. But Auſtin in the ſame place profeſſeth, that the markes, he names, and all other whatſoeuer, whereby he is held in the Catholicke Church, are nothing worth in compariſon of truth manifeſtly prooued out of the Scripture. But of this matter I ſhall haue occaſion to ſpeake againe hereafter, where you propound ſome of Auſtins words more at large.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     Of theſe markes, diuers authors haue written at large. I (for breuitie ſake) haue choſen out onely theſe foure: Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apoſtolica: One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke: becauſe I hope theſe will be ſufficient, and becauſe I finde theſe eſpecially, ſet forth in Scriptures: commended by Councels: and generally admitted, of all ſorts, both Catholickes and Proteſtants, as now I am to declare.
                  
                  
                     Firſt, for the generall admittance of theſe properties of the true
                     
                     Church, I need no other proofe, but that both Catholicks and Proteſtants allow of the Nicene, and Conſtantinopolitane Creed, wherein we profeſſe to beleeue the true Church, the which Church, is there deſcribed with thoſe onely foure properties which before I named, as though by thoſe onely, euery man might ſufficiently know that Church, which in euerie point, they are bound to beleeue. Now if beſides this proofe, out of the generally receiued Counſels, ſome preciſe man would haue me prooue theſe properties to agree to the true Church, out of the Scripture it ſelfe, this alſo I may eaſily doe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  So many and diuers are the markes of the Church, propounded by 
                        Bellar. de not. Eccleſ. li. 4. cap. 3. your Popiſh writers, that you had good cauſe, to giue ſome reaſon, why you cull theſe foure out of all the reſt. Firſt you alledge breuitie: wherof if you had beene ſo deſirous, you would not ſo often haue repeated the ſame matters. You adde the ſufficiencie of theſe, their being mentioned in the Scripture, commended by Councels, and generally admitted by all ſorts, both Catholickes and Proteſtants. All which, taking them in your ſenſe, are generally falſe, as ſhall appeare in the particular handling of them. But indeed the true cauſe is, though you will not be knowne of it, that Bellarmine out of whom you haue patched vp your whole diſcourſe, though he bring fifteene: yet confeſſeth that they may all after a ſort, be reduced to theſe foure.
                  There are two faults in this proofe, whereby you labour to perſwade vs, that theſe properties are generally admitted, both by Proteſtants and Papiſts. Firſt, though both admit them, yet in diuers ſenſes; we according to the true meaning of thoſe Councels; you according to thoſe phantaſies you haue deuiſed, for the eſtabliſhing of your Apoſtaticall Synagogue. Secondly, we admit them not all as markes of the, or a viſible Church, but as hidden properties of the Catholicke Church, the myſticall bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, which are not to be diſcerned by the eye of the bodie, but by the light of faith, as all other articles in the ſame Creed are. What though there be no more properties, but thoſe foure there ſet downe? will it follow thence, that therefore they are named, as though by thoſe onely;
                     
                     euerie man might ſufficiently know the Church? Is that the vſe of thoſe points which are deliuered concerning the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt? Or rather, are they not ſet before vs, as principall matters to be beleeued, of them? So are alſo theſe properties of the Church.
                  If any man be ſo ſimple, as to take your former proofe for good, whereas it faileth in the chiefe point you would, prooue by it, as I haue ſhewed; he is fitter to be pittied then inſtructed. But, is it a note of preciſeneſſe, to deſire proofe, for matters of faith out of the ſcripture? Doubtleſſe it was then no leſſe preciſeneſſe, to appoint the ſcripture for a rule of our faith; and as great, for our Sauiour Chriſt and the Apoſtles to confirme their doctrine out of the ſcripture. For this courſe of theirs makes vs the bolder to require the like of you, whoſe authoritie we more doubt of: whereas if they had ſtood vpon their priuiledge, and neuer troubled themſelues with proouing that they deliuered, or leauing their doctrine in writing, we ſhould eaſily haue perſwaded our ſelues to reſt vpon mens authoritie, and not to looke for any proofe by ſcripture. But giue me leaue a little to conſider of this courſe of yours. The queſtion is, whether the true Church be with you or with vs. You tell vs we ſhall know that, by ſeeing whether you or we haue the markes of the true Church: we accept of this triall. How ſhall we informe our ſelues what theſe markes are? Tuſh (ſay you) for that matter you muſt be ruled by the Councels. Why? but the Councels, as you would make vs beleeue, were wholly for you, and conſiſted of Popiſh Biſhops: what reaſon haue we then to ſtand to their iudgment, in a controuerſie betwixt you & vs? You will anſwer that we ſay, they were not Popiſh. We ſay ſo indeed, and haue prooued it in diuers points, as occaſion hath bene offered. But we adde further, that theſe Councels might erre, you denie it. How will you perſwade vs the contrarie? When all is done, we muſt come to triall by the Scriptures, or elſe take your word for it. And is it for all this, preciſeneſſe to require proofe out of the Scriptures, of thoſe marks you would prooue your Church by? I haue ſhewed before, that there is no means to know certainly there is any Church of Chriſt, or any Chriſt, but by the Scriptures.

Are not the Scriptures then the fitteſt meanes to teach vs by what marks this Church may be knowne? The Councels tell vs, what they are. Who told them? the holy Ghoſt. Let it be ſo. But how did he tell them? by ſome reuelation, vtterly beſide the Scriptures, or by truth in the Scriptures? If the former; we aske how we may be ſo perſwaded? The church tels you ſo. Yet again the church? How knows the church that they had ſuch reuelatiō? What help now, but about again to the ſcriptures? Thinke not much then, if in this queſtiō cōcerning the marks of the church, we deſire to be taught by the Scriptures what thoſe markes are; eſpecially ſince (as you profeſſe) you may do it ſo eaſily: but I am afraid you will do it with more eaſe then truth.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     The true Church is ſignified to be one, by thoſe words of the Canticles, Vna eſt columba mea; if we will beleeue the expoſition 
                     The firſt mark Vna prooued out of Scripture. Cant 6. Cypr. l. de vnit. Eccliſiae. Auguſt. l. 6. in Ioan. Iob. c. 10. Rom. 12. 1. Cor. 10. Ioh. 17. 
                     of Saint Cyprian and S. Auſtin. Alſo we may gather the ſame out of thoſe words of our Sauiour, in which he calleth his Church vnum ouile, one ſheepfold. Alſo by thoſe places of S. Paul, where he termeth the Church vnum corpus, one bodie. Moreouer, Chriſt our Sauiour praying for his Church, did ſpecially intreate, and without doubt obtained, vt omnes vnum ſint, that all the members thereof ſhould be one thing, to wit, that at the least they ſhould all profeſſe one and the ſame faith, all partake of one and the ſame baptiſme, and other ſacraments, all liue vnder one and the ſame Lord, in due ſubordination and ſubiection to that vniforme and orderly gouernment of lawful paſtors, ordained and appointed in the Church by him. The true Church of Chriſt therefore is one.
                  
                     Contrary, the conuenticles of hereticks are deſtitute of this marke of vnitie, according as Tertullian affirmeth, ſaying, Denique penitus inſpectae haereſes omnes, in multis deprehenduntur cum auctoribus Lib. de Praeſcr. ſuis diſſentientes: Finally all hereſies, if they be wel looked into, are found to differ in many things from their firſt founders. And the reaſon of this diſagreement among heretickes, the ſame Tertullian aſſigneth very well in the ſame place, ſaying, Variant inter ſe Ibidem. haeretici, dum vnuſquiſque pro ſuo arbitrio modulatur quod accepit, quemadmodum ea pro arbitrio compoſuit ille qui tradidit. Heretickes do differ (in points of doctrine) among themſelues, while as euery one taketh vpon him to faſhion the faith which he receiued,
                     
                     according to his owne liking or fancie: like as he that first deliuered it vnto them, did inuent it according to his owne will and pleaſure.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  We are now come to the very point, for proofe of your maior, that they onely who are one, holy, Catholick, Apoſtolick Church, are they to whom the markes, by which the true Church is to be knowne, belong.
                  
                  To make this proofe good, you diſpute in this manner.
                  
                     
                        If One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, be good marks to know the true Church by, then they onely who are One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church, are they to whom the markes by which the true Church may be knowne, belong.
                     
                     
                        But thoſe foure properties, One, Holy, Catholick, Apoſtolick, are good markes by which the true Church may be knowne.
                     
                     
                        Therefore they onely who are One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke Church, are they to whom the markes, by which the true Church may be knowne, belong.
                     
                  
                  The conſequence of your maior is but weake. For theſe To the propoſition. foure properties may be good markes to know the true church by: that whereſouer we ſee them, we may be ſure there is a true church: and yet there may alſo be ſome true church, where they are not. I diſpute not, whether the true Church may be without theſe; but denie, that becauſe theſe, where they are, are good markes, therefore there is no true Church where theſe are wanting. This propoſition, though your proofe be lame without it, you wholy omit, and ſo propound vs a reaſon which we need not yeeld to, though you were able to proue the minor neuer ſo ſufficiently.
                  Your minor, as before I anſwered, is true, if we rightly vnderſtand To the Aſſumption. the meaning of thoſe ſeuerall properties. But the proofe you bring is ſcarce warrantable.
                  
                     All properties of the Church, belonging onely thereto, and apparent This ſyllogiſme is gathered out of the concluſiō of this Chapt. ſect. 7. to be ſeene where they are, are good markes to know the Church by.
                     But theſe foure properties are ſuch.
                     Therefore theſe foure are good markes to know the Church by.
                  
                  There is a third thing omitted by you, neceſſarily required To the propoſition.
                     
to make any propertie a good marke, viz. that it be ſuch as alwayes agrees to the Church. For otherwiſe it can ſerue, as I anſwered to your former propoſition, but only for the halfe dutie of a marke, becauſe at ſome times I may ſee the Church, and not know it for all this marke. If I find theſe properties, I may aſſure my ſelfe that I haue found the true Church, becauſe theſe neuer are but in the true Church; yet if the true Church may at any time be without theſe, as it may, for ought contained in your maior, then miſſing my marke, I ſhal be vnable to diſcerne of the true Church.
                  This minor, for the firſt part of it, is true, in ſuch ſenſe as I To the aſſumption. granted the former: theſe properties rightly vnderſtood, belong onely to the true Church. If the latter part alſo be true, that they are apparent to be ſeene, doubtleſſe truth of doctrine, which maketh the Church one, muſt needs be a certaine marke of the true Church, though you denie it that prerogatiue. Let vs now ſee how you proue the parts of your minor, with this prouiſo, that though you do proue them, yet you are little the nearer, becauſe diuers former propoſitions, vpon which this depends, remaine ſtill vnproued by you.
                  
                     It is a propertie belonging only to the true Church to profeſſe one Proofe of the Aſſumption. Part. 1. and the ſame faith, &c.
                     But to be one, is to profeſſe one and the ſame faith, &c.
                     Therefore to be one, is a propertie belonging onely to the true Church.
                  
                  I denie your maior: profeſſing one and the ſame faith, is not To the propoſition. proper onely to the Church; but common to it, with ſome falſe Churches which haue for a long time continued in one and the ſame hereſie, as the Mahometans aboue a thouſand yeares, the Arians aboue 1200. Secondly, if this marke be proper to the Church onely, then as long as heretickes continue in one and the ſame hereſie, I may conclude that they are a true Church. But to make your propoſition true, you muſt ſay inſtead of one and the ſame faith, one and the ſame true faith, which is the marke we ſet vp, to know the true Church by: and the reaſon why the Church is ſaid to be one. There are (ſaith 
                        Theodoret. ad Pſal. 47. Theodoret) infinite and innumerable Churches in the Iſles and in the Continent: but generally
                     
                     all of them are made one by their agreement in true doctrine. The Church is ſaid to be one (ſaith 
                        Ferus ad Ioa. 10. 16. Ferus) becauſe of the vnitie of faith, hope and charitie.
                  
                  Your minor alſo is falſe, vnleſſe you adde true, to profeſſe one and the ſame true faith: as the place wherō you ground your large To the Aſſumption. expoſition, might haue taught you. For our Sauiour did not pray that his Church might profeſſe one and the ſame faith at aduenture, as if he had not cared what it profeſſed, ſo it alwayes profeſſed the ſame faith; but that it might alwayes profeſſe the true faith, which he deliuered to his Apoſtles, and taught by his ſpirit.
                  But indeed 
                        Iohn. 17. 20. that prayer of our Sauiour was not made for any companie of outward profeſſors, but onely for thoſe, and particularly for euery one of them that attaine to true faith in him. As for the prophane and reprobate, what is it leſſe then blaſphemie, to ſay that our Sauiour prayed that they might be one with him and his Father, as they are one? eſpecially ſince in the ſame chapter hee denieth that he prayeth for the world; 
                     
                        verſ. 9. verſ. 20. and namely reſtraineth his prayer to them who by the miniſtery of the word beleeue in him, that is, reſt wholy and onely vpon him, not onely make profeſſion of beleeuing the Goſpell, which is enough without any inward grace, to make any man a member of your true Church. Thus haue I ſpoken of this marke, as you ſhould haue propounded your argumēt, according to the courſe of your diſputation. Now that I may leaue nothing of any moment vnanſwered, I will ſpeake to it as it is ſet downe by your ſelfe. The matter you aſſay to proue, is, that the Church is ſignified to be one, or is one. To proue this, you alledge foure ſeuerall places of Scripture. The firſt is this, 
                        Cantic. 6. 8. 
                     My Doue is one. Where by Doue, you vnderſtand the Church: by being one, profeſſing one faith, &c. To this I anſwer, firſt, that it is no good courſe of diſputing, to proue a matter in controuerſie by a place that is figuratiue and allegoricall: becauſe ſuch texts (as 
                        Thom. in Boet. q. 2. Thomas ſaith) affoord no certaine arguments: yea (as 
                        Auguſt. epiſt. 48 ad Vincen.
                      Auſtin ſaith) it is impudencie for a man to expound any allegory to his purpoſe, vnleſſe he haue manifeſt teſtimonies for the clearing of that which is doubtfull. Secondly, this interpretation of yours, is directly contrarie

to Cardinall 
                        Bellar. de eccleſ. milit. lib. 3 cap. 7. Bellarmine, and by him refuted, who makes this Doue to be the ſoule of a Chriſtian in the ſtate of perfectiō, and deliuers it as a certaine ground, that thoſe things in the Canticles which are ſpoken of the Spouſe, are not neceſſary to be vnderstood of the Church, but may alſo be expounded 
                     Pſellus apud Theod. in Cant. 
                     of the Ʋirgin Marie, or of euery perfect ſoule. Thirdly, if we take it to be ſpoken of the Church, as it is generally, and (as I am perſwaded) truly expounded; yet doth it not ſignifie any outward companie, but the true Church of Chriſt, the companie of the elect, called to the knowledge and profeſſion of the Goſpell: euery one of which is in his place and meaſure, that perfect ſoule whom the ſpouſe of Chriſt ſo commendeth. Know (ſaith 
                        Origen. in Cant. hom. 1. Origen) that the Bridegroome is Chriſt, the Bride the Church, without ſpot or wrinkle; of which it is written, that 
                     
                        Ephoſ. 5. 27. 
                     he might make it glorious, &c. And Hieron. prooem. in Cantic. Ierome, who tranſlated that commentary of Origen, ſaith, that the church ſpoken of in the Canticles, cleaueth and is ioyned to Chriſt aboue the heauens, as being made one ſpirit with him. So doth 
                        Epiph. haer. 33 Epiphanius vnderſtand the place, affirming that the Church is perfect, becauſe ſhe hath receiued from God grace and knowledge of our Sauiour Chriſt by the holy Ghoſt. 
                     
                        Bernard. in Cant. ſer. 98. Bernard, no enemy to your Church, ſaith in plaine termes, that the ſpouſe is the Church of the elect: which is ſaid to be one: becauſe all together are the ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, one chaſt virgin. 
                        Ioan. 10. 16. The ſheepfold our Sauiour ſpeaketh of, is the ſame ſpouſe, in reſpect of the ſpirituall feeding, which the ſheepe haue in this life from him: or to ſpeake more directly, it ſeemes to be that ſtate of grace, into which the ſhepheard Chriſt leadeth his ſheepe, that they may be folded vp, and ſafe frō all ſpirituall dangers, which might deſtroy them. Once, that he meanes not an outward profeſſion, common to ſheepe with goates, it may appeare by the whole courſe of the Chapter before, wherein all the ſheep of that fold, are not only ſaid to be Chriſts ſheepe, but alſo to heare his voyce, yea ſo to heare it, that they will not hearken to a ſtranger. His ſheepe heare 
                     
                        verſ. 4. 5. 8. 
                     his voyce (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. in Ioan. tract. 45. Auſtin) and he cals them by name: for he hath their names writen in the booke of life. Hereupon ſaith 
                     2. Tim. 2. 19. 
                     the Apoſtle, The Lord knoweth who are his. This ſheepfold then is that eſtate into which Chriſt the true Shepheard bringeth his elect, by the

profeſſion of his truth in the viſible Church. If any man had rather apply this text to the outward eſtate of the Churches, I will not ſtriue with him, ſo that withall he remember, firſt that in theſe outward Churches the elect onely are the ſheepe, one with Chriſt their ſhepheard, as members of his myſtical bodie. Secondly, that this one ſheepfold is not to be conſidered in regard of the Churches being one in profeſſion, but in reſpect of the Gentiles admitted to haue place in Chriſts myſticall body, as well as the Iewes, all difference betwixt people and people being taken away. In 
                        Rom. 12. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 17. the next two places the church is cōpared to a bodie (note that the compariſon is chiefly of particular Churches, in reſpect of the ſeuerall members thereof) becauſe of the mutuall coniunction and helpe which each part hath with other, and is to affoord to other. So doth 
                        Lomb. Gloſſ. interlin. Lyra, ad Rom. 10. & Catharin. ibi.
                      Lombard truly expound it, ſo you Gloſſe, ſo Lyra. If we ſtretch it farther, the chiefe cauſe why the church is one bodie, is aſſigned by Cardinal Caietan. ibi. Caietan to be the ſpirit of Christ. For Chriſt (ſaith he) is as the ſoule, giuing life, by the holy Ghoſt, to his whole myſticall bodie. But the holy Ghoſt quickens onely the elect, not the reprobate too. 1. Cor. 10. 17. In the latter of the two places, Caietan. vbi ſupra. the ſame Cardinall expounds that being one, in reſpect of charitie: and Catharin. vbi ſupra. Catharin a learned Popiſh Biſhop, vnderſtands this bodie to be the holy Church conſiſting of them that are predeſtinate and called, and iuſtified, and glorified, holy and faithfull. Of the laſt place I ſpake ſufficiently 
                        Ioan. 17. 20. before. Agreement in the truth, is the marke we looke at.
                  This you adde to proue, that to profeſſe one and the ſame faith, that is, to be one, is proper to the true church. Your proofe is, that 
                        Tertul de praeſcr. cap. 42. Tertulliā ſaith, that all hereſies, if they be wel looked into, are found to differ in many things from their firſt founders. Tertullian might truly ſay ſo, of al hereſies then known; & yet there may haue bin ſome ſince his time, perhaps that haue kept alwayes the ſame errors, without any change, worth the ſpeaking of. But (as I noted before) ſince all hereſies for a time hold their firſt errors, continuance in the ſame profeſſion, can be no good marke of the true church, vnles you can ſet downe a certaine number of yeares, during which they muſt continue in one and the ſame faith, or elſe be held for hereticks becauſe of their changing.
                  
                     
Now in concluſion of this firſt marke, I muſt obſerue a few points for the Readers inſtruction. Firſt I deſire it may be noted, that whereas vnitie is made a principal marke by your writers; they vnderſtand as well vnitie of loue as of faith: you require but the one of them, and ſo giue vs but halfe a marke. Secondly, let it be obſerued, that this marke is either no marke at all, or all one with ours; ſo that whereas you trouble vs with more then this, you make it much harder then we do, to find out the true Church. In the third place it would be conſidered what you meane by one and the ſame faith: I preſſe you with your owne argument, Chap. 14. 
                     Continuing in one and the ſame faith, in regard of ſome points only, is no good marke, becauſe heretickes continue in ſome points of truth. Continuing in all points can be no good mark: for it is not only hard, but vnpoſſible for a ſimple vnlearned man to be aſſured that any church hath alwayes continued in profeſſion of one and the ſame faith, in euery point: yea this is infinitely harder, then to diſcerne of all truth, becauſe the one is to be learned out of the Scriptures: the other cannot be known, but by ſearching the records of the church from time to time. Of the one there is certaine knowledge to be had, becauſe the Scriptures are the word of God: of the other, the beſt aſſurance we can haue, is but the teſtimonie of men, that might erre by ignorance or partialitie. Whatſoeuer doubts or difficulties you can imagine concerning the falſe tranſlation or miſunderſtanding of the Scriptures, the ſame wil accompanie all the writings of men, touching the doctrine of the Church in all ages. Then let any reaſonable man iudge, whether you or we ſhew them a better marke to know the true Church by.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  
                     The true Church is alſo proued to be holy, by that of S. Paul: 
                     The ſecond mark, ſancta. 1. Cor. 3. Templum Dei ſanctum eſt, quod eſtis vos: The temple of God is holy, which temple you are. By which place notwithſtanding S. Paul did not meane to ſignifie, that euery one of this companie was holy. For a little after in the ſame Epiſtle, he ſaith to the ſame companie: Omnino auditur inter vos fornicatio, & talis fornicatio, qualis 1. Cor. 5. nec inter gentes: There is plainly heard fornication among you, and ſuch fornication, as the like is not among the heathen. He doth not therefore (I ſay) meane that euery one of the Church is holy, but
                     
                     that the whole companie is to be termed holy, becauſe the profeſſion thereof doth of it ſelfe wholy tend to holineſſe: the doctrine being ſuch as withdraweth from all vice, and inſtructeth and moueth men to vertue: the Sacraments alſo do not onely ſignifie, but in the vertue which they haue from Chriſt his paſſion, they alſo worke in vs (as inſtrumentall cauſes) true and inward ſanctitie. Wherefore although euery one that is in the Church, be not holy, yet no doubt, alwayes ſome are: the which their holineſſe, it pleaſeth Almightie God to testifie and make knowne ſometime by miracle; and ordinarily he vſeth to make it apparent enough by the light of their vertuous actions, which at all times in many members of the true Church, do ſo ſhine before men, that by it men are moued to glorifie God, and ſometimes to imitate in their owne life that, which in others they admire. And whatſoeuer member of the Church faileth from this holineſſe of life, it is euident that the fault is onely in himſelf, who liueth not according to the preſcript of his profeſſiō, nor vſeth in due ſort thoſe means which it hath of the holy Sacraments, which (as I ſaid before) are effectuall instruments of ſanctification.
                  
                  
                     Contrariwiſe, no ſect of hereticks is truly holy; neither was there euer any perſon that did inuent, or obſtinatly adhere vnto any ſect of hereſie, which had in him true ſanctitie. And no maruel, becauſe the very profeſſion and doctrine it ſelfe of euery hereſie, is oppoſite to the very rootes of true ſanctitie; the which rootes be true Chriſtian faith and humilitie. For how can he be truly holy and iuſt, who being poſſeſſed with the ſpirit of hereſie, muſt needs be depriued of true faith, without which the iuſt man cannot liue? according to that ſaying of S. Paul: Iuſtus ex fide viuit. Or how can he be holy, that doth not only 
                     
                        Hebr. 10. Mat. 18. 1. Pet. 2. 
                     not humble himſelfe like a little one, ſubmitting himſelfe to euery humane creature, for Gods ſake: but doth proudly oppoſe himſelfe againſt the vniuerſall Church it ſelfe, whom God hath willed and commanded vs to heare, no otherwiſe then himſelfe? For wanting 
                     
                        Luk. 10. 
                     this humilitie, and conſequently the grace of God, which is denied to the proud, and giuen to the humble, there is no doubt but that howſoeuer 
                     
                        Jam. 4. 
                     ſuch a man ſeemeth in his outward behauiour, he can haue no true ſanctitie within him: the which true ſanctitie failing inwardly, it is hard for him to beare himſelfe ſo, but that ſometime or other, by one occaſion or other, he ſhall euen outwardly manifeſt this his
                     
                     inward want; as in theſe our daies, heretickes commonly do, in ſuch apparent manner, that it is no hard matter to diſcerne, that they be not (as ſome of them would haue the Church defined) a companie of Saints.
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Hauing ſhewed before, that this diſcourſe proceedeth not orderly, as it ſhould, to the proofe of that which is propounded by you, and denied by vs; I will not ſtand to lay out the fault, in euery particular, but content my ſelfe with hauing done it once for all. It is your purpoſe in this place to prooue that the Church is holy. A labour that might well haue bene ſpared: for who euer denied it, or doubted of it? But let me againe put you in minde, that when you haue prooued the Church to be holy, you haue got nothing: becauſe euerie qualitie of the Church is not by and by a marke▪ whereby it may be knowne. It may be proper to the Church, ſo that it can neuer be found but in the Church, and yet not be alwaies there to be found. It may alſo be true alwaies, and yet not be alwaies viſible. But let vs ſee your proofe.
                  
                     The Temple of God is holy.
                     The Church is the Temple of God.
                     Therefore the Church is holy.
                  
                  The holineſſe you meane, as you expound your ſelfe, is true and inward ſanctitie, which you ſay is wrought by the Sacraments. And this indeed is the holineſſe, which onely can make a man a Chriſtian. For (
                        Thomas opuſ. 6. in expoſ. ſymboli. ſect. Sanctam Eccleſiam.
                      Thomas truly ſaith) He that is not annointed with the grace of the holy Ghoſt, is not a Chriſtian. Hereupon, before I anſwer to your Syllogiſme, I will make it manifeſt, by your owne argument, that holineſſe is no good marke to know the Church by.
                  
                     Euerie good marke of the Church muſt be eaſier to be knowne, then the Church it ſelfe.
                     True inward ſanctity is not eaſier to be known, thē the Ch. it ſelfe.
                     Therefore true inward ſanctitie is no good marke of the Church.
                  
                  The Maior is yours, in plaine words generally deliuered: Chap. 13. 
                     The ſecond thing required in a good marke is, that it be more apparent, and eaſie to be knowne, then the thing is. The Minor is prooued by theſe words of yours in the ſame place. The ſecret
                     
                     diſpoſition of a mans heart is harder to be knowne, then the man himſelfe: how then ſhall true inward ſanctitie be eaſier to diſcerne, then the men in whom it is?
                  If by Temple you vnderſtand the whole company, as you plainly To the propoſition. ſ1. Cor. 3. 17. auouch, and by holineſſe true inward ſanctity, I denie your Maior. Becauſe the whole companie makes not one perſon or ſubſiſtence, wherein onely there is place for ſuch habits or qualities. True inward holineſſe is a qualitie no where reſident, but in ſome ſpeciall ſubſtance, and therefore if the whole companie of the Church, haue not a generall ſoule as Auerrois dreamed of the world, it is vnpoſſible it ſhould haue true inward holineſſe. It ſhould ſeeme alſo you ſaw as much your ſelfe, and therefore giue vs an other expoſition of the place, that the whole companie is to be termed holy. In this ſenſe you muſt conclude thus.
                  
                     The Temple of God is to be termed holy.
                     The Church is the Temple of God.
                     Therefore the Church is to be termed holy.
                  
                  But this prooueth not, that the Church is holy. Do you thinke, that the Nicene Councell, when it deliuered it as an article of faith, that we are to beleeue One holy Church, meant nothing, but that the Church was to be termed holy? Yes: they meant to teach vs, that the true Church is truly holy, being purged from the guilt of ſinne, by the ſacrifice of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and indued with true habituall righteouſneſſe by the ſpirit of ſanctification. It is a poore marke to know the Church by, to tell vs, it is a companie that is to be termed holy. What then is the Apoſtles meaning, when he ſaith the Temple of God is holy?
                  
                     
                        Chryſoſt. ad 1. Cor. homil. 9. & ibi Ambroſ. &. Theophyl.
                      Many interpreters take this whole paſſage of the Apoſtle, frō the beginning of the 16. verſe, to be a reproofe particularly of the inceſtuous perſon, and generally of all vncleane liuers: and they by Temple vnderſtand ſeuerall Chriſtians, ſanctified by the Spirit of God, who dwelleth in them, and maketh them holy. Thus do 
                        Cyril. Hieroſ. Catech. 4 Cyrill, 
                        Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 6. Irenaeus, and 
                        Cypr. teſtim. ad Quirin. lib. 3. ſect 27. Cyprian apply the place. Lombard. Thom. Lyra. Caietan. Catharin. ad hunc locum. Other, whoſe iudgement in this text I rather follow, thinke that the Apoſtle in theſe verſes continueth his former

diſcourſe, concerning the miniſterie of the word, diuerſly vſed by diuers teachers: ſome building vpon the foundation gold, ſiluer, and pretious ſtones; other laying on it timber, hay, or ſtubble. A third kind deſtroying the foundation by falſe doctrine, of whom the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh, threatning them deſtruction, becauſe they deſtroy the Temple of God. The reaſon whereof Catharin. ibi. one of them giues in theſe words, The Temple of God is holy. To defile that which is holy (ſaith Catharin) deſerueth deſtruction euen among the heathen. For if any man hurt the walles of the Citie, which the heathen accounted holy, he was to die for it. Now if this law were executed for the prophaning of walles, and temples made with hands, how much more ought the deſtroying of Chriſtians, who by faith and loue haue receiued the Lord Ieſus, be ſo ſeuerely puniſhed? Euen ſo much more (ſaith Lyra. ibi. Lyra) as ſpirituall things are to be preferred before corporall. By the Temple of God then, the Apoſtle meaneth the congregations or Churches of profeſſed Chriſtians, ſuch as that of Corinth was. Theſe (he ſaith) are holy: that is, either conſecrated to the worſhip of God, which is the profeſſed end of Chriſtian aſſemblies: or truly holy, in regard that they make profeſſion, and ſo in charitie are to be taken (but where the contrary euidently appeareth) of being iuſtified and ſanctified by the death and reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. You giue two other reaſons of their being termed holy; the one that the profeſſion of religion, of itſelfe, wholy tendeth to holineſſe. How can this be a good mark to know the true Church by, when euery company wil ſay, their doctrine hath the ſame end, and he that will beleeue it of any company, muſt know and be able to iudge of euery point they maintaine? Your ſecond is, that the Sacraments worke in vs (as inſtrumentall cauſes) true and inward ſanctitie. I will not enter into the queſtion about the Sacraments, what or how they worke: it is nothing to the purpoſe. But to the point: what hereticall Church will not, or may not ſay the like? whether truly or falſely it skils not: becauſe that will aske a new examination, ſuch as euerie one that muſt know the Church, cannot make. Therefore this marke of holineſſe is not a good marke, to know the true

Church by, being inward and claimed by all companies of Chriſtians.
                  Not onely ſome, but all the members of the true Church of Chriſt, are inwardly and outwardly holy, being purged by his bloud and ſpirit. And this their holineſſe is ſo manifeſt ordinarily, that there need none of your counterfeit miracles for the countenancing thereof: eſpecially ſince God neuer tooke that courſe in his Church, to approoue any mans holineſſe, by the gift of miracles, the vſe whereof is to confirme doctrine, when need requireth: neither can any man from miracles conclude, that he which worketh them, is inwardly truly ſanctified. 
                        Mat. 10. 8. Was not Iudas one of them, to whom power was giuen euen ouer the diuels? Yet was he 
                        Ioan. 12. 6. 
                     a thiefe, 
                     
                        Luc. 22. 48. 
                     a traitor, and 
                     
                        Ioan. 6. 70. 
                     a diuell. Many wil ſay vnto me in that day (ſaith 
                        Mat. 7. 22. 23 our Sauiour) Lord, haue we not by thy name prophecied, and by thy name caſt out diuels, and by thy name done many great workes? And then will I profeſſe to them, I neuer knew you, depart from me, ye that worke iniquitie.
                  
                  But it is ſtrange that you ſhould make true inward ſanctitie, the marke of the true Church, and ſo confidently affirme, that no doubt in the Church there are alwaies ſome holy: when as you maintaine, that 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10. it is enough to make a man a true member of the true Church, that he profeſſe outwardly, though he haue no one vertue within him at all. If all the members of the Church may be void of holineſſe, how is holineſſe a good marke of the Church? Certainly it is (at the moſt) but accidentall, and ſuch as the Church may haue, or lacke, without being, or ceaſing to be a Church thereby. He is well holpe vp no doubt, that muſt learne how to know the true Church, of ſuch teachers.
                  You haue prooued after your faſhion, that the Church is holy; now you will prooue, that no companie, but the Church is holy.
                  
                  
                     No ſect of heretickes is truly holy.
                     All companies of Chriſtians (beſides that of the true Church) are ſects of hereticks.
                     Therefore no companie of Chriſtians (beſides that of the true Church) is truly holy.
                  
                  
                     
If by hereticks you vnderſtand onely thoſe, that erre in ſome To the propoſition. fundamentall points of religion: I grant your Maior, and Minor. As for the concluſion, I am reſolued of the truth thereof, without any proofe from you. But if you acount all hereticks, who in the error of their iudgement, diſſent from other Churches of Chriſt, in matters not fundamentall, though true, I denie your ſaid Maior: and affirme, that diuers Churches may differ in opinion one from another, and continue in that difference, & maintaine it confidently, ſo they do it not againſt their knowledge and conſcience; and yet all of them be true Churches of Chriſt, and truly holy. For as long as the opinions a man holds, do not cut him off, from being a true member of the myſticall bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, they make him not ceaſe to be a true Chriſtian, truly iuſtified and ſanctified. But he that beleeueth truly in Ieſus Chriſt, and holds no fundamentall error, continues by faith a member of our Sauiours myſticall bodie. For as the iuſt liues by faith, ſo whereſoeuer there is true faith, there is life alſo: but, there is no life out of the bodie of Chriſt, becauſe the ſpirit of Chriſt is not to be had, but in his bodie. And therefore he that by faith remaineth a member of Chriſts bodie, is a true Chriſtian, truly iuſtified and ſanctified, though not perfectly holy.
                  Here we haue the proofe of your Maior, ſuch as it is.
                  
                     If the doctrine it ſelfe of euerie hereſie be oppoſite to true Chriſtian Proofe of the propoſition. faith, and humilitie, the rootes of true ſanctitie; then no ſect of hereſies is truly holy.
                     But the doctrine it ſelfe of euerie hereſie is oppoſite to true Chriſtian faith and humilitie, the roots of true ſanctitie.
                     Therefore no ſect of hereticks is truly holy.
                  
                  If by true Chriſtian faith, you meane any particular truth (as To the propoſition. a Chriſtian ought to beleeue euerie truth of God, though not ſo, as that ignorance, or misbeleeuing of euerie point can make him ceaſe to be a true Chriſtian) I denie the conſequence of your Maior.
                  I denie your Minor: Not euerie hereſie, but that which is againſt the foundation onely, is oppoſite to true Chriſtian faith & humility, 
                     To the Aſſumption. vnderſtanding by Chriſtian faith, ſuch a faith as is neceſſarily

required, that a man may be a true Chriſtian, by which onely he liues: not by beleeuing euerie truth, though that be required of him, as a dutie of ſanctification. And ſo your proofe alſo is anſwered. A man may haue that faith, by which a Chriſtian muſt liue, though he be ignorant, or miſinſtructed in diuers points of doctrine.
                  I haue ſeuered this part concerning humilitie from the former, becauſe it ſeemeth you tooke it to be of more importance, and therefore labour more in the proofe of it.
                  
                     He that doth not humble himſelfe to euerie humane creature for Gods ſake, but proudly oppoſeth himſelfe against the vniuerſall Church, cannot be holy.
                     But no hereticke doth ſo humble himſelfe, and euerie hereticke ſo oppoſe.
                     Therefore no hereticke can be holy.
                  
                  I ſhewed before, that there is no ſuch vniuerſall Church, as you often name, but neuer prooue: and therefore this argument To the propoſition. grounded vpon oppoſing againſt that which is not, in regard of ſuch a commaundement, as God neuer gaue, is idle and vaine. More particularly I anſwer concerning your Maior: that although pride be alwaies a ſinne, yet it may ſometimes be found in in a man truly ſanctified, & that in oppoſition againſt men in a matter of doctrine. But your propoſition in regard of the former part of it, as you vnderſtand it, is vtterly falſe. For it is (no way) againſt holineſſe, for a man not to beleeue euery doctrine that men will propound. 
                        Gal. 18. 
                     If I or an Angell from Heauen preach any otherwiſe to you, then we haue preached, let him be accurſed. 
                     1. Ioan. 4. 1. 
                     Trie the ſpirits, whether they be of God or no. As for that place of the Apoſtle which you alledge, your owne interpreters expound it, not of the Church, but of the ciuill Magiſtrate. He cals the office of a King, a humane creature (ſaith 
                        Caietan. ad 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14 Caietan) becauſe a King is created by the voices, or conſent of men: and he addeth euery, that he might take away all diſtinction betwixt Heathen and Chriſtian kings, in reſpect of obedience to them. 
                     
                        Rhem. Teſt. ad 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. The Rhemiſts are yet more againſt you. So he calleth the temporall magiſtrate (ſay they) elected by the people, or holding their ſoueraigntie by birth and carnall propagation, ordained for the
                     
                     Worldly wealth, power, and proſperitie of the ſubiect, to put a difference (directly againſt your interpretation) betwixt the humane ſuperioritie, and the ſpirituall Rulers, and regiment, guiding and gouerning the people to a higher end. But what need we any other expoſitor, ſince 1. Pet. 2. 13 14. the Apoſtle in the next words, directeth vs how to vnderſtand it? Whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the ſuperiour, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are ſent of him, 
                     
                        Rom. 13. 3. 4. 
                     for the puniſhment of euill doers, and for the praiſe of them that do well. But let vs take it as generally as you will, if it be againſt humilitie, not to be ſubiect to the Church, it is alſo againſt it, not to be ſubiect to the King. Yet I hope no man is ſo mad, as to ſay, that he refuſeth to be ſubiect to him, that doth not abſolutely obey him in all things. How then can this place proue, that it is againſt true Chriſtian humilitie, not to beleeue the Church, whatſoeuer ſhe propound to be beleeued?
                  None but hereticks do ſo humble themſelues; and many To the aſſumption. diſſenting from their brethren in diuers opinions, neither deſerue to be counted hereticks, though they cannot be reclaimed from their errors, nor to be held for ſchiſmaticks, as long 
                        Thomas. 2. 2. q. 39. art. 1. as they breake not off communion with thē, which yet may be done by ignorance, without pride.
                  If many heathen men haue ſo demeaned themſelues, as that they could hardly, or not at all be charged with any groſſe outward fault, doubtleſſe it is poſſible for hereticks to do the like. At the leaſt, what a gay marke of the Church is this holineſſe, which (for a long time) may be, for ought men can diſcerne, in an hereticke: who, all that while, may be taken for a true Chriſtian? Beſides, if truth of religion be to be iudged of by holineſſe of conuerſation, as a certaine marke (for that within cannot otherwiſe be ſeene) why may not a man change his conceit of anie religion, when he ſeeth any notable profeſſor thereof fall into any grieuous ſinne, as 2. Sam. 12. 9. Dauid, and 
                        Mat. 26. 70. Peter did?
                  As for vs, whom you terme hereticks at your pleaſure, if our worſt Proteſtants be not farre paſt in villanie by your Papiſts, for treaſons, murthers, and generally all kinde of vncleanneſſe; I will confeſſe, that you liue better then the grounds of your

religion require, and we worſe then ours. But I leaue this point till I come to examine your Aſſumption, concerning the holineſſe of your Church of Rome.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  
                     The true Church is prooued alſo to be Catholicke, that is to 
                     The third marke. Catholica. Iſay. cap. 59. 
                     ſay, vniuerſall; firſt, in time, by moſt plaine prophecies and promiſes of the Scripture, as I haue alreadie ſhewed in the eleuenth chapter; vnto which here I will onely adde thoſe words of Iſaias: Hoc foedus meum cum eis dicit Dominus: Spiritus meus qui eſt in te, & verba, quae poſui in ore tuo; non recedent de ore tuo, & de ore ſeminis tui, & de ore ſeminis ſeminis tui, dicit Dominus amodò vſque in ſempiternum: This is my couenant with them, ſaith our Lord: my Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth, ſhall not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy ſeed, and from the mouth of the ſeed of thy ſeed, ſaith our Lord, from henceforth for euer.
                  
                  
                     It may alſo be eaſily prooued to be vniuerſall in reſpect of place, by theſe plaine teſtimonies of holy Scripture. Conuertentur ad Dominum vniuerſi fines terrae, all the bounds of the earth ſhall be 
                     
                        Pſalm. 21. Pſalm. 71. 
                     conuerted to our Lord. Dominabitur à mari vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad mare, & à flumine vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad terminos orbis terrarum. He (to wit Chriſt) ſhall rule and haue dominion from ſea to ſea, and from the flood, vntil the furthermoſt limits of the earth. Omnes gentes ſeruient ei. All nations ſhall ſerue him. Vpon all which places and ſome other, ſee Saint 
                     Ibidem. Auſtin in his expoſition of the Pſalmes; and among other things, which he ſpeaketh to the purpoſe, note his interpretation of thoſe words à flumine vſque ad terminos orbis terrarū. Which words (ſaith he) do ſignifie, that the dominion of Chriſt began à flumine Iordano, from the floud of lordan, where he, being baptiſed, was made manifeſt, by the deſcending of the holy Ghoſt, & the ſound of his Fathers voice: from whence he began to chuſe his Diſciples: & from 
                     
                        Aug. in Pſa. 71 
                     hence (ſaith he) Doctrina eius incipiens dilatatur vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad terminos orbis terrae, cū praedicatur Euāgeliū regni in vniuerſo orbe, in teſtimoniū omnibus gentibus, & tunc veniet finis. His doctrine beginning is dilated or ſpread abroad, vnto the furtheſt parts of the earth, when the Goſpell of the kingdome is preached ouer the whole world, for a teſtimony to all nations, after which done, the end (of the world) ſhall come. See alſo the ſame S. Auſtin in his booke de vnitate

Eccleſiae, eſpecially in the ninth & tenth chapters, where he eiteth & vrgeth that place of S. Luke, where our Sauiour ſaith, Neceſſe eſt 
                        Luc. 24. impleri omnia quae ſcripta ſunt in lege, Prophetis & Pſalmis de me, &c. quoniā ſic ſcriptum eſt, & ſic oportebat Chriſtum pati & reſurgere à mortuis, & praedicari in nomine eius poenitentiā & remiſſionem peccatorū in omnes gentes, incipientibus ab Ieroſolyma: It is needfull that all things ſhould be fulfilled which are written of me in the Law, the Prophets and Pſalmes, &c. for ſo it is writtē, and ſo it was needfull that Chriſt ſhould ſuffer, and riſe again from the dead the third day, and that penance and remiſſion of ſinnes ſhould be preached in his name throughout all nations, beginning frō Ieruſalem. By which place, and diuers others, he ſheweth plainly, that the true Church of Christ cannot be contained in a corner of the world, but muſt be vniuerſall, that is, diffuſed and ſpread throughout the whole world: as the ſame S. Auſtin, beſide his other proofes, gathered out of the very name Catholica, the which name (ſaith he) was impoſed on the Church by our forefathers, vt ex ipſo nomine Aug. l de vnit. Eccleſie. oſtenderent quia per totum eſt, ſecundum totum enim Catholon Graecè dicitur: that by the very name they might ſhew that the Church is throughout the whole world. For (ſaith he) the word Catholon in Greeke (wherupon Catholik is deriued) ſignifieth a thing which is generall or agreeing to the while.
                  
                  
                     But we must note here, that when we ſay the true Church is Catholick or diffuſed throughout the whole world, it is meant, that at least by ſucceſſion of time it hath bene, or ſhall be dilated more and more in euery nation, till it haue gone throughout the whole world. Moreouer it is termed Catholicke, not onely becauſe it ſhal be ſpred ouer the whole world in proceſſe of time, but alſo becauſe euen in euery age it hath bin, and ſhall be alwayes in very many nations: and indeed in euery natiō, where any Chriſtiā religiō is; which is in a ſort to be ſpread ouer the whole world. This doth S. Auſtin in his booke de vnitate Eccleſiae, moſt diligently proue out of the Scriptures themſelues. The effect of his argument is this: The Church muſt be ſuch as it is deſcribed in Scripture. But in Scripture it is deſcribed to begin at Ieruſalem, and to proceed into all Iewrie, and to go forward 
                     
                        Act. 1. 
                     into Samaria: and to ſtretch it ſelfe further and further, vſque ad vltimum terrae, euen vnto the vttermost of the earth.
                     
                     And (ſaith he) the ſeed of the Gospell once ſowne in the field of the world, fructificat & creſcit, doth (not vniuerſally or for the moſt part 
                     
                        Coloſſ. 1. 
                     periſh, but) fructifie and grow or increaſe, in omni mundo, in the whole world, and doth continue to grow or increaſe, vſque ad meſſē, vntill the harueſt of the conſummation of the world, as our Sauiour 
                     
                        Math. 13. 
                     ſignifieth: the which conſummation will be when this ſeed is come to the full growth: praedicabitur Euangelium in vniuerſo mundo, 
                        Math. 24. in teſtimonium omnibus gentibus, (ſaith our Sauiour) & tune veniet conſummatio, the Gospell ſhall be preached in the whole world, for a teſtimonie to all nations, and then the conſummation ſhal come. This is S. Auſtins diſcourſe, by which he proueth that the true Church of Chriſt is not contained in a corner of the world, but muſt be dilated and ſpread in a ſort ouer the whole world.
                  
                  
                     On the contrary ſide, the congregation of hereticks is not Catholicke, neither in time nor place. And firſt for time, it is euident, becauſe true doctrine was firſt preached and beleeued, as the good ſeed was firſt ſowne in the field, and afterward the cockle, that is falſe doctrine, was ouer ſowed. Saint Paul did for three yeares ſpace teach the Epheſians the true doctrine of faith, and had conuerſed among them like a lambe, ſeruiens Domino cum omni humilitate, ſeruing our Lord with all humilitie: but after his departure, he ſaid, 
                     
                        Act. 20. 
                     he knew that rauenous wolues would enter in among them, not sparing the flocke; and that euen out of their owne company, there would ariſe viriloquentes peruerſa, vt abducant diſcipulos poſt ſe, men ſpeaking peruerſe things, that they may leade away diſciples after 
                     Ibidem. 
                     themſelues. And as this happened at Epheſus, ſo doubtleſſe in all other places, where there hath bin any alteration of Chriſtian doctrine; firſt the true faith was planted by ſome Apoſtle or Apoſtolicke man, and afterward the contrary was brought in by ſome ſpeaking peruerſe things, thereby leading away diſciples after themſelues. So that it is certaine, that no hereſie is ſo auncient as the true faith: neither is any one of them of ſo long continuance for the time to come, as S. Paul ſignified, when hauing deſcribed heretickes of the latter dayes, he addeth, ſed vltra non proficient, inſipientia enim eorū manifeſta erit omnibus: but they ſhall proſper no further, for their 
                     2. Tim. 3. 
                     folly ſhall be manifeſt to all. The ſame doth S. Auſtin aptly expreſſe, expounding thoſe words of the Pſalme: Ad nihilum deuenient tanquam 
                        Aug. in pſal. 57
                     
aqua decurrens. Non vos terreant fratres (ſaith he) quidam fluuij qui dicuntur torrentes; hyemalibus aquis implentur, nolite timere, poſt paululum tranſit, decurrit aqua, ad tempus perſtrepit, mox ceſſabit, diu ſtare non poſſunt. Multae haereſes, iam emortuae ſunt, &c. My brethren, let not certaine floods called land-brookes terrifie you; they are filled with winter waters, feare them not, after a while the water doth paſſe and runne downe, for a time it maketh a noiſe, but it will ceaſe by and by, thoſe flouds cannot ſtand long. Many hereſies are now already dead, &c. Now if we will haue reſpect of place, it is certaine that no hereſie is by proceſſe of time to ſpread it ſelfe abſolutely ouer the whole world, as I haue proued that the true Church ſhall do, and the reaſon hereof may be aſſigned, becauſe as S. Auſtin ſaith, diu ſtare non poſſunt, they cannot continue ſo long, as were needfull to get them ſo vniuerſally ſpred ouer the whole world; eſpecially conſidering that as S. Paul ſaith, when they haue continued a while, Inſipientia earum manifeſta fit 2. Tim. 3. omnibus, their fooliſhneſſe is made manifeſt to all, and ſo no maruel, ſi vltra non proficiant, if they proſper not, nor make no further progreſſe. Neither ordinarily in any one age is hereſie ſo vniuerſall in place as the true Catholick religiō, but for the moſt part it is cōtained in one or two countries, as it were in a corner of the world. So that of hereticks we may wel ſay, as S. Auſtin doth, that they are thoſe which ſay, Ecce hic eſt Chriſtus, ecce illic, Behold Chriſt is here, behold 
                     
                        Aug. l. de Vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 3. 
                     he is there, (that is to ſay, the true doctrine of Christ is onely truly preached in this countrey or that countrey) of which kind of people our Sauiour giueth vs warning, and biddeth vs, ſaying, nolite credere, 
                        Mat. 24. 
                     beleeue them not. We may wel ſay alſo of theſe, as the ſame S. Auſtin doth, Quaecunque congregatio cuiuſlibet haereſis in angulis 
                        Auguſt. l. de. Symb. cap. 10. ſedet, concubina eſt, non matrona: Whatſoeuer congregation of what hereſie ſoeuer ſitteth in corners (that is to ſay, is but in few prouinces, and in the reſt of the Chriſtian world, either is not at al, or at the leaſt is not manifeſtly knowne to be) is a concubine, not a matron, to wit it is not the ſpouſe of Chriſt, nor the lawfull mother of the children of God. Wherefore ſith there is this difference betwixt hereſie and true Chriſtian religion, that as the ſame Saint Auſtin ſaith, Singulae haereſes in multis gentibus vbi Eccleſia eſt, non inueniuntur: Eccleſia autem, quae vbique eſt, etiam vbi illae ſunt, 
                        Aug. l. de Vnit. Eccleſ. cap. 3.
                     
inuenitur: Hereſies are not found in many nations where the church is: but the Church, which is euery where, is found in thoſe nations where hereſies are. This difference (I ſay) being betwixt hereſie and the true religion, we need not doubt, but that to be Catholicke, or vniuerſally receiued in the Christian world, especially at all times, is a note of the truth: And that therfore the companie which profeſſeth the faith, which at all times, and in a ſort, in all places, hath bin receiued of Chriſtians, is vndoubtedly the true Church of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  What if the true Church be proued to be Catholicke, will it follow therupon, that therfore it is alwayes Catholick: ſo that a man cannot know which is the true Church, but by knowing which Church is Catholick? For ſuch muſt euery good mark be, proper to, and al times preſent with that wherof it is a mark. But let vs ſee a little better, what Catholickneſſe this is, which you deliuer for a marke of the Church.
                  If you meane by the name Catholicke, as if that were the true Church, which cals it ſelfe the Catholicke Church, what is more eaſie then for any falſe church to take vnto it ſelfe that name? Did not Theudas and Iudas profeſſe themſelues 
                        Act. 5. 36. 37. to be the Meſſiah? Hath not 
                        Mat. 24. 24. our Sauiour forewarned vs, that there ſhould ariſe falſe Chriſts and falſe Prophets? Yea the Donatiſts, who ſhut vp the church in a corner of Africa, were not aſhamed to call themſelues the Catholicke Church. And (as 
                        Aug. epiſt. 48. ad Vincent. & contr. epiſt. fundam. cap. 4. Auſtin ſaith) All hereticks would be called Catholicks.
                  
                  If you vrge the thing ſignified by the name: firſt, not one of your Papiſts among a thouſand, vnderſtands what this word Catholicke meanes; but onely that it is the name of euery one that holdeth of the Church of Rome. Secondly, if by Catholick Church, you meane ſuch a church as hath bin euer ſince the comming of our Sauiour Chriſt, and ſhall be at all times, and ouer all the world (as you expound your ſelfe:) how can it be a good marke of the true Church, when as it is an impoſſibilitie, that euery man ſhould be able to ſearch and know, which church hath alwayes bin, which hath not: which hath bin euery where, which onely in ſome places? and much more vnpoſſible is it (if there be degrees of impoſſibilitie) that euery either learned or vnlearned man ſhold certainly know, which church ſhal

alwayes continue, till the end of the world. A man may finde in the Scriptures, that the true Church of Chriſt ſhal neuer faile: but which outward companie of men is this true Church, no man by this marke of future continuance can by any meanes diſcerne. Wherupon I conclude, that your Catholickneſſe is neither for the name, nor for the thing, any good marke of any true Church whatſoeuer.
                  That by Catholickneſſe vniuerſalitie of time ſhould be ſignified, you preſume, but proue not: and yet I am perſwaded, you are not able to alledge any one ancient author but late Papiſts, that by the Catholicke Church vnderſtands a companie that hath bin alwayes ſince the beginning of the Chriſtian Church, and ſhall alwayes continue till the ſecond comming of our Sauiour Chriſt. I doubt not that the true Church ſpoken of in the Scripture, and the creed, hath ſo bin, and ſhall be: but I ſay that no man conceiues this propertie to be ſignified by the word Catholicke. The ground of my opinion is, that hauing found diuers reaſons alledged by the Fathers, why the Church is ſaid to be Catholicke, I could neuer light vpon that, concerning the time. 
                        Aug. de Gen. ad lit. cap 1. Epiſt. 170. ad Seuer in.
                      Auſtin ordinarily reſtraines Catholicknes to place: as alſo 
                        Optat. contra Parmen. lib. 2. Optatus doth. 
                        Pacian. ad Sympr. epiſt. 1. Pacianus where he purpoſely enquires the reaſon of the name, neuer once mentions it: no more doth 
                        Cyril. Hiero. catech. 18. Cyril, who yet aſſignes ſixe ſeuerall reſpects, in which the Church may be ſaid to be Catholicke. And ſurely, if by Catholickneſſe, vniuerſalitie of time be ſignified, I ſee no reaſon, neither (I thinke) can you ſhew me any, why it ſhould not as well include the time before our Sauiours comming, and ſo the Church of God that then was, as that which hath bin ſince his comming, and ſhall continue till the end of the world. So doth Thomas vnderſtand 
                        Thom. in expoſ. Symb. §. Sanct. Eccleſ.
                      the Catholickneſſe of the Church, ſtretching it from Abels time to the end of the world. But your great maiſter 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ milit. li. 3. cap. 16. Bellarmine vtterly denies that the Church before our Sauiours comming was Catholicke, reſtraining this Catholickneſſe to the Church of the Chriſtians. But becauſe I acknowledge the truth of the doctrine, I will not ſtriue about the word, though you ſhould haue prooued the ſenſe of the word, and not haue giuen too much credit to Bellarmine, who brings a place of 
                        Auguſt. de vnit. Eccleſ. c. 6. apud Bellar. de Eccl. milit. li. 4 cap. 7 §. Sunt autom.
                      Auſtin to prooue

that vniuerſalitie of time is required to make the Church Catholicke; whereas there is not a ſyllable or a letter touching that matter in the place alledged. No more is there in that other place of Bede, (which alſo he brings) but rather we may proue thence, that Catholicke belongeth to place. It is therefore 
                     
                        Beda expoſit. in Cant. lib. 5. ad cap. 6. 
                     called Catholicke (ſaith Bede) becauſe it is edified in one and the ſame faith, ouer all parts of the world. In the ſentence next before, he ſpeaketh thus: Whence the Church is called Catholicke, hee teacheth, ſaying, All the Churches through all Iewry, Galilee and Samaria had peace. So doth your Canon expound Catholicke: 
                     
                        Diſt. 11. cap. Catholica. Durand. in rat. diuin. offic. li. 1 cap. 1. nu. 2. ſo Durand, though he adde alſo two other reaſons of the name: but not that you bring,
                  As for 
                        Iſa. 59. 21. the place you quote to prooue a needleſſe queſtion, what doth it concerne the viſible Church, being ſpoken (as 
                        Hieron. ad Iſay. li. 16. c. 59. Ierome ſheweth at large, and prooueth out of 
                        Rom. 11. 26. the Apoſtle) of the Church of the elect Iewes, or (at the moſt) of the elect in generall.
                  Before I examine that which you haue here deliuered, touching the Catholicknes of the Church in reſpect of place, I hold it very needfull to conſider what was intended by the name Catholicke, and how it hath bin vnderſtood of auncient writers. And becauſe this latter point may be a meanes to giue vs ſome light for the diſcerning of the former, I will begin with it in the firſt place. Whether the word were in vſe in the time of the Apoſtles or no, ſo that any man was called a Catholicke, 
                     
                        Pacian. ad Sympro. epiſt. 1: de Cathol. nom.
                      Pacianus ſeems to ſtand in ſome doubt; yet he lets it paſſe as granted, that no man was then ſo called. Once it is out of all doubt, that it is no where in the Scriptures applied to any church, or to any man, or at all vſed. As for the title Catholicke giuen to the Epiſtles of Iames, Peter, the firſt of Iohn, and Iude, it came not from the holy Ghoſt the inditer of thoſe Epiſtles, but was added afterwards by ſome man, when the bookes of the new Teſtament were gathered together into one volume: which may better appeare by the titles of the other Epiſtles alſo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. of Saint or holy Paul: which inſcription queſtionleſſe neuer was of the Apoſtles owne ſetting downe. That which I would haue obſerued, is, that this name Catholicke was deuiſed and applied

to the Church not by God in the Scriptures, but by man: and therefore it is of leſſe importance, and more vncertaintie; yet no doubt, not giuen at aduenture, but vpon good ground, and to good purpoſe. For the original of it, it is Greeke, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , through the whole, or all: which we commonly call by two Latin names, vniuerſall or generall: ſo that the Catholicke Church, and the generall or vniuerſall Church are all one. To auow the antiquitie of this title giuen to the church, the confeſſion of faith, which is commonly called the Apoſtles creede, may be alledged; wherin we profeſſe that we beleeue the holy Catholick Church. That this creed is very ancient, it is out of queſtion; but that it was penned or indited by the Apoſtles themſelues, we haue no certaine proofe. But to leaue this point, and to returne again to the meaning of the words Catholick Church: the auncienteſt authors in whom I finde them (for they are not in Dionyſius, Ignatius, Martialis, Polycarpus, nor in Iuſtine, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origen, or any man within the firſt 200. years) are 
                        Clem. Alexan Strō. li. 7. anno 200. Clemens Alexandr. about the yeare 200. and 
                        Anno 250. Cyprian about the yeare 250. After them it grew very common, eſpecially in the Latin Church. Cyprian himſelfe hath not (that I know of) any where deliuered the reaſon of that title Catholick. But 
                        Pacian. de Cathol. nom. vbi. ſupra. Anno 380. Pacianus Biſhop of Barcelona in Spaine, purpoſely diſputeth the queſtion againſt Symproniā a Nouatian heretick, aſſigning two reaſons of the name, in this ſort: If (ſaith he) I muſt giue a reaſon of the word Catholicke, and expreſſe the Greeke in Latine, Catholicke is euery where one; or (as the learneder thinke) obedience to all Gods commmandements: ſo that by his interpretation the Catholicke Church muſt be the company of them who in all places, here and there, profeſſe one faith, and liue in obedience to all the commandements of God. This vnitie of true faith 
                        Cod. de ſum. Trin. c
                              •
                           nctos populos. Anno 372. the Emperors reſpected, Valentinian, Gratian and Theodoſius, when they commanded that all they ſhould be called Catholicks, who follow the faith that S. Peter deliuered to the Church of Rome. To this purpoſe is that of 
                        Cyril. Hier. catech. 18. Cyril, where he ſaith: The Church is called Catholicke, becauſe it teacheth all things neceſſary to be knowne. This interpretation of the word, and reaſon of the title, 
                        Auguſt. ad Ʋincen. epi. 48. Breuic. collat. 3 diei. cap. 2. the Donatiſts gaue, ſaying that the Church was not termed
                     
                     Catholicke, becauſe of the communion that one Church hath with another, throughout the whole world, but becauſe it obſerueth all the commandements and ſacraments of God. To make ſhort, the reaſon of the title Catholicke attributed to the Church, in the iudgement both of Greek and Latin writers, is, firſt the vniuerſall diſperſion of the church through all part, of the world. The Church (ſaith 
                        Cyril. Hiero. catech. 18. Cyril of Ieruſalem) is Catholick, becauſe it is ſpred all ouer the world. It is called Catholicke (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. ad Se uerin. epiſt. 170. Auſtin) becauſe it is diſperſed through the whole world. See brethren (quoth 
                        Aug. ad Pſal. 65. the ſame Auſtin in another place) how the vniuerſality of the Church ſpred ouer the whole world is commended. The Church (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. de Gene. ad lit. cap. 1. he) is called Catholick, becauſe it is vniuerſally perfect, and failes in nothing, and is ſpred ouer the whole world. Where, though he ſeeme to acknowledge the Donatiſts interpretation, yet he addes the other as more principall. And in 
                        Auguſ. Breuic. collat. 3. diei. cap. 2. the conference betwixt the Catholiks and Donatiſts, the true Chriſtians proued themſelues to be Catholicks, and ſo rightly called, becauſe they held communion with the Church ſpred ouer the face of the earth. This is that vnitie which accordingly was implied in the title of the Catholick Church, ſignifying an agreement in matters of faith, which was betwixt the ſeueral true Churches in all places. Hitherto may we reaſonably refer that of Pacianus, who ſaith that Pacian. vbi. ſupra. 
                     Catholicke is euery where one. The vnitie is ſignified, in that ſo many ſeuerall congregations make but one church, in regard of that one faith which is cōmon to all: the vniuerſalneſſe of this church in the particular aſſemblies, is noted to vs by the word Catholik. The Fathers in the Nicene councell thought good to expreſſe that vnitie by profeſſing to beleeue one Church, to which they added alſo Catholicke. So ſaith 
                        Alexander in ep. ad Alexand. Conſtant. epiſc. apud Theodor. hiſt. eccl. l. 1 c. 4. Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, who was in the time of that Councell: We acknowledge one onely Catholicke and Apostolicke Church. So 
                        Theod. ad Pſal. 47. Theodoret afterward: There is one Church ſcattered ouer ſea and land, wherefore we pray, ſaying, For the holy and onely Catholicke and Apoſtolicke Church. And in another place: Paul (ſaith 
                        Theod. in Cant. lib. 3. ad cap. 6. he) nameth many churches, not by any diuiſion of ſpirit, but ſeuered by diſtance of place. It appeareth then, that by Catholicknes, the vniuerſalneſſe of the Churches being in all places is ſignified. But what was the reaſon

why this title was added to the church? In all likelihood it was firſt deuiſed and applied to the Church, to ſignifie the breach of the partition wall, which ſometimes ſtood betwixt the Iewes and Gentils, till by our Sauiours death it was caſt downe. This I ſpeake vpon this ſuppoſition, that the word Catholicke was as ancient in the Church, as the time of the Apoſtles. But if it were brought in afterward (as I could eaſily perſwade my ſelf, but for reuerence of other mens iudgments) we may verie wel aſſent to Pacian. vbi ſupra. Pacianus, who writes of it in this maner. When after the Apoſtles times, hereſies ſprung vp, and men wēt about to pul in peeces the doue of God, that ſame Queen the Church, by diuerſity of names (as euery ſeueral hereſie had a proper name:) did not the Apoſtolicke people (they that followed the doctrine of the Apoſtles) require a ſirname for themſelues, whereby they might make difference of ſuch as remained vncorrupted (with hereſie,) leſt the error of ſome ſhould rent in peeces the vnſpotted virgin of God? Was it not meet that the principall head (the true Church) ſhould haue a proper name to be knowne by? It appeareth by theſe words, that the reaſon of the name Catholick was, at the firſt, that there might be a title, to diſtinguiſh ſound Chriſtians, and true Churches, from hereticks, & hereticall aſſemblies. To which purpoſe, that he might auow the vſe of this name, he ſignifieth, that it had before bene vſed by Cyprian. And afterward he affirmeth directly, that the true Chriſtian people are diuided from the hereticall, when they are called Catholicke. But you will perhaps demaund, why Catholicke ſhould be applied to make this diſtinction. The reaſon thereof (as I thinke) is this. The Goſpell by the preaching of the Apoſtles, was ſpred farre & neere ouer the face of the earth, & accordingly diuers Churches in diuers places eſtabliſhed: all which agreed in the vnitie of the ſame faith and doctrine. But Sathan, 
                        Mat. 13. 25. who is alwaies watching to ſow cockle, and darnell among the wheat, ſtirred vp here and there 
                        Act. 20. 30. certaine peruerſe and trouble ſome men, who ſet abroach errors to corrupt the truth of Doctrine. Now theſe teachers being diſcouered, that there might be a difference of name betwixt true Chriſtians and them (for the name of chriſtian was common to both) ſo that euerie man might learne, by the verie name to auoid the

heretickes; it was thought meete by the learned and carefull gouernours of the ſeuerall Churches, that hereticks ſhould be called by ſome ſpeciall name, either of their author, or of ſome point of error, which they held: and the true profeſſors ſhould haue the title of Catholicks, becauſe they maintained the truth of that doctrine, which was generally profeſſed by the Churches of God. In this ſenſe Pacian. vbi ſupra. Pacianus ſaith, that Chriſtian was his name, and Catholicke his ſirname. Hee that ſhall aduiſedly conſider the vſe of the word in 
                        Cyprian. ad Cornel. Epiſt. 41. Epiſt. 45. Sect. 10. Epiſt. 71. ad Quintum.
                      Cyprian, ſhall perceiue that Catholicke is oppoſed by him to ſchiſme and hereſie; and that ſaid by him, to be done againſt the Catholicke Church, which is done contrarie to the practiſe of the ſeuerall Churches in all countries. So 
                        Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. lib. 7. 
                     Clemens ſaith, that hereſies labour to rend the Church in peeces: and he calleth the Church Catholicke, becauſe of the vnitie of one faith, generally receiued, as may be gathered out of him: though indeed the chiefe thing, which he reſpecteth in the vnitie of the Church, is, that All the elect are made partakers of one and the ſame ſaluation, according to the couenant of God, which in all ages hath bene one and the ſame. Wherin he ſeemes to apply the terme Catholicke to time: but the reaſon of the name by the generall and conſtant iudgement of the ancient writers, is rather the generality of the Church, profeſſing the ſame doctrine in all places. Therefore your great Biſhop 
                        Canus loc. Theol. lib. 4. cap. poſtre.
                      Melchior Canus, expounding this title, ſaith that the Church is called Catholicke, becauſe in euery country, people, and nation, ſexe and condition, it is ſpred farre and neere. And by this difference (ſaith he afterward) it is diſtinguiſhed, not onely from the Synagogue (or Iewiſh Church) but alſo from the conuenticles of hereticks. So doth your Catechiſ. Concil. Trident. in expoſ. ſymb. catechiſme of Trent, ſet out by Pius Quintus, vnderſtand Catholicke. The Church is called Catholicke, becauſe it is ſpred, in the light of one faith, from the Eaſt to the Weſt, receiuing men of all ſorts, be they Soythians, or Barbarians, bond or free, male or female. Then followeth, the vniuerſalitie of time, containing all the faithfull, which haue bene from Adam euen till this day, or ſhall be hereafter till the end of the world, profeſſing the true faith, and being built vpon Chriſt, vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. If then we reſtraine the

                     Catholickneſſe of the Church, to vniuerſalitie of place, wherein (as we haue ſeene) perſons are alſo contained, The Catholicke Church is nothing elſe, but the companie of the elect, taken now ordinarily not onely out of the Iewes, as heretofore till the comming of our Sauiour, but alſo out of all nations and people whatſoeuer. If we ſtretch it farther to vniuerſalitie of time alſo, which can hardly be prooued out of the ancient writers, it comprehendeth all the elect that haue bene, are, and ſhall be, from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof. And thus much of the Catholicke Church, concerning the meaning; and reaſon of the word.
                  Now to your proofe, as it lieth, not by way of refutation, but of explication. We grant (as I haue ſaid often) that the Church is common to all people, and places, not ſhut vp any longer within the land of Iewry, nor appropriated to the Iews; and we condemne them of error, who teach (as ſometimes the Donatiſts & Rogatians did) that it is encloſed in Affrick or Europe, or Aſia, or America, or any of theſe, and not common to euerie one of them, aſwell as to any of them. But this is not ſo to be vnderſtood, as if the Church of Chriſt muſt needs be in all theſe, or many of theſe at once in any one time. It is enough that we acknowledge the vniuerſality of it de iure, thogh we denie it to be here, or there de facto: To ſpeake plaine, it belōgeth to the nature of the Church of Chriſt, to haue all places open to it, & it is no more tied to Rome or Ieruſalem, then it is to London or Paris, yea it hath ſpred it ſelfe ouer the face of the whole earth, and hath bene, or ſhall be in euerie particular countrie: but this largeneſſe, hath not bene, nor perhaps ſhall be, at any one time, but by ſucceſſion, as it hath pleaſed God to affoord the meanes of the Goſpell, and giue a bleſſing to it, ſometimes in one place, ſometimes in an other, as your ſelfe preſently acknowledge. But this doth not prooue, that it is a marke to know the Church by.
                  This reaſon of the name Catholicke, is a mere deuiſe of your owne, and without warrant of antiquitie. I ſay more, it is falſe too, vnderſtanding it as you do, not of the Church of the elect, but of a companie of men making knowne profeſſion of the true
                     
                     faith. For in 
                        Act. 2. 1. 2. the beginning, when the Church of Chriſt was as pure and as glorious, as euer it was ſince, it ſtretched not it ſelfe beyond the borders of Iewrie, but was for a time ſhut vp within the walles of Ieruſalem: 
                        Act. 8. 4. till the Lord by Herods perſecution, made way for it to paſſe into all the world. From that time forward it grew mightily, and ſetled it ſelfe in many countries, yea it ceaſed not to multiply till the reuealing of Antichriſt, who by little and little, corrupted the truth of doctrine, euen in the fundamentall points, and ſo deſtroyed the Church of God out of theſe parts of the world; where it had floriſhed ſome hundreds of yeares. Yet was not the world left without a true Church, no not in theſe weſterne countries: but ſuch was the ſtate of it, as that it remained in a few choſen ſeruants of God, who were hidden, 1. Reg. 18. 13. like thoſe fifties in Iſrael, from the eies of your rauenous wolues, the bloudthirſty Cleargy of your Romiſh Synagogue.
                  Saint Auſtin in that booke, you alledge, had to do with the Donatiſts, who inſolently and wickedly rent themſelues from the vnion of all the chriſtian Churches then in the world, allowing no other Church of Chriſt, but that faction of their owne in a part of Africa. 
                        Aug. de vnit. Eccle. cap. 12. They neither could, nor did charge the Churches, which they condemned, with any groſſe error in doctrine: but confidently affirmed without all ground of truth, or likelihood of reaſon, that the Churches planted by the Apoſtles, were vaniſhed out of the world: for ſupply whereof, I know not by what miracle, their Church forſooth ſprung vp vpon a ſodaine in that corner of Africa. This ridiculous conceit of theirs Auſtin refuteth, by ſhewing that the Church is to be ſought and found in the Scriptures, and not in the deuiſes and dreames of men. Let vs not heare (ſaith 
                        Vbi ſupra. cap. 3. Auſtin) this I ſay, this you ſay, but let vs heare, this ſaith the Lord: The Lords bookes are to be had, to the authoritie whereof both of vs conſent, both giue credit, both of vs obey. There let vs ſeeke the Church, there let vs trie our cauſe. And a little after, I will not haue the Church ſhewed me by mens deuiſes, but by the Oracles of God. And againe afterward, when the hereticks expound the performance of the promiſe made to Abraham. 
                        Gen. 15. 5. 
                     Thy ſeed ſhall be as the ſand of the ſea,
                     
                     and as the Starres of heauen; as if it had bene fulfilled in Donatus and his companie, 
                        Vbi ſupra. cap. 6. Auſtin anſwereth: Reade vs this, out of the Law, out of the Prophets, out of the Pſalmes, out of the Goſpell it ſelfe, out of the Apoſtles writings; reade it, and we beleeue it. This foundation being laid in the fiue firſt chapters, Auſtin proceedeth to prooue the vniuerſalneſſe of continuance of the Church, out of the Scriptures; out of the old Teſtament, Out of the Law. cap. 6. Out of the Prophets. c. 7 Out of the Pſalmes. c. 8. in the three next chapters, out of the new in the teſt. So that the argument you ſpeake of, beginneth at the ſixt chapter, the Maior or propoſitiō is in the firſt chapters to the ſixt, the Aſſumption or Minor in the other that follow. But becauſe you leaue thoſe three chapters, that ſhew what the Church ſhould be out of the old Teſtament, I will follow your courſe, and begin at the ninth: where Auſtin ſheweth that the Church was to begin at Ieruſalem, and ſo to paſſe into Samaria, and from thence to ſpread it ſelfe through the whole world. To this he bringeth in the Donatiſts thus anſwering. Theſe things (ſay they) we beleeue, and confeſſe that they are fulfilled: but afterward the world fell away, and onely Donatus companie remained. VVhat doth Auſtin replie? Let them reade this to vs (ſaith Chap. 12. Auſtin) as they reade of Enoch, of Noe, & of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, and of the Tribes which remained, the reſt rending themſelues away, and of the twelue Apostles, who continued faithfull, when all other fell away. Theſe examples the Donatiſts had brought to countenāce their ſchiſme. Auſtin willeth them to prooue their ſtedfaſtneſſe, when all other Churches failed, by the ſame Scriptures, which were to beare witneſſe of thoſe, whom they alledged. He goeth forward to refute other arguments of theirs in the chapter following, ſtill preſſing them with this, that they ſhould ſhew out of the Scriptures, that the Church founded by the Apoſtles was to vaniſh away, and their faction onely to remaine ſincere. This was his courſe, and indeed, what other courſe could he haue taken? The hereticks, as before I haue noted, did not accuſe the Catholicks of any error, againſt the foundation, whereby they might prooue, they had ceaſed to be of the Church: but onely vrged verie abſurdly a dreame of their owne, that all, but they of Donatus part, were

fallen away. What is this to the queſtion betwixt you and vs? We ſhew euidence of Scripture, to prooue that 2. Theſſ. 2. 3. See D Abbot and D. Downam of Antichriſt. there was to be a defection, that Antichriſt, the head of that defection, is to be the chiefe gouernour of the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate, that his ſeat is to be at Rome: yea we manifeſtly conuince your Apoſtaticall Church of many and groſſe hereſies: ſome of them directly ouerthrowing the foundation of our Sauiour Chriſts mediatorſhip, for the whole puniſhment of all our ſinnes, and the loue of God in chooſing vs to euerlaſting life, without reſpect of any thing on our part, wherby we, & not he, make difference of our ſelues from other: that is, we prooue that the doctrine of your Church is vtterly falſe, in the maine points of predeſtination, & iuſtification, without the true beleefe whereof, there can hardly be any true religion: becauſe the greateſt part of Gods glory, which is the end of all religion, is ouerthrowne, or hidden by ſuch errors, as your Church maintaines in theſe matters of iuſtification and predeſtination. But to the matter. This generall ground of Auſtins diſputation we acknowledge to be good and ſound: as for that which he addeth, and you eſpecially vrge, I anſwer with Auſtins good leaue, that the place he brings, prooues not a continuall increaſe of the Church, from 
                        Anſelmus ad Col. 1. 6. time to time, but onely, that when the Apoſtle writ, there had bene a good growth of the ſeed of the Goſpell, as among 
                        Col. 1. 6. the Coloſſians, ſo in the whole world. And whereas he doth aſſay to prooue, that there muſt be an increaſe of the Goſpell, till the end of the world, becauſe our Sauiour in the Parable ſaith, that 
                        Mat. 13. 30 
                     the good ſeed muſt grow till that time: we craue leaue to diſſent from him, till it be prooued, that the Parable is ſo to be vnderſtood, and that the Apoſtle ſo intended that ſpeech of his. For Parables, Auſtin himſelfe hath taught vs, in this verie queſtion againſt the Donatiſts, 
                        Aug. ad Vincent. epiſt. 48. 
                     that no man may apply any thing out of a Parable, to prooue his purpoſe by, vnleſſe he can ſhew euident and cleare reaſon for his interpretation. But this euidence ſeemes to be wanting in this expoſition of the Parable. For the ſcope of the Parable is not to prooue, that the Church ſhall continually increaſe till the end of the world: but to ſhew that in the outward congregations, good and bad ſhall be alwaies

mingled together, and ſo doth 
                        Aug. contr. epiſt. Parm. lib. 1. cap. 7. & lib. 2. cap. 2. Contr. lit. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 2 Contr. Creſcon. lib. 2. cap. 35 Contr. Donat. poſt. Collat. cap. 6. 8 Auſtin himſelfe euery where expound the place. And ſurely if from hence we may prooue ſuch a continuall growth of the Church, may we not from the ſame place conclude the like of hereſies? 
                        Mat. 13. 38 
                     Let them both grow together vntill the harueſt, ſaith the text. But what ſhould I make many words about this Parable? Our Sauiour himſelfe expounds it 
                        verſ. 37 afterward, and makes no ſuch collection of the Churches increaſe, til the worlds end. And 
                        Hieron. ad Math. 13 Ierome willeth vs not to be ouer haſtie to geſſe at the meaning of the Parable, becauſe the expoſitiō of it in the text, is deferred from the 13. verſe to the 37. but to wait til our Sauiour giue vs the interpretatiō; who hath giuen vs to vnderſtand, that the good ſeed are the children of the kingdome, not as in the Apoſtle, the Goſpel: how then are they all one? Beſide, the Parable ſpeaketh not of the outward Church, that is, of all profeſſors, all which are mēbers of your Church, if they hold of your Pope; but of the true Church indeed, the elect of God, called 
                        verſ. 43 
                     the children of the kingdome: all the good ſeed (ſaith our Sauiour) are iuſt men, and ſhall ſhine as the Sunne in the kingdome of their Father: So ſhall not all your Church do, many of your number, by your owne confeſſion, being wicked and reprobate, neither iuſt, nor to haue any place in heauen. But the decay of your owne Popiſh Church (me thinketh) ſhould ſufficiently refute this conceit.
                  
                     
                        Math. 24. 14 The other place alledged to prooue that the propagation of the Goſpell muſt increaſe till the end of the world, is neither rightly vnderſtood, nor of any force to the matter in queſtion. To ſpeake of the latter point in a word. Let vs grant, that by the end, the end of the world is ſignified. What of that? Our Sauiour doth not ſay, that the Church ſhall grow greater and greater till the end of the world, but that the Goſpell ſhall be preached in all places, before the world haue an end: ſo may it be, though after it is once preached for ſome few yeares, it be out of the world for many yeares together, and afterward be againe begun: and this may befall it oftentimes for all that prophecie. Let vs further yeeld, that it ſhall alwaies continue in the world, (as doubtleſſe it ſhall;) yet is there not hereupon

any ſuch neceſſitie of this growth to be inferred. For it may be preached in all places, and yet loſe more in one countrie, then it getteth in three, paſſing along with a ſmall retinew, from one land to another. Now for the other point, it is apparent that our Sauiour, at the leaſt in that former part of the Chapter, prophecieth of the deſtruction of Ieruſalem; before which (ſaith he) the Goſpell ſhall be preached through the whole world. The end (ſaith 
                        Chryſoſt. ad Mat. hom. 76. Chryſoſtome) namely the end of Ieruſalem. And he prooueth that the Goſpell was ſo preached by 
                        Rom. 10. 18. Col. 1. 6. two places of Scripture, the one whereof is, that out of the Epiſtle to the Coloſſians. Of the ſame opinion is 
                        Thophyl. ad Mat. 24. & ibi Gloſſ. ordin. & Lyra.
                      Theophylact, and your ordinarie Gloſſe, and Lyra, who vndertaketh to ſhew, that the Goſpell had bene preached in the three knowne parts of the world, Africa, Aſia, and Europe, before Ieruſalem was deſtroyed by Titus and Veſpaſian. 
                        Ianſen. harm. cap. 22. Ianſenius Biſhop of Gaunt diſputeth the point, and concludeth, for all Auſtins authoritie, and reaſons, that it ſeemeth we are rather to hold with Chryſoſtome, that our Sauiour ſpeaketh of the end of Ieruſalem. Which (ſaith he) is euidently gathered from this, that after our Lord had ſaid; Then commeth the end, he preſently addeth: when therefore you ſhall ſee the abhomination of deſolation, &c. For, the bringing in of this ſignifieth, that he obſerueth the order of things to come, and teacheth, what was to be done, when the end whereof he ſpake, ſhould come.
                  
                  All this part of your diſcourſe, to prooue that hereſies are not Catholicke, either from time or place, might verie well haue bene ſpared. For who ever imagined, that error was before truth, when as it is nothing elſe but a ſtraying from the truth? Yet haue ſome hereſies bene of long continuance, as Arianiſme for a great while; which was alſo ſo vniuerſall for a time, that (as Hieron. dialog. contr. Lu
                        
                           ••
                        fcrian. Ierome ſaith) the world wondred at it ſelfe, that it was become an Arian. But what ſhould I waſte time and labour about theſe things, wherein we are of one minde? Let it be enough for me againe to put you in minde, that this Catholickneſſe can be no good marke to diſcerne the Church by, from heretiks, becauſe it wanteth your ſecōd propertie of plainneſſe
                     
                     and eaſineſſe to be knowne: yea there is a meere impoſſibilitie that any man ſhould know, that any hereſie ſhall haue an end before the end of the world: or that it ſhall not ſpread far and neare ouer the world: yea it paſſeth the reach of ordinary men to know certainly, that any hereſie hath not bene ſince the beginning of the Goſpell, becauſe this matter requireth ſome ſpeciall knowledge of ſtorie, whereof moſt men are ignorant.
                  The Church in 
                        Auguſt. lib. 4. de Symb. c. 10. Saint Auſtins time, by the bleſſing of God was ſo inlarged, that it had poſſeſſion of many parts of the world; and in compariſon of it, hereſies (yea the Arian hereſie) was but in corners. In this goodly eſtate continued it for the moſt part, till (as before I obſerued) Antichriſt brake out, and ouerthrew the very foundation of faith. But if any man will ſo far preſſe Auſtins authoritie, as to make vniuerſalitie a certaine marke of the church; how will he credit the holy Ghoſt affirming by 2. Theſſ. 2. 4. Saint Paul, that there muſt be a generall falling away; and by 
                        Apoc. 12. 6. Saint Iohn, that the church muſt flie into the wilderneſſe, and there lie hidden a long time?
                  The 
                        Auguſt. de vnit. eccl. cap. 3. other teſtimonie out of Auſtin, you tranſlate falſly, to make it ſerue your turne the better. For Auſtin ſaith not, that Hereſies are not found in many nations, but that euery ſeuerall hereſie is not found in many nations where the Church is. But admit there were ſome churches without any hereſie for a time, and neuer any hereſie but where there is alſo a true church; yet g Singulae haereſes.
                      doth not Auguſtine ſay, that euery man may eaſily diſcerne the true church from hereticall aſſemblies: becauſe it may fall out, as it hath done, that hereſie, as Arianiſme, ſhall be more generall then true Religion. Let vs father grant, that whatſoeuer hath vniuerſally bin receiued in the Chriſtian world, eſpecially at all times, is true: yet cannot this Catholickneſſe be a good note of the church, becauſe (if I ſhall make bold to repeate the ſame again) it is hardly poſſible for any man to vnderſtand what points haue bin ſo receiued. But you forget your ſelfe very much: for by this rule you appoint them that will iudge which is the church, to enter into ſuch a maze, as they ſhall neuer get out of, if they ſhall not acknowledge any church for true, but that

which holdeth all things that haue euer generally bene held in the Chriſtian world. But of Catholickneſſe this may ſuffice.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  
                     Lastly, the true Church is alſo Apoſtolicke, that is to ſay, ſuch as hath her foundation from the Apoſtles, according to that ſaying of the Apostle S. Paul: Non eſtis hoſpites & aduenae, ſed eſtis 
                        Epheſ. 2. ciues ſanctorum & domeſtici Dei, ſuperae dificati ſupra fundamentum Apoſtolorum & Prophetarum, ipſo ſummo angulari lapide Chriſto Ieſu: You are not ſtrangers and forreiners, but you are citizens of the ſaints and the domeſticals of God, built vpon the foundation of the Apoſtles and Prophets, Ieſus Christ himſelfe being the higheſt corner ſtone. This we may gather out of that which is already ſaid. For if the Apoſtles were they which were appointed by our Sauior, to be vnder him the founders of his church, which by their preaching began at Ieruſalem, and from thence by 
                     
                        Act. 1. Act. 2. Aug. l. de Paſtor. cap. 8. 
                     them, and thoſe that receiued authoritie from them, tanquam vitis creſcendo vbique diffuſa eſt, (as S. Austin ſpeaketh) like a vine by growing was ſpred abroade euery where: and being thus first planted and ſpred abroad, was afterwards by the miniſtery of lawfully ſucceeding Paſtors and Doctors continued without interruption till now, and ſhall be alſo continued till the worlds end: there is no doubt but that this companie (deſcending thus lineally from the Apoſtles, and depending of them as their lawfull progenitors, and being built vpon them, as (after Chriſt himſelfe) vpon principall foundations) may well be called Apoſtolicke, that is to ſay, ſuch as deriue their pedegree from no other author or founder, later then the Apostles themſelues. All this doth Tertullian briefly, but pithily comprehend in this ſhort ſentence: Apoſtoli apud vnamquamque ciuitatem Eccleſias condiderunt; ab his autem ciuitatibus ſeu Lib. de praeſcrip Eccleſijs ab Apoſtolis conſtitutis, traducem fidei, & ſemina doctrinae, caeterae exinde Eccleſiae mutuatae ſunt, & quotidie mutuantur vt Eccleſiae fiāt, ac per hoc & ipſae Apoſtolicae deputabuntur, vt ſoboles Apoſtolicarum Eccleſiarum: The Apoſtles (to wit, either immediatly by themſelues, or by meanes of others) founded Churches at euery citie: from which cities or Churches being thus founded by the Apoſtles, other Churches afterward did borrow, and do daily borrow the ofspring of faith, and the ſeeds of doctrine, that
                     
                     they may be made Churches, and by this meanes theſe alſo ſhall be accounted Apoſtolicke, as being the iſſue of the Apoſtolicall Churches.
                  
                  
                     Contrariwiſe, no conuenticle of heretickes can be Apoſtolicke, by reaſon that hereſie (being an vpſtart noueltie, contrarie to the former receiued faith of the Church) cannot haue any Apoſtle or Apoſtolick man for author and founder, but is forced to acknowledge ſome other, of whom as it receiued the firſt being, ſo moſt commonly either the doctrine or the men that follow it, or both, receiue alſo their name, as of Arius came Arianiſme and the Arians, of Montanus came the Montaniſts and Montaniſme; and there was neuer yet hereticke, which could deriue the pedegree of his congregation by vninterrupted ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles: which maketh Tertullian to vrge them ſo earnestly, ſaying: Edant haeretici origines Lib. de praeſcrip Eccleſiarum ſuarum, euoluant ordinem Epiſcoporum, ita per ſucceſſiones decurrentes, vt primus ille Epiſcopus, aliquem ex Apoſtolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apoſtolis perſeuerauerit, authorem habuerit & anteceſſorem: Let the heretickes ſhew the beginning of their Churches (or, as they had rather ſay, of their congregations) let them vnfold the order of their Biſhops or ſuperintendents, ſo running downe by ſucceſſions, that the firſt of them ſhall haue for his author in doctrine, and predeceſſors in place, any Apoſtolicke man, who did perſeuere, and did not forſake the Apoſtles. Thus did Tertullian vrge them, becauſe he knew well that they could neuer make this proper note of the true Church to agree to their companie.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This laſt part of your diſcourſe, ſhould proue the fourth point of your former aſſumption, that, to be Apostolicke, is a propertie belonging onely to the true Church, and not hard to be diſcerned in any companie whereſoeuer it is. If all this were proued, yet were your ſyllogiſme nothing worth, becauſe I iuſtly excepted againſt the conſequence of your propoſition, which remains ſtil without any confirmation. But to let that paſſe: how idle is this proof of yours, wherein the latter part of that you ſhould proue, is quite omittted, that it is no hard matter for any ſimple man to diſcerne which Church is Apoſtolicke, which is not? If you make not this cleare, you proue nothing: and yet euery man may ſee, that

it is a matter of no ſmall ſtudie, nor ſhort time, to examine what Churches were firſt founded by the Apoſtles, and haue had an orderly ſucceſſion without interruption from time to time: yea when a man hath made the beſt ſearch he can, what hath he to reſt himſelfe vpon, but the report of men, who might deceiue, and be deceiued? And yet this ado euery poore ſoule muſt haue before he can tell to what Church he may ioyne himſelfe for his ſpirituall inſtruction in matters concerning euerlaſting life. You will aske, what courſe we take for a mans direction in this caſe? Surely the very ſame which the Scriptures teſtify we ought to follow. We propound out of the Scriptures the meanes of ſaluation: we giue our people libertie to examine that we deliuer, by the touchſtone of truth, the ſame Scriptures of God: we deſire not to haue any credit giuen to that we teach (as a matter of faith) but ſo far forth as we can proue it manifeſtly by the word of God. Thus we begin with men, thus we continue; leauing the ſucceſſe of our poore miniſtery to the bleſſing of Gods Spirit, in the hearts of them that vouchſafe vs the hearing. But for better direction in the triall of our doctrine, wee giue this rule, that true religion firſt reſpects the glory of God, and then the preſent comfort and euerlaſting ſaluation of them that profeſſe it. Whether courſe, yours or ours be more reaſonable, and more agreeable to Scripture, I leaue it to the conſideration of al men whom it doth concerne, and returne to the examining of your proofe: whereof there are theſe two parts, that the true Church is Apoſtolicke, that no conuenticle of heretickes can be Apoſtolicke.
                  
                  Of the former thus you diſpute:

                        If euery true Church muſt haue ſuch a foundation as the Church of the Epheſians had, and ſhe had her foundation from the Apoſtles; then euery true Church muſt haue her foundation from the Apoſtles.
                        But euery true Church muſt haue ſuch a foundation as the Church of the Epheſians had, and ſhe had her foundation from the Apoſtles.
                        Therefore euery true Church muſt haue her foundation from the Apoſtles.
                     
                  
                  
                     
I would make no queſtion of any part of your Syllogiſme, if To the Aſſumption. by foundation from the Apoſtles, you vnderſtood nothing but Apoſtolicall doctrine, which is indeed the maine foundation of all true Churches: but you afterward expound your meaning, and acknowledge no foundation from the Apoſtles, but by the miniſtery of ſuch as can deriue their ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles, without any interruption. In this ſenſe therefore I denie your minor, becauſe the former part of it is falſe. For euery true Church hath not, nor need haue, to make it a true Church, ſuch foundation as the Church of the Epheſians had. Yea though we doubt not, but that the Epheſiās were conuerted to the faith by ſome of the Apoſtles, and perhaps by the 
                        Act. 18. 19. Eph. 2. 12. Apoſtle Paul: yet we doe not beleeue that the Apoſtle, in the place alledged by you, ſpeakes of any ſuch foundation, but of the truth of doctrine taught by the Apoſtles. This may appeare, becauſe the Apoſtle makes the Prophets their foundation, as wel as the Apoſtles. But certaine it is, that neither the Prophets, nor any by ſucceſſion from them, laid the foundation of the Goſpell amongſt the Epheſians. He meanes (ſaith 
                        Theodo. ad Epheſ. 2. Tertull. contra Marciō. lib. 5. cap. 17. Ambroſ. ad Epheſ. 2. Theodoret) the Prophets of the old Teſtament, not of the new: leſt you ſhould cauill about the name Prophets. Beſides, the foundation of the Apoſtles muſt be conceiued, as our Sauiour Chriſt is the corner ſtone to the Epheſians: not becauſe he preached to them, but for that they reſted vpon him as a corner ſtone, the doctrine of the Apoſtles being the foundation. And if we will tie this to the perſons that deliuer 
                        Thomas in expoſit. Symb. §. Sanct. Eccle.
                      the doctrine, then to be the foundation is ſo proper to the Apoſtles, as that it cannot agree to any other man whatſoeuer, how Apoſtolicke ſoeuer he may be imagined to be. For 
                        Apoc. 21. 14. this was their ſpeciall honor aboue all other Chriſtians. Thus doe the beſt interpreters expound the place: 
                        Ʋpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that is (ſaith 
                        Ambroſ. ad Eph. 2. Ambroſe) vpon the new and old Teſtament. For that which the Apoſtles preached, the Prophets foretold. As for the Prophets of the new Teſtament, They (ſaith 
                        Ambroſ. ad Eph. 2. 20. Ambroſe) are for the ordering of the Church founded, and not for the founding of it. Ʋpon Chriſt (ſaith your 
                        Gloſſ. interl. ad Eph. 2. 20. Gloſſe) or vpon the doctrine of the Apoſtles. So Lyra. ibi. Lyra, 
                        Ʋpon the doctrine of the new and old Teſtament. With whom Lombard. ibi. Lombard agreeth, though

he expound it alſo of Chriſt. So doth Thomas ibi. Thomas: 
                        Ʋpon their doctrine. So doth Caietan. ibi. Caietan vnderſtand it; that a man may wonder at your ignorance or boldneſſe, in going againſt the ſtreame of your owne Doctors, without any ſhew of reaſon for it.
                  Wherefore if your minor intend no more, but that euery true Church is builded vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apoſtles, in reſpect of their doctrine, no exception could be taken againſt it. For 1. Cor 3. 11. 
                     other foundation no man can lay but Ieſus Chriſt: according to the preaching and propheſying of the Apoſtles and Prophets. This foundation had the Church of Epheſus, 
                        Anſel. ad Eph. 2. and in this muſt euery true Church agree with it. But you apply this to I know not what dependance of ſucceſſion, which hath no kinde of warrant from that place of the Apoſtle.
                  To ſupply your want of proofe from the Scriptures, that euery true Church must haue her foundation from ſome Apoſtle, or ſome man who can fetch his pedegree, without interruption, from the Apoſtles: you ſeeke to draw in Tertullian for a witneſſe of your error. Let vs heare his depoſitiō. The Apoſtles (ſaith 
                        Tertul. de praeſcrip. cap. 20. Tertullian) founded Churches in euery citie. Here to helpe your ſelfe, you adde this gloſſe: To wit, either immediatly by themſelues, or by meanes of other. What reaſon is there, that he that is a partie in the ſuite, ſhould haue the expoūding of the witneſſes meaning? Tertullian ſaith, the Apoſtles founded Churches: you tell vs, he meanes they did ſo by themſelues or by others. How ſhall we know, that you are ſo priuy to his meaning? If you ground your expoſition vpon thoſe words (in euery citie,) whereas the Apoſtles came not in diuers cities that were then in the world: I pray remember that there were at that time many cities, into which we are not ſure that the Goſpell had before Tertullians time bin receiued. The learned man may ſpeake in generall, and yet with ſpeciall relation to thoſe places which were then knowne to be Churches founded by the Apoſtles, as Ieruſalem, Antioch, Rome, Alexandria, Epheſus, &c. He addes farther, that From theſe Churches founded by the Apoſtles, other Churches afterward had borrowed, and (in his time) dayly did borrow the 
                     Traducem. 
                     propagation of faith, and ſeeds of doctrine. I make bold to alter

your tranſlation: let the skilfull Reader iudge whether I haue cauſe or no. But what of all theſe? Tertullian doth not ſay, that no Church is to be accounted Apoſtolicke, but that which can without interruption ſhew her deſcent from the Apoſtles; nor that euery Church is true, that can make ſuch proofe of her original. But 
                        Cap. 13. whereas the hereticks, againſt whom he there dealeth, reiected and receiued Scripture at their choiſe and would neuer leaue wrangling; Tertullian appeales to the iudgement of thoſe Churches which were knowne to be founded by the Apoſtles, and in which the truth was moſt likely to be found. As for your argument of ſucceſſion, you ſhall heare Tertullians iudgment of it. Let hereticks (ſaith 
                        Tertull. de praeſcr. cap. 32. Tertullian in the ſame book) faine a ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles: they ſhall get nothing by it. For their doctrine compared with that the Apoſtles taught, by the diuerſitie and contrarietie thereof will declare, that it came not from any Apoſtle or Apoſtolicke man: becauſe as the Apoſtles would not teach contrary one to another: ſo Apoſtolick men would not deliuer doctrine contrary to the Apoſtles, vnleſſe they were ſuch as were fallen away from the Apoſtles, to preach otherwiſe then they did. So then the chiefe triall of a true Church, is by the doctrine of the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors in the truth, becauſe it is poſſible for hereticks to ſhew their deſcent from the Apoſtles, or ſome Churches which had their beginning from the Apoſtles or Apoſtolicke men. Yea 
                        
                           Scor. hiſt. l. 1. cap. 3.
                        
                           Augu. de haer
                                 •
                              ſ. cap. 91. 92. 51.
                      it is manifeſt, that the greateſt hereſies (as the foure maine ones condemned in the foure firſt generall Councels) had their beginning of them who could ſhew their pedegree ſtep by ſtep from the Apoſtles, in reſpect of outward ſucceſſion.
                  We haue ſoone how weakly you haue proued that perſonall ſucceſſion is a thing belonging to the true Church: it remaines that you proue it to be proper to the church, and not common to it with heretickes. To which purpoſe you thus reaſon:

                        No vpſtart noueltie contrary to the former faith of the Church, can haue any Apoſtle or Apoſtolicke man for founder thereof.
                        Euery hereſie is an vpſtart noueltie, contrary to the former faith of the Church.
                        
                           
Therefore no hereſie can haue any Apoſtle or Apoſtolicke man for the founder thereof.
                     
                  
                  How much more truly and reaſonably ſpake Tertullian of To the propoſition. the like matter, when he ſaid, that 
                        Tertull. de praeſcr. cap. 32. 
                     no Apoſtolicke man taught contrary to the Apoſtles, vnleſſe he were ſuch a one as was fallen from the Apoſtles? He ſaw and acknowledged, that it was poſſible for a man inſtructed by the Apoſtles themſelues, to forſake the truth of doctrine, and become an author or maintainer of hereſie. Doth not 1. Ioā. 2. 18. 19 Saint Iohn ſpeake of ſome, who being bred vp in the church, by hereſie departed from it? What ſhould I name 1. Tim. 1. 20. Hymenaeus, Alexāder, 2. Tim. 1. 15. Phygellus, Hermogenes, 
                        Apoc. 2. 6. Nicolas, and ſuch like? Hardly can you name me any hereſie that euer tooke rooting, but the firſt plant of it ſprung vp in the nurſery of the Church. Therefore your maior is altogether vntrue, being vnderſtood as it is, of Apoſtolicke men, in reſpect of perſonall ſucceſſion, not of ſucceeding the Apoſtles in truth of doctrine.
                  But you thinke to make good your propoſition by Tertullians 
                        Tertull. de praeſcr. cap. 32. authoritie, who challengeth the heretickes to ſhew the beginning of their Churches from ſome Apoſtolicke men. Is it poſſible you ſhould either write or reade that ſentence of Tertullian, and not perceiue that it cuts the very throate of your cauſe? Doth not Tertullian in the ſentence alledged by you, directly confirme our opinion, and ouerthrow yours? Let them ſhew vs their beginning (ſaith Tertullian) from ſome Apoſtolicke man. Is that enough? I: if we beleeue you, who define Apoſtolicknes by perſonal ſucceeding the Apoſtles. But what ſaith Tertullian? He in plaine termes requires ſuch an Apoſtolicke man as perſeuered with the Apoſtles, and forſooke them not. Now that by this perſeuering with the Apoſtles, and not forſaking them, he meanes agreement in doctrine; I proue it euidently by that which followeth in the ſame Chapter. Firſt, Tertullian ſhewes that it is in vaine for them to pleade ſucceſſion in place, if their doctrine be found contrary to that which the Apoſtles deliuered: I ſet downe the ſentence before. Secondly, he doubts not to ſay, that by the hereticks diſagreeing from the Apoſtles in doctrine, thoſe Churches which cannot proue themſelues to be

Apoſtolicke, by naming any Apoſtle, or Apoſtolicke man, as the firſt founder of them, may yet conuince them not to be Apoſtolicke; and are themſelues to be counted Apoſtolicke, becauſe of their conſent in doctrine, with the Apoſtles. This is the ſumme of Tertullians words: the words themſelues run thus. To this triall (namely by doctrine, as the next ſentence before ſheweth) ſhall the hereticks be called by thoſe Churches; which though they cannot alledge any Apostle or Apoſtolicke man for their founder, as being of late, and now daily planted: yet agreeing in the ſame doctrine are neuertheleſſe counted Apoſtolicke, by reaſon of their 
                     Conſanguinitate doctrinae. 
                     agreement in doctrine. Do you not ſee, that Tertullian diſputeth for vs, againſt your pretended ſucceſſion? That he confeſſeth, heretickes may alledge perſonall ſucceſſion? That he acknowledgeth thoſe Churches for true, which cannot deriue their pedegree from the Apoſtles, or any Apoſtolicke man? That he maketh the truth of doctrine agreeing with the Apoſtles, a certaine and neceſſarie marke of the true Church? And are you not aſhamed, for all this, to bring Tertullian for an author of ſo groſſe an error? VVere you ſo blinde that you diſcerned not this your ſelfe, or did you ſo deſpiſe your Readers, that you preſumed, they would neuer haue the wit to ſee your ignorance or craft? It is now diſcouered ſufficiently, and yet this one point more muſt be added: that Tertullian requireth this ſhew of their Churches beginning, not of all heretickes, as you deceitfully alledge him (if you read him your ſelfe, and tooke him not vpon credit, at ſome other mans hands) but onely of thoſe, who pleade their continuance from the time of the Apoſtles. If any hereſies (ſaith Tertullian) dare fetch their continuance from the Apoſtles time, that therefore they may ſeeme Apoſtolicke, becauſe they were, while the Apoſtles liued; we may ſay, let them ſhew the beginning of their Churches, let them vnfould the ſucceſſion of their Biſhops, &c. With ſuch learning and conſcience doe you Papiſts alledge the Fathers, that he muſt needes be honeſter, and wiſer then you, that will not beleeue you, vpon your bare word. VVe ſee then, that to be Apoſtolicke, in your ſenſe, is no good marke of a true Church: becauſe Hereticall

Churches may ſo be Apoſtolicke, and true Churches not Apoſtolicke; and contrariwiſe, that to be Apoſtolicke in doctrine, as we expound it, is a moſt certaine note, whereby a true Church may be knowne, and the ſame, that we onely allow of.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  
                     It appeareth therefore plaine enough, that theſe foure properties, One, Holy, Catholicke and Apoſtolicke agree onely to the true Church; and ſith it is no hard matter for any to ſee or know, which companie of Chriſtians hath theſe properties (as in the next Chapter I ſhall declare,) it is alſo plaine, that theſe foure, One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, (being proper to the true Church: and apparent enough) are good notes or markes, by which men may diſcerne, which companie of thoſe, which haue the name of Chriſtians, and which profeſſe (as euerie companie profeſſeth themſelues) to teach the true doctrine of Chriſt, is indeed the true Church, which doubtleſſe teacheth in all points, the true doctrine of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Nay rather it hath euidently appeared, that neuer an one of theſe, nor all of them together, as you vnderſtand them, are any good markes of the true Church: becauſe euerie one of them is ſuch, as that either a true Church may be without them, or at the leaſt, that no ordinarie man is able to iudge, which Church hath theſe properties in it, and which hath not. Whereupon I may ſafely conclude, that your grand ſyllogiſme in this Chapter, which any man may gather out of this laſt part of it, is neither rightly applied to that, which you were to prooue, as I ſhewed in the beginning; nor true it ſelfe, either for the Maior, or Minor, as by my anſwer to it, hath bin prooued. And wheras you adde in the end, that the true Church, doubtleſſe, teacheth in all points the true doctrine of Chriſt: we haue had too much triall of your weakneſſe in iudging, and boldneſſe in affirming, to beleeue this Cuckowes ſong of yours, though you chaunt it ouer neuer ſo often.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XVI. That the Romane Church is One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, and therefore the true Church.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  Although the Romane Church were One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, in ſuch ſenſe as you vnderſtand theſe titles, yet were it not therefore the true Church: becauſe there is neuer an one of theſe properties, except it be holineſſe, (which can be a marke of the Church to no man, becauſe no man can iudge of it) but may, for the nature of it, agree to ſome hereticall aſſembly.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Thus farre my diſcourſe hath gone along all in generalities, in ſhewing the neceſſitie of true faith: and that this faith is to be learned of the true Church: and that this Church continueth alwaies, and is viſible, as being a viſible company of men profeſſing the true faith of Chriſt: partaking his Sacraments: and liuing vnder the gouernment of lawfull Paſtors his ſubſtitutes: and that, (whereas diuers companies of men take vpon them the title of this Church, whereby ſame do ſtand in doubt, which companie is the true Church) there be certaine markes, by which the true Church may be certainly knowne, and diſcerned from all other companies or congregations: and finally, that theſe markes be thoſe foure, One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, which are certainly knowne to be the properties of the true Church, both by the Nicene Creed, and alſo by plaine teſtimonies of Scriptures and Fathers.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  This generall diſcourſe of yours hath bene generally ſo weak, and ſo little to purpoſe, that you are now as new to begin, as you were at the firſt. Shall I runne ouer theſe particulars here mentioned? Chap. 1. 
                     True faith is neceſſarie to ſaluation. But not ſuch a faith, as you require, which muſt be Chap. 4. 
                     entire, whole, and ſound in all points, ſo that the misbeleeuing of any one ſhould be damnable. 2. This faith is to be learned (ordinarily) of the miniſters of the true Church: but not to be taken vpon their credit, without any examination of that they deliuer, by the word of God. 3. Chap. 5. 
                     There is no ſuch Church, and much leſſe any ſuch Chap. 11. & 12. 
                     continuance and viſibilitie of it, as you imagine, though it may be ſaid, there is one Church: becauſe all true Churches agree in the ſame doctrine of the Goſpell, as farre as is neceſſarie to ſaluation, ſo that none of them ouerthroweth the foundation. Chap. 13. There are alſo certaine markes, by which true Churches may

be diſcerned from falſe: but Chap. 15. thoſe you name, as you vnderſtand them, neither are to be found in euerie true Church, and (to the vttermoſt of mans iudgemēt) may be in heretical Churches. Now whereas you ſay, that thoſe foure One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, are certainely knowne to be the properties of the true Church; there is no certaine knowledge which are good markes, either by the Nicene Creed, or by the Fathers, but onely by the Scriptures: and neither that Creed, nor the Fathers do approoue of theſe for markes of a true Church, in ſuch ſenſe as you vrge them.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 2.
                  
                     Now it will be good to ſee, if we can by theſe generall grounds conclude, which particular company of men is the true Church of Chriſt: a concluſion of exceeding great conſequence, as touching all matters in controuerſie concerning the doctrine of faith, as may appeare, by the drift of all my former diſcourſe. For the framing of which concluſion, we ſhall not need to bring in compariſon, all the companies or ſects of diuers religions, that haue bene and are in the world: becauſe euerie one can eaſily diſcerne of themſelues, and eſpecially by the helpe of that which hath bene ſaid, that neither Turks, nor Iewes, nor whatſoeuer other infidels, can be the true Church of Chriſt; becauſe theſe neither haue the name of Chriſtians, neither do they profeſſe to haue the name of Chriſt. Neither am I now to meddle with heretickes and ſchiſmatickes of former ages, the which as they haue bin condēned, by the generall conſent of the Church, ſo in continuance of time, they haue bin worne out by the ſame Church, in ſo much, that euen the memorie of them (God be thanked) ſeemeth to be periſhed with them.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  Out of all doubt, if your generall grounds be true, it is poſſible to conclude by them, which particular companie, or rather companies, are true Churches of Chriſt. For neither can the markes of a true Church agree to a falſe: neither are they ſuch, as cannot be diſcerned where they are.
                  Of Iewes and Turkes indeed there can be no queſtion: but what ſay you to the Greeke Churches, and their Patriarckes, who pleade all theſe points for themſelues, as well as you do, and are able to make as good proofe of their Vnitie, Holineſſe, Catholickneſſe, and Apoſtolickneſſe? Yet are you farre from acknowledging

theſe to be true Churches of Chriſt, becauſe forſooth they will not come vnder the ſlauiſh yoake of your Romiſh Antichriſt. Concerning the heretickes, and ſchiſmaticks of former ages, I would to God Chriſtian Churches were as free of them, as we deſire. But Sathan, who in the beginning of the Goſpell laboured p to choake the good ſeed with his cockle and darnell, though for a time he continued in ſecuritie, and like a ſtrong man armed at all points, poſſeſſed his houſe in peace, hauing procured a generall ſubiection to his eldeſt ſonne Antichriſt your Pope; yet when in this, as it were ſecond birth of the Goſpell, he ſaw his kingdome againe in hazard, he betooke himſelfe to his former ſhifts, and ſpread abroad the poyſon of hereſie in diuers countries; that he might giue you his vaſſals occaſion to ſlaunder the doctrine of the Goſpell, as if from it theſe hereſies had riſen. This is one of his deluſions, wherby he deceiues and miſleades many to damnation, though the children of God perceiue his ſubtilty, and reſt vpon the manifeſt truth of the Scripture, for all Sathans practiſes to diſcredit it by this and ſuch other inconueniences, with which he endeauours to haue the preaching of the Goſpell accompanied, for the diſgrace thereof. This courſe alſo he tooke in the firſt beginning of the Goſpell, as it is manifeſt by the multitude and groſſeneſſe of thoſe hereſies, which brake out within the firſt 400 yeares, and were neuer ſince equalled, for number or haynouſneſſe, in twice ſo long a time: that the likeneſſe of Sathans dealing may be an argument of the like truth, he now laboreth to ouerthrow or diſcredit.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 3.
                  
                     My chiefe queſtion and compariſon therefore ſhall be betwixt the Romane Church (that is to ſay, that companie which communicateth, & agreeth in profeſſion of faith, with the Church of Rome, and liueth vnder the obedience (as touching ſpirituall matters) of the Biſhop of Rome, and other Biſhops and Paſtours vnder him,) and the Proteſtants (that is to ſay, that companie, which from Luther his time hitherward, haue oppoſed themſelues againſt the Romane Church) either all or any one ſect of them; my queſtion (I ſay) or compariſon ſhal be, to which of thoſe two, the foure forenamed marks agree, and conſequently, which of them is the true Church.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  Here you propound the matter, and argument of this chapter, which you call a compariſon: as if the queſtion were, whether of the Churches be beautified with thoſe foure properties, & conſequently, whether of them is the true Church. But to ſpeak properly, there is no compariſon intended therein. For our queſtion is not, whether your Synagogue, or our congregations, come nearer the ſtate of true Churches (which ſeemeth to be implied in making a compariſon betwixt them) but whether of them are indeed true Churches? If I ſhould compare your Church of Rome, with the Synagogues of the Iewes, the profeſſion of the Mahometans, or the companies of Anabaptiſts, or other Hereticks, I might finde that your doctrine came nearer to the truth, in many points, and ſo were more likely to ſhew me the true Church, or that theſe foure properties agreed better to you then to them. But this compariſon would not ſettle me in the knowledge of a true Church. The point is, as before I ſhewed, the proofe of your Minor, that the Church of Rome is ſhe, to whom thoſe properties belong. For the further confirmation whereof, you vndertake to prooue, that our congregations haue no intereſt to theſe titles, and this you do, not by way of compariſon, but by an argument of contraries. But let vs take it, as it is, and fall to the examination of your proofes, yet ſtill with this prouiſo, that the Church of Rome, cannot be concluded to be the true Church, nor our congregations falſe Churches, though you had, and we wanted all theſe markes, as you vnderſtand them.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 4.
                  §. SECT. I. That the Romane Church onely is one.
                  
                  
                     Firſt I finde that the Proteſtants Church is not perfectly One, or vniforme in dogmaticall points of faith, but variable, according to the varietie of times and perſons, now holding one thing, then an other; and that the learned men thereof, are ſo much at iarre among themſelues, in matters of faith, that it is hard to finde three, in all points, of one opinion, and (which is chiefely to be pondered, as principally appertaining to the marke of Vnitie) they haue no meanes to end their controuerſies, ſo to returne to Vnitie, and to continue therein. For while as they admit no rule of faith, but only Scripture: which ſcriptures diuers men expoūd diuerſly, according to the diuers
                     
                     humours and affections, opinions and phantaſies of euerie one, neuer one admitting any one head or chiefe ruler, infallibly guided by the holy Ghoſt in his doctrine to whoſe cenſure in matters of faith, euerie one ſhould of neceſſitie ſubmit themſelues, Vt capite conſtituto, ſchiſmatis tollatur occaſio: that, (as Saint Ierome ſpeaketh) a 
                     
                        Lib. 2. cont. Iouin.
                      
                     head or chiefe ruler being ordained, occaſion of ſchiſme or diuiſion may be taken away. Whilest they do thus (as they all doe thus, all proclaiming to be ruled by onely Scripture, and yet almoſt in euerie one, in one point or other, expounding Scripture diuerſly, and one contrarie to an other, according to the diuers ſeeming of euerie ones ſenſe; and neuer one admitting any one ſuperiour, infallibly guided by the holy Ghoſt, to whoſe definitiue ſentence he and the reſt will be bound to ſubmit their doctrine and expoſitions): whileſt (I ſay) they doe thus, it is vnpoſſible that they ſhould In fidei occurrere vnitatem, 
                        S. Hier. in cap. 4. ad Epheſ.
                      
                     meet (as Saint Hierome counſelleth) in the vnitie of faith. The which vnitie in profeſſion of faith notwithſtanding, is one principall thing pertaining to the vnitie of the Church: and vnitie of the Church, is one chiefe marke, by which we must diſcerne which is the true Church.
                  
                  
                     Contrariwiſe the Romane Church is alwaies one and vniforme in faith, neuer varying, or holding any dogmaticall point contrarie to that, which in former times, from the beginning it did hold. The learned men thereof, though ſometimes differing in opinion, in matters not defined by the Church, yet inmatters of faith all conſpire in one. And no marueile, becauſe they haue a moſt conuenient meanes to keepe vnitie in profeſſion of faith, ſith they do acknowledge one chiefe Paſtor appointed ouer them (to wit the ſucceſſour of Saint Peter) to whoſe definitiue cenſure in matters concerning religion, they wholly ſubmit themſelues, knowing that to Saint Peter (and 
                     
                        Matth. 16. 
                     his ſucceſſours) Chriſt our Sauiour promiſed the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen: and that he would vpon him (and his ſucceſſours) as vpon a ſure rocke, build his Church. Knowing alſo that the ſame our Sauiour did ſpecially pray for Saint Peter (and euerie 
                     
                        Luke. 22. 
                     one his lawfull ſucceſſour) that this faith ſhould not faile (at leaſt ſo farre, as to teach the Church a falſe faith) to the intent, that he might be alwaies able to confirme his brethren, if at any time, they ſhould faile in the doctrine of faith. Knowing laſtly, that to
                     
                     Saint Peter and his ſucceſſours (which word I adde, not without ſufficient 
                     
                        Chryſoſt. lib. 2. de Sacerdotio. S. Leo Ser. 2. de anniuerſ. aſſumpt. ſuae ad Pontif. Ioan. 21. 
                     authoritie and reaſon) Chriſt our Lord gaue moſt ample power ouer his vniuerſall Church, ſaying, Paſce oues meas, feed my ſheepe: that is to ſay, Rule or gouerne as chiefe Paſtour vnder me, my ſheepe; that is, all thoſe that pertaine to the ſheepfold, which is the Church; giuing him and his ſucceſſours charge to feed them, with the food of true doctrine of faith: and conſequently binding theſe his ſheepe, to receiue obediently this food of true doctrine of faith at their hands: and conſequently tying himſelfe ſo to aſſiſt him, and his ſucceſſours, with the guiding of the holy Ghoſt, that they ſhould alwaies propoſe vnto the flock of Chriſt (which is his vniuerſal Church) the food of true faith, and that they ſhould neuer teach (ex Cathedra) any thing contrarie to true faith: ſith if he ſhould not thus aſſiſt, but ſhould permit them to teach the Church errors in faith, then the Church, which 
                     
                        Luke. 10. Matth. 23. Matth. 16. Iohn. 16. 
                     he hath bound to heare this Paſtor in all points, might contrarie to his purpoſe, erre, nay ſhould by him be bound to erre, which without blaſphemie cannot be ſaid. All Catholicke learnedmen therefore knowing this, do acknowledge that the definitiue ſentence of this chiefe Paſtour (either alone, or at leaſt with a generall Councell) muſt needs be alwaies an vnfallible & vndoubted truth; and that therefore they may ſafely, yea they muſt neceſſarily ſubmit all their iudgements and opinions, either in interpreting ſcripture, or otherwiſe in matters concerning religion, to the cenſure of this Apoſtolicke ſeat. The which while they do, (as they muſt alwaies do, if they will be accounted Catholicke men, and will not caſt out themſelues, or be caſt out of the companie of Catholickes) how is it poſſible that one ſhould diſſent from another in matters of faith, or at leaſt obſtinately (as hereticks do) erre in anie point of Faith?
                  
                  
                     So that this difference may be aſſigned betwixt any ſect of heretickes and the Romane Church, that heretickes are a companie not vnited among themſelues by any linke, which is able to containe and continue them in vnitie of faith: whereas the Romane Church is Plebs ſacerdoti adunata, & grex Paſtori ſuo adhaerens, as S. Cyprian ſaith, a Church ſhould be a people ioyned to their Prieſt, and a flocke cleauing to their Paſtor, whom whilſt it heareth, as it is alwaie 
                     
                        Cypr. lib. 4. Epiſt. 9. 
                     bound to do, it is vnpoſſible, but that it ſhould retaine the vnitie
                     
                     of faith: like as on the contrary ſide, according to the ſaying of Saint Cyprian: Non aliunde haereſes obortae ſunt, aut nata ſchiſmata, 
                        Lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. quàm inde quòd ſacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec vnus in Eccleſia ad tempus Sacerdos, nec vnus iudex vice Chriſti cogitatur: Not from any other roote haue hereſies and ſchiſmes ſprung vp but from this, that men do not obey the Priest of God, neither do they conſider how that in the Church there is one Prieſt and one Iudge, for the time, in ſteed of Christ.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  In propounding theſe matters againſt vs (of your proofe I will ſpeake afterward) there are a few things worthy obſeruation, that your dealing may be manifeſt to all men. Firſt, you talke of the Proteſtants Church, as if we (like you) fancied to our ſelues ſome one church, beſide which there ſhould be none in the whole world: whereas we acknowledge ſeuerall Churches in diuers countries to be entire in themſelues, without dependance of any one vpon any other. Yet do we not denie, that there is a certaine communion betwixt and among all true Churches, which conſiſts in their agreement in doctrine, about all matters of the foundation, and the mutuall helpes of prayer, and of other Chriſtians duties to be performed by one congregation to and for another. In this reſpect there is one Church of Proteſtants; and whatſoeuer company holdeth not the foundation, is no true Church, nor to be counted a member of the Proteſtants Church.
                  Secondly, I would know why you require that our Church ſhould be perfectly one: ſince you mentioned no ſuch matter, in ſetting downe & expounding the firſt propertie of the Church. If you anſwer, that to be one, and to be perfectly one, is all one: I pray you remember, that this terme perfectly ſhould either haue bin put in before, or bin left out now. Otherwiſe, ſeeing you neuer tell vs, that it is all one, whether a Church be one, or perfectly one, why ſhold we not make our aduantage of your words, and preſume that our Church is held by you to be one, though it want ſomwhat of I know not what perfectiō
                      imagined by you: which yet you forget, when you come to ſhew that your church is one.
                  Thirdly, how doth this ſtrange ſpeech, vniforme in dogmaticall
                     
                     points of faith, agree with that plainneſſe which you profeſſe, for inſtructing of the ſimple? But in good earneſt, what meane you by dogmaticall points? It had bin very fit you ſhould haue vſed other termes, or atleaſt haue expounded theſe for the vnderſtāding of the ignorant. But this dark ſpeech makes more for you, becauſe it may perhaps affoord you ſome ſtarting hole, if you be hard driuen. Yet a man may geſſe at your meaning, becauſe when you come to proue that the Church of Rome is one, you ſeeme to interprete dogmaticall points to be matters of faith defined by the Church. If we take it in this ſenſe, I maruel how you can charge our Churches with variableneſſe in this reſpect? What one point was euer defined by the generall conſent of our Churches, which hath bin ſince altered by like conſent? If you can ſhew none, as I may well preſume you cannot; till you do, then are our Churches in dogmatical points of faith, as perfectly one, as yours ſo much bragged of.
                  Now to your argument, which is thus to be concluded:

                        That Church which is variable, according to the varietie of times and perſons, &c. the learned men whereof are at iarre among themſelues in matters of faith, &c. and haue no means to end their controuerſies, is not one.
                        But ſuch is the Proteſtants Church.
                        Therefore the Proteſtants Church is not one.
                     
                  
                  I denie your maior: varietie of opinions, differences of learned 
                     To the propoſition. 
                     men, without meanes to end their controuerſies, do not proue any Church, not to be one, vnleſſe the matters, about which they differ, be of the foundation: ſo that the ignorance of them, or error in them, be in it ſelfe damnable. To make my anſwer plaine, I wil handle as ſhortly as I can, the ſeuerall points of your propoſition. The Apoſtles, diſciples and other beleeuers, in our Sauiours time were (doubtleſſe) the true Church, and ſo alwayes continued in generall, though ſome of them haply fell away: being the true Church, they were alſo one by your owne confeſſion; yet did they not always hold the ſame dogmaticall points of faith, but varied in matters of very great moment. For a time, yea all the time of our Sauiours Chriſts life, 
                        Act. 1. 6. till his aſcenſion, they beleeued that his kingdome was not onely ſpiritual, but alſo

                     of this world. 
                     
                        Mark. 16. 11. They were ignorant of that high point concerning his reſurrection, 
                        Rom. 4. 25. 1. Cor. 15. 14. 17 without which there is no iuſtification. Yea after the deſcending of the holy Ghoſt vpon them, 
                        Act. 10. 15. they held it vnlawfull to impart the Goſpell to the Gentiles. Put caſe now, that ſome of thoſe who followed our Sauiour, had continued in theſe opinions, and that you had bin to giue ſentence, whether they & their companie had bin the true church, or the Apoſtles and people that claue to them: ſurely you muſt needs, according to this firſt part of your reaſon, haue condemned the innocent, and iuſtified the wicked. For the Apoſtles Church was not one, becauſe it had varied from ſome opinions formerly held by it, which the other companie ſtill retained. As for your odious manner of propounding the point, according to the varietie of times and perſons, it is but a froth of words, and might in regard of the change, haue bin charged in like ſort vpon the Apoſtles.
                  As for the diſſent of learned men one from another, neither was the Church euer ſo happie as to be without it, and you acknowledge it among your owne writers, though not in matters of faith; the contrary whereof I will ſhew when I come to that place. But if by matters of faith, you meant ſuch points as are fundamental, I could ſomewhat the rather hearken to you. And yet what ſhall it hinder a Church from being one, that the learned men of it make queſtion of ſuch maine matters, as long as the Church is not tainted with their priuate errors? Did the Churches of Corinth or Galatia ceaſe to be true Churches, becauſe ſome among them (and as it ſhould ſeeme no ſmall number) 1. Cor. 15. 11 in the former denied the reſurrection of the fleſh; 
                        Gal. 3. 4. 5. in the other ioyned the workes of the law with faith to iuſtification? yet were both theſe fundamētall errors, the continuance wherin without repentance, muſt needs bring certaine damnation. But your matters of faith are all points, though neuer ſo friuolous or falſe, that your Church hath determined by her lawleſſe tyrannie: whereas many matters of farre greater importance, not ſo decreed, are left free for euery man to erre in, or to be ignorant of, without any danger of damnation, or breach of vnitie.
                  
                     
This laſt point (as you ſay) is the principall matter appertaining to vnitie, that there be meanes in the Church to end controuerſies. But why, or how ſhould this be ſo principall, when as the Church may agree in the ſame points of doctrine, though priuate men diſſent from each other? Indeed to the procuring of an outward peace, it is very requiſite that particular men be not ſuffered to preach or write one againſt another. But neither is this peace ſo much worth, as that for it the Church ſhould be corrupted with errors: and the chiefe power for the remedying of this inconuenience, is in the hands of the chiefe Magiſtrate, whoſe dutie it is to prouide that his ſubiects 1. Tim. 2. 2. 
                     may leade a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godlineſſe and honeſtie. Therefore neither doth this diſagreement among the learned, make the Church ceaſe to be one, though there be no meanes to end it; which yet are not wanting in the true Churches.
                  Your minor alſo is falſe in euery part of it. 
                        Ʋariableneſſe in points of faith according to the variety of times and perſons, is when To the Aſſumption. (in regard of theſe two) the doctrine of the Church is altered. Now who is ſo ſhameleſſe as to charge vs with hauing altered, and dayly altering our iudgements in reſpect of either of theſe? What neceſſitie or occaſion can varietie of time bring for the change of doctrine? But for perſons, what ſect, profeſſion, church or companie in the world, euer was or could be freer from depending on any mans perſon, then we are, who abſolutely diſclaime all mens authority ouer our faith? Are not you they, that 12. Art. Part. 1. art. 2. charge vs with leauing the interpretation of Scripture, and conſequently the beliefe of euerie man to his owne priuate humour? And yet you are not aſhamed, to accuſe vs for variableneſſe in our doctrine, according to the varietie of perſons. If malice were not blind, it were vnpoſſible you ſhould ſlaunder vs, with ſo manifeſt contrarieties. You are the men, whoſe faith dependeth vpon the perſons of your Popes, whom you follow blindfold, whither ſoeuer any of them leadeth you. We attribute to our teachers no impoſſibilitie of erring, though we haue a reuerend opinion of their knowledge and faithfulneſſe; in regard whereof we do not lightly reiect any doctrine, or expoſition

deliuered by them, vnleſſe it be apparently falſe. Yet doe we not tie our ſelues to take whatſoeuer they teach, as a matter of faith, though we are readie to yeeld to any thing which is plainly prooued to vs out of the word of God, how contrary ſoeuer it be to our former opinions. For we know, that men are ſubiect to error, and that God doth not miraculouſly reueale all truth at once to any man; but as it ſeemes good to his gracious wiſedom, peece by peece enlighteneth the vnderſtanding of his ſeruants with the knowledge of his will and word, according to their ſinceritie in depending on him, faith in calling vpon him, & diligence in ſearching the Scriptures, the only ſufficient meanes of inſtruction. The ſecond part of your ſlander is, that our learned men ſo iarre in matters of faith, that it is hard to find three in all points of one opinion. Remember what you call matters of faith, points of doctrine defined by the Church: and forbeare bluſhing if you can, when you reade this your accuſation againſt vs. What other refutation ſhal I need to vſe, then the bare naming of the harmonie of our confeſſions, wherein the moſt partial Reader of your ſide may diſcerne your ſhameleſſe hyperbole, that I may giue it a cleanlier terme then it deſerueth. To requite your kindneſſe, I challenge you to name me (if you can) any one of your ſchoole-men, that hath not refuted ſome of his owne fellowes in ſome points, or bene refuted by them. I confeſſe there are many of them, that I haue not read: but I am ſo well acquainted with their courſes, and contradicting of one another, that I may venture without aduenture, to make this challenge.
                  Laſt of all your minor affirmes, that See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 5. 
                     our learned men haue no meanes to end their controuerſies. If you ſpeake of the euent, that our meanes are not ſufficient de facto, to make them that ſtriue, to agree in one opinion, or to make all men to be of one mind: I graunt that you ſay to be true; but I adde withall, that we may haue, when we will, as good meanes to this purpoſe, as your Church hath. For it is no more but to appoint ſome man, to whoſe iudgement we will ſtand in all matters of controuerſie. What hereticall Church may not haue the ſame meanes of vnitie, if it pleaſe? But if you denie that, de iure, wee haue

meanes ſufficient for the ending of all queſtions: I ſay your minor is vtterly falſe, becauſe we haue the Scriptures appointed and bleſſed to that end by God himſelfe. Now as the miniſterie of the word is moſt ſufficient for the begetting of faith, and ſauing of men, though it haue not this excellent effect in all: ſo the Scriptures are of abſolute ſufficiencie to cut off all controuerſies, howſoeuer men will not alwayes be ruled by them.
                  Your minor (as we haue ſeene) containes a grieuous accuſation of vs in three points of no ſmall importance. To which we pleade not guiltie, and looke to heare what euidence commeth againſt vs, to proue the enditement. But you, rather like the foreman of the grand enqueſt, then the plaintiffe that endites vs, inſtead of prouing, come in with I find that the Proteſtants Church is not perfectly one. This will not ſerue the turne: we muſt know how you finde it, or at leaſt be aſſured that you haue found it. Who would not laugh at ſuch an euidence? But though you leaue the two former points to the credulouſneſſe of your Popiſh followers, yet you attempt the proofe of the laſt by this Syllogiſme.
                  
                     They that admit no rule of faith but onely Scriptures, and allow no infallible interpreter thereof, to whoſe iudgement they will ſtand, haue no meanes to end their controuerſies, and returne to vnitie.
                     But the Proteſtant Churches admit no rule of faith, but onely Scriptures, and allow no infallible interpreter thereof, to whoſe iudgement they will ſtand.
                     Therefore the Proteſtant Churches haue no meanes to end their controuerſies, and returne to vnitie.
                  
                  I denie your maior: for the Scripture alone containes all truth neceſſarie to be beleeued, and that ſo plainly, that without any To the propoſition. ſuch ſoueraigne iudgement of any man, it is poſſible for a reaſonable man to diſcerne truth from falſhood. But if any man will be contentious, we haue the ſword of the magiſtrate, and the cenſure of excommunication to bring him into order, or to cut him off if he be incurable, that the vnitie of our Churches be not diſſolued either by hereſic or ſchiſme.
                  
                     
But to confirme your propoſition: you alledge 
                        Hieron. adu. Iouin. lib. 1. Ieromes authoritie, that there muſt be a head or chiefe ruler, that occaſion of ſchiſme may be taken away. The danger of ſchiſme that Ierome ſpeakes of in his firſt booke againſt Iouinian (not as your Printer quotes it, in the ſecond) was not in reſpect of doctrine, but of outward peace. Neither was this courſe held from the beginning (as Ierome ſaith) but in diſcretion appointed vpon occaſion. Before that, by the malice of the diuell (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Tit. cap. 1. Ierome) the Church was deuided into factions, and one man held of Paul, another of Apollo, another of Cephas, Churches were gouerned by common conſent of the Preſbyters; but after that euery man began to thinke, that thoſe which hee had baptized were his and not Chriſts: it was decreed ouer all the world, that one choſen from among the Preſbyters, ſhould be ſet ouer the reſt, to whom the whole care of the Church ſhould appertaine, and that the ſeeds of ſchiſmes might be taken away. Out of which ſentence of Ierome, we may obſerue theſe points: Firſt, that this meanes of procuring vnitie, belongeth not (neceſſarily) to the nature of the Church: for then it muſt needs haue bene as auncient as the Church. But Ierome telleth vs, that there was a time when the Church was without it, and that in her beſt eſtate while the Apoſtles liued. By little and little (ſaith Hieron. vbi ſupra. Ierome afterward) that the plants of diſſention might be plucked vp, the whole care was layed vpon one. Secondly, whereas in the place alledged by you, Ierome acknowledgeth ſuch a ſuperioritie in Peter aboue the other Apoſtles, in reſpect of age, for which (as he ſaith) he was preferred before Iohn: yet there is more heede to be taken to his iudgement in this place, where he diſputes the queſtion without all paſſion, then to that which hee ſpeakes in the heate of diſputation againſt Iouinian. But what neede we any better proofe of this point, then Saint Paul affoords vs? He blameth the Corinthians, becauſe ſome held of Paul, ſome of Apollos, ſome of Cephas. Cephas or Peter is the laſt: why not the firſt rather, if he were (as you ſay) the head? Or why ſhould the Corinthians be reproued for cleauing to him eſpecially, if he were appointed to be the chiefe? It might be a fault to depend on Paule or on Apollos, who were (in your iudgement) vnderlings:

but it was a great vertue to hang vpon Cephas the head. How forgetfull was the Apoſtle Paul both of his dutie to Peter his head, and of ſo readie a meanes to end that ſchiſme, that would not tell them that Peter was appointed head, to the end all occaſion of ſchiſme might be taken away? Thirdly, we are not ſo to vnderſtand Ierome, as if he had ſaid, that there was one head appointed ouer the whole world, but that in all places where there were multitudes of Presbyters, order was taken that ſome one choſen from among the reſt, ſhould be chiefe and principall in that Dioceſſe, as I may ſpeake, and ouer all them which were in ſome ſort accounted to be but one bodie. This agreeth with the practiſe of thoſe times, and with that of 
                        Cypr. ad Corn. epiſt. 55. §. 6. Vide ibi Goulact. ad annot. 17. Cyprian: Here of ſpring hereſies, and ſchiſmes ariſe, that the Prieſt of the Lord is not obeyed. Which Cyprian ſpeakes of euery ſeuerall Biſhop in his Dioceſſe. Whereunto alſo belongs that of Hieron. ad Ruſticum. Ierome: There be ſeuerall Biſhops of Churches, ſeuerall Archbiſhops, and ſeuerall Archdeacons, and all the Eccleſiaſticall order is ſtayed by the gouernours. Whereby (ſaith 
                        Gloſſ. ad 7. q. 2. c. in apib
                              ••
                           s
                      the Gloſſe) Ierome proueth that there may not be two or more Biſhops in one Church: but that there muſt be a ſeuerall Biſhop in euery ſeuerall Church. To which purpoſe I may farther alledge another place of Ierome: 
                        Ʋnleſſe (ſaith Hieron. contra Luciferian. Ierome) the Biſhop haue a ſpeciall power aboue other, there will be as many ſchiſmes in the Church as there be Prieſts. This courſe then of authorizing ſome one of the Presbyters aboue the reſt, was for the preſeruing of order, and keeping out of ſchiſme, not for the determining of controuerſies in Religion, as if all muſt haue ſtood to one mans iudgement in queſtions of Diuinitie: which either may be ended by the authoritie of the Scriptures, if they be neceſſary to be determined, or if they be not, may be forbidden to be proceeded in, without any danger to the Churches libertie. So that the Proteſtant Churches fully agree in matters of ſubſtance, and want not meanes to ſettle peace in queſtions of leſſe importance: or if they did, might eaſily haue as good meanes as your Church, by appointing a Pope ouer themſelues, as in policie you haue done. But as yet they finde no ſuch need, eſpecially where the remedie is worſe then the diſeaſe, as it muſt needs be in ſo lawleſſe

a tyrannie. Is it not more for the glory of God, & good of the Church, as I haue ſaid Anſwer to 12. Art part. 1. art. 5. otherwhere, that there ſhould be continuall diſagreement in ſome matters of Religion, then that all ſhould beleeue & maintain falſe doctrine? Were not our Sauiour Chriſt better haue a troubled church, thē none at all? Honorable war is to be preferred before diſhonorable peace, in the iudgement of any wiſe ſtates-man. And can it be more glorious to God, to haue outward quietneſſe in the Church with hereſy, yea with Antichriſtianiſme, then truth with contention? True Chriſtian vnitie conſiſts principally in truth of religion, without which the greateſt agreement is but a conſpiracy againſt God.
                  We are now come to the principall point of your Minor, wherein it ſtands you vpon to play the man, and to make good thoſe foure properties on the behalfe of your Church of Rome. I muſt needs ſay, it would grieue a man to take ſo much paines to ſo little purpoſe; becauſe if you prooue all that now you vndertake, all that is as good as nothing, till your Maior and your former ſyllogiſmes be better confirmed. But yet if you quit your ſelfe well in this, your Church ſhall be more beholding to you, then it was euer yet to any of your fellowes, in this queſtion. To begin withall, you propound the queſtion ſomwhat fauorably, that the Romane Church holds not any dogmaticall points contrary to that, which in former times, frō the beginning it did hold. It were much indeed, your Church ſhould teach contrarie doctrines to thoſe it hath heretofore taught, & I think you can hardly name me any hereſy ſo groſſe, as to fall frō one contrary to an other. Your ſchoolmen haue ſet vp a mint, wherin they coine vs euery day new diſtinctions, to colour matters in ſuch ſort, that your new opinions ſhall neuer appeare to be cōtrary to your old doctrine. Hauing thus pitcht the ſtate of the queſtion, it ſeemeth you thought there needed no proofe therof; once it is apparent you offer not (directly) to bring any in this whole diſcourſe: but rather endeuour to ſhew vs the reaſon of this their agreement, becauſe forſooth they acknowledge, that the definitiue ſentence of the Pope, (either alone, or at leaſt with a generall Councell) muſt needs be alwaies an vnfallible vndoubted truth. Of which in due place. But to take your matter as it lies.
                  
                     
                     
                        That Church (ſay you) which holdeth no dogmaticall point contrarie to that, which informer times from the beginning it did hold, is alwaies one.
                     
                     
                        But the Church of Rome holdeth no dogmaticall point contrarie to that, which informer times, from the beginning, it did hold.
                     
                     
                        Therefore the Church of Rome is alwaies one.
                     
                  
                  The queſtion is not, which Church is alwaies one, in regard of To the propoſition. not varying from that, which firſt it held, but which is alwaies one, according to the meaning of the Nicene Creed, that is, which Church continueth in the truth of the Goſpell. For otherwiſe an hereticall Church might be acknowledged to be one, and ſo a true Church, becauſe it remaineth obſtinate in that hereſie, which at firſt it embraced. Therefore your Maior is not true ſimply, but onely vpon this ſuppoſition, that your Church at the firſt held the truth. But becauſe we gladly acknowledge, that the Church of Rome was at the firſt ſound in faith, I will leaue your Propoſition, and come to your Aſſumption.
                  Your Minor is excepted againſt by vs (as you cannot chooſe but knowe) in verie many points, and ſome of them concerning To the Aſſumption. the foundation of Chriſtian Religion. For triall whereof we appeale to the Epiſtle to the Romanes, about matters of Faith, Grace, Iuſtification, Free will, Predeſtination, and other that neceſſarilie depend vpon theſe. Here are you as dumbe as a fiſh, and like a man that had neither eares nor eies, paſſe by this exception, without taking any knowledge of it. Is this a direct way (according to your promiſe in your title) to ſettle mens minds in all doubts, queſtions and controuerſies, concerning matters of faith? You might as well without all this ado, haue told them in one word, that the Church of Rome is the true Church, and cannot erre. For in effect what do you elſe, when after many circumſtances, the queſtion is brought to this iſſue, whether the Church of Rome hold the ſame doctrine, which in the Apoſtles time ſhe profeſſed? You tell vs ſhe doth, without any proofe of that you ſay, or anſwer to our manifold exceptions. I will not enter into particulars, as well becauſe I ſee

my anſwer growes greater then I intended or like of, as alſo for that the ſeuerall controuerſies betwixt you and vs, are ſo many ſeuerall exceptions againſt this Aſſumption.
                  For verie pure ſhame, you are driuen to confeſſe, that there are differences of opinion, among the learned of your ſide. But to helpe the matter withall, you qualifie it with ſometimes. Sometimes ſay you? Either your reading muſt be verie little, or your boldneſſe exceeding great, that you mince the matter in this ſort, with ſometimes. Anſwer my former challenge, if you can, concerning the warres among your ſchoolemen; or doe but look into Cardinall Bellarmines controuerſies, and then tell me, whether theſe differences be but ſometimes, or no. What learned writer almoſt is there of any fame on your part, whom Bellarmine doth not diſſent from, in one point or other? I might giue many inſtances, but there is no man that reads him, ignorant of that I ſay, and you haue found a ſhift for this matter, by interpreting dogmaticall points of Faith, to be matters defined by the Church. Wherein we are firſt to conſider how abſurdly you limit matters of faith: Secondly to ſhew, that euē in theſe matters ſo limited, there is not alwaies agreement amongſt your writers.
                  The vſe and office of faith (as it is onely an aſſent) is to giue vndoubted credit to the whole truth of God, by acknowledging it both to be from God, and to be true. For proofe of this, if any man deſire it, I referre him, Chap. 3. & 4. to the third and forth Chapters of this treatiſe, where you ſpeake of the infallibleneſſe and entireneſſe of faith. But though this be the dutie of faith, it hath pleaſed God to deale graciouſly with men, touching the meanes of their ſaluation, and not to exact vpon abſolute neceſſitie, an acknowledging, or knowledge of euery particular point of his truth. Some things are ſuch, as I ſhewed before, as that without them there is no poſſibilitie of ſaluation, but that whoſoeuer is ignorant of them, Ignorantia. Pr
                           •
                        uatiua. Negatiua. either by neglecting the meanes of knowledge, or by hauing no poſſibility to attaine vnto it, he is vtterly ſhut out (for ought we know) from the kingdome of heauen. Other points there are, which euerie man muſt labour to know, and beleeue, becauſe they

are to that end reuealed by God; but yet the ſimple ignorance of them, ſo it be without contempt or careleſneſſe, doth not depriue a man of ſaluation by Chriſt. The former of theſe two kindes are more properly matters of faith, being abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation. You ſpeake of matters of faith, as though not the points in thēſelues, but the determination of the Church ſhould make a neceſſitie of them to ſaluation. So that the not beleeuing of the leaſt matter of ceremonie enioyned by the Church, ſhall be more damnable then the ignorance of the greateſt point of Diuinitie, being not ſo determined. But I would faine know of you, how I ſhall vnderſtand what is to be accounted determined by the Church? You confeſſe afterward, that it is queſtionable whether the chiefe Paſtor, that is the Pope alone, or he with a generall Councel, be the Church which cannot erre. Doubtleſſe, if it be (as you Chap. 4. taught vs before) of neceſſitie to ſaluation, that we beleeue entirely all points of faith, without miſbeleeuing any one; what hope of ſaluation ſhall be left to any Papiſt, who cannot by any meanes know what is determined by the Church, and what is not? Or if he may be ſure that matters defined by the Pope and a Councell, are decided by the Church; yet ſince it is not ſo determined, whether the Pope alone be ſufficient to determine of points in controuerſie, he may refuſe to obey ſome conſtitutions of the Pope, or to beleeue ſome queſtions decided by him; and thereby ſhut himſelfe out of heauen, for not giuing credit to the determination of the Church, if that authoritie of determining be in the Pope, and he commaund men ſo to beleeue. But if this determination of the Church be ioyntly in the Pope and Councels, and that nothing is a matter of faith, but that which is ſo determined to be, then was there almoſt no matter of faith at all in the Church, till within theſe laſt 800 yeares. For it is more then euident to any man, that will not be wilfully contentious, that the Pope neuer bare any extraordinarie ſway in Councels, till he had proclaimed himſelfe vniuerſall Biſhop, which was by the grant of the murtherer Phocas, ſix hundred yeares after the beginning of the Goſpell. What ſhall we thinke of the Churches in the Apoſtles times, and ſo forward,

                     
                        Anno. 325. till the Councell of Nice, in which the Popes ſupremacie was not heard of? Had Chriſtians then no matters of faith to beleeue? How ſhould they, if all depend vpon the Pope and a general Councel? Let me grant that thoſe Councels in 
                        Act. 15. 29. the Acts were generall: what was there determined, but that the Gentiles were to abſtaine from things offered to Idols, and bloud, and that which is ſtrangled, and from fornication? VVas nothing a matter of faith, but theſe few points: which alſo till this time were not matters of faith? Either ſhew ſome good reaſon, why matters of faith were not, at this time of the Apoſtles liuing, to be tied to generall Councels and the Pope, & yet now muſt be; or confeſſe the truth to the glorie of God, that matters of faith haue their authoritie, to be matters of faith, from the word of God, and not from the determination of Pope or Councell, or both. Neither thinke to ſhift of the matter, by ſaying they are indeed matters of faith in themſelues, but not to vs. For ſo it will come to paſſe, that we ſhall ſay, the firſt Chriſtians had no points that were matters of faith to them, becauſe they had none determined by the Church in a Councell, which opinion is I know not whether of more abſurditie or impietie.
                  Now that you agreement in matters of faith, after the determination of the Church, is not ſo great, as you would make the world beleeue; it may appeare by the verie ground of religion, the Canon of the Scripture: which was determined of (by your iudgement) in 
                        Concil. Carthag. can. 47. the Councell of Carthage: wherein the Apocryphall bookes (ſay you) were allowed for Canonical: yet (ſaith 
                        Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect. Hactenus.
                      Bellarmine) Nicholas Lyra, Denys the Carthuſiā, Hugo de ſancto victore, & Cardinalis Caietan. 
                     Thomas de Vio, both theſe (at leaſt the laſt) Cardinals, follow Ierom in reiecting thē, as Apocryphal. But if this Councel may be excepted againſt, ſure (in your iudgment) the Councell of Trent may not, 
                        Concil. Trident. Seſſ 4. which hath receiued thoſe books into the canō of the ſcripture. Yet for all that, 
                        Sixtus Senē
                           ſis. biblioth. ſanctae. lib. 1. & 8. Sixtus Senenſis keeper of the Popes library, maketh bold to deny thē ſuch authority, euen ſince that Coūcel, as Bellar. vbi ſupra. Bellarmine himſelf confeſſeth. And Arias Mōtanus praef ad biblia interlin. Arias Montanus, ſince that time, doubteth not to ſay, that the Orthodoxe or true Church, following the Canon
                     
                     of the Hebrewes, accounteth thoſe bookes of the old Teſtament, written in Greeke, to be Apocryphal. What ſay you to your Biſhop Catharin, who being one of the Councell of Trent, after the determination of the Councell, againſt aſſurance of ſaluation, 
                     Sotus in Apolog. contra Catharin. defendeth that ſuch aſſurance, (notwithſtanding that decree of the Councell) may ordinarily be had by them that beleeue? You would perſwade vs, that it is a ruled caſe of your Church, long ago, that the Scriptures are not ſufficient without tradition. What ſaith 
                        Scotus prolog. in 1. ſenten. q. 2. Scotus in this caſe? Whatſoeuer pertaineth to heauenly and ſupernaturall knowledge, and is neceſſarie to be knowne of men in this life, is ſufficiently deliuered in the holy ſcriptures. The holy ſcripture (ſaith 
                        Ioan. Gerſon. ſerm. in die circumciſ. cōſid. 1. Gerſon) is ſufficient for the gouernment of the Church: or elſe was Chriſt an vnperfect Lawgiuer. I might runne on in the like courſe, touching other points, but theſe ſhal ſerue for a taſt: and ſo I paſſe ouer to your proofe, that the learned on your ſide, cannot poſſibly diſſent one from another.
                  
                  
                     They which acknowledge, that the definitiue ſentence of the Pope is to be rested vpon, as an vndoubted truth, cannot poſſibly diſſent in matters of faith.
                     But all Catholick learned men acknowledge, that the Popes ſentence is ſuch.
                     Therefore no Catholicke learned men can poſſibly diſſent in matters of faith.
                  
                  All you conclude is, that in matters determined by the Pope and a Councell, your learned men cannot diſagree, To the ſyllogiſme. becauſe they hold, that ſuch a determination is certainly true: yet for all this (as I haue ſhewed) your Church may be rent in peeces with contrarie opinions in matters of as great moment, as moſt are in religion: & if, for all this, it ceaſe not to be a true Church, why ſhould not the Proteſtants haue the like priuiledge, who haue the ſame opinion of the Scriptures, that you haue of the Pope? Be not ſo iniurious to reaſon, or blaſphemous againſt God, as to auouch that no controuerſie can be ended by the word, becauſe diuers men will expound it diuerſly. For it is contrarie both to religion and ſenſe, to imagine that the Lord would giue his people ſuch a Scripture as cannot be certainely vnderſtood in all points neceſſarie to ſaluation,

but by I know not what reuelation to ſome one man.
                  More particularly I denie your Maior. They that acknowledge To the propoſition. ſuch an authoritie in the Pope, may yet differ in opinion about matters of faith. I bring you example in that point of aſſurance, wherein Catharin diſputed againſt that doctrine, which Sotus and your writers generally ſince the Councell of Trent, affirme to haue bene the certaine decree of the Councell. Yet were they both preſent in the Councell, and none of the meaneſt there aſſembed. The reaſon of that their diſſent, and the poſſibilitie of the like betwixt other men, ariſeth from this, that decrees of Councels and Popes, being ſet downe in writing, may be diuerſly interpreted, and ſo the meaning of them miſtaken, as 
                        Catharin. tract. 2. Catharin ſaith, that he foreſaw ſome men would miſunderſtand the Councell of Trent in that point. This is all the inconueniences, you can alledge in admitting the Scripture for Iudge, and this followeth the decrees of Councels and Popes at the leaſt, as much as the writings of the holy Ghoſt: who was as able, and as carefull to ſpeake ſo, that all whom it concerned, might vnderſtand him, as the holieſt of your Councels or Popes.
                  I can hardly perſwade my ſelfe, that any man of learning, let To the Aſſumption. him be neuer ſo Catholicke, as you tearme him, can beleeue, that the Pope alone, or the Pope, and a Councell cannot erre. But it is an opinion deuiſed and retained in politicke diſcretion, to keepe things in an outward quietneſſe, & to aduance the eſtate of your Cleargie. I may not enter into the diſcuſſing of this priuiledge you claime: for it would aske much time, and a long diſcourſe, but I wil touch it, as farre as you giue me neceſſarie occaſion, and ſo proceed to that which followeth. And firſt concerning the Popes owne perſon; which ſeemeth to be your beſt plea, being alledged in the firſt place, and almoſt wholly ſtood vpon: you cannot be ſo ignorant, as not to know that diuers learned men on your ſide, confeſſe and maintaine, that the Pope may erre. Many Popes (ſaith 
                        Lyra. ad Mat. 16. Lyra) haue bene found to haue bene Apoſtataes from the faith. The Pope (ſaith 
                        Ambroſ. Catharin. ad Galat. 2. concluſ. 1 Catharin) may erre, and fall vtterly from the faith. And although in 
                        Concluſ. 2. his ſecond concluſion he tels vs, that the Pope, as Pope, that is
                     
                     ſitting (you call it ex Cathedra, out of his chaire) and lawfully, (according to the rite of vſing the key of knowledge particularly committed to him) determining a matter of faith, cannot erre; ſo that he ſhall define any thing againſt faith: yet he addeth afterward that the Pope may decree, by way of a commaundement, or Law, ſome falſe, or vniuſt thing: ſo that (ſaith he) there are many decrees of Popes found to be diuers, and contrarie one to another. And can euerie learned man, thinke you, iudge, which decrees the Pope made, as Pope, and which as a man? What idle and vncertaine fooleries are theſe diſtinctions? I do not beleeue (ſaith 
                        Alfons à Caſtro. contr. haereſ. lib. 1. cap. 4. Chriſtoph. de ca. font. de neceſſ. cor. theol. ſchol. fol. 53. b.
                      Alfouſus) that the Pope hath any flatterer ſo impudent, to grant him this prerogatiue, that he can neuer erre, nor be deceiued in expounding Scripture. I haue learned of the ſchoole Doctors (ſaith a late Archbiſhop of yours) that any Pope may erre as a Doctor, or as a man, but not as a Iudge. And this he ſpeaketh of a decree of Pope Eugenius the fourth, which many Diuines (as himſelfe confeſſeth) take to be a decree of the Councell of Florence. Yet Biſhop Catharin boldly affirmeth, that there are many things, in the ſaid decree, which if they be ſtrictly taken, and according 
                     Apud Chriſtoph. vbi ſupra. 
                     to the proper meaning of the words, wil be found to be falſe, and therefore (as he ſaith) need a fauourable interpretation. Yea the ſame Archbiſhop is not afraid to refute (as he pretendeth by the authoritie of the Councell of Trent) the iudgement and determination of three Popes, Eugenius the fourth, Clemens the Eugen. in decr. Clew. & Pius. in praefat. ad. Miſſa. Roman. eight, and Pius the fift: the two laſt hauing ſet out their Miſſals ſince the Councell of Trent, and yet (as he thinketh) reſoluing concerning the words of conſecration, contrarie to the iudgement of the Councell. It may appeare alſo by his Epiſtle dedicatorie, that a fourth Pope Sixtus the fift, to whom he writeth that Treatiſe, was of the ſame opinion in that matter, with thoſe his predeceſlors, from whom the Archbiſhop maketh bold to diſſent, as he doth from Thomas of Aquine and all his followers. But what name I priuate men, although excellently learned? Let vs heare a whole generall Councell ſpeake. We condemne and depoſe (ſaith 
                        Concil. Baſil. ſeſſ. 34. the Councell of Baſil,) Pope Eugenius a deſpiſer of the holy Canons, a diſturber of the peace, and vnitie of the Church of God, a man notoriouſly ſcandalous
                     
                     to the vniuerſall Church, a Symoniack, a for ſworne man, incorrigible, aſchiſmaticke, fallen from the faith, and an obſtinate heretick. And for the auowing of this their act, they ſpeake thus Concil. Baſil. inter epiſt. Syn. in another place: We haue heard and read, that many Popes haue fallen into error and hereſie: it is certaine that the Pope may erre. The Councell hath often condemned and depoſed the Pope, both for his hereſie in faith, and his leudneſſe in life. I might adde hereunto the authoritie of the 
                        Concil. Conſt. ſeſs. 4. Councel of Conſtance, which bindes the Pope to be obedient to the decrees of Councels. But that which I haue ſaid, may ſuffice to ſhew, that all learned Papiſts do not know, the Pope cannot erre. But you vndertake to proue they do know it, becauſe of certaine places of Scripture, wherein our Sauiour makes a promiſe of not erring to Peter and his ſucceſſors. To all which I anſwer in generall, that thoſe learned men and Councels before alledged, did know that theſe places were brought to proue the Popes priuiledge of not erring, and notwithſtanding held it for an vndoubted truth, that he might erre: you may beare with vs then, though we make queſtion of it.
                  In particular I anſwer to the places alledged, concerning Saint Peters priuiledge. 
                        Math. 16. 19. 
                     The keyes ſignifie nothing but power to open and ſhut heauen, to bind and looſe, by retaining or remitting the ſins of men. The plaine ſenſe of thoſe words (ſaith 
                        Bellar. de Rom. Pont. li. 1. cap. 12. §. Verū.
                      Bellarmine) is this, that firſt the authoritie is promiſed, or the power noted out by the keyes; then the actions and office are expounded by thoſe words, to bind and looſe. And in the verſe before, he finds fault with 
                        Caiet. de inſti. & autor. Rom. Pont. cap 5. Caietan for endeuouring to ſtretch that grant, to I know not what farther matter. I forbeare to ſet downe any proofe of this expoſition, becauſe it is cleare enough of it ſelfe, if we compare this promiſe with the performance of it in Iohns Goſpell: 
                        Ioa. 21. 22. 23 
                     Receiue the holy Ghoſt (ſaith our Sauiour) whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer ye remit, they are remitted vnto them: and whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer ye retaine, they are retained. Secondly I ſay, that Bellar. vbi ſupra. §. Dices. this power was not peculiar to Peter, but common to him with all the Apoſtles, yea with all miniſters, who are their ſucceſſors in preaching the Goſpell, ſhutting and opening, binding and looſing. Wee affirme (ſaith Bell. vbi ſupr. §. His igitur. Bellarmine) that in thoſe words, Math. 18. (which are of the ſame nature with the other, Math. 16.) nothing is graunted,
                     
                     but onely it is there declared and foretold, what power the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors were to haue. Thoſe things (ſaith 
                        Maldonat. ad Math. 18. Maldonatus) that are here promiſed to Peter, agree not onely to him, but to all Apoſtles, Biſhops, and Prieſts. Whereupon 
                        Theophyl. ad Mat. 18. 
                     Theophylact ſaith, that although it was ſaid to Peter onely, I will giue thee the keyes: yet the keyes were granted to all the Apoſtles: when? when he ſaid, whoſe ſins you forgiue. Therefore this promiſe of giuing the keyes, conueyes no other priuiledge to Peter then to all the Apoſtles, yea to all true miniſters of the Goſpell, by the iudgement of your owne Ieſuits.
                  But 
                        Luc. 22. 32. Chriſt prayed eſpecially for Peter, that his faith might not faile. And good reaſon, not without need: for he knew that Satan would tempt him ſhreudly, and giue him a fouler foyle then euer he gaue any of his other Apoſtles. Yet 
                        Auguſt. de verb. Dom. ſecund. Lucam. ſerm. 36. Auſtin brings in our Sauiour ſpeaking in generall: I haue prayed the Father for you all, that your faith might not faile. As for your Gloſſe, that our Sauiour prayed for him, that his faith ſhould not faile, (at leaſt ſo far, as to teach the Church a falſe faith:) what one word is there in the text, to anow any ſuch conceit? Beſide it is apparent, that our Sauiour ſpake not 
                        Luc Brugenſ. ad Luc. 22. of his Apoſtleſhip, but of his faith, as he was a Chriſtian, wherein he had failed finally, if our Sauiour had not mightily vpheld him: and in this faith was he fit to confirme his brethren, as 
                        Heb. 4. 15. & 2. 17. hauing had ſo extraordinary experience of Satans temptation. But if this prayer were made for Peter, that he might not teach falſe doctrine, belike either he was more ſubiect to that danger then the reſt of the Apoſtles, or they were left by our Sauiour in a continuall danger of erring: which opinion is a very neare neighbour to blaſphemie. But what a pitifull conſequence is this, Our Sauiour prayed that Peters faith might not faile; therefore the Pope cannot erre? All the hold you haue left, is in the charge giuen to Peter, 
                        Ioan. 21. 15. 
                     to feede Chriſts ſheepe: that is, to be painfull and faithfull in preaching of the Goſpell. And this interpretation is agreeable to reaſon, that our Sauiour requiring a proofe of Peters loue, ſhould charge him to make it manifeſt, by taking paines to feede his ſheepe. But your expoſition is abſurd, whereby you would haue liuery and ſeiſin of ſoueraigne authoritie in the Church giuen

to him by theſe words: If thou loue me (ſaith our Sauiour, according to your expoſition) take vpon thee the ſoueraigne gouernement of the Church. This were a poore proofe of Peters loue, which is there demaunded. You will ſay, the charge of feeding was common to all the Apoſtles; but here the Lord ſpeaketh particularly to Peter. He doth indeed. And do you not ſee the reaſon of it? Peter, becauſe of his grieuous fall, had need of ſuch a charge, both for his better autorizing, and his greater care. He ſpeakes chiefly to Peter (ſaith your frier 
                        Ioan. Ferus ad Ioan. 21. 19 Ferus) and to him eſcecially commends his ſheepe, that he might vtterly aboliſh the remembrance of his deniall. For becauſe he had fallen more grieuouſly then the other, and had more obſtinately denied Chriſt, he ſtood in need of peculiar charge, leſt by the remembrance of his deniall, he might ſuſpect that the common charge of the Apoſtleſhip belonged not to hm. He remedies his denying thrice, by his confeſſing thrice, ſaith Theoph. ibi. Theophylact: the like hath 
                        
                           Aug. in. Ioan. tract. 123.
                        
                           Hieron. in epit. Fabiola.
                        
                      Auſtin. Peter blatted out his three denial. (ſaith Ierome) by his three confeſſions. So then all that you haue ſaid of Peters not erring in matter of doctrine, is nothing worth: yet do we thankfully acknowledge that Peter could not erre in matter of faith: but we ſay, that this was no priuiledge peculiar to him, but common alſo to the other Apoſtles, by vertue of their Apoſtleſhip. Wherein if no man ſucceed them, as queſtionleſſe there are now no Apoſtles, no man can claime a priuiledge of not erring by any right from them, or any promiſe made to them.
                  It is needleſſe therefore to make many words concerning any ſucceſſor of S. Peter: onely I will ſignifie how vncertaine your Religion muſt needs be, that depends vpon ſuch points as theſe. You tell vs the Pope cannot erre. We beleeue you not, becauſe we know he is (at the beſt) but a learned man, oftentimes not ſo much, ſometimes Alfonſ. á Caſtro. ſcarce able to vnderſtand his grammer. You proue he cannot erre, becauſe he is Peters ſucceſſor. We deny the conſequence. Becauſe he may ſucceed Peter in place, and yet not in office of Apoſtleſhip, whereby Peter had that priuiledge. But principally we deny your antecedent, that the Pope is Peters ſucceſſor. Now we looke for ſome certain & euident proofe. But alas there is none to be had. We therfore

thus except againſt this imagined ſucceſſion: Firſt we ſay, there is no word of ſcripture to proue that euer Peter came at Rome. How then can it be a matter of faith, to hold that he was Biſhop of Rome? Do not ſay, you muſt beleeue the Church: for the queſtion is, whether you be the true Church or no. Secondly, we ſay farther, that it is ſomewhat vncertaine, euen in humane ſtories, whether euer Peter were at Rome or no: and if it were certaine, yet it were nor a certaintie of faith, but of opinion. But that the force of your argument, and the truth of my anſwer may the better appeare, I wil propound your reaſon in forme, and my exceptions againſt it.
                  
                     Peters ſucceſſor cannot erre.
                     The Pope is Peters ſucceſſor.
                     Therefore the Pope cannot erre.
                  
                  To the Maior I anſwer, that he which ſucceeds Saint Peter To the Propoſition. in his whole right, or in all his priuiledges, and namely that of his Apoſtleſhip, cannot erre; but any other ſucceſſor of his may erre, becauſe his priuiledge of not erring is a propertie of his Apoſtleſhip. The proofe of your Maior is thus to be framed: Proofe of the Propoſition.
                  
                  
                     He to whom the keyes are promiſed, for whom Chriſt prayed, that his faith might not faile, whom he charged to feed his ſheepe cannot erre.
                     But to Peters ſucceſſor Chriſt promiſed the keyes, for him he prayed that his faith might not faile, him he charged to feed his ſheepe.
                     Therefore Peters ſucceſſor cannot erre.
                  
                  I denie the Maior, if you take it in ſuch ſenſe, as though the To the propoſition. power of not erring had bene conueyed to Peter, by reaſon of this promiſe, prayer and charge: otherwiſe notwithſtanding by him, Peter, I grant that he to whom this promiſe was made, that is Peter, could not erre; yet was he not free from errour by vertue of this promiſe, prayer or charge, as I ſhewed before.
                  The Minor is vtterly falſe: the promiſe was made in generall to all the Apoſtles; the prayer and charge were peculiar To the Aſſumption.
                     
to Peters perſō, for ſuch eſpecial reaſon as I ſhewed before, concerning his temptation to denie Chriſt, and his deniall of him. But you tell vs, that you doe not apply that charge of feeding the ſheepe to Saint Peters ſucceſſors, without ſufficient authoritie and reaſon. Then queſtionleſſe you muſt be able to ſhew vs ſome warrant for your doing out of the Scriptures. For the teſtimonie or opinion of man, is too weake a ground to build a matter of faith vpon. And yet you bring vs nothing but the word of a man to perſwade vs, and ſcarce that too. For whereas you alledge 
                        Chryſoſt. li. 2. de Sacerdot.
                      Chryſoſtome to countenance the matter, it is but a copie of your countenance, rather to feare then hurt vs. Chryſoſtome ſaith, that our Sauiour ſhed his bloud to purchaſe thoſe ſheepe, the care whereof he committed to Peter and his ſucceſſors. But who are theſe ſucceſſors? All miniſters, or (at the leaſt) all Biſhops. If you haue read the place, I need not proue it to you. Chryſoſtome had cauſed Baſil to be preferred to a Biſhopricke againſt his will. Hereupon Baſil complaines of vnkind dealing. The other to excuſe himſelfe, vndertakes to ſhew that he had not onely not hurt him, but alſo done him a pleaſure, becauſe he had thereby giuen him occaſion and oportunitie to manifeſt his loue to Chriſt, by feeding of his flocke, which he had committed to Peter and his ſucceſſors. Now if Baſil (in Chryſoſtoms iudgement) had not bene one of Peters ſucceſſors, this had bene a poore reaſon to perſwade him that Chryſoſtome had not done him wrong. For then had he not receiued that charge, nor diſcharged that dutie, to teſtifie his loue to Chriſt, ſince the loue was to be teſtified by feeding the flocke committed, according to that charge of our Sauiour.
                  
                     
                        Leo ſerm. 1. de anniuerſ. aſſump. ſua ad Pontif.
                      Leo indeed makes the Biſhop of Rome Peters ſucceſſour. But he is too partiall a man to be iudge in his owne cauſe. I denie not, but that he was auncient and learned, and I am perſwaded, a holy man too; but yet there appeare in him euery where apparent marks of ambition, for the aduancing of his owne ſea: which may perhaps be excuſed by humane frailtie, but cannot ſerue to proue a matter of ſo great importance.
                  Your principall minor is falſe alſo, that the Pope is Peters ſucceſſor. 
                     To the principal aſſumptiō
                      It was true of the firſt Biſhops of Rome, that they were

Peters ſucceſſors in the miniſtery of the Goſpell, wherein they laboured faithfully and carefully. But this point of ſucceſſion died long ſince, with the care to diſcharge that dutie. For theſe laſt 800 yeares and vpward, the Popes (generally) haue ſucceeded the firſt reuealed Antichriſt, Boniface the third, in pride, tyrannie, idlenes, riot, and all kind of exceſſe, no way reſembling Saint Peter, either in truth of doctrine, or painfulneſſe in preaching.
                  That which you adde, of I wot not what neceſſitie lying vpō God, to teach the Church all truth, and preſerue it from erring, becauſe he hath enioyned all men to heare it, without excepting or doubting, is an idle fancy of your own, without any likelihood of truth; as hath appeared in my former anſwers.
                  But howſoeuer the Pope alone may erre, yet in a generall Councell he cannot. I heare you ſay ſo, but I ſee no proofe of it, not indeed any ſhew of reaſon for it. Whence ariſeth this impoſſibilitie of erring? Not from the Pope: For no man will flatter him ſo ſhamefully (ſaith 
                        Alfonſ. à Caſtro. lib. 1. ca. 4. Alfonſus) as to make him beleeue he cannot erre. Perhaps then it reſteth in the Councell. That cannot be neither. For 
                        Bellar. de Cō
                           cil. lib. 2. ca. 11. Bellarmine tels vs, that Councels, be they neuer ſo generall, and neuer ſo lawfully aſſembled; may erre, but onely ſo farre as they follow inſtructions giuen them by the Pope. But the Pope may erre in giuing inſtructions: and how can freedome from erring enſue vpon his inſtructions, if he himſelfe were not certainly freed from erring in giuing them? And that this power of not erring, is wholy from the Pope, no way from the Councell, it is euident by this, that 
                        Bellar. de Cō
                           cil. lib. 2. cap. 5. particular Councels are as free from error as generall, if they follow the Popes direction, or be confirmed by him. But this will be yet more euident, if we conſider the courſe that is to be held in Popiſh Councels. Firſt, the Pope ſends his Legates (ſaith 
                        Bellar. vbi ſupra. cap. 11. §. Quod vt melius.
                      Bellarmine) inſtructed concerning the iudgement of the Apostolicke ſea (that is, with knowledge of his mind, in all points that ſhal be handled) and that vpon condition, that if the Councell iumpe in opinion with the Pope, then they may proceed to make decrees; if it do not, then no decree may be made vntill the Popes pleaſure be further knowne. Secondly, 
                        Confirm. Concil. Trident. Vide Concil. Tria. Seſs. 25. c. illuſtriſsim.
                      when the Councell is ended, certaine of the Cardinals bring the

decrees thereof to the Pope, and intreate him, that it wil pleaſe his Holineſſe to confirme them; which, if he like them, he doth; if not, they are vtterly daſht. This being the courſe, how can it be imagined, that the Pope ſhould be any more exempted from erring with a Councell, then without one? I graunt he hath better helpes to diſcerne of the truth, if matters be orderly and throughly debated; but we looke for an impoſſibilitie of erring, which cannot be conueyed from the Councell to the Pope, becauſe it is not in the Councell, but ſo far as they follow the Popes inſtructions: neither can it be imparted to the Councell by the Pope, becauſe he hath it not in himſelfe alone: neither laſtly can it be in Councell and Pope together, becauſe then neither can be aboue other; but all Papiſts are of opinion, that there muſt needs be a ſuperioritie in the one, though they cannot agrtee in whether, howſoeuer 
                        Bellar. de Concil. lib. 2. ca. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Bellarmine takes vpon him to determine it. I ſay then, it is meerly impoſſible, that any Papiſt, learned or vnlearned, ſhould know that the Pope with a Councell or without a Councell cannot erre, as well becauſe the thing in it ſelfe is falſe, as alſo for that there is no agreement about the point amongſt them: and therefore the Papiſts haue no certaine meanes to keepe them in any true vnitie.
                  If you will aſſigne a difference betwixt ſects of hereticks and the Romane Church, you muſt ſay, betwixt other ſects of heretiks and the Romane Church, which is of all other, indeed, the moſt hereticall. But your difference is nothing worth. For many ſects of hereſies haue at leaſt for a time bin a flocke cleauing to their paſtor, and holding certaine grounds true or falſe, whereby their Church was to be determined. As for vs, whom you ſtrike at, we haue the moſt ſure bond that may be, to tie vs all together, euen the truth of God, and are in our ſeuerall Churches people cleauing to our paſtors: and ſuch muſt euery true church be, where there is a true Paſtor: without whom how far a company may haue the name of a Church, and in what reſpect, I ſhewed before.
                  The teſtimonies alledged out of 
                        Cypr. ad Pupian. epiſt. 68. ſect. 7. Cyprian, are not deliuered by him, concerning your Romane Church, but ſpoken of himſelfe and his flocke, and ſo generally to be applied to all other

Churches in like ſort. Pupianus, to whom he writes that epiſtle, charged Cyprian with diſperſing the flocke of Chriſt, by his ouer great ſeueritie againſt them, that had fallen into idolatry in time of perſecution. Cyprian anſwers in his owne defence, that though ſome ſtubburne and diſobedient people, refuſing to ſhew themſelues truly penitent for ſo grieuous a ſinne, left his communion and congregation: yet the true Church was not thereby ſcattered, but continued ſtedfaſtly, cleauing to their paſtor, namely himſelfe. The chaffe onely (as 
                        Cypr. ad Cornel. epiſt. 55. ſect. 6. he ſaid before) not the wheate, can be ſeuered from the Church, for ſaking their lawfull Paſtor, without any iuſt cauſe. The other place alſo is of particular Biſhopricks, not of your imagined vniuerſall Church, as before.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 5.
                  §. II. That the Romane Church onely is holy.
                  
                  
                     Secondly, I finde that the Proteſtants congregation is not holy: becauſe not onely moſt of their men be euidently more wicked then men, which both in old time and in latter yeares liued in the Romane Church; as thoſe can tell which haue ſeene both, and is confeſſed by Luther himſelfe, who ſaith thus: Sunt nunc homines magis In poſtilla ſuper Euang. Dom. primae aduētus vindictae cupidi, magis auari, magis ab omni miſericordia remoti, magis immodeſti & indiſciplinati, multoue deteriores quàm fuerunt in Papatu: Men are now more reuengefull, more couetous, more vnmercifull, more vnmodest and vnruly, and much worſe then when they were Papiſts. The like teſtimonie you may find giuen by another of their Doctors, called Smidelinus, which for breuitie 
                     
                        Conc. 4. ſuper cap. 21. Luc.
                      
                     ſake I omit. But chiefly their company is not holy, becauſe there was neuer yet Saint or holy man of it: neither is their doctrine ſuch as may of it ſelfe leade the moſt preciſe obſeruers of it to holineſſe, but doth (by diuers points which haue bin taught) rather incline men to libertie and looſneſſe of life. As for example, it inclineth them to breake faſting dayes, and to caſt away ſecret confeſſion of ſinnes to a Prieſt: both which are knowne to be ſoueraigne remedies againſt ſinne. Alſo it inclineth them to neglect good workes, for they hold them either not to be neceſſary, or not meritorious of life euerlaſting, which muſt needs make men leſſe eſteeme the practiſe of them.
                     
                     Alſo it maketh men careleſſe in keeping Gods commaundements, becauſe diuers Proteſtants (if not all) hold them vnpoſſible to be obſerued; and (as it is ſaid) impoſſibilium non eſt electio. No man chooſeth or laboureth to atchieue that which he thinketh to be altogether vnpoſſible. It maketh men alſo not to feare, or not to be carefull to auoid ſin, becauſe it is held among them that whatſoeuer we do is ſinne, and that we cannot chuſe but continually ſinne, and that all ſinnes are of themſelues mortall: which whoſoeuer thinketh, how can he be afraid to ſinne, ſith ſtultum eſt timere, quod vitari non poteſt, it is fooliſhneſſe to feare that which no way can be auoided? Finally their doctrine of predeſtination is able to make men careleſſe or deſperate in all actions and conſultations, ſith ſome of them hold all things ſo to proceeds of Gods eternall predeſtination, that man (in matters of Religion at the leaſt) hath no free-will to do well, or to auoid ill, but that God himſelfe is author, and moueth them effectually and forcibly, not only to good works, but in the ſame ſort vnto the act of ſinne. Lo whither this doctrine leadeth a man, which giueth grounds, which of themſelues incline a man, to neglect all indeuour, in the ſtudie and practiſe of vertue, and to caſt away care of auoiding ſinne and vice: and conſider whether this can be a good tree, which of 
                     
                        Mat. 7. 
                     it owne nature bringeth foorth ſo badde fruite. And ſee whether this companie, which teacheth and beleeueth ſuch pointes of vnholie doctrine, can poſſiblie be a Holy Church.
                  In the Romane Church, I confeſſe there be ſome ſinfull folke, all in it are not good. For the Church is called nigra & formoſa, 
                        Cant. 1. 
                     blacke and faire: in it are mixed good and bad, as out of diuers parables of our Sauiour I prooued before. But there are two differences betwixt the ſinfull, which are in the Romane Church, and thoſe which are among Sectaries.
                  
                     The firſt difference is, that among hereticks there are none, which we may call truly holy, of which, as of the better or more worthie part, their congregation may be termed Holy: as the Romane Church may. It may be perhaps, that one may finde diuers of them, who abſtaine from groſſe outward ſinnes, as ſtealing, ſwearing, &c. And that ſome of them do many workes morally good, as to giue almes to the needie, and that they liue at leaſt in outward ſhew, in
                     
                     vpright & moderate ſort. But alaſſe, theſe be not ſufficient or certain ſignes of ſanctitie; all this, and perhaps farre more, we may reade of heathen Philoſophers. Theſe outward actions may proceed of naturall, and ſometime of ſinfull motiues: and conſequently, they may be verie farre from true holineſſe, which muſt be grounded in true charitie; for as Saint Paule ſaith, to distribute all that one hath to feed the poore, or to giue ones bodie to burne, doth nothing auaile without 
                     1. Cor. 13. 
                     charitie: which charitie muſt proceed de corde puro, & conſcientia bona, & fide non ficta, out of a pure heart, and a good 
                     1. Tim. 1. 
                     conſcience, and an vnfained faith. The which things being moſt inward; and conſequently hidden in ſecret, cannot ſufficiently be ſhewed to others, by thoſe outward actions, which may come from other cauſes as ſoone as from theſe. Nay, they cannot be knowen certainely of the partie himſelfe. For neſcit homo vtrùm odio vel amore dignus ſit, a man knoweth not whether he be worthie of hate or 
                     
                        Eccleſ 9. 
                     loue: and quis poteſt dicere, mundum eſt cor meum? Who can ſay, my heart is cleane? but theſe things are reſerued to him onely, 
                     
                        Prou. 20. qui ſcrutatur corda, who ſearcheth the hearts, to with Almightie God, and it cannot be perfectly knowne of men, who haue them truly, and conſequently who be truly Saints, vnleſſe it pleaſe him to reueale it by miracle, or ſome other certaine way vnto vs. But hitherto 
                     See Staphil. in abſolut. reſpōſ. Cochlae. in actis Lutheri. 
                     it was neuer heard that Almightie God did by miracle, or any ſuch certaine way, giue teſtimony that either Luther or Caluin, or any of their fellowes or followers had in thē this true holineſſe, or that they were ſaints: but rather while as they preſumptuouſly attēpted to work 
                     
                        Anno. 1523. Bolſec. in vita Caluin. cap. 13. 
                     miracles, it hath pleaſed God, by giuing either none, or euill ſucceſſe, to teſtifie that they were not Saints. Whereas on the contrarie ſide, it hath pleaſed God to giue teſtimonie by miracles of the faith and holineſſe of life of diuers, which profeſſed the Romane faith; of which ſort I might bring in many examples, but I will at this time onely name Saint Bernard, Saint Dominicke, Saint Francis, who on the one ſide, were certainly knowne to haue bene profeſſors of that religion, which was then, and is now profeſſed at Rome; as may appeare, both by that which is left written of their liues, and alſo by this, that they were chiefe fathers and founders of certaine Religious orders of Monkes and Friers, which yet continue there: and on the other ſide, they are certainly knowne to be holy men, partly by
                     
                     their ſober, chaſt, and vertuous life, partly by the gift of miracles, in ſo much, that euen Luther himſelfe, and other of our aduerſaries confeſſe them to haue bene Saints. The which being confeſſed of 
                     
                        Luther. lib. de capt. Bab. Philip in Apol. art. 5. & 17 
                     theſe, muſt needs inferre the like confeſſion of the ſanctitie of mante other, who were alſo profeſſors of the ſame Romane faith, whoſe names we may finde regiſtred in the Calender, euen in bookes ſet out by Protestants, and whoſe vertuous life, holie death, and miraculous deeds, we may finde in good Authors. See Saint Athanaſ. in vita S. Antonij apud Surium. S. Bernard. in vita S. Malachiae. S. Antoninus 3. parte hiſt. titulo 23. & 24. Surius throughout his large volumes of the liues of Saints, and others. Now this being confeſſed, that diuers whom we know to haue bene members of the Romane Church, are Saints: we may well inferre that at leaſt, ſome part of this Church is holy, and that therefore of this part (per ſynecdochen) the whole may be tearmed Holy: eſpeciallie conſidering that the faith of this part, (which was a principall roote, out of which their holineſſe did ſpring) is all one in ſubſtance with the faith which we all profeſſe: and therefore we may ſay that our faith and profeſſion inclineth & leadeth to the ſame holineſſe of life that theirs did. And therefore though manie, through their owne fault, faile in the practiſe of vertue and holineſſe, yet our profeſſion (being all one with the profeſſion of theſe holy men) is to be tearmed holy, as theirs was. Of which holy profeſſion in ſome ſort, all our whole companie may be called Holy, as of the art of painting or anie other art, all that profeſſe them are commonlie tearmed by a name proper to their profeſſion, though it happen that diuers of them, be not verie skilfull, nor do not much exerciſe his art.
                  
                  
                     And from hence riſeth the ſecond difference betwixt Proteſtants and vs, to wit, that the verie doctrine it ſelfe, which Proteſtants teach, doth (as I ſhewed before) induce men to libertie, and conſequently to lewde life: whereas the Romane faith, which we profeſſe, both expreſlie for biddeth all vice, & preſcribeth lawes contrarie to libertie and looſeneſſe of life; and containeth moſt ſoueraigne meanes, to incite and mooue a man to all perfect vertue, and holineſſe of life. As for example. It teacheth, that notwithſtanding the preſcience or predeſtination of Almighty God, man hath free will, wherwith (being aided by Gods grace, which grace, through the merit of
                     
                     Chriſts Paſſion, is readie for all, that with humble, deuout and perſeuerant praier will aske, and by frequenting in due ſort the holy Sacraments, will ſeeke for it) he may auoid ſinne, and embrace vertue, the which taketh away deſpaire of ſhunning euill, and doing well, which eaſily followeth of the contrarie opinion. It teacheth alſo that Gods commaundements be not vnpoſſible to be obſerued; nay nor hard (through helpe of grace, which is alwaies at hand) to be obſerued of one, which hath but a good will; according as Saint Iohn 1. Ioh. 5. 
                     ſaith, Mandata eius grauia non ſunt, his commaundements be not heauie; yea that they may by the ſame grace, be eaſily obſerued, according to that of our Sauiour, Iugum meum ſuaue, & onus meum 
                        Mat. 11. leue, my yoake is ſweet, and my burthen light. The which moueth a man to conceiue great hope of eſchewing euill and liuing well, which hope, (and conſequently heart) to do well, a man cannot haue, who perſwadeth himſelfe, that Gods commaundements be vnpoſſible to be obſerued, as I ſhewed before. Againe it teacheth, that as a man may by grace auoid ſinne, and eaſily keepe Gods commaundements, and by doing good works, liue well: ſo this good life is pleaſing and acceptable vnto God, and theſe good workes (as proceeding from grace, and receiuing vertue from the merits of Chriſt, of which this grace doth depend) are meritorious, & ſuch, for reward wherof, God will giue to them that perſeuerantly do them, euerlaſting bliſſe in the kingdome of heauen. The which doctrine will, doubtleſſe if it be duly conſidered, breed in a mans mind great loue and delight to do well; as the contrarie muſt needs breed, at leaſt a coldneſſe in deuotion, if not a contempt and loathing of good deeds, and ſpecially of thoſe good deeds, which haue any difficultie annexed to them. It teacheth alſo that for ſinners are prepared exceeding great puniſhments in the next life; and that though there be meanes in the Church to get remiſſion of ſinne, and pardon of the paine, yet it teacheth that a man cannot ordinarily be abſolutely certaine, that he hath ſo vſed thoſe meanes, as that he hath thereby gotten that remiſſion or pardon; which is a great motiue to make men warie not to fall into ſinne, and to mooue them, Cum metu & tremore operari ſalutem, with feare & trembling to worke their ſaluation: whereas 
                     
                        Philip. cap 2. 
                     Proteſtants vpon ſuppoſed certaintie of ſaluation caſt away this wholeſome feare, and ſo may eaſily become careleſſe of auoiding any
                     
                     ſinne. Furthermore it preſcribeth wholeſome lawes and cuſtomes of fasting and praier, and of other exerciſes of vertue and pietie, whereby the fleſh may be ſubiect to the ſpirit, and the ſpirit to God. It maintaineth alſo ſecret confeſſion of ſinnes to a Prieſt; as being a thing neceſſarie, and commaunded by our Sauiour himſelfe, the which both is a great bridle to hold men backe from ſinne (as experience teacheth) and is a ſpeciall meanes, whereby the Paſtours of the Church, knowing the inward conſcience of their flock, may better apply fit remedies to their ſpirituall diſeaſes, and preſcribe to euery one fit exerciſes, for their practiſe and progreſſe in vertue. Finally the profeſſion of this Church is ſuch, that euen ſimple Proteſtants, when they ſee any Catholicke do a thing amiſſe, will ordinarily ſay, You ſhould not do thus, or, a man of your profeſſion ſhould do otherwiſe. So that thoſe which be ſinfull in the Roman Church, cannot in any ſort, aſcribe their ſinnes to any defect, or peruerſitie of the doctrine of the Church, but muſt needs acknowledge them to proceed from their owne frailtie or malice, contrarie to the teaching of the Church, and ſometimes euen contrarie to their owne conſcience, and actuall knowledge.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore I may conclude, that although there be ſome ſinfull men in the Romane Church, yet it may well be called Holy; becauſe the doctrine which it beleeueth and profeſſeth, of it owne nature, inclineth and directeth a man to the true holineſſe, and conſequently is of it ſelfe Holy: and alſo becauſe there be many holy perſons in it, ſome of which are certainely knowne in particular to be ſuch, by proofe of miracle. Others are onely knowne by this probable reaſon, to wit, that they hold the ſame faith, which was holden by thoſe, who haue bene certainly knowne be holy men; and holding the ſame faith (which muſt needs be the true faith, ſith none are truely holy, or can poſſibly pleaſe God, without the right faith, which is but one,) they haue in them a roote, out of which true holineſſe is apt to ſpring. And therefore, when we ſee no apparent euill fruit, whereby we may diſcouer ſome euill roote, but onely good, which is apt to ſpring of this good roote; and eſpecially when we ſee the fruite of their good works, to be conformable, and like to the works of thoſe, which are knowne Saints; we haue great cauſe to iudge, that they alſo are iuſt men, and in ſome ſorte holy, if not perfectly Saintes.
                     
                     Sith therefore many men which haue bene and are members of the Romane Church, haue bene & are knowne, either by abſolute proofe of miracle, or at leaſt in this other manner to be holy; of theſe as of the better, more worthie and principall part, the whole may be (as I ſaid before) tearmed Holy; as a tree that hauing a roote apt to giue life to the branches, ſome of which being dead, others haue life, is abſolutely ſaid to be aliue; which if we ſhould ſee to haue a corrupted roote, and could not perceiue it to haue any liuing branches, we ſhould haue cauſe to affirme abſolutely, that it were dead, and not aliue.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  He that doth not finde that you are a ſhameleſſe ſlaunderer, lookes verie ſleightly into your report of the Proteſtants congregation. You finde it is not holy. No doubt you are a man of great intelligence, and haue made diligent inquirie after the matter. But it well becommeth the Phariſaicall pride of your Romiſh Synagogue, to boaſt of your owne righteouſneſſe, and in compariſon of your ſelues, to deſpiſe all men.
                  Let vs ſee what euidence you bring to prooue ſo greeuous an accuſation. Moſt of our men (you ſay) are euidently more wicked then men which liued both in old time, and in later yeares in the Romane Church. How euident you make this, we will conſider by and by. For the preſent, I ſay no more, but that you ſpeake craftily to deceiue vs, in comparing moſt of our men, with I know not what men, that haue liued in the Roman Church. There is no queſtion, but that (generally) the moſt are the worſt, euerie where: becauſe all men are naturally euill, and none good, but by the eſpeciall grace of God working in them. But if you would haue dealt plainely, you ſhould haue ſhewed, that moſt men in our Churches are more wicked, then moſt men that haue liued in your Romiſh Church, ſince it became the bodie of Antichriſt reuealed. For we acknowledge, that the Church of Rome was ſomtimes a true Church of Chriſt, yeelding many worthie martyrs, confeſſors, and other holy men and women, to the honour of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt; yea we denie not, but that euen at this day, there are ſome true Chriſtians in your Churches: and that the generall ſort of Proteſtants, are inferiour to ſome amongeſt you, in

regard of outward holineſſe: as for true inward ſanctitie, neither the one, nor the other, haue any part of it; I meane neither ordinarie Proteſtants, nor the beſt of your ſide, who continue in the whole doctrine of your Church.
                  To prooue that you ſay againſt our Church, you bring vs in two kinde of witneſſes: firſt generally thoſe men, that haue ſeene the conuerſation of your Papiſts, and our Proteſtants, then particularly Luther & Smidelin: In the former, conſider how vaine a floriſh it was for you to compare our men now with Papiſts that liued in old time, and to appeale for proofe to them that haue ſeene both: as if you were able to ſhew vs ſome men of 700, or 800. yeares old, or of 300. or 400, who haue knowne and conſidered the behauiour of your men and ours. As for them, that by trafficke or trauaile otherwiſe, haue had ſight and experience of both, I dare ſtand to their iudgement, in comparing our liues with yours, for all parts of outward cariage. In which matter, I haue bene credibly informed by them, whoſe credit I haue no cauſe to ſuſpect, that the abhomination of your Clergies, and peoples liues, hath partly bred, & ſetled in them a reſolute abhorring of your religion, to which otherwiſe they were indifferently affected.
                  But you preſſe vs with Luther and Smidelin, who in their earneſt exhortations and reproofes, accuſe our men for increaſe of ſinne, after the preaching of the Goſpell. Is this ſtrange? Doth not 
                        Rom. 6. 1. 14: the holye Apoſtle tell vs, that the Goſpell in his time, was abuſed to wantonneſſe, prophane men (which yet made profeſſion of religion) taking aduantage of Gods gracious mercie preached in the Goſpell, to prouoke themſelues to ſinne? Beſides, the greateſt part at the renewing of the Goſpell, claue vnto Luther, rather in a deteſtation of your religion, the falſeneſſe whereof was moſt euident to them, then in a certaine knowledge of the truth of that, which he taught them. But of whom ſpake Luther and Smidelin? Of all Proteſtant Churches? How can that be, when they knew not the one halfe of them? Is it a good reaſon then to condemne all Proteſtant Churches, or the Proteſtants Church in generall, becauſe Luther and Smidelin complaine againſt

the congregations, in which they taught? And yet, what ſay they more then the Apoſtle Paule doth, who chargeth 1. Cor. 1. 1. & 15. 12. &
                      the Corinthians with many groſſe errors, & grieuous ſinnes, yea 5. 1. & 6. 1. 5. with ſuch fornication, as was not to be heard of among the Gentiles? What ſay you to that ſore accuſation euen againſt the miniſters of the Goſpell; 
                        Phil. 2. 21. 
                     All ſeeke their owne, and not that which is Ieſus Chriſts? A man of your humour and wiſedome would by and by conclude hereupon, that the Church of God in the Apoſtles time, was an vnholy congregation. If you Ieſuits & Prieſts (what you are in particular, I neither know nor care) beſtowed as much paines in preaching, as you do in plotting treaſon, and hearing conſeſſions, ſuch ſpeeches would not ſeeme any thing ſtrange vnto you. But that you may the better perceiue the weakeneſſe of this your reaſon, hearken a little, what is ſaid of your Church. What one can you name me (ſaith 
                        Bernard. in Cant. ſer. 77. Bernard) among all thoſe, that are (ſpirituall) rulers, that doth not take greater care, how he may emptie the peoples purſes, then how he may roote out their ſinnes? You ſay the moſt of our men are wicked. Bernard, to quit you for it, pronounceth, that there is not one of your Cleargie, that maketh any conſcience of diſcharging his duetie. Haue you forgotten what a Biſhop of yours ſaid in the late Councell of Trent, (leaſt any ſhould thinke that you are better now, then you were in Bernardes time?) The people (ſaith Cornelius. Bitonti. Epiſc. in Concil Tridet. the Biſhop) are fallen away from Chriſt to Antichriſt, from God to Epicuriſme; and the Prieſtes haue bene their ringleaders, to all kinde of lewdneſſe. Yea Adrianus in inſtruc. ad Cler. Pope Adrian the ſixt, (I am ſure you will beleeue him) ſpeaking of your Prelates, ſaith, that All of them (he putteth in himſelfe too) Declinauimus. 
                     were declined, cuerie one to his owne waies: And that there had bene none of them, a great while, that had done any good, 
                     Non fuit vſque ad vnum. 
                     no not one of them. If ſuch were, and be the ſtate of your Cleargie, geſſe you, what the common people be. Compare your witneſſes and mine, and tell me whether we ouermatch you or no, both in number and weight.
                  
                     Neuer any Saint of our Church? Why do you not refute that

which we alledge for our ſelues againſt this ſlander? We pleade that Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and all the holy men named in the Scriptures, with the Martyrs and confeſſors, ſince our Sauiour Chriſts comming in the fleſh, that all the Apoſtles (except Iudas, whom we leaue to your Simoniacall congregation) yea that many Biſhops of Rome were of our Church. To al this you reply not ſo much as one word; but tell them that will beleeue you, that there neuer was any Saint or holy man of our Church. I cannot greatly blame you, though you bind your followers to giue credit to you, without looking for proofe of that you deliuer. For if you ſhould be put to that, all were marred. But I wil render you a reaſon, why we lay challenge to all thoſe men, as members of our Church, and not of yours. They agree (ſay we, diſproue vs if you can) with vs in the ſubſtance of doctrine, concerning ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt, and other points of the foundation. If you were able to ſhew the like (which is vnpoſſible) yet would it not follow that they were of your Church: becauſe no man is, in your account a member of your Church, but he that agrees with you in all matters defined by your Church; wherein I confidently anow (and am readie to iuſtifie it) there is no auncient writer in the firſt thouſand years, that is of your opiniō; though in ſome one point or other they may agree with your doctrin. But indeed we haue no ſaints canonized by our Church, and made mediators betwixt God and vs, to rob Ieſus Chriſt of his office, and God the Father a See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 4. of thanks due to him for granting our requeſts. And if this want make our Church vnholy, the Church in the time of our Sauiour himſelfe and of his Apoſtles was moſt vnholy, in which there neuer was any ſuch practiſe or doctrine. Indeed this is the maine holineſſe, whereby 
                        Bellar. de notis Eccleſ. lib. 4 cap. 11. the learned of your ſide ſeeke to proue the truth of your Church, and not that other of particular mens conuerſation.
                  And what ſay you againſt our doctrine in this behalfe? Forſooth, that it cannot of it ſelfe leade the moſt preciſe obſeruers of it to holineſſe. The particulars of our doctrine accuſed by you, ſhall be defended in their ſeuerall places: now a word or two onely in generall. How doth any doctrine leade

to holineſſe, but by propounding the rules of true obedience to God, wherein all holineſſe conſiſts? How doe the arts of Grammer, Logicke, Arithmeticke and Geometry leade a man to ſpeake, reaſon, number, and meaſure well, but by deliuering the true rules to theſe purpoſes, which in themſelues direct to perfection in euery one of theſe profeſſions? And can our doctrine be ſaid to be inſufficient, which acknowledgeth the ſcriptures of God to be the rule of all righteouſneſſe, and all men bound to liue in obedience to the will of God, contained and reuealed in them? Do not we teach men, that vpon paine of damnation they muſt labour to keepe all Gods commaundements whatſoeuer? Are not our expoſitions of the commaundements as large in duties preſcribed, and ſins forbidden, as yours are? Do we, or you, perſwade men that there are ſome veniall ſinnes, ſmall breaches of Gods law, not to be regarded: whereas we ſhew that euery leaſt tranſgreſſion of the law is damnable? But becauſe you charge vs with particular points, which incline men (as you ſay) to libertie and looſeneſſe of life, I will come to the examination of them ſeuerally, yet but ſhortly, for that I haue anſwered them all in Anſwer to 12. Art part. 2. art. 4. another treatife againſt certaine articles propounded by one of your Popiſh faction.
                  It is vtterly vntrue, that our doctrine inclines any man to breake faſting dayes: nay rather we enioyne all men to obſerue dayes lawfully ſet apart for faſting, with all care and good conſcience, both for preparation to, and cariage in the action. As for your dayes of abſtaining from fleſh, we hold the inſtitution of them to be voyd of Religion, and vnlawfull, as making them in themſelues a part of Gods ſeruice: whereas a man, for all your faſting, may glut and gorge himſelfe with wine and all dainties, ſo he eate no fleſh, and yet keepe your Popiſh faſt, without danger of any cenſure for tranſgreſſing your law of faſting.
                  
                     Confeſſion of ſinnes to a miniſter, we neither commaund as a neceſſarie dutie, nor forbid as a ſinne, but leaue it free to euery mans conſcience, as he findeth need of inſtruction or comfort. It is ſo far from being a remedie of ſinne, as it is vſed by your church, that it rather prouokes men to ſinne, becauſe they haue ſo readie and eaſie a meanes to disburden their conſciences (as

they thinke) when they haue ſinned. A worthy gentleman that hath ſeene the experience of this matter, doubteth not to auouch as much as I ſay: that Relation of religion in theſe Weſtern parts. ſect. 7. 
                     your people ſinne, that they may haue ſomewhat to confeſſe: and confeſſe, that they may returne to ſin: yea I can name, and if need be, bring forth one, who hath bene faine in confeſſion to accuſe himſelfe of ſinnes which he neuer committed, becauſe his ghoſtly father would not be perſwaded but that being a young man, and liuing in one of your Popiſh countries, he muſt needs be defiled with the corruptions of the place and age.
                  There is no one point, wherein you more bewray your ſelues to be ſeruants, and not ſons of God, then this confeſſion againſt your owne ſoules, that you would neglect the doing of good workes, but that you looke to merite euerlaſting life by them. This motiue to good workes is ſo baſe, that no man of a free nature would yeeld vnto it. The very Philoſophers could teach you, that vertue is to be loued for vertue, and not for any outward reſpect or conſequent that may follow thereupon: and God is more diſhonored by your opinion of meriting, then honored by any your ſuppoſed good workes whatſoeuer. If you had euer felt, what a ſharpe ſpurre to holineſſe of life the aſſurance of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes is, you would neuer thinke that the practiſe of good workes is lightly eſteemed, where the mercie of God hath brought peace to the damned conſcience. And yet we want not that other helpe, expectation of reward, which we are ſure ſhal be giuen to the leaſt of our good works, though not vpon their deſert, but of the meere mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt. That wicked opinion of merit, either before or after grace, doth puffe vp the pride of mans nature, and diminiſh the glorie of Gods mercie in Ieſus Chriſt. Wages vpon deſert, is the hire of ſeruants; reward beſtowed in loue, is the gift of a kind father to a gracious ſonne, who hath ſhewed himſelf willing to performe duties of obedience.
                  What men doth it make careleſſe, but thoſe proud Phariſes that ſtand at the ſtaues end with God, and thinke ſcorne to labour in keeping the commandements, vnleſſe they may ſo keep them, as to claime heauen vpon deſert by keeping of them?

Is it not enough to ſtir vp any poore Chriſtian ſoule to obedience, that God will accept of his weake endeuours, being performed in truth and ſingleneſſe of heart, and reward them with an vnſpeakable meaſure of glorie? There is no man, vnleſſe he be more deſirous of his owne glorie then Gods, but wil be content and glad to confeſſe his vnabilitie to performe the whole will of God perfectly, and yet ſtriue from time to time to doe as much as his corruption will giue way to. It ſeemes, that not diuinitie onely, but alſo common reaſon failes you. Shall I be careleſſe in bearing my horſe head, and holding him vp from falling, becauſe I am ſure he treads neuer a ſure ſtep, but will ſtumble or trip continually, do the beſt I can? Put caſe we ſaid, as you ſlaunder vs, that whatſoeuer we do is ſin: are there therefore no degrees in ſinne? or is it all one, to ſin by infirmitie and wilfulneſſe? What if a ſicke man cannot by any meanes recouer his perfect health againe? ſhall he therefore refuſe to keepe a good diet, and grow to as much ſtrength as for his weakneſſe he can attaine to? But what Proteſtant euer ſaid, that whatſoeuer we do is ſinne? It is one thing to ſay (as we do) Anſwer to 12. art. part 2. art. 2. that ſinne by our corruption cleaues faſt to our beſt works, another thing to auouch (as you falſly charge vs) that all we do is ſinne. Neither is it fooliſhneſſe to feare that which cannot be auoided, if by our feare we can make it leſſe hurtfull to vs. Yea it is a point of great diſcretion, to labour all we can againſt ſinne, though we cannot wholly rid our ſelues of it, becauſe by this meanes our actions ſhall be free from the imputation of thoſe ſins, and receiue an vndeſerued reward at the hands of God, our mercifull Father in Ieſus Chriſt.
                  You vndertooke to proue, that the doctrines of our Church are vnholy: now you tell vs that ſome Proteſtants hold this and that. Is this to make good that you propounded? But what Proteſtants can you name, that euer taught that God moueth men effectually and forcibly, not onely to good workes, but in the ſame ſort 
                     See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 5. 
                     to the act of ſinne? Is it your ignorance or your malice, that maketh you charge vs with that which we alwayes denie and refute? We ſay, there is no force or coaction either in good or euil actions, and diſtinguiſh betwixt neceſſitie and constraint.
                     
All things come to paſſe neceſſarily, in regard of the euent, according 
                        Vide Durandīs in 2. diſt. 25. q. 4. n. 7. & ibi Lomb. et Thom. in 1. diſt. 38 q. 1. et Capreol. in 1. diſt. 38. q. 1. art. 2. ad 2. pro 4. conclu.
                      to the prouidence and predeſtination of God. But this hinders not the working of ſecundary cauſes, according to their ſeuerall natures. Beſides, though we hold that there is a neceſſitie of infallibilitie, as well in good actions as in ſinnes, ſo that whatſoeuer God hath decreed (and he hath decreed all things that come to paſſe) ſhall certainly fall out according to his decree: yet we make a great difference betwixt good and euill actions, by teaching that the one are done by the worke of Gods ſpirit in our hearts, the other by the corruption of our nature, without any warrant or motion in vs from God. Further, in thoſe good actions which we performe, the Lord doth not onely worke by vs, as by inſtruments without ſenſe or reaſon, but according to our nature, enlightening our vnderſtanding, and ſweetly inclining our affection, without any force againſt our nature, to the approuing of that which he would haue vs do, and following vs by the perſwaſion of his ſpirit, till he haue brought vs ineuitably to the performance of that which he hath decreed. So that wee doe nothing, but willingly: but to good we are made willing by God, both for the power and act: to euill we need no aſſiſtance, but the corruption of our owne hearts, and the temptations of the diuell.
                  Lo whither the malice of Antichriſts vaſſals driues them: both to auouch that for truth againſt the Church of God, which is vtterly falſe; and to gather leud conſequences of true doctrin: and conſider whether they haue cauſe to brag of holineſſe, who will do nothing that is good, but for hope of hire, and aduance their owne deſeruings aboue Gods bountie; and then tell me, if you can perſwade your conſcience, that ſuch a companie of Phariſaicall merit-mongers are likely to be the true Church of God.
                  You confeſſe there be ſome ſinfull folke in the Romane Church: but your confeſſions (if a man might haue the hearing of them) would teſtifie that there are none but ſinfull folk amongſt you. It is rehearſed by the ſecretary of Sixtus 5. for a ſingular commendation of Pius the fift, that the Cardinall of Theano, and 
                        Girol. de Catena in vita de Pio 5. pag. 33. the Biſhop of Bagnarea, who had bin his confeſſors many yeres,

affirmed, that he neuer accuſed himſelfe in confeſſion of any mortall ſinne. And do you come out with There are ſome ſinfull folke, and all in it are not good? Call to minde what I alledged before out of Bernard, againſt your whole Cleargie, that is, as you count, your whole Church. Or let that paſſe, and heare him ſpeake more generally: From the head to the foote (ſaith 
                        Bernar. de conuer. Pauli. ſer. 1. Bernard of your Church) there is no part whole. And againe: The whole multitude of Christian people hath conſpired againſt Chriſt. In 
                        In Can. ſer. 33 another place he ſaith, that a filthy contagion had ſpred it ſelfe ouer the whole Church. The law (ſaith Breidenb. in hiſt. peregr. ſuae. Breiden bachius) is departed from the Prieſts, iuſtice from the Princes, counſell from the auncient, faith from the people, loue from parents, reuerence from ſubiects, charitie from prelates, religion from Monks, good order from yong men. Neither was it thus onely in places farre diſtant from your holy Fathers ſight, but in his court, vnder his noſe, in his bed chamber and ſtudie. There (ſaith 
                        Bern. de conſid. ad Eugē. l. 4 Bernard of your Popes palace) the wicked grow forward, the godly grow backward. Whatſoeuer perfidiouſneſſe and deceit (ſaith 
                        Petrarc. epiſt. 19. See Petrarkes ſonet. 92. 107. 108. Petrarke, who liued in Rome perhaps, ſecretary to the Pope) whatſoeuer vnmercifulneſſe and pride, whatſoeuer impietie and leudneſſe of behauiour the world hath, or hath had ſcattered here and there, all that you may ſee and find heaped vp together in the citie of Rome. 
                     
                        Giouan. Boccac. nouel. 2. Iohn Boccace, who liued at the ſame time, complaineth, that not onely the courtiers, but alſo the Pope, Cardinals and Prelates liued moſt filthily, and ſinned not onely by naturall lust, but by that too, which is againſt nature, without bridle, remorſe of conſcience, or ſhame. I forbeare to ſet downe any particulars, whereof Platina and other that write the liues of your Popes, are full: becauſe I take no pleaſure in laying open your ſhame, and it is alreadie performed Iohn Bale Eng. votaries. D. Downam of Antich. lib. 1. cap. 6. in diuers of our writers. Only I muſt needs ſay, that I cannot ſufficiently wonder at your boldnes, who talke to Engliſhmen of your holineſſe, when there is no man of our nation ſo yong, or ſo ignorant, but is able to conuince the Pope himſelfe, and his Prieſts and Ieſuites of horrible rebellions and treaſons againſt our late Queene of bleſſed memory, and our whole eſtate. But what ſhall I need to ſeeke far off? Was there euer the like monſtrous and vnnatural example of treaſon & murder

(among the moſt ſauage of the heathen) to that incredible attempt of your holy ones, for the deſtruction of King, Queene, Prince, Nobilitie, Counſell, Iudges, Gentrie and Commons, all at one blow? 
                     Sueton. in Neron. Barbarous and bloudie Nero is abhorred by all men, becauſe he did wiſh that all the Senators of Rome had but one necke, that he might cut them all off at once. But your ſauageneſſe iuſtifies his crueltie: he was but a pidler to your Ieſuites and Papiſts, who with one cracke would haue taken away both Senate and people. There is more cauſe of feare, that poſteritie will neuer beleeue the true report of this execrable attempt (it is ſo like rather to a deuiſe of a Poet, then a diſcourſe of an hiſtorie writer) then that they will condemne your whole congregation of more then Turkiſh, or any other heatheniſh barbarouſneſſe. And do you, with a ſhameleſſe brazen forehead, come vpon the ſtage to brag of holineſſe? Deſpiſe not ſo much the long ſuffering of God, as to make a ſhew of religion, after ſo many abhominable treaſons and murders, ariſing (directly) from the principles of your profeſſion, and agreeing exactly with the ordinarie plots and courſes of your holy Father: 
                        See Girol. de Caten. in vita di Pio 5. pag. 112. 113. who in the raigne of our late gracious Soueraigne, practiſed diuers treaſons by his wicked inſtruments. For proofe of that I ſay, let them which vnderſtand Italian, reade the report of his Secretarie, who propounds diuers of them to the commendation of his maiſters zeale, for labouring to reduce to the Church, them that were fallen from the obedience thereunto. But the memorie, and in a manner the feeling of that horrible treaſon, Nouemb. 5. 1605. is yet ſo freſh and greene, that he deſerues not to be held either for a Chriſtian, a true hearted Engliſhman, or a reaſonable man, that lookes for fruites of holineſſe from trees planted in the Popes orchard.
                  Alas, this proofe might well haue bene ſpared. For there is no doubt but your Church of Rome hath ſtore of wicked men: and that you bring out of the Canticles, neither belongs to your Church, nor concernes the vngodly. The Church ſpoken of in that excellent ſong, is the ſpouſe of Chriſt, one fleſh with his holy maieſtie: the companie of the elect, called to true faith in the Son of God. Among theſe there is not one prophane Eſau

or bloudie Cain; ſuch as See Platina in Sylueſt. diuers of your Popes haue bene, not onely your ordinarie Papiſts. But this blackneſſe and beautie, how contrary ſoeuer they ſeeme (as 
                        Bern. in Can. Ser. 25. Bernard truly ſaith) belong to one and the ſame perſon. Wilt thou haue mee ſhew thee a ſoule (ſaith he) that is both blacke and beautifull? 
                     2. Cor. 10. 10. 
                     His epiſtles, ſay they, are of ſome worth, but his bodily preſence is weake, and his ſpeech contemptible. The blackneſſe is outward in mens ſight, the beautie in ward, ſeene of God. Therefore he addeth 
                        Bern. ubi ſupr. Origen. in Can. homil. 2. a litle after, that A true Chriſtian ſoule is blacke in the iudgement of the world, but faire in the ſight of God and of his Angels. The ſpouſe (ſaith Bern. in declam. Ecce nos reliqu. omnia. Bernard in another place) is blacke, but beautifull. The Apoſtles are men full of ſorrow, yet alwayes reioycing. Chriſt himſelfe if you looke vpon him with ſuch eyes as the Iewes did, had neither forme nor beautie. Other refer this to the eſtate of men, before and after their calling: before they are blacke, afterward faire. Other (Theod. in cāt. Tres patres apud Theod. for allegories affoord varietie of interpretation) apply it to the Church, mixt of Iewes and Gentiles: which is blacke becauſe of the Gentiles, who before knew not God. Pſellus a pud Theod. Pſellus maketh the blackneſſe to ariſe from our eſtate in Adam, the beautie from our righteouſneſſe in Chriſt. 
                        Gloſſ. ord. ibi. Bern. in Canti. Ser. 25. Thom. in Cant. cap. 1. lect. 3. Gloſſ. interlin.
                      Many vnderſtand by blackneſſe, the outward affliction of the Church. None that I haue ſeene, but Lyra in Cant. Lyra, expound it of the wicked; and yet he alſo rather liketh of that other interpretation, which maketh this blackneſſe to be according to the conceipt of the world. But I will not greatly ſtriue about the true ſenſe, which is ſo doubtfull: onely I take that expoſition which you bring, to be the worſt, becauſe it cannot agree to the true Church of Chriſt, the companie of the elect called; among whom there are none blacke, that is, wholy wicked, though all be blacke in regard of their nature, and faire in their head Chriſt.
                  You haue laboured to ſhew that the Proteſtants Church is not holy, becauſe it hath no holy men in it. From that point you poſted ouer to proue your owne Church to be holy. Here you returne againe to the diſgracing of our Church, as if your holineſſe were ſo darke in it ſelfe, that it needed ours to be layd vnder it for a foyle, that it might ſhew the better. But let vs

examine your proofe in this compariſon.
                  
                     If that Church be holy, ſome members whereof haue bene holy; that vnholy, no members whereof haue bene holy: and ſome members of the Roman Church haue bene holy, none of the Proteſtants Church; then the Romane Church is holy, the Protestants Church vnholy.
                     But that Church ſome members whereof haue bene holy, is holy: that vnholy, no members whereof haue bene holy: and ſome members of the Romane Church haue bene holy, none of the Proteſtants Church.
                     Therefore the Romane Church is holy, the Proteſtants Church vnholy.
                  
                  Your Minor is falſe, in both parts of it. For the former, if by 
                     To the Aſſumption. 
                     holineſſe, you vnderſtand true inward holineſſe, 
                     
                        Chap. 15. according to your former expoſition, no companie may be counted truely holy, becauſe ſome few among them are holy. For true holineſſe is a qualitie proper to them, in whom it is, and ſuch as cannot be communicated to any multitude ioyntly conſidered, nor affirmed of it, vnleſſe the greater part be truly holy. If any man will preſſe me with the Apoſtles authoritie, who calleth, 1. Cor. 1. 2. & 2. Cor. 1. 1. the Corinthians, and all Chriſtians in Achaia Saints: I anſwer, that the reaſon of his ſo calling them, is not becauſe ſome among them were truely holy, but becauſe they all made profeſſion of true faith in Chriſt, which is alwaies accompanied with ſanctification. According to this profeſſion of theirs, the Apoſtle charitably iudgeth of them, and tearmes them 1. Cor. 1. 2. 
                     Saints by calling; as if he ſhould ſay, that they are Saints, becauſe they profeſſe themſelues called to holineſſe of life. This appeareth the rather, becauſe 
                        Epheſ. 1. 1. Coloſſ. 1. 2. otherwhere, to be Saints, and to be faithfull is all one: where faithfulneſſe is aſcribed to whole congregations, profeſſing the faith of the Goſpell. Therefore the holineſſe of ſome few, maketh not all the Church truely holy, no more then Eliah, and thoſe ſeuen thouſand reſerued by God, made the whole Church of Iſraell holy in the ſight of God; which was an idolatrous congregation, and vnholy, for all theſe holy men were in ſome reſpect outwardly members thereof.
                  
                     
But let vs grant, that the holineſſe of fome few may priuiledge all for this title of holineſſe: yet in the ſecond place, we may iuſtly except againſt the ſtretching of this priuiledge to all that euer ſhall be, by ſucceſſion, of that companie. Were it not ridiculous trow you, for you Romanes that now are, to claime the reputation of valour, or the Iewes the opinion of holineſſe, becauſe the eſtate of Rome, and the Church of the Iewes had many valiant & holy men ſome hundreds of yeares ſince? How then can it be true, that a Church is holy, becauſe it hath had, I know not how long ago, ſome holy men members of it?
                  The other part of your Minor I acknowledge to be true, that no Church is holy, which hath not ſome holy men members of it. But I ſee not how this can ſtand with your doctrine, 
                        Bellar. de Eccleſ. milit. lib. 3. cap. 10. that it is enough to make a man a true member of the holy Catholicke Apoſtolick Church, that he make outward profeſſion of beleeuing the Goſpell, and obeying the Pope, though he haue not Chriſtian vertue in him, no not ſo much as that faith, he maketh ſhew of. For if this ſerue to giue vs the right of being true members, the Church may well be quite without inward holineſſe, as a matter not appertaining to the eſſence, or nature of it.
                  The laſt part of your Minor is falſe the, Proteſtants Churches haue had many thouſand holy men, euen all that euer held the truth of the Goſpell, according to the Scriptures: and your Church neuer had, nor ſhall haue any one truly ſanctified, that was wholly a member thereof, after your account, that is, which agreed, or agreeth with you in all points of Antichriſtianiſme. But I will follow you in your courſes, and of this ſay more afterward. Firſt you prooue the latter part, and diſpute againſt our Church in this ſort.
                  
                     That Church which hath had no members of it reuealed to be holie by miracle, or anie other certaine waie from God, hath had no members of it holy.
                     But the Proteſtants Church hath had no members of it reuealed to be holy, by miracle, or any other certain way from God.
                     
                        
Therefore the Proteſtants Church hath had no members of it holy.
                  
                  I denie your Maior, becauſe it will follow vpon granting it, To the propoſition. that no man is truly to be counted holy, but he that is declared to be ſo, by miracle or ſome other certaine way from God. For your whole diſcourſe ſheweth, that this is your meaning, where you tell vs, that No man can be knowne to be holy, but by Gods teſtimonie of his holineſſe by miracle, or ſome other certaine way: Of miracles by and by: In the meane while I would faine know, what theſe other certaine waies are, which God vſeth, to giue vs aſſurance of this, or that mans holineſſe: will you tell vs a tale of I know not what reuelations, out of your Legends and bookes of examples, which are full of ſuch fained apparitions? Legend. aurea, & ſpeculum exemplar. paſſim. Put caſe thoſe lewde lies were true tales, and that the miracles deuiſed by ſome of your complices, were worthie of credit: ſurely the number of them that haue bene truely holy, 
                        Gabriel. Biel. in Can. miſs. lect. 49. hath bene verie ſmall, if no more haue bene holy, then can pleade ſuch miracles or reuelatiōs for proofe of their holineſſe. As for thoſe, that haue teſtimony of their holineſſe from God in the Scriptures, both they are verie few, in compariſon, for ſo many thouſand yeares: and that meanes of ſhewing who are holy, ceaſſed aboue one thouſand foure hundred yeares ſince.
                  Now concerning Miracles, why ſhould we in theſe daies, 
                        Mat. 16. 3. 4. gape after them, like the vnbeleeuing Iewes, for the confirmation of any mans holineſſe, ſince we haue no warrant, nor example of Scripture, to apply them to any ſuch purpoſe? Bring me one example, if you can, out of the whole Scripture, of any miracle wrought, to prooue any man to be holy. The vſe of miracles is the confirmation of doctrine, or rather the auowing of mens calling from God, that their doctrine may be receiued. If I do not the works of my Father (ſaith 
                        Ioan. 20. 37. 38. our Sauiour) beleeue me not: but if I do, then though ye beleeue not me, yet beleeue the works, that ye may know, and beleeue that the Father is in me, and I in him. 
                     
                        Ioan. 20. 31. 
                     Theſe things are written, that ye might beleeue that Ieſus is that Chriſt the ſonne of God. To that end did our Sauiour furniſh his Apoſtles with power to worke miracles:

                     
                        Mat. 10. 7. 8 
                     As ye go, preach, ſaying, the kingdome of God is at hand. Heale the ſicke, cleanſe the leaprous, raiſe vp the dead. Therefore doth 
                        Pacian. ad Sympro. Epi. 3. Pacianus require miracles of the Nouatians, becauſe they brought in a new Goſpell. And why (I pray you) do 
                        Mat. 24. 24. falſe Prophets that ariſe, ſhew many great ſignes and wonders? To prooue themſelues to be holy? No ſurely: if they deſire an opinion of holineſſe, it is that their doctrine might the rather be receiued.
                  But to proceed yet further; if no man be holy, that hath not miracles, to teſtifie his holineſſe, I doubt much, whether any man may be thought holy or no. For it is out of queſtion, that wicked men haue wrought miracles, either truely, or at leaſt (which I rather beleeue) in ſhew, ſo that men could not diſcerne the contrarie. Shall I need to name 
                        Exod. 7. 21. 22. & 7. 8. Pharaoes ſorcerers? Doth not 
                        Mat. 24. 24. the Scripture tell vs, that falſe Chriſts, and falſe Prophets ſhall ſhew ſignes and wonders? Doth not 2. Theſs. 2. 9. the Apoſtle forewarne vs, that Antichriſt ſhal come with ſignes, and lying wonders? Your owne ſchooleman, 
                        Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miſſae. lect. 29. Gabriel Biel telleth vs, that miracles are wrought often times, by the operation of diuels. And 
                        Lyra. in Dan. cap. 14. Lyra is not afraid to ſay, that Now and then there is great deceit vſed in the Church, by miracles fained by the Prieſts, or ſome that are about them, for their worldly commoditie. Your Church affoordeth vs examples of notorious lies in this kinde. I will name two of your principall Saints. 
                        Tom. 2. opuſc. tract. de concept. virg, ca. 5. Saint Bridget auoucheth that it was reuealed to her, that the Virgin Marie was preſerued from Originall ſinne: 
                        Kather. ſer. 5. Saint Katharin of Syena had a quite contrarie reuelation. From whom rrow you came theſe miracles? Many miracles (ſaith 
                        Theophyl. in Luc. 9. Theophylact) haue bene done by the diuell. And 
                        Auguſt. de unit. Eccleſ. cap. 16. Auſtin ſpeaking of ſuch wonders alledged by the followers of Donatus, reiecteth all ſuch, as deuiſes of lying men, or illuſions of deceitfull ſpirits. Let vs heare your great Maſter Bellarmines iudgement of this matter, where he maintaineth miracles, as a marke of the Church. Till the Church hath approoued thoſe things that are done, for miracles, (ſaith 
                        Bellar. de notis. Eccleſ. lib. 4 cap. 14. ſect. Eſt autem.
                      Bellarmine) it is not euident or certaine, by aſſurance of faith, of any miracle, that it is a true miracle: His reaſon followeth. That it is not euident, it appeareth, becauſe then faith ſhould be
                     
                     euident. That it is not certaine by aſſurance of faith, it is manifeſt, becauſe it is not cleare to vs by ſuch aſſurance as cannot be falſe, that the thing done is not an illuſion of the diuell. For though the diuell cannot worke any true miracle, yet can he in ſhew do any thing neuer ſo wonderfull. If then there be no meanes to iudge any man holy, but by miracles, nor any certaintie but by the teſtimony of the Church, to know which are true miracles; doubtleſſe you can neuer prooue, that your Church is holy, becauſe there haue bene holy men members of it, till you haue firſt prooued it to be the true Church. But of your proofe enough.
                  To your Minor I anſwer, that Bellarmine, out of whom you To the Aſſumption. tooke all this, maketh the holineſſe of your men, and their miracles two ſeuerall proofes, though vnder the note of holineſſe I Bellar. de notis Eccleſ. lib. 4. ca. 13. 14. of life. Out of him I ſay farther, that the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apoſtles, yea all that euer were holy, were members of the ſame Church with vs, holding the ſame doctrine that we do, for the ſubſtance of it. You bid me prooue it. But by your leaue the duetie of prouing lies vpon the replier, whoſe place you haue taken, not vpon the anſwerer, whoſe perſon in this caſe, I ſuſtaine. Beſides I bring you the ſame proofe, that Bellarmine bringeth for himſelfe, that is, I ſay they were all of our Church. If it be abſurd to do ſo, let your Cardinall learne to diſpute better. It were long to enter into particulars, yet if I had brought the argument, I would for ſhame haue ſaid ſome what in proofe of it: but let it paſſe as it comes for this once. Againſt whom make you all this diſcourſe, to prooue that it is not poſſible to know certainly, who are holy, and who are not? Surely not againſt the Proteſtants, who confeſſe as much. If hereupon you conclude, that our Church hath had none holy, becauſe it hath had none certainly knowne to be holy, the Maior of your ſyllogiſme will be falſe, as before: viz. That Church which hath had no members of it reuealed to be holy by miracle, or anie other certaine way from God, hath had no members of it holy: and I will anſwer to your Minor, as I did, that the Patriarkes, Prophets and Apoſtles were members of our Church, certainly knowne to be holy by reuelation from God.
                  
                     
But whereas you ſay, that no man can tell, whether himſelfe be truely ſanctified or no, you affoord me proofe of that, which before I affirmed, that the Apoſtles were of our Church. Prooue your ſelues (ſaith 2. Cor. 13. 5. the Apoſtle Paule) whether you be in the faith: examine your ſelues: know ye not your owne ſelues, that Ieſus Chriſt is in you, except you be reprobates? And how doth 
                        Rom. 8. 16. the ſpirit of God, beare witneſſe to our ſpirit, that we are the children of God, if it be not poſſible to diſcerne his voice, from the deluſion of Sathan? God hath giuen (ſaith 
                        Bernard. ſerm. 1. in ſeptuag.
                      Bernard) certaine manifeſt ſignes and tokens of ſaluation, that it cannot be doubted, but that he is in the number of the elect, in whom thoſe ſignes continue. And 
                        Bernard. Juper. Cant. ſer. 8. in an other place, whatſoeuer ſoule among you (ſath the ſame man) hath at any time felt in the ſecret of his conſcience the ſpirit of the Sonne, crying Abba Father: let that ſoule preſume, that he is loued with a fatherly affection, which feeleth himſelfe indued with the ſame ſpirit, which the Sonne had. Be confident, whoſoeuer thou art, be confident, nothing doubting. By the ſpirit of the Sonne, know thou art the daughter of the Father, the ſpouſe and ſiſter of the Sonne. Do you name Bernard for a principall Saint of your Church, and go ſo directly againſt his doctrine? As for that place of 
                        Eccleſ. 9. 1. Eccleſiaſtes, what prooueth it, but onely, that See defence of the reformed Catholicke. Pag. no man can truly iudge, whether he be in Gods fauour or no, by the outward things of this life, or at the moſt, that an ordinarie naturall man can giue no true iudgement of the matter? This place (ſaith 
                        Alfonſ. Salmero. in 2. cor. 12. diſp. 14. Alfonſus Salmero, no meane Ieſuite) doth not prooue that, which ſome men draw from it, that a man knoweth not the loue of God toward him: becauſe it followeth in the text, he knoweth not whether he be worthie of hatred. But the wicked know that they are moſt worthie of Gods hatred, by reaſon of their grieuous ſins: The other place, that 
                        Prou. 20. 9. 
                     No man can ſay his heart is cleane, maketh nothing againſt the point, you would diſprooue. For what though euerie man be tainted with naturall corruption, which hath euen the nature of ſinne in it, may be not haue, withall, aſſurance, according to his meaſure of Gods loue in Chriſt? Yet if want of a pure heart, be all the hindrance, your doctrine teacheth vs, that the 
                        Concil. Trident. ſeſs. 5. cap. 5 partie baptiſed, before he fall into ſome deadly ſinne,

is wholly cleane, originall ſinne hauing loſt in him the nature of ſinne. But the knowledge of the fauour of God dependeth not vpon the meaſure of our holineſſe, but vpon the truth of it. Whereſoeuer 
                        Rom. 8. 9. 10 the ſpirit of God hath begotten true faith, there he hath begun true ſanctification, which according to his diuine power and pleaſure, be will in time bring to full perfection.
                  As if our Church had bene begun with Luther, and not Thom. in expoſ. Symb. ſect. ſanctā Eccleſ. rather with Adam, and the world; continued in the Patriarches and Prophets, and at laſt ſhewed moſt gloriouſly in the Apoſtles and Diſciples of our Sauiour Chriſt? As long as God hath giuen teſtimonie of the holineſſe of theſe worthies, our Church cannot be ſaid to haue had none certainly knowne to be holy. But though we builde not vpon any ſuch ground, tel me what it wanted of amiracle, that a poore Frier ſhould ſet himſelfe againſt the Pope, and the whole ſtate of your Church: and for all the malice & perſecution of the Pope, the Emperor, and generally all the eſtates of theſe weſterne parts, as well ciuill, as Eccleſiaſticall, except a Prince or two in Germany conuerted by him, continue and grow ſo many yeares, and leaue behind him, (after a peaceable and godly death) ſo many heires of his doctrine, daily increaſing and multiplying? It is enough that the word of God beareth witneſſe to the truth of his doctrine, though we haue neither miracle, nor reuelation of his holineſſe. But you would make the world beleeue, that he and Caluin attempted to worke miracles. If it had bene ſo, it was not to breed an opinion of their holineſſe, but to auow the truth of their doctrine. But to whom can it ſeeme likely, that they which denied, that any miracles were to be looked for, and taught that Antichriſt ſhould come with ſignes and wonders, would go about ſuch a needleſſe, and doubtfull peece of worke? What tell you vs of the Apoſtata Bolſec, or Staphylus, who ſolde themſelues to lie for the Popes aduantage? At the leaſt name ſome likely men, though partiall, and not ſuch knowne enemies and Sycophants.
                  I maruell you prooue not this point of holineſſe by the examples

of your Popes, in whoſe perſons holineſſe is inueſted, and from them deriued to all other, as honour is in, and from temporall Princes. If the Popes holineſſe, be not extraordinarily holy, what ſhould a man looke for of inferiour Papiſts? Who would not rather name the Sunne, then any ſtarre of the firſt magnitude, or the Moone her ſelfe, to prooue that there is light in the skie? But you knew how filthie that fountaine of your holineſſe is. Well, let them go as they are: you haue named vs three: the ancienteſt of whom is not yet ſix hundred yeares old. What ſay you of them? Firſt, that they were certainly knowne to haue bene profeſſors of that ſame Religion, which was then, and is now profeſſed at Rome. To whom is this certainly knowne? How many of our men haue ſhewed that the Religion of the Church of Rome is altered in diuers points, ſince Bernards time? The Councell of Trent is the pit, out of which the religiō of your preſent Church is digged. I referre the Reader, for this point, Doct. Field of the Church lib 3. cap. 7. to a Treatiſe lately written by a learned Diuine, wherein many particulars to this purpoſe are deliuered. Bernard was indeed a member of the Church of Rome, as then it was: yet either he diſſented from the doctrine of that Church, in the fundamentall points of iuſtification, or rather your Church now is fallen away from the truth, in that matter. Thou (ſaith 
                        Bernard. in Cant. ſer. 61. Bernard to our Sauiour Chriſt) art made vnto me of God righteouſneſſe: ſhal I feare leſt that one be not ſufficient for vs both? It is not a ſhore cloake that cannot couer, it will couer both thee and me largely, being both a large & eternall Iuſtice. As for our righteouſnes, Bernard altogether (as we do) acknowledgeth it, to be true but vnperfect: 
                        Bernard. in ſer. 5. de verb. Eſaiae.
                      
                     Our humble righteouſneſſe, if there be any, is true perhaps (ſaith he) but not pure, vnleſſe perchance we thinke our ſelues better, then our forefathers, who ſaid no leſſe truely, then humbly, all our righteouſneſſe is as the clouts of a menſtruous woman. For how can there be pure righteouſneſſe, wheras yet there cannot be fault wanting? VVe will not ſtriue greatly with you for Francis or Dominicke, though many abſurd doctrines, which your Church now holds, were not in their daies, nor before them, defined by any Councell, nor acknowledged by many of your Diuines.
                  
                     
To proue that theſe three were of your Church, as it is now, you alledge that which is left written of their liues, and the religious orders of Monkes and Friers founded by them. What is written of them, and by whom? Doth any man in penning their liues, affirme, that they held the ſame things in all points that your Church now holds? I trow not. But if he do, who told him ſo? If he liued in their times, he was no prophet to foreſee what would be maintained in your Church ſome hundreds of yeares after his death. If he be a late writer, what reaſon haue we to giue credit to him in ſuch a matter, farther then he is able to make good that he ſaith, by ſhewing ſuch an agreement betwixt their doctrine, and that which now you teach? That they haue left certaine orders behind them, we denie not; which may ſerue to proue, that they thought it needfull to haue people inſtructed in the knowledge of the Goſpell by preaching, and ſome trained vp of purpoſe to performe that dutie, which was the firſt end of monaſteries. But it is no eaſie matter to ſhew that your Monkes and Friers are now gouerned according to the rules appointed by them, nor any inconuenience for vs to graunt that they were of your opinion touching Frieries and monaſteries, which are matters far from the foundation of Religion, as long as there is no opinion of merit or perfection annexed thereunto.
                  The ſecond thing you affirme of them, is, that they were holy men, certainly knowne to be ſo. We are willing in charitie to thinke the beſt we may, and therefore are not haſtie to condemne them we know not. But this our iudgment is not of certaintie, vnleſſe we may haue better proofe for it then this you bring. Their liues (you ſay) and miracles teſtifie as much. But firſt, who ſhall aſſure vs that they liued ſo holily, and wrought ſuch miracles? Wee muſt haue certaine knowledge that they were holy men, who writ and reported theſe things, ere we can vpon their credit beleeue, that they ſo behaued themſelues. Secondly, put caſe that their liues were as they are ſaid to haue bene: haue you forgotten what you writ a little before? It cannot be perfitly knowne of men (ſay you) who haue truly a good conſcience, and an vnfained faith, and conſequently who be truly ſaints,
                     
                     vnleſſe it pleaſe God to reueale it by miracle, or ſome other certaine way vnto vs. Thirdly, if you thinke to ſtrike it dead by the report of their miracles, 
                        Biel. in Can. Miſſlect. 29. Biel hath taught vs, that they are oftentimes wrought by the diuell, or ſhew made of them by Prieſts, as 
                        Lyra in Dan. cap. 14. Lyra ſaith. And 
                        Bellar. de notis eccleſ. lib. 4. cap. 10. Bellarmine reſolues, that we cannot be aſſured which be true miracles, which falſe, but by the iudgement of the Church. Then are we very far from certaine knowledge that theſe men were holy: I meane ſuch knowledge as you ſpeake of, that may be a ground of faith, to teach vs infallibly which is the true Church, by the holineſſe of the members thereof.
                  But Luther and other of our men confeſſed them to haue bene ſaints. It had bene plaine dealing to haue ſaid holy men: whereas you craftily ſay ſaints, as if Luther had giuen ſome approbation of your ſaints canonized. But do Luther and Melanckthon hold them for ſaints, becauſe of their miracles, or as a thing certainly knowne to them? How could they vnderſtand what they were, but by report? They iudged charitably of them, according to the opinion that was of them in the world. And for my part, I am perſwaded of Bernard, that he was a man of a ſincere heart, and true ſanctification. But for Francis, if the report of his fiue wounds be true, I will not doubt to affirme, that he was either a wretched hypocrite in faining that miracle, or a ſilly ideot to be ſo abuſed by the diuell. The tale lies thus: that this ſame Saint Francis forſooth ſhould haue in his ſide, hands and feete, ſuch wounds as our Sauiour had, which continued always green, and were made in his bodie by I know not what ſtreames that iſſued from the Crucifixe, from the ſide, hands and feete thereof, to his ſide, hands and feete. This matter being cunningly caried by this Pope-holy ſaint, a woman ſaint, one Katharine of Sene counterfetted the like, and with like ſucceſſe. Afterward Relacion de la ſantidad yllagas de la &c en Seuilla 1589. euen of late yeares there was the like practiſe by one Marie a Prioreſſe in Portugall, of Saint Dominicks order: who caried the matter very cleanly for a time, till it pleaſed God to diſcouer her couſinage by meanes of certaine of the Nunnes, who thought ſcorne that ſhe ſhould be a ſaint rather then they; and therefore watched her ſo narrowly, and

gaue out ſuch ſuſpicious ſpeeches of her, that at laſt the whole packe of her diſſembling was opened, and ſhe enioyned fauourable penance of faſting and praying, &c. There is extant a moſt abhominable treatiſe of Saint Francis conformitie to Chriſt, Barthol dePiſts conform. S. Franciſci. wherein hee is at the leaſt equalled, if not preferred before him. But becauſe this was none of Francis owne doing, let it be as it is, the blaſphemous ſinne of your Church. Dominicke was little better then his fellow Francis, as his Legend ſheweth.
                  Vpon theſe premiſſes thus weakly proued, you bring in two concluſions: the former, that this holineſſe being confeſſed of thoſe three, muſt needs inferre the like confeſſion of the ſanctitie of many other, who were alſo profeſſors of the ſame Romane faith. If their profeſſion had bene the cauſe of their holineſſe, then you had not gathered much amiſſe. But their holineſſe (if the two latter had any) aroſe from their true faith in Chriſt, wrought in them by the holy Ghoſt, the author of that faith. But there were many in their times, as reſolute maintainers of the Romiſh Religion as they, who neuer attained to any ſuch opinion of holineſſe: and the faith you Romaniſts now profeſſe, is in maine points of iuſtification and free-will, other then that which Bernard taught. For though I haue followed you in ſaying their holineſſe, yet I acknowledge none of the three to haue bene holy, but onely Bernard. Neither are our Kalenders any euidence to proue the holines of the reſt of your Saints, though their names are continued by Almanacke writers; becauſe many old deeds and euidences are dated by their names, and not by the dayes of the moneth. The Saints Athanaſius and Bernard write of, were none of your Church, and yet (by your iudgement) both of them might be deceiued in determining who were Saints. As for Antoninus and Surius, two of your Popes vaſſailes, their teſtimonie is little worth, in any indifferent mans opinion.
                  Your latter concluſion is, that ſome part of your Church is holy, and that therefore the whole may be termed holy. But, as I haue ſaid, whatſoeuer holineſſe was in any of the profeſſed members of your Church, it ſprung from another roote then growes

in your church. Neither is there any reaſon to terme your whole companie holy, becauſe a few among them are holy; who in regard of their holineſſe, are indeed none of your company. That which they haue common with the reſt of you, makes them not holy, but rather vnholy; namely their profeſſion of ſubiection to your ſea of Rome, and their erring with you in diuers points of doctrine: their holineſſe growes from a true acknowledgement of ſaluation by faith onely, and a reſting vpon Ieſus Chriſt accordingly, without any opinion of merit in their owne actions, either before or after grace; together with a beleefe and feeling, that not they themſelues by their free will enlightened, but God by his mercy and grace made difference betwixt them and other, vouchſafing them the gift of faith, and not beſtowing it vpon other. Your ſimilitude of painting, painteth out the fondneſſe of your conceit. For being a Christian, anſwers to being a painter, in this ſimilitude, and being holy, to being skilfull. Now as euery man that is free of that Companie, is by his freedome a painter, but not thereby skilfull: ſo all that profeſſe Chriſtian Religion, are thereby Chriſtians, but not therefore holy. Neither if one or two, or a few of theſe painters were skilful, would any diſcreet man ſay, that the whole company might be termed skilfull, becauſe all make profeſſion of the ſame art of painting, wherein ſome of them are skilfull.
                  How falſly our doctrine was ſlaundered by you, with inducing men to libertie, I ſhewed in my anſwer to your accuſation: now let vs ſee wherein yours is better. Firſt you propound two general points, that it forbids expreſly all vice, and preſcribes lawes contrary to libertie. And are you able to charge vs with the contrary? Doe we not more ſtrictly interprete the lawes of God then you do? Are we not further from idolatry, allowing no religious Homily againſt perill of idolatrie. par. 3. pag. 94. vſe of any image? Do we not more abhorre ſwearing, and expound the third commandement againſt your prophane othes of Maſſe, Marie, Ladie, and all your Saints, which you account matters of ſmal moment? Who teach men to keepe the whole Sabbath, you or we? Who make a maine point of Gods law, the loue of our enemies, a counſell, and not a commaundement; we or you? Who maintaine aequiuocation & officious lies,

but you? Are not you they that hold murdering of Princes, yea euen of your owne Soueraignes, to be meritorious workes? What ſhould I name particulars? You are the men that make the corruption of our nature to be nothing elſe but the want of righteouſneſſe, that ought to be in vs. You are the men who teach vs, that originall ſinne in the regenerate, is not properly ſinne; that vncleane, vnnaturall, vnruly, ambitious, couetous, murderous, and ſuch like thoughts and motions are no ſinnes, vnleſſe we yeeld to them, or delight in them. Doe not you perſwade men, that many ſinnes are not mortall, but veniall; and ſo make men ruſh into them, without feare or ſhame?
                  Your ſecond point is, that your religion containes moſt ſoueraigne meanes to incite men to perfit vertue and holineſſe of life. What, more ſoueraigne, then God hath appointed in his word? You will not dare to ſay ſo, for very ſhame of the world. It remaines then, that you ſhew what meanes we neglect of al them that God hath commaunded vs to vſe. Do we not miniſter the ſacraments to our people? Do we not offer vp prayers, ſupplications, and interceſſions to God for them? But, that I may not runne through all particulars at once: let vs ſee what you bring peece by peece.
                  This firſt point giueth a taſt of that maine difference, which may be obſerued betwixt your Religion and ours. You ſo carie the matter, that you alwayes prouide for the freedome of mans will, whatſoeuer become of the glorie of God. We make it our chiefe care to aduance Gods glorie, though thereby we take ſomewhat from the pride of man. Let vs make this manifeſt in the particular queſtion we haue in hand. Wherein firſt wee graunt as much as you affirme: that Gods predeſtination doth not take away mans free will. But herein lies the difference betwixt you and vs: you teach that God doth onely giue a man abilitie to beleeue, and doe good workes, leauing it to himſelfe, to beleeue or not to beleeue, to do good, or not to do good. We contrariwiſe auouch, that God, beſides this abilitie, doth alſo incline our hearts to beleeue, and do, according to his owne holy purpoſe: yet doe we not any way imagine, that a man is forced

to beleeue; but onely teach, that whereas any man beleeueth it was fore appointed by God, that hee ſhould beleeue: neither could it in the euent otherwiſe fall out, though he did beleeue willingly, and by his owne choiſe. See my anſwer to 12. art part. 2. art. 4. Your doctrine maketh a man more beholding to himſelfe then to God, for his faith and good workes: becauſe God did no more for him, then he doth ordinarily for many other men, who are yet vtterly caſt away. God indeede gaue him abilitie to beleeue, if he would; but for all that, he might haue refuſed to beleeue, and ſo haue bene damned. Therefore whereas he doth beleeue, and is ſaued, he may thanke himſelfe, and not God. Thus you prouide for mans free will, with the impeachment of Gods glorie. We on the other ſide acknowledge, that as we haue power to beleeue, from the grace of God, ſo it is he that worketh our hearts to beleeue, and certainly and neceſſarily in regard of the euent, though freely in reſpect of our will, brings vs to beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt. So that you by this opinion, giue man the glorie of his ſaluation: wee leaue it wholly to God.
                  Now for the deſpaire of ſhunning euill, and doing well, which (in your conceit) enſueth vpon our opinion: there is no ſuch matter. Who ſhall be in deſpaire of ſhunning ſinne, by this doctrine? No man that hath grace. For with him the ſpirit of God is alwayes preſent, to prouoke and incline him to well doing. And this muſt needs encourage him thereto much more, becauſe he is the abler to performe any good action. As for him that is ſtill in his naturall eſtate, I hope you graunt, that there is no good to be looked for at his hands: I meane ſuch good, as may further him to euerlaſting life. But (ſay you) he can haue no hope to obtaine faith and grace, becauſe it is not within the compaſſe of mans free will to make choiſe of it, when it is offered. What though it be not? Do not we teach withall, that euerie man, to whom God affoordeth the meanes of faith, that is the miniſterie of the word, may and ought to aſſure himſelfe, that the ſpirit of God will be get faith in him, if he will ſhew himſelfe willing to be inſtructed and inclined, as he may doe, if he will aduiſedly conſider what his eſtate is

by nature, and what offer is made him by God? onely he cannot feede his naturall pride with a conceipt of being the chiefe procurer of his owne felicitie.
                  It is not vnpoſſible to obſerue the law, but to keepe it perfectly, ſo that a man cannot be charged with the breach of it in any point. Why doth 
                        Pſal. 143. 2. Dauid crie out, Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, O Lord: for in thy ſight ſhall none that liueth be iuſtified? Why doth 
                        Dan. 9. 20. Daniel confeſſe his ſinnes to God? See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 4. It is verie like, that many of your Friers are able to performe that, in which theſe worthies of the Church failed. The commaundements of God indeed are not grieuous to anie man regenerate by Gods ſpirit, becauſe (as 
                        Rom. 7. 21. the Apoſtle ſaith) he delighteth in the law of God: and by reaſon of his loue to God, thinketh nothing too heauie or too hard: as 
                        Oecum. ad 1. Ioan. 5. 3. Oecumenius expoundeth the place of Iohn. But it doth not follow thereupon, that therefore the whole law may be perfectly kept. Yea 
                        Hieron. ad Math. 11. 30. Ierome vpon that place of Mathew, directly affirmes, that many things are commaunded in the law, which (ſaith he) the Apoſtle moſt fully teacheth vs, cannot be fulfilled. 
                     Beda. ibi. Bede maketh this burden and yoke, not the commandements of the law, but the doctrine of the Gospell.
                  
                  What? cannot a man haue any heart to do well, vnleſſe hee puffe vp himſelfe with a proud conceit of being able perfectly to fulfill the whole law? How did Dauid and Daniel? Theſe are the Phariſaicall thoughts of you Papiſts, who thinke ſcorne to be beholding to God for his mercie, in forgiuing your ſinnes after baptiſme, without your owne ſatisfaction: and who will haue all of deſert, in the rigour of iuſtice. Is it not enough for a poore ſoule, who is priuie to his owne grieuous infirmities, many ſlips and great corruptions, that the Lord vouchſafeth to accept of his weake endeuours, and will crowne them with reward of glorie, for all their imperfections; but that he muſt alſo preſume of his power to keepe the whole law? You are the men that valew the pride of your corrupt nature, at an higher rate, then the glorious riches of Gods mercy in Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Here you manifeſtly bewray the pride of your hearts,

and o See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 7. your ſeruile nature, who will do nothing in thankfulneſſe to God, but vpon perſwaſion of meriting by that you do. We acknowledge, that our vnperfect obedience is acceptable to God, and that he will certainly reward euery leaſt good worke of any of his children, with a great meaſure of glorie in heauen. Only the doctrine of the ſcriptures, the knowledge of our owne imperfections, and our deſire to giue all glory to God, makes vs to renounce all opiniō of merit, & to appeale to Gods gracious promiſe onely for our reward. If theſe reſpects be not of ſufficient force with any man (as with none of you that are grounded Papiſts, they are) but that he can contemne or loathe doing of good, for all them; what ſhould I ſay, but that he ſhewes himſelf to be a ſeruant, and not a ſon: and therefore can haue no claime to the kingdome of heauen, which is the inheritance of children? 
                        Luc, 12. 32.
                  
                  VVhereas, to deceiue your owne hearts with an opinion of deſert, you aſcribe the merite of your workes to the merits of Chriſt, and teach that they are meritorious, by being dipped in his bloud: you ſhew either your ignorance or your dallying. If you thinke as you ſpeake, you bewray your ignorance: if otherwiſe, you dally with our Sauiour and his bloud. Are you able indeed to keepe the commaundements perfectly? what need haue you then of Chriſts bloud, to dip your workes in? For the perfect obſeruation of the law, brings of it ſelfe euerlaſting life, without any merit of Chriſt. Let it be from his merits, that you haue this abilitie to performe the law. Vpon the performance of it, the hire of eternall happines is abſolutely due vnto you. VVhy do you then trifle thus with our Sauiour, as if you would make him beleeue, that you thinke your ſelues more beholding to him, then indeed you can do? If you need Chriſts bloud, your works are vnperfit: if they be perfit, you need it not. Leaue this halting betwixt Chriſt and your ſelues, leſt he be auenged of your dallying.
                  To what purpoſe do you mention this your teaching, that exceeding puniſhment is due to ſinne in the next life? Doe not we teach this more effectually then you? We make the leaſt ſinne liable to euerlaſting condemnation: you teach,

that 
                        Bellar. de amiſſ. grat. lib. 1. cap. 3. there are many veniall ſinnes, which 
                        Vbi ſupra. cap 13. Bonauent. in centiloq. cap. 6. Thom. in 4. diſt. 85. art. 3. Rhem. Teſt. ad Math. 10 v. 12 Extra. de paenit. & remiſſ. cap. omnis vtriuſque in Gloſſa.
                      deſerue little or no puniſhment: in ſo much, that a knocke on the breaſt, or a ſigh, or the ſaying of one Aue-Marie, maketh ſatisfaction to God for it. But the point is, that you perſwade men, there is no aſſurance to be had of any forgiueneſſe of ſinnes committed after baptiſme. We teach the contrarie, that as many, as in the ſight of their ſinnes, with true ſorrow for them, caſt themſelues vpon Chriſt by faith to be iuſtified by him, both obtaine pardon of all their tranſgreſſions, and alſo receiue euerie one in their meaſure, and time, aſſurance that they are pardoned.
                  
                     Your doctrine (you ſay) maketh men warie, not to fall into ſinne. It reſtraineth mortall ſinne onely. For veniall ſinne cannot be puniſhed but in Purgatorie, vnleſſe a man be guiltie of mortall alſo: and if a man can make friends to the Pope, as it is no hard matter to do, eſpecially if he be well monied, he may eaſily auoid all thoſe exceeding great puniſhments. Or if he can but haue a Prieſt to ſing maſſe for him euerie Vide ſpeculum exemplar. paſſim. day (and maſſes are not verie high rated) he ſhall be ſure to be deliuered, within a ſhort ſpace. If the worſt come to the worſt, Purgatorie cannot out laſt the world, and then he goeth vp to heauen, without any more ado. But yet men are kept in awe from committing of deadly ſinnes. Neuer a whit. For it is generally preached by your Friers and Prieſtes, that confeſſion purgeth all ſins: and your people (ordinarily) are not ſo skilfull (no not one among a thouſand) as to diſtinguiſh betwixt ſinnes in this ſort: but they beleeue, that vpon their confeſſion, and abſolution (if they doe the pennaunce appoynted by their ghoſtly Father) they are as free from all their ſinnes, as when they were newly baptiſed.
                  Now concerning our doctrine, though we teach men, that aſſurance is to be had; yet we withall inſtruct them, that it is neuer in this life abſolutely without doubting, at all times: and ſ See my anſwer to 12. Art. part. 1. art. 5. that no man can be aſſured that his ſinnes are forgiuen, but he that with feare and trembling maketh conſcience of falling into ſinne; which are eſpeciall meanes prouided by God to keepe

men from ſinning; and without which, ſinne will ſo ouertake vs, and the ſenſe of Gods wrath ſo follow, & vexe vs, See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2 art. 1 that a man were better frie a yeare in your Purgatory, knowing that he ſhall one day get out of it, then lie one moneth vnder the heauie hand of God, preſſing him with the remembrance of his ſinne, and for the time hiding his gracious countenance from him. If you neuer fealt this, offer not to iudge of the extremitie thereof, for you will neuer come to giue any reaſonable geſſe of the terribleneſſe of it.
                  To preſcribe lawes of faſting, and praier as you do, that A man refraine, vpon ſuch and ſuch daies from fleſh, or patter ouer a number of Paternoſters, Aues, and Creeds, is ſo farre from teaching men to auoid ſinne, that it thruſts them neceſſarily into it. For both the opinion and doing of it as a ſeruice of God, is a grieuous ſinne, as if the Lord hated fleſh more then fiſh, or cared 
                        Durand. ratiō. lib. 6. cap. 7. n. 22. for ſuch vaine lip-labour; and alſo the verie conceit that men haue, of doing ſuch extraordinarie ſeruice, maketh them preſume, that God will beare with them, though they chance to ſinne againſt him. The like I ſay of confeſſion, but of theſe two I ſpake before in defence of our doctrine. See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 4. With what fitneſſe your remedies are applied, or rather penance is inioyned, the verieſt child may ſee; when for the moſt part they are ſuch, as I named ere while, abſtaining from fleſh, mumbling vp a certaine number of praiers, going on pilgrimage to ſome ſhrine, or ſuch like. As for true comfort in affliction of conſcience, or good direction in time of temptation, or wiſe inſtruction for a mans ſpirituall behauiour, few of your ordinarie Prieſtes, Sir Iohns Lacke-Latine, haue any knowledge or care of them.
                  This laſt point concerneth you, no more then vs. For who knoweth not, that we continually teach, that God hath called Chriſtians to holineſſe, whereof they make profeſſion, and wherein, if they do not daily exerciſe themſelues, they can haue no ſufficient aſſurance, nor reaſonable perſwaſion, that they are iuſtified by the bloud of Chriſt. Becauſe as many as haue any part of redemption by him, 
                        Gal. 4. 4. 5. haue receiued his ſpirit, and 
                        Rom. 8. 9. 11 
                     If the ſpirit of him that raiſed vp Ieſus from the dead, dwell in vs,
                     
                     our mortall bodies ſhall be quickened by the ſpirit dwelling in vs. Onely it may ſeeme, that your diſgrace, and danger ſhould be the more, if you liue not holily: becauſe you brag, that you are able perfectly to keepe the Law, and your Plea for heauen, is the deſert of your good works, together with the inward grace of faith, hope, and charitie.
                  Becauſe there is nothing in this glorious concluſion, but a heaping vp of thoſe falſe aſſertions, which I haue alreadie confuted, I will neuer make the Reader more worke then needs, by repeating of that which hath bene formerly deliuered.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 6.
                  § III. That the Romane Church onely is Catholicke.
                  
                  
                     Thirdly I finde that the Proteſtants companie is not Catholicke, that is to ſay vniuerſall, neither in time, nor in place; for it came vp of late, and is but in few places of Chriſtendome: neither in points of doctrine; for their doctrine conſiſteth chiefely of negatiues, that is to ſay in denying diuers points, which haue bene generally held in former ages: as appeareth by the Chronicles of the Magdeburgenſes their owne Doctors, who confeſſe that the ancient Fathers held this and that, which they now denie. And there is no learned Protestant (vnleſſe he be too too impudent) but he will confeſſe, that there cannot be aſſigned a viſible companie of men (profeſſing the ſame faith, which they do) euer ſince Chriſt his time, continuing without interruption till now. And therefore, will he, nill he, he muſt confeſſe, that the Proteſtants Church is not vniuerſall, and therefore not Catholicke, as out of Scripture, I ſhewed Chriſts true Church muſt be.
                  
                  
                     But the Romane Church is Catholicke. For firſt, it hath bene continually without ceaſing ſince Chriſt and his Apoſtles time, ſtill viſibly (though ſometimes in perſecution) profeſſing the ſame faith which is receiued from the Apoſtles, without change till this day. It is therefore Catholicke or vniuerſall in time. It hath alſo had, and hath at this day, ſome in euerie countrey, where there are any Chriſtians, (which is almoſt, if not abſolutely euerie where) that communicateth and agreeth with it, in profeſſion of faith. Therefore
                     
                     it is alſo Catholicke or vniuerſall in place. It teacheth alſo an vniuerſall and moſt ample vniforme doctrine of God, of Angels, of all other creatures, and ſpecially of man, of mans firſt framing, of his finall end, of things pertaining to his nature, of his fall by ſinne, of his reparation by grace, of lawes preſcribed vnto him, of vertues which he ought to embrace, of vices which he ought to eſchew, of Chriſt our Redeemer, his Incarnation, life, death, reſurrection, aſcenſion, and comming againe to iudgement, of Sacraments, and all other things, that any way pertaine to Chriſtian religion. Neither doth it at this day denie any one point of doctrine of faith, which in former times was vniuerſally receiued, for a veritie of the Catholicke Church. The which if any man will take vpon him to gaineſay, let him ſhew and prooue if he can, what point of doctrine the Romane Church doth denie, or holde contrarie to that, which by the Church was vniuerſally held before: as we can ſhew diuers points that the Proteſtants ſo hold or denie. Let him (I ſay) ſhew and prooue by ſetting downe the point of doctrine, the author, the time, the place, and what companie did oppoſe themſelues againſt it, and who they were that did continue (as the true Church muſt ſtill continue) in the profeſſion of the former faith, lineally, without interruption, till theſe our daies: as we can ſhew and prooue against them. Let him alſo ſhew what countrey there is, or hath bene, where Chriſtian faith either was firſt planted, or afterwards continued, where ſome, at leaſt haue not holden the Romane faith: as we can ſhew euen at this day, diuers places where their religion is ſcarce heard of, eſpecially in the Indian, Iaponian, and China countries, which were not long ſince, firſt conuerted to the Chriſtian faith, onely by thoſe, who were members of the Romane Church, and chiefly by Ieſuites ſent thither by the authoritie of the Pope. And to go no further then our deare countrie England: we ſhall finde in the Chronicles that it was conuerted by Augustine a Monke, ſent by Saint Gregorie the Pope, and that it cōtinued in that faith, without knowledge of the Proteſtants religion, which then, and for diuers 
                     See the Hiſtorie of Saint Bede, lib. 1. cap. 23. 
                     hundred yeares after, was neuer heard off, as being then vnhatched. The like record of other countries conuerted by meanes of thoſe onely, who either were directly ſent by the Pope or Biſhop of Rome, or at leaſt, communicated and agreed in profeſſion of faith, with him,
                     
                     we may finde in other Hiſtories. Laſtly let him ſhew ſome ſpace of time, in which the Romane Church was not ſince Chriſt and his Apoſtles time, or in which it was not viſible & knowne: as we can ſhew them many hundred yeares, in which theirs was not at all. Let him (I ſay) therefore ſhew and prooue, (which neuer any yet did or can prooue) that euer the Romane Church did either faile to be, or to be viſible: or being ſtill viſible, when the profeſſion of the ancient faith, which it receiued from the Apoſtles, did faile in it, and when, and by whom the profeſſion of a new faith began in it. As we can ſhew whē, where, & by whom, this new (no) faith of theirs began.
                  
                  
                     Certaine it is that once the Romane Church had the true faith, and was a true Church, to wit, when Saint Paule wrote to the Romanes ſaying, Veſtra fides annunciatur in vniuerſo orbe, your 
                     
                        Rom. 1. In ration. redditis academ. ra. 7. 
                     faith is renowned in the whole world. When therefore, I pray you, (as the learned and renowned Maſter Campian vrgeth) when (I ſay) did Rome change the beleefe and profeſſion of faith which once it had? Quo tempore? quo Pontifice? qua via? qua vi? quibus incrementis vrbem & orbem religio peruaſit aliena? Quas voces? quas turbas, quae lamenta ea res progenuit: Omnes orbe reliquo ſo piti ſunt, dum Roma, Roma inquam, noua Sacramenta, nouum ſacrificium nouum religionis dogma procuderet? Nullus extitit Hiſtoricus, neque Latinus, neque Graecus, neque remotus, neque citimus, quirem tantam vel obſcurè iaceret in commentarios? At what time? vnder what Pope? what way? with what violence or force? with what augmentatiō or increaſe did a ſtrange religion ouerflow the Citie and the whole world? What ſpeaches or rumors? what tumults or troubles? what lamentations (at leaſt) did it breed? Was all the reſt of the world aſleepe, when Rome (the Imperial and mother Citie, whoſe matters for the moſt part are open to the view of the whole world) when Rome I ſay, did coine new Sacraments, a new ſacrifice, a new doctrine of faith & religion? Was there neuer one Hiſtoriographer, neither Latin nor Greeke, neither farre off nor neere, who would at least obſcurely caſt into his commentaries, ſuch a notable matter as this is?
                  
                  
                     Certainly it is not poſſible, if ſuch a thing as this had happened, but that it ſhould haue bene reſisted, or at leaſt recorded by ſome. For ſuppoſe it were true, (which the Proteſtantes imagine)
                     
                     that ſome points of the faith and religion which Rome profeſſeth at this day, were as contrarie to that which was in it, when Saint Paule commended the Romane faith, as black to white, darkneſſe to light; or ſo abſurd, as were now Iudaiſme, or Paganiſme (as one of their 
                     Holinſhead in the deſcription of Britanie. Fol 11. 
                     Hiſtoriographers accounteth it worſe, ſaying, that indeed Auguſtine the Monke conuerted the Saxons from Paganiſme, but as the prouer be ſaith (ſaith he) bringing them out of Gods bleſſing into the warme Sunne:) Suppoſe, I ſay, this were true. Then I would demaund, if it were poſſible, that any Prince in any Chriſtian Citie, and much more that the Pope in Rome the mother Citie, could at this day bring in any notable abſurd rite of Iewiſh or Paganiſh religion; for example, to offer vp an Oxe in ſacrifice, or to worſhip a Cow as God: and not onely to practiſe it priuately in his owne Chappell, but to get it publickely practiſed and preached in all Churches, not onely of that Citie, but alſo in all the reſt of the Chriſtian world: and that none ſhould in Chriſtian zeale, continually oppoſe themſelues, that no Biſhop ſhould preach, no Doctor write againſt this horrible innouation of faith, and the author thereof; that none ſhould haue conſtancie to ſuffer martyrdome, which Chriſtians haue bene alwaies moſt readie to endure, rather then to yeeld to a profeſſion and practiſe, ſo contrarie to their ancient faith; that there ſhould be no true hearted Chriſtians, who would ſpeake of it, or at leaſt lament it, nor no Hiſtoriographer that would ſo much as make obſcure mention of it. Could all be ſo aſleepe, that they could not note, or ſo cold and negligent in matters concerning their ſoules good, as generally, without any care to yeeld vnto it? No certainly, though there were no promiſe of Chriſt his owne continual preſence; no aſſurance of the infallible aſſiſtāce of his holy ſpirit: yet it is not poſſible that ſuch a groſſe error ſhould ariſe among Chriſtiās, & ouerwhelme the whole world, without ſome reſiſtance. The Biſhops and Paſtors could not be ſo ſimple, or ſo vnmindfull of their duetie, but they would firſt note ſuch an euident contrarietie, to the ancient and vniuerſally receiued faith; and noting it, they would, doubtleſſe with common conſent, reſiſt, contradict, and finally, according to Saint Paule his 
                     
                        Gal. 1. 
                     rule, accurſe it. If therefore this could not happen now, nor euer heretofore was heard, that any ſuch abſurd errour or hereſie did or could ariſe, without noting or reſiſting; what reaſon can any man
                     
                     haue, to ſay, that this hath happened at Rome? Not being able to alledge any writer, that did note the thing, the perſon, the time, and what oppoſition was made and continued againſt it, as in all hereſies that haue ſprung vp of new, we can do. If there could not a little ceremonie be added to the Maſſe, but that it was ſet downe in hiſtorie, when and by whom; how could the whole ſubſtance of the Maſſe, (which conſisteth in conſecration, oblation, and conſumption of the ſacred Hoaſt) be newly inuented, and no mention made, when or by whom, or that euer there was was any ſuch new inuention at all? If alſo Hiſtoriographers were not afraid to note perſonall and priuate vices of the Popes themſelues; which they might well thinke Popes would not willingly haue made open to the world: why ſhould they haue feared to haue recorded any alteration in religion? Which if it had bene, had bene a thing done publikely in the view of the whole world; or if there were any feare or flatterie, which might tie the tongues and pennes of thoſe, that liled neare hand, that they durſt not or would not mention ſuch a matter: yet doubtleſſe others, which liued in places further off, ſhould not haue had thoſe cauſes, and conſequently would not haue kept ſecret ſuch an open and important a thing as this. If laſtly the hiſtories which make mention of theſe priuate vices of Popes, and other Chriſtian Princes, could not onely firſt come out, but alſo continue without touch, till theſe latter times: what reaſon can any haue to doubt or dreame, but that the like would haue bene ſet out about the alteration of religion, if it had happened? And that, if any ſuch Hiſtorie reporting any true accident of alteration or change of religion, had come out; it ſhould partly by Gods prouidence, partly by humane diligence, haue bene preſerued till theſe our daies: eſpecially conſidering, that ſuch records had bene ſo requiſite, for diſcerning the ancient, vnchanged, true Chriſtian Religion, from vpſtart noueltie, which muſt needs be falſe.
                  
                  
                     So that we may well conclude; that if Chriſtian Religion had, ſince the Apoſtles time, altered in Rome; it would haue bene recorded in hiſtories, as other things, and eſpecially ſuch notable alterations are recorded: and thoſe hiſtories would haue bene preſerued till this day, as other Christian monuments haue bene preſerued, euen in time of perſecution, yea euen then, when the perſecutors made
                     
                     particular enquirie for Chriſtian bookes, to burne or conſume them. But in thoſe ancient Hiſtories, there is no mention made of any ſuch alteration of Religion in Rome. Wherefore it followeth that there was no ſuch alteration or change at all. No ſuch alteration being made, it is euident that the ſame faith and Religion, which was in Saint Paules time, hath alwaies continued, and is there now. That which was there then, was the true faith and Religion, as appeareth by that high commendation, which Saint Paule hath left written of it. Therefore that which is there now, muſt needs be the onely true holy and Catholicke faith; and that companie which profeſſeth it, muſt needs be the Onely true Holy and Catholicke Church.
                  
                     Neither can I ſee what anſwere can, with any probabilitie, be forged againſt this reaſon. For to ſay, that the errours of the Church of Rome crept in by little and little, and ſo, for the littleneſſe of the thing, or for negligence of the Paſtours, were not eſpied; is an idle fiction alreadie refuted. For firſt thoſe matters, which the Proteſtants call errours in the Romane Church, be not ſo little matters, but that leſſe, euen in the like kinde, are ordinarily recorded in ſtories. Nay, ſome of them are in the Proteſtants conceits, (and conſequently if men of old time had bene Proteſtants, they would haue bene alſo in their conceits) as groſſe ſuperſtition as Paganiſme it ſelfe, namely to adore Chriſt our Sauiour, as being really and ſubſtantially preſent in the Bleſſed Sacrament; the which Sacrament Protestants hold to be, (really and ſubstantially) but a bare peece of bread. Alſo the Protestants account the vſe of the Images to be Idolatrie, and ſay (verie ignorantly or maliciouſly) that we adore ſtockes and ſtones, as the Paynims did. The which things could not ſo haue crept in by little and little, but they muſt needs be eſpied: Neither could the Pastours of the Church, at any time, be ſo ſimple and ignorant, ſo ſleepie and negligent, but they must needes haue ſeene: and ſeeing must needes in ſome ſort haue reſisted, as before I haue ſaid. For to imagine all the Paſtours, of any one age, to haue bene in ſuch a deepe Lethargicall and deadly ſleepe, that they could not onely not perceiue, when the enemie ſhould ouer ſow Cockle in the hearts of ſome; but alſo when this Cockle of falſe beleefe ſhould grow to outward
                     
                     action, and eſpecially to publicke practiſe, the which could not be but moſt apparent: to imagine (I ſay) all the Paſtors to be ſo ſimple and ſleepie, not then to marke, or not to reſist, is rather the dreame of a proud man in his ſleepe, who is apt to thinke all men fooles beſide himſelfe, then a iudictall conceit of a waking man of any vnderſtanding; who ought to thinke of things paſt, either according to the veritie recorded in ſtories, or when this faileth, by comparing the likelihood of that which hee thinketh was done by men of that time, with that which moſt men of their qualitie would do in like caſe. Finally, if theſe things were ſo, & that the church did by this means, for ſo long ſpace, in ſuch important matters, vniuerſally erre, Neglexerit Lib. de praeſcrip officium Spiritus ſanctus (as Tertullian ſpeaketh, refuting the like cauill of heretickes) the holy Ghoſt ſhould haue neglected his office: which is (as I haue proued before out of Scripture) not to permit the vniuerſall Church to fall into error, but to ſuggest vnto it all things that Chriſt ſaid vnto it, and to teach it all 
                     
                        Iohn 14. Iohn 16. 
                     truth.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                     Catholickneſſe eſpecially as you vnderſtand it, is not ſuch a propertie of the Church, but the Church may be without it: as it is plaine by that Church which was in our Sauiour Chriſts time, onely in the land of Iewrie; and after his death, 
                        Act. 8. 4. till the Church was ſcattered abroade in the world.
                  Yet let vs ſee what you bring to prooue, that our Church is not Catholicke.
                  
                  
                     If there cannot be aſſigned a viſible companie of men profeſſing the ſame faith which the Proteſtants do, euer ſince Chriſts time, continuing without interruption till now: then the Proteſiants Church is not Catholicke.
                     But there cannot be ſuch a companie aſſigned.
                     Therefore the Proteſtants Church is not Catholicke.
                  
                  I denie the conſequence of the maior: Firſt, becauſe that To the propoſition. may be Catholicke, which is not viſible: as the Church of the elect is diſperſed in all places, and yet no where to be ſeene. Secondly, becauſe Catholickneſſe belongs neither to time nor doctrine, but to place and perſons. Thirdly, becauſe it is not required, that the ſame faith in all points ſhould be profeſſed, (which you meane by the ſame faith) but onely the ſame

in matters fundamentall.
                  I grant your minor, that we cannot aſſigne you any ſuch companie, 
                     Of the Aſſumption. though we doubt not but that there was alwayes ſuch a companie greater or leſſe, as appeares by them which from time to time haue by their writings or ſufferings maintained the ſubſtance of that doctrine which we now profeſſe.
                  To proue that our doctrine is not vniuerſal, you ſay, See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 4. 
                     it chiefly conſiſteth of negatiues: whereas you cannot be ignorant that we hold all the articles of the creed, and that in the ſame ſenſe as you do, ſaue onely in ſome few differences, about the vnderſtanding of beleefe, what it is to beleeue in the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt; and what it is to beleeue the Church, and in what reſpect the Church is called holy and Catholicke, and what the Church is that we beleeue. But we denie ſome things that ſome auncient writers haue held. Doe you follow them in all points? You will not ſay ſo for very ſhame. But our Church is truly Catholicke, becauſe it is not tied to the Iewes or Ieruſalem, no nor to any other place or perſons, but common to all that will beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt.
                  VVhat get you if you proue your Church to be Catholicke: ſince that alone, without the two former points alreadie diſproued, cannot make any companie a true Church? But neither can you proue your Church to be Catholicke: let your argument ſpeake.
                  
                     That Church which is vniuerſall in time, place and doctrine of the Apoſiles, without change, is Catholicke.
                     The Romane Church is vniuerſall in time, place and doctrine of the Apoſtles, without change.
                     Therefore the Romane Church is Catholicke.
                  
                  If to make a Church Catholicke, it be required that ſhe continue Of the propoſition. in the doctrine of the Apoſtles, how did you before denie that the doctrine of the Apoſtles is a neceſſary and certaine marke of the true Church? But if you leaue this out, and affirme that Church to be Catholicke which is vniuerſall in doctrine, and thinke it not needfull, that the doctrine profeſſed be the Apoſtles: I denie your maior. The reaſons of my deniall, I deliuered in the former Chapter, when I ſhewed, that truth

of doctrine was the moſt proper and true marke of the Church.
                  But whatſoeuer your maior be, your minor is euidently falſe To the Aſſumption. in euery part of it. The very foundations of the doctrine of the Apoſtles, are ouerthrowne by your Church, in the hereſies you hold concerning predeſtination, iuſtification, free will, the inſufficiencie of the Scriptures, and the headſhip of Antichriſt your Pope. Neither do you onely faile in the doctrine of the Apoſtles, but in your vniuerſalitie of time. For how can that doctrine be ſaid to haue bin always, which was not taught by our Sauiour and his Apoſtles? As for vniuerſalitie in regard of the ample vniformitie of your doctrine; if you ſpeake of your Churches determination, many points of great moment are not as yet defined by it: for example take thoſe maine queſtions, whether the Pope be aboue the Councell or no: whether he haue without a Councell priuiledge of not erring or no: whether there be any merit of congruitie or no, and ſuch like. Yea your Church denieth the chiefe point of all, which in the Apoſtles time was held by all true Chriſtians, that iuſtification is by faith, without the workes of the law. I forbeare to ſhew the reaſons of that I affirme, becauſe any man may ſetch them out of my former anſwer in this and the laſt Chapter.
                  I looked for proofe of your minor: but you were too wiſe to vndertake a matter ſo vnpoſſible: and therefore in ſtead of that, you challenge vs to ſhew and proue the contrarie, forgetting that it is the repliers part to proue, and not the anſwerers. But I pray you tell me in earneſt, did you neuer heare of any particulars, whereby we except againſt your doctrine as none of the Apoſtles? What a vaine flouriſh is this then, to demaund new proofes of vs, and neuer once aſſay to anſwer thoſe we haue alreadie brought? But I haue made anſwer to your challenge in my refutation of your proofe, that your Church is one. Yea our mens bookes are full of theſe points and proofes, both out of Scriptures and Fathers. As for your brag, of being able to ſhew diuers points that we hold or denie, otherwiſe then the true Church did in the time of the Apoſtles: it is well knowne, that in moſt controuerſies betwixt vs, you are faine to flie from the

Scriptures of God, to the writings of men, and deuiſe interpretations to ſerue your turne. In ſome points we denie not, but that we diſſent from the opinion of ſome writers of former ages; but that we go againſt the iudgement of the whole Church before it became Antichriſtian, neither we graunt, nor you can proue. And euen for thoſe times of error, we want not the teſtimonie of learned men to auouch our doctrine againſt your hereſies. But you call vpon vs to ſet downe the point of doctrine, the author, the time, the place, what companie did oppoſe themſelues against it, and who they were that did continue in the profeſſion of the former faith. What needs all this ado? Wil it not ſerue the turne, if we make it manifeſt, that your doctrine is contrary to that the Apoſtles taught, vnleſſe we can ſhew you when euery one of your errors was firſt hatched? What if the Scribes and Phariſes had demaunded the like queſtions of our Sauiour Chriſt, touching their errors reproued by him? There is no doubt, but that as he was God, he could haue declared euery one of theſe particulars; but do you thinke he would haue fed their fooliſh humor in this caſe, and not haue contented himſelfe with ſhewing that it was not ſo from the beginning? D. Abbot againſt D. B. P. Some of our Miniſters haue truly and wittily refuted this conceit of yours, by ſhewing how abſurd it is for a man that is ſicke of the plague, a ſurfet, or any ſuch diſeaſe, to denie that he is ſo diſeaſed, becauſe the Phyſition cannot tell him at what time, and in what place, vpon what occaſion, in what companie he firſt tooke the infection, or diſtempered his bodie by ill diet. Is it a good plea againſt plaine and ſound euidence, whereby I proue that ſuch a Lordſhip ought to be mine, that I cannot ſhew when and how I loſt the poſſeſſion of euery ſeuerall cloſe and meadow, farme and cottage? But to take away all iuſt excuſe from you, our writers haue ſhewed the firſt beginnings of many of your errors, and might haue done of more, if al were extant that hath bin written; and your inquiſitors and cenſurers had not (as you call it) purged, indeed corrupted and maimed the writings of former ages, whereſoeuer they made againſt you, if you could light on them before they were too well knowne in the world.
                  
                     
This challenge hath as much reaſon as the former. We muſt proue that there haue not bene ſome in euery countrey, where the Goſpell hath bene profeſſed, that haue held your Romane faith. Or rather muſt not you proue your Catholickneſſe by ſuch induction? But we confeſſe it to be likely, that the diuell hath from time to time ſowed ſome of your tares amongſt the Lords wheate. But that your whole faith, as now you hold it, was euer maintained any where, till the laſt Councell of Trent, we challenge you to proue if you can. Surely the Greeke Church euen till this day, diſſenteth from you in many, and ſome no ſmall matters, as your Popes ſupremacie; that I may not name thoſe Chriſtians who are in precious Iohns countrey, in Armenia, Jean. Belul. and other parts of the world: to whom your doctrine is as little knowne in a manner, as ours is to thoſe Indians you ſpake of. Amongſt whom, for ought you can proue or know to the contrary, there may be, and in all liklihood are ſome, to whom the Lord hath giuen grace to reſt wholly vpon Ieſus Chriſt for pardon of their ſinnes, without any mingling of their owne workes with Chriſts, to procure them the inheritance of heauen. All ſuch we challenge to be of our Church, though they agree with you in many of your errors, through their ignorāce of the Scriptures. As for our countrey of England, which 1. Reg. 3. 26. like that harlot, you call deare, as oft as you conceiue hope of bringing it into ſubiection to the Pope, but otherwiſe wiſh it wholly deſtroyed, as ſhee did the child; it neither was conuerted by your proud Monke Auſtine, but peruerted rather: and long before he was borne, had many congregations in it, who held the ſame faith that we now do. You confeſſe they were not of your Church: for then what needed, or how could they haue bene conuerted by Auſtine? That the Goſpell was here long before that time, euen in a manner from the firſt preaching of it, 
                        Poly. Virgil. hiſt. Angl. lib. 2 Polydor Virgill no Proteſtant may teach you out of Gildas a Brittiſh writer, ancienter then Bede: Gildas witneſſeth (ſaith Polydor) that the Brittans receiued the Goſpell preſently vpon the firſt publiſhing of it abrode in the world. Yea 
                        Beda hiſt. gēt. Angl. lib. 2. c. 2. Bede, your owne author auoucheth, that ſeuen Biſhops of the Brittans, and many verie learned men refuſed to receiue Auſtine for their Archbiſhop.
                     
And 
                        Galſr. Mon. lib. 8. cap. 4. Geffrey of Monmouth teſtifieth, that Ethelbat king of Kent cauſed 1200. monkes of Bangor to be ſlaine in one day, becauſe they would not yeeld to Auſtins Archbiſhopricke: of whom that writer ſaith, that they decked with martyrdome, entred the kingdome of heauen. Mark you what he ſaith? They were martyrs, that choſe to die rather then to yeeld to your Popiſh Archbiſhop. The like conuerſion we may find in the Indies, eſpecially the Weſt, where your Catholicke nation the Spaniards haue deſtroyed in few yeares, more ſoules, then all ſent by the Pope, or agreeing in faith with him, euer conuerted in fiue times ſo many. Although, what tell you vs of men communicating with the Pope in the ſame faith? How durſt they attempt any ſuch matter, without ſpeciall commiſſion from him? Is his authoritie no more amongſt you?
                  The Romane Church hath indeed alwayes bene viſible: but it hath not alwayes bene the ſame Church. For many hundred yeares it was ours, and not yours, though the diuell laboured to ſow the tares, you now ſell for corne, among the wheate, and preuailed by little and little. It is therefore ridiculous for you to challenge vs, that we ſhould ſhew when the faith, receiued by the Church of Rome from the Apoſtles, began to faile in it. It was done (
                        Mat. 13. 25. as our Sauiour ſpeakes in the like caſe) while men ſlept: and ſo ſlily, peece by peece, that the corne was ouergrowne ere the tares were perceiued: moſt men tooke them for wheate: they that ſaw ſome difference, thought them too deeply rooted for them to plucke vp: and if any man offered to touch them with his weeding hooke, Satan had taken order by your Pope and his Cleargie, that the hooke ſhould be wrung out of his hands; and if he held hard, his head be wrung off his ſhoulders. Thus one man being taught by anothers calamitie, as in hunting with the Lion, the Foxe was by the Aſſes miſery, euery one thought it beſt to ſleepe in a whole skin, and to beare with that they could not helpe. Yet are there many examples of thoſe, who from time to time haue withſtood the tyrannie of your Pope, and your hereſies in Religion: and many more we ſhould haue heard of, if your Popiſh Cleargie had not bin chiefe commaunders through all Europe.
                  
                     
What is all this painted diſcourſe, but a flouriſhing repetition of that which hath bene often anſwered, like coleworts twice ſod, and ſtrewed ouer with ſugar? Onely to grace the ſeruice you ſend in the diſh by one, who in your eyes is a proper man. But do you not know, that as wel his owne treaſon, as the continuall practiſes of his companions, and aboue all, the late diuelliſh fire worke of your ſuperiour Garnets approbation, haue made Campions authoritie light, and the name of a Ieſuite odious to all true hearted Engliſhmen? Let vs take the Traitor at the beſt, and giue him ſome commendation of wit, and of a quicke cornicall ſtile. If once his writings be ſtript of their rhetoricall habit, and ſet naked before the light of true logicke, it will appeare to all the world (I will ſay no more then I am able to manifeſt) that neuer any man ſo doted vpon by them that would ſeeme to be great clearkes, writ more weakly or vnſoundly. You tell vs, that the Romane Church was once a true Church. We acknowledge it with thankes to God, and due commendation thereof: and are loth to ſay any thing, whereby the beſt opinion of it might be diminiſhed; but that you driue vs to it, by building vpon that high commendation, which S. Paul (ſay you) hath left written of it: as if it had once bene ſo extraordinarily rooted, that no blaſt could ſhake it. But how vaine a conceit this is, it will eaſily be ſeene, if we conſider that other Churches, which haue had as great commendations, are now no Churches at all. What is become of that famous Church at Corinth, of which the Apoſtle teſtifieth, that 
                        Cor. 1. 5. 
                     In all things it was made rich in Chriſt, in all kind of ſpeech, and in all knowledge: ſo that they were not deſtitute of any gift? yea the Apoſtle addeth, that 
                     
                        verſ. 7. 
                     Ieſus Chriſt ſhall alſo confirme them, vnto the end, that they may be blameleſſe in the day of our Lord Ieſus. This paſſeth that he ſaith of the Romanes. The like he ſaith of 
                        Phil. 1. 3. 5. 6 the Philippians, I thanke my God, becauſe of the fellowſhip which you haue in the Goſpell, from the firſt day vntill now: and I am perſwaded of the ſame thing, that he, which hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it, vntill the day of Ieſus Chriſt. How (would you haue triumphed) if the Apoſtle had ſaid as much of your Church? But what ſay you to the Church of Theſſalonica? From you (ſaith 1. Theſſ. 1. 8. the Apoſtle of

the Theſſalonians) ſounded out the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and Achaia onely: but your faith alſo, which is toward God, is ſpread abroade in all quarters. Are not theſe commendations as great as thoſe that are left written of the Romanes? Yea, what if that which the Apoſtle ſpeakes of them, be not to commend their faith, but to ſhew the reaſon of his ioy, and thankes to God for their conuerſion? As if he ſhould haue ſaid, that he did thanke God for them, becauſe of their beleeuing: and the report thereof through the world, was like to proue an occaſion of ſpreading the Goſpell, and drawing many other by their example to the profeſſion of Chriſtian Religion, and confirming them that did beleeue. He declares (ſaith 
                        Caietan. ad Rom. 1. 8. Caietan) that the cauſe of his thanksgiuing was, that the fame of their beleeuing was profitable to all the world. For Rome at that time was the head of the world: and therefore the report of the Chriſtian faith being at Rome, was ſpread abroade into all places, and was profitable to all, as being a meanes to prouoke them to beleeue. Of the confirming of others Lombard. ibi. & Ambroſ. Lombard ſaith, that they which beleeued were ſtrengthened in faith, ſeeing that their rulers were made their brethren in faith. So do Origen. Origen, Theodoret. Theodoret, Gloſſ. ordin. interl. your Gloſſes, Lyra. Lyra, Thomas. Thomas, Catharin. Catharin, and other, vnderſtand the Apoſtle. Ambroſ. ibi. Ambroſe is not afraid to ſay plainly, that the Apoſtle reioyceth for their good beginning, knowing that they might go forward to perfection. For as yet (ſaith Thomas ibi. Thomas) they had not perfect faith, becauſe ſome of them were by falſe Apoſtles ſeduced, ſo that they thought the cermonies of the law were to be ioyned with the Gospell. He doth not (ſaith Gloſs. interl. your interlinear Gloſſe) commend their faith as perfect, but their readineſſe and deſire to embrace Chriſt. All which notwithſtanding, we willingly graunt, that the Romane Church was at that time, and long after, a true Church: what gather you of this graunt? I hope you will not ſay, that therefore it muſt needs be a true church ſtill. But we ſhal better vnderſtand your meaning by that which followeth.
                  There is nothing you Papiſts are more afraid of, then to be drawne to iuſtifie your doctrine by Scripture. Therefore you alwayes keepe aloofe, and tell vs of the Church, the Church, as the Iewes did 
                        Ier. 7. 5. Ieremie of the Temple. The Romane Church
                     
(ſay you) was once a true Church. Who denieth it? Therefore is it ſo ſtill? I (ſay you) that it is, vnleſſe you can ſhew, at what time it departed from the true faith. Did you neuer know any man, who in his youth had blacke haire, and now being old is all white headed? Put caſe I would ſtand verie ſtifly vpon your argument, and ſay that his head is blacke ſtill, and vrge you to tell me, when the firſt haire changed white. Would you anſwer me, or laugh at me for my folly? But ſuch changes in faith (ſay you) would haue bene reſiſted, or at leaſt recorded by ſome, and you prooue it thus.
                  
                     If no hereſie as contrarie to truth, as blacke is to white, was euer heard of; to haue ariſen, without noting, or reſiſting, nor any ſuch could now poſſibly ſo ariſe; then no ſuch thing is to be beleeued of the Romane Church.
                     But no ſuch hereſie was euer heard of to haue ariſen, nor can ſo ariſe, without noting or reſiſting.
                     Therefore no ſuch thing is to be beleeued of the Romane Church.
                  
                  That I may anſwer directly to your Syllogiſme, remember To the ſyllogiſme. (which I alſo noted before) that you take it, as granted, that there was neuer any noting or reſiſting of errours, but there is yet record remaining of it. Whereas we geſſing reaſonably of that which is paſt, by that we ſee euerie day, perſwade our ſelues, that your Popiſh inquiſitors and cenſurers haue raced and deſtroyed many records, wherein the ariſing of your errors, and the reſiſtance made againſt them haue bene noted. I would ſpeake more of this matter, but that almoſt euerie childe knoweth, how ſhamefully, and lewdly you deale euerie day, with your owne mens writings, who forced by the euidence of truth, here and there giue witneſſe to our doctrine in their bookes. We ſee not then, why we may not yeeld this concluſion, for ought that it can aduantage you, or hurt vs. All ſuch errours doubtleſſe haue bene noted, and reſiſted; though the records thereof be periſhed, defaced, or deſtroyed by your Antichriſtian Prelates. Secondly, though it were granted to be true, that No hereſie as contrarie to the truth as blacke is to white,
                     
                     euer could ariſe without being noted or recorded: yet might your Popiſh errours haue ſtollen in, for the moſt part, vnperceiued. Becauſe they were not apparently contrary to the knowne truth, as the abſurd examples you bring of ſacrificing an Oxe, or worſhipping a Cow, are. Poperie (as the 2. Theſſ. 2. 7. Apoſtle ſaith of it, vnder the title of Antichriſtianiſme) is a myſterie of iniquitie, which began to worke in his daies, and by little and little, with colourable pretences, wrought it ſelfe into the Church, till it came to that height, in which all the world now ſeeth it. I might exemplifie this matter, in that great point, of your Popes licentious and vnlimited authority; how it began, by reaſon of the place, Rome being the chiefe ſeat of the Empire: how it grew by the fauour of the Emperours, and the worthineſſe of ſome Biſhops of that ſea, and ſo crept on, till it had gotten See Doctor Reynolds confer. with Maſter Hart pag. 313. &c. ſtrength to trample the Emperours themſelues vnder foote. It is ſaid by way of prouerbe, that Rome was not built in one day. The ſpeach is as true of your Popes Romiſh gouernment, as of Romulus firſt founding the Citie. The occaſions and pretences of your Popes greatneſſe were reaſonable faire to ſhew, and ſeemed to promiſe, I know not what ſecuritie to religion, and peace to Chriſtendome: but the euenthath ſhewed, that the one by it was, for a time, quite ouerthrowne, & the other partlie deſtroyed, and altogether brought into great hazard. But I may not enlarge my anſwer to farre. Hollinſhead diſcription of Britan. fol. 11 Our Hiſtoriographer whom you finde fault with, no doubt ſpake in that iuſt indignation he conceiued againſt the intollerable pride of the Romiſh Monke Auſtin, & in pittie of that bloodſhed, which inſued vpon his finding fauour with the Saxon kings: whom he cauſed to imbrew their hands in the bloud of many thouſand poore Chriſtians: becauſe forſooth they would not ſubmit themſelues to his inſolencie. If his ſpeech ſound vnpleaſantly in your eares, how would you haue liked 
                        Mat. 23. 15. that of our Sauiour in the Goſpell? VVo be to you Scribes and Phariſies, Hypocrites. For ye compaſſe ſea and land to make one of your profeſſion: and when he is made, you make him two fold the childe of hell more then your ſelues. For (ſaith 
                        Hieron. ad Mat. 23. Ierome) he that before did but ſimply erre in his ignorance, by your lewd conuerſation, is
                     
                     driuen from his profeſſion backe againe to Gentiliſme. Surely they that before were heathen, and might by Gods bleſſing haue bene wonne to the truth of the Goſpell, through the preaching of the Britans, and their humble conuerſation, by this Auſtin loſt the opportunitie, and became perſecutors of true Chriſtians, for your pride and ſuperſtition, with which afterward the whole nation was miſerably ouerwhelmed, and at laſt almoſt periſhed vnder the Normans. But to giue you ſome better ſatisfaction touching this point, heare I pray you in a few words, what one of your owne writers ſaith: It is a thing full of horror (ſaith 
                        Bucchinger. hiſt. Eccleſ. pag. 217. Bucchingerus) either to reade or remember, that the Popes of Rome practiſed ſuch tyranny, one againſt another. O how are they degenerated from their Anceſtors? It could not be, that in the time of ſuch cruelty, there ſhould be any regard had of Chriſtian pietie. Let no man then maruaile if ſome abuſes, and peruerſe opinions crept into the Church. There was great ignorance of the Scripture, and loue of ſuperſtition, 2. Theſs. 2. 11. 
                     The Lord ſending men ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lies, becauſe they had not receiued the loue of the truth.
                  
                  You preſſe vs here, (as you thinke) with ſome probabilitie, that if there had bene any alteration of religion, it would certainly haue bene recorded. But how ſhould it haue bene recorded, when it was not ſeene? You dreame of a ſodain change: where as the alteration grew from good to bad, yet with ſhew of ſome goodneſſe; and from bad to worſe, ſo nicely, that few or none could diſcerne it. Your probabilities are two. The former in this manner.
                  
                     If there could not a little ceremonie be added to the Maſſe, but that it was ſet downe in historie; how could the whole ſubſtance of the Maſſe be newly inuented, and no mention made of it?
                  
                  This conſequence is weake. For thoſe additions to the Maſſe were matters enioyned by your Popes, and recorded by your writers of Hiſtories, not as errours, but as vertues, to the commendation of the Authors thereof, the world growing euerie day more and more ſuperſtitious, and yet there are ſome ceremonies, & other patches of your Maſſe, about the Author

wherof there is no great agreement to be found in your writers of hiſtories. But the ſubſtance of your Maſſe was long comming in, and the words themſelues in it, hauing bene deuiſed to no ill purpoſe, were at at laſt occaſion of errour vpon errour; as it is worthily declared, by Lord Pleſſy of the Maſſe. the Lord Pleſſy in his booke of the Maſſe, to which I referre all men, that deſire to be ſatisfied in this matter, and where (I dare vndertake) they may finde good ſatisfaction. The learned know of themſelues, how to haue it alſo otherwhere, in the writings of our diuines, D. Sutliu. de Miſſa. Doctor Sutcliffe, and diuers other.
                  Your latter obiection carrieth ſome more ſhew of likelihood with it, in this ſort.
                  
                     If Hiſtoriographers were not afraid to note perſonall and priuate vices of the Popes themſelues, why ſhould they feare to record any alteration in religion?
                  
                  Do you not know why? Or can you not diſcerne the difference in this caſe? Of whom ſhould they be afraid? Your Popes for the moſt part, were ſo notoriouſly lewd, that all, your Hiſtoriographers write of them, was well knowne to the world, before they writ, ſo that they could not for ſhame, but ſay in a manner, as much as they did. But the chiefe matter was, that the latter Popes had quarrels to their predeceſſors, which was verie ordinarie: and then it was not onely ſafe, but as it were meritorious, to diſplay their villany to the world; or at the leaſt, they might imagine that the vices of their predeceſſors would ſerue for a foile to their vertues. Sometimes alſo it fell out, that the Pope in verie ciuill honeſtie, had a deteſtation of ſuch bad courſes as other before him had taken; & that gaue men ſome liberty to write more freely. But your change of doctrine neither could eaſily, nor might at all be diſcouered, becauſe it was a priuitie of your eſtate, and a principle of your religion, with Arcanum reipublicae. your Pope and Prelates, that Saint Peters vicar could not erre in doctrine. As for thē in other countries, who knoweth not, how few monuments of antiquitie remaine? Or who ſuſpecteth not iuſtly, that they haue come through huckſters handling, as in diuers it is more then apparent? Yet are there alſo diuers records in the writings of learned men, wherein any man may ſee

direct oppoſition to many points, held at this day in your Romiſh Church.
                  After many idle repetitions, turnings and windings, at the laſt you are lighted vpon a part of our anſwer, that thoſe errors and abuſes, crept in by little and little vnperceiued. For replie whereto you ſay, it is an idle fiction already refuted. How idle then is this new diſcourſe of yours, againſt a point, which you haue ouerthrowne before? But you knew well enough, for all your ſaying, that it asked further help, thē you could yet affoord it. Well, what ſay you at the laſt? iuſt nothing at all to purpoſe. For what though the matters be of great moment, and leſſe points noted by ſome writers? We ſpeake not of that, but of the ſmal difference from the truth, which at the firſt appeared in the bringing in, and beginning of your hereſies. A matter of ſmall importance, being apparently contrary to that, which is generally held to be true, ſhall find more to note and reſiſt it, then an errour in the very foundation of religiō, ſo cloſely carried that it cānot at the firſt be perceiued. You giue vs two exāples of very important matters, the Maſſe and Images. But you offer not to ſhew, that they brake out all at once, to the height of impietie: No, no, they came in by degrees, vnder a colour of reuerence, and helpe to further men in deuotion. I wittingly for beare to enter into diſcourſe of theſe points, becauſe I ſhould be too long, and the matter is already performed very excellently by that honorable perſonage the Lord Pleſſy: Pleſſy of the Maſſe. lib. 1. chap. 6. 7. 8. for the Maſſe in his firſt booke, Lib. 2. cap. 2. 3. 4. and for Images in his ſecond. See our Homilies of the perill of Idolatry.
                  
                  But I may not forget to anſwer the imputations you charge vs withal. Firſt concerning the Sacrament, you confidently auouch that we hold it to be (really and ſubſtantially) but a bare peece of bread. Wherein you ſhew that, wherewith afterward you charge vs about Images, either your ignorance, or your malice. By Sacrament we vnderſtand, according to the truth, the whole action of bleſſing, giuing, receiuing the bread and wine. The bread which you call the Sacrament, is but part of the matter of the Sacrament. But what? Do we make this bread, to be really and ſubstantially bare bread? Surely, for the nature of it, we ſay and are ſure, that it neuer ceaſeth to be bread, till

it be digeſted in the ſtomacke. But for the vſe, we acknowledge it, ſo farre as it is vſed, to be holy bread, and not bare bread, bread appointed, bleſſed, and made effectuall by God, to ſeale vp in our hearts the aſſurance of his loue, in giuing his ſonne for our redemption, and the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, reſting vpon him by faith for pardon. Indeed we do not, as you do, blaſphemouſly call the bread our Creator, or God; vpon a conceit, that (forſooth) the ſubſtance of the bread, is either vaniſhed away, or elſe turned into the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, to be torne in peeces with our teeth, or ſwallowed downe into our bellies, and from thence beſtowed in a worſe place. This ſenſeleſſe, and monſtrous opinion hath bene, and is amongſt you, the cauſe of the moſt groſſe and barbarous idolatrie, that euer was committed in the world.
                  It is neither ignorantly nor malitiouſly done of vs, to charge you, for adoring ſtocks and ſtones, as the Paynims did. Compare the things, and the worſhip, and then ſhew me a true difference. Are not your Images of wood, gold, ſtone, as the Gentiles were? Haue they not the ſhape and proportion of men and women, as theirs had? Do not you worſhip them, as diuers of the Heathen were wont to do? You 
                        Baruc. cap. 6 verſ. 3. verſ. 12. verſ. 18. 20. 
                     couer them with cloathing of purpoſe, and wipe their faces, becauſe of the duſt of the Temple. You light vp candles before them: you make their faces blacke through the ſmoake of your incenſe, you beare them in proceſſion vpon your ſhoulders, you ſet gifts before them: your Prieſts haue their heads and beards ſhauen: you call vpon them for helpe: you preſent the blinde, the halt, and ſicke before them to be healed. 
                     
                        verſ. 25. 26. verſ. 30. verſ. 31. 40. But what meane I to reckon vp ſo many particulars? Who ſees not the agreement betwixt the heathen and the Papiſts, for the matter, forme, and worſhip of their Images? Your idle diſtinctions of Idoll, and Image, of ſeruice and worſhip, of religious and ciuill worſhip, I haue Defence of the Reformed Catholicke. Pag. 544. 545. otherwhere examined and refuted. If you ſay, that you worſhip not the Image; it is too manifeſtly apparent, as a ruled caſe amongſt you, that 
                        Thom. 3. q. 25. art. 3. 
                     the Image muſt haue the ſame worſhip, 
                     See my defence of the Reformed Catholicke. Pag. 569. 
                     that belongeth to the thing, whoſe Image it is. But you do not take the Images to be Gods. If you ſpeake of all your ignorant people, I ſcarce beleeue you. But

this maketh no difference in worſhip. The heathen, at leaſt the learned and wiſer ſort of them, did not hold their Idols to be Gods, but repreſentations of their Gods. And you Papiſts, in making them mediators of interceſſion, and ſo acknowledging but one God, do little better then the Pagans: for they had but one ſoueraigne God Iupiter, who commaunded all the reſt. Not onely Dij minorum gentium, their Gods of the third and fourth forme, but alſo thoſe of the ſecond and firſt, as Hercules, Apollo, Venus, yea and Virgil Aeneid. lib. 12. Iuno her ſelfe too, who was both wife and ſiſter to Iupiter, depended vpon him, and were glad to be mediators of interceſſion to him for their fauorites: as is euerie where to be ſeene in Homer, and 
                        Ʋirgil. All the difference of any moment, that I perceiue, is, that ſome of the heathen Gods, were imagined to be ſuch by nature; and all your Diui or Saints, pety-gods, haue both their places and offices by fauour. But I am wearie of theſe abhominations and fooleries of yours.
                  The Paſtors of the Church being imployed in withſtanding manifeſt and dangerous hereſies, neither did nor could, though they ſlept not, perceiue and reprooue euery errour; yea it is more then likely, that they were content to beare with many things, as long as the maine points were held ſoundly: leaſt by ſtriuing for matters of leſſe weight, greater things ſhould be neglected, and they that erred in ſmall things, vpon reſiſtance, quite fall away to ioyne with the heretickes. This in the beginning, for ſome fiue hundred yeares, was the eſtate of the Church. And afterward plentie bred pride and idleneſſe: the chalices were turned into gold, and Prieſts into wood or lead, that partly ignorāce, & partly ſlothfulneſſe gaue the diuell opportunitie to ſow what errours he would in the middeſt of the Church. If any man of more learning or grace, thē the ordinary ſort perceiued and reprooued the errours of his time, he was by one means or other ſuppreſſed or diſgraced: all mē & their writings, eſpecially 
                        Anno. 609. after the reuealing of Antichriſt, being at the deuotion of your perſecuting Cleargie. Yet did not Almighty God leaue his truth without witnes, as it appeareth Illyricus in Catal. teſtium. veritatis. by record of them who from time to time, miſliked and withſtood your

Antichriſtian doctrines. Theſe are no dreames of a proud man in his ſleepe, but likely coniectures, or rather apparent truthes, as any indifferent man may diſcerne, and will confeſſe.
                  To ſhut vp the matter, you be take your ſelfe to your generall Rendez-vous of the Church, which forſooth, if thoſe former imputations were true, ſhould haue erred; and ſo the holy Ghoſt haue neglected his office, which your Pope hath aſſigned him, to keepe the vniuerſall Church from erring. It had bene well, your Antichriſt would haue contented himſelfe, with his ſaucineſſe toward his 
                        Leo. Epiſt. 50. Lord Saint Peter, in appointing him to the Porterſhip of heauen gates, and not haue preſumed to enioyne the holy Ghoſt alſo ſuch an office, as our Sauiour neuer committed to him. The charge our Sauiour left with that his glorious Lieutenant, ſpecified in that part of his 
                        Ioan. 14. 17. & 16. 15. Patent, which you glance at, was not concerning the vniuerſall Church, a thing (in your ſenſe) not once ſignified in the Scriptures: but touching the Apoſtles abſolutely, and all true Chriſtians in generall and particular, for matters neceſſarie to ſaluation. This accordingly hath alwaies bene performed, no man that euer truly beleeued in Ieſus Chriſt, hauing fallen into any ſuch errour, as might vtterly ſeuer him from the bodie of the true Church, that is, the company of the elect beleeuers, wherof our Sauiour Chriſt is the head: as I haue ſhewed in my ſpeciall anſwer to theſe places before.
                  But Tertullian ſaith, that the holy Ghoſt had neglected his dutie, if the Church, had vniuerſally erred. in ſuch important matters. 
                        Tertul. de praeſcript. cap. 28. Tertullian ſpeaketh not of any vniuerſall Church, but of ſeuerall particular Churches: which you grant may erre, and yet the holy Ghoſt not faile in his commiſſion. Beſides, 
                        Tertul. de praenit. cap. 10. Tertullian himſelfe ſaith otherwhere, that the Church may be preſerued in one or two: and therefore your Catholicke Church of Rome might well fall into ſuch groſſe hereſies, without any diſgrace to the Spirit of God.
               
               
                  
                  A. D. §. 7.
                  §. IIII. That the Romane Church onely is Apoſtolicke.
                  
                  
                     Fourthly, I find that the Proteſtants Church is not Apoſtolick, becauſe they cannot deriue the pedegree of their Preachers lineally, without interruption, from the Apoſtles: but are forced to acknowledge ſome other, as Luther or Caluin, or ſome ſuch, for their firſt founders in this their new faith; from whom they may perhaps ſhew ſome ſucceſſion of the preachers of their faith: but they can neuer ſhew, that Luther or Caluin themſelues (who liued within theſe hundred yeares) did either lawfully ſucceed, or was lawfully ſent to teach this new faith, by any Apoſtolicke Biſhop or Paſtor. Nay Luther himſelfe doth not onely confeſſe, but alſo brag, that he was the firſt preacher of this new found faith, Chriſtum à nobis primò vulgatum 
                        Epiſt. ad Argētan Dom. 1525. audemus gloriari, (ſaith he) We dare boaſt that Chriſt was firſt publiſhed by vs. For which his glorious boaſting, me thinkes he deſerueth well that title which Optatus giueth vnto Ʋictor the 
                     Lib cont. parm. 
                     firſt biſhop of the Donatiſts, to wit, to be called filius ſine patre, diſcipulus ſine magiſtro, a ſonne without a father, a diſciple without a maiſter.
                  
                  
                     On the contrary ſide, the Romane Church can ſhew a lineall ſucceſſion of their Biſhops, without interruption, euen from the Apoſtle Saint Peter, vnto Clement the eight the Biſhop of Rome, which liueth at this day, The which ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles, which we haue, and the Proteſtants want, the auncient Fathers did much esteeme, and vſed it as an argument, partly to confound the hereticks, partly to confirme themſelues in the vnitie of the Catholick Church. So doth Irenaeus, who ſaith, Traditionem ab Apoſtolis, & annunciatam 
                        Lib. 3. cap. 3. hominibus fidem, per ſucceſſiones Epiſcoporum peruenientem vſque ad nos, indicantes, confundimus omnes illos qui quoquo modo, vel per ſui placentiam malam, vel per vanam gloriam, vel per caecitatem & malam ſententiam, praeterquàm oportet colligunt: Shewing the tradition from the Apoſtles, and the faith comming vnto vs by ſucceſſion of Biſhops, we confound all them, who any way through euill complacence of themſelues, or vaine glorie, or through peruerſe opinion do collect (and conclude) otherwiſe then they ought. So alſo doth S. Auſtin, who ſaith, Tenet 
                        Cōt. epiſt. Fundam. cap. 4.
                     
me in Eccleſia Catholica, ab ipſa ſede Petri Apoſtoli, cui paſcendas oues ſuas Dominus commendauit, vſque ad praeſentem Epiſcopum, ſucceſſio Sacerdotum: The ſucceſſion of Prieſts from the very ſeate of Peter the Apoſtle, to whom our Lord commended his ſheep to be fed, vntill this preſent Biſhop, doth hold me in the Catholicke Church. See the ſame S. Auſtin, Epiſt. 150. Optatus li. 2. cont. Parmen. S. Epiphani. haereſ. 275. S. Cyprian lib. 1. epiſt. 6. S. Athanaſ. Orat. 2. cont. Arianos, who pronounceth them to be hereticks, qui aliunde quàm à tota ſucceſſione Cathedrae Eccleſiaſticae 
                        Athanaſ. orat. 2. cont. Arian.
                      originem fidei ſuae deducunt, who deriue the beginning of their faith from any other ground, then from the whole ſucceſſion of Eccleſiaſticall chaire. And this (ſaith he) is eximium & admirabile argumentum ad haereticam ſectam explorandam, an excellent and admirable argument, wherby we may eſpie out and diſcerne an hereticall ſect. The which argument theſe Fathers would neuer haue vrged and extolled ſo much, if they had not thought that this ſucceſſion was an vndoubted good marke of the Church, and that with this lawfull, vninterrupted, Apoſtolicall ſucceſſion of Doctours and Paſtors, the true Apoſtolicke faith and doctrine was always conioyned. The which to be conioyned, we may eaſily proue out of S. Paul himſelfe, who ſaith: Dedit Paſtores & Doctores ad conſummationem ſanctorum, in opus miniſterij, in aedificationem corporis 
                        Epheſ. 4. Chriſti, donec occurramus omnes in vnitatem fidei, & agnitionis Filij Dei, in virum perfectum, in menſuram aetatis plenitudinis Chriſti: Signifying that Chriſt our Sauiour hath appointed theſe outward functions of Paſtors and Doctors in the Church, to continue vntill the worlds end, for the edification and perfection thereof, and eſpecially for this purpoſe, vt non ſimus paruuli fluctuantes, & circumferamur omni vento doctrinae: that we may not 
                     Ibidem. 
                     be litle ones wauering, and caried about with euery wind of doctrine: Wherefore that this ordinance and appointment of Pastors and Doctors in the Church, made by our Sauiour Chriſt, may not be fruſtrate of the effect intended by him: we muſt needs ſay, that he hath decreed ſo to aſſiſt and direct theſe Paſtors in teaching the doctrine of faith, that the people (their flocke) may alwayes by their meanes be preſerued from wauering in the auncient faith, and from being caried about with euery wind of new doctrine. The which cannot be,
                     
                     vnleſſe with ſucceſſion of Pastors be alwayes conioyned ſucceſſion in true doctrine, at leaſt in ſuch ſort, that all the Paſtors cannot at any time vniuerſally erre, or faile to teach the auncient and Apoſtolicke faith. For if they ſhould thus vniuerſally erre, then all the people (who do, and ought like ſheepe, follow the voice of their Paſtor) ſhould alſo generally erre, and ſo the whole Church, which (according to S. Gregorie Nazianzen) conſiſteth of ſheepe and pastors, ſhould contrary 
                     Orat. de moderatione in diſput. habenda. 
                     to diuers promiſes of our Sauiour, vniuerſally erre. So that we may be ſure, that the ordinary Paſtors ſhal neuer be ſo forſaken of the promiſed Spirit of truth, that all ſhall generally erre, and teach errors in faith: or that there ſhall not be at all times ſome ſufficient companie of lawfull ſucceding Paſtors, adhering to the ſucceſſion of S. Peter (who was by our Sauiour appointed chiefe Paſtor) of whom we 
                     
                        Iohn 21. 
                     may learne the truth, and by whom we may alwayes be confirmed and continued in the true auncient faith, and preſerued from being caried about with the wind of vpſtart error. The which being ſo, it followeth that the true Apoſtolicke doctrine is inſeperably conioyned with the ſucceſſion of lawfull Paſtors, especially of the Apoſtolick ſea of Rome.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore we may againſt all heretickes of our time (as the ancient fathers did againſt heretickes of their time) vrge this argument of ſucceſſion, eſpecially of the Apoſtolicall ſucceſſion of the Biſhops of Rome. We may ſay to them as S. Auguſtine ſaith to the Donatiſts: Numerate ſacerdotes ab ipſa ſede Petri, & in illo ordine Patrum, quis, cui ſucceſſit, videte: Number the Prieſts from 
                     Auguſt. in Pſal cont. partem Donat. 
                     the ſeate it ſelfe of Peter, and in that order or row of Fathers, ſee which ſucceeded which. We may ſay with Irenaeus, Hac ordinatione & ſucceſſione Epiſcoporum, traditio Apoſtolorum ad nos peruenit; 
                        Iren. lib. 3. c. 3. & eſt pleniſſima oſtenſio vnam & eandem fidem eſſe, quae ab Apoſtolis vſque nunc confirmata eſt: By this orderly ſucceſſion of Biſhops, the tradition of the Apoſtles hath come vnto vs; and it is a moſt full demonſtration, that the faith which from the Apoſtles is confirmed euen vntill now, is one and the ſame. We may tell them with Tertullian, Nos communicamus cum Eccleſijs Apoſtolicis, Lib. de praeſcrip quod nulla aduerſa doctrina facit; & hoc eſt teſtimonium veritatis: We do communicate with the Apoſtolick Churches, which no contrary doctrine doth, and this is a teſtimony of the truth.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  
                  That Apoſtolickneſſe, which is a marke of the true Church, is 
 as I ſhewed Chap. 15. an agreement and ſuceſſion in doctrine, with and to the Apoſtles; not as you would haue it, a perſonall deſcent from them. And therfore your reaſon againſt our Churches, is naught.
                  
                     Euery Apoſtolicke Church (ſay you) can deriue the pedegree of their preachers lineally, without interruption, from the Apoſtles.
                     The Proteſtant Churches cannot ſo deriue their pedegree.
                     Therefore the Proteſtant Churches are not Apoſtolicke.
                  
                  Your maior is euidently falſe, becauſe otherwiſe ſome church To the propoſition. profeſſing the true faith, and not keeping record of the ſucceſſion of their teachers, might be held not to be Apoſtolicall. But 
                        Tertul. de praeſcrip. ca. 32. Tertullian affirmeth the contrary directly, that thoſe Churches which agree with the Apoſtles in faith, though they can alledge no Apostle or Apoſtolicke man for their firſt founder, yet are neuer the leſſe to be counted Apostolicall, becauſe of their conſent in doctrine. And indeed it is both impious and abſurd, to denie any Church to be Apoſtolicall, that holdeth that faith, by the preaching whereof the Apoſtles planted Churches.
                  Your minor alſo is vntrue: becauſe it is wel known, that if you haue any ſuch ſucceſſion amongſt you, we haue it too. For Luther, To the Aſſumption. Caluin, and ſome other of our Diuines, were ordered by biſhops of your church. Concerning Luther, what reaſonable mā can be ſo abſurd, as to think that Luther wold make any mā beleeue, that the Goſpel was firſt preached by himſelf: whereas he continually appeals for the proof of his doctrine to the writings of the Prophets and the Apoſtles? But Luther might truly ſay, that he was the firſt which had in thoſe times publiſhed Chriſt; eſpecially in the chiefe point of the Goſpell, which is, iuſtification by faith in Chriſt. And in this reſpect it is an honor to Luther, to haue bin a ſon without a father, and a diſciple without a maſter: and no more glory to your Popiſh Biſhops and Prieſts, to haue had ſo long a ſucceſſion in error and hereſie, then for the Arians to haue bene able to reckon vp ſo many Biſhops of their faction. Vincentius acknowledgeth a ſucceſſion, continued though ſecretly, Vincen. Lyrin. from Simon Magus to Priſcilian.
                  
                     
Let vs ſee' now whether you bring any better reaſon for your ſelues, then you haue done againſt vs: They are euen much about one.
                  
                     That Church which can ſhew a line all ſucceſsion of her Biſhops, without interruption, from the Apostle Peter to Cloment now liuing, is Apoſtolicke.
                     But the Church of Rome can ſhew ſuch a ſucceſsion, without interruption.
                     Therefore the Church of Rome is Apoſtolicke.
                  
                  
                     
                        Tertul. de praeſc. cap. 32. Tertullian thought it ſufficient to proue the hereticks not to To the Propoſition. be Apostolicke, that their doctrine agreed not with the Apoſtles. And 
                        Ambroſ. de paenit. cap. 6. Ambroſe truly affirmed, that they haue not the inheritance of Peter, which haue not the faith of Peter. He (ſaith Greg. Naziā. de laudib. Athanaſ. Nazianzen) that profeſſeth the ſame doctrine of faith, is partaker of the ſame throne. But he that embraceth contrary doctrine, muſt be thought an aduerſary, euen in the throne. He may haue the name, but the other hath the truth of ſucceſſion. Therefore 
                        Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43. Irenaeus ſaith plainly, that thoſe Biſhops onely are to be obeyed, who together with ſucceſsion haue the truth. But of this I ſpake before, Chap. 15.
                  Where there is no beginning, what continuance or ſucceſſiō 
                     To the Aſſumption. can there be? Is not the queſtion, whether Peter were euer at Rome or no, full of doubt? Are you able in any ſort to reſolue it by Scripture? vnleſſe perhaps we may ſay, that he neuer came there, becauſe it is no where plainly ſet downe, nor probably to be gathered from thēce, that euer Saint Peter was at Rome. But it is more vnlikely, that euer he was Biſhop of Rome. I might go forward, to aske you who was his ſucceſſor, Linus or Clement: which is a point not agreed vpon by auncient writers. Since that time, you haue had 32. ſchiſmes in your Church, ſometimes two, ſometimes three Popes at once, that your ſucceſſion cannot be ſo cleare as you would make it.
                  To proue your minor, you tell vs, that the auncient Fathers did much eſteeme ſucceſsion from the Apoſtles, and vſed it as an argument to confound the hereticks, and to confirme themſelues in the vnitie of the Catholicke Church. Who denieth that ſucceſſion is to be eſteemed, and that it hath ſome force to confute and confirme? But what ſucceſſion is it, that is of ſuch price & force?

Perſonall ſucceſſion alone without truth? VVe heard ere while, what Tertullian, Irenaeus, Nazianzen and Ambroſe ſay concerning ſucceſſion, that without truth it deſerueth no credit. Yea 
                        Bellar. de Eccle. mil. l. 4. c. 8 §. Dicoſecundò
                      ſome of your owne writers confeſſe, that an argument from ſucceſſion doth not hold affirmatiuely, as if there were a true Church, whereſoeuer there is ſucceſſion.
                  
                  VVherby doth Irenaeus confound hereſies? by ſhewing a perſonall ſucceſſion of Biſhops from the Apoſtles? VVhat could that helpe the matter, vnleſſe he be alſo able to proue that the doctrine he maintaines, hath come ſucceſſiuely from the Apoſtles by them? He ſpeaks plaine enough, 
                        Iren. li. 3. c. 3 
                     We confound all errors by the doctrine of the Apoſtles, and the faith preached to men by thē. Let not the word tradition trouble any man. 
                        Lib. 3. cap. 1 Irenaeus for that expounds himſelfe where he ſaith, that the Apoſtles firſt preached the Goſpell, and afterward by the will of God 
                     Tradiderunt 
                     deliuered it to vs in the Scriptures, to be the pillar and foundation of our faith. The continuance of this doctrine, by ſucceſſion, is vſed by Irenaeus as a motiue to perſwade men to the liking of that truth which had receiued ſo good acceptation, and was warranted by ſo good authority, as the teaching of the Apoſtles themſelues. In a word Irenaeus ſaith, that hereſies might then be refuted, by ſhewing that they who had bene ordained Bb. by the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors, continued in the doctrine receiued, without any approbation of ſuch hereticall fancies.
                  
                  
                     
                        Auguſt. contr. epiſt. Fundam. cap. 4 
                     Auſtin (you ſay) was held in the Church (as himſelfe profeſſeth) by the ſucceſſion of Prieſts from the verie ſeat of Peter. And why ſhould he not be held by that, rather thē leaue the Church for the dreames of the Manichees? VVe ſay, as Auſtin did, that ſuch a ſucceſſion is a better proof of the Church, then their bare promiſe of truth; eſpecially ſince (as the ſame Auguſt. breuic. collat. Auſtin ſheweth otherwhere) they wold haue their word to be takē, as you now would haue yours, for ſufficient proofe. But Auſtin in the verie ſame place you alledge, addeth withall, that if they could ſhew that the truth was on their ſide, he would preferre it before ſucceſſion; and whatſoeuer other reaſon, that made him continue a member of the Church. In this ſenſe did thoſe other ancient writers eſteeme and vrge ſucceſſion, whoſe names you muſter to ſmall

purpoſe, but onely for ſhew of authoritie.
                  Concerning that ſpeech of 
                        Athan. contra Arian. orat. 2 Athanaſius, be not ſo iniurious either to him or your ſelues, as to preſſe his teſtimony to ſo leud a purpoſe. Would you haue men thinke that he which refuted and confounded Arius and his complices by ſo many and ſo worthy proofes out of the holy Scriptures, would condemne not onely other men, but himſelfe alſo for deriuing his faith in that point from the Scriptures? But though you care not what become of all the Fathers, ſo your Popery may flouriſh: yet like a reaſonable man, conſider what a terrible blow you giue your owne cauſe. Is there no other marke of the Church but ſucceſſion? Then, by 
                        Bellar. de eccle. mil. l. 4. c. 8 Bellarmines iudgement, there is none at all; who allowes it not, as a certaine light, to ſhew vs the Church. But what wants it of blaſphemy, to pronounce men to be hereticks for making the Scriptures the foundation of their faith: to which purpoſe 
                        Iren. li. 3. c. 1 Irenaeus ſaith that they were left? And I pray you, anſwer me directly, why it ſhould not be as lawful for me to groūd my faith vpon the beginning of this ſucceſſion in the Apoſtles, as vpon the continuance of it in other men. Yet might Athanaſius well ſay, concerning that point of our Sauiour Chriſts Godhead, that he was to be counted an hereticke, that ſhould deriue the beginning of his faith from any other ground then the whole ſucceſſion: wherein the Apoſtles were comprehended, and whoſe doctrine the Churches of Chriſt till that time, in that matter had followed. But how will you proue out of this place of Athanaſius, that this ſhould be a mark to diſcerne hereticks by alwaies? It was then an excellent and admirable argument in that point, not of it owne nature, but becauſe the truth had ſucceſſiuely bene held till thoſe times.
                  How will you anſwer Bellarm. vbi ſupra. Bellarmine, who affirmes confidently and truly, that truth goes not alwaies with ſucceſſion? For if it did, why ſhould not ſucceſſion be a certaine mark of a true Church? But Bellarmine ſaith, it is not. You tell vs, that otherwiſe the ordinance of Paſtors made by our Sauiour Chriſt, ſhall be fruſtrate of the effect intended by him.
                  
                  What? vnleſſe there be truth whereſoeuer there is ſucceſſion? Then can it not come to paſſe, that any Paſtor hauing lawfull

ordination, can erre. For if one may, for all the priuiledge of ſucceſſion, doubtles ſucceſſion doth not by the nature of it, free a man from erring. But they cannot all vniuerſally erre. What is that to purpoſe, vnleſſe this impoſſibilitie of erring proceed from ſucceſſion? Let vs draw your reaſon into forme, that we may the better ſee the force or weakneſſe of it.
                  
                     If our Sauiour haue appointed a ſucceſsion of Paſtors, that the Church may not be caried away with euery blaſt of doctrine, then ſucceſsion and truth go together.
                     But our Sauiour hath appointed Paſtors to that purpoſe.
                     Therefore ſucceſsion and truth go together.
                  
                  Now the weakneſſe of your reaſon eaſily bewrayes it ſelfe: To the propoſition. the conſequence of your maior is ſo feeble. See my anſwer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 5. Shall I ſhew it you euidently in a like matter?
                  
                     If God appointed Dauid and his ſucceſſors to rule his people according to his wil and word, that they might truly ſerue him: then whoſoeuer ſucceeded Dauid, did ſo rule, and the people ſo ſerued God.
                     But God did appoint Dauid and his ſucceſſors to that end.
                     Therefore whoſoeuer ſucceeded Dauid, did ſo rule, and the people ſo ſerued God.
                  
                  I ſhall not neede to make any further anſwer to your maior, vnleſſe perhaps I may bring the like reaſon from Gods appointing a ſucceſſion of Prieſts and Leuites in the Church of the Iewes, to the very ſame end, that the people might know and do his will: which intent of his notwithſtanding was often made voyde both by Prieſts and people. Yet do not we ſay, that the world hath at any time bene without true Paſtors, and their flockes in ſome one place or other, in a greater or leſſe number, who haue taught and beleeued the true faith of Ieſus Chriſt in all points fundamentall: without diſtinct beleefe whereof, no man can be ſaued. But we denie, that either all or any Paſtor hath this priuiledge, becauſe of his ſucceſſion: yea D. Sutcliffe againſt D. Kelliſons ſuruey: pag 5. we affirme, that a Chriſtian congregation, where the ordinarie meanes cannot be had, may chuſe and authorize any man able and fit to teach, for their Miniſter; and the truth of God may be in ſuch companies preſerued, without any plea of not erring,

by reaſon of ſucceſſion eſtabliſhed, by vertue of our Sauiours appointment.
                  To 
                        Greg Nazian. de cōpoſ. diſſerēd rat. orat. 7. In Eccleſiis.
                      that of Nazianzen I anſwered before: he ſpeaketh not of the vniuerſall Church, as you falſly auouch, but of ſeuerall congregations, as his very words ſhew: Order (ſaith he) hath decreed in Churches (not in the vniuerſall Church) that the flocke and the Pastor ſhould be diuers, the flocke one thing, the Pastor another: or that ſome ſhould be the flocke, otherſome the ſhepheards.
                  You may ſay what you will, and be neuer a whit the nearer, if you bring no better proofe then yet you haue done. Auguſt. in Pſal. contra partem Donat. Saint Auguſtine biddeth the Donatiſts number the Prieſts, and ſee who haue ſucceeded one another in the Biſhopricke of Rome. What conclude you from thence? That the Church of Rome was at that time Apoſtolicke, in regard of perſonall ſucceſſion. Who denieth it? But it followeth not hereupon, either that it is ſtill in that ſort Apostolicke, about which we will not ſtriue; or (which is the principall matter) that it hath therefore ſuch Apostolickneſſe as is required to make a true Church: namely truth of doctrine; which muſt needs be meant by Auguſtine, in the words that immediatly follow: That is the rocke, againſt which the proud gates of hell preuaile not. For it is more then abſurd, to make perſonall ſucceſſion the rocke, on which the Church is builded, and againſt which hell gates cannot preuaile. It was a likely argument againſt the Donatiſts, that in ſo long a ſucceſſion there had bene neuer a Donatiſt: which Saint Auguſtine himſelfe in another place concludeth, after he hath reckoned vp all the Romane Biſhops, from Linus to Anaſtaſius then liuing. In the ranke of this ſucceſſion (ſaith 
                        Auguſt. epiſt. 165. Auguſtine) there is not one Biſhop found that was a Donatiſt.
                  
                  This teſtimonie of Irenaeus was neuer of your owne reading in him, as the corrupt alledging of it perſwadeth me. I will ſet it downe as it is 
                        Iren. l. 3. ca. 3. in the author himſelfe. Ordinatione & ſucceſſione. 
                     By this ordination and ſucceſſion (ſaith Irenaeus) the tradition of the Apoſtles hath come to vs: And 
                     Haec oſtenſio. 
                     this is a moſt full demonſtration, that 
                     Fidem eſſe. 
                     it is one and the ſame quickning faith, 
                     Conſeruata & tradita in veritate. 
                     which hath bene preſerued and truly
                     
                     taught in the Church, from the Apoſtles till now. What one word or letter is there in this ſentence, to prooue, that your Church of Rome, at this day, is Apoſtolicke, or that bare perſonall ſucceſſion is enough, to make a Church Apoſtolicke? Rome, in Irenaeus time was an Apoſtolicall Church, becauſe it had preſerued, and truly taught ſucceſſiuely, Biſhop after Biſhop, the doctrine which was deliuered by the Apoſtles. Is it therefore Apoſtolicke now, when it hath ouerthrowne the verie foundation of the Apoſtles doctrine?
                  I maruell what Apoſtolicke Churches they are, with which you communicate, whereas you ſay, that there is no Church, that hath ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles but yours? 
                        Profeſſ. fidei per Monach. Burdegal. art. 60. Your Monks of Burdeaux draw the vniuerſall Church to the communion of the Romiſh Church. It was indeed a teſtimonie of the truth, to communicate with the Apoſtolicke Churches, 
                        Tertul. de praeſcript. c. 21 in Tertullians time, while the truth was, for the ſubſtance of it, preſerued amongſt them. But let vs apply this to our purpoſe: what would you prooue by it? that the Church of Rome is Apoſtolicke? Here is no mention, nor thought of your Church in particular. But Tertullian ſaith, it is a teſtimonie of truth, for a man to communicate with the Apoſtolicke Churches. It was then a teſtimonie, but now thoſe Churches are decayed: or if ſome of them remaine amongſt the Grecians, wil you grant that all they hold is true? How will you prooue, that Tertullians generall ſpeech belongeth more to your Church, then to thoſe of the Greeks? 
                        Tertul. de praeſcript. cap. 32. Tertullian telleth you afterward, that contrarietie to the Apoſtles doctrine, may conuince Churches not to be Apoſtolicke, though they alledge ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles. But his opinion may ſufficiently appeare by that, which hath bene formerly alledged out of him: and the truth of this whole queſtion, by your diſcourſe, and my anſwer to it.
               
            
            
               
                  A. D.
                  CHAP. XVII. The Concluſion of the whole diſcourſe.
                  
               
               
                  A. W.
                  The concluſion of your whole diſcourſe (as your ſelfe expound it in your preface) is this, that the faith which the authoritie 
                     
                     of the Romane Church commendeth to vs, ought without doubt to be holden for the true faith. But this Chapter is ſuch, as that you might rather terme it a recapitulation, then a concluſion of your diſcourſe. For the greateſt part of it by farre, is ſpent in a needleſſe repetition of that, which was before deliuered, and that which ſhould be indeed your concluſion, is ſcarce ſignified in it.
               
               
                  A. D. §. 1.
                  
                     Now to make an end, conſidering all this which I haue ſaid and prooued, to wit, that there is but one, infallible, entire faith, the which is neceſſarie to ſaluation, to all ſorts of men: the which faith euerie one muſt learne by ſome knowne, infallible, and vniuerſall rule, accommodate to the capacitie of euerie one: the which rule cannot be any other but the doctrine and teaching of the true Church: the which Church is alwaies to continue viſible vntill the worlds end, and is to be knowne by theſe foure markes, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apoſtolica, One, Holy, Catholicke, Apoſtolicke: the which markes agree onely to the Romane Church, (that is to ſay, to that companie, which doth communicate, and agree in profeſſion of faith, with the Church of Rome:) whereupon followeth, that this Church or companie is the onely true Church, of which euerie one muſt learne that faith which is neceſſarie to ſaluation. Conſidering (I ſay) all this, I would demaund of the Protestants, how they can perſwade themſelues, to haue that faith, which is neceſſarie to ſaluation, ſith they will not admit the authoritie and doctrine of the Church, of which onely they ought to learne this faith? Or how they can (as ſome of them do) challenge to themſelues the title of the true Church, ſith their companie hath neuer one of the foure markes, which by common conſent of all, muſt nedes be acknowledged for the true markes of the Church? How can their congregation be the true Church, which neither is One, becauſe it hath no meanes to keepe vnitie? nor Holy, becauſe neither was there euer any man of it, which by miracle or any other euident teſtimony, can be prooued to haue bene truly holy: neither is their doctrine ſuch as thoſe that moſt purely obſerue it, do without faile, thereby become holy: nor Catholicke, becauſe it teacheth not all truths, that haue bene held by the vniuerſall Church in former times, but denieth many of them; neither is it ſpred ouer all the Chriſtian world,
                     
                     but being diuided into diuers ſectes, euerie particular ſect is contained in ſome corner of the world. Neither hath it bene in all times euer ſince Chriſt, but ſprong vp of late, the firſt founder being Martin Luther an Apoſtata, a man after his Apoſtaſie from his profeſſed 
                     See Prateolus verbo Lutherani. 
                     religious order, knowne both by his writings, words, deeds, and manner of death, to haue bene a notable ill liuer. Nor Apoſtolicke, becauſe the preachers thereof cannot deriue their Pedegree, lineally, without interruption, from any Apoſtle, but are forced to beginne their line, if they will haue any, from Luther, Caluin, or ſome latter. How can they then brag that they haue the true, holy, Catholicke, and Apoſtolicke faith; ſith this is not found in any companie, that differeth in doctrine, from the onely true, holy, Catholicke, and Apoſtolicke Church? For if it be true (which Saint Auſtin ſaith) that in ventre Eccleſiae veritas manet, the truth remaineth in the bellie 
                     
                        In Pſal. 53. 
                     of the Church: it is impoſſible that thoſe who are diſioyned by difference of beleefe from that companie, which is knowne to be the true Church, ſhould haue the true faith. For true faith (as before hath bene prooued) is but one; wherefore he that differeth in beleefe from them which haue the true faith, either he muſt haue a falſe faith, or no faith at all. Againe, one cannot haue true faith, vnleſſe he firſt heare it, according to the ordinarie rule of Saint Paule, ſaying, Fides ex auditu, faith commeth of hearing: but how can one 
                     
                        Rom. 10. 
                     heare true doctrine of faith ſine praedicante, without one to preach truly vnto him? And how ſhould one preach truly, at leaſt in all points, niſi mittatur, vnleſſe he be ſent, and conſequently aſſiſted by the ſpirit of God? Now, how ſhould we know that Luther or Caluin, or any other that will leap out of the Church, & leaue that company wherin is vndoubted ſucceſſion, and by ſucceſſion lawfull miſſion, or ſending from God; how ſhould we (I ſay) know that theſe men teaching a new, and contrarie doctrine, were indeed ſent of God? Nay certainly we may be moſt ſure, that they were not ſent of God. For ſith Almightie God hath, by his Sonne, planted a Church vpon earth, which Church he would haue alwaies continue vntill the worlds end, and hath placed in it a viſible ſucceſſion of lawfull ordinarie Paſtours, whom he will, with the aſſiſtance of himſelfe, and his holy Spirit ſo guide, that they ſhall neuer vniuerſally faile, to teach the true faith, and to preſerue the people from errours; we are not now
                     
                     to expect any to be ſent from God, to inſtruct the people, but ſuch onely as come in this ordinarie manner by lawfull ſucceſſion, order, and calling, according as S. Paule ſaith: Nec quiſquam ſumit ſibi honorem, ſed qui vocatur à Deo, tanquam Aaron. Neither doth any 
                     
                        Heb. cap. 5. 
                     man take to himſelfe the honour, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was: to wit, viſibly, and with peculiar conſecration, as we reade in Leuiticus. cap. 8. To which accordeth that which we reade 2. Paralip. 26. where Azarias ſaid to king Ozias: Non eſt tui officij, Ozia, vt adoleas incenſum Domino, ſed Sacerdotum, hoc 2. Paral. ca. 26 eſt filiorum Aaron, qui conſecrati ſunt ad huiuſmodi miniſterium: egredere de ſanctuario, &c. It is not thy office, O Ozias, to offer incenſe to our Lord, but it is the office of Prieſts, to wit, of the ſonnes of Aaron, who are conſecrated to this function or miniſterie: go out of the Sanctuarie. Which bidding when Ozias contemned and would not obey, he was preſently ſtricken with a leproſie, and then being terrified, feeling the puniſhment inflicted by our Lord, he haſtened away, as in the ſame place is declared. By which places we may learne that it doth not belong to any one to do prieſtly functions, (as to offer incenſe or ſacrifice to God, or take vpon them the authoritie to preach and inſtruct the people) but onely to Prieſts called viſibly, and conſecrated for this peculiar purpoſe, as Aaron and his children were. For though the prieſthood of the Paſtors of the new law be not Aaronicall; yet it agreeth with the Prieſthood of Aaron, (according to S. Paul his ſaying in the foreſaid place) in this, that thoſe that come to it, muſt not take the honor of themſelues, but muſt be called vnto it of God, as Aaron was, to wit, viſibly, and by peculiar conſecration. In which ordinarie maner whoſoeuer cometh, he may be truly called Paſtor ouium, a Paſtor of Chriſts flocke: becauſe 
                     
                        Ioh. 10. Ibidem.
                      intrat per oſtium, he entereth in by the doore, to wit, by Christ himſelfe, who firſt viſibly called, conſecrated, and ſent immediately the Apostles: and the Apostles by authoritie receiued 
                     2. Tim. 4. 
                     from him, did viſiblie by impoſition of hands, call, conſecrate, and ſend others: and thoſe in like manner, others from time to time, without interruption, vntill theſe preſent men, who now are Prieſts of the Catholicke Romane Church. Theſe therefore enter in by Chriſt, who is the doore, and therefore theſe be true Paſtours: and whoſoeuer entereth not thus in at the doore, but
                     
                     commeth in another way, our Sauiour telleth vs, how we ſhould account 
                     
                        Ioh. 10. 
                     of him, when he ſaith. Qui non intrat per oſtium in ouile ouium, ſed aſcendit aliunde, ille fur eſt & latro. He that entreth not in by the doore, into the ſheepfold, but aſcendeth by ſome other way, he is a theefe and a robber; who commeth not to feed the ſheepe, but to ſteale, kill, and deſtroy them. So that we haue not (I ſay) to expect any to be ſent of God to feed vs, with the food of true doctrine of faith, but ſuch onely, as come in this ordinarie manner; (as it is certaine that Luther and Caluin, when they left their former profeſſion, and tooke vpon them to preach this new faith, did not come viſibly, called, conſecreated and ſent, for this purpoſe, by any lawful authority, according to the ordinary manner:) or if it ſhould pleaſe God to ſend any one in extraordinary manner, it appertaineth to his prouidence, to furniſh him with the gift of miracles, as he did his Sonne our Sauiour Chriſt; or with a miraculous conceptiō, & with ſtrange and extraordinary ſanctity of life, as was ſeene in S. Iohn Baptiſt: or finally with ſome euident token, that it may be plainly knowne, that he is aſſuredly ſent of God. Otherwiſe the people ſhould not be bound to beleeue him, but might without ſinne, reiect his doctrine: according as our Sauiour ſaid of himſelfe, Si non facio opera patris mei, nolite 
                        Iohn. 10. credere mihi. If I do not the works of my Father, do not beleeue me. And againe, Si opera non ſeciſſem in eis, quae nemo alius fecit, 
                        Iohn. 15. peccatum non haberent. If I had not done works among them, that no other hath done, they ſhould not haue ſinned, to wit, in not beleeuing. Nay, the people ſhould now, (an ordinary courſe being, by our Sauiour ſet downe, to continue till the worlds end, as before hath bene prooued) the people (I ſay) ſhould now ſinne, in beleeuing any one, that ſhall come, and tell them that he is extraordinarily ſent of God, if he teach contrarie to that doctrine, which by ordinarie Doctors and Paſtors of the Catholicke Church is vniuerſally taught. For although it ſhould happen, that the liues of theſe Paſtors ſhould not be ſo commendable, or be ſometimes euidently bad: yet their doctrine muſt alwaies be regarded and obſerued, according to that ſaying of our Sauiour, Super Cathedram Moyſiſederunt Scribae & 
                        Mat. 23. Phariſaei: omnia ergo quae cunque dixerint vobis, ſeruate & facite: ſecundū verò opera eorum nolite facere. 
                        Ʋpon the chaire of Moſes the Scribes and Phariſees haue ſitten: all things therefore
                     
                     whatſoeuer they ſay to you, obſerue ye and do; but according to their workes do ye not. By which ſaying we are aſſured that notwithſtanding the Paſtors of the Catholicke Church ſhould at any time in their liues be like Scribes and Phariſies: yet we may alwaies ſafely, yea we muſt neceſſarily follow their doctrine, and muſt not in any wiſe admit any that ſhall offer to teach vs a contrarie doctrine, according as we are willed by Saint Paule, who ſaith: Si quis vobis euangeliz auerit 
                        Gal. 1. praeter id quod accepiſtis, anathema ſit. If any ſhall euangelize or preach vnto you, beſide (or contrarie to) that which you haue alreadie receiued, be he anathema. So that ſith the people did once receiue from the ordinarie Paſtors that doctrine, which hath deſcended from hand to hand, from Chriſt and his Apoſtles themſelues, (according to that of Saint Auſtin: Quod inuenerunt in Eccleſia, tenuerunt: quod didicerunt, docuerunt: quod à patribus 2 Contra Iulia.
                      acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt: That which they found in the Church, they held: that which they learned, they taught: that which they receiued from their fathers, that they deliuered to their children) whoſoeuer he be, that ſhall euangelize any thing oppoſite to this receiued doctrine, whether he ſeeme to be an Apoſtle, or an Angell: and much more if he be another, to wit one of theſe new maſters, who faile very much (to ſay no more) from Apoſtolicall perfection, and Angelicall puritie of life, according to Saint Paule, anathema ſit, be he anathema. Yea ſuch a one that doth not onely not bring this Catholicke or generally receiued doctrine, but bringeth in a new and contrary doctrine, we ſhould not (according to Saint Iohn) ſalute him (vnleſſe vpon ſome 
                     
                        Epiſt. 1. 
                     need or ſome good reſpect) or ſay Aue vnto him: and much leſſe ſhould we giue credit to his words, or vſe him as a rule of our faith, or preferre his teaching before the teaching of the Catholicke Church.
                  
                  
                     And ſurely me thinkes, though there were none of theſe euident proofes, which I haue brought out of Scripture: yet euen reaſon it ſelfe would teach, that we ought to giue more credit to the vniuerſall companie of Catholickes, which haue bene at all times, and are now ſpred ouer all the Chriſtian world, then to any particular priuate man, or ſome few his fellowes and followers. It is a prouerbe common amongeſt all men: Vox populi, vox

Dei, The voice of the people or whole multitude, is the voice of God; that which all men ſay, muſt needs be. And on the contrarie part, to that particular man or his priuate company, which will oppoſe themſelues againſt this generall voice of all, (like Iſmael, of whom it is written, Manus eius contra omnes, & manus omnium contra cum, his hands are againſt all men, and the hands of all are againſt him) it may well be obiected that which Luther (who was the firſt in this our age which did ſo) cōfeſſeth was obiected to himſelf by his owne conſcience, or rather principally by the mercy and grace of the Almightie God, ſeeking to reclaime him from his errour, while there was any hope. Num tu ſolùm ſapis: Art thou onely 
                     In Praef. Lib. de abrog. Miſsae, priuatae ad fratres. Aug. Ordin. in caenob. VVittenberg. 
                     wiſe? Luthers words be theſe. Quoties mihi palpitauit tremulum cor, & reprehendens obiecit fortiſſimum illud argumentum, Tu ſolus ſapis? Totne errant vniuerſi? Tanta ſecula ignorauerunt? Quid ſi tu erres, & tot tecum in errorem trahas damnandos aeternaliter? How often did my trembling heart pant, and reprehending me, did obiect to me that moſt ſtrong and forcible argument: Art thou alone wiſe? haue there ſo many vniuerſally erred? haue ſo many ages bene blinde and liued in ignorance? What rather if thou thy ſelfe erre, and draweſt ſo many after thee into errour, who (therefore) ſhall be damned eternally? This did Almightie God obiect to Luther, the which might doubtleſſe haue done him good, but that he (preſuming vpon his owne vnderſtanding of Scripture, and preferring his owne iudgement before the iudgement of the Church) hardened his heart againſt ſuch heauenly inspirations, which he tearmed Papiſticall arguments. And this ſame may well be obiected to any priuate man, or any few, who leauing the Kings broad ſtreet, or beaten hye way of the Catholicke Church, will ſeeke out a by-path, as being in their conceit, a better, eaſier, & more direct way to heauen. To them (I ſay) wel may be ſaid, Are you only wiſe? are all the reſt in former ages fooles? haue you onely after ſo many hundred yeares after Chriſt found out the true faith, and the right way to heauen? haue all the reſt liued in blindneſſe, darkneſſe, and errour? conſequently, are you onely they that pleaſe God, and ſhall be ſaued? (for, as I haue prooued before, without true and entire faith none can be ſaued) and were then all the reſt, ſo many millions, your owne forefathers and ancestors, (many of which were most
                     
                     innocent men and vertuous liuers, and ſome of which ſhed their bloud for Chriſts ſake) were (I ſay) all theſe hated of God? did all theſe periſh? were they all damned? ſhall all theſe endure vnſpeakable paines in hell for euer? O impious, cruell, and incredible aſſertion! Nay ſurely, I am rather to thinke, that you are vnwiſe, who pretending to trauell toward the happie kingdome of heauen, and to go to that glorious citie the heauenly Ieruſalem, wil leaue the beaten ſtreet, in which all thoſe haue walked that euer heretofore went thither: who by miracles ſometimes, as it were by letters ſent from thence, haue giuen teſtimonie to vs that remaine behind, that they are ſafely arriued there. You (I ſay) are vnwiſe that will leaue this way, and will aduenture the liues not onely of your bodies, but of your ſoules, in a path found out of late by your ſelues, neuer tracked before: in which whoſoeuer haue yet gone, God knowes what is become of them, ſith we neuer had letter of miracle, or any other euident token, or euer heard any word from them, to aſſure vs that they ſafely paſſed that way: me thinks, I may account you moſt vnwiſe men, that will aduenture ſuch a precious iewell as your ſoule is, to be tranſported by ſuch an vncertaine and dangerous way. I muſt needs thinke, that ſith there is but one right way, and that the way of the Catholicke Church is a ſure and approued ſafe way, you are very vnaduiſed, who with the aduenture of the irreparable loſſe of your deareſt and peerleſſe treaſure your ſoule, will leaue this ſafe and ſecure way, to ſeeke out a new vncertaine and perillous way. I muſt needs think, ſith the Catholick Romane Church is (as I haue proued) the light of the world, the rule of faith, the pillar & ſure ground of truth: that you leauing it, leaue the light, and therefore walke in darkneſſe; forſaking it, forſake the direct path of true faith, and therefore are miſled in the miſt of incredulitie, into the wilderneſſe of miſbeleefe: and finally that you hauing thus loſt the ſure ground of truth, do fall into the miry ditch of many abſurdities, and muſt needs be drowned in the pit of innumerable errors; and erring thus from the way, the veritie and the life, which is Chriſt Ieſus reſiding, according to his promiſe in the Catholicke Church, muſt needs (vnleſſe you wil, which I hartily wiſh, returne to the vnitie of the ſame Church) incur your owne perdition, death and damnation of body and ſoule: from which ſweet Ieſus deliuer you, and vs all, to the honor and perpetuall praiſe of his holy name. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A. W.
                  To theſe idle queſtions of yours, I anſwer firſt in generall, that we may with reaſon enough perſwade our ſelues that we haue the true faith and true Churches; becauſe we ſee, that the very quinteſſence of Bellarmines ſophiſtry diſtilled againe in your limbeck, is of no force to purge out or alter ſuch perſwaſion. This appeares in the particulars viewed and examined. To which I anſwer ſeuerally in a word: The doctrine of the true Church we gladly admit and receiue, yet not vpon the authoritie thereof, but becauſe it is agreeable to the Scriptures. If you ask vs then, why we are perſwaded that we haue true faith; we returne you anſwer, that we are therefore ſo perſwaded, becauſe we finde that which we beleeue auowed in Scripture, and confirmed in our hearts by the witneſſe of the holy Ghoſt. Hereupon we conclude (as well we may) that we are members of the true Church, & our congregations true Chriſtiā churches. For wheras you charge ſome of vs, but craftily forbeare to name them, with chalenging to our ſelues the title of the true Church; See my anſwer to 12. art part. 1. art. 5. it is a ſlaunder of yours, and no challenge of ours; ſaue only thus far, that we affirme there is no true Church, which agreeth not with vs in the fundamentall points of the Goſpell. But we are far frō appropriating the Church to our congregations, as if all true Churches depended vpon vs, according to that you teach of your Romiſh ſynagogue. And whereas you condemne vs for no true Churches, becauſe we want the markes of true Churches: we ſay that you take thoſe for markes, which are not ſo, as you vnderſtand them; and farther, that euery one of them rightly conceiued, is to be found in our ſeuerall congregations.
                  It is one, becauſe it holdeth that one meanes of ſaluation preached by the Apoſtles, euen faith in Ieſus Chriſt, without mingling of any workes therewith of the ceremoniall or moral law, before or after grace, to deſerue iuſtification of congruitie, or euerlaſting life of condignitie. The contrary errors held by your ſynagogue, make and proue it to be no true Church. But how fooliſh is the reaſon you bring againſt vs? The Proteſtants Church is not one, becauſe it hath no meanes to keepe vnitie. It hath meanes ſufficient, viz. the truth of the Scriptures, and teaching

of the ſpirit of God. Put caſe it wanted meanes to continue vnitie; would it follow thereupon, that it is not One? Surely no more, then that a man is not aliue, becauſe he hath not means to keepe himſelfe aliue.
                  Our Church hath had, and by the bleſſing of God hath many holy men and women, whoſe workes haue giuen, and dayly do giue cleare teſtimonies of their inward graces. Indeed we want vnholy legendaries, to deuiſe and publiſh monſtrous lies for miracles, by which you haue gotten the aduantage of vs, in the conceits of them, to whom God hath ſent ſtrong deluſions, that they might beleeue lies. But wiſedome is iuſtified of her children, though you proud Phariſes deſpiſe her.
                  Our doctrine teacheth nothing but holineſſe: that we were 
                     
                        Epheſ. 1. 4. Luk. 1. 74. 75. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Rom. 6. 3. 4. 
                     choſen to be holy: that we are freed from our ſinnes, to the end we might ſinne no more: that we are waſhed, iuſtified and ſanctified by the bloud of Chriſt; buried with him in baptiſme, that we might die to ſinne; raiſed from ſinne to righteouſneſſe, by the power of his reſurrection: that holines of life is a part of our glorie, without which no man ſhall euer ſee God: that he which ſaith he is iuſtified, and ſhewes himſelfe to be vnſanctified, deceiues his owne ſoule, and is in the ſtate of damnation: Onely we neither giue the glorie of our ſaluation to our ſelues, as if by the power of our freewill, without ſpeciall inclination thereof by the holy Ghoſt, we had receiued faith, which other men haue refuſed: though they might haue embraced it as well as we, for ought God did for or to vs, more then for or to them; nor looke to merit heauen by the worthineſſe of our workes, as if it were the wages of ſeruants, and not the inheritance of children.
                  The vniuerſal Church (as you ſpeake of it) is a meere name, without any thing anſwerable to it in nature. That which was generally held (while the Churches of Chriſt were not ſubiect to Antichriſt) concerning the ſubſtance of Religion, by which true and falſe Churches are to be iudged, we gladly and conſtantly maintaine. The errors which ſome men defended, and corrupted the Churches withall, we refute and reiect. But it is no marke of the true Church, to hold all that hath bene generally maintained in true Churches; but the dutie of it to acknowledge

for true, whatſoeuer was taught by the Apoſtles, and is recorded in Scripture.
                  How far our Church is ſpread, it paſſeth your skill truly to affirme: and we may with good reaſon perſwade our ſelues, that it is in all places, where the Goſpell is preached, and the Scriptures knowne; becauſe dayly experience ſheweth, that it hath ſome members in thoſe countries where your bloudie and tyrannous butchery of Inquiſition doth moſt rule, and vnder the noſe of your grand Antichriſt, in the citie of Rome. But it is enough to make it Catholicke, that it acknowledgeth it ſelfe to be common both to Iew and Gentile, not tied to any country, people or perſon whatſoeuer, as yours is to the Pope and Rome.
                  We are not aſhamed of Martin Luther, whom it pleaſed God to vſe admirably, if not miraculouſly, to rake from vnder the aſhes the light of the Goſpell, couered and choked with your errors and ſuperſtitions. Not as if it had bin al that while out of the world, but as 12. art. part. 1. art. 1. one of your owne fellowes ſpeakes of it, as being in the eclipſe, ouerſhadowed and darkned with the thicke miſt of your Popiſh decrees, decretals, and ſchoolmens trickes, and other ſuch leud trumpery. Our Church, that is the true Church of Chriſt was all that time in the world, but not to be ſeene of euery man: though from time to time there were ſtill found ſome who durſt maintaine the truth of Chriſt againſt your Antichriſtian hereſies. Luthers writings, words, deeds, and manner of death, were ſuch as might manifeſt to all men both his true zeale of the glory of God, and Gods eſpeciall fauour to him, whatſoeuer ſuch lying ſycophants as Prateolus faine.
                  If we would ſtand vpon Apoſtolickneſſe in ſucceſſion, what haue you, that we want; ſaue onely that you continue in ſucceſſion of error, longer then we do? But it is an idle plea, to auouch perſonall ſucceeding, where there is manifeſt contrarietie in doctrine: by which, as we heard out of 
                        Tertul. de praeſc. cap. 32. Tertullian, howſoeuer you brag of Apoſtolickneſſe, you may be proued not to be Apoſtolicall.
                  We differ not in doctrine, touching the fundamentall points

of Religion, from any true, holy, Catholicke, and Apoſtolicke Church: neither doth your ſynagogue agree with any ſuch. Therfore wheras you demand, how we can brag that we haue true faith, which is not to be found out of the true Church; we anſwer you, as oft we haue done, that we are ſure the faith we hold is true, becauſe it is agreeable to the Scriptures, and being ſo, we cannot be out of the true Church, as long as we are in the true faith.
                  True faith cannot be had by any light or diſcourſe of nature, but onely by reuelation from God. For 1. Cor. 2. 9. 
                     neither eye hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard, nor the heart of man can imagine, what the meanes are, whereby God decreed in himſelfe to ſaue thoſe whom he hath choſen to glory. Now it was not the purpoſe of God in theſe latter times, as in the firſt before the law, to reueale his will immediatly from heauen; but he ſent his Son in the nature of man, and that Sonne his Apoſtles, to giue knowledge of thoſe means of ſaluation; both by preaching for that preſent age wherein they liued, and alſo by writing, for that age, and all that were to ſucceed till the end of the world. This is all that the Apoſtle teacheth 
                        Rom. 10. 16. in the place alledged by you. Yet we denie not, that the principall ordinary means to bring men to faith, is the miniſtery of man, by word of mouth expounding the word & wil of God according to the Scriptures. Firſt then, all men to whom the Scriptures are vouchſafed, haue meanes of hearing. For in them they may, if they will, heare men appointed by God, ſpeake to their inſtruction and ſaluation. Secondly, the ſame God hath ordained, that beſides the former teaching, there ſhould be certaine men ſet apart and deputed for the miniſtery, whoſe dutie it is to preach in their ſeuerall charges the word of truth. This ſetting apart & deputing, is that ſending which is now required; and is to be performed by ſuch as are, & ſhall be authorized to that purpoſe. Thirdly for our particular caſe, we are to vnderſtand that Luther and theſe other worthies, by whoſe miniſtery it pleaſed God to reuiue the knowledge of the Goſpell decayed, were authorized to preach by your congregation, which was at that time in apparence the true Church of God. Therefore were they ſent, if your church haue any ſending: and according

to their calling, they labored in opening the truth of God, as it is reuealed in the Scriptures. Thus by the gracious mercie of God, it came to paſſe, that they teaching the word of truth, found diuers, both men and women, whoſe hearts the Lord by his ſpirit opened, ſo that they embraced the loue of the truth deliuered by them, and accepted them for their paſtors, and ſubmitted themſelues to become their flockes. By this meanes they had both a generall authoritie to preach, from that companie, which (by profeſſion) was the Church, and alſo a particular charge of thoſe who were now become indeed (in regard of their profeſſed faith) a true Church of God. We haue then in our Churches, for the late reforming of them, firſt, your calling, ſuch as it was, and ſecondly the approbation of true Chriſtians, of which true Churches conſiſt. Therefore by your owne rule, ſince we haue ſome amongſt vs that are ſent, we may alſo haue faith and true faith, though we abhor your Antichriſtian hereſies.
                  To what purpoſe is this idle diſcourſe, but to ſhew your owne errors? We neither looke for, nor allow any opinion of extraordinary ſending from God, becauſe we haue no warrant for any ſuch in the Scriptures. But wee ſay, the reſtorers of the Goſpell, in this laſt age, had ordinary allowance of that Church which bare the ſhew of the true Church, and profeſſed the beleeuing of the Goſpell, which is the foundation of the Church.
                  But you require peculiar conſecration, becauſe it pleaſed God to appoint ſuch a courſe for the Prieſthood of the Law. Do you not know, that the conſecrating and annointing of Aaron, was a part of the ceremoniall law, ſignifying the annointing of the ſpirit, which our Sauiour was to receiue: to whom, according to thoſe ſhewes, 
                        Ioan. 3. 34. the Lord gaue the ſpirit without meaſure? The conſecration that now remaines, is nothing but the ſetting a part of ſome men for the worke of the miniſterie by prayer and laying on of hands.
                  
                     2. Chron. 26 18. Your example of Oziah, is little to the purpoſe. For it had not bene lawfull for him to offer incenſe, though he had bene conſecrated with all the ceremonies that belong to the office

of the prieſthood, becauſe the office of offring incenſe was appropriated by God to the houſe of Aaron, as Azariah ſignifieth in his ſpeech to Vzziah. This appointment of God was their calling: 
                        Heb. 5. 4. the outward ceremonies were but to ſhadow forth the excellencie of our Sauiour Chriſts prieſthood. Neither doth the Apoſtle prooue the lawfulneſſe of Chriſts prieſthood, by his conſecration anſwerable to Aarons, as your alledging of the place intends, but onely by the Lords authorizing of him to that office. 
                        verſ. 5. 
                     Chriſt tooke not to himſelfe the honour to be made the high Prieſt (ſaith the Apoſtle) but he that ſaid vnto him, Thou art my ſonne, this day begat I thee, gaue it him. 
                     
                        verſ. 6. 
                     As he alſo in an other place ſpeaketh, Thou art a Prieſt for euer, after the order of Melchiſedech: what word is there here of our Sauiours conſecration?
                  You proceed to heape error vpon error, to the preiudice of Gods truth, and deſtruction of his people. If euery man be to be held for a true Paſtor, and as ſuch a one to be beleeued, if he haue an orderly admiſſion and allowance to teach: had not Arius, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Macedonius, and many other heretickes lawfull ordination, according to the cuſtome of the Churches in thoſe times? Yea, were not Luther, Bucer, Martyr, authorized by your Church, and Caluin too, as you ſay afterward, when you accuſe Luther and him for leauing their former profeſſion? Come no hirelings in by the doore, if lawfull outward admiſſion be the doore? How many that enter lawfully become wolues afterward? I know this (ſaith 
                        Act. 20. 29 Saint Paul to the Epheſians) that after my departure, grieuous wolues ſhall enter in among you, not ſparing the flocke. Moreouer, 
                     
                        verſ. 30. 
                     of your owne ſelues ſhall men ariſe, ſpeaking peruerſe things. Who can doubt, but ſome of theſe might be euen of the number of them who were lawfully admitted by impoſition of hands and prayer, the onely meanes of conſecration in thoſe times, before your ſhauing and greaſing was heard of in the Church?
                  But you ignorantly or wilfully abuſe 
                        Ioan. 10. 1. 21. that place of the Euangeliſt, by applying it to the ordinary miniſterie of the Goſpell: whereas it belongeth to the office of the Meſſiah, and the calling that hee had from God, to bee

                     
                        Heb. 13. 20. 
                     the great ſhepheard of our ſoules. 
                     
                        Ioan. 10. 8. 
                     All that came before him, profeſſing themſelues to be the Meſſiah, as 
                        Act. 5. 36. 37 Iudas and Theudas did, were theeues and robbers: entring not in by the doore, that is 
                        Ioan. 6. 27. Mat, 3. 17. by commiſſion from God, but coming in another way, by their counterfetting of a pattent from God. Neither was the preſeruation of the people, but their owne aduancement the marke they ſhot at. But the true ſhepheard Ieſus Chriſt came to giue his life for his ſheepe, that they might be ſaued. This is the true ſenſe of that worthy ſermon; which if we will apply to miniſters, they muſt be held for true Paſtors, which being authorized thereunto, do preach Chriſt Ieſus truly, without mingling any ſuch doctrines as may by any meanes draw vs from the acknowledging or reſting vpon him for ſaluation. He that ſo teacheth and is authorized thereunto, commeth in by Chriſt the doore, eſpecially if he haue withall a true deſire to feed the flock committed to him, in the ſinceritie of his heart. But if you ſtand onely vpon outward calling, the Prieſts and Leuits wanted it not, who yet were theeues, becauſe they endeuored to ſteale away the hearts of the ſheepe from Chriſt the true ſhepheard.
                  That which followeth of the neceſſitie of miracles or extraordinarie ſanctitie, concernes not vs, who pleade not any extraordinarie ſending. Luther was appointed by your Church, to preach the Goſpel. That duty, according to his calling, he faithfully performed: neuer requiring to be credited, becauſe he was extraordinarily ſent by God; but becauſe he taught that which God had left in the Scriptures, for the inſtruction and edification of his Church, in all ages till the end of the world. What neede was there now of miracles, or any other extraordinarie courſe? 
                        Ioan. 10. 37. & 15. 24. The places you bring, wee anſwered before.
                  The vniuerſall conſent of Paſtors and Doctors, in that they teach, hath bene found to be but a crooked rule to meaſure truth by; though we are perſwaded, that the world was neuer without ſome that held and taught ſo much of the truth, as is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation. But that is vniuerſally or generally taught, which is the common doctrine of ordinary teachers,

howſoeuer ſome one or two here and there may be of a contrarie opinion. 
                        Mat. 23. 2. How farre the Scribes and Phariſies were to be heard, it appeared before, where this place was alledged and anſwered. Surely he, 
                        Mat 16. 6. & 23. 16. 17. 19. that charged his Diſciples, to take heede of the leauen of the Phariſies, and called them fooles and blinde, would neuer commaund them to take their doctrine, for the rule of truth. Neither could 
                        Gal. 1. 8. Saint Paule meane, that euerie man ſhould be accurſed, who taught at any time otherwiſe, then men commonly beleeued; he ſpeaketh not a word of any common conſent in teaching, and he knew that 2. Theſſ. 2. 3. there was to be a generall Apoſtacy: but his meaning was, that they ſhould hold him for accurſed that deliuered any other doctrine of ſaluation, how generally ſo euer it were taught, then that which he himſelfe had preached to thē. But of this alſo before.
                  I hope you are not ſo mad, as to imagine that any man will beleeue, that Saint Auſtin ſo many hundred yeares ago, propheſied, that your Paſtors and Doctors ſhould from time to time teach nothing elſe generally, but that which had 
                        Auguſt. cont. Iuli. Pelag. lib. 2. in his daies deſcended from hand to hand, from Chriſt and his Apoſtles. Or do you thinke it would prooue a good reaſon to ſay, Auſtin affirmeth that Ambroſe and other learned men, who liued in the firſt 400. yeares, held that which they found in the Church, and taught that which they had learned. Therefore it cannot be that ſince his time other men haue preached or written otherwiſe? But be like this place was alledged by you rather for ornament and ſhew, then for proofe or vſe, and ſo let it paſſe.
                  Though there were no other reaſon to make vs miſlike your Church: yet this were cauſe enough of doubt, that the foundation whereon you build it, in this Treatiſe, and the like, is ſo weake and vncertaine. We muſt beleeue you, becauſe you are the Church. Who ſaith ſo? Your ſelues. But you will prooue it by Scripture. How ſhall I know that you bring, to be Scripture? The Church telleth you ſo. Shall I laugh at you, or pitie you? You are the Church, becauſe the Scripture ſaith ſo. The Scripture is Scripture to vs, becauſe you ſay ſo. 
                        Gal. 3. 1. Were the Galathians ſo ſenſleſſe, as they that beleeue ſuch abſurd

fooleries? Or is it poſſible that any man ſhould beleeue them, but he that is giuen vp by God to ſtrong deluſions, that he may beleeue lies? Bethinke your ſelues, and returne ere it be too late. The Lord will be mercifull to your former ignorance, if at the laſt you embrace the loue of the truth. Leauing thoſe euident proofes, you ſpeake of (proofes indeed of your manifold errours) you aſſay to draw vs by reaſon, becauſe it is more likelie, that the vniuerſall companie of Catholickes deſerueth credit, then any particular man or his followers. Firſt, you beg that which is in queſtion. No true Catholicke euer held all the errours that your Antichriſtian Church maintaineth: nor any one of thoſe, whereby you caſt downe the foundation of religion. Secondly, the compariſon is not betwixt the authoritie of a multitude, or a few, wherein number may either helpe or hinder, but the reaſons of each ſide are to be weighed, all other reſpects whatſoeuer ſet apart. And yet if we looke to reaſon: are not the greateſt number (for the moſt part) the worſt? Chriſts true flocke is a little one, 
                        Iuc. 12. 32. 
                     Feare not little flocke. 
                     1. Co. 1. 26. 
                     Not many wiſe men after the fleſh, not many mightie, not many noble. Was not the voice of the people, euen of Gods people, 
                        Exod. 32. 1. 
                     Make vs Gods to go before vs? The voice of God is to be heard in the Scriptures, Paphnutius in Concil. Niccno. 
                     One man that ſpeaketh according thereunto, is to be preferred before the whole world ſpeaking otherwiſe.
                  
                  Thoſe obiections made to Luther in his priuate meditations proceeded from the ſame ſpirit, by which the Phariſies ſpake to Nicodemus in their Councell, Doth 
                     
                        Ioan. 7. 48. 
                     any of the Rulers, or of the Phariſies beleeue in him. 
                     
                        Gal 1. 16. This was that communicating with fleſh and blood, which the Apoſtle would not once hearken to: Luther in his weakneſſe was drawne into it, and had periſhed in it, if the Lord of his infinite mercy, had not drawne him out of it, with a worthie and admirable reſolution. VVith the like (that it may appeare whoſe ſchollers you are) you Ieſuits, and Prieſts ſet vpon ſimple people, ticing them on in their ignorance, & your owne, though the broad way, that leadeth to deſtruction.
                  But let vs conſider this your fleſhly eloquence and anſwer to it. You aske, if we onelie be wiſe, and all the reſt in former ages
                     
                     were fooles. As if we did not acknowledge that it is the mercie of God, and not our wiſedome that hath giuen vs the abilitie, and will to vnderſtand his truth. We are not wiſer then any other, but haue found more mercy, then many haue done at the hands of God, for our ſaluation. Many in former times haue bene partakers of the like mercie, and bene made wiſe to ſaluation by the ſame truth we now profeſſe: yea it was generally held many hundred yeares, til your maſter Antichriſt draue it into holes and deſerts. After the reuealing of his pride and tyrannie: the true way to heauen ceaſed not to be found, though not ſo commonly, till it pleaſed God to ſcatter thoſe clowdie miſts of ignorance and idolatrie, by which you had hidden it, that it could very hardly be knowne. Diuers heretofore, and more now adaies finde fauour with God to diſcerne and walke through it, to the certaine, and euerlaſting ſaluation of their ſoules and bodies. So iudge we as it becommeth vs in charitie of our forefathers: that he which hath looked in compaſſion vpon vs their ſeed, did not faile to ſhew mercy vnto them, who neuer vnderſtood the myſterie of your iniquitie: but in the ſingleneſſe of their hearts embraced the generall doctrine of the Goſpell, concerning ſaluation by faith in Chriſt. This is the onely way, by which all men haue gone, that euer came to heauen, and in this way we trauell with danger of the liues of our bodies (as you ſpeake) becauſe we are continually in hazard by reaſon of your conſpiracies, treaſons, maſſacres, vnderminings and fier-works; but with aſſurance of the ſaluation of our ſoules: if we hold faſt the ſhoot-Anchor of our hope, and renouncing our owne righteouſneſſe, repoſe our ſelues by faith vpon the gracious mercy of God our Father in Ieſus Chriſt. This doing we haue better certificate, both for the ſecuritie of our way, and the end of our iourney out of the Scriptures, and by the witneſſe of the Spirit of God in our hearts, then that lying Carier the diuel can bring by any ſhew of your counterfeit miracles whatſoeuer.
                  I muſt needs perſwade my ſelfe, ſith that Apoſtolicall Romiſh Synagogue is (as I haue ſhewed) the ſeducer of the world by ſhew of authority, without reaſon, the ouerthrow and deſtruction

of truth, by denying the ſufficiency of the Scripture, and taking the vſe of it from the people of God; that all you which cleaue to it, plunge your ſelues in helliſh darkneſſe, by refuſing to ſee the light of Gods word; and by drinking of the cup of abhomination preſented to you by that ſtrumpet of Rome, looſe the taſte of truth, and runne forward in wilfull ignorance, to moſt certaine damnation. The Lord is my witneſſe, whom I ſerue weakly as I can, in the Goſpell of his Son Ieſus Chriſt, that if it were poſſible and lawfull for me, I could be content to procure your ſaluation, by pouring out my heart bloud for euerie one of you, that Ieſus Chriſt my maſter might haue the glory of your true conuerſion. To that purpoſe, and for the eſtabliſhing of them, which alreadie beleeue: I firſt vndertooke, and haue now at the laſt (by the mercifull aſſiſtance of God) finiſhed my anſwer to this ſubtill Treatiſe. Let me now earneſtly intreat you by the care of your owne ſaluation, by the zeale you haue (in ignorance) to glorifie God, by the infinite loue of Ieſus Chriſt, by the vndeſerued mercy of God the Father, by the continuall gracious motions of the holy Ghoſt, and by whatſoeuer is, or ought to be deare vnto you, that you would vouchſafe ſeriouſly in the ſinceritie of your hearts, without preiudice to conſider; whether it be not more ageeable both to the Scriptures, and the light of reaſon, to giue the whole glorie of our ſaluation to the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt, then to aſcribe the enabling of vs to ſaue our ſoules to God, and the vſe or imploying of this abilitie to the choiſe of our owne free-will. If your opinion be true, See my anſwer to 12. Art. part. 2. art. 4. euerie man that is ſaued, is more beholding to himſelfe, then to God for his ſaluation. For though he haue power from God, to be ſaued, if he will: yet neither hath he this power, but vpon preparation, depending on his free-will; and when he hath it, the vſing of it well is from himſelfe, and not from God. You will ſay, he could not vſe it well, vnleſſe he were aſſiſted continually by the grace of God. I anſwer, that for all this aſſiſtance by that grace to vſe it well, the well or ill vſing of it, when God hath done all, he will do, ariſeth from the choiſe of a mans owne will. That it was poſſible for me to be ſaued, it was Gods doing:

that this poſſibilitie tooke effect in me, I may thanke my ſelfe, more then God: ſo that by this doctrine, the glorie of euerie particular mans ſaluation is more due to the partie ſaued, then to God the Sauiour. Now on the contrarie ſide; if that we teach be true, the loſſe falles on mans part, and not vpon Gods. Is any man drawne out of the Iawes of hell and damnation? The whole glorie redounds to God. It was he that prouided meanes of ſaluation: it was he that gaue me, in particular, knowledge of that meanes. It was he, that when I was as vntoward, and vnwilling to be ſaued, as the moſt damned reprobate, wrought me to beleeue (can I euer be vnmindfull or vnthankfull!) by inclining my heart to like, and accept of his grace, and faith in Chriſt. But in the meane while I looſe the commendation, and the glory of vſing the grace of God well, by my free-will. O Adam, Adam, earth and aſhes, how faſt doth that pride of nature, whereby thou waſt deſtroyed in thy ſelfe, though in thee it were not naturall, cleaue to euerie one of thy poſteritie! 
                        Gen. 3. 5. 6. We had rather be thought able to gouerne our ſelues, then be gouerned by God. It is more pleaſing to vs, to hazard our ſaluation vpon the nice choiſe of our owne free-will, then to be aſſured of it, by the mercie of God, working in vs this choiſe to will. O that, as we are all partakers of Adams pride, ſo we might alſo partake with his repentance and faith! Would Adam (trow ye) if it might be put to his choiſe, againe venture vpon his owne free-will, though he were as pure as euer he was, rather then reſt ſecure vpon Gods almightie, and moſt certaine protection? No, no, bleſſed ſoule, he knoweth by wofull experience (though by Gods vnſpeakable goodneſſe, to his and our greater glorie) that he, and he only is out of danger, who reſignes himſelfe into Gods hands, to be diſpoſed of at his gracious pleaſure. Why refuſe we to be like to Adam in this? Will we follow him in that onely, of which onely he is aſhamed? Is it not more glorie to ariſe with him, then to haue fallē with him? O why do we euery day renew the memorie of his fault, by committing the like! Doth the brightneſſe of the truth in theſe points dazle your eies? Me thinks I ſee many of you offering to preſſe forward, as it were

to take the kingdome of heauen, the doctrine of the Goſpell, by violence: why recoile you? Why quaile you on a ſodaine? The bare name of the Church, not onely ſtayeth you, but beateth you backward. The Romiſh Church cannot erre. VVho telleth you ſo? Surely they, that can erre, your Prieſts and Ieſuits. Giue me leaue I pray you, to queſtion with you a little, and for a minute of an hower, be content to make vſe of that reaſon and knowledge, which God hath giuen you, without foreſtalling your iudgements, by preiudice of the authoritie of the Church. Doth it not appeare to you by the light of naturall reaſon, that the maine end of all religion is the glorie of God? Do not your owne conſciences teſtifie in the ſimplicitie of your hearts, that it maketh more for the glorie of God, that men ſhould be beholding to his Maieſtie for their ſaluation, then that they ſhould procure it to themſelues? Is it not alſo apparent to you in the ſecret of your owne ſoules, that our doctrine by beating downe the pride of mans free-will, aduanceth the glorie of Gods mercie: and yours, by hoyſing vp the conceit of mans good choiſe, preſſeth downe the eſtimation of Gods vnſpeakable goodneſſe? And ſhall an idle ſound weigh more with you, then ſound reaſon? Conſider, I beſeech you, what weake grounds you build this opinion of the Church vpon: I will point at that, which in my anſwer I haue handled. Can you in any ſort compare the opinion of the Churches authoritie, with the euidence of thoſe matters, wherewith before I preſſed you? Is it as cleere that there are certaine men, whom I muſt beleeue, whatſoeuer they teach, as it is, that I muſt ſeeke the aduancing of Gods glory, more then of mine owne pride? Are you as ſure, that theſe Prieſts and Ieſuits which are your teachers, be ſent by the true Church, and deliuer nothing, but the doctrine of the true Chruch; as you are, that they, who perſwade you to reſt wholy vpon God, and not at all vpon your ſelues, ſhew you the right way to procure Gods glory, and your owne ſaluation? Tuſh (ſay you) all is nothing vnleſſe I beleeue it, vpon the credit of the Church. Alaſte, how did the firſt Chriſtians, who neuer thought on the authoritie of the Church, when they heard and beleeued the Apoſtles doctrine?

Looke ouer all the Hiſtorie of the Actes, peruſe the Sermons of Peter and Paule, and tell me whether you finde, that euer they pleaded the authoritie of the Church, to procure beleefe of their doctrine. After men are conuerted, the authoritie of the Church, hath her due place, and muſt beare ſway in matters in different, but for the auowing of truth, her bare word is neuer of ſufficient importance. It was the doctrine of the Apoſtles, that wrought vpon the hearts of men, by the cleare euidence of it, through the power of the Spirit, wherewith it was accompanied. What that doctrine was, where ſhould we learne but in the ſcriptures, wherein they haue written what they preached? Theſe (you ſay) giue ſuch authoritie to the Church. This were ſomewhat, if you made not their authoritie in reſpect of vs, to depend vpon the Church. The ſcriptures (ſay 
                        Stapl. de autor. Eccleſ. li. 1. your Doctors) haue in themſelues authoritie, as being from God: but they are not of authoritie to vs, but onely by the authoritie of the Church. I perceiue you are aſhamed of theſe abſurdities. The Church muſt be beleeued vpon her word. Why ſo? The Scripture ſaith ſo. How ſhall I know that theſe bookes are ſcripture? The Church ſaith ſo. The Church and the ſcripture prooue each other, by their mutuall teſtimonie, they giue each of other: I beleeue the Church becauſe the ſcripture biddeth me, I beleeue the ſcripture, becauſe the Church biddeth me. If theſe things ſeeme to be abſurd, as indeed they are moſt abſurd, blinde not your ſelues any longer with ſuch miſts of errour, but come out of them, to the cleare light of the ſcriptures: reade them diligently, meditate in them carefully, call vpon God for his grace earneſtly, reſigne your ſelues, and your free-will to him ſincerelie: and the Lord that is moſt readie to bleſſe them, that vſe the meanes of knowledge and faith, in humilitie, and ſingleneſſe of heart, will aſſuredly enlighten your vnderſtanding, and incline your affections, that you ſhall diſcerne, like of, and embrace the true doctrine of Iuſtification by faith in Ieſus Chriſt: and ſhall renounce your owne righteouſneſſe, and free-will, to the glorie of his grace, and the preſent comfort, and euerlaſting ſaluation

of your bodies and ſoules, through the ſame his ſonne, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghoſt, be all glorie, praiſe, obedience, and thankeſgiuing, from this time for euermore. Amen.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Texts of Scripture expounded or applied.
            
               GEn.

                     1. 1. pag. 121.
                     3. 5. 6. p. 417.
                     9. 21. p. 212.
                     12. 13. p. 212.
                     15. 5. p. 288.
                     15. 13. p. 206.
                     20. 5. p. 212.
                     49. 1. 2. p. 38.
                  
               
               Exod.

                     3. 10. p. 140.
                     7. 8. p. 352.
                     7. 21. 22. p. 352.
                     19. 20. p. 140.
                     21. 1. p. 140.
                     32. 1. p. 414.
                  
               
               Leuit. 10. 11. p. 140
               Num. 24. 17. p. 171
               Deut.

                     42. p. 86.
                     31. 9. 19. p. 140.
                  
               
               Ioſu. 5. 5. p. 227.
               1. Sam. 8. 7. p. 140.
               2. Sam. 12. 9. pag. 212. 275.
               1. Reg.

                      3. 26. p. 377.
                     18. 13. p. 288.
                     19. 18. p. 187
                  
               
               2.

                     Reg. 18. 30. p. 38.
                     19. 4. 6. p. 38.
                  
               
               2. Chron. 26. 18. pag 410
               Nehe. 8. 8. 9. p 140
               Pſal.

                     1. 1. 2. pa. 10.
                     13. 20. 19. 8. p. 74.
                     22. 27. p. 276.
                     25. 5. p. 128.
                     26. 5. p. 210.
                     42 1, 2. p. 234.
                     48. 1. 8. p. 168, 169.
                     48. 5. 6. p. 234.
                     57. 3. p. 238.
                     72. 8. p. 276.
                     72. 17. p. 39.
                     73. 13. 16. 22. p. 33.
                     84. 1. 2. 10. p. 234.
                     105. 8, 9. p. 170.
                     106. 40. 41, 42, 43. p. 170
                     111. 9. p. 169.
                     119. 103. p 20.
                     119. 105. p. 74.
                     119 127. 130. pag. 20. 74.
                     133. 3. p. 169.
                     143. 2. pag. 363.
                  
               
               Prou.

                      7. 22. p. 19.
                     20. 9. p. 334. 354.
                     26. 5. p. 173.
                  
               
               Eccleſ. 9. 1. p. 334. 354.
               Cant. 6. 8. p. 264,
               Iſa.

                     30 21. p. 232.
                     35 8. p. 226. 231.
                     59. 21. p. 276. 282.
                     60. 11. p. 196. 206.
                     61. 9 p. 176. 177. 256
                     63. 9. p. 170.
                  
               
               Ier.

                     7. 5. pa. 380.
                     17. 29. 30. p. 39.
                     31. 31. p. 232,
                  
               
               Dan.

                     2. 44. pa. 29. 168. 170.
                     9. 20. p. 363.
                  
               
               Malac. 2. 7. p. 112 140.
               Math

                     1. 1. 2. p. 39.
                     3. 12. p. 208.
                     3. 17. p. 257. 42.
                     4. 23. p. 57.
                     5. 14. p. 179. 181.
                     5. 15. p. 182. 184.
                     5. 18. p. 178.
                     5. 43, 44. p 141.
                     7. 1. p. 143
                     7. 6. p. 195.
                     7. 7. p 117.
                     7. 15. p. 253.
                     7. 16. p. 36.
                     7. 22, 23. p. 272.
                     7. 25. p. 167.
                     10. 5. pa. 55. 135. 190.
                     10. 7, 8. p. 272. 352
                     10. 23. p. 190.
                     10. 33. 186.
                     11. 30. p. 336.
                     12. 31. p. 57.
                     13. 25. p. 284. 378.
                     13. 30. p. 278. 290.
                     13. 37, 38. 43. p. 291.
                     13. 48. p. 208.
                     15. 11. 14. pa. 141. 249.
                     15. 24. p. 55.
                     16. 3, 4. p. 351.
                     166. 12. p 37. 141. 413.
                     16. 16. p 199.
                     16. 18. p. 129. 158. 159. 164.
                     16. 19. p. 307. 325.
                     18. 4. p. 268.,
                     18. 17. p. 145. 147. 193, 194.
                     20. 16. p. 208.
                     22. 10. p. 208.
                     23 2. pa. 138, 139. 143. 413.
                     23. 3. p. 36.
                     23. 5, 6. 13, 14. p. 142.
                     23. 15. p. 382.
                     23. 16. p. 141.
                     23. 2. 16. 17. 19. p
                           •
                        . 413.
                     24. 14. p. 178. 291.
                     24. 24. pa. 36. 280. 352.
                     25. 1, 2. p. 209.
                     26. 70. 72. 74. p. 188 212. 275.
                     28. 19, 20. p. 35. 41. 55. 113. 135. 150 163. 179. 190. 126 199. 130. 131. 173
                  
               
               Mark.

                     9. 24. p. 33.
                     16. 11. p. 311.
                     16. 15, 16. p. 41. 135 145, 146. 150. 181
                  
               
               Luke

                     1. 32. 33. pa. 168. 172
                     1. 74. 75. p. 407.
                     3. 23. p. 39.
                     3. 31. p. 39.
                     4. 18. p. 176.
                     9. 26. p. 186.
                     10. 11 p. 137.
                     10. 11. p. 146.
                     10. 16. pag. 36. 44. 126. 136. 137. 145. 268. 308.
                     10. 21. p. 203.
                     12. 32. p. 364. 414.
                     17. 5. p. 33.
                     22 32. p. 364.
                     22 48. p. 272.
                     24. 44. p. 277.
                  
               
               Iohn

                     2. 29. p. 39. 411.
                     3. 34. p. 410.
                     4. 1, 2, 3. p. 189.
                     5. 30. p. 257.
                     5 39. p. 10. 20. 74.
                     6. 27. p. 412.
                     6. 35. p. 24.
                     6. 37. p. 166.
                     6. 38. p. 257.
                     6 40. p. 166.
                     6. 44. p. 203.
                     6. 65. p. 203.
                     6. 68. p. 39.
                     6. 70 p. 272.
                     7. 48. p. 414.
                     8. 59. p. 189.
                     9 30. p. 189.
                     10. 1, 2 p. 411.
                     10. 4. 5. 8. p. 265. 412.
                     10. 16. p. 261. 265.
                     10. 28. p. 167.
                     10. 37. p. 412.
                     11. 32. p. 57.
                     12. 6. p. 272.
                     14. 27. p. 130. 134. 373, 388.
                     14. 26. p. 130. 134.
                     15. 24. p. 412.
                     16. 15. p. 130. 135. 137 388.
                     17 9. pa. 257. 264. 266.
                     17. 20. p. 131. 264. 266.
                     17. 21. p. 261. 264.
                     20. 31. p. 81. 351.
                     
                        
21. 16, 17. pa. 308. 391.
                     21. 22, 23. pa. 325. 326.
                  
               
               Acts

                     1. 4. p.
                     1. 6. p. 39. 310.
                     1. 8. p. 277. 294.
                     21, 2. p. 288.
                     2. 2, 3. p. 39. 133.
                     2. 5. p. 136.
                     2. 38. p. 205.
                     2. 41. p. 185.
                     2. 47. p. 128.
                     4. 12. p. 26.
                     5. 11. p. 128.
                     5. 36, 37. p. 280. 412
                     81. p. 189.
                     8. 4. pa. 288. 373. 204
                     9. 24. 25. p. 189.
                     9. 31. p. 129.
                     10. 3. 5. p. 185.
                     10. 15. p. 311.
                     10. 48. p. 190.
                     13. 46. p 205.
                     13. 48. p. 204
                     13. 51. p. 146.
                     14 23. p. 129.
                     15. 22. p. 128.
                     15. 29. p. 321.
                     17. 11. p. 249.
                     18. 19. p. 297.
                     19. 25. 29. 40. 41. p. 128.
                     20. 19. p. 278.
                     20. 28. p. 158. 254
                     20. 29. 30. p. 278. 285.
                     26. 12. p. 86.
                     26. 28. p. 183.
                  
               
               Rom.

                     1. 8. p. 369.
                     3. 2. p. 152.
                     3. 4. p. 99.
                     3. 22. p. 24.
                     4. 25. p 311:
                     6. 1. 14. p. 339.
                     6. 3, 4. 407.
                     6. 23. p. 39.
                     7. 21. p. 363.
                     8. 6. p. 61.
                     8. 9. 16. p. 21. 355.
                     8. 16. p. 354 355.
                     8. 30. p. 210.
                     9. 3 p. 207.
                     9. 6, 7. p. 107. 172.
                     9. 11. p. 257. 366.
                     10. 10. p. 186. 191.
                     10. 14 p. 32. 33. 113.
                     10. 14. 15. pa. 185. 233.
                     10. 17. p. 114. 129.
                     11. 5. p. 257.
                     11. 26. p. 282.
                     11. 2. 7. p. 207.
                     12. 5. p. 261. 266.
                     13. 3. 4. p. 275.
                     16. 5. p. 129.
                  
               
               1. Cor.

                     1. 1. 2. pag. 340. 349.
                     15. p. 379.
                     1. 26. p. 414.
                     2. 9. p. 102 113. 409
                     2. 14. p. 232. 236.
                     2. 16. p. 60. 102.
                     3. 11. p. 298.
                     3. 17. 159. 267. 167 270.
                     5. 1. p. 267. 340.
                     5. 4. 5. 13. p. 209.
                     5. 11. 12. p. 147.
                     6. 1. 5. p. 340.
                     6. 4. 5. p. 148.
                     6. 11. p. 407.
                     10. 17. p. 261. 266.
                     11. 16. pa. 26. 129. 155.
                     12. 28. p. 128.
                     13. 3. p. 334.
                     14. 23. 25. p. 186.
                     14. 38. p. 25. 26.
                     15. 9. p. 128.
                     15. 11. p. 311.
                     15. 12. p. 340.
                     15. 14. 17. p. 311.
                  
               
               2. Cor.

                      1. 1. p. 349.
                     2. 10. 245.
                     2. 11. p. 109. 112.
                     10. 10. p. 348.
                     11. 14. p. 108.
                     13. 5. p. 354.
                  
               
               Gal.

                     1. 1. p. 185.
                     1. 8. pag. 105. 106. 114. 126. 137. 274. 413.
                     1. 16. p. 414.
                     2. 16. p. 24.
                     3. 4. 5. p 311.
                     4. 4. 5. p. 365.
                     4. 6. p. 21.
                     5. 20. 21. p. 49.
                     6. 16. p. 172.
                  
               
               Epheſ.

                     1. 1. p 265.
                     1. 4. p. 407.
                     1. 21. 22. p 129. 158.
                     2. 8. p. 24.
                     2. 12. p 297.
                     2. 13. p. 294.
                     4. 5. p. 28
                     4. 14. p. 254 390.
                     4. 18. p 61. 390.
                     5. 22. 25. p. 254.
                     5. 23. pa. 129. 158. 160.
                     5. 25. 27. 29. 32. px. 158. 160. 254
                     5. 27. p. 265.
                  
               
               Phil.

                     1. 3. 5. 6. pa. 379.
                     1. 18. p. 142.
                     2. 12. p. 336.
                     2. 21 p. 340.
                     3. 6. p. 128.
                  
               
               Col.

                     1. 2. p. 349.
                     1. 6. pa. 278. 290. 292.
                     1. 24. p. 129.
                     3. 18. 19. p. 142.
                     3. 20. p. 144.
                  
               
               1. Theſſ.

                     1. 8. pag. 379.
                     5. 21. p 253.
                  
               
               2. Theſſ.

                     2. 4. pag. 292.
                     2. 3. p. 290. 413.
                     2. 7. p. 382.
                     2. 9, 10, 11, 12. p. 19. 72. 114. 115. 205 247. 352. 383.
                  
               
               1. Tim.

                     1. 5. p. 334.
                     1. 20. p. 300.
                     2. 2. p. 312.
                     2. 3. 4. p. 53. 55. 57. 180. 185.
                     3. 15. pa. 128. 151. 161.
                     4. 10. p. 53. 58.
                  
               
               2. Tim.

                     1. 15. p. 300.
                     2. 19. p. 265.
                     3. 9. p 278. 279.
                     3. 16. 17. p. 96.
                  
               
               Tit. 2. 4. pa. 257.
               Hebr.

                     2. 14. p. 257.
                     216. p. 257.
                     2. 17. p. 3
                           •
                        6.
                     415. p. 326.
                     54, 5, 6. p. 411.
                     10. 38. p. 268. 351.
                     11. 6 p. 23. 24. 157. 178.
                     13. 17 p. 143.
                     13. 20. p. 412.
                  
               
               Iames 4. 6. p. 268.
               1. Pet.

                     1. 25. p. 114
                     2. 13. p. 268. 275.
                     2. 18. p. 254.
                     3. 1. 7. p. 254.
                  
               
               2. Pet.

                     1. 10. p. 115.
                     1. 19. p. 74.
                     39. p. 53. 58. 59.
                  
               
               1 Iohn

                     2. 18. 19. p. 300.
                     4. 1. p. 109. 251. 274.
                     4. 6. p. 109. 112.
                     5. 3. p. 334. 363.
                  
               
               Iude verſ. 3. p.
               Reuel.

                     1. 20. p. 216
                     2. 5. p. 216.
                     2. 6. p. 300.
                     126 p. 171. 205. 293.
                     17. 1. p. 205.
                     17. 2 p. 114. 247.
                     21. 14. p. 297.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the Authors alledged.
            
               A
               An. Dom.
               RObert Abbot An Dom. 1596
               
               Adrian. 6. 1522
               
               Cornelius Agrippa 1550
               
               Albertus Magnus 1220
               
               Alexander Alexand. Epiſcopus 320
               
               Alphonſus a Caſtro 1546
               
               Alphonſ. Toſtat. Abulenſ. epiſc. 1430
               
               Guliel. Altiſsiodorenſis 1320
               
               Ambroſius Mediolan. epiſc. 380
               
               Anſelmus Cantuarienſ. epiſc. 1080
               
               Antoninus Florentin. epiſc. 1450
               
               Athanaſius Alexandr. epiſc. 340
               
               Auguſtinus Hippon. epiſc. 400
               
               Azorius 1580
               
            
            
               B
               Iohn Bule 1560
               
               Sebaſtianus Baccadius 1597
               
               Bartholomaeus de Piſis 1500
               
               Baſilius magnus 370
               
               Baſilienſe Conſilium 1430
               
               Beda 700
               
               Bellarminus 1575
               
               Bellum papale 1600
               
               Bernardus 1130
               
               Thomas Bilſon 1587
               
               VVilliam Biſhop 1603
               
               Gabriel Biel 1449
               
               Bolſec 1565
               
               Breidenbacchius 1580
               
               Bridget 1518
               
               Bonauentura 1260
               
               Boccacio 1375
               
               Bucchingerus 1542
               
               Burdegalenſ. monachi 1585
               
            
            
               C
               Thomas de vio Caietanus 1520
               
               Melchior Canus Canar-epiſc. 1560
               
               Edmundus Campianus 1570
               
               Ioannes Capreolus An. Dom. 1415
               
               Carthagin. Concil. 3 400
               
               Catechiſmus Trident. Concil. 1565
               
               Catharina Senenſis 1370
               
               Catharinus 1550
               
               Caſſianus 430
               
               Caſſander 1530
               
               Daniel Chamierus 1605
               
               Chalcedon. Concil. 455
               
               Girolamo de Catena 1586
               
               Chriſtophor. de Capite fontium 1570
               
               Chryſoſtom. Conſtantinop. epiſc. 400
               
               Clemens P P. 1342
               
               Clemens Alexandrinus epiſc. 200
               
               Cochlaeus 1519
               
               Codex Iuſtinian. 529
               
               Conſtantienſ Concil. 1417
               
               Ianus Cornarius 1540
               
               Cornelius Bitontinus epiſc. 1545
               
               Cyprianus Carthag epiſc. 250
               
               Cyrillus Alexandr. epiſc. 430
               
               Cyrillus Hieroſolymit. epiſc. 370
               
               Nicol. Cuſan. 1464
               
            
            
               D
               Ioan Damaſcenus 700
               
               Declaratio motuum VViſbic. 1601
               
               Decretorum liber 1151
               
               Didymus Alexandr. 360
               
               Dionyſ. Areopag. noth 100
               
               Dionyſ. Carthuſian. 1460
               
               George Downam 1598
               
               Guliel. Durand. 1236
               
            
            
               E
               Epiphanius Salam. epiſc. 390
               
               Eraſmus Roterodam. 1528
               
               Eugenius 4. 1430
               
               Euſebius Caeſarienſ. epiſc. 320
               
               Extra Ioan. 22. 1315
               
            
            
               
               F
               Iohn Field An. Dom. 1606
               
               Ioan. Fernelius 1547
               
               Ioan. Ferus 1554
               
               Franciſc. Feuardent. 1584
               
               Ioan. Fiſher Roffenſ. epiſc. 1530
               
               Ioan. Foxe 1567
               
               Fulgentius 500
               
               VVilliam Fulk. 1576
               
            
            
               G
               Galfridus Momunet. 1152
               
               Gaudentius 400
               
               Gerſon 1429
               
               Genebrardus 1530
               
               Gloſſa. interlin. Anſel. Laud. 1100
               
               Gloſſ. ordin. Strab. Fulden. 840
               
               Goulartius 1590
               
               Gregorius P P. 1. 590
               
               Gregor. de Valentia 1580
               
               Gregor. Nazianzen. epiſc. 380
               
            
            
               H
               Haymo Halberſtadt. 820
               
               Heruaeus 1560
               
               Hieronymus Stridon 390
               
               Hilarius Pictauien. epiſc. 350
               
               Holinſhead 1570
               
               Holcot 1350
               
               Booke of homilies 1560
               
               Hoſius Cardinall 1530
               
               Hugo Cardinal. 1240
               
               Lady Hungerfords medita. 1605
               
            
            
               I
               Ignatius 100
               
               Illyricus 1540
               
               Irenaeus 180
               
               Iſidorus Clarius 1540
               
               Ianſenius Gandau. epiſc. 1581
               
               Ieſuits Catechiſme 1590
               
               Ieſuiticae Conſtitut. 1573
               
               Iuſtinus Martyr. 160
               
            
            
               L
               Petrus Lombard. epiſc. 1140
               
               Leo P P. 1. 450
               
               Lucas Brugenſ. 1530
               
               Martin. Lutherus 1520
               
               Nicolaus Lyranus 1320
               
            
            
               M
               Maccdonius 500
               
               Maffaeus An. Dom. 1590
               
               Maldonatus 1572
               
               Marſilinus Patauin. 1324
               
               Martialis Burdeg. 100
               
               Gregory Martin 1582
               
               Philippus Melanchth. 1530
               
               Arias Montanus 1570
               
               Philippus Mornaeus 1580
               
               Mileuitan. Concil. 407
               
            
            
               O
               Guliel. Occham 1320
               
               Oecumenius 1050
               
               Opus imperf in Math. 450
               
               Optatus Mileu. epiſc. 380
               
               Origines. Adamant. 200
               
            
            
               P
               Pacianus Barcel. epiſc. 380
               
               Pagninus 1532
               
               Panormitanus 1470
               
               Paphnutius. 320
               
               Paſchaſius 500
               
               Petrarcha 1330
               
               Petrus de Alliaco 1400
               
               Philo Carpath. epiſc. 410
               
               Picus Mirandula 1494
               
               Pius P P. 5. 1566
               
               Pighius 1525
               
               Pizamanus. 1497
               
               Platina 1451
               
               Polycarp. Smyrnen. epiſc. 140
               
               Polydorus Virgil. 1525
               
               Prateolus 1568
               
               Prierias 1530
               
               Proclus Conſtantinop. epiſc. 430
               
               Proſper Aquitan. 450
               
               Pſellus 400
               
            
            
               R
               Rhabanus Maurus 850
               
               Reuelation of Religion 1605
               
               Rhemiſh Teſtam. 1582
               
               Iohn Reynolds 1580
               
               Ruffinus Aquileienſ. 390
               
            
            
               S
               Alphonſus Salmero 1597
               
               Nicolaus Sanderus 1569
               
               Ioan. Scotus 1308
               
               
                  
Sixtus Senenſis An. Dom. 1570
               
               Smidelinus 1560
               
               Dominicus Sotus 1554
               
               Sozomenus 430
               
               Speculum exempl. 1605
               
               Staphylus 1560
               
               Didacus Stella 1560
               
               Mathew Sutcliffe 1590
               
            
            
               T
               Tertullianus 200
               
               Theod. Cyrenſ. epiſc. 440
               
               Theophylact. Bulgar. epiſc. 900
               
               Thomas de Aquino 1260
               
               Trident. Concil. An. Dom. 1545
               
               Turrianus 1580
               
               Ioan. de Turrecremata 1460
               
            
            
               V
               Vatablus 1545
               
               Vega 1568
               
               VVhitaker 1586
               
                Anno Mundi.
               Ariſtoteles 3640
               
               M. Tullius Cicero 3980
               
               Homerus 3003
               
               Virgilius 3998
               
            
         
         
            A TABLE OF THE CHIEFE MATTERS contained in the Treatiſe and Anſwer.
            
               A
               THe Academickes denied that there is any truth to be knowne. pag. 80.
               All, often was put for euery kind. p. 57.
               Allegories are not fit to prooue points of doctrine. p. 264.
               Boniface 3. the firſt reuealed Antichriſt. p. 330.
               Antichriſt reuealed, bare ſway ouer all men and their writings. p. 387.
               The Apoſtles were abſolutely to be heard, as well ſeuerally as ioyntly. p. 36. 43. 44. 112. 127. 137. 177.
               No ioynt cōſent in teaching required of the Apoſtles or any Miniſters. p. 127.
               Sought to many natiōs, were not ſought to by them. p. 179. 186.
               Were the light of the world. p. 181.
               Seuerally euery of them. p. 182.
               Did not enlightē the world by any ioint act of them all together. p. ead.
               Were not beleeued, becauſe they were ſent by the Church, but for their doctrine. p. 185. 235. 239. 240. 243.
               Might and did flie in time of perſecutiō. p. 190.
               Looked for an earthly kingdome. p. 39.
               Yet were in the ſtate of grace by reſting vpon Chriſt for ſaluation. p. ead.
               Thought it vnlawful to impart the Goſpell to the Gentiles. p. 311.
               Were ouer come by the gates of hell, according to the doctrine of Popery. p. 166.
               Apoſtolickneſſe, what it is, according to the Papiſts. 297.
               Apoſtolickneſſe of a Church, not eaſie to be knowne to all men. p. 296.
               Vnpoſſible to be known, but by report. p. ead.
               True Apoſtolicke ſucceſſion is in Apoſtolicke doctrine. p. 298. 292. 293.
               Arianiſme was very vniuerſall, and of very long continuance. p. 292.
               Ariſtotles Phyſicks ſet out, as if they had not bin ſet out. p. 81.
               
                  
The maine Aſſumption of the general Syllogiſme. p. 218.
               Anſwer to the generall Analyſis. p. 6, 7.
               Our anſwers are commonly ſo long, that few find leiſure to reade them. p. 7.
               Authority how a meanes to beget faith. p. 60.
               One man of authoritie and learning drawes many atter him. p. 121.
            
            
               B
               To beleeue in Chriſt, what it is. p. 26.
               To beleeue the Catholick Church, what it is. p. 156.
               We do not beleeue in ye church, becauſe that were to equal it with God p 157.
               They that truly beleeue in Chriſt, ſhall not erre out of the way that leadeth to euerlaſting life. p. 232.
               Beleefe how wrought p 362.
               No man is forced to beleeue. p. 361, 362.
               No man withheld from beleeuing by God. p. 58.
               A man may deliuer the truth, and himſelfe not beleeue. p. 112.
               Beleeuing expreſly, implicitè. p. 44, 45.
               To beleeue, that is, to aſſent, is not in the power or choice of mans will. p. 40.
               For what reaſon we muſt beleeue or aſſent to the truth p. 30. 31. 42. 43. 47.
               True beleeuers cannot be ſeparated frō Chriſt by death. p. 167.
               Misbeleeuing and obſtinately not beleeuing, differ much. p. 39.
               Misbeleeuing how far daminable. p. 51.
               Obſtinatly not beleeuing, how not dam nable. p 39. 40. 49.
               Refuſing to beleeue againſt conſcience, alwayes damnable. p. 40. 41.
            
            
               C
               Catharin foreſaw the Councell of Trent would be miſunderſtood. p 323.
               Catholick what it ſignifieth. p. 280. 281.
               Few ordinarie Papiſts know. 280.
               What the Catholike Church is, & why ſo called. p. 280. 283. 284. 285. 286. 374.
               Not all one with Romane. p. 7.
               As Papiſts vnderſtand it a meere name. p. 187. 199. 373. 407.
               Said to be Catholicke in ſixe reſpects. p. 281.
               In reſpect of al places & perſons. p. 285.
               Catholickneſſe ſeldome taken for vniuerſalitie of time. 281. 373.
               No particular Church Catholick, as Papiſts vnderſtand Catholick p. 3.
               The Church before our Sauiours comming not Catholicke, as the Papiſts teach p 281.
               The Catholicke Church continueth frō Adam to the end of the world. p. 160 164. 281.
               The church not called Catholick by any autor within the firſt 200. years. p. 283.
               No man called a Catholick in the Apoſtles time. p. 282.
               The word Catholicke not vſed in the Scriptures. p. ead.
               The title Catholicke not giuen to any of the Epiſtles by the Apoſtles themſelues. p. ead.
               The teaching of the Catholicke Church the rule of faith. p. 61. 151.
               Teaching contrary to the Catholicke Church, how farre accurſed. p. 106.
               The Catholick Church is as wel in heauen as in earth. p. 6. 8.
               Not viſible. p. 209.
               The Proteſtāts church Catholick. p. 408.
               The Church what it is. pag. 6. 10. 26. 71. 150. 169. 170. 175. 199. 225. 393.
               Not the Clergie onely. p. 71. 123. 131.
               Papiſts define it with relatiō to the Pope of Rome. p. 200.
               A Councel of Biſhops ye Popiſh Church. p. 136. 150.
               All profeſſors are not the true Church. 177.
               The congregation and gouernours are properly the Church where they liue. p. 148. 227.
               
                  
Diuers ſignifications of ye word Church. 127. 128. ſee Eccleſia.
               All beleeuers. p. 120. 210.
               The elect beleeuers liuing in the world. p. 201. 210.
               Generally a companie, aſſembled or not aſſembled. p. 210.
               Where the Church is to be ſought p. 61.
               To be knowne only by ye ſcriptures. p. 56
               How it is to be knowne p. 221.
               How the pillar and ground of truth. pa. 151. 152.
               Built and founded vpon the truth. p 154.
               The faith therof how far to be enquired after. p. 14.
               The authoritie thereof how farre to be yeelded to. p. 45. 50 54. 91. 111. 151. 246. 250. 275.
               A maine deluſion and needleſſe. p. 67. 72 90. 104. 238. 239.
               Cannot make that damnable, which is not ſo of it ſelfe. p. 49.
               Increaſeth the ſinne of not beleeuing, when it determineth truly p. 49.
               Not ſpoken of in the old teſtament. p. 97
               How far commended to vs by the Scripture. p. 96. 97.
               How Auſtin was moued to beleeue by the authoritie of the Church p. 93.
               The authoritie of the Church is great in matters not to be decided by ſcripture. p. 95. 96. 155. 250.
               The teſtimonie and authoritie thereof is but humane. p. 242. 243.
               What it is for a man to make himſelfe iudge ouer the Church. p. 249.
               Not to heare the Church. p. 147.
               All Churches may erre. p. 6. 46. 135.
               What is neceſſary to the being of a true Church. p. 239.
               Many reprobates are members thereof according to the Papiſts. p, 164.
               Outward profeſſion enough to make a man a mēber thereof according to ye Papiſts. pa. 23. 123. 224. 264. 272. 350.
               Why we ought to ſeeke for, and ioyne our ſelues to a true Church. p. 219. 234.
               Gods true publicke worſhip cannot ordinarily be performed but in a true Church. p. 219.
               The Church not holding the foundatiō of ye Apoſtles doctrine is to be left. p. 14
               Truth of doctrine in points fundamental, a certaine marke of a true church. p 240. 249.
               Succeſſion to the Apoſtles in doctrine makes Churches Apoſtolicke. p. 301.
               Was neuer without ſome diuerſitie of opinions among the learned. p. 311.
               The Church erred in diuers points within the firſt ſix hūdred years. p. 163.
               How it is one. p. 158. 160. 201. 215. 263. 264. 266. 284. 309. 318.
               The Proteſtants Church is one. p. 406. Adam, Abel, Enoch, &c. were of the Proteſtants Church. p. 341. 353.
               No writer within the firſt thouſand yeres agrees with the Papiſts of the Councell of Trent in all points. p. 341.
               The Popiſh Church hath not yet determined all points. p. 14. 375.
               The Church yt ignorant Papiſts beleeue, is a Prieſt or a Ieſuit. p. 15. 16. 17. 71.
               The Papiſts circle of the Scripture & the Church. p. 72. 91. 244. 246. 261. 413
               How a whole Church may be counted holy. 271.
               Many thouſands neuer had knowledge of any Church. p 55,
               No man can certainly know that there is any true Church but by the Scriptures. p 244.
               The Church hath properly to do with none but Chriſtians. p. 90. 193.
               The Church was confined to Africke by the Donatiſts. p. 3. 173. 216. 288.
               It is not all one to be in the Church and of the Church. p. 212.
               What it is to ſit in Moſes chaire. p. 140. 141.
               
                  
Who are meant by the Church beleeued in the Creed. p. 157. 158. 168. 175 210.
               The elect called are properly the church p. 158. 159. 165. 168. 211. 212. 213. 217 265.
               That Church is not viſible. p. 174. 177.
               To that onely is continuance promiſed. p. 217.
               The continuance of the Church dependeth vpō her being ioyned to Chriſt. p. 168.
               The Church in the Apoſtles time did not alwayes hold the ſame points of faith. p. 310.
               To beleeue in the Church, were to equal it with God. p. 157.
               The ceremonies before Chriſt were not continued without interruption. pag. 170. 227.
               Communion with a Church may be refuſed by ignorance without pride. p. 275.
               Confeſſion to a miniſter neither commanded nor forbidden by Proteſtant Churches. p. 342.
               Popiſh confeſſion rather prouokes men to ſinne, then reſtraines them from it. 342. 343.
               
                  Credere Eccleſiam and Credere Eccleſiae, not all one but diuers. p. 156.
               
                  Credere Deum, Credere in Deum, differ very much, p. 156.
               The perpetuall couenant. p. 178.
               Chriſtians how called Saints. p. 349.
               What makes a man ceaſe to be a Chriſtian. p. 273.
               There is no conſtraint vſed toward the will, either in good or in euill. pag. 344.
               How Conſtraint and Neceſſitie differ p. 344. 345.
               Councels may erre. p. 260.
               Are hard to be vnderſtood, and may be miſunderſtood. p. 11. 12. 323.
               Are bound to vſe all meanes of diſputation to find out the truth. p. 13.
               Deliuer ſome things as probable coniectures. p. 12.
               The courſe that hath bene and muſt alwayes be held by Popiſh generall Councels. p. 330.
               Whether the Councell be aboue the Pope or no, it is not determined. p. 14 15. 375.
               The Councell hath often depoſed the Pope. 324. 325.
               The Councell of Conſtance makes the Pope ſubiect to the decrees of Councels. p. 325.
               The Councell of the Elders among the Iewes. p. 148.
            
            
               D
               What it is to denie Chriſt. p. 190. 191. Alwayes damnable. p. 190.
               Moſt deuotion in Popery, where there is leaſt vnderſtanding. p. 27.
               Diſputation about points of Diuinitie neceſſary. p. 13.
               Diſſention among Papiſts about matters of faith. p. 321. 322. 324.
               Bellarmine diſſents in one point or other from almoſt all learned Papiſts before him. p. 319.
               Euery diſſent in opiniō makes not churches ceaſe to be churches, or holy. p. 273.
               Diſſention is better then maintaining of falſe doctrine or worſhip. p. 319.
               Doubting of ſome points, how it ouerthrowes not religion. p. 50.
               How farre the doctrine of one that is lawfully ſent, may be examined. pa. 253.
            
            
               E
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   what it ſignifieth. p. 128. Any aſſembly. pag. ead. Eſpecially about matters of religion. p. ead. Generally all beleeuers. p. 129. 201. 210. Particularly ſeuerall congregations. p. 129.
               
                  
How arguments may be drawne from thoſe places where the word is vſed. p. 129. 130.
               Eccleſiaſticall gouernours to be obeyed when they commaund that which is right. p. 37.
               The Elect before the coming of Chriſt were choſen ordinarily out of the Iews, ſince, out of the Gentiles. p. 207.
               The Elect onely are truly called. p. 210. 211.
               May fall into grieuous ſin, and yet not ceaſe to be elect. p. 211.
               England not conuerted but peruerted by Auſtin the monke. p. 377.
               Popiſh errors crept in by little and little vnperceiued. p. 382. 383. 387.
            
            
               F
               Diuers ſignifications of faith. p. 6. 22. 28.
               Faith is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluatiō. p. 22. 25. 26.
               Faith for aſſent to the truth, what it is. p. 35. 319.
               May be had without the autoritie of the Church, p. 104. 113.
               Is in ſome greater, in ſome leſſe. p. 31.
               Goeth before iuſtifying faith. p. 33.
               Is accompanied with doubting. p. 32. 33
               Perfection thereof is to be labored for. p. 32.
               Is tied to the Scripture, not to ye church. p. 46.
               May come by the preaching of the ſchiſmaticks or heretickes. p. 34.
               Not to be built on the teſtimonie of man. p. 329.
               How it is one. p. 30. 31. 47. 51.
               Entire and infallible faith neceſſarie to ſaluation. p. 73.
               How faith may be begotten. p. 25. 26. 33 34. 60. 66. 75. 76. 113. 114. 235.
               Is to be learned of the Miniſters, not of the Church. p. 234.
               Matters of faith according to Poperie. 311. 320.
               Are indeede to be proued by ſcripture. p. 250. 319. 320.
               Fundamentall points of faith. p. 40. 239.
               Obſtinately not beleeuing them damnable. p. 40.
               No matter of faith according to Poperie, till within theſe laſt 800 yeares, 320. 321.
               All popiſh faith dependeth vpon the authoritie of the Church. p. 25.
               The rule of faith what properties it muſt haue. p. 61. 63. 64. 94. 108.
               Eaſineſſe to be vnderſtood no propertie of the rule. p. 74 94.
               How farre the rule need be vnderſtood. p. 65 94.
               All truth muſt be prooued by the rule. p. 84. 87. 115.
               What points the rule muſt reſolue, and how farre. p. 84.
               Naturall wit and learning cannot be the rule of faith p. 98, 99, 100.
               No priuate ſpirit can be the rule of faith 105.
               The teaching of the Catholicke Church the rule of faith. p. 61. 122. 42.
               He that hath Popiſh faith may be damned. p. 23.
               Iuſtifying faith, what it is. p. 24.
               It is in the wil. p. 33.
               The iuſt liues by faith; and where there is faith there is life. p. 273.
               Liuely faith may be in him that is ignorant, or miſinſtructed in many points. p 274.
               The foundation of the Apoſtles doctrin is ouerthrowne by Poperie. p. 375.
               Faſting not condemned, but eſpecially commended by Proteſtants p. 342.
               A Popiſh faſt may be kept with gluttonie and drunkenneſſe. p. 342. 366.
               The interpretations of the Fathers reuerenced by the Proteſtants. p. 80.
               Frieries and monaſteries. p. 357.
               Saint Francis fiue wounds. p. 358.
            
            
               
               G
               God calleth all men from damnation. p. 56.
               Decreed all things, that are or ſhal come to paſſe. p. 345.
               Worketh not alike in good and euill actions. p. 345.
               The glorie of God is the end of all religion. p. 290. 296.
               The heathen had one ſoueraigne God aboue all the reſt. p. 387.
               To whom the reſt were mediators of interceſſion for their fauorites, as the Popiſh Saints are. p. 387.
               How we may know, that there is a goſpell. p. 245.
               The doctrine of the Goſpell is ſimply neceſſarie to ſaluation, not the books of the foure Goſpels. p. 243.
               The Goſpell hung about the necke for a preſeruatiue. p. 78.
               Many nations in Auſtins time had not heard the Goſpell. p. 55.
               The Fathers thought the world ſhould end preſently after the preaching of the Goſpell in all places. p. 55.
               Many thouſands died in the Apoſtles time, ere they could by any meanes heare of the Goſpell. p. 181. 182. 183.
            
            
               H
               Herefie what it is. p. 220.
               A worke of the fleſh. p. 52. 118.
               May be more generall, for a time, then true religion. p. 293.
               No man can certainly know how long any hereſie ſhall continue. p. 293.
               Hereſies ſpring from miſunderſtanding the Scripture. p. 119 300.
               May by it be conuinced. p. 119.
               Great hereticks haue had lawfull calling to the miniſterie. p. 36. 411.
               Hereticks pleade all for themſelues, that Papiſts do. p. 119.
               They that refuſe to make triall of their doctrine by Scripture, are hereticks. p. 220.
               Some hereticks haue continued a long time in one and the ſame doctrine. p. 263.
               Hereticks may be free from all groſſe outward ſinne. p. 275.
               The firſt 400. yeares were moſt fruitfull in monſtrous hereſies. p. 305.
               Some hereticall Churches, may be true Churches. p. 219.
               Some heretickes could pleade perſonall ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles. p. 299.
               Any hereticall Church may haue as good meanes to end controuerſies, as the Church of Rome hath. p. 313.
               Holineſſe whence it ſpringeth. p. 21. 360.
               Onely true inward holineſſe can make a man a true Chriſtian. p. 269.
               Holineſſe is reſident onely in ſeuerall perſons, not in a companie. p. 270. 249.
               Is inueſted in the Popes perſon. p. 356.
            
            
               I
               Compariſon betwixt heatheniſh & Popiſh Idolatrie. p. 386. 387.
               Diſtinction of Idoll and Image. p. 386.
               Papiſts worſhip the Image it ſelfe. p. 386.
               No religious vſe of any Image to be allowed. p. 360.
               Ignorance the ſtrength of Poperie. p. 4. 70.
               All ignorance is not hereſie. p. 50.
               How it ſhuts men out from ſaluation. p. 40. 44 49. 50. 274.
               Ignorance can excuſe no man, the Goſpell being preached euerie where. p. 113.
               Ieconiah childleſſe. p. 39.
            
            
               K
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . p. 283.
               The keyes and power to bind and looſe common to all the Apoſtles. p. 325. 326.
               
                  
Why kings are called humane creatures. p. 274.
               He refuſeth not to be ſubiect to the king that doth not abſolutely obey him in all things. p. 275.
            
            
               L
               The Lawe cannot be kept perfectly. p. 363.
               How it is not gricuous. p. 363.
               One learned mans iudgement oftentimes drawes many to it. p. 250.
               The Leuen of the Phariſies what it is. p. 37. 141.
               No life but in the bodie of Chriſt. p. 273
               The light muſt ſhine to them that are in the houſe. p. 182.
               The loue of God whence it ariſeth. p. 20
               Is not alike to all. p. 257.
            
            
               M
               Gregory Martins eauils were anſwered long ſince. p. 69.
               Markes of the Church. p. 221. 222. 226. 259.
               Muſt be proper to it always. p. 222. 280.
               Eaſier to be knowne then the Church it ſelfe. p. 222. 223.
               True doctrine in the fundamētal points is a ſure marke of the Church. p. 228. 229. 301. 374. 375.
               The Maſſe was brought in by peece meale. p. 384.
               Ouergreat zeale of Martyrdome. p. 189
               Meſsiah not Salomons ſonne. p. 39.
               The miniſtery, not the authority of men is vſed to beget faith. p. 6. 19. 234. 243 244.
               Needful for the inſtruction of the ignorant. p. 98.
               No charge, practiſe or warrant for any vniuerſal miniſtery ſince the Apoſtles time. p. 179.
               Luthers preuailing in his miniſtery, and his preſeruation wanted litle of a miracle. p. 355.
               Miniſters to be heard ſo farre as they ſpeake according to the Scriptures. p. 36. 112. 137. 142. 146.
               Yet leſſe danger not to heare them ſo ſpeaking, then not to heare the Apoſtles. p. 43 112.
               Origen preached before he was a Miniſter. p. 35.
               Antichriſts miracles. p. 114. 352.
               Miracles are often counterfetted. p. 352. 358.
               Preferred before the authoritie of the Church. p. 114.
               The vſe of miracles is to confirme doctrine, not to teſtifie of holineſſe. pa. 172. 351.
               There neuer was any true miracle wrought for confirmation of falſe doctrine. p. 115.
               Miracles are not to be beleeued for any doctrine againſt Scripture. p. 115.
               Falſe miracles cannot alwayes be diſcerned by men. p. 115. 352. 353.
               Luther and Caluin did not attempt the working of miracles. p. 355.
            
            
               N
               A naturall man what he is. p. 61. 236.
               Abſurdly called ſenſuall. pa. 60. 61. 236. 237.
               May vnderſtand the Scripture, though not beleeue it to ſaluation. p. 236.
               Neceſsitie, not conſtraint taught by Proteſtants. p. 344, 345.
            
            
               P
               Papiſts treaſon. Nouemb. 5. 1605. pa. 8. 346. 347. 379.
               The wickedneſſe of Papiſts teſtified by their owne writers. p. 340. 346.
               Papiſts reſt vpon the Pope and Councels. p. 51. 312. Are Phariſaicall boaſters. p. 338. 363.
               No Papiſt holding the authoritie of the Church, and the impoſsibilitie of the Popes erring, can be a good Chriſtian or a faithfull ſubiect. p. 72.
               
                  
Papiſts not ſonnes of God, but ſeruants of the law. p. 343. 364.
               Papiſts count murdering of Princes a meritorious worke. p. 361.
               Outward peace is not ſo t
                     ••
                  ch worth, as that for it the Church ſhould be corrupted with errors. p. 312.
               Muſt be prouided for by the ciuill magiſtrate. p. 312.
               Saint Peter the Popes Lord. p. 388.
               Why our Sauiour prayed eſpecially for him. p. 326.
               Why hee asked him thrice, if hee loued him. p. 327.
               Peters accepting of the ſoueraigntie, a poore proofe of his loue to Chriſt. p. 327.
               His ſuperioritie was in reſpect of age. p. 315.
               It is vncertaine whether euer he were at Rome or no. p. 328. 393.
               The Pope the Papiſts Lord God. p. 112.
               How he came to his height. p. 382.
               Head of the Church, though he beleeue not in heart. p. 23.
               He that is no Chriſtian may be Pope of Rome. 23. 111.
               The Pope cannot erre: p. 71.
               Can ſhew no charter for his not erring. p. 37. 71. 72.
               May erre, by the iudgement of Papiſts. p. 323.
               Euen with a generall Councell. p. 330. 331.
               It is not determined that the Pope alone cannot erre. p. 320.
               Pope Iohn 22. doubted of the immortalitie of the ſoule. p. 111.
               Pope Leo 10. counted the hiſtorie of Chriſt a fable. p. 111.
               Many Popes haue bene found to be Apoſtataes from the faith. p. 323, 324.
               Many decrees of Popes are contrarie one to another. p. 324.
               Pius 5. and Clement 8. 
                     •••
                  olue concerning the words of conſecration contrary to the Councell of Trent. pag. 324.
               Popiſh religion cannot hold vp the head without the Popes authoritie. p. 108.
               The Pope appoints the holy Ghoſt an office of his owne deuiſing. p. 388.
               Our Sauiour and his Apoſtles hid themſelues from perſecutors. p. 186.
               No neceſsitie to worſhip God publikly in time of perſecution. p. 190. 191.
               The Phariſes were blind guides. p. 249.
               To what purpoſe our Sauiors perpetual preſence ſerueth. p. 132.
               Predeſtination doth not take away free will. p. 361.
               Without true beleefe of predeſtination and iuſtification, there can hardly be any true religion. p. 290.
               Prayer for the dead. p. 96.
               How euery one that prayeth, receiueth. p. 116, 117.
               Preaching the ordinarie means of faith. p. 113. 409.
               No man might haue preached the Goſpell without warrant from God. pag. 113.
               How Luther may bee ſaid to haue firſt preached Chriſt. p. 392.
               Pride in oppoſition againſt a matter of doctrine, is ſometimes in a ſanctified man. p. 274.
               What outward profeſſion of religion is: how farre neceſſarie. p, 188, 189, 192.
               What it is to confeſſe with the mouth. p. 191.
               Falſe Prophets to be knowne by their doctrine. p. 36.
               How all propheſies in the ſcripture are alwayes true p. 206.
               Purgatorie ends with the world. p. 365
            
            
               Q
               Queſtions of religion how to be decided. pag. 61
            
            
               
               R
               Reaſon how farre it may be required in points of diuinitie. p. 16. 17. 18.
               Light of reaſon cānot find out all things neceſſarie to ſaluation. p. 25.
               The reaſon of Gods counſel and doings is oftentimes hid from men. p 204.
               Nothing againſt reaſon is to be beleeued without warrant frō God. p. 244.
               The religion of the Popiſh Church at this day is fetched from the Councell of Trent. p. 358. 377.
               Our Sauiour did not pray that the reprobate might be one with his father and him. p. 264.
               Reuelation of the ſpirit required by the Papiſts to beleeue that the Scriptures are the word of God. p. 245.
               The Church of Rome ſometimes a true Church. p. 338.
               Rome was not built in a day. p 382.
            
            
               S
               What is abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluatiō. p. 46. 55. 59. 65. 77. 188. 243. 319.
               Aſſurance of ſaluation. p. 150. 354.
               Sufficient meanes of ſaluation prouided for euery man. p. 53. 55. 58.
               Euery man hath not the meanes. p. 57.
               God will haue all men to be ſaued, not euery man. p. 53. 55. 57. 58. 203. 257.
               The meanes of ſaluation by Chriſt are ſuch as no man could deuiſe. p. 102. 103. 113. 235.
               May be knowne what they are by the Scriptures without faith, but not acknowledged to be true without faith. p. 235. 236.
               Contempt or neglect of ſome things not abſolutely neceſſary to ſaluation, may yet depriue a man of it p. 188.
               The graces of ſanctification ſhall make the enemies of Gods children acknowledge them. p. 179.
               That this mā is ſaued rather then that, it proceedeth frō the wil of God. p. 203.
               Sacrament what it is. p. 385.
               Adminiſtration of the ſacraments not abſolutely neceſſary to the being of a Church. p. 226. 227.
               All things that belong to the right adminiſtration of the ſacraments, are ſet downe in Scripture. p. 230.
               There haue bin 32. ſchiſmes in the Romiſh Church. p. 393.
               None are properly ſchiſmatickes but they that refuſe cōmunion with ſome true church. p. 275.
               Schoole-mens writings full of needleſſe and endleſſe queſtions. p. 20.
               All the ſchoolmen haue refuted ſome of their fellows, or bin refuted by them. p 313.
               Interprete and apply the ſcripture falſly. p. 118.
               Scribes why ſo called. p. 140.
               What is meant by Chriſts ſheepfold. p. 265.
               Similitudes how they argue. p. 50.
               Scripture the epiſtle of the Creator to the creature. p. 81.
               Acknowledged by Proteſtants and Papiſts to be the word of God. p. 87. 42.
               May be knowne to be ſo, by the matter. p. 89.
               Written for the inſtruction of all. p. 74. 79. 82.
               Of greater authority then any mans writings, or then all mens. p. 241.
               The bounds of the Church. p. 61.
               Ignorance thereof the cauſe of all euils. p. 119.
               Condemned by the Papiſts of hardneſſe and vncertaintie, and vnſufficiency. p. 11. 73. 79. 22
                     •
                  .
               Are not hard. p. 74. 75. 76. 77. 82. 94.
               Papiſts blaſphemies againſt the Scripture. p. 42. 5
                     •
                  . 81.
               Depriuing the people of them. p. 52.
               Hard places of Scripture muſt be expounded by the plaine. p. 79.
               
                  
Some places of Scripture ſo plaine, that they cannot be miſtaken. p. 79.
               Why ſome places of Scripture are hard, ſome eaſie. p. 76. 82.
               Scripture expoundeth it ſelfe. p. 82.
               Reading thereof may breed faith: how? p 25, 26. 34, 35, 36. 75, 76. 114. 235.
               Expoſition of the ſcripture not tied to the ſenſes of the fathers. p. 121
               No expoſition to bee thruſt vpon the church, that cannot euidently be proued. p. 122.
               The ſcriptures left inſtead of the Apoſtles, to be aduiſed with in all points of faith. p 97.
               May be vnderſtood by naturall wit and learning. p. 102. 103.
               Papiſts glad to flie to the priuate teaching of the ſpirit to know the ſcriptures. p. 72. 245.
               Scripture why called Canonicall. p 106.
               Chriſtians doubting of the ſcripture, how to be dealt withall. p. 90.
               Atheiſts in the ſame queſtion how to be dealt withall. p. 90 92.
               Knowledge of ſcripture to be laboured for. p. 20. 74.
               How far the ſcripture muſt be knowne before the church. p. 244. 247.
               Many things required to the perfect vnderſtanding thereof. p. 73. 81, 82.
               This word Expreſly foiſted in by the Papiſts into the queſtion of the ſcripture. p. 88, 89, 100.
               The Hebrew and Greeke originals reiected by the Papiſts. p. 52.
               Interpretation of ſcripture. p. 73. 80. 82. 92. 101. 118. 120. 121.
               Scripture an abſolute rule for ſaluation. p. 7. 17. 96. 97. 322.
               How alone ſufficient to ſaluation. p. 65. 66. 73. 78 96. 97.
               Sufficient for all matters of faith and maners. p. 56. 67. 68. 83. 86. 87. 89. 94. 250. 260. 314 395.
               All parts of ſcripture not true in like ſenſe, nor of like neceſſitie to be beleeued p. 38
               By what argumēt the ſpirit perſwades vs that the ſcripture is from God. p 245.
               Priuat ſpirit when to be reiected p. 120.
               What ſpirits are to be tried p. 252.
               Who are to trie them. p. 254.
               Sins of infirmitie leſſe hainous then ſins of wilfulneſſe. p. 344.
               Suſpition without iuſt cauſe againſt chriſtianitie and ciuilitie. p. 72.
               What ſucceſſion is to be eſteemed. p 2. 393. 394.
               Succeſſion no good mark of the church. p. 394, 395.
               Proteſtants haue ſucceſſion, if Papiſts haue it. p. 392. 409.
            
            
               T
               The Engliſh Tranſlation reproued. p. 66
               Defended. p. 69. 70.
               Not held by vs to be infallible. p. 68. 94.
               The Rhemiſh Tranſlation hard to be vnderſtood p. 70.
               The vulgar Tranſlation corrupt in eight thouſand places, by the iudgement of a learned Papiſt. p. 52,
               Doubts concerning it. p. 71.
               The generall Analyſis of the Treatiſe. p. 4. 5.
               The ſumme of it. p. 54.
               What Traditions are to be held for Apoſtolicall. p. 
                     •
                  5.
               The ſpirit is to teach all truth: how? p. 130
               God doth not miraculouſly reueale all truth at once to any man. p. 313.
               Truth manifeſted by one ſimple man, is to be preferred before the iudgment of neuer ſo many wiſe and learned in a Councell. p. 249. 250.
               Truth muſt be receiued, though deliuered by euill men. p. 143. 144.
               Beleefe of euery truth is required as a dutie of ſanctification. p. 274.
               The truth hath had witneſſe of men

from time to time. p. 205.
               From whom truth is hid. p 82.
               Euidence of truth, not viſibilitie of the church the means of conuerſion. p. 204
               The ſpeedie conuerſion of great multitudes by preaching, a great argument of truth. p. 205.
               Truth with contention is better then agreement with Antichriſtianiſme p. 317
               Without truth the greateſt agreement is but a conſpiracy againſt God. p. 317.
            
            
               V
               The Proteſtants Churches haue meanes to continue vnitie. p. 314.
               Vniuerſalitie. p. 65. Cannot be ſeene but onely conceiued. p. 177. No certaine marke of the Church. p. 293.
               The ſtate of the queſtion concerning the viſibility of the Church. p. 197. 209. 219
               Viſibilitie of the Church. p. 174. 176. 198 202. 20
                     •
                  . 214.
               A Church may for a time be inuiſible: how? p. 202.
               And yet the flock and Paſtor know each other. p. ead.
               Why it was neceſſarie that the churches at the firſt ſhould be viſible. p. 204. 205
               The Catholicke Church inuiſible. p. 209
               To whom the churches are viſible. p. 216
               
                  Voluntas ſigni, beneplaciti. p. 58. 59.
            
            
               W
               The will of God ought to be a ſufficient reaſon of his doings to all men. p. 204
               Mans free-will preferred before Gods glorie by the Papiſts. p. 361.
               Men commonly wonder at that they vnderſtand not. p. 27.
               Good workes ſhall be rewarded, though not vpon deſert. 343.
               Good workes are not made meritorious by being dipt in Chriſts bloud. p. 365.
            
         
         
            Faults eſcaped.
            Page. 61. line. 16. for ſeene, read ſaid p. 69. l. 9. for which, r. with. p. ead. l. 11. Iſidorus Clarius, put out the comma. p 74. l. 4. in the marg for 13. r. 130. p. 80. l. vlt. for with. r which. p. 92. l. 28. for be, r. he. p. 93 l 26. for yours, r. you p. 96. l. vlt. for expreſly. r. properly. p. 
                  •
               7. l. 19 for rule, r. vſe. p. 119. l. 24. put out, ſay. p. 134. l. 17. in the mar. for vli. r. vbi. p. l. 1. in the marg. for 2, r. 1. p. 163. l. 10. for Church, r. Churches. p. ead. l. 13. for it, r. they. p. 180. l. 17. for haue men, r. haue all men. p. 144. l. 7. in the marg. for lib, r. lit. p. 223. l. 35. for hereticke, r. hereticks. p. 292. l. 5 in the marg, for Thophyl, r. Theophyl. p. 316. l 4. in the marg for Goulact, r. Goulart. p. 292. l. 27. for from, r. for. p. 298. l. 5. for intend, r. intended. p. 302. l. 27. for it ſelf, r. in it ſelfe. p. 307. l. 8. put out, in. p. 309. l. 20. for Chriſtians, r. Chriſtian. p. 321. l 22. for you, r. your. p. 331. l. vlt for implied, r. applied p. 339. l. 20. for and ſetled, r and partly ſetled. p. 347. l. 22. for his, r. a Popes. p. 347. l. 23. for his Maiſters, r. Pius 5. his. p. 352. l. 27. for rrow. r. trow. p. 354 l. 34 for be, r. he. p 367. l. 31. for is, r. it. p. 371. l. 17. for led, r. ved. p. 378. l. 1. for Ethelbat, r. Ethelbert. p. 380. l. 8. for and the, r. and becauſe the. p. 384. l. 4. put out at. 386. l. 22. for purpoſe, r. purple. p. 412. l. 30. for we, r. were.
         
      
   