
      
         
            
            
            X
                  •••
               phons treatiſe of houſeholde.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the reder.
            ☞ This boke of houſeholde, full of high wyſedome, written by the noble philoſopher Xenophon, the ſcholer of Socrates, the whiche for his ſwete eloquēce, and incredible facilitie, was ſurnamed Muſa Attica, that is to ſay, the ſonge of Athenes: is righte counnyngly tranſlated out of the greke tonge in to Engliſſhe, by Gentian Heruet, 
                  〈…〉
               , whiche boke for the welthe of this realme, I deme very ꝓfitable to be redde.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ Xenophons treatiſe of houſeholde.
            
               
                  I Harde vpon a time the wiſe Socrates cōmune of the ordryng of an houſe, ſpeakynge to one Critobulus, after this maner. Tel me Critobulus, is the ordrynge of an houſe the name of a ſcience, lyke wyſe as phiſike is, and maſons & carpenters crafte? So me thinketh, ſaid Critobulus. Whether than may we tell, what is the duetie, and the propre office, of the ordrynge of an houſe / like wiſe as we can tel of other craftes and ſciences? Me thynketh, ſaide Critobulus, hit longeth to a good huſbande, and a good ordrer of an houſe to guyde well and order his owne houſe. But yet, ſayd So. If one dyd put hym in truſt; & charge him to order his houſe, coude not he order hi
                  •
                as well as his owne, if he wolde? For he that hath a carpenters crafte well, he can worke aſwel for an other, as he can for hym ſelfe, & may not a good huſbande, wel experte in the ordrynge of an houſe, do lyke wyſe? Me

thynketh yes, good Socrates. Than a man, ſayde Socrates, that is well ſene in that ſcience, though he haue no ſubſtaunce / nor no goodes him ſelfe, may get his liuing, and haue good wages / if he wyll order an other mans houſe / as well as he that buildeth an houſe. In good fayth, ſayde Critobulus / he were worthy to haue very good wages, if he coude take an other mās houſe in hande / and do euery thyng / that belōgeth to hit; / and make the houſe better in goodes and in ſubſtaunce. But what do we meane by the houſe / whether is it nothyng els but the bare houſe / or whether all maner of thynges, that a man hath out of the houſe / be belongynge to the houſe? Me thinketh, ſayde Critobulus, that all though that that a man hath / be not within the towne / where he dwelleth / but in the coūtre / or any where els, that al dothe belonge to the houſe, what ſo euer a man hath. And is there not ſome men / that haue enmyes? Yes mary / and a great meiny to. And ſhal we ſay, that their enmyes be theyr goodes or ſubſtance? By my feyth it were a mery ieſte, if he that hath cauſed vs to haue mo enmyes than we had / wolde haue a rewarde for it beſyde, for by cauſe we haue iuged a mans houſe / and that that a man hath to be all one, Ye but I do

not accompt that amonge a mans ſubſtance and goodes, that is nought and hurtful vnto him, but that that is good and profitable.
            Than, as farre as I ſe, ye calle that a mans goodes and ſubſtaunce, that is profitable vnto him? Ye mary do I, and ſuche thinges as be hurtful, I cal them domages and not goodes. And what if a man bye a horſe, that he can not ryde / but fall downe from his backe, and ſo do hym ſelfe a diſpleſure, is not that hors his goodes? No by my faye, ſeinge thoſe thynges be goodes that be good. Nor the grounde than ſhall not be called goodes vnto a man / the which occupieth it ſo, that he hath domage by hit. Nor the grounde ſhal not be called goodes, if where that a man ſhulde be founde and noriſſhed by it / he dieth for hunger. Than it fareth like wiſe by ſhepe. If a man hath any domage / by the reaſon that he can not guyde them, nor order them as he ſhulde, the ſhepe ſhall not be goodes vnto hym? Me thynketh no. Than, as farre as hit ſemeth by you / ye call thoſe thīges goodes, that be profitable / and thoſe thynges that be hurtefull be no goodes? So me thynketh. Than one ſelfe thynge ſhalbe called goodes vnto him that can vſe it as he ſhuld / 
                  〈◊〉
                to hym that can not / it ſhalbe no goodes:

like wiſe as recorders be goodes vnto him / that can plaie on them ſomwhat according: but vnto hym that can not, they be no other wiſe good than ſtones, that be vnprofitable, excepte a man do ſelle them. And ſo lyke wyſe by the recorders / if we ſell them, they be good: but if we kepe thē, & can not occupie them, they be no goodes. We muſt nedes to agree in this tale, ſeinge we haue ſayd afore, that thoſe thinges, that be ꝓfitable be goodes. For the recorders / as lōge as we kepe them vnſolde / they be no goodes / for they do vs no good: but if they be ſold, they be goodes. Ye mary, ſayd Socrates, if one haue the witte to ſel them well. But if one do ſelle them, that can not order hym ſelfe / euen whan they be al redy ſolde, they be no goodes / accordīg to your tale. Me thīketh ye ſay ſir Socrates, that nor yet money nother is goodes, except a man can vſe it. So me thinketh / ye haue granted all redy, that thoſe thynges be called goodes / that a man getteth any profite by. But if a man dyd beſtowe his money vpon an harlotte, & that by the reaſon of dayly cōuerſation with hir, his body were he weker, his ſoule the worſe diſpoſed, and his houſe the worſe kepte and ordered, howe ſhulde money be profitable vnto him? It can not be in no caſe / excepte

parauēture we wil cal our goodes a poiſon, the whiche whan a man dothe eate of it, hit bringeth him out of his witte. But as for money / frende Critobulus / if a man can not vſe it as he ſhulde, let him caſt it away farre from him. For hit is nother profitable vnto him, nor may be called goodes. But as for frēdes, if a man can vſe them, ſo that he get ſome profite of thē, what ſhal we ſay yt they be? Goodes forſoth, ſaid Crito. & moche more thā ſhepe or oxen, ſeinge they be a gret deale more profitable. Than, accordinge to your tale, our enmis like wiſe be goodes vnto him / that can get profite of them. So me thinketh. And it is a point thā of a good huſbande and a good ordrer of an houſe, to haue away to vſe his enmies ſo, that he may gette ſome profette by them. In any caſe. For ye ſe well inoughe, good Critob. howe many meane mennes houſes / & howe many lordes & kyngis dominiōs haue ben increaſed and amplified by the reaſon of warre. Forſoth ſir Socrates, me thynketh ye haue verye well ſpoken in this matter, but what thīke you by this, whan that we ſe that ſom men, which haue ſciences, good wages / and good propreties, wherby they myght make their houſes the better, if they wold put thē ſelfe to it: yet we may wel ſe & perceiue they

woll not do it. And therfore we ſe, that the ſciēces and good propreties, that they haue, auayle them nothynge: whether than ſhall thoſe ſciences / that they haue / be accompted for theyr goodes and ſubſtance / or for ſomwhat els? Ye ſaid Socrates, me thinketh, ye meane that by bonde men / and by ſome vile parſons. No by my feythe I: but I ſpeake of ſome of them, that be honeſt mens ſonnes and gentilmennes to / the whiche I ſe, that ſome of them, that be experte bothe in thoſe thynges / that longe to warre and alſo to peace / yet they woll not put them ſelfes to none of them. and me thīketh, they ſhuld be in a better caſe, if they were bounde men. For I ſuppoſe, that they do not that that they ſhulde, for bicauſe they lacke maiſters to putte them to hit. Howe can that ſtande, ſaide Socrates, that they haue no maiſters, whan that they deſiring to lyue in welthe and felicite, and mynded to do that that wolde be for their ꝓfette: their lordes and ſuperiours do let them, that they ſhall not do it? And what be they, ſaide Critobulus, that be inuiſible, and yet order them thus? Nay they be not all ſo inuiſible, no, Iwis they be clere inoughe to euery mans ſight. And ye knowe well your ſelfe / they be moſte vngratious and moſte myſcheuous

of all, if ſlouthfulnes, ſluggardiſe / lacke of ſtomacke and quickenes, lacke of takynge hede, and alſo negligence may be taken for vngratiouſnes. And beſyde theſe there be other deceitfull ladies, the whiche do come in vnder the colour and name of pleaſures, playenge at dice and cardes, vnprofitable triflynge and kepynge company with vnthriftes / the whiche in proces of tyme do ſhewe playnlye vnto theyr adherentes, by them deceiued, that amonge pleaſures there is ſome wo and ſome ſorowe myngled. Theſe ladies kepe them ſo in ſeruage and thraldome, that they can not be ſuffred to do nothynge, that is for theyr profite. Ye but there be ſome other, good Socrates, the whiche haue no ſuche, to let them from their buſines / but rather applie them ſelfes well fauordly to their buſines, and ſeke, and imagin al the wayes poſſible to gette them good with al: yet they do ſtroye them ſelfes, miniſſhe their liuelode, & deſtroy their houſes: And as concernynge to fynde any remedye / they be at their wittes endes. And they alſo, ſayde Socrates, be lyke wyſe bounde men / as other be, and haue ouer them very ſore and cruell felowes to theyr maiſters. Some of them be in the thraldome of glotony, ſome of licorouſnes, ſome of dronkennes,

ſome of vayne pride / and coſtly vayne glorye / the whiche kepe their ſubiectes ſo ſore in ſeruitude and bondage, that as longe as they ſe them yonge and luſtie, and able to worke / they make them to brynge them all that euer they can gette / to beſtowe it vpon theyr luſtis and pleaſures. But whan they perceyue they be ſo olde, that they can not worke, than they lette them alone with a miſchiefe / to lyue wretchedly in theyr olde age, and ſeke other, that they may bringe in to their ſeruice lyke wyſe. But it beboueth gentil Critobulus / to ſtryue and fight with them for our owne libertie, none other wyſe than we wolde with them, the whiche / with naked ſwordes and weapons in their hādis, go aboute to brynge vs in thraldome and ſeruitude. Enmyes, if that they be good honeſt men / whan they haue brought ſome men in to theyr ſubiection, they cauſe many to be moche better, teachynge them to be reuly and tēperate, that afore were to high mynded and to fierce. But as for theſe ladies they neuer ceſſe, but be euermore puniſſhyng / beatyng / and turmētyng the bodies / the ſoules, and the houſes of them, that they haue vnder: and that they do as longe as they be their maiſtreſſes. Than Critobulus ſayde vnto hym after this maner. As for

this matter me thynkethe I haue harde you ſpeke ſufficiently in it. And whan I grope and ſerche well my conſcience, I finde, that me thynkyth / I can very well refrayne all maner of ſuche thynges. Wherfore if ye wyl gyue me counſeyle, howe doinge I may encreace & make my houſe better, I thinke / I ſhall be nothinge let of them that ye calle ladies. And therfore tell me with a good wyl, if ye haue any goodnes in this matter. Or els ye thynke parauenture, that we be ryche inoughe, and nede no more goodes. By my faith, ſaide Socrates, in dede, if ye ſpeake of me, I nede no more goodes, but I am ryche inoughe. But as for you Critobulus, me thinketh ye be very poure. And by the feyth I owe to god / I haue ſome tymes great pite of you. Than Critobulus laughyng ſaide: And I pray you for goddis ſake, if al your goodes were ſolde, what ſh
                  •••
               e 
                  •
               e ye haue for them? And what ſhuld I 
                  •••
               ue for myne, if I wolde ſelle them? I thynke, ſayde Socrates, that if I myght mete with a good byer / I ſhulde haue well for my houſe, and for all my goodes a. v. or vj. marke. But as for yours, I knowe very well, that ye ſhulde haue an hundred tymes more. And ye that knowe this, do ye thīke your ſelfe, that ye lacke no more goodes,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
and haue pitie of me, bycauſe of my pouerte. For that that I haue is ſufficient inough to fynde me that that is neceſſarie. But for to meynteyne your ſtate, and the worſhyp, that ye haue taken vpon you, me ſemeth / that if ye had foure tymes as moche more as ye haue, it were not inoughe. And howe ſo, ſaide Critobulus? Than ſaid Socrates: Fyrſte of al I ſe, that ye muſte nedes make many feaſtis and many great bankettes, or the people wyll ſkante abyde the ſighte of you. More ouer ye muſt receyue in to your houſes many ſtraungers, and intreate them honorably, kepyng good hoſpitalite. Furthermore ye muſt bydde many men to diner, and do them ſome pleaſure, or els at your nede ye ſhall haue no man to helpe you. More ouer I perceiue / that the cite of Athenes begynneth to put you to many greatte charges, as to fynde horſes, to he
                  •••
                to builde thinges longyng to the citie, to, 
                  ••
               ke muſters of mē, to cauſe goodly pageāt
                  •
                to be made, & goodly plaies to be plaide▪ But if there come in warre ones, I am ſure, they wyll haue ſo moche money frō you, what in taxes, what in ſubſidies, and what in preaſtis, that ye ſhall ſcante be able ta beare it. And if ye ſeme to paye ſomewhat leſſe than your power is, they woll punyſſhe you as

ſore, as thoughe they had founde you robbynge the cōmon treaſorie. Beſyde this, I ſe yt ye haue this opinion / that ye be riche / and that ye care not to get no more goodes / and that ye gyue your ſelfe to vayne and childiſſhe pleaſures, as ye may wel do, The which thīges do moue me to haue cōpaſſion of you, fearyng leſt ye fall in to ſome myſfortune, and into great pouerte without any remedye. And as for me, if I had nede / I trowe ye knowe verye well / that there be many that wold helpe me: in ſo moche that if they gaue me but euery man a littell, I ſhulde haue more than the degree of my lyuynge doth require. But as for your frendes, al though they haue more to kepe them in their degree, than ye haue for yours: yet they loke, that ye ſhulde helpe them.
            Than ſayde Critobulus, I haue nothynge to ſay agaynſt you in this matter: But it is time for you to inſtructe me with ſome good preceptes / to thintente that I be not ſo miſerable in dede, that ye may haue cōpaſſion on me with a good cauſe. Than ſayde Socrates: Do not ye thynke your ſelfe, that ye do a very ſtrange, and a maruailous thynge / that but a pratye whyle ago, whan I ſayde, that I was riche, ye lough at me / as though I knewe not what riches mened,

and neuer ſtynted / til ye had put me to a rebuke, and made me to cōfeſſe, that I had not the hundreth parte of that, that ye haue, and nowe ye byd me to inſtructe you / and ſet my diligence / that ye be not poure in very dede. For I ſe wel good Socrates, ſaid Critobulus, that ye haue in you the caſte to make a man ryche in dede, that is to make him haue plentie and abundance. And I truſte, he that of a litell thynge can make plentie and abundance, ſhal do hit moche more lightlier of many great thynges.
            Be ye not remembred of our cōmunyng a pratye whyle ago, whan I coude in no caſe contrarie your ſayinge: that to him that can not vſe horſes / horſes be no goodes vnto hym / nor lande / nor ſhepe / nor money / nor nothing els, and yet of ſuche thinges a man may get great profite and vantage? But as for me, howe do ye thinke, that I can vſe or order ſuche thinges, that hadde neuer none? But me thought, that all though a man had nother money, nor no goodis, yet there was a certaine ſcience of gydyng and ordryng of an houſe. And what letteth you, that ye may not haue the ſame ſcience? Loke what doth let a man to playe vpon recorders, if nother he had neuer none hym ſelfe / nor borowed none of no body: the ſelfe ſame impediment

haue I in the ordring of an houſe. For I nother neuer had inſtrumentes / that is goodes and money of myn owne to lerne by hit, nor there was neuer no bodye, that charged me with his goodes, to ouer ſe thē, or to order them / excepte ye parauenture be diſpoſed ſo to do. But ye knowe wel, that they that lerne firſte to play vpon an harpe, they ſpille the harpe: So if I ſhulde nowe lerne on your houſeholde / howe to kepe an houſe / I am aferde / leſt I ſhulde deſtroye your houſe. Ha, ye go about very buſily and redily to auoyde, that ye wol not helpe me to beare, and ſuſteyne with me parte of my buſines. By my fay that do I not: I woll be glad with all myne harte to ſhewe you al that euer I can. But I thinke this, that if ye came to my houſe for ſome fyre, and I had none / if I brought you to an other place, where ye myghte haue ſome, ye wolde not be diſpleaſed with me. And if ye came and aſked me water, and I hadde none, if I brought you in to a place, where ye myghte drawe ſome, ye coude not blame me. And if ye wolde, that I ſhulde teache you muſicke / if I dyd ſhewe you other men more experte in it than I am my ſelfe, and that wolde be gladde and fayne to teache you, what coude ye blame me, if I dyd ſo?

I coude not do it with a good cauſe. Therfore I wyll ſhewe you, that theſe thynges, which ye deſire ſo inſtantly of me, that there be other men more counnyng, and more experte in them than I am. And this I grāt you, that I haue hadde a greatte mynde to knowe, whiche were the moſte counnynge / and the mooſte experte in all the citie. For whan I dyd ſome tyme conſidre / that in one worke, one buſines, and one thynge doinge ſome waxed verye poure, and ſome verye riche, I marueiled, and me thought, it was a thynge to be well conſydered / howe that ſhuld be. And thus conſideryng, I founde, that this happened none other wyſe / than the thynge it ſelfe and reaſon wolde. For I ſawe, that they that behaued them ſelfes raſſhely in their buſines / had domage and loſſe by it: and they, that with diſcretion, witte, and good aduiſement applied theyr buſynes / broughte theyr matters to paſſe more quickely, more eaſily / and with more auantage. Of the whiche I thynke that ye may lerne / and ſo by the grace of god come to be a very riche man, with moche winning and lucre. Nowe by my faith I wyl neuer let you be in reſte, vntyll the tyme ye ſhewe afore theſe frendes of yours / that ye ſpeake of / that that ye haue promyſed me.
            
               But what wolde ye ſaye, if I dyd ſhewe you ſome men, the whiche haue builded for verye moche money / vnprofitable houſes / without any good caſte, or any good cōmoditie: and other that for leſſe coſte a great dele, haue made houſes / lackynge nothyng that longeth to an houſe / wyll ye not ſaye, that I do ſhewe you a poynt of a good ordrer of an houſe? Yes veryly ſaid Crito. What if I ſhewe you nexte and according to the ſame, that ſome men haue moche houſeholde ſtouffe / and of all ſortes, and whan they haue nede of it, they can not vſe it, but it is to ſeche, and they can not tell whether hit be luſte or ſaue leyde vp? And for this cauſe they be wonderſlye greued in theyr myndes, and vexe & trouble their ſeruātes, and nothinge els. And alſo other men, the whiche haue no more / but rather leſſe / haue euery thyng redy at hande / whan they haue nede of it. What ſhulde be the cauſe of it, gentil Socrates / but that the tone doth caſt aſyde euery thynge foliſſhelye, without any order: and the tother layth vp euery thinge in his place? There ye ſaide well / ſayde Socrates. And he not only ſetteth euerye thynge in his place / but alſo in ſuche a place as is mete and conuenient to ſet hit in.

Me ſemeth, ſayd Cri. that ye ſay, that this alſo is a poynt of a good order of an houſe. And what if I ſhewe you, that in one place al the bounde men & ſeruantes be tyed faſte, & yet they runne awaye often tymes: and in an other place they be loſed / wyllyng to abyde & labour with al theyr hartes, wyll ye not thynke this a good poynt of a houſe keper, worthy to be loked vpon? Yes mary, ſaid Critobulus, & very worthy to be loked vpon. And what if I ſhewe you houſbande men / of the whiche ſome complayne and ſaye, that they dye for hunger, for all theyr huſbandry, and ſome that haue plentie / of al maner of thynges neceſſary, by the reaſon of their huſbandry. Ye mary, ſayd Critobulus, parauenture they beſtowe their money and theyr goodes / not where they ſhulde / but in ſuche thynges as be hurtefull bothe to them and to theyr houſes. In dede there be ſome ſuche / ſayde Socrates / but I do not ſpeke of them, but of thoſe, the which cal them ſelfe huſbande men, and yet they can ſcant get their meate & their drinke. And what ſhulde be the cauſe of this gentyl So? I wyll bringe you vnto them, ſayde So. and whā ye ſe them, than ſhal ye lerne. Mary that wyll I, if that I can. Ye but

firſt ye muſte proue your ſelfe, if ye ſhall be able to knowe it, whan ye ſe them. It cometh in to my mynde nowe, that ye wolde riſe very yerly, and go a great waye, to ſe enterludes played, & that ye wolde intreate me nedes to go with you, but ye neuer had me to ſuche a ſighte. Than ye thinke, myne owne Socrates, that I am worthye to be laughed to ſcorne of you. Ye but of your ſelfe moche more. But what if I do ſhewe you ſome men / the whiche by the reaſon of kepyng of horſes, haue bene brought to exſtreme pouerte, and other / the whiche by the reaſon of hit, haue made them ſelfes ryche men / and haue gotten ſo great ſubſtāce, that they liue lyke lordes? I haue ſene them, and I knowe them bothe, but I haue neuer the more vantage for that. The cauſe of it is, that ye beholde them lyke wyſe / as ye loke vpon the plaiers of enterludes, not to thintēt that ye may be a poete, but for a paſtime & a recreation. And parauēture ye do well in that, for ye be not mynded to be a poete, but where ye be cōpelled to kepe and fynde horſes, wyll ye not iuge your ſelfe a foole, if ye go not aboute to ſtudie a remedie, that ye be not ignoraunte in that behalfe, ſeinge that the ſelfe ſame thynges be

good to the vſe, and profitable to be ſolde. Your mynde is that I ſhulde breke horſes? No by my faith it, no more than if ye wolde haue a good laborer, I wolde gyue you coū
               ſell to bringe hym vp of a childe. But there be ages bothe of horſes and of men, the whiche be immediately profitable / and do daily ſo growe, that they do more good one daye than an other. Furthermore I can ſhewe you ſome men, the which haue ſo vſed and ordred their wyues / that they comforte them and helpe them towarde the increſing of their houſe: and ſome that haue ſuche wyues, the which deſtroy vtterly the houſe, and ſo the moſte parte of men haue. But who is to be blamed for this / the huſbande or the wyfe / good Socrates? A ſhepe / if hit do not well, for the moſte parte we do blame the ſheperde. And a horſe moſte comonly / if he be ſkyttiſſhe, and do ſome diſpleſure, we blame the breker. And a wyfe lyke wyſe, if her huſbande teache hir well, if ſhe do not folowe it, ſhe is parauenture to blame. But if he do not teache her, if ſhe be rude / vnwomanly / and witles / is not he to be blamed? Yes by my faith, ſayde Cri. And ſeinge that we be frendes, & may ſpeke plainly betwene our ſelfes, Is there euer

any other wyſe man, that ye truſte & charge ſo moche in your buſynes, as ye do your wyfe? No forſoth, ſayd he. And is there any, that ye commune leſſe with, than ye do with her? No by my faith, and if there be any, they be very fewe. Ye maried her verye yonge / whan ſhe had nother ſene nor harde moche of the worlde. Wherfore hit were more to be maruailed at it, if ſhe knew and dyd as ſhe ſhulde / than if ſhe dyd amiſſe. Crito. They, the whiche ye ſay, haue good wyues, haue they taughte them ſo in dede? Socra. It is a thynge not to ſtande longe vpon. For I wyll brynge you my wyfe Aſpaſia / the whiche ſhall ſhewe you all this better than I my ſelfe. But me thynkethe that a wyfe, beinge a good companion / and a good felowe to her huſbande in a houſe, is very neceſſary / and within a littel as moche worthe as the huſbande. For commonlye goodes and ſubſtāce do come in to the houſe by the labour and payne of the man, but the woman is ſhe for the moſte parte, that kepeth and beſtoweth it, where nede is. And if theſe two thinges ſtande well to gether / and be wel ordeined, the houſes do increace, if not / they muſte nedes decaye.
            More ouer me thinketh, that I can ſhewe

you in all ſciences them, that do worke and labour, accordynge as they ſhulde, if ye thynke that it nedeth. But what nede you to reherſe them all good Socrates / ſayde Critobulus? For hit is nother poſſible for a man to haue worke men of all faculties / ſuche as ſhulde be, nor hym ſelfe to be experte in all. But as for ſuche ſciences / as be mooſte honorable, and maye become me well to occupie them / them I wolde ye dyd ſhewe me, and alſo thoſe men, the which applie them ſelfes vnto them. And ye of your ſyde helpe to teache me, and further me in them as moche as ye can. Ye ſpeke very well frende Critobulus, ſayde Socrates. For ſuche craftes, as be called handye craftes, they be very abiecte and vile / and littell regarded and eſtemed in cities and cōmon welthes: For they do deſtroye the bodies of thoſe, that do occupie them / whan they make them to ſytte euermore at home, and to be fedde vppe alwaye in the ſhade, and ſome make them to ſtande all the day ſtaryng on the fire. And whan the body is ones tender and feble / the ſtomacke and ſpirite muſte nedes to waxe a greatte deale the weaker. And agayne, they haue but ſmalle leyſure to ſette theyr mynde and diligence

to do theyr frendes any good, nor alſo the common welthe. Wherfore ſuche men ſeme to be but a ſmalle comforte to theyr frendes at a nede, nor no good men to ſuccour theyr countree in tyme of ieopardie. And for a ſuertie in ſome cities and common welthes, and ſpecially ſuche as be daylye in warre / hit is not lawfull to neuer a cyteſyn to occupie no handye crafte.
            And what faculties wyll ye counſayle me to vſe gentyll Socrates? So. Let not vs thynke ſcorne, nor be aſhamed to folowe the kynge of the Perſis. For they ſaye, that he / ſuppoſynge the ſcience of warre / and alſo of huſbandrye to be mooſte honorable / and alſo neceſſarye amonge other faculties, dothe regarde and exerciſe them wonderſly. And whan Critobulus harde that / he ſayde: Do ye thynke, that the kynge of Perſia carethe any thynge for huſbandrye? If we conſydre hit after this maner, ſayde Socrates, we ſhall parauenture come to knowlege, whether he dothe or not. For euery man graunteth, that he ſettethe ſore his ſtudie vpon ſuche thīges, as longe to warre. For it is apointed to euery lieutenāt & lorde of the coūtres

vnderneth hym, howe many men of armes, moriſpikes, bylles, archers, and croſbowes they ſhall haue redy in theyr wages, either to kepe his ſubiectes frō rebellion for feare, or to kepe the countre, if enmyes do inuade it. Beſide theſe he layth gariſons in all the towres and caſtels, and there is a capitayne apoynted to paye them truely theyr wages, and to ſe that there be no faute in hit. And the kynge cauſeth euery twelue monthe the muſters to be made of al them that be in his wages, and be apoynted to be redye in harneis at any tyme / and ſo bryngeth them all together, thoſe reſerued that be in gariſons, in to a place, that they call the place of congregation. And ſuche as be nighe his manour and his dwellyng place, he ouerloketh them hym ſelfe. But they that dwelle in farre countrees, he ſendethe thyther ſome, that he truſteth beſte to haue the ouer ſyghte of them. And thoſe heedes, rulers, and capitaines, whether they haue many or fewe vnder them, if they brynge forthe theyr full nombre / that is apoynted vnto them / well harneiſed and well horſed, and wel furniſſhed of al maner of thinges, he gyueth very great prayſe and honour to the lieutenantes and to the lordes, and gyuethe them many

great gyftes and rewardes, ſo that they be riche for euer. But whan he fyndeth / that his lordes, his lieutenauntes, and deputies haue no regarde to the capitaynes of his ſoudiours, but catche and polle, and care but onely for their owne vantage, he puniſſheth them ſore, he putteth thē out of their officis, and ſetteth other in their ſtede. In doinge thoſe thīges, there is no man that doubteth / but that he applieth his mynde and his ſtudie very ſore to warre. But beſide this / al the countrey / that is therby / where he dwelleth / he rydeth aboute hym ſelfe / takynge hede and markynge howe hit is tylled and laboured. But whan a countrey is ſo farre of, that he can not come to ſe it hym ſelfe / he ſendeth them, that he truſtethe beſte, to ouer ſe it. And whan he fyndeth, that his lieutenantes and deputies do kepe the countrey wel inhabited / the grounde wel plowed and laboured, full of ſuche trees as the countre wyll beare, he promoteth them to the rule of more coūtres, he gyueth them great preſentes, and dothe them great honour. But whan he findeth the countre deſerte and vnhabited, the grounde vntilled and vnlaboured, by cauſe of their negligence / wronges doinge, extorſions, & cruelties, he puniſſheth

them, he putteth them out of theyr offices / and ſetteth other in theyr rowmes. In doinge theſe thinges, do ye thynke, that he ſetteth leſſe his mynde to haue his countre wel replenyſſhed of dwellers, and well tylled and laboured / than that the ſoudiours ſhuld defende hit well? Moreouer of the lieutenantes and deputies / that he hath, One man hath not the charge of two thynges at ones. For ſome of them be apoynted to haue the ouerſyghte of the huſbande men and labourers / and to gether the tithes and tributes of them. And there be other, that haue the ouerſighte of the ſoudiours / and of the gariſons. And if the lieutenant of the gariſon do not his duetie in kepynge and defendynge the countree, he that is the lieutenaunt of the houſbande men and labourers / accuſeth the tother lieutenaunt, that they can not plie theyr worke for lacke of good defence. But if the lieutenaunt of the garyſon dothe his deutye / and kepethe the countre in peace, ſo that they may worke at theyr pleaſure / and the lieutenant of the huſbande men dothe not ſe to the countrey / that hit be well inhabited / and that the houſbande men applie theyr worke as they ſhulde, than the lieutenant of the garyſon

accuſeth him agayne. For whan the houſbande men do not labour well, the ſoudiours can ſcante gette vitayles / nor the kyng can haue his tribute. And in ſome countres of Perſia a great lorde, that they call Satrapa, occupiethe the rowme of bothe lieutenantes. Than ſpake Critobulus, and ſayde: If the kynge dothe, as ye ſay / he taketh as moche hede to huſbandrye, as he doth to warre. So. More ouer in what ſo euer countre he liethe / and where ſo euer he makethe his abydynge, he ſettethe his mynde to haue goodlye fayre gardeynes / that they calle in theyr tonge Paradiſe, fulle of all maner of thynges, that the erthe bryngeth forthe. And there he bydethe for the moſte parte / as longe as the tyme of the yere dothe not lette hym.
            Than by my faythe, ſayde Critobulus, ſeinge that he bydeth there hym ſelfe, he muſt nedes do his diligence, that theſe gardeynes maye be as fayre and as goodly as can be / well repleniſſhed with trees / and all maner of thynges / that the erthe can brynge forthe. And alſo ſome ſay, good Critobulus, ſayde Socrates, that whan the kynge gyueth any rewardes, that he calleth them fyrſte, that haue behaued them ſelfes

manly in the warres, bicauſe it were to none effecte to tylle and labour the grounde, excepte there were ſome, that ſhuld defende it. And nexte to them he callethe thoſe / that haue prouided / that the countre ſhulde not be ydell, but well occupied and laboured / ſaying, that the valiant men of warre coude not lyue, if the good labourers were not. And they ſay, that Cyrus, the whiche hath ben a very famous, and an excellent kynge, ſaide vpon a tyme vnto them, that he called vnto hym to gyue them rewardes, that he hym ſelfe was well worthy to haue the rewardes of them bothe. For he ſaide, that he was verye good bothe to ſe the countrey wel laboured, and alſo to kepe & defende it. Forſothe, ſaide Critobulus, if Cirus dyd ſay ſo, he dyd ſhewe plainly, that he had as greatte pleaſure / that the countre ſhulde be wel occupied, as to haue good mē of warre. So. By my faithe, if Cirus had lyued, he wold haue proued a very noble prince: and of that he ſhewed many great and euident tokens at diuers tymes, and amonge the tother / whan he came forthe agaynſte his brother to trie by batayle, who ſhulde be kynge. For they ſay / that from Cirus no man fled to the kyng / but many thouſandes

lefte the kynge to come and ſerue Cirus. And me thynketh this is a great argument of a princis vertue / whan men do obey hym with their owne good wyll, and be glad to abyde with hym in tyme of ieopardie. For Cirus frendes ſtode fightynge aboute hym whiles he was yet alyue, and whan he was ſlayne / they fightyng moſte valiantly were ſlayne all beſide hym, excepte Arieus, the whiche was ſet in the lefte wynge.
            This gentyll Cirus, whan Lyſander came to hym, to brynge hym preſentes from the cities of Grece confederated vnto him, they ſay, as Lyſāder ſhewed hym ſelfe to a frēde of his in the towne of Megara / that he receiued him with moche humanite, & amonge other thynges he ſhewed hym a gardeyne, that was called the Paradis of Sardis. But whan Lyſander beganne to maruayle at it, by cauſe the trees were ſo faire and ſo egally ſette / and the orders of the trees lay ſtreyghte one agaynſt an other, and made goodly angles & corners well ꝓporcioned / and many ſwete and pleaſant ſauours came to theyr noſes, whan they were walkynge, he wondrynge therupon ſayde thus: Forſothe Cirus the great beautifulnes of theſe thinges is a greatte maruayle to me, but I

wonder moche more of him, that hath meaſured and ſette them thus in order. Than Cirus, whan he herde this dyd reioyce and ſaye: All theſe that ye ſe I haue meaſured them, and ſette them in order, and I can ſhewe you ſome trees, that I haue ſet with myne owne handes. And Lyſander whan he had loked vpon hym, and beholden his goodly apparell, and felte the good fauour that came from it / and the eſtimable fayrenes of his golden chaynes / his rynges, and his precious ſtones, ſayde: What ſaye ye Cirus, haue ye ſette any of theſe with your owne handes? Than Cirus anſwered. Do ye maruayle of this Lyſander? By the faythe that I owe to god, whan I am well at eaſe / I neuer go to dyner vnto the time I haue done ſomwhat, outher in feates of armes, or in ſome poynte of huſbandrye tyl I ſwete. Than, whan Lyſander herde this, he toke hym by the hande and ſayde: Me thynkethe Cirus, ye be fortunate not without a cauſe. For ye be fortunate beinge a good man.
            And this I reherſe vnto you myne owne Critobulus, ſayd Socrates, for this cauſe, that ye maye ſe / that they that be ryche and fortunate, can not well kepe them frome

huſbandrye. For hit is ſuche an exerciſe, and ſuche a buſynes / that a man maye haue pleaſure in hit, bothe to encreace and multiplie his goodes, and alſo to exerciſe the bodye ſo / that hit ſhall be able to do all maner of thynges, that longethe for an honeſt man to do. For fyrſte of all, the grounde bryngeth forthe all ſuche maner of thynges, that a man is fedde and nouryſſhed with, and hit bryngeth forthe alſo ſuche thynges, that a man may haue pleaſure by hit. Moreouer, hit gyuethe vs all ſuche thynges, as we nede to trymme and dreſſe the auters and ymages withall, and that with mooſte pleaſaunt ſyghtes and ſauours. Furthermore of meates neceſſarye for mannes vſe, ſome hit bryngethe by hit ſelfe, and ſome hit nouryſſhethe. For the crafte of kepynge of ſheepe is annexed to huſbandrye, ſo that we maye vſe them at our owne pleaſure. And though hit gyuethe vs plentye of all maner of thynges / yet hit dothe nat ſuffre vs together them with ſoftenes and tendernes / but vſethe vs to be harde and ſtronge / in wynter by the reaſon of the colde, and in ſomer by the reaſon of the heate.

And as for them, the which do labour with theyr owne handes, hit maketh them bygge and myghtye, and they that occupie huſbandrye but onely with ouer lokynge & takinge hede to other mennes warkes, it quickeneth and maketh them lyke men / makynge them to ryſe yarely in the mornynge, and cauſyng them to walke a great waye. For bothe in the feldes and alſo in the cities, euery thyng that a man doth to any purpoſe, muſte nedes be done in tyme and in ſeaſon. Moreouer if he wyll be a horſe man, and defende his countre on horſebacke, a horſe may no wher be better fedde than in the countre. And if he wyll be a footeman, houſbandry maketh a man ſtronge bodied, and cauſethe hym to exerciſe hym ſelfe goinge a huntyng, whan it gyueth lyghtly meate to the dogges, and the grounde bryngeth vppe and nouriſſheth wylde beaſtis. And the horſes / and lyke wyſe the dogges / thus holpen by the waye of huſbandry, do agayne ſome ſeruice to the grounde. For the horſe beareth hym yerly in the mornynge, that wyll ſe the grounde be nat let alone vntylled & vntrymmed / and at nyghte beareth hym home agayne, if he tarye neuer ſo late. And the dogges kepe away wylde beaſtis / that they ſpille not the

frute, and kylle the ſhepe, and make a man to be ſure in a wyldernes. More ouer, it comforteth and ſtyrreth huſbande men to be bolde, and to ſtande manly to defende theyr countre, ſeinge it leaueth the frutes abrode in the playne to be vſurped of hym that is ſtronger. And what facultie wyll make a man more apte to runne, to ſhote / and alſo to leape, than huſbandrye? What ſcience yeldeth more againe to thē that do labour? What ſcience receiueth him, that is ſtudious, with greatter pleaſure, ſeinge whan he cometh / it gyueth hym leaue to take what he wyll? Where ſhall a ſtraunger be better welcomed to make hym good chere? Wher ſhall a man haue better commoditie to kepe his wynter with fire inoughe and hotte bathes? And where is more pleaſant dwellynge for goodly waters / gentyll wyndes and ſhadowe, than in the feldes? Where may a man make better feaſtis / and more triumphant bankettes?The praiſe of huſbandrye. What other place do ſeruātes loue better? What other place doth a wyfe lyke more? Where do childrē deſire more to be? Where be frendes better receyued / and gladder to be? Forſoth me thynketh it a maruaylous thynge / if any honeſt man can fynde any ſubſtance, that he

deliteth more in, or if he can fynde any occupation outher more pleaſant than this is, or more profitable for his lyuynge. And moreouer, the grounde techeth men Iuſtice, if they haue the witte to lerne it. For they that do for it, and haue care for it / it rewardeth them with farre moche more.
            And if they / that haue bene brought vppe in huſbandrye, by ſome ſodayne chance of enmyes, they that be lordes of the countre can not tyll the grounde, they may go in to their enmies countres / ſeinge they haue ben well and hardly broughte vp, and gette there as moche, if god be not agaynſt them, as wyll ſuffice them to lyue with. And hit is often tymes more ſure to ſeke for his lyuynge, in tyme of warre / with weapons of warre / than with inſtrumentes of huſbandry.
            Huſbandry alſo teacheth men to helpe one an other. If we wyl go to warre, we muſt haue men, nor the grounde can not be laboured without men. And therfore he that wyll be a good huſbande man / he muſt get hym good luſtye worke men, and wyllynge to do after hym / and obeye hym. And the ſelfe ſame thyng he muſt go about to bringe to paſſe, that leadeth an armie to fyghte agaynſt his enmies, gyuyng great rewardes

vnto them, that behaue thē ſelfes like good valiant men, and puniſſhe them that be ſtoburne / and wyll not be ordred. And he that is a good huſbāde, muſt as often times cal vpon his labourers, and comfort them, as the capitayne doth his ſoudiours. And bounde men haue as great nede to be comforted, and meynteyned with good hope, as other fre men / yea and rather more, to thēde they runne not away, but be gladde to byde ſtylle. And ſurely he ſayde verye well, that called huſbandrye the mother and the nource of all other ſciences. For if huſbandrye dothe ſtande well, all other ſciences & faculties do the better. But if the groūde be barayne / and can beare no frute, al other ſciences be all moſte ſpilled both by ſee and by lande.
            Whan Critobulus hadde harde this / he ſpake after this maner. Me thinketh, good Socrates, ye ſpeke very wel in this matter. But ye knowe very wel, that the moſt parte of ſuche thinges / as longe to huſbandrye / a man can not caſte them afore hande. For often tymes hayle ſtones, drought, or continuall rayne, myſte, or vermyne, that eate vp the ſede that is in the grounde / do put vs beſide our intēt and purpoſe, if it were neuer

ſo good. And ſhepe lyke wyſe / if they be in neuer ſo good paſture / there comethe a ſickenes, that deſtroyeth thē al. Socrates, whan he harde that / ſaid agayne. I thought that ye knewe well, that god is aboue all / as well in huſbandry as he is in warre. We ſe that they that wyll make warre, that afore they begynne, they make their vowes, prayers / and ſacrifices, deſyryng to knowe, what is beſt to do / and what is not beſte. And thynke ye, that in thoſe thynges, that longe to huſbandry / we ſhulde haue leſſe recourſe to god? Be ye ſure of this, that good and honeſt men do worſhyp almighty god with oblations / and prayers, for all theyr frutes, theyr oxen, theyr ſhepe, and theyr horſes, and generally for al that they haue. Me thynketh good Socrates, ſaid Critobulus, that ye ſpeke very well in this matter, whan ye byd to begyn euery thinge with the truſt of the helpe / and of the grace of god / ſeinge that god is aboue al thinges / as well in warre as in peace. And therfore we wyll endeuour vs to do ſo. But ſeinge your purpoſe was to ſpeake here of the ordryng of an houſe / the whiche ye haue lefte, and be entred in to an other tale, endeuour your ſelfe to ſhewe vs a littell more, what

foloweth nexte to that that ye lefte. For nowe that I haue harde you ſaye that that ye haue ſpokē, me ſemeth I ſe moche better than afore / what a man muſt do for to lyue. Wherfore Socrates ſayde: But wyll ye, that we reherſe all that we haue ſpoken afore, and agreed in, to thintent that we may, if we can, go forth in this matter / bringyng ſuche thīg as we ſhal like wiſe agree vpō? Me thynketh that lyke wyſe / as hit wolde be a great pleaſure, whan two men haue lente money one to an other, to agree vpon the rekeninge: So nowe in our cōmunication / vttrynge our myndes one to an other, if we myght gree in one tale.
            Well than, ſayd Socrates, we agreed vpon this, that the ordrynge of an houſe is the name of a ſcience, and that ſemeth to be the ſcience, to order and increace the houſe. And we toke the houſe for all a mans poſſeſſions and goodes. And we ſayde, that was truely the poſſeſſion and goodes of a man, the whiche was profitable vnto hym for his lyuynge / and we founde al that profitable / that a man coude vſe and order. And therfore we thoughte impoſſible for a man to lerne all maner of ſciences. And as for all the handye craftes, we thoughte

beſte to expelle them from vs / lyke wyſe as many cities and common welthes dyd. For they ſeme bothe to diſtroye a mannes body, and to breke a mannes harte and ſtomacke. And herof / we ſayde, that this myghte be an euident token. For if the enmyes dyd inuade the countres, and one dyd ſette the huſbande men and the artificers a ſyde diuided in two partes, and aſked them, whether they had leuer to come forthe and pitche the felde to fighte with their enmyes, or els to gyue vp the feldes / and kepe and defende the cities: They that haue bene vſed in the feldes and huſbandrye wolde be gladde to fighte, to delyuer the countre. But on the tother ſide, the artificers wolde do that that they haue bene broughte vp in, that is to ſytte ſtylle / neuer labourynge, nor neuer puttynge them ſelfes in preace, nor in ieopardie. More ouer we commended houſbandrye for a good exerciſe and a good occupation for a good and an honeſt man / by the whiche mē may haue al that is neceſſarie for them. For it is an occupation very ſone lerned, and very pleaſant to be occupied in it: the whiche alſo maketh a mannes bodye myghty, ſtronge / well complexioned / and well fauoured / his ſtomacke and his ſpirite

to be alwaye luſtye and redye to do for his frendes / and for his countre.
            More ouer, we iugged that hit gaue men harte and courage to be valiant and hardy / ſeinge the frutes,why huſbandry is moſte honorable. that the grounde brought forthe, laye abrode in the playne, without trenches, boulwarkes, or fortreſſes. And therfore that kynde of lyuynge ſemed to be moſte honorable, and beſte eſtemed in cities and common welthes / bicauſe hit makethe good men / well diſpoſed, and well mynded to do good for the common welthe.
            Than ſayde Critobulus, I am after my mynde ſufficiently perſwaded / that a man may haue a very good, an honeſt, and a pleaſant lyuynge in occupienge huſbandry. But where ye ſayd, that ye knewe the cauſe, that ſome dyd ſo vſe and occupie huſbandrye / that they had by hit plentie of all maner of thinges, that they neded: and ſome agayne, that ſo ordred them ſelfes in hit, that hit auayled them nothynge, theſe two thynges wolde I gladly here of you, to thentent we may do that that is good, and eſchewe that that is contrarye.
            But what if I do tel you ſwete Critobulus, ſayde Socrates, euen from the begynnyng, what cōmunication I had ones with a man,

the whiche might be called truely / & in dede a good honeſt man? That wolde I here verye fayne ſayde Critobulus. For I my ſelfe do greatly deſyre / that I may be worthy of that goodly name. Than wyll I tell you / howe I came fyrſte to the conſideration of this. For as touchynge good carpenters, good ioyners, good peynters, good ymagers, me thought, that I myghte in a littel tyme ſe and beholde their warkes moſte allowed and beſt accepted / that made them to be ſo called. But to thēde I might ſe and beholde, howe they that hadde that goodly and honorable name of a good and an honeſt man, dyd behaue them ſelfes to be worthy of it, my mynde dyd coueyte greatly to talke with one of them. And firſte of all for bicauſe Good and Honeſt, wente to gether, whan ſo euer I ſawe any goodly man, I drewe to hym / and wente aboute to knowe of hym, if I myghte ſe Good and Honeſt, in a goodly man. But it wold nat be. For me thoughte that I founde / that there were many with goodlye bodies and fayre viſages / that hadde but yuell diſpoſed and vngratious ſoules.
            Than me thought it beſt to enquere no further of goodly bodies / but to get me to one

of them / that were called good and honeſt men. And for bicauſe I harde, that Iſchomachus was generally, bothe of men, women, citezins and ſtraungers, called and taken for a good honeſte man, me thoughte I coude do no better, than to proue howe I myghte cōmune with hym. And vpon a tyme, whan I ſawe hym ſittyng in a porche of a churche, for bicauſe me thought he was at leyſer, I came to hym, and ſet me downe by hym, and ſaide: What is the cauſe good Iſchomachus, that ye, whiche be wonte to be euer more occupied, ſyt here nowe after this maner, for I haue ſene you for the moſt parte euermore doinge ſome what, & lightly neuer ydell, excepte hit were very littell? Nor ye ſhulde not nowe haue ſeene me good Socrates, ſaid he, ſytting after this maner, if I had not apoynted with certaine ſtraungers to tarye here for them. And if ye were not here, where wolde ye haue bene, or howe wolde ye haue ben occupied, ſayde I to hym? For I wolde knowe of you very fayne, what thyng ye do, that maketh you to be called a good and an honeſt man? The good cōplection of your body ſheweth well ynough, that ye byde not alway ſlougginge at home. And than Iſchomachus,

laughynge at that that I ſayde, what do ye, that makethe you to be called a good and an honeſte man, and reioyſynge in his harte / as me thoughte by hym / ſayde? I can not telle if any man callethe me ſo / whan you and he talke of me, but whan I muſte paye money / or for taxes, preaſtis / or ſubſidies, they calle me playnelye by my name Iſchomachus. And in dede good Socrates, I do nat alwaye byde at home, for my wyfe can order well inoughe ſuche thynges as I haue there. Yea but this wolde I knowe of you very fayne, Dyd ye your ſelfe brynge your wyfe to this; or els had her father and her mother brought her vppe, ſufficiently to order an houſe afore ſhe came to you? Iſcho. Howe coude ſhe haue bene ſo, whan ſhe was but fyftene yere olde, whan I maryed her? and afore ſhe had ben ſo negligētly brought vppe / that ſhe had but very littell ſeene, very littell harde, and very littell ſpoken of the worlde. And I trowe ye wolde not thynke it ſufficient in her, if ſhe coude do nothynge but ſpynne and carde / and ſette the hande maydens to worke. As for ſuche thynges as concerne the lower partes of the bely, good Socrates, ſayde he, ſhe had

bene very well broughte vp, the whiche is no ſmalle poynte of good bryngynge vppe, bothe in a man and in a woman. And dyd ye teache your wyfe all the remenant, ſaide I, ſo that ſhe is able to take hede to all maner of thynges? Yes, ſayde he, but not afore I had made my prayers to all myghty god, deſirynge hym, that he wolde gyue me the grace, to teache her ſo, and her to lerne that of me, that ſhulde be good & profitable to vs bothe. And dyd your wyfe make the ſelfe ſame prayer with you, ſayde I? Yes mary, ſaide Iſchomachus, and it ſemed in a maner, that god dyd promiſe euidently, and ſhe like wiſe ſhewed with clere and manifeſte tokens, that ſhe wolde very well regarde and take hede to that that ſhe ſhulde be taught. For goddis ſake good Iſchomachus, ſayde I, what dyd ye begynne to teache hir firſte: for I had leauer here you tell me ſuche a thynge / than if ye ſhulde diſcriue me a iuſtynge or a turnament, though it had bene neuer ſo triumphant? Mary I wyl tell you Socrates, ſaide he. Whan we were ones ſo wel acqueinted, & ſo familiar / that we talked to gether, I examined her after this maner. Tell me good bedfelowe, did ye euer caſt in your mīde, for what cauſe

I haue taken you, and your father and your mother deliuered you vnto me? I trowe ye knowe well inoughe, that I toke you not for nede, that I had of a bedfelowe to lye with me, for I myghte haue had inowe at my commandment. But whan I had conſidered in my mynde, and your father and your mother lyke wyſe, that hit were well done, to fynde out a good one to be parte taker both of our houſe, and of our children̄ / I choſe you afore all other, and your father and mother like wiſe choſe me. Wherfore if here after god gyue vs the grace / that we may haue children to gether, we ſhall take counſayle / howe to brynge them vp and inſtructe them in vertue. For it ſhall be for bothe our profettes to haue them, bothe to defende vs / and to helpe and nouriſſhe vs in our olde age. Now the houſe that we haue is common to vs bothe. For all that euer I haue, I haue ſhewed you and delyuered it vnto you to kepe for both our behoues: and ye lyke wyſe haue done the ſame. And ye may not caſte in your mynde, whiche of vs bothe broughte more.
                  
                     •
                   good leſ
                  
                     •
                  on for a wyfe. But this ye muſte knowe for a ſuertie, that loke whiche of vs twayne doth behaue him ſelfe, and doth beſt in this felowſhyp / that he bryngeth more / 

and his parte is the better.
            Than my wyfe, good Socrates, anſwered here vnto after this maner. Wherin can I helpe you, ſaide ſhe? or wherin maye my littell power do you any good? For truly my mother tolde me, that all to gether laye in your handes, and that hit belonged vnto me / to be ſobre and lyue in chaſtite. Mary ſo it is good wyfe, ſayde I, and ſo my father tolde me to. But hit is the poynt of a ſobre huſbande / and of a ſobre wyfe / to do ſo, that that, the whiche they haue, may be well ordred and guyded / & to encreace and get more to it, by ſome good & rightful way. And what do ye ſe in me, ſayde my wyfe, that I may encreace our houſe, if I do applie it? Mary, ſayd I, if ye endeuoir your ſelfe to do thoſe thinges to the beſte of your power / the whiche bothe god wylleth, that ye ſhulde do, & the lawe exhorteth you to it. And what thynges be thoſe, ſayde ſhe? Verily, ſaide I, no ſmalle thynges, excepte ye thynke, that that Bee dothe but a littell good, the whiche remaineth ſtyl in the hyue, to ouer ſe the warkes, whan the other go abrode to gether floures. And forſothe me thynketh / that god almyghty hath ſette to gether for many good cauſes and conſyderations,

that goodlye couple / that is the huſbande and the wyfe, to thentente that they ſhulde be moſte profitable one to an other in that good felawſhyp.why wedlocke was ordeyned. Fyrſt of all to thentent that mankynd do not decaye and faile, this ioly couple lieth to gether and ingendreth children. Than againe by reaſon herof, they bringe forth chyldren to helpe & ſoccour thē in theyr olde age. More ouer the maner and lyuyng of men, doth greatly differ from the lyfe of wylde beaſtis, the whiche be alway abrode in the feldes. For it is mete for men to haue houſes. Wherfore it is conuenient / that they / whiche wyll haue ſomwhat to brynge in to their houſes / haue mē with them to do thoſe warkes / that muſte be done abrode in the feldes. For tyllynge of the grounde, ſowynge of the corne / ſettyng of trees, & kepynge of beaſtis at graſſe and paſture, be all done abrode. But agayne it is nedeful, whan thoſe frutes be conueyed in to the houſe / to ouerſe & ſaue them / and to do all ſuche thynges as muſte be done at home. Babis and yonge chyldren muſte nedes be broughte vppe within the houſe. Breadde muſte be baked / and the meate ſodde & dreſſed within the houſe. Alſo ſpynnynge / cardynge / and weauynge / 

muſte be done within the houſe.
            And where that bothe thoſe thynges, that muſte be done abrode,A houſe wyfes office. and thoſe that be done within the houſe do require care and diligence: me thynkethe that god hathe cauſed nature to ſhewe playnlye, that a woman is borne to take hede of all ſuche thinges, as muſte be done at home. For he hath made man of bodye / harte / and ſtomacke ſtronge and myghtye to ſuffre and endure hete and colde, to iourneye, and go a warfare. Wherfore god hath in a maner commaunded and charged hym with thoſe thynges / that be done abrode oute of the houſe. He alſo remembrynge, that he hath ordeyned the woman to brynge vp yonge chyldren, he hath made her farre more tender in loue towarde her chyldren than the huſbande. And where he hath ordeyned, that the woman ſhulde kepe thoſe thynges, that the man getteth and bringeth home to her, and he knowynge verye well, that for to kepe a thynge ſurelye, hit is not the worſte poynte to be doubtful and fearefull, he dealed to her a greatte deale more feare, than he dyd to the man.
            And he alſo perceyuynge, that if any man dothe hym wronge, the whiche laboureth

and worketh without, he muſt defende hym ſelfe, he diſtributed to the man a great deale more boldnes. And for bicauſe it behoueth, that bothe they do gyue and receyue, he hath gyuen them indifferently remembrance and diligence, in ſo moche / that it is harde to diſcerne, whether kinde hath more of them / either the man or the woman.
            He hath alſo graunted them indifferently to refraine them ſelfes from ſuche thinges, as is conuenient they do. And hath gyuen them power and auctorite, that loke in what thynge the either of them dothe the better / he bringeth the more away with hym. But bicauſe the natures and the diſpoſitions of them bothe be not egallye ſo perfecte in all theſe thinges, they haue ſo moche the more nede the tone of the tother. And this couple is ſo moche the more profitable the tone to the tother, bicauſe that that the tone lacketh the tother hath. wherfore good wyfe, ſeinge we ſe that, whiche god hath ordeined for vs bothe, we muſte enforce / and endeuour our ſelfes to do bothe our partis in the beſte wyſe. The lawe ſemeth to comforte vs and exhorte vs to it, the whiche coupleth man & wyfe to gether. And lyke wyſe as god makethe them come to gether to gette

children, So the lawe wyll haue them liue to gether partakers one of an others goodes in good felawſhyp. Lyke wyſe the lawe ſheweth, and god commandeth, that it is beſte for eche of them to do theyr parte. For it is more honeſtie for a womā to kepe her houſe, than to walke aboute. And it is more ſhame for a man to byde ſlouggynge at home / than to applie his mynde to ſuche thynges as muſte be done abrode. But if any man dothe contrarye to that that he is naturally borne to / parauenture god wyll remembre, that he breaketh his ſtatutis and decrees / and wyll puniſſhe hym / outher for bicauſe he is negligent in that that he ſhulde do / or elles bycauſe he takethe vpon hym that that belongeth to the wyfe. Me thynketh alſo / that the maiſtres bee / that kepeth the hyue, dothe lyke wyſe that that god hath ordeyned her vnto. And what dothe the maiſtres bee, ſayde ſhe,A good enſample of bees. wherby it may be likened to that that I muſte do? For bicauſe, ſayde he, hit bydeth alwaye in the hyue, and wyll not ſuffre no bees to be ydell: and they that ſhulde worke without / ſhe ſendeth thē to theyr worke. And what ſo euer any of them bryngethe home / ſhe marketh / receyueth, and ſaueth it, vntyll the

tyme come that hit muſte be occupied. And whan the tyme cometh, that it muſte be occupied / than ſhe diſtributeth euery thing accordyng as equite requireth. And ſhe cauſeth them that do byde within to weaue and make the faire hony comes after the beſte wiſe, and taketh hede to the yōge bees, that they be well fedde and brought vppe. But whan they be come to that age / and to that point, that they be able to worke, ſhe ſēdeth them out with one, the whiche they folowe as their gyde and capitayne. And muſte I do ſo to, ſayde my wyfe? Ye forſothe ſayde I: For ye muſte alway byde within the houſe, and thoſe men / the whiche muſte worke abrode, ye muſt ſende them to it: and they that muſte worke within, ye muſt commande them, and be ouer them, to ſe them do it. And that that is brought in / ye muſt receiue it. And that, whiche muſte be ſpente of it, ye muſte parte and deuide it. And that that remaineth, ye muſte ley it vp and kepe it ſafe tyl tyme of nede. And beware / that that / whiche was apoynted to be ſpente in a twelue monthe, be not ſpente in a monthe. And whan the wolle is broughte in to you, ye muſte ſe that hit be carded and ſponne / that clothe maye be made of hit. Alſo ye

muſte ſe that the corne, whiche is broughte in to you, be not ſo mouſtye and douſty / that hit maye not be eaten.Howe ſeruātes muſt be entreted But one thynge ſpecially aboue all other there is, that ye muſte be carefull fore, and that ſhall gette you great fauour and loue, that is, if any of our ſeruantes, happe to falle ſicke, that ye endeuour your ſelfe the beſt that ye can / not onely to cheryſſhe them, but alſo to helpe that they may haue their helthe agayne. By my feythe, ſayde my wyfe, hit is a verye gratious and a kynde dede. For whan they be ones holpen, and eaſed / they wyll cunne vs very good thanke, and be the more louynge and feythfull vnto vs.
            And me thoughte, ſayde Iſchomachus, that hit was an anſwere of a good and an honeſte wyfe. And by the reaſon of this good prouiſion of this maiſtres bee, ſayde I, all the tother beare ſo good loue and affection vnto her, that whan ſo euer ſhe goth out of the hyue / there wyll none tarye behynde, but all wayte vpon her.
            Than my wyfe anſwered me. I do great lye maruayle / whether ſuche thynges, as ye ſaye the maiſtres bee dothe, do not belonge moche more to you than to me. For my kepyng and departing within, were

but a littell worthe, excepte ye dyd your diligence, that ſomwhat myght be brought in. And my bryngynge in, ſayde I, ſhulde auayle but a littell, excepte there were one / that kepte & ſaued that, that I brought in.
            Do ye not ſe, ſayde I, howe euery man hath great pite of them, the which, they ſay, that their puniſſhement is to poure water in to tubbes full of hooles, tyll they be full. And they pite them for nothinge els, but by cauſe they ſeme to labour in vayne. By my fayth, ſaid my wyfe, they be very miſerable in dede, the which do ſo. There be other thynges, that belonge to you to take hede of, the whiche muſte nedes be very pleaſant vnto you / as whan ye haue taken one in to your ſeruice, that can nother ſpynne nor carde / if ye teache her to do it, hit ſhall be twyſe ſo moche more worthe vnto you. And if ye haue a maide, the whiche is outher negligent, or is not trewe of her handes, or that can not wayte, if ye make her diligent, truſtye, and a good ſeruant, all ſhall be to your great profette. And agayne, whan ye ſe your ſeruantes good and ſobre felowes, and profitable for our houſe / ye muſte do them good / and ſhewe them ſome gentilnes. But if there be any of thē knauiſſhe or frowarde,

ye muſte puniſſhe them. And this agayne ſhulde be moſte pleaſant of all, if ye coude make your ſelfe better than I, and make me as it were your ſeruant. And ye nede not fere leſte in proces of tyme, whan ye come to age, ye be leſſe ſet by: but be ye ſure of this, if ye be diligent, louynge, and tendable to me, our children, and houſholde, the elder that ye waxe / the more honorable and better eſtemed ſhal ye be. For it is not the beautifulnes, and goodlye ſhappe, but the very vertue and goodnes that men regarde, and fauour.
            I remembre good Socrates, that my firſte cōmunication with her, was after this maner. And dyd ye perceiue, good Iſchomachus, ſaide I, that by the reaſon of this, ſhe was any thynge moued to be more diligent? Yes verily, ſaide Iſchomachus, And I ſawe her vpon a time ſore an angerd with her ſelfe, and greatly a ſhamed / that whan I aſked her a thynge, that I hadde broughte home, ſhe coude not fette hit me. And whan I ſawe that hit greued her very ſore / I ſaid vnto her. Take neuer the more thoughte for the matter, if ye can not gyue me that that I aſke you. For it is a token of pouerte in very dede, whan a man lacketh

a thynge / that he can not haue. But this nede may be ſuffered a great deale better / whan a man ſekethe a thynge and can not fynde it / than if at the begynnynge he dothe not ſeke for it / knowyng that he hath it not. But as for this ye be not to be blamed, ſaide I, but I my ſelfe / ſeinge I haue not apoynted you a place, where to leye euery thynge that ye myghte knowe, where ye ſhulde ſet hit, and where to fette hit agayne.
            
               The praiſe and profyt of order.There is nothynge, good ſwete wyfe, ſo profitable and ſo goodlye amonge men, as is an order in euery thynge.
            In playes and enterludes, where a great company of men is aſſembled to playe their partes, if they ſhulde raſſhely do and ſaye / what ſo euer felle in to theyr braynes, hit wolde be but a trouble and a buſynes / and no pleaſure to beholde them. But whan they do and ſpeake euerye thynge in order / the audience hath a verye greatte pleaſure bothe to beholde them, ye and alſo to here them.
            And like wiſe an armie of men ſwete wife, ſaid I, that is out of order, and ſette out of good arraye / is a very great confuſion, in daunger to be lightlye ouer come of theyr enmies, and a verye pitous and miſerable

ſighte to their frendes, as whan there is together in a plumpe, aſſes, fotemen, cartes / baggage / and men of armes. And howe ſhulde they go forwarde, whan they do let one an other? He that gothe letteth hym that runnethe, he that rounneth diſtourbeth hym, that ſtandeth ſtyll, the carte letteth the mā of armes, the aſſe the carte / the baggage the fote man. And if they ſhulde come to the pointe / that they muſt fighte / how coude they fight beinge in that taking? For whā they be faine, by the reaſon of their il order, to flee their owne company, that letteth thē, howe coude they, thus fleinge, ouer come them, that ſet vpon them in good order of batayle, & wel weaponed? But the armie, that is wel ordred and kept in good array / is a very pleaſaunt ſighte to theyr frendes / and greuous to their enmies. What frende is there, but that he wyll haue a very great pleſure to ſe the foote men marche forward in good order and arraye? What is that man, but he wyll maruayle whan he beholdeth a greatte nombre of men of armes rydynge in good arraye and order? And what enmie wyll not be aferde, whan he ſeeth moriſpikes, bylles / men of armes / croſſe bowes, and alſo archers, the whiche folowe

their capitaynes in good arraye and order of bataile? And alſo whan they marche forwarde in good array, if they be neuer ſo many thouſādes, yet they walke as peſibly as though there were but one man alone.
            And what maketh a galey / wel furniſſhed with men, feareful to the enmies, and pleaſaunt to beholde vnto frendes, but that hit goth ſo ſwyftly? And what maketh them that be in it / that they do not trouble one an other / but that they do ſytte in order / keke & make ſignes in order, lye downe in order, ryſe in order, drawe the oores in order? And as for confuſion & miſorder / me thynketh hit is lyke / as if a man of the countree ſhuld put together on a heape, otes, wheate, barlye, and peaſe / and whan he had nede to occupie any of them, he ſhulde be fayne to trie hit out, and put hit by hit ſelfe agayne. Wherfore ſwete wyfe / ye ſhall lyghtlye eſchewe ſuche confuſion, if ye putte to your good wyl to ſet in good order that that we haue, and take to you that that ye haue nede of / and ſpare not: and gyue to me that that I call for gratiouſly. And let vs ſeke out and prepare a hanſome place to ſette euery thynge in / accordynge as euery thinge requireth. And whan we haue ſette it there / 

let vs ſhewe hit the ſeruante, that ſhe maye fetche hit, and laye hit vppe there agayne. And thus we ſhall knowe / what we haue ſaued, & what we haue loſte. For the place hit ſelfe ſhall lacke that that it ſhulde haue. And the ſight wyl ſerche out that that hath nede of helpe / and make vs to knowe anone where liethe euery thynge, ſo that we ſhall not be to ſeke, whan we haue nede of hit.
            I remembre good Socrates, that vpon a tyme I wente a bourde a ſhyppe of Phenicia, where I behelde the goodlyeſt order and the mooſte perfecte that euer I ſawe.The order of a ſhyp. I conſydered howe great abundance of implimentes was in that ſmalle veſſell. There were many oores, and many other thynges made of wodde: with the whiche they brynge the ſhyppe in to, and out of the hauen. What a ſorte of ſhrowdes, halſers, cables, lines, and other takeling was there? With howe many ingins of warre bothe to defende it ſelfe, and to greue an enmie, was hit armed? What a ſighte of armoure and weapons for the men / cary they about with them. More ouer, they carye with them moche vitayle and other neceſſaries / that men vſe at home in their houſes. Beſyde al this, hit ſhas laded, with ſuche ſtouffe and

goodes, as the ſhyppe maiſter gettethe by the cariage therof. And all this geare that I ſpeake of, was ſtowed in ſo littell a rowme, that a farre greatter place wolde not haue receyued it / if hit ſhulde haue bene remoued. And I marked howe euerye thynge was ſo well ſette in good order / that no one thynge dyd lette an other, nor hadde no nede to be longe ſoughte fore: Nor were not ſo ſcatered, and ſo yll compacte, that a man ſhulde tarye longe for hit / whan he ſhulde occupie hit quickelye. And he that wayted vpon the Patrone of the ſhyppe / that is to ſaye, he that ſtandethe in the fore parte of the ſhyppe, I perceyued, that he hadde euerye place ſo well in his mynde, that thoughe he were not there / he wolde telle you redilye, where euerye thynge laye, none other wyſe than he that is lerned, can telle howe many letters go to this worde, Socrates, and in what place euery letter is ſette. More ouer, I ſawe hym, whan he was ſerchynge and caſtynge in his mynde, howe many thynges a ſhyppe hath nede of: Than I maruaylynge wheron he muſed and ſtudied, aſked hym, what he meaned. I conſidre and caſt afore hande good man, quod he, if any thing

ſhulde chaunce / howe and in what redynes euery thynge lyeth in the ſhyppe / whether any thynge lieth out of his place, or if euery thynge be not trymmed to the purpoſe. For hit is no tyme, whan god ſendeth vs a ſtorme on the ſee / to be ſekyng that that we nede of / nor to brynge forth that that is not hanſome & well trymmed. For god thretneth & puniſſheth them that boydel & negligent. And we may be glad, if he do not deſtroy vs, whā we do our deutie. And if he ſaueth them / that vſe great labour and diligence, they oughte to thanke hym greatly. Wherfore whan I perceyued and ſawe that goodly and perfecte order, I ſaide vnto my wyfe, that hit ſhulde be great ſlouthe and negligence vnto vs, if they, whiche be but in littell ſhyppes and ſmalle veſſels, fynde feete places to ſtowe euery thynge in, that they carye with them, And thoughe they be ſore ſhaken and troubled / and continuallye in great feare, yet they kepe a good order, And we that haue ſo goodly places, and a houſe ſtandynge ſtedfaſtlye on the lande, coude not fynde places mete and cō
               uenient for to ſette euery thynge in, howe moche oughte we to be blamed of lewdnes and ſmalle wyſedome?
            
               We haue ſufficiently ſpoken howe profitable it is to ſette all the implimentes of the houſe in good order, and to ſette euery thing in ſuche a redines / in places mete therfore, that hit may be eaſye to fynde and come by whan nede requireth. But howe goodly a thynge is it to ſe ſewtis of all a mannes apparel, lienge by it ſelfe, keuerlettes, & counterpoyntes by them ſelfes, ſhetes, towels, and al naprye ware by them ſelfes / pottes, pannes, caudrous, and other garnitures of the ketchyn by them ſelfe, al that longeth to the table by it ſelfe / and ſo lyke wyſe of all other thinges, that longe to an houſe, wher at he that is vnwyſe, and knoweth not good order wyll laugh. And whether it be ſo or not my ſwete wife, we may lightly proue without great coſt / and with ſmall labour. And ye muſte not trouble your ſelfe / as though it were an harde thyng to fynde one, that coude lerne the places / and remembre where to ſette euery thing. For we knowe well, that in the citie there is a thouſande tymes more wave than we haue: but ye
                  •
                what ſo euer ſeruant ye wyll commande to go and bye you ſomwhat / in the market / he wyll not ſtande ſtyl, as though he coude not tel what to do, but by the reaſon that he remembreth,

where he hath ſene of it / he goth thither ſtreighte waye, and fetcheth hit. And ſurely ther is none other cauſe of this / ſaid I / but that there is a place determined, where one ſhall haue hit. But if one ſeketh a man / the whiche ſeketh hym to / may fortune he wyll often tymes be ſoner werye than he can fynde hym. And of this lyke wyſe there is none other cauſe, but that ther is no place appointed, where the tone ſhulde tary for the tother. As for ſettyng in order of the houſeholde ſtouffe / and of the vſe of hit, I remembre I ſpake vnto her after this maner. And howe thoughte ye by your wyfe good Iſchomachus, ſayde I? Whether dyd ſhe obeye you in that thynge / that ye taught her ſo buſily? Iſch. What ſhuld I ſay / but that ſhe promiſed to applie her mynde vnto it. And me thought verily by her countinaunce / ſhe was very gladde / that where afore ſhe was in a great doubte and perplexitie / ſhe had founde a good way in it, and beſoughte me, that I wolde make an order of euery thing, as I had ſaide vnto her as ſoone as was poſſible. And what order did you ſhewe hir good Iſchomachus ſaid I? Iſcho. What order ſhuld I ſhewe her but this? Fyrſte me thought beſt to

ſhewe her, what a houſe properly was ordeyned fore. For hit is not ordeyned to be gorgiouſlye peynted with diuers faire pictures, but it is builded for this purpoſe & cō
               ſideration, that it ſhulde be a ꝓfitable veſſel for thoſe thīges, that ſhuld be in it. Wherfore in a maner it byddeth the dwellers, to lay vp euery thyng, where it is moſt mete to put it. The inner priuey chābre, bicauſe it ſtandeth ſtrongeſt of all / loketh for to haue the iewels, plate, and all ſuche thynges as be moſte precious. The drye places loke for the wheate, The colde for the wyne. And bryght places do deſyre ſuche workes and thynges, as require lightſomnes. More ouer, I ſhewed her howe parlers & dynyng places, wel trymmed & dreſſed, for men to eate & drynke in, in ſommer ſhuld be colde, & in winter hotte. And I ſhewed her howe al the ſituation of the houſe was very moche ſouthward, wherby it may be clerely vnderſtāde, that in winter the ſonne lighteth welfauourdly vpon it, and in ſomer there is goodly ſhadowe in it. Further, I ſhewed her the nourcerie & the womens lodgynge, diuided from the mens lodgynge, left there came out any thyng amiſſe, & our ſeruantes ſhulde get them children without our conſentement.

For they that be good / if they haue children throughe our permiſſion, they woll loue vs the better. And they that be noughte, if they come ones to couple with a womā, they wil finde the more wayes / & the better ſhyfte to fulfyl their vngratiouſnes. And after we had ſpoken thus, ſaide he, we wente and deuided the houſehold ſtouffe, by ſewtes and ſortes after this maner. Firſt we dyd put to gether all maner of thynges longynge to ſacrifices. Nexte to that the good wyues apparell, both for holy dayes and workynge dayes, and afterwarde the good mannes apparayle bothe for the holy dayes, & alſo for warre, Clothes for mens chambres, and for the nourcerie, mennes ſhowes, and womens ſhowes, Than we appoynted out the inſtrumentes, that belonge to ſpinning & cardyng, and ſuche as perteine to the bake houſe, to the kechin, to the bathe, & to the boulting houſe. We dyd ſeperate a ſonder thoſe thinges, that ſhuld be occupied alwaye, from thoſe, that be occupied but at diner & ſouper. And we dyd ſeperate that that we ſhulde ſpende in a monthes ſpace / and that that was appoynted to ſerue vs a twelue monthe. For ſo it is the better knowē, in what maner it is brought to an ende.

And after we had ſeperated all the houſeholde ſtouffe in ſewtis and ſortis / we dyd ſet euery thynge in a place conuenient.
            Afterwarde all the inſtrumentes that our ſeruātes muſt occupie dayly, as for the bake houſe, for the ketchyn / for ſpynnynge and cardyng, and other lyke, we dyd ſhewe them the place, wher they ſhuld put them agayne, and than deliuered them / & bade them kepe them ſafe. And as for ſuche thynges, as ſhulde be occupied but ſeldome, or vpō holy dayes, or whan there came any ſtraungers vnto vs, or at certayne other tymes, in certayne buſyneſſe, we deliuered them vnto a woman, that we made the keper of our ſtore houſe / and ſhewed her the place / where they ſhulde be ſette. And whan we had made a rekenynge vnto her of all, and alſo written euery thynge, we bade her, that ſhe ſhulde deliuer them forth as tyme and nede required, and that ſhe ſhulde remembre well to whom ſhe deliuered any thynge, And whan ſhe receyued it agayne / that ſhe ſhulde lay it vppe / where ſhe had hit before. And to be keper of our ſtore houſe, we appoynted her, that ſemed vnto vs moſte ſobre and temperate in eatynge, drinkyng / and ſlepyng, and that ſhe coude very wel refrayne the cōpany

of men: and that ſemed alſo to haue a very good remembrance / and that wold beware to be founde in a faute throughe her negligence / leſt ſhe ſhulde diſpleaſe vs with hit / and ſeke the meane to do that that ſhulde pleaſe vs / that ſhe myghte be prayſed and rewarded for hit. More ouer we taughte her to haue a good wyll towarde vs, and to loue vs, For bicauſe that whan there was any thynge happened, that made vs ioyfull and gladde, we made her partaker of hit / and if we were ſorowfull and heuy for any matter / we called her, and ſhewed her the ſame. Furthermore we taught her to ſette her good wyll and her good mynde to encreaſe our houſe, teachyng her the way and the maner howe. And if any thynge fortuned well to vs / we gaue her parte of it. Alſo we taughte her to be iuſte and trewe in her buſynes, and to eſteme and ſet more by them, that were good and rightfull, than by them that were falſe and vntrewe: And we ſhewed her howe they lyued in more welthe & more libertie, than they that were falſe and vntruſtye. And ſo thus we dyd ſette her in the rowme. And at the laſte good Socrates, ſayde he, I ſayde vnto my wyfe / that all this ſhulde auayle nothynge / 

except ſhe toke diligēt hede / that euery thīg might remaine ſtyl in good order. I taught her alſo howe in cōmon welthes, & in good cites / that were wel ruled & ordred, it was not inough for the citezins and dwellers, to haue good laws made vnto thē, except that they beſide choſe men to haue the ouerſighte of the ſame lawes, the whoſe duetie ſhuld be to ſe, that they, the which do wel, and according to the lawe, may be preyſed, & he that doth the cōtrary, to be puniſſhed. And ſo I bad my wife, that ſhe ſhuld thīke her ſelfe to be, as if it were the ouerſeer of the lawes within our houſe: and that ſhe ſhulde, whan ſhe thought beſt,A good wiues duite. ouerſe the ſtuffe, veſſell / & implementes of our houſe / none other wyſe thā the capitaine of a gariſon ouerſeeth and proueth the ſondiours, how euery thing ſtā
               deth: or like wiſe as the Senate & the counſell of Athenes ouerſeeth & maketh a proffe both of the men of armes, and alſo of theyr horſes. And that ſhe ſhulde preiſe & reward hym, that were worthy, to her power / as if ſhe were a quene, And blame, ye and puniſſhe hym, that doth deſerue it. Beſide all this I taught her, that ſhe ſhulde not be diſpleaſed, if I did put her to more buſines, & charged her with mo thinges to be done in

the houſe, than any ſeruant I had, ſhewinge her, that prentis & couenāt ſeruātes haue no more of their maiſters goodes, but as moch as they deliuer them, to do theyr mayſters ſeruice with all, or to beſtowe it in their behalfe, or to kepe it for them: & they may occupie none of hit to theyr owne vſe, excepte their maiſters do giue it them. But he that is the maiſter / he hath all, & may vſe euery thynge at his owne pleaſure, wherfore he that hath moſte profit by it, if his goodes be ſafe, hath moſte loſſe, if they be loſte or periſhed: I ſhewed her, it were reaſon he ſhulde be moſte diligent, & take beſte hede about it. Than ſaide I. Good Iſchomachus, whan your wife harde this, howe did ſhe take it? what will ye haue any more of it good Socrates / but that ſhe ſaid: I knew her not wel if I thought it did greue her, that I ſhulde teache her to take hede to her goodes & ſubſtaūce. For it ſhuld haue ben more greuous vnto me a great dele, ſaid ſhe, if ye had bade me to take no hede to my goodes / than to bydde me to be dilygent aboute that that is myn owne. For me thinketh, that like wyſe, as it is naturally giuen to a good woman, rather to be dylygent aboute her owne chyldren than not to care for them,

Lyke wyſe it is more pleaſure for an honeſt woman to take hede to her owne goodes, than to ſet noughte by them.
            And whan I harde, ſayde Socrates, that his wife gaue him ſuche an anſwere, I ſaid: By my faythe Iſchomachus, ye tell me of a iolye and a manlye ſtomacke of a woman. Ye, ſayde he, ye ſhall here me telle you other thynges yet, that wyl well ſhewe her good luſtye harte, that whan ſhe had harde but ones ſpeake of it, ſtreighte way ſhe dyd after me in it. So. I pray you tel me that, for ſurelye I haue more pleaſure a greatte deale, to lerne the vertue of a woman aliue, than if Zenſis the excellent peynter ſhulde ſhewe me the picture & portrature of a faire woman. Than ſayde Iſchomachus, whan I had ſene her vpon a tyme / that ſhe hadde peynted her face with a certayne oyntment, that ſhe myghte ſeme whitter than ſhe was, and with an other oyntment, that ſhe myght ſeme redder than ſhe was in very dede, and that ſhe had a peyre of highe ſhowes on her feete, to make her ſeme taller woman than ſhe was, I ſayd vnto her: Tell me, good wyfe, whether wolde ye iuge me worthyer to be beloued, if our goodes and ſubſtaunce nowe beinge common one to an other, if I

ſhulde ſhewe you that that I haue in verye dede, and make nother more of hit, nor no leſſe than it is in very dede / and kept nothīg priuey from you: or if I wente aboute to deceyue you, ſayinge I hadde more than I haue, and ſhewyng you falſe money, cheines of braſſe in ſtede of golde, countrefete precious ſtones, redde in the ſtede of ſcarlette / falſe purpull in the ſtede of pure and good? Than ſhe anſwered ſtreighte waye. God forbid ye ſhuld be ſuche one: For if ye were ſuche one, I coude not fynde in myn harte to loue you. I wyl tel you wyfe, We be come to gether to thintent to haue pleaſure of the body one of an other, at the leſt men ſay ſo: Whether than, ſeinge I muſte gyue you my body to vſe with you, were I better to be beloued after your iugement, if I ſtudied and wente aboute to make my bodye ſeme the luſtier, the ſtronger, the better coloured / the better complectioned / and ſhulde noynte my face with certayne oyntmētes, and ſo ſhewe me vnto you, and lie with you / and gyue you theſe oyntementes to ſe and to handle in the ſtede of my colour and of myne owne face? Forſoth, ſayd ſhe, I ſhulde neuer haue more pleaſure in handlynge any oyntement in the ſtede of your face / nor delite more in thynge

counterfeted, than in your very eies & your naturall face. Thynke lyke wyſe by me good wyfe, ſaide Iſchomachus, that I haue no more pleaſure in oyntmētes, than I haue in your owne natural body and face. And like wiſe as god hath made horſes to haue pleaſure with maares, bulles with kyne, rammes with ewes, ſo lyke wyſe men do thinke that body moſt pleſant, that is pure. And as for ſuche wyles and deceites / they may parauenture begyle ſtrangers, ſo that they ſhal neuer be ſpied, but they that be daily cōuerſant to gether, they ſhal lightly perceiue, if the tone go aboute to deceiue the tother. For they wyll be ſpied, either whan they riſe out of their bed, before they make them redye, or whan they ſweate, or whan they wepe, or whan they waſſhe and bathe them. So. And I prey you, ſaid I, what an anſwere made ſhe to it. Iſch. What, ſaid I? by my faith ſhe wente neuer ſens about no ſuche maters, but ſhewed her ſelfe alway pure with as good comelines as myght be. And ſhe aſked me, whether I coude giue hir any counſayle howe ſhe ſhulde be fayrer in dede, & not only appere ſo. And thā I gaue her coūſeyle, that ſhe ſhuld not ſit ſtyl like a ſlaue or a bounde woman, but go about the

houſe like a maiſtres, & ſe howe the workes of the houſe wēte forwarde: ſome tymes to the weauing womē, both to teche them that ſhe can do better than they, & alſo to marke who dothe better or worſe. ſome tymes to loke vpō her that baketh the bread. ſome times to loke vpon her, that kepeth the ſtore houſe, to ſe her ſet vp and met that that ſhe weaueth. ſome times to beſtyr her ſelfe loking if eueri thing be ſet vp in his place. For I rekened, that this ſhulde be bothe a waye to take hede to the houſe, & alſo ſhuld ſerue for a good walke. Alſo I ſayde it were a good exerciſe to waſhe, to boulte, to bake, to ſhake keuerlettes, hāgynges, tappeſſary ware, & to ſet thē vp againe in their places. For I ſaid, if ſhe did ſōwhat to exerciſe her ſelfe / ſhe ſhulde haue the more luſte to her meate, ſhe ſhuld be the more helthie, & gette better fauoured colour in very dede. And alſo the ſight of the maiſtres being more clenlier & far better apparailed, & ſettinge her hāde to worke, & in a maner ſtriuīg with her ſeruantes who ſhalle do moſte, is a great cōforte vnto them, that be vnder her, ſpecially whā it lieth in them, either to do her pleaſer in doing of their worke with a good wil, or to be cōpelled to do it aginſt thier willes.

But they that alwaye do ſtande ſtylle lyke quenes in theyr maieſtie / they wyll be onely iuged of thoſe women that be triumphantly arrayde, the whiche do deceyue them.
            And nowe, ſayde he, good Socrates be ye ſure, ſhe liueth euen as I haue taughte her, and as I tell you.
            
               So. Than ſaide I. Good Iſchomachus, me thinketh ye haue ſufficiently ſpoken touchynge the behauour of your wyfe, and of you, to the great prayſe of you bothe: but nowe I pray you, tell me your owne dedes, that bothe ye may reioyce in tellynge ſuche thynges / the whiche do gette you ſo good a name. And whan I haue harde and lerned the workes and dedes of a good honeſt mā, I may gyue you ſuche thākis as ye deſerue, and accordynge to my power. By my faythe, ſayde Iſchomachus, I wyll be glad to tell you all, what ſo euer I do, to thintent ye may correcte me, if ye thynke I do not wel in ſome thynge. Socra. Ye but tell me, howe coude I correcte you, ſeinge that ye be come to this poynte to be a good honeſte man, ſpecially whan I am the man, that is taken for a trifler, that occupieth him ſelfe in nothynge, but in meaſurynge of the aier: And that that is a very ſore rebuke / 

and a token of moſt great foly, I am called a poure man. And I aſſure you,The name of pouerte. that name wolde haue troubled me very ſore / if I had not mette the tother daye by chaunce one Nicias hors, & ſene moche people that came after to beholde him, and harde very moche talkyng of hym. And in very dede I came to the horſekeper and aſked hym, whether the horſe had moche money or not. And he loked vpon me as though I had ben madde to aſke hym ſuche a pyuiſſhe queſtion / and ſaid: Howe ſhuld a horſe haue any money? And ſo I turned me euen backe agayn, whā I harde / it was laufull for a poure horſe to be good, if he had a good free harte and ſtomacke with hym. And therfore I preye you, ſeinge it is lyke wiſe lauful for a poure man to be good, that ye wyll telle me your maner of lyuynge to the vttermoſte poynte, to thentent that whan ye haue tolde me, I may endeuoir my ſelfe to lerne hit: & from this day forward to begynne to folowe you and do after you. For that may be called a very good daye, on the whiche a man begynneth to be good and vertuous. I know well ye ieſte with me good Socrates, ſayde Iſchomachus: but yet I wyll tell you as farforthe as I can, the holle courſe of my

life, the whiche I purpoſe to folowe ſtylle tyll the laſt day of my lyfe.
            After that I had wel perceyued / that except a man knoweth what is to be done, and wyll ſet and applie his mynde and diligēce to performe the ſame, god granteth no man to do well. And vnto them, that be bothe wyſe and diligent, god ſendeth welthe and good fortune. Wherfore firſte of all I beganne to honour and worſhyp god / and to calle vpon hym with my prayers / that he wold voucheſafe to ſende me the grace, that I might haue my helthe, ſtrength of body / honour in my citie, good wyl of my frendes, to returne home againe ſafe from warfare / with the encreace of my riches and goodes. Socra. And whan I harde that / I ſayde: And care ye ſo moche to waxe riche, ſeinge that whan ye be riche, ye haue the more trouble, in ſtudienge howe to order and kepe your goodes? Yes mary, ſaide Iſchomachus, I haue no ſmalle care of that that ye aſke me. For me thynketh it is great pleaſure bothe to worſhyp god honorably, and to helpe my frendes / if they be in nede, and to ſe that the citie be not depriued of the ornamētes of riches, as moche as lieth in me. Socra. By my fayth that that ye ſay good

Iſchomachus, is good and alſo very honorable / & longynge to a man of great power & ſubſtance. Iſcho. It muſt nedes be thus. For there be ſome men, the whiche can not lyue, but they muſte be holpen of other men. And there be many agayne / that reken hit ſufficient, if they can gette that / that is neceſſarie for them. But thoſe that wyll not onely order and gyde theyr houſes / but alſo haue ſo great abundance, that they do bothe honour to the citie / and alſo helpe and eaſe theyr frendes: why ſhuld not they be called and taken for men of profounde wiſedome, of great power, and of ſtoute ſtomacke? Socra. Surely there be many of vs, ſayde I, that may wel praiſe ſuche maner of men. But for goddis ſake telle me euen from the place, where ye beganne, howe ye go aboute to mainteine your helth, and alſo the ſtrēgth of your body / howe it may be laufull to retourne honorably home agayne ſafe fro the warre. For as touching the encreaſinge of goodes, we ſhal here of it afterwarde ſufficiently. But me thinketh, ſaide Iſcho, that theſe thīges be linked to gether, & come one after an other. For when a man hath meate & drinke ſufficiently, if he do labour wel, he ſhal haue his helth the better and the lōger.

And he that is well exerciſed in warre, he ſhall returne home ſafe agayne / and with more honour. And he that is diligent, and doth not coker hym ſelfe, nor gyue him ſelfe to ſlouthe and idelnes / he is the more likely to encreace his houſe. So. Forſothe good Iſchomachus, I graunte you all this euen hitherto, where ye ſay, that he that laboureth, taketh peyne, vſeth diligence, and exerciſeth him ſelfe, cometh the rather to goodes. But what labour ye vſe to meinteine a good complection, and to get you ſtrength, and howe alſo ye exerciſe your ſelfe for the warre / and howe ye ſtudie to get ſo moche ſubſtance and goodes / that ye maye bothe helpe your frendes / and make the citie more honorable and ſtronger by it, that wolde I very fayne here. Verily good Socrates ſaide Iſchomachus, I ryſe in the mornynge out of my bedde ſo yerly, that if I wol ſpeke with any man, I ſhall be ſure to fynde hym yet within. And if I haue any thynge ado in the citie, I go aboute it, and take hit for a walke. And if I haue no matter of great importance to do within the citie, my page bryngethe my horſe afore in to the feldes, and ſo I take the way to my grounde for a walke, better parauenture than if I dyd

walke in the galeries and walkynge places of the cite. And whā I come to my groūd, if my tenantes be eyther ſettynge of trees, or tyllynge or renewynge the grounde / or ſowyng, or carienge in the frute, I beholde howe euery thynge is done, and caſte in my mynde, howe I myghte do hit better. And afterwarde for the moſte parte, I get me a horſebacke and ryde as nere as I can, as though I were in warre conſtrayned to do the ſame, wherfore I do nat ſpare nother croked wayes, nor no ſhrowde goinges vp, no ditches / waters / hedges / nor trenches / takynge hede for all that as nere as can be poſſible, that in this doinge, I do not maime my horſe. And whan I haue thus done, the page leadeth the horſe trottynge home againe, and carieth home with hym in to the citie, out of the countre that that we haue nede of. And ſo than I get me home again, ſome tymes walking, and ſome tymes runnynge. Than I waſſhe my handes, and ſo go to diner good Socrates, the whiche is ordeyned betwene bothe, ſo that I abyde al the day nother voyde nor yet to full. So. By my trouth good Iſchomachꝰ, ye do theſe thynges wonders pleaſantly. For in dede to vſe & occupie at ones al maner of thīges,

that be ordeined for helthe, for ſtrength, for exerciſe of warre / for ſtudy and conueiance howe to get goodes / and all in one tyme, me thinketh a maruailous thynge. For ye do ſhewe euident tokens, that ye applie your minde wel & truly to al this. For we ſe you cōmonly, thanked be god / for the moſt parte helthful, ſtronge and luſty. More ouer we know, that ye be called one of the beſt horſe men, and one of the richeſt men of the citie. Iſcho. And though I thus do, as ye haue hard, yet can not I eſchewe detraction: ye thoughte parauenture that I wolde haue ſayde, I am therfore called a good honeſte man. So. And forſothe ſo I was aboute to ſay good Iſchomachꝰ, But this I thought firſt to enquere of you, whether ye do ſtudie and ſet your mynde, howe to anſwere theſe detractours / and ſpeake in a cauſe, whether it be your owne or an other mans, or to iuge it, if nede be. Iſcho. Thinke yon that I do not ſufficiently my parte in this matter / if I thīke by my good dedes to defēde my ſelfe, and do no wronge / and as moche as I may helpe and do pleaſure to many men? And more ouer, thinke ye that it is not well done to accuſe ſuche men, that do wronge both to priuate men, and alſo to the citie / and that

wyll do no man good? So. But yet if ye ſet your mynde to ſuche thynges / I praye you ſhewe it me? Iſcho. Forſoth I neuer ſtint, but am alway exerciſing my ſelfe in retoricke & eloquence. For whan I here one of my ſeruantes compleyne on an other / or anſwere in his owne cauſe, I ſeke to knowe the trouthe. Agayne / I either blame ſome man to my frendes, or els praiſe him, or els I go aboute to brynge at one ſome men of min acqueintance, that be at variāce, endeuorynge my ſelfe to ſhewe them / howe hit is more for their profette to be frendes / than yl wyllers and enmies. And before the high rulers I vſe both to commēde and defende hym, that is oppreſſed by wronge and iniurie / and before the lordes of the coſt ſeile I accuſe hym, that I ſe promoted vnworthily, & I preiſe that that is done by coū
               ſaile & deliberation, & the contrary I diſcō
               mende. But I am nowe broughte to this point, that either it behoueth me to ſuffre or to puniſhe. So. Of whom I prey the Iſch. For that do not I yet knowe.Stryffe with a wyfe. 
               Iſch Mary of my wyfe. So. But in what maner do ye ſtryue in your quarel? Iſch. Whan ſhe happeth to ſay trouth, it is very gentylly done, But whan ſhe lieth / & erreth in her wordes,

forſoth Socrates, I can not refourme her. So. May chance that, that is falſe, ye can not make hit trewe. But parauenture ye wold begone Iſchmachus, and I do let you. Truly I wolde be lothe to tarye you, if hit pleaſe you to go hēce. Iſcho. No in good fayth, good Socrates, I wyl not go hence tyl the courte breake vp. Socra. By my faythe, ye be righte circumſpecte and take good hede, that ye loſe not that honorable name, to be called a good honeſte man. For where parauēture ye haue many great buſineſſis and thinges to take hede to, that require great diligence, yet bicauſe ye promyſed thoſe ſtrāgers to tary for them here, ye wyll not deceiue them. Iſcho. As for thoſe my buſineſſes that ye ſpeake of Socrates, I haue prouided for thē wel inough. For I haue in the feldes my baillies of huſbandrye, and my deputies. So. But ſine we be fall in this communication, I praye you Iſchomachus tel me / whan ye haue nede of a good bayllie, do ye inquere, whether there be any that can do it well, and ſo finde the meane to haue hym: lyke wyſe as whā ye haue nede of a carpenter, whan ye knowe where is one / that can good ſkylle therof / ye wil deſire to haue hym, or els do ye make

your bayllies and deputies your ſelfe, and teache them to do hit? By my fayth,How to pr
                     •
                  
                  paire a ba
                     •
                  
                  lye of huſbandrye. I indeuour me to teache and inſtructe them my ſelfe. For he that ſhulde be ſufficient to do thoſe thynges for me in myne abſence, that he is put to / what nedethe he to knowe any thynge, but that that I do my ſelfe. For if I be ſufficient to ſette men a worke, and commaunde them what they ſhall do, I trow I am able to teache an other man that that I can do my ſelfe. Socra. Than he that is a baylly of huſbandry muſt owe you good wyl and fauour, and alſo to al yours, if he beinge preſent, ſhal be ſufficient in your abſence. For without loue and good wyl, what good can a bayllye do, if he be neuer ſo experte and connynge? By my faythe, ſayd Iſchomacus, neuer a whyt: but as for me / the fyrſte thynge that euer I do / I go aboute to teache hym to loue me and myn, and to loue my goodes. And I praye you for goddis ſake tell me / howe do ye teache hym to loue you and yours, who ſo euer he be that ye do this benifitte vnto? By my fayth, ſayd he, by gentyl & liberall dealing whan god ſendeth me plenty of any maner thinge. Socra. This ye meane I trowe, that they, the whiche be eaſed and holpe by

your goodes or money / do loue you and deſyre that ye may do well. Surely good Socrates / ſayde he / that is the beſte inſtrument that can be to allure and gette a mans good wyll withall. Socra. And whan he heareth you good wyll good Iſchomachus, is he therfore ſufficient to be a bayllye? For we may ſe that al mē loue them ſelfes / and yet through ſlonggiſſhenes they be negligent to do thoſe thynges, the whiche for the moſte parte they coueyte right moche to haue, as goodes, Iſcho. Ye but whan I wol make ſuche men as loue me my baillies and ouerſeers of my buſineſſes, I inſtructe and moniſſhe them before howe they ſhulde ouerſe euery thynge diligently. Socra. Can ye brynge that to paſſe? Forſothe me thynketh it is vnlikely, that any man coude be taught to gyde an other mans buſines aryght. Iſcho. In very dede it is impoſſible good Socrates to inſtructe and teache euery man diligently to do it. Socra. And who be they that ye thinke mete to be taught and inſtructed? For that I deſyre very greatly to knowe. Iſcho. Fyrſte of all they that can not refraine them ſelfes from dronkennes ar excluded from this care. For drōkē
               nes bringeth in with hit forgetfullnes of al

maner of thynges, that a man ſhulde do. Socra. Whether than is it impoſſible, but onely in them, that can not refrayne them from dronkennes, to make them diligent, or be there any other beſide? Yes mary ſayde Iſchomachus and they alſo that can not refrayne them ſelfe from ſlepe. Socra. Be there any mo beſyde thoſe? Methynketh, ſayde Iſchomachus, that they, the whiche do ſette theyr mynde ſore to the pleaſure of the fleſſhe / that it is impoſible to teache them to haue more mynde to any thynge than to that. for they can fynde nother hope nor ſtudy more pleaſant to them then of theyr louers. And whan they haue any thynge to do, it is harde to imagyne a ſorer puniſſhement than that is to them to be kept from them they be in loue with. Therfore I let ſuche maner of men go nor neuer go about to teach them to be more diligēt. So. Ye but they, that do ſet theyr mynde ſore to lucre, be not they apte to be taught that diligence / the whiche ſhulde be vſed and occupyed in your grounde? Iſchomachus. Yes marye they / there can none be ſooner brought to this dyligēce. For ye nede no more but only to ſhew them, that dylygence is verye profytable.

wherfore if I chance to haue ſuche one, I cōmende him moche. So. And as for other men, the whiche do refrain them from ſuche thinges as ye do commande / and haue a metely good mynde towarde lucre / howe do ye teache them to be as diligent as ye wold haue them? Iſcho. Mary very well good Socrates. For whan I ſe them diligent, I do bothe preyſe and rewarde them. And agayne whan I ſe them negligent and reche leſſe, I both do and ſay al that euer I can to anger and vexe them with. So. Ye but Iſchomachus, ſauinge your tale, that is of thē that be al redy inſtructed to be diligent: tell me this, touchinge the inſtruction of them, whether it be poſſible for a man, that is naturally negligent / to make other diligent? Iſch. No by my fayth / no more than he that hath no ſkyl in muſike can make other men muſitians. For hit is harde for a ſcholer to lerne that thynge well, that his maiſter teacheth yll. And it is harde for a ſeruant to vſe any dilygence, whan his mayſter gyueth hym example of negligence.Diligente mayſters make good ſeruantes. And ſhortely to ſpeake and in generall / I do nat remembre, that euer I hard that any yll maiſter had any good ſeruauntes. Mary this haue I ſene, that a good diligēt maiſter

by chaſtiſynge of dulheded ſeruantes / hath lightly inſtructed them. But he that wyll go aboute to make other diligente in theyr worke, he moſte ſpecially ought to be a prouident and a ware man, and ouer ſe and marke their workes. And whan there is any thinge wel and diligently done, he muſt cunne hym great thanke that dyd it / and he muſte not ſtycke to puniſſhe hym ſharpelye, accordyng as he deſerueth, that is negligēt in his buſines. And forſoth me thinketh to this purpoſe hit is a ryghte goodlye anſwere / that the Perſian made, For whan the kyng of Perſe aſked hym / rydyng vpon a ryght faire horſe, what thynge dyd ſoneſt make an horſe fat, he ſaid his maiſters eies.
            Some thynke lyke wyſe good Socrates, by all other thynges, that the maiſters eie moſte ſpeciallye maketh them to be in farre better plite. So. But whan ye haue tolde and ſhewed hym very well & with great inſtāce / that he muſt take hede to ſuche thīges as ye wyll haue hym, and that he is verye diligent / is he than mete to be your baillye or ſtewarde, or els muſte he lerne ſomwhat beſyde to make hym fitte for that purpoſe? Iſcho. No iwis man. For it behoueth him yet to lerne, what he muſt do, and whan, and

howe he ſhall order euery thyng. For els what auaileth a baylye or a ſtewarde more without this / than a phiſition / the whiche nighte and daye / yarly and laie taketh hede to a ſicke man / and yet he woteth not what is profitable for the ſame pacient. So And whan he knoweth what is to be done / ſhall he nede any thinge els, or ſhall he than be a perfecte bailye or ſtewarde? Iſcho. Me thinketh / that he ſhulde lerne alſo to rule the worke men. So. And do ye teache your bailie or ſtewarde to be able to rule? I go about it at lefte, ſayd Iſchomachus. So. And I praye you for goddes ſake, howe do ye teche men to haue the ſcience to rule and cō
               mande? Iſch. Very eaſily good Socrates / in ſo moche, that I thynke ye ſhall laugh at it / whan ye here it. So. Forſoth good Iſchomachus, ſayde I, it is no matter to laugh at / but he deſerueth & ought rather to be hyghly landed, that hath the wyt to teache that. For he that can teache men how to rule, he can alſo make them maiſters, & he that can make them maſters, can make them princelyke & able to be kinges. Iſcho. Suerly all maner of beſtes good Socrates do lerne to obey by the reaſon of theſe two thinges, that is to ſay, whan they do ſtryue, & wyll not be

obedient, they be puniſhed: and whan they do quickely that that a man byddeth them / they be cheriſhed and well intreated. Coltis and yong horſes lerne to obey their brekers and tamers: For whan they do obey them, they haue ſōwhat done to them for it / that is to theyr pleaſure & eaſe: But whan they wyl not obey, they beate and handell them very ſore and roughly for it, vntyll the time they ſerue the breker at his wyll.
            And yonge ſpaynels lyke wiſe, the which be worſe than men a great dele / for lacke of reſon, and for lacke of ſpeache, yet they lerne to ren a bout / to fetche or cary / to go in to the water after the ſame maner. For whan they obey, they haue ſomwhat gyuen them, that they haue nede of, and whan they wil not nor care not for it, they be puniſſhed. But as for men they may be well parſwaded and brought to obedience, if a man will ſhewe them, howe it ſhal be for theyr profitte, if they do obey. Neuertheleſſe vnto bonde men and vile perſones that way that is vſed and occupyed towarde beaſtis, wyll verye well induce them for to lerne to obeye. For if ye do ſomewhat for theyr bealye and make them fare well, ye ſhall gette verye moche done of them.
            
               But ioly ſtomackes and noble natures be moſt moued and ſtyrred with prayſe. For there be ſome natures, that do deſyre as moche laude and preyſe, as other do meate and drynke. And whan I haue taught him, that I will make my baillie or my ſteward / ſuche thynges, the whiche whan I do them my ſelfe / me thynketh I ſhall make men more obedient vnto me, I do ioyne this vnto hit beſyde. For as touchynge hooſen and ſhowes, and other rayment, the whiche I muſte gyue my laborers, I make them not a like. For ther be ſome better and ſome worſe: to thentent that the beſte workmen may haue the preeminence to haue the better, & the worſt may be gyuen to the worſt. For me thynketh it greueth good ſeruantes hartes very ſore / whan they ſe that the worke that they haue done, and howe thoſe haue euen as moche as they, that wyll nother labour nor take peyne, whan it behoueth to do it. Wherfore nother I my ſelfe wyll not ſuffre, that they that be worſte / and they that be beſte ſhulde be ſerued all a lyke. And whan I ſe that my bayllies and deputies dothe gyue the moſte and the beſte to them that do beſte, I do preyſe hym for it. But and I ſe him preferre any man afore

other bicauſe of his flaterynge, or for ſome other pyniſhe cauſe, I do not ſuffre it ſo to paſſe, but I blame and rebuke him greately therfore, and I go aboute to teache him alſo, that that, whiche he doth, is not for his profitte nother. So. And whan he is ſufficient thus to rule and gyde, good Iſchomachus, ſo that he can make them to obeie him, do ye thynke that baillye perfecte on euery ſyde, or hath he nede of ony other thynge els? Yes mary / ſayde Iſchomachus, for it behoueth him to kepe his handes clene from his mayſters goodes / and beware that he ſteale nothinge therof. For if he / that hath the frutes in his handes wolde be ſo bolde to conuey ſo moche out of the waye, that that, whiche remayned were not ſufficient to maynteyne the worke and fynde the labourers, what profytte ſhulde we haue by his bayliſhyp, and by his diligence? So. And do you in dede take vpon you to teache them that iuſtice and rightfulnes? Yes mary, ſayde Iſchomachus, but I fynde that euery man dothe not obeye and folowe this teachinge and inſtrucion of myn. Neuertheles I take here a pece of Dracons lawes, and here a pece af Solons, and ſo endeuour my ſelfe to bringe my ſeruantes to folowe

iuſtice. For me thinketh that theſe men haue made many lawes to teche men iuſtice. For they haue wrytten, that he muſte be punyſſhed that ſteleth, and he that robbeth muſte be put in priſon and put to dethe. wherfore it may be clere ſene, that they haue wrytten thoſe thynges to the intent that they, the whiche do get any goodes foule and ſhamefully, contrary to reaſon and equite, ſhulde haue no vantage nor no profyt by hit. And whan I haue this do / I brynge in beſyde ſome lawes of the kynge of Perſe, to make my ſeruauntes to deale ryghtfully in that that they be put to. For as touchynge Dracons and Solons lawes, they do no more but punyſſhe them that do amyſſe:Perſiens 
                     •
                  awes. but the kyng of Perſes lawes do not only punyſhe them that do wronge and vniuſtly / but alſo they do them good that be ryghtfull and deale iuſtly. Wherby it appereth, that many, the whiche be verye couetous / and care not what they do / ſo that they may winne, when they ſe that they, the whiche be ryghtfull and good / waxe rycher than they / the whiche do other men wronge, they continue and proſpere well in this that they do no man wronge. And whan I perceyue that any of them, vnto the whiche I haue ben good and

ſhewed pleaſure vnto them, wyll not leaue, but go about ſtylle to do wronge and deale vniuſtly, than whan I perceyue that he is paſt al remedy, I put hym out of his roume, and wyl not let hym occupy it no more. But whan I perceyue, that any of them ſetteth his mynde and courage to be a good / a iuſte and a true ſeruant, and doth it not ſo moche bycauſe they thynke to haue ſome vauntage by hit, but for the deſire that they haue to pleaſe me, and to be preyſed of me, though they be bounde men / I vſe them as free men / and for theyr ioly free hart, I do not onely promote them in goodes and ryches / but alſo preiſe and commende them as good and honeſt men. For me thynketh that and honeſt man / that is deſyrous of honour / doth differre in this poynt from a couetous man, that for preyſe and honour wyll take peyne and put hym ſelfe in ieoperdie / whan it is nedefull: and yet kepe hym ſelfe cleane from foule lucre. And thus whan ye haue ones engendred and faſtned this affection in a man / that he oweth you good wylle / and beareth you good loue and fauour / and that ye haue brought hym to this poynt, that he wyll applie his mynde and diligence to do euen as ye wold your ſelfe, and beſide that,

ye haue gotten hym the ſcience, howe euery worke that is done ſhalbe moſte profitable / and made him alſo ſufficiēt and able to rule, and that he wyl beſide this bring and ſhewe you the frutes of the grounde none otherwyſe than ye wolde to your ſelfe: whether nedeth he any thyng els or not, I wyl ſpeke no more, for me thynketh that ſuche a man ſhulde be a verye good and a profytable ſtewarde and deputie. Socra. But I praye you good Iſchomachus, do not leaue behynde that parte, whiche we haue ſo lightly ronne ouer. And what is that, ſayd Iſchomachus? Socra. Mary ye ſayde, that the greatteſt poynt of all was to lerne howe euery thynge ſhulde be done, to the ende that profite therby ſhulde ryſe vnto vs, for other wyſe ye ſayde, that diligence coude auayle nothynge / excepte a man knewe what and howe to do. Iſcho. Do ye byd me to teache you the ſcience of huſbandry? Forſoth it is it, ſayd I, that maketh them ryche / that can wel occupie it / and they that can nat, though they take neuer ſo moche peyne / they lyue wretchedlye.
            
               Iſcho. Nowe than fyrſt of al ye ſhall here howe gentyll a ſcience it is. For ſeynge it is moſte profitable and pleaſant to occupye / 

moſte goodlyeſt, beſt beloued of god and of men, and beſyde that, moſte eaſye to lerne, howe ſhulde it nat be a gentyll ſcience? For we call all theſe beaſt is gentyll / the whiche be goodly, great, and profitable, and be nat fierce but tame amonge men. So. But me thynketh good Iſchomacus / that I haue very well perceyued, that where ye ſayde, howe a man muſte teache a ſtewarde and a deputie, and that ye taught hym to owe you good loue and good wylle, and lyke wyſe / that ye wente about to make hym diligent, able to rule, and alſo ryghtfull: but where ye ſayde, that he, whiche wyll be diligent in dede in huſbandry, muſt lerne what is to be done, howe, and in what ſeaſon, me thynketh we haue ouer paſſed hit ſomewhat to quickely and to negligently. Lykewyſe as if ye ſayde / that he, the whiche wyll write that that a man ſpeaketh, and rede that that is wrytten, muſte knowe his letters. For he that dyd here this, hath harde nothyng els, but that he muſt lerne to knowe his letters. But whan he perceyueth, that he is neuer the nerer to knowe what letters do meane. And nowe lyke wyſe I beleue very well, that he, the whiche wyl vſe diligence in huſbandry / muſt lerne to know wel huſbandry,

but though I beleue and knowe that well, yet am I neuer the wyſer howe to occupye huſbandry. And if I were euen now determined to falle to huſbandry, I wold thynke I were lyke a phiſition / the whiche gothe about and loketh vpon / ſeke men, yet can he not tell what is good for them. And therfore to thende I be not ſuche one, teache me the very poynt and caſte of huſbandry. For ſothe good Socrates, ſayde he, it is not by this as by other craftes and ſciences / that he which lerneth them muſt be a longe tyme about them / and beſtowe moche peyne and labour in them / er he can do any thynge to get his lyuyng by. Huſbandry is nothyng ſo harde to lerne: for ye ſhall lerne it euen anone lokyng vpon the labourers, and partly by herynge ſpeke of hit / ſo that if ye wyl ye may teache hit vnto other. And trewely other artificers and craftes men do hyde and kepe priuey to them ſelfe the beſt poyntes of theyr ſciences, the good huſbande men, he that ſetteth trees beſte / he wyll haue very great pleaſure, if any man beholde hym, and he that ſoweth after the ſame maner. And if ye aſke hym of any thynge that is well wrought, I am ſure he wyll neuer kepe from you / howe he dyd it.

And ſo good Socrates, huſbandry techeth them that be conuerſant in it to be of gentyl maners and diſpoſition. Soc. Forſoth this is a good begynnynge, and nowe I haue harde you tell this moche, it is vnpoſſible to ſtoppe me from inquerynge of you further therof. And therfore ſeynge ye ſaye it is a thynge ſo eaſy to lerne, do the rather ſhewe hit me. For it is no ſhame to you to teache that that is eaſye: but it is rather a great ſhame to me / if I can it not, ſpecially whan it is ſo profitable.
            And therfore I wyll ſhewe vnto you firſt of all ſayde Iſcho. that that whiche is the diffuſeſt poynte of all huſbandry, as they ſay whiche diſpute of it moſte exactly in wordes, and in dede occupie it neuer a whit, is nothynge harde at all. For they ſay,Knowlege of good grounde. that he that wyll be a good huſbande man / muſt fyrſte knowe the nature of the grounde. So. In dede they ſeme to ſay well: For he that doth not knowe, what the grounde wyl brynge forthe / I trowe he can not knowe nother what ſede he ſhulde ſowe / nor what trees is beſte to ſette. Iſcho. And therfore a man may knowe by an other mannes grounde, what hit wyll brynge forthe and what hit wyll not, whanne he ſeeth

bothe the frutes and alſo the trees. And whan he knoweth it ones, hit is not for his profitte to ſtryue agaynſte god and nature. For if a man doth eyther ſowe or ſette that that he hath nede of, he is neuer the nerer to haue that that is neceſſarie for hym, excepte the grounde do in a maner delyte and take pleaſure bothe to brynge it forth and to noryſſhe it. But if he can nat knowe the goodnes and fertilite of the grounde by reaſon of the idelnes and negligence of them that haue it in hande: he ſhall often tymes better knowe it by ſome grounde that is nat farre from it, than of the neighbour that dwelleth by it. And all though the grounde be vntylled and vnlaboured, yet it ſheweth his owne nature. For that grounde, that bereth good wylde frutes and wyedes, wyll brynge forth, if it be taken hede to and well tylled, other good frutes and herbes as well as them. So that they that be not all of the beſt ſene in huſbandry, can well diſcerne the nature of the grounde. Socra. Forſothe good Iſchomachus, I may be bolde to byde by this, that a man nedethe not to abſteyne from huſbandrye, for feare leeſt he knowe not the nature of the grounde. For I do remembre / that fiſſhers, whiche be alweys

occupied in the ſee, the whiche come not to beholde the grounde howe it is, nor walke not fayre and ſoftly, but rūne euen through it, whan they ſe the frutes on the grounde, they wyll not ſtycke to ſhewe theyr opinion of the grounde, whiche is good, and whiche is bad / and prayſe this, and diſprayſe that. And I ſe they wyll be communynge often tymes with men, that can very good ſkylle in huſbondry, and ſhewe them very many thynges touchinge a good grounde. Iſcho. Where than wyll ye haue me to begyn good Socrates to declare huſbandry vnto you, leſt I reherſe ſomwhat that ye knowe alredy, for I perceyue, ye be right expert therin? So. This me thinketh both profitable and a very great pleaſure to lerne / and alſo hit belongeth ſpecially to a philoſopher to knowe, howe I myght, if I wolde, by tyllynge and laborynge the grounde, haue very moche plentie of barly, rye, wheate, and other corne Iſcho. This I trewe ye know wel inough, that falowynge and ſtyrrynge of the grounde, helpeth very moche to the ſowinge? So. Forſoth ſo I do. Iſcho. And what if we ſhulde begynne to falowe and plowe the grounde in wynter? Soc. That were nought. For than the erthe ſhulde be

all ſlymy. Iſcho. And what thynke ye in ſomer? So. Than it wolde be to harde to plowgh it. Iſcho. Wel than we muſt nedes begynne in the ſpringe of the yere. So. Ye mary / for than it is moſt lykely / that the grounde openneth and ſpredeth his owne ſtrengthe and vertue aboute, whan it is falowed and tylled in that tyme. Iſcho. Yea and beſide that good Socrates the yonge wides turned vp ſo downe at that tyme be as good to the grounde as any dougynge: and they be not yet come to that ſtrength / that the ſeede of them caſte adowne can growe vp agayne. And I trowe ye knowe this well inough, that if the falowinge, and the tyllynge of the grounde ſhulde be good, the grounde muſt be clene kepte and delyuered from wides, and wel fauourdly heated and warmed of the ſon. So. Me thynketh in very dede it ſhulde be ſo. Iſcho. And do ye thike, that that can be better brought to paſſe by any other meane / thanne if the groūde be often tymes ſtirred in the ſomer? So. I knowe very well, that the wides can neuer better wither away and drye vp, nor the grounde be better heated throughe the heate of the ſonne / thanne if the grounde be ploughed and ſtyrred in the middes of ſommer

/ and in the myddes of the day. And if any man do falowe, or dygge the grounde with his owne hādes, is it not clere inough, that he alſo muſte ſeperate aſonder the wides from the grounde, and caſte the wides abrode, that they may dry vp, and turne vp ſo downe and ſtyrre the grounde / that the ſoorenes and the rawe watriſſhenes of hit may be warmed and well dryed vp? Iſcho. Than ye ſe well good Socrates, howe we be both in one opinion touchynge falowinge and ſtyrrynge of the grounde. So. So me thynketh. And touchynge ſowinge, haue ye any other knowlege or opinion, but that is the ſeaſon to ſowe, the whiche bothe men of olde antiquite / approuyng it by experience / and all they, that be nowe, takynge hit of them / do iudge it beſt of al? For whan the ſomer is ones paſt, and Septembre cometh in, al men that be in the worlde do loke vpō almighty god, that whan it ſhalbe his pleaſure to ſende ſome rayne & make the groūde wete and moyſty, that they may fal to ſowinge euen as he commandeth it. Soc. And forſothe good Iſchomachus all the men in the worlde haue determined by one aſſente / that they wyl not ſowe, whan the grounde is drye. And hit is clere to euery man, that

they take great loſſis and damages / that wyll go aboute to ſowe afore god byddeth them. Iſcho. Than in theſe thynges al we men do agre. So. For in that that god techeth, it foloweth / that euery man agreeth in it: As for a ſimilitude, Euery man thynketh beſt to weare good furred and wel lyned gownes in wynter / if he be able, and al ſo to make good fyre, if he haue wodde. Iſcho. Yea but there be many, the whyche do vary in this touchinge ſowinge, whether it be beſte to ſowe in the begynnynge, in the myddes, or at the later ende. Soc. And god dothe not ſende euery yere of one lyke temperatnes of wether. For ſome tymes it is beſt to ſowe in the begynnynge, ſome tymes in the myddes, ſome tymes at the later ende. Iſcho. But what thynke ye beſt gentyll Socrates, whanne ſo euer a man hath choſen his ſowynge tyme / or euer more in this tyme, or nowe in this and nowe in that, whether is it beſt to ſowe moche ſeede or litel? So. Me thynketh beſt of all good Iſchomachus to diſtribute the ſeede, wel, ful, and truly. For I ſuppoſe it is a great deale better to take corne inough euer more, than ſome tymes to moche and ſometymes to lytel. And in this poynt alſo good Socrates

ſayd he, you beinge the lerner do agre with me the techer, and ye haue ſhewed your opinion afore me. So. But what of that ſayde I / for in the caſtynge of the ſeede there is moche counnynge? Iſcho. In any caſe good Socrates, lette vs loke vpon that. For ye knowe wel, that it muſt be caſt with a mans hande. So. Forſothe I haue ſen it done ſo. Iſcho. But ſome can caſte it euen, and ſome can not. So. well than it lacketh nothynge els but to exerciſe the hāde, as harpers and luters do / that hit maye folowe the mynde. Iſch. It is very wel ſayde: But what if the grounde be thynner or groſſer? So. what meane you by that? Do ye not take the thinner for the weaker, and the groſſer for the ſtronger? Iſcho. That ſame meane I. So. And this wolde I fayne know of you, whether ye wyl gyue as moche ſeede to the tone as to the tother, or els whiche of them wyl ye gyue more vnto? Iſch. In the wyne that is ſtronge, me thynketh hit behoueth to put the more water, and the man that is ſtronger muſt beare the greater burthen, if there be any thinge to be caried, and ſom men are fedde and nouriſſhed with ſklēder fare, and the ſame herin muſt be obſerued. So. Thike you not that the grounde wayeth ſtronger,

if a man do put more frute in it, like wiſe as moyles and horſes do waxe ſtronger with cariage / that wolde I deſire you to teache me. Whan Iſchomchus herde that, he ſayd: what Socrates ye ieſte with me. But yet, ſayde he, take this for a very ſuretye, that whaune a man hath ſowen any ſeede in the grounde, loke whan the grounde hath moſt comforte of the ayre with wete and moyſtnes, if the corne be grene newly riſen out of the erthe, if he ſtyrre and turne it in ageyne, it is as if it were a ſuſtinance to the groūde, and getteth as moche ſtrength by it / as if it had ben donged. But if ye ſuffre the groūde cōtinually to brynge forth frute of the ſede, it is harde for a weake grounde to brynge forth moche frute ſtyll: lyke wyſe as hit is hard for a weake ſowe to gyue ſucke and ſuſtināce to many pigges, and kepe them fatte and in good plite whan they waxe great. So. Ye ſey good Iſchomacus that ye muſte ſowe leſſe ſeede on a weker grounde. Iſcho. So I do in dede good Socrates: and ye alſo dyd graunte hit vnto me a littel afore, whan ye ſayd, that ye thought that the weakeſt ſhuld be left charged. So. But for what reaſon good Iſchomachus, do ye make dyches in the corne feldes? Iſcho. Ye wotte

wel, that in wynter are many ſhowers. So. what therof? Iſcho. Mary therof chaunce many hurtes: for a great parte of the felde is ſurrounded with water, and the corne coueredde in mudde, and the rootes of moche of the corne are worne and waſſhed awaye with the water, and further often tymes by reaſon of the greate abundaunce of water, there cometh moche wides and other harlotry, that ſuppreſſeth & diſtroyeth the corne. So. It is lyke inough, that all this ſhulde be. Iſc. And thynke ye than, that the corne beinge in that takinge / hath not nede to be holpe? So. Yes mary. Iſch. Than if the corne be couered with mudde, what ſhal we do to helpe it? So. Mary eaſe the grounde and make it lighter. Iſcho. But what if the root is be waxed thynne and almoſte worne away? So. Thā ye muſt caſt to more erthe that it maye take roote and growe agayne. Iſch. But what if the wides and other harlotry ſucke vp the moyſture from the corne, lyke as the drone bees, the whiche beinge them ſelfes vnprofitable do robbe awaye & eate vp the bees vitayles, that they had ſet vp for to worke with? So. Mary the wides and harlotry muſt be pluckte and cut away, lyke wiſe as the drone bees are voyded our

of the hyues. Iſcho. Thynke yon than that we do not make the dyches and ſloughes in the feldes for a good cauſe? So. Forſothe ſo it is, but I thīke nowe in my mynde good Iſchomacus, what a thynge it is to brynge in ſimilitudes & likeneſſis. For ye haue moued me more a greate deale / and made me more diſpleaſed ageynſt theſe wides, whan ye ſpake of the drone bees, than whan ye ſpake of the wides them ſelfes. But nowe after this ſayd I, harueſt ſeaſon wyl come / wherfore I pray you tell me if ye haue any thinge to teche me in this matter. Iſcho. So I wyl, if ye do not ſhewe your ſelfe, that ye knowe it as wel as I. This ones ye knowe that the corne muſte alway be reaped. Soc. What els? Iſch. Whether than muſt ye ſtāde to reape it with the wynde or agaynſte the wynde?To reape corne. 
               So. Not agaynſt the wynde, for it wolde be a great peyne, as I thynke bothe for the eies and alſo for the hādes to reape agaynſte the eares blowen downe with the wynde. Iſcho. And how wyl ye cutte it, at the very toppe, or euen by the groūde? So. If the ſtalke be ſhort, I wyl cutte it a lowe that there maye be ſtrawe inough: But if it be very hie, I thynke better to cutte it in the myddell, to thentent that nother the threſſhere

nor the fanners / ſhal take more peyne in vayne than nedeth, and that that remayneth, I thynke if it be burned / hit wyll do the grounde very moche good, and if it be layde with the donge it wyl fyl and encreſe it. Iſchomacus. Do ye ſe nowe frende Socrates, howe ye be taken in the very dede doinge, that ye knowe as well as I, what longeth to reapynge? So. In faythe I am aferde leſt it be ſo in dede: And nowe wyll I ſe like wiſe whether I can threſſhe or not. Iſcho. This ye knowe well that horſes do threſſhe corne. Socra. why ſhulde I not,To threſhe corne and not onely horſes but alſo moyles and oxen lyke wiſe? Iſcho. But howe can theſe beaſtis ſtampe well and threſſhe the corne euen as they ſh
                  ••
               de good Socrates? Soc. It is clere, tha
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                is by the reaſon of them, whiche haue thecha
                  •
               ge of the threſſhynge. For they do euermore turne and ſtyrre and put vnder theyr fee
                  •
                that that is vnthreſſhed / and ſo they muſt nedes make hit euen, and make an ende of hit as quickely as may be. Iſcho. Th
                  •
               h as for this buſynes, ye knowe it as wel as I. Socra. Nowe after this good Iſchomachus, lette vs clenſe the corne and wynnowe hit. Iſcho. Telle me thā good Socrates, do ye knowe this, that

if ye begynne to winnowe it in that parte of the wynowynge place, where the wynde is ageynſt you, that the chaffe wyl be ſcatered abrode through al the winnowynge place? So. It muſte nedes. Iſcho. Than it muſte nedes as wel fal vpon the corne. So Verily it is no ſmal poynte to make the chaffe to go beyonde the corne in a voyde rowme of the wynowynge place. But if a man begyn to wynowe vnder the winde, or a ſyde halfe of hit, than it is clere, that al the chaffe wyl voyde to the place that is ordeyned for hit. Iſcho. But whan ye haue clenſed the corne euen to the myddyf of the wynowing place, whether than, the corne beinge thus ſcatered abrode, wyl ye wynowe the remanant / or wyl ye put fyrſte to gether on a heape as narowly as can be al that euer is clene? So. Forſoth I wyl firſt put to geder on a heape all that is clene, left parauenture the chaffe be caried about the wynowinge place, wher by I ſhulde be fayne to wynowe twyſe one thynge. Iſcho. Nowe than gentyl Socrates, ye may teche an other man, if ye wyll, how he ſhal ſooneſt gette his corne clenſed. So. In good fayth I had almoſt forgotte, that I coude all this a greate while ago. And nowe I caſte in my mynde, whether I

haue forgottē my ſelfe, that I can playe on a harpe / play vpon recorders / peynte / and carue, and other ſciēces. For there was neuer man, that taught me theſe no more thā to be a huſbande man. And I ſe as well other men worke in theyr ſciēces as huſbāde men laboure the grounde. Iſcho. And dyd not I tel you but a littel afore, that this ſcience of huſbandry is wonders pleaſant and very eaſy to lerne? So. I knowe very wel good Iſchomacus / that I vnderſtode and coude al maner of thynges, that do lōge to ſowinge / but I haue forgottē my ſelfe that I coude them. But the ſettynge of trees ſayde I, is that any poynte of huſbandry?Settynge of trees. 
               Iſch. Yes mary. So. How happeneth than that I knewe wel al ſuche thynges as lōge to earynge and ſowyng / and am ignoraunt in that that longeth to plantynge of trees? Iſcho Be ye ignorant in dede? So. I muſt nedis be, ſeinge I know not in what groūde a man ſhulde ſet a tree / nor howe depe / nor of what length / nor what breade it be ſette in / nor whan it is in the groūde how it ſhal beſt growe and come vp. Iſcho. Wel than lerne that that ye knowe not. I am ſure ye haue ſeen what pyttes they make for trees that do ſette them? So. That I haue very

many tymes. Iſcho. And dyd ye euer ſe any of them deper than thre fote? So. No mary I / nor yet deper than two fote and a halfe. Iſcho. And as for the brede dyd you euer ſe any broder than thre fote? So. Forſoth and god / I neuer ſawe none paſt two foote and a halfe brode. Iſch. Now anſwere me this agayne, Dyd ye euer ſe any of leſſe altitude than two foote? So. In very dede I neuer ſawe none of leſſe altitude thā two fote and a halfe. For if the plantes were but ſhalow ſet, they wolde ſoone be writhed vp. Iſcho. Than it is apparāt inough to you good Socrates / that they dygge the pyttes to ſet in trees, no dyper than two foote and a halfe, nor no broder than two foote and a halfe. So. It muſt nedes be ſo, ſeinge it is ſo clere. Iſc. But touchyng the groūde / do ye knowe which is drie & which is wete, if ye ſe it? So. Me thynketh the grounde, that lyeth about Licabectꝰ / or any other that is lyke vnto it, is drye grounde: And that is called a wete grounde / the whiche lieth aboute Phalericus, ful of maris al aboute / and any other lyke vnto it. Iſcho. Whether than wyll ye digge vp a depe pitte to ſette in trees in the dry grounde or in the wete? So. In the dry groūde verily. for if ye ſhulde make a depe

pytte in the wete grounde / ye ſhulde fynde water: and than ye coulde not ſette it in the water. Iſch. Me thynketh ye ſay very wel. And whā the pittes be dygged vp, ye know what trees be mete for both groūdes? So. Very wel. Iſcho. And if ye wolde that the tree, whiche ye do ſette / ſhulde growe and come vp well fauordly, whether thynke ye it wyl better ſpringe and waxe mighty and ſtrōge / if ye ſette vnderneth erthe that hath ben labored and occupied afore, orels ſuche as hath ben alwaye vnoccupied. So. It is clere inough ſayd I, that it wyl growe and come vp better by the reaſon of the erthe occupied than of the grounde vnoccupied. Iſc. Than there muſte ſome erthe be put vnderneth? So. Why ſhulde it not? Iſc. But whether thynke ye, that the vyne braunche, the whiche ye ſette, wyl gether rootis better if ye ſette it ſtreyght vpright, or if ye ſet it croked vnder the groūde, ſo that it be lyke this greke lettre, Y, turned vp ſet downe? So. Mary euen ſo. For than there ſhall be the more rootis in the erthe / wherby the plante ſhall ſtande the faſter, and ſo many the mo branches ſhal ſpringe vp. Iſcho. Wel than in this matter we haue both one opiniō. But whether wyl ye no more but caſte the erthe

to the plante that ye ſet, orels wil ye treade & rāme it hard downe? So. Forſoth I wyl trede and ſtampe it harde to, for els it were ieoperdy leſt the rayne wolde lightly perce in, and ſo rotte and marre the rootis / orels the ſonne dryinge the erthe away from the rootis of the plante, ſhulde lewſe and vnfaſten it, and ſo kyll it. Iſcho. wel than good Socrates we be bothe of one opinion touchynge ſettynge of vines. So. And ſhall I ſette a fygge tree after the ſame maner? Iſcho. Yes I trow, and al other trees lyke wyſe. For if ye can ſette vines wel, what other ſettynge is ther but that ye may take it vpon you lyke wyſe? So. But howe ſhulde we ſette olyue trees good Iſchomacus? I pray you proue afore any thynge / whether I can any ſkylle therin. Iſcho. Ye ſe howe there is a good depe pytte digged for an olyue tree, I wote well ye coude not chooſe but ſe hit, ſeinge they be digged euen by the high wayes ſyde. Alſo ye ſe howe the very ſtockes of the olyues be ſette in the ſettynge place. And farther ye ſe howe there is clay layde vpon the toppes of them: And howe of all trees that be planted, there are none couered aboue / but only the ſame. So. All this I ſe well. Iſc. And whan ye ſe it / what

ſhulde be the let, that ye ſhuld not knowe it: excepte parauenture ye can nat tell howe to clappe a ſhelle faſt to the clay, that is ſet on the toppe therof? So. By my faythe, of all this that ye haue ſpoken, there is nothynge but I know it. And now I caſt in my minde agayne, what is the cauſe / that whan ye aſked me but a littel afore in generall, whether I coude ſet trees, I ſayde no. For me thought I coude not tell / how a man ſhulde ſet trees▪ But after ye began to enquere of me euery thynge by it ſelfe, I anſwered you according to your mynde, and to your owne opinion, the whiche be called the moſte parfecte huſbande man, that is now at this day alyue. Is not my chance good, Iſchomacus ſayde I, aſkyng a maner of teachynge? For I haue lerned & can wel nowe euery thynge by it ſelfe / what ſo euer ye haue demanded of me. For ye leade me by ſuche thynges / as I am ſkilled in & vnderſtande, vnto ſuche thynges as I perceyued not: and ſo ye perſwade and make me beleue that I knowe them as well as the tother. Iſcho. Well, thynke ye, that if I aſked you after the ſame maner touchinge ſyluer or golde / whiche is good and which is badde, that I coude perſwade you, that ye be a good trier of golde

and ſyluer? And agayne, I coude not parſwade you, if I aſked you neuer ſo moche, that ye can play vpon recorders, or that ye can peynte, or do any ſuche thynges? Soc. Parauenture yes. For ye haue parſwaded me, that I haue well the ſcience of huſbandry: and yet I knowe wel, that there was neuer any body that taught me that ſcience. Iſcho. It is not ſo good Socrates: For I haue tolde you a praty while ago, that huſbandry is ſo pleaſant and ſo familiar a ſcience, that they, the whiche do eyther ſe hit, or here tel of hit, be euen by and by well lerned in it. And alſo it ſheweth many thynges it ſelfe for a man to lerne, howe to order it beſt. For euen at the firſt the vine, the whiche crepeth vp vpon the trees, if there be any nere hande it, ſheweth, that it wolde be holpen vp and ſuſteyned. And whan it ſpredeth abrode his leaues and braunches, the grapis beinge yet but veri tēder, it ſhewith, that in that ſeaſon hit wolde haue ſhadowe made there vnto hit, where as the heate of the ſonne lyeth ſoore vpon it. And whan hit is tyme for the grapis to waxe ripe & ſwete the which is cauſed only by the heate of the ſonne, it letteth the leaues fal, to teache the huſbāde men, that it wolde be lightned and

eaſed, that the frute maye the better waxe rype. And whan that by the reaſon it hath brought forth moche frute, and ſome ar rype and ſome not, it ſheweth, that thoſe cloſters, that be rype, muſt be gedered, like as on fygge trees they muſte be taken downe / that be rype and redy to be gethered. Soc. Howe can this be, good Iſchomacus, if huſbandry be ſo eaſy to lerne, and euery man knoweth what is to be done, as well one as an other, that they haue not a lyuinge by hit al a lyke? For ſome haue great plentye and lyue welthily, and other ſom haue ſcātly ſo moche as they nede, and be in dette to other men? Iſch. Mary I wyl tel you good Socrates, hit is nother the knowelege nor lacke of knowelege of huſbande men / that maketh ſome of them riche and ſom powre. For ye ſhal not lightly here ſuche a tale go about, that ſuche a mans houſe is vndone, bicauſe he hath not ſowed euen: or bycauſe that he hath nat well ſette and planted his trees: or bicauſe he knewe not what groūd was good for vynes, he hath ſette his in a naughty grounde: or bicauſe he knewe not, that it was good to falowe the grounde before he did ſowe it: or bicauſe he knew not, that it was good to dounge hit. But this ye

may here often tymes very wel, This man getteth no croppe on his grounde this yere. For he hath made no prouiſyon to gette hit ſowed, or to gette it dounged. And agayne: This man getteth no wyne. For he nother careth to plante any vynes in his grounde / nor ſeeth nothynge to thoſe, that be alredy planted, to make them brynge forthe ſome frute. This man hath no oyle. This man hath no fyggis: For he wyll take no peyne nor applie his mynde to haue any. Theſe be the cauſes good Socrates, that make one huſbāde man to differre from an other, and to be alſo vnlyke in ſubſtance and in riches / a great dele more / thā if any of them ſemed to be experter in his workes and buſineſſis. And of the capitaynes of warre lyke wiſe, there be many, the whiche haue egally good wytte and very good ſight in ſuche thynges as do longe to warre, and yet there be ſome of them better and ſome worſe / and that is throughe the diuerſite of takynge hede and of diligence. For ſuche thynges as all capitaynes do knowe, and alſo the moſt part of them, that were neuer in that dignite, ſome capitaynes do them and ſome not. As thus. All they knowe, that it is better for them, that ſhal leade an army through their ennemies

lande to marche forwarde in good order and array: that they may be alway redy to fight, if nede be. And yet ſom of them that knowe this very well do hit, and ſome do not. Alſo all they knowe / that it is beſte to kepe watches and ſcoutwaches bothe by nyght and by day: And yet ſome of them ſe well to, that it be ſurely kept, and ſome do not. Agayne / whan they leade theyr army through narowe places / ye ſhall all moſte fynde none, but that he knoweth, it is better to preuente theyr enemies be tymes than to late. And yet ſome of them do theyr dilygēce, that they may ſo do, and ſome do not. And lyke wyſe of doungynge. Euery man ſayth / it is very good and neceſſary for the grounde to dounge hit. And they ſe / howe men may haue it bothe of beſtis in his owne kynd, and alſo fynde other meanes to haue it, and make eaſily a very great deale therof. And yet ſome take hede, that hit be getered, and ſome let it paſſe, and care not for hit. Yet god ſendeth rayne from aboue, and al maner of holowe grounde receyueth hit / and kepeth it / and waxeth a pouddell with it. The groūde bryngeth forth al maner of wydes and naughty harlotry. And he that wyll ſowe, muſte fyrſt rydde and purge the

grounde, and ſuche wydes and thynges as he gethereth out of the lande if he caſt them into the water / in proces of tyme it woll be as good and as holſome to the grounde, as any donginge. for what wydes be there, or what groūd is it, that wyl not becom doūge in very dede, if it be caſt in to ſtādynge water? More ouer what remedy is there, if the grounde be to wete to ſowe in hit? or to ſoore to ſet trees in it? Euery mā knoweth, that the water muſte be voyded out by makynge of dytches and ſloughes pourpoſely therfore: and how the ſoorenes is miniſhed and mitigated, if all maner of thynges / the whiche be not ſoore / whether they be drye or were / be myngled ther with. And ſome huſbandes take good hede to this, and ſome regarde it not. But if a man knowe neuer a whitte, what the grounde wyl bringe forth, nor can ſe nother frute nor tree in it / nor ſpeke with no man / that ſhall tell hym the trouthe of hit: is it not farre a great deale eaſier to haue a profe of hit, than eyther of a horſe or a man? For that that it ſheweth, it is not ſhewed falſely and colorably: but tilled it ſheweth the very trouthe / without any faynynge / what it can brynge forth / and what not. And forſothe me thynketh / 

that the grounde doth beſt examyne, which be good / and whiche be vnthryfty huſbandes, in that that it ſetteth forth al maner of thynge ſo eaſy to be lerned, and ſo ſoone to be knowen. For it is not in huſbandry as it is in other craftes / that they, the whiche do not worke, may excuſe them ſelfes, and ſey that they can not ſkyyl to do it: but euery man knoweth, that if the grounde be wel tylled and huſbandly handled, it ſheweh vs pleaſure agayne for it. And ſurely huſbandry is it / that beſt proueth a mans vnluſty corage and ſluggiſſhe diſpoſition. For there is no man can parſwade hym ſelfe, that a a man can lyue without ſuche thynges as be neceſſary. But he that hath no ſcience / wherby he may gette his lyuynge, nor wyl not fall to huſbandry: it is clere / he is eyther a ſtarte foole / orels he purpoſeth to gette his lyuynge by robbinge and ſtelyng / orels by begginge. More ouer, ſayde he, it made greatly to the matter, concernynge the gettynge or loſynge by huſbandry, that whan they haue many laborers and ſeruā
               tes, that the tone taketh good hede, that his worke men be ſette to theyr worke in due ſeaſon and tyme, and the tother doth not. For that man is better than ten other / that

falleth to his worke in ſeaſon. And that mā is farre worſe than an other, the whiche ſuffreth his worke men to leaue theyr worke and go theyr way ouer tymely. And as for betwene hym, that ſuffreth his worke men and laborers to trifyll away the day, and hym that wyll not, there is as greate difeference, as betwene the holle worke finiſſhed and the halfe of hit: Lyke wyſe as in iorneyinge by the way in fyfty myle ſpace / two men, whiche go bothe one waye, and though they be bothe as ſwyfte, as holle / as yonge, and as luſty the tone as the tother: yet the tone ſhall ouer go the tother. xxv. myle in a day, if the tone goth on his iourney luſtily, and the tother for ſlouthe & cheriſſhinge of hym ſelfe, reſteth by the way beſydes ſpringes and fountaynes, and ſeketh for ſhadowes and ſofte wyndes to refreſſhe hym with. Lyke wyſe in workynge there is greate oddes, whan a man doth applye luſtyly his worke, and whan he dothe not, and rather fyndethe excuſes, why he ſhulde not worke, and ſuffereth his folke euery daye to trifle forth the tyme. And as for to worke wel and diligētly, or to worke nought and negligently, there is as great difference betwene theſe two thynges, as

is betwene hym that worketh and hym that workethe neuer a whytte. For whan they go aboute to clenſe the vynes from wydes and harlotry, if they dygge in ſuche wyſe, that therby growe vp mo and greatter wides than dydde before, why maye it not be ſayde, that they were idel and wrought neuer a whitte. And therfore theſe be the thynges, by the whiche many mens houſholdes be a greatte deale rather vndone, than for lacke of ſcience or of great knowlege. For a man that is at great coſtis and charges in his houſe, and can not gette as moche, nother by his rentes, nor by his huſbandry, as wyl fynde hym and his meyny: it is no maruayle, if in the ſtede of great plenty and riches, he fall in to extreme pouertie. But vnto ſuche men as wyll diligentlye applye them ſelfe to huſbandry, and increaſe theyr ſubſtaunce and ſhortely waxe riche therby, my father ſhewed ſomtyme a good precept, the whiche alſo he taught vnto me. He coū
               ſeiled me, that I ſhuld neuer bye that groūd the whiche hath ben well laboured and tylled, but ſuche a grounde, as remayned vnlaboured and vntilled, either through theyr negligence, that owed it, orels bicauſe they were not able to do it. For the groūd that is

wel tylled and dight, wyl coſte moche more money, and yet hit is than euen at the beſte: And the grounde / that can waxe no better, can not make a man to haue ſo moche pleaſure, and to reioyce ſo moche / as the tother doth, whiche waxeth better and better. For he thought, that all maner of goodes / whether it be londe or catell, the whiche do encreace and waxe better / cauſethe a man to haue more pleaſure and ioye in it. And there is nothynge, that increaſeth more than doth that grounde, the whiche laye before vntylled & vndight, and nowe is waxed good and frutefull. And be ye ſure of this good Socrates, that we haue often tymes made moche lande, that we haue bought a greate deale more worthe than the price that hit was bought for at the fyrſt. And this caſt, that is ſo notable and ſo profitable, is ſo eaſy to lerne, that nowe ye haue ones harde it / ye can it as well as I, & ye may teche it vnto other, if ye lyſt. But as for my father, he neuer lerned hit of none other man, nor neuer ſpente greatte ſtudye to fynde it out: But bicauſe his minde was greatly ſet vpon huſbandry, and alſo he had a pleaſure to laboure, he ſayde, he deſyred to haue ſuche a grounde, that both he myght haue ſomwhat

to do, and alſo that the profite commynge of hit myght reioyce hym. For me thynketh good Socrates, that of all the Atheniens, my fathers mynde was moſte ſet vpon huſbandry, euen of his owne nature. Socra. And whan I harde that, I aſked him: whether dyd your father kepe ſtyll to him ſelfe all the lande that he occupied, or dyd he ſell any of hit, if he coude get moche money for it? Iſch. Yes mary he dyd ſelle ſome of it nowe and than: immediatly after he wolde bye an other pece, that laye vntylled and vndighte, bicauſe his mynde was ſo moche ſet to laboure and to huſbandrye. So. For ſothe good Iſchomacus, ye ſhewe me here a maruailous deſire and affection, that your father had to huſbandrye, none other wyſe as me thynkethe, than ſome marchauntes myndes be ſet vpon wheate. For marchant men by the reaſon that theyr hartes is ſore fixed vpon wheate, where ſo euer they here that there is moſt wheate, thether wyll they in any wyſe reſorte, and wyll not ſtycke for daunger to paſſe any ſee what ſo euer it be. And whan they haue boughte vp as moche therof as they can get, they ſhyppe it in the ſelfe ſame ſhyp that they ſayle in them ſelfe, and ſo bringe it home. And whan they haue

nede of money, I trow they do not ſell it a way raſſhely, not carynge in what place, as though they deſired to be lightly diſpatched therof: but they brynge it thither to ſell, where they here, that wheate is at a great price, and where as men wolde very fayne haue it. Iſcho. Wel Socrates ye ieſte with me: but yet me thynketh he loueth the maſons crafte neuer the worſe, that buyldeth houſes and ſelleth them, and maketh newe agayne afterwarde. Soc. By my faythe I ſwere to you good Iſchomacꝰ, I beleue you very wel, in that ye thynke, that euery man loueth beſt, and ſetteth his mynde moſt vpō that thynge, wherby he thynkethe to gette any great profitte. But nowe I conſider in my mynde, howe wel al your commynicacion hath ſerued to the purpoſe and groūd of this matter. For your grounde and begynnynge was, that the ſcience of huſbandry is ſooneſt and beſt lerned of all other ſciences: And now by the reaſon of that that ye haue ſayd, I am vtterly perſwaded, that it is ſo. Forſoth ſayd Iſchomacus, hit is ſo in very dede. But as for that thynge that is egally common to al mennes dedes, whether it be in the exerciſe of huſbandry, or in the orderynge of an houſe, or in the gouernynge of

a Citie, or in the knowlege and ſcience of feates of warre, I graunte you very well that there be ſome men, that haue a far better witte, a farre better caſt and policie, and knowe better howe to rule and commande, than ſome other do. Like as in a galey whā they be on the ſee, and muſte dryue as farre with oores in a daye, as they ſhulde ſayle, there be ſome, that be ſette to comforte and corage them, the which haue ſo good grace both in their wordes and ī their dedes, that they ſo quicken and encorage men, that they laboure with all their verry hartes. And there be other ſome ſo groſſe and ſo rude, that they wyl be twyſe as lōge in makynge of theyr viage, as the tother were. And as for the tother, they come downe ruſſhynge meryly ſweatynge and preyſynge one an other. And as for theſe felowes they come downe leyſerly, and they neuer ſweate for the matter, they hate the maiſter of the galey, and he agayne hateth them. And after the ſame maner there be ſome Capitaynes, that do differ one from an other. For there be ſome, that can not brynge it to paſſe, to make their ſoudiours gladde to take peyne, nor to put them ſelfes in ieopardie, but euen very than whan they can not choſe, but they

wyl rather boſt them ſelfes, and take it for a great preyſe, that they maye contrary the capitaynes mynde, nor the capitaynes can not inſtructe theym to be aſſhamed, if any thynge misfortune, that is worthye of rebuke. But there be other, whiche be good, wyſe, and politike capitaynes, the whiche if they take in hand the ſelfe ſame men, or parauenture other, as they do often tymes, they wyll make them to be aſſhamed to do any thynge, that ſhulde tourne to theyr rebuke, and to thynke that it is beſt for them, bothe to be obediente euery one of them by hym ſelfe, and whan nede requireth to take peyne, gladly to do hit all to gether with a very good wyll. And lyke wiſe as there be ſome priuate men, the which of theyr owne nature be gladde to take labour and peyne, So a good capitayne engendreth this affection in all his hoſtis mynde, that they be gladde to be put to peyne, and they coueite nothynge els ſo moche, as to be preyſed for ſome greatte and notable acte, done in the ſight of their capitayne. And what ſo euer capitaynes they be, that haue ſuche men of warre vnder them, berynge to them warde ſo good mynde and fauoure, I ſaye they in very dede be myghty and ſtronge: and not

they, the whiche haue a greate myghty body, and can throwe a darte, and ſhote very wel: Nor they that haue good horſes, and can runne with a ſpeare and iuſte afore any man: but they that can brynge theyr ſoudiours in to ſuche affection and beleue, that they wolde gladly folowe them throughe fyre and water, and through all maner of daunger. Suche men maye well be called hardy and valyant, that haue ſo many bold men redy and preſte to do what ſo euer they commaunde. And hit maye well be ſayde, that he goth forward with a myghty ſtrōge hande, that hath ſo many hādes folowynge hym redy at his pleaſure. And he may be called a very great man in dede, the whiche doth very greatte actes, more by prudence and wiſedome, than through the ſtrength of his body. More ouer whether he be a debite or a ruler, that can make men redy and gladde to applie theyr worke, and brynge them to continue well in hit, they be thoſe, that ſhall ſooneſt get goodes and growe to great ſubſtaunce. And as for the maiſter, if he be ſuche a man that can well puniſſhe the laborers, that do nought, and reward them that do very wel, yet whan he cometh to the workes, if the laborers do make no ſhewe

of it, I wyll not ſet greatly by hym: but he the whiche whan they do ſe hym, they be all moued and ſtyrred vp, and haue a greatte corage and deſire one to do better than another, and a feruente mynde to be prayſed aboue al, I ſay that that man hath ſom thīge of the diſpoſition longynge to a kynge. And me thynketh it is a very great poynte in all maner of thynges, that be done by the helpe of men, as well as it is in huſbandry. And to obteyne hit, verily I wyll not ſaye, as I haue done in huſbandrye, that a man ſhall lerne it, if he ones ſeeth it, or hereth it tolde, but I ſay, he that wyll be able to do it, had nede to be very wel inſtructed, and eke to be of a good gentyll nature, and that is moſte of all to haue a very great grace and gyfte of god. For me thynketh this grace cometh not all of man, to rule and gouerne ſo, that men very gladly wyll be obedient, but it is rather a ſpecial gifte of almighty god: and he graunteth it vnto them that be indowed with vertue and temperaunce. But to rule men tyrnnouſly againſt their wylles, he putteth thē vnto it (as me ſemeth) yt he iugeth worthy to lyue thus in the worlde, as they ſay, that Tantalus dryueth forth the tyme in helle, beinge alway aferde to dye twyſe.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Flete-ſtrete, by Thomas Berthelet printer to the kynges moſt noble grace. an. M. D. xxxij. Cum priuilegio.
            
         
      
   