
      
         
            
            
            THE DOVE: OR PASSAGES OF Cosmography.
            BY RICHARD ZOVCHE Ciuillian, of New Colledge in OXFORD.
            
               Sicut Columbae.
            
            
               LONDON: Printed for George Norton, and are to besould at his shop vnder the blacke Bell, neere Temple-barre. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE TRVELY Noble, and worthily Honoured, Edward Lord Zouche, St. Maur and Cantelupe, of his Maiesties Priuie-Councell.
            
               Right Honorable:
            
            
               MY resolued assurance, that the mouths of Infants may reueale a truth, makes me who haue not attain'd that perfection of speech, which is reputed worthie to be openly heard, yet hopefully ambitious to be beleeu'd. And truely, I desire no more, but that this simple Intelligencer, who hath brought in a relation of the WORLD to me, may report me againe to the world, one who wish the good of all who are studiously affected, and Honour of those who haue put life into

my poore indeauours. How much I am bound both in my selfe, and those whom I esteeme as neare, to your Lordships fauours, I should blush in this idle manner to make profession, did I not thinke that those noble ends, which haue giuen beginning to all your actions, haue enabled you to entertaine with constancie, the slender acknowledgements of great deseruings. But what your Honour did neuer expect in the great vnthankfull, and cannot meet in this little imperfect world of mine, may you finde eternally remembred, in that more glorious and incorruptible to come.
            
               Your Lordships kinsman obliged in duty RICHARD ZOVCHE.
            
         
         
            
               
               Ad Autorem.
               ISte tripartitae liber est Descriptio terrae,
               Et simul ingenij Mappa, typus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tui.
               Consimili versu pingatur America, su tu
               Ipse, Columba velut Musa, Columbus eris.
               
                  THO. LAKE.
               
            
            
               TAm paucis, tot, tanta? quis O, si deforet orbis,
               Non velit in Libro, Zouche, habitare tuo?
               
                  IOAN: HARRIS, N.C.
               
            
            
               
               To my dearely affectionate friend Mr. RICHARD ZOVCHE.
               THy worke hath tongue, for vs t'admire thy worth,
               Silence, the voyce of an admiring minde
               Should then best fit my pen; but Loue breaks forth
               And will needs speake what in thy booke I finde,
               And wrestingly, out of my wonted lynes
               It makes me shuffle in these hobling rymes.
               Though t'were not thine, it's good, but hauing birth
               From thee, it's excellent; who in an houre
               Flyest o're the forrest of the spatious earth,
               And of each Eden dost cull out some flowres,
               And leau'st out nothing, (this is admirable)
               Which to a setled eye can be remarkeable,
               And in so narrow lines could be discouer'd
               Of so much World;) but thy penne hath vtterr'd,
               And for this Truth, which men best-bred do know
               Didst but into the Muses garden goe.
               Who fearing danger dares not crosse the Sea,
               And of the Earth desires to know the frame,
               Let him but read thy worke, and he shall see
               The worlds faire Symstry by distinguisht names,
               And by thy Art, his ignorance may know
               For which most men by Land and Sea doe row:
               And let him blesse thy wit, and prayses sing
               that thus with ease dost him such knowledg bring.
               
                  Ingenious ZOVCHE, liue thy Verses long,
               Fly faire, and far thy Doue, with her smooth song:
               Of thy all-Noble name for Armes long knowne,
               These Lettred times haue thee design'd their owne.
               
                  Your Louer and friend, Richard Yong.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To the Author.
               BEhold, a miracle, a singing Doue,
               Which sweetly sings, yet sings not sweets of Loue.
               Each studie be her Doue-house, and each breast,
               Which harbours studious thoughts, her gentle neast.
               
                  
                     Nic. Stoughton, Int. Temp.
               
            
            
               ASpice; non veneri est deuota Columba; mouetur
               Illius, auspicijs, penna, Minerua, tuis.
               Ergo Deae noctis studiosae Noctua cedat,
               Dum tu gaudentem luce tueris auém.
               
                  Car. Herbert, N.C.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Doue.
            
               TAke wing my Muse, and like that siluer DOVE
               Which o'er the world new-bath'd, did hou't
                     ••
                   fly
               The low-coucht Seas, and high-plac't Land aboue,
               Discerne with faithfull, though with fearefull eye,
               That what both Land and Sea resounding ring
               Wee may to this All-makers prayses sing.
            
            
               He who directs the Sparrowes tender flight,
               And sees him safely reach the hurtlesse ground,
               Guide thee in all thy PASSAGES aright
               And grant thy Course be sure, they Restin
                     •
                   found
               From Mount of Oliues, as from Hill of 
                     ••
                  yes,
               Blest with the Branch of Peace though not of Praise.
            
            
               And you whose Care our Floating house yet saues
               From sinking in the Deluge of Despayre,
               Whil'st with poore feather'd oares she passe the waues
               Of this all-vulgar-breath'd, storme-threatning Ayre:
               Deare LORD vouchsafe with patient looke t'attend
               Her flights both trembling rise, and humble end.
            
         
         
            
            The World.
            
               TO our small Isle of Man, some well compare
               The WORLD, that greater Continents huge frame
               Nor much vnlike eythers Perfections are
               Their Matter, and their Mixture both the same:
               Whence M
                     •
                  ns Affection it so much allures,
               Sith greatest Likenesse greatest Loue procures.
            
            
               But if their outward Formes we looke vpon,
               Wee shall their Figures diuers plainely see:
               For mans erected tall Proportion
               To his heau'n-hoping Soule doth best agree:
               VVhereas the World each way being framed round,
               The aptest forme for turning Change hath found.
            
            
               Like Natures rarest workemanship, the Eye,
               The well contriued instrument of seeing,
               VVhich by exact and apt Rotunditie,
               Performes his duty, and preserues his beeing,
               Of many curious circling Spheares composed,
               And Orbs, within the Orbs without enclosed.
            
         
         
            
            The Earth.
            
               IN midst of which by rarer Engeny,
               Then Mars and Venus hang in Lemnian net:
               The Land and Sea imbracing louingly,
               Making one perfect Globe, in th'ayre were set.
               VVhose interveyning qualities agree
               To breede and beare what moue, or resting be.
            
            
               Thrice happy Vnion when these Greater things
               Accord in perfect Loue and Amitie:
               VVhose peace an vniuersall blessing brings,
               Causing in lesser states sweet harmonie:
               And euer blessed be his powerfull hand,
               By whom this Order doth supported stand.
            
            
               Now Rose-cheek't Morning, kindest Friend of Arts,
               Learnings best Mistresse, my presuming Muse
               Of all the Earths diffused, sundry parts
               Thy Neighbour confine Kingdomes first doth chuse,
               That when her faultie boldnesse shee doth see,
               If blush she doe not she may learne of thee.
            
         
         
            
            
            Asia.
            
               THe worlds true Mother-Land, mans Nurcery,
               Great ASIA, obiect of diuiner view,
               Saluted first by Heau'ns all-seeing eye,
               Soonest by it departing, bid t'adiew.
               The West yet wrapt in Darknesse shin'd in Light,
               That since inlightened, lyes inwrapt in Night.
            
            
               CHINA her farthest Region in the East,
               By Portugals to vs discouered late,
               Is with much Pleasure, and rich Plentie blest,
               With People, and with Princes fortunate:
               Yet most procuring wonder doe excell
               The Cities where her Prince and People dwell.
            
            
               The skill of Printing and Artillery,
               
               Rarest inuentions which these dayes haue seene,
               (If we beleeue the Fame which thence doth flye)
               Here in the ancient'st times haue practis'd beene:
               And sure that People is or should be wise,
               Which say We see with one, They with both eyes▪
               
            
            
               
               Bord'ring on China Northward lies CATHAY,
               Rul'd by her Emperour, the mighty Cham,
               
               To whom great TARTARIE doth tribute pay:
               Great Tartary whose farre distended name,
               Twixt auncient India, and the Icy Sea,
               Possesseth all to Westerne Muscouy.
            
            
               The Nation sprung from Sires of Scythian race,
               Not satisfi'ed with Ob, nor Volga's floud,
               People anew some new vnpeopled place,
               In guilded sculs carowsing luke-warme bloud,
               More happy yet in spoyling States well built,
               Then in erecting where their force hath spilt.
            
            
               As those hayle vollies which the VVhirle-winds cast
               Of leaden drops, from some darke molten showres,
               Beat downe the fruit, and all the fields lay wast:
               Led by great Tamberlaine those storming Powres
               Forc'd Asia's Tyrant, with his prostrate troope,
               Vnder their fearefull Armes to bend and stoope.
            
            
               
               Southward from China, doe confining lie
               The Easterne INDIES whose rich golden sands
               Vnder conduct of greedy tyranny,
               Oft felt the violence of warlike bands,
               VVhich hoping to proue rich with forreyne spoyle,
               Forsooke the sweetnesse of their natiue soyle.
            
            
               First Bacchus did this Country ouer-runne,
               And set vp trophees in the conquer'd East:
               Oh would he had gone on as he begunne,
               And neuer turned to subdue the West!
               Might Indus bancks haue bore his branching Vines,
               Nor Europes streams bin stain'd with sweeter wines.
            
            
               Great Alexander next wtth powerfull might,
               VVithout resistance, did these parts subdue,
               VVhil'st the Inhabitants not vs'd to fight
               Away before his Armie trembling flew.
               Since subiect vnto him, whose spacious minde
               Not Gange, nor once farthest Gades confinde.
            
            
               
               Their state most slauish, Fortune miserable,
               Their life is painefull, and vnpleasing to them,
               They others making strong, are made vnable,
               And wealth which blesseth few, did first vndoe them,
               Which is no more then hath beene seene of old,
               They most vnhappy who haue heapt most gold.
            
            
               Their neighbour PERSIA tride this long before,
               Greatly presuming on her mightie treasure:
               But fill'd with much, and euer crauing more,
               Did surfet, and grow sicke with too-much pleasure:
               For whose disease the Fates did thinke it good
               The Prince of Macedon should let her bloud.
            
            
               
                  Cyrus, with Natures rarest graces blest,
               The type of vertue, paragon of Honour,
               Pluckt from Assyria's proud Imperiall crest
               A Monarchs Diadem, and plac't it on her:
               Which they who follow'd, but with ill successe,
               Vnhappy soone did lose, or leaue much lesse.
            
            
               
               Yet since those losses, somewhat haue regain'd
               These sometimes onely expert carpet Knights,
               That late in Champion Field their vertue train'd,
               Countries farre of remote, now oft affrights:
               Their mighty Sophy to that strength is growne,
               That fear'd of others, he yet feareth none.
            
            
               The west of Asia, once Earths Paradice,
               Since subiect to the TVRKS most slauish yoke,
               Hath seene her Cedars reaching to the Skyes,
               Layd low by his fierce sacrilegious stroke:
               Her glorious Kingdomes of illustrous fame,
               Being swallow'd in the deluge of that name.
            
            
               Downe from ARMENIA'S ruder Mountaine tops,
               This violent impetuous Torrent fell,
               Whose stronger source impatient of stops,
               Orewhelmed all th'Inhabitants that dwell
               Betwixt the greater Sea, nere Trebizond,
               And that which washeth rich Arabians strond.
            
            
               
               The CASPIAN Sea which seemes on Ocean,
               Within his Circuits is restraind and bound:
               But this outragious race of Ottoman
               Which hath no end, nor limits euer found:
               Scorning with bancks or borders to be held,
               Hath o're Euphrates, and broad Tygris sweld.
            
            
               Great Babylon sometimes ASSYRIA'S pride,
               By their preuailing armies ouerthrowne,
               Their fury, and their fiercenesse hauing tride,
               Now feeles by deere experience of her owne,
               What griefe Iudaea captiue then sustain'd,
               When by her Riuers weeping shee complain'd,
            
            
               Yet now no comfort can IVDAEA take
               In this her Neighbour nations 
                     •
                  uster woe,
               Her fellowship in miserie may make
               Her like distressed minde like passion show,
               Yet not bewaile it, sith her losse more neare,
               May borrow many, but not lend a teare.
            
            
               
               This Country by the Midland Sea confin'd.
               VVas once a happy, and a HOLY LAND:
               To Gods owne peoples heritage assign'd,
               Manured onely by his royall hand,
               Then Scaene of heau'nly fauour, since the Stage
               Of most inhumane, furious, hellish rage.
            
            
               Here HE, who hath the highest Heau'n his Throne,
               The Earth his foot-stoole, did vouchsafe to make
               His regall Presence, that thrice-sacred-ONE,
               Whose mightie vertue Diu'lish forces brake,
               In humane nature borne to vnder-goe
               Our most inhumane sinne-reuenging woe.
            
            
               O blessed Loue, of Iuda's blessed King!
               O happy Mercy of that blessed Loue!
               Let Quires of Angels to his glory sing,
               Let Earth beneath, let highest Heau'ns aboue
               Assist poore Man his soules best thoughts to raise,
               To his distressed soules Redeemers praise.
            
            
               
               Hierusalem, thou Iuda's choysest Cittie,
               Beholding all his wonderfull effects,
               Wer't chiefest obiect of his tender pittie,
               But yet his kindnes cruelly neglects:
               Which foule offence deseruing thy decay,
               Iordan may witnesse but ne're wash away.
            
            
               Thy glory since to desolation chang'd,
               Thy Bulwarks, and faire Buildings are defaced,
               All fauours of the Heau'ns, are quite estrang'd,
               Thy people fleeing thee, else-where disgraced:
               And Sion which did Siluer drops distill.
               Thy Vallyes with salt teares of griefe doth fill.
            
            
               Aboue Iudaea, bord'ring on the West,
               Of great Armenia, lesser ASIA lyes;
               Which on three sides, three famous Seas inuest,
               Once knowne so many Kingdomes to comprise,
               Now his entire, whose Tyranny so farre,
               Sworne foe to peace, hath rauaged in warre.
            
            
               
               His burthen stiffe-neckt Taurus vndergoes,
               And slye Moeander by his winding shelfe,
               Snake-like enwreathed, which so doubtfull flowes,
               Deludes obseruers, and doth loose himselfe,
               Vnwilling his strange cruelty to see,
               Doth euer seeke, but findes no corner free.
            
            
               Betwixt the red Sea, and the Persian bay,
               From Palaestina to the Southern Maine,
               Famous ARABIA doth at large display
               Her triple-folded thrice-illustrous traine,
               Whose riches into diuers Countries brought,
               Are with great trauell, and much danger sought.
            
            
               To those faire parts which being farthest plac't,
               Doe serue as Spicery to other Lands,
               A tedious fearefull iourney must be pac't,
               Through Rocky desarts, and Wind-driuen Sands,
               Where many Merchants trading oft haue bin,
               Lost in the spatious Wildernes of Sin.
               
            
            
               
               Of Baulmes and Spices well this soyle may boast,
               Whilst Mahomet from hence first issued forth:
               VVe enuy not the fruit of this faire coast,
               Nor ought that to despise the colder North,
               VVhich so great distance from those parts remou'd,
               Haue beene no lesse by bount'ous Heau'n belou'd.
            
         
         
            
            Afrique.
            
               AFRIQVE remoued to the Southern parts,
               In forme resembling some well-shapen shield,
               VVould ill resist the Sunnes more piercing darts,
               But that her vncouth monster-bearing field,
               To Phoebus angry fury most expos'd,
               VVithin great Neptunes Bauldrick rests inclos'd:
            
            
               Betwixt the Midland Sea, and Sanguine bay,
               Deuided by a little tract of ground,
               Hither from out of Asia, a way
               As o're a straight, but strong-built Bridge is found,
               VVhere Nilus streames, like many branching vaines
               Doe feed with plenty AEGYPTS fruitfull plaines.
            
            
               Nature dispos'd her selfe to recreate,
               As in her fittest worke-house, here doth vse,
               (VVhich Art may wonder at, not imitate)
               Life into new created shapes t'infuse,
               The Sun-beames serue as fire, the worke to make,
               The slymy soyle as apt each forme to take.
            
            
               
               Industrious Art, lesse potent, not lesse proud,
               Enuying Natures vncompared power,
               Hath there vprais'd outreaching eu'ry cloud,
               Many a gallant, and starre-threatning Tower:
               Whose strange, sky-piercing, flame-resembling spires
               This age distrusts, Antiquitie admires.
            
            
               Next, neere those Cynthia's-kisse-aspiring Hils,
               Where profuse Nilus hides his Bankrupt-head:
               Those tawny troopes whose fame all Afrike fils.
               Vnder great PRAESTER IOHNS conduct are led,
               By whom the Christian ensignes are retain'd,
               But with some blots of error fowly stain'd.
            
            
               And least some corner more diuinely blest,
               From strange Prodigious monsters should be free,
               A late vsurped Kingdom's here possest
               By that rude AMAZONIAN Anarchy,
               Where they, who should a distaff, scepters sway,
               And Men their Wiues imperious rules obay.
            
            
               
               In ZANZIBAR, neare to that Southern Cape,
               Which lately from GOOD-HOPE deriu' his name,
               If not by Nature, many an vgly shape
               Haue beene brought forth by M
                     ••
                  ster-ma
                     •
                  ing Fame,
               Such Creatures hardly could produced be,
               But by th'assistance of her Midwifry.
            
            
               There headlesse some are fram'd, as Momus would,
               With eyes and mouth, like windowes, in their breast;
               Others as cast in Polyphemus mould,
               Of one Light in their fore-head stand possest:
               Some Pygmyes, Men Diminutiues▪ maintaine
               Like Pawnes tall squadrons 
                     •
                  n a chesse-boord plaine
            
            
               Hence turning Northward that great Kingdome lyes
               Now by the name of MANICONGO knowne:
               And ri
                     •
                  h GVYNAEA, whose commodities
               The English to their Country oft haue showne.
               Then NVBIA Eastward, whose warme sands enfold
               Heapes of the purest, best refined gold.
            
            
               
               The La
                     ••
                   of NEGROES is not far from thence
               Nearer exended to th'Atlanticke Maine:
               VVherei
                     •
                   the Blacke-Prince keepes his residence,
               Attended 
                     •
                  y his ietty, coloured traine:
               VVho in their natiue beautie most delight,
               And in contempt doe print the Diuell white.
            
            
               VVith wilde Arabia, LYBIA may contend,
               A field of dangers, and vnheard of feares,
               Her sands want number, and her Desarts end.
               Inhabited by Lyons, Panthers, Beares:
               Such rough possessors of so rude a soyle,
               That none, of eyther, eyther would despoyle.
            
            
               Next these the Pastures of NVMIDIA lye;
               VVhere, with their easily-remouing tents,
               The Princes of that wandring Policie
               Doe follow still their Grazing Regiments:
               And sure those Troopes are worser taught then fed,
               VVhere Rulers by the Multitude are led.
            
            
               
               From Skye-prop Atlas to that watry Plaine,
               VVhich doth twixt Africk and faire Europe runne,
               Oppos'd to Italy, to Fraunce, and Spayne,
               BARBARIA next, enioyes a milder Sunne;
               VVhose borders sundry kingdomes doe confine,
               Fez, with Marocco, Tunes, Telesine.
            
            
               FEZ, long since famous for her fruitfull Vines;
               And rich MAROCCO, which with Sugred Reedes
               Sweetens the relish of those sharper wines,
               VVhich th'other Countryes bruised cluster bleedes,
               Lye next those Island in the VVesterne maine,
               Where Fortunes first, since dwelt Actaeons trayne,
            
            
               From Carthage ruines, whose yet infant State,
               Bathed in poore Queene Didoes wronged bloud,
               Her most strange Loue turning to stronger Hate,
               With Rome in long-fixt opposition stood:
               TVNIS and TESELINE deriu'd, doe grow
               In fast-bound Friendship with great Europes foe.
            
         
         
            
            
            Europe.
            
               THe Complement of this inferiour Globe,
               Faire Amphitrite, Natures chiefest pride,
               Thrice glorious with her siluer-waued robe,
               With Islands, as with Iewels beautified:
               Within her Armes enfolded, sets apart
               EVROPE, the Earths sure Head, the Worlds sound Hart.
            
            
               Where swift Iberus with true lowlinesse,
               Performes his dutie to the Midland mayne,
               The great and lesser BALEARIDES,
               First in the Streights doe guard the coasts of Spaine,
               Whose expert Youth, were wont, the smallest thing
               To strike far distant with their well-rul'd sling.
            
            
               Then as the Holmes, two sturdy vmpires met
               Betwixt the quar'ling Welsh, and English tydes,
               In equall distance each from other set,
               As both remoued from faire Seuernes sides:
               SARDINIA next with CORSICA doth stand
               Twixt the fierce Roman and fell Punick Land.
            
            
               
               Triangl'd SICILY, some Authors say,
               Was once one with th'Italian Continent,
               Till working Neptune twixt them dig'd a way
               With force of his three forked Instrument:
               Rebell to Heau'n here Aetna vpward casts,
               To daunt the Lightning, Sulphure-fuming blasts.
            
            
               Little MELITA which Paules innocence,
               Scaping the water, at the fire did trie.
               More to the South-coast scituate from hence,
               Hath beene renowned for their Chiualry,
               Who driu'n from Rhodes neere Caria, here withstood
               The profuse wasters of poore Christians bloud.
            
            
               Next, CANDY, Cradle of reputed Ioue,
               
               With Nectar-dropping Vines is ouer-spread:
               Whence Eastward sacred to the Nymph of Loue,
               CYPRVS erects her Myrtle-crowned head.
               Well twixt these two hath Neptue put some space,
               Whose fruits once met in one, marre any place.
            
            
               
               The ARCH-SEA rowling from th'vnruly North,
               Doth seeme to threaten Candyes ouer-throw;
               But that the troopes of CYCLADES stand forth
               To breake the fiercenesse of his furious blow,
               Like Xerxes fearefull Army, Asia's wonder,
               Cutting in broken streames his strength asunder.
            
            
               Aboue that are those STREIGHTS so much renown'd,
               Which Europe scarce from Asia separate,
               VVhere Helle first, Leander since was drown'd,
               By them made famous, though vnfortunate,
               Yet (so from smalnesse things to Greatnesse rise:)
               The GREATER-Sea beyond this passage lyes.
            
            
               Such is that Channell, by whose slender sides,
               As through her Sluce, the vast MAEOTIS Pond
               Charged with full fraught Greatnesse, hardly slides
               From out her round shores close in circling bond:
               VVhich TANAIS falling from the frozen Hils,
               With his cold, almost Chrystall current fils.
            
            
               
               Neare Tanais with Tartary confin'd,
               Along the Northerne Ocean, doth lye
               With wast Liuonia in the West conioyn'd
               The spacious Empire of vast MVSCOVY,
               Whose Duke like Boreas in his big-built Hall,
               Doth foes at hand affright, farre off appall.
            
            
               SVVEDEN and NORVVAY in the same degree,
               Saue what a narrow Isthmus doth retaine,
               Quite from the Earth almost diuided be,
               Pull'd by the strong Arme of the Baltick Mayne,
               Which wrong peace making Winter doth preuent,
               And them congeal'd bindes to the Continent.
            
            
               Next POLAND, Southward, doth her bounds extend
               Downe from Muscouia towards Hungary,
               Which diuers other Countries comprehend,
               Whose confines round about her confines lye,
               Pleasant Massouia, rich and fruitfull Russia,
               Cold Pomerania, and much colder Prussia.
            
            
               
               Within the compasse of two goodly Riuers,
               Sav
                     •
                  s and Teissa, plowd with many a floud,
               Which vp to Ister all his store deliuers:
               Ister disperseth to the Countries good,
               Vnhappy HVNGARY by Nature's blest.
               Much good possessing by much ill possest.
            
            
               Eastward enuirond round about with Hils,
               As with the strongest Rampires of defence,
               In peace her Valleyes TRANSYLVANIA tils
               Somewhat secur'd from Turkish violence:
               So he who to that Empire hath giu'n way,
               Hath also meanes and power to make it stay.
            
            
               Beyond Danubius many branching streames,
               Which through the East of Europe stately runne,
               Reuiued by the more relieuing beames,
               Of a directer, and more Southern Sunne:
               Illyricum, Dalmatia, and Thrace,
               Changing their names, retaine their antient place.
            
            
               
               THRACE on three sides is washt with Neptunes waues,
               Yet is no fruitfull, nor delightsome soyle,
               Her old Inhabitants were old Romes slaues,
               Her new Rome now made new inuaders spoyle,
               Where th'Orient Empires Seat, by him 's aspir'd,
               Whose rule like Phaëtons, the world hath fir'd,
            
            
               In equall parallell to Thrace confines
               Antient DALMATIA, through well temp'red vaines
               Which once diffusing her rich golden Mines,
               Now equall bondage, with poore Thrace sustaines,
               Her low-layd Temples sleeping in the dust,
               And brightest glory quite ore-grown with rust,
            
            
               Below it GREECE the dismall Sepulcher
               Of Learning, Vertue, Valour, Pollicy,
               Which once were flourishing and famous there,
               Since in rude Barbarisme doe buried lye,
               Seemes what she hath bene now vnapt to show,
               Obiect of Fury, Image of strange woe.
            
            
               
               Had Helen in her vndissembling glasse,
               Viewing the wrinckles which her age had wrought,
               Foreseene what misery should come to passe,
               To her disfigur'd Countrey, her sad thought
               (So scarce faire Dames beholding foule are pleas'd,
               Had not she much bene ioyd, had much bene eas'd.
            
            
               Olympus, vnto whom the Clouds gaue way,
               To vpstart Tyranny submits, and bowes:
               Parnassus once Crown'd with the verdant Bay,
               With saddest Cyprus shrowdes his mourning browes,
               And Tempe, rob'd of all her pleasing weeds,
               With spitefull furrows wounded weeps and bleeds.
            
            
               Athens, Miuerua's Chappell, Phoebus Quire,
               Within whose Cloysters, those pure vestall Maydes
               The Muses, kept their euer-burning fire
               Whose light, our cold, darke ignorance vpbraids,
               From broken ruines, and her vaults scarce found
               No voyce, but voyce of horror's vs'd to sound.
            
            
               
               The Schoole of Vertue, stately Theater,
               Of brauest, men-beseeming action,
               Whose Lawes excelling farre, exceeded were,
               By Customes easily, and truely done:
               Like feeble Miloes armes eneru'd, and dead▪
               
               Old Lacedaemons vertuous strength is fled.
            
            
               And Theban wals, raised by the pow'rfull sound
               Of rare Amphions sweet well-fingerd Lute,
               Humbly saluting the debased ground,
               Lye raz'd with noyse of Trumpets, Drums, and Flute
               VVhich Instruments, if any, may be sayd
               Here to haue true, and quick Diuision plaid.
            
            
               VVhere like a second Midland Sea the pride
               Of swelling ADRIA, doth distend her shoares,
               Oppos'd to Italy, whose armed sides
               Oft feare th' approaching of Slauonian oares:
               ILLYRICVM whilst Turcisme it ore-flowes,
               Feeles not her billowes nor respects her blowes.
            
            
               
               Some rather curious how the Earth should stand,
               Then carefull how similitudes doe runne,
               Haue likend to a Legg, th'ITALIAN Land:
               But since it hath so many conquests wonne,
               It farre more fitly might compared be
               Vnto an Arme, the limb of Chiualry.
            
            
               Her Wealth, her sinewes, and her Riuers veynes,
               Her Buildings were her Bones, her People Marrow,
               Yet whilest she Mars his warlike Speare sustaines,
               At length was wounded with yong Cupids arrow,
               Since of Bellona'es ensignes dispossest,
               On Venus pillow long hath layn at rest.
            
            
               The pleasant Land of labour, Naples seat,
               VVhere first appeared that contagious sore,
               VVhich since contracted by the Frenchmens heat,
               They farther Westward or'e the Alps haue bore,
               By female luxury impaird, was faine
               To seeke her physicke in the Fields of Spaine.
            
            
               
               Life-feeding humours drawne from eu'ry part,
               Tyber engrossing, hath that Vlcer bred
               Impostem'd Rome, which quite confounding Art,
               Hath o're the Bosome of all Europe spred.
               O! may some Royall Heau'n-grac'd hand asswage
               This swelling Euils Kings-stroke-asking rage!
            
            
               
                  Florence by Arno almost compast round,
               The perfect Beautie of the Tuscan plaines,
               If well disposed it continuing sound
               Infectious anguish not so much sustaines
               To her great Medici, who haue withstood
               The common danger, owes her chiefest good.
            
            
               The Gate of Italy transporting farre,
               The sundry plenties of her faire increase,
               Long foe to Venice in the fiercest warre,
               Corriuall in the softst delights of Peace,
               With strong-mand Gallyes Genua scours the seas,
               With well-rigd Pinnaces seekes Rodes of ease.
            
            
               
               Like hundred armed Briareus, the Po,
               Stretcht forth on Lumbardyes delightfull bed,
               VVith dropsie humours makes her ouerflow,
               By which surcharged not discreetly fed,
               Oft times her Spunges (Millaines Duke put by)
               Suck her abundance, and doe soke her dry.)
            
            
               Bath'd in the Adriatiques farther waue,
               As some faire Sea-nymph, famous Venice sits,
               Whom all the prayse which fiction freely gaue
               To Sea-borne Venus, farre more truely fits
               Earths richest Iewell, Beauties brightest Starre,
               Mother of Loue, Loue of the God of Warre.
            
            
               
               The Eagle, badge of Sou'raigne Maiestie,
               Vpon one breast deuiding many heads,
               The sundry parts of scu'red GERMANIE,
               At large displayed, shadowing ouer-spreads,
               Whence much distracted, that faire body stayes,
               VVhose chiefest parts are bent so diuers wayes.
            
            
               VVhere it on Italy doth next confine,
               Closing with Hungary, doth AVSTRICH rest:
               Renowned Austrich, whose Prince-branching Line
               Stretcht through the yeelding, and declining West,
               VVith various windings hath attaind of late,
               Many a farre and neere encompast state.
            
            
               Like great Danubius vnresisted source,
               Their fame extended to the larger maine,
               By sundry conquerd Islands takes his course,
               Obseru'd of Italy obey'd of Spaine,
               Thence through the streights close passage hauing pierc't
               By th' Ocean, to both Indies is disperst.
            
            
               
               
                  Iser, and Oenus which from TYROLL flowes,
               Hauing their homage to Bauaria done,
               With Licus which the bounds of Suevia showes,
               And many high-born streams which down-ward run:
               Against the Turks encroaching power combin'd,
               To Austria's Current haue their forces ioyn'd.
            
            
               Mora which to Morauia lends her name,
               Her tribute duely vncompell'd doth bring:
               And great Odera Slesia's chiefest fame,
               With yonger Albis, hold him for their King.
               The Waser, Rhine, the Maze, the Sceld though free,
               Yet to Danubius all inferiour be.
            
            
               The Oder hauing Slesia's bounds out-gone,
               Doth Brandenbourghs faire Marqui
                        •
                     ate salute,
               Whose double Marches now both rang'd in one,
               Mongst German Princedomes beares a choise repute;
               Thence in the Baltick Ocean vp resign'd
               Her freezing streames colde entertainment finde.
            
            
               
               Neare to BOHEMIA'S farthest Eastern skyrt,
               As from the Earth's breast, yet small Albis crawles,
               VVhere, with th'Hercinian Forrests Pale begyrt,
               And stately Mountaines strong surrounding wals,
               Till with Multauia ioyn'd she breakes the bay,
               From out her Country hardly findes a way.
            
            
               From thence through Saxony she takes her course,
               Where meeting Sala, (whose faire streames diuide
               Turinge from Misnia) with more strength'ned force,
               She goes t'encounter with the Northern tyde:
               O'er which preuailing neare to Iuitlands Coasts,
               In triumph towards Denmarkes Court she posts.
            
            
               Haile DENMARKES Court, seate of a faithful King,
               Sweet nurcery of Brittaines Sou'raigne QVEENE,
               Fountaine of all our ioy, from whom doe spring
               The Hope of Thames, and Happinesse of Rhene;
               
                  Latona like which makes the Albion Land,
               Her Childrens Well-rockt Cradle firmer stand.
            
            
               
               The Hassian confines quickly passing by,
               Waser vpon Westphalia longer stayes,
               VVhence Em to Freeslands Embden seemes to flye,
               VVing'd with affection, which detests delayes:
               VVhere in the watry region both doe meete,
               And each imbracing other kindly greete.
            
            
               Downe from the Alps-spring Cloud-despising heads,
               Europes perpetuall well-fill'd Conduits, flow
               (VVhose farre-dispersed moysture all o'er-spreads)
               The Rhene, the Rhosne, the Danow and the Po,
               Po and Danow towards the rising Sunne,
               Sothward the Rhosne, the Rhene doth Northward runne.
            
            
               Rhene through the fighting Switzers Cantons past,
               Downe from those Countries loftie verge descends
               Through Basell, and by Strasbourg; then with hast
               Meetes Neccar, which faire Heidelberg commends:
               VVhose lesser streames which Wittenberg confine,
               Growne big doe honour Rhenes Count Palatine.
               
            
            
               
               Now stay you gentle streames, and let that ayre
               Which sweetens your pure waues, refresh my Muse,
               Ne'er may my Silence passing by that Paire,
               Which make Earth happy, courteous Heau'n abuse.
               What Loue-taught Turtles onely best expresse,
               Lesse may my Doue adorne, admire no lesse.
            
            
               Here the faire SHEVVER of th'Imperiall Court,
               Prince of those Princes which doe Caesars make:
               In Honours Palace, ioyn'd to Vertues Fort,
               Where equall pleasure Loue and Beautie take,
               Reside (ô worthy of immortall breath!)
               Faire FREDERICK, and fair'st ELIZABETH.
            
            
               He as another Mercury on Earth,
               Deputed faithfull Arbiter of Right:
               Shee like cleare Cynthia of Caelestiall birth,
               From Brittaine SVNNE deriuing heauenly Light:
               In sweet Coniunction matcht, doe truely show,
               VVhat happy States to high-plac't Vertues owe.
            
            
               
               Thence Rhene and Neccar friendly take their way
               To Mentz, where Maenus from Franeouia rose,
               Doth for their comming with attendance stay,
               And kindely with them downe to Collen goes:
               Mosella passing Triers them first o'er-takes,
               And entertained once, no more forsakes.
            
            
               So would these Mitred Cities once professe,
               Truths worth apparent, which they conscious see,
               Albis and Oder might consent no lesse,
               The Duke and Marquisse both conioyn'd agree:
               That German Diadem design'd to bare,
               Rhenus with swelling Isther might compare.
            
            
               From Collen passing downe along by Cleue,
               
               Then thorough Gelders reaching Holland, all
               Together of the Continent take leaue,
               And in among the Zeland Islands fall.
               Where Noble 
                     
                        ••
                     sle doth keepe with English bands,
               Flushing, the key of all the Nether-lands.
            
            
               
               The Mase confining Lutzenbourg, descends,
               Meeting with Sambre at Namur, to Liege:
               Then Brabants halfe-encompast coast defends
               From neighb'ring Gulick, and neere Gelders Siege:
               And passing well-man'd Huisden, ioynes at length
               To Rhenes more worthy force, his wel-met strength.
            
            
               To them the Sceld, rising neere Cambray speeds,
               Which leauing Artois borders on the VVest;
               Through Henault comes to Tourney, then proceedes
               To Gaunt in Flanders, where not finding rest,
               It makes to Antwerpe, by whose safe conuoy
               It doth at length a long-wisht end enioy.
            
            
               
                  Belge's faire Daughters midst these flouds remaine.
               Of which with low obeysance some doe bowe,
               Bearing vp Isabel th'Infanta's traine,
               For whose deare Loue oblieg'd in Nuptiall vowe,
               Her coosen Austrich from the Church estrang'd,
               His scarlet Bonnet for steele Beauer chang'd.
            
            
               
               The rest to Faiths allegeance firme adhere,
               Freed by the Christian Faiths Defendres ayde,
               Her Champions hauing them secur'd from feare,
               And Superstitions strong encroaching staid:
               All vertuous Captaines, most praise-worthy all,
               Braue Norris, Sydney, Vere, and Vuedall.
               
            
            
               And may not Enuy here my Loue debarre
               Or Zouches name be in my name deprest,
               Both 
                     William and Allan Zouche.
                   you who yet attend the charge of warre,
               And 
                     Henry and Francis Zouche
                   you whose happy Soules in Peace doe rest,
               Deare, Loue-deseruing Brothers, ought to be,
               By them remembred, not forgot by mee.
            
            
               
               FRANCE, Europes Eden, Westerne Paradice,
               Part pal'd with Mountaines, moated part with Seas
               The famous Seed-plot of the Flowre de Lyce,
               
               VVants nothing which the curious sense muy please,
               Except the easie Arbour of Repose,
               Vnder the shadow of the Sou'raigne Rose.
               
            
            
               The more then earthly once reputed Powers,
               Driu'n from the troubled and distemper'd East,
               There placing since their fancy-pleasing Bowers,
               Where they more freely might disport and feast:
               Choysest delights of them esteem'd most deare,
               Seeme to haue planted and disposed here.
            
            
               
                  Ioues Oake, whose root he makes his conscious pillow,
               And thicke-leau'd boughes his shady Canopy:
               Si
                     •
                  ke-thoughted Iuno's pale forsaken Willow,
               Crowne of contempt-conceiuing Iealousie,
               That on the ayrie Mountaines, this doth grow
               Where Crystall Riuers through coole Vallyes flow
            
            
               
               Vnder the Lawrels, worth adorning wreaths,
               
                  Mars
                  ▪ and Apollo ioynd in friendship rest;
               Yet Mars short-winded angry accents breaths,
               Late basely of great HENRY dispossest,
               And f
                     •
                  arce Apollo hath lamenting left,
               Of his diuine Du Bartas quite bereft.
            
            
               Amongst the Oliues fruite-concealing leaues,
               
                  Pallas and all the Virgin Muses sing,
               To chearefull CERES, well-growne ripened sheaues,
               The rurall Nymphs as rarest posyes bring,
               
                  Venus and Cupid midst the myrtels sport,
               The Elms doe Bacchus and his Vines support.
            
            
               Great Britaines Ocean with his conquering tide,
               Passing the entrance of their yeelding shore,
               Hath prou'd their plenty, and represt their pride,
               Hath tride their vertue not impaird their store,
               And much admiring most himselfe admir'd,
               His right reserued, hath his force retir'd.
            
            
               
               The fayrest of-spring of the floudy Peeres,
               With due obseruance to his Crystall Throne,
               Doe pay the tribute of their siluer teares:
               Rich Seyne, sweet Loyre, & great Garond, the Rhone
               Hasting his banke-disdaining course t'enlarge,
               Doth in the streighter Seas his streame discharge.
            
            
               Thorough Geneua's cleare and constant Lake
               He comes to Lyons, hauing left Sauoy,
               Where meeting Soane from Burgundy, they take
               By Daulphny to Auignion, thence with ioy,
               Passing by Prouence, they at Arles attaine
               A spatious entrance to the Midland Mayne.
            
            
               Well-planted Champaigne Seyne first watring fals
               On Paris, scituate in the Isle of Fraunce,
               About whose stately Citties goodly wals,
               Many of Amphitrites daughters daunce,
               Till all conioyning Norman Vales giue place,
               They reach the Harbour of the Hau'n of grace.
            
            
               
               Hence did that worthy Duke first hoyse his Sayle.
               Whom Right conducted, Conquest seem'd t'attend,
               Fortune assisted with a prosprous gale,
               The floure of Vertue Fraunce along did send,
               Which vnto English fields remou'd, and set,
               Prepar'd a roome for great Plantaginet.
            
            
               Amongst them, not the meanest of the flocke,
               
                  Allan, the Earle of lesse Brittain came,
               Deriuing from the stemmes of antient Stocke,
               
               That sometimes flourishing, now fading name:
               Which though it little to earths moysture owe,
               Blest by the deaw of Heau'n againe may grow.
            
            
               The siluer Crescent, in the sable skye
               Seemes to resemble Loyres cornuted streames,
               But farther follow'd with attending eye:
               It lookes like full-fac'd Phaebe's scattring Beames,
               She midst the lesser Stars great lustre showes,
               This mongst the Minor flouds abundant flowes.
            
            
               
               Rising in Auergne it descends to Neuers,
               Then passing Orleans, turneth downe to Tours,
               Whence bending vnto Nants, it Poictou seuers
               From Brittaine, where this horne of plenty powers
               Her much encreased scarce contained store,
               Ouer the surface of the Westerne shore.
            
            
               So when the second Henry first set forth,
               Simply attended with the strength of Mayne:
               Proceeding forward his attractiue worth,
               Adding braue spirits to his spreading traine,
               Whilst to a larger state his Hopes aspire,
               His late-got-greatnes all the Land admire.
            
            
               From out the Frontier Hils, through Gascony,
               
               Garond to Toulouse lesse obserued goes,
               Then entertaining from all parts supply,
               Passeth to Bordeaux, and by passing growes,
               That ere at Blay it reach the watry realme,
               Her Sea-beseeming-waues the Land ore-whelme.
            
            
               
               How did the Sou'raigne of St. George his Knights,
               His new enobled Garter here aduance,
               Whilest his admired Order's worth incites
               The states succeeding of amazed France,
               To follow after, though preceded farre,
               With Badge of Golden Fleece, and sparkling Starre?
            
            
               Crecy and Poitiers saw the Princely Bands,
               Ecclips with feathr'y Clouds the lowring day:
               And Agincourt in daunger, trembling stands,
               Whilst Henryes valour ore it towring lay:
               Each place but passable by searching fame,
               Gaue way to Neuils, and great Talbots name.
            
            
               
               NExt France the Pirenean Hils descry,
               SPAYNE, as the Orchard of th'Hesperides,
               Whose golden fruit, obseru'd with wary eye
               A sterne and watchfull Gardian did possesse;
               Now blest the wealth and happy is that soyle
               Whose keepers care 's not feard, nor strangers spoile.
            
            
               Vnder those stately Mountaynes shady side,
               Entrencht by great Iberus, lyes Nauar,
               
               Whence nearer to that Sea which Spaine deuides
               From parched Africke, Southward seated are
               Hot Arragon, and those choyce-hearbed-fields
               Of good Valenc'a, which such plenty yeelds.
            
            
               These, and those Seigneuries which here, erewhile
               No great Superiours, free controulement brookt,
               Are by the lofty Turrets of Castile,
               
               Vpon t'Herculian Pillars rais'd, ore-lookt,
               Her mounted Ordinance commanding all,
               Betwixt Nauar, and farthest Portugall.
            
            
               
               The Western Ocean doth confine the shore
               Of wealthy Portugall, where Tagus sands
               Mixt with abundance of Gold-yeelding ore,
               Was sifted by some Guilt-approuing hands,
               Wohse Mettall-minded hard affection would
               Turne with refining all they touch't to gold.
            
            
               Now on poore Protestants such Art they vse,
               Whom they with all pursuite do first enquire,
               And hauing found, doe sift, and sifted bruise,
               At last their soundnes they explore with fire:
               And though they neuer will their stamp admit,
               To passe with Angels they doe make them sit.
            
            
               Faire Andaluzia which had once repute,
               For giuing weary Phoebus welcome rest,
               Feedes her Siuilians with Gold-seeming fruite:
               Oh! would they were with vs indeed so blest
               Who farre more truely entertaine the Light,
               
               Repelling errours wrong-protecting Night.
            
            
               
               There Boetis which doth fall neere Cadis bay,
               Seing the English ensignes faire displayd,
               Stopping her troubled course, beganne to stay,
               And feeling her vaste body much dismayd:
               Vp 
                     •
                  oward Corduba where first she bred,
               Her bloud contracting back retir'd and fled.
            
            
               The winged Charriots, which out-sayld the wind,
               Led by great Essex, with much ease did passe
               Beyond Plus vltra, and haue left behinde
               Trophees aboue the Monuments of Brasse,
               Of which may yet these peacefull times relate,
               Louing our own, though theirs we leaue to hate.
            
            
               Thence as that Nauy, where the flowre of Greece
               Return'd from Colchos, whilest they come from Spaine,
               Brauely enriched with the Golden Fleece,
               And ride triumphing ore the Sea-greene-plaine:
               Great Brittaine Glories Capitoll dilates,
               The close-bard entrance of her Crystall gates.
            
            
               
               GReat BRITTAINE shadow of the starry Sphears
               Selfe-viewing Beauties true presented Grace
               In Thetis Myrrhour, on this Orbe appeares,
               In Worth excelling, as extoll'd in Place:
               Like the rich Croisade on th'Imperiall Ball,
               As much adorning as surmounting all.
            
            
               Bounded within the watry Firmament,
               Whose euer-mouing streames about it role,
               She measures forth her length in faire extent,
               Towards the Southern, from the Northern Pole:
               Betwixt her Riuers Zone-diuiding Lines,
               Each Citie like a Constellation shines.
            
            
               Auon and Twede her Tropicks, Zodiack-wise
               Passe Trent and Seuern: to the springing Morne
               Trent goes declining, Seuerne bending lyes
               Downe by the Western, freez-cloath'd Capricorne.
               
               Thames, as th'Equator, doth more eeuen runne,
               Proud with the Mansions of her biding Sunne
               
            
            
               
               Maiesticke SVNNE, long may thy kinde aspect
               Shed downe sweet influence vpon this Clime,
               Beyond all Enuy, as without Defect,
               Ruling but neuer altering our Time,
               Till passing from our teare-bedewed eyes,
               Thy Glory in another Heau'n shall rise.
            
            
               T
                     •••
                   soone our IVLIAN-STARRE late Prince of Light,
               The sparkling lustre of whose vertuous ray
               To Brittaine hearts content with shortest Night,
               Promis'd the comfort of eternall day:
               Too soone expir'd, ô worthy long to proue
               The worlds great Wonder, & his Countries Loue.
            
            
               And faire ELISA midst the glistering Crew,
               Which as our glorious Cynthia seemes renew'd,
               Lately remouing from our fainting view,
               Her presence with all graces bright endew'd,
               For Latmus shade, doth spend her precious houres
               On Rhenus Banks amidst the Myrtle Bowres.
               
            
            
               
               Yet like those glistring Emblems neare the Pole,
               Still aboue Earths Horizon el
                     •
                  uate.
               May our Heroicke Princes name controule
               The Starry Orders of this well-rul'd State,
               And Brittaines Chariot as the Northern VVayne,
               With great Arcturus ioyne her CHARLEMAIGNE.
            
            
               A stately Burs, built in the VVestern Strand,
               Renowned Exeter farre off doth seeme:
               But London, Exchange-Royall of the Land,
               Is obiect of the Peoples best esteeme:
               So whilst the glorious Day-star shines more bright,
               Cleare Hesperus obscur'd doth giue no light.
            
            
               Sweet-seated Sals-bry, VVilshyres ornament,
               Neighb'red with Plaines, graced with goodly Vallies,
               Like some delightfull Garden of Content,
               Watring with siluer streames her well-squar'd allies,
               But that it doth more firme and surely stand,
               Doth seeme another Venice in our Land.
            
            
               
               
                  Bathe, fairely-built, throughout the World is knowne
               For her most wholesome strength-repayring Springs,
               But she which hath so strange effects oft showne,
               VVith ill successe did lend her Founder wings:
               Poore worme-like creeping men she might restore,
               Ne'er make them borne to goe, like Birds to soare.
            
            
               
                  Bristow, the Marchants Magazin, enclos'd
               With Rocky Hils, by Auons streame imbrac't,
               Faire by industrious workemanship compos'd
               As by great Natures wisedome firmely plac't,
               Viewing her verdant Marsh, may well disdaine
               Romes somtimes-glory, Mars his Champian plaine.
            
            
               Old Winchester, the auncient seate of Kings,
               For vertue, and for valour much renowned,
               So subiect vnto change are earthly things,
               In stead of Diadem with Bayes is crowned.
               Where worthy Wicchams children now mainetaine
               The fame once known by great king Arthurs traine.
            
            
               
               
                  Oxford by Isis Crystall streames confin'd,
               And well-discerning Cambridge, Learnings Payre,
               Excell those Lamps which once on Ida shin'd:
               Bright Iuno shew'd, cleare Pallas, Venus faire;
               But eyther of these thrice illustrious eyes,
               Doth Brightnes, Clearnesse, Fairnesse all comprise.
            
            
               As that true Ensigne of th'Almighties Loue,
               Liuely displayed in the Cloudy Skye,
               The gazers eye astonished doth moue
               To wonder at such strange varietie:
               Rain-bow-resembling London, Englands Blisse,
               The Heau'ns great Mercy, and Earths Maruell is.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               READER:
            
            
               IF thy Patience be not too much discouraged, aduenture on the little Common-weale of my poore thoughts. I euer rather admired then professed Poetry, the necessitie of my Studies, to which a higher direction

then mine owne choyse hath appointed mee, forbidding the one, and that delight, which beyond ordinary content receiued in all sorts of Learning, hath beene presented to me in this, occasioning the other: yet haue I, as my leasure gaue me leaue, taken to my selfe in this idlenesse that reliefe, which in other varietie most doe thinke they may iustly vse. I know some whose credit hath challenged respect exceeding strong in preiudice against the composing and reading such trifles, yet the excellency of diuers in this kinde, commended

by others, whom I haue no warrant to distrust, makes my small experience thinke, that some Muses, like Silke-wormes, spinne a fine threed for necessary vse, as many like Spiders curious webs for vnprofitable admiration. His censure who affirmed the reading of Amadis du Gaule as dangerous to youth, as of Macciauel pernitious to old men, was, as the Author, truly generous; yet I presume it extends not to all which without proclaiming title to wisdome and iudgement, seeme rais'd or fashioned by imagination.

There is, who hath vndertaken to illustrate by places of the Arcadia, all the points of the Art of speaking: I will adde (which is as much as Achilles his Father desired Chiron should teach his Sonne) hee is rude that cannot discerne, or exceeding austere that scornes to obserue therein, worthy behauiour and carriage both in priuate and common businesse: And one as vnderstanding in the Pollicie of Letters and Peace, as La Noue was experienced in the Discipline of Armes, and a troubled State, by exquisite vnfolding of

some fabulous Stories, makes it plaine, that the Cesternes of these times, deriue the fulnes of their wisdome, by no other conueyance then such narrations, from the purer springs of all antiquitie. To whom he had yeelded his assent; who, imploying his faithfull labours in teaching to beleeue, I know had care he might not be disprou'd, and farther graceth Poetry, with the choise appellation of the Soules vvoing-Suite; in which diuers (their excellencie carrying them higher) haue shewed their thoughts not vnfit for solemne, yea

Sabaoth deuotions. And truely, they who will be pleas'd to credit our owne tongue, and age, may finde our present, and later Poets, capable of that commendation, which was giuen the antienst among the Greekes: That if their writings were preserued, no part of Learning should wholy perish. Spencer, hauing as well deliuered Morall, and Heroicall matter for vse and action, as Du Bartas (now ours) Naturall and Diuine, for study and meditation. I would not diminish the worthy reputation of other Volumnes; for mine owne

part, it being knowne to some, I haue spent time in them, I should be loth to be thought ignorant of that, which I am perswaded all that know doe well allow. But as the plaine way affecteth most, the neerest many, so I am sure there are some, who, had they beene shewed that which was pleasing, would haue prooued successefull, when they haue returned exceeding empty from Systems and Commentaries.
            What I haue attempted in this subiect, was long since excellently performed by Dionysius in Greeke,

and diuers in Latin, whose example hath giuen me some incouragement, but no more direction then Magellan to Syr Francis Drake, shewing the Straights might be past, not instructing how. Some places may seem obscure, but I intend it to those who vnderstand, or desire to know something in this Argument: I haue not touched all, because I would be short, and haue vsed shortnes, as vnwilling to sweat, and make a labour of my sport, as any fastidious lookers on are quickly apt to distast satietie. As it is, Reader, I indifferently leaue it

to thy discretion: what esteeme thou wilt be pleased to put on it, is in thy power, how I may valew thy esteeme remaines in mine.
            FINIS.
         
      
   