
      
         
            
            
            THE
LAMENTATIONES
OF IEREMY,
TRANSLATED VVITH GREAT
CARE OF HIS HEBREVV ELEGANCIE, AND
ORATORIOVS SPEACHES: VVHERIN HIS SIXFOLD
ALPHABET STIRRETH
all to attention,
OF GODS ORDERED
Providence in Kingdomes
confuſion.
            
            VVITH EXPLICATIONES
from other Scriptures,
touching his ſtory &
phraſes.
            BY HVGH BROVGHTON.
1606
         
         
            
            
            OF
IEREMIES LIKENES
TO MOSES IN MANY
DEGREES.
            
               IEremy had great reſemblances to likē
him vnto Moſes in many poincts,
pleaſant to conſider: & much for his
auctority. As Moſes vvas of Levj,
the godlieſt tribe, and the beſt familie:
that vvhich by faith hid him three
moneths: So Ieremie vvas of Levj,
of the ſacrificers of Anathoth: & his father vvas Chelkiah
the high ſacrificer: vvho found the Lavv, hid in the
temple: in Manaſſes dayes: vvhoſe repentance vvas but
a litle afore his death: that he could not think of the
Lavv. And Amon his ſonne vvas vvicked. Of this Levite
came Ieremy: Sonne & father honorers of Moſes.
Moſes vvas vnvvilling to go vpon his meſſage: Ieremie
vvas vnvvilling to go vpon his meſſage. Moſes ovvne
tribe ſtood vp againſt him: Core & his companie. Ieremie
his ovvne, the men of Anathoth ſtood vp againſt
him: Moſes vvas caſt into the river by his ovvn kindred:
Ieremye vvas caſt into a dungeon by his ovvne kindred.
Moſes vvas taken out of the river by one
of Pharaohs maydens: Ieremie vvas taken out of the
dungeon by an Aethiopian, by Abdemelech. Moſes
reproved Iſrael: Ieremie reproved Iſrael: Moſes
told Iſrael, of captiuitie: & cloſly of ſeaventie yeres:
Levit. 26. and of a nevv remembrance of covenant▪
Ieremie told Iſrael of captivitie & expreſſely to end at 70

yeres: and of the Nevv Teſtament Moſes told that the
Kings should go to a ſtrange Land: vpon deſert, to
be rooted out: Ieremie telleth the Kings shall go to Babel.
& telleth expreſly tvviſe: Ier. 36. & 22. that the
Kings ſtock shalbe rooted out. Moſes deſired of God to
shevv him his vvayes: ſeing the ſtrange ſucceſs of vvicked
here: Ieremie deſired to knovv vvhy the vvicked proſpered.
Moſes bade Iſraell they should no more returne
to Aegypt. Ieremie bade Iſrael they should no more returne
to Aegypt. Moſes ſpake frō his ovvn faith in God:
that the rebels againſt him should haue a ſtrange death:
Ieremie from his fayth in God tolde the pſeudoprophet
Ananias, S. of Azor, this yere thou shalt die. Moſes
vvrote of ſadnes to Rachel the mother, by her death at
Beth Lechem, Ieremy vvrot that Rachel shall vveep for
her childrens death at Beth Lechem. Moſes prophecied,
a King, of Chriſt the King fortie yeares: Ieremie prophecied
vnto Kings, of Chriſt the true King forty yeres.
Moſes vvrote moſt curious poetrie Ex. 15 & Deut. 32.
Ieremies Lamētations bring more ioy for learned ſtile:
then ſadnes by ſpeach of the nations fall. Moſes and Ieremie
ſaued much of their company by their forty yeres:
for going into the Land: from the vvildernes: & out of
the Land into the vvildernes of the heathen. The Phariſees
deſpiſing Moſes & Ieremie, & Apoſtles 40 yeres
bred Eternall Lamentations.
            
               THE COMMENDATION
OF IEREMIES LAMENTATIONS.
               THe holy ſpirit commendeth in Ier. 36. the booke of
Lamentations: that it abridgeth all Ieremies ſermons

made from the thirtenth of Ioſias vnto the fourth
of Ioakim, vvhich ſpace Ieremy reckoneth to betvventy
three yeares. And as he abridgeth his ovvn ſermons
made from the phraſes of the Lavv, Iob, Pſalmes, and
Salomons Books, & from all the former prophets: So
his Lamentations in verie ſpeach do call the reader to
former vvorks that the reading of them bringeth into
mind all the former holy vvriters. And the holy Daniel
ſo delighted in him, that ch: 9. he abridgeth his Lamentations
hovv vnder heaven it hath not bene done, as
it hath bene done to Ieruſalem: vvhere everie curſe ſpoken
in the Lavv of Moſes hath shevved full event. God
bade Ieremie vvrite the Booke: & to read it in a great
faſt. Baruc vvrot it & read it to the nobles: they bring it
to Ioakim the King: & read it: he being at a fier in his
vvinter chāber: in his fift yere: vvhen he had returned
from Babel, & purpoſed rebellion in his hart. It vvas about
November: & a burning fier vvas in his chamber:
& as Iehudj read three or four Leaves, Ioakim vvith a
penknife cut them, & caſt them into the fier: till he cō
                  ſumed
all the Book. yet the nobles requeſted him not
to deale ſo. Alſo he commaunded to lay hold vpon Ieremy
& Baruc. But God hid them: & bade Ieremy vvrite
againe the book▪ vvith addition: the threefold Alphabet:
ch. 3. as vvell may be thought: & to prophecy of
Ioakim, the rooting out of his ſucceſſion and houſe: &
that he shalbe buryed like an aſſe: caſt out of Ieruſalem.
Which fell out as he vvas caryed the ſecond tyme for Babel.
               And thus in Ieremie GOD honoreth the Lamentationes
of Ieremie▪
               
            
            
               
               HOVV DANIELS VISIONS HONOVR
IEREMYES LAMENTATIONS.
               FIve yeres after Ieremies Lamētations vver firſt vvritten
Daniel vvriteth of the Ievves enemies: hovv
they make a great & goodly image: & figureth them not
by beaſtes, vvhile the Kings of Iudah be ſavage vvightes,
& cauſed Ieremies Lamentations: But after threeſcore
yeres, vvhen the Kings race vvas gone, then Iudahs enemies
vver likened vnto ſavage beaſtes: & the Ievves
of Ieremies Lamentatiōs are the holy: vvhich shal poſſeſs
a kingdome for Euer and Euer. Alſo Ieremie Lam.
4. cloſly telleth of Babels fall: that doth Daniel liuely
deſcribe: chapt. 5. Ieremie Lam. 5 prayeth vnto God
to turne his People: becauſe ſo onely they can be returned:
& to renue his gratious face as of old. Daniel ch.
9. expreſly nameth Ieremies 70 yeres for Gods anger:
& prayeth for the renevving of Gods favour.
            
            
               THE STORY OF IVDAH, FOR THE
TIME OF IEREMIES LAMENTATIONS.
               Daniel onely recordeth, ch. 1. that in the third of Iehoiakim;
Nabuchadnezzar King of Babel came againſt
Ieruſalem▪ But by Ieremy, ch. 25. vve gather that
part of Ioakim his fourth vvas alſo in Nabuchadnezar
his firſt. And then God gave the K. into his hands: &
part of the veſſels of the temple: & God brought K. and
veſſels vnto Babel: But the K. vvas ſuffred to returne:
for in his fift vere he vvas at Ieruſalem: This captivity
vvas mentioned onely in Daniel: vvho vvas alſo caryed

vvith three as godly, Ananias, Miſael, & Azarias: & other
of the Kings race. Eight yeres after this vvould not
teach K. Ioakim that he vpon rebellion should be bury
                  
                     •
                  s
an Aſſe: For he had ſinned againſt the holy Gh. in bur
                  
                     •
                  ing
Ieremies Lamentatiōs: & could not be renued to re
                  
                     〈…〉
                  nce:
but muſt haue open punishment here, as Eternal

                     〈◊〉
                   Gehenna. After five yeres Daniel & Nab: both dreamed
of the great Image: that should rule not only Iudah
but all: a long time: Ioakim cared nothing for all this.
Nab. the K. preſently maketh a Golden Image, to augment
the viſions memorie: & his hope: as Diod: Siculꝰ
noteth: that he should be a Monarch: and vvould haue
it vvorshipped. Then Daniels godly coſyns quench the
fier. And the K. of Babel proclameth Gods glory: But
Ioakim contemneth God, to haſten iudgment! & rebelleth
againſt Nab: K. of Babell. The ſecond & third ch.
of Daniel muſt be here conſidered: hovv againſt them
the vvicked harden their hart. So God ſent armies of
Chaldeans, Aram, Moab, & Ammon againſt Iudah, &
they took Ioakim and bound him in chaynes to haue
brought him to Babel: 2. ch. 36. But he died by the vvay,
& he vvas buryed like an aſſe. Ier. 36. Iehoiachin reigned
three moneths: like a Cruell Lion. Him Nabuchadnezar
ſuffred not to ſit any longer vpon Davids
throne: But caried him to Babel. And moo veſſels of
the temple & palace; & all the nobles: & Mardochaj thē
a ſuckling, one of Ieremies Lamented. Then alſo vvas
Ezekiel captiued. That he might freely in Babel tell the
reſt of Iuda they should follovv. But they vvould never
beleue that Iudahs kingdome should erre to deſtruction.
Many thouſands alſo of the People, all ſaving

the poore, he caried to Babel: & kept Iechonias 37. yeres
in priſon: that vvicked Thalmudiſts should not ſay: Iechonias
by repentance called back Gods oth: that ſaid he
should dy childles. Repentance should haue holpen Achabs
broode; firſt out of priſon. But no repentance, not
Moſes repentance, can call back Gods oth: Beſides the
oth paſſed as vvell for Ioakim that none of his ſeed should
ſit vpon Davids throne. yet the infidels teach it to
be Atheiſme to ſay that Salomons race is ended. But
the Goſpell of S. Luke & Ier. 36. & 22. & Aggej. 2. &
Zach. 12. teach vs that it is infidelity
to deny it to be ended.
Let him that
readeth
vnderſtand.
            
         
         
            
            TO
THE MOST NOBLE
HENRY
PRINCE OF GREAT
BRITANY.
            THE Law promiſſeth (G. P). all bleſſing
of this world, &, when this earthly
houſe of tabernacle is diſſolved, a building
from God everlaſting, yf we kepe it:
But without any token that men wold kepe
it, breaking upon breaking is foretold:
& eight and twenty fold puniſhmentes,
until at the laſt Iudah ſhould loſe their
Land and be ſeaventy yeares in the Land
of Nemrod: wher they might behold the
wicked building: which bred confuſion of
tongues: and which ſhould end the tōgue
of Adam from comon uſe. VVhen the firſt
yere of this captivitie was beginning: Ieremie
penned a forme of lamentatiōs: ſhewing

mans miſery to the full. and the rooting
out of Salomons howſe, which from
Roboam was Ammonitiſh: and from Ochozias
was Achabiſh: and was often nere
rooting out. that men might better beleve
it ſhould wholy decay: and loke unto
the family of Chriſt the ſonne of Nathan
Salomons brother. The Godly in captiuity,
as Daniel, who ſtopped the mouth
of Liones, and Ananias, Miſael, with Aſarias,
who quenched the force of fyre, were
humbled by theſe Lamentationes to behold
the dayes of Chriſt. And preſently
from theyr begining Daniel beginneth
his captiuity: as a witneſs to Ieremies
trueth; and ſheweth how God in ſorowes
advaunced him to be welthier then mighty
Kinges; and contrived the Kingdomes
which thence ſhould afflict faithfull Iudahs
religion, vnto the forme of one mās
body: and diſtinct in matter, as Iudahs zeale,
or relenting wold be. Ieremyes Lamentations
I have ſet over into our tongue;
with care to ſet forth, ſo nere as our ſpeach

could, the oratorious bravery of his
wordes. But all men, yea all Grekes,
though theyr learning & eloquence were
powred into one head, wold come nothing
nere his heavenly gayneſſe. They
muſt lerne his owne language that wold
fill theyr eares with thoſe ſoundes of Chanaan.
Beſides his tranſlation, I have ſhewed
his meaning ſo far as I demed nede was;
for his conferēce with the other holy workes.
And him I joyned to Koheleth,. Alſo
I finiſhed that work which was ſent over
to your G. in Ebrew and Latin which
hādleth Davids Families & Daniels ſūme.
That I have alſo turned into mo lāguages;
as conteyning an explication of comon
Chriſtianity. Theſe I laboured, that your
G. might by ripe yeres, be ripe in the know
ledg of God.
            
               Your Graces most humble,
HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
LAMENTATIONS
OF IEREMY.
            
               Aleph. 1 HOw is the city dwelt
ſolitary vvhich vvas
full of people; She is
become a very widdow.
The great among
nations, the prince among countreys
is becomeIehoiakim was caryed to Babel, in the first of Nabu: & Daniel, Ananias, Miſael, & Azaria
                     •
                   with other yong nobles. Da. 1. And Iehoiakim was ſuffred to returne to his Kingdome: being made a ſervant tributarie to the King of Babel. tributary.
            
               Beth. 2 She weepeth ſore all theAffliction is night. as Eſ. 21. Three yeares Iehoiakim ſerved the K. of Babel. That time was night: Three yeres he was vexed with forces of Chaldeans Syrians Moabites Ammonites. And that was a darker night. night:
Her teares trickle vpon her cheeks: She
hath no comforter of all her Lovers: all
herEgypt and Tyrus & other near nations, which afterwards reſisted Babel 35. yeres. yet they left Ieruſalem to be taken of Nabuchadnezar after a ſmall ſiege. friends deale vnfaithfully with
her: They are become her enemies.
            
               
               Gimel. 3. IudahIn th' eight of Nab: with K. Iechonias & Mar dochai then a childe, & Ezekiel, & many who thē ſaw Salomons temple, & Lived till Aggei asked them, of it & Zorobabels▪ Ag. 2. And many thouſands: all ſaving the poore. And againe when the remnant is captived, after full bondage & ſorow. Beſides in the Booke of Ester Letters went into 127 countreyes againſt the Iewes, & againe for them. And the Chaldean ſcattered thē not: wherfore we muſt vnderstand that many beleeving their conntrey should become vnder Babel fled into other coutreyes. And of them might they bee who made the ſynagoges in Corinth & Rome. leaveth countrey after
affliction & much bondage. She dvvelleth
among the heathen: She findeth no reſt:
all that purſue her overtake her in the
ſtraites.
            
               Daleth. 4. The wayes of Sion mourne, becauſe
none come to the feaſtes: all her
gates be deſolate; her ſacrificersThey ſighed not for killing the prophets but for the punishment. ſigh: her
virgines ſorow, & ſhe feeleth bitternes.
            
               He. 5 Her aduerſaries are the chief: her
enemies proſper: becauſe the Eternal hath
made her ſorowfull, for her great treſpaſes:
Her infantsAs Mardochai: who was actiue in Eſthers dayes: Ester. 10. & was caried to Babel 62. yeres afore Babel fell. So he muſt liue 85. at the leaſt; though he were 
                     〈…〉
                  ived, in his cradle. go to captivity, before
the adverſarie.
            
               
               Chap. I.
               
                  Vau. 6 And from theAll ſettled comon weales are called daughters in the Scripture; as Daughter Babel, pſ. 137. So Rome is pictured a woman Apo. 17 daughter Sion all
her gayneſs is departed: her Princes are like
hartes which finde no paſture, and goe
voyd of all ſtrength before the purſuer.
               
                  Zain. 7 Ieruſalē remembreth in the dayes
of her affliction and vexation, all the pretious
thinges that ſhe had in the old time:
vvhen the People hath fallen by the hand
of the Enemy: and ſhe hath no helper: her
adverſaries behold her, & Laugh at herThis prophecieth how in Babel they will mourne for deſire vnto their feastes: which in their Land they would not keep aright And the Chaldeans will skoph their Sabbatiſmes, as did long after Horace, Ovid, and other Poets. & Tully too: Deſerving to haue his head cut off and his tongue pricked, as he had. The pſ. 137. commenteth vpon this verſe.
Sabbatiſmes.
               
                  Cheth. 8 Ieruſalē hath ſinned grevouſly:
therfore came ſhe into
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Nydah. Such vncertainty of place as Cain had Gen. 4. wandring from place to place. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      expreſseth of purpoſe this word, 1 Cor. 4. 11. diſperſiō: all that
honoured her contemne her: becauſe
they haue ſeene her ſhame: alſo ſhe ſigheth

& turneth her ſelf backwardes.
               
                  Teth. 9 HerIer. Ch. 2. hādleth this at large. The trope meaneth Idolatry. vncleanes is vpon her
skirtes. She remembreth notDeu. 32. O that they were wiſe, & would remember their last end. Moſes ſpake of this age. her laſt
end: Hovv ſhe is vvonderfully brought
downe, ſhe hath no comforter. O Eternal
ſee my affliction: becauſe the enemy is
mightie.
               
                  Iod. 10 The aduerſary layeth his hand
vpon all her
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Apoc. 18. pretious thinges: vvhen
ſhe ſeeth the nations come into her temple:
of whome thou haſt commaunded:
They ſhould not come into thyThat is: They shall beare no office in thy comon weale. they are Ammonites and Moabites. Deut. 23. 3. they come now even into the Temple where onely the Levites should come. congregation.
               
                  Caph. 11 All her People ſigh, ſeeking for

bread: they give theyr pretious thinges for
This ſpeach is a prophecie of the famine that should befall the city, in the laſt ſiege: which began in the ninth of Sedekias. Then Nab; compaſſed the city with ſiege, vntil the Eleventh yere; when the famine was exceeding great, & the People of the Land had no meat. 2. K. 25. 1. Though two captiuities were past, & none were left but a remnant of poore, & Ezekiel in captivity prophecyed that Sedekias and his companie should come after the former, & Ieremie ſtill in Ieruſalem commented in Sermons vpon his Lamentations, all this moved not Sedekias & his nobles. For they knew not the Kingdome of Christ: that it was for the world to come; & knew that an Eternall throne was promiſed vnto David. 2. Sam. 7. & 1. Chro. 17. So still they made their belly their God. Phil. 3. And to this day the Thalmudiques ſay; in R. Moſes Ben Mamony Tom. 1. tractat. Poenitentia: Perek or ſection. 9. All the good thinges vvhich the prophets prophecied vnto Iſrael: they are onely body thinges, vvherein the body shalbe benefited in the dayes of Meſſias; vvhen the Kingdome shalbe reſtored to Iſrael. Moſes foretold Deut. 32. that when they became fat, groſſe, and burly, they would forget God that made them, & contemne the rock of their Saluation. And Eſay Ch. 6. recordeth that to haue come to paſſe: & Rambam tract. poenit. recordeth the ſinne there to be ſin against the holy Ghoſt: wherein God would never give repentance. As they could not repent: to give ever at the ſiege: but they dreamed still that Egypt would help; but Ieremy Lamenteth that their folly: So for the ſecond destruction, they beleeved not the Angel Dan. 9. that telleth againe and againe that their city should haue a final deſtruction. But when S. Stephen, act. 6 & 7. told the ſame, & had in his faco like the Angels brightnes, they ſtopped their eares: & would neither hear nor ſee. And who would haue thought that Saraias the high Sacrificer, & father of good Eſra should conſpire with the reſt to damne Ieremy for a falſe prophet, becauſe he told of Ruine to the temple, & implements: & of the New Testament. But man ſold into ſin cannot ſee, where God openeth not the eyes. And here the ſpirit teacheth the Godly to grone with ſighinges vnſpeakable. meat to keep in life. See ô Eternall, &
conſider how contemptible I am become.
               
                  
                  Lamed.
                  Daniell full of grace honoureth this verſe ch. 9. thus: It hath not ben done vnder all the heaven as it hath bene done to Ieruſalem. 12 This hath not befallen you, ô
all that paſſe by the way. Conſider yee,
& ſee yf ther be any ſadnes like my ſadnes,
which is cauſed vnto me; where the Eternall
hath cauſed ſorow, in the day of his
hoat anger.
               
                  Mem. 13 From an high he hath ſent fier
into myThe cities of Iuda brent by the Chaldeans. bones, and made it prevaile: he
hath ſpread a net to my feet: he hath turned
me backward, he hath made me deſolate,
ſick, all the day.
               
                  
                  Nun. 14 TheThe yoke of the Law was given to teach how ſinne abounded. So ſeing they humbled not themſelves before God, to walk better in his holy covenant, all the curſes written in the Lawes of Moſes came vpon them: when from the yoke of the Law, which theſe fathers could not bear, they yoke of their treſpaſſes galled the neck. When Dan. Ch. 9. confeſſed this much: the angel Gabriel teacheth him of the eaſie yoke of Christ, named ſo: Math. xj. And that oration of the Angel Gabriel is no leſſe to the old Testament then the ſun is to the ſky. yoke of my treſpaſſes hath
made an impreſſion by his hand: they plat

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . s. Paul expoundeth this ſtrange Ebrew with as ſtrange Greek: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Eb. 12. Sin that cunningly wrappeth about. And this he meaneth that the glorious wiſdome of Moſes Law, which ſtandeth for the marrow, ſtill, but not for the outward, Sabbat, circumciſion Tabernacle, & other rites of Levy, this blinded them, who would not looke vnto Chriſt the end of the Law; that God from the Law plagued them, & made the Law, held as their table, to be their trappe: Seing they would not enter into the reſt of Chriſt: where baptiſme, and the Lordes ſupper are no burden. S. Paul calling the Ebrewes being in the Errour of Sedekias times vnto Ieremies Lamentations, cloſly warneth by the former destruction, a ſecond as a deluge: when the Apoſtles preaching hath had forty yeres as Ieremies when Sedekias & his went into the wildernes of the heathen. The Thalmudiques traditiōs to this day, are their ſinnes, platting themſelves as the boughes of a tree, or the Nerves of the Elephants coddes. Iob 40. 17. Whence Ieremy borowed his word, which S. Paul gaue to Gracia. themſelves; they go over myNeck ſignifieth as in Abak., 3. the higheſt townes of ſtate. when Ioſuah conquered Chanaan. Such was Ieruſalem to Ieremies dayes & S. Paules. neck;
he hath beaten downe my ſtrength: The
Lord hath given me into their handes before
whome I cannot ſtand.
               
                  
                  Samech. 15 The Lord hath troden downe
all myWhē Nah: caryed away all the men of warre, & all the nobles, & Iewellers, in his eight yere 2. K. 34. valiant, within me; he hath called
anWhen the Kings of the earth aſsisted Nab: to be ſiege Ieruſalem; Craaeſus King of Lydia might well be one of them. Old Herodotus noteth his familiarity with the King of Babel. God would haue Kings to know Ieruſalems fall by Babel, that when they should hear of Babels houſe of Nemrod fallen, by Iapheth and Sem, & proclamation to ſend home the Iewes by ſubſidy of 120 nations; they might listen when God in Christ would pity the world for that liberality to his people. aſſembly againſt me, to breake
my yonge men; the Lord hath troden the
winepreſſe, to the virgin daughter Iudah.
               
                  Ain. 16 Therfore do I weepe; mine eye
mine ey gusſheth out of water; for cōforter is
far from me, that should keep in my
life; my children are deſolate becauſe the
enemy is the ſtronger.
               
                  
                  Pe. 17 Sion ſpreadeth the handes,
ſhe findeth no comforter; The Eternall
hath given charge concerning Iacob, to
his enemies round about him; Ieruſalem is
become a mēſtruous woman amōg them.
               
                  Sade. 18 TheDā. Ch. 9. expreſeth this whole ſentēce. Eternall is iuſt. For I
haue rebelled againſt his mouth. Heare
now all ye people & ſee my ſadnes. My virgins
& my yōg mē are gone into captivity.
               
                  Coph. 19 I called vpon myEgyptiās, Ezek. 29. reſisted Babel, as well as Iuda: But promiſing help they durſt not performe it. As in many places Ezekiel telleth, 30. & 31. & moo. Alſo though wee have no record of confederacy betwixt Iudah & other Enemies to Babel, reaſon telleth that all of one danger at the first, ioyned League: Theſe were confederate with Egypt, Ezek. 30. Cush, Put & Lud, & all Arabia, & Cub or Barbaria. Theſe, as haters of Ieruſalem partly for feare of Nabuchadnezars greatnes, partly of hatred to Gods trueth, for ſake Ieruſalem, while Nab: beſiegeth Sedekias: Ezekiel Ch. 29. & 30. prophecieth againſt them. Lovers; &
they haue deceaved me; My ſacrificers &
my Elders yeeld vp the ghoſt in the citie,
when they ſeeke them meat to keepe in
their life.
               
                  Resh. 20 See ô Eternall how I am in

diſtreſſe. My bovvels areIob. 16. 16. diſquieted,
& my hart is turned vvithin me, becauſe I
have ſtubburnelie rebelled.Deu. 32. They shalbe brent with hunger & eatē vp with burning, & bitter deſtruction. without, the ſword shall robbe: within shalbe fear. S. Paul 2. Cor. 7. 5. calleth Moſes & Ieremy both into minde: ſaying: when we came into Macedonia my flesh had no reſt: vve vvere alvvayes in diſtreſſe, vvithout vvas fighting, vvithin vvas feare: Thus divinely honoureth he the ſonges of Moſes and Ieremy: as having tbeir wordes ſtill before him, ioyning Moſes prophecy with Ieremyes story: & shewing how the Apostles were vexed in the world, as Ieruſalem of the Chaldeans. VVithout
the ſword doth robbe, within is death
it ſelf.
               
                  Schin. 21 They have heard how I ſigh, having
no comforter; all my enemies haue
heard my evel;Namely Tyrus, reproved of Ezechiel for ioyance at the fall of 
                        •
                     eruſalem: which Tyrus is there told of ruine. Many yeares it was beſieged of Nab: & taken at the laſt. Other nations vntaken yet, but told Ier. 25. that they should ſerve Babel, they alſo hated Iudah; concerning whome this prophecy is vttered. they reioyce at thy doing.
Thou bringeſt a day which thou haſt
proclaymed, thatNamely Tyrus, reproved of Ezechiel for ioyance at the fall of 
                        •
                     eruſalem: which Tyrus is there told of ruine. Many yeares it was beſieged of Nab: & taken at the laſt. Other nations vntaken yet, but told Ier. 25. that they should ſerve Babel, they alſo hated Iudah; concerning whome this prophecy is vttered. they ſhalbe as I am.
               
                  
                  Tau. 22 Let allThe firſt Alphabet row is ended in the prophecy of ending the wicked Kingdomes which should be brought vnder Babels yoke: to shew that all theſe troubles are in Gods providence ſetled in moſt exquiſite order for his iudgments. their evell come before
thee; and do vnto them as thou haſt
done vnto me for all my treſpaſſes. For my
ſighings be many & my hart is ſick.
            
            
               Chap. 2.
               
                  Aleph. 1 HOw hath theFoure Hebrew names of God are onely vſed in this book: Iehovah, the Eternal, in ech Chapter: & is accompanied with Adonaj: Abrahams ſtay, with a note of trinity: (Gen. 15.) Lam. Ch. 1. 2, 3. And in the third alſo, with El: Mighty, & once in a moſt fit argument; & with 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      The most HIGH, twiſe; wherin Ieremy complayneth againſt the high states of Iudah, vnto one whome they felt higher & mightier. In the fourth and fift, Iehovah: Performer of promiſe from Eternall purpoſe, onely is vſed Elohim the exact mighty iudge, only vſed Gen. 1. & elſwhere most vſuall in ſtory, is not at all in this book: where the prophet sheweth how God in will remember mercy▪ to make the Iewes in Babell a golden state: & not enter into iudgement to conſume them. A tranſlater, vnmindefull of fit English for ech, will blinde his reader. Lord beclouded
in his anger the
daughter Sion; he hath caſt downe from
heaven to the earth the fayreneſs of Iſrael:
and remembreth not his footſtoole in the
day of his anger.
               
                  
                  Beth. 2 The Lord hathEb. ſwallowed, & vſed as here, Iob. 2. overwhelmed,
nothing ſparing, all the dwellings of
Iacob: he hathDeut. 28. & Amos terme of Davids tabernacle Ch. 9. is here. broken downe in his
vvrath the fortes of the daughter Iudah:
He hathEſ. 25. brought vnto the ground, He
hath madePſ. 89. where the whole pſalme handleth this matter: that Salomons kingdome was but vanitie: & that of Mesſias is in heaven. a riddance of the kingdome,
& of the Princes.
               
                  Gimel. 3 He hath broken in his hoat
anger all thePſ. 75, 12. horne of Iſrael: He hath
turned back his rightPſ. 89. hād from the enemy:
and he hath kindledDeut. 33. in Iacob a flaming
fier which eateth vp round about.
               
                  Daleth. 4 He hath bent his bow as an
enemy: he hath ſettled his right hand as an
adverſarie: he hath killed all the pleaſant
to the eye, in the tent of the daughter Siō:

he hath powred out his heath as fier.
               
                  Heh. 5 The Lord is become a very enemy:
he hath overwhelmed Iſrael, he hath
overwhelmed all2. K. 25. her palaces: he hath
marred allDeut. 28. her fortes: & he hath multiplyed,
in the daughter Iudah,Eſay 29. hath the ſame ſtrange Ebrew for this matter. heavines
vpon heavines.
               
                  Vau. 6 And he hath pluck vp hisPſ. 76. 3. The Temple, & ſo in the Chaldy here.
pavilion as a garden: he hath put downe
his feaſtes: the Lord hath cauſed in Sion
feaſt and Sabbath to be forgotten, & he
hath lothed in the indignation of his anger,
This was the maine point whervpon Koheleth wrote that all things vnder the Sun were vain. And for this the Atheist Ioakim brent the Lamentations: whervpon God told he should have the buriall of an aſse: & that none of his seed should ſit vpon Davids throne: & expreſly that Iechonias should dy childeleſſe. As to this houre our Learned over Europe cannot beleeve Ieremy 22. & s. Luc. 3. for that, ſo in Ieremyes dayes men could hardly beleeve this: & for this the Sacrificers condemned Ieremy too. So hard a matter it is to deſpiſe the world: & to looke to the Kingdome of heaven. And further large commenting I shall not need. The learned in I brew vpon a warning may by mine examples ſearch how still from other holy writers Ieremy fetcheth his phraſes. King & Sacrificer.
               
                  
                  Zain. 7 The Lord hath reiected his
altar: he hath caſt off his temple: he hath
delivered into the hand of the Enemy the
walles of her towres: they make a noiſe
in the houſe of the Eternall as on a feaſt
day.
               
                  Cheth. 8 The Lord purpoſed to deſtroy
the vvall of daughter Siō: he ſtretched the
line; he withdrew not his hand from over-whelming:
both frontier and wall mourned:
together they became of no ſtrength.
               
                  Teth. 9 Her gates are ſunck to the
ground; he hath marred & broken into
shevers all her barres; her King & her princes
are among heathen thatRo. 2. haue no
Law; alſo her prophets find no viſion from
the Eternall.
               
                  Iod 10 The Elders of the daughter Siō
ſit on the ground, they be ſilent; they caſt
vp duſt vpon their head; they put on ſackcloth.
The virgins of Ieruſalem hāg down
their heades to the ground.
               
                  
                  Caph. 11. Mine eyes are ſpent by teares;
my bowels are diſquieted; my liver is
powred vpon the ground; for the breach
of the daughter of my people; while infant
& ſuckling faint in the ſtreets of the
of the towne.
               
                  Lamed. 12 To their mothers they ſay
wher isEb. corne. bread wine; & when they faint
as the ſlayn in the ſtreates of the city; when
they powre out their ſoules in the boſome
of their mothers.
               
                  Mem. 13 VVhat teſtimony ſhall I
bring for thee, what ſhall I liken to thee, ô
daughter Ieruſalem? what ſhall I compare
with thee, that I may cōfort thee, ô daughter
virgin Sion? For thy breach is great as
the ſeas. VVho can heale thee;
               
                  Nun. 14 Thy prophets have looked
out for thee thinges vaine, & which have
loſt the ſaltnes: they have not diſcovered
thine iniquitie, to turne away thy captivity;
but they have looked out for thee, prophecies

of diſperſion.
               
                  Samech. 15 All that paſſe by the way
clap their hands, they hiſſe & wagge theyr
head at the daughter Ieruſalem. Is this the
city of which they ſaid:pſ. 48. the perfection of
fayrnes, the ioy of all the earth;
               
                  Phe. 16 All thy enemies gape with
their mouth againſt thee: they hiſs and
gnaſh the teeth: they ſay, we haue devoured:
this now is the day which we haue expected,
we haue found, we haue ſeen.
               
                  Ain. 17 The Eternall hath done that
which he purpoſed: he hath performed his
word, as he ordeined of old time: he hath
broken down, and nothing ſpared▪ and he
hath made the enemy to rejoyce over thee:
he hath exalted the horne of thy adversaries.
               
                  Sade. 18 Their hart will cry vnto the
Lord: O wall of daughter Sion, powre
downe teares like a river day & night: take
thee no reſt: nor let the apple of thyne eye

leaue off.
               
                  Koph. 19Eb. Kumi 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Marc. 5. 41. Ariſe, break out on the
night at the firſt watch: poure out thy hart
like water before the face of the Lord: lift
vp thyne handes vnto him for the life of
thy children, which faint for hungre, in
the corner of every ſtreat.
               
                  Resh.
                  Deut. 28. 20 See ô Eternall & behold with
whome thou haſt dealt thus. Should women
eat theyr owne fruict; infants that
may be ſpanned; ſhould ſacrificer & prophet
be killed in the temple of the Lord?
               
                  Schin 21 They lie in the ſtreates,Deut. 32. on the
ground, yong & old: my virgins & yong
men fall by the ſword: thou doſt kill in the
day of thyne anger; thou doſt make a
ſlaughter; thou doeſt nothing ſpare.
               
                  Tau. 22 Thou calleſt, as in a day of
aſſembly,Pſ. 31 14. Ier. 6. 25 20. 3. & 10 & 46. 5. & 49. 29. my feares from round about; &
there was in the day of the anger of the Eternall
none eſcaped or remnant. Them,
whome I could ſpanne, & brought vp, my

enemy hath conſumed.
            
            
               Chap. 3.
               
                  Aleph.
                  Ieremy telleth his own miſery: after wicked Ioakim brent his Lamentations, and ſought to kill him, & 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     uc & he prophecieth how he shalbe vſed by the Sacrific
                        •
                     rs wickednes in sedelias times: This Chapter was added to the first book. 1. I am the man that hath ſeen affliction by the rodde of his wrath.
               
                  Aleph 2 Me hath he led & cauſed to
go into darknes & not light.
               
                  Aleph 3 He is wholly bent, he turneth
his hand againſt me all the day.
               
                  Beth. 4 He hath made my fleſh and
my skin wax old; he hath bruſed all my
bones.
               
                  Beth 5Ier. 32. He hath built round about me, and he hath compaſſed me with gall, and
wearynes
               
                  Beth 6 InPſ 
                        •
                     43. Ier. 38. dark places hath he ſet me,
as the dead for ever.
               
                  Gimel. 7. He hath made a wall about
me, that I cannot get out: he hath laid an
heavie chaine vpon me.
               
                  Gimel 8 Though I cry, and call pitiouſly
he ſhutteth out my prayer.
               
                  
                  Gimel 9 He hath walled in my wayes
with ſquared ſtones; and turned away my
pathes.
               
                  Daleth 10 A beare lying in wait, is he
vnto me; a Lion in a ſecret place.
               
                  Daleth 11 My wayes hath he made thorny;
& he hath torne me; he hath made me
deſolate.
               
                  Daleth. 12 He hath bent his bow, &
ſet me as a mark for an arrow.
               
                  Heh 13 He hath ſhot into my reines
the ſhaftes of his quiver.
               
                  Heh 14
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 1. Cor 4. we are made a ſpectacle of the world. I am become a laughter to
all my people: their ſong all the day.
               
                  Heh. 15 He hath filled me with bitternes.
he hath made me dronk with wormewood.
               
                  Vau 16 And he hath burſt my teeth
with pible ſtones: he hath turned me on
my face in aſhes.
               
                  Vau 17 And my ſoule is caſt off frō
peace: I haue forgotten the good.
               
                  
                  Vau 18 And I thought in my ſelf, my
ſtate is vndone, and my hope from the Enall.
               
                  Zain. 19 Remember my affliction,
& my vexation, worme wood & gall.
               
                  Zain 20 My ſoule ſhall ſtill remember
them, & pray within me full heavily.
               
                  Zain 21 I will ſet this to my hart wherfore
I ſhall hope:
               
                  Cheth. 22 It is the mercie of the Eternall
that we are notPſ. 64. 7. conſumed, becauſe his cō
                  paſſions
are not ſpent,
               
                  Cheth 23 Becauſe they be new every
morning, becauſe thy fidelity is great,
               
                  Cheth 24 The Eternall is my portion,
ſayth my ſoule: Therefore I will truſt
in him.
               
                  Teth. 25 The Eternall is good to them
that wayt on him: to the ſoule that will
ſeek vnto him.
               
                  Teth 26 It is good that a man truſt &
expect for the ſalvation of the Eternall.
               
                  
                  Teth 27 It is good for a man that he
beare the yoke in his youth.
               
                  Iod 26 He will ſit alone, & be ſtill, becauſe
HE hath laid it vpon him.
               
                  Iod 27 He will lay his face to the groūd,
that there may be hope.
               
                  Iod 28 He willMat. 5. giue his cheek to
the ſtriker, he wilbe filled with reproches.
               
                  Caph 29 For the Eternall will not
caſt off for ever.
               
                  Caph 30 For though he make ſorowfull
he will alſo haue compaſſion: according to
the riches of his grace.
               
                  Caph 31 For he doth not grieve from
his own hart, nor make ſorowfull the ſōnes
of man.
               
                  Lamed 32 To ſtampe vnder his feet all
the priſoners of the earth,
               
                  Lamed 33 To overthrow the right of a
man before the face of the Higheſt,
               
                  Lamed 34 To ſubvert a man in his cauſe,
the Lord liketh not.
               
                  
                  Mem. 37 VVho is he that ſaith, that
any thing falleth out, which the Lord cō
                  maunded
not?
               
                  Mem. 38 From the mouth of the
higheſt cometh not the evell & the good?
               
                  Mem 39 VVhat ſhould living man
grudge, any perſon after his ſinne:
               
                  Nun 40 Let vs ſearch & try our ways,
& returne vnto the Eternall.
               
                  Nun 41 Let vs lift vp our hart withMat. 6.
our handes vntoEl. Eb vſed but here: for all the Lamentations. God which is in heauen.
               
                  Nun 42 VVe haue treſpaſſed and rebelled:
thou haſt not forgiven.
               
                  Samech. 43 Thou haſt couered thy ſelf in
anger, & doſt perſecute vs: thou haſt killed,
nothing ſparing.
               
                  Samech. 44 Thou haſt couered thy ſelf
with a cloud: that prayer ſhould not paſſe
through.
               
                  Samech.
                  S. Paul tranſlates this. 1. Cor. 4. 45 Thou haſt madeHimſelf, & Baruc, & Vriah. vs the offſcouring
and refuſe in the middeſt of the
people.
               
                  
                  Pe 46 All our enemies open their
mouthes againſt vs.
               
                  Pe 47 Fear and pit is come vpon vs:
ruine & breach.
               
                  Pe 48 My eye runneth with rivers
of water for the breach of the daughter of
my people.
               
                  Ain. 49 Mine ey floweth & cannot
ceaſſe: becauſe there is no reſt:
               
                  Ain 50 Vntill the Eternall looke down
& behold from heaven.
               
                  Ain 51 Myne eye worketh into my
soule for all the daughters of my city.
               
                  Sade 52 Mine enemies haue without
cauſe chaſed me as a bird.
               
                  Sade 53 They haue cut off my life in the
dungeō & they haue caſt a ſtone vpon me.Ier. 
                        •
                     8. 6.
               
               
                  Sade 54 VVaters ſwim over my head,
I ſaid, I am cut off.
               
                  Koph 55 I haue called vpon thy name
ô Eternall out of the low dungeon.
               
                  Koph 56 Thou diddeſt hear my voice,Ier. 38.
                  
hide not thine eare from my releaſe; at my
prayer.
               
                  Koph. 57 Thou dreweſt near in the day
that I called vpon thee: thou ſaydeſt: feare
not.
               
                  Resh 58 O Lord thou haſt pleaded
the cauſe of my ſoule, thou haſt redeemed
my life.
               
                  Resh 59 Thou haſt ſeen, ô Eternall,
my wrong: Iudge my right.
               
                  Resh 60 Thou haſt ſeen all their vengeance,
al their deviſes againſt me.
               
                  Shin 61 Thou haſt heard their reproching,
ô Eternall, all their deviſes againſt
me.
               
                  Shin 62 The lippes ofThe Sacrificers that held Ieremy guilty of death for ſaying that Babell should destroy the citie. Ier. 38. them that ſtand
vp againſt me: & their meditation againſt
me all the day.
               
                  Shin 63 TheirPſ. 139. 2. lying downe, and
riſing vp, do thou behold: I am become

                  They thought it ſo strange that Salomons race & kingdome should fall. their ſonnet.
               
                  Tau 64 Thou wiltS. Paul tranſlateth this verſe againſt Alexander the Copper-ſmith. 2. Tim. 4. reward them, ô Eternall,
according to the workes of theyr
hands.
               
                  Tau 65 Thou wilt giue them a burſting
of hart: thy heavie curſe wilbe vpon
them.
               
                  Tau 66 Thou wilt perſecute in anger,
& ridIeremy Ch. 24. told how the men of the third captivitie should come to nothing. And Ezekiel prophecied onely in their dayes: but they would take no warning. This threefold Alphabet endeth in their threefold & abſolute destruction. Yet Ezra was of that captivity. But an infant. And of Anathoth curſed by Ieremy, by repentance 128 returned. Ezra, 2. them from vnder the heavens of
the Eternall.
            
            
               Chap. 4.
               
                  Aleph. 1 HOw is the gold dimmed, how
is the pureone name of gold in Eb. cethem chāged:
how be the holy ſtones powred out at the

corner of all ſtreats.
               
                  Beth 2 The children of Sion the pretious,
valewed as the Feſſe ore, how are they
reckoned as earthen veſſels, the work of
the potters hand.
               
                  Gimel. 3 Even the Dragons open
their breaſt, they give ſuck to their whelps:
the daughter of my people is like the cruell:
asIob. 39 14. the oſtrich in the wildernes.
               
                  Daleth 4 The tongue of the ſuckling
cleaveth vnto his throte for thirſt: the
infants ask for bread, none doth break it
to them.
               
                  He 5 They that fed delicately lye
deſolate in the ſtreats; they which were
brought vp in ſcarlet embrace the donge.
               
                  Vau 6 And the puniſhment of the
daughter of my people paſſeth the penaltie
of Sodome, which was overthrowen as
in a moment; and no handes ſtayed vpon
her.
               
                  
                  Zain 7 Her Nazarites were purer then
ſnow, whyter then milke; they were in
colour redder then the carbuncles; they
were poliſhed like the Saphir.
               
                  Cheth 8 Their viſage is darker then a
coale; they cānot be knowen in the ſtreats;
theyr skin ſticketh to theyr bones; it is as
dry as a ſtick.
               
                  Teth 9 The ſlayn by the ſword are
better then the ſlayn by hunger. For they
waſt away perced by wanting the fruictes
of the field.
               
                  Iod 10 The hands of the pitifull
women ſeth their own children; they became
their meat, in the breach of the
daughter of my people.
               
                  Caph 11 The Eternall hath accompliſhed
his indignation; he hath powred
out his hoat anger; and he hath kindled a
fier in Sion, which hath eaten vp her foundations.
               
                  Lamed 12 The Kings of the earth, &

all that dwell in the world, would not beleve
that the adverſarie ſhould enter the
gates of Ieruſalem.
               
                  Mem 13 For the ſinnes of her prophets,
for the iniquityes of her Sacrificers,
which ſhed within her the blood of the
iuſt:
               
                  Nun 14 The blinde ſtumble in the
ſtreat: they are polluted with blood: that
men might not touch their garments.
               
                  Samech 15 Give place, ô polluted, they
cryed vnto them, giue place, give place:
touch not: when they took flight, yet they
ſtumbled vpon others. Among the heathē
it was ſaid: they ſhal no lōger haue a dwelling.
               
                  Pe 16 The face of the Eternall hath
ſcattered them: he will no more regard thē.
They reſpect not the perſon of the Sacrificers,
they pity not the Elders.
               
                  Ain 17 Even yet our eyes are ſpent at
our vaine help: In our waiting we wait for

a nation that cannot ſaue.
               
                  Sade 18 They chaſe our ſteppes that
we cannot go in the ſtreates: our end is approched:
our dayes are fulfilled: for our
end is come.
               
                  Koph. 19. Our perſecuters are ſwifter
then the egles of the sky, on the mountaines
they purſue vs, in the plaine fieldes
they lay wait for vs.
               
                  Resh 20 The ſpiritIoſias: the King: kild by Pharao Necho. of our noſtrels
the anointed of the Eternall was caught in
their trap: of whome we ſayd, in his ſhadow
ſhall we live among the nations.
               
                  Shin 21 Reioyce & be glad o daughter
Frō Eſaw to the Herodes Edom hated Iacob. & no leſſe then ten prophecies are against them: As Barbinel noteth vpon Obedias. Edom, which dwelleſt in the Land
of Huz. Over thee alſo the cup ſhall paſſe:
thou ſhalt be drunk & ſhew thy nakednes.
               
                  Tau 22 Thy puniſhment is accompliſhed,
ô daughter Sion: He will noAs in Dan. 9. 490 yeres they held their land in Gods favour. more

cary thee away: he will viſit thine iniquitie,
ô daughter Edō: he will diſcover thy ſinns.
            
            
               Chap. 5.
               1 REmember ô Eternal, what hath
befallen vs: conſider & behold
our reproch.
               2 Our inheritance is turned to ſtrangers:
our houſes roaliants.
               3 VVee are become orphanes, fatherles:
our mothers are as widowes.
               4 Our water doe we drink by money,
and our wood cometh by price.
               5 Our necks are vnder perſecution: we
are weary; we have no reſt.
               6 VVe gave our handes to Egypt, to
Aſſur, for to be ſatisfied with bread.
               7 Our fathers haue ſinned; they are
no more; we beare their puniſhment.
               8 Servants rule over vs; none reſcueth
from their hand.
               9 By our liues we get our bread; for

the ſword of the playn fieldes.
               10 Our skin is as black as an oven: for
the burning of hunger.
               11 They defile the women in Sion: the
virgins in the cities of Iudah.
               12 The princes are hanged by theyr
hand: the PerſonsDeut. 28. 21. of the Elders are not
honoured.
               13 The yong men they take to grind:
& the boyes fayle vnder the wood.
               14 The Elders have ceaſed from the
gate: the yong men from their ſonges:
               15 The ioy of our hart hath ceaſed;
our dance is turned into mourning.
               16 The crowne of our head is fallen▪
wo now vnto vs that we have ſinned.
               17 For this our hart is ſick; for theſe
things our eyes be dim.
               18 For mount Sion which is deſolate;
the foxes walk vpon it.
               19 Thou ô Eternall continueſt for ever;
thy throne from age to age.
               
                  
20 VVherfore doeſt thou forget vs for
ever, and forſake vs ſo long time.
               21 Turne vs, ô Eternall vnto thee, & we
ſhall returne: renew our dayes as of old.
               22 But thou haſt greatly hated vs: thou
haſt bene exceedingly angry againſt vs.
               
                  Of foure repeated
verſes.
                  Turne vs, o Eternall vnto thee, & vve shall returne:
renevv our dayes as of old.
                  The verſe 21 is one of the foure which in the Maſſoreth Bible are
Printed as a poſtſcript for better memory: an other is the laſt ſave one in
Eccleſiastes: an other the laſt ſave one in Eſay: the fourth, the laſt ſave
one in Malachi, as I noted vpon Eccleſiaſtes. Theſe ſayings conteyne
the main of the writers. That in Eccleſiaſtes biddeth vs looke for all happines
in the world to come: that of Eſay telleth how all Moyſes policy shall
end. That of Malachy sheweth how Iohn Baptist shall begin the New
Teſtament. And this of Ieremy telleth that God will begin a new state
for his People. Vpon that they ſtudyed in Babylon fifty yeres: and they
made themſelves a golden age: knowing that the kingdome of Christ was
in ſuffrings. Afterwards they are plainly told of the true kingdome:
& be renued, as of old. This verſe was geven in the beginning of the captivitie
for a comfort that way.
               
            
            Finis.
         
      
   