
      
         
            
            
               
CERTAINE PSALMES OF DAVID, heretofore much out of vse, because of their difficult tunes. The nombèr whereof are contained in the page following. Reduced into English meter better fitting the common tunes. By H. D.
            
            Printed by Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majestie. 1603.
            Cum Privilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
         
            
            The nomber of these Psalmes, reduced into Meter fitting the common tunes.
            
               PSAL.
               CIIII.
               CXI.
               CXX.
               CXXI.
               CXXII.
               CXXIIII
               CXXV.
               CXXVI.
               CXXX.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               FOrasmuch (Christian Reader) as there are diuers of the singing Psalmes much out of vse onely because of the difficultie of their tunes: And forasmuch as the moste of them are of those 15. Psalmes, which are called Psalmes of Degrees, that is, very excellent Psalmes, and extraordinarily penned by the wisdom of the holy Ghost. I haue (by the helpe of God) reduced nyne of them (which I take to be all wherein any difficulty of tune consisteth) into English meter fitting the common tunes. The

which at the earnest request of diuers my godly & learned friends, I haue caused to be printed: wherin, as I haue principally sought the glorye of God, and thy spirituall comfort, so I pray thee accept ther of in such Christian loue, as I haue laboured to effect this small peece of seruice vnto thee, without imputing either presumption or rash nes vnto me. For the Lord knoweth, that in the simplicitie of my hart I haue done it, and in all submission to the better learned, of whome I hope that God wil raise some, better to perform this work. Thus beseeching the Almighty to fill thy hart with all spirituall comfort, meete for thee in his infinite wisdome, I commend thee to his grace.
            
               Thine in the Lord Iesus, H. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Psalme 104.
            
               An excellent Psalme to praise God for the creation of the world, & gouernance of the same by his maruelous providence. 35. Wherin the Prophet praieth against the wicked, who are occasion that God diminisheth his blessings.
            
            Sing this in the tune of the 25. Psalme.
            
               
                  My soule prais thou the Lord: O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory; & honour.1   MY soule, Iehoua praise,
               O Lord my gracious God
               With glorie, honour, and greatnesse
               Thou art most richlie clad.
               
                  Which couereth himself with light as with a garment, & sprea deth out the hea uens like a couraine.2   Which couereth with light
               Himselfe as with array:
               And spreadeth out the heauens bright
               Like courtaines faire and gay.
            
            
               
                  Which laieth the beames of his chambers in the waters, and maketh the cloudes his chariot, and walketh v
                        •
                     on the wings of the windes.3   Which layeth his chamber beames
               Within the waters saire:
               And walketh on the wings of windes,
               
                  
The cloudes his Chariots are.
               
                  Which maketh his spirites his messi
                        ••••
                     s, & a flaming fire his ministers.4  Which by his power doeth make
               The Spirites his messingers,
               And eke ordayned flaming fire
               To be his ministers.
            
            
               
                  He set the earth vpon her foundations, so that it shal neuer moue.5  He set the earth on her
               foundations firme and sure:
               So that it neuer shall remoue
               but constantly endure.
               
                  Thou couerest it with the deepe as with a garment: the waters would stand aboue the mountaines.6  Thou coueredst it with deepe
               As with a garment wyde:
               And so aboue the mountaines then
               The waters did abyde.
            
            
               
                  But at thy rebuke they flie, at the voice of thy thunder they haste away.7  But they at thy rebuke
               Doe flee and haste away:
               Euen at the voyce of thy thunder,
               they passe without delay.
               
                  And the mountaines ascend, & the vallies descend to the place which thou hast established for them.8  The mountaines high ascend,
               and eke the vallies lowe
               Descend into the place which thou,
               appointedst for them so.
            
            
               
                  But thou hast set them a bond which they shall not passe, they shall not returne to couer the earth.9  But thou hast set a bound
               Which they shall neuer passe:
               
                  
Nor once returne to hyde the earth,
               As once it couered was.
            
            
               The second part
               
                  
                     He sendeth the springs into the vallies which runne betwene the mountaines.10  The fountaines forth he sends
                  Into the vallies lowe:
                  So that they with their springing streames,
                  Betweene the mountaines flowe.
               
               
                  
                     They shall giue drinke to all the beasts of the field, and the wilde asses shal quench their thirst.11  They shall giue drinke to all
                  The sundrie beastes in field:
                  And with their moysture quench the thirst
                  Of all the Asses wilde.
                  
                     By these springs shall the fowles of the hea uen dwel, & sing among the branches.12  By these springs shall the birdes
                  And sowles of heauen dwell:
                  And sing among the branches such
                  Sweete songs as doe excell.
               
               
                  
                     He watereth the mountaines from his chambers & the earth is filled with the frute of thy works.13  He watereth from his cloudes,
                  The mountaines huge and bye:
                  With fruite of thy works thou hast filde
                  The earth most plenteously.
                  
                     He caused grasse to growe for the cattell, & hearbe for the vle of man that he may bring forth bread out of the earth.14  He causeth grasse and hearbe
                  For man and beast to growe:
                  That he may bring most wholesome bread,
                  Out of the earth also.
               
               
                  
                     
                     And wine that maketh glade the hart of man, and oyle to make his face to shyne, and bread that strengtheneth mans hart.15  And maketh strong and glade
                  The hart with bread and wyne:
                  And with his pleasant oyle doth make
                  the face of man to shyne.
                  
                     The high trees ar satisfied, euen the Cedars of Libanon, which he hath planted.16  The trees of Libanon,
                  
                  The Cedars high and tall
                  Are satisfied from his hand,
                  Which hath them planted all.
               
               
                  
                     That the Birds may make their nests there the Stork dwelleth in the Firre trees.17  (That there the Birdes may build,
                  And boldly make their nest:)
                  The Storke in sirre trees eke doth dwell,
                  And there doth safely rest.
                  
                     The high mountaines are for the Goates: the rockes are a refuge for the Conics.18  The hilles and stony rocks,
                  A refuge of delight,
                  Are for the Conics and the Goates,
                  To vse by day or night.
               
               
                  
                     He appointed the moon for certaine seasons, the Sunne knoweth his going downe.19  For certaine seasons he
                  Appointed hath the Moone:
                  The Sunne also full well doth know
                  His place of going downe.
                  
                     Thou makest darkness, & it is dark, wherin all the beastes of the Forrest creep forth.20  Thou onely makest darke
                  The time which we call night:
                  Wherein the beastes of Forrests all,
                  Creepe forth for their delight.
               
               
                  
                     
                     The Lyons roare after their pray, and seeke their meate at God.21  The Lyons for their pray
                  Doe roare and range abroad:
                  And still doe waite and seeke for all
                  Their foode and meate from God.
                  
                     When the Sunne riseth, they retire, and couch in their dennes.22  But when the shyning Sunne
                  Doth ryse, then they retire:
                  And swiftly to their dennes doe run,
                  Whereas they couched were.
               
               
                  
                     Then goeth man forth to his worke, and to his labour vntill the euening.23  Then goeth the painfull man
                  Forth to his toylesome warke:
                  And to his labour till the night
                  Preuent him▪ with the darke.
               
            
            
               The third part.
               
                  
                     O Lord, how manifold are thy workes, in wisdome hast thou made them all the earth is full of thv riches.24  O Lorde how many are
                  Thy workes in wisdome made
                  Thou hast them all: and ceke the earth
                  Thy wealth doth ouerspread.
                  
                     So is the gret and wide sea, for there in ar things creeping innumerable both small beasts and great.25  Also thy treasures fill
                  The Seas so large and wyde:
                  Where liuing creatures nomberlesse
                  Both small and great abyde.
               
               
                  
                     There go the shippes▪ yea, that Liuiathan, whom thou hast made to play therein.26  There goe the Nauies great,
                  And he whome thou doest make:
                  
                     Leuiathan that hugest Whale
                  
                     
His pleasures there to take.
                  
                     All these waite vpon thee, that thou mayest giue them foode in due season.27  All these on thee do waite,
                  That thou mayest them relieue
                  With such suffising foode as thou
                  In season dost them giue.
               
               
                  
                     Thou giuest to them & they gather it: thou openest thine hand, and they are filled with good things28  Thou giuest it to them,
                  They gather it from thee:
                  Thou openest thine hand and then
                  Fild with good things they be.
                  
                     But if thou hyde thy face, they are trobled: if thou take away their breath they die, and return to their dust29  But if thou hyde thy face
                  They are sore troubled all:
                  And if thou take away their breath,
                  To dust anone they fall.
               
               
                  
                     Againe, if thou send foorth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth.30  Againe, if thou send forth
                  That powerfull Spirit of thine,
                  They are created, and thou dost
                  Renew the earth againe.
                  
                     Glory be to the Lorde for euen let the Lord reioice in his works.31  All glory to the Lord,
                  Both now and eke for aye:
                  And let the Lord our God reioyce,
                  In all his workes alway.
               
               
                  
                     He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth▪ hee toucheth the mountaines and they smoake.32  The earth if he behold
                  It trembleth sore for feare:
                  
                     
The mountaines hie if he but touch,
                  They smoake in like maner.
                  
                     I will sing into the Lord all my life, I will praise my God while I liue.33  Wherefore to praise the Lord,
                  I will reioyce and sing:
                  Whilst life doth last I will advance
                  the praise of God my King.
               
               
                  
                     Let my words be acceptable vnto him, I will reioice in the Lord.34  O let my words and thoughts
                  Be pleasing vnto thee:
                  Then in Iehouah to reioyce
                  My ioye shall euer be.
                  
                     Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, & the wicked till there be no more. O my soule praise thou the Lord.35  Let sinners be consum'd,
                  Let lewde men still decaye:
                  But thou my soule praise thou the Lorde,
                  Praise ye the Lord alway,
               
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxj.
            
               He giueth thankes to the Lorde for his mercifull workes to his Church. 20. And declareth wherein true wisdome and right knowledge consisteth. Praise ye the Lord.
            
            
               
                  I will praise the Lord with my whole hart in the assemblie and congregati on of the iust.1  TO praise the Lord with my whole hart Psal. 111.
               
               I will reioyce alwayes:
               In Congregations of the iust,
               I will advance his praise.
               
                  
                  The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of all them that loue them.2  The wondrous works of God the Lord
               In greatnesse doe exceede:
               And all men ought to seeke them out,
               That loue them well indeede.
               
                  His worke is beautifull & glorious, and his righteousnes endureth for euer.3  His worke is full of beautie, and
               Of glorie riche in store:
               His righteousnesse most righteously,
               Endureth euermore.
            
            
               
                  He made his wonderful works to be had in remembrance: the Lord is mercifull and full of compassion.4  His wondrous works he made that we
               Should euer them remember:
               Full of compassion is he
               And mercifull for euer.
               
                  He hath giuen a portion to them that feare him: he wil euer be mindful of his covenant.5  A portion faire he hath bestow'd
               On them that doe him dreede:
               And mindefull of his couenant
               He euer is indeede.
            
            
               
                  He hath shewed to his people the power of his workes, in giuing vnto them the heritage of the heathen.6  His powerfull workes to Israell
               He graciously hath shew'd:
               In that the Heathens heritage
               He hath on them bestow'd.
               
                  The works of his hands are truth and iudgement, all his statutes are true.7  His handie workes are equitie,
               And iudgement: iust are found
               His statutes all most plenteously
               In trueth do still abound.
            
            
               
                  
                  They are established for euer and euer, and ar
                        •
                      done in truth & equitie.8  They are most firmelie stablished,
               For euer and for aye:
               And eke are done in equitie,
               And in the trueth alway.
               
                  He sent redemption vnto his people, he hath commanded his Couenant for euer: holy and fearfull is his Name.9  He sent redemption to his folke,
               His Couenant shall endure
               For euer. By diuine precept
               His Name is fearfull sure.
            
            
               
                  The beginning of wisdome is the f
                        •
                     ar of the Lord: all they that obserue them haue good vnderstanding: his praise endureth for euer.10  His feare true wisdome doth beginne,
               His Lawes obserue doe they
               That any vnderstandiug haue,
               His praise doth last for aye.
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxx.
            
               The prayer of Dauid being vexed by the false reports of Sauls slatterers. 5. And therefore he lamenteth his long abode among those infidels, who were giuen to all kinde of wickednesse and contention.
            
            A song of Degrees.
            
               
                  I cald vnto the Lord in my trouble, and he heard me.1  IN time of trouble to the Lord, Psal. 120.
               
               I did both call and cry:
               And he did graciously accorde,
               To beare me by and by.
               
                  Deliuer my soule, O Lord from lying lips, & from a deceitfull tongue.2  Lord, quite my soule, and set me free,
               
                  
From lying lippes and wrong:
               And from the cursed subtelty
               Of a deceatfull tongue.
            
            
               
                  What doth thy deceitfull tongue bring vnto thee? or what doth it availe thee?3  Thy tongue still vsed to deceat,
               What doth it thee auaile?
               Thus of thy falshoode to entreate,
               How shouldest thou preuaile?
               
                  It is as the sharp arrowes of a mightie man, and as the coales of Iuniper,4  It pearceth like the arrowes sharpe
               Shot by a man of might:
               It wounds the simple harmelesse hart:
               Lyke coales and fire so bright.
            
            
               
                  Wois me that I remaine in Me sech, and dwel in the tents of Kedar.5  In cruell Mesech I remaine,
               Opprest with grief and woe:
               And mee to dwell they doe constraine,
               In Kedars Tents also.
               
                  My soule hath too long dwelt with him that hateth peace.6  My sillie soule too long hath dwelt
               With him that doth not cease,
               To shew the hatred of his hart
               Against the man of peace.
            
            
               
                  I seek peace, & when I speak thereof, they are bent to warre.7  I meckelie seeke to them for peace,
               I speake for amitie:
               But they the more to warres are bent
               In all extremitie.
            
         
         
            
            Psalme Cxxj.
            
               This Psalme teacheth that the faithful ought onlie to looke for help at God, who only doeth maintaine, preserue, and prosper his Church.
            
            
               
                  I lift mine eies to the montains from whence my help shall come.1  MY watchfull eyes I will advance, PSAL. 121.
               
               aboue the loftie sky:
               My helpe, I knowe, shall come from thence,
               And that right speedily.
               
                  My help com meth from the Lord, which hath made both heauen and earth,2  My helpe doth onlie from the Lord
               Our gracious God proceede:
               VVhich hath the heauens and the earth,
               Made by his power indeede.
            
            
               
                  He will not suffer thy foot to slippe, for hee that keepeth thee will not slumber.3  He will for euer safely keepe
               Thy slyding foote from fall:
               Our watchfull God vvill neuer sleepe,
               Nor slumber vvill at all.
               
                  Hee that keepeth Israel, behold he wil neither slumber nor sleepe.4  He that doth keepe his Israel
               In safetie, vvill not sleepe:
               Beholde he still doth watch full well,
               From dangers them to keepe.
            
            
               
                  The Lorde is thy keeper, the Lorde is thy shadowe at thy right hand.5  Knowe thou therefore assuredly,
               the Lord thy keeper is:
               
                  
The Lord thy shadowe for to be
               In troubles will not misse.
               
                  The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moone by night.6  The Sunne or Moone by day or night,
               Shall not thee smyte at all,
               With parching heate, or slashing light
               they hurte thee neuer shall.
            
            
               
                  The Lord shal preserue thee from all euill, he shall keepe thy soule.7  The Lord shall still thee so preserue,
               From euilles all and some:
               That thy poore soule shall neuer swerue,
               Nor yet in danger come.
               
                  The Lorde shall preserue thy going out. & thy comming in, from henceforth and for euer.8  Thy goings out and commings in,
               The Lord shall still preserue:
               From henceforth, and for euer he,
               Will neuer see the swerue.
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxxij.
            
               Dauid reioyceth in the name of the faithful, that God hath accomplished his promise, and placed his Arke in Zion. 3. For the which he giueth thankes, 8. and praicth for the prosperitic of the Church.
            
            
               
                  I reioyced when they saide vnto me, we will goe into the house of the lord1  MY ioyes were great whē as they said, Psal. 122.
               
               Come, we will goe the way,
               
                  
Vnto the house of God the Lord,
               Where holy Arke doth stay.
               
                  Our feet shal stand in thy gates, O Ierusalem.2  Our wandring feete shall sirmely stand,
               O faire Ierusalem,
               Within thy comelie gates when we
               Shall enter into them.
            
            
               
                  Ierusalem is builded as a citie that is compact together in it self.3  Ierusalem is comelie built
               Not scattered heere and there:
               But standeth firmely of it selfe,
               With houses strong and faire.
               
                  Whereunto the tribes, euen the tribes of the Lord goe vp according to the testimony to Israel, Praise the Name of the Lord.4  Whereto the Trybes, euen all the Trybes
               Of God the Lord doe goe:
               As by commandement they are bound,
               His prayses forth to showe.
            
            
               
                  For there are thrones set for iudgement, euen the thrones of the house of Dauid.5  For there are comely thrones erect,
               Truè iudgement to maintaine:
               Which thrones to Dauids house are set,
               For euer to remaine.
               
                  Pray for the peace of Ierusalem let them pro sper that loue thee.6  O pray thou euer for the peace
               Of faire Ierusalem:
               Let all thy friends abound in grace,
               And prosper well therein.
            
            
               
                  Peace be with in thy walles, & prosperity within thy pallaces.7  The peace of God within thy walles
               
                  
And all prosperitie,
               Within thy comely pallaces
               The Lord graunt still may bee.
               
                  For my brethten and neighbours sakes, I wil wish thee nowe prosperity.8  The ioyes that all our brethren deare
               Enioy by meanes of thee,
               Enforce me thus in heart to wishe
               Thy great prosperitie.
            
            
               
                  Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will procure thy wealth.9  Because of that most worthie place
               Gods house and dwelling sure,
               Which he in thee hath set to bee
               Thy wealth I will procure.
            
         
         
            Psalme. Cxxiiij.
            
               The people of God escaping a great peril, do acknowledge themselues to be deliuered, not by their owne force, but by the power of God: they declare the greatnesse of the perill, and praises the Name of the Lord.
            
            A song of Degrees, or Psalme of Dauid.
            
               
                  If the Lorde had not bene on our side (may Israel now say)1  IF God had not stoode on our side Psal. 124.
               
               Israell may confesse,
               
                  If the Lorde had not bene on our side when men rose against vs.2  If God had not sustaind our cause
               
                  
When men sought our distresse,
               They had then swallow'd vs vp quick
               
                  They had then swallowed vs vp quick, when theirwrath was kindled against vs.3  When as their wrath and are
               Against vs all was kindled thick
               Like dreadfull flaming fire:
            
            
               
                  Then the waters had drowned vs, and the streame had gone ouer our soule.4  Then had the waters drowned vs,
               And sure the raging streame
               Our soules had ouerwhelmed all
               Yea ouerslow'd amaine:
               
                  Then had the swelling waters gone ouer our soule.5  The swelling waters, then had gone
               Ouer our soule out right
               And so consum'd vs euerie one
               By deadly force and might.
            
            
               
                  Praised be God, which hath not giuen vs as a pray vnto their teeth.6  But praised be our God and Lord
               Which hath not giuen vs
               A pray vnto their teeth and sword
               That we should perish thus.
               
                  Our soule hath escaped, euen as a birde from the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken and we are deliuered.7  Our soule from them escaped is
               As bird from fowlers snare:
               The snare is broke, deliuered
               Behold we safely are.
            
            
               
                  Our helpe is in the name of the Lord, who hath made both heauen & earth.8  Our helpe for euer in the name,
               Of God the Lord doth stand,
               
                  
Who founded hath and furnished
               Both heauen seaes and land.
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxxv.
            
               Wherein is described the assurance of the faithfull in their afflictions, 4. desiring their wealth, 5. and the destruction of the wicked
            
            A Song of Degrees▪
            
            
               
                  They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be remoued, but remayneth for ever.1  THey that their trust in God repose, Psal 125.
               
               Shall be as Zion hill:
               Which neuer can remoued be,
               But ay remayneth still
               
                  As the mountaines are about Ierusalem, so is the Lord about his people, from henceforth and for euer.2  As round about Ierusalem,
               The mountaines stand full strong:
               So is the Lord about his folke,
               And euer them among.
            
            
               
                  For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put forth their hand to wickednesse.3  For wickeds rod on iust mens lot,
               For euer shall not be:
               Least righteous men put forth their hand
               Vnto iniquity.
               
                  Dowell, O Lord to those that be good & true in their harts.4  Doe well, O Lord, vnto all those
               That vpright are in hart:
               But those that vnto crooked waies
               Shall choose to turne apart:
               
                  
                  But those that turne aside by their crooked waies, them shall the Lord lead with the workers of iniquity, but peace shalbe vpon Israell.5  Them shall the Lord with workers lead
               Of all iniquitie:
               But peace vpon his Israell
               For euermore shall be.
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxxvj.
            
               This Psalme was made after the returne of the people from Babilon, and sheweth that the meane of their deliuerance was wonderfull after the 70. yeares captiuity fore-spoken by Ieremiah the Prophet chap 23. 12. 29. 10.
            
            
               
                  When the Lord brought againe the captiuitie of Zion, we were like them that dreame.1  WHen mightie Ioue did Zion folke Psal. 126.
               
               Reduce from deadlie thrall,
               And vs poore Captiues brought againe,
               We were like dreamers all.
               
                  Then was our mouth filled with laughter, & our tongue with ioy: then saide they among the heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them.2  Then was our mouth with laughter fild,
               Ioyes did our harts delight:
               The heathen saule that God great things
               Did for them by his might.
            
            
               
                  The Lorde hath done great things for vs whereof we rereioyce,3  Things wonderfull the Lord hath wrought
               For vs his children deare:
               Wherefore in him we doe reioyce
               In hart with ioyfull cheare.
               
                  O Lord bring againe our captiuitie, as the rivers in the south.4  And thou O Lord fulfill our ioy,
               
                  
And bring the rest againe
               Of Captiues, as thou doest refreshe
               South grounds with floodes and raine.
            
            
               
                  They that sow in teares shall reape in ioy.5  They that with griefe in mournfull teares,
               Their seede doe spread and sowe:
               Shall reape in ioy assuredlie,
               Our God shall worke it so.
               
                  They went weeping, and carried precious seede, but they shall returne with ioy, & bring their sheaues.6  They weeping went and precious seede,
               They carried forth with them:
               But shall returne with ioy and bring
               Their heauie sheaues againe.
            
         
         
            Psalme Cxxx.
            
               The people of God from their bottomlesse miseries do cry vnto God, and are heard. 3. They confesse their sinnes, and flee vnto Gods merries.
            
            
               
                  Out of the deepe places haue I called vn to thee.1  FRom depth of hart possest with greese, Psal. 130.
               
               Wherein I nowe doe lye:
               To thee, O Lord, for some reliese,
               I doe both call and cry.
               
                  Lord beare my voice, let thine cares attend to the voice of my praiers.2  Lord heare my voice, grant my request
               Which I doe make to thee:
               
                  
And let thy gracious eares be prest,
               To my lowde sounding cry.
            
            
               
                  If thou, o lord straitly markest iniquities, o lord who shal stand.3  If thou, O Lord, do straitlie marke,
               Our fowle iniquitie:
               O Lord who can before thee stand,
               Excused for to be.
               
                  But mercy is with thee, that thou maiest be feared.4  But mercy and compassion,
               O Lord are still with thee:
               That men may loue and feare the Name
               Of thy great Maiesty.
            
            
               
                  I haue wayted on the Lord, my soule hath wayted, and I haue trusted in his worde.5  I haue attended still vpon
               Thy holy will, O Lord,
               My soule hath waited, and I haue
               Still trusted in his word.
               
                  My soule waiteth on the Lord more then the morning watch watcheth for the morning.6  No watchman more desirouslie,
               Doth watch for dawning day,
               Then doth my soule in constancie,
               Waite on the Lord alway.
            
            
               
                  Let Israell waite on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercie, and with him is great redemption.7  Let Israell waite on the Lord,
               Whose mercy doth abound:
               And with the Lorde redemption great
               
                  
Is euer to be found.
               
                  And hee shall redeeme Israell from all his iniquities.8  And he shall sure his Israell,
               From all their sinnes redeeme.
               And purge from all iniquities,
               Them that doe trust in him.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   