
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Certayne Chapters of the prouerbes of Salomon drawen into metre by Thomas sterneholde, late grome of the kynges Magesties robes.
            ¶ Imprynted at London by Iohn Case, dwellynge in Peter colledge rentes, for Willyam Seres.
            Cum priuilegio ad immendum solum,
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the ryght worshipful, and my singuler good Maister, syr Thomas Spek knyght, one of the gentilmen, of the kynges maiesties most honourable privy chambre, your most boū
               den seruaunte to commaunde at all tymes, Ihon Case wysheth worshyppe, healthe, and prosperitie, wyth encrease of vertue.
            
               Considerynge the duty and seruice whyche I owe to youre good mastershyppe, I have no lesse then iust cause wyth chearfull & ready herte, to offer the same vnto you. As well for that youre maistershyppe hath not onely shewed manifold benifites to my poore frendes, but also vnto me, beynge one among al other left able to acquite any parte of youre goodnes, my power and habilitie beynge, smalle, myne herte and mynde

beynge readye. In token whereof I haue dedicated thys little boke vnto your maistershyppes name, desiering you accordynge to youre accustomed gentlenesse to take the same in good parte, and also for a testimonye, that if I were able by anye other meane to gratifye youre maistershyppe, that I woulde be as ready as any manne lyuyng. The copye of thys boke was deliuered me by a frende of myne beynge sometyme seruaunte vnto maister Thomas Sterneholde, whereby it is to be coniectured, that the same were putte in metre by hym, yet not so parfectly perused, by reasō of sodaine deathe, as perchaunce he would haue done, if he hadde longer lyued. Notwythstandynge, I truste your mastershyppe nor any other shall thynke thē worthy to lye in a corner, and neuer to appeare abrode. In hope whereof I haue caused the same to be prynted, & haue dedicated the same vnto you,

as the fyrste fruites of my good wyll, towardes your maistershippe. Thus desierynge God to prospere you in al worshippe & encrese of vertue.
            ¶ Your good maistershyps most humble seruaunt at al times to commaunde Iohn Case.
            DO al your dedes wt good aduice cast in your myndes alwayes the end
            Wit bought is of to dere aprice, the tried trust take as your frend.
            For frendes I fynd there be but two, of countenaunce & of effect:
            Of the one sorte there are inoughe, but fewe bene of the other sect.
            Also beware the venune swete, of filed wordes and flattery:
            For to deceive, they be moste mete, that best can playe hypocrisie.
            let wisdome rule your dede & thought
            so shal your works be wiseli wrought
            
               Who lyst to leade a quiet lyfe, who lyst to rid him self frō strife:
            Geue care to me, marke what I saye, remēbre well, beare it away.
            Hold backe thy tong at meate & mele speke but few words, bestow thē wel
            By words the wise man yu shalt espye by words a fole thou shalt sone try.
            A wiseman can his tonge make cease, a fole can neuer hold hys peace.
            Who loueth reste, of wordes beware, who loueth wordes, is sure of care,
            For wordes oftymes, mē haue bē shēt for silence kept, fewe theim repente.
            Two eares, one tong, only thou hast, ino thinges to hear, then wordes to wast
            A fole in no wise cā hi forbeare, he hath two tonges, & but one eare.
            Be sure thou kepe a stedfaste brayne, lest that thy wordes put y• to paine.
            Wordes wisely set are worthe much gold ye price of rashnes is sone told
            If time require wordes to be had, to hold thi peace I hold the madde.
            
               Talke onely of neadful verities, stryue not for triflyng fantasies.
            With sobernes the trouthe boult out, affyrme nothing wherin is doubte.
            Who to this song wil take good hede & spend no mo wordes then he nede.
            Though he be a fole & haue no brain he shal bi this great wisdome gaine.
            Speke while time is, els hold ye styll, words out of time oft things do spil.
            Say wel, & do wel, are things twaine twise blest is he, in whō both do raine
            Say well is sure a worthy thyng, of say wel great goodnes doth alway sprig
            Saiwel frō dowel differ a leter saywel is good, but dowel is better.
            Say wel is ruled by man somedeale, do wel to god doth wholy appeale.
            Saywel is good, & doth many please do wel is better, & doth the world ease
            Saiwel cause mani to scripture cleue for lack of dowel, they quickly leue.
            If saiwel & dowel, wer ioind in fraim al were wel & wōne, gote were ye game
            
               Say wel in daunger of death is cold do wel is earnest, and wōderous bold
            When say wel for feare doth tremble and quake,
            Do well is 
                  •
               oconde, and good cheare doth make.
            Finis.
         
         
            
            The prouerbes of Salomon, traunslated into Englyshe meter.
            
               
                  Argumentum. Cha. i.
                  The wisedome of the Lord our God, doth call vpon vs styll:
                  That we 
                        •
                     e farre from wicked men, and folowe not their wyll.
               
               
                  My son thi father harke vnto & to hys lore encline.
               Forsake yu not thy mothers law but sure let it be thine
               For that shall cause grace plētiful, to lyght vpon thine heade:
               And on thy necke shall be a chayne, and stande the in good steade.
               Therfore (my son) take yu good hede when synners do the tempte,
               For thoughe that they do the entyce, to them do not consente.
               If they shal saye, come thou wt vs, let vs laye wayte for bloude:
               
                  And causeles kyll the innocent, and spoyle them of theyr good.
               Let vs them swallowe quycke and hole let vs devour them all:
               As those that slyde into a pitte, so shall they take theyr fall.
               And we shall costelye ryches fynde, to do therwyth our wyll:
               And wyth the spoyles ye we shal gette we may our houses fyll.
               Caste in thy lotte amonge vs now, a man of that thou arte:
               And then we wyll haue all one purse, and thou shalt haue thy parte.
               But walke yu not with thē (my son) theyr pathes do thou refrayne:
               Theyr feete are hasty bloude to shede all yll they do retayne.
               But all in vaine the nette is layde, before the byrdes eyes:
               Yet one an others bloude to spyll, much all they do deuise.
               And they thē selues their own dear blud this waye do hurte and noye:
               
                  And theyr owne Soules do quite depriue of all eternal ioye.
               Thys is the way of gredy men and thys is all theyr feate:
               For to beryue his brothers lyfe: his ryches for to gette.
               Without therefore dothe wisedome call & putteth forth hyr voyce:
               Behold for in the open streates, to you she maketh noyse.
               She calleth before the multitude, that all men may hyr knowe.
               And in the towne gates openly, hyr wordes she doth nowe shewe.
               Oh folysh men and fonde saith she howe longe wyll ye delyte:
               And foleishe schole
                     •
                  and ye vnwyse, to wysedome beare suche spyte.
               Oh turne to my correction, I will my mynde expresse:
               And I wyl make you vnderstand my wordes both more and lesse.
               Sence then that I haue called you and ye refuse my name:
               
                  And haue put forth myne hande also, and ye forsake the same.
               And al my counsels ye haue hadde, in mockynge and despite.
               And also my correction, haue set at naught and lyght.
               Therefore wyll I laughe ioyfully, in your destruction:
               And mocke you whan the plage you feare shall iustely on you come.
               And whā yt which you fear so much full sodaynly doth fall:
               And troubles and great heuines, shall come vpon you all.
               Thē when you do vpon me craue, I wyll not heare your mynde:
               Thoughe you seke me, and that early yet shall you not me fynde.
               And why? I saye bycause that you, my knowledge so abhorde:
               And cast away agaynst my wyll, the feare of God the Lorde.
               I sayde before they dyd refuse, my counsels euery one:
               
                  And dyd not cease for to despyse, my good correction.
               To eat the frute of their owne way the Lord shal them constrayne:
               With y• deuice he shal them fyll, of theyr insensate brayne.
               And for the fall of the vnwyse, he shall them slaye anone:
               And eke the wealth of foles shall be, their owne confusion.
               But who to me that geueth eare, shall dwell safely I saye:
               And haue inough, and nede not feare by nyght, nor yet by daye.
            
            
               
                  Argumentum. Cha. ii.
                  It is here taughte that we shuld learne Gods wysedome to obtaine:
                  The wealth also that comth thereof is here described plaine.
               
               MI son receiue yu these my wordes, the which shalbe right wise
               And kepe thou my cōmaūdemētes, my son I the aduise.
               
                  So that thine eares may euermore to wysedomes scholes enclyne:
               Applye thyne herte to vnderstand suche thynges as he diuyne.
               For if thou after wysedome crye, and styll vpon hys craue:
               And calleste on for knowledge gyfte bycause thou wouldest hyr haue.
               And seke for hyr as yu wouldst seke for mony in the dust.
               And dygge for hyr as treasure that in earth is hydde and trust.
               Thē shalt yu right wel vnderstāde, the feare of god the Lorde:
               And of hys lawe the knowledge find, accordynge to hys worde.
               For god alone doth gyue to vs, hys wisedome for to speake:
               Out of hys mouthe doth knowledge spring and vnderstandynge eke.
               The rightuous men he doth preserue in welfare through his might.
               He dothe defende the innocent, that walke his way aright,
               
                  He doth them kepe strayght in hys pathes that they go not astraye:
               He doth directe hys holy ones, to walke ryght in his waye.
               If thou be suche, yu shalt thē learne by iustice for to deale:
               With euery man in equitye, throughout the commen weale.
               In iudgemente ryght thou shalte lykewise all other men excell:
               And euery good path vnto the, the lord shall shewe full well.
               If wisedome enter in thyne herte, and knowledge in thy spryte:
               Then vnderstandyng good counsell, shall the preserue vpryght.
               That thou mayst so deliuerd be from euery wycked waye:
               And frō those men yt froward thinges do alwayes speake and saye.
               The whych do leaue ye way of light and walke in darckenes styll:
               And which reioyce most iocundly, when they have done full yll.
               
                  Whyche do delyte in wyckednes.
               Whose wayes are vyle & vayne:
               Whose croked pathes ar slaūderouse from them do thou refrayne.
               That also frō the straunge woman deliuerde thou mayste be:
               And from hys eke that is not thyne: or was not wedde to the.
               Which speketh fayr, & doth forsake the husband of hys youth:
               And doth forget the comnaunt made, of God and of hys trouth.
               Take hede, hyr house enclineth fast to death, as I the tell:
               Hyr pathes are sure the ready way, that leadeth doune to hell.
               And they also that go to hyr, shall not come out agayne:
               Nor take holde of the way of lyfe, I tell the thys is playne.
               That thou mayst walke in the sure waye whereof I do the tell:
               And kepe ye pathes of ryghtuousnes, then shalt thou do ryght well.
               
                  For why
                     •
                  the iuste shall euer lyue, in ioye that dothe not cease:
               The innocente remayne on earth in wealth, and eke in peace.
               But the vngodly shall be plucte, out of the lande I saye:
               And wycked men chased shalbe, out of the fame for aye.
            
            
               
                  Argumentū Cha iii.
                  Sure trust in god ought al men haue and not in their owne braine
                  The wicked man thou shalt not feare, ne yet the skorner vaine.
               
               
                  MI son, forget not yu my lawe but haue it styl in sight:
               And let thyne herte obserue my words so shalt yu walke aryght.
               For sure they shal prolōg thy daies thyne yeres, and lyfe also:
               And beyng the peace and quietnes, and rydde the out of wo.
               Let mercy nor yet faythfulnes, henceforth from the departe:
               
                  Bynd them about thy necke (my son) and wryte them in thyne herte.
               And so shalt yu greate fauour wine, of god and eke of men:
               In vnderstandyng perfitlye, expert thou shalt be then.
               Wyth all thyne hert to god the lord put confidence and truste:
               And leane thou not in anye wyse to thyne owne wytte and luste.
               In al thy wayes haue thou respect vnto the lyuynge lorde:
               He shall thy doynges order well accordynge to hys worde:
               Be not to wyse in thy conceyte, but feare god in thyne herte:
               In haste also from wyckednes, endeuoure to departe.
               So shall thy nauyll styll (my sōne) continue hole and sounde:
               Thy bones also and body shall, wyth lyuely strength abounde.
               Honoure the lorde, and to him giue the best of thy substaunce:
               
                  And thy fyrst frutes of thyne encrease his glory to aduaunce.
               So shal thy barnes be fylled full, and that wyth plentuousnes.
               Thy presses all shall ouerflowe, wyth wyne of greate swetenes.
               The bytter scorge of god thy lorde, (my sonne) do not despise:
               And when thou arte rebukte of hym, faynte not in any wyse.
               For loke whō that ye lord doth loue hys rodde shall on hym lyght:
               Evē as the father whypes hys sonne to knowe hym selfe aryght.
               Yet doth the lorde neuertheles loue hys aflycted styll:
               Euen as the father dothe hys chylde, when he hath bete hys tyll.
               Full well is he therefore I say, the whych dothe wysedome fynde:
               And vnderstandynge to obtayne, doth sette hys herte and mynde.
               For marchaūdice ther is none such throughout the worlde so rounde.
               
                  There is no siluer nor yet golde, wherin such wealth is founde.
               More worth thē al ye gold on earth, let wysedome be to the:
               To hyr all thynge thou canste desyre, compared maye not be.
               On hyr ryght hand attendaunt is longe lyfe, wyth coloure grene:
               And honour standes on hyr left hand, wyth ryches well besene.
               Hyr wayes also right pleasaunt are whyche pleasure doth not cease:
               Hyr pathes lykewyse are nothyng els but vnitie and peace.
               She is a tre of lyfe to them, that laye holde on hyr ryght:
               And bleste are they that kepe hyr fast, wyth all theyr power and myght.
               In wisedome eke the lyuyng Lord full well the earth dyd founde:
               And we hys word ye heauens he made the earthe to compasse rounde.
               And throughe the wisedome of the lorde the waters brake vp all:
               
                  The cloudes also pour downe yeraine that on the earth doth fall.
               My son, lette not these thynges departe at no tyme from thyne eyes:
               But kepe my lawe and counsels all, by the in any wyse.
               So shall it be eternall lyfe, the soule for to embrace:
               Thy mouthe shall be replenished wyth vertue and wyth grace.
               Then shalte thou be right
                     •
                   sure to walke ful boldely in the waye:
               Thy feete shall neuer slyppe from the by nyght, nor yet by daye.
               If thou dost stepe at any tyme, thou nedst not be afrayed:
               But swetely stepe, and take thy reste, for god wyl be thyne ayde.
               And thoughe that the vngodly me, rushe in with vyolence:
               Thou shalt not be afrayed at all, for god is thy defence.
               The lord wil stād fast by thy syde, and helpe the at thy nede:
               
                  And kepe the safe, and suffer not, thyne enemies to procede.
               And such as woulde to other men do good wyth all their herte:
               And haue therto sufficient, to let is not thy part.
               And if thy selfe thou able be, thy neyghboure to releue:
               Helpe him with such as yu maist spare and gladly to hym gyue.
               Refuse not to do good to them to whome it doth belonge:
               
                  
                     •••
                  yle that thy ryght hand able is to do it them amonge:
               And if thy frend do aske of the say not, gette thou thy waye:
               To morrowe come agayne to me, or els some other daye.
               And then I will gyue the (yu sayste) where as thou mayst it nowe:
               Even out of hande, and if thou wylte, thys god doth not alowe.
               Intēd not to thy neyghbours hurt where he no harme hath ment:
               
                  And wher to liue in rest and peace he settes his whole entente.
               Striue not (my sonne) we any mā
                  
                     •
                   where as he doth no woo:
               Nor folowe thou the vniust man, but hye the fast him froo.
               For whye the way of scorners all. the Lorde doth cleane deteste:
               And for to talke wyth symple men the Lorde is pleased beste.
               Create scarcitye the lord doth se
                     •••
                   wher wycked men abyde:
               But he doth blesse the godly men and shall for them prouide.
               The lord shall laugh at skornefull men and meeke them to their face:
               But to the lowly he wyll gyue, hys goodnes and hys grace.
               The wyse wyth their possessyons, in honoure shall remayne:
               But shame is the promocion that folyshe men obtayne.
            
            
               
               
                  Argumen. Cha. iiii.
                  Howe sagely and howe fatherly, he doth vs here aduise:
                  That we from euil our hertes refraine and study to be wise.
               
               
                  YE children heare your father no
                     •
                   how he doth you exhort:
               Take hede yt you do wisdom
                     •
                   lern
                     •
                   which shalbe your confort.
               And I wyl gyue you good reward and therwythe wyl you fyll:
               If you wyll not forsake my lawe, but study therein styll.
               For when I was the onelye sonne, of both my parentes dere:
               And tenderly beloued was, of father and mothere.
               Then he taught me full louyngely and vnto me dyd preache:
               And thus he sayde full oftentymes as I wyll you nowe teache.
               Se that thou dost receiue (sayd he) my wordes into thy breste:
               And kepe thē wel, so shalt thou lyue in perfite ioie and reste.
               
                  In vnderstadynge busilye, apply thy selfe alwaye:
               Let not the same depart from the by nyght, nor yet by daye.
               And wysedome neuer suffer thou, from the for to digresse:
               If thou loue hyr she shall preserue, and kepe the from distresse.
               The chiefest point of wysedome is, that thou do take in hande:
               Before al goodes wysdome to gette, and learne to vnderstande.
               Make much of hyr & she shall the, promote to power and might:
               And if thou hyr embrace, she shall to honour brynge the ryght.
               For she wyl make thyne head truly both good and gracious:
               And we a crowne shall garnysh it, that is full glorious.
               My son, therefore embrace wt spede the wordes I say to the:
               So that thy yeares in ioye and peace on earth prolonged be.
               
                  The wayes of wysedome vnto the
               I shall make fayre and playne:
               And in the pathes of equitye, shall leaue the to remayne.
               So that thou mayste walke wel in them & haue none hinderaunce:
               And when yu runst, thou shalt not fal, nor haue an euyl chaunce.
               Of wisedome thē sure hold take yu and do not lette hyr god:
               In kepynge hyr, thou shalt surely, defended be from woo.
               And in the path come not (my son) of the vngodly trayne:
               Nor walke thou in the wycked waye, of them whose lyfe is vayne.
               Frō the yll trade of naughty men, departe thou cleane asyde:
               And se that thou go farre from them, and kepe the styll awyde.
               They can not steepe tyll they have done some harme or els mischefe:
               Nor take their reaste tyll they have wrought to some mā wo or griefe.
               
                  For they do eate the bytter breade of wyllfull wyckednes:
               And drynke the wine of cōmen spoyle and all vngodlines.
               The pleasaūt pathes of godly mē appeare bothe lyght and gaye:
               And to al men more bryght do shyne then doth the lyghtsome daye.
               But the yll waye of wycked men, to darckenes is comparde:
               Wherin men fall, or they beware, or els do scape ful harde.
               My sonne, marke well my wordes th
                     ••••
                  e that I do to the tel:
               And to the same thyne eares enclyne, and vnderstande them well.
               And se that frō thy faythful minde, thou letst them not departe:
               But kepe them styl ful stedfastly, in the mydst of the herte:
               For they are lyfe vnto al those that chaunceth them to fynde:
               And health of body eto al suche, as beare them in theyr mynde,
               
                  My son also kepe well thyne herte for therin resteth lyfe:
               And put from the a frowarde mouth, and lyppes that causen stryfe.
               And let thine eyes wt diligence, behold that which is ryght:
               And eke thyne eye lyddes loke before directly in the lyght
               Marcke well thy pathes, lest yt thy fete happe sodainly to slyde:
               So shall thy gate be sure inoughe, whether thou go or ryde.
               Turne not asyde on the left hande, For yet vnto the righte:
               But kepe away from wyckednes, thy fete wyth all thy myght.
               The perfite pathes the Lord doth knowe that lede the way of lyght:
               The wycked wayes the lord also considereth aryght.
               But such as walke in godlines the lorde wyll kepe and saue:
               And all theyr iourneys prosperre so that they none harme shall haue
            
            
               
               
                  Argumen. Cha. v.
                  All harlottes 
                        •
                     e, thine honour saue thy pe
                        •
                     es spende not in vaine
                  Of thine owne f
                        •
                     oure enioy the fruite, straunge loue also refraine,
               
               
                  Mi son giue eare, & that with spede my wisdome folow yu:
               With good pretēce to wisedoms scole thine eares se that yu bow
               So that thou dost regard alwaye. my ryght and good counsell:
               And yu thy lyppes may nurtour kepe, lyke wyse in speakynge well.
               The flattrynge lyppes of wyck
                     •••
                  , hore
                     ••
                   may well compared be:
               To hony combes whych do distyll as we do often see.
               Whole wordes appeare vnto thine eares as smoth as any oyle:
               But yu art lyke wtout good hede, to take the shame and foyle.
               An in the ende the pleasure paste, assured mayste thou be:
               The bitter taste of wormewood shall more pleasaunt seme to the.
               
                  And so likewise more sharpe she is, then swerde of stele wel wrought:
               Which on both sides wt cutting edge mans lyfe doth brynge to nought.
               Forsakte she hath the pathe of lyfe, vnstedfast is hyr waye:
               So yt thou shalt it neuer knowe what euer she doth saye.
               Hyr fete do leade the way to death hyr steppes do leade to hell:
               The same be alwayes wanderynge, and in no place can dwel.
               Geue eare therefore my son alwaye, and berke well vnto me:
               And on the words of my wise mouth, attendaunte se thou be.
               Estraunge thy selfe as farre frō hir as euer that thou maye:
               And come not nie hyr dores nor house by nyght nor yet by daye.
               And do thou not thine honor giue vnto an other one:
               Nor yet the fruite of thy longe yeres, to suche as be thy fone.
               
                  That wyth thy ryches other men, theyr houses do not fyll:
               Nor we thy paynes a straūgers house be stufte agaynste thy wyll.
               Lest that yu mourne, but all to late vpon a wofull daye:
               When yu haste spent both lyfe & good and be compelde to saye.
               Alas why did I nourtour hate why dyd myne herte despyse:
               The learnynge pure yt I was taught which woulde haue made me wyse
               Why was I not obediente, to them that dyd me teache:
               And harkened not to them the whych so muche to me dyd preache.
               Wherfore almost all care & griefe, is casten me vpon:
               In the mydst of the multitude, and congregation.
               To vse the drinke of thine own wel is sure a pleasaunte thynge:
               And of the brooke that floweth from, the heade of thyne owne sprynge.
               
                  Suffer the same to ouerflowe, as ryuers to the bryncke:
               That water pure the neady may, of them at all tymes dryncke.
               Yet let them be thyne owne onelye, if nede of them thou haste:
               And the straunge mā kepe well from them if long they may not laste
               Likewise be gladde of thyne owne wyfe depart yu not hir froo:
               A louynge hynd thou shalt hyr haue, 
                     •
                   treadely be the Roo.
               The brestes of hyr se that alwayes. disaunt be to the:
               And with hyr loue hold the cōtente so shall you best agre.
               Wherfore (my sōne) why wylt thou haue in harlottes such delyte:
               And doste embrace thy neighboures wife
               And dost to hym suche spyte.
               Remembre that of eche mans lyfe, the trade in the Lordes syght:
               Apeareth plaine, which he doth iudge accordynge vnto ryght.
               
                  And of mās steppes we watchfull eies the nombre hath he told:
               And doth hys wayes we iudgemente tight consider and beholde.
               The wyckednes of an ill man shall catche hym selfe at laste:
               And we the snares of hys owne synne he shall be trapped faste.
               Bycause he woulde not learned be death shal him ouercome:
               And headlong for hys folyshnes, to Sathan shall he ronne.
            
            
               
                  Argumen. Cha. vi.
                  Here art thou warned of suretishippe, and douthfulnes to 
                        ••
                     e:
                  Of doctrine false beware the sleygh
                        •
                      and 
                        ••
                     e adulterie.
               
               
                  MI sōne if thou a suretye be, or promise for thy frende:
               Thou haste thy hād so fastened it wil not be vntwind.
               And boūd yu art in thyne own wordes as faste as thou mayste be:
               And taken art in thyne owne speache, tyll he acquiteth the.
               
                  Discharge thy selfe for yu arte come into thy neyghbours dette:
               Seke then all meanes, and se if thou thy neighboure canste entreate.
               Refrayne thyne eyes from to much slepe and to thy selfe beware:
               As doth yu doo the blouddy houndes, or byrde the fowlers snare.
               The lytle ant (thou slouthful man) to thyne example take:
               And lerne of hyr for to be wyse, and purueyaunce to make.
               For where she hath no gouernour, for maister hyr to learne:
               Nor wytty kynge vnder whose rule, 
                     ••
                  all holden is the sterne.
               Yet nature doth in hir this worke wythout any other gyde:
               In somer tyme wyth busy care, for wynter to prouide.
               Dew long wylt yu (oh slougysh mā) in idlenes remayne:
               And giue the whole to rest and slepe, and stackest to take payne.
               
                  Go to, go to, stepe hardely, and slumbre out thy fyll:
               With folded armes lye downe to rest and take thou thyne owne wyl.
               As one that iourneth by the waye, so pouertye shall come:
               And also lyke a weponed man, on the shall fiercely ronne.
               But if thou be industrious, and well thy laboure plye:
               Thyne heruest shall be plentiful, and yelde abundauntlye.
               And as the riuers great and dep
                     •
                  , encrease by rage of rayne:
               So shal thy barnes be stuffed ful of corne, and eke of grayne.
               And thou shal stand nothyng at al, in feare of anye lacke:
               The wofull bagge of beggery, shall neuer greue thy backe.
               A wycked man, and he that is replenished wyth gyle:
               Doth alwaye seke maliciouslye, wyth lyes the to begyle.
               
                  He serueth to none vse at all, he flereth wyth hys eyes:
               And wyth his fingers meneth craft and giues hym selfe to lyes.
               And he dothe alwayes exercise.
               Come mischyefe for hys parte:
               And causer is of muche discorde, throughe malice of hys herte.
               With hast therefore remediles, some yll shall on hym fal:
               From him his lyfe shall taken be. 
                     •
                  ven he thynkes lest of all.
               Sixe thinges there be on earth my son 
                     •
                  hich god doth hate full sore
               The seuenth aboue the other sixe the lorde doth most abhore.
               A proud disdainefull loke the lord, doth vtterly refuse:
               A lyinge tonge wyth filed wordes deceitefully doth vse.
               The hurtful hādes which haste do make the giltles bloud to spyll:
               And can not els them selues refraine, til they haue done some ill.
               
                  In hert yt doth his euill thoughtes to thys onely employe: which way to worke most wickednes and other men to noye.
               The fete also which ready be greate synnes for to commite:
               And in one place can neuer stande till they some mischiefe hitte.
               A witnes false that doth his lippes deceitfully applye:
               And couertly hys neighboure greue, with some newe forged lye.
               The sower of discorde is worse, when brethren doth agre:
               And he yt doth cause louinge frendes greate enmies for to be.
               But thou my son, my coūsels al print sure into thine herte:
               Do not forsake thy mothers lawe nor laye the same aparte.
               Commende them to thy memorie, binde them thy necke about:
               And wher thou goest, lead thē wt the, then stepe and haue no doubte.
               
                  And when yu wakst out of thy stepe in them se thou delyte:
               For my preceptes a lantarne are, and to thy fete a lyghte.
               In whych thou maiste wtout peril, passe safely on thy waye:
               For nurtour is if thou it take, to lyfe a ready staye.
               The same shal the preserue also, from hyr that lyues amyse:
               And also from the harlots tonge, 
                     •
                  hich so deceytfull is.
               Let not hyr beutye the enflame hyr beckes are very hokes:
               To catche thyne herte into hir snare, through hyr deceytful worckes.
               To bring a mā to begge his bread, it is an harlots guyse:
               But for the lyfe of honestye, the godly dothe deuise.
               May any man the stamynge fyre, in hys bare bosome brynge:
               But that it shall hys clothes burne, and cause his fleshe to wrynge▪
               
               
                  Or may a man on redde bote coles barefote passe on hys waye:
               And yet the same him neuer greue: no no, I dare well saye.
               Euē so I thynke that the same mā that doth an harlote see:
               And vseth hym to touche hyr oft, vngiltye can not be.
               The there is not despysed of al, that steales for very nede:
               Dis gredy wombe, & hongry guttes, in hongre for to fede.
               The vtmost is, if he be found, seuentymes to yelde agayne:
               Or els to make amendes wythal, his goodes that do remayne.
               But if thou be in whoredome foūd with anye neghbours wyfe:
               Thou plaist the fole, for ye dost bryng, destruction on thy life.
               Thou gettest thy selfe rebuke and shame wherof none can the rydde:
               Dishonour eke thou purchasest, which neuer shall be hydde.
               
                  For why
                     •
                  hir husbāds wrathful ire entreated can not be:
               Thoughe yu giue giftes, amendes to make as much as is in the.
            
            
               
                  Argumen. Cha. vii.
                  In this he doth all men exhort. to wisedome for to cleaue.
                  he sheweth eke the harlots tricks wherwith she doth deceyve.
               
               
                  MI son marke wel mi coūsels al & lay them vp in store:
               Obserue wel my cōmaūdemētes by the for euermore.
               And honoure thou the lyuyng-lord so shalt thou be ryght sure:
               To rayne in ioyes celestiall, whyche euer shall endure.
               And other goddes feare not at all, in men haue thou no truste:
               And this doyng thou shalte be sure to lyue emonge the iuste:
               Thē kepe thou my cōmaūdementes lo, once agayne I saye,
               
                  Euen as the apple of thyne eye, by whyche thou seest the daye.
               And eke aboute thy fingers tenne, se that thou do them bynde:
               And write thē in thyne herte wt spede, and prynt them well in mynde.
               And se that thou to wysdome saye thou arte my sister deare:
               And vnderstandinge cal likewyse thy kynsewoman full neare.
               For wysdome shall the safely kepe from women that be yll:
               So that on harlots fyled wordes thou shalt not set thy wil:
               As I by chaunce sate downe to se the folye of yonge men.
               And kept me close wtin mine house and pepte out nowe and then.
               Beholde I saw a yonge fole passe the corner of the streate:
               And hyed as faste as he myght goo, and harlette for to mete.
               And so towarde the harlots house he toke his way full ryght:
               
                  Thynkynge to scape and not be sene, when it was almoste nyght.
               And sodainlye there mette wyth him, an harlot proude and bolde:
               Whyche alwaye set hyr whole delyte, to mocke both yong and olde.
               For in hyr herte deceyte was hydde, and wantonnes also:
               Which she declard by hyr attyre, and tokens other mo.
               Whose feete coulde not abyde wtin, the house, but ranne about:
               Now here now ther, in ech blind lane, wythin, and eke wythout.
               She caught the yōg mā kissing him, and shamed not to saye:
               I made a vowe whych to perfourme,
               I purposed thys daye.
               Wherfore came I to mete the nowe, and to beholde thy face:
               And thus I haue by happe the foūd: my waye as I dyd trace.
               My house is decte we painted clothes, of Egypte the to please.
               
                  My bedde dothe smell of Sinamon, of myrre and Aloes.
               Come ou therfore and let vs lye togyther all thys nyght.
               And let vs twayne our pleasure take, tyll it be brode day lyght.
               Mine husbande is not nowe at home he is gone farre awaye:
               Wyth him he toke the money bagge, and coines not home to daye.
               And thus we many flattering wordes she dyd hym ouercome:
               And also throughe hyr lyinge lippes, anon she had hym wonne.
               Immediatly he folowed hir, muche lyke vnto an oxe: whych ledde is to a slaughter house, where he is kylde we knockes,
               Or lyke vnto the folysh lambe, that skyppeth in the leese:
               When that the boucher fetcheth hym, mens appetite to please.
               He thynketh not howe shamefullye, to pryson he is brought.
               
                  Where his body suffreth wo, for foly by hym wrought.
               This harlote vile, of this yong fole so chaunged had hys herte:
               And had anone wounded to death his liuer with hir dart.
               That lyke a birde he made greate haste to fall into the gyn:
               Not knowynge of the fowlers art, vntill that he was in.
               For loue I speake full fatherlye and counsell the eftsone:
               Marke well my wordes we diligence obserue them well my sonne.
               Let not thine hert in harlots snares at any tyme be caught:
               Be not deceiued, refuse hyr sight hir pathes be very naughte.
               Hir house my son is the ryght waye that leadeth vnto hell.
               The chambers of the same to deathe', may be compared well.
            
            
               
               
                  Argument Chap. viii.
                  The wisemen doeth commend to vs the sonne of god moste hye,
                  Whiche is the worde that al thinges made, and was eternally.
               
               How can you saye (oh mortal mē) that wisedome doeth not crye
               And prudence eke exalt aloude her voice incessauntlye?
               In places all, as in the toppes of hilles that be full stepe,
               And in the plaine and wide countreis, and valeis that be depe,
               In common places, and nigh the same in churches and in stretes,
               And in the gates of Cities great where many people metes.
               The mightie word, the son of god doeth call vnto mankynde,
               Which was before the heavens were made and vttreth thus his mynde.
               O sonnes of men to you I speake and earnestly do crye,
               
                  My wysedome learne to vnderstand and kepe it faythfullye:
               Oh herken well, and geue good eare of wayghty thynges & wyse:
               My lyppes shal speke, mine hert shall styll, much godlines deuyse.
               My talke shalbe on vertuous things wherin I moste delyght.
               My lyppes abhorre the wycked man for all hys power and myght.
               My counselles all, and my precepter, be rightuous and strayght;
               There is in them no wyckednes, nor any maner sleyght.
               To suche as do theym vnderstande they be but very playne:
               And not to harde for theym to kepe, if there of they be fayne.
               Before gret heaps of worldly goods, chose thou my disciplyne:
               My doctryne is of greater pryce, then is the golde so fyne.
               As lyghtsom daies wyth hys bryght beames excelleth ye darke night:
               
                  Whē that the skies are full of sterres or mone doth giue hyr lyght.
               Euen so trulye doth wysedome passe, and farre aboue excell.
               All wordely wealthe: to it nothynge, may be compared well:
               I whych am the eternall worde, and equall in all myght.
               To god, which al thinges hath made and created aryght.
               Assystaunte am, from tyme to tyme,
               In counsels that are luste:
               And lykewyse am of al good though
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the geuer when I luste.
               And he whyche hath the feare of god, sure prynted in hys breaste:
               Doth hate all vyce, all pryde of herte, and vtterly deteste.
               The wycked pathes in which to walk yll men haue theyr delyght:
               The double tonge hys neyghbours hurte which worketh wt despite.
               I onely gyue vnto mans herte, good counsell to deuise:
               
                  To deale vpright in equitie, and iustice exercyse.
               All wisedome doeth procede from me as from the very spring,
               All wordly strength, and fortitude to man alone I bryng.
               By me ye kynges theyr power do take and rule the earth therby,
               And holsome lawes are stablished, and kept accordingly.
               By me also all Magistrates the people kepe in awe,
               And iudges geue their sentences according to the lawe.
               And suche as do vnfaynedly loue me, I loue agayne,
               And whē they cal, great haste I make to ridde them out of payne.
               All wordly goodes be geuen to me to do with them my will,
               And I have power whom that I liste with ioye on earth to fill.
               And I likewise of heauenly giftes haue plentie and great store,
               
                  With me dothe grace celestiall, remaine for euermore.
               No treasure in the worlde so voyde, comparde may iustely be:
               Unto the fruite and perfecte welthe, whiche do procede from me.
               The tried golde and siluer fyne, whiche dothe on earth remaine:
               And stones of price vnto the same, may well be compted vaine.
               And in the wayes of righteousnes, to walke is my delight:
               And in the place where iudges do, accordyng vnto right.
               I do also the godly men. throughe mercye to me call:
               And plentuously do them enriche, with grace celestiall.
               With god I haue bene hetherto and was eternally:
               Before the earthe was created, my father stode I bye.
               I was begotte longe tyme before the waters dyd surrownde:
               
                  The earth, or that the myghty hylles were setled on the grounde.
               I was lykewyse before the flouddes, had made them selues away:
               Or that the earth or lyttle hylles, were brought vnto theyr staye.
               And when yt god ye heauēs dyd make,
               I was euen then at hande:
               And whē the depes he dyd commaūd not to surround the lande,
               And when also the fyrmament, he made as we nowe see:
               And running sprynges of water pure commaunded for to be.
               And when that he vnto the seas, assygned a certayne place:
               And willd the flouddes not to excede, theyr bondes in anye case.
               And when likewise the earth he made immoueable to stande:
               I was wyth hym, and to eche thynge, dyd put myne helpinge hande.
               I dyd reioyce, and daye by day,
               I dyd delyght in men:
               
                  Greate pleasure eke I had to be in company of them:
               Wherefore my sonnes enclyne youre hertes and herken vnto me:
               Moste bleste he is that in my wayes, delyteth for to be.
               And doth the same kepe fayethfully, as I to hym haue taught:
               And spedlye maketh haste to voyde the thynge whych semeth naughte
               Geue eare, geue eare I say mi sonnes and learne for to be wyse:
               He is a fole and wycked man, that doth the same despise.
               And happye is the man that doth, heare me wyth good intent.
               And he also whose watchfull eyes, on me are alwayes bente.
               For he that hath obtayned me, of perfite blysse is sure:
               And God to hym the lyfe wyll gyue that euer shall endure.
               And who that doth agaynst me synne doth bryng his soule to care.
               
                  Mine enemies shal of dredeful death be wrapped in the snare.
            
            
               
                  Argumen. Cha. ix.
                  From sinfulnes the sonne of god, dothe call bothe younge and olde:
                  And sheweth plaine the wyckednes, of ha
                        •
                     lottes proude and bolde.
               
               The wisdome high of god aboue, equall with him in might:
               Whiche from the first beginning was from heauen descended right.
               And here on earthe the shape of man disdained not to take:
               Whiche being done, vnto hym selfe a princely house dyd make.
               Wherin wer wrought of marble fyne pillers bothe large and wyde,
               The same therby that he might cause for euer to abyde.
               And then anone great quantitie, of vitailes did he staye,
               With wholsome metes, & pure good wyne his table dyd he laye.
               
                  And thē sent fourth his handmaides all and gaue them to their charge
               To bidde all men vnto his house, whiche was so fayre and large.
               And saide also full louingly. yf any fole there be,
               Let him resorte vnto myne house and come streight vnto me.
               To synneful men he spake likewise resorte to me with spede,
               And of my breade eate you your fill prepared for your nede.
               And drinke the wyne before you sitte and leave your ignoraunce,
               Walke in the trace emong the good where wisdome ledeth the daunce.
               If than thou doest the skornefull mā admonishe to repent,
               Thou doest nothing but work i vain for he wil not relent.
               He yet amende his wicked life whereby he doth prouoke
               The iuste and euerlasting god to plage him with his stroke.
               
                  And in the same iniuriouse, vnto thy selfe thou arte:
               And wynneth hate: for thy good wyl, he setteth not a farte.
               But if thou doste, yea bytterlye, rebuke hym that is wyse:
               He wyll the loue, and at no tyme thy good counsel despise.
               The wyse man dothe aduertismente, alwaye turne to the beste.
               And by the same more ready is, all vice for to deteste,
               For who so doth the rightuous teach of this thynge may be sure:
               He will make haste lerning to winne, and therin wyll endure.
               The feare of God the fyrste poynt is, hys wysedome to obtayne.
               Of wysedome he shall neuer mysse, in whom goddes feare doth rayne.
               To suche wyl god send ioyful dayes and wyll theyr yeres encrease:
               And all theyr good wyll multyplye, that they maye lyue in peace.
               
                  The wyseman doth all yll escape, and nothinge doth he lacke:
               The skornyng men great synne doth beare vpon hys wofull backe.
               Of pratynge whores and impudent, it is the mounted guyse.
               Wyth flattryng wordes and whorish trickes to tyce in the vnwise.
               A shameles whore of godlines, doth knowe nothinge at all:
               In open streates shee sytteth downe, that men she may there call.
               As they do passe from place to place, their busines to do.
               If anye man do want hys wytte, let hym go hyr vnto:
               To whom she wyll not stycke to say, and boldely to hym tell:
               The water that by stealthe is gotte, all other dothe excell.
               And so lykewyse the stollen breade, although the same be sowre:
               Muche sweater is then other breade, at large while men deuoure.
               
                  But in thyne harte my louyng sone print this my saying well,
               Whoso by her is ouercome descendeth vnto hell.
               And who that doth contrary wise her wicked waye denye,
               Unto his soule winth quietnes and saued shalbe thereby.
            
            
               
                  Argument. Chap. x.
                  The wise man with the folyshe man is here compared playne,
                  The feare of god commended is and liuing gotte with payne.
               
               The wise sonne doth his father fill with gladnes and with ioye,
               But the vnwise with sorow dothe his mother hurte and noye.
               And treasure gotten wickedly shall profite thee nothyng,
               But wisedome shall deliuer thee from death and from his stryng.
               The lorde wil not his holy ones in honger to abide,
               
                  But the vngodly kepe he wyll, from their desyre full wyde.
               An idle hand the thrifty man, doth make bothe pore and bare:
               But yet the hande in labour quyke the neady crieth from care.
               The wyseman doth in somer tyme, hyz frutes laye vp in store:
               That he thereby in wynter cold may helpe him selfe the more.
               But who so that in haruest tyme a slouggardes parte dothe playe:
               A fole him sheweth and is compelde, to begge an other daye.
               With beuty deckt is the bryght face, of cuery ryghtuous one:
               But past all shame the wicked are, wyth their presumption.
               Of wysedome eke the memory, shall have a good reporte:
               Euen so the name of wycked men, shall sone to shame resort.
               A wyse man wyll admonished be and that is signe of grace:
               
                  A fole wyll rather then he so do, be strycken on the face.
               Who so that leadeth a gyltlesse lyfe, doth walke a way ryght sure:
               If thou treadste in the wycked trace, thou she weste thy selfe vnpure:
               The wycked man beware my sonne, lest he do the some harme.
               Dute of the mouthe of folyshe men, all wyckednes dothe frame.
               The ryghtuous mouth dothe make much peace, & is the wel of lyfe:
               The wycked mouthe contrarye wyse, doth alway sturre vp stryfe.
               And enuy eke the mother is, of cursed wordes and fell:
               But loue doth hyde full gentilly the wordes not spoken wel,
               The lyppes of them that vnderstand of wysedome haue no lacke:
               But the scourge doth onely belonge, vnto a folyshe backe.
               Wyse men doth good knowlege kepe more surer then their londe:
               
                  But nygh to theyr destruction, drawe folyshe men and fonde.
               The richmans goodes are his strōge holde, wherin hys truste is all.
               If pouertye oppresse the pore, the rych mans helpe is small:
               The good is wont to neadye menne, parte of hys goodes to gyue.
               And of his store his neighbours lack with plenty to releue.
               But to bestowe in vanities, the wycked do not cease:
               Such goods as he shuld wel employ vnto hys neighbours ease.
               Take hede therefore and chastisment receyue wyth all thyne hert:
               If thou refuse aduertisemente, thou playest a folyshe part.
               Dissemblinge lyppes are very cause, of hatred and despyte:
               A Fole he is whyche slaunderouslye, hys neighbours fame dothe byte:
               Of many wordes & idle talke, offences do aryse.
               
                  But well is he that can refra
                     •
                  ne, hys tonge from tellyng lyes.
               The tonge whych is all innocent a noble treasure is:
               The cruell hart of wycked men delyght to do amyse.
               The ryghtuous doth wt their fayre speach a multitude endame:
               For to embrace muche godlines And to 
                     •
                  sc
                     •
                  ue all sha
                     ••
                  .
               And so lykewyse the folyshe menne, are lyghtly caught in snare:
               Of theyr owne words, & trapped fast or they therof beware.
               The blessynge of the lorde onely, of ryches sendeth store:
               Thy trauayle is the instrument wherby he geueth more.
               If God do not encrease thy corne, and blesse it wyth hys hand:
               Then shalt thou labour but in vaine in tyllynge of thy lande.
               A fole in vyce reioyceth styll, for why, he doth not care:
               
                  Yet neuertheles, I the aduise, of such one to beware:
               For at the laste wyth misery, the wycked peryshe shall.
               When godly men shal prospere well, and dreade nothyng at all:
               Ungodly menne shall vanyshe quyte, and neuer turne agayne:
               Much lyke vnto an hurlynge storme, mixed wyth haile and rayne.
               The ryghtuous shall continue styll, and hereof be right sure:
               In reste and peace of conscience for euer to endure.
               As vinegre good with his sharpe tast doth set on edge the tethe:
               And the thycke smoke vnto the eyes, is cause of payne and griefe.
               A slouthful man and 
                     ••
                  ggysh beast, the good doth so offende:
               Whē they in vayne would have hym thryue and he wyl not amend.
               The fear of god doth blesse the good, and the yeres doth prolong:
               
                  As for the yeres of wycked men, shall not continue longe.
               The good doth byde in patience and shall be glade therfore:
               The wycked shall for all theyr haste, peryshe for euermore.
               The waies of god doth courage geue vnto all godly men:
               But suche as lyue in wyckednes, greate feare dothe fynde in theym.
               The ryghtuous shall at no tyme fall, but stedfastly shall stande:
               The wycked men shall dwell in lyfe, no longe tyme on the land.
               The mouthe also of godly men, in wysedome doth delight:
               The lyinge tonges of frowarde men, againste the trouth doth fight.
               The ryghtuouse lyppes are occupied in wisedomes talke onely:
               Ungodly menne abuse theyr tonges, in shame and blasphemy.
            
            
               
               
                  Argumen. Cha. xi.
                  To deale vpright here ar we taught, and humble for to be:
                  And mercy eke commended is, ioynd wyth simplicitie.
               
               
                  IN the lordes sight, & in his eye it is a thing most vile
               wt subtil weight or mesure false thi neibour to begile
               But god the lorde contrary wise, in trouthe doth mooste delyghte:
               It is hys wyll that all men shoulde, with other deale vpryght
               The equall weyght and balaūce iust, to god ryght pleasaunte be.
               When that the same vnto all menne, do yelde wyth equitye.
               Rebuke and shame do folowe pride, in whom that it doth rayne:
               But where there is humilitie, greate wysedome dothe remayne.
               Who dothe not hate wyll, herte, nor mind throughout ye world so wide
               
                  The fierce and proude disdainful mā whych is addicte to pride:
               Who doth not loue vnto theyr power the man of humble sprite.
               The way whych in doinge good to other doth delyght:
               The symplenes and meanynge true, whych godly men assaye:
               Doth them directe in holines and in the perfite waye.
               The wicked craft and wyly sleyghtes whych in the yl are found:
               Do at the laste cast downe thē selues, and laye them on the grounde.
               The day that God in dome shal sytte to iudge both good and bad:
               What shall thē the goodz vs preuayl, whych in thys world we had.
               The iustice yet and ryghtuousenesse, whych Christ to man dyd brynge:
               Frome deathe shall safe deliuer hym, and from hys deadly stynge.
               The meanynge true of simple menne, shal holde them still vpryght.
               
                  The wycked trayne shal headlōg fal, for al theyr power and myght.
               The godly folke through rightuousnes deliuerd be at laste
               The wycked in theyr owne deceyte, shall trapped be full faste.
               When death arests the wycked man, wyth hys mooste dreadful darte:
               Hys hope is gone, for on hys goodes, onely he set hys herte.
               The iuste man is, by the lordes helpe, deliuered from yll:
               In steede of whome the wycked man, tormented shall be styll.
               Beware also dissemblynge men, for they wyll sone betraye:
               Their faithful frēd through flattring words what so their mouth doth say
               But yet the iuste and fayethfull men, theyr knowledge shal defend:
               From all the snares of fyled wordes, which wycked men intend.
               If that perchaunce an honest manne, to wealth aduaunced be:
               
                  If that perchaunce an honeste man, to wealth aduaunced be:
               The hole citye wherin he dwelth, reioyce as well as he.
               And if so be a wycked man, do happen to decaye,
               All men be glade that he so sone is vanished awaye.
               And so lykewyse thorowe godly men, a citye shall encrease:
               To which by theyr good gouernaūce is brought both rest and peace.
               So that the same in noblenes, all other shall excell:
               As in a ranke of ladies fayre, some one doth beare the bel.
               But throughe the mouthe of wycked whych honestye do hate:
               Hole contries and greate regions are set at stryfe and bate.
               Wherby at length ye same be brought to ruine and decaye:
               And from a fall by no meanes canne, thē selues vpholde and stay.
               
                  Who so that doth hys frende despise, doth shewe but lytle wytte,
               By thys it semes to lyue on earth, that he is nothynge fytte.
               The wyse man can euen when he list, from talke hys tong reframe:
               Wherby he scapes the daūgerous yl, of hatred and disdayne?
               The flattrynge man and famed frend that doth nothyng but glosse:
               Of hys deare frende vnfayethfullye, the secretes doth disclose.
               But faithfull frendes whose doinges are vpryght and also iuste:
               In no wyse wyl bewraye the thynges committed to theyr trust.
               And where there lackes a gouernour both politique and wyse.
               The people whyche be vnder hym, shall fall and neuer ryse.
               But happy is that region, whose ruler hath the grace:
               The talke of godly coūselours to folowe and embrace,
               
                  Who so is bound for staūgers dets, doth bryng hym selfe to care.
               And is compeld the same to paye,
               Thoughe he be pore and bare.
               But he shall lyue in quietnes, and haue no feare at all:
               Whych taketh hede by surety shyppe, lest he in daunger fall.
               A woman whych is gracious, and doth apply hyr minde:
               To vertuous schole vpon the earth, is sure greate grace to fynde.
               An idle hande can at no tyme, to welthines attayne.
               But he is sure the same to wyn, that laboureth wyth payne.
               The man in whose hert mercy works hym selfe doth profite moste:
               For mercy from internall payne, doth rydde hys symple gost.
               The cruell man farre otherwyse, with malice and debate:
               Euen suche as ought be nere to hym, doth persecute and hate.
               
                  Of the vaine worckes of wycked mē, no profite comth at all:
               Theyr doynges are not parmanente, but sure to haue a fall.
               But who so dothe seke ryghtuousnes and practise hyr in dede.
               Is sure to haue eternall ioye for hys rewarde and nede.
               And mercy doth prepare the way that leadeth vnto blysse:
               If thou be geuen to wyckednes, of death thou shalt not misse.
               The livynge lord doth most abhorre, The man whose hert is yll.
               And onely bent to wyckednes, with whole entent and wyl.
               But he doth mooste reioyce in suche, that in hys worde delite:
               And leade theyr lyues accordyngely, in simplenes of sprite.
               A woman whych in bewtye doth, all other farre amende:
               And hath no good conditions, hyr bewty to amende.
               
                  Unto a rynge of pure good gold, a man may well compare:
               The whyche a sowe in hyr foule nose, continually doth beare.
               The iuste menne do reioyce in good, and holines embrace:
               But bent vnto all filthines, the wycked ronne their race.
               And some ther be ye wyth theyr goods their neighbour doth releue,
               And yet the same do still encrease, thoughe they do largely geue
               And some there be contrary wyse that others robbe and pyll:
               Of ryches greate, yet for al that, they be but beggers styll.
               The soule of hym mooste blessed is, and neuer shall haue nede:
               Which in his store we gladsome herte the hongry men doth fede.
               And so lyke wise he neuer shall, for lacke of drynke decaye:
               That vnto hym doth reche the cuppe, that trauailth by the waye.
               
                  The people curse most bitterly, the tyller of the grounde:
               Which in his barnes no corne at all, will suffer to be founde.
               In time of derth, althoughe he haue, greate plenty and great store:
               But kepes it close euen purposelye, to make the price the more.
               But blest is he in all mens mouthes, that when the corne is skant:
               Bringeth forth his graine, & suffreth not the market for to wante.
               He riseth well, and in good time, for good thinges that dothe call:
               The naughty worckes of wicked mē, shall sone oppresse them all.
               Who so in hys vayne ryches dothe, put confidence and truste.
               Is sure hereof when he thynkes lest, to fall into the duste.
               Where as the iust and faythfull mā, shall prospere still in peace.
               Euen as a tre in the sprynge tyme, doth budde forth and encrease.
               
                  And who ye doth through foly bringe hys housholde cut of frame.
               Shal washe hys goodes, & in the end susteyne rebuke and shame.
               And then at length for lacke of wytte, and spoylynge that was hys:
               Against hys wyl the wysemans nede to serue he shall not mysse.
               The tree of lyfe or heauēly ioye, is euen the very gayne:
               And frute that iust & rightuous men, shal repe for all theyr payne.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               
                  In this chapter doth Salomon, proue all thinges vaine to be:
                  Which raineth vnderneth the sunne, saue onely gods trueth and veritie
               
               I Salomon Dauids sōne, kinge of Ierusalem:
               Chosen by god to teache the Iewes, & in his lawes to leade thē.
               Confesse vnder the sonne, that euery thyng is vayne:
               The world is false: that man is fraile and al hys pleasures payne.
               Alas what stable fruite, may Adams chyldren fynd:
               In that they seke by swette of browes the trauell of the mynde.
               We that lyue on the earthe, drawe toward our decaye:
               Our children fyll our place a whyle, and then they fade awaye.
               Suche chaunges makes the earthe, and doth remoue for none:
               But serues vs for a place, to playe our partes vpon.
               
                  When that the restlesse Sunne, westwarde hys course hath runne:
               Towardes the easte he hyes as faste, to ryse where he begunne.
               When hoory Bore as hath, blowen forth hys frosen blaste:
               Then zephirus wyth hys gētle breth, dissolues the yce as faste.
               Floudes that drynke vp smal brokes and swell by rage of raine:
               Discharge in seas whych thē repulse, and swallowe strayght agayne.
               These worldely pleasures lorde, so swyft they runne theyr race:
               That scarce our eies may thē discerne they hyde so little space.
               What hath bene, but is nowe, the lyke hereafter shall:
               What newe deuise grounded so sure that breadeth not the fall▪
               
               What may be called newe, but suche thynges in tymes paste,
               Hath tyme buried, and dothe reuyue, and tyme agayne shall waste.
               
                  Thynges paste ryghte worthy fame, hath nowe no brute at all:
               Euen so shal dye such thinges ye now, the simple wonders call.
               I that in Dauides seate, syrte crowned and reioyce,
               That wyth my septer rule the Jewes and teach them wyth my voyce.
               Haue searched longe to knowe, all thynges vnder the sunne:
               To se howe in thys mortall lyfe, a surety myght be wonne.
               Thys kyndeled wyll to knowe, straunge thynges for to desyre,
               God hath graft in our gredy brestes, a torment for our hyre.
               The ende of eche trauayle, fortwyth I sought to knowe:
               I founde it vayne mixed wyth gall, and burdned wyth muche wo.
               Defaultes of natures workes, no mans hande may restore:
               Whyche be in numbre lyke the sand, vpon the salt floude shore.
               
                  Then vauntynge in my wyl, I gan call to my mind:
               What rules of wysedome I had taught that elders coulde not fynde.
               And as by contraries, to trye most thynges we vse:
               Mens solyes and theyr errours eke, I gan them all peruse.
               Thereby with more delight, to knowledge for to clyme:
               But thys I founde an endles worke, of payne and losse of tyme.
               For he to wysedomes schole, that doth applye hys mynd:
               The farther that he wades therin, the greater doubte shal fynd.
               And such as enterprice, to put newe thynges in vre:
               Of some yt sh
                     〈…〉
                   skorne their deuyse, may we
                     ••
                   them selues assure.
               Rom
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ensife fansies then, I g
                     〈…〉
                   myne herte reuoke:
               And gaue me to such sporting plaies as laughter might prouoke.
               
                  But euen such vaine delightes, when they most blinded me:
               Alwaies me thought a smilyng grace a kynge did yll agree.
               Then sought I howe to please, my bealy wyth much wyne:
               To fede me fatte wyth costely meates of rare delites and fyne.
               And other pleasures eke, to purchase me wyth reste:
               In so greate choice to fynd the thyng that myght content me best.
               But lorde what care of mynd, what sodayne stormes of yre,
               What broken stepes endured I: to compasse my desyre.
               To builde me houses fayre, then set I al my cure:
               By pryncely actes thus straue I still to make my fame endure.
               Delicious gardens eke, I made to please my syght:
               And graft therin all kynde of fruite, that myght the mouthe delyghte.
               
                  Lyuely sprynges by conduites, from their olde course I drewe.
               For to refreshe the fruitful trees, that in my garden grewe.
               Of cattell greate encrease, I bredde in lyttle space,
               Bondemē I hadde & gaue thē wiues who serued me with their race.
               Greate heapes of shining golde, by sparynge gan I saue:
               Furnished wt suche thynge of pryce, as fittes a prynce to haue.
               To heare fayre women synge. sometyme I dyd reioyce:
               Rauished wyth theyr pleasaūt tumes and swetenes of theyr voyce.
               Lemmans I had so fayre, and of so lyuely hue:
               That who so gased in their face, myght well their beuty rue.
               Neuer erst sate there kynge, so ryche in Dauides seate:
               Yet styl me thought for so smal gaine the trauell was to greate:
               
                  Frome my desirous eyes, I hadde no pleasaunt syght:
               Nor from my herte no kynd of mirth, that myght geue them delight.
               Whych was the onely fruite, I rept of all my payne:
               To fede mine eien, and to reioice my hert with al my gayne.
               But when I made my counte, with howe greate care of minde:
               And hertes vnrest that I had sought, so wastefull fruite to fynde.
               Then was I stroken straight, wyth that abused fyre:
               To glory in that goodly wytte, that compaste my desyre:
               But freshe before myne eyes: grace dyd my faultes renue:
               What gentle callynge I had fledde, my ruine to pursue.
               What ragyng pleasures paste, perill, and harde escape:
               What frensies in myne heade hadde wrought the liquore of ye grape.
               
                  The erroure that I sawe, that their fraile hertes doth moue:
               Whych striue in vayne for to cōpare wyth hym that sittes aboue.
               In whose moste perfite workes, such craft appeareth playne:
               That to the leste of them there maye, no mortall man attayne.
               And lyke as lyghtsome daye, doth shyne aboue the nyght:
               So darke to me dyd foly seme and wisdomes beames as bryght.
               Whose eyes dyd seme so cleare, mo
                     •
                  es to discerne and fynde:
               But will had closed folyes euen, who groped lyke the blynd.
               Yet death and time consumes, all wytte and wordely fame:
               And loke what ende that folye hathe, and wysedome hath the same.
               Then sayde I thus (oh Lorde) may not then wysedome cure,
               The woful wronges & hard cōflictes, that foly doth endure▪
               
               
                  To sharpe my witte so fyne, then why toke I thys payne:
               Now well I finde thys noble searche, maye eke be called vayne.
               As slaunders lothsome, brute soūdes, folies iuge rewarde:
               Are put to silence all by tyme, and brought to finall regard,
               Euen so doth tyme deuoure the noble blaste of fame:
               Which shuld resoūd the glory greate that doth deserue the same.
               Thus present chaunges chace, away the wonders paste:
               Ne is the wisemans fatall threde, yet lenger sponne to laste.
               Then on thys wretched vale, our lyfe I lothed playne:
               When I beheld our fruteles paynes, to compasse pleasures vayne.
               My trauayle thus I spent, hath me produced loo:
               An heyre vnknowen shal repe ye frute that hym the sede dyd sowe.
               
                  But wherunto the Lorde, his nature shall enclyne:
               Who can forknow into whose hādes, my goodes I shall resygne▪
               
               But Lorde, howe pleasaunte swete, semeth the idle lyfe:
               That neuer charged was wyth care, nor burdened wyth stryfe.
               And vyle the gredy trade, of them that toyle so sore:
               To leue to such their trauailes fruite, that neuer swette therfore.
               What is that pleasaunt gayne, which is that swete releife:
               That shoulde delaye the bytter taste, that we fele of your griefe.
               The gladesome dayes we passe, to seke a simple gayne:
               The quiete nyghte by broken stepes, to fede a resteles brayne.
               What hope is left vs then, what conforte doth remayne,
               Our quiete hertes for to reioyce, wyth the fruite of our payne.
               
                  If that be true who maye, hym selfe so happy call:
               As I whose fre 
                     •
                   sumptuous spence, doth shyne beyonde them all.
               Surely it is a gyfte, and fauoure of the Lorde:
               Liberally to spende our goodes, the grounde of all discorde.
               And wretched hertes haue they, that let their treasure molde:
               And cary the rodde that scourgeth thē that glor
                     ••••
                   theyr golde.
               But I do knowe by proufe, whose ryches beare such bruite,
               What stable wealth may stād in wast and heapynge of such fruite.
               LIke as the sterneles boate, that sayles with euery winde:
               The slipper tope of worldely wealth, by cruell proufe I finde,
               Skant hath the seede wherof, that nature formeth man:
               Receiued life, when death hym yeldes to earth wher he beganne.
               
                  The graffed plantes with payne, wherof we hoped fruite:
               To rote thē vp which blossoms spred then is our chiefe pursuite.
               And shredde the spraies whose groth, we laboured wyth payne:
               Eche frowarde threatenynge chere, of fortune makes vs plaine:
               And euerye pleasaunte trayne of hyr, reioyce our hertes agayne.
               Aunciente walles to race, is our vnstable 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               And of theyr wether beaten stones to builde some newe deuise.
               Newe fansies daily sprynge, which fade returnyng moo:
               And now we practice to attaine that straight we must forgo.
               Sometyme we seke to spare, that afterwardes we wast:
               And that we trauayle for to knytte, for to vniosse as faste.
               In sobre silence nowe, our quiete lyppes we close:
               
                  And we vnbrideled tonges forthwith our secrete hertes disclose.
               Suche as in folded armes, we did embrace we hate:
               Whom strayght we reconcile againe, and banishe all debate:
               My seede wyth laboure sowen suche sede produceth me:
               To waste my lyfe in contraries that neuer shall agree.
               From god these heauy cares, are sente for our vnrestes:
               And we such burthens for our wealth He fraughteth styll oure breastes.
               All that the lorde hath wrought, hath bewty and good grace:
               And to eche thyng assigned is hys propre tyme and place.
               And graunted eke to man, of all the worldes estate:
               And of eche thinge wroughte in the same to argue and debate.
               Whiche acte thoughe it approche, the heauēly knowledge most:
               
                  To search the natural course of thinges yet all is labour losse.
               But the wandrynge eyes: that longe for surety sought,
               Found ye by payne in certayne wealth might in thys worlde be boughte.
               Who liueth in delight, and sekes no gredy thrifte:
               But frelye spendes his goodes maye thinke it is a secrete gyft.
               Fulfilled shall he be, what so the lorde intend: which no diuice of mans witte maye, appayre ne yet amende.
               Who made all thynges of noughte, that Adams children might:
               Lerne for to dreade ye lord ye wrought such wonders in their syght.
               The grissy wonders paste. whych now are out of mynde:
               To be renued in our dayes, the lorde hath so assinde.
               Lo, thus this carefull scourge, doth steale on vs vnware:
               
                  Whiche when the fleshe hathe cleane forgote he doth againe repaire.
               When I in thys vayne searche, had wandred fro my witte
               Beholde I sawe a royall throne, where iustice shoulde haue sytte.
               In stede of whom I sawe, with fierce and cruel mode:
               Wher wrong was set that cruel beast and dranke the gyltles bloude.
               Then thought I thus, the day the lorde shall syt in dome:
               To vewe h
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , & chuse the pure, the spotted haue no rome.
               Yet by suche scourges sent, that eche agreued mynde:
               Lyke brute beastes that in their rage and fury by their kinde.
               His erroure may confesse, when he hath wresteled long.
               And with suffraunce maye him arme, the sure defence of wronge:
               For death that of the beste, the carren doth deuoure,
               
                  Unto the noble kynde of man, presēce the fatall houre.
               The perfecte fourine that god, hath geuen either to man:
               Or other beast, dissolue it shall, to earth where he began,
               And who can tell if that, the soule of man assende,
               Or wyth the body of it dye, and to the groude descende.
               Wherfore ech gready herte, that ryches 
                     ••
                  kes to gayne:
               Gather may 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  , that springet 
                     〈◊〉
                   his payne.
               A 
                     ••
                  cane conuenient wealth, I meane to take in worthe:
               And wyth an hande of largest in, measure poure it forthe.
               For treasure spent in lyfe, the body doth susteyne:
               The heyre shal wast the hoorded gold amased with muche payne.
               Ne may foresyght of man, suche ordre gyue in life:
               
                  For to foreknowe who shall enioye, theyr gotten goodes wyth stryfe.
            
            
               Domine deus salutis uicae.
               O Lorde vpon whose wyll, dependeth my welfare:
               To call vpon thy holy name, sins day nor night I spare.
               Graunte that the iuste requeste, of thys repentaunt mynd:
               So perce thyne eares ye in thy sighte, some 
                     〈…〉
                   fynd.
               My soule 
                     〈…〉
                   full, with griefe 
                     〈◊〉
                   paste:
               My restles b
                     •
                  dye doth consume, and death approcheth faste.
               Lyke them whose fatall threde, thine hand hath cutte in twayne:
               Of whom there is no farther bruite, whyche in theyr graues remaine.
               Oh lorde thou haste me caste, headlonge to please my foo:
               Into a pytte all bottomeles, wher as I playne my woo.
               
                  The burden of thy wrathe, it doth me sore oppresse:
               And sondry stormes thou hast me sēt of terrour and distresse.
               The faythful frendes are fledde, and banished from my syght:
               And suche as I haue helde ful deare, hath set my frendshyp lyght.
               My duraunce doth perswade, of fredome suche dispaire:
               That by the teares yt bayne my brest, myne eye lyght doth 
                     •
                  ppayre.
               Yet dyd I neu
                     ••
                   care, thyne ayde for desyre:
               With humble hert & stretched hādes for to appeare thyne ire.
               Wherfore dost thou forbeare in the defence of thyne?
               To shewe suche tokens of thy power, in syght of Adams lyne.
               Wherby eche feble hert, with fayth myght be so fedde:
               That in the mouth of thine elect, thy mercies might be spredde.
               
                  The fleshe that fedeth wormes, can not thy loue declare:
               Nor such set forth thy faieth as dwel, in the lande of dispayre.
               In blynde endured hertes, lyght of thy lyuely name:
               Can not appeare ne cā not iudge, the bryghtnes of the same.
               Nor blasted may thy name, be by the mouthe of those:
               whom death hathe shitte in silence so, as they 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
               The lyuely 
                     〈…〉
                  , that in thys worlde delyght:
               Nor be the trumpe yt muste resownd, the glory of thy might.
               Wherfore I shall not cease, in chiefe of my distresse.
               To cal
                     •
                  on the tyl that the slepe, my wery bones oppresse.
               And in the morning eke, when that the slepe is fledde:
               With flouddes of salte repentaunte teares to washe my restles bedde.
               
                  Wyth in thys careful mynde, burdened wyth care and grefe:
               Why dost thou lorde appaese, that shoulde be hys relefe.
               My wretched state beholde, whō death shall strayghte assayle:
               Cast not from the thaflicted styll, that neuer dyd but wayle.
               The breade lo, of thyne ire, hath trode me vnder feete:
               The scourges of thyne angry hande, hath made death seme full swete.
               Lyke as the roringe waues, the sonken shyppe surrounde:
               Greate heapes of care dyd folow me, And I no succoure founde.
               For they whom no mischaunce, coulde from my loue deuide:
               Are forced to my greater grefe, frome me theyr face to hyde.
            
            
               Inte domine sperauf.
               In the lorde haue I hoped, let me not fele the blame:
               
                  At any time I the beseche, of disapoynted shame.
               But me defende and kepe, deliuer as I truste:
               Now throughe thy mighte weout the which there may no man be iust.
               Geue eare and rydde me sone, my fortresse before me:
               In whose defence thou shalt me saue, if I defended be.
               For thou are wont to be, myne holde and my succour:
               And for my 
                     〈◊〉
                   be thou both, my guyde and 
                     〈◊〉
                   fortour.
               Thou shalt vntangle me. from snares that they have hydde,
               To take me with: for wythout the my selfe I can not rydde.
               Into thy cure I shall, betake my simple sprite:
               Thou hast and shalt deliuer me, most iust in thy behyght.
               Alowed I haue not them, that fettes their endes in vayne:
               
                  Mine onely hope bothe all and some, in the doth sure remaine.
               Let me (oh lorde enioye) thy mercies oft assayde:
               By troubles for thou didest regard, wherin my life was stayed.
               And hast not suffred me, with enmyes power be paynde.
               But rather hast thou set at large, my steppes that were restraynde,
               Rewe o
                     ••
                  ne now (oh good lord) at hand
                     •
                   my da
                     ••
                  n
                     ••
                  r loo:
               Mine eye, my life 
                     〈◊〉
                   my fleshe, alas doth fre
                     ••
                   for woo.
               Moste of my dayes and yeres, in troubles wasted are:
               My strength decaieth, my bones do quaile such mischefe me doth marre.
               Dreade of my many foes, hath made my frendes to swarue,
               And they me abhorre wythout cause, of whom I good deserue.
               I am cast as forgote, as dede in death doth steru
                     •
                  :
               
                  As a brokē potte of whō the shardes, for nothing more can serue.
               I hearde the assembles saye, and threaten woo and stryfe:
               As thoughe it semde by one consente, I were not worthy life.
               But I oh lorde in the, settynge my sure beliefe:
               D
                     •
                   knowe thou art, what me befall, my god and hole reliefe.
               My 
                     ••
                  me is in 
                     〈…〉
                  , shal ensue.
               Deliv
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   ntes power, which doth my lyfe pursue:
               Shewe yet thy frendly chere, vnto thy simple slaue:
               Accordynge to thy natyue ruthe, thou me defende and saue.
               Imputed for no mocke, lorde let it be to me:
               That in my neede myne onely healpe, I seke onely at the.
               The wicked hath the mocke, and holde theyr peace in hel:
               
                  Buried mought althey be now, of further helpe that tell.
               And let that mouth be dombe, that wountes his lyppes to lyes:
               Speakynge slaunders of the iust mā wyth proude disdainefull cryes.
               What plenty and what wealth, hast thou layd vp for those:
               That honour the, that hope in the for whom thou dost disclose.
               All openly at eye, 
                     〈◊〉
                   full many a no 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               That Adams line 
                     〈◊〉
                   much and lerne 
                     •
                  hre
                     •
                  r to drede.
               Thou dost bestowe them ryght, afore thy looke and face:
               Whych is debarde from wycked mē, they may not haue that grace.
               Where thou dost them defend, from threates of mighty power:
               Frō venim tonges thou dost thē hyde within thy pleasaunt bower.
               Farre aboue all landes, thy mercies I have founde:
               
                  And wondrous worckes in my defēce as citye walled rounde.
               I haue thought me or thys, farre caste out of thy syght:
               But yet euen then thou heardeste my voyce my prayer day and night.
               Love ye therfore the Lorde, hys goodnes whych do taste:
               The symple for he doth defend, rewardes the proude as fast.
               Be of good cheare all ye, that hope of 
                     〈◊〉
                   good turne:
               For he wil 
                     〈◊〉
                   stil your hertes that trust in his returne.
            
            
               Miserere mei deus.
               For thy greate mercies sake haue mercy lorde on me:
               For thy goodnes do cleane away, my greate impuritie.
               My misdeades put away, and eftsone
                     •
                   make me cleane
               From synne and all impuritie, the for to serue agayne.
               For nowe I do confesse, my faultes done vnto the:
               
                  And myne offence is neuer frō, the presence of myne eye.
               To the, euen I to the, have done thys fore offence:
               And this misedede, I shew my fault, not ferynge thy presence.
               But if thou wylt vouchsafe, of thys me now to ease:
               And geue thy worde to me, I shal not the displease.
               Then named shalt thou be, a god both ius
                     •••••
                   true:
               Most constaunte 
                     〈◊〉
                   promises not chaunging them a 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Yea then I say thou shalt, be counted iuste in dede:
               Condemning them that wil not turne and call for helpe at nede.
               All thynge is knowen to the, and nothyng from the hydde.
               Even how of synne I hadde no lacke when I was conceyued.
               For why? to it also, my mother was in thrall:
               
                  And when that I conceyued was by hyr I hadde my fall.
               And though it were not small, which by hyr then I hadde:
               Yet in the trouth is thy delight, whyche wisedome make me glade.
               If thou (oh lord) wylt clense, and purge me fro my sinne,
               With I sope washte I shal be cleane, a newe life to begynne.
               If thou wilte putte awaye, my synne, and me renc
                     ••
                  e:
               Then shal I be that was once blake, as w
                     •
                  yte as is the knewe.
               When thou shalt me reioyce, and drawe to mirth agayne.
               Then wyl my bones be voyde of wo, which thou somtimes didst paine.
               Thy face for thy names sake, do turne from mine offence:
               And for thy mercyes greate I craue, preserue me now from thence.
               Oh Lorde make cleane myne herte, that I in me reserue:
               
                  And yt thy sprite wythin my brest, alway may me preserue.
               For thy benignitie, forsake me not (or lorde)
               He take away thy blessed spirite, lest that I be abhorde.
               But rather graunt to me, 
                     ••
                  e confort of thy hande:
               Ar
                     •
                   wyth thy sprite as principal 
                     〈◊〉
                   me to wythstand.
               If that thou wylt thys graunte, then in
                     •
                  ers shall I tell:
               Their life how that they shal appoint in ioye 
                     〈…〉
                   o well.
               And those that ouerthrowen, and thral to sinne be made:
               They shall repent and turne agayne, by seynge of my trade.
               Oh aucthour of myne health, from murder make me free:
               Thy rightuousnes mi mouth shal tel and praise it certaynly.
               Release my tonge oh Lorde, wherof thou hast the cure.
               
                  That then it may declare abrode, thy prayse, and eke thy power.
               If that I shoulde applye, in presence for to brynge:
               The outward sacrifice, oh lord, it woulde please the nothynge.
               He yet wylt thou regard, as thoughe thou hadst respecte:
               The offeryng ye the heate doth 
                     〈◊〉
                  , whych we to the direct.
               The sacrifice wherwyth, the lorde is pleased son
               It is the sprite 
                     〈◊〉
                   peni
                     ••
                  nt, that 
                     〈…〉
                   none.
               It is the herte of trouthe, with dolour stroken sore:
               Thou canste not Lorde despise these twayne no not for euermore:
               To Sion lorde alwayes, declare thy gentlenes:
               Ierusalem the walles therof, againe may haue redresse.
               The sacrifices then, shalbe pleasaunte to the:
               
                  Whych shall declare as tokens true, our inwarde puritie.
               I meane the purged offeryng, and eke oblation:
               On aulters whē we, calues shal laye, thy name to call vpon.
            
         
         
            Againste nigardy, and riches.
            No wyght in thys worlde, that wealth can attaine:
            Unlesse he beleue, that all is but vayne.
            And loke howe it commeth so leue it to god:
            As tydes vse theyr tymes, to ebbe and to floo.
            Thys mucke on the molde, that men so desyre,
            Doth worcke them much woo, and moue them to ire.
            With griefe it is gote, with care it is kepte:
            Wyth sorowe sone loste, that longe hath bene repte.
            
               And wo worth the man, that fyrste dolue the molde:
            To fynde out the myne, of syluer or golde.
            For when it laye hydde, and to vs vnknowen:
            Of stryfe and debate, the seede was not sowen.
            Then lyued men well, and held them content,
            Wyth meate drinke and cloth, wythout any rent.
            Their houses bu
                  •••
               ore, to 
                  〈…〉
                selues in:
            For cas
                  •
               e
                  •
               s and toures, were then to begyn.
            No towne had his wall, they feared no warre:
            Nor enemyes hoste, to seke them affare.
            So ledde they their lyues, in quiet and reste:
            Tyll hoorde began hate, from east vnto weste.
            
               And golde for to growe, a lorde of greate price:
            Whych chaunged the world from vertue to vyce.
            And turned all thynge, so farre from his kynde:
            That howe it should be, is 
                  •
               orne out of mynde.
            For 
                  〈◊〉
                beare nowe, the 
                  〈◊〉
                and the brute:
            And onely 
                  •
               he cause, of all our pursuite.
            Whych maketh amonge vs, suche 
                  〈…〉
               .
            And shall tyl we seke, the ryght way agayne.
            When mariage was made, for vertue and loue:
            Then was no diuorce, goddes knotte to remoue.
            When iudges would suffer, no brybbes in their syght:
            Their iudgementes were then accordynge to ryght.
            
               When prelates had not, possessions nor rent:
            They preached the trouthe, and truly they went.
            When men dyd not flatter, for fauoure nor mede:
            Then kynges herde the trouth, and howe the worlde yede.
            And men vnto honour, throughe vertue did rise:
            But all thys is 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            
               
                  〈…〉
                a
                  •
               y my
                  •••
               
            
            For mony 
                  〈◊〉
                all: and 
                  〈◊〉
                a god:
            
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               ot to be, for Ch
                  ••••
                
               
                  ••
               bode.
            And bade th
                  ••••
                should, take nothyng in hande:
            But for the lordes loue, and wealth of the lande.
            And willes vs full oft. that we should refrayne.
            From wrestyng hys wyll, to make our owne gayne,
            
               For couetous folke, of euery estate:
            As hardly shall enter, wythin heaven gate.
            As thorowe a nedles eye, a camell to crepe:
            Why do these mad men, then hoorde vp and kepe.
            Yea more then may serue, the
                  •
                selues to suffyce:
            As though 
                  ••
               fite blysse, shoulde that waye ary
                  •
               ,
            But if they woulde 
                  〈◊〉
                to synke in their br
                  •••
               
            
            What trouble of mynde what vnquiet reste:
            What mischiefe, what hate, thys money doth brynge:
            They woulde not so toyle, for so vile a thynge.
            For they that haue muche, are euer in care:
            Whyche way to wynne, and how for to space:
            
               Their slepes be vnsound, for feare of the thiefe:
            The losse of a lyttle, doth worke them much griefe,
            In sekynge their lacke, they want that they haue:
            And subiecte to that, which should be their slaue.
            They neuer do knowe, whyle ryches do raygne:
            A frende of effe
                  ••
               , 
                  〈…〉
                that doth fame.
            For flatterers sake, where 
                  〈◊〉
                doth dwell:
            And 
                  〈◊〉
                at the loureth, they bide them farewell.
            The poore do
                  ••
                them curse, as oft as they want:
            In hauynge so muche, to make it so skante.
            Theyr children sometyme, do wyshe them in graue:
            That they myght possesse, that ryches they haue.
            
               And that whyche they wynne, wyth trauaile and strife:
            Oft tymes as we see, doth cost them theyr lyfe.
            Lo, these be the fruites, that ryches brynge forth:
            Wyth many other moo, which be no more worth.
            For money is cause, o
                  •
                
               
                  •••
               ther and thef
                  •
               
            
            Of battell of bloddeshedd
                  •
                whych should god we
                  •••••
               
            
            Of rauyne, of wrot
                  •••
                of false wytness 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Of treason conspired 
                  〈◊〉
                and eke of forw
                  ••••
               nge.
            And for to be shorte, and knytte vp the knotte,
            Fewe mischefes at al, that money makes not.
            But though it be ill, when it is abused:
            Yet neuertheles, it may be well vsed.
            
               Nor I do not fynde, that men be denide:
            For sufficient thynges, them selves to prouide.
            Accordynge as god, hath put them in place.
            To have and to holde, a tyme and a space.
            So it be wel wonne, and after well spente:
            For it is not th
                  •••
               s, 
                  〈◊〉
                that 
                  •
               ntent.
            And 
                  〈…〉
               , 
                  〈…〉
                skyll:
            
               
                  〈…〉
                me
                  •
               e, to vse at 
                  〈◊〉
                wyll.
            As priestes shoulde not take, promotions in hande:
            To lyue at theyr case, lyke lordes of the lande.
            But onely to fede, gods flocke with the trouthe:
            To preache, and to teache, wythout any slouthe.
            
               Nor folkes shoulde not nede, greate ryches to wynne.
            But gladely to lyue, and for to flee synne.
            Hys will for to worcke, that is theyr soules health:
            And then may they thynke, they lyue in much wealthe:
            For in this vaine worlde, 
                  〈◊〉
                be 
                  〈◊〉
                in: nothyng but 
                  〈◊〉
                mischief
                  •
                and synne.
            Temptation, vntrou
                  •••
                contention and 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Then lette vs not 
                  〈◊〉
                by so vile a lyfe 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            But lyfte vp oure 
                  〈◊〉
                and loke throughe our fayth:
            Beholdynge his mercies, that many tymes sayth.
            The iuste men shall lyue, by their good beleife:
            And shall haue a place, where can be no griefe.
            
         
      
   