
      
         
            
            To my Chriſtian friend, 
                  •
               . F. com
                  •
               ort in Chriſt during this life, and glory with Chriſt in the life to come.
            
               WHen I lay at Pinchfield (where I had more leiſure and fewer Bookes than I could haue wiſhed, I compoſed this Selah or Collection of thoſe verſes in the booke of Pſalms Which the Holy Ghoſt maks remarkable with this word of attention Selah. VVhich verſes I haue ſet together not according to the order of the pſalmes from whence they be taken, but according to the correſpōdency of matter which the verſes themſelues contein, conſidered with verſes adioiyning. Out of wh
                  •
               ch, I ſomtimes take ſo much as may make the ſenſe of the verſe wherein Selah is more euident to the purpoſe wherevnto I apply it. The word Selah I vnderſtand in eue
                  •
               y verſe ſaue onely in one; In which I expreſſe it, becauſe the Spirit hath ſet a double mark vp
                  •
               n that. This collection written I gaue for a Newyears gift to you for whoſe ſake eſpecially it was cōpoſed. But now, in conſideratiō of the calamities of theſe times it is imprinted, that I may beſtow it vpon mo then your ſelfe: For ſuch is the communion of Saints, in the fellowſhip of the Spirit, that the feelings o
                  •
                the whole Church, and of euery member, be alike, & therefore doth the Spirit in ſundry Pſalmes, ſpeake both plurally and ſingularly of one and the ſame ſubiect▪ yea▪ ſometimes in one and the ſame verſe. Receiue eft-ſoones this compoſed Selah, as a token of my remembring the kindneſſe which I haue receiued from you and your friends, and ſhew how you eſteeme it, by making ſome good vſe thereof. Fare-well.
            
         
      
      
         
            SELAH
            
               Complaint. 
               O God heare my praier, hearkē vnto the words of my mouth, For ſtrangers are riſen vp againſt me, and Tyran
                  •
               s ſeeke my ſoule. They haue not ſet God before them. 54. 2. 3.
            
            
               3. 2. Many ſay vnto my ſoule, There is no helpe for him in God.
            
            They haue ſharpened their tongues like a ſerpent. Adders poiſon is vnder their lips.
            
               83. 8. Aſhur is alſo ioyned with them, they haue beene an arme to the children of Lot.
            
               140. 5. The Proud haue laid a ſnare for me, and ſpread a net with cordes in my Path-way, and ſet grinnes for me.
            
               74. 5. If I rewarded euill vnto him that had peace with me; then let mine enemy perſecute my ſoule and take it, yea let him tread my life down vpon the earth, and lay mine honour in the duſt.
            
               55. 6. 7. I ſaid, O that I had winges like a doue, then would I flie away & reſt; Behold I would take my flight farre off, & lodge in the wilderneſſe.
            
               77. 3. I did thinke vpon God, and was troubled, I prayed, and my ſpirit was full of anguiſh.
            
               32. 4. For thy hand is heauy vpon me day and night, and my moiſture is turned into the drought of ſummer.
            
               39 11. When thou with rebukes doth chaſtiſe man for iniquity, thou as a moth makeſt his beauty to conſume. Surely euery man is vanity.
            
               89. 48. What man liueth & ſhall not ſee death? Shall he deliuer his ſoule from the hand of the graue?
            
               45. The daies of his youth haſt thou ſhortened, and couered him with ſhame.
            
               39. 5. Behold, thou haſt made my dayes as an hand-bredth, and my age is nothing in reſpect of thee. Surely euery man in his beſt eſtate is altogether vanity.
            
               88. 10. Wilt thou ſhew a myracle to the dead? or, Shall the dead riſe, and praiſe thee?
            
               7. Thine indignation lieth vpon me, and thou haſt vexed me with all thy waues.
            
               77. 9. Hath God forgotten to be mercifull? Hath he ſhut vp his mercy in diſpleaſure?
            
               32. 5. Then I acknowledged my ſinne vnto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: For I thought, I will confeſſe againſt my ſelfe my wickedneſſe vnto the Lord, and thou forgaueſt the puniſhment of my ſinne.
            
               Comfortes. 
               3. 8. Saluation belongeth vnto the Lord, amd thy bleſſing is vpon thy people.
            
               66. 7. He ruleth the world with his power, his eyes behold the nations; The rebellious ſhall not exalt themſelues.
            
               50. 6. And the heauens ſhall declare his righteouſneſſe; For God is iudge himſelfe.
            
               9. 16. The Lord is knowne by executing iudgment, The wicked is ſnared in the worke of his owne hands: Higgai
                     •
                  n Selah.
            
            
               55. 19. God wil heare and afflict them, euen he that raignes of old.
            
               75. 23. When I ſhall take a conuenient time, I will iudge righteouſly. The earth and all the inhabitants therof are diſſolued: But I will eſtabliſh the pillars of it.
            
               76. 1. 2. 3. God is knowne in Iudah, his Name is great in Iſrael: For in Shalem is his tabernacle, and his dwelling in Zion. There brake be the arrowes of the bow, the ſheild, and the ſword, and the battaile.
            
               87. 3. Glorious things are ſpoken of thee, ô City of God.
            
            
               6. The Lord ſhall count, when he righteth thy people, He was born there.
            
            
               89. 3. 4. I haue made a couenaunt with my choſen, I haue ſworn to Dauid my ſeruant; Thy ſeed will I establiſh for euer, and ſet vp thy throane from generation to generation.
            
            
               37. He ſhall be eſtabliſhed for euermore as the moone, and as a faithfull witneſſe in the heauen.
            
               68. 7. O God, when thou wenteſt forth before thy people, when thou wenteſt through the wilderneſſe.
            
               76, 7. When thou ô God aroſe to iudgement to help all the meeke on the earth.
            
               77. 15. Thou haſt redeemed thy people with thine arme, euen the ſonnes of Iacob and Ioſeph.
            
            
               85. 2. Thou haſt forgiuen the iniquity of thy people, and couered all their ſinnes.
            
               4, 2. O ye ſonnes of men, how long will ye turne my glory into ſhame, louing vanity and ſeeking lies?
            
               82, 2. How long will ye iudge vniuſtly, & accept the perſōs of the wicked?
            
               62. 3. 4. How long will ye imagine miſcheife againſt a man? ye ſhall be all ſlaine, ye ſhall be as a bowed wall, or as a wall ſhaken; yet they conſult to caſt him downe from his dignity. Their delight is in lies, they bleſſe with their mouthes, but curſe with their hearts.
            
               49. 10, 11, 13. Fooliſh men periſh and leaue their riches for others: yet they thinke their houſes ſhall continue for euer, and call their landes by their names. This their way vttereth their fooliſhneſſe, yet their poſterity delighteth in their talke.
            
               52. 3. Thou doſt loue euill more then good, and lies more then to ſpeake the truth.
            
               4. 5. Thou loueſt all words that may deſtroy, ô deceitfull tongue. So ſhall God deſtroy thee for euer; He ſhall take and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the liuing.
            
               4. 4. Tremble, and ſinne no
                  •
               , examaine your owne heart, and be ſtill.
            
               67, 4. Let the na
                  •
               ions be glad and reioyce. For thou ſhalt iudge the people righteouſly, and gouerne then nations vpon the earth.
            
               Faith. 
               62. 8. Truſt in him alway yee people, poure out your heartes before him: For he is our hope.
            
               81. 7. Thou calledſt in affliction, and I deliuered thee, and anſwered thee in the ſecret of thunder, I proued thee, at the waters of Mer
                     •
                  bah.
            
            
               24. 6. This is the generation of them that ſeeke him, of them that ſeeke thy face, this is Iacob.
            
            
               84. 4. Bleſſed are they that dwell in thine houſe, They wil euer praiſe thee.
            
               3. 4. I did call vpon the Lord with my voice, and he heard mee out of his holy mountaine.
            
               46. 1, 2, 3. God is our hope, and ſtrength, and helpe in troubles, ready to be found. Therefore will not we feare though the earth be moued, & though the mountaines fall into the middeſt of the ſea, and though the waters therof rage and be troubled, and the mountaines ſhake at the ſurges of the ſame.
            
               32. 7. Thou art my ſecret place, thou preſerueſt me from trouble, thou compaſſeth me about with ioyfull deliuerance.
            
               57. 3. He will ſend from heauen and ſaue mee from the reproofe of him that would ſwallow me vp.
            
               49. 15 But God ſhall deliuer my ſoule from the power of the graue: For he will receiue me.
            
               46. 7. The Lord of hoſtes is with vs. The God of Iacob is our refuge.
            
               47. 4. Hee hath choſen our inheritance for vs, euen the glory of Iacob whom he loued.
            
               48. 8. As we haue heard, ſo haue we ſeen in the citie of the Lord of hoſtes, in the Citie of our God. God wil eſtabliſh it for euer.
            
               Prayer. 
               67. 1. God be mercifull vnto vs, and bleſſe vs, and cauſe his face to ſhine among vs.
            
               59. 5. Euen thou ô Lord God of hoſtes, ô▪ 
               God of Iſraell, awake to viſit all the heathen, and be not mercifull vnto all that tranſgreſſe maliciouſly.
            
               13. Conſume them in thy wrath, conſume them that they bee no more, and let them knowe that God ruleth in Iacob, euen vnto the ends of the world.
            
               16. 20. Put them in feare, ô Lord, that the heathen may know that they are but men.
            
               140. 8. Let not the wicked haue his deſire ô Lord, performe not his wicked thought, leſt they be to proud.
            
               84. 8. O Lord of hoſtes heare my prayer, hearken ô God of Iacob.
            
            
               143. 6. I ſtretch foorth mine handes vnto thee, my ſoule deſireth after thee as a thirſty land.
            
               20. 1, 2, 3. The Lord heare thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Iacob defend thee, ſend thee helpe from the Sanctuary, and ſtrengthen thee out of Zion: Let him remember all thine offerings, and turne thy burnt offerings into aſhes.
            
               Praiſe. 
               21▪ 1
                     •
                  . The King ſhall reioyce in thy ſtrenth ô Lord, yea how greatly ſhall he reioice in thy ſaluation! Thou haſt giuen him his hearts deſire, and haſt not denied him the requeſt of his lippes.
            
               60. 3, 4. Thou haſt ſhewed thy people heauie things, thou haſt made vs drinke the wine of giddines. But now thou haſt giuen a banner to them that feare thee that it may be diſplayed becauſe of thy truth.
            
               46. 11. The Lord of hoſtes is with vs. The God of Iacob is our refuge.
            
               24. 19. Who is the king of glory? The Lord of hoſts he is the king of glory
            
               57. 6. They haue laid a net for my ſteps, my ſoule is preſſed downe, they haue digged a pit before me, and are fallen into the middeſt of it.
            
               44. 7. 8. But thou haſt ſaued vs from our aduerſaries, and haſt put them to confuſion that hate vs. Therefore will we praiſe God continually, and will confeſſe thy Name for euer.
            
               61. 4. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for euer, and my truſt ſhall be vnder the couering of thy wings.
            
               66. 14, 15. I will goe to thine houſe with burnt offerings, and wil pay thee my vowes which my lips haue promiſed and my mouth hath ſpoken in mine aff
                  •
               ictions I will offer vnto thee the burnt offerings of fat rammes, with incenſe. I wil prepare bullockes and goats.
            
               4 All the world ſhal worſhip thee, & ſing vnto thee, euē ſing to thy Name.
            
            
               68. 32. Sing vnto the Lord ô ye Kingdomes of the earth, ſing praiſes vnto the Lord.
            
               19. Praiſed be God, euen the God of our ſaluation, who ladeth vs daily with benefits.
         
      
   