
      
         
            
            ¶The Preface to the
Reader.
            
               
                  PLutarche a noble Philoſopher, &
a diligent Hiſtorician, writeth
in the life of Demetrius a king
of Macedonie, that when an
olde woman came to him, beſéeching him
to heare her ſpeake, and he made aunſwer
that he had no leaſure, the woman looking
vpon him, ſayd to him agayne with a loude
voyce: why, haue you no leaſure to rule, as
a king ſhoulde? Which wordes ſo pearced
the kinges heart, and ſo greatly preuayled
in him, that he forthwith gaue her audience,
and from that day, none came to him
for any matter, but gently, and with all diligence
he did heare them, & diſcuſſe their
cauſes. Boyſteouſlye were theſe wordes
ſpoken of a ſubiect, and not with that reuerence
that was méete to be geuen to a
king. Notwithſtanding, as Cicero witneſſeth
in the ſecond of his Tuſculanes: Triſtis
res eſt dolor, ſine dubio, aſpera, amara,
inimica naturae, ad patiendum tolerandum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
difficilis: Sorow is a gréeuous thing, without
doubt ſharpe, bitter, and an enemye to
nature, harde to ſuffer and forbeare. Sorowe

(as I ſuppoſe) conſtreyned the ſéelye
woman to ſpeake as ſhe did, & veras exprimere
voces, and to vtter the truth. On the
other ſide conſider, not only the gentle nature
of this noble prince, but alſo his great
wiſedome, in conſidering nothing to be
more ſéemely for a gouernour, then to hear
mens cauſes indifferentlye, and to ſée all
wronges redreſſed. Nihil (ſayeth the ſame
Plutarche) tam egregium tam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   proprium
Regis eſſe videtur, quàm iuſticiae opus, Nothing
is ſo excellent & ſo properlye pertayning
to him that is a magiſtrate, as iuſtice.
I haue read that the Tribunes, which wer
officers choſen for the defence of the Commons
of Rome, had their gates or dores
neuer ſhut, neither by day, nor by night, in
token that thither might be the recourſe of
al them that had néede of ſuccour. So ought
euery gouernoure, whether he be ſpiritual
or temporall, to be a ſuccour, and as it wer
a caſtle and a fortreſſe to them that be vnder
his tuition. Dion Caſsius in his bookes
that he wrote de principe, amongſt other
preceptes, willeth chiefely and aboue all
thinges, that whoſoeuer be the head of the
people, be a diligent worſhipper & folower
of God: next, that he be louing to his ſubiectes,

if he will haue them to be faythfull
to him, and loue him as ſubiectes ſhoulde
their prince. For it is not of likelyhood, ſaid
Dion, neither doth nature permit, but that
he that loueth, ſhould be loued, when we
ſée dogges to fawne, and horſes to neye to
them, of whom they be cheriſhed. Again, he
would haue ſuch rulers to call themſelues
ſhepherdes and féeders of men, rather then
otherwiſe. So Homer calleth a king paſtorem
populi, a ſhepherde and féeder of the
people. And Plato in his Dialogue called
Minos, writeth, that Minos and Radamanthus,
which gaue lawes to ye men of Crete,
were the true ſhepherdes of men, whiche
was not ſpoken of ſo noble a Philoſopher
without a iuſt cauſe: for nothing doth more
nouriſh, mainteine and vpholde a common
wealth then lawe, which, as Tullie in ſecū
                  do
de natura deorum ſayth, eſt recti praeceptio,
praui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   depulſio, a commaunder of that
which is good and honeſt, and an expulſer
of all that is noughte and vnhoneſt. Now,
as a ſhepherdes care is to ſée his ſhéepe
fedde in wholſome paſtures, and to be
kepte ſafe from wolues, & al other beaſtes
that would wery and deſtroy them: and if

any in the flocke be infected with any outwarde
ſcabbe, or inward maladie, to remedie
it betime: or if the contagion admit no
helpe, but is incurable, to haue ſuche a one
away from the flocke, that he hurt none of
them that be whole: Euen ſo muſt he that
will be a ſhepherde of men, ſtudye for the
good ordering and quietnes of the multitude,
ouer whom he hath charge, and that
all enormities that might diſturbe a common
wealth, whether it be ſpirituall or ciuill,
be expelled, and that all faultes be
redreſſed with due correction, vſing lenitie
and ſeueritie, after as hope or diſpaire of
amendment ſhall appeare. Neither hath the
name of a ſhepherde lacked his preheminence
at any time. That good Abell, ad cuius
munera deus reſpexit, to whoſe giftes &
ſacrifice God had reſpect, was a ſhepherde:
Abraham, in whoſe ſéede God promiſed,
that all nations ſhoulde be bleſſed, was a
ſhepherde: ſo was Iſaac his ſonne, and Iacob
his nephewe, and his ſonnes alſo. Moyſes
that noble captayne, and deliuerer of
God his people, was a ſhepherde in the
lande of Madian. Dauid, of whom S. Steuen
ſayde, that God gaue this teſtimonye:
Inueni Dauid filium leſſe, virum ſecundùm

cor meum, qui faciet omnes voluntates meas:
I haue founde Dauid the ſonne of Ieſſe, a
man after mine owne heart and minde,
which ſhall do all my will. Act. 13. This noble
king Dauid was a ſhepherde. Theſe I
ſuppoſe almightie God woulde haue to be
enſamples to all them that be in authoritie,
for as Paule ſayth: Quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſcripta
ſunt, ad noſtram eruditionem ſcripta ſunt,
All thinges that are written, are written
for our inſtruction, that as they fedde that
ſéely innocent cattell, ſo ſhoulde all Magiſtrates
that profeſſe his ſons name, learne
to gouerne the people in the obedience of
his doctrine, that they might be innocentes
manibus, & puro corde: nec iurantes in dolo
proximo ſuo, Innocents of their handes,
and of a pure heart, which vſe no deceipt
towardes their neighbours, but in al their
doinges ſhewe themſelues to be veras oues
paſcuae Chriſti, the true ſhéepe of the paſture
of Ieſus Chriſte, who ſayeth: Bonus
paſtor animam ſuàm dat pro ouibus ſuis, A
good ſhepherd geueth his life for his ſhéepe.
Fewe wordes, but full of pith: And neuer
could mo thinges be ſpoken more compendiouſlye.
For what will he refuſe to doo?
what labour, what trauayle, what payne

will he forſake, which for yt perfourmance
of that he goeth about, will not ſpare his
owne life? If a good ſhepherde ſetteth ſo
great ſtore by his ſhéepe, if he loue them ſo
tenderly, that he will rather loſe his lyfe
then to ſée thē in any danger, what will he
not doo els for them? Howe can it be otherwiſe,
but that he will ſée his flocke fedde in
wholſome paſtures? howe can it be thoght,
that he will not tarye with them to kéepe
them from wolues, from dogges that fall
to byting of them, and from other like rauenous
beaſts? Who would imagine him
to be ſo negligent, that he will not in the
euening bring them home to the cote or
folde? Will he not, trowe you, if any be
ſtrayed, go ſéeke him out, and bring him agayne
to his felowes? If any be ſicke, will
he not ſée him holpen with all diligence?
Sée therfore what a great matter our Sauior
did comprehend & folde vp, as it were,
& knit together in a bundell, al that can be
deſired in a good herdeſman. O that gouernours
whō god hath put in authoritie, per
quem reges regnant, by whom kinges doo
reigne, who had Peter, if he loued him, to
féede his ſhéepe, who hath alſo conſtitute
vnder him féeders vpon the earth, ſome ſpirituall,
ſome temporall, O, I ſay, that they

would diligently looke vpon theſe wordes:
A good shepherde geueth his life for the
sheepe, & ſeriouſlye ponder in their minde
what a charge is hid in this ſhort ſentēce,
how many thinges princeps paſtorum, the
prince of ſhepherdes, as Peter calleth him,
doth require of them whom he hath made
herdſmen vnder him, whoſe duetie is to be
good paſtours and faythfull féeders like to
their maſter. O that they wold call to their
mind, that they muſt at length depart hēce,
& come where it ſhalbe ſaid to euery one of
thē: Redde rationem villicationis tuae, Geue
accompt of thy bayliwike, Come forth and
ſhew how thou haſt fed my flock that I cō
               mitted
to thy handes: Thou Biſhop, howe
haſte thou viſited thy dioceſſe, what Parſons,
what Vicares haſte thou admitted?
Thou Archedeacon, howe often haſte thou
viſited & ſéene euery curate to do his duty?
how haſt thou redreſſed al enormities and
ſlaunders within thy iuriſdictiō? Thou parſon,
thou vicare, thou curate, how haſt thou
fed thy flock with good enſamples of charitie
& vertuous liuing, with kéeping of hoſpitality
to thy power, by preching holſome
doctrine, in reuerently miniſtring my Sacramentes?
Thou king, howe haſte thou
ruled thy Realme? What lawes

lawes haſte thou made for the ſetting forth
of my glorye, for the extirpation of hereſyes,
for maintenaunce of equitie, for puniſhment
of wronge, for prouiſion, that
thinges may be ſolde at a competent price,
that couetous men make no dearth to
their condemnation, when I geue plentie?
Thou Lorde, howe haſte thou gouerned
vnder thy prince? Thou man of woorſhip,
howe haſte thou indeuoured to haue quietnes
kepte, and the princes lawes to be
obeyed? Thou Iuſtice, how haſte thou miniſtred
right indifferently to all perſons?
Thou Maior or head officer in anye Citie
or Towne, howe haſte thou kept thy ſelfe
cléere from periurie? howe haſte thou ſéene
good order obſerued, and al ydlenes & diſſolute
maners to be baniſhed? Finally, thou,
whatſoeuer officer or Magiſtrate thou be,
howe haſte thou regarded the common
wealth, and preferred it afore thy priuate
lucre or commoditie? O that theſe thinges
were conſidered: for as ſure as God liueth,
theſe accomptes will he call vpon ſtraytly.
None ſhall eſcape, Cui multum datur (as
S. Gregorie ſayeth) multum ab eo quaeretur,
He that hath muche geuen him, ſhall
make a great accompt thereof, and muche

ſhall be of him required: And at that daye
percaſe he ſhall recken him ſelfe moſte fortunate
and happie, that had leaſte in this
worlde, and leaſt to doo. And he peraduenture
moſte infortunate, that hath moſte to
doo in this worlde, vnleſſe he order it well,
vnleſſe he order it righteouſly, iuſtly, and
ordinately.
            Nowe, good Reader, thou haſte hearde,
that Chriſte ſayeth: Bonus paſtor animam
ſuam dat pro ouibus ſuis, And to put thée
out of doubt who is this good ſhepherde, he
ſayeth: Ego ſum paſtor bonus, & cognoſco
oues meas, & cognoſcunt me meae. I am the
good ſhepherde, which will geue my lyfe
for my ſhéepe, by my death to purchaſe thē
lyfe, that as I will riſe, and dye no more,
ſo ſhall they after their bodily death ariſe
at the laſt day, neuer to dye any more, but
to liue alwayes with my father and me. I
knowe my ſhéepe, not all onely that they
be mine, but I ſo knowe them for mine,
that I wilbe their ſuccour in their tribulations,
I will ſtrengthen them in their
perſecutions, I will receaue them into my
ioye and glorie, I knowe them, and they
knowe me. This is then required of the
ſhéepe, that they knowe their ſhepherde.

Thrée properties muſt be in euery man or
woman that ſhall haue this worthy name
to be called a ſhéepe of Chriſte. The firſte
propertie is, that our Sauiour ſayeth, that
his ſhéepe doo know him. This knowledge
haue Chriſtes ſhéepe of him, that by his
godhead he is their father, by his manhood
he is their brother, and by his benefites he
is their louing lorde and maſter. They
knowe it is he, and none other, that hath
made their peace with God his father: Ipſe
enim eſt pax noſtra, for he is our peace (Ad
Epheſios ſecundo) he hath gotten vs forgeuenes
of our ſinnes, he hath deliuered
vs out of the bondage of the deuill, he hath
purchaſed heauen for vs, he is to vs Turris
fortitudinis, the Tower of our ſtrength.
The ſeconde propertie of Chriſtes ſhéepe
is, to heare their ſhepherdes voyce, and to
geue no eare to the voyce of any ſtraunger.
You will aſke me peraduenture, how
you ſhoulde heare him, which although he
be verily and bodily héere with vs in the
Sacrament of the Aultare, yet in his humane
forme he is aſcended vp into heauen,
and ſitteth on the right hande of his
father? Wherevnto I aunſwere, that we

muſt heare his voyce ſounding by the
mouth of his Churche, which is the verye
true ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſte, Quam ſanctificauit,
mundans eam lauacro aquae in verbo
vitae, whom he hath ſanctified and purified
with the bath of water in the worde of
life, vt exhiberet ipſe ſibi glorioſam eccleſiam
non habentem maculam aut rugam, to
make it a glorious Churche to himſelfe
without ſpot or wrinkle (Ad Epheſios. 5.)
If we heare the church, we heare Chriſte:
for as the holy Biſhop and Martyr Irenaeus
writeth in the fortie Chapter of his thirde
booke, Vbi eccleſia, ibi & ſpiritus, & vbi ſpiritus
dei, illic eccleſia & omnis gratia, ſpiritus
autem veritas, where the Churche is, there
is the ſpirite of God, and where the ſpirite
of God is, there is the Churche and all
grace, and the ſpirite is truth. Wherefore
as the ſame godly father writeth in ye forty
and thrée Chapiter of his fourth booke, we
be bounde to be obedient to the Prelates
of the Churche, his qui ſucceſsionem habent
ab Apoſtolis, to them that haue their
ſucceſſiō from the Apoſtles. Reliquos verò
(ſayth he) qui abſiſtunt a principali ſucceſsi-,

& quocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   loco colliguntur, ſuſpectos habere
quaſi haereticos oportet, As for all other
that go away from the principall ſucceſſion,
we ought to ſuſpect them as heretikes.
Theſe are Ireneus wordes in the
place nowe alleaged. And Chriſt ſayth him
ſelfe: Qui vos audit, me audit, He that heareth
you, heareth me. Wherfore, if we wil
heare Chriſt, as his father hath commaunded
vs, Ipſum audite, Heare him, Math. 17.
then muſt we heare the Churche. The
Churche is our moſte holy Mother, whom
we ought to haue in great reuerence, and
to commit our ſelues wholly vnto her, to
heare her, and, like obedient children, to do
what ſhe biddeth vs. What the Churche
holdeth in matters of religion, that muſt
we holde: what the Churche preſcribeth, it
is our duetie to folowe: what the Churche
forbiddeth, that are we bound, vnder paine
of damnation to auoyde in any wiſe. S.
Iohn in the fourth Chapter of his firſte Epiſtle
biddeth vs be ware, that we beléeue
not euery ſpirite, but to trye the ſpirites,
whether they be of God or not. Then, how
can they be of God, whiche go from the
Churche? S. Auguſtine in the expoſition
of this Epiſtle of S. Iohn, tractatu primo,
               
writeth thus: Qui eccleſiam relinquit, quomodo
eſt in Chriſto, qui in membris Chriſti
non eſt? Quomodo eſt in Chriſto, qui in
corpore Chriſti non eſt? He that leaueth
the Churche, howe is he in Chriſte, that is
not in the members of Chriſte? howe is he
in Chriſt, that is not in the body of Chriſt?
By the which S. Auguſtine affirmeth, that
the Churche, which is the ſpouſe of Chriſt,
is alſo the miſticall bodye of Chriſte, and
Chriſte is the heade of the Churche. As
many therefore, as be Chriſte his ſhéepe,
they heare their ſhepherdes voyce in the
Churche. They will not heare the voyce of
ſtraungers, as of Luther, Oecolampadius,
Zuinglius, Caluine, & like heretikes, which
for all their gaye wordes, and crying ſtill,
Chriſte and the Goſpell, maye haue euerye
one of them, theſe verſes of Perſius in his
fifte Satyre worthely ſpoken to him:
            
               Pelliculam veterem retines, & fronte politus
Aſtutam vapido ſeruas ſub pectore vulpem.
Thou kéepeſt ſtill thine olde hyde vppon
thée, and bearing a fayre face, thou wrappeſt
a wylye foxe vnder thy vaporous
breſt. Theſe be they, of whom S. Peter
ſpeaketh in the ſeconde Chapter of his ſecond
Epiſtle: Magiſtri mendaces, qui introducunt

ſectas perditionis, Lying maſters,
bringing in ſectes of perdition, and denying
the God that bought them. Howebeit,
ſithen it is ſo, as Paule ſayeth, There will
be alwayes rauening wolues,Act. 20. 
               non parcentes
gregi, not ſparing the flock, And among
our owne ſelues will men ariſe, ſpeaking
peruerſe thinges, And ſuche is our frayle
nature, that as the wittie Horace ſayeth:

                  Decipimur ſpecie recti,
               
            
            We be ſoone deceaued vnder the colour of
truth. It behoueth vs to folowe the counſel
of our head and principall maſter Ieſus
Chriſte, whiche teacheth vs an excellent
document of heauenly philoſophie, ſaying:
Attendite vobis à falſis Prophetis, Take yée
héede to your ſelues, and beware of falſe
Prophetes, which come vnto you, in veſtimentis
ouium, in ſhéepes cloathing, but inwardly
they are Lupi rapaces, Rauening
wolues: We muſt, I ſay, beware, that we
be not deluded, and vnder colour of Euangelicall
veritie, be made to receaue pernitious
and damnable hereſyes, as alas the
more pitie, hath miſerably chaunced to our
noble Realme of Englande, vnder colour
of bringing vs to truth, leading vs awaye
from the truth, to the vtter decaye of all

godlines, and ſetting vp of counterfaite religion.
The wéede hath nowe ouer growen
the corne, euill, hurtfull, and ſoulequelling
wéedes of hereſie haue ouergrowen, oppreſſed,
pulled downe to the grounde, and
vtterly choked the good corne of chriſten
religion, and all eccleſiaſticall conſtitutions.
All you therefore that haue bene ſeduced,
and taken wéedes for wholſome flowers,
beware leaſt with the ſtenche of ſuche
rotten wéedes, yée infecte your ſoule to euerlaſting
damnation. The infallible truth
is dayly opened vnto you, The falſhood is
mightily conuinced, as ſhall plainelye appeare
in the Diſcourſe héere folowing.
Stande no more in the defence of that,
which you may eaſily knowe and ſée with
your eyes, if ye will not be wilfullye and
obſtinately blinde, to be nothing but deceipt:
What doo I call it, deceipt? naye, I
cal it a moſt venimous poiſon to the ſoule,
yea, and an helliſhe draught of endleſſe
death. Playe not the parte of a mad man,
of whom Horace writeth in the ſeconde
booke of his Epiſtles, that he was angrye
with his frendes, for that they had cauſed
him to be healed of his phreneſie, and reſtored
to his wittes agayne: Be not angrye,

that you may (if you will) be brought
out of the fowle miſte, into the cléere ayre,
from darkenes to light, from an horrible
phreneſie to godly wiſedome. Folowe the
wholſome counſell of Saint Paule in the
fourth to the Epheſians, Vt non ſimus amplius
pueri, qui fluctuemus, & circumferamur
quouis vento doctrinae, per verſutiam
hominum, per aſtutiam qua nos adoriuntur,
vt imponant nobis, That we be no longer
children, and fléete too and fro, caried hither
and thither with euerye blaſt of doctrine,
by the wilines and craftines of men,
wherwith they ſet vpon vs to deceiue vs.
There haue béene a great manye ſuche
ſprongen vp in our Realme of late, which
haue taught vs wronge Leſſons: Emendemus
ergò in melius, Let vs amend therfore.
The thirde propertie is, that the ſhéepe doo
folowe their Shepherde: This propertie
is of ſo great importance, that without it
the other two cannot auayle. It is not ynough
to knowe Chriſte to be our refuge,
our helpe and ſuccoure: It is not ynoughe
with that alſo to heare Chriſte ſpeaking to
vs in his Churche, except we folow Chriſt
and his Churche, and ſhewe our ſelues
willingly to doo that which the Churche

commaundeth vs. We muſt faſt, when the
Churche commaundeth vs, and as it biddeth
vs: We muſt pray as the Churche inſtructeth
vs, We muſt doo thoſe good woorkes
that the Churche teacheth vs to doo. In
obeying the Churche, we obey God: if we
be diſobedient to the Churche, we diſobeye
God. For as Chriſoſtome ſayeth vpon the
firſte Epiſtle to the Corinthians, vt corpus
& caput vnus eſt homo, ita vnum eſt eccleſia
& Chriſtus, As the body and the head is
but one man, ſo is Chriſte and his Church
one thing. Doo therefore as the wiſe man
biddeth thée, Audi diſciplinam patris tui, &
ne dimittas legem matris tuae, Heare the
diſcipline of thy father, and forſake not
the lawe of thy mother: I meane, thy mother
the holye Churche, whom as manye
as forſake, they forſake God alſo. For as
holy Ciprian writeth de ſimplicate praelatorum:
Habere non poteſt deum patrem,
qui eccleſiam non habet matrem, He can
not haue God to be his father, that knoweth
not the Churche for his mother. Yée
may ſée here euidentlye, that this holye
man would haue vs to be obedient vnto,
and diligently to kéepe, the ordinaunces

of our fathers, & not to inſtitute euery day
newe faſhions, as men moſte vnconſtant,
and full of newe fangles. The Lacedemonians
are prayſed, that they ſuffered no
ſtraunge ware to be brought into their Citie,
whereby the Citizens might be effeminated
and corrupted in their maners,
and for the ſame cauſe they extoll greatlye
Licurgus, which made the ſame law. Now,
if the Lacedemonians were ſo ſerious obſeruers
of their olde lawes and cuſtomes,
what a ſhame ſhall this be to vs Chriſtian
men (which were not taught of Licurgus,
but of Chriſte himſelfe) dayly to alter and
chaunge, not content with thoſe rites and
Ceremonyes that were ordeyned of auncient
time out of memorie? Irenaeus teacheth
in his thirde booke againſt the hereſyes
of Valentine, and ſuche other: whoſe
wordes taken out of his fourth Chapter of
the ſayde booke, I will briefely rehearſe:
Si quae de aliqua modica quaeſtione diſceptatio
eſſet, nonnè oporteret in antiquiſsimas
recurrere eccleſias, in quibus Apoſtoli conuerſati
ſunt, & ab eis de praeſenti quaeſtione
ſumere quod certum & re liquidum eſt? If
any controuerſie ſhoulde be of any queſtion,
were it neuer ſo litle, muſt it not be

méete to haue our recourſe vnto the moſte
auncient Churches, in the which the Apoſtles
were conuerſant, and of them to receaue
the playne certaintie thereof? It foloweth,
Quid autem ſi ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Apoſtoli quidem
Scripturas reliquiſſent nobis, nonnè oportebat
ordinem ſequi traditionis, quam
tradiderunt his quibus committebant eccleſias?
But what if the Apoſtles left nothing
written of that matter, muſt we not folow
the tradition of them, to whoſe gouernaunce
they committed the Churches?
Here haue you the minde of Irenaeus, who
was néere vnto Chriſt his time: for as S.
Hierome teſtifyeth in an Epiſtle to one
Theodora, he was Diſciple to Papias, who
was S. Iohn the Euangeliſts ſcholler. He
woulde haue men to be taught of Chriſte,
of his Apoſtles and their ſucceſſours, and
not of euery one, which raſhelye and without
lawfull authoritie taketh vpon him to
be a teacher. Chriſten men ſhould be obedient
to chriſten ordinaunces, and folowe
that doctrine that is alowed by them that
are lawfully called, and haue the cenſure
of doctrine committed to them. Such were
the Apoſtles, called and put in authoritie
by Chriſte. Suche were they, to whom

theſe agayne gaue the charge ouer anye
faythfull congregation. Suche are all they
which haue ſo from time to time béene
lawfully called by them that haue power
to put others in authoritie, and ſo ſuccéeded
in due order, els, Quomodò praedicabūt
niſi mittantur, Howe ſhall they preache,
except they be ſent, as it is written in the
tenth to the Romanes, and ſent by them
which haue authoritie to ſende. Did not
S. Paule for that purpoſe leaue Titus in
Crete? Did he not alſo geue Timothie
charge to laye handes to quickelye on no
man? To theſe that be thus lawfullye ordeyned
and called to haue cure and charge
of ſoules, ye are bounde to geue an eare: by
theſe ye muſt be ruled in matters of religion,
as obedient children to their ſpiriritual
fathers. And this biddeth S. Hierome, writing
to Nepotian: Eſto ſubiectus pontifici
tuo, & quaſi animae parentem ſuſpice, Be
ſubiect to thy Biſhop, & reuerence him as
thy ſoules father. The ſame leſſon teacheth
Chriſoſtome in an Homilye, De recipiendo
Seueriano, where he beginneth thus: Sicuti
capiti corpus cohaerere neceſſarium eſt, ita
eccleſiam ſacerdoti, & principi populum,
As it is of neceſſitie, that the body cleaue

to the head, ſo it is likewiſe of neceſſitie,
that the congregation cleaue to their
Prieſt and ſpirituall ruler, and the people
to their prince. And within a fewe wordes
after he alleageth for the confirmation of
this matter the Apoſtle writing thus to
the Hebrewes, in the thirtenth Chapter:
Obedite praepoſitis veſtris & obtemperate
eis, quia ipſi peruigilant pro vobis, quaſi pro
animabus veſtris rationem reddituri, Obeye
them that haue the ouerſight of you, and
doo as they would haue you, for they watch
for your ſakes, as they which ſhall geue
accoumptes for your ſoules. This obedience
doth our Sauiour require of all men,
ſaying: Qui vos audit, me audit, He that
heareth you, heareth me. This obedience
to Chriſtes Churche hath continued
throughout all Chriſtendome time out
of minde. And if the authoritie of the
learned and holye fathers ought to beare
ſwaye and preuayle, as of right it ought
to doo in déede. Arrogantium enim
hominum eſt, maiorum ſuorum authoritatem
aſpernari, & ſe illis ingenio vel ſapientia
anteponere: For it is the maner and
propertie of proude arrogant perſons to
contemne the authoritie of their elders,

and to preferre themſelues before themin
wit or learning. If the conſent of all
chriſten Regions ſhould be regarded, probabilia
(ſayth Ariſtotle in the firſt Chapter
of the firſte booke of his Topikes) quae videntur
omnibus vel plurimis, Thoſe things
are probable, which all men, or at the leaſt,
the moſt part doo iudge to be ſo. If the long
continuaunce of time muſt be of importance,
In his enim (as witneſſeth S. Hilarie
vpon the hundred and eyghtéene pſalme)
tanquàm in coelo verbum dei permanet, in
quibus hoc verbum non offenditur, In thē
doth the word of God abide, among whom
that worde is not offended. If theſe thrée,
I ſaye, The authoritie of the learned Fathers,
The common conſent of chriſtian
Regions, The long continuaunce of time,
may be a ſufficient teſtimonie for the veritie,
we haue the true Goſpell, and ye true
ſenſe of it: Our religion is the very chriſtian
religion, The order of Ceremonyes
that the Catholike Churche doth vſe, is the
right order, Our faſting and praying is according
to the Scriptures, Our Church is
the true and lawfull ſpouſe of Chriſt, from
the which as many as ſeperate them ſelues,
they are no ſhéepe of Chriſtes folde,

they are reprobate perſons, they are the
children of Beliall, they are ympes of hell.
You know what order your fathers kept,
howe they liued, and howe they beléeued:
You are not ignoraunt, howe you haue
béene brought vp, inſtructed and trained in
the lawes of Chriſte. Whoſoeuer goeth about
to infringe or breake any part of that
godly order, of that auncient cuſtome and
laudable vſage, he is an heretike, an enemye
to God, a murtherer to mannes ſoule,
a diſturber of the common wealth, a ſubuerter
of all honeſt diſcipline, and therfore
moſte vnwoorthy to liue among men.
            I haue hearde, read, and ſéene manye
thinges, yet can I not reade, heare, or ſée
any worlde more contaminate and proue
to all kinde of vices then this our age is.
And howbeit afore our dayes haue béene
in all times and ages men and women verye
vitious and monſtrous in their liuing,
yet then vertue was vertue, and vice was
vice: But nowe in our corrupt time, we
haue loſt the true names and vſe of all
thinges, and vertue with vs is taken for
vice, and contrarily, vice is coumpted for
vertue. They that be ſtudious of modeſtie,
obſeruers of temperancie, and louers of

ſobrietie, they be nowe a dayes called
Pinchepennyes, and ſuche that hunger
droppeth out of their noſes. If any be vertuous,
& folowers of the Catholike, which
is ye true religion, they be called Phariſeys
& Papiſts: The diſcrete mā, he is called an
hipocrite, & the ſmall talker a foole and an
ignorant perſon. On the other ſide, they
that leade their liues in all kinde of ryote,
they be called hanſome men, men of
the right making, and ſuche as can tell
howe to kéepe honeſt mennes companye.
Agayne, the ſtatelyer that one goeth, the
higher that he looketh, and the ſtouter and
malapertlier that he ſpeaketh, the more is
he prayſed among ye worldlings for a wiſe
man, who will not ſuffer himſelfe to be ouertroden
and made a laughing ſtocke to
euery Raſcall. With ſuch vayne glorious
prayſes be ſuche proude Thraſoes extolled
and magnifyed of the more parte, and no
ſmall number are geuen to flatterie, and
enhauſing of Clawbacks, that neuer could
that ſaying of Terence be better verifyed
then it is nowe: Obſequium amicos, veritas
odium parit, To holde vp mennes yea and
their naye, in holding with the hare, and
running with the hounde, getteth a man

frendes, but he that will lay flattery aſide,
and tell the playne truth, ſhall get nothing
but hatred. Thus in theſe dayes vice is extolled,
and vertue contemned: Ill rule is
made of, and good rule neglected.
            O heart diſſimuled, which vnder coloure
to be iuſt and true, canſt cloke vnto vs hipocriſie
for deuotion, ambition for gentlenes,
couetouſnes for competencie, crueltie
for zeale, bolde babling without learning
for eloquence, floriſhing, Rhetorike without
fruite or reaſon, follye for grauitie, wilines
without wit, and fleſhly wanton libertie,
for libertie of the Goſpell. This is
nothing els but the deuils drifte, alway couering
his poyſon vnder ſome taſte of ſugar:
Fallit enim vitium ſpecie virtutis & vmbra:
For the ſumme and ende of all their
falſe doctrine, is nothing els but malice
with murther, to the ouerthrowe of Chriſtes
religion, and the true miniſters thereof.
This is their ſhéepes clothing, for an
vnhappie reformation: Nam impia ſub dulci
melle venena latent, Vnder ſwéete honye
is deadly venome hid. O blinde ignorance,
and ignorant blindnes, O cruell & damnable
miſchiefe comming frō ye bottomles pit

of hell. O intolerable furiouſnes and hereſie
more deteſtable then it may any longer
be ſuffered: The great diſpleaſure, the extreme
vengeaunce, the cruell plagues of
God hange ouer our heades, if this horrible
hereſie be not ſhortly remoued from
mens mindes. O good God, howe long wilt
thou ſuffer this intolerable abhomination?
It ſhameth me, it abhorreth me to thinke,
that theſe ſhameleſſe beaſtes are not aſhamed
to ſpeake of the moſte belſſed Sacramentes
of Chriſtes Churche: who is able
to expreſſe eyther by tonge or penne their
wicked abhomination? whye haue we a
pleaſure to forſake the true vnderſtanding
of Gods moſte ſacred worde, and become
folowers and bondſlaues of the deuils coū
               terfeite▪
and deceiptfull expoſitions, and
carnall reaſons ſet out by his miniſters,
who in religion are ſo deuided, that nowe
they dreame one thing, and now another:
this day they like, to morowe they miſlike,
and one is againſt another of them, euen
in the higheſt miſterie of Chriſte his religion.
And no meruaile, for the deuill is
their chiefe head, whom they ſerue, and he
is full of lyes, variaunce, diuiſion, and diſcorde:
and vnder him their Schoolemaſters

were Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Bucer, Melancthon, and the Archeheretike
Caluine, whoſe hereſies are confuted
in the Diſcourſe hereafter enſuing.
Theſe with the reſt of that rable did neuer
agrée one with another, in their doinges
there is no vnitie, no certaintie at all: and
therfore ſuch maſters, ſuch ſcollers come of
them. And this diuiſion, this vnconſtancie
of doctrine was a manifeſt tokē, that they
were not the children of our true mother
the catholike Churche, nor miniſters of
of Chriſte, but the children of the deuill,
and miniſters of Antichriſte, yea, very Antichriſtes.
For whoſoeuer (ſayth S. Auguſtine)
is gone from the vnitie of the Catholike
Churche, he is become an Antichriſte.
Theſe Antichriſtes haue borne a
great ſtroke nowe too longe time in our
Realm of England, in whō is no conſtancie,
no ſtedfaſtnes of religion and doctrine:
Theſe are they that haue damnably deceued
you, & haue with their damnable preachinges
intiſed you from Churche to
Churche, from an heauenly Churche, to a
malignant Church: from a louing mother,
to a flattering harlot: from the condition
of grace, to the ſtate of perdition: from

truth to falſhood, from faythfull beléeuing
to carnall reaſoning, from ſauing Chriſte
to deceauing Antichriſte. But (good Reader)
beware, be not deceaued, and be not aſhamed
to ariſe, that haſte ſo ſhamefullye
fallen, be not aſhamed to come home to
your mother the Churche, ſith ſhe is not aſhamed
to receaue you: Let not follye loſe
the thing that grace hath ſo preciouſly offered
& purchaſed: Let not wilfulnes and
blindnes put out ſo great light as is nowe
ſhewed vnto thée, but embrace moſte humbly
the doctrine of our Mother the Catholike
Church, ſo ſhall you ſit in the lappe of
ſo tender a mother, which will
cheriſh you into life euerlaſting.
Chooſe ye beſt,
whiles choyſe
lyeth in
lot.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            A notable diſcourſe, plainly
and truely diſcuſſing, who be
the right miniſters of the
Catholique Churche.
            
               ¶The firſte Chapter
               
                  CAluin your Patriarch doth laie to
our charge a great and an outragious
boldnes, ſaying (according to
his opinion) that we haue introduced
or taken in hande the miniſterie
of Ieſus Chriſte, without being called
to it by him that did inſtitute Aaron
in the ſaide eſtate. And becauſe
that he himſelfe can better then I expreſſe
his complaint or accuſation, I
thinke it beſte to ſet foorth his owne
writinges, which, according to his
diſciples opinions, are of great force
and vertue.In his booke of Inſti. ca. 18. Art. 58. His wordes, as you may
reade, are theſe. Seing that the Papiſtes
heare S. Paule ſaye, that no perſon
ought to take vpon him, or vſurpe
the name and the honoure of Prieſthoode,
                  Heb. 5.
                  
                  but he that is called to it as
Aaron was. And that Ieſus Chriſte
tooke it not vpon him ſelfe, but did obeye
the vocation of his father, either
they ought to ſhewe, that God
is the Author and inſtitutour of their
prieſthood, or els they muſt confeſſe,
that they are not called of God, ſeing
that of their owne boldenes they haue
taken it in hande.
               
               Theſe are Caluins wordes, by the
which the reader maye gather, that
Caluin doeth enioyne vs to render
him an accoumpt of oure vocation.
And although that it be ſo, that by
the Ciuill lawe one ought to trye
the righte of the poſſeſſion,L. Si quis ad ſe ad leg. lul. de nil. publ. &c before
he come to demaunde it, and the
ſpoyle (as we are to him and his felowes,
as touching oure Temples
and Reuennues in manye places)
ought to be reſtored agayne before
the ſute proceede: Yet, releaſſing
this, that the lawe doeth alowe vs,

we are content to aunſwere to his
demaund: adding this requeſt therto
that both you that are his diſciples,
and he, doo make readie your papers
to aunſwere vs the like as touching
yours. But before I proceede in mine
aunſwere (vnder correction of a
man that thinkes to haue ſuche good
eyes) me ſeemeth, that his argument
is but very ſimple: to ſai, that of
we cannot ſhewe, that God is the
Authour of our Prieſthood, that we
ſhould be conſtrained to confeſſe, that
it is not of God, ſeeing that without
being called, we take it vpon vs. For,
what reaſon is there, I praye you,
in this? for although it were ſo, that
of our owne priuate power and authoritie,
without being called, wee
ſhoulde take it vppon vs, it ſhoulde
not folowe by that, that it is not of
God. For by that reaſon one mighte
ſaye, that GOD was not the

authour of the prieſthood of Aaron,
ſeing that Dathan,
                  Num. 16. 
                  Abyron, and Ozias
tooke it vpon thē of their owne
boldenes:2. Paral. 26 the which is not true. And
as touching this, that he ſaieth, that
our order of prieſthood is not of God,
we will proue that falſe in ſome other
place, but at this time we muſt treat
of our vocation, to aunſwere him &
his complices, howe and by what
vertue we exerciſe our miniſterie.
We are called to this eſtate, according
to the ordinarie way: that is to
ſaye, by the right ſucceſſion of Biſſhops
and Paſtors, and by the continuance
of one Catholique faith, deriued
from the Apoſtles to our dayes,
without the interruption of it vniuerſallye:
for in diuers places of the
worlde it hath bene euer cleere and
certaine, manifeſtlye ſhining like the
light ſet on the table,Math. 5. to geue light to
all thoſe of the houſe, and not vnder
the buſſhell, to be ſhadowed with

darknes.Ephe. 4. S. Paule, after that he had
recited by order the Eccleſiaſticall
Hierarchie, I meane, of the Apoſtles,
Prophetes and Euangeliſts, he doth
declare at the laſt the cauſe why they
were inſtituted, being for the edification
of the miſticall body of Chriſte,
the which is the Catholique Church,
vntill (ſaith he) that in the vnitie of
faith we go to meete him. He taketh
his ſimilitude of many that come frō
diuerſe wayes, and meete all in one
waye. And thus he meanes, that the
ſpirituall edification of the Churche,
ordeined of Biſhops, Paſtours and
Doctours, ſhall endure, vntill that
the Goſpell be preached through all
nations. By the effecte of the whiche
Goſpell, both Frenche, Spaniſh, Engliſh,
Greeke, Perſian, Arabian, Latines,
and Barbares, with manye other
nations which were to tedious
to name, haue met together, hauing
of great antiquitie, all one kinde of

Catholike faith by the Apoſtles and
their ſucceſſors for euer. As the ſonne
of God, before he ſuffered, did attaine
and arriue to the perfection of his
age: euen ſo, his miſticall body of the
Churche ſhall continue in this world,
vntill it be perfect in his members,
and that the number of the choſen be
accompliſhed. And euē as a materiall
building cannot be perfectly atchieued
without continuance of workemen
and Maſons: euen ſo the ſpirituall
building of the Churche cannot
be atchieued without the ſucceſſion
of Biſhops and Paſtors, preaching,
or cauſing the worde of God to be
preached, which is the verye ſpiritual
building, the which hath bene euer
common and viſible in the Churche,
according to the prophecie of Eſaye.
Sap. 61. who meaning to declare the
care that God taketh as touching
the preſeruation of his Churche, he
did ſaye, as it were repreſenting the

ſtate of Hieruſalem. I haue eſtabliſhed
and ordeined watchemen vpon
the walles, the whiche ſhall neuer
holde their peace, neither daye nor
night. Theſe watchemen are thoſe,
that haue announced to vs our ſaluation:
They are the trompettes of
Ieſus Chriſte, which neuer haue left
their ſounding in the true Churche of
God, from the Apoſtles time vnto
this preſent daye.
            
            
               ¶The .2. Chapter.
               SAint Paule foloweth this diſcourſe
in the fourth Chapiter vnto the Epheſians,
where as he doeth declare
vnto vs the fruit that doth procede of
this ſucceſſion of Paſtors, and of the
perſeuerance of the reaſonable ſheepe
in one kinde of ſpirituall doctrine,
called the vnitie of fayth. For he ſayeth,
that God eſtabliſhed this order
to that ende, that we ſhoulde

not be like light childrē, caried away
with euerye blaſt of falſe doctrine,
through the ſubtilitie of men, & their
craftie wordes, full of deceipte. In
theſe wordes you doo ſee, howe the
Apoſtle doeth declare vnto vs the
counſaile and the intention of the holye
Ghoſte: I meane, that we ſhould
be conſtant in our fayth, the which is
grounded vpon the worde of God, &
interpreted and declared vnto vs by
the Doctours and Paſtors, that ſucceſſiuely
haue continued in one kinde
of faith and Catholike religion, from
the firſte time that it was preached,
without turning with euery winde,
but rather that we ought to ſtande
firme and ſtable. Here is to be noted,
that when the Apoſtle doth tell, how
he hath lefte vs paſtors and doctors,
to warne vs of the ſubtilitie of falſe
teachers, he doth vſe a certain greeke
worde very apte for this purpoſe, the
which hath in Engliſhe the ſignification,

of the playing or cogging at diſe.
And euen as he that hath no great
ſkill, if he playe with ſuche a one, he
will ſoone looſe his money, becauſe
the other can caſt what he wil: Euen
ſo, if a ſimple man, being vnlearned,
doo chaunce to talke with ſuch a one
as can cog, or (to ſpeake plainely) falſly
interprete the Scriptures, he may
ſoone be deceaued: as we ſee it dayly
happen to many, that playe awaye
and put in hazarde the reſt of al their
ſpirituall inheritaunce, I meane, the
faith, which hath beene lefte to them
by their fathers, from age to age,
ſince Chriſtes time. Thus haue the
Arrians, the Neſtorians, and diuers
other heretikes deceiued many a mā,
as I will ſhewe more at large hereafter.
            
            
               The .3. Chapter.
               THe place that I haue quoted of
the Apoſtle doth ſhew, howe dangerous

a thinge it is to fall into the
handes of ſuch Coggers of the ſcriptures,
and likewiſe howe certaine a
thinge it is, to folowe the interpretation
of the auncient Doctours, ſtanding
to that, that euer the Catholike
Churche hath taught, and not to
turne at euery blaſt. Vpon this matter
one Vincentius Lyrinenſis, who
floriſhed aboue a thouſande yeres agone,Lib. con. haer.
he ſaith thus: If anye man perchaunce
demaunde, ſaying: Since
that the rules of the Scripture are
certaine and ſufficient of them ſelues:
And what neede haue we then of the
authoritie of the Churche? He aunſwereth:
For that (ſayeth he) that the
ſecretes and miſteries of the holye
Scriptures are ſuch, that euery man
doeth not vnderſtande them, and interprete
them after one ſorte, but that
of one place this man and that man
ſhall ſeeme to mainteyne their opinions,
being cleane contrary one to

another, ſo that, looke howe manye
men, ſo many interpretations: For,
one way it is interpreted by Neſtorius,
another waye by Arrius, another
way by Sabellius, and ſo forth, according
to diuers hereſies that haue riſen
from time to time. And therefore
it is neceſſarye for the knowledge of
the trueth, among ſo manye errours,
to drawe the right line of the Propheticall
and Apoſtolicall interpretation,
according to the rule and true
ſenſe of the Catholike Churche.
               This is the learned opinion of this
auncient father Vincentius Lyrinenſis.
               
            
            
               ¶The .4. Chapter.
               WHoſe diſcourſe doeth make me
remember the Complaynt that
the Soule doeth make vnto her
Spouſe IESVS CHRISTE,
                  
being both repreſented,Canti. 1. by Salomō,
and his legitimate ſpouſe. I praye
thee (ſaith ſhe) O my dere frende, tell
me in what place thou doeſt lye and
reſt at noone dayes, for I woulde be
very glad and deſirous to folowe the
flockes of thy felowes? The which is
as much to ſay, as if ſhe meant thus:
I ſee many ſheperdes in theſe mountains,
which haue great aboundance
of ſheepe, I ſee thoſe of the Romane
Church, I ſee Donatiſtes, I ſee Nouatians,
or, to ſpeake of our time, I
ſee one flocke folowe Luther, another
flocke folowe Zuinglius, another folow
Caluin, another the Anabaptiſts,
another the Sacramentaries, and ſo
forth diuers others, of whom when
I demaunde particulerly, Whoſe is
this flocke? they doo al aunſwer me,
It is of Chriſt, and euery one ſaieth,
this is the Catholike Churche, euery
one doeth ſaye, that he is his felowe,
that is to ſaye, as touching the guyding

of his flock. Now it is not poſſible,
that they doo all teache the truth,
conſidering howe they vary amonge
them ſelues: therfore I do deſire thee
to tell me, where thou doeſt reſt thy
ſelfe at noone dayes? that is as much
to ſaye, teache me, which is the true
Catholike Churche, which doth celebrate
the true miſterie of the Croſſe,
which is the place, where thou waſt
nayled at noone dayes, being nayled
both handes and feete? Heare nowe
the aunſwer of Ieſus Chriſte: If
thou doeſt not know the place where
I reſt, O moſte beautifull among all
women, folowe thou the pathe that
thy flocke hath made before thee, ſetting
thy tabernacle or thy lodge, hard
by the tabernacle of thy Shepherds.
If we well note, and vnderſtande
this aunſwere, it will learne vs that,
that ſhal ſuffiſe to kepe vs frō rūning
euer aſtray. The ſenſe is this: O thou
Chriſtian, which art troubled in thy

conſcience, not knowing, becauſe of
ſo many hereſyes, which waye thou
ſhalt goe, or howe thou ſhalt decerne
the true religion from other falſe doctrine,
take my counſaile, the which
is, to folowe ſteppe by ſteppe the
flocke that went before thee. If that
a thouſande, or two thouſand ſheepe
runne ouer a plaine, thoſe that come
afterwarde, doo not they know well
the path that is made before them?
doo not they diſcerne the waye that
the firſte went? Yes ſurely, although
there be no Sheperd to guide them.
And if thou doeſt aunſwere, that this
doth not ſuffiſe, for I doo ſee diuers
pathes, I ſee the pathe of the Caluiniſtes,
the path of the Lutherans, and
the pathe of thoſe of the Romane
Churche: but yet doo not I knowe
which flocke I ſhould choſe. To this
I anſwere thus:Canti. 1. Set thy Tabernacle
by the Tabernacle of the Shepherdes,
and of thy Paſtors, I mean,

that I woulde haue thee to leane
to that flocke, that can leade thee
from age to age, and from yere to
yere, vnto the Croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt,
on the which he was nailed at noone
dayes: and there it is where thou
oughteſt to quiet thy ſelfe and thy
conſcience. Then to beginne: If thou
doeſt aſke the Caluiniſtes, Where is
the true fayth (the which, as they
ſaye, doeth conſiſte in the true preaching
of the worde of the Lorde,
and in the adminiſtration of the
Sacramentes, according to the inſtitution
of Ieſus Chriſte) they will
aunſwere: It is at Geneua, the Lutherans
will aunſwere, At Wittemberge,
and the Anabaptiſtes will aunſwere
at Monaſterium: The Vbiquitaries,
they will aunſwere, At Tubinge:
and the Trinitaries, At Petricone:
and ſo conſequently of the reſt.
And then purſue, and aſke farther,
where it was twentye yeares

agone? They will ſay, in the ſaide Cities:
but if thou come to demaunde of
them, wher it was a hundred or two
hundred yeres agone, if they are aſhamed
anye thing at all to lye, they
will not aunſwere at all, for there is
none of them, that can deny, but that
Luther, who beganne to preache his
newe Goſpell the yere. 1517. was the
firſte beginner of all theſe troubles, &
the father of all thoſe that teache this
reformed religion. Then is it farre frō
that place, where thy frend was nailed
at middaie, or where he was crucifyed
aboue. 1500. yeres agone, before
the newe Churche was dreampt
of. And therefore thou maieſt eaſelye
perceaue, that this flock cannot leade
thee to the place that thou doeſt deſire:
and conſequently, that is not the
flocke that we ſhoulde folowe. Then
let vs com vnto the Romane Church,
& demaund, where was this flock an
hundred yeres agone? They wil aunſwere

thee, In Fraunce, Spaine, Englande,
Germanie, and ſo ouer all
Chriſtendom. And if thou aſke, where
it was. 500. yeres agone, they will
ſay, In the ſaide places. And a thouſande
yeres agone likewiſe: and likewiſe,
a thouſande and fiue hundred
yeres agone. This flocke then will
not leaue thee by the waye, as the others
doo, but it will leade thee vnto
the very time of the death and paſſion
of Chriſte, by continuaunce of one
doctrine, and by ſucceſſion of paſtors,
which Salomon doth call the tabernacle
of the Shepherdes: And therefore
this is the place where thou muſt
ſeeke thy Tabernacle, and quiet thy
conſcience to the ende, that thou be
not a loſt ſheepe, and that thou be not
readie to turne at euery blaſt of newe
doctrine, that our newe Coggers of
the Scriptures doo ſet forth, to deceaue
the ſimple ſheepe.
            
            
               
               ¶The .5. Chapter.
               THe like vnto this is confirmed
by Vincentius Lyrinenſis (of
whom we haue ſpoken before)
for he ſaith in the booke aboue named
that that perſon ought to be eſtemed
a true Catholike, that hath nothing
in greater commendation then ye true
religion of the Catholike faith: yea, although
it were the wiſeſt man in the
world, and the greateſt Philoſopher,
& the faireſt ſpeaker that euer was,
if he came to ſpeake againſt the olde
doctrine that hath bene taught vs of
our forefathers, time out of mind, we
ought (ſaith he) to diſdaine that learned
Clarke with all his philoſophie &
cunning, and to hold our ſelues to the
auncient opinion of the Churche, the
which hath continued vntill this preſent
day. And if that nowe one ſhould
bring a newe doctrine, that was not
hearde of before, contrary vnto that,

that hath euer ben taught in ye Churche,
ſay, yt it doth not apperteine vnto
the ſtate of the Catholike faith, & that
it is no religion, but a temptatiō. And
therfore, if we wilbe ſaued, we ought
to liue and dye in that faith that hath
continued by ſucceſſion of Paſtours,
euen from Chriſtes time vnto theſe
dayes.Lib. 4. contra haereſ. cap. 65. 
                  S. Irenaeus a very famous writer,
in his fourth booke againſt hereſies,
the. 65. Chapter, who was within
a fewe yeres of the Apoſtles, Archbiſhop
of Lions, writeth the veri like,
ſaying that the true faith and the true
knowledge of God, is the doctrine of
the Apoſtles, and the auncient eſtate
of the Church throughout the world,
according to the ſucceſſion of thoſe
Biſhops, vnto whom only the Apoſtles
committed the cuſtodye of the
Churche throughout the worlde,
the which (ſayeth he) is come to vs.
This ſayde Irenaeus doeth write
in his thyrde booke, and ſeconde

Chapiter, that he and his felowes did
withſtande the Valentinians and the
Marcioniſtes, which were great heretikes,
by the traditions of the Apoſtles,
that is to ſaye, the doctrine not
written, but receued from age to age
of the Apoſtles, and ſo continued till
their time. He ſaith likewiſe: vnto the
Traditions which are of the Apoſtles,
and that by ſucceſſion of paſtors
haue bene vſed in the Churche, we do
perſuade & prouoke thoſe that ſpeake
againſt Traditions. He writes as
much more in the thirde Chapter of
the ſaide booke: Foraſmuch (ſayth he)
as it were to tedious to ſet forth in
one booke the Succeſſours of all the
Churches, and to tell them one by
one, we doo ouerthrowe thoſe, that
for vayne glorie doo ſeeke to gather
diſciples together, teaching them contrary
to that that doth apperteyn vnto
the Traditions of the Apoſtles, the
which we doo ſhewe to them by the

ſaide Traditions, and by the faith
that hath bene taught and is come to
vs by ſucceſſion of the Biſhops of the
great and auncient Church of Rome,
the which was founded by the two
glorious Martyrs and Apoſtles, S.
Peter and S. Paule. Theſe are his
wordes in his thirde booke aduerſus
haereſes, the fyfth Chapter. And at the
beginning of the ſaide Chapter he
ſaith thus: All thoſe that will vnderſtand
the truth, may preſently regard
the traditions of the Apoſtles, which
are manifeſt throughout the world,
and we cannot coumpt the number
of thoſe that haue bene inſtituted and
ordeyned Biſhops in the Churche, &
their Succeſſoures till our dayes,
which haue neither knowen nor taughte
anye thing like vnto the fables
and tales that theſe doo preache vnto
vs. &c. Not without cauſe wee
may nowe a dayes ſay the like of the
Lutherans, Caluiniſtes, & other ſectes

of our time. After this he doeth ſet
forth all the Popes of Rome, from S.
Peter vnto Eleutherius, which was
Pope in his time. And he did affirme,
that that number did ſuffiſe to proue,
that the doctrine of Marcian and Valentinian
was falſe and very hurtfull,
becauſe that it was vnknowen, or at
the leaſt not receaued or approued by
the Churche, being vnder the gouernaunce
of any of thoſe Popes. Then
with greater reaſon ought preſcriptiō
to take place againſt a new doctrine,
which hath beene vnknowen this
1500. yeres, or at the leaſt, if any bodie
ſought to publiſhe it, he was condemned
as a falſe pernitious heretike
            
            
               ¶The .6. Chapter.
               
                  S. Auguſtine in his Epiſtle. 365. about
the like matter, doeth ſet forth
all the Popes by order, which haue
bene from S. Peters time vntil Anaſtaſius,
which was pope in his time, and

by his continuall ſucceſſion he doeth
proue, that the doctrine of ye 
                  Donatiſts
is heretical, becauſe that none of thoſe
popes which he did recite, nor no part
of the Churche did receaue it. I pray
you, maye not we ſaye the like by
the Caluiniſtes and other heretikes.
The ſaide S. Auguſtine in the Epiſtle
that he doth call Epiſtola fundamenti.
Cap. 4. doeth write the reaſons that
did keepe him vnder the obedience of
the Catholike Romane Church. And
amonge other, he doeth alleage the
common conſent of all nations, and
the continuall ſucceſſion of Biſhops.
And in his booke which he made againſt
the aduerſarie of the olde and
newe lawe, he doeth name the ſucceſſion
of the biſhops, as moſt certain to
anſwer to that that we ſayd before of
S. Paul:
                  Ephe. 1. I mean, yt he would not haue
vs to be wauering & doubtfull in our
doctrin, but yt we ſhould be firm & ſtable,
ye which ſtablenes is obteined by

the knowledge and intelligence of
the Scriptures, according to the traditions
of the Churche, and the ſucceſſion
of the Apoſtles and Biſhops.
The Churche (ſaieth S. Auguſtine)
frō the Apoſtles time hath continued
through the certaine ſucceſſion of the
Biſhops, vntill our dayes.
            
            
               ¶The .7. Chapter.
               YOu doo ſtudie as muche as you
canne, to reiect our ſucceſſion, and
not without cauſe, knowing that
this onely doeth ſuffiſe to ouerthrowe
all the hereſies of thoſe new reformed
Goſpellers. Caluin, as the moſte apparant,
doth ſeeke to proue that our
reaſon is of no force, becauſe that the
Greekes haue had euer ſucceſſion of
Paſtours, and yet we doo not holde
them as Catholikes. But if the Reader
doo well note that, that we haue
alreadie ſayde, he ſhall finde the aunſwere
vnto this obiection, I meane,
becauſe that the Greekes haue not

had ſucceſſion and continuaunce of
doctrine, called vnitie of fayth by the
Apoſtles, the which ought euer to
be ioyned to the continuaunce of
the Paſtors, to ſhew the true recogniſaunce
of the Catholike religion.
There is none that doo ſtudy & reade
of thoſe matters, but that doo know
the vnconſtant faith of the Greekes,
as touching the proceeding of the holye
ghoſte: the which errour they had
abiured at the laſt Councell of Florence,
and yet notwithſtanding they
did turne to it againe, beſides diuers
other light thinges, to ſpeake moderatelye,
which are not approued by
their auncient fathers, S. Iohn Chriſoſtome,
S. Cirill, S. Baſil, and Athanaſius,
nor yet by our aduerſaries at this
preſent time. The which errours I
haue no neede to ſet foorth in this
booke: for my intent is but to ſpeake
of that, that prickes vs at hande, becauſe
of ill neighborhood. Some doo

alleage vnto vs the negligence of our
paſtors, and their ill liues, for ye which
cauſe they ſay, that the mētioned ſucceſſion
cannot take place. But this
argument is of no force: For althogh
that the careleſſe liues of ſome Biſſhops
and eccleſiaſticall perſons haue
bene ſo great and ſo hurtfull vnto the
blud of our Sauior Chriſt (I mean,
to the ſoules bought with it) yet notwithſtanding
that, the Churche hath
not loſt the ſucceſſion & continuaunce
of one doctrine, as touching the adminiſtration
of the Sacramentes by
thoſe that were deputed by the Biſſhops.
If one ſhould ſee a Prelate doing
nothing, and his lieftenant doing
all, which of thoſe two woulde you
take to be Biſhop? they haue both deuided
their charges: the one receueth
the profite, the other takes all the
payne. If they be both content, what
loſſe doo you feele? he that hath anye
intereſt, let him valewe the damage.

And although that the negligence of
the Biſhop be not excuſable before
God with the diligence of the deputie,
nor his conſcience cleere, yet this
ought to ſuffiſe, that though his faultes
be through negligence, or through
euil liuing, yet that ought not to perturbe
the aſſurance of our doctrin, the
which wee haue taught vs by the
word of God, interpreted by the true
doctours, that haue bene before vs, agreing
in vnitie of faith, as I haue
alredie ſaid: For neither the naughtines
of Achas, Num. 1. nor of Ioram,
nor of diuers other great ſinners,
which are inrolled in the booke of the
generation of Ieſus Chriſte, were
not able to withſtande the fulfilling
of the promiſe of God made to
Abraham, that is to ſai, that he would
be borne of this line: Euen ſo, the ill
liues and conuerſatiō of diuers wicked
Popes, that haue folowed after
Saint Peter, haue neuer beene

able to moue Chriſte to breake his
promiſe, that is to ſaye, that the fayth
of his Churche ſhoulde neuer fayle,
Math. 16. and that the gates of hell,
(that is to ſaye) of infidelitie, which
are the portes of damnation, ſhould
neuer preuaile againſt it. Eſa. 58. Our
aduerſaries therefore, that take ſuche
great paines to ſet forth in golden legends
the liues of the wicked popes
that haue beene ſince S. Peters time,
thinking thereby to ouerthrowe the
ſucceſſion of the Catholike eccleſiaſticall
fayth, doo no leſſe offende God,
then if they ſhould go about to proue
the promiſe of God made to the Patriarches
to be vaine, becauſe of the
euill liues of their ſucceſſours. Therefore
thoſe that doo reproche vnto vs
now, that the popes of our dayes are
not altogether ſo holy as S. Peter, we
do cōfeſſe it. But they cannot deny, or
they wil cōfeſſe vnto vs, that ye aboue
named euil kings, Achaz, Ioram, Manaſſes,

Amon, Iechonias, and others
did leade no ſuche holy liues, as Abraham,
Iſaac, Iacob, or Dauid: and yet
notwithſtanding thoſe euill kinges
haue beene ſet forth in the generation
of our Sauiour, as the Fathers of
the iuſt Ieſus Chriſte. Let them iudge
thē that haue any wit, whether this
be a great foly or no, to ſee howe theſe
craftie Coggers of the Scriptures
ſhould make many ſimple perſons refuſe
to be the Popes ſpiritual childrē,
becauſe they were ſinners, ſeeking
thereby to ouerthrowe all the auncient
cuſtomes of the Churche.
            
            
               ¶The .8. Chapter.
               VPon Moyſes Chayre there ſitteth
(ſayeth oure Sauiour Chriſte)
who? not the godlieſt menne of the
worlde, but the Scribes and Phariſes:
Doo that they ſaye, but not that
that they doo. But if our newe Goſpellers
had beene in thoſe dayes, they

woulde haue tolde Chriſte, that his
commaundement was not to be obſerued,
becauſe the liues of Anna and
Cayphas were not correſpondent vnto
thoſe of Moyſes and Aaron: for the
firſte came to the vocation of prieſthood,
being called of God: but the
laſt attained to it by the vocation of
their purſes, and yet notwithſtanding,
rather then our Sauiour wold
breake this harmonie of the miſticall
body of the Churche, he was not onlye
content to permit, that Caiphas
ſhould execute his office (although he
was vnworthye, as one that came to
it by Simony) but rather he did confirme
his Pontificate with the gifte
of the ſpirite of prophecying, with the
which he was as fullye inſpired as euer
was Dauid, Eſay, or any of ye reſt,
& al to teache vs that, that I haue alreadie
ſaid: I meane, that the Eccleſiaſtical
order, & the adminiſtration of
the Sacramentes, doo not conſiſt in

the good or euill liues of the Paſtors,
but only of God and of his worde, interpreted
by them. As touching that
that appertaineth to our health, God
hath no regarde to the life of the magiſtrate
temporall or eccleſiaſtical: for
he can aſwell ſerue him with an euill
perſon to doo good to the common
wealth, as of a good, as the godlye
prophecies of the wicked Balaam doo
wel witnes. Num. 24. And here is to
be noted, that when we talke of the
ſucceſſion of Biſhops, and of the doctrine
continuing in the Churche, we
doo not meane onely to talke of the
Popes, but of all the Biſhops and other
hauing Eccleſiaſticall charges,
not onely at Rome, but through all
other places, where the true preaching,
and right adminiſtratiō of the
Sacraments be vſed. And therefore
you doo pretende in vaine, to proue,
that the aboue mentioned ſucceſſion

hath beene interrupted by the diſſention
of Popes and Antipopes, and by
the Ciuill warres that haue beene at
Rome in times paſt. For althoughe
that the Sea of Rome was vacant
for a time, the Chaires of the Biſhops
in Fraunce, Spaine, Englande, and
ouer all Chriſtendome were not vacant,
they did not for their debates
let to adminiſter the precious body of
Ieſus Chriſt, and the reſt of the Sacramentes,
to preache and teache the
people, doing manye other godlye
deedes. And to be briefe, the Ciuil diſſention
at Rome did not cauſe the reſt
of the people throughout Chriſtendome
to breake the vnitie of their
fayth, which they helde before their
diſcordes. The ambition of the popes
of Rome was in nothing preiudiciall
vnto thoſe that helde the integritie of
their fayth, nor through the reaſon of
their yl gouernāce our ſauiour Chriſt
did not loſe his rightful inheritaunce.
            
            
               
               ¶The .9. Chapter.
               NOwe ſeing that we haue yelded
you a full accompt of our vocatiō
to the miniſtery: if we may be ſo bold,
I thinke it is no great preſumption
to demaunde the like of yours. For
euen as Caluin hath heretofore called
vpon vs to haue vs proue, that wee
are the children of God, or otherwiſe
he woulde abſolutelye affirme, that
God can not be called the authour of
our vocation to the miniſtery. We ſay
likewiſe, that if you doo not ſhewe
the like of yours, you ſhall geue vs
leaue (although it be againſt youre
willes) to ſaye that yours commeth
not from God, but from the procurement
of his aduerſarye.
               Tertulian, who, as you knowe, aboue
1200. yeres agone, ſpeaking againſt
ſuche as you are, in his booke de praeſcript.
haeret. doth write theſe words.
Edant origines Eccleſiarum ſuarum, euoluent

ordinem Epiſcoporum ſuorū
per ſucceſsiones ab initio decurrentem.
Hoc enim modo Eccleſiae Apoſtolicae
curſus ſuos deferunt, ſicut Romanorum
Clementem Epiſcopum à Petro
ordinatum: id proinde, vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   et coeteri,
exhibeant, quos ab Apoſtolis in Epiſcopalibus
conſtitutos, Apoſtolico ſemine
radices habeant.
               You ſee well by theſe wordes, howe
that Tertulian doeth continue with
the ſucceſſion of the Paſtours, the
which he doeth affirme to be neceſſarye,
ſaying: that you, and ſuch as you
are, ought not to be receiued to the
miniſterie of the Church, nor to teach
the people, contrary to the eccleſiaſticall
order, except that you ſhewe the
antiquitie of your table. And it is neceſſary
(ſaith he) that you recken your
Paſtors and Biſhops by order, and
howe they haue ſucceeded one after
another: for this is the waye that the
Churches doo maintaine their right.

The ſaide Tertulian doth ground his
ſimilitude vppon the cuſtome of the
Ciuill gouernaunce. For when that
thoſe yare princes or Lordes doo ſuruaye
their landes, the ſubiectes are
bounde to ſhewe, what bandes they
holde of them, ſetting it all forth by
accompt, ſhewing by what tenure
they holde their copie, and whether it
be demeanes or freeholde, comming
by inheritance or bought: they ought
likewiſe to name him that had it before,
and by their owne title to ouerthrowe
all other perſons that maye
make claime vnto it. According to
this paterne and order we haue geuen
you accompt of our inheritance,
although we were not bounde to it,
ſetting before your eyes the ſimilitude
of Salomon, by whom our Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſte is repreſented.
That ſame Salomon doeth geue the
ſheepe that runnes aſtray counſaile,
to ſet his Tabernacle by the Tabernacle

of the Sheperdes, and to folow
their flocke, vntil he come to the place
where Chriſte was nailed on the
Croſſe at noone dayes. The whiche
counſell, as the moſte certaine (according
to Tertulian his opinion) we doo
folowe, thinking it ſufficient, to keepe
vs firmely in the right and auncient
Catholike fayth. For we that are the
ſheepe of Chriſte, doo folow, as touching
our religiō, the ſteppes that our
fathers led before vs, and, as it were,
going vp vppon the ladder of Iacob.
Gen. 28. we mount by degree and
degree, I meane, from yeere to yeere,
and from age to age, vntill that we
come to S. Saturim, S. Denice, S. Marcial,
and S. Gratian, which were thoſe
that did firſte teache the Catholike
faith in Tholoſe, in Paris, and to thoſe
of Guyenna and Lorayne, and ſo conſequently
to all the reſt of the Saintes,
that firſte did teache the Catholike
fayth through all Chriſtendome,

whom we doo call in iudgement before
God, to defend that fayth which
they haue geuen vs, from hande to
hande, they may call vppon the Apoſtles
which ſent them, and the Apoſtles
may direct thēſelues to Chriſte,
who by the mouth of his moſte louing
Apoſtle doth commaunde vs to
continue in that that was taught vs
at the beginning. 1. Ioan. 2. And ſo we
ſhall continue and reſt with the Father,
the Sonne and the holy Ghoſt.
And if any body doth come to teache
vs anye other doctrine, then that
which hath bene taught vs at the beginning:
I doo not ſaye, written in
booke, but printed in our hearts, that
he be holden as an Anathema,
                  Galat. 1. or an
excommunicate perſon, yea, although
it were an Angell of heauen. The
which doeth perſwade vs, not to receaue
your newe doctrine or Goſpell,
but to keepe our ſelues vnder the gouernaunce
of our olde Paſtours and

Biſhops, without hauing any reſpect
to their euill or good liues: for as touching
our faith and ſaluation, that
doth unport nothing. The good and
holye liues of Ieſus Chriſte and his
Apoſtles hath profited nothing, neither
to the obſtinate Iewes, nor to
the vnbeleuing Gentiles: Nor in the
like caſe the depraued life of manye
euil Biſhops that haue bene at Rome
and in other places haue not ſhut the
dores of heauen againſt thoſe that
are true Catholikes, and leade perticuler
liues, the which are two principall
poyntes that doo quiet our conſciences:
I meane, the one, that we
beleue that, that our Paſtours & the
vniuerſall Church haue beleued theſe
thouſande and fiue hundred yeres:
and the other, that their euill liues
cannot hurt vs. For as the Apoſtle
doth ſaye, Euery man ſhall beare his
owne bundell.
            
            
               
               ¶The .10. Chapter.
               NOwe to turne vnto the taking of
your accompts, may it pleaſe you
to ſhewe vs, howe you haue folowed
the ſteppes of the flocke of Chriſt, according
to the counſell that we gaue
to his reaſonable ſheepe, as we haue
ſayde before, Who hath taught you
the way that you doo folowe? what
doctours were your firſt tutors? who
hath taught you, that the precious
body of our Sauiour is not really in
the Sacrament of the Aultare? who
hath taught the doctrine (or, if it be
not grief vnto you, hereſy) which you
wold haue vs to receiue as a Goſpel?
I know before hand, that you wil alleage
me Ieſus Chriſte, and his holy
Apoſtles, whoſe ſteppes you doo profeſſe
to folow, preching euery wher, yt
there is no difference betweene your
Church (or to ſay truth, Sinagog) &
the church of ye Apoſtles. But I pray,

Let me vnderſtand by what means
you canne ioyne your ſelues vnto the
Churche of the Apoſtles, ſeing that
you condemne and cut off all the
Chriſtians that haue beene and are
betweene you and them. For to verifye
this, I will alleage no other but
your owne workes: for Caluin in his
Inſtitutions at the Treatiſe of the
Supper of the Lord, ſpeaking of the
oblation of the body of our Sauiour
Chriſte, as it was offered in olde
time, he doeth write punctually theſe
wordes: Caluinus, in ſua inſtitutione
tradita de Coena Domini. I finde
(ſayth he) that thoſe of olde time haue
chaunged this faſhion, otherwiſe then
the Inſtitution of our Sauiour did require,
ſeing that their ſupper did repreſent
a certaine ſpectacle of a ſtraunge
Inuention, or at the leaſt, of a newe
maner. There is nothing more ſure vnto
the faythfull, then for them to holde
them ſelues vnto the pure ordinance of

the Lorde, by whom it was called a
ſupper, to the ende, that onely his authoritie
may be our rule. Yet it is true,
that when I conſider their good meaning,
and that their intent was, neuer
to derogate from the onely ſacrifice of
Chriſte, I dare not condemne them of
folye, and yet I thinke, that one cannot
excuſe them, that they haue not ſomewhat
fayled in the exteriour forme: for
they haue folowed more the Cerimonies
of the Iewes, then the order of Ieſus
Chriſte did permit. And this is the
point, in which they ought to be reſiſted:
for they haue conformed to muche
vnto the olde Teſtament, not contenting
themſelues with the ſimple inſtitution
of Chriſte, they haue to muche
inclined themſelues vnto the ſhadowed
Ceremonies of the Iewes lawe.
               
               Theſe are Caluins words. The Reader
may by them ſee well, howe this
noble Reformer of the Goſpell doeth
correct al ages and Churches, be they

of Martyrs, Confeſſors, Doctours, Interpreters,
Preachers, or anye others,
from the Apoſtles time vnto our age,
yet doth he not deny, but that hauing
ſome regard of their ſimple ignorāce,
he is content to be ſo good to them, as
for this time not to condemne their
error or impietie, becauſe that which
they did was with a good intent:
but yet fearing, that the bearing thē
to muche fauour woulde trouble his
conſcience, he geueth ſentence againſt
them, ſaying, that they ought to be reſiſted,
becauſe they were not content
with the onely inſtitution of Chriſte,
but rather, that in this caſe they haue
folowed the ſhadows of the Iewes.
Nowe, for my part, I thinke Caluin
and his felowes ſo ſcrupulous, that
they would not ioyn themſelues vnto
perſons that are ſpotted wt Iewiſh
Ceremonies. And becauſe that all
maner of people, howe wiſe ſoeuer
they were, frō the Apoſtles time vntil

our dayes, haue fallen into this error,
he doth counſel my maſters his deformed
folowers (according to his ſentence)
to folowe none of them at all,
but only the pure worde of the Lord,
preached by Ieſus Chriſte, and by his
aboue mentioned Apoſtles.
            
            
               ¶The .11. Chapter.
               YOu doo knowe very well, that S.
Paule doth compare many times ye
miſticall body of the Churche vnto a
natural body, ſeing yt 
                  Ieſus Chriſt is ye
head, vnto whō the body is ioined by
ioints, bones, & ſinews. If one ſhould
then demaund of you, howe the feete
are ioined to ye head, you wil anſwere
me, by the legs, which are next vnto ye
feete. And if I aſke you, how the legs
are ioined to ye hed, you wil anſwere,
by ye ioints and by ye reins of ye back, &
ſo conſequently frō member to member.1. Cor. 10.
I do beleue, that we are al of one
accorde, that the ende of the world is
at hande, and ſo conſequentlye, that

we are the lowermoſt part of the body,
ſo that we are the feete or the legges.
Then my maſters, you that haue
made ſo fine an Anotomie of the
Maſſe, at my requeſt make another of
the miniſterie of your congregation.
If you ſhould ſee ſuch another as Apelles,
that would paint a man, and
that he had drawen his head, and
without painting the reſt of his bodye,
he had ſet his feete vnder his
eares, what would you ſay to ſuche a
Table? (Spectatum admiſsi riſum teneatis
amici:) Would you not thinke,
that he was a ſimple painter, or els a
great Ieſter? Euen ſo doo you deſerue,
that one ſhould laugh at youre
miniſterie: For you will ioyne youre
Churche (if it may be ſo called) vnto
the Churche of the Apoſtles, without
ſetting forth any members betweene
them. You take but ſcant meaſure,
when you will cut of al the Biſhops,
Paſtors and doctors that haue bene

from the Apoſtles time til our dayes,
they being the members that folowe
the head of the Churche. This maye
well be called a newe Religion, or to
ſay the truth, it is a meere preſumption,
to flye without winges, or to
clymbe without a ladder. And I ſay
to you againe, that this is not the
waye to folowe the Counſell of the
great Shepherde that I mentioned
before, who doth ſay to vs, that if we
will not miſſe the way of the Catholikes,
we ought to folow the flocke of
thoſe ſhepe that haue gone before vs,
that is to ſaye, that we ſhould recken
by ſucceſſion the Paſtors that haue
ſucceeded in continuance of one kind
of doctrine, the which, as we haue
ſhewed, the Catholike Churche doth,
and hath euer done.
            
            
               ¶The .12. Chapter.
               AS touching the reſt, you haue accuſtomed
in your miniſterie, to vſe

the impoſition, or laying on of hands,
and you ſaye, that it is an auncient
and honeſt Ceremonie,Exod. 29. In this you
ſay ye truth. For as we reade, of great
antiquitie this Cerimonie hath beene
vſed, aſwell in the olde lawe, as in the
lawe of grace. And vnto that did redounde
the impoſition of handes laid
vpon the Wether that was brought
to the immolation of the Sacrifice
of Moyſes lawe:Leuit. 4. to declare,Num. 8. &. 17. that thoſe
that are ordeined vnto the ſeruice of
God, and vnto the miniſterie of the
Church, ought to retaine the like Ceremonie:
& ſo the Iſraelites did laye
their handes vppon the Leuites, and
Moyſes likewiſe did laye his handes
vpon Ioſua, whē he was made a captain
of the Iſraelites, who did repreſent
ye Church of Chriſt. The apoſtles
haue vſed ye like, as we find, wher we
read,Act. 8. 19. &. 13. that S. Peter and S. Iohn did lay
their handes vpon the Chriſtiā people
of Samaria, & S. Paule vpon the Epheſians,
                  
and likewiſe the Apoſtles vpon ye
ſeuen Deacons, & vpon S. Paule and
Barnabas.
                  Tim. 
                        •
                     . S. Paule doeth admoniſhe
Timothe, not to deſpiſe the grace that
he had receued by ye impoſitiō of handes,
& that he ſhould ſet forth the gifte
of God that he had receiued with the
impoſition of the handes of S. Paul
vpō him.A &. 7. He doth likewiſe cōmaunde
him, not to vſe this impoſitiō of hāds
wtout diſcretiō, to ye end that he do not
cōmunicat wt ye ſin of another. Caluin
according to theſe authorities in his
inſtitutiō booke (Ar. 8. ca. 50.) of faith
doth cōmaund ye like to be vſed in his
Churche. It doth appere (ſaith he) that
the Apoſtles haue vſed no other Ceremonie
in the vocation to the miniſtery
but this impoſition of handes. Now I
thinke, yt thei tooke this cuſtom of the
Iewes, who did preſent vnto god by
ye impoſition of hands that, that they
wold bleſſe & cōſecrate. After this ſort
Iacob (Gen. 48.) whē he would bleſſe

                  Ephraim and Manaſſes, he laide his
handes vpon their heades. Our Sauiour
did the like vppon the litle children,
when he did praye. Math. 19.
And as I thinke, it was all to one
ende ordeined in the lawe: and therefore,
the Apoſtles, by the impoſition of
handes, did ſignifye, that they did offer
vnto God him, that they did receaue
into the miniſterie, althoughe
they did vſe it likewiſe with thoſe,
vnto whom they did diſtribute the
viſible giftes of the holy Ghoſt. How
ſo euer it be, they haue vſed this ſolemnitie
as many times, as they did
ordeyne any body to the miniſterie of
the Churche, as we ſee by example,
aſwell touching the Paſtours and
doctours, as the Deacons. Now, although
there be no ſpecial commaundement,
as touching the impoſition
of handes: yet notwithſtanding, ſeeing
that we reade, that the Apoſtles
did vſe it continuallye, that which

they did vſe ſo diligently ought to be
vnto vs as a precept. And ſurely, it is
a profitable thing, to ſet forth to the
people the dignitie of the Miniſterie
by ſuche a Ceremonie, and to make
him know, that is thus ordeyned miniſter,
that he apperteyneth no more
to himſelfe, but that he is dedicated
to the Seruice of God and of his
Churche. &c. Thus, ſeing that Caluin
doth confeſſe the impoſition of handes
to be ſo neceſſary for the miniſterie
of the Churche, and that it is approued,
aſwell by the lawe of nature,
as by the lawe of Moyſes or of the
Goſpell, Anſwere vs then, who was
he, that laide his handes vpon Caluin,
to ſafe conduct the charge of his
conſcience? You will aunſwere me,
Zuinglius, or Oecolampadius, or the others
of his time. And if by chaunce
one would be ſo curious, as to purſue
this demaund, mounting a litle higher:
I meane, to know of whom theſe

abouenamed haue receued their bleſſing
and impoſition of handes, I
thinke you will not name the Apoſtles,
if you will not haue euery man
to laughe at your follye: for there is
none ſo ſimple, but doeth knowe, that
they died aboue. 1500. yeres agone.
And ſeing that your patriarch hath
made vs ſo goodly an oration, as touching
this impoſition of handes, affirming
it to be neceſſarye, both by the
lawe of Nature, the lawe of Moyſes,
and the lawe of Grace howe doeth it
come to paſſe, that Zuinglius hath
not vſed it, to confirme his miniſterie.
            
            
               ¶The .13. Chapter.
               If that the good doctour S. Ciprian
had bene in theſe our dayes,Cip. 1. epiſt. cap. 6. might
he not well haue ſaide againſt youre
Schollers, that which he did write
againſt Nouatus? there needed no other,
but in ſteede of Nouatus to put
in Caluinus or Zuinglius, et nomine

mu tato, de vobis fabula narrabitur.
               
               Seing that the ſaide S. Ciprian doth
holde & affirme, that Nouatus oughte
to be accompted as no Biſhop, becauſe
he ſucceded no bodie, but rather
that he did make himſelfe a Biſhop,
without anye impoſition of handes.
Then to what purpoſe, I praye you,
are ye of the opinion, that Caluin and
Zuinglius are ſuch faithful miniſters,
conſidering that they are as far from
prouing yt confirmation of their miniſterie,
as euer was Nouatus. You wil
anſwer me, yt you haue no nede of the
impoſitiō of hāds of ye Papiſts, ſuperſtitious
Idolaters & Infidels. But
this maketh your cauſe neuer ye better:
for if you are ſo ſcrupulous by nature,
that it goeth againſt your cōſciences
to come to kneele to our Biſſhops,
you ſhuld (I ſay in times paſt)
haue required your ancient miniſters
to haue geuē you a warrant for ye cō
                  firmatiō
of your eſtate, whē one doth

demaund of you, ſince when your religion
begon, you are not content, to
claime the beginning from the Apoſtles,
but rather, ſtepping hardly forwarde,
ye are not content to ſtaye at
Dauid or Abraham, but you muſt needes
fetche it from Abell, yea, from Adam.
And if one ſhould ſpurre you forwarde,
you would go, I knowe not
whether. Then ſeing that your
Churche is ſo auncient, and that it
hath indured till our dayes (if we wil
beleeue you) it is not like to be true,
that it hath beene deſtitute altogether
of miniſters: for although it be ſo
that God did greatly afflicte the Iſraelites
with the captiuitie of Babilon,
yet did he neuer leue them without
comfort of good doctours, ſuche
as Daniel, Ezechias, Abdias, and many
others: Euen ſo you, that thinke in
your owne heades, to be the people of
God, I cannot thinke (if it be ſo) he
would ſo haue geuen you ouer, as to

want miniſters to comfort you in
your afflictions, and to ordeyne your
miniſterie, by the impoſition of handes,
What ſtayes you, that you doo
not go to them, ſeing that you haue
nothing to do with oures? And if you
ſay, that you haue done ſo, doo vs ſo
muche pleſure, as to let vs heare their
names, and in what time they did
floriſhe, or otherwiſe you may pardon
vs, if we geue no credite to your fayned
imaginations.
            
            
               ¶The .14. Chapter.
               
                  CAluin doth alleage to vs, that the
Apoſtles doo ſaye, that is, that no
body ought to take vpon him the honour
of the high prieſthood, except he
be called to it as Aaron was, meaning
by that to conclude, that of our
owne authoritie wee haue vſurped
the dignitie of prieſthood. We haue
aunſwered him at large of our vocation
by the ſucceſſion of Paſtors ioyned

with the impoſition of handes. I
doe demaunde of him, or of his, if they
can make any true anſwer to the like
obiection. You do lay to our charge
the yl liues of our Popes & Biſhops,
and the naughtines that you pretend
to find in our Preachers: but al thoſe
inuectiues ſerue to no other purpoſe,
but to ſhewe howe you keepe a learned
ſchoole of rayling, the which preheminence
we do yelde to you without
any debate or proceſſe, for ye may
attribute that vnto your ſelues as
your owne by right, in ſteede of the
impoſition of hands, which ye want.
But in one thing to my iudgement
you are greatly ouerſeene, and that
is this: Why doe ye not fyll bothe
ſides of your Booke, in the one you
ſette foorth at large without omitting
anye poynte of their yll dooinges,
all the naughtie lyues of oure

Paſtours and Byſhoppes: but the
other ſydes of the leaues are emptie,
you ſhoulde haue written on them
the holye lyues of your Miniſters
ſucceeding one after an other this
thouſande and fiue hundred yeeres.
When the Popes Bonifacius and
Gregorius didde gouerne yll their
Seates at Rome, whiche were the
good and holy Miniſters that dyd
their duety at Geneua? When our
Doctours dyd preache agaynſt god
in times paſte, in what part or vnder
what ſigne were your Miniſters
lodged, that dyd then preache
the pure woorde of the Lorde: yf
they dydde hyde them ſelues, they
dydde not followe the pure worde
of the Lorde, the whiche you ſay
is neceſſarie too knowe the true
and faythfull beleeuers. For Chriſte
doth ſay, Matthewe. 10. That hee

that ſhall denye him before men, him
will he denie before his father in heauen.
And S Paul doth ſay: Rom. 10.
That with the heart one doth beleue
to Iuſtice, and with the mouth one
muſt confeſſe to ſaluation. But to ſay
the truth, your religion was not then
founde out, and the Grandfathers &
great Grandfathers of Caluin had
neuer dreampt of the hereſyes that
now their reformed childe hath ſet ſo
newly abroche. And therefore thinke
it not ſtraunge, if that thoſe people
that are not light headed, ſend you to
preache in newe found landes, as one
that hath here at home geuen manifeſtly
iudgement againſt himſelf, confeſſing,
as we haue alleaged aboue,
that the Churche of God hath vſed
the impoſition of handes, yours hath
not done ſo: & therfore it doth folowe,
that it is not of God, and that, that
doth folow conſequently, is, that it is
of the deuill. For we knowe, that you

alowe no Purgatorie, I meane, no
meane betweene them both.
            
            
               ¶The .15. Chapter.
               YOu will ſaye to me, that this argument
ought to take place in an
ordinarie Commiſſion, but yours is
extraordinarie, as that was of the
Prophetes of the olde Teſtament,
whom God did ſende to correct the
Scribes and Phariſes: and that euē
ſo God hath inſpired you and others
of your ſect to the like effect, that is to
ſaye, to correct the ſuperſtitious liues
and doctrine of the Papiſtes Idolaters:
and by this, as farre, as I can
ſee, ye are Commiſſaries of God in
his behalfe: and ye may ſay wel with
S. Paule (although ye haue not bene
rauiſhed vnto the third heauen) that
ye are not ſent by man or of man,Gal. 1. but
by the authoritie of oure Sauiour
Chriſte. But what woulde you ſaye,
if we ſhoulde ſpeake againſt it, as a

number doo, and that to reuenge this
quarel, we ſhould write againſt your
Commiſſion, we might well aide our
ſelues with a Sillogiſme of our ſauiour
Chriſte, if we woulde come to
pleade the matter,Ioh. 6. which is this: He
that is of God, doth obey the worde of
God: but you doo not obey the worde
of God, therefore ye are not of God.
I knowe that you wil denye the Minor,
and therefore it doeth appertaine
to vs to proue it. Chriſte doeth ſaye:
Giue vnto Coeſar that,
                  Mat. 22. 
                  that apperteyneth
to Coeſar: and to God that, that
apperteyneth to God. That is to ſaye,
to ſpeake familiarlye, Geue Geneua
vnto his Lorde, and the Biſhopricke
vnto his Biſhop. Nowe, you doo not
obeye this commaundement, and
therefore, as one that doeth not apperteyne
vnto God, you haue prouided
your ſelfe a newe maſter. And
becauſe we woulde not haue ſome to
thinke, that we that are not of the

countrey doo beare falſe witnes againſt
you, or, that we doo it without
hauing anye intereſt vnto the
matter: I am ſure, that all the world
doeth knowe, that ye haue ſet all
Fraunce in as ill an eſtate, as ye haue
done the dukedome of Sauoye: In
that that appertayneth to ye Church,
is there any Biſhoprick or dioces left,
where ye haue not ſought with all
youre power to preache youre holye
doctrine? where haue ye forgotten,
that, that Saint Paule doeth ſaye,
whiche is:Rom. 10. 
                  Howe ſhall they preache,
if they are not ſent? What righte
haue you, to come to reape other
mennes corne? Doo not you remember
that, that Tertulian doeth write
againſt youre elders that did perſecute
the Catholike Churche, againſt
whom he ſayeth in his booke de
praeſcriptione haereticorum: What
are ye, and from whence doo ye come?

By what right, O Marcian, doeſt thou
cut downe my wood? why doeſt thou,
O Apelles, remoue my landes? And a
litle after he ſayeth: The place is mine,
I haue bene thus long time in poſſeſsion,
and before thee I haue good title
and euidence, to mainteine my right, of
thoſe, to whom it did appertayne,
which lefte it me by inheritaunce from
the Apoſtles. etc. Our Churche of
Fraunce, which is one of the principall
members of all the Catholike
Churche, might with good cauſe ſay
vnto you the like. And I praye, what
would you anſwere? you cannot denye,
but that aboue a thouſand yeres
before ye were borne, that the fayth
in which ye were baptized, and the
which you haue falſelye denied, was
planted, I doo not ſaye, in this onelye
kingdome of Fraunce, but ouer all
Chriſtendome. If you pretende anye
right to the contrary, ſhewe the reaſon
of your poſſeſſion by the euidence

of the auncient doctours, and after
come to demaund it, as I haue ſaide
before: I meane, that you ſhould yeld
the eccleſiaſticall gouernment, which
you haue vſurped in manye places
with to great libertie of conſcience, &
licence to doo euill, which is the very
death of the ſoule, as Saint Auguſtine
doth ſay. Epiſt. 166. And after that ye
haue reſtored Fraunce to his olde
eſtate, then there wilbe more apparaunce
of the matter, that ye are ſent
to preache the true worde of God,
then there is now. But in this eſtate
that ye are, although that God had
geuen you commiſſion (the which he
neuer thought) he would haue called
it backe, becauſe of your noble actes.
Theodoſius and Arcades, whiche in
old time were Emperours of Rome,
(L. ſi quis in tantam. cod. vnde vi.) did
eſtabliſh or make an Edict, that if the
true owner or lorde of a thing ſhould
vſe any force, or to ſeeke by the waye

of violence (without ſtaying for the
ſentence of the Iudge) to get poſſeſſion
of his owne from another man,
yea, although the other had no right
to it, he ſhoulde not onely loſe the poſſeſſion,
but likewiſe the propertie: but
if it were founde, that he that did
enter by force, had no right to the
Mannur, he ſhould not onely be depriued
of it, but moreouer he ſhoulde
be condemned to geue as much more
of his owne vnto him, againſt whom
he had vſed the force, as the thinge
was valued at, that he ſought to
vſurpe. If one ſhoulde call you, my
maſters the newe refourmed Goſpellers,
to ſuch a reckening, ye might
well packe vp your pipes, and tranſporte
your fidelye into another countrey,
for you ſhoulde haue no other
remedie, but to runne awaye with
the goodes, and preache pouertie.
            
            
               
               ¶The .16. Chapter.
               FOr your defence you alleage no
other reaſon but youre good
zeale, and your ardent Apoſtolical
affection, the which hath moued
you to ſowe this ſeede of ſedition.
You ſaye, that the fielde is great, and
there are fewe good reapers, but if
you marke that, that doth folowe afterwarde,
and to take the counſaile
of the wiſe: Chriſte doeth not commaunde
therefore, that euerye one
ſhoulde take his ſickle, and goe, and
cut downe other mennes corne. But
he ſayeth:Mat. 15. 
                  Praye the maſter of the
worke, to the ende, that he ſende more
woorkemenne to his vine. He doeth
teache vs, that if we ſee anye eſtate
out of order, we ſhoulde praye to
God to redreſſe it: And in the meane
time we ought to correct and amend
our own liues: for if euery man were

for him ſelfe, God would be for vs all.
Yet, notwithſtanding this, it is not
reaſonable, that vnder the colour of a
good zeale, a ſeruant ſhoulde take in
hand an acte of ſo great importance,
without expreſſe commaundement
of his maſter, as it is ſaide. But now
that we are come to talke of your
good zeale (if it pleaſe you) let vs
knowe, if thoſe ardent flames of charitie
haue ſo inflamed you, that you
haue ouerthrowen the Chaires of the
negligent Paſtors and Biſhops, and
in their roomes ye haue collocated
your miniſters in euery place, where
ye could beare any ſwaye, as it doeth
appere in many townes and Cities
in this Realme. I doo not doubt, but
that you will doo the beſt that ye can
to doo the like with the reſt, I mean,
aſwell Temporall as Spiritual. For
euē as God (of whom ye ſpeake ſo often)
doeth make no exception of perſons,
euen ſo you, that call your ſelues

his Lieuetenants wil make no difference
betwene the euyl eſtates & the
good. Euery one doth know that the
adminiſtration of iuſtice is very honourable
before God, and that there
be many in this vocation that would
not for any thing do any wrong vnto
the widowe & fatherleſſe childe, and
yet we ſee and knowe by experience,
that ther are many others that without
any conſcience, doe take brybes
and offer wrong, both to the fatherles
and to the widowe, the whiche
crimes are no leſſe in that eſtate, then
the careles liuing of the Biſhops and
Paſtors. So that I thinke by this,
that he that hath geuen you charge
and power to turne the Byſhops out
of their ſeates, ye Curates out of their
benefices, and the Monkes & Abbots
out of their Abbeys, becauſe of their
euil liuings: would likewiſe extende
your commiſſion, to put downe Lordes,
Knightes, Iudges and Gentlemen,

becauſe of the corrupt liues of
many of them. And to make an ende
of the reformation, your holy Ghoſte,
and thoſe zealous flames of the ſpirite,
woulde moue you to goe a litle
higher: for there is nothing done, but
the ſpirite may amend it. Againſt the
great trees, ſtriue the great windes,
and againſt great dignities great abuſes.
It is not vnknowen to all mē,
that ther are good and godly Catholike
princes and kinges, whiche are
ſurely to the people the great giftes of
God: but likewiſe one cannot denye,
but that there hath beene and are diuers
ill princes that do gouerne their
people careleſly and without Iuſtice.
And if by chaunce your Goſpell ſhuld
fal into ſome kingdom, wher ye prince
were not ſo ſage nor ſo wiſe as you
would haue him: in your conſcience,
what wold you do to him? I think, yt
that very zeal (if you could) that hath
moued you, vnder ye coulor of a refor-

Goſpell, to trouble ſo muche our ſtate,
woulde likewiſe commaunde you, to
diſpoſſeſſe thoſe kinges that do abuſe
their owne kingdoms, euen aſwel as
to depriue thoſe Biſhoppes that
doo abuſe their biſhoprickes. But, O
Lorde, what a Goſpell is this, if it be
permitted, yt the people ſhall call their
princes to accompt, or, that they may
correct their ſuperiours vnder ye color
of a reformed goſpel, what ſeditions,
troubles & warres ſhal we ſee ouer al
Chriſtendome? we ſhal ſee fulfilled, to
our great harme, ye prophecie of Eſay,
who ſaieth:Cap. 3. 
                  The people ſhall ſeeke to
rayſe one againſt another, and euerye
one againſt his neibour, the yong man
ſhal diſdain the old, and the ignoble the
noble. etc. But what coulor ſoeuer ye
cloke your new goſpel wtal, ye run far
wide frō him that doth cōmaund vs
to obeye all creatures for the loue of
God.Rom. 13. He doeth not regarde, whether
they doo acquite their charge

or no, for the obedience of the inferiours
is not limitted by the duty of the
ſuperiours.Rom. 13. 
                  All power doth come of
God, ſayth the Apoſtle, and he that
reſiſteth that power, doth reſiſte the
ordinance of God, and they that doo
with ſay it, acquire for them ſelues dā
                  nation
for euer. He doth make no diſtinction
of perſons, whether it be a
Magiſtrate Eccleſiaſtical or temporal,
whether it be a king or a Pope,
a Biſhop or a Lorde, he doth talke
generally of al powers that are eſtabliſhed
by God, to make vs liue in
peace & tranquilitie. God had not choſen
of his good wil Caeſar the Emperour
of Rome to be king of Ieruſalē,
as he did chooſe Saul, Dauid, Salomon
and the reſt, for of his owne ambition
and vnſaciable cupiditie, he had vſurped
the kingdome apperteyning to
the houſe of Dauid: yet our Sauiour
did commaund that they ſhould pay
him tribute. Math. 22. The whiche

commaundement he him ſelfe did fulfyl
to teache others obedience. God
did like wiſe permit that the wicked
king Nabuchodonozor ſhuld deſtroy
the kingdome of Hieruſalem, to puniſhe
the wickednes of thoſe that
dwelt in it. And although he had inuaded
the kingdome of Iuda, to the
which he had no title nor right, yet
doth god proteſt that he gaue it him,
and he wylleth and doth commaund
that they ſhould obey him, euen as yf
he were the beſt prince of the world.
Beholde (ſayth God by the Prophet
Ieremie, Cap. 27.) you ſhal tel your
Lordes that I make the earth, the men,
and the beaſtes that walke on the face
of the earth, through my great ſtrength
and mightie arme, and I haue geuen it
to whom it pleaſeth me: And ſo nowe
I haue geuen al theſe Lands and countreys
to Nabuchodonozor my ſeruant
king of Babylon. Beſides this, I haue
geuen him the beaſtes and the feelds to

ſerue him, his ſonne, and his ſons ſon,
vntill the time of his earth come: alſo
of him many people and great kinges
ſhal com, and ſhal ordein, that the kingdome,
or the people that ſhall not ſerue
Nabuchodonozor kinge of Babilon,
I will viſite that people (ſaith the lord)
with the ſworde, peſtilēce, and hunger,
vntill that I conſume them in his handes.
etc. But if you my masters the
newe reformers of the Goſpell had
ben in thoſe dayes, what would haue
bridled your burning zeale? Coulde
ye not with a litle better cauſe report
of Nabuchodonozor that, that ye
report of the Pope: for who is that
Nabuchodonozor, that wee ſhoulde
ſubmit our ſelues vnto him? He is not
a king, he is not a Tiraunt, he is not
an Emperoure, but a Robber, a Cutthrote,
more cruell then any kinde of
wilde beaſte. Is it not by him, that
the Prophetes haue repreſented the
ſpoyler of nations? for God, when he

woulde cauſe Eſaye to talke of the
fall of Lucifer,
                  Cap. 14. he doeth diſcrye it vnder
the perſon of Nabuchodonozor:
then howe will you haue vs to ſubmitte
our ſelues to be ſubiect vnto
him, whom God doeth liken, not onelye
to a deuill, but to the Captayne
of all the deuilles of hell? Manye
cauſes doo perſwade vs, not to obey
him. Firſte, his wicked and abhominable
life. Secondlye, our religion,
for we beleeue in God, that created
heauen and earth: but as for him, he
is more then a woorſhipper of Idoles,
for he is one that called him
ſelfe a God. Thirdelye, he is not of
the line of Dauid, by whom God
hadde promiſed to eſtabliſhe his
Kingedome, for he was a ſtraunger,
and ſuche a one as got into
the kingdome by force, making him
ſelfe a king, not by righteous election,
but by violent compulſion, ſo that,

conſidering all theſe things ye might
well, according to your zeale, haue
found fault with his raigne, but god
would haue ſtopped your mouthes,
ſaying as I haue written aboue, I
haue created al things, and I giue them
to whom it pleaſeth me. Or as he
ſaith in Iob,
                  Cap. 34. 
                  It is I that cauſe Hypocrites
to reigne, to puniſh the ſinnes of the
people. Or as he ſayth in the. 4. of
Daniel, I haue the preheminence ouer
the kingdomes of men, and I geue thē
to whom it pleaſeth me. And he that
ſpeaketh agaynſt him that is put in
authoritie, although he be as euyl as
Nabuchodonozor, he ſhal periſhe thorough
the ſworde, famine, or peſtilence,
or that that is worſe, through
eternall death. Theſe are the very
wordes that god ſpake by the Prophet,Math. 11.
and therfore ſayth Chriſt, Come
vnto me, and learne in my ſchole, for I
am humble and mylde of hart, I haue
obeyed Pylate, and Annas, and Cayphas,

I haue ſuffered the ſentence of
death, and haue bene nayled betweene
two theeues, and I toke it paciently for
your ſakes. Learne of me to be my diſciples
in the ſchoole of humilitie, and
you ſhal find reſt in your ſpirites. The
which true reſt in deede is for euery
man to examine diligently his owne
conſcience, and to commit to God the
conſciences of his Superiours.
            
            
               ¶The .17. Chapter.
               ANy man may eaſilye perceaue by
this diſcourſe, that you haue no
great reaſon, in ſaying that that you
ſay, & much leſſe to doo that that you
preache, I meane, to beginne the reformation
of the Church by the way
of force, the which is a thing contrarye
to all lawes diuine and humane,Cod. vt nemo in ſua cauſa iud.
which defende that one ſhoulde be
Iudge in his owne cauſe: and you
will not onely be a Iudge, but a partie,
reſembling in this him that gaue

the blowe to Chriſte,
                  Ioh. 15. vnto whom
the aunſwere was made, If wee
haue done yll, proue it before the
Iudge, ſeeing that you are our accuſers.
If you ſaye, that God hath geuen
you power, to knowe, to iudge,
and to exempt, that is to ſaye, to driue
vs out of our poſſeſſion, and to cauſe
the people to forſake that religion,
which they haue mainteyned theſe
1500, yeres and vpwardes, ſhew vs
your commiſſiō wt as ſure a warrant,
as ſo great a matter doth require, ſeeing
that you ſaye, that ye are ſent extraordinarily,
as Moyſes was to redeme
the children of Iſrael out of the
captiuity of Egipt, that is to ſai, according
vnto your interpretation, ye children
of God, and the true faithful out
of the falſe religion of the Papiſts, of yt
which the Pope Antichriſte, & worſe
then Pharao, is the head and maſter.
Thus ye vſe to expound and morali
                  
                     ••
                  te
the figures of the olde Teſtament,

in fauoure of the Catholike
Churche: yet is it ſo, that when God
ſpake vnto you about ſo zealous a
thing as this, ye forgat one thing that
doeth hinder greatlye youre Commiſſiō.
You ſhould haue ſhewed god,
yt the Commiſſiō which he gaue you,
was like to breede no leſſe miſchief amongſt
the Papiſtes, then Moyſes did
among yt 
                  Egiptians. For I am ſure (if
any to try you, wold take your othe)
that you woulde ſweare, that the
Pope is as yll as Pharao, and we as
harde hearted as the Egyptians.
Therefore, why did ye not demaund
of him a Rodde to conuert into a
Serpent, and to paſſe drye foote ouer
the redde Sea? Whye did ye not require
at his hande, that it mighte
pleaſe him to authorize his worde
preached by youre miniſters with
Signes, miracles and tokens, as he
did, when he ſente youre felowes
the Apoſtles, ſeeinge that you

are Prophetes, howe commeth it to
paſſe, that you haue not foreſeene,
that we would not beleue you: for
who is he (although he were a deuil)
that could not ſay as muche. But we
haue one diſauowe which God hath
geuen to manye, which doo report
that they doo come from him, whiche
doth greatly ouerthrowe the authoritie
of your commiſſion. He doth ſay
in the .14. of Hieremie, The Prophets
preache falſely in my name, I haue not
ſent them, I haue not commaunded
them, nor I haue not ſpoken vnto thē:
but they prophecie vnto you falſe viſions
and naughtie diuinations, to deceaue
your heartes. And likewiſe in
the .27. Chapiter, I haue not ſent them
(ſaith the Lord God) and they prophecie
in my name falſelye, to thintent I
ſhould forſake you, and that aſwell
you as your prophetes ſhould periſhe.
Item in the .29. Let not your Prophetes
ſeduce you, that are amongeſt

you, nor your Southſayers, and doo
not marke the dreames that ye dreame,
for they doo prophecie falſelye vnto
you in my name, ſeing that I haue not
ſent them, ſaith the Lorde. etc. So
that, although it wer true, that God
hath ſent you (as it is falſe) we might
with a iuſt cauſe pretend an excuſe of
ignorance, and to ſaye with great aſſuraunce
that,Gen. 20. that Abymilech ſayde
vnto God, where he threatned that
he woulde kill him, becauſe he kepte
Abrahams wife. O Lorde God (ſayde
he) would you kill a poore ſimple nation?
Shall it be ſayde, that we beleue
all thoſe that fayne to come in youre
name? haue not you commaunded vs
by the Apoſtle, That we ſhoulde not
beleue euery ſpirite:
                  1. Ioh. 4. 
                  and that the Angel
of darknes doth tranſfourme himſelfe
into an Angell of light? Haue not you
commaunded to be written, that we
ſhould beware which way we take,
& that ſuche a waye doth ſeeme good,

the whiche notwithſtanding doeth
leade vnto damnation and perdition.
If any, ſaying, that he is our princes
ſeruant, ſhould come to demaunde a
ſumme of mony in his maſters name
and that he had neither his hand nor
his ſeale to warrant his demaunde,
would not we ſende him awaye like
a falſe merchant, fering that he wold
deceaue vs? then with greater reaſon
ought we to feare the committing of
our faith, and the hope of our ſaluation
into their hands, whom we know
not, nor that cannot ſhewe any miracles,
to confirme their preaching, as ye
Apoſtles did.Mat. 28. 
                  Qui confirmabant ſermonem,
ſequentibus ſignis. That is,
which did confyrme their preaching
with Signes or miracles folowing:
why do not they ſai, as he ſaid, whoſe
ſucceſſors they profeſſe to be, the ſigns
of my commiſſion & Apoſtleſhip haue
bene accompliſhed among you with
ſignes and miracles. 2. Cor. 12.
            
            
               
               ¶The .18. Chapter.
               YOu do aunſwere vs, as yt Iewes
were anſwered by Chriſte, when
they did demaund him to ſhew ſome
Miracles:Mat. 12. 
                  The generation adulterous
and peruerſe doeth demaunde ſignes,
but no ſigne ſhalbe geuen them. etc.
But this compariſon can not be applyed
vnto vs, for we are not ſo hard
of beliefe as the Iewes, nor you ſuch
faithful meſſengers of God, as Chriſt
was, of whom the Iewes did demaunde
ſome ſignes of obſtinate hatred,
after thei had ſene ſo many lame
healed, ſo many blinde receiue their
ſight, ſo many deafe heare, & ſo many
diſpoſſeſt that had ſpirites: but as for
you, we haue ſene your cōmiſſion not
to haue extended ſo far, as to reſtore a
flie to life againe, or to heale a lame
gooſe, although that greater matters
are required to confirme ſo ſtraunge
and ſo new a reformed Goſpel. Theſe

wordes doo make you mad, crying
out and preching in euery place, that
your Churche ought not to be called
newe, but rather, that it is olde and
Apoſtolicall, and that your doctrine
is the verye ſame that S. Peter and S.
Paule did preache. And to drawe the
ſimple people to beleue that, that you
ſaye, you doo declare your faith, ſaying
that you doo beleue, & doo preach,
that there is one God in Trinitie of
perſons, and the ſecond, which is our
Sauiour became manne from the
wombe of the virgin, and that he
ſuffered and did riſe againe, and to be
briefe, you ſhewe, that you haue profited
in your religion, for you haue bene
but fortie yeeres (which is the time
ſince it began) in learning the great
Creede, & the Pater noſter, the whiche
you coulde not learne in a thouſande
and fyue hundred of ours. But in all
this you ſay nothing to the purpoſe:
for we doo not demaunde of you,

whether you can well your Cathechiſme,
the which you hauing learned
of vs, you teache to others. And as
Sampſon ſaide: Iud. 15. If you had not
labored with my Cowe, ye would neuer
haue hit my Riddle. That is to ſai,
That if that our Churche had not
nurſed or taught you, which are her
rebellious children, you woulde haue
knowen nothing: for it is of our
Churche, that you haue learned the
principles of your faith. She is the
Cowe that hath nouriſhed Caluin in
a Chanonrie of Noyon, & Theodore
de Bexa in the Priorie of Louinnam
harde by Paris: and conſequentlye all
the other miniſters, which haue learned
all that they knowe, at the Conuent
of S. Fraunces, S. Dominick, S.
Auguſtine, and of S. Bennet, where ye
were nouriſhed ſpirituallye, as touching
your doctrine: and temporally,
as touching the mainteyning of your
ſtudie, at the charge of that Church,

againſt the which ye doo nowe ſo
ſtriue, as the Camels, whiche ſometime
rewarde their maſters for their
good keeping with yerking & biting:
ſo that coulor it howe you liſt, ye cannot
denye, but that ye ſet forth newe
deuiſes. For althogh it is ſo, that your
hereſyes (which to pleaſe the eares of
the vnlearned, ye call the refourmed
Goſpel and pure worde of God) haue
bene in times paſt, yet they were buried
in the very depth of hell, and you
haue raiſed them againe, cloked with
newe coulors. But although it were
ſo, that your doctrine were not new,
but very olde, yet ought not you to be
more priuiledged thē 
                  Moyſes and the
Prophetes, whoſe ſimple and playne
wordes the world would not beleue,
although they preached no new doctrine,
no more then you ſay that you
doo. Moyſes did ſhewe manye miracles
in Egipt,
                  24. and why? was the principall
cauſe to deliuer the children of
Iſraell out of ye captiuitie of Pharao?
                  
No ſurelye: for to what purpoſe, I
pray you, ſhuld God ſhewe ſuch great
power and might againſt a ſimple
worme of earth? Is it like to be true,
that he ſhoulde moue the whole heauens
with ſuche great darkenes,Exod. 19. to
ſend ſo many notable plages, to bring
him to yeld, which had confeſſed his
wickednes, for the torment that he
ſuffered with the flyes, the frogges, &
Graſhoppers? Surely no, he himſelfe
doth ſhew the cauſe, it is to the ende,
that my name be knowen ouer al the
earth: that is to ſay, that men ſhoulde
know, that he is God. If we come to
the Apoſtles, we ſhall fynde likewiſe,
that their doctrine was not new: for
when they began to preache, vnto the
Gentiles & Idolaters, they did not at
ye firſt preach Ieſus Chriſt, but thei did
ſeeke to blot out of ye mindes of ye ſimple
people, ye fooliſhe opinion that they
had in ye multitude of gods, & to teach
thē, that there was but one god, who

had created the heauen & earth, who
ſendeth rayne in time of neede, and
all thinges els that are required for
the ſuſtenance of in. This is ye doctrin
that S. Paule did preach, as we reade
in the Actes.
                  Act. 14. This doctrine was not
newe amonge men, although it were
ſo, that they were Paynims: for not
onely in Moyſes lawe, nor in the law
of Grace, but euen by the lawe of Nature
God hath bene knowen, euen of
thoſe which were not of the familie of
Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob, vnto whō
the promiſe of the Incarnation of
Chriſte was made. Of this doth Abimilech
the king of Gerar bear witnes,
who did excuſe himſelfe before
god, for the wife of Abraham: he could
neuer haue knowen, howe to talke
thus with God, if he had not knowē
him. Beſydes this, he made Abraham
to ſweare by the inuocation of the
ſaide God,Gen. 20. that neither he, nor his
heires ſhoulde ſuffer any damage by

his poſteritie.Gen. 24. 
                  Bathuell did likewiſe
knowe God, when he confeſſed, that
he was the authour of the mariage
of his daughter with Abrahams ſon:
euen ſo Abimilech the king of the Paleſtines,
and Phicol & Ochoſath ſayde
vnto Iſaac: We heare that God is wt
thee, and therefore we are come to
make alliance together.Iud. 2. 
                  Adonibezeth,
although he were a Gentile, did not
he confeſſe one God, when he ſayde,
that he had geuē him ye ſelfe ſame puniſhment
that he had geuē ye. 70. kinges?
Iob & al his frends, althogh they
were Gentiles, haue auouched one
God to be the Creator of heauen and
earth, euen aſwell as the Iſraelites,
as it doeth appere by the diſcourſe of
the ſaide Iob. If we reade the hiſtories
of the Paynims, we ſhal find, that
they bear witnes of one God among
themſelues. Diogenes Laertius in the
liues of the Philoſophers, doth write,
that the Emperoure Adrian did demaunde

of a philoſopher called Secundus,
what God was. He aunſwered:
God is an immortall ſpirite, incomprehenſible,
conteyning all the worlde, a
light, and a ſoueraine goodnes. True it
is, that this Secundus was bolder to
ſpeake of God, then another Philoſopher
called Simenides, of whō 
                  Tullie
doth write in his fyrſt booke De natura
deorum, vnto whom, when the tyrāt
Hyero did demaūd of him, what
God was, and that he had geuē him
diuers dayes of reſpit to anſwer him,
at ye laſt he ſaide, that he did acknowledge
in him an infinite of all thinges.
Cicero himſelf in the fyrſt queſtion of
his Tuſculanes, doth gouerne & geue
the being to all things. And in diuers
places of that worke he doth wel expreſſe,
yt he knew well, that there was
one God, & that ye gods that the Gentiles
did worſhip, wer but mortal mē,
And in the ſaide booke he ſaieth, that
we know God by his workes, in the

which he doth not much differ frō 
                  Dauid,
ſaying: That the heuens declare the
glory of God,
                  Pſal. 18. 
                  and the firmament doth
anoūce his works. And in ye. 40. chapter
of Eſay, whē god did talke with ye
Gentiles, he did cal his works to bere
witnes of his greatnes. Lift vp your
eyes (ſaith he) and beholde who hath
made this.
                  Sap. 13. And ye 
                  Sage doth ſay, yt men
through their vaniti haue not knowē
God by his works.Rom. 1. And S. Paul doth
abſolutely cōdemne thē, ſaying, ye thei
can procure no excuſe of ignorance, for
the inuiſible things (ſuch as is the diuinitie
of God) may be knowe by the
viſible thinges. And therfore they are
vnexcuſable, hauing hidden the truth
of God to vniuſtice: for after that
they haue knowen him, they haue
not geuen him that thankes and honour,
that they ſhould haue done, but
they haue beene deceaued through
their owne ſubtilitie, & making a profeſſion
of knowledge, they haue beene

founde fooliſhe and ignoraunt. S. Auguſtine.
8. lib. de Ciu. dei. ca. 24. doeth
reckē 
                  Mercurius, called Hermes Trimegiſtus,
among theſe, foraſmuche as
he did continue in his owne erroure,
although he knewe by that (that one
may ſee in his owne writinges) that
his auncetours did erre greatly in ye
making and worſhipping of ſo many
Gods.
            
            
               ¶The .20. Chapter.
               
                  LActantius Firmianus in his booke
of his diuine Inſtitutions. Cap. 5.
writing againſt the Gentiles, doeth
proue, that there is but one God, and
he doeth alleage as witneſſes all the
olde learned Philoſophers, ſuche as
Thales, Mileſius, Pithagoras, Anaxagoras,
Cleanthus, Anaximeus, Cryſippus,
Heno, Plato, Ariſtotel, Seneca, &
others. Octauius likewiſe, a chriſtian
Orator, diſputing againſt Caecilius,
as then a Gentile, doeth alleage likewiſe,

to confounde theſe olde Philoſophers,
and he doeth adde more, Xenophon,
Spenſippus, Demaritus, Strato,
                  Act. 12.
                  Theophraſtus and many more. S.
Paule likewiſe, preaching to the Athenians,
doth proteſt, that he doth teach
them no newe thing, but rather him
whom they did worſhip, and did not
knowe. By the which it is plainelye
to be ſeene, that the Apoſtles did not
announce vnto the people any newe
lawe, for it was verye olde, and notwithſtanding,
they did confirme it
with miracles. And if you ſaye, that
although thoſe learned Philoſophers
had a knowledge of God, as it doeth
appere by their workes: yet there is
founde in them no mention of Ieſus
Chriſte, and therfore, that it was neceſſary
to approue that doctrine with
ſignes and miracles. But contrarywiſe,
that you in your newe refourmed
Goſpell, doo preache the olde Apoſtolicall
lawe, I doo aunſwere you

to this, that the .9. Sybilles did ſpeake
of his comming and byrth, euen as
playnly as any of the Prophetes: and
amongſt other Sybilla Erithrea did as
fully propheſie of the comming of our
Sauiour to iudge the quicke and the
dead, as any other prophet, as S.
Auguſtine doth teſtifie. Li. 1. de ciui.
dei. cap. 23. Likewiſe of his death and
paſſion, and of the myracles he ſhould
doo before his death. The Oracles of
the falſe goddes haue likewiſe declared
vnto the Gentiles the comming
of Chriſte, as Lactantius Firmianus
doth write,Lib. 
                        •
                     . ca. 15. 
                  lib. 4. cap. 15. in his booke
of the deuine inſtitutions. Nicephorus
in like maner dothe write howe
Auguſtus Caeſar ſacrifiſing to the
God Apollo, Pythius in his temple
coulde get no other but a very breefe
aunſwere, then Caeſar dyd demaund
why he coulde not make him then
as fullye aunſwere as he did at other
tymes, Apollo was conſtrayned

to ſaye the trueth, the whyche
was, that a young Hebrewe childe
borne of late did commaunded him
to retire him ſelfe into his hell, vnto
whom he was forced to yeelde obediently,
foraſmuche as he was god,
and gouernour of the other goddes,
and therefore that he did counſel the
ſayde Caeſar quietly to retyre himſelfe,
and to make no more adoe: the
verſes are theſe,

                     Me puer Hebraeus diuos deos ipſe gubernans
                     Cedere ſede iubet, triſtem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         redire ſuborcum,
                     Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abſcedito
noſtris.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The .21. Chapter.
               THus you ſee that Ieſus chriſt was
anounced among the gentiles before
the cōming of the Apoſtles, who
notwithſtanding this dyd not let

to ſet forth the doctrine that they wer
ſent to preache, with many notable
miracles, although they did not reach
but that doctrine that was verye ancient:
And although that their doctrine
was newe and vnknowen to
the Gentiles, yet you cannot alleage,
that it was ſo vnto the Iewes: for
they being ſtudied & learned in Moyſes
lawe, they hearde nothing of the
Apoſtles, but had bene prophecied by
the Prophetes. Doeth not S. Paule
ſay at the beginning of his Epiſtle to
the Romanes, that he was ſeperated
to preache the Goſpel, the which God
promiſed by the holye Scriptures. S.
Peter talking with the Iewes,Act. 3. doeth
geue them plainelye to vnderſtande,
that his was no newe doctrine, becauſe
yt he did preach Ieſus Chriſte, of
whom Moyſes had prophecied longe
before, ſaying thus. God ſhall rayſe a
Prophete among your brethren,
                  Deut. 16. 
                  you
ſhall obey him as you doo me, and he

that doth refuſe it, ſhalbe put to death.
S. Peter ſaith afterwarde: All the prophetes
that haue beene from Samuell
vnto this time, doo announce vnto
you theſe dayes, that is to ſaye, the
doctrine that we doo preache. That
that the Apoſtles did preach vnto the
Iewes, that is to wit, the remiſſiō of
their ſinnes, by the death and paſſion
of Chriſte, it was no newe thing: for
as S. Peter ſayde vnto Cornelius,
                  Act. 10. All
the Prophetes haue witneſſed, that
theſe that beleue in him, ſhall obteyne
remiſſion of their ſins: for it had bene
ſo prophecied by Eſay. cap. 55. vnto ye
people, aboue .800. yeres, ſaying that
he had layed vpon his ſonne all oure
iniquities, as it doeth appere in his
booke, in the which he doth ſhew him
ſelfe more an Euangeliſt then a Prophete:
for there he doth write the torments
of our Sauiour, euen as if he
had bene preſent at his paſſiō. Dauid
likewiſe doth talk of ye like, where he

doeth mention, the extreme affliction
of our Redeemer, and of the gal,
the Iſope, and the Vinager. Daniel
did not onely diſcrye the death of
our Sauiour, but therewithall, the
verye time that he ſhoulde come. And
to be briefe, all the Prophetes haue
announced vnto the Iewes that,
that the Apoſtles did preache vnto
them. Nowe, if we deſire to knowe
why this olde doctrine preached, aſwell
to the gentiles as to the Iewes
by the Apoſtles, was confirmed
with many miracles, which they did
in the name of God, who ſent them,
the cauſe is this: the deuill had ſo obſcured
and hidden the truth ouer all
nations, that ſuperſtitious Idolatrye
had taken place in ſteede of the true
ſeruice of God, ſo yt ye poore Painims
did not put their truſt in one God,
but in a multitude of goddes. And in
like maner, the true religion geuen by
god to ye Iſraelites, had ben troubled,

and almoſte cleane aboliſhed by the
traditions of the Scribes and Phariſes,
in the which they did truſte, for
the iuſtification and remiſſion of
theyr ſynnes. The like doo you reporte
of vs, and of your great curteſye
yee are content to matche vs
with the ſuperſtitious Iewes, and
Idolatrous Paynims, plating your
ſelues in the degree of the pure Goſpellers,
and the true children of God,
taking vppon you the Succeſſion
of the Apoſtles, and calling youre
Congregation, the true Catholike
and Apoſtolicall Churche. This
ſoundes notablye well, but ſeeing
that youre cauſe is abſolutelye to refourme
the Churche, as they didde,
preaching the auncient doctrine of
God, as they did, and dealing with
ſuperſtitious Idolaters, that cleaue
more to the traditions of menne,
then vnto the pure worde of god, as

the Iewes. Seing thē, that our caſe
is reported vnto the ſimilitude of the
Iewes, and yours to the Apoſtles &
Prophetes, howe comes it to paſſe,
that you doo not as they did, ſeeing
that you are ſent from one maſter?
Why doo ye not make your commiſſion
appere by ſignes and miracles,
ſeeing that God hath euer done the
like heretofore, when he hath ſent the
like Commiſſion to yours?
            
            
               ¶The .22. Chapter.
               YOu doo coniure vs by the name of
the liuing God, to receaue youre
Goſpell and pure word of God, or els
you doo threaten vs, that you will
ſhake off the duſt of your feet in teſtimonie
againſt vs, becauſe that wee
will not beleue your wordes. But in
this matter ye doo alleage a wronge
text: for we were very ſimple, if we
ſhoulde forſake or remoue the foundation
of our Churche, vppon ſuche an

occaſion as I will ſhewe by this diſcourſe
that doeth folowe, I am ſure
that you are not ignorant, howe that
Luther, after he began to preache, his
Goſpell was not founde barren: for
immediatlye after his beginning, he
did ingender another Goſpeller, that
is to wyt, Andrew Coralſtadius, and
from thence was produced another,
called Zuinglius, & of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius.
Then, Thomas Muncerus,
conſidering, that he had no leſſe
the gifte of the ſpirite then the reſt, he
began to forge a newe Goſpell of the
Anabaptiſts, with ye which he thought
to gratifye the Towne of Milhouſe,
who had receaued alreadie the Goſpell
of Luther. But the Senate of
that Towne, being weried alreadye
with to many ſtraunge Goſpels, they
aduertiſed Luther your fyrſte Apoſtle
of it. And he wrote to them againe,
that Thomas Muncerus ought not to
be receaued, if he could not proue his

vocation by ſome miracle. And if you
demaunde where I haue founde
this, I ſaye to you, not in the workes
of ſome lying Papiſt, but in the
Commentaryes of youre deere Hiſtoriographer
maſter Sleydon,Li. 8. fo. 4. who
hath ſo good a grace in his writing,
and is ſo moued with the trueth of
his ſpirite, that he doth omit nothing
in his Hiſtorie, but that, that doeth go
agaynſt himſelfe, and the profeſſours
of his religion. I doo wiſhe thoſe
that doo vnderſtande the Latine, to
reade this aunſwere of Luther in the
Commentaries them ſelues, and for
the reſt, I will ſet it forth, tranſlated,
not by me, but by a miniſter of youre
owne ſect, called Robert Preuoſt, who
dwelleth in a ſegnorie of Berne. According
to his tranſlation, the wordes
are theſe. Luther was of opinion, that
the Senate of Milhouſe ſhould do very
well and wiſely, to demaunde of Muncer,
who had geuen him commiſsion
to teache, and who had called him vnto

it. If he ſay, that it is God, let them demaunde
of him, to ſhewe ſome ſigne or
miracle to proue his vocation: and yf
he could not do it, that they ſhould baniſhe
him: for it is common to God, to
declare his will by ſome miracle, at
any time when he will haue the common
cuſtome and order chaunged.
               
               Theſe are the wordes of Luther. We
ought to yeelde that that is right to
euery body, and not depriue any man
of the praiſe that he doth deſerue. And
ſo I ſay, all the Catholike Churche is
bound to geue prayſe and thankes to
Luther, for ye memorable good & wiſe
counſel that he hath geuē, for he hath
taught vs, how we ſhal expel & ouerthrow,
not only ye hereſies that he did
preache vnto vs, but likewiſe yours, &
thoſe of all the reſt. For if it be ſo, that
euery time that god will chaunge the
ordinarie cuſtome (ſuche as ours) to
an extraordinarye (ſuche as yours)
there ought miracles to be ſhewed by

thoſe that come extraordinarily. By
this good & godly aduiſe, we knowe,
that Martin Luther, nor none of you
all, which doo come extraordinarily,
as he did, do come from God, but rather
from the prince of darknes. Caluin
doth confirme this opinion of Luther,
as touching the vocation of the
miniſterie: for vpon the thirde Chapter
of S. Luke, in his harmonie, he doeth
ſay thus, None ought to attribute
vnto himſelfe by authoritie any office,
foraſmuch as it is great temeritie: ſuch
perſons did nothing of them ſelues except
it were, being called to it by God.
Of this we gather, we ought to enterpriſe
nothing of our ſelues: for if
that the great Prophets haue attended
to be called of God, what are
thoſe, that in theſe dayes take it vpon
them of them ſelues, we ought to anſwere,
that they are preſumptuous felowes.
&c. like vnto Caluin and his felowes.
            
            
               
               ¶The .23. Chapter.
               ALthough that by the teſtimonie of
your owne doctoures ye are condemned,
yet you doo ſtill mainteyne
your yll cauſe, ſaying, that ye ought
to be receaued to preache the Goſpell
extraordinarily, that is to ſaye, without
the commiſſion of the Paſtors &
Biſhops, being thoſe that are ſent vs
by the permiſſion and ordinaunce of
God. And you ſay, to mainteine your
Commiſſion extraordinarie, that you
haue ye holye Scriptures, which you
doo alleage, the which alone ought
in this behalfe to be of more credite,
then all the miracles that euer the Apoſtles
did. For it maye ſo chaunce, yt
by ſubtill deuiſes and impoſtures of
the deuill, miracles maye be falſelye
counterfaited, but not the Scripture
which is the touchſtone of the truth,
as it ſhalbe ſeene by experience, when
the childe of perdition, otherwiſe called

                  Antichriſte ſhall come. For he, to
confyrme his ſaying, ſhall ſhewe ſuch
great Signes and Miracles, that
the verye electe ſhoulde be ſeduced, if
it were poſſible. Nowe to aunſwere
vnto this, which is a notable waye
to deceaue the ſimple and vnlearned,
I ſay, that if the alleaging of Scriptures
ſhoulde maynteyne you, and
fauoure your cauſe ſo muche as you
doo ſaye, our ſyde were driuen to
harde ſhiftes: for then we might bee
blamed before the ſeate of God, not
onely for not receyuing your Goſpell,
but likewiſe, for refuſinge the Goſpell
of diuers heretikes that haue
beene manye hundred yeeres before
you were borne: which did all alleage
the Scriptures, as it doeth appere
by the three paſſages written vnto
the Hebrewes aboue mentioned.Cap. 6. 10. &. 12. By
the whiche the Nouatians did pretende,
to verifye, that the mercye of

God was denyed vnto him, that did
offende after his Baptiſme, ioyned
with that that is written in the fyrſt
booke of the Kinges. If man (ſayde
the good Helye) doeth ſinne agaynſt
man, he maye agree with him agayne:
but yf he come to offende God, who
ſhall he be that ſhall praye for his ſinne?
Did not the Arrians alleage Scriptures,
to maynteyne, that Chriſte
was not God and manne? Yes ſurelye,
as manye places or more then
the Catholikes. Saint Auguſtine doth
write in his booke De haereſibus, ad
Quoduultdeum, That there was
in his tyme a certayne ſecte of heretikes
that taughte, that for a man
to be ſaued, he ought to be gelded.
And they did alleage the nynetenth
Chapiter of Saint Mathewe, where
CHRISTE doeth prayſe the
Ennuches, whiche haue gelded
theym ſelues for the Kingedome

of heauen. And if a man were
diſpoſed to forge another hereſye like
this, he might ſoone finde ſcripture to
mainteyne it, being yll interpreted: for
he doth commaund, that we ſhoulde
pull out our eyes, and to cut off our
handes and feete euerye time, that
through them we are ſcandalizated:
for (ſaith he) it were better for one to
enter blinde or lame into the kingdome
of heauen, then to be condemned,
hauing all our members: ſo that,
taking theſe words as they are plainly
written, we ought to cut the members
from our body. Beſydes this, he
that would forge an hereſie ſomwhat
more pleaſaunt and eaſye, one might
ſoone doo it: the which is, that for to
go to Paradiſe, we haue no neede of
hoſe, ſhoes or money, becauſe that our
Sauiour did ſo commaund it to his
Apoſtles.An hereſie of the Puritans. One may likewiſe proue by
the Goſpell, that we haue no neede of
Magiſtrates nor other Superiours,

foraſmuch as our Sauiour hath ſaid,
that one is your Lorde and maſter,
namely Chriſte. Moreouer, a manne
maye proue by Scripture, that one
ought to retayne nothing vnto him
ſelfe, if any other demaunde it, foraſmuche
as it is written, If one demaunde
of you your coate, you ought
not onely to geue it, but your dublet
alſo: and if that one geue vs a box on
the eare, it is not inough to take it patiently,
but we muſt turne the other
cheeke alſo. Iouinian a great heretike,
did teache, that a Chriſtian after his
baptiſme doth no more offende God,
yea, that he coulde not, although he
would. Who would not hate ſuche a
blaſphemous error as this? yet if the
alleaging of the Scriptures ought
to ſuffiſe, he maye be preferred before
maſter Caluin as more auncient: for
he doth alleage S. Iohn in his fyrſt Epiſtle,Cap. 5.
who ſaith: We knowe, that he
that is borne of God, doeth not ſin, for

the generation of God doeth preſerue
him, and the yll ſpirite ſhall not touche
him. And in the ſame Epiſtle he ſayeth:Cap. 3.
Euery man that is borne of God,
that is to ſaye, baptiſed, he doeth not
ſinne, for the ſeede of God doth dwell
in him, and he cannot ſinne, for he is
borne of god. S. Auguſtine doth write
in his .89. Epiſt. ad Hilarium, that the
Pelagians and Maniches, amonge other
hereſyes that they did mainteyne,
they ſayde, that it was impoſſible
for riche men to enter into Paradiſe,
vntill they had ſolde all their
goodes, and geuen them to the poore,
and that all things ought to be common.
The which doctrine is eaſily to
be mainteyned by the Scripture yll
vnderſtoode:Math. ca. 10. &, 16. for our Sauiour doth
ſaye, that for to be his Diſciples, we
muſt forſake and renounce all that
we haue, in teſtimonie of the which
the fyrſte Chriſtians at Ieruſalem
did ſell all their poſſeſſions, and preſented

the money of them to the Apoſtles
to geue to the poore. And that
that is worſe, the Adamites did mainteyne
a greater errour then this, and
more brutiſhe, the which is, that all
mens wiues ſhould be common, and
they did call this the true Goſpel, and
the pure worde of God, alleaging for
it the fyrſt & eyght of Geneſis, where
God doth ſaye: Increaſe and multiplye,
and repleniſhe the earth. If you
doo ſaye, that this is a fooliſhe opinion,
I confeſſe it to be ſo: but that very
Churche which hath condemned
this hereſye of theirs, doeth likewiſe
condemne yours. When the deuil determined
to fight with Chriſte, he
thought he could in no wiſe ayde him
ſelfe ſo well, as with the holy Scripture,
perſwading him, that the beſt
way for him to ſhewe him ſelfe to be
the ſonne of God was to breake
his necke, caſtinge himſelfe downe
from the Pinnacle of the TemTemple.

And he did alleage this text
ſaying,Pſal. 90. as it is written: That the Angels
of God ſhoulde ſo preſerue him,
that he ſhoulde not hurt his foote againſt
the ſtones, folowing that Dauid
ſaide. And if I ſhould go about to
write al the places of Scripture that
the heretikes haue alleaged, to mainteyne
their horrible errours, I thinke
ſurely, I might make a bigger booke
then the Bible.
            
            
               ¶The .24. Chapter.
               YF that the ſonne doo hate the father,
or the father the ſon: or if the
wife doo hate the huſband, or the huſband
the wife, they may take ye word
of God, yll vnderſtoode, to defende
their cauſe: for he doth cōmaunde vs,
that we ſhall hate thoſe that are neereſt
vnto vs, as vnder the payne of
not entring into Paradiſe, if we doo
contrarye. But this ought to be vnderſtoode,
that we ought not to preferre

the loue of any creature, howe
neere ſoeuer they be to vs, before the
loue of God. In like maner, he that
will ſaye, that we ſhoulde not eate of
ye blud of thoſe beaſts that ar ſmothered,
he may ſoone alleage the Scripture
for it, which doeth ſaye, That at
the Councell that the Apoſtles helde
at Ieruſalem, being preſent the holye
Ghoſte, this ordinance was made, as
we reade in the .15. Chapter of the
Actes. And if that one ſhould take in
hande to bring all the places of ſcripture,
that the heretikes haue alleaged
to mainteyne their opinions, I dare
boldly ſaye, that he ſhall fynde it an
endleſſe piece of worke. For amonge
ſo great a number of falſe prophetes,
there hath bene very fewe, or almoſte
none, but they haue ſought to mainteyne
their opinions by Scripture,
drawing the places, as it were by violence,
to a depraued and a corrupte
ſenſe, being this the maner of interpreting

of the Scriptures, called at
this day the pure worde of God, by
thoſe that haue profeſſed to be as long
as they liue, enemies to the trueth.
The learned and auncient Doctour
Epiphanius, in his fyrſt booke againſt
hereſyes, doeth alleage, as touchinge
this matter, a verye familier example,
ſaying, that if ſome good Caruer
had made the Image of a king, adorned
with manye Iewelles and precious
ſtones, and that another ſhould
come afterward, and ſhould take the
ſame Iewels & precious ſtones, and
make with them the Image of a
Foxe or a Dogge, and that he ſhould
ſaye: Beholde, here is the Image of
a king, woulde not euery body laugh
him to ſcorne, and ſay, that he did it in
mockerie, or els, that he were mad?
Yes ſurely: for although they be the
ſame Iewelles, and that very ſtuffe,
wherewith was made the Image
of the kinge, yet, becauſe that this

other workeman hath taken them
awaye, and faſhioned them after
another ſorte, it ought no more to be
called the Image of a king, but the
picture of a foxe or a dogge. Euen
thus is it with the holye Scriptures,
whiche were lefte vs by the
Apoſtles and Prophetes, for to paint
in riche coulours the Image of the
great kinge of glorye: but ſeeinge
that you take thoſe precious ſtones
from the Image of this kinge,
and doo appropriate them vnto the
Image of a foxe, making them ſerue
to cloake youre hereſyes withall, it
ought no more to be called the worde
of God, nor the holye Scripture,
but the woorde of menne, and falſe
doctrine. And therefore, yf you will
haue it to beare the fyrſte name,
you muſt ſet it in the fyrſt eſtate, that
is to ſaye, that it ought to be interpreted
by him, that did firſte indite it.

It is not by the will of man, ſayth S.
Peter. Epiſt. 2. Ca. 1. That the prophecie
was brought, but by the inſpiration
of the holy Ghoſte, that holye perſons
haue ſpoken. &c. I knowe well,
that you attribute the intelligence of
the Scripture vnto your Sinagog:
But howe ſhall we beleue, that the
holy Ghoſte doth dwell more in you,
then in all the vniuerſall Churche,
which hath continued from the paſſion
of Chriſt, vntil this time? I pray,
doo ſo much as aunſwere me, if you
my maſters be the lodging of the holye
Ghoſte, where did he make his reſidence
before ye were borne? I know
already your aunſwere, the which is,
In the heartes of the faithfull. And
where were thoſe faythfull? Marye,
where the holy Ghoſte was. Anſwer
thus ſtill, and ye ſhalbe ſure, that ye
ſhall not be ouertakē: for it is as good
as to playe Handie dandie, and ſo ye
ſhall accompliſhe the olde Prouerbe,

the which ſayeth: It is as farre from
Douer to Caleys, as from Caleys to
Douer. But to the ende that all the
worlde may ſee the great hazarde of
eternall damnation that thoſe runne
into, that are ſo ready to beleue euery
body, thinking that they are aſſured
of their health, foraſmuche as thoſe
that ſeduce them, ſay beholde, there is
the Scripture, it is the pure worde of
God and the verye Goſpell, I will
ſet forth ſome hereſyes, that haue bene
in times paſt condemned by the Catholike
Churche: the which notwithſtanding
haue bene aſwell, yea, and
more largelye confyrmed by Scripture,
then you can confyrme anye of
yours.
            
            
               ¶The .25. Chapter.
               THe Catholike Church continually
hath faythfully holden, and doeth
hold, that our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt
is true God and man, hauing taken

naturall fleſhe in the wombe of the
virgin Marye, whollye like vnto
ours, as touching the corporal eſſence,
that is to ſaye, excepted onelye ſinne,
the which bodye he did fourme of the
verye fleſhe and ſubſtaunce of his
mother, by the operation of the holye
Ghoſte, who hath wrought ſo notable
and excellent a woorke, that two
contrary or diuers natures are miraculouſlye
ioyned and vnited in one
perſon, without confuſion or conuerſion
of the one ſubſtaunce into the other,
but by coniunction and vnion
of them both, called by the diuines,
Hypoſtatique. This doctrine hath euer
beene receaued and holden by
the Churche in equall degree of
trueth and reuerence, with the reſt of
the poyntes of religion, which nowe
you ſeeke to aboliſhe. And notwithſtanding
this, diuers Miniſters and
Preachers deriued from the ſacred

conſiſtoryes of Valentinus, Photinus,
Manes, Theodorus, Neſtorius, Apollinaris,
Eutichus, Macharius, Eutiocheus,
beſydes a great number of other
famous heretikes that I cannot here
name, haue ſought to teache the contrarye,
ſaying, that they were ſent
from him that ſent the Apoſtles, to
refourme the Churche, not by the
Traditions of men, which you call
Papiſticall, but by the pure worde of
God. For euen like you, my maſters,
did Valentinus and his felowes begin
the refourmed Churche, taking vpon
them the correction of all the Magiſtrates
and Fathers in times paſt,
ſaying that they did abuſe the people,
becauſe that they taught, that Ieſus
Chriſte had taken fleſhe and bloud
of the Virgin Marye, ſaying, that
this was a great errour: the whiche
ought to be refourmed, and that the
people ſhoulde beleeue, that he
brought his bodye from heauen,

and that he cauſed it to paſſe through
the wombe of the virgin Marye, as
the water doth through the chanell.
This Goſpell was very ſtraunge, yet
the ſaide Valentinus did not want
Scripture, as you haue to confyrme
it, interpreting it, euē as you do interprete
here in Fraunce. He did alleage
for his text the thirde of Iohn, where
Chriſte doth ſaye: No perſon is aſcended
to heauen, but he that did deſcende
from heauen. And therefore did he
mainteine, that ſeing Chriſt is in heauen,
and deſcended from heauen, that
he tooke no fleſhe of the virgin Marye.
Neſtorius another notable heretike,
did linke his Goſpel to Apollinaris
opinion in this caſe, ſeperating the
manhood from God, and ſaying that
the ſonne of man ought not to be called
GOD: for ſeeing (ſaide Apollinaris)
that this man is deſcended
from heauen, it doth folowe, that
he tooke no fleſhe of the virgin: and

beſydes this,Ioh. 6. Chriſte ſaith: I am deſcended
from heauen, not to doo my
will, but the will of my father. Here
he doeth not ſpeake, as one that is
God, for if it were ſo, he woulde haue
no other will but the will of his father,
and ſo he doth ſpeake like a mā.
And he ſayeth, that he is deſcended
from heauen: for the which cauſe this
ſame Valentinus did take the concluſion
of this Goſpel to his aduantage,
for the third authoritie that is written
in the fyrſte to the Corinthians,
where S. Paule ſayth: the fyrſt manne
is of earth earthlye, the ſeconde is of
heauen heauenly. The which paſſage
or place is as fyt to ſerue Valentinus
opinion, as al the places that you, and
all thoſe that holde your opinion can
alleage.
            
            
               ¶The .22. Chapter.
               ANother Miniſter likewiſe called
Apollinaris folowed after theſe,

ſent by the ſaid maſter, and yet according
to his ſaying, he did preache the
pure word of God, affirming that the
Churche ought to be reformed, which
had beleued, yt the two natures were
conteined in Ieſus Chriſte, & that the
true religion was, to beleeue, as it is
written in the firſt of Iohn, that the
word was in deede becom fleſh, or cō
                  uerted
into fleſhe: And to confyrme
this, he did alleage ye ſaid place, wher
S. Iohn doth ſay: And the worde was
made fleſh: & whē the Catholikes did
reply againſt him, ſaying that yt 
                  verbe
or word tooke fleſhe, and not as touching
the conuerſion of one ſubſtance
into another: he did fortifie his Goſpell
with another text, where S. Iohn
doth write of the mariage at Canaa,
where the water was chaunged into
wine, that is to ſaye, as touching
the verye ſubſtaunce of the water,
which was turned into wine: Euen
ſo ſayth he, that it became at the very

Incarnation of Chriſte, alleaging
that that we haue ſayde, And ye word
was made fleſhe. Arrius, whiche was
the moſte famous heretike that euer
hath beene, did pretende to verifye an
other Goſpell: and his was, that our
Sauiour Chriſte had not taken at
his Incarnation, a perfecte ſoule, as
other men haue, but that he had only
a body, and that his diuinitie did ſupplye
the abſence of his ſoule. Of this
opinion was Apollinaris, Theodorus,
Moſsneſtenus: and Neſtorius came
after, and they did blame the Catholike
Churche, becauſe it did teache
the ſayde vnion, called, as I haue
ſayde, Hipoſtaticque, that is to ſaye, of
the two natures in one perſon. And
they did alleage for their argument
a very ſubtill reaſon, the which was,
that God did inhabite within the
body of our ſauiour, as he did within
a Temple, that is to ſay, by grace, and

not by being vnited together. And
therefore, euen as it were a great follye,
to ſay that God is a Temple, that
ſo it is to ſaye, that God is a manne.
This Goſpell did ſeeme verye newe,
yet did not they want Scripture to
mainteyne it, and that more plainer,
then euer I coulde ſee anye place, to
mainteyne your hereſyes. Chriſte did
ſaye vnto ye Iewes:Ioh. 2. 
                  Vndoe this Temple,
and in three dayes I will builde it
againe. He meant it by the Temple of
his bodye, ſaith S. Iohn. Then the bodye
of Ieſus Chriſte is the Temple of
god, & god is not his tēple. See whether
this be not a notable argument
to deceaue the ſimple man that is not
vſed to reade howe the doctours expounde
theſe hard places. And moreouer
they did alleage S. Paule in the
fyrſt to the Coloſsians, where he doth
ſaye, that the plenitude or fulnes of
diuinitie doth dwell in Ieſus Chriſte
corporally, they doo alleage this place

greatly to their purpoſe, to proue, that
God is a Temple, that is to ſaye, by
grace, and not being vnited. For the
thirde place they take the. 8. of Iohn,
where Chriſte doth ſaye: He that hath
ſent me, is with me, and he hath not left
me alone. And therefore Theodorus
& his felowes did conclude, that there
was no more vnion betweene the diuinitie
and humanitie of our Sauiour,
then there is betweene God and
vs.1. Cor 5. Of the which S. Paul doth ſpeake,
where he ſayeth: He that is ioyned to
God, is made one ſpirite with him.
            
            
               ¶The .27. Chapter
               IT doeth ſuffiſe, that one maye ſee
by theſe felowes, howe ſoone one
that is yll diſpoſed may alleage ſcripture
in corrupt ſenſe, to mainteyne
ſuche hereſyes as theſe, the whiche I
will not ſtay to confute: for (thankes
be to God) they doo not reigne nowe,
for they haue periſhed and their auauthours,

as you ſhall and your folowers,
if ye doo not repent in time.
And beſydes this, our doctours haue
fullye aunſwered by textes of Scriptures
theſe olde hereſyes, as you may
ſee in al ye auncient eccleſiaſticall writers,
and confuted them, not onelye
with pithye reaſons, but with the
true worde of God, and the authoritie
of diuers generall Councels. And
if I haue noted here ſome part, both
of their authours, and of them, to
ſhew, how they did ſeeke to confyrme
their damnable opinions, I doo it,
only to warne the ſimple people, that
they ſhoulde not ſo ſoone geue eare to
falſe Paſtors, which haue nothing in
their mouthes but the holye Scripture,
and the pure worde of God, couering
the cuppes of their poyſon
with the golde and pretious ſtones
which they haue taken from the Image
of the eternall kinge, to painte

thoſe ſubtill Foxes that will leade
them all to damnation. And therefore
in the name of God I doo deſyre
thoſe that are not much vſed to reade
the Scriptures, nor to heare how the
Churche and the Doctours doo expounde
the harde places, to beware,
howe they reade them, for feare of falling
into errour, taking onely the letter,
which manye times hath a contrarye
ſenſe to that that is outwardlye
written. For if ſo manye men of
great learning and excellent vnderſtanding
haue found ſuch great rocks
in this rough ſea, which haue manye
times ouerthrowen their ſhips: howe
daungerous then muſt it needes be
vnto thoſe that will take it in hande
ſo doubtfull a nauigation, hauing litle
ſkill or none at all. But as for you
my maſters of the contrarye ſyde,
you canne ſayle with all tides and al
winds geuing ye gouernance of ye ſhip

or the guiding of the ſterne, without
conſideration to all kinde of people.
We haue at this daye in Fraunce (I
will not ſay in Englande) many that
haue the holy ſpirite, Interpreters of
the Scriptures: And forſooth, what
are they? Mary Pedlers, Cobblers,
Tanners, Bankrouts, Runnegates,
and ſuche others: which hauing no other
liuing, ſue to my Lorde Biſhop,
and he makes them miniſters, being
not one of them, but hath the holy ſpirite:
for aſſoone as they can ſaye, the
Lorde, and rayle vpon the Pope, the
Biſhops, and al the learned men that
haue bene in times paſt, Oh, theſe are
great doctors, no place of Scripture
to them is harde, all the auncient doctours
were men, and the generall
Councels did erre. I knowe, that you
doo mainteine your opinion with the
ſaying of Chriſte,Ioh. 8. alleaging it as other
heretikes haue done, the whiche
is, That the heauenly father hath hid

theſe high and profound things from
the great Clerkes, and hath reuealed
them vnto the meeke and humble.
This is true, but it ought to be vnderſtoode,
to the humble and meeke
of ſpirite, and not to thoſe which truſt
ſo much to their owne wittes, beinge
puffed vp with arrogant ignoraunce,
that they thinke to knowe more in
three dayes reading, then the Doctours
coulde in fyftie yeres ſtudie, faining
themſelues to be like the Apoſtles,
as if that god, gouerned by their
appetites, did ſende euery month the
feaſt of Pentecoſt.
            
            
               ¶The .28. Chapter.
               I Praye Syrs, ſince you are ſo abſolute,
aunſwere me to this obiection:
Is it good to beleeue all maner of
people, that doo alleage the Scriptures,
or no? If ye ſaye, yea, why doo
not you beleue the abouenamed Valentinus,
Apollinaris, Hebion, Cherintus
                  
and Neſtorius, with diuers others
that haue ſought to mainteyne their
errours with the newe and olde Teſtament.
If you ſaye no, but that we
ought rather to folowe the counſell of
S. Iohn in his fyrſte Epiſtle, cap. 4.
The which is, not to beleue euery ſpirite,
but that we ought to proue, whether
it be of God or no: What proufe
will you ſhewe vs of yours? Shewe
the priuiledge that you haue, by the
which God doth enioyne vs to beleue
your Goſpell, rather then the Goſpell
of the Pelagians, Nouatians, Neſtorians,
and other ſuche falſe Apoſtles,
conſidering that they haue alleaged
the Scriptures aſwell as you. If
you ſaye, that they were heretikes, abuſers
of the people, and rauiſhing
wolues cloathed in lambes Skins,
and falſe Interpreters of the Scriptures,
all this is certaine: But what
though the like reporte goeth of you?
Ye ſaye, that ye are ſent from God,

to refourme the Churche, They ſaye
as muche. They preached, that the
Pope was Antichriſte, ſhewinge
themſelues verye eloquent in detracting
and rayling againſt ye Catholike
Romane Churche, you doo the like.
At euery worde they did alleage the
Scriptures in their Sermons, to
confyrme their doctrine, as you do for
yours. That that they preached, was
called by them the Goſpell, and the
pure worde of the Lord: theſe are the
very tearmes that you vſe amonge
your holye prophetes: they haue beene
condemned as heretikes by the generall
Councels, you are ſo likewiſe.
They did appeal vnto the pure word
of God, you doo the like: Yet are they
proued to be falſe cogging knaues,
and ſo ſhall you. Then ſeing there is
ſo great an vniformitie betweene
you, vppon what grounde ſhall we
confyrme that reaſon that ſhoulde
condemne theym as heretikes,

and allowe you for Catholikes. S. Auguſtine
in his Epiſtle .161. did put vnto
a Donatiſt called Honoratus this
probleme: We deſire thee, not to think
it much to aunſwere vs to this: what
cauſe doeſt thou knowe, or what
thing hath there bene done, that hath
made Chriſt loſe his inheritance, ſpred
ouer all the worlde, to come to be contayned
only in Affrick, & there only to
remayne? We put the like queſtion to
Caluin, Beza, Virett, and the reſt, that
it may pleaſe them to tell vs, if that
by chaunce they haue ben aduertiſed,
through what occaſion our Sauiour
Chriſt hath loſt his inheritaunce, that
is to ſaye, the Churche ſpread ouer all
the worlde, to remaine nowe in the
latter dayes, with a company of rude
Swizers, or in two or three corners
beſydes, and not among the reſt, (for
there is a great number of good Catholikes)
what badge can ye ſhewe,
or what ſigne to make vs know, that

you are the ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles
of Chriſte? If that the Scriptures
that you alleage, ought to be a ſufficient
proufe, we are content to accepte
it, if you will be content to graunt
the like vnto the abouenamed heretikes,
whiche haue fortifyed their
campe with as manye places more,
then you doo alleage. Nowe if that
(notwithſtanding the Scriptures
by them alleaged) you doo condemne
them as heretikes, becauſe that they
did interprete them contrary to that
that the Churche doth teache (and to
ſay truth, you can imagine no other
excuſe) to what purpoſe doo you take
vpon you the names of Catholikes,
ſeeing that you commit the like offence?
The diuerſities of thoſe old hereſyes
grounded vppon the Scriptures
yll interpreted, doo teache vs,
that we ſhoulde not permit the noyſe
of youre reformed Goſpell that ſoundeth
ſo ſhrill, to make vs reele from

our auncient fayth, and without going
ſo farre to ſeek that that we haue
ſo neere at hande. Let vs talke of the
preſent time, howe many contrarye
ſectes doth there reigne? howe many
heades of hereſyes? Some are Lutherans,
ſome Anabaptiſts, ſome Puritans,
ſome Proteſtants, ſome Preciſians,
and all theſe do fortifye their campes
with Scriptures, to fight one againſt
another. The Zuinglians and
the Caluiniſts on the other ſyde doo
write, that all theſe doo erre, and they
proue it by Scripture. The Anabaptiſts
laughe at all the reſt. The Prophetes
Celeſtes, which is another
ſecte, doo no leſſe, grounding theym
ſelues vppon their reuelations, becauſe
that Dauid ſayeth:Pſal. 84. 
                  Heare what
the Lorde doeth ſpeake in me. The
Deiſts or Trinitaries, which are come
laſt of all, crye out and ſaye, that all
they are heretikes, and they proue it

by the olde and newe Teſtament. I
praye nowe tell me, which of al theſe
ſhall I receaue, ſeeing that they doo
all alleage the holye Scriptures? If
we receaue ſome and not all, thoſe
that are refuſed will ſaye, that we offer
them wronge: for they haue their
ſhoppes ſtored with as good ſtuffe of
the Scriptures, and as wel alleaged
as all the reſt. If we receaue them
all, it will be a renewing of the olde
confuſion of Babilon, through the neglecting
of ſo manye Goſpels. If you
ſaye, that we oughte to folowe thoſe
that conforme them ſelues moſte vnto
the pure worde of God, that will
come to one ende: for if I doo demaunde
of you, how we ſhall know
whiche do conforme theym ſelues
moſte vnto the truthe, you aunſwere
me, that it muſt be done by the grace
of the holye Ghoſte, ſent by the
Lorde, yf with a true hearte

he is inuocated of the faythfull. Seeing
you knowe ſo well the way how
to agree together, howe comes it to
paſſe, that you haue not vſed it this
fortie or fiftie yeres, which are the precinctes
of the time, ſince your auncient
Churche beganne: ſeeing that you
haue aſſembled ſo manye times together,
why haue ye not prayed vnto
the Lorde, to ſende the ſpirite of truth
to make peace amongſt his Apoſtles?
I thinke that you are not ſo vnſhamfaſte,
that you will denye the quarels
and debates that haue riſen amonge
you: I doo not ſaye, in light wordes,
but in great battailes, in rayling proceſſes,
in horrible excommunications,
ſent from the Churches of the Lutherans
vnto the Caluiniſts, and from the
Caluiniſts vnto the Lutherans, as I
haue ſet foorth at large in the booke
that I made of the Sacrament: and
therefore ye are greatlye ouerſeene,
that ye haue not inuocated the ſpirite

of the Lorde, as Caluin hath taught
you in his Cathechiſme, to the ende
that you may come to ſome accorde.
            
            
               ¶The .29. Chapter.
               NOwe to turne againe to our former
purpoſe, if it were ſo, that of
our owne free deliberation we were
minded to forſake our Catholike religion,
the iniurious diſputations that
you vſe amonge your ſelues, were ſufficient,
to make vs to ſuſpende oure
iudgement, without leaning to anye
of both parties, vntill that we coulde
ſee you more reſolute in youre opinions,
being the hardeſt matter, the
knowing in what countrey the reſidence
ſhoulde be kepte for that matter.
You haue geuē abſolute ſentence,
ſaying, that the Catholike Churche
hath erred, euen from the Apoſtles
time vnto this preſent, in praying to
God for the ſoules of thoſe that are
deade, conſtituted in a thirde place
called Purgatorye. You ſhoulde, me

thinke, at the leaſt allowe a thirde
place, although it be not that, to receaue
the ſoules of thoſe, whoſe conſciences
you haue ſo troubled, that
they knowe nowe, neither what is
their faith, nor of what religion they
ſhould be: for whē they reade Luthers
workes they are Lutherans, whē they
meete with Caluins workes they are
Caluiniſts, and at the laſt they do not
know, which ſide in deede is ye trueſt,
being both falſe: and therfore I think
it were good, that a ſequeſtration
were made, that neyther God nor the
Deuill might haue parte of their
ſoules, till there were a farther inquirye
made of ſuche a number of ſects,
and that ſome good and honeſt arbitratour
might geue iudgement as
concerning which partie hath moſte
right. And in the meane while I beſeeche
God, to open ſo the eyes of the
people, that they maye ſee both youre
errours and their owne, and that

through the aboundaunce of their
ſinnes he permit them not to fall into
an Heatheniſme, vnto the which you
doo ſeeke to drawe them with ſo manye
contrary Goſpels.
            
            
               ¶The .30. Chapter.
               IT doth appere well by that that I
haue ſaide, howe the aſſuraunce of
your vocation to the miniſterie is but
founded vpon ſande, foraſmuche as
you doo ſeeke particulerly a contrary
meaning euery one to his owne perticuler
ſenſe, being not this the waye
that an extraordinarye miniſter ſent
from God, ſhoulde vſe to confyrme
his doctrine: for this hath beene the
cuſtome of all olde heretikes, as I
haue alreadye ſayde. There is a verye
great difference betweene ſetting
foorth the Scripture to refourme
ones religion, & to reforme ones conditions:
for when there is any queſtiō
                  
of the refourming of ones maners,
there is no neede to regarde, whether
the doctrine be newe or olde: for (as
the Apoſtle ſayth) let euery man take
it to his owne ſenſe: but when it is to
be talked of, as touching ones fayth,
the Catholike ought greatlye to beware
of ſinguler interpretations, and
to holde them as very ſuſpitious. He
ought to folowe the ſentence that is
holden and taught by the auncient
Catholike Churche, without making
any accompt of all theſe new deuiſes:
for euen as, when one will repaire an
olde houſe, he dares commit it to anye
Maſon, although his cunning be but
ſmall: but if the foundation muſt be
touched, he will ſeeke the beſt maſters
he can fynde: Euen ſo, when one
will correct me for my euill life or conditions,
although that it be ſo, that he
that ſeeks to reforme me be not of the
wiſeſt of the worlde, and that he alleage
to me ſome place or figure of

the Sceipture, not altogether to the
purpoſe, yet all this ought to turne to
me to one effect: for I know his meaning,
although he cannot well expreſſe
it, the which is to haue me chaunge
my naughtie life, and to leaue my yll
conditions. But when he ſhall come
to touche my fayth, and to perſwade
me from that that all my auncetours
did euer holde, frō that that ye Catholike
Churche deriued from the Apoſtles
hath holden and doth holde, and
from that that both the Scripture,
and the generall Councels, and all
the auncient doctours teache and affyrme:
In the repayre of this foundation
I ought to truſt none but euen
the verye beſt, I meane not one or
two, but all theſe that I haue named.
And now, if you ſay, that they maye
all erre, I praye, remember the olde
prouerbe that ſaith: He is a foole that
thinkes that he onely is wiſe, and all
the other fooles, and that it is more

agreable to reaſon, yt one onely ſhould
erre, then one great multitude: for as
thei ſay commonly, two eyes ſee more
then one, and fowre more then two.
            
            
               ¶The .31. Chapter
               OVr Sauiour Chriſte did approue
his vocation after another ſort thē
you doo yours. Searche (ſaith he) the
Scriptures,Ioh. 5. for they beare witnes of
me: he doth not ſay, yt they ar Iudges,
as you ſaye, for you will haue none other
arbitrator but the word of God.
You knowe, that they are two different
thinges, to beare witnes, and to
be a Iudge, & yet the ſcriptures of the
old Teſtament doo conteine, not only
the veritie of the doctrine of our Sauiour
Chriſt, but therwithall the very
ſufficient probation of his perſon, to
teache vs the true worde of God, & to
ouerthrow & deſtroy the whole kingdome
of Sathan, as it is plainlye
ſeene by thoſe that liſt to looke vppon
the oracles of the olde patriarchs and

Prophetes. It is written in the third
of Geneſis, that God ſaide vnto the
woman that her ſeede ſhoulde breake
downe ye ſerpents head. And likewiſe
in the ſaid booke ther is mentiō made
of this diuine ſeede of Abraham:
                  Gen. ca. 12 15. 19. 22. &. 24. & in
the. 15. and. 53. Chapters of Eſay, & in
the. 2. Pſalme Dauid doth talke of it.
And in like maner Daniell, Moyſes &
Aaron with al the reſt of the prophets
in their ſacrifices haue very perfectly
painted the comming and paſſion of
our Sauiour. Moyſes left written in
the prophecie of Iacob, that ye 
                  Meſsias
ſhould come, when the Royall ſcepter
and the adminiſtration of it ſhould be
taken from the line of Iuda. Daniell
was not content to ſaye as the reſt,
that he ſhould come, but he did aſſign
the very time, that is to ſay, by the ſeuentie
two weeks, counting from the
fourth yere of the reigne of Zedechias,
vntill ye time that our Sauiour was
nayled vpon the Croſſe, ye which time

was iuſt fyue hundred yeres. Then,
ſeeing that Chriſte came at the verye
preſcribed time, he might well haue
ſayde vnto the Iewes, that the ſcriptures
did beare witnes of him. But
yet to ſay the truth, if he had done no
other but this, he had not fully approued
his vocation, to condemne their
incredulitie. For they might haue ſaid
vnto him: We know well, that by the
ſaying of the olde prophetes the Meſſias
ſhould come of the line of Iacob,
about this time, foraſmuche as the
Scepter of this kingdome is taken
from the line of Iuda, to be deliuered
vnto Herode: But what though, is
this a good conſequence: the Meſſias
ought to come about this time, therefore
it is I? No no, ſhewe vs your
Commiſſion, let vs ſee ſome Signes,
howe we ſhall knowe it: for if wee
ſhoulde receaue you as our king, it
may be, that ſome other woulde come
and craue the like, ſaying that wee

were abuſed. Our Sauiour Chriſte
ſore fearing this obiection, tooke another
witnes wt him beſydes the ſcripture,
I meane his Miracles. The
workes that I doo (ſayth Chriſte) in
the name of my father,Ioh. 5. beare witnes
of me. The like proufe is made, when
S. Iohn Baptiſt ſent his Diſciples to
our Sauiour,Mat. 11. to haue him teache the
true beliefe that they ſhould haue in
him: this queſtion was put to him,
Art thou he that ſhoulde come, or
ought we to attende for ſome other?
Go your wayes (ſayde Chriſte) and
tell Iohn what ye haue hearde and
ſeene. The blinde receaue their ſight,
the lame do walk vpright, the dumbe
ſpeake, the deafe heare, the lepers are
cured, the dead are raiſed againe, and
the poore are preched vnto, the which
is as much to ſay as, tell Iohn, that I
am the true Meſſias, and that he
ought to attende no other. I doo verifye
my doctrine both by the Scripture

and by Miracles. For firſte Eſay
doeth write, that when the Meſsias
ſhoulde come, he ſhould doo the Miracles
aboue mentioned. Then, ſeeing
that I haue done them in youre preſence,
it foloweth, that I am he that
ſhould come. Thus you ſee Sirs, that
both the Scripture and Miracles
were neceſſarye for the confyrmation
of the comming of Chriſte amonge
the Iewes, who were neuer harder
of beliefe then we are, according to
your opinion: and therefore blame vs
not, if we ſende you packing like
Coggers of the Scriptures, the
which doo neither beare witnes of
your comming, nor yet doo any miracles,
the which two things and more
are neceſſary to make vs beleue your
reformed Goſpell.
            
            
               ¶The .32. Chapter.
               YOu doo alleage the inuincible patience
of your holye Martyrs in

times paſt, for at this preſent, if it pleſed
God that you did martyrizate no
more ſoules with your falſe preching,
then there are bodyes that ſuffer for
your doctrine, your ſect were nothing
ſo daungerous as it is. You glorye in
your Martyrs of times paſt, which
haue ſealed with their owne bloud
the doctrine of that holye Citie Geneua.
But in this ye are much deceaued,
for S. Iohn Chriſoſtome in his fyrſte
oration againſt the Iewes doth ſay,
That the payne doeth not make the
Martyr, but the cauſe: for otherwiſe
the theeues and murderers might
clayme the like title, although they
ſuffer for another cauſe: for we honour
and loue the Martys (ſaith he)
not for the tormentes that they doo
ſuffer, but for that it is for Chriſte, and
that they ſuffer for Iuſtice. And S.
Auguſtine in his fyrſte booke contra
Epiſtolam Parmeniani, Capit. ſeptimo,
writing agaynſt ſome of your

felowes that preſumed to be Martyrs,
he doth ſay, that euery one is not
a Martyr that is puniſhed by the
Emperour, or by the king for matters
of religion, otherwiſe (ſaith he) the deuils
might attribute vnto themſelues
the glorye of martyrdome, becauſe
they ſuffered perſecution at the chriſtian
Emperours handes, when thoroughout
the worlde, their Idolles
were pulled downe, and they caſte
out, and thoſe that did offer ſacrifice
vnto them greuouſlye puniſhed: then
(ſaith he) the Iuſtice is not certaine
through the paſſion, or for hauing ſuffered
death: but the death and paſſion
is glorious, when it is for the ſuſtayning
of the true fayth. And therefore
(ſayeth he) our Sauiour, becauſe he
would not haue the ſimple deceaued
vnder this coulour of truth, he did
not onely ſaye: Bleſſed are thoſe that
ſuffer (but he added) for Iuſtice. But
this can in no wiſe be attributed vnvnto

thoſe heretikes that ſuffer, to ſeperate
the vnion and concorde of the
Catholike Churche. And in his booke
de vnitate Eccleſiae, contra Epiſtolam
Petiliani, he doth write, that the Donatiſts,
which were a ſect of heretikes
that reigned in his time, to confyrme
their doctrine, they did not attende,
that others ſhould put them to death,
but they did caſt them ſelues downe
from high places: Others did burne
them ſelues in the fyre, to be honored
after their death as Martyrs: and
that is more, they did threaten men, if
they woulde not kill them. S. Ciprian
in like maner doth write in the fyrſte
booke of his Epiſtles, in the fyrſte
Epiſtle, that though an heretike ſuffer
death for Chriſte, that doeth not
confyrme him as a Martyr, but that
his death is the verye puniſhment of
his error, and that he cannot go to
heauen, which is the manſion of the
humble: for ſeing that he doth ſeperate

himſelfe from the houſe of peace,
which is the Churche (ye know well
of what Churche he doth ſpeake) that
he cannot be receaued into heauen. &c
All thoſe that haue written the hiſtoryes
of the Bohemians, doo ſaye, that
in the time of one Ziſcha a martiall
miniſter of the hereſye of the Heborites
or Huſsites, there were a certaine
ſect of heretikes called Adamites, like
vnto the olde hereſye of the Nicholaites:
for they did ſay, as theſe doo, that
mens wiues ſhould be common, and
they went al naked, euery one taking
the woman he liked beſt, whom he
did carye vnto their miniſter, and before
him he did ſaye, The holy Ghoſte
doth inſpire me to lye with this perſon:
then the ſaide reuerent father did
geue him his bleſſing, ſaying: Increaſe
and multiplye, & ſo they went awaye.
This abouenamed Ziſcha, althoughe
he had done a number of wicked deedes,
yet he determined to aboliſh and

take away this ſect, and ſo he cauſed
two women to be burnt for this abhominatiō,
the which two (notwithſtanding
the torment of the fyre) did
ſing & geue thankes to God, for that it
had pleaſed him to permit them do dy
for ſo holy and ſo iuſt a quarell. Did
not Michaell Seruet, who was once
maſter Caluins derling, rather deſyre
to ſuffer at Geneua, then he wold confeſſe,
that Chriſte was God? and yet,
notwithſtanding his great patience,
(or to ſay the truth, deuilliſhe obſtinacie)
cannot be ſufficient to make him
a Martyr, nor to perſwade you, to beleeue
his doctrine. There is a certaine
miniſter of the Lutherans called Ioachim
Weſtphall, who in a woorke of
his doth mocke at Caluin, who did
vaunt, that within theſe fyue yeres aboue
an hundred had ſuffred death, to
ſuſtayne the Goſpell of Geneua: & he
doth aunſwer him at large, prouing yt
the ſect & doctrin of ye ſaid place ought

not to be approued for the multitude
of falſe martyres, for the Anabaptiſts
whom he doth iuſtly condemne, haue
had of their ſect a great many more,
for in leſſe then three yeres there hath
ſuffred a great number more thē euer
there did ſuffer of Caluiniſtes in fyueteene.
And to conclude this matter,
the ſayde Weſtfal. doth ſay, that the
diuel hath his Martyrs (euen as wel
as god) with whom like a good Sergeant
he doth marche, geuing the
vauntward vnto the martyrs of the
Calueniſtes that haue ſuffered at Geneua.
So that if one demaund of the
Lutherans, whyther goe thoſe that
dye in the religion of Caluin, of Beza,
or of the Anabaptiſtes? they ſaye, To
the Diuel. And if one demaund of the
Calueniſts in like maner, Whither go
the Anabaptiſts and the Lutherans?
they ſay in likewiſe, To the diuel. And
who would put the like queſtion to
the Anabaptiſts, I am aſſured they

would ſay as the others, To the Diuel.
For my part I beleeue you, I aſſure
you, all three, And ſeeing that ye
agree ſo wel, that one ſerue for an others
harbēger, we were very fooles
if we ſhould ſtay your paſſage, but let
you go al to the diuel for companie, for
I thinke if you were al gone, our debates
would ceaſe, and hel would be
ſo ful, that the diuel would long for
no more.
            
            
               ¶The .33. Chapter.
               THere is a certayne miniſter of the
Lutherans called Heſhuſius, the
which within theſe three yeres hath
made a booke agaynſt Caluine, Peter
Boquin, Theodore de Beza, and Guliel
mus Elcimalcius: & he ſayth amongſt
other things, that Carolſtadius, Zuen
feldius, Caluine, and Beza doo ſhewe
wel the vncertayntie of their fayth by
the diuerſities of opinions that there
is amongſt thē, the which fault (ſaith

he) doth proceede of this, that they
haue forſakē the true ſenſe of the ſcripture
to folowe the opinions of their
owne heades. And in that very booke
the ſayde Author doth giue the lye to
Caluin, becauſe that in that he wrote
agaynſt the abouenamed Weſtphal,
he ſayth that Martin Luther and his
adherentes did acknowledge him as
their brother, ye which thing he mainteynes
to be falſe. Thus ſeeing ye agree
together like dogges and cattes,
and that al theſe ſects haue confirmed
their falſe doctrine with the ſhedding
of their owne blood, it is beſt to conclude,
as we haue ſaid before, That it
is not the payne nor the torment that
doth make the righteous martyr, except
we ſhould ſay, that diuers contrary
meſſaungers are ſent from one
maſter, the which is notoriouſly falſe,
for that good king from whom the
truth doth come in deede, hath ſo
good a memorie, that he doth neuer

ſend contrary meſſangers, but rather
his faythful ſeruauntes doo al with
one voyce and one accorde honour
him, as the father of our Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſte.
            
            
               ¶The .34. Chapter.
               SOme of your godly ſect (to verifie
that the vocation of your miniſtery
doth come of God) doo ſet before our
eyes the holynes of thoſe newe Chriſtians,
that is to ſay, how they neuer
ſweare, but yea for yea, and no for no,
that they do no wrōg to no man, that
they do neither rob nor ſteale, but that
they are cōtent with yt that god hath
ſent thē, & that they ar very charitable
to the poore: then ſeeing yt our Sauior
doth ſay, that one ſhal know the tree
by ye fruit, we ought to cōfes (ſai they)
yt the tree being good, the fruit is good
yt is to ſay, their religion is good, ſeing
that by ye grace of god it doth produce
ſuch ſwete & pleaſant fruit. I anſwer
you firſt to this, yt our ſauior doth not

geue general rules, but that that moſt
commonly doth happen, as when he
ſayth,Luk. 6 that of the abundāce of the hart
the mouth ſpeaketh, woulde you affyrme
by this, that his meaning was
vniuerſally? God forbid that he that
is the author of al truth ſhould meane
ſo ſtarke a lye. Do you not remember
what ſpeach he did vſe to the Phariſeys,Mat. 15.
when he ſaid, This people do honor
me with their mouthes, but their
harts are farre from me? you ſee that
this ſentence is contrarie to the other,
if you do not vnderſtand it as I haue
ſaid, that is to ſay, that many times a
mā doth vtter that that is in his hart:
as a Ruffian takes great pleaſure to
talke of quarels, a proude perſon to
talke of hautie enterpriſes, a couetous
man to talke of ryches or gaynes, and
ſo it is of al other ſinnes. But with
al this a man may not affyrme truly,
that hypocriſie doth neuer reigne in
their harts, whoſe mouthes are ful of

Gods word.Dani. 15 The Iudges of S. Suſan,
had not they God and his lawes in
their mouthes, and the diuel in their
hartes?Iohn. 18. We haue a law (ſaid the Iewes
and Phariſees agaynſt Chriſt)
and according to this lawe giuen vs
by Moyſes, he ought to dye. The zeale
of Iuſtice did ſound in their mouthes,
and hatefull enuy did dwell in their
hartes. And therefore you ſee many
times that man doth ſpeake contrary
to that that he thinketh, and euen ſo it
is of ye ſentence of our Sauiour, whē
he ſayth, that by the fruite one ſhall
know the tree. For many times naturally
the fruite is good, although the
tree be worth nothing, as the famous
liues and workes of diuers heathen
Philoſophers doo witneſſe, of whom
the holynes and ſcrupuloſitie of conſcience
was ſuche, that I do beleeue
aſſuredly that at the day of Iudgmēt
a great number of Chriſtians which
leade Paynims liues, wilbe confounded

with the example of thoſe men
that knew not god. Thus of the firſt,
the fruite is good, but the trees are
worth nothing, for their religion was
falſe & Idolatrous, applying as S.
Paul doth ſay,Rom. 1. the trueth of God to
vnrighteouſnes. And as for the ſecōd,
the trees are good, beeing graft vppon
the true Catholique Religion,
but the fruites doo degenerate from
the ſtocke.
            
            
               ¶The .35. Chapter.
               IF that the ſence of this Prouerbe be
harde for you to diſgeſt, I am content
to ſtay vntill your ſtomacke be
ſomewhat better, aſſuring myſelf that
you can interprete it no waye vnto
your aduauntage. There is nothing
more certaine then the good tree to
beare good fruite, if one doth not
make him change his owne nature,
but if one doo graffe vpon it ſome
Crabſtocke or ſome other kynde of

wilde fruite, the tree can beare no
other but Crabbes or wyldinges:
Euen ſo we Chryſtian perſons, who
are the trees of God planted by the
pleaſaunt fountayne of his grace,
and purged with the holy water of
Baptiſme to beare fruite at our ſeaſon,
ſo that we take euer to proſpet
withall, the dewe of his grace that
planted vs, I meane, the fayth of our
Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, ſo long we
beare good fruite, as it is ſayd before,
alleaging the 3. of S. Iohn, yll vnderſtoode
by Iouinian, He that is borne of
God doth not ſinne, for the generation
of God doth preſerue him, & the enimy
of our health ſhal not touche him.
And in the ſayde Chapter he ſayth agayne,
All men, or euery man that is
borne of God doth not ſinne, for the
ſeede of God is in him, and he can
not ſinne, becauſe he is borne of God.
By this it is not ment that Baptiſme
(the which he doth cal the beeing

borne of God) doth take away from
man the power or libertie to do euyl,
for if he wyl degenerat from the grace
that he hath receaued by the Sacrament
of regeneration, & that in ſteede
of growing graft vpon the ſtocke of
the loue of God, which is the true life
that he will fructifie towards his
death and deſtruction, in this caſe he
is no more the ſonne of God, for as
Chriſte ſayth,Iohn. 8. If ye be the children of
Abraham, do the works of Abraham.
But as he doth cōtinue and hath this
good wyl, which was taught by the
Angel vnto the Shepheards, & that
he doth continue, hauing the grace
that was inſpired in him by the holy
ghoſt at his baptiſme, ſo long he doth
not ſinne vnto eternal death, for the
generation of God, that is to ſay, the
grace receyued by this holy Sacrament,
doth ſo defend him, that the diuel
can not perſecute him to death, being
not able to preuayle agaynſt him,

and as long as this good ſeede, which
is the word of god, doth dwel in him,
he cannot ſinne, and if he did ſinne, the
ſede would no longer remaine in him.
The holy ghoſt ſayth,Sap. 1. The wiſe man
ſhal refuſe the hypocrite and diſſembler,
and ſhal depart from the vayne
and craftie cogitations, and therefore
the grace of God and ſinne can not
dwel togeather, nor we oughte not
thinke S. Iohns wordes ſtraunge, in
that he ſayth, That he that is borne
of God doth not ſin, for it is as much
to ſay, as that one can not ſerue two
maſters, and that he that ſerueth god
can not ſerue the diuel.1. Cor. 10. For S. Paul
ſayth, You can not aſſiſt at the Table
of god and of the diuel altogether, for
what communication is there betweene
Iuſtice and Iniquitie, or betweene
Ieſus Chriſt & Belial. And
he that doth loue this world declareth
him ſelfe an enemy vnto God. And a
little before he had ſayd, He that doth

commit ſinne, is the ſonne of the deuil,
the which doeth not affyrme, that a
ſinner cannot be the ſonne of God, if
he repent and do penaunce: but in the
meane while, he that is in actuall ſin,
or hath a minde to doo euil, is as then
not the ſonne of God, but the ſonne of
the deuill. The good tree doeth not
beare yll fruite: for although the fruit
doo rot or periſhe vpon the tree, that
corruption doeth not proceede of the
tree, but of the wormes, byrdes, or of
ſome other kinde of vermine: & therefore,
when they ſaye, that by the fruite
we ſhall knowe the tree, and by the
workes the faith, this ought to be vnderſtood,
when the fruite doth ripe in
ſeaſon, & that it hath the naturall humour
and propertie of the tree. And
in a man, that he haue the influence of
the true fayth, and not otherwiſe: for
euen as the rotten fruite hanging vppon
the tree, doth not digreſſe nothing
from the good Stocke: euen ſo the yil

workes of vs that are Chriſtians,
ought not to ſtayne our holy and Catholike
religion. For the corruption of
our yll fruites commeth of our ſelues,
and not of our religion, the whiche
doth defende vs from doing that we
do, I meane, to ſweare, to blaſpheme,
to commit adultery, to doo anye man
wronge, or to offende God any way.
He that doeth deſyre then by the
fruit, to knowe whether the tree of
our religion be good, he ought not to
bende his eyes to looke vpon the rotten
fruite, as if that were ſufficient to
proue the goodnes of the tree: but let
him looke vppon the good fruites,
Suche are all the Doctours, aſwell
of the Greeke as Latine Churche, ſo
manye good Emperours and vertuous
Kinges, Princes, Dukes and
erles, which haue reigned in France,
Spayne, Germany and Englande,
and ouer all the worlde, and haue

dyed in the fayth, leauing their workes
to bear witnes of their good fruites.
The which haue buylded ſo many
fayre hoſpitals, to helpe and releue
the poore, ſo many goodly Colleges to
enterteyne fatherles children at their
bookes, ſo many foundations & workes
for the common wealth, and that
haue buylded ſo manye ſumptuous
Abbeys and houſes of Religion, the
whiche you with your godly zeale
haue not only robbed & ſpoyled, but
that that is more odious, you haue
pulled thē cleane down, to deface the
memory of our Aunceſters, and to acquite
al theſe which are notable monumentes,
you brag of the good deedes
that your good Chriſtians doo,
which are much like vnto the gaynes
of thoſe that vſe to cogge at diſe, for although
they winne much it is neuer
ſeene: or like the Iewes, whiche to
color their horrible cruelty in putting
our Sauiour vniuſtly to death, they

went and bought with the money
that they gaue to Iudas a field to bury
the dead. And ſo you hauing robbed &
ſpoyled from the religious houſes and
Abbeyes more then you are able to
reſtore, you thinke to acquite it all
with geuing a litle to the poore. No,
no, theſe deuiſes are but vaine, yf by
the fruite the tree be knowen (as
Chriſte ſayth) let them that haue any
iudgement, looke vpon the fruit of our
trees, and then iudge, whether they
be good or no.
            
            
               ¶The .36. Chapter.
               NOwe ſeing that you haue viſited
our gardein, If a man may be ſo
bolde, I pray lend vs the keyes, that
we maye in like maner viſite yours, &
that we may ſee the fruits of your religiō.
Reade all ye hiſtories writtē frō
the Paſſion of Chriſte to our dayes,
and you ſhall fynd, that all thoſe ſects
that haue left our Romane Churche,

haue done more miſchieſe in one yere,
being ſeperated from the ſaid Church,
then they did in an hundred yeres before.
But becauſe our meaning is not
to recite all the acts of your predeceſſors,
enemies to the Catholike church,
it ſhall ſuffiſe to make a ſhort diſcourſe
of thoſe that haue bene of late dayes,
I meane the Bohemians or Huſsites,
whoſe folowers you doo affyrm your
ſelues to be: for in your godly booke of
Martyrs, you haue placed Iohn Hus
as the fyrſte Martyr of your auncient
Church (who was burnt for an heretike
about a. 120. yeeres agone) euen
as wee accoumpt S. Steuen to be the
fyrſt Martyr of our Churche. Nowe,
to knowe, whether ye be of the opinion
of the Huſsites or no, that I leaue
for ſome other time, and for this preſent
I am content to condeſcende to
that that you haue written, I mean,
that Iohn Hus did preache your Goſpell,
and made a number of ſuch faithfull

perſons as you are, and that he
ſuffered death to ſuſtaine your religion.
Then let vs ſee, what good fruite
this did produce vnto vs: Thoſe that
haue written the ſtories of Boheme,
and amonge others Eneas Siluius, do
teſtifye, that in the yere of our Lorde
God. 1418. there was a certaine
monke that became an Huſsite in the
Citie of Prage, which is the Metropolitane
of that Kingdome, the
which accompanied with a number
of companions as zealous as himſelf,
they did execute ſo horrible a crueltie,
that eleuen of the principall Magiſtrates
were driuen to flee from the
Citie, to ſaue their lyues, and ſeuen
more (for in all they were. 18.) beinge
taken by them, they did caſt them out
at the windowes of their owne houſes,
& did kill them with their ſpeares
as they fell. This was done, Sigiſmondus
being then Emperoure, in
the time of Martine the fyrſte

Pope of Rome of that name, & Vneſlaus
being then king of Boheme. The
next yere after the death of this ſayde
Vneſlaus, they did ſpoyle al the monaſteries,
Abbeyes and Churches of the
ſayde kingdome. And among others,
one Iohn Ziſcha, who was their captaine
in the Citie of Prage, he made
them all paſſe through the edge of the
ſwerde, without ſparing man, womā
or childe. And the like was done in another
Towne of the ſaide kingdom
called Meſsim, the yere. 1423. It wer
to tedious to write all their cruelties,
they did not care, whether thoſe of
their company wer of their ſect or no,
for ſome were Idumeans, ſome Paleſtines,
ſome Moabites, and ſome other
Amelecites: euen as of your bountifull
goodnes ye call all thoſe that will not
be of your ſect, Papiſts, Infidels, Hipocrites
and Idolaters: and therfore
we may iuſtly ſay, that you are their
right heyres apparant, although ye

haue gone ſomewhat before them, &
(as our Sauiour ſaide) accompliſhed
the meaſures of your fathers by the
heroicall actes that you haue done in
this (almoſte deſolate) kingdome of
Fraunce, there needeth no other witnes
to proue it, but the teſtimonie of
your owne eyes & eares, which haue
heard and ſeene more almoſte thē any
man can write. Therefore I beſeeche
you, not to reproche anye more the abuſes
of our eccleſiaſticall miniſters:
for although it be ſo, that they haue
neede of ſome reformation, yet I doo
thinke it is neceſſarye to chooſe ſome
better ſtayed perſons then you are, for
you haue done more harme in fyue
yeres, then ours haue done in a. 1500.
S. Auguſtine in the fyrſte booke of the
Citie of God, doeth magnifye in the
Chriſtians behalfe the diuine fauoure
of God: for he doth write, that when
the Gothes did deſtroye & ſpoyle the
Citie of Rome, the Romanes (althogh

they were not Chriſtian) did retyre
them ſelues for their ſauegard into the
Churches and Temples of the Martyrs.
And the Gothes being but a barbarous
nation, had that reſpect to
God, that they neuer durſt nor wolde
enter into thoſe holy places to doo thē
any diſpleaſure. You which make ſo
great profeſſion of the Goſpell, haue
ſhewed your ſelues a great deal more
cruell then thoſe barbarous people: for
they did pardon all thoſe that went
to the Temples, and you haue in manye
places ſpoyled the Churches, and
murdered all thoſe that ye founde in
thē, ſo yt one might wel ſay to you that
that Optatus Myleuitanus in his book
con. Parm. Donatiſt. the which was, yt
the Donatiſts ought to be content (&
you likewiſe) to haue wounded the
members of the Church, and to haue
deuided the people of God, at the
leaſt you ſhould haue ſpared the aultares
and the temples, & not to make
warre againſt the ſtones.
            
            
               
               ¶The .37. Chapter.
               YOu make vs but a verye ſlender
aunſwer, ſaying, that we wer the
firſt, & that you doo no other but that
that we haue taught you. If wee
ſhould ſay the contrary, I know who
ſhould ſay the truth: but to auoide all
quarels, the beſt is (folowing ye councell
of our Sauior) to geue you more
then you demaund. Let vs put ye caſe,
that we ſhould confeſſe to be the firſt,
doth it folowe therfore, yt your matter
is good? I pray do but conſider ye verdict
that you both geue of your ſelues
& of vs. We are (according to your ſacred
goſpel & Apoſtolical iudgement)
no other but poor & ſimple Infidels, &
ſuperſtitious Idolaters: but contrariwiſe,
you are Apoſtles, Prophetes, Euangeliſts,
ye true childrē of God. Seing
thē, that god hath ſhewed you ſo
much fauoure, and poured vppon you
the bountifull giftes of his grace,
howe haue ye ſought ſo cruellye to

reuenge your ſelues againſt his expreſſe
commaundement. Is this the
waye of reformation, to ſhewe your
ſelues as yll as we or worſe? ſeinge
that the matter falleth out ſo plainly,
I pray you be not ſo obſtinate, geue
place vnto the beſt to reforme the reſt,
for to be worſe then you I think none
can be founde. You my maſters, that
can make ſuch tedious ſermons, and
rayle at large againſt our Popes and
Biſhops, whye doo you paſſe ouer ſo
lightly the faultes of your miniſters?
you ſet out gloriouſly the titles of Apoſtles,
Prophets, Euangeliſts, & extraordinarie
meſſengers of God for
your ſelues: as good Godfathers ye
now chriſten our popes & biſhops, calling
them rauening and greedie deuouring
wolues. In this ye do greatlye
abuſe the intellection of the ſcriptures:
for if you marke well that that
our Sauiour doth ſaye,Iohn. 10. ye ſhall find,
that ye runne farre wide of the text,

and the ſimilitude of the wolfe doth
full well appertayne vnto your miniſterie.
There he doth declare the difference
that is betwixt the good ſhepherde
and the bad (which he doth call
Mercenarium) & the wolfe. The good
Shepherde is he, that doeth hazarde
and venture his life for his flock: The
yll Shepherde is he, that taketh the
milke and the wool from the ſheepe, &
letteth them rome without taking anye
care to keepe them. The wolues
ſeeing them rome abrode, ſcatered frō
the flocke, doth deuoure all thoſe that
are yll kept. The good Shepherde is
our Sauiour Chriſte and his Apoſtles,
and all the good Biſhops that
did floriſhe in olde time, and al the holye
Confeſſors and martyrs that haue
liued in the golden age, when ye bloud
of our Sauiour Chriſte was yet hot
boyling in their heartes. The yll ſhepherdes
haue folowed after, whiche
haue not cared for their ſheepe. The

wolues (which are the heretikes) ſeeing
this haue ſcatered the ſheepe out
of the fould of Chriſt, which is the catholike
Church, where they had bene
borne ſpiritually, that is to ſaye, regenerated
wt the grace of the holy ghoſt,
& the Sacrament of baptiſme, to folow
the ſectes of perdition. If all our
Shepheardes had bene as carefull to
keepe their flockes as they ought to
haue bene, your Congregation had
neuer ben ſo ſtrongly builded as it is
at this day in Fraunce. And therefore
you offer your Churche (if it maye be
ſo called) great wronge, when you
ſpeake againſt the abuſes of ours, for
our ſinnes haue bene and are the principall
foundation of your buildinge.
And euen as the worme is nouriſhed
in the Apoſteme with the yll humors,
euen ſo you feede of our faultes, and
are nouriſhed with our ſinnes, youre
fyre burnes with our wood: and if we
woulde amende our liues, I knowe

howe ſoone your religion woulde decaye.
And therefore our Paſtors are
not wolues, but they haue permitted
the wolues to deuoure their ſheepe,
and ſo they ſhall aunſwere for them
before the throne of the eternall
Iudge, who doth aduertiſe them by
the Prophete Ezechiell, that they ſhal
aunſwere for all the miſchiefes that
happen vnto their ſheepe, manye
of the which are ſcabbed and full of
diſeaſes: and therefore I would haue
you to cauſe ſome bodye to chooſe among
yours and ours thoſe that are
beſt,, to the ende, that through this diuiſion,
and your ayde, we maye take
the reſt. I thinke, that if anye thing
condemne vs, it wilbe this cauſe, foraſmuch
as we haue continued in that
doctrine which was preached vnto
vs at the firſte, as you your ſelues can
not denye, if you will confeſſe the
truth.
            
            
               
               ¶The .38. Chapter.
               ALl our auncient doctours, aſwell
of the Greeke, as of the Latine
Churche ſince the Apoſtles time, and
the Chriſtians of all the foure quarters
of the world, which wer in thoſe
dayes, haue made their promiſes and
vowes vnto God, euen as we doo
now, & at their baptiſme they did vſe
euen thoſe very Ceremonies that we
do, with the ſelf ſame exorciſmes, adiurations
and annoyntings, that we
doo vſe in our Catholike Churche,
which you call Papiſticall: & to proue
this true, we wil bring ye ſaid aunciēt
doctours as witneſſes, if it pleaſe you
to read the places that we wil quote.
Tertulian (who liued verye neere the
Apoſtles time) doeth make mention
in his booke that he intituled, De reſurrectione
carnis, of the annoynting
vſed at the Baptiſme, and of the renouncing
the deuil and all his pompe.

In his booke De corona militis, he
doth ſpeake of the thirde dipping vnder
the water, in the name of the father,
the ſonne, and the holye Ghoſte.
S. Ciprian the Martyr, who was aboue.
1300. yeres agone, doth write
in the ſecond volume of his Epiſtles,
Epiſt. 12. how they did vſe in his time
to geue the holye Chriſme vnto the
children that were baptiſed. Origen
in his twelfth Homilie, and in diuers
other places of his works doth make
mention of the renouncing of the deuill
at ones baptiſme, and of the making
of the ſigne of the Croſſe vppon
childrens faces when they were chriſtened.
S. Iohn Chriſoſtome in his. 12.
Homilie, vpon the fyrſte Epiſtle to the
Corinthians. Cap. 4. And in his fyrſte
Homilie vppon the fyrſte Chapter to
the Epheſians, he doth make mention
of the ſayde renunciation made from
the deuill and all his workes. Reade
I pray, if it be your pleaſure, S. Aug.

in Pſal. 31. Aug. li. 15. contra Iulia. Pelag.
li. 1. Cap. 2. Item de nuptiis et concupiſcentia.
Lib. 1. Cap. 20. In Ioannē,
tract 33. In Canonicam Ioannis, tract.
3. et Tractat. 6. Et de eccleſi. dogmat.
Cap. 31. De Simbolo, lib. 1. Cap. 7. et
lib. 2. Cap. 11. Et libro de his qui initiantur
ſacris. Cap. 1. Baſilius de Spiritu
Sancto, Cap. 15. et. 75. Arnobius in Pſ.
27. All theſe Doctoures, which were
aboue a thouſande yeeres agone, if
you reade in them the places that
heere I haue quoted, you ſhall fynde,
that they did vſe at the Baptiſme of
their children thoſe verye Cerimonyes
that we doo nowe vſe, and that
you doo ſo miſlike. And as for Confeſſion,
before the receauing of the
Sacrament, our Sauiour Chriſte
doeth teache vs, that the Eccleſiaſticall
Miniſters haue authoritie to
bynde and forgeue ſinnes.Ioh. 20. 
                  S. Ciprian
in his fyfth Sermon De lapſis,
                  Mat. 16. 
                  Origen
vppon the thirtie and ſeuenth

Pſalme, and in Leuit. Hom. 2. S. Auguſtine
lib. 2. de viſitatione infirmorum
Cap. 4. S. Ciril. libro. 12. in Ioannem,
Cap. 56. S. Hierom in Eccleſi. Cap. 10.
All theſe Doctours, according to the
Scriptures, in theſe places doo confyrme
auriculer confeſſion. And as for
praying vnto the Saintes in Paradiſe
to helpe vs with their prayers,
reade Origen, in his thirde Homilie
vpon the Canticles, and in his ſecond
booke vppon Iob, and in his eyght
booke in Eccleſi. Reade Chriſoſtome,
in his eyght Homilie vppon the Epiſtle
to the Epheſians, the fourth Chapter,
and S. Auguſtine, in his twentie
booke againſt Fauſtinus, the one and
twentie Chapter, and Saint Hierom
againſt Vigilantius. All theſe make
mention of the praying vnto the
Saintes. And for praying for the
deade, Reade Tertulian in his booke
De Monogonia, and in his booke
De Corona militis, and Saint Ciprian

ad plebem Furnenſem, and in the fyrſt
booke of his Epiſtles: and Origen in
Hieremiam. Hom. 12. Item in Epiſt. ad
Ro. lib. 8. cap. 11. Reade Chriſoſtome,
in his third Homilie vpon the Epiſtle
of S. Paule to the Philippians, and S.
Aug. li. 2. de gen. againſt the Maniches,
Cap. 20. and in the Incheridion
ad Laurent. Cap. 110. Item, libro de cura
pro mortuis agenda. All theſe Doctours,
whoſe workes haue continued
theſe. 1200. yeeres, doo teache vs all
theſe thinges that nowe we doo obſerue,
the which they left in writing
by the ordinaunce of God, to confute
ſuche heretikes as you are.
            
            
               ¶The .39. Chapter.
               ANd if I did not thinke, that it
would be to tedious for the Reader,
I woulde ſet forth the reſt of our
Catholike doctrine, & the confyrmation
of it by the teſtimonie of ſuche a
number, of not onely Doctours, but

therewith al holy Confeſſors & Martyrs,
which haue ſuffered for our religion,
and that haue taught vs, both
by worde of mouth, and by writing,
all that we doo vſe at this daye, teaching
vs to liue and dye in it and for
it. I would haue you anſwere me vnto
this: Doo you thinke, that they be
in heauen or in hell? I know wel, that
meere ſcrupuloſitie of conſcience will
make you not expreſſe plainelye that,
that your works doo teache, and that
you will remit this queſtiō to ye iudgement
of God. But this is not to the
purpoſe, for I do not demaund of you
any abſolute aunſwere, as if you had
bene in heuen or hell to ſee it: but this,
to vtter in your conſcience, what you
thinke of thoſe that haue holden,
mainteyned and confeſſed our fayth
(whom you call Infidels and ſuperſtitious
Papiſtes) are they condemned?
If you ſay, yea, Then wherefore
was the bloud of Chriſte ſhed on the

Croſſe? it had bene better that he had
neuer ſuffred, if this were true. If you
ſaye, that God woulde be mercifull to
them, becauſe their error proceeded of
ignoraunce, and ſo, that he will haue
pitie of vs, becauſe of ours. But I
knowe, that you will ſay, that we are
nowe vnexcuſable, becauſe that wee
do refuſe the truth that you do preach.
By the ſelfe ſame reaſon our aunceſters
can alleage before God no good
excuſe, foraſmuch as they do make no
accompt of the receauing of ſuch miniſters
as you are, and that haue preched
the like Goſpell that you doo announce
vnto vs. S. Hierome and al the
Chriſtians of his time are then condemned,
becauſe they woulde not receaue
the Goſpell of Vigilantius, who
did euen as you doo preache, that we
ſhoulde not allowe the expoſition of
the doctours, nor honour the relicques
of Martyrs. S. Auguſtine is likewiſe
condemned, becauſe he wrote & preached

againſt the Arrians, who taught
as you do, that it is an offence to pray
for the dead. And to be briefe, if that
which you doo preach ought to be called
the Goſpel and true word of God,
ſince the Apoſtles time ther hath bene
neuer a Chriſtian Doctour in the
Church: for they haue all taught the
contrarye to your forged Goſpell, as
euery man may ſee, that will take the
payne, but to looke in their workes, or
to reade thoſe places that are quoted
by me and diuers others that haue
confuted your hereſies manye a hundred
yeere agone by their authorities.
Let them then that haue any eyes,
beholde the hazarde that ye runne into,
and ſo manye others throughout
the worlde, which folowe your opinion.
If one ſhoulde come to accuſe another
of falſehoode, and that before
he be aſſured of this matter, wherewith
he did ſeeke to attaynt the defendaunt,
woulde not one thinke

his matter verye great, or his knowledge
very ſmall, to run headlong into
the daunger of that crime, which, if
he could not proue, he ſhoulde be condemned
for himſelfe. What then ſhall
become of you, O moſt ſimple ſheepe,
which ſeeke with fayned arguments
to condemne, not one or two, but all ye
Chriſtians and Catholikes that haue
bene in this worlde ſince the Paſſion
of Chriſt, the which haue refuſed and
reproued your doctrine as hereticall,
& haue taught vs this that wee holde
at this day? But now to aunſwer vnto
that that was mentioned a litle before,
and that which a number of your
flocke haue told me, when I haue cō
                  ferred
with them, which is, that the
errour of our predeceſſours was not
imputed vnto thē, foraſmuch as theſe
good ſimple people went to worke after
the groſſeſt ſort, thinking to doo
well, and that as then they did not
vnderſtande well the truth, which is

nowe brought to light through your
Goſpell. I ſaye, that in this ye are deceaued
more then halfe the value of
your religion: for before ſome of them
dyed, they had forgotten more then euer
you haue learned, for all that, that
you know you haue learned it of their
bookes (or ſtollen it, to ſay the truth)
interpreting both their workes and ye
Scriptures contrary to the truth of
their meaning. And although it were
ſo that they had al erred, your colored
excuſe of ſimplicitie could auaile them
nothing, for the worde of God would
accuſe them.2. Cor. 4. If the Goſpell (ſaith S.
Paule) had bene hidden, it hath bene
hidden to thoſe that haue periſhed, the
ſpirites of the which the God of this
world hath blinded: then if that thoſe
vnto whom the truth hath beene hiddē
haue periſhed, wherfore doth your
excuſe ſerue them? This being true, as
it is moſte like, I meane, yt they haue
not erred, nor that you onely ſhalbe ſaued,

and they all condemned. To my
iudgement our aunceſters wt all their
ſimplicitie did neuer erre ſo muche as
your diſciples doo, to folowe ſuch maſters,
as condemne that faith that the
catholike church hath taught & mainteyned
theſe. 1500, yeres, to mainteyn
thoſe hereſies that haue bene buried in
hel many an hundred yere agone, and
nowe are called vp againe by Martin
Luther, Caluin and his felowes.
            
            
               ¶The .40. Chapter.
               YF that by a good and a right title
your diſciples call them ſelues the
children of god, this makes me beleue
that the ſaying of our Sauiour is fulfilled
in them,Luk. 16. ye which is, The childrē
of this world are wiſer in their generation
then the children of light: To
proue this true, we ſee this daily experience:
for a wiſe worldly man when
he doth put out his money to gayne,
he will not truſt the promiſe ſo ſoone

of one or two or three, as he will doo
the bondes of a whole Towne or Citie
that ſhould warrant or aſſure his
gayne. But you nor your diſciples
haue not done thus, but rather ye contrarye.
It had bene better for you to
haue fyrſte put youre fayth and truſte
in God, beleeuing that he hath geuen
his holye ſpirite, and declared the
meaning as touching the Scriptures
vnto the Catholike Churche, and not
to hazarde the hope of your ſaluation,
putting it into the handes of Luther,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and three
or fowre other ſuch pelting merchantes,
which haue newly ſet vp ſhoppes
at Wittemberge, Geneua and Loſane,
which one of theſe dayes we ſhall ſee
bankruptes, as their predeceſſours
haue bene before them, the which after
that they had deceaued the poore
ſimple Catholikes, and gayned ſome
of their ſoules for the deuill, they
haue at the laſte ſolde all theyr

their honeſtie and credite, ſo that at
this daye, except that it be thoſe that
reade the auncient hiſtoryes, no bodye
els doth remember, that euer they liued
in the world. You are come now
laſt of al to make vp their merchaundiſe,
but your credite can hardlye be
good before God: for you ſhall haue againſt
you all the auncient Catholike
Churche, which hath continued viſible
ſince the comming of Chriſte vnto
this daye, all the doctours of all the vniuerſities,
all the Empires, Kingdomes
and priuate ſtate throughout
all the worlde, which haue receaued &
honoured this doctrine, that you call
Papiſtical. And if you ſaye, that you
will not truſt men, but the very word
of the Lord, we agree to the like, that
we ought all to beleue the Scripture,
but we vary about the interpretation,
for you interprete it after one ſort, and
we after another: you expounde it after
a new ſort, and the Catholike

Churche doth folowe the olde expoſition
of the auncient Doctours and
traditions which you haue forſaken:
or to ſaye the truth, your Miniſters
haue led the ſheepe aſtraye from the
olde flocke, at the departing from the
which they haue bene all ſcatered abroade,
ſome folowing Luther, ſome
Caluine, ſome the Anabaptiſts, and ſo
forth, for the which the Popes and
kinges and others that haue had the
gouernment of the Churche, ſhal anſwere
at the laſt day of iudgement, for
as much as while they ſlept, you haue
come and ſowed weedes among the
good corne. Then ſeeing you are the
ſheepe that rome aſtray, what excuſe
can they make before God, that wilfully
folowe your ſteppes? We confeſſe,
that we are the poore ſheepe of
God that haue continued with oure
olde flocke ſtedfaſt and whole, as touching
our religion, but verye weake &
ſickly as touching our maners: that is

to ſay, full of ſinnes and vices, attending
ſome ſage phiſitions to heale vs,
and good paſtors to keepe vs, caſting
out the chaffe from the corne, I mean,
cutting off thoſe abuſes that are offenſiue
not to ſuche ſcrupulous conſciences
as you haue, but vnto him that
doth threaten them for the careleſſe
liues of their ſheepe, and ſo to continue
in that auncient fayth that by ſucceſſion
of paſtors we haue receued from
the Apoſtles.
            
            
               ¶The .41. Chapter.
               
                  I Knowe well, that you wil take this
confeſſiō of mine to your aduantage,
ſaying that for feare of being infected
with our ſuperſtitious diſeaſes, you
haue ſeperated your ſelues frō ye common
flocke: but if you do conſider my
firſte wordes, they haue barred you al
maner of wayes to reply iuſtly: for I
haue already ſaid, that althogh we be
ſickly and weake ſheepe, as touching
our doings or maners, yet, in regarde

of our fayth (thankes be to God) we
are ſafe and ſounde, keeping ſtill that
integritie of religion that by ſucceſſion
of paſtors we haue receaued from the
Apoſtles, without adding or diminiſhing
any thing to the grounde of our
catholike beliefe: for as for ceremonies
the Church hath vſed thē euer as touching
yt time & the place, to ye honor of
god, & edification of our neighbor: and
therfore, if you did ſeperate your ſelues
from our kind of liuing, to leade a holy
ſolitarye life, as ye holy Heremites and
ſaintes haue done in times paſt, forſaking
ye conuerſatiō of ye cōmon people,
to liue in contemplation, wtout ſeperating
thē ſelues frō ye cōmunion of the
Churche, in the which they haue bene
baptiſed, and had receaued their faith,
your doings had ben as much worthi
of praiſe in that reſpect, as nowe they
are damnable, conſidering howe you
forſake the common tabernacle, within
the which both you and we haue
receaued the Sacraments of regeneration,

and our ſpirituall foode altogether.
And to the ende that no bodye
runne aſtray from the right path that
he ſhould folowe, the good Chriſtian
ought to fixe in his minde this reſolution,
I mean, to ſerue God, and to liue
in the Catholike fayth, commonlye or
priuately: for when there is any queſtion
put, as touching the life, the common
way,Mat. 7. as Chriſte doth ſaye, doeth
leade one to perdition, and the narow
waye doth guide vnto the port of ſaluation.
But if one ſpeake of religion,
the contrarye is verifyed: for the common
way is the way of health, & the
priuate way is the path of damnation.
The Prophete Dauid in the. 24.
Pſalme, had a regarde to this, when
he prayed god to teach him his waies
by the religion, and his pathes, by the
maners and cuſtomes.
            
            
               ¶The .42. Chapter.
               NOw to turne to the partition that

we haue vpon the. 34. and. 37. of Ezechiell,
and vppon the tenth of Iohn, it
is playne, that we are the flockes of
weake and ſickly ſheepe: and your diſciples
are the ſheepe that runne this
way and that way aſtraye: thoſe that
are our yll prelats take vpon them the
title of Mercenarij paſtoris, but vnto
your Miniſters the titles of deuouring
wolues, may be applyed without
any ſcrupuloſitie of conſcience: for
you watche to none other intent, but
to make the ſheepe runne out of the
fold, and to deuour them, becauſe that
our paſtors haue not taken care to
keepe them. And although they bee
not excuſable, aſwell for their ſilence,
as for their naughtie liues, I ſee not
your Patriarchs and zealous Miniſters
amende muche them ſelues, the
faultes that they finde in vs: for beſydes
the true and certayne experience
that we haue had by the tryall
that we haue ſeene to our coſte in this

Realme within theſe fyue or ſix yeres,
I haue read full manye a golden Legend
of your ſacred martyrs and holy
Biſhops, which do not altogether redound
to the honor of your pretended
reformed Church. And among others
Theodore de Beza Caluins ſucceſſor in
the Pontificate ſeate of the holy Citie
of Geneua, of whom ſuche thinges are
preached abrode, that if the one halfe
of them be true, he is ſcant ſo good a
man as S. Iohn Baptiſt. And becauſe
I woulde not haue you to miſlike
them for their religion, I will not alleage,
to verifye this, anye Catholike
authour, but ſome of Luthers Succeſſours
your fyrſte founder, who
taught you to write ſo learnedlye (I
woulde ſaye raylinglye) againſte the
Churche of Rome.
                  In his booke of the true body of Chriſt in the ſacrif. written in Latin. 
                  Tilemanus Heſhuſius
a Miniſter of the Lutherans, in
the booke that I haue alreadye noted,
doeth openlye accuſe the ſayde Beza
                  
of great infamye, that he did not
onely content the fanſie of his minde,
with leading a luxurious and a licentious
life, and to ſtayne his vow with
a bolte of adulterous loue, but that
that is worſe, he himſelfe hath ſet
forth in writing al his laſciuious acts,
the which (ſaith he) he hath ſonge in
ſacrilege ryme to the Inſtrument,
to manifeſt his ſynne to the whole
ſight of the worlde. And in that very
booke he doth ſay, that Beza, who (as
I haue tolde you) is a Biſhop of the
holy Citie of Geneua, is an infamous
monſter, whoſe naughty life any man
maye reade ſet forth by himſelfe in his
owne Epigrams: & notwithſtanding
(ſayth he) to heare him ſpeake, you
woulde thinke he were Saint Iohn
Baptiſt, for he can talke of nothinge
but of his holye life. This ſame very
Miniſter in the booke where he writeth
theſe thinges, he doeth laye to

                  Bezas charge that he tooke with him
to Geneua another mans wife, without
the knowledge of her huſbande,
whoſe name was Candida. Thus ſeeing
by the verye teſtimonie of thoſe
that are our enemies, & that are your
brethren, as touching the ſeeking to
ouerthrowe the Catholike Churche.
The principall pillers of your Church
are bawdes, theeues and adulterers,
ruffins: why doo ye not firſte begin to
reforme your ſelues, to this intent, that
when we ſee, that you haue taken the
blocke out of your own eyes, we may
be the better content, that you ſhould
ſpye the mote in ours. Remember that
our Sauiour ſayth in the Goſpel, that
the phiſition ought to cure himſelfe.
            
            
               ¶The .43. Chapter.
               YOu that can ſaye ſo well, that one
ought to liue according to ye ſcripture,
and that you will by it refourme
vs, why do ye not beginne with your

ſelues, to geue vs the better example.
From whence come ſo many kinde of
vſuries and exceſſiue intereſts as you
doo vſe? You call our Churche abhominable
and adulterous. He that is
among you without ſinne, let him caſt
the fyrſte ſtone. You doo abhorre oure
Idols (as you terme them, talking of
our Images) howe commeth it to
paſſe then, that ſome of youres ſhould
come ſo neere vs that are Idolaters,
as to rob our Churches, and to carye
away the Images and reliques, and
to go and ſell them in other places?
But nowe to make an ende of this
diſcourſe, although it were ſo, that
your woorkes were the beſt of the
worlde, yea, whollye without ſpot or
ſinne (as ſome of you doo affyrme) yet
were not they ſufficient to moue vs to
chaunge our religion, nor to forſake
that that our forefathers haue taught
vs: for although it be ſo, that our Sauiour
Chriſte was as iuſt and as innocent

as any can be, hath beene, or euer
ſhalbe, yet neyther his holy life, nor
the Scriptures that he did alleage, to
proue his comming by the authoritie
of the Prophetes, nor the teſtimonie
of S. Iohn Baptiſt: all theſe thinges together
wer not ſufficient to perſwade
the Iewes to forſake their old lawes,
and to receaue the Goſpell, without
the teſtimonie of the great miracles
that he did in their preſence. He doeth
confeſſe this plainely, where he ſayth:
If I had not done in their preſence
the workes and miracles that neuer
any had done, they ſhould haue no ſin.
This ſentence is moſte notable and
woorthy to be grauen in the heartes
of all Catholikes, to aſſure their conſciences
which are troubled with ſuch
diuerſitie of opinions. For although it
were ſo, that you my maſters were
the honeſteſt men of the worlde, ſent
from God to teache and preache a
true doctrine, yet ſhoulde we be excuſable

before God for not receauing of
your commiſſion, euen as the Iewes
had bene for not receuing of our Sauiour
Chriſte, if he had not done ſo
manye miracles. For we knowe no
cauſe, why you ſhoulde be more priuileged
then Chriſte. And ſeing that you
haue ſhewed nothing to verifye it
this waye, and that the Scriptures
make no mention of your vocation,
nor you ſhewe no miracles, and that
your liues are at the leaſt as yll as
ours: what moues you to be ſo bolde
and ſo vnſhamefaced, as to threaten
vs with eternall damnation, if we receaue
not your hereticall doctrine, the
which is ſo full of diſcordes and diuiſions,
that one maye eaſilye gather by
this, from whence it came, and whither
it doeth leade one, although yee
haue nothing in your mouthes, but
the Goſpell & the worde of the Lorde?
and as S. Auguſtine ſayde vnto your
ſemblables. Sola perſonat apud vos

veritatis pollicitatio. I ſay no more at
this time, but that I beſeeche God to
drawe you as nere to vs as you are
farre from vs, and to inſpire youre
mindes to turne to the flock of Chriſt,
the which, both to your owne harme
and ours you haue forſaken.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶An offer made by a Catholike
to a learned Proteſtant, wherein
ſhall appere the difference betwixte
the open knowen Churche of the Catholikes,
from the hidde and
vnknowen congregation
of the Proteſtants.
            
               FIrſte, ſeeing it cannot be denyed,
that our Sauiour
Chriſte before his departure
and Aſcenſion, did commit
the charge and gouernment of his
Churche, the teſtimonie of his word,
the truth of his Goſpell, the miniſtration
of his Sacramentes, to his Apoſtles
and Diſciples, & that not only
for them ſelues, but to their ſucceſſors
Biſhops and prieſts,Mat. 28. & to none other,
ſaying onely vnto them:Mar. 16. 
               Euntes, docete
omnes gentes. Goe ye and teache
all people and nations of the worlde,
baptiſing them in the name of the father,

and of the ſonne, and of the holy
ghoſte, teaching them to obſerue and
keepe all thinges which I haue commaunded
you. Further Thapoſtle S
Paule being at Miletum, in executing
of his charge and gouernment,
gaue this admonition to the biſhops
and prieſtes there aſſembled before
him,Act. 20. ſaying: Attendite vobis, et vniuerſo
gregi. Take hede vnto your ſelues,
and vnto the whole flocke of Chriſte,
in the which the holy ghoſte hath ordeyned
you biſhops. Regere eccleſiam
dei, to gouerne the church of God.
            And in the thirtenth Chapiter of his
Epiſtle to the Hebrews he doth commaunde
al other ſortes of men, without
exception of Emperours, kinges,
Queenes, & princes, to obey their biſſhops
and prieſtes, ſaying: Obedite
Praepoſitis veſtris,
               Heb. 13. 
               et ſubiacete eis, ipſi
enim peruigilant, quaſi rationem pro
animabus veſtris reddituri. Obey your
Prelates, and doo what they appoynt

you, for they doo watche, as
men that ſhall render accoumptes for
your ſoules. Seeing that by the teſtimonies
before alleaged it can not be
denyed, but that the charge and gouernment
of Chriſte his churche, the
preaching of his doctrine, the adminiſtration
of his Sacraments, was
by him committed to his Apoſtles &
diſciples, and to all Biſhops and prieſtes
as Succeſſors of them, to plant
chriſtian fayth and religion in his catholike
churche vniuerſally throughout
all nations, coaſtes and quarters
of the worlde. Seeing this is by the
playnnes of the ſayde Teſtimonyes
of ſuche an vndoubted truth, that it
cannot be denyed: Nowe let the learned
Proteſtant, affyrming princes to
be the ſupreme heades of the Church,
eyther ſhewe by ſome ſuche other
like playne teſtimonyes of the ſcriptures,
that our Sauiour Chriſte did
committe the chiefe charge and

ſupreme gouernment of his Churche
to Emperours, kinges, Queenes and
princes, to plant chriſtian fayth & religion
in the ſame, or that anye one of
Chriſte his Apoſtles or diſciples did
conuert any people, lande, or countrey
from their Idolatry & Ethnike kinde
of liuing, to Chriſtian fayth & religion
by preaching the doctrine of the
Proteſtantes: as of onely fayth to iuſtifye,
the contempt of good workes,
and that they be all vncleane in the
ſight of God, the denyall of free will,
of the reall preſence of Chriſtes bodye
in the holy Euchariſt, of the ſacrifice
of the moſte bleſſed Maſſe, the aboliſhing
of Chriſte his Sacramentes, &
of all grace and goodnes by them cō
               ferred
vnto vs, then I ſhal yeelde and
recant, and not before.
            
                Seconde, Chriſte his Catholike
Churche being on this wiſe planted
by Thapoſtles & diſciples of Chriſte,
by Biſhops and prieſts the ſucceſſors

of them, had at all times a ſpecial care
and regarde, not onelye of preaching
Gods worde, but alſo of the preſeruation
of the ſame worde and Goſpel by
writing, of the ſacred Bible, and holy
Scriptures, and did diſcerne & iudge
them from all other writinges prophane
or authentique of all ſortes.
What Churche hath had from time
to time the cuſtody of the ſacred ſcriptures,
and moſte ſafely hath preſerued
them for the neceſſary foode of Gods
people, and from the corruption of the
aduerſaries, aſwel Iewes and Gentiles,
as ſchiſmatikes and heretikes of
all ſortes, but onely the common
knowen Catholike Church of Chriſt?
When therefore the learned Proteſtantes
ſhalbe able to bring proufe to
the contrarye, that their priuate conuenticles
and congregations were ye
firſte bringers forth of this ſacred Bible
and the worde of God written,
the chiefe preſeruers and defenders of

the ſame in all times and ages, from
all Iewes, Gentiles, heretikes and
ſchiſmatikes, Then I will, as I ſaide
before, reuolte and recant.
            
                Thirde, ſhew me good reaſon why
ye proteſtants doo beleeue our catholike
churche enfourming and telling
you this to be the word of God written,
the true Bible and ſacred Scriptures,
and doo refuſe to credite her in
the true ſenſe and vnderſtanding of
the ſame Scripture, ſhe being vndoubtedly
led with the ſpirite of god
in them both: For if the Catholike
Churche had the true ſpirite of God
in diſcerning and iudging the true
Scriptures of God, from the reſt not
Scriptures, why ſhoulde not we beleeue
that ſame catholike churche gouerned
and led by the ſame ſpirite, in
geuing the true ſenſe, meaning and
vnderſtanding of the ſcriptures. Whē
ye ſhalbe able to render a ſufficient
reaſon of the one, and not of ye other,

I ſhall then yeelde and recant, and
not before.
            Fourth, Let the proteſtantes make 
ſufficient proufe by auncient writers
of the eccleſiaſticall hiſtoryes, what
church it is, that all theſe fyftene hundred
yeeres paſt hath continued thoroughout
fyrme and ſtedfaſt, whiles
all other conuenticles and congregations,
aſwell of the Atrians, as of the
Neſtorians, Maniches, Nouatians,
Vigilians, Iouinians, and the reſt of
heretikes of all ſortes, haue decayed,
bene conuinced and ouerthrowen; &
that by any other church, then by the
common knowen catholike Churche
of Chriſte, And I ſhal then yeeld and
recant, and not before.
            Fyfte, If it may ſufficiently be proued,
that any other Churche then the 
common knowen catholike churche
of Chriſte, hath inſtituted and ordeyned
all goodly ceremonies, & ſolemne
obſeruations in the ſame dayly practiſed

and vſed, as the feſtiuall dayes
of Chriſtmas, Candlemas, Eaſter,
Whitſontide, the feaſts of thapoſtles
and holy Euangeliſts, of S. Michaell
tharchangell, and of all halowes &
bleſſed Saintes, the obſeruation of
the holye faſt of Lent, and Imber
dayes, the faſte of thapoſtles, and of
all the aforeſaide feſtiual Eues, beſide
the weekely faſt of Frydayes & Saturdayes,
& the reſt yet obſerued and
allowed on both ſydes, to the honour
and glorye of God, Then I will recante,
and not before.
            
                Sixth, let the proteſtantes ſhewe
what Church from Chriſte his time
hitherto, and for the whole ſpace of
theſe fiftene hundred yeres paſt, hath
exerciſed diſcipline and due correction
vpon offenders in all degrees, and for
that purpoſe hath not onely prouided
and made, but continuallye executed
lawes, canons and decrees eccleſiaſticall,
by ſuſpenſion, excommunication,

degradation, and ſuch other like.
Let thē proue this diſcipline to haue
proceeded of the Proteſtants congregations,
or to haue continued from
time to time, in anye other Churche,
then in the common knowen Catholike
Churche of Chriſte, And I will
then recant, and not before.
            Seuenth, let me know of the Proteſtants,
what Church hath brought
forth for the ſpace of theſe fyftene hundred
yeres paſt, as children begotten
of her owne wombe, ſo manye thouſandes
of bleſſed Martyrs, of ſtoute
and bolde confeſſors, of pure and innocent
virgins, and of other holye
Saintes of al ſortes, and ſo acknowledged
of eyther partie. And if it ſhall
in fine fall out, that anye one of them
was of ye Proteſtants congregatiō,
faith or belief, whiles they liued here,
and not of the cōmon knowen faith
and religion of the Catholike Church
of Chriſte, or that they were approued

and canonized for Saintes, when
they were deade, by the proteſtantes
congregation, and not only by the catholike
churche of Chriſte, I ſhal then
ſubmit and recant, and not before.
            
                Eight, Wheras the Apoſtle Saint
Paule teſtifieth, that Chriſt gaue vnto
his Churche, ſome Apoſtles, ſome
Prophetes, ſome Euangeliſtes, ſome
paſtors and doctours, ad conſummationem
ſanctorum in opus miniſterij:
and ſo to continue to the edifying of
his body the catholike Churche vntill
his comming agayne. Nowe if the
Proteſtants ſhalbe able to proue by
eccleſiaſticall hiſtoryes of all ages, the
continuance and vſe of the ſaid functions
and degrees in their congregations,
and that by ſome orderly ſucceſſion
and playne accompt made from
Chriſt his time hitherto, thei haue neuer
lacked the ſayde appoynted officers,
or that any other church thē the
common knowen catholike church of

Chriſte, hath had at all times the continuance
of the ſame, I ſhall then recant
and relent, and not before.
            Ninth, whereas the proteſtants by
the drift of reaſon and argument are 
forced of the Catholikes, to acknowledge
and confeſſe their churche and
congregations to haue lyen hydden &
vnknowen for the ſpace of one whole
thouſand yeres together, without all
the foreſayde functions and miniſtrations
of Apoſtles, prophets, Euangeliſts,
paſtors & doctors of their goſpel,
fayth and religion, at the leaſt wiſe to
be openly perceyued and knowen: If
therefore they ſhalbe able for the ſpace
of that whole time to proue by auncient
writers of eccleſiaſtical hiſtoryes,
any other worde, Goſpell or doctrine
to be vniuerſally and openly taught,
any other Sacramentes to be miniſtred,
anye other diſcipline or correction
to be practiſed, anye other
Iudgementes, Decrees, Canons,

or lawes to be exeuted, then thoſe
which were dayly practiſed in the cō
               mon
knowen Catholike Churche of
Chriſte, I will then recant, and not
before.
            
                Tenth, foraſmuche as the Proteſtantes
doo affyrme their congregations,
faith and religion, to haue bene
practiſed in the primatiue Churche of
Chriſte, ſome of them for the ſpace of
the firſte three hundreth yeeres, as
Iohn Caluine: ſome for the ſpace of
foure or fyue hundred yeres, as Martine
Luther and his complices: ſome
for the whole ſpace of the fyrſte ſixe
hundreth yeeres, as maſter Iewell,
and the authours of the Apologie of
the Churche of Ingland, and therin
not agreeing among them ſelues (as
the maner of heretikes is) I requyre
ſome better ſtayed and certayne tale
of them, where and when this ſodeyn
change from the Proteſtants religiō
to the Papiſts ſhould be made, as in

what yere of our Lorde, vnder what
Pope and Emperour? by what perſons
of name it was ſo wrought and
brought to paſſe, and vpon what occaſion,
& what Apoſtles, Prophetes,
Euangeliſtes, Paſtors and doctours
of their congregations did gayneſay
or withſtande the ſame? And who
doth make anye mention of this ſodeyne
and meruailous change of the
Proteſtantes religion to Papiſtrie?
what one ecceſiaſtical writer, or auncient
father of the whole world? And
when they ſhalbe able reaſonablye to
aunſwere, and to ſatiſfye theſe my demaundes,
then I will recant & yeelde
to them, and not before.
            Eleuenth, Let the learned Proteſtant
ſhewe me what order of ſeruice 
or common prayer, what order of miniſtration
of Sacramentes their
Churche had, before papiſtrie (as they
call it) preuayled in the worlde. Let
im ſhewe me one booke, or copie of

any Communion, or what els you
liſte, that was in Engliſhe, or in anye
vulgare or common tonge, beſide the
Hebrewe, Greeke and Latine, or that
lacked prayer for the ſoules departed,
or inuocation to Saintes, or ſacrifice
for the ſinnes both of the quicke & the
deade, or that charged a number to
receaue with the prieſte, or that he
could not els conſecrate or ſay Maſſe
receauing alone, or that the people
ſhould take the ſacrament for breade
and wine, and not for the reall bodye
and bloud of Chriſte, or that they
ſhould geue no honour to it, or not reſerue
the ſame for the comfort of the
ſicke and diſeaſed people, or that denied
extreme vnction, with the reſt of
the Sacramentes, to be behoufull or
neceſſary for them: Let the learned
proteſtant bring foorth and ſhewe
ſuche a Communion booke, or anye
leafe, lyne, or worde of any ſuche doctrine,
or any churche or congregation,

that euer had any authenticall ſeruice
or miniſtration of the Sacraments,
other then that which is yet daylye &
openly practiſed in the cōmon knowen
catholike churche of Chriſte, And
I ſhall then recant, and not before.
            Twelfth: I demaunde of the learned 
proteſtant to knowe cauſe & reaſon,
why their congregations do admit
and receaue all Biſhops, prieſts,
deacons, and other officers ſpirituall,
ordered by our catholike Churche, as
men lawfull and ſufficient to preache
the worde of God, to miniſter the ſacramentes,
and to exerciſe al ſpiritual
Iuriſdiction in no leſſe wiſe, but rather
more, then if they had bene ordered
in their owne priuate congregations:
whereas the catholike churche
of Chriſt doth not acknowledge any
man of their ordering & calling to be
any whit the more fit for any ſpirituall
function in Chriſt his church, then
other cōmon lay men. When therfore

the learned Proteſtant ſhalbe able to
ſhewe good cauſe and reaſon, whye
our Catholike Churche, hauing by
their owne conſent and approuing
lawfull prieſtes, Biſhops and ſpiritual
miniſters, not to be alſo the lawful,
true and catholike churche of Chriſte,
I will then recant, and not before.
            
                Thirtene, I require of the learned
proteſtant to expreſſe what furniture,
furtherance or commoditie to the honor
and ſeruice of God, did chriſtianitie,
or any part of Chriſtendome receaue
by his Churche or congregations?
what temple or churche did you
build at any time for your aſſemblies,
and ſeruice of god? what Biſhopriks
for the better gouernment of ye church
did you founde or procure? what vniuerſities,
ſchooles or colleges did you
at any time erect for ye maintenaunce
of chriſtian doctrine, fayth and religion?
When the learned Proteſtant
ſhalbe able to proue by eccleſiaſticall

hiſtories, and olde auncient writers,
theſe thinges to be the monumentes
of their conuenticles and priuate congregations,
of their fayth and religion,
and not of the common knowen
fayth, religion, and catholike Churche
of Chriſte, Then I ſhal in like maner
yeelde and recant, and not before.
            Fourthtene, Let the learned Proteſtant 
name anye one felowſhip or
companye of beleeuers in the whole
chriſtian worlde, that in all Articles
of faith and religion be in one vnitie,
in one meaning and beliefe, and contented
alſo to captiue & ſubmit their
ſeuerall meaninges to the iudgementes
of their prelates and ſpirituall gouernours,
and of one chiefe head and
paſtor among them, in all eccleſiaſticall
thinges and cauſes: Let (I ſaye)
the learned proteſtant name any one
company thus agreing among them
ſelues, and thus humblye affected in
Chriſtian fayth and religion, ſauing

onely the holye and bleſſed felowſhip
of the common knowen catholike
churche of Chriſte, And I will then
recant, and not before.
            
                Fyftene, Againe I doo demaunde
of the learned proteſtant, whether ye
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illirians,
Caluiniſts, Confeſſioniſts, Swenkfeldians,
Anabaptiſts and ſuche like,
be al of one church and congregation
or no? And if he be able to proue theſe
ſectes, being of ſuch diuerſitie in fayth
and religion, to make one church, and
that euery one of them may geue ſaluation
to their felowes, being ſo diſagreable
one with another in high miſteryes
and poyntes of fayth and religion,
or that I ought to beleeue all
thoſe, rather then the one true catholike
churche of Chriſte: or yet anye of
theſe, more one then another, all of
them making ſuch a bolde chalenge
of the truth of Gods worde and Goſpell.
When the learned proteſtant
ſhall be able by good reaſon, or drifte

of argument to ſatiſfye theſe my requeſtes,
Then I ſhall yeelde and recant,
and not before.
            Sixtene, when the proteſtant ſhall
be able to proue, that thoſe perſons 
which in their departure made from
the catholike churche of Chriſte, haue
more deſyre to beare ye name of Sectaryes,
as of Lutherans, Suinglians,
Illyrians, Caluiniſts, Swenkfeldians,
and Anabaptiſtes, then the
name of Chriſtians or Catholikes,
are the true members of Chriſte his
Churche, and not heretikes and ſchiſmatikes,
nor yet folowers therein of
their forefathers, the Arrians, whiche
toke their names of Arrius, the Maniches
of Manes, the Neſtorians,
of Neſtorius: the Nouatians, the Vigilians,
the Iouinians, Pelagians,
Eutichians, and others, Then I ſhall
yeeld & recant, and not before.
            Seuenthtene, I demaunde of the
learned proteſtant, whether if the 
               
whole ſpace of that thouſand yeres of
blindnes, wherein their Churche laye
hid and vnknowen, ſuppreſſed by papiſtrie,
ſuperſtition and Idolatrye, as
they terme it, whether they whiche
were then baptized, and openly profeſſed
Chriſt, wer ſaued or not? If the
Proteſtant doo aunſwere, yea, conſequently
it foloweth, that they were
ſaued without the Church of Chriſte,
liuing in all ignorance, ſuperſtition &
Idolatry, as they ſay. If he aunſwer
no, and that there was no ſaluation
out of their hid & vnknowen Church,
then all men of all degrees, yong and
olde, for the whole ſpace of the foreſayde
thouſand yeeres (by the Proteſtants
iudgement) periſhed without
all hope of Gods mercye, and were
damned, When therefore the learned
Proteſtant ſhall be able to proue by
good reaſon and argument, eyther
that ther is a way to ſaluation without
the Churche of Chriſte, or that all

people profeſſing Chriſte, periſhed for
ſo many hundreth yeeres together,
Then I will recant, and not before.
            Eightene, Let the learned Proteſtant 
make prouf vnto me, how their
hid, vnknowen and ſecrete churche,
not hauing in it the doctrine of Chriſt
his Goſpell openlye taught, no miniſtration
of Sacramentes, no ſpirite
of prophecying, no diſcipline of
rod or correction, no ordering of Biſſhops,
prieſtes, and eccleſiaſticall miniſters,
nor yet anye other ſpirituall
function executed in the ſame, for the
ſpace of one thouſand yeres together,
Let him proue their hid & vnknowen
Churche; with the lacke of all theſe
thinges, to be the true ſpouſe and Catholike
church of Chriſte, And I will
recant, and not before.
            Ninthtene, Againe, on the other 
ſide, let the learned proteſtant proue,
that it is not the true Churche of
Chriſte, that hath in the face of the

world, for the ſpace of fiftene hundred
yeres paſt, exerciſed preaching, the cō
               uerſion
of nations to the obedience of
the Goſpell, that hath alwayes had
the adminiſtration of Sacraments,
the hearing of matters in controuerſie,
the orderlye ſucceſſion of Biſhops,
the vniformitie of ſolemne Ceremonies,
and the vnitie of fayth, that hath
in her ſelfe all holye functions of the
ſpirite, as working of miracles, remiſſion
of ſynnes, the true ſenſe and
interpretation of Gods word, that is
beautifyed with diuerſitie of ſtates
commended by Chriſte, as with martyrs,
with confeſſors, holye virgins, &
ſuch other. Let ye proteſtant proue vnto
me, that this is not ye true churche,
and that we are not bound to obey &
beleue this church, & none other, in all
controuerſies & doubtes vpriſing eyther
by ye difficultie of ſcripture, or by
vain contention & pride of heretikes,
and I wil yeld & recant, & not before.
            
               
Twentie, Moreouer, let the learned
proteſtant proue, that ye true and catholike 
churche of Chriſte may at any
time be voyde of Gods ſpirite (which
he hath promiſed to be wt his churche
for euer) ſaying:Ioh. 14. 
               Et ego rogabo patrē,
et alium paracletum dabit vobis, vt
maneat vobiſcum in aeternum) or falſly
to interprete any ſentēce of holy ſcripture,
or to induce any error among ye
people, or approue vnprofitable and
hurtful vſages among the chriſtians,
or that ſhe ſuffereth any damnable abuſe
in her religion, without open reprehenſion
thereof: Let the learned
proteſtant proue anye of theſe poyntes,
And I will then yeelde and recant,
and not before.
            One & twentie, If vnitie in faith,
auſteritie of life, ſharpe diſcipline,
great penance, muche faſting, large
almes, godly deuotion, obedience to
higher powers, grauitie, and true
charitie be not more euidentlye

exerciſed and vſed in our common
knowen catholike church, then in the
proteſtants congregation: And contrarywiſe,
if diſcord in religion, licentiouſnes
in liuing, contempt of diſcipline,
reiecting of penaunce, lothſomnes
of faſting, lacke of zeale and deuotion,
diſobedience to Magiſtrates,
Sacrilege, Apoſtacie, breaking of
vowes, vnlawfull luſtes, wantonnes
in all life and maners, doo not agree
better, and more cleere to the proteſtantes,
then to the catholikes, being
the playne ſignes and fruits of a falſe
churche, Then wil I recant, and not
before.
            
                Two and twenty, Let the learned
proteſtant proue vnto me, that their
churche & congregation might rightlye
be called catholike, which for the
ſpace of a thouſande yeres together
was ſo particuler, that no man could
name any certaine place where their
churche was, or that it might be called

holye, which had for ſo longe
time and ſpace neyther the doctrine
of Chriſtes Goſpell taught in it, neyther
Baptiſme, nor anye other Sacrament
of Chriſte vſed to ſanctifye
them withal, or that it could be called
one church, which, aſſoone as it grew
vp, and ſhewed it ſelfe to the worlde,
was deuided into ſo many & ſundry
ſects, of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illiricans,
Caluiniſts, Swenfeldians,
Anabaptiſts, and ſuch other: or that it
might be called Apoſtolike, whiche
coulde neuer make an accompt by orderly
ſucceſſion and diſcent from any
one of Chriſte his Apoſtles, or any other
Apoſtolike man, or that their ſecrete,
hid and vnknowen congregation
was euer of that maieſtie or authoriti,
yt it had at any one time or ſeaſon,
the true obedience of all chriſtian
nations, or that it was euer able to
aſſemble and gather vniuerſall and
generall Councels of all nations &

chriſtian people, or to exerciſe any diſcipline
or correction vppon offenders
throughout all kingdomes and regions
profeſſing Chriſte: or that theſe titles
folowing properly applyed by the
Scriptures and doctors to the true
churche of Chriſte, could euer be chalenged
by any right to their hid & vnknowen
congregation, I mean, theſe
titles, namelye Corpus Chriſti, The
body of Chriſte, Sponſa Chriſti, The
ſpouſe of Chriſte, Amica Chriſti, The
louer of Chriſt: Vnice dilecta Chriſto,
Dearely beloued of Chriſt: Columba
ſpecioſa, The beautifull doue: Domus
dei, The houſe of God: Columna veritatis,
The piller of truth: Ciuitas dei
The Citie of God: Ciuitas ſuper montem
poſita, A Citie ſet vppon an hill:
Fons ſignatus, A ſpring or fountayne
ſurely ſigned and ſealed: Sponſa Agni
The ſpouſe of the Lambe: Mulier amicta
ſole, A woman clothed with ye
               
Sun: Habitatio fratrū inuicē, a dwelling
of brethren all together, Mons
dei, The hill of God, Sacra Anchora,
The holye Anchore: Vinea Domini,
Our Lordes vineyarde: Terra viuentium,
The lande of the liuing: Eccleſia
magna, The great and mightie
Churche: Archa Noe, Noes Arche:
Vna, Sancta, Catholica, et Apoſtolica
Eccleſia, One, holye, Catholike, and
Apoſtolike Churche: Domus pacis,
The houſe of peace: Domus refugij,
The houſe of refuge: Domus veritatis,
The houſe of truth: Societas Sanctorum,
The felowſhip of holy Saints:
Nutrix Chriſtianorum, The Noriſhe
of the Chriſtians: Vxor de latere
Chriſti, The Spouſe out of Chriſte
his ſyde, ſicut Eua de latere Adam, like
as Eue was out of the ſyde of Adam.
Let the learned Proteſtant
make proufe, that theſe moſte excellent
propertyes and peculier Denominations
and Callinges maye

poſſiblye agree to their hid and vnknowen
congregations and priuate
ſocieties, or to any other knowen ſocietie
of the whole worlde, but onely to
the holy ſocietie, moſte bleſſed companye
and felowſhip of the common
knowen catholike Church of Chriſt,
And I will then relent, yeelde, and
recant, and not before.
            Laſt of all,Certayne and aſsured ſignes and tokēs of falſe prophetes, heretikes and ſchiſmatikes. when theſe notes folowing,
being moſt certayne and ſure
ſignes and tokens of Antichriſtians,
falſe Prophetes, heretikes, and ſchiſmatikes,
mentioned, and manifeſtlye
expreſſed in diuers partes of the ſcriptures,
ſhall by the learned proteſtant
be proued more aptly and truely to agree
vnto vs of the common knowen
catholike Church of Chriſte, then vnto
the proteſtants of ſo many ſundrye
and diuers ſects and congregations,
I ſhal ſubmit, yeelde and recant, and
not before.
            
                Firſt ſigne and token appropriated

to Antichriſtes, falſe Prophetes, heretikes
and ſchiſmatikes, in the ſcripture,
is, their departure from the cō
               mon
knowen catholike churche of
Chriſte, wherein they were baptiſed,
and firſt receaued chriſtian faith
and religion, of the which ſygne and
token ſpeaketh Thapoſtle S. Iohn,
ſaying:1. Iohn. 2. 
               Ex nobis prodierunt, ſed non erant
ex nobis, nam ſi fuiſſent ex nobis,
permanſiſsent vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nobiſcum. They
departed from vs, but they were not
of vs, for if they had bene of vs (and
of our Churche) they woulde (ſayeth
Thapoſtle S. Iohn) haue continued
with vs ſtill, and not haue departed
from vs. And here nowe the learned
proteſtant, not being able to denye,
that they haue departed from our cō
               mon
knowen catholike church, from
our fayth and religion, wherein they
were fyrſte baptiſed, and not we departed
from them, but ſtill remaining
in the profeſſion of the ſame fayth &

religion that we fyrſte receaued: he
muſt needes by the dryfte of argument
and reaſon graunt alſo, that
this fyrſte ſigne and token of falſe
prophetes, heretikes, and ſchiſmatiks
was before ſpoken of the Apoſtle S.
Iohn, onely of them, and not of vs.
            
                Second ſure marke, ſygne and token
of falſe prophetes, heretikes and
ſchiſmatikes is, that they being thus
departed from the Catholike church,
doo of themſelues, and of their owne
authoritie, without warrant, beinge
not ſent, ſet vp a newe Goſpell, a new
fayth and religion, by preaching of a
newe doctrine, to aſſemble and ſet vp
a newe churche and congregation.
Of this ſigne and token, and great
preſumption ſpeaketh thapoſtle S.
Paule:Rom. 10. 
               Quomodo enim praedicabunt
niſi mittantur? How ſhall men preach
except they be ſent? And in his Epiſtle
to the Hebrewes he ſayeth:Heb. 5. 
               Nec
quiſquam ſibi ſumit honorem, niſi

qui vocatur a deo, quemadmodum et
Aaron. Let no man take vnto himſelfe
honoure, except he be called of
God, like as Aaron was. Certayne it
is, that Aaron was called vnto the
office and dignitie of a Biſhop, ordinarily
by Moyſes, and by externall
and viſible vnction. Moyſes himſelfe
was extraordinarilye called and ſent
of God, approued by miracle, as it
appereth in the fourth Chapiter of
Exodus. And therfore the Apoſtle S
Paule nameth Aaron, and not Moiſes,
to ſignifye, that all extraordinary
vocations by miracles (as Moyſes
was) are nowe ceaſſed, and that we
muſt from hencefoorth be ordinarilye
called by externall vnction, as Aaron
was. When therfore the learned proteſtant
ſhal be able to proue their iuſt
and due vocation ordinarily or extraordinarilye
to proceede of God, and
not onely of man, I ſhall then yeelde
and recant, and not before.
            
               
Thirde ſigne & token of falſe Prophetes,
heretikes and Schiſmatiks,
is, that they being firſt departed from
the catholike churche, and ſecondarily
not called, doo forthwith al of them
ſelues preache and teach contentiouſlye
and ſeditiouſly againſt the doctrine
before time taught of the common
knowen catholike churche of
Chriſte, as againſt the Sacraments
of Chriſte his Churche, by a flat denyall
of manye of them, againſt the
reall preſence of Chriſte his bodye in
the holy Euchariſt, againſt ye bleſſed
ſacrifice of the Maſſe propitiatorye
both for the liue & the deade, againſt
penaunce, and worthy fruites therof,
by faſting, watche, prayer, and all
ſtraightnes of life, againſt vowes, inuocation
of Saintes, prayer for ſoules
departed, and finally agaynſt the
churche it ſelfe, flatlye denying, that
Chriſte hath here vpon the earth any
Spouſe or viſible churche here to be

heard ſpeake, perceaued or ſeene. The
Apoſtle S. Paule in admonition geuing
vnto vs, to beware of this ſygne
and token,Heb. 13. ſayeth: Doctrinis varijs et
peregrinis nolite abduci. Be not you
led and caried awaye with theſe diuers
and ſtraunge doctrines: ſo termed
of Thapoſtle S. Paule, becauſe
they are not agreing, but contrary to
the receaued and common knowen
doctrine of Chriſt his catholike churche.
When therfore the learned Proteſtant
ſ
                  •
               al be able to proue, that they
and their congregations are not the
rayſers vp of theſe contentions and
ſtrifes, by their preaching of theſe
ſtraunge doctrines, but we, that are
members of the catholike Churche,
Then I will ſubmit and recant, and
not before.
            Fourth ſigne and token of falſe prophetes,
heretikes and ſchiſmatikes, is,
               Schiſma in eccleſiam introducere, To
bring into the churche of Chriſte by

their doctrine, ſchiſme, diuiſion and ſeperatiō
of one member from another,
and of the whole miſticall body from
the true heade Ieſus Chriſte. For
whereas the health and ſaluation of
Chriſte his flocke & people doth moſte
chiefely conſiſt in peace, concorde, and
vnitie, they therfore which by ſchiſme
doo deuide and diſperſe his flock, and
of one ſocietie and felowſhip before,
do make many and diuers, they innot
ſparing nor preſeruing in vnitie ye flock
of Chriſte, are become raue
                  ••
               ng wolues.
Thapoſtle S. Paule knowing
the great daunger and hurt vpriſing
of ſchiſme, doth moſte humblye beſeeche
vs with all diligent circumſpection
to auoyde the ſame, ſaying:
Obſecro vos fratres per nomen domini
noſtri Ieſu Chriſti,
               1. Cor. 1. 
               vt idipſum dicatis
omnes, et non ſint in vobis ſchiſmata,
ſitis autem perfecti in eodem ſenſu, et
in eadem ſententia. I beſeeche you brethren
by the name of our Lorde Ieſus

Chriſte, that ye all ſay one thinge,
and that there be no ſchiſmes among
you, but be perfect, in one minde, and
one meaning. Nowe if the learned
proteſtant ſhalbe able to proue, that
wheras about the time of three ſcore
yeres and aboue, we were al (not onlye
here in this Realme, but vniuerſallye
in all other Realmes profeſſing
Chriſte) of one Churche, of one
fayth and religion, and of one vnitie
therein: if he ſhalbe able to proue, that
this late ſchiſme, whereby we are ſo
deuided and diſperſed, that ſome are
become Lutherans, ſome Zuinglians,
ſome Caluiniſts, ſome Puritans
and Anabaptiſts, did proceede from
vs, and from the common knowen
Catholike Church of Chriſte, and not
whollye from their priuate Churche
and congregations, and of the deceptfull
and falſe doctrine by them
preached and taught, I ſhall

then ſtay no longer, but yeeld and recant,
and not before.
            
                Fyfte ſigne and token of falſe prophetes,
heretikes and ſchiſmatikes is,
diſobedience: Et non obedire, ſed reſiſtere
eis qui praeſunt in eccleſia dei: And
not to obey, but reſiſt thoſe which doo
beare rule, and gouerne in the church
of God: of the which ſort of men the
Apoſtle S. Paule geueth vs warning
ſaying: Quemadmodum Iamnes
et Mambres reſtiterunt Moyſi,
               2. Tim. 3. 
               ita et hi
reſiſtunt veritati,
               Exod. 7. 
               homines corrupti mē
                  te,
reprobi circa fidem. Like as Iamnes
and Mambres did reſiſt Moiſes,
euen ſo do theſe reſiſt the truth, being
men of corrupt mind, and reprobates
in faith. Now when the learned proteſtant
ſhalbe able to proue, that this
rebellion and diſobedience to all Biſſhops,
prelates, and eccleſiaſticall gouernours,
is to be found in the catholike
churche, and not in the priuate
churche & congregations of the proteſtantes,

Then I ſhall yeelde, ſubmit
and recant, and not before.
            Sixte ſigne and token of falſe prophets,
heretikes, and ſchiſmatikes is,
the ficklenes, & weak ſlippernes of errors
& hereſies: Quòd quaelibet haereſis
prae catholicae fidei peepetua firmitate
facile tranſit ac perit. For that euerye
hereſye, in compariſon of the ſtabilitie
and perpetual continuance and firmnes
of the catholike fayth, doth ſoone
periſh and paſſe away. Thapoſtle S
Peter in ſpeaking of theſe falſe prophetes,
ſayeth: Magiſtri mendaces ſuperducent
ſibi celerem perditionem, et
perditio eorum non dormitat: Theſe
lying maſters doo bring vppon them
ſelues a quick and ſpeedie ouerthrow,
and their deſtruction ſhall not be ſlacked
nor ſlowed. The truth of this teſtimonie
is to be tryed by all ſectaries
and ſortes of heretikes that euer haue
bene, as of the Nicolaites, Arrians,
Donatiſts, Maniches, Pelagians,

Iouiniſts, Neſtorians, Nouatians,
Sabellians, and the reſt of heretikes,
whoſe errors and hereſyes being neuer
ſo ſtoutly vpholdē by Emperors,
kinges and princes, yet by generall
councels, and cenſures of Chriſte his
catholike churche, they had in fyne
their iuſt condemnation and ouerthrowe.
What ſhoulde I here make
mention of the Lutherans and proteſtants
of our time? When the Lutherans
here in this Realme haue taken
their iuſt ouerthrowe already, for
the great deſyre the proteſtants had
to preferre the doctrine of the Oecolampadians,
Suinglians and Caluiniſts.
The Suinglians and Caluiniſts
with the reſt ſectaryes of all
ſortes are nowe here in this Realme
at the very neere and like poynte, they
being nowe readye to yeelde vp the
ghoſte, and to tylte vp their heeles
for the great deſyre the common and
baſer ſorte of the people haue to be

Preciſians and Puritans. And they
being winked at of the Magiſtrats,
there be no ſmall number of all degrees
and ſortes of men that doo further
and fauour them in this their attempt,
to the great increaſe of thē. It
cannot therefore be denyed, but that
all ſectaryes and hereſyes are on this
wiſe mouing, ſitting, and euer paſſing
from one ſecte to another, without
any long time of continuance or
ſtay in any one of them, vntill they
come ad profundum malorum, and to
a moſt playne and open apoſtacie, to
be miſcreants, Turkiſhe, and of Mahomets
religion, not caring or ſetting
by God, nor the deuill, neither for heauen
nor hell. Nowe hereſyes being
thus ficle and mouing, the finall ende
of them thus lamentable and horrible
in the ſight of God, Let any learned
proteſtant liuing anſwere directlye
and playnelye without all cauill,
coloure, or fraude of wordes, without

all vnprofitable and impertinent
digreſſions, not onely to this, but to al
the foreſaide ſignes tokens, and demaundes,
And I ſhall for company &
good felowſhip with them, leaue the
common knowen churche, and the
playne way of ſaluation, beaten by
our forefathers for the ſpace of theſe
fyftene hundred yeres paſt, and nowe
wander with thē in their vncertaine
bypathes, through vnknowen deſertes,
rough woods, brambles and bryers,
to ſeeke in the end we cannot tell
what.
            And here to conclude, and of my
part to miniſter vnto you ſome occaſion
in the relinquiſhing of theſe priuate
churches and congregations of
ſectaries, to returne to the vnitie and
attonement of the common knowen
catholike churche of Chriſte, where
ſtabilitie and conſtancie of fayth and
religion is onely to be founde, I ſhall
here lay before you the worthy example

of the bleſſed martyr Sebaſtian,
by him brought of a loafe of breade to
Genſerichus then king of the Vandales,
a furious and a barbarous nation,
whiche breaking into Affrike,
they founde there many valiant captayns
placed by the Emperour Theodoſius
the ſecond, for the defence and
ſauegarde of the countrey: amonge
the reſt was this Sebaſtian, by dignitie
an earle, and a couragious and
valiant captayne, who with the reſt
yeelding to the force of Genſericus,
was, as Victor de perſecutione Vandalorum
writeth, for his great wiſedome
and valiantnes not ſo muche
beloued as feared of the king Genſerichus,
who being an Arrian, intended
by colour of religion to work his
death. For Genſerichus knowing
Sebaſtian to be a ſeuere and a perfit
chriſtian man, conuented him before
the Arrian Biſhops, and vnder the
pretence that amitie and frendſhippe

might be the ſurer, and continue the
longer betwixte them, Genſerichus
moued him to become an Arrian, and
to profeſſe the ſame maner of beleefe
and religion, as he and his people
were of. For anſwere this holy martyr
Sebaſtian requeſted Genſerichus
the king to commaunde a fyne
wheten loafe to be brought vnto him,
and taking it in his hande (and here
to omit many of his wordes and notable
ſayinges) he requeſted the king
Genſerichus, to commaund the loafe
of breade to be broken in peeces, to be
ground, brought to flower, and boulted
afreſhe, to be ſeaſoned with water
and ſalte, and baked agayne, if then
it ſhould in the end proue better bread
then it was before he would not faile
to accompliſhe the king Genſerichus
his will & pleaſure: but if it were not
poſſible by breaking of the loafe, and
baking of it againe, to better it, but to
make woorſe breade then before, he

wold not, nor could not conſent therevnto:
And in fine ſuffered death, in ye
defence of the chriſtian fayth & religiō
by him alreadye profeſſed and receaued,
rather then he would condiſcend
to the impayring, infringing or breaking
of any part therof. And ſo Genſerichus
cauſed this bleſſed man Sebaſtian
to dye a holye Martyr. Thus
much I haue brieflye deducted out of
the hiſtory of Victor, to yt intent, that
ſo apte and familiar an example of ſo
holy & bleſſed a martyr, might in theſe
perplexities and doubtes in theſe ofte
changes & mutations of religion, confort
ye weaklings of Chriſt his church,
and bring them to ſome more better
ſtay, when by this example of Sebaſtians
loaf, certain & ſure we may be,
that the loafe of the vnitie of Chriſte
his Churche, the loafe of his Goſpell,
fayth and religion, being by ſchiſme
and hereſye neuer ſo ofte broken, neuer
ſo finely grynded, boulted, ſearced

and ſyfted, kneaded, & baked agayne
and agayne, they ſhall neuer be able
to better it, or to bring it to that perfection
which it had before. And therfore
all their attemptes to the contrarye
are moſte vayne, the only remembraunce
of this Sebaſtians loafe
ſhould ſuffiſe to confyrme the faythfull,
to ſtay the wauering and weaklinges,
and to plucke the deceaued
backe agayne, and to cauſe them in
leauing of this their fickle waueringnes
of this their proceedinges (as
they terme it) from one ſecte to another,
from one congregation to another,
and from their ſcatering abrode
with Antichriſte, to ſtay them ſelues,
and to gather them ſelues with our
Sauiour Chriſt into the vnitie of his
common knowen catholike churche,
where they ſhalbe ſure to 
                  •
               ynd vnitie
of religion, vniformitie in all ceremonies
and obſeruances of the ſame,
with thattonement of chriſtian fayth

throughout in all Sacramentes and
articles of our Creede, to the pacifying
of many contentions and ſtrifes
among vs, to the quietation of mens
conſciences, cauſing vs all profeſſours
of Chriſte, as brethren here to liue together
in quietnes, peace and vnitie,
to the more better aſſuraunce of the
publique eſtate of this Realme, and
to the great glorye and honour of almightie
God, to whom be all
prayſe, honour and glorye
worlde without ende.
            Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   