
      
         
            
            
            THE
SECRETES
OF THE REVERENDE
MAISTER ALEXIS OF
PIEMOVNT.
            Containyng excellente remedies againſt
diuers diſeaſes, woundes, and other accidents,
with the manner to make diſtillations,
parfumes, confitures, diynges, colours,
fuſions and meltynges.
A worke well approued, verye
profytable and neceſſary
for euery
man.
            Tranſlated out of Frenche into Engliſh,
by Wyllyam Warde.
            Imprynted at London by Iohn Kingſtone
for Nicolas Inglande, dwelinge in
Poules churchyarde.
            ANNO. 1558.
Me
                  •
               ſs. Nouemb.
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
         
         
            
               
health. In all theſe thinges are certaine ſecrete
vertues, whiche be manifeſte ſignes of
goddes loue and fauoure towardes man: for
he created them to thintent that men ſhould
vſe them, glorifie him, and geue him thankes
for them. And becauſe the vſe and knowledge
of them, and their vertues, is ſo expedient for
al creatures, God of his mere goodnes, hath
not onely geuen vnto the diligent ſearchers
therof, the gifte of perfitte vſage, and vnderſtandinge
of their operation in this time of
Chriſtianitie: but alſo vnto infideles before
Chriſt, beynge ignoraunt from whence that
gyfte came: who, notwithſtanding their ignoraunce,
did ſo reuerence the wonderful vertues
of thinges created in the worlde, that
they thought that eche of thoſe thinges had
had in it ſelfe a certaine diuine power, or els
that there was of euery thinge a ſeueral god
or creatour. Now, if they gaue ſuche honoure
vnto thinges created, not knowinge the creatoure,
what woulde they haue doen, if they
had knowen and confeſſed God to haue bene
the onely maker of the worlde, of man, and of
all thinges therin, of nothinge? Trulye they
woulde not haue done as ſome curious Chriſtians
amonge vs nowe a dayes do, whiche
(as your honour well vnderſtandeth) moſte
impudentlye deſpiſe all maner of medecines,
and ignorauntly diſpute againſt the vertues
and operation of herbes, and trees, ſayinge:

that if the ſicke man be appointed of God to
dye, all the medecines in the worlde can not
ſaue his life. Whervnto it may eaſely be aunſwered,
that euery man that is vexed with a
diſeaſe, is not appointed of God to die of the
ſame: but the infirmitie is ſent him as a puniſhment
for his offences, and yet hath God
created thinges to geue him eaſe and remedy
for his diſeaſe, which no Chriſtē man ought
to contempne or deſpiſe: for he that deſpiſeth
the worke, ſeemeth to contempne the workeman.
And agayne, becauſe that the appointment
and determination of God, concerning
the life and death of man, is ſo ſecrete, and ſo
farre beyonde the capacitie of mans reaſon,
and vnderſtandinge, and that we know not
when God hath prefixed the terme of our life,
we vſe in our infirmities and weaknes, thoſe
remedies that God hath created to be receaued
at their handes, to whome he hath geuen
the knowledge howe to miniſter theim vnto
vs. All theſe thinges are abundantly ynough
knowen vnto your honour, with a great many
more reaſons then I am able to alledge,
and therfore I do but bring owles to Athens
in declaringe this vnto you. But thus much
I may well ſaye, that mooſt madde are they,
and voyde of all reaſon & Chriſtianitie, that
wyle ſet ſo light by the workes of God: yea,
they are vnprofitable members of a common
welth, not worthy to bear the name of

Chriſtians: for by their fonde and falſe perſwaſions
to the ignoraunte and ſimple ones
in their diſeaſes, againſt the receiuing of any
medicines, many times it chaūceth, that thei
folowynge their fooliſhe aduiſe in neglectyng
Phiſick, thei be caſt away and periſhe, whiche
otherwiſe might haue bene ſaued. Me thinketh
this ſhould be ſufficient to perſwade thē
to embrace good and holeſome remedies: thei
ſee daylie that herbes, oinctmentes, plaiſters
made of thinges growing on the earth, and
ſuche like, by their vertues, do cure and heale
externall and outwarde woundes, ſores, cuttes,
ſwellinges, and other infirmities of the
body, and yet they will not beleue that ſuche
vertues can heale the internall and inwarde
diſeaſes. Vtterly ignoraunte be thei, that ſo
imagine with them ſelues, for thei that deſpiſe
Phiſick, deſpiſe a heauenly ſcience. But
what be thei that thus contempne it? Forſoth
ignoraunt & vnlearned men, that barke
at, and backbite theim that take paines for
the commoditie of all men. But it is comonly
ſeene and proued. Scientia non habet inimicum
praeter ignorantem. Whiche ſaiynge
(I feare me) is verified more in ſome of vs
Engliſhe men, than in anye other nation, I
woulde God it were not. And yet I thincke
there is no man ſo beſtiall, ſo rude, or ſo blunt
of wit, but that he is (by a certaine inſtinct of
natural inclinatiō) deſirous to know things

not before knowen, to heare newes not before
heard, and to vnderſtand bokes in his maternall
tonge, written firſt in a forein langage,
to thende not to ſeme altogether ignoraunte
in matters both of the liberall ſciences, and
alſo of hiſtories, ſet forth for his rudiment and
inſtruction, as in Coſmographie, in Aſtronomie,
in Philiſophie, in Logike, in Rhetoricke,
and ſpecially in Phiſick, whereof we had neuer
ſo muche neede as in theſe our daies, conſidering
the ſtraunge and vnknowen diſeaſes
that ſwarme amonge vs, and mo in number
then can be found remedy for. Therefore conſidering
with my ſelf (right honorable) that
I could not better declare my bounden duetie
vnto you, nor do my countrey a greater pleaſure,
than to put ſome thinge abroade vnder
youre honoures name, whereby it mighte receiue
ſome commodite: I haue taken in hand
to tranſlate this noble and excellent woorke
called, The Secretes of the Reueuerende Maſter,
Alexis of Piemount, firſte written in the
Italian toungue, and after tourned into
Frenche, and of late into Dutche, and nowe
laſte of al into Engliſh, becauſe that as well
Engliſhe men, as Italians, Frenche menne,
or Dutchmen, may ſucke knowlege and profit
hereof: beyng a work come out of the hands
of ſo famous a man as Alexis is, and dedicated
fyrſte to ſuche a noble prince as the duke of
Sauoye is, to whome trifles or fables are

not to be preſented, nor beinge a man vnder
whoſe name and protection lies or vayne inuentions
oughte to be ſette forth. Therefore
wayinge the age, the learninge and fame of
the auctor, & the nobilitie of the ſaied Prince,
men may eaſely iudge that ſuche intollerable
paynes haue not bene taken in the collection
of theſe ſecretes, to blowe an vntrueth
into mennes eares, but rather that this boke
hath ben publiſhed and communicated to the
worlde by the ſaied Alexis, for the care and
good zeale that he had to the health of mens
bodies, and that men of all countreys might
haue the knowledge of that with eaſe, ſitting
at home in their ſtudies, whiche he got with
greate trauayle and laboure, wandering almoſte
al the world ouer, as in his epiſtle here
to the reader he declareth.
            And nowe (right honourable) like as Chriſtopher
Plantine of Antwarpe, the printer of
this worke in Frenche, choſe the Prince of
Piemount, to protecte and adourne the fruites
of his labours, vnder the honoure of his
name: euen ſo I the tranſlatour hereof into
our Engliſhe tounge, haue thoughte it my
duety (with your honours fauour) to preſente
this my tranſlation vnto you, and to putte it
forth vnder your honours name and protection,
deſiring, and humbly requiring the ſame,
to accept my poore good wyll, hauinge good
hope that you ſhall finde ſuche thinges in the

diſcourſe of the whole booke, that you will
not onely take pleaſure in the knowledge of
them: but alſo commoditie, if it pleaſe you to
put in experience and proofe, thoſe that ſeme
moſte beſt vnto you: whereof there bee ſome
as excellente and as eaſie, as were euer ſette
foorthe in any toungue, as by your honours
wiſedom and iudgement, in the readyng you
ſhall eaſely perceiue. I am not able ſufficiently
to praiſe the excellencie of the boke, and
the diligence of the aucthour, ner to extol the
wonderfull giftes of God in men, whiche accordyng
to their talent, impart to the worlde
the encreaſe and fruicte of ſoche giftes, as he
diſtributeth vnto them. Of the whiche giftes
I thinke I ſhould not moche erre, if I ſaied
Phiſike to be the beſt and the moſte neceſſary
Nam ſi corporum noſtrorū, & tranquillitatis
vitae (quae ſine ſecunda valetudine vix eſſe
poteſt) rationem habere volumus, fatebimur
medicinam excellentiſſimam, mortalibus neceſſariam
eſſe. And euen ſo Cornelius Celſus
whiche wrote moſte excellente Bookes of
Phiſike, affirmeth ſaiyng. Alimēta ſanis corporibus
agricultura promittit: ſanitatem autem
aegris medicina: et idcirco deo optimo
maximo gratias habere debimus, qui vitam
nobis elargitus eſt: deinde medico, qui eam
nobis conſeruat, diuturnioremꝙ facit.
            
            
               
All this learninge and knowledge doo the
Greke auctors affirme to be moſt aunciente,
and moſt neceſſary in a common welth. For,
as it is deſyred of all men to liue in health of
body, ſo is it requiſite that medecines, both
preſeruatiue and curatiue, be hadde and vſed
amonge men, whiche not onelye comforteth
the infirme and diſeaſed bodye, but alſo putteth
the ſoule in remembraunce of Goddes
great power and myght, that hath geuen
ſuche vertue vnto thinges growing on
the earth, for mannes commoditie,
preſeruation, and health: which
health I pray God longe to
remayne with you, and
all your family
with
much encreaſe of vertue and honoure,
vnder the protection
of almightye God.
            
               Your humble Seruaunt
William Warde.
            
         
         
            
            Don Alexis to the reader.
            
               THey that haue knowen me in
time paſt, or to ſpeake plaine,
haue vſed me familierly all my
lyfe time, can peraduenture,
tel how God by his great goodnes,
hath made me to be borne
of a noble houſe and bloude
(accordinge to the commune,
I will not ſaye vayne, perſwaſion
of them, that ſtabliſh nobilitie more in the merites
of another man, than in our own) and that beſides this
I haue alwaies had my pleaſures, and great plentie of
richeſſe, yea farre paſſing the ſmalnes of my deſertes. I
wil ſay yet more (not to boaſt or to auaunce my ſelf, but
to the ende to refourme the gentill reader, and to geue
thankes vnto God) that there be many whiche knowe,
how I being geuen euen from my firſt youth vnto ſtudy,
haue gotten, not onely the knowledge of the Latin,
Greke, Ebrue, Caldei, and Arabic tonge, and alſo of diuers
other nations and countreis: But aboue al thinge
hauinge by a natural inclination, taken a ſinguler pleaſure
in Philoſophy, and in the ſecretes of nature, haue
wandered and trauailed abroad in the worlde the ſpace
of .xxvii. yeares, to the intent to acquainte my ſelf with
all ſortes of learned and diſcrete men. By the which diligence
and curioſitie, I haue learned many goodlye ſecretes,
not alonely of men of great knowledge and profound
learning, and noble men, but alſo of poore w
                  •
               mē
artificers, peyſantes, and all ſortes of men. Moreouer I
haue ben thre times in Leuant, and ſondry times haue
traua
                  •
               led almoſt all other partes of the world, without
reſting or ſeiourning at any time in one place aboue .v.
moneths. Now this my ſtudy and deſire of knowledge,
as well of the vniuerſall ſciences, as of particuler ſecretes,
and althoughe it was geuen vnto me by nature, as
to the moſt part of men (for euery man by an inſtincte of
nature deſyreth to knowe thinges) yet haue I alwayes

been noſeled vp by a certain ambition and vainglorie,
to knowe that, whiche an other ſhould bee ignoraunte
of: whiche thyng hath grafted in me, a continuall niggardneſſe
or ſparing, to diſtribute or communicate any
of my ſecretes, yea vnto my moſte ſinguler frendes that
I had: ſaiyng, that if the ſecretes were knowen of euery
man, thei ſhould no more bee called ſecretes, but publike
and common.
            Now, it chaunced theſe fewe daies paſt, being in Milan:
in the fowerſkore and twoo yere, and ſeuen monethes
of myne age, that a poore artificer was maruelouſly
tourmented with the ſtone, and had been twoo daies
without making his vrine. The Cyrurgen that dreſſed
hym, knowyng well that I had many ſecretes, and ſingulerly
for the ſtone, came to me, and requeſted me that
I would teache hym the receipte, or at the leaſt to giue
hym the medecine, compoſed and ready made, for the
health of the patiente. But I perceiuyng that he would
vſe other mennes thinges, for his owne profite and honour,
refuſed to giue it hym, but willed hym to bryng
me vnto the ſicke man, and that I my ſelf would miniſter
the medecine vnto him gratis. The Phiſition, either
fearyng blame if it ſhould bee knowen, that he had recourſe
to the aide of an other man, hauyng peraduenture,
boſted that he had the ſecrete hymſelf, or els in the
meane tyme, ſtill to make his profite in diſſembling the
matter, and differryng it yet twoo daies more, with diuerſe
excuſes and colours, vntill he brought me to the
patiente, whom at my commyng I founde ſo nigh his
ende, that after he had a little lifted vp his iyes, caſtyng
them pitiouſly towarde me, he paſſed from this into a
better life: not hauyng any neede, neither of my ſecrete
nor any other receipt to recouer his health. With this
cace I was moued to ſoche a compaſſion and ſorowe,
that not onely I wiſſhed my ſelf euill, but alſo I deſired
to die: ſeyng my ambition and vain glorie, to haue been
the cauſe that this poore man was not ſuccoured with
the remedy, and gifte that God the father, and Lorde of

vs all had giuen me. Wherefore, ſo greate was the remorſe
of conſcience in me, that, deſiryng to ſequeſtrate
my ſelf frō the worlde, and not findyng my ſelf of ſoche
a diſpoſition of mynde, that I could liue in a Monaſterie
emong religious menne, better edified then I, I
was at the laſte fully reſolued with my ſelf, to chooſe a
place ſeparate from any Toune, where I haue a little
lande, ſome bookes, and a ſtudie, for to auoide idlenes.
Here I liue a life, whiche I call a Monkes life, with one
ſeruaunte, whiche goeth to the toune, not to begge, but
to buie my prouiſion, and other thynges neceſſarie: for
to ſuſtaine his poore life and myne, as long as it ſhall
pleaſe God.
            But yet not hauyng the power to put out of my fantaſie,
but that I was a verie homicide and murtherer,
for refuſing to giue the Phiſition the receipt and remedie,
for the healyng of this poore manne, I haue determined
to publiſhe and communicate to the worlde, all
that I haue, beyng aſſured that fewe other menne haue
ſo many as I. And mindyng to ſet forth none, but ſoche
as bee moſte true and proued, I haue theſe daies paſte
(taken partly out of my Bookes, and partly out of my
memorie, all thoſe that came to hand) made a collection
of ſoche as I am certaine bee veritable, true, and erperimented,
not caryng if ſome of theim be written, or
printed in any other Bookes then this. For of this my
collection the reader, as touchyng thoſe, maie at the
leaſt take this vtilitee and profite, that whereas before
he mought haue doubted, whether ſoche remedies ſette
foorthe by an other manne, were true or not, he ſhall
bee now aſſured, vnder the affirmaunce of my faithe:
For truely, I would not ſette my ſelfe (beeyng in the
age, and diſpoſition, bothe of bodie and mynde, that
I am nowe in) to write fables or lies, that ſhould
continue alwaies. But of one poyncte I wille aduertiſe
the reader, and that is, that he dooe the thynges
with good diligence, and that in medecines concernynge

mannes body, he vſe the ayde and helpe of phiſitions:
Although in dede many of theim, moued with a
certaine ruſtick, and euyll grounded enuie, with a paſſion
of Ialouſy, are wont to blame and contempne thinges
that come not of them ſelues. Wherefore, as wel in
this, as in euerye other pointe, if he that will vſe theſe,
ſhould perchaunce finde, that the thing would not take
effecte according to his contentation, lette him beware
that he abuſe not him ſelf in the confection of them, and
to beginne againe with more diligence. Aſſuringe him
ſelfe, that (as I haue ſayd) there is nothing in this boke
but is true and experimented. And geuing alwayes
glory and praiſe vnto god onely for all, haue a
good hope, that, by meane of his diuine
grace, I will conſequentlye make you
a preſent of the reſt of all that I
haue gotten in ſo manye
trauayles, voyages,
coſtes, and
diligente ſtudye.
            Fare well.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
Secretes of the reuerent Maſter
Alexis of Piemont.
            
               THE FIRST BOKE.
               The maner an ſecrete to conſerue a mannes youthe, and to
holde backe old age: to maintain a man alwaies in health
and ſtrengthe, as in the faireſt flower of his age.
               
                  ¶All this is taken out of the long ſtudie, and diuers experiences,
that a gentleman made, by the ſpace of many yeres, in the ſeruice of
a noble Ladie. Beyng a thyng moſte certain, that an old man, of thre
skore and ten yeres, all withered withage, of a verie euill complexion,
and ſubiect to diuers kindes of diſeaſes, was altered and chaunged,
as into the age of ſxe oir eight and thirtie yeres.
                  
                     FIrſte, menne ought to haue alwaies
in remembraunce, and before
their iyes, that no grace, gifte, or commoditie,
is to be hoped for, but of God
onely. In whoſe greate clemencie and
goodneſſe, the greate prophete, beyng
aſſured, and ſtabliſhed in conſcience,
through his perfect faithe, cried, ſaiyng: Renouabitur, ſicut
aquilla, inuentus mea. And by the ſame mercie & goodneſſe,
he prolonged, ſo many yeres, the life of Ezechias: & made
Moiſes to liue a hūdred and .xx. yeres, and more, and not
one of his tecthe, at any time mouyng: without any dimnes
of ſight, or ache of heade. He then, as a moſte mightie
creatoure, and father of all, hauyng aſſigned vnto man,
the terme of his life, and lefte hym to the arbitremente of
his owne will: and alſo hauyng giuen vertue, ſtrengthe
and properties vnto thynges, and leauyng theim to execute
ordinarily, their mouynges and nature, hath alſo left
power vnto humaine creatures, to preſerue theim ſelues
in healthe, vntill the tearme and prefixed ende of our life,
bothe vniuerſally and particularly. But, for aſmoche as

wee knowe not, how to emploie thynges, accordyng as
thei are conuenable and meete for our nature, and our
chaunces or neceſſities, our diſordinate maner of life maketh
vs to liue, the moſte parte in diſeaſes, to precipitate
our yougth and to abbreuiate moche our life. Then, hauyng
our thought and mynde, alwaies firme and ſure in
hym, and replete with faithe and deuotion, ſaiyng in the
name of his infinite goodneſſe, vnto our ſelues: Longitudine
dierum replebo eum, et oſtendam illi ſalutare meum. We
will commence and begin, as inſpired with hym, and aſſured
to helpe our ſelues, with the vertue and ſtrength of
thinges, created in the worlde by his diuine power, onely
for our benefite. And mindyng for a publike profite, to
communicate ſome thing, as well ſearched and found out
of my ſelf, by long experience, as lately obtained and gotten,
of a ſpeciall frende of mine, whiche alſo, by greate diligence
and experience, hath by the ſpace of ſeuen yeres:
proued this maner of preſeruing & ſtabliſhing, the health
and yougth, I will firſt giue you the maner, how to make
a miraculous licoure, conſeruatiue, and reſtoratiue of the
naturall heate, and radicall humour, in the whiche twoo
thinges conſiſteth, principally the health, the vigour, the
ſtrength, and the life of man.
               
               
                  ¶To make a precious licoure, and of ineſtimable vertue: the
whiche taken at the mouthe, ſtrengtheneth and augmenteth the naturall
heate, and radicall humidite purifieth the blood, and clenſeth
the ſtomacke from all ſuperfluitie of humours: and by that meane
conſerueth the health and yougth, and prolongeth the life of hym
that vſeth it.
                  
                     IN the moneth of Maie, at the Sonne riſyng,
thou ſhalt take vp in a peuter diſhe, or ſome
veſſell of glaſſe, beyng very cleane, the dewe
that is fallen vpō Roſemarie, Borrage, and
other good herbes, Sage onely excepted, for
it is a thing moſte certain, that vnder Sage certain venemous
beaſtes, are wonte to aſſemble, whiche infecte and
poiſon it, with their breathe: and though that the leaues,

maie by waſihing be purified and clenſed, from ſoche exhalatiō
and breathing, yet neuertheleſſe, if the dewe that
falleth vpon the leaues, chaunce to take ſoche venim and
poiſon, it is not poſſible by any meanes to purifie it: and
therefore you ſhall not take vp the dewe of Sage. Then,
after hauyng gathered as moche dewe, as you thinke
good, haue three glaſſes ready, of ſoche greatneſſe as you
will, the whiche glaſſes you ſhall fil, ſome what more then
halfe full: the one with Suger, the other with Manna,
and the third with Honnie, the reſt of the glaſſes remaining
ſtill emptie and voide: and then fill them all vp, full
with the ſaid dewe, ſtopping them faſt with white waxe,
and couer them with a linen clothe. Kepe theim alſo in a
cupborde, or ſome other place out of the Sonne, as long
as nede ſhall be to vſe of it, as we will declare afterward.
And then take the inice of Quinces, & haue redie in a litle
glaſſe, ſome good Agaric, broken in pieces onely, and not
in poulder: the whiche you ſhall couer, with theſaid iuice
of Quinces, in ſoche ſorte as you haue doen with the Suger,
and other thinges in the glaſſes, and kepe it well couered.
Then, take the Iuice of all theſe thinges followyng,
of redde Roſes, or incarnate, of Succorie, of Endiue
of Fumiterie, of Bugloſſe, of Borage, of Mallowes, of
Hoppes, of the leaues and flowers of Marche violettes: &
of eche of theſe iuices a like quātitie: then mixe them wel
together. That doen, take a pound or two of Aloes Epaticā
                     
or as moche as you wil: for the more there is, the better it
ſhall be, bicauſe that theſaid Aloe beyng ſoſteeped, watered,
and prepared, as we will ſhe we you, is a verie exquiſite
& familiare medecine, to kepe in a houſe, and take of it
by litle lumpes or pilles, ones in the weke, when a man
goeth to bed: for it kepeth the body from putrifaction, and
from all euill humours: and is very profitable and good,
againſt the ache or paine in the ioinctes, and alſo for the
Frenche Pockes, as herafter we will declare orderly.
                  Take of the ſaied Aloe, of the beſt and the freſheſt,
ſoche a quantitie as you will, and put it in a cup of glaſſe,
or cleane platter, as is aboue ſaid, and ſet it in a windowe

or ſome other place in the Sonne, watryng or ſtepyng it
in theſaid iuices mingled together, giuing it therof as often
as ſhalbe ſufficient to make it moiſt, and to make of it
as it were athicke ſirop. Then couer the cup with a clene
linen clothe, or paper, to kepe it onely from the duſte, and
leaue it ſo in the Sonne. And when it is almoſte waxen
drie, embibe or water it again as before, and let it ſtand in
the Sonne. This ſhall you doe, ſo often, vntill you haue
made it ſoke and drinke vp as moche iuice, as the weight
of halfe the Aloe onely: that is to ſaie, if the Aloe weighe
twoo pound, make it drinke vp at diuers times, one poūd
of theſaid iuices. This doen, take theſe thinges followeyng,
Turbit halfe and vnce, fine Sinamom, Spica Nardi,
Fole foote, alias Aſtrabacca, Squinantum, Carpobalſamum,
                     Xylobalſamum. The wood whereof natural balme commeth.
                     Xilobalſamum, Lignum Aloes, Bdellium, Mirrhe,
Maſtic, of eche of them an vnce, with halfe an vnce of Safron:
All theſe thynges beyng well beaten into pouder,
and put into a cleane panne, you ſhall poure into theim,
ſo moche common water, that it ſurmounte theſaied matieres,
a good hande breadth, lettyng theim boile with a
a ſmall fire, the ſpace of an hower or more. After this you
ſhall ſtraine the ſaied decoction, and by litle and litle, water
from tyme to tyme, the ſaid Aloe in the Sonne, as you
haue afore doen: and this you ſhall doe ſo long, vntill the
Aloe haue dronke vp all the decoction. This doen, take it
out of the Sonne, and it ſhall be a precious thing, to kepe
in your houſe, as we haue all ready declared, whiche alſo
maintaineth the body in health, kepeth the heade cleane,
and cauſeth to haue a good colour, and a quicke and liuely
ſpirite, to them that vſe of it. He that is not of abilitie
to make this mixtion, in the maner aboue ſaid, maie make
it in this wiſe. Kepe diligently the ſaied Aloe, in litle diſſhes
of woode, to make this that wee will ſpeake of, here
followyng. Take Aqua vite, not to fine, nor of the
firſt ſtillyng, but ſtilled twiſe, or thriſe at the moſte. And
putte in diuers litle violles of glaſſe (the one bigger then
the other) all theſe thynges followyng, well beaten into
pouder, at the leſt thoſe that maie be beaten, puttyng alſo

in eche of theim, aſmoche of the Aqua vite, as ſhall bee
three fingers aboue them in the Violles, doyng as hereafter
foloweth. Take an vnce of ſmalle fine Perles, well
waſſhed three or fower tymes in cleare water: and then
beyng dried, and laied in the iuice of Lemons, or Cytrōs,
well ſtrained, leaue theim ſo by the ſpace of three daies:
and ſo put the ſaied perles, that thei maie be with theſaid
iuice, remaining in the glaſſe, putting to them Roſe water,
three fingers high or aboue the perles, as is afore mē
                     tioned.
Then take an vnce of fine read. Corall, and put it
likewiſe in the Iuice of Lemons or Citrons, vſyng it in
al poinctes, like as ye did the perles, puttyng it in a glaſſe
by it ſelf with Roſe water, with fower vnces of blew V
                        •
                     
                     triol,
well burned in a cloſe pot. This doen, take the flowers
& tender ſtalkes of Roſemarie, of Burrage, of Bugloſſe,
of Sage, of Selandine, of Iſope, of Scabioſe, of
Rue, of ſainct Ihons worte, of Primroſes, together with
all the tender leaues of the ſaied herbes: and then ſtampe
them ſlightly in a morter of ſtone or wood, and put them
altogether into one glaſſe, or into diuers, with as moche
Aqua vite, as will be aboue them, three or fower fingers,
as we haue ſaied of the other thinges, and let them frande
ſo in the glaſſe, wel ſtopped with ware or bombaſe. Take
after this, halfe an vnce of Saffron, well beaten into pouder,
and put it in a glaſſe by it ſelf, with Roſe water, after
the maner of the other thynges: then put to it fower vnces
of Triacle, with Roſe water, in an other glaſſe, after
the foreſaied maner: and take one vnce of fine Cinamom,
a quarter of an Vnce of Cloues, an Vnce of Lignum Aloe
an vnce of Aniſe ſeede, and vnce of Fenell ſeede, halfe an
vnce of Smallage ſeede, fiue or sixe vnces of Ieniper berries,
halfe an vnce of Cheruell ſeede, of the ſeede and bark
of a Cedartree, of eche of them twoo vnces, halfe an vnce
of Myrrhe, a quarter of an vnce of Storax or Styrax Liquida,
an Vnce of Bengewine, an vnce of Sandali, of all
ſortes of Mirabolanes, of eche of thē three vnces, of Pine
apple kernelles mondified three vnces, of yelowe Ambre
whiche the Apoticaries call Carabe, twoo vnces, thre vnces

of white Dittanie grene or drie, the eight parte (or as
litle as you will) of an vnce of Muſke. Let all theſe thynges
hee well ſtamped, and mixed together, and putte in a
glaſſe with their Aqua vite, as is ſaied of the other. You
muſt then ſtoppe well all the ſaied violles or glaſſes, or other
veſſelles, with waxe or bombaſe, and with parechement
ouer it: and ſo ſet them a daie in the Sonne, and the
night followyng, in the aire abrode. The morowe after,
take ſome great veſſell of glaſſe, as thicke as you can get,
hauyng no couer, bicauſe you maie alwaies loke into it:
and thereinto you ſhall powre faire & ſoftly the Roſe water,
that is in all the glaſſes, eche of them beyng coloured
with their ſubſtaunce, in ſoche maner that no part of the
ſubſtaunces, whiche are in the bottome, be mixte with it.
And after, hauing put al the ſaied Aqua vite, into the ſaid
veſſell, as is aboue ſaid, ye ſhal ſet it in ſome place, where
as no Soonne can in any wiſe come vnto it. But beware
that the three firſt glaſſes, that is to ſaie, with the Suger,
the Māna, and the Honie in the dewe, ought neuer to be
ſet in the Sonne, but muſt be kept vntil you put it in vre,
as we wil ſhewe you. And after that you haue poured, the
Aqua vite, out of all the ſaied glaſſes, ye ſhall put in other
freſhe, and ſet them well ſtopped in the Sonne, and in the
night in the aire, as is afore ſaied. Then put them all together
with the other, in the ſaid veſſell of glaſſe, and put
again in euery violle other Aqua vite, and doe as before:
and thus muſt ye doe eight or tenne tymes, or till you ſee
that the Aqua vite, will bee no more coloured, or haue taken
all the ſubſtaunce of the drooges, that are in the violles.
A man can not chaunge the ſaied Aqua vite to often,
bicauſe ye muſt paſſe all the ſaied waters of life, through
a bath called Balneum Marie, as wee will hereafter declare
by the whiche ye maie paſſe, as well a greate quantitie as
a ſmalle, and by this meane alſo, ye ſhall loſe no parte of
the vertue, or ſubſtaunce of the ſaid thynges, hauyng drawen
and taken it all with the ſaied Aqua vite, of the whiche
ye muſt firſt haue made prouiſion, of fower or fiue flagons.
Then, ye muſt take all the ſaied Aqua vites, beyng

put into one veſſell, and mixte theim well together, with
the three firſt violles, where the Suger, the Manna, and
the Hōnie, with the dewe, is: and then the violle with the
Agarie, and three vnces of the ſaied Aloes, prepared and
watred. After this, put all theſe thinges in a greate violle
made of good and thicke glaſſe, to thende it be not in daū
                     ger
of breakyng, in handelyng of it. And to be more aſſured,
after ye haue well mixed all together, ye maie deuide
all the ſubſtaunces, into diuers ſmalle glaſſes, or violles,
to paſſe theim through the ſaied Balneum Marie, at ſondry
times or at ones in diuers litle fourneiſes, in this mananer.
You ſhall ſet and trimme the violles with ſtrawe
or Towe, in the bottome of a panne or caudron, wherein
there muſt be water, and ſet the ſaied caudron vpon a furnaiſe
of yearth, and this is called ſtillyng per Balneum
Marie: Then ſet vnto the violle, his Limbecke, with his
recipient that the ſubſtaunce take no winde or vent: then
you muſte make your fire ſo, that the caudron maie ſeeth
or boyle faire and ſoftly, and ſo ſhall you diſtille and make
come into the recipient, all the Aqua vite as clere as Criſtalle,
the whiche, bicauſe it hath been paſſed through, by
diſtillation diuers tymes, will bee better for all thynges
then the other, and principally to be taken at the mouthe,
bicauſe it kepeth parte of the vertue and ſtrengthe of the
thynges, that it was put into. Alſo you muſt vnderſtande
that of the fiue partes onely, of all the ſubſtaunce, whiche
ſhall be in the violle or violles three or fower partes muſt
bee diſtilled: and the reſt to remaine in the bottome of the
ſaied violles. This doen, let the ouen or foruaiſe and the
caudron coole, and in vndoyng the Limbecke, and the recipient,
ye ſhall take awaie the violles, kepyng well this
diſtilled water for to ſerue you, as wee haue afore ſaied:
and then put all the ſubſtaunce, whiche remaineth in the
ſaid violles not diſtilled, into ſome other greate and thick
violle or glaſſe, wel couered or bound in wicker or oſiers,
ſtoppyng it well with waxe or bombaſe, and aboue that,
with a double parechemente, and locke it handſomely in
ſome place, farre from the Soonne, and out of all heate.
                  
                     
This licoure hath not his like in vertue, the whiche takē
euery weke ones or twiſe, the quātitie of a ſponefull, preſerueth
health, driueth awaie all euill complexions from
the body, maintaineth and ſtrengthneth ſo the naturall
heate, and radicall moiſtneſſe, and vpholdeth a man in his
ſtrengthe and vigoure of the heads, and of the witte, maketh
the viſage well coloured, the breath ſwete, the bodie
yong and luſtie, that a mā is not able worthely to eſteme,
or iudge the vertue thereof: and leſſe able to expreſſe and
praiſe the greate goodneſſe of God the creatoure, that giueth
ſoche vertue vnto thynges created, and openeth the
witte and vnderſtandyng of man to knowe them, and to
vſe them to the profite and commoditie of his creatures.
                  Now the maner how to vſe it, is this: In the Spryng
time, ye maie take it alone, or with a little broth of Veale,
Pigeons or Chickens, or els in Maluoiſie, or ſome other
good white wine. In Sommer, ye muſt take it with water
of Bugloſe, or the decoctiō of Borrage, Bugloſe, Letteſe,
Succorie, Endiue, or els ſome of the ſaid herbes: and
at all tymes it is good to take of it a ſponefull, putte into
halfe a glaſſe ful of the milke of a woman, new brought a
bed of a man child, or of a nurrice that giueth a man child
ſucke, or els in Gotes milke. And the quantitie & oft vſing
of it muſt be obſerued, accordyng to the perſones, & tyme:
for, vnto a weke and aged man and thoſe that haue been
lately ſicke, or weake of nature, ye muſte giue it oftener,
and a greater quātitie, then vnto a yong and luſtie man.
Alſo a man maie take of it oftener, and more in Winter,
then in Sommer. Now ye muſt vnderſtande, that all the
flowers, herbes, and other thinges reherſed, are not foūd
together in one time and ſeaſon: wherefore the ſaid licour
can not be made at one tyme, but beginnyng the firſte or
ſeconde weeke of Maie, it ſhall be at the leaſt, the ende of
September or October, before ye can make an ende: and
therefore you muſt gather from tyme to tyme, eche thing
in his ſeaſon, as you maie get them, and put them in ſome
veſſell, euery one by them ſelues, or with the other thynges
that thei ought to be ioyned with, after the maner aboue

ſaied: and vſe to dreſſe and trimme the ſaid thynges,
accordyng to the tyme that you maie get them in. And yet
if you can not furniſhe your ſelf, with al ſoche thinges as
I haue declared, take thoſe that you can gette, prouided,
that the reſte whiche you can not get, bee not of to greate
importaunce: but it ſhould be more expedient and ſure, to
haue of all, ſeyng there is nothyng of any greate coſte or
charge, or to hard to be gotten. Moreouer, if you wil haue
your matter in good perfection, there resteth but to make
a naturall diſſolutiō of fine gold: and when you will take
of it, take twoo partes of the ſaid licoure, & one part of the
diſſolutiō of the gold, whiche we will teache you to make
hereafter: although that in this preſente booke, wee will
make no mention of the perfiteſt maner, of making ſoche
a diſſolution, whiche we haue gotten by great ſtudie, and
obſeruation, and by often expertēce of the thyng, that we
will doe, aſwell for not being verie poſſible to ſhewe it by
writyng, without makyng demonſtration thereof: as for
other cauſes but we wil put here ſome other maners and
waies, bothe good & true, and of ſoche importaunce, that
peraduenture better hath not, vnto this daie, been found.
               
               
                  ¶A potion or drinke, to be vſed in ſteade of Sirop, good for men of
al ages and complexiōs, that will be purged the whiche, taken what
daie you will, driueth a waie the euill humours, without mouyng or
troublyng the good, or doing any burte: And is alſo very good for the
great Pockes, and all infinnities, as well of the stomacke, as of the
heade: and is like wiſe profitable for them that be in health, to take
twiſe in the yere, in ſteade of an ordinary purgation, that is to ſaie,
in the Spryng tyme, and in September.
                  
                     TAke Mallowes, and boile them in water, vntill
thei bee ſofte, that thei can almoſte bee no
ſofter: then ſtrain the decoction, and take pouder
of Sene, and of the barke of Lignum ſanctum,
called Guatac, of eche of them ſeuen vnces,
well beaten to pouder, and clenſed or ſifted, Salt Armoniac
twoo dragmes: and in the meane tyme, ſet the decoction
of the Mallowes vpon the fire, with halfe a pound

of Honie, and let the ſaid decoction be aboute twoo common
glaſſes in quantitie, whereunto ye muſt put halfe a
pounde of wine lies, and then let it boils faire and ſoftly,
the ſpace of halfe an houre, ſkimmyng well the Honnie.
After this, ye muſt ſtraine it, and put it hotte as it is into
a potte by litle and litle, where the foreſaied thynges be,
that is to ſaie, the Sene, the Guaiac, and Armoniac ſalte.
Now in powryng, you muſt alwaies ſturre the ſaied thinges
with a Spone, or ſome other thing. And then immediatly
ye muſt couer the pot with his couer, in ſhuttyng it
cloſe, and cloſyng it vp with claie, round aboute the ſides,
ſo that nothyng maie breath or reſpire out, and ſo ſet the
pot vpon the fire, by the ſpace of twoo Pater noſters, and
no more. Then take it from the fire, and wrap it in a pillowe
of fethers, well warmed by the fire, or in a tubbe or
barrell, full of branne well heated, or in ſome clothe very
hote, to thende it maie be well nurriſhed and kept warme
and leaue it ſo by the ſpace of ten or twelue houres. Then
afterward ye muſt open the pot, and ſtraine the ſaied ſubſtaunce,
through a ſtrainer or thicke canueſſe, & you muſt
haue ready before, halfe a glaſſe of white wine, and in the
ſame three or fower vnces of Rubarbe, cut in ſmalle pieces,
and that the Rubarbe haue been in it, the ſpace of a
daie or twoo before: the whiche wine ye ſhall powre into
the decoction of the ſaid thinges, as ſone as it is ſtrained,
as is aforeſaied: and put thereunto an vnce of Aloe Epaticum,
prepared and ordered, as is aboue ſaied: or at the leſt
as the Apoticaries doe ſell it, and call it Aloe Lotum, with
the iuice of Roſes, or other wiſe, the whiche ye muſte put
in, well beaten to pouder, with halfe an vnce of Caſſia Lignea,
and kepe all this cōpoſition in a violle, or other veſſell
well couered. The maner of receiuyng it, is to heate
it a litle at the breake of the daie, and to take halfe a glaſſe
full or more of it, accordyng to the exigent of the ſickneſſe,
and the qualitie of the perſone, & hauing taken it, he muſt
kepe his bedde a while, and ſlepe, if it be poſſible: and then
riſe and walke aboute the houſe, or els where at his pleaſure.
Neuertheleſſe, it were better that he kept the houſe,

and ſpecially bicauſe of the mouyng of the body. And this
maie he vſe .v.vij.ix. or .xj. mornynges: for the pluralitie
can not hurte. Alſo this potion or drinke, is of ſoche exquiſite
boūtie for mannes body, that we nede to vſe none
other maner of purgation, or medicine.
               
               
                  ¶A verie eaſie and good remedie, for to heale all maner of Pockes,
whiche is made with litle coſt, and requireth not that a manne
kepe his bedde or his houſe, but maie vſe it going in the ſtreetes: And
it is alſo verie good for all ſortes of grief in the iointes, in what part
of the bodie ſo euer it be.
                  
                     TAke .iij. poundes of rawe Honie, and a poūd
of the Iuice of the flowers of an herbe called
Molis or Lung worte, whiche hath his leafe
ſomewhat long, fatt, or full of carnoſite, and
ſomewhat white, his flower Yelowe, faſſioned
like a belle: and for lacke of the flowers, the Iuice of
the herbe: then take halfe a pounde of Lignum Sanctum,
beaten into pouder, and hauing let it boile in cōmon water,
a good while, ye muſt ſtraine it, and put the ſaid iuice
with the ſaied Honnie, into a pot, puttyng to it three vnces
of Aloe epaticum, ordered as is afore ſaid, or as the Apoticaries
ſell it, waſſhed with the Iuice of Roſes. And
then, vpon the ſaied Aloe beaten to pouder, ye muſt poure
as moche of the ſaied water, wherein the Guaiacum hath
boiled, as wyll mounte in the potte fower or fine fingers
high:
                        Sorbū latin. Frēch. Corme There groweth none ī England, & therfore we haue no Englishe name for it, ſauīg ſom engliſh it, and cal it ſeruis beries then adde thereunto twoo vnces of the Vineigre of
Squilla, and lette it boile faire and ſoftly, by the ſpace of
halfe an houre, or a litle more, ſkummyng well alwaies
the H
                        •
                     unie, and when it hath almoſte boiled inough, put
vnto it three vnces of fine Sinamō, well beaten into pouder,
ſet it again a while vpon the fire: then, hauyng taken
it of, and ſetten it vp to keepe, ye muſte heate of it in the
morning a glaſſe full: and after you haue dronken it, eate
a litle piece of a Quince, or of a fruite called in Latine
Sorbum, in Frenche Corme, or grene Grapes, Pome Granade,
or of ſome other bindyng thyng, what ye will: and
keepe your bedde, ſleapyng as long as you will: and alſo

after you be riſen, and haue doen your buſineſſe, yea, out
of the houſe, if it come ſo to paſſe. But (as we haue ſaid)
to keepe your bedde or houſe, is alwaies the beſt for you,
when ye vſe Phiſicke. And this potion or drinke, muſte
you take from daie to daie: but if the paine be not to vehement,
it ſhall ſuffice being taken twiſe in the weeke: and
this doyng, you ſhall ſee a wonderfull operation, and ye
ſhall not nede to vſe Lignum ſanctū, nor any other thing.
This remedy onely is ſufficiente for all menne, and hath
been proued and experimented diuers tymes, and vpon
diuers perſones.
               
               
                  ¶To diſſolue and reducte gold into a potable licoure, whiche conſerueth
the youth and health of a manne, as well taken by it ſelf, as
mingled with the foreſaied licoure, ſpoken of in the ſecond Chapiter
of this preſente booke, and will heale euery diſeaſe that is thought
curable, in the ſpace of ſeuen daies at the furtheſt.
                  
                     TAke a glaſſe full of the Iuice of Limons,
and heate it ouer the fire, vntill it beginne
almoſte to ſeeth: then take it from the fire,
and ſtrain it three or fower times through
a Linnen clothe, and afterwarde diſtille it
through a long gutter of Felte: then take
twoo pounde of rawe Ho
                        •
                     nie, and ſette it on the fire in a
pot, mixyng with it the ſaid Iuice of Lemons, and adding
thereunto halfe a pounde of common ſalte, that is clene,
white and well beaten: mixe well all together, and let it
ſeeth faire and ſoftly, vntill there remaine no more ſkum
of the Honnie. Then take that remaineth in the pot, and
diſtill it in a vrinall of glaſſe, makyng but a ſmalle fire at
the beginnyng, encreaſyng it by litle and litle, and at the
ende greate and ſharpe: and whē all is cooled again, open
the violle, and powre the water out of the recipient, into
an other violle, ſtoppyng it ſure for takyng vente. This
dooen, ye muſte breake the vrinall of glaſſe, and take the
lies that ſhall remain in the bottome, and put it into a couered
pot, the whiche pot you muſte couer ouer and ouer
with claie or morter, to the entente it maie the better endure

the fire: and after put it into ſome fourneſſe, where
glaſſe is made, or into a potters fourneſſe or Lune kill, or
ſome other ſemblable thing, ſo that it maie be in a greate
fire, by the ſpace of twoo or three daies. And after that the
ſaied ſubſtaunce ſhall be taken out again, ſtampe it well,
and for a pounde of the ſame, put in fower vnces of Manna,
and twoo vnces of Suger candie, and if there be more
or leſſe of the ſubſtaunce, ye muſt put in a good proportiō
of the Manna and Suger candie, in equall quantitie with
the ſubſtaunce. Then put al into an other vrinall of good
glaſſe, well claied, and powre vpon it the water, whiche
you kept before in the violle, puttyng thereunto twiſe as
moche fine Aqua vite, as was in the ſaied firſt violle. And
hauyng trimmed and ſette the vrinall of Glaſſe vpon the
fourneſſe, with his limbecke, and his recipient, and well
cloſyng all the iointes with claie or morter, ye ſhall make
the matter diſtill faire and ſoftly, with a ſmalle fire: for it
will eaſely diſtill: & when it will diſtill no more, augment
your fire, ſo that ye maie diſtille all that is poſſible. But
you muſt leaue the water, with the violle, vpon the fourneſſe,
without mouyng it any whit, vntill you will put it
in experience. This doen, take fine golde foile, that is of
xxiiij. Carates well fined with Antimonium: and take of
the ſaied fotle, what quantitie ye will, in a cup of glaſſe,
in minglyng theim well with Honnie, or with Iulep roſet
or Violet, as men are wont to dreſſe it to write withall,
whereof we will put parfitely all the maners and faſious,
in the fift boke of this volume. And after you haue
well vnmixed, and purged it from the ſaied Honnie with
hotte water, as ſhall bee ſaied in the ſame place, you ſhall
put them to ſtille in a violle of glaſſe: and then hauing taken
of the recipiente, put the ſaied water into a long necked
glaſſe, well ſtopped with white waxe, hauyng firſte
put vpon the ſaid gold, whiche is in the violle, the height
of fiue fingers of the ſaied water: and then ſet to the limbeck
with his recipiēt, ſtoppyng well with clate the iointes,
makyng the water, whiche ſhall be vpō the ſaid gold,
to diſtill with a ſmall fire, not augmenting it at the ende,

to make all to diſtill: and care not if the gold remain ſome
what moiſt. This doen, take awaie the Limbeck frō the
Violle, without takyng awaie or vntiyng the recipiente
from the ſaid Limbeck, not ſturryng the water out of the
recipient. But take ſome man to helpe you, who, whiles
you take the Limbeck of from the Vrinall, ſhall powre vpon
the ſaied gold, the ſame water that you kept in the violle,
ſtopped with white waxe: & let hym put in as moche
as at the firſte tyme, that is to ſaie, the heighte of fiue fingers:
then immediatly ſet the Limbeck vpon the Vrinall
again, cloſing well with claie the iointes or ſides a newe,
makyng the diſtillation as afore, and ſo conſequently, vntill
all the water of the ſaied violle, bee diſtilled vpon the
ſaied gold. And finally, ye ſhall powre the gold out of the
violle into a glaſſe, ſomewhat greate, to holde the water
that you haue diſtilled into it at diuers times, as we haue
ſaid in the Chapiter before: then ſet to the Limbeck with
his recipient, and ſee that by the ſpace of .xv. or .xx. daies,
the water of the bathe be hotte, without ſeethyng, ſo that
yet nothing maie diſtille. Then after make the water to
ſeeth, and diſtille all that maie be diſtilled: and in the bottome
of the violle, the golde will remaine diſſolued into a
licoure moſte precious, whiche you muſt keepe in ſome litle
glaſſe well ſtopped. And if you will haue it yet finer,
you maie make it without takyng it out of the ſaid glaſſe,
in puttyng to it again the ſaied water, and diſtillyng it a
freſhe, not kepyng (for all that) the water from ſeethyng,
as you did before, but make it ſeeth and diſtille all at ones
and this diſtillyng maie you reiterate as oftē as you will:
for the oftener it is diſtilled, the better it is. Thus doing
ye ſhall haue a right, naturall, and perfite potable golde,
whereof ſomewhat taken alone, euery monethe ones or
twiſe, or at the leaſte with the ſaied licoure, whereof wee
haue ſpoken in the ſeconde Chapiter of this booke: is verie
excellente to preſerue a mannes youth and health, and
to heale in fewe daies, any diſeaſe rooted in a manne, and
thought incurable. The ſaied gold will be alſo good and
profitable, for diuers other operations & effectes: as good

wittes & diligent ſearchers of the ſecretes of nature, maie
eaſely iudge. In this ſame maner (obſeruyng all thynges
diligently) a man maie make of ſ
                        •
                     iluer beaten into foile to
haue likewiſe a potable ſ
                        •
                     iluer, of a meruellous vertue,
yet not ſoche as the golde: And I aſſure you, that I ſawe
aboue, .v. yeres ago, an Engliſhe man haue a water made
of ſiluer, paraduenture, trimmed & dreſſed after an other
ſort, accordyng to diuers differēt waies, tēding (notwithſtandyng)
all to one ende, with the whiche water the ſaied
Engliſhe man did many thinges, eſtemed as miraculous,
in healing many painfull diſeaſes and infirmities of mā.
               
               
                  ¶To heale an excreſcens or growyng vp of the fleſhe, within
the yarde of a man, albeit it were rooted in of a long tyme.
                  
                     TAke the lies of Honie diſtilled, or, if you cā
not haue ſoche, take Honie, and burne it in
a pot: and put the blacke leefe that ſhal remain
in the bottome, into an other pot, or
into an irō pan, & set it to burne or calcine
in a verniſhers fourneſſe, or ſoche other in
a great fire, by the ſpace of .iij. or .iiij. daies, wherof ye ſhal
haue a ſubſtaunce as yelowe as gold, the whiche will be
excellent, to laie vpon all manner of woundes: for it eateth
awaie the euill fleſhe, mondifieth, and healeth the good,
without pain or grief, whiche maketh to be moche better
for all woundes, then is the Precipitatum, that the Syrurgens
comonly vſe. Take then of this pouder an vnce,
of Dogges turdes .ij. vnces, leeſe of wine halfe a dragme,
whiche is the halfe of theight part of an vnce, fine ſuger
                        •
                      a
dragme, roche Alume burned a dragme, of Nill a dragme
let all theſe thynges bee well beaten to pouder, and ſifted
through a fine ſeeue & then take grene leaues of an Oliue
tree, and beate them in a morter of ſtone, moiſting them a
litle with white wine, the whiche being well ſtamped, ye
muſt ſtrain in a preſſe, or betwene .ij. trāchours, for to get
out the Iuice, and putte to it as moche Plantaine Iuice:
then ſet it to the fire in a litle potte, and afterward put in
it by litle and litle the ſaied pouder, minglyng altogether

continually: And laſte of all ye muſte adde vnto it, a litle
grene waxe, and a verie litle Honie roſat, that it maie be
a liquide ointemente and ſo keepe it. This ointemente
is very precious, to conſume all maner of ercreſcence, or
growyng vp of fleſhe, in any tender place of the body, as
in the ſecrete members, or in the noſe, whereunto a man
dare not applicque any ſtrong or ſmartyng thyng. Now
when ye muſte vſe it for the carnoſite, within a mannes
yarde, you ſhall take firſte of all a Squirte, and fill it with
white wine, wherein drie Roſes, and Plantaine leaues
haue been ſodden and boiled, wherewith alſo ye ſhall mix
a litle womans milke, or the milke of a Gote: then waſhe
well the mannes yarde within, with this Squirte: After
this take a litle waxe candell, ſomwhat long, and of ſoche
greatneſſe, as it maie enter into his yarde, at the poincte
whereof ye ſhall put a litle of the ſaied ointemente, warming
it a litle, and thruſt it as farre into his yarde as you
can, vntil you feele the Carnoſite, and leaue the ſaid ointmente
within the yarde a litle while: then take it out again,
and doe thus mornyng and euenyng, liyng a bedde
his bealie vpward, when ye ſhall put in the candell with
the ointement, and you ſhall ſee a meruellous effecte: for
it ſhall heale hym throughly, in fewe daies, without any
daunger.
               
               
                  To heale all maner of inflamatiō and euill diſpoſition of the
liuer, and by this ſame ſecrete haue been healed certain perſones,
whiche had their faces as it were Leparie, greate ſwollen
legges, their handes inflambed, and rough within ſide.
                  
                     TAke flower, or Amilum made of Barley, whiche
ye ſhall eaſily finde at the Apoticaries, and ſeeth
it halfe an houre in common water: then ſtraine
it, and put it in an other newe pot, that is clene
and not, puttyng to it a fewe Mallowes, Succorie, Hoppes,
Endiue, and Burrage: and ſeeth all theſe together,
vntill it bee diſſolued, and adde to it an vnce of Sandal:
and then ſtraine all, and take in a linnen clothe, as moche
Caſſia extracta, as will goe in to twoo Nuttes, and put it

within the ſaied linen clothe with the Caſſia, while the
water be hote, preſſyng it ſo harde betwene your twoo
fingers, that all the ſubſtaunce of it, maie goe into the
ſaied water: then putte it to the Suger or Penides, as
moche as you will. Of this drinke, whiche is of a very
amiable ſauoure, ye muſt take from daie to daie, a litle
glaſſe ful in the mornyng, liyng in your bed, with your
breſt vpward: then laiyng ſome linen clothe vpon your
ſtomack, ſlepe if you can, and take of it alſo after you be
vp, and haue dooen your neceſſaries, the whiche doyng
you ſhal finde your ſelf very well healed in fewe daies.
But here note, that this muſt be doen in Sommer, and
not in Winter: and he that hath his ſtomack very cold,
maie weare before his breſt, ſome pece of Scarlat, or other
clothe, and ſometyme annointe his ſtomacke with
an oile, made for the weakeneſſe of it, the perfecte compoſition
whereof, we will put hereafter.
               
               
                  To heale the Emorhodes or Piles in a nighte, a rare
ſecrete and verie excellente.
                  
                     TAke the leaues of grene Elder, and
boyle theim in water, vntill thei be
diſſolued: Then take a piece of redde
cloth, a litle bigger then the palme of
your hand, and ſtretche it a long vpō
your palme. Now, muſt the pacient
be in his bed, with his bealy douneward,
bicauſe ye muſt laie the ſaid leaues vpon the Emorhodes,
hot as thei wer taken out of the caudron, hauyng
laied vpon them before, a litle oile Oliue. Then
take an other litle piece of cloth, with other leaues, and
take awaie the firſt, continuyng thus, and chaungyng
alwaies the leaues, if not all the night, at the leaſt as
long as ye maie: and alſo in the meane time, ye muſt let
the patient ſlepe as moche as he will, who, in the mornyng
ſhall finde hym ſelf as luſtie, and as well diſpoſed
as if he had neuer had the diſeaſe.
               
               
                  
                  A ſinguler ointment, whiche healeth all burnynges with
fire, not leauyng any cicatrice or skarre where it hath been.
                  TAke the white of twoo Egges, twoo vnces of
Tutia Alexandrina, twoo vnces of quicke Lime
waſshed in .ix. waters, an Vnce of new Waxe,
with as moche Oyle Roſatte, as ſhall ſuffice,
and make thereof an ointmente, whiche ye ſhall finde
verie good, for this that we haue ſpoken of.
               
               
                  A perfecte and proued remedie for them that bee weake
of ſtomacke, and can not keepe their meate, without vomityng
it vp again.
                  
                     HAuyng taken twoo pounde of redde waxe,
and made prouiſion of a diſhefull of oile oliue,
take peces of Alablaſter, and heate thē
in the fire, and then quenche theim in the
ſaied Oile: heate them again, and quenche
them as before: and ſo three or fower times. This doen
beate the Alablaſter to pouder, and mixe it with the ſaid
ware and oile, wherein it was quenched: then put all to
diſtill through a croke necked violle, like a Bagge pipe
claied rounde about, ſauyng the bottome, whiche diſtillers
beyonde ſea doe vſe, the Frenche men cal Retorte or
Cornue, and make ſoche a fire, as the Oile maie diſtille,
wt al the reſt yt poſſible maie be diſtilled: and then keepe
it, puttyng to it halfe an vnce of Mirrhe, beaten in pouder.
And when you will put it in effecte, ye muſt take a
litle pan of Braſſe, or Iron: and hauyng the toppes and
leaues of Worme woode, whiche is a bitter herbe, put
them in the ſaied Oile, and ſeeth or frie all together:
then take it, hote as it is, and rubbe the patientes breaſt
with it, vp to the throte, doyng thus alwaies at night,
when he is in his bedde, and it ſhall make his ſtomacke
ſtrong. He muſt vſe in his meate, as moche Roſemarie
as he can, bee it rawe or otherwiſe, and ſpecially in his
drinke. He muſt vſe likewiſe the moſte excellente Aqua
vite, whereof we will ſpeake hereafter.
               
               
                  
                  An excellente remedie, wherewith a woman of .xxxvi.
yeres was healed, that had ſo marred her ſtomacke, that in
the ſpace of twoo yeres and an balfe, ſhe was neuer naturally
purged douneward: and as ſone as ſhe had eatē any thing,
ſhe vomited it vp againe, ſo that ſhe became yelowe, and as
drie as a ſticke.
                  
                     A Monke, of the order of ſaincte Auguſtine, a
man of greate knowledge, and full of meruelous
ſecretes, healed the ſaied woman,
with this remedy followyng: &, in the ſpace
of .xvij. daies, made her as whole and ſound
faire, and wel coloured, as ſhe was before her ſickneſſe.
                  Firſt of all, he had made a litle ouen, like vnto ſoche
as men bake breade in, ye which he did heate with roſemarie:
and the ſayd Ouen was in facion like a Bakers
Ouen, wherein he baked litle pretie loaues and cakes,
whiche he gaue her a lone, without any other thyng to
eate, viij. or .x. daies, and gaue her white wine to drinke
without water. He gaue her alſo gentle meates, with
Sinamom and Suger: and euery mornyng gaue her in
a glaſſe, aboute a finger heighte of water, made after
this maner folowing. Aqua vite halfe a glaſſe ful, wherin
he put the yelowe pille of halfe a Citron, or Orenge
cut in pieces, the flowers of Roſemarie a handfull, fine
Sinamom an vnce, Safron a quarter of a dragme, Bē
                     gewin
a dragme, with a litle Muſke: and made her to
bee waſhed ouer and ouer, or bathed in the decoction of
Roſemarie, and other ſwete herbes, ones a weeke: and
euery night annointed her breaſt with the ſaied Oile,
diſtilled and ſodden with Wormewoode. And aboue al
thynges, commaunded her to keepe a Cuſhen vpon her
ſtomacke, in the night tyme, and cauſed her to lye long
a bedde in the mornyng: he made her alſo eate the confection
of Diambre. And in this wiſe he made her in xvij.
daies, as whole and as faire, as ſhe was before, whom
no Phiſicion could euer finde remedy for, duryng al the
tyme of her ſickneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Three remedies verie good againſt he wormes in
litle children.
                  TAke the flower of wheate well boulted, as moche
as will lye vpon three crounes of gold, and put it
in a glaſſe, and powre vnto it well water, or foū
                     tain
water, ſo moche as will ſtiepe the ſaid flower, and
make it looke like as it wer milke, and no thinner: then
giue the childe drinke of it, and you ſhall ſee that with
his ſiege, the Wormes will come forthe ſtarke dedde,
whiche is a verie good remedy.
               
               
                  ¶The ſeconde remedie.
                  TAke a Citron or Orenge, and make in hym a
hole, as big as a peny, by the whiche hole with
wringyng, ye ſhall make the licoure come out:
and hauyng made a hole into the middle and
more, ye ſhall powre in to it oile of Baie free or leaues,
the Iuice of Rue, the Iuice of Wormewood, Triacle,
flower of a kinde of poulſe corne, called Lupinum or Lupinus
in Latine, hauyng one ſtalke, the leafe in fiue diuiſions,
the codde creuiſed aboute, hauing in it fiue or ſixe
graines, harde, broad, and redde. Thei be common in
Fraunce & Italie, but here vnneth knowen. And ſeeth
all this a while: and then powre it in a diſhe, and annointe
therewith the childes nauell, ſtomacke, temples
noſetrilles, and the vttermoſte part of his poulſes, and
ye ſhall immediatly ſee a wonderfull operation.
               
               
                  ¶The thirde remedie.
                  
                     FOr children that be ſo litle, that a man can
not miniſter the medecine in at the mouth,
you ſhall take very good Aqua vitae, wherewith
ye ſhall waſhe or weate the ſtomacke,
or the breaſt of the childe: then pouder ouer
the ſaid places, with the pouder of fine Mirrhe, and laie
the child doune a litle while, with his breaſt vpwarde,
and you ſhal ſee incontinent, that with the dunge of the
child, the worme ſhall come out dead.
               
               
                  
                  To heale children of the Lunatike diſeaſe, whiche happeneth
vnto theim, by reaſon of a worme with twoo heades,
that breedeth in their bodies, the whiche worme, commyng
vnto the harte, cauſeth theim to haue ſoche a paſsion, that
often tymes it killeth theim.
                  TAke the tender ſtalkes of a Wildyng tree, and
drie theim in the ſhadowe: then ſtampe theim
well, and ſifte theim, and take of the ſaied pouder,
and the roote of Gentian, & of long Perne
of eche of them a quarter of an vnce, and half a quarter
of an vnce of Mirrhe. All theſe thynges well beaten in
pouder, ye ſhall put in a diſſhe, or in ſome other veſſell,
as you thinke good: moiſt them with a litle water: then
take of it with your twoo fingers, and weate the lippes
and the mouthe of the child. Doe this three or fower times,
and you ſhall ſee the worme come out deade with
his ſiege. This haue I often tymes ſeen by experience,
and many children, whiche, for lacke of good help, haue
died with ſoche maner of Wormes, the whiche afterwarde
beyng opened, menne haue founde the Worme
ſtickyng vpon their hartes. And for the ſame accidente
the other remedies, whiche we haue written before, againſt
the Wormes, be alſo very good.
               
               
                  A remedie for the fallyng ſick neſſe.
                  TAke Germander gathered in Ma
                        ••
                     , when it is
in bloſome: drie it in the ſhadowe, and make it
in pouder. And when you will vſe it, take the
yelke of an Egge or twaine, and ſturryng or
breakyng it with a ſponefull of the ſaied pouder: then
ſeeth it, and giue it to the paciente to eate. Dooe this,
Mornyng and Euenyng, eight daies long: but all this
while he muſt abſtaine from wine, and carnall company
of women, from al ſorte of poulſe, as Beanes, Peaſon,
Vetches, Tares, and ſoche other, from Salades,
ſalte Fleſhe, and from all other thynges, whiche are of
a harde concoction or digeſtion. A verie goodly and notable
ſecrete.
               
               
                  
                  To make oile of Brimſtone, to heale all maner of Cankers
diſeaſes or ſores, whiche come of a putrified humoure, and
renne cōtinually, commonly called Fiſtules, and alſo to heale
olde and inueterate woundes.
                  TAke Brimſtone beaten in pouder, and hauyng
ſteeped and mollified it, with common oile, put
it in a Gourde, apte to ſtill out of, ſo that it bee
brought as it were like pa
                        ••
                     e, the whiche you
ſhall diſtill through the mouthe of the ſaid Gourde: and
the oile that ſhall drop out, ye ſhall put into a violle, fillyng
it halfe full: and afterwarde fill vp the ſaied violle
with Plantan water, and with the Iuice of Cardus benedictus,
and ſo let it boile a pretie while. Then waſhe the
wounde with Aqua vite, or white wine, and laie to it of
the ſaid oile, and in fewe daies ye ſhall heale it parfitly.
               
               
                  To take awaie the venim or poyſon from a wounde, made
by ſome poiſoned weapon or arrowe.
                  TAke Aſſa Fetida, and a gomme called Galbanum,
of eche of them an vnce, and ſteepe them in Vinaigre,
the ſpace of a night, then ſette it to the
fier to diſſolue, and ſtraine it through a Linen
clothe, miring with it twoo vnces of Vnguentū diabaſilicū:
and laie it to the wounde, and incontinent the ſaid ointmente
will drawe vnto it ſelf, and kill all the venim, ſo
that the wounde maie afterward be healed, as all other
maner of woundes bee: and in caſe ye lacke, or can not
get Galbanum, it ſhall ſuffice to haue onely Aſſa Fetida, to
drawe the venim out of the ſaied wounde.
               
               
                  Againſt the bityng of all venemous beaſtes.
                  AS ſoone as the perſon feleth hymſelf bitten, with
any venimous beaſt (or at the leaſte as ſone as
is poſſible) take grene leaues of a figge tree, and
preſſe the milke of them, three or fower times in
to the wounde. And for this ſerueth alſo Muſtard ſeede
mingled with vinagre.
               
               
                  
                  To drawe an arrowe heade or other Iron, out of a wound.
                  TAke the iuice of valerian, in the whiche ye ſhall
weate a tente, and put it into the wounde, laiyng
the ſaid herbe ſtamped vpon it, then make
your bindyng or bande, as it appertaineth, and
by this meanes ye ſhall drawe out the Iron. And after
heale the wounde, accordyng as it ſhall require.
               
               
                  Againſt a vehement cough of yong children.
                  TAke the Iuice of Perſely, pouder of Commin,
womannes milke, and mixe all well together:
then giue the childe drinke thereof, and after,
make this ointment folowing. Take the ſeede
of Line or Flaxe, and Fenigreke, and ſeeth them in cō
                     mon
water: then preſſe with your hand, the ſubſtaunce
of the ſaied herbes, whiche you ſhall mingle with Butter,
and ſo annointe the childes breaſt with it, heatyng
it often tymes.
               
               
                  For hym that hath a bunche or knobbe in his heade, or
that hath his heade ſwollen with a fall.
                  TAke an vnce of Baie ſalt, rawe Honie thre vnces,
Commin three Vnces, Turpentine twoo
vnces, intermingle all this well vpon the fire:
then laie it abrode vpō a linen clothe, and make
thereof a plaiſter, the whiche ye ſhall laie whote to his
heade, and it will altogether aſwage the ſwell yng, and
heale hym cleane and nete.
               
               
                  A good remedie for one that is deffe.
                  TAke Mint, Sage, Penniroiall, Roſemarie,
Iſope, Mugworte or Motherworte,
wilde Minte, Calaminte, Camomille,
Millefoile, Yarrow or Noſeblede, herbe
ſaincte Ihon, Wormewood, Southernwood,
Centorie, of eche of them a hand
                        •
                     full:
Seeth theim in a cleane pan, with as moche good
white wine, as there be herbes, and let it ſeeth altogether,

vntil the third part be diminiſhed: then cauſe theſe
oiles folowyng, to be made at the Apoticaries: old Oile
twoo vnces, oile of Leeke, oiles of Almondes, of eche of
them an vnce, of the iuice of Rue halfe an vnce, of Maluoiſie
an vnce and a halfe: put all theſe thynges in a lōg
neckt glaſſe or violle, and let it ſeeth with a ſmalle fier,
vntill the Iuice and the Maluoſie bee almoſte all conſumed:
then take it from the fire, and putte in to it theſe
Drogues folowyng, well beaten into pouder, that is to
ſaie, Spiknard, Coloquintida, the ſtone of a Beuer, called
Caſtoreū, Maſtic, of eche of them a grain and a halfe:
ſtoppe wel the ſaid violle, that nothyng maie take vent:
then put it in a pan full of water, and make it ſeeth the
ſpace of three howers. Then take it from the fire, and
powre the ſaid licours in ſome platter, whiche you ſhall
ſet in the ſonne, and leaue it there vntill it ſhall become
verie cleare, and hauyng ſtrained it through ſome fine
linen cloth, and preſſed well the ſubſtaunce, ye ſhall put
a grain and a half of Muſke in a diſſhe, and incorporate
it well by litle and litle, with the ſaied Oile, and then
keepe it in a violle, well ſtopped with waxe and Parchmente.
After this, take the pan with the ſaied herbes,
and heate theim vpon the fire: then take, for a couer or
lidde, a fonnell made of white Iron: and when ye go to
bedde, couer the pan with the ſaied fonnell, and ſee that
the pan be good and hote: then, by the litle hole aboue,
let the patient take the ſmoke into his eare, by the ſpace
of halfe an hower. This doen, heate the ſaid oile, vntill
it be luke warme, and let it droppe into his eare two or
three droppes: and ſtoppe his eare with a litle Muſked
bombaſe, or Cotton, and let him ſlepe therevpon. Now
he muſte, in receiuyng the parfume or ſmoke into his
eare, haue in his mouth ſome drie Beanes, and after he
hath chewed theim, ſpit them out again, to thende that
in chewyng, he maie open the conduites of his Eares.
And with the grace of God, he ſhall find hymſelf healed
in fewe daies, prouided, that the diſeaſe be in aniwiſe
curable. If in caſe this helpe not, ye neede not ſeeke any

other remedie in the worlde. If a man haue alſo anie
hummyng or noyſe in his eares, let him vſe the ſayde
medecine, & you ſhall ſe, with Gods helpe a wonderfull
thinge: for it will heale the defeneſſe of a man, though
he haue had it .xxx. yeres, ſo that he be not borne deafe.
Let him vſe alſo to take pilles to purge his head, and to
eate good meate alwaies.
               
               
                  To heale a woman that hath the Matrice out of her nanaturall
place.
                  
                     TAke a Flinte ſtone that hath bene alwaies
in the earth, and not taken the ayer, and
put it in ſome baſket, couered in a greate
fire: and whan it is verie hote, put it in a
litle Tubbe or barrell, and weete it wyth
Vinagre caſt vpon it, and cauſe the woman to ſtand ouer
it, to receiue the ſmoke or parfume of it, and than
let her go to bed, for this muſt be doone at night. Ye
ſhall, after this, take of the iuice of Rue, & make a litle
rounde balle of Cotton, wherunto ye ſhal tie a threede:
and than dippe the ſaied balle in the ſayd iuice of Rue,
and put it into the mouth of the Matrice, the which wil
incontinent take the balle, and draw it in, and than it
will returne into his naturall place agayne. But you
muſte binde and tie the ball ſure and well, leaſt paraduenture
it ſhould remayne within. After this, make an
oyntment as foloweth, wherwith ye ſhall anoynte the
reynes of her backe. Take an herbe called in Greeke
Ciclaminos, of the latines Rapum, Tuber terrae, or Vmbilicus
terrae, of the Apoticaries Panis porcinus, of the Frenche
men Pain de pore, and Rue, as muche of one as of the other,
and ſtampe them well: and than ſeeth it in a pan
with olde oyle, vntill the whole be diminiſhed by the
thirde part. This doone, let it coole againe, and hauing
preſſed out all the ſubſtaunce, ye ſhall power it into an
other new pan, adding to it a litle new waxe, and heatyng
it all together, vntill it be well incorporated: thā
annoynte her raynes with all, and lay hote Tow vpon

it, and than ſwaddel her as women do yonge infantes.
And ſo ſhe muſt be layed in her bed, with her belly vpwarde,
and her head lower than her buttockes. Thys
muſt ye do from night to night, three times, & ſhe ſhall
be healed. She muſt alſo eate whote thinges in operation,
as Pigeons, and Hennes, with ſpices and other
like thynges. She ſhall be healed without any greefe,
and if ſhe had had it .xxx. yeres.
               
               
                  ¶To make a womans milke to come and encreaſe.
                  TAke the greene leaues of Fenell, & make therof
a decoction, be it in wine or water, wherof
ye ſhall geue the woman drinke, as wel at her
meales, as other wiſe, as often as may be, and
ſhe ſhall be abondant in milke. Furthermore, if the
woman haue not ordinarilie her naturall purgacion
called Floures, this wll ſerue her for a good medecine.
               
               
                  ¶A verie goodly ſecrete for the gommes or burgeons that
remaine of the great Pockes, as well olde as new.
                  TAke Bole armenick, Vinagre, and oyle Roſet,
and make thereof a defenſife,A defēſife is made when a ſurgien wil lay any drawing or healing plaiſter vpon or to a wounde, he maketh ſome oyntmēt reſtrain 
                           •
                        iue becauſe it ſhall not drawe or heale to faſt, and that is called a defenſife. or oyntment, annoynting
the burgeons round aboute .iij. or .iiij.
fingers large: thā take .ij partes of the oyle of an herbe
called Euphorbium, firſt founde out by Iuba the kyng of
Libia. Looke Ruellius, Lib. 3. cap. 53. and one part of oyle
Violet: and mixe them together, and annoynt the burgeons
with all, hauynge firſt well waſſhed them with
Redde wine, vorie hote. And whan you haue thus annoynted
them, with the ſayd oyle of Euphorbiū, lay vpon
it ſome litle bande annoynted with Butter, leauing it
ſo three or foure houres, or as longe as you will: than
vncouer the Burgeons, and if you finde no bladders,
do once agayne as before, vntill you ſe ſome. And than
you maie pricke and breake the ſaied bladders, or let
them breake of them ſelues: & than ye may heale them
with ſome healyng oyntment.
               
               
                  
                  Another remedie for the ſame bourgeons of the Pockes.
                  
                     WAſhe the burgions with Wine, and make
the defenſif aboue ſaied: than take .iij. partes
of Vnguentum aureum, and one parte of
Sublimatum, well broken or beaten: mengle
the ſaied Sublimatum wt the ſaid oyntment,
and lay it with a plaſter vpon the burgeons, leauing
it therupon, a day or more, if you can, & ye ſhal find
the burgeons or buddes, and the fleſh fayre and neate,
whiche will ſeeme to be a miraculous thynge, and if it
worke not well at the firſte, ye muſt renew it agayne,
twiſe or thriſe, accordyng as the burgeons ſhalbe hard
and olde. Now, whan they be thorowlie diſſolued and
leuſed, take Butter waſſhed with Wyne, and lay it
vpon a linnen cloth, and put it vpon them, and ſo ſhall
you heale them perfectlie. Note alſo that the ſaied ointment,
with the Sublimat, will draw vnto him all the
aquoſite, and euil humours of the arme or legge, whervnto
it is layde. Wherfore it will not onlie heale the
place where you laye it, but will alſo purge the whole
member of all euill humours, that is in it, and therfore
there is a verie good water confect and made of it, for
to heale ſcabbes, as we will tell you afterwarde. It
healeth alſo all other accidentes, wherupon you make
any outwarde application: and (as we haue ſayed) draweth
to him ſelfe al the watriſhnes, and humour of the
member, wherupon it is layde. Now, whan you wyll
lay it vpon the burgeons, or vpon anie corrupte place,
weete wel the linnen clothe, and the band that you wil
binde it withall: weete well alſo rounde aboute the infect
or ſore place: for the ſaid medecine, will draw all
the corruption thorow the ſaied places. And this is a
verie worthie and cra
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     te ſecrete, for all thinges, ſo
that it be well vſed, made and applied.
               
               
                  A verie eaſie and parfite remedie for him that hath
anie blow with aſwo
                        •
                      d
                        •
                     ſtaffe, or ſtone, or other like thyng,
yea, though he were gr
                        •
                     uouſlie wounded.
                  
                     
TAke Taxue barbatus, and ſtampe it, and take the
iuice of it: and if the wounde bleede, wipe it,
and make it cleane, waſſhinge it with white
wine, or water: than lay of the ſayd iuice vpon
the wounde, and the herbe vpon it, of the whiche you
toke the iuice, and than make your bindinge, and let it
be on it a whole daie: and you ſhall ſe a wonderfull
effecte.
               
               
                  ¶A water to beale all maner of woundes in ſhort ſpace:
whiche is a thinge that euerye man ought alwayes to
haue in his houſe, for the accidentes and chaunces that
maye fall, ſeyng it is eaſye to bee made, and wyth lytle
coſt, and that it is of ſo meruelous an operation.
                  
                     TAke a pounde of newe yelowe waxe, or
as muche as you will, and lette it melte
vpon a fier in a cleane panne: and then
powre it into another panne, or diſhe,
wherein muſt bee Malmſey, Muſcadel,
or other white wyne that is very good:
afterwarde take it out of the wine and melt it agayne:
then powre it again vpon the ſaid wine, doing ſo .vii. times.
And then take the ſaid waxe, & melt it vpō the fier,
mixyng with it a handfull of bricke finely beaten into
duſt: incorporate all well together, & put it into a croke
necked viole of glaſſe, which diſtillars, call a Bagpipe,
claied about vp to the middes of the necke: & let it diſtill
firſt with a litle fier, by the ſpace of .viij. houres: & afterward
make your fier greater, & at thende verie greate.
But you muſt aboue all thing, cloſe wel the ſydes and
ioyntes of the ſaied veſſell, and of the recipient, which
muſt be ſomewhat greate. After that the ouen & all the
other thinges bee colde agayn, you ſhall take the water
out of the recipient, and ſhall powre it into a violl
well ſtopped with waxe and cyred clothe, ſo that in no
race it maye take vent: neither ſet it in a place where
anye heate of the ſonne or fier maye come to it: for it is
of ſo fine a ſubſtaunce, that it woulde flie and vaniſhe

awaie immediatlye. The ſaide lycour is merueylous
good for all kinde of woundes: and ye muſt weate and
moiſt the wounde with it, and hynde vpon it a piece of
lynen clothe ſteeped in the ſayd water. And amonge all
the experiences that hath been ſeene, thys was experimented
and proued vpon a ſeruaunt of a noble man called
Feonello Pio de Carpe, reſydent in Veniſe, the yere
1548. the whiche ſeruaunte hauinge receyued a ſtroke
with a dagger vpon the inſteppe of the foote, whiche is
a place verye daungerous, did nothing but laye therto
a lytle of the ſayde water, whiche a gentell man of the
ſaide Senyor Leonello had in his houſe: & in the ſpace
of two daies he was ſo healed that ſkant coulde a man
perceyue the cicatrice or ſkarre where the cut was: it is
alſo exceding good for ſhronken ſynowes. And if thys
foreſayd water bee well and naturally made or diſtilled
the ſecond time, it is of ſo fine and perſyng ſubſtaunce,
that if a man laye of it vpon the palme of his hande, ye
ſhal ſee it perſe thorowe incontinent and in a moment,
and leaue the place drie as thoughe it had neuer been
layde there. Therefore they that haue any knowledge
maye helpe diuers diſeaſes, in adding to it ſome other
licour or pouder, ſuche as they woulde haue perſe into
the fleſhe.
               
               
                  To make oyle of S. Ihons wort, which is called in Veniſe,
and in diuers other places redde oyle: and is of ſuche
vertue that a man can ſkantly expreſſe it, as well to
heale woundes, as other infinite diſeaſes, whereof we
wyll ſhewe the moſt notable, and thoſe that haue been
founde trew by experience.
                  
                     YOu muſt gather in the moneth of May and
Iune, the herbe called of the Greekes Hypericon,
of the Latynes Perforata, of the
Frenchmen Millepertuis, and of vs in Englande
S. Ihons worte, before it begin to
floryſhe or haue floures: and ſtampe it in a morter of
marble, or of wood very cleane, and putte it ſo ſtamped

in a violle or glaſſe: and then powre to it as muche
white wine as will couer it all ouer, and adde to it of
good oyle olyue aboute the height of two fyngers, leauyng
it ſo in the ſaide glaſſe wel ſtopped, and after that
ye muſt gather the ſaid herbe with his bloſſomes vpon
S. Ihons day in the mornyng after the ſonne is ryſen,
and puttyng the bloſſomes a part, ye muſt ſtampe wel
the herbe with the ſtalkes, and after ye haue cut it very
ſmall, take it out of the morter, and ſtampe it in the
ſame morter alſo a litle, the floures or bloſſoms whiche
you kepte a parte, and mingle them with theyr herbe,
whiche was ſtamped before. But the bloſſomes muſte
wey foure times or very nigh as muche as al the herbe
that ye gathered in the moneth of Maye, and before S.
Ihons day, and was putte in the ſaide violle or glaſſe,
with the wine and oyle olyue. You muſte after this
mingle al theſe things together, and put them in ſome
violle or glaſſe, or els in ſome pan of earth very cleane,
with the ſaid wine and oyle olyue, and put to it againe
other wine and oyle, vntil al bee couered as before: and
then ſet al this in the Sonne in ſome veſſell well ſtopped.
And twelue or fiftene daies after when the ſeede
of S. Ihons wort ſhalbe ripe, you muſt gather of it in
the morning after the Sonne is vp: and ſtampe it well,
and ſo mingle it with the ſaide herbe, and bloſſomes:
but you muſt put no wine to it, ſauynge onely the oyle
oliue. And the ſaied ſeede muſte in quantitie wey as
much as the fourth or thirde parte of the ſayd herbe before
the wyne bee putte to it: alſo the oyle muſt bee of
ſuche quantitie, as maye be aboue all the ſubſtaunces a
good handfull or twoo. After this ſet a caudron of water
on the fier, with hey or ſtrawe in the bottom: and
put the ſaied violle into it ſo that it bee not in daunger
of breakyng, when the water beginneth to ſeeth. This
maner of ſetting the violles or glaſſes in a caudron of
boylyng water, is called of our moderne Philiſophers,
Balneum Marie, and it is dreſſed and trimmed in thys
ſorte, as well for to diſtill with a Lymbecke, as for to

make putrefaction, euaporation, or diſſolution: of the
whiche thinges we wyll ſpeake afterwarde, when we
comme to the matter of diſtyllyng. Then muſte you
make the water in the ſaide caudron to ſeeth, with the
ſubſtaunce whiche is in it, by the ſpace of thre or foure
houres, according to the quantitie of the ſaid ſubſtaunces,
vntyl the wine, or at the leaſt the moſt part of it be
dronke and conſumed, which ye ſhal know in this maner.
Take a litle of the ſubſtaunce on the ende of a
ſticke, and caſte it in the fier, and if it burne withoute
anye noyſe, it is a ſigne that there is no moore wyne
left. The ſayde violle muſte bee vncouered whyle the
water boyleth, becauſe the wyne maye euaporate and
breathe out. And if the ſayde ſubſtaunce bee ſo great in
the violle, that it paſſe fyue or ſyxe pounde, ye ſhal put
to it theſe thinges folowing, accordyng to the weyght
and meaſure that we wyl ſhewe you, and kepe alwais
good proporcion, accordinge to the quantitie of the
weyghte of the water, whiche ſhalbe moore or leſſe
then fyue pounde. Fyrſt take quicke brymſtone, or els
when it is made into long canes or ſtickes half a poūd,
commune white ſalte, eyght vnces, of ſmallage a diſhfull
wel waſhed, fyrſt in water, and then in honnye roſat,
or other honny (ſo that it bee ſodden and ſkymmed)
foure vnces: ten vnces of Turpentyne, waſhed once or
twiſe in well, ryuer, or conduite water, of the iuyce of
Taxus barbatus, of the iuyce of white or blacke Dictamum,
of eche of them foure vnces, of Saffron thre vnces, rootes
of Dictamum, rootes of Gentian, the rootes of Imperatoria
the rootes of the herbe called Crocodilium or Carlina,
the rootes of Valerian, and the rootes of Selandyne,
of eche of them two vnces. And if the ſayd rootes
be greene, you muſte ſtampe them wel: if they bee
drie, ye muſt beate them into pouder: an vnce of myrre,
two vnces of redde ware, two vnces of fyne Triacle,
an vnce of the ſeedes of a Cedar tree, thre vnces of yuy
ſeede thorowe rype, foure vnces of the ſeede of a Bay
tree thorowe rype, ſyxe vnces of aqua vitae, an vnce of

Synamom, half an vnce of lignum Aloe. Let all theſe be
well ſtamped, and put in a violle or vrinall with the
ſaide herbe, bloſſomes, and oyle: ye muſte ſtoppe well
the ſaide violle, that the ſubſtaunce haue no maner
vent or euaporation. Then make a fier vnder the caudron
ſo that the water maie be hotte without ſeething,
and keepe it ſo the ſpace of two or thre dayes: and the
longer the better. If in cace the fier go out in the night
there is no greate daunger: ye maie make it againe in
the morning, but you muſt kepe it ſo much the longer.
Hauing then taken the violle out of the caudron, and
left it in the Sonne all the reſt of the Somer, kepe it in
your houſe well couered: and the older ſuche oyle wareth,
the better it will bee. But it ſhalbe good to put to
it euerye yeare newe iuyce, of the ſaide herbe S. Ihons
wort, and of the bloſſomes and ſeede well ſtamped, and
that the ſaide bloſſomes, herbe, or ſeedes bee ſodden, by
the ſpace of foure or ſixe houres in oyle oliue: and then
muſte you powre all the oyle with the ſubſtaunce into
ſome veſſell, and preſſe well all the bloſſomes and the
herbe, and caſt them away, and put in other: and yf ye
ſhoulde dooe ſo euerie yeare the oyle woulde not be the
worſe but rather better. If al theſe foreſaid things can
not be gotten in one ſeaſon or time it is no matter: for
a man maye put them in as he findeth them: and if ye
can not get them all, ye may put in theim that ye can
finde or get. The vertues of this excellent oile are infinite,
of the which we will ſpeake onely of the chiefeſt, &
thoſe that haue been proued by experience, as wel of vs
as of other in our preſence, and by our appoyntment
and orderinge. Firſt, it hath as muche or more vertue,
then the true and right baulme, and it is good for all
colde griefes, as well within as without the bodie: for
the Sciatica, and colde goute, in heating it and rubbing
the place withal: for a quartayne, tertian, or quotidian
ague, when a man anointeth the raines of the backe an
houre before the ague come. Alſo it healeth meruelous
well Colicam paſsionem, when a man rubbeth or anoynteth

warmely his breſt or ſtomacke withall, and when
it is put in gliſters with other ſubſtaunces, as we will
declare in the chapter of the Colicke paſſion. And if ye
anoynt the place about the priuie membres of a man or
woman, it will make them to vrine or piſſe well. If a
woman haue her fruit dead in her wombe taking three
or foure dragmes of the ſaide oyle, ſhe ſhalbe deliuered
incontinent. It is likewiſe good for all griefes of the
breſt or ſtomacke. It is a thing aboue all other moſt excellent
and miraculous for the plage, anoyting the raines
of the backe, and in drinking two dragmes or two
dragmes and a halfe in good white wine: but note that
it muſt bee dronke before the ſixte houre after the ſickeneſſe
is begonne, and rubbe the place of the ſickeneſſe
with it, it beinge heated. It healeth moreouer all maner
vlcers, ſores, boyles, botches, and corrupte matter
within the ſkinne couered with a ſkabbe, as well olde
as new, & alſo bruſings, or knockes. And good for other
infinite thinges, as euery man maye dayly proue by experience.
And ſpecially it is verie good for the retraction
or drawinge againe of woundes or ſuch like.
               
               
                  ¶To make an oyle of a redde dogge, by the meane wherof
(beſide other infinite vertues that it bath) I haue
bealed a frier of S. Onofres, who had by the ſpace of
xij. yeres, a lame and drye withered arme lyke a ſticke,
ſo that nature gaue it no more noriſhement.
                  TAke a yonge dogge of redde heare, and keepe
him thre daies without meate: and then ſtrangle
him with a corde, and lette him lye dead a
quarter of a houre, and in the meane time boile
a kettle of oyle vpon the fier, and putte the dogge in
whole or in pieces, it maketh no matter how, ſo that he
bee all there with the ſkinne and heare: and make him
ſeeth ſo vntill he bee almoſt ſodden to pieces, keping alwaies
the kettle cloſe couered. In the meane time take
Scorpions to the number of foure ſkore or a hundreht,
and putte theym in a baſyn on the fier, vntill they bee

thorowly burned. Then putte them into the ſaid kettle
 wt the oyle & the dogge, putting to it a good diſhfull
of great grounde wormes,achees called of the apoticaries biſmalua or maluiſcus and in Latyne hibiſcus or Athaea. or ſmallage well waſhed, a
good handfull of S. Ihons worte, a handfull of wylde
or marſhe mallowes, and a handfull of wal wort, with
an vnce of Saffron. Seeth all theſe thinges well together,
vntill the fleſhe of the dogge be broken and fallen
in pieces. And becauſe ye muſt haue much oyle, ye may
at the firſte putte into the kettle two partes of water,
and one parte of oyle: and in ſething ye may powre in
water, vntill the dogge bee all together broken, as is
alreadie ſaide: then let it waxe colde. After this ye ſhall
take the bones of him and the herbes, and when ye
haue preſſed and ſquiſſed them well, that all the ſubſtaunce
remaine in the ſaide oyle, caſte them a waye.
                  This doen, you ſhall take only that which is aboue vpon
the water: that is to ſaie, the oyle and the greaſe,
and caſt away the water, if there be muche: but if there
be but a litle, ſo that you can ſkant diſcerne the oyle frō
the water, ye ſhall take all together, for a litle water
can not bee but good. Then ſtraine it thorowe a ſtrayner
or canueſe, firſte weated or ſteeped in white wine:
and take then vnguentum Agrippe ſeuen or eyght vnces,
of the marie of the gambon and bones of a hogge, a
pounde, of the marie of the hinder thighes of an aſſe a
pounde, or as muche as you maye get. Put all theſe
thinges together, with the ſaide oyle and greaſe: and
make it ſeeth vppon the fier: then adde to it a diſhefull
or an halfe of oyle roſat: & when it ſetheth, you ſhal put
to it thre vnces of Maſtick, two vnces of Gomme Elemi,
eyghte vnces of redde Waxe: but the Maſticke
and the Gomme muſte bee well beaten into pouder
and ſifted. And when all this hath boyled the ſpace of
halfe an houre, let it coole againe, and ſette it in the
Sonne in ſome kinde of veſſel wel couered by the ſpace
of certaine daies. Then ſhal you haue an excellent ſubſtaunce
and matter for all kinde of colde infirmities,
and for many other. And as I haue alredie ſaid, I haue

ſeene the experience of it in a Frier of S. Onofrey,
that is to ſaie: of them that weare anhabit of Roan colour:
but (as he ſaied) he dwelt not in the monaſterie,
becauſe of the ſaid infirmitie of his lefte arme, whiche
was as drie as the braunche of a withered tree. Moreouer,
he ſaied vnto me, that he did not remember nor
coulde tell whether that chaunced vnto him, either by
ſickneſſe, or by ſome wounde or hurte. The ſaide arme
was become ſmaller then the other almoſte by halfe, ſo
that the ſaide arme had almoſte no ſtrength at all, and
coulde not helpe it ſelfe in no wiſe. I cauſed him then
to bee annointed with the ſaide oyle (whiche I had ſet
in the Sonne the Somer of the yeare 1547.) by the
ſpace of .ij. miſerere, & made him tarie in the Sonne vntill
the ſaied oyle was cleane dryed vp, and had perced
thorowe the ſaied arme: and within .lv. daies, men did
perceyue and ſee perfitelye that the veynes gaue nouriſhment
vnto the membre. Nine daies after, the arme
was as full of fleſhe as the other: and with the helpe of
god, was as whole and ſound, as though it had neuer
been hurte. This ſaide oyntment or oyle is a precious
thing, and good for al colde infirmities, & for the gout:
and ſpeciallye for all contractions or ſhrinkinges together
of ſynowes or membres, and woundes, albeit, the
man were wounded in the middes of the bodie, in putting
into it this oyle, ſhal a miraculous thing beſeene:
and it is alſo good for the ſinowes. As I came from Ieruſalem
in the yere 1518. in a ſhippe, of the whiche the
maiſter was called Peter de Chioggia, we were ſet vpon
by fiue foyſtes of Pirates, on this ſide Corphu, and one
of the Mariners ſo attainted with the ſtroke of a gonne
that he had his arme bruſed and broken, and with the
ſame blowe another hurt in the breſt. The Phiſition
would haue cut of the arme. But among other things
that I caried about with me, I found a bore of the ſaid
oyntment, wherwith I anoynted his arme, and in the
ſpace of ſixe or ſeuen days, he was healed miraculouſly.
I haue made many experiences, aſwel vpon myſelf, as

vpō others: and hauing giuen of it vnto diuers men to
ayde them ſelues withall, they haue tolde me that they
haue foūd in it a meruelous vertue & operation. If you
make this oyle in the time when the herbe of S. Ihons
wort is found, ye ſhal putte in the herbe, the bloſſome,
and the ſeede: but if it be in the time when it can not be
foūd, after ye haue made the firſt decoctiō of the dog, as
we haue ſaid, ye ſhal boyle the oyle & the greaſe once againe,
putting to it the oyle of S. Ihons wort, whereof
we haue ſpoken afore, or as ye may get it: that is to ſai,
halfe aſmuch as al the oyle and greaſe is. And if ye can
not find biſmalua or wild mallowes, ye may put in ſtede
of it, y• oyntment called Dialtea, which is found cōmonly
at the Apoticaries. And when ye wil boyle the dog in
the kettle, it ſhalbe good to put to it, thre torteſes that
liue on the lande and not on the water, and ſo ſhall the
ſaid oyntment be very excellent for the goute. A certein
man of mine acquaintaunce, of the age of thirtie yeres,
vexed with the gout, whome I made take of this oyle,
and anoynt himſelf a litle in the place of the griefe, and
about it, putting to it two partes of oyle roſat, one part
of oyle violet, & two partes of the ſaid oyle of the dogge,
told me that he had found a merueylous eaſe and helpe
by it. And the ſaid griefe returning againe foure times
at ſondrie times, yet anoyntinge himſelfe therewith
thre times (as is aforeſayde) the paine came vnto hym
no moore in the ſpace of three yeares that wee were in
Rome together, whiche was the yere 1514. And thys
man was called Diego, a Portugall, and dwelte at the
mount Iordan. Sith that tyme, being gone to Veniſe,
and from thence into Leuaunt, I haue heard nothynge
of hym.
               
               
                  To make an oyntment, the moſt excellent in the worlde,
whoſe vertues are infinite, as we will declare afterwarde.
VVhiche, Princes ought to commaunde to be made and kept
in their cōmon wealthes: and that it ſhould be made in the
preſence of Phiſitions, as Triacle is made: or at the leaſt euerie
man ought to haue it in his houſe, and ſpeciallie bycauſe
a man may make a great quantite of it: and the lenger it is
kept the better it waxeth.
                  
                  
                     TAke firſt oyle Roſet, the oyls of Violettes,
the Oyle of Neuuphar, oyle of
Spick, oyle of the herbe called Coſtum
commonlie called Cocus or herba marie,
the oyle of Bay, oile of Nutmegges,
the oyle of the bloſſomes of Iaſemin,
of eche of them a pounde. The oyle
of Nutmegges, and of Sinamom, is made in ſeething,
Nutmegges, or Sinamon wel ſtamped, in oyle Oliue.
And in the like maner, ye may make the oyle or decoction
of Xilobalſamum, of Carpobalſamum, of lignum Aloe, of
Mirrhe, of Frankenſence, of the gūme of Iuie, of Maſticke,
and of Cloues, and it ſhall ſuffiſe onely, to put in
the oyle of theſe ſaid ſpices, half as much as eche of the
other mounteth vnto, that is to ſay, half a pound. Likewiſe
muſt ye make oyle of Campher, but ye muſte not
ſeeth it, but onely warme the oyle Oliue, in a litle pan
and poure it ſo vpon the Campher a good way of from
the fire: than muſt you ſoubdaynlie couer it: for the
Campher is ſo fine and delicate, that it would incontinent
breath out and vaniſh away: and therefore dothe
the Campher cleaue vnto the lidde, and ſides of the pan
bicauſe it cannot get out. You muſt put onlie halfe an
vnce of Campher, for euerie two or three pounde of the
whole quantite of the other oyles together: than adde
to it, a pounde of the oyle of Turpentine, made by diſtillation,
and three vnces of the oyle of Storar liquida:
after this, put all theſe oyles ſo mingled together, into
a great cawdron or kettell tinned within, which muſte
be high and narrow, to the ende that all the thynges,
that ye will put in, maie afterwarde be well couered,
with the ſaied oyles: And the ſayde cawdron, ought to
haue a couer that maie cloſe him well and iuſtly: than
ſet it vpon a ſmall fire, and put in three of theſe blacke

Vipers, iij. Todes .x. of theſe litle beaſtes, called in latine
Tarantulae or Stelliones, which be like vnto Liſardes,
hauinge ſpottes on their backes like Starres, and .l.
Scorpions. And if ye can get anie other venimous beaſtes,
put them in quicke, if not at the firſt time, at the
leaſt at euerie time whan ye can haue them: and after
you haue well couered and cloſed the cawdron, giue it
but a light fire, the ſpace of .v. or .vi. daies. It ſhall be
good to ſet the ſaied cawdron, in maner of a Fornayſe,
as it were to make Salt peter, or as Sope cawdrons be
ſet: than after, by the ſpace of a day, make the fire a litle
greater, vntill all the venimous beaſtes be broken into
pieces, and almoſt conſumed in the ſayd oyle, wherinto
it ſhould be good, to haue put firſt, a pot of good white
Wine. Than hauing taken the cawdron from the fire
and taken all the ſayde beaſtes, preſſe them or wringe
them hard in ſome canueſſe or linnen cloth, weat
                        •
                      with
white Wine. Than take the oyle of Saincte Ihons
wort, compounde, as we haue before declared, halfe as
muche as all the oyle of the ſayde beaſtes, and the thyrd
part of the oyle of the redde dogge, mingle all well together,
and put to it the bloſſomes of Selandine, the
bloſſomes of Sainct Ihons worte, ſuche a quantite as
you will, puttinge alſo to it, a handefull of white ſalte,
the iuice of Taxus barbatus, and of white Dictamū, at your
diſcretion: the iuice of Criſpina rubra, if ye can gette it.
This Criſpina rubra, is a herbe like vnto a Thiſtle, and
is taken of Ioannis Agricola, to be the brier called Reſpis:
but it hath leaues l
                        •
                     ſſer, and tenderer than a Thiſtle,
and is eaten almoſt in euerie place, in Italie, in Salades.
And there it is called in ſome places, Cardonello, and
in Veniſe, Sigone. The red Criſpin is in al poinctes like
vnto the white and greene, and differeth in nothynge,
but in colour: it is a verie precious herbe. I ſaw once a
man, that clefte a yonge Kiddes head, almoſt a ſunder:
and after layde to it, onely the iuice of the ſayde redde
Criſpin: and ioyned the head together, and bounde it
with a bande: and in two daies the Kidde was healed,

as ſounde as he was before. Alſo it is verie good, in the
time of a Plage or peſtilence, as wee will afterwarde
declare. Than, if you can get of the iuice of the ſaied
Criſpina, or Cardonello, ye ſhall put a pound of it, with the
ſaid oyles, and as much of the iuice of Carduus benedictus,
a pounde of the flouers or bloſſomes, of the ſaid Carduus
benedictus, an vnce of Lignū Aloe in pouder, and an vnce
of Saffran. Set all theſe thinges well mixed together,
in the Sunne, all the whole Sommer time, in diuers
veſſels of glaſſe, or of earth leaded within, wel couered
with paper or linen clothe. And keepe it as a precious
thyng: whoſe vertues to expreſſe, it is impoſſible. The
ſaied oyle is excellent good, principallie for all maner
of contractions, and ſhrinkinges of the members, of a
mans bodie, and of woundes, as well olde as freſſhe,
againſt Fiſtules, Cankers, and the diſeaſe called in latin
Struma, whiche is a ſwelling in the throte, of gathered
matter and bloud, whiche wee call in Engliſh, the
Kinges euil, or the Quinſes, whan the place of the ſore
is rubbed with it, or when Towe weate in the ſayde
oyle is laied vnto it, and beginnyng in the firſt quarter
of the wane, or decreaſynge of the Moone, (with the
grace of God) the ſayd accidentes, ſhalbe healed before
the new Moone. Alſo the ſaied oyle, is good againſt all
maner of venim or poyſon, beyng annointed about the
hart, if the Poyſon be taken at the mouth: and if a man
be bitten with anie venimous beaſt, or hurte with anie
intoxicated weapon, ye muſt wryng well the bloud out
of the wounde. and than rubbe the place, and round aboute
it with the ſaied oyle. It is alſo good for anie mē
                     ber
that is ſtiffe, and nomine, and almoſt for all diſeaſes
that can chaunce vnto mans bodie, wherunto anie
outward application is made of it.
               
               
                  ¶A verie true and proued remedie, agaynſt a Quartayne
ague.
                  
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
iij. or .iiij. graynes of Frankenſence, of the male kynde
otherwiſe called Olibanum: than couer agayne the ſaied
hole, with the litle peece that you toke of firſt, & roſte it
ſo vpon the embers, ſo that it burne not, but that it may
waxe tender. Than take it from the fire, and breake it
into .iiii. partes, with all the Frankenſence in it: and ſo
giue it the pacient to eate, it will by and by, make the
Apoſtume to breake, & heale him cleane. The foreſaied
Smith, had al readie ſhutte his teeth, ſo that men were
fayne to open them with a ſpoone or knife: and ſo they
put of it into his mouthe, as well as they coulde, and
ſtraight way he tourned with his breaſt, vpon the beddes
ſide, and ſpitte out a great parte of the matter, that
was come forth of the Apoſtume broken: and therupon
ſlept more than .ix. houres, and whan he waked, he called
for meate, & found him ſelf thorowlie whole, which
was a thyng worthie to giue God thankes for.
               
               
                  Another ſecret, or remedie, agaynſt the ſaied diſeaſe
of the Pleureſye.
                  TAke the flower, that ſticketh on the bourdes
and walles of a Mille, and make therof paſte
with water: and ſo make litle cakes, of the bigneſſe
of a grote, or ſomewhat more, and hauing
baked or fried them, in an yron ladie, or in a friyng pan,
with the oyle of Scorpions, lay one of them ſo vpon the
place, where the patient feeleth his greef, and that as
hote as he maie endure, rubbynge, and annoyntyng it
with the ſaied oyle of Scorpions: and whan one of the
cakes is almoſt colde. Lay to another very hote, & heate
the firſt againe in the ſaied oyle, and ſo conſequentlie
take awaie one, and put to another .x or .xv. times, and
ſhortlie after the Apoſtume ſhal breake, and in ſpitting
the matter oute, the patient (with Gods ayde) ſhall be
healed.
               
               
                  Another good ſecret agaynſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  
                     
                     OPen a white lofe new baket, in the
middle, and ſpread it well with good
Triacle, on bothe the halfes, on the
crommie ſide, and heate it at the fyre:
than laie one of the halfes, vpon the
place of the diſeaſe, and the other half
on the tother ſide of his body directly:
and ſo binde them, that they ſturre not, leauynge them
ſo a daie and a night, or vntill the Apoſtume breake:
which I haue ſometime ſeen doen, in .ij. houres or leſſe.
And than take awaie the breade, and immediatlie the
patient will begyn to ſpit, and voide the putrifaction of
the Apoſtume, and after he hath ſlept a litle, ye ſhal giue
him ſome meate, and with the helpe of God, he ſhall be
ſhortlie healed.
               
               
                  Another remedie againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke a toothe of a wilde Bore: and if the payne
holde him in the right ſyde, ye muſte take the
tooth of the right iawe: if otherwiſe, ye muſt
take the lefte tooth: yet not withſtandynge. it
hath been founde by experience, to be all one of whiche
iawe ſo euer it were. Scrape the ſaied tooth with a
knife, vpon a cleane table, or vpon a paper: than take of
the ſame ſcrapynges, as muche as you maie laye vpon
two grotes, and giue the pacient drinke of it, with a litle
Barley water, or in the brothe of litle redde graines
like vnto Ciche peaſon, or with white Wyne with a litle
water. This hath alwaies bene founde verie good
and true.
               
               
                  To make a water, good for the breaſt or ſtomake, of the
which men vſe to giue them drinke, that be tourmented or
greeued with the ſtitche in the ſide, or pleuritike Apoſtumes
the whiche water is of a verie good ſauour, and mondifieth
meruclous well the breaſt or ſtomacke.
                  
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
the ſpace of two Miſerere: and then waſſhe the legge
well (that is to ſaye the wounde and rounde aboute the
wounde) with the ſaid wine luke warme. Then take
theſe pouders folowing, that is to ſaye, Ariſtolochia, both
of long and rounde, Maſticke, Myrre, Dragons bloud,
called in Engliſhe Pellytorie of Spaine, Aloe epaticum,
Nyll, called in Latyne Tutia, the barke or ryne of gourdes
burned, of eche of theſe an vnce, Nummia, or as
ſome call it, Humia, and Boale armoniacke, of eche of
them a quarter of an vnce well ſtamped, and ſtrayned,
laye all vpon the ſaid griefe: than take the herbes boyled
in wine, as is aforeſaide, and binde them vppon the
wounde with a bande, in chaungyng it twiſe a day, or
at the leaſt once, and you ſhall ſee the legge healed in
fewe daies.
               
               
                  ¶To heale ſwollen knees or legges, redde, and full of
humours: a ſecrete merueylous good, eaſie to bee made,
and of lytle charge, and often times proued.
                  TAke the ſkinne of a dogge, yf you may get it: or if
not, take a white lambes ſkynne, or elles the
ſkinne of a kidde, and cut a piece of it as broade
as the palme of youre hande, or moore, and another
piece of the length of your hande, or ſomewhat moore:
then melte in a pan on the fier theſe thinges folowing:
roſen of a Pine tree two pounde, Galbanum .v. vnces,
Maſticke an vnce, Muſke, Amber, Tyuet, of eche of
them ſixe graynes, or as muche as you wyll, & breake
the Maſticke betwene two papers: then put the roſen
and the Galbanum to melte in a panne with a ſmall
fier, and when it is well melted, ye ſhall putte the maſticke
to it, and ſturre them well with a lytle ſtycke, to
the entent that nothing burne. After this lay it abrode
whote as it is, vppon the ſaide ſkinne halfe a fynger
thicke. Then take twelue or fiftene of theſe litle beaſtes
called Monkes peaſon or ſowes (whereof is founde
a greate quantitie vnder ſtones in moyſte places) and
theym in a morter, with a litle Barrowes greaſe
                        •
                     
                     
make thereof an vnction or oyntment to laye vpon the
ſaide plaiſter of the ſkinne, heatyng the ſayd ſkynne at
the fier, and laye it vnder the knee, or vnder the calfe of
the legge, harde bounde, and leaue it ſo two or three
dayes: but if the legge be hearie, ye muſt ſhaue the hear
awaye with a raſour, for the plaiſter woulde els cleaue
to it, when you take it of agayn, if you find that it hath
made litle bladders, perce them, and wipe them cleane.
This doen, waſhe them with the wine, wherin the decoction
of the Agrimoyne, the Oliue leaues, the Roſes,
and plantaine was made: and ſo wype and drie theym
againe. Make cleane alſo the ſaide plaiſter, remouynge
and ſturryng a litle the oyntment: and after hauynge
heated it againe by the fyre, lay it againe vpon the leg.
Dooe thus euery thirde or fourth day, and you ſhall ſee
that the plaiſter ſhall haue drawen vnto it ſelfe in a
ſmall time a great aquoſitie of the legge, and ſhall haue
taken away the redneſſe, inflamation, and ſwellinge.
And if there bee a wounde, you ſhall heale it, as we
haue aboue ſayde.
               
               
                  A verye ſure and perfect remedie agaynſt a Sciatica,
often tymes proued and experimented in diuers partes
of the worlde.
                  
                     FYrſte make this confection that foloweth.
Take thre pounde of rawe honny, and put
it in a panne with two glaſſes full of water,
and make it ſeeth or boyle together, vntyll
you ſee the ſkūme or froth mounte vp,
the whiche you muſte take away. Then take the rootes
of the herbe called in Latine Acorus and in Engliſh
Galingale, or of the herbe called yelowe Gladen, make
them cleane, cut them in ſmal pieces, and ſtampe them
well. Take of theſe herbes one pounde for the ſayde
thre poundes of honnye, and put them by lytle and lytle
into the ſayde panne, alwaies ſturryng them a litle,
letting them ſo boyle, by the ſpace of a good houre.
                  Then put to it alſo an vnce of fine Synamom wel beaten

into pouder, take it ſo from the fier, and keepe it in
the ſame panne, or in ſome other veſſell. Giue vnto the
patient of this conſerue at night when he goeth to bed,
about foure or fyue ſponefulles, and in the mornynge
early as muche or more. Giue him alſo thereof before
his meales and after: the oftner he eateth of it the better
he ſhal be. If it be in winter, heate it for him a lytle:
and while he thus vſeth it, let him alwaies ſit vpon his
buttockes, that is to ſay: vpon the bone or huckle wher
the Sciatica is, with the plaiſter declared in the chapter
before, that is to ſay, of yt Roſen, Galbanū, Maſticke, the
litle beaſtes called Monkes peaſon or ſowes, with the
reſt there mencioned. Then, at the ende of ten dayes
take it of, and laye it other ten dayes vppon his thigh.
And from thence take it agayne, making it cleane, mixing
and ſturring it a newe, and laye it vnder the calfe
of the legge tenne dayes more: and at euerye tyme you
ſhall ſee that it wyll haue engendred litle puffes or bladers,
and drawen to it ſelf al the aquoſitie and watriſhnes,
in ſuche ſorte, that it wyll take awaye the griefe
and heale it. This is a verye rare ſecrete agaynſt ſuche
a diſeaſe, whiche verye fewe Phiſitions colde hitherto
fynde certayne remedie for. If in caſe the diſeaſe bee
olde or hath runne longe, giue the pacient ſometyme
this gliſter folowyng. Take Mallowes, Mercurie, Fenell,
greene or drie, Wormewode, Rue, wilde Cucumbers
broken, as muche of the one as of the other: than,
put to it two handfulles of branne, ſeeth all in common
water, vntill the thirde parte bee deminiſhed: and ſo
let it coole againe. After this, take a diſhe and a halfe
full of this decoction, three ſponefulles of ſkimmed
Honnye, oyle of Camemille, and oyle of Rue, of eche
of them an vnce and a halfe: mingle all well together,
and make a Gliſter of it, whiche you ſhall miniſter vnto
the Pacient in the mornynge: and ſo make him lye vpon
that ſide where the Sciatica is. Two dayes after ye
ſhall giue him another Gliſter, after three dayes another:
and than foure dayes after yet another, continuyng

ſo a moneth together. If the griefe be ſo indured
and hardened that it wyll not behealed by the aforeſaid
remedies, you maye giue him Pilles the thyrde daye
after, the fourth daye, the fyfte daye, and ſo vnto ſyxe or
ſeuen tymes. But the Pylles wyll profit the Pacient
nothing at all vnleſſe he abſtayne from eatinge ſalte or
ſharpe meates, and from all ſortes of pulſe corne, as
Peaſe, Beanes, Tares, and Fitches, and ſuche other:
lykewiſe from drinking water, or white wyne. Manye
haue been healed onely with the ſaide plaiſter, not leauinge
to dooe their buſineſſe abrode notwithſtanding:
other haue alſo vſed the conſerue. But in ſo manye
yeres I haue had but two vpon whom (for to take awaye
the diſeaſe being olde and farre goen) I was conſtrained
to vſe the ſayde Pilles and Gliſters, whereby
they were healed. I had alſo one, whiche vſed but only
the plaiſter and the conſerue, of whom the huckle bone
was out of ioynt, and hardened, and with the ſaied remedie
he was perfitly healed in the ſpace of three ſkore
and tenne daies, and the ſaied bone retourned againe
into his former place and ſtate: but he tolde me that
whileſt he vſed the ſaid plaiſter and conſerue, a Nonne
counſeyled him to take from daye to daye, foure times,
the bigneſſe of a Nutte of Turpentine waſhed in Borrage
water, and that he ſhould not tell me of 
                        •
                     t, whereby
he founde him ſelfe healed in ſhort time.
               
               
                  A water for to heale in fiue dayes at the moſte, all maner
of great ſkabbes, as well inwarde as outwarde: and is
a water cleare and white, and is of an odoriferous ſauour,
ſuch as a man may preſent to a Queene.
                  TAke Plantaine water two glaſſefulles, Roſe water
a glaſſefull, of the water of the floures of Cytrons
or Orenges halfe a glaſſe full, or leſſe: put
all thys together in a cleane panne or violle of glaſſe:
and put to it an vnce of Sublyme, that is to ſay: quicke
ſiluer, ſuch as commonly is founde at the Apoticaries:
it muſte bee well beaten to pouder. Then let it boyle

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
his bodie, as longe as he maie, and he ſhal finde it verie
excellent.
               
               
                  Another remedie againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke half a glaſſe, or leſſe, of the iuice of Barberies,
whan they be verie redde, and ripe, and
put into it as muche red Corall, well beaten in
pouder, as will lie vpon two grotes, and giue the patient
drinke therof.
               
               
                  Another perfect remedie againſt the ſame diſeaſe, and
to make a man piſſe that hath bene .iiij. or .iiij. daies without
makinge water, and that in the ſpace of half an hower, and
will breake the ſtone within .x. or .xij. daies.
                  TAke fine pouder of Virga aurea, and put a ſponefull
of it, into a new laied Egge, ſoft roſte, and giue
the patient drinke therof, in the morninge at hys
breakefaſt, and lette him not eate at the leaſt in foure
houres after, and than ſhall he make water in leſſe thā
halfe an hower. If ye vſe this continuallie, the ſpace of
x. or .xii. daies, as is a foreſaid, you ſhall make him piſſe
out the ſtone without anie paine or greefe.
               
               
                  Another remedie agaynſt the Stone and payne of
the raynes.
                  TAke the ſeedes of blew Violettes, or march Violettes,
the ſeedes of common Burres, with theyr
litle poddes and all, or ripe Burres a pounde, put
them to drie in an Ouen (for otherwiſe it wil be a hard
thyng to ſtampe them) ſtamping them afterward with
their ſeedes. This doone, take a quicke Hare, & ſtrangle
him with a corde, to thentent there be none of the
bloud loſt: put him ſo whole, or in peeces into ſome veſſel,
feete, guttes, head and all: than put him to burne in
an Ouen, ſo that all, as wel the bones, and the ſkinne,
as the fleſh bee brought to pouder, this dooen, ye ſhall
ſtampe it well, and mingle the pouder with the two other
pouders aforeſaied: drie Oken leaues, well beaten

to pouder .iiij. vnces, drie Saxifrage or Sampire, halfe
a pounde, Bay berries .v. vnces. Let all theſe thynges
be well beaten in pouder, ſifted, and mixte together.
                  Giue of this pouder vnto the pacient, as much as wyll
lie vpon a grote, makynge him to drinke it, in the mornyng,
to his breakefaſt, in white wine, and let him doo
this often times. It is the moſt exquiſite thyng in the
worlde, as well for the grauell, as for the ſtone: but for
the grauell, you muſt take leſſe, and not ſo ofte as for
the Stone.
               
               
                  The laſt, and the moſte excellent remedie of all, agaynſt
the ſtone, be it in the reignes, or in the bladder, of what qualite
or quantite, ſo euer it be.
                  
                     IN the moneth of Maie, when Oxen go to
graſſe, or be at paſture, ye ſhall take of their
dunge, not to freſh, nor to drie: than diſtille
it faire and ſoftlie (to thende it ſmell not of
the ſmoke) into ſome veſſell of glaſſe, or
earth leaded within, of the whiche dunge will come a
water, without ſauour or euill ſtenche, whiche will be
verie good, to take of all maner of ſpottes, or blemiſhes
in the face, if you waſhe it, with it, morninge and eueninge.
You ſhall keepe the ſaied water, in a Violle wel
ſtopped: than take .iij. or .iiij. Radiſhes, ſuch as menne
eate in ſalettes, cut them ſmall, & put them in a Violle,
and fill vp the violle with wine greeke, or good Malmſey,
or other good white wine, lettyng it ſtand ſo in the
Sunne, and in the ayre, a daie and a night. Than take
one parte of that wine, two partes of the ſaied water,
of the Oxe dunge, halfe a parte of the water of Stawberies.
iij. or .iiij. droppes of the iuice of Limons, or Citrons:
and let there be of all theſe waters, ſo proportioned
together, halfe a glaſſe full, or ſome what more, into
the which, you ſhall putte a peece of Suger, or a litle
Honnie roſet: for the one and the other, ſerue as wel to
the ſauour, as to the profite of the ſubſtaunce. After
this, you ſhal put to it ſome of the pouder mentioned in

the Chapiter before, as much, as will lie vpon a grote,
and than giue the patient drinke of it, and ſhortlie after
you ſhall ſe a wonderfull effect
                        •
                      for manie, vnto whome
I haue giuen of it, haue not tarried half an hower, but
they haue piſſed, in the whiche piſſe, they haue founde
ſo manie litle ſtones, that all together, came to the bigneſſe
of a Walnutte, and of others, vnto the quantite
of a haſel Nutte: in vſinge often the ſaied remedie, they
haue finally bene perfectly healed. I cauſed once a gentilman
of Millan, to take of it by the ſpace of .xii. daies,
whome the Phiſitions eſtemed as dead, & would haue
cut him, but in the ſpace of the ſaied .xij. daies, I made
come out of him ſo many ſtones, that all together came
to the quantite of an Egge, I made him make his water
thorow a linnen cloth, laied ouer an Vrinall, to the
intente, to take vp the ſtones together: and the thirde
mornynge, he woulde take the glaſſe, a litle more
than halfe full, and ſhortlie after, beyng about to make
water, he began to crie out, for the great paine he felte
in his yarde: after this payne was paſte, lookyng in the
linnen cloth, he founde a ſtone as longe and as bigge,
as a Bene, ſomwhat pointed at one of the ſides, which
paraduenture, in paſſyng thorow his yard, cauſed him
to haue all that payne. Now, although that manie, as
well of olde time, as now of late daies, haue written diuers
and ſondrie remedies, againſt the ſaied diſeaſe, yet
was there neuer founde a ſurer, truer, or preſenter remedie,
than this. The ſaied water and the pouder, may
be kept longe, but you muſt at euerie time renew the
wine of the ſaied Radiſh, and the iuice of the Limon or
Citron, for in the ſpace of two daies (the wine chieflie)
giueth ſuch a ſent, that a man maie ſkant endure it.
               
               
                  For him that ſpittet
                        •
                      bloud, by hauing ſome veyne
of his breaſt broken.
                  TAke Myſe dunge, beaten in pouder, as muche, as
will lie vpon a grote, and put it into half a glaſſe
full, of the iuice of Plantain, with a litle Suger,

and ſo giue the patient drinke therof, in the mornynge
before his breakefaſt, and at night before he go to bed.
Continuyng this ſame, you ſhall make him whole and
ſounde.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the greefe in the Lunges, and ſpittinge of
bloud, a thyng experimented.
                  TAke an herbe called Farfara, or Tuſsilago, of the Apoticaries
Vngula caballina, Coltes foote in Engliſh,
the Frenche men call it, pate de lion. Incorporate it wel,
with the larde of a Hogge, chopped, and a new laied
Egge: boyle all together in a panne: and giue the patient
of it to eate, doyng this .ix. mornynges, and you
ſhall ſe a meruelous thynge. This is alſo very good, to
make a man fatte.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the paine of t
                        •
                     e flankes, of the reynes, and
all other greefes.
                  TAke three quarters of an vnce of Stora
                        •
                      liquid
                        •
                     ,
Capons greaſe, or Hennes greaſe, the greaſe of a
Gooſe, the greaſe of a Ducke, of eche of theim .v.
dragmes, of oyle reſet .iiii. dragmes, of redde War .ii.
dragmes and a halfe, of Butter half a dragme: melt the
greaſes, the oyle, and the Butter altogether, power
them together, and mingle them. Than hauyng put to
it the Stora
                        •
                     , ſpredde it vpon a linnen cloth, and ſo
laie it hote vpon the place of the greefe, and you ſhal incontinent
ſe him whole.
               
               
                  ¶Agaynſt the ſtinkinge of the breath.
                  TAke Roſemarie leaues, with the bloſſomes, if you
can get them, and ſeeth them in white wine, with
a litle Myrrhe, Sinamom, and Bengewin: and takyng
of the ſaied wine often times in your mouth, you ſhall
finde a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  ¶Agaynſt the bytyng of a madde dogge, and the rage or
madneſſe that foloweth the man after he is bitten.
                  
                     
TAke the bloſſomes or flowers of wilde Thiſltes,
dried in the ſhadow, and beaten into pouder, giue
him drinke of the ſame pouder, in white Wine,
halfe a Walnut ſhell full, and in thriſe takynge it, be
ſhall be healed: A thynge founde true by experience.
               
               
                  To take a waie the dead fleſh, that commeth or
groweth in the noſe.
                  TAke the iuice of Leekes, that haue not bene
twiſe planted, and adde to it a litle greene wax,
and make an oyntement therof, puttyng to it a
litle of the fine pouder of the leeſe of wine, and
put often times of this oyntment in the noſe of the pacient,
and you ſhall ſe a meruelous thyng.
               
               
                  For one, which (with falling from ſome high place) feareth
to haue ſome thinge broken in his body.
                  TAke halfe a glaſſefull of oyle Oliue: and put into
it, pouder of the ſeede of Creſſes, the quantitie of
halfe a Walnut ſhelfull, than giue it the patient
to drinke, at once, or at twiſe. It ſhalbe good to let hym
bloud, immediatlie after he is fallen, or as ſoone as is
poſſible, and as ſoone as he is let bloud, giue him thys
drinke. And he that cannot drinke the oyle, let him take
the pouder with wine. If you cannot get the ſeedes of
Creſſes, giue him of the pouder of Mene, of the which
there is alwaies inough found at y• Apoticaries: if he be
bruſed or hurt outwardlie, annoynt the ſore place with
oyle Roſet, and than lay vpon it, the leaues of Myrnis,
and of dried Roſes, and ſo ſhall you heale him parfitlie.
               
               
                  A verie good and eaſie remedie, againſt the diſeaſe,
called the Kinges euill.
                  TAke the herbe called Farfara, Fole foote in Engliſh,
well ſtamped with his rootes, and beynge
myngled with the flower of the ſeede of Line or
Fla
                        •
                     e, and the greaſe of a Barrow: make therof a plaiſter,
and laie it vpon the ſore, changyng it twiſe a daie,

and all the ſores of the diſeaſe, ſhall bee reſolued into
ſweate. After thei be healed, waſhe often the place with
white wine, by the ſpace of .x. or .xv. daies.
               
               
                  Another remedie againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke the ſtones of a horſe, and put them in a Fier
pan, among the embers and coles, leauyng them
there, vntill they may be beaten into pouder, than
giue the patiente drinke of the ſaied pouder, in white
wyne, the quantite of two pennie weight, continuyng
this the ſpace of .xxi. daies: by this meanes you ſhall
make him caſt out at his mouth, all the ordure and filth
of the euill, and ſhall heale him thorowly.
               
               
                  To know whether a woman, ſhall euer conceiue or not.
                  TAke of the ruen of a Hare, and hauing frayed and
conſumed it,Coagulum Leporis dela preſſure de lieure. in hote water, giue it the woman to
drinke, in the mornyng at her breakfaſt, than let
her ſtande in a hote bathe: and if there come a greefe or
payne in her bellie, ſhe maie conceiue: if not, ſhe ſhall
neuer conceyue.
               
               
                  A verie rare remedie for to take the kernels out of a mannes
throte, in fiftie daies at the f
                        •
                     rtheſt.
                  TAke the rootes of Walwort, well waſhed, and
boyled in white wine, and take alſo, theſe thinges
folowyng: Sponge burned half a pound, &
two hundred cornes of Peper. Al theſe thynges
beyng well beaten into pouder, boyle them, in the ſaied
wine, with the Walwort rootes: and hauinge ſodden
them wel, poure out the wine, and kepe it in a viol wel
ſtopped in ſome moyſt place, than giue the patient of
this wine to drinke, three times a day, at euerie time a
glaſſeful, that is to ſay, mornyng, noone, and night.
                  And while he vſeth this, he muſt eate no other breade
but Barley breade, and drinke his wyne without water.
He muſt alſo abſtayne from eatyng any maner herbes,
Fyſh, Garlick, Beetes, or other ſuch like. Thys

maner of regiment, ought a man to begyn, at the full
moone, continuyng vntill the ende of the ſame, and after
vntill the quarter encreaſynge, of the nexte Moone:
that is to ſaie .xlv. daies, and without doubt the patient
ſhal be healed.
               
               
                  Another remedie, eaſier to be made.
                  TAke drie Camomill redact into pouder, & mengled
with Honnie, then take in the mornyng, a
ſponefull of it, into your mouth, and as muche
at night, lettyng it go downe of it ſelfe: vſe this
continually, vntill you be healed, vſe good gouernemēt
as is afore ſayde.
               
               
                  A thinge proued, and experimented, to be verie tra
                        •
                     
againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke Polipodium (whiche is an herbe, like vnto
Ferne) growyng vpon the ſtumpe or ſtocke of
a Cheſtnut tree, if you can get of it: if not, take
of the other, and beate it into pouder, giue the
patient drinke thereof, with wine or Honnie, twyſe a
daie, at eche time, as muche as will lie vpon a grote:
continue this, by the ſpace of .xxi. daies beginnynge at
the quarter decreaſyng of the Moone, and keepynge alwaies
good diet, as is aboue ſaid, he ſhall be whole.
               
               
                  To make the ſkinne ſtretch and returne agayne into
his place, after the kernell is healed.
                  
                     TAke the knoppes that remaine on the Roſe
ſtalke, after the Roſes be fallen of (whiche
be like beadeſtones, facioned like an Egge)
with the ſeede that is in them, Alom of the

                        •
                     ocke, the flower or bloſome of a Pome granade,
of eche of theſe a like quantitie. Seeth them in
white Vinaigre, vntill half be conſumed, put to it alſo
half as much as al the reſt, of Ros ſyriacus or Rhus. Which
the Apoticaries call Sumach, or Sunach, ſtamped, & boyle
all agayne, vntill all the Vinaigre be almoſte wholy

conſumed. And of that which remayneth, annoynt the
place rounde aboute: and by that meanes, ye ſhall cauſe
the ſkinne to ſtretche, and come to his place, as it was
before.
               
               
                  A verie exquiſite remedie agaynſt the diſeaſe called in
Latyne Augina, and in Greeke Synanche, whiche is an
inflamation of the Muſcle of the inner Gargill, the
French men call it Squinancie, in Engliſh Quinſey.
                  TAke the water of Scabioſe, a pounde, of Aqua vite,
an vnce, mengle them together, and laye it vpon
the ſoore, or griefe, and you ſhall finde the Pacient
whole in three houres.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke Swallowes, bake them in an ouen, beate thē
to pouder, and laye them vpon the griefe thorowe
the mouth if it be poſſible: if not you ſhall entermingle
it with Honnye roſet, and a litle Flower or
Meale, of Amylum, & then put it in his mouth, letting it
goe downe of it ſelfe, and you ſhall ſee a merueylous
thinge.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt the ſame ſickeneſſe.
                  TAke oyle of Romaine vitriolle, and put two or
three droppes of it, in white wine, with the which
you ſhall gargle or waſhe your mouth and throte
often tymes.
               
               
                  A verye good remedye agaynſt the kinges euyll.
                  TAke Ceruſe or white Leade well ſtamped foure
vnces, oyle Olyue, eyght vnces, let this boyle together
fiue or ſixe houres, ſtyrring it continually:
and when it is waxen or become verye blacke, it is ſodden
ynough: then ſpreade it vpon a lynnen cloth, and
laye it vnto the place of the ſoore: yf the ſoores be broken,

they will be healed incontinent: if not, they wyll
reſolue and leuſe, and ſhortly heale thorowly.
               
               
                  To heale the ſame diſeaſe by a ſubſtance taken at the
mouthe.
                  
                     DReſſe a Henne as it were to eate, ſo
that ſhe bee boyled in a great potte or
caudron, with a greate deale of water
without Salt, letting it boyle vntyll
all the bones bee ſeperated from
the fleſhe: then take the ſaied bones
and drie them in an ouen, or at the fier,
ſo that they bee not burned or waxe blacke, after
this beate them well to pouder, and take of the ſeede of
Seſamum, beaten well likewiſe into pouder, & mengle it
with the pouder of the Hennes bones, as muche of the
one as of the other. And ſo take a ſponefull of the two
pouders, and mingle it with Honnye, cauſing the Pacient
to eate of it at night when he goeth to bedde, and
in the morning when he riſeth. This ought to be doen
from the beginning of the quarter decreaſinge of the
Moone vnto the ende: It is a verye excellent ſecrete. It
alſo happened to me of ſome men, in whome the ſayed
diſeaſe was ſo olde and ſo farre gone that this ſaied remedie
coulde not helpe them, whome I cauſed to take
with the ſaied pouder ſpecified as foloweth, whiche
ought to bee made after this maner. Take a certayne
litle Serpent called a Slowe worm
                        •
                     : boyle him in oyl
                        •
                     
Olyue, vntill he bee broken and conſumed, then rubbe
the euyll with the ſayed oyle, and lay pieces of towe vpon
it, leauing it ſo three or foure daies: and after that,
make a newe anoynting, and laye tow to it againe as
before. By this ſaied remedie I healed them perfitlye,
thankes bee vnto God.
               
               
                  A heauenlye water which hath many goodly and 
                        ••
                     
                     table
Vertues, as we ſhall ſhewe you after.
                  
                     
                     TAke Cloues, Nutmegges, Ginger,
Zeduaria, long Pepper, rounde Pepper,
the ſeede of Ienuper, Orenge
pilles, the bloſſomes or floures of
Sage, Baſyll, Roſemary, Maioram,
roūd Mint, Bay berries, Pēnyryall,
Gentian, Calamintha, the floures of
Elder, the flowres of white and redde Roſes, Spicknarde,
lignum Aloes, wilde Cubebes, Cardamomum, or
graines, whiche the Apoticaries call Granum paradiſi,
fine Cynamom, Calamum Aromaticum, Sticados, Chamedrios,
called in Engliſhe Germander, Camepitheos, Melligetta,
Maſticke, Enſence, of the male kinde, Aloe epaticum,
Anyſe ſeede, the ſeede of Maioram, or Maioram gentle,
drie figges, drie Raiſins, Dates, ſwete Almondes, kernelles
of a Pyneaple, of eche of theſe an vnce, white
Honnie, ſixe vnces. Then take Suger waiyng aſmuch
as all the ſaied compoſition, and mengle well all together,
putting alſo to it Aqua vite waiyng as muche as
all the ſaied ſubſtaunce, but the ſaied Aqua vite muſte
bee diſtilled fiue times thorow a Limbecke, receyuinge
alwaies the beſt: and mingle all the ſaied thinges together
in the ſaied water: then put all into a violle well
ſtopped, leauing it ſo the ſpace of two dayes. Then afterwarde
you ſhal ſette it vpon the forneſſe wt his Limbecke
and recipient, diſtillinge it with a ſmale fier,
wherof wil come a cleare and precious water, continue
ſo the fier, vntill the water begin to chaūge his colour,
and come forth white: then chaunge the recipient, and
receyue the ſaied white water a part, for it is not good,
but for to blaunche and make white the face, and there
is neither ſpotte nor lyntell, or anye kinde of redde burgeons
in the face of a man, the whiche, beinge waſhed
with this water by the ſpace of fiftene daies wil not go
out, and weare away, leauinge the face and the ſkynne
white, ſhininge and well ſauouringe. This is a verie
rare kinde of waſhinge, and meete for great ladies and
princeſſes. You ſhall mi
                        •
                     e the firſt water whiche is

cleare, with Aqua vite of like quantitie, the whiche is
called Mel balſami. Nowe hauinge putte and left all
theſe thinges in a violle well ſtopped, the ſpace of two
dayes, ſet it to diſtill with a ſmal fier, then receyue and
put the firſt water by it ſelfe, whiche will diſtill verye
cleare, and odoriferous. When you ſee that the water
beginneth to come forthe like raine water, chaunge
your recipient, and receyue that ſame likewiſe by it
ſelfe, vntill you ſee the thirde water come out, whiche
will bee of ſanguyne colour, the whiche you ſhall powre
into a violle, and ſtoppe it well with waxe: keepe
it diligentlye as a precious thinge: for it hath many notable
and excellent vertues, of the whiche the beſt bee
theſe that folowe. The firſt is, that if you laye a lytle of
it vpon a freſhe wounde, there neede no other medicine
to cure it. The ſeconde is, it is good for al old woundes,
againſt the Canker, the wormes, and againſt Nolime
tangere, and all other diſeaſes growinge, ye muſt weate
the ſoore places with it euerie ſeconde or thirde daye
once, and by thys meanes, in the ſpace of fyftene
or twentie daies, he or thei ſhalbe healed. The thirde
is, that if anye manne haue a Carbuncle, or Saynct
Antonies diſeaſe, called commonlye in Italye and in
Fraunce, S. Antonies fier, or other peſtilenciall ſyckeneſſe,
and waſhe the place with the ſaied water, will it
kil it within an houre. The fourth is, it is good againſt
the paine of the eyes, ſo that the eye bee not out, or loſt:
if you putte a litle droppe of it into the eye in the morninge,
and as muche at nighte, it will heale the paine
in fiftene daies. And althoughe it bee ſomewhat prickyng,
yet the griefe of it paſſeth ſoone away, ſo that it
can not in any wiſe hurte the eyes. The fifte is, that
if any man haue the ſtone in the raines of his backe,
and in the bladder, & drinke three droppes or a dragme
of it with a litle white wine, he ſhalbe delyuered therof
in few daies. The ſixte is, that it healeth the Emeraudes
or Pyles, if they bee waſhed with it euerye daye
once. The ſeuenth is, that it healeth all maner of diſeaſe

or pain of the Matrice & the colick, when a ſponeful
is dronke of it with the broth of a henne, or of cabbeges.
The eyght is, that when a man batheth the ſhronken
and endured ſynowes of the bodie, they ſtretche, and
heale in fewe daies. The nynth is, that it healeth runnyng
and watrie eyes, when a droppe is put into them
in the morning. The tenth is, that it is verie good to
heale all maner of ſkabbe, ſkurfe, and other like thinges,
waſhing them with it often times. The eleuenth
is, that if a man put a droppe of it into his eare at night
or in the morninge, it taketh awaie all the griefe and
wormes that engender in the eare. The twelfth is,
that it healeth all venemous bitinge, when ye waſhe
the venemous place with it, and is farre better for ſuch
an accident then the triacle is. The thirtenth is, that
it killeth all wormes in mannes bodie, if a man rubbe
his noſeſtrelles, or drinke a verie litle of it. And finallie,
it is alſo verie good for venemous hurtes or woundes,
and for all woundes incurable. It healeth the kinges
euill, and the diſeaſe called the fallinge ſickeneſſe,
and all other infirmities in the exteriour partes of the
bodie, and with this water maye a man waſhe hym
ſelfe, or elles drinke it. It is alſo good for euerye colde
ſickeneſſe, and reſtoratiue for olde folkes, or thoſe
that are conſumed and debilitate with hunger, ſickeneſſe,
or ſorow of mind. It conſerueth the radicall moyſture,
and naturall heate, it mainteyneth health, and
keepeth a man in longe life, who ſo euer vſeth it as it
oughte to bee vſed.
               
               
                  Pilles of a Meruelous operation and vertu, agaynſt the
Sciatica, which we promiſed to ſpeake of in the chapiter of
the Sciatica.
                  TAke 
                        •
                     illes Alephangines, of Hermodactil maioris
and minoris, of eche of them a ſcrupule which
is the thyrde part of a dragme .ij. graynes of ſalt
Gemma, diſſolue and ſtyrre them with the iuyce of roſes,
and make of all this ſubſtaunce fyue pylles, and at the

begynninge, when the Sciatica is feruent and greate,
you ſhall take of the ſayde fyue pylles euery fower dayes:
and when it begynneth to declyne and aſſwage, you
ſhall take them onely the fyfte day, than, the ſyxt, the ſeuenth,
and the eyght daye, vntyll all be done: and take
them alwayes in the mornyng at the breake of the day,
abſteynynge at the leaſt ſix or ſeuen howres from meat.
Nowe, although that the ſayde pylles be not for a man
to kepe his chambre, and that they prouoke not to the
ſtoole, yet ye muſte not drynke anye whyte wyne, nor
water, nor eate anye ſalte thynges, nor anye kynde of
pulſe corne, as beanes and peaſon, with ſuch other like
nor oynyons, garlyke, or ſuche lyke, yf the diſeaſe be inueterate,
olde, or farre gonne.
               
               
                  ☞A notable ſecrete to heale a madde man, be it that the
madnes came vnto hym by a whyrlynge, or giddyneſſe of the
heade or brayne, or otherwyſe.
                  
                     FYrſte of all make hym fower Glyſters, in
fower morninges, one after another. Let
the fyrſte glyſter be ſymple: that is to ſaye,
made with water wherin ye haue boyled or
ſodden wheat bran, commun oyle, and ſalt.
Let the ſeconde be of water ſodden with malowes, mercurye,
pellitory of the wal, and violet leaues, with oyle
and ſalte. Let the thyrde be of water boyled with oyle,
ſalte, ſodden wyne, and honny. And let the fourth glyſter
be of the lyke decoction that the thyrde was, adding
to it end
                        •
                     ue, buglaſſe, and the toppes of the braunches
of Walwort. And after that this decoction is ſtrayned,
ye ſhal put to it an vnce of Caſsia fiſtula, and halfe a quarter
of an vnce of Metridate. Nowe, hauynge giuen him
theſe fower glyſters fowre ſondry mornynges, you ſhal
geue hym this medecyne. Polipodium of an Oke well
ſtamped, a handefull or twayne, and wrynge oute the
iuyce of it, and put it in a glaſſe the quantite of two fingers
high, puttinge to it two vnces of hony roſet, and a
quarter of an vnce of Electuary roſet, and as muche of

dyafenycon. All theſe thinges beynge wel incorporated
together, geue them vnto the pacient to drynk at night
when he goeth to bedde .ij. or .iij. houres after the ſonne
ſette, and geue it hym luke warme: if in caſe he wil not
take it, bynde hym, and holde hym parforce, make hym
open his mouth, put ſome ſtycke between his teth, and
than powre the medecine into his throte, as men do vnto
horſes. And when he hath taken all, if it be in Wynter,
you ſhall make hym ſytte ſo vpon his bedde half an
howre, well couered rounde about, to thintent he take
no colde after it: yf it be in Sommer, ye may let hym go
aboute the houſe where he wyll, but ſe that he go not
out. When the medecine hath done his operation, take
this oynctment folowynge: that is to ſaye, a pound and
a halfe of the iuyce of the rootes of Walwort, wherunto
you ſhall adde as muche butter: boyle this together
a good whyle, vntyll all the iuyce be almoſt conſumed,
than put to it oyle of Camomill, oyle roſet, oyle of ſaynt
Iohns wort, of eche of them an vnce. Incorporate well
all theſe thynges on the fyre, and make therof an oynctment,
wherwyth you ſhall annoynt the pacient frome
the necke vnto the fete, armes and legges and all: but
the oynctment muſt be hote, and he muſt be ſo well annoycted
and rubbed that the oinctment may penetrate
and perce thorowe. Contynue, doynge this the ſpace of
a moneth, annoyntynge hym euery euenyng and mornynge,
or at the leaſt once a daye. The thyrde or fourth
day after you haue begon to annoynte hym, burne him
with a hote yron vpon the ſeame or ioynynge together
of the head, and at the firſt lay vpon the marke a linnen
cloth with barrowes greaſe, leauynge it ſo the ſpace of
viij. or .x. dayes: and after wrappe a greate Cyche peaſe
in yuy leaues, and put vpon the ſayde yuy leaues a pece
of the ſole of a ſhoe made fyne and thynne, byndynge it
vnder his throte with ſome bande, or beneth his heade,
ſo that it may bide on, and chaunge it alwayes at night
and in the mornynge. If in caſe he paſſe fowre monethes
and receyue not health, or returne to his wytte, ye

muſte begyn agayne to geue hym the ſame glyſters he
had before, and the ſame medecynes, annoyntyng hym
as before: and withoute doubte (by the grace of God) he
ſhalbe hole. He muſt eate at the begynninge chyckens,
mutton, and roſt veale: after, you maye gyue hym roſte
and ſodde with pottage of Amylum, beetes, and mallowes,
and alſo newe layde egges, puttynge ſpices in his
meate, cauſynge hym ſometyme to eate, (eyther in his
pottage or otherwyſe) betayne, ſage, maioram, & mint,
not ſufferinge hym in any wyſe to take ſalte, ſharp, nor
aygre thynges, pulſe corne, Garlike, Onyons, nor ſuch
lyke, ye may geue hym white wyne with water: let him
alſo cary euer about hym ſome good odours, and heare
melodye or muſicke: ſpeake oftentymes ſoberlye and
wyſelye vnto hym, admoniſhinge hym to be wyſe and
ſage, rebuke hym of his folye when he doth or ſpeaketh
any fonde thynges. And in ſuche cace the auctoritie of
ſome fayer woman auayleth much to tell hym all theſe
thynges, for good admonitions are of great vertue, and
ſtrength, for to ſtablyſhe and ſettle a brayne troubled or
dyſquieted with any ſyckneſſe or paſſion.
               
               
                  ☞Pylles of maſter Mychael a Scot, the whiche heal the
greife or payne of the heade, be it inueterate or recent, purge
the brayne, claryfye the ſyghte, cauſe a man to haue a good
memorye, good colour in face, and be alſo very good for many
infyrmities.
                  TAke of Aloe waſhed .iij. ſcrupules, the rootes of
wylde gourdes, of al ſortes of Mirabolanes, of the
confection made with Scammony, called Diagridion,
Maſti
                        •
                     , Bay berries, and Roſes, of eche of
them halfe a dragme, of Saffron a ſcruple, Myrrhe half
a ſcruple: ſtampe all well together, and make thereof
Pylles with the iuyce of Colewortes, and take three or
foure of theim whan you goo to bedde, euery thyrde or
fourth daye once.
               
               
                  
                  ☞Agaynſt the payne of wemens breaſtes, a very excellent
remedye.
                  TAke the yelkes of two newe layde egges, the
weyght of two pence of newe Waxe, a lytle oyle
roſet, a lytle Nyll, called in latyn Tuti
                           •
                        , prepared
and trymmed in Roſe water, ſet all this on the fyre to
melte in a cleane pan, and whan it is colde agayn, ſpred
it vpon a lynnen cloth, and laye it to the ſore breaſtes,
but you muſte haue fyrſte waſhed the ſayde ſore places
with whyte wyne, wherein hath ben ſodden leaues of
Roſes, Plantayne leaues, and the leaues of an Olyue
tree, both greene and drye, and after hauynge wyped
and dryed it agayne, laye the playſter to it, dreſſed and
prepared as I haue ſayde, and incontinent the ſore ſhal
he healed.
               
               
                  ☞To ripe a felon, Cattes heere, botch, byle, or other apoſtumes
or ſwellinges, whiche haue nede of quicke and ſodayne
ripinge.
                  TAke crommes of breade, Rayſins dryed in an
Ouen, or otherwyſe, and than well ſtamped,
Butter, Hogges ſuet, Leuen, cowe mylke, and
a lytle Saffron. Make of all this an oyntmente
and laye it vpon the ſore, puttynge fyrſt a lytle Saffron
in poulder vpon the very place where you wyll haue it
breake, and vpon that the playſter, leauinge it ſo vntyll
nyght, and chaunge it mornynge and euenyng, ſo ſhall
you make it ſoone rype and breake, then dreſſe it with
oyle roſet, and yelkes of egges one whole daye, after
that purge awaye the ordure and fylth with ſome drawynge
oyntment. Fynally you ſhall laye to it the oyntment
of Aloe and Tutia, or ſome conſolidatiue or healyng
oyntmentes.
               
               
                  ☞To reſolue a felon, Cattes beare, byle or botche, at the
beginninge.
                  
                     
TAke the rootes of wilde or marſhe Mallowes called
of the Apoticaries Biſmalua or Maluauiſcus, mū
                     dified
and made cleane, and cut in ſmale pieces,
well ſtamped in a morter of ſtone. Than take ſome
great potte or caudron that holdeth ſixe or ſeuen great
violles filled with water, & boile in it theſe things folowinge:
Lickerous, Iſope, greene or drie Sage, Roſemary,
Carduus benedictus, figges, drie Raiſins, Amylum of
Barley, or Barley flower, of eche of theſe thynges
at youre diſcretion, and as muche of the one as of
the other: and adde to it more, a handfull of Succorie,
wyth hys rootes, lette all thys ſeeth in the ſayde
caudron or kettle, the ſpace of an houre, or a houre and
a halfe, and then lette it coole againe ſo that you maye
well endure your hande in it. Than take oute all the
ſaid ſubſtaunces, and putte them in a cleane canueſſe,
and wring out all the ſubſtaunce into the ſaied water
in the kettell: put in it alſo two or three pounde of the
ſaid rootes of Maluauiſcus ſtamped, as before, then ſet it
to boyle and ſeeth againe three howres or more: take
it from the fier, and doe as you did at the firſt time: but
if it had ſo muche ſodden that all the rootes were broken
and conſumed, it ſhoulde not neede to haue ſtrayned
or wronge theim thorowe a canueſſe. This doen,
take the decoction of it, and ſet in a potte vpon the fier,
with as muche Honnie, or litle leſſe, leauing it to boile
ſo faire and ſoftlye, taking away the ſkomme that ſhall
come of the Honnye. After it hath thus boyled a good
ſpace, adde to it an vnce, or as muche as you wyll of
Sinamon, and a quarter of an vnce or more of Bengewine
ſtamped, & a litle Muſke: then take it immediatly
from the fier, and couer it, to the entent it take no
vent: ſpecially, if you haue putte in the muſke, whiche
would elles vaniſhe awaye with the ſmoke, wherefore
you maye putte in the Muſke when the water is luke
warme after it is taken of: So ſhall you haue an excellent
conſerue to vſe and occupie all the winter, as well
at night, as in the morning, and at all times when you

liſt, but you muſte at euerye time you take warme it againe,
and take thereof .ij. or .iij. ſponefulles at a time.
And if you wil haue it thicker, put to it pouder of ſuger,
or Penides: & if you wil haue it clearer, ye muſt put to it
a litle more of the firſte decoction, whiche we haue ſpoken
of. This ſecret is of ſuche excellencie, that if a man
vſe of it in the winter, as afore is ſaied, it is not poſſible
for him to bee vexed or turmented with the cogh,
rumes, murres, catarres, or anye other like diſeaſe.
               
               
                  A goodlye and pleaſaunt ſecrete to beale the cogh,
in rubbynge the ſoles of the feete: and is a thing verye
eaſye, and certayne.
                  TAke two or three Garlike heades, well mundified
and made cleane, ſtampe them well, than put
to them hogges ſuet, and ſtampe them well a
newe: and at nighte when you gooe to bedde, warme
well the ſoles of youre feete, and annoynt them well
with the ſaied confection, and then warme them again
as hote as you maye endure, rubbing them well a pretie
ſpace: and being a bedde lette your feete bee bounde
with ſome warme linnen clothe, and rubbe alſo the
ſmall of your legges with the ſaied oyntment, by thys
meane you ſhall bee healed in three nightes were the
cogh neuer ſo vehement. If you wyll at youre meales
vſe of the ſaied decoction in youre wine, or otherwiſe,
you ſhall finde your ſelfe wel at eaſe in your ſtomacke,
and head, and ſhall the better driue away your cogh,
and all other euill diſpoſitions of the bodie.
               
               
                  A verye goodly and eaſye remedie to heale in a daie or
twaine, all maner of inueterate and olde woundes,
wherein is growen dead and ſuperfluous fleſhe, and
woundes that can not bee cured by anye other medycynes.
                  TAke three vnces of Turpentine (firſte waſhed in
commune water, and then in Roſe or Plantaine
water) and the yolke of an egge, an vnce

a glaſſe full of the ſaied wine: but you muſt haue taken
firſte a Walnutte, a Figge, and twoo or three litle
braunches of Rue. If you dooe this in the morninge,
you ſhall bee aſſured for that daye.
               
               
                  An oyntment to make an apoſtume breake, and the
ſoore of the plage to fall of.
                  
                     TAke a quarte and a halfe of common
oyle, and ſette it on the fyre in ſome
veſſell, then putte to it foure vnces
of Ceruſe or white leade well ſtamped,
litarge of ſiluer verie fine and
thinne, three vnces, common Waxe,
four vnces, and leaue it ſo long vpon
the fyre, vntill you maye ſpreade it with youre finger
vpon a marble ſtone. This doen, take it from the fier,
and powre a litle vinagre vpon it, but you muſte holde
it farre of, to the intent it leape not in youre face: than
make of this oyntment a plaiſter, as greate as all the
ſoore, and make a hole in the middes of it as bigge as a
peny: after this, make a litle plaiſter of ſome oyntment
that mortifieth, of the bignes of y• ſaid hole: than make
another plaiſter of the ſame bignes, the which you ſhal
laie vpon the ſoore, ſo that the plaiſter with the mortifiyng
oyntment bee betwene bothe, and leaue it vpon
the ſoore the ſpace of .xxiiij. houres, than chaunge onely
the middle plaiſter, that is to ſaie: he that mortifieth,
and put another in his place, the which you ſhal alſo let
lie foure and twenty houres: and before that the plaiſter
bee laied rounde aboute and ſtretched, annoynt the
place verie thicke with freſhe Hogges ſuet, or Hennes
greaſe, to mollifie it, and ſo you ſhall make it harde in
the middle, and rounde aboute you ſhall make a circle
of tender fleſhe, in ſuche ſorte that the ſoore wyll breake
oute and come forth. And the eyght and fourty houres
once paſſed, after you haue taken of the plaiſter, lay vpon
it another plaiſter made with freſhe Hogges greaſe,
and immediatlye will fal of from it a dead fleſhe in maner

of a rounde pommell, and there will remayne a
hole, the whiche you muſt heale with ſome oyntmente
or elles with Diaculum magnum: & when the fleſhe beginneth
to growe, laye to it burned Alom, by the ſpace of
foure and twenty houres, and then the ſaied oyntment
vpon it.
               
               
                  ❀ Another remedy agaynſt the plage.
                  TAke the toppe of Rue, a garlyke heade, or halfe a
quarter of a Walnutte, and a corne of ſalte: eate
this euery morninge, continuing ſo a moneth together,
and be merry and iocunde. This receipt is alſo
good agaynſt wormes.
               
               
                  ❀ Another very good remedy againſt the plage.
                  TAke Aqua vite, the water of wyld perceley, called
in Greke Melliſſophyllon, Melyphyllon, and Melinon,
and in latin Apiaſtrum, and Plantayne water, of
eche of them a pounde, and whan you will vſe of it,
whiche you ought to do daylye, you ſhall take as muche
of thone as of thother, ſo that all together mount to the
quantitie of two fingers hygh in a glaſſe, & than drinke
it, ſo ſhall you be preſerued and ſaulfe from the plague.
This water is alſo good for fiſtules, and woundes, and
is well tryed and experimented.
               
               
                  Another perfecte recept agaynſt the plague.
                  TAke a violle, or ſome other glaſſe, and fyll it vnto
the thyrde part full with fyne tryacle, and one thyrdendeale,
or thyrde parte with Aqua vite, and the other
thyrde part with the vryne of a yonge man childe that
is a vyrgyne, and helthfull: myxe all well together, and
giue the pacient drinke therof three morninges, that is
to ſaye, euery morning a glaſſefull. This hath ben proued
in Venyſe, the yeare 1504.
               
               
                  ¶Another agaynſt the plague.
                  
                     
                     AS ſone as the perſon fealeth him ſelfe infected,
let hym take the beſt Triacle he canne
finde, and after hauinge ſwallowed downe
a parte of it, let him take of the ſame the
bygneſſe of a Cheſtnut, and lay it vpon the
ſore that beginneth to riſe, rubbinge it well rounde about
with the ſaid Triakle. Incontinent after this you
muſte take a Pygeon, and cut him in the middes quick,
fethers and all, lay him to the ſore warme as he is, and
let him lie on it, vntill that parte of the Pigeon be waxen
and become grene, and the Triacle redde: then take
it of, and you ſhall ſee that out of the Pigeon will come
a greene water, whiche is all the venim that was in it.
Ye muſt afterward cure the place with this plaiſter folowinge.
Take two partes of freſhe Barrowe greaſe,
and one parte of wormewood well ſtamped, and laye it
vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  ☞A thing oftentimes proued and experimented againſt
the plague.
                  TAke Maſtic two vnces, Euphorbium an vnce, Spicknarde
.v. vnces, beate this into poulder, and geue
it the patient to drinke. If he be vnder .x. yeares of
age, geue him a ſcrupule of it. If he be of yeares frome
x. to .xx. halfe a dragme: but if he be aboue .xx. yeares
olde, ye ſhall geue him a dragme, than take the herbe
called in Greke Pentaphilon, in latine Quinquefolium, and
in Engliſhe Cinkfoile, and wrappe it like a round apple
in a piece of linnen cloth, layenge it ſo vnder whote
imbers by the ſpace of fowre Miſerere, and after hauing
taken it out againe, cut it in three pieces in the myddle,
and laye it vpon the ſore or griefe, which you ſhal cauſe
to ceaſe immediately.
               
               
                  ❀ A preſeruatiue agaynſte the plague, oftentymes
proued.
                  IN a daungerous time, take .iij. little braunches of
Rue, a Walnutte and a figge: eate all this, and you

ſhall be ſafe.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke the dunge or excremente of a yonge boye betwene
ten and .xij. yeares of age, and drie it, and after
beat it into poulder: This done, put of it at the moſt
two ſponefulles in a glaſſe of white wine, and geue it
the pacient to drinke at the leaſte ſixe houres after the
greife taketh him, and the ſooner the better. This hath
ben founde true in many men.
               
               
                  ❀ Another.
                  TAke the iuyce of a white Onyon, Hony, Vynaigre,
the iuyce of Rue, and of Saint Iohns wort, of eche
of them a like quantitie, mixe all together, and geue the
patient to drinke thereof two thirdendeales of a glaſſefull,
but let him haue it whote, and before the ſixt houre
after the paine ſhall haue taken him: This done make
him ſweate as much as he may in his bedde. This hath
ben founde of great perfection, and experimented vpon
diuers men.
               
               
                  ❀ In a ſuſpecte tyme of a plage.
                  TAke Pulliole or Peniroyall, in latin Pulegium, with
Sugre roſet, and make an electuary, the which you
ſhall vſe and eate, in a ſuſpect time of a plague, at your
breakefaſt, the quantitie or bygnes of a Cheſtnut, this
haue men proued, and founde good.
               
               
                  ☞Another well tried and proued agaynſte the
peſtilence.
                  TAke Walnuttes when they be grene, tender, and
good to make 
                        〈◊〉
                      or preſerues, put theim in
Vynaigre 
                        〈◊〉
                      of .viij. dayes, than take them oute
againe 
                        〈…〉
                      theim in pieces, puttynge theim ſo
into a 
                        〈…〉
                      Vinaigre, and ſtille the water
of 
                        〈…〉
                      you ſhall geue the patient drinke
euer 
                        〈…〉
                      a glaſſefull, and whan he hath dronke

it, let him ſweate well in his bedde.
               
               
                  ❀ A very perfyte ſecrete againſt the plague.
                  TAke an vnce of Aloe Epaticū, halfe an vnce of Myrrhe
halfe an vnce of Saffron: beate into poulder and
ſifte the Aloe and the Myrrhe together, than beate the
Saffron in poulder, ſtiepe, and ſoke it, or waſhe it with
white wyne very ſtronge, ſo that it be like a ſauce, than
put the other poulders to it, and mixe well altogether,
yf nede be you maye put more wine to it, ſo much that
of all may be made as it were a lumpe, and ſo pilles.
And if you wil make it very ſtronge, for euery vnce put
to it halfe an vnce of Diagridrum, and halfe an vnce of
Camphyre. Maiſter Fraunceſſe Albert toke three eight
partes of the ſayde Pilles, without Diagridium, ſokynge
and ſteepinge them in good wine, and gaue them to the
patient as ſone as he coulde: and ſo made him ſweate
muche in his bedde, for by ſweatinge the venom dydde
reſolue.
               
               
                  ❀Another very good ſecrete.
                  TAke the flowers or bloſſomes of Walnuttes,
and drye them in the ſhadowe, and whan the
Nuttes be in ſeaſon to confict, you ſhall cut part
of them into ſmall pieces, the whiche you ſhall
put in ſtronge Vynaigre by the ſpace of three dayes:
than take th
                        •
                     im oute, and mengle them with the ſayde
flowers, diſtilling them thorowe a Limbecke of glaſſe,
or of earth leaded within: kepe this water diligentlye,
and whan anye man feeleth him ſelfe taken or infected
with the plage, geue him of it as ſone as is poſſible two
vnces and a halfe, or thre vnces, and you ſhall dryue awaye
the diſeaſe by the courſe of the belly, or by vomitynge,
or elles wyl make the ſore or botch to come forth,
the whiche you ſhal make rype and breake, as we haue
afore declared.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To make a carbuncle, and al other botches, apoſtumes
and plague ſoores to breake, a preſent remedye and very
eaſy to make.
                  TAke Baye Salte well beaten into poulder and
ſifted, incorporate it with the yelke of 
                        •
                     an Egge,
and laye it vpon the carbuncle or ſore, and be aſſured
that (with the grace of God) it wil drawe to it ſelf
all the venim and poyſon of the plague or ſoore, ſo that
in ſhorte time he ſhall be cured: A remedye oftentymes
proued.
               
               
                  ❀ A very good remedy agaynſt the markes of the plage,
commonly called Goddes markes.
                  TAke freſhe and greene Rhaponticum, which is the
herbe and rote called the more and great Centorie:
it is named of Pliny (as Ruellius writeth)
Rhacoma, the rotes of the herbe called Sanguinaria
Dactilon, of ſome Dens canis, of Dioſcorides Coronopus, that
is to ſaye, crowes fote. Some take it to be Dandelion.
The rootes of Turmentylle, white Dictanium, of eche of
theſe an vnce, ſtampe all well, and put it in a pot or vyole,
with well, riuer, or cunduyte water, at your diſcretion,
rather to muche then to litle, vntyll it paſſe halfe a
handfull aboue the other thinges in the potte or more,
then let it boyle with a lytle cleare and flaminge fire
without ſmoke, vntil it be diminiſhed of the third part,
than ſtraine it out ſoftly, and it will be of the colour of
wine, kepe it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe, and whan neceſſitie
requyreth, you may geue the patient a glaſſefull of
it in the morninge, and as muche at night, two houres
before ſupper, and it, muſt be very hote: than couer him
well in his bedde, and make hym ſweate. Whan the
markes come forth, he ſhall become like a lazar or leper
and ſhall be ſhortly cured.
               
               
                  ❀Agaynſt the mortalitie of the peſtilence, a verye perfyt
remedie.
                  
                     
TAke Gentian, Seduaria, rootes of Turmentille, of
eche of them two vnces, redde Sandale, whit and
recent Dictanium hartes horne burned, white pearles,
Bole armenick, rounde Ariſtolochia, of eche of theim
an vnce, Campher halfe an vnce, white Sugre two vnces,
of all theſe thinges well beaten to poulder, you ſhal
take at euery time a dragme, with thre vnces of endiue
water, or ſorell water, myre the water and the poulder
with the bigneſſe of a Walnutte of fine Triacle. You
muſt miniſtre this medicine before the ſickneſſe hathe
continued with the perſon twelue houres, for it is than
ſurer. If in caſe after the twelue houres it worke not ſo
well as you woulde haue it, yet muſte you haue a good
hope. And if the patient be yet in the age of infancy, you
ſhall geue him halfe a dragme of it, with an vnce and a
halfe of one of the ſayd waters, and with a like quantitie
of Triacle. The ſayde drinke is not ſoluble or laxatiue,
nor cauſeth no greif to him, but onelye killeth the
poyſon. If any man had dronken or eaten anye poiſon,
this is a verye good medecine for him: it is alſo good
agaynſt a hote feuer or ague. Note alſo that (if it be poſſible)
the patient muſte be let bloude before he take the
ſayde medecine: if not, let it be done afterwarde, that is
to ſay, on the ſame ſyde that he fealeth the greif.
               
               
                  ☞To make litle rounde apples or balles agaynſt the
plage.
                  TAke Laudanum halfe an vnce, Storax calamita an
vnce, Olambre diamuſci, of eche of theym halfe a
dragme, Campher two graynes, Cloues fiftene
graines, Nutmegges, Mace, of eche of them halfe an
eyghte parte, damaſkine Roſe a ſcrupule, Synamom
halfe a dragme, Spicknarde fiftene graynes, Muſke,
C
                        •
                     uet, of eche of them eyghte graynes, fine Uiolettes
halfe a dragme, lignum Aloes foure graines, Calami aromaetici
the bigneſſe of a Beane, fine Amber foure graines,
Myrre the bigneſſe of a Beane. Stampe firſte the Laudenum
with a hote peſtell, than ſtampe well the Storax calaminta,
                     
and all the other thinges eche one by it ſelfe:
and than mixe all together, and ſtampe it ſtill with a
hote peſtell, addinge to it at euerye time Storax liquida,
and Roſe water, vntill all the ſaied thinges bee well
incorporated: and than make youre rounde apples or
balles.
               
               
                  An oyntment to kill the plage.
                  TAke Sope makers water, and boyle it vntill it
waxe or become as it were an oyntment, than
take of the woode of Willowe, or Beeche, and
burne it: after, quenche the coles in vinagre, and drie
them in the ſhadowe, in ſuche ſorte that a man maye
ſtampe and ſift them. Take alſo quicke lime at youre
diſcretion, and mingle it with the ſaied Sope water:
then take the ſame pouder vntill you haue ynough, and
halfe an vnce of freſhe and ſweete Hogges greaſe or
ſeyme: mixe all together, after this dooen, take of lytle
greene wormes ſhininge with a gloſſe like golde, bred
in the toppe of Aſſhes or Oliues, called in Latyne Cantharidae
or Cantharides halfe a dragme, beate theym into
pouder and mixe theym together, with the reſt, making
an oyntment ſomewhat harde: leaue it ſo in ſome veſſell
well cloſed and ſtopped, and if there ariſe anye oyle
vpon it, take it of fayre and ſoftlye.
               
               
                  A verie perfite oyle againſt the plage and all poyſon.
                  TAke oyle of the eldeſt you can finde, and boyle it
the ſpace of an houre, & for euery poūd of the ſaid
oyle, put in .l. ſcorpiōs, or as many as you can get,
put all this in a pot vncouered, the which pot you ſhall
ſet in a kettle or caudron of boylinge water, vntill the
thirde part of the oyle or ſomewhat leſſe bee conſumed.
Than take oute the Scorpions, and powre the oyle
thorowe a canueſſe into another potte, or violle well
ſtopped, whiche you ſhall ſette in the Sunne the ſpace
of two or three monethes: if it bee not in Sommer, ſet
it vpon hete aſſhes, by the ſpace of three or foure dayes.

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
ſit vppon the botche or ſoore, or the place of the plage,
and holde her ſo a good while. Then you ſhall ſee that
the ſaied Henne will haue drawen all (or at the leaſt
ſome) the poyſon and infection, and that ſhortlye after
ſhe will die. It ſhall be good to dooe this with twoo or
three or moe Hennes, immediatlye one after another,
the whiche will drawe all the venom oute of the ſoore.
This doen, annoynt the place with good Triacle, and
let not in the meane time to vſe other remedies by the
mouth, whereof we haue ſpoken here before, that is to
ſaye, the Yuy or Baye berryes, or ſome other remedie,
that you finde muſt redie. If the ſoore bee ſo harde that
it will not breake, you maye vſe the foreſaied remedies
to make it breake, to the intent that all the venom may
comme out, and voyde from the heart.
               
               
                  ☞An aduertiſement and warnynge of greate importauuce,
to preſerue a mannes ſelfe in tyme of peſtylence.
                  
                     BEcauſe the euyll humours that be in
mannes bodye, do eaſelye receiue the corruption
& infection of the ayer, it is good
to kepe the ſtomacke, and the head cleane
purged, not to ouerlade it with eatinge
and drinkinge, but to abſteine frō groſſe
meates, to purge him ſelfe as ofte as is poſſible, with
ſome gentill and familier purgation, as Caſsia, pilles, as
the pilles of Maſticke, of Aloe, or of other ſuche like
thinges, and aboue all, to vſe often of the leeſe of wyne,
called Tartre, whiche you muſt beate well in poulder,
and ſtiepe it with hote water, & than ſtraine it or dreane
it fayer and ſoftely out: Afterwarde drie it thorowly, as
men do white ſalt, than kepe the ſame poulder, and put
thre vnces of it with a pounde of ſugre roſet, and in the
morninge take a good ſponefull thereof vntill there be
an vnce or more, and do this from day to daye, for it will
kepe your body cleane, and purged: and he that can not
do it with Sugre roſet, let him take the leeſe ſtamped,

and ſtiepe or waſſhe it in the broth of fleſhe or of colewortes,
ſturringe it vntill al be leuſed and vndone that
may be leuſed, then let it ſtand a while, and after powre
ſoftely the broth into a diſhe, caſt awaye the ſubſtances
that go to the bottome, and drinke the broath: do this
euery daye at the houres of your meales, or at the leaſt
euerie ſeconde daye, or whan you ſhall thinke good. It
ſhalbe good alſo to eate in youre pottage, thinges that
purge the bloude, as Buglaſſe, Borrage, Succorie, Let
tyſe, and ſuche lyke: and aboue all not to kepe your ſtomack
ouer charged, nor to emptie: and in the morninge
betime, to take ſome of the foreſaied preſeruatiues, as
the poulder that was experimented in England (as we
haue recited) or ſuche other like. Than .ii .or. iii. houres
before dyner to take ſome of the ſayde other preſeruatiues,
as the Rue with a figge, and with the Walnutte,
whiche is a thinge very good, or ſome of the ſayd confections,
or a piece of the pille of a Cytron conficte, or a
ſponefull of the iuyce of Citrons dreſſed as we wyll declare
hereafter, and to vſe of it at meales in maner of a
ſaulce, and after meales to vſe of the ſeede of Citrons
confict in Sugre, as they make the Coriander, and Almondes,
whiche is a thinge verye good agaynſt all maner
of venim and poyſen. And lykewiſe at your meales
to eate the white and the inne ſide of a Cytron with a
litle ſugre if you wyll, and to eate it with fleſh, or bread
(as men eate lemons) in the morninge, at none, and at
night when you go to bedde. It ſhuld be alſo very good
to bath and waſhe youre handes, youre temples, youre
poulſes, and poure noſe with Vinaygre roſet, or with
other, wherevnto you muſte put a lytle Campher, roſe
water, Lignum Aloes, Xilobalſamum, if you can gette it, if
not, a lytle Sinamom in ſteede of it. It is good alwaies
to kepe ſuche maner of Vinaigre beſide you in ſome viole,
for to vſe of it whan time ſhall require: for it is a very
good preſeruatiue: and if you can not haue the Vinaygre
compounde, as is ſayde, vſe Vynaygre of common
wyne. Alſo it ſhall be good to cary about you ſome

parfume, or good odour, either in your gloues, ſhurte,
handkercher, cappe, bearde, or to hange it aboute your
necke, or otherwiſe. Your houſe oughte to be kepte as
cleane and as nete as is poſſible, not ſauoringe of pyſſe
nor other ordure, ye ought to kepe it ſhut, waſhinge often
the gutters and priuies. Ye muſte alſo kepe as fewe
foule and ſtincking clothes in your houſe as is poſſible.
Riche men ought oftentimes to parfume theyr houſes
with ſome notable parfume, wherof we will put in the
booke folowing a good nombre. Poore men may make
prouiſion of leaues, and of the woode of a Baye tree, of
Roſe mary, Ienepar, Cypres, and to vſe it as often as
they may, burninge it in the myddes of theyr chamber,
or houſe, and principally at night and in the morninge.
Likewiſe of Orenge and lemmon pilles, or other ſwete
ſmellinge thinges. Storax calamita, and Labdanum, be
good chepe and are very good for this purpoſe. As concerninge
the diſpoſition of courage and minde, ye muſt
conſider that ſorowe, ſadneſſe, or melancolie, corrupte
the bloude and other humours, weaken the hearte, and
depraue & hurte nature, therefore ought a man to auoide
them as much as is poſſible. Alſo if a man be to merrye
oriocunde, it dilateth, and enlargeth the pores and
paſſages of the ſeede of man, and the harte, ſo that he is
the more enclined to receiue the euyll ayer, and venim,
whiche are thinges▪ that penetrate and pearce ſore. Alſo
a man muſt beware of drinkinge to muche wine, for it
maketh merry and chereth a man out of meaſure. Now
becauſe that in time of a peſtilence euery man is afraid,
ſo that he thinketh that a man can not ketch the diſeaſe,
in being to merry (onles it be ſo that he be dronke, as is
ſayd) but contrarye in beinge to ſadde or ſorowfull: for
ſorow & ſadneſſe come of them ſelues, not ſought after:
Therfore it is good to vſe temperance, and moderatiō,
walkinge and recreating him ſelfe honeſtly, not vſing
to muche carnall companie or copulation. And aboue
all, a man muſte haue alwayes a ſure hope and confidence
in God, euer to hee readye and diſpoſed to dye,

when it ſhall pleaſe him to call vs, not eſtemynge ſo
muche this mundaine life, or fearinge ſo muche death,
whiche is none other thinge than an iſſue or departinge
oute of this life full of calamities, and an entring
into an eternal life repleniſhed with all ioye, ſolace, and
pleaſure.
               
               
                  ☞To dreſſe and order the Iuyce of Cytrons, for
to vſe of it as is afore ſayde.
                  TAke the Iuyce of Citrons as muche as you wyl,
and put it in a panne leaded within in, than adde
to it twoo vnces of ſkimmed Honnye for euerye
pounde of the ſaied Iuyce, a lytle Sugre after
your diſcretion, a litle Synamom in poulder. Let thys
boyle a verie litle while together, and than keepe it
and take of it before youre meale, and at youre meales,
in ſteede of ſauce, whiche is a verye good remedie, as
well for to preſerue a man agaynſt the infection of the
ayre, as to driue it awaye after he isfected with it. It is
alſo a very good medicine for to take as ſoone as a man
doubteth to haue receyued ſome poyſon into his bodie.
                  ¶The ende of the fyrſte
booke.
               
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               take Muſke, Amber, and Ciuet as muche as ye will, in
a veſſell ſuche as parfumours vſe, and put to it. iii. or
iiii. droppes of fayre water: after this, tempre it with a
lyttle roſe water, vntyll it be lyke tender and ſofte paſt:
than ſet the veſſell for to parfume and ſmoke vppon the
fyre, lyke as men parfume chambers: and ſe that all the
fume and ſmoke he receyued thorowe the ſayd nuttes.
This done, you ſhal take out of it the oyle which wil be
very excellent, as well to vſe alone by it ſelfe, as to parfume
gloues, and all other thynges.
               
                  ☞To make an odoriferous and ſweete water, verye
good.
                  TAke twelue pounde of Damaſke roſe water, Lauander
water, Cloues, Synamom, of eche of
them a dragme, Mace, great Cardamomum, Muſke,
Amber, of eche of them halfe a ſcruple, drie Pylles of
Citrons, Sandalum citrinum, Ireos, of eche of them halfe a
dragme, Bengewin, Storax calamita, of eche a ſcrupule,
and of all this make a compoſition, the which you ſhall
put in a veſſell of glaſſe well ſtopped, leauinge it ſo by
the ſpace of fiftene daies. Afterwarde let it bee diſtilled
in Bal
                           •
                        eo Marie, the maner whereof is deſcribed in the
firſt booke, and the water that ſhall iſſue oute of it, put
in a violle well ſtopt in the Sunne the ſpace of fiftene
dayes, and than ſhall you haue a water of greate excellencie.
               
               
                  ☞The ſeconde odoriferous water.
                  TAke the leaues of Damaſke roſes, the freſhe leaues
of Gylle flowres of eche of them a pounde, the flowres
of Roſemarye, the flowres of Lauander, the flowres
of Iaſemyn, Maioram, Sauourye, Serpyne, or
Serpille, called wilde Time, or running Time, which
groweth on olde walles, ouer welles and pondes: and
in ſome places it ſmelleth like time, and in ſome places
lyke to Sauourye, it is called in Latyne Serpyllus or Serpillum,
in Frenche du Serpolet, of theſe three vnces, of drie

Citron pilles an vnce. After this Synamom, Bengewine,
Storax calamita, of eche of thē two dragmes, Nutmegges,
Macaleb, of eche of theym a dragme: but you
muſte ſtampe well the herbes, and bray the ſpyces wel,
then put all together in a earthen potte leaded: and after
it hath ſtande in the Sunne, by the ſpace of twoo
daies diſtille it in Balneo Marle. And to the water that
iſſueth out, putte a ſcrupule of fine Muſke, lettinge it
ſtande afterwarde in a violle of glaſſe well ſtopped by
the ſpace of twentye or thyrtye dayes. Then ſhall you
haue a notable water.
               
               
                  The thyrde ſweete water.
                  TAke ſixe pounde of Damaſke roſe water, a glaſſe
full of Malmſey, three pounde of Damaſke roſe
leaues freſhe and newe, Lauander flowres, the
flowres of greene Spike, of eche of them foure vnces,
the flowres of Cherfoyle or Cheruille, flowres of Iaſemine,
the flowres or bloſſomes of Olyue trees, of eche
of them a pounde and a halfe, the drie flowres or bloſſomes
of Orenge trees three vnces, of the drye pilles of
Cytrons foure dragmes, cloues a dragme and a halfe,
Synamom, Storax calamita, Bengewyne, of eche of
them two ſcrupules, Nutmegges a ſcrupule. Let al the
ſaied ſpices fyrſt bee well beaten into poulder, and then
put all together into a violle well ſtopte by the ſpace of
ten daies, than after lette all bee dyſtylled in Balneo marie.
And to the water that commeth oute, adde Muſke,
and Amber, of eche of them a ſcrupule and a halfe. You
muſt kepe it in the Sunne and in ſome neate place.
               
               
                  ☞The fourth ſweete water.
                  TAke Cloues well beaten in poulder twoo dragmes,
the poulder of Sandalum citrinum, and Macaleb,
of eche of theym a ſcrupule, ten pounde of
Damaſke roſe water, & the water of the herbe
that the Italians call Soltanella fower pounde, Lauander

water a ponnde. Let all this bee lefte together by
the ſpace of foure dayes, and then put it in a Limbecke,
and diſtell it, vnto this water that commeth of it, lette
theſe ſpyces folowing bee put well beaten to poulder,
that is to ſaye, Cloues, Synamom, Bengewine, Storax
calamita, of eche of them halfe a dragme: and then again
diſtill it in Balneo Marie. Finallye you ſhall put to it
Muſke, and Amber, in all, halfe a ſcrupule, and let the
water bee kept in a violle, or other veſſell of glaſſe well
ſtopte.
               
               
                  ☞The fyfte ſweete water.
                  TAke fower pounde of Damaſke roſe water, Lauender
water, Spike water, of eche of them thre
vnces, the water of bloſſomes of Lymons, or
Orenges, the water of the bloſſomes Myrtell of a tree,
bloſſomes of Iaſemin, of Maioram, of eche of theym
halfe a pounde, Bengewyne, Storax calamita of eche a
dragme, Muſke halfe a ſcrupule. Mengle well all together,
and keepe it in violles well ſtopte ſyxe dayes.
                  Then diſtille it in Balneo Marie, and keepe the water in
a veſſell of glaſſe, by the ſpace of fiftene dayes in the
Sunne, and afterwarde reſerue it for to ſerue youre
tourne, when you wyll occupie it.
               
               
                  ☞The ſyxte odoriferous water.
                  TAke freſhe flowres of Roſemarye twoo pounde,
Amber a ſcrupule, three pounde of the flowres of
Orenges, Lemons and Citrons, all confuſely together,
whiche the Frenche men call can de naphe, leaue
all together in ſome veſſell well ſtoppte tenne dayes.
Then the water being diſtilled in Balneo Marie, lette it
bee kepte in a violle of glaſſe verie cloſe and ſtopped.
               
               
                  ☞The ſeuenth ſweete water.
                  TAke of the foreſaied water of Naphe, foure poūd,
Damaſke roſe water, twoo pounde, with halfe
a ſcrupule of Amber. All theſe thinges being wel

mixed together, and putte in a violle of glaſſe well
ſtopte, leaue theym in the Sunne by the ſpace of a moneth,
and then keepe theym to occupie at youre pleaſure.
               
               
                  ☞The eyght odoriferous water.
                  TAke fowre pounde of Damaſke roſe water, wyth
ſixe vnces of Lauender water, the flowres of Iaſemyn
three pounde, with half a ſcrupule of fyne Muſke.
Keepe wel all this together in a veſſell wel ſtopt, by the
ſpace of tenne dayes: and after diſtill it in Balneo Marie,
vntil al bee come out. Then kepe it in a violle of glaſſe,
for youre vſe when you ſhall occupie it, and you ſhall
finde it a merueylous water.
               
               
                  ☞The nynth ſweete water.
                  TAke the Pilles of Orenges, and of greene Citrons
of eche of them halfe an vnce, Cloues a ſcrupule,
the flowres of Spike newelye gathered ſixe vnces. All
theſe thinges muſte bee mixte together as afore is ſaid,
with ſixe pounde of Damaſke roſe water: and after
they haue ſtande certaine daies in ſome couered veſſell,
you muſte ſtyll theym in Balneo Marie. And the water
that ſhall come of it will bee very excellent.
               
               
                  ☞The tenth odoriferous water.
                  TAke twoo pounde of the leaues of Damaſke roſes,
Macaleb halfe a dragme, halfe a ſcrupule of good
Amber: and hauing firſt beaten that whiche is needefull,
ſette all vpon hote ymbers twoo or three daies: but
before you diſtille it, you muſte let it ſteepe ten dayes, in
ten pounde of the water of Damaſke roſes, and ſo than
diſtill it in Balneo Marie. The water of it muſte afterwarde
bee kept in the Sunne the ſpace of fiftene daies.
               
               
                  ☞Oyle of Orenges verie excellent.
                  TAke a pounde of ſwete Almondes well pilled, the
flowers of Limons or Orenges, aſmuche as you
will, the which you ſhall deuide into three equall

partes: After this you ſhall laye the thirde parte of the
ſame flowers abroade vpon a very white linnen clothe
in a ſieue, ſtrowinge alſo abroade vpon thoſe flowers
halfe of the ſayde Almondes, the whiche you ſhall couer
with another thirde parte of the ſayde flowers: And
than the reſt of the ſayde Almondes, the which you ſhall
couer finally with the reſte of your flowres, ſo that the
Almondes may euermore be in ye myddle of the flowres
in the ſaid ſieue, & ſo leaue them together by the ſpace of
ſixe dayes, renewinge and chaunginge euery daye the
flowres, and than the Almondes. This done, you ſhall
beate the Almondes in a morter, and preſſe them in a
fayre white lynnen cloth, in a preſſour, vntyl there iſſue
out a very cleare oyle, whervnto you ſhall adde a lyttle
Ciuet, Muſke, and Bengewine. Afterwarde leaue it in
the ſonne eight dayes, in ſome veſſell well ſtopped.
               
               
                  Oyle of Iaſemine, and of violettes.
                  TAke ſweete Almondes well pilled and brayed, the
flowers of Iaſemyn as much as you wil, and layeng
them ranke vpon ranke, you ſhal leaue them
in ſome moyſte place ten dayes together or more, than
take them awaye, and preſſe out the oyle in a preſſoure:
the vertue of the which oyle ſerueth for diuers thinges.
In the like maner maye you haue oyle of Violetes, and
other flowres.
               
               
                  Oyle of Nutmegges very parfyt.
                  TAke Nutmegges, of the beſt you can finde, and
accordinge to the quantitie of the oyle that you
wyll haue: and hauinge cut them in ſmall pieces,
you ſhall put to them as much Malmſey as
will couer them ouer in ſome veſſell of glaſſe or other,
leauinge theim ſo the ſpace of three dayes. Than take
them out and ſet them to drye in ſome cleane place, by
the ſpace of two dayes. Finally heate them at the fyre,
ſprinklinge them with roſe water: Than preſſe theim
as is before mentioned, in a preſſour, and you ſhal haue

out of them an excellente oyle good for manye thinges,
whiche muſt be kept in ſome cleane veſſell well ſtopte.
               
               
                  Oyle of Bengewyne very excellent.
                  TAke ſixe vnces of Bengewyne, wel beaten into
poulder, the which you ſhal let diſſolue a whole
day in oyle of Tartre, and Roſe water, of eche a
pounde: and than with a cloſe pipe ye ſhall diſtill
it thorowe a Limbecke, and ſo keepe it as a thynge
mooſt excellent.
               
               
                  Oyle of Storax very excellent.
                  
                     IN like maner is made oyle of Storax. Take
Storax liquida, what quantitie you wyl, and
put it in Roſe water two or thre dayes, thē
dyſtill it as the Bengewin was in the maner
aboueſayde. Fyrſte there iſſueth oute
water, and then a very excellent and precious oyle.
               
               
                  Oyle of Myrrhe, good for them that haue their fleſſhe
full of humours, and carraine leane, for to make it tractable,
quicke, naturall, and ſtronge.
                  TAke Egges harde roſted, and cut theim in the middes,
take awaye the yelke, and fyll them vp with
Myrrhe beaten into poulder, and put thē in ſome moiſte
place, where the ſayde Myrrhe may diſſolue into oyle,
by little and little. This oyle maketh not onely the face
or other partes of the body ſofte and tractable, but alſo
taketh awaye all Cycatrices and ſkarres.
               
               
                  The maner to make that oyles ſhall neuer waxe mouldy,
nor putrifie.
                  TAke for euery pounde of oyle two graynes of ſalte,
one graine of the filing of copper or braſſe, as much
roche Alom as ſalte, and boyle all the ſayd thinges a letle
together in Balneo marie: than ſtraine it out, and let
it ſtande eyght dayes in the Sonne. And than kepe ſuch
oyle as longe as you will, and feare not, for it will neuer

diminiſhe, putrifye, nor corrupt.
               
               
                  ❀ Poulder of Iris.
                  TAke Iris electe, what quantitie you will, and after
you haue wel beaten it into poulder, ſtiepe it, and
temper it alſo well with Roſe water, and laye it
than abrode vpon a ſieue couered. This done, take Storax
calamita, and Bengewyn, of eche of theim halfe an
vnce, beate them well into poulder, and make therof an
infuſion into a glaſſe of Roſe water, & hauynge poured
it vnder the ſaid ſieue wel couered rounde about, ye ſhal
afterward ſeeth it vpon the embers. And ſo the Iris waxinge
cleane and dry, receiueth the parfume of the other
ſubſtaunces. This poulder will be excellent to geue an
odoure vnto clothes or garmentes, & all other thinges.
               
               
                  Poulder of Violettes.
                  TAke Iris, knoppes of Roſes, of eche a pound, pilles
of Cytrons drye .iiii. vnces, Gylleflowers, Sandalum
citrinum, drye Lauender, Coliander, of eche of
them two vnces, Nutmigges an vnce, Maioram dryed,
Storax calamita, of eche of them an vnce and a halfe, Bengewyn
electe ſixe vnces. Beate to poulder and ſift finelye
all the ſayde thinges, and the poulder ſhal be made:
the whiche you ſhall kepe in a viole of glaſſe, well ſtopt
that it take no vent.
               
               
                  A whyte poulder to put in litle bagges.
                  TAke Saudalum Citrinum a quarter of an vnce,
poulder of the beſt Bengewin that may be gotten,
Iris, of eche of them an vnce, and boile them
in Roſe water inough: than take burned Alom
and well ſifted twelue vnces, let it lye in the ſayde water
and make pilles, or litle balles flatte at both endes,
of the biggeneſſe of peaſon or biggar, the whiche you
ſhall drye in the ſhadowe: and afterwarde beate theim
in to poulder, and ſyft them again, and than it is made.
But if you will haue it muſked, take Ambre and Muſk,

eche of them. xxiiii. graines, Ci
                        •
                     et .xviij. graines, & mixing
al this together, fil we it lyttle bagges of linen cloth
Taffeta, or other ſylk, the which you maye laye among
clothes, or other garmentes, a thinge verye excellente.
               
               
                  Poulder of Cypres.
                  TAke a litle herbe that groweth and is found vpon
the ſtocke or ſtumpe of Walnuttes or Okes, whiche
is lyke little heare, and muſte be gathered in
Ianuarye and Februarye, when the wether is drye,
drye it, and than waſhe it with fayre riuer or well water,
and drie it ones agayne in the ſhadowe, and hauing
waſhed it ſo three or foure times, you ſhall put it in roſe
water by the ſpace of an houre: After beat it into poulder
verye ſmall and ſyfte it, but the ſieue whereon you
muſt ſtrowe the ſayde poulder muſt be alwayes ſyrynkled
a litle with roſe water, coueringe it well, to thintent
it take no maner of vent: And after this you muſt
parfume it with theſe thinges folowing, that is to ſay:
with Bengewyn, Storax calamita, of ech of them two vnces,
of the ſwete parfume called Thymiama, a dramme, Lauander
half a dragme, Lignū Aloe, a quarter of an vnce.
Beat eche thing by it ſelf groſſely, & than mingle them
together, and deuide them into four partes, wherof one
part muſt be ſet vpō the furnis in a veſſel within ye ſieue
leuing it ther til it be al conſumed, & do ſo wt all the .iiii.
parts, vntyl al the pouder of ye ſayd parfume be burned.
But you muſte take heede that the panne dyſh, or other
veſſell, wherein the ſaide poulders ſhall be put for to be
brent, be ſet vnder the ſieue, wher your poulder is, and
that the ſieue be well couered, that nothinge vent out,
ſo that the poulder in the ſieue may receiue all the ſayde
parfume. Than after take an vnce of the ſayd poulder,
and intermire with it by lytle and litle, ſixe graynes of
Cyuet, and. xxvi. graines of fine Muſke, wel beaten together
in poulder. This poulder muſt be kept in a viole
or other veſſell of glaſſe very cloſe, to thentent it take no
vent, and muſte alſo be ſet in a drie place. This is the
moſt excellent poulder that a man can make. It is very

true that out of Cipres and the eaſt partes men bringe
to Veniſe certaine rounde balles of a yelowe coloure,
whiche they call Butri, of an Ile nigh vnto Candy, called
Butra, and ſay that it is Oxe dunge taken vp in Maye,
and diuers times ſprinkled and watred with roſe water
than dried, and finallye made in to rounde balles, the
whiche the parfumers do braye, and without any more
parfuminge them in a ſieue, they adde vnto it Bengewyne,
Muſke, and Ciuette, more or leſſe, accordynge as
they wyll make it good.
               
               
                  ☞Vvhite muſked Sope.
                  TAke Sope ſcraped or grated, as much as you will
the whiche (when ye haue well ſtieped and tempe
red in roſe water) leaue it eight dais in the ſunne:
Than you ſhall adde to it an vnce of the water or milk
of Macaleb, twelue graines of Muſke, and ſixe graines
of Ciuet, and reducinge all the whole into the fourme
and maner of harde paſt, you ſhall make therof very excellent
balles.
               
               
                  Another kinde of odoriferous white Sope.
                  TAke Veniſe Sope of the eldeſt you can finde, the
whiche you ſhall cutte or ſcrape with a knife, and
ſette it three dayes in the Sonne: And after hauinge
well brayed it, you ſhal diſſolue it in a veſſell leaded
within, with a pounde of good roſe water, lettinge
it boyle with a ſmall fire, than you ſhall put to it of the
roote of Iris, called Ireos, beaten into poulder .iiij. vnces,
Amylum ſixe vnces, whyte Sandale two vnces, Storax
liquida an vnce, Oyle of Spike an vnce, and ſturringe
it alwayes with a ſticke, ye ſhall afterwarde let it coole
againe. And finally make balles of it, euen as you wil.
               
               
                  ☞To make Damaſkine ſope muſked.
                  TAke a pounde of the beſt Sope you can gette, and
after hauing grated or ſkraped it verie ſmal, take
fine Synamom, Nutmegges, Storax calamita, of

eche of them an vnce, lignum Aloes two dragmes, Bengewine
perfite and thorowlye made two vnces, the poulder
of Viollettes an vnce. Hauing beaten well to poulder
all theſe foreſaied thinges, you ſhal adde vnto them
a dragme of the poulder of Cypres, a lytle Muſke, and
Ciuet: then ſteepe and temper it in Roſe water, and after
leaue it fourtie daies in the Sunne, in mouing and
ſturring it often times. Than make balles of it, or lytle
rounde loues, the whiche you muſte keepe in boxes
of woode with cotton, wolle or bombaſe.
               
               
                  ☞To get out the milke of Macaleb.
                  
                     BYcauſe the vſe of the mylke of Macaleb
hath been putte in manye compoſitions,
as we haue ſaied, we will teache you the
maner howe to get it out, which ſhall be
this. Take the Macaleb, whiche are litle
ſoote and odoriferous graynes ſo called,
the whiche you ſhall ſtampe in a morter, with Roſe water,
or ſome other ſweete water, vntill they bee lyke a
ſauce, and hauing put them in a poke of linnen clothe,
you ſhall preſſe the milke out of theim in a preſſoure, or
betwene two lytle bourdes. Then braye agayne, with
the ſayed water, that whiche ſhall remaine in the poke,
and preſſe it a newe, vntill there iſſue no moore milke.
But here I muſte aduertiſe you, that this milke continueth
not aboue two or three dayes: therefore you muſt
immediatlye put it in effect and occupie it.
               
               
                  ☞Poulder of Ciuet verye exquiſite.
                  TAke Sngre candye what quantitie you liſt, and
put it in a braſen morter: and after you haue wel
beaten it, adde to it as muche Ciuet as you wyll:
and make thereof poulder, the whiche you muſte keepe
alwayes cloſe.
               
               
                  ☞A priucipall poulder.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
TAke Damaſkene Roſes, Cipre Alexandrin,
Sandalum citrinum, of eche of theym an vnce, Iris
halfe an vnce, lignum Aloes, Calamus aromaticus,
Galanga Bengewine, of eche of theym a grayne
and a quarter, you ſhall make of all thys a verie fyne
poulder, and incorporate it well, keepynge in a violle
well ſtopped.
               
               
                  ☞A white odoriferous poulder.
                  TAke Iris electe three vnces, white Sandall twoo
vnces, Damaſke roſes, Lignum Aloes, Bengewyn,
Cypre alexandrine, of eche of theym twoo
vnces, Muſke foure graynes, Ciuet three graynes:
beate theym a parte, and ſifte theym: then incorporate
them together in the ſame braſen morter, that you dyd
beate them in, and keepe the poulder of them in a violle
well ſtopped.
               
               
                  ☞A redde poulder.
                  TAke Damaſke roſes twoo vnces, Sandalium citrinum
an vnce, lignum Aloes, Cypre alexandryn, of eche of
them a grayne and halfe a quarter, Iris halfe a grayne
or more, Cloues a ſcrupule, fine Muſke three graynes,
Ciuet two graines, Amber twoo graines. Bray theim
and mixe them together, and ſo keepe them.
               
               
                  ☞A blacke poulder.
                  TAke Cipri Alexandrini, lignum Aloes, of eche of theym
halfe an vnce, Sandali citrini, Damaſke roſes,
labdaniterreni, of eche of theim a quarter, Cloues
a grayne, and a lytle more, Muſke thre graines,
Cyuet twoo graynes, beate theym in poulder and kepe
theym.
               
               
                  ☞Poulder of Cypre verye exquiſite.
                  TAke a pounde of the moſſe of an Oke, and waſhe
it well in faier water, vntill the water remayne
cleare: then laye it abrode vpon a table in the

Sunne vntill it bee dried: after, ſprinkle or water it,
with roſe water: and hauinge it lefte it ſo couered in a
diſhe or platter, you ſhall laye it a brode agayne in a verie
hote Sunne, when it is drie ynough to beate, beate
it in poulder, and ſifte it finelye almoſte all: You ſhall
ſprinkele or water this poulder, with Muſke roſe water,
and laye it abroade vppon a greate ſarce, tourned
downewarde, good and thicke, and ſome what courſe,
vnder the whiche ſarce, you ſhall make a perfume as
foloweth, couexinge it with a clothe, whiche bee thus:
Bengewine two graynes and a quarter, Labdani half a
graine and more, Storax calamita twoo carrettes, lignum
Aloes halfe a grayne and more, fine Muſke half a grain.
Beate all theſe thinges groſſelye, and after mixe them
together, then put by lytle and lytle the poulder vnder
the ſarce in ſome potte ſharde, with a litle fier in it, and
caſte it in as you woulde dooe Frankenceſe, ſtaiyng at
euerie time, vntill the firſt parte, firſt caſt in, bee conſumed.
Nowe, all the ſaied perfume beinge dooen, if you
will make the ſaied poulder verie fine and exquiſite, vnto
euerye vnce adde theſe thinges folowinge, Bengewine
a carret, Muſke foure graines, Ciuet twoo graines,
beate theſe by theym ſelues verie ſmall and fyne,
and mingle them with the ſaied vnce of poulder, ſo that
all maye bee well incorporated together: than keepe it
well, for it is notable and ſinguler.
               
               
                  ☞Another waye to make it verie perfecte.
                  
                     TAke the recente and freſſhe dunge of an
Oxe, and drie it in the Sunne, or in an
ouen, then beate it, and ſifte it, ſprinkle
it well after with Roſe water, and leauing
it ſo in a veſſel, the ſpace of a daye,
drie it agayne in the Sunne. And when
it is drie, bathe it againe with Roſe water, and drie it
againe, and dooe ſo three or foure times. The laſt time
you ſhall water it or bathe it ſomewhat more then the
other times, becauſe it maye cleaue to the bottome of

the veſſell, whiche muſte bee well leaded within, and
verie cleane, after this you ſhall remoue and ſturre it
well, and perfume it with ſome perfume, that the other
foreſayed poulder was perfumed with. Then hauinge
perfumed it diuers times, you ſhall lette it drie in the
ſaied veſſell, takinge heede alſo that it take no vent.
And after it is wel dried ſtampe it, and ſift it a newe agayne,
and then keepe it in ſome violle: and if you wyll
make it verie fine, take an vnce of the ſaied poulder,
three graines of fyne Muſke, foure graines and a halfe
of Bengewine, twoo graines of Cyuet, braye and incorporate
all well together, and keepe it.
               
               
                  ☞A ſweete and odoriferous poulder, verie excellent
to laye in cheſtes and cofers.
                  TAke the buddes of Roſes as many as you wyll,
and drie them in the ſhadow: than ſet theim abroade
whan the ſonne is moſt hoteſt in a clene
veſſell, puttinge to theim ſuche a quantitie of
Roſe water as will beare them vp, and ſturrynge them
well, leaue them in the Sunne (couered with a linnen
cloth) vntyll it be hote. And whan they be drye, & haue
dronke vp all the roſe water, take for euerye pounde of
Roſes, ten graines of Muſke, and a quarter of fine violettes
beaten ſmal into poulder, in puttinge to them by
litle and litle of the ſayde poulder, and mixinge well all
together, vntill they beginne to be incorporated: but
before you put in the ſaide poulder, dreane and powre
out the water of the ſayd veſſel, that there remayne not
a droppe in the bottome. This done, laye the ſayd roſes
abroade in a baſen of copper, or of braſſe, whiche is better,
and let the ſayde baſin be plaine and euen, not inboſſed,
and ſet them in the Sunne when it ſhyneth moſt
hoteſt, coueringe them ouer, ſo that neuertheleſſe they
may drie, than make a poulder of them, and kepe it.
And if you wil geue a ſwete odour or ſauour vnto your
garmentes, take the ſaid Roſes ſo dried before you beat
them in poulder, and put thē in ſome lytle linen bagge

very fine, the whiche you may laye in youre coffers, or
where your apparell lyeth.
               
               
                  An odoriferous and ſwete poulder.
                  TAke the buddes of redde Roſes, and braie them in
a morter, as thoughe you woulde haue the iuyce
out of them, than ſet them in a hote Sunne, ſprin
klinge them with Roſe water, and ſo water them and
drie them againe oftentimes, and than make of them a
poulder, the whiche you ſhal parfume with the poulder
of Cypre, as the other aforeſayd, and kepe it in a vyole.
               
               
                  Oyle of Bengewyne.
                  TAke Bengewine as much as you will, and lay it vnder
a dungehill in a violle or glaſſe well ſtopped (ſo
that it take no vente) by the ſpace of fiftene or twentye
dayes: Than ſtrayne it, and kepe it in a viole, for it is
a ſinguler and deintie oyle.
               
               
                  A very good and odoriferous poulder, to carrye aboute a
man, or to lay in coffers.
                  TAke fourtene vnces of roſes newly dried, fine cloues,
twoo dragmes, the ſeede of Spyke a dragme, Storax,
halfe an vnce, fine Synamom halfe a dragme. Braye
them, and kepe them in a violle well ſtopped, you maye
alſo put to them (if you wil) two graynes of fyne Muſk,
Ligni Aloes halfe a dragme.
               
               
                  Balles agaynſt the peſtilence or plage, whiche alſo geue
an adour vnto all thinges
                  TAke Storax, one part, Ladani one parte, cloues halfe
a parte, Campher at your diſcretion, but leſſe then
of anye of the other ſubſtaunces, of Spikenarde a good
quantite, and of Nutmegges alſo, of all this make paſte
with Roſe water, in the whiche you ſhal tēper Gomme
dragant, and Gomme Arabike, ſturringe and bruſyng
them well. Of this paſt you ſhall make balles to holde
in your handes, and to ſmell to.
               
               
                  
                  A princely licour.
                  TAke Muſke, Ambergriſe, Ciuette, of eche of theim
foure graynes, braye all together, and incorporate
it with a lytle oyle of ſwete Almondes, and make therof
a licoure, whiche you ſhall kepe in a beſſell of yuorye
well ſtopped, and vſe of it as you vſe Ciuet.
               
               
                  Liquide and ſofte Sope of Naples.
                  TAke ſtronge lie, with two partes of the aſſhes of
the wood of the tree called in latine Cerrus, which
is a kind of tre like to a poplar, hauing a ſtreight
longe ſtem bearinge a kinde of maſte, roughe withoute
like a Cheſtin, and one parte of quicke time, and make
it ſo ſtronge that it may beare a newe laide egge ſwimminge
betwene two waters. Take eighte potfulles of
this lie very hote, a potfull of deeres greaſe or ſuet well
ſtrained cleane: mingle them and ſet theim on the fyre,
but ſee that they ſeeth not. Put all in a greate veſſell
leaded within hauinge a large bottome, leauinge it in
Sommer in the Sunne, and ſtyrringe it foure or fyue
times a daye with a ſticke, and note that you muſte ſet
it in the day time in the ſunne, and the night time in the
ayre abroade, ſo that it raine not, continuinge thus the
ſpace of eight daies. Let it ware as firme and as harde
as you will, ſo that it remain neuertheleſſe in the forme
of paſt, and the older it is, the better it wil be. Than afterwarde
take of this maſſe or paſt, as much as you wil
and put it in a veſſell leaded, ſtyrringe it well with a
ſticke, and adde to the ſame as muche fine Muſkte Roſe
water as you will: kepe it eyghte dayes in the Sonne,
ſtyrringe it from time to time, as is aforeſaide: and if it
waxe to harde, put Roſe water to it, in ſuch quantitie,
that it be neither to harde nor to ſoft, and fill as manye
litle boxes with all, as you will.
               
               
                  To make the ſayde Sope muſked.
                  TAke fine Muſke as muche as you liſte, beate it well
in a braſen morter, putting to it Roſe water ſomewhat

warme, and hauinge mixed them well together,
put them in the veſſell where youre Sope is, mengling
them well together, and let them ſtande a while, and
than fill litle boxes with it at your pleaſure.
               
               
                  A very excellent paſte and ſwete, made with Muſke,
whiche eaten cauſeth a ſwete breath.
                  TAke Gomme dragant ſtieped and tempered in Roſe
water, vntill it be ſoft & white, make therof as it
were paſte, & take of it the bygneſſe of a Haſel nut, bray
it in a braſen morter, puttinge to it a little poulder of
good Sugre, and halfe a graine of fine Muſke, ſtieped
and tempered in Roſe water, mixe all well together.
                  And if you wil haue it better, put to it more Muſke and
Sugre, and than as muche Mace beaten in poulder as
will lye vpon a pennye, and mixe it agayne well together,
than put to it a little of the meale or flower of Amylum
beaten into poulder: but it were better to putte in
redde Sandal, wel broken in ſonder, indifferently, and
to put it in by litle and lytle, ſo muche that a man maye
make of it conuenient paſte, the whiche you ſhall cutte
after your fantaſye, and drye it in the ſhadowe. And yf
you will haue it of diuers coloures, adde to it ſuche coloures
well grounde as you pleaſe. Prouided that they
be colours, wherein there is no poyſon or daunger: you
may alſo gylte or couer with ſyluer the ſayde pieces, as
men do confitures, and they wyll be verye good and of
the beſt makinge.
               
               
                  Another very excellent.
                  TAke Gomme Arabike .v. vnces, fine Sugre .iiij.
vnces. Amylum .iij. vnces, and for eche vnce of
theſe foreſayde thinges .x. graines of fine Muſk
whiche will mounte in the whole to a hundred
and twenty graynes, and than it wyll be perfit.
               
               
                  Dentifrices or rubbers for the teeth of great perfection,
for to make them cleane.
                  
                     
TAke poulder of redde Corall .iiii. vnces, of the
ſhardes of Galleye pottes two vnces, of cuttle
bone an vnce, of a Pumeyſe ſtone an vnce, cloues,
Synamom, and Maſticke of eche of them a
dragme, Perles ſtamped halfe an vnce, Dragons bloud
an vnce, fine Muſke .iii. graynes, ſtampe wel the whole
and ſyft it thorow a ſarce, than mengle it well together
and incorporate it with Gomme dragant tempered and
ſtieped in Roſe water, make all into dowe or paſte, and
make therof thinges to rubbe your teeth with, to make
them white, wherwith you ſhall not onely make theim
very fayre, but alſo preſerue them from putrifaction.
               
               
                  Oyle of Bengewin odoriferous.
                  
                     PVt a pounde of Bengewin well beaten in
poulder, into ſome ſhorte and wyde veſſell,
ſo that you may put in your hand, than put
to it two pounde of Roſe water, and mixe
all well together, and ſo couer it with a
Limbecke or ſtillitory of glaſſe, well bounde with a linnen
cloth, and al the ioynctes and ſides well ſtopt. Giue
it at the firſte a little fyre, vntill all the water be drawen
out (and this is the water that we ſpake of before,) and
afterwarde encreaſe your fyre by litle and litle, and thē
you ſhal ſe the oyle come out, and incontinent ſet vnder
another cleane recipiente to receiue the oyle, and make
vnder it a great fyre, to the intent that all the oyle may
come out, the whiche being all diſtilled, there wyl come
furth a certayne Gomme, like vnto Manna, the whiche
wyll be verye good to keepe. And whan you will make
ſwete or odoriferous water, take a violle full of cleane
well water, and put into it a lytle of the ſayd Gomme,
and it wyll make it ſmell ſwete, but you muſte ſtyrre it
well. If you will haue it better, take Roſe water, and
not well water.
               
               
                  Oyle of Storax calamita.
                  
                     
TAke ſtorax calamita as muche as you will, with ſuch
a quantitie of Roſe water as pleaſeth you, and put
it in a large potte, not cloſinge the ioyntes or ſydes, but
let the Limbecke be a litle at one ſide, to the intente it
maye take ayre, and alter not the fire, but kepe it accordinge
as you ſhall ſe ſhalbe nedeful. And whan the oyle
commeth, chaunge the recipient, and than make a greater
fyre, and receiue the oyle, and kepe it, for it is a ſinguler
and deynty thinge.
               
               
                  To make oyle of Labdanum.
                  TAke fine Labdanum, and mundifie it wel, and do
with it as you did with the Bengewine: But if
you will haue it otherwiſe, you maye take as
muche as you will of it, and hauinge broken it
in ſmall pieces, putte it weete into a veſſell of braſſe,
puttinge to it a pounde of Roſe water, and halfe a
pounde of the oyle of ſwete Almondes, couer well the
veſſell with his couer, and ſtoppe it with linnen cloutes
plaiſtered ouer with claye or other matter, ſettynge
it ſo to drye: than afterwarde ſet it vpon a lyttle
fyre that it may boyle fayer and ſoftely two or thre houres.
This done, you ſhall take it from the fyre, and let
it cole before you vncouer it, than take it quickely out,
and put it in a vyole. And (to the ende to preſerue it the
better) put to it a lytle roche Alom burned, or elles a
lytle Ambergryſe. And when you wyll put it in the vyole,
you muſte put it in as cleare as is poſſible.
               
               
                  Oyle of Nutmegges.
                  TAke what quantitie of Nutmegges you wyll, the
whiche well broken into pieces in a morter, you
ſhall putte it in a large or wyde veſſell, powrynge
vpon them a little Aqua vite, ſo that the Nutmegges
maye be thoroughlye wette. Let them ſtande ſo two or
thre dayes, in ſtyrringe them ſometyme, and turninge

them vpſyde downe, and ſee that the ſayde veſſell be
well ſtopped, then adde to it as muche Roſe water as
will be aboue the Nutmegges, two or three fingers
highe, and couer them with the Limbecke, cloſinge it
well. Diſtill them at the firſte with a ſmall fyre, vntyll
all the water be come out: than chaunge the recipient,
and augment the fyre, ſo muche, till you cauſe the oyle
to diſtille out, and whan you ſee that all is almoſt come
furth, make your fire very great, and kepe the ſaid oyle
in a violle.
               
               
                  Another maner.
                  TAke a pounde of Nutmegges, the whiche beynge
well broken in pieces, you muſt put in a new veſſell
of earth well leaded within, than powre vpō
them Malmeſey, or ſome other wine, vntill they be all
couered, and that the wine be aboue the Nuttes twoo
fingers high: After this you ſhall put to it at the leaſte
two pounde of freſhe butter, and mingle all together,
ſtoppinge or coueringe well the veſſell, and leaue it in
the heate of the Sunne in ſome panne, or in ſome other
hote place, by the ſpace of four or fiue dayes, than boile
it vpon the hote coles with a ſmall fyre, vntyll the wine
be conſumed, than powre it thorowe a newe courſe linnen
cloth before it be coole. This done, ſet the oyle certaine
dayes in the Sunne, in a violle of glaſſe, vntyll
the thicke ſubſtaunce be deſcended to the bottome: Finally
powre it ſo agayne thorough a newe courſe lynnen
clothe, and putte it in another vyolle, and ſoe
kepe it.
               
               
                  A very exquiſyte ſope, made of diuers thinges.
                  TAke Aluminis catini thre vnces, quicke lyme one part
ſtronge lye that will beare an egge ſwimminge betwene
two waters, thre pottels, a pot of commun oyle:
mengle all well together, puttinge to it the white of an
Egge well beaten, and a dyſſhefull of the meale or
floure of Amylum, and an vnce of Romayne Vitrioll,

or redde leade well beaten into poulder, and mixe it
continuallye for the ſpace of three houres, then lette it
ſtande, by the ſpace of a daye, and it will bee righte and
perfite. Finallye, take it oute, and cutte it in pieces: after
ſette it to drie twoo daies, in the wynde, but not in
the ſunne. Occupie alwaies of this ſope, when you will
waſhe youre head, for it is verie holſome, and maketh
faier heare.
               
               
                  ☞Sope with Cyuet.
                  TAke of the ſaied Sope as muche as you wyll, and
ſet it a while in the Sunne in Roſe water, putting
to it the poulder of Cyuette, and mixinge it well. And
if you adde to it alſo Muſke, it will bee the better, ſo
that the Muſke haue been before ſteeped and tempered
in roſe water.
               
               
                  ☞Sope with diuers ſweete and excellent oyles.
                  
                     TAke of the foreſaied Sope, whiche hath
ſtande a while in the Sunne in Roſe water,
and put to it a lytle of the oyle of Bengewine,
or of ſome other odoriferous oyle,
and mixe it well: but you muſte putte in of
the oyles reaſonablie, neither to muche nor to lyttle,
but with diſcretion, accordinge to the quantitie of the
Sope.
               
               
                  ☞Sope roſat.
                  TAke freſhe and recent roſes wel ſtamped, and incorporated
them with the ſaid Sope, as before, the
whiche you maye alſo dode at youre pleaſure of
all other ſortes of flowres.
               
               
                  ☞VVhite Sope of a good ſauour and odour.
                  HAuing cutte, after the maner of Damaſco, in
ſmall pieces the oldeſt Sope that is poſſible to
bee founde, you ſhall laye it abrode vpon a table,
in a place where it maye drie, than hauinge lefte it

there, the ſpace of eyght and or .x. dayes, you muſt after
warde ſtampe it lightlye or ſlenderlye, and make therof
poulder: and the ſame being ſifted, you ſhal adde to it
foure vnces of Ireos, vppon tenne pounde of the ſayed
poulder, white Sandall three vnces, two vnces of Macaleb,
an vnce of the meale or flowre of Amylum and all
well beaten into poulder, you ſhall mixe it with tenne
pounde of the poulder of the aforeſaide Sope: then all
beinge ioyned together, you ſhall putte it in a morter,
with an vnce of Storax liquida and a walnut ſhelfull of
the oyle of Spike, and hauinge well ſtamped it altogether,
it ſhall bee made. Then afterwarde make balles
or ſquare 
                        •
                     akes of it, as you wyll, with the meale or
flowre of Amylum: then drie in the ſhadowe, and keepe
them, for it is a thinge verie excellent.
               
               
                  ☞Perfect ſope.
                  TAke ſyxe graynes of Muſke tempered and ſteeped
in good Roſe water, foure graines of Ciuet,
reduced and beaten into poulder, and mingle
them with the ſaied Sope, but the tempered or ſteeped
Muſke, muſte bee hote, and by this meanes you ſhall
haue a verie perfect Sope.
               
               
                  VVhole and maſſy blacke ſope.
                  TAke tenne pounde of the ſaied poulder of Sope
well ſifted, cloues foure vnces, of good Mace
twoo vnces, damaſke Macaleb, Cyperus whiche
the Apoticaries call Iuncus odoratus, Sandali Citrini,
Storax liquida, of eche of theym an vnce, ſweete
oyle as muche as ſhall ſuffiſe: and hauing ſtamped that
whiche oughte to bee ſtamped, make of it as is aboue
ſaied. But if you will haue it more ſinguler, putte to it
Muſke tempered in Roſe water, as afore, with a lytle
Ciuet, after incorporate well all together, and make
thereof balles or ſquare cakes, or hartes, or ſuche other
formes, as you luſte to muke youre ſelfe: then dry them
in the ſhadowe: and ſo ſhall you finde them of a ſinguler

good odour and ſauour.
               
               
                  ☞Damaſke parfume.
                  TAke fyne Muſke foure gaynes, Cyuet two graynes,
Ambergris, fine Sugre, of eche of them foure
graynes, Bengewine a grayne, of fatte Storax calamita
three graines, lignum Aloes twoo graines: beate
them well into poulder, and putte all together in a litle
parfuminge panne, powre into it as muche Roſe water,
or the water of the flowres of Orenges, Citrons,
and Lemons, all together, as will bee twoo fingers
highe aboue the other drooges, in makinge vnder it a
ſmall fier that it maye not boyle, and when the water
is conſumed, you ſhall powre in other: and hauing continued
thus doinge a certaine number of daies, you
ſhall haue an excellent Sope.
               
               
                  ☞Another parfume of Damaſke.
                  TAke Storax calamita, foure vnces, Bengewyne
foure vnces, Labdanum lignum Aloes Synamon, of
eche of theym an vnce, Sperma Ceti, a dragme,
Muſke foure ſcrupules, cloues, a dragme, Roſe water
eyght vnces, ſtampe them, and putte them in the parfuming
panne.
               
               
                  ☞An excellent pomander.
                  
                     TAke .xvi. or .xx. Pepins, or other
ſwete & melow apples, y• which beinge
pared and cut in quarters, you
ſhall adde to euerye quarter fowre or
ſixe Cloues, then put them in ſome
veſſell of earthe well leaded within,
with as muche Roſe water, as wyll
couer them ouer. Then couer them with a trenchour,
or ſome other cleane thinge lettinge them ſo ſtande one
whole daye. And after powre them all in ſome newe
veſſell well leaded, putting to it foure pounde of freſhe
hogges ſuet, well taken from the fleſhe and ſkynne cut

verie ſmall, and well chopped with a knife: make vrder
it a ſmall fier that it burne not, than in ſtraining it
out, you ſhall make it droppe into ſome veſſell of freſhe
and cleare water, and ſo purifie the greaſe thre or foure
daies, keping it in the ſame veſſell, and chaunginge often
times a daye the ſaied water: for the oftener you
chaunge it, the better you ſhall purge the greaſe.
                  Than take out the ſaied ſeyme, the apples and the roſe
water together, and take the fatte oute of the veſſell,
dreaninge it well, and adding to it Spikenarde, with
twoo vnces of Cloues, an vnce of Synamom, a quarter
of ſandalum citrinum, an vnce of Bengewyne, and as
muche of ſtorax calamita. Braye all theſe kindes together,
and put it in a fine linnen clothe, in maner of litle
purſes: but let the cloth bee ſome what large, and binde
it wel that the ſayd kinds ſcatter not abrode among the
greaſe. Then make it boyle with a litle fier, far of from
the flame or leyt, or ſet before it ſome tyle or bricke letting
it boyle ſo faire and ſoftlye, foure or ſixe houres,
vntill all the roſe water bee vaniſhed awaye, whiche
may be proued in this maner. Put a lytle ſticke downe
to the bottom of the veſſell, and plucke it oute agayne
quickelye, and put it in the fier: and if it burne without
anye noyſe, it is a token that there is no moore water:
but tarte vntyll it bee all well conſumed, ſturringe it
ſometime, to the entent it burne not to, or ſmell of the
burning. Beware alſo of the ſmoke, for if it take once y•
ſauour of it, you can neuer get it out, & when all is wel
ſodden, take eyghte vnces of white Waxe, and put it in
the ſaied veſſell, mixinge all together, and let it ſo melt
with the ſaied ſubſtaunces, the whiche you muſt nowe
and then ſturre. This dooen take it from the fier, letting
it ſtande and reſt a quarter of an houre, that is to
ſaie: vntill the groſſe ſubſtaunce bee deſcended to the
bottome: then powre it faier and ſoftlye thorowe twoo
newe courſe linnen clothes, into a veſſell well leaded
within, wherein muſte bee twoo diſhefull of Roſe water:
but take heere of preſſinge it, ſo that the lees come

not oute into the ſame veſſell (but into another) for it
woulde be ſomewhat red. Let it ſo coole vntill the next
morninge, and whan it is ſolide, harde, and maſſy, denide
it into foure partes, and put it into a round veſſell
leaded, ſtyrringe it well with a peſtle, addinge to it by
lytle and litle good and fyne Muſkte roſe water, and ſo
ſtyrre it vntyll it be well incorporated. Nowe, if in caſe
you ſe that it doth not well incorporate together, ſet it a
lytle vpon the fyre, and whan it is hote, powre, roſe water
vpon it, ſturringe it well about, vntill it waxe verye
fine and thinne, but take good hede to the fyre. And ſo
kepe it in newe and cleane veſſels.
               
               
                  Another Pomaunder.
                  TAke Pippins or other like melowe Apples, and
laye them vpon a tyle for to bake in an Ouen, thē
take out the core and the kernels, and make them
cleane within, brayenge and breakinge the reſte, and
ſtraine it thorough a fyne canueſſe or ſtraynour. This
done, take as much fat or greaſe of a kidde as you haue
Apples, and ſtraine it likewiſe, boylinge it all together
in a newe veſſell well leaded, vntill the roſe water be
conſumed: than adde to it Muſke, Cloues, Nutmegges
and ſuch like ſubſtaunces of a reaſonable quantitie, according
to your diſcretion: prouided alwayes that they
be well brayed and broken in pieces, as is aboue ſaied,
and boyle them in the like maner aforeſaied, then ſtrain
them and kepe them.
               
               
                  Another Pomaunder.
                  TAke freſh barowes greaſe & put it in a new veſſel,
with roſe water vnderneth, & whiles it melteth
in the ſame, you ſhal take out that which is
melted, to thend it ſmell not of the fyre, than put
it in cold water the ſpace of .x. daies, raiſing, and lifting
it vp euery day .ix. or .x. times, & ſtyrring it at eche time
chaunginge alwayes the water. Than take of the ſaied
Apples, & purifie them cleane of their kernels, cuttinge

them in quarters not pared: this doen, laye them three
daies to ſtiepe in Muſkt roſe water: take alſo fiftene
Cloues ſtieped a daye in colde water often tymes renewed,
and putting them after in a fine linnen cloth, boilinge
them in roſe water with a ſmall fire, the ſpace of
an houre: than hauinge well ſcommed away all the ordure
and filthe, put in thre vnces of white Waxe, and
make it ſeeth a little, and after ſtraine it into a newe
veſſell well leaded, leauing it ſo all a night. This done,
you ſhal take out al the white Pomaunder, and becauſe
there wil remaine a litle ordure in the bottom, you ſhal
put it in morter with roſe water, & ſtyrre it: the more
you do ſeuer it a ſonder in ſtyrringe it, and put roſe water
to it, the more ſhall you fine it: but you muſt ſe that
the morter be cleane. Than take the tallowe or greace
of a younge barrowe, and ſtiepe it in colde water, leauinge
it ſo the ſpace of foure daies, but you muſte often
chaunge the water, and purifie the ſaied greace well of
all the little ſkinnes that is in it, veynes, and griſtels.
                  Take likewiſe twenty of the foreſaied Apples, and for
eche Apple put in thre or foure Cloues, and hauing deuided
the Apples in four quarters cores and all, ſtampe
them a lytle. Than take the ſayd tallowe or greace and
put it in fine roſe water, vntyll the ſayde water be conſumed,
and after you haue boiled it fayre and ſoftly, put
in the ſaied Apples ſtamped, and make them boile, adding
to it a litle fine Synamom, Spiknard, Nutmegs,
and other ſpices, ſuch as you thinke good. And whan it
hath boiled inough, ſtraine it thorow a linen cloth, into
ſome cleane veſſell. It ſhuld be wel done to put to it a litle
calues tallow wel purified in the maner aforeſaied.
And whan it is ſodden and ſtrained, mixe all togethers
and put it in a cleane veſſel, it is a very exquiſite thing.
               
               
                  Excellent Ipocras.
                  TAke an vnce of Synamom, of Ginger .ii. dragms
Melligetta thre dragmes, Cloues two deniers,
Nutmegges, Galanga, of eche of them a denier,

ſtampe all, and put it in a ielley bagge or ſtrainer, than
take a pint of the beſt redde or white wine you can get,
or a pint of good Malmeſey or other ſtronge wine, mixe
well all togethers, than take a pounde of Sugre fined,
and hauinge ſtamped it, put it into the other wyne, and
ſo poure it vpon the ſtrainoure, wherin you dyd put the
ſayd wine with the ſpices, than hauinge taken it oute,
you muſte poure it on agayne, ſo often vntyll it become
as cleare as it was before, ſtyrringe it ſometime in the
ſtrayner or bagge: and here note that this is to make
but a flagon full. Wherefore, if you will haue more,
you muſte take a greater quantitie of the ſayd thinges.
And for to make it verye excellente, you maye bynde a
lyttle Muſke in a fine linnen clothe at the ende of the
ſtrayner, ſo that all the ſubſtaunce maye paſſe ouer and
vpon it, the which by that meane wil receiue the odour
and ſent of the ſayde Muſke.
               
               
                  ☞To make litle cuſſhins of parfumed Roſes.
                  TAke buddes of redde Roſes, their heades and
toppes cut awaye, drie theim in the ſhadowe vpon
a table, or a linnen cloth: water & ſprinkle
the ſaid buddes with Roſe water, and let theim
drie, doing this fiue or ſixe times, turning them alwais
to thende they waxe not vinewed or mouldy: than take
the poulder of Cipre, Muſke and Amber made into
poulder, accordinge as you would make them excellent,
for the more you put in of it, the better they ſhall be: put
to it alſo Lignum Aloes, well beaten in poulder. Let the
ſaid poulder be put with the buddes wete wt roſe water
Muſkt, mixing wel the buddes together with the poulder,
to thend that al may be well incorporated, & ſo ſhall
you leaue them ſo al a night, couering them wt ſome linnen
cloth or Taffeta, that the Muſke may not breath or
riſe out. The whiche thinge done, take finallye lyttle
bagges of Taffeta, of what bigneſſe you wil, and according
to the quantitie of the buddes that you would put

amonge all the poulder. Than cloſe vp the bagges, and
for to ſtoppe vp the ſeames, you muſt haue your mixtion
of Muſke, Amber, and Ciuette, made as it were to
ceare with, wherewith you ſhall rubbe all a longe the
ſeames, to ſtoppe the holes made with the needle in ſowynge:
You maye alſo ſowe ſome ribande (of golde, or
ſylke, or of what you will) ouer the ſaied ſeames. Theſe
be the beſt that a man can make: and (as I haue ſayed)
the more Muſk, Amber, Ciuet, and Aloe you put in, the
better they will be. If you will make theim with leſſe
coſte, take ſuche buddes as are ſpoken of before, prepared
and ordered in the ſame ſort, and in ſteede of Muſke
and Amber, put in the poulder of Cloues, Synamom,
Irios, and a litle Mace, obſeruinge ſuche a maner of parfuminge
the buddes, as before.
               
               
                  Matches or litle lightes of a very good odour.
                  TAke of Campher an vnce, of white encens twoo
vnces, beate them into poulder, and make thereof
litle rounde Apples, or balles with a litle waxe,
than put them in a veſſell with roſe water, and lyghte
them with a candell, and they wyll geue a fayre lyghte,
and a very good ſauour.
               
               
                  A compoſition of Muſke, Ciuet, and Ambergriſe.
                  TAke a dragme and a half of good Amber, and bray
it vppon a Porphyre ſtone with oyle of Iaſemin,
fyrſt alone, and than a litle with Muſke, as much
as ſhall ſuffiſe. This doen, adde to it Damaſke roſes,
and Bengewin, of ethe of them an vnce, Irios a dragme
and a halfe: All theſe thinges beaten in poulder, and
ſtrayned or ſyfted, you ſhall braye with a dragme of Ciuette,
vntil they be brought into the fourme and maner
of an oynctment. This done, kepe it in a Horne, or veſſell
of glaſſe well cloſed.
               
               
                  ☞A parfume for a Chaumber very excellent.
                  
                     
TAke Storax Calamita, Bengewine, Ligni Aloes, of
eche of them an vnce, coales of Willow well beaten
into poulder .v. vnces. Theſe thinges mixed
with Aquauite, as much as will ſuffiſe to make paſte,
make therof litle cakes, or other formes what you wil,
and ſo kepe them. And whan you will vſe or occupie of
it, put it into the fire, for in conſumyng, litle and litle,
it will make a ſinguler good odour in the place where
you burne it.
               
               
                  Sope of Naples.
                  TAke Deares greaſe, or the Tallow of a Cowe, or
yonge Calfe, or of a Kidde a pounde, put it in a veſſell
of earth well leaded: and after you haue well ſtrayned
it, put vpon it, with diſcretion to much nor to litle,
of Sope makers lie, the firſt, beſt, and ſtrongeſt of three
ſortes that they vſe, called the maiſter lie, and kepe the
ſaied greaſe in the heate of the Sunne, mi
                        •
                     ynge it well
there, and like wiſe in the night abrode in the ayer: but
take hede that there come no water to it. Whan you ſe
that it is ſomewhat drie, put to it againe as muche as
ſhall neede of the ſeconde and thirde lie, mixed together
which Sope makers vſe: Rubbe a litle vpon your hand
beyng cleane, and if it make a frothe, it is a token it is
made.
               
               
                  Parfume for a Lampe.
                  TAke Ligni Aloes a quarter, Begewine an vnce,
Storax calamita half an vnce, Muſke a ſcruple, Ambergreeſe
halfe a ſcruple, Roſe water inoughe.
You ſhall putte all theſe thynges well beaten to poulder
into the Lampe.
               
               
                  A ſhorte parfume.
                  TAke a glaſſefull of Roſe water, Clones well beaten
in poulder, a penny weight: than take the fire
panne, and make it redde hote in the fire, and put
theron of the ſaied Roſe water with theſayd poulder of

Cloues, making it ſo confume, by litle and litle, but the
roſe water muſt bee muſkt, and ſo you ſhal make a parfume
of excellent good odour.
               
               
                  ☞An odoriferous parfume for chambers.
                  TAke Thymiama a pounde, Storax liquida twoo vnces,
Storax calamita three vnces, Labdanum an vnce, coales
of Willowe and Tracagantum aſmuche as you wyll:
but ſtiepe or temper the poulder of the coales, and the
Tracagantum with roſe water, and let it lie ſo three daies
a ſtiepe in the ſame water, and then make therof paſte.
               
               
                  ☞A verie good parfume for to trimme gloues wyth
litle coſt, and yet will continue longe.
                  
                     FIrſt let the gloues bec greate, and of good
thicke leather, to the which you ſhall gyue
a little Ciuet all alonge the ſeames: Than
waſhe them in roſe water, twiſe or thryſe,
preſſing theym harde: this doen, take twoo
partes of roſe water, one parte of the water of the bloſſoms
of Mirtell tree, mingle them together: addinge to
it two partes of the water of the flowres of Orenges,
Lemons, & Citrons, called of the Frēchmen, can de nafe,
and waſhe them ſo long therwith, that they ſauour no
moore of the leather: then laye theym in a platter, and
leaue them there couered with the ſaied water, & pouldered
ouer with the poulder of Cypres, by the ſpace of
a day or twaine. This dooen, take them out, and preſſe
them a litle, and ſo drie them in the ſhadowe. When
they bee half drie, geue them a litle Ciuet in this wiſe:
put aſmuche Ciuet as you ſhall thinke good in a diſhe,
with a litle oyle of Iaſemyne, that is not olde, the whiche
you ſhall make to diſſolue before the fier: than annoynt
therewith the gloues within ſide, and rub them
wel betwene your handes chafing them at the fier, vntil
you thinke that the ciuet be perced and gone thorow
them, and leaue them ſo a while. Then after rub them
wel with a clothe, to the ende the Ciuet maye perce the

better, and the gloues waxe ſoft: then draw and ſtretch
them out abrode, leauing them ſo the ſpace of a dai, and
when you ſhall thinke they be humyde and moyſte, enlarge
them, and blowe them, and puffe them vp: leaue
them ſo vntil thei bee halfe dried. Than take good parfume
to burne, & holde them ouer the ſmoke of the ſaied
parfume, to the eude that it maye perce and go into the
inner partes of the gloues. and parfume them within
ſide. This ſhall you dooe thriſe a daye, the ſpace of .xx.
daies, weating them at eche time with a litle parfumed
water, & wrappinge them with ſome white linen cloth:
than take Muſke, and Amber as much as you wyl, and
put it in a tinne platter, with oyle of Iaſemine, or Bengewine,
or ſome other oyle: let them well diſſolue at the
fier, with a litle perfumed water, than annoynte them
with a penſell on the out ſide, and not within: annoynt
alſo the ſeames with Ciuet, and lay them certein daies
among dried roſes. Finally, lay them for the ſpace of .iij.
or .iiij. daies betwene two matreſſes: than wil they bee
excellent, as if it were to preſent an emperour withall.
               
               
                  ☞A verye exquiſite Ciuet to parfume gloues, and to
annoynt a mans handes with.
                  TAke three pounde of white wine, the tallowe or
greaſe of a Gote, ſhepe, or Kidde, a pound: boyle
all together with a ſmall fier vpon the embres
or coales, in a couered panne, than take them
from the fier, and when it is coole againe, putte them in
a platter with cleare water, and waſhe them well fiue
or ſixe tymes: and put them againe in cleare water all a
night. This dooen, take a pounde of roſe water: twoo
pound of white wine: & with this boile the greaſe vpon
the coales with a ſmal fier, vntil one half be conſumed:
than take ſwete Nauewes, & roſt them vnder the aſhes,
but burne them not. And for eche pound of greaſe, take
halfe a pound of the inner white of the ſaied Nauewes,
and boyle it in roſe water, the ſpace of halfe an houre,

than ſtrayne it, and put it into a morter with oyle of Iaſemin,
or of Citrons or ſuch like, or els with a litle Cā
                     pher:
After this you ſhall take a diſhe or the bottome or
foote of a glaſſe, wet within with Roſewater, wherin
you ſhall make the forme and facion of the Ciuette, addyng
to it firſt of all three vnces of Ceruſe, well beaten
in poulder for euery pounde of tallow or greaſe, and it
will be an excellent and princely thing.
               
               
                  Oyle of Roſes and floures, very parfit.
                  TAke the ſeede of Millons well mundified and ſtā
                     ped,
and laye them by rankes or by beddes, with
the flowres of Roſes, by the ſpace of .viii. daies,
then take a litle linnen bagge wette in Roſe water, or
in the water of other flowres, in the whiche bagge you
ſhall put the ſeede: and hauyng well bounde it, put it in
a preſſour, and preſſe oute the oyle, whiche will be very
precious, and the which you muſt kepe alwaies cloſe.
               
               
                  Oyle of Cloues very noble.
                  TAke Almondes mondified and made cleane with a
knife, and broken in pieces, ſtiepe or temper theym
in Roſe water, than dreſſe them in this maner. Take
Cloues ſtamped, and temper or lay theim in Roſe water,
& couer the veſſell diligently, leauyng them ſo vntil
the water haue taken the vertue of the Cloues: put alſo
the Almondes in the ſaid water, and leaue them ther
vntil they be ſwollen wt the water. And after you haue
taken them out and dried them in the Sunne, lay them
in the water againe to ſwell, and afterwarde let theim
drie well as before, continuyng thus .v. or .vi. times:
Then put them in a preſſe, and preſſe out the oyle, whiche
you ſhall kepe in a cleane veſſell well ſtopped, In
this maner may you make oyle of Muſke, of Amber, of
Bengewin, of Storax calimita, of Aloe, of Synamom, of
Mace, and of Nutmegges. You may make them alſo in
diuers ſortes, and put to them Aqua vite.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To make an excellent parfume to parfume Chambers,
garmentes, Coue
                        •
                     lettes, Sheetes, and al other thinges, belonginge
to any Prince.
                  TAke pilles of Citrons dried in the ſhadowe, and
if you can not get of Cytrons, take of Lemons,
or Orēges, or if you can get none of theſe, take
the leaues of Roſes eyther greene or dryed, accordinge
to the ſeaſon of the yeare: and whatſoeuer is
of al theſe thinges aboueſaid, you muſt occupy it whole
or by ſmall pieces, and not in poulder. And whan you
will make the parfume, take of the ſayd pieces as much
or as many as you wyll, and annoyncte them well with
Ciuette on euery ſide: after laye them vpon ſome coles
in the middes of the Chamber, or ſome corner, as you
lyfte, this will geue a verye pleaſaunte and precious odoure
thoroughoute all the Chamber. If you will yet
make it better, you may put with the Ciuette, Muſke,
and Ambergriſe, as muche as you will: and if you deſire
to make it with leſſe coſte, and yet neuertheleſſe very
good, take Roſe water of the flowres of Orenges, or
ſuche other odoriferous and ſwete water, with Oyle of
Iaſemin, or of Cloues, or ſuche lyke at your pleaſure,
with the whiche you ſhall temper and ſtiepe Storax calamita,
and a little Lignum Aloes, yf you haue anye, if not,
you ſhall do well inough without it: adde to it as much
Ciuette as you will, and make a licoure therof as thick
as ſau
                        •
                     ce, wherewith you ſhall annoynte the Citron or
Orenge pilles: than laye theim ſo vpon the coles, and
it will be an excellente thinge, and continue twiſe as
longe as it woulde do, if you burned the odours without
the pilles, and beſides that it maketh the parfume to
dure longer, they make alſo the compoſition farre better
and perfecter. If with the ſayde parfume you would
parfume lynnen clothes, Sheetes, or other like thinges,
make it in this maner. Put the lynen, and thinges
that you wyll haue parfumed, in a cofer, that hath no
chinckes, cliftes, chappes, creſtes, holes, or is broken,

wherby the ſmoke may haue iſſue out. You muſt range
and laye your linnen and other thinges on eche ſyde of
the cofer, leauinge a place in the myddle to ſette a lyttle
panne, or other veſſell with fyre in it, and the ſaid pilles
to parfume theym, you maye alſo laye clothes vpon the
ly
                        •
                     de of the cofer. This done, you muſt ſet in the middle
the lyttle veſſell with coales, and a
                        •
                     ſo the pilles: and
hauinge ſhutte the cofer, you muſte let all the parfume
burne out, not openinge the cofer of longe tyme after.
And hauinge thus tar
                        •
                     ed, open the cofer, and tourne
youre linnen and other thinges, to the ende to parfume
them on the other ſide that is not parfumed, and put in
newe parfume, doinge as before, you ſhall finde this of
a greate excellencie, ſo that the cofer it ſelfe ſhall be ſo
well parfumed with it, that all that you putte afterwarde
in it, ſhall ſauoure of it. And if you will, you
maye alſo parfume in the ſayde cofer other lytle coffers
for handkerchers, and other thinges, as lyttle cuſſhy
                        •
                     s,
and bagges of Roſes, whiche are parfumed alſo with
oute ſyde, beynge kepte in the cofers, for they geue alwayes
an odoure and ſauoure to thinges that you put
in them.
               
               
                  ☞Rounde apples or balles to take ou
                        •
                      ſpottes of oyle 
                        〈◊〉
                     
greaſe.
                  TAke purgine Sope, or ſoft Sope, and incorporate
it with the aſſhes of vines finelie ſifted, as much
of the one as of the other, than put amonge the
ſaied▪ poulder Roche Alome burned, and the drye
leeſe of 
                        •
                     yne well beaten into poulder, incorporate
well all together, and make therof lyttle round Apples
or balles: whiche you maye vſe to take oute ſpottes of
any garmente.
               
               
                  ☞To make a paſte for ſweete 
                        •
                     eades or
Beadeſtones.
                  
                  
                     TAke a pounde and a halfe of blacke earth
well beaten into poulder, foure vnces of
Gomme dragant, and laye it a ſtiepe, or
temper it in a morter, with as muche
Roſe water as wil couer the earth with
the ſaied Gomme dragant, and ſtampe
it well by the ſpace of halfe an houre, with theſe ſweete
thinges folowinge. That is to ſaye: Storax calamita, an
vnce, poulder of Cloues halfe an vnce, Labdanum, halfe
an vnce, Synamom halfe an vnce, Sandalum Citrinum,
halfe an vnce: beate all into poulder verye finelye, and
mixe all together with the foreſaied paſte, than take it
oute of the morter, and braye it wel betwene your handes,
by the ſpace of halfe an houre. And than you maye
make thereof Beades or Beadeſtones.
                  ☞The ende of the ſeconde
booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE
Secretes of the reuerende Maſter
Alexis of Piemount.
               THE THIRD BOKE.
               
                  A goodlie ſecrete for to condite or confyte Orenges, Citrons,
and all other fruytes in ſyrop, whiche is a notable thinge.
                  
                     TAke Cytrons, or other
fruites, and cut them in pieces
as you wil, taking out of them
the iuyce or ſubſtaunce that is
within them: than boyle them
in freſhe water aboute halfe an
houre, vntil they be tender, and
as ſoft as you wuld haue them.
And whan you haue taken thē
out, caſt them in cold water, leuing them ſo vntil night.
After this you ſhall ſet them againe to the fire in other
freſh water, and do but onely heat it in that water with
a ſmall fyre, for it muſt not ſeeth, nor be to hote: but let
it onely ſimper a litle, you ſhal continue thus .viij. daies
together, heatinge them euerye day in hote water, and
puttinge them agayne at nighte in colde water. Some
heat the water but once a day, to thend not to make the
citrons to tender, but chaunge the freſh water at night
to take out al the bitternes of the pilles, the whiche beinge
taken away, you muſt take ſugre, or clarified hony
and prepared (as we wil declare afterward) wherin you
muſt put the citrons, hauing firſt well dried them from
the water. In winter you muſt kepe them from y• froſt,
leauing them two or thre houres in a place mete for the
purpoſe: and in Somer you ſhal leaue them there all a
night, and a day, and a night in honye. Than boyle the
hony or ſugre againe by it ſelf, without the Orenges or
Citrons, by the ſpace of halfe an houre or ſomewhat
leſſe, with a ſmall fyre, and beinge cooled, ſet it agayne
to the fire with ye Citrons, continuing ſo .ij. morninges

to the ende to bring the honny to hys perfection, according
as neede ſhall requier. If you will putte honnye
in the water, and not Sugre, you may clarifie it twiſe,
and ſtraine it thorowe a ſtramer, according to the arte
and maner, that hereafter I will teche you, to the ende
you may haue perfitelye the vſe and facion of makinge
all ſuche thinges. Nowe, hauinge thus warmed and
clarified it, you ſhall ſtrayne it, and ſet it againe on the
fier, with the Citrons onely, makinge it to boyle with
a ſmal fier, the ſpace of a quarter of an houre: than take
it from the fier, and let it ſtande and reſt, at euery time
you dooe it, a daye and a night. The next morning you
ſhal boyle it againe together, the ſpace of half an houre,
and dooe ſo twoo morninges, to the ende that the Honnie
or Sugre maye well and perfitlye bee incorporated
with the Cytrons. All the arte and conninge conſiſteth
in boylinge this cyroppe together with the Cytrons,
and alſo the cyrope by it ſelfe. Wherefore he that
hath no ſkyll in the boyling of it, will quickelye lette it
take the ſmoke, ſo that it ſhall ſauour of the fier: but he
that can trimme it wel, it is an exquiſite and pleaſaunt
thing. In this maner maye al other fruites bee dreſſed:
as ripe Peaches with the in ſide and ſkinne, Lemons,
Orenges, Appeles, greene Walnuttes, Lettuſe, well
made cleane, and voyded of their greate leanes, and other
thinges like, all the whiche you muſte boyle, as is
aforeſayed: but ſome more ſome leſſe, after as nede ſhal
bee, and according to the nature of the fruite. So ſhall
you make alwaies a good perfite, and durable thinge.
               
               
                  ☞The maner howe to purifie and prepare honnye and
ſugre for to confite Cytrons and all other fruites.
                  TAke euery time tenne pounde of Hony, the white of
twelue newe layed egges, and take awaye the froth
of them, beating them well together with a ſticke, and
ſixe glaſſes of faier and freſhe water: then put them into
the Honnye, and boyle them in a potte with a moderate
fier, the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, or ſomwhat

leſſe, than take theim faire and ſofetlye frome the fier,
ſcumming them well, and paſſe them ſo hote thorowe a
ſtrainer: for it ſhall be the fairer, and the clearer, for any
thing that you wyll occupie or vſe it aboute. Hauinge
thus ordered it, take for ſixe pounde of Cytrons, twelue
pounde of Honnie. The Sugre is alſo ordered and dreſſed
in like ſorte as the Honny is: but if you will con
                        •
                     ite
Citrons with Sugre, you muſte note this difference,
that for ſyxe pounde of Cytrons, you ſhall putte but .ix.
of Sugre, for to confite theym, ſo that they maye bee
kepte all the yeare. This is, becauſe the honny maketh
a greate deale moore ſkumme and froth, then the ſugre
dooeth, and therefore you muſte putte the thyrde parte
moore of Honnie. In keeping this proportion, you can
not faile to dooe it well.
               
               
                  ☞To confite Peches after the Spanyſhe facion.
                  TAke greate and fayre Peches, whiche you ſhall pill
and make cleane, and cutte theym in pieces, and ſo
laye theym abrode vppon a table faire and cleane in the
Sunne by the ſpace of two dayes, tourning theym euer
at nighte, and in the morninge, and put theim hote into
a Iuleppe of Sugre, well ſodden and prepared as
is aforeſaied. And after you haue taken them out, ſette
them agayne in the Sunne, tourninge them often vntill
they bee well dried. This dooen put theym agayne
into the Iulep, and then in the Sunne, vntill they haue
gotten a faire barke or cruſte, as you wyll haue theym,
and this ſhall you dooe three or foure times: then being
thus prepared, you maye keepe theym in boxes for winter,
for it is a ſoueraygne thinge.
               
               
                  ☞To make Conſerue or Confiture of Quinces, called
in Latyne Cotoneatum, Cydoniatum or Cydonites, as
they dooe in Valence, whiche alſo the Geneuoyes dooe
vſe.
                  TAke Quinces, and purifie them, and when you haue
taken oute the kernelles, ſeeth theym in faire & freſh

water, ſo much, vntil they open and break, then ſtraine
them through a cleane ſtrainer, that there remayn nothinge
in the ſaied ſtrainer, but onelye the hardneſſe of
them, that is to ſaie: the ſkinne the kore and ſuche lyke.
For eyght pounde of the ſaied ſtrained ſubſtaunce, you
muſte putte three pounde of faier and fine Sugre: and
taking a veſſell of tinne faire and large in the bottome,
you ſhall myngle the Quinces with the Sugre: and
then ſette theym to boyle with a litle fyre, ſturrynge
theym with a broade ſklyſe of woode, vntill all be well
ſodden, whiche if you wyll knowe, loke when all ſhall
leuſe it ſelfe, and cleaue no more to the ſaied veſſell, for
then it is ſodden to his perfection, and ſhall bee time to
take it of. And if you put to it anye Muſke, ſtampe it
with a litle Sugre, as much as you wyll, & caſt it into
the ſaied veſſel, ſturring it alwaies with your ſklyſe of
woode. If you wyll adde ſpices to it, put in Synamom,
Cloues, Nutmegges, and Ginger, as muche as you
wyll, boylinge the Muſke with a little Vinagre. Thys
dooen, with the broade ſklyſe laye of this confection of
Quinces vpon a table, where fyrſte you muſte haue ſifted
and ſtrowed Sugre, and ſo make rounde, broade or
long pieces, as you wil wt the circle of a bore, of what
greatneſſe you lyſte: then ſet theym in the Sunne vntil
they bee thorowe drie. And whan they haue ſtande a
while, tourne theym vp ſide downe: making them alwaies
a bedde of lifted Sugre bothe vnder and aboue.
Then tourne theym ſtill in the ſaied Sugre, and drye
theym in the Sunne, ſo longe vntill they haue gotten a
faire white cruſt of Sugre. Better comfites of Quynces,
ſweeter, or hartier than this, a man can not make.
In like maner maye you dreſſe and trymme Peches,
Peares, and other kyndes of fruites: A thing of greate
ſingularitie.
               
               
                  ☞To make a paſte of ſugre, whereof a man maye
make all maner of fruites, and other fyne thynges,
with theyr forme, as platters, diſhes, glaſſes, cuppes,
and ſuch like thinges, wherwith you may furniſh a table:
and when you haue doen, eate them vp. A pleaſant
thing for them that ſit at the table.
                  
                     
TAke gomme dragant, as muche as you will, and
ſtiepe it in Roſe water, vntill it be molified. And
for foure vnces of Sugre, take of it the bignes of
a Beane, the iuyce of Lemons a walnut ſhell full, and
a litle of the white of an egge: but you muſt firſte take
the gomme, and beate it ſo much with a peſtel in a morter
of white marble, or of braſſe vntill it become like
water, then putte to it the iuyce with the white of the
egge, incorporating wel al together. This dooen, take
iiii. vnces of fine white ſugre, well beaten to poulder,
and caſt it into the morter by litle and litle, vntil all bee
turned into the forme of paſte. Than take it oute of the
laied morter, and bray it vpon the poulder of ſugre, as
it were meale or flowre, vntill all bee like ſoft paſte, to
the ende you may turne it and facion it which way you
wil. Whan you haue brought your paſte to this forme,
ſpreade it abrode with Sinamom, vpon greate or ſmall
leaues, as you ſhal thinke it good: and ſo ſhal you forme
and make what things you wil, as is aforeſaied. With
ſuche fine knackes as maye ſerue a table, taking heede
that there ſtand no hote thing nigh vnto it. At the ende
of the banket they may eate al, and breake the platters,
diſhes, glaſſes, cuppes, and all thinges: for this paſte is
verie delicate and ſaueurous. If you will make a thing
of moore fineſſe than this, make a tarte of Almondes
ſtamped with ſugre, and roſe water, of like ſorte that
march paines be made of. This ſhall you laye betwene
twoo paſtes of ſuche veſſelles or fruites, or ſome other
thing as you thinke good.
               
               
                  ☞To make a confection of Melons or Pompones.
                  TAke what quantitie of Melons you wil, and take
them before they be ful ripe, but let them be good,
& make as many cuttes in thē as they bee marked

with quarters on euery ſide, & hauing mondified them,
taken oute their kernelles, and pilled of the vtter rine,
ſtiepe them in good vinaigre, leauinge theim ſo by the
ſpace of ten dayes: and whan you haue taken them out,
take other Vinagre, and ſtiepe them a newe againe,
other ten dayes, remouinge and ſtyrringe theim euerye
daye: than whan time ſhall be, take them oute, and put
them in a courſe linnen cloth, driyng and wiping them
well. Finally ſet them in the ayer the ſpace of a day and
a night, than boile them in hony, and by the ſpace of ten
daies geue them euery daie a little bubbling or boilinge,
leauing them alwaies in the hony: and let them boile at
eche time onelye but one wawme. Then take the ſaide
pieces, & put them in what kind of veſſell you will, and
take theſe ſpices folowinge, the poulder of Cloues, of
ginger, of Nutmegs, & of Sinamom, whereof you ſhall
make ſpices, this done, make one bedde or ranke of the
pieces of melons, & another of the ſpices: than take fine
white hony, and poure it vpon them in the ſaide veſſell.
               
               
                  ☞To make Melons and Pompones ſweete and verye
delicate.
                  TAke fine ſugre, and diſſolue it in water, than take
the ſeedes of a Melon, and cleaue them a litle on the
ſyde, that ſticketh to the melon, and put them in the ſugred
water, addinge to them a lyttle Roſe water, leaue
the ſayde ſeedes ſo by the ſpace of thre or foure houres,
and then take them out, and you ſhall ſee that as ſoone
as the ſayde ſeede is drye, it will cloſe vp agayne. Plant
it, and there will come of it ſuche Melons as the lyke
hath not bene ſeene. And if you will geue them the ſauoure
of Muſke, put in the ſayde water a lyttle Muſke,
and fine Synamom. And this may you do alſo with the
ſeedes of Pompones and Coucombers.
               
               
                  To confyte orenge pilles, whiche may be done at all times
of the yeare, and chiefly in Maye, becauſe than the ſayd
pilles be greater and thicker.
                  
                     
TAke thicke Orenge pilles cut in foure or .vi. pieces,
and ſti ep them in water the ſpace of ten or .xii
dayes. You maie knowe whan they be ſtieped ynough,
if you hold them vp in the ſunne and ſe thorow
them, for than they be ſtieped inough: and if you cannot
ſee thorowe them, let them yet ſtiepe vntill you maye:
than afterward lay them to drie vpon a table, and than
betwene two drie linen clothes. Moreouer put them in
a kettle, or veſſell leaded, adding to it as muche hony as
wil halfe couer the ſaied pilles, more or leſſe as you ſhal
thinke good. Boile them a little, ſtyrring them always
and than take them from the fire, leaſte the honye ſeeth
to muche, for if it ſhoulde boile but a litle more then it
ought to boile, it woulde be thicke and maſſife. Let it
than ſtande & reſt foure dayes in the ſaid hony, ſtirringe
and mengling well euery daye the ſaide Orenges and
hony together. For, becauſe there is not hony inoughe
to couer ouer al the orenge pilles, you muſt ſtyrre them
wel & oftentimes, to thende they may al equally receiue
of the honnye. This ſhall you do three times, geuinge
them one bublinge or boilinge at eche time, and ſo let
them reſt and ſtand .iii. daies as we haue ſaied. Finally
you ſhall ſtraine or dreane them from the ſayde honye,
and boile theim in as muche other honnye as you ſhall
thinke will ſuffice, and after you haue let theim boyle
the ſpace of a Credo, take them from the fire, and beſtow
them in veſſels, putting to them of the beſte ſpices you
can finde, as Ginger, Cloues, and Sinamom: mixe all
well together, and you ſhall haue made an excellente
thinge. And note, that the hony that ſhall remayne, wil
be ſtill good for to dreſſe and trimme other Orenges, or
other thinges withall.
               
               
                  To confyte walnuttes.
                  FIrſte take Walnuttes whan they be litle & greene,
with the pille or huſke and al, and make in them .iiii
litle holes, or mo, than ſtiep them in water .xi. dayes, or
more or leſſe: make them cleane and boile theim in

hony, as the foreſayde Orenges, but make them ſeeth
foure times as muche. And note that the honye is alwayes
good, but you muſt oftentimes put in freſhe, becauſe
it conſumeth. Finally you ſhall dreſſe them with
ſpices, as the Orenges, but putte not manye cloues to
them for they will make them to bytter.
               
               
                  To confyte Gourdes.
                  TAke the necke of the Gourde and cut it in longe
pieces, as you thinke good, and powre vpon thē
boiling water, and do ſo .xi. morninges, but you
muſt haue pilled them finely; and taken awaye
the inner part that ſerueth for nothinge. This doone,
ſeeth them in a kettle vntill they be neither to much nor
to litle boyled, but euen hole and maſſiue not broken:
than drie them vpon a table in the ſhadowe the ſpace of
two dayes, and after wipe them cleane piece by piece,
with a linen cloth, & do with them as with the Orēges.
               
               
                  To confite cheries.
                  TAke cherries and leaue them a day in the ſunne
than take out the ſtones, and ſette theim in the
ſunne agayne thre dayes: after this ſeeth theim
as we haue ſayde of the Orenges: but you muſt
leaue them in hony .xv. dayes, and by the fyre .iii. dayes,
ſo that they may onely be kepte warme, to thende they
ſauoure not of burninge, or of the fire. And after you
haue well mixed and incorporated all, you ſhall putte
them in hony with ſpices. Al theſe confitures may dure
many yeares, ſo that you refreſhe them with other hony
boyled a litle, whan they be diminiſhed.
               
               
                  ❀To make litle morſels as they vſe in Naples, an exquiſite
thinge, for they be very ſauorous, do comforte the ſtomacke,
and make a ſwete breath.
                  TAke thre pound of fine ſugre, ye flower of meale .vi.
pound, of Sinamom thre vnces, Nutmegs, ginger,
pepper, of eche of them balfe an vnce, but let the quantitie

of the pepper be greater than of the reſidue, rawe
white honny, not clarified, three vnces. Firſte make a
round cycle with the ſaide flowre, in the middle wherof,
you ſhal put the Sugre, and vpō it a pound of Muſkt
Roſe water, bray and breake well all theſe things with
your handes, ſo longe, vntill you feele no more Sugre.
This done, you ſhall put in the ſaide ſpices, and than
the hony, mixinge well all together with your hande.
After this mengle it againe amonge the flowre, & kepe
ſome of it to flower the tile or other thinges that you
muſt bake it vpon. And whan all is well broughte and
made into paſt, you ſhall cut the litle morſels in ſunder
with youre handes, making eche of them three vnces
weight, or there aboute, than turne and make them in
to the fourme of a fyſhe, dreſſinge them with youre inſtrument
meete for the ſame purpoſe. Than heate your
ouen and laye them vpon litle tiles of copper or earth,
makinge firſt vpon the tiles a good thicke bed of floure,
you muſt bake them the mouth of the ouē open, keping
euermore a fire at one of the ſides of the mouth of the
ouen, ye muſt alſo touche them often times, to ſe if they
be baked ynoughe, and whither they hange ſure, and
holde together betwene youre fingers: You maye alſo
bake them in the fire in ouens of copper couered, ſuche
as tartes be made in, then when you haue taken theim
out you muſt gilt them.
                  ☞The ende of the thirde
booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE
Secretes of the reuerende Maſter
Alexis of Piemount.
               THE FOVRTH BOKE.
               
                  ☞An odoriferous and precious water, wherwith a man
may weate or bath anye linnen clothe, to wype or rubbe
his face, which wil make the fleſh white and wel coloured:
and the more a man rubbeth his face with it the
fairer it is, and alſo continueth .vi. monethes: 
                        〈◊〉
                      thing experimented
and proued yea, and it for a quene.
                  
                     TAke a pounde of roche
Alome, waſſhed and burned,
Malmeſey twoo glaſſes full,
paſte of Borax .vi. vnces, white
Gomme dragant a pounde,
Gomme arabicke thre vnces,
ſtiep al in the Malmſey, by the
ſpace of twoo naturall dayes,
myngle it with twoo pottes of
Goates milke, and ſtoppe it well that it take no vente:
than take nine vnces of Sublimatū, and ſet it to burne or
calcine in an vnyelded potte, well cloſed vp in a furnayſe,
and twoo pounde of Ceruſe of Alexandria, prepared
in this maner. Lappe it vp with the white of an
egge, in ſome lynnen clothe, and boyle it in ſweete lye,
vntill the thirde part be deminiſhed: than mixe all theſe
thinges well together. This dooen, take twoo pounde
of rawe white Honny, thre pound of Terebentyne of
Alexandria, three glaſſes of ſtilled vinagre, Ginger ſtamped
.vi. vnces: boyle all with the ſaied vinagre, vntyil
there be but two glaſſesfull left. Than take .iii. vnces
of fine Mirre elect, & put it vpon the ſaid thinges: after
this take twoo vnces of litarge or white leade of ſiluer
wel beaten into poulder, and boile it in .iii. glaſſes full
of good vergeous or whyte wyne, vntyll the thyrde

part be diminiſhed: than with a litle cane, rede, or ſtick,
mixe or ſturre well all the ſaied thinges together, in
ſome veſſell, the ſpace of .vi. houres. Finallye, put into
the ſame about fiftie ſnailes out of their ſhelles & made
cleane, an vnce of Campher, a good fatte henne flawen
and brokē into ſmall pieces, without waſhing her, two
Orenges withoute their pilles, kernelles, or the lytle
ſkinne within the pille .xii. Lemons ordered likewiſe,
or elles the iuyce of them, which will conſume the ſaied
ſnayles, and all wyll waxe like paſte. This dooen, take
the white of .xxv. egges new laied, hard roſte, with the
whiche you muſt incorporate ſixe vnces of Synamom,
and a certaine quantitie of ſugre candy, and put all together
in a violle into the bathe or baine, and ſtill it.
The firſt water that ſhall come of it, will be white, the
ſeconde yet whiter, which you ſhall receyue a parte by
it ſelfe, and the thirde verie white. Then myngle the
firſt with the laſte, and diſtill it againe, and kepe it, for
it is good: yet not ſo good as the ſecond, which is verye
excellent aboue all thinges in the world, and that muſt
ſerue for the viſage or face. If you will dreſſe or trimme
handkerchers with it, as is aboue ſaied, take what
handkerchers you will, ſo that they bee not very fine, &
lay them in a platter, and powre vpon theym as muche
water as wyll couer them, leauing them ſo the ſpace of
ſixe houres, than hauing taken them oute, and hanged
them vp, in ſuch ſort, that the water may droppe out of
them into the ſame platter, ye ſhal let them ſo drie, then
bathe or waſhe them again, as before, other vi. houres,
driyng them agayne, and ſo .vii. times. Than ſhal you
haue an excellent thing.
               
               
                  ☞To make a water that wyll make a whyte and pale
perſone well coloured.
                  TAke white Pigeons, and fatten them with Pyneapple
kernelles, the ſpace of .xv. daies, and than kil
them: and hauing caſt away the head, the feete, and the
guttes, with all the garbage, diſtill them in a limbecke

with halfe a loffe of Succarine Alom, thre hundred leaues
of fine ſiluer plate, fiue hundred of golde foyle, and
the cromme of .iiii. white loues ſtieped or weated in almonde
milke, a pounde of the marye of a calfe or oxe,
and freſhe barrowes greaſe. Make all this to diſtil with
a litle fier, & you ſhal haue therof a verie perfite water.
               
               
                  ☞A verie good water to make the face appeare of the
age of .xxv. yeares.
                  TAke a couple of calues feete, and ſeeth theym in
xviii. pounde of riuer water, vntil halfe be conſumed,
then put to it a pounde of ryſe, and lette it
ſeeth with crommes of fine manchet breade ſtieped in
milke, two pound of freſhe butter, and white of .x. new
laied egges, with their ſhelles & all: ſet thoſe al thinges
to diſtill, and into the water that ſhall come of it, put a
litle Campher, and ſuccarine Alom, and you ſhall haue
an excellent and noble thing of it.
               
               
                  ☞A water to beautifie the face, and all other partes
of the bodye.
                  TAke of white Borar twoo vnces, roch Alome an
vnce, Campher twoo dragmes, Alome called in
Latyne Alumen ſciſsilae or plumae, whiche naturallye
groweth like a ſtone, and not withſtandinge maye be
deuided, there bee longe ſtrakes ſeene in it, and the Alome
called Alumen catinae, becauſe it is boyled in a caudron,
and is made more pure by an herbe (like to herbe
yuye) burned into aſhes and lye made therewith, of ech
of theſe an vnce: beate eche of theſe to poulder by them
ſelues: and than incorporate all well together, and put
it in ſome greate veſſel full of condite water, the which
you ſhal couer and cloſe vp ſure with a lynen cloth, and
ſet it to the fier, the ſpace of two houres, than take it awaye,
and when it is colde agayne, putte it in another
veſſell, and take the white of two egges new layed the
ſame day, and beate it well with a litle vergeous: and
ſo put it in the veſſell with water, and leaue all ſo together

the ſpace of .xx. dayes in the Sunne, and you ſhall
haue a perfite thing of it.
               
               
                  ☞A water to make the ſkinne white, and to take away
the ſunne burning.
                  TAke halfe a potfull of raine water, and fill it vp
with vergeous, than ſeeth it vntill it bee halfe
conſumed: and in the meane time that it yet boyleth,
fill it with the iuyce of Lemons. When it
hath ſodden, take it from the fier, and putte to it the
white of .iiii. egges newe layed, and well beaten, but
the foreſaied ſubſtaunces muſte be colde before you put
in the ſaied white of the egges: and than is it made.
               
               
                  ☞Another water to beautifie the face, and to make
it appeare of the age of fiftene yeres.
                  TAke quicke Brimſtone an vnce, white enſence of
the beſt .ii. vnces, of Myrre twoo vnces, of fyne
Ambergriſe .vi. dragmes, beate eche of theſe
drooges by them ſelues, and then mingle them altogether
with a pounde of roſe water. This doen, put them
to diſtill, and kepe it in a veſſel cloſe ſtopped. And when
you go to bedde, waſhe your face therewith, and leaue
it ſo not wiping it: and in the morning waſhe it againe
with well water luke warme, and by thys meane ſhall
you mayntayne, and keepe the ſkynne verie delycate,
fyne, and ſmoth.
               
               
                  ☞An eaſye water for Ladyes and gentil women.
                  TAke the whyte of eyghte newe layed egges, and
beate them vntill they bee conuerted into a cleare
water, then ſtrayne them, and take Alumen catinae or Desſquamatum,
Boras, Campher, Alumen zucharinum which
is made with Alome relented, Roſe water and whites
of egges into the facion of a Sugre lofe, of eche of them
an vnce, of Vinagre eyght vnces, water of beane bloſſoms
twoo vnces. Let all theſe ſaied thinges be finelye
ſtamped and beaten in a morter, and than put all together

in a great violle of glaſſe, the whiche beynge well
couered, you ſhall leaue in the ſunne the ſpace of fiftene
dayes, ſtyrringe the ſayde water twiſe or thriſe a daye,
and ſo let it ſtande and reſt. This done, put it in another
violle, and waſhe your ſelfe with it whan you wil,
leauinge it ſo a certaine ſpace vpon your face: and than
rubbe it with a piece of ſcarlet. The lady or gentlewoman
that will vſe often times to waſhe her face with
this water, yea, were ſhe of yeares thre ſcore, ſhe ſhall
appeare to be of the age of, xv. yeare.
               
               
                  ☞To make a goodly luſtre or beautiflynge of the face,
good for ladies and dames.
                  TAke a greate Lemmon, and make a hole in the
toppe of him thorough the which hole you ſhall
take out of the ſubſtaunce within the bigneſſe
of a Walnutte: and fyll it agayne with Sugre
Candye, with foure or fiue goldfoyle leaues, and couer
it agayne with the piece that you toke of, ſowinge it
with a needle, ſo that it may remaine faſt on. Than ſet
the ſayde lemon to roſte vpon the coales, righte vp, and
after as it ſhall beginne to roſte or boyle, tourne it often,
vntill it hath ſweat a good ſpace, than take it of.
And whan you will vſe of it, putte one of your fingers
into the hole that was ſowed vp, and rubbe youre face
with it, with ſome fine linnen clothe, and it will proue
an exquiſite thinge.
               
               
                  To take out ſpottes, lentilles, or pimpels of the face.
                  TAke the meale or flowre of a kind of pulſe corne called
Lupinum, which groweth in Italy and Fraunce,
but here vnneth knowen, the freſhe and recente gall of
a goate, the iuyce of a lemon, Alome ſucharine, incorporate
well all together in maner of an oynctmente: and
rubbe at night the place with it where the ſpottes or
burgeons be, and you ſhalbe incontinent cured of them
This is well experimented and proued.
               
               
                  ☞A very good way how to geue a luſtre or ſhew to all
diſtilled water.
                  
                     
TAke litle greene pine Apples well mondified, cut
them in litle rounde and flatte pieces: whiche you
ſhall ſtiepe three dayes in cowe milke, chaunging
the milke once a day (but it were better in goates milk)
at the ende of thre dayes diſtille them with theſe poulders
folowing. Poulder of glaſſe foure vnces, pieces of
redde corall two vnces, Suger Candy four vnces, roch
Alome .i. vnce, quicke ſiluer mortified with ſpittle, an
vnce and a halfe .xij. new laide egges broken with their
ſhelles and all, Turpentine waſhed in ix. waters, four
vnces, Snailes ſuch as carry no ſhelles on their backes
and if you can not get ſuch, take thoſe that cary ſhelles.
All theſe thinges well ſtamped eche one by him ſelfe,
mingle them together, and than make in the Limbeck
a rowe or bedde of them, than a bedde of the poulders,
and one of Turpentine, and ſo another of the ſnayles,
and thus one vpon another, vntill the Limbecke be ful,
than caſt vpon it a glaſſefull of good white wine, and
make vnto it a temperat fyre. Thus ſhall you haue ſuch
a water as you wuld deſyre, the which you ſhal kepe in
a flagon of glaſſe: for it is very good to make white and
to beautifie the fleſh, and to take away the wrinckles of
the face: A thinge proued.
               
               
                  To make a water of whyte Melons, that maketh a fair
ſkinne.
                  TAke white Melons well made cleane of theyr
pilles, and cut them in pieces a fyngar thick, leauing
all the middes alone, than take theſe thinges
folowinge: Succharyne Alome four vnces,
quicke ſyluer broken or mortified, an vnce, Roch Alom
burned an vnce, Turpentine waſhed a pound .xij. new
layde Egges ſtamped with ſhelles and all, white Snailes
cut in pieces as many as you will, Suger. iiii. vnces,
with a glaſſefull of goates milke, and one of white
wine: than fyll the Limbecke with the ſaied thinges,
layeng rancke vpon ranck, as we haue ſaid of the other
water before. Giue it than a litle fire, and kepe the water

in a viole, whiche will be excellente to waſhe youre
fa
                        •
                     e with. After this maner is made ye water of Auguria
of the bloſſomes of beanes, of mallowes, and of the bloſſomes
of Tanſey, or wild vine, & other ſuch like things.
               
               
                  To make a very good water of Gourdes, as well garden
Gourdes as wilde.
                  TAke Gourdes, and plucke of their vtter pille or
barke, cut them into little round wheeles, than
put to them ſixe vnces of ſuccarine Alome, an
vnce of Alom ſciffilae or plumae, the value of a peny
of Myrrhe, halfe a pounde of Turpentine waſſhed,
foure newe laide egges ſtamped and well beaten together,
ſixe Lemons cut in trenches, Snailes as many as
you will, a glaſſe of white wine. Beate into poulder
that whiche ought to be beaten, and mixe well all together,
makinge the firſt ranke of Suger, the ſeconde of
poulder, and the thirde of Snayles: than put the wine,
the Lemons, and the egges vpon all the reſte, and ſo diſtill
it with a ſmall fire: and the water that commeth of
it muſt be kept .viii. or .xv. dayes in the ſunne in a viol.
A man may make the lyke alſo of Gourdes that growe
nigh vnto the ſea.
               
               
                  ☞An oyntment for the face whiche beinge kepte on,
or vſed continually the ſpace of eighte dayes, altereth
the ſkinne and reneweth it finely.
                  TAke four newe laide egges, and lay them eyghte
dayes together in ſtronge Vinaigre, ſo that they
become tender and ſoft, that you may take of the
ſhelles. After this take oute the yelkes finelye that you
breake them not, and put them in an earthen diſhe leaded.
This done, take the value of a peny of white Turpentine
well waſſhed, the value of a halfe peny of ſugre
Candy, and twiſe as muche of the paſte of Borar, Campher,
Verdegriſe, Roche Alome, of eche of them ſixe deniers.
All theſe thinges well beaten to poulder, take .ii.
quarters of quick ſiluer mortified wt ſpettle, or the iuyce

of lemons, oyle of wine leeſe called Tartarum .iiii. vnces,
a white onyon, which you ſhall boyle in white wine, &
ſtraine thorowe a ſtrainer, and mingle al this with the
yelkes of the egges, incorporatinge, and beatinge all
well together, with the iuyce of two lemmons. And at
night whan you goe to bed, laye the ſayde compoſition
vpon your face, necke, and breaſte, lettinge it ſo drye of
it ſelfe. Nowe, you muſt ſtyrre it well at euery time you
will occupie it, and you maye not take it to ſone from
your face, for than you ſhall marre the ſkinne: but you
muſt let it lie on the ſpace of eight dayes. And although
you would thinke the ſayed compoſition burned or flawed
of the ſkinne of your face, you may not for all that
take it of, but let it worke his operation, and at thende
of eight dayes take it of in this maner folowing. Take
wheate bran, mallowes, leaues of Marche violettes,
Beane poddes, crommes of breade, and a good quantitie
of rawe honny, and boyle al theſe thinges together,
vntill it be all ſofte, than powre it in to ſome potte, and
let it coole vntill ſuche tyme as you maye endure the
ſmoke therof, holdinge youre face ouer the potte. Alſo
couer well your heade, your breaſte, and other places,
where you haue laide the ſaide paſt, and holde your face
ſo ouer the ſmoke of the pot vntil the ſweate drop down
by al your face. And whā you perceiue your ſelf to ſwet
take a litle of the ſaid water, & put crommes of bread in
to it, and whan you haue well ſwete, take of the breade
crommes, & rubbe with them al about wher the compoſition
is laide: for there the ſkin wil be very tender, and
therfore muſt you rubbe hard, vntil your face be cleane
of the ſaid paſt, or compoſition, than immediatly waſhe
your face with cleane water, and wipe it drie again. After
this, you muſt take ſome diſtilled water, wherein is
no ſtronge ſubſtaunce, and bath your face with all fiue
or ſix times. If in caſe there remaine behind anye of the
ſaied paſt in any place of your body, rubbe it well with
the ſaid crommes of bread, or ſome linen cloth, wete or
dieped in ſuch diſtilled water, and you ſhall incontinent

ſee that that ſkinne which was rough, thicke, and rude,
ſhalbe chaunged and altered into a fine, faire, and delycate
ſkynne. But beware that in eyght daies after you
go not abroade in the open aire, or to nygh the fyre, leſt
the new fyne, tender, and delycate ſkynne, ſhoulde be
burned, or take anye hurte. This is a goodly ſecrete.
               
               
                  ☞For him that hath naturally a redde face.
                  TAke foure vnces of the kernelles of peches, twoo
vnces of gourdes ſeedes, and make therof an oyle,
wherwith you ſhall anoynt his face morning and euening,
and this will kil and deſtroy the redneſſe. A thing
founde trew by experience.
               
               
                  ☞To make aqua argentata or ſiluered water, which maketh a
white ruddie and gliſtring face and is made like a water
and not like an oyntment, that the dames of Italy for the
moſt part do vſe, althoughe that fewe men make it as it
ought to bee made.
                  TAke .iiii. vnces of Sublimatum, and break it in ſonder
in a morter, ſtyrringe it alwaies with one hande.
When it is broken ynough, take .iiii. deniers of quicke
ſiluer, and put it in ſtronge white vinagre the ſpace of
viii. daies, than put it in another veſſell with other vinagre,
and boyle it a litle. This doen, take the quicke ſyluer
out of the vinagre, and lay it in a diſhe, taking the
crome of a lofe, which you ſhall cromme with the ſayed
quicke ſiluer, ſtyrring wel altogether, vntill the quicke
ſiluer be faire and cleare, than blow in it, and the bread
will flie away: than ſhall you put this quicke ſiluer, ſo
purged, with the ſublimat, in mixing and ſtyrrynge it
wel with one hand, & ſo it wil become white as ſnowe:
than take hote boylinge water, and powre it into the
ſaied morter, which muſt alſo be hote, and ſtyrre it well
and mixe all together, and ſo let it ſtand and reſt. After
this take diligently the water away, which wil be very
good for ſcabbes, or ſkurfe: & powre to it other ſethinge
water, & waſ
                        •
                     he it well, as before, foure or fiue tymes.

This dooen, take .xii. or .rv. Perles, and a Carlyn or
twoo of golde broken in ſonder, or elles a lytle Campher,
a lytle Boras, a lytle Talchum, if you haue any.
All theſe thinges ſhall you breake and bruſe in ſunder,
with one hande in a morter, and ſo leaue it fourtye
daies in the Sunne, ſturring it euery daye with youre
hande the ſpace of halfe an houre. After the ſaied fourtie
daies take foure newe layed egges, the whiche beinge
a lytle heated by the fier: you ſhall brake: and hauyng
taken the whites of them, you ſhall put them into
the ſaied morter, mingling well all together, and ſo
ſhall you dooe this water folowing. Take litle ripe Lemons,
and take of the outwarde yelowe pille, than cut
them in ſmall pieces, wyth .xii. newe layed egges, beatynge
the yelke, the white, and the ſhelles together,
than adding to it twoo vnces of Turpentyne, you ſhal
put al into a Limbecke, making to it a litle fier, wherof
you ſhall haue about a glaſful of water, with the which
water you ſhal temper your ſiluered water in the morter:
than kepe it in a violle cloſe ſtopped, in a cole place:
And ſo it will bee an excellent thinge, and it were to
geue a queene. And when you wyll occupie of it, lette
your face fyrſt bee cleane, and than laie to the ſaied water,
as muche as you ſhall by youre diſcretion, thynke
ſufficient, lettinge it drie of it ſelfe.
               
               
                  ☞To make an oy
                        •
                     tment for the face.
                  
                     TAke three vnces of the fatte caule of a fatte
lambe, the whiche you ſhall put into freſhe
water, chaunging it euery day fiftie times,
ſeuen or eyghte daies together, then cut it
very ſmall, put it in an earthen panne leaded,
full of whyte cleare Vinagre, with a dragme of
Campher ſtamped. Boyle this together by the ſpace of
twoo or thre Pater noſter, and after ſtrayne the greaſe
with the foreſaied thinges, thorowe a whyte linnen
clothe, than lette the greaſe coole, vntill it bee harde againe:
and if there bee anye ordure or fylthe at the bottome,

you muſte take it away. After this take twoo vnces
of the oyle of Tartare, and put it in ſome veſſell vpon
the coales, vntill it come together: and hauing ſet it
in a moyſte place by the ſpace of a daye and a night, put
to it an vnce of Borar well waſſhed, than ſtampe and
mixe all well together, adding to it an vnce, and a halfe
of Ceruſe waſſhed, and hauing put all in a new carthen
panne leaded, ſet it on a ſmall fier, ſtyrryng it alwaies
well together, vntyl all the ſaied thinges be wel
incorporated together: and after that you haue layed it
vpon your face, laye on alſo a redde coloure made wyth
the grayne whereof Scarlate is died, called in Latyne
Coccum, and wyth Braſſel, for it ſhalbe better than with
Braſyll alone.
               
               
                  ☞To make a redde colour for the face.
                  TAke redde Sandall fynely ſtamped, and ſtrong vinagre
twyſe diſtylled, than put into it as much Sandall
as you wyll, and let it boyle faire and ſoftly, & put
to it alſo a lytle roche Alom ſtamped, and you ſhal haue
a very perfite redde. If you wyll make it odoriferous
and ſauour well, put a lytle Muſke to it, or els Ciuet, or
ſome other odoriferous thing what you lyſt.
               
               
                  ☞To make the face fayre.
                  TAke Beanes and a kynde of a litle grayne called in
Latyne Faſeoli, and Cyche peaſon, and make a poulder
thereof, which you ſhall ſtiepe and temper in luke
warme water, with the white of an egge, and the milk
of an aſſe: and than lay it out to drye. And after ſtiepe
it in a lyttle water, wherewith you ſhall waſſhe youre
face, and it wyll become fayer, cleare, and nete.
               
               
                  ☞To make the face faire another waye.
                  TAke the freſſhe bloſſomes of Beanes, and diſtyll
them thorowe a Limbecke, and ſo waſſhe youre
face with the water that ſhall come of them.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To make the face fayre.
                  TAke the flowres of Roſemary, and boyle them in
white wine, than waſhe youre face with it, and
vſe of it for to drinke and ſo ſhall you make youre
face verie faire, and alſo your breath ſweete.
               
               
                  ☞To take out ſpottes or redde pimples out of a mans
face and to make the ſkinne very faire.
                  TAke a litle roche Alome, and breake it a ſonder into
ſmall pieces, than take the white of an egge newely
layed euen at that inſtant, the whiche you ſhall ſet to
the fyre in a lytle panne leaded, with the roche Alome,
and leaue it ſo vntyl you ſee that it beginneth to boyle,
mingle it alwaies with a lytle ſticke. And when it is
waxen hard, annoynet well al yourface with it three or
foure daies, and it wil make your face fairer. A thinge
founde trew by experience.
               
               
                  ☞To make a water that maketh the face white.
                  TAke Lytarge, Syluer ſublymed the value of a
grote, and put it into ſome veſſel wt ſtrong white
vinagre, than boyle it vntyll it bee deminiſhed
the heyght of two fyngers: lette it ſtande and reſt, than
ſtraine it and kepe it. Alſo milke and the iuyce of Orenges
mixed with the oyle of wyne lees is verie good.
               
               
                  ☞Another maner to make the face fayre.
                  TAke the gall of a Hare, of a Cocke or Henne, and
of Eeles, temper them with Honnye, and putte
them ſo into a veſſell of braſſe well ſtopped, for to
annoynt your face with whan you lyſte, but take heede
it touche not your eyes: for it would inflame them and
make them looke redde, and ſo hurt you.
               
               
                  ☞To take of ſpottes lyntelles or redde pymples out of
the face.
                  TAke greene Liſardes quicke, and boile them in oyle
vntyll the thyrde parte bee conſumed. Strayne

this, and put to it white ware, and than make thereof
an oyntment, wherwith you ſhall often times annoint
your face.
               
               
                  To take of a ringe worme or tetter that renneth all ouer
a mannes face, called in Frenche Le feu volant.
                  TAke the rootes of La
                           •
                        athum acutum, called Sorel
as wel wylde, as of the garden, waſh them wel
and mondifie them, and cutte them in ſmall pieces,
the whiche you ſhall ſtiepe in ſtrong whyte
vynagre, and leaue them in it two dayes & two nights.
Afterwarde rubbe the place of the ſore with it three or
foure times a day, and at night with the ſayd pieces of
the ſorell retes, letting them ſtiepe alwaies after in the
ſayde Vynagre, and you ſhall be cured.
               
               
                  To dryue a way life.
                  TAke encens, and the larde of a barrowe Hogge,
properly called barrowes greaſe, Boyle them together
in an earthen panne or potte leaded, and
with this ointment rubbe or annoynte the place where
the life be.
               
               
                  To make a water that taketh of all ſtayninge, dying, and
ſpottes from the handes of artificers that gette them by
workinge, and maketh them very white and fayre: It is
alſo good for them that be ſunne burned.
                  TAke the iuyce of a Lemon, with a litle baye ſalte,
and waſhe your handes with it▪ and let them drye
of them ſelues: waſhe them agayne, and you ſhall
finde all the ſpottes and ſtayninges gone. It is alſo very
good againſt the ſcurfe or ſcabbes.
               
               
                  To make a water that maketh the fleſhe and ſkinne of a
man or woman very fayer, and will be kept like a precious
baulme.
                  TAke a yonge crow euen out of the neſt, if you maye
get one ſo: if not, take him as yonge as you maye:

to whome (by the ſpace of .xl. dayes) ye ſhall geue none
other meate, but the yelkes of harde egges. Than kyll
him, and flawe him, breakinge the fleſhe into ſmal pieces:
than take leaues of a myrtle tree, and lay one ranck
of them, and another of the little pieces of the crowe, in
ſome great violl of glaſſe, powdered and ſtrowed ouer
with the poulder of Talchum, ſtamped with the oyle of
ſwete Almondes, and put in as muche of it as your diſcretion
ſhal iudge, for a great quantitie will do no hurt
to it. And if there remayne yet anye pieces of the ſayde
crowe, make therof another ranck, adding therto ſome
myrtle leaues, and than of the Talchum, and the ſayde
glaſſe muſt be large, wyde, and lowe. Finally you ſhall
poure vpon it thre or foure vnces of the oyle of Myrrhe,
dreſſed with egges, as is declared in this booke. Than
ſet the ſaied violl or glaſſe vnder the Limbeck, ſtopping
well the ſides and ioyntes, that it take no vent, and likewiſe
the recipient: and geue it at the beginning a ſmall
fyre for the ſpace of foure or fiue houres, ſo that al theſe
thinges may be diſſolued, and as it were, breake, and
corrupt amonge them ſelues: than make the fyre greater
and greater, and at the ende very great for the ſpace
of an hour, letting it after cole. And if the fire haue ben
great ynough, the water will be yelowe, and ſomwhat
redde, the whiche water you ſhall put into another lyke
glaſſe, great, according to the quātitie of the ſaid water
putting to it half a pound of roſemary bloſſoms, halfe a
glaſſefull of Aqua vite, ſetting al to diſtill agayne wt the
limbeck, and recipient as before: you muſt put in the recipiēt,
or at the beke of the limbeck, ſome fine litle cloth,
wherin muſt be white Bengewin ſtamped betwene ij.
papers as wel as you can. Whan this water ſhalbe diſtilled,
it will be very cleare & fayre, which you ſhal kepe
in a viol, wel ſtopped with waxe, and cered cloth, to the
ende it take no vent, and you may neither kepe it in the
ſunne, nor in any hote place. This will be a noble and
precious water, whiche hath not the like in the worlde
for to make the ſkin fayre, and to preſerue it. The maner

how to vſe it is this. Fyrſte, you muſt waſhe youre
face well with cleare water diſtilled, and than rub well
both face, breaſt, and other places of youre body where
you liſt, with a piece of ſcarlet weted in the ſayd water,
and lie downe vpon your bedde, holding a litle while,
the piece of wet ſcarlet vpon your face, and thus maye
you do euery .viii. or euery .xv. daies once, or elles euery
moneth, or euery two moneths. In the mean time you
may vſe ſome other water, as the water of Beane bloſſomes,
of gourdes, of melons, of onyons, of white flourdelice,
of the rote of the herbe called in latin Dracontium,
or more comonly Serpentaria, in engliſhe dragons, and of
other like: but you muſt take hede that you put in it no
ſublime, nor Ceruſe in any wiſe. Thus ſhal you haue a
water of a merueilous vertu, to make your ſkinne and
fleſhe fayre and naturall, and to conſerue and keepe it
longe yonge, gaye, freſhe, and nete.
               
               
                  ☞A verye goodlie water to waſhe the face, necke, and
the breaſt, whereof a man maye make a greate quantitie,
for the more there is of it, the better it is: It maketh the
ſkinne and fleſhe of the face fayer, not burtinge or deſtroyinge
the teeth, and ſhall ſeme that the face is nothinge
at all holpen with any coloure, but that it is euen
ſo by nature.
                  TAke two fatte Pigcons, two pounde of Veale,
ſeedes of Spurge, pilled thre vnces of Pine apple
kernelles, ſweete Almondes, bytter Almondes,
the rootes of white and yelowe floure delice, Beanes
broken in pieces and mo
                        •
                     dified, the gall of an Oxe, the
roote of Dragons, the roote of a litle yonge Aſhe, or
romon Diptum, a litle lemon the yelow pill taken away,
& cut in pieces, the cromme of a white lofe wet in milke
gomme dragant ſtieped in wine, gomme Armoniac ſlieped
in Vinaigre, and let there be of all theſe thinges a
reaſonable quantitie. Than put therevnto flowres or
bloſſoms of Liguſtrum, which is a tre hauing leaues like
an oliue tre, but they be broder and ſofter, & more grene

of colour, whiche doth beare white flowers and ſwete,
wherof is made an oyle called Oleum ciprinum. And this
free doth growe in watrie places, as Willowes and ſalowes
do, and beareth a blacke fruite like vnto an elder
free, and diſtill all theſe with a ſmall fyre, hauing bound
or tied a litle linen cloth with Muſk, and white Benge
wyne, at the becke of the Limbecke: than kepe the water
in a glaſſe well ſtopped, for it will be very excellente
to make a white and naturall ſkinne or fleſhe, without
hurtinge the teeth or any other thinge.
               
               
                  ☞To make a very excellente redde colour for the face,
whiche is naturall, and continueth longe vpon the face,
makinge it alwayes gayer and fairer.
                  TAke the whites of .xxv. harde Egges, and put a
glaſſefull of the mylke of greene figges among
them, if you can get none of it, take lytle figges
that be not rype, and cutte them in ſmal pieces,
whiche you ſhall mingle with the ſayd egges: and than
diſtill them, and the water that ſhall come thereof, maketh
of it ſelfe the fleſſhe white: but if you will make it
redde, take for euery glaſſefull of the ſaied water, two
vnces of Alome Sciſſilae or plumae, beaten in poulder, half
an vnce of the grayne called in latine Coccum, wherwith
ſcarlet is died, and two vnces of the graynes that men
vſe to die Cr
                        •
                     mſon 
                        •
                     ilke with. Let all this he putte in a
viole well ſtopped, that it take no vent, then ſet the vyole
in a kettle of bote water (not boylinge hote) by the
ſpace of eyghte dayes. This done, ſtraine oute well the
ſubſtaunce of the ſayde coloures, and take the water ſo
coloured and died: and putte to it as muche more of the
ſame Alome, and graynes as before, and ſet it agayne
altogether in hote water, by the ſpace of eyght dayes:
than ſtrayne oute the water, and adde to it the thyrde
time ſome Alom, and graines, with a litle gomme Arabick,
that is to ſay, for euery glaſſefull of water, half an
vnce of gomme, ſetting it againe in hote water eyghte

dayes, as before: and after you haue taken it oute,
ſtrayne it, and you ſhall haue the faireſt redde, that is
poſſible to wiſhe for. Than weate ſome lytle piece of
Scarlate or Crymſon ſylke in it, and rubbe youre face
therewith ſo longe vntill the fleſhe beginne to waxe
ſomewhat chafed, and the redde well perced thorowe.
You maye alſo adde to it what odoure or ſauoure you
will. And if you will not ſet the violle in hote water, as
is aforeſaied, ſet it before a lytle fyre, not ſufferynge it
to ſeeth, and that for the ſpace of a daye or moore: than
ſtrayne it, and you ſhall ſee all thinges come to paſſe,
as I haue ſaied.
               
               
                  ☞Another kinde of redde verye good for the face, eaſier
to make, and with leſse coſte.
                  TAke twoo vnces of fiſſhe glewe verie cleare, and
ſtiepe it in white wine, the ſpace of fyue or ſyxe
dayes, vntill it bee very ſofte: than take Braſſell
that is good and of a good colour, well ſcraped or cut in
ſmall pieces, than ſtiepe it in well water, ſo that the
water bee aboue it moore than a hande breadeth, and a
halfe, this dooen, boyle it together with a ſmall fyre,
aſſaiyng euermore the colour vpon a paper, vntyll it be
to your fantaſie. And before you take it from the fyre,
put to it, for euery glaſſefull of the ſaied colour, an vnce
of rawe roche Alome beaten in poulder, and Gomme
arabicke, as muche as three or foure beanes. Than take
it frome the fyre, and keepe it in a v
                        •
                     olle cloſe ſtopped:
& ſo ſhall you haue an erquiſite thing. Women of baſe
degree, are wont to ſeeth onely the Braſyll in wyne or
water, putting to it a litle roche Alome, and Gomme,
letting it hoyle vntill the colour be to their mynde.
                  Other take redde Sandall or Saunders, the whiche
they put in wine, or at the leaſt in Aqua vite, and not
boyle it at all, but keepe it ſo the ſpace of a night. Than
in tourninge the water, they put moore Sandall to it,
and a lytle moore Alome, accordynge as they lyke the
coloure.
               
               
                  
                  ☞An excellent white aboue all other,
                  TAke brayed Talchum, and burned tinne beaten in
to poulder with a wodden peſtell, than waſhe them
and mingle them together, and put them in ſome maner
of platter, or other great and large veſſell, couered
with ſuche another, and ſo ſet it in a glaſſemakers fornayſe,
the ſpace of three or foure dayes. And hauing taken
it out, it will bee as white as ſnowe. Than braye
it finely with the water of yonge fygges, or with the
milke of greene fygges, or with diſtilled vynagre, or
ſome other ſuche ſharpe and clammy thyng.
               
               
                  ☞To make heare as yelow as golde.
                  TAke the ryne or the ſcrapynges of Rubarbe, & ſtiepe
it in white wyne, or in cleare lye: and after you haue
waſhed your head with it, you ſhall weate your heares
with a ſponge or ſome other cloth, and lette them drye
by the fyre, or in the Sunne: After this weate them
and drye them agayne: for the oftener you dooe it, the
fairer they wyll bee, without hurting your head anye
thyng at all.
               
               
                  ☞To make lye to waſhe the head, whiche (beſyde
that it comforth the braine, and the memorie) maketh
the heare long, faire, and yelow, like golde.
                  TAke lye that is not to ſtrong, but as women commōly
make it to waſſh their heades: and make as
muche of it in a kettle, as wyll ſerue you ten waſhinges,
putting to it this folowing. The pilles of ten
Orenges, or of ſweete Lemons, if you haue anye, yf
not take ſowre ones, the pilles of Cytrons, as manye
as you can gette, bee they greene or drie it is all one,
the bloſſoms of Camomell, Baye leaues, a handfull of
the herbe called Maiden heare, halfe a handfull of Agrimoyne,
twoo or three handefulles of Barley ſtrawe,
chopped in pieces, halfe a diſhefull of a kynde of pulſe
corne, called in Latyne Lupinus and in Frenche Lupius,
                     
hauing one ſtalke, the leafe in fyue deuiſions, the cod
creaueſyd aboute, hauynge in it fyue or ſyre graynes,
harde, broade, and redde, they bee commonlye in
Fraunce and in Italye, but here in Englande vnneth
knowen, and therefore they haue no Engliſhe name:
they muſt bee dried, a diſhefull of Fennygreeke, halfe
a pounde of wine lies, or twoo or three diſſhfulles of
Brome bloſſomes, whereof it is good alwayes to haue
ſome drie in your houſe to make ſuche thinges withal.
Put all this that I haue named in a great veſſell with
the ſaied lie, leauing it alwayes ſo, to take thereof and
occupie when you will. And the lenger the ſaied lye
ſhall be compounde with the foreſaied thinges, the better
it will bee. The ſaied compoſition will bee good for
fyue or ſyxe monethes or moore: and you maye renewe
it at your pleaſure. But when you wyll put it in vſe,
take it handſomely and cleanely vp, without touching
in any wiſe the ſaied drooges put in it: and in heatinge
it agayne you maye put in it a lytle Myrre and a lytle
Synamom: and thus ſhall you make it verye good, as
well for the health of the head, and eyeſyghte, as for to
beautifie and make the heare faire.
               
               
                  ☞Lye to make heare blacke.
                  TAke Gomme lye, and boyle it with a handfull
of the leaues of Beete, three or foure handfuls
of Sage leaues, eyther greene or drie, and as
muche Myrre as you wyll, with Baye leaues,
and a fewe leaues or outwarde pille of a Walnut. But
when you wyll vſe of thoſe lyes that make yelowe or
blacke, rubbe not youre face, or youre necke with it,
leaſt they become blacke, or yelowe, although they dye
not the ſkinne ſo ſoone as they dooe the heare. And after
hauing thus waſhed youre heare, you muſte waſhe
your face with common lye, or cleare water, or elles
with white wine.
               
               
                  
                  ☞An oyle for to annoynt the heare, which maketh it
yelowe lyke golde, long and glyſtryng lyke burnyſhed
golde.
                  
                     TAke a glaſſefull of the oyle of Seſamum,
whiche is a white graine growynge in
India, whereof oyle is made, whiche is
called oleum Seſaminum, if you can get of
it, if not, take oyle Olyue not greene,
but verye yelowe, and cleare, where vnto
you ſhall put three vnces of drie brome bloſſomes,
well mundified, from the verdure and greeneſſe that is
in them, and from the white that you ſhal find wythin:
than ſtampe them ſo groſely, adding thervnto an vnce
of the yelowe that is in the middle of white flowre delices,
and a quarter of an vnce of Curcuma, and the ſixte
part of an vnce of Saffron, wt a litle Synamom, Bengewine,
Muſke, and Ciuet, if you wyll. All theſe thinges
will giue a good ſauour, helpe the colour and comfort
the head: you muſt put all together into one veſſell
or violle, wherein muſte bee oyle, which you ſhall kepe
in the Sunne all the Sommer, and ſo take of it at euery
time, a litle for your face, and the older it waxeth, the
better it will bee. Alſo you maye at the ende, putte the
oyle agayne vpon the ſaied drooges, into the veſſell, for
they will continue ſtill good together manye yeres: or
elles you maye chaunge thoſe ſubſtaunces, accordynge
as you ſee neede. It ſhall bee alſo very good to anoynt
with this oyle the kombe that women kembe them ſelues
with, in the Sunne: or elles laye ſome linnen cloth
hote vpon their head, and let it ſo lye, without putting
any other thing to it. This is a thing very rare and excellent
for a queene: for to dooe thus there can not bee
founde a better.
               
               
                  ☞A very goodly way or maner howe to make yelowe
aberne heare, without ſtandinge long or nothing at all
in the Sunne, a rare and a verie excellent ſecrete.
                  
                     
TAke halfe a pounde of Antimonium, halfe a pounde
of wine leeſe, nine vnces of ſalt Peter, al theſe thinges
beinge finely brayed and incorporated, take an earthen
pot or panne, and put it in the middle of a fire, that
the fire maye be both aboue it and vnderneth it, vntyll
it be redde hote: than caſte in the ſayde poulders, by little
and lyttle with a ſpone, tarryinge a little ſpace betwene
euery ſponefull caſtinge in, vntill the fyrſt be all
burned, and continue ſo caſtinge in one ſponefull after
another, vntill all be in. But this muſte be doone in a
chymney, or in an open place, becauſe there wyll ryſe
ſuche aboundaunce of ſmoke that it is not poſſible for
you to endure it, than hauynge letten it coole, breake
the ſayde panne, and in the bottome you ſhall fynde as
it were a maner of a thicke cake or browne lofe. Than
breake the ſayde matter and ſubſtaunce in dyuers pieces
vpon the grounde, or in ſome cleane place, and you
ſhall fynde in the middle, certayne little graynes like
vnto fine ſiluer: but they be brittle and eaſy to be broken.
And this is it that the ſearchers oute of the ſecretes
of nature do call the kinge or chiefe of Antimonium,
whiche in operation belongynge to metall ſerueth
for many thinges, as we will after declare. But this
will not ſerue any thyng at all for to make heare white
notwithſtandinge you muſte kepe it by it ſelfe. Than
take the reſte, and the blacke ſubſtaunce and yellowe,
and all that you finde in the bottome, and on the ſides
of the ſayde panne. All the which thinges (becauſe they
wyll incontinent waxe moyſt) you ſhall ſtampe groſſely
and quicklye, addinge to it for euery pounde, an vnce
of Vitrioli, rubified or made redde, as we wyll ſhewe
you hereafter. This doone, putte all theſe thynges together
in lye, not to ſtronge, and lette it ſtiepe vntyll
it becomme as it were a ſaulce, putting to it, two vnces
of the oyle of yelkes of Egges, yf you haue anye, if not,
take Oyle Olyue. Nowe, you muſte keepe this licoure
thicke as it is, in ſome veſſell, vntyll it be harde, and
you ſhall fynde it alwaies good. Whan you wyll put

it in effect, take common lie, and put into it two or thre
vnces of rawe Roche Alome ſtamped, and waſhe youre
heade with it as you are wont to dooe. And after you
haue waſhed it, without dryinge it anye otherwiſe than
of it ſelfe, annointe all youre heare with the ſaied lycoure
heated, and beinge thus annoyncted, wrappe
them in a hote linnen clothe, reſting your ſelfe a while.
This doen, you ſhall take of the ſayed annoinctynge,
waſſhynge youre heade with hote lye, vſinge and dreſſinge
the Sope as you ſhall thinke good. And finallie
waſſhe youre heade and heare againe with a little
warme white wine, and wrappe them with a hote linnen
clothe, or drie theim in the Sunne, or by the fire,
as you will, and laſte of all you ſhall annointe youre
ſelfe with oure ſaied oile, or with the Oyle of Iaſemin,
or ſome other odoriferous and ſwete Oyle, which may
conſerue the heares that they break not, and may geue
them a luſtre to make them gliſter and ſhine, vſing this
maner of annoynctinge euerie .xv. dayes, or euerye moneth,
as you liſte youre ſelfe. By this meane you ſhall
haue faier heare and gliſteringe like golde. But remember
to vſe in al thinges a diſcretion, and diligence,
at the fyrſte whan you vſe any receipte, as for an example
in this confection, you muſte take heede that the lie
be not to ſtronge, leaſte with the ſaied oynctment (whiche
I tell you is very ſtronge) it eate and conſume your
heare. Alſo you muſte well conſider the quantitie, and
howe longe it muſte lye on youre heade, before you
waſſhe it awaie, as is declared: and ſoo, accordinge
to the experience that you ſhall haue in the effecte, you
ſhall vſe and gouerne youre ſelfe in all thinges, for
there is no rule ſo certaine, but leaueth alwaies ſome
place for the diſcretion, diligence, and Iudgemente of
the perſonne that will followe it, and putte it in vre or
effecte.
               
               
                  An oyntment to make the heares fall from anye place
of the body.
                  
                     
TAke the whites of three newe laied egges well
beaten, eight vnces of quick lime, an vnce of orpiment,
and the whole beinge beaten in poulder,
let it be put among the whites of the egges
and adde to it after a litle lie, ſo much that it may make
it a licour thicke like ſaulce. Than with a penſill or
ſome other thinge, annoint the place frome the whiche
you will haue the heares fall, and leaue the oinctmente
ſo vpon it the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, or a little
more, than waſhe the place with warme water, and all
the heare will fall of, or if not, you muſte annoincte it
againe, and hauinge ſtaied a while, waſhe it as before,
and the heares will fall of without doubt. Finallie you
muſte annoint the ſaied place with oyle Roſet, or with
the oyle of Violettes, and the ſkinne will remayne very
faier, and without hurt.
               
               
                  ☞An oyle or licoure to make the heare fall of, and may
be kepte as longe as a manne wyll: It is alſo good for all
occaſions.
                  TAke an vnce of Soda (whiche is aſſhes made of
graſſe, whereof glaſſemakers doo vſe to make
their Criſtall) ten vnces of quicke lime eyghte
vnces of Orpimente, and make thereof a fine
poulder, whiche you ſhall putte in a panne, with
as muche ſweete and cleere lie as will be aboue the
poulder a handefull: than boyle it together a good
houre, and after hauinge lette it ſtande by the ſpace of
xxiiii. houres, you muſte ſtraine it, and take three vnces
of it, and put therto an vnce of oyle Oliue, and let it
boile together vntill the water be conſumed and vaniſhed
awaie, which you ſhal knowe, caſtinge a droppe or
two into the fire, with a little ſticke, and if it make no
noiſe, it is a ſigne there is no more water lefte. If you
will make it odoriſerous & ſwete, put to it Muſke, or Ciuet,
& ſo kepe it: and whan you wil make the heares to
fal of, waſh firſt the place wel with hote water, thā annoinct
it wt the ſaid oyle, and leaue it ſo a certaine ſpace

and than waſſhe it againe with hote water, and all the
heare will fall away. Finallye annointe the place with
oyle Roſet, or violet oyle.
               
               
                  An aduertiſement or leſſon for them that will make the
heare fall of.
                  FIrſte, you muſte note that the heare will not fall awaye,
but whan the mone decreaſeth, that is to ſay,
in the quarter of the wane, and it is far better to make
them fall of with the oinctmente, or with oyle, than to
plucke them out with a payre of pincers, as ſome gentle
wemen do vſe in Fraunce, becauſe it doth violence vnto
the fleſh, moueth the bloud, and enlargeth the pores,
and alſo maketh the heare to growe againe greater.
                  Therefore in all ſortes it is good to annoint by and by
the place with ſome coolinge or refreſhing oyle, as oyle
roſet, or of Violettes. Likewiſe, you muſte vnderſtande
that oftentimes the oynctment beinge mixed with Orpiment,
burneth the ſkinne, and that commeth by the
naughty or to ſtronge compoſition of it, or whan a man
letteth it drye to longe vpon the place, or without fyrſte
waſſhinge the place with hote water, or whan a man
annoincteth not the place by and by after the heares be
fallen, as we haue ſayde before.
               
               
                  To cauſe that the heare ſhall growe no more or to make
them come out thynne and fyne lyke the fyrſt ſoft heare
or moſynes of the face.
                  
                     A Man can ſcant fynd a remedy that the hear
growe no more, becauſe that manye whan
they will do it, they make certaine oyntementes
very colde and drye, wherwith they
anoincte the place a good while, not doinge
any good at al, by reaſon of the power of nature, which
hath alwayes his courſe, and caſteth oute her ſuperfluities,
with the heare. Therfore they burne the ſkin and
do but marre it, wherfore you muſt note that they muſt
make them fall of in the laſte quarter of the wane of

the Moone, and then incontinent annoyncte the place
with oyle roſat, or of Violettes: this dooen, the heare
groweth agayne weaker, ſofter, and finer: and ſlacketh
at euery time moore and moore in comming forth.
                  But if you will that it neuer growe more, vſe theſe remedies
folowinge, whiche are very good, and certaine
by experience. Take the litle ſtones of Oliues burned,
the outwarde coddes of beanes, dried, the ſeede of Henbaine,
Litarge of golde and ſiluer, the ſhelles of fyſhes
called in Latyne Tellmae, burned, and the iuyce of blacke
Poppy, as much of the one as of the other, and halfe as
much Orpiment as of one of thoſe thinges. All this beyng
beaten to poulder, boyle it in as muche oyle Oliue
roſat, as will couer them ſixe fingers heyght, ſtyrringe
it continually by the ſpace of twoo or thre houres: than
let it coole, and ſtraine the ſaied oyle, and ſo keepe it,
putting to it the fourth part of the oyle of Selandyne.
And when the heares bee fallen, take a little linnen
cloth, wette in the ſaid oyle luke warme, and lay it vpon
the ſaied place, leauinge it ſo bounde on all a nyght.
In the morning take of the lynnen cloth, and annoynt
the place with oyle roſate: and at night lay the lynnen
cloth on againe wetted as before: and this do .vi. or .vii.
nightes, but let it be in the wane of the Moone. And yf
you perceyue that the heares grow againe, make them
fall away agayne at the nexte wane of the Moone, doyng
in al poyntes as before: you ſhall not oft doe it, but
you ſhal make that the heares ſhall neuer grow more.
               
               
                  ☞To make a kinde of cloth or plaiſter to take the heare
from the face, necke, and handes, or from anye parte of
the bodye.
                  TAke twoo vnces of Turpentyne, halfe an vnce of
white waxe broken ſmall, or ſome what moore or
leſſe, accordinge as neede ſhall require, Bengewyne,
Storax calamita, at youre diſcretion. Fyrſte melte
the waxe a lyttle, wyth a lyttle fier, and than the
Bengewyne and Storax: after this, put in the Turpentyne,

adding to it a lytle Ceruſe well brayed, and ſettinge
it to the fyre, putte in to it a lyttle Maſticke, and
make thereof a mixion neither to thicke nor to cleare
or thinne. Than take a piece of linnen clothe of what
bygneſſe you will, and lay it abrode vpon a table, ſpreading
afterwarde the ſaied compoſition vpon it with a
ſpone, or ſome other thinge, as it were in maner of a
plaiſter, than let it coole, and keepe it ſo the one vppon
the other open, without folding vp the lynnen clothe,
for when the ſaied mixion is colde, it is harde. If you
will putte it in profe and occupie, dooe as foloweth.
                  At night when you gooe to bedde, waſhe your face and
necke with luke warme water, rubbinge it well
with a linnen cloth, or with your hand: and when it is
drie or when you haue wiped it, take a piece of the
ſaied plaiſter, or cyred clothe, and heate it by the fyre,
vntill the ſaied mixion bee liquide and ſofte, then immediatly
binde it vpon youre face, or vppon the place,
from whence you woulde haue the heare to falle, and
preſſe it harde on, leauinge it ſo all night. In the morninge
go to youre lokinge glaſſe, and pluckynge of one
ende of the ſaied lynnen clothe, you ſhall plucke awaye
with it all the heare of your face, and ſo ſhall you leaue
a very faire ſkinne. And if in caſe there remain yet any
of the ſaied mixion vpon the fleſhe, waſſhe it with hote
water, and with wheate branne, rubbinge it ſo longe
with ſome piece of lynnen cloth, tyl you make it fal of,
than waſhe your face with Aqua vite, or white wine,
or with ſome other diſtilled water, being not to ſtrong,
but let it be of Melons, or gourdes, or of ſuch other like
and vſe afterwarde waters meete for the face, as you
lyſt, and thus ſhall you kepe and maintayne youre face
as cleare as glaſſe.
               
               
                  ☞A meruelous ſecrete, whiche the greate lordes
of the Moores dooe vſe, whereby they make that
theyr children haue no heare vnder their armes, or
other place where they wyll. And this ſecrete founde
I in Syria, the yeare 1521. by the meanes of a lorde
of the countrey, whoſe doughter I healed.
                  
                  AS ſoone as the child is borne, they make ready by
and by a peece of fine golde, or a Ducar, or els a
rynge, or ſome like thinge, and kepe it in the fyre
vntill it be redde hote, not meltyng it, than they
carry it with a payer of tonges & laye it vpon the place,
where they will no heare ſhall grow, and immediatlie
annoynte it with oyle Roſat, or the oyle of Violettes:
than after .xxiiii. houres, they do the like agayn, and by
this meanes there groweth neuer heare in that place.
I haue often times made the heare fall from yong gentil
womens browes and foreheades with this medecine
and they haue founde it wonderfull: but the golde muſt
be very fine, which ſuffexeth no token, marke or ſkarre
to remaine wher the burning was, as other metals do.
I haue kept this ſecret hidden a longe time, 
                        •
                     although
that diuers times, men would haue giuen me greate
giftes, yet I would not publiſh it a broade, vntill now
that I haue doone it, in this preſent booke.
               
               
                  ☞To make a kinde of cloth, called cloth of Leuant wherwith
women vſe to colour their faces.
                  
                     TAke the ſhearynge of ſkarlate, and boyle it
in water, where quicke Lyme hath bene
boyled: and after you haue boyled it a good
ſpace, you ſhall ſtraine it, and take a potful
of it, and put into it two vnces of Braſill,
cutte in litle peeces, addyng to it an vnce of Roche
alume, and as muche of Verdigreeſe, and a quarter of
an vnce of gumme Arabicke: and after you haue well
boiled it, the ſpace of halfe an houre, take a peece of olde
linnen clothe, of what bigneſſe you wil, and wete it in
this decoction, or red colour, than couer the pan, and let
the ſaied mixtion coole, by the ſpace of a day & after you
haue taken it oute, drie it in the ſhadowe, and keepe it

in ſome veſſell, among odoriferous and 
                        •
                     oote thinges,
for to helpe you.
               
               
                  ☞The ſame another waye.
                  
                     TAke a glaſſefull of Aqua vite, a quarter of an
vnce of the graine that I ſpake of before called
Coccum, halfe an vnce of Braſyll, halfe an vnce of
gomme armoniacke, put all theſe thinges together,
in the glaſſe where the Aqua vite is, than ſtoppe
it claſe, for feare it take vent, and the ſayed glaſſe muſte
bee full. After this ſette it vpon a ſmall fier, makinge it
ſeeth faire and ſoftlye, or elles ſette it in the Sunne, by
the ſpace of twoo or three daies. This doen, ſtrayne it,
and put in it pieces of olde linnen cloutes, as we haue
ſaied before. If you thinke, in ſtrayninge this water,
that the coloure is not redde, to your minde, your maye
put in moore of the ſaied grayne and braſell.
               
               
                  ☞To dye a whyte bearde or heare of the heade into
a faire blacke.
                  TAke good galles of Leuant, or ſuche lyke, and frie
them in oyle, but let them not burne: than ſtampe
them, and ſifte them once or twiſe. Take alſo Ferretum
or Spaniſhe blacke, whiche the Frenchmen call
Atrament d'Eſpaigne, the whiche likewiſe you ſhal ſtampe
and beate well to poulder. Than take a panne full of
lye, and put into it the pylles or rynes of Pomegranades,
Walnut pilles, Pineapples, Myrre, Sage leaues,
as muche as you wyll. Let all this boyle together, vntill
it bee broughte vnto the thirde parte. You muſte
haue in it alſo two partes of galle, and one of Ferretum,
tempering and incorporating all well together, vntill
the blacke colour content you, wherewith you may die
your bearde, and heare, in this maner. Waſhe youre
bearde with lye not to ſtronge, leaſt it hurte you: and
whiles your head or beard is yet hote, annoynt it with
the ſaied confection: but it muſt bee luke warme, to the
entent it maye penetrate and perce the better, and ſo

leaue it a certaine ſpace. Than waſſhe youre heade or
bearde fyrſt with lie, and than with hote water, and
you ſhall haue youre heade and bearde ſayre and
blacke. This hurteth not, nor ſmarteth anye thinge
at all, neyther bringeth anye inconuenience to the
heade.
               
               
                  ❀ A noble and excellent poulder to make cleane the teeth,
to make them faſt and white, and to conſerue the gommes.
A better thinge can not be founde, and it were to
geue or preſent to a Quene or Princeſſe.
                  
                     TAke Lacca of grain,Lacca de graine, is a certaine confection or mixtion, made of graine, and are little rounde red balles. Lacca is a Turkiſh worde, and not vſed amonge vs, but amonges the Italians, if you can get 
                        〈◊〉
                     , if not, take
of the graine it ſelfe that is very good .x. partes,
ſeuen partes of barley cakes or breade, ſo burned
that they be brought to coales, Lignum aloe
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . partes, fine pommeyſe ſtone ſcoured and made clene
in embers, and ſtieped or tempered in white wine, or
in Vinaigre eight partes, dragons bloud three partes,
roche Alome burned foure partes, honnye burned in a
panne vntyll it be fyrſte blacke, and than yelowe, three
partes (and this may you do of the lees of honnye, that
remayneth whan it is diſtilled, puttinge it in a panne,
and ſettinge it in a glaſſemakers fourneſſe the ſpace of
a day or two) coles of the wood of roſemary, three partes,
fyne Synamom two partes, Bengewyne one part,
Bole Armenick oriental, nine partes, white wine lees
two partes, Aleblaſter one part ſmall pearles one part,
the ſcrapynge of yuorye two partes, lyttle Quinces not
rype, of the byggeneſſe of a Walnutte, or a little more,
ſixe partes. Nowe the beſt be thoſe that be not come to
perfection vpon the tree; the whiche you muſte burne
in the fyre, euen vnto coales, Maſtir eighte partes. Let
all theſe thinges be well ſtamped, and paſſed thorough
a fine ſarce, addinge thereto a lyttle Muſke, and ſome
Golde or Syluer foyle. This doone, you ſhall keepe the
ſayde poulder in ſome boxe well ſtopped, and ſo ſhall
you haue a precious thynge. And whan you will occupie

of it, waſſhe your mouth well fyrſt, with cleane water,
or wine, than rubbe your teeth with youre fingar,
or ſome lynnen cloth, taking of the ſayed poulder vpon
it, and after waſhe your mouth well. Thus ofte doing,
you ſhall alwayes haue your teeth very white, faſte in
your head, ſtronge and not hollowe.
               
               
                  To make a very excellente conſerue to ſcoure the teeth,
to comforte the gummes, and to make a ſwete and good
breath.
                  
                     BEcauſe the vſe of the poulder to ſcoure
teeth, ſeemeth leſſe commodious, than
ſome licoure or conſerue, which agreeth
better with the mouth, therefore we will
write here a very excellent one, whiche
hath not his like in the worlde, and muſt
be made as foloweth. Take one part of ſyrop roſet, two
partes of the ſyrop of Myrtell, or of the woode called
Lentiſcus, out of the whiche commeth a gomme called
Maſtir, put this together in a cleane panne, than put to
it of the ſaied poulder for the teeth, whereof we haue
ſpoken in the Chapter before, ſo that al may be brought
into ſofte paſte or dowe, than ſet the little pan vpon &
chafinge diſhe, wherein muſt be ſome hote aſhes, with
a fewe embers, or elles at the leaſte ſet it farre from the
fyre, and make it boile ſayre and ſoftly, ſtyrringe it alwayes,
vntyll it be as thicke as honny or thicker: than
take it frō the fyre, and put to ſome goldfoile and muſk,
what quantitie you will. And ſo ſhal you haue a ſinguler
thinge for to do this that I haue ſpoken of.
               
               
                  An aduertiſement or leſſon concerning the making of poulders,
and conſerues for the teeth.
                  IF you wil make the ſaid thinges as excellent as is poſſible,
you muſt take of the ſaid things as much as you
may get: or if you cannot haue them al, take at the leaſt
the moſt excellent, as graine, pearles, Corall, yellowe
Amber, Lignum aloes, Boale Armenick, alſo the coales of

Barley Cakes or loues whan they are burned, and all
the other thinges be very good in it. And if you woulds
geue it to ſome greate prince or lorde, which had rather
haue it of a good colour, or would know the thinges in
it, you may make it as is ſaied, of ſewe thinges, with
goldfoile and Muſke. And he that wil make it with leſſe
coſt, and a greater quantitie, may (with the thinges mē
                     tioned
in the chapter with the poulder) adde poulder of
brickes, poulder of marble, Creuiſe or lopſters ſhelles
burned, and a little white ſalte, the lees that remaineth
in the bottome when men make ſtronge water, called
Aqua fortes, is alſo very good, eyther by it ſelfe, or mingled
with ſome other thinge, and ſoo ſhall you haue a
greate deale of ſubſtaunce with ſmall coſt. And if a man
wil make a conſerue of litle charge, and without much
labour, he muſt take rawe honnye, or honny roſet, and
mingle it with the ſaid poulders, and ſo rubbe his teeth
therwith, with his finger, or with a linnen clothe, and
waſhe his mouth well after it. Doinge this euery eight
dayes, he ſhall make his teeth very fayre and white.
A thinge very good, and mete for euery man.
               
               
                  An excedinge white and good poulder to ſcoure the teeth,
whiche is meeter for lordes and great men, then anye of
the other before.
                  FYrſt here is to be noted a goodly and notable ſecrete
of great vertue, for to ſcoure and make white teeth,
whiche is the pommeiſe ſtone alone, ſo that it be of that
fyne and whyte ſtone, whiche ſhoemakers doo vſe to
whiten whyte leather Shoes, and well beaten in poulder:
For in rubbinge youre teeth with the ſame poulder,
if ſcoureth and maketh them cleane, and taketh away
all the roughneſſe of theim, as men ſee by experience,
that the pommeiſe ſtone is vſed to polyſſhe bones,
marble, and other like thinges. I haue ſene of my frendes,
men of great iudgement and knowledge, whiche
gaue nothinge vnto greate men and Lordes, but the

ſayd poulder, whan it is well beaten in poulder, a man
can not tell what it is: alſo you may geue it a little ſauour,
layinge it amonge bagges of Muſke and Amber,
of whome it taketh an odour, and I haue ſeene men of
eſtimation, that helde it for a thinge of greate importaunce,
when they ſawe the vertue and operation of it.
Nowe, if you will make a white poulder, more noble
and more profitable for the teeth, and gommes, take
ſmall pearles ſtamped a lytle, or elles whole, and putte
them in a dyſhe, or in a wyde glaſſe: than take the iuyce
of lemons or orenges, ſtrayned thorough a linen cloth,
at the leaſte ſixe or ſeuen times, and poure it vppon the
ſaied Pearles, vntill it couer them ouer three or foure
fingers high, and you ſhal ſee that in ſhorte ſpace it wil
beginne to boyle, and than couer it with ſome paper, or
linnen cloth, leauinge it ſo three or foure dayes, and at
the ende you ſhall finde the ſayed pearles diſſolued and
molten in the iayde iuyce, and tourned into a paſte as
white as ſnowe, marye there will be a little yellowe
ſkinne vppon it, engendred of the ſayed ſuyce. This
doen, take cleere well water, or the water of Lentiſcus
diſtilled, and poure it vpon the ſayed paſte, three or four
fingers heighte aboue. Than take a little forke, or the
ſteale of a ſyluer ſpone, or ſome thinne ſticke, and ſtyre
the paſte well aboute in the ſayed water, lettinge it ſo
ſtande, and finallye caſte oute the water, and if you ſee
yet anye of the yellowe, remayne vpon the ſaied paſte,
waſhe it againe, as before, and couer it with a paper,
lettinge it ſo drye of it ſelfe, in the ſunne. After this you
ſhall take three partes of the ſaied paſte, or whyte poulder,
foure partes of white Pommeiſe ſtone, as is aforeſayed,
two partes of white Bengewine, one parte of
Roche Alome well burned, one parte of white Corall,
halfe a parte of white yuorye, halfe a parte of Aleblaſter
verie white. Breake and bruſe all theſe well vpon
a table of marble, or in a ſyluer cuppe, puttinge to it
ſome ſiluer foile, and thus ſhall you haue a very whyte
and excellente ſubſtaunce or matter to make your teeth

as white as ſnowe. And if you will, you waye put it to
keepe in a conſerue, with the ſyrope of Ceder, or honny
Roſet, or otherwiſe as you will. Alſo, if you will make
the ſaied poulder verye redde, dreſſe it onelye with the
Lacca of graine, and a lyttle redde corall. Nowe, becauſe
that in ſtampinge, it will waxe ſomewhat white, put to
it a little Boale Armonicke, with a little of the iuyce of
Dragons bloude, and alſo golde foile. You maye g
                        •
                     ue
to all theſe ſaied poulders what odoure and ſauour you
will, but vnto the white poulder you may put no Muſk
nor Amber, nor any other ſuche drooges, for it woulde
take awaye the whiteneſſe, but you maye putte it well
ynoughe in a lyttle bagge amonge Muſke, or other
odours.
               
               
                  ☞A diſtilled water, excellente for to make the teethe
white immediatelye, and to preſerue theym wonderfully.
                  
                     TAke a pounde of the firſte water diſtilled
of honny, the whiche is white: than put
it in a violl, with an vnce of commune
white ſalte, halfe a pounde of raw roche
Alome, an vnce of Salte Peter, halfe a
poūde of ye water of the leaues of Lentiſcus,
two vnces of Maſtick, the heighte of twoo fingers of
Vynaigre in a glaſſe, and as muche white wine: Diſtil
all theſe thinges with a ſmall fire, that they ſmell not
of the ſmoke, nor any burninge: continuinge youre diſtillation
in ſuche ſorte, that you be at the leaſte foure
and twenty houres in diſtillinge the whole, or elles you
may make it diſtill in Balnee marie, whiche is the ſureſte
of all. Nowe, you muſte continue youre diſtillation ſo
long, vntill there bee a moyſt ſubſtaunce to come forth,
and into the water that diſtilleth out, you ſhall put a litle
poulder of fine Synamom, a litle Lignum Aloes, and
Boale Armonicke, for to geue it a redde colour, whiche
many men like well: alſo for to geue it a ſtrength and

odour, you ſhal put in rawe honny makinge it diſſolue
in the heate of the Sunne, for it is a thing good for the
gummes, and geueth a good fauour to the water.
Keepe this well as an excellent thing, and it were for a
queene. And when you wyll occupie of it, waſhe well
your mouth fyrſt, and wipe youre teeth with a little
piece of white linnen clothe, and than pike them wyth
a tooth piker made of the woode Lentiſcus, or ſome other
thinge wette in the ſaied water, or with a lyttle
clothe, rubbe them a lyttle, and incontinent you ſhall
perceyue and feele it faſten and bynde youre gommes,
and comforte your teeth making them faire and white.
And he that loueth better the white then the redde, let
him put no Synamom, Boale armonicke, nor Lignum
Aloes into it, after it is diſtilled, but let hym put it in to
deſtill with the other thinges, puttinge of eche of them
as muche as there is of Maſticke, and it ſhal be euen as
excellent and as white as otherwyſe.
               
               
                  ☞Three aduertiſementes or leſſons of importaunce
to kepe the teeth white and vncorrupt and alſo a ſwete
breathe.
                  THe firſt is, he that vſeth not to waſſhe well hys
mouth euer when he hath eaten his meales, ſhal
I haue alwayes yelowe teeth & a ſtinking breath.
The ſeconde is, he that ſlepeth with his mouth
cloſe, hath likewiſe an euyll breath, and foule teeth.
The thirde is, that for to maintayne and kepe the teeth
faire and white, and a ſweete breath, when a man is
layed is his hedde, and when he waketh in the mornyng,
it is good to purge well the breaſte and throte,
ſpitting out all that is gathered together that nyghte:
which alſo is good for the ſtomacke and heade. And hauing
your teeth and breath warme take a lynnen cloth
or the corner of the ſhete, and rubbe youre teeth well
within and withoute, to take awaye the fumoſitie of
the meate, and the yelowneſſe of the teeth gathered together
in the night: for it is that, that maketh youre

teeth yelowe, and gommes redde, and corrupteth your
breath. This is a verie neceſſarye thing to be knowen,
and oughte well to be obſerued: It is alſo good to eate
euery mornynge ſome graynes of Maſticke.
               
               
                  ❀ A decoction to waſhe and ſcoure the mouth, to faſten
loſe teeth, to conſolidate and make ſounde the gommes,
and to make the fleſhe grow agayne if it were decayed
or fallen awaye.
                  TAke halfe a glaſſefull of Vynaigre, and as muche
water of Lentiſcus, of Roſemarye, Myrrhe, Maſtick,
Boale Armenicke, the moiſture that diſtilleth
out of Dragons bloude, Roche Alome burned, of
eche of theim an vnce, 
                        •
                     ine Synamom halfe an vnce,
well, riuer, or fountaine water, three glaſſefulles: mingle
all well together, and let it boyle with a ſmall fyre,
addinge to it halfe a pounde of honny, takinge awaye
the ſcumme of it, than put in a little Bengewine. And
whan it hath boyled a quarter of an houre, take it from
the fyre, and keepe it in a cleane vyole, and waſhe your
teeth often times withall, as wel before, as after meat:
and holdinge it a while in your mouth, it is verye good
for the heade, and maketh a ſweete breath. A thinge of
great excellencie.
                  The ende of the fourth
booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE
Secretes of the reuerende Maſter
Alexis of Piemount.
               THE FIFTE BOOKE.
               
                  ☞To make perfyt Aſure, ſuch as commeth from beyond
the ſeas.
                  
                     TAke fyrſte a pounde of Lapis Laſuli,
ſpotted like Marble, and
ſomewhat of the colloure of
Aſure, with ſome veynes of
Golde, or greene, of the whiche
you ſhall make this profe folowynge.
Take a little piece of
it, and put it vpon hote coales,
blowinge it with a payre of
bellowes, the ſpace of an houre, than let it coole agayne
and touche it with your hande, if it breake, and vndoe
lyke earth, it is nothinge worth, but if it abyde fyrme
and harde together, and keepe his colour of Aſure, it is
good. Than take a pounde of the ſame, and breake it
into ſmall pieces, whiche you ſhall melte in the fyre the
ſpace of a good houre, blowinge it continuallye. This
doen, take good Vyneygre diſtilled, in ſome kynde of
veſſell, wherein you ſhall quenche the ſayed pieces, and
let them drye: than take water made as foloweth.
Take a panne leaded, and putte in it a quarte of cleere
water, and a lytle rawe whyte honnye. Boyle it, and
ſkymme it well, vntyll there be no more ſkumme, and
ſo let it coole. Than take of Dragons bloude wel ſtamped,
the quantitie of a Walnutte, and wette it lyttle
and little with the ſayed water, and it beynge wel dipt,
ſtrayne it thorowe a linnen cloth, into ſome veſſell leaded.
And you muſte note, that the water may not be to
rodde, nor to cleere, but betwene both, that is to ſaye,
betwene cleere and redde, to the ende that the Aſure

may take a Violette coloure. After this, braye well the
ſayde Lapis laſuli, ſo molten and burned, with the ſayed
water (as vermilleon is commonly brayed) by the ſpace
of an hour or more: thā aſſemble it together in a glaſſe,
or ſome other veſſell leaded, ample and large, drying it
in the ſhadowe, and not in the Sunne: for it would loſe
his colour. And whan it is drye, beate it well to poulder,
and keepe it in ſome cleane lynen cloth wel 
                        〈◊〉
                     
than make this paſt folowinge. Take two vnces of the
coſin or gomme of a white pine tree, two vnces of Pigraeca
two vnces of Maſtick, two vnces of ye oyle of line,
two vnces of Turpentine, two vnces of newe Ware:
ſtampe well that muſt be ſtamped, and cutte the Ware
into ſmall pieces, than put all in a newe panne, and
boyle it till it come to his perfection, whiche maye be
knowen, by caſtinge a droppe of it into cold water, and
if in takinge it with your wette hande, it cleaue not to
your hande, it is parfecte: and therfore you ſhal ſtraine
it thorowe ſome cleane cloth, into a veſſell full of colde
water, but this muſt you do while it is yet hote, for if
it be cold, it will not ſtraine, and leaue it ſo longe in the
water, vntyll it be harde, than take it and ſet it to drye.
Nowe, whan you will incorporate it with the poulder,
do thus: Cut the ſayde confection in ſmal pieces, which
you ſhall put into ſome kettle tinned within, and ſet it
ſo on the fyre, and whan it beginneth to bubble vp, put
to it an vnce of the oyle of bytter Almondes, lettyng it
ſo boyl the ſpace of two Miſerere, and in the meane time
make ready your poulder of Lapis laſuli in a veſſel, with
ſome little ſticke made for the purpoſe: than take the
kettle, and poure it by little and lyttle, into the veſſell
vpon the ſayed poulder, not ceaſſinge to ſturre it alwayes
with the lyttle ſticke, vntill it be all well incorporated
with the ſayd poulder of Lapis laſuli, This doen
let it cole, than annoinct your handes with oyle Oliue,
and take the ſayd ſubſtaunce, and toſſe it vp and downe
with youre handes, to thende to incorporate it well together.
And after you haue broughte it to the fourme

and faſhion of breade or paſte, put it in a veſſell leaded,
and keepe it ſo the ſpace of tenne dayes at the leaſte.
                  And whan you will take out of it the Aſure, make fyrſt
cleare lie, with the aſſhes of vynes, of the whiche you
ſhall ſet a kettle full to the fyre, ſeethinge it as hote as
you may endure your hande in it: than after, putte the
ſaied confection or paſte in a veſſell leaded, and adde to
it as muche of the ſaied lie as you ſhall thinke good.
                  Than ſtyre the ſaied ſubſtaunce fayre and ſoftlye, vntyll
you ſee the Aſure come out, and whan you ſee it iſſued
out, poure the ſaied lie with the Aſure into a veſſell
leaded, of the which veſſelles you muſt haue a good
nomber, than put to it againe of the other hote lie, doinge
as before, puttinge it afterward againe into another
veſſell, and do thus vntill there be no more Aſure.
And here you muſte note, that of a pounde of Lapis laſuli
if it be fine, there is loſte but an vnce, and is had oute of
it in the whole, eleuen vnces, that is to ſay: fiue vnces
of good and fine, three vnces of a mean ſorte, and three
vnces of courſer. The fine is worth at the leaſte twoo
crownes and a halfe the vnce, the meane, a crowne an
vnce, and the other halfe a crowne. Nowe, after you
haue gotten out all the Aſure, loke well whiche is like
the one the other, for to put eche of them by them ſelues
into three partes, as we haue ſaied. Than waſhe it wel
with fayre and cleere lye, pouringe it out of one veſſell
into another, vntil it be come to a good colour, and purified
from all ordure and fylth. And whan you thinke
it is cleane inough, drie itin the ſhadowe, in a chaumber,
and whan it is drie, take a glaſſefull of fine Aqua
vite, and ſtiepe in it a little good braſill, & than trimme
and dreſſe your Aſure with the ſame Aqua vite, and let
it drie, continuinge ſo the ſpace of three dayes, vntil the
Aſure be participant, and haue taken parte of ſuche lycoure,
and than it ſhall be of an excellent fyne coloure.
Keepe eche ſort by it ſelfe in bagges of leather well ſowed
and bounde.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To make a fyne confection of graine, called Laeca of
grayne.
                  TAke a pounde of the ſhearinge of ſcarlette, and
put it in a newe panne full of lie that is not to
ſtronge, and boyle it vntyll the lie take the coulour
of it. This doen, take a bagge, large and
wyde aboue, and narrowe poincted beneth, whereinto
you ſhall powre the ſayed ſhearing of ſcarlette, and the
lye, ſetting a veſſell vnderneth, than wringe and preſſe
the bagge harde, that all the ſubſtaunce, and all the coloure
may ſtraine and dreane out, after that waſhe the
ſhearinge and the bagge, in the veſſel where the colour
is. And if you thinke that the ſhearinge hath yet more
colour in it, boyle it againe with other lie, ordring it as
before. This done, you ſhall heate the ſayed couloured
lye vpon the fire, but let it not boile, and you muſt haue
ready vpon the fyre ſome cleane pan, with cleane water,
into the whiche beinge hote, you ſhall put .v. vnces
of Roche Alome, beaten to poulder. And as ſone as you
ſee it diſſolue, take a bagge, like vnto the fyrſte, and
whan the coloure is hote, take it from the fyre, and put
into it Alome, and caſte all ſo together into the bagge,
ſettynge vnder it ſome veſſell leaded, and loke yf vnderneth
the coloure come out redde, than take hote water
and poure it into the bagge, with all the reſte that was
ſtrained out of it, into the ſaied veſſell vnder the bagge,
and poure that ſo often, whiche ſhall ſtraine and renne
out vnderneth, vntill the licour that ſhall iſſue oute, be
no more redde, but cleere as lye: hauinge thus ſtrained
all the water, the coloure will remaine in the bagge,
which you ſhal vndoe and ſeuer a ſonder with a ſclyſe
of wood, putting it downe to the bottome of the bagge,
and bringe it al into a maſſe, or lumpe, or into little tablettes,
or into what fourme you will, and than drie it
vpon a newe cleane pauinge tyle, in the ſhadow, within
your houſe, or elles abroade where no ſunne ſhineth.
And ſo ſhall you haue an excellent thinge of it.
               
               
                  
                  To dye bones into a greene colour.
                  
                     TAke a panne full of cleare water, and put
into it a good greate piece of quicke lyme,
leauinge it ſo the ſpace of a daye. The next
daye morninge mingle it well together
with a ſticke, and ſo let it reſte, and at none
ſtyrre it agayne, and likewiſe at night. The nexte morninge
folowinge, you ſhall ſtraine it cleane oute and
kepe it, in the meane time haue the bones that you will
die in a readineſſe, and boile them well in other common
water, wherein Roche Alome hath ben diſſolued,
and whan it hath boyled a good ſpace, you ſhall take
them out, and let them drie, than ſcrape them wel with
a knife, and put them into the ſayde lime water, and
addinge to it ſome Verdegriſe, you ſhall let them ſeeth
well, and than take them out. And after you haue wyped
and dried them, do with them what ye will, for thei
will be very fayre: And in ſtede of the ſaied lyme water
you may vſe piſſe, whiche wyll be of the like operation.
               
               
                  Another maner howe to die bones, or Iuorye, into the
coloure of an Emeraude.
                  TAke Aqua fortis ſeparatiua, and put therin to fret and
diſſolue, as muche copper or braſſe, as the water is
hable with her force to diſſolue and leuſe: this doen,
put in what peece of woorke you will, beynge fyrſte
cutte in the fourme that you will haue it, as beftes for
kniues, penkniues, ynckhornes, images, or anye other
thinge to youre fantaſie, leaue them in it the ſpace of a
night, and thei ſhall be of the colour of an Emerande.
Nowe, if in ſteede of copper or braſſe, you didde put in
Syluer, it woulde be the better.
               
               
                  ☞To die bones redde, blewe, or of anye coloure you
wyll.
                  
                     
                     FIrſte boyle your bones in Alome water,
than take quicke lyme water, or
piſſe, and in this water or pyſſe, you
ſhall put Braſyll, Azur, or an herbe
called Rub
                        •
                     a, which the Apoticaries
call Rubramaior, and Rubra tinctorum,
or Rubea tinctorum, wherewith they
coloure wolle or ſkinnes, in Engliſhe Chickweede, or
what other colour you wyll, and than ſeeth your bones
or Iuozie therein, and they wyll take ſuche coloure as
you put in.
               
               
                  ❀A very goodlie ſecrete to dye or colour woode, of what
colour a man will, which ſome Ioyners do vſe that make
tables and other thinges of diuers colours, and do eſteme
it amonge them ſelues to be of ſuche excellencie, that one
brother will not teache it another.
                  TAke early in the morninge, newe and freſhe horſe
donge, made that night, and take of the moyſteſte
ye can gette, with the ſtrawe or lytter and al, and
laye vpon ſome little ſtickes layde a croſſe one ouerthwart
another, and ſet ſome veſſell vnderneth, for to
receaue that ſhall droppe or fall from the ſayde donge.
And yf you can not haue inough in one morninge, doe
the like two or three times, or as ofte as you wyll: than
whan you haue wel dreamed out the water of this dong
you ſhall put into euery pot of the ſayed water, the bigneſſe
of a beane of Roche Alome, and as much gomme
Arabick. Than ſtiepe what colour you will in it, vſing
dyuers veſſels, if you will haue diuers colours, and put
in what pieces of wood you will, holdinge them at the
fyre, or in the Sunne: and at eche tyme plucke out ſome
pieces and laye them apart, leauinge the other in, for
the lenger ye let them lie in the water, the more wyll
the colour alter. And in this manner you ſhall haue a
greate quantitie of diuers colours, the one cleerer, the
other darker, and maye vſe it to youre commoditie, ſo

what vſe you liſt, for they ſhall be coloured both within
and withoute, ſo that they will neuer loſe theyr colour,
neither by water or any other thinge.
               
               
                  ☞To counterfeyte the blacke woode called Hebenus,
or Hebenum, and to make it as fayre as the naturall
Hebene, which groweth no where but in India.
                  
                     ALl kynde of woode that is lyke vnto
this Hebene, may be dyed black: but
the hardeſt and the maſſiueſt (as boxe
and other lyke) are meeteſt for it,Sola India fert Hebenū
                      and
will be bryghter, and aboue all, the
wood of a Mulbery tree, as well the
white as the blacke, is the beſte to be
couloured, albeit the blacke be muche more for the purpoſe.
Take than the ſaied wood, and let it lye the ſpace
of three dayes in Alome water, either in the Sunne, or
a pretye waye of frome the fyre, vntill the water waxe
ſomewhat warme: than take oyle Oliue, or Oyle of
lyne ſeede, and put it in a little panne, wherein is the
bygneſſe of a nutte, of Romaine Vitriole, and as much
Brymſtone. This doen, ſeeth your woode in the ſayde
Oile a certaine ſpace, and ſo ſhal you haue a thinge very
darke of colour. And the lenger you let it boile, the
blacker it will waxe, but to much boylinge burneth it,
and maketh it bryttle, therfore both in thone and other
you muſt be circumſpecte, and vſe diſcretion.
               
               
                  To die ſkynnes blewe, or of the colour of Aſure.
                  
                     HAuinge fyrſt well waſhed the ſkinne, and
than wronge him, take the berries of walwort,
and elder berries, and ſeeth them in
water, wherein Roche Alome was diſſolued,
paſſe him once thorowe this water, &
let him drie, than paſſe him again thorow the ſame water,
and being wiped and dried againe, waſh him with

cleere water, than ſcrape out that water with the back
of a knife, & once again paſſe it ouer wt the ſame colour,
and let it dry, ſo ſhal it be of a very blew or Aſur colour.
               
               
                  To die ſkinnes in chickweede, called in latin Rubra maiore,
or Rubra tinctorum, into a redde colour.
                  
                     HAuing anoincted, waſhed, wronge, &
layd abroad the ſkin, as is aforeſaied,
wete it with water that white wine
lees and baye ſalt hath ben boiled in,
and than wring him. Take than creuiſes
or crabbe ſhelles (be they of the
ſea or of the riuer) burned into aſhes,
the whiche you ſhall temper with the ſaid water of the
lees and ſalt, and rubbe well the ſkinne therwith, than
waſhe him well with cleere water, and wringe hym.
This done, take ruddle tempered in water of lees, and
rubbe the ſkinne well ouer and ouer with it, and than
with the foreſayde aſhes, waſſhinge, and wringinge it
thre times. Finallye, after you haue waſſhed him, and
wronge him, if you thinke it be not well ynoughe, you
ſhall geue him one dienge with Braſyll. The paſte or
maſſe of Rubra tinctorum, muſt be made with water that
lees or tartre hath bene boiled in, and the ſayed water
muſt be luke warme, whan you make the paſte of ruddle,
than leaue it ſo the ſpace of a night. After this, put
vpon the ſayd Rubra tinctorum, a lyttle Alome, dragges,
or lees, or Alome catinum, ſtieped in water. You maye
alſo adde to it the colour of the ſhearing of ſcarlet, whiche
hath bene taken oute boylinge in lye, whiche is a
goodly ſecrete.
               
               
                  To die ſkinnes Greene.Sap green is made with the berries of a Dogge berry tree
                  
                  ANnoint the ſkinne, and waſh him well with cold
water, and than in hote water, and ſo wipe & drie
him. This doen, take of the graines wherwt men

the ſappe (the decoction wherof ſhall be put in thende of
this boke, with them of all other neceſſary thinges) and
the ſayde graynes or berries muſte be verye rype, than
put them in cleare water, couered a fingar heigth, put
therein alſo Roche Alome, and geue theim onelye one
wawlme on the fyre. This doen, ſtrayne them out into
ſome veſſell, than take the ſkinne, and folde him in the
middle, rubbinge him well on both ſydes, with the ſaid
ſodden graines, or berries, whiche remaine in the pan,
and after with rawe Alome poulder. This doen, take
the aſhes of ſhepes donge burned, and wete it with the
ſaied coloure that you ſtrained into the ſayde veſſell,
and rubbe the ſkinne wel on euery ſide, than cleere him
againe of the ſaied graines, and waſhe him with cleere
water, and ſet him to drie withoute wipinge him. Fynally
caſt on him two glaſſefulles of the ſayde coloure,
and it will be a perfecte greene.
               
               
                  Another waye to dye ſkinnes greene.
                  
                     LEtte the ſkinne be annoincted, well
waſſhed, wronge, and ſtretched oute
as before, than take of the ſame graines
and berries ye toke before, which
you ſhall ſtampe and ſeeth in Roche
Alome water, and geue the ſkynne
twoo wypes ouer with this coloure,
and ſo let it dry. After this you ſhal geue him one dying
or colouringe of yellowe, made with the graynes, or
berries of Nerprum, ſodden in water and Alome, and a
lyttle Saffron, and you ſhall haue an excellent greene.
               
               
                  ❀To die the ſayde ſkinnes greene another waye.
                  TAke the ſkinne, being annoincted, waſſhed, and
ſpredde abroade, dye and coloure him with the
coloure made of ſap greene, and put to it a few
aſſhes wette in water, and ſo rubbe the ſkinne

all about. And whan you haue waſhed and wyped hym
againe, geue him one wype ouer with and Indian coloure
ſodden in Roche Alome. And whan it is drye, lay
on it of the foreſayde yellow, and you ſhall haue a fayre
and liuely greene.
               
               
                  ☞Another waye to dye ſkinnes of Aſure coloure,
and fayre.
                  TAke the ſkinnes of blacke grapes, and rubbe
well your leather with all, vntill it waxe ſomewhat
blewe, and alſoo rubbe it well with the
poulder of Indicum, then waſhe it, drye, and polyſhe
it. Than ſtiepe the Indicum in thicke redde wyne:
and whan the ſkynne is waſhed, annoinct him with it,
and you ſhall haue a fayre ſkinne aſured blewe.
               
               
                  ¶Another maner to dye ſkinnes Greene.
                  TAke rype elder berries, and the berries of walwort,
and of ſappe greene, and this well ſtamped,
you ſhall put to it Roche Alome, as muche
as you ſhall thinke good, but rather to muche
than to little: than take the lye, and put into it the ſaied
berries of ſappe greene, and ſeeth them one waulme.
                  This doen, put in the berries of the walwort, or elder,
and make them ſeeth alſo one waulme, than take them
from the fyre, and let them coole, and after rubbe the
ſkinnes with theim. Finallye, ye ſhall caſt vpon them,
the aſhes of ſheepes donge, rubbinge them well with
it. After this, geue theim the couloured water that the
ſaied graines or berries were ſodden in, than take of
the water with a curryers knyfe, and let them drye.
And yf you nede to geue theim more coloure, than you
maye put in more Indicum boyled, and it wyll be the
better.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To die neates leather into a greene colour, as well in
galle as in leaues.
                  
                     POlyſhe well the leather with a pommeyſe
ſtone, annointe it well with
oyle, and waſhe it: than take an vnce
or two of galles ſtamped, and put it
in hote water, leauing it ſo an hour,
than ſtraine it thorow a linen cloth,
and put the leather into the ſame water,
rubbinge it well with your handes, and leaue it ſo
the ſpace of an houre: and hauinge taken it out, wring
it, and ſtretch it abroad, & tight it. Than take the graines
or berries of Nerprum, gathered in Iuly, whan thei
be yet greene: drie them, and ſtampe them well, adding
therto for euery ſkinne, two vnces of Roche Alom beaten
in poulder, and mingled with the poulder of y• ſaied
berries or graines. Than powre vpon the ſayd poulder
boylinge water, and let it coole, this doen, poure of the
ſayd water with the ſaid graines vpon the ſkinne, rubbinge
it well ouer with the palme of youre hande, than
ſtiep the aſhes of goates donge, in the water of the ſaid
graines, and with the ſame water rubbe likewiſe the
ſkin well with youre hande, after this waſhe him, and
ſcrape out the water with a tanners paring knife, than
tight him out, and take other ripe gaines of ſap grene
and ſet them to ſeeth, hole, in water with Roch Alom,
and afterwarde let them coole. Than take of the ſayde
ſodden berries or graines, and rub the ſkin with theim
with your handes, and put of the aſhes vpon it, which
you ſhall ſtiep in the ſame greene water, that the ſayed
berries were ſodden in. Finallye, you ſhall waſſhe the
ſkin, and take out the water with a ſcraping knife, thā
you ſhall geue it a courſe ouer of the ſaied grene water
with a bruſh or clout meet for ſuch a purpoſe: And than
lay him to drie, and trim him, and you ſhall haue a fair
grene. If you will haue the coloure darcker, or ſadder,
whan you ſet the ſaid graines to ſeeth with the Alom,

you ſhall put to it a little Indicum well brayed. And you
muſt note, that the water muſt be hote whan you ſtiepe
the aſhes in it, with the water of the graines of Nerprū.
                  
               
               
                  ¶To die ſkines greene with the flowres of Ireos.
                  TAke the freſſhe flowres of Raphanitis,
                     Ireos, a kind of floure deluce called in latin R
                           •
                        
                        phaniti
                           •
                        
                      or Ireos, and
ſtampe them well, than take the drie graines or berries
of Nerprum, and with them ſtampe roche Alome, a
reaſonable quantitie, whereof a greate deale can do no
hurte: put to it a little raine water, and mingle all this
with the foreſayd flowres ſtamped. Kepe this colour in
ſome clene veſſel, and than take the ſkinnes, being annointed,
and waſhed as is aforſaid, and put to them the
graines of ſap grene with the ponlder, in the ſame maner
that we haue ſpoken of the other: waſhe them, and
ſcrape of the water with a knife, and ſo let them drye,
and geue them one wipe ouer finely with the ſayed colour
that you kept, let them drie again, then dreſſe them
according to the ſcience, and you ſhal haue fair leather.
               
               
                  ❀To die bones in a turkiſhe or redde colour.
                  ALl kinde of bones may well be died and coloured,
but hartes horne is farre better then anye other.
Take than what bone you will, & ſhape him into what
forme you pleaſe, and pulliſh him, and then boyle him
in Roche Alome water a good while, letting him afterward
drie, than take good grene, and ſtiep it in goates
piſſe, and put it in ſome copper or braſen veſſell, well
couered, and hide it vnder a dongehil the ſpace of .xv. or
xx. dayes, and then ſhall you finde it verye fayre. You
may make the like alſo with the brine of a man in ſtede
of the goates pyſſe. And for to make it redde, put in Cinabrium,
or Braſyll, in ſteade of greene: but than you
muſt put it in ſome veſſell of wood or glaſſe, and not of
copper nor braſſe.
               
               
                  To die hogges bryſtels and other things, for to make
rubbers and bruſſhes.
                  
                     
                     FIrſte waſh well the bryſtels, thē take
water wherin Roche Alom hath ben
boyled, and put the ſayd briſtels therin,
and let them lye vntill they take a
coloure ſomewhat yellow: than take
Chickeweede well ſtamped, and put
it in Vyneaygre. Afterwarde ſette a
kettle with cleere water on the fyre, wherinto you ſhal
caſte the ſaied Chickeweede, with the Vyneaygre and
all, and whan it beginneth to boyle, caſt in the bryſtels,
and let them ſeeth but a very lyttle whyle, than take of
the kettle from the fyre, and let it coole, and ſo ſhall you
haue your briſtels of an excellent good colour.
               
               
                  ☞To dye the ſaied briſtels yellowe, greene, or blewe, or
any other colour.
                  
                     FIrſte you muſt waſſhe them, and let theym
boyle in Alome water, as the other before:
than take Liguſtrum, and ſaffron, if you will
haue them yellowe. Indicum, or the iuyce of
elder berries, or walwort, or els of the flowers
of Ireos, if you will haue them blew. If you wil haue
them greene, take paynters greene, and dreſſe them as
is aboue ſaied, aſſayinge ſometime if the coloure pleaſe
you. And by this meanes you maye dye theim what colour
you liſte.
               
               
                  ☞To make a purple, whiche is a coloure wherewith
men vſe to make a coloure lyke golde, for to paynte and
wryte with.
                  
                     MElt a pounde of fine tinne, and melted as it
is, take it from the fire, and put into it. viij
or ten vnces of quicke Siluer, mingle well
all together vntil it be like as it were dow:
than take a pounde of Brimſtone, and a
pounde of Armoniacke ſalte well brayed. Incorporate

all this with the ſayde dowe of the Tinne and Quicke
Syluer, and braye them well together in a morter, or
other veſſell of wood, or ſtone, and not of Braſſe. Than
put al this compoſition into ſome violl, which muſte be
well luted or clayed about the mouth, or ſo emplaiſtred
that the clayinge or lutinge be higher than the violle a
finger height or twayne. Than afterwarde ſet it ſo vpon
the fourneis, makinge to it a ſlowe fyre at the firſt,
and after a little bygger, and ſo you ſhal maynteyne it,
ſtyrringe at tymes with a little ſticke that whiche is in
the glaſſe. And whan you ſee that it wil make a yellow
colour, take it from the fyre, and let it coole, and ſo ſhall
you haue a very fayre purple coloure lyke the colour of
golde: Afterwarde braye it with lie, and waſhe it with
piſſe, or lie, addinge to it a little Saffron, and ſtiepe it
with gommed water, as you ſhall ſee hereafter moore
playnely.
               
               
                  ☞To make Lacca of Braſyll.
                  
                     TAke twoo pailes full of ſtronge lie, and
put in it a pounde of the ſhearing of ſine
ſcarlette, and let it boyle vntill the ſaied
ſhearinge be all together diſſolued and
conſumed into water: than after poure
it into ſome veſſell of wood or ſtone, and
caſte into it by little and little, a pounde of Roch Alom,
minglinge it well with a ſclyſer of wood, and poure alſo
to it, by little and little, two payles full of colde water.
And after put it in a ſtraininge bagge, and lette it
dreane / and trickle out, then put that remayneth in the
bagge into ſome veſſell of glaſſe. This doen, you ſhall
ſet on the fyre a pounde of Verzine or Braſill cutte in
pieces into a payle full of lye, and let it ſeeth vntill it be
diminiſhed the thicknes of a finger, than ſtraine it in another
bagge, and let the water that commeth oute be
ſet againe on the fyre, with an vnce of gomme Arabick
made in poulder, and let it ſeeth vntyll it be diminiſhed

halfe a ſinger: then powre it vpon the ſayed compoſition,
that you did put into the veſſel of glaſſe, minglinge
well all together with a wodden ſclyſer, than put it in
a bagge, and ſtrame it well. The dowe of Verzine wil
remayne in the bagge, whereof you may make rounde
apples or balles, and drye them in the ſhadowe, and it
will be parfite.
               
               
                  ☞To make white tables to wryte in with the poynt of a
wyre, ſuche as come out of Germany.
                  TAke plaiſter called Gipſum, cribled and ſifted,
and ſtiepe it, and temper it with hartes glue, or
other, and geue your parchment leafe one touch
with it, and whan it is dry, ſcrape it, that it may
be euen and bryght, and couer it ouer againe with the
ſayed plaiſter, called Gypſum, and ſcrape it as before:
than take Ceruſe, well brayed and ſifted, and ſtiepe it
with the Oyle of line ſeed ſodden: Annoint your tables
with this mixtion, and let it drye in the ſhadowe, the
ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes. This doen, take a cloute, or
linnen cloth wete in water, wherewith you ſhall flicke
and make ſmoeth the ſaied tables, but the cloth muſte
fyrſte be wronge hard, and the water preſſed oute, then
leaue it ſo the ſpace of .xv. or .xx. dayes, vntill it be thorowe
drye, than applie it to your vſe.
               
               
                  ☞To make roſet, or ruddle.
                  TAke an vnce of Braſill broken ſmall, a quarter
of an vnce of Ceruſe, and a quarter of an vnce
of Roche Alome, mixe all theſe thinges well together,
and ſtampe them well, than poure pyſſe
vpon them, vntil they be al couered with it, leauinge it
ſo the ſpace of. iii. dayes, and mixing it. iii. or. iiii. times
a day. Afterward ſtraine it thorowe a linnen cloth, and
put it in a pan not leaded, or in a morter of white ſtone
and let it drie in a place where there commeth neyther

Sunne nor day lyght: than ſcrape the ſaied roſet, and
kepe it, and whan you will write withall, ſtiepe it in
gommed water.
               
               
                  ☞To gylt ouer parchement, leather or other ſuch work,
which men vſe in ſteade of hanginges, or tapiſtry.
                  TAke thre pounde of the Oyle of lyne, Vernix, Pixgraeca,
of eche a pound, halfe an vnce of Saffron
poulder. Boyle all this in a panne leaded, ſo
muche, and ſoo longe, that puttinge into it a
hennes feather, and taking it by and by out agayne, it
ſeeme as it were burned. Than take it from the fyre,
and take a pound of Aloe epaticum, of the beſt, well made
in poulder, and caſte it in by little and little, ſtyrringe it
incontinent well together with a ſtronge ſticke: for otherwiſe
it woulde ſwell and ryſe vp a lofte. And yf in
caſe for al the ſtyrringe it riſe vp, take it of the fyre, and
let it ſtande a while, and than ſet it en the fyre agayne,
makinge it boyle a new, ſtyrring it alwayes diligently.
And whan all is well incorporated together, take it frō
the fyre, and let it reſt a while, than ſtraine it thorowe
a linnen cloth, into ſome other veſſell wherein you will
kepe it, and it is made. Nowe, if in ſteade of Saffron, ye
did put to it of the yellowe ſeed which is in the flowres
of Lillies, you ſhall make it muche better and fairer.
Whan you will gylte the parchemente, you ſhall
geue it a grounde or ſituation with the white of an
Egge, or Gomme, wherevpon you ſhall laye ſiluer or
tinne leaues, but it ſhall not be ſo fayre with the leaues
of tinne, as with ſyluer. Than lay the ſayde Vernix hote
vpon the parchement, or leather ſiluered, and you ſhall
ſee immediately a coloure of golde very fayre. Lette it
drye wel in the Sunne, and print it, than paynt it with
what colour you wyll.
               
               
                  ☞To dye Crimſon ſylke.
                  
                     
                     FIrſte cutte in ſ
                        •
                     nder, or ſcrape harde
Sope ſmall, and melte it in common
water, than take your ſylke in a lynnen
bagge, or of fyne canueſſe and
thynne, and put it into a kettle with
the ſayde water & Sope. Let it boſle
halfe an howre, ſlyrringe it that it
cleaue not to the kettle, then take it out, and waſhe it in
ſalt water, and after in freſh water. Take alſo for euery
pounde of Silke, a pounde or more of Roche Alome
alayde in colde water, and ſee there be water ynough,
into the whiche you ſhall put the ſayde ſylke withoute
any bagge, and without ſettinge it on the fyre, leauing
it ſo the ſpace of eyghte houres: than take it oute and
waſhe it in freſhe water, and after in ſalte water, then
agayne in freſhe water, and let it not drye, but putte it
wete as it is in a kettle with the Crimſen, well ſtamped
and ſyſted, that is to ſaye, three vnces for euerye
pounde of ſylke. If you will haue the ſylke of a higher
colour, take foure vnces of it, and boyle it in as muche
water as will couer the ſylke, and that the water be aboue
it foure or fiue fyngers high, and for eche pounde
of the ſayde Crimſen, you ſhall putte in three vnces of
ſmall galles of Iſtria, well beaten into poulder: or in
ſtede of them, you may put in halfe an vnce of Arſenick
Criſtaline, for euery pounde, whiche wyl make the colour
fayrer, but it is daungerous becauſe of the ſmoke,
and all incenueniences that maye happen, where ſuche
water maye fall. And whan it beginneth to boyle, put
into it your Sylke, prepared and ordered as is aforeſayed,
and let it boyle a quarter of an houre. Finallye
take it of, and lette it drye in the ſhadowe, and you ſhal
haue an excellent thinge.
               
               
                  To prepare and trymme Braſyll, for to make of it four
diuers colours.
                  
                     
                     PVt Braſyll in as muche cleare water as ye
will, and ſeeth it vntill it be diminiſhed of
the thyrde parte, or at the leaſte vntyll the
colour pleaſe you, that is to ſaye, that it be
very redde, then deuide this colour into. iiii
partes: and if of one of the partes you will make roſet,
put nothing to it, for the colour will be ſuche of it ſelfe.
If you will make the other part blewe, put to a lyttle
Lime water, and you ſhall haue very fayre blew: mary
the Braſyll muſte be luke warme. If you will make it
Violet, put lye to it: but if tawny, you ſhall putte to it
Alumen fecis.
                  
               
               
                  ☞To make roſet of Braſyll another waye.
                  TAke a potte of water, and put in it the byggeneſſe
of a Walnutte of vnſleaked Lyme, leauinge
it ſo the ſpace of a nighte, then take as
muche Braſyll, bruſed and broken, as will fyll
the veſſell, that you wyll boyle it in, halfe full: than
poure into it the ſayed water with the Lyme wel ſtrained,
and lette it ſo ſtiepe in the ſayed water, the ſpace of
foure howres, makinge it afterwarde boyle vntyl it be
come to halfe, than howe downe faire and ſoftly the veſſell
that you boiled it in, and drawe oute the coloure into
ſome other cleane veſſell, puttynge to it the quantite
of a Cyche Peaſe of Roche Alome, well brayed, and
putte it in whan it is verye hote: than ſhall you haue
a goodly thinge to do withall what you will. If you
wyll wryte with it, adde to it a little Comme water.
If you wyll make it Blewe, putte to it three vnces of
Lye, more or leſſe, into a veſſell, and you ſhall haue a
very ſayre blewe.
               
               
                  ☞To make beyonde ſea Aſure, without Lapis
La
                        •
                     uli.
                  
                     
TAke an vnce of Siluer, calcined or burned with
Aqua fortis, and an vnce and a halfe of ſalt Armoniack,
mixe all well together with vynayger,
and lette it clarifie a lyttle. If the Vynayger be
more than the ſayd thinges, take away that is to much,
and put the reſt in a veſſell well leaded, and well ſtopte,
that the ſubſtaunce haue no vente oute, leauinge it ſo
xxv. dayes, and at the ende you ſhall finde verye fayre
Aſure.
               
               
                  ☞To make a grene colour to write or paynt with.
                  TAke Verdegriſe, Litarge, Quicke Syluer, and
braye all this together with the piſſe of a younge
chylde: and than write or painte with it, and you
ſhall ſee an excellent colour, as it were an Emeraulde.
               
               
                  ☞To braye fyne golde, wherewith a man maye write,
or paynt with a penſyll.
                  TAke golde leaues beaten, and foure droppes of
hony: mixe it wel together, and put it in a glaſſe.
And whan you wyll occupie it, ſtiepe and temper
it in Gommed water, and it will be good.
               
               
                  ☞The ſame another waye.
                  TAke as muche as you will of the leaues of golde
or ſyluer beaten, and laye it abroade in a large
cuppe or glaſſe, as euen as you can, and wette it
with cleare water, than braye it with your fingar,
wetinge ſometyme your fyngar, but ſpreade it not
to muche abroade in brayinge it, and continue thus doynge
vntill it be well broken, puttinge vnto it alwayes
water. And whan you thinke it is broken and brayed
ynoughe, fill the cuppe with cleane freſhe water, and
ſtyrre it well, than let it repoſe halfe an houre: After
this ſtrayne the water, and you ſhall finde the golde in

the bottome of the cuppe, the whiche you maye drie at
youre pleaſure. Whan you wyll putte it in 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
ſtiepe and temper it with Gommed water: alſo you
muſt kepe it well couered, that it take no fylth. This is
the beſte waye that is, to make brayed or pow
                        ••
                     ed
Golde.
               
               
                  ☞Another waye with Purpurine.
                  TAke Purpurine, which you ſhall fynde to be ſold,
or that you haue made youre ſelfe in the manner
aforeſayde, than put it in a dyſh, with pyſſe or lie,
and dippe it well with your fingar little and lyttle: afterwarde
fyll the dyſhe with pyſſe or lie, and let all ſetle
downe into the bottome. This doen, ſtyrre it agayne,
chaunging often the ſayd lie, vntill all be as you would
haue it, and finelye beynge broken and pounned, and
that the laſt pyſſe or lye be as cleare as whan you dydde
put it in, and after you haue ſtrained it oute, you ſhall
put to it a lyttle Saffron, and temper it with Gommed
water. Than maye you wryte, paynt, or do any thinge
elles with it.
               
               
                  ¶To make a grounde to gylt vpon, with burniſhed golde.
                  TAke Gipſum, the quantitie of a Walnut, Boale
Armenicke, the byggeneſſe of a Beane, Aloehepaticke,
Sugre candy, of eche of theim the quantitie
of a Beane, ſtampe them by them ſelues, and puttinge
the one vpon the other, you ſhall put to it laſte of all a
little Ciuette, or honny.
               
               
                  ☞To laye or ſettle golde with a ſingle grounde.
                  TAke fine Gipſum, Aloe Epaticum, Boale Armenick
of eche like quantitie, and temper it with the
whites of new layd egges, which you haue ſtrained
thorow a linen cloth, & if your ground be to ſtronge

you maye temper it with water.
               
               
                  ❀Another waye to laye on golde.
                  TAke Gommed water, and with the ſame onely
put golde, and the ſayed grounde will be good
vpon parchemente, or vppon ſkinnes, the lyke
maye you make with the whites of newe layed
Egges, and with the milke of figges alone.
               
               
                  To make colours of all kynde of metalles.
                  TAke Criſtall, or paragon ſtone, and braye it well
with the white of an Egge, and than write with
it, and whan it is drye, rubbe the writynge with
golde, or any other metall, and you ſhall haue the ſame
coloure that the metall is of.
               
               
                  To laye golde on a blacke bottome or grounde.
                  TAke the ſmoke of a Lampe, and powne or braye it
well with the Oyle of line, or of Walnuttes. And
whan you will laye the golde vpon the ſayd ground, ſe
that it be neither to moiſt nor to drye.
               
               
                  ☞To make letters of the colour of golde, without golde.
                  TAke an vnce of Orpimente, and an vnce of fyne
Criſtall, and braye theim eche one by him ſelfe,
than mingle theim together with the whites of
Egges, and wryte with it.
               
               
                  ❀To make ſyluer letters without ſyluer.
                  TAke an vnce of Tynne, two vnces of quicke ſyluer,
and melte theim together, than braye theim with
Gommed water, and write with it.
               
               
                  
                  ❀To make greene letters.
                  TAke the iuyce of Rue, Verdegriſe, and Saffron
                        •
                     
braye them well all together, and wryte therewith
with Gommed water.
               
               
                  To make white letters in a blacke feilde.
                  TAke the pure mylke of a fygge tree, in a glaſſe,
and ſet it in the ſunne the ſpace of halfe an hour:
than alaye it, or temper it with Gommed water,
whan you will occupie it. And whan you haue written
with it blacke the paper with incke, as muche as you
wyll if the paper be greate: and whan it is drye, rubbe
it well with a linnen cloth. Than the letters that you
made with the mylke of the fygge tree, will go of all to
gether, and the paper wyll remayne written white, becauſe
it was kept and preſerued by the ſame mylk, from
the yncke, where the letters were. The lyke maye you
make with the yelke of an Egge, tempered in water,
with the whiche you maye wryte alſo: And whan the
writinge is drye, rubbe wel the paper ouer with incke,
as before. And whan it is drye, rubbe the ſayde letter,
made with the yelke of the Egge, with ſome lynnen
cloth or knyfe, and they will goo of, and leaue a whyte
ſpace, whereby you ſhall haue fayre white letters in a
blacke paper.
               
               
                  To make a greene colour for to write and paynt withall.
                  TAke greene byſe, and ſtiepe it alone in Vynaigre,
and paſſe it thorowe a linnen cloth, and braye it
well vpon a Porphire ſtone, with cleare water,
and put to it, in brayinge it, a little honny, and lette it
d
                        •
                     e well, than braye it againe wel with Gommed water,
and it will be perfecte.
               
               
                  ☞To trimme and dreſſe Aſure.
                  
                     
                     AZure is brayed with hony, as greene, but ye nede
not purge it otherwiſe: temper it with ye whites
of Egges beaten, or with the water of glewe, and
not of Gomme. The water of glewe, is made
with parchement glew, cleare and mollified, and ſtrained
as Gomme is.
               
               
                  ☞To dreſſe or trimme Cinabrium, for to wryte or
paynt with.
                  
                     BRay well the Cinabrium vppon a Porphyre
ſtone, with cleare condite water,
than let it drie, and putte it in an
ynckehorne, or glaſſe, but it is better
in an inckhorne in winter. After this
poure piſſe into it, minglinge it well
together, and leauinge it ſo vntyll
nyght, vntyll all the Cinabrium be gone to the bottome:
than chaunge the pyſſe, and do as before, leauinge it ſo
vntyll the nexte morninge, chaunginge ſo the vrine or
pyſſe foure or fyue dayes, vntyl al be wel purged. Than
take the white of an Egge well beaten, vntyll it be
brought into cleare water, whiche you ſhal poure vpon
the Cinabrium, ſo that it be more than a fingar aboue it:
After mixe well al together with ſome ſticke of a Walnutte
tree, or elles with ſome little bone, than lette the
Cinabrium deſcende downe to the bottome, and do with
this as before with the pyſſe, the ſpace of two or three
dayes, and this will take awaye all the ſauoure of the
piſſe. This doen, ye ſhal put another whyte of an Egge
and mingle all well together, and than it will be perfyt:
you muſt kepe it well ſtopped. At euerye time that
you will occupie of it, ſtyrre it well: and whan the
white of the Egge is ſo dreſſed, as is declared, it neuer
corrupteth.
               
               
                  ☞A grounde to laye golde vpon anye mettall
or yron.
                  
                     
TAke Vernix liquida, a pounde, Turpentine, Oyle
of lyne, of eche of theym an vnce: myre well all together,
and it is made.
               
               
                  ☞To gylte the edges of bookes.
                  TAke the quantitie of a Walnut of Boale Armenicke,
the byggeneſſe of a Cyche peaſe of Sugre
Candye: braye them drye the one with the other,
and putte to it a little of the white of an Egge well beaten,
than mingle well all together. This doen, take the
booke that you will gylte, whiche muſte be wel bound,
well glewed, euen cutte, and well poliſhed, ſet him faſt
in the preſſe, and that as euen and as righte as you can
poſſible. Then with a penſill geue him a wype ouer
with the white of an Egge well beaten, and let it drye,
than geue him alſo another with the ſayd compoſition.
And whan it is well dryed, ſcrape it, and polliſh it wel.
Laſt of all when you will laye on the Golde, wette the
ſayde edges with a little cleare water, with a penſill,
and than incontinent put on the golde leaues, cutte in
that biggeneſſe they ought to be, and whan it is drye,
pollyſhe it with a dogges tothe. This doen, you maye
make what worke you will vpon it.
               
               
                  ☞To kepe whites of egges as longe as a man will without
corruptinge, and without putting Arſenick to it.
A ſecrete not muche knowen.
                  TAke the whites of Egges, not breakinge them in
any wiſe, and put to them as muche white Vynaygre
as ſhall ſuffiſe, that is to ſaye, a reaſonable
quantitie, leaue it ſo the ſpace of twoo dayes, than paſſe
it thorow ſome linnen cloth, without breakinge or beatynge
the white of the Egges, leauinge it ſo the ſpace
of eight dayes, than ſtrayne it agayne, and put it in a
violle well ſtopped, for to occupy whan you haue nede.
               
               
                  
                  ❀ The maner howe to make the grounde or foundation
for Indicum.
                  TAke Gomme Armoniacke three partes, Gomme
Arabick one parte, Serapinum, a fourth part, ſtiepe
theſe in Vynaygre, vntyll they be very ſofte, than
mixe them well, and ſtraine them thorow a linen cloth,
and it wyll be verye good to occupye whan you haue
neede.
               
               
                  Another perfyt grounde for the ſame thinge.
                  TAke Gomme Armoniack an vnce, Gomme Arabicke
thre vnces, and ſtiepe it in Vyneaygre the
ſpace of a daye and a nighte, than take the biggeneſſe
of a Walnutte of good yellowe Honnye, and a
Garlyke heade, well pilled and made cleane, and well
ſtamped. Boyle all theſe thinges together in ſtronge
Vynaigre, puttinge to it a little Aloe Epatic, and lette it
boyle a good while, than ſtraine it thorow a linen cloth
and wringe out well all the ſubſtaunce of it. And if you
thinke it be liquide or ſoft, or to cleare, boile it agayne,
vntill you thinke it is thicke inoughe, than kepe it in a
glaſſe, or veſſell of earth leaded, or of bone. Whan you
wil gilt any thinge, anoint it fyrſt with this compoſition,
with a penſill, and rub it wel, ſo that the ingra
                        •
                     ing
be not filled, & leaue it ſo as long as you wil: than, whā
you will lay on the leaues of gold, blowe a little youre
breath vpon the ſaied foundation or ground, and ſet on
the ſaied leaues of gold, diſpoſing and orderinge theim
as is requiſite, preſſing them wel downe with a penſil,
or with a little wol or bombaſe, and than ſhal you haue
a very excellente giltyng.
               
               
                  ☞A goodlye waye howe to make Golde and Syluer
in poulder, a thinge eaſye to be done, and there wyll
come of it an excellent coloure. This is a verye rare ſecrete,
whiche hath not bene vſed nor knowen vntyll
this preſent.
                  
                     
                     TAke leaues of golde a crowne weighte, or
as muche as you will, and ſet it to the fyre
in ſome little cleane pan or pipkin, and in
another veſſell you ſhall put foure times as
muche in weighte of quicke ſiluer, a good
waye of from the fyre, ſo that it may but onely warme
a litle, for otherwiſe it mighte vaniſhe awaye. Let not
the leaues of golde take ſo muche heate, that thei melt,
but let them waxe almoſt redde. This doen, take them
from the fyre, and the quicke ſyluer lykewiſe, whiche
you ſhall poure hote vpon the leaues of golde, and incontinent
mingle them well together with a litle ſtick,
the ſpace of a Paternoſter, and poure it afterwarde into
a dyſhe full of cleere water, and you ſhall haue a dowe
of the ſaied golde and quicke ſyluer, but the coloure of
the golde will be ſo darkened and obſcure, that a man
ſhall perceaue and ſee nothinge at all. And this is the
dowe that the Goldſmythes call Amalgama, and the learned
men Malagma, whiche is a Greke word, and being
corrupted of the Arabians, was chaunged into Amalgama.
Alſo you may make this colde, in brayinge the leaues
a good whyle with the quicke ſyluer vppon a Porphyre
ſtone, vntyll all be mixed and ioyned together.
                  And braying it alſo with ſtronge Vinagre, or the iuyce
of Lemons, it will ſoner be made, and wyl incorporate
and come together the better, than muſte you waſſhe
it wiſe or thriſe with cleare water. Nowe, how ſoeuer
you haue made this dowe, or Amalgama, you muſt ſtrain
it thoroughe a lynnen cloth, fyne and thicke, to the intente
that a parte of the quicke ſyluer maye go thorow:
or elles ſtraine it thorough a wylde goates ſkynne, or
a lambes ſkinne, whiche is farre better, and preſſe it
harde, to thintente there may come out as much quicke
ſyluer as is poſſible. Than take that remayneth in the
cloth or ſkynne, and put to it halfe as much fayre quick
Brymſtone citrine. Fyrſte ſtampe well the Brymſtone
and mingle it with the ſaied paſte or dowe: and beynge
ſo myngled, ſette it on the fyre in a dyſſhe or yron lad
                        •
                     e,

leauinge it ſo vntyll all the Brymſtone be burned, and
all the reſt yellowe. Than let it cole, and put it in a diſh
waſhynge it ſo often with cleare water, tyll you haue
a fayre colour of Golde. Than kepe it in ſome glaſſe or
earthen veſſell leaded, as you do the other punned and
brayed Golde, and whan you will put it in experience,
ſtiepe it in Roſe water, or other, wherin you ſhal haue
mollified or diſſolued ſome cleare gomme Arabicke.
                  Than dreſſe and order it to write or paynte with, and
you ſhall haue an excellent thinge. Whan you haue
written or painted, beynge once drye, you maye burniſhe
it with a dogges toeth, whiche you can not do to
the other brayed or punned golde, that Scriueners and
Painters nowe a dayes do vſe. This ſecrete hath bene
practiſed of the olde and auncient writers, as we ſee in
ſome of theyr bokes. But nowe you muſt vſe the practiſe
to burniſh it, layinge a white paper vpon the gold,
and rubbinge fyrſte vpon the ſaied paper with the dogges
toeth. And if you thinke that it is not yet burniſhed
ynoughe, you maye burniſhe it once agayne, with the
toeth vpon the Golde without the paper betwixt.
               
               
                  ☞To make a verye fayre Vernix, to verniſhe the ſaied
golde, and all other workemanſhippe.
                  TAke Bengewine, and bray it the beſte you can
betwixt two papers, than put it in ſome violle,
and poure vpon it good Aqua vite, that it be aboue
the Bengewyne three or foure fingars
hygh, and leaue it ſo a day or twaine, than put to it, for
halfe a violle of ſuche Aqua vite, fine, or ſixe blades of
Saffron ſlenderly ſtamped, or elles whole. This doen,
ſtraine it, and with a penſill Verniſhe therewith anye
thynge gylted that you will, which wil become bright,
and fayer, dryenge it ſelfe immediatelye, and will continue
many yeares. Nowe, if you will dreſſe Syluer in
ſuche a manner, do euen with the ſiluer leaues as you
did with the Golde, if not, in ſteede of Brimſtone you

ſhall take white commun ſalte, then dreſſe the Verniſh
in the foreſaied manner, puttinge to it the Almonde or
Bengewine, that is to ſaye, the white that is founde in
the middes of Bengewine, and put in no Saffron at
all. And the ſaied Verniſhe of Bengewine, and Aquavite,
without any other thinge, is very good to verniſh
all thinges, as well painted as not painted, and alſo to
make tables and coffers of Walnutte tree, and Nebene
to gliſter and ſhine, and of all other thinges: Lykewiſe
workes of Copper gilted, and not gylted: for it maketh
bright, preſerueth, aydeth the colour, and drieth incontinent,
without takinge any duſt or fylth, but that you
may make it clene with a linnen cloth, or with a foxes
taile, whiche is better, as if it were not verniſhed at al.
               
               
                  To bray or break golde or ſyluer eaſely after the comes
maner that the beſt workmaſters do vſe.
                  TAke what golde leaues you will, and incorporate
them wel in a cuppe of glaſſe, with Iulep roſet, ſtir
ringe it well with your middle finger, little and little.
And when all is incorporated together, braye it well
vpon a Porphyre ſtone, than poure by little and lyttle,
clere water vpon the ſaid ſtone, mixing it alwais: After
ſtrain the ſaid gold & Iulep, into a diſh, or cup of glaſſe,
and waſhe well the ſtone that there remaine nothinge.
Than ſtirre all with your finger in the ſaied diſhe, and
let it ſo repoſe: after, poure the water out, and putte in
other freſhe, cleere, and warme, and waſhe it ſo, vntyll
all the Iulep be waſhed and clenſed oute, and that the
water (putting it in your mouth) be in no wiſe ſweete,
than let it drie. This d
                        •
                     en, you ſhall put it in a cuppe of
cleane glaſſe, and rake out a fewe hote embers a good
way from the fyre, that the glaſſe breake not, wherevpon
you ſhall ſet the ſaied cuppe, vntyll the gold waxe
very hote, and be retourned to his naturall colour. Finally
temper it with go
                        •
                     med water, for to put it in experience.
               
               
                  
                  To make a lycoure, that maketh a golden coloure without
golde.
                  TAke the iuyce of Saffron flowres, whan thei are
freſhe vpon the plante, and if you can get none,
take Saffron dried, wel made in poulder, and put
to it as muche yellowe and gliſteringe Orpiment, that
is ſcaly, and not earthy: than, with the gall of a Hare,
or of a Pike (whiche is better) braye them well together.
This doen, put them in ſome violle vnder a donghyll
certayne daies, then take it out and keepe it, and
whan you will wryte with this licoure, you ſhall haue
a fayre coloure of Golde.
               
               
                  ❀ Another licour of the colour of Golde, for to wryte
and to gylte yron, woode, glaſſe, bone, and other lyke
thynges.
                  TAke an egge layed the ſame day that you begin
to make this, the whiche egge you ſhall open at
one ende, and take out all the white, than take
two partes of quicke ſyluer, and one parte of
ſalte armoniack, that is cleane, and well beaten: and of
theſe two thinges, you ſhall put as much vpon the yelk
of the egge that remaineth in the ſhell, as will fyll it
vp againe: than mingle well all together with a lyttle
ſticke. After, ſtoppe the ſayed egge with the piece that
you tooke of, cloſinge it well with a piece of waxe, that
nothing may enter into it, nor any thinge iſſue oute.
                  Than laye it vnder horſe donge, right vp, the open end
vpwarde, this doen, take another halfe egge ſhell, and
make as it were a couer or a cappe vpon the ſayed broken
ende, coueringe it with dunge, and leaue it ſo the
ſpace of twenty or fiue and twentye dayes, and ſo ſhall
you haue a very fayre coloure of gold, for to write, and
to do what you wyll withall. And if the ſayed ſubſtance
be to harde or to thicke, you may breake it, or temper it
with gommed water.
               
               
                  
                  ☞Another goodly licour, to make a golden coloure with
little coſt, and is a thinge eaſye to be doen.
                  TAke the pilles of Citrons, or Orenges very yelow,
and cleere thē well of the white that is within ſyde,
than ſtampe them well in a morter of ſtone, or woode,
well made cleane, and take good yellowe Brimſtone,
cleare and bryght, and well beaten in poulder, whiche
you ſhall mingle with the ſaied pilles ſtamped, ſtampinge
well all together. This doen, you ſhall putte all
this into a violle, and kepe it in a depe ſellar or caue, or
in ſome moyſt place, by the ſpace of .viii. or .x. days. Finallye,
you ſhall heate it agayne by the fyre, and then
write or paint with it, and you ſhal finde it a very excellent
coloure of Golde.
               
               
                  ☞To make yncke, or a colour to wryte with, in a verye
good perfection.
                  TAke good Galles, and breake theim in three or
foure pieces, that is to ſay, ſtampe them ſlightly,
and put them in a fryinge panne, or ſome other
yron panne, with a litle Oyle, frieng them a litle, then
take a pounde of them, and put it in ſome veſſel leaded,
pouringe into it as muche white wine as wyll couer it
ouer, more then a good hand breadth. After, take a
pounde of Gomme Arabick, well ſtamped, and eyghte
vnces of Vitriole well made in poulder: myxe all well
together, and ſet it in the ſunne certaine dayes, ſtering
it as often as you may: then boyle it a litle if you ſe that
you haue neede, and after ſtraine it, and it will be perfecte.
And vpon the lees that ſhall remayne in the bottome,
you maye poure other wine, and boyle it a little,
and ſtrain it. You may put wine vpon the ſame lees as
often as you will: that is to ſay, vntil you ſe yt the wine
whiche you put in, will ſtaine or be coloured no more.
Then, mingle al the ſaied wine, wherunto you ſhal put
other g
                        ••••
                     s, gomme, and vitriole, as at the beginning

thē keping it in the Sunne, you ſhal haue a better inck
then the fyrſte, and do ſo euery day, for the oftener you
do it, the better you ſhall haue it, and with leſſe coſte.
And if you finde it to thicke, or that it be not flowinge
ynough, put to it a lyttle cleare lie, whiche will make it
liquide and thinne inoughe. If it be to clere, adde to it a
little gomme Arabick. The galles muſt be ſmal, curled
and maſſiue within, if they be good. The good vitriolle
is always within of a colour like vnto the elemēt. The
beſt gomme, is cleere and brittle, that in ſtamping it, it
becommeth poulder eaſely, without cleaning together.
               
               
                  A good waye and maner howe to make incke for to carry
about a man in a drie poulder, whiche (whan he wil
write with) he muſt temper with a little wyne, water,
or vynaiger or with ſome other licour, and than he may
incontinent put it in experience. Vvyth the ſaid poulder
all other incke maye be amended, be it neuer ſo euill.
                  TAke Peche or Abricot ſtones with their kurnels,
ſwete Almondes, or bitter, 
                        〈◊〉
                      that thei haue their
ſhelles harde, and that the Almondes be within
them. And if in caſe you can gette but the ſaied ſtones
without theyr kurnels, it ſhall be good ynough, but yet
not ſo good as with the kurnels. Take then all the ſaid
thinges together, or thoſe that you can get, and burne
them vpon the coales: and whan they be very redde and
enſ
                        •
                     amed, take them out, and thus beinge redacte and
made into verye blacke coales, kepe theim in a panne.
                  Take likewiſe Roſin of a Pine tree, and putte it in a
panne, and make it flame and burne: than take another
little ſcillette, or elles a lyttle bagge holden open,
with little ſtickes layde a croſſe ouer it, or otherwiſe, as
you ſhall thinke good, and hold the mouth of the bagge
downewarde ouer the flambe, ſo that the ſmoke of the
ſaied Roſin maye gather together, and ſticke rounde aboute
the ſaied panne or bagge, and whan al the Roſin
to burned, and all colde againe, cauſe all the ſayd ſmoke

to fall vpon a paper, or table, or ſome other thinge, and
kepe it, but if you will not take the paines to make this
ſmoke, bye it of them that make printers incke. Of this
blacke or ſmoke, you ſhall take one part, or what quantitie
you will, of the coales of the ſaied ſtones another
part, of Vitriole one parte, of fried galles, as is aforeſaied,
two partes, of Gomme Arabicke foure partes.
                  Let all theſe thinges be well ſtamped, ſifted, and myngled
together, and then kepe well this poulder in a linnen
bagge, or of leather, for the older it is, the better it
will be. Whan you will occupie it, for to make y
                        ••
                     ke
thereof, take a little of it, and temper it with wine, water,
or Vynaigre, the whiche beyng put into it warme,
the yncke ſhall be the better, neuertheleſſe, beinge put
in colde, it maketh no great matter, and you ſhall haue
immediately very good incke, whiche you maye carrye
where you will without ſpillinge or ſheadinge. If you
haue naughty inck, put to it a little of the ſayd poulder,
and it will becomme immediately very good black, and
haue a good gloſſe.
               
               
                  ❀ To make a great deale of yncke quickly, and with litle
coſte.
                  TAke of the blacke that Curriers or tanners doo
black their ſkins with, for you may haue much
for moneye: than take of a fyſhe called a Cuttle,
whiche coſteth almooſt nothinge, and chieflye in
places nighe to the ſea ſide, and in eating the ſaied fiſhe
at diuerſe times, you maye keepe the galles together.
Than myngle the ſaied galles with the Tanners colour,
and withoute anye other thinge, you ſhall haue a
perfit Incke. To make it yet better, you maye putte to
it of the ſaied poulder made of the coales of Vitriole,
of Galles, and of gomme, and the ſayd. Incke ſhalbe very
good to print in copper, putting to it a little vernix, &
a little oyle of line, ſo that it may be liquide and flitting
of it ſelfe, for to pearce the better into all manner of

engrauinges, and that it maye abide well vpon the paper,
without renninge abroade.
               
               
                  ❀To make Printers Incke.
                  
                     PRinters Incke is made onelye with
the ſmoke of Roſine, as is aboueſaid,
and is tempered with moiſt Verniſh,
you muſte ſeeth it a little, to make it
liquide or thicke, as you ſhall neede.
But in Winter moiſter then in Somer:
and alwaies the thicker maketh
the letter fayrer, blacker, clearer, and brighter. But in
what maner ſo euer it be, it muſte be euer well mixed
with the ſmoke. And to make it liquide, as is ſaied, you
muſt put to it more oyle of line, or of Walnuttes to the
bernyſhe. If you wyll make it thicker, put leſſe Oyle,
and more ſmoke, lettinge it ſeeth more. If you wyll
Printe redde, in ſteade of the ſaied ſmoke, mingle Vermillion
well brayed, with the ſayed Verniſhe. If you
will Printe greene, put in green Bice. If you wyll
make it Blew (as men haue done ſomtime heretofore)
take Azure of Almaine, or of that of glaſſe, whiche is
nowe made at Veniſe, doing in all poyntes as we haue
ſpoken of the blacke incke.
               
               
                  ☞To make yncke ſo white, that although a man write
with it vpon white paper, it may eaſelye and perfytlye
be redde. A very goodly thinge.
                  
                     TAke the ſhelles of newe layed egges,
verye white, and wel waſhed, then bray
them well vpon a cleane marble ſtone,
with cleare water. Put them in a cleane
dyſh, vntill the poulder deſcende to the
bottome: after dreane oute the water
lightlie, and lette the poulder drie of it ſelfe, or in the
ſunne, and ſo ſhall you haue an excellente white, that

neyther Ceruſe, nor any other white in the world may
be compared vnto it, if you dreſſe, and kepe it cleane.
And whan you will occupie it, take gomme Armoniac
well waſhed, and mollified of that yellowe ſkynne that
is about it: then ſtiepe It the ſpace of a night in diſtilled
Vynagre, and in the morninge you ſhall finde it diſſolued,
and the Vynagre ſhall become whiter than milke:
the whiche you ſhall ſtrayne thorowe a cleane lynnen
cloth, and with a little of this white licour you ſhal temper
the ſaied poulder, and than wryte or paynt with it,
and you ſhall haue a whyte, excellente aboue all other
ſortes. A noble woman of Italye vſed no other thynge
to blaunche her face: and kepte her ſelf very white with
al, and yet it appeared not that ſhe vſed any ſuch thing.
Alſo the ſayd poulder hurteth nothinge at all the face,
nor the ſkinne, nor yet the teeth, as the ſublime, the Ceruſe,
and other like thinges do, whiche gentylwemen
ofte vſe, to theyr great detriment and hurte. But if you
will vſe the ſaied white made of egge ſhelles vpon your
face, you muſt braye and conſume it very fyne, and that
it haue almoſte no palpable ſubſtaunce, and that it may
be penetratiue and pearſinge, to thintent it maye continue.
In the whiche thinge euery man may proue and
aſſaye what his witte is able to do. But aboue all thinges,
whan you will vſe it for the face, it is neceſſary that
you put to it the thyrd part of calcined and burned Talchum,
as we will ſhewe you in the booke folowinge.
               
               
                  ☞To make a poulder to take of blottes of yncke, fallen
vpon the paper, or elles the letters and wrytinge
from the paper: whiche is a rare ſecrete, but yet profytable.
                  TAke Ceruſe well brayed, and make thereof a
dowe with the milke of a figge tree, then let it
drie: afterwarde braye it agayne, and drye it as
before, and ſo ſeuen tymes: then keepe it ſo in
poulder. And whan you wil vſe it to take out blottes, or

letters out of paper, take a lyttle linnen cloth wette in
water, preſſinge and wringinge the water oute, then
ſpreade it abroade vpon the place where you woulde
haue it, and leaue it therevpon vntill the paper and the
incke be moyſte with all: than take awaye the wette
cloth, and vpon the blotte or letters that you will haue
taken awaye, put a little of the ſaid poulder of Ceruſe,
leauinge it ſo the ſpace of a nighte. In the morninge,
you ſhall take a linnen cloth cleane and drye, wherwith
you ſhall rubbe of ſoftlye and finelye the ſaied poulder,
and the paper wil remaine exceding white for to wryte
vpon agayne, as well as before, and better. And if al be
not well rubbed of at the fyrſt time, you may do it once
againe, and you ſhall not fayle.
               
               
                  To make a kinde of verniſh, but much fayrer, and better
than that whiche Scriuenars do vſe; and is of leſſe
coſt, and ſtinketh not as other verniſh doeth.
                  THe Verniſhe whiche Scriueners commonlye
vſe, is nothinge elles but the gomme of Ieniper
made in poulder, and of the ſame is liquide
verniſhe made, in boylinge the ſaied gomme in
the Oyle of line, and of this poulder do Scriueners vſe
to cauſe that the incke runne not abroade, and that the
letter be the fairer and cleaner. Now for to make a poulder
of like effecte, and verye fayre, with leſſe coſte, and
without any euil ſauour, take Egge ſhelles what quantitie
you wil, taking away the little ſkinne within ſide:
and whan you haue groſſely ſtamped theim, put theim
in a panns that will endure the fyre, coueringe it with
ſome couer, then ſet it in ſome glaſiers or potters furneis,
or in a bricke, tyle, or lyme makers kylle, leauing
it there vntyll all the ſhelles be come into a verye white
poulder, whiche is called Egge lyme: ſyfte it, and kepe
it. And whan you will occupie it, caſte a little of it vpon
the paper, or parchement, and ſpreade the poulder well
vpon it, rubbing it wel with a Hares fote, or otherwiſe

then takinge awaye that is to much, write vpon it, and
you ſhall finde it of better effecte then the vernix. Whan
the writinge is drye, if you will take awaye the ſaied
poulder, yea the common verniſhe, for feare leaſte men
ſhoulde white theyr handes, rubbe the paper or parchement
with crommes of white breade, for it wyll drawe
to it ſelfe, and take awaye all the verniſhe or poulder
that is vpon it.
               
               
                  ☞To make incke to rule paper for to write by, wher
                        •
                     
of the writinge being drie, the liues maye ſo be▪ taken
out, that it ſhall ſeeme ye haue written without lines.
                  TAke Paragon ſtone, ſtampe and bray it wel, then
take the bygneſſe of a little nutte, of the fayreſte
tartre or lees of white wine, calcined and burned,
ſettinge it to ſtiepe and diſſolue in a dyſhful of clere water,
and than ſtraine it oute. And with this water you
ſhall temper the blacke poulder of the Paragon ſtone,
vntill it become like incke, with the whiche you ſhall
rule your paper, or parchement: and wryte vpon thoſe
lines what you will with common inck. And whan the
writinge is drye, for to take out the ſaied lynes, you ſhal
take harde crommes of white breade, and rubbe youre
paper ouer with them, and the lines that you haue ruled,
wyll go out, as cleane as thoughe there had neuer
bene line at all. This is a goodly ſecrete, and very rare.
                  *The ende of the fyfte
booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE
Secretes of the reuerende Maſter
Alexis of Piemount.
               THE SIXTE BOOKE.
               
                  ☞To ſublime Quicke Syluer, that is to ſaye, to make
common ſublyme, that Goldſmithes, Alebemiſtes, and
Gentil wemen do vſe, and that men vſe in many thinges
concerninge Phiſycke.
                  
                     TAke a pounde of Quicke
Syluer, and put it in ſome veſſell
of wood with a little Vynaygre,
and Salte Peter, than
braye it, and mortifie it well
with a wodden peſtell. Than
take halfe a pounde of commen
ſalt, foure vnces of Salt Peter,
and let all this be well brayed,
and put vpon the Quicke Syluer in the ſame veſſell of
woode, ſtyringe well all together, puttinge to it twoo
pounde of Roche Alome burned. Incorporate well all
this together, and put it in a violle, or ſome potte, luted
and clayed a finger higher then the ſubſtaunce within
is. Then put it, and diſpone it, in a panne or ſcillet, vpon
ſiſted aſhes: than ſet the ſaied panne on the furnes,
ſettinge the Limbecke vpon the violle or potte luted,
and then the recipient, to receaue that diſtelleth out, as
men do in all maner of diſtillations. Make to it at the
fyrſte a ſlowe fyre, vntyll all the moyſture be drawen
out, whiche you ſhall take out of the recipient, and kepe
well, for it will be good for many thinges, and ſpecially
for to mortifie other Quicke Syluer, to make other ſublime.
This doen, make your fyer greater, and continue
it ſo, vntyll you ſee Mercury or Quicke Syluer, to be
ſublimed thorowly whyte, that is to ſaye, that it be ryſen

aboue al the ſubſtance, and made as it were a white
cake. And if you will make it higher, that is to ſay, vnto
the necke and brimme of the violle or pot, then take a
ſheete of paper, and wrappe it rounde about the violle
or potte, that is to ſaye, aboute the body of it that is vncouered
aboue the furneis: then encreaſe your fyre, and
make it greater, and this white cake wyll riſe by little
and little, and will cleaue to the brimme of the pot, remaininge
there lyke a little be
                        ••
                     e of white ſublime, then
let it coole. Than take of the recipient, and lyfte vp the
Limbecke, makinge the pot cleane without ſide, to the
intent that whan you break it, there fal no filth among
the ſaied ſublyme. This done, breake the violle or potte
and in takinge of the ſublime, you muſt kepe it from the
ſmoke, and in this ſorte you may make a loafe or cake of
a hundred, or two hundred pounde, or as muche as you
wyll, kepinge alwaies the proportion of the quantitie
of the thinges, accordinge to the weighte here aboue
written. The lees that remayneth in the bottome of the
ſayd potte or violl, may be ſtamped and diſſolued in boilinge
water, and than ſtraine it, and lette it ſeeth, and
than drie thorowlye: there will remaine in the bottome
a ſalte, whiche will be of the nature of the Salt Peter,
of the common ſalte, and of the Alome that you did put
in. And the ſayde ſalte will be very good to make other
newe ſublime, with other Quick Siluer, and vinaiger:
or elles in ſteade of Vynaigre you maye take the foreſaid
water that diſtilleth in the ſublimation, and ſo ſhal
you make it very perfitte. And you muſte note, that the
ſaied ſublime, made with Roche Alome, is better for
gentilwomen, that wil paint their faces with ſublime.
But I counſaile theim, that in ſteade of ſublime, they
vſe ſome of the waters that I haue ſpoken of in the
bookes before. For Goldeſmithes, Alkemiſtes, and for
manye thinges required in Phiſicke, it is better to put
in rawe Vitriole, in ſteade of burned Alome: but this is
very euil and hurtful for gentlewemen: for, the mooſte
part of them that make ſublime, make it with Vitriole

partly becauſe it is made with leſſe coſt, and partly becauſe
it is profitabler for many thinges, thē made with
Alome, whiche is almdoſt for nothinge but for gentlewemen.
There be ſome naughty perſonnes that putte
Arſenic Criſtallyne to diſtille with Quicke Syluer, a
thinge practiſed of to many men. Wherefore it is good
and profitable to admonyſhe euerye man that he take
heede, for certainely, in reſpecte of a little gayne, they
make them ſelues worthy to be burned quicke: for beſides
that men ſe oftentimes, that by ſuche ſublyme wemen
haue theyr faces ſwollen withall, like a bladder
blowe
                        •
                     , alſo it may happen that in Phiſicke they hurte
or kyll men The ſayde ſublime made with Alome and
Vitriole, may eaſely be ſublimed a newe, that is to ſay,
for euery pounde of this ſublime, to putte to it halfe a
pound of common white ſalte, or burned Alome, or vnsleaked
lime, in ſettinge this to ſublime, as before: the
whiche wyll ſublime it ſelfe much ſoner, and will waxe
fayrer, the oftener you ſublime it. The Alchemiſtes, folowynge
the preceptes of Geber, of Saynte Thomas,
and other Philoſophers, go aboute and ſpende tyme to
ſublime it diuers times for to make it firme, amonge
whom there be that ſublime it a hundreth times, and other
ſome two hundreth tymes, and yet at thende bring
it to none effect: and that cometh, becauſe that alwayes
they put in, in ſubliminge the ſaied lecs, that is to ſaye,
the ſalte, alome, or vitriole, as we haue ſaied. And ſeing
that the nature of the fyre is to fix and make firme thinges
that ſone flit awaye, the oftener the ſaied ſublime
cometh to the fyre, the more doth it faſten at euery time,
but that part that is faſtened, is alwaies mingled with
the ſaied lees, and ſo is loſt: Therfore they which made
the ſaied ſublimation, not conſideringe the reaſons and
cauſes why ſuche a thinge happeneth, founde that by
little and little theyr ſublime was diminiſhed, and (peraduenture)
thought it hadde flowen awaye, or els conſumed
in the fyre, rather than to beleue that it remayned
in the ſaied lees, from the whiche it can in no wyſe

be ſeparated. Nowe mindinge philoſophicallye to procede
in the faſteninge or fixinge the ſaied ſublyme, you
muſt fyrſte ſublime it three or foure times, with common
ſalte, burned Alome, lime, or Talchum, as is ſaied
to the intent that in this wiſe it may be mondified, and
clenſed from all earthy and vncleane ſubſtaunce, that
it conteyneth, and frome the ſuperfluous moiſture,
whereof it is full. It is mondified and made cleane of
the earthy ſubſtaunce, becauſe the earth ſublimeth not,
but remayneth in the bottome of the viole or pot, cleauinge
with the grounes, whiche is the Salte, Alome,
or Vttriole that is put in it, the whiche thinges we call
here lees or dregges, becauſe they remaine in the bottome,
as the lees of wine, or of Oyle doeth. Alſo it is
pourged of the aquoſitie, or ſuperfluous moiſture, two
maner of wayes. The fyrſte is, becauſe that with the
ſame, or diſtilled water, wherwith it was watered, as
we haue ſaied before, the moiſture or watrineſſe of the
ſaied Quick ſiluer diſtilleth out in a vapour. The other
is, becauſe of the ofte ſubliminge it, the nature of the
fyre is annexed vnto it, whiche diminiſheth it, the whiche
two thinges are the principall cauſe whye it faſteneth.
And ſo are they the onelye partes that make the
perfyt fixion or faſteninge, accordinge as they are ſufficiently
ioyned with the thinges that you wyl faſten or
fixe. And here we meane no other thinge, by the thynge
fixed or faſtened, but that the fyre hath made ſuche a decoction,
that it daniſheth not awaye, or is lightly caried
awaye with the wynde, and that all the ſubſtaunce remayneth
in the bottome, and conſumeth no more.
                  Therefore, after you haue ſublimed it three or foure
tymes, and that it is well pourged of the carthye ſubſtaunce,
and of the ſuperfluous moiſture, as is aforeſayed,
you ſhall ſet it to ſublime a parte by it ſelfe, withoute
any grownes or lees, and ſhall ſublime it ſo often,
vntyll all remayne fixed to the bottome of the violle or
potte, and that it flye not awaye nor diminiſhe for anye
greate fyre that you make.
                  
                     
But if you wyll make it in leſſe ſpace, and eaſier, obſerue
this rule, whiche is certayne and infallible.
                  Whan you haue ſublimed it three or foure times, or
oftener, you ſhall adde to it the fourth part of fine ſiluer
calcined and burned, as we wyll afterwarde declare:
than after you haue mixed it well together, ſet it to ſublyme:
and whan it is ſublimed, mingle that whiche is
ryſen vp, with that that remaineth in the bottome, then
ſublime it again, and ſo, ſo often that it ryſe vp no more
but remayne in the bottome for al the vehemence of the
fyre, and ſo ſhall it be perfit, very white, cleane, fuſible,
and penetratiue or pearſinge. And he that would make
a good quantitie of it, and is not hable to putte to it as
muche fyne ſiluer, as the fourth part of it, he may make
it in this maner folowinge. After he hath ſublimed it
three or foure times, with the grownes or lees, as is aforeſaied,
let him kepe it by it ſelfe, and take a little of it
that is to ſaye, as muche as for to ioyne or put with the
fourth part of fyne ſyluer, that he ſhould put to it, as in
example. If he haue but half an vnce of Syluer, let him
take an vnce of the ſayde ſublime, and whan he hath
mixed it together, let him ſublime it as often as before,
vntyll all remayne fixed in the bottome, and he ſhall
haue two vnces, or little leſſe of ſublime fixed: for the
fyre in dryenge it, and making the decoction, cateth and
conſumeth ſome parte of it, beſyde that conſumeth in
ſtampinge, and in the vyole or potte. Than let him take
theſe two vnces fixed, or as muche as is of it, with three
times as muche of ſublime not fixed, that was kepte,
and then let him mingle all together, and ſublime it as
oft as before, vntil al be fixed. And if he wil make more
of it, let him take agayne three partes of the other ſublyme:
and ſo ſhall he make it as often and as muche as
he wyll, whiche is muche better then to make it all at
once, for by this meanes is volatile fixum, and fixum volatile
oftener made, whiche is that, that the philoſophers
eſteme mooſt, and is alſo more fuſible, more pearſynge,
and of greater vertue. In this operation conſiſteth all

all the ſecrete, and the greateſt maiſtry of the Philoſophers,
and cheiflye of Geber, who maketh the mooſte
part of his worke in this manner of ſubliminge and firinge
often times, and onely keepeth the thinge ſecrete
that muſt be ſublimed, the which thinge becauſe he wil
hide it from theim that be not worthye to knowe it (as
hym ſelfe affirmeth) he calleth it Quick Syluer, but he
meaneth another thinge, althoughe in effecte the ſame
thinge declareth that it is but quick ſyluer, but brought
from his nature vnto a perfecter degre, as for example.
Dowe, is meale, not in his fyrſt eſſence and being, but
is redact and made of the baker, into a more eſtimable
nature, and nerer to perfection. No man ought to hope
to attayne to this high knowledge, by his owne wytte,
but onely by the grace and gifte of God, who (as all the
Philoſophers ſaye) Cui vult largitur, & ſubtrabit.
                  
               
               
                  ☞To make Cinabrium, and thereof to make loaues of a
hundreth or two hundreth poundes, as great as a man liſt
as thoſe are that come oute of Almayne, whiche ſecrete
hath not before this tyme bene knowen of anye in Italy.
                  
                     ALl thoſe that delight in ſecretes, and
principally in thinges belonginge to
metalles, knowe howe to dreſſe Cinabrium,
but in a ſmall quantitie, as a
pound or two at a time, and not paſt.
In Germanye, and ſome partes of
Fraunce, there be that make it in
great lompes, or maſſes, and ſend it ſo into Italye, and
ouer all the worlde, and yet kepe it meruelous ſecret to
them ſelues, without publiſhinge it vnto manye men.
Therefore we will alſo communicate this ſecrete (although
it conſiſt in a ſmall thinge) to the glory of God,
and the profite of the common welth, reachinge here in
a breife manner, to make it in as great a quantitie as a
man will. Take of Quicke Syluer nine partes, Brimſtone
citrine two partes, yet many men put thre partes

of Brimſtone, for the nine partes of quick ſiluer, other
foure, and ſome as muche of the one as of the other.
But whan it is for to paynte with, there cannot be to
much Brimſtone, for there commeth the liuelier colour
of it, and for other thinges it is better that for one poūd
of Quicke Siluer, there be but three or foure vnces of
Brimſtone. Putte then the Brimſtone in ſome large
panne, meltinge it with a ſlowe or ſmall fyre: & whan
it is molten, take the Quicke Syluer in a linnen cloth,
in your lefte hande, and wringe it little and little into
the ſaied Brimſtone (whiche muſt fyrſte be taken from
the fyre) and mingle it with a ſticke, to thende the quick
ſyluer maye incorporate it ſelfe well with the Brymſtone,
not ceaſinge to ſtyrre it, and to looſe it alwayes
from the panne, vntyll all be well cooled, and you ſhall
haue a blacke mixture, whiche ſhall be neither lyke the
Brimſtone, nor quick ſyluer. Stampe this mixtion, and
bray it well, and ſifte it, and of this poulder you maye
make what quantitie you will, puttinge it in a greate
panne. Nowe yf you wyll dreſſe the Cinabrium, you ſhall
take a violle of glaſſe as great as you will, yet ſee notwithſtandinge
that ye fyll the ſaied violle but a quarter
full with the ſubſtaunce that you ſhall putte in it.
And after hauynge well luted and clayed the violle,
with a claye or paſte made with white claye, and the
ſhearinge of cloth (whiche men call Lutum ſapientiae, as
we will ſhewe you hereafter howe to make it perfectly)
and whan it is well dried, putte in as muche of the ſaid
poulder, as wyll fill a quarter of the ſayed violle, or
leſſe, and without cloſynge vppe the mouth of the ſaied
veſſell of glaſſe, ye ſhall ſet it vppon a greate furneis,
if you haue muche ſubſtaunce, than make vnder it a
flighte and ſlowe fyre, the ſpace of two or three houres,
and afterwarde ſomewhat greater. But for to make a
greate quantitie of it, you muſte euer and anone, putte
in of the ſaied poulder, leauynge ſo ſtyll the ſaied veſſell
of glaſſe vppon the fyre to ſublyme: then take a ſticke
made meete for the purpoſe, that maye reache to the

bottome of the ſaied veſſell, and be more then a handefull
withoute, and haue alſo vppon the ſticke a rounde
lumpe of the ſayed Lutum ſapientiae, to the intente that
the ſayed ſticke ſo being put into the viol, it maye cloſe
the mouth of it, and that whan the ſticke riſeth vp, the
piece of Lutum ſapientiae, maye alſo riſe withall, and open
the mouth of the ſaied violle. You muſte haue alſo
made readye, and ſettled, a fonnell (ſuche as they fyll
hogges heades of wyne withall) whiche muſte haue alwayes
the necke of it within the mouthe of the vyolle,
and that the ſticke maye go thorough the myddle of the
funnell, that by that meanes, it maye ſtoppe the ſtrayte
of the funnell, with the mouthe of the violle.
                  All theſe thinges thus ſet in order, you muſte keepe the
ſaied poulder nyghe vnto the fyre, to the intente that
it maye be hoate: for if you ſhoulde putte it in colde,
vppon the hoate that is in the Violle, you ſhould make
colde, and lette the ſublimation of the Cinabrium.
                  
                  Nowe, whan the fyrſte poulder hath bene on the fyre,
the ſpace of fyue houres, and that it is thoroughlye, or
partelye ſublimed, lyfte vppe the ſticke a little, that is
in the potte, and ſo open the mouth of it, in lyftinge vp
the rounde piece of claye that ſtopped it, and putte in
three or foure ſponefulles of the ſaied poulder that you
kepte warme, then lette downe the ſticke, with the
rounde buttonne of claye, that it maye cloſe the vyolle,
as before.
                  And you muſte vnderſtande, that the ſayed ſticke is
not put into the violle for anye other cauſe, but to kepe
that the ſayed poulder whiche is in the bottomme, beginninge
to ſublyme, ſhoulde not cleaue rounde about
the mouth of the violle, for than it woulde ſtoppe it ſo,
that you coulde putte none other poulder into it, nor
make the loaues ſoo greate, as is ſayed: and herein
conſyſteth the whole Secrete to make the loues great.
For if you woulde putte in all the ſubſtaunce at once,
that is to ſaye, a hundrethe, or twoo hundreth pounde
of ſubſtaunce, you ſhoulde make the maſſe, or lumpe

ſo great, that it woulde neuer be broughte to perfection,
and muſte make ſo greate a fyre to it, that rather it
woulde melte both the veſſell, and alſo marre the furneis,
than the matter or ſubſtaunce woulde ſublyme.
                  But in puttinge it in thus by little and little, the ſticke
beinge in the middle, all the ſubſtaunce ſublimeth, baketh,
and waxeth redde, and by little and little, ſticketh
to the higheſt parte of the veſſell, then, in puttinge to it
agayne newe poulder, it deſcendeth to the bottom, and
there findinge all thinges hote, with that that it is hote
it ſelf, and in a ſmal quantitie it ſublimeth, baketh, and
waxeth redde incontinent, incorporatinge it ſelfe with
the fyrſte. So in puttinge in, by little and little newe
hote poulder, and keping alwayes the fyre in one ſtate,
you ſhal make as great a quantitie of it as you wil, and
ſhal haue very great loaues of fayre Cinabrium, the whiche
wyll haue onely a hole in the middle, whiche is the
ſpace where the ſticke went thorow. Finally, you may
put to it newe poulder in takinge awaye the ſticke all
together, and cloſing the mouth, and than make a fire:
for this laſt poulder wyll lykewiſe ſublyme, and wyll
make a bottome to the lofe of Cinabrium, Moreouer, note
and vnderſtande, that the great fyre, that is to ſay, long
continued and kept, hurteth not, and now and then you
muſt moue, and lifte vp and downe the ſayde ſticke, to
the intent that the Cinabrium cleaue not to it, and ſtoppe
ſo the mouth of the veſſell, that you can putte no more
freſhe poulder to it, as is ſayed. This is the ſure, and
perfecte waye and meane howe to make Cinabrium in as
greate loaues as you will, whiche hytherto hath not
bene knowen in Italye. You maye do the like in pottes
of potters claye white, ſoo that they be well luted and
clayed ouer, that they maye endure the fyre, and not
breake.
               
               
                  ☞To fyne and renewe Borax.
                  
                     
                     
                        BORAX was called of the auncient
writers Chriſocolla, and was both naturall
and artificiall, as Plini, Dioſcorides,
and other write, and men did
vſe of it in Phiſicke, and alſo to ſowder
Gold and Syluer, and other metalles,
as men vſe yet nowe a dayes:
for the nature of it is to melte, and to reſolue quickely
anye ſouderynge. It is vſed in worke alſo for to make a
bodye, that is to ſaye, to gather together the fylynge of
Golde and ſiluer, and in all other thinges, wherein a
man hath neede of a quicke and ſodayne foundinge or
meltinge. Moreouer, gentlewemen helpe theim ſelues
alſo muche with it to make theim fayre: for it maketh
the ſkinne very white, fine, and cleane, without daunger
of any poyſon, or of hurtinge the teeth, or fleſhe.
                  The auncient men of olde time had of it grene, whereof
nowe a dayes is none founde, nor yet anye man maketh
it. Marye, we haue that is very white, and alſoo
ſomewhat blacke, whiche peraduenture a man may ſay
is like theyr grene. The white is in little longe pieces,
with certayne ſynewes or veines all a longe, ſo like vnto
Roche Alome, that many are deceiued, or deceiue other
with it: For whan a man ſetteth the ſaied Borar
vpon the fyre, it boyleth, and ſwelleth vp in all poyntes
like Alome, and ſo remayneth white, and full of hoales
lyke a ſponge, and eaſy to be broken with your handes,
euen as Roche Alome burned. But ſubtyle and craftye
marchauntes knowe Borax from Alome thre maner of
wayes. The fyrſte is, that Alome put in a mans mouth
is eygre and ſharpe of taſte, and reſtraintife, but Borax
hath no maner of taſte, but a dead and vnſauery guſte,
as a meane betwene the ſauour of Oyle, and whaye of
Mylke. Therefore they that wyl deceaue other, and falſifye
the true Borax, take little pieces of rawe Rocfe
Alome, and kepe them in Oyle of Almondes, in whay,
or in mylke. Some other put to it alſo honny, or ſugre,
for to moderate the eygerneſſe of the Alome, with the

ſweteneſſe of it. Other there be, that melte all the ſaied
thinges on the fyre, and than ſet theim to coole in ſome
colde place, vntyl all be waxen into yee, or little ſtones,
and puttinge to it Salte Peter, Sal alcali, Tartre, Alome
de fece, and ſuche lyke thinges, and make little ſtones
ſomewhat lyke vnto Borarx but fyrſte they differ
in fourme and faſhion, for the true Borax is alwayes
longe in fourme, and the ſtones where Alome is amonge,
are neuer broughte into anye fourme, but into
little ſquare ſtones. Furthermore, thei differre in the
ſeconde ſorte, and that is this: That Alome beynge
burned, maketh a greater lumpe, then when it is raw:
but the true Borax is broughte and reduced into a verye
ſmall quantitie, and this is an euidente ſigne to
knowe it. The thyrde, whiche is of mooſt importaunce
and the ſureſte, is, that the matter wherein the Alome
is, will not ſouder in no manner of wiſe, and wyll not
melte neither, ſo well as the Borax will. I ſaye, it will
not melte ſo well, becauſe that where any Salt Peter,
Tartre, and Sal alcali is, there the matter will melte, at
the leaſte in ſome parte: for all the ſaied thinges helpe
to the foundinge of metalles. The Salte Peter, whan
there is a good quantitie of it, is knowen incontinente
vppon the fyre, for it maketh the boylinge wateryſhe,
and caſteth aboute, as it were lyttle ſparkes of fyre.
                  The other thinges made with the foreſayed mixions,
dyuers tymes, in whaye, milke, or in water, and congeled
into lyttle pebbles, make certayne ſtones, but
they be alwayes ſalte, to brighte, and to violente to
melte: for whan a manne wyll ſouder anye worke of
Golde, or thinne Syluer with it, it cauſeth the worke
to melte together, and where as there is Sugre, it
leaueth the Golde and Syluer ſpotted. Men make other
mixtures, whiche are verye good for to ſouder, or
to melte, whiche neuertheleſſe are differente frome the
Borax in fourme and ſauoure, of the whiche we wyll
make mention hereafter.
                  Nowe, for to retourne to the true Borax of oure

tyme, men bringe vs certayne barrels full, of a kind of
greaſe, ful of certayne litle pebbles, which is called the
dowe or paſte of Borare. Vnto this daye menne haue
broughte it oute of Alexandria, where it was alſoo of
olde tyme made: and therefore is it that the aunciente
Arabian Anthones, whiche haue wrytten of thynges
concernynge mettalles, called the Borax Nitrum Alexandrinum.
And within theſe fewe yeares, they haue begonne
to brynge it frome the Weſte partes, yet I can
not tell whether it be made there, or elles paraduenture
it be broughte latelye oute of the Indes. There
was within theſe fewe yeares ſoo greate lacke of it in
Italye, that it was ſolde at the leaſte, for a crowne an
vnce, of that, that was made into ſtones. And nowe,
within this twoo yeare, there is come ſuche hahoundaunce
oute of the Weſte partes, that the pounde is
worth but a crowne and a halfe, and leſſe.
                  The waye howe to make it (whiche is vſed in the
ſaied Weſt partes) is thus. In Mines, where Golde
and Syluer, or Copper is gotten, is found a kynde of
water, whiche (as I my ſelfe haue ſeene and proued by
experience) is of it ſelfe verye neete and excellente for to
ſouder or to founde with. And alſo I knowe a place in
Germanye, where there is a greate veyne of ſuche water,
whiche notwithſtandinge, the payſauntes knowe
not of. Nowe, they take this water, with the earth that
is vnderneath it, or on the ſydes, and boyle it a certaine
tyme, and than ſtrayne it, and ſo leauinge it, it congeleth
into lyttle pebbles, euen like vnto Salte Peter.
                  And therefore yf a man ſhoulde keepe theim longe ſoo,
thei would not continue, but would reſolue by litle and
litle: Alſo for to make them better, and to preſerue thē,
and noriſhe them in their owne nature and kynde, they
take the groundes or dregges that is left of the ſaid water,
& earth, putting to it barrows greaſe, or the greaſe
of ſome other beaſt: than they goo to the mine, where
they make a greate hole in the grounde, in the bottome
wherof they lay a ranck of the ſaid greaſe, & vpon that a

rancke of the ſayde little pebble ſtones, and than again
another of greaſe, and ſo conſequently as much as they
wyll, but ſo that the laſte rancke be of greaſe, or of the
ſaied dowe or paſte, and ſo they leaue it open and vncouered,
the ſpace of certayne moneths: yet many of them
do all this within theyr houſes, in the earth, or in great
veſſelles. Than, whan they wyll ſell it, or ſende it out
of the countrey, they take the ſayed paſte or dowe, with
the ſtones and all, with a fyre panne or ſome like thing,
and fyll barelles and tonnes of it.Alexis ſpeaketh of Italy, and not the tranſlatour of England. This is the ſame that
commeth vnto vs, whiche we call dowe or paſte of Borax.
It is ſent alſo from the countreye where Borax is
made, or little ſtones of the ſayed paſte, ſo renewed and
fined as I will ſhewe you. About thyrty yeare ago they
ſent muche more of this Borax, fyned and renewed,
than they did of the paſte, becauſe that in Italye they
coulde not dreſſe nor make it, nor bringe it into little
ſtones, wherefore it was not put in vre, but of certayne
wemen in diſtillations, for to paint them ſelues with.
Since there hath ben one in Veniſe that began to dreſſe
it, and after him a woman whom he had taught. Theſe
two gat a greate ſomme of money, and the ſayd ſecrete
was longe betwene them two onely, althoughe it was
deſyred of euery man longe before. Finally, it is nowe
come ſo farre forwarde, that many men in Venyſe can
dreſſe it, but one maketh it farre better, then another,
and peraduenture very fewe haue the perfection of dreſſynge
it, with ſuche adnauniage that he looſe nothinge
of the ſubſtaunce, and to make as muche of it as is poſſible
perfectly, as I will ſhewe you hereafter folowing.
Now, you muſte take fyrſt of the ſayd paſte, that is not
mouldy, vinewed, or putrified, for than it is a ſign that
it ſhoulde be olde, and of many yeares, and thereby the
little ſtones ſhoulde be diminiſhed, loſte, or decayed. Yet
neuertheleſſe this is of no great importaunce: for it is
better to aſſay with your finger within the paſt, to ſe yf
it be full of the ſayed pebbles, for the worlde beynge all
together geuen to gayne, and full of deception and

fraude, they that make it, put ſometime very fewe pebbles
in the ſaied greaſe, for to haue more ſubſtaunce:
and beſyde this, they that bye it to ſell agayne, take out
alſo a good quantitie of the ſaied pebbles: wherefore it
is neceſſary to be circumſpecte, to the intente that diligence
maye ſurmounte, or at the leaſte diſcouer the gile
and deceate. Fynallye, if you will fine and renewe the
ſayed Borax from ſuche paſte or dowe, do thus. Take
water luke warme, that is to ſaye, for twoo pounde of
paſte, halfe a payle full, whiche you ſhall put into ſome
earthen veſſell, puttinge the paſte into it, than with
youre hande fraye and ſtyrre it in ſonder, as you wolde
temper leauen for to kneade, after this, ſtrayne out the
ſaied water well thoroughe a ſtraynoure, and take the
little ſtones that remaine in the ſaied veſſell, that is to
ſay, thoſe that be of the bigneſſe of a Walnut, or beane,
and put them in a veſſell, ſprinklinge them with Oyle
Olyue, as thoughe it were a ſalade, but the Oyle muſt
be white: and if you haue none good, take common oyle
and ſet it in the ſunne, purginge it well, and annointe
the ſaied ſtones with it, minglinge them well together
with your hande. Afterward put them in a litle bagge,
and mixe them well together againe, as men do confitures,
this doen, putte theim in little boxes, and keepe
theim, and thus ſhall you haue the beſt Borax that can
be poſſible. If you will renew and multiplie it, do thus.
Take the ſame water that was ſtrayned out, and put it
in a kettle vpon a ſmall fyre, keepinge the fyre alwayes
in one eſtate, than ſcymme it with an yron ladle, and
put alſo with the ſcumme, the ordure and filth that ſhal
be in the bottome: but take good heede, that in ſeething
it flie not awaye. Continue thus dooinge vntyll it be
well ſodden, whiche is knowen thus: put a little vpon
your nayle and if it renne not, it is ynough ſodden, or
els you may proue it vpon a paper, as men do Syrops,
and if it byde ſtill, it is ſodden, or wette a ſtringe in the
ſayed water, and holde it betwixte youre fingers, than
plucke it oute by the ende, and if you feele it roughe, it

is ſodden. Then take the kettle from the fyre, and couer
it with ſome couer fytte for it, that there fall no ordure
or fylth in it: this doen, burie the kettle in wheate
branne, and cloſe it well rounde aboute, coueringe it
with clothes or other thinges, ſo that it be wel ſtopped.
You maye bury it, or hyde it in a hote dungehyll, and
leaue it there the ſpace of eight or ten dayes, and afterwarde
vncouer it, and you ſhall finde cruſte vpon it, the
whiche you ſhall take and put in on one ſyde, and you
ſhall finde in the ſayed kettle, as it were little pieces of
yce, whiche you ſhall take oute, and put in another veſſell,
waſſhinge them with cole and freſhe water, than
drye them vpon a table in the ſhadowe, and lette thoſe
ſtones whiche at the firſte time remayned in the ſtraynoure,
be mingled with the ſaied pieces of yce. Than
take Alome de fece, that is white, foure pounde, in thre
payles full of water, three vnces of Salte Peter, than
boyle this with a ſmall fyre, and ſcymme it, as you dyd
the other, in prouinge it vpon your nayle, or vpon paper,
if it bee ſodden, as before. This doen, take it from
the fyre, and let it reſt, and whan it is cleare, take a litle
payle full and a halfe of it, and ſet it on the fyre in another
cleane kettle. And whan you ſee that it will boyle,
put in the ſayed cruſte, and that it be of tenne pounde,
and make it ſeeth as the other did, eſſayinge vpon your
nayle or paper, as you did before. Than put it in a little
virkin, and lay two ſtickes a croſſe, with foure cordes,
wherevnto you ſhall tie a little leade, to the intent they
may ſtretche well, and without touchinge the bottome,
by foure fingers, and that to the ende the Borax maye
ſticke and cleaue to it, and than burie it as before. This
muſt not be put int the bagge, but anoint the ſame that
you finde ſtickinge vpon the cordes with a feather, and
the other that remayneth ſtil in the veſſel, you ſhal ſprinkle
as it were a ſalade. The clere that you ſhal take out
of it, muſt be of the biggeneſſe of a haſell nut or beane:
and the other will be leſſe, you ſhall put into the water
that remaineth, whiche water you ſhall ſet on the fire,

makinge it ſeeth, and doinge as before, and ſo continue
vntill all the water be conuerted and tourned into Borax,
ſo that nothinge be loſte. And remember (at the beginninge
whan you diſſolue in luke warme water, as
we haue ſayed before) to put to it the bigneſſe of a ciche
peaſe of the ruen of a Hare, for that will make all the other
partes of the Borax to cleaue and take together.
               
               
                  ☞A good and eaſye waye to make Aqua fortis, better
then any other.
                  TAke Roche Alome and Vitriole, or ſalte peter,
or elles all three together, of eche of theim lyke
quantitie, that is wel calcined and burned, and
well brayed. And if you will haue it ſtronger,
put as muche ſalte Peter a parte, as of Alome and Vitriole
together: put all this in ſome potte or violle, well
luted and clayed ouer, and in the recipient or receptorie
two vnces of well water, for euerye pounde of the ſaid
ſubſtaunces. Let the receiptorye be in freſhe water, and
alwayes wette aboue with ſome wette linnen cloth, ſo
that it be neuer drye. And by this meanes the exhalations
or fumes wil better mingle them ſelues with their
water, and will not ſticke or cleaue to the recipiente.
This doen, take the potte or violle luted, and trimme it
ſo that the mouth hange downewarde, ioyning it with
the recipiente, without a Limbecke, luting and claiyng
well the ioynctes and ſides with flowre, and the whites
of Egges: and diſpoſe and order it in ſuche maner, that
the fyre come not to the recipient. And at the beginning
put a fewe hote coales vnder the bottome of the vyolle
or potte, vntyll the matter looſe and diſſolue it ſelf, and
paſſe his fyrſte furye. This doen, couer it with coales,
and the fyre muſte be verye highe: and for to do beſte,
there muſte be lyttle walles of bricke to holde vp the
greate coales, in great quantitie vpon the ſayed potte.
Whan you haue made this greate fyre, the ſpace of
three or foure, or ſixe houres, all wyll be made.
                  
                     
Than let it coole, and take out the water, whiche is very
good and perfit, and kepe it in a veſſell of glaſſe well
ſtopped with waxe.
               
               
                  ☞The true and perfyte practiſe to caſte medalles, and
all other workemanſhyppe, as well in braſſe, as in gold,
Syluer, Copper, Leade, Tynne, as of Cryſtall, Glaſſe, and
Marble.
                  
                     FIrſte of all, you muſte haue alwayes
the earth or ſande ready, wherin you
wyll faſhion and fourme your work:
but becauſe there be dyuers ſortes,
and euerye man dreſſeth it as he can
gette it, and as he hathe ſkill in makinge
it, we will put here ſome of the
ſureſt and moſt parfiteſt, and of diuers kyndes, to thend
that if a man can not get or make the one, he may euermore
haue recourſe to the other. And vnderſtande, that
all theſe that we will put here, may be ſet a worke eche
of them by them ſelues, or mixed one with another, or
all together, for they are good euery waye. The bounty
and perfection of eche of theſe earthes for to caſt anye
mettall in, conſiſteth in theſe thinges, that is to wytte:
that firſt and chieflie it be fine and ſmal, and in no wiſe
roughe, or full of grommels, to the intent that all thinges
maye eaſely take print. Secondly, that they receiue
the metall well, and that they neither cleaue, breake,
chappe, or waxe into a cruſte. They muſt alſo be tempered
with a water called Magiſtra, (of the whiche we wil
ſpeake afterwarde) to the intente that beynge drie, thei
maye be harder, and holde faſter together. Thyrdelye,
that they maye continue, and ſerue at diuers foundinges
and meltinges, to the intente that whan you wyll
caſte many medalles, or other thinges all of one ſorte,
ye neede not at euerye time make newe mouldes. Alſo
you muſt vnderſtand, that for metalles that are ſoft, as
Leade, and Tynne, all earth, ſo it be good, wyll ſuffiſe:

Prouided alwayes, that it be fine and ſmall, and well
tempered with the ſayed Magiſtra, as I wil declare here
after.
               
               
                  ☞The fyrſte earth to caſte in a moulde all maner of fuſible
mater.
                  
                     TAke Emerill, that men burniſhe ſwordes
or armoure with, and braye it very ſmall,
in flaming it, as wee will ſhewe you afterwarde,
and temper it, or reduce it into dow
or paſte, with the ſaied Magiſtra, as I wyll
tell you hereafter, and ſo dreſſinge it, you ſhall make a
very good earth, whiche will continue for manye foundinges
and meltinges, ſo that it be well gouerned and
tempered, and the more it is occupied, the better it wyll
waxe: Prouided, that it be alwayes brayed a newe, and
than watered and tempered with the Magiſtra.
                  
               
               
                  ¶The ſecond earth or ſande.
                  TAke pieces of thoſe veſſelles, or pottes of earth
that are made in Valentia in Italie, or other
that glaſſemakers vſe to keepe their molten
glaſſe in the furneſſe, and if you maye onely get
the bottoms, or the pieces from the middle to the lower:
moſte parte of them, it ſhall be the better, in takinge awaye
the glaſſe that is rounde about them, if not, take
them as you maye. Than take Goldſmithes croſettes,
or meltinge pottes, newe, and breake theim in pieces,
and that the weight of the ſayed croſettes be as muche
as the pieces of the ſaied veſſelles before. All theſe thinges
beinge fyrſte beaten and ſtamped in a morter, let
them be well brayed after vpon a Porphire ſtone, with
water, as men braye colours, and hauinge made theim
verye fine and ſmall, by ſeethinge them againe on the
fire, as we will after declare, kepe them in little goates
leather bagges, or in ſome clooſe boxes, to the ende that

becauſe of theyr fineneſſe they flie not, and vaniſſhe awaye
in the ayre.
               
               
                  ☞The thirde earth, or ſande.
                  TAke the filinge of yron, ſande, or yron oore, or
the ſparkes that flie from hoate yron whan it is
beaten, or elles all together: but that it be pure
without any earth or fylth: than putte it in an
yron panne, or in ſome other veſſel that wyll endure the
fyre, ſprinklinge it with ſtronge Vinaigre, and keping
it on the fyre the ſpace of eighte houres, after this temper
it agayne in Vinaygre, and then incenſe, and heate
it in the fyre, brayinge and renewinge it diuers times,
as the other. And keepe it in leather bagges, or in boxes
well ſtopped.
               
               
                  ☞The fourth earth or ſande.
                  TAke pieces of a pommeiſe ſtone made hote in the
fyre, and quenched in Vynaygre foure times.
Than take. ii. partes of the ſparkes of yron brayed
and ſtamped, & one part of the pommeiſe ſtone
Mingle al together, and putte it in the fire, and braye it
often times, and ſo kepe it as the other.
               
               
                  ❀The fyft earth, and the moſt parfyt.
                  TAke mutton bones, but if you take thoſe of the
heade, they will be better, if not, take of what
part ſo euer it be, and burne thē vpon the coales
or in ſome furneis, vntil they waxe very white:
than ſtampe them, and ſifte them. This doen, you ſhall
put the poulder in ſome yron panne, or other thinge,
amonge the coales, ſo that it may burne well, than put
to it a good handfull of tallowe, ſtyringe it with ſome
yron, in ſuche wiſe, that all the tallowe maye be burned
with the ſaied poulder, leauynge it ſoo on the fyre

yet halfe an howre. Than take it oute and braye it,
and burne it agayne, ſprinklynge, and brayinge it
often tymes as you dyd the other, vntill it be verye fine
and ſmall, and than ſhall it be perfit, and will ſerue for
many foundinges or meltinges.
               
               
                  ❀The ſyxte earth.
                  
                     TAke Cuttle bones, and burne them in the
fyre, vntyll they be very white, and vſe thē
in all thinges as you didde the mutton bones,
and than keepe it as afore. Fynallye,
there is alſo earth made of the aſhes of Vynes,
of ſtrawe, of burned paper, of horſe dunge, dryed
and burned, of bricke ſtamped, of Boale, or of redde
earthe, or other lyke thinges that remayne in the fyre
without meltinge, wherein men printe verye well all
maner of metall, the whiche alſo neither breake, cleaue
in ſonder, nor chappe, as is aforeſayed.
               
               
                  ☞A goodlye waye and maner howe to make all
theſe earthes verye fyne, and ſmall, and almooſte
impalpable.
                  TAke whiche of theſe foreſaied earthes you will,
or anye other, and after you haue well ſtamped
it, and ſyfted it, drye it in a kettle by the fyre,
or in a fryenge panne, or other veſſell, vntyll
it be verye whoate: than take it frome the fyre,
and ſtampe it well, as before, with water or Vynaigre,
heate it agayne, and braye it ſtylle with water, or
Vynaygre, and neuer drye: doyng ſo fiue or ſixe times.
Fynallye you ſhall putte it in a veſſell of white earthe,
well leaded, and powre into it as muche cleare water
as wyll ſurmounte it foure fyngars high: than ſtyrre it
with a lyttle cleane ſticke, and lette it reſte the ſpace
of an Aue Maria. Afterwarde poure the ſayed water

finely and wiſely into ſome other veſſell that is cleane:
And vpon the ſayed earth that remayneth in the fyrſte
veſſell, you ſhall powre other water, and ſtyre it as before:
than powre the ſame with the other fyrſte powred
out, and thus do ſo often, vntil that with the water, you
haue poured out all the fineſt and ſmalleſte parte of the
ſame earth. And if there remaine yet in the firſte veſſell
anye parte of groſſe earth, braye it a new, and than put
it with the other. This doen, you ſhall let all the ſame
fyne and ſmall earth, whiche you poured into the other
veſſell, go downe to the bottome: and than powre oute
fayer and ſoftely the water, and let the poulder dry that
remayneth in the bottome, the whiche afterwarde you
ſhall braye well once agayne, and paſſe it thorow a fyne
ſieue or ſarce of Silke, if you thinke good, and you ſhall
haue a poulder, ſuche as there is not the like, whiche
you muſte keepe, as the other before, in leather bagges,
or in boxes of woode well ſtopped, paſtynge or glewing
the ſides, to the intente that the poulder flie not awaye,
for it is a ſubſtaunce almooſt as fyne and as ſubtyle as
the ayre.
               
               
                  ☞To make a water called Magiſtra, wherewith the
ſayed earthes to make mouldes is tempered, and moyſted
agayne at euery caſtinge and foundinge.
                  
                     TO cauſe that the ſayed earth be faſte and
firme, and that beinge faſhioned and
drye, it maye holde together, and not fal
agayne into poulder, you muſte make
this water, whiche is called la Magiſtra,
whiche is a worde, not knowen frome
whence it is deducted, as the Philoſophers haue forged
and geuen names to certayne waters, accordinge to the
effecte that they ſerue for, as they haue doen of this water.
And it ſeemeth that they meante by this, the ſame
thinge that we vnderſtande by the meane or waye, or
ſuche a thinge, that is a meane or way to kepe together

or to diſſolue, or to do ſome like thinge: thus it is made.
They take common ſalt, the whiche they wrappe in a
linnen cloth wette in water, or other licour, and being
ſo lapped vp, it is layde in the middle of the embers in a
furneis, or in ſome other lyke place, to the intente that
with a
                        •
                     payre of bellowes they maye geue it alwayes a
greate fyre, or elles thei put it in ſome croſet, or other
ſmall veſſell, iuted and clayed, blowing it wel the ſpace
of an houre, than they let it coole. And he that will not
blowe it alwayes, as is aforeſayde, let hym laye it in the
middes of hote coales, and yet couer it well with fyre,
and whan it is coole agayne, be muſt ſtampe it, and put
it in a pot well leaded, and put to it as muche water as
wyll couer it, foure or ſixe fingars high: than muſte he
ſet it on the fyre, and ſtyrringe it, he ſhall make all the
ſaied ſalte to diſſolue. This doen, it muſt coole agayne,
and he ſtrained or paſſed thoroughe a felte twiſe: and
this is done for to moiſt or baine the ſayed earthes, and
to make them holde together, as we will declare afterwarde.
Alſo you maye make this Magiſtra with the whites
of Egges, beaten with a ſticke of a figge tree, vntil
they be conuerted and tourned in a froth or ſcumme,
then let them reſt the ſpace of a nighte, and in the morninge
poure oute the water that is founde vnder the
froth. With this water is the ſaied earth moyſted and
hayned, and it appeareth that it is better then other: for
it maketh it faſter and firmer, and cleaner, nor cleaueth
ſo ſone vnto the thinges caſte in the mouldes: therefore
ſome put a little of this water of whites of Egges, with
the other Magiſtra made of ſalte. Other put to it a lyttle
water of Gomme Arabick, addinge in all thinges iudgement,
experience, and induſtry.
               
               
                  ☞To make Lutum ſapientiae verye parfytie.
                  
                     
TAke of the beſte white potters earth that you
can get, for in one place there is better than in
another, that is to ſaye, of that whiche can beſt
endure the fyre, as ſuche as they make pottes of
in Padua, and likewiſe in Germany: for it is of ſuch perfection,
that the pottes whiche be made of it, and wherin
they dreſſe their meate, may alſo ſerue to found metalles
in. Take then of the beſte, and ſpecially if it muſt
ſerue for a thinge that hath neede to be longe vppon a
great fyre, otherwiſe, take ſuche as you can get. There
is founde of it, that is of a graye colour, as the common
ſorte is, and alſo there is white, that men vſe in ſome
place of Vicence, whiche is like loaues of Gipſum, or plaiſter,
and is called of the Italians Florette de Chio. We
here in Englande vppon the vſe thereof, maye geue it
what name we wyll. Potters vſe of it in Veniſe, for to
white the diſhes, and other thinges, before they verniſh
or polliſh them. There is alſo founde of it that is redde,
as in Apulia, where there is greate quantitie, and that
they call Boale, and is the very ſame that ſome Apoticaries
do ſell for Boale Armenick, and the Venitians
vſe of it, for to paynt redde the forefrontes of their houſes,
with lime, bricke, and Vermillion, coueringe it afterwarde
with Oyle of line. This redde earth is the
fatteſt, and the clammieſt of all the reſt, and therefore it
cleaueth ſooneſt by the fyre, if it be not tempered with
ſome other ſubſtaunce. And becauſe that all the ſayed
earthes be to fatte, the one more than the other, therefore
men put to them ſome leane ſubſtaunce. Nowe, if
you take of that of aſhe colour, whiche is moſt commen,
and the leſt fatty, you may compoſe and make it in this
maner. Take of the ſaied earth foure partes, of cloth-makers
floxe or ſhearing, one part, aſhes that haue ſerued
in a buck, or other, half a part, drie horſe donge, or
the donge of an Aſſe, one part. If you will make it parfiter,
put to it a fewe ſtamped brickes, and ſparkes of
yron: let all theſe thinges be well ſtamped, and ſifted,
that is to ſaye: the earth, the aſhes, the horſe donge, the

brickes, and the ſparkes of yron: than mingle all together,
and make it into earth, and make a bedde thereof,
vpon the whiche you ſhall caſte by little and little, the
floxe, as equally as you can. This doen, powre to it water,
ſtyringe it well fyrſte with a ſticke, and than with
a pallet broade at the ende. And whan all is well incorporated
together, as you woulde haue it, laye it vppon
ſome great borde, and beat it wel, and that a good ſpace
with ſome great ſtaffe, or other inſtrument ofyron, minglinge
and ſtearinge it well, for the lenger you beate it,
the better it is. By this meane you ſhall haue a verye
good claye for to lute or clay, and ioyne violles, flagons
of glaſſe to ſtill with, and bottels of gourdes for ſtilling
and other great thinges, as furneſſes and ſuche like, as
we will declare afterwarde. But he that will make it
with more eaſe, let him put the earth only, the flox, and
the horſe donge, with a fewe aſhes. Some put no horſe
donge to it, and ſome no floxe, according to the purpoſe
that they make it for. For to ſtop and cloſe vp the mouthes
of ſtillinge glaſſes, or violles, to thintent they take
no vent on the fyre, the ſayed clay wil be very good: neuertheleſſe
men put to it two partes of quicke lime, and
the whites of Egges, and then it wyl be ſurer to let nothinge
vent out but the glaſſe it ſelf. All kinde of clay or
earth would be kept moiſt, and redy dreſſed for him that
will occupy it continually, but it muſte not be kepte to
watery nor yet lefte to drye, for than it woulde ſerue
for nothinge, ſeinge that after it is once hardened, a
man can not dreſſe it anye more to do any good withal.
And whan you put water to it, it is mollified by little
and little aboue, and is as it were a ſauce, but within
remayneth harde, and if you put to much water to it,
you marre it vtterlye. Therefore, whan you ſee that it
beginneth to waxe drye, feede it a newe little and little
with water, ſtyringe it tyll it be well, and ſo ſhall you
make it perfecte.
               
               
                  
                  ❀ Certayne thinges, whiche he that will take in hande
any foundinge or caſtinge of metalles, muſt alwayes haue
readye, and in ordre.
                  
                     BEcauſe that inſtrumentes and meanes,
be thoſe that make all thinges
come oute of the workemans hande
with a perfection, therfore, to the intente
that whan the tyme is come to
beginne a worke, you be not vnfurnyſhed,
or ſuſtayne domage for lacke
of thinges neceſſary: Fyrſt, let your coales be of ſtrong
woode, yonge and drye, your croſettes or melting pottes
without cleftes or chappes, and of graye coloure,
which commonlie are better than the blacke, or white.
you muſte haue a little burde to geue it vent ouer the
mouth of the croſet, whiche is vncouered for certayne
cauſes: a cane or reede to blowe awaye the ordure and
fylth out of the croſet, a thinge eaſier than with a payre
of bellowes: an yron with a hoke, for to take the coales
out of the croſet or meltinge potte, and likewiſe a payre
of tonges: a preſſe of woode to kepe faſte and ſure the
fourmes or mouldes in pouringe in the mettal: two little
tables or more of walnut tree woode, or boxe, or of
ſome other harde and maſſiue woode, or elles of copper
made very euen and equall on euery ſide, for to tourne
the mouldes, and to keepe theim ſteddye: two pieces of
wolle, or more, to the intente, that if in faſteninge the
mouldes in the preſſe, they be not equall and euen with
out ſyde, theſe pieces may fil vp the empty place: a compaſſe
and a rule for to parte and deuide the caſting holes
and pipe wherin the mettal muſt runne: an yron made
like a ſcrapinge knife or raſoure, ſharpe at the end, and
edged at the ſydes, ſuche as gilters do vſe to make euen
the caſtinge holes, or pipes of mouldes, the which wyll
ſerue to make the breathinge hooles and pipes that the
vapoure goeth out at whan the worke is made, and hauinge
no ſuche inſtrument, you may make them with

a knife, as handſomely as you can. You muſt alſo haue
readye a little oyle, and turpentine in a dyſhe, with a litle
paper, or ſome piece of linnen cloth to wette in the
ſayed oyle and turpentine, and to burne it, for to parfume
the fourmes and mouldes whan they be well wiped,
to the intente the metall maye runne the better.
And becauſe that ſometime ſuch parfume filleth vp the
holowneſſe and engrauing of the worke, you muſt haue
a hares foote to wipe awaye the ſuperfluitie of it, and
alſo for to ſwepe together the duſt, to thintent it fall not
whan you will caſte anye thinge in the mouldes. And
than muſt you haue a bruſhe, or rubber of latin wyer,
and one of ſylke, ſuche as men make cleane combes
with, for to rubbe and polliſhe the worke, before it is
fourmed and faſhioned, to the intente to polliſhe it and
dreſſe a newe, as neede ſhall be, whan the worke is
caſte.
               
               
                  ☞The maner or order that a man ought to kepe, wh
                        •
                     re

                        •
                     e wyll caſt or founde medalles, or any other thinge.
                  
                     FIrſte, you ſhall laye the medalle or other
worke that you wyll caſte, in a
dyſhe with ſtronge Vynaigre, Salte,
and burned ſtraw: than rubbe it well
with your hande, vntill it be cleane:
lykewiſe with a rubber, or bruſhe.
This doen, waſhe it in freſhe water,
and wipe it with a linnen cloth. After this, laye vpon a
table of hard wood, or of copper well pollyſhed, half the
moulde or fourme, that is to ſay, the female. And let the
myddle parte, that is to ſaye, that whiche is ioyned to
the other, be layed vpwarde vpon the table, in whiche
thinges thus layed, you ſhall lay youre medalles, or the
thinge you will fourme or faſhion, and let it be cleane,
as we haue ſaied, orderinge it in ſuche ſorte, if there be
but one, that it be iuſte and directlye agaynſte the conduyte
or pype, and as lowe in the frame as it maye, to

the intente that the pipe or cundite may be the longer,
and that it may haue metall ynough. If there be more
than one, you ſhal order and ſet them on the ſydes of the
fourme or frame, and leaue place in the middle for to
make the hole or pipe, to powre the metall in. And yf
there be more then two, you muſte beware that one receaue
not the mettall of another, but make to euery one
his little pipe or condite, whiche maye aunſwere and
come iuſtly to the pipe or hole in the middle. Then take
one of the ſayed fine earthes, wel ſifted thorough a fine
ſarce, and whan you haue wel brayed it, put it in a platter,
or great diſhe, to the intente that in handelinge it,
there go nothinge out, and you ſhall moiſte it little and
little, with the water called Magiſtra, mixinge it well
with your handes, and rubbinge it ſo longe betweene
your handes, that wringinge it with your fiſte, it holde
and cleaue together, but you muſt note, that I ſpeake of
moiſtinge it, and not of thorowe wettinge it, for it may
not wete your hande in preſſinge it, nor cleaue vnto
your hande like paſt, but tha it onely holde together a
little more or leſſe then drye flower or meale, and being
ſo wronge in your hand, it may breake in pieces whan
you touche it with your fingar. And hauinge thus brought
it to a fourme, lay it handſomely vpon the medals
in the fourme or mould, with thendes of your fingars,
and than with your hand wringe it, and preſſe it harde
downe, not ſparinge to preſſe it well, in puttinge vpon
it the other little table, and preſſing it down with your
handes, as hard as you can, yea with all your might.
                  Than with a cutting yron with a right and euen edge,
and with a ruler made iuſte and euen by line the ſaied
fourmes with the earth, cutting away handſomely, the
earth that paſſeth ouer the ſaied mouldes, and ſo laye
them vpon one of the pieces of wolle, and then the litle
flat table, then you ſhal take with both your handes the
two little tables, aboue and beneth, and holding theim
faſt together, turne handſomly y• mouldes vpſide down,
and taking of the table, you ſhal ſe vnder the medals, in

lyftinge it vp, yf there be any earth entred in, if ther be,
you muſte take it awaye with the hares fote. Then, ſetting
the other part of the fourme or mould in his place,
you ſhall fill it with the ſame earth, preſſinge it well, as
before, and makinge it euen and equall with the yron.
Afterwarde, with the poynt of the yron, you ſhall lifte
vp a little, at one of the corners, halfe the moulde or
fourme, and take it of fayer and ſoftly with your hand,
and take out the medalles nimbly, touchinge them a litle
round about, with the point of a ſmall penne or quil,
if at the firſt they will not come oute, turninge downeward
that part of the mould wherin they did ſticke whā
you opened it. And if yet they will not come oute, ſtrike
them a croſſe with the point of a knife, vntill, that turninge
downewarde the mouldes, they come out. And if
in caſe they be not wel printed, according to your mind,
you may put theim agayne into theyr place, and preſſe
theim againe: and hauinge ſet on both ſides the twoo
pieces of wolle, and the tables, cloſe theim in the preſſe.
Fynallye, with the ſaied ſhaue, or ſharp yron, make the
ſayed pypes or conduites holowe, compaſſinge theim
with your compaſſe, and rule, in ſuche ſorte, that they
come iuſte and equally: than ſhall you trimme them ſo
agaynſte the fyre for to drye, tourning theim ſometime,
vntyll they be well dried. Then with a matche or wyke
tempered or wette in Oyle, and Turpentyne, and beinge
ſet on fire, ſmoke it, and if there remain any ſuperfluous
thinge, wipe it away with the hares foot. Then
ioyne them together agayne, and hauing layde to them
the wolle, and tables, wringe them a little in the preſſe,
and in the meane time hauing made ready and molten
the metall (yf it be ſyluer, or white copper, it is knowen
by the ſhininge of it, and clearneſſe in the melting pot:
and if it be tinne, by caſtinge into it a ſtone, or ſome paper,
and that it burne it) you ſhall caſt it, and the thinge
ſhall go well, withoute anye other helpe or ayde, for to
make it runne, ſauynge that after the tynne is molten,
put in a little, that is to ſaye, a twentith part of ſublimatā
                     
                     
in reſpecte of the whole quantitie, and one 
                        ••
                     ghte parte
of Antimonium: for beſyde that theſe thinges make it
runne well, they harden it and make it ſownde well.
                  Then the mouldes beynge colde, take out handſomelye
the medalles: and whan you will caſte other, you muſte
parfume and ſmoke the mouldes agayn: and then preſſe
them, and ſo caſt your thinges as before, and do it as often
as you thinke good. And if you ſee that the mouldes
be not broken, and that you will kepe them for another
tyme, you maye laye them in a drie place, and they wyll
kepe well. Finallye, the ſayde earth taken oute of the
mouldes, brayed and ſifted, will be alwayes better to
ſerue your tourne. The medalles ſo caſte, are ſodden againe
afterwarde, and waxe white, ſo that they be not
of Tynne. Alſo you maye geue to all theſe medalles
what colours you will, as we wil declare more at large
hereafter.
               
               
                  ☞To make a white, to blaunche and make white medalles,
or other thinges newlye molten, and alſo for to
renewe medalles of olde ſyluer.
                  TAke the medalles, or other thinges newly founded
or molten, or elles the olde ones that you
will renewe, and laye theim vppon the coales,
tourninge theim often, vntill they waxe of a
graye coloure, than rubbe them with a bruſh of copper
wyer, puttinge them afterwarde in this white coloure
folowinge. Take ſalte water of the ſea, or common water
ſalted, with a handfull of baye ſalte, wherin you ſhal
put the lees of white wine, and Roche Alome rawe.
                  Boyle all this in a panne leaded: and if the worke be of
copper, made white by anye ſophiſtical ſubſtaunce, you
ſhall put to it theſe thinges folowinge, that is to ſaye,
Syluer heaten, or Siluerfoile, the weight of a Spaniſh
Reall, Sal Armoniacke, waying three times as much,
Salte Peter the weighte of flue Realles. All the ſayed
thinges beynge put in ſome potte of earth, with a couer

hauinge a
                        ••
                     ole in the middes, ſet them in the middle of
the fyre, coueringe it with aſhes and coales vp to the
necke, and leaue it there ſo, vntill all the humoures be
breathed out, then let all coole againe, and beate it into
poulder very ſmall. This doen, take an vnce of this ſubſtance,
or ſomewhat more or leſſe, and boile it in the
ſaied white confection of the Salt water, onelye halfe a
quarter of an howre, puttinge in the medalles, or other
workes. Then poure out this water with the medalles
into cleere and luke warme water, and after rubbe the
medalles with the Tartre or lees, and other thinges
that remayne in the potte: and hauinge waſſhed theim
well with freſhe water, wype them drie.
               
               
                  ¶To gylt yron with water.
                  TAke well, riuer, or conduite water, and for thre
pounde of the ſame, take two of Roche Alome,
an vnce of Romaine Vitriolle, the weight of a
ponny of Verdegreſe, thre vnces of Sal gemma
an vnce of Orpimente, and let all botle together: and
whan you ſe it boyle, put in lees called Tartre, and bay
ſalte, of eche of them halfe an vnce, and whan it hath
ſodden a little while, take it from the fire, and paint the
yron with all, than hauinge ſet it in the fyre to heate,
burniſhe it, and it is doen.
               
               
                  ❀ The lyke another waye
                  TAke Oyle of line foure vnces, Tartre or wyne
lees two vnces, the yelkes of egges hard roſted
and ſtamped, two vnces, Aleo cicotrinum, an vnce
Saffron a quarter of a dragme. Boile all theſe
thinges together in a new earthen potte a good ſpace,
and if the oyle of line couer not all the ſaied ſubſtaunces
put in more water vntil there be ſufficient, then anoint
your yron with this mixtion, hauing fyrſt burniſhed it,
and ſo ſhall you make it of the colour of golde.
               
               
                  
                  ☞To gylte yron with golde foile, and water, or elles
with golde mixte with Quicke Syluer, as goldſmythes
are wont to gilte ſiluer.
                  TAke Romayne vitriole an vnce, roche, Alome,
two vnces, ſalte Armoniack an vnce: all theſe
thinges beyng well beaten in poulder, and boiled
in common water, take your yron wel burniſhed,
and wette it with the ſayed water, rubbinge it
well: than lay on your goldefoyle, and let it drye by the
fyre. This doen, burniſhe it with ſtone Hematite, as
men are wont to do, and it wyll be verye fayre. If you
will gilt with golde mixt with quicke ſyluer, as goldeſmithes
vſe to gilte ſyluer, you ſhall adde to the ſaied
water, a dragme or Verdigreeſe, half an vnce of Sublimatum,
and let it boyle al together, than put your yron
to boyle in the ſaied water: but if it be ſo greate that it
can not go in, rubbe it with the ſaied boylinge water,
and heate it, that it maye receiue the Amalgama of the
quicke ſyluer and the gold, the which Amalgama we haue
taughte you to make in the fift boke, in the chapiter of
minglinge or mixinge golde. And whan you haue heated
the yron, gylt it with the ſame golde ſo mixed with
the quicke ſyluer, and ſmoke or fume it at the fyre with
a lampe, or with Brimſtone, as goldſmithes commonly
do, or rather with waxe, wherof we wil hereafter ſhew
you a very good maner and waye, and better then that
is vſed in Germany, or in any place where it hath hitherto
ben vſed.
               
               
                  ¶To die or coloure into the colour of braſſe, or alſo to
gylte Syluer, whiche ſheweth better, and continueth
longer.
                  IT is a thinge moſt certaine, that gold ſet vpon
white yron or ſyluer, ſheweth not ſo fayre as vpon
braſſe: for as ſone as it beginneth to weare
a litle, men may ſee the whiteneſſe of the yron

or ſyluer, whiche is not ſo ſoone ſecne vpon anye redde
coloure. Therefore many practiciens, whan they wyll
gylte anye woode, or other thinge, laye the bottome or
grounde (not of redde, as the moſt part do) but of yelow
to the intente that the golde ſhall not ſo ſoone appeare
worne, as vpon the redde, and more vpon the white.
                  The ſayed yellow can not be laide vpon yron or ſyluer:
but leauing all this aſide, whan you will gilt ſyluer, or
geue a colour of braſſe vnto yron, you ſhall do after this
maner. Take verdet, or Verdegriſe, Vitriol of Almain,
and ſalt Armoniacke, at your diſcretion, but let the Vitriole
be of a greater quantitie than the other thinges:
put all this well beaten in poulder into ſtronge Vinaiger,
letting it boile halfe an houre. And when you haue
taken it from the fyre, while the ſubſtaunces be yet boilinge,
you ſhall put in your yron that you will coloure,
coueringe well the pot with his couer, and with cloth
vpon it that it vent not out, and ſo let it coole, and you
ſhall haue your yron well coloured, of a braſen coloure,
and thus maye you gilte it with quicke ſyluer, as yf it
were braſſe. Eſteme this as a goodly ſecrete, and alſo
profitable.
               
               
                  ☞A water or colour to laye vnder Diamondes, as well
true as counterfeite, that is to ſaye, made of white Saphyres,
as we wyll declare afterwarde.
                  TAke the ſmoke of a candell, gathered together
in the bottome of a baſen, and make it into a
dowe with a little oyle of Maſticke: than putte
the ſaied mixtion vnder the Diamonde in the
ringe, where you wyll ſet it.
               
               
                  ☞To counterfayte a Diamonde, with a white
Saphyre.
                  
                     
                     THis ſecrete is knowen well ynough of the
Iewellars, that vſe almooſt all one maner
indifferent good: but we (after we haue deſcribed
theyr faſhion) will ſhewe you a way
far better. They take a Saphire of a good
white coloure, and ſet it in the fire in a goldſmithes croſet
amonge the fylinge of yron, or of golde, thinking becauſe
it is of great value, that it is better for ſuch a purpoſe,
but yet the fylinge of yron is a great deale better.
They let this fylinge or rubbyſh of yron become almoſt
redde, without meltinge it, and caſt theyr Saphire into
it, leauing it therein a prety while. And after they haue
taken it out, if the white colour like a Diamond do not
like them, they caſt it in agayne, and ſo often, tyll they
ſe it be to their fantaſie, than they ſet it in a ringe, and
colour it as before. Nowe here foloweth another waye
a great deale better. Take white ſmalte well beaten in
poulder, and mingle it with the ſayed filinge of Golde,
or yron, but ſo that there be as muche ſmalte as filinge,
then take a little other ſmalte withoute fylynge, and
make it into dowe, with your ſpettle, and in this dowe
wrappe your Saphire, and let it dry well at the fyre.
                  This doen, tye it at the ende of a ſmall and fine wyer,
and leaue the other ende ſo longe that you maye plucke
it out whan you will. Afterwarde couer it with the ſaid
filinges, and leaue it ſo on the fyre a certaine ſpace, vntyll
the filinge be very hote, as is aforeſayd, but ſo that
in no caſe it melt: than plucke out once youre Saphire,
to ſe if the colour pleaſe you, if not put him in agayne
vntill it be fayre to your minde.
               
               
                  ☞To ingroſſe thinne Balleſſes to ſet in ringes.
                  IF you haue Balleſſes as thinne as paper, dreſſe
them of what greatnes or largeneſſe you wyll,
and take a piece of fine Criſtall coloured lyke a
Balles: then take a great graine of Maſtick, the
whiche you ſhall ſticke vpon the pointe of a knife, and

heate it well agayne the fyre, and ſodaynlye it wil caſte
out a little droppe like the teare of a mans eye, hauing
a luſtre like a pearle, with the whiche droppe, glewe on
the ſaied Balles vpon the Criſtall, and feare not that it
will gather to a lumpe, or hinder the colour: Then polliſhe
it, and geue it a luſtre, and ſo ſet it in golde, and it
will be very fayer, and ſeeme to be veryly a Balles.
               
               
                  ☞To make Rubies of twoo pieces, and Emeraudes, as
they make them at Mylan.
                  
                     TAke the drop or teare of Maſticke, wherof
we haue ſpoken in the Chapiter before,
and if you will make Emeraudes,
you ſhall coloure it with Spaniſh grene
tempered and mingled with Oyle, puttinge
to it a little waxe, if neede be, and
if it be to thicke, temper it with water: But if you will
make Rubies, take Gomme Arabicke, Alom ſuccarine,
rawe Roche Alome, as much of the one as of the other,
and let it boyle all together in common water: than put
into the ſayd water ſome Braſill cutte ſmall, and let it
ſeeth, puttinge to it ſome Alome Catine ſo called, becauſe
it is boyled in a caudron, of the whiche the more
there is, the darcker it will be: then take the droppe of
Maſticke aboueſaid, and colour it with the ſaied redde.
This doen, take two pieces of Criſtal, dreſſed and trimmed
with the whele, of what faſhion and greatnes you
will, ſo that the piece whiche you will laye vppermoſte,
be not ſo greate as the other vnderneth, that is to ſaye,
the one dreſſed vpon the other, as the nayle vpon the finger,
iuſt on euery ſide. After this lay that vnderneth, vpon
a little fire pan, or ſome other inſtrumente of yron
on the coales, that the ſaied Criſtall may be verye hote,
and than touche it vpon with the ſaied redde droppe or
teare, whiche you ſhall take vppon the ende of a ſticke:
but it muſt be ſo hote that it may droppe downe the better:
and whan you ſee that the ſayde piece of Criſtall is

coloured ynoughe, you ſhall take the other leſſer piece,
that muſte be ſet aboue, whiche lykewiſe muſt be hote,
and ſet it vpon the ſaied droppe, and it wyll conglutinat
                        •
                     
and glew together the two pieces of Criſtal, without
cauſinge any thickneſſe or let vnto the luſtre of the
Rubie, the whiche will be cleare and brighte on euerye
ſyde. Afterward ſet it in your ringe, ſettinge to the Ruby
the redde leafe, and the grene to the Emerauldes, as
we will teach you hereafter how to make the ſaid leaues
for all kinde of ſtones, as well fine, as artificiall.
               
               
                  ❀ To make a paſte or dowe for precious ſtones, as Emerauldes,
Rubies, Saphyrs, and ſuch like, which be but of one
piece, well coloured within and without.
                  TAke potters lead burned, iii. vnces, and put it in as
much water as will couer it a finger or two highe:
then ſtirre it with your finger, letting it go down to the
bottome. Afterward poure out the water, whiche wyll
ſerue for to wette within ſide the earthen pot leaded, to
thintent that the matter cleaue not to the ſydes of it,
wherin you put all the ſubſtaunce. Than take other .iij
vnces of Vermillion dried, and mingle it with the ſayd
leade, then an vnce of Criſtall calcined and burned, or
elles of a Calcidoine ſtone, with .xiiij. or .xvj. carattes at
the mooſt, of Rubricke, or ſparkes of Copper. All theſe
thinges well ſtamped, and mingled together, you ſhall
put in a pot of earth leaded, well wette within with the
ſaid water of the lead: then couer it, and ſet it in a glaſſe
makers furneis, by the ſpace of thre or foure dayes, and
you ſhall haue a very fayre paſte or dowe, the which you
may cauſe to be dreſſed with the wheele, as you wil. At
Veniſe men bye the ſtone for a grote or ſixe pence at the
mooſt. And for to make yellow ſtones, you ſhal put to it
the ruſt or rubbiſhe of yron. And to make Rubies, put
to it Cynople or redde leade: and in thoſe that be of colours,
you ſhall folowe the order that we wyl teach you
hereafter.
               
               
                  
                  ❀ To make Emerauldes, and other ſtones or Iewelles.
                  TAke Sal alcali, and diſſolue it in water, diſtillinge
it thorough a felt, and drye it, then diſſolue it agayne,
and drie it ſo three times, afterward beat
it into poulder: then take fine Criſtall; and cauſe
an Apoticarye to ſtampe and ſift it for you, as they do
Criſtall prepared. Then take two vnces and a halfe of
the ſaied Criſtal, of Sal alcali, two vnces, Spaniſh grene
an vnce, fyrſte tempered and ſtieped in Vinaygre, and
than ſtrained. The ſayd thre poulders, you ſhal put in a
veſſell, as in a newe earthen pot leaded, the whiche pot
you ſhall lute and clay ouer, and couer it that it take no
vent, then leaue it ſo clayed and luted the ſpace of three
dayes, the longar the better, vntill all be thorowe drye.
Afterwarde, you ſhall putte it in a potters furneis, the
ſpace of .xxiiij. houres. Then take the ſayde compoſition,
and dreſſe it as men do fyne ſtones, and you ſhall
haue them excellent. And if you wyll haue Rubies, put
Cinople to it, in ſteade of Spaniſhe greene. If you wyll
haue Saphirs, put to it Lapis Laſuli, But if you wil haue
Iacinthes, you muſte put in Corall in ſteade of greene
Verderame, as is before ſayed.
               
               
                  ❀ To calcine or burne Cryſtall and the calcidoyne ſtone, to
put in the ſaied mixtions of precious ſtones.
                  TAke Tartre calcined and burned an vnce, and diſſolue
it in a diſhe full of cleare water, then ſtrayne
it out, and take the pieces of Criſtall, or Calcidoin
ſtone, and heate them vpon the fyre in an yron ladle or
fyre panne: than quenche them in the water that is in
the dyſhe: take theim oute, and heate theim agayne,
and quenche theim as before in the ſame water, doinge
ſo ſyxe or ſeuen tymes, and they ſhall be verye well calcined
and burned. Then beat them fynely into poulder
and put it into the ſayd mixtion. Neuertheles remēber,
that if you wil make Emerauldes, you muſt beat ye ſaid

ſubſtaunces to poulder in a brafen morter: but if you
will make Rubies: or other, you muſte ſtampe theim in
an yron morter, and beware that they touche not the
braſſe,
               
               
                  ☞A water to harden the ſaied ſtones.
                  
                     BEcauſe that all the ſaied artificiall
ſtones are commonlye bryttle, for to
harden them, do as foloweth. Take
little pieces of Calamita, and calcine
them as you didde the Criſtall: then
beate them into poulder, and putte it
in a moyſte place, vntill it be turned
and diſſolued into water, with ye whiche you ſhal knede
Vitriole Almaine, or Romayne, raw, without making
it redde: then make thereof a ſofte paſte or dow, or elles
a ſyroppe, whiche you ſhall ſtill in a glaſſe or Viol with
a croked necke, or in an vrinal, and with the water that
commeth of it, you ſhall knede barly flower, makinge a
harde paſt, in the whiche you ſhall wrappe your maſſe
of ſtones, made as is before ſaid, or the ſtones ſelf, whan
they be dreſſed and faſhioned with the whele: then put
them, ſo wrapped in the ſame paſte, into an ouen with
a bache of breade, and take them out with the breade.
And whan you haue taken of the paſte, you ſhall finde
your ſtones harde, as if they were naturall. If you ſe it
be neede, you may couer theim with the ſayd paſte, and
bake them againe in the ouen, and than ſhall you haue
them parfite and harde.
               
               
                  ☞To calcine fyne ſyluer.
                  
                     SEinge that we are entered into the matter
of calcininge, we will ſhewe you the calcination
of fine ſyluer, and than of Talcum, as
we haue promiſed before. There be diuers
wayes of calcininge ſyluer, wherof we wil

put here three of the beſt. Take fine ſyluer beaten very
fine and thinne, then cut it in pieces as bigge as a Spaniſhe
ryall, or more or leſſe, for it maketh no great matter:
then take a croſet, or an erthen potte, and lay in the
bottome of it a rancke of common ſalte, not white, nor
prepared or trimmed to eate, but euen as it cometh out
of the ſalines or ſalt panne, and it muſt be ſtamped very
ſmall. Vpon this ſalt you ſhall laye likewiſe a rancke of
the ſayd pieces of ſyluer, and then another of ſalte, and
another of ſiluer, and ſo conſequently as longe as your
ſyluer laſteth, in ſuch ſorte, that the laſt rancke may be
of ſalte, and that good and thicke: then couer all this
with a paper, lutinge and clayinge well the croſet, or
little earthen potte, and leauinge a little hole in the coueringe
the biggeneſſe of a gooſe quill. And whan it is
drie, couer it ouer, and rounde aboute, with coales and
embers, and leaue it in ſuche a fyre, at the leaſt three or
foure houres: then hauing taken it out, and all beyng
coole, open the croſet, and take out the pieces of Syluer
one after another, makinge theim cleane that the ſalte
ſtick not vpon them. And if you perceiue that they be ſo
brittle that you may break them with your finger, like
a cruſt of bread, it is done & made: if not, put them again
into the croſet or pot, ſetting them in the fyre as before.
And to make it perfitly, you ought to do this thre tymes
or more. This doen, make your ſiluer into poulder, and
waſh it in a diſhfull of hote water, & let it ſincke to the
bottom. After, ſtraine out the water ſo handſomly, that
you loſe no part of ye ſaid poulder: or to auoid al daūgers
paſſe it thorow a felt: this doen, put other hote water to
it, & ſtraine it out as before, ſo often tyll you may know
by the taſt of the water, that al the ſalt is purged away.
Than ſhal your ſyluer be well calcined, & diminiſhed of
the weight, dried, and become frō his nature into a maſſif
part, and ſomwhat like vnto gold. Thus wil it ſerue
you for diuers thinges, if you can dreſſe it wel. The like
is done with Talcum, in ſteade of common ſalt: but than
you nede not waſſhe it in hote water. Some calcyne it

with ſalte, or Talcum twelue or .xv. times, and more,
to the intent to haue it more maſſiue and ſounder, and
more commodious to take colour. It maye be alſo doen
in this manner, that is to ſaye, to melte the ſyluer in a
Goldſmithes meltinge pot, and for euerye vnce of the
ſame, to put in a pound or more of Brimſtone ſtamped,
and that little and little. True it is, that ſo it wyll conſume
more than by the ſalte, or Talcum, but it ſhall be
farre better if the Brimſtone be fyrſt purged in ſtronge
lye (that is to ſaye, made with ſtronge aſhes, and quicke
lime, or ſuch lyke thinges.) Nowe let vs come to the other
maners of calcininge ſyluer.
               
               
                  ☞The ſecond maner of Calcininge ſyluer.
                  TAke Aqua fortis ſeperatiua, made with Salt peter
and Alome, as we haue before declared, then
take fine ſiluer, fyled or polliſhed, or beaten into
leaues, or made in ſmall pieces, or graines, that
is to ſaye, of the ſayd ſyluer one parte, and of aqua fortis,
thre partes, and haue the ſaied water in a violl: then
put in the ſaied ſyluer, and you ſhall ſe it will incontinent
beginne to boyle, and that the bottome of the viol
will be hote if the water be good. Let it ſo boyle, vntyll
it boyle nor eate no more, holdinge ſtyl the violl in your
hande, or ſettinge it in ſome place farre from the fyre.
But if the water be not ſtronge, you muſt ſet it a lyttle
to the fyre, holdinge ſtyll the violl in youre hande vpon
the embers, or elles you may ſet it vpon a fewe aſſhes,
or vpon ſome little furneis. And whan it hath lefte boylinge,
and eaten all the ſyluer, you ſhall ſe the water
waxe greene, ſo that there ſhall remaine no ſyluer in
the bottome, if that the water were well calcined and
burned: for than it would make as it were white lyme
at the bottome, or if there were any golde in the ſyluer,
it would make it deſcende to the bottome in little round
pieces, like pearles, or like ſande. Nowe, after that the
ſayd ſyluer is diſſolued, and eaten of the ſayd aqua fortis,
                     
you ſhall take another violl bigger, or an vrinal, or earthen
pot half full or more of well or riuer water, wherinto
you haue diſſolued, and haue in a readines a good
handfull of common white ſalte: then let the ſaied water
be ſtrayned two or three tymes. This doen, you ſhal
poure the aqua fortis whiche diſſolued the ſyluer into the
ſalte water, leauing it ſo the ſpace of .iiij. or ſix houres:
then ſhal you finde at the bottome as it were a bedde of
herbes or greene ruſhes, whiche ſhall be the ſyluer diſſolued,
and the ſalt aqua fortis, and alſo a part of the common
ſalt that you did put in. Afterwarde diſtill the ſaid
water by a felt, and take the ſyluer that is ſo diſcended
to the bottome, and put it in a croſet, coueringe it well,
to thintent there fall no ordure nor fylth into it: than
bury and couer it ouer and ouer in hote burninge embers,
coueringe it wel alſo with fyre, that it may burne
the ſpace of .iij. houres or more. Finally, let it coole wel
agayne, and poure the ſiluer oute of the croſet, into a
diſhefull of hote water, ſtirring it a little together with
your fingar, and than let it reſt: and after poure out fayr
and ſoftly the ſaid water, and put in other, doing as before,
vntill the water waxe no more ſalt. This doen, let
the ſyluer drye, whiche ſhall be very well calcined for to
ſerue your turne in any thinge that you will.
               
               
                  ☞The thirde maner of calcining ſyluer.
                  YOu ſhal mixe together into dowe or paſte called
Amalgama, one part of ſiluer leaues, with thre or
four partes of quick ſiluer, as we haue declared
in the fift boke, in the chapter of the maner how
to bray gold: then bray this Amalgama, or paſte, with comon
ſalt, and ſet it to the fyre vntill the quick ſyluer be
vaniſhed awaye, afterward waſh it with hote water, ſo
much and ſo often, that the water be no more ſalt, then
ſhall you haue your ſyluer calcined. After this, if you
thinke good, you maye braye it againe with other ſalt,
without other quick ſiluer: and then put it to the fire in

a croſet, three or foure houres, and waſhe it againe, as
is aforeſayde.
               
               
                  To calcine Talcum quickly out of hande.
                  
                     BEcauſe that Talcum is a thing of ſo great
importaunce, and ſo muche deſyred of all
good wittes, menne haue founde diuers
wayes to calcine it, the whiche teache vs
that we muſt put to it twiſe as much ſalt
peter as common ſalte, or rawe Tartre
with the Talcum, and then put all this in a furneis certayne
dayes, and then to ſeperate the ſalte or Tartre,
with hote water. Other heate it vppon the coales, and
quenche it in pyſſe, and do it often times. Other ther be
that wrappe it in litle white pieces of wollen cloth, and
put it in the midees of a great fyre, the ſpace of halfe an
houre, or more, and than they finde it thorowly molten
and all in a light piece, and full of hooles like a ſponge,
not much differing from burned Alome. All the whiche
wayes, to ſay the trueth, are nothing worth, nor do not
perfectly calcine it, where they corrupt the nature of the
Tartre, and make it become lyke vnto quicke lyme, or
Alome, or elles of little ſtrength. Nowe, for to calcine it
out of hand and perfectly, you ſhal take the Talcum rawe
and made into little leaues, or ſtamped as wel as is poſſible,
and than put it in a croſet, or in a fyre pan among
the hote coles. And whan it is very hote, or rather redde
hote, you ſhal put to it drop by drop, diſtilled Vineaigre
wherein Tartre hath ben diſſolued, and put therevnto
the thirde part of Aqua vite, pouring it by little and little
vpon the hote lees or Tartre, that is to ſay, thre vnces
of Vynaigre for euery pound of Talcum: then take it
from the fire, and you ſhal find it fayr and wel calcined.
Finally, you ſhal waſhe it with hote water, to thintent
to ſeperate the lees or Tartre from it. It is calcined alſo,
beinge made in leaues as thin as is poſſible, layinge
them by ranckes or beddes, with little flat pieces of ſyluer,

in a croſet luted and clayed, than put them in a furneis
where glaſſe or bricke is made, by the ſpace of four
or fiue dayes. The like is doen alſo with little pieces of
Tynne.
               
               
                  ☞An excellent and very eaſy waye to gilte yron, copper,
and ſyluer, to make it ſeeme lyke maſſyue golde.
                  
                     FIrſt if you wil gilt ſiluer, or iron, you
muſt geue it the colour of copper, as
we haue aforeſaid? than take beaten
gold, which you ſhal mixe with quick
ſyluer, and make Amalgama or paſte
thereof, as is ſaid before, and ſhal put
the ſaid Amalgama in a litle diſhe, vpon
the whiche you ſhal poure the iuyce of a frute called Cucumis
aſininus, ſuch a quantitie that it maye be aboue the
ſayd ſubſtaunces a fingar high. Kepe this gold thus prepared
and trimmed, and couer it, to thintent there fall
no filth nor ordure into it, which you may vſe and occupy
whan you wil. Afterward, the thinges that you wil
gilt, muſt be very cleane, and well poliſhed, then with a
penſell you ſhall geue them of the ſaid gold ſo prepared
with quick ſyluer, and as it were diſſolued, rubbynge it
well all aboute. If you wyll not do ſo, you maye gylte
after the common maner of goldſmithes: yet notwithſtandinge
with golde made into Amalgama, or mixed as
is aforeſayed, chafinge the worke that you will gylte
with Aqua fortis, as they do. Then make the quicke ſyluer
vaniſhe away, as the goldſmithes of Italy comonly
do, that is to ſay, with a lampe of line ſeed Oyle, and
with Brimſtone, and make afterwarde a gylt vpon the
worke, that is lyke Saffron. But I counſell you to vſe
this maner in the chapiter folowinge, whiche is partly
the ſame that the goldſmithes do vſe, in Fraunce and
elles where, but it is muche amended, and this is it.
               
               
                  
                  ☞A parfyt maner and waye to gilte, and to make the
quick ſyluer to vaniſh away from the thinge gylted.
                  
                     PVt in a pan the rubbiſh or ſcumme of
copper, and the filinge of yron, then
poure vpon it ſtronge Vynaigre not
diſtilled, as much as wil couer it two
or three fingars high. Let it boyle ſo
the ſpace of an houre, then poure out
the ſaid Vineaigre, and put in other,
letting it boile as before, and do thus foure or ſix times.
Afterward make the ſayd Vynaigres put together, to
euaporate or drye vp, or elles make it diſtill oute, for to
haue one vynaigre of it, whiche will be good for manye
thinges. This doen, you ſhal put vnto the ſayd poulder
remaining at the bottome, the eight parte of Almayne
Vitriole, and as muche of Ferrerum of Spaine, and the
half of an eight parte of ſalte Armoniacke, with a little
Brimſtone: then into a little molten waxe with a little
Oyle of line, or Oyle Olyue, you ſhal put little and little
the ſaied poulders well mingled together. Fynallye
take that whiche you haue couered with the ſaied Amalgama
of golde and quick ſyluer, and with a penſyll couer
and lay it ouer well with the ſayed waxe ſo mixed, than
put it, ſo cyred, in the middes of hote burninge coales,
and let it burne and conſume all the waxe. This doen,
you ſhall haue ſuche a gylt, that it ſhall be like maſſiue
golde. And at the ende you may polliſh it with bruſſhes
of copper wyre and colde water, or you may burniſhe it
as you wyll.
                  The ende of the Secretes of Dom Alexis
of Piemount.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Here foloweth the Table of all the ſecretes
conteined in this preſent volume.
            
               
                  THe maner, and ſecrete to conſerue
a mans youth, and to
holde back olde age, to maintaine
a man always in helth
and ſtrength, as in the fayreſt
floure of his yeres. Fo. 1
               To make a precious licoure, &
of ineſtimable vertue, the
whiche taken at the mouth,
ſtrengtheneth and augmenteth
the naturall heate, and radicall moiſture, purifieth
the bloud, and clenſeth the ſtomacke from all
ſuperfluitie of humours: and by that meane conſerueth
the health and youth, and prolongeth the life of
him that vſeth it. Folio. 1.
               A potion or drinke to be vſed in ſtede of Syrop, good for
men of all ages and complections, that will be purged:
the whiche taken what day you wyll dryueth away
the euill humours, without mouinge or troublinge
the good, or doinge any hurt. And is alſo very
good for the great pockes, and al infirmities, as wel
of the ſtomacke as of the heade, and is likewyſe profitable
for them that be in health, to take twiſe in the
yeare of an ordinary purgation, that is to ſaye, at the
Springe, and in September. Fol. 5.
               A very eaſy and good remedy for to heale all manner of
pockes: whiche is made with little coſte, and requyreth
not that a man kepe his bedde or his houſe, but
may vſe it goinge in the ſtretes. And it is alſo verye
good for all ſortes of greife in the ioynctes, in what
parte of the body ſo euer it be. Fol. 6.
               To reſolue and reduce golde into a potable licour, whiche
conſerueth the youth and health of a man, aswel
taken by it ſelfe, as mixed with the foreſayde licoure
ſpoken of in the ſecond chapiter of this preſent boke,
and wyll heale euery diſeaſe that is thought incurable,
in the ſpace of ſeuen dayes at the furtheſt. Fol. 6
               
                  
To heale an excreſcence or growyng vp of the fleſhe,
within the yarde of a man, albeit it were rooted in of
a long tyme. Folio. 8.
               To heale all maner of inflammation, and euill diſpoſition
of the liuer, and by this ſecrete been healed certaine
perſones, whiche had their faces as it were Leprie,
greate ſwollen legges, their handes inflamed,
and rough within ſide. Idem.
               To heale the Emeraudes or Piles, in a nighte, a rare
ſecrete and very excellent. Folio. 9.
               A ſinguler oinctmente, whiche healeth all burnynges
with fire, not leauyng cicatrice or ſkarre where it
was. Idem.
               A parfite and proued remedie for theim that bee weake
of ſtomacke, and can not keepe their meate without
vomityng it vp again. Idem.
               An excellente remedie wherewith a woman of thirtie
and ſixe yeres was healed, that had ſo marred her ſtomacke,
that in the ſpace of twoo yeres and an halfe,
ſhe was neuer naturally purged dounewarde: and
as ſone as ſhe had eaten any thing, ſhe vomited it vp
againe, ſo that ſhe became yellowe, and as drie as a
ſticke. Folio. 10.
               Three remedies verie good againſt the wormes in little
children. Idem.
               The ſeconde remedie. Idem.
               To thirde remedie. Idem.
               To heale children of the Lunatike diſeaſe, whiche happeneth
vnto theim, by reaſon of a worme with twoo
heddes, that breadeth in their bodies, the whiche
worme, comyng vnto the hart, cauſeth them to haue
ſoche a paſſion, that often times it killeth the. Fo. 11.
               A remedie for the fallyng ſicknes. Idem.
               To make oile of Brimſtone, to heale all maner of Cankers,
diſeaſes or ſores, whiche come of a putrified humoure,
and renne continually, commonly called Fiſtules,
and alſo to heale inueterate and olde woundes.
Idem.
               
                  
To take awaie the venime or poiſon from a wounde
made by ſome poiſoned weapon or arrowe. Idem.
               Againſt the bityng of all venemous beaſtes. Idem.
               To drawe an arrowe heade, or any other Iron out of a
wounde. Folio. 12.
               Againſt a vehement cogh of young children. Idem.
               For hym that hath a bunche or knobbe in his heade, or
that hath his heade ſwollen with a fall. Idem.
               A good remedie for one that is deaffe. Idem.
               To heale a woman that hath the Matrice out of her naturall
place. Folio. 13.
               To make a womās Milke to come and encreaſe. Idem.
               A verie good Secrete for the Gommes or Burgeons,
that remaine of the greate Pockes, as well olde as
newe. Idem.
               An other remedy for the ſame burgeons of pockes. Idē.
               A verie eaſie and parfite remedie for hym that hath any
blowe with a Sworde, Staffe, or ſtone, or other like
thyng, yea, though he were greuouſly wounded. Idē
               
               A water to heale all maner of woundes in ſhorte ſpace:
whiche is a thyng that euery manne ought alwaies
to haue in his houſe, for the accidentes and chaunces
that maie fall, ſeeyng it is eaſie to bee made, and
with little coſte, and that it is of ſo merueilous an operation.
Idem.
               To make oile of Saincte Ihons worte, whiche is called
in Veniſe, and diuerſe other places, redde oile, and is
of ſoche vertue, that a manne can ſkante expreſſe it,
as well to heale woundes, as other infinite diſeaſes,
whereof we will ſhewe the moſte notable, and thoſe
that we haue founde true by experience. Fol. 15.
               To make oile of a redde Dogge, by the meane whereof
(beſide other infinite vertues that it hath) I healed a
Frier of Saincte Onofres, who had, by the ſpace of
twelue yeres, a lame and drie arme, withered like a
ſticke, ſo that nature gaue it no moare nouriſhemente.
Folio. 17.
               To make an oinctment the moſt excellent in the world,

whoſe vertues are infinite, as we will declare afterwarde,
whiche princes oughte to commaunde to be
made and kepte in their common wealthes: and that
it ſhoulde be made in the preſence of Phiſitions, as
Triakle is made, or at the leaſt euery man oughte to
haue it in his houſe, and ſpecially becauſe a man may
make a great quantitie of it, and the lengar it is kept
the better it waxeth. Fol. 19.
               A very true and proued remedye agaynſte a quartayne
ague. Fol. 20.
               To heale wartes, a ſecrete very excellent and eaſy to be
dooen, proued and experimented vppon dyuers perſonnes.
Fo. 21
               A very profitable and eaſye remedye to be made againſt
plureſies, whiche in two dayes healed a Smith that
was almoſt dead, and had not ſlept in .ii. nightes. Idē
               
               Another ſecrete or remedy againſte the ſayd diſeaſe of
the plureſie. Idem.
               Another goodly ſecret againſt the ſame diſeaſe. Fol. 22.
               Another againſt the ſame diſeaſe. Idem.
               To make a water good for the breſt or ſtomacke, of the
whiche men vſe to geue them drinke that be tormented
or grieued with the ſtitche in the ſide, or pluretik
apoſtumes: the whiche water is of a meruelous good
ſauoure, and mondifieth very well the breaſte or ſtomacke.
Idem.
               Agaynſt all diſeaſes of the mouth, palate, throte, gummes,
and Iawes. Fol. 23.
               For all woundes or ſores of the legges, be they recente
or olde, although the legges were coueerd ouer with
them, and eaten vnto the bone. Idem.
               To heale ſwollen knees or legges, redde, and full of humours:
a ſecrete meruelous good, eaſye to be made,
and of litle charge, and often times proued. Idem.
               A very ſure and parfit remedie agaynſte a Sciatica, oftentimes
proued and experimented in dyuers partes
of the worlde. Fol. 24
               A water for to heale in. v. dayes at the mooſt, all maner

of greate ſcabbes, as well inwarde as outwarde,
and is a water cleare and white, and of an odoriferous
ſauoure, ſuche as a manne maye preſente to a
Quene. Fol. 25.
               Againſt the diſeaſe or gre
                     •
                  f of the flankes, and the colick
paſſion, experimented and proued diuers times. Idē
               
               Another remedy agaynſt the ſame. Fol. 26.
               Another parfit remedye agaynſte the ſame diſeaſe, and
to make a man piſſe that hath ben three or four days
without making water, and that in the ſpace of half
an houre, and will breake the ſtone in ten or twelue
dayes. Idem.
               Another remedye agaynſte the ſtone, and payne of the
reynes. Idem
               The laſte and mooſt excellent remedy of al, agaynſt the
ſtone, be it in the reynes, or in the bladder, of what
qualitie or quantitie ſo euer it be. Folio. 27.
               For hym that ſpitteth bloude, by hauing ſome veyne of
his breaſt broken. Idem.
               Agaynſt the greif in the lunges, and ſpittinge of bloud
a thinge experimented. Fol. 28.
               Agaynſt the payne of the flankes, of the reynes, and all
other greifes. Idem.
               Againſt the ſtinkinge of the breath. Idem.
               Agaynſt the bytinge of a madde dogge, and the rage or
maddeneſſe that foloweth the manne after he is bitten.
Idem.
               To take awaye the dead fleſhe that cometh or groweth
in the noſe. Idem.
               For one which (with falling from ſome high place) feareth
to haue ſomething broken in his body. Idem.
               A very good and eaſy remedye againſt the diſeaſe called
the kinges euyll. Idem.
               Another remedy againſt the ſame diſeaſe. Fol. 29.
               To knowe whether a woman ſhall euer conceiue or
not. Idem.
               A very rare remedye for to take the kernelles oute of a
mannes throte in fifty dayes at the furtheſt. Idem.
               
                  
An other remedie eaſier to be made. Folio. 29.
               A thyng experimented and proued to bee very true, againſt
the ſame diſeaſe. Idem.
               To make the ſkin ſtretche, and retourne again into his
place, after the kernell is healed. Idem.
               A verie exquiſite remedie againſt the diſeaſe, called in
Latine Augina, and in Greke Synanche, whiche is an
inflammation of the Muſkle of the inner gargille,
the Frenche menne call it Squinancie, in Engliſhe,
Quinſey. Folio. 30.
               An other againſt the ſame diſeaſe. Idem.
               An other againſt the ſickneſſe. Idem.
               A verie good remedie againſt the kynges euill. Idem.
               To heale the ſame diſeaſe by a ſubſtaunce taken at the
mouthe. Idem.
               A heauenly water, whiche hath many goodly and notable
vertues, as we will ſhewe you after. Folio. 31.
               Pilles of a merueilous operation and vertue, againſte
the Sciatica, whiche we promiſed to ſpeake of, in the
Chapiter of the Sciatica. Folio. 32.
               A notable ſecrete to heale a madde manne, be it that the
madneſſe came vnto hym, by a whirlyng or giddineſſe
in the heade or braine, or otherwiſe. Idem.
               Pilles of Maſter Michaell a Scotte, the whiche heale
the grief or paine of the heade, be it inueterate or recent,
purge the braine, clarifie the ſight, cauſe a man
to haue a good memorie, good colour in the face, and
be alſo verie good for many infirmities. Folio. 33.
               Againſt the paines of womens breaſtes, a verie excellent
remedie. Folio. 44.
               To ripe a Fellon, Cattes heere, Botche, Boile, or other
apoſtumes or ſwellynges, whiche haue neede of
quicke and ſodain ripyng. Idem.
               To reſolue a Fellon, Cattes heere, Botle, or Botche at
the firſt beginnyng. Idem.
               To make Emplaſtrum Aureum, whiche is of a wonderfull
vertue, for all ſortes of woundes. Idem.
               An other excellent ſecrete, whiche was brought out of

India, and is very good for diuers accidentes of mannes
bodie. Folio. 44.
               Againſt al maner of coghes, as well inueterate and old
as recent and newe, a certain and ſure remedy. fo. 35.
               An excellente conſerue againſte the choghe, and all anguiſhe
of the breaſt, whiche alſo mondifieth and clenſeth
the ſtomacke, cauſeth a good voice, and a faire
coloure in the face. Idem.
               A goodlie and pleaſaunte Secrete to heale the cogh, in
rubbyng the ſolles of the feete: and is a thyng verie
eaſie and certain. Folio. 36.
               A verie goodly and eaſie remeadie to heale, in a daie or
twaine, al maner of inueterat & old woundes wherin
is growen deade and ſuperfluous fleſhe, & woundes
that can not be cured, by any other medicines. Idem.
               Againſt al maner of peſtilence or plague, be it neuer ſo
vehemente, a moſte certain and proued thing. Idem.
               A verie good parfume againſt the plague. Idem.
               An other remedie very good againſt the plague. Idem.
               For hym that is ſicke of the plague. Idem.
               An ointment to make an apoſtume breake, and the ſore
of the plague to fall of. Idem.
               An other remedie againſt the plague. Folio. 38.
               An other verie good remedie againſt the plague. Idem.
               An other perfite receipt againſt the plague. Idem.
               An other againſt the plague. Idem.
               A thyng oftentymes proued and experimented againſt
the plague. Idem.
               A preſeruatiue againſt ye plague oftētimes proued. Idē
               
               An other. Folio. 39.
               An other. Idem.
               In a ſuſpecte tyme of a plague. Idem.
               An other wel tried & proued againſt the peſtilence. Idē.
               A verie parfite ſecrete againſt the plague. Idem.
               An other verie good ſecrete. Idem.
               To make a carbuncle and all other botches, apoſtumes
and plague ſores, to breake, a preſente remedie, and
verie eaſie to make. Folio. 40.
               
                  
A verie good remedie againſt the markes or ſpottes of
the plague, commonly called Gods markes. Fo. 40.
               Againſt the mortalitie of the Peſtilence, a verie perfite
remedie. Idem.
               To make little rounde Apples or balles againſte the
plague. Idem.
               An oinetment to kill the plague. Fol. 41.
               A verie perfite oile againſt the plague & al poiſon. Idē.
               A merueilous ſecrete for to preſerue a manne from the
plague: and hath been proued in Englande of all the
Phiſitions, in that greate and vehement plague, in
the yere. 1348. whiche crepte throughout all the
worlde, and there was neuer man that vſed this Secrete,
but he was preſerued from the plague. Idem.
               A verie ſure and parfite remedie to cure a manne of the
Peſtilence, and ſome there hath been, that haue been
cured in a nighte: the ſaied remedie is alſo good for
Goddes markes, and Carbuncles, Boiles, Botches
and ſoche like ſickneſſes, as ſaincte Anthonies fire,
and ſoche other. Idem.
               A verie goodlie and preſent remedie for to heale the peſtilence,
and drawyng out the venime frō the botche,
or ſore, or other like accident. Fol. 42.
               An aduertiſement or warnyng of greate importaunce,
to preſerue a man in tyme of peſtilence Idem.
               To dreſſe and order the Iuice of Citrons, for the vſe of
it, as is afore ſaied. Fol. 44.
            
            
               Of the ſeconde booke.
               TO make oile Imperialle, to perfume the heere
or bearde of a manne, to rubbe his handes or
glooues with, and to put alſo into the Lie or
water, wherein Princes or greate mennes
clothes are waſſhed, and this oile maie a man make
with coſte inough, and alſo with little charge or expenſe.
Fol. 44.
               To make oile of Ben with ſmall charge, the whiche of
it ſelf wil be odoriferous or ſoote in ſauour, and very

excellente, whereof parfumours doe vſe aptly, for to
parfume gloues, or other thyhges with all. Fol. 45.
               To make an odoriferous & ſwete water very good. Idē.
               The ſeconde odoriferous water. Idem.
               The third ſwete water. Folio. 46.
               The ſowerth ſwete water. Idem.
               The fift ſwete water. Idem.
               The ſixt ſwete water. Idem.
               The ſeuenth ſwete water. Idem.
               The eight ſwete water. Folio. 47.
               The nineth ſwete water. Idem.
               The tenth ſwete water. Idem.
               Oile of Orenges verie excellent. Idem.
               Oile of Iaſemine and of Violettes. Idem.
               Oile of Nutinegges verie perfite. Idem.
               Oile of Bengewin, verie excellent. Folio. 48.
               Oile of Storar verie excellent. Idem.
               Oile of Myrrhe, good for them that haue their fleſh full
of humours, and carraine leane, for to make it tractable,
quicke, naturall, and ſtrong. Idem.
               The maner to make that oiles ſhall neuer waxe mouldie,
nor putrifie. Idem.
               Poulder of Iris. Idem.
               Poulder of Violettes. Idem.
               A white poulder to put in little bagges. Idem.
               Poulder of Cypres. Folio. 49.
               White Muſked Sope. Idem.
               An other kinde of odoriferous white Sope. Idem.
               To make Damaſkine Sope Muſked. Idem.
               To get out the milke of Macaleb. Folio. 50.
               Poulder of Ciuet verie exquiſite. Idem.
               A principall poulder. Idem.
               A white odoriferous poulder. Idem.
               A redde poulder. Idem.
               A blacke poulder. Idem.
               Poulder of Cipre verie exquiſite. Idem.
               An other waie to make it verie perfite. Folio. 51.
               A ſwete and odoriferous poulder, verie excellent to laie

in cheſtes and coſers. Fol. 51.
               An odoriferous and ſwete poulder. Fol. 52.
               Oyle of Bengewine. Idem.
               A very good and odoriferous poulder, to cary aboute a
man, or to laye in cofers. Idem
               Balles agaynſte the peſtilence or plague, whiche alſo
geue an odour vnto all thinges. Idem
               A princely lycour. Idem.
               Liquide and ſoft ſope of Naples. Idem.
               To make the ſayd ſope muſkt. Idem.
               A very excellent paſte and ſweete, made with muſke,
whiche eaten cauſeth a ſwete breath. Folio. 53.
               Another very excellent. Idem.
               Dentifrices or rubbers for the teeth, of great perfection
for to make them cleane. Idem
               Oyle of Bengewine odoriferous. Idem.
               Oyle of Storar Calamita. Idem.
               To make oyle of Labdanum. Fol. 54.
               Oyle of Nutmegges. Idem.
               Another maner. Idem.
               A very exquiſite ſope, made of diuers thinges. Idem
               Sope with Ciuet. Fol. 55.
               Sope with diuers and excellent oyles, Idem.
               Sope roſat. Idem.
               White ſope of a good ſauour and odour. Idem
               Perfect ſope. Idem.
               Whole and maſſiue blacke ſope. Idem.
               Damaſke parfume. Folio. 56.
               Another parfume of damaſke. Idem.
               An excellent pommaunder. Idem.
               Another pommaunder. Fol. 57.
               Another pommaunder. Idem.
               Excellent Ipocras. Idem.
               To make little cuſſhins of parfumed roſes Fol. 58.
               Matches or litle lightes of a very good odour. Idem
               A compoſition of Muſke, Ciuet, and Ambergriſe. Idē.
               A parfume for a chamber very excellent. Idem.
               Sope of Naples. Fol. 59.
               
                  
Perfume for a lampe Fol. 59.
               A ſhorte perfume Idem.
               An odoriferous perfume for chambers Idem.
               A very good perfume for to trymme gloues wyth lytle
coſt, and yet will continue longe. Idem.
               A very exquyſite Cyuet to perfume gloues, and to annoynt
a mans handes with. Fol. 60.
               Oyle of roſes and floures, very parfyte. Idem.
               Oyle of Cloues very noble. Idem.
               To make an excellent parfume to perfume chambers
garmentes, Couerlettes, Sheetes, and al other thinges,
belongyng to any prince. Fol. 61.
               Rounde apples or balles to take out ſpotes of oyle or
greaſe. Idem.
               To make a paſt or dowe for ſweete beades or beadſtones. Idem.
            
            
               Of the thirde boke.
               A goodly ſecrete for to condyte or confite Orenges,
citrons, and all other fruytes in ſyrop, whiche is
a notable thinge. Fol. 62.
               The maner howe to purifye and prepare honnye, and
ſuger, for to cōfyte Cytrons and al other fruites. 63.
               To confite Peches after the ſpanyſhe facion. Idem.
               To make conſerue or confyture of Quynces, called in
latyne Cotoneatum, Cidoniatum or Cidonites, as they do
in valence, whiche alſo the Geneuoys do vſe. Idem.
               To make a paſt of ſuger, wherof a man maye make all
maner of fruytes, and other fyne thinges, with their
forme, as platters, dyſhes, glaſſes, cuppes, and ſuche
like thinges, wherwith you maye furnyſhe a table:
and when you haue done, eate them vp. A pleaſante
thinge for them that ſitte at the table. Fol. 64.
               To make a confection of Melons or ponpones. Idem.
               To make Melones & 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſwete & very delicate. 65.
               To confyte orenge pilles, whiche maye be done at all
tymes of the yeare and chiefly in May, bycauſe than
the ſayde pilles be greater and thicker, Idem.
               
                  
To confite Walnuttes. Folio. 65.
               To confite Gourdes. Idem.
               To confite Cherries. Folio. 66.
               To make little morſelles, as thei vſe in Naples, an exquiſite
thyng, for thei be verie ſauorous, doe conforte
the ſtomacke, and make a ſwete breath. Idem.
            
            
               Of the fowerth booke.
               AN odoriferous and precious water, wherewith
a manne maie weate or bath any linen cloth,
to wipe or rubbe his face, whiche will make
his fleſhe white and well coloured: & the more
a manne rubbeth his face with it, the fairer it is, and
alſo continueth ſixe monethes, a thyng experimented
and proued, yea, and it wer for a quene. Foli. 67.
               To make a water that will make a white and pale perſone,
well coloured. Idem.
               A verie good water, to make the face appere of the age
of .xxv. yeres. Folio. 68.
               A water to beautifie the face, and all other partes of the
bodie. Idem.
               A water to make the ſkinne white, and to take awaie
the Sunne burnyng. Idem.
               An other water to beautifie the face, and to make it appere
of the age of .rv. yeres. Idem.
               An eaſie water for ladies and gentlewomen. Idem.
               To make a goodly luſtre, or beautifiyng of the face,
good for ladies and dames. Foli. 69.
               To take out ſpots, lentilles, or pimpels in the face, Idē
               
               A verie good waie, how to giue a luſtre or ſhewe, to all
diſtilled water. Idem.
               To make a water of white Melōs, that maketh a faire
ſkinne. Idem.
               To make a verie good water of Gourdes, as well garden
Gourdes, as wilde. Folio. 70.
               An ointment for the face, whiche beyng kepte on, or vſed
continually, the ſpace of eight daies, altereth the
ſkinne, and reneweth it finely. Idem.
               
                  
For hym that hath naturally a redde face. Folio. 71.
               Ta make Aqua argentata, or ſiluer water, whiche maketh
a white, ruddie, and gliſtryng face: and is made
like a water, and not like an oyntment, that the Dames
of Italie, for the moſte parte dooe vſe, although
that fewe men make it, as it ought to be made. Idem
               To make an ointment for the face. Idem.
               To make a redde colour for the face. Folio. 72.
               To make the face faire. Idem.
               To make the face faire an other waie. Idem.
               To make the face faire. Idem.
               To make a water, that maketh the face white. Idem.
               An other maner to make the face faire. Idem.
               To take ſpottes, lintelles, or redde pimples, out of the
face. Idem.
               To take of a ring worme or tetter, that renneth al ouer
a mannes, called in Frenche, Le fru volant. Folio. 73.
               To driue awaie Liſe. Idem.
               To make a water that taketh awaie al ſtainyng, diyng
and ſpottes from the handes of artificers, that get thē
by working, and maketh them very white and faire:
it is alſo good for them that be ſunne burned. Idem.
               To make a water, that make the fleſhe and ſkinne of a
manne or woman verie faire, and will be kept like a
precious baume. Idem.
               A verie goodlie water to waſhe the face, necke, and the
breaſt, whereof a manne maie make a greate quantite,
for the more there is of it, the better it is: it maketh
the ſkinne and the fleſhe of the face, faire, not
hurtyng or deſtroiyng the teeth, and ſhall ſeme that
the face is nothyng at al holpen with any colour, but
that is euen ſo by nature. Folio. 74.
               To make a verie excellente redde coloure for the face,
whiche is naturall, and continueth long vppon the
face, makyng it alwaies gaier and fairer. Idem.
               An other kinde of redde verie good for the face, eaſier
to make, and with leſſe coſte. Fol. 75.
               An excellent white aboue al other. Idem.
               
                  
To make heare as yellow as golde. Idem.
               To make lye to waſhe the head, whiche (beſide that it
comforteth the brayne, and the memory) maketh the
heare longe, fayre, and yellow like golde. Idem
               Lye to make heare blacke. Fol. 76.
               An oyle for to annoynt the heare, whiche maketh it yelowe
lyke golde, longe and gliſtering lyke burniſhed
golde. Idem.
               A very goodly way or maner howe to make yellowe aberne
heare, without ſtanding longe, or nothinge at
al in the ſonne, a rare and a very excellent ſecret. Idē
               
               An oyntment to make the heares fall from any place of
the body. Fol. 77.
               An oyle or lycour to make the heare fall of, and maye be
kept as longe as a man wyll: It is alſo good for all
occaſions. Fol. 78.
               An aduertiſement or leſſon for them that will make the
heare fall of. Idem.
               To cauſe that the heare ſhall grow no more, or to make
them come out thinne and fine lyke the fyrſt ſoft hear or
moſines of the face. Idem.
               To make a kind of cloth or plaiſter to take the heare frō
the face, neck, & handes, or frō any part of the body. 79
               A merueilous ſecrete, whiche the greate lordes of the
Moores do vſe, wherby they make that their children
haue no hear vnder their armes, or other place wher
they wyl. And this ſecrete found I in Siria, the year
1521 by the meanes of a lorde of the countrey, whoſe
doughter I healed. Idem
               To make a kind of cloth, called cloth of Leuant, wherwith
women vſe to colour their faces. Fol. 80.
               The ſame another way, Idem
               To dye a white beard or heare of the heade into a fayre
blacke. Idem
               A noble and excellent poulder to make cleane the teeth
to make them faſt and white, & to conſerue the gommes,
a better thinge can not be found, and it were to
preſent to a Quene or princeſſe. Fol. 81.
               
                  
To make a very excellent conſerue to ſcoure the teeth,
to comforte the gommes, and to make a ſwete and
good breath. Idem
               An aduertiſement or leſſon concerning the makynge of
poulders, and conſerues for the teeth. Idem
               An exceding white and good poulder to ſcoure the teeth
whiche is meter for lordes and great men, than anye
of the other before. Fol. 82.
               A diſtilled water, excellent for to make the teeth white
immediatly, and to preſerue them wonderfully. f. 83.
               Thre aduertiſementes or leſſonnes of importaunce, to
kepe the teeth white and vncorrupt and alſo a ſwete
breath. Idem
               A decoction to waſhe and ſcour the mouth, to faſten loſe
teeth, to conſolidate and make ſounde the gommes,
and to make the fleſſhe growe agayne if it were decayed
or fallen a waye. Fol. 84.
            
            
               Of the fyſte boke.
               TO make parfit Aſure, ſuche as cometh from be
yond the ſeas. Fol. 84.
               To make a fine confection of grayne, called
Lacca of grayne. Fo. 86
               To dye bones into a grene colour. Idem.
               Another maner howe to die bones, or Iu
                     •
                  rye, into the
colour of an Emeraude. Idem.
               To die bones redde, blew, or of any colour you wil. Idē
               
               A very goodly ſecrete to die or colour wood, of what colour
a man wil, which ſome ioyners dovſe that make
tables, and other thinges of diuers coloures, and do
eſteme it among them ſelues to be of ſuch excellency,
that one brother will not teache it another. Fol. 87
               To counterfeit the black wood called Hebenus, or Hebenum,
& to make it as fayre as the natural Hebene,
whiche groweth no where but in India. Idem.
               To die ſcinnes blew, or of the colour of Aſure. Idem.
               To dye ſkynnes in Chickweede, called in latyne Rubra
                  
                  maior or Rubra tinctorum, into a redde coloure. Fol. 88.
               To dye Skinnes greene. Idem.
               To dye the ſaied Skinnes an other waie. Idem.
               An other waie to dye Skinnes of Aſure coloure and
faire. Folio. 89.
               An other maner to dye Skinnes greene. Idem.
               To dye Neates leather into a grene colour, as well in
gal as in leaues. Idem.
               To dye Skinnes grene, with the flower of Ireos. fo. 90
               To dye bones in a Turkiſhe or redde colour. Idem.
               To dye Hogges briſtelles, and other thynges, for to
make rubbars and bruſſhes. Idem.
               To dye the ſaied briſtelles yellowe, grene or blewe, or
any other colour. Idem.
               To make Purple, whiche is a colour, wherewith men
vſe to make a coloure like golde, for to painte and
write with. Idem.
               To make Lacca of Braſill. Foli. 91.
               To make white tables to write in, with the poinct of a
wire, ſoche as come out of Germanie. Idem.
               To make Roſet or ruddle. Idem.
               To gilte ouer Parchemente, Leather, or other ſoche
woorke, whiche menne vſe in ſteade of hangynges,
or Tapiſtrie. Folio. 92.
               To dye Crimſon ſilke. Idem.
               To prepare and trimme Braſill, for to make of it foure
diuers colours. Idem.
               To make Roſet of Braſill an other waie. Foli. 93.
               To make beyondſea Aſure, without Lapis laſuli. Idem.
               To make a grene coloure, to write or paint with. Idē.
               To braie fine golde, wherewith a manne maie write,
or painte with a penſill. Idem.
               The ſame an other waie. Idem.
               An other waie with purpurine. Folio. 94.
               To make a grounde to gilte vppon, with burniſſhed
Golde. Idem.
               To laie or ſettle golde with a ſingle ground. Idem.
               An other waie to laie on golde. Idem.
               
                  
To make colours of all kinde of metalles. Idem
               To laye golde on a blacke ground. Idem.
               To make letters of the colour of gold without gold. Id.
               To make ſyluer letters without ſiluer. Idem.
               To make greene letters. Fol 95
               To make white letters in a blacke field. Idem.
               To make a greene colour for to write and paynt withall.
Idem.
               To trimme and dreſſe Aſure. Idem.
               To dreſſe or trimme Cinabrium, for to write or paynte
with. Idem.
               A ground to lay golde vpon any metall or yron. Idem.
               To gylt the edges of bookes. Fol. 96.
               To kepe and preſerue whites of egges as long as a mā
wyll without corrupting, and without putting Arſenick
to it. A ſecrete not muche knowen. Idem.
               The maner howe to make the grounde or foundation
for Indicum. Idem
               Another perfit ground for the ſame thinge. Idem
               A goodly way howe to make gold and ſiluer into poulder,
a thinge eaſy to be done, and there wyll come of
it an excellent colour. This is a very rare ſecret, whiche
hath not ben vſed nor knowē vntil this preſet. 96
               To make a very fayre Vernix, to verniſh the ſaid gold,
and all other workmanſhippe. Fol. 97.
               To braye or break gold or ſiluer eaſely, after the comen
maner that the beſt workmaſters do vſe. Fol. 98
               To make a lyeour, that maketh a golden colour without
gold. Idem.
               Another lycour of the colour of golde, for to wryte, and
to gilt iron, wode, glaſſe, bone, & other like things. 98
               Another goodly licour, to make a golden colour with litle
coſt, and is a thinge eaſy to be done. Fol. 99.
               To make incke, or a coloure to write with, in a verye
good perfection. Idem.
               A good waye and maner howe to make ynck for to cary
about a man in a drye poulder, whiche (whan he will
wryte with) he muſt temper with a lyttle wyne, water,

or Vinaigre, or with ſome other licour, and than
he may incontinent putte it in experience. With the
ſayd poulder all other yncke maye be amended, be it
neuer ſo euill. Idem.
               To make a great deale of ynck quickely, and with lyttle
coſte. Fol. 100.
               To make Printers inck. Idem
               To make yncke ſo white, that althoughe a man write
with it vpon white paper, it may eaſely and perfitlye
be redde. A very goodly thinge. Idem.
               To make a poulder to take of blottes of yncke, fallen vpon
the paper, or ells the letters and writinge from
the paper: whiche is a rare ſecrete, but yet profitable.
101.
               To make a kynde of vernyſhe, but muche fayerer, and
better than that whiche Scryueners do vſe, and is of
leſſe coſt, & ſtinketh not as other vernyſh doeth. Idem.
               To make yncke to rule paper for to wryte by, wherof
the writynge beyng dry, the lynes maye be takē out,
that it ſhall ſeme ye haue written without lines. 102.
            
            
               The ſixte booke.
               TO ſublime quyckſyluer, that is to ſaye, to make
common ſublime, that Goldſmithes, Alchemiſtes,
and gentelwemen do vſe, and that mē
vſe in many thinges concerning phiſick. 102.
               To make Cinabrium, and therof to make loaues of a hundreth
or two hundreth poundes, as great as a man lyſt:
as thoſe are that com out of Almaine, which ſecrete hath
not before this time bene knowe of any in Italy Fo. 105
               To fyne and renewe Borax. Fol. 107
               A good and eaſy way to make aqua fortis better than any
other. Fol. 110.
               The true and parfyte practyſe to caſt medalles, and all
other workmanſhyp, as well in braſſe, as in golde,
ſiluer, coppar, leade, Tyn, as of Cryſtall, glaſſe, and
marble. Fo. 110.
               The fyrſt earth to caſt in a moulde all maner of fuſyble

matter. Fol. 111.
               The ſecond earth or ſande. Idem.
               The thirde earthe or ſande. Idem.
               The fourth earthe or ſande. Idem.
               The fyfte earth or ſande the moſt parfyte. Idem.
               The ſixt earth. Fol. 112.
               A goodly waye and maner howe to make all theſe earthes
very fine and ſmall, & almoſt impalpable. Idem.
               To make a water called magiſtra, wherwith the ſaide
earthes to make mouldes, is tempered, and moyſted
agayne at euery caſtynge or foundyng. Idem.
               To make Lutum ſapientiae very parfyte. Fol. 113
               Certaine thinges, whiche he that wyll take in hande any
foundyng or caſtynge of mettalls, muſte alwayes
haue 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and in order. Fol. 114.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   or order that a man ought to kepe, whan he
wyll caſte or founde medalles, or anye other thynges.
Fo. 115.
               To 
                     〈◊〉
                   white, to blanche or make white medalls,
or other thynges newlye molten, and alſo for to renewe
medalls of olde ſyluer. Fol. 116.
               To gylte yron with water. Fol. 117.
               The lyke another waye Idem.
               To gilte yron with golde foyle, and water, or ells with
gold myrt with quick ſiluer, as gold ſmiths are wont
to gylte ſyluer. Idem.
               To dye or colour into the colour of braſſe, or alſo to gilt
ſyluer, whiche ſhe wethe better, and continueth longer.
Idem.
               A water or colour to lay vnder Diamondes as wel true
as counterfeyte, that is to ſaye, made of whyte Saphires,
as we will declare afterward. Fol. 118.
               To counterfeite a diamōd, with a white Saphire Idem
               To ingroſe thinne Baleſſes to ſet in ringes. Idem
               To make Rubyes of two peeces, and Emeraudes, as
they make them at Milan Fol 119.
               To make a paſt or dowe for precious ſtones, as Emeraudes,
rubes, Saphirs, & ſuch like, which be but of one

piece well coloured within and without. Idem.
               To make Emerauldes, and other ſtones or Iuels. 120.
               To calcine or burne Criſtall and the Calcidoyne ſtone,
to put in the ſaied mixtions of precious ſtones. Idem
               A water to harden the ſayd ſtones. Idem
               To calcine fine ſiluer. Idem
               The ſecond maner of calcining ſyluer. Fol. 121
               The third maner of calcining ſiluer. Fol. 122
               To calcine Talchum quickly and out of hand. Idem
               An excellent and very eaſy way to gylt yron, coper, and
ſyluer, to make it ſeme like maſſiue golde. Fol. 123.
               A parfit maner and way to gylt, and to make the quick
ſyluer to daniſh away from the thinge gylted. Idem
            
            The ende of the Table.
            
         
      
   