
      
         
            
            
            THE NEVV TESTAMENT OF IESVS CHRIST, TRANSLATED FAITHFVLLY INTO ENGLISH, out of the authentical Latin, according to the beſt corrected copies of the ſame, diligently conferred vvith the Greeke and other editions in diuers languages: Vvith ARGVMENTS of bookes and chapters, ANNOTATIONS, and other neceſſarie helpes, for the better vnderſtanding of the text, and ſpecially for the diſcouerie of the CORRVPTIONS of diuers late tranſlations, and for cleering the CONTROVERSIES in religion, of theſe daies: IN THE ENGLISH COLLEGE OF RHEMES.
            Pſal. 118.
            
               Da mihi intellectum, & ſcrutabor legem tuam, & cuſtodiam illam in toto corde meo.
            
            
               That is, Giue me vnderſtanding, and I vvil ſearche thy lavv, and vvil keepe it vvith my vvhole hart.
            
            S. Aug. tract. 2. in Epiſt. Ioan.
            
               Omnia qua leguntur in Scripturis ſanctis, ad inſtructionem & ſalutem noſtram intentè oportes audire: maxime tamen memoria commendanda ſunt, qua aduerſus Hareticos valent plurimùm: quorum inſidia, infirmiores quoſque & negligentiores circumuenire non ceſſant.
            
            
               That is, Al things that are readde in holy Scriptures, vve muſt heare vvith great attention, to our inſtruction and ſaluation: but thoſe things ſpecially muſt be commended to memorie, vvhich make moſt againſt Heretikes: vvhoſe deceites ceaſe not to circumuent and beguile al the vveaker ſort and the more negligent perſons.
            
            PRINTED AT RHEMES, by Iohn Fogny. 1582. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            THE CENSVRE AND APPROBATION.
            
               CVM huius verſionis ac aeditionis authores, nobis de fide & eruditione ſint probè cogniti, aliiue S. Theologiae & linguae Anglicanae peritiſsimi viri conteſtati ſint, nihil in hoc opere reperiri, quod non ſit Catholicae Eccleſiae doctrinae, & pietati conſentaneum, vel quod vllo modo poteſtati ac paci ciuili repugnet, ſed omnia potius veram fidem, Reip. bonum, vitaeue ac morum probitatem promouere: ex ipſorum fide cenſemus iſta vtiliter excudi & publicari poſſe.
            
               
                  
                     
                        PETRVS REMIGIVS Archidiaconus maior Metropolitana inſignis Eccleſia Rhemenſis, Iuris Canonici Doctor, Archiepiſcopatus Rhemenſis generalis Vicarius.
                     
                        HVBERTVS MORVS, Rhemenſis Eccleſiae Decanus, & Eccleſiaſtes, & in ſacratiſsimae Theologiae facultate Doctor.
                     
                        IOANNES LE BESGVE, Canonicus Rhemenſis, Doctor Theologus, & Cancellarius Academiae Rhemenſis.
                     
                        GVLIELMVS BALBVS, Theologiae profeſſor, Collegij Rhemenſis Archimagiſter.
                  
               
            
            
               S. Auguſt. lib. 1. c. 3. de ſerm. Do. in monte.
               Paupertate ſpiritus peruenitur ad Scripturarū cognitionem: vbi oportet hominem ſe mitem praebere, ne peruicacibus concertationibus indocilis reddatur.
               Vve come to the vnderſtanding of Scriptures through pouertie of ſpirit: vvhere a man muſt ſhevv himſelf meeke-minded, leſt by ſtubburne contentions, he become incapable and vnapt to be taught.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE TO THE READER TREATING OF THESE THREE POINTS: OF THE TRANSLATION OF HOLY SCRIPTVRES INTO THE vulgar tongues, and namely into Engliſh: of the cauſes vvhy this nevv Teſtament is tranſlated according to the auncient vulgar Latin text: & of the maner of tranſlating the ſame.
            
               THE holy Bible long ſince tranſlated by vs into Engliſh, and the old Teſtament lying by vs for lacke of good meanes to publiſh the vvhole in ſuch ſort as a vvorke of ſo great charge and importance requireth: vve haue yet through Gods goodnes at length fully finiſhed for thee (moſt Chriſtian reader) all the NEVV TESTAMENT, vvhich is the principal, moſt profitable & comfortable peece of holy vvritte: and, as vvel for all other inſtitution of life and doctrine, as ſpecially for deciding the doubtes of theſe daies, more propre and pregnant then the other part not yet printed.
            Vvhich tranſlation vve doe not for all that publiſh,Tranſlation of the Scriptures into the vulgar tōgues, not abſolutely neceſſarie or profitable, but according to the time. vpon erroneous opinion of neceſsitie, that the holy Scriptures ſhould alvvaies be in our mother tonge, or that they ought, or vvere ordained by God, to be read indifferently of all, could be eaſily vnderſtood of euery one that readeth or heareth them in a knovven language: or that they vvere not often through mans malice or infirmitie, pernicious and much hurtful to many: or that vve generally and abſolutely deemed it more conuenient in it ſelf, & more agreable to Gods word and honour or edification of the faithful, to haue them turned into vulgar tonges, then to be kept & ſtudied only in the Eccleſiaſtical learned languages: Not for theſe nor any ſuch like cauſes doe vve tranſlate this ſacred booke, but vpon ſpecial conſideration of the preſent time, ſtate, and condition of our countrie, vnto vvhich, diuers thinges are either neceſſarie, or profitable and medicinable novv, that othervviſe in the peace of the Church vvere neither much requiſite, nor perchance vvholy tolerable.
            In this matter,The Churches vviſedom and moderatiō concering vulgar tranſlation. to marke onely the vviſedom & moderatiō of holy Church and the gouernours thereof on the one ſide, and the indiſcerete zeale of the
 popular, and their factious leaders, on the other, is a high point of prudence, Theſe later, partly of ſimplicitie, partly of curioſitie, and ſpecially of pride and diſobedience, haue made claime in this caſe for the common people, vvith plauſible pretences many, but good reaſons none at all. The other,Mat. 24, 45, 1 Cor. 4, 1. to vvhom Chriſt hath giuen charge of our ſoules, tho diſpenſing of Gods myſteries and treaſures (among vvhich holy Scripture is no ſmale ſtore) and the feeding his familie in ſeaſon vvith foode fit for euery ſort, haue neither of old nor of late, euer vvholy condemned all vulgar verſions of Scripture, nor haue at any time generally forbidden the faithful to reade the ſame: yet they haue not by publike authoritie preſcribed, commaunded, or authentically euer recommended any ſuch interpretation to be indifferently vſed of all men.
            The Armenians ſay they haue the Pſalter and ſome other peeces tranſlated by S. Chryſoſtom into their language,The Scriptures in the vulgar languages of diuers nations. vvhen he vvas baniſhed among them:Bib. Sāct. li. 4. and George the Patriarch,Hiero, ep. 134. in vvriting his life, ſignifieth no leſſe. The Saluonians affirme they haue the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue, turned by S. Hierom, and ſome vvould gather ſo much by his ovvne vvordes in his epiſtle to Sophronius,Bib. Sāct. lib. 4. but the place in deede proueth in not. Vulpilas ſurely gaue the Scriptures to the Gothes in their ovvne tonge, and that before he vvas an Arrian.Aūcient Catholike tranſlations of the Bible into the Italian, Frenche, & Engliſh tongue. It is almoſt three hundred yeres, ſince Iames Archbiſhop of Genua, is ſaid to haue tranſlated the Bible into Italian. More then tvvo hundred yeres agoe, in the daies of Charles the fifth, the Frenche king, vvas it put forth faithfully in Frenche, the ſooner to ſhake out of the deceiued peoples hādes, the falſe heretical tranſlations of a ſecte called Vvaldenſes.
               Li. 1 hiſt. Angl. c. 1. In our ovvne countrie, notwithſtanding the Latin tonge vvas euer (to vſe Venerable Bedes vvordes) common to all the prouinces of the ſame for meditation or ſtudie of Scriptures, and no vulgar tranſlation commonly vſed or occupied of the multitude, yet they vvere 
                  •
               xtant in Engliſh euen before the troubles that Vvicleffe and his folovvers raiſed in our Church, as appeareth, as well by ſome peeces yet remaining,An aunciēt prouincial cōſtitution in England concerning Engliſh tranſlations. See Linvvod li. 5 tit. de Magiſtris.
                as by a prouincial Conſtitution of Thomas Arundel Archbiſhop of Canturburie, in a Councel holden at Oxford. vvhere ſtraite prouiſion vvas made, that no heretical verſion ſet forth by Vvicleffe, or his adherentes, ſhould be ſuffered, nor any other in or after his time be publiſhed or permitted to be readde, being not approued and allovved by the Dióceſan before: alleaging S. Hierom for the difficultie and danger of interpreting the holy Scripture out of one tonge into an other, though by learned and Catholike men. So alſo it is there inſinuated, that neither the Tranſlations ſet forth before that Heretikes time, nor other aftervvard being approued by the lavvful Ordinaries, were euer in our countrie wholy forbidden, though they were not (to ſay the truth) in quiet and better times (much leſſe when the people vvere prone to alteratiō, hereſie, or noueltie) either haſtily admitted, or ordinarily readde of the vulgar, but vſed onely, or ſpecially, of ſome deuout religious and contemplatiues perſons, in reuerence, ſecrecie, and ſilence, for their ſpiritual comforte.
            Now ſince Luthers reuolt alſo,The like Catholike and vulgar tranſlations in many coūtries, ſince Luthers time. diuers learned Catholikes, for the more ſpeedy aboliſhing of a number of falſe and impious tranſlations put forth by ſundry ſectes, and for the better preſeruation or reclaime of many good ſoules endangered thereby, haue publiſhed the Bible in the ſeueral languages of almoſt all the principal prouinces of the Latin Church: no other bookes in the world being ſo pernicious as hereticall tranſlations of the Scriptures, poiſoning the people vnder colour of diuine authoritie, & not many other remedies
 being more ſoueraine againſt the ſame (if it be vſed in order, diſcretion, and humilitie) then the true, faithful, and ſincere interpretation oppoſed therevnto.
            Vvhich cauſeth the holy Church not to forbid vtterly any Catholike tranſlation,The Churches order & determinatiō concerning the reading of Catholike tranſlatiōs of the Bible in vulgar tōgues. though ſhe allow not the publiſhing or reading of any abſolutely and without exception, or limitation: knowing by her diuine and moſt ſincere wiſedom, how, where, when, and to whom theſe her Maiſters and Spouſes giftes are to be beſtowed to the moſt good of the faithful: and therfore neither generally permitteth that which muſt needes doe hurt to the vnworthy, nor abſolutely condemneth that which may doe much good to the worthie. Vvherevpon, the order which many a wiſe man wiſhed for before, was taken by the Deputies of the late famous Councel of Trent in this behalfe,Ind. lib. prohibit. regula 4. and confirmed by ſupreme authoritie, that the holy Scriptures, though truely and Catholikely tranſlated into vulgar tonges, yet may not be indifferētly readde of all men, nor of any other then ſuch as haue expreſſe licence therevnto of their lawful Ordinaries, with good teſtimonie from their Curates or Confeſſors, that they be humble, diſcrete and deuout perſons, and like to take much good, and no harme thereby. Vvhich preſcript, though in theſe daies of ours it can not be ſo preciſely obſerued, as in other times & places, where there is more due reſpecte of the Churches authoritie, rule, and diſcipline: yet, we truſt all wiſe and godly perſons will vſe the matter in the meane while, with ſuch moderation, meekenes, and ſubiection of hart, as the handling of ſo ſacred a booke, the ſincere ſenſes of Gods truth therein, & the holy Canons, Councels, reaſon, and religion do require.
            Vvherein, though for due preſeruation of this diuine worke from abuſe and prophanation, and for the better bridling of the intolerable inſolencie of proude, curious, & contentious wittes, the gouernours of the Church guided by Gods Spirit,The holy Scriptures neuer read of al perſons indifferently, at their pleaſure. as euer before, ſo alſo vpon more experience of the maladie of this time the
                  •
                before, haue taken more exacte order both for the readers and tranſlatours in theſe later ages, then of old: yet we muſt not imagin that in the primitiue Church, either euery one that vnderſtoode the learned tonges wherein the Scriptures were written, or other languages into which they were tranſlated, might without reprehenſion, reade, reaſon, diſpute, turne and toſſe the Scriptures: or that our forefathers ſuffered euery ſchole-maiſter, ſcholer, or Grammarian that had a litle Greeke or Latin, ſtraight to take in hand the holy Teſtament: or that the tranſlated Bibles into the vulgar tonges, were in the handes of euery huſbandman, artificer, prentice, boies, girles, miſtreſſe, maide, man: that they were ſung, plaies, alleaged, of euery tinker, tauerner, rimer, minſtrel: that they were for table talke, for alebenches, for boates and barges, and for euery prophane perſon and companie. No, in thoſe better times men were neither ſo ill, nor ſo curious of them ſelues, ſo to abuſe the bleſſed booke of Chriſt: neither was there any ſuch eaſy meanes before printing was inuented, to diſperſe the copies into the handes of euery man, as now there is.
            They were then in Libraries,Vvhere and in vvhoſe handes the Scriptures vvere in the primitiue Church. Monaſteries, Colleges, Churches, in Biſhops, Prieſts, and ſome other deuout principal L
                  •
               y mens houſes and handes: who vſed them with ſeare and reuerence, and ſpecially ſuch partes as perteined to good life and maners, not medling, but in pulpit and ſchooles (and that moderately to) with the hard and high myſteries and places of greater difficultie. The poore ploughman, could then in labouring the ground, ſing the hymnes
 and pſalmes either in knowen or vnknowen languages,Hovv the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of thoſe daies did read them, vvith what humilitie and religion, and enformation of life and maners. as they heard them in the holy Church, though they could neither reade nor know the ſenſe, meaning, and myſteries of the ſame. Such holy perſons of both ſexes, to whom S. Hierom in diuers Epiſtles to them, commendeth the reading and meditation of holy Scriptures, were diligent to ſearche all the godly hiſtories & imitable examples of chaſtitie, humilitie, obedience, clemencie, pouertie, penance, renoūcing the world▪ they noted ſpecially the places that did breede the hatred of ſinne, feare of Gods iudgement, delight in ſpiritual cogitations: they referred them ſelues in all hard places, to the iudgement of the auncient fathers and their maiſters in religion, neuer preſuming to contend, controule, teach or talke of their owne ſenſe and phantaſie, in deepe queſtions of diuinitie. Then the Virgins, did meditate vpon the places and examples of chaſtitie, modeſtie and demureneſſe: the maried, on coniugal faith and continencie: the parents, how to bring vp their children in faith and ſeare of God: the Prince, how to rule: the ſubiect, how to obey: the Prieſt, how to teach: the people, how to learne.
            Then the ſcholer taught not his maiſter,The fathers ſharply reprehend as an abuſe, that al indifferenly ſhould reade, expound, and talke of the Scriptures. the ſheepe controuled not the Paſtor, the yong ſtudent ſet not the Doctor to ſchoole, not reproued their fathers of error & ignorance. Or if any were in thoſe better daies (as in al times of hereſie ſuch muſt needes be) that had itching eares, tikling tonges and wittes, curious and contentious diſputers, hearers, and talkers rather then doers of Gods word: ſuch the Fathers did euer ſharply reprehend, counting them vnworthy and vnprofitable readers of the holy Scriptures. S. Hierom in his Epiſtle to Paulinus, after declaration that no handy craft is ſo baſe, nor liberall ſcience ſo eaſy, that can be had without a maiſter (which S. Auguſtine alſo affirmeth,Hiero. ep. 103
                     •
                  . 6. 
               De vtilitate cred. cap. 7.) nor that men preſume in any occupation to teach that they neuer learned, Only (ſaith he) the art of Scripture is that vvhich euery man chalengeth: this the chatting old vvife, this the doting old man, this the brabling ſophiſter, this on euery hand, men preſume to teach before they learne it. Againe, Some vvith poiſe of lofty vvordes deuiſe of ſcripture matters among vvomen: otherſome (phy vpon it) learne of vvomen, vvhat to teach men, and leſt that be not ynough, by facilitie of tong, or rather audacitie, teach that to others, vvhich they vnderſtand neuer a vvhit them ſelues. to ſay nothing of ſuch as be of my facultie: vvho ſtepping from ſecular learning to holy ſcriptures, and able to tickle the eares of the multitude vvith a ſmothe tale, thinke all they ſpeake, to be the Law of God. This he wrote then, when this maladie of arrogancie and preſumption in diuine matters, vvas nothing ſo outragious as now it is.
            S. Gregorie Nazianzene made an oration of the moderation that vvas to be vſed in theſe matters:In orat. de moderatio. in diſputa. ſeruanda. where he ſaith, that ſome in his time thought them ſelues to haue all the wiſedom in the world, when they could once repeat tvvo or three wordes, and them ill couched together, out of Scriptures, but he there diuinely diſcourſeth of the orders and differences of degrees: how in Chriſtes myſticall body, ſome are ordeined to learne, ſome to teach: that all are not Apoſtles, all Doctors, all interpreters, all of tonges and knovvledge, not all learned in Scriptures & diuinitie: that the people went not vp to talke with God in the mountaine, but Moyſes, Aaron, & Eleazar: nor they neither, but by the difference of their callings: that they that rebell againſt this ordinance, are guilty of the conſpiracie of Corè & his cōplices: that in Scripture there is both milke for babes, and meate for men, to be diſpenſed, not according to euery ones
 greedines of appetit or vvilfulnes,The Scriptures muſt be deliuered in meaſure and diſcretion, according to eche mans neede and capacitie. but as is moſt meete for eche ones neceſsitie and capacitie: that as it is a ſhame for a Biſhop or Prieſt to be vnlearned in Gods myſteries, ſo for the common people it is often times profitable to ſaluation, not to be curious, but to folovv their Paſtors in ſinceritie & ſimplicitie: vvhereof excellently ſaith S. Auguſtine,De 
                     ••
                  gone Chriſt. c. 33. 
               Fidei ſimplicitate & ſinceritate lactati, nutriamur in Chriſto: & cum parui ſumus, maiorum cibos non appetamus. that is, Being fed vvith the ſimplicitie and ſinceritie of faith, as it vvere vvith milke, ſo let vs be nouriſhed in Chriſt:
               De bono perſeuer. c. 16. 
               and vvhen vve are litle ones, let vs not couet the meates of the elder ſort. Vvho * in an other place teſtifieth, that the vvord of God can not be preached nor certaine myſteries vttered to all men alike, but are to be deliuered according to the capacitie of the hearers:1 Cor. 3. as he proueth both * by S. Paules example, vvho gaue not to euery ſort ſtrong meate, but milke to many, as being not ſpiritual,Io. 16. but carnal and not capable: and * by our lordes alſo, vvhho ſpake to ſome plainely, and to others in parables, & affirmed that he had many things to vtter vvhich the hearers vvere not able to beare.
            Hovv much more may vve gather, that all thinges that be vvritten, are not for the capacitie and diet of euery of the ſimple readers, but that very many myſteries of holy vvritte, be very far aboue their reach, & may and ought to be (by as great reaſon) deliuered them in meaſure & meane moſt meete for them? vvhich in deede can hardly be done,Ia orat. de modera. in diſp. ſerua. in fine. Hiero. in prooem. cō. mentar. in Ezachi. vvhen the vvhole booke of the Bible lieth before euery man in his mother tonge,The Ievves lavv for not reading certaine bookes of holy Scripture vntil a time. to make choiſe of vvhat he liſt. For vvhich cauſe the ſaid Gregorie Nazianzen vviſheth the Chriſtians had as good a lavv as the Hebrues of old had: vvho (as S. Hierom alſo vvitneſſeth) tooke order among them ſelues that none ſhould read the Cantica Canticorum nor certaine other pieces of hardeſt Scriptures, till they vvere thirtie yeres of age.
            And truely there is no cauſe vvhy men ſhould be more loth to be ordered and moderated in this point by Gods Church and their Paſtors, then they are in the vſe of holy Sacraments: for vvhich as Chriſt hath appointed Prieſtes and miniſters, at vvhoſe handes vve muſt receiue them, and not be our owne caruers:Eph. 4. ſo hath he giuen * vs doctors, prophetes, expoūders, interpreters, teachers and preachers, to take the lavv and our faith at their mouthes: becauſe our faith and religion commeth not to vs properly or principally by reading of Scriptures,Ro. 10, 17. but (as the Apoſtle ſaith) by hearing of the preachers lavvfully ſent: though reading in order and humilitie, much confirmeth and aduanceth the ſame. Therfore this holy booke of the Scriptures, is called of S. Ambroſe, Liber ſacerdotalis, the booke of prieſtes, at vvhoſe handes and diſpoſition vve muſt take and vſe it. Li. 2. ad Grat.
            
            The vviſe vvil not here regard vvhat ſome vvilful people do mutter,The popular obiections of vvithholding the Scriptures from the people, anſvvered. that the Scriptures are made for all men, and that it is of enuie that the Prieſtes do keepe the holy booke from them. Vvhich ſuggeſtion commeth of the ſame ſerpent * that ſeduced our firſt parents,Gen. 3. vvho perſuaded them, that God had forbidden them that tree of knovvledge, leſt they ſhould be as cunning as him ſelf,Vvhy the Church permitteth not euery one at their pleaſure to reade the Scripture. and like vnto the Higheſt. No, no, the church doth it to keepe them from blind ignorant preſumption, and from that vvhich the Apoſtle calleth falſi nominis ſcientiam knovvledge falſely ſo called:
               1 Tim. 6, 20. and not to embarre them from the true knovvledge,Ro. 12, 3. of Chriſt. She vvould haue all vviſe, but vſque ad ſobrietatem, vnto ſobrietie, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: ſhe knovveth the Scriptures be ordained for euery ſtate, as meates, elements, fire, vvater, candle, kniues, ſvvord, & the like:
 vvhich are as needful (moſt of them) for children as old folkes, for the ſimple as the vviſe: but yet vvould marre all, if they vvere at the guiding of other then wiſe men, or vvere in the handes of euery one, for whoſe preſeruation they be profitable. She forbiddeth not the reading of them in any language, enuieth no mans commoditie, but giueth order hovv to doe it to edification, and not deſtruction:The holy Scriptures to carnal men & Heretikes, are as pearles to ſvvine. hovv to doe it without caſting the holy to dogges,
               Mat. 7, 6. or pearles to hogges: (See S. Chryſoſt. ho. 24 in Matth, declaring theſe hogges & dogges to be carnal men & Heretikes, that take no good of the holy myſteries, but thereby do both hurt them ſelues & others:) how to doe it agreably to the ſoueraine ſinceritie, maieſtie, & depth of Myſterie conteined in the ſame. She vvould haue the preſumptuous Heretike, notvvithſtanding he alleage them neuer ſo faſt, flying as it vvere through the whole Bible, and coting the Pſalmes, Prophets, Goſpels Epiſtles, neuer ſo readily for his purpoſe, as Vincentius Lirinenſis ſaith ſuch mens faſhion is:Li. de preſcriptionibus. yet ſhe vvould according to Tertullians rule, haue ſuch mere vſurpers quite diſcharged of all occupying and poſſeſſion of the holy Teſtament, which is her old and onely right and inheritance, and belongeth not to Heretikes at all,Orig. in 2 ad Ro. vvhom Origen calleth Scripturarū fures, theeues of the Scriptures. She would haue the vnvvorthy repelled, the curious repreſſed, the ſimple meaſured, the learned himbled, and all ſortes ſo to vſe them or abſteine from them, as is moſt conuenient for euery ones ſaluation: with this general admonition, that none can vnderſtand the meaning of God in the ScripturesLuca 24. except Chriſt open their ſenſe, and make them partakers of his holy Spirit in the vnitie of his myſtical bodie: and for the reſt, ſhe committeth it to the Paſtor of euery prouince and people, according to the difference of time, place, and perſons, how and in vvhat ſort the reading of the Scriptures is more or leſſe to be procured or permitted.
            Vvherein,S. Chryſoſtoms exhortations to the reading of holy Scriptures, and vvhen the people is ſo to be exhorted. the varietie of circūſtances cauſeth them to deale diuerſly: as we ſee by S. Chryſoſtoms people of Conſtantinople, vvho vvere ſo delicate, dull, vvorldly,In vita Athanaſij. and ſo much giuen to dice, cardes, ſpecially ſtage-plaies or theaters (as S. Gregorie Nazianzene witneſſeth) that the Scriptures & all holy lections of diuine things were lothſome vnto them: whereby their holy Biſhop was forced
Ho. 2 in Mat. & ho. 3 de Lazaro. et ho. 3 in 2 ad Theſſ. & alibi ſapè.in many of his ſermons to crie out againſt their extreme negligence and contempt of Gods vvord, declaring, that not onely Eremites and Religious (as they alleaged for their excuſe) but ſecular men of all ſortes might reade the Scriptures, and often haue more neede thereof in reſpect of them ſelues, then the other that liue in more puritie and contemplation: further inſinuating, that though diuers thinges be high and hard therein, yet many godly hiſtories, liues, examples, & precepts of life and doctrine be plaine: and finally, that when the Gentiles vvere ſo cunning and diligent to impugne their faith, it were not good for Chriſtians to be to ſimple or negligent in the defenſe thereof. as (in truth) it is more requiſite for a Catholike man in theſe daies vvhen our Aduerſaries be induſtrious to empeache our beleefe, to be ſkilful in Scriptures, then at other times vvhen the Church had no ſuch enemies.
            To this ſenſe ſaid S, Chryſoſtom diuers thinges,S. Chryſoſtom maketh nothing for the popular and licentious reading of Scriptures vſed among the Proteſtants novv a daies. not as a teacher in ſchole, making exact and general rules to be obſerued in all places & times, but as a pulpit man, agreably to that audiēce & his peoples default: nor making it therfore (as ſome peruerſely gather of his wordes) a thing abſolutely needful for euery poore artificer to reade of ſtudie Scriptures, nor any vvhit fauouring the preſumptuous, curious, and contentious iangling and ſearching of Gods ſecretes, reproued by the foreſaid fathers, much leſſe approuing the exceſſiue pride and
 madnes of theſe daies,Euery ſimple artificer among them readeth much more the deepeſt & hardeſt queſtion̄s of holy Scripture, then the moral partes. vvhen euery man and vvoman is become not only a reader, but a teacher, controuler, and iudge of Doctors, Church, Scriptures and all: ſuch as either contemne or eaſily paſſe ouer all the moral partes, good examples, and precepts of life (by vvhich as vvell the ſimple as learned might be much edified) & only in a maner, occupie them ſelues in dogmatical, myſtical, high, and hidden ſecretes of Gods counſels, as of Predeſtination, reprobation, election, preſcience, forſaking of the Ievves, vocation of the gentiles, & other incomprehenſible myſteries,1. Tim. 6. 
               Languiſhing about queſtions of onely ſaith, fiduce, nevv phraſes and figures,2 Tim. c. 3 
               euer learning, but neuer comming to knovvledge, reading and toſſing in pride of vvitte, conceit of their ovvne cunning, and vpon preſumption of I can tell vvhat ſpirit,2 Pet. 3. ſuch bookes ſpecially and Epiſtles, as S. Peter foretold that the vnlearned and inſtable vvould depraue to their ovvne damnation.
            They delight in none more then in the Epiſtle to the Romans,They preſuppoſe no difficulties, which al the learned fathers felt to be in the Scriptures. the Cantica canticorum, the Apocalypſe, which haue in them as many myſteries as wordes. they find no difficultie in the ſacred bookeApoc. 5, 1. claſped vvith ſeuē ſeales. they aſke for no expoſitorAct. 8. Confeſs. lib. 12. cap. 14. vvith the holy Eunuch. they feele no ſuch depth of Gods ſcience in the ſcriptures, as S. Auguſtine did, vvhen he cried our, Mira profunditas eloquiorum tuorum, mira profunditas (Deus meus) mira profunditas: horror eſt intendere in eam, horror honoris, & tremor amoris. that is, O vvonderful profoundnes of thy vvordes: vvonderful profoundnes, my God, vvonderful profoundnes: it maketh a man quake to looke on it: to quake for reuerence, and to tremble for the loue thereof. they regard not that vvhich the ſame Doctor affirmeth,See ep. 3. Aug. that the depth and profunditie of vviſedom, not only in the vvordes of holy Scripture, but alſo in the matter & ſenſe, is ſo vvonderful, that, liue a man neuer ſo long, be he of neuer ſo high a vvitte, neuer ſo ſtudious, neuer ſo ſeruēt to attaine the knovvledge thereof, yet vvhen he endeth,Hiero, ep. 13. c. 4. he ſhall confeſſe he doth but begin. they feele not vvith S. Hierom, that the text hath a hard ſhel to be broken before vve come to the kirnel. they vvill not ſtay them ſelues in only reading the ſacred Scriptures thirtene yeres together,Ruff. Ec. hiſt. li. 2. c. 9. vvith S. Baſil & S. Gergorie Nazianzene, before they expound them, nor take the care (as they did) neuer othervviſe to interpret them, then by the vniforme conſent of their forefathers and tradition Apoſtolike.
            If our nevv Miniſters had had this congitation and care that theſe and all other vviſe men haue,Maners and life nothing amended, but much worſe, ſince this licentious toſſing of holy Scriptures. and euer had, our countrie had neuer fallen to this miſerable ſtate in religion, & that vnder pretence, colour, and coūtenance of Gods vvord: neither ſhould vertue and good life haue bene ſo pitifully corrupted in time of ſuch reading, toiling, tumbling and tranſlating the booke of our life and ſaluation: vvhereof the more pretious the right and reuerent vſe is, the more pernicious is the abuſe and prophanation of the ſame: vvhich euery man of experience by theſe fevv yeres proofe, and by comparing the former daies and maners to theſe of ours, may eaſily trie.
            Looke vvhether your men be more vertuous, your vvomen more chaſt, your childrē more obedient, your ſeruants more truſtie, your maides more modeſt, your frendes more faithful, your laitie more iuſt in dealing, your Cleargy more deuout in praying: vvhether there be more religion, feare of God, faith and conſcience in all ſtates novv, then of old, vvhen there vvas not ſo much reading, chatting, and iangling of Gods vvord, but much more ſincere dealing, doing, and keeping the ſame. Looke vvhether through this diſorder, vvomen teach not their huſbands, children their parents, yong fooles their old and vviſe fathers, the ſcholers their maiſters, the ſheepe their paſtor, and the People
 the Prieſt.Scriptures as profanely cited as heathen poëtes. Looke vvhether the moſt chaſt and ſacred ſentences of Gods holy vvord, be not turned of many, into mirth, mockerie, amorous ballets & deteſtable letters of loue and leudnes: their delicate rimes, tunes, and tranſlations much encreaſing the ſame.
            This fall of good life & prophaning the diuine myſteries, euery body ſeeth: but the great corruption & decay of faith hereby,Scriptures err
                     •
                  neouſly expounded according to euery vvicked mans priuate fanſie. none ſee but vviſe men, who onely knovv, that, vvere the Scriptures neuer ſo truely tranſlated, yet Heretikes and ill men that follovv their ovvne ſpirit and knovv nothing, but their priuàte fantaſie, and not the ſenſe of the holy Church and Doctors, muſt needes abuſe them to their damnation:1 Cor. 2,and that the curious ſimple and * ſenſual men vvhich haue no taſt of the things that be of the Spirit of God, may of infinite places take occaſion of pernicious errors. for though the letter or text haue no error, yet (ſaith S. Ambroſe) the Arrian, or (as vve may novv ſpeake) the Caluinian interpretation hath errors. lib. 2 ad Gratianum ca. 1. and Tertullian ſaith, The ſenſe adulserated is as perilous as the ſtyle corrupted. De Praeſcript. S. Hilarie alſo ſpeaketh thus: Hereſie riſeth about the vnderſtanding, not about the vvriting: the fault is in the ſenſe, not in the vvord. lib. 2 de Trinit. in principio. and S. Auguſtine ſaith, that many hold the ſcriptures as they doe the Sacraments, ad ſpeciem, & non ad ſalutem: to the outvvard ſhevv, and not to ſaluation. de Baptiſ. cont. Donat. lib. 3 ca. 19. Finally all Sect-maiſters and rauening vvolues,Mat. 4. yea * the diuels them ſelues pretend Scriptures,Al Heretikes pretend Scriptures. alleage Scriptures, and vvholy ſhroud them ſelues in Scriptures, as in the wooll and fleeſe of the ſimple ſheepe. Vvhereby the vulgar, in theſe daies of generall diſputes, can not but be in extreme danger of error, though their bookes vvere truely tranſlated, and vvere truely in them ſelues Gods ovvne vvord in deede.
            But the caſe novv is more lamentable:The Scriptures haue been falſely and heretically tranſlated into the vulgar tongues, and ſundrie other vvaies ſacrilegiouſly abuſed, and ſo giuen to the people to reade. for the Proteſtants and ſuch as S. Paul calleth ambulantes in aſtutia,
               2 Cor. 4. 
               vvalking in deceitfulnes, haue ſo abuſed the people and many other in the vvorld, not vnvviſe, that by their falſe tranſlations they haue in ſteede of Gods Lavv and Teſtament, & for Chriſtes vvritten vvill and vvord, giuen them their ovvne vvicked vvriting and phantaſies, moſt ſhamefully in all their verſions Latin, Engliſh, and other tonges, corrupting both the letter and ſenſe by falſe tranſlation, adding, detracting, altering, tranſpoſing, pointing, and all other guileful meanes: ſpecially vvhere it ſerueth for the aduantage of their priuate opinions, for vvhich, they are bold alſo, partly to diſauthoriſe quite, partly to make doubtful, diuers vvhole bookes allovved for Canonical Scripture by the vniuerſal Church of God this thouſand yeres and vpward: to alter al the authentical and Eccleſiaſtical vvordes vſed ſithence our Chriſtianitie, into nevv prophane nouelties of ſpeaches agreable to their doctrine: to change the titles of vvorkes, to put out the names of the authors,Bezaan not. in c. 1. Lu. v. 78. to charge the very Euangeliſt vvith follovving vntrue tranſlation, to adde whole ſentences proper to their ſect, into their pſalmes in meter,See the tenth article of their Creede in meter. euen into the very Creede in rime.Al this their dealing is noted (as occaſion ſerueth) in the Annotations vpon this Teſtiment: and more at large in a booke lately made purpoſely of that matter, called, A DISCOVERIE &c.
                al vvhich the poore deceiued people ſay and ſing as though they vvere Gods ovvne vvord, being in deede through ſuch ſacrilegious treacherie, made the Diuels vvord.
            To ſay nothing of their intolerable liberty and licence to change the accuſtomed callings of God, Angel, men, places, & things vſed by the Apoſtles and all antiquitie, in Greeke, Latin, and all other languages of Chriſtian Nations, into nevv names, ſometimes falſely, and alvvaies ridiculouſly and for oſtentation taken of the Hebrues: to frame and fine the phraſes of holy Scriptures after the forme of prophane writers, ſticking not, for the ſame to ſupply, adde, alter or diminiſh as freely as if they tranſlated Liuie, Virgil, or Terence. Hauing
 no religious reſpect to keepe either the maieſtie or ſincere ſimplicity of that venerable ſtyle of Chriſtes ſpirit, as S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh, vvhich kind the holy Ghoſt did chooſe of infinite vviſedom to haue the diuine myſteries rather vttered in, then any other more delicate, much leſſe in that meretricious maner of vvriting that ſundrie of theſe new tranſlators doe vſe: of vvhich ſort Caluin him ſelfe and his pue-fellovves ſo much complaine,Caluin cōplaineth of the new delicat trā
                  ſlators, namely Caſtalion: him ſelf & Beza being as bad or vvorſe. that they profeſſe, Satan to haue gained more by theſe nevv interpreters (their number,Pref. in nouū Teſta. Gal. 1567. leuitie of ſpirit, and audacitie encreaſing daily) then he did before by keeping the word from the people. And for a paterne of this miſcheefe, they giue Caſtalion, adiuring all their churches and ſcholars to bevvare of his tranſlation, as one that hath made a very ſport and mockery of Gods holy vvord. ſo they charge him: them ſelues (and the Zuinglians of Zuricke,Ioſt
                     •
                   Sim lerus in vita Bullingeri. vvhoſe tranſlations Luther therfore abhorred) handling the matter vvith no more fidelitie, grauitie, or ſinceritie, then the other: but rather vvith much more falſification, or (to vſe the Apoſtles vvordes) cauponation and adulteration of Gods vvord, then they, beſides many vvicked gloſes,2 Cor. 2. 17. prayers, confeſsion of faith, conteining both blaſphemous errorsSee the 4 article of their Creede in meter, vvhere they profeſſe that Chriſt deſcēded to deliuer the fathers, & afterward in their cōfeſſiō of their faith, they deny Limbus patrum.
                and plaine contradictions to them ſelues and among them ſelues, all priuileged and authoriſed to be ioyned to the Bible, and to be ſaid and ſung of the poore people, and to be beleeued as articles of faith and vvholy conſonant to Gods vvord.
            Vve therfore hauing compaſsion to ſee our beloued countrie men, vvith extreme danger of their ſoules, to vſe onely ſuch prophane tranſlations, and erroneous mens mere phantaſies, for the pure and bleſſed vvord of truth, much alſo moued therevnto by the deſires of many deuout perſons: haue ſet forth, for you (benigne readers) the nevv Teſtament to begin vvithal,The purpoſe & commoditie of ſetting forth this Catholike edition. truſting that it may giue occaſion to you, after diligent peruſing thereof, to lay avvay at leſt ſuch their impure verſions as hitherto you haue ben forced to occupie. Hovv vvell vve haue done it, vve muſt not be iudges, but referre all to Gods Church and our ſuperiors in the ſame. to them vve ſubmit our ſelues, and this, and all other our labours, to be in part or in the vvhole, reformed, corrected, altered, or quite aboliſhed: moſt humbly deſiring pardon if through our ignorance, temeritie, or other humane infirmitie, vve haue any vvhere miſtaken the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt. further promiſing, that if hereafter we eſpie any of our ovvne errors, or if any other, either frende of good vvil, or aduerſarie for deſire of reprehenſion, ſhal open vnto vs the ſame: vve vvil not (as Proteſtants doe) for defenſe of our eſtimation, or of pride and contention, by vvrangling vvordes vvilfully perſiſt in them, but be moſt glad to heare of them, and in the next edition or othervviſe to correct them: for it is truth that vve ſeeke for, and Gods honour: which being had either by good intention, or by occaſion, al is vvel.The religious care & ſinceritie obſerued in this tranſlatiō. This vve profeſſe onely, that vve haue done our endeuour vvith praier, much feare and trembling, leſt vve ſhould dangerouſly erre in ſo ſacred, high, and diuine a vvorke: that vve haue done it vvith all faith, diligence, and ſinceritie: that vve haue vſed no partialitie for the diſaduantage of our aduerſaries, nor no more licence then is ſufferable in tranſlating of holy Scriptures: continually keeping our ſelues as neere as is poſſible, to our text & to the very vvordes and phraſes vvhich by long vſe are made venerable,See S. Auguſt. li. 3. confeſ. c. 5. though to ſome propſiane or delicate cares they may ſeeme more hard to barbarous, * as the whole ſtyle of Scripture doth lightly to ſuch at the begining: acknowledging with S. Hierom, that in other writings it is ynough to giue in trāſlation, ſenſe for ſenſe, but that in Scriptures, leſt vve miſſe the ſenſe, vve muſt keepe the very
 vvordes. Ad Pammach. epiſtola 101. ca. 2 in princip. Vve muſt, ſaith S. Auguſtine, ſpeake according to a ſet rule, leſt licence of wordes breede ſome vvicked opinion concerning the thinges conteined vnder the vvordes. De ciuitate lib. 10. cap, 12.The auncient fathers kept religiouſly the very barbariſmes of the vulgar Latin text. Vvhereof our holy forefathers and auncient Doctors had ſuch a religious care, that they vvould not change the very barbariſmes of incongruities of ſpeach vvhich by long vſe had preuailed in the old readings or recitings of ſcriptures▪ as,Mat. 22. 
               Neque uubent neque nubentur, in Tertullian li. 4. in Marcion. in S. Hilarie in c. 22 Mat.Mar. 8. and in al the fathers. Qui me confuſus fuerit, confundar & ego eum, in S. Cyprian ep. 63 nu. 7. Talis enim nobis decebat ſacerdos (vvhich vvas an elder tranſlation then the vulgar Latin that novv is) in S. Ambroſe c. 3 de fugaſeculi.
               Hebr. 7. and S. Hierom him ſelf, vvho othervviſe corrected the Latin tranſlation that vvas vſed before his time, yet keepeth religiouſly (as him ſelf profeſſeth Praefat.
               Mat. 6. 10. 22. 
               in 4 Euang. ad Damaſum) theſe and the like ſpeaches, Nonne vos magis pluris eſtis illis? and, filius hominis non venit miniſtrari, ſed miniſtrare: and, Neque nubent, neque nubentur:
               Lu
                     •
                  . 13. in his commentaries vpon theſe places. and, Non capit Prophetam perire extra Hieruſalem, in his commentaries in c. 2. Ioël. ſub finem. And S. Auguſtine, vvho is moſt religious in al theſe phraſes, counteth it a ſpecial pride and infirmitie in thoſe that haue a litle learning in tonges, & none in thinges, that they eaſily take offenſe of the ſimple ſpeaches or ſoleciſmes in the ſcriptures. de doctrina Chriſt. li. 2. cap, 13. See alſo the ſame holy father li. 3 de doct. Chriſt. c. 3. and tract. 2 in Euang. Ioan. But of the maner of our tranſlation more anon.
            Now, though the text thus truely tranſlated, might ſufficiently, in the ſight of the learned and al indifferent men,Of the ANNOTATIONS, vvhy they vvere made, & vvhat matter they cō
                  teine. both controule the aduerſaries corruptions, and proue that the holy Scripture vvhereof they haue made ſo great vauntes, make nothing for their nevv opinions, but vvholy for the Catholike Churches beleefe and doctrine, in all the pointes of difference betvvixt vs: yet knovving that the good and ſimple may eaſily be ſeduced by ſome fevv obſtinate perſons of perdition (vvhom vve ſee giuen ouer into a reprobat ſenſe, to whom the Goſpel,2 Cor. 2. vvhich in it ſelf is the odour of life to ſaluation, is made the odour of death to damnation, ouer vvhoſe eies for ſinne & diſobedience God ſuffereth a veile or couer to lie, whiles they read the nevv Teſtamēt, euen as the Apoſtle ſaite the Ievves haue til this day,2 Cor. 3. in reading of the old, that as the one ſort can not finde Chriſt in the Scriptures, reade they neuer ſo much, ſo the other can not finde the Catholike Church nor her doctrine there neither) and finding by experience this ſaying of S. Auguſtine to be moſt true,De doct
                     •
                  . Chriſt. lib. 3. cap. 10. 
               If the preiudice of any erreneous perſuaſion preoccupate the mind, vvhatſoeuer the Scripture hath to the contrarie, men take it for a figuratiue ſpeach: for theſe cauſes, and ſomevvhat to help the faithful reader in the difficulties of diuers places, vve haue alſo ſet forth reaſonable large ANNOTATIONS, thereby to ſhevv the ſtudious reader in moſt places perteining to the controuerſies of this time, both the heretical corruptions and falſe deductions, & alſo the Apoſtolike tradition, the expoſitions of the holy fathers, the decrees of the Catholike Church and moſt auncient Coūcels: which meanes vvhoſoeuer truſteth not, for the ſenſe of holy Scriptures, but had rather folow his priuate iudgemēt or the arrogat ſpirit of theſe Sectaries, he ſhal vvorthily through his owne wilfulnes be deceiued. beſeeching all men to looke vvith diligence, ſinceritie, and indifferencie, into the caſe that concerneth no leſſe then euery ones eternal ſaluation or damnation.
            
               Vvhich if he doe, vve doubt not but he ſhal to his great contentment, find the holy Scriptures moſt clerely and inuincibly to proue the articles of Catholike
 doctrine againſt our aduerſaries, vvhich perhaps he had thought before this diligent ſearch, either not to be conſonant to Gods vvord, or at leaſt not conteined in the ſame,
               Hereſies make Catholikes more diligent to ſearch and finde the ſenſes of holy Scripture for refelling of the ſame. 
               and finally he ſhal proue this ſaying of S. Auguſtine to be moſt true.
               In Pſal. 67. propè finem. Multi ſenſus &c. Many ſenſes of holy Scriptures lie hidden, and are knowen to ſome fevv of greater vnderſtanding: neither are they at any time auouched more commodiouſly and acceptably then at ſuch times, vvhen the care to anſvver heretikes doth force men there vnto. For then, euen they that be negligent in matters of ſtudie and learning, ſhaking of ſluggiſhnes, are ſtirred vp to diligent hearing, that the Aduerſaries may be refelled. Againe, hovv many ſenſes of holy Scriptures, cōcerning Chriſtes Godhead, haue been auouched againſt Photinus: hovv many, of his Manhod, againſt Manichaeus: hovv many, of the Trinitie, againſt Sabellius: hovv many, of the vnitie in Trinitie, againſt the Arrians, Eunomias, Macedonians: hovv many, of the Catholike Church diſperſed through out the vvhole vvorld, and of the mixture of good and bad in the ſame vntil the end of the vvorld, againſt the Donatiſtes and Luciferians and other of the like errour: hovv many againſt al other heretikes, vvhich it vvere to long to rehearſe? Of vvhich ſenſes and expoſitions of holy Scripture the approued authors and auouchers, ſhould othervviſe either not be knovven as al, or not ſo vvel knovven, as the contradictions of proud heretikes haue made them.
            
               Thus he ſaith of ſuch thinges as not ſeeming to be in holy Scriptures to the ignorant or heretikes, yet in deede be there. But in other pointes doubted of, that in deede are not decîded by Scripture, he giueth vs this goodly rule to be folovved in all, as he exemplifieth in one. Then doe vve hold (ſaith he) the veritie of the Scriptures, vvhen vve doe that vvhich novv hath ſeemed good to the Vniuerſal Church, vvhich the authoritie of the Scriptures them ſelues doth cōmend: ſo that, foraſmuch as the holy Scripture can not deceiue, vvhoſoeuer is afraid to be deceiued vvith the obſcuritie of queſtions, let him therein aſke counſel of the ſame CHVRCH, vvhich the holy Scripture moſt certainely and euidently ſhevveth and pointeth vnto.Many cauſe
                     •
                   vvhy this nevv Teſtament is trāſlated according to the auncient vulgar Latin text. 
               Aug. li. 1. Cont. Creſcon. c. 13.
            NOVV TO GIVE thee alſo intelligence in particular, moſt gentle Reader, of ſuch thinges as it behoueth thee ſpecially to knovv concerning our Tranſlation: Vve tranſlate the old vulgar Latin text, not the common Greeke text, for theſe cauſes.
            1. It is ſo auncient,It is moſt auncient. that it vvas vſed in the Church of God aboue 1300 yeres agoe, as appeareth by the fathers of thoſe times.
            2. It is that (by the common receiued opinion and by al probabilitie) vvhich S. Hierom aftervvard corrected according to the Greeke,Corrected by S. Hierom. by the appointment of Damaſus then Pope, as he maketh mention in his preface before the foure Euangeliſtes, vnto the ſaid Damaſus: and in Catalogo in fine, and ep. 102.
            3. Conſequently it is the ſame vvhich S. Auguſtine ſo commendeth and allovveth in an Epiſtle to S. Hierom.Ep. 10.
               Commēded by S. Auguſtine.
            
            4. It is that,Vſed and expounded by the fathers. vvhich for the moſt part euer ſince hath been vſed in the Churches ſeruice, expounded in ſermons, alleaged and interpreted in the Commentaries and vvritings of the auncient fathers of the Latin Church.
            5. The holy Councel of Trent,Only authentical, by the holy Councel of Trent. for theſe and many other important conſiderations,Seſſ. 4. hath declared and defined this onely of al other latin tranſlations, to be authentical, and ſo onely to be vſed and taken in publike leſſons, diſputations, preachings, and expoſitions, and that no man preſume vpon any pretence to reiect or refuſe the ſame.
            6. It is the graueſt,Moſt graue, leaſt partial. ſincereſt, of greateſt maieſtie, leaſt partialitie, as being vvithout al reſpect of controuerſies and contentions, ſpecially theſe of our
 time, as appeareth by thoſe places vvhich Eraſmus and others at this day tranſlate much more to the aduantage of the Catholike cauſe.
            7. It is ſo exact and preciſe according to the Greeke,Preciſe in folovving the Greeke. both the phraſe and the word, that delicate Heretikes therfore reprehend it of rudene
                  •
               . And that it follovveth the Greeke far more exactly then the Proteſtants tranſlations, beſide infinite other places, we appeale to theſe. Tit. 3. 14. Curent bonis operibus praeeſſe. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Engl. bib. 1577, to mainteine good vvorkes. and Hebr. 10, 20. Viam nobis initiatut, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Engliſh Bib. he prepared. So in theſe vvordes, Iuſtificationes, Traditiones, Idola &c. In al vvhich they come not neere the Greeke, but auoid it of purpoſe.
            8. The Aduerſaries them ſelues,Preferred by Beza him ſelf. namely Beza, preferre it before al the reſt. Inpraefat. no. Teſt an. 1556. And againe he ſaith, that the old Interpreter tranſlated very religiouſly. Annot. in 1. Luc. v. 1.
            9. In the reſt, there is ſuch diuerſitie and diſſenſion, and no end of reprehending one an other,Al the reſt miſliked of the Sectaries them ſelues, eche reprehending an other. and tranſlating euery man according to his fantaſie, that
Co
                     •
                  hla. c. 11 de Cano. Script. authorit
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     ••
                  .Luther ſaid, If the vvorld ſhould ſtand any long time, vve muſt receiue againe (which he thought abſurd) the Decrees of Councels, for preſeruing the vnitie of faith, becauſe of ſo diuers interpretations of the Scripture. And Beza (in the place aboue mentioned) noteth the itching ambition of his fellovv-tranſlators, that had much rather diſagree and diſſent from the beſt, then ſeeme them ſelues to haue ſaid or vvritten nothing. And Bezas tranſlation it ſelf, being ſo eſteemed in our countrie, that the GeneuaThe nevv Teſt. printed thē yere 1580. in the title. Engliſh Teſtaments be tranſlated according to the ſame, yet ſometime goeth ſo vvide from the Greeke, and from the meaning of the holy Ghoſt, that them ſelues which proteſt to trāſlate it, dare not folow it. For example, Luc. 3, 36. They haue put theſe wordes, The ſonne of Cainan, which he wittingly and wilfully left out: and Act. 1, 14. they ſay, Vvith the vvomen, agreably to the vulgar Latin: where he ſaith, Cum vxoribus, vvith their vviues.
            
            10. It is not onely better then al other Latin trāſlations,It is 
                     〈◊〉
                   then the vulgar Greeke text it ſelf. but then the Greeke text it ſelf, in thoſe places where they diſagree.
            The proofe hereof is euident, becauſe moſt of the auncient Heretikes were Grecians, & therfore the Scriptures in Greeke were more corrupted by them, as the auncient fathers often complaine. Tertullian noteth the Greeke text which is at this day (1 Cor. 19. 47) to be an old corruption of Marcion the Heretike,
               The auncient fathers for proofe therof, and the Aduerſaries them ſelues. and the truth to be as in our vulgar latin,Li. 5 cont. Marcionō. 
               Secundus homo de coelo coeleſtis, The ſecond man from heauen heauenly. So reade otherAmbroſe. Hierom. auncient fathers, and Eraſmus thinketh it muſt needes be ſo, and Caluin him ſelf folovveth it Inſtit. li. 2. c. 13. parag. 2.Li. 1, cont. louin. c. 7. Againe S. Hierom noteth that the Greeke text (1 Cor. 7, 33) which is at this day, is not the Apoſtolical veritie or the true text of the Apoſtle: but that which is in the vulgar Latin, Qui cum vxore eſt, ſolicitus eſt quae ſunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori, & diuiſus eſt. He that is vvith a vvife, is careful of vvorldly things, hovv he may pleaſe his vvife, and is deuided or distracted. The Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie called the Tripartite,Li. 12 c. 4. noteth the Greeke text that now is (1 Io. 4, 3) to be an old corruption of the auncient Greeke copies, by the Neſtorian Heretikes, & the true reading to be as in our vulgar Latin, Omnis ſpiritus qui ſoluit IESVM, ex Deo non eſt. Euery ſpirit that diſſolueth IESVS, is not of God: and Beza confeſſeth that Socrates in his Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie readeth ſo in the Greeke,Li. 7. c. 32. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                &c.
            But the proofe is more pregnant out of the Aduerſaries them ſelues. They forſake the Greeke text as corrupted, and tranſlate according to the vulgar Latin,
 namely Beza and his ſcholers the Engliſh tranſlatours of the Bible,The Caluiniſtes them ſelues oftē forſake the Greeke as corrupt, and tranſlate according to the aūcient vulgar latin text. in theſe places. Hebr. chap. 9, verſ. 1. ſaying, The firſt couenant, for that vvhich is in the Greeke.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               The firſt tabernacle. vvhere they put, couenant, not as of the text, but in an other letter, as to be vnderſtood, according to the vulgar Latin, vvhich moſt ſincerely leaueth it out altogether, ſaying, Habuit quidem &prius inſtificationes &c. The former alſo in deede had iuſtifications &c. Againe, Ro. 11, verſ. 21. They tranſlate not according to the Greeke text,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Temporiſeruientes, ſeruing the time, vvhich Beza ſaith muſt needes be a corruption: but according to the vulgar Latin, Domino ſeruientes, ſeruing our Lord. Againe, Apoc. 11, verſ. 2. they tranſlate not the Greeke text, Atrium quod intra templum eſt, the court vvhich is vvithin the teme: but cleane contrarie, according to the vulgar Latin, vvhich Beza ſaith is the true reading, Atrium quod eſt foris templum, the court vvhich is vvithout the temple. Onely in this laſt place, one Engliſh Bible of the yere 1562, folovveth the errour of the Greeke. Againe, 2 Tim. 2. verſ. 14. they adde, but, more then is in the Greeke, to make the ſenſe more cōmodious and eaſie, according as it is in the vulgar Latin.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                Again, Ia. 5, 12. they leaue the Greeke, and folovv the vulgar Latin, ſaying, leſt you fall into condemnation. I doubt not (ſaith Beza) but this is the true and ſincere reading, and I ſuſpect the corruption in the Greeke came thus &c. It vvere infinite to ſet dovvne al ſuch places, vvhere the Aduerſaries (ſpecially Beza) folovv the old vulgar Latin and the Greeke copie agreable therevnto, condemning the Greeke text that novv is, of corruption.
            Againe, Eraſmus the beſt tranſlatour of al the later,Superfluities in the Greeke▪ vvhich Eraſmus calleth trifling and raſh additions. by Bezas iudgement, ſaith, that the Greeke ſometime hath ſuperfluities corruptly added to the text of holy Scripture. as Mat. 6. to the end of the Pater noſter, theſe vvordes, Becauſe thine is the kingdom, the povver, and the glorie, for euer-more. Vvhich he calleth, nugas, trifles raſhly added to our Lords praier, and reprehendeth Valla for blaming the old vulgar Latin becauſe it hath it not, likevviſe Ro. 11, 6. theſe vvordes in the Greeke, and not in the vulgar latin: But if of vvorkes, it is not novv grace: othervviſe the vvorke is no more a vvorke. and Mar. 10, 29. theſe vvordes, or vvife, and ſuch like.See No. Teſt. Graec. Rob. Stephani in folio, and Criſ
                     •
                  ins. Yea the Greeke text in theſe ſuperfluities condemneth it ſelf, and iuſtifieth the vulgar Latin excedingly: as being marked through out in a number of places, that ſuch and ſuch vvordes or ſentences are ſuperfluous, in al which places out vulgar Latin hath no ſuch thing, but is agreable to the Greeke vvhich remaineth after the ſuperfluities be taken avvay. For example, that beforementioned in the end of the Pater noſter, hath a marke of ſuperfluitie in the Greeke text thus 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ and Marc. 6, 11 theſe vvordes, Amen I ſay to you, it ſhal be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrhe in the day of iudgement, then for that citie. and Mat. 20, 22. theſe vvordes, And be baptized vvith the baptiſme that I am baptized vvith? Vvhich is alſo ſuperfluouſly repeated againe verſ. 23. and ſuch like places exceding many: which being noted ſuperfluous in the Greeke, and being not in the vulgar Latin, proue the Latin in thoſe places to be better, truer and more ſincere then the Greeke.
            Vvherevpon vve conclude of theſe premiſſes, that it is no derogation to the vulgar Latin text, which we tranſlate, to diſagree from the Greeke text, wheras it may notwithſtanding be not onely as good,The vulgar Latin tranſlation agreeth vvith the beſt Greeke copies, by Bezas ovvne iudgement. but alſo better,Beza prafat. No. Teſt. 1556 See him alſo Anno. in 13. Act. v. 20. and this the Aduerſarie him ſelf, their greateſt and lateſt tranſlatour of the Greeke, doth auouch againſt Eraſmus in behalfe of the old vulgar Latin trāſlation, in theſe notorious vvordes. Hovv vnvvorthely and vvithout cauſe (ſaith he) doth Eraſmus blame the old Interpreter as diſſenting from the Greeke? he diſſented, I graunt, from thoſe Greeke copies vvhich he had gotten: but vve haue found, not in one place, that the ſame interpretation
 vvhich be blameth, is grounded vpon the authoritie of other Greeke copies, & thoſe moſt a
                     •
                  ncient. Yea in ſome number of places vve haue obſerued, that the reading or the Latin text of the old Interpreter, though it agree not ſometime vvith our Greeke copies yet it is much more conuenient, for that it ſeemeth be folovved ſome better and truer copie. Thus far Beza. In vvhich vvordes he vnwittingly, but moſt truely, iuſtifieth and defendeth the old vulgar Tranſlation againſt him ſelf and al other cauillers, that accuſe the ſame, becauſe it is not alwaies agreable to the Greeke text: Vvhereas it vvas tranſlated out of other Greeke copies (partly extant, partly not extant at this day) either as good and as auncient,Vvhen the Fathers ſay, that the Latin text muſt yeld to the Greeke, & be corrected by it, they meane the true and vncorrupted Greeke text. or better and more auncient, ſuch as S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh of, calling them doctiores & diligentiores, the more learned and diligent Greeke copies, vvhervnto the latin tranſlations that faile in any place, muſt needes yeld. Li. 2. de doct. Chriſt. c. 15.
            And if it were not to long to exemplifie and proue this, which would require a treatiſe by it ſelf, we could ſhew by many and moſt cleere examples through out the new Teſtament, theſe ſundrie meanes of iuſtifying the old tranſlation.
            1 Firſt, if it agree with the Greeke text (as commonly it doth, and in the greateſt places cōcerning the controuerſies of our time, it doth moſt certainely) ſo far the Aduerſaries haue not to complaine:The vulgar Latin Tranſlatiō, is many waies iuſtified by moſt auncient Greeke copies, & the Fathers. vnles they wil complaine of the Greeke alſo, as they doe Ia. 4. v▪
                2. and 1 Pet. 3. v. 21. where the vulgar Latin foloweth exactly the Greeke text, ſaying, Occiditis: and▪ 
               Quod vos ſimilis formae, &c. But Beza in both places correcteth the Greeke text alſo as falſe.
            2 If it diſagree here and there from the Greeke text, it agreeth with an other Greeke copie ſet in the margent, whereof ſee examples in the foreſaid Greeke Teſtaments of Robert Steuens and Criſpin through out▪ namely 2 Pet. 1, 10. Satague vt per bona opera certam veſtram vocationem faciatis. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and Marc. 8. v. 7. Et ipſos benedixit, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            3 If theſe marginal Greeke copies be thought leſſe authentical then the Greeke text, the Aduerſaries them ſelues tel vs the cōtrarie, vvho in their tranſlations often folow the marginal copies, and forſake the Greeke text: as in the examples aboue mentioned Ro. 11. Apoc. 11. 2 Tim. 2. Iac. 5. &c. it is euident.
            4 If al Eraſmus Greeke copies haue not that which is in the vulgar Latin, Beza had copies which haue it, and thoſe moſt auncient (as he ſaith) & better. And if al Bezas copies faile in this point and wil not helpe vs, Gagneie the Frenche kings preacher, and he that might commaund in al the kings libraries, he found Greeke copies that haue iuſt according to the vulgar Latin: & that in ſuch place as would ſeeme otherwiſe leſſe probable▪ as Iac. 3. verſ. 5. Ecce quantus ignis quam magnam ſilum incendit! Behold hovv much fire vvhat a great vvood it kindleth! A man would thinke it muſt be rather as in the Greeke text,Codex veronenſis. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               A litle fire vvhat a great vvood it kindleth! But an approued auncient Greeke copie alleaged by Gagneie, hath as it is in the vulgar Latin. And if Gagneis copies alſo faile ſometime, there Beza and Criſpin ſupply Greeke copies fully agreable to the vulgar Latin. as ep. Iudae verſ. 5. Scientes ſemel omnia, quoniam IESVS &c. and verſ 19. Segregant ſemetipſos. likewiſe 2 Epheſ 2. Quòd elegerit vos primitias: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in ſome Greeke copies. Gagn. & 2 Cor. 9. Veſtra amulatio, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . ſo hath one Greeke copie. Beza.
            5 If al their copies be not ſufficient, the auncient Greeke fathers had copies and expounded them, agreable to our vulgar Latin as 1 Tim. 6, 20. Prophanat vocum nouitates.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                So readeth S. Chryſoſtom and expoundeth it againſt Heretical & erroneous nouelties. Yet now we know no Greeke copie that readeth ſo.
 Likewiſe Io. 10, 29. Pater meus quod mihi dedit maius omnibus eſt.
               The Greeke fathers. ſo readeth S. Cyril and expoundeth it li. 7 in Io. c. 10. likewiſe 1 Io. 4, 3. Omnie ſpiritus qui ſoluit IESVM, ex Deo non eſt. ſo readeth S. Irenaeus li. 3. c. 18. S. Auguſtine tract. 6. in Io. S. Leo epiſt. 10. c. 5. beſide Socrates in his Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie, li. 7. c. 22. and the Tripartite li. 12. c. 4. vvho ſay plainely, that this was the old and the true reading of this place in the Greeke. And in what Greeke copie extant at this day is there this text Io. 5, 2. Eſt autē Hieroſolymis probatica piſcina? and yet S. Chryſoſtom, S. Cyril, and Theophylacte read ſo in the Greeke, and Beza ſaith it is the better reading▪ and ſo is the Latin text of the Romane Maſſe booke iuſtified, and eight other Latin copies, that reade ſo▪ for our vulgar Latin here, is according to the Greeke text, Super probatica. & Ro. 5. v. 17. Donationis & iuſtitiae. ſo readeth Theodorete in Greeke.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                & Lu. 2. v. 14. Origen & S. Chryſoſtom reade, Hominibus bonae voluntatis, and Beza liketh it better then the Greeke text that novv is.
            6. Vvhere there is no ſuch ſigne or token of any auncient Greeke copie in the fathers, yet theſe later Interpreters tel vs, that the old Interpreter did folovv ſome other Greeke copie. as Marc. 7, 3. Niſi crebro lauerint. Eraſmus thinketh that he did read in the Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , often: and Beza and others commend his coniecture, yea and the Engliſh Bibles are ſo tranſlated. vvhereas novv it is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                vvhich ſignifieth the length of the arme vp to the elbovv. And vvho vvould not thinke that the Euangeliſt ſhould ſay, The Phariſees vvaſh often, becauſe othervviſe they eate not, rather then thus, Vnles they vvaſh vp to the elbovv, they eate not?
            
            7. If al ſuch coniectures,The Latin fathers. and al the Greeke fathers help vs not, yet the Latin fathers vvith great conſent vvil eaſily iuſtifie the old vulgar trāſlation, vvhich for the moſt part they folovv and expound.See Annot Lenan. in No. Teſt. and Annot. Luca Brugenſis in biblia. as, Io. 7, 39. Nondum erat ſpiritus datus. ſo readeth S. Auguſtine li. 4 de Trinit. c. 20. and li. 83. Quaeſt. q. 62. and tract. 52 in Ioan. Leo ſer. 2 de Pentecoſte. Vvhoſe authoritie vvere ſufficient, but in deede Didymus alſo a Greeke Doctor readeth ſo li. 2 de Sp. ſancto, tranſlated by S. Hierom, and a Greeke copie in the Vaticane, and the Syriake nevv Teſtament. Likevviſe Io. 21, 22. Sic eum volo manere. ſo reade S. Ambroſe, in Pſal. 45. & Pſal. 118. octonario Reſh. s. Auguſtine and Ven. Bede vpon S. Iohns Goſpel.
            8. And laſtly, if ſome other Latin fathers of auncient time, reade othervviſe, either here or in other places, not al agreing vvith the text of our vulgar Latin, the cauſe is, the great diuerſitie and multitude that vvas then of Latin copies, (vvhereof S. Hierom complaineth) til this one vulgar Latin grevv onely into vſe.Praefat. in 4. Euang. ad Damaſum. Neither doth their diuers reading make more for the Greeke, then for the vulgar Latin, differing oftentimes from both. as vvhen S. Hierom in this laſt place readeth, Si ſic eum volomanere, li. 1. adu. Iouin. it is according to no Greeke copie novv extant. And if yet there be ſome doubt, that the readings of ſome Greeke or Latin fathers, differing from the vulgar Latin, be a checke or condemnation to the ſame: let Beza, that is, let the Aduerſarie him ſelf, tel vs his opinion in this caſe alſo.Praefat. citata. 
               Vvhoſoeuer, ſaith he, ſhal take vpon him to correct theſe things (ſpeaking of the vulgar Latin tranſlation) out of the auncient fathers vvritings, either Greeke or Latin, vnles he doe it very circumſpectly and aduiſedly, he ſhal ſurely corrupt al rather then amend it, becauſe it is not to be thought, that as often as they cited any place, they did alvvaies looke into the booke, or number euery vvord. As if he ſhould ſay, Vve may not by and by thinke that the vulgar Latin is faultie and to be corrected, vvhen vve read othervviſe in the fathers either Greeke or Latin, becauſe they did not alvvaies exactly cite the vvordes, but folovved ſome
 commodious and godly ſenſe thereof.
            Thus then vve ſee that by al meanes the old vulgar Latin tranſlation is approued good,The fevv and final faultes negligently crept into the vulgar Latin tranſlation. and better then the Greeke text it ſelf, and that there is no cauſe vvhy it ſhould giue place to any other text, copies, or readings. Marie if there be any faultes euidently crept in by thoſe that heretofore wrote or copied out the Scriptures (as there be ſome) them vve graunt no leſſe, then vve vvould graunt faultes novv a daies committed by the Printer, and they are exactly noted of Catholike vvriters, namely in al Plantins Bibles ſet forth by the Diuines of Louan:Seſs. 4. and the holy Councel of Trent vvilleth that the vulgar Latin text be in ſuch pointes throughly mended, & ſo to be moſt authentical. Such faultes are theſe, Inſide, for in fine: Praeſcientiam, for, praeſentiam: Suſcipiens, for, Suſpiciens: and ſuch like very rare. vvhich are euident corruptions made by the copiſtes, or grovven by the ſimilitude of vvordes. Theſe being taken avvay, vvhich are no part of thoſe corruptions and differences before talked of, vve tranſlate that text vvhich is moſt ſincere, and in our opinion and as vve haue proued, incorrupt. The Aduerſaries contrarie, tranſlate that text, vvhich them ſelues confeſſe both by their vvritings and doings, to be corrupt in a number of places, & more corrupt then our vulgar Latin, as is before declared.
            And if vve vvould here ſtand to recite the places in the Greeke vvhich Beza pronounceth to be corrupted,The Caluiniſts confeſſing the Greeke to be moſt corrupt, yet tranſlate that only, and hold that only for authentical Scripture. vve ſhould make the Reader to vvonder, hovv they can either ſo plead othervviſe for the Greeke text, as though there vvere no other truth of the nevv Teſtament but that: or hovv they tranſlate onely that (to deface, as they thinke, the old vulgar Latin) vvhich them ſelues ſo ſhamfully diſgrace, more then the vulgar Latin, inuenting corruptions vvhere none are, nor can be, in ſuch vniuerſal conſent of al both Greeke and Latin copies. For example, Mat. 10. The firſt Simon, Vvho is called Peter. I thinke (ſaith Beza) this vvord 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,In Annot. No. Teſt. an. 1556. 
               firſt, hath been added to the text of ſome that vvould eſtabliſh Peters Primacie. Againe Luc. 22. The Chalice, that is ſhed for you. It is moſt likely (ſaith he) that theſe vvordes being ſometime but a marginal note, came by corruption out of the margent into the text. Againe Act. 7. Figures vvhich they made, to adore them. It may be ſuſpected (ſaith he) that theſe vvordes, as many other, haue crept by corruption into the text out of the margent. And 1 Cor. 15. He thinketh the Apoſtle ſaid not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , victorie, as it is in al Greeke copies, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , contention. And Act. 13. he calleth it a manifeſt errour, that in the Greeke it is, 400 yeres, for, 300. And Act. 7. v. 16. he reckeneth vp a vvhole catalogue of corruptions. namely Marc. 12. v. 42. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Vvhich is a farthing: and Act. 8. v. 26. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , This is deſert. and Act. 7. v. 16 the name of Abraham, & ſuch like. Al vvhich he thinketh to haue been added or altered into the Greeke text by corruption.
            But among other places, he laboureth excedingly to proue a great corruption Act. 7. v. 14. vvhere it is ſaid (according to the Septuaginta, that is, the Greeke text of the old Teſtament) that Iacob vvent dovvne into Aegypt vvith 75 ſoules. And Luc. 3. v. 36. he thinketh theſe vvordes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Vvhich vvas of Cainan,
               They ſtanding preciſely vpon the Hebrue of the old, and Greeke text of the nevv Teſtament, muſt of force denie the one of them. to be ſo falſe, that he leaueth them cleane out inAn. D
                     •
                  . 1556 and 1565. both his editions of the nevv Teſtament: ſaying, that he is bold ſo to doe, by the authoritie of Moyſes. Vvhereby he vvil ſignifie, that it is not in the Hebrue text of Moyſes or of the old Teſtament, and therfore it is ſelfe in the Greeke of the nevv Teſtament. Vvhich conſequence of theirs (for it is common among them and concerneth al Scriptures) if it vvere true, al places of the Greeke text of the nevv Teſtament, cited out of the old according to the Septuaginta, and not according
 to the Hebrue (vvhich they knovv are very many) ſhould be falſe, and ſo by tying them ſelues onely to the Hebrue in the old Teſtamēt, they are forced to forſake the Greeke of the nevv: or if they vvil mainteine the Greeke of the nevv, they muſt forſake ſometime the Hebrue in the old. but this argument ſhal be forced againſt them els vvhere.
            By this litle, the Reader may ſee vvhat gay patrones they are of the Greeke text,They ſay the Greeke is more corrupt then vve vvil graunt them. and how litle cauſe they haue in their owne iudgements to tranſlate it, or vaunt of it, as in derogation of the vulgar Latin tranſlation, & how eaſily we might anſwer them in a word, why we tranſlate, not the Greeke: forſooth becauſe it is ſo infinitely corrupted, But the truth is, we do by no meanes graūt it ſo corrupted as they ſay, though in compariſon we know it leſſe ſincere & incorrupt then the vulgar Latin, and for that cauſe and others before alleaged we preferre the ſaid Latin, and haue tranſlated it.
            If yet there remaine one thing which perhaps they wil ſay, when they can not anſwer our reaſons aforeſaid: to wit, that we preferre the vulgar Latin before the Greeke text,We preferre not the vulgar Latin text, as making more for vs. becauſe the Greeke maketh more againſt vs: we proteſt that as for other cauſes we preferre the Latin, ſo in this reſpect of making for vs or againſt vs, we allow the Greeke as much as the Latin, yea in ſundrie places more then the Latin, being aſſured that they haue not one, and that we haue many aduantages in the Greeke more then in the Latin, as by the Annotations of this new Teſtament ſhal euidently appeare:The Greeke text maketh for vs more then the vulgar Latin. namely in al ſuch places where they dare not tranſlate the Greeke, becauſe it is for vs & againſt them. as when they tranſlate, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ordinances, and not, iuſtification, and that of purpoſe as Beza confeſſeth Luc. 1, 6. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ordinances, or inſtructions, and not traditions, in the better part. 2 Theſſ. 2, 15. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Elders, and not Prieſts: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , images rather then idols. and eſpecially when S. Luke in the Greeke ſo maketh for vs (the vulgar Latin being indifferent for them and vs) that Beza ſaith it is a corruption crept out of the margent into the text.Luc. 22. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     •
                  0. Vvhat neede theſe abſurd diuiſes and falſe dealings with the Greeke text,For the real preſence. if it made for them more then for vs, yea if it made not for vs againſt them? But that the Greeke maketh more for vs,For faſting. ſee 1 Cor. 7. In the Latin, Defraude not one another, but for a time, that you giue your ſelues to prayer. in the Greeke, to faſting and prayer. Act. 10, 30. in the Latin Cornelius ſaith, from the fourth day paſt vntil this houre I vvas praying in my houſe, and behold a man &c. in the Greeke, I vvas faſting, and praying. 1 Io. 5, 18, in the Latin,For free vvil. 
               Vve knovv that euery one vvhich is borne of God, ſinneth not. but the generation of God preſerueth him &c. in the Greeke, but he that is borne of God preſerueth him ſelf. Apoc. 22, 14. in the Latin, Bleſſed are they that vvaſh their garmēts in the bloud of the lambe &c.Againſt only faith. in the Greeke, Bleſſed are they that doe his commaundements. Rom. 8, 38. Certus ſum &c.
               Againſt only faith. 
               I am ſure that neither death nor life, nor other creature is able to ſeparate vs from the charitie of God. as though he vvere aſſured, or we might and ſhould aſſure our ſelues of our predeſtination,Againſt ſpecial aſſurance of ſaluation. in the Greeke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I am probably perſuaded that neither death nor life &c. In the Euangeliſts about the Sacrifice and B. Sacrament, in the Latin thus: This is my bloud that ſhal be ſhed for you: and in S. Paul, This is my body vvhich ſhal be betraied or deliuered for you: both being referred to the time to come and to the ſacrifice on the croſſe.For the ſacrifice of Chriſts body and bloud. in the Greeke, This is my bloud vvhich is ſhed for you: and, my body vvhich is broken for you: both being referred to that preſent time when Chriſt gaue his body and bloud at his ſupper, then ſheading the one and breaking the other; that is, ſacrificing it ſacramentally and myſtically. Loe theſe and the like our aduantages in the Greeke, more then in the Latin.
            
                But is the vulgar tranſlation for al this Papiſtical,The Protātats condemning the old vulgar tranſlation as making for vs, cōdemns them ſelues & therfore do we folow it? (for ſo ſome of them call it, and ſay it is Againſt D. Sand. Rocke pag. 147. See Kemniſ. in exam. Cōc. Trid. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 4. the worſt of al other.) If it be, the Greeke (as you ſee) is more, and ſo both Greeke and Latin and conſequently the holy Scripture of the new Teſtament is Papiſtical. Againe if the vulgar Latin be Papiſtical, Papiſtrie is very auncient, and the Church of God for ſo many hundred yeres wherein it hath vſed and allowed this tranſlation, hath been Papiſtical. But wherein it is Papiſtical? forſooth in theſe phraſes and ſpeaches,Mat. 3. & 11. Eph. 5. Luc. 1. Heb. 13. 
               P
                     ••
                  
                  nitentiam agite. Sacramentum hoc magnum eſt. AVE GRATIA PLENA. Talibus hoſtiis promeretur Deus. and ſuch like. Firſt, doth not the Greeke ſay the ſame? ſee the Annotations vpon theſe places. Secondly, could he tranſlate theſe things Papiſtically or partially, or rather prophetically, ſo long before they were in controuerſie? thirdly, doth he not ſay for p
                     ••
                  nitentiam agite, in an other place, p
                     ••
                  nitemini:
               Mar. 1. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Luc. 16. v. 20. and doth he not tranſlate other myſteries, by the vvord, Sacramentum, as Apoc. 17, Sacramentum mulieris: and as he tranſlateth one vvord, Gratia plena, ſo doth he not tranſlate the very like vvord, plenus vlceribus, vvhich them ſelues do folow alſo? is this alſo Papiſtrie? Vvhen he ſaid Heb. 10, 29. Quanto deteriora merebitus ſupplicia &c. and they like it vvel ynough:It is void of al partialitie. might he not haue ſaid according to the ſame Greeke word, Vigilate vt mereamini fugere iſta omnia & ſtare ante filium hominis. Luc. 21, 36. and, Qui merebuntur ſaculum illud & reſurrectionem exmortuis &c. Luc. 10, 35. and, Tribulationes quas ſuſtinetis, vt mereamini regnum, Dei, pro quo et patimini. 2. Theſſ. 1. 5. Might he not (we ſay) if he had partially affecteted the word merite, haue vſed it in al theſe places, according to his and Na. Teſt. 1580. your owne tranſlation of the ſame Greeke word Hebr. 10, 29? Vvhich he doth not, but in al theſe places ſaith ſimply, Vt digni habeamini, and, Qui digni habeb
                     ••
                  tur. and how can it be iudged Papiſtical or partial, when he ſaith,in ep. ad Hebr. 
               Talibus hoſtiis promer
                     •
                  tur Deus, Heb. 13? Vvas Primaſius alſo S. Auguſtines ſcholer, a Papiſt, for vſing this text, and al the reſt, that haue done the like? Vvas S. Cyprian a Papiſt,Ep. 14 & 18. for vſing ſo often this ſpeach, promereri Dominum iuſtis operibus, po
                     •
                  nitentia, &c.? or is there any difference, but that S. Cyptian vſeth it as a deponent more latinly, the other as a paſſiue leſſe finely? Vvas it Papiſtrie, to ſay Senior for Preſbyter, Miniſtrantibus for ſacrificantibus or liturgiam celebrantibus, ſimulacbris for idolis, fides tuaete ſaluum fecit ſometime for ſanum fecit? Or ſhal we thinke he was a Caluiniſt for tranſlating thus, as they thinke he was a Papiſt,The Papiſtrie thereof (as they terme it) is in the very ſentences of the Holy Ghoſt, more, then in the tranſlatiō. when any word ſoundeth for vs?
            Againe, was he a Papiſt in theſe kinde of wordes onely, and was he not in whole ſentences? as,Mat. 16. 10. 20. 
               Tibi dabo claues, &c. Quicquid ſolueris in terrae, erit ſolutum & in coelis. and, Quorum remiſeritis peccata, remittuntur eis. and, Tunc reddet vnicuique ſecundum operaſua. and,Mat. 16. la
                     •
                  . 2. 
               Nunquid poterit ſides ſaluare eum? Ex operibus iuſtificatur homo & non ex fide tantùm. and,1 Tim. 5. 
               Nubere volunt, damnationem habentes, quia primam fidem irritam fecerunt. and,1 Io. 5. 
               Mandata eius grauia non ſunt. and, Aſpexit in remunerationem.
               Heb. 12. Are al theſe and ſuch like, Papiſtical tranſlations, becauſe they are moſt plaine for the Catholike faith which they call Papiſtrie? Are they not word for word as in the Greeke, and the very wordes of the holy Ghoſt? And if in theſe there be no accuſatiō of Papiſtical partiality, vvhy in the other? Laſtly, are the auncient fathers, General Councels, the Churches of al the weſt part, that vſe al theſe ſpeaches & phraſes now ſo many hundred yeres, are they al Papiſtical? Be it ſo, and let vs in the name of God folow them, ſpeake as they ſpake, tranſlate as they tranſlated, interprete as they interpreted, becauſe we beleeue as they beleeued. And thus far for defenſe of the old vulgar Latin tranſlation, and why we tranſlated it before al others: Now of the maner of tranſlating the ſame.
            
                IN THIS OVR TRANSLATION,The maner of this tranſlation, and vvhat hath been obſerued therein. becauſe we wiſh it to be moſt ſincere, as becōmeth a Catholike tranſlation, and haue endeuoured ſo to make it: we are very preciſe & religious in folowing our copie, the old vulgar approued Latin: not onely in ſenſe, which we hope we alwaies doe, but ſometime in the very wordes alſo and phraſes, which may ſeeme to the vulgar Reader & to common Engliſh cares not yet acquainted therewith, rudeneſſe or ignorance but to the diſcrete Reader that deepely weigheth and conſidereth the importance of ſacred wordes and ſpeaches, and how eaſily the voluntarie Tranſlatour may miſſe true ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſt, we doubt not but our conſideration and doing therein, ſhal ſeeme reaſonable and neceſſarie: yea and that al ſortes of Catholike Readers wil in ſhort time thinke that familiar, which at the firſt may ſeeme ſtrange, & wil eſteeme it more, when they ſhalSee the laſt Table a
                     •
                   the end of the booke. otherwiſe be taught to vnderſtand it, then if it were the common knowen Engliſh.
            For example,Certaine vvordes not Engliſh nor as yet familiar in the Engliſh tongue. vve tranſlate often thus, Amen amen, I ſay vnto you. Vvhich as yet ſeemeth ſtrange. but after a while it wil be as familiar, as Amen, in the end of al praiers and Pſalmes. and euen as when we end with, Amen, it ſoundeth far better then, So be it: ſo in the beginning, Amen, Amen, muſt needes by vſe and cuſtom ſound far better, then, Verily verily. Vvhich in deede doth not expreſſe the aſſeueration and aſſurance ſignified in this Hebrue word, beſides that it is the ſolemne and vſual word of our Sauiour See annot. to expreſſe a vehement aſſeueration, and therfore is not changed, neither in the Syriake nor Greeke,Amen. nor vulgar Latin▪ Teſtament,Io. c. 8. v. 34. & Apoc. c. 19. v. 4. but is preſerued and vſed of the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles them ſelues, euen as Chriſt ſpake it, propter ſanctiorem authoritatem▪
                as S. Auguſtine ſaith of this and of Allelu-ia
               Alleluia. 
               for the more holy and ſacred authoritie thereof, li. 2. Doct. Chriſt. c. 11. And therfore do we keepe the word Allelu-ia, Apoc. 19, as it is both in Greeke and Latin yea and in al the Engliſh tranſlations, though in their bookes of common praier they tranſlate it, Praiſe ye the Lord. Againe, if Hoſanna, Raca, Belial, and ſuch like be yet vntranſlated in the Engliſh Bibles, why may not we ſay,No, Teſt. an. 1580. Bib. an. 1577. 
               Corbana,
               Paraſceue. and Paraſceue: ſpecially when they Engliſhing this later thus, the preparation of the Sabboth, put three wordes more into the text, then the Greek word doth ſignifie, Mat, 27, 62. And others ſaying thus, After the day of preparing, make a cold tranſlation and ſhort of the ſenſe: as if they ſhould trāſlate, Sabboth, the reſling. for, Mar. 14. v. 42. 
               Paraſceue is as ſolemne a word for the Sabboth eue, as Sabboth is for the Iewes ſeuenth day. and now among Chriſtians much more ſolemner, taken for Good-friday onely. Theſe wordes then we thought it far better to keepe in the text, and to tel their ſignification in the margent or in a table for that purpoſe, then to diſgrace bothe the text & them with tranſlating them.Paſche. Such are alſo theſe wordes, The Paſche. The feaſt of Azymes.
               Bib. 1577. 
               The bread of Propoſition.
               Mat. 26. 17. Vvhich they tranſlate The Paſſeouer,
               Azymes. 
               The feaſt of ſvvete bread, The ſhevv bread. But if Pentecoſt Act. 2 be yet vntrāſlated in their bibles, and ſeemeth not ſtrange: why ſhould not Paſche and Azymes ſo remaine alſo, being ſolemne feaſtes, as Pentecoſt was? or why ſhould they Engliſh one rather then the other? ſpecially whereas Paſſeouer at the firſt was as ſtrange, as Paſche may ſeeme now, and perhaps as many now vnderſtand Paſche, as Paſſemer. and as for Azymes, when they Engliſh it, the feaſt of ſvveete bread, it is a falſe interpretatiō of the word, & nothing expreſſeth that which belongeth to the feaſt, concerning vnleauened bread. And as for their terme of ſhevv bread, it is very ſtrange and ridiculous, Againe, if Proſelyte be a receiued word in the Engliſh bibles Mat. 23. Act. 2:
               Neophyte. why may not we be bold to ſay, Neophyte. 1 Tim. 3? ſpecially when they tranſlating it into Engliſh, do falſely expreſſe the ſignification
 of the word thus, a yong ſcholer. Vvhereas it is a peculiar word to ſignifie them that were lately baptized, as Catechumenus, ſignifieth the newely inſtructed in faith not yet baptized, who is alſo yong ſcholer rather then the other▪ and many that haue been old ſcholers, may be Neophytes by differring baptiſme. And if Phylacteries be allowed for Engliſh Mat. 23, we hope that Didragmes alſo, Prepuce, Paraclete, and ſuch like, wil eaſily grow to be currant and familiar. And in good ſooth there is in al theſe ſuch neceſſitie, that they can not conueniently be tranſlated.Phil. 3. as when S. Paul ſaith, conciſio, non circumciſi
                     •
                  : how can we but folow his very wordes and alluſion? And how is it poſſible to expreſſe Euangelizo,
               Vvhy vve ſay, our Lord, not, the Lord (but in certaine caſes) ſee the Annotations 1 Tim. 6. pag. 585. but as vve do, Euangelize? for Euangelium being the Goſpel▪ what is, Euangelizo or to Euangelize, but to ſhew the glad tydings of the Goſpel, of the time of grace, of al Chriſts benefites? Al which ſignification is loſt, by tranſlating as the Engliſh bibles do, I bring you good tydings. Luc. 2, 10. Therfore we ſay Depoſitum, 2 Tim. 6. and, He exinanited him ſelf, Philip. 2. and, You haue refloriſhed, Philip. 4. and, to exhauſt, Hebr. 9, 28, becauſe vve can not poſsibly attaine to expreſſe theſe vvordes fully in Engliſh, and vve thinke much better, that the reader ſtaying at the difficultie of them, ſhould take an occaſion to looke in the table folovving, or othervviſe to aſke the ful meaning of them, then by putting ſome vſual Engliſh vvordes that expreſſe them not,Catholike termes proceding from the very text of Scripture. ſo to deceiue the reader. Sometime alſo vve doe it for an other cauſe. as vvhen vve ſay, The aduent of our Lord, and, Impoſing of handes, becauſe one is a ſolemne time, the other a ſolemne action in the Catholike Church: to ſignifie to the people, that theſe and ſuch like names come out of the very Latin text of the Scripture. So did Penance, doing penance, Chalice, Prieſt, Deacon, Traditions aultar, hoſt, and the like (vvhich vve exactly keepe as Catholike termes) procede euen from the very vvordes of Scripture.
            Moreouer, we preſume not in hard places to mollifie the ſpeaches or phraſes, but religiouſly keepe them vvord for vvord, and point for point, for feare of miſsing,Certaine hard ſpeaches and phraſes. or reſtraining the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt to our phantaſie. as Eph. 6. Againſt the ſpirituals of vvickednes in the celeſtials.
               Io. 2. and, Vvhat to me and thee vvoman? whereof ſee the Annotation vpon this place. and 1 Pet. 2. As infants euen novv borne, reaſonable, milke vvithout guile deſire ye. Vve do ſo place, reaſonable, of purpoſe, that it may be indiffēt both to infants going before, as in our Latin text: or to milke that folovveth after, as in other Latin copies and in the Greeke. Io. 3 vve tranſlate,The Proteſtāts preſumptuous boldnes and Iibettie in tranſlating. 
               The ſpirit breatheth vvhere he vvil &c. leauing it indifferent to ſignifie either the holy Ghoſt, or vvinde: vvhich the Proteſtants tranſlating, vvinde, take avvay the other ſenſe more common and vſual in the auncient fathers. Vve tranſlate Luc. 8, 23. They vvere filled, not adding of our ovvne, vvith vvater, to mollifie the ſentence, as the Proteſtants doe. and c. 22. This is the chalice, the nevv Teſtament &c. not, This chalice is the nevv Teſtament, likevviſe, Mar. 13. Thoſe daies ſhal be ſuch tribulation &c. not as the Aduerſaries, In thoſe daies, both our text and theirs being othervviſe Iac. 4, 6. And giueth greater grace, leauing it indifferent to the Scripture, or to the holy Ghoſt, both going before. Vvhereas the Aduerſaries to to boldly & preſumptuouſly adde, ſaying, The Scripture giueth, taking avvay the other ſenſe, which is far more probable. likevviſe Hebr. 12, 21 vve tranſlate, So terrible vvas it vvhich vvas ſeen, Moyſes ſaid &c. neither doth Greeke or Latin permit vs to adde, that, Moyſes ſaid, as the Proteſtants preſume to doe. So vve ſay, Men brethren, Avvidovv vvoman, A vvoman a ſiſter, Iames of Alphaus, and the like. Sometime alſo we folow of purpoſe the Scriptures phraſe. as,Mat. 5. 
               The hel of fire, according to Greeke and
 Latin. vvhich we might ſay perhaps, the firy hel, by the Hebrue phraſe in ſuch ſpeaches,Gehenn
                     •
                   ignis. but not, hel fire, as commonly it is tranſlated. Likevviſe Luc. 4, 36. Vvhat vvord is this, that in povver and authoritie he cōmaundeth the vncleane ſpirits? as alſo, Luc 2. Let vs paſſe ouer, and ſee the vvord that is done, Vvhere we might ſay, thing, by the Hebrue phraſe, but there is a certaine maieſtie and more ſignification in theſe ſpeaches, and therfore both Greeke & Latin keepe them, although it is no more the Greeke or Latin phraſe, then it is Engliſh. And vvhy ſhould vve be ſquamiſh at nevv vvordes or phraſes in the Scripture, vvhich are neceſſarie: vvhen vve do eaſily admit and folovv nevv vvordes coyned in court and in courtly or other ſecular vvritings?
            Vve adde the Greeke in the margent for diuers cauſe
                  •
               .The Greeke added often in the margent for many cauſes. Sometime vvhen the ſenſe is hard, that the learned reader may conſider of it and ſee if he can helpe him ſelf better then by our tranſlation. as Luc 11. Nolite extolli. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and againe, Quod ſupereſt date eleemoſynam. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Sometime to take away the ambiguitie of the Latin or Engliſh, as Luc. 11. Et domus ſupradomum cadet. Vvhich we muſt needes Engliſh, and houſe vpon houſe, ſhal fall. by the Greeke, the ſenſe is not, one houſe ſhal fal vpon an other. but, if one houſe riſe vpon it ſelf, that is, againſt it ſelf, it ſhal periſh according as he ſpeaketh of a kingdom deuided againſt it ſelf, in the wordes before. And Act. 14. Sacerdos Iouis qui erat. in the Greeke, qui, is referred to Iupiter. Sometime to ſatisfie the reader, that might otherwiſe conceiue the tranſlation to be falſe as Philip. 4. v. 6. But in euery thing by praier, &c. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , not, in al praier, as in the Latin it may ſeeme. Sometime when the Latin neither doth, nor can, reache to the ſignification of the Greeke word, we added the Greeke alſo as more ſignificant.Mat. 4. 
               Illi foli ſeruies, him only ſhalt thou ſerue, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And Act. 6. Nicolas a ſtranger of Antioche, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and, Ro. 9. The ſeruice, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and Eph. 1. to perfite, inſtaurare omnia in Chriſto, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And, Vvherein he hath gratified vs, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . & Eph. 6. Put on the armour, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and a number the like. Sometime, when the Greeke hath two ſenſes, and the Latin but one, we adde the Greeke. 2. Cor. 1. By the exhortaion vvherevvith vve alſo are exhorted. the Greeke ſignifieth alſo conſolation &c. and 2 Cor. 10. But hauing hope of your faith increaſing, to be &c. vvhere the Greeke may alſo ſignifie, as or vvhen your faith increaſeth. Sometime for aduantage of the Catholike cauſe, when the Greeke maketh for vs more then the Latin. as, Seniores,Act. 15. 2 Theſ. 2. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Vt digni habeamini. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Qui effundetur, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Praecepta, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . & Io. 21. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Paſce & rege. And ſometime to ſhew the falſe tranſlation of the Heretike,1. Cor. 11. as when Beza ſaith, Hoc poculum in meo ſanguine qui. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Luc. 22. &, Quē oportet coelo cōtineri. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Act. 3. Thus we vſe the Greeke diuers waies, & eſteeme of it as it is worthie, & taken al cōmodities thereof for the better vnderſtāding of the Latin, which being a tranſlation, can not alwaies attaine to the ful ſenſe of the principal tonge, as vve ſee in al tranſlations.
            Item vve adde the Latin vvord ſometime in the margent,The Latin text ſometime noted in the margent. vvhen either vve can not fully expreſſe it, (as Act. 8. They tooke order for Steuens funeral, Curauerunt Stephanum. and, Al take not this vvord, Non omnes capiunt.) or vvhen the reader might thinke, it can not be as vve tranſlate. as, Luc. 8. A ſtorme of winde deſcended into the lake, and they vvere filled, & complebantur. and Io. 5. vvhen Ieſus knevv that he had novv a long time, quiaiam multum tempus haberet. meaning, in his infirmitie.
            This preciſe folovving of our Latin text, in neither adding nor diminiſhing, is the cauſe why we ſay not in the title of bookes, in the firſt page, S. Matthevv,
 S. Paul
                  •
                becauſe it is ſo neither in Greeke nor Latin.In the beginning of bookes, Matthew, Paul &c. not S. Matthew. S. Paul &c. though in the toppes of the leaues folovving, where vve may be bolder, we adde, S. Matthew &c. to ſatisfie the reader. Much vnlike to the Proteſtants our Aduerſaries, vvhich make no ſcruple to leaue out the name of Paul in the title of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues,Bib. an. 1579. 1580. an. 1577 1562. though it be in euery Greeke booke vvhich they tranſlate. And their moſt authoriſed Engliſh Bibles leaue our (Catholike) in the title of S. Iames Epiſtle and the reſt, vvhich vvere famouſly knovven in the primitiue Church by the name of Catholicae Epiſtolae. Euſeb. hiſt. Eccl. li. 2 c. 22.
            Item vve giue the Reader in places of ſome importance,An other reading in the margent. an other reading in the margent, ſpecially vvhen the Greeke is agreable to the ſame. as Io. 4. tranſiet de morte ad vitam. Other Latin copies haue, tranſiit, and ſo it is in the Greeke.
            Vve binde not our ſelues to the pointes of any one copie, print, or edition of the vulgar Latin, in places of no controuerſie, but folovv the pointing moſt agreable to the Greeke and to the fathers commentaries.The pointing ſometime al
                     •
                  e
                  
                     •
                  ed. As Col. 1, 10. Ambulantes dignè Deo, per omnia placentes. Vvalking vvorthy of God, in al things pleaſing. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Eph. 1, 17. Vve point thus, Deus Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti, pater gloriae. as in the Greeke, and S. Chryſoſtom, & S. Hierom both in text and commentaries. Vvhich the Catholike reader ſpecially muſt marke, leſt he finde fault, vvhen he ſeeth our tranſlation diſagree in ſuch places from the pointing of his Latin Teſtament.
            Vve tranſlate ſometime the word that is in the Latin margent,The margent reading ſometime preferred before the text. and not that in the text, when by the Greeke or the fathers we ſee it is a manifeſt fault of the writers heretofore, that miſtooke one word for an other. As, In fine, not, in ſide, 1. Pet. 3. v. 8. praeſentiam, not, praeſcientiam, 2 Pet. 1. v. 16. Heb. 13. latuerunt, not, placue
                     •
                  unt.
            
            Thus we haue endeuoured by al meanes to ſatisfie the indifferent reader, and to helpe his vnderſtanding euery way, both in the text, and by Annotations: and withal to deale moſt ſincerely before God and man, in tranſlating and expounding the moſt ſacred text of the holy Teſtament. Fare wel good Reader, and if we profit the any whit by our poore paines let vs for Gods ſake be partakers of thy deuout praiers, & together with humble and contrite hart call vpō our Sauiour Chriſt to ceaſe theſe troubles & ſtormes of his dereſt ſpouſe: in the meane time comforting our ſelues with this ſaying of S. Auguſtine: That Heretikes, vvhen they receiue povver corporally to afflict the Church doe exerciſe her patience: but vvhen they oppugne her onely by their euil doctrine or opinions. then they exerciſe her vviſedom. De ciuit. Dei li. 18. ca. 51.
         
         
            
            THE SIGNIFICATION OR MEANING OF THE NVMBERS AND MARKES vſed in this Nevv Teſtament.
            THe numbers in the inner margent of the text, ſhevv the number of verſes in euery Chapter.
            The numbers in the Arguments before euery Chapter, point to the ſame numbers of verſes in the text, treating of the ſame matter.
            The numbers in the beginning of the Annotatiōs, ſignifie, that the Annotation is vpon ſuch a verſe of the text.
            The numbers in the inner margent, or els vvhere, ioyned to the citations of Scripture, if they be vvritten thus, Gen. 4, 16. the firſt is the chapter, the ſecond is the verſe. If thus, Gen. 4. 16. both are the Chapters. If thus, Gen. 4, 16. 17. 18. the firſt is the chapter, al the reſt, the verſes. If thus, Gen. 4, 16. 5, 7. it ſignifieth, chap. 4. verſ. 16. and chap. 5. verſ. 7.
            ✝ This croſſe ſignifieth the beginning of euery verſe.
            ″ This marke in the text, ſignifieth that there is an Annotation vpon that vvord or vvordes vvhich folovv the ſaid marke.
            * This ſtarre in the text, or in the Annotations, ſignifieth the allegations cited ouer againſt the ſame in the margent, or ſome other thing anſvvering therevnto.
            ` ’ This marke ſhevveth an other reading in the margent. And if there be nothing in the margent, it ſignifieth that thoſe vvordes are not in ſome copies.
            : ; a 
               b Theſe notes in the text, referre the reader to the ſelf ſame in the margent.
            Mt. for Matthevv.
            Mr. for Marke.
            
               ⊢ This marke ſignifieth the ending of Goſpels and Epiſtles.
            Their beginning is knovven by the margent, vvhere directly at the beginning of them, is ſet, The Goſpel, or, The Epiſtle vpon ſuch a day. And if it could not be ſo ſet directly (becauſe of other marginal notes) then b is the marke of their beginning. And if ſome fevv by ouerſight be not noted in the margent, it is ſupplied in the table of Epiſtles and Goſpels, at the end of this booke.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE BOOKES OF THE NEVV Teſtament, according to the counte of the Catholike Churche.
            
               4 GOSPELS.
               The Goſpel of S. Matthevv.
               The Goſpel of S. Marke.
               The Goſpel of S. Luke.
               The Goſpel of S. Iohn.
               The ACTES of the Apoſtles.
            
            
               S. PAVLES EPIST. 14.
               The Epiſtle to the Romanes.
               The 1 Epiſtle to the Corinthians.
               The 2 Epiſtle to the Corinthians.
               The Epiſtle to the Galatians.
               The Epiſtle to the Epheſians.
               The Epiſtle to the Phillppians.
               The Epiſtle to the Coloſſians.
               The 1 Epiſt. to the Theſſalonians.
               The 2 Epiſtle to the Theſſaloniās.
               The 1 Epiſtle to Timothee.
               The 2 Epiſtle to Timothee.
               The Epiſtle to Titus.
               The Epiſtle to Philemon.
               The Epiſtle to the Hebrevves.
            
            
               THE 7 CATHOL. EPISTLES.
               The Epiſtle of S. Iames.
               The 1 Epiſtle of S. Peter.
               The 2 Epiſtle of S. Peter.
               The 1 Epiſtle of S. Iohn.
               The 2 Epiſtle of S. Iohn.
               The 3 Epiſtle of S. Iohn.
               The Epiſtle of S. Iude.
               The APOCALYPSE of S. Iohn.
            
            
               1 The infallible authoritie and excellencie of them aboue al other writings.
               
                  S. Auguſtine li. II. cont. Fauſtum. cap. 5.
                  THe excellencie of the Canonical authoritie of the old and new Teſtament, is diſtincted from the bookes of later writers: which being confirmed in the Apoſtles times, by the ſucceſſion of Biſhops, and propagations of Churches, is placed as it were in a certaine throne on high, wherevnto euery faithful & godly vnderſtanding muſt be ſubiect and obedient. There, if any thing moue or trouble thee as abſurd, thou maieſt not ſay, The author of this booke held not the truth: but, either the copie is faultie, or the Tranſlatour erred, or thou vnderſtandeſt not. But in the workes of them that wrote afterward, which are conteined in infinite bookes, but are in no caſe equal to that moſt ſacred authoritie of CANONICAL SCRIPTVRES: in which ſoeuer of them is found euen the ſame truth, yet the authoritie is far vnequal.
               
            
            
               2 The diſcerning of Canonical from not Canonical, and of their infallible truth, and ſenſe, commeth vnto vs, only by the credite vve giue vnto the CATHOLIKE CHVRCHE: through vvhoſe cōmendation vve beleeue both the Goſpel and Chriſt him ſelf. Vvhereas the Sectaries meaſure the matter by their fantaſies and opinion.
               
                  S. Auguſtine cont. Epiſt. fundamenti cap. 5.
                  I for my part, vvould not beleeue the Goſpel, vnles the authoritie of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH moued me. They therfore whom I obied ſaying, Beleeue the Goſpel:Luther, Caluin. vvhy ſhould I not beleeue them ſaying, Beleeue not * Manichaeus? Chooſe vvhether thou vvilt. If thou wilt ſay, Beleeue the Catholike: loe they vvarne me that I giue no credite vnto you: and therefore beleeuing them, I muſt needes not beleeue thee. If thou ſay, Beleeue not the Catholikes: it is not the right vvay, by the Goſpel to driue me to the faith of Manichaeus, becauſe I beleeued
 the Goſpel it ſelf by the preaching of Catholikes.
               
               
                  Againe li. de vtilit. credend. cap. 14.
                  I ſee the concerning Chriſt him ſelf, I haue beleeued none, but the confirmed and aſſured opinion of peoples and nations: and that theſe peoples haue on euey ſide poſſeſſed the myſteries of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH. Vvhy ſhould I not therfore moſt diligently require, ſpecially among them, what Chriſt commaunded, by vvhoſe authoritie I vvas moued to beleeue, that Chriſt did commaund ſome profitable thing? Vvilt thou (ō Heretike) tel me better vvhat he ſaid? vvhom I vvould not thinke to haue been at al, or to be, if I muſt beleeue, becauſe thou ſaieſt it. Vvhat groſſe madnes is this, to ſay, Beleeue the Catholikes, the Chriſt is to be beleeued: and learne of vs, vvhat he ſaid.
               
               
                  Againe cont. Fauſtum li. II. cap. 1.
                  Thou ſeeſt then in this matter what force the authoritie of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH hath, vvhich euen from the moſt grounded and founded ſeates of the Apoſtles, is eſtabliſhed vntil this day, by the line of Biſhops ſucceding one an other, & by the conſent of ſo many peoples. Vvhereas thou ſaieſt, This is Scripture, or, this is ſuch an Apoſtles, that is not: becauſe this ſoundeth for me, and the other againſt me. Thou then art the rule of truth. vvhatſoeuer is againſt thee, is not true.
               
            
            
               3 No heretikes haue right to the Scriptures, but are vſurpers: the Catholike Church being the true ovvner and faithful keeper of them. Heretikes abuſe them, corrupt them, and vtterly ſeeke to aboliſh them, though they pretend the contrarie.
               
                  Tertullianli. De praeſcriptionibus, bringeth in the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH ſpeaking thus to all Heretikes.
                  Vvho are you, Luther, Zuinglius, Caeluin. vvhen, and from vvhence came you? vvhat doe you in my poſſeſsion, that are none of mine? by vvhat right (Marcion) doeſt thou cut dovvne my wood? vvho gaue the licence (ô Valentine) to turne the courſe of my fountaines? by vvhat authoritie (Apelles) doeſt thou remoue my boundes? andTheir ſcholers & folovvers. you the reſt, vvhy do yovv ſovv and ſeede for theſe companions at your pleaſure? It is my poſſeſſion, I poſſeſſe it of old, I haue aſſured origins thereof, euen from thoſe authors vvhoſe the thing vvas. I am the heire of the Apoſtles. As they prouided by their Teſtament, as they comitted it to my credite, as they adiured me, ſo doe I hold it. You ſurely they diſherited alvvaies and haue coſt you of, as forainers, as enemies.
               
               
                  Againe in the ſame booke.
                  Encountering vvith ſuch by Scriptures, auaileth nothing, but to ouerturne a mans ſtomake or his braine. This hereſie receiueth not certaine Scriptures: and if it do receiue ſome, yet by adding and taking avvay, it peruerteth the ſame to ſerue their purpoſe: and if it receiue any, it doth not receiue them vvholy: and if after a ſort it receiue them vvholy, neuertheles by diuiſing diuers expoſitions, it turneth them cleane an other vvay &c.
               
            
            
               4 Yet do they vaunt them ſelues of Scriptures excedingly, but they are neuer the more to be truſted for that.
               
                  S. Hierom aduerſus Luciferianos in fine.
                  Let them not flatter them ſelues, if they ſeeme in their ovvne conceite to affirme that vvhich they ſay, out of the chapters of Scripture: vvhereas the Diuel alſo ſpake ſome thinges out of the Scriptures, and the Scriptures conſiſt not in the reading, but in the vnderſtanding.
               
               
                   
                  Vincentius Lirinenſis li. cont. prophanas haereſ
                        •••
                      Nouationes.
                  Here perhaps ſome man may aſke, vvhether heretikes alſo vſe not the teſtimonies of diuine Scripture. Yet in deede do they, and that vehemently. For thou ſhalt ſee them flie through euery one of the ſacred bookes of the Lavv, through Moyſes, the bookes of the kings, the Pſalmes, the Apoſtles, the Goſpels, the Prophets. For, vvhether among their ovvne fellowes, or ſtrangers: vvhether priuatly, or publikely: vvhether in talke, or in their bookes: vvhether in bankets, or in the ſtreates: they (I ſay) alleage nothing of their ovvne, which they endeuour not to ſhadow vvith the wordes of Scripture alſo. Read the vvorkes of Paulus Samoſatenus, of Priſcillian, of Eunomian, of Iouinian,Of Caluin, of 
                           •
                        uel, of the reſt. of the other plagues & peſtilences: thou ſhalt finde an infinite heape of examples, no page in a manner omitted or voide, which is not painted and coloured with the ſentences of the new or old teſtament. But they are ſo much the more to be taken heede of, & to be feared, the more ſecretly they lurke vnder the ſhadowes of Gods diuine law. For they knovv their ſtinkes vvould not eaſily pleaſe any man almoſt, if they were breathed out nakedly & ſimply them ſelues alone, & therfore they ſprinkle them as it vvere vvith certaine pretious ſpices of the heauenly vvord: to the end that he vvhich would eaſely deſpiſe the errour of man, may not eaſely contemne the oracles of God. So that they doe like vnto them, vvhich vvhen they vvil prepare certaine bitter potion
                        •
                      for children, do firſt anoint the brimmes of the cup vvith honie, that the vnwarie age, vvhen it ſhal firſt feele the ſvvetnes, may not feare the bitternes.
               
            
            
               5 The cauſe vvhy, the Scriptures being perfit, yet vve vſe other Eccleſiaſtical vvritings and tradition.
               
                  Vincentius Lirinenſis in his golden booke before cited, aduerſus prophanas haereſ
                        ••
                      Nouationes.
                  Here ſome man perhaps may aſke, for aſmuch as the Canon of the Scriptures is perfit, and in all pointes very ſufficient in it ſelf, vvhat neede is there, to ioyne therevnto the authoritie of theSo he calleth the Churches ſenſe, and the fathers interpretations of Scriptures. Eccleſiaſtical vnderſtanding? for this cauſe ſurely, for that all take not the holy Scripture in one and the ſame ſenſe, becauſe of the deepenes thereof. but the ſpeaches thereof, ſome interpret one vvay, & ſome an other vvay, ſo that there may almoſt as many ſenſes be picked out of it, as there be men. for, Nouatian doth expound it one vvay, and Sabellius, an other vvay, othervviſe Donatus, othervviſe Arîus, Eunomius, Macedonius, othervviſe Photinus, Apollinaris, Priſcillianus, othervviſe Iouinian, Pelagius, Celeſtius, laſtly othervviſe Neſtorius.Othervviſe Wicleſſe Luther, Caluin, Puritanes. And therfore very neceſſarie it is, becauſe of ſo great vvindinges and turninges of diuers errours, that the line of Prophetical and Apoſtolical interpretation, be directed according to the rule of the Eccleſiaſtical and Catholike ſenſe or vnderſtanding.
               
               
                  S. Baſil li. de Spiritu ſancto cap. 27.
                  Of ſuch articles of religion as are kept and preached in the Church, ſome vvere taught by the vvritten vvord, other ſome vve haue receiued by the tradition of the Apoſtles, deliuered vnto vs as it vvere from hand to hand in myſterie ſecretly: both vvhich be of one force to Chriſtian religion: and this no man vvil deny that hath any litle ſkill of the Eccleſiaſtical rites or cuſtomes. for if vve goe about to reiect the cuſtomes not conteined in Scripture, as being of ſmal force, vve ſhal vnvvittingly and vnavvares mangle the GOSPEL it ſelf in the principal partes thereof, yea rather, vve ſhal abridge the very preaching of the Goſpel, and bring it to a bare name.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE SVMME OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
            
               THAT which was the ſumme of the Old Teſtament, to wit, Chriſt and his Church,
               Aug. de cat. rud. cap. 3. 4. as S. Auguſtine ſaith catechizing the ignorant: the very ſame is the ſumme of the New Teſtament alſo. For (as the ſame S. Auguſtine ſaith againe) In the Old Teſtament there is the occultation of the New: and in the New Teſtament there is the manifeſtation of the Old.
               Super Exod. q. 73. And in another place: In the Old doth the New lye hidden, and in the New doth the Old lye open. And thervpon our Sauiour ſaid:Mat. 5. 
               I am not come to breake the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them. For aſſuredly I ſay vnto you, til heauen and earth paſſe, one iote or one title ſhall not paſſe of the Law, till all be fulfilled. In vvhich vvordes he ſhevveth plainely, that the nevv Teſtament is nothing els but the fulfilling of the old.
            Therfore to come to the partes: The Goſpels doe tell of Chriſt himſelfe (of vvhom the Old Teſtamēt did foretell) and that euen from his coming into the vvorld, vnto his going out therof againe. The Actes of the Apoſtles doe tell of his Church beginning at Hieruſalem the headcitie of the Ievves, and of the propagation therof to the Gentiles and their headcitie Rome. And, the Apocalypſe doth prophecie of it, euen to the conſummation therof, which ſhal be in the end of the world. The Epiſtles of the Apoſtles do treat partly of ſuch queſtions as at that time were moued, partly of good life and good order.
            
               The Summe of the 4 Goſpels.
               THe Goſpels doe tell hiſtorically the life of our Lord Ieſus, ſhevving plainely,Io. 20, 31. that he is Chriſt or the king of the Ievves, vvhom vntil then, al the time of the Old Teſtament, they had expected: and vvithal, that they of their ovvne mere malice and blindnes (the iniquitie beginning of the Seniors, but at the length the multitude alſo conſenting) vvould not receaue him, but euer ſought his death: vvhich for the Redemption of the vvorld, he at length permitted them to compaſſe, they deſeruing thereby moſt iuſtely to be refuſed of him, and ſo his Kingdom or Church to be taken avvay from them, and giuen to the Gentils. For the gathering of vvhich Church after him, he chooſeth Tvvelue, and appointeth one of them to be the cheefe of al, vvith inſtructions both to them and him accordingly.
               The ſtorie hereof is vvritten by foure:Eze. 1. vvho in Ezechiel and in the Apocalypſe are likened to foure liuing creatures,Apoc. 4. euery one according as his booke beginneth. S. Matthevv to a Man, becauſe he beginneth vvith the pedegree of Chriſt as he is man. S. Marke to a Lion, becauſe he beginneth vvith the preaching of S. Iohn Baptiſt, as it vvere the roaring of a lion in the vvildernes. S. Luke to a Calfe, becauſe he beginneth vvith a prieſt of the Old Teſtament (to vvit, Zacharie the father of S. Iohn Baptiſt) vvhich Prieſthood vvas to ſacrifice calues to God. S. Iohn to an Egle, becauſe he beginneth vvith the Diuinitie of Chriſt, flying ſo high as more is not poſsible.
               
                   The firſt three do report at large vvhat Chriſt did in Galilee, after the impriſonment of S. Iohn Bapiſt. Vvherefore S. Iohn the Euangeliſt vvriting after them all, doth omit his doinges in Galilee (ſaue onely one, vvhich they had not vvritten of, the vvonderful bread vvhich he told the Capharnaites he could and vvould giue, Io. 6.) and reporteth firſt, vvhat he did vvhiles Iohn Baptiſt as yet vvas preaching and baptizing: then, after Iohns impriſoning, vvhat he did in Iurie euery yere about Eaſter. But of his Paſsion all foure do vvrite at large.
               Vvhere it is to be noted, that from his baptizing (vvhich is thought to haue been vpon Tvvelfthday, vvhat time he was beginning to be about 30 yere old, Luk. 3.) vnto his paſsion, are numbred three monethes and three yeres, in vvhich there vvere alſo 4 Eaſters.
            
         
         
            The argument of S. Matthewes Goſpel.
            S. Matthevves Goſpel may be vvell diuided into fiue partes. The firſt parte, as touching the Infancie of our Lord Ieſus: Chap. 1 and 2.
            The ſecond, of the preparation that vvas made to his manifeſtation: chap. 3. and a piece of the 4.
            The third, of his manifeſting of him ſelfe by preaching and miracles, and that in Galilee: the other piece of the 4. chap. vnto the 19.
            The fourth, of his comming into Iurie, tovvard his Paſsion: chap. 19. and 20.
            The fifth, of the Holy vveeke of his Paſsion in Hieruſalem: chap. 21 vnto the end of the booke.
            Of S. Matthew vve haue Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Lu. 5: How being before a Publican, he vvas called of our Lord, and made a Diſciple. Then Luk. 6. Mar. 3. Mat. 10: Hovv out of the vvhole number of the Diſciples he vvas choſen to be one of the tvvelue Apoſtle. And out of them againe he vvas choſen (and none but he and S▪ Iohn) to be one of the foure Euangeliſtes. Among vvhich foure alſo, he vvas the firſt that vvrote, about 8 or 10 yeres after Chriſtes Aſcenſion.
         
         
            
            THE HOLY GOSPEL OF IESVS CHRIST ACCORDING TO MATTHEW.THE FIRST part of this Goſpel, of the Infancie of our Sauiour Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The pedegree of Ieſus, to ſhew that he is Chriſt, promiſed to ⸬ Abraham and Gen. 12. 22. Dauid. 18. That he was conceiued and borne of a Virgin,
                        
                           •
                        . Reg. 7. as Eſay prophecied of him.Pſal. 131.
                  
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE booke of the Luc. 3, 31. generation of IESVS Chriſt, the ſonne of Dauid,This Goſpel is moſt ſolemly ſung in holy Church at Mattins vpō Chriſtmas day. the ſonne of Abraham.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  Gen. 21. 29. 38.Abraham begat Iſaac, And Iſaac begat Iacob.As alſo it is the Goſpel of the Cōception and Natiuiti
                           •
                        
                      of our B. Lady: becauſe here is declared the pedegree of her alſo. And Iacob begat Iudas and his brethren: ✝ 
                     verse 3 And Iudas begat Phares and Zaram of ″ Thamer. 1 Par. 2, 5. And Phares begat Eſron. And Eſron begat Aram. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Aram begat Aminadab.Ruth. 4, 18. And Aminadab begat Naaſſon. And Naaſſon begat Salmon. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Salmon begat Booz of Raab. And Booz begat Obed of Ruth. And Obed begat leſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And leſſe begat Dauid the King.
               And 2 Re. 12, 24. Dauid the King begat Salomon of her that was the vvife of Vrias. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And 1 Par. 3, 10. Salomon begat Roboam. And Roboam begat Abia. And Abia begat Aſa. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And Aſa begat Ioſaphat. And Ioſaphat begat Ioram. And Ioram begat Ozias. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And Ozias begat Ioatham. And Ioatham begat Achaz. And Achaz begat Ezechias. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And Ezechias begat Manaſſes. And Manaſſes begat Amon.4 Reg. 24. And Amon begat Ioſias. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And Ioſias begat Iechonias & his brethren 2. Par. 36. in the Tranſmigration of Babylon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And after the Tranſmigration of Babylon, 1 Par. 3. Iechonias begat Salathiel. 1 Eſd. 3. And Salathiel begat Zorobabel. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud. And Abiud begat Eliacim. And Eliacim begat Azor. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And Azor begat Sadoc. And Sadoc begat Achim. And Achim begat Eliud. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And Eliud begat Eleazar. And Eleazar begat Mathan. And Mathan begat Iacob. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And Iacob
 begat ″ Ioſeph the ″ huſband of MARIE:de qua. of vvhom vvas borne IESVS, vvho is called CHRIST. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 Therefore al the generations from Abraham vnto Dauid, fourtene generations. And from Dauid to the Tranſmigration of Babylon, fourtene generations. And from the Tranſmigration of Babylon vnto CHRIST, fourtene generations.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the generation of CHRIST vvas in this vviſe.The Goſpel vpō Chriſtmas eue. and Vpon S. Ioſephs day the 19 of Marche. When his mother MARIE vvas ſpouſed to Ioſeph, before they came together, ſhe vvas found to be vvith childe by the Holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Wherevpon Ioſeph, for that he vvas a iuſt man, & vvould not Deut 24, 1. put her to open ſhame: vvas minded ſecretely to dimiſſe her. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But as he vvas thus thinking, behold the Angel of our Lord appeared to him in ſleepe ſaying: Ioſeph ſonne of Dauid, feare not to take MARIE thy vvife. for that vvhich is ″ borne in her, is of the Holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And ſhe ſhal bring forth a ſonne: and thou ſhalt call his nameIESVS an Hebrue word, in Engliſh SAVIOVR. IESVS. For he ſhal ſaue his people from their ſinnes. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 22 And al this vvas done that it might be fulfilled vvhich our Lord ſpake by the Prophet ſaying.Eſa. 7, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 23 
                  Behold ″ a Virgin ſhal be vvith childe, ″ and ″ bring forth a ſonne, and they ſhal call his name Emmanuel, vvhich being interpreted is, God vvith vs. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Ioſeph riſing vp from ſleepe, did as the Angel of our Lord cōmaunded him, and tooke his vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he knevv her not ″ til ſhe brought forth her ″ firſt borne ſonne: and called his name IESVS.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  1. Thamar.] Chriſt abhorred not to take fleſh of ſome that were il, as he choſe Iudas among his Apoſtles: Let not vs diſdaine to receaue our ſpiritual birth and ſuſtenance of ſuch as be not alwayes good.
                  16. Ioſeph.] Ioſeph marying our Lady as neere of kinne (for ſo was the Nu. 36. law) by his pedegree ſheweth hers, and conſequently Chriſts pedegree from Dauid.
                  16. Huſband.] True and perfect mariage, and continual liuing in the ſame, without carnal copulation. Aug. lib. 2. Conſen. Euang. c. 1.
                  20. Borne in her.] The triple good or perfection of mariage accompliſhed in the parents of Chriſt, to wit, Iſſue, Fidelitie, Sacrament. Aug. de nup. & conc. li. 1. c. 11.
                  23. A Virgin.] Our Sauiour borne in mariage,Virginitie preferred. but yet of a Virgin, would honour both ſtates: and withal, teacheth vs agaynſt Iouinian the old Heretike and theſe of our time, that virginity and the continent life are preferred before mariage that hath carnal copulation, See S. Hierom. adu. Iouin. and S. Greg. Nazianz. Ser. 20. de ſtudio in pauperes, in initio.
                  
                  23. A Virgin.] As our Ladie both a virgin and a mother, brought forth Chriſt the head corporally: ſo the Churche a virgin and a mother, bringeth forth the members of this head ſpiritually. Aug. li. de Virg. ca. 2.
                  23. And bring forth.] The Heretike Ioulnian is here refuted,Our B. Ladies perpetual virginity. holding that her virginity was corrupted in bringing forth Chriſt. Aug. har. 28. Li. 1 cont. Iulian. c. 2.
                  
                      25. Til, Firſt-borne.] Heluidius of old abuſed theſe wordes,Tradition. 
                     til, and, firſt-borne, agaynſt the perpetual virginity of our B. Ladie. Hiero. cont. Helu. which truth though not expreſſed in Scripture, yet our Aduerſaries alſo do graunt, and Heluidius for denial therof was condemned for an heretike by tradition only. Aug. har. 14.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The Gentils come vnto Chriſt with their offerings, and that ſo openly, that the Iewes can not pretend ignorance. 1 The Iewes with Herode conſpire againſt him. 13 He therevpon fleeth from them into Aegypt. 16 They afterward, ſeing their ſubteltie preuailed not, imagined to oppreſſe him by open perſecution. 19 But they at length dyed, and he returneth to the land of Iſrael: al according to the Scriptures.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHEN IESVS therfore vvas Luc. 2, 7. borne in Bethlehem of Iuda in the dayes of Herod the King, ″ behold,The holy feaſt of the Epiphanie called Twelfth-day the 6 of Ianuarie. vpon which day this is the Goſpel. there came Sages from the Eaſt to Hieruſalem, ✝ 
                     verse 2 ſaying, vvhere is he that is borne King of the Ievves? For vve haue ſeene his ″ ſtarre in the Eaſt, and ″ are come to adore him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And Herod the King hearing this, vvas troubled, & al Hieruſalem vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And aſſembling together al the high Prieſtes & the Scribes of the people, he ″ inquired of them vvhere Chriſt ſhould be borne. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they ſayd to him, In Bethlehē of Iuda. For ſo it is vvritten by the Prophet: ✝ 
                     verse 6 
                  And thou Bethlehem the land of Iuda,
                  Mich. 5, 2. 
                  art not the leaſt among the Princes of Iuda: for out of thee ſhal come forth the Capitaine that ſhal rule my people Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Then Herod ſecretly calling the Sages, learned diligently of them the time of the ſtarre which appeared to them: ✝ 
                     verse 8 and ſending them into Bethlehem, ſayd, Goe, and inquire diligently of the childe: and when you ſhal finde him, make reporte to me, that I alſo may come and adore him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 Who hauing heard the king, went their way: and behold the ſtarre which they had ſeen in the Eaſt, went before them, vntil it came & ſtoode ouer, where the childe was. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And ſeing the ſtarre, they reioyced vvith exceding great ioy. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And entring into the houſe, they found the childe vvith MARIE his mother, & falling dovvne ″ adored him: and opening their ″ treaſures, they offered to him Pſa. 71, 10. ″ giftes: gold, frankincenſe, & myrrhe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And hauing receiued an anſvver in ſleepe that they ſhould not returne to Herod, they vvent backe an other vvay into their countrey. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And after they vvere departed,The Goſpel of Childermas day. behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in ſleepe to Ioſeph, ſaying: Ariſe, & take the childe & his mother, & flee into Aegypt: and be there vntil I ſhal tel the. For it vvil come to paſſe that Herod vvil ſeeke the childe to deſtroy him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Who aroſe, & tooke the childe
 and his mother by night, and retyred into Aegypt: and he vvas there vntil the death of Herod: ✝ 
                     verse 15 that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſpoken of our Lord by the Prophet,Oſ. 11, 
                        •
                     . ſaying, ″ Out of Aegypt haue I called my ſonne.
               
               ✝ 
                     verse 16 Then Herod perceauing that he vvas deluded by the Sages,The Martyrdō of the holy Innocents, Whoſe holy day is kept the 28 of Decembre. Was exceding angrie: and ſending ″ murdered al the men children that vvere in Bethlehem, & in al the borders therof, from tvvo yere old & vnder, according to the time vvhich he had diligently ſought out of the Sages. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Then was fulfilled that vvhich vvas ſpoken by Ieremie the Prophet ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 18 
                  A voice in Rama vvas heard,
                  Iere. 31, 15. 
                  crying out & much vvayling: Rachel bevvayling her children, & vvould not be comforted, becauſe they are not. 
                  ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 But vvhen Herod vvas dead, behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in ſleepe to Ioſeph in Aegypt,The Goſpel on Twelfth eue. ✝ 
                     verse 20 ſaying, Ariſe, and take the childe & his mother, & goe into the land of Iſrael. for they are dead that ſought the life of the childe. ✝ 
                     verse 21 who aroſe, & tooke the childe & his mother, and came into the land of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But hearing that Archelaus reigned in Ievvrie for Herod his father, he feared to goe thither: and being vvarned in ſleepe retyred into the quarters of Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And coming he dvvelt in a citie called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſayd by the Propheres: That he ſhal be called a Nazarite.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  1. Behold.] Our Lordes apparition or Epiphanie to theſe Sages being Gentils, their Pilgrimage to him, and in them the firſt homage of Gentilitie done vnto him the twelfth day after his Natiuitie: and therfore is Twelfth day highly celebrated in the Catholike Churche for ioy of the calling of vs Gentils. His baptiſme alſo and firſt miracle are celebrated on the ſame day.
                  2. Starre.] Chriſts Natiuitie depended not vpon this ſtarre, as the Priſcillianiſts falſely ſurmiſed: but the ſtarre vpon his Natiuitie, for the ſeruice wherof it was created, Grego. Ho. 10.
                  2. Come to adore.] This coming ſo far of deuotion to viſite and adore Chriſt in the place of his birth,Pilgrimage. was proprely a Pilgrimage to his perſon: and warranteth the faithful in the like kind of external worſhip done to holy perſons, places, and things.
                  4. Inquired of them.] The high Prieſts were rightly conſulted in quaeſtion of their law and religion, and be they neuer ſo il, are often forced to ſay the truth by priuilege of their v
                        •
                     ction: as here and after, they did concerning the true Meſſias.
                  11. Adored him] This body (ſaith S. Chryſoſtom.) the Sages adored in the cribbe. Let vs at the leaſt imitate them: thou ſeeſt him not now in the cribbe,Adoratiō of the 
                           •
                        . Sacrament. but on the altar: not a woman holding him, but the Prieſt preſent, and the Holy Ghoſt powred out aboundantly vpon the ſacrifice. Ho. 24. in 1. Cor. Ho. 7. in Mt. Ho. de ſancto Philogonio.
                  
                  11. Treaſures.] Theſe treaſures are as it were the firſt fruites of thoſe riches and gifts,Pſal. 71. which (according to the Prophecies of Dauid and Eſay) Gentilitie ſhould offer to Chriſt and his Churche,Eſa. 60. and now haue offered, ſpecially from the time of Conſtantine the Great. As alſo theſe three Sages, being principal men of their Countrie, repreſent the whole ſtate of Princes, kings, and Emperours,Chryſ. that were (according to the ſaid Prophecies) to beleeue in Chriſt, to humble them ſelues to his croſſe,Theophyl. to foſter, enriche, adorne and defend his Church. Wherevpon it is alſo a very conuenient and agreable tradition of antiquitie,The three kings. and a receiued opinion among the faithful,Cic. de Diuinat. * not lacking teſtimonies of ancient writers, and much for the honour of our Sauiour, that theſe three alſo were kings:Pli
                           •
                        . li. 20. to Witte, either according to the ſtate of thoſe Countries, * where the Princes
 were Magi,
                     Esther 1, 1
                           •
                        . 14. and * Magi the greateſt, about the Prince: or as we read in the Scriptures, of Melchiſedec king of Salem, and many other kings that dwelt within a ſmall compaſſe: or as * Iobes three freendes are called kings.Tob. 2. Theſe are commonly called the three kings of Colen, becauſe their bodies are there,Amb. 1. tranſlated thither from the Eaſt Countrie: their names are ſaid to haue been Gaſpar,Off. c. 1
                           •
                        . Melchior, Baltaſar.
                  11. Gifts.] Theſe Sages were three, and their gifts three, and eche one offered euerie of the three, to expreſſe our faith of the Trinitie. The Gold, to ſignifie that he was a King: the frankincenſe, that he was God: the myrrhe, that he was to be buried as man. Aug. ſer. i. de Epiph.
                  
                  15. Out of Aegypt.] This place of the Prophete (and the like in the new Teſtament) here applied to Chriſt, wheras in the letter it might ſeeme otherwiſe, reacheth vs how to interprete the old Teſtament, and that the principal ſenſe is of Chriſt and his Churche.
                  16. Murdered.] By this example we learne how great credite we owe to the Churche in Canonizing Saints, and celebrating their holy daies: by whoſe only warrant,Canonizing of Saincts. without any word of Scripture, theſe holy Innocents haue been honoured for Martyrs, and their holy day kept euer ſince the Apoſtles time, although they died not voluntarily, nor al perhaps circunciſed, and ſome the children of Pagans. Aug. ep. 
                           ••
                        . Orig. ho. 1. in diuerſos.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Iohn Baptiſt by his Eremites life, by his preaching and baptiſme, calleth al vnto penance, to prepare them to Chriſt. 10. He preacheth to the Phariſees and Sadducees, threatening to them (vnles they truly doe penance) reprobation here and damnation hereafter: and ſo ſaluation ſendeth them to Chriſt and his baptiſme.THE SEcond part of this Goſpel, Of the Preparatiō that was made to the manifeſtation of Chriſt. Which being far more excellent then Iohns, yet Chriſt him ſelf among thoſe penitents vouchſafeth to come vnto Iohns baptiſme. where he hath teſtimonie from heauen alſo.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND in thoſe dayes * cometh Iohn the Baptiſt preaching in the ″ deſert of Ievvrie,Mr. 1, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 2 & ſaying,Luc. 3, 3. ″ Doe penance: for the Kingdom of heauen is at hand.Eſ. 40, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For this is he that vvas ſpoken of by Eſay the Prophet, ſaying, A voyce of one crying in the deſert, prepare ye the way of our Lord, make ſtraight his pathes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the ſayd Iohn had his garment of camels heare, & a girdle of a ſkinne about his loynes: and his meate was locuſtes & vvilde honie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 Then vvent forth to him Hieruſalem & al Ievvrie, and al the countrey about Iordan: ✝ 
                     verse 6 & vvere baptized of him in Iordan, ″ confeſſing their ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And ſeeing many of the Phariſees & Sadducées coming to his baptiſme, he ſayd to them.
               Ye vipers brood, vvho hath ſhevved you to flee from the vvrath to come? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Yeld therfore ″ fruite vvorthie of penance. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And delite not to ſay vvithin your ſelues, vve haue Abraham to our father. for I tel you that God is able of theſe ſtones to raiſe vp children to Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For novv the ″ axe is put to the roote of the trees. Euery tree therefore that doth
It is not only damnable, to doe il: but alſo, not to doe good.not yeld good fruite, ſhal be cut dovvne, & caſt into the fyre. ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  Mr. 1, 8.I in deede baptize you ″ in vvater vnto penance.Lu. 3, 16. but he that ſhal come after me,Io. 1, 26. is ſtronger then I,Act. 11, 16. 19, 4. vvhoſe ſhoes I am not vvorthie to beare,Aug. Ser. 61 de temp. he ſhal baptize you in the Holy Ghoſt
 & fire. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Whoſe fanne is in his hand, and he ſhal cleane purge his ″ floore: and he vvil gather his vvheate into the barne, but the chaffe he vvil burne vvith vnquencheable fire.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then cometh IESVS from Galilee to Iordan, vnto Iohn, to be baptized of him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But Iohn ſtayed him, ſaying, I ought to be baptized of thee, and comeſt thou to me? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And IESVS anſvvering, ſayd to him, Suffer me for this time. for ſo it becommeth vs to fulfil al iuſtice. Then he ſuffered him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And IESVS being baptized, forthvvith came out of the vvater: and loe the heauens vvere ″ opened to him: and he ſavv the Spirit of God deſcending as a doue, & coming vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And behold a voyce from heauen ſaying, This is my beloued ſonne, in vvhom I am vvel pleaſed.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  1. Deſert.]
                     Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 6. pag. 
                           •
                        11. Cent. 1. li. 1. c. 10. Of this word deſert (in Greeke eremus) commeth the name Eremitages, and Eremites, that liue a religious and auſtere life in deſerts and ſolitatie places,Eremites. by the example of S. Iohn Baptiſt, whom the holy Doctors therfore call the Prince and as it were the author of ſuch profeſſion. S. Chryſ. ho. 1 in Marcum & ho. de Io. Baptiſta. Hiero. ad Euſtoch. de e
                           •
                        ſtod. virg. Iſid. li. 1. c. 15 de diu off. Bernardus de excel. Io. Baptiſta. Wherewith the Proteſtants are ſo offended that * they ſay, S. Chryſoſtom ſpake raſhly and vntruely.Cythraeus in 3. cap. Mat. Bucerus ibid. And no maruel, for whereas the Euangeliſt himſelf in this place maketh him a perfect paterne of penance and Eremitical life, for deſert or wildernes, for his rough and rude apparel, for abſtayning from al delicate meates (according to our Sauiours teſtimonie alſo of him Mt. 11, 8▪ Luc. 7, 33) they are not aſhamed to peruert all with this ſtrange commentarie,See Caniſ. de verb. Dei corruptelis Ii. 1. c. 2. 3. 4. that it was a deſert * full of townes and villages, his garment was * chamlet, his meate * ſuch as the countrey gaue and the people there vſed: to make him thereby but a common man like to the reſt, in his maner of life: cleane againſt Scriptures, fathers 
                        〈◊〉
                      reaſon.
                  2. Doe penance.)
                     Mt. 4, 17. So is the Latin, word for word, ſo readeth al antiquitie, namely S. Cyprian ep. 52 often,Penance. and S. Auguſtine li. 13 Confeſ. c. 12. and it is a very vſual ſpeache in the New Teſtament,Lu. 13, 3. 5. ſpecially in the preaching of S. Iohn Baptiſt,Lu. 24, 47. * Chriſt him ſelf, and * the Apoſtles: to ſignifie perfect repentance,Act. 2, 38, 26, 20. which hath not onely confeſſion and amendment, but contrition or ſorow for the offenſe, and paineful ſatisfaction: ſuch as S. Cyprian ſpeaketh of in al the foreſaid epiſtle. But the Aduerſaries of purpoſe (as * namely Beza proteſteth) miſlike that interpretation,Annot. in hunc locū. Serm. in fam. & ſiccit. becauſe it fauoureth Satisfaction for ſinne, which they cannot abide. Where if they pretend the ⸬ Greeke word,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . we ſend them to theſe places Mat. 11, 21. Lu. 10, 13. 1 Cor. 7, 9. where it muſt needes ſignifie, ſorowful,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . payneful, and ſatisfactorie repentance. we tel them alſo that * S. Baſil a Greeke Doctor calleth the Niniuites repentance with faſting and hearecloth and aſhes, by the ſame Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . And more we wil tell them in other places.
                  8. Confeſsing their ſinnes.) Iohn did prepare the way to Chriſt and his Sacraments, not only by his baptiſme, but by inducing the people to confeſſion of their ſinnes. Which is not to acknowledge them ſelues in general to be ſinners, but alſo to vtter euery man his ſinnes.
                  9. Fruite worthie.) He preacheth ſatisfaction by doing worthy fruites or workes of penance, which are (as S. Hierom ſaith in 2. Ioel) faſting, praying, almes and the like.
                  10. The axe.) Here preachers are taught to dehort from doing euil for feare of Hel, and to exhort to doe good in hope of heauen: which kind of preaching our Aduer, doe condemne.
                  11. In water.) Iohns baptiſme did not remitte ſinnes,Iohns baptiſme and Chriſts. nor was comparable to Chriſts Baptiſme, as here it is playne and in manie other places. Hiero. adu. Lucifer. Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. li. 5. c. 9. 10. 11. Yet is it an article of our Adu. that thone is no better then the other. which they ſay not to extol Iohns, but to derogate from Chriſtes baptiſme, ſo far, that they make it of no more valure or efficacie for remiſſion of ſinnes, and grace, and iuſtification, then was Iohns: thereby to mainteine their manifold hereſies, that Baptiſme taketh not away ſinnes, that a man is no cleaner nor iuſter by the Sacrament of Baptiſme then before, that it is not neceſſarie for children vnto
 ſaluation, but it is ynough to be borne of Chriſtian parents, and ſuch like erroneous poſitions wel knowen among the Caluiniſts.
                  12. Floore.) This floore is his Church militant here in earth, wherein are both good and bad (here ſignified by corne and chaffe) til the ſeparation be made in the day of iudgement: contrarie to the doctrine of the Heretikes, that hold, the Church to conſiſt onely of the good.
                  16. Opened.) To ſignifie that heauen was ſhut in the old law, til Chriſt by his Paſſion opened it, and ſo by his Aſcenſion was the firſt that entered into it; contrarie to the doctrine of the Heretikes. See Hebr. 9, 
                        •
                     . and 11, 40.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Chriſt going into the deſert 
                        •
                     o prepare him ſelf before his Manifeſtation, ouercometh the Deuils tentations. 12 Beginning in Galilee, as the Prophet ſaid he ſhould: 18 he calleth foure Diſciples: and with his preaching and miracles draweth vnto him innumerable folowers.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN * IESVS was ledde of the Spirit into the ″ deſert,The Goſpel vpō the firſt Sunday in Lent. to be tempted of the Deuil.
Mr. 1, 12 ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vvhen he had ″ faſted fourtie daies and fourtie nightes,Lu. 4, 1. aftervvard he vvas hungrie. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the tempter approched & ſayd to him, If thou be the ſonne of God, commaund that theſe ſtones be made bread.Deu. 8, 3 ✝ 
                     verse 4 Who anſvvered & ſaid, It is vvritten, Nor in bread alone doth man liue, but in euery word that procedeth from the mouth of God.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 Then the Deuil tooke him vp into the holy citie, and ſet him vpon the pinnacle of the Tēple, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and ſayd to him, If thou be the ſonne of God, caſt thy ſelf dovvne, for ″ it is vvritten. That he wil giue his Angels charge of thee,
                  Pſ. 90, 12. 
                  & in their hands ſhal they hold thee vp, leſt perhaps thou knocke they foote agaynſt a ſtone. ✝ 
                     verse 7 IESVS ſayd to him againe,Deu. 6, 16. It is vvritten, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Againe the Deuil tooke him vp into a very high mountaine: and he ſhevved him al the Kingdoms of the vvorld, and the glorie of them, ✝ 
                     verse 9 and ſayd to him, Al theſe vvil I giue thee, if falling dovvne thou vvilt adore me. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Then IESVS ſayth to him,Deu. 6, 13. Auant Satan: for it is vvritten, The Lord thy God ſhalt thou adore, & ″ him onely ſhalt thou ſerue. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Then the Deuil left him: and behold Angels came, and miniſtred to him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And * vvhen IESVS had heard that Iohn vvas deliuere vp,Mr. 1. 14 he retyred into Galilee:THE THIRD part of the Goſpel, of Chriſts manifeſting him ſelf by preaching, and that in Galil
                        •
                     e. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and leauing the citie Nazareth,Luc. 4, 14. came & dvvelt in Capharnaum a ſea tovvne, in the borders of Zabulon & Nephthali, ✝ 
                     verse 14 that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſayd by Eſay the Prophet.Iſa. 9, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 15 
                  Land of Zabulon & land of Nephthali, the way of the ſea beyond Iordan of Galilee, of the Gentils: ✝ 
                        verse 16 the people that ſate in darkneſſe, hath ſeen great light: and to them that ſate in a countrey of the ſhadow of death, light is riſen to them. ✝ 
                     verse 17 From that time IESVS began to
 preach, and to ſay,Mr. 1, 15.″* Doe penance, for the Kingdom of heauen is at hand.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And IESVS * vvalking by the ſea of Galilee,The Goſpel vpō S. Andrewes day. ſavv tvvo brethren,Lu. 5, 1. Simon vvho is called Peter, & his brother, caſting a nette into the ſea (for they vvere fiſhers) ✝ 
                     verse 19 & he ſayth to them, Come ye after me, and I vvil make you to be fiſhers of men. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But they incontinent leauing the nettes, folovved him.Mar. 1, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And going forvvard from thence, he ſavv * other tvvo brethren,Luc. 5, 10. Iames of Zebedee & Iohn his brother in a ſhippe vvith Zebedee their father, repayring their nettes: and he called them. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And they furthvvith left their nettes & father and folovved him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And IESVS vvent round about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogs, & preaching the Goſpel of the Kingdome: and ″healing euery maladie and euery infirmitie in the people. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And the bruite of him vvent into al Syria, and they preſented to him al that vvere il at eaſe, diuerſly taken vvith diſeaſes and torments, and ſuch as vvere poſſeſt, and lunatikes, and ſicke of the palſey, and he cured them: ✝ 
                     verse 25 And much people folovved him from Galilee and Decapolis, and Hieruſalem, and from beyond Iordan.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  1. Deſert.] As Iohn the Baptiſt, ſo our Sauiour by going into the deſert and there liuing in contemplation euen among brute beaſts,Eremites. and ſubiect to the aſſaults of the Diuel for our ſinnes, geueth a warrant and example to ſuch holy men as haue liued in wilderneſſe for penance and contemplation, called Eremites.
                  2. Faſted fourtis daies.] Elias and Moyſes (ſaith S. Hierom) by the faſt of 40 daies were filled with the familiaritie of God,The Lent-faſt. and our Lord him ſelf in the wilderneſſe faſted as many, to leaue vnto vs the ſolemne daies of faſt. (that is, Lent.) Hiero. in c. 58 Eſa. S. Auguſtine alſo hath the very like wordes ep. 119. And generally al the ancient fathers that by occaſion or of purpoſe ſpeake of the Lent-faſt, make it not onely an imitation of our Sauiours faſt, but alſo an Apoſtolicall tradition, and of neceſſitie to be kept.Ign
                           •
                        . ep. 5. Ambr. d
                           •
                         Quadrag. ſer. 36. 34. Hier. ep. 54. ad Mar
                        
                           •
                        el. adu. Montanum. 
                     Contem
                           •
                        e not Lent (ſaith S. Ignatius) for it conteineth the imitation of our Lordes conuerſation. And S. Ambroſe ſaith plainely, that it was not ordained by men, but conſecrated by God: nor inuented by any earthly cogitation, but commaunded by the heauenly Maieſtie, And againe, that it is ſinne not to faſt al the Lent. S. Hieroms wordes alſo be moſt plaine: We (ſaith he) faſt fourtie daies, or, make one Lent in a yere, according to the tradition of the Apoſtles, in time conuenient. This time moſt conuenient is (as S. Auguſtine ſaith ep. 119) immediatly before Eaſter, thereby to communicate with our Sauiours Paſſion: and (as other writers do adde) thereby to come the better prepared and more worthily, to the great ſolemnitie of Chriſtes Reſurrection: beſide many other goodly reaſons in the ancient fathers which for breuitie we omitte. See (good Chriſtian Reader) 12 notable ſermons of S. Leo the Great de Quadrageſi
                           ••
                        , of Lent: namely Ser. 6 and 9. Where he calleth it the Apoſtles ordinance by the doctrine of the Holy Ghoſt. See S. Ambroſe from the 23 ſermon forward: in S. Bernard 7 ſermons, and in many other fathers the like.Aug. Ser. 69. de tēp. Laſt of al, note well the ſaying of S. Auguſtine, who affirmeth that by due obſeruation thereof, the wicked be ſeparated from the good, infidels from Chriſtians, Heretikes from faithful Catholikes.
                  
                      6. It is written.] Heretikes alleage ſcriptures, as here the Deuil doeth, in the falſe ſenſe: the Churche vſeth them, as Chriſt doeth, in the true ſenſe, and to conſute their falſehood. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. li. 
                           •
                        . c. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 10. 7.
                  11. Him only ſerue.] It was not ſayd, ſayth S. Auguſtine, The Lord thy God only ſhalt thou 
                        •
                     dore,
                        
                           •
                        atrîa. Dulia. as it was ſaid, Him onely ſhalt thou ſerue: in Greeke, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Aug. ſup. Gen. 9. 61. Wherevpon the Catholike Churche hath alwayes vſed this moſt true and neceſſarie diſtinction: that there is an honour dew to God only, which to giue vnto any creature, were Idolatrie: and there is an honour dew to creatures alſo according to their dignitie, as to Saints, holy things, and holy place. See Euſeb. Hiſt. Ec. li. 4. c. 14. S. Hierom. cont. Vigil: ep. 53. Aug. li. 10. Ci
                           •
                        it. c. 1. li. 1 Trin. c. 6. Con
                           •
                        . Nic. 2. Damaſe. li. 1. de Imag. Bed. in 4. Luc.
                  
                  17. Doe penance.] That penance is neceſſarie alſo before baptiſme, for ſuch as be of age: as Iohns, ſo our Sauiours preaching declareth, both beginning with penance.
                  23. Healing euery maladie.] Chriſt (ſaith S. Auguſtine) by miracles gat authoritie, by authoritie found credit, by credit drew together a multitude, by a multitude obteyned antiquitie, by antiquitie fortified a Religion, which nor only the moſt fond new ryſing of Heretikes vſing deceitful wiles, but neither the drowſie old errour of the very Heathen with violence ſetting agaynſt it, might in any part ſhake and caſt downe. Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 14.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Firſt,THE SERmon of Chriſt vpon the Mount: conteyning the paterne of a Chriſtian life, in theſe three chapters folowing. Wherof S. Auguſtine hath two goodly bookes to. 4. 3 he promiſeth rewardes, 13 and he layeth before the Apoſtles their office. 17 Secondly, he proteſteth vnto vs that we muſt keepe the commaundements, and that more exactly then the Scribes and Phariſees, whoſe iuſtice weas counted moſt per
                        •
                     ite: but yet that it was vnſufficient. he ſheweth in the precepts of 21 Murder, 
                        •
                     7 Aduoutrie, 
                        •
                     1 Diuorce, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Swearing, 38 Reuenge, 42 Vſurie, 43 Enemies.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND ſeeing the multitudes,Luc. 6, 20. he * vvent vp into a mountaine: and vvhen he vvas ſet, his Diſciples came vnto him, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and opening his mouth he taught them, ſaying.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Bleſſed are the poore in Spirit:THE EIGHT Beatitudes: which are a patt of the Catechiſme. for theirs is the Kingdom of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Bleſſed are the meeke: for they ſhal poſſeſſe the land. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Bleſſed are they that mourne:The Goſpel vpō Alholowes day, and vpon the feaſtes of many Martyrs. for they ſhal be comforted. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Bleſſed are they that hunger & thirſt after iuſtice: for they ſhal haue their fil. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Bleſſed are the merciful: for they ſhal obtayne mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Bleſſed are the cleane of hart: for they ſhal ſee God. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Bleſſed are the peace-makers: for they ſhal be called the children of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Bleſſed are they that ſuffer perſecution ″ for iuſtice: for theirs is the Kingdom of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Bleſſed are ye vvhen they ſhal reuile you, and perſecute you, & ſpeake al that naught is agaynſt you, vntruely, for my ſake: ✝ 
                     verse 12 be glad & reioyce, for your″ revvard is very great in heauen. ⊢ For ſo they perſecuted the Prophets, that vvere before you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 You are the * ſalt of the earth.Mr. 9, 50. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But if the ſalt leeſe his vertue,The Goſpel on the feaſts of Doctors. vvherevvith ſhal it be ſalted? It is good for nothing any more but to be caſt forth,Luc. 14, 34. and to be troden of men. ✝ 
                     verse 15 You are the ″ light of the vvorld. A citie cannot be hid, ſituated on a mountaine. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Neither do men light a
 * candel and put it vnder a buſhel,Mr. 4, 21▪
                   but vpon a cādleſticke, that it may ſhine to al that are in the houſe.Lu. 8, 16▪ 11, 33. ✝ 
                     verse 17 So let ″ your light ſhine before men: that they may ſee your good vvorkes, and glorifie your father vvhich is in heauen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 Do not thinke that I am come to breake the Lavv or the Prophets. I am not come to breake: but to fulfil. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For aſſuredly I ſay vnto you,Luc. 16, 17. * til heauen and earth paſſe, one iote or one tittle ſhal not paſſe of the Lavv: til al be fulfilled. ✝ 
                     verse 20 He therfore that ſhal * breake ″ one of theſe leaſt commaundements,Ia. 2, 10. & ſhal ſo teach men: ſhal be called the leaſt in the Kingdom of heauen. But he that ſhal doe and teach: he ſhal be called great in the Kingdom of heauen.The Goſpel vpō the fifth Sunday after Pentecoſt. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 21 For I tel you, that vnles ″ your iuſtice abound more then that of the Scribes and Phariſees, you ſhal not enter into the Kingdom of heauē.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 You haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old.Exo. 20, 13. * Thou ſhalt not kil▪ and vvho ſo killeth,Deut. 5, 17. ſhal be in danger of iudgement. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But I ſay to you, that vvhoſoeuer is angrie vvith his brother, ſhal be in danger of iudgment. And vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſay to his brother, Raca: ſhal be in danger of a councel. And whoſoeuer ſhal ſay, Thou foole: ſhal be guilty of the ″ hel of fyre. ✝ 
                     verse 24 If therefore thou offer thy ″ gift at the altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath ought agaynſt the: ✝ 
                     verse 25 leaue there thy offering before the altar, and goe firſt to be reconciled to thy brother: and then coming thou ſhalt offer thy gift.Luc. 12, 58. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 26 * Be at agreement vvith thy aduerſarie betimes vvhiles thou art in the vvay vvith him: leſt perhaps the aduerſarie deliuer thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the officer,⸬ This Priſon is taken of very ancient fathers, for Purgatorie: namely S. Cypr. ep. 52. ad Anton. nu▪ 6. and thou be caſt into ⸬ priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Amen I ſay to thee, thou ſhalt not goe out from thence til thou repay the laſt farthing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 You haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old,Exo. 20, 14. * Thou ſhalt not committe aduoutrie. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But I ſay to you, that vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſee a vvoman to luſt her, hath already committed aduoutrie vvith her in his hart. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And if thy right eie ſcandalize thee, plucke it out, & caſt it from thee▪ for it is expedient for thee that one of thy limmes periſh, rather then thy vvhole body be caſt into hel. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And if thy right hand ſcandalize thee, cut it of, and caſt it from thee: for it is expedient for thee that one of thy limmes periſh,Deu. 24, 1. rather then that thy vvhole body goe into 
                     •
                  el.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 It vvas ſayd alſo,Mt. 19, 7. * vvhoſoeuer ſhal dimiſſe his vvife, let 
 him giue her a bil of diuorcement. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But I ſay to you, vvhoſoeuer ſhal dimiſſe his vviſe, ″ excepting the cauſe of fornication, maketh her to committe aduoutrie: And he that ſhal marie her that is dimiſſed, ″ committeth aduoutrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 Agayne you haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old,
* Thou ſhalt not committe periurie: but thou ſhalt performe thy othes to our Lord.Exo. 20, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 35 But I ſay to you ″ not to ſvveare at al: neither by heauen,Leu. 19, 11. becauſe it is the throne of God: ✝ neither by the earth, becauſe it is the foote-ſtole of his feete: neither by Hieruſalē, becauſe it is the citie of the great King. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Neither ſhalt thou ſvveare by thy head, becauſe thou canſt not make one heare vvhite or blacke. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Let your talke be, yea, yea: no, no: and that vvhich is ouer & aboue theſe, is of euil.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 You haue heard that it vvas ſayd,Exo. 21, 
                        •
                     4. * An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. ✝ 
                     verse 39 But I ſay to you ″ not to reſiſt euil: but if one ſtrike thee on thy right cheeke, turne to him alſo the other: ✝ 
                     verse 40 and to him that vvil contend vvith thee in iudgment, and take away thy cote, let goe thy cloke alſo vnto him, ✝ 
                     verse 41 and vvhoſoeuer vvil force thee one mile, goe vvith him other tvvayne.Deu. 15, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 42 He that aſketh of thee, giue to him: and * to him that vvould borovv of thee,The Goſpel vpō the friday after Aſhwenſday. turne not avvay.
                ✝ 
                     verse 43 You haue heard that it vvas ſayd,Leu. 19, 18. * Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour, and ⸬ hate thine enemie. ✝ 
                     verse 44 But I ſay to you, loue your enemies,So taught the Phariſees, not the Law. doe good to them that hate you: and pray for them that perſecute and abuſe you: ✝ 
                     verse 45 that you may be the children of your father vvhich is in heauen, vvho maketh his ſunne to riſe vpon good & bad, and rayneth vpon iuſt & ⸬ vniuſt.We ſee then that the temporal proſperitie of perſons and countries is no ſigne of better men or truer religion. ✝ 
                     verse 46 For if you loue them that loue you, vvhat revvard ſhal you haue? do not alſo the Publicans this? ✝ 
                     verse 47 And if you ſalute your brethren only, vvhat do you more? do not alſo the heathen this? ✝ 
                     verse 48 Be you perfect therfore, as alſo your heauenly father is perfect.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  10. For Iuſtice.) Heretikes and other malefactours 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſuffer willingly and ſtoutly: but they are not bleſſed,Falſe Marteyrs. becauſe they ſuffer not for iuſtice. For (ſayth S. Aug.) they can not ſuffer for iuſtice, that haue deuided the Churche, and, where ſound fayth or charitie is not, there cannot be iuſtice. Cont. ep. Parm. li. 1. c. 9. Ep. 50. Pſal. 34. Conc. 2. And ſo by this ſcripture are excluded al falſe Martyrs, as S. Auguſtine often declareth, and S. Cypr. de Vnit. Eccl. nu. 8.
                  12. Reward.)Merces. In Latin and Greeke the word ſignifieth very wages and hire dewe for workes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and ſo preſuppoſeth a meritorious deede.
                  
                      15. The light.) This light of the world, and citie on a mountayne, and candel vpon a candleſticke, ſignifie the Clergie, and the whole Churche, ſo built vpon Chriſt the mountayne, that it muſt needes be viſible,The Church viſible. and can not be hid nor vnknowen. Aug. cont. Fulg. Donas. c. 18. Li. 16. cont. 
                           •
                        auſt. c. 17. And therfore, the Churche being a candle not vnder a buſhel, but ſhining to al in the houſe (that is) in the world, what ſhal I ſay more (ſayth S. Auguſtine) then that they are blind which ſhut their eyes agaynſt the candel that is ſet on the candleſticke? Tract. 2. in ep. 10.
                  17. Your light.) The good life of the Clergie edifieth much, and is Gods great honour: whereas the contrarie diſhonoureth him.
                  20. One of theſe.) Behold how neceſſarie it is, not only to beleeue, but to keepe al the commaundements, euen the very leaſt.
                  21. Your iuſtice.) It is our Iuſtice,True inherent iuſtice. when it is geuen vs of God. Aug. in Pſ. 
                           •
                        0. Conc. 1. De Sp. & lit. c. 9. So that Chriſtians are true
                        •••
                     uſt, and haue in them ſelues inhaerent iuſtice, by doing Gods commaundement. without which iuſtice of workes no man of age can be ſaued. Aug. de fid. & oper. c. 16. Whereby we ſee ſaluation, iuſtice, and iuſtification, not to come of only fayth, or imputation of Chriſtes iuſtice.
                  23. Hel of fyre.] Here is a playne difference of ſinnes,Venial ſinnes. ſome mortal that bring to Hel, ſome leſſe, and leſſe puniſhed, called venial.
                  24. Gift at the altar.] Beware of coming to the holy altar or any Sacrament out of charitie. But be firſt reconciled to thy brother, and much more to the Catholike Churche, which is the whole brotherhod of Chriſtian men, Heb. 1
                           •
                        , 
                     
                        •
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Excepting the cauſe of fornication.] This exception is onely to ſhew, that for this one cauſe a man may put away his wife for euer: but not that he may marrie another: as it is moſt plaine in S. Marke and S. Luke,Mr. 10, 11. who leaue out this exception,Mariage a Sacrament, and is not diſſolued by diuorce. ſaying: * Whoſoeuer dimiſſeth his Wife and marieth an other,
                     Lu. 16, 18. 
                     committeth aduou
                           •
                        rie. See the Annot. Luc. 19, 9. But if both parties be in one and the ſame fault, then can neither of them not ſo much as diuorce or put away the other.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Committeth aduontrie.] The knot of Mariage is a thing of ſo great a Sacrament, that not by ſeparation it ſelf of the parties it can be looſed, being not lawful neither for the one part nor the other, to marie agayne vpon diuorce. Aug. de bo. Coniug. c. 7.
                  15. Not to ſweare.] The Anabaptiſts here not folowing the Churches iudgement, but the bare letter (as other Heretikes in other caſes) hold that there is no othe lawful, no not before a iudge. whereas Chriſt ſpeaketh agaynſt raſhe and vſual ſwearing in common talke, when there is no cauſe.
                  19. Not to Reſiſt euil.] Here alſo the Anabaptiſts gather of the letter, that it is not lawful to goe to law for our right. as Luther alſo vpon this place held, that Chriſtians might not reſiſt the Turke. whereas by this, as by that which foloweth, patience only is ſignified and a wil to ſuffer more, rather then to reuenge. For neither did Chriſt not S. Paule folow the letter by turning the other cheeke. Io. 1
                           •
                        . Act. 23.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In this ſecond chapter of his Sermon, he Controwleth the Phariſees iuſtice (that is, their almes, prayer, and faſting) for the ſcope and intention therof, which was vaine glorie. 1
                        •
                      Their end alſo was to be riche, but ours muſt not be ſo much as in neceſſaries.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  TAKE good heede that you doe not your ″ iuſtice before men, to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe reward you ſhall not haue with your father which is in heauen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 Therfore when thouTHE a firſt worke of iuſtice. doeſt an almes-deede, ſound not a trompet before thee, as the hypocrites doe in the Synagogues and in the ſtreetes, that they may be honoured of men: Amen I ſay to you, they haue receiued their reward. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But when thou doeſt an almes-deede, let not thy left hand know vvhat thy right hand doeth: ✝ 
                     verse 4 that thy almes-deede may be in ſecrete, and thy father vvhich ſeeth in ſecrete, vvil ″ repay the. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen yeTHE SEcond worke of iuſtice. pray, you ſhal not be as the ″ hypocrites, that loue to ſtand & pray in the Synagogs and corners of the ſtreetes, that they may be ſeen of men: Amen I ſay to you, they haue receiued their revvard. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But thou vvhen thou ſhalt pray, enter into thy chamber, & hauing ſhut the doore, pray to thy father in ſecrete: and thy father vvhich ſeeth in ſecrete, vvil repay thee. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen you are praying, ſpeake not much, as the heathen. For they thinke that in their ″ much-ſpeaking they may be heard. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Be not you therefore like to them, for your father knovveth vvhat is needeful for you, before you aſke him.The PATER NOSTER.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 Thus therefore ſhal you pray.Luc. 11, 2. * OVR FATHER which art in heauen, ſanctified be thy name. ✝ 
                        verse 10 Let thy Kingdom come. Thy wil be done, as in heauen, in earth alſo. ✝ 
                        verse 11 Giue vs to day ourIn S. Luke, the Latin is, Panem quotidianum, dayly bread, the Greeke being indifferent to both, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ſuperſubſtential bread. ✝ 
                        verse 12 And forgiue vs our dettes, as we alſo forgiue our detters. ✝ 
                        verse 13 And ″ leade vs not into tentation. But deliuer vs from euil. Amen.
                  Mr. 11, 25. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For ″ if you vvil * forgiue men their offenſes, your heauenly father vvil forgiue you alſo your offenſes. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But if you vvil not forgiue men, neither vvil your father forgiue you your offenſes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen youThe third worke of iuſtice. faſt, be not as the hypocrites, ſad. For they disfigure their faces, that they may appeare vnto men to faſt. Amen I ſay to you, that they haue receiued their revvard. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But thou vvhen thou doeſt faſt,The Goſpel vpō Aſhwenſday. anoynte thy head, and vvaſh thy face: ✝ 
                     verse 18 that thou appeare not to men to faſt, but to thy father vvhich is in ſecrete: and thy father vvhich ſeeth in ſecrete, vvil repay thee.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 * Heape not vp to your ſelues treaſures on the earth:Luc. 12, 33. vvhere the ruſt & mothe do corrupt, & vvhere theeues digge through & ſteale. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But heape vp to your ſelues treaſures in heauen: vvhere neither the ruſt nor mothe doth corrupt, and vvhere theeues do not digge through not ſteale. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For vvhere thy treaſure is,Luc. 11, 34. there is thy hart alſo. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 22 * The candel of thy body is thine eye. If thine eye be ſimple, thy vvhole body ſhal be lightſome. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But if thine eye be naught: thy vvhole body ſhal be darkeſome. If then the light that is in thee, be darkenes: the darkenes it ſelf hovv great ſhal it be?
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 No man can * ſerue ″ tvvo maſters.The Goſpel on the 14 Sunday after Pentecoſt. For either he vvil hate the one,Luc. 16, 13. and loue the other: or he vvil ſuſtayne the one, and contemne the other. You cannot ſerue God and Mammon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 Therfore I ſay to you,Luc. 12, 22. * be not ″ careful for your life vvhat you ſhal eate, neither for your body vvhat rayment you ſhal
 put on. Is not the life more then the meate: and the body more then the rayment? ✝ 
                     verse 26 Behold the foules of the ayre, that they ſovv not, neither reape, nor gather into barnes: and your heauenly father feedeth them. Are not you much more of price then they? ✝ 
                     verse 27 And vvhich of you by caring, can adde to his ſtature one cubite? ✝ 
                     verse 28 And for rayment vvhy are you careful? Conſider the lilies of the field hovv they grovv: they labour not, neither do they ſpinne. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But I ſay to you, that neither Salomon in al his glorie vvas arayed as one of theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And if the graſſe of the field, vvhich to day is, and to morovv is caſt into the ouē, God doth ſo clothe: hovv much more you O ye of very ſmal fayth? ✝ 
                     verse 31 Be not careful therefore, ſaying, vvhat ſhal vve eate, or vvhat ſhal vve drinke, or vvherevvith ſhal vve be couered? ✝ 
                     verse 32 for al theſe thinges theThey ſeeke temporal things only, and that not of the true God, but of their idols, or by their owne induſtrie. Heathen do ſeeke after. For your father knovveth that you neede al theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Seeke therefore firſt the Kingdom of God, & the iuſtice of him: and al theſe things ſhal be giuen you beſides. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Be not careful therfore for the morovv. For the morovv day ſhal be careful for it ſelf. ſufficient for the day is the euil thereof.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  1. Iuſtice.] Hereby it is playne that good werkes be iuſtice, and that man doing them doeth iuſtice,Good workes iuſtifie. and is thereby iuſt and Iuſtified, and not by fayth only. Al which iuſtice of a Chriſtian man our Sauiour here compriſeth in theſe three workes, in Almes, faſting, and prayers. Aug. li. perf. iuſt. 
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        . So that to giue almes, is to doe iuſtice, and the workes of mercie are iuſtice. Aug. in Pſ. 49. v. 5.
                  4. Repay.] This repaying and rewarding of good workes in heauen, often mentioned here by our Sauiour,Merites. declareth that the ſayd workes are meritorious, and that we may doe them in reſpect of that reward.
                  5. Hypocrites.] Hypocriſie is forbidden in al theſe three workes of iuſtice, and not the doing of them openly to the glorie of God and the profite of our neighbour and our owne ſaluatiō:Hypocriſie. for Chriſt before (c. 5.) biddeth, ſaying: Let your light ſo ſhine before men &c. And in al ſuch workes S. Gregotles rule is to be folowed, The worke ſo to be in publike, that the intention remayne in ſecrete. Ho. 11. in Euang. c. 10.
                  7. Much ſpeaking.] Long prayer is not forbid, for Chriſt * him ſelf ſpent whole nights in prayer,Luc. 6, 12, 18, 1. 21, 36. and he ſayth, * we muſt pray alwayes, and * the Apoſtle exhorteth to pray without intermiſſion, and the holy Church * from the beginning hath had her Canonical houres of prayer: but idle and voluntary babling,1 Theſ. 5, 17. either of the heathens to their goddes, or of Heretikes, that by long Rhetorical prayers thinke to perſuade God:Cypr. de orat. Do. in fine. wheras the Collects of the Churche are moſt breeſe and moſt effectual. See S. Auguſtine ep. 121, c. 8, 9. 10.
                  11. Superſtantial bread.) By this bread ſo called here according to the Latin word and the Greeke,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . we aſke not only al neceſſarie ſuſtenance for the body, but much more al ſpiritual foode, namely the bleſſed Sacrament it ſelf,The B. Sacrament. which is Chriſt the true bread that came from heauen, and the bread of life to vs that eate his bodie. Cypr. de orat. Do. Aug. ep. 121 c. 6. 11. And therfore it is called here Superſubſtantial, that is, the bread that paſſeth and excelleth al creatures, Hiero. in. 2. Tit. in 6. Mat. Amb. li. 5. de Sacr. 6. 4. Aug. ſer. 22. de verb. Do. ſec. Mat. S. Germanus in Theoria.
                  
                  12. Dettes.) Theſe dettes doe ſignifie not only mortal ſinnes,Venial ſinnes. but alſo venial, as S. Auguſtine often teacheth: and therfore euery man, be he neuer ſo iuſt, yet becauſe he can not liue without venial ſinnes, may very truly and ought to ſay this prayer. Aug. cont. du
                           •
                        s. ep. Pelag. li. 1. 
                           •
                        . 14. li. 21 de Ciuit. 6. 27.
                  
                      13. Leade vs not.] S. Cypr. readeth,In Expoſ. orat. Do. 
                     Ne patiaris nos induci.
                     God is not author of euil. Suffer vs not to be led, as S. Auguſtine noteth li. de ho. perſeu. c. 6. and ſo the holy Churche vnderſtandeth it, becauſe God (as S. Iames ſayth) tempteth no man:Iac. 1. though for our ſinnes, or for our probation and crowne, he permitte vs to be tempted. Beware then of Bezaes expoſition vpon this place, who (according to the Caluiniſts opinion) ſaith, that God leadeth them into tentation, into whom him ſelf bringeth in Satan for to fill their harts: ſo making God the author of ſinne.
                  14. If you forgeue.) This poynt, of forgeuing our brother, when we aſke forgiueneſſe of God, our Sauiour repeateth agayne, as a thing much to be conſidered: and therfore commended in the parable alſo of the ſeruant that would not forgiue his felow ſeruant, Mat. 18.
                  16. Faſt.] He forbiddeth not open and publike faſts,
                        
                           •
                        ud. 20, 26. which in the * Scriptures were commaunded and proclamed to the people of God,2. Eſd. 9. and the Niniuires by ſuch faſting appeaſed Gods Wrath:Publike faſt. but to faſt for vaine glorie and praiſe of men,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 2, 15. and to be deſirous by the very face and looke to be taken for a faſter,Ion. 3. that is forbidden, and that is hypocriſie.
                  20. Treaſures in heauen.] Treaſures layd vp in heauen, muſt needes ſignifie, not fayth only, but plentiful almes and deedes of mercie and other good workes,Meritorious Workes. which God keeping as in a booke, wil reward them accordingly: as of the contrarie the Apoſtle ſayth, He that ſoweth ſparingly, ſhal reape ſparingly. 2. Cor. 9.
                  24. Two Maſters.] Two religions, God and Baal, Chriſt and Caluin, Maſſe and Communion, the Catholike Churche and Heretical Conuenticles. Let them marke this leſſon of our Sauiour, that thinke they may ſerue maſters, al times, al religions. Agayne, theſe two maſters doe ſignifie, God and the world, the ſleſ he and the ſpirit, iuſtice and ſinne.
                  25. Careful.] Prudent prouiſion is not prohibited, but to much doubtfulnes and feare of Gods prouiſion for vs: to whom we ought with patience to committe the reſt, when we haue done ſufficiently for our part.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In this third and laſt Chapter of his Sermon, becauſe we know not mens endes, he biddeth vs beware of iudging: 6 and neuertheleſſe to take open dogges (ſo he calleth them) as they be. 7 If theſe workes of iuſtice ſeeme to hard, we muſt pray inſtantly to him that giueth them. 12 In the concluſion, he giueth one ſhort rule of al iuſtice. 13 and then he exhorteth with al vehemencie to the ſtraite way both of the Catholike fayth, 21 and alſo of good life: becauſe only fayth wil not ſuffiſe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IVDGE ″ not, that you be not iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For * in what iudgment you iudge,Luc. 6, 37. you ſhal be iudged: and in what meaſure you mete,Mr. 4, 24. it ſhal be meaſured to you agayne. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And why ſeeſt thou the more that is in thy brothers eye: and the beame that is in thine ovvne eye thou ſeeſt not? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Or how ſayeſt thou to thy brother, Let me caſt out the more of thine eye: and behold a beame is in thine owne eye? ✝ 
                     verse 5 Hypocrite, caſt out firſt the beame out of thine owne eye, and then ſhalt thou ſee to caſt out the more out of thy brothers eye.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 Giue not that which is ″ holy to dogges: neither caſt ye your pearles before ſwine, leſt perhaps they treade them with their feete, and turning, al to teare you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 * Aſke,Lu. 11, 9▪
                   and it ſhal be giuen you: ſeeke, and you ſhal finde, knocke, and it ſhal be opened to you. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For ″ euery one that aſketh, receiueth: and that ſeeketh, findeth: and to him
 that knocketh, it ſhal be opened. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Or vvhat man is there of you, vvhom if his childe ſhal aſke bread, vvil he reach him a ſtone? ✝ 
                     verse 10 Or if he ſhal aſke him fiſh, vvil he reach him a ſerpent? ✝ 
                     verse 11 If you then being naught, knovv hovv to giue good giftes to your children: hovv much more vvil your father vvhich is in heauen, giueThese good things are grace and al ſpiritual gifts, and whatſoeuer pertayneth to the health of the ſoule. good things to them that aſke him?
               ✝ 
                     verse 12 
                  
                     Luc. 6, 31. Al things therfore vvhatſoeuer you vvil that men doe to you doe you alſo to them. For this is the Lavv and the Prophets.
               
                  
                     Luc. 13, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Enter ye by the narrovv gate: becauſe brode is the gate, and large is the vvay that leadeth to perdition, and many there be that enter by it. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Hovv narrovv is the gate, and ſtraite is the vvay that leadeth to life: and fevv there are that finde it!
               
                  The Goſpel on the 7 Sunday after Pentecōt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Take ye great heede of falſe Prophets, vvhich come to you in the ″ clothing of ſheepe, but invvardly are rauening vvolues ✝ 
                     verse 16 ″ By their 
                     Luc. 6, 44. fruites you ſhal knovv them. Do men gather grapes of thornes, or figges of thiſtels? ✝ 
                     verse 17 Euen ſo euery good tree yeldeth good fruites, and the euil tree yeldeth euil fruites. ✝ 
                     verse 18 A good tree can not yeld euil fruites, neither an euil tree yeld good fruites. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Euery tree that yeldeth not good fruite, ſhal be cut dovvne, and ſhal be caſt into fyre. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Therfore by their fruites you ſhal knovv them.
               ✝ 
                     verse 21 Not euery one that ſayth to me, ″ Lord, Lord, ſhal enter into the Kingdom of heauen: but he that doeth the vvil of my father vvhich is in heauen, he ſhal enter into the kingdom of heauen.⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 22 Many ſhal ſay to me in that day, Lord, Lord, haue not vve prophecied in they name, and in thy name caſt out diuels, and in thy name vvrought many miracles? ✝ 
                     verse 23 And then I vvil cōfeſſe vnto them, That I neuer knevv you, depart from me you that vvorke iniquitie. ✝ 
                     verse 24 
                  
                     Luc. 6, 47. Euery one therfore that heareth theſe my vvordes, and doeth them: ſhal be likened to a vviſe man that built his houſe vpon a rocke, ✝ 
                     verse 25 and the rayne fel, and the fluddes came, & the vvindes blevve, and they beate agaynſt that houſe, and it fel not, for it vvas founded vpon a rocke. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And euery one that heareth theſe my vvordes, & doeth them not, ſhal be like a fooliſh man that built his houſe vpon the sand, ✝ 
                     verse 27 and the rayne fel, and the fluddes came, and the vvindes blevve, and they beate agaynſt that houſe, and it fel, & the fall therof vvas great.
               ✝ 
                     verse 28 And it came to paſſe, vvhen IESVS had fully ended theſe vvordes, the multitutde vvere in 
                     Mar. 1, 22. Luc. 4, 32. admiration vpon his
 doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For he vvas teaching them as hauing povver, and not as their Scribes and Phariſees.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  1. Iudge not.] It is not Chriſtian part to iudge il of mens actes which be in them ſelues good and may procede of good meaning, or of mans inward meanings and intentions which we can not ſee: of which fault they muſt beware that are to ſuſpicious and giuen to deeme alwayes the worſt of other men. But to ſay, that Iudas, or an Heretike euidently knowen to die obſtinatly in hereſie, is damned, and in al other playne and manifeſt caſes to iudge, is not forbidden.
                  6. Holy to dogges.] No holy Sacrament and ſpecially that of our Sauiours bleſſed body,Worthy receiuing. muſt be geuen wittingly to the vnworthy, that is, to them that haue not by confeſſion of al mortal ſinnes examined and proued them ſelues. See the Annot. 1. Cor. 11, 27. 28. 29.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Euery one that aſketh.] Al things that we aſke neceſſarie to ſaluation with humilitie, attention, continuance, and other dewe circunſtances, God wil vndoubtedly graunt when it is beſt for vs.
                  15. Clothing of ſheepe.] Extraordinarie apparance of zeale and holines is the ſheepes cote in ſome Heretikes:Heretikes Wolues in ſheepe-ſkinnes. but theſe of this time weare not that garment much, being men of vnſatiable ſinne. This is rather their garment, common to them with al other Heretikes, to crake much of the word of the Lord,Ro. 16, 1
                           •
                        . and by pretenſed allegations and * ſweete wordes of benediction, and ſpecially by promiſe of knowledge, light and libertie of the Goſpel, to ſeduce the ſimple and the ſinful.
                  16. Fruites.] Theſe are the fruites which Heretikes are knowen by, diuiſion from the whole Churche,Heretikes knowen by their fruites. diuiſion among them ſelues, taking to them ſelues new names and new malſters, inconſtancie in doctrine, diſobedience both to others and namely to ſpiritual officers, loue and liking of them ſelues, pride and intolerable vaunting of their owne knowledge aboue al the holy Doctors, corruption, falſification, and quite denying of the parts of Scriptures that ſpecially make agaynſt them, and theſe be common to al Heretikes lightly. Otherſome are more peculiar to theſe of our time, as Inceſtuous mariages of vowed perſons, Spoile of Churches, Sacrilege and profanation of al holy things, and many other ſpecial poynts of doctrine, directly tending to the corruption of good life in al ſtates.
                  21. Lord, Lord.] Theſe men haue faith, otherwiſe they could not inuocate, Lord, Lord: Ro. 10. But here we ſee that to beleeue is not ynough, and that not only infidelitie is ſinne, as Luther teacheth.Not only faith. Yea Catholikes alſo that worke true miracles in the name of our Lord, and by neuer ſo great fayth, yet without the workes of iuſtice ſhal not be ſaued. 1. Cor. 13. Agayne, conſider here who they are that haue ſo often in their mouth, The Lord, the Lord, and how litle it ſhal auaile them, that ſet ſo litle by good workes, and contemne Chriſtian iuſtice.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Immediatly after his Sermon (to confirme his doctrine with a miracle) he cureth a Leper. 5 But aboue him and al other Iewes, he cōmendeth the faith of the Centurion, who was a Gentil: and foretelleth by that occaſion, the vocation of the Gentiles, and reprobation of the Iewes. 14 la Peters houſe he ſheweth great grace. 18 In the way to the ſea he ſpeaketh with two, of folowing him: 23 and vpon the ſea commaundeth the tempeſt: 28 and beyond the ſea he manifeſteth the deuils malice agaynſt man, in an heard of ſvvine.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen he vvas come dovvne from the mountaine,The Goſpel on the 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie. great multitudes folovved him: ✝ 
                     verse 2 And * behold a leper came and adored him ſaying,Mr. 1, 40. Lord, if thou vvilt, thou canſt make me cleane.Lu. 5, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And IESVS ſtretching forth his hand, touched him, ſaying. I vvil. be thou made cleane. And forthvvith, his leproſy vvas made cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS ſayth to
 him,Leu. 14, 2. See thou tel no body: but goe, * ſhevv thy ſelf to the ″ prieſt, & offer the ″ gift vvhich Moyſes commaunded for a teſtimonie to them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * vvhen he vvas entred into Capharnaum,THE GOSPEL vpon the thurſday after Aſhwenſday. And alſo in Maſſe for the ſicke. there came to him a Centurion,Lu. 7, 1. beſeeching him, ✝ 
                     verse 6 & ſaying, Lord my boy lieth at home ſicke of the palſey, & is ſore tormēted. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And IESVS ſayth to him, I vvil come, & cure him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the Centurion making anſvver, ſayd, Lord ″ I am not vvorthie that thou ſhouldeſt enter vnder my roofe: but only ſay the vvord, and my boy ſhal be healed. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For I alſo am a man ſubiect to authoritie, hauing vnder me ſouldiars: and I ſay to this, goe, and he goeth: and to an other, come, & he cometh: and to my ſeruant, doe this, & he doeth it. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And IESVS hearing this, marueiled: and ſayd to them that folovved him, Amen I ſay to you, I haue not found ſo great faith in Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I ſay to you, that many ſhal come from the Eaſt and Weſt, and ſhal ſitte dovvne vvith Abraham & Iſaac & Iacob in the kingdom of heauen: ✝ 
                     verse 12 but the children of the kingdom ſhal be caſt out into the exteriour darkeneſſe: there ſhal be vveeping & gnaſhing of teeth. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And IESVS ſaid to the Centurion, Goe: and as thou haſt beleeued, be it done to thee. And the boy vvas healed in the ſame houre. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And * vvhen IESVS was come into Peters houſe,Mr. 1, 29▪
                   he ſavv ″ his vviues mother layde,Lu. 4, 38▪
                   & in a fitte of a feuer: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and he touched her hand, and the feuer left her, and ſhe aroſe, and miniſtred to him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen euening vvas come, they brought to him many that had diuels: and he caſt out the ſpirites vvith a vvord:Eſa. 53, 4. and al that vvere il at eaſe he cured: ✝ 
                     verse 17 that it might be fulfilled vvich vvas ſpoken by Eſay the Prophete ſaying, He tooke our infirmities, and bare our diſeaſes.
                  1. Pet. 2, 24.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And IESVS ſeeing great multitudes about him, commaunded to goe beyond the vvater.Lu. 9, 57▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 19 And a * certaine Scribe came, and ſayd to him, Maſter, I vvil folovv thee vvitherſoeuer thou ſhalt goe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And IESVS ſayth to him, the foxes haue holes, and the foules of the ayre neſtes: but the ſonne of man hath not vvhere to lay his head.Luc. 9, 
                        •
                     9. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And * an other of his Diſciples ſayd to him, Lord, permit me firſt to goe & burie my father. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But IESVS ſayd to him, Folovv me, and ″ let the dead burie their dead.THE GOSPEL on the 4 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * vvhen he entered into the boate,Mar. 4, 36. his Diſciples folovved him:Lu. 8, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 24 and loe a great tempeſt aroſe in the ſea, ſo 
 that the boate vvas couered vvith vvaues, but he ſlept. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And they came to him, and raiſed him, ſaying, Lord, ſaue vs, vve periſh. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he ſaith to them, Why are you fearful O ye of litle faith? Then riſing vp ″ he commaunded the vvindes & the ſea, and there enſued a great calme. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Moreouer the men marueled ſaying, What an one is this, for the vvindes and the ſea obey him? ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 And * vvhen he vvas come beyond the vvater into the countrey of the Geraſens,Mr. 5, 1. there mette him tvvo that had diuels,Luc. 8, 26. coming forth out of the ſepulcres, exceding fierce, ſo that none could paſſe by that vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And behold they cried ſaying, What is betvvene vs and thee IESV the ſonne of God? art thou come hither to torment vs before the time? ✝ 
                     verse 30 And there vvas not farre frome them an heard of many ſvvine feeding. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And the diuels beſought him ſaying, If thou caſt vs out, ſend vs into the heard of ſvvine. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And he ſaid to thē, Goe. But they going forth vvent into the ſvvine, and behold the whole heard vvent vvith a violence headlong into the ſea: and they dyed in the vvaters. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And the ſvvineheardes ſled: and comming into the citie, told al, and of them that had been poſſeſſed of diuels. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And behold the vvhole citie vvent out to meete IESVS, and vvhen they ſavv him, they beſought him that he vvould paſſe from their quarters.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  4 Prieſt.] The Prieſts of the old law (ſaith S. Chryſoſtome) had authoritie and priuilege only to diſcerne who where healed of leproſie, and to denounce the ſame to the people: but the Prieſts of the new law haue power to purge in very deede the filth of the ſoule.Prieſts forgiue ſinnes. Therefore whoſoeuer deſpiſeth them, is more vvorthie to be puniſhed then the rebel Datha
                        •
                      and his complices. S. Chryſo. li. 3. de Sacerd.
                  
                  4. Gift.] Our Sauiour willeth him to goe and offer his gift or ſacrifice according as Moyſes preſcribed in that caſe, becauſe the other ſacrifice being the holieſt of al holies, which is his body, was not yet begonne. So ſaith S. Aug. li. 2. q. Euang. q. 3. & Cont. Aduerſ. leg. & Preph. li. 
                           •
                        . c. 19. 20.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Not worthy.] Orig. ho. 5. in diuerſ. When thou eateſt (ſaith he) and drinkeſt the body and bloud of our Lord,DOMINE, non ſum dignus. he entereth vnder thy roofe. Thou alſo therefore humbling thy ſelf, ſay: Lord I am not worthy. &c. So ſaidLiturg. S. Chryſ. Graec. ſub finem. S. Chryſoſtom in his Maſſe, and ſo doeth the Cath. Churche vſe at this day in euery Maſſe, See S. Auguſtine ep. 118 ad Ianu.
                  
                  14. His Wiues mother.
                     Prieſts mariage.) Of Peter ſpecially among the reſt it is euident that he had a wife, but (as S. Hi
                        •
                     rom ſayth) after they were called to be Apoſtles,Lib. 1. adu. they had no more carnal companie with their wiues,Iou. c. 14. as he proueth there by the very wordes of our Sauiour, * He that hath left wiſe &c.
                     Mt. 19, 29. And ſo in the Latin Churche hath been alwayes vſed, that maried men may be and are daily made Prieſts,Epiph. hae. 59. either after the death of the wife, or with her conſent to liue in perpetual continencie. And if the Greekes haue Prieſts that doe otherwiſe, S. Epiphanius a Greeke Doctor telleth them that they doe it agaynſt the ancient Canons, andSozom. li. 1. c. 22. Paphnutius plainely ſignifieth the ſame in the firſt Councel of Nice. But this is moſt playne, that there was neuer either in the Greeke Church or the Latin,Socrat. li. 1. c. 
                           •
                        . authentical example of any that married after holy Orders.
                  22. Let the dead.) By this we ſee that not only no wordly or carnal reſpect, but no other laudable
 dutie toward our parents, ought to ſtay vs from folowing Chriſt, and chooſing a life of greater perfection.
                  26. He commaunded.) The Churche (here ſignified by the boate or ſhippe) and Catholikes, are often toſſed with ſtormes of perſecution, but Chriſt who ſeemed to ſleepe in the meane time, by the Churches prayers awaketh, and maketh a calme.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The Maiſters of the Iewes he confuteth both with reaſons and miracles: a defending his remitting of ſinnes, 9 his eating with sinners, 14 and his condeſcending to his weake Diſciples vntil he haue made them ſtronger. 18 ſhewing alſo in two miracles, the order of his prouidence about the lewes and Gentils, leauing the one when he called the other. 27 he cureth tvvo blind men, and one poſſeſſed. 35 And hauing vvith ſo many miracles together confuted his enemies, and yet they worſe and worſe, vpon pitie toward the people, he thinketh of ſending true paſtours vnto them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND entring into a boate,The Goſpel vpon the 18 Sunday after Pentecoſt. he paſſed ouer the vvater, and came into his ovvne citie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And * behold they brought to him one ſicke of the palſey lying in bedde.Mr. 2, 3. And IESVSWe ſee that the fayth of one helpeth to obtaine for an other. ſeeing their faith,Luc. 5, 18. ſaid to the ſicke of the palſey, Haue a good hart ſonne, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And behold certaine of Scribes ſayd vvithin them ſelues,″ He blaſphemeth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS ſeeing their thoughtes, ſaid. Wherfore thinke you euil in your hartes? ✝ 
                     verse 5 ″ Whether is eaſier, to ſay, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee: or to ſay, Ariſe and vvalke? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But that you may knovv that the ″ Sonne of man hath povver in earth to forgiue ſinnes, (then ſayd he to the ſicke of the palſey,) Ariſe, take vp thy bedde, and goe into thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he aroſe, and vvent into his houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the multitudes ſeeing it, vvere afrayd, and ″ glorified God that gaue ſuch povver ″ to men. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And * vvhen IESVS paſſed forth from thence,The Goſpel vpō S. Matthewes day. he ſavv a man ſitting in the cuſtome-houſe,Mar. 2, 14. named Matthevv:Luc. 5, 27. And he ſayth to him, Folovv me. And he aroſe vp, and folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And it came to paſſe as he vvas ſitting at meate in the houſe, behold many Publicans and ſinners came, and ſate dovvne vvith IESVS and his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the Phariſees ſeeing it, ſayd to his Diſciples: vvhy doth your Maſter eate vvith Publicans & ſinners? ✝ 
                     verse 12 But IESVS hearing it, ſayd: They that are in health, neede not a phyſicion, but they that are il at eaſe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But go your vvayes and learne vvhat it is,Oſe. 6, 6. 
                  I vvil mercie, & ″ not ſacrifice. For I am not come to cal the iuſt, but ſinners. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Then * came to him the Diſciples of Iohn,Mar. 2, 18. ſaying, vvhy do vve and the Phariſees ″ faſt often,Lu. 5, 33. but thy Diſciples do not
 faſt? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And IESVS ſayd to them, Can the children of the bridegrome mourne, as long as the bridegrome is vvith them? But the dayes vvil come vvhen the bridegrome ſhal be taken avvay from them, andChriſt ſignifieth that the Churche ſhal vſe faſting daies after his Aſcenſion. Epiph. in Comp. fid. Cath. Aug. ep. 
                     
                        •
                     0. then they ſhal faſt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And no body putteth a peece of ravv cloth to an old garment. For he taketh avvay the peecing therof from the garment, and there is made a greater rent. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Neither do they put ″ nevv vvine into old bottels. Othervviſe the bottels breake, and the vvine runneth out, and the bottels periſh. But nevv vvine they put into nevv bottels: and both are preſerued together.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 * As he vvas ſpeaking this vnto them,Mar. 5, 22. behold a certaine Gouernour approched,The Goſpel vpō the 23 Sunday after Pentecoſt. and adored him,Luc. 8, 41. ſaying, Lord, my daughter is euen novv dead: but come, lay thy hand vpon her, and ſhe ſhal liue. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And IESVS ryſing vp folovved him, and his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And behold a vvoman vvhich vvas troubled vvith an iſſue of bloud ″ tvvelue yeres, came behind him, and touched the hemme of his garment. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For ſhe ſayd vvithin her ſelf, If I ſhal ″ touch only his garment: I ſhal be ſafe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But IESVS turning and ſeeing her, ſayd, Haue a good hart daughter,Loe, her deuotion to the hemme of his garment, was not ſuperſtitiō, but a token of greater faith: ſo is the deuout touching of holy relikes. thy faith hath made the ſafe. And the vvoman became vvhole from that houre. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen IESVS vvas come into the houſe of the Gouernour, & ſavv minſtrels and the multitude keeping a ſturre, ✝ 
                     verse 24 he ſayd, Depart: for the vvenche is not dead, but ſleepeth. And they laughed him to ſkorne. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen the multitude vvas put forth, he entred in, and held her hand. And the mayde aroſe. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And this bruite vvent forth into al that countrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And as IESVS paſſed forth from thence, there folovved him tvvo blinde men crying and ſaying, Haue mercie on vs, O ſonne of Dauid. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vvhen he vvas come to the houſe, the blinde came to him. And IESVS ſayth to them, ″ Do you beleeue, that I can doe this vnto you? They ſay to him, Yea Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Then he touched their eyes, ſaying, According to your faith, be it done to you. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And their eyes vvere opened, and IESVS threatened them, ſaying, See that no man knovv it. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But they vvent forth, & bruited him in al that countrey.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhen they vvere gone forth,Mat. 12, 22. behold they brought him a dumme man, poſſeſſed vvith a diuel. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And after the diuel vvas caſt out, the dumme man ſpake, and the multitudes marueled ſying, Neuer vvas the like ſeene in Iſrael.
 ✝ 
                     verse 34 But * the Phariſees ſayd,In like maner ſay the Heretikes, calling al miracles done in the Catholike Churche, the lying ſignes of Antichriſt. In the prince of diuels he caſteth out diuels.Mt. 12, 24.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And IESVS vvent about al the cities, and tovvnes, teaching in their ſynagogs, and preaching the Goſpel of the kingdom, and curing euery diſeaſe, and euery infirmitie. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And ſeing the multitudes, he pitied them: becauſe they vvere vexed, and lay like ſheepe that haue not a ſhepheard. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Then he ſayth to his Diſciples, The harueſt ſurely is great, but the vvorkemen are fevv. ✝ 
                     verse 38 ″ Pray therfore the Lord of the harueſt, that he ſend forth vvorkemen into his harueſt.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  3. He blaſphemeth.] When the Iewes heard Chriſt remitte ſinnes, they charged him with blaſphemie, as Heretikes now charge his prieſts of the new Teſtament, for that they remitte ſinnes: to whom he ſayd, Whoſe ſinnes you ſhal forgeue, they are forgeuen &c. Io. 20.
                  5. Whether is eaſier.]
                     Men haue power to forgiue ſinnes. The faithleſſe Iewes thought (as Heretikes now a daies) that to forgeue ſinnes was ſo proper to God, that it could not he communicated vnto man: but Chriſt ſheweth that as to worke miracles is otherwiſe proper to God only, and yet this power is communicated to men, ſo alſo to forgeue ſinnes.
                  6. The ſonne of man in earth.) Chriſt had power to remit ſinnes, and often executed the ſame, not only as he was God, but alſo as he was a man, becauſe he was head of the Churche and our cheefe Biſhop and Prieſt according to his manhod, in reſpect wherof al power was geuen him in heauen and earth. Mat. 28, v. 18.
                  8. Glorified.) The faythful people did glorifie God that gaue ſuch power to men for to remit ſinnes and to doe miracles, knowing that that which God committeth to men, is not to his derogation, but to his glorie. him ſelf only being ſtil the principal worker of that effect, men being only his miniſters, ſubſtitutes, and working vnder him and by his commiſſion and authoritie.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . To men.) Not only Chriſt as he was man, had this power to forgeue ſinnes, but by him and from him the Apoſtles, and conſequently Prieſts, Mat. 28. Al power is geuen me. Mat. 18. Whatſoeuer you ſhal looſe in earth, ſhal be looſed in heauen. Ioan. 20. Whoſe ſinnes you ſhal forgeue, they are forgeuen.
                  
                  13. Not ſacrifice.)
                     External Sacrifice. Theſe are the wordes of the Prophete, who ſpake them euen then when ſacrifices where offered by Gods commaundement: ſo that it maketh not agaynſt ſacrifice, but he ſaith that ſacrifice only without mercie and charitie, and generally with mortal ſinne, is not acceptable. The Iewes offered their ſacrifices dewely, but in the meane time they had no pitie nor mercie on their brethren: that is it which God miſliketh.
                  14. Faſt often.)
                     Faſting. By the often faſting of his diſciples, we may eaſely gather that he appointed them a preſcript maner of faſting: as it is certaine he taught them a forme of prayer. Lu. 5. and 11.
                  
                  17. New wine.) By this new wine, he doth playnly here ſignifie faſting and the ſtraiter kind of life: by the old bottels, them that can not away therewith.
                  19. Twelue yeres.) This woman a Gentil had her diſeaſe twelue yeres, and the Gouerners daughter a Iewe (which is here rayſed to life) was twelue yeres old, Luc. 8. Marke then the allegorie hereof in the Iewes and Gentils. As that woman fel ſicke when the wenche was borne, ſo the Gentils went their owne wayes into idolatrie, when the Iewes in Abraham beleeued. Agayne, as Chriſt here went to rayſe the wenche, and by the way the woman was firſt healed, and then the wenche reuiued: ſo Chriſt came to the Iewes, but the Gentils beleeued firſt and were ſaued, and in the end the Iewes ſhal beleeue alſo. Hiero. in Mat.
                  
                  21. Touche only.) Not only Chriſtes wordes, but his garment and touche thereof or any thing to him belonging,Relikes and Images. might doe and did miracles,Euſeb. li. 
                           •
                         c. 14. hiſt. force proceding from his holy perſon to them. Yea this woman returning home * ſet vp an Image of Chriſt, for memorie of this benefite, and the hemme of the ſame Image did alſo miracles. This image Iul
                        •
                     an the Apoſtata threwe downe, and ſet vp his owne in ſteede therof, which was immediatly deſtroyed by fyre from heauen. But the image of Chriſt broken in peeces by the heathen, the Chriſtians afterward gathering the peeces together, placed it in the Churche: where it was (as Sozomenus writeth) vnto his time.li. 5 c. 20.
                  
                  
                      2
                        •
                     . Do you beleeue that I can.] We ſee here that to the corporal healing of theſe men he requireth onely this faith, that he is able. Which faith is not ſufficient to iuſtifie them. How then doe the Heretikes by this and the like places pleade for their onely iuſtifying faith? See the Annot. Mar. 5, 36.
                  3
                        •
                     . Pray therfore.) Therfore doth the Churche pray and faſt in the Imber dayes, when holy Orders are geuen, that is, when workemen are prepared to be ſent into the harueſt. See Act. 1
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He giueth to the Tvvelue the povver of Miracles, and ſo ſendeth them to the loſt ſheepe of the lovves, 5 vvith inſtructions accordingly: to and by occaſion of the ſending, foretelleth of the perſecutions after his Aſcenſion, arming them and al other againſt the ſame, 40 and alſo exhorting the people to harbour his ſeruants in ſuch times of perſecution.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND hauing called his tvvelue Diſciples together,Mr. 3, 13. 6, 7.
* he gaue them ″ povver ouer vncleane ſpirites,Lu. 6, 13 9, 1. that they ſhould caſt them out, and ſhould cure al maner of diſeaſe, and al maner of infirmitie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the names of the tvvelue Apoſtles be theſe: the ″firſt, Simon vvho is called Peter, and Andrevv his brother, ✝ 
                     verse 3 Iames of Zebedee, and Iohn his brother, Philip and Barthlemevv, Thomas and Matthevv the publican, and Iames of Alphaeus, & Thaddaeus, ✝ 
                     verse 4 Simon Cananaeus, and Iudas Iſcariote, vvho alſo betrayed him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 Theſe tvvelue did IESVS ſend: commaunding them, ſaying, Into the vvay of theThey haue here commiſſion to preach only in Iſrael: the time being not yet come to call the Gentiles. Gentiles goe ye not, and into the cities of the Samaritans enter ye not: ✝ 
                     verse 6 but goe rather to the ſheepe that are periſhed of the houſe of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And going preache, ſaying, That the kingdom of heauē is at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Cure the ſicke, raiſe the dead, cleanſe the lepers, caſt out diuels: gratis you haue receiued, gratis giue ye. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Do not ″ poſſeſſe gold, nor ſiluer, nor money in your purſes▪ ✝ 
                     verse 10 not a ſkrippe for the vvay, neither two coates, neither ſhoes, neither rodde. for the vvorkeman is vvorthie of his meate. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And into vvhatſoeuer citie or tovvne you ſhal enter, inquire vvho in it is vvorthie: and there tarie til you goe forth. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen ye enter into the houſe, ſalute it, ſaying, ″ Peace be to this houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And if ſo be that houſe be vvorthie, your peace ſhal come vpon it. but if it be not vvorthie: your peace ſhal returne to you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhoſoeuer ſhal not receiue you, nor heare your vvordes: going forth out of the houſe or the citie ″ ſhake of the duſt from your feete. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Amen I ſay to you, it ſhal be ″ more tolerable for the land of the Sodomites and Gomorrheans in the day of iudgement, then for that citie.
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 16 Behold I ſend you as ſheepe in the middes of vvolues.The Goſpel vpō the Commemoration of S. Paul, Iun. 30. Be ye therfore⸬ Wiſedom and ſimplicitie both be neceſſarie in preachers, Biſhops and Prieſts. vviſe as ſerpents, and ſimple as dooues. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And take heede of men. For they vvil deliuer you vp in Councels, and in their ſynagogs they vvil ſcourge you. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And to Preſidents and ″ to Kings ſhal you be ledde for my ſake, in teſtimonie to them and the Gentiles.Mar. 15, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But vvhen they ſhal deliuer you vp, * take no thought hovv or vvhat to ſpeake
                     •
                   for ″ it ſhal be giuen you in that houre vvhat to ſpeake.Luc. 12, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For it is not you that ſpeake, but the ſpirit of your father that ſpeaketh in you.Luc. 21, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 21 * The brother alſo ſhal deliuer vp the brother to death, and the father the ſonne: and the children ſhal riſe vp agaynſt the parents, and ſhal vvorke their death, ✝ 
                     verse 22 and you ſhal be odious to al men for my name. but he that ſhal perſeuêre vnto the end, he ſhal be ſaued. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen they ſhal perſecute you in this citie,The Goſpel vpō S. Athanaſius day. Maij 2. flee into an other. Amen I ſay to you, you ſhal not finiſh al the cities of Iſrael, til the ſonne of man come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 * The Diſciple is not aboue the maiſter,Luc. 6, 40 nor the ſeruant aboue his lord. ✝ 
                     verse 25 It ſuffiſeth the diſciple that he be as his maiſter: and the ſeruāt as his lord. If they haue called the goodmā of the houſe Beelzebub, ″ hovv much more them of his houſhold? ✝ 
                     verse 26 Therfore feare ye not them. For nothing is hid, that ſhal not be reuealed: and ſecrete, that ſhal not be knovven. ✝ 
                     verse 27 That vvhich I ſpeake to you in the darke, ſpeake ye in the light: and that vvhich you heare in the eare, preache ye vpon the houſe 
                     •
                  oppes. ✝ 
                     verse 28 AndA goodly cō
                     fort for Chriſtians and Catholikes and al good men, in the perſecutiōs of Turke, of Heretikes, of al Wicked men. feare ye not them that kil the body, and are not able to kil the ſoul: but rather feare him that can deſtroy both ſoul and body into hel. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 Are not tvvo ſparovves ſold for a fa
                     •
                  thing: and not one of them ſhal fall vpon the ground vvithout your father? ✝ 
                     verse 30 But your very heares of the head are al numbered. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Feare not therfore:Mar. 8, 38. better are you then many ſparovves. ✝ 
                     verse 32 * Euery one therfore that ſhal ″ confeſſe me before men, I alſo vvil confeſſe him before my father vvhich is in heauen.Luc. 9. 26. 12, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But he that ſhal denie me before men, I alſo vvil denie him before my father vvhich is in heauen.The Goſpel vpō a Martyrs day that is not a Biſhop. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Do not ye thinke * that I came to ſend peace into the earth:Luc. 12, 51. I came ″ not to ſend peace, but the ſvvord.Mich. 7, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 35 For I came to ſeparate * man agaynſt his father, and the daughter agaynſt her mother, and the daughter in lavv agaynſt her mother in lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And a mans enemies, they of his ovvne houſhold. ✝ 
                     verse 37 He that loueth father or 
 mother ″ more then me, is not vvorthy of me: and he that loueth ſonne or daughter aboue me, is not vvorthy of me. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he that taketh not his croſſe, and folovveth me, is not vvorthy of me. ✝ 
                     verse 39 He that hath found his life, ſhal loſe it: and he that hath loſt his life for me, ſhal finde it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 * He that receiueth you,Luc. 10, 16. receiueth me: and he that receiueth me, receiueth him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 41 He that receiueth a Prophet ″ in the name of a Prophet, ſhal receiue the revvard of a Prophet. and he that receiueth aThe reward for harbouring & helping any bleſſed iuſt perſon ſuffering for his iuſtice and conſcience. iuſt man in the name of a iuſt man, ſhal receiue the revvard of a iuſt man. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And
* vvhoſoeuer ſhal giue drinke to one of theſe litle ones a cuppe of cold vvater,Mar. 9, 41. only in the name of a diſciple, amen I ſay to you, he ſhal not loſe his revvard. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  1. Power.) Miracles were ſo neceſſarie to the confirmation of their doctrine beginning then to be preached, that not only Chriſt him ſelf did miracles, but alſo he gaue to his Apoſtles power to doe them.
                  2. Firſt Simon.) Peter the firſt, not in calling, but in preeminence,Peters Primacie. for (as S. Ambroſe ſaith in 2 Cor. 12.) Andrew firſt folowed our Sauiour before Peter:
                     Beza in Annot. noui Teſt. 155
                           •
                        . 
                     and yet the Primacie Andrew receaued not, but Peter. Which preeminence of S. Peter aboue the other Apoſtles is ſo playnly ſignified in this word, Firſt, by the iudgement euen of Heretikes, that Beza, notwithſtanding he confeſſeth the conſent of al copies both Latin and Greeke, yet is not aſhamed to ſay that he ſuſpecteth that this word was thruſt into the text by ſome fauourer of Peters Primacie. Wherby we haue alſo that they care no more for the Greeke then for the Latin, when it maketh agaynſt them: but at their pleaſure ſay that al is corrupted.
                  9. Do not poſſeſſe.) Preachers may not carefully ſeeke after the ſuperfluities of this life, or any thing which may be an impediment to their function. And as for neceſſaries, they deſerue their temporal liuing at their hands for whom they labour ſpiritually.
                  12. Peace to this houſe.) As Chriſt him ſelf vſed theſe wordes or this bleſſing often,Biſhops bleſſing. 
                     Peace be to you, ſo here he biddeth his Apoſtles ſay the like to the houſe where they come: And ſo hath it been alwaies a moſt godly vſe of BiſhopsAug. de ciuit. li. 22 c. 8. Leo Imp. i vit. S. Chryſ. Socrat. li. 
                           •
                         c. 14. to geue their bleſſing where they come. Which bleſſing muſt needes be of great grace and profite, when none but worthy perſons (as here we read) might take good thereof:It remitteth venial ſinnes. and when it is neuer loſt, but returneth to the geuer, when the other partie is not worthy of it. Among other ſpiritual benefites it taketh away venial ſinnes. Amb. in 9. Luc.
                  
                  14. Shake of the duſt.) To contemne the true preachers, or not to receaue the truth preached, is a very damnable ſinne.
                  15. More tolerable.) Hereby it is euident that there be degrees and differences of damnation in Hel fyre according to mens deſerts. Aug. li. 
                           •
                         de Bapt. c. 19.
                  18. Kings.) In the beginning Kings and Emperours perſecuted the Churche, that by the very death and bloud of Martyrs it ſhould grow more miraculouſly, afterward when the Emperours and kings were them ſelues become Chriſtians, they vſed their power for the Churche, agaynſt Infidels and Heretikes. Aug. ep. 48.
                  19. It ſhal be giuen.) This is verified euen at this preſent alſo, when many good Catholikes, that haue no great learning, by their anſwers confound the Aduerſaries.
                  25. How much more.) No maruel therefore if Heretikes call Chriſtes Vicar Antichriſt, when their forefathers the faithles Iewes called Chriſt him ſelf Beelzebub.
                  32. Confeſſe me.) See how Chriſt eſteemeth the open confeſſing of him,Confeſſing of Chriſt and his truth. that is, of his truth in the Catholike Churche,Act. 9. for as whē Saul perſecuted the Churche, he ſayd * him ſelf was perſecuted: ſo to confeſſe him, and his Churche, is al one. Cōtrariewiſe, ſee how he abhorreth them that deny him before men. Which is not only to deny any one litle article of the Catholike fayth cōmended to vs by the Churche: but alſo to allow or conſent to hereſie by any meanes, as by ſubſcribing,
 coming to their ſeruice and ſermons, furthering them any way agaynſt Catholikes, and ſuch like.
                  34. Not peace but ſword.) Chriſt came to breake the peace of worldlings and ſinners: as when the ſonne beleueth in him, and the father doth not: the wife is a Catholike, and the huſband is not. For to agree together in infidelitie, hereſie, or any other ſinne, is a naughty peace. This being the true meaning of Chriſtes wordes, marke that the Heretike interprete this to mainteine their rebellions and troubles which their new goſpel breedeth. Beza in no. Teſt. an. 1565.
                  37. More then.] No earthly thing, nor duty to Parents, wife, children, countrie, or to a mans owne body and life, can be any iuſt excuſe why a man ſhould doe, or feyne him ſelf to doe or beleeue any thing, agaynſt Chriſt or the vnitie and faith of his Churche.
                  41. In the name.] Reward for hoſpitality, and ſpecially for receiuing an holy perſon, as Prophet, Apoſtle, Biſhop, or Prieſt perſecuted for Chriſtes ſake. For by receiuing of him in that reſpect as he is ſuch an one, he ſhal be partaker of his merites, and he rewarded as for ſuch an one. Whereas on the contrarie ſide, he that receiueth an Heretike into his houſe and a falſe preacher doth communicate with his wicked workes. Ep. 2. Io.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Iohn the Baptiſt in priſon alſo doing his diligence, ſendeth ſome of his diſciples to Chriſt: that as they heard, ſo they might alſo ſee his miracles vvith their eyes. 7 Aftervvard Chriſt declareth hovv vvorthy of credite Iohns teſtimonie vvas: 16 and inueigheth agaynſt the levves, vvho vvith neither of their maners of life could be vvonne: 20 no nor vvith Chriſtes infinite miracles: 25 prayſing Gods vviſedom in this behalfe, 27 and calling to him ſelf al ſuch as feele the
                        •
                     e ovvne burdens.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe: vvhen IESVS had done cōmaunding his tvvelue Diſciples, he paſſed from thence, to teach & preach in their cities.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 * And vvhen Iohn had heard in priſon the vvorkes of Chriſt:The Goſpel on the 2. Sunday in Aduent. ſending tvvo of his diſciples,Luc. 7, 18. he ſaid to him, ✝ 
                     verse 3 ″ Art thou he that art to come, or looke vve for an other? ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS making anſvver ſaid to them, Goe and report to Iohn vvhat you haue heard and ſeen.Eſa. 35, 5. 61, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 5 * The blinde ſee, the lame vvalke, the lepers are made cleane, the deafe heare, the dead riſe againe, to the poore the Goſpel is preached: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and bleſſed is he that ſhal not be ſcandalized in me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen they vvent their vvay, IESVS began to ſay to the multitudes of Iohn, ″ What vvent you out ″ into the deſert to ſee? a reede ſhaken vvith the vvinde? ✝ 
                     verse 8 But vvhat vvent you out to ſee? a man clothed in ſoft garments? Behold they that are clothed in ſoft garments, are in Kinges houſes. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But vvhat vvent you out to ſee? a Prophet? yea I tel you and more then a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For this is he of vvhom it is vvritten,Mal. 3, 1. 
                  Behold I ſend mine angel before thy face, vvhich ſhal prepare thy vvay before thee. 
                  ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Amen I ſay to you, there hath not riſen among the borne of vvomen a greater then Iohn the Baptiſt: yet he that is the
 leſſer in the kingdom of heauen, is greater then he. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And
* from the dayes of Iohn the Baptiſt vntil novv,Luc. 16, 16. the kingdom of heauen ſuffereth violence, and the violent beare it avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For al the Prophets and the Lavv prophecied vnto Iohn:Mal. 4, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 14 and if you vvil receiue it, he is * ″ Elias that is for to come. ✝ 
                     verse 15 He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And * vvherevnto ſhal I eſteeme this generation to be like?Luc. 7, 31. It is like to children ſitting in the market-place: vvhich crying to their companions, ✝ 
                     verse 17 ſay, we haue piped to you, and you haue not daunced: vve haue lamented, and you haue not mourned.Mt. 3, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For * Iohn came neither ″ eating not drinking: and they ſay, He hath a diuel. ✝ 
                     verse 19 The Sonne of man came eating and drinking, and they ſay, Behold a man that is a glotton and a vvinedrinker, a frende of Publicans and ſinners. And vviſedom is iuſtified of her children.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 Then * began he to vpbraide the cities,Luc. 10, 13. vvherein vvere done the moſt of his miracles, for that they had not done penance. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Wo be to thee Corozain, vvo be to thee Beth-ſaida: for if in Tyre & Sidon had been vvrought the miracles that haue been vvrought in you, they had done″ penance in hearecloth and aſhes long agoe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But neuertheleſſe, I ſay to you, it ſhal be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of iudgement, then for you. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And thou Capharnaum, ſhalt thou be exalted vp to heauen? thou ſhalt come dovvne euen vnto hel. for if in Sodom had been vvrought the miracles that haue been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained vnto this day. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But notvvithſtanding I ſay to you, that it ſhal be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of iudgement, then for thee.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 At that time IESVS anſvvered and ſaid.Luc. 10, 21. * I confeſſe to thee O Father lord of heauen and earth,The Goſpel vpō S. Matthias day Feb. 24. and vpon S. Francis day Octob. 4. and for many Martyrs. becauſe thou haſt hid theſe things from the vviſe and prudent, and haſt reuealed thē to ″ litle ones. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Yea Father: for ſo hath it vvel pleaſed thee. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Al things are deliuered me of my Father. And no man knovveth the Sonne but the Father: neither doth any knovv the Father, but the Sonne, and to vvhom it ſhal pleaſe the Sonne to reueale. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Come ye to me al that labour, and are burdened, and I vvil refreſh you. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Take vp my yoke vpon you, and learne of me, becauſe I am meeke, and humble of hart: and you ſhal finde reſt to your ſoules. ✝ 
                     verse 30 For my″ yoke is ſvveete, and my burden light. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  3. Art thou he] Iohn him ſelf doubted not, for he baptized him and gaue great teſtimonie of him before: Io. 1. But becauſe his diſciples knewe him not, nor eſteemed of him ſo much as of Iohn their owne Maiſter, therfore did he ſend them vnto Chriſt, that by occaſion of Chriſtes anſwer he might the better inſtruct them what he was, and ſo make them Chriſtes diſciples, proferring them to a better Maiſter.
                  7. What went you out.]
                     Eremitical life. High commendation of Iohns holineſſe, as wel for his faſting, rough attire, ſolitary life, and conſtancie, as for the dignitie of his function.
                  7. Into the deſert.] The faythful people in al ages reſorted of deuotion into wildernes to ſee men of ſpecial and rare holynes, Prophets, Eremites, Anchorites &c. to haue their prayers or ghoſtly counſel. See S. Hierom de vitae Hilarionis.
                  
                  14. Elias.)
                     Elias. As Elias ſhal be the meſſenger of Chriſtes later coming, ſo was Iohn his meſſenger and Praecurſor at his former coming: and therfore is he called Elias, becauſe of his like office and like ſpirit. Luc. 1. Grego. ho. 7. in Euang.
                  
                  18. Eating and drinking.] The wicked quarrellers of the world miſconſtre eaſely al the actes and life of good men. If they be great faſters and auſtere liuers, they are blaſphemed and counted hypocrites; if they conuerſe with other men in ordinary maner, then they be counted diſſolute.
                  21. Penance in ſackcloth.]
                     Penance. By this ſackcloth and aſhes added here and in other places, wee ſee euidently that Penance is not only leauing of former ſinnes, and chaunge or amendement of life paſt, no nor bare ſorowfulnes or recounting of our offenſes already committed, but requiteth puniſhement and chaſtiſemēt of our perſons by theſe and ſuch other meanes as the Scriptures do els where ſet forth, and therfore concerning the worde alſo, it is rather to be called Penance, as in our tranſlation: then (as the Aduerſaries of purpoſe auoyding the word) Repentance or Amendement of life:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and that according to the very vſual ſignification of the * Greeke word in the moſt ancient Eccleſiaſtical Greeke writers: who for Poenitentès (which in the Primitiue Churche did publike penance) ſay,Dionyſ. Eccl. hier. c. 3. in initio. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, Men that are doing penance. And concerning that part of penance which is Cōfeſſion, the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie calleth it by the ſame Greeke word, and the penitents comming to confeſſion, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Sozom. li. 7 c. 16. Socrat. li. 5 c. 19.
                  25. Litle ones.) Theſe litle ones doe not ſignifie here only the vnlearned, as though Coblers and weauers and wemen and girles had this reuelation, and therfore do vnderſtand al Scriptures and are able to expound them: but here are ſignified the humble, whether they be learned or vnlearned:Mt. 18. 
                           •
                        . as when he ſayth, Vnles you become as litle ones, you ſhal not enter into the Kingdom of heauen. And ſo alſo the greateſt Doctors (who as they were moſt learned, ſo moſt humbled them ſelues to the iudgement of the Catholike Churche) are theſe litle ones: and Heretikes, who although vnlearned, yet vaunt their knowledge and their ſpirit of vnderſtanding aboue al ancient fathers and the whole Churche, can not be of theſe litle and humble ones.
                  30. Yoke ſweete.]
                     The commaundements poſſible. What is this light burden and ſweete yoke, but his commaundements, of which S. Iohn ſayth 1. Ep. 5. His commaundements are not heauy? cleane contrary to the Aduerſaries that ſay, they are vnpoſſible to be kept.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The blindnes of the Phariſees about the Sabboth he reproueth by Scriptures, by reaſon, and by a miracle, 14 and his death being therfore ſought by them, he meekely goeth out of the vvay, according as Eſay had prophecied of him, 2
                        •
                      His caſting out of deuils alſo he defendeth agaynſt them, 31 and ſetteth forth the daunger they ſtand in for their horrible blaſphemie. 38 And becauſe they aſke yet for a ſigne, he ſhevveth hovv vvorthely they ſhal be damned, 43 foretelling hovv the deuil ſhal poſſeſſe their Nation, 46 and teſtifying that although he be of their bloud▪ yet not they for this, but ſuch as keepe his commaundements are deere vnto him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AT that time * IESVS vvent through the corne on the Sabboth:Mr. 2, 23. and his Diſciples being hungrie,Lu. 6, 
                        •
                     . began to plucke the eares, and to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the Phariſees ſeeing them, ſaid to him. Loe, thy Diſciples doe that vvhich is not lavvful
 for them to doe on the Sabboth-dayes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But he ſayd to them,1. Re. 21, 4. Haue you not read vvhat * Dauid did vvhen he vvas an hungred, and they that vvere vvith him: ✝ 
                     verse 4 hovv he entred into the houſe of God, and did eate the loaues of propoſition, vvhich it vvas not lavvful for him to eate, nor for them that vvere vvith him,Leu. 24, 9. * but for prieſtes only? ✝ 
                     verse 5 Or haue ye not read in the * Lavv, that on Sabboth-dayes the prieſtes in the temple do breake the Sabboth,Nu. 28, 9 and are vvithout blame? ✝ 
                     verse 6 but I tel you that there is here a greater then the tēple. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And if you did knovv vvhat it is,Oſe. 6, 6. 
                  I wil mercie, and not
                  See the annotatiō chap. 9, 13. 
                  ſacrifice: you vvould neuer haue condemned the innocentes. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the Sonne of man is lord of the Sabboth alſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen he had paſſed from thence, he came into their ſynagogue.Mr. 3, 1, Lu. 6, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * behold there vvas a man vvhich had a vvithered hand, and they aſked him ſaying, Whether is it lavvful to cure on the Sabboths? that they might accuſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But he ſayd to them, what man ſhal there be of you, that ſhal haue one ſheepe: and if the ſame fall into a ditche on the Sabboths, vvil he not take hold and lift it vp? ✝ 
                     verse 12 Hovv much better is a man more then a ſheepe? therfore it is lavvful on the Sabboths to doe a good deede. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then he ſayth to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. and he ſtretched it forth, and it vvas reſtored to health euen as the other.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the Phariſees going forth made a cōſultation agaynſt him, hovv they might deſtroy him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But IESVS knovving it, retired from thence: and many folovved him, and he cured them all. ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he charged them that they ſhould not diſcloſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 That it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſpoken by Eſay the Prophete,Eſ. 42, 1 ſaying. ✝ 
                     verse 18 
                  Behold my ſeruant vvhom I haue choſen, my beloued in vvhom my ſoul hath vvel liked. I vvil put my ſpirit vpon him, and iudgement to the Gentiles ſhal he ſhew. ✝ 
                        verse 19 He ſhal not contend nor crie out, neither ſhal any man heare in the ſtreetes his voyce. ✝ 
                        verse 20 The reede bruiſed he ſhal not breake, and ſmoking flaxe he ſhal not extinguiſh: til he caſt forth iudgement vnto victorie. ✝ 
                        verse 21 And in his name the Gentiles ſhal hope.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 Then * vvas offered to him one poſſeſſed vvith a deuil,Luc. 11, 14. blinde and dumme: and he cured him, ſo that he ſpake & ſaw. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And al the multitudes vvere amaſed,Mar. 3, 22 and ſayd, whether this be the Sonne of Dauid? ✝ 
                     verse 24 But the Phariſees hearing it, ſayd. This felovv caſteth not out diuels but ″ in Beelzebub the Prince of the diuels. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And IESVS knovving their cogitations, ſaid to them.
               Euery kingdomTherfore the Kingdom of heretikes can not poſſibly ſtand, becauſe it is alwayes ful of diuiſiō and diſſenſion. deuided againſt it ſelf ſhal be made
 deſolate: and euery citie or houſe deuided agaynſt it ſelf, ſhal not ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And if Satan caſt out Satan, he is deuided againſt him ſelf: hovv then ſhal his Kingdom ſtand? ✝ 
                     verse 27 And if I in Beelzebub caſt out deuils: your children in vvhom do they caſt out? Therfore they ſhal be your iudges. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But if I in the Spirit of God do caſt out deuils, then is the kingdom of God come vpon you. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Or hovv can a man enter into the houſe of the ſtrong, and rifle his veſſel, vnles he firſt binde the ſtrong? and then he vvil rifle his houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 30 He that is ″ not vvith me, is agaynſt me: and he that ″ gathereth not vvith me, ſcattereth. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Therfore I ſay to you, euery ſinne and blaſphemie ſhal be forgiuen men, but ″ the blaſphemie of the Spirit ſhal not be forgiuen. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſpeake a vvord agaynſt the Sonne of man, it ſhal be forgiuen him: but he that ſhal ſpeake againſt the Holy Ghoſt, it ſhal not be forgiuen him neither in this vvorld, nor ″ in the vvorld to come. ✝ 
                     verse 33 EitherIt is a mans owne free wil and election, to be a good tree or an il tree: to bring forth good fruites or bad. S. Auguſtine vpon this place. li. 2. c. 4 de actis cum F
                           •
                        lic. Manichae
                           •
                        .
                   make the tree good, and his fruite good: or make the tree euil, and his fruite euil. for of the fruite the tree is knowē. ✝ 
                     verse 34 You vipers broodes, hovv can you ſpeake good things, vvhereas you are euil? for of the aboundance of the hart the mouth ſpeaketh. ✝ 
                     verse 35 A good man out of a good treaſure bringeth forth good things: and an euil man out of an euil treaſure bringeth forth euil things. ✝ 
                     verse 36 But I ſay vnto you that euery ″ idle vvord that men ſhal ſpeake, they ſhal render an account for it in the day of iudgement. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For of thy wordes thou ſhalt be iuſtified, and of thy vvordes thou ſhalt be condemned.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 Then anſvvered him certaine of the Scribes and Phariſees,THE GOSPEL vpon vveneſday the firſt weeke of Lent. ſaying, Maiſter, vve vvould ſee a ſigne from thee. ✝ 
                     verse 39 who anſvvered, and ſaid to them,
               The vvicked and aduouterous generation ſeeketh a ſigne: and a ſigne ſhal not be giuen it, but the ſigne of Ionas the Prophet.Ion. 2, 
                        •
                     . ✝ 
                     verse 40 For as * Ionas vvas in the vvhales belly three dayes and three nightes: ſo ſhal the Sonne of man be in the hart of the earth three dayes and three nightes. ✝ 
                     verse 41 The men of Niniuee ſhal riſe in the iudgemēt vvith this generatiō, and ſhal condemne it:Ion. 3, 5. becauſe * they did penance at the preaching of Ionas.3. Reg. 10, 1. And behold more then Ionas here. ✝ 
                     verse 42 The * Queene of the South ſhal riſe in the iudgement vvith this generation, and ſhal condemne it: becauſe ſhe came from the endes of the earth to heare the vviſedom of Salomō, and behold more
 the Salomon here.Luc. 11. 24. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And * vvhen an vncleane ſpirit ſhal goe out of a man, he vvalketh through dry places, ſeeking reſt, and findeth not. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Then he ſaith, I vvil returne into my houſe vvhence I came out. And coming he findeth it vacant, ſvvept vvith beſoms, and trimmed. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Then goeth he, and taketh vvith him ſeuen other ſpirites more vvicked then him ſelf,2. Pet. 2, 20. and they enter in and dvvel there: and * the laſt of that man be made vvorſe then the firſt. So ſhal it be alſo to this vvicked generation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 As he vvas yet ſpeaking to the multitudes,Mar. 3, 31. * behold his mother and his brethren ſtoode vvithout,The Goſpel vpō the day of the Seuen Brethren &c. Iulij 
                        •
                     0. ſeeking to ſpeake to him.Luc. 8. 20. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And one ſaid vnto him, Behold thy mother and thy brethren ſtand without, ſeeking thee. ✝ 
                     verse 48 But he anſvvering him that told him, ſaid, ″ Who is my mother, and vvho are my brethren? ✝ 
                     verse 49 And ſtretching forth his hand vpon his Diſciples, he ſaid, Behold my mother and my brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 50 For vvhoſoeuer ſhal doe the vvil of my father, that is in heauen: he is my brother, and ſiſter, and mother. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  24. In Beelzebub.] The like blaſphemie agaynſt the Holy Ghoſt is, to attribute the miracles done by Saincts either dead or aliue, to the Diuel.
                  30. Not with me.] They that are indifferent to al religions,Neuters in religion. commonly and fitly called Neuters, 
                        •
                     oyning them ſelues to neither part, let them marke theſe wordes wel, and they ſhal ſee, that Chriſt accoumpted al them to be agaynſt him and his Church, that are not plainely and flatly with him and it.
                  30. Gathereth not with me.] He ſpeaketh not only of his owne perſon, but of al to whom he hath committed the gouernement of his Church, and ſpecially of the cheefe Paſtours ſucceeding Peter in the gouernement of the whole.Ep. 
                           •
                        8. As S. Hierom writing to Damaſus Pope of Rome, applieth theſe words vnto him, ſaying of al Heretikes, He that gathereth not with thee, ſcattereth: that is to ſay, He that is not with Chriſt, is with Antichriſt.
                  
                  31. The blaſphemie of the Spirit.] He meaneth not that there is any ſinne ſo great, which God wil not forgiue, or whereof a man may not repēt in this life, as ſome Heretikes at this day affirme: but that ſome heinous ſinnes (as namely this blaſphemie of the Iewes againſt the eu
                        •
                     dent workes of the Holy Ghoſt, and likewiſe Archeheretikes who wilfully reſiſt the knowē truth and workes of the Holy Ghoſt in Gods Church) are hardly forgeuen, and ſeldom haue ſuch men grace to repent. Otherwiſe among al the ſinnes agaynſt the Holy Ghoſt (which are commonly reckened ſixe) one only ſhal neuer be forgiuen,Final impenitence. that is, dying without repentance wilfully, called Final impenitence. Which ſinne he committeth that dieth with contempt of the Sacrament of Penance, obſtinatly refuſing abſolution, by the Churches miniſterie: as S. Auguſtine plainely declareth in theſe wordes.Remiſſion of ſinnes in the Church. 
                     Whoſoeuer he be that beleueth not mans ſinnes to be remitted in Gods Church, and therfore deſpiſeth the bountifulnes of God in ſo mighty a worke, if he in that obſtinat minde continue tll his liues end, he is guilty of ſinne againſt the Holy Ghoſt, in which Holy Ghoſt Chriſt remitteth ſinnes. Enchir. 83. Ep. 50 in fine.
                  
                  32. Sonne of man.] The Iewes in their wordes ſinned againſt the ſonne of man, when they reprehended thoſe things which he did as a man, to witte, calling him therfore, a glutton, a great drinker of wine, a freend of the Publicans, and taking offenſe becauſe he kept company with ſinnes, brake the Sabboth, and ſuch like: and this ſinne might more eaſely be forgiuen them, becauſe they iudged of him as they would haue done of any other man: but they ſinned
 and blaſphemed againſt the Holy Ghoſt (called here the finger of God whereby he wrought miracles) when of malice they attributed the euident workes of God in caſting our diuels, to the diuel him ſelf: and this ſinne ſhal not be remitted, becauſe it ſhal hardly be remitted, as we ſee by the plague of their poſteritie vntil this day.
                  3
                        •
                     . Nor in the world to come.] S. Auguſtine and other Holy Doctors gather herevpon, that ſome ſinnes may be remitted in the next life,Purgatorie. and conſequently prooue Purgatorie thereby. De Ciuit. Dei li. 21 c. 18. D. Gregor, Dial. li. 4 c. 39.
                  36. Idle word.] If of euery idle word we muſt make accoumpt before God in iudgement, and yet ſhal not for euery ſuch word be damned euerlaſtingly: then there muſt needes be ſome temporal puniſhment in the next life.
                  4
                        •
                     . Who is my mother.] The dutiful affection toward our parents and kinsfolke is not blamed, but the inordinate loue of them to the hinderance of our ſeruice and duty toward God.Al Hereſies alleage Scriptures. Vpon this place ſome old Heretikes denied Chriſt to haue any mother. Aug. li. de Fid. & Symb. c. 4. Neither euer was there any hereſie ſo abſurd, but it would ſeeme to haue Scripture for it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  Speaking in parables (as the Scripture foretold of him, and as meete vvas for the reprobate Ievves:) he ſhevveth by the parable of the Sovver, that in the labours of his Church, three partes of foure do periſhe through the fault of the hearers. 24 and yet, by the parable of good ſeede and cockle (as alſo of the Nett
                        •
                     ) that his ſeruant
                        •
                      muſt not for al that, neuer vvhile the vvorld laſteth, make any Schiſme or Separation. 31 And by parables of the litle muſtard ſeede and leauen, that notvvithſtanding the three parts periſhing, and ouerſovving of cockles, yet that fourth part of the good ſeede ſhal ſpreade ouer al the vvorld. 44 And vvithal, vvhat a treaſure, and pearle it is. 53 After al vvhich, yet his ovvne countrie vvil not honour him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE ſame day IESVS going out of the houſe,Mr. 4, 1. ſate by the ſea ſide. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And * great multitudes vvere gathered together vnto him,Lu. 8, 4. in ſo much that he vvent vp into a boate & ſate: and al the multitude ſtoode in the ſhore, ✝ 
                     verse 3 and he ſpake to them many things in parablesh, ſaying,
               Behold the ſovver vvent forth to ſovv. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhiles he ſovveth, ſome fell by the vvay ſide, and the foules of the aire did come and eate it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Otherſome alſo fell vpon rockie places, where they had not much earth: and they ſhot vp in continent, becauſe they had not deepenes of earth, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and after the ſunne vvas vp, they parched: and becauſe they had not roote, they vvithered. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And other fell among thornes: and the thornes grevve and choked them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And otherſome fell vpon good ground: and they yelded fruite, the ″ one an hundredfold, the other threeſcore, and an other thirtie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And his Diſciples came and ſaid to him. Why ſpeakeſt thou to them in parables? ✝ 
                     verse 11 Who anſvvered and ſaid vnto them, Becauſe ″ to you it is giuen to knovv the myſteries of the kingdom of heauen: but to them it is not giuen. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For 
 he that hath, to him ſhal be giuen, and he ſhal abound: but he that hath not, from him ſhal be taken avvay that alſo vvhich he hath. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Therfore in parables I ſpeake to them: becauſe ſeeing they ſee not, andWhen Gods word is preached, they proprely haue eares to heare, that haue hartes to obey: and they hearing do not heare, which heare by ſenſe of their body, and obey not by conſent of their hartes. Aug. de dono perſeu. c. 14. hearing they heare not, neither do they vnderſtand: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and the prophecie of Eſay is fulfilled in them, vvhich ſaith, With hearing ſhal you heare, and you ſhal not vnderſtand: and ſeeing ſhal you ſee, and you ſhal not ſee. ✝ 
                        verse 15 For the hart of this people is vvaxed groſſe, and vvith their eares they haue heauily heard, and their eies ″ they haue ſhut: leſt at any time they may ſee with their eies, and heare with their eares, and vnderſtand vvith their hart and be conuerted, and I may heale them. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But bleſſed are your eyes becauſe they doe ſee, and your eares becauſe they doe heare. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For amen I ſay to you, that
* many Prophets and iuſt men haue deſired to ſee the things that you ſee,Luc. 10, 23. and haue not ſeen them: and to heare the things that you heare, and haue not heard them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Heare you therfore the parable of the ſovver.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 Euery one that heareth the vvord of the kingdom and vnderſtand not, there cometh the vvicked one, and catcheth avvay that vvhich vvas ſovven in his hart: this is he that vvas ſovven by the vvay ſide. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he that vvas ſovven vpon rockie placesh: this is he that heareth the vvord, and incōtinent receiueth it vvith ioy, ✝ 
                     verse 21 yet hath he not roote in him ſelf, but is for a time: and vvhen there falleth tribulation and perſecution for the vvord, he is by and by ſcandalized. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he that vvas ſovven among thornes, this is he that heareth the vvord, and the carefulnes of this vvorld and the deceitfulnes of riches choketh vp the vvord, and he becometh fruitles. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But he that vvas ſovven vpon good ground: this is he that heareth the vvord, and vnderſtandeth, and bringeth fruite, and yeldeth ſome an hundred-fold, and an other threeſcore, and an other thirtie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 An other parable he propoſed to them,The Goſpel vpō the 5 Sunday after the Epiphanie. ſaying, The kingdom of heauen is reſembled to a man that ſovved good ſeede in his field. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But vvhen men vvere a ſleepe, his enemy came and ouerſovved cockle among the vvheate, and vvent his vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And vvhen the blade vvas ſhot vp, and had brought forth fruite, then appeared alſo the cockle. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And the ſeruants of the goodman of the houſe comming ſaid to him, Sir, didſt thou not ſovv good ſeede in thy field? Whence then hath it cockle? ✝ 
                     verse 28 And he ſaid to them, The enemy man hath done this. And the ſeruants ſaid to him, Wilt thou vve goe and gather it vp? ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he ſaid, No: ″ leſt perhaps
 gathering vp the cockle, you may roote vp the vvheate alſo together vvith it. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Suffer both to grovv vntil the harueſt, and in the time of harueſt I vvil ſay to the reapers, Gather vp firſt the cockle, and binde it into bundels to burne, but the vvheate gather ye into my barne. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 An other parable he propoſed vnto them,The Goſpel vpō the 
                        •
                      Sunday after the Epiphanie. ſaying,Mar. 4, 30. * The kingdom of heauen is like to a muſtard-ſeede,Luc. 13, 18. vvhich a man tooke and ſovved in his field. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Which is the ″ leaſt ſurely of al ſeedes: but vvhen it is grovven, it is greater then al herbes, and is made a tree, ſo that the ſoules of the aire come, and dvvel in the branches thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 33 An other parable he ſpake to them, The kingdom of heauen is like to leauen, vvhich a vvoman tooke and hid in three meaſures of meale, vntil the vvhole vvas leauened.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 Al theſe things IESVS ſpake in parables to the multitudes, and vvithout parables he did not ſpeake to them: ✝ 
                     verse 35 that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſpoken by the Prophet ſaying,Pſa. 77, 2. 
                  I wil open my mouth in parables, I wil vtter things hidden from the foundation of the vvorld. ⊢
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 Then hauing dimiſſed the multitudes, he came into the houſe, and his Diſciples came vnto him, ſaying, Expound vs the parable of the cockle of the field. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Who made anſvver and ſaid to them, He that ſoweth the good ſeede, is the Sonne of man. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And the field, is the vvorld. And the good ſeede: theſe are the childrē of the kingdom. And the cockle: are the children of the vvicked one. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And the enemie that ſovved them, isNor God then, but the Diuel is the author of all euil. the deuil. But the harueſt, is the ende of the vvorld. And the reapers, are the Angels. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Euen as cockle therfore is gathered vp, and burnt vvith fire: ſo ſhal it be in the ende of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 41 The Sonne of man ſhal ſend his Angels, and they ſhal gather out of his kingdom al ſcandals, and them that vvorke iniquitie: ✝ 
                     verse 42 and ſhal caſt them into the furnace of fire, There ſhal be vveeping and gnaſhing of teeth. ✝ 
                     verse 43 Then ſhal the iuſt ſhine as the ſunne, in the kingdom of their father. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 44 The kingdom of heauen is like a treaſure hidden in a field▪
                  The Goſpel for Virgins & other holy women. vvich a man hauing found, did hide it, and for ioy thereof goeth, and ſelleth al that he hath, and byeth that field. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Againe the kingdom of heauen is like to a marchant man, ſeeking good pearles. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And hauing found one precious pearle, he vvent his vvay, and ſold al that he had, and
 bought it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 47 Againe the kingdom of heauen is like to a nette caſt into the ſea, and gathering together of al kind of fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 48 Which, vvhen it vvas filled, dravving it forth, and ſitting by the ſhore, they choſe out theHere alſo are ſignified good and bad in the Church. good into veſſels, but the bad they did caſt out. ✝ 
                     verse 49 So ſhal it be in the conſummation of the vvorld. The Angels ſhal goe forth, and ſhal ſeparate the euil from among the iuſt, ✝ 
                     verse 50 and ſhal caſt them into the furnace of fire, there ſhal be vveeping and gnaſhing of teeth. ✝ 
                     verse 51 Haue ye vnderſtoode al theſe things? They ſay to him, Yea. ✝ 
                     verse 52 He ſaid vnto them, Therefore euery Scribe inſtructed in the kingdom of heauen, is like to a man that is an houſholder, vvhich bringeth forth out of his treaſure nevv things and old. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 53 And it came to paſſe:Mr. 6, 1. vvhen IESVS had ended theſe parables,
Luc. 4, 16. he paſſed from thence. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And * coming into his ovvne countrie, he taught them in their ſynagogues, ſo that they marueled, and ſaid, Hovv came this fellovv by this vviſedom and vertues? ✝ 
                     verse 55 Is not this the ″ carpenters ſonne? Is not his mother called MARIE, and his brethren, Iames and Ioſeph, and Simon and Iude: ✝ 
                     verse 56 and his ſiſters, are they not al vvith vs? Whence therefore hath he al theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 57 And they vvere ſcandalized in him. But IESVS ſaid to them, There is not a Prophet vvithout honour but in his ovvne countrie, and in his ovvne houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 58 And he vvrought not many miracles there becauſe of their incredulity.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  8. One an hundred.] This difference of fruites is the difference of merites in this life,Difference of merites and rewardes. and rewardes for them in the next life, according to the diuerſities of ſtates, or other differences, of ſtates, as that the hundred fold agreeth to virgins profeſſed, threeſcore fold to religious widowes, thirtiefold to the maried. Aug. li. de. S. Virginit. c. 44. & ſeq. Which truth the old Heretike Iouinian denied (as ours doe at this day) affirming that there is no difference of merites or rewardes. Hiero. li. 2 adu. Iouia. Ambroſ. ep. 82. Aug. her. 82.
                  11. To you is giuen.] To the Apoſtles and ſuch as haue the guilding and teaching of others, deeper knowledge of Gods word and myſteries is giuen, then to the common people. As alſo to Chriſtians generally, that which was not giuen to the obſtinate Iewes.
                  15. They haue ſhut.) In ſaying that they ſhut their owne eies, which S. Paul alſo repeateth Act. 28:
                     God is not the author of euil. he teacheth vs the true vnderſtanding of al other places, where it might ſeeme by the bare wordes that God is the very author and worker of this induration, and blindnes, and of other ſinnes:Iren. apud Euſeb. li. 5. c. 19. * which was an old condemned blaſphemie, and is now the Hereſie of * Caluin: whereas our Sauiour here teacheth vs, that they ſhut their owne eies, and are the cauſe of their owne ſinne and damnation, God not doing, but permitting it, and ſuffering them to fall further becauſe of their former ſinnes,Calu. li. 2▪ Inſtit. c. 4. as S. Paul declareth of the reprobate Gentiles. Ro. 1.
                  25. Ouerſowed.) Firſt by Chriſt and his Apoſtles was planted the truth, and falſhod came afterward, and was ouerſowen by the enemy the Diuel, and not by Chriſt, who is not the
 author of euil. Tertul, de praeſcript.
                  
                  29. Left you plucks vp alſo.] The good muſt tolerate the euil, when it is ſo ſtrong that it can not be redreſſed without danger and diſturbance of the whole Church, and committe the matter to Gods iudgement in the later day. Otherwiſe where il men (be they Heretikes or other malefactors) may be puniſhed or ſuppreſſed without diſturbance and hazard of the good, they may and ought by publike authority either Spiritual or temporal to be chaſtiſed or executed.
                  30 Suffer both to grow.] The good and bad (wee ſee here) are mingled together in the Churche.Good and euil in the Church. Which maketh againſt certaine Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, which ſeuered them ſelues of old from the reſt of the whole world, vnder pretence that them ſelues only were pure, and al others both Prieſts and people ſinners: and againſt ſome Heretikes of this time alſo, which ſay that euil men are not of, or in the Churche.
                  32. The leaſt of al ſeedes.] The Church of Chriſt had a ſmal beginning, but afterward became the moſt glorious and knowen common-welth in earth: the greateſt powers and the moſt wiſe of the world putting them ſelues into the ſame.
                  35. Carpenters ſonne.] Herevpon Iulian the Apoſtata and his flatterer Libanius tooke their ſcoffe againſt our Sauiour, ſaying (at his going againſt the Perſians) to the Chriſtians, what doeth the Carpenters ſonne now? and threatening that after his returne the Carpenters ſonne ſhould not be able to ſaue them from his furie. Wherevnto a godly man anſwered by the Spirit of Prophecie, He whom Iulian calleth the Carpenters ſonne, is making a woodden coffin for him againſt his death. And in deede not long after there came newes that in that bataile he dyed miſerably. Sozo. li. 6 c. 2. Theodo. li. 36. 28. The very like ſcoffe vſe Heretikes that call the body of Chriſt in the B. Sacrament, bakers bread. It ſeemeth in deede to the ſenſes to be ſo, as Chriſt ſeemed to be Ioſephs natural ſonne, but faith telleth vs the contrarie as wel in the one as in the other.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Hearing the vnvvorthy decollation of Iohn Baptiſt by Herode, is he betaketh him to his vſual ſolitarines in the deſert, and there feedeth 5000 vvith fiue loaues. 23. And then after the night ſpent in the mountaine in prayer, he vvalketh vpon the ſea (ſignifying the vvide vvorld) 28 yea and Peter alſo: vvherevpon they adore him as the ſonne of God. 35 And vvith the very touche of his garments hemme he healeth innumerable.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AT that time * Herod the Tetrach heard the fame of IESVS:Mar. 6, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ſaid to his ſeruants,Lu. 9, 7. 3, 19. This is Iohn the Baptiſt: he is riſen from the dead, and therefore vertues vvorke in him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For Herod apprehended Iohn and bound him, and put him into priſon becauſe of Herodias, hisbrother Philips brothers' vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For Iohn ſaid vnto him, It is not lavvful for thee to haue her. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvilling to put him to death, he feared the people: becauſe they eſteemed him as a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But on Herods birth-day, the daughter of Herodias daunced before them: and pleaſed Herod. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Wherevpon he promiſed with an othe, to giue her vvharſoeuer ſhe vvould aſke of him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But ſhe being inſtructed before of her mother ſaith, Giue me here in a diſh the head of Iohn the Baptiſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And the king vvas ſtroken ſad: yet becauſe of hisA wicked and raſh othe, and more wickedly fulfilled: becauſe an vnlawfull othe bindeth no mā. othe and for them that ſate vvith him at table, he commaunded it to be giuen. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he ſent, and beheaded Iohn in the priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And his head vvas brought in a diſh:
 and it vvas giuen to the damſel, and ſhe brought it to her mother. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And his Diſciples came and tooke the body, and ″ buried it:S. Iohns diſciples at this time had wel learned their duety toward Chriſt. and came and told IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Which vvhen IESVS had heard,Mar. 6, 31 * he ″ retired from thence by boate,Lu. 9, 10 into a deſert place apart, and the multitudes hauing heard of it,Io. 6, 2. folovved him on foote out of the cities. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he coming forth ſavv a great multitude, and pitied them, and cured their diſeaſed. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhen it vvas euening, his Diſciples came vnto him, ſaying, It is a deſert place, and the houre is novv paſt: dimiſſe the multitudes that going into the tovvnes, they may bye them ſelues victuals. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But IESVS ſaid to them, They haue no neede to goe: giue ye them to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 17 They anſvvered him. We haue not here, but fiue loaues, and tvvo fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Who ſaid to them, Bring them hither to me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And vvhen he had commaunded the multitude to ſitte dovvne vpon the graſſe, he tooke the fiue loaues and the tvvo fiſhes, and looking vp vnto heauen he bleſſed and brake, and gaue the loaues to his Diſciples, and ″ the Diſciples to the multitudes. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And they did al eate, and had their fil. And they tooke the leauings, twelue ful baſkettes of the fragments. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the number of them that did eate vvas, fiue thouſand men, beſide vvomen and children.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 And forth vvith IESVS commaunded his Diſciples to goe vp into the boate,The Goſpel vpon the Octaue of S. Peter and S. Paul. Iulij 6. and to goe before him ouer the vvater, til he dimiſſed the multitudes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And hauing dimiſſed the multitude,Mar. 6, 46. he * aſcended into a mountaine alone to praye. And vvhen it vvas euening,Io. 6, 16. he vvas there alone. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But the boate in the middes of the ſea vvas toſſed vvith vvaues. for the vvinde vvas contratie. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And in the fourth vvatch of the night, he came vnto them vvalking vpon the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And ſeeing him vpon the ″ ſea vvalking, they vvere troubled ſaying, That it is a ghoſt. and for feare they cried out. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And immediatly IESVS ſpake vnto them, ſaying, Haue confidence: it is I, feare ye not. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And Peter making anſvver ſaid, Lord if it be thou, bid me come to thee vpon the vvaters. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he ſaid, Come. And Peter deſcending out of the boate, ″ vvalked vpon the vvater to come to IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But ſeeing the vvinde rough, he vvas afraid: and vvhen he began to be drovvned, he cried out ſaying, Lord, ſaue me. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And incontinentNotwithſtā
                     ding the infirmities of them that gouerne the Churche, yet Chriſt ſuſtaineth them, and holdeth them vp, yea and by them, whatſoeuer they are, he vpholdeth and preſerueth his Church. IESVS ſtretching forth his hand tooke hold of him, and ſaid vnto him, O thou of litle faith, vvhy didſt thou doubt? ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhen
 they vvere gone vp into the boate, the vvinde ceaſed. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And they that vvere in the boate, came and adored him, ſaying, In deede thou art the ſonne of God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 And hauing paſſed the vvater, they came into the countrie of Geneſar. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhen the men of that place vnderſtoode of him, they ſent into al that countrie, and brought vnto him al that vvere il at eaſe: ✝ 
                     verse 36 and they beſought him that they might touche but theSee before, chap. 9, 20. hemme of his garment, and vvhoſoeuer did touche, vvere made hole.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  3. Becauſe of Herodias.) It is to ordinary in Princes to put them to death that freely tel them ſuch faultes: women, whom they fanſie, ſpecially inciting them to ſuch miſcheefe.
                  12. Buried it.) An example of duty toward the dead bodies of the faithful. Wherein ſee the difference of Catholike Chriſtian men and of al infidels,Hiero. in Epitaph. be they Pagans, Apoſtataes, or Heretikes. For whereas the Chriſtians had layd the body of this bleſſed Prophete and Martyr 
                        •
                      in Samaria with the Relikes of Elias and Abdias,Paula. c. 6. by vertue wherof wōderful miracle were wrought in that place: in Iulian the Apoſtataes time, when men might doe al miſcheefe freely againſt Chriſtian religion, the Pagans opened the tombe of S. Iohn Baptiſt,Sacrilege againſt holy Relikes. burnt his bones, ſcattered the aſhes about the fields: but certaine religious Monkes coming thither a pilgrimage at the ſame time, aduentured their life and ſaued as much of the holy Relikes as they could, and brought them to their Abbot Philip a man of God: who eſteeming them to great a treaſure for him and his, to keepe for their priuate deuotion, ſent them to Athanaſius the B. of Alexandria, and he with al reuerence layd them in ſuch a place (as it were by the Spirit of Prophecie) where afterward by occaſion of them was built a goodly chappel. Theod. li. 3 c. 6. Ruff. li. 2 c. 28. 27. Marke here that the Heretikes of our time doe as thoſe Pagans, to the bodies and Relikes of al bleſſed Saints that they can deſtroy: and Catholikes contrariwiſe haue the religious deuotion of thoſe old Chriſtians, as appeareth by the honour done now to his head at Amiens in France.
                  13. Retired.) Chriſt much eſteemed Iohn, and withdrewe him ſelf aſide, to giue example of moderate mourning for the departed, and to ſhew the horrour of that execrable murder. as in the Primitiue Churche many good men ſeing the miſerable ſtate of the world in the time of perſecution, and the ſinnes that abounded withal: tooke an occaſion to forſake thoſe tumults, and to giue them ſelues to contemplation: and for that purpoſe retired into the deſerts of Aegypt and els where, to doe penance for their owne ſinnes and the ſinnes of the world. Wherevpon partly roſe that infinite number of Monkes and Eremites,Eremites. of whom the fathers and Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories make mention. Hiero. to. 2 in vit. Pauli Eremita. Sozo. li. 1 c. 12. 13.
                  19. The Diſciples to the multitudes.) A figure of the miniſterie of the Apoſtles, who as they here had the diſtribution and ordering of theſe miraculous loaues, ſo had they alſo to beſtow and diſpenſe al the foode of our ſoules in miniſtering of the vvord and Sacraments, neither may lay men chalenge the ſame.
                  26. Walking.) When not only Chriſt, but by his power Peter alſo walketh vpon the vvaters, it is euident that he can diſpoſe of his owne body aboue nature and contrary to the natural conditions thereof, as to goe through a doore. Io. 20. to be in the compaſſe of a litle bread. Epiphan. in Anchorato.
                  
                  29. Walked.] Peter (ſaith S. Bernard) walking vpon the waters,Peters Primacie. as Chriſt did, declared him ſelf the only Vicar of Chriſt, which ſhould be ruler not ouer one people, but ouer al. For many waters, are many peoples. Bernard. li. 2 de conſid. c. 8. See the place, how he deduceth from Peter the like authoritie and iuriſdiction to his ſucceſſor the Biſhop of Rome.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  The Phariſees of Hieruſalem comming ſo farre to carpe him, he chargeth vvith a tradition contrarie to Gods commaundement. 10 And to the people he yeldeth the reaſon of that vvhich they reproued: 15 and againe to his Diſciples, ſhevving the ground of the Phariſaical vvaſhing (to vvitte, that meates othervviſe defile the ſoule) to be falſe. 21 then he goeth aſide to hide him ſelf among the Gentils: vvhere, in a vvoman he findeth ſuch faith, that he is faine, leſt the Gentils ſhould before the time extort the vvhole bread, as ſhe had a crumme, to returne to the levves. 34 vvhere (al contrarie to thoſe Phariſes) the common people ſeeke vvonderfully vnto him. and he after he hath cured their diſeaſed feedeth 4000 of them vvith ſeuen loaues.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN came to him from Hieruſalem Scribes and Phariſees,Mr. 7, 1. ſaying,The Goſpel vpō wenſday the 3. weeke in Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Why do thy Diſciples tranſgreſſe the tradition of the Auncientes? For they waſh not their hāds when they eate bread. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But he anſvvering ſaid to them: Why do you alſo tranſgreſſe the cōmaundement of God for your tradition? For God ſaid,Exo. 20, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 4 
                  Honour father and mother. and, Heth it ſhal curſe father or mother,Leu. 20, 9. dying let him dye. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But you ſay, Whoſoeuer ſhal ſay to father or mother, The gift vvhatſoeuer procedeth from me, ſhal profite the: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and ſhal not honour his father or his mother: and you haue made fruſtrate the cōmaundement of God for your ovvne tradition. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Hypocrites, vvel hath Eſay Prophecied of you,Eſa. 29, 13. ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 8 
                  This people honoureth me vvith their ″ lippes: but their hart is farre from me. ✝ 
                        verse 9 And in vaine do they vvorſhippe me, teaching doctrines and ″ commaundements of men.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And hauing called together the multitudes vnto him, he ſaid to them, Heare ye and vnderſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 11 ″ Not that vvhich entreth into the mouth, defileth a man: but that vvhich procedeth out of the mouth, that defileth a man. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Then came his Diſciples, and ſaid to him, Doeſt thou knovv that the Phariſees, vvhen they heard this vvord, vvere ſcandalized? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But he anſvvering ſayd: All planting vvhich my heauenly father hath not planted, ſhal be rooted vp. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Let them alone: blinde they are, guides of the blinde. And if the blinde be guide to the blinde, both fall into the ditch. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And Peter anſvvering ſayd to him, Expound vs this parable. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But he ſayd, Are you alſo as yet vvithout vnderſtanding? ✝ 
                     verse 17 Do you not vnderſtand, that al that entreth into the mouth, goeth into the belly, and is caſt forth into the priuy? ✝ 
                     verse 18 But the things that proceede out of the mouth, come forth from the hart, and thoſe things ″ defile a man. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For from the hart come forth euil cogitations, murders, aduoutries, fornications, thefts, falſe teſtimonies, blaſphemies. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Theſe are the things that defile
 a man▪ but to eate vvith vnvvaſhen hands, doeth not defile a man. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And IESVS vvent forth from thence and retired into the quarters of Tyre and Sidon.The Goſpel vpō Thurſday the fifth weeke in Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And behold * a vvoman of Chanaan came forth out of thoſe coaſtes,Mr. 7. 25. and crying out, ſayd to him, Haue mercie vpon me, O lord the Sonne of Dauid: my daughter is ſore vexed of a Deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Who anſvvered her not a vvord. And his Diſciples came and beſought him ſaying, Dimiſſe her: becauſe ſhe crieth out after vs: ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he anſvvering ſaid: I vvas not ſent but to the ſheepe that are loſt of the houſe of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But ſhe came and adored him, ſaying, Lord, help me. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Who anſvvering, ſaid: It is not good to take the bread of the Children, and to caſt it to the dogges. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But ſhe ſaid, Yea lord: for the vvhelpes alſo eate of the crummes that fal from the table of their maiſters. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Then IESVS anſvvering ſaid to her, O vvoman,It were a ſtraunge caſe that Chriſt ſhould commend in this woman a ſole faith without good workes, that is to ſay, a dead faith ſuch as could not worke by loue, and which S. Iames doubted not to call the faith not of Chriſtians but of Diuels. Aug. de Fid. & Op. c. 1
                           •
                        .
                   great is thy faith: be it done to thee as thou vvilt: and her daughter vvas made hole from that houre. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And vvhen IESVS vvas paſſed from thence, he came beſide the ſea of Galilee: and aſcending into the mountaine, ſare there. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And there came to him great multitudes, hauing vvith them dumme perſons, blinde, lame, feeble, and many others: and they caſt them dovvne at his feete, and he cured them: ✝ 
                     verse 31 ſo that the multitudes marueled ſeeing the dumme ſpeake, the lame vvalke, the blinde ſee: and they magnified the God of Iſrael.Mr. 8, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And * IESVS called together his Diſciples, and ſaid: I pitie the multitude: becauſe three dayes novv they continue vvith me, and haue not vvhat to eate: and dimiſſe them faſting I vvil not, leſt they fainte in the vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And the diſciples ſay vnto him: vvhence then may vve gette ſo many loaues in the deſert as to fil ſo great a multitude? ✝ 
                     verse 34 And IESVS ſayd to them, Hovv many loaues haue you? but they ſayd, Seuen, & a fevv litle fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And he commaunded the multitude to ſit dovvne vpon the ground. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And taking the ſeuen loaues & the fiſhes, and geuing thankes, he brake, & gaue to his diſciples, andHere we ſee againe that the people muſt not be their owne caruers, nor receiue the Sacraments or other ſpiritual ſuſtenance immediatly of Chriſt, or at their owne hād, but of their ſpiritual gouerners. the diſciples gaue to the people. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And they did al eate, and had their fill. And that vvhich vvas left of the fragments they tooke vp, ſeuen baſkets ful. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And there vvere that did eate, foure thouſand men, beſide children & vvomen. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And hauing dimiſſed the multitude, he vvent vp into a boate, and came into the coaſtes of Magedan.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  8. With their lippes.] This is to be vnderſtood properly of ſuch as haue euer God in their mouth, the word of our Lord, the Scriptures, the Goſpel, but in their hart and al their life be in deede Godles. It may be applied alſo to ſuch as ſay their prayers without attention or eleuation of mind to God, whether he vnderſtand the prayers or no, that ſaith them. For many a poore Chriſtian man that vnderſtandeth not the wordes he ſpeaketh, hath his hart neerer heauen, more ſeruor and deuotion,1. Cor. 14. more edification to him ſelf, more profite in ſpirit (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) and leſſe diſtractions, then not only al Heretikes Which haue no true feeling of ſuch things, but then many learned Catholikes. And therefore it is not to be vnderſtood of praying in vnknowen tongues, as Heretikes ſometime expound it, farre wide from the circumſtance of the place and Chriſtes intention, ſpeaking of the hypocritical Iewes.
                  9. Commaundements of men.] Such only are here called traditions, doctrines, or commaundements of men, which be either repugnant to Gods lawes, as this of defrauding their parents vnder pretenſe of religion: or which at the leſt be friuolous, vnprofitable, and impertinent to pietle or true worſhipe,The difference betwene the Iewiſh traditions here reprehended, and the Churches Apoſtolical traditions. as that other ſort of ſo often Waſhing hands and veſſels without regard of inward puritie of hart and mind. Let no man therefore be abuſed with the Proteſtants peruerſe application of this place againſt the holy lawes, canons, and precepts of the Church and our ſpiritual Gouernours, concerning faſtes, feſtiuities, and other rules of diſcipline and due order in life and in the ſeruice of God. For ſuch are not repugnant but conſonant to Gods word and al pietie, and our Lord is truely honoured, worſhiped, and ſerued both by the making and alſo by the obſeruing of them.
                        
                           •
                        . Theſ. 2, 15. * S. Paul gaue commaundements both by his epiſtles and by word of mouth, euen in ſuch matters wherein Chriſt had preſcribed nothing at al,1. Cor. 11. and he chargeth the faithful to obſerue the ſame.Act. 15. The Apoſtles and Prieſts at Hieruſalem made lawes, and the Chriſtians were bound to obey them.Aug. Ser. de tēp. 251. See 1. Cor. 16, 2. The keeping of Sunday in ſteede of the Sabboth is the tradition of the Apoſtles, and dare the Heretikes deny the due obſentation therof to be an acceptable worſhipe of God?Epiph. har. 75 They preſcribed the Feſtes of Eaſter, and whitſontide and other Solemnities of Chriſt and his Saincts, which the Proteſtants them ſelues obſerue.Hiero. ep. 54 ad Marcel. cōt. Mont. They appointed the Lent and Imber faſtes and other, as wel to chaſtiſe the concupiſcence of man, as to ſerue and pleaſe God thereby, as is plaine in the faſting of * Anna, Tobie, Iudith, Eſther, who ſerued and pleaſed God thereby. Therefore neither theſe nor other ſuch Apoſtolike Ordinances, nor any precepts of the holy Church or of our lawful Paſtors are implied in theſe Phariſaical traditions here reprehended, nor to be compted or called the doctrines and commaundements of men, becauſe they are not made by mere humane power, but by Chriſtes warrant and authoritie, and by ſuch as he hath placed to rule his Church, of whom he ſaith,Luc. 2, 37 Tob. 12. Iudith c. 8 Eſth. 4. Luc. 10, 16 
                     He that heareth you, heareth me: he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. They are made by the Holy Ghoſt, ioyning with our Paſtors in the regiment of the faithful, they are made by our Mother the Church, which whoſoeuer obieth not,Mat. 18, 17. we are warned to take him as an Heathen. But on the other ſide, al lawes, doctrines, ſeruice and iniunctions of Heretikes, how ſoeuer pretended to be conſonant to the Scriptures, be commaundements of men: becauſe both the things by them preſcribed are impious, and the Authors haue neither ſending nor commiſſion from God.
                  11. Not that which entereth.] The Catholikes doe not abſtaine from certaine meates,Difference of meates. for that they eſteeme any meate vncleane either by creation or by Iudaical obſeruation: but they abſtaine for chaſtiſment of their concupiſcences. Aug. li. de. mor. Ec. Cath. c. 33.
                  18. Defile a man] It is ſinne only which properly defileth man, and meates of them ſelfe or of their owne nature doe not defile: but ſo farre as by accident they make a man to ſinne,Catholike abſtinence. as the diſobedience of Gods commaundement or of our Superiours who forbid ſome meates for certaine times and cauſes,Gen. 3. is a ſinne. As the apple which our firſt parents did eate of, though of it ſelf it did not defile them, yet being eaten againſt the precept, it did defile. So neither fleſh nor fiſh of it ſelf doth defile, but the breach of the Churches precept defileth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  The obſtinate Phariſees and Sadducees, as though his foreſaid miracles were not ſufficient to proue him to be Chriſt, require to ſee ſome one from heauen, 5 Wherevpon forſaking them, he warneth his diſciples to beware of the leauen of their doctrine: 
                        〈◊〉
                      and Peter (the time now approching for him to goe into lewrie to his Paſsion) for confeſsing him to be Chriſt, he maketh the Rocke of his Churche, geuing fulnes of Eccleſiaſtical power accordingly. 21 And after, he ſo rebuketh him fordiſſuading his Croſſe and Paſsion, that he alſo affirmeth the like ſuffering in euery one to be neceſſarie to ſ
                        •
                     luation.
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there came to him the Phariſees and Sadducees tempting:Mar. 8, 12. and they demaunded him to ſhevv them a ſigne from heauen.Luc. 12, 54. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But he anſvvered & ſaid to them, when it is euening, you ſay, It vvil be faire-vvether, for the elemēt is redde. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And in the morning, This day there vvil be a tēpeſt, for the element doth glovve and lovvre. The face therfore of the element you haue ſkil to diſcerne: and the ſignes of times can you not? ✝ 
                     verse 4 The * naughtie and aduouterous generation ſeeketh for a ſigne:Mat. 12, 39. and there ſhal not a ſigne be giuen it, but the ſigne of Ionas the Prophet. And he left them and vvent avvay.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * vvhen his diſciples vvere come ouer the vvater,Mar. 8, 14. they forgot to take bread. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Who ſaid to them,Lu. 12, 1. Looke vvel and bevvare of the leauen of the Phariſees & Sadduces. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But they thought vvithin them ſelues ſaying, Becauſe vve tooke not bread. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And IESVS knovving it, ſaid, why do you thinke vvithin your ſelues O ye of litle faith, for that you haue not bread? ✝ 
                     verse 9 Do you not yet vnderſtand,Mat. 14, 17. 15, 34. neither do you remember * the fiue loaues among fiue thouſand men, and how many baſkets, you tooke vp? ✝ 
                     verse 10 neither the * ſeuen loaues, among foure thouſand men, and hovv many maundes you tooke vp? ✝ 
                     verse 11 Why do you not vnderſtand that I ſaid not of bread to you, Bevvare of the leauen of the Phariſees & Sadducees? ✝ 
                     verse 12 Then they vnderſtoode that he ſaid not they ſhould bevvare of the leauen of bread, but of the doctrine of the Phariſees and Sadducees.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And * IESVS came into the quarters of Caeſarea Philippi:The Goſpel vpō SS. Peter and Paules day Iun. 29. And in Cathedra Petri Roma, Ian. 18. & Antiochia Febr. 22. And Petri ad vincula Aug. 1. And on the day of the creation and coronation of the Pope, and on the Anniuerſarie thereof. and he aſked his diſciples,Mar. 8, 27. ſaying, ″ whom ſay men that the Sonne of man is? ✝ 
                     verse 14 But ″ they ſaid,Luc. 9, 18. Some Iohn the Baptiſt, & otherſome Elias, and others Hieremie, or one of the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 15 IESVS ſaith to them, But vvhom do you ſay that I am? ✝ 
                     verse 16 Simon Peter anſvvered & ſaid, Thou art Chriſt the ſonne of the liuing God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to him, ″ Bleſſed art thou Simon bar-Iona: becauſe fleſh & bloud hath not reuealed it to thee, but my father vvhich is in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And ″ I ſay to thee,Io. 1, 42. 
                  That ″ thou art *That is, a Rocke. Peter: and ″ vpon this ″ Rocke vvil I ″ build my Church, and the ″ gates of hel ſhal not preuaile againſt it. ✝ 
                        verse 19 And I * vvil giue ″ to thee the ″ keies of the kingdom of heauen.
                  Io. 21, 15. 
                  And ″ vvhatſoeuer thou ſhalt binde vpon earth, it ſhal be bound alſo in the heauens: and vvhatſoeuer thou ſhalt looſe in earth it ſhall be looſed alſo in the heauens. 
                  ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 Then he commaunded his diſciples that they ſhould tel 
 no body that he vvas IESVS CHRIST.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 From that time IESVS began to ſhevv his diſciples, that he muſt goe to Hieruſalem, & ſuffer many things of the Ancients & Scribes & cheefe-Prieſtes, and be killed, and the third day riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And Peter taking him vnto him, began to rebuke him, ſaying, Lord, be it farre from thee, this ſhal not be vnto thee. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Who turning ſaid to Peter, Goe after meThis word in Hebrew ſignifieth an aduerſarie, as 3 Reg. 5, 4. and ſo it is taken here. Satan, thou art a ſcandal vnto me: becauſe thou ſauoureſt not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Then IESVS ſaid to his diſciples,THE GOSPEL for a Martyr that is a biſhop. If any man wil come after me, let him denie him ſelf, and take vp his croſſe, and follow me. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For he that will ſaue his life, ſhal loſe it. and he that ſhal loſe his life for me, ſhal finde it. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For what doth it profite a man, if he gaine the vvhole vvorld, and ſuſtaine the damage of his ſoule? Or vvhat permutation ſhal a man giue for his ſoule? ✝ 
                     verse 27 For the Sonne of man ſhal come in the glorie of his father vvith his Angels: and then vvil he render to euery man according to his ″ vvorkes. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 Amen I ſay to you,Mar. 9, 1 * there be ſome of them that ſtand here,Luc. 9, 27. that ſhal not taſte death, til they ſee the Sonne of man comming in his kingdom.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
                  13. Whom ſay men.] Chriſt intending here to take order for the founding,OF PETERS PRIMACIE. regiment, and ſtabilitie of his Church after his decea
                        •
                     e, and to name the perſon to whom he meant to geue the general charge thereof, would before by interrogatories draw out (and namely out of that one whom he thought to make the cheefe) the profeſſiō of that high and principal Article, That he was the ſonne of the liuing God. Which being the ground of the Churches faith, was a neceſſarie qualitie and condition in him that was to be made Head of the ſame Church, and the perpetual keeper of the ſaid faith and al other points thereon depending.
                  14. But they ſaid.] When Chriſt aſked the peoples opinion of him, the Apoſtles al indifferently made anſwer: but when he demaunded what them ſelues thought of him, then loe Peter the mouth and head of the whole felowſhip anſwered for al. Chryſ. ho. 55. in Mat.
                  
                  17. Bleſſed art thou.] Though ſome other (as Nathanael Io. 1, 49) ſeeme to haue before beleued and profeſſed the ſame thing for which Peter is here counted bleſſed, yet it may be plainely gathered by this place,Hilar. can. 6 in. Mat. & li. 6. de Trinit. and ſo S. Hilarie and others thinke, that none before this did further vtter of him, then that he was the ſonne of God by adoption as other Saincts be, though more excellent then other be. For it was of congruitie and Chriſtes ſpecial appointment, that he vpon whom he intended to found his new Church, and whoſe faith he would make infallible, ſhould haue the preeminence of this firſt profeſſion of Chriſtes natural diuinitie,Chryſ. ho. 55 in Mat. or, that he was by nature the very ſonne of God a thing ſo farre aboue the capacitie of nature, reaſon, fleſh and bloud, and ſo repugnant to Peters ſenſe and ſight of Chriſtes humanitie, fleſh, and infirmities, that for the beleefe and publike profeſſion there of he is counted bleſſed, as Abraham was for his ſaith: and hath great promiſes for him ſelf and his poſteritie, as the ſaid Patriarche had for him and his ſeede. According as S. Baſil ſaith,Baſil. li. 1 adu. Eunom. Becauſe he excelled in faith, he receiued the building of the Church committed to him.
                  1
                        •
                     . And I ſay to thee.] Our Lord recompenſeth Peter for his confeſſion, geuing him a great reward, in that vpon him he builded his Church. Theophilactus vpon this place.
                  
                      1
                        •
                     . Thou art Peter.] Chriſt (in the firſt of Iohn v. 42) foretold and appointed that this man then named Simon,PETER. ſhould afterward be called Cephas, or Petrus, that is to ſay, a Rocke, not then vttering the cauſe,Cyril. li. 
                           •
                         c. 12 Com. in Io. but now expreſſing the ſame, videlicet (as S. Cyril writeth) For that vpon him is vpon a firme rocke his Church ſhould be builded. Wherevnto S. Hilarie agreing ſaith, O happie foundation of the Church in the impoſing of thy new name. &c. And yet Chriſt here doth not ſo much call him by the name Peter or Rocke,Hilar. in hunc lo
                           •
                        ū. as he doth affirme him to be a rocke: ſignifying by that Metaphore, both that he was deſigned for the foundation and ground worke of his houſe, which is the Church: and alſo that he ſhould be of inuincible force, firmitie, durablenes, and ſtabilitie, to ſuſtaine al the windes, wa
                        •
                     es, and ſtormes that might fall or beate againſt the ſame. And the Aduerſaries obiecting againſt this, that Chriſt only is the Rocke or foundation, wrangle againſt the very expreſſe Scriptures and Chriſtes owne wordes, geuing both the name and the thing to this Apoſtle. And the ſimple may learne by S. Baſils wordes,Baſil. li. de poenit. how the caſe ſtandeth. Though (ſaith he) Peter be a rocke, yet he is not a rocke as Chriſt is. For Chriſt is the true vnmoueable rocke of him ſelf. Peter is vnmoueable by Chriſt the rocke. For Ieſus doth communicate and impart his dignities, not voyding him ſelf of them, but holding them to him ſelf,
                     2 Mt. 5. 14. 
                     beſtoweth them alſo vpon others. He is the light, and yet, 2 You are the light: he is the Prieſt, and yet he 3 maketh Prieſts:
                     3 Luc. 22. 19. 
                     he is the rocke, and he made a rocke.
                  
                  18. And vpon this rocke.] Vpon that which he ſaid Peter was, wil he build his Church: and therfore by moſt euident ſequele he foundeth his Church vpon Peter. And the Aduerſaries wrangling againſt this,Thou art Cephah, and vpon this Cephah.
                      do againſt their owne conſcience and knowledge: ſpecially ſeing they know and confeſſe that in Chriſtes wordes ſpeaking in the Syriake tonge, there was no difference at al betwene Petrus and Petra: yea and that the Greeke wordes alſo though differing in termination, yet ſignifie one thing, to wit,rocke.. a rocke, or ſtone, as them ſelues alſo tranſlate it. Io. 1, 42. So that they which profeſſe to follow the Hebrew or Syriake and the Greeke, and to tranſlate immediatly out of them into Latin or Engliſh, ſhould if they had dealt ſincerely, haue thus turned Chriſtes wordes, Thou art a rocke, and vpon this rocke: or, Thou art Peter, and vpon this peter wil I build my Church: For ſo Chriſt ſpake by their owne confeſſion without any difference. Which doth expreſly ſtoppe them of al their vaine euaſions, that Petrus the former word is referred to the Apoſtle: and petra the later word, either to Chriſt only, or to Peters faith only: neither the ſaid original tonges bearing it, nor the ſequele of the wordes, vpon this, ſuffering any relation in the world but to that which was ſpoken of in the ſame ſentence next before: neither the wordes folowing which are directly addreſſed to Peters perſon, nor Chriſtes intention by any meanes admitting it, which was not to make him ſelf or to promiſſe him ſelf to be the head or foundation of the Church. For his father gaue him that dignitie, and he tooke not that honour to him ſelf, nor ſent him ſelf, nor tooke the keies of heauen of him ſelf, but al of his father. he had his cōmiſſion the very houre of his incarnation.Aug. li. 1 retr. c. 21. 
                           〈…〉
                         in Pſ. 69. de verb. And though S. Auguſtine ſometimes referre the word (Petra) to Chriſt in this ſentence (which no doubt he did becauſe the terminations in Latin are diuers, and becauſe he examined not the nature of the original wordes which Chriſt ſpake, nor of the Greeke, and therefore the Aduerſaries which otherwiſe flee to the tongs, ſhould not in this caſe alleage him) yet he neuer denieth but Peter alſo is the Rocke and head of the Church, ſaying that him ſelf expounded it of Peter * in many places, and alleageth alſo S. Ambroſe for the ſame in his hymne which the Church ſingeth. And ſo do we alleage the holy Councel of Chalcedon,Do. ſec. Io. ſer. 49. ſer. 15. 16. 26. 29 de Sanctis. Annot. in Iob c. 30. 
                     Act. 3 pag. 118. Tertullian, de praeſcript, Origen, Ho. 5 in Exo. S. Cyprian, De vnit. Ec. S. Hilarie, Can. 16 in mat. S. Ambroſe, Ser. 47. 68. li. 6 in c. 9. Luca. S. Hierom, Li. 1 in Iouin, & in c. 2 Eſa. & in c. 16 Hier. S. Epiphanius, In Anchor. S. Chryſoſtom, Ho. 55 in Mat. S. Cyril, Li. 2 c. 12. com. in Io. S. Leo, Ep. 
                     
                        •
                     9. S. Gregorie, Li. 4 ep. 32 ind. 13.
Theodor. li. 5 haer. Fabul. c. de. poenit.and others: euery one of them ſaying expreſly that the Church was founded and builded vpon Peter. For though ſometimes they ſay the Church to be builded on Peters faith, yet they meane not (as our Aduerſaries do vnlearnedly take them) that it ſhould be builded vpon faith either ſeparated from the man, or in any other man: but vpon faith as in him who here confeſſed that faith.
                  1
                        •
                     . Rocke.] The Aduerſaries hearing alſo the Fathers ſometimes ſay, that Peter had theſe promiſes and prerogatiues, as bearing the perſon of al the Apoſtles or of the whole Church, deny abſurdly that him ſelf in perſon had theſe prerogatiues. As though Peter had been the proctor only of the Church or of the Apoſtles, confeſſing the faith and receiuing theſe things in other mens names. Where the holy Doctors meane only, that theſe prerogatiues were not geuen to him for his owne vſe, but for the good of the whole Church, and to be imparted to euery vocation according to the meaſure of their callings:Hiero. ep. 7, to. 2. and that theſe great priuileges geuen to Peter ſhould not decay or die with his perſon, but be perpetual in the Church in his ſucceſſors. Therfore S. Hierom to Damaſus taketh this Rocke not to be Peters perſon only, but his ſucceſſors and his Chaire. I (ſaith he) folowing no cheefe or principal but Chriſt,
                     Pſal. cont. part. Donat. to. 7. Leo ep. 89. 
                     ioyne my ſelf to the communion of Peters chaire, vpon that rocke I know the Church was built. And of that ſame Apoſtolike Chaire S. Auguſt. ſaith, That ſame is the Rocke which the proud gates of Hel do not ouercome. And S. Leo, Our Lord would the Sacrament or myſterie of this gift ſo to pertaine vnto the office of al the Apoſtles, that he placed it principally in bleſſed S. Peter the cheefe of al the Apoſtles, that from him as from a certaine head he might poure out his giftes, as it were through the whole body: that he might vnderſtand him ſelf to be an aliene from the diuine myſterie that ſhould preſume to reuolt from the ſoliditie or ſtedfaſtnes of Peter.
                  
                  
                      1
                        •
                     . Build my Church.] The Church or houſe of Chriſt was only promiſed here to be builded vpon him (which was fulfilled, Io. 21, 1
                           •
                        .) the foundation ſtone and other pillers or matter being yet in preparing, and Chriſt him ſelf being not only the ſupereminent foundation but alſo the founder of the ſame: which is an other more excellent qualitie then was in Peter, for which he calleth it my Church: meaning ſpecially the Church of the new Teſtament. Which was not perfectly formed and finiſhed, and diſtincted from the Synagogue til whitſunday, though Chriſt gaue Peter and the reſt their commiſsions actually before his Aſcenſion.
                  18. Gates of hel.] Becauſe the Church is reſembled to a houſe or a citie, the aduerſarie powers alſo be likened to a contrarie houſe or towne, the gates wherof, that is to ſay, the fortitude or impugnations ſhal neuer preuaile againſt the citie of Chriſt. And ſo by this promis we are aſſured that no hereſies nor other wicked attempts can preuaile againſt the Church builded vpon Peter,Pſal. cont. part. Donati. which the Fathers call Peters ſee and the Romane Church. Count (ſaith S. Auguſtine) the Prieſts from the very See of Peter, and in that order of fathers conſider vvho to vvhom hath ſucceeded. that ſame is the rocke vvhich the proud gates of Hel do not ouercome.
                     De vtil. 
                           ••
                        ed. c. 17. And in an other place, that is it which hath obtained the toppe of authoritie, Heretikes in vaine barking round about it.
                  
                  19. To thee.] In ſaying, to thee vvil I geue, it is plaine that as he gaue the keies to him, ſo he builded the Church vpon him.
                     Cyp. epiſt. 73. 
                     So ſaith S. Cyprian, To Peter firſt of al, vpon vvhom our Lord built the Church, and from vvhom he inſtituted and ſhevved the beginning of vnitie, did he geue this povver, that that ſhould be looſed in the heauens,Greg. li. 4. ep. 
                           •
                        2. ind. 11. vvhich he had looſed in earth. Wherby appeareth the vaine cauil of our Aduerſaries, which ſay the Church was built vpon Peters Confeſsion only, cōmon to him and the reſt, and not vpon his perſon, more then vpon the reſt.
                  
                  19. The keies.) That is, The authoritie or Chaire of doctrine, knowledge, iudgement and diſcretion betwene true and falſe doctrine: the height of gouernement,The dignities of the keies. the power of making lawes, of calling Councels, of the principal voice in them, of confirming them, of making Canons and holeſom decrees, of abrogating the contrarie, of ordaining Biſhopes and Paſtors or depoſing and ſuſpending them, finally the povver to diſpenſe the goods of the Church both ſpiritual and temporal. Which ſignification of preeminent power and authoritie by the vvord keies the Scripture expreſſeth in many places:Apoc. 1. namely ſpeaking of Chriſt, I haue the keies of death and Hel, that is, the rule. And againe,Eſa. 
                           •
                        2, 22 
                     I vvil geue the key of the houſe of Dauid vpon his ſhoulder. Moreouer it ſignifieth that men can not come into heauen but by him, the keies ſignifing alſo authoritie to open and ſhut, as it is ſaid Apoc. 3. of Chriſt, who hath the key of Dauid, he ſhutteth and no man openeth. By which wordes we gather that Peters authoritie is maruelous, to whom the keies, that is, the power to open and ſhut heauen, is geuen. And therfore by the name of keies is geuen that ſupereminent power which is called in compariſon of the power graunted to other Apoſtles, Biſhops aud Paſtors, plenitude poteſtatis, fulnes of power. Bernard, lib. 2. de conſiderat. c. 8.
                  19. Whatſoeuer thou ſhal bind.) Al kind of diſcipline and puniſhment of offenders, either ſpiritual (which directly is here meant) or corporal ſo farre as it tendeth to the execution of the ſpiritual charge, is compriſed vnder the word, bind. Of which ſort be Excommunications, Anathematiſmes, Suſpenſions, degradations, and other cenſures and penalties or penances enioyned either in the Sacrament of Confeſsion or in the exterior Courtes of the Church, for puniſhment both of other crimes, and ſpecially of hereſie and rebellion againſt the Church and the chee
                        •
                     e paſtors therof.
                  19. Looſe.) To looſe, is as the cauſe and the offenders caſe requireth, to looſe them of any the former bandes, and to reſtore them to the Churches Sacraments and Communion of the faithful and execution of their function, to pardon alſo either al or part of the penances enioyned, or what debtes ſo euer man oweth to God or the Church for the ſatisfaction of his ſinnes forgeuen. Which kind of releaſing or looſing is called Indulgence: finally this whatſoeuer, excepteth nothing that is puniſhable or pardonable by Chriſt in earth, for he hath committed his power to Peter. And ſo the validitie of Peters ſentence in binding or looſing whatſoeuer, ſhal by Chriſtes promis be ratified in heauen. Leo Ser. de Transfig. & Ser. 2. in anniuerſ-aſſumpt. ad Pontif. Hilar. can. 16. in Matth. Epiph. in Ancherato prepe initium. If now any temporal power can ſhew their warrant out of ſcripture for ſuch ſoueraine power, as is here geuen to Peter and conſequently to his ſucceſſors, by theſe wordes, whatſoeuer thou ſhal binde, and by the very keies, wherby greateſt ſoueraintie is ſignified in Gods Church as in his familie and houſhold,Eſa. 22. and therfore principally attributed and geuen to Chriſt * who in the ſcripture is ſaid to haue the key of Dauid, but here cōmunicated alſo vnto Peter,Apoc. 
                           •
                        . as the name of Rocke: if I ſay any temporal poteſtate can ſhew authoritie for the like ſoueraintie, let them chalenge hardly to be head not only of one particular, but of the whole vniuerſal Church.
                  27. Workes.) He ſaith not,Good workes. to geue euery man according to his mercie (or their faith) but according to their workes. Auguſt. de verb. Apoſt. Ser. 35. And againe, How ſhould our Sauiour reward euery one according to their workes,Freewill. if there were no free wil? Auguſt. lib. 2. cap. 4. 5. 8. de act. cum Foelic. Manich.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  As he promiſed, he giueth them a ſight of the glorie, vnto which Suffering doth bring: 
                        •
                      a
                        •
                     d then againe doth in
                        •
                     ulcate his Paſsion. 14 A deuil alſo he caſteth out which his Diſciples could not for their incredulitie and lacke of praying and faſting. 22 being yet in Galilee, he reuealeth more about his Paſsion, 24 and the tribute that the Collectors exacted for al, he payeth for himſelf and Peter: declaring yet withal his freedom both by word and miracle.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after ſix dayes IESVS taketh vnto him Peter and Iames and Iohn his brother,The TRANSFIGVRATION of our Lord, celebrated in the Church the 6. of Aug. and bringeth them into a high mountaine apart:Mr. 9, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he vvas ″ tranſfigured before them.Luc. 9, 28. And his face did ſhine as the ſunne:2. Pet. 1, 17. & his garments became vvhite as ſnovv.The Goſpel of the ſaid feaſt, & of the 2. Sunday in Lent: and on the Saterday before. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And behold there ″ appeared to them Moyſes and Elias talking vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Peter anſvvering, ſaid to IESVS, Lord, it is good for vs to be here: if thou vvilt, let vs make here three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moyſes, and one for Elias. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And as he vvas yet ſpeaking, behold a bright cloude ourſ had ovved them. And loe a voice out of the cloude, ſaying. This is my vvelbeloued ſonne, in vvhom I am vvel pleaſed: heare ye him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the diſciples hearing it, fel vpon their face, and vverefore afraid. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And IESVS came and touched them: and he ſaid to them, Ariſe, and feare not. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they lifting vp their eyes, ſavv no body, but only IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And as they deſcended from the ″ mount, IESVS commaunded them, ſaying, Tel the viſion to no body, til the Sonne of man be riſen from the dead. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And his Diſciples asked him, ſaying, what ſay the Scribes then,Mal. 4, 5. that * Elias muſt come firſt? ✝ 
                     verse 11 But he anſvvering, ſaid to them, ″ Elias in deede ſhal come, and reſtore al things. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And I ſay to you, that Elias is already come, and they did not knovv him, but vvrought on him vvhatſoeuer they vvould. So alſo the Sonne of man ſhal ſuffer of them. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then the Diſciples vnderſtoode, that of Iohn the Baptiſt he had ſpoken to them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And * vvhen he vvas come vnto the multitude,Mar. 9, 14. there came to him a man falling dovvne vpon his knees before him,Luc. 9, 37. ✝ 
                     verse 15 ſaying, Lord haue mercie vpon my ſonne, for he is lunatike, and ſore vexed: for he falleth often into the fire, and often into the vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 16 and I offered him to thy Diſciples: and they could not cure him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 IESVS anſvvered and ſaid, O faithles and peruerſe generation, hovv long ſhal I be vvith
 you? Hovv long ſhal I ſuffer you? bring him hither to me. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And IESVS rebuked him, and the deuil vvent out of him, and the ladde vvas cured from that houre. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Then came the Diſciples to IESVS ſecretely, and ſaid, ″ Why could not vve caſt him out? ✝ 
                     verse 20 IESVS ſaid to them, becauſe of your incredulity. for, amen I ſay to you, if you haue ″ faith as a muſtard ſeede, you ſhal ſay to this mountaine, Remoue from hence thither: and it ſhal remoue, and nothing ſhal be impoſsible to you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But this kinde is not caſt out but by ″ prayer and faſting.
               ✝ 
                     verse 22 And * vvhen they conuerſed in Galilee,Mr. 9, 31 IESVS ſaid to them,Luc. 9, 44. The Sonne of man is to be betraied into the hands of men: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and they ſhal kil him, and the third day he ſhal riſe againe. And they vvere ſtroken ſadde excedingly.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And vvhen they vvere come to Capharnaum, there came they that receiued the didrachmes, vnto Peter, and ſaid to him, Your maiſter doth he not pay theTheſe didrachmes were peeces of money which they payed for tribute. didrachmes? ✝ 
                     verse 25 He ſaith, Yes. And vvhen he vvas entered into the houſe, IESVS preuented him, ſaying, what is thy opinion Simon? The kings of the earth of vvhom receiue they tribute or cenſe? of their children, or of ſtrangers? ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he ſaid, Of ſtrangers. IESVS ſaid to him, Then the ″ children are free. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But that vve may not ſcandalize them, goe thy vvaies to the ſea, and caſt a hooke: and that fiſh vvhich ſhal firſt come vp, take: and vvhen thou haſt opened his mouth, thou ſhalt find a
This ſtater was a double didrachme, and therfore was payed for two.ſtater: take that, and giue it them for ″ me and thee.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
                  2. Transfigured.] Marke in this Transfiguration many maruelous points, as,Chriſt can exhibite his body vnder what forme he liſt. that he made not only his owne body, which then was mortal, but alſo the bodies of Moyſes and Elias, the one dead, the other to die, for the time as it were immortal: thereby to repreſent the ſtate and glorie of his body and his Saincts in heauen. By which maruelous transfiguring of his body, you may the leſſe maruel that he can exhibite his body vnder the forme of bread and vvine or otherwiſe as he liſt.
                  3. Appeared Moyſes.] By this that Moyſes perſonally appeared and was preſent with Chriſt,Saincts after their death deale with and for the liuing. it is plaine that the Saincts departed may in perſon be preſent at the affaires of the liuing. Auguſt. de cura pro mort. c. 15. 16. For euen as Angels els where, ſo here the Saincts alſo ſerued our Sauiour: and therfore as Angels both in the old Teſtament and the new, were preſent often at the affaires of men, ſo may Saincts.
                  9. Mount.]
                     Holy places. This mount (commonly eſteemed and named of the ancient fathers Thabor) S. Peter calleth the holy Mount becauſe of this wonderful viſion,2. Pet. 1▪ 18. like as in the old Teſtament where God appeared to Moyſes in the buſh and els where to others, he calleth the place of ſuch Apparitions,Exo. 3, 
                           •
                        . 
                     holy ground.
                     Deuotion and Pilgrimage to the ſame. Wherby it is euident that by ſuch Apparitions, places are ſanctified, and therevpon groweth a religion and deuotion in the faithful toward ſuch places, and namely to this Mount Thabor (called in S. Hierom Itabirium Ep. 17.) there was great Pilgrimage in the Primitiue Church, as vnto al thoſe places which our Sauiour had ſanctified with his preſence and miracles,
 
                     and therfore to the whole land of promis,
                     The holy land. 
                     for that cauſe called the holy land. Su S. Hiero. in Epitap. Paula. & ep. 17. & 18 ad Mercellam.
                  11. Elias ſhal come.] He diſtinguiſheth here plainly betwene Elias in perſon, who is yet to come before the iudgement:Elias. and betwene Elias in name,Luc. c. 17. to wit, Iohn the Baptiſt, who is come already in the ſpirit and vertue of Elias.Mal. 4, 5. So that it is not Iohn Baptiſt only nor principally of whom Malachie prophecieth (as our Aduerſaries ſay) but Elias alſo him ſelf in perſon.
                  19. Why could not we.] No maruel if the Exorciſts of the Catholike Church which haue power to caſt out diuels,True miracles onely in the Cath. Church. yet doe it not alwaies when they wil, and many times with much a doe: Wheras the Apoſtles hauing receiued this power * before ouer vncleane ſpirites, yet here cānot caſt thē out.Mt. 10. But as for haeretikes, they can neuer doe it, nor any other true miracle, to confirme their falſe ſaith.
                  20. Faith as muſtard ſeed.) This is the Catholike faith, by which only al miracles are wrought: yet not of euery one that hath the Catholike faith, but of ſuch as haue a great and forcible faith and withal the gift of miracles. Theſe are able as here wee ſee by Chriſtes warrant not only to doe other wonderful miracles here ſignified by this one,1. Cor. 13. Hiero. in vita S. Hi lari
                           •
                        nis. Niceph. li. 6, c. 17. but alſo this very ſame, that is, to moue mountaines in deede, as S. Paul alſo preſuppoſeth, and S. Hierom affirmeth, and Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories namely telleth of Gregorius Neocaeſarienſnis,Gregorius Than maturgus. that he moued a mountaine to make roome for the foundation of a Church, called therfore and for other his wonderful miracles, Thaumaturgus. And yet faithleſſe Heretikes laugh at al ſuch things and beleue them not.
                  21. Prayer aud faſting.)
                     Prayer and Faſting. The force of faſting and praying: whereby alſo we may ſee that the holy Churche in Exorciſmes doeth according to the Scriptures.Greg. Niſſ. de vit. Gregorij. When ſhee vſeth beſide the name of IESVS, many prayers and much faſting to driue out Deuils. becauſe theſe alſo are here required beſide faith.
                  26. The Children fres.) Though Chriſt to auoid ſcandal, payed tribute, yet in deede he ſheweth that both him ſelf ought to be free from ſuch payments (as being the kings ſonne, aſwel by his eternal birth of God the Father, as temporal of Dauid) and alſo his Apoſtles, as being of his familie, and in them their ſucceſſors the whole Clergie, who are called in Scripture the lotte and portion of our Lord.The priuileges and exemptions of the Clergie. which exemption and priuilege being grounded vpon the very law of nature it ſelf, and therfore practiſed euen among the Heathen (Gen. 42, 27.) good Chriſtian Princes haue confirmed and ratified by their lawes in the honour of Chriſt, whoſe miniſters they are, and as it were the kings ſonnes. as S. Hierom declareth playnly in theſe wordes, We for his honour pay not tributes, and as the Kings ſonnes, are free from ſuch payments. Hiero. vpon this place.
                  27. Me and thee.] A great myſterie in that he payed not only for him ſelf,Peters praeminence. but for Peter bearing the Perſon of the Churche, and in whom as the cheefe, the reſt were conteyned. Aug. q. exno. Teſt. q. 
                           •
                        5. to. 4.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  To his Diſciples he preacheth againſt ambition the mother of Schiſme: 7 foretelling both the author vvhoſoeuer he be, and alſo his folovvers, of their vvo to come. 
                        〈◊〉
                      and ſhevving on the contrary ſide, hovv precious Chriſtian ſoules are to their Angels, to the Sonne of man, and to his Father. 15 charging vs therfore to forgiue our brethren, vvhen alſo vve haue iuſt cauſe againſt them, be it neuer ſo often, and to labour their ſaluation by al meanes poſsible.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AT that houre the Diſciples came to IESVS,Mr. 9, 34. ſaying.The Goſpel on Michelmas day Septemb. 29. And vpon his Apparition Maij 8. ″ Who,Luc. 9, 46. thinkeſt thou, is the greater in the kingdom of heauen? ✝ 
                     verse 2 And IESVS calling vnto him a litle childe, ſet him in the middes of them, ✝ 
                     verse 3 and ſaid, Amen I ſay to you, vnles you be conuerted, and become as litle children, you ſhal not enter into the kingdom of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Whoſoeuer therfore ſhal humble him ſelf as this 
Humility, innocencie, ſimplicity, cōmended to vs in the ſtate and perſon of a childe.litle childe, he is the greater in the kingdom of heauē. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he that ſhal receiue one ſuch litle childe in my name, receiueth me.Mr. 9, 42. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And * he that ſhal ſcandalize one of theſe litle 
 ones that beleeue in me, it is expedient for him that a milſtone be hanged about his necke,Lu. 17, 2 and that he be drovvned in the depth of the ſea.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvo be to the vvorld for ſcandals. for it is neceſſary that ſcandals do come: but neuertheleſſe vvo to that man by vvhom the ſcandall commeth. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And * if thy ″ hand,Mt. 5, 30 or thy foote ſcandalize thee: cut it of, and caſt it from thee.Mar. 9, 43. It is good for thee to goe in to life maimed or lame, rather then hauing tvvo hands or tvvo feete to be caſt into euerlaſting fire. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And if thine eye ſcandalize thee, plucke him out, and caſt him from thee: It is good for thee hauing one eye to enter into life, rather then hauing tvvo eyes to be caſt into the hel of fire. ✝ 
                     verse 10 See that you deſpiſe not one of theſe litle ones:Luc. 19, 10. for I ſay to you that ″ their Angels, in heauen alvvaies do ſee the face of my father vvhich is in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For * the Sonne of man is come to ſaue that vvhich vvas periſhed.Lu. 15, 4 ✝ 
                     verse 12 * Hovv thinke you? If a man haue an hundred ſheepe, and one of them ſhal goe aſtray: doth he not leaue ninetie nine in the mountaines, and goeth to ſeeke that which is ſtraied? ✝ 
                     verse 13 And if it chaunce that he finde it: amen I ſay to you, that he reioyceth more fore that, then for the ninetie nine that vvent not aſtray. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Euen ſo it is not the vvil of your father, vvhich is in heauen, that one periſh of theſe litle ones.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 But * if thy brother ſhal offend againſt thee,Luc. 17, 3. goe,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday the 3 weeke in Lent. and rebuke him betvvene thee and him alone. If he ſhal heare thee, thou ſhalt gaine thy brother. ✝ 
                     verse 16 and if he vvil not heare thee, ioyne vvith thee beſides, one or tvvo: that in the mouth of
* tvvo or three vvitneſſes euery vvord may ſtand.Deu. 19, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And if he vvil not heare them,That is (as S. Chryſoſtō here expoundeth it) tell the Prelates and cheefe Paſtours of the Church: for they haue iuriſdiction to binde and looſe ſuch offenders, by the wordes folowing v. 18. tel the Church. And if he vvil not heare the Church, let him be to thee as ″ the heathen and the Publican. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Amen I ſay to you, whatſoeuer you ″ ſhal binde vpon earth, ſhal be bound alſo in heauen: and vvhatſoeuer you ″ ſhal looſe vpon earth, ſhal be looſed alſo in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Againe I ſay to you, that if tvvo of you ſhalAl ioyning together in the vnity of Chriſtes Churche in Councels and Synods, or publike prayers, is of more force then of any particular man. conſent vpon earth, concerning euery thing vvhatſoeuer they ſhal aſke, it ſhal be done to them of my father vvhich is in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For vvhere there be tvvo or three gathered in my name, there am I ″ in the mindes of them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 Then came Peter vnto him and ſaid,Lu. 17, 4 * Lord, how often ſhal my brother offend againſt me, and I forgiue him? vntil
 ſeuentimes? ✝ 
                     verse 22 IESVS ſaid to him,Luc. 17, 4. I ſay not to thee * vntil ſeuen times:The Goſpel vpō the 21 Sunday after Pentecoſt. but vntil ″ ſeuentie times ſeuen times. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 23 Therfore is the kingdom of heauen likened to a man being a king, that vvould make an account vvith his ſeruants. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And vvhen he began to make the account, there vvas one preſented vnto him that ovved him ten thouſand talents. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And hauing not vvhence to repay it, his lord commaunded that he ſhould be ſold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and it to be repayed. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But that ſeruant falling dovvne, beſought him, ſaying, Haue patience tovvard me, and I vvil repay thee all. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And the lord of that ſeruant moued vvith pitie, dimiſſed him, and the dette he forgaue him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vvhen that ſeruant vvas gone forth, he found one of his felovv-ſeruants that did ovve him an hundred pence: and laying hands vpon him thratled him, ſaying, Repay that thou ovveſt. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And his felovv ſeruant falling dovvne, beſought him, ſaying, Haue patience tovvard me, and I vvil repay the all. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And he vvould not: but vvent his vvay, and caſt him into priſon, til he repayed the dette. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And his felovv-ſeruants ſeeing vvhat vvas done, vvere very ſorie, and they came, and told their lord al that vvas done. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Then his lord called him: and he ſaid vnto him, Thou vngratious ſeruant, I forgaue thee al the dette becauſe thou beſoughteſt me: oughteſt nor thou therfore alſo to haue mercie vpon thy felovv-ſeruant, euen as I had mercie vpon thee? ✝ 
                     verse 33 And his lord being angrie deliuered him to the tormenters, vntil he repayed al the dette. ✝ 
                     verse 34 So alſo ſhal my heauenly father doe to you, if you forgiue not euery one his brother from your hartes. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVIII.
                  1. Who is the greater.] The occaſion of this queſtion and of thier contention for Superioritie among the reſt of their infirmities which they had before the comming of the Holy Ghoſt, was (as certaine holy Doctors write) vpon emulation toward Peter, whom only they ſaw preferred before the reſt in the payment of the tribute,C. 17. v. 27 by theſe wordes of our Sauiour, Geue it them for me and thee. Chryſ. ho. 59. Hiero. in Mat. Vpon this place.
                  7. Scandals.] The ſimple be moſt annoyed by taking ſcandal of their preachers, Prieſts, and elders il life: and great damnation is to the guides of the people whether they be temporal or ſpiritual, but ſpecially to the ſpiritual, if by their il example and ſlaunderous life the people be ſcādalized.
                  8. Hand, foote, eye.] By theſe partes of the body ſo neceſſarie and profitable for a man, is ſignified, that whatſoeuer is neereſt and deereſt to vs, wife, children, freeudes, riches, al are to be conte
                        ••
                     ned and forſaken for to ſaue our ſoule.
                  10. Their Angels.] A great dignitie and a maruelous benefite that euery one hath from his
 Natiuitie an Angel for his cuſtodie and Patronage againſt the wicked before the face of God.Protection of Angels. 
                     Hiero. vpon this place. And the thing is ſo plaine, that Caluin dare not deny it, and yet he wil needes doubt of it, lib. 1. Inſt. c. 14. ſect. 1.
                  17. Not heare the Church.]
                     Diſobedieuce to the Church. Not only Heretikes, but any other obſtinate offender that wil not be iudged nor ruled by the Church, may be excommunicated, and ſo made as an Heathen or Publican was to the Iewes,Excommunication. by the diſcipline of the ſame, caſting him our of the felowſhip of Catholikes. Which Excommunication is a greater puniſhement then if he were executed by ſword, fire, and wild beaſtes. Aug. cont. Adu. leg. li
                           •
                        . c. 17. And againe he ſaith, Man is more ſharply and pitefully bound by the Churches Keies, then with any yron or adamantine manicles or fetters in the world. Auguſt. ibidem.
                  
                  17. Heathen.] Heretikes therfore becauſe they wil not heare the Church, be no better nor no otherwiſe to be eſteemed of Catholikes, then heathen men and Publicans were eſteemed of Catholikes, then heathen men and Publicans were eſteemed among the Iewes.
                  18. You ſhal binde.]
                     Mat. 
                           •
                        . 18, 19. As before he gaue this power of binding and looſing ouer the whole,Power to binde and looſe. firſt of al and principally to Peter, vpon whom he builded his Church: ſo here not only to Peter, and in him to his ſucceſſors, but alſo to the other Apoſtles, and in them to their ſucceſſors, euery one in their charge. Hieron. lib. 1. c. 14. aduerſ. Iouin. and Epiſt. ad Heliod. Cyprian. de Vnit. Eccl. nu. 3.
                  18. Shal looſe.] Our Lord geueth no leſſe right and authoritie to the Churche to looſe, then to binde,Li. 1. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        . c. 2. as S. Ambroſe writeth againſt the Nouatians, who confeſſed that the Prieſts had power to binde, but not to looſe.
                  20. In the middes of them.)
                     Catholike Aſſemblies. Not al aſſemblies may chalenge the preſence of Chriſt; but only ſuch as be gathered together in the vnity of the Church, and therfore no conuenticles of Heretikes directly gathering againſt the Churche, are warranted by this place. Cypr. de vnit. Eccleſ. nu. 7. 8.
                  22. Seuentie times ſeuen.) There muſt be no end of forgeuing them that be penitent, either in the Sacrament by abſolution, or one man an other their offenſes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  He anſvvereth the tempting Phariſees,THE fourth part of this Goſpel, Chriſts comming into Iurie toward his Paſſion. that the caſe of a man vvith his vvife ſhalbe (as in the firſt inſtitution it vvas) vtterly indiſſoluble, though for one cauſe he may be diuorced. 10 And therevpon to his Diſciples he highly commendeth Single life for heaven. 13 He vvil haue children came vnto him. 16 He ſhevveth vvhat is to be done to enter into life euerlaſting: 20 What alſo, for a rich man to be perfect: 27 As alſo vvhat paſsing revvard they ſhal haue vvhich follovv that his counſel of perfection: 29 yea though it be but in ſome one peece.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe,Mr. 10, 1. vvhen IESVS had ended theſe vvordes, he departed from Galilee, & came into the coaſtes of Ievvrie beyond Iordā, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and great multitudes folovved him: and he cured them there.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And there came to him the Phariſees tempting him,The Goſpel for Mariage. And for S. Agatha Febr. 5. and ſaying,make man Gen. 1, 27. Is it lavvful for a man to dimiſſe his vvife, for euery cauſe? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Who anſvvering, ſaid to them, Haue ye not read, that he which did make' from the beginning, made them male and femal? And he ſaid.Gen. 2, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 5 
                  For this cauſe, man ſhal leaue father and mother, and ſhal cleane to his vvife: and they tvvo ſhal be in one fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Therfore novv they are not tvvo, but one fleſh. That therfore vvhich God hath ioyned together,Deut. 24, 1. let ″ not man ſeparate. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 7 They ſay to him, why then * did Moyſes commaund to giue a bil of diuorce, and to dimiſſe her? ✝ 
                     verse 8 He ſaith to them, Becauſe Moyſes for the hardnes of your hart permitted you to dimiſſe your vviues:
 but from the beginning it vvas not ſo.Mt. 5, 32 ✝ 
                     verse 9 And I ſay to you, that 
* Whoſoeuer ſhal dimiſſe his vvife,Mr. 10, 11. ″ but for fornication, and ſhal mary an other, doth committe aduoutrie: and he that ſhal mary her that is dimiſſed,Luc. 16, 18. committeth aduoutrie. ✝ 
                     verse 10 His diſciples ſay vnto him, If the caſe of a man vvith his vvife be ſo,1. Cor. 7, 11. it is not expedient to mary. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Who ſaid to them, ″ Not al 

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . caplunt.take this vvord, but they to vvhom it is giuen. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For there are eunuches which vvere borne ſo frō their mothers vvombe: and there are eunuches vvhich were made by men: and there are eunuches, vvhich haue ″ gelded them ſelues for the kingdom of heauen. ″ He that can take, let him take. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then * were litle children preſented to him,Mr. 10, 13. that he ſhould ″ impoſe hands vpon them & pray.Luc. 18, 15. And the diſciples rebuked them. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But IESVS ſaid to them, Suffer the litle children, and ſtay them not from comming vnto me: for the kingdom of heauen is for ſuch. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And when he had impoſed hands vpon them, he departed from thence.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And * behold one came and ſaid to him,Mr. 10, 17. Good Maiſter, vvhat good ſhal I doe that I may haue life euerlaſting? ✝ 
                     verse 17 Who ſaid to him,Luc. 18, 18. what aſkeſt thou me of good? One is good, God. ButI ſee not (ſaith S. Auguſtine) why Chriſt ſhould ſay, If thou wilt haue life euerlaſting, keepe the commaundements: if without obſeruing of thē, by only faith one might be ſaued. Aug. de 
                           •
                        id, & op. c. 15. if thou vvilt enter into life, keepe the commaundements. ✝ 
                     verse 18 He ſaith to him,Exo. 20, 13. which? And IESVS ſaid, Thou ſhalt not murder, Thou ſhalt not committe aduoutrie, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, Thou ſhalt not beare falſe vvitnes, ✝ 
                        verse 19 Honour thy father and thy mother,
                  Leu. 19, 18. 
                  Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 20 The yong man ſaith to him, Al theſe haue I kept from my youth: vvhat is yet vvanting vnto me? ✝ 
                     verse 21 IESVS ſaid to him, ″ If thou vvilt be perfect, goe, ſel the things that thou haſt, & giue to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen: and come, ″ folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vvhen the yong man had heard this vvord, he vvent avvay ſad: for he had many poſſeſſions. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And IESVS ſaid to his diſciples, ✝ Amen I ſay to you, that a rich man ſhal hardely enter into the kingdom of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And againe I ſay to you, it is eaſier for a camel to paſſe through the eye of a nedle,
S. Marke expoundeth it thus, riche men truſting in their riches, ca. 10, 24.then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen they had heard this, the diſciples marueled very much, ſaying, who then can be ſaued? ✝ 
                     verse 26 And IESVS beholding, ſaid to them. With men this is impoſſible: but vvith God ″ al things are poſſible. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Then Peter anſvvering, ſaid to him,The Goſpel vpō the Conuerſion of S. Paul Ian. Behold vve haue ″ left al things, & haue folovved thee: ″ vvhat therfore ſhal vve haue? ✝ 
                     verse 28 And IESVS ſaid to them,
 Amen I ſay to you,25. And in a v
                        •
                     
                     tiue Maſſe of SS. Peter and Paul, and for holy Abbotes. that you vvhich haue folovved me, in the regeneration, when the Sonne of man ſhal ſitte in the ſeate of his maieſtie, you ″ alſo ſhal ſitte vpon tvvelue ſeates, iudging the tvvelue tribes of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And euery one that hath left houſe, or brethren, or ſiſters, or father, or mother, orHereof is gathered that the Apoſtles amōg other things left their wiues alſo to folow Chriſt. Hiero. li. 1. aduerſ. Iouin.
                   vvife, or children,Mr. 10, 31. or landes for my names ſake: ſhal receiue an hundred fold, and ſhal poſſeſſe life euerlaſting. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 30 And * many ſhal be firſt,Lu. 13, 30. that are laſt: and laſt, that are firſt.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
                  6. Not man ſeparate.] This inſeparability betwixtman and wife riſeth of that, that wedlocke is a Sacrament. Aug. li. 2. de pec. origine c. 34. to. 7. De
                        •
                     upt. & concupiſ. li. 1. c. 10.
                  9. But for fornication.)
                     Mariage after diuorce vnlawful. For aduoutrie one may dimiſſe an other, Mat. 5. But neither party can marry againe for any cauſe during life. Aug. li, 11. de adult. coniug. c. 21. 22. 24. for the which vnlawful act of marrying agayne, Fabiola that noble matrone of Rome albeit ſhee was the innocent part,In Epitaph. Fabiola. did publike penance, as S. Hierom writeth in her high commendation therefore. And in S. Paul Ro. 7. it is plaine that ſhee which is with an other man, her huſband yet liuing, ſhal be called an aduoutereſſe: contrary to the doctrine of our Aduerſaries.
                  11. Not al take.) Whoſoeuer haue not this gift geuen them, it is either for that they wil not haue it, or for that they fulfil not that which they wil: and they that haue this gift or attayne to this word, haue it of God and their owne free wil. Aug. li. de grat. & lib. arbit. c. 4. So that it is euident no man is excluded from this gift,Orig. tract. 7. in Mat. but (as Origen here ſaith) it is geuen to al that aſke for it: contrarie to our Aduerſaries that ſay it is impoſſible, and that for excuſe of breaking their vowes, wickedly ſay, they haue not the gift.
                  12. Gelded them ſelues.)
                     Vow of chaſtitie.They geld them ſelues for the kingdom of heauen which vow chaſtity. Aug. de virginitate c. 24. which proueth thoſe kind of vowes to be both lawful, and alſo more meritorious, and more ſure to obtaine life euerlaſting, then the ſtate of wedlocke, contrarie to our Adu, in al reſpectes.
                  14. He that can.)
                     Counſels not Precepts. It is not ſaid of the Precepts, keepe them who can, for they be neceſſarie vnder paine of damnation to be kept:Aug. ſer. 6. de temp. but of Counſels only (as of virginity, abſtaining from fleſh and wine, and of geuing al a mans goods away to the poore) it is ſaid, He that can attaine to it, let him doe it: which is counſel only, not a commaundement. Contrary to our Adu. that ſay, there are no Counſels, but only precepts.
                  13. Impoſe.)
                     Biſhops and Religious mens bleſſing. They knew the valour of Chriſtes bleſſing, and therfore brought their children to him: as good Chriſtian people haue at al times brought their children to Biſhops to haue their bleſſing. See Annotation before Chap. 10, 12. And of Religious mens bleſſing ſee Ruſſin. li. 2. c. 1. hiſt. S. Hierom in Epitaph. Paulae c. 7. & in vit. Hilarionis, Theodoret, in hiſtoria ſanctorū Patrum num. 8.
                  21. If thou wilt be perfect.]
                     The Religious ſtate of perfection. Loe, he maketh a plaine difference betwene keeping the commaundements, which is neceſſary for euery man: and being perfect, which he counſeleth only to them that wil. And this is the ſtate of greate perfection which Religious men doe profeſſe, according to Chriſtes counſel here, leauing al things and folowing him.
                  21. Folow me.] Thus to folow Chriſt is to be without wife and care of children, to lacke propriety, and to liue in common, and this hath great reward in heauen about other ſtates of life: which, S. Auguſtine ſaith, the Apoſtles folowed, and him ſelf, and that he exhorted others to it as much as lay in him. Aug. ep. 19. in fine, & in pſ. 103 Conc 3. poſt med.
                  
                  26. Al things poſsible.] This of the camel through a nedels eye, being poſſible to God, although he neither hath done it, nor by like wil doe it: maketh againſt the blaſphemous infidelity of our Aduerſaries that ſay, God can do no more then he hath done or wil doe. We ſee alſo that God can bring a camel through a nedels eye, and therfore his body through a doore, and our of the ſepulchre ſhut, and out of his mother a virgin, and generally aboue nature and contrary to nature do with his body as he liſt.
                  27. Left al.)Vow of pouertie in reſpect of reward. 
                     This perfection of leauing al things the Apoſtles vowed. Aug. li. 17. de Ciu. Dei c. 4.
                  27. What ſhal we haue.) They leaue al things in reſpect of reward, and Chriſt doeth wel allow it in them by his anſwer.
                  28. You alſo ſhal ſitte.)
                     Aug. in pſ. 121. Note that not only Chriſt, who is the principal and proper iudge of the liuing and the dead, but with him the Apoſtles and al perfect Saints ſhal iudge: and yet that doeth nothing derogate to his prerogatiue, by whom and vnder whom they hold this and al other dignities in this life and the next.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  To ſhevv hovv through Gods grace the Iewes ſhalbe ouerrunne of the Gentils, although they beginne after, he bringeth a parable of men working ſoner and later in the vineyard, but the later revvarded in the end euen as the firſt. 17 He reuealeth more to his Diſciples touching his paſsion: 20 Bidding the ambitious tvvo ſuiters to thinke rather of ſuffering with him: 24 And teaching vs (in the reſt of his Diſciples) not to be greeued at our Eccleſiaſtical Superiors, conſidering they are (as he was him ſelf) is toile for our Saluation. 29 Then going out of Iericho, he geueth ſight vnto tvvo blind.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE kingdom of heauen is like to a man that is an houſholder vvhich vvēt forth early ″ in the morning to hire vvorkemen into his vineyard.The Goſpel vpon the Sunday of Septuageſme. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And hauing made couenāt vvith the workemen for a penie a day, he ſent them into his vineyard. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And going forth about the third houre, he ſavv other ſtanding in the market place idle, ✝ 
                     verse 4 and he ſaid to them, Goe you alſo into the vineyard: and that vvhich ſhal be iuſt, I vvil giue you. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And they vvent their vvay. And againe he vvent forth about the ſixt & the ninth houre: and did likevviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But about the eleuenth houre he vvent forth and found other ſtanding, & he ſaith to them, what ſtand you here al the day idle? ✝ 
                     verse 7 They ſay to him, Becauſe no man hath hired vs. He ſaith to them, Goe you alſo into the vineyard.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And vvhen euening vvas come, the lord of the vineyard ſaith to his bailife, Call the vvorkemen, and pay them their hire, beginning from the laſt euen to the firſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Therfore vvhen they vvere come that came about the eleuenth houre, they receiued euery one ″ a penie. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But vvhen the firſt alſo came, they thought that they ſhould receiue more: and they alſo receiued euery one a penie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And receiuing it theyThe Iewes are noted for enuying the vocation of the Gentiles, and their reward equal with thē ſelues. murmured againſt the good man of the houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 12 ſaying, Theſe laſt haue continued one houre: and thou haſt made them equal to vs that haue borne the burden of the day and the heates. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But he anſvvering ſaid to one of them, Frende, I doe the no vvrong: didſt thou not couenant vvith me for a penie? ✝ 
                     verse 14 Take that is thine, and goe: I vvil alſo giue to this laſt euen as to thee alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Or, is it not lavvful for me to do that I vvil? is thine eye naught, becauſe I am good? ✝ 
                     verse 16 So ſhal the laſt, be firſt:Mr. 10, 32. and the firſt, laſt. For many be called, but ″ fevv elect. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 * And IESVS going vp to Hieruſalem,The Goſpel in a 
                        •
                     otiue Maſſe of the holy Croſſe. tooke the tvvelue diſciples ſecretly,Luc. 18, 31. and ſaid to them, ✝ 
                     verse 18 Behold vve goe vp to 
 Hieruſalem, and the Sonne of man ſhal be deliuered to the cheefe prieſtes and to the Scribes, and they ſhal condemne him to death, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and ſhal deliuer him to the Gentiles to be mocked, & ſcourged, & crucified, and the third day he ſhal riſe againe. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 * Then came to him the mother of the ſonnes of Zebedee vvith her ſonnes,Mr. 10, 35. adoring and deſiring ſome thing of him.
                     The Goſpel vpon S. Iam
                           •
                        s day Iul. 25. And S. Iohns ante portam Latinam Ma
                        ••
                     . 6. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Who ſaid to her, what vvilt thou? She ſaith to him, Say that theſe my tvvo ſonnes may ſitte, one at thy right hād, and one at thy left hand in thy kingdom. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid, You knovv not vvhat you deſire. Can you drinke of the cuppe that I ſhal drinke of? They ſay to him, we can. ✝ 
                     verse 23 He ſaith to them, My cuppe in deede you ſhal drinke of: but to ſitte at my right hand and left, is not mine to giue to you: but ″ to vvhom it is prepared of my father. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 24 And the ten hearing it, vvere diſpleaſed at the tvvo brethren.
Mr. 10, 41. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And IESVS called them vnto him, and ſaid, * You knovv that the princes of the gentilesSuperiority is not here forbidden among Chriſtians, neither Eccleſiaſtical nor temporal: but heatheniſh tyranny is forbidden, and humility commended. ouerrule them: and they that are the greater,Lu. 22, 25. exerciſe povver againſt them. ✝ 
                     verse 26 It ſhal not be ſo among you, but vvhoſoeuer vvil be the greater among you, let him be your miniſter: ✝ 
                     verse 27 and he that vvil be firſt among you, ſhal be your ſeruant. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Euen as the ″ Sonne of man is not come to be miniſtred vnto, but to miniſter, and to giue his life a redemption for many. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And * vvhen they vvent out from Iericho,Mr. 10, 46. a great multitude folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And behold tvvo blinde men ſitting by the vvay ſide, heard that IESVS paſſed by, and they cried out ſaying, Lord, haue mercie vpon vs, ſonne of Dauid. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And the multitude rebuked them that they ſhould hold their peace. But they cried out the more, ſaying, Lord, haue mercie vpon vs, ſonne of Dauid. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And IESVS ſtoode, and called them, and ſaid, Vvhat vvil ye that I doe to you? ✝ 
                     verse 33 They ſay to him, Lord, that our eies may be opened. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And IESVS hauing compaſſion on them, touched their eies. And immediatly they ſavv, and folovved him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
                  1. In the morning.] God called ſome in the morning, that is, in the beginning of the world, as Abel, Enoch, Noë, and other the iuſt and faithful of the firſt age: at the third houre, Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, and the reſt of their age: at the 6 houre of the day, Moyſes, Aaron, and the reſt: at the 9 houre, the Prophets: at the eleuenth, that is, at the later end of the world, the Chriſtian
 Nations, Aug. de verb. Doniniſer. 59. breifly, this calling at diuerſe houres ſignifieth the calling of the Iewes from time to time in the firſt ages of the world, and of the Gentils in the later age thereof. It ſignifieth alſo that God calleth coūtries to the ſaith, ſome ſouer, ſome later: and particular men to be his ſeruants, ſome yonger, ſme elder, of diuerſe ages.
                  9. Peny.] The peny promiſed to al,Diuerſitie of glorie in heauen. was life euerlaſting, which is common to al that ſhal be ſaued:1. Cor. 15. but in the 
                        ••
                     me life there be degrees of glorie, as * betwixt ſtarre and ſtarre in the element. Aug. li. de virgi
                           •
                        t. c. 26.
                  16. Fewa
                        •
                     ct.] Thoſe are elect which deſpiſed not their caller, but folowed and beleued him: for men 
                        〈◊〉
                      not but of their owne free will. Aug. li. 1 ad Simplic. q. 1.
                  23. To whom it is prepared.]
                     Mt. 16, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      The kingdom of heauen is prepared for them that are worthy of it and deſerue it by their wel doing,Ro. 2. 6. as in holy Scripture it is very often, That God wil repay euery man according to his workes.
                     Mt. 25, 34 and, Come ye bleſſed, poſſeſſe the kingdom prepared for you. Why? becauſe I was hungrie,
                     Difference of merites and reward. 
                     and you gaue me meate: thirſtie, and you gaue me drinke: &c. Therfore doeth Chriſt ſay here, It is not mine to giue. becauſe he is luſt and wil not giue it to euery man without reſpect of their deſerts: yea nor alike to euery one, but diuerſly according to greater or leſſer merits, as here S. Chryſo,Chryſ. ho. 66 in Mt. maketh it plaine, when our Sauiour telleth them, that although they ſuffer martyrdom for his ſake, yet he hath not to giue them the two cheefe places. See S. Hiero. Vpon this place, and li. 2 adu. Iouin. c. 15. This alſo is a leſſon for them that haue to beſtow Eccleſiaſtical benefices, that they haue no carnal reſpect to kinred &c. but to the worthines of the perſons.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . As the ſonne of man.]
                     Io. 13, 1
                           •
                        . Chriſt him ſelf as he was the Sonne of man, was their and our Superiour, and * Lord and Maiſter, notwithſtanding his humility: and therfore it is pride and haultineſſe which is forbidden, and not Superiority or Lordſhip, as ſome Heretikes would haue it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  Being now come to the place of his Paſsion,THE FIFTH part, of the Holy weeke of his Paſſiō in Hieruſalem. he entereth with humility and triumph together: 12 Sheweth his zeale for the houſe of God ioyned with great maruels. 15 And to the Rulers he boldly defendeth the acclamations of the children. 
                        〈◊〉
                      He 
                        •
                     urſeth alſo that fruitles lea
                        ••
                     e tree: 23 auoucheth his power by the witnes of Iohn: 28 and foretelleth his in two parables their reprobation (with the Gentils vocation) for their wicked deſerts, 42 and conſequently their irreparable damnation that ſhal enſue therof.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen they drevv nigh to Hieruſalem,The Goſpel on Palme Sunday before the benedictiō of the Palmes. and vvere come to Beth-phagee vnto Mount-oliuet,Mr. 11, 1. then IESVS ſent tvvo diſciples,Lu. 19, 20. ✝ 
                     verse 2 ſaying to them,Io. 12, 15 Goe ye into the tovvne that is againſt you,PALME SVNDAY. and immediatly ″ you ſhal finde an aſſe tied and a colt vvith her: looſe them & bring them to me: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and if any man ſhal ſay ought vnto you, ſay ye, that our Lord hath neede of them: and forthvvith he vvil let them goe.Eſa. 62, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And this vvas done that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſpoken by the Prophet, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 5 
                  Say ye to the daughter of Sion,
                  Zach. 9, 9. 
                  Behold thy king commeth to thee, meeke, & ſitting vpon an aſſe and a colt the fole of her that is vſed to the yoke. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the diſciples going, did as IESVS commaunded them. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they brought ″ the aſſe and the colt: and laide their garments vpon them, and made him to ſit thereon. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And a very great multitude ſpred their * garments in the vvay: and others did cut boughes from the trees, and ſtravved them in the vvay: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and the multitudes 
 that vvent before and that folovved, cried, ſaying, ″ Hoſanna to the ſonne of Dauid:
                  Pſ. 117, 26. 
                  bleſſed is he that commeth in the name of our Lord. ⊢ Hoſanna in the higheſt.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhen he vvas entred Hieruſalem,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday the firſt weeke in Lent. the vvhole citie vvas moued, ſaying, who is this? ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the people ſaid, This is IESVS the Prophet,Mr. 11, 15. of Nazareth in Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And * IESVS entred into the temple of God, and caſt out al thatHow much the abuſe of Churches by merchandiſing, walking, or other profane occupying of them, diſpleaſeth God, here we may ſee. ſold and bought in the temple,Lu. 19, 45. and the tables of the bankers, and the chaires of them that ſold pigeons he ouerthrevve: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and he ſaith to them,Eſa. 56, 7. It is vvritten, My houſe ſhal be called the ″ houſe of prayer: but you haue made it a denne of theeues. ✝ And there came to him the blinde,Ier. 7, 11 and the lame in the temple: and he healed them. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the cheefe prieſtes & Scribes ſeeing the maruelous things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, & ſaying, Hoſanna to the ſonne of Dauid: they had indignatiō, ✝ 
                     verse 16 and ſaid to him, Heareſt thou vvhat theſe ſay? And IESVS ſaid to them, Very vvel,Pſ. 8, 3. haue you neuer read, That out of the ″ mouth of infants and ſucklings thou haſt perfited praiſe? ✝ 
                     verse 17 And leauing them, he vvent forth out of the citie into Bethania, and remained there. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And in the morning returning into the citie,MVNDAY. he vvas an hungred.Mr. 11, 13. ✝ 
                     verse 19 * And ſeeing a certaineThe Iewes hauing the wordes of the law, and not the deedes, were the figtree ful of leaues, and void of fruite. Aug. de verb. Do. Serm. 44. figtree by the vvay ſide, he came to it: and found nothing on it but leaues only, and he ſaith to it, Neuer grovv there fruite of thee for euer. And incontinent the figtree vvas vvithered. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the diſciples ſeeing it, marueled ſaying, Hovv is it vvithered incontinent? ✝ 
                     verse 21 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid to them, Amen I ſay to you,Mt. 17, 20. * if you ſhal haue faith, and ſtagger not,TVESDAY. not only that of the figtree ſhal you doe, but and if you ſhal ſay to this mountaine, Take vp and throvv thy ſelf into the ſea, it ſhal be done. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And al things vvhatſoeuer you ſhal aſke in prayer ″ beleeuing, you ſhal receiue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen he vvas come into the temple, there came to him as he vvas teaching, the cheefe Prieſts and auncients of the people,Mr. 11, 28. ſaying, * ″ In vvhat povver doeſt thou theſe things? and vvho hath giuen thee this povver? ✝ 
                     verse 24 IESVS anſvvering ſaid to them,Lu. 20, 2 I alſo vvil aſke you one vvord: vvhich if you ſhal tell me, I alſo vvil tel you in vvhat povver I doe theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 25 The Baptiſme of Iohn vvhence vvas it? from heauen, or from men? But they thought vvithin them ſelues, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 26 If vve ſhal ſay from heauen, he vvil ſay to vs, vvhy then did you not beleeue him? but if vve ſhal ſay from men: vve feare the multitude, for al hold Iohn as a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And anſvvering
 to IESVS they ſaid, We knovv not. He alſo ſaid to them, Neither do I tel you in vvhat povver I doe theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 But vvhat is your opinion? A certaine man had tvvo ſonnes: and comming to 
                     •
                   the firſt, he ſaid, Sonne, goe vvorke to day in my vineyard. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he anſvvering, ſaid, I vvil not. But aftervvard moued vvith repentance he vvent. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And comming to the other, he ſaid likevviſe. And he anſvvering, ſaid, I goe Lord, and he vvent not. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Which of the tvvo did the fathers vvil? They ſay to him, The firſt. IESVS ſaith to them, Amē I ſay to you, that the Publicans and vvhoores goe before you into the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 32 For Iohn came to you in the vvay of iuſtice: and you did not beleeue him. but the publicans and vvhoores did beleeue him: but you ſeeing it, neither haue ye had repentance aftervvard, to beleeue him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 An other parable heare ye:The Goſpal vpon friday the ſecond weeke in Lent. A man there vvas an houſholder vvho * planted a vineyard,Eſ. 5, 1. and made a hedge round about it,Mr. 12, 1. and digged in it a preſſe,Lu. 20, 9. and builded a tovvre, and let it out to huſbandmen: and vvent forth into a ſtrange countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And vvhen the time of fruites drevve nigh, he ſent his ſeruants to the huſbandmen, to receiue the fruites thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And the huſbandmen apprehending his ſeruants, one they beat, an other they killed, and an other they ſtoned. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Againe he ſent other ſeruants moe then the former: and they did to them likevviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And laſt of al he ſent to them his ſonne, ſaying, They vvil reuerence my ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But the huſbandmen ſeeing the ſonne, ſaid vvithin them ſelues, This is the heire, come, let vs kil him, and vve ſhal haue his inheritaunce. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And apprehending him they caſt him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him. ✝ 
                     verse 40 When therfore the lord of the vineyard ſhal come, vvhat vvil he doe to thoſe huſbandmen? ✝ 
                     verse 41 They ſay to him, The naughtie men he vvil bring to naught: and his vineyard he vvil let out to other huſbandmen, that ſhal render him the fruite in their ſeaſons.
                ✝ 
                     verse 42 IESVS ſaith to them, Haue you neuer read in the Scriptures, The ſtone which the builders reiected,
                  Pſ. 117, 22. 
                  the ſame is made into the head of the corner? By our lord was this done, and it is maruelous in our eyes. ✝ 
                     verse 43 Therfore I ſay to you, that the kingdom of God ſhal be taken avvay from you, and ſhal be giuen to a nation yelding the fruites thereof.Eſ. 8, 14 ✝ 
                     verse 44 And * he that falleth vpon this ſtone, ſhal be broken: and on vvhom it falleth, it ſhal al to bruiſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And vvhen the cheefe Prieſtes and Phariſees had heard his parables, they knevve that he ſpake of them. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And ſeeking 
 to lay hands vpon him, they feared the multitudes: becauſe they held him as a Prophet. 
                     •
                  
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
                  2. You ſhal finde.] Chriſt by diuine power both knewe where theſe beaſts were being abſent, and commaunded them for his vſe, being an other mans, and ſodenly made the colt fitte to be ridden on, neuer broken before.
                  7. The aſſe and the col
                           •
                        .] This aſſe vnder yoke ſignifieth the Iewes vnder the Law and vnder God their Lord,Hiero. in Mat. as it were his old and ancient people: the yong colt now firſt ridden on by Chriſt, ſignifieth the Gentiles, wilde hitherto and not broken, now to be called to the faith and to receiue our Sauiours yoke.Aug. li. 12 cōt. Fauſt. c. 42. And therfore the three laſt Euangeliſts writing ſpecially to the Gentils, make mention of the colt only.
                  8. Garments in the way.] Theſe offices of honour done to our Saulour extraordinarily,Proceſſion on Palme-ſunday with the B. Sacrament. were very acceptable: and for a memory hereof the holy Church maketh a ſolemne Proceſſion euery yere vpon this day, ſpecially in our Countrie when it was Catholike, with the B. Sacrament reuerently caried, as it were Chriſt vpon the aſſe, and ſtrawing of ruſhes and floures, bearing of Palmes, ſetting vp boughes,Al deuout offices in that kinde, exceding grateful. ſpredding and hanging vp the richeſt clothes, the quire and queriſters ſinging as here the children and the people. al done in a very goodly ceremonie to the honour of Chriſt and the memorie of his triumphe vpon this day. The like ſeruice and the like duties done to him in al other ſolemne Proceſſions of the B. Sacrament, and otherwiſe, be vndoubtedly no leſſe grateful.
                  9. Hoſanna.] Theſe very wordes of ioyful crie and triumphant voice of gratulation to our Sauiour,HOSANN▪
                      holy Church vſeth alwaies in the Preface of the Maſſe, as it were the voice of the Prieſt and al the people (who then ſpecially are attent and deuout) immediatly before the Conſecration and Eleuation, as it were expecting, and reioycing at his comming.
                  13. Houſe of prayer.] Note here that he calleth external ſacrifice (out of the Prophete Eſay) prayer. For he ſpeaketh of the Temple, which was builded properly and principally for ſacrifice.
                  16. Mouth of infants.] Yong childrens prayers proceding from the inſtinct of Gods ſpirit,Prayers not vnderſtood of the partie, are acceptable. be acceptable: and ſo the voices of the like, or of other ſimple folke now in the Church, though them ſelues vnderſtand not particularly what they ſay, be maruelous grateful to Chriſt.
                  22. Beleeuing.] In reſpect of our owne vnworthineſſe, and of the things not alwaies expedient for vs, we may wel doubt when we pray, whether we ſhal obtaine or no
                        •
                      but on Gods part we muſt beleeue, that is, we muſt haue no diffidence or miſtruſt either of his power or of his wil, if we be worthy,Mar
                           •
                        . 11, 22. and the thing expedient. And therfore S. Marke hath thus, Haue ye faith of God.
                  
                  23. In what power?] The Heretikes preſumptuouſly thinke them ſelues in this point like to Chriſt,Haeretike
                           •
                         runne, not ſent. becauſe they are aſked, in what power they come, and who ſent them: but when they haue anſwered this queſtion as fully as Chriſt did here by that which he inſinuateth of Iohns teſtimonie for his authority, they ſhalbe heard, and til then they ſhal be ſtil taken for thoſe of whom God ſpeaketh by the Prophete,Ier. 33. 
                     They 
                           •
                        anne, and I ſent them not.
                  
                  28. The firſt.) The firſt ſonne here is the people of the Gentils, becauſe Gentility was before there was a peculiar and choſen people of the Iewes, and therfore the Iewes here as the later, are ſignified by the other ſonne.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  Yet by one other parable he fore ſheweth the moſt deſerued reprobation of the earthly and perſecuting Iewes, and the gratious vocation of the Gentils in their place. 15 Then he defeateth the ſnare of the Phariſees and Herodians about paying tribute to Caeſar. 23 He anſwereth alſo the inuention of the Sadducees againſt the Reſurrection: 34 and a queſtion that the Phariſees aſke to poſe him: turning and poſing them againe, becauſe they imagined that Chriſt ſhould be no more then a man: 
                        〈◊〉
                      and ſo he putteth al the buſy Secte
                        •
                      to ſilence.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND IESVS anſvvering, ſpake againe in parables to them,The Goſpel vpō the 19 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ſaying: ✝ 
                     verse 2 The kingdom of heauen is likened to a man being a king, vvhich made a 
                     •
                   mariage to his ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſent his 
                     •
                   ſeruants to call them that vvere inuited to the mariage: and they vvould not come. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Againe he ſent other ſeruants, ſaying, Tel them that vvere inuited, Behold I haue prepared my dinner: my beeues and fatlings are killed, and al things are ready: come ye to the mariage. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they neglected: and vvent their vvaies, 
                     •
                   one to his farme, and an other to his merchandiſe: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and the reſt laid hands vpon his ſeruants, and ſpitefully intreating them, murdered them. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But vvhen the king had heard of it, he vvas vvroth, and ſending his hoſtes, deſtroied thoſe murderers, and burnt their citie. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Then he ſaith to his ſeruants, The mariage in deede is ready: but they that vvere inuited, vvere not vvorthie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Goe ye therfore into the high vvayes: and vvhoſoeuer you ſhal finde, call to the mariage. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And his ſeruants going forth into the vvayes, gathered together al that they found,Not only good men be within the church, but alſo euil mē. againſt the Heretikes of theſe daies. bad and good: and the mariage vvas filled vvith gheſtes. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the king vvent in to ſee the gheſtes: and he ſavv there a man not attired in a vvedding garment. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And he ſaith to him, Frende, hovv cameſt thou in hither not hauing a vvedding garment? But he vvas dumme. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then the king ſaid to the vvaiters, Binde his hands and feete, and caſt him into the vtter darkenes: there ſhal be vveeping & gnaſhing of teeth. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For many be called, but fevv elect. 
                     •
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 * Then the Phariſees departing,Mr. 12, 13. conſulted among them ſelues for to entrappe him in his talke. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they ſend to him their diſciples vvith the Herodians,Lu. 20, 20. ſaying, Maiſter, vve knovv that thou art a true ſpeaker, and teacheſt the vvay of God in truth, neither careſt thou for any man. for thou doeſt not reſpect the perſon of men: ✝ 
                     verse 17 tel vs therfore vvhat is thy opinion, is it lavvful to giue tribute to Caeſar, or not? ✝ 
                     verse 18 But IESVS knovving their naughtines, ſaid, what do you tempt me Hypocrites? ✝ 
                     verse 19 Shevv me the tribute coine. And they offred him a penie. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And IESVS ſaith to them, whoſe is this image and ſuperſcription? ✝ 
                     verse 21 They ſay to him, Caeſars. Then he ſaith to them, Render therfore the things that are Caeſars, 
                     •
                   to Caeſar:* Mr. 12, 19. and the things that are Gods, to God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And hearing it they marueled,Lu. 20, 27. and leauing him vvent their vvaies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 * That day there came to him the Sadducees, that ſay 
 there is no reſurrection:Act. 23, 6. and aſked him, ✝ 
                     verse 24 ſaying, Maiſter, Moyſes ſaid, If a man die not hauing a childe, that his brother marie his wife, and raiſe vp ſeede to his brother.
                  Deu. 25, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And there vvere vvith vs ſeuen brethren: and the firſt hauing maried a vvife, died: and not hauing iſſue, left his vvife to his brother. ✝ 
                     verse 26 In like maner the ſecond and the third euen to the ſeuenth. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And laſt of al the vvoman died alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 28 In the reſurrection therfore vvhoſe vvife of the ſeuen ſhal ſhe be? for they al had her. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And IESVS anſwering, ſaid to them, You do erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the povver of God. ✝ 
                     verse 30 For in the reſurrection neither ſhal they marie not be maried: but are 
                     •
                   as the Angels of God in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And concerning the reſurrectiō of the dead, haue you not read that vvich vvas ſpoken of God ſaying to you,Exo. 3, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 32 
                  I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob? He is not God 
                     •
                   of the dead, but of the liuing. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And the multitudes hearing it, marueled at his doctrine.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 * But the Phariſees hearing that he had put the Sadducees to ſilence,Mar. 12, 28. came together:The Goſpel vpō the 17 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 35 and one of them a doctor of lavv aſked of him, tempting him, ✝ 
                     verse 36 Maiſter, vvhich is the great commaundement in the lavv?Deut. 6, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 37 IESVS ſaid to him, Thou ſhalt loue the lord thy God from thy whole hart, and with thy whole ſoul, and with thy whole minde. ✝ 
                     verse 38 This is the greateſt and the firſt commaundement. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And the ſecond is like to this,Leu. 19, 18. 
                  Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thyſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 40 
                  
                     •
                   On theſe tvvo commaundements dependeth the vvhole Lavv and the Prophets.
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 And * the Phariſees being aſſembled,Mr. 12, 35. IESVS aſked them ✝ 
                     verse 42 ſaying,Lu. 20, 41. What is your opinion of Chriſt? Whoſe ſonne is he? They ſay to him, Dauids. ✝ 
                     verse 43 He ſaith to them, Hovv then doth Dauid in ſpirit cal him Lord, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 44 The Lord ſaid to my Lord, ſitte on my right hand,
                  Pſ. 109. 1. 
                  vntil I put thine enemies the foote ſtole of thy feete? ✝ 
                     verse 45 If Dauid therfore call him Lord, hovv is he his ſonne? ✝ 
                     verse 46 And no man could anſvver him a vvord: neither durſt any man from that day aſke him any more.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
                  2. Mariage.) Then did God the Father make this mariage, when by the myſterie of the Incarnation he ioyned to his ſonne our Lord, the holy Church for his ſpouſe. Greg. hom. 
                           •
                        8.
                  
                  3. Seruants.) The firſt ſeruants here ſent to inuite, were the Prophets: the ſecond, were the Apoſtles: and al that afterward conuerted countries, or that haue and doe reconcile men to the Church.Wordly excuſes againſt reconciliation.
                  
                  5. One to his farme) Such as refuſe to be reconciled to Chriſtes Church, alleage often vaine impediments and worldly excuſes, which at the day of iudgement wil not ſerue them.
                  
                      11. A man not attyred.] If profiteth not much to be within the Church and to be a Catholike, except a man be of good life, for ſuch an one ſhal be damned, becauſe with faith he hath not good workes:The Church cō
                        ſiſteth of good and bad. as is euident by the example of this man, who was within, and at the feaſt as the reſt, but lacked the garment of charitie and good workes▪ And by this man are repreſented al the bad that are called▪ and therfore they alſo are in the Church, as this man was at the feaſt: but becauſe he was called, and yet none of the elect, it is euident that the Church doth not conſiſt of the elect only contrarie to our Aduerſaries.
                  2
                        •
                     . To Caeſar.) Temporal duties and payments exacted by worldly Princes muſt be payed,Neither muſt temporal Princes exact, nor their Subiects giue vnto them, Eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction. ſo that God be not defrauded of his more ſoueraine dutie. And therfore Princes haue to take heede, how they exact: and others, how they geue to Caeſar, that is, to their Prince, the things that are dewe to God, that is, to his Eccleſiaſtical miniſters. Wherevpon S. Athanaſius reciteth theſe goodly wordes out of an epiſtle of the ancient and famous Cōfeſſor Hoſius Cordubenſis to Cōſtantius the Arian Emperour: Ceaſe I beſeche thee, and remember that thou art mortal, feare the day of iudgement, intermedle not with Eccleſiaſtical matters, neither doe thou commaund vs in this kinde, but rather learne them of vs, to thee God hath committed the Empire, to vs he hath cōmitted the things that belong to the Church: and as he that with malicious eies carpeth thine Empire, gaineſayeth the ordinance of God: ſo doe thou alſo beware, leſt in drawing vnto thee Eccleſiaſtical matters, thou be made guilty of a great crime. It is written, Geue ye the things that are Caeſars, to Caeſar: and the things that are Gods, to God. Therfore neither is it lawful for vs in earth to hold the Empire, neither haſt thou (O Emperour) power ouer incenſe and ſacred things. Athan. Ep. ad Solit. vitā agentes. And S. Ambroſe to Valentinian the Emperour (who by the il counſel of his mother Iuſtina an Arian, required of S. Ambroſe to haue one Church in Millan deputed to the Arian Heretikes) ſaith: we pay that which is Caeſars, to Caeſar: and that which is Gods, to God. Tribute is Caeſars, it is not denied: the Church is Gods, it may not verely be yelded to Caeſar: becauſe the Temple of God can not be Caeſars right. Which no man can deny but it is ſpoken with the honour of the Emperour. for what is more honorable then that the Emperour be ſaid to be the ſonne of the Church? For a good Emperour is within the Church, not aboue the Church, Ambr. lib. 5. Epiſt. Orat. de Baſil. trad.
                  
                  30. As Angels.) As Chriſt proueth here,The Saints heare our prayers. that in heauen they neither marry nor are married, becauſe there they ſhal be as Angels: by the very ſame reaſon, is proued, that Saints may heare our prayers and helpe vs, be they neere or farre of, becauſe the Angels do ſo, and in euery moment are preſent vvher they liſt, and neede not to be neere vs, when they heare or helpe vs.
                  30. As Angels.) Not to marry nor be married,Religious ſingle life, Angelical. is to be like to Angels: therfore is the ſtate of Religious men and women and Prieſts, for not marrying, worthely called of the Fathers, an Angelical life. Cyp. lib. 2. de diſcipl. & ha
                           •
                        . Virg. ſub finem.
                  
                  32. Of the dead.) S. Hierom by this place diſproueth the Heretike Vigilantius, and in him theſe of our time, which to diminiſh the honour of Saincts, call them of purpoſe, dead men.
                  40. On theſe two.) Hereby it is euident that al dependeth not vpon faith only,Not onely faith. but much more vpon charitie (though faith be the firſt) which is the loue of God and of our neighbour, which is the ſumme of al the law and the Prophetes: becauſe he that hath this double charitie expreſſed here by theſe two principal commaundemēts, fulfilleth and accompliſheth al that is commaunded in the Law and the Prophetes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  The Scribes and Phariſees after al this, continuing ſtil incorrigible, although he wil haue the doctrine of their Chaire obeied, yet againſt their workes (and namely their ambition) he openly inueigheth, crying to them eight woes for their eightfold hypocriſie and blindnes: 34 and ſo concluding with the moſt worthy reprobation of that perſecuting generation and their mother-citie Ieruſalem with her Temple.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN IESVS ſpake to the multitudes and to his diſciples,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday the ſecond weeke in Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 2 ſaying, Vpon 
                     •
                   the chaire of Moyſes haue ſitten the Scribes and the Phariſees. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Al things therfore 
                     •
                   vvhatſoeuer they ſhal ſay to you, obſerue ye and doe ye:Luc. 11, 46. but according to their vvorkes doe ye not,Act. 15, 10. for they ſay and doe not. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For * they binde heauy burdens & importable: and put them vpon mens ſhoulders:
 but vvith a finger of their ovvne they vvil not moue them. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they doe al their vvorkes, for to be ſeen of men▪ for they make brode theirTheſe phylacteries were peeces of parchement, wherein they wrote the ten cōmaundements, and folded it, and caried it on their forehead before their eies, imagining groſly and ſuperſtitiouſly, that ſo they fulfilled that which is ſaid Deu. 6, They ſhal be immoueable before thine eies. Hiero. in 23▪ Mat. phylacteries,Deu. 22, 12. and enlarge their * fringes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And they 
                     •
                   loue the firſt places at ſuppers, and * the firſt chaires in the Synagogs,Nu. 15, 38. ✝ 
                     verse 7 and ſalutations in the market-place, and to be called of men,Mr. 12, 38. Rabbi. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But be not you called Rabbi. for 
                     •
                   one is you
                     •
                   maiſter, and al you are brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And call none father to your ſelfe vpon earth: for one is your father, he that is in heauen.Ia. 3, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Neither * be ye called 
                     •
                   maiſters: for one is your maiſter, Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He that is the greater of you, ſhal be your ſeruiteur. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And he that exalteth him ſelf, ſhal be humbled: and he that humbleth him ſelf, ſhal be exalted. 
                     •
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vvo to you 
                     •
                   Scribes & Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you ſhut the kingdom of heauen before men. For your ſelues do not enter in: & thoſe that are going in, you ſuffer not to enter.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you * deuoure vvidovves houſes,Lu. 20, 47. 
                  
                     •
                   praying long prayers▪ for this you ſhal receiue the greater iudgement.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you goe round about the ſea and the land, to make one proſelyte: and vvhen he is made, you make him the childe of hel 
                     •
                   double more then your ſelues.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 Wo to you blinde guides, that ſay, Whoſoeuer ſhal ſvveare by the temple, it is nothing: but he that ſhal ſvveare by the gold of the temple, is bound. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Ye fooliſh and blinde, for vvhether is greater, the gold, or the temple that ſanctifieth the gold? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſvveare by the altar, it is nothing: but vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſvveare by the gift that is vpon it, is bound. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Ye blinde, for vvhether is greater, the gift, or the altar that 
                     •
                   ſanctifieth the gift? ✝ 
                     verse 20 He therfore that ſvveareth by the altar, ſvveareth by it and by al things that are vpon it: ✝ 
                     verse 21 and vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſvveare by the temple, ſvveareth by it and 
                     •
                   by him that dvvelleth in it: ✝ 
                     verse 22 and he that ſvveareth by heauen, ſvveareth by the throne of God & by him that ſitteth thereon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you tithe mint, and aniſe, and cummin, and haue left the vveightier things of the lavv, iudgemēt, and mercie, and faith. theſe things you ought to haue done, & not to haue omitted thoſe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Blinde guides, that ſtraine a g
                     •
                  at, and ſvvallovv a camel.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 25 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you make cleane that on the outſide of the cuppe and diſh:
                     
                        •
                      they are ful▪
                   but vvithin you are ful' of rapine and vncleannes. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Thou blinde Phariſee, firſt make cleane the inſide of the cuppe and the diſh, that the outſide may become cleane.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, hypocrites: becauſe you are like to vvhited ſepulchres, vvhich outvvardly appeare vnto mē beautiful, but vvithin are ful of dead mens bones, and al filthines. ✝ 
                     verse 28 So you alſo outvvardly in deede 
                     •
                   appeare to men iuſt: but invvardly you are ful of hypocriſie and iniquitie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 Wo to you Scribes and Phariſees, ye hypocrites: becauſe you build the Prophets ſepulchres, and 
                     •
                   garniſh the moniments of iuſt men, ✝ 
                     verse 30 and ſay: If vve had been in our fathers dayes, vve had not been their felovves in the bloud of the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Therefore you are a teſtimonie to your ovvne ſelues, that you are the ſonnes of them that killed the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And fil you vp the meaſure of your fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 33 You ſerpents,The Goſpel vpō S. Steuens day Decemb. 26. vipers broodes, hovv vvil you flee from the iudgement of hel? ✝ 
                     verse 34 Therfore behold I ſend vnto you Prophets and vviſe men and ſcribes, and of them you ſhal kil & crucifie, and of them you ſhal ſcourge in your Synagogs, and perſecute from citie into citie: ✝ 
                     verse 35 that vpon you may come al the iuſt bloud that vvas ſhed vpon the earth,Gen. 4, 8▪
                   from the bloud of * Abel the iuſt euē vnto the bloud of * Zacharias the ſonne of Barachias,2. Par. 24, 22.vvhom you murdered betvvene the temple and the altar. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Amen I ſay to you, al theſe things ſhal come vpon this generation.Luc. 13, 34. ✝ 
                     verse 37 * Hieruſalem, Hieruſalem, vvhich killeſt the Prophets, and ſtoneſt them that vvere ſent to thee, hovv often vvould I gather together thy children as the henne doth gather together her chickens vnder her vvinges, and thouFree wil. vvouldeſt not? ✝ 
                     verse 38 Behold, your houſe ſhal be leſt deſert to you. ✝ 
                     verse 39 For I ſay to you, you ſhal not ſee me from hence forth til you ſay, Bleſſed is he that commeth in the name of our Lord. 
                     •
                  
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII.
                  2. Chaire of Moyſes.]
                     The See of Rome preſerued in truth. God preſerueth the truth of Chriſtian religion in the Apoſtolike See of Rome, which is in the new law anſwerable to the chaire of Moyſes, notwithſtāding the Biſhops of the ſame were neuer ſo wicked of life: yea though ſome traitour as il as Iudas were Biſhop thereof, it ſhould not be preiudicial to the Church and innocent Chriſtians, for whom our Lord prou
                        •
                     ding ſaid, Doe that which they ſay, but doe not as they doe. Auguſt. Epiſt. 165.
                  
                  
                      3. Whatſoeuer they ſhal ſay.]Cōtra lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 51. Why (ſaith S. Auguſtin) dōeſt thou call the Apoſtolike Chaire the chaire of peſtilence?The dignitie of the See of Rome, notwithſtanding ſome euil Biſhops thereof. If for the men, why? Did our Lord Ieſus Chriſt for the Phariſees, any vvrong to thee Chaire vvherein they ſate? Did he not commend that chaire of Moyſes, and preſeruing the honour of the chaire, reproue them? For he ſaith: They ſitte vpon the Chaire of Moyſes, that vvhich they ſay, doe ye. Theſe things if you did vvel conſider, you vvould not for the men vvhom you defame, blaſpheme the See Apoſtolike,Cōtra lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 61. vvhervvith you doe not communicate. And againe he ſaith: Neither for the Phariſees (to vvhom yu compare vs not of vviſdom but of malice) did our Lord commaund the Chaire of Moyſes to be forſaken, in vvhich chaire verely he figured his ovvne▪ for he vvarneth the people to doe that vvhich they ſay, and not to doe that vvhich they doe, and that the holineſſe of the Chaire be in no caſe forſaken, nor the vnity of the flocke deuided, for the naughty Paſtours.
                  6. Loue the firſt places.) He condemneth not dew places of Superiority geuen or taken of men according to their degrees, but ambitious ſeeking for the ſame, and their prowde hart and vvicked intention, which he ſaw within them, and therfore might boldly reprehend them.
                  8. One is your maiſter.)
                     Many maiſters are many Arch-heretikes. In the Catholike Church there is one Maiſter, Chriſt our Lord, and vnder him one Vicar, with whom al Catholike Doctors and teachers are one, becauſe they teach al one thing, but in Arch-heretikes it is not ſo, where euery one of them is a diuerſe maiſter, and teacheth contrarie to the other, and wil be called Rabbi and Maiſter, euery one of their owne Diſciples: Arius a Rabbi among the Arians, Luther among the Lutherans, and among the Caluiniſts Caluin.
                  10. Maiſters.)
                     Doctors, Maſters, and ſpiritual fathers. Wiclefe and the like Heretikes of this time doe herevpon condemne degrees of Schole and titles of Doctors and Maiſters: where they might as wel reproue S. Paul for calling him ſelf Doctor and Maiſter of the Gentiles:
                     1. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 1. and for ſayingEph. 4. that there ſhould be alwayes Doctors in the Church, and whereas they bring the other words folowing, againſt Religious men who are called fathers: as wel might they by this place take away the name of carnal fathers, and blame S. Paule for calling him ſelf the only ſpiritual father of the Corinthians.1. Cor. 4, 15 but in deede nothing is here forbidden but the contentious diuiſion and partiality of ſuch as make them ſelues Ringleaders of Schiſmes and Sectes, as Donatus, Arius, Luther, Caluin.
                  11. Scribes and Phariſees.]
                     The honour of Prieſthod. In al theſe reprehenſions it is much to be noted, that our Sauiour for the honour of Prieſthod neuer reprehendeth Prieſts by that name. Cypr. ep. 65. whereas our Heretikes vſe this name of purpoſe in reproche and deſpite.
                  14. Praying long prayers.)
                     The intention. They are not reprehended here for the things them ſelues, which for the moſt part are good, as, long prayer, making Proſelytes, garniſhing the Prophetes ſepulchres, &c. but for their wicked purpoſe and intention, as before is ſaid of faſting, prayers, almes, Mat. 6.
                  
                  15. Double more.)
                     Not only faith. They that teach that it is ynough to haue only faith, doe make ſuch Chriſtians, as the Iewes did Proſelytes, children of Hel far more then before. Auguſt. lib. de fide & oper. cap. 26.
                  
                  19. Sanctifieth.) Note that donaries and gifts beſtowed vpon Churches and altars, be ſanctified by dedication to God, and by touching the altar and other holy things: as now ſpecially the veſſels of the ſacrifice and Sacrament of Chriſtes body and bloud,The altar is ſanctified by our Lords body therevpon. by touching the ſame, and the altar it ſelf wherevpon it is conſecrated. whereof Theophylacte writeth thus vpon this place: In the old lavv Chriſt permitteth not the gift to be greater then the altar,
                     Theophyl. 
                     but vvith vs, the altar is ſanctified by the gift:
                     Mat. 23. 
                     for the hoſtes by the diuine grace are turned into our Lords body, and therfore is the altar alſo ſanctified by them.
                  
                  21. By him that dwelleth therein.) By this we ſee that ſwearing by creatures, as by the Goſpel, by Saincts, is al referred to the honour of God, whoſe Goſpel it is, whoſe Saincts they are.
                  28. Appeare to men.) Chriſt might boldly reprehend them ſo often and ſo vehemently for hypocriſie, becauſe he knew their harts and intentions: but we that can not ſee within men, may not preſume to call mens external good doings, hypocriſie: but iudge of men as we ſee and know.
                  29. Garniſh▪) Chriſt blameth not the Iewes for adorning the ſepulchres of the Prophetes, but entwyteth them of their malice toward him, and of that which by his diuine knowledge he foreſaw, that they would accompliſh the wickednes of their fathers in ſheding his bloud, as their fathers did the bloud of the Prophetes. Hilar.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               
                  To his Diſciples (by occaſion of Hieruſalem and the Temples deſtruction) he foretelleth▪ * vvhat things ſhalbe before the conſummation of the vvorld, as ſpecially, 14 the Churches ful preaching vnto al nations: 15 then, vvhat ſhalbe in the very conſummation, to vvit, Antichriſt vvith his paſsing great perſecution and ſeduction, but for a ſhort times▪ 29 then incontinent, the Day of iudgement to our great comfort in thoſe miſeries vnder Antichriſt. 35 As for the moment, to vs it perteineth not to knovv it, 37 but rather euery man to vvatch, that vve be not vnprouided vvhen he commeth to ech one particularly by death.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND IESVS being gone out of the temple, vvent.Mr. 13, 1▪
                   And his diſciples came to ſhevv him the buildings of the tēple.Lu. 21, 5▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he anſvvering ſaid to thē, Do you ſee al theſe things? Amen I ſay to you, there ſhal 
                     •
                   not be left here a ſtone vpon a ſtone that ſhal not be deſtroied.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen he vvas ſitting vpon Mount-oliuet,The Goſpel for a votiue Maſſe in time of warre▪ and for many Martyrs. the diſciples came to him ſecretly, ſaying: Tel vs, vvhen ſhal theſe things be? and vvhat ſhal be 
                     •
                   the ſigne of thy comming, and of the conſummation of the vvorld? ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to them,TVESDAY night. Bevvare that no man 
                     •
                   ſeduce you: ✝ 
                     verse 5 for many ſhal come in my name ſaying, 
                     •
                   I am Chriſt: and they ſhal ſeduce many. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For you ſhal heare of vvarres, & bruites of vvarres. See that ye be not troubled. for theſe things muſt be done: but the end is not yet. ✝ 
                     verse 7 for nation ſhal riſe againſt nation, and kingdom againſt kingdom: and there ſhal be peſtilences, and famines, and earth-quakes in places, ✝ 
                     verse 8 and al theſe things are the beginnings of ſorovves.Mat. 10, 17▪
                   
                  
                     •
                   ✝ 
                     verse 9 Then * ſhal they deliuer you into tribulation, and ſhal kil you: and you ſhal be odious to al nations for my names ſake. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And then many ſhal be ſcandalized: and they ſhal deliuer vp one an other: and they ſhal hate one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And manyThere were in the people falſe Prophetes, as among you alſo ſhal be lying Maiſters, which ſhal bring in Sectes of perdition. 2. Pet. 2. falſeprophets ſhal riſe: and ſhal ſeduce many. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And becauſe 
                     •
                   iniquitie ſhal abound: the charitie of many ſhal vvaxe cold. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But he that ſhal perſeuêre to the end, he ſhal be ſaued. 
                     •
                   ✝ 
                     verse 14 And this Goſpel of the kingdom 
                     •
                   ſhal be preached in the vvhole vvorld, for a teſtimonie to al nations, and then ſhal come the conſummation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Therfore vvhen you ſhal ſee 
                     •
                   
                  the abomination of deſolation, vvhich vvas ſpoken of by Daniel the Prophet,The Goſpel vpō the laſt Sunday after Pentecoſt. ſtanding in the holy place (he that readeth,Dan. 9, 27. let him vnderſtand) ✝ 
                     verse 16 then they that are in levvrie, let them flee to the mountaines: ✝ 
                     verse 17 and he that is on the houſe-toppe, let him not come dovvne 
 to take any thing out of his houſe: ✝ 
                     verse 18 and he that is in the field, let him not goe backe to take his coate. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And vvo to thē that are vvith childe, and that giue ſucke in thoſe dayes. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But pray that your flight be not in the vvinter or on the Sabboth. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For there ſhal be then great tribulation, ſuch as hath not been from the beginning of the vvorld vntil novv, neither ſhal be. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vnles thoſe daies had been ſhortened, no fleſh ſhould be ſaued: but for the elect the daies 
                     •
                   ſhal be ſhortened. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Then if any man ſhal ſay vnto you, LoeWhoſoever draweth Chriſt or his Church from the Communion and felowſhip of al Nations Chriſtened, to one corner, towne, or Countrie, beleeue him not. Aug. de vnit. Ec. c. 1.
                   here is Chriſt, or there: do not beleeue him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For there ſhal riſe falſe-Chriſtes and falſe-Prophets, and ſhal ſhevv 
                     •
                   great ſignes and vvonders, ſo that the elect alſo (if it be poſſible) may be induced into errour. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Loe I haue foretold you. ✝ 
                     verse 26 If therfore they ſhal ſay vnto you, Behold he is in the deſert: goe ye not out: behold 
                     •
                   in the cloſets, beleeue it not. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For as lightening cōmeth out of the eaſt, and appeareth euen into the vveſt, ſo ſhal alſo the aduent of the ſonne of man be. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Whereſoeuer the body is, thither ſhal the egles alſo be gathered together.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And 
                     •
                   immediatly after the tribulation of thoſe dayes
* the ſonne ſhal be darkened,Ezech. 32, 7. and the moone ſhal not giue her light,Ioel 3, 15▪
                   and the ſtarres ſhal fal from heauen,Dan. 7, 15. and the powers of heauen ſhal be moued: ✝ 
                     verse 30 and then ſhal appeareThis ſigne of the Sonne of man, is the holy Croſſe, which thē ſhal appeare to the Iewes to their confuſion. Chryſ. in Mat. ho. 77. It ſhal be no leſſe confuſion to Heretikes that can not abide the ſigne thereof. the ſigne of the Sonne of man in heauen: and then ſhal al tribes of the earth bevvaile: and they ſhal ſee the Sonne of man comming in the cloudes of heauen vvith much povver and maieſtie. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And he ſhal ſend his Angels vvith a trumpet, and a great voyce: and they ſhal gather together his elect from the foure vvindes, from the furtheſt partes of heauen euen to the endes thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And of the figtree learne a parable: When novv the bough thereof is tender, and the leaues come forth, you knovv that ſommer is nigh. ✝ 
                     verse 33 So you alſo, vvhen you ſhal ſee theſe things, knovv ye that it is nigh euen at the doores. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Amen I ſay to you, that this generation ſhal not paſſe, til al theſe things be done. ✝ 
                     verse 35 Heauen and earth ſhal paſſe, but my vvordes ſhal not paſſe. 
                     •
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 But of that day and houre no body knovveth, neither the Angels of heauen, but the Father alone.Gen. 7, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And as * in the dayes of Noe, ſo ſhal alſo the comming of the Sonne of man be. ✝ 
                     verse 38 For as they vvere in the dayes before the floud, eating and drinking, marying and giuing to mariage, euen vnto that day in vvhich Noe entred into the arke, ✝ 
                     verse 39 and knevve not til
 the floud came, and tooke them al: ſo alſo ſhal the cōming of the Sonne of man be. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Then two ſhal be in the field: one ſhal be taken, and one ſhal be left. ✝ 
                     verse 41 tvvo vvomen grinding in the mill: one ſhal be taken, and one ſhal be left. ✝ 
                     verse 42 Watch therfore becauſe you knovv not vvhat houre your Lord vvil come.The Goſpel for a Cōfeſſor that is a Biſhop. And for S. Clement martyr, Nouemb. 23. ✝ 
                     verse 43 But this knovv ye,1. Theſ. 5, 1. that * if the good man of the houſe did knovv vvhat houre the theefe vvould come, he vvould ſurely vvatch, and vvould not ſuffer his houſe to be broken vp. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Therefore be you alſo ready, becauſe at vvhat hou
                     •
                  e you knovv not, the Sonne of man vvil come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 45 Who, thinkeſt thou, is a faithful and vviſe ſeruant, vvhom his lord hath appointed ouer his familie, to giue them meate in ſeaſon? ✝ 
                     verse 46 Bleſſed is that ſeruant, vvhom vvhen his lord cōmeth, he ſhal finde ſo doing. ✝ 
                     verse 47 Amen I ſay to you, that ouer al his goods ſhal he appoint him. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 48 But if that naughtie ſeruant ſhal ſay in his hart, My lord is long a comming: ✝ 
                     verse 49 and ſhal beginne to ſtrike his felovv-ſeruants, and eateth, and drinketh vvith drunkards: ✝ 
                     verse 50 the lord of that ſeruant ſhal come in a day that he hopeth not, and an houre that he knovveth not, ✝ 
                     verse 51 and ſhal deuide him, and appoint his portion vvith the hypocrites: there ſhal be vveeping and gnaſhing of teeth.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIIII.
                  2. Not left.] This was fulfilled 40 yeres after Chriſtes Aſcenſion by Veſpaſian the Emperour and his ſonne Titus. Euſeb. li. 
                           •
                        . c. 6. & ſeq. ex Ioſepho. Vpon which wordes, There ſhal not be left &c.
                     The Church cā neuer faile. which threaten the deſtruction of the Iewes Temple:Mt. 16. Li. adu. Gentes 
                           〈◊〉
                         Chriſtus ſit Deus, propè finē. and thoſe wordes, Vpon this Rocke I wil build my Church, which promiſe the building of the Catholike Church of al nations: S. Ch
                        •
                     yſoſtome making a long compariſon of theſe two prophecies of Chriſt, ſaith thus: Thou ſeeſt in both, his great and vnſpeakable power, in that that he increaſed and built vp them that worſhipped him, and thoſe that ſtumbled at him, he abaſed, deſtroyed, and plucked them vp by the roote. Doeſt thou ſee how whatſoeuer he hath built, no man ſhal deſtroy: and whatſoeuer he hath deſtroyed, no man ſhal build? He builded the Church, and no man ſhal be able to deſtroy it: he deſtroyed the Temple, and no man is able to build it, and that in ſo long time. For they haue endeuoured both to deſtroy that, and could not: and they haue attempted to build vp this, and they could not doe that neither, &c.
                  3. The ſigne.] Our Maiſter knowing that it was not profitable nor ſeemly for them to know theſe ſecretes, gaue them by way of Prophecie, warning of diuerſe miſeries, ſignes, and tokens, that ſhould fall, ſome further of, and ſome neerer the later day: by which the faithful might alwayes prepare them ſelues, but neuer be certaine of the houre, day, moneth, nor yere, when it ſhould fall. Aug. Ep. 10.
                  
                  4. Seduce.] The firſt and principal warning,Heretikes ſeduce vnder faire titles. needful for the faithful from Chriſtes Aſcenſion to the very end of the world, is, that they be not deceaued by Heretikes, which vnder the titles of true teachers and the name of Chriſt and his Goſpel, wil ſeduce many.
                  5. I am Chriſt.] Not only ſuch as haue named them ſelues Chriſt, as Simon, Menander, and ſuch like: but al Arch-heretikes be Chriſtes to their folowers, Luther to the Lutherans, Caluin to the Caluiniſts: becauſe they beleeue them, rather then Chriſt ſpeaking in his Church.
                  
                      12. Iniquity abound.] When Hereſie and falſe teachers reigne in the world, namely toward the later day, wicked life aboudeth, and charity decayeth.The Goſpel now preached to Infidels.
                  
                  14. Shal be preached.] The Goſpel hath been preached of late yeres, and now is, by holy Religious men of diuers Orders, in ſundery great Countries which neuer heard the Goſpel before, as it is thought.
                  15. Abomination of deſolation.]
                     The abomination of deſolation. This abomination of deſolation foretold, was firſt partly fulfilled in diuerſe prophanations of the Temple of Hieruſalem, when the ſacrifice and ſeruice of God was taken away. but ſpecially it ſhal be fulfilled by Antichriſt and his Precurſors, when they ſhal aboliſhe the holy Maſſe,The aboliſhing of the holy ſacrifice of the Maſſe by Antichriſt and his miniſters. which is the Sacrifice of Chriſtes body and bloud, and the only ſoueraine worſhip dewe to God in his Church: as S. Hyppolytus writeth in theſe wordes: The Churches ſhal lament with great lamentation, becauſe there ſhal neither oblation be made, nor incenſe, nor worſhip grateful to God. But the ſacred houſes of Churches ſhal be like to cottages, and the pretious body and bloud of Chriſt ſhal not be extant (openly in Churches) in thoſe dayes, the Liturgie (or Maſſe) ſhal be extinguiſhed, the Pſalmodie ſhal ceaſe, the reciting of the Scriptures ſhal not be heard. Hippol. de Antichriſto. By which it is plaine that the Heretikes of theſe daies be the ſpecial fore-runners of Antichriſt.
                  22. Shal be ſhortened.]
                     Antichriſt. The reigne of Antichriſt ſhal be ſhort, that is, three yeres and a halfe. Dan. 7. Apoc. 11. Therfore the Heretikes are blaſphemous and ridiculous, that ſay, Chriſtes Vicar is Antichriſt, who hath ſitten theſe 1500 yeres.
                  24. Great ſignes.] Theſe ſignes and miracles ſhal be to the outward appearance only, for S. Paule calleth them * lying ſignes,1. Theſ. 2. to ſeduce them only that ſhal periſh. Wherby we ſee that if Heretikes could worke feyned and forged miracles, yet we ought not to beleeue them, much leſſe when they can not ſo much as ſeeme to doe any.
                  26. In cloſets.]
                     The ſecrete cō
                        uenticles of Heretikes. Chriſt hauing made the Churches authority bright and clere to the whole world, warneth the faithful to take heede of Heretikes and Schiſinatikes, which haue their conuenticles aſide in certaine odde places and obſcure corners, alluring curious perſons vnto them. Aug. li. 1. q. Euang. q. 38.
                     Catholike Chriſtians ſecretely aſſembling in time of perſecution. For as for the comming together of Catholikes to ſerue God in ſecrete places, that is a neceſſarie thing in time of perſecution, and was vſed of Chriſtians for three hundred yeres together after Chriſt,Act. 1, 12. * and the Apoſtles alſo and diſciples came ſo together in Hieruſalem for feare of the Iewes. And Catholikes doe the ſame at this day in our countrie, not drawing religion into corners from the ſociety of the Catholike Church, but practiſing ſecretely the ſame faith, that in al Chriſtendom ſhineth and appeareth moſt gloriouſly.
                  29. Immediatly.] If the later day ſhal immdediatly folow the perſecution of Antichriſt, which is to endure but three yeres and halfe,Antichriſt. as is aforeſaid: then is it mere blaſphemie to ſay, Gods Vicar is Antichriſt, and that (by their owne limitation) theſe thouſand yeres almoſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               
                  Continuing his Sermon, he bringeth two parables, of ten Virgìns, and of Talents, to ſhew how it ſhalbe in Domeſday with the Faithful that prepare, and that prepare not themſelues. 31 Then alſo without parables he ſheweth that ſuch Faithful as doe workes of mercy, ſhal haue for them life euerlaſting: and ſuch as doe not, euerlaſting damnation.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN ſhàl the kingdom of heauen be like to ten 
                     •
                   virgins:The Goſpel for holy Virgins. vvhich taking their 
                     •
                   lampes vvent forth to meete the bridegrome and the bride. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And fiue of them vvere fooliſh, and fiue vviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 3 but the fiue fooliſh, hauing taken their lampes, did not take ″ oil vvith them: ✝ 
                     verse 4 but the vviſe did tak
                     •
                   oile in their veſſels vvith the lampes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the bridegrom 
                     •
                   tarying long, they ſlumbered all the ſlept. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And at midni
                     ••
                  t there vvas a clamour made, Behold the bridegrome com
                     •••
                  , goe
 ye forth to meete him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Then aroſe al thoſe virgins: and they trimmed their lampes. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the fooliſh ſaid to the vviſe, Giue vs ofIf we be not in the fauour of God, and haue not our owne merites, we ſhal not be holpen by other mens deſerts at the day of iudgement. your oile: becauſe our lampes are going out. ✝ 
                     verse 9 The vviſe anſvvered, ſaying, Leſt peraduenture there ſuffiſe not for vs and you, goe rather to them that ſel: and bie for your ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhiles they vvent to bie, the bridegrome vvas come: and they that vvere ready, entred vvith him to the mariage, and the gate vvas ſhut. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But laſt of al come alſo the other virgins, ſaying: Lord, Lord, open to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But he anſvvering ſaid, Amen I ſay to you, I knovv you not. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Watch ye therfore, becauſe you knovv not the day nor the houre. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 For * euen as a man going into a ſtrange countrie,The Goſpel for a Cōfeſſor that is a Biſhop. called his ſeruants,Luc. 19, 12. and deliuered them his goods. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And to one he gaue fiue talents, and to an other tvvo, and to an other one, to euery one according to his propre facultie: and immediatly he tooke his iourney. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he that had receiued the fiue talents, vvent his vvay, and occupied vvith the ſame, and gained other fiue. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Likevviſe alſo he that had receiued the tvvo, gained other tvvo. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But he that had receiued the one, going his vvay digged into the earth, and hid his lords money. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But after much time the lord of thoſe ſeruants commeth, and made a count vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And there came he that had receiued the fiue talents, and offred other fiue talents, ſaying, Lord fiue talents thou didſt deliuer me, beholdFree will with Gods grace doth merite. I haue gained other fiue beſides. ✝ 
                     verse 21 His lord ſaid vnto him: wel fare thee good and faithful ſeruant, becauſe thou haſt been faithful ouer a fevv things, I vvil place thee ouer many things: enter into the ioy of thy lord. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And there came alſo he that had receiued the tvvo talents, and ſaid, Lord tvvo talents thou didſt deliuer me: behold I haue gained other tvvo. ✝ 
                     verse 23 His lord ſaid to him, wel fare thee good and faithful ſeruant: becauſe thou haſt been faithful ouer a fevv things, I vvil place thee ouer many things, enter into the ioy of thy lord. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he alſo that had receiued the one talent, came forth, and ſaid, Lord, I knovv that thou art a hard man, thou reapeſt vvhere thou didſt not ſovv: and gathereſt vvhere thou ſtravvedſt not: ✝ 
                     verse 25 and being afraid I vvent, and hid thy talent in the earth: behold loe here thou haſt that vvhich thine is. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And his lord anſvvering, ſaid to him:A terrible example for al ſuch as do not employ the very leaſt gift of God, to his glorie. Naughtie and ſloughtful ſeruant, thou didſt knovv that I reape vvhere
 I ſovv not, & gather vvhere I ſtravved not: ✝ 
                     verse 27 thou oughteſt therfore to haue committed my money to the bankers, and comming I might haue receiued mine ovvne 
                     •
                   vvith vſurie. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Take ye avvay therfore the talent from him, and giue it him that hath ten talents.Mr. 13, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For to * euery one that hath ſhal be giuen, and he ſhal abound: but from him that hath not, that alſo vvhich 
                     •
                   he ſeemeth to haue,Lu. 8, 18 ſhal be taken avvay from him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the vnprofitable ſeruant caſt ye out into the vtter darkneſſe. There ſhal be vveeping and gnaſhing of teeth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 And vvhen the ſonne of man ſhal come in his maieſtie,The Goſpel vpō munday the firſt weeke of Lent. and al the Angels vvith him, then ſhal he ſitte vpon the ſeate of his maieſtie: ✝ 
                     verse 32 and al nations ſhal be gathered together before him, and he ſhal 
                     •
                   ſeparate them one from an other, as the paſtor ſeparateth the ſheepe from the goates: ✝ 
                     verse 33 and ſhal ſet the ſheepe at his right hand, but the goates at his left. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Then ſhal the king ſay to them that ſhal be at his right hand, Come ye bleſſed of my father, poſſeſſe you the kingdom
This kingdō then is prepared for thoſe onely that do good workes: as Chriſt alſo ſignifieth els where, ſaying that it is not in his power to giue it otherwiſe. See the annot. 
                           •
                        . 20, 23.
                   prepared for you from the foundation of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 35 for I vvas an hungred, and 
                     •
                   you gaue me to eate: I vvas a thirſt, and you gaue me to drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 36 I vvas a ſtranger, and you tooke me in: naked, and you couered me: ſicke, and you viſited me. I vvas in priſon, and you came to me. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Then ſhal the iuſt anſvve
                     •
                   him, ſaying: Lord, vvhen did vve ſee thee an hungred, and fed thee: a thirſt, and gaue thee drinke? ✝ 
                     verse 38 and vvhen did vve ſee thee a ſtranger, and tooke thee in? or naked, and couered thee? ✝ 
                     verse 39 or vvhen did vve ſee thee ſicke or in priſon: and came to thee? ✝ 
                     verse 40 And the king anſvvering, ſhall ſay to them, Amen I ſay to you, as long as you did it to one of theſe my leaſt brethren, you did it to me. ✝ 
                     verse 41 Then he ſhal ſay to them alſo that ſhal be at his left hand, 
                     •
                   Get ye avvay from me you curſed into fire euerlaſting, vvhich vvas prepared for the Deuil and his angels. ✝ 
                     verse 42 for I vvas an hungred, and you 
                     •
                   gaue me not to eate: I vvas a thirſt, and you gaue me not to drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 43 I was a ſtranger, and you tooke me not in: naked, and you couered me not: ſicke, and in priſon, and you did not viſite me. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Then they alſo ſhall anſvver him, ſaying, Lord, vvhen did vve ſee thee an hungred, or a thirſt, or a ſtranger, or naked, or ſicke, or in priſon: and did not miniſter to thee? ✝ 
                     verse 45 Then he ſhal anſvver them, ſaying, Amen I ſay to you, as long as you did it not to one of theſe leſſer, neither did you it to me. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And theſe ſhal goe into puniſhment euerlaſting: but the iuſt, into life euerlaſting. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXV.
                  
                     1. Virgi
                           •
                        s.] Theſe virgins fiue wiſe, and fiue fooliſh, ſignifie that in the Church militant there be good and bad:Good workes neceſſarie. which bad ſhal be ſhut out at the later day, although they haue lampes (that is faith) as the other, becauſe their lampes are out, that is, their faith is dead without charity and good workes to lighten them Greg. ho. 12.
                  
                  
                     1. Lampeſ.] Theſe lampes lighted, be good workes, namely of mercy, and the laudable conuerſation which ſhineth before men. Aug. ep. 120, c. 33.
                  
                  
                     3. Oyle.)
                     Right intētion. This oyle is the right inward intention directing our workes to Gods glorie, and not to the praiſe of our ſelues in the ſight of men. Aug. ep. 120, c. 33.
                  
                  
                     27. With vſurie.) Vſurie is here taken for the lawful gaine that a man getteth by wel employing his goods. When God geueth vs any talent or talents, he looketh for vſurie, that is, for ſpiritual increaſe of the ſame by our diligence and induſtrie.
                  
                     29. That which he ſeemeth to haue.]
                     We muſt vſe Gods gifts. He is ſaid to haue Gods gifts, that vſeth them, and to ſuch an one God wil increaſe his giftes. He that vſeth them not, ſeemeth to haue, rather then 
                        •
                     ath them, and from him God wil withdraw that which before he gaue.
                  
                     32. Separate.)
                     Good and bad in the Church. Lo here is the ſeparation, for in the Church militant they liued both together. As for Heretikes, they went out of the Church before, and ſeparated them ſelues, and therfore are not to be ſeparated here, as being iudged already.
                  
                     34. Come ye, 41 get ye away.)
                     Heauen is the reward of good workes, and Hel of the contrarie. It is no incongruity that God ſhould ſay, Goe into euerlaſting fire, to them that by their free wil haue repelled his mercie: and to the other, Come ye bleſſed of my father, take the kingdom prepared for them, that by their free wil haue receiued faith, and confeſſed their ſinnes and done penance. Aug. li. 2 act. cum Fel. Manich. c. 8.
                  
                  
                     35. You gaue me.) Hereby we ſee how much almes-deedes and al workes of mercy preuaile towardes life euerlaſting, and to blot out former ſinnes. Aug. in Pſ. 49.
                  
                  
                     42. Gaue me not.) He chargeth them not here that they beleeued not, but that they did not good workes. For ſuch did beleeue, but they cared not for good workes, as though by dead faith they might haue come to heauen. Aug. defid. & op. c. 15. & ad Dulcit. q. 2. to. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               
                  To the Councel of the Iewes, Iudas by occaſion of Marie Magdaelens 
                        •
                     intmēt, doth ſell him for litle. 17 After the Paſchal lambe, 26 he giueth them that bread of life (promiſed Io. 6.) in a myſtical Sacrifice or Separation of his Body and Bloud. 31 And that night he is after his prayer 47 taken of the Iewes men, Iudas being their captaine: and forſaken of the other eleuen for feare: 57 is falſely accuſed, and impiouſly condemned of the Iewes Councel, 67 and ſhamefully abuſed of them: 69 and thriſe de
                        •
                     ied of Peter: Al, euen as the Scriptures and him ſelf had often foretold
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe,The Paſſion according to S. Matthew in theſe two Chapters, is the Goſpel at Maſſe vpon Palme Sunday. vvhen IESVS had ended al theſe vvordes,Mr. 14, 1 he ſaid to his Diſciples,Lu. 22, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 2 You knovv that after tvvo dayes ſhal be Paſche, and the Sonne of man ſhal be deliuered to be crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Then vvere gathered together the cheefe Prieſtes and auncients of the people into the court of the high prieſt,TENEDRE Weneſday. vvho vvas called Caiphas: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and they conſulted hovv they might by ſome vvile apprehend IESVS, and kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they ſaid, Not on the feſtiual day, leſt perhaps there might be a tumult among the people.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 6 And * vvhen IESVS vvas in Bethania in the houſe of Simon the Leper,Mr. 14, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 7 there came to him a vvoman hauing an alabaſter-boxe of pretious ointment,Io. 12, 3. and povvred it out vpon his head as he ſate at the table. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the Diſciples ſeeing it, had indignation ſaying, whereto is 
                     •
                   this vvaſt? ✝ 
                     verse 9 for this might haue been ſold for much, and giuen to the poore. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And IESVS knovving it, ſaid to them: why do you moleſt this vvoman? for ſhe hath vvrought a 
                     •
                   good vvorke vpon me. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the poore you haue alvvayes vvith you: but me 
                     •
                   you haue not alvvayes. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For ſhe in povvring this ointment vpon my body: hath done it to burie me. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Amen I ſay to you, vvhereſoeuer this Goſpel ſhal be preached in the vvhole vvorld, that alſo vvhich ſhe hath done,Hereby 
                        〈◊〉
                      learne that the good workes of Saincts are to be recorded and ſet forth to their honour in the Church after their death. whereof riſe their holy daies and Cōmemorations. ſhal be reported for a memorie of her. ✝ 
                     verse 14 * Then vvent one of the Tvvelue,Mr. 14, 10. vvhich vvas called Iudas Iſcarioth, to the cheefe Prieſtes, ✝ 
                     verse 15 and ſaid to them,Lu. 22, 3 what vvil you giue me, and I vvil deliuer him vnto you? But they appointed vnto him thirtie peeces of ſiluer. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And from thenceforth he ſought opportunitie to betray him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And * the firſt day of the Azymes the Diſciples came to IESVS,Mr. 14, 12. ſaying,MAVNDY thurſday. where vvilt thou that vve prepare for thee to eate the Paſche?Lu. 22, 7 ✝ 
                     verse 18 But IESVS ſaid, Goe ye into the citie to a certaine man: and ſay to him, The Maiſter ſaith, My time is at hand, vvith thee do I make the Paſche vvith my Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the Diſciples did as IESVS appointed them, and they prepared the Paſche. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But vvhen it vvas euen, he ſate downe vvith his 
                     •
                   tvvelue Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhile they vvere eating, he ſaid: Amen I ſay to you, that one of you ſhal betray me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And they being very ſad,Pſ. 40, 10. began euery one to ſay, Is it I Lord? ✝ 
                     verse 23 But he anſvvering ſaid, * He that dippeth his hand vvith me in the diſh, he ſhal betray me. ✝ 
                     verse 24 The Sonne of man in deede goeth as it is vvritten of him: but vvo be to that man, by vvhom the Sonne of man ſhal be betrayed. It vvere good for him, if that man had not been borne. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And Iudas that betrayed him, anſvvering ſaid, Is it I Rabbi? He ſaith to him, Thou haſt ſaid.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 And * vvhiles they vvere at ſupper, IESVS 
                     •
                   tooke bread, and 
                     •
                   bleſſed,1. Cor. 11, 24. and brake: and he gaue to his Diſciples, and ſaid, Take ye, and eate: 
                     •
                   THIS IS 
                     •
                   MY BODY. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And taking the chalice, 
                     •
                   he gaue thankes: and gaue to them, ſaying: DrinkeSee the margent note Mar. 14, 23.
                   ye al of this. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For THIS IS 
                     •
                   MY BLOVD OF
 THE NEVV TESTAMENT, VVHICH SHAL BE SHED FOR MANY VNTO REMISSION OF SINNES. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And I ſay to you, I vvil not drinke from henceforth of this 
                     •
                   fruite of the vine,THVRSDAY night. vntil that day vvhen I ſhal drinke it vvith you nevv in the kingdom of my father. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And an hymne being ſaid, they vvent forth vnto Mount-oliuet.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 Then IESVS ſaith to them,The NOCTVRNE of Mattins in the Churches Seruice, anſwereth to this night part of our Sauiours Paſſion, and ſo conſequently the other Canonical houres to the reſt. Al you ſhal be ſcandalized in me, in this night. For it is vvritten,Zach. 13, 7. 
                  I vvil ſtrike the Paſtor, and the ſheepe of the flocke ſhal be diſperſed. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But after I ſhal be riſen againe, I vvil goe before you into Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And Peter anſvvering, ſaid to him, Although al ſhal be ſcandalized in thee, I vvil neuer be ſcandalized. ✝ 
                     verse 34 IESVS ſaid to him, Amen I ſay to thee, that in this night before the cocke crovv, thou ſhalt denie me thriſe.Io. 13, 38. ✝ 
                     verse 35 * Peter ſaith to him, Yea though I ſhould die vvith thee, I vvil not denie thee. Likevviſe alſo ſaid al the Diſciples.
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 Then IESVS commeth vvith them into a village called Gethſémani: and he ſaid to his Diſciples, Sitte you here til I goe yonder, and pray. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And taking to him Peter and the tvvo ſonnes of Zebedee, he began to vvaxe ſorovvful and to be ſad. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Then he ſaith to them: My ſoul is ſorovvful euen vnto death: ſtay here, and vvatch vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And being gone forvvard a litle, he fel vpon his face, praying, and ſaying, My Father, if it be poſsible, let this chalice paſſe from me. neuertheleſſe 
                     •
                   not as I vvil, but as thou. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And he commeth to his Diſciples, and findeth them ſleeping, and he ſaith to Peter, Euen ſo? Could you not vvatch one houre vvith me? ✝ 
                     verse 41 ″ Watch ye, and pray that ye enter not into tentation. The ſpirit in deede is prompt, but the fleſh vveake. ✝ 
                     verse 42 Againe the ſecond time he vvent, and prayed, ſaying, My Father, if this chalice may not paſſe, but I muſt drinke it, thy vvil be done. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And he commeth againe, and findeth them ſleeping: for their eyes vvere become heauy. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And leauing them, he vvent againe: and he prayed the third time, ſaying the ſelf ſame vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Then he commeth to his Diſciples, and ſaith to them, Sleepe ye novv and take reſt: behold the houre approcheth, and the Sonne of man ſhal be betrayed into the hands of ſinners. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Riſe, let vs goe: behold he approcheth that ſhal betray me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 47 * As he yet ſpake,10. 18, 3. behold Iudas one of the Tvvelue came, and vvith him a great multitude vvith ſvvordes and clubbes, ſent from the cheefe Prieſtes and the auncients of the people.
 ✝ 
                     verse 48 And he that betrayed him, gaue them a ſigne, ſaying, whomſouer I ſhal kiſſe, that is he, hold him. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And forthvvith cō
                  ming to IESVS, he ſaid, Haile Rabbi. And he kiſſed him. ✝ 
                     verse 50 And IESVS ſaid to him, Freend, vvhereto art thou come? Then they drevve neere, and laid hands on IESVS, and held him. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And behold one of them that vvere vvith IESVS, ſtretching forth his hand, drevve out his ſvvord: and ſtriking the ſeruant of the high Prieſt, cut of his eare. ✝ 
                     verse 52 Then IESVS ſaith to him, Returne thy ſword into his place: for al that take the ſvvord, ſhal periſh vvith the ſvvord. ✝ 
                     verse 53 Thinkeſt thou that I cannot aſke my Father: and he vvil giue me preſently more then tvvelue legions of Angels? ✝ 
                     verse 54 Hovv then ſhal the scriptures be fulfilled, that ſo it muſt be done? ✝ 
                     verse 55 In that houre IESVS ſaid to the multitudes: You are come out as it vvere to a theefe vvith ſvvordes and clubbes to apprehēd me: I ſate daily vvith you teaching in the temple: and you laid no hands on me. ✝ 
                     verse 56 And al this vvas done, that the scriptures of the Prophers might be fulfilled. Thē the diſciples al leauing him, fled.
                ✝ 
                     verse 57 But they taking hold of IESVS, led him to Caiphas the high Prieſt, vvhere the Scribes and auncients vvere aſſembled. ✝ 
                     verse 58 And Peter folovved him a farre of, euen to the court of the high Prieſt. And going in he ſate vvith the ſeruants, that he might ſee the end. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And the cheefe Prieſtes and the vvhole Councel ſought false vvitnes againſt IESVS, that they might put him to death: ✝ 
                     verse 60 and they found not, vvhereas many falſe vvitneſſes had come in. And laſt of al there came tvvo falſe vvitneſſes: ✝ 
                     verse 61 and they ſaid, * This man ſaid, I am able to deſtroy the temple of God,Io. 2, 19. and after three dayes to reedifie it. ✝ 
                     verse 62 And the high Prieſt riſing vp, ſaid to him: Anſvvereſt thou nothing to the things vvhich theſe do teſtifie againſt thee? ✝ 
                     verse 63 But IESVS held his peace. And the high Prieſt ſaid to him: I adiure thee by the liuing God, that thou tel vs if thou be Chriſt the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 64 IESVS ſaith to him, Thou haſt ſaid.Dan. 7, 13. neuertheles I ſay to you, hereafter you ſhal ſee * the Sonne of man ſitting on the right hand of the povver of God, and comming in the cloudes of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 65 Then the high Prieſt rent his garments, ſaying, He hath blaſphemed, vvhat neede vve vvitneſſes any further? behold, novv you haue heard the blaſphemie, ✝ 
                     verse 66 hovv thinke you? But they anſvvering ſaid, He is guilty of death. ✝ 
                     verse 67 Then did they ſpit on his face, and buffeted him, and other ſmote his
 face vvith the palmes of their hands, ✝ 
                     verse 68 ſaying, Prophecie vnto vs O Chriſt: vvho is he that ſtrooke thee?
                ✝ 
                     verse 69 But Peter ſate vvithout in the court: and there came to him one 
                     •
                   vvenche, ſaying: Thou alſo vvaſt vvith IESVS the Galilean. ✝ 
                     verse 70 But he denied before them all, ſaying, I vvot not vvhat thou ſayeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 71 And as he vvent out of the gate, an other vvenche ſavv him, and ſhe ſaith to them that vvere there, And this felovv alſo vvas vvith IESVS the Nazarite. ✝ 
                     verse 72 And againe he denied vvith an othe, That I knovv not the man. ✝ 
                     verse 73 And after a litle they came that ſtoode by, and ſaid to Peter, Surely thou alſo art of them: for euen thy ſpeache doth bevvray thee. ✝ 
                     verse 74 Then he began 
                     •
                   to curſe and to ſvveare that he knevve not the man.To this time the LAVDES do anſwer in the Churches Seruice. And incontinent the cocke crevve. ✝ 
                     verse 75 And Peter remembred the vvord of IESVS vvhich he had ſaid, Before the cocke crovv, thou ſhalt deny me thriſe. And going forth, ″ he vvept bitterly.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVI.
                  
                     1. This waſt.]
                     Coſt vpō Churches, altars, &c. Coſt beſtowed vpon Chriſtes body then aliue, being to the ſame not neceſſary, ſeemed to the diſciples loſt and fruitles: ſo the like beſtowed vpon the ſame body if the Sacrament, vpon altars, or Churches, ſeemeth to the ſimple loſt, or leſſe meritorious, then if the ſame were beſtowed vpon the poore.
                  
                     10. Good worke.] Coſt beſtowed for religion, deuotion, and ſignification, is a meritorious worke,Releefe of the poore. and often more meritorious then to geue to the poore,Ambroſ li. 2 Off. c. 2
                           •
                        . though both be very good, and in ſome caſe the poore are to be preferred: yea * in certaine caſes of neceſſity, the Church wil breake the very cōſecrated veſſels and iewels of ſiluer and gold, and beſtow them in workes of mercy. But we may remember very wel, and our fathers knew it much better, that the poore were then beſt releeued, when moſt was beſtowed vpon the Church.
                  
                     11. Haue not.) We haue him not in viſible maner as he conuerſed on the earth with his diſciples, needing releefe like other poore men:Chriſt alwaies with vs in the B. Sacrament. but we haue him after an other ſort in the B. Sacrament, and yet haue him truly and really the ſelf ſame body. Therfore he ſaith, they ſhould not haue him, becauſe they ſhould not ſo haue him, but after an other maner, as when he ſaid Luc. 24 as though he were not then with them, when I was with you.
                  
                  
                     20. Twelue.) It muſt needes be a great myſterie that he was to worke in the inſtitution of the new Sacrifice by the maruelous tranſmutatiō of bread and wine into his body and bloud.A wonderful myſterie in the Inſtitution of the B. Sacrament. Whereas he admitted none (although many preſent in the citie) but the twelue Apoſtles, vvhich were already taught to beleue it without contradiction Io. 6, and were to haue the adminiſtration and conſecration thereof by the Order of Prieſthod, which alſo was there geuen thē to that purpoſe. Whereas at the eating of the Paſchal lambe al the familie was wont to be preſent.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        6. He tooke bread.) Here at once is inſtituted, for the continuance of the external office of Chriſtes eternal Prieſthod according to the order of Melchiſedec, both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, though the Scriptures geue neither of theſe names to this action:The holy Euchariſt is both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament. and our Aduerſaries without al reaſon or religion accept in a ſort the one, and vtterly deny the other. A Sacrifice, in that it is ordeined to continew the memory of Chriſtes death and oblation vpon the Croſſe, and the application of the general vertue thereof to our particular neceſſities, by cōſecrating the ſeueral 
                        •
                     lemēts not into Chriſtes whole perſon as it was borne of the virgin or now is in heauen, but the bread into his body apart, as betrayed, broken, and geuen for vs: the wine into his bloud apart, as ſhed out of his body for remiſſion of ſinnes and dedication of the new Teſtament, which be conditions of his perſon as he was in ſacrifice and oblation. In which myſtical and vnſpeakable maner, he would haue the Church to offer and ſacrifice him daily, and he in myſterie and Sacrament dyeth,
 though now not only in heauen, but alſo in the Sacramēt, he be in deede per Concomitantia
                           •
                        
                      (as the Church calleth it, that is, by ſequele of al his partes to ech other) whole, aliue, and immortal. Which point becauſe ou
                        •
                      Aduerſaries vnderſtand not,Mat. 2
                           •
                        
                        ▪ 2
                           •
                        . 
                     not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, they blaſpheme, and abuſe the people to their damnation. It is alſo a Sacrament, in that it is ordeined to be receiued into our bodies and to feede the ſame to reſurrection and immortality, and to geue grace and ſaluation to our ſoules, if we worthely receiue it.
                  
                     26. Bleſſed.)
                     The bleſſing of Chriſt referred to the creatures and working an effect in thē. Our Aduerſaries for the two wordes that are in Greeke and Latin, benedixit, and, gratias egit, he bleſſed, he gaue thankes, vſe only the later, of purpoſe to ſignifie that Chriſt bleſſed not nor conſecrated the bread and the wine, and ſo by that bleſſing wrought any effect vpon them, but gaue thankes only to his father, as we doe in ſaying grace. But the truth is that the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſignifieth properly to bleſſe, and is referred to the thing that is bleſſed, as Luc. 9 of the fiſhes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , benedixit eis, he bleſſed them, and thereby wrought in them that wonderful multiplication. So the bleſſing of God is alwayes effectual: and therfore here alſo he bleſſed the bread,Conſecration. and by that bleſſing, with the wordes folowing, made it his body. Ambroſ. li. de his qui initi. myſt. c. 9. Aug. ep. 59 ad Paulinum. Now whereas taking the cuppe it is ſaid, he gaue thankes. We ſay that it is al one with bleſſing, and that he bleſſed the cuppe, as before the bread:
                        
                           •
                         Cor. 10. as it is euident by theſe wordes of S. Paul, Calix cui benedicimus, the cuppe which we bleſſe: and therfore he calleth it, Calicem benedictionis, the cuppe of bleſſing; vſing the ſame Greeke word that is ſpoken of the bread. But why is it then ſaid here, he gaue thankes? becauſe we tranſlate the wordes faithfully as in the Greeke and the Latin, and becauſe the ſenſe is al one, as we are taught by S. Paul before alleaged, and by the fathers, which cal this geuing of thankes ouer the cuppe or ouer the bread,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . the bleſſing therof. S. Iuſtin. in fin. 2. Apol. Panem Euchariſtiſatum: S. Iren
                        •
                     e li. 4. c. 34. Panem in quo grati
                           •
                         act
                           •
                         ſunt. S. Cyprian de coen. do. Calix ſolenni benedictione ſacratus. that is, The bread bleſſed by geuing thankes vpon it. The cuppe conſecrated by ſolemne bleſsing.
                  
                  26. This is.)Tranſſubſtantiation. The bread and the wine be turned into the body and bloud of Chriſt by the ſame omnipotent power by which the world was made, and the word was incarnate in the wombe of the virgin. Damaſc. li. 4 c. 14. Cypr. de Coen. Domini. Amb. li. de myſt. init. c. 9.
                  26. My body.)No figuratiue but a real preſence. He ſaid not, This bread is a figure of my body: or, This wine is a figure of my bloud: but, This is my body, and, This is my bloud. Damaſc. li. 4 c. 14. Theophyl. in hunc locum. Cone. 2. N
                        •
                     c. act. 6, to. 4 eiuſdem actionis in fine. When ſome fathers cal it a figure or ſigne, they meane the outward formes of bread and wine.
                  
                  
                     28. Bloud of the new Teſtament.) As the old Teſtament was dedicated with bloud in theſe wordes, This is the bloud of the Teſtament &c. Heb. 9. ſo here is the inſtitution of the new Teſtament in Chriſtes bloud,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . by theſe wordes, This is the bloud of the new Teſtament &c. Which is here myſtically ſhed,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and not only afterward vpon the Croſſe: for the Greeke is the preſent tenſe in al the Euangeliſtes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and S. Paul: and likewiſe ſpeaking of the body 1 Cor. 11. it is in the Greeke the preſent tenſe, and Luc. 22. and in the Latin here. And the Heretikes them ſelues ſo put it in their tranſlations.
                  
                     29. Fruite of the vine.)
                     The elements after conſecratiō called bread and wine. S. Luke putteth theſe wordes before he come to the conſecration, whereby it ſeemeth that he ſpeaketh of the wine of the Paſchal lambe, and therfore nameth it, the fruite of the vine. but if he ſpeake of the wine which was now his bloud, he nameth it notwithſtā
                     ding wine, as S. Paule nameth the other bread, for three cauſes: firſt becauſe it was ſo before: as Eue is called Adams bone,Gen. 2. and, Aarons rod deuoured their roddes: Whereas they were not now roddes, but ſerpents.Exo. 7. And, He taſted the water turned into wine: whereas it was now wine and not water: and ſuch like,Io. 
                           •
                        . ſecondly, becauſe it keepeth the formes of bread and wine, and things are called as they appeare: as when Raphael is called a yong man Tob. 5. and, Three men appeared to Abraham Gen. 18. whereas they were three Angels, thirdly, becauſe Chriſt in this Sacrament is very true and principal bread and wine, feeding and refreſhing vs in body and ſoule to euerlaſting life.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        9. Not as I wil.) A perfect example of obedience and ſubmitting our ſelf and our willes to Gods will and ordinance in al aduerſity: and that we ſhould deſire nothing temporal, but vnder the condition of his holy pleaſure and appointment.
                  
                     41. Watch and pray.)
                     De 
                           •
                        rat. Hereof came Vigils and Nocturnes,Vigils and Nocturnes. that is, watching and praying in the night,Do. nu. 
                           •
                        5. commonly vſed in the Primitiue Church of al Chriſtians, as is plaine by S. Cyprian andAdu. Vigilant. ep. 
                           •
                        3. S. Hierom: but afterward and vntil this day, ſpecially of Religious perſons.
                  69. Wench.)The vertue of the holy Ghoſt. 
                     S. Gregorie declaring the difference of the Apoſtles before the receiuing of the Holy Ghoſt and after, ſaith thus: Euen this very Paſtor of the Church him ſelf, at whoſe moſt ſacred body we ſitte, how weake he was, the wenche can tell you: but how ſtrong he was after, his anſwer to the high Prieſt declareth, Act. 5. 29: We muſt obey God rather then men. Greg. ho. 20 
                        •
                     o Euang.
                  
                     74. To curſe.)
                     Mans infirmitie A goodly example and warning to mans infirmity, and to take heede of preſumption, and to hang only vpon God in tentations.
                  
                     75. Wept bitterly.)
                     Peters teares and repentance. S. Ambroſe in his Hymne that the Church vſeth at Laudes, ſpeaking of this, ſaith, Hoc ipſa Petra eccleſia canente, culpam diluit. When the Cocke crewe, the Rocke of the Church him ſelf waſhed away his fault. S. Auguſt. 1 Retract. c. 
                           •
                        1.
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVII.
               
                  The cheefe of the Ievves accuſe him to Pilate the Gentil (his betrayer, and the Iudge, and the Iudges wife, teſtifying in the meane time manifoldly his innocencie:) 20 and perſuade the common people alſo not only to preferre the murderer Barabbas, but alſo to crie, CRVCIFIGE: (Al, to the reprobation of their vvhole nation, and nothing but fulfilling the Scriptures.) 27 After many illuſions, 31 he is crucified by the Gentils. 38 Which the Ievves ſeeing, do triumph as if they had novv the victorie. 45 But euen then by many vvonderful vvorkes he declareth his might, to their confuſion 57 Finally being buried, they to make al ſure, ſet ſouldiars to keepe his ſepulcher.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen morning vvas come,PRIME or Hora prima in the Churches Seruice. al the cheefe Prieſtes and auncients of the people conſulted together againſt IESVS,Mr. 15, 1▪
                   that they might put him to death.Lu. 23, 1. Io. 18, 28. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And they brought him bound and deliuered him to Ponce Pilate the Preſident.GOOD FRIday.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Then Iudas that betrayed him, ſeeing that he vvas condemned, 
                     •
                   repenting him, returned the thirtie ſiluer peeces to the cheefe Prieſtes and auncients, ✝ 
                     verse 4 ſaying, I haue ſinned, betraying iuſt bloud. But they ſaid, what is that to vs? looke thou to it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And caſting dovvne the ſiluer peeces in the temple, he departed: and vvent and hanged him ſelf vvith an halter. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the cheefe Prieſtes hauing taken the ſiluer peeces, ſaid, It is not lavvful to caſt them into theThis Corbana was a place about the Temple, which receiued the peoples gifts or offerings. See Mar. 12, v. 42. Córbana: becauſe it is the price of bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And after they had conſulted together, they bought vvith them the potters field, to be a burying place for ſtrangers. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For this cauſe that field vvas called Hacéldama, that is, the field of bloud, euen to this preſent day. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Then vvas fulfilled that vvhich vvas ſpoken by Ieremie the Prophet,Zach. 11, 12. ſaying, And they tooke the thirtie peeces of ſiluer, the price of the priced, vvhom they did price of the children of Iſrael: ✝ 
                        verse 10 and they gaue them into the potters field, as our Lord did appoint to me.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And IESVS ſtoode before the Preſident, and the Preſident aſked him, ſaying, Art thou the King of the Ievves? IESVS ſaith to him, Thou ſayeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen he vvas accuſed of the cheefe Prieſtes and auncients, he anſvvered nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then Pilate ſaith to him, Doeſt thou not heare hovv many teſtimonies they alleage againſt thee? ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he anſvvered him not to any vvord: ſo that the Preſident did maruel excedingly.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vpon the ſolemne day the Preſident had accuſtomed to releaſe vnto the people one priſoner vvhom theyHORA TERTIA in the Churches Seruice.
                   vvould. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he had then a notorious priſoner, that vvas called Barabbas. ✝ 
                     verse 17 They therfore being gathered together, Pilate ſaid: whom vvil you that I releaſe to you, Barabbas, or IESVS that is called Chriſt? ✝ 
                     verse 18 For he knevve that for enuie they had deliuered him. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And as he vvas ſitting in place of iudgment, his vvife ſent vnto him, ſaying: Haue thou nothing to doe vvith that iuſt man. for I haue ſuffered many things this day in my ſleepe for him. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But the cheefe Prieſtes and auncients perſuaded the people, that they ſhould aſke Barabbas, and make IESVS avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the Preſident anſvvering, ſaid to them: Whether vvil you of the tvvo to be releaſed vnto you? But they ſaid, Barabbas. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Pilate ſaith to them, what ſhal I doe then vvith IESVS that is called Chriſt? They ſay al, Let him be crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 23 The Preſident ſaid to them, why vvhat euil hath he done? But they cried the more, ſaying, Let him be crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Pilate ſeeing that he nothing preuailed, but rather tumult vvas tovvard: taking vvater he vvaſhed his hands before the people, ſaying, I am 
                     •
                   innocent of the bloud of this iuſt man: looke you to it. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And the vvhole people anſvvering, ſaid, His bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our children. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Then he releaſed to them Barabbas, and hauing ſcourged IESVS, deliuered him vnto them for to be crucified.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 Then the Preſidents ſouldiars taking IESVS into the Palace,Io. 19, 2. gathered together vnto him the vvhole band: ✝ 
                     verse 28 * and ſtripping him, put a ſcarlet cloke about him, ✝ 
                     verse 29 and platting a crovvne of thornes, put it vpon his head, and a reede in his right hand. And bovving the knee before him, they mocked him, ſaying, Haile King of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And ſpitting vpon him, they tooke the reede, and ſmote his head. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And after they had mocked him, they tooke of the cloke from him, and put on him his ovvne garments, and led him avvay to crucifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And in going they found a man of Cyréne, named Simon:HORA SEXTA in the Churches Seruice. him they forced to take vp his croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And they came into the place that is called Golgotha, vvhich is, the place of Caluarie. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And they gaue him vvine to drinke mingled vvith gall. And vvhen he had taſted, he vvould not drinke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And after they had crucified him, they deuided his garments, caſting lottes: that it might be fulfilled vvhich vvas ſpoken by the Prophet,Pſ. 21, 19 ſaying: They deuided my garments among
 them: and vpon my veſture they did caſt lottes. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And they ſate and vvatched him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And they put ouer his head his cauſe vvritten, THIS IS IESVS THE KING OF THE IEWES. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Then vvere crucified vvith him tvvo theeues: one on the right hand, and one on the left. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And they that paſſed by, blaſphemed him, vvagging their heades, ✝ 
                     verse 40 and ſaying, Vah, thou that deſtroyeſt the temple of God, and in three daies doeſt reedifie it: ſaue thine ovvne ſelf: ″ if thou be the ſonne of God, come dovvne from the Croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 41 In like maner alſo the cheefe Prieſtes With the Scribes and auncients mocking, ſaid: ✝ 
                     verse 42 He ſaued other: him ſelf he can not ſaue: if he be the King of Iſrael, let him novv come dovvne from the Croſſe, and vve vvil beleeue him. ✝ 
                     verse 43 * He truſted in God:Pſ. 21, 9. let him novv deliuer him if he vvill:Sap. 2, 18. for he ſaid, That I am the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And the ſelf ſame thing the theeues alſo that vvere crucified vvith him, reproched him vvithal.
                ✝ 
                     verse 45 And from the ſixt houre, there vvas darkeneſſe made vpon the vvhole earth, vntil the ninthe houre. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And about the ninthe houre IESVS cried vvith a mighty voice, ſaying, Eli, Eli, lamma-ſabacthani? that is, My God, my God, 
                        •
                      vvhy haſt thou forſaken me? ✝ 
                     verse 47 And certaine that ſtoode there and heard, ſaid, He calleth Elias. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And incontinent one of them running, tooke a ſponge, & filled it vvith vinegre: and put it on a reede, and gaue him to drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And other ſaid, Let be, let vs ſee vvhether Elias come to deliuer him. ✝ 
                     verse 50 And IESVS againe crying vvith a mighty voice,HORA NONA in the Churches Seruice. yelded vp the ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And be hold the vele of the temple vvas rent in tvvo peeces, from the toppe euen to the botome, and the earth did quake, and the rockes vvere rent, ✝ 
                     verse 52 and the graues vvere opened: and many bodies of the ſaincts that had ſlept, roſe. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And they going forth out of the graues after his reſurrection, came into the holy citie: and appeared to many. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And the Centurion and they that vvere vvith him vvatching IESVS, hauing ſeen the earth-quake and the things that vvere done, vvere ſore afraid, ſaying, In deede this vvas the ſonne of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 55 And there vvere there many vvomen a farre of, vvhich had folovved IESVS from Galilee, miniſtring vnto him: ✝ 
                     verse 56 among vvhom vvas Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames and Ioſeph,HORA VESPERARVM, or, Euenſong. and the mother of the ſonnes of Zebede
                     •
                  . ✝ 
                     verse 57 And vvhen it vvas euening, there came a certaine 
 rich man of Arimathaea, named Ioſeph, vvho alſo him ſelf was diſciple to IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 58 He vvent to Pilate, and aſked the body of IESVS.HORA COMPLETORII, or Complin. Then Pilate commaunded that the body ſhould be deliuered. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And Ioſeph taking the body, ″ vvrapt it in cleane ſindon, ✝ 
                     verse 60 and laid it in his ovvne nevve monument, vvhich he had hevved out in a rocke. And he rolled a great ſtone to the doore of the monument, and vvent his vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 61 And there was there Marie Magdalene, and the other Marie, ſitting ouer againſt the ſepulchre.
                ✝ 
                     verse 62 And the next day,SATVRDAY called Sabbatum ſa
                        ••
                     
                     ctum. vvhich is after the Paraſceue, the cheefe Prieſtes and the Phariſees came together to Pilate, ✝ 
                     verse 63 ſaying, Sir, vve haue remembred, that that ſeducer ſaid yet liuing, After three dayes I vvil riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 64 Commaund therfore the ſepulchre to be kept vntil the third day: leſt perhaps his Diſciples come, and ſteale him, and ſay to the people, He is riſen from the dead: and the laſt errour ſhal be vvorſe then the firſt. ✝ 
                     verse 65 Pilate ſaid to them, You haue a gard: goe, gard it as you knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 66 And they departing, made the ſepulchre ſure: ſealing vp the ſtone, vvith vvatchmen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                     3. Repenting him.]
                     Horrour of conſcience. Note how ſpedily the plague of God falleth after ſinne, and ſpecially men muſt note what torment of conſcience, and deſperation often foloweth the ſheading of innocent bloud.
                  
                     5. Hung himſelf.]
                     Deſperation. If he had rightly repented, notwithſtanding his horrible treaſon, he might haue obteyned mercy: but by hanging him ſelf he tooke away al meanes of mercy and ſaluation, becauſe he died finally impenitent.
                  
                     24. Innocent of his bloud.]
                     They that execute lawes againſt their cō
                        ſcience, are like to Pilate. Though Pilate was much more innocent then the Iewes, and would haue been free from the murder of our Sauiour, ſeeking al the meanes that he could (without offending the people and the Emperours lawes) to dimiſſe him: Yet he is damned for being the miniſter of the peoples wicked wil againſt his owne conſcience, euen as al Officers be, and ſpecially the Iudges and Iuries which execute lawes of temporal Princes againſt Catholike men: for al ſuch be guilty of innocent bloud, and be nothing excuſed by that they execute other mens will according to the lawes, which be vniuſt. For they ſhould rather ſuffer death them ſelues, then put an innocent man to death.
                  
                     40. If thou be the Sonne.]
                     Chriſt derided in the B. Sacrament, euen as vpō the Croſſe. Maruel not, when thou heareſt our Sauiour in the B. Sacrament mocked at, or ſeeſt him abuſed of wicked men, that he ſtraight reuengeth not ſuch blaſphemies: or that he ſheweth not him ſelf there viſibly and to the ſenſes, when faithles Heretikes wil ſay, Let me ſee him, taſt him, &c. for he ſuffered here the like on the Croſſe, when he might at his will haue come downe with as much eaſe as he roſe when he was dead.
                  
                     46. Why haſt thou forſaken me?] Beware here of the deteſtable blaſphemie of Caluin and the Caluiniſts,Catechiſ. Calu. & Inſtit. li. 2. 16. who thinking not the bodily death of Chriſt ſufficient, ſay, that he was alſo here ſo forſaken and abandoned of his Father, that he ſuſtained in ſoule and conſcience the very feares and torments of the damned, And to take away the Article of his deſcending into Hel after his death, (which was with triumph and not in paine,)Caluins blaſphemie. they ſay that his deſcending was nothing els, but that his ſoule ſuffered the very paines of Hel vpon the Croſſe. Whereas in deede by theſe wordes out of the Pſalme, our Sauiour wil ſignifie no more but that his paines (being now ſo long on the Croſſe and ready to die) were very great, and therfore according to the infirmity of his humane nature, for very anguiſh (as before in the garden when he was but toward his Paſſion) he ſaith he
 was forſaken, for two cauſes, firſt becauſe it was the wil of God not to deliuer him, but that he ſhould die: ſecondly, becauſe his diuine nature did ſo repreſſe it ſelf for the time, that he felt no comfort thereof at al, but was left to die in extreme paines as a mere man.
                  
                     19. Wrapped.]
                     Reuerent vſing of our L. Body. This honour and duty done to Chriſtes body being dead,S. Hiero. in hunc locum. was maruelous grateful and meritorious And this wrapping of it in cleane find on may ſignifie by S. Hierom, that the Body of our Lord is to be wrapped not in gold, pretious ſtones, and ſilke, but in pure linnen. And ſo in the whole Church it is obſerued byto. 1, Cō
                        cil. S. Silueſters conſtitution,Corporals. that the Corporal wherevpon our Lordes body lieth on the altar, muſt be pute and plaine linnen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               
                  He riſeth againe the third day, and (the blind moſt obſtinate Iewes by bribery working to their owne reprobation) he appeareth to his Diſciples in Galilee (as both before his Paſsion he foretold them Mat. 26, and now after his Reſurrection, firſt the Angel, then alſo him ſelf appointed by the women) 
                        〈◊〉
                      and ſendeth them to al Nations, to build his Church among the Gentils.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND in the euening of the Sabboth vvhich davvneth on the firſt of the Sabboth,The Goſpel for the night Maſſe of Chriſtes Reſurrection, which is now vſed to be ſaid on Eaſter eue in the morning. came Marie Magdalene,Mr. 16, 1. and the other Marie ″ to ſee the ſepulchre.Luc. 24, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And behold there vvas made a great earth-quake.Io. 20, 1. For an Angel of our Lord deſcēded from heauen:EASTER day. and comming, rolled backe the ſtone, and ſate vpon it: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and his countenance vvas as lightening: and his garment as ſnovv. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And for feare of him, the vvatchmen vvere frighted, and became as dead. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Angel anſvvering ſaid to the vvomen, Feare not you. for I knovv that you ſeeke IESVS that vvas crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 6 he is not here: for he is riſen,Mt. 29, 32. * as he ſaid. come, and ſee the place vvhere our Lord vvas laid. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And going quickly, tel ye his Diſciples that he is riſen: and behold he goeth before you into Galilee. there you ſhal ſee him. loe I haue fortold you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they vvent forth quickly out of the monument vvith feare and great ioy, running to tel his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And behold IESVS mette them, ſaying, Al haile. But they came neere and tooke hold of his feete, and adored him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Then IESVS ſaid to them, Feare not. goe, tel my brethren that they goe into Galilee, there they ſhal ſee me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Who vvhen they vvere departed, behold certaine of the vvatchmen came into the citie, and told the cheefe Prieſtes al things that had been done. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And being aſſembled together vvith the auncients, taking counſel, they gaue a greate ſumme of money to the ſouldiars, ✝ 
                     verse 13 ſaying, Say you, That his Diſciples came by night, and ſtole him avvay vvhen vve vvere a ſleepe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And if the Preſident ſhal heare of this, vve 
 vvil perſuade him, and make you ſecure. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But they taking the money, did as they vvere taught. And this vvord vvas bruited abrode among the Ievves, euen vnto this day.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the eleuen Diſciples vvent into Galilee,The Goſpel vpō Friday in Eaſter weeke. vnto the mount vvhere IESVS had appointed them. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſeeing him they adored,The Goſpel in the feaſt of the B. Trinitie. but ſome doubted. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And IESVS comming neere ſpake vnto them, ſaying. Al povver is giuen to me in heauen and in earth. ✝ 
                     verse 19 
                  
                     •
                   going therfore teach ye al nations: BAPTIZING THEM IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER AND OF THE SONNE AND OF THE HOLY GHOST, ✝ 
                     verse 20 teaching them to obſerue al things vvhatſoeuer I haue commaunded you, and behold I am vvith you ″ al daies, euen to the conſummation of the vvorld. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVIII.
                  1. To ſee the Sepulcher.]In Ep. 17 Paulae & Euſtoch. ad Marcel. to. 1. 
                     The deuout women came to viſite our Sauiours ſepulcher,
                     The holy Sepulcher, and Pilgrimage therevnto. 
                     and for their deuotion firſt deſerued to know the Reſurrection, and to ſee him riſen. The honour of the which Sepulcher and the Pilgrimage therevnto in the Primitiue Church, S. Hierom declareth in theſe wordes, The Iewes ſometime honoured Sancta Sanctorum, becauſe there were the Cherubs, and the Propitiatorie, and the Arke of the Teſtament, Manna, Aarons rodde, and the golden altar. Doth not the Sepulcher of our Lord ſeeme vnto thee more honorable? Which as often as we enter into, ſo often doe we ſee our Sauiour lie in the ſindon: and ſtaying there a while▪ we ſee the Angel againe ſitte at his feete, and at his head the napkin wrapped together.Eſa. 11. The glorie of whoſe Sepulcher, we know was long prophetied before Ioſeph hewed it out, by Eſay ſaying▪ And his reſt ſhal be honour: to witte, becauſe the place of our Lordes burial ſhould be honoured of al men. And at this preſent, notwithſtanding the Turkes dominion, yet doe the Religious Chriſtian Catholike men by Gods mighty prouidence keepe the holy Sepulcher,
                     The Catholike Church to be gathered of al Nations, And Chriſts continual protection of the ſame Church. which is within a goodly Church, and Chriſtians come out of al the world in Pilgrimage to it.
                  
                     19. Going then.] Commiſſion to baptize and preache to al Nations geuen to the Apoſtles, and grounded vpon Chriſtes ſoueraine authority, to whom was geuen al power in heauen and in earth.
                  
                     20. With you al daies.] Here Chriſt doth promiſe his concurrence with his Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors; as wel in preaching as miniſtring the Sacraments, and his protection of the Church neuer to ceaſe til the worlds end: contrary to our Aduerſaries, ſaying that the Church hath failed many hundred yeres til Luther and Caluin.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE ARGVMENT OF S. MARKES GOSPEL.
            
               S. Markes Goſpel may be vvel diuided into foure partes.
            The firſt part, of the preparation that was made to the manifeſtation of Chriſt: chap. 1. in the beginning.
            The Second, of his manifeſting himſelfe by Preaching and Miracles, and that in Galilee: the reſidue of the 1. chap. vnto the 10. chap.
            The third, of his comming into Iurie, tovvards his Paſsion: chap. 10.
            The fourth, of the Holy weeke of his Paſsion in Hieruſalem: chap. 11. to the end of the booke.
            Of S. Marke and his conuerſation with the tvvo Apoſtles S. Paul and S. Barnabee, vve haue at large Act. 12 and 15. ſomevvhat alſo Col. 4. and 2. Tim. 4. and to Philémon. Moreouer of his familiaritie vvith the Prince of the Apoſtles S. Peter, vve haue 1 Pet. 5. For ſo it pleaſed our Lord, that onely tvvo of the Euangeliſtes ſhould be of his tvvelue Apoſtles, to vvit, S. Matthew and S. Iohn. The other tvvo, S. Marke and S. Luke, he gaue vnto vs of the Diſciples of his two moſt principal and moſt glorious Apoſtles S. Peter and S. Paul. Whoſe Goſpels therefore were of Antiquitie counted as the Goſpels of S. Peter and S. Paul them ſelues.In Catal. Script. Eccleſiaſt. 
               Marke the diſciple and interpreter of Peter (ſaith S. Hierom) according to that which he heard of Peters mouth, wrote at Rome a briefe Goſpel at the requeſt of the Brethren (about 10 or 12 yeres after our Lordes Aſcenſion.) Which when Peter had heard, he approued it, and with his authoritie did publiſh it to the Church to be read, as Clemens Alexandrinus writeth li. 6. hypotypoſ.
            
            In the ſame place S. Hierom addeth, hovv he vvent into Aegypt to preach, and vvas the firſt Biſhop of the cheefe Citie there, named Alexandria: and hovv Philo Iudaeus at the ſame time ſeeing and admiring the life and conuerſation of the Chriſtians there vnder S. Marke,Philo de Supplicibus. vvho vvere Monkes, vvrote a booke thereof, vvhich is extant to this day.In Catalogo. And not onely S. Hierom (in Marco, & in Philone) but alſo Euſebius Hiſt. li. 2. ca. 15. 16. 17. Epiphanius Secta 29 Nazaraeorum, li. 1. to. 2. Caſsianus de Inſtit. Caenobiorum li. 2. c. 5. Sozomenus li. 1. c. 12. Nicephorus li. 2 c. 15. and diuerſe others, do make mention of the ſaid Monkes out of the ſame Author. Finally, He died (ſaith S. Hierom) the 8 yere of Nero, and was buried at Alexandria, Anianus ſucceding in his place. But from Alexandria he vvasNaucler. generat. 28. tranſlated to Venice, Anno Dom. 830.
            It is alſo to be noted, that in reſpect of S. Peter, vvho ſent S. Marke his ſcholer to Alexandria, and made him the firſt Biſhop there, this See vvas eſteemed next in dignitie to the See of Rome, and the Biſhop thereof vvas accounted the cheefe Metropolitane or Patriarch of the Eaſt, and that by the firſt Councel of Nice. Whereof ſee S. Leo ep. 53. S. Gregorie li. 5. ep. 60. & li. 6. ep. 37.
         
         
            
            THE HOLY GOSPEL OF IESVS CHRIST ACCORDING TO MARKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Iohn (the Eremite of vvhom the Prophets) preaching penance,THE FIRST part of this Goſpel: of the preparatiō to Chriſts manifeſtation. and liuing him ſelf accordingly. baptizeth the people to prepare them to Chriſt, 7 telling them, that it is not his, but Chriſts Baptiſme, in vvhich they ſhal receiue the Holy Ghoſt. 9 IESVS there is manifeſted from heauen: 12 and by and by he alſo goeth into the vvilderneſſe. 14 Beginning in Galilee, 16 after that he hath called foure Diſciples, 21 he preacheth firſt in Capharnaum, confirming his doctrine vvith beneficial Miracles, to the great admiration of al: 35 then alſo (but firſt retiring into the vvildernes) in al the reſt of Galilee, vvith like miracles.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE beginning of the Goſpel of IESVS CHRIST the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 2 As it is vvritten in 
                     •
                   Eſay the Prophet',Mal. 3, 1. 
                  (Behold I ſend mine Angel before thy face,
                  Eſa. 40, 3. the prophets 
                  vvho ſhal prepare thy vvay before thee,) ✝ 
                        verse 3 A voice of one crying in the deſert, Prepare ye the vvay of our Lord, make ſtraight his pathes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 * Iohn vvas in the deſert baptizing,Mt. 3, 1. and preaching the baptiſme of penanceIohns baptiſme put them in hope only of remiſſiō of ſinnes as a preparatiue to Chriſtes Sacrament by which ſinnes were indeede to be remitted. Aug. li. 5 de bapt. c. 10.
                   vnto remiſsion of ſinnes.Lu. 3, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And there vvent forth to him al the countrie of Ievvrie,Io. 1, 15. and al they of Hieruſalem: and vvere baptized of him in the riuer of Iordan, 
                     •
                   confeſsing 
                     •
                   their ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And Iohn vvas 
                     •
                   clothed vvith camels heare, and a girdle of a ſkinne about his loines: and he did eate locuſtes and vvild honie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he preached, ſaying, There commeth a ſtronger then I after me: vvhoſe latchet of his ſhoes I am not vvorthie ſtouping dovvne to vnlooſe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 I haue baptized you 
                     •
                   vvith vvater: but he ſhal baptize you vvith the holy Ghoſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And it came to paſſe: in thoſe daies came IESVS from Nazareth of Galilee: and vvas ″ baptized of Iohn in Iordan. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And forth vvith comming vp out of the vvater, he ſavv the heauens opened, and 
                     •
                   the Spirit as a doue deſcending, and remaining on him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And a voice vvas made from heauen, Thou art my beloued ſonne, in thee I am vvel pleaſed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And forth vvith * the Spirit droue him out into 
                     •
                   the deſert.Mt. 4, 1.
                  Lu. 4, 1.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he vvas in the deſert fourtie daies, and fourtie nightes: and vvas tempted of Satan. and he vvas vvith beaſtes,THE SECOND part of this Goſpel: of Chriſts manifeſtation. and the Angels miniſtred to him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And * after that Iohn vvas deliuered vp,Mat. 4, 12. IESVS came into Galilee,Luc. 4, 14. preaching the Goſpel of the kingdom of God, ✝ 
                     verse 15 and ſaying, That the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand:He doth not preach beleefe or faith only, but penance alſo. be penitent, and beleeue the Goſpel.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 * And paſsing by the ſea of Galilee,Mat. 4, 18. he ſavv Simon and Andrevv his brother,Lu. 5, 2. caſting nettes into the ſea (for they vvere fiſhers) ✝ 
                     verse 17 and IESVS ſaid to them, Come after me, and I vvil make you to become fiſhers of men. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And immediatly leauing their nettes, they folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And being gone thence a litle further, he ſavv Iames of Zebedee, and Iohn his brother, and them repairing their nettes in the ſippe: ✝ 
                     verse 20 and forthvvith he called them. And leauing their father Zebedee in the ſhippe vvith his hired men, they folovved him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And * they enter into Capharnaum,Mat. 4, 13. and he forthvvith vpon the Sabboths going into the Synagogue,Lu. 4, 31 taught them. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And they vvere aſtonied at his doctrine▪ for he vvas teaching them as hauing povver, and not as the Scribes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And 
* there vvas in their Synagogue a man in an vncleane ſpirit:Luc. 4, 32. and he cried out, ✝ 
                     verse 24 ſaying, what to vs and to thee IESVS of Nazareth? art thou come to deſtroy vs? I knovv vvho thou art, the Sainct of God. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And IESVS threatened him, ſaying, Hold thy peace, and goe out of the man. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And the vncleane ſpirit tearing him, and crying out vvith a great voice, vvent out of him. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And they marueled al, in ſo much that they queſtioned among them ſelues, ſaying, what thing is this? vvhat is this nevv doctrine? for vvith povver he commaundeth the vncleane ſpirits alſo, and they obey him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And the bruite of him vvent forth in continent into al the countrie of Galilee.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And immediatly * going forth out of the Synagogue,Mat. 8, 14. they came into the houſe of Simon and Andrevv,Luc. 4. 42. vvith Iames and Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And Simons vviues mother lay in a fit of a feuer: and forthvvith they tel him of her. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And comming neere he lifted her vp taking her by the hand: and incōtinent the ague left her, and ſhe miniſtred vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhen it vvas euening after ſunne ſet, they brought to him al that vvere il at eaſe and that had deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And al the citie vvas 
 gathered together at the doore. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And he cured many that vvere vexed vvith diuerſe diſeaſes: and he caſt out many deuils, and he ſuffered not them to ſpeake that they knevv him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And riſing very early, and going forth he vvent into a deſert place: and there he prayed. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And Simon ſought after him, and they that vvere vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vvhen they had found him, they ſaid to him, That al ſeeke for thee. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he ſaith to them, Let vs goe into the next tovvnes and cities, that I may preach there alſo: for to this purpoſe am I come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 39 And he vvas preaching in their Synagogs,Mt. 8, 2. and in al Galilee: and caſting out deuils.Lu. 5, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And a * leper commeth to him beſeeching him: and kneeling dovvne ſaith to him, If thou vvilt, thou canſt make me cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And IESVS hauing compaſsion on him, ſtretched forth his hand: and touching him, he ſaith vnto him, I vvil, be thou made cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen he had ſpoken, immediatly the leproſie departed from him, and he vvas made cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And he threatened him, and forthvvith caſt him forth. ✝ 
                     verse 44 and he ſaith to him, See thou tel no body: but goe, ſhevv thy ſelfOur Sauiour euen when he healed the leper by extraordinarie miraculous power, would not yet breake order, but ſent the partie to the Prieſt. to the high prieſt, and offer for thy cleanſing the things that * Moyſes commaunded,
Leu. 14, 3. for a teſtimonie to them. ✝ 
                     verse 45 But he being gone forth, began to publiſh, and to blaſe abrode the vvord: ſo that novv he could not openly goe into the citie, but vvas abrode in deſert places, and they came together vnto him from al ſides.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     5. Confeſsing their ſinnes.]
                     Confeſſion. A certaine confeſſion of ſinnes there was euen in that penance which Iohn preached, and which was made before men were baptized. Whereby it is cleere that Iohn made a preparation to the Sacrament of Penance which afterward was inſtituted by Chriſt, as wel as he did by baptizing prepare the way to Chriſts baptiſme.Particular confeſſion.
                  
                  
                     5. Their ſinnes.] He doth not ſay that they confeſſed them ſelues to be ſinners, which may be done by a general confeſſion:Iohns example of penance. but that they confeſſed their ſinnes, which is a particular confeſſion.
                  
                     6. Clothed.] The Holy Ghoſt thought it worthy of ſpeciall reporting how ſtraitly this Prophete li
                        •
                     ed, and how he abſtained from delicate meates and apparel. See M
                           •
                        t. c. 3.
                  
                  
                     8. With water.]
                     Baptiſme in water. Iohn with water only,Calu. 4. inſt. c. 16. Chriſt with the Holy Ghoſt, not only, as the Heretikes hold, that ſay water is not neceſſary, but with water and the Holy Ghoſt, as it is plaine Io. 3. vnles a man be borne againe of water and the Holy Ghoſt, he ſhal not enter into the kingdom of heauen.
                  
                  
                     9. Baptized of Iohn.] The humility of Chriſt not diſdaining his ſeruants baptiſme. Which is an example for al faithful not to diſdaine Chriſts Sacraments of any Prieſt be he neuer ſo ſimple, being by the Catholike Church lawfully called. Aug. li. 5 de bapt. c. 9.
                  
                  
                     10. The Spirit.]
                     The B. Trinitie. Expreſſe mention of the B. Trinitie▪ the Father ſpeaketh from heauen, the
 Holy Ghoſt appeareth in the likeneſſe of a doue, the Sonne alſo is recommended vnto vs. Ambroſ. li. 1 de Sacram. c. 5.
                  
                  
                     12. Deſert.]
                     Chriſts example of penance. Chriſt doing penance by long faſting, ſolitarineſſe, and conuerſing with wilde beaſtes, gaue example and inſtruction to the Church for Lent faſt, and to holy Eremites of retiring them ſelues to the wilderneſſe and prayer.
                  35. Deſert place.] Chriſt vſed very often to retire into ſolitary places, no doubt for our example, to teach vs that ſuch places are beſt for prayer and contemplation,Solitarie contemplation. and that we ſhould often retire our ſelues from worldly matters to ſolitary meditation of heauenly things.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Againſt the Scribes and Phariſees he defendeth firſt his povver to remitte ſinnes in earth, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and his eating vvith ſinners (as being the Phyſici
                        •
                     n of ſoules, ſignified in thoſe his miraculous cures vpon bodies): 
                        〈◊〉
                      then alſo he defendeth his Diſciples, not hauing as yet any faſtes by him preſcribed vnto them, and plucking 
                        •
                     ares of corne vpon the Sabboth: ſignifying vvithal that he vvil change their ceremonies.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND againe he entred into Capharnaum after ſome daies,Mt. 9, 1. and it vvas heard that he vvas in the houſe,Lu. 5, 18 ✝ 
                     verse 2 and many came together, ſo that there vvas no place no not at the doore, and he ſpake to them the vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And they came to him bringing one ſicke of the palſey, vvho vvas caried of foure. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen they could not offer him vnto him for the multitude, they 
                     •
                   vncouered the roofe vvhere he vvas: and opening it they did let dovvne the couche vvherein the ſicke of the palſey lay. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen IESVS had ſeen 
Our Lord is moued to be merciful to ſinners by other mens faith and deſires, and not only by the parties owne meanes alvvay. their faith, he ſaith to the 
                     •
                   ſicke of the palſey, Sonne, 
                     •
                   thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And there vvere certaine of the Scribes ſitting there and thinking in their hartes, ✝ 
                     verse 7 why doth he ſpeake ſo?Iob. 14, 4. he blaſphemeth. * Who can forgiue ſinnes but only God?Eſa. 43, 25. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Which by and by IESVS knovving in his ſpirit, that they ſo thought vvithin them ſelues, ſaith to them, why thinke you theſe things in your hartes? ✝ 
                     verse 9 Whether is eaſier, to ſay to the ſicke of the palſey, Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee: or to ſay, Ariſe, take vp thy couche, and vvalke? ✝ 
                     verse 10 But that you may knovv that 
                     •
                   the Sonne of man hath povver 
                     •
                   in earth to forgiue ſinnes (he ſaith to the ſicke of the palſey) ✝ 
                     verse 11 I ſay to thee, Ariſe, take vp thy couche, and goe into thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And forthvvith he aroſe: and taking vp his couche, vvent his vvay in the ſight of al, ſo that al marueled, and glorified God, ſaying, That vve neuer ſavv the like.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he vvent forth againe to the ſea: and al the multitude came to him, and he taught them. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen he 
 paſſed by,Mt. 9, 9. * he ſavv Leui of Alphaeus ſitting at the cuſtome place:Lu. 5, 27 and he ſaith to him, Folovv me. And riſing vp he folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And it came to paſſe, as he ſate at meate in his houſe, many Publicans and ſinners did ſit dovvne together vvith IESVS and his Diſciples. for they vvere many, vvho alſo folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the Scribes and the Phariſees ſeeing that he did eate vvith Publicans and Sinners, ſaid to his Diſciples, why doth your Maiſter eate and drinke vvith Publicans and ſinners? ✝ 
                     verse 17 IESVS hearing this, ſaith to them, The vvhole haue not neede of a Phyſicion, but they that are il at eaſe. for I came not to call the iuſt, but ſinners.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And * the diſciples of Iohn and the Phariſees did vſe to faſt:Mt. 9, 13 and they come,Lu. 5, 32 and ſay to him, Why do the diſciples of Iohn and of the Phariſees faſt: but thy diſciples do not faſt? ✝ 
                     verse 19 And IESVS ſaid to them, why, can the children of the mariage faſt, as long as the bridegrome is vvith them? So long time as they haue the bridegrome vvith them, they can not faſt. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But the daies vvil come vvhen the bridegrome ſhal be taken avvay from them: and then they ſhalHe foretelleth that faſting ſhal be vſed in his Church, no leſſe then in the old law or in the time of Iohn the Baptiſt. See Mat. c. 9, 15.
                   faſt in thoſe daies. ✝ 
                     verse 21 No body ſovveth a peece of ravv cloth to an old garment: othervviſe he taketh avvay the nevv peecing from the old, and there is made a greater rent. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And no body putteth nevv vvine into old bottels: othervviſe the vvine burſteth the bottels, and the vvine vvil be ſhed, and the bottels vvil be loſt. but nevv vvine muſt be put into nevv bottels.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * it came to paſſe againe vvhen he vvalked through the corne on the Sabboths,Mt. 12, 1 and his Diſciples began to goe forvvard and to plucke the eares.Lu. 6, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And the Phariſees ſaid to him, Behold, vvhy do they on the Sabboths that vvhich is not lavvful? ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he ſaid to them, Did you neuer read vvhat Dauid did, vvhen he vvas 
                     •
                   in neceſsitie, and him ſelf

                     verse 26 vvas an hungred and they that vvere vvith him?1. Re. 21, 6. hovv * he entred into the houſe of God vnder Abiathar the high Prieſt, and did eare the loaues of Propoſition, vvhich it vvas not lavvful to eate * but for the Prieſts, and did giue vnto them vvhich vvere vvith him?Leu. 24, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he ſaid to them, The Sabboth vvas made for man, and not man for the Sabboth. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Therfore the ſonne of man isThe maker of the law may abrogate or diſpenſe whē and where for iuſt cauſe it ſeemeth good to him. Lord of the Sabboth alſo.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     4. Vncouered.) Such diligence ought to be vſed to bring ſinners to Chriſt in his Sacraments, as was vſed to procure this man and others, by Chriſt, the health of their bodies.
                  
                     5. Sicke of the palſey.) Such as this man was in body by diſſolution of his limmes, ſuch alſo was he in ſoule by the noiſome deſires of the world occupying his hart, and withdrawing him from al good workes. Aug. de Paſtor. c. 6 to. 9.
                  
                  
                     5. Thy ſinnes.) Hereby it appeareth that Chriſt healed this ſicke man firſt in his ſoule, before he tooke away his bodily infirmity:The Sacramēts to be called for in ſicknes. which may be an inſtruction for al men in bodily diſeaſe, firſt to call for the Sacraments, which be medicines of the ſoule. As hereby alſo may be gathered that many diſeaſes come for ſinne, and therfore can not be healed til the ſinnes be remitted.
                  
                     10. The Sonne of man.) As Chriſt proueth vnto them, that him ſelf as man, and not as God only, hath power to remitte ſinnes,Mā hath power to remit ſinnes. by that in al their ſightes he was able to doe miracles and make the ſickman ſodenly ariſe: ſo the Apoſtles hauing power graunted them to doe miracles, though they be not God, may in like maner haue authority from God to remitte ſinnes, not as God, but as Gods miniſters.
                  
                     10. In earth.)
                     Chriſt remitteth ſinnes by the Prieſts miniſterie. This power that the Sonne of man hath to remitte ſinnes in earth, was neuer taken from him, but dureth ſtill in his Sacraments, and miniſters, by whom he remitteth ſinnes in the Church, and not in heauen only. For concerning ſinne, there is one court of conſcience in earth, and an other in heauen: and the iudgement in heauen foloweth and approueth this on earth: as is plaine by the wordes of our Sauiour to Peter firſt,Mt. 18, 19. and then to al the Apoſtles, Whatſoeuer you ſhal bind vpon earth,
                     Mt. 18, 18. ad Heliod. ep. 1. 
                     ſhal be bound in heauen: Whatſoeuer you ſhal looſe vpon earth, ſhal be looſed in heauen: wherevpon S. Hierom ſaith, That Prieſts hauing the keies of the kingdom of heauen, iudge after a ſort before the day of iudgement. And S. Chryſoſt. li. 3 de Sacerd. paul. poſt princip. more at large.
                  
                  
                     25. In neceſsity.)
                     Amb. li. 
                           •
                         off. c. 28. In neceſſity many things be done without ſinne, which els might not be done: and ſo * the very chalices and conſecrated iewels and veſſels of the Church in caſes of neceſſity are by lawful authority turned to profane vſes: which otherwiſe to alienate to a mans priuate commoditie is ſacrilege.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The blind Phariſees ſeeking his death for doing good vpon the Sabboths, he meekely goeth out of the vvay: vvhere the people that flocke vnto him, and his Miracles, are innumerable. 13 Yea to his Tvvelue alſo (hauing neede of moe vvorkmen) he geueth povver to vvorke Miracles. 
                        •
                     0 He ſo occupieth him ſelf for ſoules, that his kinne thinke him madde. 22 The Scribes of Hieruſalem come ſo farre, and yet haue nothing but abſurdly to blaſpeme his caſting out of Diuels, to their ovvne damnation. 
                        •
                     1 That the Ievves ſhould not (after their maner) thinke it ynough, that he is of their bloud, he telleth that ſuch rather are deere to him, as keepe Gods commaundements.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he entred againe into the Synagogue,Mt. 12, 9 and there vvas a man there that had a vvithered hand.Lu. 6, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And they vvatched him vvhether he vvould cure on the Sabboths: that they might accuſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſaith to the man that had the vvithered hand, Riſe vp into the middes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And he ſaith to them, Is it lavvful on the Sabboths to doe vvel or il? to ſaue a ſoule, or to deſtroy? but they held their peace. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And looking round about vpon them vvith anger, being ſorovvful for the blindenes of their hart, he ſaith to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he ſtretched it forth: and his hand vvas reſtored vnto him.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the Phariſees going forth, immediatly made a conſultation vvith the Herodians againſt him hovv they might deſtroy him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But IESVS vvith his Diſciples retired to the ſea: and a great multitude from Galilee and Ievvrie folovved him, ✝ 
                     verse 8 and from Hieruſalem, and from Idumaea, and beyond Iordan. And they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing the things vvhich he did, came to him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he ſpake to his Diſciples that a boate might attend on him becauſe of the multitude, leſt they ſhould throng him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 for he healed many, ſo that there preaſed in vpon him forThe only touching of Chriſts holy perſon, or any part of his clothes, or whatſoeuer belonged to him, did heale al diſeaſes. to touch him, as many as had hurtes. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the vncleane ſpirites, vvhen they ſavv him, fel dovvne vnto him: and they cryed ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 12 ″ Thou art the ſonne of God. And he vehemently charged them that they ſhould not diſcloſe him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And * aſcending into a mountaine,Mt. 5, 1. 10, 1. he called vnto him vvhom he vvould him ſelf:Lu. 6, 12 9, 1. and they came to him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he made that ″ tvvelue ſhould be vvith him, and that he might ſend them to preach. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he gaue them povver to cure infirmities, and to caſt out diuels. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he gaue to Simon the name ″ Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and Iames of Zebedee, and Iohn the brother of Iames: and he called their names, Boanerges, vvhich is, the ſonnes of thunder. ✝ 
                     verse 18 and Andrevv and Philippe, and Bartlemevv and Matthevv, and Thomas and Iames of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus and Simon Cananaeus, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and Iudas Iſcariote, vvho alſo betrayed him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And they come to a houſe: and the multitude reſorteth together againe, ſo that they could not ſo much as eate bread. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen his had heard of it, they vvent forth to lay hands on him. for they ſaid, That he vvas becomeSee here the conceite of worldly frēdes, who thinke the Zeale of Religion, madnes: and therfore count them madde, that are Zelous in Gods cauſe and for the Catholike faith: and the more Zelous, the more mad. mad. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the Scribes vvhich vvere come dovvne from Hieruſalem,Mat. 12, 24. ſaid, * That he hath Beelzebub: and that in the prince of deuils he caſteth out deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And after he had called them together,Luc. 11, 15. he ſaid to them in parables, Hovv can Satan caſt out Satan? ✝ 
                     verse 24 And if a ″ kingdom be deuided againſt it ſelf, that kingdom can not ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And if a houſe be deuided againſt it ſelf, that houſe can not ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And if Satan be riſen againſt him ſelf, he is deuided, and can not ſtand, but hath an end. ✝ 
                     verse 27 No body can rifle the veſſel of the ſtrong, being entred into his houſe, vnles he firſt binde the ſtrong, and then ſhal he rifle his houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Amen I ſay to you, that al ſinnes ſhal be forgiuen the ſonnes of men, and the blaſphemies wherevvith
 they ſhal blaſpheme. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But he that ſhal blaſpheme againſt the Holy Ghoſt, he hath not forgiueneſſe for euer, but ſhal be guilty of an ″ eternal ſinne. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Becauſe they ſaid, He hath an vncleane ſpirit.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 And * there come his mother and brethren:Mt. 12, 46. and ſtanding vvithout they ſent vnto him calling him,Lu. 8, 19▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 32 and the multitude ſate about him: and they ſay to him, Behold thy mother and thy brethren vvithout ſeeke thee. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And anſvvering them, he ſaid, ″ Who is my mother and my brethren? ✝ 
                     verse 34 And looking about vpon them vvhich ſate round about him, he ſaith, Behold my mother and my brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 35 For vvhoſoeuer ſhal doe the vvil of God, he is my brother and my ſiſter and mother.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     13. Thou art the Sonne.) The confeſſion of the truth is not grateful to God, proceding from ouery perſon. The diuel acknowledging our Sauiour to be the ſonne of God, was bidden hold his peace: Peters confeſſion of the ſame was highly allowed and rewarded. Aug. tract. 10 in ep. Ioan. Ser. 30. 31. de verb. Apoſtoli.
                     Sermons, Seruice, and praier of Heretikes. Therfore neither Heretikes ſermons muſt be heard, no not though they preach the truth. So is it of their prayer and ſeruice, which being neuer ſo good in it ſelf, is not acceptable to God out of their mouthes, yea it is no better then the howling of wolues. Hiero. in 7 Oſ
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     14. Twelue.)
                     The number of Twelue, myſtical. This number of twelue Apoſtles is myſtical and of great importance (as appeareth
* by the chooſing of Mathias into Iudas place to make vp againe this number) prefigured in the 12 Patriarkes,Act. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     Gen. 49. the 12 Princes of the children of Iſrael, Num. 1. the 12 fountaines found in Elim, Exod. 15. the 12 pretious ſtones in the Rational of Aaron, Exod. 39. the 12 Spies ſent by Moyſes, Num. 13. the 12 ſtones taken out of Iordan whereof the Altar was made, Ioſu. 4. the 12 loues of Propoſition, Leuit. 24. &c. Anſelm. in Mt. c. 10. And theſe are the 12 foundations of heauenly Hieruſalem. Apoc. 21.
                  
                  
                     16. Peter.) Peter in numbering the Twelue is alwaies the firſt, and his name is ſo giuen him for ſignification of his calling to be the * Rocke or Foundation of the Church vnder Chriſt:Peters preeminence, as here alſo the name BOANERGES is giuen to other two Apoſtles for ſignification,Mt. 1
                           •
                        . and ſo names els where in the old Teſtament and in the new.
                  
                     24. Kingdom againſt kingdom.)
                     Diſſenſion of Heretikes. As this is true in al Kingdoms and Common-weales where Ciuil diſſenſion reigneth,Greg. li. 
                           •
                         ep. 3. ſo is it ſpecially verified in hereſies and Heretikes, which haue alwaies diuiſions among them ſelues as the plague of God, for diuiding them ſelues and others from the Church.
                  
                     29. Eternal ſinne.)
                     Venial ſinnes forgiuen after death. That which is here called eternal,Mt. 12, 32. is (as S. Matthew expreſſeth it) that which ſhal neither be remitted in this life, nor in the life to come. Where we learne by S. Marke, that there are alſo ſinnes not eternal: and by S. Matthew, that they are ſuch, as ſhal be forgiuen either here, or in the life to come.
                  
                     33. Who is my mother?)
                     Spiritual kinred and buſines preferred before carnal and worldly. Neither is it here ſaid, that he had no mother, as ſome vpon theſe wordes falſly gather: nor ingratitude to our parents is taught vs by this anſwer: but we be hereby admoniſhed to preferre the ſpiritual mother of the Faithful, which is the Church Catholike, and our brethren in her, and their ſpiritual good, aboue our carnal parents or kinne. For ſo our Maiſter being occupied here about heauenly things, accounted al them his mother and brethren, which did the will of his Father.The B. Virgin without ſinne. in which number our Lady his mother was alſo included, for ſhe did his fathers will. Aug. ep. 38. Yea and aboue al others, becauſe ſhe had ſo much grace giuen her that ſhe neuer ſinned not ſo much as venially in al her life. Aug. de nat. & grat c. 36.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHA. IIII.
               
                  The parables (in vvhich he ſpeaketh to the Ievves, becauſe they vvere reprobate) he expoundeth to his Diſciples, ſhevving that in his ſovving, three parts of foure ſhal periſh, through the fault of the hearers. 21 and that his ſeruants, muſt confeſſe their faith, 24 and vſe their gifts (contrary to thoſe ſtony and thorny hearers.) 26 and that his Church (notvvithſtanding the looſing of thoſe three partes of the ſeede) ſhalbe brought by his prouidence to the harueſt, that is, to the end of the vvorld: 30 grovving ouer al in time, though in the beginning it 
                        •
                     e as the litle muſtard ſcede▪ 35 and though ſuch tempeſts of perſecution in the ſea of this vvorld doe riſe againſt it.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND againe he began to teach at the ſea ſide:Mt. 13, 1. and a great multitude vvas gathered together vnto him,Lu. 8, 4. ſo that he vvent vp into a boate, and ſate in the ſea, and al the multitude about the ſea vvas vpon the land: ✝ 
                     verse 2 and he taught them in parables many things, and ſaid to them in his doctrine, ✝ 
                     verse 3 Heare ye:
                Behold, the ſovver vvent forth to ſovv. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhiles he ſovveth, ſome fel by the vvay ſide, and the foules of the aire came, and did eate it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And otherſome fel vpon rocky places vvhere it had not much earth: and it ſhot vp immediatly, becauſe it had not deepnes of earth: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and vvhen the ſunne was riſen, it parched, and becauſe it had not roote, it vvithered. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And ſome fel among thornes: and the thornes grewe vp, and choked it, and it yelded not fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And ſome fel vpon good ground: and it yelded fruite that grewe vp and increaſed, and it brought forth, one thirtie, one ſixtie, and one an hundred.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he ſaid, He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhen he vvas alone, the Tvvelue that vvere vvith him, aſked him the parable. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he ſaid to them, To you it is giuen to knovv the myſterie of the kingdom of God: but toSuch as be out of the Church, though they heare and read neuer ſo much, they cannot vnderſtand. them that are vvithout, al things are done in parables: ✝ 
                     verse 12 that * ſeeing they may ſee,Eſa. 6, 9 and not ſee: and hearing they may heare, and not vnderſtand: ″ leſt at any time they ſhould be conuerted and their ſinnes be forgiuen them. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he ſaith to them, Do you not knovv this parable? and hovv ſhal you knovv al parables?Bed. in 4 Marc. ✝ 
                     verse 14 He that ſovveth: ſovveth the vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And they by the vvay ſide, are theſe: vvhere the vvord is ſovven, and vvhen they ſhal haue heard, immediatly commeth Satan, and taketh avvay the vvord that vvas ſovven in their hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And thy likevviſe that are ſovven vpon the rocky places, are theſe: vvho vvhen they heare the vvord, immediatly vvith ioy receiue it: ✝ 
                     verse 17 and they haue not roote
 in them ſelues, but are temporal: aftervvard vvhen tribulation is riſen and perſecution for the vvord, forthvvith they are ſcandalized. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And other there be that are ſovven among thornes: theſe are they that heare the vvord, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and the cares of the vvorld and the deceitfulnes of riches, and concupiſcences about other things entring in choke the vvord, and it is made fruiteles. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And theſe are they that vvere ſovven vpon the good ground, vvhich heare the vvord and receiue it, and yeld fruite one thirtie, one ſixtie, and one an hundred.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And he ſaid to them,Lu. 8, 16 * Commeth a candel to be put 
Chriſt came not to teach his doctrine in corners and hucker mucker, as Heretikes doe, but to lighten the whole world therewith. vnder a buſhel, or vnder a bed? and not to be put vpon the candleſticke? ✝ 
                     verse 22 For there is nothing hid, vvhich ſhal not be made manifeſt: neither vvas any thing made ſecret, but that it ſhal come to light. ✝ 
                     verse 23 If any man haue eares to heare, let him heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he ſaid to them,Lu. 8, 18 See vvhat you heare. * In vvhat measure you mete, it ſhal be meaſured to you againe, and more ſhal be giuento you that heare.to you.' ✝ 
                     verse 25 For he that hath, to him ſhal be giuen: and he that hath not, that alſo vvhich he hath, ſhal be taken avvay from him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he ſaid, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man caſt ſeede into the earth, ✝ 
                     verse 27 ″ and ſleepe, and riſe vp night and day, and the ſeede ſpring, and grovve vp vvhiles he knovveth not. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For the earth of it ſelf bringeth forth fruite, firſt the blade, then the eare, aftervvard the ful corne in the eare. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And vvhen the fruite hath brought out it ſelf, immediatly he putteth in the ſickle, becauſe harueſt is come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 * And he ſaid,Mat. 13, 31. To vvhat ſhal vve liken the kingdom of God? or to vvhat parable ſhal vve compare it? ✝ 
                     verse 31 As a ″ muſtard ſeede:Luc. 13▪ 19. vvhich vvhen it is ſovven in the earth, is leſſe then al the ſeedes that are in the earth: ✝ 
                     verse 32 and vvhen it is ſovven, it riſeth vp, and becommeth greater then al herbes, and maketh great boughes, ſo that the ″ birdes of the aire may dvvel vnder the ſhadovv thereof.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 And vvith many ſuch parables he ſpake to them the vvord, according as they vvere able to heare: ✝ 
                     verse 34 and vvithout parable he did not ſpeake vnto them. but apart, he explicated al things to his Diſciples.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And he ſaith to them in that day,Mt. 8, 23 vvhen euening vvas come,Lu. 8, 22 * Let vs paſſe ouer to the other ſide. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And dimiſsing the multitude, they take him ſo as he vvas in the boate: and there
 vvere other boates vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And there aroſe a great ſtorme of vvinde, and the vvaues bette into the boate, ſo that the boate vvas filled. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he vvas in the hinder part of the boate ſleeping vpon a pillovv: and they raiſe him, and ſay to him, Maiſter, doth it not pertaine to thee that vve periſh? ✝ 
                     verse 39 And riſing vp he threatened the vvinde, and ſaid to the ſea, Peace, be ſtil. And the vvinde ceaſed: and there vvas made a great calme. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And he ſaid to them, Why are you feareful? neither yet haue you faith? And they feared vvith great feare: and they ſaid one to an other, Who is this (thinkeſt thou) that both vvinde and ſea obey him?
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     12. Leſt they ſhould be conuerted.] Theſe ſpeaches here and els where,God is not author of ſinne, but mans owne will. we muſt not ſo vnderſtand as though he ſpake in parables of purpoſe and to this end, that the hearers might not vnderſtād, leſt they ſhould be conuerted: which were as much to ſay as that he would not haue them vnderſtand, nor be conuerted: but we muſt learne the true ſenſe of this very place in S. Matthew and in the Actes,Mt. 13. where our Sauiour and S. Paul ſpeake thus, They haue heard heauily, and haue ſhut their eies,
                     Act. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     left perhaps they may ſee, and vnderſtand, and be conuerted, and I heale them. Whereby it is euident, that the ſpeaking in parables was not the cauſe (for many beſide the Apoſtles heard and vnderſtood) but them ſelues would not heare, and vnderſtand, and be conuerted: and ſo were the cauſe of their owne wilful and obſtinate infidelity. And therfore alſo he ſpake in parables, becauſe they were not worthy to vnderſtand, as the other to whom he expounded them.
                  
                     27. And ſleepe.] The Church, and Chriſts doctrine, (ſleepe we, wake we) increaſeth by the great prouidence of God.1. Cor. 3. only the preachers muſt ſow, and plant, and water, and * God wil giue the increaſe, nouriſhing the ſeede in mens harts. And therfore we may not giue ouer, or be impatient and ſolicitous, if we haue not alwaies good ſucceſſe: but doing our duty, commit the reſt to God.
                  
                     31. Muſtard ſeed.]
                     The Church viſibly increaſing. If the Church and Truth had more and more decaied and been obſcured after the Apoſtles time vnto ours, as the Heretikes hold: then had it been great in the beginning, and ſmal afterward: where this Parable ſaith contrary, that it was a muſtard ſeed firſt, and afterward a great tree▪ 
                     vide Chryſ. to. 5 contra Gentiles in vita S. Babylae Mart.
                  
                  32. The birdes.]
                     Chriſtian religion wonderfully ſpreading. Of al ſectes or doctrine, Chriſts religion at the beginning was the ſmalleſt, and moſt contemptible: but the ſucceſſe thereof farre paſſed al mans doctrine: in ſo much that afterward al the wiſeſt and greateſt of the world made their reſidence and reſt therein.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  To the Geraſens (and in them to al men) Chriſt manifeſteth how the Diuel of his malice would vſe them, if he would permitte: 17 and yet they like not their Sauiours preſence. 21 A woman Gentil, that began her ſickneſſe when the Iewes daughter began her life (ſignifying Abrahams time) he cureth by the way as he was comming to heale the Iewes: And euen then the Iewes do die, but yet them alſo he wil reuiue, as here the Iewes daughter.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND they came beyond the ſtraite of the ſea into the countrie of the Geraſens.Mat. 8, 28. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And as he vvent out of the boate,Luc. 8 26. immediatly there mette him out of the ſepulchres a man in an vncleane ſpirit, ✝ 
                     verse 3 that had his dvvelling in the ſepulchres. and neither vvith chaines ″ could any man novv binde him: ✝ 
                     verse 4 for being often bound vvith fetters and chaines, he had burſt the chaines, and broken the fetters. and no body could tame him. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and he vvas alvvaies day and night in the ſepulchres and in the mountaines, crying and cutting him ſelf vvith ſtones. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And ſeeing IESVS a farre of, he ranne and adored him: ✝ 
                     verse 7 and crying vvith a great voice, ſaid, What to me and thee IESVS the ſonne of God moſt high? I adiure thee by God that thou torment me not. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For he ſaid vnto him, Goe out of the man thou vncleane ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he aſked him, What is thy name? And he ſaith to him, My name is Legion: becauſe vve are many. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he beſought him much, that he vvould not expel him out of the countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And there vvas there about the mountaine a great heard of ſvvine, feeding. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the ſpirits beſought him, ſaying, Send vsIt is not with out myſterie that the diuels deſired, and Chriſt ſuffered them to enter into the ſwine,ſignifying that filthy liuers be meete dwelling places for diuels. Aug. tract. 6 in ep. Io.
                   into the ſvvine, that vve may enter into them. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And IESVS immediatly graunted vnto them. And the vncleane ſpirits going out, entred into the ſvvine: and the heard vvith great violence vvas caried headlong into the ſea, about tvvo thouſand, and vvere ſtifled in the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And they that fed them, fled, and caried nevves into the citie and into the fields. And they vvent forth to ſee vvhat vvas done: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and they come to IESVS, and they ſee him that vvas vexed of the deuil, ſitting, clothed, and vvel in his vvittes: and they vvere afraid. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they that had ſeen it, told them, in vvhat maner he had been dealt vvithal that had the diuel: and of the ſwine. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And they began to deſire him, that he vvould depart from their coaſtes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhen he vvent vp into the boate, he that had been vexed of the diuel, began to beſeeche him that he might be vvith him, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and he admitted him not, but ſaith to him, Goe into thy houſe to thine, and tel them hovv great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had mercie vpon thee. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he vvent his vvay, and began to publiſh in Decapolis hovv great things IESVS had done to him: and al marueled.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 * And vvhen IESVS had paſſed in boate againe ouer the ſtraite,Mat. 9, 18. a great multitude aſſembled together vnto him, and he vvas about the ſea.
                     Archſynagogue, cheefe gouerner of a Synagogue. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And there commeth one of the Archſynagogs,Luc. 8, 42. named Iaîrus: and ſeeing him, he falleth dovvne at his feete, ✝ 
                     verse 23 and beſought him much, ſaying, That my daughter is at the point of death, come, impoſe thy hands vpon her, that ſhe may be ſafe and liue. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he vvent vvith him, and a great multitude folovved him, and they thronged him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And a vvoman vvhich vvas in an iſſue of bloud tvvelue yeres, ✝ 
                     verse 26 and had ſuffred many things of many Phyſicions, and had beſtovved al that ſhe had, neither vvas any thing the better, but vvas rather vvorſe: ✝ 
                     verse 27 vvhen ſhe had heard of IESVS, ſhe came in the preaſſe behind him, and touched his garment. ✝ 
                     verse 28 for ſhe ſaid, That ″ if I ſhal touche but his garment, I ſhal be ſafe. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And forthvvith the fountaine of her bloud vvas dried: and ſhe felt in her body that ſhe vvas healed of the maladie. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And immediatly IESVS knovving in him ſelf ″ the vertue that had proceeded from him, turning to the multitude, ſaid, Who hath touched my garments? ✝ 
                     verse 31 And his Diſciples ſaid to him, Thou ſeeſt the multitude thronging thee, and ſayeſt thou, who hath touched me? ✝ 
                     verse 32 And he looked about to ſee her that had done this. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But the vvoman fearing and trembling, knovving vvhat vvas done in her: came and fel dovvne before him, and told him al the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And he ſaid to her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee ſafe, goe in peace, and be vvhole of thy maladie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 As he vvas yet ſpeaking, they comefrom to' the Archſynagogue, ſaying, That thy daughter is dead: vvhy doeſt thou trouble the Maiſter any further? ✝ 
                     verse 36 But IESVS hauing heard the vvord that vvas ſpoken, ſaith to the Archſynagogue, Feare not: ″ only beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And he admitted not any man to folovv him, but Peter and Iames and Iohn the brother of Iames. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And they come to the Archſynagogs houſe, and he ſeeth a tumult, and folke vveeping and vvailing much. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And going in, he ſaith to them: Why make you this a doe and vveepe? the vvenche is not dead, butTo Chriſt, that can more eaſily raiſe a dead man then we can doe one that is but a ſleepe, death is but ſleepe. Aug. de verb. Do. S
                           •
                        r. 44.
                   ſleepeth. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And they derided him. But he hauing put forth al, taketh the father and the mother of the vvenche, and them that vvere vvith him, and they goe in vvhere the vvenche vvas lying. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And holding the vvenches hand, he ſaith to her, Talithacumi, vvhich is being interpreted, ″ wenche (I ſay to thee) ariſe. ✝ 
                     verse 42 and forthwith
 the wēche roſe vp, and walked. and ſhe vvas twelue yeres old: and they vvere aſtonied vvith great aſtoniſhment. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And he commaunded them earneſtly that no body ſhould knovv it: and he bad that ſome thing ſhould be giuen her to eate.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     3. Could bind him.] We ſee here that mad men which haue extraordinary ſtrength, are many times poſſeſſed of the diuel:Profane and natural men. as there is alſo a deafe and a dumme diuel, and vncleane ſpirits, which worke theſe effects in men, poſſeſſing their bodies. Al which things infidels and carnal men folowing only nature and reaſon, attribute to natural cauſes: and the leſſe faith a man hath, the leſſe he beleeueth that the diuel worketh ſuch things.
                  
                     2
                           •
                        . If I ſhal touch.]
                     The touche of Relikes. So the good Catholike ſaith, If I might but touche one of his Apoſtles, yea one of his Apoſtles napkins, yea but the ſhade of one of his Saincts, I ſhould be better for it. Act. 5. and 19. See S. Chryſ. to. 5 cont. Gent. in principio. in vit. Babyla. Yea S. Baſil ſaith,Baſil. in Pſ. 115. He that toucheth the bone of a martyr, receiueth in ſome degree holineſſe of the grace or vertue that is therein.
                  
                     30. Vertue.] Vertue to heale this womans maladie, proceeded from Chriſt, though ſhe touched but his coate: ſo when the Saincts by their Relikes or garments do miracles, the grace and force thereof commeth from our Sauiour, they being but the meanes or inſtruments of the ſame.
                  
                     36. Only beleeue.]
                     Scripture fondly applied to proue onely faith. It is our common ſpeache, when we require one thing ſpecially, though other things alſo be as neceſſarie, and more neceſſarie. As the Phyſicion to his patient, Only haue a good hart: when he muſt alſo keepe a diet, and take potions, things more requiſite. So Chriſt in this great infidelity of the Iewes, required only that they would beleeue he was able to doe ſuch a cure,V. 5. ſuch a miracle, and then he did it: otherwiſe it foloweth in the next Chapter, He could not do miracles there becauſe of their incredulity. Againe, for this faith he gaue them here and in al like places health of body, which they deſired, and therfore he ſaith not, Thy faith hath iuſtified thee: but, hath made the ſafe or whole. Againe this was the fathers faith, which could not iuſtifie the daughter. Whereby it is moſt euident, that this Scripture, and the like, are foliſhely abuſed of the Heretikes to proue that only faith iuſtifieth.
                  
                     41. Wenche ariſe.] Chriſts miracles, beſides that they be wonders and waies to ſhew his power, be alſo ſignificatiue:By three dead, are ſignified three kind of ſinners. as theſe which he corporally raiſed from death,Aug. de verb. Do. ſer. 44. put vs in minde of his raiſing our ſoules from ſinne. The Scripture maketh ſpecial mention only of three raiſed by our Sauiour, of which three, this wench is one within the houſe: an other, the widowes ſonne in Naim, now caried out toward the graue: the third, Lazarus hauing been in the graue foure daies, and therfore ſtinking. Which diuerſity of dead bodies, ſignifie diuerſity of dead ſoules, ſome more deſperate then other, ſome paſt al mans hope, and yet by the grace of Chriſt to be reuiued and reclaimed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In his owne countrey (ſignifying the reprobate Iewes) he is contemned, and therfore worketh litle in reſpect. 6 His Apoſtles preache euery where and worke miracles, ſo that King Herode (who ſhamefully killed Iohn Baptiſt) and others are ſtriken with great admiration. 30 After Iohns death he goeth into the Deſert, where great concurſe being vnto him, he feedeth 5000 with fiue loaues. 46 And after he hath praied long in the mountaine, he walketh vpon the ſea. 53 And with the very touche of his garments hemme he healeth innumerable.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND going out from thence,Mt. 13, 54. he vvent into his countrie: and his Diſciples folovved him.Lu. 4, 16 ✝ 
                     verse 2 and vvhen the Sabboth vvas come, he began to teach in the Synagogue: and many hearing him vvere in admiration at his doctrine, ſaying, How came this felovv by al theſe things?
 and vvhat vviſedom is this that is giuen to him, and ſuch vertues as are vvrought by his hands? ✝ 
                     verse 3 Is not this ″ the Carpenter, the ſonne of MARIE, the brother of Iames and Ioſeph and Iude and Simon? why, are not alſo his ſiſters here vvith vs? And they ″ vvere ſcandalized in him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS ſaid to them, That there is not a Prophet vvithout honour, but in his ovvne countrie, and in his ovvne houſe, and in his ovvne kinred. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and ″ he could not doe any miracle there, but only cured a fevv that vvere ſicke, impoſing his hands ✝ 
                     verse 6 and he marueled becauſe of their incredulity, and he vvent about the tovvnes in circuite teaching.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 * And he called the Tvvelue:Mt. 10, 1 and began to ſend them tvvo and tvvo,Lu. 9, 1. and gaue them povver ouer vncleane ſpirits. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And he commaunded them that they ſhould take nothing for the vvay, but a rod only: not ſkrippe, not bread, nor money in their purſe, ✝ 
                     verse 9 but ſhod vvith ſandals, and that they ſhould not put on ″ tvvo coates. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he ſaid to them, Whitherſoeuer you ſhal enter into an houſe, there tarie til you depart thence. ✝ 
                     verse 11 and vvhoſoeuer ſhal not receiue you, nor heare you: going forth from thence ſhake of the duſt from your feete for a teſtimonie to them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And going forth they preached that they ſhould doe penance: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and they caſt out many diuels,Ia. 5, 14. and * anointed ″ vvithA preparatiue to the Sacramēt of extreme vnction. Iac. 5.
                   oile many ſicke, and healed them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And * king Herod heard (for his name vvas made manifeſt) and he ſaid,Mt. 14, 1 That Iohn the Baptiſt is riſen againe from the dead,Lu. 9, 7. and therfore vertues vvorke in him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And others ſaid, That it is Elias. But others ſaid, That it is a Prophet, as one of the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Which Herod hearing, ſaid, Iohn vvhom I beheaded, he is riſen againe from the dead.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the ſaid Herod ſent and apprehended Iohn,The Goſpel vpō the decollation of S. Iohn Baptiſt Aug. 29. and bound him in priſon for Herodias the vvife ofHe might and ſhould by Moyſes law haue maried his brothers wife, if he had been dead without iſſue: but this Philip was yet aliue, and had alſo this daughter that daunced. Philippe his brother, becauſe he had maried her. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For Iohn ſaid to Herod,Leu. 18, 16. 20, 21. * It is not lavvful for thee to haue thy brothers vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And Herodias lay in vvaite for him: and vvas deſirous to kil him, and could not. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For Herod feared Iohn, knovving him to be a iuſt and holy man: and he kept him, and by hearing him did many things: and he heard him gladly. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen a conuenient day vvas fallen, Herod made the ſupper of his birth-day to the Princes and the Tribunes and the cheefe of Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vvhen the daughter of the ſame Herodias
 came in, and had daunced, and pleaſed Herod, and them that ſate vvith him at the table: the King ſaid to the damſel, Aſke of me vvhat thou vvilt, and I vvil giue it thee, ✝ 
                     verse 23 and he ſvvate to her, That vvhatſoeuer thou ſhalt aſke I vvil giue thee, though the halfe of my kingdom. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Who vvhen ſhe vvas gone forth, ſaid to her mother, What ſhal I aſke? But ſhe ſaid, The head of Iohn the Baptiſt. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen ſhe vvas gone in by and by vvith haſt to the King, ſhe aſketh ſaying, I vvil that forthvvith thou giue me in a platter the head of Iohn the Baptiſt. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And the King vvas ſtroken ſad. Becauſe of his othe and for them that ſate together at table he vvould not diſpleaſe her: ✝ 
                     verse 27 but ſending the hangman, commaunded that his head ſhould be brought in a platter. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And he beheaded him in the priſon, and brought his head in a platter: and gaue it to the damſel, and the damſel gaue it to her mother. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Which his diſciples hearing came, and tooke his body: and they put it in a monument. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 And * the Apoſtles gathering together vnto Ieſus,Lu. 9, 10 made relation to him of al things that they had done and taught. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And he ſaid to them, Come apart into the deſert place, and reſt a litle. For there vvere that came and vvent, many: and they had not ſo much as ſpace to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And 
* going vp into the boate,Mt. 14, 13. they vvent into a deſert place apart. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And they ſavv them going avvay, and many knevv: and they ranne flocking thither on foote from al cities, and preuented them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 And going forth, IESVS ſavv a great multitude: and he had compaſsion on them, becauſe they vvere as ſheepe not hauing a ſhepheard, and he began to teach them many things.Mt. 14, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And * vvhen the day vvas novv farre ſpent, his Diſciples came to him, ſaying, This is a deſert place, and the houre is novv paſt:Lu. 9, 12 ✝ 
                     verse 36 dimiſſe them,Io. 6, 5. that going out into the next villages and tovvnes, they may bie them ſelues meates to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And he anſvvering ſaid, Giue ye them to eate. And they ſaid to him, Let vs goe and bie bread for tvvo hundred pence: and vve vvil giue them to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he ſaith to them, Hovv many loaues haue you? goe and ſee. And vvhen they knevv, they ſay, Fiue, and tvvo fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And he commaunded them that they ſhould make al ſit dovvne, by companies vpon the greene graſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And they ſate dovvne in rankes by hundreds and fifties. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And vvhen he had taken the fiue loaues, and the tvvo fiſhes: looking vp vnto heauen,
 he bleſſed, and brake the loaues, and gaue to his Diſciples to ſet before them: and the tvvo fiſhes he deuided to al. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And al did eate, and had their fill. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And they tooke vp the leauings, tvvelue ful baſkets of fragments: and of the fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And they that did eate, vvere fiue thouſand men. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And immediatly he compelled his Diſciples to goe vp into the boate, that they might goe before him beyond the ſtraite to Bethſaida: vvhiles him ſelf did dimiſſe the people.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 And * vvhen he had dimiſſed them,Mt. 14, 23. he vvent into the mountaine to pray.The Goſpel on Saterday after Aſhweneſday. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And vvhen it vvas late,Io. 6, 16. the boate vvas in the middes of the ſea, and him ſelf alone on the land. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And ſeeing them labouring in rovving (for the vvinde vvas againſt them) and about the fourth vvatch of the night he commeth to them vvalking vpon the ſea: and he vvould haue paſſed by them. ✝ 
                     verse 49 But they ſeeing him vvalking vpon the ſea, thought it vvas a ghoſt, and cried out. ✝ 
                     verse 50 For al ſavv him, and vvere troubled. And immediatly he talked vvith them, and ſaid to them, Haue confidence, it is I, feare ye not. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And he vvent vp to them into the ſhippe, and the vvinde ceaſed: and they vvere farre more aſtonied vvithin them ſelues: ✝ 
                     verse 52 for they vnderſtoode not concerning the loaues: for their hart vvas blinded.
                ✝ 
                     verse 53 And * vvhen they had paſſed ouer,Mt. 14, 34. they came into the land of Genezareth, and ſet to the ſhore. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And vvhen they vvere gone out of the boate, incontinent they knevv him: ✝ 
                     verse 55 and running through that vvhole countrie, they began to carie about in couches thoſe that vvere il at eaſe, vvhere they heard he vvas. ✝ 
                     verse 56 And vvhitherſoeuer he entred into tovvnes or into villages or cities, they laid the ſicke in the ſtreates, and beſought him that they might touche but the hemme of his garment: and as many as touched him, vvere made vvhole. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . The carpenter.) As his countrie-folkes ſeeing him not only to be a poore man, but alſo knowing (as they thought) his vvhole parentage to be but vulgar, not reaching to his Godhead and diuine generation, did take offence or ſcandal of him: ſo doe the Heretikes take like offence at his parſon in the B. Sacrament, ſaying, why, this is not God: for it is bread made of corne by ſuck a baker, of the ſame moulde that ſuch a lofe is: not marking that it was not made Chriſt by baking, but by Conſecration, and the vertue of Chriſts vvordes.
                  
                      
                     3. They were ſcandalized.]
                     Chryſ. ho. 49, in Mt. This ſcandal roſe partly of enuy of his equals by birth, who reputing them ſelues as good as he, tooke ſkorne to be taught of him. Wherevpon Chriſt ſaith, A Prophet is not without honour but in his owne countrie:
                     Lu. 4, 25. ſignifying (as it is plaine in Luke) the malice and enuy of the Iewes his countrie men in refuſing him (Io. 1.) and that the Gentils would more eſteeme of him.
                  
                     5. He could not.] It is ſaid that he could not worke miracles there, not meaning that he was not able, but that on their part there wanted apt diſpoſition to receiue them. And therfore he would not of cōgruity worke there, vvhere their incredulity vvas ſo great, that it vvould not haue profited them.Marc. 5, 36. And for this cauſe he ſaith * els where to them that wil ſee and enioy his miracles, Only beleeue.
                  
                  
                     8. Not two coates.] He forbiddeth ſuperfluites, and to careful prouiſion of bodily things, when they are about Gods ſeruice in gaining ſoules.Mt. 10. And for the contrariety that ſeemeth here and in S. Matthew, vnderſtand that there he forbiddeth them to carie rod or ſtaffe to defend them ſelues, here he permitteth a vvalking rod or ſtaffe to leane and ſtay vpon: there he forbiddeth ſhoes to couer al the foote, ſuch as we vveare: here he permitteth ſandals, that is ſuch as had ſoles only, which the poore commonly vvare in 
                        •
                     evvry, and novv ſome religious men. See S. Auguſtins opinion li. 
                           •
                         c. 30 de conſenſu Euang. to. 4.
                  
                  
                     13. With oile] In the wordes of the commiſſion oile is not mentioned, and yet it is certaine by this their vſing of oile, that either Chriſt did then appoint them to vſe it, or they might take it vp of them ſelues, by vertue of the general commiſſion.
                  
                     13. With Oile). By this it is cleere that not only the Apoſtles or other may haue power to worke miracles, by their only word and inuocation of Chriſts name, but alſo by application of creatures: which creatures alſo haue a miraculous medicinal vertue to heale diſeaſes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The maſters of Hieruſalem comming ſo farre to carpe him 6 he chargeth with traditions, partly friuolous, 9 partly alſo contrarie to Gods commaundements. 14 And to the people he yeldeth the reaſon of that which they carped, 17 and againe to his diſciples, ſhewing the ground of the Iewiſh waſhing (to witte, that meates otherwiſe de
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e the ſoule) to be falſe. 24 But by and by among the Gentils, in a vvoman he findeth vvonderful faith, vpon her therfore he beſtovveth the crumme that ſhe aſked, 32 returning (becauſe the time of the Gentils vvas not yet come) to the Ievves vvith the loafe. 32 Where he ſhevveth his compaſsion tovvardes mankind ſo deafe and du
                        •
                     me, 36 and of the people is highly magnified.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there aſſemble together vnto him the Phariſees and certaine of the Scribes,Mt. 15, 1 comming from Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vvhen they had ſeen certaine of his diſciples eate bread vvith ″ common hands, that is, not vvaſhed, they blamed them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For the Phariſees and al the Ievves, vnles they often vvaſh their hands, eate not, holding the tradition of the Auncients: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and from the market, vnles they be vvaſhed, they eate not: and many other things there be that vvere deliuered vnto them to obſerue, the vvaſhings of cuppes and cruſes, and of braſen veſſels & beddes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Phariſees and Scribes aſked him, Why do not thy diſciples vvalke according to the tradition of the Auncients, but they eate bread vvith common hands? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But he anſvvering, ſaid to them, Wel did Eſay Prophecie of you hypocrites,Eſa. 29, 13. as it is vvritten, This people honoureth me
                  They that ſay well or teache and preache well, or haue Chriſt and his word in their mouth, and liue naughtily, be touched in this place. 
                  with their lippes, but their hart is farre from me. ✝ 
                        verse 7 and in vaine doe they worſhip me, teaching doctrines ″ precepts of men.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 8 For leauing the commaundement of God, you hold the traditions of men, the vvaſhings of cruſes and cuppes: & many other things you doe like to theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he ſaid to thē, wel do you fruſtrate the precept of God, that you may obſerue your ovvne tradition.Exo. 20, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For Moyſes ſaid, Honour thy father & thy mother. and, He that ſhal curſe father or mother, dying let him dye. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But you ſay, If a man ſay to father or mother,Leu. 20, 9. 
                  Corban (vvhich is a gift) vvhatſoeuer proceedeth from me, ſhal profit thee: ✝ 
                     verse 12 and further you ſuffer him not to doe ought for his father or mother, ✝ 
                     verse 13 defeating the vvord of God for your ovvne tradition vvhich you haue giuen forth. and many other things of this ſort you doe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And calling againe the multitude vnto him, he ſaid to them, Heare me al you, and vnderſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 15 ″ Nothing is vvithout a man entring into him, that can defile him. but the things that proceede from a man thoſe are they that make a manSee the firſt annotation vpō this chapter. cōmon. ✝ 
                     verse 16 If any man haue eares to heare, let him heare. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen he vvas entred into the houſe from the multitude, his Diſciples aſked him the parable. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he ſaith to them, So are you alſo vnſkilful? Vnderſtand you not that euery thing from vvithout, entring into a man, can not make him common: ✝ 
                     verse 19 becauſe it entreth not into his hart, but goeth into the belly, and is caſt out into the priuy, purging al the meates? ✝ 
                     verse 20 But he ſaid that the things vvhich come forth from a man, they make a man common. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For from vvithin out of the hart of men proceede euil cogitations, aduouteries, fornications, murders, ✝ 
                     verse 22 theftes, auarices, vvickedneſſe, guile, impudicities, an euil eye, blaſphemie, pride, foliſhnes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Al theſe euils proceede from vvithin, and make a man common.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And * riſing from thence he vvent into the coaſtes of Tyre and Sidon:Mt. 15, 21. and entring into a houſe, he vvould that no man ſhould knovv, and he could not be hid. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For a vvoman immediatly as ſhe heard of him, vvhoſe daughter had an vncleane ſpirit, entred in, and fel dovvne at his feete. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For the vvoman vvas a Gentile, a Syrophaenician borne. And ſhe beſought him that he vvould caſt forth the diuel out of her daughter. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Who ſaid to her, Suffer firſt the children to be filled. for it is not good to take the childrens bread, and caſt it to the dogges. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But ſhe anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Yea lord. for the vvhelpes alſo eate vnder the table of the crummes
 of the children. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he ſaid to her, For this ſaying goe thy vvay, the deuil is gone out of thy daughter. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And when ſhe vvas departed into her houſe, ſhe found the maid lying vpon the bed, and the deuil gone out.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 And againe going out of the coaſtesof Tyre and Sidon, he came of Tyre,The Goſpel vpō the 11 Sunday after Pentecoſt. he came by Sidon' to the ſea of Galilee through the middes of the coaſtes of Decapolis. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they bring to him one deafe and dumme: and they beſought him that he vvould impoſe his hand vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And taking him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into his eares: and ″ ſpitting, touched his tongue. ✝ 
                     verse 34 and looking vp vnto heauen, he groned, and ſaid to him, ″ Ephphetha, vvhich is, Be thou opened. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And immediatly his eares vvere opened, and the ſtring of his tongue vvas looſed, and he ſpake right. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And he commaunded them not to tel any body. But hovv much he commaunded them, ſo much the more a great deale did they publiſh it, ✝ 
                     verse 37 and ſo much the more did they vvonder, ſaying, He hath done al things vvel: he hath made both the deafe to heare, and the dumme to ſpeake. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     2. Common.] Common and vncleane is al one. For the Iewes were commaunded by the Law to eate certaine kindes of meates only, and not al indifferently: and becauſe theſe were ſeparated from other meates, and as it were ſanctified to their vſe, they called the other common and profane: and becauſe the Law calleth thoſe cleane and theſe vncleane, thereof it is, that vncleane and common is al one, as in this Chapter often, and Act. 10.
                  
                  7. Precepts of men.] Mens ordinances which be repugnant to Gods commaundements, be here condemned:Commaundements of men. as al obſeruations not edifying nor profitable to the fulfilling of Gods commaundements, be vaine and ſuperfluous: as many obſeruations of the Phariſees were then, and the like traditions of Heretikes be now. for howſoeuer they bragge of Scriptures, al their maner of adminiſtration and miniſterie is their owne tradition and inuention without al Scripture and warrant of Gods word. But the traditions of the Apoſtles and Ancients, and al the precepts of holy Church we are commaunded to keepe,Traditions. as things not preſcribed by man, but by the Holy Ghoſt. Act. 15, 
                           ••
                        . 41. 2 Theſſal. 
                           •
                        , 61.
                  
                  
                     11. Gift▪] To giue to the Church or Altar is not forbidden, but the forſaking of a mans parents in their neceſſitie,Dutie to parēts. pretending or excuſing the matter vpon his giuing that which ſhould relieue them, to God or to the Altar, that is impious and vnnatural. And theſe Phariſees teaching children ſo to neglect their duties to their parents, did wickedly.
                  
                     15. Nothing entering into a man.] As theſe wordes of our Sauiour do not import, that the Iewes then might haue eaten of thoſe meates which God forbade them: no more doe they now, that we Chriſtians may eate of meates which the Church forbiddeth vs.Abſtinēce from certaine meates. And yet both then and now al meates are cleane, and nothing entering into a man, defileth a man. For neither they then, nor we now abſteine, for that any meates are of their nature abominable, or defile the eaters, but they for ſignification, we for obedience and chaſtiſement of our bodies.
                  
                     33. Spitting.)
                     Chriſts ſpittle worketh miracles. Not only by Chriſts vvord and vvil, but alſo by ceremonie and by application of external creatures vvhich be holy, miracles are vvrought. as by Chriſts ſpittle, vvhich vvas not part of his perſon, being a ſuperfluity of his body, but yet moſt holy. Theophyl. in 7 Marci.
                  
                  
                      
                     34 Ephphetha.)
                     Exorciſmes and other ceremonies in Baptiſme. The Church doth moſt godly imitate and vſe theſe very vvordes and ceremonies of our Sauiour in the Exorciſmes before Baptiſme, to the healing of their ſoules that are to be baptized, as Chriſt here healed the bodily infirmitie and the diſeaſe of the ſoule together. Ambroſ. li. 1 de Sacram. c 1.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Of compaſsion he feedeth the people, 4000 vvith ſeuen loaues. 10 After al vvhich miracles as though they vvere yet vnſufficient to proue him to be Chriſt, the obſtinate Phariſees do require ſome miracle from heauen. 13 Wherevpon forſaking them, he vvarneth his Diſciples to bevvare of the leauen of their doctrine, neither to feare vvant of neceſſaries. 22 He healeth a blind man by degrees and vvith ceremonies. 27 Peter confeſſeth him (though men al this vvhile had not learned ſo farre) to be Chriſt. 31 and by and by he reuealeth to them his paſsion, 32 rebuking alſo Peter for diſſuading it, 34 and ſhewing that it is a thing vvherein al that vvil be ſaued (namely in time of perſecution) muſt folovv him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IN thoſe daies againe vvhen there vvas a great multitude,Mt. 15, 32. and had not what to eate:The Goſpel vpō the 6 Sunday after Pentecoſt. calling his Diſciples together, he ſaith to them, ✝ 
                     verse 2 I haue compaſsion vpon the multitude: becauſe loeGreat feruour and deuotion in the good people, and exceding force in our Maiſters preaching, that made thē abide faſting ſo long to heare his diuine ſermons. three daies they now endure vvith me, neither haue vvhat to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and if I dimiſſe them faſting into their home, they vvil faint in the vvay: for ſome of them came farre of. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And his Diſciples anſvvered him, Whence may a man fil them here vvith bread in the vvildernes? ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he aſked them, Hovv many loaues haue ye? Who ſaid, Seuen. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he commaunded the multitude to ſit dovvne vpon the ground. And taking the ſeuen loaues, giuing thankes he brake, and ″ gaue to his Diſciples for to ſet before them, and they did ſet them before the multitude. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they had a fevv litle fiſhes: and ″ he bleſſed them, and commaunded them to be ſet before them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they did eate and vvere filled. and they tooke vp that vvhich vvas left of the fragments, ſeuen maundes. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And they that had eaten vvere about foure thouſand: and he dimiſſed them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * immediatly going vp into the boate vvith his Diſciples,Mt. 15, 39. 16, 1. he came into the quarters of Dalmanûtha. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the Phariſees vvent forth, and began to queſtion vvith him, aſking of him a ſigne from heauen, tempting him. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And groning in ſpirit, he ſaith; Why doth this generation aſke a ſigne? Amen I ſay to you, If a ſigne ſhal be giuen to this generation. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And leauing them, he vvent vp againe into the boate, and paſſed beyond the ſtraite.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 14 And they forgot to take bread: and they had but one loafe vvith them in the boate. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he commaunded them, ſaying, Looke vvel and bevvare of the leauen of the Phariſees, and the leauen of Herod. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they reaſoned among them ſelues ſaying, Becauſe vve haue not bread. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Which IESVS knovving, ſaith to them, Why doe you reaſon, becauſe you haue not bread? do you not yet knovv nor vnderſtand? yet haue ye your hart blinded? ✝ 
                     verse 18 hauing eies ſee you not?Mar. 6, 38. and hauing eares heare you not? Neither do you remember? ✝ 
                     verse 19 When * I brake fiue loaues among fiue thouſand: and hovv many baſkets ful of fragmēts tooke you vp? They ſay to him,Mr. 8, 5. Tvvelue. ✝ 
                     verse 20 * When alſo ſeuen loaues among foure thouſand, hovv many maundes of fragments tooke you vp? And they ſay to him, Seuen. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And he ſaid to them, Hovv do you not yet vnderſtand?
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 And they come to Bethſaida: and they bring to him one blinde, and deſired him that he vvouldOur Sauiour vſed to worke much by touching: that we may learne not to cōtemne the corporal and external application of holy things, nor to chalēge by the ſpirit and faith only, as Heretikes doe. touche him. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And taking the hand of the blinde, he led him forth out of the tovvne: and ſpitting into his eies, impoſing his hands, he aſked him if he ſavv any thing. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And looking vp, he ſaid, I ſee men as it vvere trees, vvalking. ✝ 
                     verse 25 After that againe he impoſed his hands vpon his eies, and be began to ſee, and vvas reſtored, ſo that he ſavv al things clerely. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he ſent him into his houſe, ſaying, Goe into thy houſe: and if thou enter in to the tovvne, tel no body.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And * IESVS vvent forth and his Diſciples into the tovvnes of Caeſarêa-Philippi:Mt. 16, 13. and in the vvay he aſked his Diſciples,Lu. 9, 18 ſaying to them, Whom do men ſay that I am? ✝ 
                     verse 28 Who anſvvered him, ſaying, Iohn the Baptiſt, ſome Elias, & other ſome as it vvere one of the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Then he ſaith to them, But vvhom do you ſay that I am? Peter anſvvering ſaid to him, Thou art Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And he threatened them that they ſhould not tel any man of him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 And he began to teache them, that the Sonne of man muſt ſuffer many things, and be reiected of the Auncients and of the high Prieſtes and the Scribes, and be killed: and after three daies riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And he ſpake the vvord openly. And Peter taking him, began to rebuke him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Who turning, and ſeeing his Diſciples, threatened Peter, ſaying, Goe behind me Satan, becauſe thou ſauoureſt not the things that are of God, but that are of men. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And calling the multitude 
 together vvith his Diſciples, he ſaid to them, If any man vvil folovv me, let him deny him ſelf, and take vp his croſſe, and folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 35 For he that vvil ſaue his life, ſhal loſe it: and he that ſhal loſe his life ″ for me and the Goſpel, ſhal ſaue it. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For vvhat ſhal it profit a man, if he ″ gaine the vvhole vvorld, and ſuffer damage of his ſoule? ✝ 
                     verse 37 Or vvhat permutation ſhal a man giue for his ſoule? ✝ 
                     verse 38 For he that ſhal be aſhamed of me, and of my vvordes in this aduouterous and ſinful generation, the Sonne of man alſo vvil be aſhamed of him, vvhen he ſhal come in the glorie of his father vvith the holy Angels.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     6. Gaue to his diſciples.] He ſerueth the people not immediatly him ſelf, but by the Apoſtles miniſterie: to teach vs that we muſt receiue Chriſtes Sacraments and doctrine, not at our owne hand, but of his Prieſts and our Paſtours.
                  
                     7. Bleſſed them.]
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . So is it in ſome ancient Greeke copies, agreable to our Latin, and in S. Luke expreſly in the common Greeke text,Luc. 9, 16. that he bleſſed the fiue loaues and the two fiſhes: which muſt be alwaies marked againſt the Heretikes,Bleſſing of creatures vvorketh an effect in thē. which denie this bleſſing to pertaine to the creatures, but 
                        •
                     eine it alwaies to be referred to God for thanks giuing. For if it were ſo, he would haue ſaid grace but once for that whole refection: but he did ſeuerally bleſſe both the bread firſt, and afterward the fiſhes alſo,Gen. 1, 22▪ 28. multiplying them by his ſaid bleſſing (as * he did mankind and other creatures in the beginning by bleſſing them) and ſo working effectually ſome change or alteration in the very creatures them ſelues.
                  
                     35. For me and the Goſpel.]
                     What is to ſuffer for the Goſpel. By the Goſpel is ſignified, not only the foure Euangeliſtes, but al Scriptures, and whatſoeuer Chriſt ſaid that is not in Scripture: for he ſaith in this very place, He that ſhal be aſhamed of my wordes, the Sonne of man wil be aſhamed of him &c. Neither his owne wordes only,Luc. 9. but whatſoeuer the Apoſtles taught in word or writing: for our Sauiour ſaith, He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. For defence of any of al theſe and of euery Article of the Catholike faith, we ought to die, and this is to loſe our life for Chriſt and his Goſpel.
                  
                     36. Gaine the whole world.]
                     Doing againſt our owne conſcience. Let ſuch note this, that for feare or flattery of the world cōdeſcend to obey the vniuſt lawes of men touching religion, againſt their owne conſciences: and be content for the reſt of a few daies of this life, and for ſauing their temporal goods, to loſe their ſoule and the ioyes of heauen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The more to confirme them, he giueth them in his Transfiguration a ſight of his glorie, wherevnto Suffering doth bring, 9 and then againe doth inculcate his Paſsion. 14 A Diuel alſo he caſteth out, which his Diſciples (vpon whom therfore the peruerſe Scribes triumphed in his abſence) could not, for lacke of faſting and praying. 30 Being yet in Galilee, he reuealeth more about his Paſsion. 33 And (becauſe in the way to Capharnaum they contended for the Primacie (he teacheth them that humility is the way to Primacie before God: 38 bidding them alſo, not to prohibit ſuch as be not againſt them: nor to giue ſcandal to any one of the faithful. and on the other ſide, the faithful to auoid them by whom they may be ſcandalized and fall, be they neuer ſo neere vnto them.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he ſaid to them,Mt. 16, 27. 17, 1 Amen I ſay to you, that there be ſome of them that ſtand here,Lu. 9, 27 vvhich ſhal not taſt of death, vntil they ſee the kingdom of God comming in povver. ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  See the Annotations vpon the 17 of S. Matthew. And after ſix daies IESVS 
                     •
                  aketh Peter and Iames and Iohn: and bringeth them alone into a high mountaine apart, and vvas transfigured before them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And his garments vvere made gliſtering and vvhite excedingly as ſnovv, the like vvhereof a fuller cannot make vvhite vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And there appeared to them 
The law and the Prophets ioyne with Chriſt and his Goſpel: the one ſignified by Moyſes, the other by Elias. By whoſe apparitions here we alſo learne that ſometime there may be perſonal entercourſe betwixt the liuing & the dead, though not ordinarily. Elias vvith Moyſes: and they vvere talking vvith IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Peter anſvvering, ſaid to IESVS, Rabbi, it is good for vs to be here: and let vs make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moyſes, and one for Elias. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For he knevv not vvhat he ſaid: for they vvere frighted vvith feare: ✝ 
                     verse 7 and there vvas a cloude ouerſhadovving them, and a voice came out of the cloude, ſaying, This is my Sonne moſt deere: heare ye him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And immediatly looking about, they ſavv no man any more but IESVS only vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And as they deſcē
                  ded from the mountaine, he commaunded them that they ſhould not tel any man vvhat things they had ſeen: but vvhen the Sonne of man ſhal be riſen againe from the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they kept in the vvord vvith them ſelues: queſtioning together vvhat that ſhould be, when he ſhal be riſen from the dead.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And they aſked him, ſaying, What ſay the Phariſees then and the Scribes,Mal. 4, 5 that * Elias muſt come firſt? ✝ 
                     verse 12 Who anſvvering ſaid to them, Elias vvhen he commeth firſt, ſhal reſtore al things: andas hovv' it is vvritten of the Sonne of man, that he ſhal ſuffer many things and be contemned. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But I ſay to you that ″ Elias alſo is come (and they haue done to him vvhatſoeuer they vvould) as it is vvritten of him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And * cōming to his Diſciples,Mt. 17, 14. he ſavv a great multitude about them, and the Scribes queſtioning vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And forth vvith al the people ſeeing IESVS,Lu. 9, 37 vvas aſtonied, and much afraid: and running to him, ſaluted him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he aſked them,The Goſpel vpō weneſday in the Imber weeke of September. What do you queſtion of among you? ✝ 
                     verse 17 And▪ one of the multitude anſvvering, ſaid, Maiſter, I haue brought my ſonne to thee, hauing a dumme ſpirit, ✝ 
                     verse 18 who, vvhereſoeuer he taketh him, daſheth him, and he fometh, and gnaſheth vvith the teeth, and vvithereth: and I ſpake to thy Diſciples to caſt him out, and they could not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Who anſvvering them,
 ſaid, O incredulous generation, hovv long ſhal I be vvith you? hovv long ſhal I ſuffer you? bring him vnto me. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And they brought him. And vvhen he had ſeen him, immediatly the ſpirit troubled him: and being throvven vpon the ground, he tumbled foming. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And he aſked his father, Hovv long time is it ſince this hath chaunced vnto him? But he ſaid, From his infancie: ✝ 
                     verse 22 and often times hath he caſt him into fire and into vvaters, to deſtroy him. but if thou canſt any thing, helpe vs, hauing compaſsion on vs. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And Ieſus ſaid to him, If thou canſt beleeue, al things are poſsible to him that beleeueth. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And incontinent the father of the boy crying out, vvith teares ſaid, I do beleeue Lord: helpe my incredulity. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen IESVS ſavv the people running together, he threatened the vncleane ſpirit, ſaying to him, Deafe and dumme ſpirit, I commaunde thee, goe out of him, and enter not any more into him. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And crying out, and greatly tearing him, he vvent out of him, and he became as dead, ſo that many ſaid, That he is dead. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But IESVS holding his hand, lifted him vp: and he roſe. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vvhen he vvas entred into the houſe, his Diſciples ſecretely aſked him, Why could not vve caſt him out? ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he ſaid to them, This kinde can goe out by nothing, butNote the great force of prayer, and faſting. by prayer and faſting. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 And * departing thence they paſſed by Galilee,Mt. 17, 22. neither vvould he that any man ſhould knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And he taught his Diſciples,Lu. 9, 21 and ſaid to them, That the Sonne of man ſhal be betrayed into the hands of men, and they ſhal kil him, and being killed the third day he ſhal riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But they knevv not the vvord: and they vvere afraid to aſke him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 And * they came to Capharnaum.Mt. 18, 1 Vvho, vvhen he vvas in the houſe,Lu. 9, 46. aſked them, What did you treate of in the vvay? ✝ 
                     verse 34 But they held their peace. for in the vvay they had diſputed among them ſelues, vvhich of them ſhould be the greater. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And ſitting dovvne, he called the Tvvelue, and ſaith to them, If any man vvil be firſt, he ſhal be laſt of al, and the miniſter of al. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And taking a childe, he ſet him in the middes of them. Vvhom vvhen he had embraced, he ſaid to them, ✝ 
                     verse 37 Vvhoſoeuer ſhal receiue one of ſuch children in my name, receiueth me. and vvhoſoeuer ſhal receiue me, receiueth not me, but him that ſent me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 * Iohn anſvvered him,Lu. 9▪ 49. ſaying, Maiſter vve ſavv one caſting out deuils ″ in thy name, vvho folovveth not vs, and vve
 prohibited him. ✝ 
                     verse 39 But IESVS ſaid, Do not prohibit him. for there is no man that doth a miracle in my name, and can ſoone ſpeake il of me. ✝ 
                     verse 40 for he that is not againſt you, is for you. ✝ 
                     verse 41 For vvhoſoeuer ſhal giue you to drinke a cuppe of vvater in my name, becauſe you are Chriſts: amen I ſay to you, he ſhal not loſe hisReward for almes deedes, whereby it is euident they be meritorious. revvard. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhoſoeuer ſhalTo giue ſcandal by our life to the weake in faith, is a great ſinne, ſpecially in Prieſts, Preachers, and Princes. ſcandalize one of theſe litle ones beleeuing in me: it is good for him rather if a milſtone vvere put about his necke, and he vvere caſt into the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And if thy hand ſcandalize thee, cut it of. it is good for thee to enter into life, maimed, then hauing tvvo hands to goe into hel, into the fire vnquencheable, ✝ 
                     verse 44 vvhere their vvorme dieth not, and the fire quencheth not. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And if thy foote ſcandalize thee, choppe it of. it is good for thee to enter into life euerlaſting, lame, rather then hauing tvvo feete, to be caſt into the hel of vnquencheable fire, ✝ 
                     verse 46 vvhere their vvorme dieth not, and the fire quencheth not. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And if thine eye ſcandalize thee, caſt it out. it is good for thee vvith one eve to enter into the kingdom of God, rather then hauing tvvo eies, to be caſt into the hel of fire, ✝ 
                     verse 48 vvhere their vvorme dieth not, and the fire quencheth not. ✝ 
                     verse 49 For euery one ſhal be ſalted vvith fite: and 
* euery victime ſhal be ſalted vvith ſalt.Leu. 2, 13 ✝ 
                     verse 50 Salt is good. but if the ſalt ſhal be vnſeaſoned: vvhervvith vvil you ſeaſon it? Haue ſalt in you, and haue peace among you.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     4. Elias with Moyſes.)
                     Elias. Moyſes. Moyſes repreſenteth the perſons of al the Saincts that ſhal be departed this life when Chriſt commeth in his Maieſtie to iudgement: And Elias (who was then liuing) figureth the holy men that ſhal then be found aliue when he commeth in glorie. Who both ſhal then begin to reigne with Chriſt in glorie. Beda in 9. Marc.
                  
                  
                     13. Elias alſo is come.)
                     Elias and Iohn Baptiſt Eremites. Elias was Zelous for Gods Law, a great reprehender of ſinne, and an Eremite, and ſhal be the Precurſor of Chriſt in his ſecond Aduent: So was Iohn before his firſt Aduent, a Zelatour, a Corrector, an Eremite, and his Precurſor. Theod. in 
                           •
                        aten. Thoma ſuper hunc locum. See S. Hierom in the life of Paul the eremite, that both Elias and Iohn Baptiſt vvere counted principal profeſſours of that life.
                  
                     38. In thy name.)
                     The name of IESVS worketh miracles. Miracles are vvrought ſometime by the name of IESVS, whatſoeuer the men be, when it is for the proofe of a truth or for the glorie of God. In ſo much that Iulian the Apoſtata him ſelfe did driue away diuels with the ſigne of the Croſſe: as S. Gregorie Nazianzene writeth orat. 1 in Iulian. Theodoret. li. 
                           •
                         c. 3 hiſt. And ſo alſo Heretikes may doe miracles among the Heathen, to prooue any article of the Chriſtian faith: but they neuer did nor euer ſhal vvorke any miracle to prooue any of their erroneous opinions. as, to prooue that Chriſt is not really in the B. Sacrament.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He anſwereth the tempting Phariſees (and againe his diſciples afterward) that the caſe of a man with his wife ſhalbe (as in the firſt inſtitution) vtterly indiſſoluble.THE THIRD part of this Goſpel, Chriſtes cōming into Iewrie toward his Paſſion. 13 He bleſſeth children. 17 He ſheweth what is to be done to get life euerlaſting. 21 What alſo for a rich man, to be perfect: 2
                        •
                      as alſo what paſsing reward they ſhal haue that doe ſo in time of perſecution. 32 He reuealeth more to his Diſciples touching his Paſsion: 35 bidding the two ambitious ſuiters to thinke rather of ſuffering with him: 41 and teaching vs in the reſt of his Diſciples, not to be greeued at our Eccleſiaſtical Superiours, conſidering they are (as he was him ſelf) to toile for our ſaluation. 46 Then going out of Iericho, he giueth ſight to a blinde man.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND riſing vp thence,Mt. 19, 1 he commeth into the coaſtes of Ievvrie beyond Iordan: and the multitudes aſſemble againe vnto him. and as he vvas accuſtomed, againe he taught them. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the Phariſees comming neere, aſked him, Is it lavvful for a man to dimiſſe his vvife? tempting him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But he anſvvering, ſaid to them,Deut. 24, 1. Vvhat did Moyſes commaund you? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Who ſaid,
* Moyſes ″ permitted to vvrite a bil of diuorce, and to dimiſſe her. ✝ 
                     verse 5 To vvhom IESVS anſvvering, ſaid, For the hardnes of your hart he vvrote you this precept. ✝ 
                     verse 6 but from the beginning of the creation * God made them male and femal.Gen. 1, 27. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For this cauſe, * man ſhal leaue his father and mother: and ſhal cleaue to his vvife,Gen. 2, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 8 and they tvvo ſhal be in one fleſh. therfore novv they are not tvvo, but one fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 9 That therfore vvhich God hath ioyned together,The obligation betwixt man and wife is ſo great, that during life it can not be broken. let not man ſeparate.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * in the houſe againe his Diſciples aſked him of the ſame thing.Mt. 19, 9 ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he ſaith to them,Mt. 5, 32 Whoſoeuer dimiſſeth his vvife and ″ marrieth an other:Lu. 16, 18. committeth aduoutrie vpon her. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And if the vvife dimiſſe her huſband, and mary an other,1. Cor. 7, 11. ſhe committeth aduoutrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And * they offered to him yong children,Mt. 19, 13. that he might touche them. And the Diſciples threatened thoſe that offered them.Lu. 18, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Whom vvhen IESVS ſavv, he tooke it il, and ſaid to them, Suffer the little children to come vnto me, and prohibit them not. for the kingdom of God is for ſuch. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Amen I ſay to you: Whoſoeuer receiueth not the kingdom of God as a litle childe, ſhal not enter into it. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And embracing them, and impoſing hands vpon them, heOur Sauiour gaue the children his bleſſing. bleſſed them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen he vvas gone forth in the vvay, a certaine man running forth and kneeling before him aſked him,
 * Good Maiſter,Mt. 19, 16. vvhat ſhal I doe that I may receiue life euerlaſting? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And IESVS ſaid to him, Why calleſt thou me good? ″ None is good but one,Lu. 18, 18. God. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Thou knovveſt theNote that the keeping of Gods cōmaundements procureth life euerlaſting. commaundements,Exo. 20, 13.
* Commit not aduoutrie, Kil not, Steale not, Beare not falſe vvitneſſe, doe no fraude, Honour thy father and mother. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But he anſvvering, ſaid to him, Maiſter al theſe things I haue obſerued from my youth. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And IESVS beholding him, loued him, and ſaid to him, One thing is vvanting vnto thee:This is counſel of prefectiō (not a precept) which the Religious profeſſing and keeping voluntary pouertie, doe folow. goe, ſel vvhatſoeuer thou haſt, and giue to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen: and come, folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Who being ſtroken ſad at the vvord, vvent avvay ſorovvful. for he had many poſſeſsions. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And IESVS looking about, ſaith to his Diſciples, Hovv hardly ſhal they that haue money, enter into the kingdom of God! ✝ 
                     verse 24 And the Diſciples vvere aſtonied at his vvordes. But IESVS againe anſvvering, ſaith to them, Children, hovv hard is it for them that truſt in money, to enter into the kingdom of God! ✝ 
                     verse 25 It is eaſier for a camel to paſſe through a nedels eie, then for ″ a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvho marueled more, ſaying to them ſelues, And vvho can be ſaued? ✝ 
                     verse 27 And IESVS beholding them, ſaith, Vvith men it is impoſsibile: but not vvith God. for al things are poſsible vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And Peter began to ſay vnto him, Behold, vve haue left al things, and haue folovved thee. ✝ 
                     verse 29 IESVS anſvvering, ſaid,Exceding happie be they that can forſake their temporal things for religion. Amen I ſay to you, there is no man vvhich hath left houſe, or brethren, or ſiſters, or father, or mother, or children, or landes for me and for the Goſpel: ✝ 
                     verse 30 that ſhal not receiue ″ an hundred times ſo much novv in this time: houſes, and brethren, and ſiſters, and mothers, and children, and landes, vvith perſecutions: and in the vvorld to come life euerlaſting.Mt. 19. 30. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But * many that are firſt, ſhal be laſt: and the laſt, firſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they vvere in the vvay going vp to Hieruſalem:Lu. 13, 30. and IESVS vvent before them, and they vvere aſtonied: and folovving vvere afraid.Mt. 20, 17. And * taking againe the Tvvelue, he began to tel them the things that ſhould befal him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 That, behold vve goe vp to Hieruſalem,Lu. 18, 31. and the Sonne of man ſhal be betrayed to the cheefe Prieſtes, and to the Scribes and Auncients, and they ſhal condemne him to death, and ſhal deliuer him to the Gentiles, ✝ 
                     verse 34 and they ſhal mocke him, and ſpit on him, and ſcourge him, and kil him, and the third day he ſhal riſe againe.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 35 And * there come to him Iames and Iohn the ſonnes of Zebedee,Mt. 20, 
                        •
                     0. ſaying, Maiſter, vve vvil that vvhat thing ſoeuer vve ſhal aſke, thou doe it to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 36 But he ſaid to them, What vvil you that I doe to you? ✝ 
                     verse 37 And they ſaid, Graunt to vs, that vve may ſit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And IESVS ſaid to them, You vvotte not vvhat you aſke. can you drinke the cuppe that I drinke: or be baptized vvith the baptiſme vvhervvith I am baptized? ✝ 
                     verse 39 But they ſaid to him, Vve can. And IESVS ſaid to them, The cuppe in deede vvhich I drinke, you ſhal drinke: and vvith the baptiſme vvhervvith I am baptized, ſhal you be baptized: ✝ 
                     verse 40 but to ſit on my right hand or on my left, is not mine to giue vnto you, but to vvhom it is prepared. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And the ten hearing, began to be diſpleaſed at Iames and Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And IESVS calling them,Mt. 20, 25. ſaith to them, * You knovv that they vvhich ſeeme to rule ouer the gentiles, ouerrule them: and their Princes haue povver ouer them.Lu. 22, 25. ✝ 
                     verse 43 But it is not ſo in you. but vvhoſoeuer vvil be greater, ſhal be your miniſter: ✝ 
                     verse 44 and vvhoſoeuer vvil be firſt among you, ſhal be the ſeruant of al. ✝ 
                     verse 45 For the Sonne of man alſo is not come to be miniſtred vnto, but to miniſter, and to giue his life a redempption for many.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 And * they come to Iericho:Mt. 20, 29. and vvhen he departed from Iericho, and his Diſciples, and a very great multitude, the ſonne of Timaeus,Lu. 18, 35. Bar-timaeus the blinde man, ſate by the way ſide begging. ✝ 
                     verse 47 Vvho vvhen he had heard, that it is IESVS of Nazareth: he began to crie, and to ſay, IESVS, ſonne of Dauid, haue mercie vpon me. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And many threatened him, to hold his peace. but he cried much more, Sonne of Dauid,

                     verse 49 haue mercie vpon me. And IESVS ſtanding ſtil commaunded him to be called. And they call the blinde man, ſaying to him, Be of better comfort, ariſe, he calleth thee. ✝ 
                     verse 50 Vvho caſting of his garment leapt vp, and came to him. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to him, Vvhat vvilt thou that I doe vnto thee? And the blinde man ſaid to him, Rabbôni, that I may ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And IESVS ſaid to him, Goe thy vvaies, thy faith hath made the ſafe. And forthvvith he ſavv, and folovved him in the vvay.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     4. Permitted.)
                     Toleration and permiſſion of euil. Some things are permitted, though not approued or allowed, to auoid greater inconueniences. No man may doe euil for any cauſe, but he may permit other mens euils for diuerſe cauſes:Aug. ep. 119 c. 19. as God him ſelf doeth, who can doe no euil. So doth the Prince and Common-wealth permit leſſer euils to eſchew greater, and ſo may the Holy Church much more (as S. Auguſtine ſaith ſhe doeth) being placed among much chaffe and much cockle, tolerate many things: and yet whatſoeuer is againſt faith and good life, ſhe neither approueth, nor diſſembleth with ſilence, nor committeth.
                  
                     11. And marrieth an other.) That which S. Matthew vttered more obſcurely, and is miſtaken of ſome,Mariage after diuorce vnlawful. as though he meant that for fornication a man might put away his wife and marry an other,Lu. 16, 18. is here by this Euangeliſt (as alſo by S. Luke) put out of doubt, generally auouching, that whoſoeuer putteth away his wife and marrieth an other, committeth aduoutrie. Aug. li. 1 de adult. coniug. c, 11 & ſequentibus.
                  
                  
                     18. None is good.) None is entirely, ſubſtantially, and of him ſelf good, but God: though by participation of Gods goodnes, men are truely alſo called good.
                  
                     25. A riche man.) He is here called a rich man that hath his confidence (as here is expreſſed) in his treaſure, and had rather forſake his faith and duty to God, then loſe them▪ as al they which liue in Schiſme or Hereſie to ſaue their goods.
                  30. An hundred times ſo much.)
                     Then reward in this life that forſake ought for Gods ſake. Sometime God doth ſo bleſſe men alſo in wordly benefites that haue forſaken al for him,Hiero. in 19 Mat. as S. Gregorie, S. Auguſtine, and S. Paulinus: but the principal meaning is, * that he wil giue to ſuch men in this life aboundance of grace and ſpiritual comfort and contentatiō and ioy of cōſcience (as they feele which haue experience) the which ſpiritual giftes excede the temporal commodities more then an hundred ſold▪ in ſo much that he that hath fully forſaken but ſmal things for religion, would not forſake religion to haue al the world.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Being novv come to the place of his Paſsion,THE fourth part of this Goſpel, the Holy weeke of his Paſſion in Hieruſalem. he entreth with triumph as their Chriſt. 12 He curſeth that fruitleſſe leafie tree. 15 He ſheweth his Zeale for the houſe of God: for which the Rulers ſeeke his deſtruction. 24 He exhorteth his Diſciples to ſtedfaſtnes of faith, and to forgiue their enemies. 27 He auoucheth his power by the witnes of Iohn who was a man ſent of God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen they came nigh vnto Hieruſalem and Bethania to Mount-oliuet,Mt. 21, 1. he ſendeth tvvo of his Diſciples,PALME-Sunday. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ſaith to them,Lu. 19, 20. Goe into the tovvne that is againſt you,Io. 12, 15 and immediatly entring in thither, you ſhal finde a colt tied, vpon vvhich no man yet hath ſitten: looſe him, and bring him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And if any man ſhal ſay to you, Vvhat doe you? ſay that he is needeful for our Lord: and incontinent he vvil ſend him hither. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And going their vvaies, they found the colt tied before the gate vvithout in the meeting of tvvo vvaies: and they looſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And certaine of them that ſtoode there, ſaid to them, Vvhat doe you looſing the colt? ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vvho ſaid to them as IESVS had commaunded them: and they did let him goe vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they brought the colt to IESVS: and they lay their garments vpon him, and he ſate vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 AndAl theſe voluntary dueties were grateful to our Sauiour, and ſo be the like done to him in the B. Sacrament. many ſpred their garments in the vvay:
 and others did cut boughes from the trees, and ſtravved them in the vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And they that vvent before and they that folovved,Pſ. 117, 26. cried ſaying, Hoſanna, bleſſed is be that commeth in the name of our Lord. ✝ 
                        verse 10 bleſſed is the kingdom of our father Dauid that commeth, Hoſanna in the higheſt. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he entred Hieruſalem into the temple: and hauing vevved al things round about, vvhen novv the euening houre vvas come, he vvent forth into Bethania vvith the Tvvelue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the next day vvhen they departed from Bethania,MVNDAY. he vvas an hungred.Mt. 21, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And * vvhen he had ſeen a farre of a figtree hauing leaues, he came if happily he could finde any thing on it. And vvhen he vvas come to it, he found nothing but leaues. for it vvas not the time of figges. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And anſvvering he ſaid to it, Novv no man eate fruite of the any more for euer. And his Diſciples heard it. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And they come to Hieruſalem.
               And * vvhen he vvas entred into the temple,Mt. 21, 12. he began to caſt out them that ſold and bought in the temple, and the tables of the bankers,Lu. 19, 45. and the chaires of them that ſold pigeons he ouerthrevv. ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he ſuffred not that any man ſhould carie a ″ veſſel through the temple: ✝ 
                     verse 17 and he taught, ſaying to them,Eſa. 56, 7. Is it not vvritten, That my houſe ſhal be called the houſe of prayer to al nations? But you haue made it ″ adenne of theeues. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vvhich vvhen the cheefe Prieſtes and the Scribes had heard,Ier. 7, 11 they ſought hovv they might deſtroy him. for they vvere afraid of him, becauſe the vvhole multitude vvas in admiration vpon his doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And vvhen euening vvas come, he vvent forth out of the citie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And * vvhen they paſſed by in the morning,Mt. 21, 20. they ſavv the figtree vvithered from the rootes.TVESDAY. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And Peter remēbring, ſaid to him, Rabbi, behold the figtree that thou didſt curſe, is vvithered. ✝ 
                     verse 22 
                  The Goſpel for S. Gregorius Thaumaturgus Nouemb. 17. And in a Votiue Maſſe for any neceſſitie. And IESVS anſvvering ſaith to them, Haue
Faith of God is to beleeue that he is able, and that he wil doe it if it be expedient, and no impediment on our part. faith of God. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Amen I ſay to you, that vvhoſoeuer ſhal ſay to this mountaine, Be taken vp and be caſt into the ſea, and ſhal not ſtagger in his hart, but beleeue that vvhatſoeuer he ſaith, ſhal be done: it ſhal be done vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Therfore I ſay to you, al things vvhatſoeuer you aſke, praying, beleeue that you ſhal receiue, and they ſhal come vnto you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen you ſhal ſtand to pray, forgiue if you haue ought againſt any man: that alſo your father which is in heauen, may forgiue you your ſinnes: ✝ 
                     verse 26 
                  God neuer forgiueth ſinnes to him that pardoneth not his enemies frō his hart. Whereby it is euident that more is required then only faith. If ſo be that
 you vvil not forgiue, neither vvil your father that is in heauen, forgiue you your ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And they come againe to Hieruſalem.
               And * vvhen he vvalked in the temple,Mt. 21, 23. there come to him the cheefe Prieſtes and the Scribes and the Auncients, ✝ 
                     verse 28 and they ſay to him,Lu. 20, 2. In vvhat povver doeſt thou theſe things? and vvho hath giuen thee this povver, that thou ſhouldeſt doe theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 29 And IESVS anſvveering ſaid to them, I alſo vvil aſke you one vvord, and anſvver you me: and I vvil tel you in vvhat povver I doe theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 30 The baptiſme of Iohn vvas it from heauen, or from men? anſvver me. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But they thought vvith them ſelues, ſaying, If vve ſay, From heauen: he vvil ſay, Vvhy then did you not beleeue him? ✝ 
                     verse 32 If vve ſay, From men, they feared the people. for al accounted Iohn that he vvas in deede a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And they anſvvering ſay to IESVS, Vve knovv not. And IESVS anſvvring ſaith to them, Neither do I tel you in vvhat povver I doe theſe things.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     16. Veſſel through the temple.]
                     Profaning of Gods Church. He could not abide to ſee the Temple of God profaned, no nor ſuffred thoſe things to be done in it, which otherwiſe were not vnlawful but honeſt, if they had been done in dewe place. How much leſſe can he abide the profaning of Churches now with Heretical ſeruice and preaching of hereſie and blaſphemie?
                  
                     17. D
                           •
                        nne of theeues.] If the Temple was then a denne of theeues, becauſe of profane and ſecular merchandiſe: how much more now, when the houſe appointed for the Holy Sacrifice and Sacrament of the Bodie of Chriſt, is made a denne for the Miniſters of Caluins bread?
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  He foretelleth to the Iewes in a parable their reprobation moſt worthy, and the vocation of the Church of the Gentils in their place, 10 him ſelf being the headſtone thereof. 13 He defeateth the ſnare of the Phariſees and Herodians, about paying tribute to Caſar: 18 anſwereth alſo the inuention of the Sadducces againſt the Reſurrection: 28 alſo the oppoſition of a Scribe. 35 And ſo hauing put al the buſie ſectes to ſilence, he turneth and poſeth them on the other ſide, becauſe they imagined Chriſt ſhould be no more but a man. 38 Bidding the people to beware of the Scribes, being ambitious and hypocrites. 41 He commendeth the poore widovv for her two mites, aboue al.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he began to ſpeake to them in parables,Eſ. 5, 1.
                  This man, is God the Father. This vineyard, is (as Eſay ſaith 5. 1.) the houſe of Iſrael. The ſeruants ſent, are Moyſes and the Prophet
                        •
                     , whō the Iewes did diuerſely afflict and perſecute. A man planted a vineyard and made a hedge about it,Mt. 21. 33. and digged a trough,Lu. 20, 9. and built a tovvre, and let it out to huſbandmen: and vvent forth into a ſtrange countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he ſent to the huſbandmen in ſeaſon a ſeruant, to receiue
 of the huſbandmen, of the fruite of the vineyard. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Vvho apprehending him, bette him: and ſent him avvay emptie. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And againe he ſent to them an other ſeruant: and him they vvounded in the head, and vſed him reprochefully. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And againe he ſent an other, and him they killed: and many other, beating certaine, and killing others. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Therfore hauing yet one
His Sonne is CHRIST our Sauiour, whō the Iewes crucified out of the citie of Ieruſalem, as it were caſting him out of the vineyard. ſonne moſt deere: him alſo he ſent vnto them laſt ſaying, That they vvill reuerence my ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But the huſbandmen ſaid one to an other, This is the heier: come, let vs kill him: and the inheritance ſhal be ours. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And apprehending him, they killed him, and caſt him forth out of the vineyard. ✝ 
                     verse 9 What therfore vvil the lord of the vineyard doe?The Iewes and their guides to whom the vineyard was ſet, deſtroied: and Gods vineyard giuen to the Apoſtles and their Succeſſors in the Gentils. He vvil come and deſtroy the huſbandmen: and vvil giue the vineyard to others. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Neither haue you read this ſcripture, The
                  CHRIST is become the corner ſtone of the Synagogue and the Church in which the faithful both of the Iewes and Gentils are conteined. 
                  ſtone vvhich the builders reiected,
                  Pſ. 117, 22. 
                  the ſame is made the head of the corner: ✝ 
                        verse 11 By our Lord was this done, and it is maruelous in our eies? ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they ſought to lay hands on him, and they feared the multitude. for they knevv that he ſpake this parable to them. And leauing him they vvent their vvay.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 * And they ſend to him certaine of the Phariſees and of the Herodians:Mt. 22, 15. that they ſhould entrappe him in his vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvho comming,Lu. 26, 20. ſay to him, Maiſter, vve knovv that thou art a true ſpeaker, and careſt not for any man: for thou doeſt not looke vpon the perſon of men, but teacheſt the vvay of God in truth, is it lavvful to giue tribute to Caeſar: or ſhal vve not giue it? ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvho knovving their ſubteltie, ſaid to them, Vvhy tempt you me? bring me a penie that I may ſee it. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But they brought it him. And he ſaith to them, Vvhoſe is this image, and inſcription? They ſay to him, Caeſars. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to them, Render therfore the things that are Caeſars, to Caeſar: and that are Gods, ″ to God. And they marueled at him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And * there came to him the Saducees that ſay there is no reſurrection:Mt. 22, 23. and they aſked him ſaying, Maiſter, ✝ 
                     verse 19 * Moyſes vvrote vnto vs,Lu. 20, 27. that if any mans brother die, and leaue his vvife,Act. 23, 6. and leaue no children, ″ his brother ſhal take his vvife and raiſe vp ſeede to his brother. ✝ 
                     verse 20 There vvere therfore ſeuen brethren:Deu. 25, 5. and the firſt tooke a vvife, and died leauing no iſſue. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the ſecond tooke her, and died: and neither this left iſſue. And the third in like maner. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the ſeuen tooke her in like ſort: and did not leaue iſſue. Laſt of al the vvoman alſo
 died. ✝ 
                     verse 23 In the reſurrection therfore vvhen they ſhal riſe againe, vvhoſe vvife ſhal ſhe be of theſe? for the ſeuen had her to vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to them, Do ye not therfore erre ″, not knovving the ſcriptures, nor ″ the povver of God? ✝ 
                     verse 25 For vvhen they ſhal riſe againe from the dead, they ſhal neither marrie, no
                     •
                   be married, but are as the Angels in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And as concerning the dead, that they do riſe againe, haue you not read in the booke of Moyſes, hovv in the buſh God ſpake to him,Exo. 3, 6 ſaying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob? ✝ 
                     verse 27 He is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing. You therfore are much deceiued.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 And * there came one of the Scribes that had heard them queſtioning,Mt. 22, 34. and ſeeing that he had wel anſwered them, aſked him vvhich vvas the firſt cōmaundement of al. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And IESVS anſvvered him,Deu. 6, 5 That the firſt commaundement of al is, Heare Iſrael: the Lord thy God, is one God. ✝ 
                        verse 30 And thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God from thy vvhole hart, and vvith thy vvhole ſoul, and vvith thy vvhole minde, and vvith thy vvhole povver. This is the firſt commaundement. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And the ſecond is like to it,Leu. 19, 18. 
                  Thou ſhalt loue they neighbour as thy ſelf. An other commaundement greater then theſe there is not. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And the Scribe ſaid to him, Vvel Maiſter, thou haſt ſaid in truth, that there is one God, and there is none other beſides him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And that he be loued from the vvhole hart, and vvith the vvhole vnderſtanding, and vvith the vvhole ſoule, and vvith the vvhole ſtrength: andThis excellencie of Charitie teacheth vs that faith only is not ſufficiēt. to loue his neighbour as him ſelf is a greater thing then al holocauſtes and ſacrifices. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And IESVS ſeeing that he had anſvvered vviſely, ſaid to him, Thou art not farre from the kingdom of God. And no man novv durſt aſke him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And * IESVS anſvvering,Mt. 22, 41. ſaid, teaching in the temple, Hovv do the Scribes ſay, that Chriſt is the ſonne of Dauid?Lu. 20, 41. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For Dauid him ſelf ſaith in the holy Ghoſt: Our Lord ſaid to my Lord,
                  Pſ. 109, 1. 
                  ſit on my right hand, vntil I put thine enemies the foote-ſtoole of thy feete. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Dauid therfore him ſelf calleth him Lord, and vvhence is he his ſonne? And a great multitude heard him gladly.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he ſaid to them in his doctrine, * Take heede of the Scribes that vvil vvalke in long robes, and be ſaluted in the market-place, ✝ 
                     verse 39 and ſit in the firſt chaites in the Synagogs, and loue the higheſt places at ſuppers: ✝ 
                     verse 40 vvhich deuoure vvidovves houſes vnder the pretence of long prayer: theſe
 ſhal receiue larger iudgement.
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 * And IESVS ſitting ouer againſt the treaſurie,Lu. 21, 2. beheld hovv the multitude did caſt money into the treaſurie, and many rich men did caſt in much. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen there came a certaine poore vvidovv, ſhe caſt in tvvo mites, vvhich is a farthing. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And calling his Diſciples together, he ſaith to them, Amen I ſay to you, that this poore vvidovv hath caſt inGod doth accept almes that are correſpondent to euery mans abilitie▪ and the more able, the more muſt a mā giue. more then al that haue caſt into the treaſurie. ✝ 
                     verse 44 For al they of their aboundance haue caſt in: but ſhe, of her penurie hath caſt in al that ſhe had, her vvhole liuing.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     17. To God.]
                     God firſt to be ſerued, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Prince. Theſe men were very circumſpect and wary to doe al duties to Caeſar, but of their dutie to God they had no regard. So Heretikes, to flatter temporal Princes, and by them to vphold their Hereſies, doe not only inculcate mens dutie to the Prince, diſſembling that which is dewe to God: but alſo giue to the Prince more then dew, and take from God his right and dutie. But Chriſt allowing Caeſar his right, warneth them alſo of their dutie toward God. And that is it which Catholikes inculcate, Obey God, doe as he commaundeth, Serue him firſt, and that the Prince.
                  
                     19. His brother ſhal take.)
                     Leu. 18, 16 Marke wel here,Marying the brothers wife. that the Law which ſaith, Thou ſhalt 
                        〈◊〉
                      marry thy brothers wife,Deu. 25, 5. is not ſuch as admitteth no diſpenſation, as though this mariage we
                        ••
                      againſt nature. For here the ſame Law ſaith, that in ſome caſe, the brother not only might, but then was bound to marry his brothers wife.
                  
                     24. Not knovving the Scriptures.)
                     Many truthes deduced out of ſcripture, which Heretikes ſee not. who would haue thought that by this place of Scripture alleaged by Chriſt, the Reſurrection were proued? and yet we ſee that Chriſt doth hereby deduce it, and chargeth theſe great Doctors and Maiſters (which arrogated to them ſelues the knowledge of Scriptures) that it is their ignorance, that they knew not ſo to deduce it. No maruel then if the Holy Doctors and Catholike Church make the like deductions ſometime and proofes, where the Heretike doth not or wil not ſee ſo much, therfore no doubt, becauſe he knoweth no
                        •
                      the Scriptures, whereof he boaſteth ſo much, nor the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſt in them. For example, when of that place, It ſhal not be forgiuen in this vvorld nor in the vvorld to come, ancient fathers deduce, that there are ſinnes remitted after this life in Purgatorie. See Mat. 1
                           •
                        . 32.
                  
                  
                     24. The power of God.)
                     Heretikes ignorant and without faith. Euen ſo doe Heretikes erre two waies: becauſe they know not the Scriptures, which they interprete contrarie to the ſenſe of the whole Church and of al the ancient fathers: and becauſe they know not the power of God, that as he is able to raiſe the ſelfe ſame bodies againe, ſo he can make his body preſent in many places: but being altogether faithleſſe and not beleeuing his power, they diſpute of al ſuch matters only by reaſon and their owne imaginations.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  To his Diſciples (by occaſion of Hieruſalem and the Temples deſtruction) he foretelleth, 5 vvhat things ſhalbe before the conſummation of the vvorld, as ſpecially the Churches ful preaching vnto al nations. 14 Then, vvhat ſhalbe in the very conſvmmation, to vvit, Antichriſt vvith his paſsing great perſecution and ſeduction, but for a ſhort time. 24 then incontinent the day of Iudgement, 28 to our great comfort in thoſe miſeries vnder Antichriſt. 32 As for the moment, to vs it perteineth not to knovv it. 33 but rather euery man to vvatch▪ that vve be not vnprouided vvhen he commeth 
                        •
                     o 
                        〈◊〉
                      one particularly by death.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen he vvent out of the temple, one of his Diſciples ſaith to him,Mt. 24, 1▪
                   Maiſter,See the Annotations vpon S. Matthew c. 24. behold what maner of ſtones,Lu. 21, 5. and vvhat kinde of buildings. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to him, Seeſt thou al theſe great buildings? There ſhal nor be left a ſtone vpon a ſtone, that ſhal not be deſtroied.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen he ſate in Mount-oliuer againſt the temple, Peter and Iames and Iohn and Andrevv aſked him apart, ✝ 
                     verse 4 Tel vs,TVESDAY night. 
                  
                     •
                   vvhen ſhal theſe things be? and vvhat ſhal be the ſigne vvhen al theſe things ſhal begin to be conſummate? ✝ 
                     verse 5 And IESVS anſvvering began to ſay to them, See, that no man ſeduce you. ✝ 
                     verse 6 for many ſhal come in my name ſaying that ″ I am he: and they ſhal ſeduce many. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen you ſhal heare of vvarres and bruites of vvarres, feare not. for theſe things muſt be,Great vvarres toward the later end. but the end is not yet. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For nation ſhal riſe againſt nation and kingdom againſt kingdom, and there ſhal be earthquakes in places, and famines. Theſe things are the beginning of ſorovves.Much perſecutiō of the faithful and Catholike men in the later end. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But looke to your ſelues. For they ſhal deliuer you vp in Councels, and in Synagogs ſhal you be beaten, and you ſhal ſtand before Preſidents and Kings for my ſake, for a teſtimonie vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And into al nations firſt the Goſpel muſt be preached. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And vvhen they ſhal leade you and deliuer you, be not careful before hand vvhat you ſhal ſpeake: but that vvhich ſhal be giuen you in that houre,Great treacherie and many falſe brethren at the ſame time. that ſpeake ye. For it is not you that ſpeake, but the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And brother ſhal deliuer brother vnto death, and the father his ſonne: and the children ſhal ariſe againſt the parents, and ſhal vvorke their death. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And you ſhal be odious to al men for my name.Conſtancie and perſeuerāce neceſſarie in time of perſecution. But he that ſhal endure vnto the end, he ſhal be ſaued.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen you ſhal ſee ″ the abomination of deſolation,
                  Dan. 9, 27. ſtanding vvhere it ought not (he that readeth, let him vnderſtand) then they that are in Ievvrie,2. Theſs. 2, 4. let them flee vnto the mountaines: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and he that is on the houſe-toppe, let him not goe dovvne into the houſe, nor enter in to take any thing out of his houſe: ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he that ſhal be in the field, let him not returne backe to take his garment. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvo to them that are vvith childe and that giue ſucke in thoſe daies. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But pray that the things chaunce not in the vvinter. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For thoſe daies ſhal be ſuch tribulations as vvere not from the beginning of the creation that God created vntil novv, neither ſhal
 be. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vnles the Lord had ſhortened the daies, no fleſh ſhould be ſaued: but for the elect vvhich he hath elected, he hathAntichriſts reigne ſhal be three yeres and a halfe. Dan. 7. Apoc. 13.
                   ſhortened the daies. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And then if any man ſhal ſay vnto you, Loe, here is Chriſt: loe, there: do not beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For there ſhal riſe vp falſe-Chriſts and falſe-Prophets, and they ſhal ſhevv ″ ſignes and vvonders, to ſeduce (if it be poſsible) the elect alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 23 You therfore take heede: behold I haue foretold you al things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 But in thoſe daies after that tribulation * the ſunne ſhal be darkened,Ez. 31, 7▪
                   and the moone ſhal not giue her light,Ioel. 3, 15▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 25 and the ſtarres of heauen ſhal be falling dovvne, and the povvers that are in heauen, ſhal be moued. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And then they ſhal ſee the * Sonne of man comming in the cloudes,Dan. 7, 13. vvith much povver and glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And then ſhal he ſend his Angels, and ſhal gather together his elect from the foure vvindes, from the vttermoſt part of the earth to the vttermoſt part of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And of the figtree learne ye a parable. Vvhen novv the bought thereof is tender, and the leaues come forth, you knovv that ſommer is very nigh. ✝ 
                     verse 29 ſo you alſo vvhen you ſhal ſee theſe things come to paſſe, knovv ye that it is very nigh, at the doores. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Amen I ſay to you, that this generation ſhal not paſſe, vntil al theſe things be done. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Heauen and earth ſhal paſſe, but my vvordes ſhal not paſſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 But of that day or houre no man knovveth, neither the Angels in heauen, nor theNot as though him ſelf knew not, as the Heretikes Agnoït
                        •
                      held: but becauſe he knew it not for to teach it others, as being not expedient. Ambr. de fide li. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Sonne,The Goſpel for a Cōfeſſor that is a Biſhop, And on the Anniuerſarie of the creation of a Biſhop. but the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Take heede, vvatch, and pray▪ for you knovv not vvhen the time is. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Euen as a man vvho being gone into a ſtrange countrie, left his houſe: and gaue his ſeruants authoritie * ouer ech vvorke, and commaunded the porter to vvatch. ✝ 
                     verse 35 Vvatch ye therfore (for you knovv not vvhen the lord of the houſe commeth: at euen, or at midnight, or at the cocke crovving, or in the morning) ✝ 
                     verse 36 leſt comming vpon a ſoden, he finde you ſleeping. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And that vvhich I ſay to you, I ſay to al, Vvatch. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     4. When ſhal theſe things be?] The miſeries which did fall before the deſtruction of the Temple and citie of Hieruſalem,Arch heretikes be Falſe-Chriſts and Falſe-Prophets. were a reſemblance of the extreme calamitie that ſhal befall before the later day at the time of Antichriſt: wherevpon Chriſts ſpeaketh indifferently of both.
                  
                     6. I am he.] As before deſtruction of Hieruſalem, diuerſe Seducers aroſe, and called them ſelues Chriſtes, promiſing the people deliuerance from the feares and dangers they were in of
 forraine ſouldiars: ſo ſhal there come many towards the end of the world, and make them ſelues Chriſtes and Authors of Sectes, and ſhal gaiue many Diſciples: as in plaine wordes foloweth in this chapter v. 22. There ſhal riſe vp Falſe-Chriſts and Falſe-Prophets &c.
                  
                  
                     14. The abomination of deſolation.]
                     Hyppolyt. li. de Antichriſto. No hereſie doth ſo properly and purpoſely tend to this abomination of deſolation * which by Antichriſt ſhal be atchieued,Caluiniſme tendeth to the abomination of deſolation. as this Caluiniſme: which taketh away with other Sacraments and external worſhip of God,Cypr. de Can. Do. nu. 1. the very ſacrifice of Chriſtes Body and bloud. Which being taken away (as S. Cyprian ſaith) no religion can remaine.
                  
                     22. Signes and Wonders.] Faſle-Chriſtes and Falſe-Prophets be ſeducers, who in the later day by the power of the diuel ſhal ſeeme to worke wonders, and yet men muſt not beleeue them. Much leſſe theſe, which for their falſe faith can not ſhew ſo much as one falſe miracle.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Iudas by occaſion of Marie Magdalens ointment,THE PASSION according to S. Marke in theſe tvvo chapters, is the Goſpel at Maſſe vpon Tueſday in the Holy weeke. doth ſel him to the Councel of the Ievves 12 After the Paſchal lambe he giueth them the bread of life (Io. 6.) in a myſtical ſacrifice or ſeparation of his bodie and bloud. 27 and that night, is after his prayer, 43 taken of thee levves men. Iudas being their Captaine: is forſaken of the other eleuen for feare: 53 is falſly accuſed, and impiouſly condemned of the Ievves Councel, 65 and ſhamefully abuſed of them: 66 and thriſe denied of Peter. Al euen as the Scriptures and him ſelf had often foretold.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the Paſche vvas and the Azymes after tvvo daies:Mt. 26, 1▪
                   and the cheefe Prieſts and the Scribes ſought hovv they might by ſome vvile lay hands on him,Lu. 22, 1▪
                   and kil him.TENEBRE Weneſday. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For they ſaid, Not on the feſtiual day, leſt there might be a tumult of the people.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And * vvhen he vvas at Bethania in the houſe of Simon the Leper,Mat. 26, 6. and ſate at meate, there came a vvoman hauing an alabaſter boxe of ointment,Ioan. 12, 3. of pretious ſpike-narde: and breaking the alabaſter-boxe, ſhe povvred it out vpon his head. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But there vvere certaine that had indignation vvithin them ſelues, and ſaid, Vvhereto is ″ this vvaſt of the ointment made? ✝ 
                     verse 5 For this ointment might haue been ſold for more then three hundred pence, and giuen to the poore. And they murmured againſt her. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But IESVS ſaid, ″ Let her alone, vvhy do you moleſt her? ſhe hath vvrought a good vvorke vpon me. ✝ 
                     verse 7 for the poore you haue alvvaies vvith you: and vvhen you vvil, you may doe them good: butwe haue not Chriſt here needing our almes, as when he cō
                     uerſed vpon the earth. See Mat. 26, 11.
                   me you haue not alvvaies. ✝ 
                     verse 8 That vvhich ſhe had, ſhe hath done: ſhe hath preuented to anoint my body to the burial. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Amen I ſay to you, Vvhereſoeuer this Goſpel ſhal be preached in the vvhole vvorld, that alſo vvhich ſhe hath done, ſhal be told for a memorie for her.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * Iudas Iſcariote one of the Tvvelue vvent his vvay to the cheefe Prieſts,Mat. 26▪ 17. for to betray him to them.Lu. 22, 7▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvho hearing 
 it, vvere glad: and they promiſed him that they vvould giue him money. And he ſought hovv he might betray him conueniently.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And * the firſt day of the Azymes vvhen they ſacrificed the Paſche,Mt. 26, 17. the Diſciples ſay to him,MAVNDY Thurſday. Vvither vvilt thou that vve goe,Lu. 22, 7▪
                   and prepare for thee to eate the Paſche? ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he ſendeth tvvo of his Diſciples, and ſaith to them, Goe ye into the citie: and there ſhal meete you a man carying a pitcher of vvater, folovv him: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and vvhitherſoeuer he entreth, ſay to the maiſter of the houſe, that the Maiſter ſaith, Vvhere is my refectorie, vvhere I may eate the Paſche vvith my Diſciples? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he vvil ſhevv you a great chamber, adorned: and there prepare for vs. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And his Diſciples vvent their vvaies, and came into the citie: and they found as he had told them, and they prepared the Paſche.Io. 13, 21▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 17 And * vvhen euen vvas come, he commeth vvith the Tvvelue. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhen they vvere ſitting at the table and eating, IESVS ſaid, Amen I ſay to you, that one of you ſhal betray me, he that eateth vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But they began to be ſad, and to ſay to him ſeuerally, Is it I? ✝ 
                     verse 20 Vvho ſaid to them, One of the Tvvelue, he that dippeth vvith me his hand in the diſh. ✝ 
                     verse 21 and the Sonne of man in deede goeth,Pſ. 40, 
                        •
                     0. * as it is vvritten of him, but vvo to that man by vvhom the Sonne of man ſhal be betrayed. it vvere good for him,Mt. 26, 26. if that man had not been borne. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And * vvhiles they vvere eating, IESVS tooke ″ bread: and bleſſing brake, and gaue to them,Luc. 21, 19. and ſaid, Take, THIS IS ″ MY BODY. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And taking the ″ chalice, giuing thankes he gaue to them. and theyAl dranke, to wit, al the twelue, for moe were not preſent. Whereby is euident that the vvordes in S. Mat. (26, 27) Drinke ye al of this, were ſpoken to al the Apoſtles onely, which here are ſaid that they al did drinke. And ſo it is no general cōmaundement to al men. al dranke of it.1. Cor. 11, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he ſaid to them, THIS IS ″ MY BLOVD OF THE NEVV TESTAMENT, THAT SHAL BE SHED FOR MANY. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Amen I ſay to you, that novv I vvil not drinke of the fruiteSee Annot. in Mat. c. 26, 29. of the vine vntil that day vvhen I ſhal drinke it nevv in the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And an hymne being ſaid, they vvent forth into Mountoliuet.THVRSDAY night.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And IESVS ſaith to them, You ſhal al be ſcandalized in me in this night:Z
                        •
                     ch. 13, 7. for it is vvritten, I vvil ſtrike the Paſtor, and the ſheepe ſhal be diſperſed. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But after that I ſhal be riſen againe, I vvil goe before you into Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And Peter ſaid to him, Although al ſhal be ſcandalized: yet not I. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And IESVS ſaith to him, Amen I ſay to thee, that thou this day in this night, before the cocke crovv tvviſe, ſhalt thriſe deny me.
 ✝ 
                     verse 31 But he ſpake more vehemently, Although I ſhould die together vvith thee, I vvil not denie thee. And in like maner alſo ſaid they al.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they come into a farme-place called Gethſemani. And he ſaith to his Diſciples, Sit you here, vntil I pray. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And he taketh Peter and Iames and Iohn vvith him: and he began to feare and to be heauy. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And he ſaith to them, My ſoul is ſorovvful euen vnto death: ſtay here, and vvatch. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhen he vvas gone forvvard a litle, he fel flat vpon the ground: and he prayed that if it might be, the houre might paſſe from him: ✝ 
                     verse 36 and he ſaid, Abba, Father, al things are poſſible to thee, tranſferre this chalice from me. but not that vvhich I vvil, but that vvhich thou. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And he commeth, and findeth them ſleeping. And he ſaith to Peter, Simon, ſleepeſt thou? couldſt thou not vvatch one houre? ✝ 
                     verse 38 Vvatch ye, and pray that you enter not into tentation. The ſpirit in deede is prompt, but the fleſh infirme. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And going avvay againe, he prayed, ſaying the ſelfe ſame vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And returning, againe he found them a ſleepe (for their eies vvere heauy) and they vviſt not vvhat they ſhould anſvver him. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And he commeth the third time, and ſaith to them, Sleepe ye novv, and take reſt, it ſuffiſeth, the houre is come: behold the Sonne of man ſhal be betraied into the hands of ſinners. ✝ 
                     verse 42 Ariſe, let vs goe. behold, he that ſhal betray me, is at hand.
                ✝ 
                     verse 43 And * as he vvas yet ſpeaking,Mt. 26, 47. commeth Iudas Iſcariote one of the Tvvelue,Luc. 22, 47. and vvith him a great multitude vvith ſvvordes and clubbes, from the cheefe Prieſtes and the Scribes and the Auncients.Io. 18, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And the betrayer of him had giuen them a ſigne, ſaying, Vvhomſoeuer I ſhal kiſſe, it is he, lay hold on him, and leade him vvarily. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And vvhen he vvas come, immediatly going to him, he ſaith, Rabbi, and he kiſſed him. ✝ 
                     verse 46 But they laid hands vpon him: and held him. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And one certaine man of the ſtāders about, dravving out a ſvvord, ſmote the ſeruant of the cheefe prieſt, and cut of his eare. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to them, As to a theefe are you come out vvith ſvvordes and clubbes to apprehend me? ✝ 
                     verse 49 Ivvas daily vvith you in the temple teaching, and you did not lay hands on me. But, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled. ✝ 
                     verse 50 Then his diſciples leauing him, al fled. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And a certaine yong man folowed him clothed vvith ſindon vpō the bare: & they tooke him. ✝ 
                     verse 52 But he caſting of the ſindon, fled from them naked.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 53 And they brought IESVS to the cheefe Prieſt: and al the Prieſts and the Scribes and the Auncients aſſembled together. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And Peter folovved him a farre of euen in vnto the court of the high Prieſt: and he ſate vvith the ſeruants at the fire, and vvarmed him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 55 And the cheefe Prieſts and al the councel ſought teſtimonie againſt IESVS, that they might put him to death, neither found they. ✝ 
                     verse 56 For many ſpake falſe witnes againſt him: and the teſtimonies vvere not cōuenient. ✝ 
                     verse 57 And certaine riſing vp, bare falſe vvitnes againſt him, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 58 That vve heard him ſay,Io. 2, 19. * I vvil diſſolue this temple made vvith hand, and in three daies vvil I build an other not made vvith hand. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And their teſtimonie vvas not conuenient. ✝ 
                     verse 60 And the high Prieſt riſing vp into the middes, aſked IESVS, ſaying, Anſvvereſt thou nothing to theſe things that are obiected to thee of theſe? ✝ 
                     verse 61 But he held his peace and anſvvered nothing. Againe the high Prieſt aſked him, and ſaid to him,Dan. 7, 13. Art thou Chriſt the ſonne of the bleſſed God? ✝ 
                     verse 62 And IESVS ſaith to him, I am. And you ſhal ſee the * Sonne of man ſitting on the right hand of povver, and comming vvith the cloudes of heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 63 And the high Prieſt renting his garments, ſaith, Vvhat neede vve vvitneſſes any further? ✝ 
                     verse 64 You haue heard blaſphemie. hovv thinke you? Vvho alHere we may ſee that they were worthily reprobated and forſaken, according to our Sauiours predictiō by the parable (Mar. 12) The kingdom of God ſhal be takē from you &c.
                   condemned him to be guilty of death. ✝ 
                     verse 65 And certaine began to ſpit vpon him, and to couer his face, and to beate him vvith buffets, and to ſay vnto him, Prophecie: and the ſeruants gaue him blovves.
                ✝ 
                     verse 66 And vvhen Peter vvas in the court beneath, there commeth one of theHe feareth not afterward Rome the Lady of the world, that in the houſe of Caipha
                        •
                      was afraid of the high Prieſtes wench. Leo in Natiu. Pet. & Pau. ſer. 1.
                   vvoman-ſeruants of the high Prieſt. ✝ 
                     verse 67 And vvhen ſhe had ſeen Peter vvarming him ſelf, beholding him ſhe ſaith, And thou vvaſt vvith IESVS of Nazareth. ✝ 
                     verse 68 But he denied, ſaying, Neither knovv I, neither vvot I vvhat thou ſaieſt. And he vvent forth before the court: and the cocke crevve. ✝ 
                     verse 69 And againe a vvench ſeeing him, began to ſay to the ſtanders about, That this fellovv is of them. ✝ 
                     verse 70 But he denied againe. And after a vvhile againe they that ſtoode by, ſaid to Peter, Verily thou art of them: for thou art alſo a Galilaean. ✝ 
                     verse 71 But he ″ began to curſe and to ſvveare, That I knovv not this man vvhom you ſpeake of. ✝ 
                     verse 72 And immediatly the cocke crevv againe. And Peter remembred the vvord that IESVS had ſaid vnto him, Before the cocke crovv tvviſe, thou ſhalt thriſe deny me. And he began to vveepe.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     4. This waſt.]
                     Coſt religiouſly beſtowed vpon Chriſt and his Church. Religious offices done to Chriſt for ſignification, deuotion, or honour ſake, both then in his life, and novv in the Holy Sacrament, be of ſome (vnder pretence of better beſtowing ſuch things vpon the poore) condemned vniuſtly.
                  
                     6. Let her alone.] Chriſt anſwereth for the deuout woman, and for defence of her fact, as we muſt anſwer againſt the ignorant and il men, vvhen they blame good men for giuing their goods to the Church.
                  22. Bread.]The real preſence by Conſecration. This is bread before the Sacramental wordes, but the Conſecration once done, of bread is made the fleſh of Chriſt. Ambroſ. li. 4 c. 4 de Sacramentis.
                  
                  
                     23. Chalice.] Wine and Water is put into the Chalice, but is made bloud by Conſecration of the heauenly word:Very bloud vnder the forme of wine. though to auoid the lothſomneſſe which would be in the ſight of bloud, thou receiueſt that which hath the likenes and reſemblance thereof. Ambr. ibidem.
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     . 24. My bodie, My bloud.] Whoſoeuer beleeueth it not to be true that is ſaid, he falleth from grace and ſaluation.Faith neceſſarie in the B. Sacrament. 
                     Epiph. in Ancorato. Let vs euer giue credite to God, and neuer reſiſt him, though the thing that he ſaith, ſeeme neuer ſo abſurd in our imagination, or farre paſſe al our ſenſe and vnderſtanding. For his wordes can not beguile vs, but our ſenſe may eaſely be deceiued. Seeing therfore that he ſaid, This is my body, let vs neuer doubt of the matter. Chryſoſt ho. 83. in Mat. ſub finem.
                  
                  
                     71. He began to curſe.] In this one Apoſtle, Peter, the firſt and cheefe in the order of Apoſtles, in whom the Church was figured, both ſortes were to be ſignified, to wit, the ſtrong and the weake,Peter. becauſe, without both the Church is not. Aug. ſer. 13. de verb. Do. Againe, Our Sauiour would ſhew by the example of the cheefe Apoſtle, that no man ought to preſume of him ſelf, when neither S. Peter could auoid the danger of mutability. Aug. tract. 66. in Euang. Io. Leo Ser. 9. de Paſs. Do.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  The cheefe of the Ievves accuſe him to Pilate the Gentil. 
                        •
                      And (he ſeeking to deliuer him) they perſuade the common people (vvho hitherto vvere alvvaies ready to defend him) not only to prefere the murderer Barabbas, but alſo to crie Crucifige (to the reprobation of the vvhole nation.) 16 After many illuſions, 20 he is crucified by the Gentils. 
                        •
                     9 Vvhich the Ievves ſeing, do triumph as if they had novv the victorie. 33 But euen then by many vvonderful vvorkes he declareth his might, 42 and finally is buried honorably.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND forthvvith in the morning the cheefe Prieſts vvith the auncients and the Scribes and the vvhole councel,GOOD FRIDAY. conſulting together,Mt. 27, 1▪
                   binding IESVS led and deliuered him to Pilate.Lu. 23, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And Pilate aſked him,Io. 18, 28▪
                   Art thou the King of the Ievves? but he anſvvering, ſaid to him, Thou ſaieſt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the cheefe Prieſts accuſed him in many things. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Pilate againe aſked him, ſaying, Anſvvereſt thou nothing? ſee in hovv many things they accuſe thee. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But IESVS anſwered nothing more: ſo that Pilate marueled.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vpon the feſtiual day he vvas vvont to releaſe vnto them one of the priſoners vvhomſoeuer they had demaunded. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And there vvas one called Barabbas, vvhich vvas put in priſon vvith ſeditious perſons, vvho in a ſedition had committed murder. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And when the multitude vvas come vp, they 
 began to require according as alvvaies he did vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And Pilate anſvvered them, and ſaid, Vvil you that I releaſe to you the King of the Ievves? ✝ 
                     verse 10 For he knevv that the cheefe Prieſts for enuy had deliuered him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But the ″ cheefe Prieſts moued the people, that he ſhould releaſe Barabbas rather to them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And Pilate againe anſvvering, ſaid to them, Vvhat vvil you then that I doe to the King of the Ievves? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But they againe cried, Crucifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And Pilate ſaid to them, Vvhy, vvhat euil hath he done? But they cried the more, Crucifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And Pilate vvilling ″ to ſatisfie the people, releaſed to them Barabbas, and deliuered IESVS, hauing vvhipped him, for to be crucified.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And * the ſouldiars led him into the court of the Palace,Io. 19, 2. and they call together the vvhole band: ✝ 
                     verse 17 and they clothe him in purple, and platting a crovvne of thornes, they put it vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And they began to ſalute him, Haile King of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And they ſmote his head vvith a reede: and they did ſpit on him▪ and bovving the knees, they adored him. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And after they had mocked him, they ſtripped him of the purple, and put on him his ovvne garments, and they leade him forth to crucifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And they forced a certaine man that paſſed by, Simon a Cyrenêan comming from the countrie, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to take vp his croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And they bring him into the place Golgotha, vvhich being interpreted is, The place of Caluarie. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And they gaue him to drinke vvine mingled vvith myrrhe: and he tooke it not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And crucifying him, they deuided his garments, caſting lottes vpon them, vvho ſhould take vvhich. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And it vvas the third houre, and they crucified him. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And the title of his cauſe vvas ſuperſcribed, KING OF THE IEWES. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And vvith him they crucifie tvvo theeues: one on the right hand, and an other on his left. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And the Scripture vvas fulfilled that ſaith,Eſa. 53, 1
                        •
                     . 
                  And vvith the vvicked he vvas reputed. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And they that paſſed by, blaſphemed him, vvagging their heades, and ſaying, Vah,thou that deſtroi
                        •
                     ſt▪
                   'he that deſtroieth' the temple, and in three daiesbuildeſt▪
                   buildeth ′ it: ✝ 
                     verse 30 
                  So Heretikes ſay of the B. Sacrament, If it be Chriſt, let him ſaue him ſelf from al iniuries. ſaue thy ſelf, comming dovvne from the croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 31 In like maner alſo the cheefe Prieſts mocking, ſaid vvith the Scribes one to an other, He ſaued others, him ſelf he can not ſaue. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Let Chriſt the King of Iſrael come dovvne novv from the croſſe: that vve may ſee and beleeue. And they that vvere crucified vvith him, railed at him.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 33 And vvhen it vvas the ſixt houre, there vvas made darkenes vpon the vvhole earth vntil the ninthe houre. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And at the ninthe houre IESVS cried out vvith a mightie voice, ſaying,Pſ. 21, 1. 
                  Eloi, Eloi, lamma-ſabacthani? Which is being interpreted, My God, my God, vvhy haſt thou
                  See (Mat. c. 27, 46) the blaſphemous expoſition of Caluin and his folovvers, and take heede thereof. 
                  forſaken me? ✝ 
                     verse 35 And certaine of the ſtanders about hearing, ſaid, Behold, he calleth Elias. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And one running and filling a ſpunge vvith vinegre, and putting it about a reede, gaue him drinke, ſaying, Let be: let vs ſee if Elias come to take him dovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And IESVS putting forth a mightie voice, gaue vp the ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And the vele of the temple vvas rent in tvvo, from the toppe to the bottome. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And the Centurion that ſtoode ouer againſt him, ſeeing that ſo crying he had giuen vp the ghoſt, ſaid, In deede this man vvas the ſonne of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 And there vvere alſo vvomen looking on a farre of: among vvhom vvas Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames the leſſe and of Ioſeph, and Salóme: ✝ 
                     verse 41 and vvhen he vvas in Galilee, they folovved him, and miniſtred to him, and many other vvomen that came vp together vvith him to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen euening vvas come (becauſe it vvas the Paraſceue, vvhich is the Sabboth-eue) ✝ 
                     verse 43 came Ioſeph of Arimathaea a noble Senatour, vvho him ſelf alſo vvas expecting the kingdom of God: and he vvent in boldly to Pilate, and aſked the body of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 44 But Pilate marueled if he vvere novv dead. And ſending for the Centurion, aſked him if he vvere novv dead. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And vvhen he vnderſtoode by the Centurion, he gaue the body to Ioſeph. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And Ioſeph ″ bying ſindon, and taking him dovvne, vvrapped him in the ſindon, and laid him in a monument, that vvas hevved out of a rocke. And he rolled a ſtone to the doore of the monument. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And Marie Magdalene and Marie of Ioſeph beheld vvhere he vvas laid.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  
                     11. Cheefe Prieſts.]
                     The Prieſts of the old Teſtament. Heretikes abuſe the ignorant people with theſe naughtie Prieſts of the old Teſtament, to make that name odious, and to diſcredite the Prieſts of Chriſt in the new Teſtament.Euſeb. Ec. But for theſe Prieſts, thou maiſt not maruel that they are ſo buſy againſt Chriſt, * partly becauſe they were ſuch as were intruded by the ſecular power of the Roman Emperour,Hiſt. li. 
                           •
                         c. 6. ex Ioſepho. and from yere to yere by bribery and frendſhip, not by ſucceſſion according to the Law of Moyſes: partly becauſe the time was now come when the old Prieſthod of Aaron ſhould ceaſe, and the new begin according to the order of Melchife dec: and for theſe cauſes cod ſuffered their former priueleges of wiſedom and iudgemēt and diſcretion to decay in theſe later vſurpers, and that according to
 the Prophet ſaying,Ezech. 7, 26. 
                     The Law ſhal periſh from the Prieſt and counſel from the Ancients. But the Prieſthod of the new Teſtament is to continew vnto the end of the world,The Prieſthod of the new Teſtament. and hath (as being the principal part of the Church) the aſſiſtāce of the Holy Ghoſt for euer promiſed,Io. 16, 1
                           •
                        . to teach it al truth: and for Peter the cheefe Prieſt thereof vnder Chriſt,Luc. 22. and 10. our Sauiour praied, That his faith ſhould not faile:Executīg lawes againſt innocents. and to the reſt he ſaid, He that heareth you, heareth me.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . To ſatisfie the people.] Pilate ſhould haue ſuffered death, rather then by other mens prouocation or commaundement haue executed an innocent: as a Chriſtian iudge ſhould rather ſuffer al extremitie,Religious duty tovvard the bodies of Chriſt and his Saincts. then giue ſentence of death againſt a Catholike man for his faith.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        6. Bying ſindon.] This dutie done to Chriſtes body after his departure, was exceding meritorious, and is therfore by holy write ſo often commended for an example to faithful men, to vſe al honour and deuotion towards the bodies of Saincts and holy perſons.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  The third day, to three vvomen at his Sepulcher, an Angel telleth that he is riſen, and vvil (as he promiſed Mar. 14, 28.) ſhevv him ſelf in Galile
                        •
                     . 9 The ſame day he appeareth to Marie Magdalene, aftervvard to tvvo Diſciples: yet the Eleuen vvil not beleeue it, vntil to them alſo he appeareth. 15▪ To vvhom hauing giuen commiſsion into al nations, vvith povver alſo of Miracles, he aſcendeth, and they plant his Church euery vvhere.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen the Sabboth vvas paſt,Mt. 28, 1▪
                   Marie Magdalene and Marie of Iames,The Goſpel vpō Eaſter day. and Salôme ″ bought ſpices,Iu. 24, 1▪
                   that comming they might anoint IESVS.Io. 20, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And very early the firſt of the Sabboths,EASTER DAY. they come to the monument: the ſunne being novv riſen. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And they ſaid one to an other, Vvho ſhal roll vs backe the ſtone from the doore of the monument? ✝ 
                     verse 4 And looking, they ſavv the ſtone rolled backe. for it vvas very great. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And entring into the monument, they ſavv a yong man ſitting on the right hand, couered vvith a vvhite robe: and they vvere aſtonied. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vvho ſaith to them, Be not diſmaied: you ſeeke IESVS of Nazareth, that vvas crucified: he is riſen, he is not here, behold the place vvhere they laid him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But goe, tel his Diſciples andPeter is named in ſpecial (as often els vvhere) for prerogatiue. Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee:Mr. 14, 28. there you ſhal ſee him, * as he told you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 But they going forth, fled from the monument. for trembling and feare had inuaded them: and they ſaid nothing to any body. for they vvere afraid.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he riſing early the firſt of the Sabboth,Io. 20, 16. * appeared firſt to Marie Magdalene,Luc. 8, 2. * out of vvhom he had caſt ſeuen deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 10 She vvent and told them that had been vvith him, that vvere mourning and vveeping. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And they hearing that he vvas aliue and had been ſeen of her,Lu. 24, 13. did not beleeue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And * after he appeared in an ″ other ſhape to tvvo
 of them vvalking, as they vvere going into the countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and they going told the reſt:Lu. 24, 36. neither them did they beleeue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Laſt * he appeared to thoſe eleuen as they ſate at the table:The Goſpel vpō the Aſcenſion day. and he exprobrated their incredulity and hardnes of hart,Io. 20, 19. becauſe they did not beleeue them that had ſeen him riſen againe.Mt. 28, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he ſaid to them, * Going into the vvhole vvorld preach the Goſpel to al creatures. ✝ 
                     verse 16 He that ″ beleeueth and is baptized, ſhal be ſaued: but he that beleeueth not, ſhal be condemned. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And them that beleeue ″ theſe ſignes ſhal folow: In my name ſhal they caſt out deuils, They ſhal ſpeake vvith nevv tonges, ✝ 
                     verse 18 Serpents ſhal they take avvay, And if they drinke any deadly thing, it ſhal not hurt them, They ſhal impoſe hands vpon the ſicke: and they ſhal be vvhole.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And ſo our Lord IESVS after he ſpake vnto them,❀The Aſcenſion. * vvas aſſumpted into heauen,Lu. 25, 51. and ſate on the right hand of God. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But they going forth preached euery vvhere: our Lord working vvithal, and confirming the vvord vvith ſignes that folovved. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     1. Bought ſpices.]
                     The vvomens deuotion tovvard Chriſts body novv dead. As ſhe did beſtow and conſume a coſtly ointment vpon his body being yet aliue (c. 14, 3,) Chriſt him ſelf defending and highly commending the fact againſt Iudas and other who accounted it to be ſuperfluous and better to be beſtowed otherwiſe: So not without great deuotion and merite, ſhe and theſe other women ſeeke to anoint his body dead (though Heretikes or other ſimple perſons may pretend ſuch things to be better beſtowed vpon the poore) and therfore,Mr. 16, 9.
* ſhe firſt before al other,Mt. 28, 9. * and they next, ſaw him after his Reſurrection.
                  
                     12. In an other ſhape.]
                     Chriſts body vnder diuers formes. Chriſt though he haue but one corporal ſhape, natural to his perſon, yet by his omnipotencie he may be in whatſoeuer forme, and appears in the likeneſſe of any other man or creature, as he liſt, Therfore let no man thinke it ſtrange, that he may be vnder the forme of bread in the B. Sacrament.
                  
                     16. He that beleeueth.] Note wel, that whereas this Euangeliſt mentioneth only faith and baptiſme,Not onely faith. as though to beleeue and to be baptized were ynough, S. Matthew addeth theſe wordes alſo of our Sauiour,Mt. 28. 20. 
                     teaching them to obſerue al things whatſoeuer I haue commaunded you, which conteineth al good workes and the whole iuſtice of a Chriſtian man.
                  
                     17. Theſe ſignes ſhal folow.]
                     The gift of miracles. It is not meant, that al Chriſtians or true beleeuers ſhould doe miracles: but that ſome for the proofe of the faith of al, ſhould haue that gift. The which is the grace or gift of the whole Church, executed by certaine for the edification and profite of the whole.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF S. LVKES GOSPEL.
            
               S. Lukes Goſpel may be diuided into fiue partes.
            The firſt part is, of the Infancie both of the precurſor, and of Chriſt himſelfe: chap. 1 and 2.
            The ſecond, of the Preparation that vvas made to the manifeſtation of Chriſt: chap. 3 and a piece of the 4.
            The third, of Chriſtes manifeſting him ſelfe, by preaching and miracles, ſpecially in Galilee: the other piece of the 4 chap. vnto the middes of the 17.
            The fourth of his comming into Iurie tovvards his Paſsion: the other piece of the 17 chap. vnto the middes of the 19.
            The fifth, of the Holy weeke of his Paſsion in Hieruſalem: the other part of the 19 chap. vnto the end of the booke.
            S. Luke vvas ſectator (ſaith S. Hierome) that is, a diſciple of the Apoſtle Paul,Hier. in Catalago. and a companion of 
                  〈◊〉
                his peregrination. And the ſame vve ſee in the Actes of the Apoſtles: Vvhere, from the 16 chap. S. Luke putteth him ſelfe in the traine of S. Paul, vvriting thus in the ſtorie. Forthwith we ſought to goe into Macedonia. and in like maner, in the firſt perſon, commonly through the reſt of that booke. Of him and his Goſpel, S. Hierom vnderſtandeth this ſaying of S. Paul: Vve haue ſent with him the brother, vvhoſe praiſe is in the Goſpel through al Churches.2. Cor. 8, 8. 
               where alſo he addeth: Some ſuppoſe, ſo often as Paul in his Epiſtles ſaith, According to my Goſpel, that he meaneth of Lukes booke. And againe: Luke learned the Goſpel not onely of the Apoſtle Paul, who had not been with our Lord in fleſh, but of the other Apoſtles: which him ſelfe alſo in the beginning of his booke declareth,Luk. 1, 2. ſaying, As they deliuered to vs who them ſelues from the beginning ſaw, and were miniſters of the word. It foloweth in S. Hierome: Therfore he wrote the Goſpel, as he had heard, but the Actes of the Apoſtles he compiled as he had ſeen.Col. 4, 14. 
               S. Paul vvriteth of him by name to the Coloſsians:
               2. Tim. 4, 21. Luke the Phyſicion ſaluteth you. and to Timothee: Luke alone is with me.Hiero. in Catalogo. 
               Finally of his end thus doth S. Hierome vvrite: He liued foureſcore and foure yeres, hauing no wife. He is buried at Conſtantinople: to vvhich citie his bones vvith the Relikes of Andrew the Apoſtle were tranſlated out of Achaia the twentith yere ofConſtantius. Conſtantinus.Hier. con. Vigil, 2. 
               And of the ſame Tranſlation alſo in another place againſt Vigilantius the Heretike: It grieueth him that the Relikes of the Martyrs are couered with pretious couerings, and that they are not either tied in cloutes or throwen to the dunghil.The Heretike ſo counted the Catholikes for their honouring of Saincts and Relikes. why, are we then * ſacrilegious, when we enter the Churches of the Apoſtles? WasConſtantius Conſtantinus' the Emperour ſacrilegious, who tranſlated to Conſtantinople the holy Relikes of Andrew, Luke, and Timothee: at which the Diuels rore, and the inhabiters of Vigilantius confeſſe that they feele their preſence?
            His ſacred body is novv as Padua in Italie, Vvither it vvas againe tranſlated from Conſtantinople.
         
         
            
            THE HOLY GOSPEL OF IESVS CHRIST ACCORDING TO LVKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The Annunciation and Conception, firſt of the Precurſor:THE FIRST part: of the Infācie both of the Precurſor, and of CHRIST him ſelf. 26 and ſixe moneths after, of Chriſt alſo him ſelf. 39 The Viſitation of our Ladie, vvhere both the mothers do Prophecie. 5
                        •
                      The Natiuitie and Circu
                        •
                     ciſion of the Precurſor, vvhere his father doth prophecie, 80 The Precurſor is from a childe an Eremite.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BECAVSE many haue gone about to compile a narration of the things that haue been accompliſhed among vs: ✝ 
                     verse 2 according as they haue deliuered vnto vs, vvho from the beginning them ſelues ſavv and vvere miniſters of the vvord: ✝ 
                     verse 3 it ſeemed good alſo vnto me ″ hauing diligently atteined to al things from the beginning, to vvrite to thee in order,Act. 1, 1. good * Theophilus, ✝ 
                     verse 4 that thou maiſt knovv the veritie of thoſe vvordes vvhere of thou haſt been inſtructed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 There vvas in the daies of Herod the king of Ievvrie,The Goſpel vpō the eue of S. Iohn Baptiſt. a certaine Prieſt named Zacharie,1 Par. 24, 10. of the * courſe of Abia: and his vvife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And they vvere both ″ iuſt before God, vvalking ″ in al the commaundements ″ and iuſtifications of our Lord vvithout blame, ✝ 
                     verse 7 and they had no ſonne: for that Elizabeth vvas barren, and both vvere vvel ſtriken in their daies. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And it came to paſſe: vvhen he executed the prieſtly function in the order of his courſe before God, ✝ 
                     verse 9 according to the cuſtome of the Prieſtly function,Exo. 3, 17. he vvent forth by lot * to offer incenſe, entring into the temple of our Lord: ✝ 
                     verse 10 and * al the multitude of the people vvasWe ſee here that the Prieſt did his dutie vvithin, the people in the meane time praying vvithout: and that the Prieſts functions did profite thē, though they neither heard nor ſaw his doings. praying vvithout at the houre of the incenſe.Leu. 16, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And there appeared to him an Angel of our 
 Lord, ſtanding on the right hand of the altar of incenſe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And Zacharie vvas troubled, ſeeing him: and feare fel vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But the Angel ſaid to him, Feare not Zacharie, for thy praier is heard: and thy vvife Elizabeth ſhal beare thee a ſonne, and thou ſhalt cal his name Iohn: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and thou ſhalt haue ″ ioy and exultation, and many ſhal reioyce in his natiuitie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 for he ſhal be great before our Lord:This abſtinence foretold and preſcribed by the Angel, ſhevveth that it is a worthy thing, and an acte of religion in S. Iohn, as it was in the Nazarites. and vvine and ſicer he ſhal not drinke: and he ſhal be repleniſhed vvith the Holy Ghoſt euen from his mothers vvombe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he ſhal * conuert many of the children of Iſrael to the Lord their God,Mal. 4, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and he ſhal goe before him * in the ſpirit and vertue of Elias:Mt. 11, 14. that he may conuert the hartes of the fathers vnto the children, and the incredulous to the vviſedom of the iuſt, to prepare vnto the Lord a perfect people. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 18 And Zacharie ſaid to the Angel, Vvhereby ſhal I knovv this? for I am old: and my vvife is vvel ſtriken in her daies. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the Angel anſvvering ſaid to him, I am Gabriel that aſſiſt before God: and am ſent to ſpeake to thee, and to euangelize theſe things to thee. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And behold,Zacharie puniſhed for doubting of the Angels word. thou ſhalt be dumme, and ſhalt not be able to ſpeake vntil the day vvherein theſe things ſhal be done: for-becauſe thou haſt not beleeued my vvordes, vvhich ſhal be fulfilled in their time. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the people vvas expecting Zacharie: and they marueled that he made tariance in the temple. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And comming forth he could not ſpeake to them, and they knevv that he had ſeen a viſion in the temple. And he made ſignes to them, and remained dumme. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And it came to paſſe, after the daies of his office vvere expired, ″ he departed into his houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And after theſe daies Elizabeth his vvife conceiued: and hid her ſelf fiue moneths, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 25 For thus hath our Lord done to me in the daies vvherein he had reſpect to take avvay my reproche among men.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 
                  The Goſpel vpō the Annunciation of our Lady, March 25. And on the weneſday of Imber weeke in Aduēt, And for a Votiue Maſſe of our Lady in Aduent. And in the ſixt moneth, the Angel Gabriel vvas ſent of God into a citie of Galilee,Mt. 1, 18 called Nazareth, ✝ 
                     verse 27 * to a virgin deſpouſed to a man vvhoſe name vvas Ioſeph, of the houſe of Dauid: and the virgins name vvas MARIE, ✝ 
                     verse 28 And the Angel being entred in,The beginning of the AVE MARIE. See the reſt v. 42. ſaid vnto her, ″ HAILE ″ ful of grace, our Lord is vvith thee: bleſſed art thou among vvomen. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Vvho hauing heard, vvas troubled at his ſaying, and thought vvhat maner of ſalutation this ſhould be.Eſa. 7, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the Angel ſaid to her, Feare not MARIE, for thou haſt found grace vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 31 * Behold
 thou ſhalt conceiue in thy vvombe, and ſhalt beare a ſonne: and thou ſhalt call his name IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 32 he ſhal be great, and ſhal be called the ſonne of the moſt High, and our Lord God ſhal giue him the ſeate of Dauid his father: ✝ 
                     verse 33 * and he ſhalDan. 7, 14, 27, reigne in the houſe of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdom there ſhal be no end. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And MARIE ſaid to the Angel,She doubted not of the thing as Zacharie, but enquired of the meanes. Hovv ſhal this be done? ″ becauſe I knovv not man? ✝ 
                     verse 35 And the Angel anſvvering, ſaid to her, The Holy Ghoſt ſhal come vpon thee, and the povver of the moſt High ſhal ouerſhadovv thee. And therfore alſo that vvhich of thee ſhal be borne Holy, ſhal be called the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And behold ″ Eliſabeth thy coſin, ſhe alſo hath conceiued a ſonne in her old age: and this moneth, is the ſixt to her that is called barren: ✝ 
                     verse 37 becauſe there ſhal not be impoſſible vvith God any vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And MARIE ſaid,At this very moment when the B. Virgin gaue conſent, ſhe conceiued him perfect God and perfect man. BEHOLD the handmaid of our Lord, be it done to me according to thy word. 
                  ⊢ And the Angel departed from her.
                ✝ 
                     verse 39 And MARIE riſing vp in thoſe daies,The Goſpel vpō the Viſitatiō of our Lady, Iul, 2. And vpon the Imber friday in Aduent. vvent vnto the hil countrie vvith ſpeede, into a citie of Iuda. ✝ 
                     verse 40 and ſhe entred into the houſe of Zacharie, and ſaluted Eliſabeth. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And it came to paſſe: as Eliſabeth heard the ſalutation of MARIE, theIohn the Baptiſt being yet in his mother: wombe, reioyced and acknowledged the preſence of Chriſt and his mother. infant did leape in her vvombe. and Eliſabeth vvas repleniſhed vvith the Holy Ghoſt: ✝ 
                     verse 42 and ſhe cried out vvith a loude voice, and ſaid, ″ BLESSED art thou among vvomen, and bleſſed is the fruite of thy vvombe. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And vvhence is this to me, that the ″ mother of my Lord doth come to me? ✝ 
                     verse 44 For behold as the voice of thy ſalutation founded in mine eares, the infant in my vvombe did leape for ioy. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And bleſſed is ſhe that beleeued, becauſe thoſe things ſhal be accompliſhed that vvere ſpokē to her by our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And MARIE ſaid,
               MY SOVLE doth magnifie our Lord.MAGNIFICAT at Euenſong.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 47 And my ſpirit hath reioyced in God my Sauiour. ⊢ 
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 48 Becauſe he hath regarded the humilitie of his handmaid: for behold from hence forthHaue the Proteſtants had alwaies generations to fulfil this prophecie? ordo they call her bleſſed, that derogate what they can from her graces, bleſſings, and al her honour? al generations ″ ſhal call me bleſſed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 49 Becauſe he that is mightie hath done great things to me, and holy in his name.
                ✝ 
                     verse 50 And his mercie from generation vnto generations, to them that feare him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 51 He hath ſhevved might in his arme: he hath diſperſed the proude in the conceit of their hart.
                ✝ 
                     verse 52 He hath depoſed the mightie from their ſeate, and hath exalted the humble.
                ✝ 
                     verse 53 The hungrie he hath filled vvith good things: and the riche he hath ſent avvay emptie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 54 He hath receiued Iſrael his childe, being mindeful of his mercie, ✝ 
                     verse 55 As he ſpake to our fathers, to Abraham and his ſeede for euer.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 56 And MARIE taried vvith her about three moneths: and ſhe returned into her houſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 57 And Eliſabeths ful time vvas come to be deliuered:The Goſpel vpō the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt Iun. 24. called Midſōmer day. and ſhe bare a ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 58 And her neighbours and kinſfolke heard that our Lord did magnifie his mercie vvith her, and they did congratulate her. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And it came to paſſe: on the eight day they came to circumciſe the childe, and they called him by his fathers name, Zacharie. ✝ 
                     verse 60 And his mother anſvvering, ſaid, Not ſo, but he ſhal be called Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 61 And they ſaid to her, That there is none in thy kinred that is called by this name. ✝ 
                     verse 62 And they made ſignes to his father, vvhat he vvould haue him called. ✝ 
                     verse 63 And demaunding a vvriting table, he vvrote,Lu. 1, 13. ſaying, * Iohn is his name. And they al marueled. ✝ 
                     verse 64 And forthvvith his mouth vvas opened, and his tonge, and he ſpake bleſſing God. ✝ 
                     verse 65 And feare came vpon al their neighbours: and al theſe things vvere bruited ouer al the hil-countrie of Ievvrie: ✝ 
                     verse 66 and all that had heard, laid them vp in their hart, ſaying, what an one, trovv ye, ſhal this childe be? For the hand of our Lord vvas vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 67 And Zacharie his father vvas repleniſhed vvith the Holy Ghoſt: and he prophecied, ſaying,
                ✝ 
                     verse 68 
                  BLESSED BE OVR LORD God of Iſrael:BENEDICTVS at Laudes. becauſe he hath viſited and vvrought the redemption of his people: ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 69 And hath erected the horne of ſaluation to vs, in the houſe of Dauid his ſeruant.
                ✝ 
                     verse 70 As he ſpake by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the beginning.
                ✝ 
                     verse 71 Saluation from our enemies, and from the hand of al that hate vs:
                ✝ 
                     verse 72 To vvorke mercie vvith our fathers: and to remember his holy teſtament,
                ✝ 
                     verse 73 * The othe vvhich he ſvvare to Abraham our father,Gen. 22, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 74 that he vvould giue to vs, That vvithout feare being deliuered from the hand of our enemies, vve may ſerue him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 75 In holines and ″ iuſtice before him, al our daies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 76 And thou childe,Mal. 3, 1. ſhalt be called the Prophet of the Higheſt: for * thou ſhalt goe before the face of our Lord to prepare his vvaies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 77 To giue knovvledge of ſaluation to his people, vnto remiſsion of their ſinnes,
                ✝ 
                     verse 78 Through the bovvels of the mercie of our God, in vvhich ″ the * Orient, from on high,Zac. 3. 9. 6, 12. hath viſited vs,
                ✝ 
                     verse 79 To illuminate them that ſit in darkenes, and in the ſhadovv of death: to direct our feete into the vvay of peace.Mal. 4, 2.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 80 And the childe grew, and vvas ſtrengthened in ſpirit, and vvasMarke that he was a voluntarie Eremite, and choſe to be ſolitarie from a childe, til he was to preach to the people, in ſo much that antiquitie counted him the firſt Eremite. Hiere. in vit. Pauli.
                   in the deſerts vntil the day of his manifeſtatiō to Iſrael.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     3. Hauing diligently atteined.]
                     Sacred writers and holy Coū
                        cels. Hereby vve ſee that, though the Holy Ghoſt ruled the penne of holy vvriters that they might not erre, yet did they vſe humane meanes to ſearch out and find the truth of the things they wrote of. Euen ſo doe Councels, and the Preſident of them, Gods vicar, diſcuſſe and examine al cauſes by humane meanes, the aſſiſtance of the Holy Ghoſt concurring and directing them into al truth, according to Chriſtes promiſe Io. 16, 13: as in the very firſt Councel of the Apoſtles them ſelues at Hieruſalem is manifeſt Act. 15, 7 and 28. Againe here vve haue a familiar preface of the Author as to his frende, or to euery godly Reader (ſignified by Theophilus) cōcerning the cauſe and purpoſe and maner of his vvriting, and yet the very ſame is confeſſed Scripture, vvith the vvhole booke folovving.The ſecond booke of the Machabees. Maruel not then if the Author of the ſecond booke of the Machabees
* vſe the like humane ſpeaches both at the beginning and in the later end,2 Mach. 2, & 15. neither do thou therfore reiect the booke for no Scripture, as our Heretikes doe: or not thinke him a ſacred vvriter.
                  
                     6. Iuſt before God.] Againſt the Heretikes of this time, here it is euident that holy men be iuſt, not only by the eſtimation of men,True iuſtification by obſeruing the commaundements. but in deede and before God.
                  
                     6. In al the commaundements.] Three things to be noted directly againſt the Heretikes of our time. firſt, that good men doe keepe al Gods commaundements: which (they ſay) are impoſſible to be kept. Againe, that men be iuſtified not by only imputation of Chriſtes iuſtice, nor by ſaith alone, but by walking in the commaundements. Againe, that the keeping and doing of the commaundements is properly our iuſtification.
                  
                     6. Iuſtifications.]
                     Corrupt tranſlation of Heretikes. This word is ſo vſual in the Scriptures (namely in the Pſal. 118) to ſignifie the commaundements of God, becauſe the keeping of them is iuſtification, and the Greeke is alwaies ſo fully correſpōdent to the ſame, that the Heretikes in this place (otherwiſe pretending to eſteeme much of the Greeke) bluſh not to ſay,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . that they auoid this word of purpoſe againſt the iuſtification of the Papiſts. And therfore one vſeth Tullies word forſooth,
                        Beza in Annot. no. Teſt. 1556. in Latin conſtituta: and his ſcholers in their Engliſh Bibles ſay, Ordinances.
                  
                  
                     14. Ioy and exultation.) This was fulfilled, not only when he was borne, but now alſo through the whole Church for euer, in ioyful celebrating of his Natiuitie.
                  
                     2
                           •
                        . He departed.) In the old Law (ſaith S. Hierom) they that offered hoſtes for the people, were not only not in their houſes, but were purified for the time, being ſeparated from their wiues,The continēcie of prieſts. and they dranke neither wine nor any ſtrong drinke, which are wont to prouoke concupiſcence. Much more the Prieſts of the new Law that muſt alwaies offer ſacrifices, muſt alwaies be free from matrimonie. Li. 1 c. 19. adu. louin. and ep. 50 c. 3. See S. Ambroſe in 1 Tim. 3. And therfore if there were any religion in Caluins Communion, they would at the leaſt giue as much reuerence in this point, as they in the old Law did to their ſacrifices, and to the loaues of propoſition. 1 Reg. 21.
                  
                  
                     28. Haileful of grace.) Holy Church and al true Chriſtian men doe much and often vſe theſe wordes brought from heauen by the Archangel,Often ſaying of the AVE MARIE. as wel to the honour of Chriſt and our B. Ladie, as alſo for that they were the wordes of the firſt glad tidings of Chriſts Incarnation and our Saluation by the ſame,Liturg. S. Iacobs & Chryſ. and be the very abridgement and ſumme of the whole Goſpel. In ſo much that the Greeke Church vſed it daily in the Maſſe.
                  
                     28. Ful of grace.)
                     Corrupt tranſlation of Heretikes. Note the excellent prerogatiues of our B. Lady, and abhorre thoſe Heretikes which make her no better then other vulgar women,S. Athan. de S. Deip. and therfore to take from her fulneſ of grace, they ſay here, Haile freely beloued, contrarie to al ſignifications of the Greeke word, which is at the leſt,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     endued with grace, as S. Paul vſeth it Epheſ. 1. by S. Chryſoſtoms interpretation:S. Ephrem in orat. de laud. B. virg. Ambro. in 1 or rather, ful of grace, as both * Greeke and Latin fathers haue alwaies here vnderſtood it, and the Latines alſo read it, namely S. Ambroſe thus, wel 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſhe only called ful of grace. vvho only obteined the grace, vvhich no other vvoman deſerued, to be repleniſhed with the author of grace. And if they did as wel know the nature of theſe kind of Greeke wordes, as they would ſeeme very ſkilful, they might eaſily obſerue that they ſignifie fulnes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . as when them ſelues tranſlate the like word (Luc. 1
                           •
                        , 20) ful of ſores.Luc. li. 2. 
                     Beza. vlceroſus.
                  
                  
                     14. I know not man.)
                     Hier, ep. 140 in exp. pſ. 44. Theſe wordes declare (ſaith S. Auguſtine) that ſhe had now vowed virginitie to God.Our B. Lady vowed virginitie. For otherwiſe neither would ſhe ſay, How ſhal this be done? nor haue added, becauſe I know not man. Yea if ſhe had ſaid only the firſt wordes, How ſhal this be done? It is euident that ſhe would not haue aſked ſuch a queſtion, hovv a vvoman ſhould beare a ſonne promiſed her, if ſhe had married meaning to haue carnal copulation. c. 4 de virgin. As if he ſhould ſay. If ſhe might haue knovven a man and ſo haue had a childe, ſhe vvould neuer haue aſked, How ſhal this be done? but becauſe that ordinarie way vvas excluded by her vow of virginitie, therfor ſhe aſketh. How? And in aſking, How? The plainly declareth that ſhe might not haue a childe by knowing man, becauſe of her vow. See S. Grego. Nyſſene de ſancta Chriſti Natiuitate.
                  
                  
                      
                     36. Eliſabeth thy Coſin.)
                     Chriſt came of both tribes, Iuda and Leui. By this that Eliſabeth and our Lady were coſins, the one of the tribe of Leui, the other of Iuda, is gathered that Chriſt came of both tribes, Iuda and Leui, of the kings and the prieſts: him ſelf both a king and a prieſt, and the Anointed (to vvit) by grace ſpiritually, as they vvere vvith oile materially and corporally. Auguſt. 2 de Conſenſ. Euang. c. 1.
                  
                  
                     42. Bleſſed art thou.)
                     The bleſſed virgin MARIE. At the very hearing of our Ladies voice, the infant and ſhe vvere repleniſhed vvith the Holy Ghoſt, and ſhe ſang praiſes not only to Chriſt, but for his ſake to our B. Lady, calling her bleſsed and her fruite bleſsed, as the Church doeth alſo by her vvordes and example in the AVE MARIE.
                  
                     43. Mother of my Lord.)
                     Her excellēcie. Elizabeth being an exceding iuſt and bleſſed vvoman, yet the vvorthines of Gods mother doth ſo far excel her and al other vvomen, as the great light the litle ſtarres. Hiero. Praef. in Sophon.
                  
                  
                     48. Shal call me bleſſed) This Prophecie is fulfilled,Her honour in al the world. when the Church keepeth her Feſtiual daies, and when the faithful in al generations ſay the AVE MARIE, and other holy Antems of our Lady. And therfore the Caluiniſtes are not among thoſe generations which call our Lady bleſſed.
                  
                     63. Iohn is his name.)
                     Myſterie and ſignification in names. wee ſee that names are of ſignification and importance, God him ſelf changing or giuing names in both Teſtaments: as, Abraham, Iſrael, Peter, and the principal of al others, IESVS: and here IOHN, vvhich ſignifieth, Gods grace or mercie, or, God vvil haue mercie. For he vvas the Precurſor and Prophet of the mercie and grace that enſued by CHRIST IESVS. Note alſo that as then in Circunciſion,What names to be giuē in Baptiſme. ſo novv in Baptiſme (vvhich anſvvereth therevnto) names are giuen. And as vve ſee here and in al the old Teſtament, great reſpect was had of names: ſo we muſt beware of ſtrange, profane, and ſecular names (now a daies to common) and rather according to the * Catechiſme of the holy Councel of Trent,c. de bapt. in fine. take names of Saincts and holy men, that may put vs in minde of their vertues.
                  
                     75. Iuſtice before him.)
                     True iuſtice, not imputatiue. Here alſo we ſee that we may haue true iuſtice, not only in the ſight of men, or by the imputation of God, but in deede before him and in his ſight: and that the comming of Chriſt vvas to giue men ſuch iuſtice.The Heretikes controule both Greeke and Latin text.
                  
                  
                     78. The orient.) Maruel not if Heretikes controule the old authentical tranſlation, as though it differed frō the greeke: vvhereas here they make much a doe to cōtroule not only al the greeke interpreters of the old teſtament,Beza. but alſo S. Luke him ſelf, for the vvord 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as differing from the Hebrevv.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The Natiuitie of Chriſt, 8 and manifeſtation thereof to the Shepheards by an Angel, and by them to others. 21 His Circunciſion. 22 His Preſentation, together with Simeons (as alſo Annes) atteſtation and prophecying of his Paſsion, of the Iewes reprobation, and of the Gentils illumination. 41 His annual aſcending to Hieruſalem with his parents, to whom he was ſubiect, and his fulnes of wiſedom ſhewed among the Doctors at twelue yeres of his age.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe,The Goſpel at the firſt Maſſe vpon chriſtmas day. in thoſe daies there came forth an edict from Caeſar Auguſtus, that the vvhole vvorld ſhould be enrolled. ✝ 
                     verse 2 This firſt enrolling vvas made by the Preſident of Syria Cyrinus. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And al vvent to be enrolled,In the yere, frō the creation of the vvorld 5199: frō Noës floud, 2957: from the Natiuitie of Abraham, 2015: from Moyſes and the cōming forth of the people of Iſrael out of Aegypt, 1510: frō Dauid anointed king, 1032: from the firſt Olympias, 800: from the building of Rome, 752: hebdomada 63, according to the prophecie of Daniel (c. 9), that is, in the yere 440 or there about: in the ſixt age of the vvorld, vvhen there vvas vniuerſal peace in al the vvorld: the eternal God and ſonne of the eternal Father, meaning to conſecrate and ſāctifie the vvorld vvith his moſt bleſſed cōming, being cōceiued of the Holy Ghoſt, nine moneths after his conception, IESVS CHRIST the ſonne of God is borne in Bethlehem of Iuda, in the yere of Caeſar Auguſtus 42. Vſuard. in martyrol. Decēb. 25. according to the cōmon ancient ſupputation.
                   euery one into his ovvne citie. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Ioſeph alſo vvent vp from Galilee out of the citie of Nazareth into Ievvrie, to the citie of Dauid that is called Beth
                     •
                  lehem: for-becauſe he vvas of the houſe and familie of Dauid, ✝ 
                     verse 5 to be enrolled vvith MARIE his deſpouſed vvife that vvas vvith childe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And it came to paſſe, vvhen they vvere there, her daies vvere fully come that ſhe ſhould be deliuered. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And ſhe brought forth her firſt begotten ſonne,
 and ſvvadled him in clothes, and laid him dovvne in a manger: becauſe there vvas not place for them in the inne.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And there vvere in the ſame countrie ſhepheards vvatching, and keeping the night vvatches ouer their flocke. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And behold, an Angel of our Lord ſtood beſide them, and the brightnes of God did ſhine round about them, and they feared vvith a great feare. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And the angel ſaid to them, Feare not: for behold I euangelize to you great ioy, that ſhal be to al the people: ✝ 
                     verse 11 becauſe this day is borne to you a SAVIOVR vvhich is Chriſt our Lord, in the citie of Dauid. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And this ſhal be a ſigne to you, You ſhal finde the infant ſvvadled in clothes: and laid in a manger. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And ſodenly there vvas vvith the Angel a multitude of the heauenly armie, praiſing God, and ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 14 
                  Glorie in the higheſt to God:
                  GLORIA IN EXCELSIS at Maſſe. 
                  and in earth peace to 
                        •
                     men of good vvil. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 
                  The Goſpel at the ſecōd maſſe vpō Chriſtmas day. And for a Votiue of our Lady frō chriſtmas to Candlemas. And it came to paſſe: after the Angels departed from them into heauen, the ſhepheards ſpake one to an other: Let vs goe ouer to Bethlehem, and let vs ſee this vvord that is done, vvhich our Lord hath ſhevved to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they came vvith ſpeede: and they found MARIE and Ioſeph, and the infant laid in the manger. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſeeing it, they vnderſtood of the vvord that had been ſpoken to them concerning this childe. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And al that heard, did maruel: and concerning thoſe things that vvere reported to them by the ſhepheards. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But MARIE ″ kept al theſe vvordes, conferring them in her hart. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the ſhepheards returned, glorifying and prayſing God in al things that they had heard, and ſeen, as it vvas ſaid to them. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 
                  The Goſpel vpon the Circunciſiō of our Lord Ian. 1. And * after eight daies vvere expired,Gen. 17, 12. that the childe ſhould be circunciſed: his name vvas called IESVS, vvhich vvas * called by the Angel,Lu. 1 31. before that he vvas conceiued in the vvombe. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 
                  The Goſpel vpon the Purification of our Lady or Candlemas day. And after the daies vvere fully ended of her purification 
* according to the lavv of Moyſes,Leu. 12, 6. they caried him into Hieruſalem, to preſent him to our Lord ( ✝ 
                     verse 23 as it is vvritten in the lavv of our Lord,Exo. 13, 2 
                  That euery male opening the matrice, ſhal be called holy to the Lord.)
                  Nu. 8, 16 ✝ 
                     verse 24 and to giue a ſacrifice * according as it is vvritten in the lavv of our Lord,Leu. 12, 8. a paire of turtles, or tvvo yong pigeons. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And behold, there vvas a man in Hieruſalem, named Simeon, and this man vvas iuſt and religious, expecting the conſolation of Iſrael: and the Holy Ghoſt vvas in him. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he had receiued an anſvver of the Holy Ghoſt, that he 
 ſhould not ſee death vnles he ſavv firſt theSee Ioh. 1, 20 and 41. CHRIST of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he came in ſpirit into the temple. And vvhen his parents brought in the childe IESVS, to doe according to the cuſtome of the Lavv for him: ✝ 
                     verse 28 he alſo tooke him into his armes, and bleſſed God, and ſaid,
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 
                  NOW THOV doeſt dimiſſe thy ſeruant O Lord,NVNC DIMITTI
                        •
                      at Complin. according to thy vvord in peace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 Becauſe mine eies haue ſeen, thy SALVATION,
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 Vvhich thou hast prepared before the face of al peoples:
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 A light to the reuelation of the Gentils, and the glorie of thy people Iſrael. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 And his father and mother vvere marueling vpon thoſe things vvhich vvere ſpoken concerning him. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And Simeon bleſſed them, and ſaid to MARIE his mother, Behold this is ſet ″ vnto the ruine, and vnto the reſurrection of many in Iſrael, and for a ſigne vvhich ſhal be contradicted, ✝ 
                     verse 35 and
Simeon prophecied not only of Chriſt but of our B. Lady, of al her ſorowes: wherein ſhe was alwaies partaker with our Sauiour, from his flight into Aegypt euen to hir death. thine ovvne ſoule ſhal a ſvvord pearce, that out of many hartes cogitations may be reuealed. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And there vvas Anne a prophetiſſe, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aſer: ſhe vvas farre ſtriken in daies, and had liued vvith her huſband ſeuen yeres from her virginitie. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And ſhe vvas ″ a vvidovv vntil eightie and foure yeres: vvho departed not from the temple, ″ by faſtings and praiers
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſeruing night and day. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And ſhe at the ſame houre ſodenly comming in, confeſſed to our Lord: and ſpake of him to al that expected the redemption of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And after they had vvholy done al things according to the lavv of our Lord, they returned into Galilee, into their citie Nazareth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 And the childe grevv, and vvaxedſtrong in ſpirit: ſtrong': ful of vviſedom, and the grace of God vvas in him. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And his parents vvent euery yere vnto Hieruſalem,Exo. 23, 15. 34, 17. * at the ſolemne day of Paſche. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen he vvas tvvelue yeres old,The Goſpel vpō the firſt Sunday after the Epiphan
                        •
                     e. they going vp into Hieruſalem according to the cuſtome of the feſtiual day,Deu. 16, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 43 and hauing ended the daies, vvhen they returned, the childe IESVS remained in Hieruſalem: and his parents knew it not. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And thinking that he vvas in the companie, they came a daies iourney, and ſought him among their kinſfolke and acquaintance. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And not finding him, they returned into Hieruſalem, ſeeking him. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And it came to paſſe, after three daies they found him in the temple ſitting in the middes of the Doctors, hearing them, and aſking them. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And al vvere aſtonied that heard him, vpon his vviſedom and anſvvers.
 ✝ 
                     verse 48 And ſeeing him, they vvondered. And his mother ſaid to him, Sonne, vvhy haſt thou ſo done to vs? behold thy father and I ſorovving did ſeeke thee. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And he ſaid to them, Vvhat is it that you ſought me? did you not knovv, that I muſt be about thoſe things, vvhich are my fathers? ✝ 
                     verse 50 And they vnderſtood not the vvord that he ſpake vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And he vvent dovvne vvith them, and came to Nazareth: and vvas ″ ſubiect to them. And his mother kept al theſe vvordes in her hart. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And IESVS proceeded in vviſedom and age, and grace vvith God and men. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     14. Men of good wil.]
                     Free vvil. The birth of Chriſt giueth not peace of minde or ſaluation but to ſuch as be of good will, becauſe he worketh not our good againſt our willes, but our willes concurring. Aug. quaeſt. ad Simpli
                           •
                        . li. 1. q. 2. to. 4.
                  
                  
                     19. Kept al.]
                     Our B. Lady ful of deepe contemplations. Our Lady though litle he ſpoken of her concerning ſuch matters in the Scriptures, becauſe ſhe was a woman, and not admitted to teach or diſpute in publike of high myſteries: yet ſhe knew al theſe myſteries, and wiſely noted and contemplated of al thoſe things that were done and ſaid about Chriſt, from the firſt houre of his Conception til the end of his life and his Aſcenſion.
                  
                     34. To the ruine.) Therfore to the ruine of ſome, becauſe they would not beleeue in him, and ſo vvere the cauſe of their owne ruine,1 Pet. 2, 1. as he is els where called, A ſtumbling ſtone, becauſe many would ſtumble at him and ſo fall by their owne fault,Mens ruine and damnation is of themſelues. other ſome he raiſed by his grace from ſinne to iuſtice, and ſo he was the reſurrection of many. The Apoſtle vſeth the like ſpeache, ſaying: We are to ſome the odour of life,
                     2 Cor. 2, 16 
                     vnto life: to others, the odour of death, vnto death. Not that their preaching was to cauſe death, but becauſe they that would not beleeue their preaching, wilfully incurred deadly ſinne and damnation.
                  
                     38. A vvidow.) Marke that widowhod is here mentioned to the commendation thereof euen in the old Teſtament alſo,Holy vvidowhod. and the fruite and as it were the profeſſion thereof is here commended,1 Cor. 7. to vvitte, faſting, praying, being continually in the Temple, euen as S. Paul more at large for the ſtate of the new Teſtament ſpeaketh of widowhod and virginitie, as being profeſſions more apt and commodious for the ſeruice of God.
                  
                     37. By faſtings and praiers ſeruing.)
                     Faſting an act of religion. Seruing, in the Greeke is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, doing diuine worſhip vnto God, as by praier, ſo alſo by faſting, ſo that faſting is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, an act of religion whereby we doe worſhip God, as we doe by praier, and not vſed only to ſubdew our fleſh, much leſſe (as Heretikes would haue it) as a matter of poliIcie.
                  
                     61. Subiect to them.)
                     Dutiful obedience to parents. Al children may learne hereby, that great ought to be their ſubiection and obedience to their Parents, when Chriſt him ſelf, being God, would be ſubiect to his parents being but his creatures.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.THE SECOND part: The preparation that vvas made to the manifeſtation of CHRIST.
               
               
                  Iohn, to prepare al to Chriſt (as Eſay had prophecied of him) baptizeth them to penance, 7 inſinuating their reprobation, and the Gentils vocation, 10 teaching alſo and exhorting ech ſort to doe their dutie. 15 That him ſelf is not Chriſt vvil alſo iudge his baptized. 19 Iohns impriſonment. 21 Chriſt being him ſelf alſo baptized of Iohn, hath teſtimonie from heauen, 23 as he vvhoſe generation reduceth vs againe to God.
               
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND in the fiftenth yere of the empire of Tiberius Caeſar,The Goſpel vpō Imber Saturday in Aduent. And on the 4 Sunday in Aduent. Pontius Pilate being Gouernour of Ievvrie, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother Tetrarch of Ituréa and the countrie Trachonîtis, and Lyſanias Tetrarch of Abilina, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vnder the high Prieſts Annas and Caiphas: the vvord of our Lord vvas made vpon Iohn the ſonne of Zacharie,Mt. 3, 1. in the deſert. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And * he came into al the countrie of Iordan,Mr. 1, 1. preaching the baptiſme ofPenance prepareth the way to Chriſt. penance vnto remiſſion of ſinnes: as it is vvritten in the booke of the ſayings of Eſay the Prophet:Eſa. 40, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 4 
                  A voice of one crying in the deſert: prepare the vvay of our Lord, make ſtraight his pathes. ✝ 
                        verse 5 Euery valley ſhal be filled: and euery mountaine and hil ſhal be made lovv, and crooked things ſhal become ſtraight: and rough vvaies, plaine: ✝ 
                        verse 6 and al fleſh ſhal ſee the SALVATION of God.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 He ſaid therfore to the multitudes that vvent forth to be baptized of him,Mt. 3, 7. * Ye viper broodes, vvho hath ſhevved you to flee from the vvrath to come? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Yeld therforeFruites of penance be workes ſatisfactorie. fruites vvorthie of penance. and doe ye not begin to ſay, Vve haue Abraham to our father. For I tel you, that God is able of theſe ſtones to raiſe vp children to Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And novv the axe is put to the roote of the trees.A man vvithout good workes is vnfruitful, and ſhal be caſt into euerlaſting fire. Euery tree therfore that yeldeth not good fruite,is ſhal be' cut dovvne, and caſt into fire. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And the multitudes aſked him, ſaying, Vvhat ſhal vve doe then? ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he anſvvering, ſaid vnto them:Almes counſeled or enioyned for ſinnes and to auoid damnation. He that hath tvvo coates, let him giue to him that hath not: and he that hath meate, let him doe likevviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the Publicans alſo came to be baptized, and ſaid to him, Maiſter, vvhat ſhal vve doe? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But he ſaid to them, Doe nothing more then that vvhich is appointed you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the ſouldiars alſo aſked him, ſaying, Vvhat ſhal vve alſo doe? And he ſaid to them, Vexe not neither calumniate any man: and be content vvith your ſtipends.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 AndIohn was ſo holy that many might by errour eaſily thinke he was Chriſt. the people imagining, and al men thinking in their harts of Iohn,Mt. 3, 11. leſt perhaps he vvere Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 16 Iohn anſvvered,Mr. 1, 8, ſaying vnto al, * I in deede baptize you vvith vvater:
How ſay then the Heretikes that the Baptiſme of Chriſt is of no greater vertue then Iohns? but therecōmeth Io. 1, 26. ſhal come' a mightier then I, vvhoſe latchet of his ſhoes I am not vvorthie to vnlooſe, he ſhal baptize you in the Holy Ghoſt and fire.Act. 1, 5. 11, 16. 19 4. ✝ 
                     verse 17 vvhoſe fanne is in his hand, and he vvil purge his floore: and vvil gather the vvheate into his barne, but the chaffe he vvil burne vvith vnquencheable fire. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Many other things alſo exhorting did he euangelize to the
 people.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 * And Herod the Tetrarch,Mat. 14, 3 vvhen he vvas rebuked of him for Herodias hisbrother Philips brothers' vvife,Mar. 6, 17. and for al the euils vvhich Herod did: ✝ 
                     verse 20 ″ he added this alſo aboue al, and ſhut vp Iohn into priſon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 * And it came to paſſe vvhen al the people vvas baptized,Mt. 3, 13. IESVS alſo being baptized and praying,Mr. 1, 9. heauen vvas opened:Io. 1, 32. ✝ 
                     verse 22 and the Holy Ghoſt deſcended in corporal ſhape as a doue vpon him: and a voice from heauen vvas made: Thou art my beloued ſonne, in thee I am vvel pleaſed. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And IESVS him ſelf was beginning to be about thirtie yeres old: as it was thought, the ſonne of Ioſeph, vvho vvas ″ of Heli, ✝ 
                     verse 24 vvho vvas of Matthat, vvho vvas of Leui, vvho vvas of Melchi, vvho vvas of Ianné, vvho vvas of Ioſeph, ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvho vvas of Matthathias, vvho vvas of Amos, vvho vvas of Naum, vvho vvas of Heſli, vvho vvas of Naggé, ✝ 
                     verse 26 vvho vvas of Mahath, vvho vvas of Matthathias, vvho vvas of Semei, vvho vvas of Ioſeph, vvho vvas of Iuda, ✝ 
                     verse 27 vvho vvas of Iohanna, vvho vvas of Reſa, vvho vvas of Zorobabel, vvho vvas of Salathiel, vvho vvas of Neri, ✝ 
                     verse 28 vvho vvas of Melchi, vvho vvas of Addi, vvho vvas of Coſam, vvho vvas of Elmadan, vvho vvas of Her, ✝ 
                     verse 29 vvho vvas of IeſuS, vvho vvas of Eliézer, vvho vvas of Iorim, vvho vvas of Matthat, vvho vvas of Leui, ✝ 
                     verse 30 vvho vvas of Simeon, vvho vvas of Iudas, vvho vvas of Ioſeph, vvho vvas of Iona, vvho vvas of Eliacim, ✝ 
                     verse 31 vvho vvas of Melcha, vvho vvas of Menna, vvho vvas of Matthatha, vvho vvas of Nathan, vvho vvas of Dauid, ✝ 
                     verse 32 * vvho vvas of Ieſſé, vvho vvas of Obed, vvho vvas of Booz, vvho vvas of Salmon, vvho vvas of Naaſſon, ✝ 
                     verse 33 vvho vvas of Aminadab, vvho vvas of Aram, vvho vvas of Efron, vvho vvas of Phares, vvho vvas of Iudas, ✝ 
                     verse 34 vvho vvas of Iocob, vvho vvas of Iſaac, vvho vvas of Abraham, vvho vvas of Tharé, vvho vvas of Nachor, ✝ 
                     verse 35 vvho vvas of Sarug, vvho vvas of Ragau, vvho vvas of Phaleg, vvho vvas of Heber, vvho vvas of Salé, ✝ 
                     verse 36 
                  Beza boldly wipeth out of this Goſpel, theſe wordes, vvho vvas of Cainan: though al the Greeke copies both of the old Teſtament & of the new, haue the wordes with ful cōſent. whereby vve learne the intolerable ſaucines of the Caluiniſts, and their cōtempt of holy Scripture, that dare ſo deale with the very Goſpel it ſelf. vvho vvas of Cainan, vvho vvas of Arphaxad, vvho vvas of Sem, vvho vvas of Noë, vvho vvas of Lamech, ✝ 
                     verse 37 vvho vvas of Mathuſalé, vvho vvas of Henoch, vvho vvas of Iared, vvho vvas of Malaleel, vvho vvas of Cainan, ✝ 
                     verse 38 vvho vvas of Henos, vvho vvas of Seth, vvho vvas of Adam, vvho vvas of God.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     20. He added this aboue al.] The fault of Princes and other great men, that can not only not abide to heare their faults, but alſo puniſh by death or empriſonment ſuch as reprehend them for the ſame (ſpecially if they warne them, as Prophets and Prieſts doe, from God) is exceding great.
                  
                     23. Of Heli.] Vvhereas in S. Matthevv,The reconciliation of Matthew and Luke in our Sauiours petigree. Iacob is father to Ioſeph, and here Heli, the caſe vvas thus, Mathan (named in S. Matthevv) of his vvife called Eſcha begat Iacob: and after his death, Melchi (named here in S. Luke) of the ſame vvoman begat Heli: ſo that Iacob and Heli vvere brethren of one mother. This Heli therfore marrying and dying vvithout iſſue: Iacob his brother, according to the Lavv married his vvife, and begat Ioſeph, and ſo raiſed vp ſeede to his brother Heli. whereby it came to paſſe, that Iacob was the natural father of Ioſeph, which as (S. Matthew ſaith) begat him: and Heli was his legal father according to the Law, as S. Luke ſignifieth. Euſeb. li. 1 Ec. Hiſt. c. 7▪ Hiero. in 6. 1 Mat. Aug. li. 2▪ c. 2. 3 de conſ. Euang.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Chriſt going into the Deſert to prepare him ſelf before his manifeſtation, ouercommeth the tentations of the Diuel. 14 then beginning gloriouſly in Galilee, 16 he ſheweth to them of Nazareth his commiſsion out of Eſay the Prophet, 23 inſinuating by occaſion the Ievves his countriemens reprobation. 31 In Capharnaum his doctrine is admired, 33 ſpecially for his miracle in the Synagogue. 38. from vvhich, going to Peters houſe, he ſhevveth there much more povver. 42 Then retiring into the vvilderneſſe, he preacheth aftervvard to the other cities of Galilee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND IESVS ful of the Holy Ghoſt,Mt. 4, 1. returned from Iordan,Mr. 1, 12▪
                   and vvas driuen in the ſpirit into the deſert, ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  The Churches faſt of 40 daies (called Lēt) cō
                     meth of this, & is an Apoſtolical Tradition. Clem. Conſtit. Apoſt. li. 5 c. 13. Hier. ep. ad Marcal. 
                           •
                        du erro. Mō
                        tani. Leo ſer. 6 et 9 de Quadrageſ.
                   fourtie daies, and vvas tempted of the deuil. And he did eate nothing in thoſe daies: and vvhen they vvere ended, he vvas an hungred. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the Deuil ſaid to him, If thou be the ſonne of God, ſay to this ſtone that it be made bread. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS made anſvver vnto him,Deuter. 8, 3. It is vvritten, That not in bread alone ſhal man liue, but in euery vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Deuil brought him into an high mountaine, and ſhevved him al the kingdoms of the vvhole vvorld in a moment of time: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and he ſaid to him, To thee vvil I giue this vvhole povver, and the glorie of them: for to me they are deliuered, and to vvhom I vvil, I doe giue them. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Thou therfore if thou vvilt adore before me, they ſhal al be thine. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid to him,Deu. 6, 13 10, 20. It is vvritten,See the Annot. in S. Matthew c. 4, 11. 
                  Thou ſhalt adore the Lord thy God, and him only ſhalt thou
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  ſerue. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he brought him into Hieruſalem, and ſet him vpon the pinnacle of the temple: and he ſaid to him,Pſal. 90, 11. If thou be the ſonne of God, caſt thy ſelf from hence dovvnevvard. ✝ 
                     verse 10 ForIf the Diuel him ſelf alleage Scripture againſt Chriſt, no maruel that Heretikes do ſo againſt Chriſts Church. it is vvritten, that He hath giuen his Angels
 charge of thee, that they preſerue thee: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and that in their hands they ſhal beare thee vp, leſt perhaps thou knocke thy foote againſt a ſtone. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid to him,Deut. 6, 16. It is ſaid, Thou ſhal not tempt the Lord thy God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And al the tentation being ended, the Deuil ″ departed from him vntil a time.THE third part: of Chriſtes manifeſting him ſelf by preachīg and miracles, ſpecially in Galilee▪
                  
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 * And IESVS returned in the force of the ſpirit into Galilee,Mt. 4, 12. and the fame vvent forth through the vvhole countrie of him.Mr. 1, 14 ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he taught in their ſynagogues, and vvas magnified of al.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 * And he came to Nazareth vvhere he vvas brought vp:Mt. 13, 54. and he entredOur Sauiour vſed to preach in their Synagogues. according to his cuſtom on the Sabboth day into the ſynagogue:Mr. 6, 1. and he roſe vp to reade. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the booke of Eſay the Prophet vvas deliuered vnto him.Io. 4, 43 And as he vnfolded the booke, he found the place vvhere it vvas vvritten,Eſa. 61, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 18 
                  The Spirit of the Lord vpon me, for vvhich he anointed me, to euangelize vnto the poore he ſent me, to heale the contrite of hart, ✝ 
                        verse 19 to preach to the captiues remiſsion, and ſight to the blinde, to dimiſſe the bruiſed vnto remiſsiō, to preach the acceptable yere of the Lord, and the day of retribution. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen he had folded the booke, he rendred it to the miniſter, and ſate dovvne. And the eies of al in the ſynagogue vvere bent vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And he began to ſay vnto them: That this day is fulfilled this ſcripture in your eares. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And al gaue teſtimomonie to him: and theyHe had a maruelous grace, and an extraordinarie force in mouing the harts of his hearers. marueled in the vvordes of grace that proceded from his mouth, and they ſaid, Is not this Ioſephs ſonne? ✝ 
                     verse 23 And he ſaid to them, Certes you vvil ſay to me this ſimilitude,The Goſpel vpon Munday in the 3 vveeke of Lent. 
                  Phyſicion, cure they ſelf: as great things as vve haue heard ″ done in Capharnaum, doe alſo here in thy countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he ſaid, Amen I ſay to you, that no Prophet is accepted in his ovvne countrie.3 reg. 17, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 25 In truth I ſay to you, * there vvere many vvidovves in the daies of Elias in Iſrael, vvhen the heauen vvas ſhut three yeres and ſix moneths, vvhen there vvas a great famine made in the vvhole earth: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and to none of them vvas Elias ſent, but into Sarepta of Sidon, to a vvidovv vvoman.4 reg. 5, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 27 * And there vvere many lepers in Iſrael vnder Eliſaeus the Prophet: and none of them vvas made cleane but Naamā the Syrian. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And al in the ſynagogue vvere filled vvith anger, hearing theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And they roſe, and caſt him out of the citie: and they brought him to the edge of the hil, vvherevpon their citie vvas built, that they might throvv him dovvne headlong. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But he ″ paſſing through the middes of them, vvent his vvay. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 31 * And he vvent dovvne into Capharnaum a citie of Galilee:
Mat. 4, 13. 7, 28. and there he taught them on the Sabboths. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they vvere aſtonied at his doctrine:Mr. 1, 21 becauſe his talke vvas in povver. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And in the ſynagogue there vvas a man hauing an vncleane Diuel, and he cried out vvith a loud voice, ✝ 
                     verse 34 ſaying, Let be, vvhat to vs and thee IESVS of Nazareth? art thou come to deſtroy vs? I know thee vvho thou art, the SAINCT of God. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And IESVS rebuked him, ſaying, Hold thy peace, & goe out of him. And vvhen the Deuil had throvven him into the middes, he vvent out of him, and hurted him nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And there came feare vpon al, and they talked together one vvith an other, ſaying, Vvhat vvord is this, that in povver and vertue he commaundeth the vncleane ſpirits, and they goe out? ✝ 
                     verse 37 And the fame of him vvas publiſhed into euery place of the countrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 And IESVS riſing vp out of the ſynagogue,Mat. 8, 14. entred into Simons houſe.The Goſpel vpon Thurſday in the 3 vveeke of Lent. And vpon Saturday in Vvhitſonvveeke. * And ″ Simons vviues mother vvas holden vvith a great feuer:Mr. 1, 30 and they beſought him for her. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And ſtanding ouer her, he commaunded the feuer, and it left her. And incontinent riſing, ſhe miniſtred to them. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And vvhen the ſunne vvas dovvne, al that had diſeaſed of ſundrie maladies, brought them to him. But he impoſing hands vpon euery one, cured them. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And Deuils vvent out from many, crying and ſaying, That thou art the ſonne of God. And rebuking them he ſuffred them not to ſpeake, that they knevv he vvas Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen it vvas day, going forth he vvent into a deſert place: and the multitudes ſought him, and came euen vnto him: and they held him that he ſhould not depart from them. ✝ 
                     verse 43 To vvhom he ſaid, That to other cities alſo muſt I euangelize the kingdom of God: becauſe therfore I vvas ſent. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And he vvas preaching in the ſynagogs of Galilee. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     13. Departed vntil a time.)
                     The diuels tentations. No maruel if the diuel be often or alvvaies buſie vvith Chriſtian men, ſeeing after he was plainely ouercome by Chriſt, yet did he not giue him ouer altogether, but for a time.
                  
                     23. Done in Capharnaum) God maketh choiſe of perſons and places where he worketh miracles or doeth benefites,Miracles at one place and not at an other. though he might doe the ſame els where if it liked his wiſedom. So doth he in doing miracles by Saincts, not in al places, nor towards al perſons, but as it pleaſeth him, Aug. ep. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                      
                     30. Paſsing through the middes of them.)
                     Chriſts body conteined in place aboue nature. Either by making him ſelf inuiſible, or alſo more wonderfully, penetrating the multitude and paſſing through them, as he did through the doore, his body either being without ſpace of place, or with other bodies in one place. By al which and the like his doings mentioned in the Goſpel, it is euident that he can alter and order his body as he liſt, aboue the natural conditions of a body.
                  
                     38. Simons wiues mother.)
                     The Apoſtles left their vviues.It is euident that Peter had a wife, but after his calling to be an Apoſtle, he leaft her, as S. Hierom writeth in many places ep. 14 c. 2 ad Iulianum. Li. 1 adu. Ionin. See the Annot. Matth. 9, 29.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Hauing taught the people out of Peters ſhip, 4 he ſhevveth in a miraculous taking of fiſhes, hovv he vvil make him the fiſher of men. 12 He cureth a leper by touching him, and ſendeth him to the Prieſt in vvitneſſe that he is not againſt Moyſes. 15 The people flocking vnto him, he retireth into the vvilderneſſe. 17 To the Phariſees in a ſolemne aſſembly he proueth by a miracle his povver to remit ſinnes in earth. 27 He defendeth his eating vvith ſinners, as being the Phyſicion of ſoules, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and his not preſcribing as yet of any faſtes to his Diſciples.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe,The Goſpel vpō the 4 Sunday after Pentecoſt. vvhen the multitudes preſſed vpon him to heare the vvord of God, and him ſelf ſtoode beſide the lake of Geneſareth. ✝ 
                     verse 2 * And he ſavv tvvo ſhippes ſtanding by the lake:Mt. 4, 18. and the fiſhers vvere gone dovvne, and vvaſhed their nettes.Mar. 1, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he going vp into ″ one ſhip that vvas Simons, deſired him to bring it backe a litle from the land. And ſitting, he taught the multitudes out of the ſhip.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And as he ceaſed to ſpeake, he ſaid to Simon, Launche forth into the deepe, and let looſe your nettes to make a draught. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Simon anſvvering, ſaid to him, Maiſter, labouring al the night, vve haue taken nothing: but in thy vvord I vvil let looſe the nette. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen they had done this, they incloſed ″ a very great multitude of fiſhes, and their nette vvas broken. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they ″ beckened to their fellovves that vvere in the other ſhip, that they ſhould come and help them. And they came and filled both ſhippes, ſo that they did ſinke. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Vvhich vvhen Simon Peter did ſee, he fel dovvne at IESVS knees, ſaying, Goe forth from me, becauſe I am a ſinful man, O Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For he vvas vvholy aſtoniſhed and al that vvere vvith him, at the draught of fiſhes vvhich they had taken. ✝ 
                     verse 10 In like maner alſo Iames and Iohn the ſonnes of Zebedee, vvho vvere Simons fellovves. And IESVS ſaid to Simon, Feare not: from this time novv, ″ thou ſhalt be taking men.Mt. 8, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And hauing brought their ſhippes to land, leauing al things they folovved him.Mar. 1, 40. 
                  ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 * And it came to paſſe, vvhen he vvas in one of the cities,
 and behold a man ful of leproſie, and ſeeing IESVS, and falling on his face, beſought him ſaying, Lord, if thou vvilt, thou canſt make me cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And ſtretching forth the hand, he touched him, ſaying, I vvil. be thou made cleane. And immediatly the leproſie departed from him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he commaunded him that he ſhould tel no body, but, Goe,See S. Mat. Annot. c. 8, 4. ſhevv thy ſelf to the Prieſt,Leu. 14, 2. and offer for thy cleanſing * as Moyſes commaunded, for a teſtimonie to them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 But the bruite of him vvent abrode the more. and great multitudes came together to heare, and to be cured of their infirmities. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he retired into the deſert, and praied.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 * And it came to paſſe one day,Mt. 9, 2. and he ſate teaching.The Goſpel vpō Friday in whitſonvveeke. And there vvere Phariſees ſitting and Doctors of Lavv that vvere come out of euery tovvne of Galilee and Ievvrie and Hieruſalem:Mr. 2, 3. and the vertue of our Lord vvas to heale them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And behold men carying in a bed a man that had the palſey: and they ſought to bring him in, and to lay him before him. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And not finding on vvhich ſide they might bring him in for the multitude, they ″ vvent vp vpon the roofe, and through the tiles let him dovvne vvith the bed into the middes, before IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 20 ″ Vvhoſe faith vvhen he ſavv, he ſaid, Man, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the Scribes and Phariſees began to thinke, ſaying, who is this that ſpeaketh blaſphemies? who can forgiue ſinnes, but only God? ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vvhen IESVS knevve their cogitations, anſvvering he ſaid to them, Vvhat doe you thinke in your hartes? ✝ 
                     verse 23 Vvhich is eaſier to ſay, Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee: or to ſay, Ariſe, and vvalke? ✝ 
                     verse 24 but that you may knovv that ″ the ſonne of man hath povver in earth to forgiue ſinnes (he ſaid to the ſicke of the palſey) I ſay to thee, Ariſe, take vp thy bed, and goe into thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And forth vvith riſing vp before them, he tooke that vvherein he lay: and he vvent into his houſe, magnifying God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And al vvere aſtonied: and they magnified God. And they vvere repleniſhed vvith feare, ſaying, That vve haue ſeen maruelous things to day. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 * And after theſe things he vvent forth,Mt. 9, 9. and ſavv a Publican called Leui,Mr. 2, 14 ſitting at the Cuſtome-houſe,The Goſpel vpō S. Matthevves eue Septēb. 2
                        •
                     . and he ſaid to him, Folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And ″ leauing al things, he roſe and folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 29 and Leui made him a great feaſt in his houſe: and there vvas a great multitude of Publicans, and of others that vvere ſitting at the table vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And their Phariſees and Scribes
 murmured, ſaying to his diſciples, why doe you eate and drinke vvith Publicans and ſinners? ✝ 
                     verse 31 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid to them, They that are vvhole, neede not the Phyſicion:Mat. 9, 14. but they that are il at eaſe. ✝ 
                     verse 32 
                  Chriſt came not to call thoſe, who preſume of their owne iuſtice, and that coūpt them ſelues to haue no neede of Chriſt. I came not to call the iuſt, but ſinners to penance. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 But they ſaid to him,Mar. 2, 18. * Vvhy doe the diſciples of Iohn
                     See S. Mat. Annot. c. 9, 14. faſt often,Lu. 5, 33. and make obſecrations, and of the Phariſees in like maner: but thine doe eate and drinke? ✝ 
                     verse 34 To vvhom he ſaid, why, can you make the children of the bridegrome faſt vvhiles the bridegrome is vvith them? ✝ 
                     verse 35 But the daies vvil come: and vvhen the bridegrome ſhal be taken avvay from them, then they ſhal faſt in thoſe daies. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And he ſaid a ſimilitude alſo vnto them, That no man putteth a peece from a nevv garment into an old garment: othervviſe both he breaketh the nevv, and the peece from the nevv agreeth not vvith the old. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And no bodie putteth nevv vvine into old bottels: othervviſe the nevv vvine vvil breake the bottels, and it ſelf vvil be ſhed, and the bottels vvil be loſt. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But nevv vvine is to be put into nevv bottels: and both are preſerued together. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And no man drinking old, vvil nevv by and by. for he ſaith, The old is better.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     3. One ſhip Simons.)
                     Peters ſhip. It is purpoſely expreſſed that there were two ſhippes, and that one of them was Peters, and that Chriſt went into that one, and ſate downe in it, and that ſitting he taught out of that ſhip: no doubt to ſignifie the Church reſembled by Peters ſhip, and that in it is the chaire of Chriſt, and only true preaching.
                  
                     6. A great multitude of fiſhes.)
                     Peter fiſhing. Likewiſe by this ſignificatiue miracle wrought about Peters fiſhing, is euidently forſhewed vvhat wonderful ſucceſſe Peter ſhould haue in conuerting men to Chriſt,Act. 2, 41. 4, 4. both Ievves and Gentiles, as vvhen at one draught, that is to ſay, * at one Sermon he drewe into his ſhip, which is Chriſtes Church, a great number of men, as he did now fiſhes: and ſo continually by him ſelf and his Succeſſors vnto the worlds end.
                  
                     7. Beckened to their fellowes.)
                     Peters coadiutors. Peter had ſo much worke that he called for helpe and ioyned vnto him the other ſhip, repreſenting to vs his Copartiners in the preaching of the Goſpel, and the coniunction of the Synagogue and the people of Gentilitie vnto Peters ſhip, that is, to the Church of Chriſs. Ambro. li. 4. in Luc. c. vlt.
                  
                  
                     10. Thou ſhalt be taking men.)
                     Peters preeminence in fiſhing for 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſoules. That al this aforeſaid did properly meane Peters trauailes to come, in the cōuerſion of the world to Chriſt, and his prerogatiue before al men therein, it is euident by Chriſt ſpecial promis made to him ſeuerally and apart in this place, that he ſhould be made the taker of men, though to other he giueth alſo, as to Peters cooperators and coadiutors, the like office. Mat. 4. 19.
                  
                  
                     19. Went vp vpon the roofe.)
                     Zeale of ſoules. A ſtrange diligence in procuring corporal health of and by Chriſt: and an example for vs of the like or greater, to obteine ſaluation of him either for our ſelues or our frendes, and to ſeeke to his Church and Sacraments with what extraordinarie paine ſoeuer.
                  
                     20. Whoſe faith.)
                     The interceſſiō of others, Great is God (ſaith S. Ambroſe) and pardoneth one ſort through the merites of others, therfore if thou doubt to obtaine forgiueneſſe of thy great offenſes, ioyne vnto thy ſelf interceſſors, vſe the Churches helpe, which may pray for thee and obtaine for thee that which our Lord might denie to thy ſelf. Amb. li. 5 in Luc.
                  
                  
                      
                     24. The ſonne of man in earth.)
                     In catena S. Thomae. By which act (* ſaith S. Cyril) it is cleere that the Sonne of man hath power in earth to remit ſinnes:Prieſts do remit ſinnes. which he ſaid both for him ſelf and vs. For he, as God being made man and Lord of the Law, forgiueth ſinnes. And we alſo haue obtained by him that wonderful grace.Io. 20, 23. for it is ſaid to his Diſciples, Whoſe ſinnes you ſhal remit, they are remitted to them. And how ſhould not he be able to remit ſinnes, who gaue others power to doe the ſame?
                  
                     28, Leauing al folowed him.)
                     Hiero. in Mat. 9. The * profane Iulian charged Matthevv of to much lightnes,Forſaking al, and folovving Chriſt. to leaue al and folovv a ſtranger, at one vvord. but in deede hereby is ſeen the maruelous efficacie of Chriſtes vvord and internal vvorking,Athan. in vit. S. Antonij. Auguſt. cōfeſ. li. 8 c. 12. Bonau. in vit. S. Frā
                        ciſci. that in a moment can alter the hart of a man, and cauſe him nothing to eſteeme the things moſt deere vnto him. Which he did not onely then in preſence, but alſo daily doth in the Church. For ſo S. Antonie, S. Francis, and others, by hearing only the vvord of our Sauiour read in the Church, forſooke al and folowed him.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  For reprouing by Scripture and miracle (as alſo by reaſon) the Phariſees blindnes about the obſeruation of the Sabboth, 11 they ſeeke his death, 12 Hauing in the mountaine prayed al night, he chooſeth tvvelue Apoſtles. 17 and after many miracles vpon the diſeaſed, 20 he maketh a ſermon to his Diſciples before the people: propoſing heauen to ſuch as vvil ſuffer for him, 24 and vvo to ſuch as vvil not. 27 Yet vvithal exhorting to doe good euen to our enemies alſo. 19 and that the Maiſters muſt firſt mend them ſelues. 46 finally, to doe good vvorkes, becauſe only faith vvil not ſuffice.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe on theS. Hierom (ep. 1 ad Nepotia.) vvriteth of him ſelf, that being at Cōſtantinople, he aſked his maiſter Gregorie Nazianzene, the famous Doctor, then Biſhop there what Sabboth this vvas, who by his anſwer declared that it was very hard to tel, neither is it yet knowen to the beſt learned. Yet the Proteſtants are wont to ſay, Al is very eaſie. Sabboth ſecond-firſt,Mt. 12, 1 vvhen he paſſed through the corne,Mr. 2, 23 his Diſciples did plucke the eares, and did eate rubbing them vvith their hands. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And certaine of the Phariſees ſaid to them, Vvhy doe you that vvhich is not lavvful

                     verse 3 on the Sabboths? And IESVS anſvvering them, ſaid, ″ Neither this haue you read vvhich Dauid did, vvhen him ſelf vvas an hungred and they that vvere vvith him:1. Re. 21, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 4 * hovv he entred into the houſe of God, and tooke the loaues of Propoſition, and did eate, and gaue to them that vvere vvith him, vvhich it is not lavvful to eate * but only for Prieſts?Leu. 24, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he ſaid to them, That the ſonne of man is Lord of the Sabboth alſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 And it came to paſſe on an other Sabboth alſo, that he entred into the ſynagogue,Mt. 12. 10. and taught. * And there vvas a man,Mr. 3, 1. and his right hand vvas vvithered. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the Scribes and Phariſees vvatched if he vvould cure on the Sabboth: that they might finde hovv to accuſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But he knevv their cogitations: and he ſaid to the man that had the vvithered hand, Ariſe, and ſtand forth into the middes. And riſing he ſtoode. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And IESVS ſaid to them, I aſke you, if it be lavvful on the Sabboths to doe vvel or il: to ″ ſaue a ſoule or to deſtroy? ✝ 
                     verse 10 And looking about vpon them al, he ſaid to the
 man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he ſtretched it forth: and his hand vvas reſtored. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And they vvere repleniſhed vvith madnes: and they communed one vvith an other vvhat they might doe to IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And it came to paſſe in thoſe daies,The Goſpel vpō S. Bartlemewes day. he vvent forth into the mountaine to pray, and he paſſed ″ the vvhole night in the prayer of God.Mt. 10, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 13 * And vvhen day vvas come,Mr. 3, 13 6, 7. he called his Diſciples: and he choſe tvvelue of them (″ vvhom alſo he named Apoſtles) ✝ 
                     verse 14 ″ Simon vvhom he ſurnamed Peter,Lu. 9, 1. and Andrevv his brother, Iames and Iohn, Philippe and Bartholomevv, ✝ 
                     verse 15 Matthevv and Thomas, Iames of Alphaeus and Simon that is called Zelótes, ✝ 
                     verse 16 and Iude of Iames, and Iudas Iſcariote vvhich vvas the traitour.The Goſpel vpō Alholowes eue. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And deſcending vvith them he ſtoode in a plaine place, and the multitude of his Diſciples,And for many Martyrs. and a very great companie of people from al Ievvrie and Hieruſalem: and the ſea coaſt both of Tyre and Sidon, ✝ 
                     verse 18 vvhich vvere come to heare him, and to be healed of their maladies. And they that vvere vexed of vncleane ſpirits, vvere cured. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And al the multitude ſought to touch him, becauſe vertue vvent forth from him, and healed al ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he lifting vp his eies vpon his Diſciples, ſaid,
               * Bleſſed are ye poore:Mt. 5, 2. 6, 7. for yours is the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Bleſſed are you that novv are an hungred: becauſe you ſhal be filled. Bleſſed are you that novv doe vveepe: becauſe you ſhal laugh. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Bleſſed ſhal you be vvhen men ſhal hate you, and vvhen they ſhal ſeparate you, and vpbraide you, and abandon your name as euil, for the ſonne of mans ſake. ✝ 
                     verse 23 ″ Be glad in that day and reioyce: for behold, your revvard is much in heauen. ⊢ for according to theſe things did their fathers to the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But vvo to you that are riche, becauſe you haue your conſolation. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Vvo to you that are filled: becauſe you ſhal be hungrie. Vvo to you that novv doe laugh: becauſe you ſhal mourne and vveepe. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvho, vvhen al men ″ ſhal bleſſe you for according to theſe things did their fathers to the falſe-Prophets.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 But to you I ſay that doe heare, Loue your enemies, doe good to them that hate you. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Bleſſe them that curſe you, and pray for them that calumniate you. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he that ſtriketh thee on the cheeke, offer alſo the other. And from him that taketh avvay from thee thy robe, prohibit not thy coate alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 30 AndThat is, to euery one iuſtly aſking For that vvhich is vniuſtly aſked, may be iuſtly denied. Aug. li. 1. c. 40. de Serm. Do. in monte.
                   to euery one that aſketh thee, giue: and of him 
 that taketh avvay the things that are thine, aſke not againe. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And according as you vvil that men doe to you, doe you alſo to them in like maner. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And if you loue them that loue you, vvhat thanke is to you? for ſinners alſo loue thoſe that loue them. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And if ye doe good to them that doe you good: vvhat thanke is to you? for ſinners alſo doe this. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And if ye lend to them of vvhom ye hope to receiue: vvhat thanke is to you? for ſinners alſo lend vnto ſinners, for to receiue as much. ✝ 
                     verse 35 But loue ye your enemies: doe good and ″ lend, hoping for nothing thereby, and your revvard ſhal be much, and you ſhal be the ſonnes of the Higheſt, becauſe him ſelf is beneficial vpō the vnkinde and the euil.The Goſpel vpon the firſt Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Be ye therfore merciful as alſo your father is merciful. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Iudge not, & you ſhal not be iudged. condemne not, & you ſhal not be cōdemned. forgiue, and you ſhal be forgiuen. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Giue, and there ſhal be giuen to you. good meaſure & preſſed dovvne and ſhaken together and running ouer ſhal they giue into your boſome. For vvith the ſame meaſure that you do meate, it ſhal be meaſured to you againe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 39 And he ſaid to them a ſimilitude alſo: Can the blinde leade the blinde? doe not both fal into the ditch? ✝ 
                     verse 40 The diſciple is not aboue his maiſter: but euery one ſhal be perfect, if he be as his maiſter. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And vvhy ſeeſt thou the mote in thy brothers eie: but the beame that is in thine ovvne eie thou conſidereſt not? ✝ 
                     verse 42 Or hovv canſt thou ſay to thy brother, Brother, let me caſt out the more out of thine eie: thy ſelf not ſeeing the beame in thine ovvne eie? Hypocrite, caſt firſt the beame out of thine ovvne eie: and then ſhalt thou ſee clerely to take forth the more out of thy brothers eie. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 43 For there is no good tree that yeldeth euil fruites: nor euil tree, that yeldeth good fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 44 For euery tree is knovven by his fruite. For neither doe they gather figges of thornes: neither of a buſh doe they gather the grape. ✝ 
                     verse 45 The good man of the good treaſure of his hart bringeth forth good: and the euil man of the il treaſure bringeth forth euil▪ for of the aboū
                  dance of the hart the mouth ſpeaketh.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 And vvhy cal you me, Lord, Lord: and doe not the things vvhich I ſay? ✝ 
                     verse 47 Euery one that commeth to me, and heareth my vvords, and doeth them: I vvil ſhevv you to vvhom he is like. ✝ 
                     verse 48 He is like to a manHe buildeth right & ſurely, that hath both faith and good vvorkes: he buildeth on ſand, that truſteth to his faith or reading or knovvledge of the ſcripture, and doth not vvorke or liue accordingly. building a houſe, that digged deepe, and laid the foundation vpon a rocke. And vvhen an inundation roſe, the riuer bette againſt that
 houſe, and it could not moue it: for it vvas founded vpon a rocke. ✝ 
                     verse 49 But he that heareth, and doeth not: is like to a man building his houſe vpon the earth vvithout a foundation: againſt the vvhich the riuer did beate: and incontinent it fell, and the ruine of that houſe vvas great.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     1. Neither this haue you read?]
                     Heretikes vnderſtād not the Scriptures. The Scribes and phariſees boaſted moſt of their knovvledge of the Scriptures: but our Sauiour often ſhevveth their great ignorance. Euen ſo the Heretikes that novv a daies vaunt moſt of the Scriptures and of their vnderſtanding of them, may ſoone be proued to vnderſtand litle or nothing.
                  
                     9. Saue a ſoule.] Hereby it ſeemeth that Chriſt (as at other times lightly alvvaies) did not only heale this man in body, but of ſome correſpondent diſeaſe in his ſoule.
                  
                     12. The vvholenight.)
                     The Churches praiers at the times of giuing holy Orders. Our Sauiour inſtantly prayed, alone in the mount vvithout doore, al night long, as a preparation to the deſignement of his Apoſtles the day after: to giue example to the Church of praying inſtantly vvhen prieſts are to be ordered, and a leſſon to vs al vvhat vve ſhould doe for our ovvne neceſſities, vvhen Chriſt did ſo for other mens.
                  
                     13. Vvhom he named Apoſtles..] Here it is to be noted againſt our Aduerſaries that deceitfully meaſure to the ſimple the vvhole nature and qualitie of certaine ſacred functions, by the primitiue ſignification and compaſſe of the names or vvordes vvhereby they be called. vvith vvhom as a Prieſt is but an elder,Calu. Inſt. li. 4 c. 
                           •
                        . and a Biſhop, a vvatchman or Superintendent, ſo an Apoſtle is nothing but a Legate or Meſſenger, and therfore (as they argue) * can make no Lawes nor preſcribe or teach any thing not expreſſed in his mandatum.
                     The name and dignitie of Apoſtles. Know therfore againſt ſuch deceiuers, that ſuch things are not to be ruled by the vulgar ſignification of the word or calling, but by vſe and application of the holy writers, and in this point by Chriſts ovvne expreſſe impoſition. And ſo this vvord. Apoſtle, is a calling of Office, gouernement, authoritie, and moſt high dignitie giuen by our Maiſter, ſpecially to the College of the Tvvelue: whom he endued aboue that vvhich the vulgar etymologie of their name requireth, vvith povver to bind and looſe, to puniſh and pardō, to teach and rule his Church.Pſ. 108, 8. Out of vvhich roome and dignitie, vvhich is called in the Pſalme and in the actes,Act. 2, 20. a Biſhoprike, vvhen Iudas ſel, Mathias vvas choſen to ſupply it, and vvas numbered among the reſt,Eph. 1, 20. vvho vvere as founders or foundations of our religion, as the Apoſtle termeth them. Therfore to that college this name agreeth by ſpecial impoſition and prerogatiue, though aftervvard it vvas by vſe of the Scriptures extended to S. Paul and S. Barnabas,Act. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . and ſometimes to the Apoſtles ſucceſſors:1 Cor. 12. as alſo (by the like vſe of Scriptures) to the firſt conuerters of countreis to the ſaith,Eph. 4, 11. or their coadiutors in that function. In vvhich ſenſe S. Paul chalengeth to be the Corinthians Apoſtle,1 Cor. 9, 2. and nameth Epaphroditus the Philippians Apoſtle: as vve call S. Gregorie & his Diſciple S. Auguſtin,Phil. 2, 25. our Apoſtles of England. In al vvhich taking, it euer ſignifieth dignitie, regiment, Paternitie, Principalitie, and Primacie in the Church of God: according to S. Paul 1. Cor. 12, He hath placed in his Church, firſt in deede Apoſtles &c. whereby vve may ſee that S. Peters dignitie vvas a vvonderful eminent Prerogatiue and Soueraintie, when he vvas the head not only of other Chriſtian men, but the head of al Apoſtles, yea euen of the College of the Tvvelue. And if our Aduerſaties liſt to haue learned any profitable leſſon by the vvord Apoſtle, more profitably and truely they might haue gathered,Luc. 4, 18. that Chriſt called theſe his principal officers, Apoſtles, or Sent (him ſelf alſo ſpecially and aboue al other being Miſſus,
                     Hebr. 3, 1. that is, Sent, and called alſo Apoſtle in the Scriptures) to vvarne vs by the nature of the vvord, that none are true Apoſtles, Paſtors, or Preachers, that are not ſpecially ſent and called, or that can not ſhevv by vvhom they be ſent. and that al Heretikes therfore be rather Apoſtates then Apoſtles, for that they be not ſent, nor duely called, nor choſen to preach.
                  
                     14. Simon.) Peter in the numbering of the Apoſtles,Peters preeminence. alvvaies firſt named and preferred before Andrevv his elder brother and ſenior by calling, See Annotat. Mt. 10, 2.
                  
                  
                     23. Be glad.)
                     Al perſecution for Chriſt, is a bleſſing. The common miſeries that fall to the true preachers and other Catholike men for Chriſts ſake, as pouertie, famin, mourning, and perſecutions, be in deede the greateſt bleſſings that can be, and are meritorious of the revvard of heauen. Contrarievviſe, al the felicities of this vvorld vvithout Chriſt, are in deede nothing but vvo, and the enterance to euerlaſting miſerie.
                  
                     26. Shal bleſſe you.)
                     The vanitie of Heretical preachers. This vvo pertaineth to the Heretikes of our daies, that delight to haue the peoples praiſes and bleſſings and ſhoutes, preaching pleaſant things of purpoſe to their itching
 eares: as did the Falſe-Prophets, vvhen they vvere magnified and commended therfore of the carnal Ievves.
                  
                     35 Land, hoping nothing.) In that vve may here ſeeme to be moued to lend to thoſe vvhom vve thinke not able nor like euer to repay againe,Againſt vſurie. it muſt be holder for a counſel rather then a commaundement, except the caſe of neceſſitie. but it may be taken rather for a precept, vvherein vſurie, that is to ſay, the expectation not of the money lent, but of vantage for lone, is forbidden: as by other places of Scripture it is condemned, and is a thing againſt the Lavv of nature and nations. And greate ſhame and pitie it is, that it ſhould be ſo much vſed or ſuffered among Chriſtians, or ſo couered and cloked vnder the habite of other contractes, as it is.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  He teſtifieth, the faith of the Centurion who was a Gentil, to be greater them he found among al the Iewes, and cureth his ſeruant abſent. 11 the vvidovves ſonne he reuiueth and reſtoreth to her, and is renowmed therevpon. 18 To Iohns meſſengers he anſwereth vvith miracles, leauing to Iohn to preach thereby vnto them that he is Chriſt. 24 And afterward he declareth how vvorthy credit was Iohns teſtimonie, 29 inueighing againſt the Phariſees, 31 Who vvith neither of their maners of liuing could be wonne. 36 ſhewing alſo vnto them by occaſion of Marie Magdalen, how he is a frende to ſinners, not to maintaine them in ſinne, but to forgiue them their ſinnes vpon their faith and penance.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen he had fully ſaid al his vvords into the cares of the people, he entred into Capharnaum.Mt. 8, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the ſeruant of a certaine Centurion being ſicke, vvas readie to die: vvho vvas deere vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And when he had heard of IESVS, he ſent vnto him the Auncients of the Ievves, deſiring him to come and heale his ſeruant. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But they being come to IESVS, beſought him earneſtly, ſaying to him, That he is vvorthie that thou ſhouldeſt doe this for him. ✝ 
                     verse 5 for he loueth our nation: and he hath ″ built a ſynagogue for vs. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And IESVS vvent vvith them. And vvhen he vvas novv not farre from the houſe, the Centurion ſent his frends vnto him, ſaying, Lord, trouble not thy ſelf. forSee the Annotations vpon S. Matth. c. 8, 8. 
                  I am not vvorthie that thou ſhouldeſt enter vnder my roofe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 for the vvhich cauſe neither did I thinke my ſelf vvorthie to come to thee: but ſay the vvord, and my ſeruant ſhal be made whole. ✝ 
                     verse 8 for I alſo am a man ſubiect to authoritie, hauing vnder me ſouldiars: and I ſay to this, goe, and he goeth: and to an other, come, and he commeth: and to my ſeruant, doe this, and he doeth it. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Vvhich IESVS hearing, marueiled: and turning to the multitudes that folovved him he ſaid, Amen I ſay to you, neither in Iſrael haue I found ſo great faith. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they that vvere ſent, being returned home, found the ſeruant that had been ſicke, vvhole.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 11 And it came to paſſe,The Goſpel vpō the 15 Sunday after Pentecoſt. And vpō Thurſday in the 4 vveeke of Lent. And for S. Monica S. Auguſtin
                        •
                      mother Maij. 4. aftervvard he vvent into a citie that is called Naim: and there vvent vvith him his Diſciples and a very great multitude. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen he came nigh to the gate of the citie, behold a dead man vvas caried forth, the only ſonne of his mother: and ſhe, vvas a vvidovv: and a great multitude of the citie vvith her. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvhom vvhen our Lord had ſeen, being moued vvith mercie vpon her, he ſaid to her, Vveepe not. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he came neere and touched the coffin. And they that caried it, ſtood ſtil: and he ſaid, Yong man, I ſay to thee, Ariſe. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he that vvas dead, ſate vp, and beganne to ſpeake. And he gaue him to his mother. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And feare tooke them al; and they magnified God, ſaying, That a great Prophet is riſen among vs: and, That God hath viſited his people. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And this ſaying vvent forth into al Ievvrie of him, and into al the countrie about.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And Iohns diſciples ſhevved him of al theſe things.Mt. 11, 2▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 19 * And Iohn called tvvo of his diſciples, and ſent them to IESVS, ſaying, Art thou he that art to come; or expect vve an other? ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen the men vvere come vnto him, they ſaid, Iohn the Baptiſt hath ſent vs to thee, ſying, Art thou he that art to come: or expect vve an other? ✝ 
                     verse 21 (And the ſelf ſame houre, he cured many of maladies, and hurtes, and euil ſpirits: and to many blinde he
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   gaue ſight.) ✝ 
                     verse 22 And anſvvering, he ſaid to them, Goe and report to Iohn vvhat you haue heard and ſeen: * That the blinde ſee,Eſa. 35, 5. 61, 1. the Iame vvalke, the lepers are made cleane, the deafe heare, the dead riſe againe, ✝ 
                     verse 23 
                  
                     Pauperes euangelizantur, that is, to the poore the Goſpel is preached, and they receiue it. the poore are euangelized: and bleſſed is he vvhoſoeuer ſhal not be ſcandalized in me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 * And vvhen Iohns meſſengers vvere departed,Mt. 11, 7▪
                   he began to ſay of Iohn to the multitudes, Vvhat vvent you out into the deſert to ſee? a reede moued vvith the vvinde? ✝ 
                     verse 25 But vvhat vvent you forth to ſee? a man clothed inMarke this vvel concerning Iohns apparel and diet. See the Annotations vpon S. Matth. c. 3, 4. ſoft garments? behold they that are in coſtly apparel and delicacies, are in the houſe of kings. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But vvhat vvent you out for to ſee? a Prophet? Certes I ſay to you, and more then a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 27 this is he of vvhom it is vvritten,Mal. 3, 1 
                  Behold I ſend mine Angel before thy face, vvhich ſhal prepare thy vvay before thee. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For I ſay to you, A greater Prophet among the children of vvomen then Iohn the Baptiſt, there is no man, but he that is the leſſer in the kingdom of God, is greater then he. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And al the people hearing and the Publicans, iuſtified God, being baptized vvith
 Iohns baptiſme. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But the Phariſees and the lavvyersAs they that contēned Iohns baptiſme, deſpiſed Gods counſel and wiſedō; ſo much more they that make no accoumpt of the Sacraments of the Church, deſpiſe Gods counſel and ordinance touching their ſaluation, to their owne damnation. deſpiſed the couſel of God againſt them ſelues, being not baptized of him. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And our Lord ſaid, Vvherevnto then ſhal I liken the men of this generation, and vvherevnto are they like? ✝ 
                     verse 32 They are like to children ſitting in the market-place, and ſpeaking one to an other, and ſaying, Vve haue piped to you, and you haue not daunced: vve haue lamented, and you haue not vvept.Mt. 3, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 33 For Iohn the Baptiſt came * neither eating bread nor drinking vvine: and you ſay, He hath a deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 34 The ſonne of man came eating and drinking: and you ſay, Behold a man that is a gurmander and a drinker of vvine, a frende of Publicans and ſinners. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vviſedom is iuſtified of al her children.
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 And one of the Phariſees deſired him to eate vvith him.The Goſpel vpō S. Marie Magdalens day Iul, 22. And vpon Thurſday in Paſſion weeke. And vpō Imber Friday in Sept. And being entred into the houſe of the Phariſee, he ſate downe to meate. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And behold a vvoman that was in the citie, a ſinner, as ſhe knevv that he vvas ſet dovvne in the Phariſees houſe, ſhe brought an alabaſter boxe of ointment: ✝ 
                     verse 38 and ſtanding behind beſide his feete, ſhe began toA perfect paterne of true penance in this vvoman, vvho ſought of Chriſt vvith opē teares & other ſtrange vvorkes of ſatiſfaction and deuotion, remiſſion of her ſinnes. vvater his feete vvith teares, & vviped them vvith the heares of her head, and kiſſed his feete, & anointed them with the ointmēt. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And the Phariſee that had bid him, ſeeing it, ſpake vvithin him ſelf, ſaying, This man if he vvere a Prophet, vvould knovv certes vvho and vvhat maner of vvomā ſhe is vvhich toucheth him, that ſhe is a ſinner. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And IESVS anſering ſaid to him, Simon, I haue ſomevvhat to ſay vnto thee but he ſaid, Maiſter, ſay. ✝ 
                     verse 41 A certaine creditour had tvvo debters: one did ovve fiue hūdred pence, and the other fiftie. ✝ 
                     verse 42 They hauing not vvherevvith to pay, he forgaue both. Vvhether therfore doth loue him more? ✝ 
                     verse 43 Simon anſvvering ſaid, I ſuppoſe that he to vvhom he forgaue more. But he ſaid to him, Thou haſt iudged rightly. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And turning to the vvoman, he ſaid vnto Simon, Doeſt thou ſee this vvoman? I entred ″ into thy houſe, vvater to my feete thou didſt not giue: but ſhe vvith teares hath vvatered my feete, and vvith her heares hath vviped them. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Kiſſe thou gaueſt me not: but ſhe ſince I came in, hath not ceaſed to kiſſe my feete. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Vvith oile thou didſt not anoint my head: but ſhe vvith ointment hath anointed my feete. ✝ 
                     verse 47 For the vvhich I ſay to thee, Many ſinnes are forgiuen her, becauſe ſhe hathNot only faith (as you may perceiue) but loue or charitie obtaineth remiſſion of ſinnes. loued much. But to vvhom leſſe is forgiuen, he loueth leſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And he ſaid to her, Thy ſinnes are forgiuen
 thee. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And they that ſate together at the table, began to ſay vvithin them ſelues,As the Phariſees did alwaies carpe Chriſt for remiſſiō of ſinnes in earth, ſo the Heretikes reprehend his Church that remitteth ſinnes by his authoritie. Vvho is this that alſo forgiueth ſinnes? ✝ 
                     verse 50 And he ſaid to the vvoman, ″ Thy faith hath made the ſafe, goe in peace. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     5. Built a Synagogue.) As at that time to found a Synagogue, vvas acceptable to God, and procured the praiers of the faithful people for vvhoſe vſe it vvas made:Building of Churches, Monaſteries, &c. ſo novv much more in the nevv Teſtament, to build a Church Monaſterie, College, or any like vvorke for the honour and ſeruice of God, is grateful to him and procureth the praiers of the good people for vvhoſe vſe ſuch things be founded.
                  
                     44 Into thy houſe.] An exceding approbation of the extraordinary vvorkes and ſignes of external deuotion,Exteriour ſignes of more then common deuotion. vvhich ſeeme to carnal men (though othervviſe faithful) to be often ſuperfluous or not acceptable. This Simon vvas perhaps of a good vvil, and therfore (as diuers others did els vvhere) inuited Chriſt to his houſe, not of curioſitie or captiouſnes, as ſome other did: but of affectiō, as it may ſeeme by Chriſts familiar talke vvith him. Notvvithſtanding his duties tovvardes him vvere but ordinary, but the anointing, vvaſhing, kiſſing, vviping of his feete in ſuch ſort as the vvoman did, vvere further ſignes of more then vulgar loue: ſuch as is in deuout men or vvomen that goe on pilgrimage and kiſſe deuoutly the holy memories of Chriſt and his Saincts. Vvhich is no more but an exteriour expreſſing of their affection, and that they loue much, as euery vulgar chriſtian man doth not.
                  
                     50 Thy faith.] The remiſſion of her ſinnes being attributed before to charitie, is novv alſo ſaid to come of her faith.Iuſtification attributed not to faith onely. Vvhereby you may knovv that it commonly procedeth of both, and of hope alſo, though but one named. Becauſe vvhen there be diuers cauſes concurring to one effect, the ſcriptures commonly name but one, and that eſpecially vvhich is moſt proper to the purpoſe and time▪ not excluding the other. And therfore his vvorking miracles vpon any perſon, is attributed to the faith of them on vvhom or at vvhoſe deſire they be done. Becauſe he vvrought his miracles to induce al men to beleeue in him, and therfore ſpecially required faith at their hands, and namely before other things, vvhether they did beleeue that he vvas able to doe that vvhich they aſked at his hands: vvithout vvhich it had ben rather a mockrie and tentation of him, then a true deſire of benefite at his hands.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Going ouer al Galilee with his traine, 4 he preacheth to the Iewes in parables becauſe of their reprobation: 9 but to his Diſciples manifeſtly: becauſe he wil not for the Iewes incredulity haue his comming fe
                        •
                     ſtrate: 19 ſignifying alſo that we art his kinne (though we be Gentils) and not his carnal brethren the Iewes. 22 To whom alſo (ſignified by the Geraſens) after the tempeſt in his ſleepe (that is, in his death) and caulme in his reſurrection, he commeth: but they preferring their temporals before his preſence, he leaueth them againe. 41 Likewiſe comming to cure the Iewes (who were borne when the Gentils ſickened, about Abrahams time) he is preuented with the faith of the Gentils, and then the Iewes die, but them alſo in the end he wil reſtore.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe afterward, and he made his iourney by cities and tovvnes preaching and euangelizing the kingdom of God: and the Tvvelue vvith him, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ſome vvomen that had been cured of vvicked ſpirits and infirmities,Mr. 16, 9. * Marie vvhich is called Magdalene, out of vvhom ſeuen deuils vvere gone
 forth, ✝ 
                     verse 3 and Ioane the vvife of Chuſa Herods procurator, and Suſan, andaliae multae many others that ″ did miniſter vnto him of their ſubſtance.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And * vvhen a very great multitude aſſembled,Mt. 13, 1. and haſtened out of the cities vnto him,The Goſpel vpō the Sunday of Sexageſine. he ſaid by a ſimilitude.Mr. 4, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 5 The ſovver vvent forth to ſovv his ſeede. and vvhiles he ſovveth, ſome fel by the vvay ſide, and vvas troden vpon, and the foules of the aire did eate it. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And other ſome fel vpon the rocke: and being ſhot vp, it vvithered, becauſe it had not moiſture. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And otherſome fel among thornes, and the thornes grovving vp vvithal, choked it. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And other ſome fel vpō good ground: and being ſhot vp, yelded fruite an hundred fold. Saying theſe things he cried, He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And his diſciples aſked him vvhat this parable vvas. ✝ 
                     verse 10 To vvhom he ſaid, To you it is giuen to knovv the myſterie of the kingdō of God,Eſ. 6, 9. but to the reſt in parables,See the Annotations vpon S. Matthevv. c. 13, 14. that * ſeeing they may not ſee, and hearing may not vnderſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the parable is this: The ſeede, is the vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they beſides the vvay: are thoſe that heare, then the deuil cōmeth, and taketh the vvord out of their hart, leſt beleeuing they be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For they vpon the rocke: ſuch as vvhen they heare, vvith ioy receiue the vvord: and theſe haue no rootes: becauſe
Againſt the Heretikes that ſay, faith once hat can not be loſt, and that he vvhich novv hath not faith, neuer had. for a time they beleeue, and in time of tentation they reuolt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And that vvhich fel into thornes, are they that haue heard, and going their vvaies, are choked vvith cares and riches and pleaſures of this life, and render not fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And that vpon good ground: are they vvhich in a good and very good hart, hearing the vvord, doe reteine it, and yeld fruite in patience. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And no man lighting a candel doth couer it vvith a veſſel, or put it vnder a bed: but ſetteth it vpō a cādelſticke, that they that enter in, may ſee the light. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For there is not any thing ſecrete, that ſhal not be made manifeſt: nor hid, that ſhal not be knowen, & come abrode. ✝ 
                     verse 18 See therfore how you heare. For he that hath, to him ſhal be giuen: and vvhoſoeuer hath not, that alſo vvhich he thinketh he hath, ſhal be taken avvay frō him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And * his mother and brethren came vnto him: and they could not come at him for the multitude. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And it vvas told him, Thy mother and ″ thy brethren ſtand vvithout, deſirous to ſee thee. ✝ 
                     verse 21 who anſvvering ſaid to them, MyHe did not here diſdainfully ſpeake of his mother, but teacheth that our ſpiritual kinred is to be preferred before carnal cognation. Hilar. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Mat.
                   mother and
 my brethren, are they that heare the vvord of God and doe it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 * And it came to paſſe one day:Mt. 8, 23. and he vvent vp into a boate,Mar. 4, 36. and his diſciples, and he ſaid to them, Let vs ſtrike ouer the lake. And they launched forth. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen they vvere ſailing, he ſlept: and there fel a ſtorme of vvinde into the lake, and theycomplebantur. vvere filled, and vvere in danger. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And 
See the Annotations vpon S. Matthevv c. 8, 24. they came and raiſed him, ſaying, Maiſter, vve periſh. But he riſing, rebuked the vvinde and the tempeſt of vvater: and it ceaſed, and there vvas made a calme. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he ſaid to them, Vvhere is your faith? who fearing, marueiled one to an other, ſaying, Vvho is this (trovv ye) that he commaundeth both the vvindes and the ſea,Mt. 8, 28 and they obey him? ✝ 
                     verse 26 * And they ſailed to the countrie of the Geraſens vvhich is ouer againſt Galilee.Mr. 5, 1.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And vvhen he vvas come forth to the land, there mette him a certaine man that had a deuil novv a very long time, and he did vveare no clothes, neither did he tarie in houſe, but in the monumēts. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And as he ſavv IESVS, he fel dovvne before him: and crying out vvith a great voice, he ſaid, Vvhat is to me and thee IESVS ſonne of God moſt high? I beſeech thee doe not torment me. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For he commaunded the vncleane ſpirit to goe forth out of the man. For many times he caught him, and he vvas bound vvith chaines, and kept vvith fetters: and breaking the bondes vvas driuen of the deuil into the deſerts. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And IESVS aſked him ſaying, Vvhat is thy name? But he ſaid, Legion. becauſe many deuils vvere entred into him. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And they beſought him that he vvould not commaund them to goe into the depth. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And there vvas there a heard of many ſvvine feeding on the mountaine: and they deſired him, that he vvould permit them to enter into them. And he permitted them. ✝ 
                     verse 33 The deuils therfore vvent forth out of the man, and entred into the ſvvine: and the heard vvith violence vvent headlong into the lake, and vvas ſtifled. ✝ 
                     verse 34 which vvhen the ſvvineheards ſavv done, they fled: and told into the citie and into the tovvnes. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And they vvent forth to ſee that vvhich vvas done: and they came to IESVS, and found the man, out of vvhō the deuils vvere gone forth, ſitting at his feete, clothed, and vvel in his vvittes, and they vvere afraid. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And they alſo that had ſeen, told them hovv he had been made whole from the legion. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And al the multitude of the countrie of the Geraſens beſought him to depart from
 them: for they vvere taken vvith great feare. And he going vp into the boate, returned. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And the man out of vvhom the deuils vvere departed, deſired him that he might be vvith him. But IESVS dimiſſed him, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 39 Returne into thy houſe, and tel hovv great things God hath done to thee. And he vvent through the vvhole citie, preaching hovv great things IESVS had done to him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 And it came to paſſe: vvhen IESVS vvas returned, the multitude receiued him.Mt. 9, 18▪
                   and al vvere expecting him. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And
* behold there came a man vvhoſe name vvas laîrus,Mr. 5, 22. and he vvas Prince of the Synagogue: and he fel at the feete of IESVS, deſiring him that he vvould enter into his houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 42 becauſe he had an only daughter almoſt tvvelue yeres old, and ſhe vvas a dying. And it chaunced, vvhiles he vvent, he vvas thronged of the multitudes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 43 And there vvasSee the Annotations vpon S. Matthew c. 9. 19. a certaine vvoman in a fluxe of bloud from tvvelue yeres paſt, vvhich had beſtovved al her ſubſtāce vpon Phyſicions, neither could ſhe be cured of any: ✝ 
                     verse 44 ſhe came behind him, and touched the hemme of his garment: and forthvvith the fluxe of her bloud ſtinted, ✝ 
                     verse 45 And IESVS ſaid, Vvho is it that touched me? And al denying,It is an euidēt ſigne of prerogatiue, that Peter only is named ſo often as cheefe of the company. Mar. 1, 36. Act. 5, 29. Luc. 9, 12. Mar. 16, 7. 1 Cor. 15, 5.
                   Peter ſaid, and they that vvere vvith him, Maiſter, the multitudes throng and preſſe thee, and doeſt thou ſay, Vvho touched me? ✝ 
                     verse 46 And IESVS ſaid, Some bodie hath touched me. for I knovv that there is vertue proceded from me. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And the vvoman ſeeing, that ſhe vvas not hid, came trembling, and fel dovvne before his feete: and for vvhat cauſe ſhe had touched him, ſhe ſhevved before al the people: and hovv forthvvith ſhe vvas made vvhole. ✝ 
                     verse 48 But he ſaid to her, Daughter, thy faith hath made the ſafe, goe thy vvay in peace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 49 As he vvas yet ſpeaking, there cōmeth one to the Prince of the ſynagogue, ſaying to him, That thy daughter is dead, trouble him not. ✝ 
                     verse 50 And IESVS hearing this vvord, anſvvered the father of the maide, Feare not:See the Annotations vpon S. Marke c. 5, 36. beleeue only, and ſhe ſhal be ſafe. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And vvhen he vvas come to the houſe, he permitted not any man to enter in vvith him, but Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and the father and mother of the maide. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And al vvept, and mourned for her. But he ſaid, Vveepe not, the maide is not dead, but ſleepeth. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And they derided him, knovving that ſhe vvas dead. ✝ 
                     verse 54 But he holding her hand cried ſaying, Maide ariſe. ✝ 
                     verse 55 And ″ her ſpirit returned, and ſhe roſe
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   incontinent. And he bade them giue her to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 56 And her parentes vvere aſtonied, vvhom he commaunded to tel no man that vvhich vvas done.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . That did miniſter.]
                     Holy women that folowed Chriſt. It vvas the cuſtome of the Ievves that vvomen of their ſubſtance did miniſter meate and drinke and cloth to their teachers, going about vvith them. vvhich becauſe it might haue been ſcandalous among the gentiles,1 Cor. 9, 5. 1
                           •
                        . S. Paul maketh mention that he vſed it not. And they miniſtred to our Lord of their ſubſtance for this cauſe, that he vvhoſe ſpiritual benefites they reaped, might reape their carnal things.
                  
                     20. Thy brethern.]
                     The brethren of Chriſt. Theſe brethern of our Lord, vvere not the ſonnes of the B. Virgin MARIE the mother of God,Hiero. cōt. as Heluidius vvickedly taught: neither are they to be thought (as ſome others ſay) the ſonnes of Ioſeph by an other vviſe:Heluid. C. 9. for (as S. Hierom vvriteth) not only our Lady vvas a virgin, but by reaſon of her, Ioſeph alſo: that our Sauiour might be borne of a virginal matrimonie. But they are called his brethren (according to the viſual ſpeach of the Scriptures) becauſe they vvere his coſins,Ibidē 
                        
                           •
                        . 8. either the ſonnes of Ioſephs brother, or (as the more receiued opinion is) the ſonnes of our Ladies ſiſter called Marie of Iames, which Iames therfore is alſo called the brother of our Lord.
                  
                     55. Her ſpirit returned.) This returning of the ſoules againe into the bodies of them whom CHRIST and his Apoſtles raiſed from death (ſpecially Lazarus who had been dead foure daies) doth euidently proue a third place againſt our aduerſaries,A third place after this life. that ſay, euery one goeth ſtraight to Heauen or to Hel. 
                        •
                     or it can not be thought that they vvere called from the one or the other, and therfore from ſome third place.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  His Twelue alſo now preaching euery where and working miracles, 6 Herod and al do wonder much. 10 After vvhich, he taketh them and goeth into the vvilderneſſe: Where he cureth and teacheth, feeding 5000 vvith fiue leaues. 18 Peter confeſſing him to be Chriſt, 21 he on the other ſide foretelleth his Paſsion, and that al muſt in time of perſecution folovv him therein. 
                        •
                     7 Vvherevnto to encourage vs the more, 27 he giueth in his Transfiguration a ſight of the glorie, vvhich is the revvard of ſuffering. 
                        •
                     7 The next day he caſteth out a diuel vvhich his Diſciples could not. 43 Vvhom amiddes theſe vvonders he fore vvarneth againe of his ſcandalous Paſsion, 49 And to cure their ambition, he telleth them, that the moſt humble he eſteemeth moſt: 49 bidding them alſo, not to prohibit any that is not againſt them. 51 Yea and tovvard ſuch as be againſt them Schiſmatically, to ſhevv mildnes for al that, 57 Of folowing him, three examples.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND calling together the tvvelue Apoſtles,The Goſpel vpō Thurſday in whitſō weeke. he gaue themTo cōmaund Diuels and diſeaſes either of body or ſoule, is by nature proper to God onely: but by Gods gift, men alſo may haue the ſame euen ſo to forgiue ſinnes. vertue and povver ouer al deuils,Mt. 10, 1 and to cure maladies.Mr. 3, 13 6, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he ſent them to preach the kingdom of God: and to heale the ſicke. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſaid to them, Take nothing for the vvay, neither rod, nor ſkippe, nor bread, nor money, neither haue tvvo coates. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And into vvhatſoeuer houſe you enter, tarie there, and thence doe not depart. ✝ And vvhoſoever ſhal not receiue you, going forth out of that citie,
 ſhake of the duſt alſo of your feeteA great fault to reiect the true preachers, or not to admit them into houſe for needful harbour and ſuſtenance. for a teſtimonie vpon them. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And going forth they vvent a circuite from tovvne to tovvne euangelizing and curing euery vvhere. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And * Herod the Tetrarch heard al things that vvere done by him:Mt. 14, 1 and he ſtaggered becauſe it vvas ſaid of ſome,
Mar. 6, 14. That Iohn vvas riſen from the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 8 but of other ſome, That Elias hath appeared: and of others, that a Prophet one of the old ones vvas riſen. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And Herod ſaid, Iohn I haue beheaded: but vvho is this of vvhom I heare ſuch things? And he ſought for to ſee him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * the Apoſtles being returned,Mt. 14, 13. reported to him vvhatſoeuer they did: and taking them he retired apart into a deſert place,Mar. 6, 31. vvhich belongeth to Beth-ſaida. ✝ 
                     verse 11 which the multitudes vnderſtāding,Io. 6, 5. folovved him: & he receiued them, and ſpake to them of the kingdom of God, and them that had neede of cure he healed. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the day began to dravv tovvards an end. And the Tvvelue comming neere, ſaid to him, Dimiſſe the multitudes, that going into tovvnes and villages here about, they may haue lodging, and finde meates: becauſe here vve are in a deſert place. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he ſaid to them, Giue you them to eate. But they ſaid, we haue no more but fiue loaues and tvvo fiſhes: vnles perhaps vve ſhould goe and bie meates for al this multitude. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And there vvere men almoſt fiue thouſand. And he ſaid to his diſciples, Make them ſit dovvne by companies fiftie and fiftie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And ſo they did. And they made al ſit dovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And taking the fiue loaues and the tvvo fiſhes, he looked vp vnto heauen, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
                  Here you ſee that he bleſſed the things, and not only gaue thanks to God. See Annot. Marci. c. 8, 7.
                   bleſſed them: and he brake, and diſtributed to his diſciples, for to ſet before the multitudes. ✝ 
                     verse 17 AndThe miraculous prouidēce. of God toward ſuch as folow Chriſt into deſerts, priſons, baniſhment, or whitherſoeuer. they did al eate, and had their fill. And there vvas taken vp that vvhich remained to them, tvvelue baſkets of fragments.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 * And it came to paſſe:Mt. 16, 13. vvhen he vvas alone praying, his diſciples alſo vvere vvith him: and he aſked them ſaying, Vvhom doe the multitudes ſay that I am?Mar. 8, 27. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But they anſvvered, and ſaid, Iohn the Baptiſt: and ſome, Elias: but ſome, that one of the Prophets before time, is riſen. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he ſaid to thē, But vvhom ſay ye that I am? Simon Peter anſvvering, ſaid, The CHRIST of God. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But he rebukīg them, cōmaunded that they ſhould tell this to no man, ✝ 
                     verse 22 ſaying, That the ſonne of man muſt ſuffer many things, and be reiected of the Auncients and cheefe Prieſts and Scribes, and be killed, and the
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   third day riſe againe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And he ſaid to al, If any man vvil come after me, let him denie him ſelf, and take vp his croſſe daily, and folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For he that vvil ſaue his life, ſhal loſe it: for he that ſhal loſe his life for my ſake, ſhal ſaue it. ✝ 
                     verse 25 for vvhat profit hath a man if he gaine the vvhole vvorld, and loſe him ſelf, and caſt avvay him ſelf? ✝ 
                     verse 26 For he that ſhal be aſhamed of me and of my vvordes, him the Sonne of man ſhal be aſhamed of, vvhen he ſhal come in his maieſtie, and his fathers, and of the holy Angels. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And I ſay to you aſſuredly, There be ſome ſtanding here that ſhal not raſt death, ″ til they ſee the kingdom of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 * And it came to paſſe after theſe vvordes almoſt eight daies,The TRANSFIGVRATION. and he tooke Peter and Iames and Iohn,Mt. 17, 1 and vvent into a mountaine to pray.Mr. 9, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And vvhiles he prayed, the ſhape of his countenance vvas altered: and his raiment vvhite and gliſtering. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And behold tvvo men talked vvith him. And they vvere Moyſes and Elias, ✝ 
                     verse 31 appearing in maieſtie. And they told his deceaſe that he ſhould accompliſh in Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But Peter and they that vvere vvith him, vvere heauie vvith ſleepe. And avvaking, they ſavv his maieſtie, and the tvvo men that ſtoode vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And it came to paſſe, vvhen they departed from him, Peter ſaid to IESVS, Maiſter, it is good for vs to be here: and let vs make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moyſes, and one for Elias: not knovving vvhat he ſaid. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And as he ſpake theſe things, there came a cloud, and ouerſhadovved them: and they feared,2. Pet. 1, 17. vvhen they entered into the cloude. ✝ 
                     verse 35 * And a voice vvas made out of the cloude, ſaying, This is my beloued ſonne, heare him. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And vvhiles the voice vvas made, IESVS vvas found alone. And they held their peace, and told no man in thoſe daies any of theſe things vvhich they had ſeen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 * And it came to paſſe the day folovving,Mt. 17, 14. vvhen they came dovvne from the mountaine, there mette him a great multitude.Mar. 9, 17. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And behold a man of the multitude cried out, ſaying, Maiſter, I beſeeche thee, looke vpō my ſonne becauſe he is mine only one. ✝ 
                     verse 39 and loe, the ſpirit taketh him, and he ſodenly crieth, and he daſheth him, and teareth him that he fometh, and vvith much a doe departeth renting him. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And I deſired thy diſciples to caſt him out, and they could not. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid,Incredultie hindereth the effect of Exorciſmes, and other miraculous power giuen to the Church. O faithles and peruerſe 
 generation, hovv long ſhal I be vvith you and ſuffer you? bring hither thy ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And vvhen he came to him, the deuil daſhed, and tore him. And IESVS rebuked the vncleane ſpirit, and healed the lad: and rendred him to his father. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And al vvere aſtonied at the might of God: and al merueiling at al things that he did, he ſaid to his diſciples, ✝ 
                     verse 44 Lay you in your hartes theſe vvordes, for it ſhal come to paſſe that the Sonne of man ſhal be deliuered into the hands of men. ✝ 
                     verse 45 But they did not knovv this vvord, and it vvas couered before them, that they perceiued it not. And they vvere afraid to aſke him of this vvord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 * And there entredDeſire of preeminence is an humane infirmitie oftē euen among the good. Againſt which, Chriſt teacheth humility, but forbiddeth not Superiority. a cogitation into them,Mt. 18, 1 vvhich of them ſhould be greater.Mar. 9, 34. ✝ 
                     verse 47 But IESVS ſeeing the cogitations of their hart, tooke a childe and ſet him by him, ✝ 
                     verse 48 and ſaid to them, whoſoeuer receiueth this childe in my name, receiueth me: and vvhoſoeuer receiueth me, receiueth him that ſent me. For he that is the leſſer among you al, he is the greater.
                ✝ 
                     verse 49 * And Iohn anſvvering ſaid,Mar. 9, 38. Maiſter, vve ſavv a certaine man caſting out deuils in thy name, and vve prohibited him, becauſe he folovveth not vvith vs. ✝ 
                     verse 50 And IESVS ſaid to him,
There be ſome that folow not Chriſt preciſely in life and doctrine, of whom we may make our aduā
                     tage to the propagation of Chriſtes honour and religion, whē they doe any thing for the aduācemēt thereof, of what intention ſoeuer they doe it. Philip. 1, 15.
                   Prohibit not. for he that is not againſt you, is for you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 51 And it came to paſſe, vvhiles the daies of his aſſumption vvere accōpliſhing, and he fixed his face to goe into Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And he ſent meſſengers before his face: and going they entred into a citie of the Samaritans to prepare for him. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And they receiued him not, becauſe his ″ face vvas to goe to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And vvhen his diſciples Iames and Iohn had ſeen it, they ſaid, Lord vvilt thou vve ſay that fire come dovvne from heauen and conſumethem as Elias alſo did? them'? ✝ 
                     verse 55 And turning, ″ he rebuked them, ſaying, You knovv not of vvhat ſpirit you are. ✝ 
                     verse 56 The ſonne of man came not to deſtroy ſoules, but to ſaue. And they vvent into an other tovvne.
                ✝ 
                     verse 57 And it came to paſſe as they vvalked in the vvay, a certaine man ſaid to him,Mt. 8, 19. * I vvil folovv thee vvhitherſoeuer thou goeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 58 IESVS ſaid to him,This man would haue folowed him for temporal commodities, and therfore was not ſuffered. The foxes haue holes, and the foules of the aire neſtes: but the ſonne of man hath not vvhere to repoſe his head. ✝ 
                     verse 59 But he ſaid to an other, Folovv me. And he ſaid, Lord, permit me firſt to goe, and to burie my father. ✝ 
                     verse 60 And IESVS ſaid to him, Let the dead burie their dead: but goe thou, ſet forth the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 61 And an other ſaid, I vvil folovv thee Lord, but permit me
 firſt to take my leaue of them that are at home. ✝ 
                     verse 62 IESVS ſaid to him, ″ No man putting his hand to the plough, and looking backe, is apt for the kingdom of God.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     27. Til they ſee.)
                     The Tranſfiguration. To the Apoſtles, that had to preach the kingdom of God and to ſuffer ſo much miſerie for the ſame in this vvorld, he vvil ſhevv his glorie, and giue them a taſt of his owne ioyful ſtate and of his Saincts in heauen, calling thither Moyſes and Elias, that the Lavv and Prophets might be vvitneſſes of the ſame. See the annotation vpon S. Matthevv c. 17, 2.
                  
                     53. Face to goe to Hieruſalem.) The Samaritans vvere Schiſmatikes from the Ievves,Io. 4. 9. and had a Schiſmatical temple in mount Garîzim,Schiſmatikes. of purpoſe to dravv men thither from Gods temple in Hieruſalem,
                        
                           •
                         Re 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           •
                        7. vvhere only vvas the true and as it vvere the Catholike ſeruice and Sacrifice vnto God.Tob. 
                           •
                        . Therfore they did not gladly receiue our Sauiour, becauſe they perceiued he vvas going to Hieruſalem.
                  
                     53. He rebuked them.) Not iuſtice nor al rigorous puniſhment of ſinners is here forbidden,Deſire of reuenge. not Elias fact reprehēded, nor the Church or Chriſtian Princes blamed for putting Heretikes to death: but that none of theſe ſhould be done for deſire of our particular reuenge,Act. 5. or vvithout diſcretion, & regard of their amendement,The Churches ſeueritie. and example to others. Therfore S. Peter vſed his povver vpon Ananias and Sapphira, vvhen he ſtrooke them both dovvne to death for defrauding the Church.
                  
                     62. No man looking backe.) It is a dangerous temptation for a man that hath loſt or left his goods for Chriſt,Looking backe. to looke much backe at them, and to remember vvith delight the pleaſures and eaſes of this vvorld, for it breedeth in him diſcontentment of the troubles and croſſes that are incident to the ſtate of ſuch as fully folovv Chriſt. In vvhich caſe a man ſhould euer looke forvvard tovvards heauen, and neuer backevvard to the vvorld.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He ſendeth yet 72 moe to preach to the Iewes, with power alſo of miracles, 13 crying w
                        •
                      to the cities impenitent. 17 At their returne he agniſeth the great power he gaue them, but yet teacheth them not to be proud thereof, 21 and praiſeth God for his grace, 23 his Church alſo for her happy ſtate. 2
                        •
                     . To one of the Scribes he ſheweth, that the loue of God and of his neighbour wil bring him to life euerlaſting, 29 teaching him by the parable of the Samaritane, to take euery one for his neighbour that needeth his charitie. 38 To Martha he ſheweth that Maries Contemplatius life is the better.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after this our Lord deſigned alſo other 
As the twelue Apoſtles did repreſent the higher degree of the clergie, called Biſhops: ſo theſe Seuentie tvvo beare the figure of the inferiour clergie, called Prieſts. Beda.
                   ſeuentie tvvo:The Goſpel vpō S. Markes day and S. Lukes. and he ſent them tvvo and tvvo before his face into euery citie and place vvhither him ſelf vvould come. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he ſaid to them, The harueſt truely is much: but the vvorkemen fevv. Deſire therfore the lord of the harueſt, that he ſend vvorkemen into his harueſt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Goe: behold I ſend you as lambes among vvolues. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Carie not purſe not ſkrip, nor ſhoes: and ſalute no body by the vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Into vvhatſoeuer houſe you enter, firſt ſay, Peace to this houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 and if the ſonne of peace be 
 there, your peace ſhal reſt vpon him: but if not, it ſhal returne to you. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And in the ſame houſe tarie you, eating and drinking ſuch things as they haue.1. Tim. 5, 18. * For the vvorkeman is vvorthie of his hire. Remoue not from houſe to houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And into vvhat citie ſoeuer you enter, and they receiue you, eate ſuch things as are ſet before you: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and cure the ſicke that are in it, and ſay to them, The kingdom of God is come nigh vpon you. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And into vvhatſoeuer citie you enter, and they receiue you not, going forth into the ſtreates thereof, ſay, ✝ 
                     verse 11 The duſt alſo of your citie that cleaueth to vs, vve doe vvipe of againſt you. yet this knovv ye that the kingdom of God is at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 12 I ſay to you, it ſhal beDifferences of paines and damnation in Hel according to the differences of demerites. Aug. li. 
                           •
                        . c. 5. cont. Iulian.
                   more tolerable for Sodom in that day, then for that citie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvo to thee Corozáim, vvo to thee Beth-ſaida: for if in Tyre and Sidon had been vvrought the miracles that haue beene vvrought in you, they had done penance ſittingTrue penance not onely to lead a new life, but to puniſh the body by ſuch things as here be recorded, for the il life paſt. in ſacke cloth and aſhes long agoe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But it ſhal be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the iudgement, then for you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And thou Capharnaum that art exalted vnto heauē; thou ſhalt be thruſt dovvne euen vnto hel. ✝ 
                     verse 16 
                  It is al one to deſpiſe Chriſt, and to deſpiſe his Prieſts and Miniſters in the the Catholike Church: to refuſe his doctrine, & theirs. He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. And he that deſpiſeth me, deſpiſeth him that ſent me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the Seuentie-tvvo returned vvith ioy, ſaying, Lord, the Deuils alſo are ſubiect to vs in thy name. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he ſaid to them, I ſavv Satan as a lightening fal from heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Behold, I haue giuen you povver to treade vpon ſerpents, and ſcorpions, and vpon al the povver of the enemie, and nothing ſhal hurt you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But yet reioyce not in this, that the ſpirits are ſubiect vnto you: but reioyce not in this, that your names are vvritten in heauen. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 In that very houre he reioyced in ſpirit, and ſaid, I confeſſe to thee O Father, Lord of heauen and earth, becauſe thou haſt hid theſe things from the vviſe and prudent, and haſt reuealed them ″ to litle ones. Yea Father, for ſo hath it vvel pleaſed thee. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Al things are deliuered to me of my father. And no man knovveth vvho the Sonne is, but the Father: and vvho the Father is, but the Sonne, and to vvhom the Sonne vvil reueale. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And turning to his Diſciples, he ſaid, Bleſſed are the eies that ſee the things that you ſee.The Goſpel vpō 12 Sunday after Pētecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For I ſay to you, that many Prophets and Kings deſired to ſee the things that you ſee, and ſavv them not: and to heare the
 things that you heare, and heard them not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And behold a certaine lavvyer ſtoode vp, tempting him and ſaying, Maiſter, by doing of vvhat thing ſhal I poſſeſſe life euerlaſting? ✝ 
                     verse 26 But he ſaid to him, In the lavv vvhat is vvritten?Deu. 6, 5 hovv readeſt thou? ✝ 
                     verse 27 He anſvvering ſaid, Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God vvith thy vvhole hart,
                  Leu. 19, 18. 
                  and vvith thy vvhole foule, and vvith al thy ſtrength, and vvith al thy minde: and thy neighbour as thy ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And he ſaid to him, Thou haſt anſvvered right, ″ this doe and thou ſhalt liue. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But he deſirous to iuſtifie him ſelf, ſaid to IESVS, And vvho is my neighbour? ✝ 
                     verse 30 And IESVS taking it,S. Auguſtin ſaith that the Apoſtle (1. Cor. 9.) according to this place did ſupererogate, that is, did more then he needed or was bound to doe, when he might haue required al duties for preaching the Goſpel, but would nor. li. de ep. Monach. c. 5. whereof it cō
                     meth, that the workes which we doe more then precept, be called workes of Supererogation: & whereby it is alſo euident againſt the Proteſtāts, that there be ſuch workes. See Optatus li. 6. cont. Par
                           ••
                        n. how aptly he applyeth this parable to S. Paules counſel of virginitie (1 Cor. 7) as to a worke of ſupererogation. ſaid, A certaine man vvent dovvne from Hieruſalem into Iericho, and fel among theeues, vvho alſo ſpoiled him, and giuing him vvoundes vvent avvay leauing him ″ halfe-dead. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And it chaunced that a certaine Prieſt vvent dovvne the ſame vvay: and ſeeing him, paſſed by. ✝ 
                     verse 32 In like maner alſo a Leuite, vvhen he vvas neere the place, and ſavv him, paſſed by. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But a certaine Samaritane going his iourney, came neere him: and ſeeing him, vvas moued vvith mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And going vnto him, bound his vvoundes, povvring in oile and vvine: and ſetting him vpon his ovvne beaſt, brought him into an inne, and tooke care of him. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And the next day he tooke forth tvvo pence, and gaue to the hoſt, and ſaid, Haue care of him: and vvhatſoeuer thou ſhaltSuperogaueris, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſupererogate, I at my returne vvil repay thee. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Vvhich of theſe three in thy opinion vvas neighbour to him that fel among theeues? ✝ 
                     verse 37 But he ſaid, He that did mercie vpon him. And IESVS ſaid to him, Goe, and doe thou in like maner. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 
                  The Goſpel vpon the Aſſumptiō of our Lady Aug. 15.
                   And it came to paſſe as they vvent, and he entred into a certaine tovvne: and a certaine vvoman named Martha, receiued him into her houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 39 and ſhe had a ſiſter called Marie. vvho ſitting alſo at our Lords feete, heard his vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But Martha vvas buſie about much ſeruice. vvho ſtoode and ſaid, Lord, haſt thou no care that my ſiſter hath left me alone to ſerue? ſpeake to her therfore, that ſhe help me. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And our Lord anſvvering ſaid to her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and art troubled about very many things. ✝ 
                     verse 42 But one thing is neceſſarie. ″ Marie hath choſen the beſt part vvhich ſhal not be taken avvay from her. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     21. To litle ones) By this place euery vulgar artificer may not preſume that God hath reuealed al truth to him, and therfore refuſe to be taught of the learned. for Chriſt did not aftervvard endevv fiſhers and vulgar men nor any other vvith the gifts of vviſdom and tonges, vvithout their induſtrie, ſtudy, and teaching, though at the beginning, of great prouidence he did it, that it might be cleere to the vvorld,The humble vnlearned Catholike knovveth Chriſt better then the proud learned Heretike. that al Nations vvere conuerted to him not by perſuaſion of cunning Orators or ſubtil Diſputers, but by the plaine force of his grace and truth, vvhich S. Auguſtine counteth greater then al other miracles. Further we are taught by this place, that the poore humble obedient children of the Church knovv by their faith the high myſteries of Chriſtes Diuinity, and his preſence in the B. Sacrament, and ſuch like: rather then Arius, Caluin, and other like proud Scribes and Phariſees.
                  
                     28. This doe.) Not by faith only, but by keeping Gods commaundements we obtaine life euerlaſting: not onely by beleeuing, but by doing. The heretikes ſay that it is impoſſible to keepe this commaundement of louing God with al our hart.The commaundements poſſible to be kept. But the Scriptures giue vs examples of diuers that haue kept and fulfilled it, as far as is requiſite in this life. 3. reg. 14, 8. 
                           •
                        . Par. 15, 15. Pſ. 118, 10. Ecclci. 47, 9, 10. 4 Reg. 20, 3. 5. Luc. 1, 5. And if it vvere impoſſible to keepe it, and yet by Chriſt propoſed for the meane to obtaine life euerlaſting, he had mocked this Lavvyer and others, and not taught them.
                  
                     30. Halfe dead.) Here is ſignified man vvounded very ſore in his vnderſtanding and free-wil,Conc. Arauſ. 
                           •
                         cap. 25. to. 1. and al other povvers of ſoule and body, by the ſinne of Adam: but yet that neither vnderſtanding, nor free-vvil,The parable of the vvounded man, explicated. nor the reſt vvere extinguiſhed in man or taken avvay. The Prieſt and Leuite, ſignifie the Lavv of Moyſes:Conc. this Samaritane, is Chriſt the Prieſt of the nevve Teſtament: the oile and vvine,Cōc, Trid. his Sacraments: the hoſt, the prieſts his miniſters. Vvhereby is ſignified, that the Lavv could not recouer the ſpiritual life of mankind from the death of ſinne,Seſt. 6. c. 1. that is, iuſtifie man: but Chriſt onely, vvho by his paſſion and the grace and vertue thereof miniſtred in and by his Sacraments, iuſtifieth, and increaſeth the iuſtice of man, healing and abling free-vvil to doe al good vvorkes.
                  
                     42. Marie the beſt part.) Tvvo notable exāples, one of the life Actiue, in Martha: the other of the life Contēplatiue,The Contemplatiue or Religious life, better then the Actiue and ſecular. in Marie
                        •
                      repreſenting vnto vs, that in holy Church there ſhould be alvvaies ſome to ſerue God in both theſe ſeueral ſorts. The life contēplatiue is here preferred before the actiue, the Religious of both ſexes are of that more excellent ſtate, and therfore our Proteſtants haue wholy abandoned them out of their common wealth, which the true Church neuer wanted. But to ſay truth, they haue neither Martha nor Marie. our Lord geue them grace to ſee their miſerie, If ours were not anſwerable to their profeſſion, or were degenerated, why haue they no new ones? if our Churches Votaries vowed vnlawful things, Chaſtitie, Pouertie, Obedience, Pilgrimage: what other Votaries or lawful vowes haue they? For, to offer voluntarily by vow (beſides the keeping of Gods commaundements,Vovves and votaries. wherevnto we are bound by precept and promiſe in our Baptiſme) our ſoules, bodies, goods, or any other acceptable thing to God, is an acte of ſoueraine worſhip belonging to God onely: and there was neuer true religion without ſuch vowes and Votaries. If there be none in their whole Church that profeſſe contemplation, or that vow any thing at al to God voluntarily, neither in their bodies nor in their goods: God and the world knovv they haue no Church nor religion at al.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  He teacheth a forme of prayer, 
                        •
                      and exhorteth to pray inſtantly, 11 aſſuring that ſo God wil giue vs good things. 14 The Iewes blaſpheming his caſting out of Diuels, and aſking for a miracle from heauen, 17 he defendeth his doing: 
                        〈◊〉
                      foretelling alſo the Diuels expulſion by him out of the world (that is, the vocation of the Gentils) 24 and his reentrie into their nation, 27 with their reprobation though he be of their fleſh, 29 and alſo their final moſt worthy damnation. 37 Againe, to the Phariſees and Scribes he crieth wo, as authors of the ſaid 
                        ••
                     probation now at hand.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe, vvhen he vvas in a certaine place, praying, as he ceaſed, one of his Diſciples ſaid to him, Lord teach vs to pray, as Iohn alſo taught his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he ſaid them,Mt. 6, 9. * Vvhen you pray, ſay, FATHER, ſanctified be thy name. Thy kingdom come, ✝ 
                        verse 3 Our daily bread giue vs this day, ✝ 
                        verse 4 and forgiue vs our ſinnes, for becauſe our ſelues alſo doe forgiue euery one that is in debt to vs, And lead vs not into temptation. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he ſaid to them, Vvhich of you ſhal haue a frende,
                     The Goſpel in Maioribus 
                           •
                        itanijs on S. Markes day, and in the Rogation daies. And in a votiue Maſſe againſt the Pagans. and ſhal goe to him at midnight, and ſhal ſay to him, Frende, lend me three loaues, ✝ 
                     verse 6 becauſe a frende of mine is come out of his way to me, and I haue not what to ſet before him: ✝ 
                     verse 7 & he from vvithin anſvvering ſaith, Trouble me not, novv the doore is ſhut, and my children are vvith me in bed: I can not riſe and giue thee. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And if he ſhal perſeuêre knocking, I ſay to you, although he vvil not riſe and giue him becauſe he is his frende, yet for his importunitie he vvil riſe,The Goſpel in a votiue Maſſe for ſinnes. and giue him as many as he needeth.Mt. 7. 7. ✝ 
                     verse 9 * And I ſay to you, Aſke, and it ſhal be giuen you: ſeeke, and you ſhal finde: knocke, and it ſhal be opened to you. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For euery one that aſketh, receiueth: and he that ſeeketh, findeth: and to him that knocketh, it ſhal be opened. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And vvhich of you if he aſke his father bread, vvil he giue him a ſtone? or a fiſh, vvil he for a fiſh giue him a ſerpent? ✝ 
                     verse 12 Or if he aſke an egge, vvil he reach him a ſcorpion? ✝ 
                     verse 13 If you then being naught, knovv hovv to giue good giftes to your children, hovv much more vvil your father from heauen giue the good ſpirit to them that aſke him? ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 * And he vvas caſting out a deuil,Mt. 12, 22. and that vvas dumme. And vvhen he had caſt out the deuil, the dumme ſpake: and the multitudes marueiled.The Goſpel vpō the 3 Sunday in Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 15 * And certaine of them ſaid,Mr. 3, 22. In Beel-zebub the prince of Deuils he caſteth out Deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And other tempting, aſked of him a ſigne from heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But he ſeeing their cogitations, ſaid to them, Euery kingdom deuided againſt it ſelf, ſhal be made deſolate, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   houſe vpon houſe, ſhal fall. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And if Satan alſo be deuided againſt him ſelf, hovv ſhal his kingdom ſtand? becauſe you ſay that in Beel-zebub I doe caſt out Deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And if I in Beel-zebub caſt out Deuils: your children, in vvhom doe they caſt out? therfore they ſhal be your iudges. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But if I in theThis finger, is the ſpirit of God, Mt. 12, 28. finger of 
 God doe caſt out Deuils: ſurely the kingdom of God is come vpon you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvhen the ſtrong armed keepeth his court: thoſe things are in peace that he poſſeſſeth. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But if a ſtronger then he, come vpon him and ouercome him: he vvil take avvay his vvhole armour vvherein he truſted, and vvil diſtribute his ſpoiles. ✝ 
                     verse 23 He that is not vvith me, is againſt me: and he that gathereth not vvith me, ſcattereth. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vvhen the vncleane ſpirit ſhal depart out of a man, he vvandereth through places vvithout vvater, ſeeking reſt. And not finding, he ſaith, I vvil returne into my houſe vvhence I departed. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen he is come, he findeth it ſvvept vvith a beſome, and trimmed. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Then he goeth and taketh ſeuen other ſpirits vvorſe then him ſelf, and entring in they dvvel there. And thenouiſsima ſiunt laſt of that man be made vvorſe then the firſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 
                  The Goſpel vpon Aſſumption eue, and in a Votiue of our Lady betwene Candlemas and Eaſter, and betwene Pētecoſt and Aduent. And came to paſſe: vvhen he ſaid theſe things, a certaine vvoman lifting vp her voice out of the multitude ſaid to him, ″ Bleſſed is the vvombe that bare thee, and the pappes that thou didſt ſucke. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But he ſaid,The ſaid mother of God, in that alſo was bleſſed that ſhe was the temporal meanes & miniſter of the Incarnatiō, but much more bleſſed, in that ſhe continued the perpetual keeper of his word. Beda. Aug. tract. 19. in Ioan.
                   Yea rather, bleſſed are they that heare the vvord of God, and keepe it. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And the multitudes running together, he began to ſay,
* This generation,Mt. 12, 29. is a vvicked generation: it aſketh a ſigne, and a ſigne ſhal not be giuen it but ″ the ſigne of Ionas the Prophet.Ion. 2, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 30 * For as Ionas vvas a ſigne to the Niniuites: ſo ſhal the Sonne of man alſo be to this generation.3 Reg. 10, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 31 * The Queene of the South ſhal riſe in the iudgement vvith the men of this generation, and ſhal condemne them: becauſe ſhe came from the endes of the earth to heare the vviſedom of Salomon. and behold, more then Salomon here. ✝ 
                     verse 32 The men of Niniuee ſhal riſe in the iudgement vvith this generation,Ion. 3, 5. and ſhal condemne it, * becauſe they
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Marke that the great penance of the Niniuites (Ionae 3) is here expreſſed by this Greeke vvord. See Annot. Mat. 3, 2. The Goſpel for a Confeſſor that is Biſhop. did penance at the preaching of Ionas. and behold, more then Ionas here.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 * No man lighteth a candel,Mt. 5, 15. and putteth it in ſecrete, neither vnder a buſhel:Mar. 4, 21. but vpon a candleſticke, that they that goe in may ſee the light. ✝ 
                     verse 34 * The candel of thy body, is thine eie.Mt. 6, 22. If thine eie be ſimple, thy vvhole body ſhal be lightſome: but if it be naught, thy body alſo ſhal be darkeſome. ✝ 
                     verse 35 See therfore that the light vvhich is in thee, be not darkeneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 36 If then thy vvhole body be lightſome, hauing no part of darkeneſſe: it ſhal be lightſome vvholy, and as a
 bright candel it ſhal lighten thee. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vvhen he vvas ſpeaking, a certaine Phariſee deſired him that he vvould dine vvith him. and he going in ſate dovvne to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And the Phariſee began to thinke vvithin him ſelf and to ſay, Vvhy he vvas not vvaſhed before dinner. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And our Lord ſaid to him,Mt. 23, 25. * Novv you Phariſees doe make cleane that on the out ſide of the cuppe and of the platter: but that of yours vvhich is vvithin, is ful of rapine and iniquitie. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Fooles, did not he that made that on the outſide, make that alſo that is on the inſide? ✝ 
                     verse 41 But yetQuod ſupereſt, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that that remaineth, ″ giue almes, & behold al things are cleane vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 42 But vvo to you Phariſees, becauſe you tithe minte and revve and euery herbe: and paſſe ouer iudgement and the charitie of God. but theſe things you ought to haue done, and not to omit thoſe. ✝ 
                     verse 43 Vvo to you Phariſees, becauſe you loue the firſt chaires in the ſynagogs, and ſalutations in the market-place. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Vvo to you, becauſe you are as monuments that appeare not, and men vvalking ouer, are not vvare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 45 And one of the Lavvyers anſvvering ſaith to him, Maiſter, in ſaying theſe things, thou ſpeakeſt to our reproche alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 46 But he ſaid, ″ Vvo to you Lavvyers alſo: becauſe you lode men vvith burdens which they can not beare,The Goſpel for many Martyrs. and your ſelues touch not the packes vvith one of your fingers. ✝ 
                     verse 47 Wo to you thatNot the building of the Prophets monuments is condemned, but their imitation of their fathers that ſlew the Prophets. Ambroſ.
                   build the monumēts of the Prophets: and your fathers did kil them. ✝ 
                     verse 48 Surely you doe teſtifie that you conſent to the vvorkes of your fathers: becauſe they in deede did kil them, and you build their ſepulchres. ✝ 
                     verse 49 For this cauſe the vviſedō alſo of God ſaid, I vvil ſend to them Prophets and Apoſtles, and of them they vvil kil and perſecute. ✝ 
                     verse 50 that the bloud of al the Prophets that vvas ſhed from the making of the vvorld, may be required of this generation,Gen. 4, 8 ✝ 
                     verse 51 * from the bloud of Abel vnto the * bloud of Zacharie that vvas ſlaine betvvene the altar and the temple.2. Par. 24, 22. Yea I ſay to you, it ſhal be required of this generation. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 52 Vho to you Lavvyers, becauſe you haue taken avvay the key of knovvledge: your ſelues haue not entred, and thoſe that did enter you haue prohibited. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And vvhen he ſaid theſe things to them, the Phariſees and the Lavvyers began vehemently to vrge him, and to ſtoppe his mouth about many things, ✝ 
                     verse 54 lying in waite for him, & ſeeking to catch ſome thing of his mouth, that they might accuſe him.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     27. Bleſſed is the vvombe.)
                     Beda vpon this place. Let vs alſo (ſaith Venerable Bede) lift vp our voice vvith the Catholike Church,Our B. Lady. of vvhich this vvoman vvas a figure: let vs lift vp our hartes among the people, and ſay to our Sauiour, Bleſſed be the vvombe that bare thee, and the pappes vvhich thou didſt ſucke, for bleſſed in deede is the mother vvhich bare the King that ruleth heauen and earth for euer.
                  
                     29. The ſigne of Ionas.)
                     The ſigne of Ionas. Of al miracles, his Reſurrection, after he had been according to his body, in the graue, according to his ſoule, in Hel three daies, vvas the greateſt, and moſt conuinceth the incredulous Ievves: and therfore a greater or more euident then that, he ſaith he vvil not giue them.
                  
                     41. Giue almes.)
                     
                        Ecclci. 3, 33. The great force of almes is here and in diuers places of holy vvrite ſignified.The force of almes. In one place, they extinguiſh ſinne: in an other, they redeeme ſinnes: in an other, they deliuer from death:Dan. 4, 24 in an other, to them giuen or omitted, our iudgement to heauen or hel is attributed: and here they make cleane and ſatisfie for the Ievves former offenſes.Tob. 4, 12, 11. 9. for (as S. Auguſtine ſaith c. 70 Enchiridij) almes deedes profite not a man that hath a vvill to continevv in his ſinnes, but they are to be done for a propitiation to God of former offenſes.Mat. 25. 35, 42. Novv hovv vvel the Proteſtants like this doctrine ſo euidently ſet forth in Scripture, let the indifferent iudge, and hovv vvel it agreeth vvith their onely faith.
                  
                     46. Wo to you Lavvyers.)
                     The Lavvyers and Prieſts of the old Teſtament. Theſe vvere Doctors of Moyſes Lavv, othervviſe called Scribes. Shal we therfore crie out againſt al Lavvyers novv, or ought the name of Lavvyer be odious vvith vs, becauſe of theſe naughty Lavvyers among the Ievves? much leſſe ought the name of Prieſts to be odious (as Heretikes would haue it) becauſe of the Ievves Prieſts that vvere ſo buſy againſt our Sauiour.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  He prepareth his Diſciples againſt perſecutions to come vpon them at their publiſhing of his doctrine. 13 With deuiding the brethrens inheritance he wil not medle, but exhorteth them againſt auarice, 22 and his Diſciples (by this occaſion) againſt ſolicitude ſo much as of neceſſaries. 32 yea counſeling them to geue al in almes, 35 and to be ready at a knocke: 41 namely admoniſhing Peter and other Prelats to ſee to their charge: 49 and al, not to looke but for perſecution. 54 The Iewes he reprehendeth for that they wil not ſee this time of grace, 58 whereas it is ſo horrible to die without reconciliation.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND when great multitudes ſtoode about him, ſo that they trode one an other, he began to ſay to his Diſciples, Take good heede of the leauen of the Phariſees, vvhich is hypocriſie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 * For nothing is hid,Mr. 10, 26. that ſhal not be reuealed: nor ſecrete, that ſhal not be knovven. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For the things that you haue ſaid in darkneſſe,Mar. 4, 22. ſhal be ſaid in the light: and that vvhich you haue ſpoken into the eare in the chambers, ſhal be preached in the houſe-toppes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And I ſay to you my frendes, Be not afraid of them that kil the body, and after this haue no more to doe. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But I vvil ſhevv you vvhom ye ſhal feare:The feare of Hel alſo is profitable: contrarie to the proteſtāts, teaching ſecuritie of ſaluation, and that feare of Hel maketh men hypocrites. feare him vvho after he hath killed, hath povver to caſt into hel. yea I ſay to you, feare him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Are not fiue ſparovves ſold for tvvo farthings: and one of them is not forgotten before God? ✝ 
                     verse 7 Yea the heares alſo of your head are
 al numbered.Mt. 10, 32. Feare not therfore: you are more vvorth then many ſparovves. ✝ 
                     verse 8 * And I ſay to you, ″ Euery one that confeſſeth me before men,Mar. 8, 38. the Sonne of man alſo vvil confeſſe him before the Angels of God. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But he that denieth me before men,Mt. 12, 33. ſhal be denied before the Angels of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * And 
See Annot. Mt. 12, 32. euery one that ſpeaketh a vvord againſt the ſonne of man, it ſhal be forgiuen him:Mr. 3, 28 but he that ſhal blaſpheme againſt the holy Ghoſt,Mt. 10, 19. to him it ſhal not be forgiuen. ✝ 
                     verse 11 * And vvhen they ſhal bring you in to the ſynagogs and to magiſtrates and poteſtates,Mar. 13, 11. be not careful in vvhat maner, and vvhat you ſhal anſvver, or vvhat you ſhal ſay. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the holy Ghoſt ſhal teach you in the very houre vvhat you muſt ſay.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And one of the multitude ſaid to him, Maiſter, ſpeake to my brother that he deuide the inheritaunce vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But he ſaid to him, Man, ″ vvho hath appointed me iudge or deuider ouer you? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he ſaid to them, See and bevvare of al auarice: for not in any mans aboundance doth his life conſiſt, of thoſe things vvhich he poſſeſſeth. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he ſpake a ſimilitude to them, ſaying, A certaine riche mās field yelded plentie of fruites. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and he thought vvithin him ſelf, ſaying,
Giue it to the poore, that ſhouldſt thou do, ſaith S. Baſil. Vvhat ſhal I doe, becauſe I haue not vvhither to gather my fruites? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he ſaid, This vvil I doe, I vvil deſtroy my barnes, and vvil make greater: and thither vvil I gather al things that are grovven to me, and my goods, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and I vvil ſay to my ſoule, Soule, thou haſt much goods laid vp for many yeres, take thy reſt, eate, drinke, make good cheere. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But God ſaid to him,A goodly warning for al riche men. Thou foole, this night they require thy ſoule of thee: and the things that thou haſt prouided, vvhoſe ſhal they be? ✝ 
                     verse 21 So is he that laieth vp treaſure to him ſelf, and is not ″ riche to God vvard.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he ſaid to his Diſciples,Mt. 6, 25 * Therfore I ſay to you,He forbiddeth not cōpetent prouidēce, but to much carefulnes. See Annot. vpon S. Matth. c. 6, 25. Be not careful for your life, vvhat you ſhal eate: nor for your body, vvhat you ſhal doe on. ✝ 
                     verse 23 The life is more then the meate, and the body is more then the raiment. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Conſider the rauens, for they ſovv not, neither doe they reape, vvhich neither haue ſtorehouſe not barne, and God feedeth them. Hovv much more are you of greater price then they? ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhich of you by caring can adde to his ſtature one cubite? ✝ 
                     verse 26 If then you be not able to doe ſo much as the leaſt thing, for the reſt vvhy are you careful? ✝ 
                     verse 27 Conſider the lilies hovv 
 they grovv: they labour not, neither doe they ſpinne. But I ſay to you, Neither Salomon in al his glorie vvas araied as one of theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And if the graſſe that to day is in the field, and to morovv is caſt into the ouen, God ſo clotheth: hovv much more you O ye of litle faith! ✝ 
                     verse 29 And you, doe not ſeeke vvhat you ſhal eate, or vvhat you ſhal drinke: and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . be not lifted vp on high. ✝ 
                     verse 30 for al theſe things the nations of the vvorld doe ſeeke. but your father knovveth that you haue neede of theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But ſeeke firſt the kingdom of God, and al theſe things ſhal be giuen you beſides. ✝ 
                     verse 32 
                  The Goſpel for S. Paulinus Iun. 22. And for a Cōfeſſor that is not a Biſhop. Feare not
It was litle at the begining, & is ſtil in cōpariſon of al the reprobate: but in itſelf very great, as in the parable of the great tree that grew of the litle muſtard ſeed. Mt. 13. litle flocke, for it hath pleaſed your father to giue you a kingdom. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Sel the things that you poſſeſſe, and giue almes.
* Make to you purſes that vveare not,Mt. 6, 20. treaſure that vvaſteth not, in heauen: vvhither the theefe approcheth not, neither doth the mothe corrupt. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For ″ vvhere your treaſure is, there vvil your hart be alſo. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 35 
                  The Goſpel for a Cōfeſſor that is not a Biſhop. Let yourTo girde our loines, is to keepe chaſtitie and cōtinencie. Gregor. ho. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   loynes be girded, and candles burning in your handes, ✝ 
                     verse 36 and you like to men expecting their lord, when he ſhal returne from the mariage: that vvhen he doth come and knocke, forthvvith they may open vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Bleſſed are thoſe ſeruants, vvhom vvhen the Lord commeth, he ſhal finde vvatching. Amen I ſay to you, that he vvil gird him ſelf, and make them ſit dovvne, and paſſing vvil miniſter vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And if he come in the ſecond vvatch, and if in the third vvatch he come, and ſo finde,Mt. 24, 43. bleſſed are thoſe ſeruants. ✝ 
                     verse 39 * And this knovv ye, that if the houſ holder did knovv vvhat houre the theefe vvould come, he vvould vvatch verely, and vvould not ſuffer his houſe to be broken vp. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Be you alſo ready: for at vvhat houre you thinke not, the Sonne of man vvil come. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 And Peter ſaid to him, Lord, doeſt thou ſpeake this parable to vs, or likevviſe to al? ✝ 
                     verse 42 And our Lord ſaid, Vvho (thinkeſt thou) is a faithful ſtevvard and vviſe, vvhom the lord appointeth ouer his familie, to giue them in ſeaſon their meaſure of vvheate? ✝ 
                     verse 43 Bleſſed is that ſeruant, vvhom vvhen the lord commeth, he ſhal finde ſo doing. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Verely I ſay to you, that ouer al things vvhich he poſſeſſeth, he ſhal appoint him. ✝ 
                     verse 45 But if that ſeruant ſay in his hart, My lord is long a comming: and ſhal begin to ſtrike the ſeruants and handmaides, and eate and drinke, and be drunke: ✝ 
                     verse 46 the lord of that ſeruant ſhal come in a day that he hopeth not, and at an houre that he knovveth not, and ſhal deuide him, and
 ſhal appoint his portion vvith the infidels. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And that ſeruant that knevv the vvil of his lord, and prepared not him ſelf, and did not according to his vvil: ſhal be beaten vvith many ſtripes. ✝ 
                     verse 48 But he that knevv not, and did things vvorthie of ſtripes: ſhal be beaten vvith fevv. And euery one to vvhom much vvas giuen, much ſhal be required of him: and to vvhom they committed much, more vvil they demaund of him. ✝ 
                     verse 49 I came to caſt fire on the earth: and vvhat vvil I, but that it be kindled? ✝ 
                     verse 50 But I haue to be baptized with a baptiſme: and hovv am I ſtraitened vntil it be diſpatched?Mt. 10, 34. ✝ 
                     verse 51 * Thinke you that I came to giueHe meaneth the naughtie peace that is betvvene vvorldlings & ſinners, the agreement that is in in
                        •
                     idelity, in Hereſie, or in any other vvickednes, he came to breake this peace. See Annot. Matth. c. 10, 34. peace on the earth? No, I tel you, but ſeparation. ✝ 
                     verse 52 For there ſhal be from this time, fiue in one houſe deuided: three againſt tvvo, and tvvo againſt three. ✝ 
                     verse 53 There ſhal be deuided, the father againſt the ſonne, and the ſonne againſt his father, the mother againſt the daughter, and the daughter againſt the mother, the mother in lavv againſt her daughter in lavv, and the daughter in lavv againſt her mother in lavv.
                ✝ 
                     verse 54 * And he ſaid alſo to the multitudes,Mt. 16, 2 When you ſee a cloude riſing from the vveſt, by and by you ſay, A ſhoure commeth, and ſo it commeth to paſſe: ✝ 
                     verse 55 and vvhen the ſouth vvinde blovving, you ſay, That there vvil be heate: and it commeth to paſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 56 Hypocrites, the face of the heauen and of the earth you haue ſkil to diſcerne: but this time hovv doe you not diſcerne? ✝ 
                     verse 57 And vvhy of your ſelues alſo iudge you not that vvhich is iuſt? ✝ 
                     verse 58 * AndSee Annot. Mt. 5, 25. vvhen thou goeſt vvith thy aduerſarie to the Prince,Mt. 5, 25 in the vvay endeuour to be deliuered from him: leſt perhaps he dravv thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the exactour, and the exactour caſt thee into priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 59 I ſay to thee, thou ſhalt not goe out thence, vntil thou pay the very laſt mite.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Euery one that confeſſeth.]
                     Open confeſſiō of our faith. A Catholike man is bound to confeſſe his faith, being called to accoumpt or examined by Iew, Heathen, or Heretike, concerning the ſame. Neither is it ynough to keepe Chriſt in his hart, but he muſt alſo acknowledge him in his wordes and deedes. And to deny Chriſt, or any article of the Catholike faith, for ſhame or feare of any worldly creature, hath no leſſe puniſhment, then to be denied, refuſed, and forſaken by Chriſt at the houre of his death before al his Angels: Which is an other maner of preſence and Conſiſtorie, then any Court or Seſſion that men can be called to for their faith, in this world.
                  
                      
                     11. Be not careful.]
                     The holy Ghoſt teacheth euery vnlearned Catholike to giue ſufficiēt reaſon of his faith. That the poore vnclearned Catholike ſhould not be diſcouraged, or make his excuſe that he is a ſimple man, not able to anſvver cunning Heretikes, nor to giue a reaſon of his beleefe, and therfore muſt ſuffer or ſay any thing rather then come before them: our Maiſter giueth them▪ comfort, promiſing that the Holy Ghoſt ſhal euer put into their hartes at time of their appearance, that vvhich ſhal be ſufficient for the purpoſe, not that euery one vvhich is conuented before the Aduerſaries of faith, ſhould alvvaies be endeed vvith extraordinary knovvledge to diſpute and confute, as the Apoſtles and others in the primitiue Church vvere: but that God vvil euer giue to the ſimple that truſteth in him, ſufficient courage and vvordes to confeſſe his beleefe. For ſuch an one called before the Commiſſioners, ſaith ynough and defendeth him ſelf ſufficiently, vvhen he anſvvereth that he is a Catholike man, & that he wil liue and die in that faith which the Catholike Church throughout al Chriſtian countries hath and doth teach, and that this Church can giue them a reaſon of al the things vvhich they demaund of him. &c.
                  
                     14. Who hath appointed?] Chriſt refuſed to medle in this temporal matter, partly becauſe the demaund proceded of couetouſnes and il intention,The dealing of Clergie men in vvorldly affaires. partly to giue an example to Clergie men, that they ſhould not be vvithdravven by ſecular affaires and controuerſies from their principal function of praying, preaching, and ſpiritual regiment: but not vvholy to forbid them al actions pertaining to vvorldly buſines, ſpecially vvhere and vvhen the honour of God, the increaſe of religion,In vita c. 19. the peace of the people, and the ſpiritual benefite of the parties doe require. In vvhich caſes S. Auguſtin (as Poſſidonius vvriteth) vvas occupied often vvhole daies in ending vvorldly controuerſies,Li. de op. Monach. c. 29. and ſo he vvriteth of him ſelf alſo, not doubting but to haue revvard therfore in heauen.
                  
                     21. Riche to God vvard.]
                     Meritorious vvorkes. He is riche tovvards God, that by his goods beſtovved vpon the poore, hath ſtore of merits, and many almeſmens praiers procuring mercie for him at the day of his death and iudgement, vvhich is here therfore called treaſure laid vp in heauen, vvhere the barnes be large ynough. The neceſſitie of vvhich almes is by Chriſt him ſelf here ſhevved to be ſo great, and ſo acceptable to God, that rather then they ſhould lacke the fruite thereof, they ſhould ſel al they haue and giue to the poore.
                  
                     34. Where your treaſure is.]
                     Almes. If the riche man vvithdravven by his vvorldly treaſure, can not ſet his hart vpon heauen, let him ſend his mony thither before him, by giuing it in almes vpon ſuch as vvil pray for him, and his hart vvil ſolovv his purſe thither.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  He threateneth the Iewes to be forſaken vnles they doe penance, 10 and confoundeth them for maligning him for his miraculous good doing on the Sabboths. 18 but his kingdom (the Church) as contemptible as it ſeemeth to them now in the beginning, ſhal ſpread ouer al the world, 20 and conuert al, 23 and what an hartſore it ſhal be to them at the laſt day, to ſee them ſelues excluded from the glorie of this kingdom, and the Gentils admitted in their place. 31 foretelling that it is not Galilee that he feareth, but that obſtinate and reprobate Hieruſalem vvil nedes murder him, as alſo his meſſengers afore and after him
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvere certaine preſent at that very time telling him of the Galilaeans, vvhoſe bloud Pilate mingled vvith their ſacrifices. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he anſvvering ſaid to them, Thinke you that ″ theſe Galileans vvere ſinners more then al the Galilaeans that they ſuffred ſuch things? ✝ 
                     verse 3 No, I ſay to you: but vnles youOr as it is vttered in other places, do penāce, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the which in the new Teſtament ſignifieth perfect repentance. See Annotatiōs Mat. 3, 2. 11, 21.
                  Niſi poenitentiam habueritis, haue penance, you ſhal al likevviſe periſh. ✝ 
                     verse 4 As thoſe eightene vpō vvhom the toure fel in Silóe, and ſlevv them: thinke you that they alſo vvere detters aboue al the men that dvvel in Hieruſalem? ✝ 
                     verse 5 No, I ſay to you: but if you haue not penance, you ſhal al likevviſe periſh.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he ſaid this ſimilitude,The Goſpel on the Imber Saturday in Sept. A certaine man hadThe figtree vvith only leaues & no fruite, is the Iewes ſynagogue, & euery other people or perſō which hath faith and faire wordes, and no good workes. a figtree planted in his vineyard, and he came ſeeking for fruite on it, and found not. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he ſaid to the dreſſer of the vineyard, Loe it is three yeres ſince I come ſeeking for fruite vpon this figtree: and I finde not. Cut it dovvne therfore: vvhereto doth it alſo occupie the ground? ✝ 
                     verse 8 But he anſvvering ſaith to him, Lord, let it alone this yere alſo, vntil I digge about it, and dung it. ✝ 
                     verse 9 and if happily it yeld fruite: but if not, hereafter thou ſhalt cut it dovvne.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he vvas teaching in their ſynagogue on the Sabboths. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And behold a vvoman that had a ſpirit of infirmitie eightene yeres: and ſhe vvas crooked neither could ſhe looke vpvvard at al. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Whom vvhen IESVS ſavv, he called her vnto him, and ſaid to her, Woman, thou art deliuered from thy infirmitie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he impoſed hands vpon her, and forthvvith ſhe vvas made ſtraight and glorified God. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the Archſynagogue anſvvering (becauſe he had indignation that IESVS had cured on the Sabboth) ſaid to the multitude, Sixe daies there are vvherein you ought to vvorke, in them therfore come, and be cured: and not in the Sabboth day. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And our Lord anſvvering to him, ſaid, Hypocrite, doth not euery one of you vpon the Sabboth looſe his oxe or his aſſe from the manger, and leadeth them to vvater? ✝ 
                     verse 16 But ″ this daughter of Abraham vvhom Satan hath bound, loe, theſe eightene yeres, ought not ſhe to be looſed from this bond on the Sabboth day? ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen he ſaid theſe things, al his aduerſaries vvere aſhamed: and al the people reioyced in al things that vvere gloriouſly done of him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 He ſaid therfore,Mt. 13, 31. * Vvherevnto is the kingdom of God like,Mr. 4, 30. and vvherevnto ſhal I eſteeme it like? ✝ 
                     verse 19 It is like to a 
See Annota. Matth. 13, 31. muſtard ſeede, vvhich a man tooke and caſt into his garden, and it grevv: and became a great tree, and the foules of the aire reſted in the boughes thereof.Mt. 13, 33. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And againe he ſaid, * Like to vvhat ſhal I eſteeme the kingdom of God? ✝ 
                     verse 21 It is like to leauen, vvhich a vvoman tooke and hid in three meaſures of meale, til the vvhole vvas leauened. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he vvent by cities and tovvnes teaching, and making his iourney vnto Hieruſalem.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And a certaine man ſaid to him, Lord, be they fevv that are ſaued?Mt. 7, 13 * But he ſaid to them, ✝ 
                     verse 24 
                  Chriſtians in their liues muſt ſeeke the ſtrait way, but in religion the ancient common way. Striue to enter ″ by the narrovv gate: becauſe many, I ſay to you, ″ ſhal ſeeke to enter,
 and ſhal not be able. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But vvhen the good man of the houſe ſhal enter in, and ſhut the doore, and you ſhal begin to ſtand vvithout, and knocke at the doore, ſaying, Lord open to vs: and he anſvvering ſhal ſay to you, I knovv you not vvhence you are: ✝ 
                     verse 26 then you ſhal begin to ſay, Vve did ″ eate before thee and drinke, and in our ſtreates didſt thou teach. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he ſhal ſay to you, I knovv you not vvhence you are, depart from me al ye vvorkers of iniquite. ✝ 
                     verse 28 There ſhal be vveeping and gnaſhing of teeth: vvhen you ſhal ſee Abraham and Iſaac and Iacob, and al the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and you to be thruſt out. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And there ſhal come from the Eaſt and the Vveſt and the North and the South: and ſhal ſit dovvne in the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And behold, they areThe Gentils comming into Gods fauour later, are preferred before the Iewes which were firſt, laſt that ſhal be firſt, and they be firſt that ſhal be laſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 The ſame day there came certaine of the Phariſees, ſaying to him, Depart and get the hence, becauſe Herod vvil kil thee. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And he ſaid to them, Goe, and tel that foxe, Behold I caſt out deuils, and perfite cures this day and to morovv, and the third day I am conſummate. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But yet, I muſt vvalke this day and to morovv and the day folovving, becauſe itNon capit 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   cannot be that a Prophet periſh out of Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 34 * Hieruſalem, Hieruſalem vvhich killeſt the Prophets, and ſtoneſt them that are ſent to thee,Mt. 23, 37. hovv often vvould I gather thy childrē as the bird doth her brood vnder her vvings, andThe Iewes loſt their preeminence, by their owne free will, & not by Gods cauſing: who ceaſed not to call and crie vpon them, and they would not heare. Whereby free will is plainly proued. thou vvouldeſt not? ✝ 
                     verse 35 Behold your houſe ſhal be left deſert to you. And I ſay to you, that you ſhal not ſee me til it come vvhen you ſhal ſay, Bleſſed is he that commeth in the name of our Lord.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII
                  
                     2. Theſe Galilaans) It is Gods mercie that he ſtraight puniſheth not al offenders,Some puniſhed for example. but ſome fevv for a vvarning to all:Nu. 16. as that for Schiſme he ſtriketh nor al ſuch as haue forſaken the Church and the lavvful Prieſts,2 Mach. 3 as he did Coré and his complices: that for ſpoile of Churches he reuengeth not al,Act. 5. as he did Heliodorus: and al that vow and reuoke their gifts to God, as Ananias and Sapphîra. Some few therfore for their iuſt deſerts, be ſo handled for example, to prouoke al others guilty of the ſame crimes to doe penance. Which if they doe not in this life, they ſhal all aſſuredly periſh in the next world. Optatus li. 1 cont. Parmen, ſub finem.
                  
                  
                     16. This daughter.)
                     Diſeaſes not natural. we may ſee that many diſeaſes which ſeeme natural, doe procede of the Diuel by Gods permiſſion, either for ſinne, or for probation: and both thoſe kindes Chriſt ſpecially cured, for that no natural medicines could cure them, and ſpecially becauſe he came to diſſolue the workes of Satan both in body and ſoul.
                  
                     24. By the narrovv.) Our Lord is not contrarie to him ſelf in that he anſvvereth, the gate to be ſtraite, and fevv to be ſaued, whereas els vvhere he ſaid, that many ſhould come from the Eaſt and Vveſt &c. and ioy with Abraham in the kingdom of heauen. Mat. 8. 11. For though they be few in
 reſpect of the vvicked of al ſortes, yet they be many in them ſelues and in the ſocietie of Angels, the vvheate cornes are ſcarſe ſeen at the threſhing, vvhen they are medled with the chaffe: but vvhen the il are remoued, the vvhole barne of heauen ſhal be filled. So ſaith S. Aug. Ser. 32 de verb. Do.
                  
                  
                     24. Shal ſeeke.) Many vvould be ſaued and looke to be ſaued, but can not, becauſe they vvil not take paines to enter in at ſo ſtraite a paſſage,Penance. that is to ſay, to faſt much, pray often, doe great penance for their ſinnes, liue in holy Churches diſcipline, abſtaine from the pleaſures of this world, and ſuffer perſecution and loſſe of their goods and liues for Chriſtes ſake.
                  
                     26. Eate before thee.) It is not ynough to feede vvith Chriſt in his Sacraments, or to heare his vvord the Church,Schiſme. to chalēge heauen thereby, vnleſſe vve liue in vnitie of the Catholike Church. So S. Auguſtine applieth this againſt the Donatiſtes,Cont. lit. Petil. li. 2 c. 55. that had the very ſame ſeruice and Sacraments which the Catholike Church had, but yet ſeuered them ſelues from other Chriſtian countries by Schiſme.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  By occaſion of dining with a Phariſee, 2 after that he hath againe confounded them for maligning him for his miraculous good doing on the Sabboth. 7 he teacheth them humilitie, ſeing their ambition, 1
                        •
                      and in their workes to ſeeke retribution not of men in this worlde, but of God in the world to come: 16 foretelling alſo that the Iewes for their worldly excuſes ſhal not taſt of the Supper, but the Gentils in their place, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Yea that ſo far muſt men be from al worldlines, that they muſt earneſtly bethinke them before they enter into his Church, and be ready to forgot all: 34 ſpecially conſidering they muſt be the ſalt of others alſo.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe vvhen IESVS entred into the houſe of a certaine Prince of the Phariſees vpon the Sabboth to eate bread,The Goſpel vpō the 16 Sūday after Pentecoſt. and they vvatched him. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And behold there vvas a certaine man before him that had the dropſie. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And IESVS anſvvering, ſpake to the Lavvyers and Phariſees, ſaying, Is it Lavvful to cure on the Sabboth? ✝ 
                     verse 4 But they held their peace, but he taking him, healed him, and ſent him avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And anſvvering them he ſaid, Vvhich of you ſhal haue an aſſe or an oxe fallen into a pit: and vvil not incontinent dravv him out on the Sabboth day? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And they could not anſvver him to theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he ſpake to them alſo that vvere inuited a parable, marking hovv they choſe the firſt ſeats at the table, ſaying to them, ✝ 
                     verse 8 when thou art inuited to a mariage, ſit not dovvne in the firſt place, leſt perhaps a more honorable then thou be inuited of him: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and he that bade thee and him, come and ſay to thee, Giue this man place: and then thou begin vvith ſhame to take the laſt place. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But vvhen thou art bidden, goe, ſit dovvne in the lovveſt place: that vvhen he that inuited thee, commeth, he may ſay to thee, Frende, ſit vp higher: then ſhalt thou haue glorie before them that ſit at table vvith thee. ✝ 
                     verse 11 becauſe euery one that exalteth him ſelf, ſhal be humbled: and he that humbleth him ſelf, ſhal be exalted. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 12 And he ſaid to him alſo that had inuited him, Vvhen thou makeſt a dinner or a ſupper, call not thy frendes, nor thy brethrē, nor kinſmen, nor thy neighbours that are riche: leſt perhaps they alſo inuite thee againe, and recompenſe be made to thee. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vvhen thou makeſt a feaſt, cal the poore, feeble, lame, and blinde, ✝ 
                     verse 14 and thou ſhalt be bleſſed, becauſe they haue nor to recōpenſe thee: forReward for charitable deedes, and that they may be done for reward, againſt our Aduerſaries. recompenſe ſhal be made thee in the reſurrection of the iuſt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhen one of them that ſate at the table vvith him, had heard theſe things, he ſaid to him, Bleſſed is he that ſhal eate bread in the kingdom of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 But he ſaid to him,The Goſpel vpō the 2 Sunday after Pentecoſt. A certaine man made a great ſupper, and called many. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And he ſent his ſeruant at the houre of ſupper to ſay to the inuited, That they ſhould come, becauſe novv al things are ready. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And they began al at once to make excuſe. The firſt ſaid to him,Worldlines, wealth, and voluptuouſnes, are the things that ſpecially hinder men from God. I haue bought a farme, and I muſt needes goe forth and ſee it, I pray thee hold me excuſed. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And an other ſaid, I haue bought fiue yoke of oxen, and I goe to proue them, I pray thee, hold me excuſed. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And an other ſaid, I haue maried a vvife, and therfore I can not come. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the ſeruant returning told theſe things to his lord. Then the maiſter of the houſe being angrie, ſaid to his ſeruant, Goe forth quickly into the ſtreates and lanes of the citie, and the poore and feeble and blinde and lame bring in hither. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the ſeruant ſaid, Lord, it is done as thou didſt commaunde, and yet there is place. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And the lord ſaid to the ſeruant, Goe forth into the waies and hedges: and ″ compel them to enter, that my houſe may be filled. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But I ſay to you, that none of thoſe men that vvere called, ſhal taſt my ſupper. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And great multitudes vvent vvith him:The Goſpel for a Martyr that is a Biſhop. And for S. Baſil Iun. 14.
                   and turning, he ſaid to them,Mt. 10, 37. ✝ 
                     verse 26 * If any man come to me and hateth not his
No creature ſo deere vnto vs, vvhich vve muſt not hate or forſake, if it hinder vs, and in that reſpect that it hindereth vs from Chriſt, or his Church, & our Saluation. father and mother, and vvife and children, and brethren and ſiſters, yea and his ovvne life beſides: he can not be my diſciple. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he that doth not beare his croſſe and come after me: cannot be my diſciple. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For, vvhich of you minding to build a toure, doth not firſt ſit dovvne and recken the charges that are neceſſarie, vvhether he haue to finiſh it: ✝ 
                     verse 29 leſt, after that he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finiſh it, al that ſee it, begin to mocke him, ✝ 
                     verse 30 ſaying, That this man began to build, and he could not finiſh it? ✝ 
                     verse 31 Or
 vvhat king about to goe to make vvare againſt an other king, doth not firſt ſit dovvne and thinke vvhether he be able vvith ten thouſands to meete him that vvith tvventie thouſands commeth againſt him? ✝ 
                     verse 32 Othervviſe vvhiles he is yet farre of, ſending a legacie he aſketh thoſe things that belong to peace. ✝ 
                     verse 33 So therfore euery one of you that doth notHe that is a right Chriſtian man, muſt make his account that if he be put to it (as he often may be in times of perſecution) he muſt renoū
                     ce al that euer he hath, rather then forſake the Catholike faith. renounce al that he poſſeſſeth, cannot be my diſciple. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 * Salt is good.Mt. 5, 13. But if the ſalt leeſe his vertue, vvherevvith ſhal it be ſeaſoned?Mar. 9, 50. ✝ 
                     verse 35 It is profitablè neither for the ground, nor for the dunghil, but it ſhal be caſt forth. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     2
                           •
                        . Compel them.) The vehement perſuaſion that God vſeth both externally by force of his vvord and miracles,Free-vvil. and internally by his grace, to bring vs vnto him, is called compelling: not that he forceth any to come to him againſt their owne willes, but that he can alter and mollifie an hard hart,ep. 50 pa
                           •
                        
                        lo poſt princip. & ep. 204. & li. 1 cont. ep. Gaudent. 6. 25. and make him vvilling that before vvould not. S. Auguſtine alſo referreth this compelling to the penal lawes which Catholike Princes do iuſtly vſe againſt Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, prouing that they who are by their former profeſſiō in Baptiſme ſubiect to the Catholike Church,Heretikes may by penal lawes be cōpelled to the Catholike faith. and are departed from the ſame after Sectes, may and ought to be compelled into the vnitie and ſocietie of the vniuerſal Church againe. and therfore in this ſenſe, by the two former partes of the parable, the Ievves firſt, and ſecondly the Gentils, that neuer beleeued before in Chriſt, vvere inuited by faire ſvveete meanes onely: but by the third, ſuch are inuited as the Church of God hath power ouer, becauſe they promiſed in baptiſme, and therfore are to be reuoked not onely by gentle meanes, but by iuſt puniſhment alſo.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  By occaſion of the Phariſees murmuring at him for receiuing penitent ſinners, he ſheweth what ioy ſhalbe in heauen for the conuerſion of one ſinner, 11 and for the yonger ſonne, which is the Gentils: 25 the elder (to wit the Iewes) in the meane time diſdaining thereat, and refuſing to come into his Church.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there approched Publicans and ſinners vnto him for to heare him.The Goſpel vpō the 3 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the Phariſees and the Scribes murmured ſaying, That this man receiueth ſinners, and eareth vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſpake to them this parable, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 4 * VvhatThis man, is our Sauiour Chriſt: whoſe care & trauaile in ſerching & reducing ſinners to repentāce, al ſpiritual men ſpecially ſhould folow. man of you hauing an hundred ſheepe:Mat. 18, 12. and if he hath loſt one of them, doth he not leaue the ninetie nine in the deſert, and goeth after that vvhich vvas loſt vntil he finde it? ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen he hath found 
 it, laieth it vpon his ſhoulders reioycing? ✝ 
                     verse 6 and comming home calleth together his frendes and neighbours, ſaying to them, Reioyce vvith me, becauſe I haue found my ſheepe that vvas loſt? ✝ 
                     verse 7 I ſay to you, that euen ſo there ſhal be ioy in heauen vpon one ſinner that doth penance, ″ then vpon ninetie nine iuſt that neede not penance. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Or vvhatThis vvoman is the catholike Church, vvho alſo cōtinually ſeeketh her loſt children. vvoman hauing ten grotes: if ſhe leeſe one grote, doth ſhe not light a candle, and ſvveepe the houſe, and ſeeke diligently, vntil ſhe finde? ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen ſhe hath found, calleth together her frendes and neighbours, ſaying, Reioyce vvith me, becauſe I haue found the grote vvhich I had loſt? ✝ 
                     verse 10 So, I ſay to you, there ſhal be ioy ″ before the Angels of God vpon one ſinner that doth penance. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he ſaid,The Goſpel vpō Saturday in the 2 weeke of Lent. A certaine man had tvvo ſonnes: ✝ 
                     verse 12 and the yonger of them ſaid to his father, Father, giue me the portion of ſubſtance that belongeth to me. And he deuided vnto them the ſubſtance.The prodigal ſonne, is a pa
                        •
                     
                     ble, both of the Gentils conuerſion, & alſo of euery diſſolute ſinner penitētly returning to God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And not many daies after the yonger ſonne gathering al his things together vvent from home into a farre countrie: and there he vvaſted his ſubſtance, liuing riotouſly. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And after he had ſpent al, there fel a ſore famine in that countrie, and he began to be in neede. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he vvent, and cleaued to one of the citizens of that countrie. And he ſent him into his farme to feede ſvvine. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he vvould faine haue filled his bellie of the huſkes that the ſvvine did eate: and no bodie gaue vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And returning to him ſelf he ſaid, Hovv many of my fathers hirelings haue aboundance of bread: and I here periſh for famine? ✝ 
                     verse 18 I vvil ariſe, and vvil goe to my father, and ſay to him, Father, I haue ſinned againſt heauen and before thee: ✝ 
                     verse 19 I am not novv vvorthie to be called thy ſonne: make me as one of thy hirelings. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And riſing vp he came to his father. AndGods wonderful and tender mercie toward penitent ſinners. vvhen he vvas yet farre of, his father ſavv him, and vvas moued vvith mercie, and running to him fel vpon his necke, and kiſſed him. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And his ſonne ſaid to him, Father, I haue ſinned againſt heauen & before thee, I am not novv vvorthie to be called thy ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the father ſaid to his ſeruants, Quickely bring forth the firſt ſtole, and doe it on him, and put a ring vpō his hand, and ſhoes vpon his feete: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and bring ″ the fatted calfe, and kil it, and let vs eate, and make merie: ✝ 
                     verse 24 becauſe this my ſonne vvas dead, and is reuiued: vvas loſt, and is found. And they began to make merie. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But his elder ſonne vvas in the field.
 and vvhen he came and drevv nigh to the houſe, he heard muſicke and dauncing: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and he called one of the ſeruants, and aſked vvhat theſe thinges ſhould be. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he ſaid to him, Thy brother is come, and thy father hath killed the fatted calfe, becauſe he hath receiued him ſafe. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But he had indignation, and vvould not goe in. His father therfore going forth began to deſire him. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But he anſvvering ſaid to his father, Behold, ſo many yeres doe I ſerue thee, and I neuer tranſgreſſed thy commaundement, and thou didſt neuer giue me a kidde to make merie vvith my frendes: ✝ 
                     verse 30 but after that thy ſonne, this that hath deuoured his ſubſtance vvith whoores, is come, thou haſt killed for him the fatted calfe. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But he ſaid to him, Sonne, thou art alvvaies vvith me, and al my things are thine. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But it behoued vs to make merie and be glad, becauſe this thy brother vvas dead, and is reuiued, vvas loſt, and is found. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  
                     7. Then vpon ninety nine iuſt.)
                     Ioy in heauen for euery penitent. Neither God, nor the Saincts in heauen, nor men in earth do for al that eſteeme more of penitent ſinners, then they do of them that continevv iuſt and godly: though by the ſoden motion and preſent affection of ioy that man taketh and expreſſeth in ſuch alteration and nevv fallen good, it be here ſignified that the conuerſion of euery ſinner is exceding acceptable to God, and giueth his Saincts nevv cauſe of ioy and thankes giuing to God in an other kinde then for the continuance of the iuſt.
                  
                     10. Before the Angels.) The Angels and other celeſtial ſpirits in heauen, do reioyce at euery ſinners conuerſion:The Angels and Saincts knovv our hartes. they know then and haue care of vs, yea our hartes and inward repentance be open to them: how then can they not heare our prayers? And betwixt Angels and the bleſſed ſoules of Saincts there is no difference in this caſe,Mt. 22, 14. the one being as highly exalted as the other and as neere God, in whom and by whom onely they ſee and know our affaires, as the other.
                  
                     23. The fatted calfe.) This feaſting and feſtiuitie (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. 2, qu. Euang. c. 33. to. 4.) are novv celebrated throughout the vvhole vvorld the Church being dilated and ſpred:The B. Sacramēt and Sacrifice of the Altar. for, that calfe in the body, and bloud of our Lord is both offered to the Father, and alſo feedeth the vvhole houſe. And as the calfe ſignifieth the B. Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt, ſo the firſt ſtole may ſignifie our innocencie reſtored in baptiſme, and the reſt, other graces and giftes giuen vs in the other Sacraments.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  He teacheth the riche to procure heauen vvith their riches. 14 And being therfore derided of the couetous Phariſees (vvho ſavv temporal riches promiſed in the letter of the Lavv) he ſhevveth that novv is come the preaching of the kingdom of God, howbeit the Lavv for al that in no iote ſhal be fruſtrat. 19 foretelling them alſo, that the couetous Ievvis ſhal be denied of their father, Abraham, when poore Laxarus the penitent Gentily ſhal reſt in his boſome.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he ſaid alſo to his Diſciples,The Goſpel vpō the 8 Sūday after Pentecoſt. There vvas a cartaine riche man that had a
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   bailife: & he vvas il reported of vnto him, as he that had vvaſted his goods. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he called him, and ſaid to him, Vvhat heare I this of thee? render account of thy
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   bailiſhip: for novv thou canſt no more be bailife. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the bailife ſaid vvithin him ſelf, Vvhat ſhal I doe, becauſe my lord taketh avvay from me the bailiſhip? digge I am not able, to begge I am aſhamed. ✝ 
                     verse 4 I knovv vvhat I vvil doe, that vvhen I ſhal be remoued from the bailiſhip, they may receiue me into their houſes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore calling together euery one of his lords detters, he ſaid to the firſt, Hovv much doeſt thou ovve my lord? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But he ſaith, An hundred pipes of oile. And he ſaid to him, Take thy bil: and ſit dovvne, quickly vvrite fiftie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 After that he ſaid to an other, But thou, hovv much doeſt thou ovve? Vvho ſaid, An hundreth quarters of vvheat. He ſaid to him, Take thy bil, and vvrite eightie. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And ″ the lord praiſed the bailife of iniquitie, becauſe he had done vviſely: for the children of this vvorld, are vviſer then the children of light in their generation. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And I ſay to you, Make vnto you frendes of the
Māmon (ſaith S. Hierom q. 6. ad Algaſ.) in the Syriake tongue ſignifieth riches. mammon of iniquitie: that vvhen you faile, ″ they may receiue you into the eternal tabernacles. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 He that is faithful in the leſt, is faithful in the greater alſo: and he that is vniuſt in litle, is vniuſt in the greater alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 11 If then you haue not been faithful in the vniuſt mammon:
                     Mammon of iniquitie, becauſe they are often il gotten, or il beſtowed, or occaſion of euil, or at the leaſt worldly & falſe & not the true heauēly riches. vvith that vvhich is the true vvho may credit you? ✝ 
                     verse 12 And if you haue not been faithful in other mens:Mat. 6, 24. that vvhich is yours, vvho vvil giue you? ✝ 
                     verse 13 * No ſeruant can ſerue tvvo maiſters, for either he ſhal hate the one, and loue the other: or cleaue to one, and contemne the other. You can not ſerue God and mammon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the Phariſees vvhich vvere couetous, heard al theſe things: and they derided him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he ſaid to them, You are they that iuſtifie your ſelues before men, but god knovveth your hartes,Mat. 11, 12. becauſe that vvhich is high to men, is abomination before God. ✝ 
                     verse 16 * The lavv and the prophets, vnto Iohn. from that time the kingdom of God is euangelized,Mat. 5, 18. and euery one doth force tovvard it.Mat. 5, 31. 19, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 17 * And it is eaſier for heauen and earth to paſſe, then one tittle of the lavv to fall. ✝ 
                     verse 18 * Euery one that dimiſſeth his vvife,Mar. 10, 11. 1. Cor. 7, 11. ″ and marieth an other, committeth aduoutrie: and he that marieth her that is dimiſſed from her
 huſband, committeth aduourrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 There vvas a certaine riche man,The Goſpel vpō Thurſday in the 2 weeke of Lēt. & he vvas clothed vvith purple and ſilke: and he fared euery day magnifically. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And there vvas a certaine begger called Lazarus, that lay at his gate, ful of ſores: ✝ 
                     verse 21 deſiring to be filled of the crommes, that fel from the riche mans table, but the dogges alſo came, and licked his ſores. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And it came to paſſe that the begger died, and vvas caried ″ of the Angels into ″ Abrahams boſome. And the riche man alſo died: and he vvas buried in hel. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And lifting vp his eies, vvhen he vvas in torments, he ſavv Abraham a farre of,Lazarus in Abrahams boſome, and reſt: but both in hel, and not in the kingdom of heauen before Chriſt. Hiero. ep. 3. Epitaph. Nepot.
                   and Lazarus in his boſome: ✝ 
                     verse 24 and he crying ſaid, Father Abraham, haue mercie on me, and ſend Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger into vvater, for to coole my tongue, becauſe I am tormented in this flame. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And Abraham ſaid to him, Sonne, remember that thou didſt receiue
To be in continual pleaſures, eaſe, wealth, peace, and proſperlty in this world, is perilous, & a ſigne of paines in the next. S. Hiero.
                   good things in thy life time, and Lazarus likevviſe euil: but novv he is comforted, and thou art tormented. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And beſide al theſe things, betvvene vs and you there is fixed ″ a great

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a horrible diſtance. chaos: that they vvhich vvil paſſe from hence to you, may not, neither goe from thence hither. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he ſaid, Then, father, I beſeeche thee that thou vvouldeſt ſend him vnto my fathers houſe, for I haue fiue brethren, ✝ 
                     verse 28 for to teſtifie vnto them, ″ leſt they alſo come into this place of torments. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And Abraham ſaid to him,Abrahā had knowledge of things in earth which were not in his time as that they had Moyſes and the Prophets bookes which he neuer ſaw. Auguſt. de cura pro mor. c. 14.
                   They haue Moyſes and the Prophets: let them heare them. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But he ſaid, No, father Abraham, but if ſome man ſhal goe from the dead to them, they vvil doe penance. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And he ſaid to him, If they heare not Moyſes and the Prophets, neither if one ſhal riſe againe from the dead, vvil they beleeue. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     2. The lord praiſed.) This mans deceiuing his maiſter is not praiſed, nor vve vvarrāted by his fact to gaine vniuſtly for to haue vvherevvith to giue almes:Good vvorkes. but his prudence, in that he prouided ſo ſubſtancially for him ſelfe vvhileſt his maiſters goods vvere in his handes, is commended, not for a vertue, but for avvorldly pollicie: and propoſed as an example of the careful prouiſion that rich men (who are Gods ſtewards in earth) ſhould make for their ſoules, againſt they be put out of their bailiſhip and be called to account, vvhich is the day of their death: and for a condemnation of faithful mens folly and negligence, that being aſſured they ſhal out of their offices, and vvell knovving they might gaine ſalutation by their money, haue ſo litle regard thereof.
                  
                     9. They 
                           〈◊〉
                         receiue.)
                     Tob. 12, 9. A great comfort to al great almes-men, and a vvonderful force and vertue in almes,Mat. 25. vvhith beſide the merite of the worke of mercie,Almes meritorious. vvhich (as in other places of Scripture is ſaid) purgeth ſinne and gaineth heauen, pocureth alſo not onely the praiers of their beadſmen
 in earth,The Saincts do pray for vs. but their patronage in heauen alſo. whereby alſo the praiers of Saincts for the liuing, and namely for them to whom they vvere beholding in their life, are proued. Yea and that they be in ſuch fauour with God, that they may and doe receiue their frendes vvhich vvere once their benefactors, into their manſions in heauen, no leſſe then the farmers vvhom the il ſtevvard pleaſured, might receiue their freend into their earthly houſes. Which alſo inſinuateth to vs, that almes beſtovved ſpecially vpon holy men, vvho by their merites and praiers are great in Gods grace, may much more helpe vs then our charitable deedes done vpon vulgar men in neceſſitie, though that be of exceding great merite alſo. See al this in theſe Doctors folovving. Hiero. qu. 6. ad Algaſ. to. 3. Ambroſ. in Luc. Auguſt. ſer. 35 de verb. Do. c. 1. Gregor. moral. li. 
                           〈◊〉
                         c. 14. Augu. li. 2 q. Euang. qu. 34. Chryſ. ho. 3
                           •
                         ad po. Antioch. to. 5.
                  
                  
                     18. And marrieth.)
                     Mariage after diuorce vnlavvfull. The good of Mariage through out al nations and men, is in iſſue and fidelitie of chaſtitie, but among the people of God it conſiſteth alſo in holines of Sacrament: Whereby it commeth to paſſe that is a heinous crime to marry againe, though there be a diuorce made, ſo long as the parties liue. Aug. de bono coniug. c. 24 to. 6. See the Annotations vpon Marke 10, 11.
                  
                     22. Of the Angels.)
                     Vnmerciful riche men. Angels carie good mens ſoules to heauen novv, as they did then his to Abrahams boſome. See the revvard of pouerty, affliction, and patience: and on the contrarie, the end and revvard of vvealth ioyned with vnmercifulnes. Note alſo here, that at the day of euery mans death there is a particular iudgement, and therfore the ſoule ſleepeth not nor hangeth in ſuſpenſe til the general iudgement.
                  
                     22. Abrahams Boſome.)
                     Abrahams boſome. The Boſome of Abraham is the reſting place of al them that died in perfect ſtate of grace before Chriſtes time, heauē before being ſhut from men. It is called in Zacharie,Limbus patrū. 
                     a lake vvithout vvater,
                     Zach. 9, 11. and ſometimes a priſon, but moſt commonly of the Diuines Limbus patrum, for that it is thought to haue been the higher part or brimme of Hel,Eſa. 42, 7. the places of puniſhment being far Iovver then the ſame, vvhich therfore be called Infernum inferius.
                     Aug. in Pſ. 85. Ep. 99. 
                     the lovver hel. where this manſion of the fathers ſtood, or whether it be any part of Hel, S. Auguſtine doubteth: but that there was ſuch a place, he nor no Catholike man euer doubted: as al the fathers make it moſt certaine,Chriſt deſcēded into Hel, and deliuered the fathers. that our Sauiour deſcending to Hel, went thither ſpecially, and deliuered the ſaid fathers out of that manſion. Iren. li. 4 c. 
                           •
                        9. Euſeb. Demonſt. Euang. li. 10. c. 8 ſub finē. Nazian. orat. 2 de Paſch. Chryſoſt. to. 5 in demonſt. Quod Chriſtus ſit Deus paulo poſt initium. Epipha. in hereſ. 46 Tatiani. Ambro. de myſt. Paſch. c. 4. Hiero. in 9 Zacharia. Auguſt. ep. 99 & li. 20 de Ciuit. c. 15. Paulinus in Panegyrico Celſt. Cyrillus in lo. li. 12 c. 36 ad illud, Inclinato capite. Gregor. li. 6 ep. 179. vvhich truth and place though of al the ancient vvriters confeſſed and proued by this and other Scriptures: yet the Aduerſaries deny it (as they do Purgatorie) moſt impudently.
                  
                     26, A great chaos.)
                     Purgatorie, A great diſtance betvvixt Abrahams boſome and the inferiour hel. Some iudge Purgatorie to be placed there, from vvhence (no doubt) Chriſt alſo deliuered ſome at his deſcending to hel.Aug. ep. 99. for, theſe in Abrahams boſome vvere not in paines: and S. Auguſtine ſaith the Scriptures be plaine that he tooke ſome out of the places of puniſhment, and yet none out of the hel of the damned. What other place then can that be but Purgatorie?
                  
                     28. Leſt they alſo.) If the damned had care of their frendes aliue how & for what cauſe ſoeuer, much more haue the Saincts and ſaued perſons. And if thoſe in hel haue meanes to expreſſe their cogitations and deſires,Saincts do heare our praiers and haue care of vs. and to be vnderſtood of Abraham ſo far diſtant both by place and condition, much rather may the liuing pray to the Saincts and be heard of them: betvvixt earth (that is to ſay) the Church militant and heauen,Gen. 32. being continual paſſage of ſoules, and * Angels aſcending and deſcending by Iacobs ladder. M
                        •
                     n muſt not for al that be curious to ſearche how the ſoules of the deceaſed expreſſe their mindes, and be heard one of an other, and ſo fall to blaſphemie, as Caluin doth,Calu. li. 3 aſking whether their eares be ſo long to heare ſo far of,Caluins blaſphemie. and wickedly meaſuring al things by mortal mens corporal groſſe maner of vttering conceits one to an other.Iuſtit. c. 22 ſect. 24. Which was not here done by this damned nor by Abraham, with corporal inſtruments of tongue, teeth, and eares: though for the better expreſſing of the damneds caſe, Chriſt vouchſaued to vtter it in termes agreeing to our capacitie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  So damnable it is to be author of a Schiſme, 3 that we muſt rather forgiue be it neuer ſo often. 5 We muſt he feruent in faith, 7 and humble withal, knowing that we are bound to God, and not he to vs. ″ The nine Iewes are vngrateful after that he hath cured their leproſie: but the one Samaritane (the one Catholike Church of the Gentils) far otherwiſe. 20 The Phariſees aſking, when cōmeth this kingdom of God (of whoſe approching they had now heard ſo much) he teacheth that God muſt reigne within vs: 22 and warneth vs after his Paſsion neuer to goe out of his Catholike Church for any new ſecrete cōming of Chriſt that Heretikes ſhal pretend, but onely to expect his ſecond cōming in glorie, 26 preparing our ſelues vnto it, becauſe it ſhal come vpon many vnprouided, 31 ſpecially through the perſecution of Antichriſt a litle before it.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he ſaid to his Diſciples,Mt. 18, 7 It isNot of mere neceſſitie, for then it were no fault: but praeſuppoſing the great wickednes of men, it is impoſſible but there ſhal be ſcandals & therfore it foloweth, Vvō to him by whom they come.
                   impoſſible that ſcandale ſhould not come:Mar. 9, 42. but vvo to him by vvhom they come. ✝ 
                     verse 2 It is more profitable for him, if a mil-ſtone be put about his necke, and he be caſt into the ſea, then that he ſcādalize one of theſe litle ones. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Looke vvel to your ſelues,
* If thy brother ſinne againſt thee,Mt. 18, 21. rebuke him: and if he doe penance, forgiue him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And if he ſinne againſt thee ſeuen times in a day, and ſeuen times in a day be conuerted vnto thee, ſaying, It repenteth me, forgiue him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Apoſtles ſaid to our Lord, Increaſe faith in vs. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And our lord ſaid,Mat. 17, 20. * If you had faith like to a muſtard ſeede, you might ſay to this mulberie tree, be thou rooted vp, and be tranſplanted into the ſea: and it vvould obey you. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhich of you hauing a ſeruant plovving or keeping cattle, that vvil ſay to him returning out of the field, Paſſe quickly, ſit dovvne: ✝ 
                     verse 8 and ſaith not to him, Make ready ſupper, and gird thy ſelf,THE fourth part of this Goſpel, The cōming of Chriſt into Iewrie, towardes his Paſſion. and ſerue me vvhiles I eate and drinke, and aftervvard thou ſhalt eate and drinke? ✝ 
                     verse 9 Doth he giue that ſeruant thankes, for doing the things vvhich he commaunded him? ✝ 
                     verse 10 I trovv not. So you alſo, vvhen you ſhal haue done al things that are commaunded you, ſay, Vve are ″ vnprofitable ſeruants: vve haue done that vvhich vve ought to doe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And it came to paſſe, as he vvent vnto Hieruſalem, he paſſed through the middes of Samaria and Galilee.The Goſpel vpō the 13 Sūday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen he entred into a certaine tovvne, there mette him ten men that vvere lepers, vvho ſtoode a farre of: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and they lifted vp their voice, ſaying, IESVS maiſter, haue mercie on vs. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvhom as he ſavv,Leu. 14, 2. he ſaid, Goe, * ſhevv your ſelues ″ to the Prieſts. And it came to paſſe, ″ as they vvent, they vvere made cleane. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And one of them as he ſavv that he vvas made cleane: vvent backe vvith a loud voice magnifying God, ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he fel on his face before his feete, giuing thankes: and this vvas a Samaritane. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And IESVS anſvvering ſaid, Vvere not ten made cleane? and vvhere are the nine? ✝ 
                     verse 18 There vvas not found that returned, and gaue glorie to God, but this ſtranger. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And he ſaid to him, Ariſe, goe thy vvaies: becauſeAnd yet we ſee here it vvas not only faith, but alſo his thankfulnes & returnīg to giue glorie to God. thy faith hathmade thee ſafe. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And being aſked of the Phariſees, Vvhen commeth the kingdom of God? he anſvvered them and ſaid, The kingdom
 of God commeth not vvith obſeruation: ✝ 
                     verse 21 neither ſhal they ſay, Loe here, or loe there, for loeVvhile they aſke and looke for a temporal kingdō in pompe and glorie, loe their king & Meſſias was now amōg thē
                     ▪ whoſe ſpiritual kingdō is vvithin al the faithful that haue dominiō ouer ſinne. the kingdom of God is vvithin you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he ſaid to his Diſciples, The daies vvil come vvhen you ſhal deſire to ſee one day of the Sonne of man: and you ſhal not ſee.Mt. 24, 23. Mar. 13, 21. ✝ 
                     verse 23 * And they vvil ſay to you, Loe here and loe there.No man muſt rūne out of the Church after Schiſmatikes to heare them preach Chriſt in corners, Chriſts doctrine being open in al the world. See annot. Mt. 14, 23. Goe not, neither doe ye folovv after. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For euen as the lightening that lighteneth from vnder heauen, vnto thoſe partes that are vnder heauen, ſhineth: ſo ſhal the Sonne of man be in his day. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But firſt he muſt ſuffer many things and be reiected of this generation. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And as it came to paſſe in the Gen. 7, 5 daies of Noé, ſo ſhal it be alſo in the daies of the Sonne of man. ✝ 
                     verse 27 They did eate and drinke, they did marie vviues and vvere giuen to mariage euen vntil the day that Noé entred into the arke: and the floud came, and deſtroyed them al. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Likevviſe as it came to paſſe in the
* daies of Lot:Gen. 19, 24. They did eate and drinke, bought and ſould, planted, and builded: ✝ 
                     verse 29 and in the day that Lot vvent out from Sodome, it rained fire and brimſtone from heauen, and deſtroyed them all: ✝ 
                     verse 30 according to theſe things it ſhal be in the day that the Sonne of man ſhal be reuealed. ✝ 
                     verse 31 In that houre he that ſhal be in the houſe-toppe, and his veſſel in the houſe, let him not goe dovvne to take them vp: and he that is in the field, in like maner let him not returne backe. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Be mindeful of * Lots vvife.Gen. 19, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Vvhoſoeuer ſeeketh to ſaue his life, ſhal loſe it: and vvhoſoeuer doth loſe the ſame, ſhal quicken it. ✝ 
                     verse 34 I ſay to you, in that night there ſhal be tvvo in one bed: the one ſhal be taken, and the other ſhal be left: ✝ 
                     verse 35 tvvo vvomen ſhal be grinding together: the one ſhal be taken, and the other ſhal be left: tvvo in the field: the one ſhal be taken, and the other ſhal be left. ✝ 
                     verse 36 They anſvvering ſay to him, Vvhere Lord? ✝ 
                     verse 37 Vvho ſaid to them, Vvhereſoeuer the body ſhal be, thither vvil the eagles alſo be gathered together.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     10. Vnprofitable ſeruants.)
                     How we are vnprofitable & profitable ſeruants. If our Sauiour had ſaid that the keeping of Gods cōmaundements had bene vnprofitable and not auailable to our ſelues, them might the Proteſtants haue truely argued thereby that our vvorkes deſerue not heauen or any revvard at Gods hand: but ſo he ſaid not, but that our ſeruice is to God vnprofitable, who calleth for it as duety, and not as a thing needeful
 or profitable to himſelf. And though here our Maiſter teach vs ſo humbly to conceiue of our ovvne doings tovvard him,Mt. 25, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . yet him ſelf els vvher calleth not his ſervants vnprofitable vvhen they haue done their labour, but ſpeaketh thus, Good and faithful ſeruant, becauſe thou vvaſt faithful in a litle, I vvil place thee ouer much: enter into the ioy of thy Lord.
                     Io. 15, 14. Yea of ſuch as ſerue him in the grace of the new Teſtament, he affirmeth that he wil not now name them ſeruants but frendes, yea and take them for his ovvne children, and as his frendes and ſonnes he counteth of vs and our vvorkes tovvards heauen, though vve in humilitie and truth muſt confeſſe alvvaies that vve be to him vnprofitable ſeruants. Yea and S. Paul ſaith plainly, that by cleanſing our ſelues from ſinful vvorkes, we ſhal be profitable veſſels to our lord 2 Timot. 2, 21.
                  
                  
                     14. To the prieſts.)
                     Confeſſion to the Prieſt. This leproſie ſignifieth ſinne, vvhich though God may and can heale vvithout any mans meanes, yet he doth it not ordinarily but by the Prieſts miniſterie: therfore let no man deſpiſe Gods ordinance nor ſay that it is ynough to confeſſe to God though he neuer come at the prieſt. li. de viſit. infirm. apud Auguſt.
                  
                  
                     14. As they vvent.) A man may ſometimes be ſo contrite and penitent, that his ſinne is forgiuen before he come to the Prieſt, but then alſo he muſt notwithſtanding goe to the Prieſt, as theſe lepers did: ſpecially whereas we are neuer ſure how contrite we are, and becauſe thereis no true contrition, but with deſire alſo of the Sacrament in time and place.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  The Church is taught to commit the reuenge of her perſecutions to God, and to pray inceſſantly, for he no doubt (though in the perſecution of Antichriſt fevv vvil ſo thinke) vvil at length come. 9 We muſt alſo pray vvith humility, becauſe vve knovv not with the Phariſee if we be iuſt, but vve knovv vvith the Publicane that vve be ſinners. 15 He vvil haue children to be brought to him, and al to be as children. 18 What is to be done to get life euerlaſting. 22 What alſo, to get perfection, 28 and vvhat revvard they ſhal haue that leaue al, year or any part, for his ſake. 31 he foretelleth of his Paſsion moſt particularly, 33 and entring into Iericho, cureth one blinde man.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he ſpake alſo a parable to them that it behouethVve ſhould pray alwaies by faith, hope, and charitie, and by working the thinges that be acceptable to God: though ſpecial times of vocal praiers in the Canonical houres be aſſigned for the ſturring of vs vp to God through external ſignes of deuotion. alwaies to pray, & not to be weary, ✝ 
                     verse 2 ſaying, There was a certaine iudge in a certaine citie, vvhich feared not God, and of man made no accoumpt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And there vvas a certaine vvidow in that citie: and ſhe came to him, ſaying, Reuenge me of mine aduerſarie. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And he vvould not of a long time. but aftervvard he ſaid vvithin him ſelf, Although I feare not God, nor make accoumpt of man: ✝ 
                     verse 5 yet becauſe this vvidovv is importune vpon me, I vvil reuenge her, leſt at the laſt ſhe come and defame me. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And our Lord ſaid, Heare vvhat the iudge of iniquitie ſayeth. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvil not God reuenge his elect that crie to him day and night: and vvil he haue patience in them? ✝ 
                     verse 8 I ſay to you that he vvil quickly reuenge them. But yet the Sonne of man comming, ″ ſhal he finde trovv you, faith in the earth?
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he ſaid alſo to certaine that truſted in them ſelues as iuſt,The Goſpel vpō the 10 Sunday after Pentecoſt. and deſpiſed others, this parable: ✝ 
                     verse 10 Tvvo men vvent vp into the Temple to pray: the one a Phariſee, and the other a Publicane. ✝ 
                     verse 11 The Phariſee ſtanding, praied thus vvith 
 him ſelf: God, I giue thee thankes that I am not as the reſt of men, extorcioners, vniuſt, aduouterers, as alſo this Publicane. ✝ 
                     verse 12 
                  To take pride of faſting, tithing, or any good worke, is naught: though the workes thē ſelues be very good. I faſt tvviſe in a vveeke: I giue tithes of al that I poſſeſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the Publicane ſtanding a farre of vvould not ſo much as lift vp his eies tovvard heauen: but heSo doe the prieſts and people at the holy Altar knocke their breaſts, & ſay with the hū
                     ble Publicane, Deus propitius. Auguſt. pſ. 31 conc, 3.
                   knocked his breaſt, ſaying, God be merciful to me a ſinner. ✝ 
                     verse 14 I ſay to you, this man vvent dovvne into his houſe iuſtified more then he: becauſe euery one that exalteth him ſelf, ſhal be humbled: and he that humbleth him ſelf, ſhal be exalted. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 * And they brought vnto him infants alſo,Mt. 19, 13. Mr. 10, 13. that he might touche them. Vvhich thing vvhen the Diſciples ſavv, they rebuked them. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But IESVS calling them together, ſaid, Suffer children to come vnto me, and forbid them not, for the kingdom of heauen is for ſuch. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Amen I ſay to you, Vvhoſoeuer receiueth not the kingdom of GodIn matters of faith & religion we muſt be as humble & obedient to the Catholike Church as yong childrē to their parents. as a childe, ſhal not enter into it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 * And a certaine Prince aſked him,Mt. 19, 16. Mr. 10, 17. ſaying, Good maiſter, by doing vvhat, ſhal I poſſeſſe euerlaſting life? ✝ 
                     verse 19 And IESVS ſaid to him, Vvhy doeſt thou call me good? None is good but only God.Exo. 20, 13. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Thou knovveſtNot faith only but alſo keeping the cōmaundements purchaſe life euerlaſting. See annot. Mat. 19, 16. the commaundements: Thou ſhalt not kil, Thou ſhalt not commit aduoutrie, Thou ſhalt not beare falſe vvitnes, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, Honour thy father and mother. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvho ſaid, Al theſe things haue I kept from my youth. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvhich IESVS hearing, ſaid to him, Yet one thing thou lackeſt:This is not a commaundmēt or precept, but counſel: vvhich the religious do folow. See Annot. Mat. 19. Sel al that euer thou haſt, and giue to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen: and come, folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 23 He hearing theſe things, vvas ſtroken ſad: becauſe he vvas very riche. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And IESVS ſeeing him ſtroken ſad, ſaid, Hovv hardly ſhal they that haue money, enter into the kingdom of God? ✝ 
                     verse 25 For it is eaſier for a camel to paſſe through the eie of a nedle, then for a riche man to enter into the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And they that heard, ſaid, And vvho can be ſaued? ✝ 
                     verse 27 He ſaid to them, The things that are impoſſible vvith men, are poſsible vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And Peter ſaid, Loe, vve haue left al things, and haue folovved thee. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Vvho ſaid to them, Amen I ſay to you, There is no man that hath leaft houſe, or parents, or brethren; orThe Apoſtles among other things left their wiues alſo, as S. Hierom noteth out of this place. li. 1 adu. Iouin.
                   vvife, or children for the kingdom of God, ✝ 
                     verse 30 and ſhal not receiue much more in this time, and in the vvorld to comeLife euerlaſtīg the reward for leauing or loſing willingly our goods for Chriſts ſake. life euerlaſting.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 * And IESVS tooke the Tvvelue,Mt. 20, 17. Mr. 10, 32. and ſaid to them, Behold vve goe vp to Hieruſalem,The Goſpel vpō the Sunday of Quiquageſme. and al things ſhal be conſummate
 vvhich vvere vvritten by the Prophets of the ſonne of man. ✝ 
                     verse 32 For he ſhal be deliuered to the Gentiles, and ſhal be mocked, and ſcourged, and ſpit vpon: ✝ 
                     verse 33 and after they haue ſcourged him, they vvil kil him, and the third day he ſhal riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And they vnderſtoode none of theſe things, and this vvord vvas hid from them, and they vnderſtoode not the things that vvere ſaid.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And it came to paſſe, vvhen he drevv nigh to Iericho, a certaine blinde man ſate by the vvay, begging. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And vvhen he heard the multitude paſſing by, he aſked what this ſhould be. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And they told him that IESVS of Nazareth paſſed by. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he cried ſaying, IESVS ſonne of Dauid, haue mercie vpon me. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And they that vvent before, rebuked him, that he ſhould hold his peace. But he cried much more, Sonne of Dauid haue mercie vpon me. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And IESVS ſtanding, commaunded him to be brought vnto him. And vvhen he vvas come neere, he aſked him, ✝ 
                     verse 41 ſaying, Vvhat vvilt thou that I doe to thee? but he ſaid, Lord, that I may ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And IESVS ſaid to him, Do thou ſee, thy faith hath made thee vvhole. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And forthvvith he ſavv, and folovved him, magnifying God. And al the people as they ſavv it, gaue praiſe to God. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     8. Shal he finde faith?)
                     The Church erreth not in faith. The Luciferians and Donatiſts vſed this place to excuſe their fall from the Church, as our Aduerſaries novv doe, ſaying that it vvas decaied in faith, vvhen they forſooke it. To vvhom vve anſwer as S. Hierom and S. Auguſtin anſwered them,Hier, con
                           •
                        . Lucif. c. 6. Aug. de vnit. Ec. c. 15, & de verb. Do. Ser. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . that Chriſt ſaith not that there ſhould be no faith leaft in earth: but by this maner of ſpeache the inſinuateth, that at the later day in the great perſecution of Antichriſt faith ſhould be more rare, and the faithful among ſo many wicked not ſo notorious: ſpecially that perfect faith containing deuotion, truſt, and affection toward God, which our Maiſter ſo praiſed in certaine vpon whom he wrought miracles, and by force vvhereof mountaines might be moued, vvhich is rare euen vvhen the Church floriſheth moſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  In Ieriche he lodgeth in the houſe of Zachaus a Publicane, and againſt the murmuring Iewes openeth the reaſons of his ſo doing, 11 He ſhevveth, that the laſt day ſhould not be yet, 15 and whas then in the iudgement he vvil doe both to vs of his Church as vvel good as bad, 47 and alſo to the reprobate Ievves. 29 Being nevv come to the place of his Paſsion, he entreth (vveeping and foretelling the deſtruction of blinde Hieruſalem) vvhich triumph as their Chriſt. 4
                        •
                      He ſhevveth his zeale for the houſe of God, and teacheth therein euery day. 47 The rulers would deſtroy him, but for feare of the people.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND entring in,The Goſpel vpō the Dedication of a Church. he vvalked through Iericho. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And behold a man named Zachaeus: and this vvas a Prince of the Publicans, and he riche. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſought to ſee IESVS vvhat he vvas, and he could not for the multitude, becauſe he vvas litle of ſtature. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And running before, he ″ vvent vp into a ſycomore tree that he might ſee him: becauſe he vvas to paſſe by it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen he vvas come to the place, IESVS looking vp,Zachaeus. ſavv him, and ſaid to him, Zachaeus, come dovvne in haſt: becauſe this day I muſt abide in thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he in haſt came dovvne, and receiued him reioycing. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen al ſavv it, they murmured, ſaying that he turned in, to a man that vvas a ſinner. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But Zachaeus ſtanding, ſaid to our Lord, Behold the halfe of my goods, Lord, I giue to the poore: and if I haue defrauded any man of any thing, ″ I reſtore fourefold. ✝ 
                     verse 9 IESVS ſaid to him, That this day ſaluation is made to this houſe:Mt, 18, 12. becauſe that he alſo is the ſonne of Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * For the Sonne of man is come to ſeeke and to ſaue that vvhich vvas loſt. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 They hearing theſe things, he added and ſpake a parable, for that he was nigh to Hieruſalem, and becauſe they thought that forthvvith the kingdom of God ſhould be manifeſted. ✝ 
                     verse 12 He ſaid therfore,The Goſpel for a confeſſor that is not a Biſhop, and namely for S. Lewis the king of France, Auguſt. 25. * A certaine noble man vvent into a farre countrie to take to him ſelf a kingdom,Mt. 25, 14. and to returne. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And calling his ten ſeruants, he gaue them ten poundes, and ſaid to them, Occupie til I come. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And his citizens hated him: and they ſent a legacie after him, ſaying, Vve vvil not haue this man reigne ouer vs. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And it came to paſſe after he returned, hauing receiued his kingdom: and he commaunded his ſeruants to be called, to vvhom he gaue the money: that he might knovv how much euery mā had gained by occupying. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the firſt came, ſaying, Lord, thy pound hath gotten ten poundes. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And he ſaid to him, Vvel fare thee good ſeruant, becauſe thou haſt been faithful in a litle, thou ſhalt haue povver ouerMarke here againſt the aduerſaries, that the rewards of theſe two good ſeruants be diuers & vnaequal, according to the diuerſitie or inequality of their gaines, that is, their merites. and yet one receiueth the peny (Mt. 20, 9.) as wel as the other, that is, heauen or life euerlaſting. ten cities. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the ſecond came, ſaying, Lord, thy pound hath made fiue poundes. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And he ſaid to him, And be thou ouer fiue cities. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And an other came, ſaying, Lord, loe here thy pound, vvhich I haue had laid vp in a napkin. ✝ 
                     verse 21 for I feared thee, becauſe thou art an auſtêre man: thou takeſt vp that thou didſt not ſet dovvne, and thou reapeſt
 that vvhich thou didſt not ſovv. ✝ 
                     verse 22 He ſaith to him, By thine ovvne mouth I iudge thee, naughtie ſeruant. Thou didſt knovv that I am an auſtere man, taking vp that I ſet not dovvne, and reaping that vvhich I ſovved not: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and vvhy didſt thou not giue my money to the banke,See annotatiōs Matth. 27, 29, &c. and I comming might certes vvith vſurie haue exacted it? ✝ 
                     verse 24 And he ſaid to them that ſtoode by, Take the pound avvay from him, and giue it to him that hath the ten poundes. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And they ſaid to him, Lord, he hath ten poundes. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But I ſay to you, that to euery one that hath ſhal be giuen: and from him that hath not, that alſo vvhich he hath ſhal be taken from him. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 27 But as for thoſe mine enemies that vvould not haue me reigne ouer them,THE fifth part of the Goſpel, Of the Holy weeke of his Paſſion in Hieruſalem. bring them hither: and kil them before me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 And hauing ſaid theſe things,Mt. 21, 1 he vvent before aſcending to Hieruſalem.Mr. 11, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 29 And it came to paſſe * vvhen he vvas come nigh to Bethphagé and Bethania vnto the mount called Oliuet,Io. 12, 15 he ſent tvvo of his Diſciples, ✝ 
                     verse 30 ſaying, Goe into the tovvne vvhich is ouer againſt,PALME SVNDAY. into the vvhich as you enter, you ſhal finde the colt of an aſſe tied, on vvhich no man euer hath ſitten: looſe him, and bring him. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And if any man aſke you, Vvhy looſe you him? You ſhal ſay thus to him, becauſe our Lord needeth his ſeruice. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they that vvere ſent, vvent their vvaies, and found as he ſaid to them, the colt ſtanding. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And vvhen they looſed the colt, the ovvners thereof ſaid to them, Vvhy looſe you the colt? ✝ 
                     verse 34 But they ſaid, becauſe our Lord hath neede of him. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And they brought him to IESVS. And caſting their garments vpon the colt, they ſet IESVS therevpon. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And as he vvent, they ſpred their garments vnderneath in the vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vvhen he approched novv to the deſcent of mount-Oliuet, al the multitudes ofhis diſciples, them that deſcended', began vvith ioy to praiſe God vvith a loude voice, for al the miracles that they had ſeen, ✝ 
                     verse 38 ſaying, Bleſſed is he that commeth king in the name of our Lord, peace in heauen, and glorie on high. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And certaine Phariſees of the multitudes ſaid to him, Maiſter, rebuke thy diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 40 To vvhom he ſaid, I ſay to you, That if theſe hold their peace, the ſtones ſhal crie. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And as he drevv neere, ſeeing the citie, he vvept vpon it, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 42 Becauſe if thou alſo hadſt knovven, and that in this thy day, the things that pertaine to thy peace: but novv they are hid from thine
 eies. ✝ 
                     verse 43 ForThis was fulfilled 40 yeres after the death of Chriſt by Titus & Veſpaſianus, vvhen beſides incredible miſeries of famine and other diſtreſſès, there periſhed eleuē hundred thouſand, and were taken captiues 97000, the ſiege begīning in the very ſame feaſt & greateſt ſolēnitie of Eaſter when they put Chriſt to death. Euſeb. li. 1 hiſt. c. 6. 1. 8. Ioſeph. li. 7 c. 17.
                   the daies ſhal come vpon thee: and thy enemies ſhal compaſſe thee vvith a trenche, and incloſe thee about, and ſtraiten thee on euery ſide, ✝ 
                     verse 44 and beate thee flat to the ground, and thy children that are in thee, and they ſhal not leaue in thee a ſtone vpon a ſtone: becauſe thou haſt not knovven the time of thy viſitation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 45 
                  Mt. 21, 12. Mr. 11, 15. And entring into the temple, he began to caſt out the ſellers therein and the biers, ✝ 
                     verse 46 ſaying to them, It is vvritten, That my houſe is the houſe of praier.
                  MVNDAY But you haue made it a denne of theeues. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And he vvas teaching daily in the temple.Eſ. 56, 7 And the cheefe Prieſts and the Scribes and the Princes of the people ſought to deſtroy him:Ier. 7, 11 ✝ 
                     verse 48 and they found not vvhat to doe to him. For al the people vvas ſuſpenſe, hearing him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX
                  
                     4. Went vp.) Not onely invvard deuotion of faith and charitie tovvards Chriſt, but external offices of ſeeing,External deuotion. folovving, touching, receiuing, harbouring him, are recommended to vs in this example: euen ſo our manifold exteriour deuotion tovvards his Sacraments, Saincts, and ſeruants, be grateful: ſpecially the endeuour of good people not onely to be preſent at Maſſe or in the Church, but to be neere the B. Sacrament, and to ſee it vvith al reuerence and deuotion according to the order of the Church, much more to receiue it into the houſe of their body.
                  
                     2. I reſtore fourefold.)
                     Reſtitution. That vvhich vve giue of our ovvne, is almes and ſatisfaction for our ſinnes: but that vvhich vve reſtore of il gotten goods by Extortion, Vſurie, Simonie, Bribrie, Theft, or othervviſe, that is called here Reſtoring. And it is of duty and not of free almes, and muſt be rendred not to vvhom vve lift, but to the parties annoyed if it be poſſible, othervviſe it muſt be beſtovved vpon the poore, or other good vſes, according to the aduiſe of our ſuperiour & ſuch as haue charge of our ſoules. But that he yelded fourefold, that vvas more then he vvas bound,Satisfaction. but very ſatisfactorie for his former ſinnes alſo. And herevvith vve may note, that it is not the giuing of a peny, grote, or crovvne, of a riche mans ſuperfluitie, that is ſo much recōmended to ſinnes for redeeming their faultes: but this large beſtovving vpon Chriſt, to ſell al and giue it in almes, to giue the moytie of our goodes, to render foure times ſo much, for that vvhich is vvrongfully gotten,Lu. 21, 3. that extinguiſheth ſinnes. The poore vvidovves braſſe peny vvas very grateful, becauſe it vvas al or much of that ſhe had: but the riche mans pound of his ſuperfluitie, though it be good, yet is nothing ſo grateful.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  To the Iewes he auoucheth his power by the vvitnes of Iohn vvho vvas a man ſent of God. 9 and foretelleth in a parable their reprobation moſt vvorthy (vvith the vocation of the Gentiles in their place) 17 and conſequently their irreparable damnation that ſhal enſue thereof. 20 He defeateth their ſnare about paying tribute to Caeſar: 27 he anſvvereth alſo the inuention of the Sadduces againſt the Reſurrection, 40 And ſo hauing put them al to ſilence, 41 he turneth and poſeth them, becauſe they imagined that Chriſt ſhould be no more but a man: 45 bidding al to bevvare of the Scribes (authors of the Ievves ſchiſme from him) being ambitious and hypocrites.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe: in one of the daies vvhen he vvas teaching the people in the temple and euangelizing,Mr. 21, 23. Mr. 11, 27, the cheefe Prieſts and the Scribes vvith the auncients aſſembled,TVESDAY. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ſpake ſaying to him,
See Annot. Mat. c 21, 23. Tel vs, in vvhat povver doeſt thou theſe things? or, vvho is he that hath giuen the this povver? ✝ 
                     verse 3 And IESVS anſvvering, ſaid to them, I alſo vvil aſke you one vvord. Anſvver me, ✝ 
                     verse 4 The baptiſme of Iohn was it from heauē, or of men? ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they thought within them ſelues, ſaying, That if vve ſay, From heauen: he vvil ſay, Vvhy then did you not beleeue him? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But if vve ſay, Of men: the vvhole people vvil ſtone vs: for they are certaine that Iohn is a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they anſvvered that they knevv not vvhence it vvas. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And IESVS ſaid to them, Neither doe I tel you in vvhat povver I doe theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he began to ſay to the people this parable,Eſa. 5, 1. * A certaine 
See the marginal annotations Marc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . man planted a vineyard,Mt. 21, 33. Mr. 12, 1. & let it out to huſbandmen: and he vvas from home a long time. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And in time he ſent to the huſbandmen a ſeruant, that they ſhould giue him of the fruit of the vineyard. Vvho beating him, ſent him avvay emptie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And againe he ſent an other ſeruant. But they beating him alſo and reprochfully abuſing him, ſent him avvay emptie. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And againe he ſent the third: vvho vvounding him alſo, caſt him out. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the lord of the vineyard ſaid, Vvhat ſhal I doe? I vvil ſend my beloued ſonne: perhaps vvhen they ſhal ſee him, they vvil reuerence him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvhom vvhen the huſbandmen ſavv, they thought vvithin them ſelues, ſaying, This is the heire, let vs kil him, that the heritage may be ours. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And caſting him forth out of the vineyard, they killed him. Vvhat therfore vvil the Lord of the vineyard doe to them? ✝ 
                     verse 16 He vvil come, and vvil deſtroy theſe huſbandmen, and vvil giue the vineyard to others. Vvhich they hearing,Pſ. 117, 22. ſaid to him, God forbid. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But he beholding them ſaid, Vvhat is this then that is vvritten, The ſtone vvhich the builders reiected, the ſame is become into the head of the corner? ✝ 
                     verse 18 Euery one that falleth vpon this ſtone, ſhal be quaſhed: and vpon vvhom it ſhal fall, it ſhal breake him to pouder. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the cheefe Prieſts and Scribes ſought to lay handes vpon him that houre: and they feared the people, for they knevv that he ſpake this ſimilitude to them.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 20 * And watching,Mt. 22, 15. Mr. 12, 13. they ſent ſpies which ſhould feine them ſelues iuſt: that they might take him in his talke, and deliuer him to the principaltie and povver of the Praeſident. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And they aſked him, ſaying, Maiſter, vve knovv that thou ſpeakeſt and teacheſt rightly: and thou doeſt not accept perſon, but teacheſt the vvay of God in truth. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Is it lavvful for vs to giue tribute to Caeſar, or no? ✝ 
                     verse 23 But conſidering their guile, he ſaid to them, Vvhy tempr you me? ✝ 
                     verse 24 Shevv me a penie. Vvhoſe image hath it and inſcription? They anſvvering ſaid, Caeſars. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he ſaid to them, Render therfore the things that are Caeſars,So duties muſt be done to Princes, that our duety to God be not neglected. See Annot. Mat. c. 22, 15. to to Caeſar: and the things that are Gods, to God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And they could not reprehend his vvord before the people: and marueiling at his anſvver, they held their peace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 * And there came certaine of the Sadducees,Mt. 22, 23. Mr. 12, 18. vvhich denie that there is a reſurrection, and they aſked him, ✝ 
                     verse 28 ſaying, Maiſter, Moyſes gaue vs in vvriting, * If a mans brother die hauing a vvife,Deu, 25, 5. and he haue no children, that his brother take her to vvife, and raiſe vp ſeede to his brother. ✝ 
                     verse 29 There vvere therfore ſeuen brethren: and the firſt tooke a vvife, and died vvithout children. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the next tooke her, and he died vvithout children. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And the third tooke her. In like maner alſo al the ſeuen, and they left no ſeed, and died. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Laſt of al the vvoman died alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 33 In the reſurrection therfore, vvhoſe vvife ſhal ſhe be of them? ſithens the ſeuen had her to vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And IESVS ſaid to them, The children of this vvorld marrie, and are giuen in mariage: ✝ 
                     verse 35 but they that ″ ſhal be
The greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      impotteth alſo this much, they that are made vvorthie, to wit, by the grace of God, and ſo they are in deede worthie, as alſo in the next chapter verſe 36. & 2. Theſſ. 1. 5.
                   counted vvorthie of that vvorld and the reſurrection from the dead, neither marrie, nor take vviues, ✝ 
                     verse 36 neither can they die any more, for they are ″ equal to Angels: and they are the ſonnes of God, ſeeing they are the ſonnes of the reſurrectiō. ✝ 
                     verse 37 But that the dead riſe againe, Moyſes alſo ſhevved, beſide the buſh, as he calleth the Lord, The God of Abraham, and the God of Iſaac,
                  Exo. 3, 6. 
                  and the God of Iacob. ✝ 
                     verse 38 For God is not of the dead, but of the liuing▪ for al liue to him. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And certaine of the Scribes anſvvering, ſaid to him, Maiſter, thou haſt ſaid vvel. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And further they durſt not aſke him any thing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 But he ſaid to them,Mt. 22, 44. Mr. 12, 36. * Hovv ſay they that Chriſt is the ſonne of Dauid? ✝ 
                     verse 42 and Dauid him ſelf ſaith in the booke of pſalmes, The Lord ſaid to my Lord, Sit on my right hand, ✝ 
                        verse 43 til I put thine enemies,
                  Pſ. 109, 1. 
                  the foote ſtoole of thy feete? ✝ 
                     verse 44 Dauid then calleth him Lord: and hovv is he his ſonne?
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 45 And al the people hearing him, he ſaid to his Diſciples, ✝ 
                     verse 46 * Bevvare of the Scribes,Mt. 23, 6. Mr. 12, 38. that vvil vvalke in robes, and loue ſalutations in the market-place, and the firſt chaires in the ſynagogs, and the cheefe roomes in feaſtes. ✝ 
                     verse 47 vvhich deuoure vvidovves houſes: feining long praier. Theſe ſhal receiue greater damnation.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Shal be counted vvorthie.) This truth and ſpeach that good men be vvorthy of heauen, is according to the Scriptures,To be worthie of heauē, or to deſerue & merite it. and ſignifieth that mans vvorkes done by Chriſts grace do condignely or vvorthely deſerue eternal ioy, as Sap. 3. God proued them, and found them vvorthy of him ſelf. and Mat. 10. He that loueth his father more then me, is not vvorthy of me. and Coloſ. 1, That you may vvalke vvorthy of God. and moſt plainly Apoc. 3. They ſhal vvalke vvith me in vvhite, becauſe they are vvorthy. as of Chriſt (c. 1) Thou art vvorthy o Lord to receiue glorie &c. And that, to be counted vvorthie, and to be vvorthie,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . is here al one,The new Teſtamēt an. 1580. it is plaine, by the Greeke vvord, vvhich S. Paul vſeth ſo, as the aduerſaries ovvne Engliſh Teſtaments do teſtifie, reading thus Hebre. 10. Of hovv much ſorer puniſhment ſhal he be vvorthie, vvhich &c. And it muſt needes ſignifie, becauſe men for ſinnes are not only counted, but are in deede vvorthie of puniſhment, as them ſelues do graunt. They do greatly therfore forget them ſelues, and are ignorant in the Scriptures, and knovv not the force nor the valure of the grace of God, which doth not onely make our labours grateful to God, but worthie of the reward which he hath prouided for ſuch as loue him. See the Annot. 2 Theſſ. 1, 5.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        6. Equal to Angels.) Saincts of our kinde,The dignitie of Saincts. now in their ſoules, and after their reſurrection in body and ſoule together, ſhal be in al things equal to Angels: and for degree of bliſſe, many Saincts of greater merite ſhal be aboue diuers Angels: as S. Iohn Baptiſt, the Apoſtles, and others, and our B. Lady aboue al the orders of holy ſpirits in dignitie and bliſſe, and no maruel, our nature by Chriſt being ſo highly exalted aboue al Angels.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  He commendeth the poore vvidovv for her tvvo mites, aboue al. 5 Hauing ſaid that the Temple ſhal be quite deſtroied, 7 he foretelletb firſt many things that ſhal goe before, 20 then a ſigne alſo vvhen it is neere, after vvhich ſhal come the deſtruction it ſelf in moſt horrible maner, vvithout hope of reſtitution, vntil al Nations of the Gentils be gathered into his Church in the very end of the vvorld. 25 And then vvhat ſignes ſhal come of the laſt day, terrible to the vvorld, 28 but comfortable to vs of his Church, 34 ſo that vve be alvvaies vvatchful.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND beholding,Mr. 12, 14. he ſavv them that did caſt their giftes into the treaſurie, riche perſons. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he ſavv alſo a certaine poore vvidovv caſting tvvo braſſe mites. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſaid, Verely I ſay to you, that this poore vvidovv hath caſt more then al. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For al theſe of their aboundance haue caſt into the giftes of God: but ſhe ″ of her penurie, hath caſt in al her liuing that ſhe had.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And certaine ſaying of the temple that it vvas adorned 
 vvith goodly ſtones and donaries, he ſaid, ✝ 
                     verse 6 Theſe things vvhich you ſee,Mt. 24, 1. Mar. 13, 1. * the daies vvil come vvhereinThis was fulfilled 40 yeres after the death of Chriſt, the 19 of Auguſt, being the very moneth and day where in the Babylonians burnt it: from the firſt building thereof by Salomō 1
                        •
                     30 yeres, from the reedifying thereof vnder Cyrus, 639 yeres. Ioſep. de bel. Iud. li. 9 cap. 10.
                   there ſhal not be left a ſtone vpon a ſtone that ſhal not be deſtroied, ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they aſked him,TVESDAY night. ſaying, Maiſter, when ſhal theſe things be: and vvhat ſhal be the ſigne vvhen they ſhal begin to come to paſſe? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Vvho ſaid, See you be not ſeduced forMany falſeprophets & Heretikes. See An. Mt. 24. Mr. 13. many vvil come in my name, ſaying that I am he: and the time is at hand, goe not therfore after them. ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  The Goſpel for many Martyrs. And vvhen you ſhal heare of vvarres and ſeditions, be not terrified: theſe things muſt firſt come to paſſe, but the end is not yet by and by. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Then he ſaid to them, Nation ſhal riſe againſt nation, and kingdom againſt kingdom. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And there ſhal be great earth-quakes in places, and peſtilences and famines, and terrours from heauen, and there ſhal be great ſignes. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But before al theſe things they vvilGreat perſecutiō of Catholike men. lay their hands vpon you: and perſecute you deliuering you into ſynagogs and priſons, dravving you to kings and preſidents for my name. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and it ſhal happen vnto you for teſtimonie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Lay vp this therfore in your hartes, not to premeditate hovv you ſhal anſvver. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For I vvil giue you mouth and vviſedom, vvhich al your aduerſaries ſhal not be able to reſiſt and gaine ſay. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And you ſhal be deliuered vp of your parents and brethren, and kinſemen & frendes: and they vvil put to death of you. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And you ſhal be odious to al men for my name: ✝ 
                     verse 18 and a heare of your head ſhal not periſh. ✝ 
                     verse 19 In your patience you ſhal poſſeſſe your ſoules. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen you ſhal ſee Hieruſalem compaſſed about vvith an armie: then knovv that the deſolation thereof is at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 21 then they that are in Ievvrie, let them flee to the mountaines: and they in the middes thereof, let them depart: and they in the countries, let them not enter into it. ✝ 
                     verse 22 for theſe are the daies of vengeance, that al things may be fulfilled that are vvritten. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But vvo to them that are vvith childe and that giue ſucke in thoſe daies. for there ſhal be great affliction vpon the land, and vvrath on this people. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And they ſhal fall by the edge of the ſvvord: and ſhal be led captiue into al nations. and Hieruſalem ſhal be troden of the Gentiles: til the times of nations be fulfilled.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 * 
                     •
                   And there ſhal be ſignes in the ſunne and the moone and the ſtarres:Eze. 32, 7. Ioel. 3, 15. and vpon earth diſtreſſe of nations,The Goſpel vpō the 1 Sunday in Aduent. for the confuſion of the ſound of ſea and vvaues, ✝ 
                     verse 26 men vvithering
 for feare and expectation, vvhat ſhal come vpon the vvhole vvorld. for the povvers of heauē ſhal be moued: ✝ 
                     verse 27 and then they ſhal ſee the Sonne of man comming in a cloude vvith great povver and maieſtie. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But vvhen theſe things begin to come to paſſe, looke vp and lift vp your heades: becauſe your redemption is at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And he ſpake to them a ſimilitude. See the figtree and al trees: ✝ 
                     verse 30 Vvhen they novv budde forth fruite out of them ſelues, you knovv that ſummer is nigh. ✝ 
                     verse 31 So you alſo vvhen you ſhal ſee theſe things come to paſſe, knovv that the kingdom of God is nigh. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Amen I ſay to you, that this generation ſhal not paſſe, til al be done. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Heauen and earth ſhal paſſe: but my vvordes ſhal not paſſe. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 And looke vvel to your ſelues, leſt perhaps your hartes be ouercharged vvith ſurfetting and drunkēneſſe and cares of this life: and that day come vpon you ſodenly. ✝ 
                     verse 35 For as a ſnare ſhal it come vpon al that ſit vpon the face of al the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Vvatch therfore, praying at al times, that you may be
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . See Annot. c. 20, 15. accounted vvorthie to eſcape al theſe things that are to come, and to ſtand before the Sonne of man.
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 And the daies he vvas teaching in the temple: but the nightes going forth, he abode in theSolitarineſſe or eremitage (as S. Gregorie Nazian. ſaith) is a goodly thing, this doth the mount Carmel of Elias teach, Iohns deſert, & that mount vnto which IESVS often retired, & was quietly alone with him ſelf. Ser. 26 de amore pauperum.
                   mount that is called Oliuet. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And al the people in the morning vvent vnto him in the temple to heare him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     4. Of her penurie.) To offer or giue almes of our ſuperfluites, is not ſo acceptable nor meritorious, as to beſtow ſome of that which is of our neceſſarie prouiſion, and which we may hardly ſpare from our ſelues: for, that procedeth of greater zeale, vvil, and intention, which be more reſpected of God then the ſubſtance of the gift.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  Iudas doth ſell him to the Ievves. 7 After the old Paſchal, 19 he giueth to his diſciples the bread of life in a myſtical ſacrifice of his body and bloud, for an euerlaſting comemoration of his Paſsion. 21 He couertly admoniſheth the traitour. 24 Againſt their ambitious contention he ſhevveth them that the maioritie of any among them in this vvorld is for their ſeruice, as his ovvne alſo vvas: 28 and hovv he vvil exalt them al in the vvorld to come: 31 foretelling Peter the ſingular priuilege of his faith neuer failing, 33 and his three negations: 35 and hovv they ſhal al now be put to their ſhiftes. 39 And that night, after his praier with ſvveating of bloud, 43 he is taken of the Ievves men, Iudas being their captaine: yet ſhevving them both by miracle and vvord, that they could doe nothing vnto him but by his ovvne permiſsion. 54 Then in the cheefe Prieſtes houſe he is thriſe denied of Peter, 63 ſhamefully abuſed of his keepers, 66 and in the morning impiouſly condemned of their Councel, for confeſsing him ſelf to be the Sonne of God.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the feſtiual day of the Azymes approched,
Mt. 26, 1 vvhich is called Paſche:The PASSION according to S. Luke in theſe two chapters, is the Goſpel at Maſſe vpon Tenebre weneſday. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and the cheefe Prieſts and the Scribes ſought hovv they might kil him:Mr. 14, 1 but they feared the people. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And Satan entred into Iudas that vvas ſurnamed Iſcariote, one of the Tvvelue.TENEBRE Weneſday. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And he vvent, and talked vvith the cheefe Prieſts and the Magiſtrates, hovv he might betray him to them. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And they vvere glad, and bargained to giue him money. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he promiſed. And he ſought opportunitie to betray him apart from the multitudes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 * And the day of the Azymes came,Mt. 26, 17. Mr. 14, 12. vvherein it vvas neceſſarie that the Paſche ſhould be killed. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And he ſent Peter and Iohn,MAVNDY Thurſday. ſaying, Goe and prepare vs the Paſche, that vve may eate. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But they ſaid, Vvhere vvilt thou that vve prepare it? ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he ſaid to them, Behold, as you enter into the citie, there ſhal meete you a man carying a pitcher of vvater: folovv him into the houſe into vvhich he entreth, ✝ 
                     verse 11 and you ſhal ſay to the good manof the houſe, The Maiſter ſaith to thee, Vvhere is the inne vvhere I may eate the Paſche vvith my Diſciples? ✝ 
                     verse 12 And he vvil ſhevv you a great refectorie adorned: and there prepare. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And they going, found as he ſaid to them, and prepared the Paſche.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen the houre vvas come, he ſate dovvne, and the tvvelue Apoſtles vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he ſaid to them, ″ Vvith deſire I haue deſired to eate this Paſche vvith you before I ſuffer. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For I ſay to you, that from this time I vvil not eate it, til it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ″ taking the chalice he gaue thankes, and ſaid, Take and deuide among you, ✝ 
                     verse 18 for I ſay to you, That I vvil not drinke of the generation of the vine, til the kingdom of God doe come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 * And taking bread,Mt. 26, 26. Mr. 14, 22. he gaue thankes, and brake: and gaue to them, ſaying, ″ THIS IS MY BODY ″ VVHICH IS GIVEN FOR YOV.1. Cor. 11, 24. ″ Doe this ″ for a commemoration of me. ✝ 
                     verse 20 In like maner the chalice alſo, after he had ſupped, ſaying,The Greeke is here ſo plaine, that there was very bloud in the chalice, ſhed for vs, that Beza ſaith it is a corruption in the greeke. See the Annota. vpon this place. THIS IS THE CHALICE ″ THE NEVV TESTAMENT IN MY BLOVD, ″ VVHICH SHAL BE SHED FOR YOV.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 * But yet behold,Mt. 26, 21. Mr. 14, 20. the hand of him that betraieth me, is vvith me on the table.Io. 13, 18 ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the Sonne of man in deede
 goeth according to that vvhich is determined: but yet vvo to that man by vvhom he ſhal be betrayed. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And they began to queſtion among them ſelues, vvhich of them it ſhould be that ſhould doe this.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 * And there fel alſo a cōtention betvvene them,Mt. 20, 25. vvhich of them ſeemed to be greater.Mr. 10, 42. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he ſaid to them, The kinges of the Gentiles ouerrule them: and they that haue povver vpon them, are called beneficial. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But you not ſo: but he that is the greater among you, let him become as the yonger: & he that is the leader, as the waiter. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For which is greater, he that ſitteth at the table, or he that miniſtreth? is not he that ſitteth? but I am in the middes of you, as he that miniſtreth: ✝ 
                     verse 28 & you are they that haue remained vvith me in my tētations. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And I diſpoſe to you, as my father diſpoſed to me, a kingdō: ✝ 
                     verse 30 that you may eate & drinke vpon my table in my kingdom, & may ſitStraight after the former louing checke & admonition, he promiſeth to them al that haue bene partakers with him of his miſeries in this life, greater prcemi
                        ••
                     ence in heauen, then any Potentate can haue in this world, & therfore that they neede not be careful of dignitie or Supremacie. vpon thrones, iudging the tvvelue tribes of Iſrael.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 And our Lord ſaid, ″ Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath required to haue you for to ſift as vvheate: ✝ 
                     verse 32 BVT I HAVE PRAIED FOR THEE, that thy faith faile not: and thou once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Vvho ſaid to him, Lord, vvith thee I am readie to goe both into priſon and vnto death.Mt. 26, 34. Mr. 14, 30. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And he ſaid, * I ſay to thee, Peter, the cocke ſhal not crovv to day, til thou denie thriſe that thou knovveſt me. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And he ſaid to them, Vvhen I ſent you 
* vvithout purſe and ſkrippe and ſhoes,Mt. 10, 9. Lu. 10, 4. did you lacke any thing? But they ſaid, Nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 36 He ſaid therfore vnto them, But novv he that hath a purſe, let him take it, likevviſe alſo a ſkrippe: and he that hath not, let him ſel his coate, and bie a ſvvord. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For I ſay to you, that yet this that is vvritten, muſt be fulfilled in me,Eſ. 53, 12 
                  And vvith the vvicked vvas he reputed. For thoſe things that are concerning me, haue an end. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But they ſaid, Lord, Loe tvvo ſvvordes here. But he ſaid to them, It is ynough,Mt. 16, 36. Mr. 14, 32. ✝ 
                     verse 39 * And going forth he vvent according to his cuſtome into mount-Oliuet. And his Diſciples alſo folovved him.THVRSDAY night. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And vvhen he vvas come to the place,Io. 18, 1, he ſaid to them, Pray, leſt ye enter into tentation. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And he vvas pulled avvay from them a ſtones caſt: and kneeling he praied, ✝ 
                     verse 42 ſaying, Father, if thou vvilt, transferre this chalice from me. But yet not my vvil, but thine be done. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And there appeared to him an Angel from heauen, ſtrengthening him. And being in an agonie, he praied the longer. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And his ſvveat became 
 as droppes of bloud trikling dovvne vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And vvhen he vvas riſen vp from praier, and vvas come to his Diſciples, he found them ſleeping for penſifenes. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And he ſaid to them, Vvhy ſleepe you? ariſe, pray, leſt you enter into tentation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 47 As he vvas yet ſpeaking, behold a multitude: and he that vvas called Iudas, one of the Tvvelue, vvent before them, and approched to IESVS, for to kiſſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And IESVS ſaid to him, Iudas with a kiſſe doeſt thou betray the ſonne of man? ✝ 
                     verse 49 And they that vvere about him, ſeeing vvhat vvould be, ſaid to him, Lord, Shal vve ſtrike vvith the ſvvord? ✝ 
                     verse 50 And one of them ſmote the ſeruant of the high Prieſt: and cut of his right eare. ✝ 
                     verse 51 But IESVS anſvvering, ſaid, Suffer ye thus farre. And vvhen he had touched his eare, he healed him. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And IESVS ſaid to them that vvere come vnto him, the cheefe Prieſts, and magiſtrates of the temple, and auncients, As it vvere to a theefe are you come forth vvith ſvvordes and clubbes? ✝ 
                     verse 53 Vvhen I vvas daily vvith you in the temple, you did not lay handes vpon me, but this is your houre, and the povver of darkeneſſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 54 And apprehending him, they led him to the high Prieſts houſe: but Peter folovved a farre of. ✝ 
                     verse 55 And a fire being kindled in the middes of the court, & they ſitting about it, Peter vvas in the middes of them. ✝ 
                     verse 56 Vvhom vvhen a certaine vvenche ſavv ſitting at the light, and had beheld him, ſhe ſaid, This fellovv alſo vvas vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 57 But he denied him, ſaying, Vvoman, I knovv him not. ✝ 
                     verse 58 And after a vvhile an other man ſeeing him, ſaid, And thou art of them. But Peter ſaid, O man I am not. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And after the ſpace as it vvere of one houre, a certaine other man affirmed, ſaying, Verely this fellovv alſo vvas vvith him. for he is alſo a Galilaean. ✝ 
                     verse 60 And Peter ſaid, Man I knovv not vvhat thou ſayeſt. And incontinent as he vvas yet ſpeaking, the cocke crevv. ✝ 
                     verse 61 And our Lord turning looked on Peter. And Peter remembred the vvord of our Lord, as he had ſaid, That before the cocke crovv, thou ſhalt thriſe denie me. ✝ 
                     verse 62 And Peter going forth a doores, vvept bitterly.
                ✝ 
                     verse 63 And the men that held him, mocked him, beating him. ✝ 
                     verse 64 And they did blindefold him, and ſmote his face. And they aſked him ſaying, Prophecie, vvho is it that ſmote thee? ✝ 
                     verse 65 And blaſpheming many other things they ſaid againſt him.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 66 And vvhen it vvas day, there aſſembled the auncients of the people and cheefe Prieſts and Scribes, and they brought him into their councel, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 67 If thou be Chriſt tel vs. And he ſaid to them, If I tel you, you vvil not beleeue me: ✝ 
                     verse 68 if alſo I aſke, you vvil not anſvver me, nor dimiſſe me. ✝ 
                     verse 69 But from hence forth the Sonne of man ſhal be ſitting on the right hand of the povver of God. ✝ 
                     verse 70 And they al ſaid, Art thou then the ſonne of God? Vvho ſaid, You ſay that I am. ✝ 
                     verse 71 But they ſaid, Vvhat neede vve teſtimonie any further? For our ſelues haue heard of his ovvne mouth.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
                  
                     15. With deſire I haue deſired.]
                     The old Paſchal ceaſeth and a new is inſtituted. This great deſire he had to eate this Paſchal lambe, was not for it ſelf, vvhich he had celebrated many yeres before: but becauſe he meant immediatly after the Paſchal of the Law vvas ſacrificed & eaten, to inſtitute the other new Paſchal in the oblation and eating of his owne body, by vvhich the old Paſchal ſhould end and be fulfilled, and in which the old Teſtament and Law ceaſing, the Kingdom of God (which is the ſtate of the new Teſtament and of his Church) ſhould begin. For, the very paſſage from the old Law to the new was in this one ſupper.
                  
                     17. Taking the chalice.] This chalice according to the very euidence of the text it ſelf alſo, is not the ſecond part of the Holy Sacrament, but that ſolemne cuppe of vvine vvhich belonged as a libament to the offering and eating of the Paſchal lambe. Which being a figure ſpecially of the holy Chalice,Two cuppes or chalices at Chriſtes laſt ſupper. vvas there drunken by our Sauiour, and giuen to the Apoſtles alſo, with declaration that it ſhould be the laſt cuppe of the Law, not to be drunken any more, til it ſhould be drunken new in the kingdom of God, that is to ſay, in the celebration of the B. Sacrament of his bloud of the new Teſtament.Mt. 26, 29 And by this place it ſeemeth very like that the wordes in S. Matthew, I wil not drinke of the fruite of the vine &c. were pertaining to this cuppe of the old Law, and not to the Holy Sacrament, though they be there by repetition or recapitulation ſpoken after the holy Chalice.
                  19. This is my body.] Although ſenſe tel thee it is bread, yet it is the body, according to his vvordes. let faith confirme thee,The real preſence. iudge not by ſenſe, after the vvordes of our Lord let no doubt riſe in thy minde. Cyril. myſtag. 4. Of the veritie of fleſh and bloud there is left no place to doubt: by the profeſsion of our Lord him ſelf and by our faith it is fleſh and bloud in deede. Is not this truth? To them be it vntrue, which deny IESVS CHRIST to be true God. Hilar li. 8 de Trinit.
                  
                  19. Which is giuen.]Chriſt ſacrificed his body and bloud in Sacrament at his ſupper. 
                     As the former wordes make and proue his body preſent, ſo theſe wordes plainely ſignifie, that it is preſent, as giuen, offered or ſacrificed for vs: and being vttered in the
                     quod datur 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     preſent tence, it ſignifieth not onely that it ſhould aftervvard be giuen or offered on the Croſſe, but that it vvas then alſo in the Sacrament giuen and offered for vs. Whereby it is inuincebly proued that his Body is preſent as an hoſt or Sacrifice: and that the making or conſecrating thereof muſt needes be Sacrificing. And therfore the holy Fathers in this ſenſe call it a Sacrificing. Niſſen. orat. 1 de reſur.The Sacrifice of the Altar. Leo ſer.Cyril. Alex. anathem. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     
                        •
                      et 
                        •
                      de Paſs. Heſychius li. 2. in Leuit. c. 8. Grego. ho. 37 in Euang. et Dial. li, 4, c. 59. Cyrillus Hieroſ. myſtag. 5. Dionyſ. Eccl. hier. c. 3. Ignat. ep. 5. ad Smyrn. Iuſtinus dial. cum Tryph. circ. med. Iren. li. 4, c. 32 et 14. Tertu!. de cult, fam. et ad vxor. li. 2. Cypr. ep. ad Cacil. et de Can. Do. Euſeb. Demonſt. euang. li. 1 c. 10 Nazian. orat, 
                        •
                      cont. Iulianū. Chryſt. ho. 83 in 26 Mat. et li. 6 de Sacerd. Ambroſ. li. 4 de Sacram. c. 6. et li. 1 Offic. c. 48. Hiero. in ep. ad Hedib. q 2. et ad Euagr. ep. 126 to. 3. Auguſt. in pſal. 33 conc. 1. et alibi ſape. Graci omnes in 9 Hebr. et Primaſius. Conc. Nic. 1. can. 14. Epheſ. ad Neſtor, Conſtantinop. 6. can. 32. Nicen. 
                        •
                      act. 6 to. 3. La
                        •
                     cran. Conſtant. Flor. Trid.
                  
                     19. Doe this)
                     The Apoſtles are made Prieſtes, & the Sacrament of holy Orders inſtituted. In theſe vvordes the holy Sacrament of Order is inſtituted, becauſe povver and cōmiſſion to doe the principal act and vvorke of Prieſthod, is giuen to the Apoſtles: that is, to doe that vvhich Chriſt then did concerning his body: which was, to make and offer his body as a ſacrifice for vs and for all that haue neede of Sacrifice, and to giue it to be eaten as Chriſtes body ſacrificed, to al faithful. For as the Paſchal lambe was firſt ſacrificed, and then eaten: ſo vvas his body: and thus to doe he here giueth commiſſion and authoritie to the Apoſtles, and to al Prieſts which
 be their ſucceſſors in this matter. Dionyſ. cal. Hierar. c. 3. Iren. li. 4, c. 32. Cypr. ep. ad Cacil. Chryſ. ho. 17 in ep. ad Hebr. Ambroſ. in Pſ. 38. & in c. 10 ad Hebr.
                  
                  
                     19. For a commemoration.] This Sacrifice and Sacrament is to be done perpetually in the Church for the commemoration of Chriſt, ſpecially of his Paſsion: that is to ſay, that it may be a liuely repreſentation,A cōmemoratiue ſacrifice is a true ſacrifice, no leſſe then the prefiguratiue ſacrifices were true ſacrifices. exemplar, and forme of his Sacrifice vpon the croſſe. Of vvhich one oblatiō on the croſſe, not onely al other ſacrifices of the Lavv vvere figures, but this alſo: though this in a more nigh, high, myſtical, and maruelous ſort then any other. for in them Chriſt death vvas ſignified as by reſemblance and ſimilitudes of external creatures and bodies of brute beaſts, but in this of the new Teſtament, his body viſibly ſacrificed on the croſſe, in and by the ſelf ſame body ſacrificed and immolated in Sacramēt and vnder the ſhapes of bread and vvine, is moſt neerely & perfectly reſembled: and therfore this is moſt properly cōmemoratiue, as moſt neerely expreſſing the very condition,Ambr. in 10. Hebr. Chryſ. ho. 17 in ep. ad Hebr. nature, efficacie, ſort, and ſubſtance of that on the croſſe. For which the holy fathers call it the very ſelf ſame ſacrifice (though in other maner) which was done on the croſſe, as it is the ſelf ſame thing, that is offered in the Sacrament, and on the croſſe. whereby you may ſee the peruerſitie of the Proteſtants or their ignorance, that thinke it therfore not to be Chriſts body, becauſe it is a memorie of his body or a figure of his body vpon the croſſe: nor to be a true ſacrifice, becauſe it is a commemoratiue ſacrifice. for as the thing that more liuely, neerely, and truely reſembleth or repreſenteth, is a better figure then that which ſhadoweth it a far of: ſo this his body in the Sacramēt,To be a figure of a thing, and yet the thing it ſelf, repugneth not. is more perfectly a figure of Chriſts body & ſacrifice, then any other. Chriſt him ſelf the Sonne of God is a figure and character of his fathers perſon, being yet of the ſelf ſame ſubſtance, and Chriſts body transfigured on the holy Mount, was a figure and reſemblance of his perſon glorified in heauen, euen ſo is his body in the Sacrament to a faithful man that knovveth by his beleefe grounded on Chriſts owne vvord, that in the one forme is his body, in the other his bloud, the moſt perfect repreſentatiō of his death that can be. As for the ſacrifice, it is no leſſe a true Sacrifice, becauſe it is commemoratiue of Chriſts Paſſion: then thoſe of the old Teſtament vvere the leſſe true, becauſe they vvere prefiguratiue, for that is the condition annexed to al Sacrifice of euery Lavv, to repreſent Chriſts Paſſion.
                  
                     20. The nevv Teſtament in my bloud.] Moyſes tooke the bloud of the firſt ſacrifice that vvas made after the geuing of the Lavv Exod. 24. and vvith bloud confirmed the couenant and compact betvvixt God and his people, and ſo dedicated the old Teſtament, vvhich vvithout bloud (ſaith S, Paul) vvas not dedicated.Hebr. 9. Moyſes put that bloud alſo into a ſtāding peece, and ſprinkled al the people &c.Both teſtamēts dedicated in bloud. vvith the ſame, & ſaid theſe formal vvordes, This is the bloud of the couenant &c. or (as it is read in S. Paul) of the Teſtament vvhich God hath deliuered vnto you.
                     verſ. 20. Vnto al vvhich, Chriſt in this action about the ſecond part of this his ſacrifice, in euery of the Euangeliſts moſt cleerely alludeth, expreſſing that the new Teſtament is begonne and dedicated in his bloud in the Chalice, no leſſe then the old vvas dedicated, begonne, and ratified in that bloud of calues conteined in the goblet of Moyſes, vvith vvhich his ovvne bloud he ſprinkled invvardly his Apoſtles as the firſt fruits of the new Teſtament, imitating the wordes of Moyſes, and ſaying, This is the Chalice the new Teſtament &c.: which the other Euangeliſts ſpake more plainly, This is my bloud of the new Teſtament.
                     The external religion of the new Teſtament principally in the ſacrifice of the altar. By al which it is moſt certaine, that Chriſtes bloud in the Chalice, is the bloud of Sacrifice, and that in this ſacrifice of the altar conſiſteth the external religion and proper ſeruice of the new Teſtamēt, no leſſe then the ſoueraine worſhip of God in the old Law did cōſiſt in the ſacrifices of the ſame. For though Chriſtes ſacrifice on the Croſſe and his bloud ſhed for vs there, bed the general price, redemption, and ſatisfaction for vs all, and is the laſt and perfecteſt ſealing or confirmation of the new law and Teſtament: yet the ſeruice and Sacrifice which the people of the new Teſtament might reſort vnto, could not be that violent action of the Croſſe, but this on the Altar, which by Chriſtes owne appointment is and ſhal be the eternal office of the new Teſtament, and the continual application of al the benefites of his Paſſion vnto vs.
                  
                     20. Which ſhal be ſhed.)
                     
                        calix qui the chalice which 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      It is much to be obſerued that the relatiue,
                        The chalice ſhed for vs, muſt needes ſignifie, the bloud therein, not vvine, and the ſame ſacrificed. 
                     Vvhich, in theſe vvordes is not gouerned or ruled (as ſome vvould perhaps thinke) of the novvne bloud, but of the vvord chalice. which is moſt plaine by the Greeke. Which taketh away al cauillations and ſhifts from the Proteſtants, both againſt the real preſence and the true Sacrificing. For it ſheweth euidently, that the bloud as the contents of the chalice, or as in the chalice, is ſhed for vs (for ſo the Greeke readeth in the preſent tenſe) and not onely as vpon the croſſe. And therfore as it foloweth thereof inuincibly, that it is no bare figure, but his bloud in deede, ſo it enſueth neceſſarily
                        •
                      that it is a Sacrifice, and propitiatorie, becauſe the chalice (that is the Bloud contained in the ſame) is ſhed for our ſinnes. For al that know the maner of the Scriptures ſpeaches, know alſo that this, Bloud to be ſhed for ſinne,
                     Beza condemneth the Goſpel it ſelf of falſhod and impoſſibilitie. to be ſacrificed for propitiation or for pardon of ſinnes. And this text proueth al this ſo plainely, thatAnnot. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Teſt. 1556. Beza turneth him ſelf roundly vpon the Holy Euangeliſt, charging him with Soloeciſme or falſe Greeke, or els that the wordes (which yet he cōfeſſeth to be in al copies Greeke and Latin) are thruſt into the text out of ſome other place: vvhich he rather ſtandeth vpon then that S. Luke ſhould ſpeake incongruouſly in ſo plaine a matter. And therfore he ſaith plainely that it can not be truely ſaid neither of the chalice it ſelf nor of the contents thereof: vvhich is in deede to giue the lie to the bleſſed Euangeliſt, or to deny this to be Scripture. So cleere is the Scripture
 for vs, ſo miſerable flights and ſhifts is falſhod put vnto, God be thanked.
                  
                     24. Contention.]
                     Ambition. The Apoſtles perceiuing Chriſts departure from them and his kingdom to be neere, as infirme men and not yet endewed with the ſpirit of God, began to haue emulation and cogitations of Superiority one ouer an other: which our Maiſter repreſſeth in them by exhortation to humility and by his owne example, that being their Lord, yet ſo lately ſerued them: not forbidding Maioritie or Superioritie in them, but pride, tyranny, and contempt of their inferiours.
                  
                     31. Simon Simon.] Laſtly to put them out of doubt, he calleth Peter twiſe by name, and telling him the Diuels deſire to ſifte and trie them al to the vttermoſt (as he did that night) ſaith that he hath ſpecially prayed for him,Peters faith ſhal neuer faile. to this end that his faith ſhould neuer faile, and that he being once conuerted, ſhould after that for euer confirme, eſtabliſh or vphold the reſt in their faith. which is to ſay, that Peter is that man whom he would make Superiour ouer them and the whole Church. Whereby we may learne that it was thought fit in the prouidence of God, that he who ſhould be the head of the Church, ſhould haue a ſpecial priuilege by Chriſtes praier and promes, neuer to faile in faith, and that none other either Apoſtle, Biſhop, or prieſt may chalenge any ſuch ſingular or ſpecial prerogatiue either of his Office or perſon, otherwiſe then ioyning in faith with Peter and by holding of him.Serm. 2. The danger (ſaith S. Leo) was common to al the Apoſtles, but our Lord tooke ſpecial care of Peter,Aſſump. ad Pontif. Li. q. Noui. Teſt. q. 75. to. 4. that the ſtate of al the reſt might be more ſure, if the head were inuincible: God ſo diſpenſing the aide of his grace, that the aſſurance and ſtrength which Chriſt gaue to Peter, might redound by Peter to the reſt of the Apoſtles. S. Auguſtine alſo: Chriſt praying for Peter, prayed for the reſt, becauſe in the Paſtor and Prelate the people is corrected or commended. And S. Ambroſe writeth, that Peter after his tentation was made Paſtor of the Church, becauſe it was ſaid to him, Thou being conuerted, confirme thy brethren. Neither was this the priuilege of S. Peters perſon, but of his Office, that he ſhould not faile in faith but euer confirme al other in their faith.The Romane faith of Peters ſucceſſors can not falle. For the Church, for whoſe ſake that priuilege was thought neceſſarie in Peter the Head thereof, was to be preſerued no leſſe afterward, then in the Apoſtles time. wherevpon al the Fathers apply this priuilege of not failing and of confirming other in faith,Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 6. Bernard. ep. 190. to the Romane Church and Peters ſucceſſors in the ſame. To which (ſaith S. Cyprian) infidelity or falſe faith can not come. And S. Bernard ſaith writing to Innocentius Pope, againſt Abailardus the Heretike, we muſt referre to your Apoſtleſhip al the ſcandals and perils which may fall, in matter of faith ſpecially. For there the defects of faith muſt be holpen, where faith can not faile. For to what other See was it euer ſaid,Popes may erre perſonally, not iudicially or definitiuely. 
                     I haue prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith do not faile? So ſay the Fathers. not meaning that none of Peters ſeate can erre in perſon, vnderſtanding, priuate doctrine or writings, but that they can not nor ſhal not euer iudicially conclude or giue definitiue ſentence for falſhod or hereſie againſt the Catholike faith, in their Conſiſtories, Courts, Councels, decrees, deliberations or conſultations kept for deciſion and determination of ſuch controuerſies, doubts, or queſtions of faith as ſhalbe propoſed vnto them: becauſe Chriſtes prayer and promes protecteth them therein for confirmation of their brethren.Deut. 17. And no maruel that our Maiſter would haue his vicars Conſiſtorie & Seate infallible, ſeeing euen in the old Law the high Prieſtod and Chaire of Moyſes wanted not great priuilege in this caſe, though nothing like the Churches and Peters prerogatiue. But in both, any man of ſenſe may ſee the difference betwene the perſon, and the Office, as wel in doctrine as life. Liberius in perſecution might yeld, Marcellinus for feare might commit Idolatrie, Honorius might fall to Hereſie,Aug. ep. 166. in fine. and more then al this, ſome Iudas might creepe into the Office: and yet al this without preiudice of the Office and Seate, in which (ſaith S. Auguſtine) our Lord hath ſet the doctrine of truth. Caiphas by priuilege of his Office prophecied right of Chriſt, but according to his owne knowlege and faith, knew not Chriſt. The Euangeliſts and other penners of holy write, for the execution of that function had the aſſiſtance of God, and ſo far could not poſſibly erre: but that Luke, Marke, Salomon or the reſt might not erre in other their priuate vvritings,The learned fathers ſought to the B. of Rome for reſolution of doubtes. that we ſay not.Bernardus ep. 190. Chryſ. ep. 1 & 2. It was not the perſonal wiſedom, vertue, learning, or faith of Chriſts Vicars, that made S. Bernard ſeeke to Innocentius the third: S. Auguſtine and the Biſhops of Afrike to Innocentius the firſt, and to Celeſtinus, ep. 90. 92. 95: S. Chryſoſtome to the ſaid Innocentius: S. Baſil to the Pope in his time ep. 52: S. Hierom to Damaſus ep 57. 58. to. 2. but it was the prerogatiue of their Office and higher degree of Vnction, and Chriſts ordinance, that would haue al Apoſtles and Paſtors in the vvorld, for their confirmation in faith and Eccleſiaſtical regiment, depend on Peter. The lacke of knowledge and humble acceptation of which Gods prouidence, that is, that one is not honoured and obeyed of al the brotherhod, is the cauſe of al Schiſmes and Hereſies,Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 2 ſaith S. Cyprian. A point of ſuch importance, that al the Twelue being in Apoſtleſhip like, Chriſt would yet for the better keeping of vnity and truth, haue one to be head of them al, that a head being once appointed, occaſion of Schiſme might be taken away, ſaith S. Hierom. li. 1. adu. Iouinian. c. 14.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  The Ievves accuſe him to Pilate the Gentil: 4 Who ſeeking earneſtly to deliuer him, ſpecially after that Herod ſent him backe, 17 they not onely preferre the murderer Barabbas, but alſo crie, CRVCIFIGE. 26 in the vvay to Caluarie he foretelleth the vvomen that lamented vpon him, the horrible deſtruction of their Hieruſalem. 
                        •
                     2 vpon the croſſe he is betvvene tvvo theeues, 
                        •
                     5 ſcorned of the Ievves, 36 of the ſouldiars, 39 and of one of the theeues, 40 but euen there confeſſed of the other theefe, 44 and after his death (becauſe of the great miracles concurring) alſo of the Centurion. 4
                        •
                      yea and of the vvhole multitude. 50 and finally he is buried honorably.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND all the multitude of them riſing vp,GOOD FRIDAY. led him to Pilate.Mt. 27, 1, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And they began to accuſe him, ſaying,Mr. 15, 1 Io. 18, 27. Vve haue found this man ſubuerting our nation, & prohibiting to giue tributes to Caeſar, and ſaying that he is Chriſt the king. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And Pilate aſked him, ſaying, Art thou the king of the Ievves? But he anſvvering ſaid, Thou ſayeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Pilate ſaid to the cheefe Prieſts and multitudes, I finde no cauſe in this man. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But they vvere more earneſt, ſaying, He ſtirreth the people teaching through out al Ievvrie, beginning from Galilee euen hither. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But Pilate hearing Galilee, aſked if the man vvere of Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen he vnderſtoode that he vvas of Herods iuriſdiction, he ſent him backe to Herod, vvho vvas alſo him ſelf at Hieruſalem in thoſe daies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And Herod ſeeing IESVS, vvas very glad, for he vvas deſirous of a long time to ſee him, for becauſe he heard many things of him: and he hoped to ſee ſome ſigne vvrought by him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he aſked him in many vvordes. But he anſvvered him nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And there ſtoode the cheefe Prieſts and the Scribes conſtantly accuſing him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And Herod vvith his armie ſet him at naught: and he mocked him, putting on him a vvhite garment, and ſent him backe to Pilate. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And Herod and Pilate vvere made frendes that day▪ for before they vvere enemies one to an other.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And Pilate calling together the cheefe Prieſts and magiſtrates, and the people, ✝ 
                     verse 14 ſaid to them, You haue preſented vnto me this man, as auerting the people, and behold I examining him before you, haue found no cauſe in this man of thoſe things vvherein you accuſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 No, nor Herod neither. for I ſent you to him, and behold, nothing vvorthie of death is done to him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 I vvil chaſten him therfore and dimiſſe him.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 17 And he of neceſſitie had to releaſe vnto them vpon the feaſt day, one. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But the vvhole multitude together cried out, ſaying, Diſpatch him, and releaſe vs Barabbas. ✝ 
                     verse 19 vvho vvas for a certaine ſedition made in the citie and murder, caſt into priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And Pilate againe ſpake to them, deſirous to releaſe IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But they cried againe, ſaying, Crucifie, crucifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he the third time ſaid to them, Vvhy, vvhat euil hath this man done? I finde no cauſe of death in him. I vvil correct him therfore and let him goe. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But they vvere inſtant vvith loude voices requiring that he might be crucified. And their voices preuailed. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Pilate adiudged their petition to be done. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he releaſed vnto them him that for murder and ſedition had been caſt into priſon, vvhom they demaunded: but IESVS he deliuered to their pleaſure.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 And vvhen they led him, they tooke one Simon of Cyréne comming from the countrie: and they laid the croſſe vpon him to carie after IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And there folovved him a great multitude of people, and of vvomen vvhich bevvailed and lamented him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But IESVS turning to them, ſaid, Daughters of Hieruſalem, vveepe not vpon me, but vveepe vpon your ſelues, and vpon your children. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For behold the daies ſhal come, vvherein they vvil ſay, Bleſſed are the barren, and the vvombes that haue not borne, and the pappes that haue not giuen ſucke.Oſ. 10, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 30 
                  Then ſhal they begin to ſay to the mountaines, Fal vpon vs: and to the hilles, Couer vs. ✝ 
                     verse 31 For if in the greene wood they doe theſe things, in the drie vvhat ſhal be done?
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And there vvere led alſo other tvvo malefactours vvith him, to be executed. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And after they came to the place vvhich is called Caluarie, there they crucified him: and the theeues, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And IESVS ſaid, Father, forgiue them, for they knovv not vvhat they doe. But they deuiding his garments, did caſt lottes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 And the people ſtoodbeholding, expecting', and the princes vvith them derided him, ſaying, Others he hath ſaued, let him ſaue him ſelf, if this be Chriſt, the elect of God. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And the ſouldiars alſo mocked him comming to him, and offering him vinegre, ✝ 
                     verse 37 ſaying, If thou be the king of the Ievves, ſaue thy ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And there vvas alſo a ſuperſcription vvritten ouer him in Greeke, and Latine, and Hebrevv letters: THIS
 IS THE KING OF THE IEVVES. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And one of thoſe theeues that vvere hanged, blaſphemed him, ſaying, If thou be Chriſt, ſaue thy ſelf, and vs. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But the other anſvvering, rebuked him, ſaying, Neither doeſt thou feare God, vvhere as thou art in the ſame damnation? ✝ 
                     verse 41 And vve in deede iuſtly, for vve receiue vvorthie of our doings: but this man hath done no euil. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And he ſaid to IESVS, Lord, remember me vvhen thou ſhalt come into thy kingdom. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And IESVS ſaid to him, Amen I ſay to thee: this day thou ſhalt be vvith me ″ in paradiſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 44 And it vvas almoſt the ſixt houre: and there vvas made darkeneſſe vpon the vvhole earth vntil the ninthe houre. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And theThis eclipſe was ſeene and wondred at as a thing aboue nature, of Dioniſius Areopagîta at Thebes, whē he was yet a Pagan. Dionyſ. ep. ad Polycarp, et ep. ad Apollophanē.
                   ſunne vvas darkened: and the veile of the temple vvas rent in the middes. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And IESVS crying vvith a loude voice,Pſ. 30, 6. ſaid, Father, into thy handes I commend my ſpirit. And ſaying this, he gaue vp the ghoſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 47 And the Centurion ſeeing that vvhich vvas done, glorified God, ſaying, In deede this man vvas iuſt. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And al the multitude of them that vvere preſent together at that ſight, and ſavv the things that vvere done, returned knocking their breaſts. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And al his acquaintance ſtoode a far of: and the vvomen that had folovved him from Galilee, ſeeing theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 50 * And behold a man named Ioſeph,Mt. 27, 57. Mr. 5, 43, vvhich vvas a ſenatour, a good man and a iuſt, ✝ 
                     verse 51 he had not conſented to their counſeil and doings,
                     
                        •
                     o. 19, 38 of Arimathaea a citie of Ievvrie, vvho alſo him ſelf expected the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 52 This man came to Pilate, and aſked the body of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And taking it dovvne, vvrapped it in ſindon, and laid him in a monument hevved of ſtone, ″ vvherein neuer yet any man had been laid. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And it vvas the day of Paraſceue, and the Sabboth drew neere. ✝ 
                     verse 55 And the women that vvere come with him from Galilee, folovving after, ″ ſavv the monument, and hovv his body vvas laid. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And returning they prepared ſpices and ointments: and on the Sabboth they reſted according to the commaundement.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII
                  
                     34. Forgiue them.) A perfecte example of charitie in our Sauiour praying for his crucifiers, vvhich the firſt martyr S. Steuen did folovv, Act. 7: and the praiers of 
                        •
                     oth vvere heard: Chriſts praier taking effecte in the Centurion and others, Steuens in Paul.
                  
                      
                     43. In Paradiſe.) Thou maiſt not herevpon differre thy conuerſion or amendment,The good theefe. preſuming of grace at the laſt houre of thy life, not looke to haue ſaluation by ſaith and confeſſion of Chriſt vvithout good workes, no
                        •
                      to goe ſtraight to heauen vvithout ſatisfaction, penance, or puniſhment for thy former ſinnes and life il ſpent, nor chalenge ſecuritie and certaine knovvledge of thy ſaluation. for this good theeues caſe is not common, but a rare example of mercie and prerogatiue. but for the firſt point, learne only not to deſpaire, though thou haſt been il to the laſt moment of thy life. for the ſecond, that faith, hope, and charitie, repentance, and good vvil be ſufficient, and good vvorkes not required,Pardon of due penance and ſatisfaction. vvhere for vvant of time and opportunitie they cannot be had. for the third, that Chriſt gaue to this happy man for his 
                        •
                     elous confeſſion of him and reprehending his fellovv, not only remiſſion of his ſinnes, but alſo by extraordinarie grace, a pardon of al penance and ſatisfaction due either in this life or the next for the ſame. euen as the holy Church by his examle and commiſſion giueth pardons alſo to ſome of her zelous children, of al puniſhment due for their offenſes, and ſuch goe ſtraight to heauen. laſtly, that euery one hath not a reuelation of his ſaluation as this man had, and therfore can not be ſo ſure as he was.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        3. Wherein neuer.) As in the wombe of MARIE none was conceiued before nor after him, ſo in this monument none was laid before nor after him: which prerogatiue (no doubt) was of Gods prouidence, this Ioſeph no leſſe abſtaining afterward to be buried in it, then the other Ioſeph from copulation with the mother of our Lord. S. Auguſtine.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Saw the monument.) Theſe good vvomen of great deuotion obſerued the Sepulcher for the honour of the holy body.Viſiting the Sepulcher, or Sepulchres. Vvherevpon the deuotion of faithful folke vvatching and viſiting on Good-Friday and Eaſter eue the ſepulcher made in euery Church for memorie of our Lords burial, is exceding good and godly, ſpecially the B. Sacrament for more ſignification ſake being preſent in the ſame Sepulcher.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               
                  Deuout vvomen not finding his body in the Sepulcher. 4 Angels tel them that he is riſen according to his ovvne prediction: 9 yet the Apoſtles vvil not beleeue it. 12 but neither Peter findeth his body there. 13 He vvalketh vvith tvvo Diſciples, declaring al this vnto them out of the Scriptures, and is knovven of them by breaking of bread. 36 The ſame day he appeareth to the Eleuen and others being together, 
                        •
                      felt of them, and eateth vvith them. finally teaching them out of the Scriptures not onely of his Paſsion and Reſurrection, 47 but alſo of his Catholike Church, 49 he promiſeth the Holy Ghoſt to confirme them, 50 and ſo aſcendeth into heauen.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND in theThat is, firſt after the Sabboth, which is (saith S. Hiero. q. 4 ad Hedib.) dies Dominica, our Lords day, vvherein he aroſe. for the weeke is deuided into the Sabboth, & the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 of the Sabboth. & the Apoſtle (1 Cor. 16, 2) cōmaunded a collection of money to be made on the firſt of the Sabboth. whereby we learne, both the keeping of Sunday, & the Churches count of daies by the 2. 3. 4 of the Sabboth, to be Apoſtolical. which S. Sylueſter after ward named, 2. 3. 4 feriam &c. Breuiar. Roman. Decemb. 31
                   firſt of the Sabboth very early they came to the monument,EASTER DAY. carying the ſpices vvhich they had prepared.Mt. 28, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 2 And they found the ſtone rolled backe from the monument.Mr. 16, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 3 And going in,Io. 20, 1. they found not the body of our Lord IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And it came to paſſe: as they vvere aſtonied in their minde at this, behold tvvo men ſtoode beſide them in gliſtering appareil. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen they feared and caſt dovvne their countenance tovvard the ground, they ſaid vnto them, Vvhy ſeeke you the liuing vvith the dead? ✝ 
                     verse 6 he is not here, but is riſen. remember hovv he ſpake to you, vvhen he yet vvas in Galilee,Lu. 9, 22 ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſaying, * That the Sonne of man muſt be deliuered into the handes of ſinners and be crucified, and the third day riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they remembred his vvordes. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And going 
 backe from the monument, they told al theſe things to thoſe eleuen, and to al the reſt. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And it vvas Marie Magdalene, and Ioane, and Marie of Iames, and the reſt that vvere vvith them, vvhich ſaid theſe things to the Apoſtles. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And theſe vvordes ſeemed before them as dotage, and they did not beleeue them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 But * Peter riſing vp ranne to the monument:Io. 20, 3. and ſtouping dovvne he ſavv the linnen clothes lying alone, and went avvay marueiling with him ſelf at that which was done.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 * And behold,Mr. 16, 12. tvvo of them vvent the ſame day into a tovvne vvhich vvas the ſpace of ſixtie furlonges from Hieruſalem,The Goſpel vpō Munday in Eaſter weeke. named Emmäùs. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And they talked betvvixt them ſelues of al thoſe things that had chaunced. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And it came to paſſe: vvhile they talked and reaſoned vvith them ſelues, IESVS alſo him ſelf approching vvent vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 16 but their eies vvere held that they might not knovv him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And he ſaid to them, Vvhat are theſe communications that you conferre one vvith an other vvalking, and are ſad? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And one vvhoſe name vvas Cleophas, anſvvering, ſaid to him, Art thou only a ſtranger in Hieruſalem, and haſt not knovven the things that haue been done in it, theſe daies? ✝ 
                     verse 19 To vvhom he ſaid, Vvhat things? And they ſaid, concerning IESVS of Nazareth, vvho vvas a man a Prophet, mightie in vvorke and vvorde before God and al the people. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And hovv our cheefe Prieſtes and Princes deliuered him into condemnation of death, and crucified him. ✝ 
                     verse 21 but vve hoped that it vvas he that ſhould redeeme Iſrael: and novv beſides al this, to day is the third day ſince theſe things vvere done. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But certaine vvomen alſo of ours, made vs afraid: vvho before it vvas light, vvere at the monument, ✝ 
                     verse 23 and not finding his body, came, ſaying that they ſavv a viſion alſo of Angels, vvho ſay that he is aliue. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And certaine men of ours vvent to the monument; and they found it ſo as the vvomen ſaid, but him they found not. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he ſaid to them, O foliſh, and ſlovv of hart to beleeue, in al things vvhich the Prophets haue ſpoken. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Ought not Chriſt to haue ſuffred theſe things, and ſo to enter into his glorie? ✝ 
                     verse 27 And beginning from Moyſes and al the Prophets, he did interpret to them in al the ſcriptures the things that vvere concerning him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And they drevv nigh to the tovvne vvhither, they vvent: and he made ſemblaunce to goe further. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And they forced
 him, ſaying, Tarie vvith vs, becauſe it is tovvard night, and the day is novv farre ſpent. And he vvent in vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And it came to paſſe, vvhiles he ſate at the table vvith them, he ″ tooke bread, and bleſſed and brake, and did reach to them. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And their eies vvere opened, and they knevv him: and he vaniſhed out of their ſight. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they ſaid one to the other, Vvas not our hart burning in vs, vvhiles he ſpake in the vvay, and opened vnto vs the ſcriptures? ✝ 
                     verse 33 And riſing vp the ſame houre they vvent backe into Hieruſalem: and they found the eleuen gathered together, and thoſe that vvere vvith them, ✝ 
                     verse 34 ſaying, That our Lord is riſen in deede, and hath appeared to Simon. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And they told the things that vvere done in the vvay: and hovv they knevv him in the breaking of bread.⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 * And vvhiles they ſpeake theſe things,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday in Eaſter weeke. IESVS ſtoode in the middes of them,Mr. 16, 14. Io. 20, 19. and he ſaith to them, Peace be to you: it is I. feare not. ✝ 
                     verse 37 But they being troubled and frighted, imagined that they ſavv a ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he ſaid to them, Vvhy are you troubled, and cogitations ariſe into your harts? ✝ 
                     verse 39 See my handes, and feete, that it is I my ſelf. handle, and ſee: for a ſpirit hath not fleſh and bones, as you ſee me to haue. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And vvhen he had ſaid this, he ſhevved them his handes and feete. ✝ 
                     verse 41 But they yet not beleeuing and marueiling for ioy, he ſaid, Haue you here any thing to be eaten? ✝ 
                     verse 42 But they offred him a peece of fiſh broiled, and a honie combe. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And vvhen he had eaten before them, taking the remaines he gaue to them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 44 And he ſaid to them, Theſe are the vvordes vvhich I ſpake to you, vvhen I vvas yet vvith you, that al things muſt needes be fulfilled, vvhich are vvritten in the lavv of Moyſes, and the Prophets, and the Pſalmes, of me. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Then he opened their vnderſtanding, that they might vnderſtand the Scriptures. ✝ 
                     verse 46 and he ſaid to them, That ſo it is vvritten, and ſo it behoued Chriſt to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from the dead the third day: ✝ 
                     verse 47 
                  As he ſhal be Anathema (ſaith S. Aug.) which preacheth that Chriſt neither ſuffered nor roſe againe, becauſe we learne by the Goſpel, That it behoued Chriſt to ſuffer and to riſe againe the third day: ſo he ſhal alſo be Anathema, whoſoeuer preacheth the Church to be els where thē in the cōmunion of al natiōs: becauſe by the ſelf ſame Goſpel we learne in the wordes next folowing, and penāce to be preached in his name & remiſsiō of ſinnes through out al nations, Auguſt. ep. 48.
                   and ″ penance to be preached in his name and remiſſion of ſinnes vnto al nations, ⊢ beginning from Hieruſalem.Act. 1, 8. 2, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 48 And you are vvitneſſes of theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 49 * And I ſend the promes of my Father vpon you: but you, tarie in the citie, til you be endued vvith povver from high.
                ✝ 
                     verse 50 And he brought them forth abrode into Bethánia:Mr. 16, 19. Act. 1, 9. and lifting vp his handes he bleſſed them. ✝ 
                     verse 51 * And it came to paſſe,ASCENSION DAY. vvhiles he ″ bleſſed them, he departed from them, and
 vvas caried into heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 52 And they adoring vvent backe into Hieruſalem vvith great ioy: ✝ 
                     verse 53 and they vvere alvvaies in the temple praiſing and bleſſing God.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                     30. Tooke bread.) The Fathers in diuers places take this to be meant of the B. Sacrament. Author operis imperf. ho. 17. S. Auguſtine li. 39 de conſenſu Euang. c. 25 & ſer. 140 de temp. & ep. 59 ad Paulinum q. 1
                           •
                        
                      Paulinus him ſelf in the next epiſtle before that, among S. Auguſtines. Venerable Bede alſo vpon this place. Theophylacte vpon this place. And that it ſhould be meant of the holy Sacrament,The B. Sacr
                           •
                        
                        ment in on kinde. the forme of ſolemne taking the bread into his handes, bleſſing it, breaking it, and reaching it to his diſciples (exceding proper to the conſecration, and common to none other vulgar benediction, nor any where vſed but in Chriſts miraculous multiplying the loaues) and the ſingular effecte in notifying Chriſt vnto them, do proue. And if it be the Sacrament (as it is moſt probable) then is it an euident example and vvarrant of miniſtration in one kinde.
                  
                     46. Penance to be preached.)
                     The Cathol
                           ••
                        e or vniuerſal Church. He ſhevved vnto them out of the Scriptures, not onely the things that were now accompliſhed in himſelf, but alſo that were yet to come about his Church: as, where it ſhould begin,De vnit. to vvit, at Hieruſalem: and hovv farre it ſhould goe, to vvit, to al nations: that he might not ſuffer vs (ſaith S. Auguſtine) to erre neither in the bridegrome nor in the bride.Ec. c. 10. For this maketh manifeſtly againſt al Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, that ſet vp nevv churches in particular countries, dravving the people from the foreſaid onely true Church, vvhich from Hieruſalem ſo grovvethMt. 24, 14. ouer al nations, til the end of the vvorld come.
                  
                     50. Bleſſed them.) Chriſt our high prieſt,Heb. 7, 6. prefigured ſpecially therein by Melchiſedec,Chriſt bleſſed diuers waies. often gaue his bleſſing to his:Io. 20, 21. 26. Marc. 10, 16. ſomtimes by vvordes, as, Peace be to you: ſomtimes by impoſing his handes: and now here by lifting vp his hands ouer his Diſciples as it vvere for his farewel. In vvhat forme, the Scripture doth not expreſſe, but very like it is that in forme of the croſſe, as Iacob the Patriarch bleſſed his nephewes for ſignification of Chriſts benediction.Bleſſing with the ſigne of the croſſe. for now the croſſe began to be glorious among the faithful,Gen. 48, 14. and the Apoſtles (as it is moſt certaineTeriul. de coron. milit. nu. 3 Baſil. de Sp. ſanct. c. 27. by the fathers vvhich call it an ancient tradition) vſed that ſigne for an external note of benediction. Yea S. Auguſtine ſaith (in Pſ. 30. Conc. 3) that Chriſt him ſelf not without cauſe would haue his ſigne to be fixed in our foreheads as in the feate of ſhame faſtnes, that a Chriſtian man ſhould not be aſhamed of the reproche of Chriſt. and what forme can a Chriſtian man vſe rather to bleſſe him ſelf or others, then that which was dedicated in Chriſts death, and is a conuenient memorial of the ſame? Howſoeuer it be, that the Biſhops and Prieſts of Gods Church bleſſe with an external ſigne, no man can reprehend, being warranted by Chriſts owne example and action.
               
            
         
         
            
            ❀ THE ARGVMENT OF S. IOHNS GOSPEL.
            
               S. Iohns Goſpel may be diuided into foure partes.
            The firſt part is, of the actes of Chriſt before his ſolemne manifeſtation of himſelfe, vvhile Iohn Baptiſt vvas yet baptizing: Chap. 1. 2. 3. 4.
            The ſecond, of his Actes in Iurie (hauing novv begonne his ſolemne manifeſtation in Galilee, Mat. 4, 12) the ſecond Eaſter or Paſche of his preaching: Chap. 5. For of the firſt paſche, we had in the firſt part, chap. 2, 13: And the paſche of
               This ſpeach very common in this Goſpel, as appeareth by the places here marked, declareth that he writeth to the Gentils. 
               the Iewes was at hand. And that feaſt vvhereof vve haue in this ſecond part, chap. 5, 1:Iren. li. 2. c. 39. 
               After this there was a feſtiual day of * the Iewes, is thought of good Authors, to be the feaſt of Paſche.
            The third part is, of his Actes in Galilee, and in Iurīe, about the third Paſche, and after it: cap. 6, to the 12. For ſo vve haue chap. 6, 4: And Paſche the feſtiual day of * the Iewes was at hand.
            
            The fourth part is of the fourth paſche (vvhich vve haue in the end of the chap. 11, 55: And the paſche of * the Iewes was at hand) that is to ſay, of the Holy vveeke of his Paſsion in Hieruſalem: chap. 12. vnto the end of the booke.
            By vvhich diuiſion it is manifeſt, that the intent of this Euangeliſt vvriting after the other three, vvas, to omit the Actes of Chriſt in Galilee, becauſe the other three had vvritten them at large: and to reporte his Actes done in Iurie, vvhich they had omitted.
            And this he doth, becauſe Iurie vvith Hieruſalem and the Temple, beeing the principal parte of the Countrey, there abode the principal of the Ievves, both for authoritie, and alſo for learning in the lavv or knovvledge of the Scriptures. and therfore that vvas the place, vvhere our Lord IESVS finding in the Head it ſelfe and in the leaders of the reſt, ſuch vvilful obſtinacie and deſperate reſiſtance, as the Prophets had foretold, did by this occaſion, much more plainely then in Galilee, both ſay and proue, at ſundry times, euen euery yere of his preaching, himſelfe to be the CHRIST that had bene ſo lōg promiſed vnto them, & expected of them: & the ſame CHRIST to be not onely a man, as they imagined, but alſo the natural, conſubſtantial, & coëternal Sonne of God the Father, vvho novv had ſent him. Therfore theſe vvere the vvordes and deedes that ſerued beſt the purpoſe of this Euangeliſt, being, to ſhevv the glorie & excellencie of this perſon IESVS: that thereby the Gētils might ſee, hovv vvorthily Hieruſalem & the Ievves vvere reprobated, vvho had refuſed yea & crucified ſuch an one: and hovv vvel & to their ovvne ſaluation themſelues might doe, to receiue him and to beleeue in him. For this to haue bene his purpoſe,Io. 20, 31. him ſelfe declareth in the end, ſaying: Theſe are written, that you may beleeue that IESVS is CHRIST the Sonne of God: and that beleeuing, you may haue life in his name.
            
            
               And herevpon it is,
               Hier. in Catal. 
               that S. Hierome vvriteth thus in his life: Iohn the Apoſtle,Io. 21, 20. whom IESVS loued very much, theMat. 4. 21. ſonne of Zebedee,
Mat. 4. 21. the brother of Iames the ApoſtleAct. 12, 2. whom Herod after our Lords Paſſion
 beheaded, laſt of al wrote the Goſpel, at the requeſt of the Biſhops of Aſia, againſt Cerinthus, and other Heretikes, and ſpecially againſt the aſſertion of the Ebionites then riſing, who ſay that Chriſt was not before MARIE. Wherevpon alſo he was compelled to vtter his Diuine Natiuitie. Of his three Epiſtles, and of his Apocalypſe, ſhal be ſaid in their ovvne places.
            
            
               It folovveth in S. Hierome, that In the Second perſecution vnder Domitian, fourtene yeres after the perſecution of Nero he was exiled into the ile Patmos. But after that Domitian was ſlaine, and his actes for his paſſing crueltie repealed by the Senate: vnder Nerua the Emperour he returned to Epheſus, and there continuing vnto the time of Traiane the Emperour, he founded and gouerned al the Churches of Aſia, and worne with old age, he died the threeſcore and eighteth yere after the Paſſion of our Lord, and was buried beſides the ſame citie.
            
               Whoſe excellencie the ſame holy Doctor thus breifly deſcribeth. li. 1. Aduerſ. Iouinianum.
               
                  IOHN the Apoſtle, one of our Lords Diſciples, vvho vvas the yongeſt among the Apoſtles, and vvhom the faith of Chriſt found a virgin, remained a virgin, and therefore isIo. 13, 23. 24. &c. 21, 20. move loued of our Lord, and
Io. 13, 23. 24. &c. 21, 20. lieth vpon the breaſt of IESVS: and that vvhich Peter durſt not aſke,Io. 13, 23. 24. &c. 21, 20. he deſireth him to aſke: and after the reſurrection, vvhen Marie Magdalen had reported that our Lord vvas riſen againe, both of them ranne to the Sepulchre,Io. 20, 4. but he came thither firſt: and vvhen they vvere in the ſhip and, fiſhed in the lake of Genezareth, IESVS ſtood on the ſhore, neither did the Apoſtles knovv vvhom they ſavv:Io. 21, 7. onely the virgin knovveth the virgin, and ſaith to Peter. It is our Lord. This Iohn vvas both an Apoſtle, and Euangeliſt, and Prophet: an Apoſtle, becauſe he vvrote to the Churches as a Maiſter: an Euangeliſt, becauſe he compiled a booke of the Goſpel, vvhich (except Matthew) none other of the tvvelue Apoſtles did: a Prophet, for he ſavv in the ile Patmos, where he was baniſhed by Domitian the Emperour for the teſtimonie of our Lord, the Apocalypſe, conteining infinite myſteries of things to come. Tertullian alſo reporteth, that at Rome being caſt into a barrel of hote boiling oile, he came forth more pure and freſher or liuelier, then he vvent in. Yea and his Goſpel it ſelf much differeth from the reſt. Matthevv beginneth to vvrite as of a man: Marke of the prophecie of Malachie and Eſay. Luke of the Prieſthod of Zacharie: the firſt hath the face of a man, becauſe of the genealogie: the ſecond the face of a lion, for the voice of one crying in the deſert: the third the face of a calfe, becauſe of the Prieſthod. But Iohn as an Eagle flieth to the things on high, & mounteth to the Father him ſelf, ſaying: In the beginning was the VVORD, and the VVORD was with God, and God was the VVORD. Thus far S. Herome.
               Vpon this Goſpel there are the famous commentaries of S. Auguſtine called Tractatus in Euang. Ioan. to. 9. and tvvelue bookes of S. Cyrils commentaries.
            
         
         
            
            THE HOLY GOSPEL OF IESVS CHRIST ACCORDING TO IOHN.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The preface of the Euangeliſt,The 1. parte: commending Chriſt (as being God the Sonne incarnate) to the Gentils,THE ACTES of Chriſt before his manifeſtation, whiles Iohn Baptiſt was yet baptizing. and ſetting out the blindnes of the Ievves in not receiuing him. 19 Then, the teſtimonies of Iohn Baptiſt, firſt to the ſolemne legacie of the Ievves: 29 ſecondly, vvhen he ſavv IESVS come to him: 35 thirdly, to his ovvne Diſciples alſo, putting them ouer from him ſelf to IESVS. Vvho made it plainer to them that he is Chriſt, 40 and ſo began he alſo to haue Diſciples.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IN THE beginning ″ vvas the WORD, and the WORD vvas ″ vvith God, and ″ God vvas the WORD.The Goſpel at the third Maſſe vpō Chriſtmas day. And euery day at the end of Maſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 2 This vvas in the beginning vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Al things vvere made ″ by him: and vvithout him vvas madenothing that was made. nothing. That vvhich vvas made', ✝ 
                     verse 4 in him vvas life, and the life vvas the light of men: ✝ 
                     verse 5 and the light ſhineth in darkeneſſe, and the darkeneſſe did not comprehend it. ✝ 
                     verse 6 There vvas a man ſent from God, vvhoſe name vvas Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 7 This man came for teſtimonie: to giue teſtimonie of the light, that al might beleeue through him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 He vvas not the light, but to giue teſtimonie of the light. ✝ 
                     verse 9 It vvas the true light, vvhich lighteneth euery man that commeth into this vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 10 He vvas in the vvorld, and the vvorld vvas made by him, and the vvorld knevv him not. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He came into his ovvne, and his ovvne receiued him not. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But as many as receiued him, ″ he gaue them povver to be made the ſonnes of God, to thoſe that beleeue in his name. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvho, not of bloud, not of the vvil of fleſh, nor of the vvil of man, but of God are borne. ✝ 
                     verse 14 AND ″ THE VVORD VVAS MADE FLESH,ET VERBVM CARO FACTVM EST. and dvvelt in vs (and vve ſavv the glorie of him, glorie as it vvere of the only-begotten of the Father) ful of grace and
 veritie. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 Iohn giueth teſtimonie of him, and crieth ſaying, This vvas he of vvhom I ſpake, He that ſhal come after me,
He is preferred & made of more dignitie and excellencie then I, becauſe he was before me & al things, eternal God. is made before me: becauſe he vvas before me. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And of his fulnes al vve haue receiued, and grace for grace. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the lavv vvas giuen by Moyſes, grace and veritie vvas made by IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 18 God ″ no man hath ſeen at any time: the only begotten Sonne vvhich is in the boſome of the father, he hath declared.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And this is Iohns teſtimonie,The Goſpel vpō the 3 Sunday in Aduent. vvhen the Ievves ſent from Hieruſalem Prieſts and Leuites to him, that they ſhould aſke him, Vvho art thou? ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he confeſſed, and did not denie: and he confeſſed, That I am not CHRIST. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And they aſked him,Mal. 4, 5 Vvhat then? Art thou * Elias? And he ſaid, I am not.Deu. 18, 15. Art thouBy like the Iewes ignorātly vnderſtood not the place in Deuteronomie, of Chriſt, and therfore they aſke alſo whether he be the Prophet there ſpoken of. See alſo c. 7, 40. * the Prophet? And he anſvvered, No. ✝ 
                     verse 22 They ſaid therefore vnto him, Vvho art thou, that vve may giue an anſvver to them that ſent vs? vvhat ſaieſt thou of thy ſelf? ✝ 
                     verse 23 He ſaid,Eſa. 40, 3. 
                  I am the voyce of one crying in the deſert, make ſtraight the vvay of our Lord, as Eſaie the Prophet ſaid. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And they that vvere ſent, vvere of the Phariſees. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And they aſked him, and ſaid to him, Vvhy then doeſt thou baptize, if thou be not Chriſt, nor
Mt. 3, 11. Elias, nor the Prophet? ✝ 
                     verse 26 Iohn anſvvered them, ſaying, *He doth oftē here ſignifie the great difference of his baptiſme & of Chriſts, as of his perſon & Chriſts. See Annot. Mat. 3. I baptize in vvater:Mr. 1, 8. but there hath ſtood in the middes of you vvhom you knovv not.Lu. 3, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 27 The ſame is he that ſhal come after me, that is made before me: vvhoſe latcher of his ſhoe I am not worthie to vnlooſe. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Theſe things were done in Bethania beyond Iordan, vvhere Iohn vvas baptizing. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 The next day Iohn ſavv IESVS cōming to him,The Goſpel on the octaue of the Epiphanie. and he ſaith, Behold the lambe of God, behold him that taketh avvay the
                  ſinnes 
                  ſinne' of the vvorld.
                  AGNVS DEI at Maſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 30 This is he of vvhom I ſaid, After me there commeth a man, vvhich is made before me: becauſe he vvas before me. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And I knevv him not, but that he may be manifeſted in Iſrael, therefore came I baptizing in vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And Iohn gaue teſtimonie, ſaying, That I ſavv ″ the Spirit deſcending as a doue from heauen, and he remained vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And I knevv him not: but he that ſent me to baptize in vvater, he ſaid to me, He vpō vvhom thou ſhalt ſee the Spirit deſcending and remaining vpon him, he it is that baptizeth in the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And I ſavv: and I gaue teſtimonie that this is the ſonne of God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 The next day againe Iohn ſtoode,The Goſpel vpō S. Andrews eue. and tvvo of his diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And beholding IESVS vvalking, he ſaith, Behold
 the lambe of God. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And the tvvo Diſciples heard him ſpeaking, and they folovved IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And IESVS turning, and ſeeing them folovving him, ſaith to them, Vvhat ſeeke you? Vvho ſaid to him, Rabbi (vvhich is called by interpretation, Maiſter) vvhere dvvelleſt thou? ✝ 
                     verse 39 He ſaith to them, Come and ſee. They came, and ſavv where he abode and they taried vvith him that day: and it vvas about the tenth houre. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And Andrevv the brother of Simon Peter vvas one of the tvvo that had heard of Iohn, and folovved him. ✝ 
                     verse 41 He findeth firſt his brother Simon, and ſaith to him, Vve haue found
Meſſias in Hebrue, in Greeke Chriſt, ī Engliſh Anointed, to witte, with the ſpiritual oile of grace aboue his brethren. Pſ. 44.
                   MESSIAS, vvhich is being interpreted, CHRIST. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And he brought him to IESVS. And IESVS ″ looking vpon him, ſaid, Thou art Simon the ſonne of Iona: thou ſhalt be calledCephas in Syriake, & Peter in Greeke, in Engliſh, Rocke, See Mat. 16, 18. 
                  Cephas, vvhich is interpreted, Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 43 On the morovv he vvould goe forth into Galilee, and he findeth Philippe. And IESVS ſaith to him, Folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And Philippe vvas of Bethſaida, the citie of Andrevv and Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Philippe findeth Nathanael, and ſaith to him, Him vvhom Moyſes in the lavv, and the Prophets vvrote of: vve haue found IESVS the ſonne of Ioſeph, of Nazareth. ✝ 
                     verse 46 And Nathanael ſaid to him, From Nazareth can there be any good? Philippe ſaith to him,The Goſpel in a votiue Maſſe of the holy Angels. Come and ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 47 IESVS ſavv Nathanael comming to him, and he ſaith of him, Behold an Iſraelite in very deede, in vvhom there is no guile. ✝ 
                     verse 48 Nathanael ſaith to him, Hovv knovveſt thou me? IESVS anſvvered and ſaid to him, Before that Philippe did cal thee, vvhen thou waſt vnder the figtree, I ſaw thee. ✝ 
                     verse 49 Nathanael anſvvered him, and ſaith, Rabbi, thou art the ſonne of God, thou art the king of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 50 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Becauſe I ſaid vnto thee, I ſavv thee vnder the figtree, thou beleeueſt: greater then theſe things ſhalt thou ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And he ſaith to him, Amen Amen I ſay to you, You ſhal ſee the heauen opened, and the * Angels of God aſcending and defcending, vpon the Sonne of man.Gen. 28, 12. 
                  ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     1. Was the word,] The ſecond Perſon in Trinitie which is the natural, onely, and eternal Sonne of God the Father,How God the Sonne is called the VVORD. is called the WORD: not as the holy Scriptures or ſpeaches of the Prophets and Apoſtles (vvritten and ſpoken by Gods commaundement for the vttering of his diuine wil towards man) be called his word, but in a more diuine, eminent, and ineffable ſort, to expreſſe vnto
 vs in a ſort, by a terme agreable to our capacitie, that the Sonne of God ſo is, and ſo from euerlaſting is borne of God the Father, as our prime concept (which is our internal and mental word) is and iſſueth out of our intelligence & minde. This VVORD then, Sonne, or ſecond Perſon in the holy Trinitie, was and had his being then already, when other creatures (of what ſort ſo euer) had but their beginning,The Platonikes. and therfore can not be a creature, as many Heretikes before the writing of this Goſpel thought,Auguſt. de Ciu. Dei li. 10, c. 29. and as the Arrians after taught. And this firſt ſentence of the Goſpel not onely the faithful, but the Platonikes did ſo admire (as S. Auguſtine writeth) that they wiſhed it to be written in gold.
                  
                     1. With God.)
                     The VVORD coeternal vvith the Father, diſtinct in perſon, and of the Father. Becauſe a man might ſay, If the VVORD vvere before any thing vvas created, vvhere or hovv could he be? the Euangeliſt preuenting that carnal concept, ſaith firſt, that he vvas vvith God, vvhoſe being dependeth not vpon time, place, ſpace, or any other creatures, al vvhich vvere made by him. ſecondly, he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that the VVORD hath his proper ſubſiſtence or perſonalitle diſtincte frō God the Father, vvherby Sabellius the old Heretike is refuted, thirdly, here is inſinuated the order of theſe tvvo perſons, one tovvardes the other, to vvit, that the Sonne is with and of the Father, and not the Father of the Sonne. Fourthly, you may conſute here the blaſphemie of Caluin,Calu. inſt. li. 1 c. 13. ſect. 23 & 25. holding the ſecond Perſon to be God, not as of God the Father, but as of him ſelf. And yet ſuch are the bookes that our youth now read commonly in England, and that by commaundement.
                  
                     1. God vvas the VVord.] Leſt any man vpon the premiſſes, which ſet forth the relation and diſtinction of the ſecond Perſon from the firſt,The VVORD true God by nature. might thinke that the Father onely were God, the Euangeliſt expreſly teacheth, the VVORD to be God. for though the wordes ſeeme to lie otherwiſe (becauſe we haue of purpoſe ſo owed the elegancie which the Euangeliſt him ſelf obſerued in placing them ſo, and therfore they ſtand ſo both in Greeke and Latin) yet in deede the conſtruction is thus,1 Io. c. 5, 20. 
                     The VVORD vvas God, and (as in his firſt Epiſtle the ſame Apoſtle writeth) true God: leſt any might ſay (as the Arians did) that he was God in deede, but not truely and naturally, but by common adoption or calling,The Proteſtants are like the vvrāgling Ariās. as good men in the Church be called the ſonnes of God. What wonderful wrangling and tergiuerſation the Arians vſed to auoid the euidence of this place, we ſee in S. Auguſtine li. 3 de Doct. Chriſt. c. 2. euen ſuch as the Proteſtauts do, to auoid the like wordes, This is my body, concerning the B. Sacrament.
                  
                     3. By him.]
                     The VVORD not a creature but the creator. Againe, by this he ſignifieth the eternitie, diuinitie, omaipotencie, and equalitie of the WORD or Sonne, with God the Father, becauſe by him al things were created. al things he ſaith, both viſible of this vvorld: and inuiſible, as Angels and al ſpiritual creatures. Wherevpon it is euident alſo, that him ſelf is no creature, being the creator of al: neither is ſinne of his creation, being a defecte of a thing, rather then a thing it ſelf, and therfore neither of nor by him.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . He gaue them povver.]
                     Free-vvil. Free wil to receiue or acknowledge Chriſt, & power giuen to men, if they wil, to be made by Chriſt the ſonnes of God: but not forced or drawen therevnto by any neceſſitie.
                  
                     14. The Vvord made fleſh.]
                     Humble kneeling at the ſolemne wordes of Chriſts incarnation. This is the high and diuine teſtimonie of Chriſts incarnation and that he vouchſaued to become man, for the acknowledging of which inexplicable benefite and giuing humble thankes for the ſame, al Chriſtian people in the world by tradition of the Fathers proſtrate them ſelues or kneele downe, when they heare it ſung or ſaid at the holy Maſſe, either in this Goſpel: or in the Crede by theſe wordes, ET HOMO FACTVS EST.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . No man hath ſeen.] Neuer man in this mortalitie ſaw God in the very ſhape and natural forme of the diuine eſſence,How mortal men ſee God. but men ſee him onely in the ſhape of viſible creatures, in or by which it pleaſeth him to ſhew him ſelf vnto many diuerſly in this world: but neuer in ſuch ſort as vvhen he ſhevved him ſelf in the perſon of the Sonne, of God, being made truely man and conuerſing with men.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        2. The Spirit.]
                     The B. Trinitie. Here is an euident teſtimonie of the third Perſon in Trinitie, which is the Holy Ghoſt: ſo that in this one Chapter we finde expreſly againſt al Heretikes, Iewes, & Pagans, ſet furth the truth of the Churches doctrine concerning the whole Trinitie.
                  
                     42. Looking vpon him.]
                     Peter by his new name deſigned to be the Rocke of the Church. This beholding of Simon, inſmuateth Chriſts deſignement and preferring of him to be the cheefe Apoſtle, the Rocke of the Church, and his Vicar. and therfore vpon that Diuine prouidence and intention he accordingly changeth his name,Cephas. Petrus. calling him for Simon, Cephas, which is a Syriake word, as much to ſay as, Rocke or Stone. And S. Paul commonly calleth him by this name Cephas,Li. 2 c. 12 in Ioan. whereas other both Greekes and Latines call him altogether by the Greeke word, Peter, which ſignifieth the ſelf ſame thing. vvhereof S. Cyril ſaith, that our Sauiour by foretelling that his name ſhould no more novv be Simon, but Peter, did by the vvord it ſelf aptly ſignifie, that on him, as on a rocke and ſtone moſt firme, he vvould build his Church.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  At the requeſt of his mother he vvorketh his firſt miracle, turning vvater into vvine at a mariage in Galilee, although the time of his manifeſtation be not yet come. 1
                        •
                      Then in Hieruſalem at Paſche, being but one, and yet obſeure, he throweth out of the Temple moſt miraculouſly al the marchant
                        •
                     s. 28 And being yet of the blind Ievves aſked a ſigne, he ſignifieth ſo long before, that they ſhould kill him, but he vvil riſe againe the third day. 2
                        •
                      Vvhich alſo preſently they vvould doe, but that he knovving their falſes hartes (though many beleeue in him) vvil not t
                        •
                     
                     ri
                        •
                      among them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the third day there vvas a mariage made in Cana of Galilee:The Goſpel vpō the 2 Sunday after the Epiphanie. and the mother of IESVS vvas there. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And ″ IESVS alſo vvas called, and his Diſciples to the mariage. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the vvine failing, the mother of IESVS ſaith to him, ″ They haue no vvine. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS ſaith to her, Vvhat is to me and thee vvoman? my houre commeth not yet. ✝ 
                     verse 5 His mother ſaith to the miniſters, ″ Vvhatſoeuer he ſhal ſay to you, doe ye. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And there were ſet there ſixe vvater-potters of ſtone, according to the purificatiō of the Ievves, holding euery one tvvo or three meaſures. ✝ 
                     verse 7 IESVS ſaith to them, Fil the vvater-pottes vvith vvater. And they filled them vp to the toppe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And IESVS ſaith to them, Dravv novv, and carie to the cheefe ſtevvard. And they caried it. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And after the cheefe ſtevvard taſted theHe that ſeeth water turned in to wine, nedeth not diſpute or doubt hovv Chriſt changed bread into his body. vvater made vvine, and knevv not vvhence it vvas, but the miniſters knew that had dravvne the vvater: the cheefe ſtevvard calleth the bridegrome, ✝ 
                     verse 10 and ſaith to him, Euery man firſt ſetteth the good vvine: and vvhen they haue vvel drunke, then that vvhich is vvorſe. But thou haſt kept the good vvine vntil novv. ✝ 
                     verse 11 This beginning of miracles did IESVS in Cana of Galilee: and he manifeſted his glorie, and his Diſciples beleeued in him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 After this he vvent dovvne to Capharnaum him ſelf and his mother, and his brethren, and his diſciples: and there they remained not many daies.The Goſpel vpō Munday in the fourth vveeke of Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the Paſche of the Ievves vvas at hand, and IESVS vvent vp to Hieruſalem: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and he found in the temple them that ſold oxen and ſheepe and doues, and the bankers ſitting. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhen he had made as it vvere a vvhippe of litle coardes, he ″ caſt them al out of the temple, the ſheepe alſo and the oxen, and the money of the bankers he powred out, and the tables he ouerthrevv. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And to them that ſold doues, he ſaid, Take avvay 
 theſe things hence, and make not the houſe of my father, a houſe of marchandiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And his Diſciples remembred that it is vvritten, The zeale of thy houſe hath eaten me. ✝ 
                     verse 18 The Ievves therfore anſvvered and ſaid to him,Pſ. 68, 10. Vvhat ſigne doeſt thou ſhevv vs, that thou doeſt theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 19 IESVS anſvvered and ſaid to them,Mt. 26. 61. 27, 40. * Diſſolue this temple, and in three daies I vvil raiſe it. ✝ 
                     verse 20 The Ievves therfore ſaid, In fourtie and ſixe yeres vvas this temple built, and vvilt thou raiſe it in three daies? ✝ 
                     verse 21 But he ſpake of the temple of his body. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Therfore vvhen he vvas riſen againe from the dead, his Diſciples remembred, that he ſaid this, and they beleeued the ſcripture and the vvord that IESVS did ſay. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen he vvas at Hieruſalem in the Paſche, vpon the feſtiual day, many beleeued in his name, ſeeing his ſignes vvhich he did. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But ″ IESVS did not commit him ſelf vnto them, for that he knevv al, ✝ 
                     verse 25 and becauſe it vvas not needeful for him that any ſhould giue teſtimonie of man: for he knevv vvhat vvas in man. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     2. IESVS alſo vvas called.)
                     Chriſt with his preſence honoureth and approueth Mariage. By his vouchſauing to come with his to the Mariage, he approueth the cuſtome of the Faithful in meeting at honeſt foſtes and recreations for maintenance of loue,Cyril. in 2 peace, and amitie among them ſelues: he reproueth the hereſie of Tatian, Marcion, and ſuch like condemning wedlocke:Io. c. 22. laſtly (as S. Cyril ſaith) he ſanctifieth and bleſſeth the Mariage of the Faithful in the new Teſtament, making it a new creature in him, and diſcharging it of the manifold maledictions and diſorders wherein it was before. By which benediction the often diuorces, remariages, and pluralities of wiues, and the womens ſeruile ſubiection and imparitie in that caſe, be redreſſed and reduced to the primitiue inſtitution, and ſo Chriſtian mariage made a Sacrament. See S. Aug. de nupt. & concup. li. 1 6. 10 & 21. li. 1 de adult. coniug. c. 8.
                  
                  
                     3. They haue no vvine.) Our Lady many vvaies vnderſtood that now the time approched of manifeſting him ſelf to the world by miracles and preaching,Our Ladies interceſſion. and nothing doubted but that he would now being at her requeſt. Whereby we learne that Chriſt ordinarily giueth not his graces, but humbly aſked and requeſted there vnto, and that his mothers interceſſion is more then vulgarly effectual, and that he denieth her nothing.
                  
                     4. What is to me and thee?)
                     Tranſlatours of holy Scriptures. Becauſe this ſpeach is ſubiect to diuers ſenſes, we keepe the wordes of our text, left by turning it into any Engliſh phraſe, we might ſtraiten the holy Ghoſts intention to ſome certaine ſenſe either not intended, or not onely intended, and ſo take avvay the choiſe and indifferencie from the reader, vvhereof (in holy Scripture ſpecially) al Tranſlatours muſt bevvare. Chriſt then may meane here, what is that, woman, to me & thee being but ſtrāgers, that they want wine? as ſome interpret it. or (which is the more proper vſe of that kinde of ſpeach in holy write) what haue I to doe with thee? that is, why ſhould I haue reſpect to thy deſire in this caſe? In matters touching my charge & the cōmiſſion of my father for preaching, working miracles, and other graces, I muſt not be tied to fleſh and bloud, which vvas not a reprehēſion of our Lady, or ſignificatiō that he vvould not heare her in this or other things pertaining to Gods glorie or the good of men, for the euent ſhovveth the contrarie. but it vvas a leſſon to the companie that heard it, and namely to his Diſciples, that reſpect of kinred ſhould not dravv them to doe any thing againſt reaſon, or be the principal motion vvhy they doe their dueties, but Gods glorie.
                  
                     5. Whatſoeuer he ſhal ſay.) By this you ſee,Our lady doubteth not but Chriſt vvil graūt her petition. our Lady by her diuine prudence and entiere familiaritie and acquaintance with al his maner of ſpeaches, knew it was no checke to her, but a doctrine to others: and that ſhe had no repulſe, though he ſeemed to ſay his time was not yet come
 to worke miracles: not doubting but he would begin a litle before his ordinary time for her ſake, as S. Cyril thinketh he did:li. 2 in Io. c. 23. and therfore ſhe admoniſheth the waiters to marke wel, & to execute whatſoeuer Chriſt ſhould bid them doe.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . Caſt them out.) By this chaſtiſing corporally the defilers and abuſers of the Temple he doth not onely ſhew his power,Profaners of Gods Church are to be puniſhed in ſoul & body by the Spiritual power. that being but one poore man he could by force execute his pleaſure vpon ſo many ſturdy fellowes: but alſo his ſoneralne authoritie ouer al offenders, and that not vpon their ſoules onely, as by excommunication and ſpiritual penalties, but ſo far as is requiſite for the execution of ſpiritual iuriſdiction, vpon their bodies and goods alſo. That the Spiritualtie may learne, how far and in what caſes, for iuſt zeale of Chriſts Church, they may vſe and exerciſe both ſpiritually and temporally their forces and faculties againſt offenders, ſpecially againſt the prophaners of Gods Church, according to the Apoſtles alluſion 1 Cor. 3. If any defile the Temple of God, him vvil God deſtroy.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        4. IESVS committed not him ſelf,) S. Auguſtine applieth this their firſt faith and beleefe in Chriſt,The B. Sacrament is not to be giuen to nouices or yonglings in faith. ſodenly raiſed vpon the admiration of his wonders,Tract. in Io. 11. but yet not fully formed or eſtabliſhed in them, vnto the faith of Nouices or Catechumen: in the Church: and Chriſts not committing his Perſon to them as yet, to the Churches like warineſſe and wiſedom, in not opening not giuing to them our Lord in the B. Sacramēt, becauſe al were not to be truſted with that high point without ful trial of their faith.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He teacheth Nicodemus, that to come to the kingdom of God, Baptiſme is neceſſarie, as being our Regeneration. 10 Vvhich point Nicodemus as then not vnderſtāding, 11 he ſhevveth that they muſt beleeue him, and vvhat good cauſe there is for them ſo to doe. 
                        •
                     3. After this he alſo baptizeth, and Iohn likevviſe at the ſame time. 25 Wherevpon a queſtion being moued. Whether Baptiſme is better, 25 Iohn anſvvereth it by ſaying, that he is ſo far inferiour to Chriſt, as a mere man to God moſt high.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvas a man of the Phariſees,The Goſpel vpō Holy Roode day, Maij 
                        •
                     . named Nicodemus, a prince of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 2 This man came to IESVS by night, and ſaid to him, Rabbi, vve knovv that thou art come from God a maiſter, for no man can doe theſe ſignes vvhich thou doeſt, vnles God be vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Amen, Amen I ſay to thee, Vnles a man be borne againe, he can not ſee the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Nicodemus ſaid to him, Hovv can a man be borne, vvhen he is old? can he enter into his mothers vvombe againe and be borne? ✝ 
                     verse 5 IESVS anſvvered, Amen, Amen I ſay to thee, Vnles a man be ″ borne againe of vvater and the Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 6 That vvhich is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh: & that vvhich is borne of the ſpirit, is ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Marueil not, that I ſaid to thee, You muſt be borne againe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 The ſpirit breatheth vvhereWe folow rather S. Auguſt. & thoſe ancient fathers, which moſt commōly vnderſtand this place of the holy Ghoſt, & not of the winde
                        •
                      although both ſenſes be good. he vvil: and thou heareſt his voice, but thou knovveſt not vvhence he commeth and vvhither he goeth: ſo is euery one that is borne of the Spirit. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Nicodemus anſvvered, & ſaid to him, Hovv can theſe things be done? ✝ 
                     verse 10 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Thou art a 
 maiſter in Iſrael, and art thou ignorant of theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 11 Amen, Amen I ſay to thee, that vve ſpeake that vvhich vve knovv, and that vvhich vve haue ſeen vve teſtifie, and our teſtimonie you receiue not. ✝ 
                     verse 12 If I haue ſpoken to you earthly things, and you beleeue not: hovv if I ſhal ſpeake to you heauenly things, vvil you beleeue? ✝ 
                     verse 13 And no man hath aſcended into heauen, but he that deſcended from heauen, the Sonne of man vvhich is in heauen.Nu. 21, 9 ✝ 
                     verse 14 And as * Moyſes exalted the ſerpent in the deſert, ſo muſt the Sonne of man be exalted: ✝ 
                     verse 15 that euery one vvhich beleeueth in him, periſh not,The Goſpel vpō Munday in the whitſonweeke. but may haue life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For ſo God loued the vvorld, that he gaue his only-begotten ſonne: that euery one that beleeueth in him, periſh not, but may haue life euerlaſting. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 17 For God ſent not his ſonne into the vvorld, to iudge the vvorld, but that the vvorld may be ſaued by him. ✝ 
                     verse 18 He that beleeueth in him, is not iudged. but he that doeth not beleeue, ″ is already iudged: becauſe he hath not beleeued in the name of the only-begotten ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And this is the iudgment: becauſe the light is come into the vvorld, and men haue loued the darkeneſſe rather then the light: for their vvorkes vvere euil. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For euery one that doeth il, hateth the light, and commeth not to the light, that his vvorkes may not be controuled. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But he that doeth veritie, commeth to the light, that his vvorkes may be made manifeſt, becauſe they vvere done in God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 After theſe things IESVS came and his Diſciples into the countrie of Ievvrie: and there he abode vvith them, and baptized. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And Iohn alſo vvas baptizing in Aenon beſide Salim: becauſe there vvas much vvater there, and they came, and vvere baptized. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For Iohn vvas not yet caſt into priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And there roſe a queſtion of Iohns diſciples vvith the Ievves concerning purification. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And they came to Iohn, and ſaid to him, Rabbi, he that vvas vvith thee beyond Iordan,Io. 1, 19. to vvhom * thou didſt giue teſtimonie, behold he baptizeth, and al come to him. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Iohn anſvvered and ſaid, A man can not receiue any thing, vnleſſe it be giuen him from heauen.Io. 1, 20. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Your ſelues doe beare me vvitneſſe, * that I ſaid, I am not CHRIST: but that I am ſent before him. ✝ 
                     verse 29 He that hath the bride, is the bridegrome: but the frende of the bridegrome that ſtandeth and heareth him, reioyceth vvith ioy for the voice of the bridegrome. This my ioy therfore is filled.
 ✝ 
                     verse 30 He muſt increaſe, and I diminiſhe. ✝ 
                     verse 31 ″ He that cōmeth from aboue, is aboue al. He that is of the earth, of the earth he is, and of the earth he ſpeaketh. He that commeth from heauen, is aboue al. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhat he hath ſeen and heard, that he teſtifieth: and his teſtimonie no man receiueth. ✝ 
                     verse 33 He that hath receiued his teſtimonie, hath ſigned that God is true. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For he vvhom God hath ſent, ſpeaketh the vvordes of God. for God doth not giue the ſpirit by meaſure. ✝ 
                     verse 35 The Father loueth the Sonne: & he hath giuen al things in his hand. ✝ 
                     verse 36 He that beleeueth in the Sonne, hath life euerlaſting: but he that is incredulous to the Sonne, ſhal not ſee life, but the vvrath of God remaineth vpon him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     5. Born
                           •
                         againe of water.] As no man can enter into this world not haue his life an I being in the ſame,Baptiſme in water neceſſarie to ſaluation. except he be borne of his carnal parents: no more can a mā enter into the life & ſtate of grace which is in Chriſt, or attaine to life euerlaſting, vnles he be borne and baptized of water and the Holy Ghoſt, whereby we ſee firſt, this Sacrament to be called our regeneration or ſecond birth, in reſpect of our natural and carnal which was before. Secondly, that this Sacrament conſiſteth of an external element of water, and internal vertue of the Holy Spirit: wherein it excelleth Iohns Baptiſme, which had the external element, but nor the ſpiritual grace, thirdly, that no man can enter into the kingdom of God, not into the fellowſhip of Holy Church, without it. Whereby the * Pelagians, and Caluiniſts be condemned, that promiſſe life euerlaſting to yong children that die without Baptiſme,Auguſt. haereſ. 18. and al other that thinke onely faith to ſerue, or the external element of water ſuperfluous or not neceſſarie: our Sauiours wordes being plaine and general. Though in this cafe,Baptiſme in two caſes not neceſſarie, but othervviſe ſupplied. God which hath not bound his grace, in reſpect of his owne freedom, to any Sacrament, may and doth accept them as baptized, which either are martyred before they could be baptized, or els depart this life with vow and deſire to haue that Sacrament, but by ſome remedileſſe neceſſirie could not obtaine it. Laſtly, it is proued that this Sacrament giueth grace ex opere operato, that is, of the worke itſelf (which al Proteſtants denie) becauſe it ſo breedeth our ſpiritual life in God, as our carnal birth giueth the life of the world.
                  
                     18. It iudged already.]
                     Euery infidel, and namely heretikes, are iudged already. He that beleeueth in Chriſt with faith which worketh by charitie (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) ſhal not be condemned at the later day nor at the houre of his death:Gal. 5, 6. but the infidel, be he Iew, Pagan, or Heretike, is already (if he die in his incredulitie) by his owne profeſſion and ſentence condemned, and ſhal not come to iudgement either particular or general, to be diſcuſſed according to his workes of mercie done or omitted.Tit. 3, 11
                           •
                        . In which ſenſe S. Paul faith that the obſtinate Heretike is condemned by his owne iudgement, preuenting in him ſelf, of his owne free wil, the ſentence both of Chriſt and of the Church.
                  
                     31. He that commeth from aboue.]
                     The excellencie of Chriſts povver and graces. As though he ſhould ſay, No maruel that men reſort to Chriſt ſo faſt and make leſſe account of me, for, his baptiſme and his preaching and his perſon are al from heauen immediatly. He bringeth al from the very boſome, mouth, and ſubſtance of God his Father. Whatſoeuer is in me, is but a litle drop of his grace. His ſpirit and graces are aboue al meaſures or mens gifts, euen according to his Manhod: and al power temporal and ſpiritual, the kingdom and the Prieſthod, and al ſoueraintie in heauen and earth are beſtowed vpon him as he is man alſo.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Leauing Ievvrie becauſe of the Phariſees, in the vvay to Galilee he talketh vvith a Samaritane vvoman, telling her that he vvil giue vvater of euerlaſting life, 16 ſhevving him ſelf to knovv mens ſecretes, 19 preferring the Ievves religion before the Samaritanes, but ours (the Chriſtian Catholike religion) before them both, 25 and vttering vnto her that he is Chriſt. 28 vvhich by her teſtimonie and his preaching very many Samaritanes do beleeue: he in the meane time fore telling his Diſciples, of the harueſt he vvil ſend them in to. 45 The Galilaans alſo receiue him, vvhere againe he vvorketh his ſecond miracle.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHEN IESVS therfore vnderſtoode that the Phariſees heard that IESVS maketh mo Diſciples, and baptizeth, thē Iohn, ✝ 
                     verse 2 (hovvbeitHe did not baptize ordinarily yet that he baptized his Apoſtles, S. Aug. thinketh it very probable, ep. 108. IESVS did not baptize, but his Diſciples) ✝ 
                     verse 3 he left Ievvrie, and vvent againe into Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 4 and he had of neceſsitie to paſſe through Samaria.Gen. 48, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 5 He commeth therfore into a citie of Samaria vvhich is called Sichar:The Goſpel vpō Friday in the 
                        •
                      weeke in Lent. * beſide the maner that Iacob gaue to Ioſeph his ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And there vvas there the fountaine of Iacob. IESVS therfore vvearied of his iourney, ſa
                     •
                  e ſo vpon the fountaine. It vvas about the ſixt houre.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 There commethThis woman is a figure of the Church, not yet iuſtified, but now to be iuſtified. Aug. tract. 15 in loan.
                   a vvoman of Samaria to dravv vvater, IESVS ſaith to her, Giue me to drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For his Diſciples vvere gone into the citie, to bie meates. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Therfore that Samaritane vvoman ſaith to him, Hovv doeſt thou being a Ievve, aſke of me to drinke, vvhich am a Samaritane vvomā? For the IevvesThere were many other cauſes why the faithful Iewes could not abide the Samaritans, but their preciſe abſtaining from their companie & cōuerſation, was their Schiſmatical Temple and seruice in moūt Garîzim. do not communicate vvith the Samaritanes. ✝ 
                     verse 10 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to her, If thou didſt knovv the gift of God, and vvho he is that ſaith vnto thee, Giue me to drinke: thou perhaps vvouldeſt haue aſked of him, and he vvould haue giuen theeHe ſpeaketh of his baptizing in the Holy Ghoſt. See Io. c. 7, 39. liuing vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 11 The vvoman ſaith to him, Sir, neither haſt thou vvherein to dravv, and the vvel is deepe: vvhence haſt thou the liuing vvater? ✝ 
                     verse 12 art thou greater then our father Iacob, vvho gaue vs the vvel, and him ſelf dranke of it, and his children, and his cattel? ✝ 
                     verse 13 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to her, Euery one that drinketh of this vvater, ſhal thirſt againe: but he that ſhal drinke of the vvater that I vvil giue him, ſhal not thirſt for euer, ✝ 
                     verse 14 but the vvater that I vvil giue him, ſhal become in him a fountaine of vvater ſpringing vp vnto life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 15 The vvoman ſaith to him, Lord giue me this vvater, that I may not thirſt, nor come hither to dravv.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 IESVS ſaith to her, Goe, call thy huſband, and come hither. ✝ 
                     verse 17 The vvoman anſvvered and ſaid, I haue no huſband.
 IESVS ſaith to her, Thou haſt ſaid vvel, that I haue no huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For thou haſt had fiue huſbands: and he vvhom thou novv haſt, is not thy huſband. this thou haſt ſaid truely.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 The vvoman ſaith to him, Lord, I perceiue that thou art a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 20 ″ Our fathers adored in this mountaine, and you ſay, * that at Hieruſalem is the place vvhere men muſt adore.Deu. 12, 6. Pſ. 121 13. ✝ 
                     verse 21 IESVS' ſaith to her, Vvoman beleeue me, that the houre ſhal come, vvhen you ſhal neither in this mountaine, nor in Hieruſalem adore the Father.4 Reg. 17, 28, 36. ✝ 
                     verse 22 * You adore that you knovv not: vve adore that vve knovv, for ſaluation is of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But the houre commeth, and novv it is, vvhen the true adorers ſhal adore the Father ″ in ſpirit and veritie. for the Father alſo ſeeketh ſuch, to adore him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 God is a ſpirit, and they that adore him, muſt adore in ſpirit and veritie. ✝ 
                     verse 25 The vvoman ſaith to him, I knovv that MESSIAS commeth, (vvhich is called CHRIST): therfore vvhen he commeth, he vvil ſhevv vs al things. ✝ 
                     verse 26 IESVS ſaith to her, I am he, that ſpeake vvith thee.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And incontinent his Diſciples came: and they marueiled that he talked vvith a vvoman. No man for al that ſaid, Vvhat ſeekeſt thou, or vvhy talkeſt thou vvith her?
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 The vvoman therfore left her vvater-pot: and ſhe vvent into the citie, and ſaith to thoſe men, ✝ 
                     verse 29 Come, and ſee a man that hath told me al things vvhatſoeuer I haue done. Is not he CHRIST? ✝ 
                     verse 30 They vvent forth therfore out of the citie, and came to him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 In the meane time the Diſciples deſired him, ſaying, Rabbi eate. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But he ſaid to them, I haue meate to eate vvhich you knovv not. ✝ 
                     verse 33 The Diſciples therfore ſaid one to an other, Hath any man brought him for to eate? ✝ 
                     verse 34 IESVS ſaith to them, My meate is to doe the vvil of him that ſent me, to perfit his vvorke. ✝ 
                     verse 35 Doe not you ſay that yet there are foure moneths, and harueſt commeth? Behold I ſay to you, lift vp your eies, and ſee the countries, that they are vvhite already to harueſt. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And he that reapeth, receiueth hire, and gathereth fruite vnto life euerlaſting: that both he that ſovveth, and he that reapeth, may reioyce together. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For in this is the ſaying true: that it is one man that ſovveth, and it is an other that reapeth. ✝ 
                     verse 38 I haue ſent you to reape that vvhich you laboured not: others haue laboured, and you
 haue entred into their labours.
                ✝ 
                     verse 39 And of that citie many beleeued in him of the Samaritans, for the vvord of theThis womā myſtically beīg the Church, it is here ſignified, that they which at the firſt beleeue becauſe the Church teacheth ſo, afterward be much confirmed, ſinding it in the Scripture alſo, and by other inſtructions. vvoman giuing teſtimonie, that he told me al things vvhatſoeuer I haue done. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Therfore vvhen the Samaritans vvere come to him, they deſired him that he vvould tarie there. And he taried there tvvo daies. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And many moe beleeued for his ovvne vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And they ſaid to the vvoman, That novv not for thy ſaying doe vve beleeue: for our ſelues haue heard, and doe knovv that this is the Sauiour of the vvorld in deede. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 43 And after the tvvo daies he departed thence: and vvent into Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 44 For IESVS him ſelf gaue teſtimonie that a Prophet hath not honour in his ovvne countrie.Mt. 4, 12 ✝ 
                     verse 45 Therfore
* vvhen he vvas come into Galilee,Mr. 1, 14 the Galilaeans receiued him,Luc. 4, 14. vvhereas they had ſeen al things that he had done at Hieruſalem in the feſtiual day: for them ſelues alſo came to the feſtiual day.
                ✝ 
                     verse 46 He came againe therfore into Cana of Galilee,Io. 2, 9. * Vvhere he made vvater vvine.The Goſpel vpō the 20 Sunday after Pentecoſt. And there vvas a certaine lord vvhoſe ſonne vvas ſicke at Capharnáum. ✝ 
                     verse 47 He hauing heard that IESVS came from Ievvrie into Galilee, vvent to him, and deſired him that he vvould come dovvne & heale his ſonne. for he began to die. ✝ 
                     verse 48 IESVS therfore ſaid to him, Vnleſſe you ſee ſignes and vvonders, you beleeue not. ✝ 
                     verse 49 The lord ſaith to him, Lord, come dovvne before that my ſonne die. ✝ 
                     verse 50 IESVS ſaith to him, Goe, thy ſonne liueth. The man beleeued the vvord that IESVS ſaid to him, and vvent. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And as he vvas novv going dovvne, his ſeruants mette him: and they brought vvord, ſaying, That his ſonne liued. ✝ 
                     verse 52 He aſked therfore of them the houre, vvherein he vvas amended. And they ſaid to him, That yeſterday at the ſeuenth houre the feuer left him. ✝ 
                     verse 53 The father therfore knevv that it vvas in the ſame houre vvherein IESVS ſaid to him, Thy ſonne liueth. and him ſelf beleeued and his vvhole houſe. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 54 This againe the
* ſecond ſigne did IESVS,Io. 2, 11. vvhen he vvas come from Ievvrie into Galilee.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        0. Our Fathers adored.]
                     The Schiſmatical tēple contendeth againſt the true Tēple. By adoration is meant doing of ſacrifice. for other offices of Religion might be done in any place. The Samaritanes to defend their adoring in Garizim, pretended their worſhiping there to be more ancient then the Iewes in Hieruſalem, referring it to
 Iacob: Whereas in deede that Patriarch adoring there before the Temple vvas appointed, or the Lavv giuen,Ioſeph. li. antiq. 11. c. 8. made nothing for their Schiſme: Which vvas begone by Manaſſes a fugitiue Prieſt, onely to hold his vnlavvful wife thereby, and to obtaine Superioritie, in Schiſme: vvhich he could not doe in the vnitie of his brethren: long after the Temple of Hieruſalem, from vvhich the reuolt vvas made. Therfore Chriſt giueth ſentence for the Ievves and the Temple of Hieruſalem, affirming that they had a good ground thereof, but the Samaritanes none at al.
                  Ioſephus alſo recordeth hovv the Samaritanes demaunded of Alexander the Great, the like priuileges and immunities as he had graunted to the high Prieſt and Temple of Hieruſalem, pretending their Temple to be as great and as vvorthy,The true Temple preuaileth. and them ſelues to be Ievves as the other, and to vvorſhip the ſame God.Ioſeph. li. 13. antiq. c. 6. but their Schiſmatical hypocriſie vvas eaſely ſpied and dimiſſed vvith nothing. An other time the Ievves and Samaritanes (as the ſame vvriter teſtifieth) made a great ſturre in Alexandria about the truth and antiquitie of the Schiſmatical temple and ſeruice in Garizim and the other true Temple of Salomon: in ſo much that the matter vvas put to arbitrement by Ptolomaeus the kings commaundement, onely to trie
                        •
                      whether of the two was firſt. And the Schiſmatikes (as their cuſtome is) per ſaltum can make their Church or ſeruice as old as they liſt, referring it to the Patriarches, as our Schiſmatikes do now to Chriſt and the Apoſtles. But when the trial was made, onely they of Hieruſalem did inuincibly proue by continual ſucceſſion of their Prieſts,The true Temple is proued by continual ſucceſſion. and by the iuſt note of the time when the Schiſmatikes went out from them, that theirs was the lavvful, and the other the falſe temple and falſe adoration, and ſo it was iudged, and the Samaritanes put to ſilence. Afterward the ſaid Schiſmatikes (which is lightly the end of al Schiſmes) reuolted quite from the Iewes religion, and dedicated their temple in Garîzim to Iupiter Olympius, as Caluins ſupper and his bread and wine is like at length to come to the ſacrifice of Ceres and Bacchus.
                  
                     23. In Spirit and veritie.) Our Sauiour foretelleth her that the end & ceaſing of their ſacrifice & adoration in both the Temples ſhould ſhortly be,Chriſtian adoratiō throughout al natiōs in euery place, in ſpirit & veritie: that is, in the Sacraments and ſeruice of the new law, ful of ſpirit & grace: in the veritie of things before prefigured, ſpecially the true ſacrifice of Chriſts body and bloud. and euen then vvas begone to be fulfilled: inſtructing her in three things concerning that point. firſt, that the true Sacrifice ſhould be tied no more to that one place or nation,Mal. 1, 11. but that true adoration ſhould be through out al Nations according to the Prophecie of Malachie. Secondly, that the groſſe and carnal adoration by the fleſh and bloud of beaſtes and other external terrene creatures, nor hauing in them grace, ſpirit, and life, ſhould be taken avvay, & an other ſacrifice ſucceede, which ſhould be in it ſelf inuiſible, celeſtial, diuine, ful of life, Spirit, and grace, and thirdly, that this adoration and ſacrifice ſhould be the veritie it ſelf, vvhereof al the former ſacrifices and hoſtes were but ſhadovves and figures, and he calleth that here ſpirit and truth,Io. 1, 17. vvhich in the firſt Chapter is called grace and truth. Al vvhich is no more but a prophecie and deſcription of the Sacrifice of the faithful Gentils in the body and bloud of Chriſt: not that it is not by external meanes giuen to vs (for othervviſe vve being men conſiſting of fleſh and bloud could not be capable thereof) but that it is ſpirit and life in it ſelf, being the fleſh of the VVORD of God. And if a man enlarge the vvord of Adoratiō, (vvhich here as is ſaid, ſignifieth properly the worſhip of God by ſacrifice) to al the Sacraments of the new Law, they al likewiſe be ſpirit and grace, the Holy Ghoſt working inuiſibly and internally vpon our ſoules by euery one of them. Wherevpō our Baptiſme, is water & the Holy Ghoſt: our Penance, the word of abſolution and the Holy Ghoſt: our Confirmatiō, oile & the Holy Ghoſt by impoſition of handes: finally, al the adoration of the Catholike Church, is properly ſpiritual, though certaine external creatures for our natures, ſtate and neceſſitie, be ioyned therevnto. Take heede therfore thou gather not of Chriſts wordes, that Chriſtian men ſhould haue no vſe of external office towards God: for that would take away al ſacrifice, Sacraments, praiers, Churches, and ſocietie of men in his Seruice.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Curing a bed
                        •
                     ed man at the pond of miracle,The 2 part: becauſe he doth it on the Sabboth,THE ACTES of Chriſt in Iewrie (hauing already begonne his ſolemne Manifeſtation in Galilee Mt. 4, 12) the ſecond Paſche of his preaching. the blind Ievves do perſecute him, 7 and againe becauſe he ſaith that God is his natural father. 19 He therevpon continueth ſaying, the Fathers operation and his to be in euery thing alone, and that he ſhal do greater things then theſe miraculous cures, to vvit, 21 quicken the dead in ſoule by ſinne, as being appointed Iudge of al, 21 yea and quicken the dead in bodies alſo, incōtinent iudging al vprightly. 31 And that theſe are not bragges of his ovvne, but his vvitneſſes to be, 33 Iohn Baptiſt, 36 his ovvne miraculous vvorkes, 37 his fathers voice at his baptiſme, 39 the Scriptures alſo, namely of Moyſes.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe things there vvas a feſtiual day of the Ievves,The Goſpel vpō friday in the firſt vveeke of Lent. and IESVS vvent vp to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And there is at Hieruſalem
`vpon'By our latin text and the Greeke, this miraculous pond vvas in or vpon Probatica, that is, a place vvhere the ſheepe to be ſacrificed, vvere kept. But by other latin copies, S. Hierom, and ſome Greeke fathers, Probatica is the very pōd it ſelf: ſo called, becauſe the ſheepe of ſacrifice vvere there vvaſhed. Probatica a ″ pond vvhich in hebrevv is ſurnamedBetheſda, Bethſaida', hauing fiue porches. ✝ 
                     verse 3 In theſe lay a great multitude of ſicke perſons, of blinde, lame, vvithered, expecting the ſtirring of the vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And an Angel of our Lord deſcended at a certaine time into the pond: and the vvater vvas ſtirred. And he that had gone dovvne firſt into the pond after the ſtirring of the vvater, vvas made vvhole of vvhatſoeuer infirmitie he vvas holden. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And there vvas a certaine man there that had been eight and thirtie yeres in his infirmitie. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Him vvhen IESVS had ſeen lying, & knevv thatmultū tempus haberet, he had novv a long time, he ſaith to him, Vvilt thou be made vvhole? ✝ 
                     verse 7 The ſicke man anſvvered him, Lord, I haue no man, vvhen the vvater is troubled, to put me into the pond. For vvhiles I come, an other goeth dovvne before me. ✝ 
                     verse 8 IESVS ſaith to him, Ariſe, take vp thy bed, and vvalke. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And forthvvith he vvas made vvhole: and he tooke vp his bed, and vvalked. And it vvas the Sabboth that day. ✝ 
                     verse 10 The Ievves therfore ſaid to him that vvas healed, It is the Sabboth, thou maiſt not take vp thy bed. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He anſvvered them, He that made me vvhole, he ſaid to me, Take vp thy bed, and vvalke. ✝ 
                     verse 12 They aſked him therfore, Vvhat is that man that ſaid to thee, Take vp thy bed, and vvalke? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But he that vvas made vvhole, knevv not vvho it vvas. For IESVS ſhronke aſide from the multitude ſtanding in the place. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Aftervvard IESVS findeth him in the temple, and ſaid to him, Behold thou art made vvhole: ″ ſinne no more, leſt ſome vvorſe thing chaunce to thee. ✝ 
                     verse 15 That man vvent his vvay, and told the Ievves that it vvas IESVS that made him vvhole. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 16 Therevpon the Ievves perſecuted IESVS, becauſe he did theſe things on the Sabboth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 But IESVS anſvvered them, My father vvorketh vntil novv: and I doe vvorke. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Therevpō therefore the Ievves ſought the more to kil him: becauſe he did not only breake the Sabboth, but alſo he ſaid God was his father, making him ſelf aequal to God. ✝ 
                     verse 19 IESVS therfore anſvvered, and ſaid to them, Amen, amen I ſay to you, The Sonne can not doe any thing of him ſelf, but that vvhich he ſeeth the Father doing.
 For vvhat things ſoeuer he doeth, theſe the Sonne alſo doeth in like maner. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For the Father loueth the Sonne, and ſhevveth him al things that him ſelf doeth, and greater vvorkes then theſe vvil he ſhevv him, that you may marueil. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For as the Father doth raiſe the dead and quickeneth: ſo the Sonne alſo quickeneth vvhom he vvil. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For neither doth the Father iudge any man: but al iudgement he hath giuen to the Sonne, ✝ 
                     verse 23 that al may honour the Sonne, as they doe honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Sonne, doth not honour the Father, vvho ſent him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Amen, amen I ſay to you, that he vvhich heareth my vvord, and beleeueth him that ſent me, hath life euerlaſting. and he commeth not into iudgement, butis paſſed ſhal paſſe' from death into life. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Amen,The Goſpel vpō Alſoules day. amen I ſay to you, that the houre commeth, and novv it is, vvhen the dead ſhal heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and they that haue heard, ſhal liue. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For as the Father hath life in him ſelf: ſo he hath giuen to the Sonne alſo to haue life in him ſelf: ✝ 
                     verse 27 and he hath giuē him povver to doe iudgement alſo, becauſe he is the Sonne of man. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Marueil not at this, becauſe the houre commeth vvherein al that are in the graues, ſhal heare his voice, ✝ 
                     verse 29 and they that haue 
Not faith only, but good and il deedes ſhal be counted, and accordingly rewarded at the day of iudgement. done good things, ſhal come forth into the reſurrection of life: but they that haue done euil, into the reſurrection of iudgement. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 30 I can not of my ſelf doe any thing. As I heare, ſo I iudge: and my iudgement is iuſt. becauſe I ſeeke not my vvil, but the vvil of him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 31 If I giue teſtimonie of my ſelf, my teſtimonie is not true. ✝ 
                     verse 32 There is an other that giueth teſtimonie of me: and I knovv that the teſtimonie is true vvhich he giueth of me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 * You ſent to Iohn:Io. 1, 19. and he gaue teſtimonie to the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 34 But ″ I receiue not teſtimonie of man: but I ſay theſe things that you may be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 35 He vvas the lampe burning and ſhining. And you vvould for a time reioyce in his light. ✝ 
                     verse 36 But I haue a greater teſtimonie then Iohn. For the vvorkes vvhich the Father hath giuen me to perfit them: the very vvorkes them ſelues vvhich I doe, giue teſtimonie of me, that the Father hath ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And the Father that ſent me, him ſelf hath * giuen teſtimonie of me.Mt. 3, 17 neither haue you heard his voice at any time, nor ſeen his ſhape, ✝ 
                     verse 38 and his vvord you haue not remaining in you: becauſe vvhom he hath ſent, him you beleeue not. ✝ 
                     verse 39 ″ Search theCatholikes ſearche the ſcriptures, and finde there, Peters & his ſucceſſors Primacie, the real preſence, the Prieſts power to forgiue ſinnes, iuſtification by faith & good workes, Virginitie preferred before matrimonie, breach of the vow of cō
                     tinencie damnable, voluntarie pouertie, Penā
                     ce, almes, and good deedes meritorious, diuers rewardes I heauē accordīg to diuers merites, & ſuch like. ſcriptures, for you 
 thinke in them to haue life euerlaſting: and the ſame are they that giue teſtimonie of me: ✝ 
                     verse 40 and you vvil not come to me that you may haue life. ✝ 
                     verse 41 Glorie of men I receiue not. ✝ 
                     verse 42 But I haue knovven you, that the loue of God you haue not in you. ✝ 
                     verse 43 I am come in the name of my Father, and you receiue me not: ifHe meaneth ſpecially Antichriſt How thē can the Pope be he, ſeing the Iewes receiue him not? an other ſhal come in his ovvne name, him you vvil receiue. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Hovv can you beleeue, that receiue glorie one of an other: and the glorie vvhich is of God only, you ſeeke not? ✝ 
                     verse 45 Thinke not that I vvil accuſe you to the Father. there is that accuſeth you, Moyſes, in vvhom you truſt. ✝ 
                     verse 46 For if you did beleeue Moyſes: you vvould perhaps beleeue me alſo, for of me he hath vvritten. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And if you doe not beleeue his vvritings: hovv vvil you beleeue my vvordes?
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     2. A pond.)
                     1 Vertue of miracles giuen to creatures. This is as great a wonder and worke as was in the old Law, yet neuer recorded in the Scripture before: the conditions and circunſtances of the ſame much to be diſtinctly weighed againſt the Miſcreants of this time for many cauſes. Firſt, that God without derogation to his honour, yea to the great cōmendation of it, doth giue vertue of miracles and cure to water or other creatures. Secondly,2 The ſame giuē ſpecially to ſanctified creatures. that he giueth ſuch vertues to theſe creatures ſpecially which be by vſe and occupying in ſacred functions or otherwiſe, as it were ſanctified: for this pond was it wherein the carcaſſes of ſheepe (therfore called Probatica) & other beaſts to be ſacrificed,Hiero. de locis Hebr. poſt med. were firſt waſhed, to which being alwaies red (as S. Hierom ſaith) with the bloud of hoſtes, this force was giuen, for the commendation of the ſacrifices of the Law there offered. How much more may we acknowledge ſuch workes of God miraculouſly done in or about the Sacrifice or Sacrament of the new Teſtament, which faithleſſe men wholy reiect and condemne for fables, becauſe they know not the Scriptures nor the power of God Thirdly,3 Miracles done at on time more thē at an other, ſpecially ī greater ſolemnities. that this operation was giuen at one time more then an other, & rather on great feſtiual daies then other vulgar times (for this vvas the feaſt of Paſche or of Pentecoſt) as daies more ſanctified, and vvhen the people made greater concourſe: which ſhevveth that vve ſhould not vvonder to ſee great miracles done at the Memories and feaſtes of Martyrs or other great Feſtiuities, more then at other places and times. Fourthly,4 Angels and Sainctes patrones & Workers in places of miracles. that the Angels or ſome ſpecial Saincts are Preſidents or Patrones of ſuch places of miracle, and workers alſo vnder God of the effects that there extraordinarily be done. Which ought to make Chriſtians leſſe doubt, that the force of diuers waters in the world is iuſtly attributed by our forefathers and good ſtories to the prayers and preſence of Saincts, which profane incredulous men referre onely to nature, vntruely pretending that God is more glorified by the workes of nature, which be of his ordinarie prouidence, then by the graces of Miracle giuen to his Saincts or Angels by his extraordinarie prouidence. Fifthly,5 Miracles in certaine places, & wrought vpō thē that corporally viſite the ſame See S. Auguſtine ep. 137. that miracles be not wrought on men by their faith onely and as wel by their preſence, in ſpirit as in body, or vpon the parties deſire or deuotion onely, according to the Heretikes pretext that God is a like preſent by his power and grace to euery man and place: and therfore that men neede not to go from their owne houſes or countries to ſeeke holines or health at the places of Chriſts or his Saincts birth, death, memories: for none could haue benefite of this water but he that could touch it, and be in it corporally, and at that iuſt time when the water was in motion by the Angel.6 Al reaſonīg in theſe matters muſt yeld to Gods pleaſure. Yea ſixtly, we may conſider that in ſuch caſes to make the matter more maruelous, rare, and more earneſtly to be ſought for, and to ſignifie to vs that God hath al ſuch extraordinary operations in his owne wil and commaundement, without al rules of our reaſons and queſtioning thereon,Hiero. con. Lucifer. c. 
                           •
                         10. 2. none could be healed but that perſon who firſt could get into the pond after the Angel came and ſtirred the ſame.7 This water is a figure of Baptiſme. Seuenthly, that theſe graces of corporal cures giuen to this water, * prefigure the like force of the Sacrament of Baptiſme for the cure of ſoules, though we neede not ſeeke correſpondence thereof to the figure in euery point.
                  Laſtly, Chriſt by his power of excellencie and prerogatiue could and did heale this poore man
 that could get no body to help him into the water,8 Chriſt extraordinarily healeth and ſaueth vvithout creatures. becauſe he earneſtly and long deſired the remedie by God appointed, but was excluded by neceſſitie: as our Lord ſaueth al ſuch as die without Baptiſme, if they in their owne perſons earneſtly intended, deſired, and ſought for the ſame.
                  
                     14. Sinne no more.) We may gather hereby that this mans long infirmitie was for puniſhment of his ſinnes, and that men often attribute their ſicknes to other natural defects, and ſeeke for remedies of the world in vaine,Sinne the cauſe of ſicknes and infirmities. when the ſinne for which it was ſent, remaineth, or is not repented of
                        •
                      and therfore that in al infirmities men ſhould firſt turne to God & goe to their Ghoſtly father, and then call for the wordly Phiſicions afterward.
                  
                     34. I receiue not.) Our Maiſter meaneth that mans teſtimonie is not neceſſarie to him, nor that the truth of his Diuinitie dependeth on worldly witneſſes or mens commendations: though to vs ſuch teſtimonies be agreable and neceſſarie. and ſo for our inſtruction he vouchſaued to take the teſtimonies of Iohn the Baptiſt and Moyſes and the Prophets: and departing out of this world, to ſend forth al his Apoſtles, and in them al Biſhops and Lawful Paſtors, to be his witneſſes from Hieruſalem to the ends of the world.
                  
                     39. Searche the Scriptures.)
                     Neither Ievves nor Heretikes finde the truth, becauſe they ſearche not the Scriptures deepely, but read ſuperficially. He reprehendeth the Iewes, that reading daily the Scriptures and acknowledging that in them they ſhould finde life and ſaluation, they yet looked ouer them ſo ſuperficially that they could not finde therein him to be CHRIST their King, Lord, life, and Sauiour. For the ſpecial maiſters & Scribes of the Ievves then, were like vnto our Heretikes novv, vvho be euer talking and turning and ſhuffling the Scriptures, but are of al men moſt ignorant in the deepe knovvledge thereof. And therfore our Maiſter referreth them not to the reading onely or learning them without booke, or hauing the ſentences thereof gloriouſly painted or vvritten in their Temple, houſes, or coates: but to the deepe ſearche of the meaning and myſteries of the Scriptures, vvhich are not ſo eaſily to be ſeen in the letter.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Hauing vvith fiue loaues fed fiue thouſand 16 (vvalking alſo the night after vpon the ſea) 22 on the morovv the people there vpon reſorting vnto him,The 3. part. 27 he preacheth vnto them of the Bread vvhich he vvil giue: telling them that he is come from heauen,His ACTES in Galilaee, & in Iewrie, about the third Paſche and after. and therfore able to giue ſuch bread as cā quicken the word, euen his ovvne fleſh: and that al his Elect ſhal beleeue as much. 60 Many not vvith ſtanding do murmur at this doctrine, yea and become apoſtataes, thoug he tel them that they ſhal ſee by his Aſcenſion into heauen, that he is deſcended from heauen, but the Tvvelue ſticke vnto him, beleeuing that he is God omnipotent, as he ſaid. Among vvhom alſo (that no man be ſcandalized) he ſignifieth that he foreknovveth vvhich vvil become a traiter: as among the foreſaid, vvhich vvould become apoſtataes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe things IESVS vvent beyond the ſea of Galilee,The Goſpel vpō Midlen
                        •
                      Sūday. vvhich is of Tiberias:Mt. 14, 13. Mar. 6, 32. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and a great multitude folovved him, becauſe they ſavv the ſignes vvhich he did vpon thoſe that vvere ſicke.Lu. 9, 10 ✝ 
                     verse 3 IESVS therfore went vp into the mountaine, and there he ſare vvith his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the Paſche vvas at hand, the feſtiual day of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Vvhen IESVS therfore had lifted vp his eies, and ſavv that a very great multitude commeth to him, he ſaith to Philippe, Vvhence ſhal vve bie bread: that theſe may eate? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And this he ſaid, tempting him. for him ſelf knevv vvhat he vvould doe? ✝ 
                     verse 7 Philippe anſvvered him, Tvvo hundred penie vvorth of bread is not ſufficient for them, that euery man may take a litle peece. ✝ 
                     verse 8 One of his Diſciples, Andrevv the brother of Simon Peter, ſaith
 to him, ✝ 
                     verse 9 There is a boy here that hath fiue barley loaues, & tvvo fiſhes: but vvhat are theſe among ſo many? ✝ 
                     verse 10 IESVS therfore ſaith, Make the men to ſit dovvne. And there vvas much graſſe in the place. The men therfore ſate dovvne, in number about fiue thouſand. ✝ 
                     verse 11 IESVS therfore tooke the loaues: and vvhen he had giuen thankes, he diſtributed to them that ſate. in like maner alſo of the fiſhes as much as they vvould. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And after they vvere filled, he ſaid to his Diſciples, Gather the fragments that are remaining, leſt they be loſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 They gathered therfore, and filled tvvelue baſkets vvith fragments of the fiue barley loaues, vvhich remained to them that had eaten. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Thoſe men therfore vvhen they had ſeen vvhat a ſigne IESVS had done, ſaid, That this is the Prophet in deede that is to come into the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 15 IESVS therfore vvhen he knevv that they vvould come to take him, and make him king,Mt. 14, 23. Mr. 6, 46. * he fled againe into the mountaine him ſelf alone. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen euen vvas come, his Diſciples vvent dovvne to the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen they vvere gone vp into the ſhippe, they came beyond the ſea into Capharnáum. and novv it vvas darke, and IESVS vvas not come vnto them ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the ſea aroſe, by reaſon of a great vvinde that blevv. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvhen they had to vved therfore about fiue and tvventie or thirtie furlonges, they ſee IESVS vvalking vpon the ſea, and to dravv nigh to the ſhippe, and they feared. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But he ſaith to them, It is I, feare not. ✝ 
                     verse 21 They vvould therfore haue taken him into the ſhippe: and forthvvith the ſhippe vvas at the land to vvhich they vvent.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 The next day, the multitude that ſtoode beyond the ſea, ſavv that there vvas no other boate there but one, and that IESVS had not entred into the boate vvith his Diſciples, but that his Diſciples only vvere departed: ✝ 
                     verse 23 but other boates came in frō Tiberias beſide the place vvhere they had eatē the bread, our LordTheſe wordes do plainly import, that the giuing thankes was an effectual bleſſing of the bread and working the multiplication thereof. giuing thankes. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vvhen therfore the multitude ſavv that IESVS vvas not there, nor his Diſciples, they vvent vp into the boates, & came to Capharnaū ſeeking IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhē they had found him beyond the ſea, they ſaid to him, Rabbi, vvhē cameſt thou hither? ✝ 
                     verse 26 IESVS anſvvered them, and ſaid, Amen, amen I ſay to you, you ſeeke me not becauſe you haue ſeene ſignes, but becauſe you did eate of the loaues, and vvere filled. ✝ 
                     verse 27 ″ Vvorke not the meate that
 periſheth, but that endureth vnto life euerlaſting, vvhich the Sonne of man vvil giue you. For him the Father, God, hath ſigned. ✝ 
                     verse 28 They ſaid therfore vnto him, Vvhat ſhal vve doe that vve may vvorke the vvorkes of God? ✝ 
                     verse 29 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to them, This is the vvorke of God, that you beleeue in him vvhom he hath ſent. ✝ 
                     verse 30 They ſaid therfore to him, Vvhat ſigne therfore doeſt thou, that vve may ſee, and may beleeue thee? vvhat vvorkeſt thou?
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 Our * fathers did eate Manna in the deſert,Exo. 16, 4. 14. as it is vvritten, Bread from heauen he gaue them to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 32 IESVS therfore ſaid to them,why we keepe the hebrue word, Amen, & tranſlate it not, See the Annot. c. 8. verſ. 34.
                   Amen,Pſ. 77, 24. amen I ſay to you, Moyſes gaue you not the bread from heauen, but my Father giueth you ″ the true bread from heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 33 For the bread of God it is that deſcendeth from heauen, and giueth life to the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 34 They ſaid therfore vnto him, Lord, giue vs alvvaies this bread. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And IESVS ſaid to them, I am the bread of life, he that commeth to me, ſhal not hunger: and he that beleeueth in me, ſhal neuer thirſt. ✝ 
                     verse 36 But I ſaid to you that both you haue ſeen me and you beleeue not.The Goſpel in the An̄iuerſarie of the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Al that the Father giueth me, ſhal come to me: and him that commeth to me I vvil not caſt forth. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Becauſe I deſcended from heauen, not to doe mine ovvne vvil, but the vvil of him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 39 For this is the vvil of him that ſent me, the Father: that al that he hath giuē me I leeſe not thereof, but raiſe it in the laſt day. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And this is the vvil of my father that ſent me: that euery one that ſeeth the Sonne, and beleeueth in him, haue life euerlaſting, and I vvil raiſe him in the laſt day. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 The Ievves therfore murmured at him, becauſe he had ſaid, I am the bread vvhich deſcended from heauen: ✝ 
                     verse 42 and they ſaid, is not this IESVS the ſonne of Ioſeph, vvhoſe father and mother vve knovv? Hovv then faith he, That I deſcended from heauen? ✝ 
                     verse 43 IESVS therfore anſvvered and ſaid to them, Murmure not one to an other: ✝ 
                     verse 44 no man can come to me,The Goſpel vpō Imber vveneſday in vvhitſon-vveeke. vnles the Father that ſent me, ″ dravv him: and I vvil raiſe him vp in the laſt day. ✝ 
                     verse 45 It is vvritten in the Prophers, And al ſhal be docible of God.
                  Eſa. 54, 13. Euery one that hath heard of the Father, and hath learned, commeth to me. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Not that any man hath ſeen the Father, but he vvhich is of God: this hath ſeen the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 47 Amen, amen I ſay to you, he that beleeueth in me, hath life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 48 I am the bread of life. ✝ 
                     verse 49 Your fathers did eate ″ Manna in the deſert: and they died.
 ✝ 
                     verse 50 This is the bread that deſcendeth from heauen: that if any man eate of it,The Goſpel in a daily Maſſe for the dead. he die not. ✝ 
                     verse 51 I am the liuing bread, that came dovvne from heauen. If any man eate of this bread, he ſhal liue for euer:Mt. 26, 26. Mr. 14, 22. Lu. 12, 19. 1. Cor. 11, 24. and * the bread vvhich I vvil giue, is my fleſh for the life of the vvorld. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 52 The Ievves therfore ſtroue among them ſelues, ſaying, ″ Hovv can this man giue vs his fleſh to eate? ✝ 
                     verse 53 IESVS therfore ſaid to them, Amen, amen I ſay to you, ″ Vnles you eate the fleſh of the Sonne of man, ″ and drinke his bloud, ″ you ſhal not haue life in you. ✝ 
                     verse 54 He that eateth my fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, hath life euerlaſting: and ″ I vvil raiſe him vp in the laſt day. ⊢
                  The Goſpel vpō COR
                        •
                     VS CHRISTI day. ✝ 
                     verse 55 For my fleſh, is ″ meate in deede: and my bloud is drinke in deede. ✝ 
                     verse 56 He that eateth my fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, abideth in me, and I in him. ✝ 
                     verse 57 As the liuing father hath ſent me, and I liue by the father: and he that eateth me, the ſame alſo ſhal liue by me. ✝ 
                     verse 58 This is the bread that came dovvne from heauen. Not as your fathers did eate Manna, and died. ″ He that eateth this bread, ſhal liue for euer. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 59 Theſe things he ſaid teaching in the Synagogue, in Capharnáum.
                ✝ 
                     verse 60 Many therfore of his Diſciples hearing it, ſaid, This ſaying is hard, and vvho can heare it? ✝ 
                     verse 61 But IESVS knovving vvith him ſelf that his Diſciples murmured at this, he ſaid to them,Io. 3, 13. Doth this ſcandalize you? ✝ 
                     verse 62 ″ If then you ſhal ſee * the Sonne of man aſcend vvhere he vvas before? ✝ 
                     verse 63 It is the ſpirit that quickeneth, ″ the fleſh profiteth nothing. The vvordes that I haue ſpoken to you, be ſpirit and life. ✝ 
                     verse 64 But there be certaine of you ″ that beleeue not. For IESVS knevv from the beginning vvho they vvere that did not beleeue, and vvho he vvas that vvould betray him. ✝ 
                     verse 65 And he ſaid, Therfore did I ſay to you, that no man can come to me, vnles it be giuen him of my Father. ✝ 
                     verse 66 After this many of his Diſciples ″ vvent backe: and novv they vvalked not vvith him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 67 IESVS therfore ſaid to the Tvvelue, Vvhat, vvil you alſo depart? ✝ 
                     verse 68 Simon ″ Peter therfore anſvvered him, Lord, to vvhom ſhal vve goe? thou haſt the vvordes of eternal life. ✝ 
                     verse 69 And vve beleeue and haue knovven that thou art. Chriſt the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 70 IESVS anſvvered them, Haue not I choſen you the Tvvelue: & of you one is a deuil? ✝ 
                     verse 71 And he meant Iudas Iſcariot, Simons ſonne: for this ſame vvas to betray him, vvhereas he vvas one of the Tvvelue.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     27. Worke not the meate.] By their greedy ſeeking after him for meate of the body, he taketh occaſion to dravv them to the deſire of a more excellent foode which he had to giue them, and ſo by litle to open vnto them the great meate and myſterie of the B. Sacrament: which (as he proueth) doth not onely far paſſe their ordinarie bread or his maruelous multiplied loaues, but Manna it ſelf, which they thought came from heauen, and ſo much wondered at it.
                  
                     32. The true bread.] Though the perſon of Chriſt incarnate, euen out of the Sacrament alſo, be meant vnder the Metaphores of bread and drinke from heauen: and our beleefe in him, be ſignified by eating and feeding:Why Chriſt is called bread: & beleeuing, eating. yet the cauſes why they ſhould be recommended vnto vs in ſuch termes,Ierem. 11, 19. Gen. 49. 11. were, that he was to be eaten and drunken in deed in the formes of bread and wine: for the which cauſe his body on the croſſe is called his bread: & his bloud ſhed on the croſſe, * the bloud of the grape: no doubt becauſe the ſame body and bloud were in Holy Sacrament to be eaten and drunken. In vvhich ſpeaches, either of Chriſts perſon generally, or peculiarly of the ſame as in the B. Sacrament the true bread is not taken proprely and ſpecially for that ſubſtance which is of corne, and called vvith vs bread:What ſignifieth, The true bread. but generally for food or meate, and therfore it hath ioyned vvith it lightly a terme ſignifying a more excellent ſort of ſuſtenance: as, the true bread, the bread of heauen, the bread of life,Lu. 24, 35. Superſubſtantial bread. in which ſort the holy Sacrament which is Chriſts body, is both here.The B. Sacrament called bread. and in S. Luke and S. Paul alſo,Act. 2, 42. 20, 7. often called bread, euen after conſecration: not onely for that it was made of bread, but becauſe it is bread more truely, and by more excellent property and calling,1 Cor. 10. then that vvhich ordinarily is named bread.
                  
                     44. Dravv him] The Father dravveth vs and teacheth vs to come to his Sonne, and to beleeue theſe high and hard myſteries of his incarnation and of feeding vs vvith his ovvne ſubſtance in the Sacrament:God draweth vs vvith our free wil. not cōpelling or violenty forcing any againſt their will or without any reſpect of their conſent,Aug. cont. duas Ep. Pelag. li. 1 c. 19. & Ser. 2 de verb. Ap. c. 2. as Heretikes pretend: but by the ſvveete internal motions and perſuaſions of his grace and ſpirit he wholy maketh vs of our owne vvill and liking to conſent to the ſame.
                  
                     49. Manna, and died.] The Heretikes holding the fathers of the old Teſtament to haue eaten of the ſame meate, and to haue had as good Sacraments as vve, be here refuted: Chriſt putting a plaine difference in the very ſubſtance thereof,The manifold preeminēces of the B. Sacramēt aboue Manna. and in the graces and effects much more at large. Manna vvas onely a figure of the B. Sacrament, though a very excellent figure thereof for many cauſes. It came in a ſort from heauen, out Sacrament more: it vvas made by God miraculouſly, our Sacrament more: it vvas to be eaten for the time of their peregrination, our Sacrament more: it vvas to euery man vvhat he liked beſt, our Sacrament more: a litle thereof ſerued and ſufficed as vvel as much, our Sacrament more: it vvas reſerued for ſuch daies as it could not be gathered, and our Sacramēt much more: it vvas kept for a memorial in the arke of the Teſtament, our Sacrament much more: the diſcontented and incredulous murmured and gainſaid it, at our Sacrament much more it ſuſtained their bodies in the deſert, our Sacrament both body and ſoule much more.
                  52. Hovv can this man?] It came not to their minde that nothing vvas impoſsible to God, that vvickedly ſaid,In the B. Sacrament, Hovv, is a Iewiſh word. Hovv can this man giue vs his fleſh? but vve may make great profite of their ſinne, beleeuing the Myſteries, and taking a leſſon, neuer to ſay or once thinke, Hovv? for it is a Ievviſh vvord and vvorthy al puniſhment, ſo ſaith S. Cyril. li. 4 c. 11 in Io. Neuertheles if one aſked onely for deſire to learne in humility, as our Lady did touching her hauing a childe in her virginitie, then he muſt take the Angels anſwer to her, That it is of the Holy Ghoſt, ſo ſaith S. Damaſcene li. 4. c. 14.
                  53. vnles you eate.) Chriſt cōmending the Sacrament of the faithful vnto vs, ſaid, Except you eate &c. you can not haue life in you.The real preſence. So the life ſaith of life, and to him that thinketh the life to be a lier, this meate ſhal be death & not life to him.Ser. 6 de ieiun. 7. menſ. 
                     Auguſt. Ser. 2 de verb. Ap. c. 1. And S. Leo thus, Becauſe our Lord ſaith, Except you eate &c. let vs ſo communicate that vve nothing doubt of the truth of Chriſtes body and bloud: for that
                        〈◊〉
                     receiued vvith mouth, vvhich is beleiued in hart: and they anſvver Amen in vaine, that diſpute againſt that vvhich they receiue.
                  
                     53. And drinke.) This the Proteſtants alleage for the neceſſitie of receiuing in both kindes: but in reſpect of them ſelues (who lightly hold al this chapter to pertaine nothing to the Sacramental receiuing,Receiuing in both kindes not neceſſarie. but to ſpiritual feeding on Chriſt by faith onely) it can make nothing for one kinde or other. And in reſpect of vs Catholikes, who beleeue Chriſts whole perſon both humanitie and Diuinitie, both fleſh and bloud to be in either forme, and to be vvholy receiued no leſſe in the firſt, then in the ſecond or in both, this place commaundeth nothing for both the kindes.
                  
                     53. You ſhal not haue life.)
                     The Sacramental receiuing of Chriſts body, not alwaies neceſſarie to ſaluation. Though the Catholikes teach theſe wordes to be ſpoken of the Sacrament, yet they meane not (no more then our Sauiour here doth) to exclude al from ſaluation, that receiue not actually and Sacramentally vnder one or both kindes. For then children that die after they be baptized and neuer receiued Sacramentally, ſhould periſh: which to hold, were heretical Neither did S. Auguſtine meane,Li. 1 de pec. merit. c. 
                           •
                        
                      applying theſe wordes to infants alſo, that they could not be ſaued without receiuing ſacramentally, as not onely the Heretikes, but Eraſmus did vnlearnedly
 miſtake him:The true morning of S. Auguſtin: vvordes touching infants receiuing of the B. Sacrament. but his ſenſe is that they were by the right of their Baptiſme ioyned to Chriſts body Myſtical, and thereby ſpiritually partakers of the other Sacrament alſo of Chriſts body and bloud. As al Catholike men that be in priſon, ioyning with the Church of God in hart and deſire to receiue and be partakers with the Church of this Sacrament, and thoſe ſpecially that deuoutly heare Maſſe and adore in preſence the body and bloud of Chriſt, ioyning in hart with the Prieſt, al theſe receiue life and fruite of the Sacrament, though at euery time they receiue not ſacramentally in one or both kindes.Cō
                        
                           •
                        . Trid. Seſ. 21 c. 4. And although in the Primitiue Church the holy Sacrament in the ſecond kind were often giuen euen to infants to ſanctifie them, yet (as the holy Councel hath declared) it was neuer miniſtred vnto them with opinion that they could not be ſaued without it, and therfore the Heretikes do vntruely charge the Church and the Fathers with that errour.
                  54. I vvil raiſe him.)Cyril. li. 4 c. 14, 15. As the Sonne liueth by the Father, euen ſo do vve liue by his fleſh, ſaith S. Hilarie. li. 8. de Trin.The effects of the B. Sacramēt both in our body and ſoule. 
                     And S. Cyril againe thus, Though by nature of our fleſh vve be corruptible, yet by participation of life vve are reformed is the propertie of life. For not onely our ſoules vvere to be lifted vp by the holy Ghoſt to life euerlaſting, but this rude groſſe terreſtrial body of ours is to be reduced to immoralitie, by touching,Tertul. de reſur. 
                           •
                        ar. nu. 7. taſting, and eating this agreable food of Chriſtes body. And vvhen Chriſt ſaith, I vvil raiſe him vp, he meaneth that this body vvhich he eateth, ſhal raiſe him. Our fleſh (ſaith Tertullian) eateth the body and bloud of Chriſt, that the ſoule may alſo be fatted. therfore they ſhal both haue one revvard at the Reſurrection.Li 4, c. 34. 
                     And S. Irenaeus, Hovv do they affirme that our bodies be not capable of life euerlaſting, vvhich is nouriſhed by the body and bloud of our Lord? Either let them change their opinion, or els ceaſe to offer the Euchariſt.Nyſſ. in orat. catech. magna. 
                     S. Gregorie Nyſſene alſo ſaith, That liuely body entering into our body, changeth it and maketh it like and immortal.
                  55. Meate in deede.)The B. Sacrament is the true Manna & vvater of the rocke. 
                     Manna, was not the true meate: nor the water of the rocke, the drinke in deede: for they did but driue avvay death or famine for a time and for this life. But the holy Body of Chriſt is the true food nouriſhing to life euerlaſting, and his bloud the true drinke that driueth death avvay vtterly, for they be not the body and bloud of a mere man, but of him that being ioyned to life is made life: and therfore are vve the body and members of Chriſt, becauſe by this benediction of the myſterie vve receiue the ſonne of God him ſelf. So ſaith S. Cyril li. 4 c. 16 in Io.
                  
                  
                     58. He that eateth this bread.)
                     Cō
                        
                           •
                        . Trid. Seſ. 21 c. 1. By this place the holy Councel proueth that for the grace and effect of the Sacrament,The vvhole grace and effect thereof in one kinde, and therfore the people not defrauded. which is the life of the ſoule, there is no difference whether a man receiue both kindes or one, becauſe our Sauiour vvho before attributed life to the eating and drinking of his body and bloud, doth here alſo affirme the ſame effect, vvhich is life euerlaſting, to come of eating onely vnder one forme. Therfore the Heretikes be ſeditious calumniators that would make the people beleeue, the Catholike Church and Prieſts to haue defrauded them of the grace and benefite of one of the kindes in the Sacrament.Receiuīg in one or both kindes, īdifferēt, according to the holy Churches appointment. Nay, it is they that haue defrauded the world, by taking away both the real ſubſtance of Chriſt, and the grace from one kinde and both kindes, and from al other Sacraments. The Church doth onely (by the wiſedom of Gods Spirit and by inſtruction of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, according to time and place, for Gods moſt honour, the reuerence of the Sacrament, and the peoples moſt profite thereby) diſpoſe of the maner and order, how the Prieſt,Ep. 118 c. 6 ad Ianuarium. how the people ſhal receiue, and al other particular pointes, Which him ſelf (ſaith S. Auguſtine) did not take order for,
                     Authoritie of Scriptures and the Primitiue Church for receiuing in one kinde. 
                     that he might cōmit that to the Apoſtles, by vvhom he vvas to diſpoſe his Churches affaires, though both he and the Apoſtles and the Fathers of the primitiue Church left vs example of receiuing vnder one kind,Lu. 24, 35. Chriſt * at Emmaüs, The Apoſtles Act. 2, 42. The primitiue Church in giuing the bloud onely to children, Cypr. li. de lapſis, nu. 10. in reſeruing moſt commonly the body onely, Tertul. li. 2 ad vxo. nu. 4. Cypr. li. de lapſis, nu. 10. in houſeling the ſicke therewith, Euſeb. Ec. hiſt. li. 6 c. 36. in the holy Eremites alſo that receiued and reſerued it commonly and not the bloud, in the wildernes, Baſil. ep. ad Caeſariam Patritiam. and in diuers other caſes which were to long to rehearſe.
                  Whereby the Church being warranted and in the ruling of ſuch things fully taught by Gods ſpirit,The cauſes of the Churches practiſe & ordināce cōcerning one kinde. as wel for the reprouing of certaine hereſies, that Chriſt God and man vvas not vvhole and al in euery part of the Sacrament, as ſpecially for that the Chriſtian people being novv enlarged, and the communicants often ſo many at once, that neither ſo much vvine could be conueniently conſecrated, nor vvithout manifold accidents of ſheading or abuſing be receiued (vvhereof the Proteſtants haue no regard, becauſe it is but common vvine vvhich they occupie, but the Church knovving it to be Chriſts ovvne bloud, muſt haue al dreadful regard) therfore I ſay ſhe hath decreed and for ſome hundreth yeres put in vſe,The Prieſts that ſay Maſſe, muſt receiue both kindes. that the Prieſt ſaying Maſſe, ſhould alvvaies both conſecrate and alſo receiue both kindes, becauſe he muſt expreſſe liuely the Paſſion of Chriſt, and the ſeparation of his bloud from his body in the ſame, and for to imitate the vvhole action and inſtitution as vvel in ſacrificing as receiuing,Lu. 22, 19. as to vvhom properly it vvas ſaid, Do this, for that vvas ſpoken onely to ſuch as haue povver thereby to offer and conſecrate.1 Cor. 11. But the Lay men, and the Clergie alſo vvhen they do not execute or ſay Maſſe them ſelues, ſhould receiue in one kinde, being thereby no leſſe partakers of Chriſts vvhole perſon and grace, then if they receiued both. For (as S. Paul ſaith) He that eateth the hoſtes,
                     1 Cor. 10, 18. 
                     is partaker of the altar. He that eateth, ſaith he: for though there vvere drink-offerings or libaments ioyned lightly to euery ſacrifice, yet it vvas ynough to eate onely of one kinde, for to be partaker of the vvhole.
                  
                      62. If you ſhal ſee.)]Chriſt inſinuateth that faithles mē ſhal not beleeue his preſence in the B. Sacrament, becauſe he is aſcē
                        ded. Our Sauiour ſeemeth to inſinuate, that ſuch as beleeue not his wordes touching the holy Sacrament, and thinke it impoſſible for him to giue his Body to be eaten in ſo many places at once, being yet in earth, ſhould be much more ſcandalized and tempted after they ſaw or knew him to be aſcended into heauen. Vvhich is proued true in the Capharnaites of this time. whoſe principal reaſon againſt Chriſts preſence in the Sacrament is, that he is aſcended into heauen: yea, who are ſo bold as to expound this ſame ſentence for them ſelues thus, It is not this body or fleſh which I wil giue you, for that I wil carie with me to heauen. Whereby if they meant onely that the condition and qualities of his body in heauen ſhould be other then in the Sacrament, it were tolerable: for S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh ſometime in that ſenſe. but to deny the ſubſtance of the body to be the ſame, that is wicked.
                  
                     63. The fleſh profiteth nothing.) If this ſpeach were ſpoken in the ſenſe of the Sacramentaries, it would take away Chriſts incarnation, manhod, and death, no leſſe then his corporal preſence in the Sacrament. for if his fleſh were not profitable, al theſe things were vaine. Therfore CHRIST denieth not his owne fleſh to be profitable, but that their groſſe and carnal conceiuing of his wordes, of his fleſh, and of the maner of eating the ſame, was vnprofitable. Which is plaine by the ſentence folowing, where he warneth them, that his wordes be ſpirit and life, of high Myſtical meaning,The Capharnaites groſſe vnderſtanding of Chriſts fleſh to be giuen or eaten. And, hovv his fleſh doth profit, and not profit. and not vulgarly and groſly to be taken, as they tooke them. And it is the vſe of the Scripture to call mans natural ſenſe, reaſon, and carnal reſiſting or not reaching ſupernatural truthes, fleſh or bloud. as, Fleſh and bloud reuealed not this to thee &c Mat. 16.
                  
                  This carnalitie then of theirs, ſtood in two points ſpecially: firſt, that they imagined that he would kill him ſelf, and cut & māgel his fleſh into partes, & ſo giue it them raw or roſt to be eaten among them.Auguſt. de Doct. Chr. li. 3 c. 13. Which could not be meant, ſaith S. Auguſtine: for that had conteined an heinous and barbarous facte, and therfore they might and ſhould haue bene aſſured, that he would commaund no ſuch thing: but ſome other ſweete ſenſe to be of his hard, myſtical, or figuratiue wordes, and to be fulfilled in a Sacrament, myſterie, and a maruelous diuine ſort, otherwiſe then they could comprehend, Secondly, they did erre touching his fleſh, in that they tooke it to be the fleſh of a mere man,Chriſts fleſh giueth life becauſe it is the fleſh of God & man. and of a dead man alſo, when it ſhould come to be eaten: of which kind of fleſh Chriſt here pronoūceth,Li. 4 c. 23 in Io. that it profiteth nothing, Wherevpon S. Cyriſt ſaith, This body is not of Peter or Paul or any other like, but of Chriſt IESVS who is the life it ſelf: and therfore this Body giueth life, the very fulnes of the Diuinitie dvvelling in it. And the holy Councel of Epheſus in the 11 Anathematiſme expounded alſo by the ſaid S. Cyril: The Euchariſt is not the body of any common perſon (for the fleſh of a common man could not quicken) but of the VVORD it ſelf. But the Heretike Neſtorius diſſolueth the vertue of this Myſterie,
                     Ignatius apud Theodor. dial. 3. 
                     holding mans fleſh onely to be in the Euchariſt. Thus there. And S. Ignatius cited of Theodorete, and many other Fathers haue the like. Whereby we may ſee that it commeth of the Diuinitie and Spirit (without which Chriſts fleſh can not be) that this Sacrament giueth life.
                  
                     64. That beleeue not.)
                     Iudas the cheefe of them that beleeue not the real preſence. It is lacke of faith, you ſeee here, that cauſeth men to ſpurne againſt this high truth of the Sacrament: as alſo it may be learned here, that it is the great and merciful gift of God that Catholike men do againſt their ſenſes and carnal reaſons, beleeue and ſubmit them ſelues to the humble acknowledging of this Myſterie: laſtly, that it may welverſ. 64. by Chriſts inſinuation of Iudas, be gathered, that he ſpecially ſpurned againſt our Maiſters ſpeaches of the holy Sacrament.
                  
                     66. Went backe.)
                     Heretikes beleeue nor the real preſence, becauſe they ſee bread and wine: as the Iewes beleeued not his Godhead becauſe of the ſhape of a poore man. It can be no maruel to vs now that ſo many reuolt from the Church, by offenſe or ſcandal vniuſtly taken at Chriſts body and bloud in the Sacrament: ſeeing many of his Diſciples that ſavv his vvonderful life, doctrine, and miracles, forſooke Chriſt him ſelf, vpon the ſpeach & promes of the ſame Sacramēt. for the myſterie of it is ſo ſupernatural and diuine in it ſelf, and withal ſo low & baſe for our ſakes, by the ſhew of the formes of theſe terrene elements vnder which it is, and we eate it: that the vnfaithful and infirme do ſo ſtumble at Chriſt in the Sacrament, as the Iewes and Gentils did at Chriſt in his humanitie. For, the cauſes of contradictions of the Incarnation and Tranſſubſtantion be like. And it may be verily deemed, that whoſoeuer now can not beleeue the Sacrament to be Chriſt, becauſe it is vnder the formes of bread and wine, and is eaten and drunken, would not then haue beleued that Chriſt had bene God, becauſe he was in ſhape of man, and crucified. To conclude, it was not a figure nor a myſterie of bare bread and wine,The diſciples reuoltīg at Chriſts wordes, proue that he ſpake not metaphorically, as at other 
                           •
                        imes. nor any Metaphorical or Allegorical ſpeach, that could make ſuch a troupe of his Diſciples reuolt at once. when he ſaid he was a doore, a vine, away, a Paſtor, and ſuch like (vnto which kinde of ſpeaches the proteſtants ridiculouſly reſemble the wordes of the holy Sacrament) who was ſo mad to miſtake him, or to forſake him for the ſame? For the Apoſtles at the leaſt would haue plucked them by the ſleeues, and ſaid, Goe not away my maiſters, he ſpeaketh parables. The cauſe therfore was their incredulitie, and the height of the Myſterie, for that they neither knew the meanes how it might be preſent, nor would beleeue that he was able to giue his fleſh to be eaten in many places. And euen ſuch is the vnbeleefe of the Heretikes about this matter at this day.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Peter anſvvered.)
                     As Iudas of al vnbeleeuing heretikes, ſo Peter beareth the perſon of al beleeuing Catholikes: namely in the B. Sacrament. Peter anſwereth for the Twelue, not knowing that Iudas in hart was already naught, and beleued not Chriſts former wordes touching the B. Sacrament, but was to reuolt afterward as wel as the other.Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 3. Wherein Peter beareth the perſon of the Church and al Catholike men, that for no difficulty of his word, nor for any reuolt (be it neuer ſo general) of
 Schiſmatikes, Heretikes, or Apoſtataes, either for this Sacrament or any other Article, wil euer forſake Chriſt. And when company draweth vs to reuolt, let vs ſay thus: Lord, whither or to whom ſhal we goe, when we haue forſaken thee? to Caluin, Luther, or ſuch: and forſake thee and thy Church with the vnfaithful multitude? No, thou haſt the wordes of life, and we beleeue thee,Tract. 27 in Euang. Io. and thy Church wil not nor can not beguile vs. Thou haſt (ſaith S. Auguſtine) life euerlaſting in the miniſtration of thy body and bloud, and a litle after. Thou art life euerlaſting it ſelf, and thou giueſt not in thy fleſh and bloud but that vvhich thy ſelf art.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The Iewes (of Hieruſalem) ſeeking his death, he walketh in Galilee: where he ſignifieth to his brethren, that not in this feaſt Scenopégia, but in an other (to wit, Paſche folovving) the Ievves ſhould kil him: that is, not vvhen they vvould, but vvhen he vvil. 10 In ſo much that at this feaſt he teacheth openly in the Temple, and conuerteth many. 14 both in the middle day 37 and the laſt day thereof, vvithout any hurt, though alſo the Rulers ſend to apprehend him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe things IESVS vvalkedin Galilee, into Galilee',The Goſpel vpō Tueſday in Paſſion weeke. for he vvould not vvalkein Iurie: into Ievvrie': becauſe the Ievves ſought to kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the feſtiual day of the Ievves, *
                     Scenopégia (Leu. 23 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) is the feaſt of Tabernacles, which the Iewes kept frō the 7 octob. for eight daies together, by Gods commaundement, for a memorie that their fathers dwelt by Gods protectiō fourtie yeres in tabernacles or tentes, and not in houſes, comming out of AEgypt. See Leuit. 23, 34.
                   Scenopégia, vvas at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And his brethrē ſaid to him, Paſſe from hence,Leu. 23, 34. and goe into Ievvrie: that thy Diſciples alſo may ſee thy vvorkes vvhich thou doeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For no man doeth any thing in ſecrete, and ſeeketh him ſelf to be in publike. If thou doe theſe things, manifeſt thy ſelf to the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For neither did his brethren beleeue in him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 IESVS therfore ſaith to them, My time is not yet come: but your time is alvvaies readie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 The vvorld can not hate you. but me it hateth: becauſe I giue teſtimonie of it, that the vvorkes there of are euil. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Goe you vp to this feſtiual day:I vvil not yet goe vp I goe not vp' to this feſtiual day: becauſe my time is not yet accompliſhed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 when he had ſaid theſe things, him ſelf taried in Galilee. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But after his brethren vvere gone vp, then he alſo vvent vp to the feſtiual day, not openly, but as it vvere in ſecrete. ✝ 
                     verse 11 The Ievves therfore ſought him in the feſtiual day, and ſaid, Vvhere is he? ✝ 
                     verse 12 And there vvas much murmuring in the multitude of him. For certaine ſaid, That he is good. And others ſaid, No, but he ſeduceth the multitudes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Yet no man ſpake openly of him for feare of the Ievves. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen the feſtiuitie vvas novv halfe done,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday in the 4 weeke of Lent. IESVS vvent vp into the tēple, and taught, ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the Ievves marueiled,
 ſaying, Hovv doth this man knovv letters, vvhereas he hath not learned? ✝ 
                     verse 16 IESVS anſvvered them, and ſaid, My doctrine is not mine, but his that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 17 If any man 
The vvay to come to knovv the truth, is to liue vvel. vvil doe the vvil of him, he ſhal vnderſtand of the doctrine vvhether it be of God, or I ſpeake of my ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 18 
                  It is ſpoken of Antichriſt ſpecially, and it is true in al Heretikes Auguſt. tract. 29. in Euang. Io. He that ſpeaketh of him ſelf, ſeeketh his ovvne glorie. But he that ſeeketh the glorie of him that ſent him, he is true, and iniuſtice in him there is not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Did not Moyſes giue you the lavv, and none of you doeth the lavv?Io. 5, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 20 * Vvhy ſeeke you to kil me? The multitude anſvvered, and ſaid,No maruel, vvhen theſe ſpeake thus to Chriſt him ſelf, if Heretikes call his vicar Antichriſt. Thou haſt a deuil, vvho ſeeketh to kil thee? ✝ 
                     verse 21 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to them, One vvorke I haue done: and you doe al marueil. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Therfore * Moyſes gaue you circunciſion:Leu. 12, 3. not that it is of Moyſes, but * of the fathers, and in the Sabboth you circunciſe a man.Gen. 17, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 23 If a man receiue circunciſion in the Sabboth, that the lavv of Moyſes be not broken: are you angrie at me becauſe I haue healed a man vvholy in the Sabboth? ✝ 
                     verse 24 Iudge not according to the face, but iudge iuſt iudgement.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 Certaine therfore of Hieruſalem ſaid, Is not this he vvhom they ſeeke to kil? ✝ 
                     verse 26 And behold, he ſpeaketh openly, and they ſay nothing to him. Haue the Princes knovven in deede that this is CHRIST? ✝ 
                     verse 27 But this man vve knovv vvhēce he is But vvhen CHRIST cōmeth, no man knovveth vvhence he is. ✝ 
                     verse 28 IESVS therfore cried in the temple teaching, and ſaying, Both me you doe knovv, and vvhence I am you knovv. And of my ſelf I am not come, but he is true that ſent me, vvhom you knovv not. ✝ 
                     verse 29 I knovv him, becauſe I am of him, and he ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 30 They ſought therfore to apprehend him: and no man laide handes vpon him, becauſe his houre vvas not yet come. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But of the multitude many beleeued in him, ⊢ and ſaid, CHRIST vvhen he cōmeth, ſhal he doe more ſignes then theſe vvhich this man doeth? ✝ 
                     verse 32 The Phariſees heard the multitude murmuring theſe things touching him: and thecheefe Prieſts Princes' and Phariſees ſent miniſters to apprehend him.The Goſpel vpō Mūday in Paſſion vveeke. ✝ 
                     verse 33 IESVS therfore ſaid to them, Yet a litle time I am vvith you:Io. 13, 33. and I goe to him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 34 * You ſeeke me, and ſhal not finde: and vvhere I am, you can not come. ✝ 
                     verse 35 The Ievves therfore ſaid among them ſelues, Vvhither vvil this man goe, that vve ſhal. not finde him? Vvil he goe into the diſperſion of the Gētiles, and teach the Gentiles? ✝ 
                     verse 36 Vvhat is this ſaying that he hath ſaid, You ſhal ſeeke me, and ſhal
 not finde: And vvhere I am, you can not come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 And in the laſt,Leu. 23, 36. the * great day of the feſtiuitie IESVS ſtoode, and cried, ſaying, If any man thirſt, let him come to me, and drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 38 He that beleeueth in me, as the ſcripture ſaith,Ioel. 2, 28. 
                  Out of his belly ſhal flovv riuers of liuing vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 39 (And this he ſaidAct. 2, 1. of the Spirit that they ſhould receiue vvhich beleeued in him. ⊢
                  This was fulfilled on whitſunday Act. 2, & afterward alvvaies by impoſition of hands in the Sacrament of Confirmation: viſibly in the primitiue Church, and inuiſibly to the end of the world. for as yet the Spirit vvas not giuen: becauſe IESVS vvas not yet glorified.)
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 Of that multitude therfore, vvhen they had heard theſe wordes of his, ſome ſaid, This is the Prophet in deede. ✝ 
                     verse 41 others ſaid, This is CHRIST. But certaine ſaid, Vvhy, doth CHRIST come from Galilee?Pſ. 131, 11. Mich. 5, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 42 Doth not the * ſcripture ſay, that of the ſeede of Dauid, and from Bethlehem the tovvne vvhere Dauid vvas, CHRIST doth come? ✝ 
                     verse 43 Therfore there aroſe diſſenſion in the multitude for him. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And certaine of them vvould haue apprehēded him: but no man laid handes vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 45 The miniſters therfore came to the cheefe prieſts and the Phariſees. And they ſaid to them, Vvhy haue you not brought him? ✝ 
                     verse 46 The miniſters anſvvered, Neuer did there man ſo ſpeake, as this man. ✝ 
                     verse 47 The Phariſees therfore anſvvered them, Vvhy, are you alſo ſeduced? ✝ 
                     verse 48 Hath any of the Princes beleeued in him, or of the Phariſees? ✝ 
                     verse 49 but this multitude that knovveth not the lavv, are accurſed. ✝ 
                     verse 50 Nicodemus ſaid to them,Chriſt hath ſome good alwaies euen amōg the vvicked, which ſecretly ſerue him and by vviſe delaies auert the execution of vniuſt lawes againſt him and his people, as Nicodemꝰ and Gamaliel. he * that came to him by night,Io. 3, 2. vvho vvas one of them, ✝ 
                     verse 51 Doth our lavv iudge a man, vnles it firſt heare him, and knovv vvhat he doeth? ✝ 
                     verse 52 They anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Vvhy, art thou alſo a Galilaean? Search, and ſee that from Galilee a Prophet riſeth not. ✝ 
                     verse 53 And euery man returned to his houſe.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Againe in the Temple (abſoluing an aduoutreſſe after his merciful maner, and yet vvithal declaring againſt his enemies that he is not a fauourer of ſinne, no more then Moyſes) 12 he teacheth openly, and is not for al that apprehended, telling them both of his Godhead, 21 and of their reprobation, 28 of his exaltation alſo by their Crucifying of him. 31 exhorting the beleeuers to perſeuére: 33 and ſhevving them that ſeeke his death, that they are neither free, 39 nor of Abraham, 41 nor of God, 44 but of the Diuel. 45 but that him ſelfe is of God, 52 and greater and auncienter then Abraham. 59 For the vvhich they goe about to ſtone him, but in vaine.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND IESVS vvent into the Mount-oliuet:The Goſpel vpō Saturday the 3 Weeke of Lent. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and early in the morning againe he came into the temple, and the people came to him, and ſitting he taught them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the Scribes and Phariſees bring a vvoman taken in aduoutrie: and they did ſet her in the middes, ✝ 
                     verse 4 and ſaid to him, Maiſter, this vvoman vvas euen novv taken in aduoutrie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * in the lavv Moyſes commaunded vs to ſtone ſuch.Leu. 20, 10. What ſaieſt thou therfore? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And this they ſaid tempting him: that they might accuſe him. But IESVS bovving him ſelf dovvne, vvith his finger vvrote in the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvhen they therfore continued aſking him: he lifted vp him ſelf, and ſaid to them,We can not conueniently reprehend or cōdemne other mens faults, if our ſelues be guilty of the ſame or other greater. Cyril in Io. See Annot. Mt. 7, 1.
                   He that is vvithout ſinne of you, let him firſt throvv the ſtone at her. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And againe bovving him ſelf, he vvrote in the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And they hearing, vvent out one by one, beginning at the ſeniours: and IESVS alone remained, and the vvoman ſtanding in the middes. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And IESVS lifting vp him ſelf, ſaid to her, Vvoman, vvhere are they that accuſed thee? hath no man condemned thee? ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvho ſaid, No man, Lord. And IESVS ſaid,S. Auguſtine by this example of our Maiſter proueth that Clergie men ſpecially ſhould be giuen much to mercie: and that they ought oftē, as the cauſe and time require, to get pardō of the ſecular Magiſtrates for offenders that be penitēt. Ep. 54.
                   Neither vvil I condemne thee. Goe, and novv ſinne no more. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 
                  The Goſpel vpon Saturday the 4 weeke in Lent. Againe therfore IESVS ſpake to them, ſaying, I am the light of the vvorld. he that folovveth me, vvalketh not in darkeneſſe: but ſhal haue the light of life. ✝ 
                     verse 13 The Phariſees therfore ſaid to him, Thou giueſt teſtimonie of thy ſelf: thy teſtimonie is not true. ✝ 
                     verse 14 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to them, Although I doe giue teſtimonie of my ſelf, my teſtimonie is true: becauſe I knovv vvhence I came, & vvhither I goe: but you knovv not vvhēce I come, or whither I goe. ✝ 
                     verse 15 You iudge according to the fleſh: I doe not iudge any man. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And if I doe iudge, my iudgement is true: becauſe I am not alone, but I and he that ſent me, the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And in your lavv it is vvritten,Deu. 17, 6. 19, 15. that * the teſtimonie of tvvo men is true. ✝ 
                     verse 18 I am he that giue teſtimonie of my ſelf: and he that ſent me, the Father, giueth teſtimonie of me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 They ſaid therfore to him, Vvhere is thy father? IESVS anſvvered, Neither me doe you knovv, nor my Father. If you did knovv me: perhaps you might knovv my Father alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Theſe vvordes IESVS ſpake in the Treaſurie, teaching in the temple: and no man apprehended him, becauſe his houre vvas not yet come. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 Againe therfore IESVS ſaid to them,The Goſpel vpō Munday in the 2 weeke of Lēt. I goe, and you ſhal ſeeke me, and ſhal die in your ſinne. Vvhither I goe, you can not come. ✝ 
                     verse 22 The Ievves therfore ſaid, Vvhy, vvil he kil him ſelf, becauſe he ſaith, Vvhither I goe, you can not come? ✝ 
                     verse 23 And he ſaid to them, You are from beneath, I am from aboue, you are of this vvorld, I am not of this vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Therfore I ſaid to you that you ſhal die in your ſinnes. for if you beleeue not that I am he, you ſhal die in your ſinne. ✝ 
                     verse 25 They ſaid therfore to him, Vvho art thou? IESVS ſaid to them,
So read S. Cyril, S. Ambroſe, & S. Auguſtine: expounding it of Chriſtes perſon, that he is the beginning or cauſe of al creatures. The beginning vvho alſo ſpeake to you. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Many things I haue to ſpeake and iudge of you, but he that ſent me, is true: and vvhat I haue heard of him, theſe things I ſpeake in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And they knevv not that he ſaid to them that his father vvas God. ✝ 
                     verse 28 IESVS therfore ſaid to them, Vvhen you ſhal haue exalted the ſonne of man, then you ſhal knovv that I am he, and of my ſelf I doe nothing, but as the Father hath taught me, theſe things I ſpeake: ✝ 
                     verse 29 and he that ſent me, is vvith me: and he hath not left me alone, becauſe the things that pleaſe him I doe alvvaies. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 30 Vvhen he ſpake theſe things, many beleeued in him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 IESVS therfore ſaid to them that beleeued him, the Ievves: If youOnely faith is not ſufficient without perſeuêrance or abiding in the keeping of his cō
                     maundements. abide in my vvorde, you ſhal be my diſciples in deede. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And you ſhal knovv the truth, and the truth ſhal make you free. ✝ 
                     verse 33 They anſvvered him, Vve are the ſeed of Abraham, and vve neuer ſerued any man: hovv ſaieſt thou, You ſhal be free? ✝ 
                     verse 34 IESVS anſvvered them, Amen, amen I ſay to you;Ro. 6, 16 that * euery one vvhich cōmitteth ſinne, is the ſeruant of ſinne.2 Pet. 2, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 35 and the ſeruant abideth not in the houſe for euer: the ſonne abideth for euer. ✝ 
                     verse 36 If therfore the ſonne make you free, you ſhal beMan was neuer without free wil: but hauīg the grace of Chriſt, his wil is truely made free (as S. Auguſtine ſaith) from ſeruitude of ſinne alſo. tract. 41 in Euang. Io.
                   free in deede. ✝ 
                     verse 37 I knovv that you are the children of Abraham: but you ſeeke to kil me, becauſe my vvorde taketh not in you. ✝ 
                     verse 38 I ſpeake that vvhich I haue ſeen vvith my father: and you doe the things that you haue ſeen vvith your father. ✝ 
                     verse 39 They anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Our father is Abraham. IESVS ſaith to them, If you be the children of Abraham,Not onely faith but good workes alſo make men the childrē of Abraham. according as S. Iames alſo ſpeaketh of Abrahams workes c. 2. doe the vvorkes of Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But novv, you ſeeke to kil me, a man that haue ſpoken the truth to you, vvhich I haue heard of God. this did not Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 41 You doe the vvorkes of your father. They ſaid therfore to him, Vve vvere not borne of fornication. vve haue one father, God. ✝ 
                     verse 42 IESVS therfore ſaid to them, If
 God vvere your father: verely you vvould loue me. for from God I proceded, and came: for I came not of my ſelf, but he ſent me: ✝ 
                     verse 43 Vvhy doe you not knovv my ſpeach? Becauſe you can not heare my vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 44 You are of your father the Diuel, and the deſires of your father you vvil doe. he vvas aS. Auguſtine compareth Heretikes in their ſpiritual murder by driuīg Chriſtian men out of the Church, to the Diuel that droue our parents out of Paradiſe. Cont. lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 11.
                   mankiller from the beginning, and he ſtoode not in the veritie: becauſe veritie is not in him. vvhen he ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne, becauſe he is a lyer, and the father thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 45 But becauſe I ſay the veritie, you beleeue me not. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Vvhich of you ″ ſhal argue me of ſinne? If I ſay the veritie: vvhy doe you not beleeue me? ✝ 
                     verse 47 He that is of God, heareth the vvordes of God.The Goſpel vpō PASSION Sunday. Therfore you heare not, becauſe you are not of God. ✝ 
                     verse 48 The Ievves therfore anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Doe not we ſay vvel that thou art a Samaritane, and haſt a diuil? ✝ 
                     verse 49 IESVS anſvvered,He denieth not that he is a Samaritane, becauſe he is our keeper or protector, as the word ſignifieth, and becauſe he is in deede that merciful Samaritanē in the parable of the vvounded man Luc. 10, 33. Aug. tract. 41 in Ioan.
                   I haue no deuil: but I doe honour my Father, and you haue diſhonoured me. ✝ 
                     verse 50 but I ſeeke not mine ovvne glorie. there is that ſeeketh and iudgeth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 51 Amen, amen I ſay to you, If any man keepe my vvord, he ſhal not ſee death for euer. ✝ 
                     verse 52 The Ievves therfore ſaid, Novv vve haue knovven that thou haſt a deuil. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets: and thou ſaieſt, If any man keepe my vvord, he ſhal not taſt death for euer. ✝ 
                     verse 53 Vvhy, art thou greater then our father Abraham, vvho is dead? and the Prophets are dead. Vvhom doeſt thou make thy ſelf? ✝ 
                     verse 54 IESVS anſvvered, If I doe glorifie my ſelf, my glorie is nothing. it is my father that glorifieth me, vvhom you ſay that he is your God. ✝ 
                     verse 55 And you haue not knovven him, but I knovv him. And if I ſhal ſay that I knovv him not: I ſhal be like to you, a lyer. But I doe knovv him, and doe keepe his vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 56 Abraham your father reioyced that he might ſee my day: and he ſavv, and vvas glad. ✝ 
                     verse 57 The Ievves therfore ſaid to him, Thou haſt not yet fiftie yeres, and haſt thou ſeen Abraham? ✝ 
                     verse 58 IESVS ſaid to them, Amen, amen I ſay to you, before that Abraham vvas made, I am. ✝ 
                     verse 59 They tooke ſtones therfore to caſt at him. but IESVS hid him ſelf, and vvent out of the temple. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  34. Amen, amen.]Why Amen, amen, is not tranſlated. What is it (ſaith S. Auguſtine vpon this place) vvhen our Lord ſaith, Amen, amen? He doth much cōmend and vrge the thing that he ſo vttereth, doubling it. It is a certaine othe of his, if a man may ſo ſay. for Amē
                      in Hebrue ſignifieth verum, a truth. Yet is it not tranſlated, whereas it might haue been ſaid, verum, verū
                      di
                        •
                     o vobis, but neither the
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Greeke interpreter durſt doe it, nor the Latin, the Hebrue word hath remained ſtil, that ſo it might be the more eſteemed. Tract. 41 in Ioan. By vvhich vvordes and the like
See the preface, & Annot. in Apocal. 
                              •
                           . 19, 4.
                      recorded in other places of this nevv Teſtament, the Reader may ſee great reaſon, vvhy vve alſo ſay, Amen, amen. and durſt not tranſlate it and ſuch like vvordes into our Engliſh tongue.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  To ſhow that by his Baptiſme (being the Sacrament of illumination or faith) he vvil take avvay the blindnes of the vvorld, he giueth vvith ſtrange ceremonies ſight to one borne blinde. 8 By vvhich vvonderful miracle (the atteſtation of the partie him ſelf and of his parents concurring) firſt the neighbours, then alſo the Phariſees them ſelues are plainely confounded. Yet ſo obſtinate they are, that becauſe it was the Sabboth vvhen he vvrought it. they inferre that he is not of God: yea and throvv out of their Synagogue the partie for confeſsing him. 35 But our Lord receiueth him: 39 and foretelleth by this occaſion, the excecation of the Ievve
                        •
                      (becauſe of their vvilful obſtinacie) and illumination of the Gentils vvho confeſſe their ovvne blindnes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND IESVS paſſing by,The Goſpel vpō weneſday in the 4 weeke of Le
                        •
                     t. ſavv a man blinde from his natiuitie: ✝ 
                     verse 2 and his diſciples aſked him, Rabbi, vvho hath ſinned, this man, or his parents, that he ſhould be borne blinde? ✝ 
                     verse 3 IESVS anſvvered,Though many infirmities fall for ſinne, yet not al, ſome cōming for probation, and ſome ſent that God by the cure thereof may be glorified. Neither hath this man ſinned, nor his parents: but that the vvorkes of God may be manifeſted in him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 I muſt vvorke the vvorkes of him that ſent me, vvhiles it is day. The night commeth,The time of working, and meriting, i
                        •
                      in this life: after death we can deſerue no more by our deedes, but muſt onely receiue good or il, according to the difference of workes here. vvhen no man can vvorke. ✝ 
                     verse 5 As long as I am in the vvorld, I am the light of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, he ſpit on the ground, and ″ made clay of the ſpettle, and ſpred the clay vpō his eies, ✝ 
                     verse 7 and ſaid to him, Goe,This was a figure of Baptiſme, to which al men borne in ſinne and blindnes are ſent for health & ſight. Ambr. li. 
                           •
                         c. 2 de Sacramentis.
                   vvaſh in the poole of Siloé, vvhich is interpreted, Sent. He vvent therfore, and vvaſhed: and he came ſeeing.
               ✝ 
                     verse 8 Therfore the neighbours, and they vvhich had ſeen him before, that he vvas a begger, ſaid, Is not this he that ſate, and begged? 
                     verse 9 Others ſaid, That this is he. ✝ But others, No, not ſo, but he is like him. But he ſaid, That I am he. ✝ 
                     verse 10 They ſaid therfore to him, Hovv vvere thine eies opened? ✝ 
                     verse 11 He anſvvered, That man that is called IESVS, made clay: and anointed mine eies, and ſaid to me, Goe to the poole of Siloé, and waſh. And I vvent, and vvaſhed, and ſavv. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they ſaid to him, Vvhere is he? He ſaith, I knovv not. ✝ 
                     verse 13 They bring him that had been blinde, to the Phariſees. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And it vvas the Sabboth vvhen IESVS made the clay, and opened his eies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Againe therfore the Phariſees aſked him, hovv he ſavv. But he ſaid to them, He put clay vpō mine eies, & I vvaſhed: and I ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Certaine therfore of the Phariſees ſaid, This man is not of God, that keepeth not the Sabboth. But others ſaid, Hovv can a man that is a ſinner doe theſe ſignes? And there
 vvas a ſchiſme among them. ✝ 
                     verse 17 They ſay therfore to the blinde againe, Thou, vvhat ſaieſt thou of him that opened thine eies? And he ſaid, That he is a Prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 18 The levves therfore did not beleeue of him, that he had been blinde and ſavv: vntil they called the parents of him that ſavv, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and aſked them, ſaying, Is this your ſonne, vvhom you ſay that he vvas borne blinde? hovv then doeth he novv ſee? ✝ 
                     verse 20 His parents anſvvered them, and ſaid, Vve knovv that this is our ſonne, and that he vvas borne blinde: ✝ 
                     verse 21 but hovv he novv ſeeth, vve knovv not, or vvho hath opened his eies, vve knovv not, aſke him ſelf: he is of age, let him ſelf ſpeake of him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Theſe things his parents ſaid, becauſe they feared the levves. for the Ievves had novv conſpired, that if any mā ſhould cōfeſſe him to be CHRIST, he ſhould be ″ put out of the Synagogue. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Therfore did his parents ſay, That he is of age, aſke him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 24 They therfore againe called the man that had been blinde, and ſaid to him,So ſay the Heretikes whē they derogat frō miracles done by Saincts or their Relikes, phariſaically pretending the glorie of God. As though it were not Gods glorie, whē his Saincts do it by his power and vertue: yea his greater glorie, that doeth ſuch things by his ſeruants, & by the meaneſt things belonging to them, as Peters ſhadow Act. 5. & Paules napkin Act. 9.
                   Giue glorie to God. vve knovv that this man is a ſinner. ✝ 
                     verse 25 He therfore ſaid to them, Whether he be a ſinner, I know not: one thing I know, that vvhereas I vvas blinde, novv I ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 26 They ſaid therfore to him, Vvhat did he to thee? hovv did he open thine eies? ✝ 
                     verse 27 He anſvvered them, I haue novv told you, and you haue heard: vvhy vvil you heare it againe? vvil you alſo become his diſciples? ✝ 
                     verse 28 They reuiled him therfore, & ſaid, Be thou his diſciple: but we are the diſciples of Moyſes. ✝ 
                     verse 29 We know that to Moyſes God did ſpeake: but this man vve knovv not vvhence he is. ✝ 
                     verse 30 The man anſvvered and ſaid to them, For in this it is marueilous that you knovv not vvhence he is, and he hath opened mine eies. ✝ 
                     verse 31 and vve knovv that ſinners God doth not heare. but if a man be a ſeruer of God, and doe the vvil of him, him he heareth. ✝ 
                     verse 32 From the beginning of the vvorld it hath not been heard that any man hath opened the eies of one borne blinde. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Vnles this man vvere of God, he could not doe any thing. ✝ 
                     verse 34 They anſvvered, and ſaid to him, Thou vvaſt vvholy borne in ſinnes, and doeſt thou teach vs? And they did caſt him forth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 IESVS heard that they caſt him forth: and vvhen he had found him, he ſaid to him, Doeſt thou beleeue in the ſonne of God? ✝ 
                     verse 36 He anſvvered, and ſaid, Vvho is he Lord, that I may beleeue in him? ✝ 
                     verse 37 And IESVS ſaid to him, Both thou haſt ſeen him: and he that talketh vvith thee, he it is. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But he 
 ſaid, I beleeue Lord. And falling dovvne he adored him. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 39 And IESVS ſaid to him, For iudgement came I into this vvorld:By this we ſee that this miracle was not onely maruelous and beneficial to the blinde, but alſo ſignificatiue of taking away ſpiritual blindneſſe. that they that ſee not, may ſee: and they that ſee, may become blinde. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And certaine of the Phariſees that vvere vvith him, heard: and they ſaid to him, Vvhy, are vve alſo blinde? ✝ 
                     verse 41 IESVS ſaid to them, If you vvere blinde, you ſhould not haue ſinne. but novv you ſay, That vve ſee. Your ſinne remaineth.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     6. Made clay.]
                     External ceremonies. Chriſt that could haue cured this man by his onely wil or word, yet vſed certaine creatures as his inſtruments in working, and diuers circumſtances and ceremonies, clay, water, anoynting, waſhing, &c. No maruel then that he and his Church vſe ſuch diuerſities of Sacraments and ceremonies external in curing our ſoules.
                  
                     22. Put out of the Synagogue.)
                     Heretical trāſlation. The Heretikes vntruely tranſlate here (& v. 35.) Excommunicate: to make the ſimple conceaue the Churches Excōmunication to be no other, or no better, or no more rightly vſed againſt them, then this caſting our of the Synagogue of ſuch as confeſſſed our Sauiour. They might as wel haue tranſlated for Synagogue,Caſting out of the Synagogue. Church: for the Old Teſtament, the new: for Law, grace: for fleſh, ſpirit: for Moyſes, Chriſt. For no leſſe difference is there betwene, caſting out of the Synagogue, and, Excommunication. Beſides that, not euery one which was not of the Iewes Synagogue, was therfore out of the communion of the Faithful, many true beleeuers being in other partes of the world not ſubiect to the Iewes Synagogue,The Churches Excōmunicatiō. Law, nor Sacraments. And therfore it was not al one to be out of the Synagogue, and to be excommunicated, as now, whoſoeuer is out of the Churches communion,
                        See in the Annot. Mat. 18, 17. either by his owne wil, or for his iuſt deſerts thruſt out of it by the ſpiritual Magiſtrate, he is quite abandoned out of al the ſocietie of Saincts in heauen and earth, ſo long as he ſo continueth.
                  As for the cauſe of thruſting this poore man and ſuch other out of the Synagogue, and excommunicating Heretikes, there is as great oddes as betwixt heauen and hel: he being vſed ſo for folowing Chriſt and his Church, theſe for forſaking Chriſt and his Church. Some more agreement there is betwene that corrupt ſentence of the Iewes againſt the folowers of Chriſt, and the pretended excommunication executed againſt Catholike men by our Heretikes. although in truth there is no great reſemblance. For, the Iewes though they abuſed their power ſometimes, yet had they authoritie in deed by Gods law ſo to puniſh contemners of their Law,The Heretikes ridiculous Excommunicatiō. & therfore it was feared and reſpected euen of good men. But the excommunication vſed by heretikes againſt Catholikes or any offenders, is not to be reſpected at al, being no more but a ridiculous vſurpation of the Churches right and faſhion of the ſame. for, out of their Synagogues al faithful men ought to flee, and not tarie to be thruſt out: according to the warning giuen againſt Coré and Dathan. Be ye ſeparated from their tabernacles,
                     Num. 16. 
                     leſt you be vvrapped in their ſinnes.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He continueth his talke to the Phariſees, ſhevving that they and al other that wil not enter in by him, are wolues: and that they which heare them, are not the true ſheepe. 11 But that him ſelf is the good Paſtor, and therfore to ſaue the ſheepe from theſe wolues, he wil yeld his life, which othervviſe no might of theirs could take from him: foretelling alſo his Reſurrection, and vocation of the Gentils. 22 Againe an other time, he telleth theſe Iewes openly, that they are not of his ſheepe, and that no might of theirs ſhal take from him his true ſheepe, becauſe he is God, euen as his Father is God. 31 Which by his miracles and by Scripture he ſheweth to be no blaſphemie: and they in vaine ſeeking to ſtone and to apprehend him, 40 he goeth out to the place where Iohn Baptiſt had giuen open witnes of him.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AMEN,The Goſpel vpō Tueſday in whitſon weeke. amen I ſay to you, he that entreth not by the doore into the folde of the ſheepe, but climeth vp an other vvay: he isThe theefe, is the Heretike ſpecially, & any other that vnlawfully breake in vpō the ſheepe to kil & deſtroy them by falſe doctrine and otherwiſe. a theefe and a robber. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But he that entreth by the doore, is the Paſtor of the ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 3 To this mā the porter openeth: & the ſheepe heare his voice: and he calleth his ovvne ſheepe by name, and leadeth them forth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen he hath let forth his ovvne ſheepe, heThat is the faſhion of Iewrie & other countries, ſignifying that the ſhepheard or Paſtor muſt teach the ſheepe, and not they him. goeth before them: and the ſheepe folovv him, becauſe they knovv his voice. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But a ſtranger they folovv not, but flee from him: becauſe they knovv not the voice of ſtrangers. ✝ 
                     verse 6 This prouerbe IESVS ſaid to them. But they knevv not vvhat he ſpake to them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 IESVS therfore ſaid to them againe, Amen, amen I ſay to you, that I am the doore of the ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And hovv many ſoeuer haue come, are theeues and robbers: but the ſheepe heard them not. ✝ 
                     verse 9 I am the doore. By me if any enter, he ſhal be ſaued: and he ſhal goe in and ſhal goe out, and ſhal finde paſtures. ✝ 
                     verse 10 The theefe commeth not but to ſteale and kil and deſtroy. I came that they may haue life, and may haue more aboundantly.The Goſpel vpō the 2 Sunday after Eaſter, and for S. Thomas of Canterburie, Decemb. 29.
                   
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 11 I am the good Paſtor.Eſa. 40, 11. Ezec. 34, 23. * The ″ good Paſtor giueth his life for his ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But the hireling and he that is not the Paſtor, vvhoſe ovvne the ſheepe are not, ſeeth the vvoulfe comming, and leaueth the ſheepe, and fleeth: and the vvoulfe reueneth, and diſperſeth the ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the hireling ″ fleeth becauſe he is a hireling: and he hath no care of the ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 I am the good Paſtor: and I knovv mine, and mine knovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 15 As the Father knovveth me, and I knovv the Father: andChriſtes death was ſo neceſſarie for the flocke, that when he might haue eſcaped, he voluntarily offered him ſelf to death for his flocke. I yeld my life for my ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And 
He meaneth the Church of the Gentils. other ſheepe I haue that are not of this folde: them alſo I muſt bring, and they ſhal heare my voice, and there ſhal be made * one folde and one Paſtor.Ezec. 37, 24. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 17 Therfore the Father loueth me: becauſe I yeld my life, that I may take it againe. ✝ 
                     verse 18 No man taketh it avvay from me:Eſa. 53, 7. but * I yeld it of my ſelf. and I haue povver to yeld it: and I haue povver to take it againe. This commaundement I receiued of my father.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 A diſſenſion roſe againe among the Ievves for theſe vvordes. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And many of them ſaid, He hath a deuil and is mad: vvhy heare you him? ✝ 
                     verse 21 Others ſaid, Theſe are not the vvordes of one that hath a deuil. can a deuil open the eies
 of blinde men?
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 * And ″ the Dedication vvas in Hieruſalem:1 Mach. 4, 56. 59▪
                   and it vvas vvinter.The Goſpel vpō Weneſday in Paſſion weeke. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And IESVS vvalked in the temple, in Salomons porche. ✝ 
                     verse 24 The Ievves therfore compaſſed him round about, and ſaid to him, Hovv long doeſt thou hold our ſoule in ſuſpēſe? if thou be CHRIST, tel vs openly. ✝ 
                     verse 25 IESVS anſwered them, I ſpeake to you: and you beleeue not▪ the vvorkes that I doe in the name of my Father, they giue teſtimonie of me. ✝ 
                     verse 26 but you doe not beleeue, becauſe you are not of my ſheepe. ✝ 
                     verse 27 My ſheepe heare my voice: and I knovv them, and they folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And I giue them life euerlaſting: and they ſhal not periſh for euer, and no man ſhal plucke them out of my hand.
                     An other reading is, My father that hath giuen me, &c. ✝ 
                     verse 29 My father, ″ that vvhich he hath giuen me, is greater then al: and no man can plucke them out of the hand of my father. ✝ 
                     verse 30 I and the Father arevnum. one.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 The Ievves tooke vp ſtones, to ſtone him. ✝ 
                     verse 32 IESVS anſvvered them, Many good vvorkes I haue ſhevved you from my father, for vvhich of thoſe vvorkes doe you ſtone me? ✝ 
                     verse 33 The Ievves anſvvered him, For a good vvorke vve ſtone the not, but for blaſphemie, and becauſe thou being a man, makeſt thy ſelf God. ✝ 
                     verse 34 IESVS anſvvered them, Is it not vvritten in your lavv,Pſ. 81, 6. that I ſaid, you are goddes? ✝ 
                     verse 35 If he called them goddes, to vvhom the vvord of God vvas made, and the ſcripture can not be broken: ✝ 
                     verse 36 vvhom the Father hath ſanctified and ſent into the vvorld, ſay you, That thou blaſphemeſt, becauſe I ſaid I am the ſonne of God? ✝ 
                     verse 37 If I doe not the vvorkes of my father, beleeue me not. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But if I doe, and if you vvil not beleeue me, beleeue the vvorkes: that you may knovv and beleeue that the Father is in me, and I in the Father. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 39 They ſought therfore to apprehend him: and he vvent forth out of their handes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 40 and he vvent againe beyond Iordan into that place vvhere Iohn vvas baptizing firſt: and he taried there. ✝ 
                     verse 41 and many came to him▪ and they ſaid, That Iohn in deede did no ſigne. But al things vvhatſoeuer Iohn ſaid of this man, vvere true. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And many beleeued in him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                      
                     1. Climeth an other vvay.) whoſoeuer taketh vpon him to preach without lawful ſending, to miniſter Sacraments, and is not Canonically ordered of a true Catholike Biſhop, to be a Curate of ſoules, Perſon, Biſhop, or what other ſpiritual Paſtor ſo euer, and commeth not in by lawful election and holy Churches ordinance to that dignity,Arch-heretikes ſpecially, are the theeues that clime in an other way, not by the doore. but breaketh in againſt order by force or fauour of men, and by humane lawes, he is a theefe and a murderer. So came in Arius, Caluin, Luther, and al Heretikes: and al that ſuceede them in roome and doctrine. And generally euery one that deſcendeth not by Lawful ſucceſſion in the knowen ordinarie line of Catholike Biſhops and Paſtors that haue been in al Countries ſince their conuerſion. And according to this rule S. 
                           〈◊〉
                         li. 
                           •
                         c. 3▪
                      uſeth the true ſhepheards from the theeues and Heretikes. So doe Tertul. de Praeſer. nu. 11. S. Cypr. de vnit. 
                           〈◊〉
                        , nu. 1. S. Auguſt. ep. 165. & cont. ep. Manich. c. 4. and Lirinenſit.
                  
                  
                     11. Good Paſtor.) The good Paſtor, is he whoſe ſpecial care is not of his owne aduantage, but of the ſafty of the flocke. The hireling, is he that reſpecteth not the profite and good of the flocke, but his owne lucre. The Woul
                        •
                      is the Heretike, or any perſecutor of the Church, which is Chriſts flocke.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Fleeth.)
                     Whē the Paſtor muſt tarie, or may flee. Euery Biſhop and Paſtor is bound to abide with his flocke in times of danger and perſecution euen to death, except him ſelf be perſonally ſought for, rather then the flocke, or the flocke it ſelf forſake him▪ for in ſuch caſes the Paſtor may flee, as the Apoſtles did, and S. Athanaſius, and others. S. Athan. Apol. de ſua fu
                           ••
                        . Auguſt. ep. 1
                           •
                        0.
                  
                  
                     21. The dedication.)
                     Iudas Machabaeus. This is the feaſt of Dedication inſtituted by Iudas Machabaeus li. 1 Mach. c. 4. Chriſt vouchſafed to honouran keepe that feaſt inſtituted by him: & our Heretikes vouchſafe not to pray and ſacrifice for the dead,Dedication of Churches.
                     2 Macha. 12. vſed and approued by him. The Dedication alſo of Chriſtian Churches is warranted thereby, with the annual memories thereof. And it proueth that ſuch things may be inſtituted without any expreſſe commaundement in Scripture.
                  
                     2
                           •
                        . That vvhich he gaue me.)
                     Chriſts eſſence & diuine nature of the Father. Thus read alſo diuers of the Fathers, namely S. Hilar. Trin. li. 7 poſt medium. S. Ambr. de Sp. S. li. 3. c. 18. S. Auguſt. in Io. tract. 4
                           •
                        . S. Cyril. li. 7 in Io c. 10. and vſe it to proue that Chriſt had his eſſence and nature of the Father. And therfore ſome Heretikes of our time wickedly accuſe the Councel of Laterane for falſifying this place and applying it to the ſame purpoſe.Caluins autotheiſme. Which they leſſe can abide, for that it is againſt Caluins Autotheiſme, holding that Chriſt tooke his perſon of the Father, but not his ſubſtance. See the 2 Annot. in 1 Io. v. 1.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  He cōmeth once againe into Ievvrie boldly (the time that he vvould be killed of them, being not yet come) and raiſeth Lazarus foure daies buried. 47. At vvhich miracle the blind malice of the rulers ſo increaſeth, that in Councel they conclude to make him avvay. hovvbeit the high Prieſt prophecieth vnavvares, of the ſaluation of the vvorld by his death. 
                        •
                     4 He therevpon goeth againe out of the vvay.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvas a certaine ſicke man,The Goſpel vpō Friday in the 4 weeke of Lent. Lazarus of Bethánia,Lu. 7, 37▪
                   of the tovvne of Marie and Martha her ſiſter.Mat, 26, 7. Mar. 14, 3. Io. 12, 3. ( ✝ 
                     verse 2 And Marie vvas ſhe * that anointed our Lord vvith ointemēt, and vviped his feete vvith her heare: vvhoſe brother Lazarus vvas ſicke.) ✝ 
                     verse 3 His ſiſters therfore ſent to him ſaying, Lord, behold, he vvhom thou loueſt, is ſicke. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And IESVS hearing, ſaid to them, This ſickneſſe is not to death, but for the glorie of God: that the ſonne of God may be glorified by it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And IESVS loued Martha, and her ſiſter Marie, and Lazarus. ✝ 
                     verse 6 As he heard therfore that he vvas ſicke, then he taried in the ſame place tvvo daies: ✝ 
                     verse 7 then after this he ſaith to his Diſciples, Let vs goe into Ievvrie againe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 The Diſciples ſay to him, Rabbi, novv the Ievves ſought to ſtone thee: and
 goeſt thou thither againe? ✝ 
                     verse 9 IESVS anſvvered, Are there not tvvelue houres of the day? If a man vvalke in the day, he ſtumbleth not: becauſe he ſeeth the light of this vvorld: ✝ 
                     verse 10 but if he walke in the night, he ſtumbleth, becauſe the light is not in him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Theſe things he ſaid: and after this he ſaith to them, Lazarus our frende ſleepeth: but I goe that I may raiſe him from ſleepe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 His Diſciples therfore ſaid, Lord, if he ſleepe, he ſhal be ſafe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 but IESVS ſpake of his death: & they though that he ſpakede dormitione ſomni. of the ſleeping of ſleepe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Then therfore IESVS ſaid to them plainely, Lazarus is dead: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and I am glad for your ſake, that you may beleeue, becauſe I vvas not there. but let vs goe to him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Thomas therfore, vvho is called Didymus, ſaid to his condiſciples, Let vs alſo goe, to die vvith him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 IESVS therfore came, and found him novv hauing been foure daies in the graue. ( ✝ 
                     verse 18 and Bethánia vvas nigh to Hieruſalem about fiftene furlonges.) ✝ 
                     verse 19 And many of the Ievves vvere come to Martha and Marie, to comfort them concerning theire brother. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Martha therfore vvhen ſhe heard that IESVS vvas come, vvent to meete him: but Marie ſat at home.The Goſpel in a Maſſe for the dead vpon the day of the burial or depoſition. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Martha therfore ſaid to IESVS, Lord if thou hadſt been here, my brother had not died. ✝ 
                     verse 22 but novv alſo I knovv that vvhat things ſoeuer thou ſhalt aſke of God, God vvil giue thee. ✝ 
                     verse 23 IESVS ſaith to her, Thy brother ſhal riſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Martha ſaith to him, I knovv that he ſhal riſe againe in the reſurrection, in the laſt day. ✝ 
                     verse 25 IESVS ſaid to her, I am the reſurrection and the life: he that beleeueth in me, although he be dead, ſhal liue. ✝ 
                     verse 26 and euery one that liueth, and beleeueth in me, ſhal not die for euer, Beleeueſt thou this? ✝ 
                     verse 27 She ſaith to him, Yea Lord, I haue beleeued that thou art CHRIST the ſonne of God that art come into this vvorld. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vvhen ſhe had ſaid theſe things, ſhe vvent, and called Marie her ſiſter ſecretely, ſaying, The maiſter is come, & calleth thee. ✝ 
                     verse 29 She, vvhē ſhe heard, riſeth quickely, & commeth to him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 For IESVS was not yet come into the towne: but he vvas yet in that place vvhere Martha had mette him. ✝ 
                     verse 31 The Ievves therfore that vvere vvith her in the houſe and did comfort her, vvhen they ſavv Marie that ſhe roſe quickly and vvent forth, folovved her, ſaying, That ſhe goeth to the graue, to vveepe there. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Marie therfore vvhen
 ſhe vvas come vvhere IESVS vvas, ſeeing him, fel at his feete, and ſaith to him, Lord, if thou hadſt been here, my brother had not died. ✝ 
                     verse 33 IESVS therfore vvhen he ſavv her vveeping, and the Ievves that vvere come vvith her, vveeping, he groned in ſpirit, and troubled him ſelf, ✝ 
                     verse 34 and ſaid, Vvhere haue you laid him? They ſay to him, Lord, come and ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And IESVS vvept. ✝ 
                     verse 36 The Ievves therfore ſaid, Behold hovv he loued him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 But certaine of them ſaid, Could not he that 
* opened the eies of the blinde man,Io. 9, 6. make that this man ſhould not die? ✝ 
                     verse 38 IESVS therfore againe groning in him ſelf, commeth to the graue. and it vvas a caue: and a ſtone vvas laid ouer it. ✝ 
                     verse 39 IESVS ſaith, Take avvay the ſtone. Martha the ſiſter of him that vvas dead, ſaith to him, Lord, novv he ſtinketh, for he is novv of foure daies. ✝ 
                     verse 40 IESVS ſaith to her, Did not I ſay to thee, that if thou beleeue, thou ſhalt ſee the glorie of God? ✝ 
                     verse 41 They tooke therfore the ſtone avvay. And IESVS lifting his eies vpvvard, ſaid, Father, I giue thee thankes that thou haſt heard me. ✝ 
                     verse 42 and I did knovv that thou doeſt alvvaies heare me, but for the people that ſtandeth about, haue I ſaid it, that they may beleeue that thou haſt ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 43 Vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, he cried vvith a loude voice, Lazarus, come forth. ✝ 
                     verse 44 And forthvvith he came forth that had been dead, bound feete and handes vvith vvinding bandes, and his face vvas tied vvith a napkin. IESVS ſaid to them,S. Cyril li. 76. vlt. in Io. and S. Auguſt. Tract. 49 in Io. apply this to the Apoſtles and Prieſts authoritie of abſoluing ſinners: affirming Chriſt to reuiue none frō ſinne, but in the Church and by the Prieſts miniſterie. Looſe him, and let him goe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 45 Many therfore of the Ievves that vvere come to Marie and Martha, and had ſeen the things that IESVS did, beleeued in him. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 46 And certaine of them vvent to the Phariſees, and told them the things that IESVS did.The Goſpel vpō friday in Paſſion vveeke. ✝ 
                     verse 47 The cheefe prieſts therfore and the phariſees gathered a councel, and ſaid, Vvhat doe vve, for this man doeth many ſignes. ✝ 
                     verse 48 If vve let him alone ſo, al vvil beleeue in him: and the Romanes vvil come, andAll men, but ſpecially Natiōs muſt take hee-de, that vvhiles to ſaue their temporal ſtate, they forſake God: they loſe not both as the Iewes did. Aug. tract. 49 in Io.
                   take avvay our place and nation. ✝ 
                     verse 49 But one of them named Caiphas, being the high prieſt of that yere, ſaid to them, You knovv nothing, ✝ 
                     verse 50 neither doe you cōſider that it is expedient for vs that one man die for the people, and the vvhole natiō periſh not. ✝ 
                     verse 51 And this he ſaid not of him ſelf: but ″ being the high prieſt of that yere, he prophecied that IESVS ſhould die for the nation: ✝ 
                     verse 52 and not only for the nation, but to gather into one the children of God that vvere diſperſed. ✝ 
                     verse 53 From that day therfore they deuiſed to kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 54 IESVS 
 therfore vvalked no more openly among the Ievves, but he vvent into the countrie beſide the deſert vnto a citie that is called Ephrem, and there he abode vvith his Diſciples. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 55 And the Paſche of the Ievves vvas at hand: and many of the countrie vvent vp to Hieruſalem before the Paſche to ſanctifie them ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 56 They ſought IESVS therfore: and they communed one vvith an other, ſtanding in the temple, Vvhat thinke you, in that he is not come to the feſtiual day? And the cheefe Prieſts & Phariſees had giuen cōmaundemēt, that if any man ſhould knovv vvhere he vvas, he ſhould tel, that they might apprehend him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     31. Being the high Prieſt.]
                     The priuilege of the office & order; though in a wicked perſon. Maruel not that Chriſt preſerueth his truth in the Church as wel by the vnworthy as the worthy Prelates thereof: the giftes of the Holy Ghoſt folowing their Order and office, as we ſee here in Caiphas, and not their merites or perſon. And if this man being many waies wicked, and in part an vſurper, and the Law and Prieſthod being to decline and to giue place to Chriſts new ordinance, had yet ſome aſſiſtance of God for vtterance of truth which him ſelf meant not, nor knew not: how much more may we be aſſured, that Chriſt wil not leaue Peters Seate,Lu. 22, 23. * whoſe faith he promiſed ſhould neuer falle, though the perſons which occupie the ſame, were as il as the blaſphemous and malitious mouthes of Heretikes do affirme?
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The Rulers dealing as if he hid him ſelf, 1 he cōmeth to Bethania, 
                        •
                      Where by occaſion of Iudas the theefe murmuring at Marie Magdalens coſtly deuotion,The 4 part. THE 4 Paſche, & holy weeke of his Paſſion in Hieruſalem. he foretelleth his death. 12 From thence, though they did novv intend to kil Lazarus alſo, he rideth openly into Hieruſalem, the people (becauſe he had raiſed Lazarus) confeſsing with their acclamations that he is Chriſt. 20 Where certaine Gentils deſiring to ſee him, 22 he foretelleth the conuerſion of the vvhole vvorld from the Diuel to him, to be novv inſtant, as the effect of his death vpon the Croſſe. 28 The Father alſo anſvvering from heauen to his prayer made to that purpoſe, 37 yet after al this, the Ievves continevv incredulous as Eſay prophecied of them: 42 though many beleeued, but vvere aſhamed to confeſſe him. 44 Wherevpon he ſhevveth that it is glorious before God, and ſaluation to them ſelues, to beleeue in him, and confeſſe him: and damnable, to deſpiſe him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IESVS therfore ſixe daies before the Paſche came to Bethánia,Mt. 26, 6. Mar. 14, 3. vvhere Lazarus vvas,The Goſpel vp
                        •
                     
                     ̄ Munday in Holy weeke. that had been dead,PALME SVNDAY eue. vvhom IESVS raiſed. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And they made him a ſupper there: and Martha miniſtred, but Lazarus vvas one of them that ſate at the table vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  Of this womans extraordinarie offices of deuotion, & how acceptable they were to Chriſt, ſee the Annot. Mt. 26.
                   Marie therfore tooke a povvnd of ointement of right ſpikenard, pretious, and
 anointed the feete of IESVS, and vviped his feete vvith her heare: and the houſe vvas filled of the odour of the ointmēt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 One therfore of his diſciples, Iudas Iſcariote, he that vvas to betray him, ſaid, ✝ 
                     verse 5 ″ Vvhy vvas not this ointment ſold for three-hundred pence, and giuen to the poore? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he ſaid this, not becauſe he cared for the poore: but becauſe he vvas ″ a theefe, and hauing the purſe, caried the things that vvere put in. ✝ 
                     verse 7 IESVS therfore ſaid, Let her alone that ſhe may keepe it for the day of myThe deuout offices of balming and anointing the dead bodies of the faithful are here alſo allowed. burial. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the poore you haue alvvaies vvith you: butNot in viſible and mortal cō
                     dition, to receiue almes of you or ſuch like offices for ſupply of my neceſſities. me you ſhal not haue alvvaies. ✝ 
                     verse 9 A great multitude therfore of the Ievves knevv that he vvas there: and they came, not for IESVS only, but that they might ſee Lazarus, vvhom he raiſed from the dead. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 But the cheefe Prieſts deuiſed for to kil Lazarus alſo: ✝ 
                     verse 11 becauſe many for him of the Ievves vvent avvay,The Goſpel vpō Saturday in Paſſion weeke. and beleeued in IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And on the morovv a great multitude that vvas come to the feſtiual day,PALME SVNDAY. vvhen they had heard that IESVS commeth to Hieruſalem: ✝ 
                     verse 13 they tooke theMt. 21, 7. Mr. 11, 7. Lu. 19, 35. boughes of palmes, and vvent forth to meete him, and cried,Pſ. 117, 26. 
                  Hoſanna, bleſſed is he that commeth in the name of our Lord, the king of Iſrael. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And IESVS foūd a yong aſſe,Zach. 9, 9. and ſate vpon it, as it is vvritten, ✝ 
                     verse 15 
                  Feare not daughter of Sion: behold, thy king commeth ſitting vpon an aſſes colt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Theſe things his diſciples did not knovv at the firſt: but vvhen IESVS vvas glorified, then they remembred that theſe things had been vvritten of him, and theſe things they did to him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 The multitude therfore gaue teſtimonie, vvhich vvas vvith him vvhē he called Lazarus out of the graue, and raiſed him from the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For therfore alſo the multitude came to meete him, becauſe they heard that he had done this ſigne. ✝ 
                     verse 19 The Phariſees therfore ſaid among them ſelues, Doe you ſee that vve preuaile nothing? behold, the vvhole vvorld is gone after him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And there vvere certaine Gentiles of them thatWe may ſee there is a great differēce where a man pray or adore, at home or ī the Church & holy places: when the Gentils alſo came of deuotion a pilgrimage to the Temple in Hieruſalem. came vp to adore in the feſtiual day. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Theſe therfore came to Philippe vvho vvas of Bethſaida of Galilee, and deſired him, ſaying, Sir, vve are deſirous to ſee IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Philippe commeth, and telleth Andrevv. Againe Andrevv & Philippe told IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But IESVS anſvvered them, ſaying, The houre is come, that the Sonne of man ſhal be glorified. ✝ 
                     verse 24 
                  The Goſpel for S. Ignatius Febr. 1. And for a martyr that is no Biſhop, as namely S. Laurence Aug. 10.
                   Amen, amen I ſay to you, vnles the graine of vvheate falling into the ground,
 die: it ſelf remaineth alone. but if it die, it bringeth much fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 25 He that loueth his life, ſhal loſe it: and he that hateth his life in this vvorld, doth keepe it to life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 26 If any man miniſter to me, let him folovv me: and vvhere I am, there alſo ſhal my miniſter be. If any man miniſter to me, my father vvil honour him. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 27 Novv my ſoule is troubled. And vvhat ſhal I ſay? Father, ſaue me from this houre. But therfore came I into this houre. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Father, glorifie thy name. A voice therfore came from heauen, Both I haue glorified it, and againe I vvil glorifie it. ✝ 
                     verse 29 The multitude therfore that ſtoode and had heard, ſaid that it thundered. Others ſaid, An Angel ſpake to him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid This voice came not for me,The Goſpel vpō Holy roode day Septemb. 14. in latin. Exaltatio S. Cruci
                           •
                        .
                   but for your ſake. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Novv is the iudgemēt of the vvorld: novv the Prince of this vvorld ſhal caſt forth.Io. 3, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And I, * if I be exalted from the earth, vvil dravv al things to my ſelf. ( ✝ 
                     verse 33 and this he ſaid, ſignifying vvhat death he ſhould die.) ✝ 
                     verse 34 The multitude anſvvered him, Vve haue heard out of the lavv, that CHRIST abideth for euer: and hovv ſaieſt thou, The Sonne of man muſt be exalted? Vvho is this Sonne of man? ✝ 
                     verse 35 IESVS therfore ſaid to them, Yet a little vvhile, the light is among you. Vvalke vvhiles you haue the light, that the darkeneſſe ouertake you not. And he that vvalketh in darkeneſſe, knovveth not vvhither he goeth. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Vvhiles you haue the light, beleeue in the light, that you may be the children of light. ⊢ Theſe things IESVS ſpake and he vvent avvay, and hid him ſelf from them. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vvhereas he had done ſo many ſignes before them, they beleeued not in him: ✝ 
                     verse 38 that the ſaying of Eſay the Prophet might be fulfilled, vvhich he ſaid,Eſ. 53, 1. 
                  Lord, vvho hath beleeued the hearing of vs? and the Arme of our Lord to vvhom hath it bene reuealed? ✝ 
                     verse 39 Therfore theyIf any man aſke (ſaith S. Auguſtine) why they could not beleeue: I anſwer roūdly, becauſe they would not. Tract. 13. in Io. See the meanīg of this ſpeach Annot. Mat. 18. 15. Mar. 4, 12.
                   could not beleeue,Eſa. 6, 9. becauſe Eſay ſaid againe, ✝ 
                     verse 40 
                  He hath blinded their eies,
                  Mt. 13, 14. Mr. 4, 12. Lu 8, 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  and indurated their hart: that they may not ſee vvith their eies, nor vnderſtand vvith their hart, and be conuerted, and I heale them. ✝ 
                     verse 41 Theſe things ſaid Eſaie, vvhen he ſavv his glorie, and ſpake of him.Act. 28, 27. ✝ 
                     verse 42 But yet of the Princes alſo many beleeued in him: butThis is the caſe of many principal men in ſuch countries where hereſie hath the vpperhand, who know and beleeue the Catholike faith: for the Phariſees they did not confeſſe, that they might not be caſt out of the Synagogue. ✝ 
                     verse 43 for they loued the glorie of men more, then the glore of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 44 But IESVS cried, and ſaid, He that beleeueth in me, doth not beleeue in me, but in him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And he that
 ſeeth me, ſeeth him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 46 I a light am come into this vvorld: that euery one vvhich beleeueth in me, may not remaine in the darkneſſe.but making cholſe rather to keepe mans fauour thē Gods, they dare not confeſſe the ſame. Such may pray that God and the world agree together: for els it is ſeen whoſe part they wil take. ✝ 
                     verse 47 And if any man heare my vvordes, and keepe them not: I doe not iudge him. for I came not to iudge the vvorld, but to ſaue the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 48 He that deſpiſeth me, & receiueth not my vvordes, hath that iudgeth him. the vvord that I haue ſpoken, that ſhal iudge him in the laſt day. ✝ 
                     verse 49 Becauſe of my ſelf I haue not ſpoken, but the Father that ſent me, he gaue me commaundement vvhat I ſhould ſay, and vvhat I ſhould ſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 50 And I knovv that his commaundement is life euerlaſting. The things therfore that I ſpeake: as the Father ſaid to me, ſo doe I ſpeake.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     5. Why vvas.)
                     Church ornaments. So wicked, couetous, and ſacrilegious perſons reprehend good men for beſtowing their goods vpon Church ornaments &c. vnder pretence of better beſtowing them on the poore. ſuch prouide for the poore as Iudas did.
                  
                     6. A theefe.)
                     Toleration of the euill. Iudas did not then firſt periſh when he ſhould our Lord, for he was a theefe before: and being loſt he yet folowed Chriſt, not in hart, but in body onely. Which our Maiſter tolerated, to giue vs a leſſon to tolerate the il, rather then deuide the body. Aug. tract. 50 in Io.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  As his laſt ſupper, to giue his farevvel, and that in moſt vvonderful louing maner, 4 he vvaſheth his Diſciples feete, 6 beginning vvith Peter, 8 (ſhevving hovv neceſſaris it is for vs to be vvaſhed by him in Baptiſme. and needful alſo after Baptiſme) 1
                        •
                      and by this example teaching them al humilitie one tovvard an other. 21 Then he foretelleth, that (notvvithſtanding his exceding loue tovvard them) 
                        〈◊〉
                      euen of them vvil betray him, meaning Iudas, 22 as to Iohn he ſecretly ſhevveth. After whoſe going out, he reioyceth and ſaith that euen now the houre is come, 14 commendeth vnto them to loue together, as a nevv commaundement, 
                        •
                     6 and foretelleth Peter vvho preſumed to much of his ovvne ſtrength, that euen this night he vvil deny him thriſe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND before the feſtiual day of Paſche,The Goſpel vpō Maūdy thurſday at Maſſe, and at the waſhing of feete. IESVS knovving that his houre was come that he ſhould paſſe out of this vvorld to his Father:Mt. 26, 1▪
                   vvhereas he had loued his that vvere in the vvorld,Mr. 14, vnto the end he loued them.1. Luc. 22, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vvhenBy ſupper, he meaneth the eating of the Paſchal lambe. for, the inſtitution of the B. Sacrament was after this. ſupper vvas done,MAVNDY THVRSDAY. vvhereas the deuil novv had put into the hart of Iudas Iſcariote the ſonne of Simon, to betray him: ✝ 
                     verse 3 knovving that the Father gaue him al things into his handes, and that he came from God, and goeth to God: ✝ 
                     verse 4 he riſeth from ſupper,
 and laieth aſide his garments, and hauing taken a tovvel, girded him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 5 After that, he put vvater into a baſon, and ″ began to vvaſh the feete of the diſciples, and to vvipe them vvith the tovvel vvherevvith he vvas girded. ✝ 
                     verse 6 He commeth therfore to Simon Peter. And Peter ſaith to him, Lord, doeſt thou vvaſh my feete? ✝ 
                     verse 7 IESVS anſvvered and ſaid to him, That vvhich I doe, thou knovveſt not novv, hereafter thou ſhalt knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Peter ſaith to him, Thou ſhalt not vvaſh my feete for euer. IESVS anſvvered him, If I vvaſh thee not, thou ſhalt not haue part vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Simon Peter ſaith to him, Lord, not only my feete, but alſo handes, and head. ✝ 
                     verse 10 IESVS ſaith to him, He that is vvaſhed, nedeeth not but ″ to vvaſh his feete, but is cleane vvholy. And you are cleane, but not al. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For he knevv vvho he vvas that vvould betray him. therfore he ſaid, You are not cleane al.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore, after he had vvaſhed their feete, and taken his garments, being ſet dovvne, againe he ſaid to them, Knovv you vvhat I haue done to you? ✝ 
                     verse 13 You cal me, Maiſter, and Lord: and you ſay vvel, for I am ſo. ✝ 
                     verse 14 If then I haue vvaſhed your feete, Lord and Maiſter, you alſo ought to vvaſh one an others feete. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For I haue giuen you an example, that as I haue done to you, ſo you doe alſo. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 16 Amen, amen I ſay to you, a ſeruant is not greater then his lord, neither is an apoſtle greater then he that ſent him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 If you knovv theſe things, you ſhal be bleſſed if you doe them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 I ſpeake not of you al: I knovv vvhom I haue choſen. But that the ſcripture may be fulfilled,Pſ. 40, 10. 
                  He that eateth bread vvith me, ſhal lift vp his heele againſt me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 From this time I tel you, before it come to paſſe: that vvhen it ſhal come to paſſe, you may beleeue, that I am he. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Amen, amen, I ſay to you, he that receiueth any that I ſend, receiueth me: & he that receiueth me, receiueth him that ſent me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvhen IESVS had ſaid theſe things, he vvas troubled in ſpirit:Mat. 26, 18. Mar. 14, 16. and he proteſted, and ſaid: * Amen, amen I ſay to you: that one of you ſhal betray me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 The diſciples therfore looked one vpon an other,Luc. 22, 21. doubting of whom he ſpake. ✝ 
                     verse 23 There vvas therfore one of his diſciples leaning in the boſome of IESVS, he vvhom IESVS loued. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Therfore Simon Peter beckeneth to him, and ſaid to him, who is it of vvhom he ſpeaketh? ✝ 
                     verse 25 He therfore leaning vpon the breaſt of IESVS, ſaith to him, Lord, vvho is he? ✝ 
                     verse 26 IESVS anſvvered: He it is
 to vvhom I ſhal reach the dipped bread. And vvhen he had dipped the bread, he gaue it to Iudas Iſcariote Simons ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And after the morſel, then Satan entred into him. And IESVS ſaith to him, That vvhich thou doeſt, doe it quickely. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But no man knevv of thoſe that ſate at table to vvhat purpoſe he ſaid this vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For certaine thought, becauſe Iudas had theChriſt had ſome prouiſion before hand giuen him by the Collections of the faithful, which was vſed both in his owne neceſſities, & beſtowed vpon the poore. purſe, that IESVS had ſaid to him, Bie thoſe things vvhich are needeful for vs to the feſtiual day: or that he ſhould giue ſome thing to the poore. ✝ 
                     verse 30 He therfore hauing receiued the morſel, incontinent vvent forth. And it vvas night.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 Vvhen he therfore vvas gone forth, IESVS ſaid, Novv the Sonne of man is glorified, and God is glorified in him. ✝ 
                     verse 32 If God be glorified in him, God alſo vvil glorifie him in him ſelf, and incōtinent vvil he glorifie him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Litle children, yet a litle vvhile I am vvith you.Io. 7, 34. You ſhal ſeeke me, & * as I ſaid to the Ievves, Vvhither I goe, you can not come: to you alſo I ſay novv. ✝ 
                     verse 34 * A ″ nevv cōmaundemēt I giue to you, That you loue one an other:1 Io. 3, 23. as I haue loued you, that you alſo loue one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 35 In this al men ſhal knovv that you are my diſciples, if you haue loue one to an other. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Simon Peter ſaith to him, Lord, vvhither goeſt thou? IESVS anſvvered, vvhither I goe, thou canſt not novv folovv me, but hereafter thou ſhalt folovv.Mt. 26, 35. Mr. 14, 29. ✝ 
                     verse 37 Peter ſaith to him, Vvhy can not I folovv thee novv? * I vvil yeld my life for thee. ✝ 
                     verse 38 IESVS anſvvered him, Thy life vvilt thou yeld for me? Amen, amen I ſay to thee,Lu. 22, 33. the cocke ſhal not crovv, vntil thou denie me thriſe.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     5. Began to vvaſh.)
                     Puritie required to the receiuing of the B. Sacrament. This lotion was not onely of curteſy, ſuch as the Iewes vſed tovvard their gheſts, nor onely for example of humilitie: but for myſterie and ſignification of the great puritie that is required before we come to receiue the holy Sacrament, which ſtraight after this waſhing was to be inſtituted and giuen to the Apoſtles. Ambr. li. 3. de Sacra. c. 1. Bernard. de 
                           ••
                        na Domini Serm. 1.
                  
                  
                     10. To vvaſh his feete.)
                     Venial ſinnes taken avvay by ſacred ceremonies. The foulnes of the feete, when al the reſt is cleane, ſignifieth the earthly affections and relikes of former ſinnes remitted: which are to be cleanſed by deuout actes of charitie & humilitie, as S. Ambroſe li. 3 de Sacr. c. 1. and S. Auguſtine ep. 10
                           •
                        . & tract. 56. in 
                           •
                        o. do note. And becauſe this was onely a ceremonie, & yet had ſuch force, both now and afterward vſed of the Apoſtles,Ambr. & Bern. locis cita
                           •
                        is. that it purged ſmaller offenſes and filthines of the ſoule, as S. Ambroſe and S. Bernard gather, it may not ſeeme ſtrange that holy water and ſuch ceremonies may remit venial ſinnes.
                  
                     14. You alſo ought.) Our Maiſter neuer ſpake plainer, nor ſeemed to commaund more preciſely, either of Baptiſme or the Euchariſt or any other Sacrament: and yet by the Churches iudgement
 directed by the Holy Ghoſt, we know this to be no Sacrament nor neceſſarie ceremonie, and the other to be.The Church defineth which are Sacraments and which not &c. And why do they beleeue the Church in this, and do not credit her affirming the chalice not to be neceſſarie for the communicants?
                  
                     34. A nevv commaundement.) The commaundement of mutual loue was giuen before, but manifoldly miſconſtrued, and abridged by the Iewes to freends onely, to this life onely, for earthly reſpects onely: but Chriſt reneweth it and enlargeth it after the forme of his owne loue toward vs, and giueth grace to fulfil it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  They being ſad, becauſe he ſaid that he muſt goe from them, he comforteth them many waies, as, putting them in hope to folovv him vnto the ſame place, ſo that they keepe his commaundements. Where he telleth them, that him ſelf is the vvay thither according to his Humanitie, and alſo the end according to his Diuinitie, no leſſe then his Father, becauſe he is conſubſtantial, 15 promiſing alſo to ſend vnto them (that is, to his Church) the Holy Ghoſt to be after his departure with them for euer. 28 And ſaying that it is his promotion (according to his Humanitie) to goe to the Father, for, whoſe obediēce this his death ſhalbe, & not for any guilt of his owne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LET not your hart be troubled.The Goſpel vpō SS. Philip and Iacobs day Maij. 1.
                   You beleeue in God, beleeue in me alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 2 In my fathers houſe there beTheſe manſiōs ſignifie differences of glorie in heauen. Hiero. li. 
                           •
                        . adu. Iouin.
                   many manſions. If not, I vvould haue told you, Becauſe I goe to prepare you a place. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And if I goe, and prepare you a place: I come againe and vvil take you to my ſelf, that vvhere I am, you alſo may be. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhither I goe you knovv, and the vvay you knovv.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 Thomas ſaith to him, Lord, vve knovv not vvhither thou goeſt: and hovv can vve knovv the vvay? ✝ 
                     verse 6 IESVS ſaith to him, I am the vvay, and the veritie, and the life no man commeth to the Father, but by me. ✝ 
                     verse 7 If you had knovven me, my father alſo certes you had knovven: and from hence forth youdoe knovv ſhal knovv' him, and you haue ſeen him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Philippe ſaith to him, Lord ſhevv vs the Father, and it ſufficeth vs. ✝ 
                     verse 9 IESVS ſaith to him, So long time I am vvith you: & haue you not knovvē me? Philippe, he that ſeeth me, ſeeth the Father alſo. Hovv ſaieſt thou, Shevv vs the father? ✝ 
                     verse 10 Doeſt thou not beleeue that I am in the Father, & the Father in me? The vvordes that I ſpeake to you, of my ſelf I ſpeake not. But my father that abideth in me, he doeth the vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Beleeue you not, that I am in the Father and the Father in me? Othervviſe for the vvorkes them ſelues beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Amen, amen I ſay to you, he that beleeueth in me, the vvorkes that I doe, he alſo ſhal doe, and greater then theſe ſhal he doe, ✝ 
                     verse 13 becauſe I goe to the Father, and vvhatſoeuer you ſhal aſke in my
 name, that wil I doe: ⊢ that the Father may be glorified in the Sonne.The Goſpel in a votiue Maſſe for the election of the Pope, & vpon whitſun eue. ✝ 
                     verse 14 If you aſke me any thing in my name, that vvil I doe. ✝ 
                     verse 15 If youIt is then poſſible both to loue Chriſt, and to keepe his cō
                     maundements. loue me, keepe my commaundements. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And I vvil aſke the father, and he vvil giue you an other
                     Paraclete by interpretation is either a comforter, or an aduocate: and therfore to trāſlate it by any one of them only, is ꝑhaps to abridge the ſenſe of this place. Paraclete, that he may abide vvith you for euer, ✝ 
                     verse 17 the Spirit of truth, vvhom the vvorld can not receiue, becauſe it ſeeth him not, neither knovveth him, but youſhal knovv knovv' him: becauſe he ſhal abide vvith you, and ſhal be in you. ✝ 
                     verse 18 I vvil not leaue you orphanes: I vvil come to you. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Yet a litle vvhile: and the vvorld ſeeth me no more. But you ſee me: becauſe I liue, and you ſhal liue. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 20 In that day you ſhal knovv that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 He that hath my commaundements, and keepeth them: he it is that loueth me. And he that loueth me, ſhal be loued of my father: and I vvil loue him, and vvil manifeſt my ſelf to him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 Iudas ſaith to him, not that Iſcariote, Lord, vvhat is done, that thou vvilt manifeſt thy ſelf to vs, and not to the vvorld?The Goſpel vpō whitſunday. And in a Votiue Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 23 IESVS anſvvered, and ſaid to him, If any loue me, he vvil keepe my vvord, and my father vvil loue him, and vve vvil come to him, and vvil make abode vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 He that loueth me not, keepeth not my vvordes. And the vvord vvhich you haue heard, is not mine: but his that ſent me, the Fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Theſe things haue I ſpoken to you abiding vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But the Paraclete the holy Ghoſt, vvhom the Father vvil ſend in my name, he ſhalSee the Annot. vpō the 16 Chap. vſ. 12 & 13. teach you al things, & ſuggeſt vnto you al things vvhatſoeuer I ſhal ſay to you. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Peace I leaue to you, my peace I giue to you. not as the vvorld giueth, doe I giue to you. Let not your hart be troubled, nor feare. ✝ 
                     verse 28 You haue heard that I ſaid to you, I goe and I come to you. If you loued me, you vvould be glad verily, that I goe to the Father: becauſe the Father is greater then I. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And novv I haue told you before it come to paſſe: that vvhen it ſhal come to paſſe, you may beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Novv I vvil not ſpeake many things vvith you. for the prince of this vvorld commeth, and in me he hath not any thing. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But that the vvorld may knovv that I loue the Father: and as the Father hath giuen me commaundement, ſo doe I: ⊢ Ariſe, let vs goe hence.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     12. Greater then theſe.)
                     li. de Babyla mart. 
                           •
                        o. 5. S. Chryſoſtom in a whole booke againſt the Pagans proueth that this was fulfilled not onely in Peters ſhadow,We may and muſt eaſely beleeue the miracles of Saincts & of their relikes, whē Chriſt him ſelf foretelleth they ſhal doe ſuch wonderful things. and Paules garments, which as we read in theAct. 5, 15, 19, 1
                           •
                        . Actes, healed infirmities: but alſo by the Relikes and monuments of Saincts, namely of S. Babylas, of whom he there treateth: thereby inferring that Chriſt is God, who could and did performe theſe wonderful wordes, by the very aſhes of his ſeruants. The Proteſtants cleane contrarie, as patrones of the Pagans infidelitie, as though our Sauiour had promiſed theſe & the like miraculous workes in vaine, either not meaning or not able to fulfil thē, ſo do they diſcredite al the approued hiſtories of the Church concerning miracles wrought by Saincts, namely that S. Gregorie Thaumaturgus
                     See Annot. Mat. 1
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        0. remoued a mountaine, the miracles of S. Paul the eremite and S. Hilarion written by S. Hierom, the miracles of S. Martin written by Seuerus Sulpitius, the miracles teſtified by S. Auguſtine de Ciuit. Dei, the miracles approued by S. Gregorie in his Dialoges, the miracles reported by S. Bede in his Eccleſiaſtical ſtorie and liues of Saincts:The Heretikes as faithles ī this point, as the old Pagans. and al other miracles neuer ſo faithfully recorded in Eccleſiaſtical writers. In al which things aboue their reach of reaſon and nature, they are as litle perſuaded and haue no more faith then had the Pagans, againſt whom S. Chryſoſtom in the foreſaid booke, and S. Auguſtine de Ciu. Dei li. 22 c. 8, and other Fathers heretofore haue written. No man therfore needeth to maruel that the very Image of our Lady, & the like, doe miracles, euen as Peters ſhadow did: nor wonder, if ſuch things ſeeme ſtranger and greater then thoſe which Chriſt him ſelf did: whereas our Sauiour to put vs out of doubt, ſaith expreſly that his Saincts ſhal doe greater things then him ſelf did.
                  
                     16. For euer.)
                     The HOLY GHOST is promiſed to the CHVRCH for euer. If the Holy Ghoſt had been promiſed onely to the Apoſtles, their ſucceſſors and the Church after them could not haue chalenged it, but it vvas promiſed them for euer. Whereby we may learne, both that the priuileges and promiſſes made to the Apoſtles were not perſonal, but pertaining to their offices perpetually: and alſo that the Church and Paſtors in al ages had and haue the ſame Holy Ghoſt to gouerne them, that the Apoſtles and primitiue Church had.
                  
                     17. The ſpirit of truth.) They had many particular giftes and graces of the Holy Ghoſt before, and many vertues by the ſame,The Spirit of truth ſhal aſſiſt the CHVRCH alvvaies. as al holy men haue at al times: but the Holy Ghoſt here promiſed to the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors for euer, is to this vſe ſpecially promiſed, to direct them in al truth and veritie: and is contrarie to the ſpirit of errour, hereſie, and falſhod. And therefore the Church can not fall to Apoſtaſie or Hereſie, or to nothing, as the Aduerſaries ſay.
                  
                     28. Father greater then I.) There is no place of Scripture that ſeemeth any thing ſo much to make for the Sacramentaries,The Arians alleage as plaine Scriptures as the Proteſtāts. as this and other in outward ſhew of wordes ſeemed to make for the Arians, who denied the equalitie of the Sonne with the Father. Which wordes yet in deede rightly vnderſtood after the Churches ſenſe, make nothing for their falſe ſecte, but only ſignifie that Chriſt according to his Manhod wa
                        •
                      inferior in deede, and that according to his Diuinitie he came of the Father. And if the Hereſie or diſeaſe of this time were Arianiſme, we ſhould ſtand vpon theſe places and the like againſt the Arians, as we now do vpon others againſt the Proteſtants, whoſe ſecte is the diſeaſe and bane of this time.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  He exhorteth them to abide in him (that is, his Church, being the true vine, and not the Synagogue of the Ievves any more) 9 and in his loue, louing one an other, and keeping his commaundements: 13 ſhevving hovv much he accounteth of them, by this that he dieth for them, 15 and reuealeth vnto them the ſecretes of heauen, 17 and appointeth their fruite to be perpetual: 1
                        •
                      confirming them alſo againſt the perſecutions and hatred of the obſtinate Ievves.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I AM the true vine: and my father is the huſband-man.
The Goſpel for one Martyr. ✝ 
                     verse 2 EueryChriſt hath ſome branches in his body myſtical that be fruitles. therfore il liuers alſo may be members of Chriſt & the Church. branche in me, not bearing fruite, he vvil take it avvay: and euery one that beareth fruite, he vvil purge it,Man may cō
                     tinually increaſe in iuſtice and ſanctification, ſo long as he liueth. that it may bring more fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Novv you are cleane for theS. Auguſtine expoundeth it of the Sacramē
                     tal word of Baptiſme, and not as Heretikes do, of preaching onely. Tract. 80. in Io.
                   word vvhich I haue ſpoken to you. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Abide in me: and I in you. As the branche can not beare fruite of it ſelf, vnles it abide in the vine: ſo you neither, vnles you abide in me. ✝ 
                     verse 5 I am the vine: you the branches. he that abideth in me, and I in him, the ſame beareth much fruite: for vvithout me you can doe nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 6 If any abide not in me: he ſhal be caſt forth as the branche, and ſhal vvither, and they ſhal gather him vp, and caſt him into the fire, and he burneth. ✝ 
                     verse 7 If youIf a Schiſmatike pray neuer ſo much, he is not heard, becauſe he remayneth not in the body of Chriſt. abide in me, and my vvordes abide in you: you ſhal aſke vvhat thing ſoeuer you vvil, and it ſhal be done to you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 In this my father is glorified: that you bring very much fruite, and become my Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 9 As my father hath loued me, I alſo haue loued you. Abide in my loue. ✝ 
                     verse 10 If you keepe my precepts, you ſhal abide in my loue: as I alſo haue kept my fathers precepts, and doe abide in his loue. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Theſe things I haue ſpoken to you, that my ioy may be in you, and your ioy may be filled.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 * This is my precept,Io. 13, 34 that you loue one an other, as I haue loued you.The Goſpel vpō S. Barnabees day, and on the eue of an Apoſtle. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Greater loue then this no man hath, that a man yeld his life for his frendes. ✝ 
                     verse 14 You are my frendes, if you doe the things that I commaund you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Novv I cal you not ſeruants: for the ſeruant knovveth not vvhat his lord doeth. But you I haue called frendes: becauſe al things vvhatſoeuer I heard of my father, I haue notified vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 16 You choſe not me, but I choſe you: and haue appointed you: that you goe, & bring fruite: and your fruite abide: that vvhatſoeuer you aſke the father in my name, he may giue it you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 17 Theſe things I commaund you, that you loue one an other.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 If the vvorld hate you: knovv ye that it hath hated me before you.The Goſpel vpō SS. Simon and Iudes day. ✝ 
                     verse 19 If you had been of the vvorld, the vvorld vvould loue his ovvne. but becauſe you are not of the world, but I haue choſen you out of the vvorld, therfore the vvorld hateth you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Remembre my vvord that I ſaid to you,Io. 13, 16 * The ſeruant is not greater then his maiſter.Mt. 10, 24. Lu. 6, 40. If they haue perſecuted me, you alſo vvil they perſecute. if they haue kept my vvord,
He foreſheweth that many wil not obey the Churches wordes, & no maruel, becauſe they cōtemned Chriſtes owne precepts. yours alſo vvil they keepe. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But al theſe things they vvil 
 doe to you for my name ſake: becauſe they knovv not him that ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 If I had not come, and ſpoken to them, they ſhould not haue ſinne: but novv they haue no excuſe of their ſinne. ✝ 
                     verse 23 He that hateth me, hateth my Father alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 24 If I had not done amōg them vvorkes that no other man hath done, they ſhould not haue ſinne: but novv both they haue ſeen, and they doe hate both me and my Father. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But that the vvord may be fulfilled, vvhich is vvritten in their lavv: That they hated me gratis.
                  The Goſpel vpō Sunday after the Aſcenſion, and in a Votiue of the B. Trinitie. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 26 But vvhen the Paraclete commeth vvhom I * vvil ſend you from the Father,Pſ. 24, 19. the Spirit of truth,Act. 2, 1. vvhich procedeth from the Father, he ſhal giue teſtimonie of me: ✝ 
                     verse 27 and you ſhal giue teſtimonie, becauſe you are vvith me from the beginning.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  
                     4. Vnles you abide.]
                     No man ſure of perſeuêrance. Theſe conditional ſpeaches, If you remaine in the vine, If you keepe my commaundements, and ſuch like, giue vs to wit that we be not ſure to perſiſt or perſeuêre, nor to be ſaued, but vnder conditions to be fulfilled by vs. Aug. de corrept. & gra. c. 13.
                  
                  
                     4. Vnles it abide.) Whoſoeuer by Hereſie or Schiſme or for any other cauſe is cut of or ſeparated from the Church, he can do no meritorious worke to Saluation.
                  
                     10. Keepe my praecepts.]
                     Not onely faith. This careful and often admonition of keeping his commaundements, proueth that a Chriſtian mans life is not onely or principally in faith, but in good workes.
                  
                     24. If I had.) If the Iewes had not ſinned by refuſing Chriſt, in caſe he had not done greater miracles then any other: then were it a great folly of Catholikes to beleeue Luthers or Caluins new opinions without any miracles at all.
                  
                     26. Whom I vvil ſend.) The Holy Ghoſt is ſent by the Sonne, therfore he procedeth from him alſo, as from the Father: though the late Schiſmatical Greekes thinke otherwiſe.
                  
                     27. You ſhal giue.) He vouchſafeth to ioyne together the teſtimonie of the Holy Ghoſt, and of the Apoſtles: that we may ſee the teſtimonie of truth ioyntly to conſiſt in the Holy Ghoſt and in the Prelats of the Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  The cauſe vvhy be foretelleth them their perſecution by the Ievves, is, that they be not aftervvard ſcandalized thereat. 4 Though they thinke this heauie nevves, it is for their vantage that he departeth, becauſe of the great benefites that they ſhal receiue by the comming them of the Holy Ghoſt, vvho ſhal alſo be his vvitnes againſt his enemies. 16 Although in this vvorld they ſhal ſo be perſecuted, yet to his heauenly Father they and their praiers made in his name, ſhal be moſt acceptable, and at length the childe (that is, Chriſt in al his members) being borne, their ioy ſhal be ſuch as no perſecutor can take from them. 31 Hovvbeit at this inſtant of his apprehenſion, they vvil al forſake him.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THESE things haue I ſpoken to you, that you be not ſcandalized. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Out of the ſynagogs they vvilThe Heretikes tranſlate, Excommunicate you. See what corruption this is, and the reaſon thereof, Annot. c. 9, 22.
                   caſt you: but the houre commeth, that euery one vvhich killeth you, ſhal thinke that he doeth ſeruice to God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and theſe things they vvil doe to you: becauſe they haue not knovven the Father, nor me. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But theſe things I haue ſpoken to you: that vvhen the houre ſhal come, you may remember them, that I told you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 5 But I told you not theſe things from the beginning, becauſe I vvas vvith you.The Goſpel vpō the 4 Sunday after Eaſter. And novv I goe to him that ſent me, and none of you aſketh me: Vvhither goeſt thou? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But becauſe I haue ſpoken theſe things to you, ſorovv hath filled your hart. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But I tel you the truth it is expedient for you that I goe. For if I goe not, the Paraclete ſhal not come to you: but if I goe, I vvil ſend him to you. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And vvhen he is come, he ſhal argue the vvorld of ſinne, and of iuſtice, and of iudgement. ✝ 
                     verse 9 of ſinne: becauſe they beleeue not in me. ✝ 
                     verse 10 but of iuſtice: becauſe I goe to the Father: and novv you ſhal not ſee me. ✝ 
                     verse 11 and of iudgement: becauſe the prince of this vvorld is novv iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Yet many things I haue to ſay to you: but you can not beare them novv. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vvhen he, the Spirit of truth, commeth,If he ſhal teach al truth, & that for euer (as before c. 14. 16:) how is it poſſible, that the Church can erre, or hath erred at any time or in any point? he ſhal teach you al truth for he ſhal not ſpeake of him ſelf: but vvhat things ſoeuer he ſhal heare, he ſhal ſpeake: and the things that are to come he ſhal ſhevv you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 He ſhal glorifie me: becauſe he ſhal receiue of mine, and ſhal ſhevv to you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 Al things vvhatſoeuer the Father hath, be mine. Therfore I ſaid, that he ſhal receiue of mine,The Goſpel vpō the 3 Sunday after Eaſter. and ſhal ſhevv to you. ✝ 
                     verse 16 A litle vvhile, and novv you ſhal not ſee me: and againe a litle vvhile, and you ſhal ſee me: becauſe I goe to the Father.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 Some therfore of his diſciples ſaid one to an other, Vvhat is this that he ſaith to vs: A litle vvhile, and you ſhal not ſee me: and againe a litle vvhile, and you ſhal ſee me, and, becauſe I goe to the Father? ✝ 
                     verse 18 They ſaid therfore, Vvhat is this that he ſaith, A litle vvhile? vve knovv not vvhat he ſpeaketh. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And IESVS knevv, that they vvould aſke him: and he ſaid to them, Of this you doe queſtion among your ſelues, becauſe I ſaid to you, A litle vvhile, and you ſhal not ſee me: and againe a litle vvhile, and you ſhal ſee me. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Amen,
 amen I ſay to you,The Goſpel for many Martyrs. that you ſhal vveepe, and lament, but the vvorld ſhal reioyce: and you ſhal be made ſorovvful, but your ſorovv ſhal be turned into ioy. ✝ 
                     verse 21 A vvoman vvhen ſhe trauaileth, hath ſorovv, becauſe her houre is come: but vvhen ſhe hath brought forth the childe, novv ſhe remembreth not the anguiſh for ioy, that a man is borne into the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And you therfore, novv in deede you haue ſorow, but I vvil ſee you againe, and your hart ſhal reioyce: and your ioy no man ſhal take from you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 23 And in that day me you ſhal not aſke any thing.The Goſpel vpō the 5 Sunday after Eaſter. Amen, amen I ſay to you, if you aſke the Father any thingVpon this the Church cōcludeth al her praiers, Per Chriſtū Dominum noſtrū, euen thoſe alſo that be made to Sa
                        •
                     cts. in my name, he vvil giue it you. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vntil novv you haue not aſked any thing in my name. Aſke and you ſhal receiue: that your ioy may be ful. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Theſe things in prouerbes I haue ſpoken to you. The houre commeth vvhen in prouerbes I vvil no more ſpeake to you, but plainely of the Father I vvil ſhew you. ✝ 
                     verse 26 In that day you ſhal aſke in my name: and I ſay not to you, that I vvil aſke the Father for you. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For the Father him ſelf loueth you, becauſe you haue loued me, and haue beleeued that I came forth from God. ✝ 
                     verse 28 I came forth from the Father, and came into the vvorld: againe I leaue the vvorld, and I goe to the Father.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 His diſciples ſay to him, Behold novv thou ſpeakeſt plainely, and ſaieſt no prouerbe. ✝ 
                     verse 30 novv vve knovv that thou knovveſt al things, and thou needeſt not that any man aſke thee in this vve beleeue that thou cameſt forth from God. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 31 IESVS anſvvered them, Novv do you beleeue?
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 * Behold the houre commeth,Mt. 27, 31. Mr. 14, 27. and it is novv come, that you ſhal be ſcattered euery man into his ovvne, and me you ſhal leaue alone: and I am not alone, becauſe the Father is vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Theſe things I haue ſpoken to you, that in me you may haue peace. In the vvorld you ſhal haue diſtreſſe: but haue confidence, I haue ouercome the vvorld.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     12. Yet many things.) This place conuinceth that the Apoſtles and the faithful be taught many things,Chriſt left many things to be taught by the Church. which Chriſt omitted to teach them for their weaknes: and that it was the prouidence of God that Chriſt in preſence ſhould not teach and order al things, that we might be no leſſe aſſured of the things that the Church teacheth by the Holy Ghoſt, then of the things that him ſelf deliuered.
                  
                      
                     13 The ſpirit of truth.) Euer note that the Holy Ghoſt in that he is promiſed to the Church, is called the Spirit of truth. Which Holy Spirit for many other cauſes is giuen to diuers priuate men and to al good men,The Spirit of truth. to ſanctification: but to teach al truth and preſerue in truth and from error, he is promiſed and performed onely to the Church and the cheefe Gouerner and general Councels thereof.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  After his Sermon of farevvel, he prayeth to his Father, that ſeing he hath novv finiſhed his vvorke, he vvil giue him his appointed glorie, for the conuerſion of al nations, 6 and preſerue his Apoſtles, and his Church after them in vnitie and veritie (that is, from Schiſme and Hereſie:) 24 finally alſo glorifie them vvith him in heauen.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THESE things ſpake IESVS: and lifting vp his eies into heauen,The Goſpel vpō Aſcenſion eue. he ſaid, Father, the houre is come,The Father glorifieth the Sonne by raiſing him from death, exalting him vp to his right hand, making al creatures to bow downe at his Name, and geuing him al power and iudgement. The Sonne againe glorifieth the Father, by making his honour, which onely in a maner was in Iewrie before, now knowen to al Nations. glorifie thy ſonne, that thy ſonne may glorifie thee. ✝ 
                     verse 2 As thou haſt giuē him povver ouer al fleſh that al vvhich thou haſt giuen him, to them he may giue life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And this is ″ life euerlaſting that they knovv thee, the only true God, and vvhom thou haſt ſent IESVS CHRIST. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 4 I haue glorified thee vpon the earth: I haue conſummated the vvorke vvhich thou gaueſt me to doe: ✝ 
                     verse 5 and novv glofie thou me O Father vvith thy ſelf, vvith the glorie vvhich I had before the vvorld vvas, vvith thee. ✝ 
                     verse 6 I haue manifeſted thy name to the men vvhom thou gaueſt me out of the vvorld. Thine they vvere, and 
                     •
                  o me thou gaueſt them: and they haue kept thy vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Novv they haue knovven that al things vvhich thou gaueſt me, are from thee: ✝ 
                     verse 8 becauſe the vvordes vvhich thou gaueſt me, I haue giuen them: and they haue receiued, and knovven in very deede that I came forth from thee, and haue beleeued that thou didſt ſend me. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For them doe I pray: Not for the vvorld doe I pray, but for them vvhom thou haſt giuen me: ✝ 
                     verse 10 becauſe they be thine: and al my things be thine, and thine be mine: and I am glorified in them. And novv I am not in the vvorld, and theſe are in the vvorld, and I come to thee. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 11 Holy father,The Goſpel in a Votiue Maſſe againſt Schiſme.
                  His petition is ſpecially to keepe the Apoſtles and his Church in vnit
                        •
                     e and from Schiſmes. keepe them in thy name, vvhom thou haſt giuen me: that they may be one, as alſo vve. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vvhen I vvas vvith them,Io. 18, 9. I kept them in thy name. Thoſe * vvhom thou gaueſt me, haue I kept: and none of them periſhed, but the ſonne of perdition,Pſ. 40, 10. 108, 8. that the * ſcripture may be fulfilled. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And novv I come to thee: and theſe things I ſpeake in the world, that they may haue my ioy filled in them ſelues.
 ✝ 
                     verse 14 I haue giuen them thy vvord, and the vvorld hath hated them, becauſe they are not of the vvorld: as I alſo am not of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 15 I pray not that thou take them avvay out of the vvorld, but that thou preſerue them from euil. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Of the vvorld they are not: as I alſo am not of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 17 ″ Sanctifie them in truth. Thy vvord is truth. ✝ 
                     verse 18 As thou didſt ſend me into the vvorld, I alſo haue ſent them into the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And for thē I doe:To ſanctifie him ſelf, is to ſacrifice him ſelf, by dedicating his holy body and bloud to his Father, both vpon the Croſſe, and in the holy Sacramēt. ſanctifie my ſelf: that they alſo may be ſanctified in truth. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And not for them only doe I pray, ″ but for thē alſo that by their vvord ſhal beleeue in me: ✝ 
                     verse 21 that they al may be one, as thou (Father) in me, and I in thee, that they alſo in vs may be one: that the vvorld may beleeue that thou haſt ſent me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the glorie that thou haſt giuen me, haue I giuen to them: that they may be one, as vve alſo are one. ✝ 
                     verse 23 I in them, and thou in me: that they may be conſummate in one: ⊢ and the vvorld may knovv that thou haſt ſent me, and haſt loued them, as me alſo thou haſt loued. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Father, vvhom thou haſt giuen, me, I vvil, that vvhere I am, they alſo may be vvith me: that they maye ſee my glorie vvhich thou haſt giuen me, becauſe thou haſt loued me before the creation of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Iuſt Father, the vvorld hath not knovven, thee. but I haue knovven thee: and theſe haue knovven, that thou didſt ſend me. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And I haue notified thy name to them, and vvil notifie it: that the loue vvhervvith thou haſt loued me may be in them, and I in them.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP▪ XVII.
                  
                     3. Life euerlaſting.)
                     True knovvledge of God. Both the life of glorie in heauen, and of grace here in the Church, conſiſteth in the knowledge of God: that, in perfect viſion: this, in faith working by charitie. for, knowledge of God without keeping his commaundements, is not true knowledge, that is to ſay, it is an vnprofitable knowledge. 1 Io. 2.
                  
                  
                     17. Sanctifie them.)
                     The Church can not erre. Chriſt prayeth that the Apoſtles, their ſucceſſors, & al that ſhal be of their beleefe, may be ſanctified in truth. Which is as much to ſay, as to deſire that the Church may euer haue the Spirit of truth, and be free from errour. Which praier of Chriſt had not been heard, if the Church might erre.
                  
                     20. But for them.)
                     The Canon of the Maſſe. He expreſſeth (and it is a great comfort) that he praieth not onely for the Apoſtles, but for the whole Church after them, that is, for al beleeuers. And al this profound and diuine praier is reſembled in the holy Canon of the Maſſe before the conſecration, as here it was made before his viſible Sacrifice on the croſſe.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  Being gone to the place that Iudas the Traitor did knovv, 4 he offereth him ſelf to the hand of his enemies, ſhovveth his Diuine might in ouerthrovving them al vvith a vvord, and in ſauing his Apoſtles from them alſo vvith a vvord: 10 rebuketh Peter that vvould defend him from them: 1
                        •
                      and ſo being apprehended, is brought bound to Annas and Caipha
                        •
                     , vvhere he is ſtriken by a ſeruant, and thriſe denied of Peter. 28 Againe in the morning he is by them brought to Pilate. 29 Who demaunding their accuſation, vvhereas they vvould oppreſſe him vvith their authoritie, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and examining the point of his kingdom, pronounceth him innocent: yet they cri
                        •
                      rather to haue a theeues life ſaued.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHEN IESVS had ſaid theſe things,THVRSDAY night. he vvent forth vvith his diſciples beyond the Torrent-Cedron,Mt. 26, 36. Mr. 14. 32. vvhere vvas a garden,The PASSION according to S. Iohn in theſe two Chapters, is the Goſpel at Maſſe vpon Good friday. into the vvhich he entred and his Diſciples.Lu. 22, 39. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And Iudas alſo, that betraied him, knevv the place: becauſe IESVS had often reſorted thither together vvith his Diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 3 * Iudas therfore hauing receiued the band of men,So the PASSION is read in holy weeke foure times, according to the foure Euangeliſtes, as S. Auguſtine appointed alſo in his Church at Hippo. Ser. 144. de tempore.
                   and of the cheefe Prieſts and the Phariſees,Mt. 26, 47. Mr. 14, 43. miniſters, commeth thither vvith lanternes and torches and vveapons. ✝ 
                     verse 4 IESVS therfore knovving al things that ſhould come vpon him,Luc. 22, 47. vvent forth, and ſaid to them, Vvhom ſeeke ye? ✝ 
                     verse 5 they anſvvered him, IESVS of Nazareth. IESVS ſaith to them, I am he. And Iudas alſo that betraied him, ſtoode vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 6 As ſone therfore as he ſaid to them, I am he: they vvent backvvard, and fel to the ground. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Againe therfore he aſked them, Vvhom ſeeke ye? And they ſaid, IESVS of Nazareth. ✝ 
                     verse 18 IESVS anſvvered, haue told you, that I am he, if therfore you ſeeke me, let theſe goe their vvaies. ✝ 
                     verse 9 That the vvord might be fulfilled vvhich he ſaid,Io. 17, 12▪
                   * That of them vvhom thou haſt giuen me, I haue not loſt any. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Simon Peter therfore hauing a ſvvord, drevve it out: and ſmote the ſeruant of the high prieſt: & cut of his right eare. And the name of the ſeruant vvas Malchus. ✝ 
                     verse 11 IESVS therfore ſaid to Peter, Put vp thy ſvvord into the ſcabbard. The chalice vvhich my father hath giuen me, ſhal not I drinke it? ✝ 
                     verse 12 The band therfore and the Tribune & the miniſters of the Ievves apprehended IESVS, and bound him: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and they brought him to Annas firſt, for he vvas father in lavv to Caiphas, vvho vvas the high prieſt of that yere. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And 
* Caiphas vvas he that had giuen the couſel to the Ievves,Io. 11, 49. That it is expedient that one man die for the people.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 * And Simon Peter folovved IESVS,Mt. 26, 58. Mr, 14, 54. and an other diſciple.Lu. 22, 54. And that Diſciple vvas knovven to the high prieſt, and
 vvent in vvith IESVS into the court of the high prieſt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 but Peter ſtoode at the doore vvithout. The other diſciple therfore that vvas knovven to the high Prieſt, vvent forth, and ſpake to the portreſſe, and brought in Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 17 The vvench therfore that vvas portreſſe, ſaith to Peter, Art not thou alſo of this mans diſciples? He ſaith to her,It is al one for a man to deny Chriſt, and, that he is a diſciple of Chriſt, or a Catholike, or a Chriſtian man, vvhen he is demaunded, Aug. tract, 11
                           •
                         in Io. for ſo Peter here denieth Chriſt, in denying him ſelf to be his Diſciple. I am not. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the ſeruants and miniſters ſtoode at a fire of coles, becauſe it vvas cold, and vvarmed them ſelues. And vvith them vvas Peter alſo ſtanding, and vvarming him ſelf.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 The high prieſt therfore aſked IESVS of his diſciples, and of his doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 20 IESVS anſvvered him, I haue openly ſpokē to the vvorld: I haue alvvaies taught in the ſynagogue, and in the temple vvhither al, the Ievves reſort together: and in ſecrete I haue ſpoken nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvhy aſkeſt thou me? aſke them that haue heard vvhat I haue ſpoken vnto them: behold they knovv vvhat things I haue ſaid. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, one of the miniſters ſtāding by, gaue IESVS a blovv, ſaying, Anſvvereſt thou the high prieſt ſo? ✝ 
                     verse 23 IESVS anſvvered him, If I haue ſpoken il, giue teſtimonie of euil: but if vvel, vvhy ſtrikeſt thou me?
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Annas ſent him bound to Caiphas the high prieſt. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And Simon Peter vvas ſtanding, and vvarming him ſelf. They ſaid therfore to him, Art not thou alſo of his diſciples? He denied and ſaid: I am not. ✝ 
                     verse 26 One of the ſeruants of the high prieſt ſaith to him, his coſin vvhoſe eare Peter did cut of, Did not I ſee thee in the garden vvith him? ✝ 
                     verse 27 Againe therfore Peter denied: and forth vvith the cocke crevve.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 * They therfore bring IESVS from Caiphas into the Palace.Mt. 27, 1▪
                   And it vvas morning:Mr. 15, 1▪
                   and they vvent not in into the Palace,Lu. 23, 1▪
                   that they might not be contaminated,GOOD FRIDAY. but that they might eate the Paſche. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Pilate therfore vvent forth to them vvithout, and ſaid, Vvhat accuſation bring you againſt this man? ✝ 
                     verse 30 They anſvvered and ſaid to him, If he vvere not a malefactour, vve vvould not haue deliuered him vp to thee. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Pilate therfore ſaid to them, Take him you, and according to your lavv iudge him.Io. 12, 33▪
                   The Ievves therfore ſaid to him, It is not lavvful for vs to kil any man.Mt. 20, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 32 * That the vvord of IESVS might be fulfilled vvhich he ſaid, ſignifying what death he ſhould die.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 * Pilate therfore vvent into the Palace againe,Mt. 27, 11. Mr. 15, 2. Lu. 23, 4. and called IESVS, and ſaid to him, Art thou the king of the Ievves?
 ✝ 
                     verse 34 IESVS anſvvered, Saieſt thou this of thy ſelf, or haue others told it thee of me? ✝ 
                     verse 35 Pilate anſwered, Vvhy, am I a Iewe?
It pleaſed God, that Chriſt who was to dy both for the Iewes & the Gē
                     tiles, ſhould be betraied of the one, and put to death by the other. Thy nation, and the cheefe prieſts haue deliuered thee vp to me: vvhat haſt thou done? ✝ 
                     verse 36 IESVS anſvvered, My kingdom is not of this vvorld. if my kingdō vvere of this vvorld, my miniſters verily vvould ſtriue that I ſhould not be deliuered to the Ievves. but novv my kingdom is not from hēce, ✝ 
                     verse 37 Pilate therfore ſaid to him, Art thou a king then? IESVS anſvvered, Thou ſaieſt, that I am a king. For this vvas I borne, and for this came I into the vvorld: that I ſhould giue teſtimonie to the truth. Euery one that is of the truth, heareth my voice. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Pilate ſaith to him, Vvhat is truth?
               And vvhen he had ſaid this, he vvent forth againe to the Ievves,Mt. 27, 15. Mr. 15, 6. Lu▪ 23, 17. and ſaith to them, I finde no cauſe in him. ✝ 
                     verse 39 * But you haue a cuſtome that I ſhould releaſe one to you in the Paſche: vvil you therfore that I rel
                     •
                  aſe vnto you the king of the Ievves? ✝ 
                     verse 40 They al therfore cried againe, ſaying, Not him but Barabbas. And Barabbas vvas a theefe.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  The Ievves are not ſatiſfied vvith his ſcourging and irriſion. 
                        •
                      Pilate hearing them ſay that he made him ſelf the Sonne of God, is more afraid. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Yet, they vrging him vvith his loialty tovvard Caeſar, and profeſsing that them ſelues vvil no king but Caeſar, he yeldeth vnto them. 17 And ſo Chriſt carying his ovvne Croſſe, is crucified betvvene tvvo theeues, 19 Pilate vvriting notoriouſly the onely cauſe of his death to be, for that he is their king or Chriſt. 
                        〈◊〉
                      His garments be ſo vſed, euen as the Scriptures foretold. 25 He hath ſpecial care of his mother to the end. 28 He ſignifieth al that vvas vvritten of his Paſsion, to be fulfilled, and ſo yeldeth vp his ghoſt. 31 Then by the levves meanes alſo other Scriptures about his legges and ſide, are fulfilled. 38 And finally, he is honorably buried.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN therfore Pilate tooke IESVS,Mt. 27, 27. Mr. 15, 16. and ſcourged him. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the ſouldiars platting a crovvne of thornes, put it vpon his head: and they put about him a purple garment. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And they came to him, and ſaid, Haile king of the Ievves, and they gaue him blovves. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Pilate vvent forth againe, and ſaith to them, Behold I bring him forth vnto you, that you may knovv that I finde no cauſe in him. ✝ 
                     verse 5 IESVS therfore vvent forth carying the crovvne of thornes, and the purple veſtiment. And he ſaith to them, Loe the man. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vvhen the cheefe prieſts therfore and the miniſters had ſeen him,
 they cried, ſaying, Crucifie, crucifie him. Pilate ſaith to them, Take him you, and crucifie him. for I finde no cauſe in him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 The Ievves anſvvered him, Vve haue a Law: and according to the Law he ought to die, becauſe he hath made him ſelf the ſonne of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Vvhē Pilate therfore had heard this ſaying, he feared more. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he entred into the Palace againe: and he ſaith to IESVS, Vvhence art thou? But IESVS gaue him no anſvver. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Pilate therfore ſaith to him, Speakeſt thou not to me? knovveſt thou not that I haue povver to crucifie thee, and I haue povver to releaſe thee? ✝ 
                     verse 11 IESVS anſvvered, Thou ſhouldeſt not haue any povver againſt me, vnles it vvere giuen thee from aboue. Therfore he that hath betraied me to thee, hath the greater ſinne.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 From thence forth Pilate ſought to releaſe him. But the Ievves cried, ſaying, If thou releaſe this man, thou art not Caeſars frend. euery one that maketh him ſelf a king, ſpeaketh againſt Caeſar. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But Pilate vvhen he had heard theſe vvordes, brought forth IESVS: and he ſate in the iudgemēt ſeate, in the place that is called Lithóſtrotos, and in Hebrevv Gábbatha. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And it vvas the Paraſceue of Paſche, about theHe meaneth midday, counting from ſunne riſing. for ſo doth the Scripture count the houres of the day. Mat. 20. Mar. 15. Luc. 21. Io. 4. Act. 
                           •
                         & 
                           •
                        o.
                   ſixt houre, and he ſaith to the Ievves, Loe your king. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But they cried, Avvay, avvay vvith him, crucifie him. Pilate ſaith to them, Shal I crucifie your king? The cheefe prieſts anſvvered, Vve haue no king, but Caeſar. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Then therfore he deliuered him vnto them for to be crucified.
                And they tooke IESVS,Mt. 27, 33. Mr. 15, 20. and led him forth. ✝ 
                     verse 17 * And bearing his ovvne ″ croſſe he vvent forth into that vvhich is called the place of Caluarie,Lu. 23, 33. in Hebrevv Gólgotha. ✝ 
                     verse 18 vvhere they crucified him, and vvith him two others, on the one ſide and on the other, and in the middes IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And Pilate vvrote a title alſo: and he put it vpon the croſſe. And it vvas vvritten, IESVS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE IEVVES. ✝ 
                     verse 20 This title therfore many of the Ievves did reade: becauſe the place vvhere IESVS vvas crucified, vvas nigh to the citie: and it vvas vvritten inTheſe three tongues being for other cauſes moſt famous before in al the world, are now alſo dedicated to God in the triumphās title of the Croſſe of Chriſt, and in them the holy Scriptures are more conueniently Written, taught, & preſeru
                        •
                     d. Hebrevv, in Greeke, and in Latin. ✝ 
                     verse 21 The cheefe prieſts therfore of the Ievves ſaid to Pilate, Vvrite not, The king of the Ievves: but that he ſaid, I am king of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Pilate anſvvered, That vvhich I haue vvritten, I haue vvritten.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 TheMt. 27. 35. Mr. 15, 24. Luc. 23, 34. ſouldiars therfore vvhen they had crucified
 him, tooke his garments (and they made foure partes, to euery ſouldiar a part) & his coate. And hisThis coate without ſeame is a figure of the vnitie of the Church. Cypr. de vnit. Ec. And Euthymius and other write that our Lady made it. coate vvas vvithout ſeame, vvrought from the toppe through out. ✝ 
                     verse 24 They ſaid therfore one to an other, Let vs not cut it, but let vs caſt lottes for it vvhoſe it ſhal be. That the ſcripture might be fulfilled ſaying,Pſ. 
                        •
                     1, 19▪
                   
                  They haue parted my garments among them: and vpon my veſture they haue caſt lottes. And the ſouldiars did theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And there ſtoode beſide the croſſe of IESVS,The Goſpel in a votiue Maſſe of our B. Lady betweene Eaſter & Whitſuntide.
                  The great loue faith, courage, compaſſion, and ſorovves, that our Lady had: who forſooke▪ not the Croſſe and her ſonne, when ſo many were fled from him, and his cheefe Apoſtles denied him. his mother, and his mothers ſiſter, Marie of Cléphas, and Marie Magdalene. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvhen IESVS therfore had ſeen his mother and the diſciple ſtanding vvhom he loued, he ſaith ″ to his mother: Vvoman, behold thy ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 27 After that, he ſaith ″ to the diſciple, Behold thy mother. And from that houre the diſciple tooke her to his ovvne. ⊢
               
               
                  The Goſpel in a votiue Maſſe of the Paſſion. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Aftervvard IESVS knovving that al things vvere novv conſummate,Pſa. 68, 22. that the * ſcripture might be fulfilled, he ſaith, I thirſt. ✝ 
                     verse 29 A veſſel therfore ſtoode there ful of vinegre. And they putting a ſpongeful of vinegre about hyſſope, offered it to his mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 30 IESVS therfore vvhen he had taken the vinegre, ſaid, It is cōſummate. And bovving his head, he gaue vp the ghoſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 The Ievves therfore (becauſe it vvas the Paraſceue) that the bodies might not remaine vpon the croſſe on the Sabboth (for that vvas a greate Sabboth day) they deſired Pilate that their legges might be broken, and they might be taken avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 32 The ſouldiars therfore came: and of the firſt in deede they brake the legges, and of the other that vvas crucified vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But after they vvere come to IESVS, vvhen they ſavv that he vvas dead, they did not breake his legges, ✝ 
                     verse 34 but one of the ſouldiars vvith a ſpeare opened his ſide, and incontinent there came forth ″ bloud and vvater. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And he that ſavv it, hath giuen teſtimonie: and his teſtimonie is true. ⊢ And he knovveth that he ſaith true, that you alſo may beleeue.Exo. 12, 46. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For theſe things vvere done that the ſcripture might be fulfilled, You ſhal not breake a bone of him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And againe an other ſcripture ſaith,Zac. 12, 10. 
                  They ſhal looke on him vvhom they pearſed.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 And after theſe thingsMt. 27, 57. Mr. 15, 42. Ioſeph of Arimathaea (becauſe he vvas a diſciple of IESVS, but ſecrete for feare of the Iewes) deſired Pilate that he might take avvay the body of IESVS.Lu. 23, 50. And Pilate permitted. He came therfore, and tooke avvay the body of IESVS.Io. 3, 1. 7, 50. ✝ 
                     verse 39 * Nicodemus alſo came, he that at the 
 firſt came to IESVS by the night, bringing a mixture of myrrhe and a
                     •
                  oés, about an hundred poundes. ✝ 
                     verse 40 They tooke therfore the body of IESVS, and bound it in linnen clothes vvith the ſpices, as the maner is vvith the Ievves to burie. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And there vvas in the place vvhere he vvas crucified, a garden: and in the garden a nevv monument, vvherein no man yet had been laide. ✝ 
                     verse 42 There therfore becauſe of the Paraſceue of the Ievves, they laid IESVS, becauſe the monument vvas hard by.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     15. His owne croſſe.] This croſſe, for that it was the inſtrument of our redemption, and as it were the altar of the ſupreme ſacrifice,The HOLY CROSSE. highly ſanctified by the touching, bearing, and oblation of the ſacred body and bloud of our Lord, is truely called the HOLY CROSSE: and hath been endued vvith vertue of miracles, both the whole and euery litle peece thereof. For the which cauſes, and ſpecially for the moſt neere memorial of Chriſtes Paſſion, it hath been viſited in Pilgrimages, honoured by feſtiual daies and otherwiſe, reſerued & reuer
                        •
                     nced of the ancient fathers, with al deuotion: as contrariwiſe it hath been abuſed of Pagans, Apoſtaraes, and Heretikes, ſeeking in vaine to deface and deſtroy it. See S. Cyril li. 6. cont. Iulian. S. Hierom ep. 17. S. Paulinus ep. 11. Ruffinus li. 1. c. 
                           •
                        . & 8. Euagr. hiſto. li. 4. c. 25. S. Leo ep. 72. and Ser. 
                           •
                         de Paſsione. Paulus Diac. li. 18.
                  
                  
                     26. To his mother.)
                     By this you ſee why in Catholike Churches MARIE and Iohn ſtand by the Roode. The maruelous reſpect that Chriſt had to his mother, vouchſauing to ſpeake to her, and to take order for her euen from the croſſe in the middes of his infinite anguiſhes and myſteries a working for mankind:
                  
                     27. To the Diſciple.) A great honour to Iohn and charge, to haue that bleſſed iewel in keeping: and an vnſpeakable comfort, that from that day forward the one was to the other mother and ſonne.li. 2. adu. Iouinian. 
                     virginem virgini cōmendauit, ſaith S. Hierom. He cōmended the virgin to a virgin.
                  
                  
                     34. Bloud and vvater.)
                     The Sacraments iſſued out of Chriſts ſide, and thence haue their vertue. This pearſing of Chriſts ſide, though on the ſouldiars part it was done blindly and inſolently, yet by Gods ordinance it conteined great myſteries, and was preſigured by Moyſes ſtriking the rocke with his rodde:Exo. 18. as this ſtreame of bloud and water drawen miraculouſly out of his dead body,Num. 30. running in the Sacraments of the Church after the people of God, was ſignified by the water of the ſame rocke folowing the Iſraelites in the deſert. Out of this ſide (ſaith S. Auguſtine) iſſued the Sacraments.
                     Tract. 9 in Ioan. 
                     Hence (ſaith S. Chryſoſtom) the great myſteries haue their beginning. Who vvarneth vs, that vvhen vve come to drinke of the holy chalice, vve ſhould ſo approche,Hom. 14 in Ioan. as though vve drevv the bloud out of Chriſtes ſide.The CHVRCH builded of Chriſts ſide, as Eue of Adams. And both bloud and vvater apart did flovv forth, to ſhevv vs the fountaine of the tvvo principal Sacraments, and their ſeueral matters, Baptiſme and the Euchariſt, ſpringing to life euerlaſting in the Church. The fathers alſo ſay that the Church vvho is Chriſts ſpouſe and his coadiutrice in applying the bloud and vvater to the benefite of the Faithful, was here formed, builded, and taken out of this holy ſide of Chriſt ſleeping on the Croſſe,Gen. 2, 21. as * Eue was of Adams ſide, when he was caſt a ſleepe in Paradiſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  Vpon Eaſter day his body is miſſed in the Sepulcher, firſt by M. Magdalene, 3 ſecondly by Peter alſo and Iohn, the vvinding clothes yet remayning. 11 Then to M. Magdalene, after ſhe had ſeen tvvo Angels, IESVS alſo him ſelf appeareth. 
                        〈◊〉
                      She hauing told to the Diſciples, he appeareth to them alſo the ſame day, and ſendeth them as him ſelf vvas ſent, giuing them the Holy Ghoſt to remitte and to reteine ſinnes. 26 Againe vpon lovv Sunday he appeareth to them, letting Thomas ſee, that he might beleeue, and commending ſuch as not ſeeing yet do beleeue. 30 The effect of this booke.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND theThat is, the firſt day of the weeke, as ſome interprete it, taking Sabboth (as ſometime it is) for a weeke. This is our Sunday, called Dies Domini
                           ••
                        , becauſe of our Lords reſurrection. See the marg. annot. Lu
                           •
                        . 24, 1.
                   firſt of the Sabboth,The Goſpel vpō Saturday 
                        〈◊〉
                      Eaſter weeke. Marie Magdalene commeth early,EASTER DAY. vvhen it vvas yet darke,Mt. 28, 1▪
                   vnto the monument: and ſhe ſavv the ſtone taken avvay from the monumēt.Mr. 16, 1▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 2 She ranne therfore and cōmeth to Simon Peter,Lu, 24, 1▪
                   and to the other diſciple vvhom IESVS loued, and ſaith to them, They haue taken our Lord out of the monument, and vve knovv not vvhere they haue laid him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Peter therfore vvent forth and that other diſciple, and they came to the monument.Luc. 24. 12. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And both ranne together, and that other diſciple did out-runne Peter, and came firſt to the monument. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen he had ſtouped dovvne, he ſavv the linnen clothes lying: but yet he vvent not in. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Simon Peter therfore cōmeth, folovving him, and vvent in to the monument, and ſavv the linnē clothes lying, ✝ 
                     verse 7 and the napkin that had been vpon his head, not lying vvith the linnen clothes, but apart, vvrapped vp into one place. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Then therfore vvent in that other diſciple alſo vvhich came firſt to the monument: and he ſavv, and beleeued. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For as yet they knevv not the ſcripture, that he ſhould riſe againe from the dead. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 The diſciples therfore departed againe to them ſelues.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  The Goſpel vpō Thurſday 
                        •
                      Eaſter weeke. But * Marie ſtoode at theThe Sepulchres of Martyrs (ſaith S. Hierom ep. 17) we do honour euery where, & putting their holy aſhes to our eles, if we may, we touch it alſo with our mouth: and be there ſome that thinke the monumēt wherein our Lord was laid, is to be neglected: where the Diuel and his Angels, as often as they are caſt out of the poſſeſſed before the ſaid monument, tremble and roare as if they ſtoode before the iudgement ſeate of Chriſt? monument vvithout,Mt. 28, 1▪
                   vveeping.Mr. 16, 5▪
                   Therfore as ſhe vvas vveeping, ſhe ſtouped dovvne, & looked into the monument:Luc. 24, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 12 and ſhe ſavv tvvo Angels in vvhite, ſitting, one at the head, and one at the feete, vvhere the body of IESVS had been laid. ✝ 
                     verse 13 They ſay to her, Vvomā, vvhy vveepeſt thou? She ſaith to them, Becauſe they haue taken avvay my Lord, and I knovv not vvhere they haue put him. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvhen ſhe had ſaid thus, ſhe turned backvvard, and ſavv IESVS ſtanding: and ſhe knevv not that it is IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 15 IESVS ſaith to her, Vvomā, vvhy vveepeſt thou? vvhom ſeekeſt thou? She thinking that it vvas the gardiner, ſaith to him, Sir, if thou haſt caried him avvay, tel me vvhere thou haſt laid him: & I vvil take him avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 16 IESVS ſaith to her, Marie. She turning ſaith to him, Rabbóni (vvhich is to ſay, Maiſter.) ✝ 
                     verse 17 IESVS ſaith to her, Do not touche me, for I am not yet aſcended to my Father: but goe to my brethren, and ſay to them, I aſcend to my Father and your Father, my God and your God. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Marie Magdalene commeth and telleth 
 the diſciples, That I haue ſeen our Lord, and thus he ſaid vnto me.The Goſpel vpō Dominica in albis or Lovv Sunday. 
                  ⊢
               
               
                  
                     verse 19 Therfore vvhen it vvas * late that day,Mr. 16, 14. Lu. 24, 36. the firſt of the Sabboths, and ″ the doores vvere ſhut, vvhere the diſciples vvere gathered together for feare of the Ievves, IESVS came and ſtoode in the middes,1. Cor. 15, 5. and ſaith to them, Peace be to you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen he had ſaid this, he ſhevved them his handes and ſide. The diſciples therfore vvere glad vvhen they ſavv our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 21 He ſaid therfore to them againe,Though he gaue them his peace hard before, yet novv entering to a nevv diuine action, to prepare their hartes to grace and attention, he bleſſeth them againe. Peace be to you. ″ As my Father hath ſent me, I alſo doe ſend you. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvhen he had ſaid this, ″ he breathed vpon them: and he ſaith to them, Receiue ye the Holy Ghoſt: ✝ 
                     verse 23 ″ VVHOSE SINNES YOV SHAL FORGIVE, THEY ARE FORGIVEN THEM: AND VVHOSE YOV SHAL RETEINE, THEY ARE RETEINED.The Goſpel vpō S. Thomas the Apoſtles day, Decemb. 21.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 24 But Thomas one of the Tvvelue, vvho is called Didymus, vvas not vvith them vvhē IESVS came. ✝ 
                     verse 25 The other diſciples therfore ſaid to him, Vve haue ſeen our Lord. But he ſaid to them, Vnles I ſee in his handes the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the place of the nailes, and put my hand into his ſide: I vvil not beleeue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 And after eight daies,LOVV SVNDAY. againe his diſciples vvere vvithin: and Thomas vvith them. IESVS commethSee the annotation on the 19 verſe of this Chapter. the doores being ſhut, and ſtoode in the middes, and ſaid, Peace be to you. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Then he ſaith to Thomas, Put in thy finger hither, and ſee my handes, and bring hither thy hand, and put it into my ſide: & be not incredulous but faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Thomas anſvvered, & ſaid to him, My Lord, & my God. ✝ 
                     verse 29 IESVS ſaith to him, Becauſe thou haſt ſeen me, Thomas, thou haſt beleeued:
They are more happy that beleeue without ſenſible argumēt or ſight, then ſuch as be induced by ſenſe or reaſon to beleeue. bleſſed are they that haue not ſeen & haue beleeued. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 * Many other ſignes alſo did IESVS in the ſight of his diſciples,Io. 21, 25▪
                   vvhich are not vvrittē in this booke. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And theſe are vvritten, that you may beleeue tht IESVS is CHRIST the ſonne of God: and that beleeuing, you may haue life in his name. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
                  
                     19. The doores vvere ſhut.) Such Heretikes as deny Chriſts body to be or that it can be in the B. Sacrament, for that it is in heauen, and can not be in two places at once, nor without the natural
 maner of the quantitie,The being of Chriſts body in the B Bacramēt without ſpace or quātitie correſpondēt there vnto, is proued by other examples I Scripture. ſpace or place agreable to the condition of his humanitie, be inuincible refuted by Chriſts entering into the Diſciples, the doores ſhut: and by that that his true natural body, whole and perfect in al his limmes, length, bredth, and thicknes, diſtincte and diuers from the ſubſtance and corpulence of the wood, was in the ſame proper place that the wood was in, and paſſed through the ſame: as he alſo came out of his mothers wombe, the clauſure not ſturred: and paſſed through the ſtone, out of his Sepulcher. By al which the Heretikes being plainely reproued, and conuinced of infidelitie, they boldly deny the plaine Scriptures, or ſo fondly ſhift them ſelues from the euidēce thereof, that their impudencie is ſpecially to be marked in this point.
                  Some ſay,Heretical ſhifts to auoid plaine Scripture. that he came in at the window: ſome, that the doore opened of it ſelf to let him in: ſome, that to come in, the doores being ſhut, ſignifieth no more, but that he came in late in the euening, at what time men vſe to ſhut their doores: and ſuch other flightes to defend falſhod, againſt 
                        ••
                     preſſe Scriptures, aud againſt the Apoſtles teſtimonie, who therfore tooke him to be a Spirit, becauſe they ſaw him ſtand ſodenly in the middes of them, al the houſe being cloſe ſhut. And the Fathers al confeſſe that he went in, the doores being ſhut. See S. Ambroſe li. 10 in Lucam. c. 
                           •
                        4. S. Auguſtine ep. 
                           •
                        . ad Voluſi
                           •
                        n. & li. 22 de ciuit. c. 8, & S. Cyril, in Io. li. 12, c. 53? & S. Hiero. li. 1 cont. Iouin
                           •
                        anum c. 21. we know it is the natural courſe od Gods ordinance, that euery body ſhould haue but one and his owne proper place fitted to the lineaments, quantitie, termes and limites of the ſame:Auguſt. ep. 37. without which naturally the bodies were no where,Chriſt can diſpoſe of his owne body & others aboue nature. and conſequently not at al, as S. Auguſtine ſaith ad Dardanum. but that God ſupernaturally and miraculouſly can not by his omnipotencie diſpoſe otherwiſe of his owne body, then the natural forme or quantitie or qualitie thereof require,Mat. 19. that is great incredulitie, ſeing we muſt beleeue that he can doe ſo with any other body of mere men or other creatures,Aug. li. 2
                           •
                         c. 8. de ciu. Dei. the Scripture being plaine that he can make a camel paſſe through a nedles eie, continuing in his natural figure and quantitie ſtil: and S. Auguſtine telleth of a woman whoſe ring fel from her girdle, both being faſt and whole: and Rupertus of a Religious man, whoſe girdle faſt buckled fel downe before him from his body. De off. Eccl.
                  
                  Therfore it is to much vnfaithfulnes,Vbiquetaries of Brentiani. by rules of place to embarte Chriſt of his wil or wiſedom to be in the Sacrament how him ſelf liſt, and on as many altars or places as he liketh. We deteſt for al that, the wicked hereſie of certaine Proteſtants, holding quite contrarie to the Zuinglians, that Chriſt according to his Humanitie is in euery place where the Diuinitie is: which is both againſt faith, and the common rules of nature and diuinitie.
                  
                     21. As my Father.) As when he gaue them commiſſion to preach and baptize through the world,Chriſt ſheweth his commiſſion & ſo giueth the Apoſtles power to remit ſinnes. he made mention to his owne power therein: ſo here before he inſtitute the Sacrament of Penance, and giue them authoritie to remitte ſinnes, leſt the wicked ſhould aſke afterward, by what right they do ſuch great functions, he ſheweth his Fathers commiſſion giuen to him ſelf, and then in plaine termes moſt amply imparteth the ſame to his Apoſtle: that whoſoeuer deny the Apoſtles & their ſucceſſors, the Prieſts of Gods Church, to haue right to remitte ſinnes, ſhould deny conſequently Chriſt as man to haue authoritie to doe the ſame.
                  
                     22. He breathed.) He giueth the Holy Ghoſt in and by an external ſigne, to his Apoſtles,Augu. q. no. Teſt. q. 93 Cōt. ep. Parmen. li. 2, c. 11. not viſibly and to al ſuch purpoſes as afterward at whitſuntide,The holy Ghoſt is here purpoſely giuen to the Apoſtle, to remit ſinnes. but for the grace of the Sacrament of Orders, as S. Auguſtine ſaith, and that none make doubt of the Prieſts right in remiſſion of ſinnes, ſeing the Holy Ghoſt is purpoſly giuen them to doe this ſame. In which caſe if any be yet cōtentious, he muſt deny the Holy Ghoſt to be God, and not to haue power to remitte ſinnes. It is not abſurd (ſaith S. Cyril) that they forgiue ſinnes,
                     Cyril. li. 12 
                           •
                        . 56 in Io. 
                     vvhich haue the Holy Ghoſt. For vvhen they remitte or reteine, the Holy Ghoſt remitteth reteineth in them; and that they doe tvvo vvaies, firſt in Baptiſme, and then in Penance. As S. Ambroſe alſo (li. 1 c. 7
                           •
                         de poenitentia) reſtlling the Nouatians (a Sect of old Heretikes which pretending Gods glorie as our new Sectaries do, denied that Prieſts could remitte ſinnes in the Sacrament of Penance) aſketh, vvhy it ſhould be more diſhonour to God, or more impoſſible or inconuenient for men, to forgiue ſinnes by Penance then by Baptiſme, ſeing it is the Holy Ghoſt that doeth it, by the Prieſts office and miniſterie in both.
                  
                     23. Whoſe ſinnes.) Power to offer Sacrifice which is the principal function and acte of Prieſthod, was giuen them at the inſtitution of the B. Sacrament: the ſecond and next ſpecial facultie of Prieſthod,The Sacrament of PENANCE inſtituted. conſiſting in remitting ſinnes, is here beſtowed on them. And withal the holy Sacrament of Penance implying Contrition, Confeſſion, and Satisfaction in the Penitent, and abſolution on the Prieſts part, is inſtituted, for in that, that expreſſe power and commiſſion is giuen to Prieſts to remitte or reteine al ſinnes; and in that, that Chriſt promiſeth, whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer they forgiue, they be of God forgiuen alſo: and vvhoſe ſinne they reteine, they be reteined before God: it folovveth neceſſarily,Men are bound to confeſſe, al their mortal ſinnes, and that in particular. that vve be bound to ſubmit our ſelues to their iudgment for releaſe of our ſinnes. For, this vvonderful povver vvere giuen them in vaine, if none vvere bound to ſeeke for abſolution at their handes. Neither can any rightly ſeeke for abſolution of them, vnles they confeſſe particularly at leaſt al their mortal offences, vvhether they be cōmitted in minde, hart, vvil andCypr. de lapſ. nu. 11. congitation onely, or in vvord, and vvorke, for, Gods prieſts being in this Sacrament of Penauce cōſtituted in Chriſts ſteede as iudges in cauſes of our conſcience, can not rightly rule our caſes vvithout ful and exacte cognition and knovvledge of al our ſinnes, and the neceſſarie circumſtances andHiero. in 16 Mat. differences of the ſame, which can not othervviſe be had of them being mortal men,
 then by our ſimple, ſincere, and diſtincte vtterance to them of our ſinnes, vvith humble contrite hart,To reteine ſinnes. ready to take and to doe penance according to theire iniunction. For that authoritie to reteine ſinnes, conſiſteth ſpecially in enioyning ſatisfaction and penitential vvorkes of praying, faſting, almes, and ſuch like. Al vvhich Gods ordinance whoſoeuer condemneth or contemneth, as Heretikes doe, or neglecteth, as ſome careleſſe Catholikes may perhaps doe: let them be aſſured they can not be ſaued. Neither muſt any ſuch Chriſtian man pretend or looke to haue his ſinnes after Baptiſme, remitted by God onely, without this Sacrament: (which was the old Hereſie of the Nouatians Ambr. li. 1. de po
                           •
                        nit. c. 2. Socrat. li. 7 Ec. hiſt. c. 25.) more then any may hope to be ſaued or haue his original or other ſinnes before Baptiſme,The neceſſitie of this Sac
                           ••
                        
                        ment. forgiuen by God without the ſame Sacramēt. Let no man deceiue himſelf,Hiero. ad Demetriadem. c. 
                           •
                        , to. 1. this is the ſecond table or borde after ſhipvvrack
                           •
                        , as S. Hierom calleth it. Whoſoeuer take not hold of it, ſhal periſh without al doubt, becauſe they contemne Gods counſel and order for their ſaluation. And therfore S. Auguſtine (ep. 180) ioyning both together, ſaith it is a pitiful caſe, when by the abſence of Gods Prieſts, men depart this life, aut non regenerati, aut ligati. that is, either not regenerated by Baptiſme, or faſt bound, and not abſolued by the Sacrament of penance and reconciliation ⸬ becauſe they ſhal be excluded from eternal life, and deſtruction folovveth them. And S. Victor (li. 2 de perſecut, Vandalica) telleth the miſerable lamētation of the people, when their Prieſts were baniſhed by the Arian Heretikes. Who (ſay they) ſhal baptize theſe infants? Who ſhal miniſter penāce vnto vs, & looſe vs from the bandes of ſinnes &c? And therfore S. Cyprian very often (namely ep. 54) calleth it great cruelty, & ſuch as Prieſts ſhal anſwer for at the later day, to ſuffer any man that is poenitent of his ſinnes, to depart this life without this reconciliation and abſolution:Mat. 18. 
                     becauſe (ſaith he) the Lavvmaker him ſelf (Chriſt) hath graunted,
                     The Heretikes wraſtling againſt plaine Scripture. 
                     that things bound in earth, ſhould alſo be bound in heauen: and that thoſe things might there be looſed, vvhich vvere looſed before here in the Church. And it is a world to ſee, how the Heretikes wraſtle with this ſo plaine a commiſſion of remitting ſinnes, referring it to preaching, to denouncing Gods threates vpon ſinners, and to we can not tel what els. though to our Engliſh Proteſtants this authoritie ſeemeth ſo cleere, that in their order of viſiting the ſicke,See the cō
                        munion booke. their Miniſters acknowledge & chalenge the ſame,The Engliſh Miniſters heare confeſſions, and abſolue. vſing a formal abſolution according to the Churches order, after the ſpecial cōfeſſion of the partie. But to conclude the matter, let euery one that liſt to ſee the true meaning of Chriſts wordes, and the Prieſts great power and dignitie giuen them by the ſame wordes and other, marke wel theſe wordes of S. Chryſoſtome.Li. 3 de Sacerd. 
                     For, ſaith he, they that dvvel on the earth, and conucrſein it, to them is commiſsion giuen to diſpenſe thoſe things that are in heauen.
                     Prieſts power to forgiue ſinnes, is aboue the power of Angels or worldly Princes. 
                     to them is it giuen to haue the povver vvhich God vvould not to be giuen neither to Angels nor Archangels, for, neither to them vvas it ſaid, whatſoeuer you ſhal binde in earth, ſhal be bound in heauen: and vvhatſoeuer you ſhal looſe in earth, ſhal be looſed in heauen. The earthly Princes in deede haue alſo povver to binde, but the bodies onely: but that bond of Prieſts vvhich I ſpeake of, toucheth the very ſoule is ſelf and reacheth euen to the heauens: in ſo much that vvhatſouer the Prieſts ſhal doe beneath, the ſelf ſame God doth ratifie aboue, and the ſentence of the ſeruants the Lord doth confirme, for in deede vvhat els is this, then that the povver of al heauenly things is graunted them of God? Whoſe ſinnes ſo euer, ſaith he, you ſhal reteine, they are reteined. What povver (I beſeche you) can be greater then this one? The Father gaue al povver to the Sonne: but I ſee the ſame povver altogether deliuered by the Sonne vnto them. And as this concerneth the Prieſts high authoritie to abſolue, ſo therevpon concerning confeſſion alſo to be made vnto them, the ancient Fathers ſpeake in this ſort. S. Cyprian de Lapſis nu. 11. They (ſaith he) that haue greater faith and feare of God, though they did not fall in perſecution, yet becauſe they did onely thinke it in their minde, this very cogitation they confeſſe to Gods Prieſts ſorovvfully and plainely,
                     Confeſſion to Prieſts. 
                     opening their conſcience, vttering and diſcharging the burden of their minde, and ſeeking holeſome medicine for their vvoundes though but ſmal and litle. And a litle after. Let euery one (my brethren) I beſeeche you, confeſſe, his ſinne, vvhiles he is yet aliue, vvhiles his confeſsion may be admitted, vvhiles ſatisfaction and remiſsion made by the Prieſts is acceptable before God. S. Cyril (or as ſome thinke, Origen) li. 2 in Leuit. calleth it a great part of penance, when a man is aſhamed, and yet openeth his ſinnes to our Lords Prieſt. See alſo Tertul. li. de Poenit. S. Hiero. in c. 10 Eccleſiaſtae. S. Baſil. in Regulis br
                           •
                        u. quaeſt. 229. Who compare ſinners that refuſe to confeſſe, to them that haue ſome diſeaſe in their ſecrete partes, and are aſhamed to ſhew it to the Phyſicion or Surgeon, that might cure it. Where they muſt needes meane ſecrete confeſſion to be made to them that may abſolue. And S. Leo ep. 80 moſt plainely (as before S. Cyril) expreſly nameth Prieſts.Secrete or auricular Confeſſion. 
                     That confeſſion is ſufficient vvhich is made firſt to God, then to the Prieſt alſo. And againe, It is ſufficient that guiltines of mens conſciences be vttered to the Prieſts onely by the ſecrecie of confeſsion. S. Hierome in 16 Mat. ſaith, that Prieſts looſe or binde, audita peccatorum varietate, hauing heard the varietie and differences of ſinnes. S. Paulinus writeth. of S. Ambroſe,In vita D. Ambr. prope finē. 
                     that as often as any confeſsed his ſinne vnto him for too receiue penance, he ſo vvept for compaſsion, that thereby he cauſed the peniten
                           •
                         to weepe alſo. He addeth moreouer, that this holy Doctor was ſo ſecrete in this caſe, that no man knew the ſinnes confeſſed, but God and him ſelf. And S. Auguſtine ho. 49 de 50 homilijs to. 10. ſaith thus, Doe penance ſuch as is done in the Church,
                     Mt. 18. 
                     Let no man ſay, I doe it ſecretly, I doe it to God. in vaine then vvas it ſaid, Whatſoeuer you ſhal looſe in earth, ſhal be looſed in heauen. See S. Ambroſe de poenitentia. through out. S. Cyprian de Lapſis, the booke de vera & falſa panit. in S. Auguſtine, beſide al antiquitie which is ful of theſe ſpeaches concerning abſolution, and confeſſion.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  Appearing againe in Galilee, where Peter was fiſhing with his fellowes: and cauſing them after they had al night taken none, to catch a great multitude, which Peter draweth to land, where he alſo dineth them: 15 He (expreſsing what this fiſhing ſignified) maketh Peter his Vicar, committing vnto him the feeding of his lambes and ſheepe: 18 and reuealeth vnto him, that he alſo ſhal be crucified, to the glorie of God, 20 admoniſhing him to minde that, rather then to be curious about Iohns death.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER IESVS manifeſted him ſelf againe at the ſea of Tibérias.The Goſpel on wenſeday in Eaſter weeke. And he manifeſted thus: ✝ 
                     verse 2 There vvere together Simon Peter and Thomas vvho is called Didymus, and Nathanael vvhich vvas of Cana in Galilee, and the ſonnes of Zebedee, and tvvo others of his diſciples. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Simon Peter ſaith to them, I goe to fiſh. They ſay to him, Vve alſo come vvith thee. And they vvent forth and got vp into the boate: and that night they tooke nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But vvhen morning vvas novv come, IESVS ſtoode on the ſhore: yet the diſciples knevv not that it vvas IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 5 IESVS therfore ſaith to them, Childrē, haue you any meate? They anſvvered him, No. ✝ 
                     verse 6 He ſaith to them, Caſt the nette on the right ſide of the boate: and you ſhal finde. They therfore did caſt it: and novv they vvere not able to dravv it for the multitude of fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 7 That diſciple therfore vvhom IESVS loued, ſaith to Peter, It is our Lord.See in S. Auguſtine tract. 122 
                           〈◊〉
                         Io. the great myſterie hereof concerning the CHVRCH, and in S. Gregorie hom. 24 in Euang. and S. Bernard li. 2 c. 8 de conſid. Peters PRIMACIE here miſtically ſignified. Simon Peter vvhē he had heard that it is our Lord: girded his coate vnto him (for he vvas naked) and caſt him ſelf into the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But the other diſciples came in the boate (for they vvere not farre from the land, but as it vvere tvvo hundred cubits) dravving the nette of fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Therefore after they came dovvne to land, they ſavv hote coles lying, and fiſh laid thereon, and bread. ✝ 
                     verse 10 IESVS ſaith to them, Bring hither of the fiſhes that you tooke novv. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Simō Peter vvent vp, and drevv the nette to the land, ful of great fiſhes, an hundred fiftie three. And although they vvere ſo many, the nette vvas not broken. ✝ 
                     verse 12 IESVS ſaith to them, Come, dine. And none ofthe diſciples, them that ſate at meate', durſt aſke him, Vvho art thou? knovving that it is our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And IESVS commeth and taketh the bread and giueth them, and the fiſh in like maner. ✝ 
                     verse 14 This novv theNot the third apparition, but the third day of his apparitions. for he appeared in the very day of his Reſurrectiō oftē, againe vpon Low Sunday, then this third time, And S. Marke ſaying, laſt he appeared, c. 16, 14: meaneth his laſt apparition the firſt day. third time IESVS vvas manifeſted to his diſciples, after he vvas riſen from the dead. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Therfore vvhen they had dined, IESVS ſaith to Simon 
 Peter,The Goſpel on the one of SS. Peter and Paul. Simon of Iohn, loueſt thou me more then theſe? He ſaith to him, Yea Lord: thou knovveſt that I loue thee. he ſaith to him, FEEDE MY LAMBES. ✝ 
                     verse 16 He ſaith to him againe, Simon of Iohn, loueſt thou me? he ſaith to him, Yea Lord, thou knovveſt that I loue thee. He ſaith to him,

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      feede & rule FEEDE MY LAMBES. ✝ 
                     verse 17 He ſaith to him the third time, Simō of Iohn, loueſt thou me? Peter vvas ſtroken ſad, becauſe he ſaid vnto him the third time, Loueſt thou me? And he ſaid to him, Lord, thou knovveſt al things: thou knovveſt that I loue thee. He ſaith to him, ″ FEEDE MY SHEEPE. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Amē, amen I ſay to thee, vvhen thou vvaſt yonger, thou didſt girde thy ſelf, and didſt vvalke vvhere thou vvouldeſt. but vvhen thou ſhalt be old, thou ſhalt ſtretch forth thy handes, and ″ an other ſhal girde thee, and leade thee vvhither thou vvilt not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And this he ſaid, ſignifying by vvhat death he ſhould glorifie God. ⊢
                  The Goſpel vpō S. Iohn the Euangeliſts day in Chriſtmas Decembris 27.
                   And vvhen he had ſaid this, he ſaith to him, Folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Peter turning, ſavv that diſciple vvhom IESVS loued,Io. 13, 23▪
                   folovving, * vvho alſo leaned at the ſupper vpon his breaſt, and ſaid, Lord vvho is he that ſhal betray thee? ✝ 
                     verse 21 Him therfore vvhen Peter had ſeen, he ſaith to IESVS, Lord, and this man vvhat? ✝ 
                     verse 22 IESVS ſaith to him,So readeth S. Ambroſe in Pſ. 45. & ſer. 20 in Pſ. 118. S. Aug. tract. 124 in Io. & moſt ancient copies and ſeruice bookes extant in Latine, other reade, If I vvil: other, If ſo I vvil &c. So I vvil haue him to remaine til I come, vvhat to thee? folovv thou me. ✝ 
                     verse 23 This ſaying therfore vvent abrode among the brethren, that that diſciple dieth not. And IESVS did not ſay to him, he dieth not: but, So I vvil haue him to remaine til I come, vvhat to thee? ✝ 
                     verse 24 This is that diſciple vvhich giueth teſtimonie of theſe things, and hath vvritten theſe things: and vve knovv that his teſtimonie is true. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 But there are * manyHovv fevv things are written of Chriſts actes & doctrīe in cōpariſon of that vvhich he did and ſpake? and yet the Heretikes wil needes haue al in Scripture, truſting not the Apoſtles ovvne preaching, or report of any thing that our Maiſter did or ſaid, if it be not vvritten. other things alſo vvhich IESVS did:Io. 20, 30. vvhich if they vvere vvritten in particular, neither the vvorld it ſelf I thinke vvere able to conteine thoſe bookes that ſhould be vvritten.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
                  17. Feede my ſheepe.] As it was promiſed him Mat. 16, that the Church ſhould be builded vpō him,
                     Peter is here made the general Paſtor, and the Church is builded vpon him. 
                     and that the keies of heauen ſhould be giuen to him: ſo here it is performed, & he is actually made the general Paſtor and Gouerner of al Chriſts ſheepe. For though the other ten (as Matthias and Paul alſo afterward) were Apoſtles, Biſhops, Prieſts, aud had authoritie to binde and looſe, to remitte and rete
                           •
                        ne, to preach, baptize, and ſuch like, as wel as he: Yet in theſe things and al other gouernement, Chriſt would haue him to be their head, and they to depend of him as head of their College, and conſequently of the whole flocke of Chriſt: no Apoſtle nor no Prince in earth
 (if he acknowledge him ſelf to be a ſheepe of Chriſt) exempted from his charge;
                     The Proteſtāts otherwiſe denying this preeminence of Peter, yet to vphold their Arch biſhops, do a
                        
                           •
                        ouch & proue it againſt the Puritanes. 
                     And that Chriſt maketh a difference betwixt Peter and the reſt, and giueth him ſome greater preeminence and regiment then the reſt, it is plaine by that he is aſked whether he loue our Lord more then the other Apoſtles do:
                     Cypr. de vnit. E
                           •
                        . 
                     where, for equal charge no difference of loue had bene required. To Peter (ſaith S. Cyprian) our Lord after his Reſurrection ſaid, Feede my ſheepe, and build
                        •
                     d his Church vpon him alone, and to him he giueth the charge of feeding his ſheepe. For although after his Reſurrection he gaue his povver alike to al, ſaying, As my Father ſent me, ſo I ſend you, take the Holy Ghoſt, if you remitte to any their ſinnes, they ſhal be remitted &c. Yet to manifeſt vnitie, he cōſtituted one Chaire, & ſo diſpoſed by his authoritie that vnitie ſhould haue origine of one. The reſt of the Apoſtles vvere that Peter vvas, in equal fellovvſhip of honour and povver,Li. 2 de Sacerd. but the beginning cōmeth of vnitie: the Primacie is giuen to Peter, that the Church of Chriſt may be ſhewed to be one, & one Chaire. S. Chryſoſtome alſo ſaith thus: Why did our Lord ſhede his bloud? truely to redeeme thoſe ſheepe, the cure of vvhich he committed both to Peter and alſo to his Succeſſors.Peters ſucceſſors ſuccede hī in vniuerſal authoritie. 
                     And a litle after, Chriſt vvould haue Peter indued vvith ſuch authoritie, and to be far aboue al his other Apoſtles: for he ſaith: Peter, doſt thou loue me more then al theſe do? Wherevpon our Maiſter might haue inferred. If thou loue me Peter, vſe much faſting, ſleepe on the hard floure, vvatch much, be patrone to the oppreſſed, father to the orphans, and huſband to the vvidovves: but omitting al theſe things, he ſaith, Feed my ſheepe. For, al the foreſaid vertues certes may be done eaſily of many ſubiects, not onely men but vvomen: but vvhen it commeth to the gouernement of the Church and committing the charge of ſo many ſoules, al vvoman kind muſt needes vvholy giue place to the burden and greatnes thereof, and a great number of men alſo. So writeth he.
                  
                  And,S. Gregorie though he miſliked the title of Vniuerſal Biſhop, yet is moſt plaine both in his writings & doings for the Popes Supremacie, as alſo S. Leo the great. becauſe Proteſtants would make the vnlearned thinke, that S. Gregorie deemēd the Popes Supremacie to be wholy vnlawful and Antichriſtian, for that he condemneth Iohn of Conſtantinople for vſurping the name of vniuerſal Biſhop, reſembling his inſolence therein to the pride of Antichriſt: note wel the wordes of this holy father in the very ſame place and Epiſtle againſt the B. of Conſtantinople,Grego. li. 4, ep. 76. by which you ſhal eaſily ſee that to deny him to be vniuerſal Biſhop, is not to deny Peter or the Pope to be head of the Church, or ſupreme Gouerner of the ſame, as our Aduerſaries fraudulently pretend. It is plaine to al men, ſaith he, that euer read the Goſpel, that by our Lordes mouth the charge of the vvhole Church vvas committed to S. Peter Prince of the Apoſtles. for to him it vvas ſaid, Feed my ſheepe: for him vvas the prayer made that his faith ſhould not faile: to him vvere the keies of heauen giuen and authoritie to binde and looſe: to him the cure of the Church and principality vvas deliuered: and yet he vvas not called the vniuerſal Apoſtle. This title in deed vvas offered for the honour of S. Peter Prince of the Apoſtles, to the Pope of Rome by the holy Councel of Chalcedon: but none of that See did euer vſe it or conſent to take it. Thus much S. Gregorie,See li. 
                           •
                        . ep. 72. 73, li. 2 ep. 37. 45. li. 4 ep. 95 li, 7 ep. 62. who though he both practiſed iuriſdictiō through out al Chriſtendom, as other of that See haue euer done, and alſo acknowledged the Principality and Soueraintie to be in Peter and his Succeſſors: yet would he not for iuſt cauſes vſe that title ſubiect to vanitie & miſconſtructiō. But both he & al the Popes ſince haue rather called them ſelues, Seruos ſeruorum Dei, the Seruants of Gods ſeruants. Though the word, vniuerſal Biſhop, in that ſenſe wherein the holy Councel of Chalcedon offered it to the See of Rome,The title of vniuerſal Biſhop refuſed, but vniuerſal iuriſdiction alwaies acknowledged and practiſed. was true and Lawful. For that Councel would not haue giuen any Antichriſtian or vniuſt title to any man. Onely in the B. of Conſtantinople and other, which in no ſenſe had any right to it, and who vſurped it in a very falſe and tyrannical meaning, it was inſolent, vniuſt, and Antichriſtian.Bernard. li. 2. c. 8. de cōſider. See alſo the Epiſtles of S. Leo the Great concerning his practiſe of vniuerſal iuriſdiction, though he refuſed the title of vniuerſal Biſhop. And S. Bernard (that you may better perceiue that the general charge of Chriſts ſheepe was not onely giuen to Peters perſon, but alſo to his ſucceſſors the Popes of Rome, as S. Chryſoſtom alſo before alleaged doth teſtifie) writeth thus to Eugenius, Thou art he to whom the keies of heauen are deliuered, & to whom the ſheepe are cō
                     mitted. there be other Porters of heauē, & other Paſtors of flockes: but thou haſt inherited in more glorious & differēt ſort.The Pope is Paſtor of al Paſtors. For they haue euery one their particular flocke, but to thee al vniuerſally, as one flocke to one mā are credited: being not onely the Paſtor of the ſheepe, but the one Paſtor of al the Paſtors them ſelues, but thou wilt aſke me how I proue that? euen by our Lordes word, for to whom of al, I ſay not onely Biſhops, but Apoſtles, were the ſheepe ſo abſolutely and without limitation cōmitted? If thou loue me Peter, feede my ſheepe. He ſaith not, the people of this kingdom or that citie, but, my ſheepe, without al diſtinction. So S. Bernard. And herevnto may be added that the ſecond,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     feede, is in greeke a word that ſignifieth withal to gouerne and rule, as Pſ. 
                           •
                        . Mich. 5. Mat. 2. Apoc. 2. and therfore it is ſpoken of Dauid alſo and other temporal Gouerners (as the Hebrew word anſwering therevnto) in the2 Reg. c. 5. Pſ. 77. Scriptures very often, and the Greeke in profane writers alſo.
                  1
                        •
                     . An other ſhal gird thee.]
                     Beza in hunc locū. He Prophecieth of Peters Martyrdom, and of the kinde of death which he ſhould ſuffer.Peter crucified at Rome. that was, crucifying. which * the Heretikes fearing that it were a ſteppe to proue he was martyred in Rome, deny: whereas the Fathers and ancient writers are as plaine in this, as that he was at Rome, Origen apud Euſeb. li. 3. c. 1. Euſeb. li. 2. c. 24. Hiſt. Ec. Tertul. de praeſcript. nu. 14. Aug. tract. 123 in Ioan. Chryſoſt. Beda in hunc locum.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  THE SVMME, AND THE ORDER OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORIE, gathered breifly out of al foure, euen vnto Chriſts Aſcenſion. *⁎*
                  
                  
                     Mt.
                     Mr.
                     Lu.
                     Io.
                      
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     1
                     
                        THE preface mouing the Reader to receiue CHRIST, being the aeternal VVORD of God,THE 1 PART, conteining the Infancie of Chriſt and the time that he liued obſcurely. the life and the light.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     1
                      
                     The Angel telleth Zacharie of the conception of Iohn Baptiſt, Chriſts Precurſor: and Elizabeth conceiueth him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     1
                      
                     The ſame Angel doing his meſſage to the B. Virgin, CHRIST is incarnate in her wombe.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     1
                      
                     Our B. Ladie viſiteth Elizabeth: and Iohn Baptiſt is borne, and circunciſed.
                  
                  
                     1
                      
                      
                      
                     The Angel telleth Ioſeph that his vviſe is vvith childe by the Holy Ghoſt.
                  
                  
                     1
                      
                     3
                      
                     The genealogie of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     2
                      
                     The birth of Chriſt in Bethlehem, and his circunciſion.
                  
                  
                     2
                      
                      
                      
                     The Sages come from the Eaſt, and adore Chriſt.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     2
                      
                     Chriſt is preſented in the Temle: vvhere Simeon and Anna prophecie of him.
                  
                  
                     2
                      
                      
                      
                     Ioſeph vvith the childe and his mother, fleeth into Aegypt: and returneth to Nazareth.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     2
                      
                     Ieſus being ſought of his parents, is found in the Temple among the Doctors.
                  
                  
                     3
                     1
                     3
                      
                     Iohn the Baptiſt preacheth and baptizeth, preparing al to receiue Chriſt: and among other, Chriſt is baptized of him.
                           The 2 part, conteining the time of the preparatiō toward his manifeſtation.
                     
                  
                  
                     4
                     1
                     4
                      
                     Chriſt faſteth fourtie daies, and is tempted in the vvilderneſſe.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     1
                     Iohn giueth teſtimonie of Chriſt to the legates of the Ievves, to the people, and to his ovvne diſciples.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     2
                     Chriſt vvorketh his firſt miracle, turning vvater into vvine at a mariage.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     1
                     In the feaſt of Paſche he caſteth out the biers and ſellers in the Temple, inſinuating to the Iewes his death and reſurrectiō.THE 1. PASCHE.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     3
                     He teacheth Nicodemus by night: and baptizeth in Iurie by the miniſterie of his diſciples. vvherevpon a queſtion is moued to Iohn about their tvvo baptiſmes.
                  
                  
                     14
                     6
                     3
                      
                     
                         Iohn Baptiſt is put into priſon for reprehending Herods inceſtuous aduoutrie.
                  
                  
                     4
                      
                      
                     4
                     After Iohns empriſonment, Chriſt returning into Galilee by Samaria, talketh vvith the Samaritane vvoman.
                           The 3 part, from the time that he began (Mat. 4, 1
                                 •
                               & 17.) to manifeſt him ſelf, by preaching and miracles.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     4
                     He healeth a lordes ſonne of an ague.
                  
                  
                     4
                     1
                     4
                      
                     He preacheth in Galilee, and vvaxeth very famous.
                  
                  
                     4
                     1
                     5
                      
                     He calleth foure diſciples out of the boate, and they folovv him.
                  
                  
                      
                     1
                     4
                      
                     He healeth one poſſeſſed of a diuel, in the Synagogue.
                  
                  
                     8
                     1
                     4
                      
                     He cureth Simon Peters mother in lavv, & many ſicke perſons.
                  
                  
                     8
                      
                     9
                      
                     He refuſeth three that offer to folovv him.
                  
                  
                     8
                     4
                     8
                      
                     He appeaſeth the tempeſt on the ſea.
                  
                  
                     8
                     5
                     8
                      
                     He healeth tvvo poſſeſſed of diuels in the countrie of the Geraſens, and permitteth the diuels to enter into ſvvine.
                  
                  
                     9
                     2
                     5
                      
                     He healeth the ſicke of the palſey, being let dovvne through the tiles.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                      
                     He calleth Matthevv from the cuſtome houſe, and diſputeth vvith Iohns diſciples and the Phariſees of faſting.
                  
                  
                     9
                     5
                     8
                      
                     He raiſeth the Archiſynagogs daughter, and cureth her that had a fluxe of bloud.
                  
                  
                     9
                      
                      
                      
                     He healeth tvvo blinde, and one poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     5
                     He healeth him on the Sabboth day that lay at the Probatica and had been diſeaſed 38 yeres.THE 2 PASCHE.
                     
                  
                  
                     12
                     3
                     6
                      
                     He confuteth the Phariſees being offended that his diſciples bruiſed the eares of corne on the Sabboth.
                  
                  
                     12
                      
                      
                      
                     He refelleth the Phariſees being offended becauſe he cured the vvithered hand on the Sabboth.
                  
                  
                     5.6.7
                     3
                     6
                      
                     He chooſeth the 12 Apoſtles: and maketh that diuine ſermon called Sermo Domini in monte, the Sermon of our Lord in the mount, conteining the paterne of a Chriſtian mans life.
                  
                  
                     8
                     1
                     5
                      
                     He cureth a leper.
                  
                  
                     8
                      
                     7
                      
                     He healeth the Centurions ſeruant.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     7
                      
                     He raiſeth the vvidovves ſonne at Naim.
                  
                  
                     11
                      
                     7.9
                      
                     Iohn ſendeth out of priſon his diſciples vnto Chriſt.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     7
                      
                     He forgiueth M. Magdalens ſinnes, preferring her much before the Ph
                           •
                        riſee that deſpiſed her.
                  
                  
                     12
                     3
                     11
                      
                     He healeth him that had a deafe and dumme deuil, and refuteth the blaſpheming Phariſees.
                  
                  
                     12
                     3
                     11.8
                      
                     He preferreth the obſeruers of Gods vvord before carnal mother and brethren.
                  
                  
                     13
                     4
                     8
                      
                     The parable of the ſovver.
                  
                  
                     13
                     4
                      
                      
                     The parables of the cockle, of the ſeede grovving vvhen men ſleepe, of the muſtard ſeede, and of the leauen.
                  
                  
                     13
                      
                      
                      
                     The parables of the treaſure hid in the field, of the pretious ſtone, and of the nette.
                  
                  
                     13
                     6
                     4
                      
                     Teaching in Nazareth, he condemneth it of incredulitie.
                  
                  
                     9.10
                     6
                     8
                      
                     He ſendeth the tvvelue Apoſtles to preache.
                  
                  
                     14
                     6
                     9
                      
                     Iohn is beheaded, and the fame of Ieſus commeth to Herods eares.
                  
                  
                     14
                     6
                     9
                     6
                     He feedeth 5000 men vvith fiue loaues.
                  
                  
                     14
                     6
                      
                     6
                     
                         He vvalketh vpon the ſea, and ſo maketh Peter alſo to doe.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     6
                     He reaſoneth of Manna, and of the true bread from heauen.THE 3 PASCHE.
                     
                  
                  
                     15
                     7
                      
                      
                     He reprehendeth the Phariſees for cauilling at his diſciples becauſe they did eate vvith vnvvaſhed handes.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                      
                     He healeth the daughter of the vvoman of Canaan.
                  
                  
                      
                     7
                      
                      
                     He cureth a man that vvas deafe and dumme.
                  
                  
                     15
                     8
                      
                      
                     He feedeth 4000 vvith ſeuen loaues.
                  
                  
                     16
                     8
                      
                      
                     He reiecteth the Phariſees that aſked a ſigne, and biddeth his diſciples bevvare of their leauen.
                  
                  
                      
                     8
                      
                      
                     He healeth a blinde man in Bethſaida.
                  
                  
                     16
                     8
                     9
                      
                     The time that he vvil paſſe out of this vvorld, novv dravving nigh, he maketh Peter, for confeſſing him to be Chriſt,
                           The 4 part, from the time that he began (Mat. 16, 
                                 ••
                              
                            to foretel to his Diſciples, that he muſt goe & ſuffer in Hieruſalem. the Rocke vpon vvhich he vvil build his Church, promiſing to giue him the keies of heauen, and vvithal foretelleth, that he muſt ſuffer in Hieruſalem, and that al muſt be ready to ſuffer vvith him.
                  
                  
                     17
                      
                     9
                      
                     The Tranſfiguration.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                      
                     He caſteth out the diuel vvhich his diſciples could not caſt out, commending vnto them faſting and praier.
                  
                  
                     17
                     9
                      
                      
                     He paieth the didrachmes for him and Poter, after that Peter had found a ſtater in the fiſhes mouth.
                  
                  
                     18
                     9
                     9
                      
                     His diſciples contending for Superioritie, he teacheth humilitie.
                  
                  
                     18
                     9
                      
                      
                     He threateneth the ſcandalizers of litle ones.
                  
                  
                     18
                      
                      
                      
                     He teacheth vs to forgiue our brother ſinning againſt vs.
                  
                  
                     10
                     10
                     9
                     7
                     Leauing Galilee he goeth into Iurie, and the Samaritanes vvil not receiue him.
                           The 5 part, of his going into Ievvrie toward his Paſſion.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     17
                      
                     In that iourney he healeth the ten lepers.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     7
                     He teacheth in the Temple in the feaſt of Scenopégia, that is, of Tabernacles.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     8
                     He abſolueth the vvoman taken in aduoutrie, teacheth in the Temple, and goeth out of their handes that vvould haue ſtoned him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     9
                     He reſtoreth ſight to him that vvas borne blinde.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     10
                     He reaſoneth of the true Paſtor and his ſheepe.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     10
                      
                     He ſendeth the 70 diſciples, and they returne. The parable of the Samaritane and the vvounded man. Martha entertaineth Ieſus.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     11
                      
                     He teacheth the maner and force of praier, and reprehendeth the prepoſterous cleanneſſe of the Phariſees.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     12
                      
                     He teacheth not to feare them that kil the body onely, to caſt avvay the care of riches by the parable of him that thought his barnes to litle, and that the faithful ſeruant vvil alwaies expect the comming of his lord and maiſter.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     13
                      
                     He threateneth them, vnles they doe penance, ſhewing Gods patience by the fruitles figtree that vvas ſuffered to ſtand one yere more. He healeth the crooked vvoman, teacheth the vvay to heauen to be narrovv.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     14
                      
                     He healeth him that had a dropſie, on the Sabboth: and teacheth them to renounce al things in compariſon of him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     10
                     
                        In the feaſt of Dedication he goeth out of their handes that vvould haue ſtoned him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     15
                      
                     The parables of the loſt ſheepe, of the grote, and of the prodigal ſonne.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     16
                      
                     The parable of the vniuſt bailife.
                  
                  
                     19
                     10
                     16
                      
                     Of the indiſſolubilitie of matrimonie.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     16
                      
                     The riche glutton and Lazarus.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     17
                      
                     Vvo to ſcandalizers. The force of faith euen to the mouing of trees vvith a vvord.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     18
                      
                     Of the Phariſee and the Publicane that vvent to pray.
                  
                  
                     19
                     10
                     16
                      
                     He impoſeth or laieth his handes vpon litle children, and exhorteth a yong riche man to forſake al and become perfect.
                  
                  
                     10
                      
                      
                      
                     The parable of the vvorkemen hired into the vineyard.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     11
                     He raiſeth Lazarus, and the Iewes cōſult hovv to deſtroy him.
                  
                  
                     10
                     10
                     19
                      
                     He foretelleth his death, and denieth the requeſt of Zebedees tvvo ſonnes, aſking the tvvo cheefe places about him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     18
                      
                     He healeth a blinde man before his entring into Iericho.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     19
                      
                     Zachaeus the Publicane entertaineth Chriſt. The parable of tho ten poundes deliuered to ten ſeruants.
                  
                  
                     10
                      
                     10
                      
                     He healeth tvvo blinde men as he goeth out of Iericho.
                  
                  
                     16
                     14
                     12
                      
                     At a ſupper in Bethánia, Marie povvred ointment vpon him.PALME ſunday.
                     
                  
                  
                     21
                     11
                     19
                     12
                     Riding vpon an aſſe he entreth gloriouſly into Hieruſalem.
                  
                  
                     21
                      
                      
                     12
                     He healeth the lame and the blinde, and Gentiles deſire to ſee him.
                           The 6 part, conteining the holy weeke of his Paſſion in Hieruſalem.
                     
                  
                  
                     21
                     11
                     19
                      
                     He curſeth the figtree, and caſteth the biers and ſellers out of the Temple.
                  
                  
                     21
                     11
                     19.20
                      
                     To his enemies the Ievves, he auoucheth his povver by Iohns Baptiſme vvhich vvas of God, and foretelleth their reprobation, vvith the Gentils vocation in their place, by parables: as the parable of the tvvo ſonnes, the one promiſing to doe, the other doing his fathers commaundement.
                  
                  
                     21
                     12
                     20
                      
                     The parable of the vineyard let out to huſbandmen that killed both the ſeruants and the ſonne ſent to require fruite.
                  
                  
                     22
                      
                      
                      
                     The parable of the king that made a mariage for his ſonne, inuiting gheſts to the feaſt, and they vvould not come.
                  
                  
                     22
                     12
                     20
                      
                     He anſvvereth their queſtion of paying tribute to Caeſar, and the Sadducees queſtion of the Reſurrection.
                  
                  
                     22
                     12
                      
                      
                     He anſvvereth the Phariſees queſtion, of the greateſt commaundement.
                  
                  
                     22
                     12
                     20
                      
                     He putteth them to ſilence vvith this queſtion concerning CHRIST, hovv he could be Dauids ſonne.
                  
                  
                     23
                     12
                     20
                      
                     He biddeth them doe as the Scribes teach, but not as they doe.
                  
                  
                      
                     12
                     12
                      
                     He extolleth and preferreth the poore vvidovves offering.
                  
                  
                     24
                     13
                     21
                      
                     He foretelleth to ſome of his Diſciples, the deſtruction of the Temple and of Hieruſalem: and by that occaſion, vvhat things ſhalbe before the conſummation of the vvorld,TVESDAY night. and Antichriſt in the conſummation, and then incontinent Domeſday, vvarning vs to prepare our ſelues againſt his comming.
                  
                  
                     25
                      
                      
                      
                     By the parable of the ten Virgins, & the parable of the talents,  he ſhevveth, hovv it ſhal be at Domeſday vvith the Faithful that prepare, and that prepare not them ſelues: and vvithout parables, that they vvhich doe not good vvorkes, ſhal be damned.
                  
                  
                     26
                     14
                     22
                      
                     Iudas bargaineth vvith the Ievves to betray him. and tvvo of his diſciples prepare the Paſchal lambe.TENEBRE vveneſday.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     13
                     At the ſupper he vvaſheth his Apoſtles feete.MAVNDY thurſday.
                     
                  
                  
                     26
                     14
                     22
                      
                     He inſtituteth the Sacrifice of his body and bloud in the B. Sacrament.The 4 Paſche.
                     
                  
                  
                     26
                     14
                     22
                     13
                     He foretelleth that one of the Tvvelue ſhal betray him (appeaſing their contention for the ſuperioritie) and that they ſhal al deny him.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     14
                     His ſermon after ſupper.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     17
                     His prayer to his father.Al THVRSDAY night & GOOD FRIDAY.
                     
                  
                  
                     26.27
                     14.15
                     22.23
                     18.19
                     The ſtorie of his Paſſion and burial, from thurſday at night, til the next day at euentide.
                  
                  
                     28
                     16
                     24
                     20
                     He riſeth the third day,EASTER DAY.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     16
                      
                     20
                     appeareth firſt to Marie Magdalene.
                  
                  
                     28
                      
                      
                      
                     Then to the other vvomen.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     24
                      
                     Then to Peter. ver. 34. then to the tvvo diſciples going into Emmaus. ver. 15.
                  
                  
                      
                     16
                     24
                     10
                     Then to the diſciples gathered together in a houſe at Hieruſalem, vvhen he entred the doores being ſhut, and gaue them povver to remit and reteine ſinnes.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     20
                     Then, vpon Lovv-Sunday,LOVV SVNday. to the diſciples likevviſe gathered together, and Thomas among them.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     21
                     Then, at the ſea of Tiberias, to Peter & the reſt that were fiſhing. vvhere he committeth his ſheepe to Peter.
                  
                  
                     18
                     16
                      
                      
                     Then, to the diſciples vpon a mount in Galilee: giuing them commiſſion to preache and baptize through out the vvhole vvorld.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     24
                      
                     Then in Bethánia, vvhere he promiſeth to ſend the holy Ghoſt (bidding them tarie in the meane time in Hieruſalem) 
                  
                  
                      
                     16
                     24
                      
                     and ſo bleſſing them,ASCENSION day. Aſcendeth into heauen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE ARGVMENT OF THE ACTES OF THE APOSTLES.
            
               THE Goſpel hauing ſhevved, hovv the Ievves moſt impiouſly rèiected Chriſt (as alſo Moyſes and the Prophets had foretold of them:) and therefore deſerued to be reiected themſelues alſo of him: novv folovveth this booke of the Actes of the Apoſtles (Hier. in Catal. vvritten by S. Luke in Rome the fourth y
                  •
               r
                  •
                of Nero, An. Dom. 61) and ſhevveth, hovv notvvithſtanding their deſertes, Chriſt of his mercy (as the Prophets alſo had foretold of him) offered him ſelfe vnto that vnvvorthy people, yea after that they had Crucified him, ſending vnto them his tvvelue Apoſtles to moue them to penance, and ſo by Baptiſme to make them of his Church: and vvhiles al the Tvvelue vvere ſo occupied about the Ievves: hovv of a perſecuting Ievve he made an extraordinarie Apoſtle (vvho vvas S. Paul) and to auoide the ſcādal of the Ievves (to vvhom onely him ſelfe likevviſe for the ſame cauſe had preached) ſent him, and not any of his Twelue by and by, who were his knovven Apoſtles, vnto the Gentiles, vvho neuer afore had Heard of Chriſt, and vvere vvorſhippers of many Gods, to moue them alſo (for, that likevviſe the Prophets had foretold) to faith and penance, and ſo by Baptiſme to make them of his Church: and hovv the incredulous Ievves euery vvhere reſiſted the ſame Apoſtle and his preaching to the Gentiles, perſecuting him and ſeeking his death, and neuer ceaſing vntil he fel into the handes of the Gentils:Act. 13, 46, 1
                     •
                  , 6▪ 
                  
                     •
                  9, 9. 28, 28. that ſo (as not onely he euery vvhere, but alſo the Prophets afore him, and Chriſt had foretold) the Goſpel might be taken avvay from them,Mat. 21, 23▪
                and giuen to the Gentiles:Eſa. 1. euen from Hieruſalem (vvhoſe reprobation alſo by name had been often foretold) the headcitie of the Iewes,Luc. 13, 33. vvhere it began, tranſlated to Rome the headcitie of the Gentiles. Al this vvil be euident by the partes of the booke: vvhich may be theſe ſixe.
            Firſt, hovv Chriſt Aſcending in the ſight of his Diſciples, promiſed vnto them the Holy ghoſt, fortelling that of him they ſhould receiue ſtrength, and ſo begin his Church in Hieruſalem: and from thence dilate it into al that Countrie, that is into al Iurie: yea and into Samaria alſo yea into al Nations of the Gentiles, be they neuer ſo far of. You ſhal receiue (ſaith he) the vertue of the Holy ghoſt cōming vpon you: and you ſhal be witneſſes vnto me in Hieruſalem, & in al Iurie, and Samaria, and euen to the vtmoſt of the earth. Chap. 1.
            Secondly, the beginning of the Church in Hieruſalem, accordingly. Chap. 2.
            Thirdly, the propagation of it conſequently into al Iurie, and alſo to Samaria. Chap. 8.
            Fourthly, the propagation of it to the Gentiles alſo. Chap. 10.
            Fifthly, the taking of it avvay from the obſtinate Ievves, and geuing of it to the
 Gentiles, by the miniſterie of S. Paul and S. Barnabee. Chap. 13.
            Sixthly, of taking it avvay from Hieruſalem it ſelfe, the headcitie of the Ievves, and ſending it (as it vvere) to Rome the headcitie of the Gentiles, and that,Act. 25. 11. in their perſecuting of Paul ſo far, * that he appealed to Caeſar, and ſo deliuering him after a ſort vnto the Romanes:Luc. 23, 1. as they bad * before deliuered to them alſo Chriſt him ſelfe. vvhere as S. Peters firſt cōming thither, vvas vpon an other occaſion, as ſhalbe ſaid anone. Of vvhich Romanes and Gentiles therfore, the ſame S. Paul being novv come to Rome (the laſt Chap. of the Actes) foretelleth the obſtinat Ievves there,Act. 28, 28.ſaying: Et ipſi audient. You vvil not heare, but, they vvil heare. that ſo the prediction of Chriſt aboue rehearſed might be fulfilled: And euen to the vtmoſt of the earth. And there doth S. Luke end the booke, not caring to tel ſo much as the fulfilling of that vvhich our Lord had foretold (Act. 27, 24) to S. Paul, Thou muſt appeare before Caeſar. becauſe his purpoſe vvas no more but to ſhevv the nevv Hieruſalem of the Chriſtians, vvhere Chriſt vvould place the cheefe ſeate of his Church, as alſo in deede the Fathers and al other Catholikes haue in al ages looked thither, vvhen they vvere in any great doubt: no leſſe then the Ievves to Hieruſalem, as they vvere appointed in the old Teſtament. Deut. 17, 8.
            And ſo this Booke doth ſhevv the true Church, as plainely, as the Goſpel doth ſhevv the true Chriſt, vnto al that do not vvilfully ſhut their ovvne 
                  •
               ies, to vvit, this to be the true Church, vvhich beginning viſibly at Hieruſalem, vvas taken from the Ievves, and tranſlated to the Gentils (and namely to Rome) continuing viſibly,Rom. 11, 25. and viſibly to continue hereafter alſo, Vntil the fulnes of the Gentiles ſhal be come in: that then alſo Al Iſraël may be ſaued. and then is come the end of the vvorld.Mat. 24, 
                     •
                  4. For ſo did Chriſt moſt plainely foretel vs: This Goſpel of the Kingdom ſhalbe preached in the vvhole world, for a teſtimonie to al Nations. and then ſhal come the conſummation. For the conuerſion of vvhich Nations and accompliſhing the fulnes of al Gentiles, the foreſaid Church Catholike, being mindful of her office. to be Chriſtes witnes euen to the vtmoſt of the earth, doth at this preſent (as alvvaies) ſend preachers to conuert and make them alſo Chriſtians:Tertul. de pr
                     •••
                  e. vvhereas the proteſtants and * al other Heretikes do nothing els but ſubuert ſuch as before vvere Chriſtians.
            And this being the Summe and ſcope of this Booke, thus to giue vs hiſtorically a iuſt ſight of the fulfilling of the Prophets & Chriſtes prediction about the Church: it is not to be marueiled at, vvhy it telleth not of S. Peter cōming to Rome: conſidering that his firſt cōming thither, vvas not, as S. Paules vvas, by the Ievves deliuerie of him, working ſo to their ovvne reprobatiō, but vpō another occaſion, to vvit, to confound Simon Magus. Euſ. Hiſt. li. 2. c. 12. 13. For vvho alſo ſeeth not, that it maketh no mention of his préaching to any Gentiles at al, thoſe fevv onely Act. 10 excepted, vvho vvere the firſt, and therefore (leſt the Gentiles ſhould ſeeme leſſe cared for of God, then the Ievves) Peter being the Head of al, vvas elected of God,Act. 15. 7. to incorporate them into the church, as before he had done the Ievves. God (ſaith he) among vs choſe, that by my mouth the Gentiles ſhould heare the vvord of the Goſpel, and beleeue. and S. Iames therevpon: Simon hath told how God firſt viſited to take of the Gentiles a people to his name.
               Act. 15, 14. But othervviſe (I ſay) here is no mention of Peters preaching to any Gentiles: no nor of the other eleuen Apoſtles. Vvil any man therfore inferre, that neither Peter, nor the other Eleuen preached to any Nation or citie of the Gentiles? No▪ the meaning of the Holy ghoſt vvas not to vvrite al the Actes of al the Apoſtles, no nor the preaching of Peter and his, to the Gentiles, but onely to the Ievves: thereby to ſet out vnto the vvorld, the great mercy of Chriſt tovvard thoſe vnvvorthy
 Ievves, and conſequently their moſt vvorthy reprobation for cōtemning ſuch grace and mercy▪ as alſo on the other ſide to ſhevv, hovv readily the Gentiles in ſo many Nations,Rom. 15, 19. vvere conuerted by one Apoſtle onely, vvho From Hieruſalem euen to Illy
                     •
                  icum, repleniſhed the Goſpel of Chriſt. And this parting of the vvorke ſo made by S. Peter vvith the reſt,Gal. 2, 9. doth S. Paul him ſelfe touche: That vve vnto the Gentiles, and they vnto the Circunciſion. Neuertheleſſe before his cōming to Rome, not onely vvas the Church come to Rome (as it is euident Act. the laſt chap.) there plāted by S. Peter and others (as likevviſe by S. Peter it vvas planted in the firſt Gentils, before that S. Paul began the taking of it avvay from the multitude of the Ievves, and the tranſlating of it to the multitude of the Gentils) but alſo ſo not able vvas the ſame Church of Rome, that S. Paul vvriting his Epiſtle to the Romanes,Rom. 1, 8. before he came thither, ſaith: Your faith is renovvmed in the vvhole vvorld. and therefore they vvith the reſt of the Gentiles, be that Nation vvhereof Chriſt told the Ievves,Mat. 21, 43. ſaying: The Kingdom of God ſhal be taken avvay from you, & ſhal be giuē to a Nation yelding the fruites thereof.
            
            
            As before vve noted the Goſpels, as they are read both at Mattins and Maſſe, through out the yere, in their conuenient time and place: ſo the bookes folovving (as alſo the bookes of the old Teſtament) are read in the ſaid Seruice of the Church, for Epiſtles and Leſſons, in their time & place, as hereafter ſhal be noted in euery of them. See the very ſame order and cuſtome of the primitiue Church, in S. Ambroſe ep. 33. S. Auguſtine Serm. de Tempore 139, 140, 141, 144. S. Leo Ser. 2 & 4 de Quadrag. & Ser. 13 & 19 de Paſs. Domini. S. Gregorie in his 40 homilies vpon the Goſpels.
            
         
         
            
            THE ACTES OF THE APOSTLES.The CHVRCH readeth this booke at Mattins from Low Sūday vnto the 3 Sunday after Eaſter: euen as in S. Auguſtines time. See ſerm. 83 & 93 de Diuerſis. 
                     •
                  o. 10.
            
            
               CHAP. I.The 1. part.
               
               
                  Chriſt novv ready to aſcend,The expectatiō of the Holy Ghoſt betwene the Aſcenſiō of Chriſt, and the beginning of the Church. biddeth the Apoſtles to expect the Holy Ghoſt vvhich he had promiſed. foretelling vvhere (being ſtrengthened by him) they ſhould begin his Church, and hovv far they ſhould cary it. 9 After his Aſcenſion they are vvarned by tvvo Angels to ſet their mindes vpon his ſecond comming. 14 In the daies of their expectation, 15 Peter beginneth to execute his vicarſhip, giuing inſtruction and order, by vvhich Mathias is elected Apoſtle in the place of Iudas.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE * firſt treatiſe I made ofNot al particularly, (for the other Euangeliſts write diuers thinges not touched by him) but al the principal and moſt neceſſarie thinges. al things,Lu. 1, 3. O Theophilus,The Epiſtle 
                        •
                     t Maſſe vpon Aſcenſion day. vvhich IESVS began to doe and to teache, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vntil the day vvherein ″ giuing commaundement by the holy Ghoſt to the Apoſtles vvhom he choſe, he vvas aſſumpted: ✝ 
                     verse 3 to vvhō he ſhevved alſo him ſelf aliue after his paſſion in many arguments, for fourtie daies appearing to them, & ſpeaking of the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And eating vvith them,Iu. 24, 49. * he commaunded them, that they ſhould not depart from Hieruſalem, but ſhould expect the promiſſe of the Father,Io. 14, 26. vvhich you * haue heard (ſaith he) by my mouth: ✝ 
                     verse 5 for Iohn in deede baptized vvithIohns Baptiſme gaue not the Holy Ghoſt. vvater, but
* you ſhal beThe aboundāt powring of the Holy Ghoſt vpon them on whitſunday, he calleth baptiſme. baptized vvith the holy Ghoſt after theſe fevv daies.Lu. 3, 16. 
                  
                     •
                   ✝ 
                     verse 6 They therfore that vvere aſſembled, aſked him, ſaying, Lord, whether at this time vvilt thou reſtore the kingdom to Iſrael? ✝ 
                     verse 7 but he ſaid to them, ″ It is not for you to knovv times or moments, vvhich the Father hath put in his ovvne povver:Lu. 24, 49. Act. 2, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 8 but you ſhal receiue the * vertue of the holy Ghoſt comming vpon you, and you ſhal be vvitneſſes vnto me in Hieruſalem, and in al Ievvrie, and Samaria, and euen to the vtmoſt of the earth.Mar. 16, 19. Lu. 24, 51. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And * vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, in their ſight he vvas eleuated: and a cloud receiued him out of their ſight. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhen they beheld him going into heauen, behold tvvo men ſtoode beſide them in vvhite garments, ✝ 
                     verse 11 vvho alſo ſaid, Ye men of Galilee, vvhy
 ſtand you looking into heauen? This IESVS vvhich is ″ aſſumpted from you into heauen, ſhal ſo come as you haue ſeen him going into heauen. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Then they returned to Hieruſalem from the mount that is called Oliuet, vvhich is by Hieruſalem, diſtant a Sabboths iourney. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvhen they vvere entred in, they vvent vp into an vpper chamber, vvhere abodeThis viſible companie was the true Churche of Chriſt, which he left, & commaūded to keepe together til the cō
                     ming of the Holy Ghoſt by h to be further informed & furniſhed to gaine al natiōs to the ſame Societie. Peter & Iohn, Iames and Andrevv, Philippe and Thomas, Bartholomevv and Mathevv, Iames of Alphaeus and Simon Zelótes, and Iude of Iames. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Al theſe vvere perſeuéring vvith one minde in praier vvith theThe Heretikes, ſome in the text, other in the margēt, traſlate, Wiues, to wit, of the Apoſtles, moſt Impudently, knowīg in their cōſciences that he meaneth the Maries & other holy women that folowed Chriſt. as Lu. 1, 2, 24, 10. See Beza & the Engl. Bible 1579. vvomen and ″ MARIE the mother of IESVS, and his brethren.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 
                  The Epiſtle vpō S. Mathias day Febr. 
                           •
                        4.
                   In thoſe daies ″ Peter riſing vp in the middes of the brethren, ſaid: (and the multitude of perſons together, vvas almoſt an hundred and tvventie) ✝ 
                     verse 16 You men, brethren,
*the ſcripture muſt be fulfilled vvhich the holy Ghoſt ſpake before by the mouth of Dauid concerning Iudas,Pſ. 40, 9▪
                   vvho vvas the * captaine of them that apprehended IESVS:Io. 13, 18▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 17 vvho vvas numbred among vs and obteined the lot of this miniſterie.Luc. 22, 47. Io. 18, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he in deede hath poſſeſſed a * field of the revvard of iniquitie,Mt. 27, 5. 7. and being hanged he burſt in the middes, and al his bovvels guſhed out. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And it vvas made notorious to al the inhabitants of Hieruſalem: ſo that the ſame field vvas called in their tonge, Hacel-dema, that is to ſay, the field of bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For it is vvritten in the booke of Pſalmes.Pſa. 68, 26. 
                  Be their habitation made deſert, and be there none to dvvel in it. And his Biſhoprike let another take.
                  Pſ. 108, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Therfore, of theſe men that haue aſſembled vvith vs, al the time that our Lord IESVS vvent in and vvent out among vs, ✝ 
                     verse 22 beginning from the baptiſme of Iohn vntil the day vvherein he vvas aſſumpted from vs,No ſmal myſterie, that the number of the twelue Apoſtles muſt needes be made vp againe. there muſt one of theſe be made a vvitnes vvith vs of his reſurrection.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And they appointed tvvo, Ioſeph, vvho vvas called Barſabas, vvho vvas ſurnamed Iuſtus: and Mathias. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And praying they ſaid, Thou Lord that knovveſt the harts of al men, ſhevv of theſe tvvo, one, vvhom thou haſt choſen, ✝ 
                     verse 25 to take the place of this miniſterie and Apoſtleſhip, from the vvhich Iudas hath preuaricated that he might goe to his ovvne place. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And they gaue them ″ lottes, and the lot fel vpon Mathias, and he vvas numbered vvith the eleuen Apoſtles. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     2. Giuing commaundement.] He meaneth the power giuen them to preach to baptize▪ to remit ſinnes, and generally the whole commiſſion and charge of gouernement of the Church after him and in his name, ſteede, and right▪ the which Regiment was giuen them together with the Holy Ghoſt to aſſiſt them therein for euer.
                  
                     7. It is not for you.]
                     The times and moments of things to come pertaine not to vs. It is not for vs, nor needful for the Church, to know the times & moment of the world, the comming of Antichriſt, and ſuch other Gods ſecretes. This is ynough in that caſe, to be aſſured that Chriſts faith ſhal be preached, and the Church ſpred through out al Nations, the Holy Ghoſt concurring continually with the Apoſtles and their Succeſſors for the ſame.
                  
                     11. Aſſumpted from you.] By this viſible Aſcending of Chriſt to heauen and like returne from thence to iudgement,Chriſt is aſcended, and yet really in the B. Sacrament. the Heretikes do incredulouſly argue, him not to be in the Sacrament. But let the faithful rather giue eare to S. Chryſoſtome ſaying thus: O miracle, he that ſitteth vvith the Father in heauen aboue, at the very ſame time is handled of men beneath. Chriſt aſcending to heauen, both hath his fleſh vvith him, and left it vvith vs beneath. Eliae
                           •
                         being taken vp, left to his Diſciple his cloke only: but the Sonne of man aſcending left his ovvne fleſh to vs. Li. 
                           •
                         de Sacerd. Ho. 2 ad po. Ant. in fine. Ho. de diuit. & paup. in fine.
                  
                  
                     14. MARIE the mother of IESVS.]Our B. LADY. This is the laſt mention that is made in holy Scripture, of our B Lady. for though ſhe were ful of al diuine wiſedom, and opened (no doubt) vnto the Euangeliſtes and other writers of holy Scriptures, diuerſe of Chriſts actions, ſpeaches, and myſteries, whereof ſhe had both experimental and reuealed knowledge: Yet for that ſhe was a woman, and the humbleſt creature liuing, and the paterne of al order and obedience, it pleaſed not God that there ſhould be any further note of her life,Her life. doings, or death, in the Scriptures. She liued the reſt of her time with the Chriſtians (as here ſhe is peculiarly named and noted among them) and ſpecially with S. Iohn the Apoſtle,Io. 19, 26. 27. * to whom our Lord recommended her. Who prouided for her al neceſſaries, her ſpouſe Ioſeph (as it may be thought) being deceaſed before. The common opinion is that ſhe liued 63 yeres in al.Dionyſ. ep. ad Timotheum. At the time of her death,Her death. (as S. Denys firſt, & after him S. Damaſcene de dormit. Deiparae. writeth.) al the Apoſtles then diſperſed into diuers nations to preache the Goſpel, were miraculouſly brought together (ſauing S. Thomas who came the third day after) to Hieruſalem, to honour her diuine departure and funeral, as the ſaid S. Denys witneſſeth. Who ſaith that him ſelf, S. Timothee, and S. Hierotheus were preſent: teſtifying alſo of his owne hearing, that both before here death and after for three daies, not onely the Apoſtles and other holy men preſent, but the Angels alſo and Powers of heauen did ſing moſt melodious Hymnes. They buried her ſacred body in Gethſémaui, but for S. Thomas ſake, who deſired to ſee and to reuerence it,Her ASSVMVTION. they opened the ſepulcher the third day, and finding it void of the holy body, but excedingly fragrant, they returned, aſſuredly deeming that her body was aſſumpted into heauen, as the Church of God holdeth, being moſt agreable to the ſingular priuilege of the mother of God, and therfore celebrateth moſt ſolemnely the day of her Aſſumption. And that is conſonant not onely to the ſaid S. Denys, and S. Damaſcene, but to holy Athanaſius alſo, who auoucheth the ſame, Serm. in Euang. de Deipara. of which Aſſumption of her body. S. Bernard alſo wrote fiue notable ſermons extant in his workes.
                  But neither theſe holy fathers,The Proteſtāts haue no feaſt of her at al, as they haue of other Saincts. nor the Churches tradition and teſtimonie, do beare any ſway now a daies with the Proteſtants, that haue aboliſhed this her greateſt feaſt of her Aſſumption. who of reaſon ſhould at the leaſt celebrate it as the day of her death, as they doe of other Saincts. For though they beleeue not that her body is aſſumpted, yet they wil not (we trow) deny that ſhe is dead, and her ſoule in glorie: neither can they aſke ſcriptures for that, no more then they require for the deathes of Peter, Paul, Iohn, and other, vvhich be not mentioned in ſcriptures & yet are ſtill celebrated by the Proteſtants. But concerning the B. Virgin MARIE, they haue blotted out alſo both her Natiuitie, and her Conception: ſo as it may be thought the Diuel beareth a ſpecial malice to this woman whoſe ſeede brake his head. For as for the other two daies of her Purification & Aununciation, they be not proper to our Lady, but the one to Chriſts Conception, the other to his Preſentation▪ ſo that ſhe by this meanes ſhal haue no feſtiuitie at al.
                  But contrariwiſe,How the Primitiue Church & auncient fathers honoured our B. Lady. to conſider how the auncient Church and fathers eſteemed, ſpake, and wrote of this excellent veſſel of grace, may make vs deteſt theſe mens impietie, that can not abide the praiſes of herLu. 1, 48. whom al generations ſhould call bleſſed, and that eſteeme her honours a derogatiō to her ſonne. Some of their ſpeaches we wil ſet downe, that al men may ſee, that we neither praiſe her, nor pray to her, more amply then they did. S. Athan
                        •
                     ſius in the place alleaged, after he had declared how al the Angelical ſpirits and euery order of them honoured and praiſed her with the AVE,S. Athanaſius. wherewith S. Gabriel ſaluted her; We alſo, ſaith he, of al degrees vpon the earth
 
                     
                        •
                     xtol thee with loude voice, ſaying, Au
                           •
                         gratia plena &c. Haile ful of grace, our Lord is vvith thee pray for vs 
                           〈◊〉
                         Maiſtreſſe,
                     S. Ephrem. 
                     and Lady, and Queens, and mother of God. Moſt holy and auncient Ephrem, alſo in a ſpecial oration made in praiſe of our Lady, ſaith thus in diuerſe places thereof, Intemerata De
                           •
                        p
                           •••
                         &c. Mother of God vndifiled, Queene of al, the hope of them that deſpaire, my lady moſt glorious, higher them the heauenly ſpirit
                           •
                        , more honorable then the Cherubins, holier then the Seraphins▪ and vvithout compariſon more glorious thē the ſupernal hoſtes, the hope of the fathers, the glorie of the Prophets, the praiſe of the Apoſtles. And a litle after. Virgo ante partum, in partu, & poſt partum▪ by thee vve are reconciled to Chriſt my God, thy ſonne: thou art the helper of ſinners, thou the hauen for them that are toſſed vvith ſtormes, the ſolam of the vvorld, the deliuerer of the empriſoned, the helpe of orphans, the redemption of captiues. And afterward, Vouchſafe me thy ſeruant to praiſe thee. Haile lady MARIE ful of grace, haile Virgin moſt bleſed among vvomen. And much more in that ſenſe which were to long to repeate.
                  
                     S. Cyril. hath the like wonderful ſpeaches of her honour,
                     S. Cyril. hom. 6. contra Naeſtorium. Praiſe and glorie be to thee 
                        •
                      holy Trinitieito thee alſo be praiſe, holy mother of God, for thou art the pretious pearle of the vvorld, thou the candel of vnquencheable light, the crovvne of Virginitis, the ſcepter of the Catholike faith. By thee the Trinitie is glorified and adored in al the vvorld: by thee heauen reioyceth, Angels and Archangels are glad, diuels are put to flight, and man is called againe to heauen, and euery creature that vvas held vvith the errour of Idols, is turned to the knowledge of the truth: by thee Churches are foūded through the world: thee being their helper, the Gentiles come to penance▪ 
                     and much more which we omit. Likewiſe the Greeke Liturgies or Maſſes of S. Iames,
                     The Greeke Liturgies of S. Iames, S. Baſil, S. Chryſoſtom. 
                     S. Baſil, and S. Chryſoſtom, make moſt honorable mention of our B. Lady, praying vnto her, ſaluting her with the Angelical hymne, Au
                        •
                      Maria, and vſing theſe ſpeaches, Moſt holy, vndefiled, bleſſed aboue al, our Queene, our Lady, the mother of God, MARIE, a virgin for ouer, the ſacred arke of Chriſts Incarnation, broder then the heauens that didſt beare they creatour, holy mother, of vnſpeakable light, vve magnifie thee vvith Angelical hymnes. al things paſſe vnderſtanding, al things are glorious in thee ô mother of God▪ by thee the myſterie before vnknovven to the Angels, is made manifeſt and reuealed to them on the earth▪ thou art more honorable then the Cheerubins, and more glorious then the Seraphins, to thee, O ful of grace, al creatures, both men and Angels doe gratulate and reioyce: glorie be to thee, Which art a ſanctified temple, a ſpiritual paradiſe, the glorie of virgins, of vvhom God tooke fleſh and made thy vvombe to be his throne, &c.
                  And S. Auguſtine Serm. 18. de Sanctis 
                           •
                        o. 10: or (as ſome thinke) S. Fulgentius:S. Auguſtine. 
                     O bleſſed MARIE, who can be able vvorthily to praiſe or thanke thee, receiue our praiers, obtaine vs out requeſtes, for thou art the
                     vnica ſpes▪
                      
                     ſpecial hope of ſinners, by thee vve hope for pardon of our ſinnes, & in thee, ô moſt bleſſed, is the expectation of our revvards.
                     Sancta MARIA ſuccurre miſeris, &c. And then folow theſe wordes now vſed in the Churches ſeruice: Sancta Maria ſuſcurre miſeris, iuua puſillanimes, refoue flebiles, orapro populo, interueni pro lero, intercede pro deuoto foemineo ſexu. Sentiant omnes tuum inuamen, quicunque celebrant tuam commemorationem. Pray thou continually for the people of God, vvhich didſt diſerue to beare the redeemer of the vvorld, Who liueth and reigneth for euer.
                     S. Damaſcene. S. Damaſcene alſo ſer. de dormitione Deiparae. Let vs crie vvith Gabriel, Aue gratia plena, Haile ful of grace, Haile ſea of ioy that can not be emptied, haile thevnicum leuamen 
                     onely caſe of greefes, haile holy virgin, by vvhom death vvas expelled,
                     S. Irenaeus. 
                     and life brought in. See S. Irenaeus li. 3▪ c. 33. and li. 5 circa medium, & S. Auguſtine de ſide & Symbolo. & de agone Chriſtiano. Where they declare how both the ſexes concurre to our ſaluation,As Adam and Eue, ſo Chriſt & our Lady. the man and the woman, Chriſt and our Lady, as Adam and Eue both were the cauſe of our fall, though Adam for more then his wife, and ſo Chriſt far more excellently and in an other ſort then our Lady: who (though his mother) yet is but his creature and handmaid, him ſelf being truely both God and man.See S. Greg Nzian. in fi. Trag. Chriſtus patiens.
                      In al which places alleaged & * many other like to theſe, if it pleaſe the reader to ſee and read, and make his owne eies witneſſes, he ſhal perceiue that there is much more ſaid of her, and to her, then we haue here recited, and that the very ſame or the like ſpeaches and termes were vſed then, that the Church vſeth now, in the honour and inuocation of the B. Virgin:The meaning of the titles and termes giuen to our B. Lady. to the confuſion of al thoſe that wilfully wil not vnderſtand in what ſenſe al ſuch ſpeaches are applied vnto her. to wit, either becauſe of her praier and interceſſion for vs. whereby ſhe is our hope, our refuge, our aduocate &c. or becauſe ſhe brought forth the author of our redemption and ſaluation, whereby ſhe is the mother of mercie, and grace, and life, and whatſoeuer goodnes we receiue by Chriſt.
                  
                     15. Peter riſing vp.)
                     Peter beginneth to practiſe his Primacie. Peter in the meane time practiſed his Superioritie in the cōpanie or Church, publiſhing an election to be made of one to ſupply Iudas roome. Which Peter did not vpon commaundement of Chriſt written, but by ſuggeſtion of Gods Spirit, and by vnderſtanding the Scriptures of the old Teſtament to that purpoſe: the ſenſe whereof Chriſt had opened to the Apoſtles before his departure, though in more ful maner afterward at the ſending of the Holy Ghoſt. And this acte of Peter in preſcribing to the Apoſtles and the reſt,Beza in no. Teſt. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . an. 1565. this election, and the maner thereof, is ſo euident for his Supremacie, that * the Aduerſa
                        •
                     ies confeſſe here that he was, Antiſtes, the cheefe and Biſhop of this whole College and companie.
                  
                     26. Loties.] When the euent or fall of the lot is not expected of Diuels, nor of the ſtarres, nor of any force of fortune,Caſting of lottes. but looked and praied for to be directed by God and his holy Saincts: then may lottes be vſed lawfully. And ſometimes to diſcerne betwixt two things mere indifferent, they be neceſſarie, as S. Auguſtine teacheth 
                        
                           •
                        p. 180 ad Honoratum.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The Holy Ghoſt comming to the Faithful vpon vvhitſunday.The 2 part. 5 Ievves in Hieruſalem of al Nations do vv
                        •
                     nder to heare 
                        •
                     hem ſpeaks al tongues. 14 And Peter to the deriders declareth,THE comming of the Holy Ghoſt and beginning of the Church in Hieruſalem. that it is not drunkennes, but the Holy Ghoſt vvhich Ioel did prophecie of, vvhich IESVS (whom they crucified) being now riſen againe and aſcended (as he ſheweth alſo out of the Scriptures) hath powred ou
                        •
                      from heauen, cōcluding therfore that he is CHRIST, and they moſt horrible murderers. 17 Whereat they being compuncte, and ſubmitting them ſelues, he telleth them that they muſt be baptized, and then they alſo ſhal receiue the ſame Holy Ghoſt, as being promiſed to al the baptized. 41 And ſo 3000 are baptized that very day. 42 Whoſe godly exerciſes are here reported, and alſo their liuing in ſtate of perfection. The Apoſtles worke many miracles, and God daily increaſeth the number of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen the daies of ″ Pentecoſt vvere accompliſhed,Act. 1, 4▪
                   they vvere al together in one place:The Epiſtle vpō whitſunday. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ſodenly there vvas made a ſound from heauen, as of a vehemēt vvinde cōming, & it filled the whole houſe vvhere they vvere ſitting. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And there appeared to them parted tonges as it were * of fire,Mt. 3, 11. and it ſate vpon euery one of them: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and they vvere ″ al repleniſhed vvith the
* HOLY GHOST,Io. 7, 39. and they began to ſpeake vvith diuerſe tonges, according as the HOLY GHOST gaue them to ſpeake.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And there vvere dvvelling at Hieruſalē Ievves, deuout men of euery nation that is vnder heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen this voice vvas made, the multitude came together, and vvas aſtonied in minde, becauſe euery man heard them ſpeake in his ovvne tongue. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And they vvere al amaſed, and marueled ſaying, Are not, lo, al theſe that ſpeake, Galil
                     •
                  ans, ✝ 
                     verse 8 and hovvdo v
                        •
                     e heare▪
                   haue vve heard' eche man our ovvne tongue vvherein vve vvere borne? ✝ 
                     verse 9 Parthians, and Medians, and Elamites, and that inhabite Meſo potámia, Ievvrie, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Aſia, ✝ 
                     verse 10 Phrygia, and Pamphilia, Aegypt and the partes of Lybia that is about Cyrénee, and ſtrangers of Rome, ✝ 
                     verse 11 Ievves alſo, and Proſelytes, Cretenſians, and Arabians: Vvedo heare▪
                   haue heard' them ſpeake in our ovvne tonges the great vvorkes of God. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they vvere al aſtonied, and marueled, ſaying one to an other, Vvhat meaneth this? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But others deriding ſaid, That theſe are ful of nevv vvine.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 
                  The leſſon before the Epiſtle on Imber weneſday in whitſonweeke. 
                  But
                  Peter the head of the reſt and now newly repleniſhed with al knowledge and fortitude, maketh the firſt Sermon. 
                  Peter ſtanding vvith the Eleuen, lifted vp his voice, and ſpake to them, Ye men, Ievves, and al you that dvvel in Hieruſalem, be this knovven to you, and vvith your eares receiue my vvordes. ✝ 
                        verse 15 For theſe are not drunke, as you
 ſuppoſe, vvhereas it is the third houre of the day: ✝ 
                        verse 16 But this is it that vvas ſaid by the Prophet Ioël,
                  Ioël. 2▪ 28. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And it ſhal be, in the laſt daies (ſaith our Lord) of my Spirit I vvil povvre out vpon al fleſh: and your ſonnes and your daughters ſhal prophecie, and your yong men ſhal ſee viſions, and your auncients ſhal dreame dreames. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vpon my ſeruants truely, and vpon my handmaides vvil I povvre out in thoſe daies, of my Spirit, and they ſhal prophecie: ✝ 
                     verse 19 and I vvil giue vvonders in the heauen aboue, and ſignes in the earth beneath, bloud, and fire, and vapour of ſmoke. ✝ 
                     verse 20 The ſunne ſhal be turned into darkenes, and the moone into bloud, before the great and manifeſt day of our Lord doth come. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And it ſhal be, euery one vvhoſoeuer calleth vpon the name of our Lord, ſhal be ſaued. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 Ye men of Iſraël heare theſe vvordes, IESVS of Nazareth a man approued of God among you, by miracles and vvonders and ſignes vvhich God did by him in the middes of you, as you knovv: ✝ 
                     verse 23 this ſame, ″ by the determinate counſel and preſcience of God being deliuered, you by the handes of vvicked men haue crucified and ſlaine. ✝ 
                     verse 24 vvhom God hath raiſed vp ″ looſing the ſorovves of hel, according as it vvas impoſſible that he ſhould be holden of it. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For Dauid ſaith concerning him,Pſ. 15, 8. 
                  I foreſavv the Lord in my ſight alvvaies: becauſe he is at my right hand that I be not moued. ✝ 
                        verse 26 For this, my hart hath been glad and my tongue hath reioyced: moreouer my fleſh alſo ſhal reſt in hope. ✝ 
                        verse 27 Becauſe thou vvilt not leaue ″ my ſoul
                  Who but an infidel (ſaith S. Auguſtine) wil deny Chriſt to haue deſcended to Hel? ep. 99.
                   
                  in hel, nor giue thy Holy one to ſee
                  As his ſoul ſuffered no paines in Hel, ſo neither did his body take any corruptiō in the graue. 
                  corruption. ✝ 
                        verse 28 Thou haſt made knovven to me the vvaies of life: thou ſhalt make me ful of ioyfulnes vvith thy face. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Ye men, brethren, let me boldly ſpeake to you of the Patriarch Dauid:3. Reg. 2, 10. that * he died, and vvas buried: and his ſepulchre is vvith vs vntil this preſent day. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Vvhereas therfore he vvas a Prophet,Pſ. 131, 11. and knevv that by an othe God had ſvvorne to him that of the fruite of his loynes there ſhould ſit vpon his ſeate: ✝ 
                     verse 31 forſeeing he ſpake of the reſurrection of Chriſt, for neither vvas he left in hel, neither did his fleſh ſee corruption. ✝ 
                     verse 32 This IESVS hath God raiſed againe, vvhereof al vve are vvitneſſes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 Being exalted therfore by the right hand of God, and hauing receiued of his father the promiſſe of the holy Ghoſt, he hath povvred outthis gift vvhich Pſ. 109, 1▪
                   this vvhom' you ſee and heare. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For Dauid aſcended not into heauen: but he ſaith, Our Lord hath ſaid to my Lord, ſit on my right hand, ✝ 
                        verse 35 vntil I make thine enemies the footeſtoole of thy feete. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Therfore let al the houſe of Iſraël know moſt certainly that God hath made him both Lord, and CHRIST, this IESVS, vvhom you haue crucified.
                ✝ 
                     verse 37 And hearing theſe things,Contrition. they were compuncte in hart, and ſaid to Peter and to the reſt of the Apoſtles, Vvhat ſhal
 vve doe men, brethren? ✝ 
                     verse 38 But Peter ſaid to them,Not onely amendment of life, but penāce alſo required be fore Baptiſme, in ſuch as be of age, though no
                        •
                      in that ſort as aftervvard in the Sacramēt of penance. Aug. de fid. et oper. c. 11. 
                           〈◊〉
                         ep. 108.
                   Doe penance, and be euery one of you baptized in the name of IESVS CHRIST for remiſſion of your ſinnes: and you ſhal receiue the gift of the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 39 For to you is the promiſſe, and to your children, and to al that are farre of, vvhomſoeuer the Lord our God ſhal call. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Vvith very many other vvordes alſo did he teſtifie, and exhorted them, ſaying, Saue your ſelues from this peruerſe generation. ✝ 
                     verse 41 They therfore that receiued his vvord, vvere baptized: and there vvere added in that day aboutThree thouſand were conuerted at this firſt ſermon, 
                        〈◊〉
                      they were put to the other viſible companio and Church. three thouſand ſoules.
                ✝ 
                     verse 42 And they vvere perſeuéring in the doctrine of the Apoſtles, and in the communication ofThis was the B. Sacrament, which the Apoſtles daily miniſtred to the Chriſtians at leaſt in one kinde. See chap. 20, 7.
                   the breaking of bread, and praiers. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And feare came vpon euery ſoul: many vvonders alſo and ſignes vvere done by the Apoſtles in Hieruſalem, and there vvas great feare in al. ✝ 
                     verse 44 Al they alſo that beleeued,Act. 4, 32. vvere together, * and had ″ al things cōmon. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Their poſſeſſions and ſubſtance they ſold, and deuided them to al, according as euery one had neede. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Daily alſo continuing vvith one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from houſe to houſe, they tooke their meate vvith ioy and ſimplicitie of hart: ✝ 
                     verse 47 praiſing God, and hauing grace vvith al the people. And our Lord ″ increaſed them that ſhould be ſaued, daily together.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. The daies of Pentecoſt.) As Chriſt our Paſche, for correſpondence to the figure, was offered at the Iewes great feaſt of Paſche,The feaſtes of Paſche & Pentecoſt. ſo fifty daies after (in Greeke, Pentecoſt) for accompliſhing the like▪ figure of the Law-giuing in Mount Sinal, he ſent downe the Holy Ghoſt iuſt on the day of their Pentecoſt, which was alwaies on Sunday, as appeareth Leuit. 23, 15. Both which daies the Church keepeth yerely for memorie of Chriſts death and Reſurrection, and the ſending downe of the Holy Ghoſt: as they did the like for record of their deliuerie out of Aegypt, and their Law giuing aforeſaid, the ſaid Feaſtes with vs conteining, beſides the remembrance of benefites paſt, great Sacraments alſo of the life to come. Aug. ep. 119, C. 16.
                  
                  
                     4. Al repleniſhed.) Though the Apoſtles and the reſt were baptized before, and had thereby receiued the grace of the Holy Ghoſt to ſanctification and remiſſion of ſinnes,The ſending of the Holy Ghoſt on whitſunday and the effectes thereof. as for diuers other purpoſes alſo:Lu. 24, 49▪
                      Yet as Chriſt * promiſed them they ſhould be further indued with ſtrength and vertue from aboue, ſo here he fulfilleth his promes, viſibly powring downe the Holy Ghoſt vpon al the companie and vpon euery one of them, thereby repleniſhing the Apoſtles ſpecially with al truth, wiſedom, and knowledge neceſſarie for the gouernement of the Church, and giuing both to them and to al other preſent, the grace and effect of the Sacrament of Confirmation, accompliſhing, corroborating, and ſtrengthening them in their ſaith and the confeſſion of the ſame. And laſtly for a viſible token of Gods Spirit, he endued them al with the gift of diuers ſtrange tonges: al (I ſay) there preſent,Our B. Ladie. as wel our Ladie, as other holy women and brethren, beſides the Apoſtles. though 
                        •
                      the Heretikes fondly argue,Beza Annot. in hoc 
                           〈◊〉
                         v. 1. for the deſire they haue to diſhonour Chriſts mother, that neither ſhe nor they were there preſent, nor had the gift of tongues, contrarie to the plaine text that ſaith, They vvere al together, to wit, al the 120 mentioned before c. 1. 15.
                  
                      
                     23. By the determinate counſel of God deliuered.)
                     Gods determination that Chriſt ſhould die, excuſeth not the Iewes. God deliuered him, and he deliuered him ſelf, for loue and intention of our ſaluation, and ſo the acte was holy and Gods owne determination. But the Iewes and others which betraied and crucified him, did it of malice and wicked purpoſe, and their facte was damnable, and not of Gods counſel or cauſing: though he tolerated it, for that he could and did turne their abominable facte to the good of our ſaluatiō. Therfore abhorre thoſe new Manichees of our time, both Lutherans and Caluiniſts, that make God the author and cauſe of Iudas betraying of Chriſt,B
                           •
                        za. no leſſe then of Paules conuerſion beſide the falſe tranſlation of Beza, ſaying for Gods preſcience or foreknowledge (in the Greeke, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) Gods prouidence.
                  
                  24. Looſing the ſorovves.) Chriſt was not in paines him ſelf, but looſed other men of thoſe dolours of Hel, wherewith it was impoſſible him ſelf ſhould be touched. See
                     Li. 12▪ c. 13▪ de Gen. 
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     S. Auguſtine.
                  
                  
                     27. My ſoul in Hel.)
                     Corrupt tranſlation againſt the Article of Chriſts deſcending into Hel. Where al the Faithful, according to the Creede, euer haue beleeued, that Chriſt according to his ſoul, went downe to Hel, to deliuer the Patriarches and al iuſt men there holden in bondage til his death, and the Apoſtle here citing the Prophets wordes, moſt euidently expreſſeth the ſame, diſtinguiſhing his ſoule in Hel, from his body in the graue: Yet the Caluiniſts to defend againſt Gods expreſſe wordes, the blaſphemie of their Maiſter, that Chriſt ſuffered the paines of Hel, and that no where but vpon the Croſſe, and that otherwiſe he deſcended not into Hel,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      moſt falſely and flatly here corrupt the text, by turning and wreſting both the Hebrew and Greeke wordes from their moſt proper and vſual ſignifications of, Soule, and Hel, into body, and graue: ſaying for, my ſoule in Hel, thus, my body,
                     Eng. Bible. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     life; perſon, yea (as Beza in his new Teſtament an. 1556) my carcas in the graue, and this later they corrupt almoſt through out the Bible for that purpoſe. But for refelling of both corruptions, it ſhal be ſufficient in this place: firſt, that al Hebrues & Greekes, and al that vnderſtand theſe tonges, know that the foreſaid Hebrue & Greeke wordes are as proper, peculiar, and vſual to ſignifie, ſoul and Hel, as anima and infernus in Latin, yea as ſoul and Hel in Engliſh do properly ſignifie the ſoule of man, and Hel that is oppoſite to heauen: and that they are as vnproprely vſed to ſignifie body and graue, as to ſay in Engliſh, ſoul for body, or Hel for graue, Secondly, it doth ſo mi
                        •
                     like the Heretikes them ſelues, that Caſtaleo one of their fine Tranſlatours reſelleth it, and to make it the more ſure, he for, in inferno, tranſlateth, in Orco. that is, in Hel. Thirdly, Beza him ſelf partly recanteth in his later edition, and confeſſeth that, Carcas, was no fit word for the body of Chriſt, and therfore, I have (ſaith he) changed it, but I reteine and keepe the ſa
                           ••
                        e ſenſe ſtil. meaning that he hath now tranſlated it, ſoule, but that he meaneth thereby as before, Chriſts dead body, fourthly,No. Teſt. an. 1556. annot. in 2 Act. v▪ 27▪ & 24. & in 1 Pet. 
                           •
                        , 19. he ſaith plainely, that tranſlating thus, Thou ſhalt not leaue my carcas in the graue, he did it of purpoſe againſt Limbus Patrum, Purgatorie, and Chriſts deſcending into Hel, which he calleth ſoul errours, and marueleth, that moſt of the ancient fathers vvere in that errour: namely of Chriſts deſcending into Hel, and deliuering the old fathers. Vvhat neede we more▪ He oppoſeth himſelf both againſt plaine Scriptures and al auncient fathers, peruerting the one, and contemning the other, to ouerthrow that truth which is an Article of our Crede. whereby it is euidently falſe which ſome of them ſay for their defenſe, that none of them did euer of purpoſe tranſlate falſely. See the Annotation vpon 1 Pet. 3. v. 19.
                  
                  
                     44. Al things common.)
                     Liuing in common. This liuing in common is not a rule or a precept to al Chriſtian men, as the Anabaptiſtes falſely pretend: but a life of perfection and counſel, folowed of our Religious in the Catholike Church. See S. Aug. in Pſ. 1
                           •
                        2. in principio. & ep. 109.
                  
                  
                     47. Increaſed.)
                     The increaſe & perpetuitie of the VISIBLE CHV
                           ••
                        H. Moe and moe were added to the Church (as the Greeke more plainely expreſſeth) that we may ſee the viſible propagation & increaſe of the ſame.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . from which time a diligent man may deduce the very ſame viſible Societie of men ioyned in Chriſt, through the whole booke, and afterward by the Eccleſiaſtical ſtorie, downe til our daies, againſt the pretenſed inuiſible Church of the Heretikes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  A miracle, and a Sermon of Peters to the people, ſhevving that I
                        •
                     SVS is Chriſt, and exhorting them to faith in him and penance for their ſinnes, and ſo they ſhal haue by him (in Baptiſme) the Benediction which was promiſed to Abraham.The Epiſtle vpō SS. Peter and Paules eue. Iun. 28.
                  
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND Peter and Iohn vvent vp into the temple, at theThis maketh for diſtinction of Canonical houres and diuerſitie of appointed times to pray in Se
                           •
                         Anno
                           •
                        . 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . ninthe houre of praier. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And a certaine man that vvas lame from his mothers vvombe, vvas caried: vvhom they laid euery day at the gate of the temple, that is called Specious, that he might aſke almes of them that vvent into the
 temple. ✝ 
                     verse 3 He, vvhen he had ſeen Peter and Iohn about to enter into the temple, aſked to receiue an almes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But Peter vvith Iohn looking vpon him, ſaid, Looke vpon vs. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But he looked earneſtly vpon them, hoping that he ſhould receiue ſome thing of them. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But Peter ſaid, Siluer and gold I haue not, but ″ that vvhich I haue, the ſame I giue to thee: In the name of IESVS CHRIST of Nazareth ariſe, and vvalke. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And taking his right hand, he lifted him vp, and forthvvith his feete and ſoles vvere made ſtrong. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And ſpringing he ſtoode, and vvalked: and vvent in vvith them into the temple vvalking, and leaping, and praiſing God. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And al the people ſavv him vvalking and praiſing God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they knevv him, that, it vvas he vvhich ſate for almes at the Specious gate of the temple: and they vvere excedingly aſtonied and agaſt at that had chaūced to him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And as he held Peter and Iohn, al the people ranne to them vnto the porche vvhich is called Salomons, vvondering.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 But Peter ſeing them,The Epiſtle vpō weneſday in Eaſter weeke. made anſvver to the people, Ye men of Iſraël, vvhy maruel you at this, or vvhy looke you vpon vs, as though ″ by our povver or holines vve haue made this man to vvalke? ✝ 
                     verse 13 The God of Abraham, and the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified his ſonne IESVS, vvhom you in deede deliuered and denied before the face of Pilate, he iudging him to be releaſed.
Luc. 23, 28. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But you denied the holy and the iuſt one, * and aſked a mankiller to be giuen vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 but the authour of life you killed, vvhom God hath raiſed from the dead, of vvhich vve are vvitneſſes. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And in theThis faith was not the faith of the ſame man (for he looked onely for almes) nor a ſpecial faith of the Apoſtles owne ſaluatiō: but the whole beleefe of Chriſtian Religion. faith of his name, this man vvhom you ſee and knovv, his name hath ſtrengthened: & the faith vvhich is by him, hath giuen this perfect health in the ſight of al you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And novv (brethren) I knovv that you did it through ignorāce, as alſo your princes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But God vvho foreſhevved by the mouth of al the prophets, that his CHRIST ſhould ſuffer, hath ſo fulfilled it. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Be Penitent therfore & conuert, that your ſinnes may be put out. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 20 that, vvhen the times ſhal come of refreſhing by the ſight of our Lord, and he ſhal ſend him that hath been preached vnto you IESVS CHRIST, ✝ 
                     verse 21 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvhomSome Heretikes fouly corrupt this place, thus, Who muſt be conteined in heauen, of purpoſe (as they proteſt) to hold Chriſt in heauē, from the B. Sacramēt. Beza. As though his preſēce there, drew him out of heauen. Neither cā they pretend the Greeke, which is word for word as in the vulgar latin, and as we tranſlate. heauen truely muſt receiue vntil the times of the reſtitution of al things, vvhich God ſpake by the mouth of his holy prophets from the beginnīg of the world.
 ✝ 
                     verse 22 Moyſes in deede ſaid,Deu. 18, 15. 
                  That a prophet ſhal the Lord your God raiſe vp to you of your brethren, as my ſelf: him you ſhal heare according to al things vvhatſoeuer he ſhal ſpeake to you. ✝ 
                        verse 23 And it ſhal be, euery ſoule that ſhal not heare that prophet, ſhal be deſtroied out of the people. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And al the Prophets from Samuël and aftervvard that haue ſpoken, told of theſe daies. ✝ 
                     verse 25 You are the children of the Prophets and of the teſtament vvhich God made to our fathers, ſaying to Abraham,Gen. 22, 18. 26, 4▪
                   
                  And in thy ſeede ſhal al the families of the earth be bleſſed. ✝ 
                     verse 26 To you firſt God raiſing vp his ſonne, hath ſent him bleſſing you: that euery one ſhould conuert him ſelf from his naughtines.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . That vvhich I haue.]
                     Saincts doe miracles and the like, but by the power of God. This power of working miracles vvas in Peter, and Peter properly did giue this man his health, though he receiued that force and vertue of God, and in & by him executed the ſame. Therfore he ſaith, That vvhich I haue, I giue to thee. and the Heretikes are ridiculous that note here, a miracle done by Chriſt by the handes of the Apoſtles, to make the ſimple beleeue that they had no more to doe then a dead inſtrument in the workemans hand.
                  
                     12. By our povver.] When the Apoſtles remit ſinnes, or doe any other miracles, they doe it not by any humane, proper, or natural power in them ſelues: but of ſupernatural force giuen them from aboue, to proue that the faith of Chriſt is true, and that he is God whom the Iewes crucified, in whoſe name and faith they worke, and not in their owne.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The Rulers of the Ievves oppoſe them ſelues and impriſon Peter and Iohn. 4 But yet thouſands of the people are conuerted: 5 and to the Rulers alſo, Peter boldly auoucheth by the forſaid miracle, that IESVS is Chriſt, telling them of their heinous fault out of the Pſalmes, and that vvithout him they can not be ſaued. 13 They though confounded vvith the miracle, yet procede in their obſtinacie, forbidding them to ſpeake any more of IESVS, adding alſo threates. 23 Wherevpon the Church fleeth to praier, vvherein they comfort them ſelues vvith the omnipotencie of God, and prediction of Dauid, and aſke for the gift of boldnes and miracles againſt thoſe threates. 31 And God ſheweth miraculouſly that he hath heard their praier. 
                        •
                     2 The vvhole Churches vnitie and communitie of life. 36. Of Barnabas by name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen they vvere ſpeaking to the people, the Prieſts and magiſtrates of the temple and the Sadducees came vpon them, ✝ 
                     verse 2 being greeued that they taught the people, and ſhevved in IESVS the reſurrection from the dead: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and they laid handes vpon them, and put them into vvard, vntil the morovv, for it vvas novv euening. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And 
Here againe we ſee the proceding and increaſe of the Church viſibly. many of them that had heard the vvord, beleeued: and the number of the men vvas made fiue thouſand.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 5 And it came to paſſe on the morovv, that their princes, and Auncients, and Scribes vvere gathered into Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 6 and Annas the high prieſt, and Caiphas and Iohn, and Alexander, and as many as vvere of the prieſts ſtocke. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And ſetting them in the middes, they aſked: In vvhat povver or in vvhat name haue you done this? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Then Peter repleniſhed vvith the holy Ghoſt, ſaid to them, Ye princes of the people & Auncients: ✝ 
                     verse 9 If vve this day be examined for a good deede vpon an impotent man, in vvhat he hath been made whole, ✝ 
                     verse 10 be it knovven to al you and to al the people of Iſraël, that in the name of IESVS CHRIST of Nazareth,
                     The name of IESVS. See Annot. Philip. 2, 10. vvhom you did crucifie, vvhom God hath raiſed from the dead, in this ſame this man ſtandeth before you vvhole.Pſa. 117, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 11 This is the ſtone that vvas reiected of you the builders: vvhich is made into the head of the corner. ✝ 
                     verse 12 and there is not ſaluation in any other. for neither is there any other name vnder heauen giuen to men, vvherein vve muſt be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And ſeeing Peters conſtancie and Iohns, vnderſtanding that they vvere men vnlettered,The Apoſtles conſtancie, learning and wiſdom after the cōming of the Holy Ghoſt, being but idiotes, that is, ſimple vnlettered men and timorous before. and of the vulgar ſort, they marueled, and they knew them that they had been vvith IESVS: ✝ 
                     verse 14 ſeeing the man alſo that had been cured, ſtanding vvith them, they could ſay nothing to the contrarie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But they commaunded them to goe aſide forth out of the councel: and they conferred together, ✝ 
                     verse 16 ſaying, Vvhat ſhal vve doe to theſe men? for a notorious ſigne in deede hath been done by them, to al the inhabitants of Hieruſalem: it is manifeſt, and vve can not denie it. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But that it be no further ſpred abrode among the people, let vs threaten them, that they ſpeake no more in this name to any man. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And calling them, they charged them that they ſhould not ſpeake at al, nor teache in the name of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But Peter and Iohn anſvvering, ſaid to them,Their cōſtancie and courage after their confirmation, being ſo weake before. And if any Magiſtrate cō
                     maund againſt God, that is to ſay, forbid Catholike Chriſtiā men to preach or ſerue God, this ſame muſt be their anſwer, though they be whipped and killed for their labour. See c. 5. v. 29.
                   If it be iuſt in the ſight of God, to heare you rather then God, iudge ye. ✝ 
                     verse 20 for vve can not but ſpeake the things vvhich vve haue ſeen and heard. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But they threatening, dimiſſed them: not finding hovv they might puniſh them, for the people, becauſe all glorified that vvhich had been done, in that vvhich vvas chaunced. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For the man vvas more then fourtie yeres old in vvhom that ſigne of health had been vvrought.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And being dimiſſed they came to theirs, and ſhevved al that the cheefe prieſts and Aucients had ſaid to them. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vvho hauing heard it, with one accord lifted vp their voice
 to God, and ſaid, Lord, thou that didſt make heauen & earth, the ſea, and al things that are in them, ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvho in the holy Ghoſt by the mouth of our father Dauid thy ſeruāt haſt ſaid, Vvhy did the Gentiles rage,
                  Pſ. 2, 1. 
                  and the people meditate vaine thinges: ✝ 
                        verse 26 the kings of the earth ſtand vp, and the princes aſſemble together againſt our Lord, and againſt his CHRIST? ✝ 
                     verse 27 For there aſſembled in deede in this citie againſt thy holy childe IESVS vvhom thou haſt anointed, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, vvith the Gentiles and the people of Iſraël, ✝ 
                     verse 28 to doe vvhatChriſtes death, as needeful for mans redemption, was of Gods determination: but as of the malice of the Iewes, it was not his act otherwiſe then by permiſſion. thy hand & thy counſel decreed to be done. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And novv Lord looke vpon their threatenings, and giue vnto thy ſeruants vvith al confidence to ſpeake thy vvorde, ✝ 
                     verse 30 in that, that thou extend thy hand to cures and ſignes and vvonders to be done by the name of thy holy ſonne IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And vvhen they had praied, the palce vvas moued vvherein they vvere gathered: and they vvere al repleniſhed vvith the holy Ghoſt, and they ſpake the vvord of God vvith confidence.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And the multitude of beleeuers had one hart and one ſoule: neither did any one ſay that ought vvas his ovvne of thoſe things vvhich he poſſeſſed,Act. 2, 44. but al things vvere common vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And vvith great povver did the Apoſtles giue teſtimonie of the reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST our Lord: and great grace vvas in al them. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For neither vvas there any one needie among them. For as many as vvere ovvners of landes or houſes,Note the ardent charitie and cōtempt of worldly things in the firſt Chriſtians: who did not onely giue great almes, but ſold al their lands to beſtow on the Apoſtles and the reſt that were in neceſſitie, according to Chriſtes coūſel. Mt. 16, 21. Note alſo the great honour & credit giuen to the Apoſtles, in that the Chriſtian men put al the goods & poſſeſſions they had, to their diſpoſition. ſold and brought the prices of thoſe things vvhich they ſold, ✝ 
                     verse 35 and laid it before the feete of the Apoſtles. And to euery one vvas deuided according as euery one hade neede. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And Ioſeph vvho vvas ſurnamed of the Apoſtles Barnabas (vvhich is by interpretation, the ſonne of conſolation) a Leuite, a Cyprian borne, ✝ 
                     verse 37 vvhereas he had a peece of land, ſold it, and brought the price, and laid it ″ before the feete of the Apoſtles.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     37. Before the feete.) He, as the reſt, did not onely giue his goods as in vulgar almes, but in al humble and reuerent maner as things dedicated to God,Reuerence to holy perſons. he laid them downe at the Apoſtles holy feete, as S. Luke alwaies expreſſeth,4. reg. 4, 
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      and gaue them not into their handes. The Sunamite fel downe and embraced Eliſaeus feete. Many that aſked benefites of Chriſt (as the woman ſicke of the bloudy fiuxe) fel downe at his feete and Ma
                        •
                     ie kiſſed his feete.Luc. 
                           •
                        , 47. Such are ſignes of due reuerence done both to Chriſt and to other ſacred perſons,Kiſſing their feete. either Prophetes,Lu. 7, 38. Apoſtles, Popes, or others repreſenting his perſon in earth. See in S. Hierom of Epiphanius Biſhop in Cypres, how the people of Hieruſalem of al ſortes flocked together vnto him, offering their children (to take his bleſſing) kiſsing his feete, plucking the hemme
                           •
                         of his garment, ſo that he could not moue for the throng. Ep. 
                        •
                     1 c. 4 cont. e
                        ••
                     o. Io. Hieroſol.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Ananias and his vvife Saphîra, for their ſacrilege, at Peters word fall downe dead, to the great terrour of the reſt. 12 By the Apoſtles miracles, not onely the number, but alſo their faith ſo increaſeth, that they ſeeke in the ſtreate
                        •
                      to the very ſhadow of Peter, the townes alſo about bringing their diſeaſed to Hieruſalem. 17 The Rulers againe oppoſe them ſelues, but in vaine. 19 For out of priſon an Angel deliuereth them, bidding them preach openly to al: 27 and in their Councel Peter is nothing afraid of their bigge wordes: 34 Yea Gamaliel being one of them ſelues caſ
                        •
                     eth a doubt among them, leſt the matter be of God, and therfore impoſsible to be diſſolued. 40 Finally, the Apoſtles being ſcourged by them, count it an honour, and ceaſe no day from preaching.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BVT a certaine man named Ananias, vvith Saphîra his vvife ſold a peece of land, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ″ defrauded of the price of the land, his vvife being priuie thereto: and bringing a certaine portion, laide it at the feete of the Apoſtles. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And ″ Peter ſaid, Ananias, vvhy hath Satan tempted thy hart, that thou ſhouldeſt lie to the holy Ghoſt, and defraude of the price of the land? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Remaining, did it not remaine to thee: and being ſold, vvas it not ″ in thy povver? Vvhy haſt thou put this thing in thy hart? Thou haſt not lied ″ to men, but to God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Ananias hearing theſe vvordes, fel dovvne, and gaue vp the ghoſt. And there came great feare vpon al that heard it. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And yong men riſing vp, remoued him, and bearing him forth buried him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And it vvas the ſpace as it vvere of three houres, and his vvife, not knovving vvhat vvas chaunced, came in. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And Peter anſvvered her, Tel me vvoman, vvhether did you ſel the land for ſo much? But ſhe ſaid, Yea, for ſo much. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And Peter vnto her, Vvhy haue you agreed together to tempt the Spirit of our Lord? Behold, their feete that haue buried thy huſband, at the doore, and they ſhal beare thee forth. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Forthvvith ſhe fel before his feete, and gaue vp the ghoſt. And the yong men going in, found her dead: and caried her forth, and buried her by her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And there fel greatHerevpon roſe great reuerence, awe, and feare of the vulgar Chriſtians toward the holy Apoſtles, for an example to al Chriſtian people how to behaue thē ſelues toward their Biſhops and Prieſts. feare in the vvhole Church, and vpon al that heard theſe things.The Epiſtle vpō Imber weneſday in whitſon-weeke. And within the octaue, & in a votiue of SS. Peter and Paul.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And by the handes of the Apoſtles vvere many ſignes and vvonders done among the people. And they vvere al vvith one accord in Salomons porche. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But of the reſt
 none durſt ioyne them ſelues vnto them: but the people magnified them. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the multitude of men and vvomen that beleeued in our Lord, vvas more increaſed: ✝ 
                     verse 15 ſo that they did bring forth the ſicke into the ſtreates, and laid them in beddes and couches, that vvhen Peter came,Peters ſhadow. ″ his ſhadovv at the leaſt might ouer ſhadovv any of them, and they all might be deliuered from their infirmities. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And there ranne together vnto Hieruſalem the multitude alſo of the cities ad
                     •
                  oyning, bringing ſicke perſons and ſuch as vvere vexed of vncleane ſpirits: vvho vvere al cured. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the high prieſt riſing vp, and al that vvere vvith him, vvhich is the hereſie of the Sadduces, vvere repleniſhed vvith zeale: ✝ 
                     verse 18 laid hands vpon the Apoſtles, and put them in the common priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But an Angel of our Lord by night opening the gates of the priſon,An Angel leadeth them out of priſon. & leading them forth, ſaid, ✝ 
                     verse 20 Goe: and ſtanding ſpeake in the temple to the people al the vvordes of this life. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvho hauing heard this, early in the morning entred into the temple, and taught. And the high prieſt comming, and they that vvere vvith him, called together the Councel & al the auncients of the children of Iſraël: and they ſent to the priſon that they might be brought. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But vvhen the miniſters vvere come, and opening the priſon, found them not: returning they told, ✝ 
                     verse 23 ſaying, The priſon truely vve found ſhut vvith al diligence, and the keepers ſtanding before the gates: but opening it, vve found no man vvithin. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And as ſoone as the Magiſtrate of the temple and the cheefe prieſts heard theſe vvordes, they vvere in doubt of them, vvhat vvould befall. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And there came a certaine man and told them, That the men, loe, vvhich you did put in priſon, are in the temple ſtanding, and teaching the people. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Then vvent the Magiſtrate vvith the miniſters, and brought them vvithout force, for they feared the people leſt they ſhould be ſtoned. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And vvhen they had brought them, they ſet them in the Councel. And the high prieſt aſked them,Act. 4, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 28 ſaying, * Commaunding vve commaunded you that you ſhould not teach in this name: and behold you haue filled Hieruſalem vvith your doctrine, and you vvil bring vpon vs the bloud of this man. ✝ 
                     verse 29 But Peter anſvvering and the Apoſtles, ſaid, God muſt be obeied, rather then men. ✝ 
                     verse 30 The God of our Fathers hath raiſed vp IESVS, vvhom you did kil, hanging him vpon a tree. ✝ 
                     verse 31 This Prince and 
 Sauiour God hath exalted vvith his right hand, to giue repentance to Iſraël, and remiſſion of ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 32 and vve are vvitneſſes of theſe vvordes, and the holy Ghoſt, vvhom God hath giuen to al that obey him. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Vvhen they had heard theſe things, it cut them to the hart, and they conſulted to kil them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 But one in the Councel riſing vp, a Phariſee named Gamaliel, a doctor of lavv honorable to al the people, commaunded the men to be put forth a vvhile. ✝ 
                     verse 35 and he ſaid to them, Ye men of Iſraël, take heede to your ſelues touching theſe men vvhat you meane to doe. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For before theſe daies there roſe Theódas,Theudas▪
                   ſaying he vvas ſome body, to vvhom conſented a numbre of men about foure hundred, vvho vvas ſlaine: and al that beleeued him, vvere diſperſed, and brought to nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 37 After this fellovv there roſe Iudas of Galilee in the daies of the Enrolling, and drevv avvay the people after him, and he periſhed: and as many as euer conſented to him, vvere diſperſed. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And novv therfore I ſay to you, depart from theſe men and let them alone: for if this counſel or vvorke be of men, it vvil be diſſolued: ✝ 
                     verse 39 but if it beTime, and the euident ſucceſſe of Chriſtes Church and religion, proue it to be of God: no violence of the Iewes, no perſecution of the Heathen Princes, no endeuour of domeſtical Aduerſaries, heretikes, Schiſmatikes, or il liuers, p
                        •
                     uailīg againſt it, as on the other ſide, many attempts haue been made by Arius Macedonius, Neſtorius, Luther, & the like, who thought them ſelues ſome body: but after they had plai
                        •
                     d their partes a while, their memory is buried, or liueth only in maledictiō & infamie, & their ſcholers come to naught Therfore let no Cath. man be ſcandalized that this hereſie holdeth vp for a time. For the Arians & ſome others 
                        •
                     loriſhed much lōger thē theſe, and were better ſupported by Princes and learning, & yet had an end. of God, you are not able to diſſolueit, them', leſt perhaps you be found to reſiſt God alſo. And they conſented to him. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And calling in the Apoſtles, after they had ſcourged them, they charged them that they ſhould not ſpeake in the name of IESVS, and dimiſſed them. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And they vvent from the ſight of the councel reioycing, becauſe they vvere accounted vvorthy to ſuffer reproche for the name of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And euery day they ceaſed not in the temple and from houſe to houſe to teach and euangelize Chriſt IESVS.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     2. Defrauded.)
                     Aug. ſer. 9 in append. de diuerſis tom. 10. In that (ſaith S. Auguſtine) he withdrew any part of that which he promiſed, he was guilty at once, both of ſacrilege, and of fraude, of ſacrilege, becauſe he robbed God of that which was his by promes:Sacrilege. of fraude, in that he withheld of the whole gift, a peece. Let now the Heretikes come, and ſay it was for lying or hypocriſie onely that this facte was condemned: becauſe they be loth to haue ſacrilege counted any ſuch ſinne, who haue taught men not onely to take away from God ſome peece of that or al that them ſelues gaue, but plainly to ſpoile & apply to them ſelues al that other men gaue.
                  
                     3. Peter ſaid.) S. Peter (as you ſee here) without mans relation knew this fraude and the cogitations of Ananias,Excōmunicatiō ioyned vvith corporal painer. and as head of the College and of the whole Church againſt which this robbery was committed, executed this heauy ſentence of Excommunication both againſt him, and his wife conſenting to the Sacrilege. 
                        〈◊〉
                      it was excommunication by S. Auguſtines judgement, (li. 5. cont. ep. Parm. c. 1 to. 7) and had this corporal miraculous death ioyned withal, as the Excommunication
 that S. Paul gaue out againſt the inceſtuous and others,1 Cor. 5. had the corporal vexation of Satan incident vnto it.
                  4. In thy povver.) If is diſpleaſed God (ſaith S. Auguſtine) to vvithdravv of the money vvhich they had vovved to God,Vow of Chaſtitie, & the breache thereof. hovv is he angry vvhen chaſtitie is vovved and is not performed? for to ſuch may be ſaid that vvhich S. Peter ſaid of the money: Thy virginitie remaining did it not remaine to thee, and before thou didſt vovv, vvas it not in thine ovvne power? for, whoſoeuer haue vowed ſuch things and haue not paied them, let them not thinke to be condemned to corporal deaths, but to euerlaſting fire. Auguſt. Ser. 10. de diuerſis.Greg. li. 
                           •
                        . ep. 13. 
                     And S. Gregorie to the ſame purpoſe writeth thus, Ananias had vovved money to God, vvhich aftervvard ouercome vvith diueliſh perſuaſion he vvithdravv: but vvith vvha
                        •
                      death he vvas puniſhed, thou knovveſt. If then he vvere vvorthy of that death, who tooke avvay the money that he had giuen to God, conſider vvhat great peril in Gods iudgment thou ſhalt be vvorthy of, vvhich haſt vvithdravven, not money, but thy ſelf from almighty God, to vvhom thou hadſt vovved thy ſelf vnder the habits or vveede of a Monke.
                  
                     4. Not to men, but) To take from the Church or from the Gouernours thereof, things dedicated to their vſe and the ſeruice of God, or to lie vnto Gods Miniſters, is ſo iudged of before God, as if the lie were made, and the fraude done to the Holy Ghoſt him ſelf, who is the Churches Preſident and Protector.
                  
                     15. His ſhadovv.)
                     Peters ſhadow & interceſſion. Specially they ſought to Peter the cheefe of al, who not onely by touching, as the other, but by his very ſhadow cured al diſeaſes, wherevpon S. Auguſtine faith, If then the ſhadow of his body could helpe, how much more now the fulnes of power? And if thē a certaine litle vvind of him paſſing by did profite them that humbly aſked, how much more the grace of him now being permanent & remaining? Ser. 29 de Sanctis, ſpeaking of the miracles done by the Saincts now reigning in heauen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  By occaſion of a murmur in the Church (vvhoſe number novv is ſo grovven that it can not be numbred) Seuen of them being ordered by the Apoſtles in the holy order of Deacons: 
                        •
                      one of them, Steuen, worketh great miracles: and is by ſuch as he confounded in diſputation, falſely accuſed in the Councel, of blaſphemie againſt the Temple and rites thereof.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND in thoſe daies the numbre of diſciples increaſing, there aroſe a ″ murmuring of the Greekes againſt the Hebrues, for that their vvidovves vvere deſpiſed in the daily miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the Tvvelue calling together the multitude of the diſciples, ſaid, It is not reaſon, that vve leaue the vvord of God, and ſerue tables. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Conſider therfore brethren, ″ ſeuen men of you of good teſtimonie, ful of the holy Ghoſt and vviſedom, vvhom vve may appoint ouer this buſines. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But vve vvil be inſtant in praier and the miniſterie of the vvord.The election of the 7 firſt Deacons. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the ſaying vvas liked before al the multitude. And they choſe Steuen a man ful of faith and of the holy Ghoſt, and Philippe, and Próchorus, and Nicánor, and Timon, and Pármenas, and Nicolas a
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſtranger of Antioche. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Theſe they did ſet in the preſence of the Apoſtles: and praying they impoſed handes vpon them. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the vvord of God increaſed, and the number of the diſciples vvas multiplied in Hieruſalem excedingly: a great multitude
 alſo of theNow alſo the Prieſts and they of greater knowledge & eſtimation began to beleeue. prieſts obeied the faith.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 
                  The Epiſtle vpon S. Steuens day in Chriſtmas. And Steuen ful of grace and fortitude did great vvonders & ſignes among the people. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And there aroſe certaine of that vvhich is called the Synagogue of the Libertines, and of the Cyrenians, and of the Alexandrians, and of them that vvere of Cilicia and Aſia, diſputing vvith Steuen: ✝ 
                     verse 10 and they could not reſiſt the vviſedom and the Spirit that ſpake. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Then they ſuborned men, to ſay they had heard him ſpeake vvordes of blaſphemie againſt Moyſes and God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 They therfore ſtirred vp the people, and the Auncients, and the Scribes: and running together they tooke him, and brought him into the Councel, ✝ 
                     verse 13 and they ſet falſe vvitneſſes that ſaid, This man ceaſeth not to ſpeake vvordes againſt the holy place and the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 14 for vve haue heard him ſay, that this ſame IESVS of Nazareth ſhal deſtroy this place, and ſhal change the traditions, vvhich Moyſes deliuered vnto vs. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And al that ſate in the Councel beholding him, ſavv his face as it vvereSuch is the face of al conſtant & cheereful▪ Martyrs, to their perſecutors and iudges. the face of an Angel.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     1. Murmuring.]
                     Murmuring & emulation. It commeth of humane infirmitie, that in euery Societie of men (be it neuer ſo holy) there is ſome cauſe giuen or taken by the weake, of murmur and difference, which muſt euer be prouided for and ſtaied in the beginning▪ leſt it grow to further ſchiſme or ſedition. And to al ſuch defects, the more the Church increaſeth in number and diuerſitie of men and Prouinces, the more it is ſubiect. In al which things the ſpiritual Magiſtrates, by the Apoſtles example and authoritie, muſt take orders, as time and occaſion ſhal require.
                  
                     3. Seuen men.]
                     The 7 Deacons▪
                      We may not thinke that theſe Seuen (here made Deacons) were onely choſen to ſerue profane tables or diſpoſe of the Churches mere temporalles, though by that occaſion only they may ſeeme to ſome now elected, no expreſſe mention being made of any other function, for, diuers circumſtances of this ſame place giue euidence, and ſo doth al antiquitie, that their Office ſtood not principally about profane things, but about the holy Altar. The perſons to bē elected, muſt be ful of the Holy Ghoſt and wiſedom, they muſt after publike praier be ordered and conſecrated by the Apoſtles impoſition of hands,1 Tim. 3. & 4. as Biſhops and Prieſts were afterward ordered, ep. ad Tim: where S. Paul alſo requireth in a maner the ſame conditions in them as in Biſhops. Al which would not haue beene preſcribed for any ſecular ſtewardſhip. Yea ſtraight vpon their Ordering here (no doubt by commiſſion of the Apoſtles, which they had not before their election) they preached, baptized, diſputed, and as it may appeare by the wordes ſpoken of S. Steuen, that he was ful of grace and fortitude,Act. 6, 
                           •
                        . they receiued great increaſe of grace by their Deaconſhip.
                  But S. Ignatius ep. 2 ad Tral. can beſt witnes of their Office and the Apoſtles maner and meaning in ſuch things,The office of Deacons. who writeth thus: It behòueth alſo to pleaſe by al meanes the Deacons, vvhich are for the miniſterie of IESVS CHRIST. For they are not ſeruiteurs of meate and drinke, but miniſters of the Church of God. For vvhat are Deacons but imitatours or folovvers of Chriſt, miniſtring to the Biſhop, as Chriſt to his Father, & vvorking vnto him a cleane and immaculate worke, euen as S. Steuen to S. Iames &c. S. Polycarpe,Li. Eccl. Hier. c. 1▪ part. 2. hath the like in his epiſtle ad Philippenſes. And S. Denys writeth that their Office was about the Altar, and putting the holy bread and chalice vpon the ſame. S. Clement alſo (Apoſt. Conſt. li. 
                           •
                         c. 61.) that their Office among other things, is to aſſiſt the Biſhops, and read the Goſpel in the Seruice &c. S. Cyprian in diuers places (ep. 65. & ep. 49 ad Cornel.) calleth Deacons, the Churches and the Apoſtles Miniſters, and their Office, adminiſtrationens ſacram, an holy adminiſtration. S. Hierom affirmeth, in caput 7 Michcae. and in epiſto. 85 ad Euagriun
                           •
                         tom. 2, Where
 he checketh ſome of them for preFerring them ſelues before Prieſts, and putteth them in remembrance of their firſt calling, that they be as the Leuites were in reſpect of the Prieſts of the old Law. finally by S. Ambroſe li. 1 Off
                           ••
                         c. 41 and Prudentius in Hymno de S. Laurent. ſpeaking of S. Laurence the Deacon, We may ſee their Office was moſt holy. See S. Auguſtine alſo of the dignitie of Deacons ep. 14
                           •
                         ad Valerium. Conc. Carthag. 4. can. 37. 38▪ 39▪ 41.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Ste
                        •••
                      being permitted to anſwer, beginning at Abraham, ſhevveth that God was with their fathers both in other places, and alſo long before the Temple. 4
                        •
                      and that after it vvas built, it could not be (as they groſly imagined) a houſe for God to dwel in. 51 then he inu
                        •
                     igheth againſt their ſtifneckednes, and telleth them boldly of their traiterous murdering of Chriſt, as their fathers had done his Prophets afore him. 54 Whereat they being vvood, he ſeeth heauen open, and IESVS therein his Diuine Maieſtie. 57 Whereat they become more mad, ſo that they ſtone him to death (Saul conſenting) he commending his ſoul to IESVS, and humbly praying for them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the cheefe prieſt ſaid, Are theſe things ſo? ✝ 
                     verse 2 Vvho ſaid, Ye men, brethren and fathers, heare. The God of glorie appeared to our father Abraham vvhen he vvas in Meſopotamia, before that he abode in Charan,Gen. 12, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and ſaid to him, Goe forth out of thy countrie, and out of thy kinred, and come into a land that I ſhal ſhevv thee. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Then vvent he forth out of the land of the Chaldees, and dvvelt in Charan. And from thence, after his father vvas dead, he tranſlated him into this land, vvherein you doe novv dvvel. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he gaue him no inheritance in it, no not the paſe of a foote: and he promiſed to giue it him in poſſeſſion, and to his ſeede after him, vvhen as he had no childe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And God ſpake to him,Gen. 15, 13. 
                  That his ſeede ſhal be a ſciourner in a ſtrange countrie, and they ſhal ſubdue them to ſeruitude, and ſhal euil intreate them fourehundred yeres: ✝ 
                        verse 7 and the nation vvhich they ſhal ſerue, vvil I iudge, ſaid God. and after theſe things they ſhal goeforth, and
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  ſhal ſerue me in this place.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And he * gaue him the teſtament of circumciſion,Gen, 17. and ſo he * begat Iſaac,Gen. 21. and circumciſed him the eight day: and
* Iſaac,Gen. 25. Iacob: and * Iacob, the tvvelue Patriarches. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And the Patriarches through emulatiō,Gen. 29. 30. 35. * ſold Ioſeph into Aegypt. and God vvas vvith him: ✝ 
                     verse 10 and deliuered him out of al his tribulations,Gen. 37. and he * gaue him grace and vviſedom in the ſight of Pharao the king of Aegypt,Gen. 41. and he appointed him Gouernour ouer Aegypt and ouer al his houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And there came famin vpon al Aegypt and Chanaan, and great tribulation:Gen. 42. and our fathers found no victuals. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But vvhen * Iacob had heard that there vvas corne in Aegypt: he ſent our
 fathers firſt:Gen. 45. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and at the * ſecōd time Ioſeph vvas knovven of his brethren, and his kinred vvas made knovven vnto Pharao. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And Ioſeph ſending, called thither Iacob his father and al his kinred in ſeuentie fiue ſoules.Gen. 46. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And * Iacob deſcended into Aegypt:Gen. 49. and * he died, and our fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they vvereTranſlation of Saincts bodies agreable to nature & Scripture. And the deſire to be buried in one place more then an other (which the holy Patriarches alſo had Gen. 49, 29. 50, 24. Hebr. 11, 22.) hath ſometime great cauſes. Aug. de Cur. pr
                           •
                        
                        mort. c. 1. & vlt.
                   tranſlated into Sichem,Gen. 50. and vvere * laid in the ſepulchre that Abraham * bought for a price of ſiluer of the ſonnes of Hemor the ſonne of Sichem.Gen. 23.
                  Ioſ. 24.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen the time drevv neere of the promiſſe vvhich God had promiſed to Abraham,Exo, 1, 7. the people * increaſed and vvas multiplied in Aegypt, ✝ 
                     verse 18 vntil an other king aroſe in Aegypt, that knevv not Ioſeph. ✝ 
                     verse 19 This ſame circumuenting our ſtocke, afflicted our fathers: that they ſhould expoſe their children, to the end they might not be kept aliue. ✝ 
                     verse 20 The ſame time vvas * Moyſes borne,Exo. 2, 2. and he vvas acceptable to God, who was nouriſhed three moneths in his fathers houſe ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen he vvas expoſed, Pharaos daughter tooke him vp, and nouriſhed him for her ovvne ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And Moyſes vvas inſtructed in al the vviſedom of the Aegyptians: and he vvas mightie in his vvordes and vvorkes.Exo. 2, 11▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * vvhen he vvas fully of the age of fourtie yeres, it came to his minde to viſite his brethren the children of Iſraël. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And vvhen he had ſeen one ſuffer vvrong, he defended him: and ſtriking the Aegyptian, he reuenged his quarel that ſuſteined the vvrong. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he thought that his brethren did vnderſtand that God by his hand vvould ſaue them: but they vnderſtood it not.Exo. 2, 13. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And the day folovving * he appeared to them being at ſtrife: and he reconciled them vnto peace, ſaying, Men, ye are brethren, vvherfore hurt you one an other? ✝ 
                     verse 27 But he that did the iniurie to his neighbour, repelled him, ſaying, Vvho hath appointed thee prince and iudge ouer vs? ✝ 
                     verse 28 
                  Vvhat, vvilt thou kil me, as thou didſt yeſterday kil the Aegyptian? ✝ 
                     verse 29 And Moyſes fled vpon this vvord: and he became a ſeiourner in the land of Madian, vvhere he begat tvvo ſonnes, ✝ 
                     verse 30 And after fourtie yeres vvere expired,Exo. 3, 2. there * appeared to him in the deſert of mount Sina an Angel in the fire of the flame of a buſh. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And Moyſes ſeeing it, marueled at the viſion. And as he vvent neere to vevve it, the voice of our Lord vvas made to him, ✝ 
                     verse 32 
                  I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob. And Moyſes being made to tremble, durſt not vevve it. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And our Lord
 ſaid to him, Looſe of the ſhoe of thy feete: for the place vvherein thou ſtandeſt, is ″ holy ground. ✝ 
                        verse 34 Seeing I haue ſeen the affliction of my people vvhich is in Aegypt, and I haue heard their groning, and am deſcended to deliuer them. And novv come, and I vvil ſend thee into Aegypt.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 This Moyſes, vvhom they denied, ſaying, Vvho hath appointed the prince and Captaine? him God ſent prince &Chriſt is our Redeemer, and yet Moyſes is here called redeemer▪ ſo Chriſt is our Mediator and Aduocate, and yet we may haue Saincts our inferior mediators and aduocates alſo. See Annot. 1 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 2, 1.
                   redeemer, vvith the hand of the Angel that appeared to him in the buſh. ✝ 
                     verse 36 He * brought them forth doing vvonders and ſignes in the land of Aegypt,Exo. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12, 37▪
                   and in the redde ſea, and in the * deſert fourtie yeres. ✝ 
                     verse 37 This is that Moyſes vvhich ſaid to the children of Iſraël,Exo. 16. 
                  A prophet vvil God raiſe vp to you of your ovvne brethren at my ſelf:
                  Deu. 18. 
                  him you ſhal heare.
                  Exo. 19, 3. 19. ✝ 
                     verse 38 This is he that * vvas in the aſſemblie in the vvilderneſſe, vvith the Angel that ſpake to him in Mount-Sina, and vvith our fathers: vvho receiued the vvordes of life to giue vnto vs. ✝ 
                     verse 39 To vvhom our fathers vvould not be obedient: but they repelled him, and in their hartes turned avvay into Aegypt, ✝ 
                     verse 40 ſaying to Aaron: Make vs goddes that may goe before vs▪
                  
                  Exo. 32, 1. 
                  for this Moyſes that brought vs out of the land of Aegypt, vve knovv not vvhat is befallen to him. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And they made a calfe in thoſe daies, and offered ſacrifice to the Idol, and reioyced in the vvorkes of their ovvne handes. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And God turned, andFor a iuſt puniſhment of their former offenſes God gaue them vp to worke what wickednes they would them ſelues, as it is ſaid of the Gentils Rom. 1.
                   deliuered them vp
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . to ſerue the hoſt of heauen, as it is vvritten in the booke of the Prophets: Did you offer victims and hoſtes vnto me fourtie yeres in the deſert,
                  Amos. 5, 25. 
                  O houſe of Iſraël? ✝ 
                        verse 43 And you tooke vnto you the tabernacle of Moloch, and the ſtarre of your God Rempham, figures vvhich you made, to adore them. And I vvil tranſlate you beyond Babylon.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 44 The tabernacle of teſtimonie vvas among our fathers in the deſert, as God ordained ſpeaking to Moyſes,Exo. 25. 40. 
                  that he ſhould make it according to the forme vvhich he had ſeen. ✝ 
                     verse 45 Vvhich our fathers * vvithThis is Ioſuè, ſo called in Greeke in type of our Sauiour. Ieſus receiuing,Ioſ. 3, 14. brought it in alſo into the poſſeſſion of the Gentiles, vvhich God expelled from the face of our fathers, till in the daies of Dauid, ✝ 
                     verse 46 Vvho found grace before God,Pſ. 131, 5▪
                   and * deſired that he might finde a tabernacle for the God of Iacob.1. Par. 17▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 47 And * Salomon built him a houſe.Act. 17, 25. ✝ 
                     verse 48 But the Higheſt dvvelleth ″ not in houſes * made by hand, as the prophet ſaith: ✝ 
                     verse 49 
                  Heauen is my ſeate: and the earth the foote-ſtole of my feete.
                  Eſa. 66, 1. 
                  Vvhat houſe vvil you build me, ſaith our Lord? or vvhat place is there of my reſting? ✝ 
                        verse 50 Hath not my hand made al theſe things?
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 51 You ſtiffe-necked and of vncircumciſed hartes and eares, you alvvaies reſiſt the holy Ghoſt: as your fathers, your ſelues alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 52 Vvhich of the prophets did not your fathers perſecute 
 And they ſlevve them that foretold of the comming of the Iuſt one, of vvhom novv ✝ 
                     verse 53 you haue been betraiers and murderers: vvho receiued the Lavv by the diſpoſition of Angels, and haue not kept it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 54 And hearing theſe things they vvere cut in their hartes, and they gnaſhed vvith their teeth at him. ✝ 
                     verse 55 But he being ful of the holy Ghoſt, looking ſtedfaſtly vnto heauen,The comfort of al Martyrs. ſavv the glorie of God, and IESVS ſtanding on the right hand of God. ✝ 
                     verse 56 And he ſaid, Behold I ſee the heauens opened, and the Sonne of man ſtanding on the right hand of God. ✝ 
                     verse 57 And they crying out vvith a loude voice, ſtopped their eares, & vvith one accord ranne violently vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 58 And caſting him forth vvithout the citie, they ″ ſtoned him: and the vvitneſſes laid of their garments * beſide the feete of a yong man that vvas called Saul.Act. 22, 20. ✝ 
                     verse 59 And they ſtoned Steuen inuocating, and ſaying: Lord IESVS, receiue my ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 60 And falling on his knees, he cried vvith a loude voice, ſaying:Euſebius Emiſſenus ſaith, whē he praieth for his perſecutors, he promiſeth to his worſhippers his manifeſt interceſſiō & ſuffrages. 
                        
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        o. S. Steph. & S. Auguſtine, Si Stephaniu ſi
                           •
                         nō oraſſet, Eccleſi
                           ••
                         Paulū nō habere
                           •
                        . Serm 1 de Stephano. Lord, lay not this ſinne vnto them. And vvhen he had ſaid this, he fel a ſleepe. And Saul vvas conſenting to his death.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     33. Holy ground.)
                     The holy land. If that apparition of God him ſelf or an Angel, could make the place and ground holy, and to be vſed of Moyſes with al ſignes of reuerence and feare-how much more the corporal birth,Holy places. abode, and wonders of the Sonne of God in Iewrie, and his perſonal preſence in the B. Sacrament, may make that countrie and al Chriſtian Churches & altars holy? And it is the greateſt blindnes that can be, to thinke it ſuperſtition to reuerence any things or places in reſpect of Gods preſence or wonderous operation in the ſame. See S. Hierom. ep. 17, 18. 27. of the holy land.
                  
                  
                     48. Not in houſes.) The vulgar Heretikes alleage this place againſt the corporal being of Chriſt in the B. Sacrament & in Churches: by which reaſon they might haue driuen him out of al houſes, Churches,God is not conteined in place, yet he vvil be vvorſhipped in one place more thē in an other. and corporal places, when he vvas viſible in earth. But it is meant of the Diuinitie only. & ſpoken to correct the carnal Ievves: who thought God either ſo to be conteined, compaſſed, and limited to their Temple, that he could be no vvhere els, or at leaſt that he vvould not heare or receiue mens praiers and ſacrifices in the Churches of the Gentiles, or els vvhere, out of the ſaid Temple. And ſo as it maketh nothing for the Sacramentaries, no more doth it ſerue for ſuch as eſteeme Churches and places of publike praier no more conuenient nor more holy then any other profane houſes or chambers. For though his perſon or vertue be not limited to any place, yet it pleaſeth him condeſcending to our neceſſitie and profite, to vvorke his vvonders and to be vvorſhipped of vs in holy places rather then profane.
                  
                     38. They ſtoned him.) Read a maruelous narration in S. Auguſtine of one ſtone, that hitting the Martyr on the elbovv,Relikes. rebounded backe to a faithful man that ſtood neere. Who keeping and carying it vvith him, vvas by reuelation vvarned to leaue it at Ancóna in Italie: vvherevpon a Church or Memorie of S. Steuen vvas there erected, and many miracles done after the ſaid Martyrs body vvas found out, and not before. Aug. 
                           •
                        o. 10 ſer. 38 de diuerſis in edit. Pariſ.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  So farre is perſecution from preuailing againſt the Church,The 3. part. that by it the Church greweth from Hieruſalem into al Ievvrie and Samaria.THE propagation of the Church from Hieruſalem into al Iewrie and to Samaria. 5 The ſecond of the Deacons, Philip▪ conuerteth vvith his miracles the citie it ſelf of Samaria, and baptizeth them, euen Simon Magus alſo him ſelf among the reſt, 14 But the Apoſtles Peter and Iohn are the Miniſters to giue them the Holy Ghoſt. 18 Which miniſterie Simon Magus vvould bie of them. 16 The ſame Philip being ſent of an Angel to a great man of Aethiopia, Who came a Pilgrimage to Hieruſalem, firſt catechizeth him: 16 and then (he profeſsing his faith and deſiring Baptiſme) doth alſo baptize him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the ſame day there vvas made a great perſecution in the Church, vvhich vvas at Hieruſalem, and al vvere diſperſed through the countries of Ievvrie and Samaria, ſauing the Apoſtles. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And ″ deuout mencurauerunt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   tooke order for Steuens funeral, and made great mourning vpon him. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But Saul * vvaſted the Church: entring in from houſe to houſe,Act. 22. 4. and dravving men and vvomen, deliuered them into priſon.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 They therfore that vvere diſperſed, paſſed through,
This perſecution wrought much good, being an occaſion that the diſperſed preached Chriſt in diuers Coūtries where they came. euangelizing the vvord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Philippe deſcending into the citie of Samaria,The Epiſtle vpō Thurſday in whitſunweeke. preached CHRIST vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the multitudes vvere attent to thoſe things vvhich vvere ſaid of Philippe, vvith one accord hearing, and ſeing the ſignes that he did. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For many of them that had vncleane ſpirits, crying vvith a loud voice, vvent out. And many ſicke of the palſey and lame vvere cured. ✝ 
                     verse 8 There vvas made therfore great ioy in that citie. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 9 And a certaine man named Simon, vvho before had been in that citie a Magician, ſeducing the nation of Samaria, ſaying him ſelf to be ſome great one: ✝ 
                     verse 10 vnto vvhom al harkened from the leaſt to the greateſt, ſaying, This man is the povver of God, that is called great. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And they vvere attent vpon him, becauſe a long time he had bewitched them vvith his magical practiſes. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But vvhen they had beleeued Philippe euangelizing of the kingdom of God, and of the name of IESVS CHRIST, they vvere baptized, men and vvomen. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then Simon alſo him ſelf beleeued: and being baptized, he cleaued to Philippe. Seing alſo ſignes and very great miracles to be done, he vvas aſtonied vvith admiration.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen the Apoſtles vvho vvere in Hieruſalem,The Epiſtle vpō Tueſday in whitſūweeke. And in a votiue of the Holy Ghoſt. had heard that Samaria had receiued the vvord of God: theyſent vnto themSape ſibi ſo
                        •••
                     e Petrus facit eſſe Ioannem: Eccleſiae quia virgo placet. Arator apud Bedam in Act.
                   Peter & Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvho vvhen they vvere come, praied for them, that they might receiue the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For he vvas not yet come vpon any of them, but they vvere only baptized in the name of our Lord IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Then did ″ they impoſe their handes vpon them, and they ″ receiued the holy Ghoſt. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhen Simon had ſeen that by the impoſition of the hand of the Apoſtles, the holy Ghoſt vvas giuen, he ″ offered them money, ✝ 
                     verse 19 ſaying, Giue me alſo this povver, that on vvhomſoeuer I impoſe my handes, he may receiue the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But Peter ſaid to him, Thy money be vvith thee vnto perdition: becauſe thou haſt thought that the gift of God is purchaſed vvith money. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Thou haſt no part, nor lot in this vvord. For thy hart is not right before God.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ✝ 
                     verse 22 ″ Doe penance therfore from this thy vvickedneſſe: and pray to God, ″ if perhaps this cogitation of thy hart may be remitted thee.See Apocal. 9, 21. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For I ſee thou art in the gall of bitternes and the obligation of iniquitie. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Simon anſvvering ſaid, ″ Pray you for me to our Lord, that nothing come vpon me of theſe things vvhich you haue ſaid. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And they in deede hauing teſtified and ſpoken the vvord of our Lord, returned to Hieruſalem, and euangelized to many countries of the Samaritans.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 
                  The Epiſtle vpon Thurſday in Eaſter weeke. And an Angel of our Lord ſpake to Philippe, ſaying: Ariſe, and goe tovvard the South, to the vvay that goeth dovvne from Hieruſalem into Gaza: ″ this is deſert. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And riſing he vvent. And behold, a man of Aethiopia, an eunuch, of great authoritie vnder Candace the Queene of the Aethiopians, vvho vvas ouer al her treaſures, vvas come to Hieruſalem
Note that this Aethiopian came to Hieruſalem to adore, that is, on Pilgrimage. where by we may learne that it is an acceptable acte of religion to go from home to places of greater deuotiō & ſanctificatiō. to adore: ✝ 
                     verse 28 and he vvas returning and ſitting vpon his chariot, and reading Eſay the prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And the Spirit ſaid to Philippe, Goe neere, and ioyne thy ſelf to this ſame chariot. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And Philippe running therevnto, heard him reading Eſay the prophet, and he ſaid: Trovveſt thou that thou vnderſtādeſt the things vvhich thou readeſt? ✝ 
                     verse 31 Vvho ſaid, And
The Scriptures are ſo writtē that they can not be vnderſtood without an interpreter, as eaſy as our Proteſtants make them. See S. Hierom Ep. ad Paulinū de omnibus diuin
                           ••
                         hiſtoria
                           •
                         libris, ſet in the beginning of latin bibles. hovv can I, vnleſſe ſome man ſhevv me? & he deſired Philippe that he vvould come vp and ſit vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And the place of the ſcripture vvhich he did reade,Eſ. 53, 7. vvas this: As a ſheepe to ſlaughter vvas he led: and as a lambe before his ſhearer, vvithout voice, ſo did he not open his mouth. ✝ 
                        verse 33 In humilitie his iudgement vvas taken avvay.
 His generation vvho ſhal declare, for from the earth ſhal his life be taken? ✝ 
                     verse 34 And the 
                     ••
                  nuch anſvvering Philip, ſaid, I beſeeche thee, of vvhom doth the Prophet ſpeake this? of him ſelf, or of ſome other? ✝ 
                     verse 35 And Philip opening his mouth, and beginning from this ſcripture, euangelized vnto him IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And as they vvent by the vvay, they came to a certaine vvater: and the eunuch ſaid, Lo vvater,vvhat▪
                   vvho' doth let me to be baptized? ✝ 
                     verse 37 And Philip ſaid, If thou beleeue vvith al thy hart, thou maieſt? And he anſvvering ſaid, I beleeue that IESVS CHRIST is the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And he commaunded the chariot to ſtay: and both vvent dovvne into the vvater, Philip and the Eunuch, and ″ he baptized him. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And when they vvere come vp out of the vvater, the Spirit of our Lord tooke avvay Philip, and the eunuch ſavv him no more. And he vvent on his vvay reioycing. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But Philip vvas found in Azótus, & paſſing through, he euangelized to al the cities, til he came to Caeſaréa. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     2. Deu
                           •
                        us men.]
                     S. Steuens relikes. As here great deuotion vvas vſed in burying his body, ſo aftervvard at the Inuention & Tranſlation thereof. And the miracles vvrought by the ſame, and at euery litle memorie of the ſame, vvere infinite: as S. Auguſtine vvitneſſeth. li. 
                           〈◊〉
                         de Ciuil. Dei. c. 
                           •
                        . & Sermon. de S. Steph. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 10.
                  
                  
                     14. Sent Peter.] Some Proteſtants vſe this place to proue S. Peter not to be head of the Apoſtles, becauſe he and S. Iohn were ſent by the Tvvelue, by vvhich reaſon they might as vvel conclude that he vvas not equal to the reſt▪ for commonly the Maiſter ſendeth the man, and the Superior the inferior,That Peter was ſent, is no reaſon againſt his Primacie. vvhen the vvord of Sending is exactly vſed. But it is not alvvaies ſo taken in the Scriptures, for then could not the Sonne be ſent by the Father, not the Holy Ghoſt from the Father and the Sonne: nor othervviſe in cōmon vſe of the vvorld, ſeing the inferior or equal may in
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     e his frend or Superior to doe his buſines for him, and ſpecially a body Politike or a Corporation may by election or othervviſe chooſe their Head and ſend him. ſo may the Citizens ſend their Maior to the Prince or Parliament, though he be the head of the citie, becauſe he may be more fitte to doe their buſines, alſo the Superior or equal may be ſent by his ovvne conſent or deſire. Laſtly, the College of the Apoſtles compriſing Peter vvith the reſt, (as euery ſuch Body implieth both the head and the members) vvas greater then Peter their head alone. as the Prince and Parliament is greater then the Prince alone. And ſo Peter might be ſent as by authoritie of the vvhole College, notvvithſtanding he vvere the head of the ſame.
                  
                     17. Did they impoſe.] If this Philip had been 
                           •
                         an Apoſtle (ſaith S. Bede) he might haue impoſed his handes, that they might haue receiued the Holy Ghoſt, but this none can doe ſauing Biſhops. For though Prieſts may baptize,
                     The Sacrament of Confirmation, miniſtred by Biſhops onely. 
                     and anoint the Baptized alſo vvith Chriſme conſecrated by a Biſhop: yet he can not ſigne his forehead vvith the ſame holy oile, becauſe that belongeth only to Biſhops▪ vvhen they giue the holy Ghoſt to the Baptized. So ſaith he touching the Sacrament of Confirmation in 8 Act. This impoſition therfore of hands together vvith the praiers here ſpecified (vvhich no doubt vvere the very ſame that the Church yet vſeth to that purpoſe) vvas the miniſtration of the Sacrament of Confirmation. Whereof S. Cyptian ſaith thus.
                        
                           •
                        p. 73. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 3 ad lubaianum. They that in Samaria vvere baptized of Philip, becauſe they had lavvful and Eccleſiaſtical Baptiſme, ought not to be baptized any more: but only that vvhich vvanted, vvas done by Peter and Iohn, to vvit, that by praier made for them and impoſition of handes, the Holy Ghoſt might be povvred vpon them. Vvhich novv alſo is done vvith vs, that they vvhich in the Church are baptized, be by the Rulers of the Church offered, and by our praier and impoſition of hand receiue the Holy Ghoſt, and be ſigned vvith our Lordes ſeale. So S. Cyprian.
 But the Heretikes obiect that yet here is no mention of oile. To vvhom vve ſay, that many things vvere done and ſaid in the adminiſtration of this and other Sacraments, and al inſtituted by Chriſt him ſelf and deliuered to the Church by the Apoſtles, vvhich are not particularly vvritten by the Euangeliſts or any other in the Scripture, among vvhich this is euident by al antiquitie and moſt general practiſe of the Church, to be one.
                  S. Denys ſaith,Ec. Hier. c. 2 & 4. The Prieſts did preſent the baptized to the Biſhop,Chriſme in Cō
                        firmation. that he might ſigne them diuino & d
                           •
                        ifico vnguento, vvith the diuine and deifical ointment. And againe, Aduentum S. Spiritus conſummans inunctio largitur, the inunction conſummating giueth the comming of the Holy Ghoſt. Tertullian de reſur carn. nu. 7 & li. 1 adu. Marcio. ſpeaketh of this Cōfirmation by Chriſme thus: The fleſh is anointed, that the ſoul may be conſecrated: the fleſh is ſigned, that the ſoul may be ſenſed: the fleſh by impoſition of hand is ſhadovved, that the ſoul by the Spirit may be illuminated. S. Cyprian likevviſe, ep. 70. nu. 2. He muſt alſo be anointed, that is baptized, vvith the oile ſanctified on the Altar: And ep. 72 (ſee alſo ep. 73. nu. 3) he expreſly calleth it a Sacrament, ioyning it vvith Baptiſme, as Melchiades doth (ep. ad omnes Hiſpania
                           •
                         Epiſcopos nu. 2. to 1 Con
                           •
                        .) ſhevving the difference betvvixt it and Baptiſme. S. Auguſtine alſo, cont. lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 104. The Sacrament of Chriſme in the kind of viſible ſeales is ſacred and holy, euen as Baptiſme it ſelf. Vve omit S. Cyril myſtag. 3. S. Ambroſe li. 3 de Sacram. c. 2. & de ijs qui myſterijs initiantur c. 7. S. Leo ep. 88. the aūcient Councels alſo of Laodicea, can. 48. Carthage 3 can. 39. and Arauſicanum 4 can. 1. and others. And S. Clement (Apoſt. Conſt. li. 7▪ c. 44) reporteth certaine cōſtitutions of the Apoſtles touching the ſame.Ec. Hier. c. 4. S. Denys referreth the maner of conſecration of the ſame Chriſme to the Apoſtles inſtruction. S. Baſil li. de Sp. ſancto c. 27 calleth it a tradition of the Apoſtles. And the moſt aūcient Martyr S. Fabian 
                        
                           •
                        p. 2 ad omnes Orientales Epiſcopos in initio, to. 1 Conc. ſaith plainely that Chriſt him ſelf did ſo inſtruct the Apoſtles at the time of the inſtitution of the B. Sacramēt of the Altar. And ſo doth the Author of the booke de vnctione Chriſmatis apud D. Cyprianum nu. 1. telling the excellent effects and graces of this Sacrament, and vvhy this kinde of oile and balſme vvas taken of the old Lavv, & vſed in the Sacraments of the nevv Teſtament. Vvhich thing the Heretikes can vvith leſſe cauſe obiect againſt the Church, ſeeing they confeſſeBeza in Act. c. 6. v. 6. that Chriſt and his Apoſtles tooke the ceremonie of impoſition of hands in this and other Sacraments, from the Ievves maner of conſecrating their hoſtes deputed to ſacrifice.
                  To conclude,Old hereſies againſt confirmation and Chriſme. neuer none denied or contemned this Sacrament of Confirmation and holy Chriſme, but knovven Heretikes. S. Cornelius that B. Martyr ſo much praiſed of S. Cyprian, ep. ad Fabium apud Euſeb. li. 6 c. 35 affirmeth, that Nouatus fel to Hereſie, for that he had not receiued the Holy Ghoſt by the con
                        •
                     ignation of a Biſhop. Vvhom al the Nouatians did folovv, neuer vſing that holy Chriſme, as Theodorete vvriteth, li, 1 Fabul. Haer. And Optatus li. 2 cont Parm. vvriteth that it vvas the ſpecial barbarous ſacrilege of the Donatiſts, to conculcate the holy oile. But al this is nothing to the ſauage diſorder of Caluiniſts in this point.
                  
                     17. And they receiued the Holy Ghoſt.] The Proteſtants charge the Catholikes,ke
                           ••
                        nit. in exam. conc. Trid. de Con
                           •
                        ir. that by approuing and commending ſo much the Sacrament of Confirmation, and by attributing to it ſpecially the gift of the Holy Ghoſt, they diminiſh the force of Baptiſme, chalenging alſo boldly the aūcient Fathers for the ſame. As though any Catholike or Doctor euer ſaid more then the expreſſe vvordes of Scripture here and els vvhere plainely giue them vvarrant for. If they diminiſh the vertue of Baptiſme, then did Chriſt ſo, appointing his Apoſtles and al the Faithful euen after their Baptiſme to expecte the Holy Ghoſt & vertue from aboue▪ then did the Apoſtles iniurie to Baptiſme, in that they impoſed hands on the baptized,The effectes of Baptiſme and Confirmation differ. and gaue them the Holy Ghoſt. And this is the Heretikes blindnes in this caſe, that they can not, or vvil not ſee that the Holy Ghoſt is giuen in Baptiſme to remiſſion of ſinnes, life, and ſanctification: & in Confirmation, for force, ſtrength, and corroboration to fight againſt al our ſpiritual enemies, and to ſtand conſtantly in confeſſion of our faith, euen to death, in times of perſecution either of the Heathen or of Heretikes, vvith great increaſe of grace. And let the good Reader note here our Aduerſaries great peruerſity and corruption of the plaine ſenſe of the Scriptures in this point:Haeretical ſhiftes and euaſiōs againſt manifeſt Scriptures, and againſt this Sacrament of Confirmation. ſome of them affirming the Holy Ghoſt here to be no other but the gift of vviſedom in the Apoſtles and a fevv moe to the gouernement of the Church, vvhen it is plaine that not only the Gouerners but al that vvere baptized, receiued this grace, both men and vvomen. Some, that it vvas no internal grace, but only the gift of diuers languages: Vvhich is very falſe, the gift of Tongues being but a ſequele and an accident to the grace, and an external token of the invvard gift of the Holy Ghoſt, and our Sauiour calleth it vertue from aboue. Some ſay, that vvhatſoeuer it vvas, it vvas but a miraculous thing, and dured no longer then the gift of the Tongues ioyned therevnto, by vvhich euaſion they deny alſo the Sacrament of Extreme Vnction, and the force of Excommunication, becauſe the corporal puniſhments vvhich vvere annexed often times in the Primitiue Church vnto it, ceaſeth, and ſo may they take avvay (as they meane to do) al Chriſts faith or religion,Tractat. 6 in 
                           •
                        p. 10. becauſe it hath not the like operation of miracles as in the beginning. But S. Auguſtine toucheth this point fully. Is there any man (ſaith he) of ſo peruerſe an hart, to deny theſe Children on vvhom vve novv impoſed hands, to haue receiued the Holy Ghoſt, becauſe they ſpeake not vvith Tongues? &c. Laſtly, ſome of them make no more of Con
                        •
                     irmation or the Apoſtles facte, but as of a doctrine, inſtruction, or exhortation to continevv in the ſaith receiued. Vvherevpon
 they haue turned this holy SacramentSee Con
                           •
                        . Trid. Seſs. 
                           •
                         can. 1 de Confirmat. into a Catechiſme.Cone. Trid. ſeſs. 
                           •
                         can. 14 de Bapt. There are alſo that put the baptized cō
                     ming to yeres of diſcretiō, to their ovvne choiſe vvhether they vvil cōtinevv Chriſtiās or no. To ſuch diueliſh and diuers inuentions they fall, that vvill not obey Gods Churche nor the expreſſe Scriptures, vvhich tel vs of praier, of impoſition of hands, of the Holy Ghoſt, of grace and vertue from aboue, and not of inſtruction, vvhich might and may be done as vvel before Baptiſme, & by others, as by Apoſtles and Biſhops,Biſhoping. to vvhom only this Holy function pertaineth, in ſo much that in our Countrie it is called Biſhoping.
                  
                  
                     18. Offered money.) This vvicked ſorcerer Simon is noted by S. Irenaeus li, 1 c. 20. and others, to haue been the firſt Heretike, & father of al Heretikes to come, in the Church of God. He taught, only faith in him, vvithout good life and vvorkes, to be ynough to ſaluation▪ 
                     
                        •
                     e gaue the onſet to purchaſe vvith his money a ſpiritual function, that is to be made a Biſhop▪ for, to haue povver to giue the Holy Ghoſt by impoſition of hādes, is to be a Biſhop: as to bye the povver to remitte ſinnes or to conſecrate Chriſts body,Simonie. is to bye to be a Prieſt, or to bye Prieſthod: and to bye the authoritie to miniſter Sacraments, to preach or to haue cure of ſoules, is to bye a benefice, and likevviſe in al other ſpiritual things, vvhereof either to make ſale or purchaſe for money or money vvorth, is a great horrible ſinne called Simonie: and in ſuch as thinke it lavvful (as here Simon iudged it) it is named Simoniacal Hereſie, of this deteſtable man vvho firſt attempted to bie a ſpiritual function or office. D. Greg. apud 
                           •
                        oan. Diac. in vit. li. 
                           •
                        , c. 2. 
                           •
                        . 4. 5.
                  
                  
                     22. Doe penance.) S. Auguſtine (ep. 108) vnderſtanding this of the penance done in the Primitiue Church for heinous offenſes▪
                     Pena
                           •
                        ce. doth teach vs to tranſlate this and the like places (2 Cor. 12, 21. Apoc. 9, 21) as vve doe, and as it is in the vulgar Latin, and conſequently that the Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      doth ſignifie ſo much. Yea vvhen he addeth, that very good men doe daily penance for venial ſinnes by faſting, praier, and almes, he vvarranteth this phraſe and tranſlation through out the nevv Teſtament, ſpecially him ſelf alſo reading ſo as it is in the vulgar Latin, and as vve tranſlate.
                  
                     22. If perhaps.] You may ſee, great penance is here required for remiſſion of ſinne, & that men muſt ſtand in feare and dread leſt they be not vvorthy to be heard or to obteine mercie. Vvhereby al men that bye or ſel any ſpiritual functions, dignities, offices, or liuings, may ſpecially be vva
                        •
                     ned that the ſinne is exceding great.
                  
                     24. Pray you for me.] As this Sorc
                        ••
                     er had more knovvledge of the true religion then the Proteſtants haue,Simon Magus more religious then the Proteſtants. vvho ſee not that the Apoſtles and Biſhops can giue the Holy Ghoſt in this Sacrament, or other, vvhich he plainely perceiued and confeſſed, ſo ſurely he vvas more religious then they, that being ſo ſharply checked by the Apoſtle, yet blaſphemed not as they do vvhen they be blamed by the Gouerners of the Church, but deſired the Apoſtles to pray for him.
                  
                     27. This is deſert.] Intolerable boldnes of ſome Proteſtants, here alſo (as in other places) againſt al copies both Greeke and Latin, to ſurmiſe corruption or falſhod of the text, ſaying it can not be ſo:Beza. Vvhich is to accuſe the holy Euangeliſt,Annot. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Teſt. 155
                           •
                        . and to blaſpheme the Holy Ghoſt him ſelf. See Beza, vvho is often very ſaucie vvith S. Luke.
                  
                     38. He baptized him.] When the Heretikes of this time finde mention made in Scripture of any Sacrament miniſtred by the Apoſtles or other in the Primitiue Church,The ceremonies of Sacraments done, though not mentioned. they imagine no more vvas done then there is expreſly told, nor ſcarſly beleeue ſo much. As if impoſition of hands in the Sacrament of Confirmation be onely expreſſed, they thinke there vvas no chriſme nor other vvorke or vvord vſed.De fid. & 
                           •
                        p. 
                           •
                        . 9. So they thinke no more ceremonie vvas vſed in the baptizing of this noble man, then here is mentioned. Vvherevpon S. Auguſtine hath theſe memorable vvordes, In that that he ſaith, Philip baptized him, he vvould haue it vnderſtood that al things vvere done, vvhich though in the Scriptures for breuitie ſake they are not mentioned, yet by order of tradition vve knovv vvere to be done.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Saul not content to perſecute ſo cruelly in Hieruſalem, 3 is in the vvay to Da
                        ••
                     ſcus told by our Lord IESVS of his vaine attempt, and miraculouſly conuerted to be an Apoſtle: and after great penance, reſtored to his ſight by Ananias, and baptized. 20 And preſently he dealeth mightily againſt the Ievves, prouing IESVS to be Chriſt, to their great admiration. 23 But ſuch is their obſtinacie, that they lay al Damaſcus to kil him, 26 From thence he goeth to Hieruſalem, and there ioyneth vvith the Apoſtles, and againe by the obſtinate Ievves his death is ſought. 31 The Church being novv grovven ouer al Ievvrie, Galilee, and Samaria, Peter viſiteth al: and in his viſitation, 33 healing a lameman, 36 and raiſing a dead vvoman, conuerteth very many.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND Saul as yet breathing forth threatenings and ſlaughter againſt the diſciples of our Lord,Act. 22, 4 Gal. 1, 13. came to the high prieſt,The Epiſtle vpō the Conuerſion of S. Paul Ian. 25. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and aſked letters of him vnto Damaſcus to the ſynagogs, that if he had found any men and vvomen of this vvay, he might bring them bound vnto Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And as he vvent on his iourney, it chaunced that he drevv nigh to Damaſcus:1. Cor. 15, 8. and * ſodenly a light from heauen ſhined round about him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And falling on the ground, he heard a voice ſaying to him,The heretikes that conclude CHRIST ſo in heauen that he cā be no where els til the day of Iudgement, ſhal hardly reſolue a mā that would know where CHRIST was when he appeared here in the way, and ſpake theſe words to Saul. Saul, Saul vvhy perſecuteſt thou me? ✝ 
                     verse 5 Vvho ſaid, Vvho art thou Lord? And he, I am IESVS vvhom thou doeſt perſecute, it is hard for thee to kicke againſt the pricke. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And trembling and being aſtonied he ſaid, Lord, vvhat vvilt thou haue me to doe? ✝ 
                     verse 7 And our Lord to him, Ariſe, and goe into the citie, and it ſhal be told thee vvhat thou muſt doe. But the men that vvent in companie vvith him, ſtood amaſed, hearing the voice, but ſeeing no man. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And Saul roſe vp from the ground, and his eies being opened, he ſavv nothing. And they dravving him by the hādes, brought him into Damaſcus. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he vvas three daies not ſeeing, and he did neither eate nor drinke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And there vvas a certaine diſciple at Damaſcus, named Ananias: and our Lord ſaid to him in a viſion, Ananias. But he ſaid, Loe, here I am Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And our Lord to him, Ariſe, & goe into the ſtreate that is called Straight: and ſeeke in the houſe of Iudas, one named Saul of Tarſus. for behold he prayeth. ( ✝ 
                     verse 12 And he ſavv a man named Ananias, comming in and impoſing handes vpon him for to receiue his ſight.) ✝ 
                     verse 13 But Ananias anſvvered, Lord, I haue heard by many of this man, hovv much euil he hath done to thy ſainctes in Hieruſalem: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and here he hath authoritie from the cheefe prieſts to binde al that inuocate thy name. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And our Lord ſaid to him, Goe, for a veſſel of election is this man 
                     〈…〉
                   carie my name before the Gentiles, and kinges, 
                     〈…〉
                   children of Iſraël. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For I vvil ſhevv him hovv grea
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   muſt ſuffer for my name.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And Ananias vvent, and entred into the houſe: and impoſing handes vpon him, he ſaid, Brother Saul, our Lord IESVS hath ſent me, he that appeared to thee in the vvay that thou cameſt: that thou maieſt ſee and be filled vvith the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And forthvvith there fel from his eies as it
 vvere ſcales, and he receiued ſight. and riſing he vvasPaul alſo him ſelf, though with the diuine and heauenly voice proſtrated and inſtructed, yet was ſent to a man to receiue the Sacraments, & to be ioyned to the Church. Auguſt. de doct. Chr. lib. 1. in Pr
                           ••
                        m.
                   baptized. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And vvhen he had taken meate, he vvas ſtrengthened.
               And he vvas vvith the diſciples that vvere at Damaſcus, for certaine daies. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And incontinent entring into the ſynagogs, he preached IESVS, that this is the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And al that heard, vvere aſtonied, and ſaid, Is not this he that expugned in Hieruſalem thoſe that inuocated this name: and came hither to this purpoſe that he might bring them bound to the cheefe prieſts? ✝ 
                     verse 22 But Saul vvaxed mightie much more, and confounded the Ievves that dvvelt at Damaſcus, affirming that this is CHRIST. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen many daies vvere paſſed, the Ievves conſulted that they might kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But their conſpiracie came to Sauls knovvledge.2 Cor. 11, 32. And * they kept the gates alſo day and night, that they might kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But the diſciples taking him in the night, conueied him avvay by the vvall, letting him dovvne in a baſket.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 And vvhen he vvas come into Hieruſalem, he aſſaied to ioyne him ſelf to the diſciples, & al feared him, not beleeuing that he vvas a diſciple. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But Barnabas tooke him & brought him to the Apoſtles, and told them hovv in the vvay he had ſeen our Lord, and that he ſpake vnto him, and hovv in Damaſcus he dealt confidently in the name of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And he vvas vvith them going in and going out in Hieruſalem, and dealing confidently in the name of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 29 He ſpake alſo to the Gentiles, and diſputed vvith the Greekes: but they ſought to kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 Vvhich vvhen the brethren had knovven, they brought him dovvné to Caeſaréa, and ſent him avvay to Tarſus.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 The ⸬ CHVRCH truely through al Ievvrie & Galilee and Samaria had peace,The Church viſibly procedeth ſtill vvith much comfort & manifold increaſe euen by perſecution. & vvas edified, vvalking in the feare of our Lord, and vvas repleniſhed vvith the conſolation of the holy Ghoſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And it came to paſſe, that Peter as he paſſed through al, came to the ſaincts that dvvelt at Lydda. ✝ 
                     verse 33 and he found there a certaine man named Aeneas, lying in his bed from eight yeres before, vvho had the palſey. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And Peter ſaid to him, Aeneas, our Lord IESVS CHRISThealeth heale' thee: ariſe, and make thy bed. And incontinent he aroſe. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And al that dvvelt at Lydda and Satóna, ſavv him: vvho conuerted to our Lord.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 36 And in Ioppé there vvas a certaine diſciple named Tabitha, vvhich by interpretation is called Dorcas. This vvomā vvas ful ofBehold good vvorkes and almes-deedes, & the force thereof reaching euen to the next life. good vvorkes and almes-deedes vvhich ſhe did. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And it came to paſſe in thoſe daies, that ſhe vvas ſicke and died. Vvhom vvhen they had vvaſhed, they laid her in an vpper chamber. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And vvhereas Lydda vvas nigh to Ioppé, the diſciples hearing that Peter vvas in it, they ſent tvvo men vnto him, deſiring him, Be not loth to come ſo farre as to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And Peter riſing vp came vvith them. And vvhen he vvas come, they brought him into the vpper chamber: and al the vvidovves ſtoode about him vveeping,The praiers of our Almes folke & beadſmen may do vs great good euē after our departure. For if they procured her temporal life, much more may they helpe vs to Gods merc
                        •
                     e and to releaſe of puniſhment in Purgatorie. and ſhevving him the coates and garments vvhich Dorcas made them. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And al being put forth, Peter falling on his knees praied, and turning to the body he ſaid: Tabitha, ariſe. And ſhe opened her eies: and ſeeing Peter, ſhe ſate vp. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And giuing her his hand, he lifted her vp. And vvhen he had called the ſaincts and the vvidovves, he preſented her aliue. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And it vvas made knovven through out al Ioppé: and many beleeued in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And it came to paſſe that he abode many daies in Ioppé, vvith one Simon a tanner.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Becauſe the Ievves ſo much abhorred the Gentils,The 4 part. for the better vvarrant of their Chriſtening,THE propagation of the Church to the Gentils alſo. an Angel appeareth to Cornelius the deuout Italian. 9 and a viſion is ſhevved to Peter him ſelf (the cheefe and Paſtor of al) 19 and the Spirit ſpeaketh to him, 34 yea and as he is Catechizing them about IESVS, 44 the holy Ghoſt commeth viſibly vpon them: and therfore not fearing any longer the offenſe of the Ievves, he commaundeth to baptize them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvas a certaine man in Caeſaréa, named Cornelius, Centurion of that vvhich is called the Italian band, ✝ 
                     verse 2 religious, & fearing God vvith al his houſe, ″ doing many almes-deedes to the people. And alvvaies praying to God, ✝ 
                     verse 3 he ſavv in a viſion manifeſtly, about the ninthe houre of the day, an Angel of God comming in vnto him, and ſaying to him, Cornelius. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But he beholding him, taken vvith feare, ſaid, Vvho art thou Lord? And he ſaid to him, Thy praiers and thy almes-deedes are aſcended into remembrance in the ſight of God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And novv ſend men
 vnto Ioppé, and call hither one Simon that is ſurnamed Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 6 he lodgeth vvith one Simon a tanner, vvhoſe houſe is by the ſea ſide. he vvil tel thee vvhat thou muſt doe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen the Angel vvas departed that ſpake to him, he called tvvo of his houſhold, and a ſouldiar that feared our Lord, of them that vvere vnder him. ✝ 
                     verse 8 To vvhom vvhen he had told all, he ſent them vnto Ioppé.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And the next day vvhiles they vvere going on their iourney, and dravving nigh to the citie, Peter vvent vp into the higher partes, ″ to pray about the ſixt houre. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And being hungrie, he vvas deſirous to take ſomevvhat. And as they vvere preparing, there fel vpon him an exceſſe of minde: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and he ſavv the heauen opened, and a certaine veſſel deſcending, as it vvere a great lin̄en ſheete vvith foure corners let dovvne from heauen to the earth, ✝ 
                     verse 12 vvherein vvere al foure-footed beaſtes, and that creepe on the earth, and foules of the aire. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And there came a voice to him, Ariſe Peter: kil, and eate. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But Peter ſaid, God forbid, Lord: for I did neuer eate any common and vncleane thing. ✝ 
                     verse 15 AndHere God firſt vttered to Peter that the time was come to preach alſo to the Gentiles, and to cōuerſe with them for their ſaluation, no leſſe then with the Iewes, with ful freedō to eate al meates without reſpecte of the prohibition of certaine, made in the old Law. a voice came to him againe the ſecond time, That vvhich God hath purified, doe not thou cal common. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And this vvas done thriſe. and forthvvith the veſſel was taken vp againe into heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhiles Peter doubted vvithin him ſelf, vvhat the viſion ſhould be that he had ſeen, behold the men that vvere ſent from Cornelius, inquiring for Simons houſe, ſtood at the gate. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhen they had called, they aſked, if Simon that is ſurnamed Peter, vvere lodged there. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And as Peter vvas thinking of the viſion, the Spirit ſaid to him, Behold three men doe ſeeke thee. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Ariſe therfore, and get thee dovvne, and goe vvith them, doubting nothing: for I haue ſent them. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And Peter going dovvne to the men, ſaid, Behold, I am he vvhom you ſeeke: vvhat is the cauſe, for the vvhich you are come? ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvho ſaid, Cornelius the Centurion, a iuſt man & that feareth God, and hauing teſtimonie of al the nation of the Ievves, receiued an anſvver of an holy Angel to ſend for thee into his houſe, and to heare vvordes of thee. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Therfore bringing them in, he lodged them.
               ✝ And the day folovving he aroſe and vvent vvith them: and certaine of the brethren of Ioppé accompanied him. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And on the morow he entred into Caeſaréa. And Cornelius expected them, hauing called together his kinne, and ſpecial
 frendes. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And it came to paſſe, Vvhen Peter vvas come in▪ Cornelius came to meete him, and falling at his feete ″ adored. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But Peter lifted him vp ſaying, Ariſe, my ſelf alſo am a man. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And talking vvith him, he vvent in, and findeth many that vvere aſſembled, ✝ 
                     verse 28 and he ſaid to them, You knovv hovv abominable it is for a man that is a Ievve, to ioyne, or to approche vnto a ſtranger: but God hath ſhevved to me, to call no man cōmon or vncleane. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For the vvhich cauſe, making no doubt, I came vvhen I vvas ſent for. I demaund therfore, for vvhat cauſe you haue ſent for me? ✝ 
                     verse 30 And Cornelius ſaid, Foure daies ſince,In the Greeke, faſting & praying. vntil this houre, I vvasAt the time of praier ſpecially God ſendeth men comfortable viſitations. praying the ninthe houre in my houſe, and beholdNote theſe apparitions and viſions to S. Peter, Cornelius, and others, in the Scriptures very oftē, agaīſt the incredulity of our Heretikes, that wil beleeue neither viſion nor miracle, not expreſſed in Scripture: theſe being beleeued of Chriſtian men euē before they were written. a man ſtoode before me in vvhite apparel, ✝ 
                     verse 31 and ſaid: Cornelius, thy praier is heard, and thy almes-deedes are in memorie in the ſight of God. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Send therfore to Ioppé, and call hither Simon that is ſurnamed Peter: he lodgeth in the houſe of Simon a tanner by the ſea ſide. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Immediatly therfore I ſent to thee: and thou haſt done vvel in comming. Novv therfore al vve are preſent in thy ſight, to heare al things vvhatſoeuer are commaunded thee of the Lord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 And Peter opening his mouth, ſaid, In very deede I perceiue that God is not an accepter of perſons. ✝ 
                     verse 35 but in euery nation, he that feareth him, andNot ſuch as beleeue only, but ſuch as feare God and worke iuſtice, are acceptable to him. vvorketh iuſtice, is acceptable to him. ✝ 
                     verse 36 The word did God ſend to the children of Iſraël, preaching peace by IESVS CHRIST (this is Lord of al.) ✝ 
                     verse 37 
                  The Epiſtle vpō Munday in Eaſter weeke. You knovv the vvord that hath been made through al Ievvrie,Mat. 4, 12, for * beginning frō Galilee, after the baptiſme vvhich Iohn preached. ✝ 
                     verse 38 IESVS of Nazareth hovv God anointed him vvith the holy Ghoſt and vvith povver, vvho vvent through out doing good and healing al that vvere oppreſſed of the Deuil, becauſe God vvas vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And vve are vvitneſſes of al things that he did in the countrie of the Ievves and in Hieruſalem, vvhom they killed hanging him vpon a tree. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Him God raiſed vp the third day and ″ gaue him to be made manifeſt, ✝ 
                     verse 41 not to al the people, but to vs, vvho did eate and drinke vvith him after he roſe againe from the dead.The Epiſtle vpō Munday in vvhitſōvveeke. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And he commaunded vs to preach to the people, and to teſtifie that it is he that of God vvas appointed iudge of the liuing and of the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 43 To him al the prophets giue teſtimonie, that al receiue remiſſion of ſinnes by his name, vvhich beleeue in him. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 44 As Peter vvas yet ſpeaking theſe vvordes, the holy Ghoſt fel vpon al that heard the vvord. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And the faithful of the Circumciſion that came with Peter, vvere aſtonied, for that the grace of the holy Ghoſt vvas poured out vpon the Gentiles alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 46 For they heard them ſpeaking with tonges, and magnifying God. Then Peter anſvvered, ✝ 
                     verse 47 Can any man forbid vvater, that theſe ſhould not be ″ baptized vvhich haue receiued the holy Ghoſt as vvel as vve? ✝ 
                     verse 48 And he commaūded them to be baptized in the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. ⊢ Then they deſired him that he vvould tarie vvith them certaine daies.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  2. Doing many almes deedes.] He knevv God creator of al, but that his omnipotent Sonne vvas incarnate,Good vvorkes before faith, are preparatiues to the ſame, not properly meritorious. he knevv not: and in that faith he made praiers and gaue almes vvhich pleaſed God. and by vvel doing he deſerued to knovv God perfectly, to beleeue the myſterie of the Incarnation, and to come to the Sacrament of Baptiſme.
                        
                           •
                        ed. in hūc locum. 
                     So ſaith Venerable Bede out of S. Gregorie. And S. Auguſtine thus, li. 1 de Bapt. c. 8. Becauſe vvhatſoeuer goodnes he had in praiers and almes, the ſame could not profite him vnles he vvere by the band of Chriſtian Societie and peace, incorporated to the Church, he is bidden to ſend vnto Peter, that by him he may learne Chriſt, by him he may be baptized, &c. Vvhereby it appeareth that ſuch vvorkes as are done before iuſtification, though they ſuffice not to ſaluation, yet be acceptable preparatiues to the grace of iuſtification, and ſuch as moue God to mercie, as it might appeare alſo by Gods like prouident mercifulnes * to the Eunuche.
                     Act. 8. 
                     though al ſuch vvorkes preparatiue come of grace alſo: othervviſe they could neuer deſerue at Gods hand of congruity or any othervviſe tovvard iuſtification.
                  
                  9. To pray about the ſixt houre.] The houre is ſpecified, for that there vvere certaine appointed times of praies vſed in the Lavv,
                     The Canonical houres. 
                     vvhich deuout perſons, according to the publike ſeruice in the Temple, obſerued alſo priuately: and vvhich the Apoſtles and holy Church aftervvard both kept and increaſed.
                     De Orat. 
                     Vvhereof thus vvriteth S. Cyprian very notably. In celebrating their praiers, vve finde that the three children with Daniel obſerued the third ſixt,Dom. nu. 15. and ninthe houre, as in Sacrament (or myſterie) of the holy Trinitie. &c. And a litle after, Which ſpaces of houres the vvorſhippers of God ſpiritually (or myſtically) determining long ſince, obſerued ſet times to pray: and aftervvard the thing became manifeſt, that it vvas for Sacrament (or myſterie) that the iuſt ſo praied. For at the third houre the holy Ghoſt deſcended vpon the Apoſtles,Act. 2. fulfilling the grace of our Lords promis, and at the ſixt houre Peter going vp to the higher roome of the houſe,Act. 10. vvas both by voice and ſigne from God inſtructed, that al Nations ſhould be admitted to the grace of ſaluation,Luc. 23. vvhereas of cleanſing the Gentiles he doubted before, and our Lord being crucified at the ſixt houre, at ninthe vvaſhed avvay our ſinnes vvith his bloud. But to vs (deerly beloued) beſide the ſeaſons obſerued of old, both the times and ſacraments of praying be increaſed. for vve muſt pray in the morning early,Mattins. that the Reſurrection of our Lord may be celebrated by morning praier: as of old the holy Ghoſt deſigned in the Pſalme,Pſal. 5. ſaying, In the morning early vvil I ſtand vp to thee, early in the morning vvilt thou heare my voice.Euenſong. 
                     Tovvard the euening alſo vvhen the ſunne departeth, and the day endeth, vve muſt of neceſsitie pray againe.
                  S. Hierom alſo vvriting of Daniels praying three times in a day,
                     Dan. 6. ſaith: There are three times, vvherein vve muſt bovv our knees to God. The third, the ſixt, and the ninthe houre the Eccleſiaſtical tradition doth vvel vnderſtand. Moreouer at the third houre the Holy Ghoſt deſcended vpon the Apoſtles. at the ſixt,
                     Act. 3. 
                     Peter vvent vp into a higher chamber to pray. at the ninthe, * Peter and Iohn vvent to the Temple. Againe vvriting to Euſtochium a virgin and Nonne ep. 22. c. 16. Though the Apoſtle bid vs pray alvvaies, and to holy perſons their very ſleepe is praier: yet vve muſt haue diſtinct houres of praier, that if perhaps vve be othervviſe occupied, the very time may admoniſh vs of our office or duety. The third, ſixt, ninthe houre, morning early, and the euening, no man can be ignorant of. And to Demetrias ep. 8. c. 8. that in the Pſalmes and praier ſhe muſt keepe alvvaies the third, ſixt, ninthe houre, euening, midnight, and morning. He hath the like ep. 7 c. 5. And (ep. 27 c. 10.) he telleth hovv Paula the holy Abbeſſe
 vvith her religious Nonnes ſang the Pſalter in order, in the morning, at the third, ſixt, ninthe houre, euening, midnight. by midnight meaning the time of Martins (therfore called Nocturnes agreably to S. Cyprian de Orat. Do. num. 15) and by the morning, the firſt houre called Prime: al correſpondent to the times and houres of Chriſts Paſſion, as in S. Matthevv is noted c▪ 26. 27. By al vvhich vve ſee hovv agreable the vſe of the Churches ſeruice is euen at this time to the Scriptures and primitiue Church: and hovv vvicked the Puritan Caluiniſtes be, that count al ſuch order and ſet ſeaſons of praier, ſuperſtition: and laſtly, hovv inſufficient and vnlike the nevv pretended Church-ſeruice of England is to the primitiue vſe, vvhich hath no ſuch houres of night or day, ſauing a litle imitation of the old Mattins and Euenſong, and that in Schiſme and Hereſie, and therfore not onely vnprofitable, but alſo damnable.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        5. Adored.] S. Chryſoſtom ho. 21 in Act. thinketh Peter refuſed this adoration of humilitie only, becauſe euery falling dovvne to the g
                        •
                     ound for vvorſhip ſake, is not Diuine vvorſhip or dew only to God,Adoration of creatures.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . the vvord of adoration and proſtration being commonly vſed in the Scriptures tovvard men. But S. Hierom adu. Vigil. c. 2 to. 
                           •
                        . rather thinketh that Cornelius by error of Gentility, and of Peters perſon, did go about to adore him vvith Diuine honour, and therfore vvas lifted vp by the Apoſtle, adding that he vvas but a man.
                  
                     40. Gaue him.] Chriſt did not vtter his Reſurrection and other myſteries to al at once, and immediatly to the vulgar: but to a fevv choſen men that ſhould be the gouernours of the reſt. inſtructing vs thereby to take our faith and al neceſſarie things of ſaluation, at the hands of our Superiors.
                  
                     47. Baptized, vvhich haue receiued.]
                     They that are iuſtified before, muſt not omit the Sacraments. Such may be the grace of God ſometimes tovvard men, and their charitie and contrition ſo great, that they may haue remiſſion, iuſtification, and ſanctification before the external Sacrament of Baptiſme, Confirmation, or Penance be receiued. as vve ſee in this example, vvhere at Peters preaching they al receiue the Holy Ghoſt before any Sacrament. but in the ſame vve learne one neceſſarie leſſon, that ſuch notvvithſtanding muſt needes receiue the Sacraments appointed by Chriſt, vvhich vvhoſoeuer contemneth, can neuer be iuſtified. Aug. ſuper Leuit. q. 
                           •
                        4 to. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  The Chriſtian Ievves reprehend the foreſaid fact of Peter in baptizing the Gentils 4 But he alleaging his foreſaid vvarrants, and ſhevving plainly that it vvas of God, 1
                        •
                      they like good Catholikes do yeld. 19 By the foreſaid perſecution, the Church is yet further dilated, not only into al Ievvrie, Galilee, and Samaria, but alſo into other Countries: ſpecially in Antiochia Syria the increaſe among the Greekes, is 
                        〈◊〉
                     , firſt by the foreſaid diſperſed, 23 then by Barnabas, thirdly by him and Saul together: ſo that there beginneth the name of Chriſtians: 27 vvith perfite vnity betvvene them and the Church that vvas before them a
                        •
                      Hieruſalem.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the Apoſtles and brethren that vvere in Ievvrie, heard that the Gentiles alſo receiued the vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vvhen Peter vvas come vp to Hieruſalem, they that vvere of the Circumciſion reaſoned againſt him, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 3 Vvhy didſt thou enter in to men vncircumciſed, and didſt eate vvith them? ✝ 
                     verse 4 But Peter began and declared to them the order,Act. 10, 9. ſaying: ✝ 
                     verse 5 * I was in the citie of Ioppé praying, & I ſavv in an exceſſe of minde a viſion, a certaine veſſel deſcending as it vvere a great ſheete with foure corners let dovvne from heauen, and it came euen vnto me. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Into vvhich I looking cōſidered, and ſavv foure footed beaſtes of the earth, and cattel, and ſuch as creepe, and
 foules of the aire. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And I heard alſo a voice ſaying to me, Ariſe Peter, kil and eate. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And I ſaid, Not ſo Lord: for common or vncleane thing neuer entred into my mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And a voice anſvvered the ſecond time from heauen: That vvhich God hath made cleane, doe not thou call common. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And this vvas done thriſe: and al vvere taken vp againe into heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And behold, three men immediatly vvere come to the houſe vvherein I vvas, ſent to me from Caeſaréa. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the ſpirit ſaid to me, that I ſhould goe vvith them, doubting nothing. And there came vvith me theſe ſixe brethren alſo: and vve vvent in to the mans houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he told vs, hovv he had ſeen an Angel in his houſe, ſtanding and ſaying to him, Send to Ioppé, and cal hither Simon, that is ſurnamed Peter, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvho ſhal ſpeake to thee vvordes vvherein thou ſhalt be ſaued and al thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhen I had begonne to ſpeake, the holy Ghoſt fel vpon them, as vpō vs alſo in the beginning. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And I remembred the vvord of our Lord, according as he ſaid,Act. 1, 5. 
                  Iohn in deede baptized vvith vvater, but you ſhal be baptized vvith the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 If therfore God hath giuen them the ſame grace, as to vs alſo that beleeued in our Lord IESVS CHRIST: vvho vvas I that might prohibite God? ✝ 
                     verse 18 Hauing heard theſe things, theyGood Chriſtians heare and obey gladly ſuch truthes as be opened vnto them from God by their cheefe Paſtors, by viſion, reuelation, or otherwiſe. held their peace: and glorified God, ſaying, God then to the Gentiles alſo hath giuen repentance vnto life.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 * And they truely that had been diſperſed by the tribulation that vvas made vnder Steuen,Act. 8, 1. vvalked through out vnto Phoenîce and Cypres & Antioche, ſpeaking the vvord to none, but to the Ievves only. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But certaine of them vvere men of Cypres and Cyréne, vvho vvhen they vvere entred into Antioche, ſpake to the Greekes, preaching our Lord IESVS.The Epiſtle vpō S. Barnabees day Iun. 11.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the hand of our Lord vvas vvith them: and a great number of beleeuers vvas conuerted to our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the report came to the eares of the Church that vvas at Hieruſalem,Act. 4, 36. touching theſe things: and they ſent * Barnabas as farre as Antioche. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Vvho vvhen he vvas come, and ſavv the grace of God, reioyced: and he exhorted al vvith purpoſe of hart to continevv in our Lord: ✝ 
                     verse 24 becauſe he vvas a good man, and ful of the holy Ghoſt and faith. And a great ″ multitude vvas added to our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he vvent, forth to * Tarſus,Act. 9, 30. to ſeeke Saul: ✝ 
                     verse 26 vvhom vvhen he had found, he brought him to Antioche. And they cōuerſed there
 in the church a vvhole yere: and they taught a great multitude,The name of CHRISTIANS. ſo that the diſciples vvere at Antioche firſt named ″ CHRISTIANS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 And in theſe daies there came Prophets from Hieruſalem to Antioche, ✝ 
                     verse 28 and one of them riſing, named Agabus, did by the Spirit ſignifie a great famine that ſhould be in the vvhole vvorld, vvhich fel vnder Claudius. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And the diſciples according as eche man had, purpoſed euery one to ſend, for to ſerue the brethren that dvvelt in Ievvrie: ✝ 
                     verse 30 vvhich alſo they did, ſending to the auncients by the handes of Barnabas and Saul.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     24. Multitude added.) As before (c. 10) a fevv, ſo novv great numbers of Gentiles are adioyned alſo to the viſible Church,The Church viſible. conſiſting before only of the Ievves. Vvhich Church hath beene euer ſince Chriſts Aſcenſion, notoriouſly ſeen and knovven: their preaching open, their Sacraments viſible, their diſcipline viſible, their Heades and Gouernours viſible, the prouiſion for their maintenance viſible, the perſecution viſible, their diſperſion viſible: the Heretikes that vvent out from them, viſible: the ioyning either of men or Nations vnto them, viſible: their peace and reſt after perſecutions, viſible: their Gouernours in priſon, viſible: the Church praieth for them viſibly, their Councels viſible, their gifts and graces viſible, their name (Chriſtians) knovven to al the vvorld, of the Proteſtants inuiſible Church vve heare not one vvord.
                  
                     26. Chriſtians.) This name, Chriſtian, ought to be common to al the Faithful, and other nevv names of Schiſmatikes and Sectaries muſt be abhorred.Hierony. cont. Lucif c. 7. in fine. 
                     If thou heare (ſaith S. Hierom) any vvhere, ſuch as be ſaid to be of Chriſt, not to haue their names of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, but to be called after ſome other certaine name, as Marcionites, Valentinians, (as novv alſo the Lutherans, Caluiniſts, Proteſtants) knovv thou that they belong not to the Church of Chriſt, but to the Synagogue of Antichriſt. Lactantius alſo (li. 7 Diuin. inſtit. c. 30) ſaith thus, when Phrygians, or Nouatians, or Valentinians, or Marcionites,
                     Names of Sectaries and Heretikes. 
                     or Anthropomorphites, or Arrians, or any other be named, they ceaſe to be Chriſtians, vvho hauing loſt the name of Chriſt, haue done on the names of men. Neither can our nevv Sectaries diſcharge them ſelues, for that they take not to them ſelues theſe names, but are forced to beare them as giuen by their Aduerſaries. For, ſo vvere the names of Arians and the reſt of old, impoſed by others, and not choſen commonly of them ſelues: Vvhich notvvithſtanding vvere callings that proued them to be Heretikes.Proteſtants. And as for the name of Proteſtants, our men hold them vvel content therevvith. But concerning the Heretikes turning of the argument againſt the peculiar callings of our Religious,Diuers religious orders are not diuers ſectes. as Dominicās, Franciſcans, Ieſuites, Thomiſts, or ſuch like, it is nothing, except they could proue that the orders & perſons ſo named, were of diuers faithes & Sectes, or differed in any neceſſarie point of religion, or vvere not al of one Chriſtian name and Communion: and it is as ridiculous as if it vvere obiected, that ſome be Ciceronians, ſome Plinians, ſome good Auguſtine men, ſome Hieronymians,Ierem. 35. ſome Oxford mē, ſome Cambrige men, & (vvhich is moſt like) ſome * Rechabites,Num. 6.
* Nazareite
                        •
                     .
                  Neither doth their obiection,Papiſtes, Catholikes, and true Chriſtians, al one. that vve be called Papiſtes, helpe or excuſe them in their nevv names. for, beſides that it is by them ſcornfully inuented (as the name Homouſians vvas of the Arians) this name is not of any one man B. of Rome or els vvhere, knovven to be the author of any ſchiſme or ſect, as their callings be: but it is of a vvhole ſtate and order of gouernours, and that of the cheefe Gouernours, to vvhom vve are bound to cleaue in religion and to obey in al things. So to be a Papiſt, is to be a Chriſtian man, a childe of the Church, and ſubiect to Chriſts Vicar. And therfore againſt ſuch impudent Sectaries as compare the faithful for folovving the Pope, to the diuerſitie of Heretikes bearing the names of nevv Maiſters,Not to be with the Pope, is to be with Antichriſt. let vs euer haue in readines this ſaying of S. Hierom to Pope Damaſus,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . ep. 37 & ep. 58 ad Damaſ. 
                     Vitalis I knovv not, Meletius I refuſe, I knovv not Paulinus, whoſoeuer gathereth not vvith thee, ſcattereth: that is to ſay, whoſoeuer is not Chriſts, is Antichriſts. And againe, If any man ioyne vvith Peters Chaire, he is mine.
                  
                  
                      Vve muſt here further obſerue that this name,The name of CHRISTIANS. Chriſtian, giuen to al beleeuers and to the whole Church, vvas ſpecially taken to diſtinguiſh them from the Ievves and Heathens vvhich beleeued not at al in Chriſt, and the ſame novv ſeuereth and maketh knovven al Chriſtian men from Turkes and others that hold not of Chriſt at al. But vvhen Heretikes began to riſe from among the Chriſtians,The name of CATHOLIKES. vvho profeſſed Chriſts name and ſundry Articles of faith as true beleeuers doe, the name Chriſtian vvas to common to ſeuer the Heretikes from true faithful men: and therevpon the Apoſtles by the holy Ghoſt impoſed this name Catholike vpon the Beleeuers vvhich in al points vvere obedient to the Churches doctrine. When hereſies vvere riſen (ſaith S. Pacianus ep. ad Symphorianum) & endeuoured by diuers names to tears the doue of God and Queene, and to rent her in peeces, the Apoſtolical people required their ſurname, vvhereby the incorrupt people might be diſtinguiſhed. &c. and ſo thoſe that before vvere called Chriſtians, are novv ſurnamed alſo Catholikes. Chriſtian is my name, ſaith he, Catholike my ſurname. And this vvord, Catholike, is the proper note vvhereby the holy Apoſtles in their Crede taught vs to diſcerne the true Church from the falſe heretical congregation of vvhat ſort ſoeuer.CREDO ECCLESIAM CATHOLICAM. And not only the meaning of the vvord, vvhich ſignifieth vniuerſalitie of times, places, and perſons, but the very name and vvord it ſelf, by Gods prouidence, alvvaies and only appropriated to the true beleuers, and (though ſometimes at the beginning of Sectes chalenged) yet neuer obtained by Heretikes, giueth ſo plaine a marke and euidence, that S. Auguſtine ſaid, In the lappe of the Church the very name of Catholike keepeth me. cont. ep. fund. c. 4. And againe tract. 32 in Io. vve receiue the Holy Ghoſt if vve loue the Church, if vve be ioyned together by charitie, if vve reioyce in the Catholike name and faith. And againe de ver. rel. c. 7. to. 1. We muſt hold the communion of that Church vvhich is named Catholike, not only of her ovvne, but alſo of al her enemies. for, vvil they nil they, the Heretikes alſo and Schiſmatikes them ſelues, vvhen they ſpeake not vvith their ovvne fellovves but vvith ſtrangers, call the Catholike Church nothing els but the Catholike Church: for they could not be vnderſtood vnles they diſcerne it by this name vvherevvith ſhe is called of al the vvorld. The Heretikes vvhen they ſee them ſelues preuented of this name Catholike,
                     The Proteſtāts deride the name CATHOLIKE. then they plainely reiect it and deride the name, as the Donatiſtes did, calling it an humane forgeris or fiction, vvhich S. Auguſtine calleth vvordes of blaſphemie, li. 1. c. 3
                           •
                         cont. Gaudrat. and ſome Heretikes of this time call them ſcornefully cartholikes, and cacolikes. An other calleth it, the moſt vaine terme Catholike. Beza in praf. no. Teſt. an. 1565. An other calleth the Catholike religion, a Catholike Apoſtaſie or defection, Humfrey in vit. Iuel. pag. 
                           •
                        13. Yea and ſome haue taken the vvord out of the Crede,In the Catechiſmes of the Lutherans. putting Chriſtian for it. But againſt theſe good fellovves let vs folovv that vvhich S. Auguſtine (de vtil. cred. c. 8. to. 6.) giueth as a rule to direct a mā the right and ſure vvay from the diuerſitie & doubtfulnes of al error, ſaying, If after theſe trouble of minde thou ſeeme to thy ſelf ſufficiently toſſed and vexed, & vvilt haue an end of theſe moleſtations, folovv the vvay of Catholike diſcipline, vvhich from Chriſt him ſelf by the Apoſtles hath proceded euen vnto vs, and ſhal procede from hence to the poſteritie. See the Annotation 1 Tim. 3, c. 15.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  Herod the firſt king that perſecuted the Church, hauing at Hieruſalem (vvhen Barnabas and Saul vvere there vvith the collation of the Antiochians) killed Iames the Apoſtle, 3 and to pleaſe the levves impriſoned Peter vvith the minde to kil him alſo, but fruſtrate by an Angel ſent of God at the continual praiers of the Church made for her cheefe Paſtor,The Epiſtle vpō 
                        
                           •
                         S. Peter and Paules day Iun. 
                              •
                           9.
                      19 being puffed vp vvith ſuch pride that at Caſarea he refuſeth not to be honoured as God: 23 is miraculouſly ſtriken of Gods Angel. 24 And ſo after the perſecutors death, the Churches preaching proſpereth excedingly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND at the ſame time Herod the king ſet his hādes, to afflicte certaine of the Church. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he killed Iames the brother of Iohn vvith the ſvvord. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And ſeing that it pleaſed the Ievves, he added to apprehend Peter alſo. And it vvas the daies of the Azymes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vvhom vvhen he had apprehended, he caſt into priſon, deliuering him toAs Peters perſon vvas more notorious then others, & therfore better garded then other, for feare he ſhould eſcape: ſo Gods prouidence in preſeruing & deliuering him for the longer gouernment of his Church, is very maruelous. foure quaterniōs of ſouldiars to be kept, meaning after the Paſche to bring him forth to the people. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Peter in deede vvas kept in priſon. But ″ praier vvas made of the Church vvithout intermiſſion
 vnto God for him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen Herod vvould haue brought him forth, the ſame night Peter vvas ſleeping betvvene tvvo ſouldiars, bound vvith ″ tvvo chaines: and the keepers before the doore kept the priſon. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And behold an Angel of our Lord ſtoode in preſence: and light ſhined in the houſe: and ſtriking Peters ſide, he raiſed him, ſaying, Ariſe quickely. And the chaines fel from his handes. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the Angel ſaid to him, Gird thee, and put on thy ſhoes. And he did ſo. And he ſaid to him, Put thy garment about thee, & folovv me. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And going forth he folovved him, & he knew not that it vvas true vvhich vvas done by the Angel: but he thought that he ſavv a viſion. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And paſſing through the firſt & the ſecond vvatch, they came to the yron gate that leadeth to the citie, vvhich of it ſelf opened to them. And going out, they vvent forvvard one ſtreate: and incontinent the Angel departed from him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And Peter returning to him ſelf, ſaid: Novv I knovv in very deede that our Lord hath ſent his Angel, and deliuered me out of Herods hand, & from al the expectation of the people of the Ievves. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And conſidering, he came to theIt is much for the praiſe of theſe good Chriſtians that the aſſemble to Gods ſeruice & praier was kept in their houſes in the time of perſecution, & that the Apoſtle came thither ſtraight out of priſon, as his firſt refuge, as now Chriſtian people doe much to their cōmendatiō, in places where Hereſie doth reigne. houſe of Marie the mother of Iohn, vvho vvas ſurnamed Marke, vvhere many vvere gathered and praying. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvhen he knocked at the doore of the gate, there came forth a vvenche to ſee, named Rhodè. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And as ſhe knew Peters voice, for ioy ſhe opened not the gate, but running in ſhe told that Peter ſtoode before the gate. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But they ſaid to her, Thou art mad. But ſhe affirmed that it vvas ſo. But they ſaid, It is ″ his Angel. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And Peter cōtinued knocking. And vvhē they had opened, they ſavv him, & vvere aſtonied. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And beckening vvith his hand to them, that they ſhould hold their peace, he told hovv our Lord had brought him out of priſon, and he ſaid, ″ Tel theſe things to Iames & to the brethren. And going forth he vvent
Though God had ſo miraculouſly deliuered him, yet he would not tēpt God by ta
                        •
                     ying among his perſecutors, but accordīg to Chriſtes cōmaundement fled for a time. into an other place. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And when day vvas come, there vvas no litle a doe betvvene the ſouldiars, vvhat vvas become of Peter. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And Herod, vvhen he had ſought him, and had not found, making inquiſitiō of the keepers, cōmaūded them to be led avvay: & going dovvne frō Ievvrie into Caeſaréa, there he abode. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he vvas angrie vvith the Tyrians and the Sidonians. But they vvith one accord came to him, and perſuading Blaſtus that vvas cheefe of the kings chamber, they deſired peace, for that their countries vvere nouriſhed by him.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vpon a day appointed, Herod being araied vvith kingly attire, ſate in the iudgement ſeate, and made an oration to them. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the people made acclamation, The voices of a God, & not of a man. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And forthvvith an Angel of our LordPrinces that take delite in the flattery and praiſes of the people, ſo much that they forget them ſelues to be mē, & to giue the honour to God, may be warned by this example. ſtrooke him, becauſe he had not giuen the honour to God: and being conſumed of vvormes, he gaue vp the ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But the vvord of our Lord increaſed and multiplied. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And Barnabas and Saul returned from Hieruſalem,Act. 11, 29. hauing accompliſhed their * miniſterie, taking vvith them Iohn that vvas ſurnamed Marke.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     5. Praier vvas made.] The Church praied inceſſantly for her cheefe Paſtor, and was heard of God: and al Chriſtian people are vvarned thereby to pray for their Biſhopes and Paſtors in priſon.
                  
                     6. Tvvo chaines.]
                     S. Peters chaines. Theſe chaines are famous for miracles, and vvere brought from Hieruſalem to Rome by Eudoxia the Empereſſe, vvife to Theodoſius the yonger, vvhere they vvere matched & placed vvith an other chaine that the ſame Apoſtle vvas tied with by Nero, & a Church foūded therevpon, named Petri ad vincula, Vvhere they are religiouſly kept and reuerenced vntil this day, and there is a Feaſt in the vvhole Church for the ſame, the firſt of Auguſt, vvhich vve call, Lammas day.
                  
                  15. His Angel] If proper Angels (ſaith S. Chryſoſtom) be deputed by our Lord to ſuch as haue only charge of their ovvne life,Patronage of Angels. (as one of the iuſt ſaid,Gen. 41, 16▪
                      * The Angel vvhich hath deliuered me from my youth vpvvard) much more are ſupernal Spirits at hand to helpe them vnto vvhom the charge and burden of the vvorld is committed. Chryſ. in laud. Pauli. ho. 7▪ to. 3.
                  
                  
                     17. Tel Iames.]
                     Publike praier for S. Peter the head. He vvilleth them to ſhevv this to S. Iames Biſhop of Hieruſalem and to the Chriſtians, that they might ſee the effect of their praiers for him, & giue God thankes, for S. Iames no doubt publiſhed cōmon praier for S. Peter.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The preachers of the Church of Antioche preparing thēſelues,The 5 part. the Holy Ghoſt out of them al,THE taking of the Goſpel avvay from the obſtinate Iewes, and geuing of it to the Gentils, by the miniſterie of Paul and Barnabas. chooſeth Saul and Barnabas. 3 They being firſt conſecrated Biſhops, 4 go
                        •
                      their appointed circuite ouer al th
                        •
                      land of Cypres, the Proconſul vvhereof is alſo conuerted, ſeing the miraculous excecation of a Ievv by Paul. 13 Thence, into Pamphilia: 14 and Piſidia, vvhere in Antioche Paul preacheth to the Ievves, ſhevving that IESVS is Chriſt, 38 and that in him is ſaluation, and not in their Lavv of Moyſes: 40 vvarning them to bevvare of the reprobation foretold by the Prophets▪ 44 But the next Sabboth, they blaſphening, he in plaine termes forſaketh them, and turneth to the Gentiles. Whereat the Gentils be as glad on the contrarie ſide. 50 Finally the Ievves raiſing perſecution, they forſake them, pronouncing them to be obſtinate contemners.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvere in the Church vvhich vvas at Antioche, Prophets and Doctors, among vvhom vvas Barnabas, & Simon that vvas called Niger, and Lucius of Cyréne, and Manahen vvho vvas the foſterbrother of Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   as they vvere ″ miniſtring to our Lord, and faſting, the holy Ghoſt ſaid: ″ Separate me Saul and Barnabas vnto the vvorke, vvhereto I haue taken them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Then they ″ faſting and praying, and ″ impoſing hands vpō them, dimiſſed them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And they being ″ ſent of the holy Ghoſt, vvent to Seleucia, and thence ſailed to Cypres. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen they vvere come to Salamîna, they preached the vvord of God in the ſynagogs of the Ievves. And they had Iohn alſo in their miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen they had vvalked through out the vvhole iland as farre as Paphos, they found a certaine man that vvas a magician, a falſe-prophete, a Ievv, vvhoſe name vvasBarieu▪
                   Bar-ieſu', ✝ 
                     verse 7 vvho vvas vvith the Proconſul Sergius Paulus a vviſe man. He ſending for Barnabas & Saul, deſired to heare the vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But Elymas the magician (for ſo is his name interpreted) reſiſted them, ſeeking to auert the Proconſul from the faith. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But Saul, othervviſe Paul, repleniſhed vvith the holy Ghoſt, looking vpon him, ✝ 
                     verse 10 ſaid: O ful of al guile, and al deceit, ſonne of the deuil, enemie of al iuſtice, thou ceaſeſt not to ſubuert the right vvaies of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And novv behold the hand of our Lord vpon thee, and thou ſhalt be blind, not ſeing the ſunne vntil a time. And forthvvith there fel dimneſſe and darkeneſſe vpon him, and going about he ſought ſome body that vvould giue him his hand. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Then the Proconſul, vvhen he had ſeen that vvhich vvas done, beleeued, marueling at the doctrine of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvhen Paul and they that vvere vvith him had ſailed from Paphos, they came to Pergè in Pamphylia. And Iohn depárting from them, returned to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But they paſſing through Pergè, came to Antioche in Piſidia: and entring into the ſynagogue on the day of the Sabboths, they ſate dovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And after the leſſon of the Lavv and the Prophets, the princes of the Synagogue ſent to them, ſaying, Men brethren, if there be among you any ſermon of exhortation to the people, ſpeake.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 16 And Paul riſing vp, and vvith his hand beckening for ſilence, ſaid, Ye men of Iſraël, and you that feare God, harken: ✝ 
                     verse 17 The God of the people of Iſraël choſe our fathers, and exalted the people vvhen they vvere ſeiourners in the land of Aegypt,Exod. and in a mightie arme brought them out thereof, ✝ 
                     verse 18 and for the ſpace of fourtie yeres tolerated their maners in the deſert.Ioſue. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And deſtroying ſeuen nations in the land of Chanaan, by lot he deuided their land among them, ✝ 
                     verse 20 as it vvere after foure hundred and fiftie yeres: and after theſe things he gaue Iudges,Iud. vntil Samuël the prophet. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And thenceforth they deſired a king:1, Reg. 8. and he gaue them * Saul the ſonne of Cis,1. Reg. 16▪
                   a man of the tribe of Beniamin, fourtie yeres. ✝ 
                     verse 22 and remouing him,Pſ. 88, 21▪
                   he raiſed them vp * Dauid to be king: to vvhom giuing teſtimonie, he ſaid, I haue found Dauid the ſonne of Ieſſe,
                  Pſa. 131, 11. 
                  a man according to my hart, vvho ſhall doe al my vvilles.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 Of his ſeede God according to his * promiſſe hath brought forth to Iſraël a Sauiour IESVS,Lu. 3, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Iohn * preaching before the face of his comming, baptiſme of penance to al the people of Iſraël. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen Iohn fulfilled his courſe,Lu. 3, 15. he ſaid, Vvhom doe * you thinke me to be? I am not he, but behold there commeth after me, vvhoſe ſhoes of his feete I am not vvorthie to vnlooſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 Men brethren,The Epiſtle vpō Tueſday in Eaſter vveeke. children of the ſtocke of Abraham, & they among you that feare God, to you the vvord of this ſaluation vvas ſent. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For they that inhabited Hieruſalem, and the princes thereof, not knovving him, nor the voices of the prophets that are read euery Sabboth, iudging haue fulfilled them,Lu. 23, 1▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 28 and finding no cauſe of death in him, * deſired of Pilate, that they might kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And vvhen they had cōſummated al things that vvere vvrittē of him, taking him dovvne from the tree, they put him in a monument. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But God raiſed him vp from the dead the third day: ✝ 
                     verse 31 vvho vvas 
* ſeen for many daies of them that came vp together vvith him from Galilee into Hieruſalem,Act. 1, 3. vvho vntil this preſent are his vvitneſſes to the people. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vve preach vnto you that promiſſe vvhich vvas made to our fathers: ✝ 
                     verse 33 that God hath fulfilled this ſameto vs their children, Pſ. 2, 7. to our children', raiſing vp IESVS, as in the ſecond Pſalme alſo it is vvritten: My ſonne art thou, this day haue I begotten thee. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And that he raiſed him vp from the dead, not to returne novv any more into corruption, thus he ſaid, That I vvil giue you the holy things of Dauid faithful.
                  Eſa. 55, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And therfore 
 in an other place alſo he ſaith,Pſ. 15, 10▪
                   
                  Thou ſhalt not giue thy holy one to ſee corruption. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For Dauid in his generation vvhen he had ſerued, according to the vvil of God ſlept: and he vvas laid to his fathers & ſavv corruption. ✝ 
                     verse 37 But he vvhom God hath raiſed vp, ſavv no corruption.
                ✝ 
                     verse 38 Be it knovven therfore to you, men brethren, that through him, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes is preached to you, from al the things from the vvhich you could not be iuſtified by the lavv of Moyſes. ✝ 
                     verse 39 In him euery one that beleeueth, is iuſtified. ✝ 
                     verse 40 Take heede therfore leſt that come vpon you vvhich is ſpoken in the prophets,Abac. 1, 5▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 41 
                  See ye cōtemners, and vvonder, and periſh: becauſe I vvorke a vvorke in your daies, a vvorke vvhich you vvil not beleeue, if any man ſhal tel it you.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 42 And they going forth,the Gē
                     tiles deſired▪
                   they deſired them that the Sabboth folovving they would ſpeake vnto them theſe wordes. ✝ 
                     verse 43 And vvhen the ſynagogue vvas dimiſſed, many of the Iewes, and of thedeuout proſelytes, ſtrangers ſeruing God, folovved Paul & Barnabas: vvho ſpeaking exhorted them to continue in the grace of God. ✝ 
                     verse 44 But the next Sabboth the vvhole citie almoſt aſſembled to heare the vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 45 And the Ievves ſeing the multitudes, vvere repleniſhed vvith enuy, & contradicted thoſe things vvhich vvere ſaid of Paul, blaſpheming. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Then Paul and Barnabas conſtantly ſaid, To you it behoued vs firſt to ſpeake the vvord of God: but becauſe
The Ievves of their ovvne free vvil repelling the truth, are vnvvorthy of Chriſt and vvorthily forſaken: and the Gentils though they beleeued ſpecially by Gods grace and preordination, yet they beleeue alſo by their ovvne free vvil, vvhich ſtandeth vvel vvith Gods prouidence. you repell it, and iudge your ſelues vnvvorthie of eternal life: behold vve turne to the Gentils. ✝ 
                     verse 47 For ſo our Lord commaunded vs: I haue put thee to be the light of the Gentils: that thou maieſt be ſaluation vnto the vtmoſt of the earth.
                  Eſ. 46, 6▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 48 And the Gentils hearing it, vvere glad, and glorified the vvord of our Lord: and there beleeued as many as vvere preordinate to life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 49 And the vvord of our Lord vvas ſpred through out the vvhole countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 50 But the Ievves ſtirred vp religious and honeſt vvomen, and the cheefe of the citie, and raiſed perſecution againſt Paul and Barnabas: and they did caſt them forth out of their coaſtes.Lu. 9, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 51 But they * ſhaking of the duſt of their fecte againſt them, came to Icónium. ✝ 
                     verse 52 The diſciples alſo vvere repleniſhed vvith ioy and vvith the holy Ghoſt.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     2. As they vvere miniſtring.]
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      If vve ſhould, as our Aduerſaries do, boldly turne vvhat text vve liſt,The Apoſtles liturgie or Maſſe. and flee from one language to an other for the aduantage of our cauſe, vve might haue tranſlated for miniſtring, ſacrificing, for ſo * the Greeke doth ſignifie, and ſo Eraſmus tranſlated. yea vve might haue tranſlated, Saying Maſſe, for ſo they did: and the Greeke Fathers here of had their name, Liturgie, vvhich Eraſmus tranſlateth Maſſe, ſaying, Miſſa Chryſoſtomi. But vve keepe our text, as the tranſlators of the Scriptures ſhould do moſt religiouſly.
                  
                     2. Separate me.]
                     Gal. 
                           •
                        . Though Paul vvere taught by God him ſelf and ſpecially deſigned by Chriſt to be an Apoſtle,Paul & Barnabas are conſecrated by men. and here choſen by the Holy Ghoſt together vvith Barnabas, yet they vvere to be ordered, conſecrated, and admitted by men. Vvhich vvholy condemneth al theſe nevv rebellious diſordered ſpirites, that chalenge and vſurpe the office of preaching and other ſacred actions from heauen, vvithout the Churches admiſſion.
                  
                     3. Faſting.] Hereof the Church of God vſeth and preſcribeth publike faſtes at the foure ſoléue times of giuing holy Orders (vvhich are our Imber daies) as a neceſſarie preparatiue to ſo great a vvorke▪
                     Imber daies. as S.Leo ep. 81 c. 1. Leo declareth by this place, naming it alſo an Apoſtolical tradition. See. S. Leo Ser. 9 de ieiuni
                           •
                         7 menſis,
                     Praeſcript times of faſts. 
                     & Calixtus ep. 1. to. 1. Conc. Conc. Magunt. c. 34. 35. to 3. And this faſting vvas not faſting from ſinne,Epipha. in compend. nor moral or Chriſtian temperance, as the Proteſtants ridiculouſly affirme, for ſuch faſting they vvere bound euer to keepe: but it vvas abſtinence for a time from al meates or from ſome certaine kindes of meates,Leo ſer. 3 et 4 de 
                           〈◊〉
                         7 menſis. vvhich vvas ioyned vvith praier and ſacrifice, and done ſpecially at ſuch ſeaſons as the Church preſcribed, of al together (as in Lent, the Imber daies, Friday, Saturday) and not vvhen euery man liſt, as Aërius and ſuch Heretikes did hold.. S. Auguſt. har. 53.
                  
                  
                     3. Impoſing hands.]
                     Impoſition of handes. Becauſe al bleſſings and conſecrations vvere done in the Apoſtles time by the external ceremonie of impoſition of hands, diuers Sacraments vvere named of the ſame, ſpecially Confirmation,Holy orders. as is noted before, and holy Ordering or conſecrating Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, and Subdeacons, as vve ſee here and els vvhere. In vvhich though there vvere many holy vvordes and ceremonies and a very ſolemne action: yet vvhatſoeuer is done in thoſe Sacraments, is altogether called Impoſition of hands: as vvhatſoeuer vvas done in the vvhole diuine myſterie of the B.Act. 2, 42▪
                      Sacrament, is named fraction of bread. for the Apoſtles (as S. Denys Eccl. bier. c. 1 in fine vvriteth) purpoſely kept cloſe in their open ſpeaches and vvritings vvhich might come to the hands or eares of Infidels, the ſacred vvordes and actions of the Sacraments. And S. Ambroſe ſaith, in 1 Tim. c. 4. The impoſition of the hand is myſtical vvordes vvherevvith the elected is conformed and made apt to his function, receiuing authoritie (his conſcience bearing vvitnes) that he may be bold in our Lordes ſteed to offer ſacrifice to God.
                     Hiero. 
                           〈◊〉
                         c. 58 Eſa. And S. Hierom, The impoſition of hand is the Ordering of Clerkes. Which is done by praier of the voice, and impoſition of the hand. And this is in ſome inferior orders alſo, but Paul and Barnabas vvere ordered to a higher function then inferior Prieſts, euen to be Biſhops through out al Nations.
                  
                     4. Sent of the Holy Ghoſt.]
                     Spiritual officers of out ſoules. Vvhoſoeuer be ſent by the Church, are ſent of the Holy Ghoſt, though in ſuch an extraordinarie ſort it be not done. Vvhereby vve ſee hovv far the Officers of our ſoules in the Church do paſſe the temporal Magiſtrates, vvho though they be of Gods ordinance, yet not of the Holy Ghoſts ſpecial calling.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Naxt in Iconi
                        ••
                      they preach, vvhere many being conuerted of both ſortes, the obſtinate Ievves raiſe perſecution, 6 Then in the tovvnes of Lyca
                        •
                     nīa, vvhere the Heathen firſt ſeing that Paul had healed one borne lame, are hardly perſuaded but they are Gods. 18 but aftervvard, by the inſtigation of the malitious Ievves, they ſtone Paul, leauing him for dead. 20 And ſo hauing done their circuite, they returne the ſame vvay confirming the Chriſtians, and making Prieſts for euery Church. 2
                        •
                      And being come home to Antioche in Syria, they report al to the Church there.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe at Iconium that they entred together into the ſynagogue of the Ievves, and ſo ſpake, that a very great multitude of Ievves and of the Greekes did beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But the Ievves that vvere incredulous, ſtirred vp and incenſed the hartes of the Gentils to anger againſt the brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 3 A long time therfore they abode, dealing confidently in our Lord, vvho gaue teſtimonie to the vvord of his grace, graunting ſignes and vvonders to be done by their handes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the multitude of the citie vvas deuided: and certaine of them in deede vvere vvith the Ievves, but certaine vvith the Apoſtles. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen the Gentils and the Ievves vvith their princes had made an aſſault, to vſe them contumeliouſly, and to ſtone them, ✝ 
                     verse 6 vnderſtanding it, they fled to the cities of Lycaónia, Lyſtra and Derbé, and the vvhole countrie about, and there they vvere euangelizing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And a certaine man at Lyſtra impotent of his feete ſate there, lame from his mothers vvombe, that neuer had vvalked. ✝ 
                     verse 8 This ſame heard Paul ſpeaking. Vvho looking vpon him, and ſeeing that he had faith for to be ſaued, ✝ 
                     verse 9 he ſaid vvith a loud voice, Stand vp right on thy feete. And he leaped & vvalked. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And the multitudes vvhen they had ſeen vvhat Paul had done, lifted vp their voice in the lycaónian tongue, ſaying, Gods made like to men, are deſcended to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And they called Barnabas, Iupiter: but Paul, Mercurie, becauſe he vvas the cheefe ſpeaker. ✝ 
                     verse 12 The Prieſt alſo of
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Iupiter that vvas before the citie, bringing oxen & garlands before the gates, vvould vvith the people ″ ſacrifice. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvhich thing vvhen the Apoſtles Barnabas & Paul heard, renting their coates, they leaped forth into the multitudes, crying ✝ 
                     verse 14 and ſaying, Ye men, vvhy doe you theſe things? Vve alſo are mortal, men like vnto you, preaching to you for to conuert from theſe vaine things, to the liuing God that made the heauen, and the earth, and the ſea, and al things that are in them: ✝ 
                     verse 15 vvho in the generations paſt ſuffred al the Gentils to goe their ovvne vvaies. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Hovvbeit he left not him ſelf
The Heathen might by the daily benefites of God haue knovven him at the leaſt to haue beene their Creatour and only Lord, though the myſterie of our Redemption vvere not opened to them. vvithout teſtimonie, being beneficial from heauen, giuing raines, and fruiteful ſeaſons, filling our hartes vvith foode & gladnes. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſpeaking theſe things, they ſcarſe appeaſed
 the multitudes from ſacrificing to them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But there came in certaine Ievves from Antioche and Icónium: and perſvvading the multitudes,2. Cor. 11, 25. and * ſtoning Paul, they drevv him out of the citie, thinking him to be dead. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But the diſciples compaſſing him round about, he riſing vp, entred into the citie, and the next day he vvent forth vvith Barnabas vnto Derbè.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen they had euangelized to that citie, and had taught many, they returned to Lyſtra and Icónium, and to Antioche: ✝ 
                     verse 21 confirming the hartes of the diſciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that by many tribulations vve muſt enter into the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vvhenVve ſee by this, firſt that SS. Paul & Barnabas vvere Biſhops, hauing here authoritie to giue holy Orders: ſecondly, that there vvas euen then a difference betwixt Biſhops and Prieſts, though the name in the primitiue Church vvas often vſed indifferently: laſtly, that alvvaies faſting & praying were preparatiues to the giuing of holy Orders. they ″ had ordained to them ″ Prieſts in euery Church, and had praied vvith faſtings, they commended them to our Lord in vvhom they beleeued. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And paſſing through Piſidia, they came into Pamphylia, ✝ 
                     verse 24 and ſpeaking the vvord of our Lord in Pergé, they vvent dovvne into Attalia: ✝ 
                     verse 25 and from thēce they ſailed to Antioche,Act, 13, 2▪
                   * vvhence they had been deliuered to the grace of God vnto the vvorke vvhich they accompliſhed. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And vvhen they vvere come, and 
                     •
                  ad aſſembled the Church, they reported vvhat great things God had done vvith them, & that he had opened a doore of faith to the Gentils. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And they abode no litle time vvith the diſciples.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     12. They vvould ſacrifice.) This loe is the diuine vvorſhip, conſiſting in external ſacrifice, and in acknovvledging the parties vvorſhipped to be godsAug. li. 10. de Ciu. Dei. 
                           •
                        . 1. vvhich * may be done to no man nor creature,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . and therfore the Apoſtles refuſe it vvith al poſſible diligence, and al the Angels and Saincts in heauen refuſe that adoration by ſacrifice. The Catholike Church ſuffereth no Prieſt nor other ſo to vvorſhip any Sainct in heauen or earth. She hath but one external Sacrifice, vvhich is in the holy Maſſe, of Chriſts body and bloud:Aug. li. 8. de Ciu. 6. 27. that ſhe offereth to God alone, and neither to Peter nor to Paul (ſaith S. Auguſtine) though the Prieſt that ſacrificeth ſtandeth ouer their bodies, and offereth in their memories.
                     Dulta. But other kindes of honours and dueties, inferior vvithout al compariſon (hovv great ſo euer they be) to this, vve do, as the Scriptures and Nature teache vs, to al Superiors in heauen and earth, according to the degrees of grace, honour, and bleſſednes that God hath called them vnto, from our B. Ladie Chriſts ovvne mother, to the leſt ſeruant he hath in the vvorld, for vvhich the Heretikes vvould neuer accuſe Chriſtian people of Idolatrie, if they had either grace, learning, faith, or natural affection.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Had ordained.) The Heretikes, to make the vvorld beleeue that al Prieſts ought to be choſen by the voices of the people,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      and that they neede no other Ordering or Conſecration by Biſhops, preſſing the pro
                        •
                     ane vſe of the * Greeke vvord more then the very natural ſignification requireth and Eccleſiaſtical vſe beareth,Heretical tranſlation againſt holy orders. tranſlate thus, Ordained by election. Vvhereas in deede this vvord in Scripture ſignifieth,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ordering by impoſition of hands, as is plaine by other vvordes equiualent, Act. 6, 13. 1 Tim. 4. 
                           •
                        . 2 Tim. 1. Vvhere the Ordering of Deacons, Prieſts, and others is called
* Impoſition of hands: not of the people, but of the Apoſtles. And this to be the Eccleſiaſtical vſe
 of the vvord,Hiero. in 11. Eſa. appeareth by S. Hierom ſaying (as is before alleaged) that 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     i
                           •
                         the Ordering of Clerkes or Clergie men by praier of voice and impoſition of hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Prieſts.)
                     Heretical trāſlation againſt Prieſthod. Euen ſo here alſo, as before, fleing from the proper, apt, knovven, vvord & vvhich is moſt preciſely correſpondent to the very Greeke in our tongue and al nations, they tranſlate for Prieſt, Elder, that is, for a calling of Office, a vvord of age: for a terme of art and by conſent of al the Church and Apoſtolike authoritie and Fathers, appropriated to holy Order, a vulgar, common, and profane terme: Vvith as litle grace as if they ſhould tranſlate Pontificem, a bridgemaker, the Maior of London, the Bigger of London. And thus you ſee vvithin three vvordes compaſſe they flee guilefully from the Latin to the Greeke, and againe guilefully from the Greeke to the vulgar Engliſh. Such corruption of Scriptures their hatred of Prieſthod driueth them vnto. If they had tranſlated it ſo vvhen the Scriptures vvere firſt vvritten, (at vvhich time the vvord vvas but nevvly receiued into the ſpecial and Eccleſiaſtical ſignification, and vvhen it vvas yet taken ſometimes in common profane ſort, as 1 Tim. 5. or there only vvhere our aūcient Latin verſion turneth Presbyter into Senior, becauſe the vvord vvas not yet vvholy and only appropriated to holy Orders, as aftervvard by vſe of many hundred yeres it vvas and is) their dealing might haue had ſome colour of honeſt
                        •
                     e and plaineſſe, vvhich novv can not be but of plaine falſhod and corruption, and that of further purpoſe then the ſimple can ſee. Vvhich is to take avvay the office of Sacrificing and other functions of Prieſts, proper in the nevv Teſtamēt to ſuch as the Apoſtles often, and the poſteritle in maner altogether call Prieſts, Presbyteros. Vvhich vvord doth ſo certainely imply the authoritie of ſacrificing,If Sa
                              ••
                           rdos. be a Prieſt, much more Preſbyter.
                      that it is by vſe made alſo the onely Engliſh of Sacerdos, the Aduerſaries them ſelues as vvel as vve, ſo tranſlating it in al the old and nevv Teſtament: though they can not be ignorant that Prieſt commeth of Presbyter, and not of Sacerdos: and that antiquitie for no other cauſe applied the ſignification of Presbyter to Sacerdos, but to ſhevv that Preſbyter is in the nevv Lavv, that vvhich Sacerdos vvas in the old: the Apoſtles abſtaining from this and other like old names at the firſt, and rather vſing the vvordes, Biſhops, Paſtors, and Prieſts, becauſe they might be diſtinguiſhed from the Gouernours and ſacrificers of Aarons order, vvho as yet in the Apoſtles time did their old functions ſtill in the Temple. And this to be true, and that to be a Prieſt, is to be a man appointed to ſacrifice, the Heretikes them ſelues calling Sacerdos alvvaies a Prieſt, muſt needes be driuen to confeſſe.Preſbyter. Although their folly is therein notorious, to apply vvillngly the vvord Prieſt to Sacerdos, and to take it from Presbyter vvhereof it is properly deriued,Prieſt. not only in Engliſh, but in other languages both french and Italian.Preb
                           •
                        re. Vvhich is to take avvay the name that the Apoſtles and fathers gaue to the Prieſts of the Church,Preti. & to giue it vvholy & onely to the order of Aaron, vvhich neuer had it before our Prieſthod began. Neuer did there Heretikes ſtand ſo much vpon doubtful deriuations and deſcant of vvordes as theſe Proteſtants do, and yet neuer men behaued them ſelues more fondly in the ſame: as vvhoſoeuer marketh the diſtinction of their Elders, Miniſters, Deacons, and ſuch like, ſhal perceiue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  Some of thoſe Ievves alſo that vvere Chriſtians, do fall, and are authors of the Hereſie of Iudaizing. 2 They referre the matter to Councel: 7 Wherein after great diſputation, Peter ſtriking the ſtroke, 12 and other confirming his ſentence vvith miracles, 13 and vvith Scriptures: 22 and the Apoſtles and Prieſts do vvrite and cōma
                        •
                     nd in the name of the Holy Ghoſt vvhat is to be done. 30 And the faithful thereby are ſtraightvvaies quieted in minde. 36 After vvhich, Paul and Barnabas thinking to goe againe their aboue ſaid circuite together, are by occaſion of Marke parted, to the greater increaſe of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND certaine comming dovvne from Ievvrie, taught the brethren:Gal. 5, 2. That * vnles you be circumciſed according to the maner of Moyſes, you can not be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 2 No litle ſedition therfore being riſen to Paul and Barnabas againſt them, they ″ appointed that Paul and Barnabas ſhould goe vp, & certaine others ofthem, the reſt', to the Apoſtles and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   prieſts vnto Hieruſalem, vpon this queſtion.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 3 They therfore being brought on their vvay by the Church, paſſed through Phoenîce and Samaria, reporting the conuerſion of the Gentiles: and they made great ioy to al the brethren.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen they vvere come to Hieruſalem, they vvere receiued of the Church and of the Apoſtles andAūcients here, & often in this chapter, are the ſame that Prieſtes verſ. 2 as S. Hierom taketh it alſo 1 Pet. 5. & the greeke approueth, being alvvaies one, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Prieſts. Hiero. in 1 ad Tit. et 4 ad Galat.
                   Auncients,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   declaring vvhatſoeuer God had done vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And there aroſe certaine of the hereſie of the Phariſees that beleeued, ſaying, That they muſt be circumciſed, commaunded alſo to keepe the lavv of Moyſes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the ″ Apoſtles and Auncients ″ aſſembled to conſider of this vvord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen there vvas made aSee the Annot. verſ. 28 toward the ende. great diſputation, ″ Peter riſing vp ſaid to them,Act. 10, 20. Men brethren, you knovv that * of old daies God among vs ″ choſe, that by my mouth the Gentiles ſhould heare the vvord of the Goſpel, and beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And God vvhich knovveth the hartes,Act. 10, 45. gaue teſtimonie, * giuing vnto them the holy Ghoſt as vvel as to vs, ✝ 
                     verse 9 and hath put no difference betvvene vs and them,By that faith which worketh by charitie▪ for a dead faith can not purifie the hart of man, See chap. 16, 31. by faith purifying their hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Novv therfore vvhy tempt you God, to put a yoke vpon the neckes of the diſciples, vvhich neither our fathers nor vve haue been able to beare? ✝ 
                     verse 11 but by the grace of our Lord IESVS CHRIST vve beleeue to be ſaued, in like maner as they alſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And al the multitude held their peace: and they heard Barnabas and Paul telling vvhat great ſignes and vvonders God had done among the Gentiles by them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And after they held their peace, ″ Iames anſvvered, ſaying, Men brethren, heare me. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Simon hath told hovv God firſt viſited to take of the Gentiles a people to his name. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And to this accord the vvordes of the prophets, as it is vvritten:Amos. 9, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 16 
                  After theſe things I vvil returne, and vvil reedifie the tabernacle of Dauid▪ vvhich vvas fallen, and the ruines thereof I vvil reedifie, and ſet it vp: ✝ 
                        verse 17 that the reſidue of men may ſeeke after the Lord, and al nations vpon vvhom my name is inuocated, ſaith the Lord that doeth theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 18 To our Lord vvas his ovvne vvorke knovven from the beginning of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the vvhich cauſe ″ I iudge, that they vvhich of the Gentiles are conuerted to God, are not to be diſquieted, ✝ 
                     verse 20 but to vvrite vnto them that they refraine them ſelues from the contaminations of Idols, and ″ fornication, and ſtrangled things, and bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For Moyſes of old times hath in euery citie them that preach him in the ſynagogs, vvhere he is read euery Sabboth.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 22 Then it pleaſed the Apoſtles and Auncients vvith the vvhole Church, to choſe men out of them, & to ſend to Antioche vvith Paul and Barnabas, Iudas, vvho vvas ſurnamed Barſabas, & Silas, cheefe men among the brethren, ✝ 
                     verse 23 
                  
                     Other latin copies and the greeke read thus writing by their handes an epiſtle cont
                        •
                     ining theſe things. vvriting by their handes.
               The Apoſtles and Auncients, the brethren, to the brethren of the Gentiles that are at Antioche and in Syria and Cilicia, greeting. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Becauſe vve haue heard that certaine ″ going forth from vs, haue troubled you vvith vvordes, ſubuerting your ſoules, to vvhom vve gaue no commaundement: ✝ 
                     verse 25 It hath pleaſed vs being gathered in one, to choſe out men and to ſend them vnto you vvith our deereſt Barnabas and Paul, ✝ 
                     verse 26 men that haue giuen their liues for the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST: ✝ 
                     verse 27 Vve haue ſent therfore Iudas & Silas, vvho them ſelues alſo vvil in vvordes report vnto you the ſame things. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For it hath ſeemed good ″ to the holy Ghoſt & to vs, to lay no further burden vpon you then theſe neceſſarie things: ✝ 
                     verse 29 that you abſteine from the things immolated to Idols, and bloud, and that vvhich is ſtrangled, and fornication, from the vvhich things keeping your ſelues, you ſhal doe vvell. Fare ye vvel.
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 They therfore being dimiſſed vvent dovvne to Antioche: and gathering the multitude, deliuered the epiſtle. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Vvhich vvhen they had read, they ″ reioyced vpon the conſolation: ✝ 
                     verse 32 but Iudas and Silas, them Selues alſo being prophets, vvith many vvordes comforted the brethren, and confirmed them. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And hauing ſpent ſome time there, they vvere vvith peace dimiſſed of the brethren vnto them that had ſent them. ✝ 
                     verse 34 But it ſeemed good vnto Silas to remaine there: and Iudas departed alone: ✝ 
                     verse 35 and Paul and Barnabas taried at Antioche, teaching and euangelizing vvith many others the vvord of our Lord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 And after certaine daies, Paul ſaid to Barnabas, Let vs returne andHereof our Catholike Biſhops tooke vp the neceſſarie vſe of often viſiting their flockes & cures cō
                     mitted to their charge, for confirmatiō in faith & vertue, & reformatiō of maners both of clergie & laitie. viſite our brethren in al cities vvherein vve * haue preached the vvord of our Lord,Act. 13, 14. hovv they doe. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And Barnabas vvould haue taken vvith them Iohn alſo that vvas ſurnamed Marke.Act. 13, 13. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But Paul deſired that he (as vvho * had departed from them out of Pamphylia, and had not gone vvith them to the vvorke) might not be receiued. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And there roſe a ″ diſſention, ſo that they departed one from an other, & that Barnabas in deede taking Marke ſailed to Cypres. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But
 Paul choſing Silas departed, being deliuered of the brethren to the grace of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 41 And he vvalked through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches:Not only the things cōmaunded by Chriſtes expreſſe vvord, or vvritten in the Scriptures (as our Heretikes hold) but vvhatſoeuer the Apoſtles and Rulers of the Church commaund, is to be kept & obeied. See theſe wordes repeated againe c. 16, 4. & that in the greeke, leſt any man cauil, becauſe here the greeke hath them not. Commaunding them to keepe the praecepts of the Apoſtles and the Auncients.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  
                     1. Appointed] Vve learne by this example, vvhat is to be done vvhen any controuerſie ariſeth in religion betvvene the teachers or other Chriſtian people. Vve ſee it is not ynough to contend by allegations of Scriptures or other proofes ſeeming to make for either part: for ſo of contentious part taking there ſhould be no end, but the more vvriting, vvreſtling, ſtriuing there vvere, euery one for his ovvne fanſie, cloking it vvith the title of Gods vvord and Scripture, the more Schiſmes, Sectes, and diuiſions vvould fall: as vve ſee ſpecially in the reſtles Hereſies of our time. Vvhoſe fa
                        •
                     tors admitting no iudges, ſtand to no trial of mortal men, to no tribunal of Pope, Councels, Biſhops, Synodes, but eche man to his ovvne phantaſtical ſpirit, his ovvne ſenſe of Scriptures, and his ovvne vvilful obdurate rebellion againſt Gods Church and his Superiors in the ſame.The way to end diſſenſion in religion, is to cō
                        mit it to a Coū
                        cel. But here vve ſee S. Paul and Barnabas, men that vvere Apoſtles and ful of the Spirit of God, and the other parties, though neuer ſo much partial to the ceremonies of their Lavv by their former long vſe and education therein, yet not to ſtand ſtifly to their ovvne opinion on either ſide, but to condeſcend to referre the vvhole controuerſie and the determination thereof to the Apoſtles▪ Prieſts or Auncients of Hieruſalem, that is to ſay, to commit the matter to be tried by the heads and Biſhops and their determination in Councel. This is Gods holy and vviſe prouidence among other iudgements in his Church, to keepe the Chriſtian people in truth and vnitie, and to condemne ſectes and falſe teachers and troublers of the Church. By vvhich iudgements and order, vvhoſoeuer vvil not or dare not be tried in al their doctrine and doings, they ſhevv them ſelues to miſtruſt their ovvne cauſe, and to flee from the light, and ordinance of God▪ Vvithout vvhich order of appeaſing al differences in faith and conſtructions of the Scriptures, the Church had beene more defectual and inſufficient, then any Commonvvealth or Societie of men in the vvorld: none of vvhich euer vvanteth good meanes to decide al diſcordes and diſſenſion ariſing among the ſubiects & citizens of the ſame.
                  
                     6. Apoſtles and Auncients.] The Hereſies of our Proteſtants vvhich vvould haue al men to giue voice, or to be preſent in Councels, and of others that vvould haue none but the holy or elect to be admitted, are refuted by this example, vvhere vve ſee none but Apoſtles & Prieſts or Ancients aſſembled to diſpute of the matter,Of vvhat perſons a Councel conſiſteth. though many deuout people vvere in the citie the ſame time. Neither did euer any other in the Auncient Councels of the Church aſſemble to debate and define the matter, but ſuch, though many other for other cauſes be euer preſent. Secular men or vvomen, be their gifts neuer ſo great,Deut. 
                           ••
                        
                      can not be iudges in cauſes of faith and religion. If any thing, ſaith God 
                        
                           •
                        e hard and doubtful, thou ſhalt come to the Prieſts of the Leuitical ſtocke, and thou ſhalt folovv their ſentence.
                     Mal. 2, 7. Againe, The lippes of the Prieſt ſhal keepe knovvledge, and the Lavv thou ſhalt require of his mouth.
                     Agga. 2, 12. Againe, Aſke the Lavv of the Prieſt. Much more muſt vve referre al to our Biſhops and Paſtors, vvhom God hath placed in the regiment of the Church vvith much larger priuilege, then euer he did the old Prieſts ouer the Synagogue.A general Coū
                        cel repreſenteth the vvhole Church. to vvhom it is ſaid,Luc. 10, 16 
                     He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. And it is to be noted that the Biſhops ſo gathered in Councel, repreſent the vvhole Church, haue the authoritie of the vvhole Church, and the Spirit of God to protect them from error, as the vvhole Church:li. 1. c. 1
                           •
                        . de bapt. SS. Paul and Barnabas come hither for the definition of the vvhole Church. The ſentence of a plenarie or general Councel (ſaith S. Auguſtine) is the conſent of the vvhole Church. And ſo it muſt needes be in the Church, becauſe the Magiſtrates, Senate, Councel or deputies of al commonvvealthes, repreſent the vvhole body: and to haue it othervviſe (as the Churches Rebels vviſh) vvere to bring al to hel and horrour, and them ſelues to be perpetually, by the ſeditious and popular perſons, vpholden againſt Lavv, reaſon, and religion, in their vvickednes.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Aſſembled.]
                     The firſt Councel at Hieruſalem. A Councel vvas called to diſcuſſe the matter. vvhich Councel vvas the more eaſily gathered, becauſe the Chriſtian Biſhops and countries vvere not yet ſo many, but that the principal Gouernours of the Church being not far diſperſed, and as many learned men as vvere neceſſarie, might be in Hieruſalem, or eaſily called thither. And it vvas not a Prouincial Councel or Synode only, but a general Councel, conſiſting of the cheefe Apoſtles and Biſhops that then vvere,
 though the number vvas nothing ſo great as aftervvard vſed to aſſemble, vvhen the Church vvas ſpred into al nations.
                  
                     7. Peter riſing vp.]
                     Peter head of the Councel, & his ſucceſſors after him. 
                     S. Peter as the head of the Church ſpeaketh firſt, as his Succeſſors haue euer had, not only in their perſonal preſence, but in their abſence by their legates and ſubſtitutes, the cheefe voice in al Councels general, none euer receiued into authoritie and credite in the Church vvithout their Confirmation. And therefore the Councels of the Arians and of other Heretikes, vvere they neuer ſo great, vvanting the Popes aſſent, aſſiſtance, or Confirmation, did ſhamfully erre, as Ariminenſe for the Arians, and Epheſinum ſecundum for the Neſtorians, and ſuch like condemned Aſſemblies.
                  
                     7. Choſe that by my mouth.]
                     Peters preeminence both toward Iewes & Gentiles. Though Paul vvere called and appointed ſpecially to be the Apoſtle of the Gentils, yet that vvas S. Peters ſpecial priuilege by Gods ovvne choiſe, that the firſt Gentils ſhould be called by his mouth, and that he firſt ſhould vtter to the Church that truth of the admiſſion of the Gentils him ſelf, for that he vvas Chriſtes Vicar, being notvvithſtanding (as his Maiſter vvas) Miniſter Circunciſionis,
                     Ro. 15, 8. that is, Apoſtle of the Ievves, Chriſt deferring al preeminence vnto him in that point alſo.Gal. 2, 7.
                  
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . Iames.] S. Iames becauſe he vvas an Apoſtle and alſo Biſhop of Hieruſalem, gaue his ſentence next. for the ſpeache interpoſed of SS. Paul and Barnabas, vvas but for their better information in the deciſion of the matter, and for confirmation of S. Peters ſentence, though they being Apoſtles,S. Iames and the reſt folow S. Peters ſentence. and Biſhops, had voices in the Councel alſo: as many m
                        •
                      had, though their ſentences be not heare reported. And vvhere S. Iames in his ſpeach ſaith, I iudge, it is not meant that he gaue the principal definitiue ſentence: for he (as al the reſt) folovved and allovved the ſentēce of S. Peter, as it is plaine in the text, the vvhole aſſembly for reuerence of his perſon and approbation of his ſentence,Hiero. to. 2. ep. 89 ad Auguſt. C. 2. holding their peace. Al the multitude (ſaith S. Hierom) held their peace, and into his ſentence Iames the Apoſtle & al the Prieſts did paſſe together. For though S. Iames did particulariſe certaine points incident to the queſtion debated, as of eating ſtrangled meates &c. yet the proper controuerſie for vvhich the Councel aſſembled,The principal queſtion. vvas, Vvhether the Gentils conuerted vvere bound to obſerue the Lavv of Moyſes. and it vvas concluded, that they vvere not bound, nor ought not to be charged vvith Moyſes Lavv or the Sacraments and ceremonies of the ſame. this is the ſubſtance and principal purpoſe of this Councels decree, vvhich doth binde for euer: and Peter (ſaith S. Hierom in the ſame place) vvas Prince or author of this decree,
                     Incident queſtions. the matter of fornication and Idolothytes being but incident to the queſtion or reſolution, and the forbidding of eating ſtrangled and bloud, but a temporal prohibition, vvhich by the conſent of the Church or othervviſe aftervvard vvas abrogated, the Church of God hauing the true ſenſe of difference of times,How later coū
                        cels alter the former. place, & perſons, vvhen and hovv far ſuch things are to be obſerued, and vvhen not. And in ſuch things as theſe, and in other like vvhich according to circunſtances require alteration, it is, that S. Auguſtine ſaith, li. 2 de bapt. c. 3. to. 7. The former general or plenarie Councels may be amended by the later.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Fornication.] Fornication and contamination vvith Idols, are of them ſelues mortal ſinnes, and therfore can neuer be lavvful: yet becauſe the Gentiles by cuſtome vvere prone to both, and of fornication made very ſmal account,The Churches authoritie in making Decrees. it pleaſed the Holy Ghoſt to forbid both ſpecially. Concerning the other points of abſteining from bloud and ſtiffled meates, they vvere things of their ovvne nature indifferent, in vvhich for a time the Ievves vvere to be borne vvithal, and the Gentils to b
                        •
                      a litle exerciſed to obedience. By vvhich vve may ſee the great authoritie of Gods Church and Councels, vvhich may commaund for euer, or for a time, ſuch things as be fitte for the ſtate of times and nations, vvithout any expreſſe Scriptures at al, and ſo by commaundement make things neceſſarie that vvere before indifferent.
                  
                     24. Going forth from vs.]
                     Going out, a marke of heretikes. A proper diſcription or note of Heretikes, Schiſmatikes, and ſeditious teachers, to go out from their ſpiritual Paſtors and Gouernours, and to teach vvithout their commiſſion and approbation, to diſquiet the Catholike people vvith multitude of vvordes and ſvveete ſpeaches, and finally to ouerthrovv their ſoules.
                  
                     28. To the Holy Ghoſt and to vs.]
                     God & our Ladie, and the like ſpeaches. By this firſt vve note, that it is not ſuch a fault as the Heretikes vvould make it in the ſight of the ſimple, or any incongruitie at al, to ioyne God and his creatures, as the principal cauſe and the ſecondarie, in one ſpeache, and to attribute that to both, vvhich though diuerſely, yet procedeth of both. God and you, ſay good people commonly: God and our Ladie, Chriſt and S. Iohn: We confeſſe to God and to Peter and Paul. as,Gen. 48, 15. 16. 
                     God and his Angel, To our Lord and Gedeon,
                     Iud. 7▪ 18. 20. 
                     The ſvvord of our Lord and of Gedeon, Our Lord and Moyſes, Chriſt and his Angels. Our Lord and al Saincts. ep. ad Philem. S. Paul and our Lord, 1 Theſ. 1, 6. Al theſe ſpeaches being partly Scriptures,Exod. 14, 31. partly like vnto the Scriptures ſpeaches,
                        VISVM EST Sp. ſancto & nobis. are vvarrāted alſo by this Councel, vvhich ſaith boldly, & hath giuen the forme thereof to al other Councels lavvfully called and confirmed, to ſay the like,1. Tim. 5, 
                           •
                        1. 
                     It hath pleaſed the Holy Ghoſt and vs. S Cyprian ep. 54. nu. 2. reporting the like of a Synode holden in Afrike, ſaith, It hath pleaſed vs by the ſuggeſtion of the Holy Ghoſt.
                  
                  Secondly vve note, that the holy Councels lavvfully kept for determination or cleering of doubtes, or condemning of errors and Hereſies, or appeaſing of Schiſmes and troubles, or reformation of life, and ſuch like important matters, haue euer the aſſiſtance of Gods Spirit, and therfore
 can not erre in their ſentences and determinations concerning the ſame,The holy Ghoſt aſſiſtant in al lawful coūcels, to the vvorlds end, and that by Chriſts promiſſe. becauſe the Holy Ghoſt can not erre, from vvhom (as you ſee here) ioyntly vvith the Councel the reſolution procedeth.
                  Thirdly vve learne,Io. 16, 1
                           •
                        . that in the holy Councels ſpecially (though othervviſe and in other Tribunals of the Church it be alſo verified) Chriſtes promes is fulfilled, * that the Holy Ghoſt ſhould ſuggeſt them and teach them al truth, and that not in the Apoſtles time only, but to the vvorldes end for ſo long ſhal Councels, the Church, and her Paſtors haue this priuilege of Gods aſſiſtance, as there be either doubtes to reſolue, or Heretikes to condemne, or truthes to be opened, or euil men to be reformed, or Schiſmes to be appeaſed. for vvhich cauſe S. Gregorie li. 1 ep. 24 ſub fin. reuerenceth the foure general Councels (Nicen, Conſtantinop, Epheſ, Chalced.) as the foure bookes of the holy Goſpel,S. Gregories reuerence of General Councels. alluding to the number: and of the fifth alſo he ſaith that he doth reuerence it alike: and ſo vvould he haue done moe, if they had beene before his time, vvho ſaith of them thus, Whiles they are concluded and made by vniuerſal conſent, him ſelf doth he deſtroy, and not them, vvhoſoeuer preſumeth either to looſe whom they binde, or to binde, vvhom they looſe.
                  
                  S. Gregorie therfore reuerencing al fiue alike,The Proteſtāts fond diſtinctiō betvvene the 4 firſt & the later Councels. it may be marueled vvhence the Heretikes haue their fond difference betvvixt thoſe foure firſt and other later: attributing much to them, and nothing to the reſt. Vvhereas in deede the later can erre no more then the firſt foure, being holden and approued as they vvere, and hauing the Holy Ghoſt as they had. But in thoſe firſt alſo vvhen a man findeth any thing againſt their Hereſies (as there be diuers things) then they ſay plainely that they alſo may erre, and that the Holy Ghoſt is not tied to mens voices, nor to the number of ſentences: Vvhich is directly to reproue this firſt Councel alſo of the Apoſtles, and Chriſtes promes of the Holy Ghoſts aſſiſtance to teach al truth. Yea that you may knovv and abhorre theſe Heretikes throughly,Bezas blaſphemie againſt the firſt general Councels. heare ye vvhat a principal Sect-Maiſter vvith his blaſphemous mouth or penne vttereth,Beza in praef. Teſt. No. an. 1565. ſaying, that In the very beſt times ſuch vvas partly the ambition of Biſhops, partly their foliſhnes and ignorance, that the very blind may eaſily perceiue, Satan verily to haue beene preſident of their aſſemblies. Good Lord deliuer the people and the vvorld from ſuch blaſphemous tongues and bookes, and giue men grace to attend to the holy Scriptures and Doctors, that they may ſee hovv much,Vvhat the Fathers attribute to Councels, & namely S. Auguſtine. not only S. Auguſtine and other fathers attribute to al general Councels ſpecially, (to vvhich they referre them ſelues in al doubtes among them ſelues and in al their controuerſies vvith Heretikes:) but to vvhich euen S. Paul him ſelf (ſo ſpecially taught by God) and others alſo yelded them ſelues. Notorious is the ſaying of S. Auguſtine concerning S. Cyprian, Vvho being a bleſſed Catholike Biſhop and Martyr, yet erred about the rebaptizing of ſuch as vvere Chriſtened by Heretikes. If he had liued (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. 2 de bapt c. 4,) to haue ſeen the determination of a plenarie Councel, vvhich he ſavv not in his life time, he vvould for his great humilitie and charitie ſtraight vvay haue yelded, and preferred the general Councel before his ovvne iudgement and his fellovv Biſhops in a Prouincial Councel only.
                     P
                           •
                        ouincial Councels. Vvhereby alſo vve learne, that Prouincial Councels may erre, though many times they do not, and being conformable to the general Councels, or confirmed and allovved by them or the See Apoſtolike, their reſolutions be infallible as the others are.
                  If any here aſke,Notvvithſtanding the Holy Ghoſts aſſiſtance, yet humane meanes muſt be vſed to ſearch the truth. vvhat neede ſo much diſputing, ſtudy, and trauail in Councels to find out and determine the truth, if the Holy Ghoſt infallibly guide them? Vve anſvver that ſuch is the ordinarie prouidence of God in this caſe, to aſſiſt them vvhen they doe their endeuour, and vſe all humane meanes of induſtrie, and not els. And ſo (though ſomvvhat othervviſe) God aſſiſted the Euangeliſtes and other vvriters of the holy Scriptures, that they could not erre in penning the ſame, but yet they did and ought to vſe al poſſible humane diligence to knovv and learne out the hiſtories and truth of matters,Lu. 1, 3. as is plaine in the beginning of S. Lukes Goſpel: els the Holy Ghoſt vvould not haue aſſiſted them. Euen ſo in this Councel of the Apoſtles, though they had the holy Ghoſt aſſiſtant, yet the text ſaith, cum magna conquiſitio fieret, Vvhen there vvas great diſputation, ſearch and examination of the caſe,Though the See Apoſtolike it ſelf haue the ſame aſſiſtance, yet councels be alſo neceſſarie for many cauſes. then Peter ſpake &c. If againe it be demaunded, vvhat neede is there to expect the Councels determination, if the Popes or See Apoſtolikes iudgement be infallible and haue the aſſiſtance of God alſo, as the Catholikes affirme? Vve anſvver, that for the Catholike and peaceable obedient children of the Church it is a comfort to haue ſuch various meanes of determination, trial, and declaration of the truth, and that it is neceſſarie for the recouery of Heretikes, and for the contentation of the vveake, vvho not alvvaies giuing ouer to one mans determination, yet vvil either yeld to the iudgement of al the learned men and Biſhops of al Nations, or els remaine deſperate and condemned before God and man for euer. And as I ſaid before, this aſſiſtance of the Holy Ghoſt promiſed to Peters See, preſuppoſeth humane meanes of ſearching out the truth, vvhich the Pope alvvaies hath vſed, & vvil, & muſt vſe in matters of great importance, by calling Councels, euen as here you ſee SS. Peter and Paul them ſelues and al the Apoſtles, though indued vvith the Holy Ghoſt, yet thought it notvvithſtanding neceſſarie for further trial & cleering of truth and maintenance of vnitie, to keepe a Councel.
                  Laſtly it is to be noted, that as Chriſt and the Holy Ghoſt be preſent by his promes, to al ſuch aſſemblies as gather in the obedience & vnitie of the Church, vvith ful minde to obey vvhatſoeuer ſhal be determined, vvhereby the aſſembled though of diuers iudgements before, do moſt peaceably yeld to truth, and agree in one vniforme determination of the ſame: ſo al ſuch
 as gather out of the Church,Heretical or Schiſmatical aſſembles. vvithout humilitie or intention to yeld one to an other, or to any Superior, man or Councel, or vvhat els ſo euer, but chalenge to them ſelues learning, ſpirit, and vve can not tel vvhat: ſuch, hovv many meetings ſo euer they make, being deſtitute of the Holy Ghoſt the author of truth and concord, are further of and further out, then euer before: as God hath ſhevved by the ſucceſſe of al Heretical Colloquies, Synodes, and Aſſemblies in Germanie, France, Poole, and other places in our daies. Read a notable place in S. Cyprian, that the promes of Chriſt,de vnit. Ec. nu. 7. that he vvould be in the middes of tvvo or three gathered in his name, pertaineth not to them that aſſemble out of the Church.
                  
                     3
                           •
                        . Reioyced vpon the conſolation.] Straight vpon the intelligence of the Councels determination,Al good Chriſtians reſt vpon the determinatiō of a general Councel. not only the Gentils, but euen the Maiſters of the former troubles and diſſenſion, vvere at reſt, & al tooke great comfort that the controuerſie vvas ſo ended And ſo ſhould al Chriſtian men do, vvhen they ſee the ſectes of our time condemned by the like authoritie and moſt graue iudgement of the holy Councel of Trent. Againſt vvhich the Heretikes of our time make the like friuolous exceptions and falſe cauillations, as did the old Heretikes heretofore againſt thoſe Councels that ſpecially condemned their errors. The Pope and Biſhopes (ſay they) are a partie, and they ought not to be our iudges:Al Heretikes make exceptiōs againſt the coū
                        cels that condemne them. they are partial and come vvith preiudicate mindes to condemne vs, and vve accuſe them al of Idolatrie and other crimes, and vve vvil be tried by Gods vvord only, and vve vvil expound it according to an other rule, that is to ſay, as vve liſt. So ſay they againſt this Councel, and the like ſaid the Arians againſt the firſt Nicene Councel, and al ſuch like againſt thoſe Councels namely that condemned their hereſies. And ſo ſay al theeues againſt their correctors and puniſhers, and vvould both ſay and do more againſt temporal tribunals, Iudges, Iuſtices, and Iuries, if they had as much licence and libertie in thoſe matters, as men haue novv in religion.
                  
                     37. Diſſenſion] Such occaſions of differences fall out euen among the perfect men often, vvithout any great offence. And this their departing fell out to the great increaſe of Chriſtians. And therfore it is very ridiculouſly applied to excuſe the diſagreing of the Heretikes among them ſelues in the principal pointes of religion, namely the Sacrament.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  Paul hauing for his part viſited the Churches of Syria, Cilicia, and Lycaonia, deliuering vnto them vvithal to keepe the Decrees of the Councel: 6 beginneth a nevv iourney, ouer Phrygia, Galatia, Myſia: 8 Yea into Europe alſo he paſſeth, admoniſhed by a viſion, and commeth into Macedonia, 12 and there he beginneth the Church of the Philippians, vvorking miracles, and ſuffering perſecution.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he came to Derbé and Lyſtra. And behold, there vvas a certaine diſciple there named Timothee,Ievv the ſonne of a 
                     •
                  vvidovv' vvoman that beleeued, of a father a Gentile. ✝ 
                     verse 2 To this man the brethren that vvere in Lyſtra and Iconium, gaue a good teſtimonie. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Him Paul vvould haue to goe forth vvith him: and taking him he circumciſed him becauſe of the Ievves that vvere in thoſe places. For they al knevv that his father vvas a Gentile.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen they paſſed through the cities, they deliuered vnto them to keepe theHere againe they take order that the decrees and articles of faith agreed vpon in the Councel of Ieruſalē
                     ▪ ſhould be executed & obſerued, vvhereby vve ſee both the great authoritie of Councels, & the diligence that al Prelates ought to haue to ſee the decrees & Canons of the Coūcels put in executiō. decrees that vvere decreed of the Apoſtles and Auncients which were at Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Churches vvere confirmed in faith, and did abound in number daily.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 6 And paſſing through Phrygia and the countrie of Galatia, they vvereThis people had not the Goſpel denied vnto them altogether, but for a time: becauſe (as Venerable Bede thinketh) God foreſavv they vvould not beleeue, & ſo ſhould haue been more greuouſly damned. forbidden by the holy Ghoſt to preach the vvord in Aſia. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen they vvere come into Myſia, they attempted to goe into Bithynia: and the Spirit of IESVS permitted them not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And vvhen they had paſſed through Myſia, they vvent dovvne to Troas: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and a viſion by night vvas ſhevved to Paul: There vvas a certaine man of Macedónia ſtanding and beſeeching him, and ſaying, paſſe into Macedónia, and helpe vs. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And as ſoone as he had ſeen the viſion, forthvvith vve ſought to goe into Macedónia, being aſſured that God had called vs to euāgelize to them. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And ſailing from Troas, vve came vvith a ſtraight courſe to Samothrácia, and the day folovving to Neapolis: ✝ 
                     verse 12 and from thence to Philippi, vvhich is the firſt citie of the part of Macedonia, a
                     Colonia, is ſuch a citie where the moſt inhabitants are ſtrangers, ſent thither from other great cities & States, namely from the Romanes. 
                  colónia. And vve were in this citie certaine daies, abiding. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vpon the day of the Sabboths, vve vvent forth vvithout the gate beſide a riuer, vvhere it ſeemed that there vvas praier: & ſitting vve ſpake to the vvomen that vvere aſſembled. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And a certaine vvoman named Lydia, a ſeller of purple of the citie of the Thyatirians, one that vvorſhipped God, did heare: vvhoſe hart our Lord opened to attend to thoſe things vvhich vvere ſaid of Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhen ſhe vvas baptized, and her houſe, ſhe beſought vs, ſaying: If you haue iudged me to be faithful to our Lord, enter in vnto my houſe, and tarie. And ſhe conſtrained vs. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And it came to paſſe as vve vvent to praier, a certaine vvenche hauing a Pythónical ſpirit, mette vs, that brought great gaine to her maiſters by diuîning. ✝ 
                     verse 17 This ſame folovving Paul and vs, cried ſaying,
Either the Diuel vvas compelled by the vertue of Paules preſence to ſay truth, or els (as ſuch do often times) he ſpake truth novv, that they might the more truſt him, and he better beguile them at other times. Theſe men are the ſeruants of the high God, vvhich preach vnto you the vvay of ſaluation. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And this ſhe did many daies. And Paul being ſorie, and turning, ſaid to the ſpirit, I cōmaund thee in the name of IESVS CHRIST to goe out from her. And he vvent out the ſame houre. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But her maiſters ſeeing that the hope of their gaine vvas gone, apprehending Paul and Silas, brought them into the market place to the Princes: ✝ 
                     verse 20 and preſenting them to the magiſtrates, they ſaid, Theſe men trouble our citie, being Ievves: ✝ 
                     verse 21 and they preach a faſhion vvhich it is not lavvful for vs to receiue, nor doe, being Romanes. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the people ranne againſt them: and the magiſtrates tearing their coates, commaunded
 them to be beaten vvith roddes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen they had laid * many ſtripes vpon them,2. Cor. 11. they did caſt them into priſon, commaunding the keeper that he ſhould keepe them diligently. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vvho vvhen he had receiued ſuch commaundement, caſt them into the inner priſon, and made their feete faſt in the ſtockes. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And at mid-night, Paul and Silas praying, did praiſe God. And they that vvere in priſon, heard them. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But ſodenly there vvas made a great earthquake, ſo that the foundations of the priſon vvere ſhaken. And forthvvith al the doores vvere opened: and the bands of al vvere looſed. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And the keeper of the priſon vvaked out of his ſleepe, and ſeeing the doores of the priſon opened, dravving out his ſvvord, vvould haue killed him ſelf, ſuppoſing that the priſoners had been fled. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But Paul cried vvith a loud voice, ſaying, Doe thy ſelf no harme, for vve are al here. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And calling for light, he vvent in, and trembling fel dovvne to Paul and Silas at their feete: ✝ 
                     verse 30 and bringing them forth, he ſaid, Maiſters, vvhat muſt I doe that I may be ſaued? ✝ 
                     verse 31 But they ſaid,It is no other faith that ſaueth but that vvhich vvorketh by Charitie. Aug. Enchirid. 
                           •
                        . 67.
                   Beleeue in our Lord IESVS: and thou ſhalt be ſaued and thy houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And they preached the vvord of our Lord to him vvith al that vvere in his houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And he taking them in the ſame houre of the night,Happie Gailers that doe mercie tovvard their godly priſoners, and receiue againe by them ſuch ſpiritual benefites. vvaſhed their vvounds: and him ſelf vvas baptized and al his houſe incontinent. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And vvhen he had brought them into his ovvne houſe, he laid the table for them, and reioyced vvith al his houſe, beleeuing God. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhē day vvas come, the magiſtrates ſent the ſergeants, ſaying, Let thoſe men goe. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And the keeper of the priſon told theſe vvordes to Paul, That the magiſtrates haue ſent that you ſhould be let goe novv therfore departing, goe ye in peace. ✝ 
                     verse 37 But Paul ſaid to them: Being vvhipped openly, vncōdemned, men that are Romanes, they haue caſt vs into priſon: & novv do they ſend vs out ſecretly? Not ſo, but let them come, & let vs out them ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And the ſergeants reported theſe wordes to the magiſtrates. And they vvere afraid hearing that they vvere Romanes: ✝ 
                     verse 39 and comming they beſought them, & bringing them forth they deſired them to depart out of the citie. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And going out of the priſon, they entred in vnto Lydia: and hauing ſeen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  Hovv in other parts of Macedonia he planted the Church, and namely at Theſſalonica, 5 vvhere the obſtinate Ievves are ſo malicious, that they purſue him alſo into Ber
                        •
                     a▪ 14 From vvhence being conducted into Greece, he preacheth at Athens both to the Ievves and Gentiles, diſputing vvith the Philoſophers, 19 and in Areopagods, perſuading them from their Idols vnto one God and IESVS CHRIST raiſed from the dead.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen they had vvalked through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Theſſalonica, vvhere there vvas a ſynagogue of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And Paul according to his cuſtome entred in vnto them, & there Sabboths he diſcourſed to them out of the Scriptures, ✝ 
                     verse 3 declaring and inſinuating that it behoued CHRIST to ſuffer and to riſe againe from the dead: and that this is IESVS CHRIST, vvhom I preach to you. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And certaine of them beleeued, and vvere ioyned to Paul and Silas, and of the Gentiles that ſerued God a great multitude, and noble vvomen not a fevv. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But the Ievves
                     Zelantes. This is the zeale of Heretikes, and a liuely paterne of their dealing at this day againſt Catholike Prieſts and preachers and the good Iaſons that receiue them. enuying, & taking vnto them of the raſcal ſort certaine naughtie men, and making a tumult, ſtirred the citie: and beſetting Iaſons houſe, ſought to bring them forth vnto the people. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And not finding them, they drevv Iaſon and certaine brethren to the princes of the citie, crying, That theſe are they that ſtirre vp the vvorld, and are come hither, ✝ 
                     verse 7 vvhom Iaſon hath receiued, and al theſe doe againſt the decrees of Caeſar, ſaying that there is an other king, IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they moued the people, and the princes of the citie hearing theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And taking a ſatisfaction of Iaſon and of the reſt, they dimiſſed them. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But the brethren forthvvith by night ſent avvay Paul and Silas vnto Beroea.
               Vvho vvhen they vvere come, entred into the ſynagogue of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 11 (And theſe were more noble then they that are at Theſſalonica, vvho receiued the vvord vvith al greedines, daily ſearching the ſcriptures, if theſe things vvere ſo. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And many ſurely of them beleeued, and of honeſt vvomen Gentiles, and men not a fevv.) ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvhen the Ievves in Theſſalonica vnderſtood, that at Beroea alſo the vvord of God vvas preached by Paul, they came thither alſo, mouing and troubling the multitude, ✝ 
                     verse 14 And then immediatly the 
 brethren ſent avvay Paul, to goe vnto the ſea: but Silas and Timothee remained there. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And they that conducted Paul, brought him as farre as Athens, and receiuing commaundement of him to Silas and Timothee, that they ſhould come to him very ſpeedily, they departed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen Paul expected them at Athens, his ſpirit vvas incenſed vvithin him, ſeeing the citie giuen to Idolatrie. ✝ 
                     verse 17 He diſputed therfore in the ſynagogue vvith the Ievves, & them that ſerued God, and in the market-place, euery day vvith them that vvere there. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And certaine Philoſophers of the Epicures and the Sto
                     •
                  kes diſputed vvith him, and certaine ſaid, Vvhat is it that this
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvord-ſovver vvould ſay? But others, He ſeemeth to be a preacher of nevvdaemoniorum. gods. becauſe he preached to them IESVS and the reſurrection. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And apprehēding him, they led him to Areopagus, ſaying, May vve knovv vvhat this new doctrine is that thou ſpeakeſt of? ✝ 
                     verse 20 for thou bringeſt in certaine nevv things to our eares. Vve vvil knovv therfore vvhat theſe things may meane. ( ✝ 
                     verse 21 And al the Athenians, and the ſtrangers ſeiourning there, emploied them ſelues to nothing els but either to ſpeake,The Epiſtle for S. Dionyſius Areopagita. Octob. 9. or to heare ſome nevves▪) ✝ 
                     verse 22 But Paul ſtanding in the middes of Areopagus, ſaid:
               Ye men of Athens, in al things I perceiue you as it vvere ſuperſtitious. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For paſſing by and ſeeing your
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  The Aduerſaries (in the nevv Teſt. 1580) trā
                     ſlate, your deuotions, moſt corruptly againſt the nature of the Greeke vvord (2 Theſ. 2, 4) and moſt vvickedly, againſt the laudable deuotion of good Chriſtians, calling the Pagās idolatrie and ſuperſtitiō, their deuotions. Idols, I found an altar alſo vvherevpon vvas vvritten, To the vnknovven God. That therfore vvhich you vvorſhippe, not knovving it, the ſame do I preach to you. ✝ 
                     verse 24 The God that made the vvorld and al things that are in it, he being Lord of heauen & earth, dvvellethGod is not concluded in Temples, nor needeth them for his neceſſitie of dvvelling, or other vſes of indigence. See Annot. c. 7. Act. v. 48. not in * temples made vvith hand,Act. 7, 48. ✝ 
                     verse 25 neither is he ſerued vvith mens hands, needing any thing, vvhereas him ſelf giueth life vnto al, and breathing, and al things: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and he made of one al mākinde, to inhabite vpon the vvhole face of the earth, aſſigning ſet times, and the limits of their habitation, ✝ 
                     verse 27 for to ſeeke God, if happily they may feele or finde him, although he be not farre from euery one of vs. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For in him vve liue and moue and be, as certaine alſo of your ovvne poëtes ſaid,Aratus. 
                  For of his kinde alſo vve are. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Being therfore of Gods kinde, vve may not ſuppoſe, the Diuinitie to be like vnto gold or ſiluer, or ſtone, the grauing of art and deuiſe of man. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the times truely of this ignorance vvhereas God diſpiſed, novv he denounceth vnto men that al euery
 vvhere doe penance, ✝ 
                     verse 31 for that he hath appointed a day wherein he vvil iudge the world in equitie, by a man vvhom he hath appointed, giuing al men faith, rayſing him vp from the dead.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhen they had heard the reſurrection of the dead, certaine in deede mocked, but certaine ſaid, Vve vvil heare thee againe concerning this point. ✝ 
                     verse 33 So Paul vvent forth out of the middes of them. ✝ 
                     verse 34 But certaine men ioyning vnto him, did beleeue:Dyonyſius Areopagita. among vvhom vvas alſo Dionyſius Areopagîta, and a vvoman named Dámaris, and others vvith them. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     11. Searching the Scriptures.) The Heretikes vſe this place to proue that the heaters muſt trie and iudge by the Scriptures,The people may not iudge of the ſenſe of Scriptures. vvhether their teachers and preachers doctrine be true, and ſo reiect that that they find not in the Scriptures, as though here the ſheepe vvere made iudges of their Paſtors, the people of the Prieſts, and men and vvomen of al ſortes, euen of S. Paules doctrine it ſelf: which vvere the moſt foliſh diſorder in the vvorld. And they did not therfore read the Scriptures of the old Teſtament (for none of the nevv vvere yet extant commonly) to diſpute vvith the Apoſtle, or to trie and iudge of his doctrine, or vvhether they ſhould beleeue him or no: for they vvere bound to beleeue him and obey his vvord, vvhether he alleaged Scripture or no, and vvhether they could reade or vnderſtand the Scriptures or no, but it vvas a great comfort and confirmation for the Ievves that had the Scriptures, to finde euen as S. Paul ſaid, that Chriſt vvas God, crucified, riſen,The comfort of Chriſtian men by hearing or reading the Scriptures. and aſcended to heauen: vvhich by his preaching and expounding they vnderſtood, and neuer before, though they read them, and heard them read euery Sabboth. As it is a great comfort to a Catholike man, to heare the Scriptures declared & alleaged moſt euidently for the Churches truth againſt Heretikes, in Sennons or othervviſe. And it doth the Catholikes good & much confirmeth them, to vew diligently the places alleaged by the Catholike preachers. Yet they muſt not be iudges for al that, ouer their ovvne Paſtors, vvhom Chriſt commaundeth them to heare and obey, and by vvhom they heare the true ſenſe of Scriptures.
                  
                     22. Superſtitious.) S. Paul calleth not them ſuperſtitious for adoring the true and only God vvith much deuotion or many ceremonies or in comely preſcribed order,The Proteſtāts call deuotion, ſuperſtition. or for doing due reuerence to holy Sacraments, to Saincts and their memories, Images, or Monuments: or for keeping the preſcribed lavves, daies, and faſtes of the Church, or for fulfilling vowes made to God, or for bleſſing vvith the ſigne of the Croſſe, or for capping and kneeling at the name of IESVS, or for religiouſly vſing creatures ſanctified in the ſame name, or any other Chriſtian obſeruation, for vvhich our nevv Maiſters cōdemne the Catholike people of Superſtition: them ſelues vvholy voide of that vice by al vviſe mens iudgement,The Apoſtle ſpeaketh of the Heathens ſuperſtition. becauſe they haue in maner taken avvay al religion, and are become Epicureians and Atheiſts: vvho are neuer troubled vvith ſuperſtition, becauſe it is a vice conſiſting in exceſſe of vvorſhip or religion, vvhereof they are void, but the Apoſtle calleth them ſuperſtitious for vvorſhipping the Idols and goddes of the Heathen, and
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      for the feare that they had, leſt they ſhould leaue out any God that vvas vnknovven to them: for thus their Altar vvas inſcribed: Dijs Aſia, Europa, & Lybia, Deo ignoto & peregrino. that is, To the gods of Aſia, Europe, and Lybia:Aug. de cōſ. Euāg. li. 1 
                           •
                        . 26. to the vnknovven and ſtrange God. This ſuperſtition (ſaith S. Auguſtine) is vvholy taken avvay from the Church by Chriſts incarnation,The Catholike Church alloweth no ſuperſtition. and by the Apoſtles preaching, and by Martyrs holy life and death. Neither doth the Catholike Church allovv this or any other kinde of ſuperſtitious obſeruation. Only vve muſt take heede that vve beleeue not her Aduerſaries definition of ſuperſtition, for they vvould imply therein al true religion.
                  
                     29. This Diuinitie to be like.) Nothing can be made by mans hand of vvhat forme or ſort ſo euer, that is like to Gods eſſence, or to the forme or ſhape of his Godhead or Diuinitie. therfore hovvſoeuer the Heathens did paint or graue their Idols, they vvere nothing like to God▪ And this alſo is impertinently alleaged by Heretikes againſt the Churches images: Vvhich are not made, either
 to be adored vvith godly honour, or to be any reſemblance of the Diuinitie or any of the three perſons in Godhead, but only of Chriſt as he vvas in forme of man, vvho in that reſpect may be truely expreſſed, as other men by their purtraites: and of the Holy Ghoſt, not as he is in him ſelf, but as he appeared in firy tongues or in the ſimilitude of a doo
                        •
                     e,How there may be Images or reſemblāces of the thre perſons in Trinitie, and of Angels. or ſuch like. And ſo to paint or graue any of the three perſons as they appeared viſibly and corporally, is no more inconuenient or vnlavvful, then it vvas vndecent for them to appeare in ſuch formes. And therfore to paint or portraite the Father alſo being the firſt perſon,Dan. 7, 22. as he hath ſhevved him ſelf in viſion to any of the Prophetes of the old or nevv Teſtament (namely to Daniel as an old man) or the three Angels repreſenting the three Perſons to Abraham,Gen. 18, 2. or the one Angel that vvraſtling vvith Iacob bare our Lords Perſon,Gen. 32, 24 no ſuch thing is any vvhere forbidden, but is very agreable to the peoples inſtruction.Exo. 37, 7, In vvhich ſort the Angels vvere commonly pourtered (and namely the Cherubins ouer the Propitiatorie) as they be novv in the Church, not in their natural forme, but vvith corporal vvinges (as the Seraphins appeared to Eſay the Prophete) to expreſſe their qualitie and office of being Gods Angels,Eſa. 6, 2. that is, Meſſengers: and God the Father vvith the vvorld in his hand, to ſignifie his creation and gouernement of the ſame, and ſuch like: Vvhereof the people being vvel inſtructed may take much good,Images are for the peoples inſtruction. and no harme in the vvorld, being novv through their faith in Chriſt far from al fond imagination of the falſe gods of the Pagans. And therfore S. Gregorie ſaith of the Churches Images,Grego. li. 9 ep. 9. 
                     That vvhich ſcripture or vvriting doth to the readers, the ſame doth the picture to the ſimple that looke therevpon. for in it euen the ignorant ſee vvhat they ought to folovv, in it they do read, that knovv no letters. Vvhere he calleth it a matter of antiquitie and very conuenient, that in holy places Images vvere painted to the peoples inſtruction, ſo they be taught that they may not be adored vvith diuine honour. and he in the ſame place ſharply rebuketh Serenus the Biſhop of Maſſilia, that of indiſcrete zele he vvould take avvay Images, rather then teach the people hovv to vſe them.
                  
                     34. Dionyſius Areopagita.) This is that famous Denys that firſt conuerted France, and vvrote thoſe notable and diuine vvorkes de Eccleſiaſtica & ca
                           •
                        leſti hierarchia, de diuinis nominibus,
                     S. Dionyſius Areopagita is al for the Catholikes. and others, in vvhich he confirmeth and proueth plainely almoſt al things that the Church novv vſeth in the miniſtration of the holy Sacraments, and affirmeth that he learned them of the Apoſtles, giuing alſo teſtimonie for the Catholike faith in moſt things novv controuerſed, ſo plainely, that our Aduerſaries haue no ſhift but to deny this Denys to haue been the author of them, 
                        •
                     eyning that they be an others of later age. Vvhich is an old flight of Heretikes, but moſt proper to theſe of al others. Vvho ſeeing al antiquitie againſt them, are forced to be more bold or rather impudent then others in that point.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  As Corinth in Achaia, he vvorketh vvith his ovvne hands, preaching IESVS to be CHRIST, vnto the Ievves vpon their Sabboths. 6 But they being obſtinate and blaſpheming, he in plaine termes forſaketh them, and turneth to the Gentils, among vvhom according to a viſion that he had to embolden him, he planteth the Church in great numbers, 12 the obſtinat Ievves in vaine ſoliciting the Proconſul againſt him. 18 From thence as length departing he returneth 19 by Epheſus (vvhere he promiſeth the Ievves to returne to them) 22 and ſo to Antioch in Syria (from vvhence he began his iourney Act. 15) 23 but not reſting, by and by he goeth againe to viſite the nevv Churches that he planted Act. 16 in Galatia and Phrygia: 24 Apollo in his abſence mightily confounding the Ievves at Epheſus, 27 and aftervvard at Corinth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe things, departing from Athens, he came to Corinth. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and finding a certaine Ievv, named Aquila, borne in Pontus, vvho of late vvas come out of Italie, and Priſcilla his vvife (becauſe Claudius had commaunded al Ievves to depart from Rome,) he came to them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And becauſe he vvas of the ſame craft, he remained vvith them, and vvrought, (and they vvere tentmakers by their craft.) ✝ 
                     verse 4 And
 he diſputed in the ſynagogue euery Sabboth, interpoſing the name of our Lord IESVS, and he exhorted the Ievves and the Greekes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen Silas and Timothee vvere come from Macedonia, Paul vvas inſtant in preaching, teſtifying to the Ievves that IESVS is CHRIST. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But they contradicting and blaſpheming, he ſhaking his garmēts, ſaid to them, Your bloud vpon your ovvne head: I being cleane, from hence forth vvil goe to the Gentiles. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And departing thēce, he entred into the houſe of a certaine man, named Titus Iuſtus, one that ſerued God, vvhoſe houſe vvas adioyning to the ſynagogue. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And Criſpus the prince of the Synagogue beleeued our Lord, vvith al his houſe: and many of the Corinthians hearing beleeued, and vvere baptized. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And our Lord ſaid in the night by a viſion to Paul, Doe not feare, but ſpeake, and hold not thy peace, ✝ 
                     verse 10 for-becauſe I am vvith thee: and no man ſhal ſet vpon thee to hurt thee: for I haue much people in this citie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And he ſate there a yere & ſixe moneths, teaching among them the vvord of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 But Gallio being Proconſul of Achaia, the Ievves vvith one accord roſe vp againſt Paul, and brought him to the iudgement ſeate, ✝ 
                     verse 13 ſaying, That this man contrarie to the Lavv perſuadeth men to vvorſhippe God. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And Paul beginning to open his mouth, Gallio ſaid to the Ievves, If it vvere ſome vniuſt thing, or an heinous facte, O you men Ievves, I ſhould by reaſon beare you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But if they be queſtions of vvord & names, and of your lavv, your ſelues looke vnto it: I vvil not be iudge of theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he droue them from the iudgement ſeate. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And al apprehēding Sóſthenes the prince of the ſynagogue, ſtrooke him before the iudgement ſeate: and Gallio cared for none of thoſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 But Paul vvhen he had ſtaied yet many daies, taking his leaue of the brethren, ſailed to Syria, (and vvith him Priſcilla and Aquila,) vvho had ſhorne his head in Cenchris. for he had * a vovv.Nu. 6, 18. Act. 21, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And he came vnto Epheſus, and them he left there. But him ſelf entring into the ſynagogue, diſputed vvith the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vvhen they deſired him, that he vvould tarie a longer time, he conſented not, ✝ 
                     verse 21 but taking his leaue, and ſaying, I vvil returne to you againe God vvilling, he departed from Epheſus. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And going dovvne to Caeſaréa, he vvent vp, and ſaluted the Church, and came dovvne to Antioche.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 23 And hauing taried there a certaine time, he departed, vvalking in order through the countrie of Galatia and Phrygia, confirming al the diſciples.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And a certaine Ievv,Apollo. named Apollo, borne at Alexandria, an eloquent man, came to Epheſus, mighty in the ſcriptures. ✝ 
                     verse 25 This man vvas taught the vvay of our Lord: and being feruent in ſpirit he ſpake, and taught diligently thoſe things that pertaine to IESVS, knovving only the baptiſme of Iohn. ✝ 
                     verse 26 This man therfore began to deale confidently in the ſynagogue. Vvhom vvhen Priſcilla and Aquila had heard, they tooke him vnto them, and expounded to him the vvay of our Lord more diligently. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And vvhereas he vvas deſirous to goe to Achaia, the brethren exhorting vvrote to the diſciples to receiue him. Vvho, vvhen he vvas come, profited them much that had beleeued. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For he vvith vehemencie conuinced the Ievves openly, ſhevving by the ſcriptures, that IESVS is CHRIST.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  Hovv Paul began the Church of Epheſus, firſt in 1
                        •
                      that vvere baptized vvith Iohns baptiſme, 
                        •
                      then preaching three moneths in the Synagogue of the Ievves, vntil for their obſtinacie and blaſpheming, he forſooke them, diſputing aftervvard in a certaine ſchoole for tvvo yeres ſpace to the maruelous increaſe of the Church, ſpecially through his great miracles alſo, in healing diſeaſes vvith the touche of his clothes, and expelling di
                        •
                     els, 13 vvho yet contemned the Exorciſts of the Ievves. 18 Hovv the Chriſtians there confeſſe their actes, and burne their vnlavvful bookes: 21 and hovv he foretold that after he had been at Hieruſalem, he muſt ſee Rome. 23 and vvhat a great ſedition vvas raiſed againſt him at Epheſus, by them that got their liuing of vvorking to the idolatrous Temple of Diana.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND it came to paſſe vvhen Apollo vvas at Corinth,The Epiſtle vpō whitſon-eue. that Paul hauing gone through the higher partes came to Epheſus, and found certaine diſciples: ✝ 
                     verse 2 and he ſaid to them, Haue you receiued the holy Ghoſt, beleeuing? But they ſaid to him, Nay, neither haue vve heard whether there be a holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But he ſaid, In vvhat then vvere you baptized? Vvho ſaid,Iohns baptiſme no
                        •
                      ſufficiēt. In Iohns baptiſme. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And Paul ſaid:Mt, 3, 11. * Iohn baptized the people vvith the baptiſme of penance,Mr. 1, 8. ſaying: That they ſhould beleeue in him that vvas to come after him,Lu. 3, 16. that is to ſay,Chriſts baptiſme neceſſarie. in IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Hearing theſe things, they vvere baptized in the name of our Lord IESVS.
 ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen Paul hadS. Paul miniſtred the Sacrament of Cōfirmatiō. See an̄ot, c. 8, 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   impoſed hands on them, the holy Ghoſt came vpon them, and they ſpake vvith tongues, and prophecied. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And all the men vvere about tvvelue.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And entring in to the ſynagogue, he ſpake confidently for three moneths, diſputing and exhorting of the kingdom of God. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 9 But vvhen certaine vvere indûrate, and beleeued not, il-ſpeaking the vvay of our Lord before the multitude, departing from them, he ſeparated the diſciples, daily diſputing in the ſchole of one Tyrannus. ✝ 
                     verse 10 An this vvas done for the ſpace of tvvo yeres, ſo that al vvhich dvvelt in Aſia, heard the vvord of our Lord, Ievves and Gentils.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And God vvrought by the hand of Paul miracles not common: ✝ 
                     verse 12 ſo that there vvere alſo brought from his body 
                     •
                   napkins or, handkerchefs vpon the ſicke, and the diſeaſes departed from them, and the vvicked ſpirits vvent out. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And certaine alſo of the Iudaical exorciſts that vvent about, aſſaied to inuocate vpon them that had euil ſpirits, the name of our Lord IESVS, ſaying, I adiure you by IESVS vvhom Paul preacheth. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And there vvere certaine ſonnes of Sceua a Ievve, cheefe prieſt, ſeuen, that did this. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But the vvicked ſpirit anſvvering, ſaid to them, IESVS I knovv, and 
                     •
                   Paul I knovv: but you, vvhat are ye? ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the man in vvhom the vvicked ſpirit vvas, leaping vpon them, and maſtringthem both', preuailed againſt them, ſo that they fled out of that houſe naked and vvounded. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And this vvas made notorious to al the Ievves and the Gentiles that dvvelt at Epheſus: and feare fel vpon al them, and the name of our Lord IESVS vvas magnified. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And many of them that beleeued, came confeſſing and declaringThey made not only a general confeſſiō wherein al mē ſhew thē ſelues alike to be ſinners, as our Proteſtants do: but euery one confeſſed his owne proper deedes and faultes. their deedes. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And many of them that had folovved 
                     •
                   curious things, brought together their 
                     •
                   bookes, and burnt them before al: and counting the prices of them, they found the money to be fiftie thouſand pence.The 6 part. ✝ 
                     verse 20 So mightely increaſed the vvord of God and vvas confirmed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen theſe things vvere ended, Paul purpoſed in the Spirit, vvhen he had paſſed through Macedonia and Achaia, to goe to Hieruſalem, ſaying, After I ſhall haue been there, I muſt ſeeOf taking avvay the Goſpel frō Hieruſalem the head citie of the Iewes, and giuing it to ROME the head citie of the Gentils. Rome alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And ſending into Macedonia tvvo of them that miniſtred vnto him, Timothee and Eraſtus, himſelf remained for a time in Aſia.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And at that time there vvas made no litle trouble about 
 the vvay of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For one named Demetrius, a ſiluerſmith,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   that made ſiluerThe Proteſtants tranſlate, ſhrines, in the bible an. 1577: to make the people thinke that it toucheth the holy ſhrines of Sainctes: moſt corruptly, the greeke ſignifyng plainly, temples, and that of heathē gods: temples of Diána, procured to the artificers no ſmal gaine: ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvhom calling together and them that vvere the ſame kinde of vvorkemen, he ſaid, Sirs, you knovv that our gaine is of this occupation: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and you ſee, and heare that this ſame Paul by perſuaſion hath auerted a great multitude not only of Epheſus, but almoſt of al Aſia, ſaying, That they are not gods vvhich be made by handes. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And not only vnto vs is this part in danger to be reproued, but alſo the temple of great Diana ſhal be reputed for nothing, yea & her maieſtie ſhal begin to be deſtroied, vvhom al Aſia & the vvorld vvorſhippeth. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Hearing theſe things, they vvere repleniſhed vvith anger, and cried out ſaying, Great is Diana of the Epheſians. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And the vvhole citie vvas filled vvith confuſion, & they ranne violently vvith one accord in to the theátre, catching Gaius and Ariſtarchus Macedonians, Paules companions. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And vvhen Paul vvould haue entred into the people, the diſciples did not permit him. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And certaine alſo of the Princes of Aſia that vvere his frendes, ſent vnto him, deſying that he vvould not aduēture him ſelfe into the theátre: ✝ 
                     verse 32 and others cried an other thing. For the aſſemblie vvas confuſe, & the more part knevv not for vvhat cauſe they vvere aſſembled. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And of the multitude they drevv forth Alexander, the Ievves thruſting him forvvard. But Alexander vvith his hand deſiring ſilence, vvould haue giuen the people ſatisfaction. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Vvhom as ſoone as they perceiued to be a Ievve, there vvas made one voice of al, almoſt for the ſpace of tvvo houres crying out, Great is Diana of the Epheſians. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhen the Scribe had appeaſed the multitudes, he ſaith, Ye men of Epheſus, for vvhat man is there that knovveth not the citie of the Epheſians to be a vvorſhipper of great Diana,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . &Here the Heretikes adde to the text this word, image, more then is in the greeke, to put a ſcruple into the peoples minde concerning holy Images. Iupiters childe? ✝ 
                     verse 36 Foraſmuch therfore as theſe things can not be gainſaid, you muſt be quieted, and doe nothing raſhly. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For you haue brought theſe men, being neither ſacrilegious, nor blaſpheming your Goddeſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But if Demetrius and the artificers that are vvith him, haue matter to ſay againſt any man, there are Courtes kept in the common place, & there are Proconſuls, let them accuſe one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And if you aſke any other matter: it may be reſolued in a lavvful aſſemblie. ✝ 
                     verse 40 For vve are in danger alſo to be accuſed for this daies ſedition:
 vvhereas there is no man guilty by vvhom vve may giue an account of this concourſe. And vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, he dimiſſed the aſſemblie.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     12. Napkins.]
                     Touching of Relikes, & miracles done by the ſame. The napkins that had touched S. Paules body, vvrought miracles, and it vvas no ſuperſtition to attribute that vertue to them vvhich God gaue to them in deede: nor to ſeeke to touch them for health,Act. 5, 15. vvas any diſhonour to God, but it much proued Chriſtes religiō to be true, and him to be the only God, vvhoſe ſeruants, yea vvhoſe ſeruants * ſhades and napkins could do ſuch vvonders, as S. Chryſoſtome (to. 5. cont. Gentiles, quòd Chriſtus ſit Deus, in vit. Babyla.) ſhovveth in a vvhole booke to that purpoſe, againſt the Pagans, prouing hereby and by the like vertue of other Saincts and their Relikes, that Chriſt their Lord and Maiſter is God▪ for it is al one concerning the bodies of Saincts, reliques, garments, ſtaues, bookes, or any thing that belonged to them, al which may and haue done and yet doe (vvhen it is neceſſarie to our edification) the like vvonders to Gods great honour: not only in their life time, but after their death much more▪ for S. Paules napkins had as great force vvhen he vvas dead, as vvhen he liued, and ſo much more, as his grace and dignitie vvith God is greater then before. Vvhich S. Chryſoſtom in the place alleaged proueth at large by the ſhrine of S. Babylas the Martyr: and to thinke the contrarie, is the Hereſie of Vigilantius, condemned ſo long ſince as S. Hieroms time, and by him refuted aboundantly.
                  
                     16. Paul I knovv.]
                     The name, or preſence, or Reliques of Saincts & holy men, confound the Diuel. Both the ſaid napkins taken from S. Paules body, and his name alſo, vvere dreadful and able to expel diuels. Vvhereby vve learne that not only Chriſtes name, vvhich is the principal, but his ſeruāts names alſo inuocated vpon the poſſeſſed, haue povver ouer diuels: vvhich is a maruelous honour to Saincts, and nothing diminiſheth the glorie of Chriſt, but excedingly increaſeth the ſame,In vit. Hilarionis. not only him ſelf, but his ſeruants alſo being able to do ſuch things, and to be ſtronger then any Diuel in Hel. So vve read in * S. Hierom that many did inuocate the name of S. Hilar
                        •
                     on vpon the poſſeſſed,Chryſ. loco citato. and the Diuels ſtraight departed. ſo did the Diuel knovv * S. Babylas and other Saincts, euen after they vvere dead, vvhen they could not ſpeake for the preſence of their Relikes, and vvhen they vvere tormented and expelled by them: vvhereof al antiquitie is ful of teſtimonies. But our Heretikes Luther and Caluin and their Scholers attempting to caſt out Diuels, ſp
                        •
                     d much like as theſe good fellovves did.
                  
                     19. Curious things.] Curious and vnlavvful ſciences, as Vvitcheraft, Necromancie, and other meanes of diuination by ſouthſaying,Superſtitious, heretical, and al hurtful bookes muſt be made avvay. figure-
                        •
                     aſting, interpretation of dreames, or any vvay not allovved by God and his Church, muſt much more be abhorred of old Chriſtians, vvhen theſe ſo lately conuerted vvere ſo zelous and diligent to leaue them And by this example al that are nevvly reconciled to the Church, are taught, the firſt thing they do, to burne their heretical and naughtie bookes.
                  
                     19. Bookes.] A Chriſtian man is bound to burne or deface al vvicked bookes of vvhat ſort ſo euer,Decrees and penal lawes againſt heretical bookes. ſpecially Heretical bookes. Vvhich though they infect not him alvvaies that keepeth them, yet being furth comming, they may be noiſom and pernicious to others that ſhal haue them and read them after his death, or othervviſe. Therfore hath the Church taken order for condemning al ſuch bookes, and againſt the reading of them, vvhere danger may enſue: and the Chriſtian Emperoures, Conſtantinus Magnus, Valentin
                        •
                     an, Theodoſius, Martian, Iuſtinian, made penal lavves for the burning or defacing of them. Sozem. li. 1 c. 20. li. 2c. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Conc. Chalac. act. 3. in fine, cap. Amplae. & in fine totius Conc. 
                           •
                        . Imperator. Conc. Conſtantinop. 2. conſeſ. 5. cap. Debitam. & Act. 1 cap. 1. & cap. Rem. See Euſebius li. 
                           •
                         de vita Conſtant. c. 61. 62. 63. 64. The danger of reading them, as it is manifeſt, ſo it is ſignified by Euſeb. li. 7 c. 6. s. Auguſtine li. 3 de bapt. 6. 14. S. Greg. li. 5 ep. 64.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  Hauing viſited the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia (as he purpoſed Act. 19) and novv about to ſaile from Corinth tovvard Hieruſalem, becauſe of the Ievves lying in vvaite for him, he is conſtrained to returne into Maced
                        •
                     nia, & And ſo 
                        〈◊〉
                      Philippos taking boate, commeth to Troas, vvhere vpon the Sunday, vvith a ſermon, and a miracle, he greatly confirmeth that Church. 13 Thence comming to Milétum, 17 he ſendeth to Epheſus for the Clergie of thoſe partes: to vvhom he maketh a Paſtoral ſermon, committing vnto their charge the ſtocke begūne by him there, and novv like to be ſeen of him no more, conſidering the troubles that by reuelation he looketh for at Hieruſalem.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after that the tumult vvas ceaſed, Paul calling the diſciples, and exhorting them, tooke his leaue, and ſet forvvard to goe into Macedonia. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vvhen he had vvalked through thoſe partes, & had exhorted them vvith much ſpeach, he came to Greece: ✝ 
                     verse 3 vvhere vvhen he had ſpent three moneths, the Ievves laid vvait for him as he vvas about to ſaile into Syria: and he had councel to returne through Macedonia. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And there accompanied him So
                     ••
                  pater of Pyrrhus, of Beroea: and of Theſſalonians, Ariſtarchus, and Secundus: and Caius of Derbè, and Timothee: and of Aſia, Tychicus and Tróphimus. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Theſe going before, ſtaied for vs at Troas: ✝ 
                     verse 6 but vve 
                     •
                  ailed after the daies of Azymes from Philippi, and came to them vnto Troas in fiue daies, vvhere vve abode ſeuen daies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And in the firſt of the Sabboth vvhen vve vvere aſſembled toS. Paul did here breake bread on the Sunday as it is broken in the Sacramēt of the body of Chriſt, and had both before & after the celebrating of the Sacramēt a ſermon to the people. Aug. ep. 
                           •
                        6 ad Caſulanū. V
                           •
                        ner. Beda in 20 Act.
                   breake bread, Paul diſputed vvith them, being to depart on the morovv, and he continued the ſermon vntil midnight. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And there vvere a great number of lampes in the vpper chamber vvhere vve vvere aſſembled. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And a certaine yong man named Eútychus, ſitting vpon the vvindovv, vvhereas he vvas oppreſſed vvith heauy ſleepe (Paul diſputing long) driuē by ſleepe, fel from the third loft downe, and vvas taken vp dead. ✝ 
                     verse 10 To vvhom vvhen Paul vvas gone dovvne, he lay vpon him: and embracing him he ſaid, Be not troubled, for his ſoule is in him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And going vp and breaking bread and taſting, and hauing talked ſufficiently to them vntil day light, ſo he departed. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they brought the lad aliue, and vvere not a litle comforted.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vve going vp into the ſhip, ſailed to Aſſon, from thence meaning to receiue Paul. for ſo he had ordained, him ſelf purpoſing to iourney by land. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen he had found vs in Aſſon, taking him vvith vs vve came to Mi
                     •
                  yléne. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And ſailing thence, the day folovving vve came ouer againſt Chios: and the other day vve arriued at Samos: and the day folovving vve came to Milétum. ✝ 
                     verse 16 for Paul had purpoſed to ſaile leauing Epheſus, leſt any ſtay ſhould be made him in Aſia. For he haſtened, if it vvere poſſible for him, to keepe the day of 
                     •
                   Pentecoſt at Hieruſalem.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſending from Milétum to Epheſus, he called the

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      That is, Prieſts as Act. 15. 4. See the marginal annot. there. Auncients of the Church. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vvho being come to him, and
 aſſembled together,Act. 19, 1 he ſaid to them, You knovv * from the firſt day that I entred into Aſia, in vvhat maner I haue been vvith you al the time, ✝ 
                     verse 19 ſeruing our Lord vvith al humilitie and teares, and tentations that did chaunce to me by the conſpiracies of the Ievves: ✝ 
                     verse 20 Hovv I haue vvithdravven nothing that vvas profitable, but that I preached it to you, & taught you openly and from houſe to houſe, ✝ 
                     verse 21 teſtifying to Ievves and GentilsApoſtolike preaching commendeth not faith only but penance alſo to the people. penance tovvard God and faith in our Lord IESVS CHRIST. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And novv behold, being bound by the ſpirit, I goe to Hieruſalem: not knovving vvhat things ſhal befall me in it, ✝ 
                     verse 23 but that the Holy Ghoſt through out al cities doth proteſt to me, ſaying: that bands and tribulations abide me at Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But I feare none of theſe things, neither doe I make my life more pretious thē my ſelf, ſo that I may cōſūmat my courſe & miniſterie vvhich I receiued of our Lord IESVS, to teſtifie the Goſpel of the grace of God. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And novv behold I doe knovv, that you ſhal no more ſee my face al you, through vvhom I haue paſſed preaching the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvherefore I take you to witneſſe this preſent day that I am cleere from the bloud of al. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For I haue not ſpared to declare vnto you al the counſel of God. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Take heede to your ſelues and to the vvhole flocke vvherein theBiſhops or Prieſts (for then theſe names were ſometime vſed indifferētly) gouernours of the Church of God, & placed in that roome & high functiō by the Holy Ghoſt. Holy Ghoſt hath placed you biſhops, to rule the Church of God vvhich he hath purchaſed with his ovvne bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 29 I knovv that after my departure there vvil 
                     •
                   rauening vvolues enter in among you, not ſparing the flocke. ✝ 
                     verse 30 and out of your ovvne ſelues ſhal ariſe men ſpeaking peruerſe things, to dravv avvay diſciples after them ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 31 For the vvhich cauſe be vigilant, keeping in memorie that for three yeres night and day I ceaſed not vvith teares to admoniſh euery one of you. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And novv I commend you to God and to the vvord of his grace, vvho is able to edifie, and to giue inheritance in al the ſanctified. ✝ 
                     verse 33 No mans ſiluer and gold or garment haue I coueted. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Your ſelues knovv that for ſuch things as vvere needful for me and them that are vvith me, theſe hands haue miniſtred. ✝ 
                     verse 35 I haue ſhevved you al things, that ſo labouring, you muſt receiue the vveake, and remember the vvord of our Lord IESVS, becauſe he ſaid, 
                     •
                   It is a more bleſſed thing to giue rather then to take.
                ✝ 
                     verse 36 And vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, falling on his knees he praied vvith al them. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And there vvas great vveeping 
 made of al, and falling vpon the necke of Paul, they kiſſed him, ✝ 
                     verse 38 being ſorie moſt of al for the vvord vvhich he had ſaid, that they ſhould ſee his face no more. And they brought him going vnto the ſhippe.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
                  
                     16. Pentecoſt.]
                     The Chriſtian Pentecoſt▪
                      Though the Apoſtles might deſire to come to the Ievves Feſtiuities, by reaſon of the general concourſe of people to the ſame, the better to deale for their ſaluation and 
                        •
                     o ſpred the Goſpel of Chriſt, yet it is like that they novv kept ſolemly the Chriſtian Pentecoſt or vvhitſontide, for memorie of the Holy Ghoſt, and that S. Paul vvent to that Feaſt of the Chriſtians rather then the other of the Ievves. And Ven. Bede ſaith here, The Apoſtle maketh haſt to keepe the fifteth day, that is, of remiſsion and of the Holy Ghoſt. For, that the Chriſtians already kept the eight day, that is,Sunday. the Sunday or our Lordes day, and had altered already the ordinarie Sabboth into the ſame, it is plaine by the Scriptures (1 Cor. 16, 2. Apoc. 1, 10.) and by antiquitie. Iuſtin. Mart. Apolog. 2 ad Anton. Pium in fine. And it is as like that they changed the Ievves Paſche and Pentecoſt as that, ſpecially vvhen it is euident that * theſe Feſtiuities be kept by Apoſtolike tradition,Avg. ep. 118 c. 1. and approued by the vſe of al auncient Churches and Councels.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        9. Rauening vvolues.]
                     Rauening vvolues are the Heretikes of al ages. The gouernours of the Church are foretold of the great danger that ſhould fall to the people by vvolues, that is to ſay, by Heretikes, vvhoſe cruelty tovvard the Catholikes is noted by this terme. They be knovvē by the forſaking the vnitie of the Church vvhereof they vvere before, by going out and dravving many diſciples after them, and by their peruerſe doctrine. Such vvolues came aftervvard in deede in diuers ages, Arius, M
                        •
                     cedonius, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Luther, Caluin, great bloudſucking vvolues, and vvaſters of the flocke of Chriſt.
                  
                     35. More bleſſed to giue.]
                     Chriſts ſpeaches not vvritten in the Goſpel. Among many other infinite goodly things and ſpeaches vvhich Chriſt ſpake and be not vvritten in the Goſpels, this ſentence is one: vvhich S. Paul heard of ſome of the Apoſtles daily conuerſant vvith him, or els learned of Chriſt him ſelf, or of the Holy Ghoſt▪ And it ſignifieth, that vvhereas the vvorld commonly counteth him happie that receiueth any benefite, as almes either temporal or ſpiritual,Great almeſmen bleſſed. yet in deede he that giueth or beſtovveth, is more happie. Vvhich if the vvorld did vvel conſider, men vvould giue almes faſter then they do, if it vvere but for their ovvne benefite.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  From Milētum going on his iourney, 4 he can not be diſſuaded neither as Tyre, 8 nor at Caeſarea (in both vvhich places the Holy Ghoſt reueled hovv he ſhould be handled in Hieruſalem, 10 the Prophet Agabu
                        •
                      expreſly foretelling that the Ievves there ſhould deliuer him to the Gentils) 15 but to Hieruſalem he cōmeth: vvhere being vvelcome to the Chriſtians, and namely to Iames the Biſhop, and to the Prieſts, vvhile he goeth about to ſatisfie the Chriſtian Ievves there, vvho had been miſinformed of him as if he had taught it to be vnlawful for the Iewes to keepe Moyſes Lavv: 27 he is inuaded by the infidel Ievves, and ready to be murdered by them, vntil the Romane ſouldiars do reſcue him.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen it came to paſſe that vve ſailed, being caried from them, vvith a ſtraight courſe vve came to Cóos, and the day folovving to Rhodes, and from thence to Pátara. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And when vve had found a ſhip that paſſed ouer to Phoenîce, going vp into it vve ſailed. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen vve vver
                     •
                   in the ſight of Cypres, leauing it on the left hand, vve ſailed
 into Syria, and came to Tyre: for there the ſhip vvas to diſcharge her lode. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And finding diſciples, vve taried there ſeuen daies: vvho ſaid to Paul by the Spirit, that he ſhould not goe vp to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the daies being expired, departing vve vvent forvvard, al bringing vs on the vvay, vvith their vviues and children, til vve vvere out of the citie: and falling vpon our knees on the ſhore, vve praied. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen vve had bid one an other farevvel, vve vvent vp into the ſhip: and they returned vnto their ovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But vve hauing ended the nauigation, from Tyre came dovvne to Prolomáis: and ſaluting the brethren, vve taried one day vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the next day departing, vve came to Caeſarêa.
Act. 6, 5 And entring into the houſe of * Philip the Euangeliſt, vvho vvas one of the ſeuen, vve taried vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he hadAs S. Peter had a wife, but vſed her not after his calling, as it is noted els where out of S. Hierom Lu
                           •
                        . 4, 38: ſo may it 
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     d of S. Philip being De
                        •
                     con. foure daughters virgins, that did prophecie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And as vve abode there for certaine daies, there came a certaine prophet from Ievvrie, named Agabus. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He, vvhē he vvas come to vs, tooke Paules girdle: and binding his ovvne handes & feete, he ſaid, Thus ſaith the holy Ghoſt: The man vvhoſe girdle this is, ſo ſhal the Ievves binde in Hieruſalem, & ſhal deliuer him into the handes of the Gentiles. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vvhich when vve had heard, vve & they that vvere of the ſame place, deſired him that he would not goe vp to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Then Paul anſvvered, and ſaid, Vvhat doe you, vveeping and afflicting my hart? for I am ready not only to be bound, but to die alſo in Hieruſalem for the name of our Lord IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen vve could not perſuade him, we ceaſed, ſaying, The vvil of our Lord be done.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 And after theſe daies, being prepared, vve vvent vp to Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And there came alſo of the diſciples from Caeſarêa vvith vs, bringing vvith them one Iaſon a Cyprian (vvith vvhom vve ſhould lodge) an old diſciple. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen vve vvere come to Hieruſalem, the brethren receiued vs gladly. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the day folovving Paul vvent in vvith vs to Iames, and al the Auncients vvere aſſembled. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvhom vvhen he had ſaluted, he told particularly vvhat God had done among the Gentiles by his miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But they hearing it, magnified God, and ſaid to him: Thou ſeeſt (brother) hovv many thouſands there are among the Ievves that haue beleeued: and al are zelátours of the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But they haue heard of thee that thou doeſt teach thoſe Ievves
 that are among the Gentiles, to depart from Moyſes: ſaying that they ought not to circumciſe their children, nor vvalke according to the cuſtome. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvhat is it then? needes muſt the multitude aſſemble: for they vvil heare that thou art come. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Doe this therfore vvhich vve tel thee, There are vvith vs foure men, that haue a vovve on them. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Taking theſe vnto thee, ſanctifie thy ſelf vvith them: and beſtovv on them,Nu. 6, 18. that they may * ſhaue their heads: and al ſhal knovv that the things vvhich they heard of thee, are falſe: but that thy ſelf alſo vvalkeſt 
                     •
                   keeping the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But concerning them that beleeue of the Gentils,Act. 15, 20. * vve haue written, decre
                     •
                  ing that they ſhould refraine them ſelues from the immolated to Idols, and bloud, and ſuffocated, and fornication. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Then Paul taking the men vnto him, the next day being purified vvith them entred into the temple, ſhevving the accompliſhment of the * daies of the purification,Nu. 6, 13 vntil an oblation vvas offered for euery one of them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 But vvhiles the ſeuen daies vvere a finiſhing, thoſe Ievves that vvere of Aſia, vvhen they had ſeen him in the temple, ſtirred vp al the people, and laid handes vpon him, ✝ 
                     verse 28 crying, Ye men of Iſraël, this is the man that againſt the people & the Lavv and this place teaching al men euery vvhere, hath alſo moreouer brought in Gentiles into the temple, and hath violated this holy place. ( ✝ 
                     verse 29 For they had ſeen Trōphimus the Epheſian in the citie vvith him, vvhom they ſuppoſed that Paul had brought into the temple.) ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the vvhole citie vvas in an vproare: and there vvas made a concourſe of the people. And apprehending Paul, they drevve him forth of the temple: and immediatly the doores vvere ſhut. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And as they ſought to kil him, it vvas told the Tribune of the band, That al Hieruſalem is in a confuſion. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Vvho forthvvith taking vnto him ſouldiars & Centurions, ranne dovvne to them. Who, vvhē they had ſeen the Tribune and the ſouldiars, ceaſed to ſtrike Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Then the Tribune comming neere apprehended him, and commaunded him to be bound vvith tvvo chaines: and he demaunded vvho he vvas, and vvhat he had done. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And ſome cried one thing, ſome an other, in the multitude. And vvhereas he could not knovv the certaintie for the tumult, he commaunded him to be led
                     In caſtra. So in the places folovving. into the caſtel. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhen he vvas come to the ſtaires, it chaunced that he vvas caried of the ſouldiars becauſe
 of the violence of the people. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For the multitude of the people folovved, crying, Avvay vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vvhen Paul began to be brought into the caſtel, he ſaith to the Tribune, Is it lavvful for me to ſpeake ſomething to thee? Vvho ſaid, Canſt thou ſpeake Greeke? ✝ 
                     verse 38 Art not thou the Aegyptian that before theſe daies did raiſe a tumult, and didſt lead forth into the deſert foure thouſand men that vvere murderers? ✝ 
                     verse 39 And Paul ſaid to him,Act. 22, 3. * I am a man truely a Ievv
                     •
                   of Tarſus, a citizen not of an obſcure citie of Cilicia. And I deſire thee, permit me to ſpeake to the people. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And vvhen he had permitted him, Paul ſtāding on the ſtaiers, beckened with his hand to the people. and great ſilence being made, he ſpake vnto them in the Hebrevv tongue, ſaying.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     9. Virgins.]
                     Virgins. S. Luke noteth ſpecially that his daughters vvere Virgins, meaning (no doubt) that they vvere of the ſtate, profeſſion, or purpoſe of perpetual virginitie, not only that they vvere yong maides vnmaried: and that they vvere the rather for that, endued vvith the gift of prophecie, as S. Hierom ſaith li. 1 adu. Iouin. c. 24. See Oecum. c. 29 in hunc locum.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        4. Keeping the Lavv.]
                     Auoiding of ſcādal in things not vnlavvful. Al the obſeruations of the Lavv vvere novv in them ſelues dead and vnprofitable, yet til further propagation of the Goſpel, they vvere not damnable to the keepers, nor offenſiu
                        •
                      to God, but might be obſerued euen of the Chriſtian Ievves. and for feare of ſcandalizing the vveake of that nation, nevvly conuerted or prone to receiue the faith, the Apoſtles by Gods ſuggeſtion did thinke it good to obſerue them as occaſion required.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  Being licenſed by the Tribune to ſpeake to the people, he ſhevveth them that he vvas once as earneſt on that ſide as they novv be: 6 and hovv ſtrange and miraculous his conuerſion vvas. 17 They heare him quietly, vntil he began to make mention of a viſion that ſent him avvay from them to the Gentils. 22 Then they crie out vpon him ſo, 23 that for their crying the Tribune commaundeth him to be ſcourged▪ as Which yet by his vviſedom he eſcapeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MEN brethren and fathers, heare vvhat account I doe render novv vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 2 (And vvhen they had heard that he ſpake to them in the Hebrevv tongue, they did the more keepe ſilēce. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he ſaith,)Act. 21, 39. * I am a man a Ievve, borne at Tarſus in Cilicia, but brought vp in this citie, at the feete of Gamaliel inſtructed according to the veritie of the lavv of the fathers,
 an emulátour of the Lavv as alſo al you are this day: ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho
* perſecuted this vvay vnto death,Act. 8, 3 binding & deliuering into cuſtodies men & vvomē, ✝ 
                     verse 5 as the high Prieſt doth giue me teſtimonie,
Act. 9, 2 and al the auncients. ✝ 
                     verse 6 of vvhom * receiuing letters alſo to the brethren, I vvent to Damaſcus, that I might bring them thence bound to Hieruſalem, to be puniſhed.

                     verse 7 And it came to paſſe as I vvas going, and dravving nigh to Damaſcus at midday, ſodēly from heauen there ſhone round about me much light: ✝ 
                     verse 8 and falling on the ground, I heard a voice ſaying to me, Saul, Saul, vvhy perſecuteſt thou me? ✝ 
                     verse 9 And I anſvvered, Vvho art thou Lord? And he ſaid to me, I am IESVS of Nazareth, vvhom thou perſecuteſt. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they that vvere vvith me, ſavv the light in deede, but the voice they heard not of him that ſpake vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I ſaid, Vvhat ſhal I doe Lord? And our Lord ſaid to me, Ariſe and goe to Damaſcus: and there it ſhal be told thee of al things that thou muſt doe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhereas I did not ſee for the brightneſſe of that light, being led of my companions by the hand, I came to Damaſcus. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And one Ananias, a man according to the Lavv hauing teſtimonie of al the Ievves inhabitants, ✝ 
                     verse 14 comming to me, and ſtanding by me, ſaid to me, Brother Saul, looke vp. And I the ſelf ſame houre looked vp on him. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But he ſaid, The God of our fathers hath prëordained thee, that thou ſhouldeſt knovv his vvil, and ſee the Iuſt one, and heare a voice from his mouth: ✝ 
                     verse 16 becauſe thou ſhalt be his vvitnes to al men, of thoſe things vvhich thou haſt ſeen and heard. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And novv vvhat tarieſt thou? Riſe vp, and be baptized, &The Sacramc of Baptiſme doth it ſelf vvaſh avvay ſinnes as here is plaine, & therfore doth not only ſignifie (as the Heretikes affirme) that out ſinnes be forgiuen before, or othervviſe by faith only remitted Vvhereby the Churches doctrine is proued to be fully agreable to the Scriptures, that the Sacraments giue grace ex opere operato▪
                      that is, by the force & vertue of the vvorke and vvord, done & ſaid in the Sacrament. vvaſh avvay thy ſinnes inuocating his name. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And it befel me returning into Hieruſalem, and praying in the temple, that I vvas in a traunce, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and ſavv him ſaying vnto me, Make haſt, and depart quickely out of Hieruſalem: becauſe they vvil not receiue thy teſtimonie of me. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And I ſaid, Lord, they knovv that I did caſt into priſon and beate in euery ſynagogue them that beleeued in thee. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen the bloud of Steuen thy
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvitnes vvas ſhed,
Not only the Principals but al that conſent to the death or vexation of Chriſtian men for the Catholike ſaith, do highly offend. vvhich the Apoſtle confeſſeth here, that Gods mercie may be more notoriouſly glorified in him hereby. I ſtoode by and conſented, and kept the garments of them that killed him.Act. 7, 38. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he ſaid to me, Goe, for into the Gentiles a farre vvil I ſend thee.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And they heard him vntil this vvord, and they lifted vp their voice, ſaying, Avvay vvith ſuch an one from the earth: for it is not meete he ſhould liue. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And vvhen they cried
 out, and threvv of their garments, and caſt duſt into the aire, ✝ 
                     verse 24 the Tribune commaunded him to be caried into the caſtel, and to be beaten vvith vvhippes, and that he ſhould be tormented: to knovv for vvhat cauſe they did ſo crie at him. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhen they had bound him very ſtraight vvith thōgs, Paul ſaith to the Centurion ſtanding by him: Is it lavvful for you to vvhippe a man that is a Romane and vncondemned? ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvhich the Centurion hearing, vvent to the Tribune, and told him, ſaying, Vvhat vvilt thou doe? for this man is a citizen of Rome. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And the Tribune comming, ſaid to him, Tel me, art thou a Romane? But he ſaid, Yea. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And the Tribune anſvvered, I obtained this citie vvith a great ſumme. And Paul ſaid, But I vvas alſo borne to it. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Immediatly therfore they departed from him that vvere to torment him. The Tribune alſo feared after he vnderſtoode that he was a citizē of Rome, and becauſe he had bound him. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But the next day meaning to knovv more diligently for vvhat cauſe he vvas accuſed of the Ievves, he looſed him, and commaunded the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Prieſts to come together and al the Councel: & bringing forth Paul, he ſet him among them.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  As the people in the tumult, ſo alſo the very ch
                        •
                     efe of the Ievves in their Councel ſhevv them ſelues obſtina
                        ••
                     , and vvilful perſecutors of the truth in S. Pauls perſon. Whoſe behauiour tovvardes them is ful of conſtancie, modeſtie, and vviſedom, 11 (Chriſt alſo by a viſion encouraging him, and foretelling that he ſhal to Rome.) 12 Yea they conſpire vvith 40 men to kil him traiterouſly. 1
                        •
                      But the matter being detected, the Romane Tribune conueigheth him ſtrongly to Caeſaréa.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND Paul looking vpon the Councel, ſaid, Men brethren, I vvith al good conſcience haue conuerſed before God, vntil this preſent day. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the high Prieſt Ananias commaunded them that ſtoode by him, to ſmite him on the mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Then Paul ſaid to him,He ſaid not this through perturbation of minde or of a paſſion, but by way of prophecie, that this figuratiue high prieſthod then trimmed l
                        •
                     ke a vvhited vvall, was to be deſtroied, vvhereas now the true prieſthod of Chriſt was cōt. Beda. in hun
                           •
                         Io.
                   God ſhal ſtrike thee, thou vvhited vvall. And thou ſitting iudgeſt me according to the lavv, and contrarie to lavv doeſt thou commaund me to be ſmitten? ✝ 
                     verse 4 And they that ſtoode by, ſaid, Doeſt thou reuile the high Prieſt of God? ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Paul ſaid, 
                     •
                   I knevve not, brethren, that he is the high Prieſt. For it is vvritten:Exo. 22, 28. 
                  The prince of thy people thou ſhalt not miſſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And Paul 
 knovving that the one part vvas of Sadducees, and the other of Phariſees,Such prudent euaſions from danger are lawful. vvhich S. Chryſoſtōe calleth (ſpecially in this Apoſtle) the wiſdom of the ſerpēt, as otherwiſe in his teaching and preaching & patiēco he vſed the ſimplicitie of dooue, he cried out in the Councel, Men brethren,
* I am a Phariſee,Phil. 3, 5. the ſonne of Phariſees: of the hope and reſurrection of the dead am I iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, there roſe diſſenſion betvvene the Phariſees and Sadducees,Mt. 22, 23. and the multitude vvas diuided. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the 
                     •
                   Sadducees ſay * there is no reſurrection, nor Angel, nor ſpirit: but the Phariſees confeſſe both. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And there vvas made a great crie. And certaine of the Phariſees riſing vp, ſtroue ſaying, Vve finde no euil in this man. vvhat if a ſpirit hath ſpoken to him, or an Angel? ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhen there vvas riſen great diſſenſiō, the Tribune fearing leſt Paul ſhould be torne in peeces by them, cōmaunded the ſouldiars to goe dovvne, and to take him out of the middes of them, and to bring him into the caſtel. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the night folovving our Lord ſtanding by him, ſaid, Be conſtant: for as thou haſt teſtified of me in Hieruſalem, ſoThough God who could not lie, had promiſed Paul that he ſhould goe to Rome: yet the Apoſtle omitted not humane meanes to defend him ſelf from his enemies and otherwiſe. neither ſaid he as the Heretikes called Predeſtinates, Let them do what they wil▪ they cā not hurt me, for I am pr
                        •
                     
                     deſtinate to go
                        •
                      to Rome, See his doings and ſayings to ſaue him ſelf, in the chap. folowing. muſt thou teſtifie at Rome alſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen day vvas come, certaine of the Ievves gathered them ſelues together, & 
                     •
                   vovved them ſelues, ſaying, that they vvould neither eate nor drinke til they killed Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And they vvere more then fourtie men that had made this conſpiracie: ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvho came to the cheefe prieſts and the auncients, and ſaid, By execration vve haue vovved our ſelues, that vve vvil eate nothing, til vve kill Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Novv therfore giue you knovvledge to the Tribune vvith the Coūcel, that he bring him forth to you, as if you meant to knovv ſome more certaintie touching him. But we, before he come neere, are ready for to kil him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Vvhich vvhen Paules ſiſters ſonne had heard, of their lying in vvaite, he came and entred into the caſtel and told Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And Paul calling to him one of the Centurions, ſaid, Bring this yong man to the Tribune, for he hath ſome thing to tel him. ✝ 
                     verse 18 
                  See the courteſie & equiti
                        •
                      of Heathen Officers tovvard their priſoners, to ſaue them from al iniurie and villanie. And he taking him, brought him to the Tribune, and ſaid, The priſoner Paul deſired me to bring this yong man vnto thee, hauing ſome thing to ſay to thee. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the Tribune taking him by the hand, vvent aſide vvith him apart, and aſked him, Vvhat is it that thou haſt to tel me? ✝ 
                     verse 20 And he ſaid, The Ievves haue agreed to deſire thee, that to morovv thou vvilt bring forth Paul into the Councel, as though they meant to inquire ſome more certaintie touching him. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But doe not thou credite them, for there lie in vvaite for him more then fourtie men
 of them, vvhich haue vovved neither to eate nor to drinke, til they kil him: and they are novv ready, expecting thy promiſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 The Tribune therfore dimiſſed the yong man, commaunding that he ſhould ſpeake to no man that he had notified theſe things vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And calling tvvo Centurions, he ſaid to them, Make ready tvvo hundred ſouldiars, to goe as farre as Caeſaréa, and ſeuentie horſemen, and launces tvvo hundred, from the third houre of the night: ✝ 
                     verse 24 and prepare beaſts▪ that ſetting Paul on, they might bring him ſafe to Felix the Preſident ( ✝ 
                     verse 25 For he feared leſt perhaps the Ievves might take him avvay, and kil him, and him ſelf aftervvard ſhould ſuſtaine reproche, as though he vvould haue taken money) ✝ 
                     verse 26 vvriting a letter conteining this much.
               
                  Claudius Lyſias to the moſt excellent Preſident Felix, greeting. ✝ 
                     verse 27 This man being apprehended of the Ievves, and ready to be killed of them, I comming in vvith the band deliuered him, vnderſtanding that he is a Romane: ✝ 
                     verse 28 and meaning to knovv the cauſe that they obiected vnto him, I brought him downe into their Councel. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Vvhom I found to be accuſed concerning queſtions of their lavv: but hauing no crime vvorthie of death or of bandes. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And vvhen it vvas told me of embuſhments that they had prepared againſt him, I ſent him to thee, ſignifying alſo to the accuſers, to ſpeake before thee. Fare vvel. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And the ſouldiars according as it vvas commaunded them, taking Paul, brought him by night to Antipatris. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And the next day ſending avvay the horſemen to goe vvith him, they returned to the caſtel. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Vvho vvhen they vvere come to Caeſaréa, and had deliuered the letter to the Preſident, they did ſet Paul alſo before him. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And vvhen he had read, and had aſked of vvhat prouince he vvas: and vnderſtanding that of Cilicia: ✝ 
                     verse 35 I vvil heare the, ſaid he, vvhen thy accuſers are come. And he commaunded him to be kept in Herods palace.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . I knevv not.] Our Lord (ſaith S. Cyprian) in the Goſpel, when it was ſaid to him, Anſwereſt thou the high Prieſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      teaching that the honour of Prieſthod muſt be kept,The honour of Prieſthod. ſaid nothīg to the high Prieſt,Cypr. ep. 65. 69. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 2. but only purging his innocencie, ſaid, If I haue ſpoken euil, beare witnes of euil: but if wel, why ſmiteſt thou me? Alſo the bleſſed Apoſtle vvhen it vvas ſaid to him▪ Doeſt thou aſſaile the high Prieſt ſo with il wordes? ſpake not any thing cōtumeliouſly againſt the Prieſt, whereas he might haue put forth him ſelf ſtoutly againſt them which
 had both crucified our 
                        〈◊〉
                      and vvhich had novv alſo loſt their God and Chriſt, Temple and Prieſthod▪ but though in falſe and ſpoiled Prieſts, yet cōſidering the very bare ſhadovv of the name of Prieſts, he ſaid, I knew not brethren that he vvas high Prieſt. By vvhich vvordes of the Apoſtle, either it ma
                           •
                         be thought he knevv not in deed that he vvas in that function, becauſe he had not beene of long time in thoſe partes: or els that he ſo ſaid in reſpect of the abrogation of the high Prieſthod of the Ievves, vvhereby he knevv this man not to be truely any Prieſt▪ as alſo becauſe at this time they came not orderly to it by ſucceſſion of Aaron and Lavv of Moyſes,
                     See Annot. Io. c. 11, 51. 
                     but by the Roman Emperours f
                           •
                        uour, * as is ſaid before▪ though (as it is lavvful in ſuch a caſe) the Ieſſe to irritate them, he frameth his ſpeach ſo 
                           〈◊〉
                         they might not take occaſion of further accuſation againſt him.
                  
                  
                     8. The Sadducees.]
                     The Sadducees (as it ſeemeth) denied praier for the dead. This vvas the vvorſt Hereſie among the Ievves, denying that there be any Angels, or ſpirits, the Reſurrectiō alſo of the bodies: & conſequētly (as it may very vvel be gathered by the booke of the Machabees) they denied praier for the dead.Mac. li. 2. c. 12, 43. for to offer or pray for the dead, & to thinke rightly & religiouſly of the Reſurrectiō, are made there ſequels one of an other. Of this ſect of Sadducees vvas (as Euſebius vvriteth li. 2. c. 2
                           •
                        . Ec. hiſt.) this Ananias the High Prieſt▪ that cauſed Paul to be ſmitten, for their Prieſthod had novv no more the protection of God to preſerue it in truth and right iudgement, the Chriſtian Prieſthod being then eſtabliſhed.
                  
                     12. Vovved them ſelues▪] Such vovve, other, or execrations as this, binde no man before God, yea they muſt in no vviſe be obſerued.Vnlawful othe
                           •
                         & vovves muſt no
                           •
                         to kept. It is a great offence either to vovv voluntarily, or to take any ſuch thing vpon a man, for feare or by commaundement. For example, if thou haue raſhly by promes, vow, or othe, appointed to be reuenged vpon any man, thou bindeſt not thy ſelf thereby, neither muſt thou keepe thy promes. If thou be put to an othe to accuſe Catholikes for ſeruing God as they ought to do, or to vtter any innocent man to Gods enemies and his, thou oughteſt firſt to refuſe ſuch vnlavvful othes: but if thou haue not conſtancie and courage ſo to do, yet know thou that ſuch othes binde not at al in conſcience and Lavv of God, but may and muſt be broken vnder paine of damnation. For to make or take ſuch vowes or othes, is one ſinne, a
                        •
                     d to keepe them,Mat. 14. 9. is an other far greater▪ as vvhen Herode, to keepe his othe, killed Iohn Baptiſt. And ſuch vowes and othes to God as theſe, are vnlavvful & muſt be broken: and not the vowes of Chaſtitie and Religion, as our nevv Miniſters teach by their vvordes and vvorkes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               
                  They proſecute him to Caeſarea, bringing vvith them an oratour, vvho before the Preſident Felix a
                        •
                     cuſeth him, 10 He anſvvereth, defending him ſelf from the crimes they charged him vvith, but confeſsing his religion plainly. 
                        〈◊〉
                      The Iudge perceiuing his religion to be irreprehenſible▪ yeldeth not to condemne him at their pleaſure, 24 yea he oftentimes vvith his vvife heareth his preaching, 37 but yet doth not his dutie to deliuer him out of priſon.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after fiue daies the high prieſt Ananias deſcended, vvith certaine auncients and one Tertullus an oratour, vvho vvent to the Preſident againſt Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And Paul being cited, Tertullus began to accuſe, ſaying.
               Vvhereas vve liue in much peace by thee, & many things are corrected by thy prouidence▪ ✝ 
                     verse 3 vve doe alvvaies and in al places receiue it, moſt excellent Felix, vvith al thanks geuing. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But leſt I hinder then any longer, I deſire thee of thy clemencie breifely to heare vs. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Vve haue found this man peſtiferous, and raiſing ſeditiōs to al the Ievves in the vvhole vvorld, and authour of the ſedition
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   of the ſecte of the Nazarenes, ✝ 
                     verse 6 vvho alſo hath attempted to violat the temple,
 vvhom alſo being apprehended vve vvould haue iudged according to our lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But Lyſias the Tribune comming in, vvith great force tooke him avvay out of our handes, ✝ 
                     verse 8 commaunding his accuſers to come to thee, of vvhom thou maieſt thy ſelf iudging, vnderſtand of al theſe things, vvhereof vve accuſe him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And the Ievves alſo added, ſaying that theſe things vvere ſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 But Paul anſvvered, (the Preſident making a ſigne vnto him for to ſpeake.)
               Knovving that of many yeres tho
                     •
                   art iudge ouer this nation, I vvil vvith good courage anſvver for my ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For thou maieſt vnderſtand that it is not aboue tvvelue daies to me, ſince I vvent vp to adore in Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 12 and neither in the temple did they finde me diſputing vvith any man, or cauſing concourſe of the multitude, neither in the ſynagogs, nor in the citie: ✝ 
                     verse 13 neither can they proue vnto thee the things vvhereof they novv accuſe me. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But this I confeſſe to thee, that
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   according to theBecauſe Tertullꝰ the Iewes orator called Chriſtian religion the ſect or (as it is there verſ. 
                        •
                      in the Greeke) the hereſie of the Nazarens: S. Paul anſvvereth and ſhevveth that it is no hereſie. And as for the word, Sect. in this place: it is in the Greeke, According to the vvay, vvhich they call hereſie, as alſo Act. 9, 2. 24▪ 22. And therfore the vvord ſect here is ſo taken. See Annot. c. 
                           ••
                        , 
                           •
                        2.
                   ſecte, vvhich they call hereſie, I doe ſo ſeruethe God of my fathers, the father my God', beleeuing al things that are vvritten in the Law & the Prophets: ✝ 
                     verse 15 hauing hope in God, the vvhich theſe alſo them ſelues expect, that there ſhal be a reſurrectiō of iuſt and vniuſt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 In this my ſelf alſo doe ſtudie to haue a cōſcience vvithout offenſe tovvard God & toward men alvvaies.Ro. 15, 28 ✝ 
                     verse 17 And after many yeres * I came to beſtovv almes vpon my nation, & oblations, and vovves. ✝ 
                     verse 18 In the vvhich they foūd me * purified in the tēple: not vvith multitude nor vvith tumult.Act. 21, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But certaine Ievves of Aſia, vvho ought to be preſent before thee and to accuſe, if they had any thing againſt me: ✝ 
                     verse 20 or let theſe men thē ſelues ſay, if they haue found in me any iniquitie, foraſmuch as I ſtād in the Councel, ✝ 
                     verse 21 but of this one voice only that I cried ſtāding among them,Act. 23, 6. That * of the reſurrection of the dead am I iudged this day of you. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And Felix differed them, knovving moſt certainely of this vvay, ſaying, Vvhen Lyſias the Tribune is come dovvne, I vvil heare you. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And he commaunded the Centurion to keepe him, and that he ſhould haue reſt, neither to prohibit any of his to miniſter vnto him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 And after ſome daies, Felix comming vvith Druſilla his vvife, vvhich vvas a Ievve, called Paul, and heard of him the faith that is in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he diſputing of 
The Apoſtolike teaching was not of only or ſpecial faith, but of iuſtice, & chaſtitie, & iudgement, that is to ſay, of the terrour of Hel and other Gods iudgements in the next life anſvverable to our deedes in this vvorld: by vvhich the hearers vvere firſt terrified, and ſo induced to penance. Hovv ſay Heretikes then that ſuch things make men hypocrit
                        •
                     s. iuſtice and chaſtiti
                     •
                  , and of the iudgement to come, Felix
 being terrified, anſvvered, For this time, goe thy vvay: but in time conuenient I vvil ſend for thee. ✝ 
                     verse 26 hoping alſo vvithal, that money vvould be giuen him of Paul, for the vvhich cauſe alſo oftentimes ſending for him, he ſpake vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But vvhen tvvo yeres vvere ended, Felix had a ſucceſſour Portius Feſtus. And Felix being vvilling to ſhevv the Ievves a pleaſure, left Paul in priſon.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               
                  After tvvo yeres empriſonment the Ievves continevv their ſute againſt him, ſoliciting the nevv Preſident Feſtus, 
                        •
                      firſt at Hieruſalem, then at Caeſarea: 9 vvhere through the Ievves partialitie he is faine to appeale vnto the Emperour: 13 and is in the meane time brought forth by Feſtus (giuing him good teſtimonie, notvvithſtanding the exclamations of the Ievves againſt him) vnto king Agrippa and his Queene Bernice.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FESTVS therfore vvhen he vvas come into the prouince, after three daies vvent vp to Hieruſalem from Caeſaréa. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the cheefe prieſts, & principal men of the Ievves vvent vnto him againſt Paul: and they deſired him, ✝ 
                     verse 3 requeſting fauour againſt him, that he vvould commaund him to be brought to Hieruſalem, laying vvaite for to kil him in the vvay. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But Feſtus anſvvered, that Paul is in Caeſaréa: and that he vvould very ſhortly goe thither. ✝ 
                     verse 5 They therfore, ſaith he, that are of abilitie among you, going dovvne vvith me, if there be any crime in the man, let them accuſe him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 And hauing taried among them not aboue eight or ten daies, he vvent dovvne to Caeſaréa, and the next day he ſate in the iudgement ſeate: and he commaunded Paul to be brought. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvho being brought, there ſtoode about him the Ievves that vvere come dovvne from Hieruſalem, obiecting many and greuouscrimes as 
                        •
                     . 27. cauſes vvhich, they could not proue, ✝ 
                     verse 8 Paul making anſvver, That neither againſt the lavv of the Ievves, nor againſt the temple, nor againſt Caeſar haue I any thing offended. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But Feſtus vvilling to ſhevv the Ievves a pleaſure, anſvvering Paul, ſaid, Vvilt thou goe vp to Hieruſalem, and there be iudged of theſe things before me? ✝ 
                     verse 10 And Paul ſaid, At Caeſars iudgemēt ſeate doe I ſtand, vvhere I ought to be iudged: the Ievves I haue not hurt, as thou very
 vvel knovveſt. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For if I haue hurt them, or done any thing vvorthie of death, I refuſe not to die. but if none of thoſe things be, vvhereof theſe accuſe me, no man can giue me to themIf S. Paul both to ſaue him ſelf from vvhipping and from death ſought by the Ievves, doubted not to crie for ſuccour of the Romane lawes, and to appeale to Caeſar the Prince of the Romans not yet Chriſtened: hovv much more may vve call for aide of Chriſtian Princes and their lavves, for the puniſhment of Heretikes, and for the Churches defenſe againſt them? S. Auguſtine ep. 50.
                   I appeale to Caeſar. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Then Feſtus hauing conferred vvith the Councel, anſvvered, Haſt thou appealed to Caeſar? to Caeſar ſhalt thou goe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvhen certaine daies vvere paſſed, king Agrippa & Berníce came dovvne to Caeſaréa to ſalute Feſtus. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And as they taried there a good many daies, Feſtus ſignified to the king, of Paul, ſaying, A certaine perſon vvas left priſoner by Felix, ✝ 
                     verse 15 concerning vvhom, vvhen I vvas at Hieruſalem, the cheefe prieſts and the auncients of the Ievves came vnto me, deſyring condemnation againſt him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 To vvhom I anſvvered, That it is not the Romanes cuſtome to yeld vp any man before that he vvhich is accuſed haue his accuſers preſent and take place to make his anſvver for to cleere him ſelf of the crimes. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Vvhen they therfore vvere aſſembled hither, vvithout any delaie, the day folovving, ſitting in the iudgement ſeat▪ I commaunded the man to be brought. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Of vvhom, vvhen the accuſers ſtoode vp, they brought no cauſe vvhich I thought il of: ✝ 
                     verse 19 but certaine queſtions of their ovvne ſuperſtition they had againſt him, and ofThis vvhom he termeth by contempt, one IESVS, hath novv made al the Romane Emperours and Princes of the world to know him, and hath giuen the ſeate of the Caeſars to his poore ſeruants, Peter & his ſucceſſors. one IESVS deceaſed, vvhom Paul affirmed to liue. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Doubting therfore of this kinde of queſtion, I ſaid, vvhether he vvould goe to Hieruſalem, & there be iudged of theſe things. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But Paul appealing to be kept vnto the knovvledge of Auguſtus, I commaunded him to be kept, til I ſend him to Caeſar. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And Agrippa ſaid to Feſtus, My ſelf alſo vvould heare the man. To morovv, ſaid he, thou ſhalt heare him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And the next day vvhen Agrippa and Bernice vvere come vvith great pompe, and had entred into the hall of audience vvith the Tribunes and principal men of the citie, at Feſtus commaundement Paul vvas brought. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And Feſtus ſaith, King Agrippa, and al ye men that are preſent together vvith vs, you ſee this man, concerning vvhom al the multitude of the Ievves called vpon me at Hieruſalem, requeſting and crying out that he ought not to liue any longer. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Yet haue I found nothing that he hath committed vvorthie of death. But foraſmuch as he himſelf appealed to Auguſtus, I haue determined to ſend him. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Of vvhom vvhat to vvrite for certaintie to my lord, I haue not. For the vvhich cauſe I
 haue brought him forth to you, and eſpecially to thee, king Agrippa, that examination being made, I may haue vvhat to vvrite. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For it ſeemeth to me vvithout reaſon, to ſend a priſoner, & not to ſignifie
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   his cauſes.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               
                  In that honorable Audience being permitted to ſpeake, 2 he declareth to the king vvhat he firſt vvas, 1
                        •
                      and hovv miraculouſly he vvas conuerted, 19 and that he hath preached ſin
                        ••
                     , as he vvas commaunded from heauen, and as the Prophets had foretold of Chriſt. 24 Which ſtrange tale Feſtus the Heathen Preſident hearing, ſaith that he is mad. 25 But he anſvvereth, and exhorteth them al to be Chriſtians as he is. 
                        •
                     0 They finally pronounce that he might be ſet at libertie, but only for his appeale.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BVT Agrippa ſaid to Paul, Thou art permitted to ſpeake for thy ſelf. Then Paul ſtretching forth his hand, began to make his anſvver.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 Touching al things vvhereof I am accuſed of the Ievves, king Agrippa, I account my ſelf happie for that I am to defend my ſelf this day before thee, ✝ 
                     verse 3 eſpecially vvhereas thou knovveſt al things that are among the Ievves, cuſtomes and queſtions: for the vvhich cauſe I beſeeche thee, heare me patiently. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And my life truely from my youth, vvhich vvas from the beginning in my nation in Hieruſalem, al the Ievves doe knovv: ✝ 
                     verse 5 knovving me before from the beginning (if they vvil giue teſtimonie) that according to the moſt ſure
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſecte of our religion I liued a Phariſee. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And novv for the hope of the promiſſe that vvas made of God to our fathers, doe I ſtand ſubiect to iudgement. ✝ 
                     verse 7 
                  inquā
                   the vvhich, our tvvelue tribes
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſeruing night and day, hope to come vnto. Of the vvhich hope, o king, I am accuſed of the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Vvhat incredible thing is it iudged vvith you, if God raiſe the dead? ✝ 
                     verse 9 And my ſelf truely had thought that I ought to doe againſt the name of IESVS of Nazareth many contrarie things.Act. 8, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Vvhich alſo I * did at Hieruſalem, and many of the ſaincts did I ſhut vp in priſons, hauing receiued authoritie of the cheefe prieſts: and vvhen they vvere put to death,
detuli ſententi
                     
                        ••
                     . I brought the ſentence. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And through out al the ſynagogs often times puniſhing them, I cōpelled them to blaſpheme:
 and yet more mad againſt them, I perſecuted them euen vnto foraine cities.Act. 9, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Among vvhich things vvhiles * I vvent to Damaſcus vvith authoritie and permiſſion of the cheefe prieſts, ✝ 
                     verse 13 at midday, in the vvay, I ſavv (o king) from heauen a light to haue ſhined round about me and them that vvere in companie vvith me, aboue the brightnes of the ſunne. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vvhen al vve vvere fallen dovvne on the ground, I heard a voice ſpeaking to me in the Hebrew tongue: Saul, Saul, vvhy perſecureſt thou me? It is hard for thee to kicke againſt the pricke. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And I ſaid, Vvho art thou Lord? And our Lord anſvvered, I am IESVS vvhom thou doeſt perſecure. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But riſe vp and ſtand vpon thy feete: for to this end haue I appeared to thee, that I may ordaine thee a miniſter and vvitnes of thoſe things vvhich thou haſt ſeen, and of thoſe things vvherein I vvil appeare to thee, ✝ 
                     verse 17 deliuering thee out of the peoples & natiōs vnto the vvhich novv I ſend thee, ✝ 
                     verse 18 to opē their eies, that they may be conuerted from darkenes to light, and from the povver of Satan to God, that they may receiue remiſſion of ſinnes and lot among the ſaincts by the faith that is in me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvherevpon, king Agrippa, I vvas not incredulous to the heauenly viſion: ✝ 
                     verse 20 but to them firſt that are at Damaſcus, and at Hieruſalem, and vnto al the countrie of levvrie,Act. 9, 20. and to the Gentiles * did I preach that they ſhould doePenāce often inculcated, and vvorkes agreable to the ſame. penāce, and turne to God, doing vvorkes vvorthie of penance. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For this cauſe the Ievves, vvhen I vvas in the temple,Act. 21, 30. * apprehending me, attēpted meaning to kil me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But aided by the help of God, I ſtand vntil this day, teſtifying to ſmall and to great, ſaying nothing beſide thoſe things vvhich the Prophets did ſpeake ſhould come to paſſe, & Moyſes, ✝ 
                     verse 23 if CHRIST vvere paſſible, if the firſt of the reſurrection from the dead, he vvere to ſhevv light to the people and to the Gentiles.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 As he ſpake theſe things made his anſvver, Feſtus vvith a loud voice ſaid, Thou art mad, Paul: much learning turneth thee to madneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And Paul ſaid, I am not mad, moſt excellent Feſtus: but I ſpeake vvordes of veritie and ſo brietie. ✝ 
                     verse 26 for the king knovveth of theſe things, to vvhom alſo I ſpeake conſtantly▪ for I thinke none, of theſe things to be vnknovven to him. For neither vvas any of theſe things done in a corner. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Beleeueſt thou the prophets, king Agrippa? I knovv that thou beleeueſt, ✝ 
                     verse 28 And Agrippa ſaid to Paul:
 A litle thou perſuadeſt me to become a CHRISTIAN. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And Paul ſaid, I vviſh of God, both in litle, and in much, not only thee, but alſo al that heare this day, to become ſuch as I am alſo, except theſe bandes. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And the king roſe vp, and the Preſident, and Bernice, and they that ſate by them. ✝ 
                     verse 31 And going a ſide, they ſpake among them ſelues, ſaying, That this man hath done nothing vvorthie of death or bandes. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And Agrippa ſaid to Feſtus, This man might be releaſed, if he had not appealed to Caeſar.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVII.
               
                  What a dangerous nauigation he had tovvards Rom
                        •
                     : and that by his prediction and counſel the ſhip might haue been ſaued. And for his ſake (as God alſo reuealed to him before) al the companie vvas preſerued, being 276 perſons.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after it vvas decreed that he ſhould ſaile into Italie, and that Paul vvith other priſoners ſhould be deliuered to a Centurion named Iulius, of the band Auguſta, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vve going vp into a ſhip of Adrumétum, beginning to ſail about the places of Aſia, looſed from the land, Ariſtarchus the Macedonian of Theſſalonica continuing vvith vs. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the day folovving vve came to Sidon. And Iulius intreating Paul courteouſly, permitted him to goe to his frendes, and to take care of him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen vve had looſed thēce, vve ſailed vnder Cypres: becauſe the vvindes vvere cōtrarie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And ſailing the ſea of Cilicia and Pamphilia, vve came to
Myra' Lyſtra', vvhich is in Lycia: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and there the Centurion finding a ſhip of Alexandria ſailing into Italie, remoued vs into it. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhereas many daies vve ſailed ſlovvly, & vvere ſcarſe come ouer againſt Gnidus, the vvinde hindering vs, vve ſailed neere Crete by Salmóne: ✝ 
                     verse 8 and vvith much a doe ſailing by it, vve came into a certaine place that is called Good-hauens, nigh to the vvhich vvas a citie Thalaſſa.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen much time vvas ſpent, and vvhereas novv it vvas not ſafe ſailing, becauſe theIt may ſignifie the Ievves faſt of the ſeuenth moneth Septēber, after vvhich the nauigation vvas perilous, vvinter approching. faſt novv vvas paſt, Paul comforted them, ✝ 
                     verse 10 ſaying to them, Ye men, I ſee that the ſailing beginneth to be vvith hurt and much damage not only of the lading and the ſhip, but alſo of our liues. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But the
 Centurion beleeued the gouernour and maiſter of the ſhip, more then thoſe things vvhich vvere ſaid of Paul. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhereas it vvas not a commodious hauen to vvinter in, very many taking counſel appointed to ſaile thence, if by any meanes they might comming to Phoeníce, vvinter there, a hauen of Crete looking tovvard thenames of vvindés. Afrike and the Chore. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the ſouth vvinde blovving, they thinking that they had obteined their purpoſe, vvhen they had parted from Aſſon, ſailed along by Crete. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But not long after, a tempeſtous vvinde that is called Euro-aquilo, droue againſt it. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhen the ſhippe vvas caught and could not make vvay againſt the vvinde, giuing, vp the ſhip to the vvindes, vve vvere driuen. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And running vpon a certaine iland, that is calledGraec. Clauda. Cauda, vve could ſcarſe get the cock-boate. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Vvhich being taken vp, they vſed helps, girding the ſhip, and fearing leſt they ſhould fall intoa place of quicke ſandes. the Syrte, letting dovvne the veſſel, ſo vvere they caried. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And vvhen vve vvere mightly toſſed vvith the tempeſt, the next day they caſt forth, ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the third day vvith their ovvne handes they threvve forth the tacklinges of the ſhip. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And neither ſunne, nor ſtarres appearing for many daies, and no ſmal ſtorme being tovvard, al hope vvas novv taken avvay of our ſauing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And vvhen there had been long faſting, then Paul ſtanding in the middes of them, ſaid, You ſhould in deede, O ye men, haue heard me, and not haue parted from Crete, & haue gained this hurt and loſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And novv I exhort you to be of good cheere. for there ſhal be no loſſe of any ſoule amōg you, but of the ſhip. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For ″ an Angel of the God vvhoſe I am, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . vvhom I ſerue, ſtoode by me this night, ✝ 
                     verse 24 ſaying, Feare not Paul, thou muſt appeare before Caeſar: and behold God hathPaul (ſaith S. Hierom) had ſo many ſoules in the ſhip giuen him, that is, ſo many men ſaued for his ſake: and after he is vvith Chriſt, ſhal he ſhut his mouth, and not be able once to ſpeake for them that haue beleeued in his Goſpel? Hiero. adu. vigil. Vvhereby he proueth that if 
                        •
                     od do much for the merits of Saincts in this life, much more at their interceſſion & pr
                        ••
                     r in heauen. giuen thee al that ſaile vvith thee. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For the vvhich cauſe be of good cheere ye men: for I beleeue God, that it ſhal ſo be, as it hath been ſaid to me. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And vve m
                     •
                  ſt come vnto a ce
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  ine ilande. ✝ 
                     verse 27 But after the fourtenth night vvas come on vs, as vve vvere ſailing in Adria about midnight, the ſhipmen deemed that there appeared ſome countrie to them. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Vvho alſo ſounding, found tvventie fadomes: and being parted a litle from thence, they found fiftene fadomes, ✝ 
                     verse 29 And fearing leſt vve ſhould fall into rough places; caſting out of the ſterne foure anker
                     •
                  , they vviſhed
 that day vvere come. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But as the ſhipmen ſought to flee out of the ſhip, hauing let dovvne the cock-boate into the ſea, pretēding as if they vvere about to caſt out ankers out of the fore part of the ſhip, ✝ 
                     verse 31 Paul ſaid to the Centurion and to the ſouldiars, ″ Vnles 
                     •
                  heſc tarie in the ſhip, you can not be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Then the ſouldiars cut of the ropes of the cockboate: and ſuffered it to fal avvay.
                ✝ 
                     verse 33 And vvhen it began to be light, Paul deſired all to take meate, ſaying, This day is the fourtenth day that you expect and remaine faſting, taking nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For the vvhich cauſe I deſire you to take meate for your health ſake: for there ſhal not an heare of the head periſh of any of you. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, taking bread, he gaue thankes to God in the ſight of them al: and vvhen he had broken it, he began to eate. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And being al made of better cheere, they alſo tooke meate. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And vve vvere in al the ſhip, ſoules tvvo hundred ſeuentie ſixe. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And being filled vvith meate, they lighted the ſhip, caſting the vvheat into the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And vvhen day vvas come, they knevv not the land: but they ſpied a certaine creeke that had a ſhore, into the vvhich they minded, if they could, to caſt a land the ſhip. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And vvhen they had taken vp the ankers, they committed them ſelues to the ſea, looſing vvithal the rudder bands: and hoiſing vp the maine ſaile according as the vvinde blevve, they vvent on tovvard the ſhore. ✝ 
                     verse 41 And vvhen vve vvere fallen into a place betvvene tvvo ſeas, they graueled the ſhip; and the fore-part truly ſticking faſt remained vnmoueable: but the hinder part vvas broken by the violence of the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 42 And the counſel of the ſouldiars vvas, that they ſhould kil the priſoners: leſt any ſvvimming out, might runne avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 43 But the Centurion vvilling to ſaue Paul, forbade it to be done: & he commaunded them that could ſvvimme, to caſt out them ſelues firſt, and eſcape, and goe forth to land: ✝ 
                     verse 44 and the reſt, ſome they caried on bordes, and ſome vpon thoſe things that vvere of the ſhip. And ſo it came to paſſe, that al the ſoules eſcaped to land.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     23. An Angel.]
                     Gods prouidēce to the See of ROME. S. Paul had many viſions, ſpecially to aſſure him that he ſhould to Rome and ſtand before Caesar, our Lord him ſelf before (23, 
                        ••
                     ) appearing to him, and here an Angel, for that purpoſe. Vvhereby vve plaiuely ſee the ſpecial prouidence of God tovvard that See, vvher his tvvo principal Apoſtles vvere deſigned to preach, plant the faith, liue, die, be buried, and honoured til the vvorldes end.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        1. Vnles theſe tari
                           •
                        ] Vvhen God reuealeth to vs any thing,Gods predeſtination and appointment taketh not away mans free vvil and endeuours. or aſſureth vs of any euent to come, he diſchargeth vs not thereby of our requiſite endeuours and labours for atcheiuing the ſame, not executing ordinarily his deſignements tovvards men othervviſe then by their ovvne free vvil and actions. S. Paul ſaid not here. Let vs do vvhat vve liſt: vvorke vve or ſit vve ſtil, vvhether the mariners goe out or tarie vvithin, vve are al ſure to be ſaued, for ſo God hath reuealed to me, and he can not lie, neither can it fall othervviſe▪ but contrarievviſe ſaith he▪ If theſe mariners leaue the ſhip, you can not be ſaued. So ſay al true Catholike preachers to Chriſtian people, Vvhat prouidence, predeſtination, or foreſight ſo euer God haue of your ſaluation, you are not thereby conſtrained any vvay, you haue free vvil ſtil, and can not be ſaued (though you be predeſtinate) except you keepe Gods commaundements, repent you of your ſinnes, beleeue, liue and die vvel. And if it vvere reuealed to any mā,1 Cor. 9, 2
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      that he vvere one of Gods electe, & that he ſhould finally die in grace and be ſaued,Philip. 
                           •
                        , 18. yet he vvere bound to vvorke his ſaluation vvith feare and trembling, as 
                        •
                      S. Paul both did, and taught, leſt he become reprobate: no leſſe then the ſame Apoſtle here and his ſellovves, though they had their life promiſed to them of God, yet vvere bound to labour and vſe al poſſible diligence that they might not be drovvned.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               
                  After their ſhipvvracke hauing vvintered in the Iland (novv named Malta) vvhere many miracles vvere vvrought by Paul, they take ſhip againe, and ſo by Sicile they co
                        ••
                      to Puteoli in Itali, the Chriſtian Romans comming a great vvay to meete him, to his great ioy. 16 Finally being come to Rome, in his lodging he declareth to the Iewes his cauſe, 23 and on day appointed preacheth IESVS vnto them. 25 And ſeeing their incredulitie, he ſhevveth hovv it vvas foretold by Eſay: 2
                        •
                      but that the Gentil
                        •
                      vvil not be incredulous. 10 To vvhom be there preacheth tvvo vvhole yeres vvithout prohibition.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen vve had eſcaped, then vve knevv that theThis iland (novv Malta) is the ſeate of the knightes of the Rhodes, the inhabitāts vvherof haue a ſpecial deuotion to S. Paul: to whō both the cheefe Church (being the Biſhops Seate) is dedicated, and the vvhole Iland (as they count it) conſecrated. Where the people ſhevv yet to ſtrāgers, his priſon and other memories of his miracles. iland vvas calledMelita▪
                   Mityléne. But the Barbarous ſhevved vs no ſmal courteſie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For, kindling a fire they refreſhed vs al, becauſe of the imminent raine and the colde. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen Paul had gathered together ſome number of ſtickes, and had laide them on the fire, a viper iſſuing out of the heate, inuaded his hand. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But as the Barbarous ſavv the beaſt hanging on his hand, they ſaid one to an other, Vndoubtedly this man is a murderer, vvho being eſcaped out of the ſea,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Vengeance doth not ſuffer him to liue. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he in deede ″ ſhaking of the beaſt into the fire, ſuffred no harme. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But they ſuppoſed that he ſhould be turned into a ſvvelling, and that he vvould ſodenly fall and die. But expecting long and ſeeing that there vvas no harme done on him, being changed they ſaid, that he vvas a God. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And in thoſe places vvere lands of the prince of the ile, named Publius, vvho
 receiuing vs, for three daies intreated vs courteouſly. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And it chaunced that the father of Publius lay vexed vvith feuers and the bloudy flixe. Vnto vvhom Paul entred: and vvhen he had praied, and impoſed hands on him, he healed him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Vvhich being done, al in the ile alſo that had infirmities, came, and vvere cured: ✝ 
                     verse 10 vvho alſo honoured vs vvith many honours, and vvhen vve vvere ſailing avvay, laded vs vvith neceſſaries.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And after three moneths, vve ſailed in a ſhip of Alexandria, that had vvintered in the iland, vvhoſe ſigne vvas the Caſtors. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen vve vvere come to Syracùſa, vve taried there three daies. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Thence compaſſing by the ſhore, vve came to Rhegium: and after one day the South vvinde blovving, vve came the ſecond day to Putéoli, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvhere finding brethren, vve vvere deſired to tarle vvith them ſeuen daies: and ſo vve came to Rome. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And from thence, vvhen the brethren had heard, they came to meete vs vnto Apij-forum, and the Three-tauerns. Vvhom vvhen Paul had ſeen, giuing thanks to God, he tooke courage. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen vve vvere come to Rome, Paul vvas permitted to remaine to him ſelf vvith a ſouldiar that kept him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And after the third day he called together the cheefe of the Ievves. And vvhen they vvere aſſembled, he ſaid to them,
               Men brethren, I doing nothing againſt the people, or the cuſtome of the fathers, vvas deliuered priſoner from Hieruſalem into the hands of the Romanes, ✝ 
                     verse 18 vvho vvhen they had examined me, vvould haue releaſed me, for that there vvas no cauſe of death in me. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But the Ievves contradicting it, I vvas compelled to appeale vnto Caeſar, not as hauing any thing to accuſe my nation. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For this cauſe therefore I deſired to ſee you and to ſpeake to you for, becauſe of the hope of Iſraël, am I compaſſed vvith this ″ chaine.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 But they ſaid to him, Vve neither receiued letters concerning thee from Ievvrie, neither did any of the brethren that came hither, report or ſpeake any euil of thee. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But vve deſire of thee to heare vvhat thou thinkeſt: for ″ concerning this
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſecte, it is knovvē to vs that it is gaine ſaid euery vvhere. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And vvhen they had appointed him a day, they came to him vnto his lodging very many: to vvhom he expounded, teſtifying the kingdom of God, and vſing perſuaſion to them
 of IESVS out of the lavv of Moyſes and the Prophets, from morning vntil euening. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And certaine beleeued thoſe things that vvere ſaid: but certaine beleeued not. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And vvhereas they did not agree among them ſelues, they departed, Paul ſaying one vvord: That vvel did the holy Ghoſt ſpeake by Eſaie the prophet to our fathers,Eſa 6, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 26 ſaying,Mat. 13, 14. Mr. 4, 12. 
                  Goe to this people, and ſay to them, Vvith the care you ſhal heare, and ſhal not vnderſtand: and ſeeing you ſhal ſee, and ſhal not perceiue. ✝ 
                        verse 27 For the hart of this people is vva
                        •
                     en groſſe,
                  Lu. 8, 10▪
                   
                  and vvith their eares haue they heauily heard, and their eies
                  Here alſo (as Ma
                           •
                        . 1
                           •
                        .) it is plaine that they would not ſee, northeare, & that their excecatiō is to be attributed to thē ſelues & not to God. See annota. Io. 12, 40.
                   
                  they haue ſhut:
                  Io. 12, 40▪
                   
                  left perhaps they may ſee vvith their eies, and heare vvith their eares,
                  Ro. 11, 8▪
                   
                  and vnderſtand vvith their hart, and be conuerted, and I heale them. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Be it knovven therfore to you, that this Saluation of God is ſent to the Gentiles, and they vvil heare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 And vvhen he had ſaid theſe things, the Ievves vvent out from him, hauing much queſtioning among them ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And he taried ful tvvo yeres in his hired lodging: and he receiued al that came into him, ✝ 
                     verse 31 preaching the kingdom of God, and 
                     •
                  eaching the things that concerne our Lord IESVS CHRIST vvith al confidence, vvithout prohibition.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Shaking of the beaſt.] The promes of Chriſt (Marc. 16) that venemous ſerpents ſhould not hurt them that beleeue in him, is fulfilled not in al beleuers, but in ſuch as had the gift of miracles, as S. Paul had. Vvhom here a viper by nature ſo venemous that the people thought he ſhould haue died out of hand,Malta hath S. Paules bleſſing and grace vntil this day. did no vvhit annoy: he extinguiſhing by the povver of Chriſt al the poiſon of the beaſt.The. Fazellus de rebus Siculis decad. 
                           •
                         li. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 1. Yea and (as the Chriſtian people there til this day beleeue) by S. Paules praiers the Iland vvas deliuered for euer from al ſuch venemous ſerpents, in ſo much that children there play vvith ſcorpions euer ſince that time, and Pilgrimes daily carie vvith them peeces of ſtones out of the place vvhere. S. Paul abode, by vvhich they affirme that they heale them vvhich in other countries adioyning are bitten of ſcorpions,Gods miraculous vertue in certaine countries and creatures, by his Saincts. the medicine therfore being called, S. Paules grace. The Heretikes that knovv not the povver of God, nor the miraculous vertues giuen to his Saincts, maruel and blaſpheme, vvhen they beare ſuch things as be proper to certaine countries, attributed ſometimes to Gods miracles done by his Saincts 
                        •
                      as though that vvere not poſſible, or vvere not as much to Gods honour, and more, then things proceding only of natural cauſes. Such profane men vvould not haue attributed the holſom
                        •
                     es of the vvaters of Iericho to Eliſeus his vertue and miracles,4 Reg. 2, 19▪
                      amending them by caſting ſalt into them, if the Scripture had not expreſly teſtified the ſame. It is the part of al faithful men to referre ſuch things to God, vvhen any iuſt occaſion is giuen therevnto, rather then to nature: though the incredulous doe alvvaies contrarie, for feare of ſuperſtition & diſhonouring God. As though this eſcape of drovvning, might better and more to Gods glorie, be referted to chaunce and the mariners induſtrie, then to S. Paules praiers and extraordinarie vvorking.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        0. Chaine.]
                     S. Pauls chaines h
                           •
                        onoured. I vvould vviſh novv (ſaith S. Chryſtome) to be for a time in the place vvhere theſe chaines remaine, and to ſee the 
                        •
                     etters vvhich Diuels feare, and Angels reuerence. homil. 5 ad populum Antiochenum. See alſo S. Gregorie lib. 
                           •
                        . epiſto. 
                           •
                        0. of the miracles done by S. Paules chaines, and that he ſendeth to the Empereſſe Conſtantia ſome duſt thereof 
                        〈◊〉
                      of, for a great Relike and holy gift.
                  
                      22. Concerning this ſect.) The Heretikes of al ſortes comfort them ſelues much, vvhen they finde here or els vvhere the Chriſtian faith called of the Ievves or incredulous perſons, a Sect or an Hereſie,The name of Sect is vvel giuen to al Hereſies, though the Chriſtian religion at the firſt vvas falſely ſo called. & ſometimes in contempt of Chriſtes perſon the Maiſter of the ſame, the Secte of the Nazarens: as though the Church of God might as vvel erre in naming their doctrine Hereſie, as the Ievves and Pagans might and did miſſe in condemning Chriſtian religion for an Hereſie: or as though the Proteſtants doctrine vvere as vvel proued and tried to be no Hereſie, by the Proph
                        •
                     ts and other Scriptures, miracles, and conſent of al Nations and ages, as Chriſtes bleſſed doctrine is. Vvhereas in deed the Proteſtants doctrine is euidently conuinced to be heretical, by the ſame arguments that Chriſtes religion is proued to be the only true doctrine of ſaluation, and not an hereſie. And vvhoſoeuer can deduce the Chriſtian faith from Adam to this day, through out al the Fathers, Patriarches, Prophetes, Prieſts, Apoſtles, and Biſhops, by deſcent and ſucceſſion of al lavves and ſtates of true vvorſhippers and beleeuers (vvhich is the only or ſpecial vvay to proue that the Chriſtian faith is no hereſie) he ſhal by the ſame meanes al at once proue the Proteſtants doctrine to be an hereſie and a falſe ſecte. That the Ievves therfore and il men in al places contradicted the Chriſtian religion, calling it an Hereſie or a Sect, as though it had a beginning of ſome certaine Sect-Maiſter other them God him ſelf, they vvere deceiued: and the Church of God neuertheleſſe calling the Proteſtants doctrine Hereſie in the vvorſt part that can be, and in the vvorſt ſort that euer vvas, doth right and moſt iuſtly.
                  The end of the Actes of the Apoſtles.
                  Vvherevnto we ioyne for the readers behalfe, tvvo Tables of the tvvo cheefe Apoſtles, and a note of the reſt, as an abridgement of the ſaid booke, and a ſupply of ſome things not there mentioned.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SVMME OF THE ACTES OF THE APOSTLES, CONTEINING SPECIALLY THE GESTES OF THE TVVO PRINCIPAL Apoſtles, SS. Peter and Paul, in ſuch order of time and yeres of the Emperours, and from Chriſts Natiuitia, and Aſcenſion, as they vvere done: ſo 
                  ••
               r as by holy Scriptures or Eccleſiaſtical vvriters may be gathered.
            
               Wherein though is be not poſsible to ſet dovvne the prociſe and vndoubted time or yere of euery thing, becauſe neither S. Luke nor others do note particularly and orderly the moments of euery action of the ſaid Apoſtles: no
                     •
                   vve folovv the moſt probable and plaine 
                     〈◊〉
                   that vve finde in holy Scripture and auncient vvriters.See the annot. Whereby the ſtudious reader may eaſily diſcouer the folly of the Proteſtants,Rom. 16, 15. that can finde no time when * Peter might poſsibly come to Rome, be Biſhop. and die there▪ diuers things in S. Paules actes being no leſſe hard to reconcile to the courſe of S. Lukes narration.Gal. 1. then any thing touching the hiſtorie of S. Peter namely his * three yeres preaching in Arabia: al vvhich muſt needes be true, vvhether vve bit the very iuſt time or no, and hovv ſo euer authors differ about the ſame.
            
            
               
                  A TABLE OF S. PETER.
                  
                     Tiberij
                     Nat. Dn̄i.
                     Ascen.
                      
                  
                  
                     18
                     34
                     1
                     
                        PETER cauſeth the Diſciples to procede to the election of an other Apoſtle in Iudas roome. Act. 1.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Receiuing vvith the reſt the gifts of the Holy Ghoſt on Vvhit-ſunday,Tiberij 18 he made the firſt Sermon,Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 34 and conuerted 3000. Act. 2.
                        Aſce
                              •
                           . 1
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He cureth one borne lame, preacheth Chriſt and penance to the Ievves: ſo that 5000 beleeued. Act. 3 & 4.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He is impriſoned, releaſed againe, threatened and commaunded to preache no more: but he vvith Iohn anſvvereth, that they muſt obey God more then man. Act. 4.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He ſtriketh to death vvith a vvord, Ananias and Saphira, for ſacrilege. Act. 5.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He is ſent vvith Iohn to Samaria, to confirme the nevvly baptized, vvhere he reproueth Simon Magu
                           •
                        . Act. 8.
                     
                  
                  
                     19
                     35
                     2
                     He healeth Aeneas at Lydda,Tiberij 19 and raiſeth Tabitha from death at Ioppè.Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 35 
                        Act. 9.
                        Aſce
                              •
                           . 2
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He is vvarried and taught by a viſion, to preach ſo Cornelius a Gentil. Act. 10. He defendeth his receiuing of the Gentiles Act. 11. and recordeth (Act. 15) that God called the firſt Gentiles by his miniſterie, ſo that Paules firſt preaching to them, and his going to Arabia, muſt be after this. See S. Chryſ. in Act. ho. 22. Euſeb. li. 2 c. 3.
                     
                  
                  
                     20
                     36
                     3
                     He continueth preaching in diuers partes of Iurie and the prouinces adioyning.Tiberij 20 About tvvo yeres after this,Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 36 S. Paul viſiteth him at Hieruſalem.Aſce
                              •
                           . 3 
                        Gal. 1.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He preacheth in Syria and the Prouinces of Aſia minor, Bythynia, Poutus, Galatia, Cappodocia, ordaining Biſhops and Prieſts in diuers places. 1 Pet. 1. Nacepho. li. 2 c. 35. Platina in Petro.
                     
                  
                  
                     23
                     39
                     6
                     He goeth to Antioche,Tiberij 29 preaching there,Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 39 and making that his Seate,Aſce
                              •
                           . 6 yet not remaining there continually, but for the affaires of the Church, departing thence, ſometime to Hieruſalem, ſometime to other places. Hiero. in Catalogo. Ignat. ad Magneſianos.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     At Hieruſalem he is caſt into priſon after the putting of S. Iames to death, by the commaundement of Herod. he is praied for by the vvhole Church, & deliuered out of priſon by an Angel. Act. 12.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Claudij
                     Nat. Dn̄i.
                     Ascen.
                      
                  
                  
                     2
                     44
                     11
                     Auoiding the furie of Herod, he leaueth Iurie againe. He appointeth Euodius Biſhop in Antioche, Euſeb. in Chron.
                        Claudij 2 
                        & li. 
                              •
                            c. 16. Suid
                              •
                           s,
                        Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 44 
                        Ignat,
                        Aſce
                              •
                           . 11 
                        ad Antiochen. And paſſing by Corinth, HE CAME TO ROME, to conuince Simon Magus. Hiero. in Catalogo. Euſeb. li. 2 c. 12. 13. 24. Concil. to. 1.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He approueth & declareth the Goſpel of S. Marke to be Canonical. Hiero. in Catal
                              •
                           . Euſeb. li. 2 c. 14.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Hauing founded the Church at Rome, and planted his Apoſtolical Seate there, aftervvard abſent from the citie (either expelled thence vvith other Ievves, Cornel. Tacit, in Claudio: or rather according to the office of his Apoſtleſhip) leauing it for a time, he viſited other Churches, and came to Hieruſalem againe, vſing both in his abſence and preſence, Linus and Cletus for his coadiutors. To. 2 Concil. pag. 
                              •
                           56, Epiph, to. 2. Haereſ. 27.
                     
                  
                  
                     9
                     52
                     18
                     He holdeth the firſt Councel.Claudij 9 
                        Act. 15.
                        Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 52 He is reprehended at Antioche by S. Paul.Aſce
                              •
                           . 18 
                        Galat. 1. except that difference fell before the Councel, as ſome thinke. Auguſt. 
                              •
                           p. 19.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He returneth to Rome againe, the Romane faith by his diligence novv made famous through the vvorld. Ro. 1. & 15. Theodoret. in 16. Ro. Thence he vvriteth his firſt epiſtle. 1 Pet. 5. Euſeb. li. 2 c. 14. Hiero. in Catalogo.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He ſendeth S. Marke to Alexandria, and others to plant the faith in diuers partes of the vvorld. Grego. li. 5 ep. 60. & li. 6 ep. 37. Ni
                              •
                           opho. li. 2 c. 35.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He vvriteth his ſecond epiſtle a litle before his death, vvhich Chriſt reuealed to him to be at hand, 2 Pet. 1. He taketh order for his ſucceſſor.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Neronis
                     Nat. Dn̄i.
                     Ascen.
                      
                  
                  
                     14
                     70
                     37
                     He vvas finally crucified at Rome.Neronis 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        See the laſt Annot.
                        Nat. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 70 
                        Ioan. c. 21.
                        Aſce
                              •
                           . 37
                     
                  
               
            
            
                FOELIX ECCLESIA, cui totam doctrinam Apoſtoli cum ſuo ſanguine profuderunt: vbi PETRVS Paſsioni Domini adaequatur, vbi PAVLVS Ioannis (Baptiſſae) exitu coronatur. Tertul. de Praeſcript.
            
            NON ita coelum ſplendeſcit, quando radios ſol demittit, quemadmodum ROMANORVM VRBS duas illas lampades vbique tertarum effundens.
Chryſ. in ep. Ro. hom. 32 in moral.
            
            
               Prudent in Hymno de S. Laurent.
               Hi
                     •
                   nempe iam regnant du
                     •
                  
               
               Apoſtolorum principes:
               Alter vocator Gentium,
               Alter cathédram poſsidens
               Primam, recludis creditas
               Aeternitatis ianuas.
            
            Merita Petri & Pauli propter eundem Paſſionis diem celebrius & ſolenniter Roma commendat.
S. Aug. de conſ. Euang. li. 1 c. 10.
            
            
               
                  A TABLE OF S. PAVL.
                  
                     Tiberij
                     Natiuit.
                     Aſcen.
                      
                  
                  
                     18
                     34
                     1
                     
                        SEVEN Deacons are elected and ordered by impoſition of handes. Act. 6.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Steuen the principal of them maketh a bleſſed ſermon,Tiberij 18 for vvhich he vvas ſtoned to death,Natiuit. 34 Saul (aftervvard Paul) conſenting and aiding therevnto.Aſcen. 1 
                        Act. 
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
                  
                     19
                     35
                     2
                     Saul by commiſſion perſecuteth.Tiberij 19 
                        Act. 9.
                        Natiuit. 35
                        Aſcen. 2
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     In his iourney to Damaſcùs he is conuerted. Ibid.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He goeth into Arabia and preacheth there. Galat. 1.
                     
                  
                  
                     22
                     38
                     5
                     Paul returneth to Damaſcus,Tiberij 22 vvhere being in danger he eſcapeth,Natiuit. 38 let dovvne in a baſket by the vvall.Aſcen. 5 
                        Act. 9.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Thente he commeth to Hieruſalem to ſee Peter, Galat. 1. Vvhere being in danger of his life, the brethren conuey him out of the citie to Caeſaréa, and thence to Tarſus. Act. 9.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He preacheth in the partes of Syria and Cilicia. Galat. 1. and at Antioche, vvhere the Chriſtians vvere firſt called by that name. Act. 11.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He and Barnabas being ſeuered from the reſt of the Diſciples by the appointmēt of the holy Ghoſt, and after faſting and praier, by impoſition of handes conſecrated Apoſtles and Biſhops, they comme to Cypres, vvhere he conuerted the Proconſul. Act. 13.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He preacheth in Lycaonia, and at Lyſtra is almoſt ſtoned to death. He appointeth Prieſts in euery Church, and returning by Piſidia, came againe to Antioche vvhence they firſt departed. Act. 14.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Claudij
                     Natiuit.
                     Aſcen.
                      
                  
                  
                     9
                     52
                     18
                     At Antioche and there about he remaineth (Act. 14) vntil the controuerſie touching the obſeruation of Moyſes lavv, for reſolution vvhereof he and Barnabas aſcend to Hieruſalem. Vvhere they are appointed to bring the determination of the Councel to Antioche.Claudij 9 And from thence paſſing through Syria and Cilicia,Natiuit. 52 they teach the Chriſtians to obſerue the decrees of the Apoſtles and Auncients.Aſcen. 18 
                        Act. 15.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Doing the ſame in the cities of Lycaonia and others adioining, by a viſion he is vvarned to paſſe ouer the ſea, and ſo commeth into Macedonia. vvhere he planteth the Goſpel. Act. 16.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Hence forvvard S. Luke purſueth S. Pauls ſtorie, chapter by chapter, vntil his apprehenſion in Hieruſalem, and arriual at Rome, in this order.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He returneth from Macedonia by Theſſalonica to Athens, vvhere he conuetteth many, namely S. Denys Areopagita. Act. 17.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     From Athens he commeth to Corinth, vvhere he remaineth 18 moneths. Act. 1
                              •
                           . and hauing viſited the Churches of Aſia Act. 19) he commeth backe to Corinth Act. 20. Vvhence he vvriteth his epiſtle to the Romanes. Ro. 15.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     From Corinth he ſaileth to Tróas in Aſia, vvhere vpon a Sunday he raiſed Eutychus from death, preaching til midnight▪ from Tróas he commeth to Milétum by ſea, and there ſendeth for the Biſhops and Auncients of Epheſus, and exhorteth them. Act. 20.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     Thence comming to Hieruſalem he is taken, Act. 21: and from the Tribune Lyſias deliuered to Felix the Gouernour,Neronis 2 
                        Act. 23:
                        Natiuit. 58 and by him left to Feſtus,Aſcen. 25 
                        Act. 24. he appealeth to Caeſar, Act. 25: and ſo is SENT TO ROME, Act. 27: vvhere he arriueth. Act. 28.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Neronis
                     Natiuit.
                     Aſcen.
                      
                  
                  
                     2
                     58
                     25
                     At Rome he remaineth in free priſon tvvo yere, Act. 28. and then is deliuered, 2 Tim. 4.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     After his deliuerie he preached in ſundrie countries of the vveſt, namely in Spaine. Hiero. in Cataloge. Epiph. Hareſ. 27. Him ſelf vvriteth that he purpoſed ſo to doe. Ro. 15.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     In his Epiſtle to the Philippians (c. 
                           •
                        ) he minded to viſ
                           •
                        e the Churches of Aſia, vvhich alſo he did. Genebrard. in Chron.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     He vvriteth laſt of al, his ſecond Epiſtle to Timothee a litle before his death. 2 Tim. 4. being novv the ſecond time apprehended and in bandes at Rome. Theodoret.
                     
                  
                  
                     14
                     70
                     37
                     He vvas beheaded at Rome,Neronis 14 the ſame day that Peter vvas crucified.Natiuit. 70 
                        S. Ambroſ. ſer. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 68. S Maximus.
                        Aſcen. 37
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               OF THE OTHER APOSTLES.
               THE Actes of the reſt of the tvvelue Apoſtles be not much vvritten of in this booke:Genebr. out of diuers authors. but as * other Eccleſ
                     ••
                  ſtical writers do te
                     •
                  tifie, they preached ſpecially in theſe nations, as folovveth. Andrevv in A
                        •
                     haia, Iohn in Aſia. Philip in Pbrygia, Iames in Ievvrie, Bartholomevv in Scythia, Thomas in India, Matthevv in Aethiopia, Simon in Perſia, Thadd
                        •
                     us in Meſopotamia, the other Iames in Spaine, Matthias in Paleſtine. So diſtributing them ſelues through out the vvorld, to gather one Catholike Church of al Nations, according as Chriſt gaue them commiſſion Mat. 28, 19: and as it vvas prophecied of them before Pſal. 18. Their ſound is gone forth into euery countrie, and their wordes into the endes of the whole world. But before they departed one from an other (the time vvhereof is not certainely knovven) * al Tvvelue aſſembling together,Ruffi. in expoſ. Symb. Apoſt. Ambr. 
                        •
                     er. 38. Hiero. ep. 61▪ c. 9. aduerſ erro. Io. Hieroſ. & ful of the Holy Ghoſt, eche laying dovvne his ſentence, agreed vpon tvvelue principal articles of the Chriſtian faith, and appointed them for a rule to al beleeuers: Vvhich is therfore called and is THE APOSTLES CREDE: Not vvritten in paper, as the Scripture, but from the Apoſtles deliuered by tradition. Ruff. & Hiero. locis citatis. Vvhich, as of old (Hiero. cont. Lucifer) ſo at this day al ſolemnely profeſſe in their Baptiſme, either by them ſelues or by others: and al that be of age and capacitie, are bound to know and beleeue euery article of the 
                     •
                  ame. Vvhich are theſe that folovv.
               
                  THE APOSTLES CREDE, or SYMBOLVM APOSTOLORVM.
                  1 I Beleeue in God the Father, almightie, creator of heauen and earth.
                  2 And in IESVS CHRIST, his only Sonne, our Lord.
                  3 Vvho vvas conceiued by the Holy Ghoſt, borne of the Virgin MARIE.
                  
                  4 Suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried: Deſcended into Hel.
                  5 The third day be roſe againe from death:
                  6 Aſcended into heauen: Sitteth at the right hād of God the Father almightie.
                  7 From thence he ſhal come to iudge the quicke and the dead.
                  8 I beleeue in the Holy Ghoſt.
                  9 The holy Catholike Church: the communion of ſaincts.
                  10 Forgiueneſſe of ſinnes.
                  11 Reſurrection of the fleſh.
                  12 Life euerlaſting. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLES IN GENERAL.
            
               AFTER the Goſpels, vvhich is a ſtorie of Chriſt himſelfe, and after the Actes of the Apoſtles, Vvhich is a ſtorie of Chriſtes Church: novv folovv the Epiſtles of the Apoſtles, vvhich they vvrote of ſuch matters, as they had then occaſion to vvrite of. For being the founders and the Doctors of the Church, they did in their time, as the Doctors that ſucceeded them, did after them; vvho from the beginning vnto this day, haue vvritten Epiſtles & Bookes againſt hereſies, euer as they aroſe▪ and of al other Eccleſiaſtical matters, as they had occaſion miniſtred vnto them. Of vvhich their doing the Apoſtles firſt gaue here the enſample: as alſo S. Luke in the Actes of the Apoſtles, led the vvay to al the writers of the Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtorie after him. For al though there be no compariſon betvvene them for authoritie, for aſmuch as theſe are Cannonical Scripture, and ſo are not any vvritings of their ſucceſſors: yet the occaſions and matters (as I haue ſaid) are like.
            Moſt of theſe Epiſtles are S. Paules Epiſtles:Euſeb. li 2. Eccl. hiſt. c. 22. the reſt are called * Catholicae Epiſtolae, the Epiſtles Catholike. For S. Paul vvriteth not any Epiſtle to al (hovvbeit euery one of them is for al the Church:) but ſome to particular Churches of the Gentils, as to the Romanes, to the Corinthians, to the Galatians, to the Epheſians, to the Philippians, to the Coloſsians, to the Theſſalonians: ſome to particular perſons, as to Timothee, to Tite (vvho vvere Biſhops among the Gentiles, to vvit, of Epheſus, and of Crete) and to Philémon, and then one to the Hebrevves, vvho vvere the Ievves of Hieruſalem and Iurie. But the Epiſtles of the other Apoſtles, that is, of S. Iames, S. Peter, S. Iohn, and S. Iude, are not ſo intituled to any one Church or perſon (except S. Iohns tvvo later ſhort Epiſtles, vvhich yet might not be ſeparated from his firſt, becauſe they vvere al of one Author) and therefore they are termed Catholike, that is, vniuerſal. For ſo vvriteth S. Iames: To the tvvelue tribes that are in diſperſion, greeting▪
                and S. Peter in his firſt Epiſtle, thus: To the elect ſtrāgers of the diſperſion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Aſia, & Bithynia. in his ſecond, thus: To them that haue obteined equal faith vvith vs. likevviſe S. Iude: To them that are in God the father beloued, and in Ieſus Chriſt preſerued, and called. S. Iohns firſt is vvithout title.
            Novv, for the occaſions of their vvriting, vvhereby vve ſhal perceiue the matters or arguments that they handle: it muſt be remembred (as the Storie of that time in the Actes of the Apoſtles doth at large declare) that the Church then beginning, vvas planted by the Apoſtles not onely in the Ievves, but alſo in the Gentiles: yea and ſpecially in the Gentiles. Vvhich thing offended the Ievves many waies. For, they could not abide to ſee, ſo much as their owne Countrie to receiue him for CHRIST, vvhom they had reiected and crucified: much leſſe, to ſee, them preach him to the Gentiles alſo, that offended euen thoſe Ievves alſo, that
 beleeued him to be Chriſt. Hovvbeit ſuch of them as vvere Catholikes, and therefore not obſtinat, vvere ſatisfied vvhen they vnderſtood by the Apoſtles that it vvas Gods pleaſure, as Act. 11. vve reade. But others of the became heretikes, & preached to the Chriſtian Gentiles, that it vvas neceſſary for them to receiue alſo the Ievves religion. Of ſuch vve reade Act. 15. Vnles you be circumciſed, you can not be ſaued. And as theſe did ſo preach againſt the truth, ſo did the vnchriſtened Ievves not onely them ſelues perſecute, but alſo ſtirre vp the Idolatrous Gentiles euery vvhere to perſecute the Chriſtians: by ſuch obſtinacie prouoking God to reprobate theire Nation: vvhich yet they thought vnpoſsible to be done, becauſe they vvere the ſeede of Abraham, and vvere circumciſed, and had receiued the Lavv by Moyſes, for ſuch carnal reſpects they truſted in themſelues, as though God and Chriſt vvere vnſeparably bound vnto them: attributing alſo ſo much to their ovvne workes, (vvhich they thought they did of them ſelues, being holpē with the knovvledge of their lavv,) that they vvould not acknovvledge the death of Chriſt to be neceſſarie for their ſaluation: but looked for ſuch a Chriſt, as ſhould be like other princes of this vvorld, and make them great men temporally.
            Herevpon did S. Paul vvrite his Epiſtles, to ſhevv both the vocation of the Gentiles, and the reprobation of the Ievves. Moreouer, to admoniſh both the Chriſtian Gentiles, not to receiue Circumciſion and other ceremonies of Moyſes lavv, in no vviſe: and the Ievves alſo, not to put their truſt in the ſame, but rather to vnderſtand, that novv, Chriſt being come, they muſt ceaſe. Againe, to ſhevv the neceſsitie of Chriſts comming and of his death: that vvithout it, neither the Gentiles could be ſaued: no nor the Ievves, by no vvorkes that they could doe of them ſelues, although they vvere alſo holpen by the Lavv, telling them what vvas good & vvhat vvas bad: for ſo much as al vvere ſinners, and therfore alſo impotent or infirme: and the Lavv could not take avvay ſinne, and infirmitie, and giue ſtrength to fulfil that vvhich it gaue knovvledge of▪ but this vvas God onely able to doe, and for Chriſts ſake onely vvould he doe it. Therfore it is neceſſarie for al to beleeue in Chriſt, and to be made his members, being incorporat into his Body vvhich is his Catholike Church. For ſo (although they neuer yet did good vvorke, but al il) they ſhal haue remiſsion of their ſinnes, and nevv ſtrength vvithal, to make them able to fulfil the cōmaūdemēts of Gods lavv, yea & their vvorkes after this ſhal be ſo gracious in Gods ſight, that for them he vvil giue them lift euerlaſting. This is the neceſsitie, this is alſo the fruite of Chriſtian Religion. And therfore be exhorteth al, both Gentils and Ievves, as to receiue it humbly, ſo alſo to perſeuêre in it conſtantly vnto the end, againſt al ſeduction of hereſie, and againſt al terror of perſecution: and to vvalke al their time in good vvorkes, as novv God hath made them able to doe.
            The ſame doctrine doth the Catholike Church teach vnto this day moſt exactly:The doctrine of the Cath. Church concerning good vvorkes. to vvit, that no vvorkes of the vnbeleeuing or vnbaptized, vvhether they be Ievves or Gentiles, can ſaue them: no nor of any Heretike, or Schiſmatike, although he be baptized, becauſe he is not a member of Chriſt: yea more then that, no vvorke of any that is not a liuely member of Chriſt, although othervviſe he be baptized, and continue vvithin his Church, yet becauſe he is not in grace but in mortal ſinne, no vvorke that he doth, is meritorious or able to ſaue him.
            This very ſame is S. Paules doctrine:S. Paules doctrine concerning faith and good vvorkes. he denieth to the vvorkes of ſuch as haue not the Spirit of Chriſt, al vertue to iuſtifie or to ſaue: neither requireth he a man to haue had knovvledge of the Lavv, or to haue kept it afortime, as though othervviſe he might not be ſaued by Chriſt: but yet vvhen he is Chriſtened, he requireth of neceſsitie, that he keepe Gods commaundements, by auoiding of al ſinne, and doing good vvorkes: and to ſuch a mans good vvorkes he attributeth as much vertue as
 any Catholike of this time.
            
               Neuertheleſſe there vvere certaine at that time (as alſo al the Heretikes of this our time) vvhom S. Peter termeth vnlearned and vnſtable,2. Pet. 3. 
               vvho reading S. Paules Epiſtles, did miſconſter his meaning, as though he required not good vvorkes no more after Baptiſme, then before Baptiſme: but held that onely Faith did iuſtifie and ſaue a man. Therevpon the other Apoſtles vvrote their Epiſtles, as S. Auguſtine noteth in theſe vvordes:
               Aug. de fide & oper. ca. 14. Et praef. pſal. 31. Therfore becauſe this opinion (Ad ſalutem obtinendam ſufficere Solam ſidem, that onely faith is ſufficient to obteine ſaluation) was then riſen: the other Apoſtolical Epiſtles, of Peter, Iohn, Iames, Iude, do againſt it ſpecially direct theire intention: to auouch vehemently, fidem ſine operibus nihil prodeſſe, that ſaith vvithout vvorkes profiteth nothing, As alſo Paul him ſelfe did not define it to be quamlibet fidem, qua in Deum creditur, whatſoeuer maner of faith, vvherevvith vve beleeue in God, but that holeſome & expreſſe Euangelical faith, vvhoſe vvorkes procede from loue,Gal. 5. and the faith (quoth he) that vvorketh by loue. vvherevpon that faith, vvhich ſome thinke to be ſufficient to ſaluation,1. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . he ſo affirmeth to profite nothing, that he ſaith. If I ſhould haue al faith ſo that I could remoue mountaines, and haue not charitie, I am nothing.
            
            
               He therfore that vvill not erre in this point, nor in any other, reading either S. Paules Epiſtles, or the reſt of the holy Scriptures, muſt ſticke faſt to the doctrine of the Catholike Church,
               1. Tim. 3. 
               vvhich Church S. Paul termeth the piller and ground of the truth: aſſuring him ſelf that if any thing there found to him as contrarie herevnto, he faileth of the right ſenſe: and bearing alvvaies in his minde the admonition of S. Peter,
               2. Pet. 3. 
               ſaying: As alſo our moſt deere brother Paul according to the vviſedom giuen to him, hath vvritten to you: as alſo in al his Epiſtles, ſpeaking in them of theſe things, in the vvhich are certaine things hard to vnderſtand, vvhich the vnlearned and vnſtable depraue, as alſo the reſt of the Scriptures, to theire ovvne perdition. You therfore brethren, foreknovving, take heede leſt ye be led amis by the error of the vnvviſe, and fall avvay from your ovvne ſtedfaſtnes.
            
               THE TIME VVHEN THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANES VVAS VVRITTEN, and the Argument thereof.
               
                  THE hiſtorie of S. Paul, vntil be came to Rome, S. Luke in the Actes of the Apoſtles vvrote exactly: and though vvithout any mention of his Epiſtles, yet certaine it is, that ſome of them he vvrote before he came there, to vvit, the 
                     •
                  vvo vnto the Corinthians, and this to the Romanes: & (* as it ſeemeth) before them al,Gal. 2. the Epiſtle to the Galatians. Vvherein yet becauſe he maketh mention of the fouretenth yere after his conuerſion, it appeareth, that he preached ſo long vvithout any vvriting.
               And this order may thus briefely be gathered. Firſt he preached to the Galatians Act. 16: and paſſing through Phrygia and the countrey of Galatia. Vvhereof he maketh mention himſelfe alſo, Gal. 1: Vve euangelized to you. and Gal. 4: I euangelized to you heretofore. After vvhich the falſe Apoſtles came and perſuaded them to receiue Circumciſion. Vvherevpon he ſaith Gal. 1: I maruel that thus ſo ſoone you are trāsferred from him that called you to the grace of Chriſt, vnto an other Goſpel. and vviſheth therfore
 Gal. 4. ſaying: And I vvould I vvere vvith you novv. And accordingly he came vnto them aftervvard, as vve reade Act. 18: Vvalking in order through the countrie of Galatia and phrygia, confirming al the Diſciples. At vvhich time alſo it ſeemeth, that he tooke order vvith them about thoſe contributions to helpe the neede of the Chriſtians in Hieruſalem, vvhereof he ſpeaketh 1. Cor. 16: And concerning the collections that are made for the ſaincts, as I haue ordeined to the Churches of Galatia, ſo doe you alſo. By vvhich vvordes alſo it is euident, that the Corinthians had not at then made their gathering. But vvhen he vvrote the Second to them (vvhere in the 11 Chapter he maketh mention of 14 yeres, not onely after his Conuerſion, as to the Galatians, but alſo after his Rapte, vvhich ſeemeth to haue bene vvhen he vvas at Hieruſalem Act. 9. foure yeres after his Conuerſion, in a traunce, as he calleth it Act. 22, 17) then vvere they readie. For ſo he ſaith 2. Cor. 8: You haue begone from the yere paſt. and 2. Cor. 9: For the vvhich I doe glorie of you to the Macedonians: that alſo Achaia is ready from the yere paſt. hovvbeit it folovveth theire: But I haue ſent the brethren, that (as I haue ſaid) you may be ready: leſt vvhen the Macedonians come vvith me, and find you vnready, vve be aſhamed. But vvhen he vvrote to the Romanes, then vvas he novv come to Corinth for the purpoſe, and had receiued theire contribution, and vvas readie to goe vvith it vnto Hieruſalem. For ſo he ſaith Rom. 15. Novv therfore I vvil goe vnto Hieruſalem to miniſter to the ſaincts. For Macedonia and Achaia haue liked vvel to make ſome cōtribution vpō the poore ſaincts that are in Hieruſalem.
                  The argument of the Epiſtle to the Romanes.
               
               So then, the Epiſtle to the Romanes vvas not the firſt that he vvrote. But yet it isEpih. Haer. 42▪ Marcionis. Aug. in Expoſ. incho. Ep. ad Rom. and alvvaies vvas ſet firſt, becauſe of the primacie of that Church, for vvhich cauſe alſo he handleth in it, ſuch matters as perteined not to them alone, but to the vniuerſal Church, and ſpecially to al the Gentiles: to vvit, the very frame (as it vvere) of the Church of Chriſt. Tanquam enim2. Cor. 5. pro ipſo Domino legatione fungens, hoc eſt, proEpheſ. 2. lapide angulari, vtrumque populum tam ex Iudais quàm ex Gentibus connectis in Chriſto per vinculum gratiae. ſo ſaith S. Auguſtine, giuing vs briefly the arguments. in engliſh thus: As being a legate for our Lord him ſelf, that is, for the corner ſtone, he knitteth together in Chriſt by the bād of Grace, both peoples, as vvel of the Ievves as of the Gentils. Shevving, that neither of them had in their Gentilitie or Iudaiſme any vvorkes to bragge of, or to chalenge to them ſelues iuſtificatiō or ſaluation thereby, but rather ſinnes they had to be ſorie for, and to humble themſelues to the faith of Chriſt, that ſo they might haue remiſsion of them, and ſtrength to doe meritorius vvorkes aftervvard. In vvhich ſort, becauſe the Gentils did humble them ſelues, therefore had they found mercy, though they neuer vviſt of the Lavv of Moyſes. But the Ievves, becauſe they ſtoode vpon their ovvne vvorkes, vvhich they did by their ovvne ſtrength, vvith the knovvledge of the Lavv (being therefore alſo called the vvorkes of the Lavv,)
                  The vvorkes of the Lavv. & ſo would not humble themſelues to beleeue in Chriſt crucified, they miſſed of mercy, and became reprobate, excepting a few Reliquiae that God of his goodnes had reſerued to himſelf. Hovvbeit in the end, vvhen the fulnes of the Gentils is come into the Church, then ſhal the fulnes of the Ievves alſo open their eies, acknowledge their errour, and ſubmit themſelues to Chriſt and his Church, in like maner. In the meane time, thoſe that haue found the grace to be Chriſtians, he exhorteth to perſeuerāce (as it vvas ſpecially needeful in thoſe times of perſecutions) and to leade their whole life now after Baptiſme in good workes: and to be careful of vnitie, bearing therefore one with an other, both Iew and Gentil, al that they
 may, and geuing no offence to them that are weake. Thus he diſputeth, and thus be exhorteth through the whole Epiſtle: though, if we wil diuide it by that which is principal in ech parte, vve may ſay, that vnto the 12 chapter is his diſputation: and from thence to the end, his exhortation.
               
                  Novv, in thoſe points of faith, and in al others (as alſo in example of life) the commendation that he giueth to the Church of Rome,
                  Rom. 1. 
                  is much to be noted. Your faith is renoumed in the vvhole vvorld. and your obediēce is publiſhed into euery place.Rom. 16. I reioyce therfore in you. And againe:
                  Rom. 6. you haue obeied from the hart vnto that forme of doctrine, vvhich hath been deliuered to you. And therevpon againe: I deſire you brethren,Rom. 16. to marke them that make diſſenſions and ſcandals contrarie to the doctrine vvhich you haue learned, and auoide them. For ſuch doe not ſerue Chriſt our Lord, but theire ovvne belly: and by ſvveete ſpeaches ad benedictions ſeduce the harts of innocents. Therfore to ſhunne Luther and Caluin, and al their crewes, vve haue iuſt reaſon and good vvarrant. They make diſſenſions and ſcandals againſt the doctrine of the Romane Church. Let no man therefore be ſeduced by their ſugred vvordes.
            
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE ROMANES.The church readeth S. Pauls epiſtles at Martins frō Sunday in Chriſtmas vnto Septuageſme.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The foundation of his Apoſtleſhip being laid, 
                        〈◊〉
                      he highly commendeth the Romanes, and proteſteth his affection tovvardes them. and ſo cōming to the matter, ſaith, our Chriſtian Catholike doctrine (that teacheth al to beleeue) to be the vvay to ſaluation: 118 becauſe the Gentiles (firſt of al) could not be ſaued by their Philoſophie, vvhereby they knevv God, for ſo much as they did not ſerue him, but Idol
                        ••
                      he therfore iuſtly permitting them to fall into al kind of moſt damnable ſinne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL the ſeruant of IESVS CHRIST, called to be an Apoſtle,The Epiſtle vpō Chriſtmas eue. * ſeparated into the Goſpel of God,Act. 13. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvhich before he had promiſed by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures,
                     
                        •
                      Faith muſt not be ſubiect to ſenſe, reaſon, arguing or vnderſtāding, but muſt cōmaund & be obeied in humilitie and ſimplicitie. ✝ 
                     verse 3 of his ſonne, (vvho vvas made to him of the ſeede of Dauid according to the fleſh, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho vvas predeſtinate the ſonne of God in povver, according to the ſpirit of ſanctification, by the reſurrectiō of our Lord IESVS CHRIST from the dead, ✝ 
                     verse 5 by vvhom vve haue receiued grace and Apoſtleſhip
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . for obedience to the faithS. Auguſtine vſeth this place and the like agaīſt Heretikes, vvhich vvould dravv the common Catholike faith of al natiōs, to ſome certaine countries or corners of the world. Aug. ep. 161.
                   in al Nations for the name of him, ✝ 
                     verse 6 among vvhom are you alſo the called of IESVS CHRIST:) ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 7 to al that are at Rome the beloued of God, called to be ſaincts. Grace to you and peace from God our father, and our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Firſt I giue thankes to my God through IESVS CHRIST for al you, becauſe ″ your faith is renoumed in the vvhole vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For God is my vvitnes,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvhom I ſerue ″ in my ſpirit in the Goſpel of his Sonne, thatHe praieth without intermiſſion that omitteth no day certaine times of praier. Aug. hereſ. 57.
                   vvithout intermiſsion I make ″ a memorie of you ✝ 
                     verse 10 alvvaies in my praiers, beſeeching, if by any meanes I may ſometime at the length haue a proſperous iourney by the vvil of God, to come vnto you.
 ✝ 
                     verse 11 For I deſire to ſee you, that I may imparte vnto you ſome ſpiritual grace, toThe Romanes vvere conuerted and taught by S. Peter before. therefore he vſeth that ſpeach, to confirme them in their ſaith. Author Com. apud Hierony. Theodoret. in 16. Rom. & Chryſ.
                   confirme you: ✝ 
                     verse 12 that is to ſay, to be comforted together in you by that vvhich is cōmon to vs both, your faith and mine. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And I vvil not haue you ignorant (brethren) that I haue often purpoſed to come vnto you (and haue been ſtaied hitherto) that I may haue ſome fruite in you, as alſo in the other Gentiles. ✝ 
                     verse 14 To the Greekes and the Barbarous, to the vviſe and the vnvviſe I am detter. ✝ 
                     verse 15 ſo (as much as is in me) I am ready ″ to euangelize to you alſo that are at Rome.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 For I am not aſhamed of the Goſpel. For it is the povver of God, vnto ſaluation to euery one that beleeueth, to the Ievve firſt and to the Greeke. ✝ 
                     verse 17 ForHe meaneth not Gods owne iuſtice in him ſelf, but that iuſtice vvhervvith God endueth man vvhen he iuſtifieth him. Aug. de Sp. & lit. c. 9. Whereby you may gather the vanitie of the Heretical imputatilue iuſtice. the iuſtice of God is reuealed therein by faith into faith:Abac. 2, 4. as it is vvritten: And the iuſt ″ liueth by faith.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 For the vvrath of God from heauen ″ is reuealed, vpon al impietie and iniuſtice of thoſe men that deteine the vertitie of God in iniuſtice: ✝ 
                     verse 19 becauſe, that of God vvhich is knovvē, is manifeſt in them. For God hath manifeſted it vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For his inuiſible things, from the creation of the vvorld are ſeen, being vnderſtoode by thoſe things that are made: his eternal povver alſo & Diuinitie: ſo that they are inexcuſable. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Becauſe, vvhereas they knevve God, they haue not glorified him as God, or giuē thankes: but are become vaine in their cogitations, and their foliſh hart hath been darkened. ✝ 
                     verse 22 for, ſaying them ſelues to be vviſe, they became fooles. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And they changed the glorie of the incorruptible God, into a
Lo theſe and the like are the Images or Idol
                        •
                      ſo often condē
                     ned in the ſcriptures, and not the holy Images of Chriſt and his Saincts. ſimilitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of foules and foure-footed beaſtes and of them that creepe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 (For the vvhich cauſe GodEph. 4, 19. he ſaith, They haue deliuered or giuen vp them ſelues to al vncleanneſſe. By vvhich cōferēce of ſcriptur
                        •
                      vve learne that them ſelues are the cauſe of their ovvne ſinne and damnation, God of his iuſtice permitting & leauing them to their ovvne vvil, and ſo giuing them vp into paſſions &c. hath deliuered them vp vnto the deſires of their hart, into vncleanneſſe, for to abuſe their owne bodies among them ſelues ignominiouſly.) ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvho haue changed the veritie of God into lying: and haue vvorſhipped &

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſerued the creature rather then the creator, vvho is bleſſed for euer. Amen. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Therfore ″ God hath deliuered them into paſsions of ignominie. For their vvomen haue changed the natural vſe, into that vſe that is contrarie to nature. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And in like maner the men alſo, leauing the natural vſe of the vvoman, haue burned in their deſires one tovvard an other, men vpon men vvorking turpitude, & the revvard of their errour (vvhich they ſhould) receauing in themſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And as
 they liked not to haue God in knovvledge: God deliuered them vp into a reprobate ſenſe: to doe thoſe things that are not conuenient: ✝ 
                     verse 29 repleniſhed vvith al iniquitie, malice, fornication, auarice, vvickednes, ful of enuie, murder, contention, guile, malignitie, vvhiſperers, ✝ 
                     verse 30 detractours, odible to God, contumelious, proude, hautie, inuentours of euil things, diſobedient to parents, ✝ 
                     verse 31 foliſh, diſſolute, vvithout affection, vvithout fidelitie, vvithout mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Who vvhereas they knevv the iuſtice of God, did not vnderſtand that they vvhich doe ſuch things, are ″ vvorthie of death: not only they that doe them, but they alſo that conſent to the doers.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     7. Grace to you and peace.]
                     Apoſtolical ſalutation or bleſſing. It is a kind of bleſſing rather then a prophane ſalutation, proper to the Apoſtles, of greater vertue then the benedictions of the fathers in the old Teſtament. The holy fathers of the Church ſeemed to abſteine from it for their reuerence to the Apoſtles.Epiph. h
                           •
                        
                        reſ. 6
                           •
                        . * The Manichees (Auguſt. cont. ep. fund
                           •
                        . c. 5. 
                           •
                        .) and other Heretikes (as alſo theſe of our time) becauſe they vvould be counted Apoſtles,The ſame vſed of Heretikes. often vſe it.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Your faith venoumed.] The holy Doctors vpon theſe vvordes of the Apoſtle, and ſpecially by our Maiſters promis * made to Peter,
                     The Romane faith highly cō
                        mended. 
                     that his faith ſhould not faile,
                     Luc. 22. 
                     giue great teſtimonie for the prouidence of God in the preſeruation of the Romane faith. S. Cyprian thus: ep. 55. nu. 6. They are ſo bold to cary letters from prophan
                        •
                      Schiſmatikes to the chaire of Peter and the principal Church vvhence Prieſtly vnitie roſe: not conſidering the Romanes to be them vvhoſe faith (the Apoſtle being the commender) vvas praiſed,It can not falſe, not be corrupted. to vvhom miſbel
                        ••••
                      can not haue acceſſe. So. S. Hierom Apolog. adu. Ru
                           ••
                        . li. 3 c. 4. to. 2. Knovv you, that the Romane faith commended by the Apoſtles mouth, vvil receiue no ſuch dec
                        •
                     ites, nor can be poſsibly changed, though an Angel taught othervviſe, being fenſed by S. Paules authoritie. Againe ep. 63 ad Par
                           •
                        mach. & Ocean
                           •
                        m. c. 4. to. 2. Whatſoeuer thou be that auoucheſt nevv ſectes, I pray 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue reſpect to the Romans 
                        ••
                     res. ſpare the faith which was praiſed by the Apoſtles voice.Pro
                           ••
                        . li. 2. Com. in ep. ad Gal. 
                     And in an other place: Wilye knovv ô Paula and Euſto
                        •
                     hium,The Romane ſtatiōs, a token of greater faith and deuotion. hovv the Apoſtle hath noted euery prouince vvith their proprieties? the faith of the people of Ro
                        ••
                      is pr
                        •
                     iſed. Where is there ſo g
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     concourſe to Churches and Martyrs ſ
                        •
                     pul
                        •
                     hres? Where ſoundeth Amen like thunder from heauen, or vvhere are the temples (void of Idols) ſo ſhaken as there? Not that the Romanes haue an other faith then the reſt of the Chriſtian Churches, but that there is in them more deuotion and ſimplicitie of faith. In an other place the ſame holy Doctor ſignifieth that it is al one to ſay,
                     The Catholike and Romane faith al one. 
                     the Romane faith, and, the Catholike. Apolog. 1 adu. Ruff. c. 1. So doth S. Cyprian ep. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . num. 1. ad Antonianum: and S. Ambroſe de 
                        •
                     bitu fratris, in med. Vvherevpon, this vvord, Romane, is added to, Catholike, in many countries vvhere Sectes do abound, for the better diſtinction of true beleeuers from Heretikes: vvhich in al ages did hate and abhorre the Romane faith and Church, as al malefactors do their Iudges and correctors.
                  
                  
                     9. Serue in ſpirit.] Diuerſe Heretikes vvhen they heare that God is a ſpirit, and muſt be ſerued and ado
                        •
                     ed in ſpirit,Hovv God is ſerued in ſpirit. imagine, that he muſt be honoured only invvardly, vvithout ceremonies and external vvorkes: vvhich you ſee is othervviſe, for that the Apoſtle ſerued God in ſpirit, by preaching the Goſpel. To ſerue God then in ſpirit, is to ſerue him vvith faith, hope, and charitie, and vvith al vvorkes proceding of them: as to ſerue him carnally, is vvith vvorkes external, vvithout the ſaid internal vertues.
                  
                     9. A memorie of you.] A great example of charitie for al men, ſpecially for Prelates and Paſtors, not only to preach,Praies for conuerſion of ſoules. but to pray continually for the conuerſion of people to Chriſtes faith: Vvhich the Apoſtle did for them vvhom he neuer knevv, in reſpect of Gods honour only and the zeale of ſoules.
                  
                     15. To euang
                           •
                        liza.] The Goſpel is not only the life of our Sauiour vvritten by the foure Euangeliſtes,The Goſpel is not only the written word. nor only that vvhich is vvritten in the nevv Teſtamēt: but theis vvhole courſe of preaching and teaching the faith. Vvhich faith commeth ordinarily of preaching and hearing, and not of vvriting or reading. And therfore S. Paul thought not him ſelf diſcharged by vvriting to the Romanes, but his deſire vvas to preach vnto them: for that vvas the proper commiſſion giuen to the
 Apoſtles,Mat. 28. to preach to al nations.The Apoſtles vvriting, and preaching, vvhether more neceſſarie, and hovv. The vvriting of the bookes of the Teſtament, is an other part of Gods prouidence, neceſſary for the Church in general, but not neceſſarie for euery man in particular: as to be taught and preached vnto, is for euery one of age and vnderſtanding. And therfore S. Peter (vvho vvas the cheefe of the Commiſſion) vvrote litle: many of them, vvrote nothing at al: and S. Paul that vvrote moſt, vvrote but litle in compariſon of his preaching: nor to any but ſuch as vvere conuerted to the faith by preaching before.
                  
                     17. Liueth by faith.] In the 10. to the Hebrevves, he ſhevveth by this place of the Prophete (Abacue's) that the iuſt though he liue here in peregrination, and ſeeth not preſently nor enioyeth the life euerlaſting promiſed to him, yet holdeth faſt the hope thereof by faith. In this place he applieth the Prophetes vvordes further to this ſenſe,The Catholike or Chriſtian 
                           •
                        aith with good vvorkes iuſtifieth, & vvithout this faith, no vvorkes whatſoeuer. That it is our faith, that is to ſay, the Catholike beleefe (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. 
                           •
                         cont. 
                           •
                        . ep. Pelag.) Which maketh a iuſt man, and diſtinguiſheth betvvene the iuſt and vniuſt, and that by the lavv of faith, and not by the lavv of vvorkes. Vvhereof it riſeth, that the Ievv, the Heathen Philoſopher, and the Heretike, though they excelled in al vvorkes of moral vertues, could not yet be iuſt: and a Catholike Chriſtian man liuing but an ordinarie honeſt life, either not ſinning greatly, or ſupplying his faults by penance, is iuſt, And this difference riſeth by faith, not that faith can ſaue any man vvithout vvorkes, For it is not a reprobate faith that vve ſpeake of, (as the holy Doctor ſaith) but that vvhich vvorketh by charitie, and therfore remitteth ſinnes and maketh one iuſt. See S. Auguſtines place.
                  
                     18. Is reuealed.]
                     Not only faith. By al the paſſage folovving you may ſee, that the Goſpel and Chriſts lavv conſiſteth not only in preaching faith, (though that be the ground, and is firſt alvvaies to be done:) but to teach vertuous life and good vvorkes, and to denounce damnation to al them that commit dealdy ſinnes and repent not. And againe vve ſee that not only lacke of faith is a ſinne, but al other actes done againſt Gods commaundements.
                  
                     26. Hath deliuered them vp.]
                     God is not the author of ſinne. As he ſaith here, God deliuered them vp, ſo to the Epheſians (c. 4, 19) he ſaith of the ſame perſons and things, They deliuered them ſelues vp to al vncleanneſſe. So that it is not meant here that God doth driue, force, or cauſe any man to ſinne, as diuers blaſphemous Heretikes do hold:God puniſheth ſinne by permitting men to fall further and further. but only that by his iuſt iudgement, for their ovvne deſeruing, and for due puniſhment of their former greuous, offenſes, he vvithholdeth his grace from them, and ſo ſuffereth them to fall further into other ſinnes. As, for their crime of Idolatrie, to ſuffer them to fall into vnnatural abominations: as novv for hereſie, he taketh his grace and mercie from many, and ſo they fall headlong into al kind of turpitude as contrarievviſe, for il life, he ſuffereth many to fall into hereſie. And for Chriſtes ſake let euery one that is entangled vvith the ldolatrie of this time, that is to ſay, vvith theſe nevv ſectes, looke vvel into his ovvneconſcience, vvhether his forſaking the true God, may not come vnto him for a puniſhment of his former or preſent il life vvhich he liueth.
                  
                     12. Worthy of death.]
                     Sinnes mortal and venial. Here you ſee vvhy the Church taketh ſome ſinnes to be deadly, and calleth them mortal: to vvit, becauſe al tha
                        •
                      doe them, are vvorthy of damnation: others be venial, that is to ſay, pardonable of their ovvne nature and not vvorthy of damnation.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  N
                        •
                     vv alſo he ſhevveth that neither the levves could be ſaued by the knovvledge of the Lavv, of the vvhich they did ſo much bragg
                        •
                      againſt the Gen
                        •
                     ils, ſeing they did notvvithſtanding ſinne as the Gentils did. 14 And therfore that the true levv is the Chriſtian (though he be a Gentil) vvho by grace in his hart doeth the good vvorkes that the Lavv commaundeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR the vvhich cauſe thou art inexcuſable ô man vvhoſoeuer ″ thou be that iudgeſt. For vvherein thou iudgeſt an other, thou condemneſt thy ſelf. for thou doeſt the ſame things vvhich `thou' iudgeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For vve knovv that the iudgement of God is according to veritie vpon them that doe ſuch things. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And doeſt thou ſuppoſe this ô man that iudgeſt them which doe ſuch things, and doeſt the ſame, that thou ſhalt eſcape the iudgement of God? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Or ″ doeſt
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   thou contemne the riches of his goodnes, and patience, and longanimity, not knovving that the benignity of God bringeth thee to penance? ✝ 
                     verse 5 But according to thy hardnes and impenitent hart, thou heapeſt to thy ſelf vvrath, in the day of vvrath and of the reuelation of the iuſt iudgement of God, ✝ 
                     verse 6 vvho vvil * render to euery man ″ according to his vvorkes.Good men alſo according to the merits of their good vvil ſhal haue their reward. Aug. 
                           •
                        p. 4
                           •
                        .
                   ✝ 
                     verse 7 to them truely that according to patience in good vvorke,Pſ. 61, 13▪
                   ſeeke glorie and honour and incorruption, life eternal. ✝ 
                     verse 8 but to them that are of contention, and that obey not the truth, but giue credite to iniquitie, vvrath and indignation. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Tribulation and anguiſh vpon euery ſoul of man that vvorketh euil, of the Ievve firſt and of theThat is. the Gentile.
                   Greeke: ✝ 
                     verse 10 but glorie and honour and peace to euery one that vvorketh good, to the Ievv firſt and to the Greeke.Deu. 10, 17. Act. 10. 34. ✝ 
                     verse 11 for * there is no acception of perſons vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For vvhoſoeuer haue ſinned vvithout the Lavv, vvithout the Lavv ſhal periſh: and vvhoſoeuer haue ſinned in the Lavv, by the Lavv ſhal be iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For 
* ″ not the hearers of the Lavv are iuſt vvith God:Mt. 7, 21▪
                   but the doers of the Lavv ″ ſhal be iuſtified.Ia. 1, 22▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 14 For vvhen the Gentiles vvhich haue not the Lavv, naturally doe thoſe things that are of the Lavv: the ſame not hauing the Lavv, them ſelues are a lavv to them ſelues: ✝ 
                     verse 15 vvho ſhevv the vvorke of the Lavv vvritten in their hartes, their conſcience giuing teſtimonie to them, and among them ſelues mutually their thoughtes accuſing, or alſo defending, ✝ 
                     verse 16 in the day vvhen God ſhal iudge the ſecretes of men, according to my Goſpel, by IESVS CHRIST.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 But if thou be ſurnamed a Ievv, and reſteſt in the Lavv, and doeſt glorie in God, ✝ 
                     verse 18 and knovveſt his vvil, and approueſt the more profitable things, inſtructed by the Lavv, ✝ 
                     verse 19 preſumeſt that thy ſelf art a leader of the blinde, a light of them that are in darknes, ✝ 
                     verse 20 a teacher of the foliſh, a maiſter of infants, hauing the forme of ſcience & of veritie in the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Thou therforeIt is a ſhameful and damnable thing for preachers, teachers, or other guides of mens life, to commit the ſame things them ſelues which they reproue in other. that teacheſt an other, teacheſt not thy ſelf: that preacheſt, men ought not to ſteale, thou ſtealeſt: ✝ 
                     verse 22 that ſaieſt men ſhould not commit aduoutrie, thou committeſt aduoutrie: that abhorreſt idols, thou doeſt ſacrilege: ✝ 
                     verse 23 that doeſt glorie in the Lavv,Eſ. 52, 5. thou by preuatication of the Lavv doeſt diſhonour God.Ez. 36, 20. 
                  ( ✝ 
                        verse 24 For
                  It is a great ſinne that by the i
                        •
                      life of the faithful, our Lordes name ſhould be il ſpoken of amōg the miſbeleuers, & many vvithdravven from the true religiō thereby▪
                   
                  the name of God through you is blaſphemed among the Gentiles, as it is vvriten.) ✝ 
                     verse 25 Circumciſion in deede profiteth, if thou obſerue the Lavv: but if thou be a
 preuaricátour of the Lavv, thy circumciſion is becomePrepuce is the foreſkinne not circumciſed, & therfore ſignifieth the Gentiles, or the ſtate and conditiō of the Gentiles: as circumciſiō, the Ievves and their ſtate. prepuce. ✝ 
                     verse 26 If then the prepuce ″ keepe the iuſtices of the Lavv: ſhal not his prepuce be reputed for circumciſion? ✝ 
                     verse 27 and ſhal not that vvhich of nature is prepuce, fulfilling the Lavv, iudge thee, that by the letter and circumciſion art a preuaricátour of the Lavv? ✝ 
                     verse 28 For not he that is in open ſhevv, is a Ievv, not that vvhich is in open ſhevv, in the fleſh, is circumciſion: ✝ 
                     verse 29 but he that is in ſecrete, is a Ievv: and the circumciſion of the hart, ″ in ſpirit, not in the letter: vvhoſe praiſe is not of men, but of God.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. Thou that iudgeſt.) Such as by publike authoritie either ſpiritual or temporal haue to puniſh offenders, be not forbidden to iudge or condemne any for their offenſes, though them ſelues be ſometimes guilty in their conſcience of the ſame or greater: yet may it be matter of aggrauating ſinnes before God,Iudging other men. vvhen they vvil not repent of thoſe offenſes them ſelues, for the vvhich they puniſh others. but if they be open offenders them ſelues, in the ſame ſort for vvhich they iudge other, they giue ſcandal, and thereby aggrauate their ſinnes very much. Proprely here he forbiddeth to charge an other falſely or truely vvith theſe crimes vvhereof him ſelf is as farre guilty or more then the other, as the Ievves ſpecially did the Gentils, to vvhom he ſpeaketh here.
                  
                     4. Doeſt thou contemne?) This proueth that God offereth his grace and mercie to many,Gods long ſuffering is for our repentance. and by long patience and ſufferance expecteth their repētance, differring their puniſhment of purpoſe that they may amend, and that he is not delighted in their perdition, nor is the cauſe of their ſinne: but contrarievviſe that they harden their ovvne hartes, and of their ovvne free vvil relect his grace and contemne his benignitie.
                  
                     6. According to his vvorkes.) Though the holy Apoſtles ſpecial purpoſe be in this Epiſtle, to commend vnto the Gentiles that truſted ſo much in their moral vvorkes, the faith in Chriſt: yet leſt any man ſhould thinke or gather vntruely of his vvordes,Good vvorkes meritoriou
                           •
                        . that Chriſtian mens vvorkes vvere not meritorious or the cauſe of Saluation, he expreſly vvriteth, that God giueth as vvel euerlaſting life and glorie to men, for and according to their good vvorkes, as he giueth damnation for the contrarie vvorkes.Li. de grat. & lib. arb. c. 8. And hovv ſo euer Heretikes fondly flee from the euidence of theſe places, yet S. Auguſtine ſaith, Life euerlaſting to be rendered for good vvorkes according to this manifeſt Scripture, God ſhal render to euery man according to his vvorkes.
                  
                  
                     13. Not the hearers.) This ſame ſentence agreable alſo to Chriſtes vvordes (Mat. 
                           •
                        , 21▪) is the very ground of S. Iames diſputation, that not faith alone, but good vvorkes alſo do iuſtifie. Therfore S. Paul (hovvſoeuer ſome peruerſly conſter his vvordes in other place) meaneth the ſame that S. Iames. And here * he ſpeaketh not properly of the firſt iuſtification,Aug. de Sp. & lit. c. 16. to. 3. vvhen an Infidel or il man is made iuſt,The firſt, iuſtification, vvithout vvorkes: the ſecond, by vvorkes. vvho had no acceptable vvorkes before to be iuſtified by (of vvhich kind he ſpecially meaneth in other places of this Epiſtle) but he ſpeaketh of the ſecond iuſtification or increaſe of former iuſtice, vvhich he that is in Gods grace, daily procedeth in, by doing al kind of good vvorkes,S. Paul ſpeaketh of the firſt ſpecially, S. Iames of the ſecond. vvhich be iuſtices, and for doing of vvhich, he is iuſt in deede before God. and of this kinde doth S. Iames namely treate. Vvhich is directly againſt the Heretikes of this time, vvho not only attribute nothing to the vvorkes done in ſinne and infidelitie, but eſteeme nothing at al of al Chriſtian mens vvorkes tovvard iuſtification and ſaluation, condemning them as vncleane, ſinful, hy pocritical, Phariſaical: vvhich is directly againſt theſe & other Scripture, and plaine blaſpheming of Chriſt and his grace, by vvhoſe ſpirit and cooperation vve doe them.
                  
                     13. Shal be iuſtified.) Of al other Articles deceitfully handled by Heretikes, they vſe moſt guile in this of Iuſtification:Againſt imputatiue iuſtice. and ſpecially by the equiuocation of certaine vvordes, vvhich is proper to al contentious vvranglers, and namely in this vvord, Iuſtifie, Vvhich becauſe they finde ſometime to ſignifie the acquiting of a guilty man of ſome crime vvhere of he is in deede guilty, & for vvhich he ought to be condemned, (as by mans iudgement either of ignorance or of purpoſe often a very malefactor is deemed or declared and pronounced innocent) they falſly make it ſo ſignifie in this place and the like, vvhereſoeuer man is ſaid to be iuſtified of God for his vvorkes or othervviſe: as though it vvere ſaid, that God iuſtifieth man, that is to ſay, imputeth to him the iuſtice of Chriſt,
 though he be not in deede iuſt: or of fauour reputeth him as iuſt, vvhen in deede he is vvicked, impious, and vniuſt. Vvhich is a moſt blaſphemous doctrine againſt God, making him either ignorant vvho is iuſt, and ſo to erre in his iudgement, or not good, that can loue and ſaue him vvhom he knovveth to be euill.True inherent iuſtice more for Gods glorie, & for the commendation of Chriſts merites. And a maruelous pitieful blindnes it is in the Churches Aduerſaries, that they ſhould thinke it more to Gods glorie, and more to the commendation of Chriſtes iuſtice, merites, and mercie, to call and count an il man ſo continuing, for iuſt: then by his grace and mercie to make him of an il one, iuſt in deede, and ſo truely to iuſtifie him, or as the vvord doth here ſignifie, to eſteeme and approue for iuſt in deede, him, that by his grace keepeth his lavv and commaundements. For, that the keepers or doers of the commaundements be iuſt and ſo reputed, it is plaine by the correſpondence to the former vvordes, Not the hearers are iuſt, but the doers. Vvherevpon S. Auguſtine de Sp. & lit. c. 26. to. 
                           •
                        . hath theſe vvordes, When it is ſaid, The doers of the Lavv ſhalbe iuſtified, vvhat other thing is ſaid, then. The iuſt ſhalbe iuſtified? for the doers of the Lavv verily are iuſt.
                  
                  
                     26. Keepe the iuſtices.) If a Gentile either novv ſince Chriſt, by his grace and faith, or any other before Chriſt, not of the ſtocke of Abraham, through the Spirit of God keepe the iuſtices of the Lavv,True iuſtice both in Ievv and Gentile, is by keeping the Lavv. he is iuſt no leſſe then if he had been outvvardl
                        •
                      circumciſed, and ſhal condemne the circumciſed Ievv not keeping the Lavv, vvithout vvhich, his outvvard Sacrament can not ſerue him, but ſhal be much to his condemnation, that hauing the Lavv and peculiar Sacraments of God, he did not keepe the Lavv, nor invvardly exerciſe that in his hart vvhich the outvvard ſigne did import. And al this is no more but to inſinuate that true iuſtice is not in faith only or knovvledge of the Lavv, or in the name either of Ievv or Chriſtian, but in doing good vvorkes and keeping the Lavv by Gods grace.
                  
                     29. In ſpirit, not letter.] The outvvard ceremonies, Sacraments, threates, and commaundements of God in the Lavv,The letter, and the ſpirit. are called the letter: the invvard vvorking of God in mens hart, and enduing him vvith faith,The carnal, and ſpiritual Ievve. hope, and charitie, and vvith loue, liking, vvil, and abilitie to keepe his commaundements by the grace and merites of Chriſt, are called the ſpirit. In vvhich ſenſe, the carnal Ievv vvas a Ievv according to the letter, and he vvas circumciſed after the letter: but the true beleeuing Gentil obſeruing by Gods grace in hart and in Gods ſight, that vvhich vvas meant by that carnal ſigne,de ſp. & lit. to. 3. is a Ievv according to the ſpirit, and iuſtified by God. Of the ſpirit and letter S. Auguſtine made a famous vvorke, very neceſſarie for the vnderſtanding of this Epiſtle.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He graunteth that the Ievves did paſſe the Heathen Gentils, in Gods benefits, 9 but not in their ovvne vvorkes. concluding, that he hath ſhevved, both Ievv and Gentil to be ſinners: 18 and therfore (inferring) that there muſt be ſome other vvay to Saluation, indifferent to both▪ vvhich is to beleeue in IESVS CHRIST, that for his ſake their ſinnes may be forgiuen them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHAT preeminence then hath the Ievv, or what is the profit of circumciſion? ✝ 
                     verse 2 Much by al meanes. Firſt ſurely becauſe the vvordes of God vvere cōmitted to them. ✝ 
                     verse 3 for vvhat if certaine of them haue not beleeued? Hath their incredulitie made the faith of God fruſtrate?Io. 3, 33. ✝ 
                     verse 4 God forbid. but * God is true: & 
*
                     
                        •
                     od only by nature is true, al mere men by nature may lie, deceiue and be deceiued: yet God by his grace & ſpirit may and doth preſerue the Apoſtles and principal Gouerners of his people & the Church and Councels in al truth, though they vvere and are mere men. euery man a lyer,Pſ. 115, 11. as it is vvritten: That thou maieſt be iuſtified in thy vvordes,
                  Pſ. 50, 6. 
                  and ouercome vvhen thou art iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But ″ if our iniquitie commend the iuſtice of God, vvhat ſhal vve ſay? Is God vniuſt that executeth vvrath? (I ſpeake according to man) ✝ 
                     verse 6 God forbid othervviſe hovv ſhal God iudge this vvorld? ✝ 
                     verse 7 For if the veritie of God hath abounded in my lie, vnto his glorie, vvhy am I alſo yet iudged as a ſinner, ✝ 
                     verse 8 and not (as vve are blaſphemed, and as ſome report vs to ſay) let vs
 doe euil, that there may come good? vvhoſe damnation is iuſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  Vvhat then? do vve excel them? No, not ſo. For vve haue argued the Ievves and the Greekes, al to be vnder ſinne:  ✝ 
                        verse 10 as it is vvritten:
                  Pſ. 13, 1. 52, 3. That ″ there is not any man iuſt, ✝ 
                     verse 11 there is not that vnderſtandeth, there is not that ſeeketh after God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Al haue declined, they are become vnprofitable together: there is not that doeth good, there is not ſo much as one.Pſ. 5, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Their throte is an open ſepulchre, vvith their tonges they dealt deceitefully.
Pſ. 139, 4▪
                   The venim
                     Aſpidum. A kinde of litle ſerpents. of aſpes vnder their lippes. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvhoſe mouth is ful of malediction and bitternes:Pſ, 9, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Their feete ſvvift to ſhede bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Deſtruction and infelicitie in their vvaies:Eſ. 19, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and the vvay of peace they haue not knovven.Pro. 1, 16▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 18 There is no feare of God before their eies.  ✝ 
                        verse 19 And vve knovv that vvhatſoeuer the Lavv ſpeaketh,
                  Pſ. 35, 2. 
                  to them it ſpeaketh that are in the Lavv: that euery mouth may be ſtopped, and al the vvorld may be made ſubiect to God: ✝ 
                        verse 20 becauſe
* ″ by the vvorkes of the Lavv no fleſh ſhal be iuſtified before him.
                  Gal. 2, 16. 
                  For by the Lavv is the knovvledge of ſinne.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 But novv vvithout the Lavv ″ the iuſtice of God is manifeſted: teſtified by the lavv and the Prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the iuſtice of God by faith of IESVS CHRIST, vnto al and vpō al thatTo beleeue in him, here compriſeth not only the act of faith, but of hope & charitie, as the Apoſtle explicateth him ſelf. Galat. 5, 6.
                   beleeue in him. For there is no diſtinction. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For al haue ſinned: and doe neede the glorie of God. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Iuſtified
No man atteineth his firſt iuſtification by the merites either of his faith or workes, but merely by Chriſtes grace and mercie: though his faith & workes proced
                        •
                     g of grace be diſpoſitiōs & preparations therevnto. gratis by his grace, by the redemption that is in CHRIST IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvhom God hath propoſed apropitiatour▪
                   propitiation', by faith in his bloud, to the ſhevving of his iuſtice, for the remiſſion of former ſinnes, ✝ 
                     verse 26 in the toleration of God, to the ſhevving of his iuſtice in this time: that he may be iuſt, and iuſtifying him that is of the faith of IESVS CHRIST.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 Vvhere is then thy boaſting? it is excluded. by vvhat lavv? of deedes? No, but by the lavv of faith. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For vve account a man to be iuſtified ″ by faith vvithout the vvorkes of the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Is he God of the Ievves only? is he not alſo of the Gentiles? Yes of the Gentiles alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 30 For it is one God, that iuſtifieth circumciſion by faith, and prepuce by faith. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Do vve then deſtroy the Lavv by faith? God forbid. but vve do eſtabliſh the Lavv.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     5. If your iniquitie.) No maruel that many novv a da
                        •
                     es deduce falſe and deteſtable concluſions out of this Apoſtles high and hard vvritings,2. 
                           •
                        et. 3. ſeeing that S. Peter noted it in his daies,S. Paules ſpeaches miſtaken of the vvicked▪
                      and him ſelf here confeſſeth that his preaching and ſpeaches vvere then falſely miſconſtrued: as though he
 
                     
                        •
                     ad taught that the Ievves and Gentils il life and incredulity had been directly the cauſe of Gods more mercie, and that therfore ſinne commeth of God to the aduancement of his glorie, and conſequently that men might or ſhould doe il,Ro. 5, 2
                           •
                        . that good might enſue thereof. Vvhich blaſphemous conſtructions they tooke of theſe and the like vvordes:Ro. 3, 4. 
                     vvhere ſinne abounded, there did grace more abound, and, The Lavv entered in, that ſinne might abound. and our our of the Pſalme 50. That thou maieſt be iuſtified in thy vvordes, and ouercome vvhen thou art iu
                           •
                        ged. As though he meant that men do ſinne, to the end that God may be iuſtified. And at al theſe and the like places of the Apoſtle though forevvarned by S. Peter, and by the Apoſtles ovvne defenſe and Proteſtation, that he neuer meant ſuch horrible things,The ſenſe of the places that ſound, as if God cauſed ſinne. yet the vvicked alſo of this time do ſtumble and fall. But the true meaning is in al ſuch places, that God can and doth vvhen it pleaſeth him, conuert thoſe ſinnes vvhich man committeth againſt him and his commaundements, to his glorie: though the ſinnes them ſelues ſtand not vvith his vvil, intention, nor honour, but be directly againſt the ſame, and therfore may not be committed that any good may fall. for, vvhat good ſo euer accidentally falleth, it procedeth not of the ſinne, but of Gods mercie that can pardon, and of his omnipotencie that can turne il to good. And therfore againſt thoſe earnal interpretations, S. Paul very carefully & diligently giueth reaſon alſo in this place v. 6, that it is impoſſible: becauſe God could not iuſtly puniſh any man, nor ſit in iudgement at the later day for ſinne vvithout plaine iniurie, if either him ſelf vvould haue ſinne committed, or man might doe it to his glorie. Therfore let al ſincere readers of the Scriptures, and ſpecially of S. Pauls vvritings, hold this for a certaintie, as the Apoſtles ovvne defenſe (vvhatſoeuer he ſeeme to ſay hereafter ſounding in their ſenſe, that ſinne commeth of God, or may therfore be committed that he may vvorke good thereof) that the Apoſtle him ſelf condemneth that ſenſe as ſlaunderous and blaſphemous.
                  
                     10. Not any iuſt] Theſe general ſpeaches, that both Ievv and Gentile be in ſinne, and none at al iuſt,Iob. 1. are not ſo to be taken,Hovv it is ſaid, none iuſt.
                      that none in neither ſort vvere euer good: the Scriptures expreſly ſaying that Iob,Luc. 1
                           •
                        
                      Zacharie, Eliſabeth, and ſuch like, vvere iuſt before God, & it vvere blaſphemie to ſay that theſe vvordes alleaged out of the 13 Pſalme, vvere meant in Chriſtes mother, in S. Iohn the Baptiſt, in the Apoſtles &c. For, this only is the ſenſe: that neither by the lavv of nature, nor lavv of Moyſes, could any man be iuſt or auoid ſuch ſinnes as here be reckened, but by faith and the grace of God, by vvhich there vvere a number in al ages (ſpecially among the Ievves) that vvere iuſt and holy, vvhom theſe vvordes touch not, being ſpoken only to the multitude of the vvicked, vvhich the Prophet maketh as it vvere a ſeueral body conſpiring againſt Chriſt, and perſecuting the iuſt and godly, of vvhich il companie he ſaith, that none vvas iuſt nor feared God.
                  
                     20. By the vvorkes of the Lavv.) S. Hierom and S. Chryſoſtom expound this of the ceremonial vvorkes only,No vvorkes auaile vvithout faith and grace. and in that ſenſe the Apoſtle ſpecially proſecuteth this propoſition in his Epiſtle to the Galatians but it is true alſo of al mans moral vvorkes done vvithout faith & the grace of God: vvhich can not be acceptable or auailable in Gods ſight, to iuſtifie any man, And ſo S. Auguſtine taketh it de Sp. & lit. c. 
                           •
                        . to. 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     22. Iuſtice of God) Bevvare of the vvicked and vaine commentarie of the Caluiniſtes, gloſing, the iuſtice of God to be that vvhich is reſident in Chriſt,The Heretikes phantaſtical or imputatiue iuſtice. apprehended by our faith: and ſo that imputed to vs vvhich vve in deede haue not, Vvherein at once they haue forged them ſelues againſt Gods manifeſt vvord, a nevv no iuſtice, a phantaſtical apprehenſion of that vvhich is not, a falſe faith and vntrue imputation, vvhereas the iuſtice of God here, is that vvherevvith he endueth a man at his firſt conuerſion, and is novv in a man, and therfore mans iuſtice: but yet Gods Iuſtice alſo, becauſe it is of God.De p
                           ••
                        
                        mer. li. 1 
                           •
                        . 9. 10. Of this iuſtice in vs, vvhereby vve be truely iuſtified and in deede made iuſt, S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh thus: The grace of Chriſt doth vvorke our illumination and iuſtification invvardly alſo.
                     True inhaerent iuſtice. And againe, He giueth to the faithful the moſt ſecrete grace of his Spirit, vvhich ſe
                           •
                        retly he povvreth into infants alſo. And againe, They are iuſtified in Chriſt that beleeue in him through the ſecrete communication and inſpiration of ſpiritual grace, vvhereby euery one leaneth to our Lord. And againe, Hemaketh iuſt 
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        evving by the Spirit, and regeneration by grace.
                  
                  
                     28. By faith, vvithout vvorkes.) This is the place vvherevpon the Proteſtants gather falſly their only faith,Vvhat vvorkes are excluded from iuſtification. and vvhich they commonly auouch, as though the Apoſtle ſaid, that only faith doth iuſtifie. Vvhere he both in vvordes and meaning excepteth only the vvorkes of the Lavv done vvithout Chriſt before our conuerſion: neither excluding the Sacraments of Baptiſme or Penance, not hope and charitie, or other Chriſtian vertues, al vvhich be the iuſtice of faith, as the good vvorkes proceding thereof, be likevviſe the lavv and iuſtice of faith. Al vvhich the Aduerſaries vvould exclude by foiſting in the ter
                        •
                     e,de grat, & lib. arb. c. 7. only. Of vvhich kind of men S. Auguſtine vpon this place faith thus: Men not vnderſtanding that vvhich the Apoſtle ſaith, (vve counte a man to be iuſtified by faith vvithout the vvorkes of the Lavv) did thinke that he ſaid, faith vvould ſuffiſe a man though he liued il and had no good vvorkes.
                     Gal. 1. 
                     Which God forbid the veſſel of election ſhould thinke: vvho in a certaine place after he had ſaid, * In Chriſt IESVS neither circumciſion nor prepuce auaileth any vvhit, he ſtraight added, but faith vvhich vvorketh by loue.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  That Abraham vvas not iuſtified by his ovvne povver, but by Gods grace, in vvhom he beleeued (6 vvhich is a vvay for the ſinner alſo to come to iuſtice.) 9 And that, ſeing he vvas not as then circumciſed, not only the circumciſed lovv, but alſo the vncircumciſed Gentil may by beleeuing the Chriſtian faith, come to iuſtice, as Abraham did: 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſpecially conſidering alſo, that Abraham vvas promiſed to be Father of the vvhole vvorld, and not only of the Ievves, to vvhom onely the Lavv vvas giuen: and that, not to fulfil the promiſe, but for an other cauſe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  VVHAT ſhal vve ſay then that ″ Abraham did finde, our father according to the fleſh? ✝ 
                     verse 2 For if Abraham vvere iuſtified ″ by vvorkes: he hath glorie,Gen. 5, 6. but not vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vvhat ſaieth the Scripture?Gal. 3, 6. 
                  Abraham beleeued God,
                  Ia. 2, 23. 
                  and it vvas reputed him to iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But ″ to him that vvorketh, the revvard is not
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   imputed according to grace, but according to dette. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But ″ to him that vvorketh not, yet beleeueth in him that iuſtifieth the impious, his faith is
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   reputed to iuſtice according to the purpoſe of the grace of God. ✝ 
                     verse 6 ″ As Dauid alſo termeth the bleſſednes of a man, to vvhom God reputeth iuſtice vvithout vvorkes,Pſ. 31, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 7 
                  Bleſſed are they, vvhoſe iniquities be forgiuen, and vvhoſe ſinnes be ″ couered. ✝ 
                        verse 8 Bleſſed is the man to vvhom our Lord hath not imputed ſinne.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 This bleſſednes then doth it abide in the circumciſion, or in the prepuce alſo? For vve ſay that vnto Abraham faith vvasThe vvord. Reputed. doth not diminiſh the truth of the iuſtice, as though it vvere reputed for iuſtice, being not iuſtice in deede, but ſignifieth, that as it vvas in it ſelf, ſo God eſteemed & reputed it, as the ſame greeke vvord muſt needes be taken v. 4. next going before, & 1 Cor. 4, 
                        •
                     . and els where. reputed to iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Hovv vvas it reputed? in circumciſion, or in prepuce? Not in circumciſion, but in prepuce. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And * he receiuedOur Sacraments of the nevv Lavv giue ex opere operato that grace and iuſtice of faith vvhich here is commended. vvhereas circū
                     ciſiō vvas but a ſigne or marke of the ſame. the ſigne of circumciſion,Gen. 17, 10. ″ a ſeale of the iuſtice of faith that is in prepuce: that he might be the father of al that beleeue by the prepuce, that vnto them alſo it may be reputed to iuſtice: ✝ 
                     verse 12 and might be father of circumciſion, not to them only that are of the circumciſion, but to them alſo that folovv the ſteppes of the faith that is in the prepuce of our father Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For not by the Lavv vvas the promiſſe to Abraham, or to his ſeede, that he ſhould be heire of the vvorld: but by the iuſtice of faith. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For if they that are of the Lavv, be heires: faith is made voide, the promiſſe is aboliſhed. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For the Lavv vvorketh vvrath. For vvhere is no lavv, neither is there preuarication. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Therfore of faith: that according to grace the promiſſe may be firme to al the ſeede, not to that only vvhich is of the Lavv, but to that alſo vvhich is of the faith of Abraham, vvho is
 the father of vs al,Gen. 17, 4. (as it is vvritten: ✝ 
                     verse 17 
                  For, a father of many nations haue I appointed thee) before God, vvhomhe beleeued, thou didſt beleeue', vvho quickeneth the dead: and calleth thoſe things that are not, as thoſe things that are. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vvho contrarie to hope beleeued in hope: that he might be made the father of many nations,Gen. 15, 5. according to that vvhich vvas * ſaid to him: So ſhal thy ſeede be, as the ſtarres of heauen, and the ſand of the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And he vvas not vveakened in faith: neither did he cōſider his ovvne body novv quite dead, vvhereas he vvas almoſt an hundred yeres old, and the dead matrice of Sara. ✝ 
                     verse 20 In the promiſſe alſo of God he ſtaggered not by diſtruſt: but vvas ſtrengthened in faith, giuing glorie to God: ✝ 
                     verse 21 moſt fully knovving that vvhatſoeuer he promiſed, he is able alſo to doe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Therfore vvas it alſo reputed him to iuſtice.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And it is not vvritten only for him, that it vvas reputed him to iuſtice: ✝ 
                     verse 24 but alſo ″ for vs, to vvhom it ſhal be reputed beleeuing in him, that raiſed vp IESVS CHRIST our Lord from the dead, ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvho vvas deliuered vp for our ſinnes, and roſe againe for our iuſtification.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     1. Abraham.] The Apoſtle diſputing in this chapter, as before, againſt them that thought they might be iuſtified by their vvorkes done vvithout the grace of Chriſt and faith in him,Abrahams Workes before faith. propoſeth Abraham for an example, and proueth that he had no iuſtice nor eſtimation of iuſtice before God by any vvorkes done before he had faith, or that proceded not of faith and Gods grace.
                  
                     2. By vvorkers.] If Abraham did any commendable vvorkes before he beleeued Chriſt, as many Philoſophers did,Iuſtice before men, and iuſtice before God. men might count him iuſt therfore, but in Gods ſign (vvho accepteth nothing vvithout faith in him, or that procedeth not from his grace) he ſhould neuer haue had the eſtimation of a iuſt man. Therfore God in the Scriptures reputing him as a iuſt man, giueth the cauſe therof, ſaying. Abraham beleeued God, and it vvas reputed to him for iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     4▪ To him that vvorketh.]
                     Not vvorkes, but mere grace is cauſe of our firſt iuſtificatiō. That is to ſay, He that preſumeth of his ovvne vvorkes as done of him ſelf vvithout faith, Gods helpe, and grace: and ſaying, that grace or iuſtification vvere giuen to him for his vvorkes: this man doth chalenge his iuſtification as dette, and not as of fauour and grace.
                  5. To him that vvorketh not] He vvorketh not (in this place) that hath no vvorkes or alleageth not his vvorkes done in his infidelitie as cauſe of his iuſtification, but faith in Chriſt, and that proceding of mere grace. Vvherevpon S. Auguſtine ſaith: Knovv thou that faith found thee vniuſt. And if faith giuen to thee, made the iuſt, it found thee a vvicked one vvhom it might make iuſt. If it found thee vvicked, and of ſuch an one made thee iuſt, vvhat vvorkes hadſt thou being then vvicked? None couldeſt thou haue (nor canſt haue) before thou beleeudſt. Beleeue then in him that iuſtifieth the impious, that thy good vvorkes may be good vvorkes in deede. Auguſt. in Pſal. 31.
                  
                  
                     6. As Dauid termeth.] The Proteſtants for,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     termeth, tranſlato, deſcribeth, for that they vvould haue the ignorant beleeue,Heretical tranſlation. the vvhole nature & definition of Iuſtification to be nothing els but remiſſion of ſinnes, and no grace or inherent iuſtice giuen from God at al. Vvhen the Apoſtle vvould ſay nothing els, but that in the firſt juſtificatiō God findeth no good vvorkes or merites to revvard, but only ſinnes, to forgiue vnto ſuch as haue faith in him.
                  
                     7. Couered. 8. not imputed.]
                     
                        Vvhat is, Sinnes couered or not imputed. You may not gather (as the Heretikes doe) of theſe termes, couered, and not imputed, that the ſinnes of men be neuer truely forgiuen, but hidden only, for that derogateth much to the force of Chriſtes bloud and to the grace of God, by vvhich our offences be
 truly remitted.Io. 1, 29, 2 Cor. 6, 11. He is the Lambe that taketh avvay the ſinnes of the vvorld, that vvaſheth, and blotteth out our ſinnes, therfore to couer them, or, not to impute them, is, not to charge vs vvith our ſinnes,Apoc. 1, 5. becauſe by remiſſion they be cleane taken avvay: othervviſe it vvere but a 
                        •
                     eined forgiueneſſe. See S. Auguſtine in pſal. 3
                           •
                         enarrat. 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     11. A ſeale.] The Heretikes vvould proue hereby, that the Sacraments of the Church giue not grace or iuſtice of faith, but that they be notes, markes, and badges only of our remiſſion of ſinnes had by faith before:The Sacramēts are not mere markes, but cauſes of iuſtification. becauſe Abraham vvas iuſt before, and tooke this Sacrament for a ſeale thereof only. To vvhich muſt be anſvvered, that it folovveth not that it is ſo in al, becauſe it vvas ſo in the Patriarch, vvho vvas iuſt before, and vvas therfore as it vvere the founde: of Circumciſion, or he in vvhom God vvould firſt eſtabliſh the ſame: no more then it folovveth that, becauſe the Holy Sacrament of the Altar remitted not ſinnes to Chriſt nor iuſtified him, therefore it hath that effect in none. Looke S. Auguſtine de baptiſmo contra Donatiſtas li. 4. c. 24. Vvhere you ſhal ſee that (though not in Abraham) yet in Iſaac his ſonne, and ſo conſequently in the reſt, the Sacrament vvent before, and iuſtice folovved.
                  
                     24. For vs, to vvhom it ſhal be reputed.] By this it is moſt plaine againſt our Aduerſaries, that the ſaith vvhich vvas reputed for iuſtice to Abraham, vvas his beleefe of an Article reuealed to him by God, that is to ſay, his aſſent and credit giuen to Gods ſpeaches: as in vs his poſteritie according to the ſpirit,By vvhat faith vve are iuſtified. it is here plainely ſaid, that iuſtice ſhal be reputed to vs by beleeuing the Articles of Chriſtes death and Reſurrection, and not by any fond ſpecial faith, fiducia or confidence of eche mans ovvne ſaluation, to eſtabliſh the vvhich fiction, they make no account of the faith Catholike, that is, vvherevvith vve beleeue the Articles of the faith, vvhich only iuſtifieth, but call it by contempt, an hiſtorical faith: ſo as they may terme Abrahams faith, and our Ladies faith, of vvhich it vvas * ſaid,Luc. 1, 45. Beata quae credidiſti, Bleſſed art thou that haſt beleeued. And ſo in truth they deny as vvel the iuſtification by faith, as by vvorkes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Hauing therfore through faith in Chriſt, obteined the beginning, he ſhevveth vvhat great cauſe vve haue to hope for the accompliſhment. 12 And then he procedeth in his arguing, and ſhevveth that as by one, 
                        •
                     l vvere made ſinners, ſo by one, al muſt he made iuſt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BEING iuſtified therfore by faith,The Epiſtle on Imber Saturday in vvhitſonweeke, And for many Martyrs. ″ let vs haue peace tovvard God by our Lord IESVS CHRIST: ✝ 
                     verse 2 by vvhō alſo vve haue ″ acceſſe through faith into this grace vvherein vve ſtand, and glorie,Chriſtian mē do not vaunt thē ſelues of the certaītie of their ſaluatiō, but glorie in the hope thereof onely, vvhich hope is here inſinuated to be giuen in our iuſtificatiō, & is aftervvard to be cōfirmed by probation in tribulation. in the hope of the glorie of the ſonnes of God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And not only this: but alſo vve glorie in tribulations, knovving that tribulation vvorketh patience: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and patience, probation: and ″ probation, hope. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and hope confoundeth not: becauſe ″ the charitie of God is povvred forth in our hartes, by the holy Ghoſt vvhich is giuen vs. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 6 For vvhy did Chriſt,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvhen vve as yet vvereThe Heretikes falſely tranſlate, of no ſtrength, to take avvay al free vvil. No. Test. 15
                           •
                        0.
                   vveake, according to the time die for the impious? ✝ 
                     verse 7 For, ſcarſe for a iuſt man doth any die: for perhaps for a good man durſt ſome man die. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But God commendeth his charitie in vs: becauſe, vvhen as yet vve vvere ſinners, Chriſt died for vs. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Much more therfore now being iuſtified in his bloud, ſhal vve be ſaued from vvrath
 by him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For if, vvhen vve vvere enemies, vve vvere recōciled to God by the death of his Sonne: much more being reconciled, ſhal vve be ſaued in the life of him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And not only this: but alſo vve glorie in God through our Lord IESVS Chriſt, by vvhom novv vve haue receiued reconciliation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore, as ″ by one man ſinne entred into this vvorld, and by ſinne death: and ſo vnto al men death did paſſe, in vvhich al ſinned. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For euen vnto the Lavv ſinne vvas in the world: but ſinne was not imputed, when the law was not. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But death reigned from Adam ″ vnto Moyſes, euen on them alſo that ſinned not after the ſimilitude of the preuarication of Adam, vvho is a figure of him to come. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But not as the offence, ſo alſo the gift. for if by the offence of one, many died: much more the grace of God and the gift. in the grace of one man IESVS Chriſt, hath abounded vpon many. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And not as by oneſinner, ſinne', ſo alſo the gift, for iudgemēt in deede is of one, to condemnatiō: but grace is of many offences, to iuſtificatiō. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For if in the offēce of one, death reigned by one: much more they that receiue the aboundance of grace and of donation & of iuſtice, ſhal reigne in life by one, IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Therfore as by the offence of one, vnto al men to condemnation: ſo alſo by the iuſtice of one, vnto al men to iuſtification of life. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For as by the diſobedience of one man, many vvere made ſinners: ſo alſo by the obedience of one, manyHere vve may ſee againſt the Heretikes, that they vvhich, be borne of Chriſt and iuſtified by him, be made & conſtituted iuſt in deede, & not by imputation only: as al that be borne of Adam, be vniuſt and ſinners in truth, & not by imputation. ſhal be made iuſt. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But the Lavv entred in, that ſinne might abound. And vvhere ſinne abounded, grace did more abound. ✝ 
                     verse 21 that as ſinne reigned to death: ſo alſo grace may reigne by iuſtice to life euerlaſting, through IESVS Chriſt our Lord.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     1. Let vs haue.)
                     Againſt the Heretikes ſpecial faith and ſecuritie. Vvhether vve read,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     Let vs haue peace, as diuerſe alſo of the Greeke Doctors (Chryſoſt. Orig. Theodor. O
                           ••
                        um. Theophyl.) doe, or, We haue peace: it maketh nothing for the vaine ſecuritie and infallible certaintie vvhich our Aduerſaries ſay, euery man ought to haue vpon his preſumed iuſtification by faith, that him ſelf is in Gods fauour, and ſure to be ſaued: peace tovvards God, being here nothing els, but the ſincere reſt, tranquillitie and comfort of minde and conſcience, vpon the hope he hath, that he is reconciled to God. Sure it is that the Catholike faith, by vvhich, and none other, men be iuſtified, neither teacheth nor breedeth any ſuch ſecuritie of ſaluation. And therfore they haue made to them ſelues an other faith vvhich they call Fiducia
                           •
                        , quite vvithout the compaſſe of the Creede and Scriptures.
                  
                     2. Acceſſe through faith.)
                     Iuſtificatiō attributed much to faith as to the f
                           •
                        ndation▪
                      Iuſtification, implieth al grace and vertues receiued by Chriſtes merites, but the entrance and acceſſe to this grace and happy ſtate is by faith, becauſe faith is the ground
 and firſt foundation to build on, and port to enter into the reſt. Vvhich is the cauſe that out luſtification is attributed to faith, namely in this Epiſtle, though faith it ſelf be of grace alſo.
                  
                     4. Probation hope.)
                     Our hope is ſtrengthened by vvel doing. This refelleth the errour alſo of the Proteſtants, that vvould haue our hope to hold only on Gods promiſes, and not a vvhit on our doings. Vvhere vve ſee that it ſtandeth (and is ſtrengthened alſo) vpon patience and conſtancie, and good probation and trial of our ſelues in aduerſities: and that ſo grounded vpon Gods promiſes and our ovvne doing, it neuer confoundeth.
                  
                     5. Charitie is povvred.)
                     Charitie is a qualitie in vs. Charitie alſo is giuen vs in our firſt iuſtification, and not only imputed vnto vs, but in deede invvardly povvred into our hartes by the Holy Ghoſt, vvho vvith and in his giftes & grace is beſtovved vpon vs. for this Charitie of God is not that vvhich is in God, but that vvhich he giueth vs, as S. Auguſtine expoundeth it: li. de Sp. & lit. c. 32. Vvho referreth this place alſo to the grace of God giuen in the Sacrament of Confirmation, de bapt. cont. Donat. li. 
                           •
                         c. 16.
                  
                  
                     12. By one man ſinne entred.) By this place ſpecially the Church of God defendeth and proueth againſt the old Heretikes the Pelagians,Conc. Tri. ſeſſ. s
                           •
                         decr. de pe
                           •
                        . orig. that denied children to haue any original ſinne, or to be baptized for the remiſſion thereof:Al by Adam borne in original ſinne. that in and by Adam al be conceiued, borne, and conſtituted ſinners. Which no leſſe maketh againſt the Caluiniſts alſo, that affirme, Chriſtiā mens children to be holy from their mothers vvombe. And the ſame reaſon vvhich S. Auguſtine deduceth (li. 
                           •
                         c. 
                           •
                        . 9. de pec. meritis.) out of this text, to proue againſt the ſaid Pelagians, that the Apoſtle meaneth not of the general imitation of Adam in actual ſinnes, ſerueth againſt Eraſmus and others, inclining rather to that nevv expoſition, then to the Churches and fathers graue iudgement herein. Cone. Mileuitanum c. 2.
                  
                  
                     14. vnto Moyſes.) Euen in the time of the Lavv of nature, vvhen men knevv not ſinne, and therfore it could not by mans iudgement be imputed: and in the time of Moyſes Lavv, vvhen the commaundement taught them to knovv it, but gaue them no ſtrength nor grace to auoid it, ſinne did reigne,Chriſt only not conceiued in ſinne, and (as it is thought) our B. Lady. and therevpon death and damnation, euen til Moyſes incluſiuè, that is to ſay, euen til the end of his Lavv. And that not in them onely vvhich actually ſinned, as Adam did, but in infants vvhich neuer did actually offend, but onely vvere borne and conceiued in ſinne, that is to ſay, hauing their natures defiled, deſtitute of iuſtice, and auerted from God in Adam, and by their deſcent from him: Chriſt onely excepted, being conceiued vvithout mans ſeede, and his mother for his honour and by his ſpecial protection (as many godly deuou
                        •
                      men iudge) preſerued from the ſame.
                  
                     20. That ſinne might abound.)
                     The Lavv did not cauſe more ſinne, though that vvere the ſequele thereof. 
                     That, here hath not the ſignification of cauſalitie, as though the Lavv vvere giuen for that cauſe to make ſinne abound: but it noteth the ſequele, becauſe that folovved thereof, and ſo it came to paſſe, that by the prohibition of ſinne, ſinne increaſed: by occaſion vvhereof, the force of Chriſtes grace is more amply and aboundantly beſtovved in the nevv Teſtament.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  He exhorteth vs, novv after Baptiſme, to liue no more in ſinne, but to vvalke in good vvorkes: becauſe there vve died to the one, and roſe againe to the other 14 (grace alſo giuing vs ſufficient ſtrength) 16 and vvere made free to the one, and ſeruants to the other, 21 and ſpecially becauſe of the fruite here, and the end aftervvard, both of the one and of the other.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHAT ſhal vve ſay then? Shal vve continue in ſinne that grace may abound? ✝ 
                     verse 2 God forbid. For vve that are dead to ſinne, hovv ſhal vve yet liue therein? ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  The Epiſtle vpō the 6 Sūday after Pentecoſt. Are you ignorant that al vve vvhich are baptized in Chriſt IESVS, in his death vve are baptized? ✝ 
                     verse 4 ForRemiſſion of ſinne, nevv life, ſanctification, and iuſtificatiō, are giuen by baptiſme, becauſe it reſembleth in vs and applieth to vs Chriſtes death and reſurrectiō, and engraffeth vs into him. vve are buried together vvith him by Baptiſme into death: that as Chriſt is riſen from the dead by the glorie of the father, ſo vve alſo may vvalke in nevvneſſe of life. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For if vve be become complanted to the ſimilitude of his death,
 vve ſhal be alſo of his reſurrection. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Knovving this, that our old man is crucified vvith him, that the body of ſinne may be deſtroied, to the end that vve may ſerue ſinne no longer. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For he that is dead, is iuſtified from ſinne. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And if vve be dead vvith Chriſt, vve beleeue that vve ſhal liue alſo together vvith Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 knovving that Chriſt riſing againe from the dead, novv dieth no more, death ſhal no more haue dominion ouer him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For that he died, ″ to ſinne he died once: but that he liueth, he liueth to God. ✝ 
                     verse 11 So thinke you alſo, that you are dead to ſinne, but aliue to God in Chriſt IESVS our Lord. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Let not ″ ſinne therfore reigne in your mortal body, that you obey the concupiſcences thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But neither doe ye exhibite your members inſtruments of iniquitie vnto ſinne: but exhibite your ſelues to God as of dead men, aliue: and your members inſtruments of iuſtice to God. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For ſinne ſhal not haue dominion ouer you. for you are not vnder the Lavv, but vnder grace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhat then? ſhal vve ſinne, becauſe vve are not vnder the Lavv,Io. 8, 34. but vnder grace? God forbid. ✝ 
                     verse 16 * Knovv you not that to vvhom you exhibite your ſelues ſeruants to obey,2. Pet. 2, 19. you are the ſeruants of him vvhom you obey, vvhether it be of ſinne, to death, or of obedience, to iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But thankes be to God, that you vvere the ſeruants of ſinne, butHere againe is ſignified, that our diſcharge frō the bōdage of ſinne, is by the Chriſtian faith, & by obedience to the vvhole doctrīe of Chriſts religion: in that the Apoſtle attributeth this their deliuerance frō ſinne, to their humble receiuing of the Catholike faith. haue obeied from the hart, vnto that ″ forme of doctrine, into the vvhich you haue been deliuered. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And being made free from ſinne, you vvere made ſeruants to iuſtice.The Epiſtle vpō the 7 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 19 I ſpeake an humane thing, becauſe of the infirmitie of your fleſh, for as you haue exhibited your members to ſerue vncleanneſſe and iniquitie, vnto iniquitie: ſo now exhibite your mēbers to ſerue iuſtice,
He ſignifieth that as vvhen they vvere ſubiect to ſinne by cōtinual & oftē vvorking vvickednes, they increaſed their iniquitie: that ſo alſo novv being iuſtified, they may & ſhould by external vvorkes of Iuſtice, increaſe their iuſtice and ſanctification. vnto ſanctification. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For when you vvere ſeruants of ſinne, you were free to iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 21 What fruite therfore had you then in thoſe things, for vvhich novv you are aſhamed? for the end of them is death. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But novv being made free from ſinne, and become ſeruants to God, you haue your fruite vnto ſanctification, but the end, life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For the ſtipends of ſinne, death. but ″ the grace of God, life euerlaſting in Chriſt IESVS our Lord. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     3. We that are baptized.) That vvhich before he chalenged from the Lavv of Moyſes, to faith, is novv attributed to baptiſme,Not only faith. vvhich is the firſt Sacrament of our faith and the entrance to Chriſtian religion. Whereby it is plaine that he meaneth not onely faith to iuſtifie, but the Sacraments alſo, and al Chriſtian religion, vvhich he calleth the Lavv of ſpirit, grace, and faith.
                  
                     6. Old man, body of ſinne.)
                     The old man, & the nevv. Our corrupt ſtate ſubiect to ſinne and concupiſcence, comming to vs from Adam, is called the Old man: as our perſon reformed in & by Chriſt, is named the Nevv man. And the lumpe and maſſe of ſinnes vvhich then ruled, is called the corps or body of ſinne.
                  
                     10. To ſinne he died.)
                     Dying to ſinne. Chriſt died to ſinne, vvhen by his death he deſtroied ſinne: Vve die to ſinne,Liuing to God. in that vve be diſcharged of the povver thereof, vvhich before vvas as it vvere the life of our perſons, and commaunded al the partes and faculties of our ſoule and body: as contrarievviſe vve liue to God, vvhen his grace ruleth and vvorketh in vs, as the ſoule doth rule our mortal bodies.
                  
                     12. Sinne reigne.)
                     Hovv concupiſcēce is called ſinne. Concupiſcence is here named ſinne, becauſe it is the effect, occaſion, and matter of ſinne, and is as it vvere a diſeaſe or infirmitie in vs, inclining vs to il, remaining alſo after Baptiſme according to the ſubſtance or matter thereof: but it is not properly a ſinne, nor forbidden by commaundement, til it reigne in vs, and vve obey and folovv the deſires thereof. Auguſt. 
                           •
                        i. de nup
                           •
                        . & concupiſe. c. 23. Cont. 2 epiſt. Pelag. li. 1 c. 13. Conc. Trident. Seſs. 5. decret. de pec. orig.
                  
                  
                     17. Forme of doctrine.)
                     The doctrine of our firſt Apoſtles. At the firſt conuerſion of euery nation to the Catholike faith, there is a forme & rule of beleefe ſet dovvne, vnto vvhich vvhen the people is once put by their Apoſtles, they muſt neuer by any perſuaſion of men alter the ſame, nor take of man or Angel, any nevv doctrine or Analogie of faith, as the Proteſtants call it.
                  
                     23. The grace of God,
                     Life euerlaſting a ſtipend, and yet grace. 
                     life euerlaſting.) The ſequele of ſpeache required, that as he ſaid, death or damnation is the ſtipend of ſinne, ſo life euerlaſting is the ſtipend of iuſtice, and ſo it is, and in the ſame ſenſe he ſpake in the laſt chapter: that as ſinne reigneth to death, ſo grace reigneth by iuſtice to life euerlaſting. but here he changed the ſentence ſomevvhat, calling life euerlaſting grace, rather then revvard: becauſe the merites by vvhich vve attaine vnto life, be al of Gods gift and grace. Auguſt. Ep. 105 ad Sixtum.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Our former huſband (ſinne) vvith his lavv, is dead in Baptiſme: and novv vve are maried to an other huſband (to Chriſt) to bring forth children to God, that is, good vvorkes. 7 And hovv the Lavv being good, vvas yet to vs the lavv of ſinne and death, becauſe concupiſcence reigned in vs. 17 But novv by Baptiſme grace reigneth in vs, though alſo concupiſcence doth remaine and tempt vs ſtill.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  ARE you ignorant brethren (for I ſpeake to them that knovv the Lavv) that the Lavv hath dominion ouer a man as long time as he liueth? ✝ 
                     verse 2 for * the vvoman that is vnder a huſband:1. Cor. 7, 39.
                  Nothing but death diſſolueth the band betvvixt man & vvife: though for fornication one may depart from an others companie. therfore to mary againe is aduoutrie, during the life of the partie ſeparated. her huſband liuing is bound to the lavv▪ but if her huſband be dead, ſhe is looſed from the lavv of her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Therfore her huſband liuing, ſhe ſhal be called an aduoutereſſe if ſhe be vvith an other man: but if her huſband be dead, ſhe is deliuered from the lavv of her huſband: ſo that ſhe is not an aduoutereſſe if ſhe be
 vvith an other man. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Therfore my brethrenBeing novv baptiſed and dead to ſinne, & engraffed in Chriſts myſtical body, you are diſcharged of the Lavv of Moyſes, and are free in Chriſt. you alſo are made dead to the Lavv by the body of Chriſt: that you may be an other mans vvho is riſen againe from the dead, that vve may fructifie to God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For vvhen vve vvere in the fleſh, the paſſions of ſinnes, that vvere by the Lavv, did vvorke in our members, to fructifie vnto death. ✝ 
                     verse 6 but novv vve are looſed from the lavv of death, vvherein vve vvere deteined:

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   in ſo much vve ſerue inBy Baptiſme vve haue not Chriſtes iuſtice imputed to vs, but an invvard nevvneſſe of ſpirit giuen vs and reſident in vs. nevvneſſe of ſpirit, and not in the oldnes of the letter.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvhat ſhal vve ſay then? is the Lavv ſinne? God forbid. But ſinne I did not knovv, but by the Lavv. for concupiſcēce I knevv not,Exo. 20, 17. Deu. 5, 
                        •
                     1. vnleſſe the lavv did ſay: ″ Thou ſhalt not couet. ✝ 
                     verse 8 ButSinne or con
                     
                        •
                     upiſcēce which vvas a ſleepe before, vvas wakened by prohibition, the Lavv not being the cauſe thereof, not giuing occaſion therevnto, but occaſion being taken by our corrupt nature to reſiſt that which was commaunded. ocoaſion being taken, ſinne by the commaundement vvrought in me al cōcupiſcence. For vvithout the Lavv ſinne vvas dead. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And I liued vvithout the Lavv ſometime. But vvhen the commaundement vvas come, ſinne reuiued. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And I vvas dead: and the commaundement, that vvas vnto life, the ſame to me vvas found to be vnto death. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For ſinne taking occaſion by the commaundement, ſeduced me, and by it killed me.1 Tim. 1, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore * the Lavv in deede is holy, and the commaundement holy, and iuſt, and good.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 That thē vvhich is good, to me vvas it made death? God forbid. but ſinne, that it may appeare ſinne, by the good thing vvrought me death: that ſinne might become ſinning aboue meaſure by the cōmaundemēt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For vve knovv that the Law is ſpiritual, but I am carnal, ſold vnder ſinne. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For ″ that which I vvorke, I vnderſtand not. for ″ not that vvhich I vvil, the ſame do I: but vvhich I hate, that I doe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And if that vvhich I vvil not, the ſame I doe: I cōſent to the Lavv, that it is good.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 But novv, not I vvorke it any more, but the ſinne that dvvelleth in me. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For I know that there dvvelleth not in me, that is to ſay, in my fleſh, good. For to vvil, is preſēt vvith me, but to accompliſh that vvhich is good, I finde not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For ″ not the good vvhich I vvil, that doe I: but the euil ″ vvhich I vvil not, that I doe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And if that vvhich I vvil not, the ſame I doe: novv not I vvorke it, but the ſinne that dvvelleth in me. ✝ 
                     verse 21 I finde therfore, the Lavv, to me hauing a vvil to doe good,The Epiſtle in a Votiue Maſſe for ſinnes. that euil is preſent vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For I am delighted vvith the lavv of God according to the invvard man: ✝ 
                     verse 23 but I ſee an other lavv in my members, repugning to the lavv of my minde, and captiuing me in the lavv of ſinne that
 is in my members. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vnhappie man that I am, vvho ſhal deliuer me from the body of this death? ✝ 
                     verse 25 The grace of God by IESVS Chriſt our Lord. ⊢ Therfore I my ſelf ″ vvith the minde
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ſerue the lavv of God, but vvith the fleſh, the lavv of ſinne.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Thou ſhalt not 
                           ••
                        uet.)
                     Actual concupiſcence forbidden, not habitual. It is not the habitual concupiſcence or infirmitie of our nature or ſénſual deſire or inclination to euil, coueting againſt the ſpirit, that is forbidden properly in this precept: but the conſent of our reaſon and minde vnto it, to obey and folovv the luſtes thereof, that is a ſinne and prohibited.
                  
                     15. That vvhich I vvorke.)
                     Soden inuolu
                           •
                        
                        ta
                           •
                        ie motions are no ſinne. This being vnderſtood of S. Paul himſelf or any other iuſt perſon, the ſenſe is, that the fleſh and inferiour part ſtirreth vp diuerſe diſordered motions and paſſions or perturbations againſt the minde, and vpon ſuch a ſoden ſometimes inuadeth the ſame, that before it attēdeth, or reaſon can gather it ſelf to deliberate, mā is in a ſort (though vnvvittingly) entangled. Vvhich as ſoone as it is perceiued, being of the iuſt condemned, reiected, and reſiſted, neuer maketh him a ſinner.
                  
                     15. Not that vvhich I vvil) He meaneth not,Concupiſcence taketh not avvay free vvil. that he can do no good that he vvilleth or deſireth, or that he is euer forced to do that vvhich his vvill agreeth not vnto: but that by reaſon of the forcibleneſſe of concupiſcence, vvhere of he can not rid him ſelf during life, he can not accompliſh
c. 5, 17. al the deſire of his ſpirit and minde, according as he ſaith to the Galatians, The fleſh coue
                           •
                        eth againſt the ſpirit, and the ſpirit againſt the fleſh, that not vvhatſoeuer you vvill, you can do.
                  
                  
                     19. Not the good vvhich I vvill.)
                     Sinne is voluntarie, and, otherwiſe it is no ſinne. So may the iuſt alſo be forced by the rage of concupiſcence or ſenſual appetite, to do or ſuffer many things in his inferiour part or external members, vvhich his vvill conſenteth not vnto.ep. ad Aſ
                           •
                        l
                        
                           •
                        cum 
                           •
                        00. And ſo long it is ſo farre from ſinne, that (as * S. Auguſtine faith) he neede neuer ſay to God, forgiue vs our ſinnes, for the ſame. for, ſinne is voluntarie, and ſo be not theſe paſſions.
                  
                     19. Which I vvil not.) It maketh not any thing againſt free vvill that the Apoſtle ſaith, that good men do or ſuffer ſometimes in their bodies, that vvhich the 
                        •
                     vill agreeth not vnto: but it proueth plainely free vvil. becauſe the proper act thereof, that is, to vvill or nill, to conſent or diſſent, is euer (as you may ſee here) free in it ſelf: though there may be internal or external force to ſtay the members of a man, that they obey not in euery act, that vvhich the vvill commaundeth or preſcribeth. And therfore that is neuer imputed to mā vvhich he doth in his external or internal faculties, vvhen vvil concurreth not. Yea aftervvard (v, 20) the Apoſtle ſaith, No
                           •
                         ego op
                           •
                        ror, man doeth not that vvhich is not done by his vvill: vvhich doth moſt euidently proue free vvill.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        5. With the minde, vvith the fleſh.) Nothing done by concupiſcence (vvhich the Apoſtle here calleth ſinne) vvherevnto the ſpirit,Concupiſcence defileth not a iuſt mans actiō
                        
                           •
                         as the Luther
                           •
                        s ſay. reaſon, or minde of man conſenteth not, can make him guilty before God. Neither can the motions of the fleſh in a iuſt man euer any vvhit de
                        •
                     file the operatiōs of his ſpirit, as the Lutherans do hold: but make them often more meritorious, for the continual combat that he hath vvith them. for it is plaine that the operations of the fleſh and of the ſpirit do not concurre together to make one acte, as they imagine: the Apoſtle concluding cleane contrarie▪ That in minde he ſerueth the Lavv of God, in fleſh the lavv of ſinne, that is to ſay, concupiſcence.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  That novv after Baptiſme vve are no more in ſtate of damnation, becauſe by the grace vvhich vve haue receiued, vve are able to fulfil the Lavv: vnles vve do vvilfully giue the dominion againe to concupiſ
                        •
                     ence. 1
                        •
                      Then (becauſe of the perſecutions that then vvere) he comforteth and exhorteth them vvith many reaſons.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERE is novv therefore no damnation to them that are in Chriſt IESVS: that walke not according to the fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For the lavv of the ſpirit of life in Chriſt IESVS, hath deliuered me from the lavv of ſinne and of death. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For that vvhich vvas impoſſible to the Lavv, in that it vvas vveakened by the fleſh: God ſending his ſonne in the ſimilitude of the fleſh of ſinne, euen of ſinne damned ſinne in the fleſh, ✝ 
                     verse 4 thatThis conuinceth againſt the Churches aduerſaries, that the lavv, that is, Gods cōmaundemēts may be kept, & that the keeping thereof is iuſtice, & that in chriſtian men that is fulfilled by Chriſts grace vvhich by the force of the Lavv could neuer be fulfilled. the iuſtification of the lavv might be fulfilled in vs, vvho vvalke not according to the fleſh, but according to the ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For they that are according to the fleſh, are affected to the things that are of the fleſh, but they that are according to the ſpirit: are affected to the things that are of the ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For the vviſedom of the fleſh, is death: but the vviſedom of the ſpirit, life and peace. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Becauſe the vviſedom of the fleſh, isenmitie an enemie' to God: for to the law of God it is not ſubiect, neither can it be. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they that are in the fleſh, can not pleaſe God. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But you are not in the fleſh, but in the ſpirit, yet if the Spirit of God dvvel in you. But if any man haue not the Spirit of Chriſt, the ſame is not his. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But if Chriſt be in you: the body in deede is dead becauſe of ſinne, but the ſpirit liueth becauſe of iuſtification. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And if the Spirit of him that raiſed vp IESVS from the dead, dvvel in you: he that raiſed vp IESVS CHRIST from the dead, ſhal quicken alſo your mortal bodies, becauſe of his Spirit dvvelling in you.The Epiſtle vpō the 8 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore brethren, vve are deiters: not to the fleſh, to liue according to the fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For if you liue according to the fleſh, you ſhal die▪ but if by the ſpirit, you mortifie the deedes of the fleſh, you ſhal liue. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For vvhoſoeuer 
He meaneth not that the Childrē of God be violently cō
                     pelled againſt their vvilles, but that they be ſvveetly dravvē, moued, or induced to do good. Aug. Enchirid. c. 64. De verb. Do. ſer. 43 c. 7. et de verb. Apoſt. ſer. 13▪ c. 11. 12.
                   are ledde by the ſpirit of God,2 Tim. 1, 7, Gal. 4, 5. they are the ſonnes of God. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For * you haue not receiued the ſpirit of ſeruitude againe in feare: but * you haue receiued the ſpirit of adoption of ſonnes, vvherein vve crie: Abba, (father). ✝ 
                     verse 16 For ″ the Spirit him ſelf, giueth teſtimonie to our ſpirit, that we are the ſonnes of God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And if ſonnes, heires alſo: heires truly of God, and coheires of Chriſt: ⊢ ″ yet if vve ſuffer vvith him, that vve may be alſo glorified vvith him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 For I thinke that the paſſions of this time are not ″ condigne to the glorie to come that ſhal be reuealed in vs.The Epiſtle vpō the 4 Sunday after Pentecoſt, and for many Martyrs. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the expectation of the creature,condignae ad gloriam▪
                   expecteth the reuelation of
 the ſonnes of God. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For the creature is made ſubject to vanitie, not vvilling, but for him that made it ſubiect in hope: ✝ 
                     verse 21 becauſe creature alſo it ſelf ſhal be deliuered from the ſeruitude of corruption, into the libertie of the glorie of the children of God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For vve knovv that euery creature groneth, and trauaileth euen til novv. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And not only it, but vve alſ our ſelues hauing the firſt fruites of the ſpirit, vve alſo grone vvithin our ſelues, expecting the adoption of the ſonnes of God, the redemption of our body. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 24 For ″ by hope vve are ſaued. But hope that is ſeen, is not hope for that vvhich a man ſeeth, vvherfore doth he hope it? ✝ 
                     verse 25 But if vve hope for that vvhich vve ſee not: vve expect by patience. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And in like maner alſo the Spirit helpeth our infirmitie. For, vvhat vve ſhould pray as vve ought, vve knovv not: but the Spirit him ſelf requeſteth for vs vvith gronings vnſpeakable. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And he that ſearcheth the hartes, knovveth vvhat ″ the Spirit deſireth: becauſe according to God he requeſteth for the ſainctes. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vve knovv that to them that loue God, al things cooperate vnto good, to ſuch as according to purpoſe are called to be ſainctes. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For vvhom he hath forknowen, he hath alſo predeſtinated to be made conformable to the image of his ſonne: that he might be the firſt-borne in many brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And ″ vvhom he hath predeſtinated: them alſo he hath called▪ and vvhom he hath called: them alſo he hath iuſtified▪ and vvhom he hath iuſtified: them alſo hath he glorified. ✝ 
                     verse 31 What ſhal vve then ſay to theſe things? If God before vs, vvho is againſt vs? ✝ 
                     verse 32 He that ſpared not alſo his ovvne ſonne, but for vs al deliuered him: hovv hath he not alſo vvith him giuen vs al things? ✝ 
                     verse 33 Who ſhal accuſe againſt the elect of God? God that iuſtifieth. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Who is he that ſhal condemne? Chriſt IESVS that died, yea that is riſen alſo againe, vvho is on the right hand of God, vvho alſo maketh interceſsion for vs.The Epiſtle for S. Ignatius Febr. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 35 Who then ſhal separate vs from the charitie of Chriſt? tribulation? or diſtreſſe? or famine? or nakednes? or danger?Pſ. 43, 22. or perſecution? or the ſvvord? ( ✝ 
                     verse 36 as it is vvritten, For vve are killed for thy ſake al the day: vve are eſteemed as ſheep of ſlaughter.) ✝ 
                     verse 37 But in al theſe things we ouer come becauſe of him that hath loued vs.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ✝ 
                     verse 38 For ″ I am ſure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Povvers, neither things preſent, nor things to come, neither might, ✝ 
                     verse 39 not height, nor depth, nor other creature, ſhal be able to
 ſeparate vs from the charitie of God vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS our Lord. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     16. The ſpirit giueth teſtimonie.) This place maketh not for the Heretikes ſpecial faith, or their preſumptuous certainty that euery one of them is in grace:The teſtimonie of the Spirit. the teſtimonie of the Spirit being nothing els, but the invvard good motions, comfort, and contentment, vvhich the children of God do daily feele more and more in their hartes by ſeruing him: by vvhich they haue as it vvere an atteſtation of his fauour tovvardes them, vvhereby the hope of their iuſtification and ſaluation is much corroborated and ſtrengthened.
                  
                     17. Yet if they ſuffer,)
                     Novvithſtandīg Chriſts ſatisfaction and Paſſion, yet ours alſo is required. Chriſtes paines or paſſions haue not ſo ſatisfied for al, that Chriſtian men be diſcharged of their particular ſuffering or ſatisfying for eche mans ovvne part: neither be our paines nothing vvorth to the attainement of heauen, becauſe Chriſt hath done ynough, but quite contrarie: he vvas by his paſſion exalted to the glorie of heauen: therfore vve by compaſſion or partaking vvith him in the like paſſions, ſhal attaine to be fellovves vvith him in his kingdom.
                  
                     18. Condig
                           ••
                        .) Our Aduerſaries ground hereon, that the vvorkes or ſufferances of this life be not meritorious or vvorthy of life euerlaſting, vvhere the Apoſtle ſaith no ſuch thing, no more then he ſaith that Chriſts Paſſions be not meritorious of his glorie,Al ſuffering in this life is nothing in compariſon of the heauenly glorie: and yet it is meritorious & vvorthy of the ſame. vvhich I thinke they dare not much auouch in our Sauiours actions. He expreſſeth onely, that the very afflictions of their ovvne nature, vvhich vve ſuffer vvith or for him, be but ſhort, momētanie & of no account in compariſon of the recompenſe vvhich vve ſhal haue in heauen. no more in deede vvere Chriſtes paines of their ovvne nature, compared to his glorie, any vvhit comparable: yet they vvere meritorious or vvorthy of heauen, & ſo be ours. And therfore to expreſſe the ſaid cōpariſon, here he ſaith, They art not condigne
                     ad gloriā 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     to the glorie. He ſaith not, of the glorie, as the Heretikes falſly trāſlate: though the Scripture ſpeaketh ſo alſo, vvhen it ſignifieth only a cōpariſon. as Prou. in the greeke, Omne pretioſum non eſt
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     illa dignū
                      S. Auguſtine, i
                           ••
                        i dignum. S. Hierom, non valet huic comparari. that is, No pretious thing is vvorthie of, vviſedom, or to be compared vvith it.Heretical trāſlation. See the like Eccle. 26, 20. Tob. 9, 2. But vvhen the Apoſtle vvil expreſſe that they are condigne, vvorthy, or meritorious of the glorie, he ſaith plainely, That our tribulation vvhich preſently is moment
                           •
                        nie and light,
                     1. Cor. 4. 1
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     vvorketh aboue meaſure excedingly an eternal vveight of gloris in vs. The valevv of Chriſtes actions riſeth not of the leingth or greatnes of them in them ſelues, though ſo alſo they paſſed al mens doings: but of the vvorthines o
                        •
                      the perſon. And ſo the value of ours alſo riſeth of the grace of our adoption, vvhich maketh thoſe actiōs that of their natures be not meritorious nor anſvverable to the ioyes of heauen in them ſelues,Vvhence the merite of vvorkes riſeth. to be vvorthy of heauen. And they might as vvel proue that the vvorkes of ſinne do not demerite damnation. for, ſintre in deede for the quantity and nature of the vorke is not anſvverable in pleaſure to the paine of Hel: but becauſe it hath a departing or au auerſion from God, be it neuer ſo ſhort, it deſerueth damnation, becauſe it alvvaies procedeth from the enemy of God, as good vvorkes that be meritorious, procede from the childe of God.
                  
                     24. By hope ſaued)
                     As ſometime faith only is named, ſo els vvhere only hope, and only charitie, as the cauſe of our ſaluation. That vvhich in other places he attributeth to faith, is here attributed to hope, for vvhenſoeuer there be many cauſes of one thing, the holy vvriters (as matter is miniſtred and occaſion giuen by the doctrine then handled) ſometimes referre it to one of the cauſes, ſometime to an other: not by naming one alone, to exclude the other, as our Aduerſaries captiouſly and ignorantly do argue: but at diuers times and in ſundrie places to expreſſe that, vvhich in euery diſcourſe could not, nor needed not to be vttered. In ſome diſcourſe, faith is to be recommended: in others, charitie: in an other, hope: ſometimes, almes, mercies els vvhere, other vertues. One vvhile, Euery one that beleeueth, is borne of God. 1 Io. 
                           •
                        . 1. An other vvhile, Euery one that loueth, is borne of God. 1▪ Io. 4, 7. Sometimes, faith purifieth mans hart, Act. 15, 9. And an other time, Charitie remitteth ſinnes. 1 Pet. 4, 
                           •
                        . Of faith it is ſaid, The iuſt liueth by faith. Ro. 1, 17. Of charitie, We knovv that vve are transferred from death to life, becauſe vve loue &c. 1▪ Io. 3, 14.
                  
                  
                     27. The Spirit deſireth.)
                     Scripture abuſed againſt the Godhead of the Holy Ghoſt. Arîus and Macedonius old Heretikes had their places to contend vpon, againſt the Churches ſenſe, as our nevv Maiſters novv haue. They abuſed this text to proue the Holy Ghoſt not to be God, becauſe he needed not to pray or aſke, but he might commaund if he vvere God. Therfore S. Auguſtine expoundeth it thus, The Spirit prayeth, that is, cauſeth and teacheth vs to pray, and vvhat to pray or aſke. Auguſt. de anima & eius orig. li. 4, c. 9. & ep. 121. c. 15.
                  
                  
                     30. Whom he hath predeſtinated.)
                     The doctrine of predeſtination, hovv to be reuerenced, and vvhat it teacheth vs. Gods eternal foreſight, loue, purpoſe, predeſtination, and election of his deere children, and in time their calling, iuſtifying, glorifying by Chriſt, as al other actes and intentions of his diuine vvil and prouidence tovvardes their ſaluation, ought to be reuerenced of al men vvith dreadful humilitie, and not to be ſought out or diſputed on vvith preſumptuous
 boldnes and audacitie, for it is the gulfe that many proud perſons, both in this age and alvvaies, haue by Gods iuſt iudgement periſhed in, founding thereon moſt horrible blaſphemies againſt Gods mercie, nature, and goodnes, and diuers damnable errours againſt mans free vvil, and againſt al good life and religion. This high concluſion is here ſet dovvne for vs, that vve may learne to knovv of vvhom vve ought to depend in al our life, by vvhom vve expect our ſaluatiō, by vvhoſe prouidence al our graces, giftes, and vyorkes do ſtand: by vvhat an euerlaſting gratious determination, our redemption, vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS, vvas deſigned: & to giue God inceſſable thankes for our vocation and preferment to the ſtate vve be in,Gods predeſtition taketh not avvay free wil. before the Ievves, vvho deſerued no better then they, before the light of his mercie ſhining vpon vs accepted vs, and reiected them. But this ſaid eminent truth of Gods eternal predeſtination ſtandeth (as vve are bound to beleeue vnder paine of damnation, vvhether vve vnderſtand hovv or no) & ſo S. Auguſtiue in al his diuine vvorkes vvritten of the ſame (De gratia & lib, arb. De corrept. & gratia. Ad articulos falsò impoſitos.) defendeth, declareth, proueth, and conuinceth, that it doth ſtand (I ſay) vvith mans free vvil and the true libertie of his actions, and forceth no man to be either il or good, to ſinne or vertue, to ſaluation or damnatiō, nor taketh avvay the meanes or nature of merites, and cooperation vvith God to our ovvne and other mens ſaluation.
                  
                     38. I am ſure.) This ſpeache is cōmon in S. Paul according to the latin tranſlation, vvhen he had no other aſſured knovvledge but by hope:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Confide. Hiero. q. 9 ad Algaſ. as Ro. 15, 14, 2 Tim. 1, 5. Heb. 6, 9: Vvhere the Greeke vvord ſignifieth only a probable perſuaſion.No man ordinarily is ſure of his ſaluation, but only in hope. And therfore except he meane of him ſelf by ſpecial reuelation, or of the predeſtinate in general, (in vvhich tvvo caſes it may ſtand for the certitude of ſaith or infallible knovvledge) othervviſe that euery particular man ſhould be aſſured infallibly that him ſelf ſhould be iuſtified, and not that onely, but ſure alſo neuer to ſinne, or to haue the gift of perſeuêrance, and certaine knovvledge of his predeſtination: that is a moſt damnable falſe illuſion and preſumption, condemned by the Fathers of the holy Councel of Trent. Seſs. 
                           •
                        . c. 9. 12. 13.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  With a proteſtation of his ſorow for it (leſt they ſhould thinke him to reioyce in their perdition) he inſinuateth the Iewes to be reprobate, although they come of Abrahams fleſh. 6 ſaying, to be the ſonnes of God goeth not by that, but by Gods grace: 19 conſidering that al vvere one damned maſſe. 24 by which grace the Gentils to be made his people: and ſo the prophess to haue foretold of them both. 30 And the cauſe hereof to be, that the Gentils ſubmit them ſelues to the faith of Chriſt, vvhich the Iewes vvil not.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I SPEAKE the verity in Chriſt, I lie not, my conſcience bearing me vvitnes in the holy Ghoſt, ✝ 
                     verse 2 that I haue great ſadneſſe & continual ſorovv in my hart. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For I vviſhed, my ſelf to be an ″ anáthema from Chriſt for my brethren, vvho are my kinſmen according to the fleſh, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho are Iſraëlites, vvhoſe is the adoption of ſonnes, and the glorie, and the teſtament, and the lavv giuing, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the ſeruice, and the promiſſes: ✝ 
                     verse 5 vvhoſe are the fathers, & of vvhom Chriſt is according to the fleſh, vvho is aboue al things God bleſſed for euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 But not that the vvord of God is fruſtrate. For, ″ not al that are of Iſraël, they be Iſraëlites: ✝ 
                     verse 7 nor they that are the ſeede of Abrahā,Gen. 21, 
                        •
                     2. al be children: ″ but in Iſaac ſhal the ſeede be called vnto thee: ✝ 
                     verse 8 that is to ſay, not they that are the childrē of the fleſh, they are the children of God: but they that are the childrē of the promiſſe, are eſteemed for the ſeede. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For the vvord of the
 promiſſe is this,Gen. 18, 10. 
                  According to this time vvil I come: and Sarae ſhal haue a ſonne.
                  S. Hierom. q. to. ad Hedibiam. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And not only ſhe, But * Rebecca alſo conceiuing ″ of one copulation,Gen. 25, 21. of Iſaac our father. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For vvhen they vvere ″ not yet borne,Al the epiſtle ſurely to the Romanes needeth 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and is 
                        〈◊〉
                      wrapped with 
                        〈…〉
                      that to vnderſtād it we neede the helpe of the Holy Ghoſt, who by the Apoſtle did dictat theſe ſame things: but eſpeciaally this place. How
                        •
                     eit nothīg pleaſeth vs but that which is Eccleſiaſtical, that is, the ſenſe of the Church. nor had done any good or euil (that the purpoſe of God according to election might ſtand) ✝ 
                     verse 12 not of vvorkes,Gen. 25, 23. but of the caller it vvas ſaid to her: That the elder ſhal ſerue the yonger, ✝ 
                     verse 13 as it is vvritten: Iacob I loued, but Eſau I hated.
                  Mal. 1, 2.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vvhat ſhal vve ſay then? ″ Is there iniquitie vvith God? God forbid.Exo. 33, 19. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For to Moyſes he ſaith, I vvil haue mercie on vvhom I haue mercie: and I vvil ſhevv mercie to vvhom I vvil ſhevv mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Therfore it is ″ not of the vviller, nor the runner, but of God that ſhevveth mercie.Exo. 9, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the Scripture ſaith to Pharao: That ″ to this very purpoſe haue I raiſed thee, that in thee I may ſhevv my povver: and that my name may be venovvmed in the vvhole earth. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Therfore on vvhom he vvil, he hath mercie: and vvhom he vvil, he doth indurate.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 Thou ſaieſt therfore vnto me: Vvhy doth he yet complaine? for vvho reſiſteth his vvil? ✝ 
                     verse 20 O man, ″ vvho art thou that doeſt anſvver God? Doth the vvorke ſay to him that vvrought it: Vvhy haſt thou made me thus? ✝ 
                     verse 21 Or hath not ″ the potter of clay, povver, of the ſame maſſe to make one veſſel vnto honour, and an other vnto cōtumelie? ✝ 
                     verse 22 And if God vvilling to ſhevv vvrath, and to make his might knovven,That God is not the cauſe of any mans reprobation or damnation, othervvise then for puniſhment of his ſinnes, he ſhevveth by that he expec
                        •
                     teth al mens amendement vvith great patience, and conſequently that they haue alſo freo vvil. ſuſteined in much patience the veſſels of vvrath
apted, fitted▪
                   apte to deſtruction, ✝ 
                     verse 23 that he might ſhevv the riches of his glorie vpon the veſſels of mercie vvhich he prepared vnto glorie.
               
                   ✝ 
                        verse 24 Vvhom alſo he hath called, vs, not only of the Ievves, but alſo of the Gentiles,
                  Oſ. 2, 23. 
                   ✝ 
                        verse 25 as in Oſee he ſaith, I vvil call that vvhich is not my people, my people: and her that vvas not beloued, beloued: and her that hath not obteined mercie, hauing obteined mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And it ſhalbe, in the place vvhere it vvas ſaid to them,Oſ. 1, 10▪
                   you are not my people: there they ſhalbe called the ſonnes of the liuing God.Eſ. 10, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 27 
                  And Eſaie crieth for Iſrael, If the number of the children of Iſrael be as the ſand of the ſea, the remaines ſhal be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 28 For, conſummating a vvord, and abridging it in equitie: becauſe a vvord abbridged ſhal our Lord make vpon the earth.  ✝ 
                        verse 29 And as Eſay foretold, Vnles the Lord of Sabaoth had left vs ſeede:Eſ, 1, 9. vve had been made like Sodom, and vve had been like as Gomorrha.
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 What ſhal vve ſay then? That the Gentiles vvhich purſued not after iuſtice, haue apprehended iuſtice, but the iuſtice that is of faith. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But Iſrael in purſuing the lavv of iuſtice, is not come vnto the lavv of iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Vvhy ſo? Becauſe 
 not of faith, but as it vvere of vvorkes, forHere vve ſee that they are the cauſe of their ovvne damnation by infidelity. they haue ſtombled at the ſtone of ſtombling,Eſ. 8, 14. 28, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 33 as it is vvritten, Behold I put in Sion a ſtone of ſtombling, and a rocke of ſcandal: and vvhoſoeuer beleeueth in him, ſhal not be confounded.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Anáthema.] Anáthema, by vſe of Scripture is either that vvhich by ſeparation from profane vſe, and by dedication to God, is holy, dreadful, and not vulgarly to be touched:Anáthema? or contrarievviſe, that which is reiected, ſeuered, or abandoned from God, as curſed and deteſted, and therfore is to be auoided. And in this later ſenſe (according as S. Paul taketh it 1 Cor. 16. If any loue not our Lord IESVS CHRIST, be he Anathema, that is to ſay, Avvay vvith him, Accurſed be he, Bevvare you company not vvith him) the Church and holy Councels vſe the vvord for a curſe and excommunication againſt Heretikes and other notorious offenders and blaſphemers.In vvhat ſenſe S. Paul vviſheth to be anáthema. Novv hovv the Apoſtle, vviſhing him ſelf to be Anathema from Chriſt to ſaue his Countrie mens ſoules, did take this vvord, it is a very hard thing to determine. Some thinke, he deſired onely to die for their ſaluation. Others, that being very loth to be kept from the fruition of Chriſt, yet he could be con
                     
                        •
                     ent to be ſo ſtill for to ſaue their ſoules. Others, that he vviſhed vvhat inalediction or ſeparation from Chriſt ſo euer that did not imply the disfauour of God tovvards him, nor take avvay his loue tovvard God. This only is certaine that it is a point of vnſpeakable charitie in the Apoſtles breaſt, and a paterne to al Biſhops and Prieſts, hovv to loue the ſaluation of their flocke. As the like vvas vttered by Moyſes vvhen he ſaid, Either forgiue this people,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           •
                        2, 12. 
                     or blot me out of thy booke.
                  
                  
                     6. Not al of Iſrael.] Though the people of the Ievves vvere many vvaies honoured and priuiledged,Gods promis not made to carnal Iſrael. and namely by Chriſtes taking fleſh of them: yet the promis of grace and ſaluation vvas neither onely made to them, nor to al them that carnally came of them or their fathers: Gods election and mercie depending vpon his ovvne purpoſe, vvil, and determination, and not tied to any nation, familie, or perſon.
                  
                     7. But in Iſaac.] The promiſſe made to Abraham vvas not in Iſmael,Iſaac preferred before Iſmael. vvho vvas a ſonne borne onely by fleſh and nature: but in Iſaac, vvho vvas a ſonne obtained by promiſſe, faith, and miracle: and vvas a figure of the Churches children borne to God in Baptiſme.
                  
                     10. Of one copulation.]
                     Iacob before Eſau. It is proued alſo by Gods chooſing of Iacob before Eſau (vvho vvere not onely brethren by father and mother, but alſo tvvinnes, and Eſau the elder of the tvvo, vvhich according to carnal count ſhould haue had the preeminence) that God in giuing graces folovveth not the temporal or carnal prerogatiues of men or families.
                  
                     11. Not yet borne.] By the ſame example of thoſe tvvinnes, it is euident alſo, that neither nations nor particular perſons be elected eternally,By the example of Iacob and Eſau, is ſhewed Gods mere mercie in the elect, and iuſtice in the reprobate. or called temporally, or preferred to Gods fauour before others, by their ovvne merites: becauſe God, vvhen he made choiſe, and firſt loued Iacob, and refuſed Eſau, reſpected them both as il, and the one no leſſe then the other guilty of damnation for original ſinne, vvhich vvas alike in them both. And therfore vvhere iuſtly he might haue reprobated both, he ſaued of mercie one. Vvhich one therfore, being as il and as void of good as the other, muſt hold of Gods eternal purpoſe, mercie, and election, that he vvas preferred before his brother vvhich vvas elder then him ſelf, and no vvorſe them him ſelf. And his brother Eſau on the other ſide hath no cauſe to complaine, for that God neither did nor ſuffered any thing to be done towards him, that his ſinne did not deſerue, for although God elect eternally & giue his firſt grace vvithout al merites, yet he doth not reprobate or hate any man but for ſinne, or the foreſight thereof.
                  
                     14. Is there iniquitie
                           •
                        ] Vpon the former diſcourſe that of tvvo perſons equal,That God is not vniuſt, or an accepter of perſons, is declared by familiar examples. God calleth the one to mercie, and leaueth the other in his ſinne, one might inferre that God vvere vniuſt and an accepter of perſons. To vvhich the Apoſtle anſvvereth, that God vvere not iuſt nor indifferent in deede, ſo to vſe the matter vvhere grace or ſaluation vvere due. As if tvvo men being Chriſtened, both beleeue vvel, & liue vvel: if God ſhould giue heauen to the one, & ſhould damne the other, then were he vniuſt, partial, & forgetful of his promiſſe: but reſpecting or taking tvvo, who both be vvorthy of damnation (as al are before they be firſt called to mercie) then the matter ſtandeth on mere mercie, and of the giuers vvil and liberalitie, in vvhich caſe partialitie hath no place. As for example.
                  
                     
                     1 Tvvo malefactors' being condemned both for one crime,S. Auguſtines example is of tvvo debters: the one forgiuē all, and the other put to pay all, by the ſame creditor. li. de predeſt. & gra. cap. 4.
                         the Prince pardoneth the one, and letteth the lavv procede on the other.
                     2 The theefe that is pardoned, can not attribute his eſcape to his ovvne deſeruings, but to the Princes mercie.
                     3 The theefe that is executed, can not chalenge the Prince that he vvas not pardoned alſo: but muſt acknowledge that he hath his deſeruing.
                     4 The ſtanders by, muſt not ſay, that he vvas executed becauſe the Prince vvould not pardon him, for that vvas not the cauſe, but his offenſe.
                     5 If they aſk: further, vvhy the Prince pardoned not both, or executed not both: the anſvver it, that as mercie is a goodly vertue, ſo iuſtice is neceſſarie and commendable.
                     6 But if it be further demaunded vvhy Iohn rather then Thomas vvas executed: or Thomas rather then Iohn pardoned: anſvver, that (the parties being othervviſe equal) it hangeth merely and vvholy vpon the Princes vvil and pleaſure.
                  
                  
                     1 So likevviſe, God ſeing al mankind and euery one of the ſame in a general condemnation, and maſſe of ſinne, in and by Adam, deliuereth ſome, and not otherſome.
                     2 Al that be deliuered out of that cōmon damnation, be deliuered by grace and pardon, through the meanes and merits of Chriſt.
                     3 Such as be left in the common caſe of damnation, can not complaine, becauſe they haue their deſeruing for ſinne.
                     4 Vve may not ſay that ſuch be damned, becauſe God did not pardon them, but becauſe they had ſiaue, and therfore deſerued it.
                     5 That ſome ſhould be damned, and not al pardoned, and other ſome pardoned rather then al condemned, is agreable to Gods iuſtice & mercie: both vvhich vertues in Gods prouidence tovvards vs are recommended.
                     6 That Saul ſhould be rather pardoned them Calphas (I meane vvhere tvvo be equally euil and vnderſeruing) that is onely Gods holy wil and appointment, by vvhich many an vnworthy man getteth pardon, but no good or iuſt or innocent perſon is euer damned.
                  
                  In al this mercie of God tovvards ſome, and iuſtice tovvards other ſome, both the pardoned vvorkes by their ovvne free vvil,Predeſtination and reprobatiō take not avvay free vvil, neither muſt any man be retchleſſe & deſperate. and thereby deſerue their ſaluation: and the other no leſſe by their ovvne free vvil, vvithout al neceſsitie, vvorke vvickednes, & them ſelues and only of them ſelues procure their ovvne damnation. Therfore no man may vvithout blaſphemie ſay, or can truely ſay, that he hath nothing to doe tovvards his owne ſaluation, but vvil liue, and thinketh he may liue vvithout care or cogitation of his end the one vvay or the other, ſaying, If I be appointed to be ſaued, be it ſo: if I be one deſigned to damnation, I can not helpe the matter: come vvhat come may. Al theſe ſpeaches and cogitations are ſinful & come of the enemie, and be rather ſignes of reprobation, then of election. Therfore the good, man muſt vvithout ſearche of Gods ſecretes, vvorke his ovvne ſaluation and (as S. Peter ſaith) make his election ſure by good vvorkes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Pet. 
                           •
                         10. vvith continual hope of Gods mercie, being aſſured that if he beleeue vvel and doe vvel, he ſhal haue vvel▪ for example, if a huſband man ſhould ſay, If God vvil, I ſhal haue corne ynough: if not, I can not make it, and ſo neglect to till his ground: he may be ſure that he ſhal haue none, becauſe he wrought not for it. An other man vſeth his diligence in tilling and ploughing, and committeth the reſt to God, he findeth the fruite of his labours.
                  
                     16. Not of the vviller.] If our election, calling, or firſt comming to God, lay vvholy or principally vpon our ovvne vvil or vvorkes: or if our vvilling or endeuouring to be good, vvould ſerue vvithout:Our election or cōuerſion is not of our ſelues, but of Gods grace and mercie. the helpe and grace of God, as the Pelagians taught, then our election vvere vvholy in our ſelues, vvhich the Apoſtle denieth▪ and then might Pharao and other indurate perſons (vvhom God hath permitted to be obſtinate, to ſhevv his povver and iuſt iudgement vpon them) be conuerted vvhen them ſelues lift, vvithout Gods helpe and aſsiſtance: vvhereas vve ſee the contrarie in al ſuch obſtinate offenders, vvhom God for puniſhment of former ſinnes, viſiteth not vvith his grace, that by no threates, miracles, nor perſuation, they can be conuerted. Vvherevpon vve may not vvith Heretikes inferre, that man hath not free vvil, or that our vvill vvorketh nothing in our conuerſion or comming to God: but this onely, that our vvilling or vvorking of any good to our ſaluation, commeth of Gods ſpecial motion, grace, and aſsiſtance, and that it is the ſecondary cauſe, not the principall.
                  
                     17. To this purpoſe haue I raiſed.] He doth not ſay, that he hath of purpoſe raiſed or ſet him vp to ſinne, or that he vvas the cauſe of the ſame in Pharao, or that he intended his damnation directly or abſolutely, or any othervviſe but in reſpect of his demerits: but rather (as the Apoſtle ſaith ſtraight after in this chapter of ſuch hardened & obſtinate offenders) that he vvith long patience & toleration expected his conuerſion, and (as S. Chryſoſtome
 interpreteth this vvord, Excitaui) preſerued him aliue to repent, vvhom he might luſtly haue condemned before.Exo. 9, 16. In the 9 of Exodus,In vvhat ſenſe, God raiſed vp Pharao &c. vvhence this allegation is, vve reade, Poſui
                           •
                        e, I haue put or ſet thee vp, as here, I haue raiſed thee, that is to ſay, I haue purpoſely aduanced thee to be ſo great a king, and choſen thee out to be a notorious example both of the obdurate obſtinacie that is in ſuch vvho I haue for ſo great ſinne, forſaken, and alſo to ſhevv to the vvorld, that no obſtinacie of neuer ſo mightie offenders can reſiſt me to doe any thing vvhich ſhal not fall to my glorie. Vvhich is no more to ſay, but that God often for the puniſhment of Nations, and to ſhevv his iuſtice and glorie, giueth vvicked Princes vnto them, and indueth them vvith povver and al proſperitie, and taking his grace from them vpon their deſerts, hardeneth their hartes ſo, as they vvithſand and contemne God, and afflict his people▪ in vvhoſe end and fall, either temporal or eternal, at the length God vvil euer be glorified. Neither vvould he either raiſe or ſuffer any ſuch, or giue them povver and proſperitie in this life, vvherevpon he knovveth they vvil be vvorſe, but that he can vvorke al that to his honour and glorie▪ mary, that he vſeth not ſuch rigorous iuſtice on al that deſerue it, that is his great grace and mercie. And that he exerciſeth his iuſtice vpon ſome certaine perſons, rather then vpon other ſome of equal deſerts, that lieth vvholy vpon his vvil, in vvhoſe iudgements there be many things ſecrete, but nothing vniuſt.
                  
                     20. Who art thou?] Here the Apoſtle ſtaieth the raſhnes and preſumption of ſuch poore vvormes,Heretical bookes concerning predeſtination. as take vpon them to queſtion vvith God of their election or reprobation: as certaine impious Heretikes of our time haue done, ſetting out bookes farſed vvith moſt blaſphemous and erroneous doctrine cōcerning this high and hidden myſterie, and haue giuen occaſion to the ignorant vvhich alvvaies be curious, to iangle, and perniciouſly to erre in theſe things, that are impoſsible to be vnderſtood of any, or vvel thought of, but of the obedient and humble.
                  
                     31. The potter.] This example of the pot and potter reacheth no further but to declare, that the creature may not reaſon vvith God his maker, vvhy he giueth not one ſo great grace, as an other, or vvhy he pardoneth not one as vvel as an other: no more then the chamber pot may chalenge the Potter vvhy he vvas not made a drinking pot,The example of the pot and the potter. as vvel as an other. And therfore the Heretikes that extend this ſimilitude to proue that man hath no free vvil no more then a peece of clay, doe vntruely and deceitfully apply the example▪ ſpecially vvhen vve may ſee expreſly in the booke of Exodus, that Pharao notvvithſtāding his indurate hart, had free vvil: vvhere both it is ſaid, He vvould not diſmiſſe the people: and He indurated his owne hart him ſelf. Exo. c. 
                           •
                        , 15. and (in the Hebrue) v. 32. &c. 9. 35. 1 Reg. 6, 6. And this Apoſtle alſo vvritheth,2 Tim. 2, 21. that * a man may cleanſe him ſelf from the filthy, and ſo become a veſſel of honour in the houſe of God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The Lavv vvar not (as the Ievves ignorant zeale ſuppoſed) for them to iuſtifie them ſelues by it (conſidering that they could not fulfil it 
                        •
                     ) but to bring them to Chriſt, to beleeue in him, and ſo for his ſake to be iuſtified by the grace of God: 5 according to Moyſes ſaying, and the Apoſtles preaching: 11 that ſo the Gentils alſo (according to the Prophets) hearing and beleeuing might come to iuſtice: the Ievves in the meane time (though inexcuſably) remaining incredulous.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BRETHREN, the vvil of my hart ſurely and praier to God, is for them vnto ſaluation. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For I giue them teſtimonie that they haue zeale of God, but not according to knovvledge. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For, not knovving ″ the iuſtice of God, & ſeeking to eſtabliſh their ovvne, they haue not been ſubiect to the iuſtice of God. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For,
The Lavv vvas not giuē to make a mā iuſt or perfect by it ſelf, but to brīg vs to Chriſt to be iuſtified by him. the end of the Law is Chriſt: vnto iuſtice to euery one that
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   beleeueth. ✝ 
                     verse 5 for Moyſes vvrote,The iuſtice of the Law of Moyſes went no further of it ſelf, but to ſaue a man from the temporal death and puniſhmēt preſcribed to the trāſgreſſors of the ſame. that, the iuſtice vvhich is of the Lavv,Leu. 18, 5. 
                  the man that hath done it, ſhal liue in it. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But ″ the iuſtice vvhich is of faith,Deu. 30, 12. ſaith thus, Say not in thy hart, Vvho ſhal aſcend into heauen? that is to bring Chriſt dovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 7 
                  Or vvho deſcendeth into the depth? that is to call Chriſt againe from the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But vvhat ſaith the Scripture? The vvord is nigh, in thy mouth, and in thy hart. this is the vvord of faith vvhich vve preach. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For if thou confeſſe vvith thy mouth our Lord IESVS, and in thy hart beleeue that God hath raiſed him vp from the dead,The Epiſtle vpō S. Andrevves day, Nouemb. 30. thou ſhalt be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For vvith the hart vve beleeue vnto iuſtice: but vvith the mouth confeſſion is made to ſaluation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the Scripture ſaith:Eſ. 28. 16 
                  Vvhoſoeuer beleeueth in him, ſhal not be confounded. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For there is no diſtinction of the Iew and the Greeke: for one is Lord of al, riche tovvard al that inuocate him,Ioel. 2, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 13 
                  For euery one
                  To beleeue in him & to inuocate him, is to ſerue him with al loue and ſincere affectiō. Al that ſo doe, ſhal doubtleſſe be ſaued & ſhal neuer be confounded. 
                  vvhoſoeuer ſhal innocate the name of our Lord, ſhal be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 14 ″ Hovv then ſhal they inuocate in vvhom they haue not beleeued? Or hovv ſhal they beleeue him vvhom they haue not heard? And hovv ſhal they heare without a preacher?Eſ. 52, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But hovv ſhal they preach ″ vnles they be ſenti? as it is vvritten: Hovv beautiful are the feete of them that euangelize peace, of them that euangelize good things? ✝ 
                     verse 16 But alWe ſee then that it is in a mans free wil to beleeue or not to beleeve, to obey or diſobey the Goſpel or truth preached. do not obey the Goſpel.Eſ. 53, 1. For Eſay ſaith, Lord, vvho hath beleeued the hearing of vs? ✝ 
                     verse 17 Faith then, is by hearing: and hearing is by the vvord of Chriſt.Pſ. 18. 5. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But I ſay, haue they not heard? And certes into al the earth hath the ſound of them gone forth: and vnto the endes of the vvhole vvorld the vvordes of them. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                        verse 19 But I ſay,
                  Deu. 32, 21. 
                  hath not Iſrael knovven? Moyſes firſt ſaith, I vvil bring you to emulation in that vvhich is not a nation: in a foliſh nation, I vvil driue you into anger.Eſ. 65, 1. 
                   ✝ 
                        verse 20 But Eſay is bold, and ſaith, I vvas found of them that did not ſeeke me: openly I appeared to them ″ that aſked not of me.Eſ. 63, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 21 
                  But to Iſrael he ſaith, Al the day haue I ſpred my handes to a people that beleeueth not, and contradicteth me.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . The iuſtice of God.]
                     Gods iuſtice, & the Ievves ovvne iuſtice. The iuſtice of God, is that vvhich God giueth vs through Chriſt the Ievves ovvne or proper iuſtice, is that vvhich they had or chalenged to haue of them ſelues and by their ovvne ſtrength, holpen onely by the knovvledge of the Lavv vvithout the helpe or grace of Chriſt.
                  
                     6. The iuſtice of faith] The iuſtice vvhich is of faith, reacheth to the life to come, making man aſſured of the truth of ſuch Articles as concerne the ſame▪ as, of Chriſts Aſcenſion to heauen,Iuſtice of faith. of his Deſcending to Hel, of his comming dovvne to be Incarnate, and his Reſurrection and returne againe to be glorified: by vvhich his actions vve be pardoned, iuſtified, and ſaued, as by the Lavv vve could neuer be.
                  
                      
                     8. The vvord of faith.] The vvord of faith is the vvhole Lavv of Chriſt, concerning both life and doctrine,Open cōfeſſion & proteſtation of our faith is ſometime neceſſarie. grounded vpon this, that Chriſt is our Sauiour, & that he is riſen againe. Vvhich point (as al other) muſt both be beleeued in hart, and alſo be confeſſed by mouth▪ for though a man be iuſtified invvardly vvhen he hath the vertues of faith, hope, and charitie from God: yet if occaſion be giuen, he is alſo bound to confeſſe vvith his mouth, and by al his external actions, vvithout ſhame or feare of the vvorld, that vvhich he invvardly beleeueth:Euſeb. li. 6 c. 31 hiſtor. Eccleſ. or els he can not be ſaued. Vvhich is againſt certaine * old Heretikes that taught, a man might ſay or doe vvhat he vvould, for feare or danger, ſo that he kept his faith in hart.
                  
                     14. Hovv ſhal they inuocat?] This maketh not (as Heretikes pretend) againſt inuocatiō of Saincts:The place alleaged againſt inuocatiō of Sainctes, anſvvered. the Apoſtle ſaying nothing els, but that they can not inuocate Chriſt as their Lord and Maiſter, in vvhom they do not beleeue, and vvhom they neuer heard of. For he ſpeaketh of Gentils or Pagans, vvho could not inuocate him, vnleſſe they did firſt beleeue in him. To the due inuocation of Chriſt, vve muſt knovv him and our duties to him. And ſo is it true alſo that vve can not pray to our B. Ladie nor any Sainct in heauen, til vve beleeue and knovv their perſons, dignitie, and grace, and truſt that they can help vs. But if our aduerſaries thinke that vve can not inuocate them, becauſe vve can not beleeue in them: let them vnderſtand that the Scripture vſeth alſo this ſpeach, to beleeue in men: and it is the very Hebrew phraſe, vvhich they ſhould not be ignorant of that bragge thereof ſo much. Exod. 14, 31. They beleeued in God and in Moyſes▪
                      and 
                        
                           •
                         Paral. 20, 20. in the Hebrevv. Ep. ad Thilem. v. 5. And the ancient fathers' did read in the Crede indifferently, I beleeue in the Catholike Church▪ and, I beleeue the Catholike Church, Conc. Nicen. apud Epiphan, in fine Ancorat, Hieron. contr. Lucif. Cyril. Hieroſ. Cathec. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     15. vnleſſe they be ſent.)
                     Preachers not lavvfully called not ſent. This place of the Apoſtle inuincibly condemneth al the preachings, vvritings, ordinances, innouations and vſurpations of Church; pulpit, & vvhatſoeuer our nevv Euangeliſts haue intruded them ſelues and entered into by the vvindovv: ſhevving that they be euery one from the higheſt to the lovveſt, falſe prophets, running and vſurping, being neuer lavvfully called. Vvhich is ſo euident in the Heretikes of our daies that the Caluiniſts confeſſe it in them ſelues,Confeſ. des Egli. de France. and ſay that there is an exception to be made in them, becauſe they found the ſtate of the Church interrupted.
                  
                     20. That aſked not.]
                     The firſt iuſtification of mere grace. That Chriſt vvas found of thoſe that neuer aſked after him, it proueth that the firſt grace and our firſt iuſtification is vvithout merites. That God called ſo continually and earneſtly by his Prophets and by other his ſignes and vvonders, vpon the Ievves,Free vvil. and they vvithſtood it: free vvil is proued, and that God vvould haue men ſaued, and that they be the cauſe of their ovvne damnation them ſelues.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Not al the Ievves vvere reprobate, but ſome electe: and they by grace obtained iuſtice, the reſt (according to the Prophets) being excecated. 11. Againſt vvhom not vvithſtanding the Chriſtian Gentils (to vvhom by that occaſion Chriſt is come) muſt not inſult: but rather feare euery man him ſelf to be likevviſe cut of the tree (vvhich is the Catholike Church) 25 and knovv that vvhen al the Gentils are brought into the Church, then (about the end of the vvorld) ſhal the multitude of the Ievves alſo come in: 33 according to the diſpoſition of the vvonderful vviſedom of God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Say then: Hath god reiected his people? God forbid▪ for I alſo am an Iſraëlite, of the ſeede of Abraham, of the tribe of Ben-iamin. ✝ 
                     verse 2 God hath not reiected his people vvhich he foreknevve. Or knovv you not in Elias vvhat the Scripture ſaith: hovv he requeſteth God againſt Iſraël? ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  Lord,
                  3. reg. 19. 20. 
                  they haue ſlaine thy Prophets, they haue digged dovvne thine altares: and I am left alone, and they ſeeke my life. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But vvhat ſaith the diuine
 anſvver vnto him? I haue left me ſeuen ″ thouſand men, that haue not borred their knees to
                  The Heretikes adde here alſo, Image, to the text, as Act: 19, 
                           •
                        5.
                   
                  Baal? ✝ 
                     verse 5 So therfore at this time alſo, there are remaines ſaued according to the election of grace. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And if by grace: ″ not novv of vvorkes. othervviſe grace novv is not grace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvhat then? that vvhich Iſrael ſought, the ſame he hath not obtained: but the election hath obtained: and the reſt vvere blinded.Eſ. 6, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 8 as it is vvritten: ″ God hath giuen them the ſpirit of compunction: eies, that they may not ſee: and eares, that they may not heare: vntil this preſent day.
                  Pſ. 68, 23 ✝ 
                     verse 9 And Dauid ſaith: Be their table made for a ſnare and for a trappe and for a ſcandal and for a retribution vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  Be their eies darkened, that they may not ſee: and their backe make thou alvvaies crooked. ✝ 
                     verse 11 I ſay them, haue they ſo ſtombled,The Ievves are not relected vvholy & incurably for euer: but for a part, and for a time ſuffered to fall. Which God did turne to the Gentils general good. that they ſhould fall? God forbid. but by their offence, ſaluation is to the Gentils, that they may emulate them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And if the offence of them be the riches of the vvorld, and the diminution of themIf God could and did turne their fall and ſinne into the good of the Gentils, much more vvil he vvorke good of their general conuerſion, vvhich ſhalbe at length the accompliſhmēt of the Church conſiſting of both the Nations. the riches of the Gentils: hovv much more the fulneſſe of them?
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 For to you Gentils I ſay, as long verely as I am the Apoſtle of the Gentils, I vvil honour my miniſterie, ✝ 
                     verse 14 if by any meanes I may prouoke my fleſh to emulation, and may ſaue ſome of them. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For if the loſſe of them be the reconciliation of the vvorld: vvhat ſhal the receiuing be, but life from the dead? ✝ 
                     verse 16 And if the firſt fruite be holy, the maſſe alſo: and if the roote be holy, the boughes alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And if ſome of the boughes be broken, and thou vvhereas thou vvaſt a vvilde oliue, art graffed in them, and art made partaker of the roote and of the fatneſſe of the oliue, ✝ 
                     verse 18 glorie not againſt the boughes. And if thou glorie: not thou beareſt the roote, but the roote thee. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Thou ſaieſt then: The boughes vvere broken, that I might be graffed in. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Vvel: ″ becauſe of incredulitie they vvere broken, but thou by faith doeſt ſtand: be not to highly vviſe, butWe ſee that he vvhich ſtandeth by faith, may fall from it, and therfore muſt liue in feare, and not in the vaine preſumption and ſecuritie of the Heretikes. feare. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For if God hath not ſpared the natural boughes: leſt perhaps he vvil not ſpare thee neither. ✝ 
                     verse 22 See then the goodnes and the ſeueritie of God: vpō them ſurely that are fallen, the ſeueritie: but vpon thee the goodnes of God, if thou abide in his goodneſſe, othervviſe thou alſo ſhalt be cut of. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But they alſo, if they do not abide in incredulitie, ſhal be graffed in. for God is able to graffe them in againe, ✝ 
                     verse 24 For if thou vvaſt cut out of the natural vvild oliue, and contrarie to nature vvaſt graffed into the good oliue: hovv much more they that are according to
 nature, ſhal be graffed into their ovvne oliue? ✝ 
                     verse 25 For I vvil not haue you ignorant, brethren, of this myſterie (that you be not vviſe in your ſelues) that blindnes in part hath chaunced in Iſraël, vntil the fulnes of the Gentiles might enter: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and alſo al Iſraël might be ſaued,Eſa. 59, 20. as it is vvritten: There ſhal come out of Sion, he that ſhal deliuer, and ſhal auert impietie from Iacob. ✝ 
                     verse 27 
                  And this to them the teſtament from me: vvhen I ſhal haue taken avvay their ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 28 ″ According to the Goſpel in deede enemies for you: but according to the election, moſt deere for the fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 29 for vvithout repentance are the giftes and the vocation of God. ✝ 
                     verse 30 for ″ as you alſo ſometime did not beleeue God, but novv haue obteined mercie becauſe of their incredulitie: ✝ 
                     verse 31 ſo theſe alſo novv haue not beleeued, for your mercie, that they alſo may obteine mercie. ✝ 
                     verse 32 For God hath ″ cōcluded al into incredulitie, that he may haue mercie on al. ✝ 
                     verse 33 ″ O depth of the riches of the vviſedom and of the knowledge of God:The Epiſtle vpō Trinitie Sunday. hovv incomprehenſible are his iudgements,Eſa. 40, 13. and his vvaies vnſearcheable? ✝ 
                     verse 34 for * vvho hath knovven the minde of our Lord? or vvho hath been his coūſeler? ✝ 
                     verse 35 Or vvho hath firſt giuen to him, and retribution ſhal be made him? ✝ 
                     verse 36 For of him, and by him, and in him are al things: to him be glorie for euer. Amen. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     4. Seuen thouſand.] The Heretikes alleage this place and example very impertinently to proue that the Church may be vvholy ſecrete,Gods anſwer to Elias of 7000, maketh nothīg for the Proteſtants Inuiſible Church, hid, or, vnknovven. for though the faithful vvere forced to keepe cloſe in that perſecution of Achab and Iezabel, vvhich vvas onely in the kingdom of the ten tribes, that is, of Iſaael: yet at the very ſame time, in Hieruſalem and al the kingdom of Iuda, the external vvorſhip and profeſsion of faith vvas open to al the vvorld,2 Par. 17. and vvel knovven to Elias & the faithful, ſo many, that * the very ſouldiars only vvere numbered aboue ten hundred thouſand. beſides that there is a great difference betvvene the Chriſtian Church and the Ievves, ours reſting vpon better promiſſes then theirs. And vve vvil not put the Proteſtants to proue that there vvere 7000 of their Sect, vvhen their nevv Elias Luther began: but let them proue that there were ſeuē, or any one, either then or in al ages before him, that vvas in al pointes of his beleefe. Heretikes there vvere before him, as Iouinian, Vigilantius, Heluidius, Vvicleffe &c. and vvith him, Zuinglius, Caluin, &c. Vvho beleeued as he did in ſome things, but not in al.
                  
                     6. Not novv of vvorkes.] If ſaluation be attributed to good vvorkes done of nature vvithout faith & Gods helpe,What workes are not, & what are the cauſe of ſaluation. the ſame can not be of grace. for ſuch vvorkes exclude grace, fauour, and mercie: and chalenge onely of dette, and not of gift. Therfore take heede here of the Heretikes expoſition, that vntruely exclude Chriſtian mens vvorkes from neceſſity or merite of ſaluation, vvhich are done vvith and by Gods grace, and therfore euidētly conſiſt vvith the ſame, and be ioyned vvith Gods grace as cauſes of our ſaluation. Our Aduerſaries are like if Potecaries, euer taking quid pro quo, either of ignorance, or of intent to deceiue the ſimple.
                  
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        . God hath giuen.]
                     God is not anthor of ſinne. It doth not ſignifie his vvorking or action, but his permiſsion. Chriſ. ho. 19 in ep. Ro. And S. Auguſtine ſaith,Aug. Ep. 105. ad Sixtum. not by putting malice into them, but by not imparting his grace vnto them, and that through their ovvne deſerts alvvaies, and their ovvne willes euer properly working the ſame. See Annot. Mat. c. 13, 14. Ro. c. 1, 24.
                  
                  
                     20. Becauſe of incredulity.]
                     A paraphraſtical explication of the text, conceruing the Iewes and Gentils, their ſtanding, falling, riſing againe, &c. He repreſſeth the pride of the Gentils vaunting them ſelues of their receiuing, and of the Ievves reiection, namely in that they thought the Ievves to be forſaken for no other cauſe, but that they might come into their roomes: declaring that the direct and proper cauſe of their forſaking, vvas their incredulity, exhorting the Gentiles to bevvare of the ſame, becauſe they may fall as vvel as the other, and that God is as like to execute iuſtice againſt them as againſt the Ievves, as he hath done in many nations falling to hereſie.
                  
                     28. According to the Goſpel.] In reſpect, or as concerning beleefe in Chriſt and receiuing the Goſpel, they are Gods enemies: by occaſion of vvhich their incredulity, the Gentiles found mercie: othervviſe in reſpect of his ſpecial election of that nation, and the promiſſes made to the Patriarches, the Ievves are deere to him ſtill▪ for God neuer promiſeth but he performeth, nor repenteth him ſelf of the priuileges giuen to that nation.
                  
                     30. For as you.] As the Gentiles vvhich before beleeued not, found mercie and came to faith, vvhen the Ievves did fall: ſo the Ievves not novv beleeuing, vvhen al the Gentils haue obtained mercie, ſhal in the end of the vvorld by Gods diſpoſition obtaine grace and pardon as the Gentiles haue done.
                  
                     32. Concluded al.] That ſo God taking al Nations and al men in ſinne (vvhich they fell into, not by his drift or cauſing, but of their ovvne free vvil) may of his mercie call and conuert vvhom and in vvhat order he vvill: and the parties haue no cauſe to bragge of their deſeruings: but both countries and particular men may referre their eternal election and their firſt calling and conuerſion to Chriſt, and to his mercie only: no vvorkes vvhich they had before in their incredulity, deſeruing any ſuch thing, though their vvorkes aftervvard proceding of faith and grace doe merite heauen.
                  
                     33. O depth▪]
                     How far to deale and to know, in the doctrine of predeſtination. The Apoſtle concludeth that no man ought to ſearch further into Gods ſecrete and vnſearcheable counſels of the vocation of the Gentils, and reiecting the Ievves, othervviſe then this, that al vvhich be reiected, for their ſinnes be iuſtly reiected: and al that be ſaued, by Gods great mercie and Chriſts grace be ſaued. And vvhoſoeuer ſeeketh among the people to ſpred contagion of curioſity by ſeeking further after things 
                        〈◊〉
                      mans & Angels reache, they ouerreache & ouerthrovv them ſelues. If thou vvilt be ſaued, beleeue, obey the Church, feare God and keepe his commaundements: that is thy part and euery mans els. Thou maiſt not examine vvhether thou be predeſtinate or reprobate, nor ſeeke to knovv the vvaies of Gods ſecrete iudgement tovvard thy ſelf or other men. It is the common enemy of our ſoules,The Heretikes writings of predeſtination. that in this vnhappy time hath opened blaſphemous tongues, and directed the proude pennes of Caluin, Beza, Verone, and ſuch reprobates to the diſcuſsing of ſuch particulars, to the perdition of many a ſimple man, and ſpecially of young Scholers in Vniuerſities, which with leſſe ſtudie may learne to be provvd and curious, then to be humble, wiſe, and obedient.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  He exhorteth them to mortification of the body,The ſecond part of this Epiſtle, moral. 2 to renouation of the minde, 3 to keeping of vnitie by humilitie, 
                        •
                      to the right vſing of their gifts and functions, 9 to many other good actions, 17 and ſpecially to louing of their enemies.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I BESECH you therfore brethren by the mercie of God,The Epiſtle vpō the 1 Sunday after the Epiphanie. * that you exhibite your bodies ″ a liuing hoſt,Phil. 4, 18. holy, pleaſing God, your reaſonable ſeruice. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And be not conformed to this vvorld: but be reformed in the newnes of your minde,Eph. 5, 17. 1. Th. 4, 3. * that you may proue vvhat the good, and acceptable, and perfect vvil of God is. ✝ 
                     verse 3 for I ſay by the grace that is giuen me, to al that are among you,None muſt preſume to medle aboue the meaſure of Godsgift, or out of the compaſſe of his ſtate and vocation. not to be
 more vviſe then behoueth to be vviſe, but to be vviſe vnto ſobrietie,2 Cor. 12, 11. Eph. 4, 7. * to euery one as God hath deuided the meaſure of faith.The Epiſtle vpō the 2 Sunday after the Epiphanie. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For as in one body vve haue many members, but al the members haue not one action: ✝ 
                     verse 5 ſo vve being many, are one body in Chriſt, & eche one an others members. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 6 And hauing giftes, according to the grace that is giuen vs, differēt, eitherProphecie is interpretatiō of the Scriptures, which is according to the rule of faith, when it is not againſt the right faith, or when it is profitable to edifie charitie, as S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh li. 5. Doct. Chr. c. 27 and li. 1. c. 3
                           •
                        . and in effect he ſaith the ſame li. 12. Confeſs. c. 18 vnto c. 32.
                   prophecie ″ according to the rule of faith, ✝ 
                     verse 7 or miniſterie in miniſtring, or he that teacheth in doctrine, ✝ 
                     verse 8 he that exhorteth in exhorting, he that giueth in ſimplicitie, he that ruleth in carefulnes, he that ſhevveth mercie in cheerefulnes. ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  dilectio Loue vvithout ſimulation. Hating euil▪ cleauing to good. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Louing the charitie of the brotherhod one toward an other. Vvith honour preuenting one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 11 In carefulnes not ſlouthful. In ſpirit feruent. Seruing our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Reioycing in hope. Patient in tribulation. Inſtant in praier. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Communicating to thememories neceſſities' of the ſainctes. Purſuing hoſpitalitie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Bleſſe them that perſecute you: bleſſe, andCurſing is a vice wherevnto the common people is much giuen, who often curſe thē on whom they can not otherwiſe be reuenged, they may ſee here that it is a great fault. curſe not. ✝ 
                     verse 15 To reioyce vvith them that reioyce, to vveepe vvith them that vveepe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Being of one minde one tovvard an other. Not minding high things, but cōſenting to the humble. ⊢
                  The Epiſtle vpō the 3 Sūday after the Epiphanie. Be not vviſe in your ovvne conceite. ✝ 
                     verse 17 To no man rendring euil for euil. Prouiding good things not only before God, but alſo before al men. ✝ 
                     verse 18 If it may be, as much as is in you, hauing peace vvith al men. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Not reuenging your ſelues my deereſt,Deu. 32, 35. but giue place vnto vvrath, for it is vvritten: Reuenge to me: I vvil revvard, ſaith our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 20 but if thine enemie hunger, giue him meate:
                  Pro. 25, 21. 
                  if he thirſt, giue him drinke▪ for, doing this, thou ſhalt heape coales of fire vpon his head. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Be not ouercome of euil, but ouercome in good the euil. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     1. A liuing hoſt.] Leſt men ſhould thinke by the former diſcourſe of Gods eternal predeſtination, that no reward were to be had of good life and workes, the Apoſtle now earneſtly recommendeth to them holineſſe of life.
                  
                     1. A liuing hoſt.]
                     The body chaſtifed by penāce is a grateful ſacrifice. Man maketh his body a ſacrifice to God by giuing it to ſuffer for him, by chaſtiſing it vvith faſting, vvatching, and ſuch like, and by occupying it in workes of charitie and vertue to Gods honour, whereby appeareth how acceptable theſe workes are to God and grateful in his ſight, being compared to a ſacrifice, which is an high ſeruice done to him.
                  
                     6. According to the rule of faith.] By this, and many places of holy write, we may gather, that the Apoſtles by the holy Ghoſt,The Apoſtolical rule or analogie of faith. before they were ſundered into diuers Nations, ſet downe among them ſelues a certaine Rule and forme of faith and doctrine, conteining not onely the Articles of the Crede, but al other principles, groundes, and the whole platforme of al the Chriſtian religion. Which Rule was before any of the bookes of the new Teſtment were written, &
 before the faith was preached, among the Gentiles: by vvhich not onely euery other inſeriout teachers doctrine was tried, but al the Apoſtles, and Euangeliſtes preaching, vvriting, interpreting (which is here called prophecying) were of gods Church appointed and admitted, or diſproued and reiected. This forme, by mouth and not by Scripture, euery Apoſtle deliuered to the countrie by them conuerted.c. 6, 17. c. 16, 17. For keeping of this forme, the Apoſtle before praiſed the Romanes, and afterward earneſtly warneth them by no man 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſpeache to be drawen from the ſame. This he commendeth to Timothee,1. Tim. 6, 20. calling it his 
                        〈◊〉
                      For not holding this faſt and ſure, he blameth the Galatians, further alſo denouncing to him ſelf or an Angel that ſhould write, teach, or expound againſt that which they firſt receiued,Gal. 1, 6. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , and commanding alwaies to bevvare of them that taught otherwiſe.Gal. 2, 1. For feare of miſſing this line of truth, him ſelf notwithſtanding he had the Holy Ghoſt, yet leſt he might haue preached in vaine and loſt his labour, he went to conferre with Peter and the reſt,Act. 
                           •
                        5, 6. for tho faſt keeping of this Rule of truth, the Apoſtles held Councels, and their ſucceſſors by their example. For the holding of this Rule, and by the meaſure thereof, were al the holy Scriptures written, for and by the ſame, al the glorious doctors haue made their ſermons, commendries, and interpretations▪ Gods vvork al vvritings and interpretatiōs no otherwiſe admitted nor deemed to be of God, but as they be agreable to this Rule.
                  And this is the ſure Analogies 
                        〈◊〉
                      meaſure of faith,The Heretikes phātaſtical rule, or rather rules of faith, many and diuers one from an other. ſet downe and commended to vs euery where for the Apoſtles tradition: and not the phantaſtical rule or ſquare that euery Sectmaiſter pretendeth to gather out of the Scriptures falſely vnderſtood and wreſted to his purpoſe, by which they iudge of doctor, Scripture, Church and al. Arîuſ had by that meanes a rule of his owne, Luther had his falſe weightes, and Caluin his owne alſo. According to which ſeueral meaſure of euery Sect, they haue their expoſitions of Gods word: and in England (as in other infected Countries) they kept of lare an apiſh imitation of this prophecying which S. Paul here and in other places ſpeaketh of, and which was an exerciſe in the primitiue Church, meaſured not by euery mans peculiar ſpirit, but by the former Rule of faith firſt ſet downe by the Apoſtles. And therfore al this new phantaſtical Prophecying & al other preaching in Caluins ſchoole, is iuſtly by this note of the Apoſtle condemned, for that it is not according to, but quite againſt the Rule of faith.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  To yeld obedience and al other duties vnto Poteſtats: 8 to loue their neighbour vvhich is the fulfilling of the Lavv: 11 and ſpecially to conſider, that novv being the time of grace, vve muſt doe nothing that may not beſeeme day light.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LET ″ euery ſoul be ſubiect to higher powers,Tit. 3, 7. for there is ″ no povver but of God.1. Pet. 2, 13. And thoſe that are, of God are ordeined. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Therfore he that reſiſteth the povver, reſiſteth the ordinance of God. And ″ they that reſiſt, purchaſe to them ſelues damnatiō. ✝ 
                     verse 3 for princes are no feare to the good worke, but to the euil. But wilt thou not feare the povver? Doe good: and thou ſhalt haue praiſe of the ſame. ✝ 
                     verse 4 for he is gods miniſter vnto thee for good. But if thou doe euil, feare. for he ″ beareth not the ſvvord without cauſe. For he is Gods miniſter: a reuēger vnto vvrath, to him that doeth euil. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore be ſubiect of neceſſitie, not only for vvrath, but alſo for conſcience ſake. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For therfore ″ you giue tributes alſo. for they are the miniſters of God, ſeruing vnto this purpoſe.Mt. 22, 21. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Render therfore to al men their devv:The Epiſtle vpō the 4 Sunday after the Epiphanie. * to vvhom tribute, tribute: to vvhom cuſtom, cuſtom: to whom feare, feare: to vvhō honour, honour. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Ovve 
 no man any thing: but, that you loue one an other. For he that loueth his neighbour,Exo. 20, 13. hathHere vve learne that the Law may be & is fulfilled by loue in this life: againſt the Aduerſaries ſaying it is impoſſible to keepe the commaundements. fulfilled the lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For, Thou ſhalt not commit aduoutrie, Thou ſhalt not kil, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, Thou ſhalt not beare falſe vvitnes, Thou ſhalt not couet, and if there be any other commaundement:Leu. 19, 18. it is compriſed in this vvord, Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 10 The loue of thy neighbour, vvorketh no euil. Loue therfore is the fulneſſe of the lavv. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 11 And that knovving the ſeaſon,The Epiſtle vpō the 1 Sunday in Aduent. that it is novv the houre for vs to riſe from ſleepe. For novv our ſaluation is neerer then vvhen vve beleeued. ✝ 
                     verse 12 The night is paſſed, and the day is at hand. Let vs therfore caſt of the vvorkes of darkneſſe, and doe on the armour of light. ✝ 
                     verse 13 As in the day let vs vvalke honeſtly: not in banketings and drunkennes, not in chamberings and impudicities, not in contention and emulation: ✝ 
                     verse 14 but doe ye on our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ⊢ and make not prouiſion for the fleſh in concupiſcenees.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     1. Euery ſoul be ſubiect.] Becauſe the Apoſtles preached libertie by Chriſt from the yoke of the Law and ſeruitude of ſinne, and gaue al the faithful both example and commaundement to obey God more then men, and withal euer charged them expreſly to be obedient and ſubiect to their Prelates as to them which had cure of their ſoules and were by the Holy Ghoſt placed ouer the Church of God: there were many in thoſe daies newly conuerted, that thougt them ſolues free from▪ al temporal Boteſtats, carnal Lordes, and humane creatures or powers: wherevpon the bondman tooke him ſelf to be looſe from his ſeruitude, the ſubiect from his Soueraine, were he Emperour, King, Duke, or what other ſecular,Obedience to tēporal rulers, & in what caſes. Magiſtrate ſo euer, ſpecially the Princes of thoſe daies being Heathens and perſecutors of the Apoſtles, and of Chriſtes religion. for which cauſe and for that the Apoſtles were vntruely charged of their Aduerſaries, that they withdrevv
                        •
                      men from order and obedience to Ciuil lavves and Officers: S. Paul here (as S. Peter doth 1 Chap. 2.) cleereth him ſelf, and expreſly chargeth euery man to be ſubiect to his temporal Prince and Superior: Not euery man to al that be in Office or Superiority, but euery one to him whom God hath put in authoritie ouer him, by that he is his Maiſter, Lord, king, or ſuch like: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      either to them in matters of religion or regiment of their ſoules (for moſt part vvere Pagans, whom the Apoſtle could not vvill men to obey in matters of faith,) but to them in ſuch things onely as 
                        〈…〉
                     , and what other cauſes ſo euer conſiſt vvith Gods holy vvill and ordinance,Act. 4, 19, 3, 29. for * againſt God no power may be 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     1. No povver but of God.]
                     In what ſenſe, al power or ſuperioritie is of God. S. Chryſoſtome here noteth, that power 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Superioritie, is Gods ordinance,Chryſ. in ep. Ro. ho. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . but not of
                        •
                     ſomes al Princes: becauſe to any may vſur 
                        〈◊〉
                      who reigne by his permiſsion onely, and not by his appointment: nor al actions that euery one doeth in and by his ſoueraine povver, as Iu
                        •
                     ians apoſtaſte and 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Catholikes, 
                        〈…〉
                      oppreſsion of the Iſraelites, Acha
                        •
                     s perſecution of the Prophets, Neros executing of the Apoſtles, Herods and Pilats condemning of Chriſt: al which things God permitted them, by (he abuſe of their power to accompliſh, 
                        〈◊〉
                      they vvere out of the compaſſe of his cauſing and ordinance.
                  
                     2. They that reſiſt.]
                     In things lawfully cōmaunded it is mortal ſinne not to obey our Superiors. Vvhoſoeuer reſiſteth or obeieth not his lavvful Superior in thoſe cauſes vvherein he is ſubiect vnto him, withſtandeth Gods appointment, & ſinneth 
                        •
                     oadly, and is vvorthy to be puniſhed both in this vvorld by his Superior, and by God in the next life. for in temporal gouernement, and cauſes, the Chriſtians vvere bound in conſcience to obey their Heathen Imperours: though on the other ſide, they were bound vnder paine of de
                        ••
                     ation to obey their Apoſtles and Prelates, and not to obey their kings or
 Emperours, in matters of religion. Vvhereby it is cleere that vvhen vve be commaunded to obey our Superiors, it is meant alvvaies and onely in ſuch things as they may lawfully commaund, and in reſpect of ſuch matters Vvherein they be our Superiors.
                  
                     4. Beareth not the ſword.] That the Apoſtle meaneth here ſpecially of temporal povvers, vve may ſee by the ſvvord,The Apoſtle ſpeaketh of tē
                        poral powers. tribute, & external compulſion, vvhich he here attributeth to them. And the Chriſtian men then had no doubt vvhether they ſhould obey their Spiritual povvers. but novv the diſeaſe is cleane contrarie for al is giuen to the ſecular, povver, and nothing to the ſpiritual, vvhich expreſly is ordained by Chriſt and the Holy Ghoſt: and al the faithful are commaunded to be ſubiect there vnto as to Chriſts ovvne vvord and vvill.Hereſies againſt rule and Superioritie. There vvere Heretikes called Begardi, that tooke avvay al rule and Superioritie: The w
                        ••
                     lefiſts vvould obey nor Prince nor Prelate, if he vvere once in deadly ſinne. The Proteſtants of our time (as vve may ſee in al Countrie
                        •
                      vvhere the ſecular ſvvord is dravven againſt their Sectes) care neither for the one nor for the other, though they extol onely the ſecular vvhen it maketh for them.The obedience of Catholikes both to Spiritual and temporal Superiors. The Catholikes onely moſt humbly obey both, euen according to Gods ordinance, the one in temporal cauſes, and the other in Spiritual: in vvhich order both theſe States haue bleſſedly floriſhed in al Chriſtian countries euer ſince Chriſte
                        •
                      time, and it is the very vvay to preſerue both, as one day al the vvorld ſhal confeſſe vvith vs.
                  
                     6. Ten giue tributes.] Though euery man ought to be ready to ſerue his temporal Prince vvith his goods,Hiero. in Mat. 17. by tributes of vvhat other lavvful taxes and ſubſidies ſo euer: yet they may exempt by priuileges vvhom they thinke good.The Clergie exempted from tribute. As in al countries Chriſtian: Prieſts for the honour of Chriſt, whoſe Miniſters they be, haue by the grauntes and auncient charters or kings be he excepted and exempted. Notvvithſtanding they vvere neuer vnready to ſerue voluntarely their, ſoueraine, in al common cauſes, vvith vvhatſoeuer they had. See Annot. in Mat. 17, 26.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Not in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .] This vvas the very place vvhich S. Auguſtine, that glorious Doctor,S. Auguſtines conuerſion. vvas by a voice from heauen directed vnto, at his firſt miraculous and happy conuerſion, not only to the Catholike faith, but alſo to perpetual continencie, by this voice comming from heauen, Tolle, lege: Tolle, lege, Take vp and read, take vp and read. as him ſelf telleth li. 8 Confeſ
                           •
                        e. 12.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Like a moderator and peacemaker betvvene the firme Chriſtians (vvho vvere the Gentils) and the infirme (vvho vvere the Chriſtian Ievves, hauing yet a ſcruple to ceaſe from keeping the ceremonial me
                        •
                     tes and daies of Moyſes Lavv) be exhorteth the Ievv 
                        〈◊〉
                      to condemne the Gentil vſing his libertie: and the Gentil againe, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to condemne the 
                        ••
                     rupulous 
                        •
                     ew: but rather to abſtaine from vſing his libertie, and them offending the Ievv, 
                        〈◊〉
                      be an occaſions vnto him of apoſting.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND him that is vveake in faith, take vnto you: not in diſputations of cogitatiōs. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For one beleeueth that he may ″ eate al things: but he that is vveake,eateth▪
                   let him eate' herbes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Let not him that eateth, deſpiſe him that eateth not: and he that eateth not: let him not iudge him that eateth. for God hath taken him to him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vvho art thou that iudgeſt an other mans ſeruant? To his ovvne Lord he ſtandeth or falleth, and he ſhal ſtand: for God is able to make him ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For one iudgeth ″ betvveene day and day: and an other iudgeth euery day. let euery one abound ″ in his ovvne ſenſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 He that reſpecteth the day, reſpecteth to our 
 Lord. And he that eateth, eateth to our Lord: for he giueth thankes to God. And he that eateth not, to our Lord he eateth not, and giueth thankes to God. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For none of vs liueth to him ſelf: & no man dieth to him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For whether vve liue, we liue to our Lord: or vvhether we die, we die to our Lord. Therfore vvhether vve liue, or vvhether vve die, vve are our Lords. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For to this end Chriſt died and roſe againe: that he may haue dominion both of the dead and of the liuing. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But thou, vvhy iudgeſt thou thy brother? or thou, vvhy doeſt thou deſpiſe thy brother?2. Cor. 5, 10. For * vve ſhal al ſtand before the iudgement ſeate of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For it is vvritten, Liue I, ſaith our Lord,Eſ. 45, 23. 
                  that euery knee ſhal bovve to me: and euery tongue ſhal confeſſe to God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore euery one of vs for him ſelf ſhal render account to God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Let vs therfore no more iudge one an other. but this iudge ye rather, that you put not a ſtumbling blocke or a ſcandal to your brother. ✝ 
                     verse 14 I knovv and am perſuaded in our Lord IESVS Chriſt, that nothing is
                     Common, that is, vncleane. See Annot. Marc. 7, 2. Though he vviſh the vveake to be borne vvithal, yet he vttereth his minde plainly, that in deede al the meates forbidden and vncleane in the Lavv, are novv throught Chriſt cleanſed & lawful for euery mā to vſe. cōmon of it ſelf, but to him that ſuppoſeth, any thing to be cōmon, to him it is common. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For if becauſe of meate thy brother be greeued: novv thou vvalkeſt not according to charitie.
* Do not vvith thy meate deſtroy him for vvhom Chriſt died.1. Cor. 8. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Let not then our good be blaſphemed. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the kingdom of God is ″ not meate and drinke: but iuſtice, and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 18 for he that in this ſerueth Chriſt, pleaſeth God, and is acceptable to men. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Therfore the things that are of peace let vs purſue: and the things that are of edifying one tovvard an other let vs keepe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Deſtroy not the vvorke of God for meate.Tit. 1, 15▪
                   * Al things in deede are cleane: but it is il for the man that eateth by giuing offence. ✝ 
                     verse 21 It is good not to eate fleſh, and not to drinke vvine, nor that vvherein thy brother is offended, or ſcandalized, or vveakened. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Haſt thou faith? ″ haue it vvith thy ſelf before God. Bleſſed is he that iudgeth not him ſelf in that vvhich he approueth. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But ″ he that diſcerneth, if he eate, is damned: becauſe not of faith, for ″ al that is not of faith, is ſinne.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     2. Eate al things.] By ſimilitude of vvordes the ſimple are ſoone deceiued, and Heretikes make their vauntage of any thing to ſeduce the vnlearned. There vvere diuers meates forbidden in the Lavv of Moyſes, and for ſignification, made and counted vncleane, vvhereof
 the Ievves might not eate a
                        •
                      al,The Apoſtles meaning about eating or not eating certaine meates. as porke, hare, conny, and ſuch like, both of fiſhes, foules, and beaſts, a great number: Chriſt diſcharged al them that became Chriſtians, after his Paſsion of that obſeruance and al other ceremonies of the old Lavv: Notvvithſtanding, becauſe diuers that vvere brought vp in the Lavv, had a religion and conſcience, ſodenly to foreſake their former maner, the Apoſtle here admoniſheth ſuch as beſtronger and 
                        〈◊〉
                      inſtructed in the caſe to heare vvith the vveaker ſort, that being Chriſtians could not yee finde in their hartes to eate and vſe the meates forbidden by God in the Lavv: as on the other ſide he vvarneth the vveake that vvould not eate, not to take offence or ſcandal at them that did eate vvithout ſcruple, any of the irregular or forbidden meates in the Lavv, nor in any vviſe to iudge or condemne the eater, but to commit that to God, and finally that neither nother ſhould condemne the other for eating or not eating.The Heretikes fondly abuſe this place againſt the faſtes of the Church. Now the Proteſtants fōndly apply al this to the faſtes of the Church, and differences of meates in the ſame: as though the Church did forbid any meate vvholy neuer to be eaten or touched, or made any creatures vncleane, or othervviſe preſcribed any abſtinence, then for chaſtiſing of mens bodies and ſeruice of God. It is a great blindneſſe that they can put no difference betvvixt Chriſtes faſt of fourtie daies, Mat. 4. Iohns abſtaining from al delicate meates and drinkes, Mat. 11. the vvidovv Annes, Luc. 
                           •
                        , 1
                           •
                        . the Nazareites, Num. 6. the Recabites, Ierem. 15, 14. the Niniuities, Ion. 3. S. Paules, 2 Cor. 11, 27. S. Timothees, 1 Tim. 5, 23. Iohns Diſciples and Chriſts Diſciples faſt Mat. 9, 14. 15.
                     Foliſh Heretikes ſee not the differēces of things. (which he ſaid they ſhould keepe after his departure from them:) and the ceremonial diſtinction of creatures and meates, cleane, and vncleane, in the old Lavv. of vvhich it is euident the Apoſtle treateth in al this chapter, & of none other at al. Therfore vvhen the Proteſtants by the vvordes of this place vvould proue, that vve be either made free: from faſting and from obeying the Churches commaundement or folovving Chriſtes example in that matter, or that the obſeruers of Chriſtian faſtes be vveake in faith, & ought not in any vviſe cōdemne of ſinne the breakers of the preſcribed faſtes of the holy Church, they doe abuſe ignorantly or vvilfully the Apoſtles vvordes and diſcourſe.
                  
                     5. Betvvene day and day.]
                     Diſtinction of daies. By the like deceite they abuſe this place againſt the Holydaies of Chriſt and his B. mother and Saincts, vvhich concerneth onely the Ievves feſtiuities and obſeruation of times, vvhereof in the Epiſtle to the Galatians c, 4. 10.
                  
                     6. Euery one in his ovvne ſenſe.)
                     The text explicated concerning euery mans cōſcience in Iudaical meates and drinkes. The Apoſtle doth not giue freedom; as the Churches enemies vvould haue it, that euery man may doe or thinke vvhat he liſt. but in this matter of Iudaical obſeruation of daies and meates, & that for a time onely, til the Chriſtian religion ſhould be perfectly eſtabliſhed, he would haue no reſtrainte made, but that euery one ſhould be borne vvithal in his ovvne ſenſe: yet ſo, that they ſhould not condemne one an other, nor make neceſsitie of ſaluation in the obſeruation of the Iudaical rites of meates, daies, &c.
                  
                  
                     17. Not meate and drinke.] The ſubſtance of religion or the kingdom of God ſtandeth not in meate or drinke,Not, eating, but diſobedience damnable. and therfore the better might they vſe indifferencie and toleration in that point for a time, for peace ſake and to auoid ſcandal. but if the precept of Moyſes Lavv had bound ſtill as before, then (not for the meates ſake, but for the diſobedience) it had been damnable to haue eaten the vncleane meates.
                  
                     22. Haue it vvith thy ſelf.] Thou that art perfect, and bleeueſt or knovveſt certainely that thou art free from the Lavv concerning meates and feſtiuities, yet to the trouble and hinderance of the feeble that can not yet be brought ſo far, be diſcrete & vtter not thy ſelf out of ſeaſon.
                  
                     23. He that diſcerneth.] If the vveake haue a conſcience, and ſhould be driuen to eate the things vvhich in his ovvne hart he thinketh he ſhould not doe,To doe againſt our conſcience, is ſinne. he committeth deadly ſinne, becauſe he doth againſt his conſcience,Chryſ, h
                           •
                        , 26. in ep. R
                           •
                        . or againſt his ovvne pretenſed knovvledge.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Al this is not of faith] The proper ſenſe of this ſpeach is, that euery thing that a man doeth againſt his knovvledge or conſcience, is a ſinne, for ſo by the circumſtance of the letter,Vvhat actions of infidels are ſinne, and what are not. faith muſt here be taken though S. Auguſtine ſometimes applieth it alſo to proue that al the actions of infidels (meaning thoſe vvorkes vvhich directly procede of their lacke of faith) be ſinnes. But in any vviſe take heede of the Heretikes commentarie, vvho hereby vvould proue that the infidel ſinneth in honouring his parents, fighting for his countrie, tilling his ground,Luther. and in al other vvorkes. And no maruel that they ſo hold of infidels, vvho maintaine. * that Chriſtian men alſo offend deadly in euery good deede.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  He procedeth to make peace betvvene the Chriſtian Gentils and Ievves. 8 vvith this reſolution, that the Ievves vocation is of promis in deede, but the Gentils alſo of mercie, and foretold by the Scriptures. 14 Then dravving to his ende, he excuſeth him ſelf to the Romanes for vvriting thus vnto them. 21 hoping novv at length to ſee them, after that he hath been at Hieruſalem, 
                        •
                     9 vvherevnto alſo he requeſteth their praiers.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vve that are the ſtrōger, muſt ſuſteine the infirmities of the vveake, & not pleaſe our ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Let euery one of you pleaſe his neighbour vnto good, to edification. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For,Pſa. 68, 10. Chriſt did not pleaſe him ſelf, but as it is vvritten, The reproches of them that reproched thee, fel vpon me.
                  The Epiſtle vpō the 2. Sunday in Aduent. ✝ 
                     verse 4 ForHe meaneth al that it vvitten in the old Teſtamēt: much more al things vvritten in the nevv Teſtamēt, are for our learning and comfort. vvhat things ſoeuer haue been vvritten, to our learning they are vvritten: that by the patience and conſolation of the Scriptures, vve may haue hope. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the God of patience and of comfort giue you to be of one minde one tovvard an other according to IESVS Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 6 that ofVnitie in religion commended. one minde, vvith one mouth you may glorifie God and the Father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For the vvhich cauſe receiue one an other: as Chriſt alſo hath receiued you vnto the honour of God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For I ſay Chriſt IESVS to haue beenChriſt did execute his office and miniſterie onely tovvards the people of Circumciſion, that is, the Iewes. miniſter of the circumciſion for the veritie of God to confirme the promiſſes of the fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But the Gentils to honour God for his mercie,Pſa. 17. 50. as it is vvritten: Therfore vvil I confeſſe to thee in the Gentils ô Lord,
                  Deu. 32. 43. 
                  and vvil ſing to thy name. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And againe he ſaith, Reioyce ye Gētils vvith his people. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And againe, Praiſe al ye Gentils our Lord:
                  Pſa. 116, 1. 
                  and magnifie him al ye peoples. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And againe Eſaie ſaith,Eſa. 11, 10. 
                  There ſhal be the roote of Ieſſe: and he that ſhal riſe vp to rule the Gentils, in him the Gentils ſhal hope. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the God of hope repleniſh you vvith al ioy and peace in beleeuing: that you may abound in hope, and in the vertue of the holy Ghoſt. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And I my ſelf alſo, my brethren, am aſſured of you, that you alſo are ful of loue, repleniſhed vvith al knowledge, ſo that you are able to admoniſh one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But I haue vvritten to you (brethren) more boldly in part, as it were putting you in remembrance: for the grace vvhich is giuen me of God, ✝ 
                     verse 16 to be the miniſter of Chriſt IESVS in the Gētils: ſanctifying the Goſpel of God, that the oblation of the Gentils may be made acceptable and ſanctified in the holy
 Ghoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 I haue therfore glorie in Chriſt IESVS tovvard God. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For I dare not ſpeake any of thoſe things vvhich Chriſt vvorketh not by me for the obedience of the Gentils, by vvord and deedes, ✝ 
                     verse 19 in the vertue of ſignes and vvōders, in the vertue of the holy Ghoſt: ſo that from Hieruſalem round about vnto Illy
                     •
                  icum I haue repleniſhed the Goſpel of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And I haue ſo preached this Goſpel, not vvhere Chriſt vvas named, leſt I ſhould build vpon an other mans foundation:Eſ. 52. 13▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 but as it is vvritten, They to vvhom it hath not been preached of him ſhall ſee: and they that haue not heard, ſhal, vnderſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For the vvhich cauſe alſo I vvas hindred very much from comming vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But novv hauing no longer place in theſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   and hauing a deſire to come vnto you theſe many yeares novv paſſed: ✝ 
                     verse 24 vvhen I ſhal begin to take my iourney into a paine, I hope that as I paſſe, I ſhal ſee you, and be brought thither of you, if firſt in part I ſhal haue enioyed you, ✝ 
                     verse 25 Novv therfore I vvil goe vnto Hieruſalem to minſter to theHe 
                        〈◊〉
                      the holy perſons that hauing forſaken al their goods for Chriſt, vvere vvholy 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      our Lord vvith al their minde. 
                        •
                     . Hiero. againſt Vigilantius the Heretike reprehending the almes giuen to 
                        〈◊〉
                     , as do the Heretikes alſo of our time. ſaincts. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For Macedonia and Achaia haue liked vvel to make ſome contribution vpon the poore ſaincts that are in Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For it hath pleaſed them: and they are their detters. For if the Gentiles be made partakers of their ſpiritual things: they ought alſo in carnal things to miniſter vnto them. ✝ 
                     verse 28 This therfore vvhen I ſhal haue accōpliſhed, and ſigned them this fruite, I vvil goe by you into Spaine. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And I knovv that comming to you, I ſhal come in aboundance of the bleſſing of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 30 I beſeeche you therfore brethren by our Lord IESVS Chriſt, and by the charitie of the holy Ghoſt, that youIn that the Apoſtle deſired to be praied for, vve may be moued to ſeeke the ſame as a great benefite. helpe me in your praiers for me to God, ✝ 
                     verse 31 that I may be deliuered from the infidels that are in Ievvrie, and the oblation of my ſeruice may become acceptable in Hieruſalem to the ſaincts, ✝ 
                     verse 32 that I may come to you in ioy by the vvil of God, that I may be refreſhed vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 33 And the God of peace be vvith you all. Amen.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and him ſelf to many there by name. 
                        〈◊〉
                      he declareth the doctrine vvhich the Romanes had learned, to be the touchſtone is knovv Seducers. 21 he doth vnto them the commendations of al the Churches and of certaine perſons by names 
                        •
                     5 and concludeth.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I commend to you Phoebè our ſiſter, vvho is in the miniſterie of the Church that is in Cenchris: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that you receiue her in our Lord as it is vvorthie for ſaincts: and that you aſſiſt her in whatſoeuer buſines ſhe ſhal neede you. for ſhe alſo hath aſſiſted many and my ſelf.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  The onely ſalutation of ſo vvorthy a man is ſufficient to fil him vvith greate grace that is ſo ſaluted. Chryſ. in 2. Tim. 4.
                   Salute Priſca and Aquila my helpers in Chriſt IESVS, ( ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho for my life haue laid dovvne their neckes: to vvhō not I only giue thankes, but alſo al the Churches of the Gentiles) ✝ 
                     verse 5 and theirThis domeſtical Church vvas either that faith ful and Chriſtiā houſhold, or rather the Chriſtians meeting together there & in ſuch good houſes to heare diuine ſeruice and the Apoſtles preaching in thoſe times of perſecution. domeſtical Church. Salute Epaenetus my beloued: vvho is the firſt fruite of Aſia in Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Salute Marie vvho hath laboured much about vs.Iunia ✝ 
                     verse 7 Salute Andrónicus and` Iulia' my coſins and fellovv captiues: vvho are noble among the Apoſtles, vvho alſo before me vvere in Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Salute Ampliátus my beſt beloued in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Salute Vrbánus our helper in Chriſt IESVS, and Stachys my beloued. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Salute Apelles
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   approued in Chriſt. Salute them that are of Ariſtóbolus houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Salute Herodion my kinſman. Salute them that are of Narciſſus houſe, that are in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Salute Tryphaena and Tryphóſa vvho labour in our Lord. Salute Perſis the beloued, vvho hath much laboured in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Salute Rufus the elect in our Lord and his mother and mine.The Proteſtants here teaſō thus, Peter is not here ſaluted, therfore he vvas neu
                        •
                     r at Rome. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Salute Aſyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Pátrobas, Hermes: and the brethren that are vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Salute Philólogus and Iulia, Nereus, and his ſiſter and Olympias: and al the ſaincts that are vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 16 ″ Salute one an other in a ″ holy kiſſe. Al the churches of Chriſt ſalute you.See the Annotation.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And I deſire you brethren, ″ to marke them that make diſſenſions and ſcandals contrarie to the doctrine vvhich you haueOf the Prince of the Apoſtle;, ſaith Theodorete vpon this place. learned, and auoid them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For ſuch doe not ſerue Chriſt our Lord, ″ but their ovvne belly: andThe ſpecial vvay that Heretikes haue euer had to beguile, vvas and is by ſvveete vvordes & gay ſpeaches. which their ſheepes cote ſee before deſcribed particularly in the Aunotations vpon S. Matthevv. c. 7, 15.
                   by ſvveete ſpeaches and benedictions ſeduce the hartes of innocents. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For ″ your obedience is publiſhed into euery place. I reioyce therfore in you. But I vvould haue you to be vviſe in good, and ſimple in euil. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the God of peace cruſh Satan vnder your feete quickely. The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 Timothee my coadiutor ſaluteth you, and Lucius, and Iaſon, and Sosípater, my kinſmen. ✝ 
                     verse 22 I Tertius ſalute you,

                     verse 23 that vvrote the epiſtle, in our Lord. Caius mine hoſt, and
 the whole Churches, ſaluteth you. Eraſtus the Cofferer of the citie ſaluteth you, and Quartus, a brother. ✝ 
                     verse 24 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith al you, Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And to him that is able to confirme you according to my Goſpel and preaching of IESVS Chriſt, according to the reuelation of the myſterie from eternal times kept ſecrete, ✝ 
                     verse 26 vvhich novv is opened by the Scriptures of the prophets according to the precept of the eternal God, to the obediēce of faith knovven in al Gentiles, ✝ 
                     verse 27 to God the only vviſe through IESVS Chriſt, ⊢ to vvhom' be honour & glorie for euer and euer. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     14. Salute one an other.] Neuer Sectmaiſters made more foule or hard ſhifts to proue or defend falſehood, then the Proteſtants: but in tvvo points, about S. Peter ſpecially, they paſſe euen them ſelues in impudencie. The firſt is, that they hold he vvas not preferred before the other Apoſtles, vvhich is againſt al Scriptures moſt euidently. The ſecond is, that he vvas neuer at Rome, vvhich is againſt al the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories, al the Fathers Greeke and Latine, againſt the very ſenſe and ſight of the monuments of his Seate,That S. Peter was at Rome. Sepulcher, doctrine, life, and death there. Greater euidence certes there is thereof and more vveighty teſtimonie, then of Romulus, Numas, Caeſars, or Ciceros being there: yet vvere he a very brutiſh man that vvould deny this to the diſcredite of ſo many vvriters and the vvhole vvorld. Much more monſtruous it is, to heare any deny the other. Theodorete ſaith he vvas there, vvriting vpon this chapter. Proſper alſo carmine de ingratis in principio, S. Leo de natali Petri, S. Auguſtine to 6 c. 4. cont. ep. fund. Oroſius li. 7 c. 6. S. Chryſoſtome in pſ. 48. S. Ep
                        •
                     phanius haer. 27. Prudentius in hymno 2. S. Laurentij, & hymno 12. Optatus li. 2. contra Donatiſtas. S. Hierome in Catalogo. Lactantius li. 4. c. 21, de vera ſapientia. Euſebius hiſt. Eccl. li. 2, c. 13, 15. S. Athanaſius de fuga ſua. S. Cyprian. ep. 55. nu. 6, Tertullian de praſcriptionibus nu. 14. and li 4, contra Marcionem nu, 4. Origen in Geneſ. apud Euſeb. li. 3, c. 1. Irenaeus li. 3, c. 
                           •
                        . Hegeſippus li. 3. c. 2 de excid. Hieroſolym. Caius and Papias the Apoſtles ovvne ſcholers,Chalced. conc. act. 1. and Dionyſius the B. of Corinth, alleaged by Euſebius li. 2, c. 14. & 24. Ignatius ep. ad Romanos: The holy Councel of Chalcedon, and many other affirme it. yea Peter him ſelf (according to the iudgement of the aūcient Fathers) confeſſeth he vvas at Rome, calling it Babylon 1. ep. c. 5. Euſeb. li. 2. c. 14. hist. Ec.
                     See the Annotations 1 Peto c. 5, 18. Some of theſe tel the time and cauſe of his firſt going thither: ſome, hovv long he liued there: ſome, the maner of his death there: ſome, the place of his burial: and al, that he vvas the firſt Biſhop there. Hovv could ſo many of ſuch vviſedom and ſpirit, ſo neere the Apoſtles time deceiue or be deceiued? how could Caluin and his, after fiftene hundred yeres knovv that vvhich none of them could ſee?
                  Some great argument muſt they needes haue to controule the credite of the vvhole vvorld. This of truth is here their argument,The Proteſtants great argument, that Peter was neuer at Rome. neither haue they a better in any place, to vvit, If S. Peter bad bene at Rome, S. Paul vvould haue ſaluted him, as he did others here in the end of his letter to the Romanes. Is not this a high point to diſproue al antiquitie by? Any man of diſcretion may ſtraight ſee,Epiph. har. 27. that S. Peter might be knovven vnto S. Paul to be out of the Citie, either for perſecution or buſines, vvhen this epiſtle vvas written, (for he went often out as S. Epiphanius declareth) & ſo the omitting to ſalute him, can proue no more, but that then he vvas not in Rome. but it proueth not ſo much neither, becauſe the Apoſtle might for reſpect of his dignitie and other the Churches affaires, write vnto him ſpecial letters, and ſo had no cauſe to ſalute him in his common Epiſtle. Or hovv knovv they that this Epiſtle was not ſent incloſed to S. Peters to be deliuered by his meanes to the vvhole Church of the Romanes in ſome of the aſſemblies? it is very like it was recommended to ſome one principal man or other that is not here named: and tvventy cauſes there may be vnknovven to vs. Why he ſaluted him not 
                        •
                     but no cauſe vvhy our Aduerſaries vpon ſuch friuolous reaſons ſhould reproue an approued truth. For euen as wel might they ſay that S. Iohn vvas neuer at Epheſus, becauſe S. Paul in his Epiſtle to the Epheſians doth not ſalute him. And plaine it is, that it is the Romane ſeate and faith of Peter, vvhich they (as all Heretikes before
 them) do feare and hate,The Heretikes hatred of the Romane ſee. and vvhich wil be their bane: and they knovv that there is no argument vvhich conuinceth in their conſcience, that Peter vvas neuer at Rome. Therfore to conclude, vve ſay to them in S. Auguſtines vvordes,li. 2. cont. li. Petil. c. 51. 
                     Why call you the Apoſtolike chaire, the chaire of peſtilence? What hath the Church of Rome done againſt you, in vvhich S. Peter did ſit, and from vvhich by nefarious furie you haue ſeparated your ſelues?
                  
                  
                     16. Holy kiſſe.]
                     Kiſſing the Pax. Hereof, and by the common vſage of the firſt Chriſtians, vvho had ſpecial regard of vnitie and peace among them ſelues, and for 
                        •
                     ſigne and proteſtation thereof,Orig. in 1
                           •
                        . ad Ro. kiſſed one an other, came our holy ceremonie of giuing the Pax, or kiſſing one an other in the Sacrifice of the bleſſed Maſſe.
                  
                     17. To marke them.]
                     Againſt Sect-maiſters hovv to examine our ſaith. He carefully warneth them to take heede of ſeditions ſovvers of Sectes and diſſenſion in religion, and this euer to be their marke, if they ſhould teach or moue them to any thing vvhich vvas not agreable to that vvhich they had learned at their conuerſion: not bidding them to examine the caſe by the Scriptures, but by their firſt forme of faith and religion deliuered to them before they had or did read any booke of the nevv Teſtament.
                  
                     18. But their ovvne belly.]
                     Heretikes giuen to voluptuouſnes. Hovvſoeuer Heretikes pretend in vvordes and external ſhew of their ſheepes cote, in deede they ſeeke but after their ovvne profite and pleaſure, & by the Apoſtles to ovvne teſtimonie we be vvarranted ſo to iudge of them as of men that in deede haue no religion nor conſcience.
                  
                     19. Your obedience.] Againſt Heretikes and their illuſions, there is no better way then in ſimplicitie to cleaue vnto that vvhich hath bene taught before: for the vvhich the Romane obedience is much commended. See Annot. vpon the firſt chap. verſ. 8.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
            
               HOVV S. Paul planted the Church at Corinth, cōtinuing there a yere and an halfe together, vve reade Act. 18. After that, vvhen he vvas at Epheſus Act. 19, about the end of the three yeres that he abode there, he vvrote this firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians. For euen as S. Luke there vvriteth, vvhen theſe things vvere ended,
               Act. 19, 21. 
               Paul purpoſed in the Spirit, when he had gone ouer Macedonia and Achaia, to goe to Hieruſalem: ſo likevviſe doth S. Paul himſelfe vvrite here:1 Cor. 16, 5. 
               I vvil come to you in Achaia, when I ſhal haue gone ouer Macedonia, for I vvill go ouer Macedonia. but I vvil tarie at Epheſus vntil Pentecoſt,
            
            The matter that he vvriteth of, is not one, as in the Epiſtle to the Romanes, but diuers▪ partly ſuch faultes of theirs, as vvere ſignified vnto him by them that vvere of Chloè 1 Cor. 1, 11. partly ſuch queſtions as them ſelues vvrote to him of, And concerning the things that you vvrote to me. 1 Cor. 7, 1. for ſo vve may (as it ſeemeth) deuide the Epiſtle into theſe tvvo partes. Or, to put al together, he vvriteth of eight things: 1 Of 
                  〈◊〉
                Schiſmes beginning among them, by occaſion of certaine preachers, vvhom in 
                  〈◊〉
                Second Epiſtle he toucheth more plainely as being Falſe apoſtles. chap. 1. 
                  •
               . 3▪ 4. 2 Of an inceſtuous fornicator, and ſome that vvent to lavv before infidel▪ chap. 5. 6. 3 Of Matrimonie and Continencie. chap. 7. 4 Of 
                  〈◊〉
                ſa
                  •
               raficed to Idols. chap. 8. 9. 10. 5 Of his Traditions. chap. 11. 6 Of the Giftes of the Holy Ghoſt▪ chap. 12. 13. 14. 7 of the Reſurrection. chap. 
                  〈…〉
                of the Gentiles, to ſuccour the Chriſtian▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
                at Hieru ſalem▪ chap. 16.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE CORINTHIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  After ſalutation,The 1. part, Of Schiſmes that vvere about their baptizers & preachers. 4 hauing acknovvledged the graces of their Churche, 10 he dehorteth them from their Schiſmatical boaſting againſt one an other in their baptizers (telling them that they muſt boaſt onely in Chriſt for their Baptiſme) 17 and in their preachers, vvho had the vviſedom of vvordes: telling them that it is the preaching of the Croſſe, vvhereby God ſaueth the vvorld, and vvherein onely Chriſtians ſhould boaſt: 26 ſeing God of purpoſe choſe the contemptible, that ſo him ſelf might haue the glorie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL called to be an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt, by the vvil of God, and Sóſthenes a brother, ✝ 
                     verse 2 to the Church of God that is at Corinth, to the ſanctified in Chriſt IESVS, called to be ſaincts, vvith al that inuocate the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt in euery place of theirs and ours. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Grace to you and peace from God our father and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 I giue thankes to my God alvvaies for you for the grace of God that is giuen you in Chriſt IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 5 that in al things you be made riche in him, in al vtterance, and 
                     •
                   in al knovvledge, ( ✝ 
                     verse 6 as the teſtimonie of Chriſt is confirmed in you,) ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſo that nothing is vvanting to you in any grace, expecting the reuelation of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 8 vvho alſo vvil confirme you vnto the end vvithout crime, in the day of the comming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 God is faithful: by vvhom you are called into the ſocietie of his ſonne IESVS Chriſt our Lord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And I beſeeche you brethren by the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, that you al ſay one thing, and that there be no ſchiſmes among you: but that you be perfect in one ſenſe, &
 in one knovvledge. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For it is ſignified vnto me (my brethren) of you, by them that are of Chloè, that there be contentions among you. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And I meane this, for that euery one of you ſaith,The beginning of al Schiſmes is ouer much admiring & addicting mens ſelues to their owne particular Maiſters. I certes am Paules, & I Apollos, but I Cephas, and I Chriſts. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Is Chriſt deuided? Vvhy, vvas Paul crucified for you? or in the name of Paul vvere you baptized? ✝ 
                     verse 14 I giue God thankes,Act. 18, 8. that I baptized none of you, but * Criſpus and Caius: ✝ 
                     verse 15 leſt any man ſay that in my name you vvere baptized. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And I baptized alſo the houſe of Stéphanas. But I know not if I haue baptized any other.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 For Chriſt ſent me not to baptize, but to euangelize: not in vviſedom of ſpeache, that the croſſe of Chriſt be not made void. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For the vvord of the croſſe, to them in deede that periſh, is foliſhnes: but to them that are ſaued, that is, to vs,Eſ. 38, 18 it is the povver of God. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For it is vvritten, I vvil deſtroy the vviſedom of the vviſe: and the prudence of the prudent I vvil reiecte. ✝ 
                        verse 20 Vvhere is the vviſe? vvhere is the Scribe? vvhere is the diſputer of this vvorld? Hath not God made the vviſedom of this vvorld foliſh? ✝ 
                     verse 21 For becauſe in the vviſedom of God the vvorld did not by vviſedom knovv God: it pleaſed God by the foliſhnes of the preaching to ſaue them that beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For both the Ievves aſke ſignes, and the Greekes ſeeke vviſedom: ✝ 
                     verse 23 but vve preach Chriſt crucified, to the Ievves certes a ſcandal, and to the Gentiles, foliſhnes: ✝ 
                     verse 24 but to the called Ievves & Greekes, Chriſt the povver of God and the vviſedom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For that vvhich is the foliſh of God,The Epiſtle for S. Agatha, Febr. 5.
                   is vviſer then men: and that vvhich is the infirme of God, is ſtronger then men. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For ſee your vocation brethren, that not many vviſe according to the fleſh, not many mightie, not many noble: ✝ 
                     verse 27 but the foliſh things of the vvorld hath God choſen, that he may confound the vviſe: and the vveake things of the vvorld hath God choſen, that he may confound the ſtrong: ✝ 
                     verse 28 and the baſe things of the vvorld and the contemptible hath God choſen, and thoſe things vvhich are not, that he might deſtroy thoſe things vvhich are: ✝ 
                     verse 29 that no fleſh may glorie in his ſight. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And of him you are in Chriſt IESVS, 
                     •
                   vvho is made vnto vs vviſedom from God,Ier. 9, 23 & iuſtice, & ſanctificatiō, and redemption: ✝ 
                     verse 31 that as it is vvritten, He that doth glorie, may glorie in our Lord. 
                  ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     5. In al knovvledge.]
                     Faith cōmeth by hearing rather then reading. Obſerue that the Apoſtles neuer vvrote their letters but to ſuch as vvere conuerted to Chriſtes faith before▪ for men can not lightly learne the Chriſtian religion by reading Scriptures, but by hearing, and by the preſence of their teachers, which may inſtruct them at large and particularly of euery Article, as clerely & breefely by letters they could not doe. Neither doth novv any man learne his faith firſt, but by hearing of his parents and Maiſters▪ for if vve ſhould vvhen vve come to yeres of diſcretion, 
                        •
                     e ſet to picke our faith out of the Scriptures, there vvould be a madde vvorke and many faithes among vs.
                  
                     30. Who is made.]
                     Chriſt is made our iuſtice, becauſe he is the author of the iuſtice in vs. He meaneth not, as our Aduerſaries captiouſly take it, that vve haue no iuſtice, ſapience, nor ſanctity of our ovvne, other then Chriſtes imputed to vs: but the ſenſe is, that he is made the author, giuer, and meritorious cauſe of al theſe vertues in vs▪ for ſo the Apoſtle interpreteth him ſelf plainely in the 6 Chapter folovving, vvhen he vvriteth thus, You be vvaſhed, you be iuſtified, you be ſanctified in the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST and in the Spirit of our God.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  That his ovvne preaching among them, vvas in humble maner in the ſight of man. 3 Hovvbeit it is moſt profound vviſedom (as they ſhould and vvould perceiue, if they vvere not carnal) vvhich is taught in the Church of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I (brethren) vvhen I came to you, I came not in loftineſſe of ſpeache or of vviſedom, preaching to you the teſtimonie of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For I iudged not my ſelf to knovv any thing among you but IESVS Chriſt, and him crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And
* I vvas vvith you in infirmitie,Act. 18, 1. and feare and much trembling: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and my ſpeache and my preaching vvas not in the perſuaſible vvordes of humane vviſedom, but in ſhevving of ſpirit and povver: ✝ 
                     verse 5 that your faith might not be in the vviſedom of men, but in the povver of God.
                But vve ſpeake vviſedom among the perfect. ✝ 
                     verse 6 but the vviſedom not of this vvorld, neither of the princes of this vvorld, that come to naught: ✝ 
                     verse 7 but vve ſpeake the vviſedom of God in a myſterie, which is hid, vvhich God did predeſtinate before the worlds, vnto our glorie: ✝ 
                     verse 8 which none of the princes of this vvo
                     •
                  ld did knovv: for if they had knovven, they vvould neuer haue crucified the Lord of glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But as it is vvritten,Eſ. 6 4, 4. 
                  That vvhich eie hath not ſeen, nor eare hath heard, neither hath it aſcended into the hart of mā, vvhat things God hath prepared for them that loue him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 but to vs God hath reuealed by his Spirit. For the
 Spirit ſearcheth al things, yea the profoundities of God. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For vvhat man knovveth the things of a man, but 
                     •
                   the ſpi
                  
                     •
                  it of a man that is in him? ſo the things alſo that are of God no man knovveth, but the ſpirit of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vve haue receiued not the ſpirit of this vvorld, but the ſpirit that is of God: 
                     •
                   that vve may knovv the things that of God are giuen to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 13 vvhich alſo vve ſpeake not in learned vvordes of humane vviſedom: but in the doctrine of the Spirit, comparing ſpiritual things to the ſpiritual. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But 
                     •
                   the ſenſual man perceiueth not thoſe things that are of the ſpirit of God. for it is foliſhnes to him, and he can not vnderſtand: becauſe he is ſpiritually examined. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But the ſpiritual man iudgeth al things:Eſa. 40, 13. and him ſelf is iudged of no man. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For * vvho hath knovven the ſenſe of our Lord that may inſtructe him? But vve haue the ſenſe of Chriſt.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     11. But the ſpirit of man.]
                     Hovv Angels and Saincts & mortal men knovv our cogitations. One man can not knovv an others cogitations naturally: but God giueth to Prophets and other, euen in this vvorld oftentimes, by extraordinary grace to knovv mens ſecretes.Act. 5. 4. reg. 
                           •
                         & 6. As he did to S. Peter, to knovv the fraude of Ananias and Sapphira: and to Eliſeus, his ſeruants bribery in his abſence, and vvhat vvas done in the king of Syria his chamber▪ and as he giueth to alLuc. 15, 7. Angels and Saincts (ſo far as is conuenient to our neceſsities and their heauenly glorie) to vnderſtand not onely our vocal praiers, but our invvard repentance and deſires.
                  
                     12. That vve may knovv.]
                     The Heretikes allegatiō for their vaine ſecuritie, anſvvered. The Proteſtants that chalenge a particular ſpirit reuealing to eche one his ovvne predeſtination, iuſtification, and ſaluation, vvould dravv this text to that purpoſe. Vvhich importeth nothing els (as is plaine by the Apoſtles diſcourſe) but that the holy Ghoſt hath giuen to the Apoſtles, & by them to other Chriſtian men, to knovv Gods ineffable gifts beſtovved vpon the beleeuers in this time of grace: that is, Chriſtes Incarnation, Paſsion, preſence in the Sacrament, & the incomprehenſible ioyes of heauen, vvhich Pagans, Ievves, and Heretikes deride.
                  14. The ſenſual man.]The ſenſual man. The ſenſual man is he ſpecially, that meaſureth theſe heauenly myſteries by natural reaſon, humane prudence, external ſenſe, and vvorldly affection, as the Ievv, Pagane, and Heretike doe: and ſometime both here and els vvhere, the more infirme and ignorant ſort of Chriſtian men be called ſenſual or carnal alſo, vvho being occupied in ſecular affaires, and giuen to ſenſual ioy and vvorldlines, haue no ſuch ſenſe nor feeling of theſe great gifts of God, as the perfecter ſort of the faithful haue. Vvho trying theſe high pointes of religion, not by reaſon and ſenſe, but by grace, faith, and Spirit, be therfore called ſpiritual.The ſpiritual man. The ſpiritual then is he, that iudgeth and diſcerneth the truth of ſuch things as the carnal can not attaine vnto: that doth by the ſpirit of the Church, vvhereof he is partaker in the vnitie of the ſame, not onely ſee the errours of the carnal, but condemneth them and iudgeth euery povver reſiſting Gods ſpirit and vvord: the carnal Ievv, Heathen,Hovv the ſpiritual man 
                           •
                        udgeth al, & is iudged of none. or Heretike, hauing no meanes nor right to iudge of the ſaid ſpiritual man. For vvhen the ſpiritual is ſaid to be iudged of none, the meaning is not that he ſhould not be ſubiect or obedient to his Paſtors and ſpiritual Povvers and to the vvhole Church, ſpecially for the trial or examination of al his life, doctrine, and faith: but that a Catholike man and namely a teacher of Catholike doctrine in the Church, ſhould not be any vvhit ſubiect to the iudgement of the Heathen or the Heretike, nor care vvhat of ignorance or infidelitie they ſay againſt him: for ſuch carnal men haue no iudgement in ſuch things, nor can attaine to the Churches vviſedom in any ceremonie, myſterie, or matter vvhich they condemne.
                  
                      
                     Therfore S. Irenaeus excellently declaring that the Church and query ſpiritual childe thereof, iudgeth and condemneth al falſe Prophets and Heretikes of vvhat ſort ſo euer, at length he concludeth vvith theſe notable vvordes: The ſpiritual ſhal iudge alſo all that make ſchiſmes,Iren. li. 4. 
                           •
                        . 6
                           •
                        . vvhich be cruel,The Church is vnder no mans iudgement. not hauing the loue of God, and reſpecting their ovvne priuate, more then the vnitie of the Church: mangle, deuide, and (as much as in them lieth) kill for ſmal cauſes the great and glorious body of Chriſt, ſpeaking peace, and ſeeking battaile. He ſhal iudge alſo them that be out of the truth, that is to ſay, out of the Church: vvhich Church ſhal be vnder no mans iudgement▪ for to the Church are al things knovven, in vvhich is perfect faith of the Father, and of al the diſpenſation of Chriſt, and firme knovvledge of the Holy Ghoſt that teacheth all truth.
               
            
            
               CHA. III.
               
                  If they vvil not be carnal ſtil, they muſt boaſt in God only, & not in their preachers, which are but his miniſters, 10 and neede to looke vvel hovv they preach: 12 becauſe not al preaching, though it be Catholike, is meritorious: but rather it buildeth matter to be purged by fire, vvhen it is vaine and vnfruitful (as alſo any other like vvorkes of other Catholikes.) marie if it be heretical, deſtroying the temple of God, then it vvorketh damnation. 18 The remedie is, to humble them ſelues and referre al to God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I, brethren, could not ſpeake to you as to ſpiritual, but as to carnal. As it vvere to litle ones in Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 2 I gaue youThe Church onely hath truth both in her milke and in her bread: that is, vvhether ſhe inſtruct the perfect, or the imperfect who are called carnal. Aug. li. 15. c. 
                           •
                        . cont. Fauſt.
                   milke to drinke, not meate: for you could not as yet. but neither can you novv verely, for yet you are carnal. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vvhereas there is among you emulation and contention, are you not carnal, and vvalke according to man? ✝ 
                     verse 4 For vvhen one ſaith, I certes am Paules, & an other, I Apollos: are you notcarnal▪
                   
                  
                     •
                  men'? Vvhat is Apollo then? and vvhat is Paul? ✝ 
                     verse 5 The miniſters of him vvhom you haue beleeued, & to euery one as our Lord hath giuen. ✝ 
                     verse 6 I planted, Apollo vvatered: but God gaue the increaſe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Therfore neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that vvatereth: but he that giueth the increaſe, God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And he that planteth and he that vvatereth are one. And 
                     •
                   euery one ſhal receiue his owne reward according to his ovvne labour.A maruelous dignitie of ſpiritual paſtors, that they be not onely the inſtruments or miniſters of Chriſt, but alſo Gods coadiutors in the vvorke of our Saluation. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For vve are Gods

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   coadiutors: you are Gods huſbandrie, you are Gods building. ✝ 
                     verse 10 According to the grace that is giuen me, as a vviſe vvorkemaſter haue I laid the foundation: and an other buildeth therevpon. but let euery one looke hovv he buildeth thereon. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For other foundation no man can lay, beſide that vvhich is laid: vvhich is Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And if any man build 
                     •
                   vpon this foundation, gold, ſiluer, pretious ſtones, vvood, hay, ſtubble, ✝ 
                     verse 13 the vvorke of euery one 
                     •
                   ſhal be manifeſt: for 
                     •
                   the day of our Lord vvil declare, becauſe it ſhal be reuealed in fire: and the vvorke of euery one of vvhat
 kinde it is, the fire ſhal trie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 If any mans vvorke abide, vvhich he built therevpon: he ſhal receiue revvard. ✝ 
                     verse 15 If any mans vvorke burne, he ſhal ſuffer detriment: but him ſelf ſhal be ſaued: yet ſo 
                     •
                   as by fire. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Knovv you not that you are the temple of God: and the Spirit of God dvvelleth in you? ✝ 
                     verse 17 But if any violate the temple of God, God vvil deſtroy him. For the temple of God is holy: vvhich you are. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Let no man ſeduce him ſelf: if any man ſeeme to be vviſe among you in this world, let him become a foole that he may be vviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the vviſedom of this vvorld is foliſhnes vvith God.Iob 5, 13. For it is vvritten, I vvil compaſſe the vviſe in their ſubteltie. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And againe,Pſ. 93, 11 
                  Our Lord knovveth the cogitations of the vviſe that they be 
                        •
                     aine. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Let no man therfore glorie in men. For al things are yours: ✝ 
                     verse 22 vvhether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the vvorld▪ or life, or death, or things preſent, or things to come, for al are yours: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and you are Chriſts, and Chriſt is Gods.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     8. Euery man ſhal receiue according.] A moſt plaine text for proofe that men by their labours, and by the diuerſities thereof, ſhal be diuerſly revvarded in heauen: and therfore that by their vvorkes proceding of grace, they do deſerue or merite heauen, and the more or leſſe ioy in the ſame▪ for though the holy Scripture cōmonly vſe not this vvord merite,Good vvorkes meritorious, and the revvardes in heauē are different according to the ſame. yet in places innumerable of the old and nevv Teſtament, the very true ſenſe of merite is conteined, and ſo often as the vvord, merces, and the like be vſed, they be euer vnderſtood as correlatiues or correſpondent vnto it. for if the ioy of heauen be 
                        •
                     erribution, repaiment, hire, vvages for vvorkes (as in infinite places of holy Scripture,) then the vvorkes can be none other but the valure, deſeit, price, vvorth, and merite of the ſame.Merces 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And in deede this vvord, revvard, vvhich in our Engliſh tonge may ſignifie a volutary or bountiful gift, doth not ſo vvel expreſſe the nature of the * Latin vvord, or the Greeke, vvhich are rather the very ſtipend that the hired vvorkeman or iournieman couenanteth to haue of him vvhoſe vvorke he doth, and is a thing equally and iuſtly anſvvering to the time and vveight of his trauels and vvorkes (in vvhich ſenſe the Scripture ſaith,1. Tim. 5, 18. 
                     Dignus eſt operarius mercede ſua. the vvorkeman is vvorthy of his hire) rather then a free gift. though, becauſe faithful men muſt acknovvledge that their merites be the giftes and graces of God, they rather vſe the vvord revvard, then hire,Apoc. 
                           •
                        2, 12. Mat. 16, 27. Ro. 22, 12. ſtipend, or repaiment. though in deede it be al one, as you may ſee by diuers places of holy vvrite. as, * My merces (revvard) is vvith me to render to euery one * according to his vvorkes. And Our Lord vvil 
                           •
                        ender vnto me according to my iuſtice. Pſ. 1
                           •
                        . And the very vvord it ſelf merite (equiualent to the Greeke) is vſed thus.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Mercie ſhal make a place to euery one * according to the merite of workes. Eccl
                        •
                     i 16, 15. And If you doe your iuſtice before men, you ſhal not haue reward▪ in heauen. Mat. 6, 1. Vvhere you ſee that the revvard of heauen is recompenſe of iuſtice. And the euaſion of the Heretikes is friuolous and euidently falſe, as the former and like vvordes do conuince, for they ſay heauen is our Merces or revvard, not becauſe is is due to our vvorkes, but to the promes of God: vvhere the vvordes be plaine, According to euery mans vvorkes or labours. vpon vvhich vvorkes, and for vvhich vvorkes conditionally, the promes of heauen vvas made.
                  
                     12. Vpon this foundation.] The foundaion is Chriſt, and faith in him vvorking by charitie. The vppes building may be either pure and perfect matter of gold,Building of gold, or ſtubble. ſiluer, and pretious ſtone, vvhich (according to the moſt authentical and probable expoſition) be good vvorkes of charitie and al Chriſtian iuſtice done by Gods grace: or els, vvood, hay, ſtubble, vvhich ſignifie the manifold actes of mans infirmitie and his venial ſinnes. Vvhich more or leſſe mixed and medled vvith the better matter aforeſaid, require more or leſſe puniſhmēt or purgation at the day of our death. At vvhich
 day, if by penance or other meanes in the Church, the ſaid venial ſinnes be before hand cleanſed, there ſhal neede no purgiug at al, but they ſhal ſtraight receiue the reward due to them.
                  
                     13. Shal be manifeſt.] Vvhether our life and workes be pure and neede no cleanſing,Our vvorkes ſhal be manifeſted by fire. novv in this vvorld is hard to iudge: but the day of our Lord, vvhich is at our death, vvil make it plaine in vvhat termes euery mans life is tovvards God▪ for then Purgatorie fire ſhal reueale and proue it▪ for, vvhoſoeuer hath any impure matter of venial ſinnes or ſuch other dettes, to Gods iuſtice paiable and purgable, muſt into that fire, and after due paiment and cleanſing, be ſaued through the ſame. Vvhere the vvorkes of the perfect men and ſuch as died vvith al dettes paied, cleanſed, or forgiuen, are quitted from the fire, and neuer incurre damage, paine, or loſſe thereby. The places of fathers expounding this for Purgatorie, be very many moſt euident, vvhich are cited in the laſt Annotation folovving.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . The day of our Lord ſhal declare.] That this purgation rather ſignifieth the place of Gods iuſtice after our death, then any affliction in this life, the Apoſtles preciſe ſpecifying of fire declareth, and of reuealing and notifying the difference of mens vvorkes by the ſame: vvhich is not done euidently euer in this life:Vvhat is ſignified by, the day of our Lord.
                      and namely the vvord, day of our Lord: vvhich commonly and properly ſignifieth in Scripture and namely in this Apoſtle (1 Cor. 3, 5. 2 Cor. 1, 1
                           •
                        . Philip. 1, 10. 6. 1 Theſ. 
                           •
                        , 2. 2 Theſ. 2, 2.) either the particular, or the general iudgement: and therfore that the trial ſpoken of, is not properly nor litterally meant any affliction or aduerſitie of this life,Calu. in hunc locum. as Caluin alſo cōfeſſeth, coyning a foliſh nevv conſtruction of his ovvne. Vvhere you may note alſo in that mans Commentarie, that this vvord, dies Domini, vvas ſo preiudicial againſt him and al other expoſitions of the trial to be made in this vvorld, that he vvould gladly haue (Domini) ou
                        •
                     , reading thus, A day ſhal 
                           ••
                        me vvhich ſhal open &c.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Vvhere vnderſtand, that if it vvere only Dies (as * in the Greeke) yet thereby alſo the Scripture is vvont to ſignifie the ſelf ſame thing: as, 2 Tim. 1, 12. 28. and 2 Tim. 4, 8. and Heb. 10, 25, the day, as in this place, vvith the greeke article only, vvhich is al one vvith Dies illa, or Dies Domini.
                  
                  15. As by fire.] S. Auguſtine vpon theſe vvordes of the Pſalme 37. Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, nor amend me in thy vvrath. For it ſhal come to paſſe (ſaith he) that ſome be amended in the vvrath of God, and be rebuked in his indignation. And not al perhaps that are rebuked, ſhalbe amended, but yet ſome there ſhal be ſaued by amending.Tvvo fires after this life: one eternal, the other temporal, that is, the purging or amending fire. It ſhalbe ſo ſurely, becauſe amending it 
                        •
                     amed: yet ſo as by fire. but ſome there ſhalbe that ſhalbe rebuked, and not amended, to vvhom he ſhal ſay, Goe ye into euerlaſting fire. Fearing therfore theſe more greuous paines, he deſireth that he may neither be rebuked in indignation by eternal fire, nor amended in his vvrath. that is to ſay, Purge me in this life, and make me ſuch an one as ſhal not neede the amending fire, being for them vvhich ſhalbe ſaued, yet ſo as by fire. Wherfore? but becauſe here they build vpon this foundation, vvood, hay, ſtubble? for if they did build gold, ſiluer, and pretious ſtones, they ſhould be ſecure from both fires, not onely from that eternal vvhich ſhal torment the impious eternally: but alſo from that vvhich ſhal amend them that ſhalbe ſaued by fire. for it is ſaid, he ſhal be ſafe, yet ſo as by fire. And becauſe it is ſaid, he ſhalbe ſafe, that fire is cōtemned. Yea verely though ſafe by fire, yet that fire ſhalbe more greuous,Purgatorie fire paſſeth al the paines of this life. then vvhatſoeuer a man can ſuffer in this life. And you knovv hovv great euils the vvicked haue ſuffered, and may ſuffer: yet they haue ſuffered ſuch as the good alſo might ſuffer. for vvhat hath any malefactor ſuffered by the lavves, that a Martyr hath not ſuffered in the confeſſion of Chriſt? Theſe euils therfore that are here▪ be much more eaſie, and yet ſee hovv men, not to ſuffer them, doe vvhatſoeuer thou cōmaundeſt. Hovv much better doe they that vvhich God commaundeth, that they may not ſuffer th
                        •
                     ſe greater paines? Thus far. S. Auguſtine. See S. Ambr. vpon this place 1 Cor. 3. & Ser. 20 in Pſal. 
                        •
                     18. Hiero. li. 2 c. 13 adu. Iouinianum. Gieg. li. 4. Dialog. c. 
                        •
                     9. & in Pſal. 1. P
                        •
                     nit. in principie. Origen. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                      in c. 15. Exod. and b
                           •
                        . 14 in c. 24. Leuit.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He requireth to be eſteemed for his office, but regardeth not to be praiſed of man for his vertue: conſidering that neither his ovvne conſcience is a ſufficient iudge thereof, but onely God vvho ſeeth al. 8 He toucheth them for contemning in their pride, the Apoſtles them ſelues as miſerable: 18 threatening to come to thoſe proude Falſeapoſtles vvho vvere the authors of al theſe ſchiſmes.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  SO let a man eſteeme vs as the miniſters of Chriſt,The Epiſtle vpon the 4 Sunday of Aduent. and the diſpenſers of the myſteries of God. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Here novv is required among the diſpenſers that a man be found faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But to me it is a thing of leſt account, to be iudged of you, or of mans day: but I iudge not my ſelf neither. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For I am not guilty in conſcience of any thing
                     •
                   ″ but I am not iuſtified herein: but he that iudgeth me, is our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore iudge not before the time: vntil our Lord do come, vvho alſo wil lighten the hiddē things of darkenes, and vvil manifeſt the counſels of the hartes: & then the praiſe ſhal be to euery man of God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 But theſe things, brethren,Loe vvhen he named him ſelf, and Apollo, & Cephas: he meāt other ſeditious and factious preachers vvhoſe names he ſpared. I haue tranſfigured into my ſelf and Apollo, for you: that in vs you may learne, one not to be puffed vp againſt an other, aboue that is vvritten. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For vvho diſcerneth thee? Or vvhat haſt thou that thou haſt not receiued? And if thou haſt receiued, what doeſt thou glorie as though thou haſt nor receiued? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Now you are filled, now are you become riche: without vs you reigne: & I would to God you did reigne, that vve alſo might reigne vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  The Epiſtle vpon S. Iames day, Iul. 25.
                   For I thinke that God hath ſhevved vs Apoſtles the laſt, as it vvere deputed to death: becauſeThe Epiſtle for a Confeſſor that is not a Biſhop. vve are made a ſpectacle to the vvorld, and to Angels and men. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Vve are fooles for Chriſt: but you vviſe in Chriſt. vve vveake: but you ſtrong▪ you noble, but vve baſe. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vntil this houre we doe both hunger, and thirſt, and are naked, and are beaten vvith buffets, and are vvanderers, ✝ 
                     verse 12 and labour vvorking vvith our ovvne handes. vve are curſed: and do bleſſe. vve are perſecuted: and ſuſteine it. ✝ 
                     verse 13 vve are blaſphemed: and vve beſeeche. vve are made the refuſe of this vvorld, the droſſe of al euen vntil novv. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Not to confound you, do I vvrite theſe things: but as my deereſt children I admoniſh you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 For 
So may S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle ſay to vs Engliſh men. if you haue ten thouſand paedagoges in Chriſt: yet not many fathers. For in Chriſt IESVS by the Goſpel I begat you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 16 I beſeeche you therfore be folovvers of me. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Therfore haue I ſent to you Timothee, vvho is my deereſt ſonne and faithful in our Lord: vvho vvil put you in minde of my vvaies that are in Chriſt IESVS, as euery vvhere in euery Church I teach. ✝ 
                     verse 18 As though I vvould not come to you, ſo certaine are puffed vp. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But I vvil come to you quickly, if our Lord vvil: and vvil knovv not the vvordes
 of them that be puffed vp, but the povver. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For the kingdom of God is not in vvordes, but in povver. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvhat vvil you? 
                     •
                   in rodde that I come to you: or in charitie, and the ſpirit of mildnes?
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     4. But not iuſtified.]
                     No man ſure of grace or iuſtification. The Heretikes are certaine that they be in Gods grace, but S. Paul though guiltie of no crime in his conſcience, durſt not aſſure him ſelf that he vvas iuſtified, neither could take vpon him to be iudge of his ovvne hart and cogitations, vvhether they vvere pure or no: but the trial thereof he left onely to Gods iudging day.
                  
                     21. In rodde.]
                     Spiritual power to puniſh or pardon. The Apoſtles haue povver of diſcipline and cenſures againſt offenders, and povver of gentlenes, meekenes, and indulgence alſo: to vſe either puniſhing or pardoning, according to their wiſedom, and according to the occaſions of time and place.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Sharply rebuking their Clergies negligence,The ſecond part of the Epiſtle: of the inceſtuous fornicator: & lavving before Infidels. 3 him ſelf abſent excommunicateth that publike inceſtuous perſon: 6 commaunding that hereafter no Chriſtian be ſo tolerated in any open crime, but excommunicated.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERE is plainely heard fornication among you, and ſuch fornication, as the like is not among the heathen, ſo that one hath his * fathers vvife.Leu. 18, 8. 20, 11 ✝ 
                     verse 2 And you are puffed vp: andChriſtian men ſhould be ſorovvful to ſee greuous offences borne vvithal, and ought zelouſly to ſeeke the offenders puniſhment by excōmunication. haue not mourned rather, that he might be taken avvay from amōg you, that hath done this deede. ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  
                     •
                   I in deede abſent in body, but preſent in ſpirit, haue already iudged, as preſent, him that hath ſo done, ✝ 
                     verse 4 in the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, 
                     •
                   you being gathered together and my ſpirit, 
                     •
                   vvith the vertue of our Lord IESVS ✝ 
                     verse 5 to deliuer ſuch an one 
                     •
                   to Satan for the deſtruction of the fleſh, that the ſpirit may be ſaued in the day of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Your glorying is not good. Knovv you not that a litle leauen corrupteth the vvhole paſte?The Epiſtle vpon Eaſter day. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Purge the old leauen, that you may be a nevv paſte, as you are azymes. For our Paſche, Chriſt, is immolated. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Therfore 
                     •
                   let vs feaſt, not in the old leauen, nor in the leauen of malice and vvickednes, but in the azymes of ſinceritie and veritie. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 I vvrote to you inEither this Epiſtle in the vvordes before, or ſome other. an epiſtle, Not to keepe companie vvith fornicatours. ✝ 
                     verse 10 I meane not the fornicatours of this
 vvorld, or the couetous, or the extorſioners, or ſeruers of Idols: othervviſe you ſhould haue gone out of this vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But novv I vvrote to you, not to keepe companie, if he that is named a brother, be a fornicatour, or a couetous perſon, orA notorious wilful corruption in the bible 1562: tranſlating in the verſe before, Idolaters: and here, vvorſhipper of images: the Apoſtles vvord being one, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Idolater.
                   a ſeruer of Idols, or a railer, or a drunkarde, or an extorſioner: vvith ſuch an one ″ not ſo much as to take meate. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For vvhat is it to me to iudge of them that are vvithout? Do not you iudge of them that are vvithin? ✝ 
                     verse 13 for them that are vvithout, God vvil iudge. Take away ″ the euil-one from among your ſelues.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     2. I abſent.] S. Paul here vſeth his Apoſtolike povver, of binding this inceſtuous perſon, excommunicating him by his letters and Manda
                           •••
                        , though abſent.
                  
                     4. You being gathered.] Though he commaunded the acte ſhould be done in the face of the Church,The authoritie of Eccleſiaſtical cenſures is in the Clergie only, and is executed in the name of Chriſt. as ſuch ſentences and cenſures be at this day executed alſo, yet the iudgement and authoritie of giuing ſentence vva
                        •
                      in him ſelf, and not in the vvhole multitude, as the Proteſtants and the popular Sectaries affirme. for the povver of binding and looſing vvas not giuen to the vvhole Church, but as in the perſons of the Prelats, & to them for the benefite of the vvhole. Vvherevpon S. Chryſoſtome vpon thoſe vvordes, Dic Eccleſia, Tel the Church. Mat. 18: Complaine to the Church, that is, ſaith he, to the Prelats and Preſidents thereof.
                  
                  
                     4. With the vertue.] Al ſuch great povver ouer ſinners, is holden and exerciſed in the name and vertue of CHRIST IESVS. And vvhoſoeuer ſetteth light by it, deſpiſeth our Lordes name and povver.
                  
                     5. To Satan.] To aſſure vs that al excommunicate perſons be in the povver and poſſeſſion of the Diuel, and quite out of Chriſtes protection as ſoone as they be ſeparated by the Churches ſentence, from her body and the Sacraments and felovvſhip of Chriſtian Catholike men: it pleaſed God to giue povver to the Apoſtles and Prelates in the primitiue Church,The terrible ſentence of excōmunication. to cauſe the Diuel ſtraight vpon their ſentence of excommunication, to inuade the body of the excommunicate, and to torment him corporally. ſo Chriſt excommunicated Iudas, and the Diuel entered into him, and he vvent forth of the happie felovvſhip of the Apoſtles. Io. 13, 27. ſo this Apoſtle excommunicated Alexander and Hymepaeus,Act. 5. and Satan ſtraight tooke them: 1 Tim. 1. Yet it is thought that S. Peter excommunicated Anauias and Sapphîra, and for ſigne of his povver and terrour of the ſentence, ſtrooke them both ſtarke dead. De mirabil. S. Scriptura li. 3 c. 16 apud D. Auguſt. Vvhich miraculous povver though it be not ioyned novv to that ſentence, yet as far as concerneth the puniſhment ſpiritual, vvhich it ſpecially appartaineth vnto, it is as before, and is by the iudgement of the holy Doctors (Cypr. ep. 62. nu. 3. Chryſ. in 1 Tim. 1. ho. 5. Ambroſ. in 1 Tim. 1. Hiero. ep. ad Heliod. c. 7. Auguſt. de cor. & gra. c. 15.) the terribleſt and greateſt puniſhment in the vvorld, yea far paſſing al earthly paine and torment of this life, and being a very reſemblance of damnation, and ſo often called by the Fathers,locis 
                           〈◊〉
                        . namely by S. Auguſtine. And by this ſpiritual ſvvord (ſaith S. Cyprian) al muſt die in their ſoules, that obey not the Prieſts of Chriſt in the nevv lavv, as they that vvere diſobedient to the iudges of the old lavv, vvere ſlaine vvith the corporal ſvvord. Vvould God the vvorld knevv vvhat a maruelous puniſhment Chriſt hath appointed the Prieſts to execute vpon the offenders of his lavves, and ſpecially vpon the diſobedient, as Heretikes namely.
                  
                     8. Let vs feaſt.]
                     Puritie in receiuing the B. Sacrament. The Paſchal lambe, vvhich vvas the moſt expreſſe figure of Chriſt euery vvay▪
* vvas firſt ſacrificed and aftervvard eaten vvith azymes or vnleauened bread.Exo. 1
                           •
                        5. ſo Chriſt our Paſchal, being then nevvly ſacrificed on the Croſſe, is recommended to them as to be eaten vvith al puritie and ſinceritie, in the holy Sacrament. Vvhich myſterie the holy Church in theſe vvordes commendeth to the faithful euery yere at the feaſt of Eaſter.
                  
                     11. Not to take meate.] It is not meant that vve ſhould ſeparate our ſelues corporally from al ſinners,Vve are boūd to auoid, not al ſinners, but the excommunicate only, & them, except in certaine caſes. or that vve might refuſe to liue in one Church or felovvſhip of Sacraments vvith them, vvhich vvas the errour and occaſion of the Donatiſtes great ſchiſme: nor that euery man is ſtraight after he hath committed any deadly ſinne, excommunicated, as ſome Lutherans hold: but that vve
 ſhould auoid them vvhen the Church hath excommunicated them for ſuch. though in minde, and condemnation of their faults, euery one ought to be alvvaies far from them. As for the Heathen and Pagans, vvhich be not vnder the Churches diſcipline, and at that time in external vvorldly affaires dealt vvith Chriſtians and liued amongeſt them vvhether they vvould or no, the Apoſtle did not forbid Chriſtians their companie.
                  
                     13. The euil one.] He concludeth that though they can not, nor him ſelf neither, cut of the Heathen, that be publike offenders, yet the il perſon by him excommunicated being one of their ovvne body, they may cut of, as is aforeſaid, and auoid his company. Vpon vvhich commaundement of the Apoſtle, vve ſee that vve are bound by Gods vvord to auoid al companie and conuerſation vvith the excommunicate, except in caſes of neceſſitie, and the ſpiritual profite of the perſon excommunicated.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  He rebuketh them for going to lavv before Iudges that vvere not Chriſtians, 9 telling that extorſion (as many other offenſes likevviſe) is a mortal ſinne. 12 And vvith diuers reaſons he inueigheth againſt fornication, bidding alſo to flee al occaſion thereof.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  DARE any of you hauing a matter againſt an other, to be iudged before the vniuſt, and not before the ſaincts? ✝ 
                     verse 2 Or knovv you not thatThe faithful iudge and giue ſentence vvith God at the later day, ſpecially the Apoſtles and the perfect Chriſtiās that haue forſaken al for Chriſts ſake. the ſaincts ſhal iudge of the vvorld? And if the vvorld ſhal be iudged by you: are you vnvvorthie to iudge of the leſt things? ✝ 
                     verse 3 Knovv you not that vve ſhal iudge Angels? hovv much more ſecular things? ✝ 
                     verse 4 If therfore you haue ſecular iudgements: the contemptible that are in the Church, ſet them to iudge. ✝ 
                     verse 5 I ſpeake to your ſhame. So is there not among you any vviſe man, that can iudge betvvene his brother? ✝ 
                     verse 6 but brother vvith brother ″ contendeth in iudgement: and that before infidels? ✝ 
                     verse 7 Novv certes there is plainely ″ a fault in you, that you haue iudgements amōg you. Vvhy do you not rather take vvrong? vvhy do you not rather ſuffer fraude? ✝ 
                     verse 8 But your ſelues doe vvrong and defraude: and that to the brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Knovv you not that the vniuſt ſhal not poſſeſſe the kingdom of God?
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Do not erre, Neither fornicatours, norFor this, the Engliſh bible 1562 falſely tranſlateth, vvorſhippers of images.
                   ſeruers of Idols, nor aduouterers, nor the effeminat, nor the liers vvith mankinde, ✝ 
                     verse 10 nor theeues, nor the couetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extorſioners ſhal poſſeſſe the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And theſe things certes you vvere: but you are vvaſhed, but you are ſanctified, but you are iuſtified in the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, and in the Spirit of our God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Al things are lavvful for me, but al things are not expedient. Al things are lavvful for me, but I vvil be brought vnder the povver of none. ✝ 
                     verse 13 The meate to the belly, and
 the belly to the meates: but God vvil deſtroy both it and them: and the body not to fornication, but to our Lord, and our Lord to the body. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But God both hath raiſed vp our Lord, and vvil raiſe vp vs alſo by his povver. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Knovv you not that your bodies are the members of Chriſt? Taking therfore the members of Chriſt, ſhal I make them the members of an harlot? God forbid.Gen. 2, 24. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Or knovv you not, that he which cleaueth to an harlot, is made one body? For they ſhal be, ſaith he, tvvo in one fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But he that cleaueth to our Lord, is one ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Flee fornication. Euery ſinne vvhatſoeuer a man doeth, is vvithout the body: but he that doth fornicate, ſinneth
Fornication is not onely enemy to the ſoule, but waſteth, weakeneth, corrupteth and defileth the body, more properly and directly then any other ſinnes doe. againſt his ovvne body. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Or knovv you not that your members are the temple of the holy Ghoſt vvhich is in you, vvhom you haue of God, and you are not your ovvne? ✝ 
                     verse 20 For you are bought vvith a great price. Glorifie and beare God in your body.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     6. Contendeth in iudgement.]
                     Going to law before heathen or heretical iudges. To be giuen much to brabling and litigiouſnes for euery trifle, to ſpend a pound rather then loſe a peny, the Apoſtle much reprehendeth in Chriſtian men. For a Chriſtian man to dravv an other to the iudgements ſeates and courtes of Heathen Princes (vvhich then onely reigned) and not to ſuffer their controuerſies and quarels to be taken vp among them ſelues brotherly and peaceably, was a great fault: as, for one Catholike to draw an other for mere trifles,Going to lavv not for biddē: but to agree othervviſe, better. before ſecular or heretical Officers, is a very vnchriſtian part.
                  
                     7. A fault.] He forbade not al iudgements of controuerſies, but onely ſignified that it was a fault, and that it proceded of ſome iniuries done one to an other, and imperfections, that they ſo moleſted one an other: and that it had been more agreeable to Chriſtian perfection and charitie, rather to tolerate and ſuffer a ſmal iniurie, then to draw his fellow to iudgement and ſeates.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  That maried folke may aſke their debt,The 3. part. and muſt pay it,Of Mariage and continencie. though it be better for them to conteine, 8 as alſo for the vnmarried and vvidovves to continevv ſingle, though they may marrie. 10 That the married may not depart from one an other (nor in any caſe marrie an other, during the life of the former) 12 vnles it be from one that is vnbaptized, vvhich yet he diſſuadeth: 17 counſeling alſo euery one to be content vvith his ſtate vvherein he vvas Chriſtened. 25 Virginitie is not commaunded, but counſeled as the better and more meritiorious then Mariage, 39 as alſo vvidovvhod.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND concerning the things vvhereof you vvrote to me: It is good for a man not to touch a vvoman. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But becauſe of fornication let euery man haue ″ his ovvne vvife, and let euery vvoman haue her ovvne huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 3 ″ Let the huſbanddebitū reddat render his dette to the vvife: and the vvife alſo in like maner to her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 4 The vvoman hath not povver of her ovvne body: but her huſband. And in like maner the man alſo hath not povver of his ovvne body: but the vvoman. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Defraude not one an other, except perhaps by conſent for a time,If the lay man can not pray, vnles he abſtaine from his vvife: the Prieſt that alwaies muſt offer ſacrifices, and alvvaies pray, muſt therfore alvvaies be free from matrimonie. Hiero. li. 1 c. 1
                           •
                         aduer. Iouin.
                   that you may ″ giue your ſelfto faſting & praier: to praier': and returne againe together, leſt Satan tempt you for your incontinencie. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But I ſay this ″ by indulgence, not by commaundement. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For I vvould al men to be as my ſelf: but euery one hath ″ a proper gift of God: one ſo, and an other ſo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 
                  Before he treated of the continencie of ſuch as vvere married, novv he giueth leſſons for the vnmarried alſo. But I ſay to the vnmaried and to vvidovves: it is good for them if they ſo abide euen as I alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But ″ if they doe not conteine them ſelues, let them marie. For it is ″ better to marie then
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . to be burnt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 But to them that be ioyned in matrimonie, not I giue commaundement,Mt. 5, 32 19, 9. but our Lord, * that the vvife depart not from her huſband: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and if ſhe depart, ″ to remaine vnmaried,Mr. 10, 9. Lu. 16, 18. or to be recōciled to her huſband. And let not the huſband put avvay his vvife.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 For to the reſt, ″ I ſay, not our Lord. If any brother haue a vvife an infidel, and ſhe conſent to dvvel with him: let him not put her avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And if any vvoman haue a huſband an infidel, and he conſent to dvvel vvith her: let her not put avvay her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For the man an infidel is ſanctified by the faithful vvoman: and the vvoman an infidel ″ is ſanctified by the faithful huſband: otherwiſe your children ſhould be vncleane: but novv they are holy. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But if the infidel depart, let him depart. for the brother or ſiſter is not ſubiect to ſeruitude in ſuch, but in peace hath God called vs. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For how knoweſt thou woman, if thou ſhalt ſaue thy huſbād? or how knoweſt thou man, if thou ſhalt ſaue the vvoman? ✝ 
                     verse 17 But to euery one as our Lord hath deuided, as God hath called euery one, ſo let him vvalke, and as in al Churches I teach. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Is any man called being circumciſed? let him not procure prepuce. Is any man called in prepuce? let him not be circumciſed.
 ✝ 
                     verse 19 Circumciſion is nothing, and prepuce is nothing: but the obſeruation of the commaundements of God. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Euery one in the vocation that he vvas called, in it let him abide. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvaſt thou called being a bondman? care not for it: but and if thou canſt be made free, vſe it rather. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For he that in our Lord is called, being a bondman, is thelibertus franchiſed of our Lord. likevviſe he that is called, being free, is the bondman of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 23 You vvere bought vvith price, be not made theYou muſt not ſerue men ſo that you obey & pleaſe them more then God. The Epiſtle for holy Virgins not Martyrs. bōdmen of men. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Eueryone, brethren, brother' vvherein he vvas called, in that let him abide before God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 And as concerning virgins, a commaundement of our Lord I haue not: but ″ counſel I giue, as hauing obteined mercie of our Lord to be faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 26 I thinke therfore that this is good for the preſent neceſſitie, becauſe it is good for a man ſo to be. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Art thou tied to a vviſe? ſeeke not to be looſed. Art thou looſe from a vvife? ſeeke not a vvife. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But if thou take a vvife,Virginitie counſeled as the better: Mariage not forbidden, becauſe it is no ſinne. thou haſt not ſinned. And ″ if a virgin marie, ſhe hath not ſinned. neuertheleſſe ″ tribulation of the fleſh ſhal ſuch haue. but I ſpare you. ✝ 
                     verse 29 This therfore I ſay brethren, the time is ſhort, it remaineth, that they alſo which haue vviues, be ″ as though they had not: ✝ 
                     verse 30 and they that vveepe, as though they vvept not: and they that reioyce, as though they reioyced not: and they that bye, as though they poſſeſſed not: ✝ 
                     verse 31 and they that vſe this vvorld, as though they vſed it not. for the figure of this vvorld paſſeth avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But I vvould haue you to be vvithout carefulnes. He that is without a vvife, is ″ careful for the things that pertaine to our Lord, how he may pleaſe God. ✝ 
                     verse 33 But he that is vvith a vvife, is careful for the things that pertaine to the vvorld, hovv he may pleaſe his vvife: and he is deuided. ✝ 
                     verse 34 And the vvoman vnmaried & the virgin, thinketh on the things that pertaine to our Lord: that ſhe may be holy both in body and in ſpirit. ⊢ But ſhe that is maried, thinketh on the things that pertaine to the vvorld, hovv ſhe may pleaſe her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 35 And this I ſpeake to your profit: not to caſt a ſnare vpon you, but to that vvhich is honeſt, & that may giue you povver vvithout impediment to attend vpon our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 36 But if any man thinke that he ſeemeth diſhonoured vpon his virgin, for that ſhe is paſt age, and if it muſt ſo be, let him doe that he vvil. He ſinneth not if ſhe marie. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For he that hath determined in his hart being ſettled, not hauing neceſſitie, but
 hauing povver of his ovvne vvil, and hath iudged this in his hart, to keepe his virgin, doeth vvel. ✝ 
                     verse 38 Therfore both he that ioyneth his virgin in matrimonie, doeth vvel: & he that ioyneth not, doeth better.
                ✝ 
                     verse 39 * A vvoman is bound to the lavv ſo long time as her huſband liueth:Ro. 7, 2. but if her huſband ſleepe, ſhe is at libertie: let her marie to vvhom ſhe vvil: only in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But
The ſtate of vvidovvhod more bleſſed, then the ſtate of matrimonie. more bleſſed ſhal ſhe be, if ſhe ſo remaine, according to my counſel. and I thinke that I alſo haue the Spirit of God.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     2. His ovvne vviſe.]
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      He ſaith not, as the Proteſtants here pretend to excuſe the vnlavvful coniunction of Votaries,The Apoſtle biddeth not al to marie, but to keepe their vviues before maried. 
                     Let euery one mary: but, let euery one haue, keepe, or vſe his ovvne vviſe to vvhom he vvas maried before his conuerſion. for the Apoſtle anſvvereth here to the firſt queſtion of the Corinthians, vvhich vvas not, vvhether it vvere lavvful to mary, but vvhether they vvere not bound vpon their conuerſion, to abſteine from the company of their vviues married before in their infidelitie, as ſome did perſuade them that they ought to doe. Hiero. li. 1 cont. Iouin. c. 4. Chryſ. in hunc locum be. 19.
                  
                  
                     3. Let the huſband render.] Theſe vvordes open the Apoſtles intention and talke to be onely of ſuch as are already maried, and to iuſtruct them of the bond and obligation that is betvvene the maried couple for rendring of the dette of carnal copulation one to an other: declaring that the maried perſons haue yelded their bodies ſo one to an other, that they can not vvithout mutual conſent, neither perpetually, nor for a time, defraude one the other.
                  
                     5. Giue your ſelf to praier.]
                     Continence in maried folkes for praier ſake. This time, & the Heretikes doctrine, and high eſtimatiō of matrimonial actes, are far from the puritie of the Apoſtolike and primitiue Church, vvhen the Chriſians to make their praiers and faſtings more acceptable to God, abſtained by mutual conſent euen from their lavvful vviues. our nevv Maiſters not much abſteining (as it may be thought) from their vviues for any ſuch matter. And yet S. Auguſtine ſaith, the Prelate ſhould paſſe other in this caſe, and thinke that not to be lavvful for him, that may be borne in others, becauſe he muſt daily ſupply Chriſtes roome, offer, baptize, and pray for the people. So ſaith he li. 1. q. 
                           〈◊〉
                         vtroque teſt. q. 127 in fine. See S. Hiero. li. 1 c. 19 aduerſ. Iouin. S. Ambr. li. 1 Offic. c. vlt. But alas for the people, vvhoſe maried Paſtors are in this point far vvorſe then the vulgar folke, neither teaching continencie, nor giuing good example.
                  
                     6. By indulgence,
                     Perpetual continencie, euen in maried folkes, better then carnal copulation. 
                     not commaundement.] Leſt ſome might miſconſtre his former vvordes, as though he had preciſely commaunded maried perſons not to abſtaine perpetually from carnal copulation, or not to giue their conſent one to an other of continencie but for a time onely: he declareth plainely that he gaue no rule or precept abſolutely therein, but that he ſpake al the foreſaid, condeſcending to their infirmities onely, inſinuating that continencie from carnal copulation is much better, and that him ſelf kept it continually, Aug. de bon. coniug. c. 10. Enchirid. c. 78.
                  
                  
                     7. A proper gift.] To ſuch as may lavvfully mary, or be already maried, God giueth not alvvaies that more high and ſpecial gift or grace of continencie, though euery one of them al that duely aſke and labour for it, might haue it: but ſuch are not bound to endeuour or ſeeke for it alvvaies,Who are boūd to liue continently: and that God giueth this gift to al that aſke it. and therfore can not be commaunded to abſtaine further then they like, but vvhenſoeuer a man is bound to abſtaine, either by vovv or any other neceſſarie occaſion (as if one of the parties be in priſon, vvarre, baniſhment, ſiknos, or abſent perpetually by lavvful diuorce) the other muſt needes in paine of damnation abſtaine, and can not excuſe the vvant of the gift of chaſtitie. for
See S. Auguſtine li. 
                           •
                        . c. 19. 20. de Adult. Coniug to. 4. he is bound to aſke it and to ſeeke for it of God by faſting, praying, and chaſtiſing his body: and ſo labouring duely for it, God vvil giue the grace of chaſtitie. So had S. Paul it, and ſo had al the holy men that euer liued chaſt. Therfore deteſt the doctrine of the Proteſtants in this point, that vvhen they liſt not faſt nor pray for it, ſay they haue not the gift. And it vvere a great maruel vvhy ſo fevv of the nevv Sectes or rather none novv a daies haue that gift, but that vve ſee it is obtained by thoſe meanes vvhich our forefathers vſed, & they vſe not at all. To liue in mariage continently
 vvithout the breach of coniugal fidelitio, is a gift of God alſo, but men muſt not breake their faith of vvedlocke for vvant of it, but muſt knovv that God giueth that gift to ſuch as humbly aſke it of him. Auguſt. de gras. & lib. arbitrio c. 4. De continent. c. 1.
                  
                  
                     9. If they conteine not.] He meaneth of ſuch as be free: for if they marry after they haue made vow or promes to God of chaſtitie,The Apoſtle permitteth mariage to them that be free, not to vovved perſons. they are vvorthely damned, ſuch being bound to conteine, and ſo may conteine if they liſt. Auguſt. de bono viduit. c. 8. 9. & de adult. coniug. li. 1. c. 15. & de fide ad Petrum c. 3. infine. Ambroſ. ad virg. lapſam c. 5.
                  
                  
                     9. Better to marry.] It is better to marry for the ſaid perſons that be free, then to be ouerthrovven and fall into fornication, for, to burne, or, to be burnt, is not to be tempted onely (as the Proteſtants thinke that picke quarels eaſely to marry) but it ſignifieth * to yeld to concupiſcence either in minde or external vvorke.Theodore
                           •
                         in hunc locum. Vvſe ſay alſo, for ſuch as be free, for concerning others lavvfully made Prieſts, and ſuch as othervviſe haue made vow of chaſtitie, they cannot marry at al, and therfore there is no compariſon in them betvvixt mariage and fornication or burning. for their mariage is but pretenſed, and is the vvorſt ſort of continencie and fornication or burning.
                  
                     11. To remaine vnmarried.] Neither partie may dimiſſe the other and mary an other for any cauſe.After diuorce not to marie. for though they be ſeparated for fornication, yet neither may marry againe. Auguſt. de adult. coniug. li. 1 c. 8. 9. and li. 26. 5. 19. See Annotat. Mat. 19. and S. Auguſtine in his vvhole bookes. de adulter, coniugijs to. 6.
                  
                  
                     12. I ſay, not our Lord.]
                     The Apoſtles precepts. By this vve learne, that there vvere many matters ouer and aboue the things that Chriſt taught or preſcribed, left to the Apoſtles order and interprecation: vvherein they might, as the caſe required, either commaund or counſel, and vve bound to obey accordingly.
                  
                     14. Sanctified.] Vvhen the infidel partie is ſaid to be cleane or ſanctified by the faithful, or the children of their mariage to be cleane,Hovv the infidel, or infidels childe, are ſā
                        ctified by the Chriſtian. vve may not thinke that they be in grace or ſtate of ſaluation thereby,Hiero. li. 1. c. 5 aduerſ. Iouin. but onely that the mariage is * an occaſion of ſanctification to the infidel partie and to the children. for S. Auguſtine (li. 3 de pec. mer. & remiſ. c. 12.) concludeth againſt the Pelagians, as vve may doe againſt the Caluiniſts, holding Chriſtian mens children to be holy from their mothers vvombe and not to neede Baptiſme, that vvhat other ſanctification ſoeuer it be that is here meant, it can not be ynough to ſaluation vvithout ſaith, Baptiſme, &c.
                  
                     19. But the obſeruation.] Neither to be Ievv nor Gentil, bond or free, maried or ſingle, nor the faith it ſelf vvhich is proper to Chriſtian men, vvil ſerue to ſaluation, vvithout good vvorkes and keeping the commaundements. S. Hierom adu. Iouin. li. 1 c. 16.
                  
                  
                     25. Counſel I giue.]
                     The differēce of counſels & precepts. A counſel is one thing, a commaundement is an other. To doe that vvhich is counſeled, is not neceſſarie, becauſe one may be ſaued notvvithſtanding. but he that vvil doe that vvhich he is counſeled vnto, ſhal haue a higher degree of glorie. He that fulfilleth not a cōmaundement, except he doe penance. can not eſcape puniſhment. Auguſt. li. de virg. c. 13. & 14.
                  
                  
                     28. If a virgin marrie.]
                     A profeſſed virgin may not marrie. He ſpeaketh not of that virgin vvhich hath dedicated her ſelf to God, (for if any, ſuch mary, ſhe ſhal be damned for breaking her firſt vow) but onely of yong maides vnmaried in the vvorld. Hiero. adu. Iouin. li. 1 c. 7. Chryſ. ho 20. Theodorete, Photius, and the other Greeke Doctors vpon this place apud Oecum. Epiph. hareſ. 61.
                  
                  
                     28. Tribulation of the fleſh.]
                     Virginitie counſeled as more meritorious. They are matuelouſly deceiued (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. de virg. c. 1
                           •
                        ) that thinke the Apoſtle counſeleth virginitie rather then mariage, onely for that mariage hath many miſeries and moleſtations ioyned vnto it, which by virginitie ſhal be auoided, & not in reſpect of the greater reward in heauen. for the Apoſtles prouident counſeling to virginitie, is for the next life, and he alleageth theſe troubles of mariage in that ſenſe ſpecially as they be a hinderance from the ſeruice of God here, and therfore an impediment to vs toward the next life and the more ample ioyes thereof.
                  
                     29. As though they had not.]
                     The continencie of married folke. He exhorteth that ſuch as haue vviues, ſhould not vvholy beſtovv them ſelues in the vaine tranſitorie pleaſure and voluptuouſnes of their fleſh, but liue in ſuch moderation, that their mariage hinder them as litle as may be, from ſpiritual cogitatiōs. Vvhich is beſt fulfilled of them that by mutual conſent do vvholy conteine,Their perpetual continencie, beſt. vvhether they haue had children or none, contemning carnal iſſue for the ioyes of heauen. And theſe mariages be more bleſſed then any other, ſaith S. Auguſtine de Ser. Do. in monte li. 1 cap. 14.
                  
                  
                     32. Careful for the things of our Lord.] The Proteſtants might here learne if they liſt, firſt that virginitie is not onely preferred before mariage,Virginitie preferred, and vvhy. for that it is a more quiet ſtate of life in this world, but for that it is more conuenient for the ſeruice of God. Secondly that virginitie hath a grateful puritie and ſanctitie both of body & ſoule, vvhich mariage hath not. Thirdly, they may learne the cauſe why the Church of God requireth chaſtitie in the clergie,Vvhy continencie is required in the clergie. and forbiddeth not onely fornication, but al carnal copulation euen in lavvful vvedlocke: Vvhich is not onely to the end that Gods Prieſts be not diuided from him by the clogges of mariage, but alſo that they be cleane and pure from the fleſhly actes of copulation.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  He rebuketh the learned vvho in pride of their knovvledge did eate Idolothyta, that is things offered to Idols,The 4 part. vſing (as they ſaid) their libertie: but not conſidering that the ignorant tooke their doing as an example for them to frequent ſuch meates ſo,Of meates ſacrificed to Idols. as they did before in their Paganiſme, vvith opinion that they did ſanctifie the eaters.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND concerning thoſe things that are ſacrificed to Idols, vve knovv that ″ vve al haue knovvledge.Knowledge vvithout charitie puſſeth vp in pride, and profiteth nothing at al. vvhē it is ioyned vvith charitie, then it edifieth. Aug. li. 9 ciu. Dei c. 20. Knovvledge puffeth vp: but charitie edifieth. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And if any man thinke that he knoweth ſomething, he hath not yet knovven, as he ought to knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But if any man loue God, the ſame is knovven of him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But as for the meates that are immolated to Idols, vve knovv that an Idol is nothing in the vvorld, and that there is no God, but one. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For although there be that are called gods, either in heauen, or in earth (for there are many gods, and many lordes) ✝ 
                     verse 6 yet to vs there is one God, the Father, of vvhom al things, and vve vnto him: and one Lord, IESVS Chriſt, by vvhom al things, and vve by him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But there is not knovvledge in al. For ″ ſome vntil this preſent vvith a conſcience of the Idol, eate as a thing ſacrificed to Idols: and their conſcience being vveake, is polluted. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But meate doth not commend vs to God. For neither if vve eate, ſhal vve abound: nor if vve eate not, ſhal vve lacke. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But take heede leſt perhaps this your libertie be an offenſe to the vveake. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For if a man ſee him that hath knovvledge, ſit at table ″ in the Idols temple: ſhal not his conſcience, being vveake, be edified, to eate things ſacrificed to Idols? ✝ 
                     verse 11 And through thy knovvledge ſhal the * vveake brother periſh,Ro. 14, 15 for whom Chriſt hath died? ✝ 
                     verse 12 But ſinning thus againſt the brethren, and ſtriking their vveake conſcience: you ſinne againſt Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvherfore if * meate ſcandalize my brother:Ro. 14, 21. I vvil neuer eate fleſh, leſt I ſcandalize my brother.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     1. Vve al haue knovvledge.] The ſpiritual and perfectly inſtructed Chriſtians knevv no meates,No meates vncleane. novv to be vncleane, neither for ſignification, as in the Lavv of Moyſes nor alwaies
 by nature and creation, as the Manichees thought: nor by any other pollution, as in that they vvere offered to Idols: and therefore they did eate boldly of ſuch meates as vvere ſacrificed, contemning and condemning their Idols as mere nothing, and the vvorſhip of them as the honour of things imaginarie.Giuing of ſcandal reprehended. vvhich their facte, for their vvant of diſcretion and charitie, and for the vſe of that their libertie to the offenſe and ſcandal of the vveake, the Apoſtle doth here reprehend.
                  
                     7. Some vvith a conſcience.] The perfecter mans fault vvas, that they gaue offenſe by their eating, to the vveaker Chriſtians. Who ſeeing them vvhom they reputed vviſe and learned, to eate the meates offered to Idols, conceiued that there vvas ſome vertue and ſanctificatiō in thoſe meates, from the Idol to which they vvere offered: and though: that ſuch things were or might be eaten vvith the ſame conſcience and deuotion as before their conuerſion.The Heretikes ridiculouſly apply S. Paules wordes agaīſt the Churches faſtes and abſtinence.
                  
                  Therfore the caſe ſtanding thus, and the Apoſtles diſcourſe of eating or not eating meates being ſo as is declared (a thing ſo euident that it admitteth no other interpretation) if the Proteſtants apply any of this admonition againſt our faſtes in the Cath. Church, they be to to ridiculous.
                  
                     10. In the Idols temple.] Like as novv, ſome Catholikes haue ſaid, they knovv that Caluins communion is but as other bread and vvine. But yet the ignorant ſeing ſuch goe to the Communion, thinke that it is a good act of Religion. Yea vvhatſoeuer they pretend, it muſt needes ſeeme an honour to Caluins Communion,Going to the Communion, vvhat a ſinne in Catholikes. when they are ſeen in the Idols temple ſolemly ſitting or communicating at the abominable table.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  To them that ſo vaunted their libertie about Idolothyta, he bringeth his ovvne example, to vvit, that he alſo had libertie to liue by the Goſpel, but yet that he vſed it not, ſo to auoid ſcandal of the infirme, and becauſe it vvas more meritorious. 24 Declaiming againſt their ſecuritie, and ſhevving them by ſimilitudes and examples, 24 both of him ſelf, 1 And of the Iſraelites, that ſaluation is not ſo lightly come by: 14 and ſo concludeth againe againſt eating of Idolothyta. becauſe it is alſo to commit idolatrie, 22 and not onely to giue il example to the infirme.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AM I not free? Am I not an Apoſtle? Haue I not ſeen Chriſt IESVS our Lord? Are not you ″ my vvorke in our Lord? ✝ 
                     verse 2 And if to others I be not an Apoſtle, but yet to you I am. for you are the ſeale of my Apoſtleſhip in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 3 my defenſe to them that examine me is this: ✝ 
                     verse 4 Haue not vve povver to eate and drinke? ✝ 
                     verse 5 Haue vve not povver to lead about ″ a vvoman a ſiſter, as alſo the reſt of the Apoſtles, and our Lordes brethren, andHe nameth Cephas (that is Peter) to proue his purpoſe by the example of the cheefe and Prince of the Apoſtles. S. Ambro. S. Chryſ. Oecum. vpon this place. Cephas? ✝ 
                     verse 6 Or I only and Barnabas haue not vve povver to doe this? ✝ 
                     verse 7 ″ Vvho euer plaieth the ſouldiar at his ovvne charges? Vvho planteth a vine, and eareth not of the fruite thereof? Vvho feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the milke of the flocke? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Speake I theſe things according to man? Or doth not the Lavv alſo ſay theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 9 For it is vvritten in the Lavv of Moyſes,Deu. 25, 4. 
                  Thou ſhalt not mooſel the mouth of the oxe that
                  In that coū
                     trie they did tread out their corne vvith oxen, as vve do threſh it out. 
                  treadeth out the corne. Vvhy, hath God care of oxen? ✝ 
                     verse 10 Or for vs certes doth he ſay it? For they are vvritten for vs, becauſe he that eareth,
 ought to eare in hope: and he that treadeth, in hope to receiue fruite. ✝ 
                     verse 11 If vve haue ſovven vnto you ſpiritual things, is it a great matter if vve reape your carnal things? ✝ 
                     verse 12 If other be partakers of your povver: vvhy not vve rather? Hovvbeit vve haue not vſed, this povver: but vve beare al things, leſt vve ſhould giue any offence to the Goſpel of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Knovv you not * that they which vvorke in the holy place,Deu. 18, 1. eate the things that are of the holy place: and they that ſerue

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the altar,The Engliſh bible (1562) here and in the next chapter, ſaith thriſe for altar, temple: moſt falſely & heretically, againſt holy altars, vvhich about the time of that tranſlation were digged dovvne in England. participat with the altar? ✝ 
                     verse 14 So alſo our Lord ordained for them that preach the Goſpel, to liue of the Goſpel.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 But I haue vſed none of theſe. Neither haue I vvritten theſe things, that they ſhould be ſo done in me: for it is good for me to die rather, then that any man ſhould make my glorie void. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For and ″ if I euangelize, it is no glorie to me: for neceſſitie lieth vpon me: for vvoe is to me if I euangelize not. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For if I doe this vvillingly, I haue revvard: but if againſt my vvil, a charge is committed to me. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vvhat is my revvard then? That preaching the Goſpel, I yeld the Goſpel vvithout coſt, that I abuſe not my povver in the Goſpel. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For vvhereas I vvas free of al, I made my ſelf the ſeruant of al: that I might gaine the moe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And I became to the Ievves as a Ievv, that I might gaine the Ievves. ✝ 
                     verse 21 to them that are vnder Lavv, as though I vvere vnder the Lavv (vvhereas my ſelf vvas not vnder the Lavv) that I might gaine them that vvere vnder the Lavv. to them that vvere vvithout the Lavv, as though I vvere vvithout the Lavv (vvhereas I vvas not vvithout the lavv of God, but vvas in the lavv of Chriſt) that I might gaine them that vvere vvithout the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 22 To the vveake I became weake, that I might gaine the weake. To al menNot by fiction or ſimulation, but by compaſsion of the infirmities of al ſortes. Aug. ep. 9.
                   I became al things, that I might ſaue al. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And I doe al things for the Goſpel, ″ that I may be made partaker thereof.
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 Knovv you not that they that runne in the race,The Epiſtle vpon the Sunday of Septuageſme. al rūne in deede, but one receiueth the price? ″ So runne that you may obteine. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And euery one that ſtriueth for the maiſtrie, refraineth him ſelf from al things: and they certes, that they may receiue a corruptible crovvne: but vve an incorruptible. ✝ 
                     verse 26 I therfore ſo runne, not as it vvere at an vncertaine thing: ſo I fight, not as it vvere beating the aire: ✝ 
                     verse 27 but ″ I chaſtiſe my body, and bring it into ſeruitude, ″ leſt perhaps vvhen I haue preached to others, my ſelf become reprobate.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     1. My vvorke.]
                     The Heretikes fond pretenſe of Gods honour. As he called him ſelf before Gods coadiutor, ſo here he boldly alſo chalengeth the Corinthians conuerſion to be his handy worke in our Lord: nothing derogating thereby frō Chriſt, as the Proteſtants rudely charge the Fathers & Catholike men (vnder pretenſe of Gods honour) for vſing ſuch phraſes or ſpeaches in the Apoſtles ſenſe, of the Saincts or Sacraments.
                  
                     5. A vvoman a ſiſter.]
                     Heretical trā
                        ſlation. The Heretikes peruerſely (as they do al other places for the aduantage of their Sect) expound this of the Apoſtles wiues,new Teſt. 1580. and for, vvoman, tranſlate, vvife, al belles founding vvedding to them. Vvhere the Apoſtle meaneth plainely the deuout vvomen that after the maner of Ievvrie * did ſerue the preacher of neceſſaries,Mat. 27, 55. of vvhich ſort many folovved Chriſt, and ſuſtained him and his of their ſubſtance. So doth S. Chryſoſtome, Theodorete, and al the Greekes (Oecu, in collect ſuper hunc lo.) take it. So doth S. Auguſtine De op. Monach. c. 4. and S. Hierom li. 1 adu: Iouinianum c. 14. both diſputing and prouing it by the very vvordes of the text. S. Ambroſe alſo vpon this place. And the thing is moſt plaine, for to vvhat end ſhould he talke of burdening the Corinthiā, vvith finding his vvife, vvhen him ſelf (c. 7, 7. 8.) clerely ſaith that he vvas ſingle?
                  
                     7. Who plaieth the ſouldiar?]
                     Paſtors and preachers due. He proueth by the Scriptures and natural reaſons that Preachers and Paſtors may chalenge their finding of their flocke, though him ſelf for cauſes had not, nor intended not to vſe his right and libertie therein.
                  
                     16. If I Euangelize.]
                     Vvorke of ſupererogation. If I ſhould preach either of compulſion and ſeruil feare, or mere neceſſitie, not hauing othervviſe to liue and ſuſtaine my ſelf in this vvorld, I could not looke for revvard in heauen. but novv doing it, not onely as enioyned me, but alſo as of loue and charitie, and freely vvithout putting any man to coſt, and that voluntarely and of very deſire to ſaue my hearers, I ſhal haue my revvard of God, yea and a revvard of Supererogation, vvhich is giuen to them that of aboundant charitie do more in the ſeruice of God then they be commaunded, as S. Auguſtine expoundeth it. De op. Mon. c. 5.
                  
                  
                     23. That I may be partaker.]
                     Doing vvel in reſpect of reward. A ſingular place to conuince the Proteſtants, that vvil not haue men vvorke vvel in reſpect of revvard at Gods hand: the Apoſtle confeſſing expreſly, that al this that he doth either of duety or of Supererogation aboue duety (as to preach of freecoſt, and to vvorke vvith his ovvne hands to get his ovvne meate and his fellovves, and to abſtaine from many lavvful things) al is, the rather to attaine the revvard of heauen.
                  
                     24. So runne.]
                     Running for the game. If ſuch as runne for a price, to make them ſelues more ſvvift, and to vvinne the game, abſtaine from many meates and pleaſures: vvhat ſhould not vve doe or ſuffer to vvinne the crovvne of glorie, propoſed and promiſed to none but ſuch as runne, trauel, and endeuour for it?
                  
                     27. I chaſtiſe.] The goale of euerlaſting glorie is not promiſed nor ſet forth for onely-faith men, for ſuch runne at randon:Penance meritorious. but it is the price of them that chaſtiſe and ſubdue their bodies and fleſhly deſires by faſting, vvatching, voluntary pouertie, and other afflictions. Lord, hovv farre is the carnal doctrine of the Sectaries and the mauers of theſe daies from the Apoſtles ſpirit. Vvherein euen, vve that be Catholikes, though vve do not condemne vvith the Proteſtants theſe voluntarie afflictions as ſuperfluous (much leſſe as ſuperſtitious or iniurious to Chriſts death,) but much cōmend them, yet vve vſe nothing the zeale and diligence of our firſt Chriſtian aunceters herein, and therfore are like to be more ſubiect to Gods temporal chaſtiſments, at the leaſt in the next life, then they vvere.
                  
                     72. Leſt perhaps.]
                     Aug. apud Pet. Lomb. in hunc locum. Here may vve lambes tremble (ſaith a holy father) vvhen the ramme, the guide of the flocke,S. Paul had not the Proteſtants ſecuritie of ſaluation. muſt ſo labour and puniſh him ſelf (beſides al his other miſeries adioyned to the preaching of the Goſpel) leſt perhaps he miſſe the marke. A man might thinke S. Paul ſhould be as ſure and as confident of Gods grace & ſaluation as vve poore vvretched caitiues: but the Heretikes vnhappy ſecuritie, preſumption, and faithles perſuaſion of their ſaluation is not fides Apoſtolorum but fides daemoniorum, not the faith of the Apoſtles, but the faith of Diuels.
                  
               
            
            
               CHA. X.
               
                  See the argument of the 9 Chapter, vvhich comprehendeth the contents of this alſo.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR I vvil not haue you ignorant brethren,Exo. 13, 21. that our fathers vvere al * vnder the cloude,Nu. 8, 18▪
                   & al * paſſed through the ſea, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and al in Moyſes vvere baptized in the cloude and in the ſea:Exo. 14, 22. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and * al did eate ″ the ſame ſpiritual foode,Exo. 16, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 4 and al
* drunke the ſame ſpiritual drinke (and they * drunke of the ſpiritual rocke that folovved them,Exo. 17, 6. Nu. 20, 10. and the rocke vvas Chriſt,) ✝ 
                     verse 5 but in the more part of them God vvas not vvel pleaſed. ⊢ for they
* vvere ouerthrovven in the deſert.Nu. 26, 63. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And theſe things vvere done in a figure of vs,The Epiſtle vpon the 9 Sunday after Pentecoſt. that vve be not couering euil things,Nu. 11, 4▪
                   as * they alſo coueted. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Neither become ye Idolaters,Exo. 32, 6. as certaine of them: as is vvritten: The people ſate dovvne to eate and drinke, and roſe vp to play. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Neither let vs fornicate, * as certaine of them fornicate,Nu. 25, 1▪
                   and there fel in one day three and tvventie thouſand. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Neither let vs tempt Chriſt: as certaine of them tempted,Nu. 21, 5▪
                   and * periſhed by the ſerpents. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Neither doe you murmure:Nu. 11, 23. 14, 37. as * certaine of them murmured, and periſhed by the deſtroyer. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And al theſe things chaunced to them in figure: but they are vvritten to our correption, vpon vvhom the endes of the vvorld are come. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore he that thinketh him ſelf to ſtand, let him take heedeIt is profitable to al, or in a maner to al, for to keepe them in humilitie, not to knovv vvhat they ſhal be
                        •
                      ſaith S. Auguſtine. Vvhich maketh agaiſt the vaine ſecuritie of the proteſtants. leſt he fall. ✝ 
                     verse 13 
                  Tentation hath not apprthended▪
                   Let not tentation apprehend' you, but humane, and God is faithful, vvho vvil not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue that vvhich you are able: but vvil make alſo vvith tentation
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   iſſue, that you may be able to ſuſteine. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 For the vvhich cauſe, my deereſt, flee from the ſeruing of Idols. ✝ 
                     verse 15 I ſpeake ″ as to vviſe men: your ſelues iudge vvhat I ſay. ✝ 
                     verse 16 The chalice of benediction ″ vvhich vve do bleſſe: is it not the cōmunication of the bloud of Chriſt? and the bread vvhich vve breake, is it not ″ the participation of the body of our Lord? ✝ 
                     verse 17 For being many, vve are ″ one bread, one body, al that participate of one bread. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Behold Iſraël according to the fleſh: ″ they that eate the hoſtes, are they not partakers of the altar? ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvhat then? do I ſay that that vvhich is immolated to Idols, is any thing? or that the Idol is any thing? ✝ 
                     verse 20 But the things that the heathen do immolate, to deuils they do immolate, and not to God. And ″ I vvil not haue you become fellovves of deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 21 ″ You can not drinke the chalice of our Lord, and the chalice of deuils:
 you can not be ″ partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of deuils. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Or do vve emulate our Lord? Vvhy, are we ſtronger then he?
               ″ Al things are lavvful for me, but al things are not expedient. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Al things are lavvful for me, but al things do not edifie. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Let no man ſeeke his ovvne, but an other mans. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Al that is ſold in the ſhambles, eate: aſking no queſtion for conſcience.Pſ. 23, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 26 
                  The earth is our Lordes, and the fulnes thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 27 If any inuite you of the infidels, and you vvil goe: eate of al that is ſet before you, aſking no queſtion for conſcience. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But if any man ſay, This is immolated to Idols: do not eate for his ſake that ſhevved it, and for conſcience: ✝ 
                     verse 29 conſcience I ſay not thine but the others. For vvhy is my libertie iudged of an other mans conſcience? ✝ 
                     verse 30 If I participate vvith thankes: vvhy am I blaſphemed for that vvhich I giue thankes for? ✝ 
                     verse 31 Therfore vvhether you eate, or drinke, or do any other thing: doe al things vnto the glorie of God. ✝ 
                     verse 32 Be vvithout offenſe to the Ievves and to the Gentiles, and to the Church of God: ✝ 
                     verse 33 as I alſo in al things doe pleaſe al men, not ſeeking that vvhich is profitable to my ſelf, but vvhich is to many: that they may be ſaued.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     1. The ſame.]
                     The old figures of our Sacraments. The red ſea and the cloud, 
                        •
                      figure of our Baptiſme: the Manna from heauen and vvater miraculouſly dravven out of the rocke, a figure of the holy Sacrament of Chriſtes body and bloud: our Sacraments containing the things and graces in truth, vvhich theirs only ſignified.Vve receiue greater benefites by our Sacraments thē the Iewes did by theirs. And it is an impudent forgerie of the Caluiniſts,Calu. in hunc 
                           〈◊〉
                        . to vvrite vpon this place, that the Ievves receiued no leſſe the truth and ſubſtance of Chriſt and his benefites in their figures or Sacraments, then vve do in ours: and that they and vve al eate and drinke of the ſelf ſame meate and drinke: the Apoſtle ſaying onely, that they among them ſelues did al feede of one bread, & drinke of one rocke: vvhich vvas a figure of Chriſt, therein eſpecially, that out of Chriſtes ſide pearced vpon the Croſſe, guſhed out bloud and vvater for the matter of our Sacraments.
                  
                     13. As to vviſemen.] To cauſe them to leaue the ſacrifices and meates or drinkes offered to Idols,The Apoſtle and auncient fathers ſpeake couertly of the B. Sacrament. he putteth them in minde of the onely true Sacrifice and meate and drinke of Chriſtes body and bloud: of vvhich and the ſacrifice of Idols alſo, they might not be in any caſe partakers. Vſing this terme, vt prudentibus loquor, in the ſame ſenſe (as it is thought) as the Fathers of the primitiue Church did giue a vvatch vvord of keeping ſecrete from the Infidels and vnbaptized, the myſterie of this diuine Sacrifice, by theſe vvordes, Norunt fidels, norunt qui initiati ſunt. Auguſt. in Pſ. 
                           •
                        9. & 33. Conc. 1. 2. & Pſ. 109. Ho. 42. c. 4. in lib. 50 hom. Orig. in Leuit. ho. 9. Chryſ. ho. 2
                           •
                         in Gen. in fine ho. 51 ad po. Antioch. ho. 5. in 1 Tim. S. Paul ſaith, I ſpeake to you boldly of this myſterie as to the vviſer and better inſtructed in the ſame.
                  
                     16. Which vve bleſſe.]
                     The Apoſtles bleſſed the Chalice, & ſo conſecrated. That is to ſay,Calix 
                           〈◊〉
                         benedicimus. the Chalice of Conſecration vvhich vve Apoſtles and Prieſts by Chriſtes commiſſion do conſecrate, by vvhich ſpeach as vvel the Caluiniſts (that vſe no conſecration of the cuppe at al,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . blaſphemouſly calling it magical murmuration, and peruerſely referring the benediction to thankes giuing to God) as alſo the Lutherans be refuted, vvho affirme Chriſtes body and bloud to be made preſent by receiuing & in the receiuing onely. for the Apoſtle expreſly referreth the benediction to the chalice, and not to God, making the holy bloud and the communicating thereof the effect of the benediction.
                  
                      
                     16. The participation of the body.]
                     Our vniting to Chriſt by the B. Sacrament. The holy Sacrament and Sacrifice of Chriſts body and bloud being receiued of vs, ioyneth vs in ſoul and body and engraffeth vs into Chriſt him ſelf, making vs partakers and at a peece of his body and bloud. For not by loue or ſpirit onely (ſaith S. Chryſoſtom) but in very deede vve are vnited in his fleſh, made one body vvith him, memebers of his fleſh and boones. Chryſ. ho. 45 in Io. ſub finem. And S. Cyril, Such is the force of myſtical benediction that it maketh Chriſt corporally by communicating of his fleſh to dvvel in vs. Cyril. li. 10. in Io. c. 13.
                  
                     17. One bread, one body.] As vve be firſt made one vvith Chriſt by eating his body and drinking his bloud,Our vnion among our ſelues by the B. Sacrament. ſo ſecondly are vve conioyned by this one bread vvhich is his body, and cuppe vvhich is his bloud, in the perfect vnion and felovvſhip of al Catholike men, in one Church vvhich is his body Myſtical. Vvhich name of Body myſtical is ſpecially attributed and appropriated to this one commonvvealth and Societie of faithful men, by reaſon that al the true perſons and true members of the ſame, be maruelouſly knit together by Chriſtes ovvne one body, and by the ſelf ſame bloud in this diuine Sacrament. See S. Auguſt. li. 21, c. 25 de ciu. Dei. Hilar. li. 8 de Trin. circamed.
                  
                  
                     18. They that eate the hoſtes.] It is plaine alſo by the example of the Ievves in their Sacrifices, that he that eateth any of the hoſt immolated, is partaker of the Sacrifice, and ioyned by office and obligation to God, of vvhoſe ſacrifice he eateth.
                  
                     20. I vvil not haue you.]
                     Participation in Sacrament or ſacrifice, ſhevveth of vvhat ſocietie vve are. I conclude then (ſaith the Apoſtle) thus: that as the Chriſtian vvhich eateth and drinketh of the ſacrifice or Sacrament of the altar, by his eating is participant of Chriſtes body, and is ioyned in felovvſhip to al Chriſtian people that eate and drinke of the ſame, being the hoſt of the nevv Lavv: and as al that did eate of the hoſtes of the Sacrifices of Moyſes Lavv, vvere belonging and aſſociated to that ſtate and to God to vvhom the Sacrifice vvas done: euen ſo vvhoſoeuer eateth of the meates offered to Idols, he ſhevveth and profeſteth him ſelf to be of the Communion and Societie of the ſame Idols.
                  
                     21. You can not drinke.] Vpon the premiſſes he vvarneth them plainely, that they muſt either forſake the ſacrifice and fellovvſhip of the Idols and Idolaters, or els refuſe the Sacrifice of Chriſts body and bloud in the Church.The ſacrifice of the altar is proued, by the Apoſtles compariſon with the ſacrifices of Iewes and Gentils. In al vvhich diſcourſe vve may obſerue that our bread and chalice, our table and altar, the participation of our hoſt and oblation, be compared or reſembled point by point, in al effects, conditions, and proprieties, to the altars, hoſtes, ſacrifices and immolations of the Ievves and Gentils. Vvhich the Apoſtle vvould not, nor could not haue done in this Sacrament of the Altar, rather then in other Sacraments or ſeruice of our religion, if it onely had not bene a Sacrifice and the proper vvorſhip of God among the Chriſtians, as the other vvere among the Ievves and Heathen. And ſo do al the Fathers acknovvledge, calling it onely, & continually almoſt, by ſuch termes as they do no other Sacrament or ceremonie of Chriſtes religion: The lambe of God laid vpon the table:
                     It is proued to be a ſacrifice, out of the fathers. Conc. Nic. the vnblouddy ſeruice of the Sacrifice, In Conc. Epheſ. ep. ad Neſtor. pag. 605. the Sacrifice of ſacrifices: Dionyſ. Ec. Hier. c. 3. the quickening holy ſacrifice: the vnblouddy hoſt and victime: Cyril. Alex. in Conc. Epheſ. Anath. 11. the propitiatorie ſacrifice both for the liuing and the dead: Tertul. de cor. Milit. Chryſ. ho. 41 in 1 Cor. Ho. 3. ad Philip. Ho. 66 ad po. Antioch. Cypr. ep. 66. & de coen. Do. nu. 1. Auguſt. Ench. 109. Quaeſt. 2. ad Dulcit. to. 4. Ser. 34. de verb. Apoſt. the Sacrifice of our Mediator: the ſacrifice of our price: the Sacrifice of the nevv Teſtament: the ſacrifice of the Church: Auguſt li. 9. c. 13. & li. 3 de bapt. c. 19. the one onely inconſumptible victime vvithout vvhich there is no religion: Cyprian. de coen. Do. nu. 2. Chryſ. ho. 17 ad Hebr.Cypr. Iuſtin. Irenae. infra. 
                     The pure oblation, the nevv offering of the nevv Lavv: the vital and impolluted hoſt: the honorable and dreadful Sacrifice: the Sacrifice of thankes giuing or Euchariſtical: and the Sacrifice of Melchiſedec. Vvhich Melchiſedec by his oblation in bread and vvine did properly and moſt ſingularly prefigurate this office of Chriſtes eternal Prieſthod and ſacrificing him ſelf vnder the formes of bread and vvine: vvhich ſhal continevv in the Church through out al Chriſtian Nations in ſteed of al the offerings of Aarons Prieſthod, as theMalac. 1, 11. Prophete Malachie did foretel, as S. Cyprian, S. Iuſtine, S. Irenaeus and others the moſt auncient Doctors and Martyrs do teſtifie. Cypr. ep. 63. nu. 2. Iuſtin. Dial. cum Trypho. poſt med. Irenae. li. 4. c. 12. And S. Auguſtine li. 17 c. 20 de ciu. Dei. & li. 1 cont. adu. leg. & proph. c. 18. & li. 
                           •
                         de bapt. c. 19: S. Leo ſer. 8 de Paſsione: and others do expreſly auouch that this one Sacrifice hath ſucceded al other and fulfilled al other differences of ſacrifices, that it hath the force and vertue of al other,The fathers called this ſacrifice, the MASSE. to be offered for al perſons and cauſes that the others, for the liuing and the dead, for ſinnes and for thankes giuing, and for vvhat other neceſſitie ſo euer of body or ſoule.Ambroſ. ep. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Vvhich holy action of Sacrifice they alſo call the MASSE in plaine vvordes. Auguſt. ſer. 251. 91. Con. Carthag. 2, c. 3. 4. c. 
                           •
                        4. Mileuit. c. 12. Leo ep. 88. 81 c. 2. Grego. li. 2. ep. 9▪ 93. &c. This is the Apoſtles and Fathers doctrine. God graunt the Aduerſaries may find mercie to ſee ſo euident and inuincible a truth.
                  
                     21. Partakers of the table.]
                     The diſtinctiō of Chriſtian Catholikes frō the reſt, is by not communicating with thē
                        ▪ ſpecially in their ſacrifices, and at the Communion table. Though the faithful people be many vvaies knovven to be Gods peculiar, and be ioyned both to him & among them ſelues, and alſo ſeuered and diſtinguiſhed from al others that pertaine not to him, as vvel Ievves and Pagans, as Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, by ſundry other external ſignes of Sacraments, doctrine, and gouernement: yet the moſt proper and ſubſtantial vnion or difference conſiſteth in the Sacrifice and Altar: by vvhich God ſo ſpecially bindeth his Church vnto him, and him ſelf vnto his Church, that he acknovvledgeth none to be
 his, that is not partaker of his one onely Table and Sacrifice in his Church: and acquitteth him ſelf of al ſuch as ioyne in felovvſhip vvith any of the Heathen at their Idolatrie, or vvith the Ievves at their Sacrifices, or vvith Heretikes and Schiſmatikes at their prophane and deteſtable table. Vvhich becauſe it is the proper badge of their ſeparation from Chriſt and his Church, and an altar purpoſely erected againſt Chriſtes Altar, Prieſthod,The heretikes Communiō is the very table and cup of Diuels. and Sacrifice, is in deede a very ſacrifice, or (as the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh) a table and cuppe of Diuels, that is to ſay, wherein the Diuel is properly ſerued, and Chriſtes honour (no leſſe then * by the altars of Ieroboam or any prophane ſuperſtitious rites of Gentiliti
                        •
                     ) defiled.3. reg. 12. And therfore al Catholike men, if they locke to haue felovvſhip with Chriſt and his members in his body and bloud, muſt deeme of it as of Idolatrie or ſacrilegious ſuperſtition, and abſtaine from it and from al ſocietie of the ſame, as good To bie did from Ieroboams calues and the altars in Dan and Bethel:Tob. 1. and as the good faithful did from the Excelſes,3. reg. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . and from the temple and ſacrifices of Samaria. Novv in the Chriſtian times vve haue no other Idols, but hereſies, nor Idolothytes, but their falſe ſeruices ſhifted into our Churches in ſteede of Gods true and onely vvorſhip. Cypr. de vnit Ec. nu. 2 Hiero. in 11 Oſee. & 8. Amos. & in 2. Habat. Aug. in pſ. 80. v. 10. De Ciu. Dei li. 18. c. 51.
                  
                  
                     23 Al things are lavvful.] Hitherto the Apoſtles arguments and examples vvhereby he vvould auert them from the meates offered to Idols,Hovv by participatiō with idolaters, idolatrie is committed. ſeeme plainly to cōdemne their fact as Idololatrical, or as participant & acceſſory to Idolatrie, & not onely as of ſcādal giuen to the weake brethren: and ſo no doubt it vvas in that they went into the very temple of the Idols; and did vvith the reſt that ſerued the Idols, eate and drinke of the fleſh and libaments directly offered to the Idol, yea and feaſted together in the ſame bankets made to the honour of the ſame Idols: vvhich could not but defile them and entangle them vvith Idolatrie: not for that the meate it ſelf vvas iuſtly belonging to any other but to God, or could be defiled, made noiſome or vnlawful to be eaten, but for and in reſpect of the abuſe of the ſame and deteſtable dedicating of that to the diuel, vvhich belonged not to him, but to God alone. Of vvhich ſacrilegious act that ought not to be partakers, as needes they muſt,How to auoid ſcandal in things indifferent. entering and eating with them in their ſolemnities, to this end hath S. Paul hi
                        •
                      her to admoniſhed the Corinthians. Novv he declareth that othervviſe in prophane feaſts it is lavvful to eate vvithout curious doubting or aſking vvhether this or that vvere offered meates, and in markettes to bye vvhatſoeuer is thereſold, vvithout ſcruple and vvithout taking knovvledge vvhether it be of the Idolothytes or no: vvith this exception, firſt, that if one ſhould inuite him to eate, or bye this or that as ſacred and offered meates, that then he ſhould not eate it, leſt he ſhould ſeeme to approue the offering of it to the Idol, or to like it the better for the ſame. Secondly, vvhē the vveake brother may take offence by the ſame. For though it be lavvful in it ſelf to eate any of theſe meates vvithout care of the Idol: yet al lavvful things be not in euery time and place expedient to be done.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  He commendeth them for keeping his Traditions generally. 3 and in particular for this, that a man praied and prophecied bareheaded,The. 5. part. a vvoman veiled, he bringeth many reaſons. 17 About another, he reprehendeth the riche that at the Charitable ſupper ſupped vncharitably,Of his Traditions. as telling them that they receiued therfore vnvvorthely the B. Sacrament, 23 telling them that they receiued therfore vnvvorthely the B. Sacrament, and ſhevving them vvhat an heinous ſinne that is ſeeing it is our Lordes body and the repreſentation of his death, as he by tradition had taught them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BE ye folovvers of me, as I alſo of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I praiſe you brethren, that in al things you be mindeful of me: and as I haue deliuered vnto you, you keepe ″ myIn the greeke, Traditions, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . precepts.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And I vvil haue you knovv, that the head of euery man, is Chriſt: and the head of the vvoman, is the man: and the head of Chriſt, is God.
 ✝ 
                     verse 4 Euery man praying or prophecying vvith his head couered: diſhoneſteth his head. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But ″ euery vvoman praying or prophecying vvith her head not couered: diſhoneſteth her head: for it is al one as if ſhe vvere made balde. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For if a vvoman be not couered, let her be polled. but if it be a foule thing for a vvoman to be polled or made balde: let her couer her head. ✝ 
                     verse 7 The man truely ought not to couer his head, becauſe he is the image and glorie of God, but the vvoman is the glorie of the man. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the man is not of the vvoman,Gen. 2, 21. but the vvoman of the man. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For * the man vvas not created for the vvoman, but the vvoman for the man. ( ✝ 
                     verse 10 Therfore ought the vvoman to haue povver vpon her head for the Angels.) ✝ 
                     verse 11 But yet neither the man vvithout the vvoman: not the vvoman vvithout the man, in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For as the vvoman is of the man. ſo alſo the man by the vvoman: but al things of God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Your ſelues iudge: doth it become a vvoman not couered to pray vnto God? ✝ 
                     verse 14 Neither doth nature if ſelf teach you, that a man in deede if he nouriſh his heare, it is an ignominie for him: ✝ 
                     verse 15 but if a vvoman nouriſh her heare, it is a glorie for her, becauſe heare is giuen her for a veile? ✝ 
                     verse 16 But if any man ſeeme to be contentious,
churches▪
                   vve haue no ſuch ″ cuſtome, nor the `CHVRCH' of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And this I commaund: not praiſing it that you come together not to better,The Epiſtle vpon Maundy Thurſday. but to vvorſe. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Firſt in deede vvhen you come together into the Church, I heare that there are ſchiſmes among you, and in part I beleeue it. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For ″ there muſt be hereſies alſo: that they alſo vvhich are approued, may be made manifeſt among you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Vvhen you come therfore together in one, is it not novv to eate ″ our Lordes ſupper. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For euery one taketh his ovvne ſupper before to eate. And one certes is an hungred, and an other is drunke. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvhy, haue you not houſes to eate and drinke in? or contemne ye the Church of God: and confound them that haue not? Vvhat ſhal I ſay to you? praiſe I you in this? I do not praiſe you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 
                  The Epiſtle vpon CORPVS Chriſti day. For I receiued of our Lord that vvhich alſo ″ I haue deliuered vnto you,Mat. 26, 26.
                  The Apoſtles drift in al that he ſaith here of the Sacramēt, is againſt vnvvorthy receiuing (as S. Auguſtine alſo noteth Ep. 11
                           •
                        . c. 3.) and not to ſet out the vvhole order of miniſtratiō, as the heretikes do ignorātly imagine. that our Lord IESVS ″ in the night that he vvas betraied,Mr. 14, 22. ″ tooke ″ bread: ✝ 
                     verse 24 and giuing thankes brake, and ſaid:Luc. 22, 19. ″ Take ye & eate, ″ THIS IS ″ MY BODY VVHICH SHAL BE DELIVERED FOR YOV: ″ this doe ye for
 the commemoration of me. ✝ 
                     verse 25 In like maner alſo the chalice after he had ſupped, ſaying, THIS CHALICE IS THE NEVV TESTAMENT IN MY BLOVD. this doe ye, as often as you ſhal drinke, for the cōmemoration of me. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For as often as you ſhal eate this bread, and drinke the chalice, ″ you ſhal ſhevv the death of our Lord, vntil he come. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Therfore vvhoſoeuer ſhal eate this bread, or drinke the chalice of our Lord vnvvorthily, he ſhal be ″ guilty of the body and of the bloud of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But let a man proue him ſelf: and ſo, let him eate of that bread, and drinke of the chalice. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For he that eateth and drinketh vnvvorthily: eateth and drinketh iudgement to him ſelf, ″ not diſcerning the body of our Lord. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 30 Therfore are there among you many weake and feble, and ″ many ſleepe. ✝ 
                     verse 31 But if vve did ″ iudge our ſelues: vve ſhould not be iudged. ✝ 
                     verse 32 But vvhiles vve are iudged, of our Lord vve are chaſtiſed: that vvith this world vve be not damned. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 33 Therfore my brethren, vvhen you come together to eate, ″ expect one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 34 If any man be an hungred, let him eate at home: that you come not together vnto iudgement. And the reſt ″ I vvil diſpoſe, vvhen I come.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     2. My precepts.] Our Paſtors and Prelates haue authoritie to commaund, and vve are bound to obey. And the Gouerners of the Church may take order and preſcribe that vvhich is comely in euery ſtate, as time and place require, though the things be not of the ſubſtance of our religion.
                  
                     5. Euery vvoman.] Vvhat gifts of God ſo euer vvomen haue, though ſupernatural, as ſome had in the Primitiue Church, yet they may not forget their vvomanly ſhamefaſtnes, but ſhevv them ſelues ſubiect and modeſt, and couer their heads vvith a veile.
                  
                     16. Cuſtome.] If vvomen or other, to defend their diſorder & malipertnes, diſpute or alleage Scriptures and reaſons,The Cuſtome of the Church, is a good anſwer againſt al vvranglers. or require cauſes of their preachers vvhy & by vvhat authoritie they ſhould be thus reſtrained in things indifferent, make them no other anſvver but this, This is the cuſtome of the Church, this is our cuſtome. Vvhich is a goodly rule to repreſſe the ſaucineſſe of contentious 
                        •
                     anglers, vvhich being out of al modeſtie and reaſon, neuer vvant vvordes and replies againſt the Church. Vvhich Church if it could then by preſcription of tvventy or thirty yeres, and by the authority of one or tvvo of their firſt preachers, ſtoppe the mouthes of the ſeditious: vvhat ſhould not the cuſtome of fiftene hundred yeres, & the decrees of many hundred Paſtors, gaine of reaſonable, modeſt, and humble men?
                  19. There muſt be hereſies▪] Vvhen the Apoſtle ſaith,
                     That hereſies ſhal come, and vvherfore. Hereſies muſt be: He ſhevveth the euent, and not that God hath directly ſo appointed it as neceſſarie. for, that they be, it commeth of mans malice and free vvil: but that they be conuerted to the manifeſtation of the good and conſtant in faith & the Churches vnitie, that is Gods ſpecial vvorke of prouidence that vvorketh good of euil. And for that there ſhould fall Hereſies and Schiſmes, ſpecially concerning the Article and vſe of the B Sacrament of the Altar,
                     Vvhat cōmoditie vve may make of hereſies. 
                     vvhereof he novv beginneth to treate, it may make vs maruel the leſſe, to ſee ſo great diſſenſions. Hereſies, and Schiſmes of the vvicked and vveake in faith concerning the ſame. Such things then vvil be, but vvo to him by vvhom ſcandals or Sectes do come. Let vs vſe Heretikes, ſaith S. Auguſtine, not to that end to approue their errours, but that by defending the
 Catholike doctrine againſt their deceices, vve may be more vvatchful and vvary: becauſe it is moſt truely vvritten. There muſt be hereſies that the tried and approued may be manifeſted or diſcoured from the holovv hartes among you. Let vs vſe this benefite of Gods prouidence, for Heretikes be made of ſuch as vvould erre or be naught, though they vvere in the Church: but being out, they profite vs excedingly, not by teaching the truth vvhich they knovv not, but by ſtirring vp the carnal in the Church to ſeeke truth, and the ſpiritual Catholikes, to deere the truth, for there be innumerable holy approued men in the Church, but they be not diſcerned from other among vs, nor manifeſt, ſo long as vve had rather ſleepe in darknes of ignorance, then behold the light of truth. therfore many are raiſed out of their ſleepe by Heretikes to ſee the day of God, and are glad thereof. Auguſt. c. 8. de vera relig.
                  
                  
                     20. Our Lordes ſupper.] The Chriſtians at or about the time of the Churches onely Sacrifice and their communicating thereof, kept great feaſtes: vvhich continued long, for that the reliefe of the poore vpon the common charges of the richer ſort,Agapae or ſuppers of charitie. and the charitie and vnitie of al ſortes vvere much preſerued thereby,Cōc. Gang. can. 11. for vvhich cauſe they vvere called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, Charities, of the auncient Fathers, and vvere kept commonly in Church houſes or porches adioyning, or in the body of the Church (vvhereof ſee Tertullian Apolog. c. 19.
                     Conc Loadic. can. 27. 28. Clemens Alexand. S. Iuſtine, S. Auguſtine cont. Faieſt. li. 20 c. 20.) after the Sacrifice and Communion vvas ended, as S. Chryſoſtom ho. 27. in 1 Cor. in initio iudgeth. Thoſe feaſtes S. Paul here calleth Coenas Dominicas, becauſe they vvere made in the Churches vvhich then vvere called Dominica,
                     Vvhether the Apoſtle meane by our Lords ſupper, the B. Sacrament. that is, Our Lordes houſes. The diſorder therfore kept among the Corinthians in theſe Church-feaſtes of Charitie, the Apoſtle ſeeketh here to redreſſe: from the foule abuſes expreſſed here in the text. And as S. Ambroſe in hunc locum, and moſt good authors novv thinke, this vvhich he calleth Dominicam coenam, is not meant of the B. Sacrament, as the circunſtances alſo of the text do giue, namely, the reiecting of the poore, the rich mens priuate deuouring of al, not expecting one an other, glottony and drunkenneſſe in the ſame, vvhich can not agree to the holy Sacrament. And therfore the Heretikes haue ſmal reaſon, vpon this place, to name the ſaid holy Sacramēt, rather, the Supper of the Lord, then after the maner of the primitiue Church, the Euchariſt, MASSE, or Liturgie. But by like they vvould bring it to the ſupper againe or Euening ſeruice, vvhen men be not faſting, the rather to take avvay the old eſtimation of the holines thereof.
                  
                     23. I haue deliuered.]
                     Traditiō vvithout vvriting. As al other partes of religion vvere firſt deliuered by preaching and vvord of mouth to euery Nation conuerted, ſo this holy order and vſe of the B. Sacrament vvas by S. Paul firſt giuen vnto the Corinthians by tradition. Vnto vvhich as receiued of our Lord he reuoketh them by this Epiſtle, not putting in vvriting particularly al things pertaining to the order, vſe, and inſtitution,Whether the catholikes or Proteſtants doe more imitate Chriſts inſtitution of the B. Sacrament. as he aftervvard ſaith: but repeating the ſumme and ſubſtance thereof, and leauing the reſidue to his returne. But his vvordes and narration here vvritten vve vvil particularly proſecute, becauſe the Heretikes make profeſſion to folovv the ſame in their pretended reformation of the MASSE.
                  
                     23. Ia the night.] Firſt the Aduerſaries may be here conuinced that al the circumſtāces of time, perſon, & place vvhich in Chriſtes action are noted, neede not to be imitated. As, that the Sacramēt ſhould be miniſtred at night, to men onely, to onely tvvelue, after or at ſupper, & ſuch like: becauſe (as S. Cyprian ep. 
                           •
                        3. nu. 
                           •
                        . & S. Auguſtine ep. 118. c. 6. note) there vvere cauſes of thoſe accidents in Chriſt that are not novv to be alleaged for vs. He inſtituted then this holy act: vve do not, he made his Apoſtles Prieſts,Al circunſtāces in our Sauiours action about the B. Sacramēt, neede not be imitated. that is to ſay, gaue them commiſſion to do and miniſter the ſame: vve do not he vvould haue this the laſt act of his life & vvithin the bounds of his Paſſion: it is not ſo vvith vs. he vvould eate and make an end of the Paſchal to accompliſh the old Lavv: that can not be in our action. therfore he muſt needes doe it after ſupper and at night: vve may not do ſo. he excluded al vvomen, al the reſt of his Diſciples, al lay men: vve inuite al faithful, men & vvomen. In many circunſtances then, neither vve may imitate Chriſtes firſt action, nor the Heretikes as yet do: though they ſeeme to encline by abandoning other names ſauing this (calling it Supper) to haue it at night and after meate. though (as is before noted) they haue no iuſt cauſe to call it ſo vpon Chriſt, fact, ſeeing the Euangeliſts do plainely ſhevv * that the Sacrament vvas inſtituted after Supper,Io. 13, 2. as the Apoſtle him ſelf here recordeth of the later part in expreſſ
                        •
                      ſpeach. And moſt men thinke, a long ſermon and the vvaſhing of the Apoſtles feete came betvvene, yea and that the ſupper vvas quite finiſhed, & grace ſaid. But in al theſe and ſuch like things, the Catholike Church onely, by Chriſtes Spirit can tel, vvhich things are imitable, vvhich not, in al his actions.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        1. Tooke.] Chriſt tooke bread into his hands, applying this ceremonie, action, and benediction to it,Luc. 9, 16. and did bleſſe the very element, vſed povver and actiue vvord vpon it, * as he did ouer the bread and fiſhes vvhich he multiplied:The Proteſtants imitate not Chriſt in bleſſing the bread and vvine. and ſo doth the Church of God: and ſo do not the Proteſtants, if they folovv their ovvne booke and doctrine, but they let the bread & cuppe ſtand a loofe, and occupie Chriſtes vvordes by vvay of report and narration applying them not at al to the matter propoſed to be occupied: and therfore hovvſoeuer the ſimple people be deluded by the reherſal of the ſame vvordes vvhich Chriſt vſed, yet conſecration, benediction, or ſanctification of bread and vvine they profeſſe they make none at al. At the firſt alteration of religion, there vvas a figure of the Croſſe at this vvord. He bleſſed: and at the vvorde, He tooke, there vvas a gloſſe or
 rubrike that appointed the Miniſter to imitate Chriſts action, and to take the bread into his hands: aftervvard that vvas reformed and Chriſtes action aboliſhed, and his bleſſing of bread turned to thankes giuing to God.
                  
                     23. Bread.]
                     They imitate him not in vnleauened bread, and mingling water with wine. Chriſt made the holy Sacrament of vnleauened bread, and al the Latin Church imitateth him in the ſame, as a thing much more agreable to the ſignification both in it ſelf and in our liues, then the leauen. Yet our Aduerſaries neither folovv Chriſt, S. Paul, nor the vveſt Church, in the ſame: but rather purpoſely make choiſe of that kind that is in it ſelf more vnſeemely, and to the firſt inſtitution leſſe agreable. In the other part of the Sacrament they contemne Chriſt and his Church much more impudently and damnably. For Chriſt and al the Apoſtles and al Catholike Churches in the vvorld haue euer mixed their wine vvith water, for great myſterie and ſignification, ſpecially for that water guſhed together vvith bloud out of our Lordes ſide. This our Lord did (ſaith S. Cyprian Ep. 63 ad Cecilium. nu. 4, 7.) and none rightly offereth, that folovveth not him therein. Thus Irenaeus (li. 5. c. 1.) Iuſtine (Apolog. 2. in fine.) and al the Fathers teſtifie the Primitiue Church did, and in this ſort it is done in al the MASSES of the Greekes, S. Iames, S. Baſils, S. Chriſoſtoms: and yet our Proteſtant: pretending to reduce al to Chriſt, vvil not doe as he did, and al the Apoſtles and Churches that euer vvere.
                  
                     24. This is.] Theſe vvordes being ſet dovvne, not in the perſon of the Euangeliſtes or Apoſtles,The vvordes of conſecration, to be ſaid ouer the bread and vvine. the vvhich the Proteſtants do not. but expreſſed as in Chriſtes ovvne perſon, to be ſaid ouer the bread, and the like ouer the vvine, are the formes of the Sacrament and vvordes of conſecration: neither is it a Sacrament but (as S. Auguſtine ſaith) vvhen the vvordes come,tract, 
                           •
                        0 in Io. that is to ſay, actiuely and preſently be applied to the elements of the ſame. Therfore the Proteſtants neuer applying theſe vvordes more then the vvhole narration of the inſtitution, nor reciting the vvhole (as is ſaid) othervviſe then in hiſtorical maner, (as if one vvould miniſter Baptiſme & neuer apply the wordes of the Sacramēt to the childe, but onely read Chriſtes ſpeaches of the ſame) make no Sacrament at al. And that theſe proper vvordes be the onely forme of this Sacrament, and ſo to be ſpoken ouer or vpon the bread and vvine, S. Ambroſe plainly and preciſely vvriteth, recording hovv far the Euangeliſts narratiue vvordes do goe, and vvhere Chriſtes ovvne peculiar myſtical vvordes of conſecration begin: and ſo the reſt of the fathers. Ambro. li. 4. de Sacr. e. 4. &c. 9. de init. Myſter, Iuſti. Apolog. 2. in fine. Cypr. de Can. Do. nu. 1. 2. Aug. Ser. 28. de verb. Do. ſec. Mat. Tertul. li. 4. cont. Marc. Chryſ. ho. 2. in 2. ad Tim. in fine. & ho. de prodit. Iuda to. 3. Grego. Nyſſ. in orat. Catech. Damaſe. li. 4. c. 14.
                  
                  
                     24. My body.] Vvhen the vvordes of Conſecration be by tho ſaid impietie of the Proteſtants, thus remoued from the elements:The Proteſtants haue taken away the B. Sacrament altogether. no maruel if Chriſtes holy body and bloud be not there, or that it is novv no more a Sacrament, but common bread and vvine. So they that vniuſtly charge the Cath. Church vvith defrauding the people of one peece of the Sacramēt, haue in very deede left no part nor ſpice of Sacrament, neither folovving Chriſt, as they pretend, nor S. Paul, nor any Euangeliſt, but their owne deteſtable Secte, hauing boldly defaced the vvhole inſtitution, not in any accidental indifferent circunſtances, but in the very ſubſtance and al. The right name is gone, the due elements both gone, no bleſſing or conſecration, or other action ouer them, the formes be gone: and conſequently the body and bloud, the Sacrament and the Sacrifice.
                  
                     24. This doe.]
                     The povver to conſecrate giuen to Prieſts onely. By theſe vvordes, authoritie and povver is giuen to the Apoſtles, and by the like, in the Sacrament of Orders, to al lavvful Prieſts onely. No maruel then that the nevv heretical Miniſters being lay men, giue the people nothing but bare bread and vvine, profane, naked, and natural elements void of Sacrament and al grace. See the Annotation vpon S. Luke chap. 22, 19.
                  
                     24. Take and eate.] This pertaineth to the receiuing of thoſe things vvhich by conſecration are preſent and ſacrificed before: as vvhen the people or Prieſts in the old Lavv did eate the hoſtes offered or part thereof, they vvere made partakers of the ſacrifice done to God before.The Sacramēt conſiſteth not in the receiuing. And this is not the ſubſtance, or being, or making of the Sacrament or Sacrifice of Chriſtes body and bloud: but it is the vſe and application to the receiuer, of the things vvhich vvere made and offered to God before. There is a difference betvvixt the making of a medecine or the ſubſtance and ingredience of it, and the taking of it. Novv the receiuing being but a conſequence or one of the endes vvhy the Sacrament vvas made, & the meane to apply it vnto vs: the Aduerſaries vnlearnedly make it al and ſome, ad therfore improperly name the vvhole Sacrament and miniſtration therof,Vvhy the Proteſtants call it the Communion. by calling it the Communion. Vvhich name they giue alſo rather then any other, to make the ignorant beleeue that many muſt communicate together: as though it vvere ſo called for that it is common to many. By which colluſion they take avvay the receiuing of the Prieſt alone, of the ſicke alone,Communion, vvhich is a part of the MASSES, what it ſignifieth. of reſeruing the conſecrated Hoſt and the vvhole Sacrament. Againſt vvhich deceite, knovv that this part of the MASSE is not called Communiō, for that many ſhould concurre together alwaies in the external Sacrament: but for that vve do communicate
 or ioyne in vnitie and perfect felovvſhip of one body, vvith al Chriſtian men in the vvorld, vvith al (vve ſay) that eate it through the vvhole Church, and not vvith them onely vvhich eate vvith vs at one time. And this fellovvſhip riſeth of that, that vve be euery time we receiue either alone or vvith companie, partakers of that one body vvhich is receiued through out al the vvorld. It is called cōmunion (ſaith S. Damaſcent) & ſo in deede it is,
                     li. 4. c. 14. de orthod, fide. 
                     for that by it vve comunicate vvith Chriſt & be partakers of his fleſh & diuinitie, & by it doe cō
                        communicate and are vnited one vvith an other. onely let vs take heeds that vve do not participat vvith heretikes. And vvhen the Apoſtle ſaith, that al be one bread and one body that are partakers of one Bread, he meaneth not of them onely that communicate at one time and place: but that al be ſo, that communicate in vnitie through the whole Church. Thē the name Communion is as ignorantly vſed of them, as the name of Supper.
                  
                     26. You ſhal ſhevv.] Vpon this vvord the Heretikes fondly ground their falſe ſuppoſition, that this Sacrament can not rightly be miniſtred or made vvithout a ſermon of the death of Chriſt:Hovv Chriſts death is ſhewed by the B. Sacrament it ſelf, vvithout ſermon or othervviſe. and that this and other Sacraments in the Church, be not profitable, when they be miniſtred in a ſtrange language. As though the grace, force, operation, & actiuitie, together vvith the iuſtruction and repreſentation of the things which they ſignifie, vvere not in the very ſubſtance, matter, forme, vſe, and vvorke it ſelf of euery of the Sacraments: and as though preaching vvere not one vvay to ſhevv Chriſtes Paſsion, and the Sacraments an other vvay: namely this Sacrament, conteining in the very kindes of the elements and the action, a moſt liuely repreſentation of Chriſtes death. As vviſely might they ſay that neither Abels ſacrifice nor the Paſchal lambe could ſignifie Chriſtes death vvithout a Sermon.
                  
                     27. Guilty of the body.]
                     The vvicked receiue the body & bloud. The real preſence is proued by the heinous offēſe of vnvvorthy receiuing. Firſt herevpon marke vvel, that il men receiue the body and bloud of Chriſt, be they infidels or il liuers. For in this caſe they could not be guilty of that vvhich they receiue not. Secondly, that it could not be ſo heinous an offenſe for any man to receiue a peece of bread or a cuppe of vvine, though they vvere a true Sacrament. For it is a deadly ſinne to receiue any Sacramēt with vvil & intentiō to cōtinevv in ſinne, or, vvithout repentance of former ſinnes: but yet by the vnvvorthy receiuing of no other Sacrament is man guilty of Chriſtes body and bloud, but here, vvhere the vnvvorthy (as S. Chryſoſtom ſaith) doth vilany to Chriſtes ovvne perſon, as the Ievves or Gentiles did, that crucified it. Chryſ. ho. de non contemn. Ec. &c. Ho. 60 & 61 ad po. Antioch. Vvhich inuincibly proueth againſt the Heretikes that Chriſt is really preſent.
                  
                     28. Let him proue.]
                     Confeſsiō before receiuing the B. Sacrament. A man muſt examine his life diligently vvhether he be in any mortal ſinne, and muſt confeſſe him ſelf of euery offenſe vvhich he knovveth or feareth to be deadly, before he preſume to come to the holy Sacrament. For ſo the Apoſtles doctrine here, vvith the continual cuſtom of the Cath. Church and the Fathers example, binde him to doe. Cypr. de lapſ. nu. 7. Aug. Eccl. dog. c. 53.
                  
                  
                     29. Not diſeruing the body.]
                     Adoration of the B. Sacrament. That is, becauſe he putteth no difference nor diſtinction betvvixt this high meate and others▪ and therfore S. Auguſtine ſaith ep. 118. c. 3. that it is he that the Apoſtle ſaith ſhal be damned, that doth not by ſingular veneration or adoration make a difference betvvene this meate and al others. And againe in Pſal. 98. No man eateth it before he adore it. And S. Ambroſe li. 3, c. 12 de Sp. San. We adore the fleſh of Chriſt in the Myſteries. S. Chryſoſtome ho. 24 in 1 Cor. We adore him on the altar, as the Sages did in the manger. S. Nazianzene in Epitaph. Gorgoniae. My ſiſter called on him vvhich is vvorſhipped vpon the altar. Theodorete Dial. 2 Inconf. The Myſtical tokens be adored. S. Denys, this Apoſtles ſcholer, made ſolemne inuocation of the Sacrament after Conſecration. Eccleſiaſt. Hier. c. 1 part. 
                           •
                         in princip. and before the receiuing, the vvhole Church of God crieth vpon it,See the Annot. 
                     Domine non ſum digni
                           •
                        s,
                     The manifold honour and diſcerning of Chriſtes body in the Cath. Church. 
                     Deus propitius eſte mihi peccators. Lambe of God that takeſt avvay the ſinnes of the vvorld, haue mercie on vs. And for better diſcerning of this diuine meate, vve are called from common profane houſes to Gods Churchs for this,Mat. 
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        . vve are forbidden to make it in vulge. apparel, and are appointed ſacred ſolemne veſtiments. Hiero. in Epitaph. N
                           •
                        pot. & li. 2 adu. Pelag. c. 9. Paulinus ep. 12 ad Seuer. Io. Diaco. in vit. D. Greg. li. 3, c. 59. For this, is the halovving of Corporals and Chalices; Ambr. 2 Off. c. 28. Nazianz, Orat. ad Arianos: Optatu
                           •
                         li. 6 in initio. for this, profane tables are remoued and altars conſecrated: Auguſt. Ser de temp. 255. for this, the very Prieſts them ſelues are honorable, chaſt, ſacred, Hiero. ep. 1 ad Heliodorum c. 
                           •
                         Li
                           •
                         adu. Iouin. c. 19 Ambroſ. in 1 Tim. 3. for this, the people is forbidden to touch it vvith cōmon hands. Nazianz. orat. ad A
                           ••
                        ano
                           •
                         in initio. for this, great care and ſolicitude is taken that no part of either kinde fall to the ground, Cyril. Hieroſ. myſtag. 5 in fine. Orig. ho. 13 in c. 25 Exod. for this ſacred prouiſion is made that if any hoſts or parts of the Sacrament do remaine vnreceiued, they be moſt religiouſly reſerued vvith al honour and diligence poſſible, and for this, examination of conſciences, confeſſion, continencie, & (as S. Auguſtine ſaith) receiuing it faſting.ep. 118, c. 6. Thus dovve Catholikes and the Church of God diſcerne the holy Body and bloud by S. Paules rule,The Profane bread of the Proteſtants. not onely from your profane bread and v
                        •
                     ine (vvhich not by any ſecrete abuſe of your Curats or Clerkes, but by the very order of your booke, the Miniſter, if any remaine after your Communion, may take home vvith him to his ovvne vſe
 and therfore is no more holy by your ovvne iudgement then the reſt of his meates) but from al other either vulgar or ſanctified meates, asAug. de pec. merit. li. 2. c. 24. Ep. Iuda. the Catechumens bread, and our vſual holy bread. If al this be plaine and true,Holy bread. and you haue nothing agreable to the Apoſtles nor Chriſtes inſtitution, but al clean
                        •
                      contrarie: then imporet vobis Deus and confound you for not diſcerning his holy Body, and for conculcating the bloud of the nevv Teſtament.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        0. Many ſleepe.]
                     Vnvvorthie receiuing. Vve ſee here by this, it is a fearful caſe and crime to defile by ſinne (as much as in vs lieth) the body of Chriſtin the Sacrament. ſeeing God ſtrooke many to death for it in the Primitiue Church, and puniſhed others by greuous ſicknes. No maruel that ſo many ſtrange diſeaſes and deaths fall vpon vs novv in the vvorld.
                  
                     31. Iudge your ſelues.]
                     Penance and ſatisfaction. Vve may note here that it is not ynough, onely to ſinne no more, or to repent lightly of that vvhich is paſt: but that vve ſhould puniſh our ſelues according to the vveight of the faults paſt and forgiuen: and alſo that God vvil puniſh vs by temporal ſcourges in this life or the next, if vve do not make our ſelues very cleane before vve come to receiue his holy Sacrament. vvhoſe hea
                        •
                     y hands vve may eſcape by puniſhing our ſelues by faſting and other penance.
                  
                     33. Expect one an other.] Returning novv to their former fault and diſorder for the vvhich he tooke this occaſion to talke of the holy Sacrament, and hovv great a fault it is to come vnvvorthely to it: he exhorteth them to keepe their ſaid ſuppers or feaſtes in vnitie, peace, and ſobrietie, the riche expecting the poore &c.
                  
                     34. I vvil diſpoſe.]
                     The Maſſe is agreable to the Apoſtles vſe and tradition: the Communion is not. Man particular orders & decrees, moe then be here or in any other booke of the nevv Teſtament expreſly vvritten, did the Apoſtles, as we ſee here, and namely S. Paul to the Corinthians, ſet dovvne by tradition, vvhich our vvhole miniſtration of the MASSE is agreable vnto, as the ſubſtance of the Sacrifice and Sacrament is by the premiſſes proued to be moſt conſonant: Caluins ſupper and Communion in al points vvholy repugnant to the ſame. And that it agreeth not to theſe other not vvrittē traditions,Aug. ep. 118 c. 6. they eaſely confeſſe. The * Apoſtles deliuered vnto the Church to take it onely faſting: they care not for it. The Apoſtles taught the Church to conſecrate by the vvordes and the ſigne of the Croſſe, vvithout vvhich (ſaith S. Auguſtine tract. in Io. 118. Ser. 
                           •
                        5, in append. Chryſ. ho. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in 16 Mat.) no Sacrament is rightly perfited:Aug. tract 84 in Io. & Chryſ. ho. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in Act. the Proteſtants haue takē it avvay. The Apoſtles taught the Church to keepe * a Memorie or inuocatiō of Saincts in this Sacrifice: the Caluiniſts haue none. The Apoſtles decreed that in this Sacrifice there ſhould be ſpecial praiers for the dead, Chryſ. ho. in ep. ad Philip. Aug. de cur. pro mort. c. 1: they haue none. Likewiſe that water ſhould be mixed with the win
                        •
                     , and ſo forth. See Annot. in c. 11, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 23. Bread. Therfore if Caluin had made his new adminiſtration according to all the Apoſtles written wordes, yet not knovving how many things beſide, the Apoſtle had to preſcribe in theſe wordes, Catera cum vener
                           •
                         diſponam (the reſt I wil diſpoſe, when I come) he could not haue ſatisfied any wiſe man in his new chaunge. But now ſeeing they are fallen to ſo palpable blindnes, that their doing is directly oppoſite to the very Scripture alſo, which they pretend to folow onely, and haue quite deſtroied both the name, ſubſtance, and al good accidents of Chriſtes principal Sacrament, we truſt al the world wil ſee their folly and impudencie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  They muſt not make their diuerſitle of Giftes an occaſion of Schiſme, conſidering that al are of one Holy Ghoſt, and for the profit of the one body of Chriſt vvhich in the Church: 12 Vvhich alſo could not be a body, vvithout ſuch varietie of members.The 6. part. 12 Therfore neither they that haue the inferiour giftes, muſt be diſcontent,As couching the Giftes of the Holy Ghoſt. ſeing it is Gods diſtribution: nor they that haue the greater, contemne the other, conſidering they are no leſſe neceſſarie: 25 but al in al ioyne together, 2
                        •
                     . and euery one knovv his ovvne place.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  ANd concerning ſpiritual things, I vvil not haue you ignorāt, brethren, ✝ 
                     verse 2 You know that vvhen you vvere heathen,The Epiſtle vpon the 10 Sunday after Rentecoſt. you vvent to dumme Idols according as you vvere ledde. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Therfore I doe you to vnderſtand that no mā ſpeaking in the Spirit of God, ſaith anáthema to IESVS. And no man can ſay, Our Lord IESVS: but in the holy Ghoſt.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 4 And there are diuiſions of graces, but one Spirit. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Andthere are diuiſions of miniſtrations: but one Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And there are diuiſions of operations, but one God, vvhich vvorketh al in al. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the manifeſtation of the Spirit is giuen vnto euery one to profit. ✝ 
                     verse 8 To one certes by the Spirit is giuen
Al theſe Giftes be thoſe vvhich the lear n
                        •
                     ecall Gratias gratis datas: vvhich be beſtovved often euen vpon il liuers, vvhich haue not the other graces of God whereby their perſons ſhould be grateful, iuſt & holy in his ſight. the vvord of vviſedom: and to an other, the vvord of knovvledge according to the ſame Spirit: ✝ 
                     verse 9 to an other, ″ faith in the ſame Spirit: to an other, the grace of doing cures in one Spirit: ✝ 
                     verse 10 to an other, the vvorking of miracles: to an other, prophecie: to an other, diſcerning of ſpirites: to an other, kindes of tonges: to an other, interpretation of languages. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And al theſe things vvorketh one and the ſame Spirit, diuiding to euery one according as he vvil. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 For * as the body is one,Ro. 12, 4▪
                   and hath many members, and al the members of the body vvhereas they be many,Eph. 4, 7. yet are
A maruelous vniō betwixt chriſt & his Church & a great cōfort to al Catholikes being members therof, that the church and he, the head & the body, make & be called one Chriſt. Aug. de vnit. Ec.
                   one body: ſo alſo Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For in one Spirit vvere vve al baptized intoone body, one', vvhether Ievves, or Gentiles, or bondmen, or free: and in one Spirit vve vvere al made to drinke. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For the body alſo is not one member, but many. ✝ 
                     verse 15 ″ If the foote ſhould ſay, becauſe I am not the hand, I am not of the body: is it therfore not of the body? ✝ 
                     verse 16 And if the eare ſhould ſay, becauſe I am not the the eie, I am not of the body: is he therfore not of the body? ✝ 
                     verse 17 If the vvhole body vvere the eie: vvhere is the hearing? If the vvhole vvere the hearing: vvhere is the ſmelling? ✝ 
                     verse 18 But novv God hath ſet the members, euery one of them in the body as he vvould. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And if al vvere one member, vvhere vvere the body? ✝ 
                     verse 20 But novv there are many members in deede, yet one body. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the eie can not ſay to the hand; I neede not thy helpe. or againe the head to the feete, You are not neceſſarie for me. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But much more thoſe that ſeeme to be the more vveake members of the body, are more neceſſarie: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and ſuch as vve thinke to be the baſer members of the body, vpon them vve put more aboundant honour: and thoſe that are our vnhoneſt partes, haue more aboundant honeſtie. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And our honeſt partes neede nothing: but God hath tempered the body, giuing to it that vvanted, the more aboundant honour, ✝ 
                     verse 25 that there might be no ″ ſchiſme in the body, but the members together might be careful one for an other. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And if one member ſuffer any thing, al the members ſuffer vvith it. or if one member do glorie, al the members reioyce vvith it.
 ✝ 
                     verse 27 And you are the body of Chriſt, and members of member.
                ✝ 
                     verse 28 And * ſome verily God hath ſet in the Church firſt Apoſtles, ſecondly prophets,Eph. 4, 11. thirdly doctors, next miracles, thē the graces of doing cures, helpes, gouernements, kindes of tonges. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Are al Apoſtles? are al prophets? are al doctors?
S. Auguſtine ep. 137▪
                      giueth the ſame reaſon, vvhy miracles & cures be done at the memories or bodies of ſome Saincts more then at others: & by the ſame Saincts in one place of their memories rather then at other places. are al miracles? ✝ 
                     verse 30 haue al the grace of doing cures? do al ſpeake vvith tonges? do al interpret? ✝ 
                     verse 31 But purſue the better giftes. And yet I ſhevv you a more excellent vvay.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     9. Faith in the ſame.]
                     Zealous faith. This faith is not an other in ſubſtance then the common faith in Chriſt, but is of an other accidental qualitie onely, that is, of more ſeruor, deuotiō, zeale, and confident truſt, ſpecially for doing of miracles.
                  
                     13. If the foote.]
                     Vnitie. The Church is of exceding great diſtinctiō of members, giftes, orders, and offices: yet of great concord, concurrence, mutual communion and participation in al actions of her members among them ſelues, and vvith Chriſt the head of the Body.
                  
                     25. Schiſme in the body.]
                     Schiſme. As Charitie and vnitie of ſpirit, is the proper bond and vveale of the common Body: ſo is diuiſion or Schiſme, vvhich is the interruption of peace and mutual Societie-betvvene the partes of the ſame, the ſpecial plague of the Church, and as odious to God as rebellion to the temporal Soueraine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  That aboue al other Giftes they ſhould ſeeke after Charitie: as that vvithout vvhich nothing profiteth, 4 and vvhich doth al as 
                        〈◊〉
                      to be done, and remaineth alſo in heauen.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IF I ſpeake vvith the tonges of men and of Angels,The Epiſtle vpon the Sunday of Quinquageſme, called Shroueſunday. and haue ″ not charitie: I am become as ſounding braſſe, or a tinkling cymbal. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And if I ſhould haue prophecie, and knevv al myſteries, and al knovvledge, and if I ſhouldThis proueth that faith is nothing vvorth to ſaluatiō without vvorkes, and that there may be true faith vvithout Charitie. haue al faith ſo that I could remoue mountaines, and haue not charitie, I am nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And if I ſhould diſtribute al my goods to be meate for the poore, and if I ſhould ″ deliuer my body ſo that I burne, and haue not charitie, it doth profit me nothing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 Charitie is patient, is benigne: Charitie enuieth not, dealeth not peruerſly: is not puffed vp, ✝ 
                     verse 5 is not ambitious, ſeeketh not her ovvne, is not prouoked to anger, thinketh not euil: ✝ 
                     verse 6 reioyceth not vpon iniquitie, but reioyceth 
 vvith the truth: ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſuffereth al things, beleeueth al things, hopeth al things, beareth al things. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Charitie neuer falleth avvay: vvhether prophecies ſhal be made voide, or tonges ſhal ceaſe, or knovvledge ſhal be deſtroied. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For in part vve knovv, and in part vve prophecie. ✝ 
                     verse 10 ButBy this text S. Auguſtine li. 
                        •
                     2. Ciu. c. 29 proueth that the Saints in heauen haue more perfect knovvledge of our affaires here, then they had vvhen they liued here. vvhen that ſhal come that is perfect, that ſhal be made voide that is in part. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvhen I vvas a litle one, I ſpake as a litle one, I vnderſtood as a litle one, I thought as a litle one. But vvhen I vvas made a man, I did avvay things that belōged to a litle one. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vve ſee novv by a glaſſe in a darke ſort: but then face to face. Novv I knovv in part: but then I ſhal knovv as alſo I am knovven. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And novv there remaine, faith, hope, charitie, ″ theſe three▪ but theCharitie is of al the three the greateſt. Hovv then doth onely ſaith, being inferior to it, ſaue & iuſtifie, and not Charitie? greater of theſe is charitie.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     1. Not Charitie.]
                     Charitie. Vvithout Charitie, both tovvard euery particular perſon, and ſpecially tovvard the common body of the Church, none of al the giftes and graces of God he profitable.
                  1. Deliuer my body.] Beleeue (ſaith S. Auguſtine) aſſuredly and hold for certaine, that no Heretike and Schiſmatike that vniteth not him ſelf to the Catholike Church againe,Falſe Mattyrs. hovv great almes ſo euer he giue, yea or ſhede his bloud for Chriſtes name, can poſsibly be ſaued. For, many Heretikes by the cloke of Chriſtes cauſe, deceiuing the ſimple, ſuffer much. But vvhere true faith is not, there is no iuſtice, becauſe the iuſt liueth by faith. So it is alſo of Schiſmatikes, becauſe vvhere charitie is not, iuſtice can there be none: vvhich if they had, they vvould neuer plucke in peetes the body of Chriſt vvhich is the Church. Aug. ſeu Pulg. de ſid. ad Pet. c. 39. So ſaith S. Auguſtine in diuers places, not onely of Heretikes that died directly for defenſe of their hereſie, as the Anabaptiſtes and Caluiniſts novv a daies do (for that is more damnable:) but of ſome Heretikes and Schiſmatikes that may die among the Heathen or Turkes for defenſe of truth or ſome Article of Chriſtes religion. Aug. de verb. D
                        •
                     . ſer. 50▪ c. 2. & in Pſ. 34 conc. 2 prope finem. Cypr. de vnit. Ec. nu. 
                        •
                     .
                  
                     13. Theſe three.]
                     The 3 vertues theological. Charitie is loſt by mort
                           •
                        l ſinne, not faith. Theſe are the three vertues Theological, eche one by nature and definition diſtinct from an other▪ and faith is by nature the firſt, and may be and often is before, and vvithout Charitie: and truely remaineth in diuers after they haue by deadly ſinne loſt Charitie. Bevvare therfore of the Heretikes opinion, which is that by euery mortal ſinne faith is loſt no leſſe then charitie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Againſt their vaine childiſhnes, that thought it a goodly matter to be able to ſpeake (by miracle) ſtrange languages in the Church,Much like to ſome fond Linguiſts of our time, who thinke them ſelues better then a doctor of Diuinitie that is not a Linguiſt. preferring their languages before prophecying, that as, opening of Myſteries: he declareth that this Gift of languages is inferior to the Gift of prophecie. 26 Giuing order alſo hovv both giftes are to be vſed, to vvit, the Prophet to ſubmit him ſelf to other Prophets: and the Speaker of languages not to publiſh his inſpiration, vnles there be an interpreter, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Prouided alvvaies, that vvomen ſpeake not at al in the Church.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOLOVV Charitie, earneſtly purſue ſpiritual things: but ″ rather that you may prophecie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For he that ſpeaketh vvith tongue, ſpeaketh ″ not to men, but to God: for no man heareth. But in ſpirit he ſpeaketh myſteries. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For he that prophecieth, ſpeaketh to men vnto edification, and exhortation, and conſolation. ✝ 
                     verse 4 He that ſpeaketh vvith tongues, edifieth him ſelf: but he that prophecieth, edifieth the Church. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And I would haue you al to ſpeake vvith tongues, but rather to prophecie. For greater is he that prophecieth, then he that ſpeaketh vvith tongues: vnleſſe perhaps he interpret, that the Church may take edification. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But novv brethren ″ if I come to you ſpeaking vvith tongues: vvhat ſhal I profit you, vnleſſe I ſpeake to you either in reuelation, or in knovvledge, or in prophecie, or in doctrine? ✝ 
                     verse 7 Yet the things vvithout life that giue a found, be it pipe or harpe, vnleſſe they giue a diſtinction of ſoūdes, hovv ſhal that be knovven which is piped, or which is harped? ✝ 
                     verse 8 For ″ if the trumpet giue an vncertaine voice, vvho ſhal prepare him ſelf to battel? ✝ 
                     verse 9 So you alſo by a tōgue vnleſſe you vtter manifeſt ſpeach, hovv ſhal that be knovven that is ſaid? for you ſhal be ſpeaking into the aire. ✝ 
                     verse 10 There are (for example) ſo many kindes of tongues in this vvorld, & none is vvithout voice. ✝ 
                     verse 11 If then I knovv not the vertue of the voice, I ſhal be to him to vvhom I ſpeake, barbarous: and he that ſpeaketh, barbarous to me. ✝ 
                     verse 12 So you alſo, becauſe you be emulators of ſpirites: ſeeke to abound vnto the edifying of the Church. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And therfore he that ſpeaketh vvith the tongue, ″ let him pray that he may interpret. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For if I pray vvith the tongue, ″ my ſpirit praieth, but my vnderſtanding is vvithout fruite.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhat is it then? I vvil pray in the ſpirit, I vvil pray alſo in the vnderſtanding: I vvil ſing in the ſpirit, ſing alſo in the vnderſtanding. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But if thou bleſſe in the ſpirit: he that ſupplieth the placeBy this word are meant al rude vnlearned men, but ſpecially the ſimple which vvere yet vnchariſtened, as the Catechumens, vvhich came in to thoſe ſpiritual exerciſes, as alſo infidels did at their pleaſures.
                  idiotae▪
                   of the vulgar hovv ſhal he ſay, Amen, vpon thy bleſſing? becauſe he knovveth not vvhat thou ſaieſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For thou in deede giueſt thankes vvel: but the other is not edified. ✝ 
                     verse 18 I giue my God thankes, that I ſpeakevvith tongues more thē you all. vvith the tongue of you al'. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But in the Church I vvil ſpeake fiue vvordes vvith my vnderſtanding that I may inſtruct
 others alſo: rather then ten thouſand vvordes in a tongue. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Brethren, be not made children in ſenſe, but in malice be children: and in ſenſe be perfect. ✝ 
                     verse 21 In the Lavv it is vvritten,Eſ. 28, 11▪
                   
                  That in other tongues and other lippes I vvil ſpeake to this people: and neither ſo vvil they heare me, ſaieth our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Therfore languages are for ″ a ſigne not to the faithful, but to infidels: but prophecies, not to infidels, but to the faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 23 If therfore the vvhole Church come together in one, and al ſpeake with tongues, and there enter in vulgar perſons or ″ infidels, vvil they not ſay that you be madde? ✝ 
                     verse 24 But if al prophecie, and there enter in any infidel or vulgar perſon, he is conuinced of al, he is iudged of al. ✝ 
                     verse 25 the ſecrets of his hart are made manifeſt, and ſo falling on his face he vvil adore God, pronouncing that God is in you in deede.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvhat is it then brethren? vvhen you come together, euery one of you hath ″ a pſalme, hath a doctrine, hath a reuelation, hath a tongue, hath an interpretation: let al things be done to edification. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Vvhether a man ſpeake with tōgue, by tvvo, or at the moſt by three, and ″ in courſe, and let one interpret. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But if there be not an interpreter, let him hold his peace in the Church, and ſpeake to him ſelf and to God. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And let prophets ſpeake tvvo or three, and let the reſt iudge. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But if it be reuealed to an other ſitting, let the firſt hold his peace. ✝ 
                     verse 31 For you may al prophecie one by one: that al my learne, and al may be exhorted, ✝ 
                     verse 32 and the ſpirites of prophets are ſubiect to prophets. ✝ 
                     verse 33 For God is not the God of diſſenſion, but of peace: as alſo in all the Churches of the ſaincts I teache.
                ✝ 
                     verse 34 ″ Let * vvomen hold their peace in the Churches:2. Tim. 2, 12. for it is not permitted them to ſpeake,Gen. 3, 16. but to be ſubiect, as alſo
* the Law ſaith. ✝ 
                     verse 35 But if they learne any thing, let them aſke their ovvne huſbands at home. For it is a foule thing for a vvoman to ſpeake in the Church. ✝ 
                     verse 36 Or did the vvord of God procede from you? came it vnto you onely? ✝ 
                     verse 37 If any man ſeeme to be a prophet, or ſpiritual, let him knovv the things that I vvrite to you, that they are the cōmaundements of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 38 But if any man knovv not, he ſhal not be knovven. ✝ 
                     verse 39 Therefore, brethren, be earneſt to prophecie: and to ſpeake vvith tongues prohibit not. ✝ 
                     verse 40 But let al things be done honeſtly and according to order among you.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     1. Rather prophecie.]
                     A paraphraſtical expoſition of this Chapter concerning vnknovven tongues. The gift of prophecying, that is, of expounding the hard points of our religion, is better then the gift of ſtrange tonges, though both be good.
                  
                     2. Not to men.] To talke in a ſtrange language, vnknovven alſo to him ſelf, profiteth not the hearers, though in reſpect of God vvho vnderſtandeth al tonges and thinges, and for the myſteries vvhich he vttereth in his ſpirit, and for his ovvne edification in ſpirit and affection, there be no difference: but the Prophet or Expoſitor treating of the ſame matters to the vnderſtanding of the vvhole aſſemblie, edifieth not him ſelf alone but al his hearers.
                  
                     6. If I come.] That is, If I your Apoſtle and Doctor ſhould preach to you in an vnknovven tongue, and neuer vſe any kinde of expoſition, interpretatiō, or explication of my ſtrange vvordes, vvhat profite could you take thereby?
                  
                     8. If the trumpet.] As the Trumpeter can not giue vvarning to or from the fight, vnles he vſe a diſtinct & intelligible ſound or ſtroke knovven to the ſouldiars: euen ſo the preacher that exhorteth to good life, or dehorteth from ſinne, except he doe it in a ſpeach vvhich his hearers vnderſtand, can not attaine to his purpoſe, nor doe the people any good.
                  
                     13. Let him pray that.] He that hath onely the gift of ſtrange tonges, let him pray to God for the gift of interpretation: that the one may be more profitable by the other▪ for, to exhort or preach in a ſtrange, tongue vvas not vnlavvful nor vnprofitable, but glorious to God, ſo that the ſpeach had bene either by him ſelf, or by an other, aftervvard expounded.
                  
                     14. My ſpirit praieth.] Alſo vvhen a man praieth in a ſtrange tongue vvhich him ſelf vnderſtandeth not, it is not ſo fruitful for inſtruction to him, as if he knevv particularly vvhat he praied. Neuertheles the Apoſtle forbiddeth nor ſuch praying neither, confeſſing that his ſpirit, hart, and affection praieth vvel tovvardes God, though his minde and vnderſtanding be not profited to inſtruction, as othervviſe it might haue bene if he vnderſtood the vvordes. Neither yet doth he appoint ſuch an one to get his ſtrange praier tranſlated into his vulgar tongue, to obteine thereby the foreſaid inſtruction. See the Declaration folovving of this Chapter.
                  
                     22. A ſigne.] The extraordinarie gift of tonges vvas a miraculous ſigne in the primitine Church, to be vſed ſpecially in the Nations of the Heathen for their conuerſion.
                  
                     23. Infidels.] In the primitiue Church, vvhen Infidels dvvelt neere or among Chriſtians, and often times came vnto their publike preaching & exerciſes of exhortation and expoſition of Scriptures and the like: it vvas both vnprofitable and ridiculous to heare a number talking, teaching, ſinging Pſalmes & the like, one in this language, & an other in that, al at once like a blacke ſaunts, and one often not vnderſtood of an other, ſometime not to them ſelues, and to ſtrangers or the ſimple ſtand
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     s by, not at al. Vvhere othervviſe if they had ſpoken either in knovven tonges, or had done it in order, hauing an expoſitor or interpreter vvithal, the Infidels might haue bene conuinced.
                  
                     26. A Pſalme.]
                     Of vvhat ſpiritual exerciſe the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. Vve ſee here that thoſe ſpiritual exerciſes conſiſted ſpecially, firſt, in ſinging or giuing forth nevv Pſalmes or praiers and laudes: ſecondly, in Doctrine, teaching, or reading lectures: thirdly, in Reuelation of ſecrete things either preſent or to come: fourthly, in ſpeaking Tonges of ſtrange Nations: laſtly, in tranſlating or Interpreting that vvhich vvas ſaid, into ſome common knovven language, as into Greeke, Latin, &c. Al vvhich gifts they had among them by miracle from the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                     27. In courſe.] Al theſe things they did vvithout order, of pride and contention they preached, they prophecied,The diſorders in the ſame. they praied, they bleſſed, vvithout any ſeemely reſpect one of an other, or obſeruing of turnes and entercourſe of vttering their Giftes. Yea vvomen vvithout couer or veile, and vvithout regard of their ſexe or the Angels or Prieſts or their ovvne huſbands, malepartly ſpake tonges, taught, or prophecied vvith the reſt. This vvas then the diſorder among the Corinthians, vvhich the Apoſtle in this vvhole chapter reprehendeth and ſought to redreſſe, by forbidding vvomen vtterly that publike exerciſe, and teaching men, in vvhat order and courſe as vvel for ſpeaking in tonges, as interpreting and prophecying, it ſhould be kept.
                  
                     A MORE AMPLE DECLARATION OF THE ſenſe of this 14 Chapter.
                     This then being the ſcope and direct drift of the Apoſtle,That S. Pauls place maketh nothing againſt the ſeruice in the ſaith tōge. as is moſt cleere by his vvhole diſcourſe, and by the record of al antiquitie: let the godly, graue, and diſcrete Reader take a taſt in this one point, of the Proteſtants deceitful dealing, abuſing the ſimplicitie of the popular, by peruerſe application of Gods holy vvord, vpon ſome ſmal ſimilitude and equiuocation of certaine termes,
 againſt the approued godly vſe and truth of the vniuerſal Church, for the ſeruice in the Latin or Greeke tongue: which they ignorantly, or rather vvilfully, pretend to be againſt this diſcourſe of S. Paul touching ſtrange tonges. Know therfore, firſt, that here is no vvord written or meant of any other tongues but ſuch as men ſpake in the Primitiue Church by miracle, and that nothing is meant of thoſe tongues vvhich were the common languages of the vvorld or of the Faithful,By ſtrange tonges the Apoſtle meaneth not the latin, Greeke, or Hebrue. vnderſtood of the learned and ciuil people in euery great citie, and in which the Scriptures of the Old or new Teſtament vvere written, as, the Hebrevv, Greeke, and Latin. for though theſe alſo, might be giuen by miracle & without ſtudy, yet being knovven to the Iewes, Romans, or Greekes in euery place, they be not counted among the differences of barbarous and ſtrange tonges here ſpoken of, which could not be interpreted commonly, but by the miraculous gift alſo of interpretation. And therfore this Apoſtle (as the Euangeliſts alſo and others did their bookes) vvrote his Epiſtles in Greeke to the Romans and to al other Churches. Vvhich vvhen he vvrote, though he penned them not in the vulgar language peculiar to euery people, yet he vvrote them not in Tongue, that is, in any ſtrange tongue not intelligible vvithout the gift of interpretation, vvhere of he ſpeaketh here:S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle brought in the Seruice in the latin tongue. but in a notable knovven and learned ſpeach interpretable of thouſands in euery countrie. No more did S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle, ſpeaking in Latin, & bringing in the Scriptures and Seruice in Latin, preach and pray in Tonges according to the Apoſtles meaning here, for the Latin vvas not, nor is not, in any part of the Vveſt, either miraculous or ſtrange, though it be not the National tongue of any one countrie this day. And therfore S. Bede ſaith, (li. 1 hiſt. Angl. c. 1) that being then foure diuers vulgar languages in our countrie, the Latin vvas made common to them al.The latin ſeruice one and the ſame in al countries and ſtrange to none. And in deede of the tvvo (though in truth neither ſort be forbidden by this paſſage of S. Paul) the barbarous languages of euery ſeueral prouince in reſpect of the vvhole Church of Chriſt, are rather the ſtrange Tonges here ſpoken of, then the common Latin tongue, vvhich is vniuerſally of al the Vveſt Church more or leſſe learned, and pertaineth much more to vnitie and orderly coniunction of al Nations in one faith, Seruice, and vvorſhip of God, then if it vvere in the ſundry barbarous ſpeaches of euery Prouince. Vvherein al Chriſtians that trauel about this part of the vvorld or the Iudes either,The ſeruice in vulgar tōge ſtrange and barbarous to euery ſtrāger. vvhere ſo euer they come, ſhal finde the ſelf ſame Maſſe, Mattins, and Seruice, as they had at home. Vvhere novv, if vve goe to Germanie, or the Germans or Geneuians come to vs, eche others Seruice ſhal be thought ſtrange and barbarous. Yea and the Seruice of our ovvne language vvithin a fevv hundreth yeres (or rather euery age) ſhal vvholy become barbarous and vnknovven to our ſelues, our tongue (as al vulgar) doth ſo often change.
                     And for edification, that is, for increaſe of faith, true knovvledge, and good life, the experience of a fevv yeres hath giuen al the vvorld a ful demonſtration vvhether our forefathers vvere not as vviſe,Vvhether the ſeruice in vulgar tonges do more edifie. as faithful, as deuout, as fearful to breake Gods lavves, and as likely to be ſaued, as vve are in al our tongues, tranſlations, and Engliſh praiers. Much vanitie, curioſitie contempt of Superiors, diſputes, emulations, contentions, Schiſmes, horrible errors, profenation and diuulgation of the ſecrete Myſteries of the dreadful Sacraments,See Annot▪ 1. Cor. 10. 13. * vvhich of purpoſe vvere hidden from the vulgar (as S. Denys Eccl. Hier. c. 1. and S. Baſil de Sp. Sanct. c. 27. teſtifie) are fallen by the ſame, but vertue or ſound knovvledge none at al.
                     Vvherein this alſo is a groſſe illuſion and vntruth,The vertue of the Sacramēts and Seruice conſiſteth not in the peoples vnderſtāding. that the force and efficacie of the Sacraments, Sacrifice, and common praier, dependeth vpon the peoples vnderſtanding, hearing, or knovvledge: the principal efficacie of ſuch thinges and of the vvhole miniſterie of the Church, conſiſting ſpecially of the very vertue of the vvorke, and the publike office of the Prieſts, who be appointed in Chriſtes behalfe to diſpoſe theſe Myſteries to our moſt good: the infant, innocent, idiote and vnlearned, taking no leſſe fruite of Baptiſme and al other diuine offices, meete for euery ones condition, then the learnedſt Clerke in the Realme: and more, if they be more humble, charitable, deuour, and obedient, then the other, hauing leſſe of theſe qualities and more learning.
                     Vvhich vve ſay not,The people is to be taught the meaning of Sacraments & ceremonies, and are taught in al Catholike coūtries. as though it were inconuenient for the people to be vvel inſtructed in the meaning of the Sacraments and holy ceremonies and Seruice of the Church (for, that to their comfort and neceſſarie knovvledge, both by preaching, Catechizing, and reading of good Catholike bookes, Chriſtian people do learne in al Nations much more in thoſe countries vvhere the Seruice is in Latin, then in our Nation, God knovveth:) But we ſay that there be other wales to inſtruct them, and the ſame leſſe ſubiect to danger and diſorder, then to turne it into vulgar tongues. Vve ſay, the ſimple people and many one that thinke them ſelues ſome body, vnderſtand as litle of the ſenſe of diuers Pſalmes, Leſſons, and Oraiſons in the vulgar tongue, as if they vvere in Latin: yea and often take them in a vvrong, peruerſe, and pernitious ſenſe, vvhich lightly they could not haue done in Latin. Vve ſay, that ſuch as vvould learne in deuotion and humilitie, may and muſt rather vvith diligence learne the tongue that ſuch Diuine things be vvritten in, or vſe other diligence in hearing ſermons and inſtructions: then for a fevv mens not neceſſarie knovvledge, the holy vniuerſal order of Gods Church ſhould be altered. For if in the kingdom of England onely, it be not conuenient, neceſſarie, nor almoſt poſsible, to accommodate their Seruice booke to euery prouince and people of diuers tongues: hovv much leſſe ſhould the vvhole Church ſo do, conſiſting of ſo many differences? Neither doth the Apoſtle in al this Chapter appoint any ſuch
 thing to be done, but admoniſheth them to pray and labour for the grace of vnderſtanding and interpretation, or to get others to interprete or expound vnto them. And that much more may vve doe concerning the Seruice in Latin, vvhich is no ſtrange nor miraculouſly gotten or vnderſtood tongue, but common to the moſt and cheefe churches of the vvorld, and hath bene, ſince the Apoſtles time, daily vvith al diligence through out al theſe partes of Chriſtendom, expounded in euery houſe, ſchole, church, and pulpit: and is ſo vvel knovven for euery neceſſarie part of the diuine Seruice,Catholike people in euery countrie vnderſtandeth euery ceremonie, and can behaue them ſelues accordingly. that by the diligence of parents, Maiſters, and Curates, euery Catholike of age almoſt, can tel the ſenſe of euery ceremonie of the Maſſe, vvhat to anſvver, vvhen to ſay Amen at the Prieſtes benediction, vvhen to confeſſe, vvhen to adore, vvhen to ſtand, vvhen to kneele, when to receiue, vvhat to receiue, vvhen to come, vvhen to depart, and al other dueties of praying and ſeruing, ſufficient to ſaluation. And thus is it euident that S. Paul ſpeaketh not of the common tonges of the Churches Seruice.
                     Secondly, it is as certaine, that he meaneth not nor vvriteth any vvord in this place of the Churches publike Seruice, praier, or miniſtration of the holy Sacrament, vvherein the Office of the Church ſpecially conſiſteth: but onely of a certaine exerciſe of mutual conference, wherein one did open to an other and to the aſſemblie, miraculous giftes and graces of the Holy Ghoſt, and ſuch Canticles, Pſalmes, ſecrete Myſteries, ſorts of Languages, and other Reuelations, as it pleaſed God to giue vnto certaine both men and vvomen in that firſt beginning of his Church. In doing of this, the Corinthians cōmitted many diſorders, turning Gods gifts to pride and vanitie, and namely that gift of tonges: vvhich being in deede the leaſt of al giftes,Aug. doct. Chr. li. 2. c. 13. yet moſt puffed vp the hauers, and novv alſo doth commonly puffe vp the profeſſors of ſuch knovvledge, according as S. Auguſtine vvriteth thereof.That he ſpeaketh not of the Churches ſeruice, is proued by inuincible in arguments. This exerciſe and the diſorder thereof vvas not in the Church (for any thing we can reade in antiquitie) theſe fourtene hundreth yeres: and therfore neither the vſe nor abuſe, nor S. Paules reprehēſion or redreſsing thereof, can concerne any vvhit the Seruice of the Church. Furthermore this is euident, that the Corinthians had their Seruice in Greeke at this ſame time, and it vvas not done in theſe miraculous tonges. Nothing is meant then of the Church Seruice. Againe the publike Seruice had but one language: in this exerciſe they ſpake in many tonges. In the publike Seruice euery man had not his ovvne ſpecial tongue, his ſpecial Interpretation, ſpecial Reuelation, proper Pſalmes but in this they had. Againe, the publike Seruice had in it the miniſtration of the holy Sacrament principally: vvhich vvas not done in this time of conference. For into this exerciſe vvere admitted Catechumens and Infidels and vvhoſoeuer vvould: in this vvomen, before S. Paules order, did ſpeake and prophecie: ſo did they neuer in the Miniſtration of the Sacrament. vvith many other plaine differences, that by no meanes the Apoſtles vvordes can be rightly and truely applied to the Corinthians Seruice then, or ours novv. Therfore it is either great ignorance of the Proteſtants, or great guilfulnes, ſo vntruely and peruerſly to apply them.
                     Neither is here any thing meant of the priuate praiers vvhich deuout perſons of al ſortes and ſexes haue euer vſed,The Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of the peoples priuate praiers in latin, as vpon primmars, beades, or othervviſe. ſpecially in Latin, as vvel vpon their Primars as Beades. For, the priuate praiers here ſpoken of, vvere pſalmes or hymnes and ſonnets nevvly inſpired to them by God, and in this conference or prophecying, vttered to one an others comfort, or to them ſelues and God onely. But the praiers, pſalmes, and holy vvordes of the Chriſtian people vſed priuately, are not compoſed by them, nor diuerſely inſpired to them ſelues, nor novv to be approued or examined in the aſſemblies: but they are ſuch as vvere giuen and vvritten by the Holy Ghoſt, and preſcribed by Chriſt and his Church for the faithful to vſe, namely the Pater noſter, the Au
                              •
                            Marie, and the Creede, our Ladies Mattins, the Litanies, and the like. Therfore the Apoſtle preſcribeth nothing here thereof, condemneth nothing therein, toucheth the ſame nothing at al. But the deuout people in their aūcient right may and ought ſtil vſe their Latin primars, beades, and praiers, as euer before. Vvhich the wiſedom of the Church for greate cauſes hath better liked and allowed of,Latin praiers tranſlated, or the people taught the cō
                           tents thereof. then that they ſhould be in vulgar tonges, though ſhe wholy forbiddeth not, but ſometimes graunteth to haue them tranſlated, and vvould gladly haue al faithful people in order and humilitie learne, as they may, the contents of their praiers: and hath commaunded alſo in ſome Councels, that ſuch as can not learne diſtinctly in Latin (ſpecially the Pater noſter & the Creede) ſhould be taught them in the vulgar tōgue. And therfore as vve doubt not but it is acceptable to God, & auailable in al neceſsities. & more agreable to the vſe of al Chriſtian people euer ſince their conuerſion, to pray in Latin, then in the vulgar,The peoples deuotion nothing the leſſe, for praying in Latin. though euery one in particular vnderſtand not vvhat he ſaith: ſo it is plaine that ſuch pray vvith as great conſolation of ſpirit, vvith as litle tediouſues, vvith as great deuotion and affection, and oftentimes more, then the other: and alvvaies morethen any Schiſmatike or Heretike in his knovven language. Such holy Oraiſons be in maner conſecrated
 and ſanctified in and by the Holy Ghoſt that firſt inſpired them and there is a reuerence and Maieſtie in the Churches tongue dedicated in our Sauiours Croſſe, and giueth more force and valure to them ſaid in the Churches obedience,Mat. 24. then to others. The children criedGreg. li. 27. Moral. c. 6. 
                        Hoſanna to our Sauiour,The ſeruice alvvaies in Latin through out the vveſt Church. and vvere allovved, though they knevv not vvhat they ſaid. It is vvel neere a thouſand yeres that * our people vvhich could nothing els but barbarum frendere, did ſing Alleluia, and not, Praiſeye the Lord. and longer agoe ſince the poore huſband men ſang the ſame at the plough in other Countries. Hiero. to 1 ep. 58. And Surſum corda, and Kyrie eleiſon, and the Pſalmes of Dauid ſung in Latin in the Seruice of the Primitiue Church, haue the auncient and flat teſtimonies of S. Cyptian, S. Auguſtine, S. Hierom and other Fathers. Grego. li. 7 ep. 6
                              •
                           . Cypr. exp. orat. Do. nu 13. Auguſt. c. 13 de dono perſeuer, & de bono vid. c. 16. and ep. 178. Hiero. prafat. in Pſal. ad Sephron. Aug. de Catechiz, rud. c. 9. de Doct. Chr. li. 2 c. 13. See ep. 10. Auguſt. of S. Hieroms latin tranſlation readde in the Churches of Africa. Praiers are not made to teache, make learned, or increaſe knovvledge, though by occaſion they ſometimes inſtruct vs. but their ſpecial vſe is, to offer our hartes, deſires, and vvants to God, and to ſhevv that vve hang of him in al things: and this euery Catholike doth for his condition,It is not neceſſarie to vnderſtand our praiers. vvhether he vnderſtand the vvordes of his praier or not. The ſimple ſort can not vnderſtand al Pſalmes, nor ſcarſe the learned, no though they be tranſlated or read in knovven tonges: men muſt not ceaſe to vſe them for al that, vvhen they are knovven to containe Gods holy praiſes. The ſimple people vvhen they deſire any thing ſpecially at Gods hand, are not bound to knovv, neither can they tel, to vvhat petition or part of the Paternoſter their demaund pertaineth, though it be in Engliſh neuer ſo much, they can not tel no more vvhat is, Thy kingdome come, then Adueniat regnum tuum. not vvhether their petition for their ſicke children or any other neceſſitie, pertaine to this part, or to Fiat voluntas tua, or N
                              •
                           nos inducas, or to vvhat other part els. It is ynough that they can tel,Hovv far is ſufficient for the people to vnderſtand. this holy Oraiſon to be appointed to vs, to call vpon God in al our deſires. more then this, is not neceſſarie. And the tranſlation of ſuch holy things often breedeth manifold danger and irreuerence in the vulgar (as to thinke God is author of ſinne, vvhen they read, Leade vs not into tentation) and ſeldom any edification at al. For, though vvhen the prayers be turned and read in Engliſh, the people knovveth the vvordes, yet they are not edified to the inſtruction of their minde and vnderſtanding,Hovv the mind or vnderſtāding is edified. except they knevv the ſenſe of the vvordes alſo and meaning of the holy Ghoſt. For if any man thinke that S. Paul ſpeaking of edification of mans minde or vnderſtanding, meaneth the vnderſtanding of the vvordes onely, he is fouly deceiued, for, vvhat is a childe of fiue or ſixe yeres old edified or increaſed in knovvledge by his Pater noſter in Engliſh? It is the ſenſe therfore, vvhich euery man can not haue, neither in Engliſh nor Latin, the knovvledge vvhereof properly and rightly edifieth to inſtruction. and the knovvledge of the vvordes onely, often edifieth neuer a vvhit, and ſome times buildeth to error and deſtruction: as it is plaine in al Heretikes and many curious perſons beſides. finally both the one and the other vvithout charitie and humilitie maketh the Heretikes and Schiſmatikes vvith al their Engliſh and vvhat other tonges and intelligence ſo euer,1 Cor. 13. to be as ſonans & cymbalum tinniens, ſounding braſſe and a tinkling cymbal.
                     To conclude, for praying either publikly or priuately in Latin vvhich is the common ſacred tōgue of the greateſt part of the Chriſtiā world, this is thought by the vviſeſt & godlieſt to be moſt expedient, and is certainely ſeen to be nothing repugnant to S. Paul. If any yet vvil be contentious in the matter,1 Cor. 11, 16. vve muſt anſvver them vvith this ſame Apoſtle,A notable rule of S. Auguſtine. 
                        The Church of God hath no ſuch cuſtome. and vvith this notable ſaying of S. Auguſtine, ep. 118. c. 5. Any thing that the vvhole Church doth practiſe and obſerue through out the vvorld, to diſpute thereof as though it vvere not to be done, is moſt inſolent madneſſe
                     
                     
                        14. Let vvomen hold their peace.] There be, or vvere, certaine Heretikes in our Countrie (for ſuch euer take the Scriptures diuerſely for the aduantage of time) that denied vvomen to hold lavvfully any kingdom or temporal Souerainty:Vvomen may haue any temporal Soueraintie, but no Eccleſiaſtical function. but that is falſe and againſt both reaſon & the Scriptures. This onely in that ſexe is true, that it is not capable of holy orders, ſpiritual. Regiment or Cure of ſoules: and therfore can not doe any function proper to Prieſts and Biſhopes: not ſpeake in the Church, and ſo not preach, nor diſpute, nor haue or giue voice either deliberatiue or definitiue in Councels and publike Aſſemblies, concerning matters of Religiō, nor make Eccleſiaſtical lavves concerning the ſame, nor binde, nor looſe, nor excōmunicate, nor ſuſpend, nor degrade, nor abſolue, nor miniſter Sacramēts, other then Baptiſme in the caſe of mere neceſsitie, when neither Prieſt nor other man can be had much leſſe preſcribe any thing to the Clergie, how to miniſter them, or giue any mā right to rule, preach, or execute any ſpiritual function as vnder her and by her authoritie: no creature being able to impart that vvhereof it ſelf is incapable both by nature and Scriptures. This Regiment is expreſly giuen to the Apoſtles, Biſhopes, and Prelates: they onely haue authoritie to bind and looſe, Mat. 18: they onely are ſet by the Holy Ghoſt to gouerne the Church, Act. 20,: they onely haue cure of our ſoules directly, and muſt make account to God for the ſame, Hebr. 13.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  He proueth the Reſurrection of the dead by the Reſurrection of Chriſt,The 7 part. and vvith many other arguments:Of the reſurrection of the dead. and 3
                        •
                      anſvvereth alſo obiections made againſt it. 49 And then exhorteth in reſpect of it, vnto good life.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I do you to vnderſtand,The Epiſtle vpō the 11 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. brethren, the Goſpel vvhich I preached to you, which alſo you receiued, in the vvhich alſo you ſtand, ✝ 
                     verse 2 by the vvhich alſo you are ſaued, after vvhat maner I preached vnto you if you keepe it, vnleſſe you haue beleeued in vaine. ✝ 
                     verse 3 ForThis deliuerie in the latin & greeke importeth tradition. ſo by Tradition did the Apoſtles plant the Church in al truth, before they vvrote any thing. I deliuered vnto you firſt of al vvhich I alſo receiued:Eſ. 53, 8. that Chriſt died for our ſinnes * according to the Scriptures:Dan. 9, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 4 and that he vvas buried, and that he roſe againe the third day,Pſ. 15, 10 * according to the ſcriptures: ✝ 
                     verse 5 and that he vvas * ſeen of Cephas:Ion. 2, 2. and after that of the eleuen. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Then vvas he ſeen of moe thē fiue hundred brethren together:Lu. 24. of vvhich many remaine vntil this preſent, & ſome are a ſleepe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Moreouer he vvas ſeen of Iames, then of al the Apoſtles.Act. 9, 3▪ Con
                        •
                      borne: out of time▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 8 And laſt of al, as it vvere oftradidi 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   an abortiue * he vvas ſeen alſo of me. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For I am the leaſt of the Apoſtles, vvho am not worthy to be called an Apoſtle, becauſe I perſeſecuted the Church of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But by the grace of God I am that vvhich I am: & his grace in me hath not beenIn him Gods grace is not void, that worketh by his free vvil according to the motion and direction of the 
                        ••
                     me grace. void, ⊢ but I haue laboured more aboundantly then al they: yet not I, but the grace of God ″ vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For vvhether I, or they, ſo vve preach, and ſo you haue beleeued.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 But if Chriſt be preached that he is riſen againe from the dead: hovv doe certaine among you ſay, that there is no reſurrection of the dead? ✝ 
                     verse 13 And if there be no reſurrection of the dead, neither is Chriſt riſen againe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And if Chriſt be not riſen againe, then vaine is our preaching, vaine alſo is your faith. ✝ 
                     verse 15 and vve are found alſoSo may we ſay, If the Cath. faith in al pointes be not true, then our firſt Apoſtles vvere falſe vvitneſſes then hath our Countrie beleeued in vaine al this while, then are al our forefathers dead in their ſinnes and periſhed. Which (preſuppoſing Chriſt to be God) vvere the greateſt abſurditie in the vvorld. falſe witneſſes of God: becauſe vve haue giuen teſtimonie againſt God, that he hath raiſed vp Chriſt, vvhom he hath not raiſed vp, if the dead riſe not againe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For if the dead riſe not againe, neither is Chriſt riſen againe. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And if Chriſt be not riſen againe, vaine is your faith, for yet you are in your ſinnes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Then they alſo that are a ſleepe in Chriſt, are periſhed. ✝ 
                     verse 19 If in this life onely vve be hoping in Chriſt, vve are more miſerable then al men.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 20 But novv Chriſt is riſen againe from the dead,Col. 1, 18 the
* firſt fruites of them that ſleepe:Ap. 1, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 21 for * by a man death: and by a man the reſurrection of the dead.Ro. 5, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And as in Adam al die,1. Theſ. 4, 15. ſo alſo in Chriſt al ſhal be made aliue. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But * euery one in his ovvne order: the firſt fruites Chriſt, then they that are of Chriſt, that beleeued in his comming. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Then the ende, vvhen he ſhal haue deliuered the kingdom to God and the Father, vvhen he ſhal haue aboliſhed al principalitie and authoritie and povver.Pſ. 109. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And he muſt reigne, Vntil he put al his enemies vnder his feete. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And the enemie death ſhal be deſtroied laſt.Pſ. 8, 8. 
                  For he hath ſubdued al things vnder his feete. And vvhereas he ſaith, ✝ 
                     verse 27 
                  Al things are ſubdued to him: Vndoubtedly, except him that ſubdued al things vnto him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And vvhen al things ſhal be ſubdued to him: then the Sonne alſo him ſelf ſhal be ſubiect to him that ſubdued al things vnto him, that God may be al in al.
                ✝ 
                     verse 29 Otherwiſe what ſhal they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead riſe not againe at al? ✝ 
                     verse 30 vvhy alſo are they baptized for them? vvhy alſo are vve in danger euery houre? ✝ 
                     verse 31 I die daily by your glorie brethren, vvhich I haue in Chriſt IESVS our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 32 If (according to man) I fought vvith beaſtes at Epheſus, vvhat doth it profit me, if the dead riſe not againe? Let vs eate and drinke,
                  Eſa. 22, 13. 
                  for to morovv vve ſhal die. ✝ 
                     verse 33 Be not ſeduced, Euil communications corrupt good maners.
                  Menander. ✝ 
                     verse 34 Avvake ye iuſt, and ſinne not. for ſome haue not the knovvledge of God, I ſpeake to your ſhame.
                ✝ 
                     verse 35 But ſome man ſaith, Hovv doe the dead riſe againe? and vvith vvhat maner of body ſhal they come? ✝ 
                     verse 36 Foole, that vvhich thou ſovveſt is not quickened, vnleſſe it die firſt. ✝ 
                     verse 37 And that vvhich thou ſovveſt, not the body that ſhal be, doeſt thou ſovv: but bare graine, to vvit, of vvheate, or of ſome of the reſt. ✝ 
                     verse 38 And God giueth it a body as he vvil: and to euery ſeede his proper body. ✝ 
                     verse 39 Not al fleſh, is the ſame fleſh: but one of men, an other of beaſtes, an other of birdes, an other of fiſhes. ✝ 
                     verse 40 And bodies celeſtial, and bodies terreſtrial: but one glorie of the celeſtial, and an other of the terreſtrial. ✝ 
                     verse 41 One glorie of the ſunne, an other glorie of the moone, and an other glorie of the ſtarres. For
The glorie of the bodies of Saincts ſhal not be al alike, but differēt in heauen according to mens merits. ſtarre differeth from ſtarre in glorie: ✝ 
                     verse 42 ſo alſo the reſurrection of the dead. It is ſovven in corruption, it ſhal riſe in incorruptiō. ✝ 
                     verse 43 It is ſovvē in diſhonour, it ſhal riſe in glorie. It is
 ſovven in infirmitie, it ſhal riſe in povver. ✝ 
                     verse 44 It is ſovven a natural body: it ſhal riſe aAs to become ſpiritual doth not take away the ſubſtance of the body glorified: no more vvhen Chriſtes body is ſaid to be in ſpiritual ſort in the Sacrament, doth is import the abſence of his true body and ſubſtance. ſpiritual body. If there be a natural body,Gen. 2, 7 there is alſo a ſpiritual, ✝ 
                     verse 45 as it is vvritten, The firſt man Adam vvas made into a liuing ſoul: the laſt Adam into a quickening ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 46 Yet that is not firſt vvhich is ſpiritual, but that vvhich is natural: aftervvard that vvhich is ſpiritual. ✝ 
                     verse 47 The firſt man of earth, earthly: the ſecond man from heauen, heauenly. ✝ 
                     verse 48 Such as is the earthly, ſuch alſo are the earthly, and ſuch as the heauenly, ſuch alſo are the heauenly. ✝ 
                     verse 49 Therfore as vve haue borne the image of the earthly, let vs beare alſo the image of the heauenly. ✝ 
                     verse 50 This I ſay brethren, that 
Fleſh and bloud ſignifie not here the ſubſtance of thoſe things, but the corrupt qualitie incident to them in this life by the fall of Adam. fleſh and bloud can not poſſeſſe the kingdom of God: neither ſhal corruption poſſeſſe incorruption.
                ✝ 
                     verse 51 
                  The Epiſtle vpō Al-ſoules day. Behold I tel you a myſterie. Vve ſhal al in deede riſe againe: but vve ſhal not al be changed. ✝ 
                     verse 52 In a moment, in the tvvinkling of an eie,Ap. 8, 2. 11, 15. at the * laſt trompet (for * the trompet ſhal ſound) and the dead ſhal riſe againe incorruptible: and vve ſhal be changed. ✝ 
                     verse 53 For this corruptible muſt doe on incorruption: & this mortal doe on immortalitie. ✝ 
                     verse 54 And vvhen this mortal hath done on immortalitie, then ſhal comme to paſſe the ſaying that is vvritten,Oſ. 13, 14. 
                  Death is ſvvallovved vp in victorie. ✝ 
                        verse 55 Death vvhere is thy victorie? Death vvhere is thy ſting? ✝ 
                     verse 56 And the ſting of death, is ſinne: and the povver of ſinne is the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 57 But thankes be to God that hath giuen vs the victorie by our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 58 Therfore my beloued brethren, be ſtable & vnmoueable: abounding in the worke of our Lord alvvaies, knovving that your labour is not vaine in our Lord.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                         Vvith me.)
                     Free vvil vvith grace. God vſeth not man as a brute beaſt or a blocke: but ſo vvorketh in him and by him that free wil may concurre in euery action vvith his grace, vvhich is alvvaies, the principal. The heretikes to auoid this concurrence in vvorking & labouring, tranſlate, vvhich is vvith me:
                     Heret. tranſlation. vvhere the Apoſtle rather ſaith, vvhich laboureth vvith me.
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                      Let vs eate and drinke.] S. Ambroſe applieth theſe vvordes to our Chriſtian Epicurians that taks avvay faſting,
                     Faſting is meritorious. 
                     and deny the merite thereof: Hovv can vve be ſaued (ſaith he) if we vvaſh not avvay our ſinnes by faſting, ſeeing the ſcriptures ſay, faſting and almes deliuer from ſinne▪ Vvhat are theſe nevv maiſters then that exclude al merite of faſting? is not this the very voice of the heathen ſaying. Let vs eate and drinke, to morovv vve ſhal die? li. 10. epiſt. ep. 82.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  He preſcribeth an order for their contributing to the Chriſtians at Hieruſalem,The 8 part. 3 promiſing to come vnto them.Of the contributions. 10 Of Timothe
                        •
                     
                     ▪ and of Apollos comming thither, 13 and ſo vvith exhortation, and diuers commendations, he endeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND concerning the collections that are made for the ſaincts, as I haue ordeined to the Churches of Galatia, ſo doe ye alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 2 InThat is Sū
                     day. Hiero. q. 4. Hedibiae. So quickly did the Chriſtians keepe Sunday, holiday, and aſſembled to Diuine Seruice on the ſame. the firſt of the Sabboth let euery one of you put a part vvith him ſelf, laying vp vvhat ſhal vvel like him: that not vvhen I come, then collections be made. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen I ſhal be preſent: vvhom you ſhal approue by letters, them vvil I ſend to carie your grace into Hieruſalem. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And if it be vvorthie that I alſo goe, they ſhal goe vvith me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And I vvil come to you, vvhen I ſhal haue paſſed through Macedonia. for I vvil paſſe through Macedonia. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvith you perhaps I vvil abide, or vvil vvinter alſo: that you may bring me on my vvay vvhitherſoeuer I goe. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For I vvil not novv ſee you by the vvay, for I hope that I ſhal abide vvith you ſome litle time, if our Lord wil permit. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But I vvil tarie at Epheſus vntilThe Heretikes & other nevv fangled ſtriue among them ſelues, vvhether Pentecoſt ſignifie here the terme of fiftie daies, or els the Ievves holy day ſo called. But it cōmeth not to their mindes that it is moſt like to be the feaſt of whitſontide kept & inſtituted euē thē by the Apoſtles, as appeareth by the Fathers Se
                           •
                         S. Aug. ep. 119 c. 15 & 16. Ambr. in c. 17. Luca.
                   Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For a great doore and euident is opened vnto me: and many aduerſaries.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And if Timothee come, ſee that he be vvithout feare vvith you, for he vvorketh the vvorke of our Lord, as alſo I. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Let no mā therfore deſpiſe him, but cōduct ye him in peace: that he may come to me. for I expect him vvith the brethren.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And of brother Apollo I doe you to vnderſtand, that I much intreated him, to come to vnto you vvith the brethren: &

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   at all it vvas not his minde to come novv. but he vvil come vvhen he ſhal haue leiſure.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvatch ye, ſtand in the faith, doe manfully, & be ſtrengthened. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Let al your things be done in charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And I beſeeche you brethren, you knovv the houſe of Stéphanas, and of Fortunátus, that they are the firſt fruites of Achaia, & haue ordeined them ſelues to the miniſterie of the ſaincts: ✝ 
                     verse 16 that you alſo be ſubiect to ſuch, and to euery one that helpeth and laboureth with vs. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And I reioyce in the preſence of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, becauſe
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   that vvhich you vvanted, they haue ſupplied. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For they haue refreſhed both my ſpirit and yours. Knovv them therfore that are ſuch.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 19 The churches of Aſia ſalute you. Aquila and Priſcilla vvith their domeſtical church ſalute you much in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Al the brethren ſalute you. Salute one an other in aSee Ro. 16, 16. holy kiſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 21 The ſalutation vvith mine ovvne hand Paules. ✝ 
                     verse 22 If any man loue not our Lord IESVS Chriſt, be he anáthema.
                  That is, our Lord is come. Hiero. ep. 173. Therfore anathema to al that loue him not, or beleue not. Th
                           ••
                        phyla, vpon this place.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  Maranatha. ✝ 
                     verse 23 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 24 My charitie be vvith you al in Chriſt IESVS. Amen.
            
         
         
            
               ❧THE ARGVMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
            
               FOR the time vvhen this Epiſtle vvas vvritten, looke the Argument of the epiſtle to the Romanes: to vvit, about the eightenth yere after his conuerſion, & our Lordes paſſion becauſe in the 11 chapter he maketh mention of 14 yeres,2. Cor. 11. 2. not only after his Conuerſion, as to the Galatians, but alſo after his rapte,Gal. 2. 1. vvhich ſeemeth to haue bene when he vvas at Hieruſalem Act. 9, 26. foure yeres after his Conuerſion (Gal. 1, 18) in a traunce or exceſſe of minde, as he calleth it, Act. 22, 17. Is vvas vvritten at Troas (it is thought) and ſent by Titus, as vve reade chap. 8.
            It is for the moſt part againſt thoſe falſe Apoſtles vvhom in the firſt part of the firſt to the Corinthians, be noted, or rather ſpared, but novv is conſtrained to deale openly againſt them, & to defend both his ovvne perſon vvhich they ſought to bring into contempt, making vvay thereby to the correption of the Corinthians, and vvithall to mainteine the excellencie of the Miniſterie and Miniſters of the nevv Teſtament, aboue vvhich they did magnifie the Miniſterie of the old Teſtament: bearing themſelues very high becauſe they vvere Ievves.
            Againſt theſe therefore S. Paule auoucheth the preeminent povver of his Miniſterie, by vvhich povver alſo he giueth a pardon to the inceſtuous fornicator vvhom he excommunicated in the laſt Epiſtle, ſeeing novv his penance, and againe threateneth to come & excōmunicate thoſe that had greuouſly ſinned and remained impenitent. Tvvo chapters alſo he interpoſeth of the coūtributions to the church of Hieruſalem, mentioned in his laſt, exhorting them to doe liberally, and alſo to haue all in areadines againſt his comming.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE CORINTHIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  By his troubles in Aſia he comforteth them. and (againſt his Aduerſaries the falſe apoſtles of the levves) alleageth to them the teſtimonie of his ovvne and alſo of their conſcience, 17 anſvvering them that obiected lightnes againſt him, for not comming to Corinth according to his promis.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt by the vvil of God, and Timothee our brother: to the Church of God that is at Corinth, vvith al the ſaincts that are in al Achaia. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Grace vnto you and peace from God our father, and from our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Bleſſed be the God and father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt,The Epiſtle for a Martyr that is a Biſhop. the father of mercies, and God of al comfort, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho comforteth vs in al our tribulation: that vve alſo may be able to comfort them that are in all diſtreſſe,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   by the exhortation vvherevvith vve alſo are exhorted of God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For as the ″ paſſions of Chriſt abound in vs: ſo alſo by Chriſt doth our ″ comfort abound. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhether vve be in tribulation, for your exhortation and ſaluation: vvhether vve be exhorted, for your exhortation and ſaluation, vvhich vvorketh the toleration of the ſame paſſions vvhich vve alſo doe ſuffer: ✝ 
                     verse 7 and our hope is firme for you: knovving that as you are partakers of the paſſions, ſo ſhal you be of the conſolation alſo. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 For vve vvil not haue you ignorant brethren: concerning our tribulation, vvhich happened in Aſia, that vve vvere preſſed aboue meaſure aboue our povver, ſo that it vvas tedions vnto vs euen to liue. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But vve in our ſelues had the anſvver of death, that vve be not truſting in our ſelues, but in
 God vvho raiſeth vp the dead, ✝ 
                     verse 10 vvho hath deliuered and doth deliuer vs out of ſo great dangers: in vvhom vve hope that he vvil yet alſo deliuer vs, ✝ 
                     verse 11 you ″ helping vvithal in praier for vs, that ″ by many mens perſons, thankes for that gift vvhich is in vs, may be giuen by many in our behalfe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For our glorie is this, the teſtimonie of our conſcience, that in ſimplicity and ſincerity of God, and not in carnal vviſedō, but in the grace of God vve haue conuerſed in this vvorld: and more aboundantly tovvards you. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For vve vvrite no other things to you, then that you haue read and knovv. And I hope that you ſhal knovv vnto the ende: ✝ 
                     verse 14 as alſo you haue knovven vs in part, that vve are ″ your glorie, as you alſo ours in the day of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And in this confidence I vvould firſt haue come to you, that you might haue a ſecond grace: ✝ 
                     verse 16 and by you paſſe into Macedonia, and againe from Macedonia come to you, and of you be brought on my vvay into Ievvrie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 Vvhereas then I vvas thus minded, did I vſe lightenes? Or the things that I minde, do I minde according to the fleſh, that there be vvith me, It is and It is not? ✝ 
                     verse 18 But God is faithful, becauſe our preaching vvhich vvas to you, there is not in it, ″ It is, and, It is not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the Sonne of God IESVS Chriſt, vvho by vs vvas preached among you, by me and Syluanus and Timothee, vvas not, It is, and, It is not, but, It is, vvas in him. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For al the promiſes of God that are, in him It is: therfore alſo by him, Amen to God, vnto our glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And he that confirmeth vs vvith you in Chriſt, and that hath anointed vs, God: ✝ 
                     verse 22 vvho alſo ″ hath ſealed vs, and giuen the pledge of the Spirit in our hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And I call God to vvitneſſe vpon my ſoul, that ſparing you, I came not any more to Corinth, ✝ 
                     verse 24 ″ not becauſe vve ouerrule your faith: but, vve are helpers of your ioy. for in the faith you ſtand.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     5. Paſsions of Chriſt.]
                     Al our afflictions, be Chriſts afflictions, for the coniunction betwene the head & body. Al the afflictions of the faithful be called Chriſtes ovvne paſſions, not onely becauſe they be ſuffered for him, but for that there is ſo ſtraite coniunction and communion betvvixt him being the head, and euery of the liuing members of his body, vvhich is the Church, that vvhatſoeuer is ſuffered by any one of the ſame, is counted as a peece of his ovvne Paſſion. As likevviſe vvhatſoeuer good vvorkes be done to any of them or by any of them, be accepted as done to or by Chriſt him ſelf. Vvhich thing if the Proteſtants vvel vveighed, they vvould not
 maruel that the Catholike Church attributeth ſuch force of merite and ſatisfaction to the vvorke of holy men.Merite and ſatisfaction.
                  
                  
                     5. The comfort abound.]
                     Vvorldly men feele not the comfort of afflicted Catholikes. Vvorldly men that ſee onely the exterior miſeries and afflictions that Catholikes do ſuffer being perſecuted by the Heathen or Heretikes, deeme them exceding miſerable. but if they felt or could conceiue the aboundance of conſolation vvhich Chriſt euer giueth according to the meaſure of their afflictions, they vvould neuer vvonder at the voluntary toleration of vvhat torments ſo euer for Chriſtes ſake, but vvould vviſh rather them ſelues to be in any dungeon in England vvith the comfort that ſuch haue from God, then to liue out of the Church in al the vvealth of the vvorld.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        1. You helping in praier.]
                     Interceſsiō of Saincts or holy men for vs, no derogation to Chriſt. S. Paul knevv that the helpe of other mens praiers vvas nothing derogatorie to the office of Chriſtes mediation or interceſſion for him, nor to the hope that he had in God: and therfore he craueth the Corinthians aide herein as a ſupport and ſuccours for him ſelf in the ſight of God. Vvith vvhat reaſon or Scripture then, can the Proteſtants ſay that the praiers of Sainctes be iniurious to Chriſt, or not to ſtand vvith the confidence vve haue in him? As though it vvere more diſhonour to God that vve ſhould vſe the aide of Sainctes in heauen, then of ſinners in earth:Hiero. cōt. Vigil. or * that the interceſſion of theſe our fellovves beneath, vvere more auailable then the praiers of thoſe that be in the glorious ſight of God aboue.
                  
                     11. By many mens.]
                     Publike praiers & faſtes. He meaneth, that as the praiers of many ioyned together for him, ſhal be rather heard, then of any alone: ſo their common thankes giuing to God for graunting their requeſt, ſhal be more acceptable and glorious to God, then any one mans thankes alone. Vvhich thing doth much commend the holy Churches publike praiers, proceſſions, ſtations, and pilgrimages, vvhere ſo many meete and vniformely ioyne their praiers and laudes together vnto God.
                  
                     14. Your glorie.]
                     Their glorie in heauen that conuert other. The Apoſtles, teachers, and preachers, that conuert countries or particular perſons to Chriſt, and the peoples or parties by them conuerted, ſhal in the day of iudgement haue much mutual ioy and glorie of and for eche other, one giuing to the other great matter of merite in this life, and of revvard in the next. See 1 Theſſ. 2. v. 19.
                  
                  
                     18. It is, it is not.]
                     The Proteſtants inconſtancie in chā
                        ging their writings, tranſlations, ſeruice bookes, &c. As he diſchargeth him ſelf of al other leuitie touching his promis or purpoſe of comming to them, ſo much more of al inconſtancie in preaching Chriſtes doctrine and faith. Vvherein, one day to affirme, an other day to deny, to diſſent from his fellovves or from him ſelf, to change euery yere or in euery epiſtle to forme of his former teaching, to come daily vvith nevv deuiſes repugnant to his ovvne rules, vvere not agreable to an Apoſtle and true teacher of Chriſt, but proper to falſe prophets and Heretikes. Vvhereof vve haue notorious examples in the Proteſtants: vvho being deſtitute of the ſpirit of peace, concord, conſtancie, vnitie, and veritie, as they varie from their ovvne vvritings vvhich they retract, reforme or deforme continually, ſo both in their preachings, & forme of Seruice, they are ſo reſtles, changeable, and repugnant to them ſelues, that if they vvere not kept in avve vvith much a do, by temporal lavves or by the ſhame and rebuke of the vvorld, they vvould coine vs euery yere or euery Parliament, nevv Communions, nevv faithes, and nevv Chriſtes, as you ſee by the manifold endeuours of the Puritans. And this to be the proper note of falſe Apoſtles and Heretikes, ſee in S. Iren
                           •
                        us li. 
                           •
                         c. 18. and Tertul. de praeſcript. S. Baſil. ep. 82.
                  
                  
                     22. Hath ſealed.] The learned Diuines proue by this place and by the like in the fourth to the Epheſians,Eph. 4, 3
                           •
                        . that the Sacrament of Baptiſme doth not onely giue grace,The indeleble character of Baptiſme, Cō
                        firmatiō, Holy Orders. but imprinteth and ſealeth the ſoule of the baptized, vvith a ſpiritual ſigne, marke, badge, or token, vvhich can neuer be blotted out, neither by ſinne, hereſie, apoſtaſie, nor other vvaies, but remaineth for euer in man for the cogniſance of his Chriſtendom, and for diſtinction from others vvhich vvere neuer of Chriſtes fold. by vvhich alſo he is as it were conſecrated and deputed to God, made capable and partaker of the rightes of the Church, and ſubiect to her lavves and diſcipline. See S. Hierom in 4. Epheſ. S. Ambroſe li. 1 de Sp. ſancto cap. 6. S. Cyril Hieroſol. Catecheſi 
                           •
                        7 at the end, and S. Dionyſius Areopag. c. 2. Eccl. Hierarch. The which fathers expreſſe that ſpiritual ſigne by diuers agreable names, vvhich the Church and moſt Diuines, after S. Auguſtine, call the character of Baptiſme. by the truth and force of vvhich ſpiritual note or marke of the ſoul, he ſpecially conuinceth the Donatiſtes, that the ſaid Sacrament though giuen and miniſtred by Heretikes or Schiſmatikes or vvho els ſo euer, can neuer be reiterated. See ep. 
                           •
                        7. & li. 6 cont. Donatiſt. cap. 1. & li. 2 cont. Parmenianum 6. 1
                           •
                        . As the like indeleble characters giuen alſo by the Sacraments of Confirmation and Orders, do make thoſe alſo irreiterable and neuer to be receiued but once. Vvhereas al other Sacraments ſauing theſe three, may be often receiued of the ſelf ſame perſon. And that holy Orders can not be iterated, ſee S. Auguſtine li. 2 cont. Parmen. c. 13. li. de bono coniug. c. 24. and S. Gregorie li. 2 Rggiſt. ep. 32.
                     See Conc. Tarraco. to. 
                           •
                        . Concil. The like of Confirmation is decreed in the moſt aūcient Councel Tarracon. cap. 6. Finally that this character is giuen onely by theſe ſaid three Sacraments, and is the cauſe that none of them can be in any man repeated or reiterated, ſee the decrees of the Councels Florentine and Trent. Vvhich yet is no nevv deuiſe of them, as the Heretikes falſely affirme, but agreable (as you ſee) both to the Scriptures and alſo to the auncient fathers and Councels.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        4. Not becauſe vve ouerrule.] Caluin and his ſeditious Sectaries vvith other like vvhich deſpiſe
 dominion,
                     The Caluiniſtes vvil be ſubiect to no tribunal in earth, for trial of their religiō. as S. Iude deſcribeth ſuch, vvould by this place deliuer them ſelues from al yoke of ſpiritual Magiſtrates and Rulers: namely that they be ſubiect to no man touching their faith, or for the examination and trial of their doctrine, but to God and his vvord onely. And no maruel that the male factors and rebelles of the Church vvould come to no tribunal but Gods, that ſo they may remaine vnpuniſhed at leaſt during this life. for though the Scriptures plainely condemne their hereſies, yet they could vvrithe them ſelues out by falſe gloſes, conſtructions, corruptions, and denials of the bookes to be Canonical, if there vvere no lavves or iudicial ſentence of men to rule and repreſſe them.
                  Notvvithſtanding then theſe vvordes of S. Paul,Tyrannical dominiō is forbid in Prelates, not Eccleſiaſtical Soueraintie for examination of faith or maners. vvhereby onely tyrannical, inſolent, and proud behauiour and indiſcrete rigor of Prelates or Apoſtles tovvards their flockes is noted, as alſo in the firſt of S. Peter cap. 5. (the Greeke vvord in theſe places,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and in the Goſpel Mt. 20, 25. Mr. 10, 42. ſignifying lordly and inſolent dominion:) yet he had and exerciſed iuſt ru
                        •
                     e, preeminence, and prelacie ouer them, not onely for their life, but alſo and principally touching their faith. for he might & did call them to account for the ſame, and excōmunicated heretikes for foreſaking their faith. 1 Cor. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10, 4. 13, 10. 1 Tim. 1, 20. Tit. 
                           •
                        , 11. And al Chriſtian men are bound to obey their lavvful Prelates in matters of faith and doctrine ſpecially, and muſt not vnder that ridiculous pretence of obeying Gods vvord onely (vvhich is the ſhifte of al other Heretikes, as Anabaptiſtes, Arians, and the like, as vvel as the Proteſtants) diſobey Gods Church, Councels, and their ovvne Paſtors and Biſhops, vvho by the Scriptures haue the regiment of their ſoules, and may examine and puniſh as vvel Iohn Caluin as Simon Magus,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      for falling from the Catholike faith, for though God alone be the Lord,1 Cor. 3, 9. author and giuer of faith, yet they are his * cooperators and coadiutors by vvhom the faithful do beleeue and be preſerued in the true faith, and be defended from vvolues, vvhich be Heretikes ſeeking to corrupt them in the ſame.1 Cor. 4, 15. And this ſame Apoſtle * chalengeth to be their father as he that begat and formed them by his preaching in Chriſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Proſecuting the true cauſe vvhich in the laſt chapter he gaue of his not comming, 6 he pardoneth novv after ſome part of penance, him that for inceſt he excommunicated in the laſt epiſtle, requiring them obediently to conſent therevnto. 12 Then, of his going from Tro
                        ••
                      into Macedonia, God euery vvhere giuing him the triumph.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I haue determined vvith my ſelf this ſame thing, not to come to you againe in ſorovv. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For if I make you ſorie: and who is it that can make me glad, but he that is made ſorie by me? ✝ 
                     verse 3 And this ſame I vvrote to you: that I may not, vvhen I come, haue ſorovv vpon ſorovv, of the vvhich I ought to reioyce: truſting in you al, that my ioy is the ioy of you al. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For of much tribulation and anguiſh of hart I vvrote to you by many teares: not that you ſhould be made ſorie: but that you may knovv vvhat charitie I haue more aboundantly tovvard you. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And if any man hath made ſorovvful, not me hath he made ſorovvful, but in part, that I burden not al you. ✝ 
                     verse 6 To him that is ſuch a one, ″ this rebuke ſufficeth that is giuen of many: ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſo that cōtrariewiſe you ſhould rather pardon and comfort him, leſt perhaps ſuch an one be ſvvallovved vp vvith ouer great ſorovv. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the vvhich cauſe ″ I beſeeche you that you confirme 
 charitie tovvard him. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For therfore alſo haue I written that I may knovv the experiment of you, vvhether in al things you be ″ obedient. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And vvhom you haue pardoned any thing, ″ I alſo. For, my ſelf alſo that vvhich
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Though he did great Penance (ſaith Theodorete) yet he calleth this pardoning. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a grace, becauſe his ſinne vvas greater then his penance. I pardoned, if I pardoned any thing, ″ for you ″ in the perſon of Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 11 that vve be not ″ circumuented of Satan. for vve are not ignorant of his cogitations.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vvhen I vvas come to Troas for the Goſpel of Chriſt, and a doore vvas opened vnto me in our Lord, ✝ 
                     verse 13 I had no reſt in my ſpirit, for that I found not Titus my brother, but bidding them fare vvel, I vvent forth into Macedonia. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And thankes be to God, vvho alvvaies triumpheth vs in Chriſt IESVS, and manifeſteth the odour of his knovvledge by vs in euery place. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For vve are the good odour of Chriſt vnto God in them that are ſaued, and in them that periſh. ✝ 
                     verse 16 To ſome in deede the odour of death vnto death: but to others the odour of life vnto life. And to theſe things vvho is ſo ſufficient? ✝ 
                     verse 17 For vve are not as very many, ″ adulterating the vvord of God, but of ſinceritie, and as of God, before God, in Chriſt vve ſpeake.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . This rebuke ſufficeth.]
                     The Apoſtle excommunicateth, enioyneth penance: and afterward pardoneth & abſolueth. This Corinthian for inceſt vvas excommunicated and put to penance by the Apoſtle, as appeareth in the former Epiſtle c. 5. And here order is giuen for his abſolution and pardoning. Vvherein firſt vve haue a plaine example and proofe of the Apoſtolike povver, there of binding, and here of looſing: there of puniſhing, here of pardoning: there of retaining ſinnes, here of remiſsion. Secondly vve may hereby proue that not onely amendment, ceaſing to ſinne, or repentance in hart and before God alone, is alvvaies ynough to obteine ful reconcilement, vvhereas vve ſee here his ſeparation alſo from the faithful, and the Sacraments, and from al companie or dealing vvith other Chriſtian men,1. Cor. 
                           •
                        , 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . beſides other bodily affliction: al vvhich called of the Apoſtle before interitus carnis, the deſtruction of the fleſh, and named here, Rebuke, or (as the * Greeke word alſo importeth) mulct, penaltie, correction, chaſtiſment, were enioyned him by the Apoſtles commaundement in the face of the Church, and by the offender patiently ſuſteined ſo long.Pardon or remiſsion of penance enioyned. Thirdly we ſee that it lieth in he handes of the Apoſtles, Biſhops, and ſpiritual Magiſtrates, to meaſure the time of ſuch penance or diſcipline, not onely according to the weight of the offence committed, but alſo according to the weaknes of the perſons puniſhed, and other reſpectes of time and place, as to their wiſedom ſhal be thought moſt agreable to the parties good, and the Churches edification. Laſtly by this vvhole hardling of the offenders caſe, we may refute the vvicked hereſie of the Proteſtants, that vvould make 
                        •
                     he ſimple beleeue,Penance and ſatisfaction euidently proued againſt the Proteſtants. no puniſhment of a mans ovvne perſon for ſinnes cōmitted, nor penance enioyned by the Church, nor any paines temporal or ſatisfaction for our life paſt, to be neceſſarie, but al ſuch things to be ſuperfluous, becauſe Chriſt hath ſatisfied ynough for all.Ioel. 2, 12. Vvhich Epicurian doctrine is refelled, not onely hereby, but alſo by the Prophets,Mt. 3. et 4 Iohn the Baptiſtes, Chriſtes, and the Apoſtles preaching of penance and condigne workes or fruites of repentance,Act. 2, et 26. to euery man in his ovvne perſon, and not in Chriſtes perſon onely: and by the vvhole life and moſt plaine ſpeaches and penitential
 canons of the holy doctors and Councels preſcribing times of penance, commending penance, enioyning penance, and continually vſing the word ſatisfaction in this caſe through out al their vvorkes, as our Aduerſaries them ſelues can not but confeſſe.
                  
                     8. I beſeche you.] They vvhich at the beginning did beare to much vvith the offender, and ſeemed Io
                        •
                     h to haue him excommunicated in ſo auſtere maner:Zeale againſt the excommunicate. yet through their obedience to the Apoſtle became on the other ſide ſo rigorous, and ſo farre deteſted the malefactor after he vvas excommunicated, that the Apoſtle novv meaning to abſolue him, vvas glad to intreate and commaund them alſo to accept him to their companie and grace againe.
                  
                     9. Obedient.]
                     The Apoſtle chalengeth their obediēce to his Eccleſiaſtical authoritie. Though in the laſt chapter he diſcharged him ſelf of tyrannical dominion ouer them, yet he chalengeth their obedience in al things as their Paſtor and Superior, and conſequently in this point of receiuing to mercie the penitent Corinthian. Vvhereby vve ſee, that as the power and authoritie of excommunicating, ſo of abſoluing alſo vvas in S. Paules perſon, though both vvere to be done in the face of the Church: els he vvould not haue commaunded or required their obedience.
                  
                     10. I alſo.] The Heretikes and others not vvel founded in the Scriptures and antiquitie, maruel at the Popes pardons, counting them either fruitles or vnlavvful or no elder then S. Gregorie.The authoritie of Indulgences vvhervpō it is groū
                        ded. But in deede the authoritie, power, and right of them is of Chriſtes ovvne vvord and commiſsion, principally giuen to Peter, and ſo aftervvard to al the Apoſtles, and in their perſons to al the cheefe Paſtors of the Church, vvhen it vvas ſaid, Whatſoeuer you looſe in earth,
                     Mat. 18, 18. 
                     ſhal be looſed in heauen. By vvhich commiſsion the holy Biſhops of old did cut of large peeces of penance enioyned to offenders, and gaue peace, grace, or indulgence,Cypria. ep. 13. 14. 15. * before they had accompliſhed the meaſure of their appointed or deſerued puniſhment▪ and that is to giue pardon. And ſo S. Paul here did tovvardes the Corinthian,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . See Theodoret in hūe loc. vvhom he aſſoiled of mere grace and mercie, as the vvord donare or 
                        
                           •
                        endonare doth ſignifie, when he might longer haue kept him in penance and temporall affliction for his offence. Vvherof though he had already before God invvardly repented, yet vvas he iuſtly holden vnder this correction for ſome ſatisfaction of his fault paſt, during the Apoſtles pleaſure.Vvhat is a pardon or indulgence. To remit then the temporal puniſhment or chaſtiſment due to ſinners after the offence it ſelf and the guilt therof be forgiuen of God, is an Indulgence or pardon, vvhich the principal Magiſtrates of Gods Church by Chriſtes vvarrant and the Apoſtles example, haue euer done, being no leſſe authoriſed to pardon then to puniſh, and by imitation of our Maiſter (who forgaue * the aduoutereſſe and diuers other offenders,Io. 8, 11. not only their ſinnes, but alſo often the temporal puniſhments due for the ſame) are as much giuen to mercie as to iuſtice.
                  
                     10. For you.] Theodorete vpon this place ſaith that the Apoſtle gaue this pardon to the Corinthian at the interceſsion of the bleſſed men.Cypr. locis citatu. Timotheus and Titus. And we may read in ſundrie places,Indulgences or pardons in the primitiue Church. of S. Cyprian namely, that Indulgences or remiſsions vvere giuen in the primitiue Church by the mediation of holy Confeſſors or Martyrs, and by cōmunicating the ſatisfactorie vvorkes of one to another, to vvhich end they gaue their letters to Biſhops in the behalfe of diuers their Chriſtiā brethrē, a thing moſt agreable to the mutual entercourſe that is betvvene the members of Chriſtes myſtical body, and very anſvverable to Gods iuſtice,2 Cor. 8. * vvhich by ſupply of the one ſort that aboundeth, ſtandeth entire in reſpect of the other ſort alſo that wanteth. In vvhich kinde the Apoſtle confeſſeth that him ſelf by his ſuffering and tribulations,Col. 1, 24. ſupplieth the vvantes of ſuch paſsions as Chriſt hath to ſuffer, not in his ovvne perſon, but in his body, vvhich is his Church. Vvherevpon vve inferre moſt aſſuredly, that the ſatisfactorie and penal vvorkes of holy Sainctes ſuffered in this life, be communicable and applicable to the vſe of other faithful men their fellovv-members in our Lord, and to be diſpenſed according to euery ones neceſsitie and deſeruing, by them vvhom Chriſt hath conſtituted ouer his familie, and hath made the diſpenſers of his treaſures.
                  
                     10. In the perſon of Chriſt.]
                     Al pardon and remiſsion is in the vertue and name of Chriſt. For that many might of ignorance or pride reproue the practiſe of Gods Church and her Officers, or deny the Apoſtles authoritie to be ſo great ouer mens ſoules as to puniſh and pardon in this ſort, S. Paul doth purpoſely and preciſely tell them that he doth giue pardon as Chriſtes Vicar, or as bearing his perſon in this caſe: and therfore that no man may maruel of his povver herein, except he thinke that Chriſtes povver, authoritie, and commiſsion is not ſufficient to releaſe temporal puniſhment due to ſinners.Heretical trā
                        ſlation. And this to be the proper meaning of theſe vvordes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     In the perſon of Chriſt, and not as the Proteſtants vvould haue it (the better to auoid the former concluſion of the Apoſtles giuing indulgence) In the face or ſight of Chriſt, you may eaſily vnderſtand by the Apoſtles like inſinuation of Chriſtes povver, vvhen he committed this offender to Satan,1 Cor. 5, 4. affirming that he gaue that ſentence in the name and vvith the vertue or povver of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. In al vvhich caſes the Proteſtants blindnes is exceding great,
 vvho can not ſee that this is not the vvay to extol Chriſtes povver, to deny it to his Prieſts, ſeing the Apoſtle chalengeth it by that that Chriſt hath ſuch povver, & that him ſelf doth it in his name, vertue, and perſon. So novv in this, and in no other name, giue Popes and Biſhops their pardons. Vvhich pertaining proprely to releaſing onely of temporal puniſhment due after the ſinne and the eternal puniſhment be forgiuen, is not ſo great a matter as the remiſſion of the ſinne it ſelf: vvhich yet the Prieſts * by expreſſe commiſſion do alſo remitte.Io. 20, 2
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     11. Circumuented of Satan.]
                     Al binding & looſing muſt be vſed to the parties ſaluation. Vve may ſee hereby, that the diſpenſation of ſuch diſcipline, and the releaſing of the ſame, be put into the povver and handes of Gods miniſters, to deale more or leſſe rigorouſly, to pardon ſooner or later, puniſh longer or ſhorter vvhile, as ſhal be thought beſt to their vviſedom▪ for the end of al ſuch correction or pardoning muſt be the ſaluation of the parties ſoul, as the Apoſtle noted 1 Cor. 5, 5. Vvhich to ſome, and ſome certaine times, may be better procured by rigour of diſcipline then by indulgence, to ſome others, by leuitie and humane dealing (ſo pardoning of penance is called in old Councels) rather then by ouermuch chaſtiſemē
                     
                        •
                     .Conc. Nic. can. 12. for conſideration vvhereof,The great penance of the primitiue Church. in ſome ages of the Church, much diſcipline, great penance and ſatiſfaction vvas both enioyned and alſo vvillingly ſuſteined,Ancyran. can. 2 & 5. and then vvas the leſſe pardoning and fevver indulgences, becauſe in that voluntary vſe and acceptation of puniſhment, and great zeale and feruor of ſpirit, euery man fulfilled his penanc̄e, and fevv aſked pardon. Novv in the fall of deuotion and lothſomnes that men commonly haue to do great penance, though the ſinnes be far greater then euer before,Vvhy more pardons and Indulgences now then in old time. yet our holy mother the Church knovving vvith the Apoſtle the cogitations of Satan, hovv he vvould in this delicate time, driue men either to deſperation, or to forſake Chriſt and his Church and al hope of ſaluation, rather then they vvould enter into the courſe of canonicall diſcipline, enioyneth ſmall penance, and ſeldom vſeth extremitie vvith offenders as the holy Biſhops of the primitiue Church did, but condeſcending to the vveaknes of her children, pardoneth exceding often and much, not onely al enioyned penance, but alſo al or great partes of vvhat puniſhment temporal ſo euer due or deſerued, either in this vvorld or in the next. As for the Heretikes vvhich neither like the Churches lenitie and pardoning in theſe daies, nor the old rigor of the primitiue Church,Mat. 11, 18. they be like to the Ievves 
                        •
                      that condemned Iohn the Baptiſt of auſteritie, and Chriſt of to much freedom and libertie: not knovving nor liking in deede either Chriſtes ordinance and commiſſion in binding or looſing, or his prouidence in the gouernement of the Church.
                  
                     17. Adulterating.]
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The Greeke vvord ſignifieth to make commoditie of the vvord of God,The Heretikes corrupting of the Scripture. as vulgar Vinteners do of their vvine. Vvhereby is expreſſed the peculiar trade of al Heretikes, and exceding proper to the Proteſtants, that ſo corrupt Scriptures by mixture of their ovvne phantaſies, by falſe trāſlations, gloſſes, colorable and pleaſant commentaries, to deceiue the taſt of the ſimple, as tauerners and tapſters do, to make their vvines ſalable by manifold artificial deceites. The Apoſtles contrarievviſe, as all Catholikes, deliuer the Scriptures and vtter the vvord of God ſincerely and entirely, in the ſame ſenſe and ſort as the fathers left them to the Church, interpreting them by the ſame Spirit by vvhich they vvere vvritten or ſpoken.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Leſt the Iudaical falſe Apoſtles ſhould obiect againe that he praiſeth him ſelf, he ſaith that the Corinthians are his commendation: and they in their hartes being iuſtified by his miniſterie, he thereof inferreth that the miniſters of the nevv Teſtament are farre more glorious them they of the old, 12 and our people more lightened then theirs.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BEGIN we againe to commend our ſelues? or do vve neede (as certaine) epiſtles of commendation to you, or from you? ✝ 
                     verse 2 Our epiſtle you are, vvritten in our hartes, vvhich is knovven and read of al men: ✝ 
                     verse 3 being manifeſted that you are ″ the epiſtle of Chriſt, miniſtred by vs, & vvritten not vvith inke, but vvith the Spirit
 of the liuing God: not in tables of ſtone, but in the tables carnall of the hart.The Epiſtle vpon the 12 Sunday after Pe
                        •
                     tecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And ſuch confidence vve haue by Chriſt God: ✝ 
                     verse 5 not that vve be ſufficient to thinke any thing ″ of our ſelues, as of our ſelues: but our ſufficience is of God. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vvho alſo hath made vs meete miniſters of the nevv 
                     •
                  eſtament: not in the letter, but in the Spirit. For ″ the letter killeth: but the Spirit quickeneth. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And if the miniſtration of death with letters figured in ſtones, vvas in glorie, ſo that the children of Iſraël could not behold the face of Moyſes, for the glorie of his countenāce, that is made void: ✝ 
                     verse 8 how ſhal not the miniſtration of the Spirit be more in glorie? ✝ 
                     verse 9 For if the miniſtratiō of damnation be in glorie: ″ much more the miniſterie of iuſtice aboundeth in glorie. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 For neither vvas it glorified, vvhich in this part vvas glorious, by reaſō of the excelling glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For if that which is made void, is by glorie: much more that vvhich abideth, is in glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Hauing therfore ſuch hope, vve vſe much confidence: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and not * as Moyſes put a vele vpon his face,Exo. 34, 33. that the children of Iſraël might not behold his face, vvhich is made voide, ✝ 
                     verse 14 but their ſenſes vvere dulled. For vntil this preſent day, ″ the ſelf ſame vele in the lecture of the old teſtament remaineth vnreuealed (becauſe in Chriſt it is made voide) ✝ 
                     verse 15 but vntil this preſent day, vvhen Moyſes is read, a vele is put vpō their hart. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But vvhen he ſhal be conuerted to our Lord, the vele ſhal be taken avvay.10. 4, 24▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 17 And * our Lord is a Spirit. And vvhere the Spirit of our Lord is, there is ″ libertie. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But vve al, beholding the glorie of our Lord vvith face reuealed, are tranſformed into the ſame image from glorie vnto glorie, as of our Lordes Spirit.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     1. The Epiſtle of Chriſt.]
                     The Apoſtles vvrote the Goſpel in mens hartes much more then in paper. S. Paul and other holy vvriters of Scriptures did ſet dovvne many thinges in vvriting, by penne, inke, and paper, al vvhich be of the Holy Ghoſt: but the ſpecial and proper booke of Chriſtes truth and Goſpel, is not the external vvriting in thoſe dead creatures, but in the hartes of the faithful, being the proper ſubiecte of theſe truthes and graces preached in the nevv Teſtament, and the habitacle of the Holy Ghoſt. In the vvhich booke of faithful mens hartes S. Paul vvrote diuers thinges not vttered in any Epiſtle: as ſundrie of the Apoſtles vvrote the Chriſtian religion in the hartes of their hearers onely,Scripture written, and Tradition vnwritten. and in other material bookes not at all. Vvhereof S. Irenaeus li. 3. 
                           •
                        . 4. ſaith, What and if the Apoſtles alſo had left no Scriptures, ought vve not to folovv the order of the tradition, vvhich they deliuered vnto them to vvhom they committed the Churches
                           •
                         to the vvhich ordinance many nations of thoſe barbarous people that haue beleeued in Chriſt, do conſent, vvithout letter or inke, hauing ſaluation vvritten in their hartes, and keeping diligently the tradition of the elders. And S. Hierom, (
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Hiero
                           •
                        . c. 9. ad Pa
                           •
                        .) In the Greede of our faith and hope, vvhich being deliuered by tradition from
 the Apoſtles, is not vvritten in paper and inke▪ but in the tables camal of the hart. And this is the Churches booke alſo, vvhereby and vvherein ſhe keepeth faithfully al truth vvritten in the hartes of thoſe to vvhom the Apoſtles did preach, vvith the like diligence as ſhe keepeth and preſerueth the other booke vvhich is of holy Scriptures, from al corruption of Heretikes and other iniuries.
                  
                     5. Of our ſelues.]
                     God grace & free will both muſt cōcurre. This maketh firſt againſt the Heretikes called Pelagians, that hold our meritorious actions or cogitations to be of free vvil onely, and not of Gods ſpecial grace. Secondly againſt the Proteſtantes, vvho on the contrarie ſide referre al to God, and take, avvay mans freedom and proper motion in his thoughtes and doings: the Apoſtle confeſsing our good cogitations to be our ovvne, but not as comming of our ſelues, but of God.
                  
                     6. The letter killeth.]
                     The letter killeth both Ievv and Heretike. As the letter of the old Lavv not truely vnderſtood, nor referred the Chriſt, commaunding and not giuing grace and ſpirit to fulfil that vvhich vvas commaunded, did by occaſiō kill the carnal Iew: ſo the letter of the nevv Teſtamēt not truely taken nor expounded by the Spirit of Chriſt (vvhich is onely in his Church) killeth the Heretike: vvho alſo being carnal and void of ſpirit, gaineth nothing by the external precepts or good leſſons of the Scriptures, but rather taketh hurt by the ſame. See S. Auguſtine to. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Ser. 70 & 1000 de tempore. & li. de Sp. & lit. c. 5. 6. & ſeq.
                  
                  
                     9. Much more.]
                     The preeminence of the new Teſtamēt, Sacraments, &c. The preeminence of the new Teſtament and of the prieſthod or Miniſterie thereof before the old is, that the nevv, by al her Sacraments and Prieſts as miniſters immediate of grace and remiſsion of ſinnes, doth ſo ex opere operato giue the ſpirit of life and charitie into the hartes of the faithful, as the old did giue the letter or external act of the Lavv.
                  
                     14. The ſelf ſame vele.]
                     The heretikes more blinde in not ſeing the Church, then the Iewes in not ſeing Chriſt. As the Ievves reading the old Teſtament, by reaſon of their blindnes (vvhich God for the puniſhment of their incredulitie ſuffereth to remaine as a couer vpon their eies and hartes) can not ſee Chriſt in the Scriptures vvhich they daily heare read in their Synagogs, but ſhal, vvhen they beleeue in him and haue the couer remoued, perceiue al to be moſt plainely done and ſpoken of him in their law & Scriptures: euen ſo Heretikes hauing (as S. Auguſtine noteth) a farre greater couer of blindnes and incredulitie ouer their hartes in reſpect of the Catholike Church vvhich they impugne,Aug. in Pſal. 10. Con
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        . then the Iewes haue concerning Chriſt, can not ſee, though they read or heare the Scriptures read neuer ſo much, the maruelous euidence of the Catholike Church and truth in al pointes: but vvhen they ſhal returne againe to the obedience of the ſame Church, they ſhal finde the Scriptures moſt cleere for her and her doctrine, and ſhal vvonder at their former blindnes.
                  
                     17. Libertie.]
                     True Chriſtiā libertie. The Spirit and grace of God in the nevv Teſtament diſchargeth vs of the bondage of the Lavv and ſinne,
                        
                           •
                        . Pet. 2, 1
                           •
                        . but is not a vvarrant to vs of fleſhly licence, as S. Peter vvriteth: nor diſchargeth Chriſtians of their obedience to order, lavv, and power of Magiſtrates ſpiritual or temporal, as ſome Heretikes of theſe daies do ſeditiouſly teach.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  That according as ſo glorious a miniſterie requireth, he liueth and preacheth ſincerely. 
                        〈◊〉
                      the vvhich glorie his Aduerſaries can not count vaine, conſidering his perſecutions, becauſe perſecution is to Gods glorie, and to our humilitie and hope, and meritorious of increaſe of grace in this life, and of moſt glorious bodies and ſoules aftervvard.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERFORE hauing this miniſtration: according as vve haue obteined mercie, vve faile not, ✝ 
                     verse 2 but vve renounce the ſecrete things of diſhoneſtie, not walking in craſtines, nor ″ adulterating the vvord of God, but in manifeſtation of the truth commending our ſelues to euery conſcience of men
 before God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And if our Goſpel be alſo hidde, in them that periſh it is hidde, ✝ 
                     verse 4 in vvhom the God of this vvorld hath blinded the mindes of the infidels, that the illumination of the Goſpel of the glorie of Chriſt vvho is the image of God,The Epiſtle for S. Athanaſius. Mai. Io.
                   might not ſhine to them. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For vve preache nor our ſelues, but IESVS Chriſt our Lord: and vs, your ſeruants by IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 6 becauſe God that commaunded light to ſhine of darkenes, he hath ſhined in our hartes to the illumination of the knovvledge of the glorie of God, in the face of Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But vve haue this treaſure in earthen veſſels, that the excellencie may be of the povver of God, and not of vs. ✝ 
                     verse 8 In al things vve ſuffer tribulation, but are not in diſtreſſe:aporiamur. See S. Ambr. Theoph. vve vvant, but are not deſtitute: ✝ 
                     verse 9 vve ſuffer perſecution, but are not forſaken: vve are caſt dovvne, but vve periſh not: ✝ 
                     verse 10 alvvaies bearing about in our body the mortification of IESVS, that the life alſo of IESVS may be manifeſted in our bodies. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For vve that liue, are alvvaies deliuered vnto death for IESVS: that the life alſo of IESVS may be manifeſted in our mortal fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Death then vvorketh in vs, but life in you. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And hauing the ſame ſpirit of faith,Pſ. 115, 10. as it is vvritten, I beleeued, for the vvhich cauſe I haue ſpoken, vve alſo beleeue, for the vvhich cauſe vve ſpeake alſo: ✝ 
                     verse 14 knovving that he vvhich raiſed vp IESVS, vvil raiſe vp vs alſo vvith IESVS and ſet vs vvith you. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 For al things are for you: that the grace abounding by many in giuing of thankes, may abound vnto the glorie of God. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For vvhich cauſe vve faile not: but although that our man vvhich is vvithout,corrumpitur. corrupte: yet that vvhich is vvithin, is renevved from day to day. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For that our tribulation vvhich preſently is momentanie & light,The Engliſh Bible 1577, doth falſely tranſlate, prepareth.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ″ vvorketh aboue meaſure excedingly an eternal vveight of glorie in vs, ✝ 
                     verse 18 we not cōſidering the things that are ſeen, but that are not ſeen. For the things that be ſeen, are temporal: but thoſe that be not ſeen, are eternal.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Adulterating.]
                     Heretikes corrupters of Gods word: Catholike Doctors, right handlers therof. He giueth often vvarning of falſe teachers,See Ir
                           ••
                        . li. 1. c. 1. whoſe ſpecial and proper ſtudie is to falſifie and adulterate by deceitful conſtructions, interpretations, and applications, the word of God: hauing no other end but to make their aduantage of the Scriptures, and to gaine glorie and eſtimation among the ſinful and ſimple, by new deuiſed expoſitions. Vvherein the Proteſtants do excel the auncient Heretikes, none euer more impu
                        •
                     ely handeling the vvord of God then they do.in 2 ad Rom. Origen calleth ſuch Scripturarum fures
 & adulteros, theeues and adulterers of the Scriptures. S. Cyprian (de vnit. Ec. nu. 7.) calleth them, corrupters of the Goſpel, falſe interpreters, artificers and crafteſmaſters in corrupting the truth. On the other ſide, for ſpecial reuerence and ſinceritie of dealing in thoſe matters, the fathers and al Catholike preachers or Expoſitors vvere of old called according to S. Paules vvordes to Timothee,
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 2. 
                     Rectè tractantes verbum Dei, right handlers of the vvord of God.
                  
                     17. Worketh.]
                     Tribulations meritorious of glorie. The temporal and ſhort tribulations vvhich vve patiently and willingly ſuffer for Chriſt, do winne vs euerlaſting ioy and glorie. And it is here to be noted againſt the Heretikes, that tribulations do vvorke or cauſe the ſaid ſaluation, which they deny to be giuen for ſuch thinges,Aug. in pſ. 93. prope finem. but for or by faith onely. S. Auguſtine maketh ſuch tribulations for Chriſt ſo much the meritorious cauſe of euerlaſting life and reſt, that he ſaith it is ſalable and bought thereby. And it is written. Sap. 10, God rendreth or repaieth to iuſt men the hire of their labours.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  That after death of the body the ſoule may to heauen: therfore, although naturally vve abhorre death, by grace he deſireth it rather: 9 in conſideration of Chriſtes iuſt iudgement, liuing as in the ſight of God, yea and of their conſciences. 12 Which he ſpeaketh not to praiſe him ſelf, but becauſe of his Aduerſaries vvho did glorie in carnal reſpectes: but he and the other Apoſtles regard nothing but their reconciliation vnto God by Chriſt, and to reconcile others alſo, as being his legates for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR vve knovv that if our earthly houſe of this habitation be diſſolued, that vve haue a building of God, a houſe not made vvith hand, eternal in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For in this alſo do vve grone, deſirous to be ouerclothed with our habitation that is from heauen: ✝ 
                     verse 3 yet ſo, if vve be found clothed, not naked. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For vve alſo that are in this tabernacle, grone being burdened: becauſe vve would not be ſpoiled, but ouerclothed, that that vvhich is mortal, might be ſvvallovved vp of life. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he that maketh vs to this ſame, is God, vvho hath giuen vs the pledge of the Spirit. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Being bold therfore alvvaies, and knovving that vvhile vve are in the body, vve are pilgrimes from God, ( ✝ 
                     verse 7 for vve vvalke by faith and not by ſight) ✝ 
                     verse 8 but vve are bold, and haue a good vvil to be pilgrimes rather from the body, &This place proueth that the Saincts departed novv ſince Chriſt, ſleepe not til the day of iudgement, and that they be not holden in any ſeueral place of reſt from the fruition of God til the reſurrection of their bodies, but that they be preſent vvith God in their ſoules. to be preſent vvith our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And therfore vve endeuour, vvhether abſent or preſent, to pleaſe him.Ro. 14, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For * vve muſt al be manifeſted before the iudgemēt ſeate of Chriſt, that euery one may receiue ″ the proper things of the body, according as he hath done, ″ either good or euil.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Knovving therfore the feare of our Lord vve vſe perſuaſion to men: but to God vve are manifeſt. ✝ And I hope alſo that in your conſciences vve are manifeſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vve commend
 not ourſelues againe to you, but giue you occaſion to glorie for vs: that you may haue againſt them that glorie in face, and not in hart. ✝ 
                     verse 13 for vvhether vve excede in minde, to God: or vvhether vve be ſober, to you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For the charitie of Chriſt vrgeth vs: iudging this, that if one died for al, then al vvere dead. ✝ 
                     verse 15 and Chriſt died for al: that they alſo vvhich liue, may not novv liue to them ſelues, but to him that died for them and roſe againe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Therfore vve from hence forth knovve no man according to the fleſh. And if vve haue knovven Chriſt according to the fleſh: but novv vve know him no more.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 If then any be in Chriſt a nevv creature: the old are paſſed,Eſa. 43. 19. Apoc 21, 5. behold * al things are made nevv. ✝ 
                     verse 18 but al of God, vvho hath reconciled vs to him ſelf by Chriſt: and hath giuen ″ vs the miniſterie of reconciliation. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For God in deede vvas in Chriſt reconciling the vvorld to him ſelf, not imputing to them their ſinnes, and hath put in vs the vvord of reconciliation. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For Chriſt therfore vve are legates, God as it vvere exhorting by vs. For Chriſt vve beſeeche you, be reconciled to God. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Him that knevv no ſinne, for vs he madeThat is to ſay, a ſacrifice and an hoſt for ſinne. See the laſt annot. of this chapter.
                   ſinne: that vve might be made ″ the iuſtice of God in him
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  10. The proper things of his body.] S. Auguſtine (Enchirid. 
                        •
                     . no.) obiecteth this ſpeach of the Apoſtle,
                     The obiection againſt praiers for the dead, anſvvered by S. Auguſtine. 
                     as in the perſon of ſuch as deny the praiers, almes, and ſacrifices of the liuing to be auailable for the dead, and he anſvvereth as folovveth. This practiſe (ſaith he) of Gods Church in the commendation of the dead, in nothing repugnant to the ſentence of the Apoſtle, vvhere he ſaith, that vve ſhal al ſtand before the iudgement ſeate of Chriſt, that euery one may receiue according to his deſerts in the body, either good or euil. For, in his life and before death he deſerued this, that theſe vvorkes after his death might be profitable vnto him. for in deede they be not profitable for al men. and vvhy ſo? but becauſe of the difference and diuerſitie of mens liues vvhiles they vvere in fleſh. The like he hath in diuers other places. Auguſt. li. de Praed. Sanct. c. 12. & ad Dulcit. q. 2. And ſo hath S. Denys c. 7. Ec. Hierarch.
                  
                  
                     10. Either good or euil.] Heauen is as vvel the revvard of good vvorkes, as Hel is the ſtipend of il vvorkes.Vvorkes meritorious and demeritorious. Neither is faith alone ſufficient to procure ſaluation, nor lacke of ſaith the onely cauſe of damnation: by good deedes men merite the one, and by il deedes they deſerne the other. This is the Apoſtles doctrine here and in other place, hovv ſo euer the Aduerſaries of good life and vvorkes teach othervviſe.
                  
                     18. The miniſterie of reconciliation.]
                     Biſhops and Prieſts vnder Chriſt miniſters of our reconciliatiō. Chriſt is the cheefe Miniſter, according to his manhod, of al our reconcilement to God: and for him, as his miniſters, the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors the Biſhops and Prieſts of his Church, in vvhom the vvord of reconcilement, as vvel by miniſtring of the Sacrifice and Sacraments for remiſſion of ſinnes, as by preaching and gouernement of the vvorld to ſaluation, is placed. And therfore their preaching muſt be to vs, as if Chriſt him ſelf did preach: their abſolution and remiſſion of ſinnes, as Chriſtes ovvne pardon: their vvhole office being nothing els (as vve ſee by this paſſage) but the Vicarſhip of Chriſt.
                  
                     21. The iuſtice of God.] Euen as (ſaith S. Augſtine) vvhen vve reade, Saluation is our Lordes, it is not meant that ſaluatiō Whereby our Lord is ſaued, but vvhereby they are ſaued vvhō he ſaueth (ſo vvhē it is
 ſaid,
                     Gods iuſtice, wherewith he maketh vs iuſt. 
                     Gods iuſtice, that is not to be vnderſtood vvherevvith God is iuſt, but that vvherevvith men are iuſt. vvhom by his grace he iuſtifieth. See S. Auguſtine de Sp. & lit. c. 1
                           •
                        . & ep. 120 ad Honoratum, and abhorre Caluins vvicked and vnlearned gloſe on this place, that teacheth Iuſtice no othervviſe to be in man,c. Io. 3, 7. then ſinne in Chriſt. Vvhereas the Scriptures call man iuſt, becauſe * he doth iuſtice: but not ſo call they Chriſt ſinne, becauſe he doth ſinne, but becauſe he taketh avvay ſinne, and is a ſacrifice for ſinne, as the Heretikes knovv very vvel, that knovv the vſe and ſignification of the Hebrevv vvord in al the old Teſtament,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      namely Pſal. 19, 8. and in the booke of Leuiticus very often, c. 5. 
                           •
                        . 9. 12. 14. 16. and Numer. c. 29.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  That he helpeth vvith his exhortations, and in al things behaueth him ſelf as becommeth a miniſter of God. 11 which he ſpeaketh ſo openly, becauſe his hart is open vnto them: exhorting them to be likevviſe open-harted tovvardes him, 14 and to auoid thoſe infidels.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vve ″ helping do exhorte,The Epiſtle vpon the firſt Sunday of Lent. that you receiue not the ″ grace of God in vaine. ( ✝ 
                     verse 2 For he ſaith,Eſ. 49, 8▪
                   
                  In time accepted haue I heard thee: and in the day of ſaluation haue I holpen thee. Behold, novv is the time acceptable: behold novv the day of ſaluation.) ✝ 
                     verse 3 to no man giuing any offence, that our miniſterie be not blamed:The Epiſtle for many Martyrs. ✝ 
                     verse 4 but in al things let vs exhibite our ſelues as the miniſters of God, in much patience, in tribulations, in neceſſities, in diſtreſſes, ✝ 
                     verse 5 in ſtripes, in priſons, in ſeditions, in labours, ″ in vvatchings, in faſting, ✝ 
                     verse 6 in chaſtitie, in knovvledge, in lōganimitie, in ſvveetenes, in the holy Ghoſt, in charitie not feined, ✝ 
                     verse 7 in the vvord of truth, in the vertue of God, by the armour of iuſtice on the right hand, and on the left, ✝ 
                     verse 8 by honour and diſhonour, by infamie and good fame: as ſeducers, and true: as they that are vnknovven, and knovven: ✝ 
                     verse 9 as dying, and behold vve line: as chaſtened, & not killed: ✝ 
                     verse 10 as ſorovvful, but alvvaies reioycing: as needie, but enriching many: asS. Auguſtine (in pſ. 113) gathereth hereby, that the Apoſtles did vovv pouertie. hauing nothing, and poſſeſſing al things. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Our mouth is open to you ô Corinthians, our hart is dilated. ✝ 
                     verse 12 You are not ſtraitened in vs: but in your ovvne bovvels you are ſtraitened. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But hauing the ſame revvard (I ſpeake as to my children) be you alſo dilated. ✝ 
                     verse 14 
                  It is not lawful for Catholikes to marie vvith Heretikes or Infidels. See S. Hierom. cont. I
                           •
                        
                        uinian. li. 1. Conc. Laod. 
                           •
                        . 10 & 31.
                   Beare not the yoke vvith infidels. For vvhat participation hath iuſtice vvith iniquitie? or ″ vvhat ſocietie is there betwene light and darkenes? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And vvhat agreement vvith Chriſt and Belial? or vvhat part hath the faithful vvith the infidel? ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhat agreement hath the temple of God vvith Idols? For
 you are the temple of the liuing God.Leu. 26, 11. as God ſaith, That I vvil dvvel, and vvalke in them, and vvil be their God: and they ſhal be my people. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the vvhich cauſe,Eſ. 52, 11▪
                   
                  Goe out of the middes of them, and ſeparate your ſelues. ſaith our Lord, and touch not the vncleane: and I vvil receiue you. ✝ 
                        verse 18 and I vvil be a father to you:
                  Hier. 31, 1. 
                  and you ſhal be my ſonne and daughters, ſaith our Lord omnipotent.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     1. Helping.]
                     Gods Miniſters are his coadiutors. For that he declared before the Miniſters of the nevv Teſtament to be Chriſtes deputies, and that vvhen they preach or do any function, God as it vvere ſpeaketh or doeth it by them, he boldly novv ſaith, Helping therfore: that is to ſay, ioyning or vvorking together vvith God, vve do exhort.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     1. Grace in vaine.]
                     Gods grace forceth no mā againſt his vvil. The grace of God vvorketh not in man againſt his vvill, nor forceth any thing vvithout his acceptation and conſent; and therfore it lieth in mans vvill to fruſtrate or to folovv the motion of God, as this text plainely proueth.
                  
                     5. In Watchings.] Vvhen in the middes of many miſeries and perſecutions, the Apoſtles yet of their ovvne accord added and required voluntarie vigils,Voluntarie penance. faſtings, and chaſtitie, vve may vvel perceiue theſe vvorkes to be vvonderful grateful to God, and ſpecially needful in the Clergie.
                  
                     14. What ſocietie.] Generally here is forbidden conuerſation and dealing vvith al Infidels, and conſequently vvith Heretikes, but ſpecially in praiers, or meetings at their Schiſmatical Seruice, preaching,Not to communicate with Heretikes in any acte of religion. or other diuine office vvhatſoeuer. Vvhich the Apoſtle here vttereth in more particular and different termes, that Chriſtian folke may take the better heede of it. No ſocietie (ſaith he) nor felovvſhip, no participation nor agreement, no conſent betvvene light and darknes, Chriſt and Baal, the temple of God and the temple of Idols: al Seruice, as pretended vvorſhip of God ſet vp by Heretikes or Schiſmatikes, being nothing els but Seruice of Baal and plaine Idolatrie, and their conuenticles nothing but conſpirations againſt Chriſt. from ſuch therfore ſpecially vve muſt ſeuer our ſelues alvvaies in hart and mind,Num, 16, 26. and touching any act of religion in body alſo, according as the children of Iſrael vvere commaunded by God to ſeparate them ſelues from the Schiſmatikes Corè, Dathan, and Abiron, and their tabernacles, by theſe vvordes: Depart from the tabernacles of the impious men, and touch ye not thoſe things vvhich pertaine to them, leſt you be envvrapped in their ſinnes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  He procedeth to exhorte them to puritie, and to receiue him into their charitie. 3 Which leſt they ſhould thinke he ſpeaketh to accuſe them, he commendeth them highly, both for their behauiour tovvard Titus, and for their penance vvhich they had done vpon his other epiſtle.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HAVING therfore theſe promiſſes, my deereſt, let vs cleanſe our ſelues from al inquinatiō of the fleſh and ſpirit, perſiting ſanctification in the feare of God. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Receiue vs. Vve haue hurt no man, vve haue corrupted no man, vve haue circumuented no man. ✝ 
                     verse 3 I ſpeake not to your cōdemnation. for I ſaid before that you are in our hartes to die together and to liue together. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Much is my confidence vvith you, much is my glorying for you: I am repleniſhed vvith
 conſolation: I do excedingly abound in ioy in al our tribulation. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For alſo vvhen vve vvere come into Macedonia, our fleſh had no reſt, but vve ſuffered al tribulatiō: vvithout, combats: vvithin, feares. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But God that comforteth the humble, did comforte vs, in the comming of Titus. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And not only in his comming, but alſo in the conſolation, vvhervvith he vvas comforted among you, reporting to vs your deſire, your vveeping, your emulation for me, ſo that I reioyced the more. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For although I made you ſorie in an epiſtle, it repenteth me not: albeit it repented me, ſeing that the ſame epiſtle (although but for a time) did make you ſorie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Novv I am glad: not becauſe you vvere made ſorie, but becauſe you vvere made ″ ſorie to penance. For you vvere made ſorie according to God, that in nothing you ſhould ſuffer detriment by vs. ✝ 
                     verse 10 ForContrition or ſorovvful lamenting of our oftenſes, is the cauſe of ſaluation. Not onely faith: then ſaueth, as the Heretikes affirme. the ſorovv that is according to God, vvorketh penance vnto ſaluation that is ſtable: but the ſorovv of the vvorld vvorketh death. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For behold this very thing, that you vvere made ſorie according to God, hovv great carefulnes it vvorketh in you: yea defenſe, yea indignation, yea feare, yea deſire, yea emulation, yea reuenge. in al things you haue ſhevved your ſelues to be vndefiled in the matter. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore although I vvrote to you, not for him that did the iniurie, nor for him that ſuffered: but to manifeſt our carefulnes that vve haue for you before God, ✝ 
                     verse 13 therfore vve are comforted. But in our conſolation, vve did the more aboundantly reioyce vpon the ioy of Titus, becauſe his ſpirit vvas refreſhed of al you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And if to him I gloried any thing of you, I am not cōfounded: but as vve ſpake al things to you in truth, ſo alſo our glorying that vvas to Titus, is made a truth, ✝ 
                     verse 15 and his bovvels are more aboundantly toward you: remembring the obedience of you al, hovv vvith feare and trembling you receiued him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 I reioyce that in al things I haue confidence in you.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     9. Sorie to penance.]
                     Contr
                           •
                        tion for a mans ſinne vvorketh ſaluatiō. The ſorovv vvhich a man taketh for vvorldly loſſes or any temporal aduerſitie, is not here commended, but that vvhich is and ought to be in al men for their ſinnes paſt, vvhich is called here, Sorovv tovvardes God and for penance, othervviſe called Contrition, and is a thing excedingly requiſite and much praiſed, the fruites vvhereof are theſe that the Apoſtle reckeneth, vvorking ſaluation. Vvhich doctrine is farre diſtant fromTo. 2. in aſſert. art. 6. 
                           •
                         Leone d
                           •
                        nuiat. Luthers, and Caluins, and ſuch vvicked Libertines, that teach contrition to be al together a meanes to make ſinnes either hypocrites, or to put them in deſpaire.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  By the example of the poore Macedonians he exhorteth them to contribute largely vnto the Church of Hieruſalem, 7 and by praiſing of them, 9 and by the example of Chriſt. 14 and by their ovvne ſpiritual profite in being partakers of that Churches merites, 16 and by commending the collectors that he ſendeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vve doe you to vnderſtand, brethren, the grace of God, that is giuen in the churches of Macedonia, ✝ 
                     verse 2 that in much experience of tribulation they had aboundance of ioy, & their very deepe pouertie abounded vnto the riches of their ſimplicitie, ✝ 
                     verse 3 for according to their povver (I giue them teſtimonie) and aboue their povver they vvere willing, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvith much exhortation requeſting vs the grace and communication of the miniſterie that is done tovvard the ſaincts. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And not as vve hoped, but their ovvne ſelues they gaue, firſt to our Lord,The principal reſpecte next after God, is to be had of our maiſters in religion, in al temporal and ſpiritual dueties. then to vs by the vvil of God: ✝ 
                     verse 6 in ſo much that vve deſired Titus, that as he began, ſo alſo he vvould perfit in you this grace alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But as in al things you abound in faith, and vvord, and knovvledge, & al carefulnes, moreouer alſo in your charitie tovvard vs, that in this grace alſo you may abounde. ✝ 
                     verse 8 I ſpeake not as commaunding: but by the carefulnes of others, approuing alſo the good diſpoſition of your charitie.The Epiſtle for S. Paulinus, Iun. 2
                        •
                     . ✝ 
                     verse 9 For you knovv the grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, that for you he vvas made poore, wheras he vvas riche: that by his pouertie you might be riche. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And in this point I giue counſel: for this is profitable for you, vvhich haue begōne not only to doe, but alſo to be willing, from the yere paſt: ✝ 
                     verse 11 but novv perfourme ye it alſo in deede: that as your minde is prompt to be vvilling, ſo it may be alſo to perfourme, of that vvhich you haue. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For if the vvil be prompt: it is accepted according to that vvhich it hath, not according to that vvhich it hath not. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For not that other ſhould haue eaſe, and you tribulation: but by an equalitie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Let in this preſent time your ″ aboundance ſupplie their vvant: that their aboundance alſo may ſupplie your vvant,Exo. 16, 28. that there be an equalitie, ✝ 
                     verse 15 as it is vvritten: He that had much, abounded not: and he that had litle, vvanted not. 
                  ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And thankes be to God,The Epiſtle vpon S. Lukes day, Octob. 18. that hath giuen the ſelf ſame carefulnes for you in the hart of Titus, ✝ 
                     verse 17 for that he admitted in deede exhortation: but being more careful, of his ovvne
 vvil he vvent vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vve haue ſent alſo vvith him the brother, vvhoſe praiſe is in the Goſpel through al the churches: ✝ 
                     verse 19 & not only that, but alſo he vvas ordeined of the churches fellovv of our peregrination, for this grace vvhich is miniſtred of vs to the glorie of our Lord, and our determined vvil: ✝ 
                     verse 20 auoiding this, leſt any man might reprehend vs in this fulnes that is miniſtred of vs.Ro. 12, 17. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For vve prouide good things * not only before God, but alſo before men. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And vve haue ſent vvith them our brother alſo, vvhom vve haue proued in many things often to be careful: but now much more careful, for the great confidence in you, ✝ 
                     verse 23 either for Titus vvhich is my fellovv and coadiutor tovvard you, or our brethren Apoſtles of the churches, the glorie of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 24 The declaration therfore vvhich is of your charitie and our glorying for you, declare ye tovvard them in the face of the churches. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     14. Aboundance ſupply.]
                     Temporal benefites vpon ſpiritual perſons. He meaneth that ſuch as abound in vvorldly riches, ſhould communicate for ſupply of other their brethrens neceſſities, vvhatſoeuer they may: that on the other ſide they vvhom they helpe in temporals, may impart to them againe ſome of their ſpiritual riches, as praiers, and other holy vvorkes and graces, vvhich is a happie change and entercourſe for the vvelthy men,One may ſatisfie and ſupererogate for an other. if they could ſee it. And this place proueth plainely that the faſtings and ſatisfactorie deedes of one man, be auailable to others, yea and that holy Sainctes or other vertuous perſons may in meaſure and proportion of other mens neceſſities and deſeruings, allotte vnto them, as vvel the ſupererogation of their ſpiritual vvorkes, as theſe that abound in vvorldly goods, may giue almes of their ſuperfluities, to them vvhich are in neceſſitie. Vvhich enterchange and proportion of things the Apoſtle doth euidently ſet dovvne.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  He procedeth exhorting them to the foreſaid contribution, 3 to verifie his commending of them. 6 and to do it liberally, that ſo they may merite the more, and God be the more praiſed.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR concerning the miniſterie that is done ″ tovvard the ſainctes, it is ſuperfluous for me to vvrite vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For I know your prompt minde: for the which I glorie of you to the Macedonians: That Achaia alſo is ready from the yere paſt, and your emulation hath prouoked very many. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But I haue ſent the brethren, that the thing vvhich vve glorie of you, be not made voide in this behalfe, that (as I
 haue ſaid) you may be ready: ✝ 
                     verse 4 leſt vvhen the Macedoniās ſhal come vvith me, and finde you vnready, vve (that vve ſay not, ye) may be aſhamedThat is, in this matter of almes. Chryſ. Theophyl. in this ſubſtance. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore I thought it neceſſarie to deſire the brethren that they vvould come to you, and prepare this bleſſing before promiſed,The Epiſtle for S. Laurence, Aug. 10 to be ready ſo, as a bleſſing, ″ not as auarice. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And this I ſay, he that ″ ſovveth ſparingly, ſparingly alſo ſhal reape: and he that ſovveth in bleſſings, of bleſſings alſo ſhal reape. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Euery one as he hath determined in his hart, not of ſadnes or of neceſſitie.Eccles 35, 11. ✝ for God loueth a cheereful giuer. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And God is able to make al grace abound in you: that in al things alvvaies hauing al ſufficiencie, you may abound vnto al good vvorkes, ✝ 
                     verse 9 as it is vvritten:Pſ. 111, 9 
                  He diſtributed, he gaue to the poore:
                  The fruite of almes is the encreaſe of grace in al iuſtice and good workes to life euerlaſting: God giuing theſe things for revvard & recompenſe of charitable workes, which therfore be called the ſeed or meritorious cauſe of theſe ſpiritual fruites. 
                  his iuſtice remaineth for euer. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he that miniſtreth ſeede to the ſovver, vvil giue bread alſo for to eate: & vvil multiplie your ſeede, and vvil augmēt the increaſes of the fruites of your iuſtice: ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 11 that being enriched in al things, you may abound vnto al ſimplicitie, vvhich worketh by vs thankes-giuing to God. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Becauſe the miniſterie of this office ″ doth not only ſupplie thoſe things that the Saincts vvant, but aboundeth alſo by many thankes-giuings in our Lord, ✝ 
                     verse 13 by the proofe of this miniſterie, glorifying God in the obedience of your confeſſion vnto the Goſpel of Chriſt, and in the ſimplicitie of communicating vnto them, and vnto al, ✝ 
                     verse 14 and in their praying for you, being deſirous of you becauſe of the excellēt grace of God in you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Thankes be to God for his vnſpeakeable gift.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     7. Tovvard the Saincts.]
                     Procters for Catholike priſoners. By the Apoſtles earneſt and often calling vpon the Corinthians to giue almes for relieuing the faithful in diſtreſſe, the Paſtors of Gods Church may learne, that is ſpecially pertaineth to their office to be procters for holy men in priſon, pouertie, and al other neceſſitie, ſpecially vvhen their vvant commeth for confeſſion of their faith.
                  
                     5. Not at auarice.]
                     Cheereful giuing. The couetous man that parteth vvith his peny painefully and vvith ſorovv as though he loſt a limme of his body, is noted, and cheereful, ready, voluntarie, and large contribution is commended.
                  
                     6. Sovveth ſparingly.]
                     The greater almes, the greater merite and revvard. Almes is compared to ſeede. for as the ſeede throvven into the ground, though it ſeme to be caſt avvay, yet is not loſt, but is laid vp in certaine hope of great encreaſe: ſo that vvhich men giue in almes, though it ſeeme to be caſt avvay and to periſh in reſpect of the giuer, yet in deede it is moſt fruitful, the benefite thereof manifoldly returning to him againe. Vvherevpon the Apoſtles cōcluſion is cleere, that according to the meaſure of the almes or ſeeding (vvhich is more or leſſe in reſpect of the vvil and abilitie of the giuer) the encreaſe and aboundance of harueſt, that is, of grace and glorie ſhal enſue, See S. Auguſtine in Pſal. 49 circamed. & q. 4. ad Dulcitium.
                  
                  
                      
                     1
                           •
                        . Doth not onely ſupply.]
                     Almes redoūd to Gods honour. Vvhen almes are giuen, ſpecially to holy men, not onely the giuers obtaine great benefite thereby, and the vvantes of others be ſupplied, but God alſo by the receiuers continual praiers and thankes giuing therfore, is excedingly honoured: ſo that charitie beſtovved in this ſort, is an acte of Gods vvorſhip and of religion.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Againſt the falſe Apoſtles, graunting the infirmitie of his perſon, he doth notvvithſtanding ſet out the povver of his Apoſtleſhip, 
                        〈◊〉
                      reprehending them alſo for chalenging to them ſelues the praiſe of other mens labours.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I Paul my ſelf beſeeche you by the mildenes and modeſtie of Chriſt, vvho in preſence in deede am humble amōg you, but abſent am bold on you. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But I beſeeche you, that being preſent I neede not be bold by that confidence vvhervvith I am thought to be bold againſt ſome: vvhich thinke vs as though vve vvalke according to the fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vvalking in the fleſh, vve vvarre not according to the fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For the ″ vveapons of our vvarfare are not carnal: but mightie to God vnto the deſtruction of munitions, deſtroying counſels, ✝ 
                     verse 5 and al loftineſſe extolling it ſelf againſt the knovvledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie al vnderſtanding vnto the obedience of Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and hauing in a readineſſe ″ to reuenge al diſobediēce, vvhen your obedience ſhal be fulfilled. ✝ 
                     verse 7 See the things that are according to appearance. If any man haue affiance in him ſelf, that he is Chriſts: let him thinke this againe vvith him ſelf, that as he is Chriſts, ſo vve alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For and if I ſhould glorie ſomevvhat more of our povver, vvhich our Lord hath giuen vs ″ vnto edification and not to your deſtruction: I ſhal not be aſhamed. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But that I may not be thought as it vvere to terrifie you by epiſtles ( ✝ 
                     verse 10 for his epiſtles in deede, ſay they, are ſore and vehement: but his bodily preſence vveake, and his ſpeache contemptible) ✝ 
                     verse 11 let him this thinke that is ſuch a one, that ſuch as vve are in vvord by epiſtles, abſent: ſuch alſo vve are in deede, preſent. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For vve dare not matche or compare our ſelues vvith certaine, that commend them ſelues: but vve meaſure our ſelues in our ſelues, and compare our ſelues to our ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vve vvil not glorie aboue our meaſure: but according to the meaſure of the rule, vvhich God hath meaſured to vs, a meaſure to reache euen vnto you.
 ✝ 
                     verse 14 For not, as though vve reached not vnto you, doe vve extend our ſelues beyond. For vve are come as farre as to you in the Goſpel of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 not glorying aboue meaſure in other mens labours: but hauing
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , hope of your faith increaſing, to be magnified in you according to our rule aboū
                  dantly, ✝ 
                     verse 16 yea vnto thoſe places that are beyond you, to euangelize, not in an other mans rule, to glorie in thoſe things that are prepared before.Ier. 9, 23 ✝ 
                     verse 17 But he that glorieth, let him glorie in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For not he that commendeth him ſelf, the ſame is approued: but vvhom God commendeth.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     4. Vveapons.]
                     Puniſhing of Heretikes. He meaneth the ample ſpiritual and Apoſtolical povver giuen by Chriſt for the puniſhment of falſe Apoſtles, Heretikes, and rebelles to Gods Church, vvho are here noted ſpecially by pride and inſolence (vvhich is the proper marke of ſuch fellovves) to extoll themſelues aboue the meaſure of the ſcience of God,Their pride. vvhich conſiſteth in humble obedience to the faith and the preachers of the ſame.
                  
                     6. To reuenge.]
                     The ſpiritual povver of Biſhops againſt Heretikes. You may ſee hereby, that the ſpiritual povver of Biſhops is not onely in preaching the Goſpel, and ſo by perſuaſion and exhortation onely (as ſome Heretikes hold) to remitte or retaine ſinnes,Caluin. vpon this place. but that it hath authoritie to puniſh iudge, and condemne Heretikes and other like rebelles: vvhich povver * one of the principal rebelles of this time being conuinced by the euidence of the place, acknovvledgeth to be grounded vpon Chriſtes vvord, Vvhatſoeuer you binde in earth, ſhal be bound in heauen: Mat. 18, 1
                           •
                        . applying alſo the vvordes ſpoken to Hieremie (c. 1, 10.) Behold I appoint thee ouer Nations and kingdoms, that thou plant, plucke vp, build and deſtroy: to confirme and explicate the povver Apoſtolike here alleaged by S. Paul. Mary they vvould gladly dravv this povver from the lavvful ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles,Heretical Cō
                        ſiſtories. to them ſelues, their miniſters and conſiſtories, vvhich are nothing els but the ſhoppes and Councels of ſedition and al the conſpiracies of this time, againſt the lavvful Princes of the vvorld.
                  
                     8. Vnto edification.]
                     Eccleſiaſtical cenſures (namely Excommunication) whē & where to be executed. This great povver of the Churches cenſures, ſpecially of Excommunication, as it vvas giuen for the good and ſaluation of the people, ſo it muſt not be vſed againſt the innocent: no nor yet vpon Heretikes or other offenders, but vvhere and vvhen it may by likelihod benefite either the parties, or the people, or may be executed vvithout the hurt or perturbation of the vvhole Church, as often times it can not be, by reaſon of the multitude of offenders. Vvhich cauſed the Apoſtle here to ſignifie that he vvould not vſe his vttermoſt authoritie againſt the falſe Apoſtles vvhich diſturbed them, till them ſelues vvere in perfect obedience vnto him, leſt by puniſhing the principal offenders, a greater diſturbance and reuolt might fall among the people, if they vvere not before in perfect obedience.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  He reaſoneth the matter vvith the Corinthians, vvhy they ſhould preferre the falſe Apoſtles before him. 16 And becauſe they giue them leaue to bragge and commend themſelues, and to abuſe them ſo miſerably, he truſteth they vvil alſo giue him the hearing: 21 and ſo he beginneth, and firſt ſh
                        •
                     vving himſelf in al Iudaical reſpectes (vvherein onely ſtood al their boaſting) to be as they are, he addeth aftervvard ſuch a long roll of his ſufferings for Chriſt, as is incomparable.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  VVould God you could beare ſome litle of my folly: but do ye alſo ſupport me: ✝ 
                     verse 2 for I emulate you vvith the emulation of God. For I haueThe Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors did deſpouſe the people vvhom they conuerted, to Chriſt, in al puritie & Chaſtitie of truth, and vvholy vndefiled and void of errour and hereſie. deſpouſed you to one man, to preſent you a chaſte virgin vnto Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But I feare leſt, as the ſerpent ſeduced Eue by his ſubteltie,Gen. 3, 4 ſo your ſenſes may be corrupted, & fall ″ from the ſimplicitie that is in Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For if he thatThe note of a falſe teacher, to come: 
                     
                        •
                     hat is, vvithout lavvful calling or ſending to thruſt and intrude him ſelf into an other mans charge. commeth, preache an other Chriſt vvhō we haue not preached, or you receiue an other-ſpirit vvhom you haue not receiued: or an other Goſpel vvhich you haue not receiued: you might vvel ſuffer it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For I ſuppoſe that I haue done nothing leſſe then the great Apoſtles. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For although ″ rude in ſpeache, yet not in knovvledge. but in al things we are made manifeſt to you. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Or did I commit a ſinne, humbling my ſelf, that you might be exalted? becauſe I euāgelized vnto you the Goſpel of God gratis? ✝ 
                     verse 8 Other churches I ſpoiled, taking a ſtipend, for your miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen I vvas vvith you, and had neede, I vvas burdenous to none: for that vvhich I vvanted, the brethren ſupplied that came from Macedonia: & in al things I haue kept my ſelf vvithout burden to you, and vvil keepe. ✝ 
                     verse 10 The truth of Chriſt is in me, that this glorying ſhal not be infringed tovvard me in the countrires of Achaia. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvherfore? becauſe I loue you not? God doth knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But that vvhich I doe, I vvil alſo doe, that I may cut avvay the occaſion of them that deſire occaſion: that, in that vvhich they glorie, they may be found euen like vs. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For ſuch falſe apoſtles areA proper terme for Heretikes that ſhape thē ſelues into the habit of true teachers, ſpecially by often allegation and commentatiō of the Scriptures. Reade the notable admonition of the auncient vvriter Vincentius Livinenſis in his golden booke Againſt the Prophane neuelties of al hereſies.
                   craftie vvorkes, trāsfiguring them ſelues into Apoſtles of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And no maruel: for Satan him ſelf tranſfigureth him ſelf into an Angel of light. ✝ 
                     verse 15 It is no great matter therfore if his miniſters be trāsfigured as the miniſters of iuſtice: vvhoſe ende ſhal be according to their vvorkes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 Againe I ſay, (let no man thinke me to be fooliſh: othervviſe take me as fooliſh, that I alſo may glorie a litle,) ✝ 
                     verse 17 that vvhich I ſpeake, I ſpeake not according to God, but as it vvere in fooliſhnes, in this ſubſtance of glorying. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Becauſe many glorie according to the fleſh, I alſo vvil glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For you do gladly ſuffer the fooliſh:The Epiſtle vpon the Sunday of Se
                        •
                     ageſme. vvhereas your ſelues are vviſe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For you ſuffer if a man bring you into ſeruitude, if a man deuoure, if a man take, if a man be extolled, if a man ſtrike you on the face. ✝ 
                     verse 21 I ſpeake according
 to diſhonour, as though vve had been vveake in this part. Vvherein any man dare (I ſpeake foliſhly) I dare alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 22 * They are Hebrevves:Phil. 3, 5. and I. They are Iſraëlites: and I. They are the ſeede of Abraham: and I. ✝ 
                     verse 23 They are the miniſters of Chriſt: and I. (I ſpeake as one ſcarſe vviſe) more I: in many moe labours, in priſons more aboundantly, in ſtripes aboue meaſure,Dou. 25, 3. in deathes often. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Of the Ievves fiue times, did I receiue * fourtie, ſauing one. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Thriſe vvas I beaten 
* vvith roddes,Act. 16, 23. 14, 18. 27, 15. * once I vvas ſtoned, thriſe I ſuffred * ſhipvvracke, night and day haue I been in the depth of the ſea, ✝ 
                     verse 26 in iourneying often, perils of vvaters, perils of theeues, perils of my nation, perils of Gentiles, perils in the citie, perils in the wildernes, perils in the ſea, perils among falſe brethren, ✝ 
                     verse 27 in labour and miſerie, in much vvatchings, in hunger and thirſt, in faſtings often, in colde and nakednes, ✝ 
                     verse 28 beſide thoſe things which are outwardly: my daily
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . S. Chryſoſtom and Theophylacte interpret it of daily conſpiracie againſt him. others, of multitude of cares inſtāt & vrgēt vpō him. inſtance, the carefulnes of al churches. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Vvho is vveake, and I am not vveake? vvho is ſcandalized, and Inon vror? 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ? Act. 9, 24. am not burnt? ✝ 
                     verse 30 If I muſt glorie: I vvil glorie of the things that concerne my infirmitie. ✝ 
                     verse 31 The God and Father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, vvho is bleſſed for euer, knovveth that I lie not. ✝ 
                     verse 32 * At Damaſcus the Gouernour of the nation vnder Aretas the king, kept the citie of the Damaſcenes, for the apprehend me: ✝ 
                     verse 33 and through a vvindovv in a baſket vvas I let dovvne by the vvall, and ſo eſcaped his handes.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . From the ſimplicitie.] People fall from their firſt faith, virginitie, and ſimplicitie in Chriſt, not by ſodē reuolt,As Eue by the Serpent, ſo the people are ſeduced by Heretikes. but by litle & litle, in giuing eare to the ſubtil perſuaſiō of the Serpent, ſpeaking to thē by the ſvveete mouthes & illurementes of Heretikes of vvhich kind of ſeductiō he giueth Eue for an example, vvho vvas by her greedy deſire of knovvledge and the Diuels promis of the ſame, dravven from the natiue ſimplicitie and obedience to God. as at this day, promis and pretenſe of knovvledge driueth many a poore ſoul from the ſure, true, ſincere, and onely beleefe of Gods Church.
                  
                     6. Rude in ſpeach.]
                     Heretikes ſometime eloquent. Hereby vve ſee that the ſeditious and falſe teachers haue often the gift of eloquence vvhereby the ſimple he eaſily beguiled. Such vvere Corè and Dathan, as Ioſephus vvriteth Antiq. li. 4 c. 
                           •
                        . for the ſame, S. Auguſtine (li. 5 Confeſ. c. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .) calleth the Heretike Fauſtus Manichaeus, magnum laqueum Diaboli, a great ſnare of the Diuel, ſaying that he paſſed the glorious Doctor S. Ambroſe in ſhevv of vvordes,Knovvledge better then gay wordes. but farre inferior to him (vvithout al compariſon) in ſubſtance and matter. In vvhich ſort the Apoſtle here is glad to compare him ſelf vvith the falſe Apoſtles, vvhom the Corinthians did folovv and extoll farre aboue him by reaſon of their eloquence,Yong orators among heretikes preferred before the aū
                        cient Doctors. graunting to them that gift, but chalenging to him ſelf ſuperioritie in knovvledge, vvhich al vviſe men preferre before vaine vvordes. And it is the bane of our poore countrie, that the people novv a daies giue credit rather to nevv orators and foliſh yonkers, for their ſvveete ſpeaches: then to the glorious Doctors of Chriſtes Church, for their ſingular knovvledge and more graue eloquence.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of his incomparable viſions, 
                        •
                      but for humilitie liketh better to talke of his infirmities: 11 putting the fau
                        •
                     s in the Corinthians for that he is faine thus to rehearſe his ovvne commendation. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Vvhere againe he reaſoneth the matter vvith them like 
                        〈◊〉
                      father, vvhy they ſhould preferre thoſe falſe Apoſtles before him. 20 And feareth left at his comming he ſhal be compelled to excommunicate many of them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IF I muſt glorie (it is not expedient in deede) but I vvil come to the ″ viſions and reuelatiōs of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 2 I knovv a man in Chriſt aboue fourtene yeres agoe (vvhether in the body, I knovv not: or out of the body, I knovv not: God doth knovv) ſuch a oneBy this vve may proue that it is neither impoſsible, incredible, nor vndecent, that is reported by the auncient fathers of ſome that haue been rauiſhed or rapt (whether in body or out of body God knovveth) & brought to ſee the ſtate of the next life, as vvel of the ſaued as damned. rapt euen to the third heauē. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And I knovv ſuch a man (vvhether in the body, or out of the body, I knovv not: God doth know) ✝ 
                     verse 4 that he vvas rapt into Paradiſe: & heard ſecrete vvordes, which it is not lavvful for a man to ſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For ſuch an one I vvil glorie: but for my ſelf I vvil glorie nothing, ſauing in my infirmities. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For and if I vvil glorie, I ſhal not be fooliſh: for I ſhal ſay truth. but I ſpare, leſt any mā ſhould eſteeme me aboue that vvhich he ſeeth in me, or heareth any thing of me. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And leſt the greatnes of the reuelations might extoll me, there vvas giuen me a pricke of my fleſh, an angel of Satan, to buffet me. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the vvhich thing thriſe I beſought our Lord, that it might depart from me: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and he ſaid to me, My grace ſufficeth thee, for povver is perfited in infirmitie. Gladly therfore vvil I glorie in mine infirmitie, that the povver of Chriſt may dvvel in me. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 For the vvhich cauſe I pleaſe my ſelf in infirmities, in contumelies, in neceſſities, in perſecutions, in diſtreſſes for Chriſt. for vvhen I am vveake, then am I mightie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 I am become fooliſh: you haue compelled me. For I ought to haue been commended of you: for I haue been nothing leſſe then they that are aboue meaſure Apoſtles: although I am nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Yet the ſignes of my Apoſtleſhip haue been done vpon you in al patience, ″ in ſignes & vvōders and mighty deedes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For vvhat is there that you haue had leſſe then the other churches: but that I my ſelf haue not burdened you? Pardon me this iniurie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Behold, novv the third time I am ready to come to you: and I vvil not be burdenous vnto you. For I ſeeke not the things that are
 yours: but you. For neither ought the childrē lay vp treaſures for the parents, but the parents for the children. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But I moſt gladly vvil beſtovv, & vvil my ſelf moreouer be beſtovved for your ſoules: although louing you more, I am loued leſſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 But be it ſo: I haue not burdened you: but being craftie, I tooke you by guile. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Haue I circumuented you by any of them vvhom I ſent to you? ✝ 
                     verse 18 I requeſted Titus, and I ſent vvith him a brother. Did Titus circumuent you? vvalked vve not vvith one ſpirit? not in the ſelf ſame 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 Of old thinke you that vve excuſe our ſelfe 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Againe Before God, in Chriſt vve ſpeake: but al things (
                     〈…〉
                  ) for your edifying. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For I feare leſt perhaps vvhen I come, I finde you not ſuch as I vvould and I befound of you, ſuch an one as you vvould not. leſt perhaps cōtentions, emulatiōs, ſtomakings, diſſenſions, detractions, vvhiſperings, ſvvellings, ſeditions be among you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 leſt againe vvhen I come, God humble me among you: & I mourne many of them that ſinned before, &
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Vvhich S. Auguſtine ſaith (ep. 108) is ſpoken here of doing great penance for heinous ſinnes, as P
                           •
                        ni
                        
                           ••
                        ntes did in the primitiue Church. So that it is not onely to repent or to amend their liues, as the Proteſtants tranſlate it. haue not done penāce for the vncleannes & fornication and incontinencie that they haue committed.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     1. Viſions.]
                     Viſiōs haue no credite with heretikes. S. Cyprian (ep. 69. nu. 4.) complaineth that the Aduerſaries of Gods Church and Prieſtes, giue no credit to viſions: but their incredulitie is much more in our daies, that condemne al ſuch reuelations, though they be reported and recorded for moſt certaine, of holy. S. Gregorie, S. Bede, or vvho els ſo euer. Yea they are ſo vvicked in this caſe, that the viſion vvhich the holy author of the booke of Mathabees * calleth fide dignum,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Mach
                           •
                        . 15, 11. vv
                        •
                     rthy of credit, is one cauſe vvhy they deny the vvhole booke to be Canonical: and as vvel might they for this viſion deny al S. Paules Epiſtles, and for the like, the Actes of the Apoſtles, Act. 9. 10. 11. 12. 27: and the Goſpel it ſelf, Mat. 1, 20. 2, 13, 19.
                  
                  
                     11. Aboue meaſure Apoſtles.]
                     The Apoſtles ſome greater then other. Though al vvere in that they vvere Apoſtles, of one and the ſame order, yet ye may ſee that ſome had maruelous great preeminence and priuilege aboue others in the ſame office: ſpecially S. Peter and S. Iohn, vvhom S. Paul often calleth great Apoſtles, aboue meaſue or paſsing Apoſtles, 
                           •
                        l epille
                           •
                        s, &c. 2 Cor. 11, 5. 12, 11. Gal. 2, 9.
                  
                     12. In ſignes.]
                     we muſt ſticke to the faith firſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        anted by miracles. Miracles be neceſſarie, and be great ſignes of truth, vvhen it is firſt nevvly taught. And therfore let al Catholike men hol
                        •
                      faſt that faith vvhich vvas firſt preached and confirmed by miracles. as in England by S Auguſtine, and in other nations by other holy Apoſtolike men. And let the Heretikes that preach extraordinarily, nevvly, and othervviſe then vve receiued at our firſt conuerſion, ſhevv their calling and doctrine by miracles, or els let them be taken for falſe Apoſtles as they be.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  He driueth into them the feare of excommunication: to the end that they doing penance beforehand, he may not be compelled to vſe his authoritie vvhen he commeth, and as he hath threatened. 11 And ſo vvith a general exhortation he endeth.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LO this the third time I come vnto you:Deu. 19, 15. * In the mouth of tvvo or three vvitneſſes ſhal euery vvord ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 2 I foretold and doe foretel as preſent, and novv abſent, to them that ſinned before, and al the reſt, that if I come againe, I vvil not ſpare. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Seeke you an experiment of him that ſpeaketh in me, Chriſt: vvho in you is not vveake, but is mightie in you? ✝ 
                     verse 4 For although he vvas crucified of infirmitie: yet he liueth by the povver of God. For vve alſo are vveake in him: but vve ſhal liue vvith him by the povver of God on you. ✝ 
                     verse 5 ″ Trie your ovvne ſelues if you be in the faith: proue ye your ſelues. Knovv you not your ſelues that Chriſt IESVS is in you, vnleſſe perhaps you be reprobates. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But I hope youſhal knovv knovv' that vve are not reprobates. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vve pray God, that you doe no euil, not that vve may appeare approued, but that you may doe that vvhich is good, and vve be as reprobates. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For vve can not any thing againſt the truth: but for the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For vve reioyce, for that vve are vveake, & you are mightie. This alſo vve pray for, your conſummation. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Therfore theſe things I vvrite abſent: that being preſent I may not deale hardly according to theEccleſiſtical power to puniſh offenders by the cēſures of the Church. povver vvhich our Lord hath giuen me vnto edification and not vnto deſtruction.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the reſt brethren,The Epiſtle in a 
                        •
                     oti
                        •
                     e Maſſe of the B. Trinitie. reioyce, be perfect,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , take exhortation, be of one minde, haue peace, and the God of peace & of loue ſhal be vvith you.Ro. 16, 16. 1. Co. 16, 20. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Salute one an other in a * holy kiſſe. Al the ſaincts ſalute you. ✝ 
                     verse 13 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, and the charitie of God, and the communication of the holy Ghoſt be vvith you all. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     5. Trie your ſelues.] The Heretikes argue herevpō,Vve may knovv that we haue faith, but not that vve are in grace. that euery man may knovv him ſelf certainely to be in grace: vvhere the Apoſtle ſpeaketh expreſly and onely of faith. the act vvhereof a man may knovv and feele to be in him ſelf, becauſe it is an act of vnderſtanding, though he can not be aſſured that he hath his ſinnes remitted, and that he is in al pointes in ſtate of grace and ſaluation: becauſe euery man that is of the Catholike faith, is not alvvaies of good life agreable therevnto, nor the actes of our vvil ſo ſubiect to vnderſtanding, that vve can knovv certainely vvhether vve be good or euil. See S. Auguſtine 
                        
                           ••
                        . 7 de perfect. iuſtitia c. 15. Li. de Cor. et grat. c. 13. & S. Thomas 1. 2, q. 112. art. 5.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE GALATIANS.
            
               THAT this Epiſtle may ſeeme to be the firſt that S. Paul vvrote, vvas declared in the Argument of the Epiſtle to the Romanes, notvvithſtanding that in the ſecond chapter it is euidēs to haue bene vvritten 14 yeres at the leaſt after his Conuerſion, and (as it is ſaid) from Epheſus belike at that time of his being there, vvhich is mentioned Act. 18.
            The occaſion of it vvere ſuch Falſe apoſtles, as vve reade of, Act. 15. Et quidam deſcendentes, &c. And certaine comming dovvne from Ievvrie, taught the brethren (that is the Chriſtian Gentiles at Antioche) that vnles you be circumciſed according to the manner of Moyſes, you can not be ſaued. Such commers alſo to the Galatians (vvhom S. Paul had conuerted Act. 16, as him ſelf mentioneth Gal. 1. and 4.) did ſeduce them, ſaying, that al the other Apoſtles to vvhom they ſhould rather harken then to Paul (vvho came they knevv not from vvhence) did vſe Circumciſion: yea and that Paul himſelf, vvhen he came among them, durſt do none other. And to vvinne them more eaſily, they did not lay on them the burden of the vvhole Lavv, but of Circumciſion only.
            Againſt theſe deceiuers, S. Paul declareth, that he receiued his Apoſtleſhip and learned the Goſpel that he preacheth, of Chriſt him ſelf after hi
                  •
                Reſurrection: and that the other Apoſtles (although he learned nothing of them) receiued him into their ſocietie, and allovved vvel of his preaching to the Gentiles though themſelues being Ievves, and liuing among the Ievves, had not yet left the ceremonies of the Lavv: hovvbeit they did not put in them any hope of iuſtification, but in Chriſt alone vvithout them. He declareth moreouer, that the ſaid Falſe apoſtles belyed him, in ſaying that he alſo preached Circumciſion ſometimes. Againe, that they themſelues in preaching no more but Circumciſion, did againſt the nature of Circumciſion, becauſe it is a profeſsion to obſerue the vvhole Lavv: finally, vvhatſoeuer they pretended, that in deede they did it onely to pleaſe the Ievves, of vvhom othervviſe they ſhould be perſecuted.
            So that in this Epiſtle he handleth the ſame matter, vvhich in the Epiſtle to the Romanes: but here leſſe exactly and more briefly, becauſe the Galatians vvere very rude, and the Romanes contrarivviſe, repleti, omni ſcientia (Rom. 15.) repleniſhed vvith al knovvledge.
            
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE GALATIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  After the foundation laide in the ſalutation, 
                        •
                      6 he exclaimeth againſt the Galatians, and their falſe apoſtles, 1
                        •
                      conſidering that the Goſpel vvhich he preached to thē, he had it immediatly of Chriſt him ſelf. 13 Vvhich to ſhevv he beginneth to tel the ſtorie of his conuerſion and preaching ſince then, that as he learned nothing of the other Apoſtles; ſo yet he had their approbation.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle not of men, ″ neither by man, but by IESVS Chriſt, and God the Father that raiſed him from the dead, ✝ 
                     verse 2 and al the brethren that are vvith me: to the churches of Galatia. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvho gaue him ſelf for our ſinnes, that he might deliuer vs from this preſent vvicked vvorld, according to the vvil of our God and father: ✝ 
                     verse 5 to vvhom is glorie for euer and euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 I maruel that thus ſo ſoone you are tranſferred from him that called you into the grace of Chriſt, vnto an other Goſpel: ✝ 
                     verse 7 vvhich is not an other, vnles there be ſome that trouble you, and vvilNew Goſpellers that peruert, corrupt, or alter the one onely true and firſt deliuered Goſpel, are to be auoided. See S. Auguſtine Cont. Fauſtum li. 32. c. 27.
                   inuert the Goſpel of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But although we, ″ or an Angel from heauen, euāgelize to you beſide that vvhich vve haue euangelized to you, be he anáthema. ✝ 
                     verse 9 As vve haue ſaid before, ſo novv I ſay againe, If any euangelize to you, beſide that vvhich you haue receiued, be he anáthema. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For do I novv vſe perſuaſion to men, or to God? Or do I ſeeke to pleaſe men? If I yet did pleaſe men, I ſhould not be the ſeruant of Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  The Epiſtle vpon the Commemoration of S. Paul, Iun. 30. For I doe you to vnderſtand, brethren, the Goſpel that
 vvas euangelized of me, that it is not according to man. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For neither did I receiue it of man, no
                     •
                   learne 
                     〈◊〉
                  : but by the reuelation of IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 For you haue heard my cōuerſation ſometime in Iudaiſme, that aboue meaſure I perſecuted the Church of God,Act. 9, 1. and expugned it, ✝ 
                     verse 14 and profited in Iudaiſme aboue many of mine equales in my nation, being more aboundantly an emulator of the traditions of my fathers. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But vvhen it pleaſed him that ſeparated me from my mothers vvombe, and called me by his grace, to reueale his ſonne in me, ✝ 
                     verse 16 that I ſhould euangelize him among the Gentils, incontinent I condeſcended not to fleſh and bloud, ✝ 
                     verse 17 neither came I to Hieruſalem to the Apoſtles my anteceſſors: but I vvent into Arabia, and againe I returned to Damaſcus. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Then, after three yeres I came to Hieruſalem ″ to ſee Peter: and taried with him fiftene daies. ✝ 
                     verse 19 But other of the Apoſtles ſavv I none: ſauing Iames 
S. Iames was called our Lordes brother after the hebrew phraſe of the Iewes, by vvhich neere kinſmen are called brethrē. for they were not brethren in deede, but rather ſuſters children. the brother of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the things that I vvrite to you: behold before God, that I lie not. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 21 After that, I came into the partes of Syria and Cilicia. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And I vvas vnknowen by ſight to the churches of Ievvrie, that vvere in Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 23 but they had heard only, That he vvhich perſecuted vs ſometimes, doth novv euangelize the faith vvhich ſometime he expugned: ✝ 
                     verse 24 and in me they glorified God.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     1. Neither by man.]
                     S. Paul ſent to preache by ordinarie impoſitiō of hādes. Though he vvere not firſt by mans election, nomination, or aſſignement, but by Gods ovvne ſpecial appointmēt, choſen to be an Apoſtle: yet by the like expreſſe ordinance of God he tooke orders or impoſition of hands of men, as is plaine Act. 18. Let vs bevvare then of ſuch falſe Apoſtles, as novv a daies intrude them ſelues to the office of Miniſterie and preaching, neither called of God, nor rightly ordered of men.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Or an Angel.]
                     No ſhevv of learning or vertue muſt moue vs from the faith. Many vvorthie obſeruations are made in the fathers vvritings, of the earneſt admonition of the Apoſtle, and much may vve gather of the text it ſelf, firſt, that the credit of any man or Angel for vvhat learning, eloquence, ſhevv of grace or vertue ſo euer, though he vvrought miracles, ſhould not moue a Chriſtian man from that truth vvhich he hath once receiued in the Catholike Church: of vvhich point Vincentius Li
                        •
                     inenſis excellently treateth. li. cont. profan. hareſ. Nouitates. Vvhereby vve may ſee that it is great pitie and ſhame, that ſo many folovv Luther and Caluin and ſuch other Ieude fellovves, into a nevv Goſpel, vvhich are ſo farre from Apoſtles and Angels, that they are not any vvhit comparable vvith the old Heretikes in giftes of learning or eloquence,Preaching cō
                        trarie to the ſaith, receiued is forbidden, not other preaching. much leſſe in good life.
                  
                     Secondly S. Auguſtine noteth vpon the vvord,
                     Tra
                           •
                        t. 98 in Ioan. Beſide, that not al other teaching, or more preaching then the firſt, is forbidden▪ but ſuch as is contrarie and diſagreing to the rule of faith. The Apoſtle did not ſay, ſaith he, If any man euangelize to you more then you haue receiued, but, beſide that you receiued. for if he ſhould ſay that, he ſhould be preiudi
                        •
                     ial to him ſelf, vvho coueted to come to the Theſſalonians, that he might ſupply that vvhich vvas vvanting to their faith. Novv he that ſupplieth,
 addeth that vvhich vvas lacking, taketh not avvay that vvhich vvas, &c. By vvhich vve ſee hovv friuolouſly and calumniouſly the Heretikes charge the Church vvith addition to the Scripture.
                  
                  Thirdly,The Goſpel is not onely in the written word of ſcripture, but in vnwritten tradition alſo. as vvel by the vvord euangelizamus (vve euangelize) as the vvord accepiſtis (you haue receiued) vve may note that the firſt truth, againſt vvhich no ſecond Goſpelling or doctrine may be admitted, is not that onely vvhich he vvrote to the Galatians, or vvhich is conteined either in his or any other of the Apoſtles or Euāgeliſtes vvritings, but that vvhich vvas by vvord of mouth alſo preached, taught, or deliuered them firſt, before he wrote to them. Therfore the Aduerſaries of the Church that meaſure the word of God or Goſpel by the Scriptures onely, thinking them ſelues not to incurre S. Paules curſe, except they teach directly againſt the vvritten vvord, are fouly beguiled. As therein alſo they any ſhamefully erre, when they charge the Catholikes with addint to the Goſpel, when they teach any thing that is not in expreſſe wordes written by the Apoſtles or Euangeliſtes. not marking that the Apoſtle in this Chapter, and els where, commonly calleth his & his fellovves whole preaching, the Goſpel, be it written or vnvvritten.
                  Fourthly,After-preaching & ouerſowing of nouelties, 
                           •
                        rgueth falſe doctrine. by the ſame wordes we ſee condemned al after-preachings, later doctrines, new ſectes and authors of the ſame: that onely being true, which was firſt by the Apoſtles and Apoſtolike men as the lavvful huſbandmen of Chriſtes fild, ſovved and planted in the Church: and that falſe, which was laten and as it vvere ouerſovven by the enemie. By which rule not onely Tertullian (de praeſcript. nu. 6 & 9.) but all other aūcient Doctors, and ſpecially S. Irenaeus (li. 3. c. 2. 3. 4.) tried truth from falſehod, and condemned old Heretikes, prouing Marcion, Valentine, Cerdon, Menander, and ſuch like, falſe Apoſtles, becauſe they came in with their nouelties long after the Church was ſettled in former truth.
                  Sixthly,The Apoſtles curſe vpon al that teache nevv doctrine, and dravv men from the Cath. Church. This curſe or execration pronounced by the Apoſtle, toucheth not onely the Galatians, or thoſe of the Apoſtles time, that preached othervviſe then they did, but it perteineth to al times, preachers, and teachers, vnto the worldes end, and it concerneth then. (as Vincentius Lirinenſis ſaith) that preach a new faith, or change that old faith which they receiued in the vnitie of of the Catholike Church.Li. cont. proph. haer. nouit. 
                     To preach any thing to Chriſtian Catholike men (ſaith he) beſides that vvhich they haue receiued, neuer vvas it lavvful, neuer is it, nor neuer ſhal it be lavvful, to ſay anathema to ſuch. it hath been, and is, and ſhal be alvvaies behooful. So S. Auguſtine by this place holdeth al accurſed, that draw a Chriſtian man from the ſocietie of the whole Church, to make the ſeueral part of any one ſect: that call to the hidden conuenticles of Heretikes, from the open and knovven Church of Chriſt: that allure to the priuate, from the common: finally al that draw with chatting curioſitie the children of the Catholike Church, by teaching any thing beſides that they found in the church. ep. 48. Pſal. 103. Con. 2.
                     Aug. ep. 165. mentioning alſo that a Donatiſt feined an Angel to haue admoniſhed him to call his frende out of the Communion of the Catholike Church into his ſect. and he ſaith, that if it had been an Angel in deede, yet ſhould he not haue heard him. Laſtly S. Hierom vſeth this place, wherein the Apoſtle giueth the curſe or anáthema to al falſe teachers not once but tvviſe, to proue that the zeale of Catholike men ought to be ſo great tovvard al Heretikes and their doctrines,Zeale againſt heretikes. that they ſhould giue them the anáthema, though they vvere neuer ſo deere vnto them. In which caſe, ſaith this holy Doctor, I would not ſpare mine ovvne parents. Ad Pammach. c. 3. cont. Io. Hieroſ.
                  
                  
                     18. To ſee Peter.]
                     B. Paul doth viſite S. Peter of honour and reuerence tovvard him. In what eſtimation S. Peter was with this Apoſtle, it appeareth: ſeing for reſpect and honour of his perſon, and of duety as Tertullian de praeſcript. ſaith (notvvithſtanding his great affaires Eccleſiaſticall) he vvent ſo farre to ſee him.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      not in vulgar maner, but (as S. Chryſoſtom noteth the Greeke word to import) to behold him as men behold a thing or perſon of name, excellencie, and maieſtie. for vvhich cauſe, and to fill him ſelf with the perfect vew of his behauiour, he abode with him fiftene daies. See S. Hierom ep. 10
                           •
                         ad Paulinum. to. 
                           •
                        . who maketh alſo a myſterie of the number of daies that he taried with S. Peter. See S. Ambroſe in Comment. huius loci. and S. Chryſoſtome vpon this place, and ho. 87 in Ioan.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He telleth furth the ſtorie begonne in the laſt chapter, and hovv he reprehended Peter, 15 and then ſpecially vrgeth the enſample of the Chriſtian Ievves, vvho ſought vnto Chriſt for iuſtification, and that by vvarrant alſo of their Lavv it ſelf, as alſo becauſe othervviſe Chriſts death had been needles.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THEN after fourtene yeres I vvent vp againe to Hieruſalem vvith Barnabas, taking Titus alſo vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I vvent vp according to reuelation: and ″ cōferred with them the Goſpel which I preach among the Gentiles, but apart with thē that ſeemed to be ſomething, leſt perhaps ″ in vaine I ſhould runne or had runne. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But neither Titus which vvas with me, vvhereas he vvas a Gentil, vvas compelled to be circumciſed: ✝ 
                     verse 4 but becauſe of the falſe brethren craftely brought in, vvhich craftely came in to eſpie our libertie that vve haue in Chriſt IESVS, that they might bring vs into ſeruitude. ✝ 
                     verse 5 To vvhom vve yelded not ſubiection no not for an houre, that the truth of the Goſpel may remaine vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But of them that ſeemed to be ſomething, (vvhat they vvere ſometime,Deu. 10, 17. it is nothing to me. * God accepteth not the perſon of man) for to me, they that ſeemed to be ſomething, ″ added nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But contrarievviſe vvhen they had ſeen, that to me vvas committed the Goſpel of theSee the marginal Annotation Rom. 2. v. 25.
                   prepuce, as ″ to Peter of the circumciſion ( ✝ 
                     verse 8 for he that vvrought in Peter to the Apoſtleſhip of the circumciſion, vvrought in me alſo among the Gentils) ✝ 
                     verse 9 and vvhen they had knovven the grace that vvas giuen me, Iames and Cephas and Iohn, vvhich ſeemed to be pillers, ″ gaue to me and Barnabas the right handes of ſocietie: that vve vnto the Gentiles, & they vnto the circumciſion: ✝ 
                     verse 10 only that vve ſhould be mindeful of the poore: the vvhich ſame thing alſo I vvas careful to doe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And vvhen Cephas vvas come to Antioche, ″ I reſiſted himThat is, in preſence, before them al, as 
                        •
                     eza him ſelf expoundeth it. Yet the Engliſh Bezites to the more diſgracing of S. Peter, tranſlate, to his face, No. Teſt. an. 1580. in face,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   becauſe he vvas ″ reprehenſible. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For before that certaine came from Iames, he did eate vvith the Gentiles: but vvhen they vvere come, he vvithdrevv and ſeparated him ſelf, fearing them that vvere of the circumciſion. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And to his ſimulation cōſented the reſt of the Ievves, ſo that Barnabas alſo vvas ledde of them into that ſimulation. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But vvhen I ſavv that they vvalked not rightly to the veritie of the Goſpel, I ſaid to Cephas before them al: If thou being a Ievve, liueſt Gentile-like & not Iudaically: hovv doeſt thou compel the Gentils to Iudaize.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vve are by nature Ievves, and not of the Gentils, ſinners.
Ro. 3, 19. 20.▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 16 But knovving that * man is not iuſtified by the 
 vvorkesBy this and by the diſcourſe of this whole epiſtle, you may perceiue, that when iuſtification is attributed to faith, the vvorkes of Charitie, be not excluded, but the vvorkes of Moyſes law: that is, the ceremonies, ſacrifices and ſacramēts thereof principally, and conſequently al workes done merely by nature and free wil, without the faith, grace, ſpirit, & aide of Chriſt. of the Lavv, but by the faith of IESVS Chriſt: we alſo beleeue in Chriſt IESVS, that we may be iuſtified by the faith of Chriſt, and not by the vvorkes of the Lavv: for the vvhich cauſe, by the workes of the Law no fleſh ſhal be iuſtified. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But if ſeeking to be iuſtified in Chriſt, our ſelues alſo be found ſinners: is Chriſt then a miniſter of ſinne? God forbid. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For if I build the ſame things againe vvhich I haue deſtroied, I make my ſelf a preuaricatour. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For I by the Lavv, am dead to the Law, that I may liue to God: vvith Chriſt I am nailed to the croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And I liue, novv not I: but Chriſt liueth in me. And that that I liue novv in the fleſh, I liue in the faith of the ſonne of God, who loued me, & deliuered him ſelf for me. ✝ 
                     verse 21 I caſt not avvay the grace of God. For if iuſtice be by the Lavv, then Chriſt died in vaine.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Conferred vvith them.]
                     S. Paul conferreth vvith S. Peter and the reſt, for trial of his doctrine. Though S. Paul vvere taught his Goſpel of God and not of man, and had an extraordinarie calling by Chriſt him ſelf, yet by reuelation he vvas ſent to Hieruſalem to conferre the ſaid Goſpel which he preached, vvith his elders the ordinarie Apoſtles and Rulers of the Church, to put both his vocation and doctrine to their trial and approbation, and to ioyne in office, teaching, and ſocietie or communion vvith them. For there is no extraordinarie or miraculous vocation, that can ſeuer or ſeparate the perſon ſo called, in doctrine or fellovvſhip of Chriſtian life and religion, from the ordinarie knowen ſocietie of Gods people and Prieſtes.The heretikes ſubmit their doctrine to no trial of Biſhops or Coū
                        cel. Therfore vvhoſoeuer he be (vpon vvhat pretence ſo euer) that vvil not haue his calling and doctrine tried by the ordinarie Gouerners of Gods Church, or diſdaineth to go vp to the principal place of our religion, to conferre vvith Peter and other pillers of the Church, it is euident that he is a falſe teacher, a Schiſmatike, and an Heretike. By vvhich rule you may trie al your nevv teachers of Luthers or Caluins ſchoole: vvho neuer did nor euer durſt put their preaching to ſuch conference or trial of holy Councel or Biſhops, as they ought to do, and vvould do, if it vvere of God, as S. Paules vvas.
                  
                     2. In vaine.]
                     The approbation of S. Paules doctrine by Peter & the reſt, vvas very requiſite. Though S. Paul doubted not of the truth of the Goſpel vvhich he preached, knovving it to be of the holy Ghoſt: yet becauſe other men could not, nor vvould not acknovvledge ſo much, til it vvere allovved by ſuch as vvere vvithout al exception knovven to be Apoſtles & to haue the ſpirit of truth, to diſcerne vvhether the vocation, ſpirit, & Goſpel of Paul vvere of God, he knevv he ſhould othervviſe vvithout conferēce vvith them, haue loſt his labour, both for the time paſt and to come. He had not had (ſaith S. Hierom) ſecuritie of preaching the Goſpel, if it had not been approued by Peters ſentence and the reſt that vvere vvith him. Hiero. ep. 29. c. 2. See Tertul. li. 4 Cont. Marc. nu. 3. Therfore by reuelation he vvent to conferre with the Apoſtles at Hieruſalem, that by them hauing his Apoſtleſhip and Goſpel liked and approued, he might preach vvith more fruite. Vvherein vve ſee, this holy Apoſtle did not as the ſeditious proud Heretikes do novv a daies, vvhich refuſing al mans atteſtation or approbation,No abſurditie that the Scriptures be approued by the Churches teſtimonie. vvil be tried by Scriptures onely. As alſo vve may learne that it is not ſuch abſurditie as the Aduerſaries vvould make it, to haue the Scriptures approued by the Churches teſtimonie. Seing the Goſpel vvhich S. Paul preached (being of as much certaintie and of the ſame Holy Ghoſt that the Scriptures be) vvas to be put in conference and examination of the Apoſtles, vvithout al derogation to the truth, dignitie, or certaintie of the ſame. And the cauilling of Heretikes, that we make ſubiect Gods Oracles to mans cenſure, and the Scriptures to haue no more force then the Church is content to graunt vnto them,The Church maketh not Canonical Scripture, but declareth that it is ſo▪
                      is vaine and falſe. I or, to beare vvitnes or to giue euidence or atteſtation that the preaching or vvriting of ſuch, is true and of the Holy Ghoſt, is not to make
 it true: no more then the Goldſmith or touch-ſtone that trie and diſcerne vvhich is true gold, make it good gold, but they giue euidence to man that ſo it is. And therfore that diſputation alſo, vvhether the Scripture or the Church be of greater authoritie, is ſuperfluous: either giuing teſtimonie to the other, and both aſſured by the Holy Ghoſt from al error:The Scripture & Church cō
                        pared together for antiquitie, authoritie, &c. the Church yet being before the Scriptures, the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and proper dwelling, temple, or ſubiect of God and his graces: for the vvhich Church the Scriptures vvere, and not the Church for the Scriptures. In vvhich Church there is iudicial authoritie by office and iuriſdiction to determine of doubtful queſtions touching the ſenſe of the Scriptures and other controuerſies in religion, & to puniſh diſobedient perſons. Of which iudicial power the Scriptures be not capable, as neither the truthes & determinations of the ſame can be ſo euident to men', nor ſo agreable and fit for euery particular reſolution, as diuerſitie of times and perſons requireth. Certaine is the truth, and great is the authoritie of both: but in ſuch diuers kindes, as they can not be vvell compared together. The controuerſie is much like as if a man touching the ruling a caſe in lavv or giuing ſentence in a matter of queſtion, ſhould aſke, vvhether the iudge, or the euidēce of the parties, be of more authoritie or credit, vvhich vvere as friuolous a diſpute, as it were a diſordered part for any man to ſay, he vvould be tried by no other iudge but by his owne vvritings or euidences. Vvith ſuch triſters and ſeditious perſons haue vve to do now a daies in diuinitie, as vvere intolerable in any prophane ſcience or facultie in the vvorld.
                  
                     6. Added nothing.] The Goſpel and preaching of S. Paul vvas wholy of God,The Scriptures alvvaies true in them ſelues, are ſo knovven to be by the Church. & therfore though it vvere put to the Churches probation, as gold is to the touch ſtone: yet being found in al pointes pure, nothing could be altered or amended therein by the Apoſtles. Euen ſo the Scriptures vvhich are in deede vvholy of the Holy Ghoſts enditing, being put to the Churches trial, are found, proued, and teſtified vnto the vvorld to be ſuch, and not made true, altered, or amended by the ſame. Vvithout vvhich atteſtation of the Church, the holy Scriptures in them ſelues vvere alvvaies true before: but not ſo knowen to be, to al Chriſtians, nor they ſo bound to take them. And that is the meaning of the famous ſentence of S. Auguſtine Cont. ep. fund. c. 5. vvhich troubleth the Heretikes ſo much. I vvould not beleeue the Goſpel (ſaith he) vnles the authoritie of the Church moued me.
                  
                  
                     7. To Peter of the circumciſion.] Vve may not thinke, as the Heretikes deceitfuly teach,The Apoſtles commiſsiō general through the vvorld, & yet peculiar to certaine prouinces. that the charge of the Apoſtles vvas ſo diſtincted, that none could preach or exerciſe iuriſdiction but in thoſe ſeueral places or towardes thoſe peoples or prouinces onely, vvherevnto by Gods appointment or their ovvne lot or election, they vvere ſpecially deſigned. For, euery Apoſtle might by Chriſtes commiſsion (Mat. 28. Goe, and teach al nations) vſe al ſpiritual functiō through the vvhole vvorld yet for the more particualr regard & care of prouinces, & for peace & order ſake, ſome were appointed to one countrie, & ſome to an other: as, of the other Apoſtles, we ſee in the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories, and for S. Peter & S. Paul,Iewes and Gentiles ſpecially committed to the two principal Apoſtles. it is plaine by this place & other, that to them as to the tvvo cheefe and moſt renovvmed Apoſtles, the Church of al Nations vvas giuen, as deuided into two partes, that is, Ievves and Gentiles: the firſt and principal being S. Peters lot, that herein alſo he might reſemble our Sauiour,Mat. 15. vvho vvas ſent namely * to the loſt ſheepe of Iſrael. and vvas properly
* the Miniſter of the Circumciſion:
                     Ro. 15. the ſecond being S. Paules, vvhom Chriſt choſe ſpecially to preach to the Gentiles: Not ſo for al that, that either he vvas limited to the Gentils onely, (vvhō the Actes of the Apoſtles report,Neither Peter only of the Ievves, nor Paul Apoſtle of the Gētiles only. in euery place, firſt to haue entered into the Synagogs & preached Chriſt to the Ievves, as he vvrote alſo to the Hebrues & euer had ſpecial regard & honour to thē:) or Peter ſo boūd to the Ievves only,Act. 10. & 15. v. 7. Calu. li. 4. v. 6. nu. 15. Iuſtit. that he could not meddle vvith the Gentiles: ſeing he vvas * the man choſen of God, by whom the Gentils ſhould firſt beleeue, vvho firſt baptized them, and firſt gaue order concerning them. Therfore the treacherie of Caluin is intolerable, that vpon this diſtinction of the Apoſtles charge, vvould haue the ſimple ſuppoſe,Caluins foliſh reaſon that Peter vvas not B. of Rome, & his derogaciō from Peters Apoſtleſhip. that S. Peter could not be Biſhop of Rome (ſo might he barre 
                        •
                     . Iohn from Epheſus▪ alſo) nor deale among the Gentiles, as a thing againſt Gods ordinance and the appointment betvvene him and S. Paul: as though thereby the one had bound him ſelf to the other, not to preach or meddle vvithin his fellovves compaſſe. And vvhich is further moſt ſeditious, he exhorteth al men to keepe faſt the foreſaid compact, and rather to haue reſpect to S. Paules Apoſtleſhip, then to S. Peters: as though the preaching, authoritie, and Apoſtleſhip of both vvere not a like true, and al of one holy Spirit, vvhether they preached to Iewes or Gentiles, as both did preach vnto both peoples,The Church founded at Rome by S. Peter and S. 
                           •
                        aul. as is already proued, and at length, partly by the daily decay of the Ievviſh ſtate and their incredulitie, and partly for that in Chriſtianitie the diſtinction of Iew & Gentil ceaſed after a ſeaſon: both vvent to the cheefe citie of the Gentiles, and there founded the Church common to the Hebrues and al nations, Peter firſt, and Paul aftervvard. And therfore Tertullian ſaith, de pr
                           •
                        ſcript nu. 14. O happie Church, to vvhich the Apoſtles povvred out al doctrine vvith their bloud. Where Peter ſuffereth like to our Lordes paſsion, vvhere Paul is
 
                        
                           •
                        rovvned vvith Iohn (Baptiſts) death.
                  
                  
                     9. Gaue the right handes of ſocietie.] There is and alwaies ought to be, a common fellowſhip and fraternitie of al Paſtores and preachers of the Church.Al Catholike preachers and Paſtors muſt communicate vvith Peter & his ſucceſſors. Into vvhich ſocietie who ſo euer entereth not, but ſandeth in Schiſme and ſeparation from Peter and the cheefe Apoſtolike Paſtors, what pretence ſo euer he hath, or vvhence ſo euer he chalengeth authoritie, he is a vvolfe, and no true Paſtor. Vvhich vnion and communion together was ſo neceſſarie euen in S. Paules caſe, that, notvvithſtanding his ſpecial calling of God, yet the Holy Ghoſt cauſed him to go vp to his elder Apoſtles, to be receiued into their fellovvſhip or brotherhod. for it is to be noted, that SS. Peter, Iames, and Iohn vvere not ſent to S. Paul, to ioyne vvith him or to be tried for their doctrine and calling, by him: but contrariewiſe he vvas ſent to them as to the cheefe and knovven ordinarie Apoſtles. They therfore gaue Paul their handes, that is to ſay, tooke him into their ſocietie, and not he them. And S. Hieroms rule concerning this, ſhal be found true to the vvorldes end, ſpeaking of S. Peters ſucceſſor: He that gathereth not vvith thee, ſcattereth. Ep. 17. And in an other place for the ſame cauſe he calleth Rome, tutiſsimum Communionis portum, the moſt ſafe and ſure hauen of communion or Societie.The heretikes ridiculous argumēt againſt Peters preeminence. 
                     Ep. 16. 6. 
                           •
                        . And vvhereas the Heretikes by this alſo vvould proue that Peter had no preeminēce aboue Paul being his fellovv Apoſtle, it is ridiculous. As though al of one fellowſhip or brotherhod he alvvaies equal, or as though there vvere not order and gouernement, ſuperioritie and inferioritie, in euery ſocietie vvel appointed. And they might perceiue by this vvhole paſſage, that Peter vvas the ſpecial and in more ſingular ſort, the Apoſtle of the Ievves, though Iames and Iohn vvere alſo: as S. Paul is alſo called in more ſingular ſort the Apoſtle and doctor of the Gentiles then S. Barnabas, and yet they vvere both alike taken here into this ſocietie, as they were both at once and alike ſegregated into this miniſterie, and ordered together Act. 13. It is a poore reaſon then to ſay or thinke, S. Peter not to be aboue S. Barnabas neither, becauſe of this ſocietie and fellovvſhip vnto vvhich he vvas receiued together vvith S. Paul.
                  
                     11. I reſiſted him.]
                     The heretikes malitiouſly derogate from S. Peter. Vvicked Porphyrie (as S. Hierom vvriteth) chargeth S. Paul of enuie and mal
                        •
                     part boldnes, and S. Peter of errour. Pro
                           •
                        m. Comment. in Galat. Euen ſo the like impious ſonnes of Cham, for this, and for other things, gladly charge S. Peter, as though he had committed the greateſt crimes in the vvorld. for, it is the propertie of Heretikes and il men, to be glad to ſee the Saincts reprehended and their faultes diſcouered, as vve may learne in the vvritings of S. Auguſtine againſt Fauſtus the Manichee,Paules reprehenſion of Peter, teacheth vs the zeale of the one, and humilitie of the other. vvho gathered out al the actes of the holy Patriarches, that might ſeeme to the people to be vvorthy blame. Vvhom the ſaid holy Doctor defendeth at large againſt him▪ as both he, and before him S. Cyprian, finde here vpon this Apoſtles reprehenſion, much matter of praiſing both their vertues: S. Paules great zeale, and S. Peters vvonderful humilitie: that the one in the cauſe of God vvould not ſpare his Superior, and that the other, in that excellent dignitie, vvould not take it in il part, nor by allegation of his Suprema
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      diſdaine or refuſe to be controvvled by his iunior, vvhich of the tvvo they count the greater grace and more to be imitated. For neither Peter (ſaith S. Cyprian) Whom our Lord choſe the firſt and vpon vvhom he built the Church, vvhen Paul diſputed vvith him of circumciſion, chal
                           •
                        vged inſolently or arrogantly tooke any thing to him ſelf, ſaying that he had the Primacie, and therfore the later Diſciples ought rather to obey him. ep. 71 ad Quintum. nu. 2. And S. Auguſtine ep. 19. c▪ 2 in fine. That (ſaith he) vvhich vvas done of Paul profitably by the libertie of charitie, the ſame Peter tooke in good part by holy and benigne godlines of humilitie, and ſo he gaue vnto poſteritie a more rare and holy example, if at any time perhaps they did amis, to be content to be corrected of their iuniors, then Paul, for to be bold and confident: yea the inferiors to reſiſt their betters for defending the truth of the Goſpel,
                     It proueth nothing agaiſt Peters ſuperioritie, that he vvas reprehended. 
                     brotherly charitie alvvaies preſerued. By vvhich notable ſpeaches of the Doctors vve may alſo ſee, how friuolouſly the Heretikes argue herevpon, that S. Peter could not be Superior to S. Paul, being ſo reprehended of him: vvhereas the Fathers make it an example to the Superiors, to beare vvith humilitie the correption or controulement euen of their inferiors. Namely by this example S. Auguſtine (li. 2 de bapt. 6. 1. excellently declareth, that the B. Martyr S. Cyprian, vvho vvalked avvry touching the rebaptizing of them that vvere chriſtened of Heretikes, could not, nor vvould not haue been offended to be admoniſhed & reformed in that point by his fellovves or inferiors, much leſſe by a vvhole Councel. We haue learned, ſaith he, that Peter the Apoſtle, in vvhom the Primacie of the Apoſtles by excellent grace is ſo preeminent, vvhen he did othervviſe concerning circumciſion then the truth required, vvas corrected of Paul the later Apoſtle. I thinke (vvithout any reproch vnto him) Cyprian the Biſhop may be compared to Peter the Apoſtle. hovvbeit I ought rather to feare leſt I be iniurious to Peter. for vvho knovveth not that the principalitie of Apoſtleſhip it to be preferred before any dignitie of Biſhop vvhatſoeuer? but if the grace of the Chaires or Sees differ,
                     The ſuperior may be reprehende or admoniſhed of the inferior. 
                     yet the glorie of the Martyrs is one. And vvho is ſo dull that can not ſee, that the inferior, though not by office and iuriſdiction, yet by the law of brotherly loue and fraternal correption, may reprehend his ſuperior? Did euer any man vvonders that a good Prieſt or any vertuous perſon ſhould tell the Pope, or any other great Prelate, or greateſt Prince in earth, their faultes? Popes may be reprehended, and are iuſtly admoniſhed of their faultes, and ought to take it in good part,
 & ſo they do and euer haue done,Heretikes reprehenſion of Catholike Biſhops in rather railing. vvhen it commeth of zeale & loue, as of S. Paul, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hierom, Auguſtine, Bernard: but of Simon Magus, Nouatus, Iulian, Wicleffe, Luther, Caluin, Beza, that do it of malice, & ra
                        •
                     le no leſſe at their vertues then their vices, of ſuch (I ſay) Gods Prelates muſt not be taught nor corrected, though they muſt patiently take it, as our Sauiour did the like reproches of the malitious Ievves, and as Dauid did the malediction of Semel. 2 Reg. 16.
                  
                  
                     11. Reprehenſible.] The Heretikes hereof againe inferre, that Peter then did erre in faith, and therfore the Popes may faile therein alſo. To vvhich vve anſvver, that hovvſoeuer other Popes may erre in their priuate teachings or vvritings,S. Peters errour vvas not in faith, but in conuerſation or behauiour▪
                      vvhereof vve haue treated before in the Annotation vpon theſe vvordes,Luc. 22, 32. 
                     That thy faith faile not: it is certaine that S. Peter did not here faile in faith, nor erre in doctrine or knovvledge. for it vvas conuerſation is non pr
                           •
                        dicationis vitium, as Tertullian ſaith. de praeſcript. nu. 7. It vvas a default in conuerſation, life, or regiment, which may be committed of any man, be he neuer ſo holy, and not in doctrine. S. Auguſtine and vvhoſoeuer make moſt of it, thinke no othervviſe of it. But S. Hierom andSee S. Chryſoſt. Theophyl. &c. many other holy fathers de
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     e it to haue been no fault at all, nor any other thing then S. Paul him ſelf did vpon the like occaſion: & that this vvhole combat vvas a ſet thing agreed vpon betvvene them. It is a ſchoole point much debated betvvixt S. Hierom and S. Auguſtine ep. 9. 11. 19. apud Auguſt.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  By their ovvne conuerſion at the firſt, 6 and by the example of Abraham, and promiſe made to him, he ſhevveth that the vvay to obtaine the benediction, is to ſeeke vnto God by faith in Chriſt. 10 Seing alſo that the Lavv curſeth euery one that hath not euermore kept the Lavv. 15 And, that the Lavv vvas not giuen to alter Gods teſtament, 19 but to conuince the Iovves of ſinne, 2
                        •
                      and ſo to be their padagogue or leader vnto Chriſt, 25 and then to ceaſe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Senſles Galatians, vvho hathFor any people or perſon to forſake the faith of their firſt Apoſtles & Conuerſion, at the voice of a few nouellaries, ſeemeth to wiſe men a very bewitching & ſenſles brutiſhnes, Such is the caſe of our poore coūtrie, Germanie, and others. bevvitched you, not to obey the truth, before vvhoſe eies IESVS Chriſt vvas proſcribed, being crucified among you? ✝ 
                     verse 2 This only I vvould learne of you, By the vvorkes of the Lavv, did you receiue the Spirit, or by the hearing of the faith? ✝ 
                     verse 3 Are you ſo fooliſh, that vvhereas you began vvith the ſpirit, now you vvil be conſummate vvith the fleſh? ✝ 
                     verse 4 Haue you ſuffered ſo great things vvithout cauſe? if yet vvithout cauſe. ✝ 
                     verse 5 He therfore that giueth you the Spirit, and vvorketh miracles among you: by the vvorkes of the Lavv, or by the hearing of the faith doeth he it? ✝ 
                     verse 6 As,Gen. 15, 6. Ro. 4. 3. 
                  Abraham beleeued God, and it vvas reputed to him vnto iuſtice.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Knovv ye therfore that they that areThis faith whereby Abraham was iuſtified, and his children the Gen. i
                        •
                     s beleeuing in Chriſt, implieth al Chriſtian vertues, of which the firſt is faith, the groūd & foundation of al the reſt, and therfore here and els where often named of the Apoſtle. of faith, the ſame are the children of Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the Scripture foreſeing that God iuſtifieth the Gentils by faith, ſhevved vnto Abraham before,Gen. 
                        ••
                     , 3. 
                  That in thee ſhal al nations be bleſſed. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Therfore they that are of faith, ſhal be bleſſed vvith the faithful Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For vvhoſoeuer are of the vvorkes of the Lavv, are vnder curſe.Deu. 27, 26. For it is vvritten: ″ Curſed be euery one that abideth not in al things that be vvritten in the booke of the Lavv, to doe them. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But that in the Lavv no man is iuſtified vvith God, it is manifeſt, becauſe
 
                  The iuſt ″ liueth by faith.
                  Abac. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But the Lavv is not by faith: but, He that doeth thoſe things ſhal liue in them.
                  Ro. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Chriſt hath redeemed vs from the curſe of the Lavv,Leu. 18. being made a curſe for vs (becauſe it is vvritten,Deu. 21. 
                  Curſed is euery one that hangeth on a tree) ✝ 
                     verse 14 that on the Gentiles the bleſſing of Abraham might be made in Chriſt IESVS: that vve may receiue the promiſſe of the Spirit by faith.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Brethren (I ſpeake according to man) yet a mans teſtamēt being confirmed no man deſpiſeth,The Epiſtle vpō the 13 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. or further diſpoſeth. ✝ 
                     verse 16 To Abraham vvere the promiſes ſaid, and to his ſeede. He ſaith not,Gen. 22, 18. 
                  And to ſeedes, as in many: but as in one, And to thy ſeede, vvhich is Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And this I ſay, the reſtament being confirmed of God, the Lavv vvhich vvas made after foure hundred and thirtie yeres, maketh not void to fruſtrate the promiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For if the inheritance be of the Lavv, novv not of promiſe. But God gaue it to Abraham by promiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvhy vvas the Lavv then? It vvas put for tranſgreſſions, vntil the ſeede came to vvhom he had promiſed: ordeined by Angels in the hand of a mediatour. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And a mediatour is not of one: but God is one. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvas the Lavv then againſt the promiſes of God? God forbid. For if there had been a Lavv giuen that could iuſtifie, vndoubtedly iuſtice ſhould be of the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But the Scripture * hath concluded al things vnder ſinne:Ro. 3, 9. 11, 32. that the promiſe by the faith of IESVS Chriſt might be giuen to them that beleeue. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 23 But before the faith came, vnder the Lavv we vvere kept ſhut vp, vnto that faith which vvas to be reuealed. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Therfore the Lavv vvas our Pedagogue in Chriſt: that vve may be iuſtified by faith. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But vvhē the faith came, novv vve are not vnder a paedagogue. ✝ 
                     verse 26 For you are al the children of God by faith in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For as many of you as are baptized in Chriſt, ″ haue put on Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 28 There is not Ievve nor Greeke, there is not bond nor free, there is not male nor femal. For al you are one in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 29 And if you be Chriſts, then are you the ſeede of Abraham, heires according to promiſe.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . Curſed be.]
                     Notwithſtanding venial ſinnes, men are truely iuſt, and may keepe the cōmaundements. By this place the Heretikes vvould proue that no man is iuſt truely before God, al being guiltie of damnation and Gods curſe, becauſe they keepe not euery iote of the Lavv. Vvhere in deede the Apoſtle meaneth not ſuch as offend venially (as it is plaine by the place of
 Deuteronomie vvhence he reciteth this text) but onely ſuch as commit great and damnable crimes, and ſo by greuous and mortal tranſgreſſions vvholy breake Gods precepts, and thereby incurre the curſe of the Lavv, from vvhich the ſaid Lavv could not deliuer them of it ſelf, nor by any other meanes, but by the faith and grace of CHRIST IESVS.
                  
                     11. Liueth by faith.] It is neither the Heretikes ſpecial preſumption and confidence,Iac. 2. nor the faith of Diuels,Not only faith. nor faith vvithout vvorkes vvhich is dead in it ſelf as S. Iames ſaith, that can giue life to the iuſt. for that vvhich is dead, can not be the cauſe of life. but it is the Catholike faith, as S. Auguſtine vvriteth, vvhich vvorketh by charitie (according to the Apoſtles ovvne explication of this vvhole paſſage) by vvhich the iuſt liueth. Li. 3 c. 5. cont. duas ep. Pelag. See the Annotation vpon the ſame vvordes. Rom. 1.
                  
                  
                     27. Haue put on Chriſt.]
                     Baptiſme giueth grace and iuſtification, not faith only. Here the Aduerſaries might haue ſeen, if they vvere not blinded by contentious ſtriuing againſt Gods Church, that vvhen Iuſtification is attributed to faith vvithout mention of good vvorkes or other Chriſtian vertues & Sacraments, it is not meant to exclude any of the ſame from the vvorking of iuſtice or ſaluation. for here vve learne that by the Sacrament of Baptiſme alſo vve put on Chriſt, vvhich is to put on faith, hope, charitie, and al Chriſtian iuſtice. By the ſame vve proue alſo that the Sacraments of the nevv iavv giue grace, for that the receiuers thereof put on Chriſt. And the Aduerſaries euaſion, that it is faith vvhich vvorketh in the Sacrament, and not the Sacrament it ſelf, is plainely falſe: Baptiſme giuing grace and faith it ſelf to the infant that had none before.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  That the Lavv vvas fit for the time of nonnage: but being novv come to ful age, to deſire ſuch ſeruitude is abſurd, ſpecially for Gentils. 12 And that he vvriteth this not of any diſpleaſure, but to tel them the truth, remembring hovv paſsingly they honoured him vvhom he vvas preſent, and exhorting them therfore not to harken to the falſe Apoſtles in his abſence. 21 By the allegorie alſo of Abrahams tvvo ſonnes, ſhevving. that the children of the Ievves Synagogue ſhal not inherite, but vve vvho are the children of the free vvoman: that is, of the Cath. Church of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſay,The Epiſtle vpon Twelfth eue. as long as the heire is a litle one, he differeth nothing from a ſeruant, although he be lord of al, ✝ 
                     verse 2 but is vnder tutors and gouernours vntil the time limited of the father: ✝ 
                     verse 3 ſo vve alſo, vvhen vve vvere litle ones, vvere ″ ſeruing vnder theThat is, the rudiments of religiō, wherin the carnal Iewes vvere trained vp: or the corporal creatures, wherein their manifold ſacrifices, ſacraments, and rites did conſiſt. elemētes of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But vvhen the fulnes of time came, God ſent his ſonne made of a vvoman, made vnder the Lavv: ✝ 
                     verse 5 that he might redeeme them that vvere vnder the Lavv, that vve might receiue the adoption of ſonnes.Ro. 8, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And becauſe you are ſonnes, * God hath ſent the Spirit of his ſonne into your hartes crying: Abba, Father. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Therfore novv he is not a ſeruant, but a ſonne. And if a ſonne, an heire alſo by God. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 But then in deede not knowing God, you ſerued them that by nature are not Gods. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But novv vvhen you haue knovven God, or rather are knovven of God: hovv turne you againe to the ″ vveake & poore elements, vvhich you vvil ſerue againe? ✝ 
                     verse 10 ″ You obſerue daies, and moneths, and times, and yeres. ✝ 
                     verse 11 I feare you,
 leſt perhaps I haue laboured in vaine among you. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Be ye as I, becauſe I alſo am as you: brethren, I beſeeche you, you haue hurt me nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And you knovv that by infirmitie of the fleſh I euangelized to you heretofore: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and your tentation in my fleſh you deſpiſed not, neither reiected, but
So ought al Catholike people receiue their teachers in religion, vvith al duetie, loue, & reuerence. as an Angel of God you receiued me, as Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhere is then your bleſſednes? for I giue you teſtimonie that if it could be done, you vvould haue plucked out your eies and haue giuen them to me. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Am I then become your enemie, telling you the truth? ✝ 
                     verse 17 They emulate you not vvel: but they vvould exclude you, that you might emulate them. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But do you emulate the good in good alvvaies: and not only vvhen I am preſent vvith you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 My litle children, vvhom I trauail vvithal againe, vntil Chriſt be formed in you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And I vvould be vvith you now and chaunge my voice: becauſe I am confounded in you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Tel me you that vvil be vnder the Lavv,The Epiſtle vpon the 4 Sūday in Lent. haue you not read the Lavv? ✝ 
                     verse 22 For it is vvritten that * Abraham had tvvo ſonnes:Gen. 16, 15. 21, 2. one of the bond-vvoman, and one of the free-vvoman. ✝ 
                     verse 23 But he that of the bond-vvoman, vvas borne according to the fleſh: and he that of the free-vvoman, by the promiſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 vvhich things are ſaid ″ by an allegorie. For theſe are the tvvo teſtaments. The one from mount Sina, gendring vnto bondage: vvhich is Agar, ( ✝ 
                     verse 25 for Sina is a mountaine in Arabia,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvhich hath affinitie to that vvhich novv is Hieruſalem) and ſerueth vvith her children. ✝ 
                     verse 26 But that Hieruſalem vvhich is aboue, is free: vvhich is our mother. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For it is vvritten:Eſ. 54, 1. 
                  Reioyce thou barren, that beareſt not: breake forth and crie, that trauaileſt not: becauſe many are the children of the deſolate, more then of her that hath a huſband.
                  Ro. 9, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 28 But * we brethren, according to Iſaac, are the children of promis. ✝ 
                     verse 29 ButThis mutual perſecution is a figure alſo of the Church iuſtly perſecuting Heretikes, & contrarivviſe of Heretikes (vvhich be the childrē of the bondvvoman) vniuſtly perſecuting the Catholike Church. Aug. ep. 48.
                   as then he that vvas borne according to the fleſh, perſecuted him that vvas after the ſpirit: ſo novv alſo.Gen. 21, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 30 But vvhat ſaith the Scripture? Caſt out the bond-vvoman and her ſonne. for the ſonne of the bond-vvoman ſhal not be heire vvith the ſonne of the free-vvoman. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Therfore brethren vve are not the children of the bond-vvoman, but of the free: by the ″ freedom vvhere vvith Chriſt hath made vs free. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Seruing.]
                     External vvorſhip of God by vſe of creatures, neceſſarie: & hovv the Heathen, Ievves, & Chriſtians differ in the ſame. There can be no external vvorſhip of God nor aſſociation of men in religion, either true or falſe, vvithout the vſe of corporal things or elements. The Heathen ſo vſed the creatures of elements that they ſerued them as their goddes. The Ievves, of vvhom the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh, ſerued not the creatures them ſelues vvhich they occupied in their ceremonies; but they ſerued the only true God vnder the elements: that is to ſay, being ſerullely clogged, yoked, kept occupied and in avve, vvith innumerable fleſhly, groſſe, and comberſom offices about creatures. The Chriſtians neither ſerue elements, as the one, nor be kep
                        •
                      in ſeruile thraldom thereby, as the other: but occupie only a fevv exceding eaſie, ſvvete, ſeemely, and ſignificant for an agreable exerciſe both of body and minde.The vſe of external elemēts in the Sacraments. Vvhereof S. Auguſtine ſaith thus, li. 3. c. 9▪ de doct. Chriſt. Some fevv for many, moſt eaſie to be done, moſt honorable for ſignification, and moſt cleare and pure for to be obſerued and kept, hath our Lord, him ſelf and the Apoſtolical diſcipline deliuered. And li. de ver. relig. c. 17. Of the vviſedom of God it ſelf mani nature being taken, vvhereby vve vvere called into libertie, a fevv Sacraments moſt holſom vvere appointed and inſtituted, vvhich might conteine the ſocietie of Chriſtian people, that is, of the free multitude vnder one God. And againe, cont. Fauſt. li. 19. c. 13. The Sacraments are changed, they are made caeſier, fevver, holſommer, happier, the ſame he hath in the 118 epiſtle c. 1. and many other places beſides. By vvhich you may ſee, it is not al one to vſe elements, viſible Sacraments or ceremonies, and to ſerue them as the Pagans do, or to ſerue vnder them as the Ievves did, vvherevvith the Heretikes calumniouſly charge the Chriſtians.Our Sacraments fevv & eaſie in reſpect of the Ievves. And as touching the ſmall number, facilitie, efficacie, and ſignification, vvherein the ſaid holy father putteth the ſpecial difference: vvho ſeeth not that for ſo many buſie ſacrifices, vve haue but one: for Sacraments vvel nere infinite, but ſeuen: al ſo eaſie, ſo ful of grace, ſo ſignificant, as can be poſſible, as of euery one in their ſeueral places is proued?
                  Here,S. Auguſtine falſely alleaged of the Heretikes for tvvo Sacraments only. let the good Readers take heede of a double deceite vſed by the Aduerſaries about S. Auguſtines places alleaged. firſt, in that they ſay he made but tvvo Sacraments, vvhich is vntrue, for, although treating of the difference betvvene the Ievviſh Sacraments and ours, he namely giueth example in Baptiſme and the Euchariſt (as ſometimes alſo for example he nameth but one) yet he hath no vvord nor ſigne at al that there ſhould be no moe. but contrarievviſe in the foreſaid epiſtle 118 he inſinuateth,ep. 118. c. 1. & in pſ. 103. cōc. 1 that beſides thoſe tvvo, there be other of the ſame ſort in the Scriptures. Yea, vvith water and bread, which be the elements of the tvvo foreſaid Sacraments, he expreſly nameth oile alſo (li. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 104.) the element or matter of the Sacrament of Confirmation:The other Sacraments proued out of S. Auguſtine. which in the ſame place he maketh to be a Sacrament as Baptiſme is. So doth he affirme of the Sacrament of Orders li. 1 de bapt. c. 1. and alſo of Matrimonie li. de bono coniug. c. 24. of Penance likevviſe, he ſpeaketh as of Baptiſme, which he calleth Reconciliation, li. 1. de adult. conjug. c. 28. Laſtly, by the booke de viſitatione infirmorum in S. Auguſtine, li. 2 c. 4. by Proſper de pradictionibus p. 2. c. 29. S. Innocentius ad Eugubinum Io. 1. Cont. ep. ad Eugub. c. 8. S. Cyril li. 2. in Leuiticum, and S. Chryſoſtom li. 3 de Saterdotio,
                     Aug. ſer. 215 de 
                           •
                        ēp. & de rectitud. Cath. conuerſat. 
                     Extreme vnction is proued to be a Sacrament. It is falſe then that the Heretikes affirme of S. Auguſtine, by vvhoſe doctrine it is plaine, that though the elements or Sacraments of the new lavv be but few and very fevv in compariſon of thoſe in the old lavv, yet there be no fevver then ſeuen ſpecified by him. Vvhich number of ſeuen the holy Councels of Florence and Trent do expreſly define to haue been inſtituted by Chriſt, againſt theſe late Heretikes. See more of theſe Sacraments in their places. Act. 8. 1 Tim 4. Io. 20. Ia. 5. Epheſ. 5.
                  
                  The other forgerie of the Aduerſaires concerning the elements or ceremonies, is, that S. Auguſtine (ep. 119. c. 19.) ſhould affirme, that the Church and Chriſtian people in his daies (vvherevpon they inferre that it is ſo much more novv) vvere ſo loden vvith obſeruation of vnprofitable ceremonies,S. Auguſtine falſely alleaged againſt the ceremonies of the Church. that they vvere in as great ſeruilitie and ſubiection to ſuch things as the Ievves. He ſaith ſo in deede of ſome particular preſumptions, inuentions, and vſages of certaine perſons, as that ſome made it a heinous matter to touch the groūd vvith their bare feete vvithin their ovvne octaues, and ſuch like vanities, whereby ſome ſimple folkes might be infected, vvhich this holy Doctor ſpecially miſliked, and vviſheth ſuch things (as they may, vvithout ſcandal) to be taken avvay. But that he vvrote or meant ſo of any ceremonie that the Church vſeth, either appointed by Scripture, or Councel, or cuſtom of the Catholike Church, him ſelf denieth it in expreſſe termes in the ſame place, and in ſundrie other: vvhere he allovveth al the holy ceremonies done in the miniſtration of the Sacraments and els vvhere. Vvhereby it is cleere, that the Churches moſt comely orders and ſignificant 
                        〈◊〉
                      pertaine not to the yoke of the old lavv, much leſſe to the ſuperſtition of Gentilitie, as Heretikes affirme: but to the ſvveete yoke of Chriſt and light burden of his lavv, to order, decencie, and inſtruction of the faithful, in al libertie, loue, faith, grace, and ſpirit.
                  
                     9. Vveake and poore.] Vvhether he meane of the creatures vvhich the Gentils ſerued (as it may ſeeme by the vvordes before of ſeruing ſtrange gods) ſo the elements vvere
 moſt baſe and beggerly: or of the Iuaical ceremonies and ſacraments (as moſt expound it) euen ſo alſo their elements vvere vveake and poore in them ſelues, not giuing life, ſaluation, and remiſsion of ſinnes, nor being inſtruments or veſſels of grace, as the 7 Sacraments of the nevv lavv be.
                  
                     10. You obſerue daies.]
                     The Heatheniſh and Iudaical obſeruatiō of daies heretically cō
                        pared vvith the Chriſtian obſeruation of feſtiuities and holy daies &c. That vvhich S. Paul ſpeaketh againſt the Idolotrical obſeruation of daies, mo
                        •
                     eths, and times, dedicated by the Heathen to their falſe goddes, and to vvicked men or ſpirites, as to Iupiter, Mercurie, Ianus, Iuno, Diana, and ſuch like, or againſt the ſuperſtitious differences of daies, fatall, fortunate, or diſ
                        •
                     nol, and other obſeruations of times for good lucke or il lucke in mans actions, gathered, either by particular fanſie, or popular obſeruation, or curious and vnlavvful artes, or (laſtly) of the Iudaical feſtiuities that vvere then ended and abrogated, vnto vvhich notvvithſtanding certaine Chriſtian Ievves vvould haue reduced the Galatians againſt the Apoſtles doctrine: al that (I ſay) do the Heretikes of our time falſely and deceitfully interprete againſt the Chriſtian holidaies, and the ſanctification and neceſſarie keeping of the ſame. Vvhich is not only contrarie to the Fathers expoſition, but againſt the very Scriptures, and the practiſe of the Apoſtles & the vvhole Church. Aug. cont. Adim
                           •
                        
                        ̄s. c. 16. Ep. 118. c. 7. Hiero. in hunc locum. In the Apocalypſe c. 1. there is plaine mention of the Sunday,Sūday, Eaſter, vvhitſontide. that is, our Lordes day (Dominicus dies) vnto vvhich the Ievves Sabboth vvas altered, their Paſche into our Eaſter, their Pētecoſt into our Vvhitſontide: vvhich vvere ordained & obſerued of the Apoſtles them ſelues. And the antiquitie of the feaſtes of Chriſtes Natiuitie,The feſtiuities of Chriſt. Epiphanle, & Aſcēſion is ſuch, that they cā be referred to no other origine but the Apoſtles inſtitution:Orig. ho. 3. in diuerſ. vvho (as S. Clement teſtifieth li. 
                           •
                        . conſt. Apoſt. c. 
                           •
                        9.) gaue order for celebrating their follovv Apoſtles, S. Steuens, and other Martyrs daies after their death: and much more no doubt did they giue order for Chriſtes feſtiuities.Aug. ep. 28. et. Ser. de Sāctis. According to vvhich,Other holidaies of Saincts. the Church hath kept not only his, but S. Steuens and the B. Innocents, euen on the ſame dales they be novv ſolemnely kept, & his B. mothers, and other Saincts, (as the Aduerſaries them ſelues confeſſe) aboue 1300 yeres,Fulgent. as appeareth in the barbarous combattes betvvene Vveſtphalus the Lutheran, & Caluin, and by the vvritings betvvixt, the Puritans and Proteſtants.Leo.
                  
                  For vvhich purpoſe, ſee alſo hovv old the holiday of S. Polycarpe is in Euſebius li. 4. c. 14: of the
See the Annotation, Act. 1. v, 14. Aſſumptiō of our Ladie or her dormition in S. Athanaſius,Feſtiuities of our B. Ladie. S. Auguſtine, S. Hierom. S. Damaſe. & both of that feaſt and of her Natiuitie in S. Bernard, vvho profeſſeth he receiued them of the Church, & that they ought to be moſt ſolemnel; kept. ep. 174. Vvherein vve can not but vvonder at the nevv Church of England, that (though againſt the pure Caluiniſtes vvil and doctrine) keepe other Saincts and Apoſtles daies of their death, and yet haue aboliſhed this ſpecial feaſt of our Ladies departure, vvhich they might keepe,ep. ad Timotheū. though they beleeued not her Aſſumption in body (vvhereof yet S. Denys giueth ſo great teſtimonie) being aſſured ſhe is departed at the leaſt: except they either 
                        •
                     are her, or thinke her vvorthy of leſſe remembrance then any other Sainct, her ſelf prophecying the contrarie of al Catholike generations,Luc. 1. v. 48. that they ſhould bleſſe her. And in deede the Aſſumption is her proper day, as alſo the feaſt of her Natiuitle:See. S. Grego. li. 7. ep. 29. of Martyrs feaſts al the yere, and Maſſes in the ſame. the other of the Purification and the Annune
                        •
                     ation, vvhich they keepe in England, being not ſo peculiar to her, but belonging rather to Chriſtes Preſentation in the Temple, and his Conception. To conclude, vve may ſee in S. Cyprian ep. 34. Origen ho. 3. in diuerſ.
                     Cōc. Gāgr. c. 20 Tertulliau de cor. 
                           •
                        il. S. Gregorie Nazianzene de amore pauperum. the Councel of Gangres, yea and in the councel of Nice it ſelf giuing order for Eaſter and the certaine celebrating thereof, that Chriſtian Feſtiuities be holy, aūcient, and to be obſerued on preſcript daies and times, and that this is not Iudaical obſeruation of daies,Epiphan. as Aërius taught, for vvhich he vvas condemned of Hereſie,Har. 75. as S. Epīphanius witneſſeth. But of holidaies S. Auguſtine ſheweth both the reaſon and his liking,S. Auguſtines vvordes of Feſtiuities and holy daies. in theſe memorable vvordes, 
                        〈◊〉
                      for the feaſtes belonging to our Lord,Aug. de Ciuit. Dei li. 10. c. 16. thus: We dedicate and conſecrate the memorie of Gods benefites vvith ſolemnities, feaſtes, and certaine appointed daies, left by tract of times there might creept in ingrateful and vnkinde obliuion. Of the feſtiuities of Martyrs thus: Chriſtian people celebrate the memories of Martyrs vvith religious ſolemnitie, both to moue them ſelues to imitation of them, and that they may be partakers of their merites, and be holpen vvith their praiers. Cont. Fauſt. li. 20. c. 21. And of al Saincts daies, thus Keepe ye and celibrate vvith ſobrietie the Natiuities of Saincts, that vve may imitate them vvhich haue gone before Vs, and they may reioyce of vs vvhich pray for vs. In pſ. 88. Conc. 2. in fine.
                  
                  And as is ſaid of preſcript daies of feaſtes,Preſcript faſting daies. ſo the like is to be ſaidHilar. prolog. in pſal. explan. Epip. haer. 75. & in fine. li. 3. cont. har. of faſtes, vvhich els vvhere vve haue ſhewed to be of the Apoſtles ordinance. And ſo alſo of the Eccleſiaſtical diuiſion of the yere into Aduent,Canonical houres. Septuageſme, &c. the vveeke into ſo many I eries, the day into Houres of praiers, as the Prime, the Third, the Sixth, the None &c. Vvhereof ſeeCypri. de erat. Do. nu. 15. S. Cyprian, vvho deriueth theſe things by the Scriptures from the Apoſtles alſo, and counteth theſe things vvhich the vvicked Heretikes reproue, to be ful of myſterie. Like vnto this alſo is it,Reading of the Scriptures according to the time of the yere. that the holy Scriptures were ſo diſpoſed of, and deuided, that certaine peeces (as is alvvaies obſerued and practiſed vntil this day) ſhould be read at one time, and others at other times and ſeaſons, through out the yere, according to the diuerſitie of our Lordes actions and benefites, or the Saincts ſtories then recorded. Vvhich the Puritane Caluiniſts alſo condemne of ſuperſtition, deſiring to bring in helliſh horrour and al diſorder. See conc. Carthag. 3. c. 47. & pag. 288 of this booke.
                  
                      
                     24. By an allegorie.]
                     The Scriptures haue an allegorical ſenſe beſide the litteral. Here vve learne that the holy Scriptures haue beſide the litteral ſenſe, a deeper ſpiritual and more principal meaning: which is not only to be taken of the holy vvordes, but of the very factes and perſons reported: both the ſpeaches and the actions being ſignificatiue ouer and aboue the letter. Vvhich pregnancie of manifold ſenſes if S. Paul had not ſignified him ſelf in certaine places, the Heretikes had bene leſſe vvicked and preſumptuous in condemning the holy fathers allegorical expoſitions almoſt vvholy: who now ſhew them ſelues to be mere brutiſh and carnal men, hauing no ſenſe nor feeling of the profunditie of the Scriptures, vvhich our holy fathers the Doctors of Gods Church ſavv.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        1. Freedom.]
                     True Chriſtiā libertie. He meaneth the libertie and diſcharge from the old ceremonies, ſacraments, and the vvhole bondage of the Lavv, and from the ſeruitude of ſinne, and the Diuel, to ſuch as obey him: but not libertie to do vvhat euery man liſt, or to be vnder no obedience of ſpiritual or temporal lavves and gonerners: not a licence neuer to pray, faſt, keepe holyday, or vvorkday, but vvhen and hovv it ſeemeth beſt to euery mans phantaſie. Such a diſſolute licentious ſtate is farre from the true libertie vvhich Chriſt purchaſed for vs.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Againſt the lie of the falſe Apoſtles, he proteſteth his mind of Circumciſion. 13 and teſtifieth, that they are called to libertie. But yet left any miſconſter Chriſtian libertie, he telleth them that they ſhal not inherite the kingdom, vnles they abſtaine from the vvorkes of the fleſh, vvhich are al mortal ſinnes: and do the fruitful vvorkes of the Spirit, fulfilling al the commaundements of the Lavv by Charitie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  STAND, and be not holden in againe vvith the yoke of ſeruitude. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Behold I Paul tel you that if you be circumciſed, Chriſt ſhal profite you nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And I teſtifie againe to euery man circumciding him ſelf, that he is a detter to doe the vvhole Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 4 You are euacuated from Chriſt, that are iuſtified in the Lavv: you are fallē from grace. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For vve in ſpirit, by faith,Gal. 6, 15: expect the hope of iuſtice. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For in Chriſt IESVS * neither circumciſion auaileth ought, nor prepuce: but ″ faith that vvorketh by charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 You ranne vvel, vvho hath hindered you not to obey the truth? ✝ 
                     verse 8 The perſuaſion is not of him that calleth you.1 Cor. 5, 6. * ✝ 
                     verse 9 A litle leauen corrupteth the vvhole paſte. ✝ 
                     verse 10 I haue confidence in you in our Lord: that you vvil be of no other minde: but he that troubleth you, ſhal beare the iudgement, vvhoſoeuer he be. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And as for me, brethren, if as yet I preach circumciſion, vvhy doe I yet ſuffer perſecution? then is the ſcandal of the croſſe euacuated. ✝ 
                     verse 12 I would they vvere alſo cut of that trouble you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 For you, brethrē, are called into libertie: only make not this ″ libertie an occaſion to the fleſh, but by charitie ſerue
 one an other.The Epiſtle vpō the 14 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For al the Lavv is fulfilled in one vvord: Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf.
                  Leu. 19, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But if you bite and eate one an other: take heede you be not conſumed one of an other. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And I ſay, vvalke in the ſpirit, and the Iuſtes of the fleſh you ſhal not accompliſh. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For the fleſh Iuſteth againſt the ſpirit: and the ſpirit againſt the fleſh. for theſe are aduerſaries one to an other:Here men thinke (ſaith S. Auguſtine) the Apoſtle denieth that vve haue free libertie of vvil: not vnderſtanding that this is ſaid to them, if they vvil not hold faſt the grace of faith conceiued, by vvhich only they cā vvalke in the ſpirit, & not accōpliſh the concupiſcences of the fleſh. in c. 5. Gal.
                   that not vvhat things ſoeuer ″ you vvil, theſe you doe. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But if you be ledde by the ſpirit, you are not vnder the Lavv.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the vvorkes of the fleſh be manifeſt, vvhich are, fornication, vncleannes, impudicitie, lecherie, ✝ 
                     verse 20 ſeruing of Idols, vvitch-craftes, enmities, cōtentions, emulations, angers, bravvles, diſſenſions, ſectes, ✝ 
                     verse 21 enuies, murders, ebrieties, commeſſations, and ſuch like. vvhich I foretel you, as I haue foretold you, that they vvhich doeS. Auguſtine ſhevveth hereby that not only inſidelitie is a damnable ſinne. ſuch things, ſhal not obteine the kingdom of God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 But the fruite of the Spirit is, Charitie, ioy, peace, patience, benignitie, goodnes, longanimitie, ✝ 
                     verse 23 mildnes, faith, modeſtie, cōtinencie, chaſtitie. Againſt ſuch there is no lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And they that be Chriſts, haue crucified their fleſh vvith the vices and concupiſcences. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 25 
                  The Epiſtle vpō the 15 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. If vve liue in the ſpirit, in the ſpirit alſo let vs vvalke. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Let vs not be made deſirous of vaine glorie, prouoking one an other, enuying one an other.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     6. Faith.] This is the faith vvorking by charitie, vvhich S. Paul meaneth els vvhere, vvhen he faith that faith doth iuſtifie. And note vvel that by theſe termes circumciſion & prepuce not auailable to iuſtification,Iuſtificatiō by faith only, diſproued by conference of Scriptures. it is plaine that in the other places he meaneth the vvorkes of Circumciſion and Prepuce (that is, of the Ievves and the Gentils) vvithout faith, vvhich auaile not, but faith vvorking by charitie: as vvho ſhould ſay, faith and good vvorkes, not vvorkes vvithout faith.
                  Againe note here, that if the Proteſtants vvho pretend conference of places to be the beſt or only vvay to explicate hard ſpeaches of the holy Scriptures, had folovved but their ovvne rule, this one text vvould haue interpreted & cleated vnto them al other vvhereby iuſtice and ſaluation might ſeeme to be attributed to faith alone: the Apoſtle here ſo expreſly ſetting dovvne, the faith vvhich he commendeth ſo much before, not to be alone, but vvith charitie: not to be idle, but to be vvorking by Charitie:Hovv the Proteſtants admit charitie and good vvorkes to iuſtificatiō. as S. Auguſtine noteth. defid. & ep. c. 14. Further the good Reader muſt obſerue, that vvhereas the Proteſtants ſome of them confeſſe, that Charitie and good vvorkes be ioyned and requiſite alſo, and that they exclude them not, but commend them highly, yet ſo that the ſaid Charitie or good vvorkes are no part of our iuſtice or any cauſe of iuſtification, but as fruites and effectes of faith onely, vvhich they ſay doth all, yea though the other be preſent: this falſe gloſe alſo is reproued euidently by this place,Charitie is more principal then faith in iuſtificatiō. vvhich teacheth vs cleane contrarie: to vvitte, that faith hath her vvhole actiuitie and operation tovvard iuſtice and ſaluation, of charitie, and not contrarievviſe: vvithout vvhich it can not haue any act meritorious or agreable to God for our ſaluation, for vvhich cauſe S. Auguſtine ſaith, li. 
                           〈◊〉
                         de Trin. c. 18. Fidem non facit vtilem niſi charitas. nothing maketh faith profitable but charitie. But the Heretikes anſvver, that vvhere the Apoſtle ſaith,
 
                     faith vvorketh by charitie, he maketh charitie to be the inſtrument only of faith in vvel vvorking, and therfore the inferior cauſe at the leaſt, but this alſo is eaſily refuted by the Apoſtles plaine teſtimonie, affirming that charitie is * the greater vertue, & that if a man had al faith and lacked charitie,Cor. 13. he vvere vvorth nothing. And againe, * that Charitie is the perfection and accōpliſhment of of the Iavv (as faith i
                        •
                      not) vvhich can not agree to the inſtrumental or inferior cauſe.Hovv faith vvorketh by charitie. And therfore vvhen it is ſaid that faith vvorketh by charitie,Rom. 13. it is not as by an inſtrument,1 Tim. 1
                           •
                        
                      but as the body vvorketh by the ſoul, the matter by the forme, vvithout vvhich they haue no actiuitie, Vvherevpon the the Schooles call Charitie, the forme or life of faith, that is to ſay, the force, actiuitie, & operatiue qualitie thereof, in reſpect of merite and iuſtice. Vvhich S. Iames doth plainely inſinuate, vvhen he maketh faith vvithout Charitie, to be as a dead corps vvithout ſoul or life, and therefore vvithout profitable operation. c. 2. v. 26.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Libertie an occaſion.]
                     True libertie, not carnal and fleſhly. They abuſe the libertie of the Goſpel to the aduantage of their fleſh, that vnder pretenſe therof, ſhake of their obedience to the lavves of man, to the decrees of the Church and Councels, that vvil liue and beleeue as they liſt; and not be taught by their Superiors, but fornicate vvith euery Sect maiſter that teacheth pleaſant & licentious things: and al this vnder pretence of ſpirit, libertie, and freedom of the Goſpel. Such muſt learne that al hereſies, ſchiſmes, and rebellions againſt the Church and their lavvful Prelates, be counted here among the vvorkes of the fleſh. S
                        ••
                      S. Auguſtine de fid. & op. c. 24. 25.
                  
               
            
            
               If any do ſinne, thereſt that do the vvorkes of the Holy Ghoſt, muſt not therfore take pride in them ſelues, but rather make humilitie of it, partly by fearing their ovvne fall, partly by looking ſtraitly to their ovvne vvorkes. 6 He exhorteth earneſtly to good vvorkes, aſſuring them that they ſhal reaps none other then here they ſovv. 11 With his ovvne hand he vvriteth, telling them, the true cauſe vvhy thoſe falſe Apoſtles preach circumciſion, to be only to pleaſe the Ievves: 17 and a plaine argument that he preacheth it not, to be this, that he is perſecuted of the Ievves.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BRETHREN, and if a man be preoccupared in any fault, you that are ſpiritual, inſtruct ſuch an one in the ſpirit of lenitie, conſidering thine ovvne ſelf, leſt thou alſo be tempted. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Beare ye one an others burdens: & ſo you ſhal fulfil the lavv of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For if any man eſteeme him ſelf to be ſomething, vvhereas he is nothing, he ſeduceth him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But let euery one proue his ovvne vvorke, & ſo in him ſelf only ſhal he haue the glorie, and not in an other. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For euery one ſhal beare his ovvne burden.1. Cor. 9, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And let * him that is catechized in the vvord, communicate to him that catechizeth him, in al his goods. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For what things a mā ſhal ſow, thoſe alſo ſhal he reape. For he that ſovveth in his fleſh, of the fleſh alſo ſhal reape corruptiō
                  ▪ but he that ſoweth in the ſpirit, of the ſpirit ſhal reape life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And 
* doing good, let vs not faile.2. Theſ. 3, 13. For in due time vve ſhalThe workes of mercie be the ſeede of life euerlaſting, and the proper cauſe thereof, and not faith only. reape
 not failing. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Therfore vvhiles vve haue time, let vs vvorke good to al, but ″ eſpecially to the domeſticals of the faith. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 See vvith vvhat maner of letters I haue written to you vvith mine ovvne hand. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vvhoſoeuer vvil pleaſe in the fleſh, they force you to be circumciſed, only that they may not ſuffer the perſecution of the croſſe of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For neither they that are circumciſed, do keepe the Lavv: but they vvil haue you to be circumciſed, that they may glorie in your fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 14 
                  The Epiſtle for S. Francis, Octob. 4. ButChriſt (ſaith S. Auguſtine) choſe a kinde of death, to hang on the Croſſe and to ſixe or faſten the ſame croſſe in the foreheads of the faithful, that the Chriſtian may ſay, God forbid that I ſhould glorie ſauing in the croſſe of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. Expoſ. in Euang. Io. tract. 43.
                   God forbid that I ſhould glorie, ſauing in the croſſe of our Lord IESVS Chriſt: by vvhom the vvorld is crucified to me, and I to the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For in Chriſt IESVS neither circumciſion auaileth ought, nor prepuce, but ″ a nevv creature. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhoſoeuer ſhal folovv this rule, peace vpō them, and mercie, and vpon the Iſraël of God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 From hencefurth let no man be troubleſome to me▪ for I beare the markes

                     verse 18 of our Lord IESVS in my body. The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith your ſpirit brethren. Amen. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     6. Communicate] The great duety & reſpect that vve ought to haue to ſuch as preach or teach vs the Cath.Duety to our ſpiritual teachers. faith▪ and not in regard onely of their paines taken vvith vs, and vvel-deſeruing of vs by their doctrine: but that vve may be partakers of their merites, vve ought ſpecially to do good to ſuch, or (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) cōmunicate vvith them in al our temporal goods, that vve may be partakers of their ſpiritual. See S. Auguſtine li. 2. Euang. quaeſt. q. 8.
                  
                  
                     10. Eſpecially.]
                     In almes whom to preferre. In giuing almes, though vve may do vvel in helping al that are in neceſſitie, as farre as vve can, yet vve are more bound to ſuccour Chriſtians, then Ievves or Infidels: and Catholikes, then Heretikes. See S. Hierom q. 1. ad Hedibiam.
                  
                  
                     15. A nevv creature.]
                     Iuſtice an inherent qualitie in vs. Note vvel that the Apoſtle calleth that here a nevv creature, vvhich in the laſt chapter he termed, faith vvorking by charitie, & (1 Cor. 7, 19) the obſeruatiō of the cōmaundemēts of God. Vvhereby vve may learne that vnder the name of faith is conteined the vvhole reformation of our ſoules and our nevv creation in good vvorkes, and alſo that Chriſtian iuſtice is a very qualitie,Faith with the other vertues is the formal cauſe of iuſtification. condition and ſtate of vertue and grace reſident in vs, and not a phantaſtical apprehenſion of Chriſtes iuſtice only imputed to vs. Laſtly, that the faith vvhich iuſtifieth, ioyned vvith the other vertues, is properly the formal cauſe, and not the efficient or inſtrumental cauſe of iuſtification, that is to ſay, theſe vertues put together, being the effect of Gods grace, be our nevv creature and our iuſtice in Chriſt.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE EPHESIANS.
            
               OF S. Paules firſt comming to Epheſus, and ſhort abode there, vve reade Act. 18. And immediatly Act. 19. of his returning thither according to his promiſe. vvhat time he abode there three moneths, ſpeaking to the Ievves in the Synagogue. Act. 19. v. 8. and aftervvard apart from them (becauſe they vvere obſtinate) tvvo yeres in a certaine ſchoole, ſo that al that dvvelt in Aſia, heard the vvord of our Lord, Ievves and Gentiles. Act. 19. v. 10. The vvhole time himſelf calleth three yeres, in his exhortation at Milétum to the Cleargie of Epheſus. Act. 20. v. 31.
            After all this he vvriteth this Epiſtle vnto them from Rome (as it is ſaid) being then priſoner and in chaines.
               Eph. 3. v. 1. & 4. v. 1. Eph. 6. v. 20. and that as it ſeemeth, not the firſt time of his being in bonds there, vvhereof vve reade Act. 28: but the ſecond time, vvhereof vve reade in the Eccleſiaſticall Stories aftervvard: becauſe he ſaith in this Epiſtle c. 6. v. 21. Tychicus vvil certifie you of al things, vvhom I haue ſent to you. Of vvhom againe in the 2. to Tim. c. 4. v. 12. he ſaith: Tychicus I haue ſent to Epheſus, And the ſaid, 2. Epiſtle to Timothee (no doubt) vvas vvritten very litle before his death: for in it thus he ſaith: I am euen novv to be ſacrificed, & the time of my reſolution is at hand. 2. Tim. 4, 6.
            In the three firſt chapters, he commendeth vnto them the grace of God, in caling of the Gentiles no leſſe then the Ievves, and making one bleſſed Church of both. Vvherein his intention is to moue them to perſeuêre (for othervviſe they ſhould be paſsing vngratefull) and ſpecially not to be moued vvith his trouble, vvho vvas their Apoſtle: knovving (belike) thatSee Act. 20. v. 25. 32. it vvould be a great tentation vnto them, if they ſhould heare ſoone after, that he vvere executed: therfore alſo arming them in the end of the Epiſtle, as it vvere in complete harneſſe.
            In the other three chapters he exhorteth them to good life, in all pointes, and all ſtates, as it becommeth Chriſtians: and afore all other things, that they be moſt ſtudious to continue in the vnitie of the Church, and obedience of the paſtors thereof, vvhom Chriſt hath giuen to continue and to be our ſtay againſt all Heretikes, from his Aſcenſion, euen to the full building vp of his Church in the end of the vvorld.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE EPHESIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He magnifieth the grace of Gods eternal predeſtination and temporal vecation, 11 both of the Ievves, 13 and alſo of the Epheſians being Gentils, 13 for vvhoſe excellent faith and charitie he reioyceth, and continually praieth for their increaſe, that they may ſee more cleerly the greatnes both of the inheritance in heauen, and alſo of Gods might vvhich helpeth them therevnto: 20 an example of vvhich might they may behold in the ſupereminent exalting of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt by the vvil of God: to al the ſaincts that are at Epheſus: and to the faithful in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Grace to you and peace from God our father, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Bleſſed be God and the Father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, vvhich hath bleſſed vs in al ſpiritual bleſſing, in coeleſtials, in Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 4 as he choſe vs in him before the conſtitution of the vvorld, that vve ſhould be holy and immaculate
Vve learne here that by Gods grace men be holy and immaculate, not onely in the ſight of men, nor by imputation, but truely and before God: contrarie to the Doctrine of the Caluiniſtes. in his ſight in charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Vvho hath predeſtinated vs vnto the adoption of ſonnes, by IESVS Chriſt, vnto him ſelf: according to the purpoſe of his vvil: ✝ 
                     verse 6 vnto the praiſe of the glorie of his grace, vvherein he hath
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   gratified vs in his beloued ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 7 In vvhom vve haue redemption by his bloud (the remiſſion of ſinnes) according to the riches of his grace. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Vvhich hath ſuperabounded in vs in al vviſedō and prudence, ✝ 
                     verse 9 that he might make knovven vnto vs the ſacrament of his vvil, according to his good pleaſure, vvhich he purpoſed in him ſelf, ✝ 
                     verse 10 in the diſpenſation of the fulnes of times, to
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   perfit al things in Chriſt, that are in heauen and in earth, in him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 In vvhom vve alſo are called by lot: predeſtinate
 according to the purpoſe of him that vvorketh al things, according to the counſel of his vvil: ✝ 
                     verse 12 that vve may be vnto the praiſe of his glorie, vvhich before haue hoped in Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 13 in vvhom you alſo, vvhen you had heard the vvord of truth (the Goſpel of your ſaluation:) in vvhich alſo beleeuing you vvereSome referre this to the grace of Baptiſme: but to many learned it ſeemeth that the Apoſtle alludeth to the giuing of the Holy Ghoſt in the Sacrament of Confirmation, by ſigning the baptized with the ſigne of the Croſſe & holy Chriſme. For that vvas the vſe in the Apoſtles time, as els where we haue prooued. Annot. Act. 8.
                   ſigned vvith the holy Spirit of promis, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvhich is the pledge of our inheritance, to the redemption of acquiſition, vnto the praiſe of his glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 Therfore I alſo hearing your faith that is in our Lord IESVS, and loue tovvard al the ſainctes: ✝ 
                     verse 16 ceaſe not to giue thankes for your, making a memorie of you in my praiers, ✝ 
                     verse 17 that God of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, the father of glorie, giue you the ſpirit of vviſedom and of reuelation, in the knovvledge of him, ✝ 
                     verse 18 the eies of your hart illuminated, that you may knovv vvhat the hope is of his vocation, and vvhat are the riches of the glorie of his inheritance in the ſainctes, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and vvhat is the paſſing greatnes of his povver tovvard vs that beleeue: according to the operation of the might of his povver, ✝ 
                     verse 20 vvhich he vvrought in Chriſt, raiſing him vp from the dead, and ſetting him on his right hand in celeſtials, ✝ 
                     verse 21 aboue ″ al Principalitie & Poteſtate & Power, and Domination, and euery name that is named not only in this vvorld,Pſ. 8, 8. but alſo in that to come. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And he hath * ſubdued al things vnder his feete: and hath made him ″ head ouer al the CHVRCH, ✝ 
                     verse 23 vvhich is his body, theChriſt is not ful, vvhole, and perfect without the church no more then the head without the body, fulnes of him vvhich is filled al in al.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     21. Al Principalitie.] The Fathers vpon this, and other places of the old and new Teſtament, vvhere they finde the orders of holy Angels or ſpirites named, agree that there be nine orders of them. Of vvhich ſome be here counted and called, as vve ſee: in the Epiſtle to the Coloſsians, the order of Thrones is ſpecified, vvhich maketh fiue: to vvhich if vve adde theſe foure,Nine orders of Angels. Cherubim, Seraphim, Angels, and Archangels, vvhich are commonly named in holy vvrite, in al there be nine. S. Denys coel. Hier. c. 7. 8. 9. & Ec. Hier. c. 1. S. Athanaſ. li de Communi eſſent. in fine. Gregor, Moral. li. 32. c. 18. Therfore, good Reader, make no accoumpt of * Caluins and others infidelitie,Cal. vpon this place. vvhich blaſphemouſly blame and condemne the holy doctors diligence in this point of curiouſitie and impietie. The vvhole endeuour of theſe heretikes is, to bring al into doubt, and to corrupt euery Article of our Religion.
                  
                     22. Head.]
                     As Chriſt is king, and yet men are kings alſo: ſo Chriſt is head of the Church, and yet man may be head thereof alſo. It maketh a high proofe among the Proteſtants, that no man can be head of the Church, becauſe it is a calling and dignitie proper to Chriſt. But in truth by as good reaſon there ſhould be no king nor lord,Apoc. 19. becauſe, He is king and lord. neither ſhould there be Biſhop or Paſtor,1 Pet. 2, 25. becauſe he is the Biſhop and Paſtor of our ſoules: nor Pontifex nor Apoſtle, for by thoſe titles S. Paul termeth him Hebr. 3: none ſhould be piller, foundation,
 rocke, light, or maiſter of the Church or truth, becauſe Chriſt is properly al theſe. And yet our nevv doctors (though they be exceding ſeditious and vvould for the aduantage of their ſect be gladly ridde of kings and al other Superiors temporal, if they feared not the ſword more then God, and vvould finde as good Scriptures to be deliuered of them, as they now finde to diſcharge them ſelues of obedience to Popes:) yet (I ſay) they vvil not deny,Chriſt is head of his Church in a far more excellent ſort, then any man can be. al the former titles and dignities (notvvithſtanding Chriſtes ſoueraine right in the ſame) to be giuen and communicated to the Princes and Magiſtrates of the earth both ſpiritual and temporal, though Chriſt in a more diuine, ample, abſolute, excellent, and tranſcendent ſort, haue al theſe things attributed or appropriated to him ſelf. So then, though he be the head of the Church, and the onely head in ſuch ſoueraine and principal maner, as no earthly man or mere creature euer is or can be, and it ioyned to the Church in a more excellent ſort of coniunction, then any king is to his ſubiects or Countrie, or any Pope or Prelate to the Church vvhereof he is gouernour, euen ſo, farre that it is called his body Myſtical: life, motion, ſpirit, grace iſſuing dovvne from him to it and the members of the ſame, as from the head of the natural body▪ though in this ſort (we ſay) no man can be head but Chriſt, nor the Church be body to any but to Chriſt: yet the Pope may be the miniſterial head, that is to ſay, the cheefe Gouernour, Paſtor, and Prelate of the ſame, and may be his Vicar or Vicegerent in the regiment of that part vvhich is in earth▪
                     Hiero. ep. 123. as S. Hierom calleth Damaſus the Pope, Summum Sacerdotem, the cheefe and higheſt Prieſt: and the Apoſtle ſaith of this miniſterial head, The head can not ſay to the feete, you are not neceſſarie for me.
                     1. Cor. 12, 21. For therein alſo is a great difference betvvene Chriſt and euery mortal I relate, that (as the Apoſtle here ſaith) he is head of the vvhole Church, meaning of the triumphāt (& of al Angels alſo though in an other ſort) no leſſe thē of the Church militāt. So Peter vvas not, nor any Pope, nor any man can be. Where you muſt obſerue, that for this ſoueraine preeminence of Chriſt in this caſe, the Church is not called the body myſtical of any Gouernour, Peter, Paul, or vvhat Prelate or Pope ſo euer.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He putteth them in minde of their vnvvorthines before they vvere Chriſtians: that al the praiſe may be giuen to the grace of God: 11 and of the enmitie that vvas th
                        ••
                      betvvene the Ievv and the Gentil: 
                        〈◊〉
                      vntil nevv that Chriſt by his Croſſe hath made both one, taking avvay the cerem
                        •
                     nies of the Lavv, and making one body, and building one holy Temple, of al, in his Catholike Church.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND you vvhen you vvere dead by your offenſes & ſinnes, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvherein ſometime you vvalked according to the courſe of this vvorld,Eph. 6, 12. according to the * prince of the povver of this aire, of the ſpirit that novv vvorketh on the childrē of diffidence, ✝ 
                     verse 3 in vvhom alſo vve al conuerſed ſometime in the deſires of our fleſh, doing the vvil of the fleſh and of thoughtes, and vvere by nature the children of vvrath as alſo the reſt: ✝ 
                     verse 4 but God (vvhich is riche in mercie) for his exceding charitie vvhervvith he loued vs, ✝ 
                     verse 5 euen vvhen vve vvere dead by ſinnes, quickened vs together in Chriſt, (by vvhoſe grace you are ſaued,) ✝ 
                     verse 6 and raiſed vs vp vvith him, and hath made vs ſit vvith him in the celeſtials in Chriſt IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 7 that he might ſhevv in the vvorldes ſucceding, the aboundant riches of his grace, in bountie vpon vs in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For by ″ grace you are ſaued through faith (and that not of your ſelues,
 for it is the gift of God) ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  It is ſaid, not of workes as thine, of thy ſelf being vnto thee, but as thoſe in which God hath made, formed, and created thee. Aug. de gr. & lib. arbit. c. 8. & ſeq.
                   not of vvorkes, that no man glorie ✝ 
                     verse 10 For vve are his vvorke, created in Chriſt IESVS in good vvorkes, vvhich God hath prepared that vve ſhould vvalke in them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the vvhich cauſe be mindeful that ſometime you vvere Gentils in the fleſh,1. reg. 17, 26. Ezec 44, 7. vvho vvere * called prepuce, of that vvhich is called circumciſion in the fleſh, made vvith hand:Ro. 9, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 12 vvho vvere at that time vvithout Chriſt, alienated from the conuerſation of Iſraël, and * ſtrangers of the teſtaments, hauing no hope of the promis, and vvithout God in this vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But novv in Chriſt IESVS, you that ſometime vvere farre of, are made nigh in the bloud of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For he is our peace, vvho hath made both one, and diſſoluing the middle vvall of the partition, the enmities in his fleſh: ✝ 
                     verse 15 euacuating the lavv of cōmaundements
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . in decrees: that he may create the tvvo in him ſelf into one new man, making peace, ✝ 
                     verse 16 and may reconcile both in one body to God by the croſſe, killing the enmities in him ſelf.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And comming he euangelized peace to you that vvere farre of,Ro. 5, 2. and peace to them that vvere nigh.The Epiſtle for S. Thomas the Apoſtle. Decemb. 21. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For * by him vve haue acceſſe both in one Spirit to the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Novv then you are not ſtrangers and forreiners: but you are
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   citizens of the ſainctes, and the domeſticals of God, ✝ 
                     verse 20 ″ built vpon the foundation of the Apoſtles and Prophets, IESVS Chriſt him ſelf being the higheſt corner ſtone: ✝ 
                     verse 21 in vvhom al building framed together, grovveth into an holy temple in our Lord, ✝ 
                     verse 22 in vvhom you alſo are built together into an habitation of God in the holy Ghoſt. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . By grace you are ſaued through faith.]
                     Our firſt iuſtificatiō of mere grace, & faith the foundatiō therof. Our firſt iuſtification is of Gods grace, and not of our deſeruings: becauſe none of al our actions that vvere before our iuſtification, could merite or iuſtly procure the grace of iuſtification. Againe, he ſaith, through faith: for that faith is the beginning, foundation, and roote of al iuſtification, and the firſt of al other vertues, vvithout which it is impoſsible to pleaſe God.
                  
                     20. Built vpon the foundation.]
                     The Church builded vpon Chriſt, and yet vpon the Apoſtles alſo. Note againſt the Heretikes that thinke it diſhonorable to Chriſt, to attribute his titles or callings to mortal men, that the faithful (though builded firſt, principally, and properly vpon Chriſt) yet are ſaid here to be built alſo vpon the Apoſtles and Prophets. Vvhy may not the Church then be builded vpon Peter?
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  For vvitneſsing the vocation of the Gentils, as being the Apoſtle of the Gentils, he is 
                        〈◊〉
                      priſon: 1
                        •
                     , Wherein the Gentils therfore haue cauſe to reioyce, rather then to ſhrinke. So he ſaith, 14 and alſo praieth to God (vvho is almightie) to confirmed their invvard man though the outvvard be infirmed by perſecutions.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR this cauſe, I Paul the priſoner of IESVS Chriſt, for you Gentiles: ✝ 
                     verse 2 if yet you haue heard the diſpenſation of the grace of God, vvhich is giuen me tovvard you, ✝ 
                     verse 3 becauſe according to reuelation the ſacrament vvas made knovven to me, as I haue vvrittē before in breife: ✝ 
                     verse 4 according as you reading may vnderſtand my vviſedom in the myſterie of Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 5 vvhich vnto other generations vvas not knovven to the ſonnes of men, as novv it is reuealed to his holy Apoſtles & Prophets in the Spirit. ✝ 
                     verse 6 The Gentils to be coheires & concorporat and comparticipant of his promis in Chriſt IESVS by the Goſpel: ✝ 
                     verse 7 vvhereof I am made a miniſter according to the gift of the grace of God, which is giuen me according to the operation of his povver.1. Cor. 15, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 8 To me * the leaſt of al the ſainctes is giuen this grace, among the Gentils to euangelize the vnſearcheable riches of Chriſt,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ✝ 
                     verse 9 and to illuminate al men vvhat is the diſpenſatiō of the ſacrament hidden
                     That is, for euer before. from vvorldes in God, vvho created al things: ✝ 
                     verse 10 that the manifold vviſedom of God, may be notified to the Princes and Poteſtats in the celeſtials by the Church, ✝ 
                     verse 11 according to the

                     that is, the eternal prafinitiō
                   prefinitiō of worldes, vvhich he made in Chriſt IESVS our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 12 In vvhom vve haue affiance and acceſſe in confidence, by the faith of him. ✝ 
                     verse 13 
                  The Epiſtle vpon the 16 Sunday after Pentecoſt. For the vvhich cauſe I deſire that you faint not in my tribulations for you, vvhich is your glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 For this cauſe I bovve my knees to the Father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 15 of vvhom al paternitie in the heauens and in earth is named, ✝ 
                     verse 16 that he giue you according to the riches of his glorie, povver to be fortified by his Spirit in the inner man. ✝ 
                     verse 17 ChriſtChriſt dwelleth in vs by his giftes, and vve be iuſt by thoſe his giftes remaining and reſident in vs, & not by Chriſtes proper inſtice onely, as the Heretikes affirme. to dvvel by faith in your hartes, rooted and foundedNot faith only muſt be in vs, but charitie vvhich accōpliſheth al vertues. in charitie, ✝ 
                     verse 18 that you may be able to comprehend vvith al the ſainctes, vvhat is the bredth, and length, and height, and depth, ✝ 
                     verse 19 to knovv alſo the charitie of
 Chriſt, ſurpaſſing knovvledge, that you may be filled vnto al the fulnes of God.Ro. 16, 2
                        •
                     . ✝ 
                     verse 20 And * to him that is able to doe al things more aboundantly then vve deſire or vnderſtand, according to the povver that vvorketh in vs: ✝ 
                     verse 21 to him be glorie in the CHVRCH, and in Chriſt IESVS, vnto al generations vvorld vvithout end. Amen.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He exhorteth them to keepe the vnitie of the Church moſt 
                        〈…〉
                      vvith al humilities bringing them many motiues therevnto: 7 and 
                        〈…〉
                      that 
                        〈◊〉
                      the diuerſitie it ſelf of offices is not for diuiſion, as being the gift of Chriſt him ſelf, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to build vp the Church, and to held al in the vnitie therof againſt the 
                        〈…〉
                      of Heretikes: that vnder Chriſt the head, in the Church being the body, euery member may proſper. 17 Neither (as touching life) moſt vve 
                        〈◊〉
                      like the Heathen, but as it becommeth Chriſtians, laying of al our old corrupt maners, and increaſing daily in al goodnes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Therfore priſoner in our Lord,The Epiſtle vpon the 17 Sunday after Pentecoſt. And in a Votiue Maſſe againſt Schiſme. beſeeche you, that you vvalke vvorthy of the vocation in vvhich you are called, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvith al humilitie & mildenes, vvith patience, ſupporting one an other in charitie, ✝ 
                     verse 3 careful to keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace. ✝ 
                     verse 4 One body and one ſpirit: as you are called in one hope of your vocation. ✝ 
                     verse 5 One Lord,Malat. 2, 10. ″ one faith, one baptiſme. ✝ 
                     verse 6 * One God and Father of al,The Epiſtle vpō Aſcenſion eue. And vpon SS. Simon and Iudes day. vvhich is euer al,Ro. 12, 4 1. Cor. 12, 4. and by al, and in al vs. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 7 But * to euery one of vs is giuen grace according to the meaſure of the donation of Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the vvhich he ſaith, Aſcēding on high,
                  Pſ. 67, 19. 
                  he ledde captiuitie captiue: he gaue giftes to men. ( ✝ 
                     verse 9 And that he aſcended, vvhat is it, but becauſe he deſcended alſo firſt into theHe m
                        •
                     aneth ſpecially of his deſcending to Hel. inferiour partes of the earth? ✝ 
                     verse 10 He that deſcended, the ſame is alſo he that is aſcended aboue al the heauens, that he might fill al things.) ✝ 
                     verse 11 And * he gaue,1. Cor. 12, 28. * ſome Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, and otherſome Euangeliſts, and otherſome paſtors and doctors, ✝ 
                     verse 12 to the conſummation of the ſainctes, vnto the vvorke of the miniſterie, vnto the edifying of the body of Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 13 ″ vntil we meete al into the vnitie of faith and knovvledge of the ſonne of God, into a perfect man, into the meaſure of the age of the fulnes of Chriſt: ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 14 that novv vve be not children vvauering, and caried about ″ vvith euery vvinde of doctrine in the vvickednes of men, in craftines to the circumuention of errour. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But doing the truth in charitie, let vs in al things grow in him, vvhich is the head,
 Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 16 of vvhom the vvhole body being compacte and knit together by al iuncture of ſubminiſtration, according to the operation in the meaſure of euery member, maketh the increaſe of the body vnto the edifying of it ſelf in charitie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 This therfore I ſay and teſtifie in our Lord: that novv you vvalke not as alſo the * Gentiles vvalke in the vanitie of their ſenſe,1 Pet. 4, 3. Ro. 1, 21. ✝ 
                     verse 18 hauing their vnderſtanding obſcured vvith darkenes, alienated from the life of God by the ignorance that is in them, becauſe of the blindenes of their hart, ✝ 
                     verse 19 vvho deſpairing,Ro. 1, 24. * haue giuen vp them ſelues to impudicitie, vnto the operation of al vncleannes, vnto auarice. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But you haue not ſo learned Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 21 if yet you haue heard him, and haue been taught in him,Coloſ. 3, 8 (as the truth is in IESVS.) ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 22 * Lay you avvay,Heb. 12, 1. according to the old conuerſation the old man, vvhich is corrupted according to the deſires of errour. ✝ 
                     verse 23 AndThe Apoſtle teacheth vs not to apprehēd Chriſts iuſtice by faith only, but to be renevved in our ſelues truly, & to put on vs the nevv mā formed & created in iuſtice and holines of truth. By the which, free vvil alſo is proued to be in vs, to worke with God, or to conſent vnto him in our ſanctification. be renevved in the ſpirit of your minde: ✝ 
                     verse 24 and put on the nevv man vvhich according to God is created in iuſtice, and holineſſe of the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For the vvhich cauſe laying avvay lying,
* ſpeake ye truth euery one vvith his neighbour,Zach. 8, 16. becauſe vve are members one of an other.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 * Be angrie and ſinne not.Pſ. 4, 5. let not the ſonne goe dovvne vpon your anger. ✝ 
                     verse 27 Giue not place to the Deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 28 He that ſtole, let him novv not ſteale: but rather let him labour in vvorking vvith his handes that vvhich is good, that he may haue vvhence to giue vnto him that ſuffereth neceſſitie. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Al naughtie ſpeache let it not proceede out of your mouth: but if there be any good to the edifying of the faith, that it may giue grace to the hearers. ✝ 
                     verse 30 And contriſtate not the holy Spirit of God: in vvhich you are ſigned vnto the day of redemption. ✝ 
                     verse 31 Let al bitternes, and anger, and indignation, and clamour, and blaſphemie be taken avvay from you vvith al malice. ✝ 
                     verse 32 And be gentle one to an other, merciful, pardoning one an other, as alſo God in Chriſt hath pardoned you.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  5. One faith.] As rebellion is the bane of ciuil Commonvvealths and kingdoms,
                     Vnitie of the Cath. Church. 
                     and peace and concord, the preſeruation of the ſame: ſo is Schiſme, diuiſion, and diuerſitie of faiths or felovvſhips in the ſeruice of God, the calamitie of the Church: and peace, vnitie, vniformitie, the ſpecial bleſſing of God therein, and in the Church aboue al Commonvvealths, becauſe it is in al pointes a Monarchie tending euery vvay to vnitie. but one God, but one Chriſt, but one Church, but
 one hope, one faith, one baptiſme, one head, one body. Vvhereof S. Cyprian li. de vnit. E
                        •
                     nu. 3. ſaith thus▪
                      One Church the Holy Ghoſt in the perſon of our Lord deſigneth & faith. One is my do
                        •
                     e. This vnitie of the Church he that holdith not, doth he thinke he holdeth the faith? He that vvithſtandeth and reſiſteth the Church, he that forſaketh Peters chaire vpon vvhich the Church vvas built, doth he truſt that he is in the Church? When the bleſſed Apoſtle S. Paul alſo ſhevveth this Sacrament of vnitie, ſaying, One body and one ſpirit &c. Which vnitie vve Biſhops ſpecially that rule in the Church, ought to hold faſt and maintaine, that vve may proue the Biſhoply function alſo it ſelf to be one and vndiuided,Ep. 40. &c. And againe, There is one God,Schiſme deteſtable. and one Chriſt, and one Church, and one Chaire, by our Lordes voice founded vpon Peter. An other altar to be ſette vp, or a novv Prieſthod to be made, beſides one altar, & one Prieſthod, is impoſsible. Whoſoeuer gathereth els vvhere, ſcattereth, it is adulterous, it is impious, it is ſacriligious, vvhatſoeuer is inſtituted by mans furie to the breach of Gods diuine diſpoſition. Get ye far from the contagion of ſuch men, & fle
                        •
                      from their ſpeaches at a canker and peſtilen
                        ••
                     , our Lord hauing praemoniſhed and vvarned before hand, They are blind, leaders of the blind, &c. Vvhereby vve learne that this vnitie of the Church commended ſo much vnto vs, conſiſteth in the mutual fellovvſhip of al Biſhops vvith the See of the Peter. S. Hilarie alſo (li. ad Conſtantium Auguſtum) thus applieth this ſame place of the Apoſtle againſt the Arians, as vve may do againſt the Caluiniſts.
                     Among heretikes as many faithes as willes. Perilous and miſerable it is, ſaith he, that there are novv ſo many faithes as vvilles, and ſo many doctrines as 
                        〈◊〉
                     , vvhiles either faithes are ſo vvritten ad vve vvill, or as vve vvil, ſo are vnderſtood: and vvhereas according to one God, and one Lord, and one Baptiſme, there is alſo one faith, vve fall avvay from that vvhich is the only faith, and vvhiles mee faithes be made, they beginne to come to that, that there is none at al.
                  
                     11. Some Apoſtles.]
                     The heretikes foliſh negatiue argument againſt the Pope, anſvvered. Many functions that vvere euen in the Apoſtles time, are not here named: vvhich muſt be noted againſt the Aduerſaries that call here for Popes, as though the names of Biſhops, Prieſts, or Deacons vvere not as vvel leaft out as Popes: vvhom yet they can not deny to haue been in vſe in S. Paules daies. And therfore they haue no more reaſon, out of this place to diſpute againſt the Pope, then againſt the reſt of the Eccleſiaſtical functions. Neither is it neceſſarie to reduce ſuch as be no: ſpecified here, to theſe here named: though in deede both other Biſhops and Prelates and ſpecially Popes may be conteined vnder the names of Apoſtles,The Popes office is called an Apoſtleſhip. Doctors, and Paſtors. Certes the roome and dignitie of the Pope is a very continual Apoſtleſhip, and S. Bernard calleth it Apoſtolatum. Bernard. ad Eugen. li. 14. c. 4 &c. 6 in fine.
                  
                  
                     13. Vntil vve meete.] The Church of God ſhal neuer lacke theſe ſpiritual functions, or ſuch as be anſvverable to them,Continual ſucceſsion of Biſhops, an euident argument of the true viſible Church. according to the time and ſtate of the Church, til the vvorldes end. Vvhereby you may proue, the Catholike Church, that is to ſay, that viſible companie of Chriſtians vvhich hath euer had, and by good records can proue they haue had, a continual ordinarie ſucceſſion of Biſhops, Paſtors, and Doctors, to be the onely true Church: and theſe other good fellovves that for many vvorldes or ages together can not ſhevv that they had any one Biſhop, or ordinarie yea or extraordina
                        ••
                     e officer for them and their ſect, to be an adulterous Heretical generation.The father's refuted heretikes by the ſucceſsion of the Biſhops of Rome. And this place of the Apoſtle aſſuring to the true Church a perpetual viſible continuance of Paſtors and Apoſtles or their ſucceſſors, vvarranted the holy fathers to trie al Heretikes by the moſt famous ſucceſſion of the Popes of Rome. So did S. Irenaeus, li. 3. c. 3. Tertullian, in praſcript. Optatus, li. 2 cont. Parm. S. Auguſtine, in pſ. cont. part. Donat. et cont. ep. Manich. c. 4. et ep. 165. Epiph. har. 27. and others.
                  
                     14. With euery vvinde.] The ſpecial vſe of the ſpiritual Gouernours is, to keepe vs in vnitie and conſtancie of the Catholike faith,Heretical blaſtes carie away the inconſtant only. that vve be not carried avvay vvith the blaſt or vvind of euery hereſie. Vvhich is a very proper note of ſectes and nevv doctrines that trouble the infirme vveaklings of the Church, by certaine ſeaſons of diuerſe ages: as ſometime the Arians, then the Manichees, an other time the Neſtorians, then the Lutherans, Caluiniſts, and ſuch like: vvho at diuers times in diuers places, haue blovven diuers blaſtes of flaſe doctrine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  He continueth his exhortation to good life, 5 aſſuring them againſt al deceiuers, that no committer of mortal ſinne ſhal be ſaued: conſidering that for ſuch ſinnes it is that the Heathen ſhal be damned: 
                        •
                      & that Chriſtians muſt rather be the light of al others. 22 Them he commeth in particular and exhorteth huſbands and vviues to do their duety one tovvardes the other, by the example of Chriſt and his obedient and beloued ſpouſe the Church.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BE ye therfore folovvers of God,The epiſtle vpon the 3 Sū
                     day in Lent. as moſt deere children:Io. 13, 34 ✝ 
                     verse 2 and * walke in loue, as Chriſt alſo loued vs, and deliuered him ſelf for vs an oblation and hoſt to God in an odour of ſvvetenes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But * fornication and al vncleannes,Col. 3, 5. or auarice, let it not ſo much as be named among you, as it becommeth ſainctes: ✝ 
                     verse 4 or filthines, or fooliſh talke, or ſcurrilitie, being to no purpoſe: but rather giuing of thankes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For vnderſtanding knovv you this, that no fornicatour, or vncleane, or couetous perſon (vvhich isSee the heretical corruption of this place in the Annotation Col. 3. v. 5. the ſeruice of Idols) hath inheritance in the kingdom of Chriſt and of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 Let no man ſeduce you vvith vaine vvordes. For, for theſe things commeth the anger of God vpō the children of diffidence. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Become not therfore partakers vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For you vvere ſometime darkenes, but novv light in our Lord. Vvalke as children of the light, ( ✝ 
                     verse 9 for the fruite of the light is in al goodnes, and iuſtice, and veritie) ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 10 prouing vvhat is vvel pleaſing to God: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and communicate not vvith the vnfruitful vvorkes of darkenes, but rather reproue them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the things that are done of them in ſecrete, it is ſhame euen to ſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But al things that are reproued; are manifeſted by the light. for al that is manifeſted, is light. ✝ 
                     verse 14 for the vvhich cauſe he ſaith:Eſ. 9, 60 
                  Riſe thou that ſleepeſt,
                  The Epiſtle vpon the 20 Sunday after Pentecoſt. 
                  and ariſe from the dead: and Chriſt vvil illuminate thee. ✝ 
                     verse 15 See therfore, brethren, how you vvalke vvarily.Col. 4, 5. not as vnvviſe, but * as vviſe: ✝ 
                     verse 16 redeeming the time, becauſe the daies are euil. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Therfore become not vnvviſe, but * vnderſtanding vvhat is the vvil of God.Ro. 12, 2. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And be not drunke vvith vvine vvherein is rioteouſnes, but be filled vvith the Spirit, ✝ 
                     verse 19 ſpeaking to your ſelues in pſalmes & hymnes, and ſpiritual canticles, chaūting and ſinging in your hartes to our Lord: ✝ 
                     verse 20 giuing thankes alvvaies for al things, in the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt to God & the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Subiect one to an other in the feare of Chriſt.Col. 3, 18.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 Let * vvomen be ſubiect to their huſbandes,The Epiſtle in a votiue maſſe for mariage. as to our Lord:Tit. 2, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 23 becauſe * the man is the head of the woman:1 Pe
                        •
                     . 3, 1. as Chriſt is the head of theIt is much to be noted, that in the firſt Engliſh Bibles, there is not once the name of CHVRCH in al the Bible, but in ſteede thereof, Congregatiō. vvhich is ſo notorious a corruption that thē ſelues in the later bibles correct it for ſhame, but yet ſuffer the other to be read and vſed ſtill. See the Bible printed in the yere 1562. CHVRCH. Him ſelf,Ge. 3, 16. ″ the ſauiour of his body.1 Cor. 11, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But as the CHVRCH is ſubiect to
 Chriſt, ſo alſo the vvomen to their huſbands in al things. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Huſbands, loue your vviues, as Chriſt alſo ″ loued the CHVRCH, and deliuered him ſelf for it: ✝ 
                     verse 26 that he might ſanctifie it, cleanſing it by the lauer of vvater in the vvord, ✝ 
                     verse 27 that he might preſent to him ſelf a glorious CHVRCH, not hauing ſpot, or wrinkle, or any ſuch thing, but that it may be holy and vnſpotted. ✝ 
                     verse 28 So alſo men ought to loue their vviues as their ovvne bodies. He that loueth his vvife, loueth him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For no man euer hated his ovvne fleſh: but he nouriſheth & cheriſheth it, ″ as alſo Chriſt the CHVRCH: ✝ 
                     verse 30 becauſe vve be the members of his body, of his fleſh & of his bones.Gen. 2, 24. 
                   ✝ 
                        verse 31 For this cauſe ſhal mā leaue his father & mother: and ſhal cleane to his vvife,
                  Mat. 19, 5. 
                  and they ſhal be tvvo in one fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 32 ″ This is a great ſacramēt. but I ſpeake in Chriſt and in the CHVRCH ✝ 
                     verse 33 Neuertheles you alſo euery one, let eche loue his vvife as him ſelf: and let the vvife feare her huſband. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  21. Sauiour of his body.] None hath ſaluation or benefite by Chriſt, that is not of his body the Church.
                     No 
                           •
                        aluation out of the oath CHVRCH. 
                     And vvhat Church that is, S. Auguſtine expreſſeth in theſe vvordes. The Catholike Church onely is the body of Chriſt, vvhereto ſhe is 
                        •
                     ead. out of this body the Holy Ghoſt quickeneth no man. And a litle after, He that vvil haue the Spirit, let him bevvare he remains not out of the CHVRCH, let him bevvare he enter not into it f
                        •
                     inedly. Auguſt. ep. 50 ad Bonifacium comitem in fine.
                  
                  
                     24. Subiect to Chriſt.) The CHVRCH is alvvaies ſubiect to Chriſt, that is, not onely vnder him,The CHVRCH neuer erreth. but euer obedient to his vvordes and commaundement. Vvhich an euident and inuincible demonſtration that ſhe neuer rebelleth againſt Chriſt, neuer falleth from him by error, Idolatrie, or falſe vvorſhip, as the Heretikes novv, and the Donatiſtes of old did teach.
                  
                     25. Loued the Church.]
                     Chriſts loue tovvard his Church. Loe Chriſtes ſingular loue of the CHVRCH, for vvhich onely & the members thereof he effectually ſuffered his Paſſion, and for vvhoſe continual cleanſing and purifying in this life, he inſtituted holy Baptiſme and other Sacraments: that at length in the next life it may become vvithout al ſpot,The Church triumphant vvithout ſpot and vvrinkle. vvrinkle, or blemiſh. for, in this vvorld by reaſon of the manifold infirmities of diuers her members, ſhe can not be vvholy vvithout ſinne, but muſt ſay alvvaies, Dimitte no
                           •
                        is debita noſtra, Forgiue vs our detes. Auguſt. li. 2. Retract. c. 18.
                  
                     29. At Chriſt the Church.] It is an vnſpeakable dignitie of the CHVRCH, vvhich the Apoſtle expreſſeth often els vvhere,The manifold dignitie of the Church but ſpecially in this vvhole paſſage, to be that creature onely for vvhich Chriſt effectually ſuffered, to be vvaſhed and embrued vvith vvater and bloud iſſuing out of his holy ſide, to be nouriſhed vvith his ovvne body (for ſo doth S. Irenaeus expound li, 5. in principio) to be his members,Aug. li. 8 de Symb. ad Catech. c. 9. to be ſo ioyned vnto him as the body and members of the ſame fleſh, bone, and ſubſtance to the head, to be loued and cheriſhed of him as vvife of huſband, yea to be his vvife and moſt deere ſpouſe, taken and formed (as S. Auguſtine often ſaith) out of his ovvne ſide vpon the Croſſe, as Eue our firſt father Adams ſpouſe vvas made of his tibbe. In Pſal. 126. & in Pſal. 127. & tract. 9 in Ioan. & tract. 120. In reſpect of vvhich great dignitie and excellencie, the ſame holy father affirmeth the CHVRCH to be the principal creature, and therfore named in the Creede next after the Holy Ghoſt,The Church is the principal creature. and he proueth againſt the Macedonians, the Holy Ghoſt to be God, becauſe he is named before the Church in the confeſſion of our faith. Of vvhich Incomparable excellencie of the Church, ſo beloued of Chriſt and ſo inſeparatly ioyned in mariage vvith him, if the Heretikes of our time had any ſenſe or conſideration, they vvould neither thinke their cōtemptible companie or cōgregation to be the glorious ſpouſe of our Lord,The Church can not erre. nor teach that the Church may erre, that is to ſay, may be diuorced from her ſpouſe for Idolatrie, ſuperſtition, Hereſie, or other abominations: Vvherevpon one of theſe abſurdities vvould enſue, that either
 Chriſt may ſometimes be vvithout a Church & ſpouſe in earth (as he vvas al the vvhile there vvere no Caluiniſts,Abſurdities that folow, if the Church may erre. if their Church be the ſpouſe of Chriſt) or els if the Catholike Church onely is and hath been his vvife, and the ſame haue ſuch errors as the Heretikes falſely pretend, that his vvife ſo deere and ſo praiſed here, is notvvithſtanding a very vvhoore. Vvhich horrible abſurdities proue and conuince to any man of common ſenſe, both that the Catholike Church alvvaies is, and that it teacheth truth alvvaies, and to honour God truely and ſincerely alvvaies: vvhatſoeuer the adulterous generation of Heretikes thinke or blaſpheme.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . This is a great Sacrament.] Mariage a great Sacramēt of Chriſt and his Church prefigured in the firſt parēts. Adam (ſaith S. Auguſtine tract. 15 in Io.) vvho vvas a forme or figure of him that vvas to come, yea rather God in him gaue vs a great token of a Sacrament. For both he deſerued ſleeping to take a vviſe, and of his ribbs his vvife vvas made vnto him: becauſe of Chriſt ſleeping on the Croſſe the Church vvas to be made out of his ſide. In an other place he maketh Matrimonie a Sacramēt of Chriſt and his Church: in that, that as the maried mā muſt forſake father & mother and cleaue vnto his vvife, ſo Chriſt as it vvere left his father,MATRIMONIA a Sacrament. exi
                        •
                     an
                        ••
                     ing him ſelf by his incarnatiō, & left the Synagogue his mother, & ioyned him ſelf to the Church. Li. 12 c. 8. cont. Fauſtum. In diuers other places he maketh it alſo a Sacrament, ſpecially in that it is an inſeparable bond betvvixt tvvo, and that can neuer be diſſolued but by death: ſignifying Chriſts perpetual and indiſſoluble coniunction vvith the Church his one onely ſpouſe. de Gen. ad lit. li. 9 c. 7. Cont Pelag. de pec. orig. li. 2. c. 34. De fid. et ep. c. 7. De bono coniug. c. 7. & 18. And in an other place. The good of Mariage (ſaith he) among the people of God is in the holines of a Sacrament. De bono cōiugali c. 24.
                  
                  Vvho vvould haue thought ſuch myſteries and Sacramēts to be in Mariage that the ioyning of man & vvife together ſhould repreſent ſo great a myſerie, if the Apoſtle him ſelf & after him this holy father and others, had not noted it? or vvho can maruel that the holy Church taketh this to be a Sacrament,The grace giuen by this Sacrament. and to giue grace of ſanctification to the parties maried, that they may liue together in mutual fidelitie, bring vp their children in faith aud feare of God, and poſſeſſe their veſſel (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) in ſanctification and honour,1 Theſ. 4. and not in paſſion of luſt and ignominie, as the Heathen do vvhich knovv not God, and as our brutiſh nevv Maiſters ſeeme to do that commend mariage aboue al things ſo farre as it feedeth their concupiſcences,The proteſtāts fleſhly eſtimation of mariage. but for grace, Sacrament, myſterie, or ſanctification thereby, they care no more then the Heathen or brute beaſtes do? And thus vve gather that matrimonie is a Sacrament, and not of the Greeke vvord Myſterie onely,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Sacramentum. as Caluin falſely ſaith, not of the Latin vvord Sacrament, both vvhich vve knovv haue of their nature a more general ſignification, and that in the Scriptures alſo: but vvhereas theſe names are here giuen to Matrimonie by the Apoſtle, & are not giuen in the Scriptures to Baptiſme and the Euchariſt, let them tel vs vvhy they alſo apply theſe vvordes from their general ſignification to ſignifie ſpecially and peculiarly thoſe tvvo Sacramēts neuer ſo named expreſly in Scripture. and do not likevviſe folovv the Catholike Church in calling matrimonie by the ſame name, vvhich is here ſo called of the Apoſtle, ſpecially vvhereas the ſignification in it, is as great as in any other of the Sacraments, and rather greater.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Likevviſe children and parents he exhorteth. 
                        •
                      item ſeruants and maiſters. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Then, that al take courage in the might of God, but ſo, that vvithal they arm
                        •
                      them ſelue (conſidering vvhat mightie enemies they haue) vvith al peeces of ſpiritual armour
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      praying alvvaies feruently, and for him alſo.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  CHILDREN,Col. 3, 20 obey your parents in our Lord. for this is iuſt.Exo. 20, 12, Deu. 5, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  Honour thy father and thy mother (vvhich is the firſt commaundement in the promis,)  ✝ 
                        verse 3 that it may be vvel vvith thee, and thou maieſt be long-liued vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And you fathers, prouoke not your children to anger: but bring them vp in the diſcipline and correption of our Lord.Col. 3, 22 Tit. 2, 9.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 * Seruants,1 Pet. 2, 8. be obedient to your lordes according to
 the fleſh, with feare and trembling, in the ſimplicitie of your hart, as to Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 6 not ſeruing to the eie, as it vvere pleaſing men, but as the ſeruants of Chriſt, doing the vvil of God frō the hart, ✝ 
                     verse 7 vvith a good vvil ſeruing, as to our Lord and not to men. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Knovving that euery one vvhat good ſoeuer he ſhal doe, that ſhal heGod leaueth no good worke vnrewarded. receiue of our Lord, vvhether he be bond, or free. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And you maiſters, doe the ſame things to them,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   remitting threatenings: knovving that both their Lord and yours,Deu. 10, 17. is in heauen: and * acception of perſons is not vvith him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 Hence forth brethren,The Epiſtle vpon the 21 Sunday after Pentecoſt. be ſtrengthened in our Lord, & in the might of his povver. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Put you on the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   armour of God, that you may ſtand againſt the deceites of the Deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For our vvreſtling is not againſt fleſh and bloud: but againſt Princes and Poreſtats,Eph. 2, 2 againſt the * rectors of the vvorld of this darkenes, againſt the ſpirituals of vvickednes in the celeſtials. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Therfore take the armour of God, that you may reſiſt in the euil day, and ſtand in al things perfect. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Stand therfore hauing your loines girded in truth, and 
If mā could not be truely iuſt or haue iuſtice in him ſelf, hovv could he be clothed vvith iuſtice? clothed with the breaſt-plate of iuſtice, ✝ 
                     verse 15 & hauing your feete ſhod to the preparation of the Goſpel of peace: ✝ 
                     verse 16 in al things taking the ſhield of faith, vvherevvith you may extinguiſh al the firie dartes of the moſt vvicked one. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and take vnto you the * helmet of ſaluation:Eſ. 59, 17. 1. and the ſvvord of the ſpirit (vvhich is the vvord of God) ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 18 in al praier and ſupplication praying at al time in ſpirit:Theſ. 5, 8 and in the ſame vvatching in al inſtance and ſupplication for al the ſaincts: ✝ 
                     verse 19 and for me, that ſpeache may be giuen me in the opening of my mouth vvith cōfidence, to make knowen the myſterie of the Goſpel, ✝ 
                     verse 20 for the vvhich I am a legate in this chaine, ſo that in it I may be bold according as I ought, to ſpeake.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And that you alſo may knovv the things about me, vvhat I doe: Tychicus my deereſt brother and faithful miniſter in our Lord, vvil make you vnderſtād al things: ✝ 
                     verse 22 vvhom I haue ſent to you for this ſame purpoſe, that you may know the things about vs, and he may comfort your hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Peace to the brethren andS. Auguſtine noteth in ſundrie places vpō this ſame text, that faith without charitie ſerueth not to ſaluation. li. 50. ho. 7.
                   charitie vvith faith from God the Father, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Grace with al that loue our Lord IESVS Chriſt in incorruption. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            ❀ THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE PHILIPPIANS.
            
               HOVV S. Paul vvas called by a viſion into Macedonia, vve reade Act. 16. and hovv he came to Philippi being the firſt citie thereof, and of his preaching, miracles, and ſuffering there. And againe Act. 19. Paul purpoſed in the Spirit, vvhen he had paſſed through Macedonia and Achaia, to goe to Hieruſalem, ſaying: After I haue been there, I muſt ſee Rome alſo. Vvhich purpoſe he executed Act. 20. taking his leaue at Epheſus. And being aftervvard come into Achaia, he had counſel to returne through Macedonia, and ſo at length from Philippi he began his nauigation tovvard Hieruſalem, and from Hieruſalem being caried priſoner to Rome (Act. 28.) he vvrote from thence this Epiſtle to the Philippians: or rather in his ſecond apprehenſion, about 10 yeres after the firſt.
            
               In it he confirmeth them (as he did * the Epheſians alſo about the ſame time) againſt the tentatiō that they might haue in hearing that he vvere executed.
               Eph. 3. 
               therfore he firſt ſaith:
               Phil. 1. v. 12. 23. 26. And I vvil haue you knovv brethren, that the things about me, are come to the more furtherance of the Goſpel: ſo that my bandes vvere made manifeſt in Chriſt in al the Court &c. Secondly he ſignifieth that his deſire is, to he diſſolued and to be vvith Chriſt. but yet (leſt they ſhould be diſcomforted) that he hopeth to come againe to them. Vvhereof notvvithſtanding,
               Phil. 2. v. 23. 24. 17. 
               that he hath yet no certaintie, he ſignifieth in ſaying: I hope to ſend Timothee vnto you, immediatly as I ſhal ſee the things that concerne me. Thirdly therefore he prepareth them againſt the vvorſt, ſaying: I hope to come againe to you: but and if I be immolated, vpon the ſacrifice and ſeruice of your faith, I reioyce and congratulate vvith you al, and the ſelf ſame thing do you alſo reioyce and congratulate vvith me.
            Moreouer he partly vvarneth them (as he had done before) of thoſe Iudaical Falſe-apoſtles vvho preached circumciſion & Moyſes lavv to the Chriſtian Gentils: partly he exhorteth them to ſuffer perſecution, to liue vvel, and ſpecially to humble them ſelues one to an other, rather then by any pride to breake the peace & vnitie of the Church.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE PHILIPPIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Hauing ſignified that he vſeth to thanke God for their vertue, 9 and alſo to pray for their encreaſe: 12 he certifieth them (for their confirmatiō & comfort) vvhat good was come through his trouble at Rome, 24 & that he doubteth not (though he rather deſire martyrdom) but to come againe vnto them, 27 exhorting them to liue as they ought to do, 28 and namely not to ſhrinke for perſecution.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL and Timothee the ſeruants of IESVS Chriſt: to al the ſainctes in Chriſt IESVS that are at Philippi, vvith the ″ Biſhops and Deacons. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Grace to you and peace from God our father, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 I giue thankes to my God in al memorie of you ( ✝ 
                     verse 4 alvvaies in al my praiers for al you, vvith ioy making petition) ✝ 
                     verse 5 for your communicating in the Goſpel of Chriſt from the firſt day vntil novv.The Epiſtle vpon the 22 Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 truſting this ſame thing, that he which hath begōne in you a good worke, vvil perfit it vnto the day of Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 7 as it is reaſon for me, this to thinke for al you, for that I haue you in hart, & in my bandes, and in the defenſe, and the confirmation of the Goſpel, al you to be partakers of my ioy. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For God is my vvitnes, hovv I couet you al in the bowels of IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And this I pray, that your charitie may more and more abound in knovvledge and in al vnderſtanding: ✝ 
                     verse 10 that you may approue the better things, that you may be ſincere and vvithout offence vnto the day of Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 11 repleniſhed vvith the fruite of iuſtice by IESVS Chriſt, vnto the glorie and praiſe of God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And I vvil haue you knovv brethren, that the things about me are come to the more furtherance of the Goſpel:
 ✝ 
                     verse 13 ſo that my bandes vvere made manifeſt in Chriſt in al the court, and in al the reſt, ✝ 
                     verse 14 that many of our brethren in our Lord, hauing confidence in my bandes, vvere bold more aboundantly vvithout feare to ſpeake the vvord of God. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Some in deede euen for enuie and contention: but ſome alſo for good vvil preache Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Some of charitie: knovving that I am ſet vnto the defenſe of the Goſpel. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſome of contention preache Chriſt not ſincerely: ſuppoſing that they raiſe affliction to my bandes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But vvhat? So that by al meanes, vvhether by occaſion, or by truth, Chriſt be preached: in this alſo I reioyce, yea & vvil reioyce. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For I knovv that this ſhal fall out to me vnto ſaluatiō by your praier and the ſubminiſtration of the Spirit of IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 20 according to my expectation & hope, becauſe in nothing ſhal I be confounded, but in al confidence as alvvaies, novv alſo ſhal Chriſt be magnified in my body, vvhether it be by life, or by death. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For vnto me, to liue is Chriſt: and to die is gaine. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And if to liue in the fleſh, this vnto me be the fruit of the vvorke, and vvhat I ſhal chooſe I knovv not. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And I am ſtraitened of the tvvo: hauing deſire to be diſſolued & to be vvith Chriſt, a thing much more better. ✝ 
                     verse 24 but to abide in the fleſh,more neceſſarie neceſſarie' for you. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And truſting this, I know that I ſhal abide and continue vvith you al, vnto your furtherance and ioy of the faith: ✝ 
                     verse 26 that your gratulation may abound in Chriſt IESVS in me, by my comming againe to you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 27 Only * conuerſe ye vvorthie of the Goſpel of Chriſt:Eph. 4, 1 that vvhether vvhen I come and ſee you, or els be abſent, I may heare of you that you ſtand in one Spirit, of one minde labouring together to the faith of the Goſpel. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And in nothing be ye terrified of the aduerſaries, vvhich to them is

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , A manifeſt proofe and euidence. cauſe of perdition: but to you of ſaluation, & this of God: ✝ 
                     verse 29 for to you
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   it is giuen for Chriſt, not only that you beleeue in him, but alſo that you ſuffer for him, ✝ hauing the ſame combat like as you haue ſeen in me, and novvdoe heare haue heard' of me.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                  
                     2. Biſhops and deacons.]
                     Biſhops and Prieſts alwais diſtinct functions. Vvicleſſe and other Heretikes vvould proue by this that Prieſts are not here named, and for that there could not be many Biſhops of this one tovvne, that there is no difference betvvixt a Biſhop and a Prieſt, vvhich vvas the old hereſie of Aërius, of vvhich matter,See Annot. Tit. 1. v. 5. in other places: for this preſent it is ynough to knovv that in the Apoſtles time there vvere not obſerued alvvaies proper diſtinct names of either function, as they vvere quickly aftervvard, though they vvere alvvaies diuers degrees & diſtinct functions. See S. Chryſoſtom, Occup
                           •
                        enius, Theophylactus, and the reſt of the Gracians vpon this place.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He exhorieth them muſt inſtantly to keepe the vnitie of the Church, and to humble them ſelues for that purpoſe one to an other, 
                        •
                      by the example of the maruelous humilitie of Chriſt, 
                        •
                      ſpecially ſeing hovv maruelouſly he is novv exalted for it. 13 Item to obedience, feare, and perſeuerance. 17 Inſinuating (left is ſhould aftervvardes trouble them) that be may be martyred at this time. 19 Timothee he hopeth to ſend, vvhom he highly commendeth▪ 25 as alſo Epaphroditus, vvhom he preſently ſendeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IF therfore there be any conſolation in Chriſt, if any ſolace of charitie, if any ſocietie of ſpirit, if any bovvels of commiſeration: ✝ 
                     verse 2 fulfil my ioy, that you be of one meaning, hauing the ſame charitie, of one minde, agreing in one. ✝ 
                     verse 3 nothing by contentiō, neither by vaine glorie: but in humilitie,Ro. 12, 10. * eche coūting other better then them ſelues: ✝ 
                     verse 4 * euery one not cōſidering the things that are their owne, but thoſe that are other mens.The Epiſtle vpon Palme Sunday. And vpon Holy Roode day, Mai. 3. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For this thinke in your ſelues,1 Cor. 10, 24. vvhich alſo in Chriſt IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 6 vvho vvhen he vvas in the forme of God, thought it no robberie, him ſelf to be equal to God, ✝ 
                     verse 7 but he exinanited him ſelf, taking the forme of a ſeruant, made into the ſimilitude of men, and in ſhape found as man.The Epiſtle vpon Holy Roode day Septemb. 14. And in a Votiue Maſſe of the Holy Croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 He * humbled him ſelf, made obediēt vnto death:Heb. 2, 9 euen the death of the croſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 9 ″ For the vvhich thing God alſo hath exalted him, and hath giuen him a name which is aboue al names:Eſ. 45, 14. Ro. 14, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 10 that * in the ″ name of IESVS euery knee bovve of the celeſtials, terreſtrials, and infernals: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and euery tongue cōfeſſe that our Lord IESVS Chriſt is in the glorie of God the Father. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore my deereſt, (as you haue alvvaies obeied) not as in the preſence of me only, but much more novv in my abſence, ″ vvith feare and trembling vvorke your ſaluation. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For it is God that ″ vvorketh in you both to vvil and to accompliſh, according to his good vvil. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And doe ye al things vvithout murmurings and ſtaggerings: ✝ 
                     verse 15 that you may be vvithout blame, and the ſimple children of God,
 vvithout reprehenſion in the middes of a crooked and peruerſe generation. among vvhom you ſhine as lightes in the vvorld: ✝ 
                     verse 16 conteining the vvord of lifeSuch as haue by their preaching gained any to Chriſt, ſhal ioy and glorie therein excedingly at the day of our Lord. to my glorie in the daie of Chriſt, becauſe I haue not runne in vaine, nor in vaine laboured. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But and if I bePaſtors ought to be ſo zelous of the ſaluation of their flocke, that vvith S. Paul they ſhould offer them ſelues to death for the ſame. immolated, vpon the ″ ſacrifice and ſeruice of your faith, I reioyce and congratulate vvith you al. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the ſelf ſame thing doe you alſo reioyce, and congratulate vvith me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And I hope in our Lord IESVS, to ſend Timothee vnto you quickly, that I alſo may be of good comfort, when I knovv the things pertaining to you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For I haue no mā ſo of one minde that vvith ſincere affection is careful for you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 ForMany forſake their teachers vvhen they ſee them in bandes and priſon for their faith, becauſe moſt mē preferre the vvorld before Chriſts glorie. al ſeeke the things that are their ovvne: not the things that are IESVS Chriſts. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And knovv ye an experiment of him, that as a ſonne the father, ſo hath he ſerued vvith me in the Goſpel. ✝ 
                     verse 23 This man therfore I hope to ſend vnto you, immediatly as I ſhal ſee the things that concerne me. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And I truſt in our Lord that my ſelf alſo ſhal come to you quickly. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But I haue thought it neceſſarie to ſend to you Epaphroditus my brother and coadiutor and fellovv ſouldiar, but your Apoſtle, and miniſter of my neceſſitie. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Becauſe in deede he had a deſire tovvard you al: and vvas penſife, for that you had heard that he vvas ſicke. ✝ 
                     verse 27 For in deede he vvas ſicke euen to death: but God had mercie on him: and not only on him, but on me alſo, leſt I ſhould haue ſorovv vpon ſorovv. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Therfore I ſent him the more ſpedily: that ſeeing him, you may reioyce againe, and I may be vvithout ſorovv. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Receiue him therfore vvith al ioy in our Lord: and ſuch intreate vvith honour. ✝ 
                     verse 30 becauſe for the vvorke of Chriſt, he came to the point of death: yelding his life, that he might fulfil that vvhich on your part vvanted tovvard my ſeruice.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     9. For the vvhich.]
                     Caluins blaſphemie agaīſt Chriſts owne merites. Caluin doth ſo abhorre the name of merite in Chriſtian men tovvard their ovvne ſaluation, that he vvickedly and vnlearnedly denieth Chriſt him ſelf to haue deſerued or merited any thing for him ſelf: though theſe vvordes (vvhich he ſhamefully vvritheth from the proper and plaine ſenſe, to ſignifie a ſequele and not a cauſe of his exaltation) and diuers other in holy vvrite, proue that he merited for him ſelf according to al learned mens iudgement. As Apoc 5. The lambe that vvas ſlaine, is vvorthie to receiue povver and Diuinitie. And Heb. 2. We ſee IESVS for the paſsion of death, crowned vvith glorie and honour. See S. Auguſtine vpō theſe vvordes of the Pſalme 109. propterea exaltabit caput.
                  
                  
                      
                     10. Name of IESVS.]
                     The Proteſtants vvill haue no reuerence done at the name of IESVS. By the like vvickednes they charge the faithful people for capping or kneeling vvhen they heare the name of IESVS. as though they vvorſhipped not our Lord God therein, but the ſyllables or letters or other material elemēts vvhereof the vvord vvritten or ſpoken conſiſteth, and al this, by ſophiſtications to dravv the people from due honour and deuotion tovvard CHRIST IESVS, vvhich is Satans drift by putting ſcruples into poore ſimple mens mindes about his Sacraments, his Saincts, his Croſſe, his name, his image, & ſuch like, to aboliſh al true religiō out of the vvorld, and to make them plaine Atheiſts. But the Church knovveth Satans cogitations, and therfore by the Scriptures and reaſon, vvarranteth and teacheth al her children to do reuerence vvhen ſo euer IESVS is named. becauſe Catholikes do not honour theſe things nor count them holy,Hovv Catholikes honour the name of IESVS, and other things pertaining to him. for their matter, colour, ſound, and ſyllables, but for the reſpect and relation they haue to ou
                        •
                      Sauiour, bringing vs to the remembrance and apprehenſion of Chriſt, by ſight, hearing, or vſe of the ſame ſignes. els vvhy make vve not reuerence at the name of Ieſus the ſonne of 
                        •
                     irach, as vvel as of IESVS CHRIST? And it is a pitieful caſe to ſee theſe prophane ſubtelties of Heretikes to take place in religion, vvhich vvere ridiculous in al other trade of life. Vvhen vve heare our Prince or Soueraine named, vve may vvithout theſe ſcruples doe obeiſance, but tovvardes Chriſt it muſt be ſuperſtitious.
                  
                     12. With feare and trembling.]
                     Vaine ſecuritie of ſaluatiō. Againſt the vaine preſumption of Heretikes that make men ſecure of their predeſtination and ſaluation, he vvilleth the Philippians to vvorke their ſaluation vvith feare and trembling, according to that other Scripture, Bleſſed is the man that alvvaies i
                           •
                         fearful, Prouerb. 28, v. 14.
                  13. Worketh in you.]S. Auguſtine anſvvereth the obiectiō againſt free vvil. 
                     Of this thus ſaith S. Auguſtine. Not becauſe the Apoſtle ſaith, it is God that vvorketh in you both to vvil and vvorke, muſt vve thinke he taketh avvay our free vvill. For if it vvere ſo, then vvould he not a litle before haue vvilled them to vvorke their ovvne ſaluation vvith feare and trembling. For vvhen they be commaunded to vvorke, their free vvil is called vpon: but, vvith trembling and feare, is added, l
                        •
                     ſt by attributing their vvel vvorking to them ſelues, they might be proud of their good deedes as though they vvere of them ſelues. Auguſt de gratia & lib. arbit. c. 9.
                  
                  
                     17. The ſacrifice.]
                     Martyrdom. The obedience of faith and matryrdom be ſo acceptable actes to God, vvhen they be voluntarily referred to his honour, that by a metaphore they be called ſacrifice and pleaſant hoſtes to God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He vvarn
                        •
                     th them of the Falſe-apoſtles, * ſhevving that him ſelf had much more to bragge of in Iudaiſme then they: but that he maketh price of nothing but only of Chriſt, and of Chriſtian iuſtice, and of ſuffering vvith him (12 vvherein yet he acknovvledgeth his imperfection) 17 exhorting them to beare Chriſtes Croſſe vvith him, and not to imitate thoſe bellygods.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FROM hence forth my brethren, reioyce in our Lord. To vvrite the ſame things vnto you, to me ſurely it is not tedious, and to you it is neceſſarie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 See the dogges, ſee the euil vvorkers, ſee the
By alluſiō of vvords, he calleth the carnal Chriſtiā Iews that yet boaſted in the circūciſion of the fleſh, conciſiō: & him ſelf & the reſt that circūcided their hart and ſenſes ſpiritually, the true circumciſion. S. Chryſ. Theophylact. conciſiō. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vve are the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   circumciſion, vvhich in ſpirit ſerue God: and vve glorie in Chriſt IESVS, and not hauing confidence in the fleſh, ✝ 
                     verse 4 albeit I alſo haue confidence in the fleſh. ✝ If any other man ſeeme to haue confidence in the fleſh,2. Cor. 11, 22. I more, ✝ 
                     verse 5 circumciſed the eight day, of the ſtocke of Iſraël, of the tribe of Beniamin, * an Hebrevv of Hebrevves:Act. 23, 6.
* according to the Lavv, a Phariſee: ✝ 
                     verse 6 according to emulation, perſecuting the Church of God: according to the iuſtice that is in the Lavv, conuerſing vvithout blame. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But 
 the things that vvere gaines to me,The Epiſtle for a Confeſſor that is not a Biſhop. thoſe haue I eſteemed for Chriſt, detriments. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Yea but I eſteeme al things to be detriment for the paſſing knovvledge of IESVS Chriſt my Lord: for vvhom I haue made al things as detriment, and do eſteeme them as dung, that I may gaine Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and may be found in him not hauing ″ my iuſtice vvhich is of the Lavv, but that vvhich is of the faith of Chriſt, vvhich is of God iuſtice in faith: ✝ 
                     verse 10 to knovv him, and the vertue of his reſurrection, and the ſocietie of his paſſions, configured to his death, ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  If S. Paul ceaſed not to labour ſtill, as though he vvere not ſure to come to the marke vvithout continual endeuour: vvhat ſecuritie may vve poore ſinners haue of Heretikes perſuaſions & promiſes of ſecuritie and ſaluation by onely faith? if by any meanes I may come to the reſurrection vvhich is from the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 12 ″ Not that novv I haue receiued, or novv am perfect: but I purſue, if I may comprehend vvherein I am alſo comprehended of Chriſt IESVS. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 13 Brethren, I do not account that I haue comprehended. Yet one thing: forgetting the things that are behinde, but ſtretching forth my ſelf to thoſe that are before, ✝ 
                     verse 14 I purſue to the marke,ad brauium to the price of the ſupernal vocation of God in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Let vs therfore as many as are perfect, be thus minded: and if you be any ″ othervviſe minded, this alſo Godvvil reueale hath reuealed' to you. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Neuertheleſſe vvherevnto we are come, that vve be of the ſame minde, let vs continue in the ſame rule.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 
                  The Epiſtle vpon the 23 Sunday after Pentecoſt. And for S. Clemēt, Nouemb. 23. Be folovversIt is a goodly thing vvhen the Paſtor may ſo ſay to his flocke. Neither is it any derogatiō to Chriſt, that the people ſhould imitate their Apoſtles life & doctrine, & other holy men, S. Auguſtine, S. Benedict. S. Dominike, S. Francis.
                   of me brethren: & obſerue them that vvalke ſo as you haue our forme.Ro. 16, 17. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For * many vvalke vvhom often I told you of (and novv vveeping alſo I tel you) the enemies of the croſſe of Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 19 vvhoſe end is deſtruction: vvhoſe God, is the belly: and their glorie in their confuſion, vvhich minde vvorldly things. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But our conuerſation is in heauen? vvhence alſo vve expect the Sauiour, our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 21 vvho vvil reforme the body of our humilitie, configured to the body of his glorie, according to the operation vvhereby alſo he is able to ſubdue al things to him ſelf.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     9. My iuſtice.]
                     The obiection againſt inherent iuſtice, anſvvered. Diuers Lutherans in their tranſlations do ſhamfully mangle this ſentence by tranſpoſing the vvordes,Magdeburg. cent. 1. li, 2 c. 4. pag. 222. and falſe poluting of the partes: hereof, to make it haue this ſenſe, that the Apoſtle vvould haue no iuſtice of his ovvne, but onely that iuſtice vvhich is in Chriſt. Vvhich is a falſe and heretical ſenſe of the vvordes, and not meant by S. Paul: vvho calleth that a mans ovvne Iuſtice, vvhich he chalengeth by the vvorkes of the Lavv or nature vvithout the grace of Chriſt: and that Gods iuſtice (as S. Auguſtine expoundeth this place) not vvhich is in God, or by
 vvhich God is iuſt, but that vvhich is in men from God and by his gift. li. 3 cont. 
                           •
                         ep. Pelag. c. 7. de Sp. & lit. c. 9.
                  
                  
                     12. Not that novv.]
                     Double perfection: here, and in the life to come. No man in this life can attaine the abſolute perfectnes either of iuſtice or of that knovvledge vvhich ſhal be in heauen: but yet there is alſo an other perfectnes, ſuch as according to this ſtate a man may reach vnto, vvhich in reſpect of the perfection in glorie, is ſmall, but in reſpect of other leſſer degrees of mans iuſtice and knovvledge in this life, may be called perfectnes. And in this ſenſe the Apoſtle in the next ſentence calleth him ſelf and others perfect, though in reſpect of the abſolute perfectnes in heauen, he ſaith here, he is not yet perfect nor hath yet attained therevnto.
                  
                     15. Othervviſe minded.]
                     The heretikes foliſh defenſe of their diſſenſions and diuiſions among them ſelues. Vvhen Catholike men novv a daies charge Heretikes vvith their horrible diuiſions, diſſenſions, combattes, contentions, and diuerſities among them ſelues, as the Catholikes of al other ages did chalenge their Aduerſaries moſt truely and iuſtly for the ſame, (both becauſe vvhere the Spirit of God is not, nor any order or obedience to Superiors, there can be no peace nor vnitie, and ſpecially for that it is, as S. Auguſtine ſaith (li. de agen
                           •
                         Chriſt. c. 29) the iuſt iudgement of God that they vvhich ſeeke nothing els but to diuide the Church of Chriſt, ſhould them ſelues be miſerably diuided among them ſelues) therfore (I ſay) vvhen men charge the Proteſtants vvith theſe things, they flee for their defence to this, that the old Fathers vvere not al of one iudgement in euery point of religion: that S. Cyprian ſtood againſt others, that S. Auguſtine and S. Hierom vvrote earneſtly in a certaine matter one againſt an other, that our Dominicans and Franciſcans, our Thomiſts and Scotiſts be not al of one opinion in diuers matters, and therfore diuiſions and contentions ſhould not be ſo preiudicial to the Zuinglians and Lutherans,The difference betvvene the diſagreing of auncient fathers or other Catholikes, & the Heretikes diſſenſions among them ſelues. as men make it. Thus they defend them ſelues: but ridiculouſly and againſt the rule of S. Paul here, acknovvledging that in this imperfection of mens ſcience in this life, euery one can not be free from al error, or thinke the ſame that an other thinketh: vvherevpon may riſe differences of vnderſtanding, opinion, and iudgement, in certaine hard matters vvhich God hath not reuealed or the Church determined, and therfore that ſuch diuerſitie is tolerable and agreable to our humane condition and the ſtate of the vvay that vve be in: alvvaies prouided, that the controuerſie be ſuch and in ſuch things, as be not againſt the ſet knovven rule of faith, as he here ſpeaketh, and ſuch as breake not mutual ſocietie, fellovvſhip, and communion in praier, ſeruice, Sacraments, and other offices of life and religion. for ſuch diuiſions and differences come neuer but of Schiſme or Hereſie, and ſuch are among the Heretikes, not onely in reſpect of vs Catholikes, but among them ſelues: at they knovv that be acquainted vvith the vvritings of Luther againſt Zuinglius,The ſpiteful vvritings of Heretikes, one Secte, againſt an other. or Vveſtphalus againſt Caluin, or the Puritans againſt the Proteſtants, not onely charging one an other vvith Hereſie, Idolatrie, Superſtition, and Atheiſme, but alſo condemning ech others ceremonies or maner of adminiſtrations, til it come to excommunication, and baniſhment, yea ſometimes burning one of an other. Thus did not S. Cyprian, S. Auguſtine, S. Hierom, the Dominicans, Franciſcans, Thomiſts, Scotiſts, vvho al agree in one rule of faith, al of one communion, al moſt deere one to an other in the ſame, al (thankes be to God) come to one holy Maſſe, and receiue the ſame Sacraments, and obey one head through out al the vvorld.A notable place of S. Auguſtine. S. Auguſtine li. 2 de bapt. c. 5. ſhal make vp this matter vvith this notable ſentence: We are men (ſaith he) and therfore to thinke ſomevvhat othervviſe them the thing it, is an humane tentation: but by louing our ovvne ſentence to much, or by enuying our betters, to procede vnto the ſacrilege of deuiding the mutual ſocietie and of making ſchiſme or hereſie, it diueliſh proſumption: in nothing to haue other opinion then the truth is, that is Angelical perfection. And a litle after, If you be any other vviſe minded, this God vvil reueale: but to them only (ſaith he) that vvalke in the vvay of peace, and that ſtroy a ſide into no diuiſion or ſeparation. Vvhich ſaying vvould God al our deere countrie men vvould marke, and come into the Church, vvhere onely, God reuealeth truth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He exhorteth them to perſeu
                        •
                     rant
                        •
                     , 2 and certaine by name to vnitie, 
                        •
                      to modeſtie, 
                        •
                      to peace vvithout ſolicitude or careful anxietie, 8 to al that good is, 9 to ſuch things as they ſee in him ſelf. 10 that be reioyced in their contribution, not for his ovvne neede, but for their merite.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERFORE, my deereſt brethren and moſt deſired, my ″ ioy and my crovvne: ſo ſtand in our Lord, my deereſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  Euodia 'Euchodia' I deſire & Syntyché I beſeeche to be of one minde in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Yea and I beſeeche thee my ″ ſincere companion, helpe thoſe vvomen that haue laboured vvith me in the Goſpel vvithThis Clement vvas aftervvard the 4 Pope of Rome from S. Peter, as S. Hierom vvriteth according to the cōmon ſupputation. Clement, and the reſt my coadiutors, vvhoſe names are in the booke of life. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 4 
                  The Epiſtle vpon the 3 Sunday in Aduent. Reioyce in our Lord alvvaies: againe I ſay reioyce. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Let your modeſtie be knovven to al men. Our Lord is nigh. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Be nothing careful: but
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   in euery thing by praier & ſupplicatiō vvith thākesgiuing let your petitions be knovven vvith God. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the peace of God vvhich paſſeth al vnderſtanding, keepe your hartes and intelligences in Chriſt IESVS. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 For the reſt brethren, vvhat things ſo euer be true, vvhatſoeuer honeſt, whatſoeuer iuſt, vvhatſoeuer holy, whatſoeuer amiable, vvhatſoeuer of good fame, if there be any vertue, if any praiſe of diſcipline, theſe things thinke vpon. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Vvhich you haue both learned, and receiued, and heard, & ſeen in me: theſe things doe ye, and the God of peace ſhall be vvith you. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And I reioyced in our Lord excedingly, that once at the length you haueThis refloriſhing is the reuiuing of their old liberalitie, vvhich for a time had been ſlacke & dead. S. Chryſ. refloriſhed to care for me, as you did alſo care: but you vvere occupied. ✝ 
                     verse 11 I ſpeake not as it vvere for penurie, for I haue learned, to be cōtent vvith the things that I haue. ✝ 
                     verse 12 I knovv both to be brought lovv, I knovv alſo to abound: (euery vvhere, and in al things I am inſtructed) both to be ful, & to be hungrie, both to abound, and to ſuffer penurie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 I can al things in him that ſtrengtheneth me. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Neuertheleſſe you haue done vvel, communicating to my tribulation.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 And you alſo knovv ô Philippians, that in the beginning of the Goſpel, vvhen I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated vnto me in the account of gift and
He counteth it not mere almes or a free gift that the people beſtoweth on their Paſtors or preachers, but a certaine mutual traffike as it vvere, and enterchange: the one giuing ſpiritual, the other rēdering tēporal things for the ſame. receite, but your only: ✝ 
                     verse 16 for vnto Theſſalonica alſo, once and tvviſe you ſent to my vſe. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Not that I ſeeke the gift, but I ſeeke the fruite abounding in your account. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But I haue al things, and abound: I vvas filled after I receiued of Epaphroditus the things that you ſent, an odour of ſvveetenes, an ″ acceptable hoſt, pleaſing God. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And my God ſupply
 al your
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   lacke according to his riches in glorie, in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And to God & our father be glorie vvorld vvithout end. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 Salute ye euery ſaincte in Chriſt IESVS. The brethren that are vvith me, ſalute you. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Al the ſainctes ſalute you: but eſpecially they are of Caeſars houſe. ✝ The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith your ſpirit. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     1. My ioy.]
                     The revvard of preachers. He calleth them his ioy and crovvne, for that he expected the crovvne of euerlaſting life as a revvard of his labours tovvardes them. Vvhereby vve may learne alſo, that beſides the eſſential glorie vvhich ſhal be in the viſion and fruition of God, there is other manifold fellcitie incident in reſpect of creatures.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Sincere companion.] The Engliſh Bibles vvith one conſent interprets the Greeke vvordes, faithful yokefellovv,
                     Suſpitious tranſlation. perhaps to ſignifie (as ſome vvould haue it) that the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh to his vvife: but they muſt vnderſtand that their Maiſters Caluin and Beza miſlike that expoſition,S. Chryſ. Theodore. Occum. Theophyl. and * al the Greeke fathers almoſt much more reiect it, and it is againſt S. Paules ovvne vvordes ſpeaking to the vnmaried▪
                     S. Paul had no vvife. That it is good for them to remaine ſo, euen as him ſelf did. 1 Cor. 7, 8. Vvhereby it is euident he had no vvife, and therfore meaneth here ſome other his coadiutor and fellovv-labourer in the Goſpel.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . Acceptable.] Hovv acceptable almes are before God,Almes giuen religiouſly. vve ſee here: namely vvhen it is giuen for religion to deuout perſons for a recompenſe of ſpiritual benefites▪ for ſo it putteth on the condition of an oblation or ſacrifice offered to God, and is moſt acceptable and ſvvete in his ſight.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS.
            
               
                  THE Epiſtle to the Coloſsians is not only in ſenſe, but almoſt in vvordes alſo, all one vvith the Epiſtle to the Epheſians, and vvas ſent alſo by the ſame meſſenger Tychicus. c. 4▪ 
               
                  •
               . 7. And in it he maketh like mention of his bandes and ſufferings. c. 1. v. 24. and c. 4. v. 3, 18. And therfore no doubt is vvas vvritten at Rome at the ſame time, to vvitte, in his laſt apprehenſion, yet before he knevv of his martyrdom.
            This difference there is, that he had himſelf preached to the Epheſians, but vvith the Coloſsians he had neuer bene, as he ſignifieth c. 2. v. 1. Therefore although in matters of exhortation he be here briefer then to the Epheſians, yet in matters of doctrine be is longer. And generally he aſſureth them, that to be the truth, vvhich their Apoſtle Epaphras had taught them, but namely he giueth them vvarning both of the Iudaical Falſe-apoſtles, vvho ſought to corrupt them vvith ſome ceremonies of Moyſes lavv: and alſo of the Platonike Philoſophers, vvho reiected Chriſt (vvho is in deede the head of the Church and Mediator to bring vs to God) and in ſteed of him, brought in certaine Angels as more excellēt then be, vvhom they termed, Minores dij, teaching the people to ſacrifice vnto them (calling that, humilitie) that they might bring them to the great God. Vvith vvhich falſehood the hereſie of Simon Mague a long time deceiued many, as vve reade in Epiph. har. 21.
            Againſt ſuch therefore S. Paul telleth the Coloſsians, that Chriſt is the Creator of all the Angels, God in perſon, the head of the Church, the principall in all reſpects: that he is the Redeemer, Mediator, and pacifier betvvene God and men, and therefore by him vve muſt goe to God, ſo that vvhether vve pray our ſelues, or deſire any other in earth or in heauen to pray for vs, al muſt be done (as the Cath. Church in euery Collect doth) Per Chriſtum dominum noſtrum, that is, through Chriſt our Lord. or, per Do. noſtrum Ieſum Chriſtum filium tuum, qui tecum viuit & regnat, &c. Vvhereby the Church profeſſeth cōtinually againſt ſuch ſeductions, both the Mediator ſhip, and the Godhead of Chriſt.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Saying, that he thanketh God for their excellent faith and charitie, and continually praieth for their encreaſe, he doeth vvithal giue vvitnes to the preaching of their Apoſtle Epaphr
                        •
                     s▪ and extelleth the grace of God in bringing them to Chriſt, vvho is cheefe aboue al, and peacemaker by his bloud. This is the Goſpel not of Epaphras alone, but of the vniuerſal Church, and of Paul him ſelf, vvho alſo ſuffereth for it.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt by the vvil of God, and brother Timothee: ✝ 
                     verse 2 to them that are at Coloſſa ſainctes and faithful brethren in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
               Vve giue thankes to God and the Father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt alvvaies for you, praying: ✝ 
                     verse 4 hearing your faith in Chriſt IESVS, and the loue vvhich you haue tovvard al the ſaincts, ✝ 
                     verse 5 for the hope that is laid vp for you in heauen, vvhich you haue heard in the vvord of the truth of the Goſpel, ✝ 
                     verse 6 that is come to you, as alſoHe ſheweth that the Churche and Chriſtes Goſpel ſhould daily grovv and be ſpred at length through the whole world. which can not ſtand vvith the heretikes opinion of the decay thereof ſo quickly after Chriſtes time, nor 
                        •
                     gree by any meanes to their obſcure Conuenticles. See S. Auguſtine ep. 80. in fine.
                   in the vvhole vvorld it is, and fructifieth, and grovveth, euen as in you, ſince that day that you heard & knevv the grace of God in truth, ✝ 
                     verse 7 as you learned of Epaphras our deereſt fellovv-ſeruant, vvho is a faithful miniſter of IESVS Chriſt for you, ✝ 
                     verse 8 vvho alſo hath manifeſted to vs your loue in ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 9 ThereforeThe Epiſtle vpon the 24 Sunday after Pentecoſt. vve alſo from the day that vve heard it, ceaſe not praying for you and deſiring, that you may be filled vvith the knovvledge of his vvil, in al vviſedom, and ſpiritual vnderſtanding: ✝ 
                     verse 10 that you may vvalkeSo S. Ambr. & the Gr. Doctors. or thus: vvorthily, pleaſing God &c.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvorthie of God, in al things pleaſing: Fructifying
 inMany things requiſite, and diuers things acceptable to God beſide faith. al good vvorke, & increaſing in the knovvledge of God: ✝ 
                     verse 11 in al povver ſtrengthened according to the might of his glorie, in al patience and longanimitie vvith ioy ✝ 
                     verse 12 giuing thankes to God and the Father, vvho hath made vsWe are not onely by acceptation or imputation partakers of Chriſtes benefites, but are by his grace made worthie thereof, and deſerue our ſaluation condignely. vvorthy vnto the part of the lot of the ſainctes in the light: ✝ 
                     verse 13 vvho hath deliuered vs from the povver of darkenes, and hath tranſlated vs into the kingdom of the ſonne of his loue, ✝ 
                     verse 14 in vvhom vve haue redemption, the remiſſion of ſinnes: ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 15 vvho is th
                     •
                   * image of the inuiſible God,Hebr. 1, 3 the firſt-borne of al creature:Io. 1, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 16 becauſe * in him vvere created al things in heauen, and in earth, viſible, and inuiſible, vvhether Thrones, or Dominations, or Principalities, or Poteſtates: ✝ al by him, & in him vvere created: ✝ 
                     verse 17 and he is before al, and al conſiſt in him. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he is the head of the body, the CHVRCH, vvho is the beginning, firſt-borne of the dead: that he may be in al things holding the primacie: ✝ 
                     verse 19 becauſe in him it hath vvel pleaſed, al fulnes to inhabite: ✝ 
                     verse 20 and by him to reconcile al things vnto him ſelf, pacifying by the bloud of his croſſe, vvhether the things in earth, or the things that are in heauen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 And you, vvhereas you vvere ſometime alienated and enemies in ſenſe, in euil vvorkes: ✝ 
                     verse 22 yet novv he hath reconciled in the body of his fleſh by death, to preſent you holy & immaculate, and blameles before him: ✝ 
                     verse 23 if yet ye cōtinue in the faith, grounded and ſtable, and vnmoueable from the hope of the Goſpel vvhich you haue heard, vvhich is preached among al creatures that are vnder heauen, vvhereof I Paul am made a miniſter. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Vvho novv reioyce in ſuffering for you, and 
                     •
                   do accompliſh thoſe things that vvant of the paſſions of Chriſt, in my fleſh for his body, vvhich is the CHVRCH: ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvhereof I am made a miniſter according to the diſpenſation of Gods, vvhich is giuen me tovvard you, that I may fulfil the vvord of God, ✝ 
                     verse 26 the myſterie that hath been hidden from vvorldes and generations, but novv is manifeſted to his ſainctes, ✝ 
                     verse 27 to vvhō God vvould make knowen the riches of the glorie of this ſacrament in the Gentiles, vvhich is Chriſt, in you the hope of glorie, ✝ 
                     verse 28 vvhom vve preache, admoniſhing euery man, and teaching euery man in al vviſedom, that vve may preſent euery man perfect in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 29 Vvherein alſo I labour ſtriuing according to his operation vvhich he vvorketh in me in povver.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     24. D
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••••
                        pliſh that 
                           ••••
                        teth.]
                     There is no want in Chriſtes paſsions vvhich he ſuffred in him ſelf as head: but there is vvant in thoſe paſsions of Chriſt vvhich he daily ſuffereth in his body the Church, and the members thereof. As Chriſt the head and his body make one perſon myſtical and one full Chriſt, the Church being therfore his plenitude, ful
                        •
                     es, or complement Epheſ. 1: ſo the paſſions of his head and the afflictions of the body and members make one complete maſſe of paſſions. Vvith ſuch difference for al that, betvvene the one ſort and the other, as the preeminence of the head (and ſpecial
                        •
                     y ſuch a head) aboue the body, requireth and giueth. And not only theſe paſſions vvhich he ſuffered in him ſelf, vvhich vvere fully ended in his death, and vverein them ſelues fully ſufficient for the redemption of the vvorld & remiſſion of al ſinnes, but al thoſe vvhich his body and members ſuffer, are his alſo, and of him they receiue the condition, qualitie, and force to be meritorious and ſatisfactorie For though there be no inſufficiencie in the actions or paſſions of Chriſt the head,Ro. 8, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſ
                           •
                        r. 19. de paſ
                           ••
                        . yet his vviſedom vvil▪ and iuſtice requireth and ordaineth, * that his body and members ſhould be f
                        •
                     llovves of his paſſions, as they looke to be fellovves of his glorie: that ſo ſuffering vvith him and by his example, they may appl
                        •
                     e to them ſelues and others the general medicine of Chriſtes merites and ſatisfactions, as it is effectually and applied to vs by Sacraments, ſacrifice, and other vvaies alſo 
                        〈…〉
                      ſor being no more iniurious to Chriſte
                        •
                     
                     ▪ death then the other, notvvithſtanding the vaine clamours of the Proteſtants, that vvould vnder pretence of Chriſtes Paſſion,How Chriſts merites are applied to vs, vvithout any iniurie to his death. take avvay the valure of al good deedes. Herevpon it is plaine novv, that this accompliſhment of the vvants of Chriſtes Paſſions, vvhich the Apoſtle and other Saincts make vp in their fleſh, is not mean
                        •
                      but of the penal and ſatisfactorie▪ vvorkes of Chriſt in his members, euery good man adding continually (and ſpecially Martyrs) ſomevvhat to accompliſh the full meaſure thereof: and theſe be the plenitude of his paſſions and ſatisfactions, as the Church is the plenitude of his perſon: & therfore theſe alſo through the communion of Saincts and the ſocietie that is not onely betvvene the head and the body, but alſo betvvene one members and an other, are not only ſatisfactorie and many vvaies profitable for the ſufferers them ſelues,The vvorkes of one may ſatisfie for an other. but alſo for other their fellovv-members in Chriſt. for though one member can not merite for an other properly, yet may one beare the burden and diſcharge the debt of an other, both by the lavv of God and nature▪ and it vvas ridiculous Hereſie of Vvicleffe to deny the ſame. Yea (as vve ſee here) the paſſions of Saincts are alvvaies ſuffered for the common good of the vvhole body, and ſometimes vvithal by the ſufferers ſpecial intention they are applicable to ſpecial perſons one or many: as here the Apoſtle ioyeth in his paſſions for the Colloſſians,2. Cor. 1, 
                           •
                        . in an other place his afflictions be for the ſaluation of the Corinthians,Ro. 9, 3. ſometimes he vviſheth to be Anathe
                           ••
                        a, that is according to Origens expoſition (i
                           •
                         li. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ho. 10. & 24.) a ſacrifice for the Ievves,Phil. 2. and he often ſpeaketh of his death as of a libation,2 Tim. 4. hoſt, or offering▪ as the fathers do of al Martyrs paſſions. Al vvhich dedicated and ſanctified in Chriſtes bloud and ſacrifice, make the plenitude of his Paſſion, and haue a forcible crie, interceſſion, and ſatisfaction for the Church and the particular neceſſities thereof. In vvhich, as ſome do abound in good vvorkes and ſatisfactions (as S. Paul, vvho reckeneth vp his afflictions and glorieth in them 2 Cor. 11: and Iob,Iob 
                           •
                        . vvho auoucheth that his penalties farre ſurmounted his ſinnes: and our Ladie much more, vvho neuer ſinned, and yet ſuffered ſo great dolours) ſo others ſome do vvant, and are to be holpen by the aboundance of their fellovv-members.
                  Vvhich entercourſe of ſpiritual offices and the recompenſe of the vvants of one part by the ſtore of the other,The ground of Indulgēces or pardons. is the ground of the old libels of Indulgence vvhereof is treated before our of S. Cyprian (See the Annotations 2 Cor. 2. v. 10) and of al indulgences or pardons, vvhich the Church daily diſpenſeth vvith great iuſtice and mercie, by their hands in vvhom Chriſt hath put the vvord of our reconcilement, to vvhom he hath committed the keies to keepe and vſe, his ſheep
                        •
                      to ſeede, his myſteries and al his goods to diſpenſe, his povver to binde and looſe, his commiſſion to remine and reteine, and the ſtevvardſhip of his familie to giue euery one their meate and ſuſt
                        •
                     
                     nance in due ſeaſon.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He is careful for them, though he vvere neuer vvith them: that they reſt in the vvonderful vviſedom vvhich is in Chriſtian religion, and be not caried avvay either vvith Philoſophie, to 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chriſt and to ſacrifice to Angel
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      or vvith Iudaiſme, to receive any 
                        〈…〉
                      of Moyſes lavv.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR I vvil haue you knovv brethren, vvhat maner of care I haue for you and for them that are at Laodicia, and vvhoſoeuer haue not ſeen my face in the fleſh: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that their hartes may be comforted, inſtructed in charitie, & vnto al the riches of the fulnes of vnderſtāding, vnto the knovvledge of the myſterie of God the Father of Chriſt IESVS, ✝ 
                     verse 3 in vvhom be al the treaſures of vviſedom and knovvledge hidde. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But this I ſayHeretikes do moſt commonly deceiue the people with eloquēce namely ſuch as haue it by the gift of nature, as the Heretikes of al ages had, & lightly al ſeditious perſo
                        •
                     s, vvhich dravv the vulgar ſort to ſedition by the allurement of their tongue. Nothing (ſaith S. Hierom. ep. 2. ad Nepotian▪) is ſo eaſie as vvith volubilitie of tongue to deceiue the vnlearned multitude, which whatſoeuer it vnderſtandeth not, doth the more admire and wonder at the ſame. The Apoſtle here calleth it, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , perſuaſible ſpeache. that no man deceiue you in loftines of vvordes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For although I be abſent in body, yet in ſpirit I am vvith you: reioycing, & ſeeing your order, & the conſtancie of that your faith which is in Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Therfore as you haue receiued IESVS Chriſt our Lord, vvalke in him, ✝ 
                     verse 7 rooted and built in him, and confirmed in the faith, as alſo you haue learned, aboundingin it in him' in thankesgiuing.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Bevvare leſt any man deceiue you 
                     •
                   by philoſophie, and vaine fallacie: according to the tradition of men, according to the elements of the vvorld, and not according to Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For in him dvvelleth al the fulneſſe of the Godhead corporally: ✝ 
                     verse 10 and you are in him repleniſhed, vvho is the head in al Principalitie and Povver: ✝ 
                     verse 11 in vvhom al you are circumciſed vvith circumciſion not made by hand in ſpoiling of the body of the fleſh, in the circumciſion of Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 12 buried vvith him in Baptiſme: in vvhō alſo you are riſen againe by the faith of the operation of God, vvho raiſed him vp from the dead.Eph. 2, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And you * vvhen you vvere dead in the offenſes and the prepuce of your fleſh, did he quicken together vvith him: pardoning you al offenſes, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvyping out the hand vvritingby decrees of decree' that vvas againſt vs, vvhich vvas contrarie to vs, and the ſame he hath taken out of the vvay, faſtening it to the croſſe: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and ſpoiling the Principalities and Poteſtats,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , hath ledde them confidently in open ſhevv, triumphing them in him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Let no man therfore iudge you ″ in meate or in drinke, or in part of a feſtiual day, or of the Nevv-moone, or of Sabboths: ✝ 
                     verse 17 vvhich are a ſhadovv of things to come, but the body Chriſts.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 Let no man ſeduce you,That is, wilful or ſelfwilled in voluntarie religiō. for that is, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , whereof commeth the word folowing 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Superſtitiō. v. 23. See Annot. v. 2
                           •
                        .
                   vvilling in the humilitie and 
                     •
                   religion of Angels, vvalking in the things vvhich he hath not ſeen, in vaine puffed vp by the ſenſe of his fleſh, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and
 
                  
                     •
                   not holding the head, vvhereof the vvhole body by ioyntes and bandes being
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . That is, taking ſubminiſtration of ſpiritual life and nouriſhment by grace from Chriſt the head. ſerued & compacted, grovveth to the increaſe of God. ✝ 
                     verse 20 If then you be dead vvith Chriſt, from the elements of this vvorld: 
                     •
                   vvhy do you yet
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . decree as liuing in the vvorld? ✝ 
                     verse 21 Touch not, taſt not, 
                     〈◊〉
                   not: ✝ 
                     verse 22 which things are al vnto deſtruction by the very vſe, according to the precepts and doctrines of men. ✝ 
                     verse 23 vvhich are in deede 
                     •
                   hauing a ſhevv of vviſedom in ſuperſtition and humilitie, and not to ſpare the body, not in any honour to the filling of the fleſh.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     8. By Philoſophie.]
                     Philoſophie and other humane ſciences hovv profitable or hurtful to the Church of God. Philoſophie and al humane ſcience, ſo long as they be ſubiect and obedient to Chriſt (as they be in the Schooles of Chriſtian Catholike men) be not forbidden, but are greatly commended and be very profitable in the Church of God. Othervviſe vvhere ſecular learning is made the rule of religion and commaundeth 
                        •
                     aith, there it is pernicious and the cauſe of al hereſi
                        •
                      and infidelitie▪ for the vvhich▪ S. Hierom and before him Tertullan call Philoſophers, the Patriarkes of Heretikes. and declare that al the old hereſies roſe onely by to much admiring of prophane Philoſophie. Hier
                           •
                        . ad C
                           •
                        eſiph. cont. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . c. 1. Tertul. de praſer. & cont. Hermeg. & cont. Marcio. li. 5. And ſo do theſe nevv ſectes no doubt in many things. for, other arguments haue they none againſt the preſence of Chriſt in the B. Sacrament but ſuch as they borovv of Ariſtotle and his like,The Proteſtants abuſe Philoſophie againſt the B. Sacrament. concerning quantitie, accidents, place, poſition, dimenſions, ſenſes, ſight, taſt, and other ſtraites of reaſon, to vvhich they bring Chriſtes myſteries. Al Philoſophical arguments therfore againſt any article of our faith be here condemned as deceitful, and are called alſo here, the tradition of men, and the elements of the vvorld. The better to reſiſt vvhich fallacies and traditions of Heathen men, the School learning is neceſſarie, vvhich keepeth Philoſophie in avve and order of faith, and vſeth the ſame to vvithſtand the Philoſophical and ſophiſtical deceites of the Heretikes and Heathen.Schoole learning. So the great Philoſophers S. Denys, S. Auguſtine, Clemens Alexandrinus▪ Iuſtine, Lactantius and the reſt▪ vſed the ſame to the great honour of God and benefite of the Church. So came S. Cyprian, S. Ambroſe, S. Hierom, and the Greeke fathers, furniſhed vvith al ſecular learning vnto the ſtudie of Diuinitie, vvherof ſee S. Hierom ep. 84 ad Magnum Oraetorem.
                  
                  
                     16. In meate.] The Proteſtants vvilfully or ignorantly applie al theſe kindes of forbearing meates,Aug. ep. 59. ad Paulinum in ſolut. 7. quast. to the Chriſtian faſtes: but it is by the circunſtance of the text plaine (at S Auguſtine alſo teacheth) that the Iudaical obſeruation and diſtinction of certaine cleane and vncleane meates is forbidden to the Coloſſians,Scriptures abuſed by the Proteſtants againſt Chriſtian faſting & holydaies. vvho vvere in danger to be ſeduced by certaine Ievves, vnder pretence of holines to keepe the Lavv touching meates and feſtiuities and other like, vvhich the Apoſtle ſhevveth vvere onely ſhadovves of things to come: vvhich things are come, and therfore the ſaid ſhadovves to ceaſe. Vvhere he nameth the Sabboths and feaſtes of the nevv moone, that no man neede to doubt but that he ſpeaketh onely of the Ievviſh daies and kindes of faſtes and feaſtes, and not of Chriſtian holidaies or faſting daies at all.
                  
                     18. Religion of Angels.] By the like falſe application of this text as of the other before, the Heretikes abuſe it againſt the inuncation or honour of Angels vſed in the Catholike Church, vvhere the Apoſtle noteth the vvicked doctrine of Simon Magus and others (See S. Chryſ. ho. 7 in hun
                           •
                         locum. and Epiph. har. 21.) vvho taught. Angels to be our mediators and not Chriſt, non tenens caput. not holding the head, as the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh, & preſcribed ſacrifices to be offered vnto them, meaning indifferently as vvel the il Angels as the good. Vvhich doctrine the ſaid Heretike had of Plato, vvho taught, that ſpirites (vvhich he calleth damones) vvere to be honoured as mediators next to God. Againſt vvhich S. Auguſtine diſputeth li. 8. 9. & 10 de ciuit. as the condemneth alſo the ſame vndue vvorſhip li. 10 Confeſſ. cap. 42. S. Hierom (q. 10 ad Algaſiam) expoundeth this alſo of il ſpirites or diuels,
                        S. Paules place cōcerning religion of Angels, explicated: and that the Proteſtants vvickedly abuſe it againſt the due honour & inuocation of Angels. vvhom he proueth (out of S. Steuens ſermon Act. 7) that the Ievves did vvorſhip, auouching that they ſerue them ſtill, ſo many of them and ſo often as they obſerue the Lavv. Of vvhich idolatrie alſo to Angels Theodorete ſpeaketh vpon this place, declaring that the Ievves defended their ſuperſtition tovvardes Angels by that, that the Lavv vvas giuen by them,
 deceitfully at once inducing the Coloſſiās, both to keepe the lavv, & to honouring of the Angels as the giuers of the ſame. Vvhereby diuers of the faithful vvere ſo ſeduced, that they forſooke Chriſt and his Church and ſeruice, and committed idolatrie to the ſaid Angels. Againſt vvhich abominations the Councel of Laodicia Cap. 35 tooke order, accurſing all that forſooke our Sauiour and committed idolatrie to Angels, and contemning Chriſt, kept conuenticles in the name of ſpirites and Idols. of vvhich kinde of vvorſhip of Angels and Diuels ſee Clemens Alexand. Strom. 3. Tertulliā 
                     (li. 5. cont. Marcion.) expoundeth this place of the falſe teachers that feined them ſelues to haue reuelatiō of Angels, that the Lavv ſhould be kept touching differēce of cleane & vncleane meates. Vvhich is very agreable to that * in the Epiſtle to Timothee, vvhere S. Paul calleth abſtaining from meates after the Ievviſh or heretical maner,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 4, 1. 
                     the doctrine of Diuels: vvhereof ſee more in the annotation vpon that place. Haimo a godly aūcient vvriter, vpon this place, ſaith further, that ſome Philoſophers of the Gentils and ſome of the Ievves alſo taught, that there vvere foure Angels Preſidents of the foure elements of mans body, and that in feined hypocriſie (vvhich the Apoſtle here calleth humilitie) they pretended to vvorſhip by ſacrifice the ſaid Angels. Theophylacte expoundeth this feined humilitie, of certaine Heretikes, that pretending the mediatorſhip to be a derogation to Chriſts maieſtie, vvorſhipped Angels as the only mediators, Al vvhich vve ſet dovvne vvith more diligēce, that the Heretikes may be aſhamed to abuſe this place againſt the du
                        •
                      reuerence and reſpect or praiers made to the holy Angels. Vvhom the Scriptures record ſo often to offer our praiers vp to God, and to haue been lavvfully reuerenced of the Patriarkes, neuer as gods▪ but as Gods miniſters and meſſengers, Ioſu. 5, 14. Tob. 12, 12. Gen. 48, 16. Angelus qui 
                           •
                        ruit m
                           •
                        . 1 Tim. 5, 21. And that they may be praied vnto, & can helpe & heare vs, ſee S. Hierom in cap. 10 Dani
                           •
                        lis. S. Ambroſe in Pſal. 118. ſer 1. S. Auguſtine li. 10 de ciuit. Dei c. 12. Bede li. 4 in Cantica c. 24.
                  
                  
                     19. Not holding the head.] Becauſe he hath much a do vvith ſuch falſe preachers as taught the people to preferre the Angels vvhich gaue the Lavv, or other vvhatſoeuer, before Chriſt: in this Epiſtle, and to the Epheſians, he often affirmeth Chriſt to be our head, yea and to be exalted far aboue al creatures, Angels, Poteſtats, Principalities, or vvhatſoeuer.
                  
                     20. Why doe you.) A maruelous impudent tranſlation of theſe vvordes in the Engliſh Bibles thus,Heretical tranſlation. 
                     Why are you burdened vvith traditions? Vvhere as the Greeke hath not that ſignification:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      but to make the name of Tradition odious, here they put it of purpoſe, not being in the Greeke: and in other place where Traditions are cōmended (1 Cor. 11. and 2 Theſ. 2.) and where the Greeke is ſo moſt flatly (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) there they tranſlate it, Inſtructions, ordinances
                           •
                        punc; &c.
                  
                     21. Touch not.]
                     Scripture abuſed againſt the Churches faſtes. The Heretikes (as before and alvvaies) very vainely alleage this againſt the Catholike faſtings: vvhen it is moſt cleere that the Apoſtle reprehendeth the foreſaid falſe teachers that though to make the Chriſtians ſubiect to the obſeruation of the ceremonies of the old Lavv, of not eating hogges, conies, hares fleſh
                        •
                     punc; and ſuch like, not to touch a dead corps nor any place vvhere a vvomā in her floures had ſittē, & other infinite doctrines of touching, taſting, vvaſhing, eating, and the reſt, either commaunded to the old people by God, or (as many things vvere) voluntarily taken vp by them ſelues, ſometime cleane againſt Gods ordinance, and often friuolous and ſuperſtitious. Vvhich ſort as Chriſt in the Goſpel, ſo here S. Paul calleth the precepts and doctrines of men, and ſuperſtition, and (as the Greeke vvord ſignifieth)
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      voluntarie vvorſhip, that is inuented by Heretikes of their ovvne head vvithout the vvarrant of Chriſt in the Scriptures, or the Holy Ghoſt in the Church, or any lavvful authoritie of ſuch vvhom Chriſt commaundeth vs to obey. Againſt ſuch Sect-Maiſters therfore as vvould haue yoked the faithful againe vvith the Ievviſh or Heretical faſtes of Simon Magus and the like, S. Paul ſpeaketh, and not of the Churches faſtes or doctrines.
                  
                     23. Hauing a ſhevv.] Againe the Heretikes of our time obiect, that theſe foreſaid falſe teachers pretended holines,The hypocr
                           •••
                        
                        cal abſtinēce of old Heretikes, maketh nothīg againſt true and ſincere faſting, but cōmendeth it. vviſedom, and chaſtiſement of their bodies (for ſo S. Paul ſaith) by forbidding certaine meates according to the Ievves obſeruation, euen as the Catholikes do. It is true they did ſo, and ſo do moſt vices imitate vertues▪ for if chaſtiſing of mens bodies and repreſſing their concupiſcences and luſtes vvere not godly, and if abſtinence from ſome meates vvere not laudably and profitably vſed in the Church for the ſame purpoſe, no Heretikes (to induce the 
                        •
                     boliſhed obſeruations and differences of meates of the Ievves, or the condemnation of certaine meates and creatures as abominable according to others) vvould haue falſely pretented the chaſtiſement of their fleſh, or made other ſhevv of vviſedom and pietie, to found their vnlavvful Heretical or Iudaical ſuperſtition concerning the ſame. The Catholike Church & her children, by the example of Chriſt, S. Iohn Baptiſt, the Apoſtles and other bleſſed men, do that lavvfully, godly, religiouſly, and ſincerly in deede to the end aforeſaid,1 Cor. 9, 27. 2 Cor. 11, 27. vvhich theſe falſe Apoſtles onely pretended to do. So * S. Paul did chaſtiſe his body in deede, by vvatching, 
                        •
                     aſting, and many other afflictions, and that vvas lavvful and vvas true vviſedom and pietie in deede. The foreſaid Heretikes not ſo, but to induce the Coloſſians to Iudaiſme and other abominable errors, did but pretend theſe things in hypocriſie.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He exhorteth to mortifie and put of al corrupt maners of the old man, and to put on ſuch vertues as are for the nevv man. 18 In particular alſo, vviues and huſbands, children and parents; ſeruants and maiſters, ech ſort to do their duetie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERFORE if you be riſen vvith Chriſt,The Epiſtle vpon Eaſter 
                        •
                     ue. ſeeke the things that are aboue: vvhere Chriſt is ſitting on the right hand of God. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Minde the things that are aboue, not the things that are vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For you are dead: and your life is hidde vvith Chriſt in God. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vvhen Chriſt ſhal appeare, your life: then you alſo ſhal appeare vvith him in glorie. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 * Mortifie therfore your members that are vpon the earth,Eph. 5, 3. fornication, vncleanneſſe, luſt, euil concupiſcence, and 
                     •
                   auarice, vvhich is
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the ſeruice of Idols. ✝ 
                     verse 6 for vvhich things the vvrath of God commeth vpon the children of incredulitie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 in vvhich you alſo vvalked ſometime, vvhen you liued in them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But novv lay you alſo al avvay: anger, indignation, malice, blaſphemie, filthie talke out of your mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Lie not one to an other:Eph. 4, 22. * ſpoiling your ſelues of the old man vvith his actes, ✝ 
                     verse 10 and 
                     •
                   doing on the nevv, him that is renevved vnto knovvledge,Gen. 1, 26. * according to the image of him that created him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 vvhere there is not, Gentile and Ievve, circumciſion and prepuce, Barbarous and Scythian. bonde and free: but al, and in al Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Put ye on therfore as the elect of God,The Epiſtle vpon the 5 Sunday after the Epiphanie. holy, and beloued,
Eph. 4, 32. * the bovvels of mercie, benignitie, humilitie, modeſtie, patience, ✝ 
                     verse 13 ſupporting one an other: and pardoning one an other, if any haue a quarel againſt any man. as alſo our Lord hath pardoned vs: ſo you alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But aboue al theſe things haue charitie, vvhich is the band of perfectiō: ✝ 
                     verse 15 & let the peace of Chriſt
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , triumph and haue the victorie exult in your hartes, vvherein alſo you are called in one body: and be thankeful. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Let the vvord of Chriſt dvvel in you aboundantly, in al vviſedom: teaching and admoniſhing your ovvne ſelues, vvith pſalmes, hymnes, and ſpiritual cāticles, in grace ſinging in your hartes to God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Al vvhatſoeuer you doe in vvord or in vvorke, al things in the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, giuing thankes to God and the Father by him. ⊢
               
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 18 * Vvomen be ſubiect to your huſbands,Eph. 5, 22. as it behoueth in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 19 * Men, loue your vviues: and be not bitter tovvard them.1. Pet. 3, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 20 * Children obey your parents in al things: for that is vvel pleaſing to our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Fathers, prouoke not your children to indignation:Eph. 6, 1. that they become not diſcouraged.
Eph. 6, 5 ✝ 
                     verse 22 * Seruants, obey in al things, your maiſters according to the fleſh,Tit. 2. 9. not ſeruing to the eie, as pleaſing men, but in ſimplicitie of hart,1. Pet. 2, 18. fearing God. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Vvhatſoeuer you doe, vvorke it from the hart as to our Lord, and not to men: ✝ 
                     verse 24 knovving that you ſhal receiue of our Lord theRetribution or revvard for good vvorkes: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vvhich ſignifieth rendering one for an other. retribution of inheritance. Serue our Lord Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For he that doeth iniurie,Deu. 10, 17. Ro. 2, 11. ſhal receiue that vvhich he hath done vniuſtly: and * there is not acceptiō of perſons vvith God.Gal. 2, 6.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     5. Auarice,
                     Heretical and fooliſh tranſlation. 
                     vvhich is the ſeruice of idols.] Here is a maruelous impudent and foliſh corruption in the vúlgar Engliſh Bible printed the yere 1577 and (as it ſeemeth) moſt authoriſed. Vvhere for their errour againſt the Images of Chriſt and his Saincts, and to make image and idol, al one: the tranſlator, for that vvhich the Apoſtle ſaith in Greeke, Couetouſnes is idolatrie, maketh him to ſay in Engliſh, Couetouſnes is vvorſhipping of images: as alſo Eph. 5, 
                           •
                        
                      he tranſlateth thus, The couetous perſon is a vvorſhipper of images: for that vvhich the Apoſtle ſaith, The couetous man is an idolater, meaning ſpiritual idolatrie, becauſe he maketh money his God. In vvhich ſenſe to call this ſpiritual idolatrie, vvorſhipping of images, is to ridiculous, and muſt needes procede of blinde hereſie.
                  
                     9. Doing on the nevv.] By this and the vvhole diſcourſe of this chapter conteining an exhortation to good life,Iuſtice an inherent qualitie in vs. and to put on the habite of the nevv man vvith al vertues: vve may ſee, our iuſtice in Chriſt to be a very qualitie and forme inherent in our ſoul, adorning the ſame, and not an imputation onely of Chriſtes righteouſnes, or a hiding onely of our ſinnes and vvickednes, vvhich the Heretikes falſely affirme to remaine in vs after baptiſme and alvvaies during life. See S. Auguſtine de pec. mer. & remiſ. li. 2 c. 7. & cont. Iulian. li. 6 c. 7.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He exhorteth to inſtance in praier, 5 and to vviſedom in behauiour. 7 He ſendeth Tychicus. 10 He doeth commendations, 15 and inioyneth to be done.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YOV Maiſters, that vvhich is iuſt and equal, doe to your ſeruants: knovving that you alſo haue a Maiſter in heauen.Luc. 18, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 2 * Be inſtant in praier: vvatching in it in thankes giuing,Eph. 6, 18. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 3 * praying vvithal
S. Paul euer much deſireth the praiers of the faithful: whereby vve learne the great efficacie of them. for vs alſo,Theſ. 3, 1▪
                   that God may opē vnto vs the doore of ſpeache to ſpeake the myſterie of Chriſt (for the vvhich alſo I am bound) ✝ 
                     verse 4 that I may manifeſt it, ſo as I ought to ſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 5 * Vvalke vvith vviſedom tovvard them that be vvithout:Eph. 5, 15.
                   redeeming the time. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Your talke alvvaies, in grace let it be ſeaſoned vvith ſalte: that you may knovv hovv you ought to anſvver euery man.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 The things that are about me, Tychicus our deereſt brother, and faithful miniſter, & fellovv-ſeruant in our Lord, vvil make you vnderſtand al, ✝ 
                     verse 8 vvhom I haue ſent to you for this ſame purpoſe, that he may know the things that concerne you,Phile. 10. and may comfort your hartes, ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvith * Oneſimus the moſt deere and faithful brother vvho is of you. Al things that are done here, ſhal they doe you to vnderſtand.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 Ariſtarchus my fellovv-priſoner ſaluteth you, & Marke the coſin-german of Barnabas (concerning vvhom you haue receiued commaundements, If he come to you, receiue him) ✝ 
                     verse 11 and Ieſus that is called Iuſtus: vvho are of the Circumciſion. theſe only are my coadiutors in the kingdom of God: vvhich haue been a comfort to me. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Epaphras ſaluteth you vvho is of you, the ſeruant of Chriſt IESVS, alvvaies careful for you in praiers, that you may ſtand perfect and ful in al the vvil of God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For I giue him teſtimonie that he hath muchHe did not only pray, but tooke other great paines to procure Gods grace for the Coloſſians: perhaps by watching, faſting, and doing other penance of body: that God would not ſuffer them to fall from their receiued faith to the ſecte of Simon Magus or the Iudaizing Chriſtiās. labour for you, and for them that be at Laodicia, and that are at Hierapolis. ✝ 
                     verse 14 * Luke the moſt deere phyſiciō ſaluteth you: and Demas.2 Tim. 4, 10. 11 ✝ 
                     verse 15 Salute the brethren that are at Laodicia: and Nymphas and the Church that is in his houſe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vvhen the epiſtle ſhal be read vvith you, make that it be read alſo in the Church of the Laodicians: and that you read that vvhich is of the Laodicians. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſay to Archippus, See the miniſterie vvhich thou haſt receiued of our Lord, that thou fulfil it. ✝ 
                     verse 18 The ſalutation: vvith mine owne hand, Paules. Be mindeful of my bandes. Grace be vvith you. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            ❀ THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
            
               HOVV S. Paul vvith Silas (or Siluanus) and Timothee according to a viſion calling him out of Aſia into Macedonia, came to Philippi being the firſt citie thereof, vve reade Act. 16. And hovv againe from Philippi, after ſcourging and impriſoning there, he came to Theſſalonica being the head citie of that countrie, vve reade Act. 17. vvhere after 3 vveekes preaching, the Ievves ſtirred the citie againſt them, and purſued them alſo to Beraea: ſo that Paul. vvas conucied from thence to Athens, vvhere he expected the cōming of Silas & Timothee from the foreſaid Beraea in Macedonia, but receiued them (as vve haue Act. 18.) at Corinth in Achaia.
            Hauing therefore left the Theſſalonians in ſuch perſecution, and being careful to knovv hovv they did in it, he vvas deſirous to returne vnto them, as he ſignifieth in the 2 chapter of this Epiſtle v. 17. But (as he there addeth) Satan hindered vs. therefore tarying himſelf at Athens, he ſendeth Timothee vnto them, at vvhoſe returne vnderſtanding their conſtancie, he is much comforted, as he declareth c. 3. So then they are all three together at the vvriting of this Epiſtle, as alſo vve haue in the title of it: Paul and Siluanus and Timothee to the Church of the Theſſalonians. And therefore it ſeemeth to haue bene vvritten at Corinth, not at Athens: becauſe after the ſending of Timothee to Theſſadonica, they mette not at Athens againe, but at Corinth.
            The firſt three chapters of it are, to confirme and comfort them againſt the tentations of thoſe perſecutions. The other tvvo are of exhortation, to liue according to his preceptes, namely in ſanctification of their bodies, and not in fornication: to loue one an other: to comfort one an other about their frendes departed, vvith the doctrine of the Reſurrection, and vvith continuall preparation to die: the laietie to obey, and the Cleargie to be diligent in euery point of their office.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He thanketh G
                        ••
                      for them, 
                        •
                      and gathereth that they are elect, becauſe his preaching at their firſt conuerſion vvas vvith diuine povver, and they on the other ſide receiued it vvith al ioy, notvvithſtanding the great perſecution that vvas raiſed againſt them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL and Siluanus and Timothee to the Church of the Theſſalonians in God the Father, & our Lord IESVS Chriſt. Grace to you and peace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 Vve giue thankes to God alvvaies for al you:The Epiſtle vpon the 6 Sunday after the Epiphanie. making a memorie of you in our praiers without intermiſſiō, ✝ 
                     verse 3 mindeful of the vvorke of your faith and labour, and of the charitie, & of the enduring of the hope of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, before God and our father: ✝ 
                     verse 4 knovving brethren beloued of God, your election: ✝ 
                     verse 5 that our Goſpel hath not been to you in word only, but in povver and the holy Ghoſt, and in much fulneſſe, as you knovv vvhat maner of men vve haue been among you for your ſakes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And you became ″ folovvers of vs, & of our Lord: receiuing the vvord in much tribulation, vvith ioy of the holy Ghoſt: ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſo that you were made a paterne to al that beleeue in Macedonia & in Achaia. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For from you vvas bruited the vvord of our Lord: not only in Macedonia and in Achaia, but in euery place, your faith vvhich is to God vvard, is proceded, ſo that it is not neceſſarie for vs to ſpeake any thing. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For they them ſelues report of vs vvhat maner of entring vve had to you: and how you are turned to GodIn this and the like places the Heretikes malitiouſly & moſt falſely tranſlate, conſtrue, & apply al things meāt of the Heathē idols, to the memories and images of Chriſt and his ſaincts, namely the Engliſh Bibles of the yere 1562. 1577. See the Annotatiō 1 Io. 5, 21. from Idols, to ſerue the liuing and true God, ✝ 
                     verse 10 and to expect his Sonne from heauen (vvhom 
 he raiſed vp from the dead) IESVS, vvho hath deliuered vs from the vvrath to come. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     6. Folovvere of vs.]
                     Religious perſons imitation of diuers holy men is the imitatiō of Chriſt him ſelf. S. Paul is hold to commend them for imitation of him, yea and to ioyne him ſelf in that point vvith Chriſt, to be their paterne to vvalke after. Vvhere without curioſitie he nameth him ſelf firſt, and our Lord aftervvard, becauſe he vvas a more neere and ready obiect then Chriſt, vvho vvas not nor could not be folovved but through the preaching and conuerſation of the Apoſtle, vvho vvas in their ſight or hearing. And this imitation of ſome holy man or other, hath made ſo many Religious men of diuers orders and rules, al tending to the better imitation of Chriſt our Lord. See the like vvordes of the Apoſtle, 1 Cor. 11. 
                           •
                        . and Philip. 3, 17.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  No calleth euen them ſelues to vvitnes, that his preaching vnto them vvas as he ſaid, in moſt commendable maner. 
                        〈◊〉
                      And againe on the other ſide he thanketh God for their maner of receiuing it: that is, vvith al ioy, notvvithſtanding the perſecution of their ovvne citizens.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR your ſelues knovv, brethren, our entrance vnto you, that it vvas not vaine: ✝ 
                     verse 2 butA notable example for Catholike preachers, and paſsing comfortable, whē in the middes of perſecutiōs and reproches they preache ſincerely, to pleaſe God & not men. hauing ſuffered before and * been abuſed vvith contumelies (as you knovv) at Philippi,Act. 16, 12. 23. vve had confidence in our God, to ſpeake vnto you the Goſpel of God in much carefulnes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For our exhortation vvas not of errour, nor of vncleanneſſe, nor in deceite: ✝ 
                     verse 4 but as vve vvere approued of God that the Goſpel ſhould be committed to vs, ſo vve ſpeake: not as pleaſing men, but God, vvho proueth our hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For neither haue we been at any time in the vvord of adulation, as you knovv: nor in occaſion of auarice, God is vvitnes: ✝ 
                     verse 6 nor ſeeking glorie of men, neither of you, nor of others. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvhereas vve might haue been a burdē to you, as the Apoſtles of Chriſt: but vve becamemilde children' in the middes of you, as if a nource I ſhould cheriſh her children: ✝ 
                     verse 8 ſo hauing a deſire to you, vve would gladly deliuer vnto you not only the Goſpel of God, but alſo our ovvne ſoules: becauſe you are become moſt deere vnto vs.Act. 20, 34. 1. Cor. 4, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For you are mindeful, brethren,2. Theſ. 3, of * our labour and toile. day & night vvorking, leſt vve ſhould charge any of you, vve preached among you the Goſpel of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 You
 are vvitneſſes and God, hovv holily and iuſtly and vvithout blame, vve haue been to you that did beleeue. ✝ 
                     verse 11 as you knovv in vvhat maner we deſiring and comforting you, haue adiured euery one of you (as a father his children) that you vvould vvalke vvorthie of God, vvho hath called you into his kingdom and glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore vve alſo giue thankes to God vvithout intermiſſion: becauſe that vvhen you had receiued of vs the vvord of the hearing of God, you receiued it not as the vvord of men, but (as it is in deede) ″ the vvord of God, who vvorketh in you that haue beleeued. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For you, brethren, are become folovvers of the churches of God that be in Iewrie, in Chriſt IESVS: for you alſo haue ſuffered the ſame things of your ovvne lineage, as they alſo of the Ievves, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvho both killed our Lord IESVS, and the Prophets, and haue perſecuted vs, and pleaſe not God, and are aduerſaries to al men, ✝ 
                     verse 15 prohibiting vs to ſpeake to the Gentiles that they may be ſaued, to make vp their ſinnes alvvaies. for the vvrath of God is come vpon them euen to the end. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But vve, brethren,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   depriued of you for a ſhort time, in ſight, not in hart: haue haſtened the more aboundantly to ſee your face vvith much deſire. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For vve vvould haue come to you, I Paul certes, once and againe: but Satan hath hindred vs. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For vvhat is our hope, or ioy, or crovvne of glorie?If the Apoſtle vvithout iniurie to god, in right good ſenſe call his ſcholers the Theſſaloniās, his hope, ioy, glorie: vvhy blaſpheme the Proteſtāts the Cath. Church & her childrē for terming our B. Ladie or other Sainctes, their hope, for the ſpecial conſidēce they haue in their praiers? Are not you before our Lord IESVS Chriſt in his comming? ✝ 
                     verse 19 For you are our glorie and ioy.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     12. The vvord of God.]
                     Not only the vvrittē vvord is the vvord of God. The Aduerſaries vvil haue no vvord of God but that vvhich is vvritten and conteined in the Scripture: but here they might learne that al Paules preaching before he vvrote to them, vvas the very vvord of God. They might alſo learne that vvhat ſo euer the lavvful Apoſtles, Paſtors, and Prieſtes of Gods Church preach in the vnitie of the ſame Church, is to be taken for Gods ovvne vvord, and ought not to be reputed of them for doctrines of men or 
                        ••
                     ariſaical traditions, as they falſly call canons, precepts, and decrees of holy Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Becauſe he could not come himſelf, as he deſired, he ſent Timothes, 6 At vvhoſe returne novv vnderſtanding it as they ſtand ſtill ſtedfaſt, notvvithſtāding al thoſe perſecutions, he reioyceth excedingly: to praying that he may ſee them agaīſt, 12 and for their increaſe in 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR the vvhich cauſe forbearing no longer, it pleaſed vs to remaine at Athens, alone. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And vve ſent Timothee our brother, & the miniſter of God in the Goſpel of Chriſt, to confirme you and exhort you for your faith, ✝ 
                     verse 3 that no man be moued in theſe tribulations, for your ſelues knovv, that vve are appointed to this. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For euen vvhē vve vvere vvith you, vve foretold you that vve ſhould ſuffer tribulatiōs, as alſo it is come to paſſe, & you knovv. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore I alſo forbearing no lōger, ſent to knovv your faith: leſt perhaps he that tempteth, hath tempted you, & our labour be made vaine.Act. 18, 5. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But now * Timothee cōming vnto vs frō you, & reporting to vs your faith & charitie, and that you haue a good remēbrance of vs alvvaies, deſiring to ſee vs, as vve alſo you: ✝ 
                     verse 7 therfore vve are cōforted, brethrē, in you, in al our neceſſitie & tribulation, by your faith, ✝ 
                     verse 8 becauſe novv vve liue, if you ſtand in our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For vvhat thankes giuing can vve render to God for you, in al ioy vvherevvith vve reioyce for you before our God, ✝ 
                     verse 10 night and day more aboundantly praying that vve mayThough letters or epiſtles in abſēce giue great comfort and confirmation in faith, yet it is preaching in preſence by vvhich the faith of Chriſt and true religion is alvvais both begunne and accompliſhed. ſee your face, and may accompliſh thoſe things that vvant of your faith.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And God him ſelf and our Father, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt direct our vvay to you. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And our Lord multiplie you, and make your charitie abound one to an other, & tovvard al men: as vve alſo in you, ✝ 
                     verse 13 to cōfirme your hartes vvithout blame, in holineſſe, before God and our Father, in the comming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt vvith al his Sainctes. Amen.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He exhorteth them to liue as he taught them: and namely to abſteine from al fornicatiō, 9 to loue one an other. 11 to meddle onely vvith their ovvne matters, 12 to behaue them ſelues vvel tovvard the Infidels. 13 Touching their frendes departed, he comforteth them, ſhevving that they ſhal meate againe as the Reſurrection, and be vvith Chriſt for euer.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR the reſt therfore,The Epiſtle vpon the 2 Sunday in Lent. brethren, vve deſire & beſeeche you in our Lord IESVS, that as you haue receiued of vs hovv you ought to vvalke, and to pleaſe God, as alſo you doe vvalke, that you abounde more. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For you knovv vvhat precepts I haue giuen
 to you by our Lord IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For this is the vvil of God, your ſanctificatiō: that you abſtaine from fornication, ✝ 
                     verse 4 that euery one may knovv to poſſeſſe his veſſel in ſanctification and honour: ✝ 
                     verse 5 not in the paſſion of luſt, as alſo the Gentiles that knovv not God, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and that no man ouergot, nor circumuent his brother in buſineſſe: becauſe our Lord is reuenger of al theſe things, as vve haue foretold you, & haue teſtified. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For God hath not called vs into vncleanneſſe: but into ſanctification. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 Therfore he that deſpiſeth theſe things, deſpiſeth ″ not man but God, vvho alſo hath giuen his holy Spirit in vs.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 But concerning the charitie of theAl Catholike Chriſtians make one fraternitie or brotherhod. fraternitie, vve haue no neede to vvrite to you:Io. 13, 34 15, 17. ✝ for * your ſelues haue learned of God to loue one an other.Heb 13, 1 ✝ 
                     verse 10 Yea and you doe it tovvard al the brethren in al Macedonia. But vve deſire you brethrē, that youChriſtian men ought to procede and profite continually in good vvorkes and iuſtification. aboūd more: ✝ 
                     verse 11 & that you employ your indeuour to be quiet, & that you doe your ovvne buſineſſe, & vvorke vvith your ovvne handes, as we haue cōmaunded you: ✝ 
                     verse 12 and that you vvalke honeſtly tovvard them that are vvithout: and neede nothing of any mans.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vve vvil not haue you ignorant,The Epiſtle in a Maſſe for the dead vpon the day of the burial or depoſition. brethren, concerning them that ″ ſleepe, that you be not ſorovvful, as alſo others that haue no hope. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For if vve beleeue that IESVS died and roſe againe, ſo alſo God them that haue ſlept by IESVS vvil bring vvith him.1. Cor. 15, 23. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For this vve ſay to you in the vvord of our Lord, * thatHe ſpeaketh in the perſon of thoſe that ſhal be aliue vvhen our Sauiour returneth to iudgement. vve vvhich liue, vvhich are remaining in the aduent of our Lord, ſhal not preuent them that haue ſlept. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For our Lord him ſelf in commaundement and in the voice of an * Archangel and in the trōpet of God vvil deſcend from heauen:Mt. 24, 31. 1. Cor. 13, 52. and the dead that are in Chriſt, ſhal riſe againe firſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Then vve that liue, that are left, vvithal ſhal be taken vp vvith them in the cloudes to meete Chriſt, into the aire, and ſo alvvaies vve ſhal be vvith our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Therfore cōfort ye one an other in theſe vvordes. ⊢ 
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     8. Not man but God.]
                     The precepts of the Church. He that deſpiſeth the Churches or her lavvful Paſtors precept
                        •
                     , offendeth no leſſe then if he contemned Gods expreſſe commaundements. For they be of the holy Ghoſt, and are not to be counted among the commaundements of men onely.
                  
                     13. Sleepe.] Some Heretikes peruerſly inferred of this that the foules did ſleepe til the day of iudgement: vvhere it is meant of the bodies onely.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  To talke of the time of the Reſurrection it not neceſſarie, but to prepare our ſelues againſt that time ſo ſedaine and ſo terrible to the vnprepared. 12 He beſeecheth the 
                        •
                     aietie to be obedient, 14 and the Clergia to be vigilant, vvith many ſhort precepts mee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND of the times and momentes, brethren, you neede not that vve vvrite to you. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For your ſelues knovv perfectly that the day of our Lord ſhal ſo come,Mt. 24, 44. 2 Pet. 3, 10 as * a theefe in the night. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vvhen they ſhal ſay, peace & ſecuritie: then ſhal ſodaine deſtruction come vpon them,Apoc. 3, 3 16, 15. as the paines to her that is vvith childe, and they ſhal not eſcape. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But you brethren are not in darkneſſe: that the ſame day may as a theefe ouertake you.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 For al you are the children of light, and children of the day: vve are not of the night nor of darkneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Therfore let vs not ſleepe as alſo others: but let vs vvatch and be ſober. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For they that ſleepe, ſleepe in the night: & they that be drunke, be drunke in the night. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But vve that are of the day,Eſa. 59, 17. Eph. 6, 17. are ſober, * hauing on the breaſt-plate of faith andA chriſtian mans vvhole armour is not faith only, but al the three vertues here named. charitie, and a helmet, the hope of ſaluation. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For God hath not appointed vs vnto vvrath, but vnto the purchaſing of ſaluation by our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 10 vvho died for vs: that vvhether vve vvatch, or ſleepe, vve may liue together vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the vvhich cauſe comfort one an other: & edifie one an other, as alſo you doe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And vve beſeeche you brethren, that you vvil knovv them that labour among you, and that gouerne you in our Lord, and admoniſh you: ✝ 
                     verse 13 that you haue them more aboudātly in charitie for their vvorke. haue peace vvith them. ✝ 
                     verse 14 
                  The Epiſtle vpō the Imber Saturday in Lent. And vve beſeeche you brethren,Pro. 17, 13. Ro. 12 1. Pet. 3, 9. admoniſh the vnquiet, comfort the vveake-minded, beare vp the vveake, be patient to al. ✝ 
                     verse 15 See that * none render euil for euil to any man: but alvvaies that vvhich is good purſue tovvards eche other,Luc. 18, 1. and tovvards al. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Alvvaies reioyce. ✝ 
                     verse 17 
                  To deſire eternal life of him that onely can giue it, is to pray vvithout intermiſſion: but becauſe that deſire is oftē by worldly cares cooled, certaīe houres and times of vocal praier vvere appointed. See S. Aug. ep. 121 ad Probam.
                   Pray * vvithout intermiſſion.
 ✝ 
                     verse 18 In al things giue thankes. for this is the vvil of God in Chriſt IESVS in al you. ✝ 
                     verse 19 The Spirit extinguiſh not. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Prophecies deſpiſe not. ✝ 
                     verse 21 But ″ prooue al things: hold that which is good. ✝ 
                     verse 22 From al appearance of euil refraine yourſelues.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 And the God of peace him ſelf ſanctifie you in al things:
 that your vvhole ſpirit, and ſoule and body vvithout blame may be preſerued in the comming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 24 He is faithful, that hath called you, vvho alſo vvil doe it. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Brethren pray for vs. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Salute al the brethren in a holy kiſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 27 I adiure you by our Lord that this epiſtle be read to al the holy brethren. ✝ 
                     verse 28 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith you. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTAT. CHAP. V.
                  
                     10 But proous.]
                     Not raſhly to credite euery ſpirit. Though vve may not extinguiſh the ſpirit, nor cōtēmne the prophets, yet vve muſt bevvare vve be not deceiued by geuing to light credite to euery one that vaūteth him ſelf of the ſpirit, as Arch-heretikes euer did. vve muſt trie th
                        ••
                      by the doctrine of the Apoſtles & the Spirit of the Catholike Church, vvhich can not be guile 
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
            
               THE ſecond to the Theſſalonians hath in the title as the firſt: Paul and Siluanus and Timothee, &c. And therfore it ſeemeth to haue bene vvritten in the ſame place, to vvitte, at Corinth, vvhere they remainedAct. 1
                     •
                  . v. 11. 
               a yere and ſixe moneths, & ſtraight vpon their anſwer to the firſt epiſtle.
            Firſt he thanketh God for their increaſe, and perſeuêrance (comforting them againe in thoſe perſecutions) and praieth for their accompliſment. Secondly he aſſureth them tht the day of Iudgement is not at hand, putting them in rememberāce vvhat he told them thereof by vvord of mouth▪ vvhen he vvas preſent (as therfore he biddeth them aftervvardc. 2. v. 15. to hold his Traditions vnvvritten, no leſſe then the vvritten,) to vvitte, that all thoſe perſecutions and hereſies, raiſed then, and aftervvard againſt the Catholike Church, vvere but the myſterie of Antichriſt, and not Antichriſt himſelf. but that there ſhould come at length a plaine Apoſtaſie, & thē (the vvhole fore running myſterie being once perfitly vvrought) ſhould folovv the reuelation of Antichriſt himſelf in perſon (as after all the myſteries of the old Teſtament, Chriſt IESVS our Lord came him ſelf in the fulnes of time.) And then at length after all this the day of Iudgement and ſecond comming of Chriſt ſhal be as hand, and not before, vvhatſoeuer pretenſe of viſion, or of ſome ſpeach of mine (ſaith S. Paul) any make to ſeduce you vvithal, or of my former epiſtle, or any other. For vvhich cauſe alſo in the end of this epiſtle, he biddeth them to knovv his hand, vvhich is a ſigne in euery epiſtle.
            
            Laſtly he requeſteth their praiers, and requireth them to keepe his commaundements and Traditions, namely that the poore vvhich are able get their ovvne liuing vvith vvorking, as he alſo gaue them example, though he vvere not bound thereto.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He thanketh God for their increaſe in faith and charitie, and conſtancie in perſecution (aſſuring them that they merite thereby the kingdom of God, as their perſecutors do damnation:) 11 and alſo praieth for their accompliſhment.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 PAVL and Siluanus and Timothee: to the churche of the Theſſalonians in God our Father and our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Vve ought to giue thankes alvvaies to God for you brethren, ſo as meete is, becauſe your faith increaſeth excedingly, and the charitie of euery one of you aboundeth tovvards eche other: ✝ 
                     verse 4 ſo that vve our ſelues alſo glorie in you in the churches of God, for your patience, and faith in al your perſecutions and tribulations, vvhich you ſuſtaine ✝ 
                     verse 5 for an example of the iuſt iudgemēt of God, thatNote that by conſtant and patient ſuffering of afflictiōs for chriſt men are made vvorthie (ſo the Greeke ſignifieth, as the Aduerſaries them ſelues trāſlate v. 11.) of the crowne or kingdom of heauen, and ſo do merite and deſerue the ſame. See Anno. Luc. 20, 35. And the Apoſtle here ſaith that it is Gods iuſtice no leſſe to repay glorie to the afflicted, then to render puniſhmēt to them that afflict, becauſe of their contrarie deſerts or merites. you may be
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   counted vvorthie of the kingdom of God, for the vvhich alſo you ſuffer. ✝ 
                     verse 6 if yet it be iuſt vvith God to repay tribulation, to them that vexe you: ✝ 
                     verse 7 and to you that are vexed, reſt with vs in the reuelation of our Lord IESVS from heauen vvith the Angels of his povver,1. Theſ. 4, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 8 in flame of fire, giuing reuenge to them that knovv not God, & that obey not the Goſpel of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvho ſhal ſuffer eternal paines in deſtruction, from the face of our Lord and from the glorie of his povver: ✝ 
                     verse 10 vvhen he ſhal come to beChrist ſhal be glorified in his Saincts, that is, by the great and vnſpeakable honour & exaltatiō of them he ſhal be honoured, as now he is: the honour vvhich the Church doth to them, not diminiſhing Chriſts glorie (as the Aduerſaries foliſhly pretēd) but excedingly augmenting the ſame. glorified in his ſainctes, and to be made maruelous in al them that haue beleeued, becauſe our teſtimonie
 concerning you vvas credited in that day. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvherein alſo vve pray alvvaies for you, that our God
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   make you vvorthie of his vocation, and accompliſh al the good pleaſure of his goodneſſe & the vvorke of faith in povver, ✝ 
                     verse 12 that the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God, and of our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He requireth them, in no caſe to thinke that Domeſday is at hand, 
                        •
                      repeating vnto them, that there muſt before come firſt a reuolt, ſecondly the reuelation alſo of Antichriſt him ſelf in perſon, and that Antichriſt ſhal not permit any God to be vvorſhipped but onely him ſelf: that alſo vvith his lying vvonders he ſhal vvinne to him the incredulous Ievves. But Chriſt ſhal come then immediatly in maieſtie, and deſtroy him and his. 13 Therfore he thanketh God for the faith of the Theſſalonians, 15 and biddeth them ſticke to hi
                        •
                      Traditions both vvritten and vnvvritten, & praieth God to cōfirme them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vve deſire you,The Epiſtle in the Imber Saturday of Aduent. brethren, by the cō
                  ming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, and of our congregatiō into him: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that you be not eaſily moued from your ſenſe, nor be terrified, neither by ſpirit, nor by word, nor by epiſtle as ſent by vs, ″ as though the day of our Lord vvere at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Let no man ſeduce you by any meanes, for ″ vnleſſe there come

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   a reuolt firſt, and ″ the man of ſinne be reuealed, the ſonne of perdition, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvhich is an aduerſarie & is ″ extolled,Hovv then can the Pope be Antichriſt, as the Heretikes fondly blaſpheme, vvho is ſo far from being exalted aboue God, that he praieth moſt humbly not onely to chriſt, but alſo to his B. mother and al his Saincts. aboue al that is called God, or that is worſhipped, ſo that he ſitteth ″ in the temple of God, ſhevving him ſelf as though he were God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Remember you not, that vvhen I vvas yet vvith you, I told you theſe things? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And now ″ vvhat letteth, you knovv: that he may be reuealed in his time. ( ✝ 
                     verse 7 For novv the myſterie of iniquitie vvorketh: only that he vvhich novv holdeth, doe hold, vntil he be taken out of the vvay.) ✝ 
                     verse 8 And then that vvicked one ſhal be reuealed * vvhom our Lord IESVS ſhal kil vvith the ſpirit of his mouth:Eſ. 11, 4. & ſhal deſtroy vvith the manifeſtation of his aduent, him, ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvhoſe comming is according to the operatiō of Satan, ″ in al povver, and lying ſignes and vvonders, ✝ 
                     verse 10 and in al ſeducing of iniquitie to them that periſh, for that they haue not receiued the charitie of the truth that they might be ſaued. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Therfore 
Deus mi
                        ••
                     et (ſaith S. Aug. li. 20. de Ci. c. 19.) quia Deus Diaboſum ſacere iſta permittet. God wil ſend, becauſe God wil 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Diuel to do theſe things. Whereby vve may take a general rule that Gods action or working in ſuch things is his permiſsiō. See Annot. Ro. 1, 24. God vvil ſend them the operation of errour, to beleeue
 lying: ✝ 
                     verse 12 that al may be iudged vvhich haue not beleeued the truth, but haue conſented to iniquitie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vve ought to giue thākes to God alvvaies for you, brethrē beloued of God, that he hath choſen you firſt-fruites vnto ſaluation, in ſanctification of ſpirit and faith of the truth: ✝ 
                     verse 14 into the vvhich alſo he hath called you by our Goſpel, vnto the purchaſing of the glorie of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Therfore brethren ſtand: and hold
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the ″ traditiōs vvhich you haue learned, vvhether it be by vvord, or by our epiſtle. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And our Lord IESVS Chriſt him ſelf, and God & our father vvhich hath loued vs, and hath giuen eternal conſolation, and good hope in grace, ✝ 
                     verse 17 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  This vvord of exhorting implieth in it comfort and conſolation: as 2. Cor. 1. v. 4. & 6.
                   exhort your hartes, and confirme you in euery good vvorke and vvorde.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . A
                           •
                         though the day.]
                     The day of iudgment vncertaine, and to be left to Gods ſecretes. The curioſitie of man fed by Satans deceites, hath ſought to knovv and to giue out to the vvorld, ſuch things as God vvil not impart to him, nor be neceſſarie or profitable for him to knovv: ſo farre, that both in the Apoſtles daies and often aftervvard, ſome haue feined reuelations, ſome falſely gathered out of the Scriptures, ſome preſumed to calculate and coniecte by the ſtarres, and giuen furth to the vvorld a certaine time of Chriſtes coming to iudgement. Al vvhich ſeducers be here noted in the perſon of ſome that vvere about to deceiue the Theſſalonians therein. And S. Auguſtine (in his 80 Epiſtle ad Heſychium) proueth that no man can be aſſured by the Scriptures of the day, yere, or age, that the end of the vvorld or the ſecond Aduent ſhal be.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Vnles there come a reuolt firſt.] Though vve can not be aſſured of the moment, houre, or any certaine time of our Lordes cōming,Two ſpecial ſignes before the later day: a general apoſtaſie, and the comming of Antichriſt. yet he vvarranteth vs that it vvil not be before certaine things be fulfilled, vvhich muſt come to paſſe by the courſe of Gods prouidence and permiſſion before, vvhich are diuers, vvhereof in other places of Scriptures vve be forevvarned. Here he vvarneth vs of tvvo ſpecially, of a reuolt, defection or an apoſtaſie, and of the comming or reuelation of Antichriſt. Vvhich tvvo pertaine in effect both to one, either depending of the other, and ſhal fall (as it may be thought) neere together, and therfore S Auguſtine maketh them but one thing.
                  This apoſtaſie or reuolt, by the iudgement in maner of al auncient vvriters, is the general forſaking & fall of the Romane empire. So Tertullian li. de reſur, carnis. S. Hierom q 11 ad Algaſiam. S. Chryſoſtom ho. 4. and S. Ambroſe vpon this place, S. Auguſtine De Ciuit. Dei li. 20 c. 19. Al vvhich fathers and the reſt * Caluin preſump
                        •
                     kouſly condemneth of errour and follie herein,Caluin. in hunc locū. for that their expoſition agreeth not vvith his and his fellovves blaſphemous fiction that the Pope ſhould be Antichriſt.The heretikes interpretatiō of this apoſtaſie, & their cō
                        dēning of the fathers. To eſtabliſh vvhich falſe impietie, they interprete this reuolt or apoſtaſie to be a general reuolt of the viſible Church from God, vvhoſe houſe or building (they ſay) vvas ſodenly deſtroied, and lay many yeres ruined, and ruled onely by Satan and Antichriſt. So faith the foreſaid Arch-heretike here, though for the aduantage of his defence and as the matter els vvhere requireth, he ſeemeth (as al their faſhion is) to ſpeake in other places quite contrarie: but vvith ſuch colour and colluſion of vvordes, that neither other men nor him ſelf can tell vvhat he vvould haue or ſay. And his fathers Vvicleffe and Luther, his fellovves and folovvers Illyricus, Beza, and the reſt, are (for the time of the Churches falling from Chriſt) ſo various among them ſelues, and ſo contrarie to him, that it is horrible to ſee their confuſion, and a pitieful caſe that any reaſonable man vvil folovv ſuch companions to euident perdition.
                  But concerning 
                        •
                     his errour and falſhod of the Churches defection or reuolt,There can be no apoſtaſie of the viſible Churche from God. it is refuted ſuffi
                     
                        •
                     iently by S. Auguſtine againſt the Donatiſtes in many places. Vvhere he proueth that the Church ſhal not faile to the vvorldes end, no not in the time of Antichriſt: affirming them to deny Chriſt, and to robbe him of his glorie & inheritance bought vvith his bloud, vvhich teach that the Church may faile or periſh. Li. de vnit. Ec. c. 12. 13. De Ciuit. li. 20. c. 8. In Pſal. 85 ad illud, Tu ſo
                           •
                        u Deus
 magnus. pſ. 70 Conc. 2. & Pſal. 60. De vtil. cred. c. 8. S. Hierom refuteth the ſame vvicked Hereſie in theDialog. adu. Lucifer. c. 6. Luciferians, prouing againſt them, that they make God ſubiect to the Diuel, and a poore miſerable Chriſt, that imagine the Church his body may either periſh or be driuen to any corner of the vvorld. both of them anſvver to the Heretikes arguments grounded on Scriptures falſely vnderſtood, vvhich vvere to long here to rehearſe. It is ynough for the Chriſtian reader to knovv, that it is an old deceite and excuſe of al Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, for defence of their forſaking Gods Church, that the Church is periſhed, or remaineth hidden, or in them ſelues onely and in thoſe places vvhere they and their folovvers dvvel: to knovv alſo, that this is reproued by the holy Doctors of the primitiue Church, and that it is againſt Chriſtes honour, povver, prouidence, and promis.
                  If the Aduerſaries had ſaid that this reuolt vvhich the Apoſtle foretelleth ſhal come before the vvorldes end,1 Io. 2, v. 18. is meant of great numbers of Heretikes & Apoſtataes reuolting from the Church, they had ſaid truth of them ſelues and ſuch others,It is very like, the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of a great apoſtaſie frō the See of Rome, and from moſt articles of the Catho. faith. vvhom S. Iohn calleth Antichriſtes. And it is very like (be it ſpoken vnder the correction of Gods Church and al learned Catholikes) that this great defection or reuolt ſhal not be onely from the Romane empire, but ſpecially from the Romane Church, and vvithal from moſt points of Chriſtian religion. not that the Catholike Chriſtians, either in the time of Antichriſt or before, ſhal refuſe to obey the ſame, but for that neere to the time of Antichriſt and the conſummation of the vvorld, there is like to be a great reuolt of kingdoms, peoples, and Prouinces from the open external obedience and communion thereof. Vvhich reuolt hauing been begunne and continued by Heretikes of diuers ages, reſiſting & hating the Seate of Peter (vvhich they called cathedram peſtilentia,
                     li. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 51. 
                     the chaire of peſtilence, * in S. Auguſtines daies) becauſe it is Chriſtes fort erected againſt Hel gates and al Heretikes, and being novv vvonderfully increaſed by theſe of our daies the next precurſors of Antichriſt as it may ſeeme, ſhal be fully atchieued a litle before the end of the vvorld by Antichriſt him ſelf, though euen then alſo, vvhen for the fevv daies of Antichriſtes reigne the external ſtate of the Romane Church and publike entercourſe of the faithful vvith the ſame may ceaſe, yet the due honour and obedience of the Chriſtians tovvard it, and communion in hart vvith it, and practiſe thereof in ſecrete, and open confeſſing thereof if occaſion require, ſhal not ceaſe, no more then it doth novv in the Chriſtians of Cypres and other places vvhere open entercourſe is forbidden.
                  This is certaine and vvonderful in al vviſe mens eies,The wonderful prouidēce of God in preſeruing the See of Rome more then al other ſtates, notwithſtanding manifold dangers and ſcandals. and muſt needes be of Gods prouidence, & a ſingular prerogatiue, that this Seate of Peter ſtandeth, vvhen al other Apoſtolike Sees be gone: that it ſtood there for certaine ages together vvith the ſecular ſeate of the Empire: that the Popes ſtood vvithout vvealth, povver, or humane defenſe, the Emperours knovving, vvitting, and ſeeking to deſtroy them, and putting to the ſvvord aboue thirtie of them one after an other, yea and being as much afraid of them as if they had been amuli imperij, Competitors of their Empire, as S. Cyprian noteth (epiſt. 52 ad Antonianum. num. 3) of S. Cornelius Pope in his daies, and Decius then Emperour: againe, that the Emperours aftervvard yelded vp the citie vnto them, continuing for al that in the Emperial dignitie ſtill: that the ſucceſſors of thoſe that perſecuted them, laid dovvne their crovvnes before their Seate and ſepulcres, honouring the very memories and Relikes of the poore men vvhom their predeceſſors killed: that novv vvel neere theſe 1600 yeres this Seat ſtandeth, as at the beginning in continual miſerie, ſo novv of long time for the moſt part in proſperitie, vvithout al mutation in effect, as no other kingdom or State in the vvorld hath done, euery one of them in the ſaid ſpace being manifoldly altered. It ſtandeth (vve ſay) al this vvhile (to vſe S. Auguſtines vvordes de vtil. cred. c. 17.) Fruſtra circumlatrantibus haereticis, the Heretikes in vaine barking about it, not the firſt Heathen Emperours, not the Gothes and Vandals, not the Turke, not any ſackes or maſſakers by Alaricus, Genſericus, Attila, Borbon, and others, not the emulation of ſecular Princes, vvere they kings or Emperours, not the Popes ovvne diuiſions among them ſelues and manifold difficulties and dangers in their elections, not the great vices vvhich haue been noted in ſome of their perſons, no
                        •
                      al theſe nor any other endeuour or ſcādal could yet preuaile againſt the See of Rome, nor is euer like to preuaile til the end of the vvorld dravv neere, at vvhich time this reuolt (here ſpoken of by the Apoſtle) may be in ſuch ſort as is ſaid before, and more ſhal be ſaid in the Annotations next folovving.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . The man of ſinne.]
                     Many Antichriſts, as fore runners of the great Antichriſt. There vvere many euen in the Apoſtles time (as vve ſee by the 4 Chapter of S. Iohns firſt epiſtle and in the vvritings of the aūcient fathers) that vvere forerunners of Antichriſt, and for impugning Chriſtes truth and Church vvere called antichriſtes, vvhether they did it by force and open perſecution, as Nero and others either Heathen or Heretical Emperours did, or by falſe teaching and other deceites, as the Heretikes of al ages, in vvhich common and vulgar acception S. Hierom ſaith, al belonged to Antichriſt that vvere not of the communion of Damaſus then Pope of Rome.The great Antichriſt ſhal be one ſpecial and notorious man. 
                     Hiero. ep. 57 ad Damaſ. and in an other place, al that haue nevv names after the peculiar calling of Heretikes, as Arians, Donatiſtes (and as vve ſay novv, Caluiniſtes, Zuinglians, &c.) al ſuch (ſaith he) be Antichriſtes. Dial. cont. Lucifer. c. 9. Yea theſe later of our time much more then any of the former, for diuers cauſes vvhich ſhal aftervvard be ſet dovvne. Neuertheleſſe they nor none of them are that great Aduerſarie, enemie, and impugner of Chriſt, vvhich is by a peculiar diſtinction and ſpecial ſignification named, the Antichriſt, 1 Io. 2. and the man of ſinne.
 the ſonne of perdition,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     the Aduerſarie, deſcribed here & els vvhere, to oppoſe him ſelf directly againſt God & our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The Heathen Emperours vvere many, Turkes be many, Heretikes haue been and novv are many, therfore they can not be that one great Antichriſt vvhich here is ſpoken of, and vvhich by the article alvvaies added in the Greeke, is ſignified to be one ſpecial and ſingular man:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . as his peculiar & direct oppoſition to Chriſts perſon in the 5 chapter of S. Iohns Goſpel v. 43: the inſinuation of the particular ſtocke and tribe vvhereof he ſhould be borne, to wit, of the Ievves (for of them he ſhal be receiued as their Maſſias Io. 5. v. 43.) and of the tribe of Dan.Gen. 49, 17. 
                     Ire
                           •
                        . li. 5. Hieron. com. in c. 11 Dan. Auguſt. q. in Ioſ. q. 22:
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . the note of his proper name Apoc. 13: the time of his appearing ſo neere the vvorldes end: his ſhort reigne, his ſingular vvaſt and deſtruction of Gods honour and al religion, his feined miracles, the figures of him in the Prophets and Scriptures of the nevv & old Teſtament: al theſe & many other arguments proue him to be but one ſpecial notorious Aduerſarie in the higheſt degree, vnto vvhom al other perſecutors, Heretikes, Atheiſtes, and vvicked enemies of Chriſt and his Church, are but members and ſeruants.
                  And this is the moſt common ſentence alſo of al aūcient fathers. Onely Heretikes make no doubt but Antichriſt is a vvhole order or ſucceſſion of men. vvhich they hold againſt the former euident Scriptures and reaſons, onely to eſtabliſh their foliſh and vvicked paradoxe, that Chriſtes cheefe Miniſter is Antichriſt,Beza in hoc cap. yea the vvhole order. Vvherein Beza ſpecially pricketh ſo high, that he maketh Antichriſt (euen this great Antichriſt) to haue been in S. Paules daies,The Caluiniſtes place Antichriſt in the See of Rome, in S. Paules daies. though he vvas not open to the vvorld. Vvho it ſhould be (except he meane S. Peter, becauſe he vvas the firſt of the order of Popes) God knovveth. And ſure it is, except he vvere Antichriſt, neither the vvhole order, nor any of the order can be Antichriſt, being al his lavvful ſucceſſors both in dignitie and alſo in truth of Chriſtes religion. Neither can al the Heretikes aliue proue that they or any of them vſed any other regiment or iuriſdiction Eccleſiaſtical in the Church, or forced the people to any other faith or vvorſhip of God, then Peter him ſelf did preach and plant. Therfore if the reſt be Antichriſt, let Beza boldly ſay that S. Peter vvas ſo alſo, and that diuers of the aūcient Catholike fathers did ſerue and vvorke (though vnvvares) tovvardes the ſetting vp of the great Antichriſt, for ſo doth that blaſphemous penne boldly vvrite in his Annotations vpon this place:They make S. Leo & S. Gregorie, great furtherers of Antichriſtes pride. and an Engliſh printed booke of late comming forth out of the ſame ſchoole,Againſt D. Sanders rocke pag. 248. & pag. 278. hath theſe vvordes: As for Leo and Gregorie Biſhops of Rome, although they vvere not come to the ful pride of Antichriſt, yet the myſterie of iniquitie hauing vvrought in that Seate neere fiue or ſixe hundred yeres before them, and then greatly increaſed, they vvere deceiued vvith the long continuance of errour. Thus vvriteth a malapert ſcholer of that impudent ſchole, placing the myſterie of Antichriſt as vvorking in the See of Rome euen in S. Peters time, and making theſe tvvo holy fathers great vvorkers and furtherers of the ſame. vvhereas an other Engliſh Rabbine doubted not at Paules croſſe to ſpeake of the ſelf ſame fathers as great Doctors and Patrones of their nevv Goſpel,Iuel. thus: O Gregorie, ô Leo, if vve be deceiued, you haue deceiued vs. Vvhereof vve giue the good Chriſtian Reader vvarning more diligently, to bevvare of ſuch damnable bookes and Maiſters,Antichriſt ſhal ſuffer no worſhip or adoration, but of him ſelf only. therfore the Pope can not be Antichriſt. carying many vnaduiſed people to perdition.
                  
                     4. Extolled.] The great Antichriſt vvhich muſt come neere the vvorldes end, ſhal aboliſh the publike exerciſe of al other religions true and falſe, and pull dovvne both the B. Sacrament of the altar, vvherein cōſiſteth ſpecially the vvorſhip of the true God, and alſo al Idols of the Gentils, and ſacrifices of the Ievves, generally al kinde of religious vvorſhip, ſauing that vvhich muſt be done to him ſelf alone▪ vvhich vvas partly prefigured in ſuch kings as publiſhed that no God nor man but them ſelues ſhould be praied vnto for certaine daies,Dan. 
                           •
                        . 6. as * Darîus and ſuch like. Hovv can the Proteſtants then for ſhame and vvithout euident cōtradiction, auouch the Pope to be Antichriſt, vvho (as vve ſay) honoureth Chriſt the true God vvithal his povver, or (as they ſay) honoureth Idols, and chalengeth no diuine honour to him ſelf, much leſſe to him ſelf onely, as Antichriſt ſhal do? He hūbly praieth to God, & lovvly knee
                        •
                     eth dovvne in euery Church at diuers altars erected to God in the memories of his Saincts, and praieth to them. He ſaieth or heareth Maſſe daily vvith al deuotion, he confeſſeth his ſinnes to a Prieſt as other poore men do, he adoreth the holy Euchariſt vvhich Chriſt affirmed to be his ovvne body, the Heretikes call it an Idol (no maruel if they make the Pope his Vicar Antichriſt, vvhen they make Chriſt him ſelf an Idol:) Theſe religious dueties doth the Pope, vvhereas Antichriſt ſhal vvorſhip none, nor pray to any, at the leaſt openly.
                  
                     4. In the temple.]
                     In vvhat temple Antichriſt ſhal ſitte. Moſt auncient vvriters expound this of the Temple in Hieruſalem, vvhich they thinke Antichriſt ſhal build vp againe, as being of the Ievves ſtocke, and to be acknovvledged of that obſtinate people (according to our Sauiours prophecie Io. 5) for their expected and promiſed Meſſias. Iren. li. 5 in fine. Hyppolyt. de conſum. mundi. Cyril. Hieroſ. Cacech. 15. Author op. imp. ho. 49. in Mat. See S. Hierom in 11 Dan. Grego. li. 31. Moral. c. 11. Not that he ſhal ſuffer them to vvorſhip God by their old maner of ſacrifices, (al vvhich he vvil either aboliſh, or conuert to the onely adoration of him ſelf: though at the firſt to apply him ſelf to the Ievves, he may perhaps be circumciſed and keepe ſome part of the law) for it is here ſaid that he ſhal ſitte in the Temple as God,Dan. 9. that is, he ſhal be adored there by ſacrifice and diuine honour, the name and vvorſhip of the true God wholy defaced.Mat. 24. And this they thinke to be the abominatiō of deſolation foretold by Daniel, mentioned by our Sauiour,1 Mach. 1. prefigured and reſembled by Antiochus and others, that defaced the
 worſhip of the true God by prophanation of that Temple,The abomination of deſolation conſiſteth cheefely in aboliſhing the ſacrifice of the altar. ſpecially by abrogating the daily ſacrifice, which was a figure of the only ſacrifice and continual oblation of Chriſtes holy body and bloud in the Church, as the aboliſhing of that, vvas a figure of the aboliſhing of this, vvhich ſhal be done principally & moſt vniuerſally by Antichriſt him ſelf (as novv in part by his forerunners) through out al Nations and Churches of the vvorld (though then alſo Maſſe may be had in ſecret, as it is novv in nations vvhere the ſecular force of ſome Princes prohibiteth it to be ſaid openly.) For although he may haue his principal ſeate and honour in the Temple and citie of Hieruſalem, yet he ſhal rule ouer the vvhole vvorld, and ſpecially prohibite that principal vvorſhip inſtituted by Chriſt in his Sacraments, as being the proper Aduerſarie of Chriſtes perſon, name, lavv, and Church, the prophanation and deſolation of vvhich Church by taking avvay the ſacrifice of the altar, is the proper abomination of deſolation, and the vvorke of Antichriſt onely.
                  S. Auguſtine therfore li. 20 de ciuit. c. 19. and S. Hierom q. 11 ad Algaſiam. do thinke, that this ſitting of Antichriſt in the temple, doth ſignifie his ſitting in the Church of Chriſt, rather then in Salomons temple.Hovv Antichriſt ſhal ſit in the Church. Not as though he ſhould be a cheefe member of the Church of Chriſt, or a ſpecial part of his body myſtical, and be Antichriſt and yet vvithal continuing vvithin the Church of Chriſt, as the Heretikes feine, to make the Pope Antichriſt (vvhereby they plainely confeſſe and agniſe that the Pope is a member of the Church,Beza
                           •
                        . 
                     &c. in ipſo ſinu Eccleſiae, and in the very boſome of the Church,
                     Neither Antichriſt nor his precurſors, are mēbers of the Church. ſay they;) for that is ridiculous, that al Heretikes vvhom S. Iohn calleth Antichriſtes as his precurſors, ſhould go out of the Church, and the great Antichriſt him ſelf ſhould be of the Church, & in the Church, & cōtinevv in the ſame, and yet to them that make the vvhole Church to reuolt from God, this is no abſurditie. But the truth is, that this Antichriſtian reuolt here ſpoken of, is from the Catholike Church: and Antichriſt, if he euer vvere of or in the Church, ſhal be an Apoſtata and a renegate out of the Church, and ſhal vſurpe vpon it by tyrannie, and by chalenging vvorſhip, religion, & gouernement thereof, ſo that him ſelf ſhal be adored in al the Churches of the vvorld vvhich he liſt to leaue ſtanding for his honour. And this is to ſitte in the temple o
                        •
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      againſt the Temple of God, as ſome interprete. If any Pope did euer this, or ſhal do, then let the Aduerſaries call him Antichriſt.
                  And let the good Reader obſerue,Antichriſt (by interpretatiō, One againſt Chriſt) why ſo called. that there be tvvo ſpecial cauſes vvhy this great man of ſinne is called Antichriſt. The one is, for impugning Chriſtes kingdom in earth, that is to ſay, his ſpiritual regiment vvhich he conſtituted and appointed in his Church, and the forme of gouernement ordained therein, applying al to him ſelf by ſingular tyrannie and vſurpation, in vvhich kinde S. Athanaſius (ep. at Solit. vit. degentes.) is bold to call the Emperour Conſtantius being an Arian Heretike, Antichriſt, for making him ſelf Principem Epiſcoporum, Prince ouer the Biſhops and Preſident of Eccleſiaſtical iudgements &c. The other cauſe is, for impugning Chriſtes Prieſthod, vvhich is only or moſt properly exerciſed in earth by the ſacrifice of the holy Maſſe, inſtituted for the commemoration of his death, & for the external exhibition of godly honour to the B. Trinitie, vvhich kinde of external vvorſhip by ſacrifice no lavvful people of God euer lacked.Proteſtants & Caluiniſts the neere forerū
                        ners of Antichriſt. And by theſe tvvo things you may eaſily perceiue, that the Heretikes of theſe daies do more properly and neerely prepare the vvay to Antichriſt and to extreme deſolation, then euer any before, their ſpecial hereſie being againſt the ſpiritual Primacie of Popes and Biſhops, and againſt the ſacrifice of the altar, in vvhich tvvo the ſoueraintie of Chriſt in earth conſiſteth.
                  
                     6. What letteth.]
                     S. Auguſtins humilitie in interpreting the ſcriptures S. Auguſtine (li. 20 c. 19 de ciuit del.) profeſſeth plainely that he vnderſtandeth not theſe vvordes, not that that folovveth of the myſterie of iniquitie, and leaſt of al that vvhich the Apoſtle addeth, Only that he vvhich holdeth novv, do hold &c. Vvhich may humble vs al and ſtay the confident raſhnes of this time, namely of Heretikes, that boldly feine hereof vvhatſoeuer is agreable to their hereſie and phantaſie. The Apoſtle had told the Theſſalonians before by vvord of mouth a ſecret point vvhich he vvould not vtter in vvritting, and therfore referreth them to his former talke.The myſterie of iniquitie is the couert working of heretikes toward the manifeſt reuelation of Antichriſt himſelf. The myſterie of iniquitie is cōmonly referred to Heretikes, vvho vvorke to the ſame, and do that that Antichriſt ſhal do, but yet not openly, but in couert and vnder the cloke of Chriſtes name, the Scriptures, the vvord of the Lord, ſhevv of holines, &c. Vvhereas Antichriſt him ſelf ſhal openly attempt and atchieue the foreſaid deſolation, and Satan novv ſeruing his turne by Heretikes vnderhand, ſhal tovvard the laſt end vtter, reueale, & bring him forth openly▪ and that is here, to be reuealed, that is, to appeare in his ovvne perſon.
                  Theſe other vvordes, Only that he vvhich novv holdeth, hold: Some expound of the Emperour, during vvhoſe continuance in his ſtate, God ſhal not permit Antichriſt to come, meaning that the very Empire ſhal be vvholy deſolate, deſtroied, and taken avvay before or by his comming: vvhich is more then a defection from the ſame, vvhereof vvas ſpoken before: for there ſhal be a reuolt from the Church alſo, but it ſhal not be vtterly deſtroied. Others ſay, that it is an admonition to al faithful, to hold faſt their faith and not to be beguiled by ſuch as vnder the name of Chriſt or Scriptures ſeeke to deceiue them, til they that novv pretend religion and the Goſpel, end in a plaine breach, reuolt, and open apoſtaſie by the appearance of Antichriſt, vvhom al Heretikes ſerue in myſterie, that is, couertly and in the Diuels meaning, though the vvorld ſeeth it not, nor them ſelues at the beginning thought it, as novv euery day more & more al men perceiue they tend to plaine Atheiſme and Antichriſtianiſme.
                  
                      
                     9. In al povver.]
                     What kinde of men ſhal folow Antichriſt. Satan vvhoſe povver to him is abridged by Chriſt, ſhal then 
                        •
                     e let looſe, and ſhal aſſiſt Antichriſt in al maner of ſignes, vvonders, and falſe miracles, vvhereby many ſhal be ſeduced, not only Ievves: But al ſuch as be deceiued and caried avvay by vulgar ſpeache only, of Heretikes that can vvorke no miracles, much more ſhal folovv this man of ſinne doing ſo great vvonders. And ſuch both novv do ſolovv Heretikes, and then ſhal receiue Antichriſt, that deſerue ſo to be forſaken of God, by their forſaking of the vnitie and happie fellovvſhip of Saincts in the Catholike Church, vvhere onely is the Charitie of truth, as the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh.
                  
                     15. Traditions.] Not onely the things vvritten and ſet dovvne in the holy Scriptures, but al other truthes and pointes of religion vttered by vvord of mouth and deliuered or giuen by the ApoſtlesSee S. D
                           •
                        ny
                           •
                         Arcopag. Ec. Hier. c. 1. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      to their ſcholers by tradition, be ſo here approued and els vvhere in the Scripture it ſelf, that the Heretikes purpoſely guilfully,Heretical trā
                        ſlation. and of il cōſcience (that belike reprehendeth them) refraine in their tranſlations, from the Eccleſiaſtical and moſt vſual vvord, Tradition, euer-more vvhen it is taken in good part, though it expreſſe moſt exactly the ſignification of the Greeke vvord: but vvhen it ſoundeth in their fond phantaſie againſt the traditions of the Church (as in deede in true ſenſe it neuer doth) there they vſe it moſt gladly.Traditions vnvvritten. Here therfore and
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 11 2. Theſ. 3. in the like places, that the reader might not ſo eaſily like of Traditions vnvvritten, here commended by the Apoſtle, they tranſlate it, Inſtructions, Conſtitutions, Ordinances, and vvhat they can inuent els, to hide the truth from the ſimple or vnvvarie Reader, vvhoſe tranſlations haue no other end but to beguile ſuch by art and conueiance.
                  But S. Chryſoſtom (ho. 4 in 1 Theſ 2.)
                     Their authoritie & eſtimation, & examples of ſome peculiar traditions out of the fathers. and the other greeke ſcholies or commentaries ſay herevpon, both vvritten and vnvvritten precepts the Apoſtles gaue by tradition, and both be vvorthy of obſeruation. S. Baſil (De Sp. Sancto c. 29 in principio.) thus, I account it Apoſtolike to continevv famely euen in vnvvritten traditions. and to proue this, he alleageth this place of S. Paul. In the ſame booke c. 17 he ſaieth, If vve once go about to reiect vnvvritten cuſtoms as things of no importance, vve ſhal, are vve be avvare, doe damage to the principal partes of the faith, and bring the preaching of the Goſpel to a naked name. And for example of theſe neceſſarie traditions,S. Chryſoſtom he nameth the ſigne of the Croſſe, praying tovvards the eaſt, the vvords ſpoken at the eleuatiō of ſheavving of the holy Euchariſt, vvith diuerſe cerimonies vſed before & after the conſecration, the halovving of the ſont, the bleſsing of the oile, the anointing of the baptized vvith the ſame,S. Baſil. the three immerſions into the font, the vvordes of abrenuntiatiō and exorciſmes of the partie that is to be baptiſed &c. Vvhat ſcripture (ſaith he) taught theſe and ſuch like? none truly, al comming of ſecret and ſilent tradition, vvherevvith our fathers thought it meete to couer ſuch myſteries.
                  
                  S. Hierom (Dialog. cont. Lucif. c. 4. et. ep. 28 ad Li
                           •
                        iniū.)
                     S. Hierom. reckeneth vp diuers the like traditiōs,S. Auguſtine. vvilling men to attribute to the Apoſtles ſuch cuſtoms as the Church hath receiued in diuers chriſtian countries. S. Auguſtine eſteemeth the Apoſtolike traditions ſo much, that he plainely affirmeth in ſundrie places, not onely the obſeruation of certaine feſtiuities, faſtes, ceremonies, & whatſoeuer other ſolemnities vſed in the Catholike Church, to be holy, profitable, and Apoſtolike, though they be notvvritten at al in the ſcriptures: but he often alſo vvriteth, that many of the articles of our religion and pointes of higheſt importance, are not ſo much to be proued by ſcriptures, as by tradition▪ namely auouching that in no vviſe vve could beleeue that children in their infancie ſhould be baptized, if it vvere not an Apoſtolical tradition. De Gen. ad lit. li. 10 c. 23. Tradition cauſed him to beleeue that the baptized of heretikes ſhould not be rebaptized, notvvithſtanding S. Cyprians authoritie and the manifold ſcriptures alleaged by him, though they ſeemed neuer ſo pregnant. De bap. li. 2. c. 7. By tradition onely, he and others condemned Heluidius the heretike for denying the perpetual virginitie of our Lady. And vvithout this, be the Scriptures neuer ſo plaine,S. Epiphanius. no Arian, no Macedonian, no Eutychian, no Pelagian, no Zuinglian vvil yeld. We muſt vſe tradition, (ſaith S. Epiphanius 
                        
                           •
                        har. 61 Apoſtolicorum.) For the Scripture hath not al things: and therfore the Apoſtles deliuered certaine things in vvriting, certaine by tradition. and for that he alleageth this place alſo of S. Paul. And againe haer. 55. Melchiſed There be boundes ſet dovvne for the foundation and building vp of our faith, the tradition of the Apoſtles, and holy Scriptures, and ſucceſsion of doctrine, ſo that truth is euery vvay 
                           •
                        inſed.
                  
                  S. Irenaeus (li. 3. c. 4.)
                     S. Irenaeus. hath one notable chapter, that in al queſtions vve muſt haue recourſe to the traditions of the Apoſtles: teaching vs vvithal, that the vvay to trie an Apoſtolical tradition and to bring it to the fountaine, is by the Apoſtolike ſucceſſion of Biſhops, but ſpecially of the Apoſtolike See of Rome: declaring in the ſame place that there be many barbarous people, ſimple for learning, but for conſtancie in their faith moſt vviſe,Tertullian. vvhich neuer had Scriptures, but learned onely by tradition. Tertullian. (li. de corona militis. nu. 
                           •
                        .) reckeneth vp a great number of Chriſtian obſeruations or cuſtoms (as S. Cyprian in many places doth in maner the ſame) vvhereof in fine he concludeth,S. Cyprian. 
                     Of ſuch and ſuch if thou require the rule of Scriptures, thou ſhalt finde none. Tradition ſhal be alleaged the author, cuſtom the confirmer, and faith the obſeruer.
                     Origen. Origen alſo of this matter vvriteth in plaine termes,
 that there be many thinges done in the Church (vvhich he there nameth) vvhereof there is no eaſier reaſon to be giuen then tradition from Chriſt and the Apoſtles. ho. 5. in Numer. S. Dionyſius Areopagita referreth the praying and oblation for the dead in the Liturgie or Maſſe, to an Apoſtolical tradition. in fine E
                           •
                        . Hierarch. c. 7. parte 3. So doth Tertullian De coron. militit. S. Auguſtine De 
                           •
                        ura pro mortuis c. 1. S. Chryſoſtom ho. 3. in ep. ad Philip. in Moral. S. Damaſcene S
                           •
                        r. de defunctis in initio.
                  
                  Vve might adde to al this,The Scriptures giuen vs by tradition, and the ſenſe thereof. that the Scriptures them ſelues, euen al the bookes and partes of the holy Bible, be giuen vs by tradition: els vve ſhould not nor could not take them (as they be in deede) for the infallible vvord of God, no more then the vvorkes of S. Ignatius, S. Clement, S. Denys, and the like. The true ſenſe alſo of the Scriptures (vvhich Catholikes haue & heretikes haue not) remaineth ſtil in the Church by tradition. The Crede is an Apoſtolike traditiō.The Creede an Apoſtolical tradition. 
                     Ruffin. in expo. Symb. in principio. Hiero. ep. 61. c. 9. Ambroſ. Ser. 38. Aug. de Symb. ad Catechum. li. 3. c. 1. And vvhat Scriptures haue they to proue that vve muſt accept nothing not expreſly vvritten in Scriptures? Vve haue to the contrarie, plaine Scriptures, al the fathers, moſt euident reaſons, that vve muſt either beleeue traditions or nothing at al. And they muſt be aſked vvhether, if they vvere aſſured that ſuch and ſuch things (vvhich be not expreſſed in Scriptures) vvere taught and deliuered by vvord of mouth from the Apoſtles,An inuincible argument for the credite of Traditions. they vvould beleeue them or no? If they ſay no, then they be impious that vvil not truſt the Apoſtles preaching: if they ſay they vvould, if they vvere aſſured that the Apoſtles taught it: then to proue vnto them this point, vve bring them ſuch as liued in the Apoſtles daies, and the teſtimonies of ſo many fathers before named neere to thoſe daies, and the vvhole Churches practiſe and aſſeueratiō deſcending dovvne from man to man to our time▪ vvhich is a ſufficient proofe (at leaſt for a matter of fact) in al reaſonable mens iudgement. ſpecially vvhen it is knovven that S. Ignatius the Apoſtles equal in time, vvrote a booke of the Apoſtles traditions, as Euſebius vvitneſſeth li. 3. Ec. hiſt. c. 30. And Tertullians booke of preſcriptiō againſt Heretikes, is to no other effect but to proue that the Church hath this vantage aboue Heretikes, that ſhe can proue her truth by plaine Apoſtolike tradition, as none of them can euer do.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He deſireth their praiers, 4 and inculcateth his precepts and traditions, namely of vvorking quietly for their ovvne liuing, commaunding to excommunicate the diſobedient.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR the reſt, brethren, pray for vs, that the vvord of God may haue courſe and be glorified,
                     
                        •
                      Here alſo 
                        〈◊〉
                      as is noted before 2 Theſs. 2. 15.) the aduerſaries in their tranſlatiōs auoid the vvord, Tradition, being plaine in the Greeke, leſt them ſelues might ſeeme to be noted as men vvalking inordinately, and not according to Apoſtolical Tradition, as al Schiſmatikes, Heretikes, and rebels to Gods Church doe. as alſo vvith you:Ep. 6, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and that vve may be deliuered from importunate and naughtie men.Col. 4, 3. for al men haue not faith. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But our Lord is faithful, vvho vvil confirme and keepe you from euil. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vve haue confidence of you in our Lord, that the things vvhich vve commaund, both you doe, and vvil doe. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And our Lord direct your hartes in the charitie of God, and patience of Chriſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vve denounce vnto you, brethren, in the name of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, that you vvithdravv your ſelues frō euery brother vvalking inordinarly, and not according to the

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   traditiō vvhich they haue receiued of vs. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For your ſelues knovv hovv you ought to imitate vs: for vve haue not been
 vnquiet among you:Act. 20. ✝ 
                     verse 8 * neither haue vve eaten bread of any man gratis,1. Cor. 4. but in labour & in toile night and day vvorking,
1. Th. 2. leſt vve ſhould burden any of you. ✝ 
                     verse 9 * Not as though vve had not authoritie:1. Cor. 9, 6. but that vve might giue our ſelues a paterne vnto you for to imitate vs. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For alſo vvhen vve vvere vvith you, this vve denounced to you, that if any vvil not vvorke, 
                     •
                   neither let him eate. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For vve haue heard of certaine amōg you that vvalke vnquietly, vvorking nothing, but curiouſly meddling. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And to them that be ſuch vve denounce, & beſeeche them in our Lord IESVS Chriſt, that vvorking vvith ſilence, they eate their ovvne bread.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 But you brethren * fainte not vvel-doing.Gal. 6, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And if any 
                     •
                   obey not our vvord, 
                     •
                   note him by an epiſtle: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and do not companie vvith him, that he may be confounded: and do not eſteeme him as an enemie, but admoniſh him as a brother. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the Lord of peace him ſelf giue you euerlaſting peace in euery place. Our Lord be vvith you al. ✝ 
                     verse 17 The ſaluation, vvith mine ovvne hand, Paules: vvhich is a ſigne in euery epiſtle. ſo I vvrite. ✝ 
                     verse 18 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith you al. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     10. Neither let them eate.] It is not a general precept or rule, that euery man ſhould liue by this handvvorke,The heretikes cauillation againſt Religious mē that vvorke not, anſvvered. as the Anabaptiſtes argue falſely againſt Gentlemen, and the Caluiniſtes applie it peruerſely againſt the vacant life of the Clergie, ſpecially of Monkes and other Religious men. But it is a natural admonitiō onely, giuen to ſuch as had not vvherevvith to liue of their ovvne, or any right or good cauſe vvhy to chalenge their finding of others, and to ſuch as vnder the colour of Chriſtian libertie did paſſe their time idly, curiouſly, vnprofitably, and ſcandalouſly, refuſing to do ſuch vvorkes as vvere agreable to their former calling and bringing vp. Such as theſe, vvere not tolerable, ſpecially there and then, vvhen the Apoſtle and others (that might lavvfully haue liued of the altar and their preaching) yet to diſburden their hearers, and for the better aduancement of the Goſpel,1 Cor. 9. vvrought for their liuing: * proteſting neuertheles continually, that they might haue done othervviſe, as vvel as S. Peter and the reſt did, vvho vvrought not, but vvere found othervviſe iuſtly and lavvfully, as al ſortes of the Clergie preaching or ſeruing the Church and the alter, be and ought to be,The ſpiritual trauailes of the Clergie.
                     See S. Cypr. ep. 66. by the lavv of God and nature. Vvhoſe ſpiritual labours far paſſe al bodily trauailes, where the dueties and functions of that vocation be done accordingly: as S. Auguſtine affirmeth of his ovvne extraordinarie paines incident to the Eccleſiaſtical affaires and regiment: in ſteede of vvhich, if the vſe of the Church and his infirmitie vvould haue permitted it,Religious mē working with their handes. he vviſheth he might haue laboured vvith his handes ſome houres of the day. as ſome of the Clergie did euer voluntarily occupie them ſelues in teaching, vvriting, grauing, painting, planting, ſovving, embrodering, or ſuch like ſeemely and innocent labours. See S. Hierom ep. 114 ſeu praef. in Iob. and in vit. Hilario.
                  
                  And Monkes for the moſt part in the primitiue Church (fevv of them being Prieſts, and many taken from ſeruile vvorkes and handicraftes, yea often times profeſſed of bondmen, made free by their maiſters to enter into religiō) vvere appointed by their Superiors to vvorke certaine houres of the day, to ſupply the lackes of their Monaſteries: as yet the
 Religious do (vvomen ſpecially) in many places, vvhich ſtandeth vvell vvith their profeſſion. And S. Auguſtine vvriteth a vvhole booke (de opera Monachorum to. 3.) againſt the errour of certaine diſordered Monkes that abuſed theſe vvordes, (Nolite eſſe ſoliciti, he not careful &c. and Reſpicite v
                           •
                        latilia cali, behold the foules of the aire &c.) to proue that they ſhould not labour at al, but pray only and commit their finding to God: not only ſo excuſing their idlenes, but preferring them ſelues in holines aboue other their fellowes that did worke,Monkes were ſhauen in the primitiue Church, and Nonnes clipped of their heare. and erroneouſly expounding the ſaid Scriptures for their defence: as they did other Scriptures, to proue they ſhould not be ſhauen after the maner of Monkes. Vvhich letting their heads to grow he much blameth alſo in them, See li. 2. Retract. c. 21. & 
                           •
                         op. Monach. c. 31. and S. Hieromes. ep. 48. c. 3. of Nonnes cutting their heare.
                  Vvhere by the vvay you ſee that the Religious vvere ſhauen euen in S. Auguſtines time, vvho reprocheth them for their heare, calling them Crinitos, Hearelings, as the Heretikes novv contrarievviſe deride them by the vvord Raſos, Shauelings. So that there is a great difference betvvene the auncient Fathers and the nevv Proteſtant. And as for hand labours, as S. Auguſtine in the booke alleaged, would not haue Religious folke to refuſe them, vvhere neceſsitie, bodily ſtrength, and the order of the Church or Monaſterie permit or require them:S. Auguſtines opinion concerning Religious mens working or not working. ſo he expreſly vvriteth, that al can not nor are not bound to vvorke, and that vvho ſo euer preacheth or miniſtreth the Sacraments to the people or ſerueth the altar (as al Religious men commonly now do) may chalenge their liuing of them vvhom they ſerue,li. de 
                           •
                        p Monach. c. 21. and are not bound to vvorke, * no nor ſuch neither as haue been brought vp before in ſtate of Gentlemen, and haue giuen avvay their lands or goods, and made them ſelues poore for Chriſtes ſake. Vvhich is to be noted, becauſe the Heretikes affirme the ſaid Scripture and S. Auguſtine to condemne al ſuch for idle perſons.
                  
                     14. Obey not.]
                     Eccleſiaſtical cenſures againſt the diſobedient. Our Paſtors muſt be obied, and not onely ſecular Princes, and ſuch as vvill not be obedient to their ſpiritual gouernours, the Apoſtle (as S. Auguſtine ſaith) giueth order and commaundement that they be corrected by correption or admonition, By degradation, excommunication, and other lavvful kindes of puniſhments. Cont. Donatiſt. poſt collat. c. 4. 20. Read alſo this holy fathers anſwer to ſuch as ſaid, Let our Prelates commaund vs onely vvhat vve ought to do, and pray for vs that vve may do it: but let them not correct vs. Vvhere he proueth that Prelates muſt not onely commaund and pray, but puniſh alſo if that be not done vvhich is commaunded. Li. de correp. & grat. c. 3.
                  
                  
                     14. Note him.]
                     Not to communicate with excōmunicate perſons but in certaine caſes. Diſobedient perſon to be excommunicated, and the excommunicated to be ſeparated from the companie of other Chriſtians, and the faithful not to keepe any companie or haue conuerſation vvith excommunicated perſon, neither to be partaker vvith them in the fault for vvhich they are excommunicated, nor in any other act of religion or office of life, except caſes or mere neceſsitie and other preſcribed and permitted by the law: al this is here inſinuated, and that al the Churches cenſures be grounded in Scriptures and the examples of the Apoſtles.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
            
               AFTER the Epiſtles to the Churches, novv folovv his Epiſtles to particular perſon, as to Timothee, to Titus, vvho vvere Biſhops: and to Philémon.
            Of Timothee vve reade Act. 16. hovv S. Paul in his viſitation tooke him in his traine at Lyſtra, circumciding him before, becauſe of the Ievves. he vvas then a Diſciple, that is to ſay, a Chriſtian man. Aftervvard the Apoſtle gaue him holy Orders, and conſecrated him Biſhop, as he teſtifieth in both theſe Epiſtles vnto him. 1. Tim. 4. v. 14. and 2. Tim. 1. v. 6.
            He vvriteth therfore vnto him as to a Biſhop, and him ſelf expreſſeth the ſcope of his firſt Epiſtle,1 Timoth. 3. ſaying: Theſe things I vvrite to thee, that thou maieſt knovv hovv thou oughteſt to conuerſe in the Houſe of God, vvhich is the Church. And ſo he inſtructeth him (and in him, al Biſhops) hovv to gouerne both himſelf, & others. and touching himſelf, to be an example & a ſpectacle to al ſortes, in al vertue, as touching others, to prohibit al ſuch as goe about to preach othervviſe then the Catholike Church hath receiued, and to inculcate to the people the Catholike faith: to preach vnto yong and old, men and vvomen: to ſeruants, to the riche, to euery ſort conueniently. Vvith vvhat circumſpection to giue orders, & to vvhat perſons: for vvhom to pray: vvhom to admit to the vovv of vvidovvhod &c.
            This Epiſtle vvas vvritten, as it ſeemeth, after his firſt empriſonmēt in Rome, vvhen he vvas diſmiſſed and ſet at libertie and therevpon it is, that he might ſay here,1 Timoth. 3. 
               I hope to come to thee quickly. to vvit vnto Epheſus, vvhere1 Tim. 1. Act. 20. v. 25. 38. he had deſired him to remaine. although in his voiage to Hieruſalem, before his being at Rome, he ſaid at Milétum to the Clergie of Epheſus, vpō probable feare: And now behold I knovv, that you ſhal no more ſee my 
                     •
                  ace.
            
            Vvhere it vvas vvritten, it is vncertaine: though it be commonly ſaid, at Laodicia.Col. 2. v. 1. Vvhich ſeemeth not, becauſe it is like he vvas neuer there, as may be gathered by the Epiſtle to the Coloſsians, vvritten at Rome in his laſt trouble, vvhen he vvas put to death.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He recommendeth vnto him, to inhibite certaine Ievves vvho iangled of the Lavv as though it vvere contrarie to his preaching. 11 Againſt vvhom he auoucheth his miniſterie, though he acknovvledge his vnvvorthines.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt according to the commaundement of God our ſauiour, and of Chriſt IESVS our hope: ✝ 
                     verse 2 to Timothee his beloued ſonne in the faith. Grace, mercie, and peace from God the father, and from Chriſt IESVS our Lord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 As I deſired thee to remaine at Epheſus vvhen I vvent into Macedonia, that thou ſhouldeſt denounce to certaine ″ not to teache othervviſe, ✝ 
                     verse 4 nor to attend ″ to fables and genealogies hauing no ende: vvhich miniſter ″ queſtions rather then the edifying of God vvhich is in faith. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But ″ the ende of the precept is charitie from a pure hart, andS. Auguſtine ſaith, He that liſt to haue the hope of heauē let him looke that he haue a good cōſciēce. to haue a good conſcience, let him beleeue & vvorke vvel▪for that he beleueth ſhe hath of faith: that he vvorketh, he hath of charitie. Praefat. in Pſa. 31.
                   a good conſcience, and a faith not feined. ✝ 
                     verse 6 From the vvhich things certaine ſtraying, are turned into
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . vaine talke, ✝ 
                     verse 7 ″ deſirous to be doctors of the Lavv, not vnderſtanding neither vvhat things they ſpeake, nor of vvhat they affirme. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But vve know that * the Lavv is good,Ro. 7, 13▪
                   if a man vſe it lavvfully: ✝ 
                     verse 9 knovving this that ″ the Lavv is not made to the iuſt man, but to the vniuſt, and diſobedient, to the impious and ſinners, to the vvicked and contaminate, to killers of fathers and killers of mothers, to murderers, ✝ 
                     verse 10 to fornicatours, to lyers vvith mā
                  kinde, to man-ſtealers, to liers, to periured perſons, and vvhat other thing ſoeuer is contrarie to ſound doctrine, ✝ 
                     verse 11 vvhich 
 is according to the Goſpel of the glorie of the bleſſed God, vvhich is committed to me.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 I giue him thankes vvhich hath ſtrengthened me, Chriſt IESVS our Lord, becauſe he hath eſteemed me faithful, putting me in the miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 vvho before vvas blaſphemous and a perſecutor & contumelious. but I obteined the mercie of God, becauſe I did it being ignorant in incredulitie. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the grace of our Lord ouer-abounded vvith faith and loue, vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 15 A faithful ſaying, & vvorthie of al acceptatiō,Mt. 9, 13. that Chriſt IESVS came into this vvorld * to ſaue ſinners,Mr. 2, 17. of vvhom I am the cheefe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But therfore haue I obtained mercie: that in me firſt of al Chriſt IESVS might ſhevv al patience,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   to the information of them that ſhal beleeue on him vnto life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And to the king of the vvorldes, immortal, inuiſible, onely God, honour & glorie for euer and euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 This precept I commend to thee ô Timothee: according to the prophecies going before
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪
                   on thee, that thou warre in them a good vvarfare, ✝ 
                     verse 19 hauing faith and a good conſcience,
Euil life and no good conſcience is often the cauſe that men fall to Hereſie from the faith of the Catholike Church. Againe, this plainely reproueth the heretikes falſe doctrine, ſaying, that no man can fall from the faith that he once truely had. vvhich certaine repelling, haue made ſhipvvracke about the faith. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Of vvhom is Hymenaeus & Alexander: vvhom I haue ″ deliuered to Satan, that they may learne not to blaſpheme.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     3. Not to teach othervviſe.]
                     Teaching othervviſe then the doctrine receiued, is a ſpecial marke of Heretikes. The proper marke of Heretikes & falſe preachers, is, to teach othervviſe or contrarie to that vvhich they found taught and beleeued generally in the vnitie of the Catholike Church before their time: al doctrine that is odde, ſingular, new, differing from that vvhich vvas f
                        •
                     rſt planted by the Apoſtles, and deſcēded downe from them to al nations and ages folowing vvithout contradiction, being aſſuredly erroneous.

                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                      The Greeke vvord vvhich the Apoſtle here vſeth, expreſſeth this point ſo effectually, that in one compound terme he giueth vs to vvit, that an Heretike is nothing els but an after-teacher, or teacher-otherwiſe. vvhich euen it ſelf alone is the eaſieſt rule euen for the ſimple to diſcerne a falſe Prophet or preacher by, ſpecially vvhen an hereſie firſt beginneth.Luthers teaching othervviſe. Luther found al Nations Chriſtian at reſt and peace in one vniforme faith, and al preachers of one voice and doctrine touching the B. Sacrament and other Articles: ſo that vvhat ſo euer he taught againſt that vvhich he found preached and beleeued, muſt needes be an other doctrine, a later doctrine, an after-teaching or teaching -othervviſe, and therfore conſequently muſt needes be falſe. And by this admonitiō of S. Paul, al Biſhops are vvarned to take heede of ſuch, and ſpecially to prouide that no ſuch odde teachers ariſe in their dioceſes.
                  
                     4. To fables.] He ſpeaketh ſpecially of the Iewes after-doctrines and humane conſtitutions repugnant to the lawes of God, vvhereof Chriſt giueth warning Mt. 23 and in other places, vvhich are conteined in their Cabala and Talmud:Al heretical doctrine is fables. generally of al heretical doctrines, vvhich in deede, how ſo euer the ſimple people be beguiled by thē, are nothing but fabulous inuentions, as vve may ſee in the Valentinians, Manichees, and o
                        •
                     hers of old: by the brethren of loue, Puritans, Anabaptiſtes, and Caluiniſtes of our time. For
 which cauſe Theodorete entitleth his booke againſt Heretikes, Hereticarum fabularum, Of Heretical fables.
                  
                  
                     4. Queſtions.]
                     Curious queſtioning in religion. Let our louing brethren conſider vvhether theſe contentious and curious queſtionings and diſputes in religion, vvhich theſe vnhappie hereſies haue in gendered, haue brought forth any increaſe of good life, any deuotion, or edification of faith and religion in our daies▪ and then ſhal they eaſily iudge of the truth of theſe new opinions, and the end that wil folovv of theſe innouations. In truth al the world now ſeeth they edifie to Atheiſme and no othervviſe.
                  
                     5. The end Charitie.] Here againe it appeareth, that Charitie is the cheeſe of al vertues, and the end,Charitie the very formal cauſe of our iuſtification. conſummation, and perfection of al the law and precepts▪ and yet the Aduerſaries are ſo fond as to preferre faith before it, yea to exclude it from our iuſtification. Such obſtinacie there is in them that haue once in pride & ſtubbernes forſaken the euident truth. Charitie doubtles which is here commended, is iuſtice it ſelf, and the very formal cauſe of our iuſtification, as the vvorkes proceding thereof, be the vvorkes of iuſtice. Charitas incheata (ſaith S. Auguſtine) inchoata iuſtitia: Charitas prouecta, prouecta iuſtitia: Charitas magna, magna iuſtitia: Charitas perfecta, perfecta iuſtitia eſt. Charitie novv beginning, is iuſtice beginning: Charitie grovven or increaſed, is iuſtice grovven or increaſed: great Charitis, is great iuſtice: perfect Charitie, is perfect iuſtice. Li. de nat. & grat. c. 70.
                  
                  
                     7. Deſirous to be Doctors.] It is the proper vice both of Iudaical and of Heretical falſe teachers,Heretikes great boaſters, but vnlearned. to profeſſe knowledge and great ſkill in the Lavv and Scriptures, being in deede in the ſight of the learned moſt ignorant of the vvord of God, not knowing the very principles of diuinitie, euen to the admiration truely of the learned that reade their bookes or heare them preach.
                  
                     9. The lavv not made to the iuſt.] By this place and the like, the Libertines of our daies vvould diſcharge them ſelues (vvhom they count iuſt) from the obedience of lawes.Libertines alleage ſcripture. But the Apoſtles meaning is that the iuſt man doth vvel, not as compelled by lavv or for feare of puniſhment due to the tranſgreſſors thereof, but of grace & mere loue tovvard God & al goodnes, moſt vvillingly, though there were no law to commaund him.
                  21. Deliuered to Satan.]Excommunication of Heretikes, and the effect thereof. 
                     Hymenaeus and Alexander are here excōmunicated for falling from their faith & teaching hereſie: an example vnto Biſhops to vſe their ſpiritual power vpon ſuch. In the primitiue Church, corporal affliction through the miniſterie of Satan vvas ioyned to excommunication. Vvhere we ſee alſo the diuels readines to inuade them that are caſt out by excommunication, from the fellowſhip of the faithful, and the ſupereminent povver of Biſhops in that caſe. Vvhereof S. Hierom (ep. 1. ad Heliod. c. 7) hath theſe memorable vvordes: God forbid (ſaith he) I ſhould ſpeake ſiniſtreuſly of them, vvho ſucceding the Apoſtles in degree, make Chriſtes body vvith their holy mouth, by vvhom vve are made Chriſtians: vvho hauing the k
                        ••
                     is of heauen,The Prieſts high authoritie of Excommunication. do after a ſort iudge before the day of iudgement: vvho in ſ
                        •
                     brietie and Chaſtitie haue the keeping of the ſpouſe of Chriſt. And a litle after, They may deliuer me vp to Satan, to the deſtruction of my fleſh, that the ſpirit may be ſaued in the day of our Lord Ieſus. And in the old Lavv vvhoſoeuer vvas diſobedient to the Prieſts, was either caſt out of the campe and ſo ſtoned of the people, or laying dovvne his necke to the ſvvord, expiated his offenſe by his bloud: but novv the diſobedient is cut of vvith the ſpiritual ſvvord,The terrible effect thereof. or being caſt out of the Church, is torne by the furious mouth of Diuels. So ſaith he. Vvhich vvordes vvould God euery Chriſtiā man vvould vveigh.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  By his Apoſtolike authoritie he appointeth publike praiers to be made for al mē vvithout exception. 8 alſo men to pray in at places: 9 and vvomen alſo in ſemely attire, 11 to learne of men, and not to be teachers in any vviſe, but to ſeeke ſaluation by that vvhich to them belongeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Deſire therfore firſt of al things that ″ obſecrations, praiers, poſtulations, thankesgeuings be made for al men, ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  Euen for heathen kings & Emperours by vvhom the Church ſuffereth perſecution: much more for al faithful Princes & powers and people both ſpiritual and temporal, for vvhom as members of Chriſtes body, and therfore ioyning in praier & oblation vvith the miniſters of the Church, the Prieſtes more properly and particularly offer the holy Sacrifice. See S. Auguſtine de orig. anima li. 1. c. p.
                   for kings and al that are in preeminence: that vve may leade a quiet and a peaceable life in al pietie and chaſtitie. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For this is good and acceptable before our Sauiour God,
 ✝ 
                     verse 4 ″ vvho vvill al men to be ſaued, and to come to the knovvledge of the truth, ✝ 
                     verse 5 For there is one God. ″ one alſo mediatour of God and men, man Chriſt IESVS: ✝ 
                     verse 6 vvho gaue him ſelf a redemption for al, vvhoſe teſtimonie in due times is cō
                  firmed.2. Tim. 1, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 7 * vvherein I am appointed a preacher & an Apoſtle (I ſay the truth, I lie not) doctor of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 I vvil therfore that men pray in euery place: lifting vp pure handes, vvithout anger and altercation. ✝ 
                     verse 9 In like maner
* vvomen alſo in comely attire:1. Pet. 3, 3. vvith demureneſſe and ſobrietie adorning them ſelues, not in plaited heare, or gold, or pretious ſtones, or gorgeous apparel, ✝ 
                     verse 10 but that vvhich becōmeth vvomen profeſſing pietie by good vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Let a vvoman learne in ſilence,1. Cor. 14, 34. vvith al ſubiection. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But * to teach ″ I permit not vnto a vvoman, not to haue dominion ouer the man:Gen. 1, 27. 3, 6. but to be in ſilēce. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For * Adam vvas formed firſt: then Eue. ✝ 
                     verse 14 and Adam vvas not ſeduced: but the vvoman being ſeduced, vvas in preuarication. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Yet ſhe ſhal be ſaued by generation of children: ifſhe they' continue in faith & loue and ſanctification vvith ſobrietie.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. Obſecrations.]
                     The praiers & petitions in the Maſſe, deduced out of the Apoſtles vvordes by S. Auguſtine, & other fathers. This order of the Apoſtle S. Auguſtine (ep. 59) findeth to be fulfilled ſpecially in the holy celebration of the Maſſe, vvhich hath al theſe kindes, expreſſed here in foure diuers vvordes pertaining to foure ſortes of praiers▪ the difference vvhereof he exactly ſeeketh out of the proper ſignification and difference of the Greeke vvordes. And he teacheth vs that the firſt kind of praiers vvhich here be called,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     obſecrations, are thoſe that the Prieſt ſaith before the conſecration: that the ſecond called, Praiers, be al thoſe vvhich are ſaid in and after the Conſecration, & about the Receiuing,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . including ſpecially the Pater noſter, vvherewith the vvhole Church (ſaith he) in maner endeth that part, as S. Hierom alſo affirmeth, that Chriſt taught his Apoſtles to vſe the Pater noſter in the Maſſe. Sic docuit, &c. So taught he hit Apoſtles, that daily in the Sacrifice of his body the faithful ſhould be bold to ſay, Pater noſter &c. Li. 3 cont. Pelag. cap. 5.
                     PATER NOSTER in the Maſſe. where he alludeth to the very vvordes novv vſed in the preface to the ſaid Pater noſter in the ſaid Sacrifice, audemus dicere, Pater noſter.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The third ſort called here in the text, Poſtulatiōs, be thoſe vvhich are vſed after the Cō
                     munion,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . as it vver for dimiſſing of the people vvith benediction, that is, vvith the Biſhops or Prieſts bleſſing. Finally the laſt kinde, vvhich is Thankes-giuings, concludeth al,Theoph. in hunc loc. vvhen the Prieſt and people giue thankes to God for ſo greate a myſterie then offered and receiued. Thus the ſaid holy father handleth this text ep. 59 to Paulinus.
                  S. Epiphanius alſo inſinuateth theſe vvordes of the Apoſtle to pertaine to the Liturgie or Maſſe, vvhen he thus vvriteth to Iohn Biſhop of Hieruſalem. Vvhen vve accompliſh our praiers after the rite of the holy Myſteries,
                     Praier in the Maſſe for kings and other. 
                     vve pray both for al others, and for thee alſo. 
                     
                        •
                     p. 60 c. 2 ad Io. Hieroſolym. apud Hieronymum. And moſt of the other fathers expoūd the foreſaid vvordes, of publike praiers made by the Prieſt, vvhich are ſaid in al Liturgies or Maſſes both Greeke and Latin, for the good eſtate of al that be in high degnitie, as kings and others. See S. Chryſ. ho. 6. in 1 Tim. & S. Ambr. in hunc lo
                           •
                         Proſper de vocat. li. 1. c. 4. So exactly doth the practiſe of the Church agree vvith the Precepts of the Apoſtle and the Scriptures, and ſo profoūdly do the holy fathers ſeeke out the proper ſenſe of the Scriptures, vvhich our Proteſtants do ſo prophanely, popularely, and lightly ſkimme ouer, that they can neither ſee nor endure the truth.
                  
                      
                     4▪ Vvho vvil al men] The periſhing or damnation of men muſt not be imputed to God, vvho delighteth not in any mans perdition, but hath prouided a general medicine & redemption to ſaue al from periſhing that vvil accept it,God vvil no mans perditiō but the ſaluation of al. or that haue it applied vnto them by his Sacraments and other meanes by him ordained, and ſo vvould haue al ſaued by his conditional vvil and ordinance: that is, if men vvil them ſelues, by accepting, doing, or hauing done vnto them al things requiſite by Gods lavv. for God vſeth not his abſolute vvil or povver tovvardes al
                        •••
                      this caſe. But he that liſt ſee the manifold ſenſes (al good and true) that theſe vvordes may beare, let him ſee S. Auguſtine, Ad articul. ſibi falſe impoſ. reſp. 
                           •
                        . to. 7. E
                           •
                        ch. c. 103. Ep. 107. De cor. & grat. c. 15. and S. 
                           〈◊〉
                         li. 2. de orthod. fide 
                           •
                        . 29.
                  
                  
                     5 One mediator.] The Proteſtants are to peuiſh and pitifully blind, that charge the Catholike Church & Catholikes, vvith making moe Mediators then one, vvhich is Chriſt our Sauiour, in that they deſire the Saincts to pray for them, or to be their patrones and interceſſors before God. Vve tel them therfore that they vnderſtand not vvhat it is to be a Mediator, in this ſenſe that S. Paul taketh the vvord,Hovv there is but one Mediator, Chriſt: and vvhat it is to be ſuch a Mediator. and in vvhich it is properly and onely attributed to Chriſt. For, to be thus a Mediator, is,Aug. li. 9. de Ciu. cap. 15. De fid. ad Pet. c. 2. by nature to be truely both God and man, to be that one eternal Prieſt and Redeemer, vvhich by his ſacrifice and death vpon the Croſſe hath reconciled vs to God, and paied his bloud as a full and ſufficient raunſom for al our ſinnes, him ſelf vvithout neede of any redemption, neuer ſubiect to poſſibilitie of ſinning: againe, to be the ſingular Aduocar and Patrone of mankind, that by him ſelf alone and by his ovvne merites procureth al grace & mercie to mankind in the ſight of his 
                        •
                     ather, none making any interceſſion for him, nor geuing any grace or force to his praiers, but he to al: none aſking or obtaining either grace in this life, or glorie in the next, but by him. In this ſort then (as S. Auguſtine truely ſaith, Cont. ep. Parm. li. 2. c. 8.) neither Peter nor Paul, no nor our B. Lady, nor any creature vvhatſoeuer, can be our Mediator. The aduerſaries thinke to baſely of Chriſtes mediation, if they imagine this to be his onely prerogatiue, to pray for vs, or that vve make the ſaincts our Mediators in that ſort as Chriſtis, vvhen vve deſire them to pray for vs. vvhich is ſo far inferior to the ſingular mediation of him, that no Catholike euer can or dare thinke or ſpeake ſo baſely vnto him, as to deſire him to pray for vs: but vve ſay,The different maner of praying to Chriſt, and to Saincts. 
                     Lord haue mercie vpō vs,
                     Kyrie eleiſon. 
                     Chriſt haue mercie vpon vs: & not, Chriſt pray for vs, as vve ſay to our Ladie and the reſt. Therfore to inuocate Saincts in that ſort as the Catholike Church doth, can not make them our Mediators as Chriſt is,Chriſte eleiſon. vvhom vve muſt not inuocate in that ſort. And as vvel make vve the faithful yet liuing, our Mediators (by the Aduerſaries arguments) vvhen vve deſire their praiers, as the departed Saincts.
                  But novv touching the vvord Mediator,
                     Hovv there be many mediators, as there be many ſauiours, and redeemers, euē in the Scriptures. though in that ſingular ſenſe proper to our Sauiour, it agreeth to no mere creature in heauen or earth, yet taken in more large and common ſort by the vſe of Scriptures, doctors, and vulgar ſpeach, not onely the Saincts, but good men liuing▪ that pray for vs and help vs in the vvay of ſaluation, may and are rightly called Mediators. As S. Cyril li. 22 Theſaur. c. 10 proueth, that Moyſes according to the Scriptures and Ieremie and the Apoſtles and others be Mediators. Read his ovvne wordes, for they plainely refute al the Aduerſaries cauillations in this caſe.Iud. 3, 9. And if the name of * fauiour and redeemer be in the Scriptures giuen to men,2 Eſd. 9, 27. Act. 7, 35. vvithout derogation to him that is in a more excellent and incomparable maner the onely Sauiour of the vvorld: vvhat can they ſay, vvhy there may not be many Mediators, in an inferior degree to the only and ſingular Mediator? S. Bernard ſaith, Opus eſt mediatore ad Mediatorem Chriſtum, nec alter nobis vtilior quam Maria. that is, We haue neede of a mediator to Chriſt the Mediator, and there is none more for our profite then our Ladie. Bernard. Ser. qui incipit, Signum magnum apparuit &c. poſt Ser. 5 de Aſſumpt. S. Baſil alſo in the ſame ſenſe, vvriting to Iulian the Apoſtata, deſireth the mediation of our Ladie, of the Apoſtles, Prophets, and Martyrs, for procuring of Gods mercie and remiſſion of his ſinnes. His vvordes are cited in Conc. Nic. 2. act. 4. pag. 110 & 111. Thus did and thus beleeued al the holy fathers, moſt agreably to the Scriptures, and thus muſt al the children of the Church do, be the Aduerſaries neuer ſo importunate and vvilfully blinde in theſe matters.
                  
                     12. I permit not.]
                     Women great talkers of Scripture, and promoters of hereſie. In times of licentiouſnes, libertie, and hereſie, vvomen are much giuen to reading, diſputing, chatting, and langling of the holy Scriptures, yea and to teach alſo if they might be permitted. but S. Paul vtterly forbideeth it, and theS. Chryſ. Ho. 9. in 1. Tim. Greeke Doctors vpon this place note that the vvoman taught but once, that vvas vvhen after her reaſoning vvith Satan, ſhe perſuaded her huſband to tranſgreſſion, and ſo ſhe vndid al mankind. And in the Eccleſiaſtical vvriters vve find that vvomen haue been great promoters of euery ſort of hereſie (vvhereof ſee a notable diſcourſe in S. Hierom ep. ad Ct
                           •
                        ſiph. cont. Pelag. c. 2.) vvhich they vvould not haue done, if they had according to the Apoſtles rule, folovved pietie and good vvorkes, and liued in ſilence and ſubiection to their huſbands.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Of vvhat qualitie they muſt be, vvhom he ordaineth Biſhops, 
                        •
                      and Deacons, 14 and the cauſe of his vvriting to be, the excellencie of the Catholike Church, and of Chriſt, vvho is the obiect of our religion.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  A Faithful ſaying. If a man deſire a Biſhops office, he deſireth ″ a good worke.Tit. 1, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 2 * It behoueth therfore ″ a Biſhop to be irreprehenſible, the huſband ″ of one vvife, ſobre, vviſe, comely, chaſt, a man of hoſpitalitie, a teacher, ✝ 
                     verse 3 not giuen to vvine, no fighter, but modeſt, no quareler, not couetous. ✝ 
                     verse 4 vvel ruling his ovvne houſe,
                     He ſaith, hauing children, not, getting children. S. Ambr. Ep. 82. hauing his children ſubiect vvith al chaſtitie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But if a man knovv not to rule his ovvne houſe: hovv ſhal he haue care of the Church of God? ✝ 
                     verse 6 ″ Not
                     Neophytus is he that vvas lately chriſtened or nevvely planted in the myſtical body of Chriſt.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   a neophyte: leſt puffed into pride, he fall into the iudgment of the Deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he muſt haue alſo good teſtimonie of them that are vvithout: that he fall not into reproch and the ſnare of the Deuil.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Deacons in like maner
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   chaſt, not double tonged, not giuen to much vvine, not folovvers of filthie lucre: ✝ 
                     verse 9 hauing the myſterie of faith in a pure cōſcience. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And let theſe alſo be proued firſt: & ſo let them miniſter, hauing no crime. ✝ 
                     verse 11 The vvomen in like maner chaſt, not detracting, ſober, faithful in al things. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Let deacons be the huſbandes of one vvife: vvhich rule vvel their children, & their houſes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For they that haue miniſtred vvel, ſhal purchaſe to them ſelues a good degree, and much confidence in the faith vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Theſe things I vvrite to thee, hoping that I ſhal come to thee quickly. ✝ 
                     verse 15 but if I tary long, that thou maieſt knovv how thou oughteſt to conuerſe ″ in the houſe of God, which is the CHVRCH of the liuing God, ″ the piller and ground of truth. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And manifeſtly it is a great ſacrament of pietie, vvhich vvas manifeſted in fleſh, vvas iuſtified in ſpirit, appeared to Angels, hath beene preached to gentils, is beleeued in the vvorld, is aſſumpted in glorie.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                      1. A good vvorke.]The great charge, & great merite, of Eccleſiaſtical functions. Nothing (ſaith S. Auguſtine) in this life, and ſpecially in this time, is eaſier, pleaſanter, or more acceptable to man, then the office of a Biſhop, Prieſt, or Deacon, if the thing be done onely for faſhion ſake and 
                        •••••
                     ringly but nothing before God more miſerable, more lamentable, more damnable. Againe, There is nothing in this life, and ſpecially at this time, harder, more laborious, or more dangerous, then the office of a Biſhop, Prieſt, or Deacon▪ but before God nothing more bleſſed, if they vvarre in ſuch ſort as our Captaine commaundeth. Auguſt. ep. 148.
                  
                  
                     2. A Biſhop.]
                     The Apoſtle vnder the name of Biſhop inſtructeth Prieſtes alſo. That vvhich is here ſpoken of a Biſhop (becauſe the vvordes Biſhop & Prieſt in the nevv Teſtament be often taken indifferently for both or either of the tvvaine, as is noted in an other place) the ſame is meant of euery Prieſt alſo: though the qualities here required, ought to be more ſingular in the Biſhop▪ then in the Prieſt, according to the difference of their degrees, dignities, and callings.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Of one vvife.] Certaine Biſhops of Vigilantius ſect (vvhether vpon falſe conſtruction of this text, or through the filthines of their fleſhly luſt) vvould take none to the Cleargie, except they vvould be maried firſt,The heretikes opinion cōcerning Prieſts mariage. 
                     not beleeuing (ſaith S. Hierom aduerſ. Vigilant. c. 1.) that any ſingle man liueth chaſtly, ſhevving hovv holily they liue them ſelues, that ſuſpect il of euery man, and vvil not giue the Sacrament (of Order) to the Cleargie, vnl
                           •
                        s they ſee their vviues haue great bellies, and children vvalling at their mothers breaſtes. Our Proteſtants though they be of Vigilantius ſect, yet they are ſcarſe come ſo farre, to commaund euery Prieſt to be maried. Neuertheles they miſlike them that vvill not marrie, ſo much the vvorſe, and they ſuſpect il of euery ſingle perſon in the Church, thinking the gift of chaſtitle to be very rare among them, & they do not onely make the ſtate of mariage equal to chaſt ſingle life, vvith the Heretike Iouinian, but they are bold to ſay ſometimes, that the Biſhop or Prieſt may do his duety and charge better maried,1 Cor. 7. then ſingle: expreſly againſt S. Paul, vvho affirmeth that the vnmaried thinke of the things that belong to God, and that the maried be diuerſely diſtracted and intangled vvith the vvorld.
                  The Apoſtle then, by this place vve novv treate of, neither commaūdeth, nor counſeleth,S. Paules place, of one vvife, excludeth bigamos from holy Orders. nor vviſheth, nor vvould haue Biſhops or Prieſts to marrie, or ſuch onely to be receiued as haue been maried: but, that ſuch an one as hath been married (ſo it vvere but once, and that to a virgin) may be made Biſhop or Prieſt. Which is no more then an inhibition that none hauing been tvviſe maried or being bigamus, ſhould be admitted to that holy Order. And this expoſition onely is agreable to the practiſe of the vvhole Church, the definition of aūcient Councels, the doctrine of al the fathers vvithout exception, and the Apoſtles tradition. Vvhich ſenſe S. Chryſoſtom vvholy folovveth vpon the Epiſtle to Titus (though here he folovv not vvholy the ſame ſenſe.) Ho. 2 in ep. ad Tit. S. Ambroſe alſo vpon this place, and moſt plainely and largely in his 82 Epiſtle poſt med. giuing the cauſe why bigamus can not be made Biſhop or Prieſt, in fine affirmeth, not onely the Apoſtle but the holy Councel of Nice to haue taken order that none ſhould be receiued into the Cleargie, that vvere tvviſe maried. S. Hierom Ep. 83. ad Oceanum c. 2. & ep. 
                           •
                        . c. 18. ep. 11. 
                           •
                        . 2 expreſly vvriteth that the Cleargie is made of ſuch as haue had but one vvife, at leaſt after Baptiſme: for he thought that if one vvere often maried vvhen he vvas yet no Chriſtian, he might notvvithſtanding be ordered Biſhop or Prieſt. But S. Ambroſe ep. 82. S. Auguſtine de bono Coniug. c. 18. S. Innocentius the firſt ep. 2. c. 5. 
                           •
                        . to. 1. Concil. S. Leo, ep. 87
                           •
                        
                     
                     li. 2▪ ep. 25. S. Gregorie, & after them the vvhole Church, exclude thoſe alſo vvhich haue been tvviſe maried vvhen ſo euer. vvhereof S. Auguſtine giueth goodly reaſon and example in the place alleaged. S. Leo ep. 87 addeth further, & proueth that the mā is coū
                     ted bigamus,Vvho are counted bigami.
                      & not the huſband of one vvife, in reſpect of holy Orders, not onely if he hath had tvvo vviues, but if his one vvife vvere not a virgin. vvhich being obſerued in the high Prieſts of the old lavv,Leuit. 21. muſt needes be much rather kept novv. See alſo the booke de Eccleſiaſticis dogmatibus c. 72, in S. Auguſtines vvorkes.
                  And by theſe fevv you may ſee hovv ſhamefully the ſtate of the new heretical Cleargie of our time is fallen from the Apoſtolike and al the fathers practiſe and doctrine herein.The Heretical clergie nothing regardeth the Apoſtles preſcription of one vvife. Vvho do not onely take men once or twiſe maried before, but (vvhich vvas neuer heard of before in any perſon or part of the Catholike Church) they marie after they be Biſhops or Prieſts, once, tvviſe, and as often as their luſtes require. Whereas it vvas neuer lawful in Gods Church to marrie after Holy Orders. Neither is there one authentical example thereof in the world.None euer maried after holy Orders. For thoſe of vvhom Nice Councel ſpeaketh, vvere maried before, & were but tolerated onely to vſe their wiues: the fathers in the ſame Councel prouiding expreſly at the ſame time,Socrat. li. 1 c. 8. that none from thence forth ſhould marrie after they came to holy Orders, and that according to the aūcient tradition of the Church, as Socrates and Sozomenus declare in moſt plaine vvordes.They that vvere made Prieſts of maried men, abſteined from their vviues. See Suidas in the vvord Paphnutius.
                     Sozom. li. 1 c. 
                           •
                        2. And in vvhat countrie ſo euer they haue been permitted to haue carnal dealing euen vvith their vviues whom they had before, it was not according to the exact rule of the Apoſtles & Churches tradition, by vvhich al that be in holy Orders, ſhould wholy abſtaine, not onely from marying, but euen from their wiues before maried. Vvhereof thus vvriteth S. Epiphanius
 
                     hareſ. 59 c
                           •
                        nt. Cathares.
                     
                        S. Epiphanius. 
                     The holy preaching of God receiueth not, after Chriſt, them that marrie againe after their vviues departure, by reaſon of the great dignitie and honour of Prieſthod. And this the holy Church of God obſerueth vvith al ſinceritie. Yea ſhe doth not receiue the once maried perſon that yet vſeth his vvife and begetteth children: but onely ſuch an one ſhe taketh to be Deacon,
                     Mariage of Prieſts is contrarie to the aūcient canōs. 
                     Prieſt, Biſhop, or Subdeacō, as abſtaineth from his one vvife, or is a vvidovver, ſpecially vvhere the holy canō
                        
                           •
                         be ſincerely kept. But thou vvilt ſay vnto me, that in certaine places Prieſts, Deacons, and Subdeacons do yet beget children (belike this holy father neuer heard of any Biſhop that did ſo, and therfore he leaueth out that order, vvhich he named vvith the other in the former part of the ſentence) but that is not done according to order and rule, but according to mans minde, vvhich by time ſlacketh, and for the great multitude (of Chriſtian people) vvhen there vvere not found ſufficient for the miniſterie, &c. the teſt of his vvordes be goodly for that purpoſe.Euſebius.
                  
                  Euſebius alſo Euang. demonſt. li. 1. c. 9▪
                      ſaith, that ſuch as be conſecrated to the holy miniſterie,S. Hierom. ſhould abſtaine vvholy from their vviues vvhich they had before. S. Hierom Apolog. ad Pammach. c. 8▪
                      proueth, that ſuch of the Apoſtles as were maried, did ſo, and that the Clergie ought to do the ſame by their example. Yea in his time he teſtifieth (Cont. Vigil. c. 1.) that they did liue ſingle in maner through the world, euē in the Eaſt Church alſo. What, ſaith he, ſhal the Churches of the Eaſt do, vvhat they of Aegypt, of the See Apoſtolike: vvhich take to the Clergie, either virgins, or the continent and vnmaried, or ſuch as if they haue vviues, ceaſe to be huſbands? And againe he ſaith in Apolog. ad Pāmach c. 3. (See alſo c. 8.) If maried men like not vvel of this, let them not be angrie vvith me, but vvith the holy Scriptures, vvith al Biſhops, Prieſts, Deacons, and the vvhole companie of Prieſts and Leuites,
                     S. Auguſtine. 
                     that knovv they can not offer ſacrifices if they vſe the act of mariage. S. Auguſtine de adult. Coniug. li. 2. c. 20. maketh it ſo plaine a matter that al Prieſts ſhould liue chaſt, that he writeth, that euen ſuch as vvere forced (as many vvere in the primitiue Church) to be of the Clergie,See S. Leo ep. 92. c. 
                           •
                        . vvere bound to liue chaſt, yea and did it vvith great ioy and felicitie, neuer complaining of theſe neceſsities and intolerable burdens, or impoſsibilities of liuing chaſt, as our fleſhly companie of new Miniſters and Superintendents do novv, that thinke it no life vvhithout vvomen. much like to S. Auguſtine before his conuerſion, vvhen he vvas yet a Manichee, vvho (as him ſelf reporteth Confeſſ. li. 6. c. 3) admiring in S. Ambroſe al other his incomparable excellencies,S. Ambroſe. yet counted al his felicities leſſe, becauſe he lacked a vvoman, vvithout vvhich he thought (in time of his infidelitie) no man could liue. But after his conuerſion thus he ſaid to God of S. Ambroſe: What hope he had, and againſt the tentations of his excellencie vvhat a 
                           •
                        ight he fel
                           •
                        , or rather vvhat a comfort and ſolace in tribulation, and his ſecrete mouth vvhich vvas vvithin in his hart, vvhat ſauourie and ſvveete ioyes it taſted of thy bread, neither could I coniecture, neither h
                           •
                        d I tried.
                  
                  See Tertullian li. 1 ad vxorem.
                     Tertullian. S. Cyprian de ſingul
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                      the firſt Councel of N
                        •
                     ce can. 3. Conc. Tolet. 2 can. 3. Conc. Aurelian. 3 can. 2. of Carthage the ſecond cap. 2. of Neocaeſarea cap. 1, of Ancyra cap. 10. and you ſhal find that this vvas generally the Churches order euen from the Apoſtles time,S. Cyprian. though in ſome places by the licentiouſnes of many,Councels. it vvas ſometime not ſo religiouſly looked vnto. Vvhereby you may eaſily refute the impudent clamors of Heretikes againſt Siricius, Gregorie 7, and others, vvhom they falſely make the authors of the Cleargies ſingle life.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Not a Neophyte.]None raſhly to be admitted to the Clergie▪
                      
                     That vvhich is ſpoken here properly and principally of the nevvly baptized (for ſo the vvord Neophyte doth ſignifie) the fathers extend alſo to al ſuch as be but nevvly 
                           •
                        etired from prophane occupations, ciuil gouernement, vvarfare, or ſecular ſtudies, of vvhom good trial muſt be taken before they ought to be preferred to the high dignitie of Biſhop or Prieſt. though for ſome ſpecial prerogatiue and excellencie, it hath in certaine perſons been othervviſe, as in S. Ambroſe and ſome other notable men. Tertullian (li. de praeſcript.) noteth Heretikes for their lightnes in admitting euery one vvithout diſcretion to the Cleargie.
                     Heretikes admit al ſortes vvithout exception. Their Orders (ſaith he) are raſh, light, incōſtant: novv they place Neophytes, then ſecular men, then our Apoſtataes, that they may tie them by glorie and preferment, Wh
                        •
                     m vvith the truth they can not. No vvhere may a man ſooner proſper and come forvvard, then in the cam
                        •
                     e of rebelles, vvhere to be onely, is to deſerue much▪ therfore or
                        •
                      to day a Biſhop, to morovv ſomevvhat els: to day a Deacon, to morovv Lector, that is, a Reader: to day 
                        •
                      Prieſt, to morovv a lay man▪ for to laie men alſo they enioyne the functions of Prieſtes. And S. Hierom ep. 83 ad Oceanum c. 4. ſaith of ſuch, Yeſterday a Ca
                        •
                     echumene or nevvly conuerted, to day a Biſhop: yeſterday in the theatre, to day in the Church: at night in the place of games and maiſteries, in the morning at the altar: a vvhile ago a great patrone of ſtageplaiers, novv a conſecrator of holy virgins. And in an other place, Out of the boſome of Plato and Ariſtophan
                        •
                     s they are choſen to a Biſhoprike, vvhoſe care is, not hovv to ſucke out the marovv of the Scriptures, but hovv to ſoothe the peoples cares vvith floriſhing declamations. Dialog. cont. Lucifer. c. 5.
                  
                  
                     8. Deacons.] Vnder the name of Deacons are here conteined Subdeacons, as before vnder the name of Biſhop,The three holy orders, only bound to chaſtitie. Prieſt alſo vvere comprehended▪
                     Leo ep. 92. c. 3. for to theſe foure pertaineth the Apoſtles precept and order touching one vviſe, and touching continēcie and chaſtitie, as by the alleaged Councels and fathers (namely by the vvordes of S. Epiphanius) doth appeare.Greg. li. 1, ep. 42. for they onely be in holy Orders, as ſeruing by their proper function about the Altar and the B. Sacrament: in reſpect
 vvhereof,The 4 inferiour orders not bound to chaſtitie. the law of chaſtitie pertaineth to them, and not to the foure inferior Orders of Acolyti, Exorciſta, Lectores, and O
                           •
                        tiarij. Vvho neither by precept nor vovv be bound to perpetual chaſtitie, as the others of the holy and high Orders be bound, both by precept and promis or ſolemne aſſent made vvhen they tooke Subdeaconſhip.
                  Al theſe degrees and orders to haue been euer ſince Chriſtes time in the Church of God,Al the ſeuen orders auncient, euē from Chriſt and the Apoſtles time. it might be proued by al antiquitie. but for as much as the Apoſtles purpoſe is not here to recken vp al the Eccleſiaſtical Hierarchie, it neede not be treated of in this place. But we vviſh the learned to reade the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9▪ chapters of the 4 Councel of Carthage, vvhereat S. Auguſtine vvas preſent: vvhere they ſhal ſee the expreſſe callings, offices, and maner of ordering or creating al the ſaid ſortes, and ſhal vvel perceiue theſe things to be moſt auncient and venerable. Let them read alſo Euſebius hiſtorie, the 35 Chapter of the 6 booke, vvhere for al theſe orders he reciteth Cornelius epiſtle to Fabius, concerning Nouatus. Likewiſe S. Cyprian in many places, namely ep. 55. nu. 1. where ſee the notes vpon the ſame. S. Hiero. ep. 2. c. 6. Of Subdeacon there is mention in S. Auguſtine. ep. 74 and ep. 20 de epiſtolis 22 in edit. Pariſ. S. Epiph. har
                           •
                         59. S. Cyprian ep. 24. S. Ignatius ep. 9▪
                      ad Antioch
                        •
                     nos, and in the 43 canon of the Apoſtles. Conc. Tolet. 2. can. 1 & 3. Conc. Laodicen. can. 21. Epiſt. Epiph. apud Hiero. 60. c. 1.
                  
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . In the houſe of God.]
                     S. Ambroſe calleth the B. of Rome Rector of the vvhole Church. 
                     Al the vvorld being Gods, yet the Church onely is his houſe, the Rector or Ruler vvhereof at this day. (ſaith S. Ambroſe vpon this place) is damaſus. where let our louing brethren note vvel, how cleere a caſe it vvas then, that the Pope of Rome vvas not the Gouernour onely of one particular See, but of Chriſtes vvhole houſe, vvhich is the Vniuerſal Church, vvhoſe Rector this day is Gregorie the thirtenth.
                  
                     15. The piller of truth.] This place pincheth al Heretikes vvonderfully, and ſo it euer did,The heretikes ſay directly cōtrarie to the Apoſtle, that the Church is not the piller of truth. and therfore they oppoſe them ſelues directly againſt the very letter and confeſſed ſenſe of the ſame, that is, cleane contrarie to the Apoſtle. ſome ſaying, the Church to be loſt or hidden: ſome, to be fallen avvay from Chriſt theſe many ages: ſome, to be driuen to a corner onely of the vvorld: ſome, that it is become a ſtewes and the ſeate of Antichriſt: laſtly the Proteſtants moſt plainely and directly, that it may and doth erre, and hath ſhamefully erred for many hundred yeres together. And they say herein like them ſelues, and for the credit of their ovvne doctrine, vvhich can not be true in very deede, except the Church erre, euen the Church of Chriſt, vvhich is here called the houſe of the liuing God.
                  But the Church vvhich is the houſe of God,That the Church is the piller of truth and can not erre, is proued by many reaſons. whoſe Rector (ſaith S. Ambroſe) in his time was Damaſus, and novv Gregorie the thirtenth, and in the Apoſtles time S. Peter, is the piller of truth,Io. 14, 16. the eſtabliſhement of al veritie: therfore it can not erre. It hath the Spirit of God to lead it into al truth till the vvorldes end:Mat. 16. therfore it can not erre. It is builded vpon a rocke,Mat. 28. hel gates ſhal not preuaile againſt it: therfore it can not erre. Chriſt is in it til the end of the vvorld,Eph. 4. he hath placed in it Apoſtles, Doctors, Paſtors, and Rulers,Io. 17. to the conſummation and ful perfection of the whole body, that in the meane time we be not caried about vvith euery blaſt of doctrine: therfore it can not erre.Luc. 22. He hath praied for it,Pſal. 2. that it be ſanctified in veritie, that the faith of the cheefe Gouernour therof faile not:Eph. 5. it is his houſe, his ſpouſe, his body, his lotte, kingdom and inheritance, giuen him in this vvorld: he loueth it as his ovvne fleſh, and it can not be diuorced or ſeparated from him: therfore it can not erre. the nevv Teſtament, Scriptures, Sacraments, and ſacrifice can not be changed, being the euerlaſting dourie of the Church, continued and neuer rightly occupied in any other Church but in this our Catholike Church: therfore it can not erre. And therfore al thoſe pointes of doctrine, faith, and vvorſhip, vvhich the Arians, Manichees, Proteſtants, Anabaptiſtes, other old or new Heretikes, vntruely thinke to be errors in the Church, be no errors in deede, but them ſelues moſt ſhamfully are deceiued, and ſo ſhal be ſtill, til they enter againe into this houſe of God, vvhich is the piller and ground of al truth: that is to ſay, not onely it ſelf free from al error in faith and religion, but the piller and ſtay to leane vnto in al doubtes of doctrine, and to ſtand vpon againſt al hereſies and errors that il times yeld, without vvhich there can be no certaintie nor ſecuritie. And therfore the holy Apoſtles,The meaning of this article, I beleeue the Cath. Church.
                      and Councels of Nice and Conſtantinople, made it an article of our Creeds, to beleeue the CATHOLIKE and APOSTOLIKE CHVRCH. Vvhich is, not onely to acknowledge that there is ſuch a Church, as heretikes falſely ſay: but that that which is called the Catholike Church, & knovven ſo to be, and cōmunicateth vvith the See Apoſtolike, is the Church: and that vve muſt beleeue, heare, and obey the ſame, as the touch ſtone, piller, and firmament of truth. For, al this is compriſed in that principle,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     I beleeue the Catholike Church. And therfore the Coūcel of Nice ſaid, I beleeue in the Church, that is, I beleeue and truſt the ſame in al things.
                  Neither can the Heretikes eſcape by fleing from the knovven viſible Church, to the hid congregation or companie of the Predeſtinate. For that is but a falſe phantaſtical
 apprehenſion of Vvicleffe and his folowers.It is the viſible Church that is the piller or truth and can not erre. The companie of the Predeſtinate maketh not any one Societie among them ſelues, many of them being yet vnborne, and many yet Infidels and heretikes, and therfore be not of the one houſe of God vvhich is here called, the piller of truth. And thoſe of the Predeſtinate that be already of the Church, make not a ſeueral companie from the knovven Catholike Church, but are baptized, houſeled, taught, they liue and die in the common Catholike viſible Church, or els they can neither receiue Sacraments, nor ſaluation. S. Paul inſtructeth not Timothee hovv to teach, preach, correct, and conuerſe in the inuiſible ſocietie of the Predeſtinate, but in the viſible houſe of God. So that it muſt needes be the viſible Church which can not erre.
                  If any make further queſtion,Vvhence the Church hath this priuilege neuer to erre. how it can be that any companie or ſocietie of men (as the Church is) can be void of error in faith, ſeing al men may erre: he muſt knovv that it is not by nature, but by priuilege of Chriſtes preſence, of the Holy Ghoſts aſsiſtance, of our Lordes promis and praier. See S. Auguſtine vpon theſe vvordes of the 118 Pſalme Cone. 13.
                     S. Auguſtine. 
                     Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis vſqucquaque. Vvhere he hath goodly ſpeaches of this matter. For the ſame purpoſe alſo theſe vvordes of Lactantius are very notable. It is the Catholike Church onely,
                     Lactantius. 
                     that keepeth the true vvorſhip of God, this is the fountaine of truth, this the houſe of faith, this the Temple of God: vvhither if any man enter not, or from vvhich if any man go out, he is an aliene and ſtranger from the hope of euerlaſting life and ſaluation. No man muſt by obſtinate contention flatter him ſelf,
                     S. Cyprian. 
                     for it ſtandeth vpon life and ſaluation. &c. S. Cyprian ſaith, The Church neuer departeth fr
                           •
                        m that vvhich ſhe once hath knovven. Ep. 55 ad Cornel. nu. 3. S. Ireneus ſaith, That the Apoſtles haue laid vp in the Church as in a rich treaſurie, al truth.
                     S. Irenaeus. And, that ſhe keepeth wiſh moſt ſincere diligence, the Apoſtles faith and preaching. li. 3 c. 4. & 40. & li. 1. c. 3. It vvere an infinite thing to recite al that the fathers ſay of this matter, al counting it a moſt pernicious abſurditie to affirme, that the Church of Chriſt may erre in religion.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He prophecieth that certaine ſhould depart from the Catholike faith, vvilling Timothee therfore to inculcate to the people thoſe articles of the ſaid faith. 7 Item to exerciſe him ſelf in ſpiritual exerciſe, 12 to gette authoritie by example of good life, 13 to ſtudie, to teach, to increaſe in the grace giuen him by holy orders.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the Spirit manifeſtly ſaith that in the laſt times certain 
                     •
                   ſhal depart from the faith attending to ſpirites of errour,2 Tim. 3▪
                   and doctrines of diuels,3 Pet. 3. ✝ 
                     verse 2 ſpeaking lies in hypocriſie,Iude v. 18. and hauing their conſcience ſeared, ✝ 
                     verse 3 
                  
                     •
                   forbidding to marie, to abſtaine from meates vvhich God created to receaue vvith thankes-giuing for the faithful, and them that haue knovven the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 ForWe ſee plainely by theſe vvordes ſuch abſtinence only to be diſalovved as condemneth the creatures of God to be naught by nature & creation. euery creature of God is good, and nothing to be reiected that is receiued 
                     •
                   vvith thankes-giuing. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For it is 
                     •
                   ſanctified by the vvord of God and praier.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 Theſe things propoſing to the brethren, thou ſhalt be a good miniſter of Chriſt IESVS, nouriſhed in the vvordes of the faith and the good doctrine vvhich thou haſt attained vnto. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But foliſh and old vviues fables auoid: and
 exerciſe thy ſelf to pietie.1. Tim. 1, 4. Tit. 3, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 8 ForSome (ſaith S. Chryſoſt.) expound this of faſting, but they are deceiued-for faſting is a ſpiritual exerciſe. See a goodly commentarie of theſe vvordes in S. Auguſt. li. de mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 33.
                   corporal exerciſe is profitable to litle: but pietie is profitable to al things: hauing promiſſe of the life that novv is, and of that to come. ✝ 
                     verse 9 A faithful ſaying and vvorthie of al acceptation. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For to this purpoſe vve labour and are reuiled, becauſe vve hope in the liuing God vvhich is the Sauiour of al men, eſpecially of the faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Commaund theſe things and teach.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Let no man contemne thy youth: but be an example of the faithful, in vvord, in conuerſation, in charitie, in faith, in chaſtitie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Til I come, attend vnto reading, exhortation, doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Neglect not ″ the grace that is in thee: vvhich is giuen thee by prophecie, vvith impoſition of the handes ″ of prieſthod. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Theſe things doe thou meditate, be in theſe things: that thy profiting may be manifeſt to al. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Attend to thy ſelf, and to doctrine: be earneſt in them. For, this doing, thou ſhalt ″ ſaue both thy ſelf and them that heare thee.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     1. Shal depart.]
                     Al Heretikes are apoſtataes from the faith. It is the proper deſcription of Heretikes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      to forſake their former faith, and to be Apoſtataes, as the Greeke vvord importeth: to giue care to particular ſpirites of error & deception, rather then to the Spirit of Chriſt in his Church, to folovv in hypocriſie and ſhevv of vertue the pernicious doctrine of Diuels, vvho are the ſuggeſters and prompters of al Sectes, and are lying ſpirites in the mouthes of al Heretikes and falſe preachers: men that haue put their conſcience to ſilence and made it ſenſes to the holy (hurches admonition:cap. 1. 19. the Apoſtle noting * once before alſo in this ſame Epiſtle, that Heretikes haue no conſcience, vvhich is the cauſe both of their fall and of their obduration in hereſie.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Forbidding to marrie.]
                     The old Hereſies againſt matrimonie. He ſpeaketh (ſaith S. Chryſoſtom) of the Manichees, Encratites, and Marcioniſtes. h
                           •
                        . 12 in 1 Tim. S. Ambroſe vpon this place, addeth to theſe the Patritians alſo. S. Irenaeus li. 1 c. 30. S. Epiphanius har. 45. 26. 61. 30. S. Hierom 1 cont. louin. c. 1. & ep. 50 c. 1 & 3. S. Auguſtine har. 25. 40. and generally al antiquitie affirme the ſame both of them, and alſo of the Heretikes called Apoſtolici, Ebionitae, and the like. Their hereſie about mariage vvas, that to marrie or to vſe the act of matrimonie, is of Satan, as S. Irenaeus vvitneſſeth li. 1 c. 22: and that the diſtinction of male and femal and the creation of man and vvoman for generation, came of an il God. They taught their hearers,Aug. har. 46. ſaith S. Auguſtine, that if they did vſe vvomen, they ſhould in any vviſe prouide that they might not conceiue or beare children, Clemens Alexandrinus (li. 3. Strom, in principie) vvriteth, that ſuch admit no mariage nor procreation of children, leſt they ſhould bring into the vvorld creatures to ſuffer miſerie and mortalitie. And this is the damnable opinion concerning mariage, noted here by the Apoſtle.
                  For the ſecond point conſiſting in the prohibition of meates or vſe of certaine creatures made to be eaten,The old Hereſies about abſtin
                           ••
                        e from meates. the ſaid Heretikes or diuers of them (for they vvere not al of one ſect touching theſe points) taught, that men might not eate certaine ſortes of meates, ſpecially of beaſtes and liuing creatures, for that they vvere not made (ſay they) of the good God, but of the euil. And vvine they called the gall of the Prince of darkenes, and not to be drunke at al, and the Vine vvhereof it came, to be of the Diuels creation. And diuers other creatures they cōdemned as things by nature and creation polluted and abominable. Auguſt. har. Manich. 46. & har. 25 Tatian. & toto libro de m
                           •
                        r. Manich. to. 1. Lo theſe vvere the Heretikes and their hereſies vvhich S. Paul here prophecieth of,The Catholikes impudently charged vvith the ſaid old hereſies. that forbid mariage and meates as you haue heard, for vvhich they and their folovvers vvere condemned in diuers Councels.
                  Is it not novv an intolerable impudencie of the Proteſtants, vvho for a ſmal ſimilitude of vvordes in the eares of the ſimple, apply this text to the faſtes of the Church, and the chaſtitie
 of Prieſts and Religious?Abſtinence from certaine meates is no condemnation of the meates. As though either by appointing or vſing ſome daies of abſtinence from certaine meates, the Church or any Catholike man condemned the ſaid meates, vnles the Rechabites Hierom. 35. or the Nazarites Num. 6. or the Niniuites Ion. 3. or Moyſes Exod. 34. or Elias 3 Reg. 19. or holy. Anna the vvidow Luc. 2 or Iohn Baptiſt Mat. 3 & 9. or Chriſt him. ſelf M
                           •
                        . 4. commending, vſing, and folovving a preſcript number of faſting daies, or God him ſelf that in the very beginning, in Paradiſe, preſcribed abſtinence from the fruite of one certaine tree, and after appointed ſo many faſtes in the Lavv, vnles he therfore, condēned his ovvne creatures, & the reſt, thoſe creatures from vvhich they abſtained.Diuers good cauſes of abſtinence. No, there be many good and lavvful cauſes to forbid ſome or to abſtaine frō ſome meates: as, for obedience, as in Paradiſe: for ſignificatiō, as the Ievves: for that they haue been offered to Idols, as in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians: for chaſtening the bodie and penance, for health alſo: and onely thoſe cauſes are vnlavvful for vvhich the Manichees and other Heretikes abſtained.
                  Concerning mariage likewiſe,Forbidding certaine perſons to marrie is no condemnation of matrimonie. they may as vvel charge God or the Church for forbidding the father to marrie the daughter, or the brother the ſiſter, or other prohibited perſons in the Lavv: as vvel might they charge Chriſt and the Apoſtle for prohibiting the man to marrie, during his vviues life: and appointing vvidowes that ſerue the Church, to liue vnmaried, and not admitting a maried woman as vvel as vvidovv, nor her that hath had moe huſbands, as vvel as her that hath beē maried but once: as they charge the Church for not admitting maried perſons to the altar,Catholikes eſteeme matrimonie more then the Proteſtants doe. and for forcing them & Religious perſons to keepe their promis of chaſtitie. No, the holy Church is ſo farre from condemning wedlocke, that ſhe honoureth it much more then the Proteſtants, accounting it an holy Sacrament, vvhich they do not, who onely vſe it to iuſt as the Heathen doe, and not to religion.
                  But it is an old deceitful practiſe of Heretikes to charge Catholike men vvith old condemned hereſies. The Eutychians ſlaundered the Councel of Chalcedon and S. Leo to be Neſtorians, and to make two perſons in Chriſt, becauſe they ſaid there vvere tvvo natures. Vigilius li. 5. cont. Eu
                           •
                        ychen. Arius charged Alexander his Biſhop of Sabellianiſme, for auouching the vnitie of ſubſtance in Trinitie. Socrat. li. 1. c. 3. Iulianus accuſed S. Auguſtine of the hereſie of Apollinaris. li. 5. con
                           •
                        . Iulian. c. 15. Other Pelagians chalenged him for condemning mariage.The Proteſtants obiectōs anſwered long ago by S. Hierom and S. Auguſtine. 
                     Retrait. li. 2. c. 53. And that our Proteſtants bragge not to much of their goodly inuention, louinian the old Heretike, their Maiſter in this point, accuſed
Aug. li. 2 c. 5 de nupt. & c
                           •
                        ncupiſe. the holy doctors and Catholikes vpon this ſame place, to be Manichees, and to condemne meates and mariage, as both S. Hierom and S. Auguſtine do teſtifie. And they both anſwer to the Heretike, that the Church in deede & Catholikes do abſtaine frō ſome for euer, and ſome for certaine daies, and euery Chriſtian man lightly al the 40 daies of Lent faſt: not for that they thinke the meates vncleane, abominable, or of an il creation, as the Manichees do: but for puniſhment of their bodies and taming their concupiſcences. Hiero. li. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 11. Aug. cont. Adimantum c. 14. Li. de mor. Cath. Eo. Hiero. in c. 4. ad Galat. And as for mariage, the ſaid doctors anſwer, that no Catholike man condemneth it for vnlavvful, as the old Heretikes did, but onely preferreth virginitie and continencie before it, as a ſtate in it ſelf more agreable to God and more meete for the Cleargie. See S. Auguſtine againſt Fauſtus the Manichee li. 30 c. 5. 6. and har. 25 in the name, Apoſtolici. S. Hierom ep. 50. c. 1. & 3. Al this the Catholikes continually tel the Aduerſaries, and they can not but ſee it. Yet by accuſtomed audacitie and impudencie they beare it out ſtill.
                  
                     4. With thankes giuing.] By the moſt aūcient cuſtom of the faithful both before Chriſt and ſithence,Bleſsing of the table or of meates, ſpecially by a Prieſt. men vſe to bleſſe their table and meates, by the hand and word of a Prieſt, if any be preſent, othervviſe by ſuch as can conueniently do it. And in huſbandmens houſes vvhere they haue no other meanes, they ſhould at leaſt bleſſe Gods giftes and them ſelues vvith a Pater noſter or the ſigne of the Croſſe: not onely to acknowledge from whom they haue their concinual ſuſtenauce, but alſo to bleſſe their meate and ſanctifie it. For the Greeke vvord vſed of S. Paul,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . by Eccleſiaſtical vſe, vvhē it cōcerneth meates, ſignifieth not onely thankes giuing, but bleſsing or ſanctifying the creatures to be receiued, as being al one vvith 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and in Engliſh vve call it grace, not onely that after meate, which is onely thankes to God, but that before meate, vvhich is alvvaies a benediction of the creatures, as it is plaine in the preſcript and vſual formes of grace. For vvhich cauſe a Prieſt ſhould euer do it rather then a lay man or any of inferior order in the Cleargie. In ſo much that S. Hierom (ep. 85) reprehendeth certaine Deacons vvhom he ſavv ſay grace or bleſſe the meate and the companie,To bleſſe is a preeminence of the better perſon. in the preſence of a Prieſt. Vvho alſo recordeth (in the life of S. Paul the holy Eremite) the great curteſie and humilitie of him and S. Antonie, yelding one to the other the preeminence of bleſsing their poore dinner. For to bleſſe is a great thing,Hebr. 7. and a Prieſtly prerogatiue, as the Apoſtle vvitneſſeth, declaring the preeminence of Melchiſe dec in that he bleſſed Abraham. Read the note folowing.
                  
                      
                     5. Sanctified.]
                     No creature il by nature, yea one more ſanctified then an other. Al creatures be of Gods creation, none of the Diuel, or of any other cauſe and beginning, as the Manichees blaſphemed: and therfore none are il, abominable, or vncleane by creation, nature, and condition, but al good and made for mans vſe, though al be not alike holy nor equally ſanctified. God made ſeuen daies, but he ſanctified onely one of them, he made al places, but he ſanctified none but the Temple and ſuch like deputed to his ſeruice, as the Arke, the altar, and the reſt vvhich vvere by ſacred vſe both holy them ſelues, and gaue alſo holines and ſanctification to things that touched them or vvere applied vnto them.Holy times and places, & euery thing deputed to the ſeruice of God, holy. So our Sauiour ſaith,Mat. 23. that the Temple ſanctified the gold, and the altar the gift, and generally al creatures ſecured from common and profane vſe, to religion and vvorſhip of God, are made ſacred thereby. So the places and daies of Gods apparition or vvorking ſome ſpecial vvonders or benefites tovvard the people, vvere holy, as Bethel,2 Pet. 1. Sinai, and others. And much more thoſe times and places of Chriſtes Natiuitie, Paſſion, burial, Reſurrection, Aſcenſion: vvhich is ſo plaine a caſe, that the h
                        •
                     l vvhere he vvas transfigured onely, is called therfore by S. Peter, the holy mount.
                  
                  Theſe therfore be holy memories and monuments of al ſortes ſanctified, beſides that creatures (as vve ſee here) be ſanctified alſo by the vvord of God and praier, that is to ſay, by benediction & inuocation of our Lordes holy name vpon them,Creatures hallovved by the ſigne of the Croſſe. ſpecially by the ſigne of the Croſſe, as S. Chryſoſtom noteth on this place, ho. 12 in 2 ad Tim. by the vvhich the aduerſarie povver of Satan vſurping vniuſtly vpon Gods creatures through mans ſinne, and ſeeking deceitfully in or by the ſame to annoy mans body or ſoule, is expelled, and the meates purged from him and made holeſom. S. Gregorie (li. 1 Dialog. c. 4.) recordeth that the Diuel entered into a certaine religious vvoman by eating the herbe letti
                        •
                     e vnbleſſed.The bleſſing of our meate vvhat a vertue it hath. And S. Auguſtine li. 18. de ciu. Dei 
                           •
                        . 18. ſhevveth at large, vvhat vvaies he hath by meates and drinkes and other vſual creatures of God, to annoy men: though is povver be much leſſe then it vvas before Chriſt but ſtill much deſire he hath on al ſides to moleſt the faithful by abuſing the things moſt neere and neceſſarie vnto them, to their hurt both bodily and Ghoſtly▪ for remedie vvhereof, this ſanctification vvhich the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                      is very ſoueraine, pertaining not onely to this common and more vulgar benediction of our meates and drinkes, but much more (as the proprietie of the Greeke vvord vſed by the Apoſtle for ſanctification, doth import) to other more exact ſanctifying and higher applying of ſome creatures, and bleſſing them to Chriſtes honour in the Church of God, and to mans ſpiritual and corporal benefites.
                  For as S. Auguſtine vvriteth li. 2 de pe
                           •
                        . merit. c. 26. beſides this vſual bleſſing of our daily foode, the Cathecumens (that is, ſuch as vvere taught tovvard Baptiſme) are ſanctified by the ſigne of the Croſſe,Holy bread. and the bread (ſaith he) vvhich they receiue, thought it be not the body of Chriſt, yet is holy, and more holy then the vſual bread of the table. He meaneth a kinde of bread then halovved, ſpecially for ſuch as vvere not yet admitted to the B. Sacrament: either the ſame, or the like to our holy bread, vſed in the Church of England and France on Sundaies. And it vvas a common vſe in the primitiue Church to bleſſe loaues, and ſend them for ſacred tokens from one Chriſtian man to an other▪
                     Auguſt. ep. 31. 34▪ 35. 36. and that not among the ſimple and ſuperſtitious (as the Aduerſaries may imagine) but among the holieſt, learnedſt, and vviſeſt. Such halovved breads did S. Paulinus ſend to S. Auguſtine and Alipius, and they to him againe, calling them bleſſings. Read S. Hierom in the life of Hila
                        •
                     ion (poſt medium:) hovv Princes and learned Biſhops & other of al ſortes came to that holy man for holy bread, panem benedictum. In the primitiue Church the people commonly brought bread to the Prieſts to be halovved. Author op. imp. ho. 14 in Mt. The 3 Coūcel of Carthage cap. 24. maketh mention of the bleſſing of milke, honie, grapes, and corne. See the 4 Canon of the Apoſtles. And not onely diuers other creatures vſed at certaine times in holy Churches ſeruice, as vvaxe, fire, palmes, aſhes, but alſo the holy oile, Chriſme, and the vvater of Baptiſme, that alſo vvhich is the cheefe of al Prieſtly bleſſing of creatures,The ſigne of the croſſe vſed in bleſſing. the bread and vvine in the high Sacrifice, be ſanctified, for vvithout ſanctification, yea (as S. Auguſtine affirmeth tract. 118. in Ioan.) vvithout the ſigne of the Croſſe, none of theſe things can rightly be done.
                  Can any man novv maruel that the Church of God by this vvarrāt of S. Paules vvord expoū
                     ded by ſo long practiſe and tradition of the firſt fathers of our religion, doth vſe diuers elements and bleſſe them for mans vſe and the ſeruice of God,The Churches exorciſmes. expelling by the inuocatiō of Chriſtes name, the aduerſarie povver from them,Luc. 
                           •
                        . according to the authoritie giuen by Chriſt, Super omnia d
                           •
                        monia, ouer al Diuels: and by praier, vvhich importeth as the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh, deſire of help, as it vvere by the vertue of Chriſt to combat vvith the Diuel, and ſo to expel him out of Gods creatures, vvhich is done by holy exorciſme, and euer beginneth, Adiutorium noſtrum in nomine Domini, as vve ſee in the bleſſing of holy vvater and the like ſanctification of elements.Holy vvater. Vvhich exorciſmes, namely of children before they come to Baptiſme, ſee in S. Auguſtine li. 6 cont. Iulian, c. 5. & de E
                           •
                        . dogmat. 6. 31. Denupt. & concupiſ. li. 1 6. 20. and of holy vvater, that hath been vſed theſe 1400 yeres in the Church by the inſtitution of Alexander the firſt, in al Chriſtian countries, and of the force thereof againſt Diuels, ſee a famous hiſtorie in Euſebius li. 5▪ c. 21. and in Epiphanius her. 30 Ebionitarum. See S. Gregorie to S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle, of the vſe thereof in halovving the Idolatrous temples to be made the Churches of Chriſt. apud Bedam li, 1 c. 30 hiſt. Angl. Remember hovv the Prophet Eliſeus applied ſalt to the healing and purifying of vvaters, 4 Reg. 2: hovv the
 Angel Raphael vſed the liuer of the fiſh to driue avvay the Diuel,The force of ſanctified creatures. 
                     Tob. 6. 8: hovv Dauids harp and Pſalmodie kept the euil ſpirit from Saul, 1 Reg. 16: hovv a peece of the holy earth ſaued ſuch a mans chamber from infeſtatiō of Diuels, Auguſt. de Ciuit. dei li. 22▪ c. 8:
                     The holy land. how Chriſt him ſelf, both in Sacramēts, & out of them, occupied diuers ſanctified elements, ſome for the health of the body, ſome for grace and remiſſion of ſinnes,Relikes. and ſome to vvorke miracles by. See in S. Hierom againſt Vigilantius c. 2. hovv holy Relikes tormēt them.theodoret. li. 36. 3. In the hiſtorie of Iulianus the Apoſtata,The croſſe. hovv the ſigne of the Croſſe:The name of IESVS. in the Actes (cap. 19) hovv the name of IESVS yea and of Paul putteth them to flight.
                  Furniſh your ſelues vvith ſuch examples and groundes of Scriptures and antiquitie, and you ſhal contemne the Aduerſaries cauillations and blaſphemies againſt the Churches practiſe in ſuch things, and further alſo finde, theſe ſacred actions and creatures, not only by increaſe of faith, feruor, and deuotion, to purge the impuritie of our ſoules, and procure remiſſion of our daily infirmities, but that the cheefe Miniſters of Chriſtes Church, by their ſoueraine authoritie graunted of our Lord,Remiſſion of venial ſinnes annexed to halovved creatures. may ioyne vnto the ſame, their bleſſing and remiſſion of our venial ſinnes or ſpiritual dettes:Ia. c. 5. as vve ſee in S. Iames, remiſſion of al ſinnes to be annexed to the vnction vvith holy oile, vvhich to the Catholikes is a Sacrament, but to the Proteſtants vvas but a temporal ceremonie, and to ſome of them not of Chriſtes inſtitution, but of the Apoſtles onely. In their ovvne ſenſe therfore they ſhould not maruel that ſuch ſpiritual effectes ſhould procede of the vſe of ſanctified creatures, vvhereas venial treſpaſſes be remitted many vvaies, though mortal ordinarily by the Sacraments onely.S. Gregorie. S. Gregorie did commonly ſend his benediction and remiſſion of ſinnes, in and vvith ſuch holy tokens as vvere ſanctified by his bleſſing and touching of the Apoſtles bodies and Martyrs Relikes, as novv his ſucceſſors do in the like halovved remembrances of religion. See his 7 booke, epiſtle 126: and 9 booke, epiſtle 60. Thus therfore and to the effectes aforeſaid the creatures of God be ſanctified.
                  If any man obiect that this vſe of creatures is like coniuration in Necromancie,The difference betvvene the Churches exorciſmes & other coniurations. he muſt knovv the difference is, that in the Churches ſanctifications and exorciſmes, the Diuels be commaunded, forced, and tormented by Chriſtes vvord and by praiers: but in the other vvicked practiſes, they be pleaſed, honoured, and couenanted vvithal: and therfore the firſt is godly and according to the Scriptures, but Necromancie abominable and againſt the Scriptures.
                  
                     14. The grace.]
                     Grace giuen in the Sacramēt of Orders. S. Auguſtine declareth this grace to be the gift of the holy Ghoſt giuen vnto him by receiuing this holy Order, vvhereby he vvas made fitte to execute the office to his ovvne ſaluation and other mens. And note vvithal, that grace is not onely giuen in or vvith the Sacraments, by the receiuers faith or deuotion, but by the Sacrament, per impoſitionem, by impoſition of handes. for ſo he ſpeaketh 2 Tim. 1. which is here ſaid, cum impoſitione, vvith impoſition.
                  
                  
                     14. With impoſition.]
                     Conſecratiō of Prieſts by impoſition of handes. S. Ambroſe vpon this place, implieth in the vvord Impoſition of 
                           •
                        ands, al the holy action and ſacred vvordes done and ſpoken ouer him vvhen he vvas made Prieſt. Whereby (ſaith he) he vvas deſigned to the vvorke, and receiued authoritie, that he durſt offer ſacrifice in our Lordes ſteede vnto God. So doth the holy Doctor allude vnto the vvordes that are ſaid novv alſo in the Catholike Church to him that is made Prieſt: Accipe poteſtatem offerendi pro viuis & mortuis in nomine Domini, that is, Take or receiue thou authoritie to offer for the liuing and the dead in the name of our Lord.
                     In Eſa. c. 58. for the vvhich S. Hierom alſo (as is noted before) ſaith, that the ordering of Prieſts is, by impoſition of handes and imprecation of voice.
                  
                  
                     14. Of Prieſthod.]
                     Holy Orders a Sacrament. The practiſe of the Church giueth vs the ſenſe of this place, vvhich the auncient Councel of Carthage doth thus ſet dovvne.Conc. Carth. 4 c. 3. 
                     When a Prieſt taketh orders, the Biſhop bleſsing him and holding his hand vpon his head, let al the Prieſts preſent lay alſo their hands on his head by the Biſhops hands &c. Vvho ſeeth not novv, that holy Orders giuing grace by an external ceremonie and vvorke, is a Sacrament? So al the old Church counteth it. And S. Auguſtine (cont. ep. Parmen. li. 2 c. 13.) plainely ſaith that no man doubteth but it is a Sacrament, and leſt any man thinke that he vſeth not the vvord Sacrament proprely and preciſely, he ioyneth it is nature and name vvith Baptiſme. Againe vvho ſeeth not by this vſe of impoſition of hands in giuing Orders and other Sacraments,Beza in cap. 6. Act. that Chriſt, the Apoſtles, and the Church may borovv of the Ievviſh rites, certaine conuenient ceremonies and Sacramental actions, ſeing this ſame (as * the Heretikes can not deny) vvas receiued of the maner of Ordering Aaron and the Prieſts of the old lavv or other heads of the people? See Exod. 39. Num. 27, 23.
                  
                  
                     16. Saue both thy ſelf.]
                     Men alſo are called ſauiours vvithout derogatiō to Chriſt. Though Chriſt be our onely Sauiour, yet the Scriptures forbeare not to ſpeake freely and vulgarly and in a true ſenſe, that man alſo may ſaue him ſelf and others. But the Proteſtants notvvithſtanding folovv ſuch a captious kind of Diuinitie that if a man ſpeake any ſuch thing of our Lady or any Sainct in heauen, or other meane of procuring ſaluation, they make it a derogation to Chriſtes honour. Vvith ſuch hypocrites haue vve novv a daies to do.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Hovv to behaue himſelf tovvardes yong and old. 3 to beſtovv the Churches oblations vpon the needy vvidovves, 9 and not to admitte the ſaid Churches vvidovves vnder threeſcore yeres old. 17 In diſtribution to reſpect vvel the Prieſts that are painful. 19 and hovv in his Conſiſtorie to heare accuſations againſt Prieſts. 22 to be ſtraite in examining before he giue Orders, to be chaſt, and to remitte ſomevvhat of his drinking vvater.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  A Seniour rebuke not: but beſeeche as a father: yong men, as brethren: ✝ 
                     verse 2 old vvomen, as mothers: yong vvomen, as ſiſters, in al chaſtitie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Honour vvidovves:The Epiſtle for holy vvidovves. vvhich are ″ vvidovves in deede. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But if any vvidovv haue children or nephevves: let her learne firſt to rule her ovvne houſe, and to render mutual dutie to her parents. for this is acceptable before God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But ſhe that is a vvidovv in deede and deſolate: let her hope in God, and continue in obſecrations &Becauſe of this continual praier vvhich ſtandeth not vvith cōiugal & carnal actes of matrimonie (as the Apoſtle ſignifieth 1 Cor. 7, 5) therfore vvere theſe vvidovves to liue in the ſtate of perpetual continencie. praiers night and day. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For ſhe that is in deliciouſenes, liuing is dead. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And this commaund that they be blamleſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But if any man haue not care of his ovvne, and eſpecially of his domeſticals, ″ he hath denied the faith, and is vvorſe then an infidel. ✝ 
                     verse 9 ″ Let a vvidovv be choſen of no leſſe thē three ſcore yeres, vvhich hath been the ″ vvife of one huſband, ✝ 
                     verse 10 hauing teſtimonie in good vvorkes, if ſhe haue brought vp her children, if ſhe haue receiued to harbour, if ſhe haue vvaſhed the Saincts feete, if ſhe haue miniſtred to them that ſuffer tribulation, if ſhe haue folovved euery good vvorke. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 11 But the yonger vvidovves auoid. For vvhen they ſhal be ″ vvanton in Chriſt, ″ they vvil marie: ✝ 
                     verse 12 ″ hauing damnation, becauſe they haue made void ″ their firſt faith. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and vvithal idle alſo they learne to goe about from houſe to houſe: not only idle, but alſo ful of vvordes and curious, ſpeaking things vvhich they ought not. ✝ 
                     verse 14 ″ I vvil therfore the yonger to marie, to bring forth children, to be houſevviues: to giue no occaſion to the aduerſarie for to ſpeake euil. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For novv certaine are turned backe ″ after Satan. ✝ 
                     verse 16 If any faithful man haue vvidovves, let him miniſter to them, and let not the Church be burdened: that there may be ſufficient for them that are vvidovves in deede.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 The prieſtes that rule vvel, let them be eſteemedDouble honour and liuelihod due to good Prieſtes. vvorthie of double honour: eſpecially they that labour ″ in the vvord and doctrine.Deu. 25. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For the Scripture ſaith: Thou ſhalt not mooſel the mouth to the oxe that treadeth out the corne and,1. Cor. 9. 
                  The vvorke man is vvorthie of his h
                        •
                     re.
                  Mat. 10, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 19 
                  Here the Apoſtle vvil not haue euery light felovv to be heard againſt a prieſt. ſo S. Auguſtin for the like reuerence of prieſthod, admoniſheth P
                        •
                     
                     ̄carius that in no vviſe he admitte any teſtimonies or accuſations of Heretikes againſt a Catholike prieſt. ep. 212. Againſt a prieſt receiue not accuſation: but vnder tvvo or three vvitneſſes. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Them that ſinne, reproue before al: that the reſt alſo may haue feare.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 I teſtifie before God and Chriſt IESVS, and the elect Angels, that thou keepe theſe things vvithout preiudice,
 doing nothing by declining to the one part. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Impoſe hādes on no manBiſhops muſt haue great care that they giue not orders to any that is not wel tried for his faith; learning, and good behauiour. lightly, neither do thou communicate vvith other mens ſinnes. Keepe thy ſelf chaſt. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Drinke not yet ″ vvater: but vſe a litle vvine for thy ſtomake, and thy often infirmities. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Certaine mens ſinnes be manifeſt, going before to iudgement: and certaine men they folovv. ✝ 
                     verse 25 In like maner alſo good deedes be manifeſt, & they that are othervviſe, can not be hidde.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     3. Widovves in deede.]
                     Ambr. in hunc loc. S. Ambroſe calleth them vvidovves and deſolate in deede, that might marie, but to make them ſelues better and more vvorthy of God, refuſe mariage, vvhich they knovv to be but once bleſſed,Luc. c. 2, 37. imitating * holy Anne,widowhod. vvho in faſting and praiers ſerued God night and day, neuer knovving but one huſband. Such profeſſed vvidovves then are to be honoured and ſuccoured. Neither doth he ſpeake onely of the Churches vvidovves (of vvhom ſpecially aftervvard) but of al that by profeſſion kept their vvidovvhod, exhorting them to paſſe their time in praier and faſting, v. 5. Vvhich vvas an honorable and holy ſtate much vvritten of, and commended in the primitiue Church, namely by S. Ambroſe and by S. Auguſtine, vvho vvrote bookes intitled thereof, and make it next to virginitie. Ambr. de viduis. Auguſt. de bono viduitatis.
                  
                  
                     8. He hath denied.] Not that by this or by any other deadly ſinne (except incredulitie or doubtfulnes in beleefe) they loſe their faith: but that their factes be not anſvverable to their faith and to Chriſtian religion, vvhich preſcribeth al ſuch duties.
                  
                     9. Let a vvidovv be choſen.] Novv he ſpeaketh more particularly and ſpecially of ſuch vvidovves as vvere nouriſhed and found by the oblations of the faithful & the almes of the Church,widowes called Diaconiſſa, & their office. and did vvithal ſome neceſſarie ſeruices about vvomen that vvere to be profeſſed or baptized, for their inſtruction and addreſſing to that and other Sacraments, and alſo about the ſicke and impotent: and vvithal ſometimes they had charge of the Church goods or the diſpoſition of them vnder the Deacons: in reſpect vvhereof they alſo and the like are called Diaconiſſae, Euſebius li 6 c 35 reciteth out of Cornelius Epiſtle, that in the Church of Rome there is one Biſhop, 40 Prieſts, ſixe Deacons, ſeuen Subdeacons, Acoluthi 42, Exorciſtes, Lectors, and Oſtiarij 52, vvidovves together vvith the poore 150, al vvhich God nouriſheth in his Church. See Act. Apoſt. c. 6. S. Chryſoſtom li. 3 de Sacerd
                           ••
                        ip propius finem. S. Epiphanius in hareſi 79 Collyridianorum. Novv then, vvhat maner of vvomen ſhould be taken into the fellovvſhip of ſuch as vvere found of the Church, he further declareth.Theſe widowes muſt haue had but one huſbād: wherof many Catholike cōcluſiōs are deduced.
                  
                  
                     9. The vvife of one huſband.] If you vvould haue a plaine paterne of Heretical fraude, corruption, and adulteration of the natiue ſenſe of Gods vvord, and an inuincible demonſtration that theſe nevv Gloſers haue their conſciences feared and hartes obdurated, vvillingly peruering the Scriptures againſt that vvhich they knovv is the meaning thereof, to the maintenance of their ſectes: marke vvel their handling of this place about theſe vvidovves of the Church. S. Paul preſcribeth ſuch onely to be admitted as haue been the vviues of one huſband, that is to ſay, once onely maried, not admitting any that hath been tvviſe maried. By vvhich vvordes the Catholikes proue firſt,C. 3, 2. that the like phraſe * vſed before of Biſhops and Deacons, that they ſhould be the huſbands 
                        point 1 of one vvife, muſt needes ſignifie that they can not be tvviſe maried, nor admitted to theſe and the like functions, if they vvere more then once maried before. 
                        point 2 Secondly, vve proue by this place againſt the Aduerſaries, that the ſtate of vvidovvhod is more vvorthy, honorable, decent, and pure in reſpect of the ſeruice of the Church, and more to be relieued of the reuenues thereof, then the ſtate of maried folkes▪ and that not onely (as the Aduerſaries perhaps may anſvver) for their greater neceſſitie, or more leiſure, freedom, or expedition to ſerue, in that they be not combered vvith huſband and houſhold, but in reſpect of their vidual continencie, chaſtitie, and puritie, for els ſuch as vvere vvidovves vvith intention and freedom to marie aftervvard, might haue been admitted by the Apoſtle, as vvel as thoſe that vvere neuer to marie againe.
                  
                     
                        point 3 Thirdly, vve proue that ſecond mariage not onely after admiſſion to the almes or ſeruice of the Church, but before alſo, is diſagreable and a ſigne of incontinencie or more luſt and fleſhlines then is agreable or comely for any perſon belonging to the Church: and conſequently, that the
 Apoſtle in the laſt chapter treating of the holy functions of Biſhops, Prieſts, Deacons, and of the Churches refuſing generally bigamos or tvviſe maried perſons, muſt needes much more meane that no man tvviſe maried ſhould be receiued to holy Orders: and further, that as none vvere admitted to be vvidovves of the Church, that euer intended to marie againe, ſo none ſhould euer be receiued to miniſter the Sacraments (vvhich is a thing infinitely more, and requireth more puritie, and continencie, then the office or ſtate of the ſaid vvidovves,) that intended to marie againe. To receiue the body of Chriſt (ſaith S. Hierom in Apolog. pro lib. cont. Iouin. ep. 50. c. 6.) is a greater and holier thing then praier, and therfore Prieſts that muſt both continually pray and alſo be occupied about the receiuing or miniſtring the holy Sacrament daily, muſt liue continently.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Fourthly, vve proue that it is not vnlavvful to annexe, by precept or the parties promis, ſingle life or chaſtitle to a vvhole ſtate or order of the faithful, becauſe the Apoſtle & the vvhole Church

                        verse 5 in his time ioyned to this ſtate of the Churches vvidovves, perpetual cōtinencie. Fifthly, vve proue hereby that to refuſe and not to accept the tvviſe maried or ſuch as vvil not liue ſingle, into the ſtate of vvidovves or holy Orders, is not to condemne or forbid ſecond mariage, or once & often marying, vvith the Manichees according to the doctrine of Diuels, as the Proteſtants (and before them the old condemned Iouinianiſtes) do blaſpheme the Church, for then did S. Paul allovv and teach doctrine of Diuels, vvho refuſeth a tvviſe maried vvoman, and bindeth others by their entering into this ſtate, neuer to marie againe: as no doubt he did the Cleargie men much more in the 3 chapter before. Thus loe vve Catholikes cōferre & conſter the Scriptures, & for this meaning vve haue al the Doctors vvithout exception. Vvhat ſhift then haue the Heretikes here? for marie and remarie they muſt, let the Scriptures & al the Doctors in the vvorld ſay nay to it. In truth they do not expound the vvord of God, but 
                        •
                     lee from the euidence of it, ſome one vvay & ſome an other.
                  And of al other,Beza vpon this place. their extremeſt and moſt ſhameful tergiuerſation is, that the Apoſtle here forbiddeth * not the admiſſion of ſuch vvidovves as haue been tvviſe maried, but onely them that haue had tvvo huſbands at once. vvhich vvas a very vnprobable and extorted expoſition before, concerning Biſhops and Deacons, c. 3. and (as S. Hierom ſaith ep. 83.) malo n
                           •
                        do malus cuneus: but here that an exception ſhould be made onely againſt vvidovves that had had tvvo huſbands together (vvhich vvas a thing neuer lavvful no
                        •
                      neuer heard of) that is a moſt intolerable impudencie,The Caluiniſts moſt abſurd expoſition of the Apoſtles wordes. and a cōſtruction that neuer came to any vviſe mans cogitation before: and yet theſe their fanſies muſt be Gods vvord, and bigamus or bigamîa muſt againſt their old natures and vſe of al vvriters, be al one vvith Polygamus and Polygamia. They giue an example of ſuch vvidovves, in vvomen diuorced iuſtly from their huſbands in the old lavv. As though S. Paul here tooke order for the Ievves vvidovves onely, or that had been ſuch a cōmon caſe among the Ievves alſo, that the Apoſtle needed to take ſo careful order for it,Their blaſphemie againſt the plaine text. finally, they let not to ſay that if the Apoſtle ſhould be vnderſtood to refuſe a vvidovv tvviſe maried at ſundrie times, it vvere vnreaſonable & iniurious to ſecond mariages, vvhich haue no more indecencie or ſigne of incontinencie (ſay they) then the firſt. Thus bold they are vvith the Apoſtle and al antiquitie.
                  
                     11. Wanton in Chriſt.] Vvidovves vvaxing vvarme, idle, and vvel fedde by the Church, Iuſt after huſbands, as alſo Apoſtate-Prieſts and Superintendents marie, ſpecially after they haue gotten good Eccleſiaſtical liuings. Which is to waxe vvanton in Chriſt, or againſt Chriſt. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      The Greeke vvord ſignifieth to caſt of the raines or bridle, that is, the bond or promis of continencie which they had put vpon them.
                  11. They vvil.]The very vvil to breake the vovv of chaſtitie, is damnable. In the chaſtitie of vvidovvhod or Virginitie (ſaith S. Auguſtine) the excellencie of a greater gift is ſought for. Which being once deſired, choſen, and offered to God by vovv, it is not onely damnable to enter aftervvard into mariage, but though it come not actually to mariage, onely to haue the vvil to marie is damnable. Aug. li. de bono viduit. cap. 9.
                  
                  
                     12. Hauing damnation.] It ſignifieth not blame, checke, or reprehenſion of men, as ſome to make the fault ſeeme leſſe, vvould haue it: but
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      iudgement or eternal damnatiō, which is a heauy ſentence. God graunt al maried Prieſts and Religious may conſider their lamentable caſe. Vvhat a greuous ſinne it is, ſee S. Ambroſe ad virginem lapſam cap. 5 & 8.
                  
                  
                     12. Their firſt faith.] Al the auncient fathers that euer wrote commentaries vpon this Epiſtle, Greeke and Latin, as S. Chryſoſtom, Theodorete, Oecumenius, Theophylactus, Primaſius, S. Ambroſe, Ven. Bede, Haimo, Anſelme, and the reſt: alſo al others that by occaſion vſe this place, as the 4 Councel of Carthage ca. 104. and the 4 of Toleto c. 55. S. Athanaſius li. de virginitate.
                     
                        Breaking of their firſt faith, is (by the conſent of a antiquitie) vvhē they bre
                        
                           •
                        ke their vovv of chaſtitie. S. Epiphanius har. 48. S. Hierom cont. Iouinianum li. 1. c. 7. & in c. 44. Ezech. prope finem. S. Auguſtine in exceding many places: al theſe expound the Apoſtles vvordes of the vovv of Chaſtitie or the faith and promis made to Chriſt to liue continently. What is to breake their firſt faith 
                     
                        •
                      ſaith S. Auguſtine. They vovved, and performed not. In pſ. 75. prope fin
                           •
                        m. Againe in an other place, They breake their firſt faith, that ſtand not in that vvhich they vovved. Li. de Sancta virgin. c. 33. Againe he and a
                        •
                      the fathers vvith him in Carthage Councel before named: If any vvidovves, how yong ſo euer they vvere left of their huſbands deceaſed, haue vovved them ſelues to God, left their laical habite, and vnder the teſtimonie of the Biſhop and Church haue appeared in religious vveede, and aftervvard go
                           •
                         any more to ſecular mariage, according to the Apoſtles
 ſentence they ſhal be damned, becauſe they vvere ſo bold to make void the faith or promis of Chaſtitie which they vovved to our Lord. So ſaith he and 215 fathers moe in that Councel.Why this vow is called faith or fidelitie.
                  
                  And this promis of chaſtitie is called, faith, becauſe the fidelitie betvvixt maried perſons is ordinarily called of holy writers, faith: and the vovv of chaſtitie made to God, ioyneth him & the perſons ſo vovving, as it vvere in mariage, ſo farre, that if the ſaid perſons breake promis, they are counted and called in the laſt alleaged Councel, Gods adulterers. In the 3 to the Romanes alſo and often els vvhere, faith is taken for promis or fidelitie. And that it is ſo taken here, the vvordes irritum facere (to fruſtrate and make void) do proue. for that terme is commonly vſed in matter of vovv,Vvhy the firſt faith. promis, or compacte. Gen. 17. Num. 30. This promis is called here prima fides (the firſt faith) in reſpect of the later promis vvhich vovvbreakers make to them vvith vvhom they pretend to marrie. So ſaith S. Auguſtine li. de bono viduit. c. 8. & 9. and Innocentius 1 ep. 2 
                           •
                        ap. 13. to. 1. Con
                           •
                        . And this is the onely natiue, euident,The heretikes expoſition of this firſt faith, impoſsible & againſt the text. and agreable ſenſe to the circumſtance of the letter. And the vaine euaſion of the Heretikes to ſaue the Apoſtate-Monkes, Friers, Nunnes, and Prieſts from damnation for their pretended mariages, is friuolous: to vvit, that firſt faith here ſignifieth the faith of Baptiſme or Chriſtian beleefe, & not the promis or vovv of Chaſtitie. But vve aſke them if this faith of Baptiſme be broken by mariage or no. For the text is plaine that by intending to marie, they breake their faith, and by breaking their faith they be damned, if they die vvithout repentance. In truth vvhich vvay ſo euer they writhe them ſelues to defend their ſacrilege or pretended mariages, they loſe their labour and ſtruggle againſt their ovvne conſcience and plaine Scripture.
                  
                     14. I vvil the yonger.]
                     S. Paul meaneth not that vvidovves profeſſed ſhould marie. He ſpeaketh of ſuch yong ones as vvere yet free. For ſuch as had already made vovv, neither could they vvithout damnation marie, vvere they yong or old, nor he vvithout ſinne commaund or counſel them to it. Neither (as S. Hierom proueth toothervviſe Ag
                           •
                        ruchia ep. 11. Gerontia, and S. Chryſoſtom vpon this place) doth he preciſely commaund or counſel the yong ones that vvere free, to marie, or abſolutely forbid them to vovv chaſtitie: God for bid, ſay they. But his ſpeach conteineth onely a vviſe admonition to the frailer ſort, that it vvere farre better for them not to haue vowed at all, but to haue maried againe, then to haue fallen to aduoutrie and Apoſtaſie after profeſsion.It is better for the frailer ſort, that are in danger of falling, to marie rather then to vow. Vvhich is no more but to preferre ſecond mariage before fornication: and a good warning, that they vvhich are to profeſſe, looke wel vvhat they do. S. Paules experience of the fall of ſome yong ones to mariage, cauſed him to giue this admonition here: as alſo that before, that none ſhould be receiued to the Churches almes vnder threeſcore yeres of age. Not forbidding the Church for euer, to accept any vovves of vvidowes or virgins til that age, as the Heretikes falſely affirme: but ſhewing vvhat vvas meete for that time and the beginning of Chriſtianitie, vvhen as yet there vvere no Monaſteries builded, no preſcript rule,Yong vvomen may be profeſſed & taken into religion. no exact order of obedience to Superiors: but the profeſſed (as S. Paul here noteth) courſed & wandered vp and downe idly, as novv our profeſſed virgins or Nunn
                        •
                     s do not, neither can do. Of vvhom therfore, vvhere diſcipline is obſerued, there is no cauſe of ſuch danger. Beſides that vvidowes hauing had the vſe of carnal copulation before, are more dangerouſly tempted, then virgins that are brought vp from their tender age in pietie and haue no experience of ſuch pleaſures. See S. Ambroſe li. de viduis, prouing by the example of holy Anna, vvho liued a vvidow euen from her youth til 80 yeres of age, in faſting and praying night and day, that the Apoſtle doth not here without exception forbid al yong vvidowes to vow, yea he eſteemeth that profeſsion in the yonger women much more laudable, glorious, and meritorious. See his booke de Viduis in initio.
                  
                  
                     15. After Satan.]
                     To marie after the vovv of Chaſtitie, is to goe after Satan. Vve may here learne, that for thoſe to marie vvhich are profeſſed, is to turne backe after Satan. For he ſpeaketh of ſuch as vvere maried cōtrarie to their vow. And herevpon vve call the Religious that marie (as Luther, Bucer, Peter martyr and the reſt) Apoſtataes. More vve learne, that ſuch yong ones haue no excuſe of their age, or that they be vehemently tempted and burne in their concupiſcences, or that they haue not the gift of Chaſtitie. For notvvithſtanding al theſe excuſes, theſe yong profeſſed vvidowes if they marie, go backvvard after Satan, and be Apoſtataes, & damned, except they repent. For as for the Apoſtles vvordes to the Corinthians,1 Cor. 7. 
                     It is better to marie then to burne, Vve haue before declared out of the fathers, and here vve adde, that it pertaineth onely to perſons that be free and haue not vowed to the contrarie. as S. Ambroſe li. ad virg. lapſ. c. 5. S. Auguſtine de bono vid. c. 8. and S. Hierom li. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 7. expound it.
                  
                     The Heretikes of our time thinke there is no remedie for fornication or burning,
                     The heretikes only remedie againſt concupiſcence is mariage. 
                     but mariage. and ſo did S. Auguſtine vvhen he was yet a Manichee. Puta
                        •
                     am me miſerum &c. I thought (ſaith he li. 6. Confeſ. c. 11.) that I ſhould be an vnhappie and miſerable man if I ſhould lacke the companie of a vvoman, and the medicine of thy mercie to heale the ſame infirmitie I thought not vpon, becauſe I had not tried it: and I imagined that continencie vvas in a mans ovvne povver and libertie, vvhich in my ſelf I did not feele: being ſo fooliſh not to vnderſtand that no man can be continent vnles thou
 giue it.The vow of chaſtitie lawful, poſsible to be kept, more grateful to God. Verely thou vvouldeſt giue it, if vvith invvard mourning I vvould knocke at thy 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and vvith ſound faith vvould 
                        •
                     aſt my care vpon thee.
                  By al vvhich you may eaſily proue, that chaſtitie is a thing that may lavvfully be vowed, that it is not impoſsible to be fulfilled by praier, faſting, and chaſtiſement of mens concupiſcence, that it is a thing more grateful to God then the condition of maried perſons: for els it ſhould not be required either in the Cleargie or in the Religious. finally, that it is moſt abominable to perſuade the poore virgins or other profeſſed to ſuch ſacarilegious vvedlocke, which S. Auguſtine auoucheth to be vvorſe then aduoutrie. de b
                           •
                        n. vid
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        . 4. 11. Iouinian vvas the firſt that euer made mariage equal vvith virginitie or chaſt life,Iouinians hereſie in this point, cōdemned of old, is called of the Proteſtants, Gods vvord. for vvhich he vvas condemned of hereſie. Aug. in argumento li. de bon
                           •
                         Coniugali. de pec. merit li. 3. c. 7. Li. de hareſ. har. 82. He vvas the firſt that perſuaded profeſſed virgins to marie, which S. Auguſtine ſaith vvas ſo clerely and vvithout queſtion vvicked, that it could neuer infect any Prieſt, but certaine miſerable Nunnes. Yea for this ſtrange perſuaſion he calleth Iouinian a monſter, ſaying of him thus Li. 2. R
                           •
                        tract. cap. 22. The holy Church that is there (at Rome) moſt faithfully and ſtoutly reſiſted this monſter. S. Hierom calleth the ſaid Heretike and his complices, Chriſtian epicures. li 2 cont. Iouin. c. 19. See S. Ambroſe ep. 82 ad v
                           ••
                        c
                           •
                        llenſem epi
                           ••
                        opum in initi
                           •
                        . But vvhat vvould theſe holy doctors haue ſaid, if they had liued in our doleful time, vvhen the Proteſtants go quite avvay vvith this vvickednes, and call it Gods vvord?
                  
                     17. In vvord and doctrine.] Such Prieſts ſpecially and Prelates are vvorthy of double, that is, of the more ample honour, that are able to preach and teach, and do take paines therein. Vvhere vve may note, that al good Biſhops or Prieſts in thoſe daies vvere not ſo vvel able to teach as ſome others,Many good & vvorthie Biſhops, that haue not the gift of preaching and teaching. and yet for the miniſterie of the Sacraments, and for vviſedom and gouernement, vvere not vnmeete to be Biſhops and Paſtors. for though it be one high commendation in a Prelate, to be able to teach, as the Apoſtle before noted: yet al can not haue the like grace therein, and it is often recompenſed by other ſingular giftes not leſſe neceſſarie. S. Auguſtine laboured in vvorde and doctrine, Alipius and Valerius vvere good Biſhops, and yet had not that gift. Poſsid. in vit. Aug. c. 5. And ſome times and countries require preachers more then other. Al vvhich vve note, to diſcouer the pride of Heretikes, that contemne ſome of the Catholike Prieſts or Biſhops, pretending that they can not preach as they do, vvith meretricious and painted eloquence.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        3. Wa
                           •
                        er.] You ſee hovv lavvful and hovv a holy a thing it is, to faſt from ſome meates or drinkes, either certaine daies, or alvvaies, as this B. Biſhop Timothee did: vvho vvas hardly induced by the Apoſtle to drinke a litle vvine vvith his vvater in reſpect of his infirmities. And marke vvithal, vvhat a calumnious and ſtale cauillation it is, that to abſtaine from certaine meates and drinkes for puniſhment of the body or deuotion, is, to condemne Gods creatures. See an homilie of S. Chryſoſtom vpon theſe vvordes, to. 5.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Vvhat to teach ſeruants. 3 If any teach againſt the doctrine of the Church obſtinately, he doth it of pride and for lucre. 11 But the Catholike Biſhop muſt folovv vertu
                        •
                     , hauing his eie alvvaies to life euerlaſting and to the cōming of Chriſt. 17 Vvhat to commaund the riche. 20 Finally, to keepe moſt carefully the Catholike Churches doctrine, vvithout mutation.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHOSOEVER are ſeruantes vnder yoke, let them counte their maiſters vvorthie of al honour: leſt the name of our Lord and his doctrine be blaſphemed. ✝ 
                     verse 2 But they that haue faithful maiſters, let them not contemne them becauſe they are brethren, but ſerue the rather, becauſe they be faithful and beloued, vvhich are partakers of the benefite. Theſe things teache and exhort.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 If any manSee the an̄o
                     
                        •
                     ation before cap. 1, 3. 4. teach othervviſe,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   and conſent not to the ſound vvordes of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, and to that doctrine
 vvhich is according to pietie: ✝ 
                     verse 4 he is proude, knowing nothing, but ″ languiſhing about queſtions and ſtrife of vvordes: of vvhich riſe enuies, contentions, blaſphemies, euil ſuſpicions, ✝ 
                     verse 5 conflictes of men corrupted in their minde, and that are depriued of the truth, that eſteeme gaine to be pietie. ✝ 
                     verse 6 ButThe epiſtle for S. Alexius 
                        
                           •
                        ul. 17.
                   pietie vvith ſufficiencie is great gaine. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For vve * brought nothing into this vvorld:Iob 1, 21. doubtleſſe,

                     verse 8 neither can vve take avvay any thing.Mat. 6, 25. But * hauing foode, and vvhervvith to be couered, vvith theſe vve are content. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For they that vvil be made riche, fall into tentation & the ſnare of the deuil, & many deſires vnprofitable and hurteful, vvhich drovvne men into deſtruction and perdition. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For the roote of al euils is couetouſenes:; As in the 1. chap. lacke of faith and good conſcience, ſo here couetouſnes or deſire of theſe temporal things, & in the end of this chap. preſumption, and boaſting of knowledge, are cauſes of falling from the faith: hereſie often being the puniſhmēt of former ſinner. vvhich certaine deſiring haue erred from the faith, and haue intangled them ſelues in many ſorovves.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 But thou, ô man of God, flee theſe things: andThe epiſtle for S. Timothee, Ian. 24.
                   purſue iuſtice, pietie, faith, charitie, patience, mildenes. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Fight the good fight of faith: apprehend eternal life, ⊢ vvherein thou art called and haſt confeſſed a good confeſſion before many vvitneſſes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 I commaund thee before God vvho quickeneth al things,Io. 18, 37▪
                   and Chriſt IESVS vvho * gaue teſtimonie vnder Pontius Pilate a good confeſſion: ✝ 
                     verse 14 that thou keepe the commaundement vvithout ſpotte, blameleſſe vnto the comming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 15 vvhich in due times the Bleſſed & onely Mightie vvil ſhevv,Apoc. 17, 14. 19, 16. the * King of kings and Lord of lordes, ✝ 
                     verse 16 vvho only hath immortalitie, and inhabiteth light not acceſſible,Io. 1, 18. * vvhom no man hath ſeen, yea neither can ſee, to vvhom be honour and empire euerlaſting. Amen. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 Commaund the riche of this vvorld not to be high minded, nor to truſt in the vncertaintie of riches, but in the liuing God (vvho giueth vs al things aboundantly to enioy) ✝ 
                     verse 18 to doe wel, to become riche in good workes, to giue eaſily, to communicate, ✝ 
                     verse 19 to heape vnto them ſelues a goodAlmes deedes and good workes laide for a foūdatiō and ground to attaine euerlaſting life. So ſay the doctors vpō this place. foū
                  dation for the time to come, that they may apprehend the true life.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 O Timothee, keepe the ″ depoſitum, auoiding the ″ profane

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . nouelties of voices, & oppoſitions of ″ falſely called knovvledge. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvhich certaine promiſing,S. Chryſoſtom. haue erred about the faith. Grace be vvith thee: Amen.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     4. Languiſhing.] Euen theſe be the good diſputes of our nevv Sect-maiſters, and the vvorld hath to long proued theſe inconueniences here named, to be the fruites of ſuch endles altercations in religion as theſe vnhappie ſectes haue brought forth.
                  
                     20. Depoſitum.] The vvhole doctrine of our Chriſtianitie being taught by the Apoſtles, and deliuered to their ſucceſſors, and comming dovvne from one Biſhop to an other, is called the Depoſitum,
                     
                        Depoſitum, is the Catholike truth deſcending from the Apoſtles by ſucceſsion of Biſhops, euen vnto the end. as it vvere a thing laid into their hands, and committed vnto them to keepe. Vvhich becauſe it paſſeth from hand to hand, from age to age, from Biſhop to Biſhop vvithout corruption, change, or alteration, is al one vvith Tradition, and is the truth giuen vnto the holy Biſhops to keepe, and not to lay men. See the notable diſcourſe of Vincentius Lirinenſis vpon this text. li. cont. profan. har. Nouationes. And it is for this great, old, and knovven treaſure committed to the Biſhops cuſtodie, that S. Irenaeus calleth the Catholike Church Depoſitorium diues, the rich treaſurie of truth. li. 3. c. 4. And as Clemens Alexandrinus vvriteth li. 2 Strom, this place maketh ſo much againſt al Heretikes vvho do al change this Depoſitum, that 
                        〈◊〉
                      onely, ſuch men in his daies denied this Epiſtle. The Heretikes of our daies chalenge alſo the truth, and ſay it is the old truth. but they leape 14 or 15 hundreth yeres for it ouer mens heads to the Apoſtles.The Proteſtāts can ſhew no ſuch depoſitum.
                      But vve call for the Depoſitum, and aſke them in vvhoſe hands that truth vvhich they pretend, vvas laid vp, and hovv it came dovvne to them▪ for it can not be Apoſtolical, vnles it vvere Depoſitum in ſome Timothees hand, ſo to continevv from one Biſhop to an other vntil our time and to the end.
                  20. Profane nouelties.] Non dixit antiquitates (ſaith Vincentius Lirinenſis) non dixit vetuſtates, ſed prophanas nouitates. Nam ſi vitanda eſt nouitas, tenenda eſt antiquitas: ſi prophana eſt nouitas, ſacratae eſt vetuſtas. that is, He ſaid not, ANTIQVITIES: he ſaid not, AVNCIENTNES: but PROFANE NOVELTIES. For if noueltie is to be auoided, antiquitie is to be kept: if noueltie be profane, auncientnes is holy and ſacred. See his vvhole booke againſt the profane nouelties of hereſies.
                  
                  Vve may not meaſure the nevvnes or oldnes of wordes and termes of ſpeaking in religion,Prophane nouelties of vvordes how to be tried and examined. by holy Scriptures only: as though all thoſe or only thoſe were new and to be reiected, that are not expreſly found in holy vvrite: but vve muſt eſteeme them by the agreablenes or diſagreablenes they haue to the true ſenſe of Scriptures, to the forme of Catholike faith and doctrine, to the phraſe of the old Chriſtians, to the Apoſtolike vſe of ſpeache come vnto vs by tradition of all ages and Churches, and to the preſcription of holy Councels and Schooles of the Chriſtian world: vvhich haue giuen out (according to the time and queſtions raiſed by heretikes and contentious perſons) very fit, artificiall, and ſignificant vvordes, to diſcerne and defend the truth by, againſt falſhod.
                  Theſe termes,Catholike termes not expreſly in the Scriptures, but in ſenſe, are no ſuch nouelties of vvordes. 
                     Catholike, Trinitie, Perſon, Sacrament, Incarnation, Maſſe, and many moe, are not (in that ſenſe vvherein the Church vſeth them) in the Scriptures at all, and diuers of them were ſpoken by the Apoſtles before any part of the nevv Teſtament vvas vvritten, ſome of them taken vp ſtraight after the Apoſtles daies in the vvrittings and preachings of holy Doctors, and in the ſpeach of all faithfull people, and therfore can not be counted Nouelties of vvordes. Others beſide theſe, as, Conſubſtantial, Deipara, Tranſſubſtantiation, and the like, vvhich are neither in expreſſe termes found in Scriptures, not yet in ſenſe (if vve ſhould folovv the iudgement of the ſpeciall ſectes againſt vvhich the ſaid vvordes were firſt inuented, the Arians crying out againſt Nicene Councel, for the firſt: the Neſtorians againſt the Epheſiue Coūcel, for the ſecond: the Lutherans & Caluiniſts againſt the Laterā and the later Councels, for the third) theſe vvordes alſo notwithſtanding, by the iudgemēt of holy Church and Councels approued to be conſonant to Gods vvord, and made authenticall among the faithfull, are ſound and true vvordes, and not of thoſe kinde vvhich the Apoſtle calleth Nouelties.
                  
                  The vvordes then here forbidden,Heretical nouelties of vvordes. are the new prophane termes and ſpeaches inuented or ſpecially vſed by heretikes, ſuch as S. Irenee recordeth the Valentinians had a number moſt monſtruous: as the Manichees had alſo diuers, as may be ſeene in S. Auguſtine: The Arians had their
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Similis ſubſtantia, and Chriſt to be ex non exiſtentibus: the other heretikes after thoſe daies had their
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Chriſtiparam, and ſuch like, agreable to their ſectes. But the Proteſtants paſſe in this kinde,The Proteſtāts prophane nouelties of vvordes. as they excede moſt heretikes in the number of new opinions: as their Seruum arbitrium', their ſole faith, their fiduce, their apprehenſion of Chriſtes iuſtice, their imputatiue righteouſnes: their horrible termes of terrors, anguiſhes, diſtreſſes, diſtruſt, feares and feeling of hell paines in the ſoule of our Sauiour, to expreſſe their blaſphemous fiction of his temporall damnation, vvhich they call his deſcending to hell: Their markes, tokens, and badges Sacramentall, their Companation, Impanation, Circumpanation, to auoid the true conuerſion in the Euchariſt: their preſence in figure, in faith, ſigne, ſpirit, pleadge,
 effect, to auoid the reall preſence of Chriſtes body. Theſe and ſuch like innumerable vvhich they occupie in euery part of their falſe doctrine, are in the ſenſe that they vſe them, all falſe, captious and deceitfull vvordes, and are nouitates vocum here forbidden.
                  And though ſome of the ſaid termes haue been by ſome occaſion obiter vvithout il meaning ſpokē by Catholikes before theſe Heretikes aroſe, yet now knovving thē to be the propre ſpeaches of Heretikes, Chriſtiāmen are boūd to auoid them. Wherein the Church of God hath euer been as diligent to reſiſt Nouelties of vvordes, as her Aduerſaries are buſy to inuent them▪ for vvhich cauſe ſhe vvil not haue vs cōmunicate vvith them,Catholikes muſt abhorre from heretical phraſes and vvordes. nor folow their faſhion and phraſe nevvly inuented, though in the nature of the vvordes ſometime there be no harme. In S. Auguſtines daies vvhen Chriſtiā men had any good befallē them, or entered into any mans houſe, or met any frind by the vvay, they vſed alvvaies to ſay, Deo gratias. The Donatiſtes and Circumcellions of that time being nevvſangled, forſooke the old phraſe and vvould alvvaies ſay, Laus Deo: from vvhich the Catholike men did ſo abhorre (as the ſaid Doctor vvriteth) that they had as leefe mette a theefe as one that ſaid to them,
                        
                           •
                         Pſ. 132. 
                     Laus Deo, in ſteede of Deo gratias. As novv vve Catholikes muſt not ſay, The Lord, but Our Lord: as vve ſay, Our Lady, for his mother, not, The Lady. Let vs keepe our forefathers vvordes, and vve ſhal eaſily keepe our old and true ſaith that vve had of the firſt Chriſtians. Let them ſay, Amendement, abſtinence, the Lordes Supper, the Communion table, Elders, Miniſters, Superintendent, Congregation, ſo be it, praiſe ye the Lord, Morning-Praier, Euening-praier, and the reſt, as they vvill: Let vs auoid thoſe Nouelties of vvordes, according to the Apoſtles preſcript, and keepe the old termes, Penance, Faſting, Prieſt, Church, Biſhop, Maſſe, Mattins, Euenſong, the B. Sacrament, Altar, Oblation, Hoſt, Sacrifice, Alleluia, Amen, Lent, Palme-Sunday, Chriſimas, & the very vvordes vvil bring vs to the faith of our firſt Apoſtles, and condemne theſe nevv apoſtates nevv faith and phraſes.
                  
                     20. Falſely called knovvledge.]
                     Heretikes arrogate knowledge falſely ſo called. It is the propertie of al Heretikes to arrogate to them ſelues great knovvledge, and to condemne the ſimplicitie of their fathers the holy Doctors and the Church▪ but the Apoſtle calleth their pretended ſkill, a knovvledge falſely ſo called, being in truth high and deepe blindnes. Such (ſaith S. Irenaeus li. 5 c. 17.) as forſake the preaching of the Church, argue the holy Prieſts of vnſkilfulnes, not conſidering hovv far more vvorth a religious idiote is, them a blaſphemous and impudent ſophiſter, ſuch as al Heretikes be. And againe Vincentius Lirinenſis ſpeaking in the perſon of Heretikes ſaith, Come ô ye foliſh and miſerable men, that are commonly called Catholikes, and learne the true faith vvhich hath been hid many ages heretofore, but is reuealed and ſhevved of late, &c. See his vvhole booke concerning theſe matters.
               
            
         
         
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
            
               THE cheefe ſcope of this ſecond to Timothee, is, to open vnto him that his martyrdom is at hand. Vvhich yet he doth not plainely before the end: preparing firſt his minde vvith much circumſtance, becauſe he knevv it vvould grieue him ſore, and alſo might be a tentation vnto him. Therfore he talketh of the cauſe of his trouble, & of the revvard: that the one is honorable, and the other moſt glorious: and exhorteth him to be conſtant in the faith, to be ready alvvaies to ſuffer for it, to fulfil his miniſterie to the end, as him ſelf novv had done his.
            
               Vvhereby it is certaine, that it vvas vvritten at Rome, in his laſt apprehenſion and empriſonment there: as he ſignifieth by theſe vvordes Cap. 1: Oneſiphorus vvas not aſhamed of my chaine, but when he was come to Rome, carefully ſought me, &c. And of his martyrdom, thus: For I am novv ready to be offered, and the time of my reſolution (or death) is at hand. cap. 4.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Vvith his praiſes he couertly exhorteth him not to be diſmaied for his trouble, 6 (hauing grace giuen in Orders to helpe him, 8 and knovving for vvhat cauſe he is perſecuted) and namely vvith the example of Oneſiphorus.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt by the vvil of God, according to the promiſſe of the life which is in Chriſt IESVS: ✝ 
                     verse 2 to Timothee my deereſt ſonne, grace, mercie, peace from God the father, and Chriſt IESVS our Lord.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 I giue thankes to God, vvhom I ſerue from my progenitours in a pure conſcience, that vvithout intermiſſion I haue a memorie of thee in my praiers, night and day ✝ 
                     verse 4 deſiring to ſee thee, mindeful of thy teares, that I may be filled vvith ioy, ✝ 
                     verse 5 calling to minde that faith vvhich is in thee not feined, vvhich alſo dvvelt firſt ″ in thy grandmother Loïs, and thy mother Eunîce, and I am ſure that in thee alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For the vvhich cauſe I admoniſh thee that thou reſuſcitate the;Here againe it is plaine that holy Orders giue grace, & that euen by and in the external ceremonie of impoſing the Biſhops hands. And it is a maner of ſpeach ſpecially vſed in this Apoſtle and S. Luke, that Orders giue grace to the ordered, & that to take orders or authoritie to miniſter Sacramēts or preach, is, to be giuen or deliuered to Gods grace. Act. 14, 25.
                   grace of God, vvhich is in thee by the impoſition of my handes. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For God hath not giuen vs the ſpirit of feare: but of povver, and loue, and ſobrietie. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Be not therfore aſhamed of the teſtimonie of our Lord, nor of me his priſoner: but trauail vvith the Goſpel according to the povver of God, ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvho hath deliuered and called vs by his holy calling,Tit. 3, 5. * not according to our vvorkes, but according to his purpoſe and grace,Tit. 1, 
                        •
                     . vvhich vvas giuen to vs in Chriſt IESVS * before the ſecular times. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But it is manifeſted novv by the illumination 
 of our Sauiour IESVS Chriſt, vvho hath deſtroied death, & illuminated life and incorruption by the Goſpel: ✝ 
                     verse 11 vvherein
* I am appointed a preacher and Apoſtle and Maiſter of the Gentiles.1 Timo. 2, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the vvhich cauſe alſo I ſuffer theſe things: but I am not cōfounded. For I know whom I haue beleeued, & I am ſure that he is able to keepe my ″ depoſitum vnto that day.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Haue thou ″ a forme of ſound vvordes, vvhich thou haſt heard of me in faith &Faith and loue coupled commonly together in this Apoſtles vvritings.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   in the loue in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Keepe the good depoſitum by the holy Ghoſt, vvhich dvvelleth in vs. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Thou knovveſt this, that al vvhich are in Aſia, be auerted from me: of vvhom is Phigelus and Hermogenes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 Our Lord giue mercie to * the houſe of Oneſiphorus:2 Tim. 4, 19. becauſe he hath often refreſhed me, and hath;Vvhat a happie & meritorious thīg it is to relieue the afflicted for religiō, & not to be aſhamed of their diſgrace, yrōs or what miſeries ſo euer. not been aſhamed of my chaine. ✝ 
                     verse 17 but vvhen he vvas come to Rome: he ſought me carefully, and found me. ✝ 
                     verse 18 ″ Our Lord graunt him to finde mercie of our Lord in that day. And how many things he miniſtred to me at Epheſus, thou knovveſt better.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     5. In thy grandmother.] Though God ſhevv mercie to many that be of incredulous, heretical or il parents,A great bleſſing, to haue Catholike progenitors: and very cōmendable to cleaue faſt to their faith. yet it is a goodly benediction of God to haue good education and to haue good faithful progenitors and Catholike parents. And it is a great ſinne to forſake the faith of our fathers that be Catholikes, or contrarie to our education in the Church to folovv ſtrange doctrines, abandoning not onely our next natural parents faith, but the aūcient faith and beleefe of al our progenitors for many hundred yeres together. And if to folovv the faith of mother and grandmother onely, the Chriſtian religion being then but nevvly planted, vvas ſo commendable euen in a Biſhop, hovv much more is it novv laudable to cleaue faſt to the faith of ſo many our progenitors and ages that continued in the ſame Chriſtian religion vvhich they firſt receiued?
                  Our Proteſtants in their great vviſedom laugh at good ſimple men vvhen they talke of their fathers faith.Apol. cōt. But S. Hierom,Ruff. li. 1. c. 8. 
                     I am a Chriſtian,
                     The peoples ſpeaches of their fathers faith, is very Chriſtian and laudable. ſaith he, and borne of Chriſtian parents, and carie the ſigne of the croſſe in my forehead. And againe ep. 65. c. 3. Vntil this day the Chriſtian vvorld hath been vvithout this doctrine, that faith vvil I hold faſt being an old man, vvherein I vvas borne a child. And the holy Scriptures ſet vs often to ſchole to our fathers.Deut. 32. & Pſ. 43. 
                     Aſke thy fathers, and they vvil ſhevv thee, thy auncetours, and they vvil tel thee. And againe, Our fathers haue ſhevved vnto vs. And cōmonly the true God is called the God of the faithful and of their forefathers. Dan. 2. 3. And falſe Gods and nevv doctrines or opinions be named, Nevv and freſh, ſuch as their fathers vvorſhipped not. Deut. 32. Finally S. Paul both here andAct. 24. often els alleageth for his defenſe and commendation, that he vvas of faithful progenitors. And it is a caſe that Heretikes can not lightly bragge of, no one ſect commonly during ſo long vvithout intermiſſion,2 Cor. 11. that they can haue many progenitors of the ſaid ſect, Vvhich is a demonſtration that their faith is not true▪ and that it is impoſſible our Catholike faith to be falſe, ſuppoſing the Chriſtian religion to be true.
                  
                     12. Depoſitum.] A great comfort to al Chriſtians,Al our good deedes are laid vp vvith God, to be revvarded that euery of their good deedes and ſufferings for Chriſt, and al the vvorldly loſſes ſuſteined for defenſe or confeſsion of their faith, he extant vvith God, and kept as depoſitum, to be repaied or receiued againe in heauen. Vvhich if the vvorldings beleeued or conſidered, they vvould not ſo much maruel to ſee Catholike men ſo vvillingly to loſe land, libertie, credit, life and al for Chriſtes ſake and the Churches faith.
                  
                     13. A forme.] The Apoſtles did ſet dovvne a platforme of faith, doctrine, & phraſe of Catholike ſpeach and preaching, & that not ſo much by vvriting (as here vve ſee) as by vvord of mouth: to vvhich he referreth Timothee ouer and aboue his Epiſtles vnto him. And hovv preciſely Chriſtian
 Doctors ought to keepe the forme of vvordes aunciently appropriated to the myſteries and matters of our religion,We muſt ſpeake in Catholike termes, after a certaine rule of faith, and forme of vvordes. S. Auguſtine expreſſeth in theſe vvordes li. 10 de ciuit. c. 23. Philoſophers ſpeake vvith freedom of vvordes &c. but vve muſt ſpeake according to a certaine rule, leſt licentious libertie of vvordes breede an impious opiniō of the things alſo that are ſignified by the ſame. Trinitie, perſon, eſſence, Conſubſtantial, Tranſſubſtantiation, Maſſe, Sacrament, and ſuch like, be verba ſana (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) ſound vvordes, giuen to expreſſe certaine high truthes in religion, partly by the Apoſtles and firſt founders of our religion vnder Chriſt, and partly very aptly inuented by holy Councels and fathers, to expreſſe as neere as could be the high ineſtable or vnſpeakable veritie of ſome points, and to ſtoppe the Heretikes audacitie and inuention of nevv vvordes and prophane ſpeaches in ſuch things, vvhich the Apoſtle vvarneth Timothee to auoid 1 ep. c. 6, 10. and 2 ep. 2, 16. See the Annotations there.
                  
                     18. Our Lord.]
                     Relieuers of Cath. priſoners. To haue this praier of an Apoſtle, or any Prieſt or poore Cath. man ſo relieued, giueth the greateſt hope at the day of our death or general iudgemēt, that can be: and it is worth al the landes, honours, and riches of the vvorld.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He exhorteth him to labour diligently in his office, conſidering the revvard in Chriſt, and his denial of them that deny him. 14 Not to contend, but to ſhunne heretikes: neither to be moued to ſee ſome ſubuerted, conſidering that the elect continue Catholikes, and that in the Church be of al ſortes. 24 Yet vvithal ſvveetenes to reclaime the deceiued.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THOV therfore my ſonne, be ſtrong in the grace vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS: ✝ 
                     verse 2 & the things vvhich thou haſt heard of me by many witneſſes, theſe cōmend to faithful men, vvhich ſhal be fit to teach others alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Labour thou as a good ſouldiar of Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 4 ″ No man being a ſouldiar to God, intāgleth him ſelf vvith ſecular buſineſſes: that he may pleaſe him to vvhom he hath approued him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For he alſo that ſtriueth for the maiſterie, is not crovvned vnleſſe he ſtriue lavvfully. ✝ 
                     verse 6 The huſbandman that laboureth, muſt firſt take of the fruites. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vnderſtand vvhat I ſay: for our Lord vvil giue thee in al things vnderſtanding. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Be mindeful that our Lord IESVS Chriſt is riſen againe from the dead, of the ſeede of Dauid, according to my Goſpel, ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvherein I labour euen vnto bandes, as a malefactour: but the vvord of God is not tied. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Therfore; Marke here that the elect (though ſure of ſaluation) yet are ſaued by meanes of their preachers & teachers, as alſo by their ovvne endeuours. I ſuſtaine al things for the elect, that they alſo may obtaine the ſaluation, vvhich is in Chriſt IESVS, vvith heauenly glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 11 A faithful ſaying. For if vve be dead vvith him, vve ſhal liue alſo together. ✝ 
                     verse 12 If vve ſhal ſuſtaine,Mat. 10, Ro. 3, 3. vve ſhal alſo reigne together. * If vve ſhal deny, he alſo vvil denie vs. ✝ 
                     verse 13 * If vve beleeue not: he continueth faithful, he can not denie him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Theſe things admoniſh: teſtifying before our Lord.
               
                   Contend not in vvordes, for it is profitable for nothing, but for the ſubuerſion of them that heare. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Carefully prouide to preſent thy ſelf approued to God, a vvorkeman not to be confounded, ″ rightly handling the vvord of truth. ✝ 
                     verse 16 ButSee the Annotatiō before 1 Tim. 6. v. 20. profane and vaine ſpeaches auoid: for they doe much grovv to impietie: ✝ 
                     verse 17 & ″ their ſpeache ſpreadeth as a canker: of vvhom is Hymenaeus and Philêtus: ✝ 
                     verse 18 vvho haue erred from the truth, ſaying that the reſurrection is done already, and haue ſubuerted the faith of ſome.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 But the ſure foundation of God ſtandeth, hauing this ſeale, Our Lord knovveth, vvho be his, and let euery one depart from iniquitie that nameth the name of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But ″ in a great houſe there are not only veſſels of gold and of ſiluer, but alſo of vvood and of earth: and certaine in deede vnto honour, but certaine vnto contumelie. ✝ 
                     verse 21 If any man therfore ſhal ″ cleanſe him ſelf from theſe, he ſhal be a veſſel vnto honour, ſanctified & profitable to our Lord, prepared to euery good vvorke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 But youthful deſires flee: and purſue iuſtice, faith, charitie, & peace vvith them that inuocate our Lord from a pure hart.Tit. 3, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * fooliſh and vnlearned queſtiōs auoid, knovving that they ingender braules. ✝ 
                     verse 24 But the ſeruant of our Lord muſt not vvrangle: but be milde tovvard al men, apt to teache, patient, ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvith modeſtie admoniſhing them that reſiſt the truth: leſt ſometime; Conuerſion from ſinne and hereſie is the gift of God and of his ſpecial grace: yet here vve ſee, good exhortations and praier and ſuch other helpes of man be profitable therevnto. Vvhich could not be, if vve had not free vvill. God giue them repentance to knovv the truth: ✝ 
                     verse 26 and they recouer them ſelues from the ſnares of the deuil, of vvhom they are held captiue at his vvil.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     4 No man being a ſouldiar.]
                     Vvhat ſecular affaires do not agree nor cōſiſt vvith ſpiritual mens function. Firſt of al, the Apoſtle (1 Cor. 7.) maketh mariage & the needful cares, ſolicitude, and diſtractions therevpon euer depending, ſpecial impediments of al ſuch as ſhould employ them ſelues vvholy to Gods ſeruice, as Biſhops & Prieſts are bound to do. He that is vvith a vvife (ſaith he) is careful for the vvorld, hovv to pleaſe his vvife, and is diſtracted or deuided. 2 Cor. 7.
                  Secondly, the practiſe of Phyſicke, merchandiſe, or any other profane facultie and trade of life to gather riches, and much more to be giuen to hunting, hauking, gameuing, ſhevves, enterludes, or the like paſtimes, is here forbidden.
                  Thirdly, the ſeruices of Princes and manifold baſe offices done to them for to obtaine dignities and promotions,Hovv ſpiritual men may ſerue ſecular Princes, & deale in ciuil cauſes. are diſagreable to Prieſtly functions▪ not ſo, to be their chaplens for his purpoſe to preach vnto them, to heare their confeſſions, to miniſter the Sacraments vnto them, to ſay Diuine ſeruice before them, and ſuch other ſpiritual dueties, for, al ſuch ſeruices done to principal perſons both of the Clergie and Laitie, be godly and cōſonant to Prieſtly vocation. As alſo ſeruing of Princes and Commonvveales in ciuil cauſes and matters of ſtate, in making peace and quietnes
 among the people, by deciding or compounding their controuerſies, and al ſuch like affaires tending to the honour of God and good of men, and to the vpholding of true religion, vvhen they may be done vvithout notorious damage or hinderance of their ſpiritual charge, or vvhen the hurtes thereof be aboundantly recompenſed by the neceſſarie dueties done for the general good of kingdom or Countrie:in vit. 8. Ambr. & Bern. al ſuch things (I ſay) be lavvful and often very requiſite. And S. Auguſtine, S. Ambroſe, S. Bernard, and other holy Biſhops of old vvere much occupied therein, as vve ſee in S. Auguſtines booke de opere Monachorum c. 29. & Poſsid. in vit. c. 19.
                  
                  
                     15. Rightly.]
                     Catholikes only, right hādlers of the Scripture. The Scriptures or chalenge of the vvord of God is common to Catholikes and Heretikes, but al is in the handling of them, theſe later handle them guilefully, adultering the vvord of God,2 Cor. 2 & 4. as * els vvhere the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: the other ſincerely after the maner of the Apoſtles and doctors of Gods Church. Vvhich the Greeke expreſſeth by a ſignificant vvord of cutting a thing ſtraight by a line, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     17. Their ſpeache.]
                     Heretical bookes and ſermōs are to be auoided. The ſpeaches, preachings, and vvritings of Heretikes be peſtiferous, cōtagious, and creeping like a canker. therfore Chriſtian men muſt neuer heare their ſermons nor read their bookes. For ſuch men haue a popular vvay of talke vvhereby the vnlearned, and ſpecially vvomen loden vvith ſinne, are eaſily beguiled. Nothing is ſo eaſy (ſaith S. Hierom) as vvith voluble and rolling tong to deceiue the rude people, vvhich admire vvhatſoeuer they vnderſtand not. Ep. 2. ad Nepot. c. 10.
                  
                  
                     20. In a great houſe] He meaneth not that Hymenaeus and Philétus (of vvhō he ſpake immediatly before) or other heretikes, be properly vvithin the Church, as catholike men are,Who are out of the Church or vvithin it. though greuous ſinners: but that euil men vvho for the puniſhment of their ſinnes become heretikes, vvere before they fell from their faith as veſſels of contumelie, vvithin the Church. Yea and often alſo after they be ſeuered in hart and in the ſight of God, ſo long as they ſtand in external profeſsion and vſe of the ſame, Sacraments, and in the outvvard fellovvſhip of Catholikes, not yet either ſeparated of them ſelues, nor caſt out by the gouernours of the Church, ſo long (we ſay) they be after a ſort in the Church: though properly and in deede they be out of the compaſſe of Gods houſe. Mary of thoſe that are openly ſeuered in Sacraments, Seruice, and communion, there is no queſtion but they are out of the Church.
                  
                     21. Cleanſe him ſelf.]
                     Free vvil. Man then hath free vvil to make him ſelf a veſſel of ſaluation or damnation: though ſaluation be attributed to Gods mercie principally, the other to his iuſt iudgement: neither of both being repugnant to our free vvil, but vvorking vvith and by the ſame, al ſuch effectes in vs as to his prouidence and our deſerts be agreable.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He prophecieth of Heretikes to come, 6 and noteth certaine then alſo for ſuch, bidding him to auoid them, 10 and (vvhatſoeuer perſecution befall for it) to cōtinue conſtant in the Catholike doctrine, both becauſe of his Maiſter (S. Paul him ſelf) 15 and alſo becauſe of his ovvne knovvledge in the Scriptures.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND this knovv thou,1 Timot. 4, 1. that * in the laſt daies ſhal approache perilous times. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and ″ men ſhal be louers of them ſelues, couetous, hautie, proud, blaſphemous, not obedient to their parents, vnkinde, vvicked, ✝ 
                     verse 3 vvithout affection, vvithout peace, accuſers, incontinent, vnmerciful, vvithout benignitie, ✝ 
                     verse 4 traitours, ſtubburne puffed vp, and louers of voluptuouſnes more then of God: ✝ 
                     verse 5 hauing an appearance in deede of pietie, but denying the vertue thereof. And theſe auoid. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For of theſe be they that craftely enter into houſes: and leade captiue 
                     •
                  eely ″ vvomen loden vvith
 ſinnes, vvhich are ledde vvith diuers deſire
                     •
                  . ✝ 
                     verse 7 alvvaies learning, and neuer attaining to the knovvledge of the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But as; That thoſe Magicians vvhich reſiſted Moyſes, were thus called, it is not written in al the old Teſtamēt, therfore it came to the Apoſtles knowledge by tradition, as the Church novv hath the names of the 3 kings, of the penitēt theefe, of the ſouldiar that pearced Chriſtes ſide on the Croſſe, and of the like. Iannes & Mambres * reſiſted Moyſes, ſo theſe alſo reſiſt the truth,Exo. 7. men corrupted in minde, reprobate cōcerning the faith. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But they ſhal proſper no further: for their ″ folly ſhal be manifeſt to al, as theirs alſo vvas.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 But thou haſt attained to my doctrine, inſtitution, purpoſe, faith, longanimitie, loue, patience, ✝ 
                     verse 11 perſecutions, paſſions: vvhat maner of things vvere done to me at Antioche, at Iconium, at Lyſtra: vvhat maner of perſecutiōs I ſuſtained. and out of al our Lord deliuered me. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And ″ al that vvil liue godly in Chriſt IESVS, ſhal ſuffer perſecution. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But euil men and ſeducers ſhal proſper to the vvorſe: erring, and driuing into errour. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But thou,; In al danger and diuerſitie of falſe ſectes, S. Paules admonition is, euer to abide in that vvas firſt taught & deliuered, neuer to giue ouer our old faith for a new fanſie. This is it which before he calleth depoſitum. 1. Tim. 6. and 2. Tim. 1.
                   continue in thoſe things vvhich thou haſt learned, and are committed to thee: knowing of vvhom thou haſt learned: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and becauſe from thine infancie thou haſt knovven the holy Scriptures, vvhich can inſtruct thee to ſaluation, by the faith that is in Chriſt IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 ″ * All Scripture inſpired of God,2. Pet. 1, 21. is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to inſtruct in iuſtice: ✝ 
                     verse 17 that the man of God may be perfect, inſtructed to euery good vvorke.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     2. Men ſhal be.] Al theſe wordes S. Cyprian expoundeth of ſuch as by pride and diſobedience reſiſt Gods Prieſts. Let no faithful man, ſaith he, that keepeth in minde our Lordes and the Apoſtles admonition, maruel if he ſee in the later times ſome proud and ſtubburne fellowes and the enimies of Gods Prieſts, goe out of the Church or impugne the ſame: vvhen both our Lord and th Apoſtle foretold vs that ſuch ſhould be. Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 3.
                  
                  
                     6. Women loden.]
                     Women eaſily ſeduced by hereſie. Women loden with ſinnes, are for ſuch their deſeruings, and through the frailtie of their ſexe, more ſubiect to the heretikes deceites, then men: the enemie attempting (as he did in the fall of our firſt parents) by them to ouerthrovv men. See S. Hierem vpon the 3 chapter of Ieremie. Where he addeth that euery hereſie is firſt broched propter gulam & ventrem, for gluttonie and belly-cheere.
                  
                     9. Folly manifeſt.]
                     The folly of Heretikes in time appeareth. Al heretikes in the beginning ſeeme to haue ſome ſhew of truth, God for iuſt puniſhment of mens ſinnes permitting them for ſome vvhile in ſome perſons and places to preuaile: but in ſhort time God detecteth them, and openeth the eies of men to ſee their decei tes: in ſo much that after the firſt brunt they be mainteined by force onely, al wiſe men in maner ſeing their falſhod, though for troubling the ſtate of ſuch common weales vvhere vnluckely they haue been receiued, they can not be ſo ſodenly extirped.
                  
                     12. Al that vvil liue.]
                     Perſecution. Al holy men ſuffer one kinde of perſecutiō or other, being greeued and moleſted by the vvicked, one way or an other: but not al that ſuffer perſecution, be holy, as al malefactors. The Church and Catholike Princes perſecute heretikes, and be perſecuted of them againe, as S. Auguſtine often declareth. See ep. 48.
                  
                  
                     13. Proſper.] Though hereſies and the authors of them be after a while diſcouered & by litle and litle forſaken generally of the honeſt, diſcrete, and men careful of their owne
 
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                      ſaluation, yet their authors and other great ſinners proceede from one errour and hereſie to an other, and finally to plaine Atheiſme and al Diueliſh diſorder.
                  
                     16. Al Scripture.] Beſides the Apoſtles teaching and tradition, the reading of holy Scriptures is a great defenſe and helpe of the faithful, aud ſpecially of a Biſhop, not onely to auoid and condemne al hereſies,The great profit of reading the Scriptures. but to the guiding of a man in al iuſtice, good life and vvorkes. Vvhich commendation is not here giuen to the bookes of the new Teſtament onely (vvhereof he here ſpeaketh not, as being yet for a great part not vvritten) but to the Scripture of the old Teſtament alſo, yea and to euery booke of it. For there is not one of them, nor any part of them, but it is profitable to the end aforeſaid, if it be read and vnderſtood according to the ſame Spirit vvherewith it vvas vvritten.
                  The Heretikes vpon this commendation of holy Scriptures,The Heretikes foliſh argumēt: Al Scripture is profitable, ergo only Scripture is neceſſarie & ſufficient. pretend (very ſimply in good ſooth) that therfore nothing is neceſſarie to iuſtice and ſaluation but Scriptures. As though euery thing that is profitable or neceſſarie to any effect, excluded al other helpe, and vvere onely ynough to attaine the ſame. By vvhich reaſon a man might as vvel proue that the old Teſtament vvere ynough, and ſo exclude the new: or any one peece of al the old, and thereby exclude the reſt. For he affirmeth euery Scripture to haue the foreſaid vtilities. and they might ſee in the very next line before, that he requireth his conſtant perſeuêrance in the doctrine vvhich he had taught him ouer and aboue that he had learned out of the Scriptures of the old Teſtament, vvhich he had read from his infancie, but could not thereby learne al the myſteries of Chriſtian religion therein. Neither doth the Apoſtle affirme here that he had his knowledge of Scriptures, by reading onely, vvithout helpe of maiſters and teachers, as the Aduerſaries herevpon (to committe the holy Scriptures to euery mans preſumption) do gather: but affirmeth onely that Timothee knevv the Scriptures and therfore had ſtudied them by hearing good readers and teachers, as S. Paul him ſelf did of Gamaliel and the like, and as al chriſtian ſtudents doe, that be trained vp from their youth in Catholike vniuerſities in the ſtudie of Diuinitie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He requireth him to be earneſt vvhile he may, becauſe the time vvil come vvhen they vvil not abide Catholike preaching, 5 and to fulfil his courſe, as him ſelf novv hath done. 9 and to come vnto him vvith ſpeede, becauſe the reſt of his traine are diſperſed, and he dravveth novv to heauen.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Teſtifie before God and IESVS Chriſt vvho ſhal iudge the liuing and the dead,The Epiſtle for holy Doctors, and for S. Dominike Auguſt. 4.
                   and by his aduent, and his kingdom: ✝ 
                     verse 2 Preach the vvord. vrge in ſeaſon, out of ſeaſon, reproue, beſeeche, rebuke in al patience and doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For ″ there ſhal be a time vvhen they vvil not beare 
                     •
                  ound doctrine: but according to their ovvne deſires they vvil heape to them ſelues maiſters, hauing itching eares, ✝ 
                     verse 4 and from the truth certes they vvil auert their hearing, and to fables they vvil be conuerted. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But be thou vigilant, labour in al things, doe the vvorke of an Euangeliſt, fulfil thy miniſterie. Be ſober. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For I am euen novvThe martyrdom of ſaincts is ſo acceptable to God, that it is counted as it vvere a ſacrifice in his ſight, and therfore hath many effectes both in the partie that ſuffereth it, and in others that are partakers of the merite as of a ſacrifice: vvhich name it hath by a Metaphore. to be ſacrificed: & the time of my reſolutiō is at hand. ✝ 
                     verse 7 I haue fought a good fight, I haue conſummate my courſe, I haue kept the faith. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Concerning the reſt, there is laid vp for me ″ a crovvne of iuſtice, vvhich our Lord vvil render to me in that day, a iuſt
 iudge: and not only to me, but to them alſo that loue his comming. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 Make haſt to come to me quickly. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For Demas hath left me, louing this vvorld, and is gone to Theſſalonica: Creſcens into Galatia,Col. 4, 14▪
                   Titus into Dalmatia. ✝ 
                     verse 11 * Luke only is vvith me. Take Marke, and bring him vvith thee: for he is profitable to me for the miniſterie. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But Tychicus I haue ſent to Epheſus. ✝ 
                     verse 13 The cloke that I left at Troas vvith Carpus, cōming bring vvith thee, and the bookes, eſpecially the parchement. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Alexander the Copperſmith hath ſhevved me much euil, our Lord vvil revvard him according to his vvorkes: ✝ 
                     verse 15 vvhom doe thou alſo auoid, for he hath greatly reſiſted our vvordes. ✝ 
                     verse 16 In my firſt anſvver no man vvas with me, but al did forſake me: be it not imputed to them. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But our Lord ſtoode to me, and ſtrengthened me, that by me the preaching may be accompliſhed, and al Gentiles may heare: and I was deliuered from the mouth of the lion. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Our Lord

                     
                        •
                     vvil deliuer
                  
                     •
                   hath deliuered' me from al euil vvorke: and vvil ſaue me vnto his heauenly kingdom▪ to vvhom be glorie for euer & euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 Salute Priſca and Aquila,2 Timo. 1, 16. and * the houſe of Oneſiphorus. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Eraſtus remained at Corinth. And Trophimus I left ſicke at Milêtum. ✝ 
                     verse 21 Make haſt to come before vvinter. Eubûlus and Pudens andThis Linus vvas coadiutor with & vnder 
                        •
                     . Peter, & ſo counted ſecōd in the number of Popes. Linus and Claudia, and al the brethren, ſalute thee. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith thy ſpirit. Grace be vvith you. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     3. There ſhal be a time.] If euer this time come (as needes it muſt that the Apoſtle foreſavv and foretold) novv it is vndoubtedly▪
                     The Apoſtle prophecied of our nevv delicate preachers. for the properties fall ſo iuſt in euery point vpon our nevv Maiſters and their Diſciples, that they may ſeeme to be pourtered out, rather then prophecied of. Neuer vvere there ſuch delicate Doctors that could ſo pleaſantly clavv and ſo ſvveetly rubbe the itching eares of their hearers, as theſe, vvhich haue a doctrine framed for euery mans phamſie, luſt, liking and deſire▪
                     Eſa. 30. v. 10. the people not ſo faſt crying, Speake placentia, things that pleaſe: but the Maiſters as faſt vvarranting them to doe placentia.
                  
                  
                     8. Acrovvne of iuſtice.] This place conuinceth for the Catholikes,Vvorkes meritorious. that al good vvorkes done by Gods grace after the firſt iuſtification, be truely and properly meritorious, and fully vvorthy of euerlaſting life: and that therevpon heauen is the due and iuſt ſtipend, crovvne, or recompenſe, vvhich God by his iuſtice ovveth to the perſons ſo vvorking by his grace▪ for he rendreth or repaieth heauen as a iuſt iudge,How heauen is due both of iuſtice and mercie. and not onely as a merciful giues▪ and the crovvne vvhich he paieth, is not onely of mercie or fauour or grace, but alſo of iuſtice. It is his merciful fauour and grace, that vve vvorke vvel & merite heauen: it is his iuſtice, for thoſe merites to giue vs a crovvne correſpondent in heauen. S. Auguſtine vpon theſe vvordes of the Apoſtle, expreſſeth both breifely thus,
 
                     Hovv ſhould be repay as a iuſt iudge, vnles he had firſt giuen as a merciful father. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . de grat. & lib. arbit. c. 6.
                  And vvhen you heare or read any thing in the Scriptures, that may ſeeme to derogate from mans vvorkes in this caſe, it is alvvaies meant of vvorkes conſidered in their ovvne nature and valure, not implying the grace of Chriſt, by vvhich grace it cōmeth, & not of the vvorke in it ſelf that vve haue a right to heauen & deſerue it vvorthily:It is not of vs, but of Gods grace, that vvorkes be meritorious. vvhich the Apoſtle in the 6 to the Hebrues more then inſinuateth, ſaying theſe vvordes, God is not vniuſt, to forget your vvorke & loue vvhich you haue ſhovved in his name &c. As though he vvould ſay,Mat. 20. that he vvere vniuſt if he did forget to recompenſe their vvorkes. * The parable alſo of the men ſent into the vineyard, proueth that heauen is our ovvne right, bargained for and vvrought for, and accordingly paid vnto vs as our hire at the day of iudgement,To ſuch good vvorkes heauē is due: to ſay the contrarie, is to derogate from Gods grace. for that is 
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vvhereby the Scripture ſo often calleth it. It is the goale, the marke, the price, the hire, of al ſtriuing, running, labouring, due both by promis and by couenant and right dette. See a notable place in S. Auguſtine in Pſal. 83▪ in fine: and 100 in initie, & ho. 14▪ c. 2. li. 50▪ hom: S. Cyprian alſo, and namely the later end of his booke de opere & 
                           •••
                        moſyna: and thou ſhalt eaſily contemne the contrarie falſhod, vvhich doth not ſo much derogate from mans vvorkes, as from Gods grace vvhich is the cauſe and ground of al vvorthines in mans merites. S. Auguſtines vvordes be theſe,In Pſ. 100▪
                      
                     Marke that he to vvhom our Lord gaue grace, hath our Lord alſo his detter. He found him a giuer, in the time of mercie: he hath him his detter in the time of iudgement. See the place and the reſt her coted, vvhere he examineth and explicateth the matter at large.
               
            
         
         
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TITVS.
            
               THAT Titus vvas a Gentil, and not a Ievv, and that he vvas in S. Paules traine, at the leaſt the 14 yere after his conuerſion, if not before, vve vnderſtand by the Epiſtle to the Galatians c. 2. And that he continued vvith him to the very end, appeareth in the ſecond to Timothee c. 4. Vvhere he maketh mention that he ſent him from Rome into Dalmatia, vvhen him ſelf vvas ſhortly after to be put to death.
            And therefore although S. Luke neuer name him in the Actes, as neither him ſelf, yet no doubt he comprehendeth him commonly, vvhen he ſpeaketh thus in the firſt perſon plurall: Forthvvith vve ſought to goe into Macedonia. Act, 16. For S. Paul alſo ſent him to Corinth, betvvene the vvriting of his 1 & 2 to the Corinthians (vvhich time concurreth vvith Act. 19) by occaſion vvhereof he maketh much and honorable mention of him in the ſaid ſecond Epiſtle c▪ 2. &c. 7. and againe * he ſent him vvith the ſame Epiſtle:2 Corinth. 8. both times about great matters: ſo that no doubt he vvas euen then alſo a Biſhop, and receiued accordingly of the Corinthians, vvith feare and trembling. 2. Cor. 7, v. 15. But the ſame is plainer in this Epiſtle to him ſelf c. 1. v. 5. Vvhere the Apoſtle ſaith: for this cauſe I left thee at Crete, &c. By vvhich vvordes it is manifeſt alſo, that this Epiſtle vvas not vvritten during the ſtorie of the Actes (ſeing that no mention is there of S. Paules being in the ile of Crete) but after his diſmiſsion at Rome out of his firſt trouble, and before his ſecond or laſt trouble there, as is euident by theſe vvordes: Vvhen I ſhall ſend to thee Artemas or Tychicus, make haſt to come to me to Nicopolis, for there I haue determined to vvinter. Tit. 3.
            Therefore he inſtructeth him (and in him, all Biſhops) much like as he doth Timothee, vvhat qualities he muſt require in them that he ſhall make prieſts and Biſhops, in vvhat ſort to preach, and to teach al ſortes of men, to commend good vvorkes vnto them: finally, him ſelf to be their example in all goodnes.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TITVS.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Of vvhat qualitie the Prieſts and Biſhops muſt be: 9 namely learned, conſidering the Iudaical ſeducers of that time. 12 That the Cretenſians muſt be roughly vſed, 10 haue them continue ſound in faith.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PAVL the ſeruant of God, and an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt according to the faith of the elect of God and knowledge of the truth: vvhich is according to pietie ✝ 
                     verse 2 into the hope of life euerlaſting, vvhich he promiſed that lieth not, God,
* before the ſecular times:2. Tim. 1, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 3 but hath manifeſted in due times his vvord in preaching, vvhich is cō
                  mitted to me according to the precept of our Sauiour God: ✝ 
                     verse 4 to Titus my beloued ſonne according to the cōmon faith, grace and peace from God the father, and Chriſt IESVS our Sauiour.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 For this cauſe left I thee in Crete, that thou ſhouldeſt reforme the things that are vvanting, and ſhouldeſt ″ ordaine prieſtes by cities, as I alſo appointed thee: ✝ 
                     verse 6 * if any be vvithout crime,1. Tim. 3, 2. the huſband ″ of one vvife, hauing faithful children, not in the accuſation of riote, or not obedient. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For a Biſhop muſt be vvithout crime, as the ſtevvard of God: not proud, not angrie, not giuen to vvine, no ſtriker, not couetous of filthy lucre: ✝ 
                     verse 8 but giuen to hoſpitalitie, gentle, ſober, iuſt, holy, continent: ✝ 
                     verse 9 embracing that faithful vvord vvhich is according to doctrine, that he may be able to exhort in ſound doctrine, & to reproue them that gaineſay it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 For there be many diſobedient, vaine-ſpeakers, and ſeducers, eſpecially they that are of the Circumciſion. ✝ 
                     verse 11 vvho
 muſt be controuled. vvho ſubuert vvhole houſes, teaching the things they ought not, for filthie lucre. ✝ 
                     verse 12 One of them ſaid,Epimenides. their ov
                     •
                  ne proper prophete, The Cretenſians alvvaies lier
                        •
                     , naughtie beaſtes, ſlouthful bellies. ✝ 
                     verse 13 This teſtimonie is true. For the vvhich cauſe rebuke them ſharpely, that they may be ſound in the faith, ✝ 
                     verse 14 not attending to Ievviſh fables, and commaundements of men auerting them ſelues from the truth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 * Al things areHe ſpeaketh not of the Churches abſtaining from meates ſome times, vvhich is not for any vncleannes in the creatures, but for chaſtening their bodies: but he meaneth the Ievviſh ſuperſtition, vvho novv being Chriſtians, vvould not ceaſe to put difference of cleane and vncleane according to their old lavv. See S. Auguſtine Cont. Fauſt. li. 31. c. 4.
                   cleane to the cleane:Rom. 14, 20. but to the polluted and to infidels nothing is cleane: but polluted are both their minde and conſcience. ✝ 
                     verse 16 They confeſſe that they knovv God: but in their vvorkes they deny, vvhereas they be abominable and incredulous and to euery good vvorke reprobate.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     5. Ordaine Prieſts.]
                     Prieſts muſt be conſecrated by Biſhops only. Though Prieſts or Biſhops may be nominated and elected by the Princes, people, or Patrons of places, according to the vſe of the time and diuerſitie of Countries and faſhions, yet they can not be ordered and conſecrated but by a Biſhop vvho vvas him ſelf rightly ordered or conſecrated before, as this Titus vvas by S. Paul. And here it ſeemeth that he did not onely conſecrate them vvhom the people had elected before,The popular election of the Cleargie taken avvay. but him ſelf alſo made choiſe of the perſons, no mention being here made of any other election popular. Vvhich though it vvere long vſed in the primitiue Church, yet for diuers cauſes and ſpecially for continual tumultes, partialities, and diſorders vvhich S. Auguſtine much complaineth of in his time, vvas iuſtly taken avvay, and other better meanes of their deſignement appointed. See Conc. Laodic. cap. 12. 13. S. Auguſt. de adult. coniug. li. 2. 
                           •
                        . 20. Ep. 110. and Poſsid. in vita. Aug. 
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  And that the ordering of Prieſts or impoſition of hands to that purpoſe, belongeth onely to Biſhops,The preeminēce of a Biſhop aboue a Prieſt. and to no inferior Prieſts or other perſons, it is plaine by the Apoſtolike practiſe ſet dovvne in the Scriptures, namely in the Actes, and in the Epiſtles to Timothee and Titus. And S. Hierom, vvho ſeemeth ſometimes to ſay that in the primitiue Church there vvas no great difference betvvixt a Biſhop and Prieſt, yet he euer excepteth giuing holy Orders, vvhich preeminence he attributeth to Biſhops onely. ep. 85. as he doth alſo Confirming the Baptized by giuing them the holy Ghoſt through impoſition of hand and holy Chriſme.To put no differēce betvvene them is Aërius hereſie. 
                     Dial. cont. Lucifer. c. 4. Note alſo that Aërius vvas of old condemned of hereſie, for holding that there vvas no difference betvvixt a Prieſt and a Biſhop. Epiph. har. 75. Auguſt. har. 53. Note laſtly the fraudulent tranſlation of the Heretikes alvvaies, turning for Prieſts (vvhich here is euident to be a calling of Order and office) elders, ſaying, That thou ordaine Elders. vvhich in our vulgar tonge ſignifieth the age, and not the Office properly:Heret. tranſlation. and al this for hatred of Prieſts.
                  6. Of one vvife.] To that vvhich is ſaid vpon the like vvordes 1 Tim. 3: adde this teſtimonie of S. Epiphanius li. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. cont. hareſe
                        •
                      in fine. Holy Prieſthod, ſaith he, for the moſt part procedeth of Virgins:
                        Bigami excluded from holy Orders, and the cauſes thereof. and if not of virgins, yet of them that liue a ſole or ſingle life: but and if the ſingle and ſole perſons ſuffice not to the Miniſterie, of ſuch as conteine from their vviues, or after once marying remaine vvidovves. For, him that hath him maried tvviſe, it is not lavvful to take to Prieſthod &c. If you liſt to ſee the cauſes vvhy bigamie is forbidden them that are to be Prieſts, and continencie required of the Clergie, ſee the ſame author li. 2. to. 1. hareſ. 59. S. Ambroſe li. 1. Offic. c. 50. and vpon 1 Tim. 3. S. Auguſtine de b
                        •
                     no Coniugal. c. 18. S. Hierom ep. 50 c. 5 ad Pammachium, and againſt Iouinian li. 1 c. 19. S. L
                           •
                        o 
                     
                        •
                     p. 87. and other auncient authors.
                  
                  And if the ſtudious reader peruſe al antiquitie,The notable men of both Teſtamēts, that liued cōtinētly from vviues. he ſhal finde al notable Biſhops and Prieſts of Gods Church to haue been ſingle, or continent from their vviues, if any vvere maried before they came to the Clergie. So vvas S. Paul, and exhorteth al men to the like. 1 Cor. 7, 7. So vvere al the Apoſtles after they folovved Chriſt, at S. Hierom vvitneſſeth, affirming that our Lord loued
 Iohn ſpecially for his virginitie. Apol. ad Pammach. c. 8. & li. 1 cont. Iouin. c. 14. S. Ignatius 
                        
                           •
                        p. 
                           •
                         ad Philadelph. ſaith of the ſaid Iohn, and of Timothee, Titus, Euodius, Clement, that they liued and died in chaſtitie, reckening vp of the old-Teſtament diuers notable perſonages that did the ſame, as Elias, Ieſus Naue (othervviſe called Ioſue) Melchlſedec, Eliſaeus, Hiere
                        •••
                     e, Iohn Baptiſt. No man is ignorant that al the notable fathers of the Greeke and Latin Church liued chaſt: Athanaſius, Baſil, Nazianzene, Chryſoſtom, Cyprian, Hilarie (vvho entered into holy Orders after his vviues death) Ambroſe, Hierom, Auguſtine, Leo, Gregorie the great. Certaine other notable fathers had once vviues, but no holy men euer vſed them, much leſſe maried, after they vvere in holy Orders.Only the Proteſtants complaine that they haue not the gift of chaſtitie. A maruelous thing, that ſo many heretofore ſhould haue the gift of chaſtitie then, and novv ſo fevv, if the Proteſtants ſay true, that ſkarſe one among them in our age of al their ſectes, euen of their principal Superintendents, hath had it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Vvhat to preach both to old and yong (not onely vvith vvord but vvith example alſo) and to ſeruants. 11 For there are of al ſortes in the Church, and they muſt be inſtructed accordingly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BVT doe thou ſpeake the things that become ſound doctrine. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Old men that they be ſober,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      pudicos▪
                   chaſt, vviſe, ſoūd in the faith, in loue, in patience. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Old women in like maner, in holy attire, not il ſpeakers, not giuen to much wine: teaching vvel, ✝ 
                     verse 4 that they may teach the yong women vviſedom, to loue their huſbands, to loue their children, ✝ 
                     verse 5 vviſe, chaſt, ſober, hauing a care of the houſe, gētle, ſubiect to their huſbandes, that the vvord of God be not blaſphemed. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Yong men in like maner exhort that they be ſober. ✝ 
                     verse 7 In al things ſhevv thy ſelf an example of good vvorkes, in doctrine, in integritie, in grauitie, ✝ 
                     verse 8 the vvord ſound, irreprehenſible: that he vvhich is on the cōtrarie part, may be afraid,Eph. 6, 5. hauing no euil to ſay of vs. ✝ 
                     verse 9 * Seruants to be ſubiect to their maiſters,Col. 3, 22. in al things pleaſing, not gainſaying:
1. Pet. 2, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 10 not defrauding, but in al things ſhevving good faith, that they may adorne the doctrine of our Sauiour God in al things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 For the grace of God our Sauiour hath appeared to al men:The Epiſtle at the firſt Maſſe on Chriſtmas day, and vpon the Circumciſion of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 12 inſtructing vs that denying impietie & worldly deſires, vve liue ſoberly, and iuſtly, and godly in this vvorld, ✝ 
                     verse 13 expecting the bleſſed hope and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪
                   aduent of the glorie of the great God and our Sauiour IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvho gaue him ſelf for vs, that he might redeeme vs from al iniquitie, and might cleanſe to him ſelf a people acceptable, a purſuer of
 good vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Theſe things ſpeake, and exhort ⊢ and rebuke 
;Biſhops muſt be ſtout and cōmaund in Gods cauſe, and the people muſt in no vviſe diſobey or contemne them. vvith al authoritie. Let no man contemne thee.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  To teach them obedience vnto Princes, and meekenes tovvardes al men, conſidering that vve alſo vvere as they, til God of his goodnes brought vs to Baptiſme. 8 To teach good vvorkes, 9 and to auoid vaine queſtion
                        •
                     ; 10 and obſtinate Heretikes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  ADMONISH them to be ſubiect to Princes and Poteſtates, to obey at a vvord, to be ready to euery good vvorke, ✝ 
                     verse 2 to blaſpheme no mā, not to be litigious, but modeſt: ſhevving al mildenes tovvard al men. ✝ 
                     verse 3 for we alſo vvere ſometime vnvviſe, incredulous, erring, ſeruing diuerſe deſires & voluptuouſneſſes, liuing in malice & enuie, odible, hating one an other. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But vvhenThe Epiſtle at the 2 Maſſe on Chriſtmas day, and in the Votiue Maſſe of our B. Lady betvvene Chriſtmas and Candlemas. the benignitie and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   kindnes tovvard man of our Sauiour God appeared:2, Tim. 1, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 5 * not by the vvorkes of iuſtice vvhich vve did, but according to his mercie he hath ſaued vsAs before in the Sacrament of holy Orders (1. Tim. 4. and 2 Tim. 1) ſo here it is plaine that Baptiſme giueth grace, & that by it as by an inſtrumental cauſe we be ſaued. by the lauer of regeneratiō and renouation of the holy Ghoſt, ✝ 
                     verse 6 vvhom he hath povvred vpon vs aboundantly by IESVS Chriſt our Sauiour: ✝ 
                     verse 7 that being iuſtified by his grace, vve may be heires according to hope of life euerlaſting. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 * It is a faithful ſaying, and of theſe things I vvil haue thee auouch earneſtly: that they vvhich beleeue in God, be careful to excell in good vvorkes. Theſe things be good and profitable for men.1 Tim. 4. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But * fooliſh queſtions, and genealogies,
2. Tim. 2, 23. and cōtentions, and controuerſies of the Lavv auoid. For they are vnprofitable and vaine.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 A man that is ″ an heretike after the firſt and ſecond; Theſe admonitions or correptions muſt be giuen to ſuch as erre, by our Spiritual Gouernours and Paſtors: to vvhom if they yeld not, Chriſtian men muſt auoid them. admonition auoid: ✝ 
                     verse 11 knovving that he that is ſuch an one, is ″ ſubuerted, and ſinneth, being condemned ″ by his ovvne iudgement.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Vvhen I ſhal ſend to thee Artemas or Tychicus, haſten to come vnto me to Nicopolis. for there I haue determined to vvinter. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Set forvvard Zenas the lavvyer and Apollos carefully, that nothing be vvanting to them. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And let our men alſo learne
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      praeſſe. to excel in good vvorkes to neceſſarie vſes: that they be not vnfruiteful. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Al that are vvith me, ſalute 
 thee: ſalute them that loue vs in the faith. The grace of God be vvith you al. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  10. A man that it an Heretike.]Vvho is proprely an Heretike, & vvho is not. 
                     Not euery one that erreth in religion, is an Heretike, but he onely that after the Churches determination, vvilfully and ſtubburnely ſtandeth in his falſe opinion, not yelding to decree of Councel or the cheefe Paſtors of the Church therein. They (ſaith S. Auguſtine ep. 162.) that defend their ſentence (though falſe and peruerſe) vvith no ſtubburne ſtomake or obſtinate hart, ſpecially if it be ſuch as them ſelues by bold preſumption broched not, but receiued it of their deceiued parents,Deſcription or markes hovv to knovv an Heretike. and do ſeeke the truth vvarily and carefully, being ready to be reformed if they finde it, ſuch are not to be reputed among Heretikes. And againe. li. 18. de Ciuit. c. 55. They that in the Church of Chriſt haue any cr
                        ••
                     ed or per
                        ••
                     rſe opinion, if being admoniſhed to be of a ſound and right opinion, they reſiſt obſtinatly, and vvil not amend their peſtiferous opinions, but perſiſt in defenſe of them, are thereby become Heretikes, and going forth out of the Church, are counted for enimies that exerciſe vs. Again, li. 4 de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 16. He is an Heretike that, vvhen the doctrine of the Catholike faith is made plaine and manifeſt vnto him, had rather reſiſt it, and chooſe that vvhich him ſelf held &c. And in diuers places he declareth that S. Cyprian, though he held an errour, yet vvas no Heretike, becauſe he vvould not haue defended it after a general Councel had declared it to be an errour. li. 2 de bapt. c. 4. So Poſſidonius in the life of S. Auguſtine reporteth,
                     vit Aug. c. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     hovv, after the determination of the See Apoſtolike that Pelaglus opinion vvas heretical, al men eſteemed Pelagius an Heretike, and the Emperour made lavves againſt him as againſt an Heretike. Againe S. Auguſtine ſaith, He is an Heretike in my opinion, that for ſome temporal commoditie, and ſpecially for his glorie and principalitie, coineth or els folovveth falſe or nevv opinion. de vtillit. credendi cap. 1.
                  
                  Let our Proteſtants behold them ſelues in this glaſſe,The former markes agree to the Proteſtants. and vvithal let them marke al other propretles that old Heretikes euer had, and they ſhal finde al definitions and markes of an Heretike to fall vpon them ſelues. And therfore they muſt not maruel if vve vvarne al Catholike men by the vvordes of the Apoſtle in this place, to take heede of them, and to ſhunne their preachings, bookes,Their bookes, ſeruice, & preaching muſt be auoided. conuenticles and companies. Neither neede the people be curious to knovv vvhat they ſay, much leſſe to confure them: but they muſt truſt Gods Church, vvhich doth refute and condemne them. And it is ynough for them to knovv that they be condemned, as S. Auguſtine noteth in the later end of his booke de hereſibus. And S. Cyprian ſaith notably to Antonianus demaunding curiouſly vvhat hereſies Nouatianus did teach:Ep. 52. nu. 7. 
                     No matter, ꝙ he, What hereſies he hath or teacheth, vvhen he teacheth vvithout. that is to ſay, out of the Church.
                  11. Subueried.]The Church ſeeketh the amendement of the moſt obſtinate Heretikes. 
                     Heretikes be often in corrigible, yet the Church of God ceaſeth not by al meanes poſſible to reuoke them. therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith ep. 162. The Heretike him ſelf though ſvvelling vvith odious and deteſtable pride, and madde vvith the frovvardnes of vvicked contention, as we admoniſh that he be aucided leſt he decriue the vveaklings and litle ones, ſo vve refuſe not by al meanes poſſible to ſeeke his amendment and reformation.
                  
                     11. By his ovvne iudgement.]
                     Heretikes cut them ſelues frō the Church. Other greuous offenders be ſeparated by excommunication from the cōmunion of Saincts and the fellovvſhip of Gods Church, by the ſentence of their Superiors in the ſame Church: but Heretikes more miſerable and infortunate then they, runne out of the Church of their ovvne accord, and ſo giue ſentence againſt their ovvne ſoules to damnation.
               
            
         
         
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO PHILEMON. THE ARGVMENT.
            
               Hearing of Philémons vertue, vvho vvas a Coloſsian, he vvriteth a familiar letter from Rome (being priſoner there) about his fugitiue ſeruant Oneſimus: not doubting but that he might commaund him, yet rather requeſting that he vvil forgiue him, yea and receiue him as he vvould Paul him ſelf, vvho alſo hopeth to come vnto him.
            
            
                
               
                  verse 1 
               PAVL the priſoner of Chriſt IESVS, and brother Timothee: to Philémon the beloued and our coadiutor, ✝ 
                  verse 2 & to Appia our deereſt ſiſter, & to Archippus our felovv-ſouldiar and to the church vvhich is in thy houſe. ✝ 
                  verse 3 Grace to you and peace from God our father, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.
             ✝ 
                  verse 4 I giue thankes to my God, alvvaies making a memorie of thee in my praiers, ✝ 
                  verse 5 hearing thy; Faith and charitie commēded alwais together, both neceſſarie to make a complete Chriſtiā man, and to iuſtification & ſaluation. charitie and faith vvhich thou haſt in our Lord IESVS, and ″ tovvard al the ſainctes: ✝ 
                  verse 6 that the communication of thy faith may be made euident in the agnition of al good that is in you in Chriſt IESVS. ✝ 
                  verse 7 For I haue had great ioy and conſolation in thy charitie, becauſe the bovvels of the ſainctes; The dueties of charitie and mercie done to Chriſtes priſoners, are exceding acceptable to God and al good men. haue reſted by thee brother.
             ✝ 
                  verse 8 For the vvhich thing hauing great cōfidence in Chriſt IESVS to commaund thee that vvhich pertaineth to the purpoſe: ✝ 
                  verse 9 for charitie rather I beſeeche, vvhereas thou art ſuch an one, as Paul being old and novv priſoner alſo of IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                  verse 10 I beſeeche thee for my ſonne vvhom I haue begotten in handes, * Oneſimus,Col. 4, 9. ✝ 
                  verse 11 vvho hath been ſometime vnprofitable to thee, but novv profitable both to me & thee, ✝ 
                  verse 12 vvhom I haue ſent backe to thee. And; Al Spiritual men ought to be exceding propenſe and ready to procure mens pardon, and recō
                  ciliation to al penitents. do thou receiue him as mine ovvne bovvels. ✝ 
                  verse 13 vvhom I would haue reteined vvith me, that for thee he might miniſter to me in the bandes of the Goſpel: ✝ 
                  verse 14 but vvithout thy counſel I vvould doe nothing: that thy good might be not as it vvere of neceſſitie, but voluntarie. ✝ 
                  verse 15 For perhaps therfore he departed for a ſeaſon from thee, that thou mighteſt take him againe for euer. ✝ 
                  verse 16 novv not as a ſeruant, but for a ſeruant, a moſt deere brother, eſpecially to me, but hovv much more to thee both in the fleſh and in our Lord? ✝ 
                  verse 17 If therfore thou take me for thy fellovv: receiue him as my ſelf. ✝ 
                  verse 18 And if he hath hurt thee any thing or is in thy dette, that impute to me. ✝ 
                  verse 19 I Paul haue vvritten vvith mine ovvne hand: I vvil repay it: not to ſay to thee,; The great debt & duetie that vve owe to ſuch as be our ſpiritual parents in Chriſt. that thou ovveſt me thine ovvne ſelf alſo. ✝ 
                  verse 20 Yea brother.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                God graunt I may enioy thee in our Lord. Refreſh my bovvels in our Lord. ✝ 
                  verse 21 Truſting in thy obedience I haue vvritten to thee, knovving that thou
 vvilt doe aboue that alſo vvhich I do ſay. ✝ 
                  verse 22 And withal prouide me alſo a lodging. for I hope by your praiers that I ſhal be giuen to you.
             ✝ 
                  verse 23 There ſalute thee Epaphras my fellovv-priſoner in Chriſt IESVS, ✝ 
                  verse 24 Marke, Ariſtarchus, Demas and Luke my coadiutors. ✝ 
                  verse 25 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be with your ſpirit. Amen,
            
               ANNOT.
               
                  5. Tovvard al the ſainctes.] The Apoſtle ſticketh not to ſay, Charitie and faith in Chriſt and al his Saincts,Faith and beleefe in Saincts. vvhich our captious Aduerſaries count in Catholike mens ſpeaches and vvritings, very abſurd, feining that in al ſuch vve make no difference betvvixt the loue vve beare to Chriſt, and the loue vve owe to our neighbours: betvvixt the truſt or beleefe vve haue in God, and that vvhich vve haue in his holy Saincts. Malice and contention doth ſo blinde al Heretikes.
            
         
         
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE HEBREVVES.
            
               THAT the Hebrevves vvere not all the Ievves, but only a part of them, it is manifeſt Act, 6: vvhere the primitiue Church of Hieruſalem, although it conſiſted of Ievves only, as vve reade Act. 2, yet is ſaid to conſiſt of tvvo ſortes, Greekes & Hebrues. Vvhich againe is manifeſt Phil. 3. vvhere S. Paul cōparing him ſelf with the Iudaical falſe-Apoſtles, ſaith, that he alſo is, an Hebrue of Hebrues. Finally, they ſeeme to haue been thoſe Ievves vvhich vvere borne in Iurie, vvhich for the moſt part dwelled alſo there. Therefore to the Chriſtian Ievves in Hieruſalem and in the reſt of Iurie, S. Paul vvriteth this Epiſtle, out of Italic: ſaying therevpon, The brethrē of Italie ſalute you. Heb. 13. By vvhich vvordes, & by theſe other in the ſame place, Knovv ye our brother Timothee to be dimiſſed, vvith vvhom (if he come the ſooner) I vvil ſee you, it is euident, that he vvrote this, not only after he vvas brought priſoner to Rome, vvherein S. Luke endeth the Actes of the Apoſtles: but alſo after he vvas ſet at libertie there againe.
            Many cauſes are giuen of the Doctors, vvhy vvriting to the Ievves, he doth not put his name in the beginning, Paul an Apoſtle &c. as he doth lightly in
 his Epiſtles to the Churches and Biſhops of the Gentils. The moſt likely cauſe is, for that he vvas the preacher and Apoſtle and Maiſter of the Gentils.
               2. Tim. 1. And againe in an other place he ſaith,1. Tim. 2. that himſelf vvas appointed the Apoſtle of the Gentils, at Peter of the Ievves. Gal. 2. Only S. Peter therfore vvriting to the Ievves,1. Pet. 1. doth vſe this ſtile: Peter an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt &c. becauſe he vvas more peculiarly their Apoſtle as being the vicar of Chriſt, vvho vvas alſo himſelfYet vvas Chriſt head of the Gentils alſo. So likevviſe his vicar S. Peter, notwithſtādīg his more peculiar Apoſtleſhip ouer the Iewes. more ſpecially the miniſter of the Circumciſion that is (as him ſelf ſpeaketh) not ſen
                     •
                   but to the ſheepe vvhich vvere loſt of the houſe of Iſraël.
               Rom. 5. Mat. 15.
            The Argument of the Epiſtle S. Paul him ſelf doth tell vs in tvvo vvordes, calling it verbum ſolatij,
               Heb. 1
                     •
                  . 
               the vvord of ſolace and comfort. Vvhich alſo is plaine in the vvhole courſe of the Epiſtle namely in the tenth chapter. v. 32. &c. Vvhere he exhorteth them to take great comfort and confidence in their manifold tribulations ſuſtained of their ovvne countrie men the Ievves, vvhereof the Apoſtle alſo maketh mention to the Theſſalonians. 1. Theſſ. 2. v. 14. Thoſe perſecutions then of the obſtinate incredulous Ievves their countrie men, vvas one great tentation vnto them. An other tentation vvas, the perſuaſions that they brought vnto them out of Scriptures, to cleaue vnto the Lavv, and not to beleeue in IESVS the dead man.
            And vvhereas the Ievves did magnifie their lavv, by the Prophetes, and by the Angels by vvhom it vvas giuen and by Moyſes, and by their land of promiſe, into vvhich Ioſue brought them, and by their father Abraham, and by their Aaronicall or Leuitical prieſth
                  •
               d and ſacrifices, by their Taberna
                  •
               le, & by their Teſtament: he ſhevveth that our Lord IESVS, as being the natural ſonne of God, paſſeth incomparably the Prophetes, the Angels, and Moyſes: that the Reſt or quietnes vvhich God promiſed, vvas not in their earthly land, but in heauen: that his figure Melchiſedec far paſſed Abraham: and that his prieſthod, Sacrifice, Tabernacle, and teſtament, far paſsed theirs. In al vvhich he ſhooteth often at theſe three markes: to take avvay the ſcandal of Chriſtes death, by giuing them ſundrie good reaſons & teſtimonies of it: to erect their mindes from viſible and earthly promiſes (to vvhich only, the Ievves vvere vvholy bent) to inuiſible and heauenly: and to inſinuate that the Ceremonies ſhould novv ceaſe, the time of their correction by Chriſt being novv come.
            The Epiſtle may be deuided into theſe partes: the firſt, Of Chriſtes excellencie aboue the Prophetes, Angels, Moyſes, and Ioſue: c. 1. 2. 3. 4. The ſecond, of his prieſthod and excellencie thereof aboue the prieſthod of the old Teſtament: c. 5. vnto the middeſt of the 10. The laſt part is of exhortation c. 10. v. 9. to the end of the Epiſtle.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE OF PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE HEBREVVES.
            Let the Chriſtian Reader note the corruption and impudent boldnes of our Aduerſaries,Heretical corruption. that vpon a falſe priuate perſuaſion of their ovvne, that S. Paul vvas not the author of this Epiſtle,
In the Engliſh Bible of the yer
                     •
                   2579. leaue out his name in the title of the ſame, contrarie to the authentical copies both Greeke and Latin.The Epiſtle to the Hebrues, is S. Paules. In old time there vvas ſome doubt vvho ſhould be the vvriter of it, but then, vvhen it vvas no leſſe doubted vvhether it vvere Canonical Scripture at al. Aftervvard the vvhole Church (by vvhich onely vve knovv the true Scriptures from other vvritings) held it and deliuered it, as novv ſhe doth, to the faithful, for Canonical, and for S. Paules Epiſtle. Notvvithſtanding the Aduerſaries vvould haue refuſed the Epiſtle, as vvel as they do the Author, but that they falſely imagine certaine places thereof to make againſt the Sacrifice of the Maſſe.
            
               CHAP, I.
               
                  God ſpake to their fathers by the Prophets: but to them ſelues by his ovvne Sonne, 14 vvho incomparably paſſeth al the Angels.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  DIVERSELY and many vvaies in times paſt God ſpeaking to the fathers in the prophets:The Epiſtle at the third maſſe on Chriſtmas day. ✝ 
                     verse 2 laſt of al in theſe daies hath ſpoken to vs in his Sonne, vvhom he hath appointed heire of al, by vvhom he made alſo the vvorldes.Sap. 7, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 3 * Vvho being the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   brightneſſe of his glorie, and ″ the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   figure of his ſubſtance, & carying al things by the vvord of his povver,The excellencie of Chriſt aboue Angels. making purgation of ſinnes, ſitteth on the right hand of the Maieſtie in the high places: ✝ 
                     verse 4 being made ſo much better then Angels, as he hath inherited a more excellent name aboue them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 For to vvhich of the Angels hath he ſaid at any time,Pſ. 2, 7. 2. reg. 7, 14. 
                  Thou art my ſonne, to day haue I begotten thee? and againe, I vvil be to him a father, and he ſhal be to me a ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And vvhen againe he bringeth
 in the firſt begotten into the vvorld, he ſaith,Pſ. 96, 8. 
                  And 
                        •
                      let al the Angels of God adore him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And to the Angels truely he ſaith,Pſ. 103, 4. 
                  He that maketh his Angels, ſpirites: and his miniſters,
                  Pſ. 44, 7. 
                  a flame of fire. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But to the Sonne: Thy throne ô God for euer & euer: a rod of equitie, the rod of thy kingdom. ✝ 
                        verse 9 Thou haſt loued iuſtice, and hated iniquitie: therfore thee, God, thy God hath anointed vvith the oile of exultation aboue thy fellovves.
                  Pſ. 101, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And, Thou in the beginning ô Lord didſt found the earth: and the vvorkes of thy handes are the heauens. ✝ 
                        verse 11 They ſhal periſh, but thou ſhalt continue: and they ſhal al vvaxe old as a garment. ✝ 
                        verse 12 And as a veſture ſhalt thou chaunge them, & they ſhal be changed: but thou art the ſelf ſame, and thy yeres ſhal not faile. ⊢
                   ✝ 
                     verse 13 But to vvhich of the Angels ſaid he at any time:Pſ. 109, 1 
                  Sit on my right hand,
                  1. Cor. 15, 25. 
                  vntil I make thine enemies the footeſtoole of thy feete? ✝ 
                     verse 14 Are they not al,The holy Angels (ſaith S. Auguſtine) to the ſocietie of vvhom vve aſpire in this our peregrination, as they haue eternitie to continue, ſo alſo facilitie to knovv, and felicitie to reſt: for they do helpe vs vvithout al difficultie, becauſe vvith their ſpiritual motions pure and free, they labour or trauel not. De Ciuis. li. 11. c. 31. miniſtring ſpirits: ſent to miniſter for them vvhich ſhal receiue the inheritance of ſaluation?
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     3. The figures.]
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      To be the figure of his ſubſtance, ſignifieth nothing els but that vvhich S. Paul ſpeaketh in other vvordes to the Phillippians c. 2. v 6. that he is the forme and moſt expreſſe reſemblance of his fathers ſubſtance. So S. Ambroſe and others expound it, and the Greeke vvord Character is very ſignificant to that purpoſe.The B. Sacrament a figure, and yet the true body. Note alſo by this place, that the Sonne, though he be a figure of his 
                        •
                     athers ſubſtance, is notvvithſtanding of the ſame ſubſtance. So Chriſtes body in the Sacrament and his myſtical death and ſacrifice in the ſame, though called a figure, image, or repreſentation of Chriſtes viſible body and ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, yet may be and is the ſelf ſame in ſubſtance.
                  
                     6. Let al the Angels adore.] The Heretikes maruel that vve adore Chriſt in the B. Sacrament, vvhen they might learne by this place,The adoratiō of Chriſt in the B. Sacrament. that vvhereſoeuer his perſon is, there it ought to be adored both of men and Angels. And vvhere they ſay it vvas not made preſent in the Sacrament nor inſtituted to be adored, vve anſvver that no more vvas he incarnate purpoſely to be adored: but yet ſtraight vpon his deſcending from heauen, it vvas the duety both of Angels and al other creatures to adore him.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He inferreth of the foreſaid, that it ſhal be incomparably more damnable for them to neglect the nevv Teſtament then the old, 3 conſidering the irrefragable authoritie of the Apoſtles alſo. 5 Then he proſecuteth the excellencie of Chriſt aboue the Angels, 9 vvho neuertheles, vvas made leſſer then Angels, to ſuffer and die for men, to deſtroy the dominion of the Diuel, 15 to deliuer men from feare of death, 17 and to be a fitte Prieſt for men.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THERFORE more aboundantly ought vve to obſerue thoſe things vvhich vve haue heard:As that vvhich runneth out of a broken veſſel, or that rūneth by, is loſt.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   leſt perhaps vve runne out. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For if the vvord that vvas ſpoken by Angels, became ſure, and al preuarication and diſobedience hath receiued a iuſt retribution of revvard: ✝ 
                     verse 3 hovv ſhal vve 
 eſcape if vve neglect ſo great ſaluation? vvhich vvhen it vvas begonne to be declared by our Lord, of them that heard vvas confirmed on vs,Mar. 16, 20. ✝ 
                     verse 4 * God vvithal teſtifying by ſignes, & vvonders, and diuers miracles, & diſtributions of the holy Ghoſt according to his vvil. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For not to Angels hath God made ſubiect the world to come, whereof vve ſpeake. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But one hath teſtified in a certaine place, ſaying: Vvhat is man, that thou art mindeful of him:
                  Pſ. 8, 5. 
                  or the ſonne of man, that thou viſiteſt him? ✝ 
                        verse 7 Thou didſt miniſh him litle leſſe then Angels: with glorie and honour thou haſt crovvned him,
                  1 Cor. 15 Eph. 1. 
                  and conſtituted him ouer the vvorkes of thy handes. ✝ 
                        verse 8 Al things haſt thou made ſubiect vnder his feete. For in that he ſubiected al things to him, he left nothing not ſubiect to him. But novv vve ſee not as yet al things ſubiected to him.P
                        •
                     ilip. 2, 8. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But * him that vvas a litle leſſened vnder the Angels, vve ſee IESVS,This proueth againſt the Caluiniſts that Chriſt by his Paſsiō merited his owne glorification. which they would not for ſhame deny of Chriſt, but that they are at a point to deny al meritorious workes, yea euē in Chriſt alſo▪ and therfore they tranſlate alſo this ſentēce heretically, by tranſpoſing the wordes. In the Bible printed the yere 1579.
                   becauſe of the paſſion of death, crovvned vvith glorie and honour: that through the grace of God he might taſt death for al. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For it became him for vvhom al things, and by vvhom al things, that had brought many children into glorie, to conſummate the author of their ſaluation, by his paſſion. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For he that ſanctifieth, and they that be ſanctified: al of one. For the which cauſe he is not aſhamed to call them brethrē, ✝ 
                     verse 12 ſaying, I vvil declare thy name to my brethren:
                  Pſ. 21, 23 
                  in the middes of the Church vvil I

                     verse 13
                  praiſe thee.
                  Pſ. 17, 3. And againe, Ivvil haue affiance in him. And againe, Behold here am I and my children:
                  Eſ. 8, 18. 
                  vvhom God hath giuen me. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Therfore becauſe the children haue communicated vvith fleſh & bloud, him ſelf alſo in like maner hath been partaker of the ſame: that * by death he might deſtroy him that had the empire of death,Oſe. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 15, 54. that is to ſay, the Deuil: ✝ 
                     verse 15 and might deliuer them that by the feare of death through al their life vvere ſubiect to ſeruitude.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 For no vvhere doth he take Angels: butThe dignitie of man, in that Chriſt tooke our nature vnto his perſon in Deitie, and not the nature of Angels. the ſeede of Abraham he taketh. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Vvherevpon he ought in al things to be like vnto his brethren: that he might become a merciful and faithful high Prieſt before God, that he might repropitiate the ſinnes of the people. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For in that vvherein him ſelf ſuffered and vvas tempted: he is able to helpe them alſo that are tempted.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
               
                  By example of Chriſt (vvho is incomparably more excellent then Moyſes alſo) he exhorteth them to be faithful vnto God. 7 Their revvard ſhal be, to enter into euerlaſting reſt, if they perſeuere, as contrarievviſe to be excluded (as vvas ſhadowed in their forefathers in the vvildernes) if they ſinne and become incredulous.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHEREFORE holy brethren, partakers of the heauenly vocation, conſider the Apoſtle, & high prieſt of our confeſſion IESVS: ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvho is faithful to him that made him,The excellencie of Chriſt aboue Moyſes. as alſo * Moyſes in al his houſe.Nu. 12, 7 ✝ 
                     verse 3 For, this man is eſteemed vvorthie of more ample glorie aboue Moyſes, by ſo much as more ample glorie then the houſe, hath he that framed it. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For euery houſe is framed of ſome man▪ but he that created al things, is God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And Moyſes in deede vvas faithful in al his houſe as a ſeruant, for a teſtimonie of thoſe things vvhich vvere to be ſaid: ✝ 
                     verse 6 but Chriſt as the Sonne in his ovvne houſe: which houſe are vve, if vve keepe firme the confidence and glorie of hope vnto the end.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 
                  Vvherefore,
                  Pſ. 94, 8 
                  as the holy Ghoſt ſaith, To day if you ſhal heare his voice, ✝ 
                     verse 8 harden not your hartes as in the exacerbation according to the day of tentation in the deſert, ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvhere your fathers tempted me: proued & ſavv my vvorkes ✝ 
                     verse 10 fourtie yeres. For the vvhich cauſe I vvas offended vvith this generation, and ſaid, They doe alvvaies erre in hart. And they haue not knovven my vvaies. ✝ 
                     verse 11 to vvhom I ſvvare in my vvrath, If they ſhal enter into my reſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 Bevvare brethren, leſt perhaps there be in ſome of you an euil hart of incredulitie, to depart from the liuing God. ✝ 
                     verse 13 but exhort your ſelues euery day, vvhiles to day is named, that none of you be obdurate vvith the fallacie of ſinne, ✝ 
                     verse 14 For vve be made partakers of Chriſt: yet ſo if vve keepe theFaith is the ground worke of our creatiō in Chriſt, which if we hold not faſt, al the building is loſt. beginning of his ſubſtance firme vnto the end. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhile it is ſaid, To day if you ſhal heare his voice, do not obdurate your hartes as in that exacerbation. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For ſome hearing did exaſperate: but not al they that vvent out of Aegypt by Moyſes. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvith vvhom vvas he offended fourtie yeres? vvas it not with them that ſinned,Nu. 14, 37. 21, 23. * vvhoſe carcaſſes vvere ouerthrovven in the deſert? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And to vvhom did he ſvveare that they ſhould not enter into his reſt: but to them that were incredulous? ✝ 
                     verse 19 And vve ſee that they could not enter in, becauſe of incredulitie.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  That they muſt feare to be excluded out of the foreſaid reſt (vvhich he proueth out of the pſalme) 12 conſidering that Chriſt ſeeth their moſt invvard ſecretes. 14 And that he (as their Prieſt vvho alſo him ſelf ſuffered) is able and ready to ſtrengthen them in confeſsion of their faith.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LET vs feare therfore leſt perhaps forſaking the promis of entring into his reſt, ſome of you be thought to be vvanting. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For to vs alſo it hath been denounced, as alſo to them▪ but the vvord of hearing did not profit them, not mixt vvith faith of thoſe things vvhich they heard. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For vve that haue beleeued, ſhal enter into the reſt:Pſ. 94, 11 as he ſaid, As I ſvvare in my vvrath, if they ſhal enter into my reſt: and truely the vvorkes from the foundation of the vvorld being perfited. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For he ſaid in a certaine place of theIf the Apoſtle had not euidētly here ſhewed that the Sabboths reſt was a figure of the eternal repoſe in heauen, who durſt to haue applied that Scripture of Gods reſt the ſeuenth day, to that purpoſe? Or hovv can our Aduerſaries now reprehend the like applicatiō manifoldly vſed in al holy auncient writers to the like end? ſeuenth day,Gen. 2, 2. thus: And God reſted the ſeuenth day from al his vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And againe in this, If they ſhal enter into my reſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Becauſe then it remaineth that certaine enter into it, and they to vvhom firſt it vvas preached, did not enter becauſe of incredulitie: ✝ 
                     verse 7 againe he limiteth a certaine day:Heb. 3, 7. 
                  To day, in Dauid ſaying, after ſo long time, as is aboue ſaid, To day if you ſhal heare his voice: doe not obdurate your hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For ifSo Ioſue is called in Greeke. Ieſus had giuen them reſt: he vvould neuer ſpeake of an other day aftervvard. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Therfore there is left a ſabbatiſme for the people of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For he that is entred into his reſt, the ſame alſo hath reſted frō his vvorkes, as God from his.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Let vs haſten therfore to enter into that reſt: that no man fal into the ſame example of incredulitie. ✝ 
                     verse 12 ForWhatſoeuer God threateneth by his vvord concerning the puniſhment of ſinne and incredulitie, ſhal be executed, be the offenſe neuer ſo ſecrete, deepe, or hidden in our harts▪ becauſe Gods ſpeach paſſeth eaſily and ſearcheth throughly euery part, power, and facultie of mans ſoul. the vvord of God is liuely and forcible, and more perſing then any tvvo edged ſvvord: and reaching vnto the diuiſion of the ſoule and the ſpirit, of the ioyntes alſo and the marowes, and a diſcerner of the cogitations and intentes of the hart. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And there is no creature inuiſible in his ſight▪ but al things are naked and open to his eies, to vvhom our ſpeache is.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 Hauing therfore a great high Prieſt that hath entred the heauens, IESVS the ſonne of God, let vs hold the confeſſion. ✝ 
                     verse 15 For vve haue not a high prieſt that can not haue compaſſion on our infirmities: but tempted in al things by ſimilitude, except ſinne.The Epiſtle in a Maſſe for the election of the Pope. ✝ 
                     verse 16 ″ Let vs goe therfore vvith confidence to the throne of grace: that vve may obteine mercie, and finde grace in ſeaſonable aide.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     16. Let vs go vvith confidence.] The Aduerſaries go about to proue by theſe vvordes that vve neede no helpe of Saincts to obtaine any thing, Chriſt him ſelf being ſo readie, and vve being admoniſhed
 to come to him vvith confidence as to a moſt merciful Mediator and Biſhop.Scripture abuſed againſt inuocation of Saincts. But by that argument they may as vvel take avvay the helpes and praiers of the liuing one for an other. And vve do not require the helpe either of the Saincts in heauen, or of our brethren in earth, for any miſtruſt of Gods mercie, but for our ovvne vnvvorthines: being aſſured that the praier of a iuſt man auaileth more vvith him, then the deſire of a greuous ſinner: and of a number making interceſſion together, rather then of a man alone. vvhich the Heretikes can not deny except they reproue the plaine Scriptures Neither do vve come leſſe to him, or vvith leſſe confidence, vvhen vve come accompanied vvith the praiers of Angels, Saincts, Prieſts, or iuſt men ioyning vvith vs, as they fondly imagine and pretend: but vvith much more affiance in his grace, mercie, and merites, then if vve praied our ſelues alone.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  That Chriſt being a man and infirms, vvas therein but as al Prieſts. and that he alſo vvas called of God to this office: offering as the others: 8 and ſuffered obediently for our example. 11 Of vvhoſe Prieſthod he hath much to ſay, but that the Hebrues haue neede rather to heare their Catechiſme againe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR ″ euery high Prieſt taken from amōg men,The Epiſtle for a Biſhop that is a Confeſſor, and for S. Thomas of Canterburie. is appointed for mē in thoſe things that pertaine to God: that he may offer giftes and ſacrifices for ſinnes: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that cā haue compaſſion on them that be ignorant and do erre: becauſe him ſelf alſo is cōpaſſed vvith infirmitie: ✝ 
                     verse 3 & therfore he ought, as for the people, ſo alſo for him ſelf to offer for ſinnes.2 Par. 26, 18. ✝ 
                     verse 4 * Neither doth any man ″ take the honour to him ſelf, but he that is called of God, * as Aaron.1 Par. 23 13. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 5 So Chriſt alſo ″ did not glorifie him ſelf that he might be made a high prieſt:Pſ. 2, 7. but he that ſpake to him, My Sonne art thou, I this day haue begottē thee. ✝ 
                     verse 6 As alſo in an other place he ſaith,Pſ. 109, 4. 
                  Thou art ″ a prieſt for euer, according to the order of Melchiſedec. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 7 Vvho in the daies of his fleſh, ″ vvith a ſtrong crie and teares, offering praiers and ſupplications to him that could fa
                     •
                  e him from death, vvas heard ″ for his reuerence. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 And truely vvhereas he was the Sonne, he learned by thoſe things vvhich he ſuffered, obedience: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and being conſummate, ″ vvas made to al that obey him, cauſe of eternal ſaluation, ✝ 
                     verse 10 called of God a high prieſt according to the order of Melchiſedec.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Of vvhome vve haue great ſpeache and ″ inexplicable to vtter: becauſe you are become vveake to heare. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For vvhereas you ought to be maiſters for your time, you neede to be taught againe your ſelues vvhat be the elements of the beginning of the vvordes of God: and you are become ſuch
 as haue neede of milke, & not of ſtrong meate. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For euery one that is partaker of milke, is vnſkilful of the vvord of iuſtice: for he is a childe. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But ſtrong meate is for the perfect, them that by cuſtome haue their ſenſes exerciſed to the diſcerning of good & euil.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     1. Euery high Prieſt.]
                     The deſcriptiō of a Prieſt, and his office. By the deſcription of a Prieſt or high Prieſt (for to this purpoſe al is one matter) he proueth Chriſt to be one in moſt excellent ſort, Firſt then, a Prieſt muſt not be an Angel, or of any other nature but mans. Secondly, euery man is not a Prieſt, but ſuch an one as is ſpecially choſen out of the reſt, and preferred before other of the community, ſeuered, aſſumpted, and exalted into a higher ſtate and dignitie then the vulgar. Thirdly, the cauſe and purpoſe vvhy he is ſo ſequeſtred and piked out from the reſidue, is to take charge of Diuine things, to deale as a mediator betvvixt God and the people, to be the Deputie of men in ſuch things as they haue to craue or to receiue of God, and to preſent or giue to him againe. Fourthly, the moſt proper and principal part of a Prieſts office is, to offer oblations, giftes, and ſacrifices to God for the ſinnes of the people: vvithout vvhich kind of moſt ſoueraine dueties, no perſon, people, or Commonvvealth can appertaine to God: and vvhich can be done by none, of vvhat other dignitie or calling ſoeuer he be in the vvorld,3 Reg. 13. that is not a Prieſt: diuers Princes (as vve read in the Scriptures) puniſhed by God,2 Par. 26. and king Saul depoſed from his kingdom, ſpecially for attempting the ſame.
                  And generally vve may learne here,1 Reg. 13. that in ijs qua ſunt ad Deum,
                     The Princes temporal authoritie how far it extendeth. in an matters touching God, his ſeruice, and religion, the Prieſt hath onely charge and authority: as the Prince temporal is the peoples gouernour, guider, and ſo retaine, in the things touching their vvorldly affaires: Vvhich muſt for al that by him be directed and manneged no othervviſe, but as is agreable to the due vvorſhip and ſeruice of God. againſt vvhich if the terrene Povvers commit any thing, the Prieſts ought to admoniſh them from God.
                  Vve learne alſo hereby,There is a peculiar order & calling of Prieſts of the new Teſtament. that euery one is not a Prieſt, and that the people muſt alvvaies haue certaine perſons choſen out from among them, to deale in their ſutes and cauſes vvith God, to pray, to miniſter Sacraments, and to ſacrifice for them. And vvhereas the Proteſtants vvil haue no Prieſt, Prieſthod, nor ſacrifice, but Chriſt and his death, pretending theſe vvordes of the Apoſtle to be verified onely in the Prieſthod and Seruice of the old lavv, and Chriſtes perſon alone, and after him of no moe: therein they ſhevv them ſelues to be ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the ſtate of the nevv Teſtament,Prieſts and ſacrifice neceſſarie in the new Teſtament, & nothing derogatorie to Chriſts prieſthod or ſacrifice. and induce a plaine Atheiſme and Godleſneſſe into the vvorld. for, ſo long as man hath to doe vvith God, there muſt needes be ſome deputed, and choſen out from among the reſt, to deale according to this declaration of the Apoſtle, in things pertaining to God, and thoſe muſt be Prieſts. for els, if men neede to deale no more, but immediatly vvith Chriſt, vvhat doe they vvith their Miniſters? Vvhy let they not euery man pray, and miniſter for him ſelf, and to him ſelf? Vvhat doe they vvith Sacraments, ſeing Chriſtes death is as vvel ſufficient vvithout them, as vvithout ſacrifice? Vvhy ſtandeth not his death as vvel vvith Sacrifice, as vvith Sacraments: as vvel vvith Prieſthod, as vvith other Eccleſiaſtical functiō? There is no other cauſe in the vvorld, but that (Sacrifice being the moſt principal act of religion that man ovveth to God, both by his Lavv, and by the lavv of nature) the Diuel by theſe his miniſters, vnder pretence of deferring or artributing the more to Chriſtes death, vvould aboliſh it.
                  This definition of a Prieſt and his function,The difference and excellencie of Chriſts Prieſthod. vvith al the properties thereto belonging, holdeth not onely in the lavv of Moyſes, and order of Aarons Prieſthod, but it vvas true before, in the lavv of nature, in the Patriarches, in Melchiſedec, and novv in Chriſt, and all his Apoſtles, and Prieſts of the nevv Teſtament: ſauing that it is a peculiar excellencie in Chriſt, that he onely offered for other mens ſinnes, and not at all for his ovvne, as all other doe.
                  
                     4. Taketh to him ſelf.] A ſpecial prouiſo for all Prieſts,Al true prieſts and preachers muſt be lawfully called thereto. preachers, and ſuch as haue to deale for the people in things pertaining to God, that they take not that honour or office at their ovvne hands, but by lavvful calling and conſecration, euen as Aaron did. By vvhich clauſe if you examine Luther, Caluin, Beza, and the like, or if al ſuch as novv a daies intrude them ſelues into ſacred functions, looke into their conſciences, great and foul matter of damnation vvil appeare.
                  
                     5. Did not glorifie him ſelf.]
                     The dignitie & function of Prieſthod is not to be vſurped. The dignity of Prieſthod muſt needes be paſſing high and ſoueraine, vvhen it vvas a promotion and pereferment in the ſonne of God him ſelf according to his manhod, and vvhen he vvould not vſurpe, nor take vpon him the ſame, vvithout his fathers expreſſe
 commiſſion and calling therevnto: An eternal example of humility, and an argument of condemnation to al mortal men, that arrogate vniuſtly any function or povver ſpiritual, that is not giuen them from aboue, and by lavvful calling, and commiſſion of their ſuperiors.
                  
                     6. A Prieſt for euer.] In the 109 Pſalme, from vvhence this teſtimonie is taken, both Chriſtes kingdom and Prieſthod are ſet fourth.Chriſt both Prieſt & king: but his Prieſthod more excellent of the two. but the Apoſtle vrgeth ſpecially his Prieſthod, as the more excellent and preeminent ſtate in him, our Redemption being▪ vrought & atchieued by ſacrifice, vvhich vvas an act of his Prieſthod, and not of his kingly povver, though he vvas properly a king alſo, as Melchiſedec vvas both Prieſt, and king, being a reſemblance of Chriſt in both, but much more in his Prieſthod. And our Lord had this excellent double dignitie (as appeareth by the diſcourſe of S. Paul,Pſal. 2. 109. and his allegations here out of the Pſalmes) at the very firſt moment of his conception or incarnation.Chriſt a Prieſt as he is man, not as he is God. for you muſt bevvare of the vvicked hereſie of the Arians and Caluiniſts (except in theſe later it be rather an errour proceding of ignorance) that ſticke not to ſay, that Chriſt vvas a Prieſt, or did ſacrifice, according to his Godhead. Vvhich is to make Chriſt, God the fathers Prieſt, and not his ſonne, and to doe ſacrifice and homage to him as his Lord, and not as his equal in dignity and nature. Therfore S. Auguſtine ſaith in Pſal. 109. That as he vvas man, he vvas Prieſt: as God, he vvas not Prieſt. And Theodorete in Pſal 109. As man, he did offer ſacrifice: but as God, he did receiue ſacrifice. And againe, Chriſt touching his humanity vvas called a Prieſt, and he offered no other hoſt but his ovvne body. &c.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . pag. 89. Dialog. 1 circa med. Some of our nevv Maiſters not knovving ſo much, did let fall out of their pennes the contrarie, and being admoniſhed of the errour, and that it vvas very Arianiſme, yet they perſiſt in it of mere ignorance in the groundes of Diuinitie.
                  
                     7. With a ſtrong crie.]
                     The ſacrifice on the Croſſe, vvas the principal acte of Chriſts prieſthod. Though our Sauiour make interceſſion for vs, according to his humane nature, cōtinually in heauen alſo: yet he doth not in any external creatures make ſacrifice, nor vſe the praiers ſacrificall, by vvhich our redemption vvas atchieued, as he did in the time of his mortal life, and in the act of his Paſſion, and moſt principally, vvhen vvith a loud voice, and vvith this praier, In manus tuas commende ſpiritum meum,
                     Luc. 23. 46. he voluntarily depoſed his ſoul, yelding it in moſt proper ſort for a ſacrifice. for in that laſt point of his death, conſiſteth ſpecially his high Prieſtly office, and the very vvorke and conſummation of our redemption.
                  Obſerue more ouer,Prieſts praiers more effectual. that though commonly euery faithful perſon pray both for him ſelf and others, and offer his praiers to God, yet none offereth by office, and ſpecial deputation, and appointment, in the perſon of the vvhole Church and people, ſauing the Prieſt. Vvhoſe praiers therfore be more effectual in them ſelues, for that they be the voice of all faithful men together, made by him that is appointed and receiued of God for the peoples legate.Chriſts Prieſtly actions. And of this kind vvere all Chriſtes praiers, in all his life and death, as all his other actions vvere: his faſting, vvatching, preaching, inſtituting, miniſtring, or receiuing Sacraments: euery one being done as Prieſtly actions.
                  
                     7. For his reuerence.]
                     Notorious Heretical trā
                        ſlatiō to mainteine Caluins horrible blaſphemie. Theſe vvordes haue our Engliſh Tranſlators perniciouſly and moſt preſumptuouſly corrupted, turning them thus, In that vvhich he feared, contrarie to the verſion and ſenſe of al antiquity,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Flac. Illyr. vpon this place. and to Eraſmus alſo, and contrarie to the ordinarie vſe of the Greeke vvord, as Beza him ſelf defineth it Luc. 2 v. 25: and contrarie to the propriety of the Greeke phraſe, as not onely the Catholikes, but * the beſt learned Lutherans do ſhevv and proue by many examples. They folovv herein the ſingular preſumption of Caluin, vvho vvas the firſt (as his fellovv Beza confeſſeth) that euer found out this interpretation. Vvhich neither S. Chryſoſtom, nor any other, as perfect Graecians as they vvere, could euer eſpie. Vvhere, onely to haue made choiſe of that impious and arrogant Sectaries ſenſe, before the ſaid fathers and all the Churches beſides, had been ſhameful ynough: but to ſet the ſame dovvne for very Scripture of Gods bleſſed vvord, that is intolerable, and paſſeth al impiety. And vve ſee plainely that they haue no conſcience, indifferencie, nor other purpoſe, but to make the poore Readers beleeue, that their opinions be Gods ovvne vvord, and to dravv the Scriptures to ſound after the fantaſie of their hereſies. But if the good Reader knevv, for vvhat point of doctrine they haue thus framed their tranſlation, they vvould abhorre them to the depth of Hel.Caluins blaſphemie that Chriſt ſuffered hel paines vpō the croſſe, and that his death othervviſe were inſufficient. forſooth it is thus: they vvould haue this Scripture meane, that Chriſt vvas in horrible feare of damnation, and that he vvas not onely in paines corporal vpon the Croſſe (vvhich they hold, not to haue been ſufficient for mans redemption) but that he vvas in the very ſorovves & diſtreſſes of the damned, vvithout any difference, but that it vvas not euerlaſting, as theirs is.
                  For this horrible blaſphemie (vvhich is their interpretation of Chriſtes deſcending into Hel) Gods holy vvord muſt be corrupted, and the ſacrifice of Chriſtes death (vvhereof they talke ſo preſumptuouſly) muſt no
                        •
                      be ynough for our redemption, except he be damned for vs alſo to the paines of Hel. Vvo be to our poore Countrie, that muſt haue ſuch bookes, and read ſuch tranſlations. See Caluin and Beza in their Commentaries and Annotations vpon this place, and you ſhal ſee, that for defenſe of the ſaid blaſphemies they haue thus tranſlated this text. See the Annotations before,Chriſt yelding vp the Ghoſt, accompliſhed our redemption. 
                     Act. 2, 27 and Mat. 27, 46.
                  
                  
                     9. Conſummate.] The ful vvorke of his ſacrifice, by vvhich vve vvere redeemed, vvas vvholy conſummate and accompliſhed, at the yelding vp of his ſpirit to God the Father, vvhen he ſaid, Conſummatum eſt.
                     Io. 19. 30▪
                      though for to make the ſame effectual to the ſaluation of particular men, he him
 ſelf did diuers things, and novv doth in heauen, and our ſelues alſo muſt vſe many meanes, for the application thereof to our particular neceſſities. See the next Annotation.
                  
                     9. Was made to all.] The Proteſtants vpon pretence of the ſufficiencie of Chriſtes Paſſion, and his onely redemption,Chriſts Paſsiō ſufficient for al, but profitable to them only vvhich obey, not by faith only, but by doing as he and his Church commaund. oppoſe them ſelues guilefully in the ſight of the ſimple, againſt the inuocation of Saincts, and their interceſſion, and help of vs, againſt our penitential vvorkes or ſuffering for our ovvne ſinnes, either in this life or the next: againſt the merites of faſting, praying, almes, and other things commended to vs in holy Vvritte, and againſt moſt things done in the Church, in ſacrifice, Sacrament, and ceremonie. But this place and many other ſhevv, that Chriſtes Paſſion, though it be of it ſelf far more ſufficient and forcible, then the Proteſtants in their baſeneſſe of vnderſtanding can conſider, yet profiteth none but ſuch, as both doe his commaundements, and vſe ſuch remedies and meanes to apply the benefite thereof to them ſelues, as he appointeth in his vvord, or by the Holy Ghoſt in his Church. And the Heretikes that ſay, faith onely is the thing required to apply Chriſtes benefites vnto vs, are hereby alſo eaſily refuted. for vve do not obey him onely by beleeuing, but by doing vvhatſoeuer he commaundeth. Laſtly, vve note in the ſame vvordes, that Chriſt appointeth not by his abſolute and eternal election, men ſo to be partakers of the fruite of his redemption, vvithout any condition or reſpect of their ovvne vvorkes, obedience, or free vvil: but vvith this condition alvvaies, if men vvil obey him, and do that vvhich he appointeth. See S. Auguſtine (or Proſper) to. 7 Reſponſ. Proſperi li. 2. 
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        iculo 1 ad obiectiones Vincentij, vvhere he ſaith of the cup of Chriſtes paſſion, It hath in deede in it ſelf, to profite al: but if it be not drunken, it healeth not.
                  
                  
                     11. Inexplicable.]
                     The Apoſtle omitteth to ſpeake of the B. Sacrament as a myſterie then to deepe for the Ievves capacitie. Intending to treate more largely and particularly of Chriſtes or Melchiſedek
                        •
                      Prieſthod, he forvvarneth them that the myſterie thereof is far paſſing their capacitie, and that through their feeblenes in faith and vveakenes of vnderſtanding, he is forced to omit diuers deepe points concerning the Prieſthod of the nevv lavv. Among vvhich (no doubt) the myſterie of the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the altar, called MASSE, vvas a principal & pertinent matter: vvhich the Apoſtles the Fathers of the primitiue Church vſed not to treate of ſo largely and particularly in their, vvritings, vvhich might come to the hands of the vnfaithful, vvho of al things tooke ſooneſt ſcandal of the B. Sacrament, as vve ſee Io. 6. He ſpake to the Hebru
                           •
                        s (ſaith S. Hierom ep 126) that is, to the Ievves, and not to faithful men, to vvhom he might haue been hold to vtter the Sacrament. And in deede it vvas not reaſonable to talke much to them of that ſacrifice vvhich vvas the reſemblance of Chriſtes death, vvhen they thought not right of Chriſtes death it ſelf. Vvhich the Apoſtles vviſedom and ſilence our Aduerſaries vvickedly abuſe againſt the holy Maſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  He exhorteth them to be perfect ſcholers, and not to neede to be Catechumen
                        •
                      againe▪ 4 conſidering they can not be baptized againe: 9 and remembring their former good vvorkes; for the vvhich God vvil not faile to performe them his promis, if they faile not to imitate Abraham by perſeuerance in the faith vvith patience. 20 And ſo endeth his digreſsion, and returneth to the matter of Chriſtes Prieſthod.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  VVHERFORE intermitting the vvord of the beginning of Chriſt, let vs proceede to perfection, not againe laying ″ the foundatiō of penance from dead vvorkes, and of faith tovvard God, ✝ 
                     verse 2 of the doctrine of baptiſmes, and of impoſition of handes, and of the reſurrection of the dead, and of eternal iudgement. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And this ſhal vve doe, if God vvill permit.Heb. 10, 26. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For * it is ″ impoſſible for them that were once illuminated, haue taſted alſo the heauenly gift, and vvere made partakers of the holy Ghoſt, ✝ 
                     verse 5 haue moreouer taſted the good vvord of God, and the povvers of the world
 to come, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and are fallen: to be renevved againe to penāce, crucifying againe to them ſelues the ſonne of God, and making him a mockerie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For the earth drinking the raine often cōming vpon it, & bringing forth graſſe commodious for them by vvhom it is tilled, receiueth bleſſing of God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 but bringing forth thornes and bryers, it is reprobate, and very neere a curſe, vvhoſe end is, to be burnt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 ButIt is euident by theſe vvordes, againſt the Nouatians and the Caluiniſts, that S. Paul meant not preciſely, that they had done, or could do any ſuch ſinne, vvhereby they ſhould be put out of all hope of ſaluation, and be ſure of damnation
                        •
                     , during their life. vve confidently truſt of you, my beſt beloued, better things and neerer to ſaluation: although vve ſpeake thus. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For ″ God is not vniuſt, that he ſhould forget your vvorke & loue which you haue ſhevved in his name, vvhich haue miniſtred to the ſainctes and do miniſter. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And our deſire is that euery one of you ſhevv forth the ſame carefulneſſe to the accompliſhing of hope vnto the end: ✝ 
                     verse 12 that you become not ſlouthful, but imitatours of them vvhich by faith and patience ſhal inherite the promiſſes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For God promiſing to Abraham, becauſe he had none greater by vvhō he might ſweare,Gen. 22, 16. he ſware by him ſelf, ✝ 
                     verse 14 ſaying, * Vnles bleſſing I ſhal bleſſe thee, and multiplying ſhal multiplie thee. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And ſo patiently enduring he obtained the promiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For mē ſvveare by a greater then them ſelues: and the end of al their controuerſie, for the confirmation, is an othe. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Vvherein God meaning more aboundantly to ſhevv to the heires of the promiſe the ſtabilitie of his coūſel, he interpoſed an othe: ✝ 
                     verse 18 that by tvvo things vnmoueable, vvhereby it is impoſſible for God to lie, vve may haue a moſt ſtrong comfort. vvho haue fled to hold faſt the hope propoſed, ✝ 
                     verse 19 vvhich vve haue as an anker of the ſoule, ſure and firme, and going in into the inner partes of the vele, ✝ 
                     verse 20 vvhere IESVS the precurſor for vs is entered, made a high prieſt for euer according to the order of Melchiſedec.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     1. The foundation of penance.]
                     The Apoſtles forme of Catechiſme, and the poīts therof. Vve ſee hereby, vvhat the firſt groundes of Chriſtian inſtitution or Catechiſme were in the primitiue Church, and that there vvas euer a neceſſarie inſtruction and beleefe of certaine points had by vvord of mouth and tradition, before men came to the Scriptures: vvhich could not treate of things ſo particularly, as vvas requiſite for the teaching of al neceſſarie groundes. Among theſe points were the 12 Articles conteined in the Apoſtles Creede: the doctrine of penance before Baptiſme: the maner and neceſsitie of Baptiſme▪ the Sacrament of Impoſition of hands after Baptiſme, called Confirmation: the articles of the Reſurrection, Iudgement, and ſuch like. Vvithout vvhich things firſt laid, if one ſhould be ſent to picke his faith out of the Scripture, there vvould
 be madde rule quickly. See S. Auguſtine in expoſit. inchoat. ep. ad Ro. verſut finem.
                  
                  
                     4. Impoſsible.]
                     The Nouatians (as al Heretikes) made Scripture the groūd of their hereſie. How hard the holy Scriptures be, and how dangerouſly they be read of the vnlearned, or of the proud be they neuer ſo vvel learned, this one place might teach vs.Ambr. de poenit. li. 2. c. 2. Vvhereat the Nouatians of old did ſo ſtumble, that they thought, and heretically taught, that none falling into any mortal ſinne after Baptiſme, could be receiued to mercie or penance in the Church: and ſo to a contentious man, that vvould folow his owne ſenſe, or the bare vvordes, vvithout regard of the Churches ſenſe and rule of faith (after vvhich euery Scripture muſt be expounded) the Apoſtles ſpeach doth here ſound. Euen as to the ſimple,Other places make no more for the Proteſtants then this doth for Nouatus. and to the Heretike that ſubmitteth not his ſenſe to the Churches iudgement, certaine places of this ſame Epiſtle, ſeeme at the firſt ſight, to ſtand againſt the daily oblation or ſacrifice of the Maſſe: vvhich yet in truth make no more for that purpoſe, then this text we now ſtand on, ſerueth the Nouatians: as vvhen we come to the places, it ſhal be declared.
                  And let the good Readers beware here alſo of the Proteſtants expoſition, for they are herein vvorſe then Nouatians,Caluins hereſie vpon this place, vvorſe then the Nouatians. ſpecially ſuch as preciſely folovv Caluin: holding impiouſly, that it is impoſsible for one that forſaketh entirely his faith, that is, becommeth an Apoſtata or an Heretike, to be receiued to penance or to Gods mercie. To eſtabliſh vvhich falſe and damnable ſenſe,Ambr. loco cit. & in ep. ad Heb. Chry. ho. 9 in c. 6 ad Hebr. theſe fellowes make nothing of S. Ambroſes, S. Chryſoſtoms, and the other fathers expoſition, vvhich is the holy Churches ſenſe, That the Apoſtle meaneth of that penance vvhich is done before and in Baptiſme.The fathers expoſition of this place. vvhich is no more to ſay, but that it is impoſsible to be baptized againe, and thereby to be renouated and illuminated, to die, be buried, and riſe againe the ſecond time in Chriſt, in ſo eaſie and perfect penance and cleanſing of ſinnes, as that firſt ſacrament of generation did yeld: vvhich applieth Chriſtes death in ſuch ample maner to the receiuer, that it taketh avvay al paines due for ſinnes before committed: and therfore requireth no further penance aftervvard, for the ſinnes before committed, al being vvaſhed away by the force of that Sacrament duely taken. S. Auguſtine calleth the remiſsion in Baptiſme, Magnam indulgentiam, a great pardon. Enchirid. c. 64.
                  
                  The Apoſtle therfore warneth them,The Sacramēt of penance is ready for al ſinners vvhatſoeuer. that if they fall from their faith, and from Chriſtes grace and lavv vvhich they once receiued in their Baptiſme, they may not looke to haue any more that firſt great and large remedie applied vnto them, nor no man els that ſinneth after Baptiſme:Hiero. ep. 8 ad Demetriad. c. 6. though the other penance, vvhich is called the Second table after ſhipvvracke, vvhich is a more paineful medicine for ſinne then Baptiſme, requiring much faſting, praying, and other afflictions corporal, is open not onely to other ſinners, but to al once baptized, Heretikes, or oppugners of the truth malitiouſly and of purpoſe or what way ſo euer, during this life. See S. Cypriah ep. 52. S. Ambroſe vpon this place. S. Auguſtine cont. ep. Parm. li. 2. c. 13. and ep. 50. S. Damaſcene li. 4. c. 10.
                  
                  
                     10. God is not vniuſt.]
                     Gods iuſtice in revvarding meritorious vvorkes. It is a vvorld to ſee, vvhat vvringing & vvrithing the Proteſtants make, to ſhift them ſelues from the euidence of theſe vvordes, vvhich make it moſt cleere to all not blinded in pride and contention, that good vvorkes be moritorious, and the very cauſe of ſaluation, ſo far that God ſhould be vniuſt, if he rendered not heauen for the ſame. Reuera grandis iniuſtitia Dei (ſaith S. Hierom) Si tantùm peocata puniret, & bona opera non ſuſciperet. That is, In deede great vvere Gods iniuſtice 
                           •
                         if he vvould onely puniſh ſinnes, and vvould not receiue good vvorkes. Li. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 2.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  To proue the Prieſthod of Chriſt incomparably to excel the prieſthod of Aaron (and therfore, that Leuitical prieſthod novv to ceaſe, and that lavv alſo vvith it) he ſcanneth euery vvord of the verſe alleaged out of the Pſalme, Our Lord hath ſvvorne: thou art a Prieſt for euer, according to the order of Melchiſedec.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR this ″ Melchiſedec, the king of Salem, Prieſt of the God moſt high,Gen. 14, 18. * vvho mette Abraham returning from the ſlaughter of the kings, and bleſſed him: ✝ 
                     verse 2 to vvhom alſo Abrahā deuided tithes of al: firſt in deede by interpretation,
 
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                   
                  When the fathers & catholike expoſitours pike out allegories and myſteries out of the names of mē, the Proteſtāts not endued vvith the Spirit vvherby the ſcriptures vvere giuē, deride their holy labours in the ſearch of the ſame: but the Apoſtle findeth high myſterie in the very names of perſons and places, as you ſee. the king of iuſtice: & then alſo king of Salem, vvhich is to ſay, king of peace, ✝ 
                     verse 3 ″ vvithout father, without mother, vvithout genealogie, hauing neither beginning of daies nor end of life, but likened to the ſonne of God, continueth a prieſt for euer.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And ″ behold hovv great this man is, to vvhom alſo Abraham the Patriarke gaue ″ tithes of the principal things. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And certes * they of the ſonnes of Leui that take the prieſthod,
Nu. 18, 21. Deu. 18, 1. Ioſ. 14, 4. haue commaundement to take tithes of the people according to the Lavv, that is to ſay, of their brethren: albeit them ſelues alſo iſſued out of the loines of Abraham. ✝ 
                     verse 6 but he vvhoſe generation is not numbered among them, tooke tithes of Abraham, and bleſſed him that had the promiſes. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But vvithout al contradiction, that vvhich is leſſe, ″ is bleſſed of the better. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And here in deede,The tithes giuen to Melchiſedech were not giuē as to a mere mortal mā, as al of the tribe of Leui & Aarons order were: but as to one repreſenting the Sonne of God, vvho now liueth and reigneth and holdeth his prieſthod & the functions therof for euer. men that die, receiue tithes: but there he hath vvitnes, that he liueth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And (that it may ſo be ſaid) by Abraham Leui alſo, which receiued tithes, vvas tithed. ✝ 
                     verse 10 for as yet he vvas in his fathers loines, vvhen Melchiſedec mette him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 If then conſummation vvas by the Leuitical prieſthod (for vnder it the people receiued the Lavv) ″ vvhat neceſſitie vvas there yet an other prieſt to riſe according to the order of Melchiſedec, and not to be called according to the order of Aaron? ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the prieſthod being ″ tranſlated, it is neceſſarie that a tranſlation of the Lavv alſo be made. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For he on vvhom theſe things be ſaid, is of an other tribe, of the vvhich, none attended on the altar, ✝ 
                     verse 14 For it is manifeſt that our Lord ſprung of Iuda: in the which tribe Moyſes ſpake nothing ofPrieſthod. prieſtes'. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And yet it is much more euident: if according to the ſimilitude of Melchiſedec there ariſe an other prieſt, ✝ 
                     verse 16 which vvas not made according to the Lavv of the carnal commaundement, but according to the povver of life indiſſoluble. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For he vvitneſſeth, That thou art ″ a prieſt for euer, according to the order of Melchiſedec.
                  Pſ. 109, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Reprobation certes is made ″ of the former cō
                  maundement, becauſe of the vveakeneſſe and vnprofitableneſſe thereof. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the Lavv brought nothing to perfection, but an introduction of a better hope, by the vvhich vve approche to God. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And in as much as it is not vvithout an othe, (the other truely vvithout an othe vvere made prieſtes:Pſ. 10
                        •
                     , 4. ✝ 
                     verse 21 but this ″ vvith an othe, by him that ſaid vnto him: Our Lord hath ſvvorne, and it ſhal not repent him: thou art a prieſt for euer)
                   ✝ 
                     verse 22 by ſo much, is IESVS made a ſuretie of a better teſtamēt. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And the other in deede vvere made prieſtes,The Epiſtle for a Cōfeſſor that is a Biſhop. ″ being many, becauſe that by death they vvere prohibited to continue: ✝ 
                     verse 24 but this, for that he continueth for euer, hath an euerlaſting prieſthod. ✝ 
                     verse 25 vvhereby he is able to ſaue alſo for euerthem that goe going' by him ſelf to God:Chriſt according to his humane nature praieth for vs, & continually repreſenteth his former paſſion and merites to God the Father. alvvaies liuing to make interceſſion for vs.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 For it vvas ſeemely that vve ſhould haue ſuch a high prieſt, holy, innocent, impolluted, ſeparated from ſinners, and made higher then the heauens. ✝ 
                     verse 27 vvhich hath not neceſſitie daily (as the prieſtes) firſt * for his ovvne ſinnes to offer hoſtes,Leu. 9, 7. 16, 6. then for the peoples. for ″ this he did once, in offering him ſelf. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 28 For the Lavv appointeth prieſtes them that haue infirmitie: but the vvord of the othe vvhich is after the Lavv, the Sonne for euer perfected.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
                  
                     1. Melchiſede
                           •
                        .] The excellencie of this perſon vvas ſo great, that ſome of the antiquity tooke him to be an Angel, and ſome the holy Ghoſt. Vvhich opinion not onely the Hebrues, that auouch him to be Sem the ſonne of Noë, but alſo the cheefe fathers of the Chriſtians do condemne: not doubting but he vvas a mere man and a Prieſt and a king, vvhoſoeuer he vvas. for els he could not in office and order and ſacrifice haue been ſo perfect a type and reſemblance of our Sauiour, as in this Chapter and other is ſhevved.
                  
                     3. Without father.]
                     The reſemblāce of Melchiſedec to Chriſt, in many points. Not that he vvas vvithout father and mother, ſaith S. Hierom ep. 126: for Chriſt him ſelf vvas not vvithout father, according to his diuinity, not vvithout mother, in his humanity: but for that his petigree is not ſet out in the Geneſis, as the genealogie of other Patriarches is, but is ſodenly induced in the holy hiſtorie, no mention made of his ſtocke, tribe, beginning or ending, and therfore in that caſe alſo reſembling in a ſort the ſonne of God, vvhoſe generation vvas extraordinarie, miraculous, and ineffable, according to both his natures, lacking a father in the one,By the ſundrie excellencies of Melchiſedeck
                           •
                         Prieſthod is proued the excellē
                        cie of the Prieſthod & ſacrifice of the nevv Teſtament. and a mother in the other. his perſon hauing neither beginning nor ending, and his kingdom, and Prieſthod ſpecially, in him ſelf and in the Church, being eternall, both in reſpect of the time paſt, and the time to come: as the ſaid Doctor in the ſame epiſtle vvriteth.
                  
                     4. Behold.] To proue that Chriſtes Prieſthod far paſſeth the Prieſthod of Aaron: and the Prieſthod of the nevv Teſtament, the Prieſthod of the old lavv: and conſequently that the ſacrifice of our Sauiour and the ſacrifice of the Church doth much excel the ſacrifices of Moyſes lavv, he diſputeth pro
                        •
                     oundly of the preeminences of Melchiſedec aboue the great Patriarch Abraham, vvho vvas father of the Leuites.
                  
                     4. Tithes.] The firſt preeminence, that Abraham paied tithes, and that of the beſt and moſt cheefe things that he had, vnto Melchiſedec, as a duety and homage, not for him ſelf onely in perſon,He receiued tithes of Abrahā, & conſequently of Leui & Aarō. but for Leui, vvho yet vvas not borne, and ſo for the vvhole Prieſthod of Leuies ſtocke, acknovvledging thereby, Melchiſedec not onely to be a Prieſt, but his Prieſt and Superior, and ſo of al the Leuitical order. And it is here to be obſerued, that vvhereas in the 14 of Geneſis, vvhence this holy narration is taken, both in the Hebrue, and in the 70, it ſtandeth indifferent or doubtfull, vvhether Melchiſedec paied tithes to Abraham, or tooke tithes of him: the Apoſtle here putteth al out of controuerſie, plainely declaring that Abraham paid tithes to the other, at the inferiour to his Prieſt and Superior.Tithes. And touching paiment of tithes, it is a natural duety, that men ovve to God in al lavves, and to be giuen to his Prieſts in his behalfe, for their honour and liuelihod. Iacob promiſed or vovved to pay them, Gen. 28. Moyſes appointed them Leuit. 27. Num. 18. Deut. 12. 14. 26. Chriſt confirmeth that duety Mat. 23: and Abraham ſpecially here giueth them to Melchiſedec
 plainely thereby approuing them or their equiualent to be due to Chriſt and the Prieſthod of the nevv Teſtament, much more then either in the lavv of Moyſes, or in the lavv of Nature. Of vvhich tithes due to the Clergie of Chriſes Church ſee S. Cyprian ep. 66. S. Hierom ep. 1▪ c. 7. and ep. 2 c. 5. to Hellodorus and Nepolianus. S. Auguſtine ſer. 119 de tempore.
                  
                  
                     7. Is bleſſed of the better.]
                     He bleſſed Abraham. The ſecond preeminence is, that Melchiſedec did bleſſe Abraham: vvhich vve ſee here S. Paul maketh a great and ſoueraine holy thing, grounding our Sauiours prerogatiue aboue the vvhole order of Aaron therein: and vve ſee that in this ſort it is the proper act of Prieſhod 
                        •
                      and that vvithout al controuerſie as the Apoſtle ſaith,Bleſſing a great preeminēce, ſpecially in Prieſts. he is greater in dignitie, that hath authority, to bleſſe, then the perſon that hath not, and therfore the Prieſts vocation to be in this behalfe far aboue any earthly king, vvho hath not povver to giue benediction in this ſacred maner, neither to man, nor other creature. As here Melchiſedec, ſo Chriſt bleſſed much more, and ſo haue the Biſhops of his Church done, and do, Vvhich no man can maruel that our forefathers haue ſo highly eſteemed and ſought for, if he marke the vvonderful myſterie and grace thereof here expreſſed. 
                        〈…〉
                      alſo vvhich here taketh bloſſing of Melchiſedec, him ſelf (though in an inferior ſort) bleſſed his ſonnes, as the other Patriarches did, and fathers do their children by that example.
                  
                     11. If conſummation.]
                     The ful accompliſhment of mans redēption vvas not by Aarons but by Melchiſedecks Prieſthod. The principal propoſition of the vvhole epiſtle and al the Apoſtle diſcourſe, is inſerted & grounded vpon the former prerogatiues of Melchiſedec aboue Abraham and Leul: that is, that the end, perfection, accompliſhment, and conſummation of al mans dueties and debtes to God, by the general redemption, ſatisfaction, full price and perfect ranſom of al mankind, vvas not atchieued by any or al the Prieſts of Aarons order, not by any ſacrifice or act of that Prieſthod, or of al the lavv of Moyſes, vvhich vvas grounded vpon the Leuitical Prieſthod, but by Chriſt and his Prieſthod, vvhich is of the order and rite of Melchiſedec.
                  
                     11. What neceſsitie.] This diſputation of the preeminence of Chriſtes Prieſthod aboue the Leuitical order,The Apoſtle to conſute the Ievves falſe perſuaſion of Aarons Prieſthod and ſacrifices, ſpeaketh altogether of the ſacrifice of the Croſſe. is againſt the erroneous perſuaſion of the Ievves, that thought their lavv. Prieſthod, and ſacrifices to be euerlaſting, and to be ſufficient in them ſelues, vvithout any other Prieſt then Aaron and his ſucceſſors and vvithout al relation to Chriſtes Paſſion or any other redemption or remiſſion, then that vvhich their Leuitical offices did procure: not knovving that they vvere all figures of Chriſtes death, and to be ended and accompliſhed in the ſame. Vvhich point vvell vnderſtood and kept in mind, vvill cleere the vvhole controuerſie betvvixt the Catholikes and Proteſtants, concerning the ſacrifice of the Church, for, the ſcope of the Apoſtles diſputation being, to auouch the dignity, preeminence, neceſſitie, and eternal fruite and effect of Chriſtes Paſſion, he had not to treate at all of the other, vvhich is a ſacrifice depending of his Paſſion, ſpecially vvriting to the Hebrues, that vvere to be inſtructed and reformed firſt touching the ſacrifice of the Croſſe, before they could fruitfully heare any thing of the other, though in couert and by moſt euident ſequele of diſputation, the learned and faithfull may eaſily perceiue vvherevpon the ſaid Sacrifice of the Church (vvhich is the Maſſe) is grounded. And therfore S. Hierom ſaith, ep. 126: that al theſe commendations of Melchiſedec are in the type of Chriſt, euius profectus Eccleſiae ſacramenta ſunt.
                  
                  
                     12. Tranſlated.] Note vvel this place, and you ſhal perceiue thereby, that euery lavvful forme and manner of lavv,No lavvful ſtate of people vvith out an external Prieſthod. ſtate, or gouernement of Gods people dependeth on Prieſthod, riſeth, ſtandeth, falleth, or altereth vvith the Prieſthod. In the lavv of Nature, the ſtate of the people hanged on one kind of Prieſthod: in the lavv of Moyſes, of an other in the ſtate of Chriſtianity, of an other: and therfore in the former ſentence the Apoſtle ſaid, that the Ievviſh people or Commonvvealth had their lavv vnder the Leuitical Prieſthod,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      and the Greeke more properly expreſſeth the matter, that they vvere legitimated, that is to ſay, made a lavvful people or communitie vnder God, by the Prieſthod▪ for there is no iuſt nor lavvful Commonvvealth in the vvorld, that is not made legal and Gods peculiar,External Prieſthod neceſſarie for the nevv Teſtament. and diſtinguiſhed from vnlavvful Commonvveales that hold of falſe goddes, or of none at al, by Prieſthod. Vvherevpon it is cleere, that the nevv lavv, and al Chriſtian peoples holding of the ſame, is made lavvful by the Prieſthod of the nevv Teſtament, and that the Proteſtants ſhamefully are deceiued, and deceiue others, that vvould haue Chriſtian Commonvveales to lacke an external Prieſthod, or Chriſtes death to aboliſh the ſame▪ for, this is a demonſtration. that if Chriſt haue aboliſhed Prieſthod, he hath aboliſhed the nevv lavv, vvhich is the nevv Teſtament and ſtate of Grace, vvhich as Chriſtian Commonvvealths liue vnder. Neither vvere it true, that the Prieſthod vvere trāſlated vvith the Lavv, if al external Prieſthod ended by Chriſtes death, vvhere the nevv lavv began▪ for ſo the lavv ſhould not depend on Prieſthod, but dure vvhen al Prieſthod vvere ended: vvhich is againſt S. Paules doctrine.
                  Furthermore it is to be noted,External ſacrifice alſo neceſſarie for the ſame. that this legitimation or putting Communities vnder lavv, and Prieſthod, of vvhat order ſoeuer, is no othervviſe, but ioyning one vvith an other in one homage or ſacrifice external, vvhich is the proper act of Prieſthod for, as no lavvful ſtate can be vvithout prieſthod, ſo no prieſthod can be vvithout ſacrifice. And vve meane alvvaies of Prieſthod & ſacrifice taken in their ovvne proper ſignification, as here S. Paul taketh them, for, the conſtitution difference, alteration, or trāſlation of ſtates and lavves riſe not vpon any mutation of ſpiritual or metaphorically taken Prieſthod, or ſacrifice: but vpon thoſe things in proper acception, as it is moſt plaine.
                  
                      Laſtly, it foloweth of this, that though Chriſt truely ſacrificed him ſelf vpon the Croſſe (there alſo a Prieſt according to the order of Melchiſedec) and there made the ful redemption of the vvorld,The tranſlation of the old Prieſthod & ſacrifices, muſt needes be into the ſaid Prieſthod and ſacrifice of the Church. confirmed, and conſummated his compact, and Teſtament, and the lavv and prieſthod of this his nevv and eternal ſtate, by his bloud: yet that can not be the forme of ſacrifice into vvhich the old Prieſthod and ſacrifices vvere tranſlated, vvherevpon the Apoſtle inferreth the tranſlation of the Law. For they all vvere figures of Chriſtes death, and ended in effect at his death, yet they vvere not altered into that kind of ſacrifice, vvhich vvas to be made but once, and vvas executed in ſuch a ſort, that peoples and nations Chriſtened could not meete often to vvorſhip at it, nor haue their law and Prieſtes conſtituted in the ſame▪ though for the honour and duety, remembrance and repreſentatiō thereof, not onely vve Chriſtian
                        •
                     , but alſo al peoples faithful both of Iewes & Gentiles, haue had their prieſthod and ſacrifices according to the difference of their ſtates. Vvhich kind of Sacrifices vvere tranſlated one into an other: and ſo no doubt is the Prieſthod Leuitical properly turned into the Prieſthod and ſacrifice of the Church, according to Melchiſedecks rite, and Chriſtes inſtitution in the formes of bread and vvine. See the next note.
                  
                     17. A Prieſt for euer.] Chriſt is not called a Prieſt for euer, onely for that his perſon is eternal,Hovv Chriſt is a Prieſt for eues. or for that he ſitteth on the right hand of God, and perpetually praieth or maketh interceſsion for vs, or for that the effect of his death is euerlaſting: for al this proueth not that in proper ſignification his Prieſthod is perpetual: but according to the iudgement of al the fathers grounded vpon this deepe and diuine diſcourſe of S. Paul, and vpon the very nature, definition, and propriety of Prieſthod, and the excellent act and order of Melchiſedec, and the ſtate of the new law,Chriſts eternal Prieſthod conſiſteth in the perpetual ſacrifice of his body & bloud in the Church. he is a Prieſt for euer according to Melchiſedecks order, ſpecially in reſpect of the ſacrifice of his holy body and bloud, inſtituted at his laſt ſupper, and executed by his commiſsion, commaundement, and perpetual concurrence vvith his Prieſts, in the formes of bread and vvine: in vvhich things onely the ſaid high Prieſt Melchiſedec did ſacrifice. For though S. Paul make no expreſſe mention hereof, becauſe of the depth of the myſterie, and their incredulity or feebleneſſe to vvhom he vvrote: yet it is euident in the iudgement of all the learned fathers (vvithout exception) that euer vvrote either vpon this epiſtle, or vpon the 14 of Geneſis, or the Pſalme 109, or by occaſion haue treated of the ſacrifice of the altar, that the eternity and proper act of Chriſtes Prieſthod, and conſequently the immutability of the new, law, conſiſteth in the perpetual offering of Chriſtes body and bloud in the Church.
                  Which thing is ſo vvell knowen to the Aduerſaries of Chriſtes Church and Prieſthod,The Proteſtāts cauilling vpon particles, agaīſt Melchiſedecks ſacrifice & Prieſthod, directly againſt the Apoſtle. and ſo graunted, that they be forced impudently to cauill vpon certaine Hebrue particles, that Melchiſedec did not offer in bread and vvine: yea and vvhen that vvill not ſerue, plainely to deny him to haue been a Prieſt: vvhich is to giue checkmate to the Apoſtle, and to ouerthrow all his diſcourſe. Thus vvhiles theſe vvicked men pretend to defend Chriſtes onely Prieſthod, they in deede aboliſh as much as in them lieth, the vvhole order, office, and ſtate of his eternall law and Prieſthod.
                  Arnobius ſaith, By the myſterie of bread and vvine he vvas made a Prieſt for euer. And againe,Chriſts eternal Prieſthod and ſacrifice in the Church is proued out of the fathers. 
                     The eternal memorie, by vvhich he gaue the food of his body to them that feare him▪ in pſal. 109. 110. Lactatius, In the Church he muſt needes haue his eternal Prieſthod according to the order of Melabiſedec. Li. 14. Inſtitut. S. Hierom to Luagrius,Ep. 126. 
                     Aarons Prieſthod had an end, bus Melchiſedecks, that is, Chriſtes and the Churches is perpetuall,That is, from Adā to the end of the vvorld, repreſented by ſacrifice. 
                     both for the time paſt and to come. S. Chryſoſtom therfore calleth the Churches ſacrifice, hoſtia
                           •
                         inconſumptib
                           •
                        em, an hoſt or ſacrifice that can not be conſumed. ho. 17 in 9 Hebr. S. Cyprian, boſtiam qua ſublatae, nulla eſſet futura religio, an hoſt vvhich being taken away, there could be no religion. de Cana
                           •
                         D
                           •
                        mini. nu 2. Emiſſenus, perpetuam oblationem & perpetuò currentem redemptionem, a perpetual oblation and a redemption that runneth or continueth euerlaſtingly. ho. 5 de Paſch. And our Sauiour expreſſeth ſo much in the very inſtitution of the B. Sacrament of his body and bloud: ſpecially vvhen he calleth the later kind, the nevv Teſtament in his bloud, ſignifying that as the old law vvas eſtabliſhed in the bloud of beaſtes, ſo the new (vvhich is his eternal Teſtament) ſhould be dedicated and perpetual in his owne bloud: not onely as it vvas ſhed on the Croſſe, but as giuen in the Chalice. And therfore into this ſacrifice of the altar (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. 17 de Ciuit. c. 20. S. Leo ſer. 8 de Paſsione, and the reſt) vvere the old ſacrifices to be tranſlated. See S. Cyprian ep. 63 ad Cecil. nu. 2. Ambroſe de Sacram. li. 5. 6. 4. S. Auguſtine in Pſal. 33. Conc. 
                           •
                        . and li. 17. de Ciuit. c. 17. S. Hierom ep. 17. c. 2. & ep. 126. Epiph. har. 55. Theodoret in Pſal. 109. Damaſcene li. 4. c. 14.
                  
                  Finally if any of the fathers, or all the fathers, had either vviſedom, grace, or intelligence of Gods vvorde and myſteries, this is the truth. If nothing vvil ſerue our Aduerſaries, Chriſt Ieſus confound them, and defend his eternal Prieſthod, and ſtate of his new Teſtament eſtabliſhed in the ſame.
                  
                      
                     18. Of the former commaundement.]
                     The old commaundement, and the new. The vvhole law of Moyſes conteining all their old Prieſthod, ſacrifice, ſacraments, and ceremonies, is called the Old commaundement: and the new Teſtament conteining the ſacrifice of Chriſtes body and bloud, and al the ſacraments and graces giuen by the ſame, is named the Nevv mandatum: for vvhich our forefathers called the Thurſday in the holy vveke,Maundy thurſday vvhy ſo called. 
                     Maundy thurſday, becauſe that in it, the new law and Teſtament was dedicated in the Chalice of his bloud: the old mandatum, law, Prieſthod, and ſacrifices, for that they vvere inſufficient and vnperfect, being taken avvay: and this new ſacrifice, after the order of Melchiſedec, giuen in the place thereof.The introduction of a new Prieſthod.
                  
                  
                     19. The introduction.] Euer obſerue, that the abrogation of the old law, is not an aboliſhing of al Prieſthod, of al Prieſthod, but an introductiō of a new, conteining the hope of eternal things, vvhere the old had but temporal.The eternitie of the new Prieſthod confirmed by the fathers othe, & Chriſts paſſion.
                  
                  
                     21. With an othe.] This othe ſignifieth the infallible and abſolute promis of the eternitie of the new Prieſthod and ſtate of the Church: Chriſt by his death, and bloud ſhed in the ſacrifice of the Croſſe, confirming it, ſealing it, and making him ſelf the ſurety and pledge therof. For though the new Teſtament vvas inſtituted, giuen, and dedicated in the Supper, yet the vvarrant, confirmation, and eternal operation therof, vvas atchieued vpon the Croſſe, in the one oblation and one general and euer laſting redemption there made.
                  
                     23. Being many.]
                     By the compariſon of many prieſts, & one, is not meant that there is but one Prieſt of the new Teſtament. The Proteſtants not vnderſtanding this place, feine very foliſhly, that the Apoſtle ſhould make this difference betvvixt the old ſtate and the new: that in the old, there were many Prieſts: in the new, none at all but Chriſt. Which is againſt the Prophet Eſay,Eſa. c. 61. ſpecially prophecying of the Prieſts of the new Teſtament (as S. Hierom declareth vpon the ſame place) in theſe vvordes, You ſhal be called the
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     Prieſts of God: the
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     miniſters of our God, ſhal it be ſaid to your & it taketh away al viſible Prieſthod, & conſequently the lawful ſtate that the Church and Gods people haue in earth, vvith al Sacraments and external vvorſhip.
                  The Apoſtle then meaneth firſt,The meaning is, that the abſolute ſacrifice of eternal redēption could not be done by thoſe many Aaronical prieſts but by one onely, Chriſt Ieſus: vvho liueth a Prieſt for euer, hath no ſucceſſor, and as cheefe prieſt, worketh and concurreth vvith al Prieſts in their prieſtly functions. that the abſolute ſacrifice of cōſummation, perfection, and vniuerſal redemption, vvas but one, once done, and by one onely Prieſt done, and therfore it could not be any of the ſacrifices, or al the ſacrifices of the Iewes law, or vvrought by any or by all of them, becauſe they vvere a number at once, and ſucceding one an other, euery of their offices and functions ending by their death, and could not vvorke ſuch an eternal redemption as by Chriſt onely vvas vvrought vpon the Croſſe. Secondly, S. Paul inſinuateth therevpon, that Chriſt neuer loſeth the dignitie or practiſe of his eternal Prieſthod, by death nor othervviſe, neuer yeldeth it vp to any, neuer hath ſucceſſors after him, that may enter into his roome or right of Prieſthod, as Aaron and al other had in the Leuitical Prieſthod, but that him ſelf vvorketh and concurreth vvith his miniſters the Prieſts of the new Teſtament, in al their actes of Prieſthod, as vvel of ſacrifice as Sacrament, bleſsing, preaching, praying, and the like vvhat ſo euer.
                  This therfore vvas the fault of the Hebrues, that they did not acknowledge their Leuitical ſacrifices and Prieſthod to be reformed and perfited by Chriſtes ſacrifice on the Croſſe: and againſt them the Apoſtle onely diſputeth, and not againſt our Prieſts of holy Church, or the number of them, vvho al confeſſe their Prieſthod and al exerciſes of the ſame, to depend vpon Chriſtes onely perpetual Prieſthod.
                  
                     27. This did he once.] This is the ſpecial preeminence of Chriſt, that the offereth for other mens ſinnes onely, hauing none of his owne to offer for, as al other Prieſts both of the old and new law haue. And this againe is the ſpecial dignitie of his owne perſon, not communicable to any other of vvhat order of Prieſthod ſo euer, that he by his death (which is the onely oblation that is by the Apoſtle declared to be irreiterable in it ſelf) paied the one full ſufficient ranſom for the redemption of all ſinnes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Out of the ſame Pſalme 109 he vrgeth this alſo, Sit thou on my right hand, ſhevving that the Leuitical tabernacle on earth, vvas but a ſhadovv of his true Tabernacle in heauen: vvithout vvhich he ſhould not be a Prieſt at all: 6 Vvhereas he is of a better Prieſthod the
                        •
                      they, as alſo he proueth by the excellencie of the nevv Teſtament aboue the old.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BVT the ſumme concerning thoſe things vvhich be ſaid, is: Vve haue ſuch an high prieſt, vvho is ſette on the right hand of the ſeate of maieſtie in the heauens, ✝ 
                     verse 2 aChriſt liuing and reigning in heauē, continueth his prieſtly functiō ſtil, and is miniſter not of Moyſes Sancta & tabernacle, but of his ovvne body & bloud, vvhich be the true holies, and tabernacle, not formed by mā, but by Gods ovvne hand. miniſter of the holies, and of the true tabernacle, vvhich our Lord pight & not man. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For euery high prieſt is appointed to offer giftes and hoſtes, vvherfore it is ″ neceſſarie that he alſo haue ſome thing that he may offer: ✝ 
                     verse 4 ″ if then he vvere vpon the earth, neither vvere he a prieſt: vvhereas there vvere that did offer giftes according to the Lavv, ✝ 
                     verse 5 that
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪
                   ſerue the exampler & ſhadow of ″ heauenly things. As it vvas anſvvered Moyſes, vvhen he finiſhed the tabernacle,Exo, 25, 9. 40. * See (quod he) that thou make al things according to the exampler vvhich vvas ſhevved thee in the mount.
               
                   ✝ 
                        verse 6 But novv he hath obtained a better miniſterie, by ſo much as he is mediatour of a better teſtament, vvhich is eſtabliſhed in better promiſes. ✝ 
                        verse 7 For
                  The promiſes and effectes of the Law were temporal, but the promiſes and effectes of Chriſtes Sacraments in the Church be eternal. 
                  if that former had been void of fault, there ſhould not certes a place of a ſecōd been ſought.
                  Hier. 31, 31. ✝ 
                     verse 8 
                  For blaming them, he ſaith: Behold the daies ſhal come, ſaith our Lord: and I vvil conſummate vpon the houſe of Iſrael, and vpon the houſe of Iuda a nevv Teſtament: ✝ 
                     verse 9 not according to the teſtament vvhich I made to their fathers in the day that I tooke their hand to bring them out of the land of Aegypt: becauſe they did not continue in my teſtament: and I neglected them, ſaith our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For this is the teſtament vvhich I vvil diſpoſe to the houſe of Iſrael after thoſe daies, ſaith our Lord: Giuing my lavves ″ into their minde, & in their hart vvil I ſuperſcribe them: and I vvil be ″ their God, and they ſhal be my people: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and eueryone ″ ſhall not teach his neighbour, and euery one his brother, ſaying, Knovv our Lord: becauſe al ſhal knovv me from the leſſer to the greater of them: ✝ 
                     verse 12 becauſe I wil be merciful to their iniquities, & their ſinnes I wil not now remember. ✝ 
                     verse 13 
                  And in ſaying a nevv, the former he hath made old. And that vvhich grovveth auncient and vvaxeth old, is nigh to vtter decay.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     3. Neceſſarie that he alſo.]
                     Chriſts prieſthod & ſacrifice is external, not ſpiritual only. Euen now being in heauen, becauſe he is a Biſhop and Prieſt, he muſt needes haue ſomewhat to offer, and vvherein to do ſacrifice: and that not in ſpiritual ſort onely, for that could not make him a Prieſt of any certaine order. And it is moſt falſe and vvicked, to hold vvith the Caluiniſtes,Beza in ſchol. Teſt. Gracolat. in c. 7 Heb. num. 8. that Melchiſedecks Prieſthod vvas vvholy ſpiritual. For then Chriſts death vvas not a corporal, external, viſible, and truely named ſacrifice: neither could Chriſt or Melchiſedec be any otherwiſe a Prieſt, then euery
 faithful man is: vvhich to hold (as the Caluiniſts folowing their owne doctrine muſt needes do) is directly againſt the Scriptures, and no leſſe againſt Chriſtes one oblation of his body vpon the Croſſe, then it is againſt the daily ſacrifice of his body vpon the altar. Therfore he hath a certaine hoſt in external and proper maner, to make perpetual oblation thereby in the Church: for, viſible and external act of ſacrificing in heauen he doth not exerciſe.
                  
                     4. If vpon the earth.]
                     How Chriſtes body is made fit to be ſacrificed and eaten perpetually. It is by his death, and reſurrection to life againe, that his body is become apt and fitte in ſuch diuine ſort to be ſacrificed perpetually. For if he had liued in mortal ſort ſtill, that vvay of myſtical repreſentation of breaking his body and ſeparating the bloud from the ſame, could not haue been agreable, and ſo the Church and Chriſtian people ſhould haue lacked a prieſthod and ſacrifice, & Chriſt him ſelf ſhould not haue been a Prieſt of a peculiar order, but either muſt haue offered in the things that Aarons Prieſts did, or els haue been no Prieſt at all. For, to haue offered onely ſpiritually, as all faithful men do, that could not be ynough for his vocation, and our redemption, and ſtate of the new Teſtament. How his fleſh vvas made fit to be offered and eaten in the B. Sacrament, by his death, ſee Iſychius li. 1 in leuit. cap. 2.
                  
                  
                     5. Heauenly things.] As the Church or ſtate of the new Teſtament is commonly called Regnum coelorum & Dei,
                     
                        Kingdom of heauen, and heauēly things, ſpokē of the Church. in the Scriptures, ſo theſe heauenly things be probably taken by learned men, for the myſteries of the new Teſtament. And it ſeemeth that the paterne giuen to Moyſes to frame his tabernacle by, vvas the Church, rather then the heauens them ſelues: al S. Paules diſcourſe tending to ſhew the difference betwixt the new Teſtament and the old, and not to make compariſon betwene the ſtate of heauen and the old law. Though incidently, becauſe the condition of the new Teſtament more neerely reſembleth the ſame, then the old ſtate doth, he ſometime may ſpeake ſomewhat therof alſo.
                  
                     10. Into their minde.]
                     Grace, the effect of the new Teſtament. This alſo and the reſt folowing is fulfilled in the Church, and is the proper effect of the new Teſtament, vvhich is the grace and ſpirit of loue, graffed in the hartes of the faithful by the holy Ghoſt, vvorking in the Sacraments and ſacrifice of the new law to that effecte.
                  
                     10. Their God.]
                     The new Teſtamēt or couenant betwene God & man. This mutual couenant made betwixt God and the faithful, is that vvhich vvas dedicated and eſtabliſhed,Luc. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . firſt in the chalice of his bloud, called therfore the nevv Teſtament in his bloud: and vvhich vvas ſtraight after ratified by the death of the 
                        ••
                     
                     ſtator, vpon the Croſſe.
                  
                     11. Shal not teach.] So it vvas in the primitiue Church, in ſuch ſpecially as vvere the firſt founders of our new ſtate in Chriſt. And that vvhich vvas verified in the Apoſtles and other principal men,Scriptures abuſed for phā
                        taſtical inſpirations. the Apoſtle ſpeaketh generally as though it vvere ſo in the vvhole. as S. Peter applieth the like out of Ioël, and our Sauiour ſo ſpeaketh,Act. 2. vvhen he ſaith that ſuch as beleeue in him,Io. 14. 
                           •
                        . 12. ſhal vvorke miracles of diuers ſortes. Chriſtian men then muſt not abuſe this place to make chalenge of new inſpirations and ſo great knowledge that they neede no Scriptures or teaching in this life, as ſome Heretikes doe: vvith much like reaſon and ſhew of Scriptures as the Proteſtants haue to refuſe external, ſacrifice. And it is no leſſe phantaſtical madneſſe to deny external ſacrifice, ſacraments, or Prieſthod, then it is to aboliſh teaching and preaching.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  In the old Teſtament, that ſecular Sanctuarie had tvvo partes: the one ſignifying that time, vvith the ceremonies therof for the emundation of the fleſh: the other ſignifying heauen, vvhich then vvas ſhut, vntil our High prieſt Chriſt entered into it, and that vvith his ovvne bloud, ſhed for the emundation of our conſciences. Wherevpon he concludeth the excellencie of his tabernacle and hoſt aboue the old. 25 Noting alſo the differences, that he entered but once (ſo effectual vvas that one blouddy offering of himſelf, for euer) vvheras the Leuitical High prieſt entered euery yere once.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE former alſo in deede had iuſtificatiōs

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   of ſeruice,Exo. 25. 26, 1. 36. and a ſecular ſanctuarie.The Epiſtle vpon Imber ſaturday in Septemb.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 2 For the tabernacle vvas made, the firſt, vvherin vvere, the candleſtickes, and the table, and the propoſition of Ioaues, vvhich is called Holy. ✝ 
                     verse 3 But after the ſecond vele, the tabernacle, vvhich is called Sancta Sanctorum: ✝ 
                     verse 4 hauing a golden cenſar, and the arke of the teſtamēt couered about on euery part vvith gold, in the vvhich vvas ″ a golden potte hauing Manna, and the rod of Aaron that had bloſſomed,3 Reg. 8. & * the tables of the teſtament,2 Par. 5. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and ouer it vvere * the ″ Cherubins of glorie ouerſ had ovving the propitiatorie.Exo. 25, 22. of vvhich things it is not needeful to ſpeake novv particularly. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But theſe things being ſo ordered, in the firſt tabernacle in deede the prieſts alvvaies entered, accōpliſhing offices of the ſacrifices.Exo 30, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But in the ſecond, * once a yere the high prieſt only: not vvithout bloud vvhich he offereth for his ovvne and the peoples ignorance:Leu. 16, 2. 30. ✝ 
                     verse 8 the holy Ghoſt ſignifying this, that the vvay of the holies wasThe vvay to heauē vvas not open before Chriſts paſſion. & therfore the Patriarches and good men of the old Teſtament vvere in ſome other place of reſt vntil then. not yet manifeſted, the former tabernacle as yet ſtanding. ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvhich is a
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   parable of the time preſent: according to vvhich are offered giftes and hoſtes, vvhich can not concerning the conſcience make perfectAl things done in the old Teſtament and prieſthod were figures of Chriſtes actions. him that ſerueth, ✝ 
                     verse 10 onely in meates and in drinkes, and diuerſe baptiſmes, and iuſtices of the fleſh laid on them ″ vntil the time of correction.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 ButThe Epiſtle vpon Paſſion Sunday. Chriſt aſſiſting an high Prieſt of the good things to come, by a more ample and more perfect tabernacle not made vvith hand, that is, not of this creation: ✝ 
                     verse 12 neither by the bloud of goates or of calues, but by his ovvne bloud entered in once into the Holies, ″ eternal redemption being found.Leu. 9, 8, 16, 6. 14▪
                   
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 13 For * if the bloud of goates and of oxen & the aſhes of an heifer being ſprinkled, ſanctifieth the polluted to the cleanſing of the fleſh:Nu. 19. ✝ 
                     verse 14 hovv much moreſhal hath' the bloud of Chriſt vvho by the holy Ghoſt offered himſelf vnſpotted vnto God,cleanſe cleanſed' our conſcience from dead vvorkes, to ſerue the liuing God? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And therfore he is the mediatour of the nevv Teſtament: that death being a meane, vnto the redemption ″ of theſe preuarications vvhich vvere vnder the former teſtament, they that are called may receiue the promiſe of eternal inheritance.Gal. 3, 15▪
                   
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 16 For * vvhere there is a teſtament: the death of the teſtatour muſt of neceſſitie
 come betvvene. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For a teſtament is confirmed in the dead: othervviſe it is yet of no value, vvhiles he that teſted, liueth. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vvherevpon neither vvas the firſt certes dedicated vvithout bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For al the commaundement of the Lavv being read of Moyſes to al the people: he taking the bloud of calues and goates vvithHere we may learne that the Scriptures conteine not al neceſſarie tites or truthes, whē neither the place to which the Apoſtle alludeth, nor any other, mentioneth half theſe ceremonies, but he had them by tradition. vvater and ſcarlet vvool and hyſſope, ſprinkled the very booke alſo it ſelf and al the people,Exo. 24. 8. ✝ 
                     verse 20 ſaying, * ″ This is the bloud of the Teſtament, vvhich God hath commaunded vnto you. ✝ 
                     verse 21 The tabernacle alſo & al the veſſel of the miniſterie he in like maner ſprinkled with bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And al things almoſt according to the lavv are cleanſed with bloud: and vvithout ſheading of bloud there is not remiſſion.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 It is neceſſarie therfore that ″ the examplers of the coeleſtials be cleanſed vvith theſe: but the celeſtials them ſelues vvith better hoſtes then theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For IESVS is not entred into Holies made vvith hand, examplers of the true: but into heauen it ſelf, that he may appeare novv to the countenance of God for vs. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Nor that he ſhould ″ offer him ſelf often, as the high prieſt entereth into the Holies, euery yere in the bloud of others: ✝ 
                     verse 26 othervviſe he ought to haue ſuffered often from the beginning of the vvorld: but novv once in the cōſummation of the vvorldes, to the deſtructiō of ſinne, he hath appeared by his ovvne hoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And as it is appointed to men to die once, and after this, the iudgement: ✝ 
                     verse 28 ſo alſo Chriſt vvas offered onceBy this word vvhich ſignifieth to emptie or draw out euen to the botom, is declared the plentiful and perfect redēption of ſinne by Chriſt. to exhauſt the ſinnes of many, the ſecond time he ſhal appeare vvithout ſinne to them that expect him, vnto ſaluation.ad exhaurienda, peccata.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     4. A golden potte.]
                     Relikes. The Proteſtants count it ſuperſtitious to keepe vvith honour and reuerence the holy memories or monuments of Gods benefites and miracles, or the tokens of Chriſtes Paſſion, as his Croſſe, garments, or other things appertaining to him or his Saincts, and thinke it impoſſible that ſuch things ſhould dure ſo long:They cōtinue vvithout putrefaction. vvhen they may here ſee the reuerent and long reſeruation of Manna, vvhich of it ſelf vvas moſt apt to putrifie, and of Aarons rodde, onely for that it ſodenly floriſhed by miracle, the tables of the Teſtament &c. See a notable place in S. Cyril li. 6 cont. Iulian. vvhere he defendeth againſt Iulian the Apoſtataes blaſphemie, he keeping and honouring of that Croſſe or vvood vvhich Chriſt died on.The holy CROSSE. See alſo S. Paulinus ep. 11. and vvhat reuerence S. Hierom and the faithful of his time did to the ſepulchres of Chriſt and his Martyrs, and to their relikes.The ſepulchres of Chriſt and his Saincts. 
                     We reuerence and vvorſhip (ſaith he) euery vvhere Martyrs ſepulchres,
                     ep. 17. c. 5. 
                     and putting the holy aſhes to our eies, if vve may, vve touch it vvith our mouth alſo: and do ſome thinke, that the monument vvherein our Lord vvas buried, it to be neglected? But our Proteſtant can not ſkill of this, they had
 rather folovv Vigilantius, Iulianus the Apoſtata, and ſuch Maiſters, then the holy Doctors and euident practiſe of the Church is al ages.
                  
                     5. Cherubins.] You ſee it is a fond thing, to conclude vpon the firſt or ſecond commaundement, that there ſhould be no ſacred images in the Church, vvhen euen among theſe people that vvere moſt prone to idolatrie,Images in Salomons temple commaunded by God. and groſſe in imagination of ſpiritual things ſuch as Angels are, and to vvhom the precept vvas ſpecially giuen, the ſame God that forbade them grauen idols, did commaund theſe images of Angels to be made and ſet in the ſoueraine holieſt place of al the Tabernacle or Temple. By vvhich it is plaine, that much more the images of Chriſt and his B. mother and Saincts, that may be more truely pourtered then mere ſpiritual ſubſtances can be, are not contrarie to Gods cōmaundement, nor againſt his honour, or repugnant to any other Scripture at all, vvhich condemne onely the Idols or pourtraitures of the Heathen made for adoration of falſe Gods.
                  
                     10. Vntil the time of correction.] Al thoſe groſſe and carnal ſacrifices, ceremonies, and obſeruations inſtituted to cleanſe and purifie the fleſh from legal irregularities and impurities onely, and not reaching to the purging of the ſoules & conſciences of men, being commaunded not for euer, but till Chriſtes comming,Sacrifice not taken avvay by the nevv Teſtament, but changed into a better. ceaſed then: and better, more forcible, and more ſpiritual Sacraments vvere inſtituted in their place. For vve may not imagine Chriſt to haue taken avvay the old, and put none in their places or to alter the ſacraments onely into other ſacraments external, and not alſo to tranſlate the ſacrifices to ſome other more excellent▪ for it is called, tempus correctionis, non abolitionis ſacrificij aut legis: the time of correction not of aboliſhing ſacrifice or lavv. Neither haue they more reaſon to affirme Chriſtes one oblation vpon the Croſſe to haue rather taken avvay al kind of ſacrifice, then al manner of Sacraments. The time and ſtate of the nevv Teſtament is not made lavvleſſe, hoſtleſſe, or vvithout ſacrifice, but it is the time of correction or reformation and abettering al the foreſaid things.
                  
                     12. Eternal redemption.] No one of the ſacrifices, nor al the ſacrifices of the old lavv, could make that one general price,One only ſacrifice on the Croſſe the redēption of the vvorld: and one onely Prieſt (Chriſt) the redeemes thereof. ranſom, and redemption of all mankind, and of al ſinnes, ſauing this one higheſt Prieſt Chriſt, and the one ſacrifice of his bloud once offered vpon the Croſſe. Vvhich ſacrifice of redemption can not be often done, becauſe Chriſt could not die but once. though the figures alſo thereof in the lavv of nature and of Moyſes, vvere truely called ſacrifices, as ſpecially this high and maruelous commemoration of the ſame in the holy Sacrament of the altar, according to the rite of the nevv Teſtament,Li. de Sp. & lit. c. 11. is moſt truely and ſigularly (as S. Auguſtine calleth it) a ſacrifice. But neither this ſort, nor the other of the old lavv, being often repeated and done by many Prieſts (al vvhich vvere and are ſinners them ſelues) could be the general redeeming and conſummating ſacrifice: nor any one of thoſe Prieſts, nor al the Prieſts together, either of the lavv of Nature, or of Aarons, or Melchiſedecks order (except Chriſt alone) coulde be the general redeemers of the vvorld.
                  And this is the Apoſtles meaning in al this compariſon and oppoſition of Chriſtes death to the old ſacrifices, and of Chriſt to their Prieſts: and not that Chriſtes death or ſacrifice of the Croſſe ſhould take avvay al ſacrifices,The Apoſtles diſputatiō being only againſt the errour of the Iewes cōcerning their ſacrifices and prieſts: the Proteſtants applying it againſt the ſacrifice of the Maſſe & prieſtes of the new Teſtament. or proue that thoſe Aaronical offices vvere no true ſacrifices at al, nor thoſe Prieſts, verily Prieſts. They vvere true Prieſts & true ſacrifices, though none of thoſe ſacrifices vvere the high, capital, and general ſacrifice of our price and redemption: nor none of them, or of thoſe Prieſts, could vvithout reſpect to this one ſacrifice of Chriſtes death, vvorke any thing to Gods honour, or remiſſion of ſinnes, as the Ievves did falſely imagine, not referring them at al to this general redemption and remiſsion by Chriſt, but thinking them to be abſolute ſacrifices in them ſelues. And that to haue been the errour of the Hebrues, you may read in S. Auguſtine li. 3. doct. Chriſt. c. 6. And this, vve tel the Proteſtants, is the onely purpoſe of the Apoſtle.
                  But they be ſo groſſe, or ignorant in the Scriptures, and ſo malitiouſly ſet againſt Gods and the Churches truth, that they peruerſely and foliſhly turne the vvhole diſputation againſt the ſacrifice of the B. Maſſe, and the Prieſts of the new Teſtament: as though vve held, that the ſacrifice of the altar vvere the general redemption or redeeming ſacrifice, or that it had no relation to Chriſtes death, or that, it vvere not the repreſentation and moſt liuely reſemblance of the ſame, or vvere not inſtituted and done, to apply in particular to the vſe of the partakers, that other general benefite of Chriſtes one oblation vpon the Croſſe. Againſt the Ievves then onely S. Paul diſputeth, and againſt the falſe opinion they had of their Prieſts and ſacrifices, to vvhich they attributed al remiſſion and redemption, vvithout reſpect of Chriſtes death.
                  
                     15. Of thoſe preuarications.] The Proteſtants do vnlearnedly imagine, that becauſe al ſinnes be remitted by the force of Chriſtes paſſion, that therfore there ſhould be no other ſacrifice after his death. Vvhereas in deede they might as vvell ſay, there ought neuer to haue been ſacrifice appointed by God, either in the lavv of Nature, or of Moyſes: as al their argumēts made againſt the Sacrifice of the Church vpon the Apoſtles diſcourſe, proue as vvel, or rather onely, that there vvere no ſacrifices of Aarons order or Leuitical lavv at all. For againſt the Ievves falſe opinion concerning them, doth he diſpute, and not a vvord, touching the ſacrifice of the Church, vnto vvhich
 
                     
                        •
                     n al this diſcourſe he neuer oppoſeth Chriſtes ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe: al Chriſtian men vvel knovving that the hoſt & oblation of thoſe tvvo, though they differ in maner and external forme, yet is in deede al one.
                  The Apoſtle then ſhevveth here plainely, that al the ſinnes that euer vvere remitted ſince the beginning of the vvorld, vvere no othervviſe forgiuen, but by the force and in reſpect of Chriſtes Paſſion. Yet it folovveth not therevpon, that the oblations of Abel, Abraham, Aaron, &c vvere no ſacrifices, as by the Heretikes fooliſh deduction it ſhould do: S. Paul not oppoſing Chriſtes Paſſion to them, for the intent to proue them to haue been no ſacrifices, but to proue, that they vvere not abſolute ſacrifices, nor the redeeming or conſummating Sacrifice, vvhich could not be many, nor done by many Prieſts, but by one, and at one time, by a more excellent Prieſt thē any of them, or any other mere mortal man.
                  And that you may ſee the blaſphemous pride and ignorance of Caluin, and in him, of al his fellovves:Caluins argumēt againſt the ſacrifice of the altar, maketh no leſſe againſt the ſacrifices of the old Lavv. read (ſo many as may read Heretical bookes) his commentarie vpon this place, and there you ſhal ſee him gather vpon this, that Chriſtes death had force from the beginning & vvas the remedie for al ſinnes ſince the creation of the vvorld, therfore there muſt be no mo
                        •
                      but that one ſacrifice of Chriſtes death. Vvhich muſt needes by his deduction hold (as it doth in deede) no leſſe againſt the old ſacrifices then the nevv ſacrifice of the Church, and ſo take avvay al, vvhich is againſt the Apoſtles meaning and al religion.
                  
                     20. This is the bloud.] Chriſtes death vvas neceſſarie for the full confirmation, ratification, and accompliſhement of the nevv Teſtament, though it vvas begonne to be dedicated in the ſacrifice of his laſt ſupper,The correſpondēce of vvordes in dedicating both Teſtamēts proueth the real preſence of bloud in the Chalice. being alſo vvithin the compaſſe of his Paſſion. Vvhich is euident by the vvordes prouounced by Chriſt ouer the holy chalice, vvhich be correſpondent to the vvordes that vvere ſpoken (as the Apoſtle here declareth) in the firſt ſacrifice of the dedication of the old lavv, hauing alſo expreſſe mention of remiſſion of ſinnes thereby, as by the bloud of the nevv Teſtament. Vvhereby it is plaine, that the B. Chalice of the altar hath the very ſacrificall bloud in it that vvas ſhed vpon the Croſſe, in & by vvhich, the nevv Teſtament (vvhich is the lavv of ſpirit, grace, and remiſſion) vvas dedicated, and doth conſiſt. And therfore it is alſo cleere, that many diuine things, vvhich to the Heretikes or ignorant may ſeeme to be ſpoken onely of Chriſtes ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, be in deede verified & fulfilled alſo in the ſacrifice of the altar. Vvhereof S. Paul for the cauſes aforeſaid vvould not treate in plaine termes See Iſychius li. 1 in Leuit. c. 4 paulo poſt initium, applying al theſe things to the immolation of Chriſt alſo in the Sacrament.
                  
                     23. The examplers.] Al the offices, places, veſſels, and inſtruments of the old lavv, vvere but figures and reſemblances of the ſtate and ſacraments of the nevv Teſtament,In the old Teſtament vvere figures of the novv: in the nevv, is reſemblance of the heauenly ſtate. vvhich are here called celeſtials, for that they are the liuely image of the heauenly ſtate next enſuing: vvhich be therfore ſpecially dedicated and ſanctified in Chriſtes bloud, ſacrificed on the altar, and ſprinkled vpon the faithful, as the old figures and people vvere cleanſed by the bloud of beaſts. And therfore by a tranſition vſual in the holy Scriptures, the Apoſtle ſodenly paſſeth in the ſentēce immediatly folovving, and turneth his talke to Chriſtes entrance into heauen, the ſtate vvhereof, both by the Sacraments of the old lavv, and alſo more ſpecially by them of the nevv, is prefigured.
                  
                     25. Offer him ſelf often.] As Chriſt neuer died but once, not neuer ſhal die againe, ſo in that violent, painful, and blouddy ſort he can neuer be offered againe, neither needeth he ſo to be offered any more:Chriſt once offered in blouddy ſort, but vnblouddily oftē, namely in the ſacrifice of the altar. hauing by that one action of ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, made the full ranſom, redemption, and remedie for the ſinnes of the vvhole vvorld. Neuertheleſſe, as Chriſt died and vvas offered after a ſort in all the ſacrifices of the Lavv and Nature, ſince the beginning of the vvorld (al vvhich vvere figures of this one oblation vpon the Croſſe) ſo is he much rather offered in the ſacrifice of the altar of the nevv Teſtament, incomparably more neerely, diuinely, and truely expreſſing his death, his body broken, his bloud ſhed. then did any figure of the old lavv, or other ſacrifice that euer vvas: as being in deede (though in hidden, ſacramental, and myſticall, and vnblouddy maner) the very ſelf ſame B. body and bloud, the ſelf ſame hoſt, oblation and ſacrifice, that vvas doue vpon the Croſſe.
                  
                     And this truth is moſt euident by the very forme of vvordes vſed by our Sauiour in the inſtitution and conſecration of the holy Sacrament,
                     The ſacrifice of the altar & that on the Croſſe, both one. 
                     and by the profeſſion of all the holy Doctors. Our ſacrifice, ſaith S. Cyprian, is correſpondent to the Paſsion of Chriſt. And, The ſacrifice that vve offer, is the Paſsion of Chriſt. ep. 63. nu. 4. & nu. 7. S. Auguſtine de f
                           •
                        d. ad Pet. c. 19. In thoſe carnal ſacrifices vvas the proſiguring of the fleſh of Chriſt, vvhich he vvas to offer for ſinnes, and of the bloud, vvhich he vvas to ſheads. but in this Sacrifice is the commemoration of the fleſh of Chriſt vvhich he hath novv giuen, and of the bloud vvhich he hath ſhed: in illis praenuntiabarut occidendus, in hoc annuntiatur occiſus. In them he vvas forſhevved as to be killed: in theſe he is ſhevved, as killed. And S. Gregorie Nazia
                           ••••
                         ſaith, oral. in morbum, that the Prieſt in this ſacrifice, immiſcet ſe magnis Chriſi Paſsionibus. S. Ambroſe li. 1. Offic. c. 48. Offertur Chriſtus in imagine quaſi recipiens paſsionem. Alexander the firſt. ep. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Orthodox. nu. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. Conc. Cuius corpus & ſanguis conficitur, paſsio etiam celebratur. S. Gregorie, ho. 37 in Euang. So often as vve offer the hoſt of his Paſsion, ſo often vve removve his Paſsion. And, He ſuffeteth for vs againe in myſterie. And Iſychius, li. 26. 
                        •
                      in Leuit. poſt m
                        •
                     d. By the ſacrifice of
 the onely-begotten many thinges are giuen vnto vs, to vvitte, the remiſsion or pardoning of al mankinde, and the ſingular introduction or bringing in of the myſteries of the nevv Teſtament.
                  And the ſaid fathers and others,The fathers call it the vnblouddy ſacrifice of the altar. by reaſon of the difference in the maner of Chriſtes preſence and oblation in reſpect of that on the Croſſe,Comment. in 9 Hebr. called this the vnblouddy ſacrifice, as * Caluin him ſelf confeſſeth, but anſvvereth them in the pride of hereticall ſpirit, vvith theſe vvordes: Nihil moror quòd ſi
                           •
                         loquantur vttuſti ſcriptores. that is, I paſſe not for it, that the auncient vvriters do ſo ſpeake: calling the diſtinction of blouddy and vnblouddy ſacrifice,Caluins cont
                           •
                        
                        ̄pt of the fathers. ſcholaſticall and friuolous, and diabolicum comment
                           ••
                        m, a diueliſh deuiſe. Vvith ſuch ignorant and blaſphemous men vve haue to do, that thinke they vnderſtand the Scriptures better then all the fathers.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Becauſe in the yerely feaſt of Expiation vvas only a commoration of ſinnes, therfore in place of al thoſe old ſacrifices the Pſalme telleth vs of the oblation of Chriſtes body. 10 vvhich he offered blouddily but once (the Leuitical Prieſts offering ſo euery day) becauſe that once vvas ſufficient for euer, 15 in that it purchaſed (as the prophet alſo vvitneſſeth) remiſsion of ſinnes. 19 After al this he proſecuteth and exhorteth them vnto perſeuirance partly vvith the opening of Heauen by our high-prieſt, 26 partly vvith the terrour of damnation if they fall againe: 32 bidding them remember hovv much they had ſuffered already, and not loſe their revvard.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FOR the lavv hauing ″ a ſhadovv of good things to come,Leu. 16, 14. not the very image of the things: euery yere vvith the ſelf ſame hoſtes which they offer inceſſantly, can neuer make the commers thereto perfect: ✝ 
                     verse 2 othervviſe ″ they ſhould haue ceaſed to be offered, becauſe the vvorſhippers once cleanſed ſhould haue no conſcience of ſinne any longer. ✝ 
                     verse 3 but in them there is made a cōmemotation of ſinne euery yere. ✝ 
                     verse 4 for it is ″ impoſſible that vvith the bloud of oxen and goates ſinnes ſhould be taken avvay.Pſ. 39, 7. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Therfore comming into the vvorld he ſaith: ″ Hoſt and oblation thou vvouldeſt not: ″ but a body thou haſt fitted to me:  ✝ 
                        verse 6 Holocauſtes and
                  
                     For ſinne, is the proper name of a certaine ſacrifice called in Hebrue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : as 
                        •
                     olocauſt is an other kinde. See the Annot. 2. Cor. 5. v. 2
                           •
                        .
                   
                  for ſinne did not pleaſe thee.   ✝ 
                        verse 7 Then ſaid I Behold I come: in the head of the booke it is vvritten of me: That I may doe thy vvil ô God. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Saying before, Becauſe hoſtes and oblations, & holocauſtes, & for ſinne thou vvouldeſt not, ″ neither did they pleaſe thee, vvhich are offered according to the lavv, ✝ 
                     verse 9 
                  then ſaid I, Behold I come that I may doe thy vvil ô God: he taketh avvay the firſt, that he may eſtabliſh that that folovveth. ✝ 
                     verse 10 In the vvhich vvil, vve are ſanctified by the oblation of the body of IESVS Chriſt once. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And euery prieſt in deede is ready daily miniſtring, and ″ often offering the ſame hoſtes,Pſ. 109. vvhich can neuer take avvay ſinnes: ✝ 
                     verse 12 but this man offering one hoſt for ſinnes,Cor. 15, 25. for euer * ſitteth on
 the right hand of God, ✝ 
                     verse 13 hence forth expecting, vntil his enemies be put the footeſtoole of his feete. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For by one oblation hath he conſummated for euer them that are ſanctified. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the holy Ghoſt alſo doth teſtifie to vs. For after that he ſaid:Hier. 31, 33, 34. ✝ 
                     verse 16 
                  And this is the Teſtament vvhich I vvil make to them after thoſe daies,
                  Heb. 8, 8. 
                  ſaith our Lord, giuing lavves
                  This is partly fulfilled in & by the grace of the new teſtament, but it ſhal be perfectly accompliſhed in heauen. 
                  in their hartes, & in their mindes vvil I ſuperſcribe them: ✝ 
                        verse 17 and their ſinnes and iniquities I vvil novv remēber no more. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But vvhere there is remiſſion of theſe, ″ novv there is not an oblation for ſinnes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 Hauing therfore brethren confidence in the entring of he holies in the bloud of Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 20 vvhich he hath dedicated to vs a nevv and liuing vvay by the vele, that is, his fleſh,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  To dedicat, is to be authour & beginner of a thing. The Proteſtants trāſlate, he hath prepared, for their hereſie that Chriſt vvas not the firſt mā that entered into heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 21 and a high prieſt ouer the houſe of God, ✝ 
                     verse 22 let vs approche vvith a true hart in fulneſſe of faith, hauing our hartes ſprinkled from euil conſciencel and our body vvaſhed vvith cleane vvater, ✝ 
                     verse 23 let vs hold the confeſſion of our hope vndeclining (for he is faithful that hath promiſed) ✝ 
                     verse 24 and let vs conſider, one an other vnto the prouocation of charitie and of good vvorkes: ✝ 
                     verse 25 not forſaking our aſſemblie as ſome are accuſtomed, but comforting, and ſo much the more as you ſee the day approching.Heb. 6, 4 ✝ 
                     verse 26 * For ″ if vve ſinne vvillingly after the knovvledge of the truth receiued, novv there is not left an hoſt for ſinnes, ✝ 
                     verse 27 but a certaine terrible expectation of iudgement and rage of fire, vvhich ſhal conſume the aduerſaries. ✝ 
                     verse 28 A man making the lavv of Moyſes fruſtrate:Deu. 19. 15. Mat. 18, 16. to 8, 17. vvithout any mercie * dieth vnder tvvo or three vvitneſſes. ✝ 
                     verse 29 
                  Hereſie and Apoſtaſie from the Catholike faith, puniſhable by death. hovv much more thinke you, doth he deſerue vvorſe puniſhements vvhich hath troden the ſonne of God vnder foote, and eſtemed ″ the bloud of the teſtament polluted, vvherein he is ſanctified, and hath done contumelie to the ſpirit of grace? ✝ 
                     verse 30 For vve knovv him that ſaid,Deu. 32, 35. Rom. 12, 19. 
                  Reuenge to me, I vvil repay. And againe, That our Lord vvil iudge his people. ✝ 
                     verse 31 ″ It is horrible to fal into the handes of the liuing God.Pſ. 134, 14.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 But call to minde the old daies:The Epiſtle for many Martyrs. vvherein being illuminated, you ſuſtained a great fight of paſſions. ✝ 
                     verse 33 and on the one part certes by reproches and tribulations made a ſpectacle: and on the other part made companions of them that conuerſed in ſuch ſort. ✝ 
                     verse 34 For, ″ you both had compaſſion on them that vvere in bondes: and the ſpoile of your ovvne goodes you tooke ″ vvith ioy, knovving that you haue a better
 and a permanent ſubſtāce. ✝ 
                     verse 35 Do not therfore leeſe your
Good vvorkes make great cō
                     fidence of ſaluation, & haue great revvard. confidence, vvhich hath a great remuneration. ✝ 
                     verse 36 For patience is neceſſarie for you:Aba
                        •
                     , 2, 3. Ro. 
                        •
                     1, 17. Gal. 3, 12. that doing the vvil of God, you may receiue the promiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 37 For * yet a litle and a very litle vvhile, he that is to come, vvil come, and vvil not ſlacke. ✝ 
                     verse 38 and my iuſt ″ liueth of faith. ⊢ but if he vvithdravv him ſelf, he ſhal not pleaſe my ſoule. ✝ 
                     verse 39 But vve are not the children of vvithdravving vnto perdition: but of faith to the vvinning of the ſoule.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
                  
                     1. A ſhadovv.] The ſacrifices and ceremonies of the old law, vvere ſo far from the truth of Chriſts Sacraments, and from giuing ſpirit, grace, remiſsion, redemption, and iuſtification,The old ſacrifices obſcurely ſhadovved, but the ſacrifice of the altar moſt plainely reproſenteth the ſacrifice on the Croſſe. and therevpon the entrance into heauen and ioyes celeſtiall, that they vvere but mere ſhadowes, vnperfectly and obſcurely repreſenting the graces of the new Teſtament and of Chriſtes death: vvhereas all the holy Churches rites and actions inſtituted by Chriſt in the Prieſthod of the new law, conteine and giue grace, iuſtification, and life euerlaſting to the faithful and vvorthy receiuers: and therfore they be not ſhades or darke reſemblances of Chriſtes paſſion, vvhich is the fountaine of all grace and mercie, but perfect images and moſt liuely repreſentations of the ſame, ſpecially the ſacrifice of the altar, vvhich becauſe it is the ſame oblation, the ſame hoſt, and offered by the ſame Prieſt Chriſt IESVS (though by the miniſterie of man and in myſterie) is the moſt pure and neere image, character, and correſpondence to the ſacrifice of Chriſtes paſsion, both in ſubſtance, force, and effect, that can be.
                  
                     2. They ſhould haue ceaſed.] If the hoſtes and offerings of the old law had been of them ſelues perfect to all effectes of redemption and remiſsion, as the Hebrues (againſt vvhom the Apoſtle diſputeth) did thinke, and had had no relation to Chriſtes ſacrifice on the Croſſe or any other abſolute and vniuerſal oblation or remedie for ſinne, but by and of their owne efficacie could haue generally purged and cleanſed man of all ſinne and damnation: then they ſhould neuer haue needed to be ſo often repeated and reiterated. For being both,The Ievves ſacrifices vvere not abſolute & Independēt, becauſe they vvere often repeated. generally auailable for all, by their opinion, and particularly applied (in as ample ſort as they could be) to the ſeueral infirmities of euery offender, there had been no ſinnes left. But ſinnes did remaine, euen thoſe ſinnes for vvhich they had offered ſacrifices before, notvvithſtanding their ſacrifices vvere particularly applied vnto them. For, offering yerely they did not onely offer ſacrifices for the new committed crimes, but euen for the old, for vvhich they had often ſacrificed before: the ſacrifices being rather recordes and atteſtations of their ſinnes, then a redemption or full remiſsion, as Chriſtes death is. Vvhich being once applied to man by Baptiſme, vvipeth away all ſinnes paſt, God neuer remembring them any more, nor euer any ſacrifice or ſacrament or ceremonie being made or done for them any more, though for new ſinnes other remedies be daily requiſite. Their ſacrifices then could not of them ſelues remitte ſinnes, much leſſe make the general redemption vvithout relation to Chriſtes Paſsion. And ſo you ſee it is plaine euery vvhere,The Apoſtle proueth by the often repeating of the Ievves ſacrifices, not that they vvere none, but that they vvere not abſolute & ſufficient. that the Apoſtle proueth not by the often repetition of the Iewiſh ſacrifices, that they vvere no ſacrifices at all, but that they vvere not of that abſolute force or efficacie, to make redemption or any remiſsion, vvithout dependance of the one vniuerſal redemption by Chriſt: his vvhole purpoſe being, to incul
                        •
                     ate vnto them the neceſsitie of Chriſtes death, and the oblation of the new Teſtament. As for the Churches holy ſacrifice, it is cleane of an other kinde then thoſe of the Iewes, and therfore he maketh no oppoſition betwixt it, and Chriſtes death or ſacrifice on the Croſſe, in all this Epiſtle: but rather as a ſequele of that one general oblation, couertly alvvaies inferreth the ſame: as being in a different maner the very ſelf ſame hoſt and offering that vvas done vpon the Croſſe, and continually is vvrought by the ſelf ſame Prieſt.
                  
                     4. Impoſsible.] The hoſtes and ſacrifices of the old law, vvhich the carnal Iewes made
 all the count of,The old ſacrifices remitted not ſinnes, but vvere only ſignes therof. vvithout relation to Chriſtes death, vvere not onely not perfect and abſolute ſufficient in them ſelues, but they did not, nor could not remit any ſinnes at all, being but onely ſignes therof, reſerring the offenders for remiſsion in deede, to Chriſtes Paſſion. I or the bloud of bruit beaſtes could haue no other effect, nor any other element or creature, before Chriſtes death▪ the fruite vvhereof, before it vvas extant, could be no othervviſe properly applied vnto them, but by beleefe in him.
                  
                     5. Hoſt and oblation.]
                     God refuſeth the Iewes ſacrifices, not al ſacrifice. He meaneth not that God vvould no hoſt nor ſacrifice any more, as the Proteſtants falſely imagin: for that vvere to take away not onely the ſacrifice of Chriſtes body vpon the altar, but the ſacrifice of the ſame body vpon the Croſſe alſo. Therfore the Prophet ſpeaketh onely of the legal and carnal ſacrifices of the Iewes, ſignifying that they did neuer of them ſelues pleaſe God, but in reſpect of Chriſt, by vvhoſe oblation of his owne body they ſhould pleaſe.
                  
                     5. But a body.] If Chriſt had not had a body, he could not haue had any vvorthy matter or any matter at all to ſacrifice in viſible maner,That Chriſt ſhould haue a body, vvas neceſſarie for his Prieſthod, and ſacrifice. other then the hoſtes of the old law. Neither could he either haue made the general redemption by his one oblation vpon the Croſſe, nor the daily ſacrifice of the Church: for both vvhich, his body vvas fitted by the diuine vviſedom. Which is an high concluſion, not vnderſtood of Ievves, Pagans, nor the Heretikes of our time, that Chriſtes humane nature vvas taken to make the Sonne of God (vvho in his diuine nature could not be either Prieſt or hoſt) fitte to be the ſacrifice and Prieſt of his father,The body of Chriſt is the ſacrifice of the alter. in a more vvorthy ſort, then all the Prieſts or oblations of the old law. And that this body vvas giuen him, not onely to be the ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, but alſo vpon the altar, S. Auguſtine affirmeth in theſe vvordes. The table vvhich the Prieſt of the nevv Teſtament doth exhibit▪ is of his body and bloud: for that it the ſacrifice vvhich ſucceded al theſe ſacrifices that vvere offered in ſhadovv of that to come.
                     Pſ. 39. 
                     For the vvhich alſo vve acknovvledge that voice of the ſame Mediatour in the pſalme, BVT A BODY THOV HAST FITTED TO ME, becauſe in ſteede of all thoſe ſacrifices and oblations his body is offered, and is miniſtred to the partakers or receiuers. Li. 17 Ciuit. Dei. c. 20. And againe li. 4 de Trin. c. 14. Who ſo iuſt and holy a Prieſt, as the onely ſonne of God? What might ſo conueniently be offered for men, of men, as mans fleſh? and vvhat ſo fitte for this immolation or offering, as mortal fleſh? vvhat ſo cleane for cleanſing the vices of mortal men, as ſhe fleſh borne of the virgins vvombe? and vvhat can be offered and receiued ſo gratefully, as the fleſh of our ſacrifice, made the body of our Prieſt?
                  
                  
                     8. Neither did they pleaſe thee.]
                     The Ievves ſacrifices refuſed, not al ſacrifice. By that he ſaith, the things offered in the Lavv, did not pleaſe God, and likevviſe by that he ſaith, the former to be taken avvay, that the ſecond may haue place, it is euident, that all hoſtes and ſacrifices be not taken avvay by Chriſt, as the Heretikes foliſhly conceiue: but that the old hoſtes of brute beaſtes be abrogated to giue place to that vvhich is the proper hoſt of the nevv lavv, that is, Chriſtes ovvne body.
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . Often offering the ſame hoſtes.]
                     We muſt often note that the Apoſtles ſpeache of many Prieſts and often ſacrificing, concerneth only the Iewes Prieſts and ſacrifices, not the Prieſts and ſacrifice of the new Teſtament. As S. Paul is forced often to inculcate that one principle of the efficac
                        •
                     e and ſufficiencie of Chriſtes death, becauſe of the Hebrues to much attributing to their legal ſacrifices, and for that they did not 
                        〈◊〉
                      them to Chriſtes onely oblation: ſo vve, through the intolerable ignorance and importunity of the Heretikes of this time (abuſing the vvordes of the Apoſtle ſpoken in the devve defence and declaration of the valure and efficacie of Chriſtes Paſſion aboue the ſacrifices of the Lavv) are forced to repeat often, that the Apoſtles reaſon of many Prieſts and often repetition of the ſelf ſame ſacrifices, concerneth the ſacrifices of the Lavv onely, vnto vvhich he oppoſeth Chriſtes ſacrifice and Prieſthod: and ſpeaketh no vvord of or againſt the Sacrifice of the nevv Teſtament, vvhich is the ſacrifice of Chriſtes ovvne Prieſthod, Lavv, and inſtitution, yea the ſame ſacrifice done daily vnblouddily, that once vvas done blouddily: made by the ſame Prieſt Chriſt Ieſus, though by his miniſters hands: and not many hoſtes, as thoſe of the old lavv vvere, but the very ſelf ſame in number, euen Chriſtes ovvne body that vvas crucified. And that you may ſee that this is the iudgement of all antiquity, and their expoſition of theſe and the like vvordes of this Epiſtle, and that they ſeeing the very ſame arguments that the Proteſtants novv make ſo much a doe vvithall among the ſimple and vnlearned, yet vvel perceiued that they made nothing againſt the daily oblation or ſacrifice of the altar, and therfore anſvvered them before the Proteſtants vvere extant,The Caluiniſts arguments againſt Chriſts body often offered, and in many places, anſvvered by the fathers long a goe. 1200 yeres: vve vvil ſet dovvne ſome of their vvordes, vvhoſe authoritie and expoſition of the Scriptures muſt preuaile in all that haue vviſedom or the feare of God, aboue the falſe and vaine gloſes of Caluin and his folovvers.
                  
                     Thus then firſt ſaith S. Ambroſe:
                     in 10 cap. Hebr. Quid 
                        〈◊〉
                      &c. What vve then? do not vve offer euery day? vve offer ſurely: but this ſacrifice is an exampler of that: for vve offer alvvaies the ſelf ſame, and not novv one lambe, to morovv an other, but alvvaies the ſelf ſame thing: therfore it is one ſacrifice, othervviſe, by this reaſon becauſe it is offered in many places, there ſhould be many Chriſtes, not ſo, but it is one Chriſt in euery place, here vvhole, and there vvhole, one body. But 
                        〈◊〉
                      vvhich vve doe, is done for a commemoratie
                        •
                      of that vvhich vvas done▪ for vve offer not an other ſacrifice, as the high Prieſt of the old lavv,ibidem. but alvvaies the ſelf ſame, &c. Prima
                           •
                        ius S. Auguſtines ſcholer doth alſo preoccupate theſe Proteſtants obiections thus: What ſhal vve ſay then I do not our Prieſts daily
 offer ſacrifice? they offer ſurely, becauſe vve ſinne daily, and daily haue neede to be cleanſed: and becauſe he can not die, he hath giuen vs the ſacrament of his body and bloud: that as his Paſsion vvas the redemption and abſolution of the vvorld, ſo alſo this oblation may be redemption and cleanſing to all that offer it in truth and veritie.The general redemption vpon the Croſſe is particularly applied in the ſacrifice of the altar. 
                     So ſaith this holy father, to vvitte, that as the ſacrifice of the Croſſe vvas a general redemption, ſo this of the altar is, to all that vſe it, a particular redemption or application of Chriſtes redemption to them. In vvhich ſenſe alſo V. Bede calleth the holy Maſſe, redemption
                        ••
                      corporis & anima 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,Primaſ. le
                        
                           ••
                         citate. the euerlaſting redemption of body and ſoul. li. 4 c. 22. hiſtor. Againe the ſame Primaſius, The diuinity of the Word of God vvhich is euery vvhere, maketh that there are not many ſacrifices, but one, although it be offered of many, and that as it is one body vvhich he tooke of the Virgins vvombe, not many bodies, euen ſo alſo one ſacrifice, not diuers, as thoſe of the Ievves vvere.
                  
                     ho. 17 in ep. ad Heb. S. Chryſoſtom alſo, and after him Theophylacte, and Oecumenius, and of the Latines, Haimo, Paſchaſius, Remigius, and others, obiect to them ſelues thus: Do not vve alſo offer euery day? vve offer ſurely, but this ſacrifice is an exampler of that, for vve offer alvvaies the ſelf ſame: and not novv one lambe, to morrovv an other, but the ſelf ſame: therfore this is one ſacrifice. Othervviſe, becauſe it is offered in many places, there ſhould be many Chriſtes. And a litle after, Not an other ſacrifice, as the high Prieſt of the old Lavv, but the ſelf ſame vve do alvvaies offer, rather vvorking a remembrance or commemoration of the ſacrifice. See the Annotation Luke 22, 19. vpon theſe vvordes, A commemoration. Thus did al the auncient fathers Greeke and Latin treate of theſe matters, and ſo they ſaid Maſſe, and offered daily, and many of them made ſuch formes of celebrating the diuine ſacrifice, as the Greekes and Latines do vſe in their Liturgies and Maſſes, and yet they lavv theſe places of the Apoſtle and made commentaries vpon them, and vnderſtood them (I trovv) as vvel as the Proteſtants.
                  He that for his further confirmation or comfort liſt ſee vvhat the aūcient Councels and Doctors beleeued,Councels and fathers. taught, and practiſed in this thing, let him read the firſt holy Councel of Nice cap. 14: & in fine Conc. ex Grace. the Councel of Epheſus Anathematiſ. 11. the Chalcedon Councel act. 3. pag. 112. Conc. Aneyran. c. 1. 4. & 5. Neocaeſar. can. 13. Laodic. can. 19. Carthag. 2 cap. 
                           •
                        . Carthag. 3 cap. 24. & Carthag. 4 cap. 33. &c. 41. S. Denys cap. 3 Eccl. hier. S. Andrevve in hiſtoria Paſsiones. S. Ignatius ep. ad Smyrnonſes. S. Martialis ep. ad Burdegalenſes. S. Iuſtine Dialog. cum Triphone. S. Irencus li. 4 cap. 32. 34. Tertullian de cultu forminarum, & de corona milis. Origen homil. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in Leuit. S. Cyprian ep. ad Cecilium. nu. 2. & de Cana Domini. nu. 14. & Euſebius demonſt. Euang. li. 1 cap. 10. and the reſt vvhich vve haue cited by occaſion before, & might cite but for rediouſnes: a truth moſt knovven and agreed vpon in the Chriſtian religion.
                  
                     18. Novv there is not.]
                     When the Apoſtle ſeemeth to ſay, there is no remiſſion or oblation for ſinne, he alvvaies meaneth that ful remiſſion by Baptiſme. Chriſtes death can not be applied vnto vs in that full and ample ſort as it is in baptiſme, but once: Chriſt appointing that large remiſſion and application to be made but once in euery man, as Chriſt died but once. for it is not meant, that all ſinne ſhal ceaſe after Chriſtes ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, nor that there ſhould be no oblation for ſinnes committed after Baptiſme, or that a man could not ſinne at al after Baptiſme, or that if he ſinned aftervvard, he could haue no remedie or remiſſion by Gods ordinance in the Church, vvhich diuers falſehods ſundrie Heretikes gather of this and ſuch like places: but onely the Apoſtle telleth the Hebrues, as he did before chap. 6, and as he doth ſtraight aftervvard, that if they fall novv (vvherevnto they ſeemed very prone) to their old lavv, and voluntarily after the knovvledge and profeſſion of the Chriſtian faith by Baptiſme, commit this ſinne of incredulitie and apoſtaſie, they can neuer haue that aboundant remiſſion applied vnto them by Baptiſme, vvhich can neuer be miniſtred to them againe And that general full pardon he calleth here, oblation, and aftervvard in the 26 verſe, hoſtiam pro peccato, an hoſt for ſinne.
                  
                  
                     26. If vve ſinne vvillingly.]
                     The Caluiniſts hereſie againſt remiſſion of ſinnes. As the Caluiniſts abuſe other like places againſt the holy ſacrifice of the Maſſe, ſo they abuſe this as the Nouatians did before them, to proue that an Heretike, Apoſtata, or any that vvilfully forſaketh the truth, can neuer be forgiuen. Vvhich (as is before declared in the 6 chapter) is moſt vvicked blaſphemie: the meaning hereof being, as is there ſaid, onely to terrifie the Hebrues,Al ſinnes may be remitted by penāce, but not ſo fully as by Baptiſme. that falling from Chriſt they can nor ſo eaſily haue the hoſt of Chriſtes death applied vnto them, becauſe they can not be baptized any more, but muſt paſſe by ſacramental penance, and ſatisfaction, and other hard remedies vvhich Chriſt hath preſcribed after Baptiſme in the Churches diſcipline. Therfore S. Cyril ſaith, li. 5 in Io. cap. 17. Penan
                           •
                        e is not excluded by theſe vvordes of Paul, but the renevving by the lauer of regeneration. He doth not here take avvay the ſecond or third remiſsion of ſinnes (for he is not ſuch an enemy to our ſaluation) but the hoſt vvhich is Chriſt he denieth that it is to be offered againe vpon the Croſſe.
                     Perilous reading of the Scriptures. So ſaith this holy Doctor. And by this place & the like you ſee, hovv perilous a thing it is for Heretikes & ignorant perſons to read the Scriptures. Vvhich by folovving their ovvne fantaſie * they peruert to their damnation.2 Pet. 3.
                  
                  
                     29. The bloud of the Teſtament.] Vvhoſoeuer maketh no more account of the bloud of Chriſtes ſacrifice,Contempt of Chriſts bloud in the Sacramēt. either as ſhed vpon the Croſſe, or as in the holy Chalice of the altar (for our Sauiour calleth that alſo * the bloud of the nevv Teſtament) then he doth of the bloud of calues and goates,Luc. 22. or of other common drinkes, is vvorthy death, and God vvil in the next life, if it be not puniſhed here, reuenge it vvith greuous puniſhment.
                  
                      31. It is horrible.]
                     Penance. Let al Chriſtian people do ſatisfaction and penance for their ſinnes in this life. for the iudgemēts of God in the next life done by God him ſelf, of vvhat ſort ſoeuer, vvhether temporall as in Purgatorie, or eternal as in Hell, be exceding greuous.
                  34. You had compaſsion.]
                     Mercie to the empriſoned for religion. To be merciful to the afflicted for religion, & to be partakers of their miſeries, is a very meritorious vvorke, and giueth great confidence before God in the day of repaiment or remuneration for the ſame.
                  34. With ioy.]
                     Loſſe of goods for religion. If all Chriſtian men vvould conſider this, they vvould not thinke it ſo great a matter to loſe their land or goods for defenſe of the Catholike faith.
                  38. Liueth of faith.]
                     Faith is the cō
                        fort of the afflicted. Faithful men afflicted in this life, haue their comfort in their aſſured faith and hope of Chriſtes comming to deliuer them once from all theſe miſeries: & ſo by that faith and comfort they liue, vvhereas othervviſe this miſerable life vvere a death.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  He exhorteth them by the definition of faith, to ſticke vnto God, though they ſee not yet his revvard: ſhevving that all the Saincts aforetime did the like, being all conſtant in faith, though not one of them receiued the promis, that is, the inheritance in heauen: but they and vve novv after the comming of Chriſt receiue it together.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND ″ faith is,By this vvord ſubſtāce is meant, that faith is the ground of our hope. the ſubſtance of things to be hoped for,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the argument of things ″ not appearing. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For in this the old men obtained teſtimonie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 * By faith,Gen. 1, 13 vve vnderſtand that the vvorldes vvere framed by the vvord of God: that of inuiſible things viſible things might be made.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 * By faith,Gen. 4, 4 Abel offered a greater hoſte to God thē Cain:
* by vvhich he obtained teſtimonie that he vvas i
                     •
                  ſt,Mat. 23, 35. God giuing teſtimonie to his giftes, & by it, he being dead, yet ſpeaketh. ✝ 
                     verse 5 * By faithHere it appeareth that Henoch yet liueth and is not dead: againſt the Caluiniſts. See the annot. Apocal. chap. 11.
                   Henoch vvas tranſlated,Gen. 5, 24. Eccl. 44, 16. that he ſhould not ſee death, and he vvas not found: becauſe God tranſlated him. for before his tranſlation he had teſtimonie that he had pleaſed God. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But vvithout faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God. For ″ he that commeth to God, muſt beleeue that he is, and is aVve muſt beleeue that God vvill reward all our good workes: for he is a rewarder of true iuſtice, not an accepter or imputer of that that is not. revvarder to them that ſeeke him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 * By faith,Gen. 6, 13. Eccl. 44, 17. Noë hauing receiued an anſvver concerning thoſe things vvhich as yet vvere not ſeen, ſeating, framed the arke for the ſauing of his houſe, by the vvhich he condemned the vvorld: and vvas inſtituted heire of the iuſtice vvhich is by faith.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 * By faith,Gen. 12, 4. 13, 1. he that is called, Abraham, obeied to goe forth into the place vvhich he vvas to receiue for inheritāce: and he vvent forth, not knovving vvhither he vvent. ✝ 
                     verse 9 By faith, he abode in the land of promiſe, as in a ſtrāge lād, dvvelling
 in cottages vvith Iſaac & Iacob the coheires of the ſame promiſe. ✝ 
                     verse 10 For he expected the citie that hath foundations: vvhoſe artificer and maker is God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 * By faith,Gen. 17, 19. 18, 10. 21, 2. Sara alſo her ſelf being barren, receiued vertue in conceauing of ſeede, yea paſt the time of age: becauſe ſhe beleeued that he vvas faithful which had promiſed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the vvhich cauſe euen of one (and him quite dead) there roſe as the ſtarres of heauen in multitude,Eccl. 44 22. & as the ſand that is by the ſea ſhore innumerable.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 According to faith died al theſe, not hauing receiued the promiſes, but beholding them a farre of, and ſaluting them, and cōfeſſing that they are pilgrimes & ſtrangers vpon the earth, ✝ 
                     verse 14 for they that ſay theſe things, doe ſignifie that they ſeeke a countrie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And in deede if they had been mindeful of the ſame from vvhence they came forth, they had time verely to returne. ✝ 
                     verse 16 but novv they deſire a better, that is to ſay, a heauenly. Therfore God is not confounded to be called their God. for he hath prepared them a citie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 * By faith,Gen. 22, 9. Abraham offered Iſaac, vvhen he vvas tempted: and his onlie-begotten did he offer vvho had receiued the promiſes:Gen. 21, 12. Rom. 9, 7. ( ✝ 
                     verse 18 to vvhom it vvas ſaid, That in Iſaac ſhal ſeede be called to thee.) ✝ 
                     verse 19 accounting that God is able to raiſe vp euen from the dead. wherevpō he receiued him alſoThat is, in figure and myſteri
                        •
                      of Chriſt dead, & aliue againe. for a parable.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 * By faith,Gen. 27, 27, 36. alſo of things to come, Iſaac bleſſed Iacob and Eſau.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 * BY faith,Gen. 48, 15. Iacob dying, bleſſed euery one of the ſonnes of Ioſeph:Gen. 47, 31. * and ″ adored the toppe of his roddo.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 * By faith, Ioſeph dying, made mention of the going forth of the children of Iſraël:Gen. 50, 24, 25. and gaue commaundement
The tranſlation of Relikes or Saincts bodies, & the due regard and honour vve ought to haue to the ſame, are proued hereby. concerning his bones.
                ✝ 
                     verse 23 * By faith,Exo. 2, 2. Moyſes being borne, vvas hidde three monethes by his parents: becauſe they ſavv him a proper infant, and they feared not * the kings edict.Exo. 1, 16.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 24 * By faith,Exo. 2, 11 Moyſes being made great, denied him ſelf to be the ſonne of Pharaos daughter: ✝ 
                     verse 25 rather choſing to be afflicted vvith the people of God, then to haue the pleaſure of temporal ſinne, ✝ 
                     verse 26 eſteeming the reproche of Chriſt, greater riches then the treaſure of the Aegyptians. forThe Proteſtants that deny vve may or ought to doe good in reſpect or for revvard in heauen, are hereby cōfuted. he looked vnto the remuneration.Exo. 12, 37. ✝ 
                     verse 27 * By faith, he left Aegypt: not fearing the fiercenes of the king. for him that is inuiſible he ſuſteined as if he had ſeen him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 By faith, he celebrated
 the Paſche, & the ſheading of the bloud: that he vvhich deſtroied the firſt-borne,Gen. 14, 22. might not touche them. ✝ 
                     verse 29 * By faith they paſſed the redde ſea as it vvere by the drie land: vvhich the Aegyptians aſſaying, vvere deuoured.
                ✝ 
                     verse 30 * By faith the vvalles of Iericho fel dovvne,Ioſ. 6, 10 by the circuting of ſeuen daies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 31 * By faith,Ioſ. 6, 23 25. 2, 3. Rahab the harlot periſhed not vvith the incredulous, receiuing the ſpies vvith peace.
                ✝ 
                     verse 32 And vvhat ſhal I yet ſay? For the time vvil faile me telling of Gedeon, Barac, Sampſon, Iephtè, Dauid Samuël, & the prophets:The Epiſtle for many Martyrs. ✝ 
                     verse 33 vvho by faith ouercame kingdōs, ″ vvrought iuſtice, obteined promiſes, ſtopped the mouthes of lions, ✝ 
                     verse 34 extinguiſhed the force of fire, repelled the edge of the ſvvord, recouered of their infirmitie, vvere made ſtrong in battel, turned avvay the campe of forainers: ✝ 
                     verse 35 vvomen receiued of reſurrection their dead, and others vvere racked, not accepting redemption, that they might finde a better reſurrection. ✝ 
                     verse 36 And others had trial of mockeries and ſtripes, moreouer alſo of bādes & priſons: ✝ 
                     verse 37 they vvere ſtoned, they vvere hevved, they vvere tempted, they died in the ſlaughter of the ſvvord, they vvent about in ſheep-ſkinnes, in goates ſkinnes, needy, in diſtreſſe, afflicted: ✝ 
                     verse 38 of vvhom the vvorld vvas not vvorthie. vvandering in deſertes, in mountaines and dennes, and in caues of the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 39 And al theſe being approued by the teſtimonie of faith, ⊢ receiued not the promiſe, ✝ 
                     verse 40 God for vs prouiding ſome better thing, that they vvithout vs ſhould not be conſummate.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  
                     1. Faith is.] By this deſcription of faith, and by all the commendation therof through the vvhole chapter,Not only or a ſpecial faith. you may vvell perceiue that the Apoſtle knevve not the forged ſpecial faith of the Proteſtants, vvhereby euery one of theſe new Sectmaſters & their folovvers beleeue their ſinnes are remitted, and that them ſelues ſhal be ſaued, though their ſectes be cleane contrarie one to an other.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Not appearing] This is the praiſe of faith, ſaith S. Auguſtine, if that vvhich is beleeued, be not ſeen.Faith is of things not ſeen: as in the B. Sacrament. For vvhat great thing is it, if that be beleeued, vvhich is ſeen? according to that ſentence of our Lord vvhen he rebuked his diſciple, ſaying: Becauſe then haſt ſeen me Thomas, thou haſt beleeued: bleſſed are they that haue not ſeen and haue beleeued. Aug. in euang. Io. tract. 79. Vvhich may be a rebuke alſo and a checke to al thoſe faithles ſpeaches, I vvould ſee him, taſt him, touch him and feele his very fleſh in the Sacrament, othervviſe I vvil not beleeue.
                  
                  
                     6. He that commeth.]
                     Nothing profitable or meritorious with out faith. Faith is the foundation and ground of all other vertues and vvorſhip of God, vvithout vvhich no man can pleaſe God. Therfore if one be a Iewe, a Heathen, or an heretike, that is to ſay, be vvithout the Catholike faith, al his vvorkes ſhal profit him no vvhit to ſaluation.
                  
                      
                     21. Ad
                           •
                        red the toppe of his rod.]
                     The citatiōs the nevv Teſtament, not only according to the Hebrue, but to the Septuagīta. The learned may ſee here that the Apoſtle doth not tie him ſelf to the Hebrue in the place of Geneſis vvhence it is alleaged,Gen. 47. v. 31. but folovveth the Septuaginta, though it differ from the Hebrue, as alſo the other Apoſtles and Euangeliſts and our Sauiour him ſelf did: neither vvere they curious (as men novv a daies) to examine all by the Hebrue only, becauſe they vvriting and ſpeaking by the holy Ghoſt, knevve very vvell that this tranſlationAug. de ciu. Dei li. 
                           •
                        5 c. 14. is the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt alſo, and as true, and as directly intended as the other: and therfore alſo that tranſlation continued alvvaies authentical in the Greeke Church, notvvithſtanding the diuerſitie thereof from the Hebrue.The vulgar latin tranſlation. Euen ſo vve that be Catholikes, folovv vvith al the Latin fathers the authentical Latin tranſlation, though it be not alvvaies agreable to the Hebrue or Greeke that novv is. But Caluin is not onely very ſaucie, but very ignorant, vvhen he ſaith that the Septuaginta vvere deceiued,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , rod. and yet that the Apoſtle vvithout curioſity vvas content to folovv them: becauſe it is euident, that
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      the Hebrue being thē vvithout pointes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , bed. might be trāſlated the one vvay as vvel as the other. Vvhich they vnderſtood ſo vvel (and therfore vvere not deceiued) that vvithin three lines after▪ in the beginning of the next chapter, they tranſlate the ſame vvord, as he vvould haue it in this place.
                  Againe obſerue in thoſe vvordes, He adored the toppe of his rod, that adoration (as the Scripture vſeth this vvord) may be done to creatures,Adoration of creatures, and namely of holy things. or to God at and before a creatures as at orIoſ. 7, 6. before the Arke of the Teſtament in old time, novv at or before the crucifixe, relikes, images: and in the Pſalmes 93. 131. Adore ye his footeſto
                           •
                        le. Adore ye tovvard his holy mount. We vvil adore tovvard the place vvhere his feete ſtoode: or (vvhich by the Hebrue phraſe is al one) Adore ye his holy mount. We vvill adore the place vvhere his feete ſtood. as alſoOceum. in collect. the Greeke fathers, S Damaſcene li. 1 de imaginibus, and Leontius cited of him, yea S. Chryſoſtom alſo do handel theſe places, and namely that of the Apoſtle vvhich vve novv ſpeake of, interpreting the Greeke as our Latin hath, and as vve do, He adored the rod or the toppe of his rod, that is, the ſcepter of Ioſeph novv Prince of Aegypt, ſo fulfilling Ioſephs dreames vvhich foretold the ſame Gen. 37: and vvithal ſignifying as it vvere by this propheticall fact,3 Reg. 11, 12. the kingdom of Iſrael or of the ten tribes that vvas to come of Ioſeph by Ephraim his yonger ſonne in the firſt king Ieroboam. thus the Greeke fathers. Vvhere vnto may be added, that al this vvas done in type and figure of Chriſtes ſcepter and kingdom, vvhom he adored by and in his Croſſe, as he did Ioſeph by or in his rod and ſcepter: and therfore the Apoſtle ſaith, he did it by faith,Corrupt tranſlation againſt Dulia. as hauing reſpect tovvard things to come. By al vvhich it is euident, that it is falſe vvhich the Calu
                        •
                     niſts teach, that vve may not adore image, cru
                        •
                     ifixe, or any viſible creature, that is, vve may not adore God at or by ſuch creatures, nor kneele before them: and therfore their corrupt tranſlation of this place for the ſame purpoſe is intolerable, ſaying thus, (LEANING) vpon his ſtaffe he adored (GOD)▪ adding no leſſe then tvvo vvordes more then is in the Greeke, which though it might be the ſenſe of the place, and S. Auguſtine ſo expoundeth it, yet they ſhould not make his expoſition the text of holy Scripture, ſpecially vvhereas he only of al the auncient fathers (as Beza confeſſeth) ſo expoundeth it.
                  
                     33. Wrought iuſtice.] Men are not iuſt by beleefe onely, as the Proteſtants affirme, but by vvorking iuſtice.Not faith onely. And vve may note that in all this long commendation of faith in the fathers and holy perſons, their good vvorkes are alſo ſpecially recounted, as Rahabs harbouring the ſpies, Abrahams offering his ſonne (vvhich their vvorkes S. Iames doth inculcate:)Ia
                           •
                        . 2. No
                        •
                     s making the Arke Gen. 6. Abels better oblation then Cains Gen. 4. & Hebr. 11. v. 4. and ſo forth. therfore S. Clement Alexandrinus ſaith,Li. 4 Stro. pag. 240. that the ſaid perſons and others vvere luſt by ſaith and obedience, by faith and hoſpitality, by faith and patience, by faith and humility.
                  The Apoſtles purpoſe then is nothing els,No vvorkes of the Patriarkes or any other profitable, but by their faith in Chriſt. Which is alvvaies the Apoſtles meaning in cōmending faith. but to proue to the Hebrues (vvho made ſo great account of their Patriarches and forefathers and their famous actes) that all theſe glorious perſonages and their vvorkes vvere commendable and acceptable onely through the faith they had of Chriſt, vvithout vvhich faith none of all their liues and vvorkes ſhould haue profited them any vvhit: the Gentiles doing many noble actes (as Heretikes may alſo doe) vvhich are of no eſtimatiō before God, becauſe they lacke faith. And that is the ſcope of S. Paules Epiſtle to the Romanes, and of al other paſſages vvhere he commendeth faith: further prouing ſpecially in this Epiſtle to the Hebrues, that all their ſacrifices vvere nothing els but figures and atteſtations of the Chriſtian faith in Chriſt and his death. Al vvhich high reſolution & concluſion againſt the Ievves and Gentiles, that the Chriſtian faith is the true faith & religion, the Heretikes of our time ignorantly and brutiſhly abuſe againſt Chriſtian vvorkes, ſacrifice, and Sacraments, vvhich the Apoſtle meant ſpecially to commend and eſtabliſh by his high commendation of the faith in Chriſt.
                  
                     40. Without vs ſhould not.]
                     The Patriarkes and other iuſt not in heauen before Chriſt. The fathers before Chriſt could not be accompliſhed; that is, not admitted to the heauenly ioyes, viſion, and fruition of God, till the Apoſtles and other of the nevv lavv vvere aſſociate to them, and the vvay to euerlaſting glorie opened by our Lordes death and Aſcenſion. Neither ſhal either they or vve be fully perfected in glorie both of body and ſoul, till the general reſurrection: Gods prouidence being ſo, that vve ſhould not one be conſummated vvithout an other, all being of one faith, and redeemed by one Lord Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  By the foreſaid examples he exhorteth them to patience, 2 and by example of Chriſt him ſelf crucified, 5 and becauſe this diſcipline it an argument that they be Gods children, 9 vvith vvh
                        •
                     ſe rodde they ſhould be much more content then vvish that of their carnal fathers: and becauſe it bringeth iuſtification. 12 Exhorting them therfore to plucke vp their hartes, and to take faſter footing: 18 conſidering that all bring novv ſo ſvveete, and not terrible▪ as in the old Teſtament, their damnation, if they refuſe to heare, vvil be ſo much the greater.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND therfore vve alſo hauing ſo great a cloud of vvitneſſes put vpon vs:Col. 3. 8. * laying avvay al vveight and ſinne that compaſſeth vs,1 Pet. 2, 1. by patience let vs runne to the fight propoſed vnto vs, ✝ 
                     verse 2 looking on the author of faith, and the conſummator IESVS, vvho, ioy being propoſed vnto him, ſuſtained the croſſe, contemning confuſion, and ſitteth on the right hand of the ſeate of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 For, thinke diligently vpon him vvhich ſuſtained of ſinners ſuch contradiction againſt him ſelf: that you be not vvearied, fainting in your mindes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For you haue not yet reſiſted vnto bloud, repugning againſt ſinne: ✝ 
                     verse 5 and you haue forgotten the conſolatiō, vvhich ſpeaketh to you, as it vvere to children, ſaying,Prou. 3, 11. 
                  My ſonne, neglect not the diſcipline of our Lord: neither 
                        •
                     e thou vvearied vvhiles thou art rebuked of him. ✝ 
                        verse 6 For vvhom our Lord loueth,
                  Apoc. 3, 19. 
                  he chaſteneth: and 
                        •
                      he ſcourgeth euery childe that he receiueth,
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Perſeuêre ye in diſcipline. As vnto children doth God offer him ſelf to you. for vvhat ſonne is there, vvhom the father doth not correct? ✝ 
                     verse 8 But if you be vvithout diſcipline, vvhereof al be made partakers: then are you baſtards, & not children. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Moreouer the fathers in deede of our fleſh vve had for inſtructors, and vve did reuerence them: ſhal vve not much more obey the Father of ſpirites, & liue? ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they in deede for a time of fevv daies, according to their vvil inſtructed vs: but he, to that vvhich is profitable in receiuing of his ſanctification. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And al diſcipline for the preſent certes ſeemeth not to be of ioy, but of ſorovv: but aftervvard it vvil render to them that are exerciſed by it, moſt peaceable fruite of iuſtice.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the vvhich cauſe ſtretch vp the ſlacked handes and the looſe knees: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and make ſtraight ſteppes to your feete: that no man halting erre,Rom. 12, 18. but rather be healed. ✝ 
                     verse 14 * Folovv peace vvith al men, and holineſſe: vvithout vvhich no man
 ſhal ſee God: ✝ 
                     verse 15 looking diligently leſt any manThat vve be not good, there is no lacke on Gods part, vvho offereth his grace to vs: but the defect is in our ſelues that are not anſvverable to Gods calling of vs and grace tovvards vs. be vvanting to the grace of God: leſt any roote of bitternes ſpringing vp do hinder, and by it many be polluted. ✝ 
                     verse 16 Leſt there be any fornicator or prophane perſonSuch as forſake their ſaluation and religion to ſaue their lands and goods, are like Eſau. as Eſau: * vvho for one diſh of meate ſold his firſt-birth-rightes.Gen. 25, 33. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For knovv ye that aftervvard alſo deſiring to inherite the benediction, he vvas reprobated:Gen. 27, 38.* for 
                     •
                   he found not place of repētance, although vvith teares he had ſought it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 For you are not come to * a palpable mount,Exo. 19. 20. and an

                     
                        •
                     kindled (or) burning. acceſſible'fire, and vvhirlevvinde, and darkenes, and ſtorme, ✝ 
                     verse 19 and the ſoūd of trompet, & voice of vvordes, vvhich they that heard, excuſed them ſelues, that the vvord might not be ſpokē to them, ( ✝ 
                     verse 20 for they did not heare that which was ſaid, And if a beaſt ſhal touche the mount,
                  Exo. 19, 12. 
                  it ſhal be ſtoned. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And ſo terrible vvas it vvhich vvas ſeen, Moyſes ſaid: I am frighted and tremble. ✝ 
                     verse 22 ButThe faithful are made fellovves of Angels & of al the perfect ſoules departed ſince the beginning of the vvorld, and of Chriſt him ſelf. you are come to mount Sion, and the citie of the liuing God, heauenly Hieruſalem, and the aſſemblie of many thouſand Angels, ✝ 
                     verse 23 & the Church of the firſt-borne, vvhich are vvritten in the heauens, and the iudge of all, God: and the ſpirites of the iuſt
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   made perfect, ✝ 
                     verse 24 and the mediator of the nevv Teſtament IESVS, and the ſprinkling of bloud ſpeaking better then * Abel.
                ✝ 
                     verse 25 See that you refuſe him not ſpeakingGen. 4, 10. for if they eſcaped not, refuſing him that ſpake vpon the earth: much more vve, that turne avvay from him ſpeaking to vs from heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 26 Vvhoſe voice moued the earth then: but novv he promiſeth,Ag. 2, 7. ſaying, Yet once: and I vvil moue not only the earth, but heauen alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And in that he ſaieth, Yet once, he declareth the tranſlation of moueable things as being made, that thoſe things may remaine vvhich are vnmoueable. ✝ 
                     verse 28 Therfore receiuing an vnmoueable kingdom, vve haue grace: by the vvhich
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   let vs ſerue pleaſing God, vvith feare & reuerence. ✝ 
                     verse 29 For * our God is a conſuming fire.Deu. 4, 24.
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     6. He ſcourgeth.]
                     Temporal puniſhment after remiſſiō of ſinnes, either here, or in 
                           •
                        urgatorie▪
                      By this vve proue that God often puniſheth the ſinnes euen of his louing children, though not vvith eternal damnation, yet vvith temporall chaſtiſement and correction: & that he doth not alvvaies together vvith the remiſſion of deadly ſinnes & eternal puniſhment, exempt the offender receiued to his grace, from al fatherly correction either in this life or in the next. Neither haue the Heretikes of this time any reaſon or ſcripture in the vvorld, vvhy they
 ſhould take avvay Gods chaſtiſement of his children in the next life, more then in this vvorld.
                  
                     17. He found not.] It is not meant, that Eſau could not find remiſſion of his ſinne at Gods hand: but that, hauing once ſold and yelded vp the right of his firſt-birth to his yonger brother, it vvas to late to be ſorie for his vnaduiſed bargaine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  He commandeth vnto them mutual loue, 2 hoſpitality, 3 compaſsion, 4 chaſtitie, 5 contentation, 7 imitation of the faith of their Catholike Prelates and Martyrs (not harkening to the doctrines of Heretikes, nor fearing the caſting out of the Ievves ſynagogus) 17 and obedience to their preſent paſtors. 18 And ſo vvith requeſting their praiers, and praying for them, he endeth the Epiſtle.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LET
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the charitie of the fraternitie abide in you.Rom. 12. 10. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And 
                     •
                   hoſpitalitie do not forget,1 Pet. 4. for by this,Gen. 18, 3. 19, 2. 3. certaine being not avvare, * haue receiued Angels to harbour. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Remember them in bondes, as if you vvere boūd vvith them: and them that labour, as your ſelues alſo remaining in bodie. ✝ 
                     verse 4 
                  
                     •
                   Mariage honorable in all, and the bed vndefiled. For, fornicatours & aduouterers God vvil iudge. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Let your maners be vvithout auarice: contented vvith things preſent.Deu. 31. For he ſaid, I vvil not leaue thee, neither vvil I forſake thee.
                  Ioſ. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 6 ſo that vve do confidently ſay: Our Lord is my helper:
                  Pſal. 55, 12. 117, 6. 
                  I vvil not feare vvhat man ſhal doe to me.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 
                  
                     •
                   Remember your Prelates,The epiſtle for a Confeſſor that is a Biſhop. vvhich haue ſpoken the vvord of God to you: the end of vvhoſe conuerſation beholding, imitate their faith. ✝ 
                     verse 8 IESVS Chriſt yeſterday, and to day: the ſame alſo for euer. ✝ 
                     verse 9 VvithNevv, diuers, changeable, & ſtrange doctrines to be auoided, for ſuch be hereticall. Againſt vvhich the beſt remedie or preſeruatiue is, alvvaies to looke backe to our firſt Apoſtles, & the holy fathers doctrine. various & ſtrāge doctrines be not led avvay. For it is beſt that the hart be eſtabliſhed vvith grace, 
                     •
                   not vvith meates: vvhich haue not profited thoſe that vvalke in them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  
                     •
                   Vve haue an altar: vvhereof they haue not povver to eate vvhich ſerue the tabernacle.Leu. 16, 27. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For * the bodies of thoſe beaſtes, vvhoſe bloud for ſinne is caried into the holies by the high prieſt, are burned vvithout the campe. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the vvhich thing IESVS alſo, that he might ſanctifie the people by his ovvne bloud, ſuffered vvithout the gate. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Let vs goe forth therfore to him vvithout the campe: carying his reproche. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For vve haue not here a permanent citie: but vve ſeeke that vvhich is to come. ✝ 
                     verse 15 By him therfore let vs offer 
                     •
                   the hoſt of praiſe alvvaies to God,Oſe. 14, 3. that is to ſay, * the fruite of lippes confeſſing to his name.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 16 And beneficence and communication do not forget▪ for vvith ſuch hoſtes 
                     •
                   God is promerited. ✝ 
                     verse 17 
                  
                     •
                   Obey your Prelates, and be ſubiect to them. For they vvatch as being to render account for your ſoules: ⊢ that they may doe this vvith ioy, and not mourning, for this is not expedient for you. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Pray for vs▪ for vve haue confidence that vve haue a good conſcience, vvilling to conuerſe vvel in all. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And I beſeeche you the more to doe this, that I may the more ſpedily be reſtored to you. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the God of peace vvhich brought out from the dead the great Paſtor of the ſheepe, in the bloud of the eternal teſtamēt, our Lord IESVS Chriſt: ✝ 
                     verse 21 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, make you perfect and abſolute in al goodnes.
                  aptet vos fitte you in al goodnes, that you may doe his vvil, doing in you that vvhich may pleaſe before him by IESVS Chriſt: to vvhom is glorie for euer and euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 22 And I deſire you brethren that you ſuffer the vvord of conſolation. For in very fevv vvordes haue I vvritten to you. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Knovv you our brother Timothee to be diſmiſſed: vvith vvhom (if he come the ſooner) I vvil ſee you. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Salute al your prelates, and al the ſainctes. The brethren of Italie ſalute you. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Grace be vvith you al. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     2. Hoſpitality.]
                     Hoſpitalitie. Hoſpitality, that is, receiuing and harbouring of poore pilgrimes, perſecuted and deſolate perſons,Angels harbo
                           •
                        
                        red. is ſo acceptable to God and ſo honorable, that oftentimes it hath been mens good happe to harbour Angles in ſteede of poore folke vnawares. Vvhich muſt needes be euer a great benediction to them and their families, as vve ſee by Abraham and Lot Gen. 18. & 19. (and the like fell alſo to S. Gregorie, as Io. Diaconus vvriteth, to vvhoſe ordinarie table of poore men, not onely Angels but Chriſt alſo came in Pilgrimes vveede. In vit. li. 1. c. 10. & li. 2. c. 22, 23.) vvhereof if vve had not example and vvarrant by S. Paules vvordes in this place, and many other expreſſe Scriptures of the old Teſtament, theſe ſcorneful miſcreants of this time making ſo litle account both of good vvorkes and ſuch miraculous enterance of Chriſt and his Angels into holy mens harbour, vvould make this alſo ſeeme fabulous, as they do other like things.
                  
                     4. Mariage honorable.]
                     Hovv mariage is honorable in al, if the Apoſtle did ſo ſay, as he doth not. 
                     The Apoſtle (ſaith a holy doctor) ſaith, Mariage honorable in all, and the bed vndefiled. And therfore the ſeruants of God in that they are not maried, thinke not the good of mariage to be a fault, but yet they doubt not perpetual continencie to be better them good mariage, ſpecially in this time vvhen it is ſaid of continencie, He that can take, let him take. De fid. ad Pet. 6. 3. apud Aug. in fine. Marke the doctrine of the fathers and of the Catholike Church concerning matrimonie, that it is honorable, and ſo honorable, that it is a holy ſacrament, but yet1 Cor. 7. v. 38. inferiour to virginity and perpetual continencie: honorable in all, that is, all ſuch as may lawfully marie and are lawfully maried: not in brother and ſiſter, not in perſons that haue vowed the contrarie, to vvhom the ſame Apoſtle ſaith it is damnable. 1. Tim. 5. v. 11. And this vvere the meaning of this place, if it vvere to be read thus, Mariage is honorable.
                  
                  But to ſee how the Proteſtants in all their tranſlations,One ſhort place manifoldly corrupted by the Proteſtants. to abuſe the ſimple, do falſifie this ſentence of the Apoſtle, to make it ſerue for the mariage of Votaries, it is notorious. Firſt, they vſe deceit in ſupplying the verbe ſubſtantiue that vvanteth, making it the Indicatiue moode thus, Mariage is honorable &c. as though the Apoſtle affirmed al mariage to be
 honorable or lavvful,They reſtraīe the ſenſe to their Heretical fanſie. vvhere the verbe to be ſupplied ought rather to be the Imperatiue moode, Let mariage be honorable, that ſo the ſpeache may be an exhortation or commaundement to them that be or vvil be maried, to vſe them ſelues in that ſtate in al fidelity, cleanlineſſe,1 Pet. 3. and coniugal continencie one tovvard an other:1 Theſ. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      as vvhen S. Peter alſo and this Apoſtle exhorte maried men to giue honour to their vviues as to the vveaker veſſels, and to poſſeſſe their veſſel in honour, not in the paſſions of ignominie and vncleanlineſſe: this is honorable or chaſt mariage, to vvhich he here exhorteth. And that it is rather an exhortation, then an affirmation, it is euident by the other partes and circumſtances of this place both before & after: al vvhich are exhortations in their owne tranſlations, this only being in the middes, and as indifferent to be an exhortation as the reſt (by their owne confeſsion) they reſtraine of purpoſe. Our text therfore and al Catholike tranſlatiōs leaue the ſentence indifferent
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . as it is in the Greeke, and as true tranſlatours ought to do, not preſuming to addict it to one ſide, leſt they ſhould reſtraine the ſenſe of the holy Ghoſt to their owne particular fantaſie.
                  Againe,The Eng. Bib. 1577. our new Tranſlatours corrupt the text in that they tranſlate, in omnibus, among al men, becauſe ſo they thinke it vvould ſound better to the ignorant, that Prieſts, Religious, and al vvhoſoeuer, may marie: vvhere they can not tell either by the Greeke or Latin, that in omnibus ſhould be the maſculine gendre, rather then the neutre (as not only Eraſmus, butO
                           •
                        cum. in Collect. the Greeke doctors alſo take it) to ſignifie that mariage ſhould be honorably kept betweene man and vvife in al pointes and in al reſpectes. See S. Chryſ. and Theophyl. in hunc locum. For there may be many filthy abuſes in vvedlocke, vvhich the Apoſtle vvarneth them to take heede of, and to keepe their mariage-bed vndefiled. But the third corruption for their purpoſe aforeſiad, and moſt impudent, is,Beza in no. Teſt. Groecolat. an. 1565. that ſome of the Caluiniſtes for, in omnibus, tranſlate, inter quoſuis, vvith a marginal interpretation to ſignifie al orders, conditions, ſtates, and qualities of men. So boldly they take away al indifferencie of ſenſes, and make Gods vvord to ſpeake iuſt that vvhich them ſelues vvould, and their hereſie requireth, in vvhich king they paſſe al impudencie and al heretikes that euer vvere.
                  
                     7. Remember your Prelates.]
                     Vve muſt haue regard to the faith & doctrine of the fathers. Vve be here vvarned to haue great regard in our life and beleefe, to the holy fathers, Doctors, & glorious Biſhops gone before vs in Gods Church, not doubting but they being our lawful Paſtors, had and taught the truth: of vvhom S. Auguſtine ſaid, That vvhich they found in the Church, they held faſt: that vvhich they learned, they taught: that vvhich they receiued of their fathers, the ſame they deliuered to their children. Cont. Iulian. li. 2 c. 10. Vvhich reſpect to our holy forefathers in faith, is now in this vvicked contempt of the Heretikes, ſo much the more to be had. See the ſaid holy doctors ſecond booke againſt Iulian the Pelagian throughout, vvhat great account he maketh of them in the confutation of hereſies,Memories and feaſtes of Saīcts. and hovv far he preferreth them aboue the proud Sectmaiſters of that time: as vve muſt now doe againſt our new doctors. This place alſo is rightly vſed to proue that the Church of God ſhould keepe the memories of Saincts departed, by ſolemne holidaies and other deuout vvaies of honour.
                  
                     9. Not vvith meates.]
                     Iudaical abſtinence from meates. He ſpeaketh not of Chriſtian faſtes, but of the legal difference of meates, vvhich the Hebrues vvere yet pro
                        •
                     e vnto: not conſidering that by Chriſtes faith they vvere made free from al ſuch obſeruations of the Law.
                  
                     10. We haue an altar.] He putteth them in minde by theſe vvordes, that in folowing to much their old Iewiſh rites,Material altars for the ſacrifice of chriſts body. they depriued them ſelues of an other maner and a more excellent ſacrifice and meate: meaning, of the holy altar, and Chriſtes ovvne bleſſed body offered and eaten there. of vvhich, they that continue in the figures of the old Law, could not be partakers. This altar (ſaith I ſychius) is the altar of Chriſtes body, vvhich the Ievves for their incredulity muſt not behold. Li. 6 c. 21 in Leuit.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And the Greeke vvord (as alſo the Hebrue anſvvering therevnto in the old teſtament) ſignifieth properly an altar to ſacrifice on, and not a metaphorical and ſpiritual altar.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Vvhereby vve proue againſt the Heretikes, that vve haue not a common table or profane communion borde, to eate mere bread vpon, but a very altar in the proper ſenſe, to ſacrifice Chriſtes body vpon: and ſo called of the fathers in reſpect of the ſaid body ſacrificed. Greg. Nazianz. in orat. de ſorore Gorgonia. Chryſ. demonſt. quòd Chriſtus ſit Deus. Socrat. li. 1. c. 20. 25. Aug. ep. 86. De ciu. Dei. li. 8. c. 27. & li. 22. c. 10. Confeſſ. li. 9 c. 11. 13. Cont. Fauſt. Manich. li. 20. c 21. Theophyl. in 23. Mat. And vvhen it is called a table, it is in reſpect of the heauenly foode of Chriſts body and bloud receiued.
                  
                     15. The hoſte or praiſe.]
                     The Sacrifice of the altar is the principal hoſt of praiſe and thankes giuing, therfore called, Euchariſtia.
                      Though it may ſignifie the ſpiritual ſacrifices of praiſe and thankesgiuing of vvhat ſort ſoeuer: ye it ſpecially may be thought to ſignifie the great Sacrifice of the B. body and bloud of Chriſt: not as vpon the Croſſe, vvhich vvas but once done in bloudy ſort, but as in the Church, and new Teſtament, vvhere it is daily done vnblouddily, being the proper hoſt of laude and thankes giuing▪ and therfore called the Euchariſt, and being the fruite and effecte of Chriſt and his Prieſts lippes or vvordes, that is, of conſecration: becauſe this ſacrifice is made by the force of the holy vvordes, And vvhen vve reade in the pſalme and other places of the olde
 Teſtament, of the hoſt of praiſe, it may be thought to be a prophecie of the nevv Sacrifice, & not of euery vulgar thankes giuing. And ſo the old fathers in the primitiue Church to hide the myſteries from the vnvvorthy or heathen, often ſpeake. What is (ſaith S. Auguſtine) a more holy ſacrifice of praiſe, then that vvhich conſiſteth in thankes giuing, all vvhich the faithful do knovv in the ſacrifice of the Church. Li. 1. cont. aduerſ. leg. & preph. c. 18. Againe, c. 20. The Church from the times of the Apoſtles by the moſt certaine ſucceſsions of Biſhops, offereth to God in the body of Chriſt the Sacrifice of praiſe. And a 
                        〈◊〉
                      aftervvard, Novv Iſrael according to the ſpirit, that is, the Church offereth a ſingular Sacrifice according to the ſpirit: of vvhoſe houſe be vvil not take calues nor goates, but vvil take the Sacrifice of praiſe, not according to the order of Aaron, but according to the order of Melchiſedec. See ep. 120. c. 19. & ep. 57. ad q. 1. in fine. Thus you ſee, vvhen the holy fathers handle the Scriptures, they finde Maſſe and Sacrifice in many places, vvhere the ignorant heretikes or the ſimple might thinke they ſpeake onely of a common thankes giuing.
                  
                     16. God is promerited.] This latin vvord promeretur, cannot be expreſſed effectually in any one Engliſh vvord.The Proteſtants auoid the vvord merite. It ſignifieth, Gods fauour to be procured by the foreſaid vvorkes of almes and charitie, as by the deſerts and merites of the doers. Which doctrine and vvord of merites the Aduerſaries like ſo il, that they flee▪ both here and els vvhere from the vvord,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      tranſlating here for, promeretur Deus, God is pleaſed, more neere to the Greeke, as they pretend. Which in deede maketh no more for them then the latin, vvhich is agreable to moſt auncient copies,Good vvorkes meritorious. as vve ſee by Primaſius S. Auguſtines ſcholer. For if God be pleaſed vvith good vvorkes and ſhew fauour for them, then are they meritorious, and then only faith is not the cauſe of Gods fauour to men.
                  
                     17. Obey your Prelates.]
                     The Apoſtle doth inculcate obedience to the Prieſts and Biſhops of Gods Church. There is nothing more inculcated in the holy Scriptures, then obedience of the lay people to the Prieſts and Prelates of Gods Church, in matters of ſoule, conſcience, and religion. Vvhereof the Apoſtle giueth this reaſon, becauſe they haue the charge of mens ſoules, and muſt anſvver for them: vvhich is an infinite preeminence and ſuperiority, ioyned vvith burden, and requireth maruelous ſubmiſsion and moſt obedient ſubiection of al that be vnder them and their gouernement. From this obedience there is no exception nor exemption of kings nor Princes, be they neuer ſo great. If they haue ſoules,No perſon exempted from this obediēce, in matters of religion. and be Chriſtian men, they muſt be ſubiect to ſome Biſhop, Prieſt, or other Prelate. And vvhatſoeuer he be (though Emperour of all the vvorld) if he take vpon him to preſcribe and giue lawes of religion to the Biſhops and Prieſts, vvhom he ought to obey and be ſubiect vnto in religion, he ſhal he damned vndoubtedly, except he repent, becauſe he doth againſt the expreſſe vvord of God and law of nature. And by this you may ſee the difference of an heretical and a diſordered time, from other Catholike Chriſtian daies. For hereſie and the like damnable reuoltes from the Church of God, is no more but a rebellion and diſobedience to the Prieſts of Gods Church, vvhen men refuſe to be vnder their diſcipline, to heare their doctrine, and interpretation of Scriptures, to obey their lawes and counſels. This diſobedience and rebellion from the Spiritual Gouernour, vnder pretence of obedience to the Temporal, is the bane of our daies, and ſpecially of our Countrie, vvhere theſe new Sectes are properly mainteined by this falſe principle, That the Prince in matters of ſoule and religion may commaund the Prelate: vvhich is directly and euidently againſt this Scripture and all other, that commaund the ſheepe of Chriſtes fold to obey their ſpiritual Officers.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. IAMES.
            
               THIS Epiſtle (as the reſt folovving) is directed ſpecially, as S. Augustine ſaith, againſt the errour of only faith, vvhich ſome held at that time alſo, by miſconſtruing S. Paules vvordes. Yea not only that, but many other errours (vvhich then alſo vvere annexed vnto it, as they are novv) doth this Apoſtle here touche expreſly.
            He ſaith therfore, that not only faith, but alſo good vvorkes are neceſſarie: that not only faith, but alſo good vvorkes do iuſtifie: that they are actes of Religion, or ſeruice and vvorſhip of God: that to keepe al the commaundements of God, and ſo to abſtaine from al mortal ſinne, is not impoſsible, but neceſſarie: that God is not author of ſinne, no not ſo much as of tentation to ſinne: that vve muſt ſtay our ſelues from ſinning, vvith feare of our death, of the Iudgement, of hel: and ſtirre our ſelues to doing of good, vvith our revvard that vve ſhall haue for it in heauen. Theſe pointes of the Catholike faith he commendeth earneſtly vnto vs, inueighing vehemently againſt them that teach the cōtrarie errors. Hovvbeit he doth vvithal admoniſh not to neglect ſuch, but to ſeeke their conuerſion, ſhevving them hovv meritorious a thing that is. Thus then he exhorteth generally to all good vvorkes, & dehorteth from al ſinne. but yet alſo namely to certaine, & from certaine: as, from acception of perſons, from detraction and raſh iudging, from concupiſcēce and loue of this vvorld, from ſvvearing: and, to praier, to almes, to humilitie, confeſsion and penance: but moſt copiouſly to patience in perſecution.
            Novv,Vvhich Iames vvrote this epiſtle. vvho this Iames vvas: It is not be, vvhoſe feaſt the Church keepeth the 25 of Iulie, vvhich vvas S. Iohns brother, and vvhoſe martyrdom vve haue Act. 12. but he, vvhom the Church vvorſhippeth the firſt of Maie, vvho is called Frater Domini, our lordes brother, and brother to Iude, and vvhich vvas the firſt Biſhop of Hieruſalem, of vvhom vve reade Act. 15 & 21. and alſo Gal. 2. of vvhoſe vvonderful auſteritie and puritie of life, the Eccleſiaſticall ſtories do report. Euſeb. li. 2. c. 
                     •
                  2. Hiero. in Catalogo.
            
            Therfore as the old High-prieſt had povver and charge ouer the Ievves, not only in Hieruſalem and Iurie, but alſo diſperſed in other Countries (as vve vnderſtand Act. 9. v. 1, & 2.) ſo S. Iames likevviſe, being Biſhop of Hieruſalem, and hauing care not only of thoſe Ievves vvith vvhom he vvas reſident there in Iurie,I
                     •
                  . 1. but of al the reſt alſo, vvriteth this Epiſtle, To the tvvelue tribes that are in diſperſion. and in them, to al Chriſtians vniuerſally diſperſed through the vvorld.
         
         
            
            THE CATHOLIKE EPISTLE OF IAMES THE APOSTLE.The Church readeth theſe Catholike or Canonical Epiſtles in order at Mattins, frō the 4 Sūday after Eaſter vntil Vvhitſunday.
            
            
               Catholike Epiſtle.]
               The Proteſtants abhorre the vvord Catholike.
                The vvord Catholike though in the title of this Epiſtle & the reſt folovving (called The Catholike Epiſtles) it be not vvholy in the ſame ſenſe, as it is in the Creede: yet the Proteſtants ſo feare and abhorre the vvord altogether, that in ſome of their Bibles they leaue it cleane out, although it be in the Greeke, and in ſome they had rather tranſlate ridiculouſly thus, The general Epiſtle &c. vvhereas theſe are famouſly knovven and * ſpecified in antiquitie, by the name of Catholike Epiſtles,Euſeb. li. 2. hiſt. c. 22. for that they are vvritten to the vvhole Church, not to any peculiar people or perſon, as S. Paules are.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Vve haue to reioyce in perſecution (but if vve be patient, and vvithal abſteine from al mortal ſinne) 9 conſidering hovv vve ſhal be exalted and crovvned for it, vvhen the perſecutor (vvho enricheth him ſelf vvith our ſpoiles) ſhal fade avvay. 13 But if any be tempted to fall, or to any other euil, let him not ſay, God it the author of it, vvho is the author of al good onely. 19 Such points of the Ca
                        ••
                     -faith vve muſt be content to learne vvithout contradiction and anger, and to doe accordingly. 26 Becauſe othervviſe vve may talke of Religion, but in deede it is no Religion.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IAMES the ſeruant of God and of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, to the tvvelue tribes that are in diſperſion, greeting.
                ✝ 
                     verse 2 Eſteeme it,The Epiſtle for a Martyr. my brethren, al ioy, vvhen you ſhal fall into diuers tentatiōs: ✝ 
                     verse 3 knovving that * the probatiō of your faith vvorketh patience.Ro. 5, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And let patience haue a perfect vvorke: that you may be perfect & entire, failing in nothing. ✝ 
                     verse 5 But if any of you lacke vviſedom, let him aſke of God who giueth to al men aboundantly, and vp braideth not: and it ſhal be giuen him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 But * let him 
                     •
                   aſke in faith nothing doubting▪
                  Mat. 21, 22. for he that doubteth, is like to a vvaue of the ſea,Mar. 11, 24. vvhich is moued & caried about by the vvinde. ✝ 
                     verse 7 therfore let not that man thinke that he ſhal
 receiue any thing of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 8 A man double of minde is inconſant in al his vvaies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 But let the humble brother glorie,Pſ. 102, 15. Eccl. 14, 18. in his exaltation. ✝ 
                     verse 10 and the riche, in his humilitie, becauſe * as the floure of graſſe ſhal he paſſe:Eſ. 4, 6, ✝ 
                     verse 11 for the ſunne roſe vvith heate, & parched the graſſe,1 Pet. 1, 24. and the floure of it fel avvay, and the beautie of the ſhape thereof periſhed: ſo the riche man alſo ſhal vvither in his vvaies.The Epiſtle for a Martyr that is a Biſhop. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Bleſſed is the man ſuffereth tentation:
Iob 5, 17. for vvhen he hath been proued, he ſhal receiue the crovvne of life, vvhich God hath promiſed to them that loue him. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 ″ Let no man vvhen he is tempted, ſay that he is tempted no man. ✝ 
                     verse 14 ButThe groūd of tētation to ſinne, is our cōcupiſcence, & not God. euery one is tempted of his ovvne cō
                  cupiſcence abſtracted and allured. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Aftervvard ″ concupiſcence vvhen it hath cōceiued, bringeth forth ſinne. but ″ ſinne vvhen it is conſummate, ingendreth death.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 Do not erre therfore my deereſt brethren.The Epiſtle on the 4 Sunday after Eaſter. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Euery beſt gift, and euery perfect gift, is from aboue, deſcending from the Father of lightes, vvith vvhom is no tranſmutation, nor ſhadovving of alteration. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Voluntarily hath he begotten vs by the vvord of truth, that vve may be ſome beginning of his creature.Prou. 17 27. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 19 You knovv my deereſt brethren, And * let euery man be ſvvift to heare: but ſlovv to ſpeake, and ſlovv to anger. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For the anger of man vvorketh not the iuſtice of God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 21 For the vvhich thing caſting avvay al vncleanneſſe and aboundance of malice,The Epiſtle on the 5 Sunday after Eaſter. in meekeneſſe receiue the engraffed vvord,Mat. 7, 21. vvhich is able to ſaue your ſoules. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 22 But * be doers of the vvord, and not hearers only, deceauing your ſelues. ✝ 
                     verse 23 For if a man be a hearer of the vvord,Ro. 2, 13. and not a doer: he ſhal be compared to a man beholding the countenance of his natiuitie in a glaſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For he conſidered him ſelf, and vvent his vvay, and by and by forgat vvhat an one he vvas. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But he that hath looked in ″ the lavv of perfect libertie, and hath remained in it, not made a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the vvorke: this man ſhal beBeatitude or ſaluation conſiſteth in vvel vvorking. bleſſed in his deede. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And if any man thinke him ſelf to be religious, not bridling his tong, but ſeducing his hart: this mans religion is vaine. ✝ 
                     verse 27 ″ Religion cleane and vnſpotted vvith God and the Father,
 is this, to viſite pupilles and vvidovves in their tribulation: & to keepe him ſelf vnſpotted from this vvorld. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     6. Aſke in faith nothing doubting.] The Proteſtants vvould proue by this, that no man ought to pray vvithout aſſurance that he ſhal obtaine that vvhich he aſketh.Vvhat faith is required in praier. Where the Apoſtle meaneth nothing els, but that the aſker of lavvful things may not either miſtruſt Gods povver and hability or be in diffidence and deſpaire of his mercie: but that our doubt be onely in our ovvne vnworthineſſe or vndue aſking.
                  
                     13. Let no man ſay that he is tempted of God.] Vve ſee by this, that vvhen the Scriptures (as in the Pater noſter and other places) ſeeme to ſay,God is not author of euil. that God doth ſometimes tempt vs, or leade vs into tentation: they meane not, that God is any vvaies the author, cauſer, or mouer of any man to ſinne, but onely by permiſſion, and becauſe by his gratious povver he keepeth not the offender from tentations. Therfore the blaſphemie of Heretike, making God the author of ſinne, is intolerable. See S. Auguſt. ſer. 9. de diuerſ. c. 9.
                  
                  
                     13. God is not a tempter of euils.]
                     Partial and vvilful tranſlation. The Proteſtants as much as they may, to diminiſh the force of the Apoſtles concluſion againſt ſuch as attribute their euil tentations to God (for other tentations God doth ſend to trie mens patience and proue their faith) take and tranſlate the vvord paſſuely, in this ſenſe, that God is not tempted by our euils. Vvhere more conſonantly to the letter and circumſtance of the vvordes before & after, & as agreably
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . to the Greeke, it ſhould be taken actiuely as it is in the Latin, that God is no tempter to euil, for being taken paſſiuely, there is no coherence of ſenſe to the other vvordes of the Apoſtle.
                  
                     15. Concupiſcence vvhen it hath conceiued.]
                     Concupiſcēce of it ſelf no ſinne. Concupiſcence (vve ſee here) of it ſelf is not ſinne, as Heretikes falſely teach: but vvhen by any conſent of the minde vve do obey or yeld to it, then is ſinne ingendred and formed in vs.
                  
                     15. Sinne conſummate ingendreth death.] Here vve ſee that not al ſinne nor al conſent vnto concupiſcence is mortal or damnable,Not euery ſinne mortal. but vvhen it is conſummate, that is, vvhen the conſent of mans minde fully and perfectly yeldeth to the committing or liking of the acte or motion vvherevnto concupiſcence moueth or inciteth vs.
                  
                     25. The lavv of perfect libertie.] The lavv of the Goſpel and grace of Chriſt, is called the lavv of libertie,Vvhat is the lavv of libertie in the Nevv Teſtament. in reſpect of the yoke and burden of the old carnal ceremonies, and becauſe Chriſt hath by his bloud of the nevv Teſtament deliuered all that obey him, from the ſeruitude of ſinne and the Diuel. But not as the Libertines and other Heretikes of this time vvould haue it, that in the nevv Teſtament euery man may follovv his ovvne liking and conſcience, & may chooſe vvhether he vvil be vnder the lavves and obedience of Spiritual or Temporal Rulers, or no.
                  
                     27. Religion cleane.]
                     Good vvorkes a part of mans iuſtice. True religion ſtandeth not onely in talking of the Scriptures, or onely faith, or Chriſtes iuſtice: but in puritie of life, and good vvorkes, ſpecially of charitie and mercie done by the grace of Chriſt. This is the Apoſtolical doctrine, and far from the Heretical vanitie of this time.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Againſt acception of perſon. 10 From al and euery ſinne vve muſt abſteine, hauing in al our vvordes and deedes, the Iudgement before our eies: vvherein vvorkes of mercie ſhal be required of vs, 14 and onely faith ſhal not auaile vs. 18 And that the Catholike by his vvorkes ſhevveth that he hath faith: vvhereas the Heretikes hath no more faith than the Diuel, talke he of faith neuer ſo much, and of iuſtification thereby onely, by the example of Abraham Ro. 4. Abraham in deede vvas iuſtified by vvorkes alſo, 25 and likevviſe Rahab.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MY brethren,Leu. 19, 15. Deu. 1, 16. Haue not the faith of our Lord IESVS Chriſt of glorie ″ in acception of perſons.Pro. 24, 23. Eccl. 42, 1. ✝ 
                     verse 2 For if there ſhal enter into your aſſemblie a man hauing a golden ring in goodly appareil, and there ſhal enter in a poore man in homely attire, ✝ 
                     verse 3 & you haue reſpect to him that is clothed vvith the goodly apparell, and ſhal ſay to him, Sitte thou here vvel: but ſay to the poore man, Stand thou there: or ſitte vnder my foote-ſtoole: ✝ 
                     verse 4 do you not iudge vvith your ſelues, and are become iudges of vniuſt cogitations? ✝ 
                     verse 5 Heare my deereſt brethren: hath not God choſen the poore in this vvorld, riche in faith, and heires of the kingdom vvhich God hath promiſed to them that loue him? ✝ 
                     verse 6 But you haue diſhonoured the poore mā. Do not the riche oppreſſe you by might: and them ſelues dravv you to iudgements? ✝ 
                     verse 7 Doe not they blaſpheme the good name that is inuocated vpon you? ✝ 
                     verse 8 If not-vvithſtanding you fulfil the roial lavv according to the ſcriptures,Leu. 19, 18. Mat. 22, 39. 
                  Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf, you doe vvel: ✝ 
                     verse 9 but if you accept perſons, you vvorke ſinne,Rom. 13. reproued of the Lavv as tranſgreſſours. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And 
* vvhoſoeuer ſhal keepe the vvhole Lavv, but offendeth in one:Leu. 19, 37. Deu. 1, 18. ″ is made guilty of al. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For he that ſaid, Thou ſhalt not commit aduoutrie, ſaid alſo, Thou ſhalt not kil. And if thou doe not commit aduoutrie, but ſhalt kil: thou art made a tranſgreſſour of the Lavv. ✝ 
                     verse 12 So ſpeake ye, and ſo doe, as beginning to be iudged by the lavv of libertie. ✝ 
                     verse 13 For ″ iudgement vvithout mercie to him that hath not done mercie. And mercie
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   exalteth it ſelf aboue iudgement.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 ″ Vvhat ſhal it profit my brethren, if a man ſay he hath faith: but hath not vvorkes? Shal faith be able to ſaue him? ✝ 
                     verse 15 And * if a brother or ſiſter be naked,Io. 3, 17 & lacke daily foode: ✝ 
                     verse 16 and one of you ſay to them, Goe in peace, be vvarmed & filled: but you giue them not the things that are neceſſarie for the bodie: vvhat ſhal it profit? ✝ 
                     verse 17 So faith alſo, if it haue not vvorkes, is dead in it ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 18 But ſome man ſaith, Thou haſt faith, and I haue vvorkes: ſhevv me thy faith vvithout vvorkes: & I vvil ſhevv thee by vvorkes my faith. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Thou beleeueſt that there is one God. Thou doeſt vvel: the deuils
 alſo beleeue and tremble. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But vvilt thou knovvHe ſpeaketh to al heretikes that ſay, faith onely without vvorkes doth iuſtifie, calling them vaine men, and comparing them to Diuels. ô vaine man, that faith vvithout vvorkes isdead idle'? ✝ 
                     verse 21 ″ Abraham our father vvas he not iuſtified by vvorkes,Gen. 22, 10. * offering Iſaac his ſonne vpon the altar? ✝ 
                     verse 22 Seeſt thou that ″ faith did vvorke vvith his vvorkes: and by the vvorkes the faith vvas conſummate?
Gen. 15, 6. Ro. 4, 3. Gal. 3 ✝ 
                     verse 23 And the Scripture vvas fulfilled, ſaying, Abraham beleeued God, and it vvas reputed him to iuſtice, and he vvas called ″ the freende of God. ✝ 
                     verse 24 Do you ſee that by vvorkes a man is iuſtified: & ″ not by faith only? ✝ 
                     verse 25 And in like maner alſo * ″ Rahab the harlot,Ioſ. 2, 1. 18. and 6, 22. vvas not ſhe iuſtified by vvorkes, receiuing the meſſengers, and putting them forth an other vvay? ✝ 
                     verse 26 For euen as the bodie vvithout the ſpirit is dead: ſo alſo ″ faith vvithout vvorkes is dead.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. In acception of perſons.]
                     Scripture abuſed by the Anabaptiſtes to make no diſtinction of perſons. The Apoſtle meaneth not, as the Anabaptiſts and other ſeditious perſons ſometime gather hereof, that there ſhould be no difference in Commonvveales or aſſemblies, betvvixt the Magiſtrate and the ſubiect, the free man and the bond, the riche and the poore, betvvixt one degree and an other. for, God and nature, and the neceſſitie of man, haue made ſuch diſtinctions, and men are bound to obſerue then. But it is meant onely, or ſpecially, that in ſpiritual giftes and graces, in matters of faith, Sacraments, and ſaluation, and beſtovving the ſpiritual functions and charge of foule, vve muſt eſteeme of a poore man or a bond man, no leſſe then of the rich man and the free,Vvhat the Apoſtle meaneth by acception of perſons. then of the Prince or the Gentleman: becauſe as Chriſt him ſelf calleth all, and endueth al ſorts vvith his graces: ſo in ſuch and the like things vve muſt not be partial, but count al to be fellovves, brethren, and members of one head. And therfore the Apoſtle ſaith vvith a ſpecial clauſe, That vve ſhould not hold or haue the Chriſtian faith vvith or in ſuch differences or partialities.
                  
                     10. Is made guilty of al.] He meaneth not, that vvhoſoeuer is a theefe, is alſo a murderer, or that euery murderer is an aduouterer alſo:How he that offendeth in one commaundement, is guilty of al. or that al ſinnes be equal, according to the Stoïkes and the Hereſie of Iouinian: much leſſe, that he ſhal haue as great damnation that tranſgreſſeth one commaundement, as if he had offended againſt euery precept. but the ſenſe is, that it ſhal not auaile him to ſaluation, that he ſeemeth to haue kept certaine and not broken al the commaundements: ſeeing that any one tranſgreſſion of the Lavv, proueth that he hath not obſerued the vvhole, vvhich he vvas bound to do, ſo far as is required, and as is poſſible for a man in this life. S. Auguſtine diſputing profoundly in his 29 Epiſtle to S. Hierom, of this place of S. Iames, expoundeth it thus: that he vvhich offendeth in one, that is, againſt the general and great commaundement of loue or charitie (becauſe it is in maner al, as being the ſumme of al, the plentitude of the lavv, and the perfection of the reſt) breaketh after a ſort and tranſgreſſeth al, no ſinne being committed but either againſt the loue of God, or of our neighbour.
                  
                     13. Iudgement vvithout mercie.]
                     Vvorkes of mercie exceding grateful to God. Nothing giueth more hope of mercie in the next life, then the vvorkes of almes, charitie, and mercie, done to our neighbours in this life. Neither ſhal any be vſed vvith extreme rigour in the next vvorld, but ſuch as vſed not mercie in this vvorld. Auguſt. de pec. merit. li. 2. c. 3. Vvhich is true, not onely in reſpect of the iudgement to euerlaſting damnation, but alſo of the temporal chaſtiſement in Purgatorie, as S. Auguſtine ſignifieth, declaring that our venial ſinnes be vvaſhed avvay in this vvorld vvith daily vvorkes of mercie,The proud & impudent dealing of the heretikes againſt this Epiſtle; becauſe it is ſo plaine againſt only ſaith. vvhich othervviſe ſhould be chaſtiſed in the next. See epiſt. 29. aforeſaid in ſine. and li. 21 de Ciu. Dei c. 17 in fine.
                  
                  
                     14. What ſhal it profite, if a man ſay he hath faith?] This vvhole paſſage of the Apoſtle is ſo cleere againſt iuſtification or ſaluation by onely faith, damnably defended by the Proteſtants, and ſo euident for the neceſſitie, merite, & concurrence of good vvorkes, that their firſt author Luther and ſuch as exactly folovv him, boldly (after the maner of Heretikes) vvhen they can make no ſhift nor falſe gloſe for the text, deny the booke to be Canonical Scripture. But Caluin and his companions diſagreing vvith their Maiſters, confeſſe it to be holy Scripture. but their ſhiftes and
 fond gloſes for anſvver of ſo plaine places, be as impudent as the denying of the Epiſtle vvas in the other. vvho vvould neuer haue denied the booke, thereby to ſhevv them ſelues Heretikes, if they had thought thoſe vulgar euaſions that the Zuinglians and Caluiniſts do vſe (vvhereof they vvere not ignorant) could haue ſerued. In both ſortes the Chriſtian Reader may ſee, that al the Heretikes vaunting of expreſſe Scriptures & the vvord of God, is no more but to delude the vvorld. vvhereas in deede, be the Scriptures neuer ſo plaine againſt them, they muſt either be vvreſted to ſound as they ſay, or els they muſt be no Scriptures at all. And to ſee Luther, Caluin, Beza, & their fellovves, ſitte as it vvere in iudgement of the Scriptures, to allovv or diſallovv at their pleaſures, it is the moſt notorious example of Heretical pride & miſerie that can be. See their prefaces and cenſures vpon this Canonical Epiſtle, the Apocalypſe, the Machabees, and other.
                  
                     21. Abraham vvas he not iuſtified by vvorkes?]
                     Only faith, an old hereſie. It is much to be noted that S. Auguſtine in his booke de fide & operibus c. 14. vvriteth, that the hereſie of onely faith iuſtifying or ſauing, vvas an old Hereſie euen in the Apoſtles time, gathered by the falſe interpretation of ſome of S. Paules profound diſputation in the Epiſtle to the Romans,S. Iames & the reſt inculcate good vvorkes againſt the errour of only faith falſely gathered of S. Paules vvordes. vvherein he commended ſo highly the faith in Chriſt, that they thought good vvorkes vvere not auilable: adding further, that the other three Apoſtles, Iames, Iohn, and Iude, did of purpoſe vvrite ſo much of good vvorkes, to correct the ſaid errour of onely faith, gathered by the miſconſtruction of S. Paules vvordes. Yea vvhen S. Peter (Ep. 2 c. 3.) vvarneth the faithful that many things be hard in S. Paules vvritings, and of light vnlearned men miſtaken to their perdition:Ioco citate. the ſaid S. Auguſtine affirmeth, that he meant of his diſputation concerning faith, vvhich ſo many Heretikes did miſtake to condemne good vvorkes. And in the preface of his commentarie vpon the 31 Pſalme, he vvarneth al men, that this deduction vpon S. Paules ſpeache, Abraham vvas iuſtified by faith, therfore vvorkes be not neceſſarie to ſaluation: is the right vvay to the gulfe of Hel and damnation.
                  And laſtly (vvhich is in it ſelf very plaine) that vve may ſee this Apoſtle did purpoſely thus commend vnto vs the neceſſitie of good vvorkes,S. Auguſtines vvhole diſputation in this poīt very notable, & directly againſt only faith. and the inanity aud inſufficiencie of onely faith, to correct the errour of ſuch as miſconſtrued S. Paules vvordes for the ſameLi. 83 q. q. 76. the ſaid holy Doctor noteth that of purpoſe he tooke the very ſame example of Abraham, vvhom S. Paul ſaid to be iuſtified by faith, and declareth that he vvas iuſtified by good vvorkes, ſpecifying the good vvorke for vvhich he vvas iuſtified and bleſſed of God, to vvitte, his obedience and immolation of his onely ſonne. But hovv S. Paul ſaith that Abraham vvas iuſtified by faith, ſee the Annotations vpon that place. Ro. 4. v. 1.
                  
                  
                     22. Faith did vvorke vvith.]
                     Hereſies againſt good vvorkes. Some Heretikes hold, that good vvorkes are pernicious to ſaluation and iuſtification: other, that though they be not hurtful but required, yet they be no cauſes or vvorkers of ſaluation, much leſſe meritorious, but are as effectes and fruites iſſuing neceſſarily out of faith. Both vvhich fictions, falſhods, and flightes from the plaine truth of Gods vvord, are refuted by theſe vvordes, vvhen the Apoſtle ſaith, That faith vvorketh together vvith good vvorkes:Workes cōcurre vvith faith as cauſe of iuſtification. making faith to be a coadiutor or cooperator vvith vvorkes, and ſo both ioyntly concurring as cauſes and vvorkers of iuſtification: yea aftervvard he maketh vvorkes the more principal cauſe, vvhen he reſembleth faith to the body, and vvorkes to the ſpirit or life of man.
                  
                     23. The frend of God.] By this alſo an other falſe and friuolous euaſion of the Heretikes is ouertaken,Workes make vs iuſt in deede before God. vvhen they feine, that the Apoſtle here vvhen he ſaith, vvorkes do iuſtifie, meaneth that they ſhew vs iuſt before men, and auaile not to our iuſtice before God. For the Apoſtle euidently declareth that Abraham by his vvorkes vvas made or truely called the freend of God, and therfore vvas not (as the Heretikes ſay) by his vvorkes approued iuſt before man onely.
                  
                     24. Not by faith onely.]
                     The Proteſtants ſay, by faith only: S. Iames cleane contrarie, Not by faith only.
                      This propoſition or ſpeache is directly oppoſite or contradictorie to that vvhich the Heretikes hold. For the Apoſtle ſaith, Man is iuſtified by good workes, and not by faith only. but the Heretikes ſay, Man is not iuſtified by good vvorkes, but by faith only. Neither can they pretend that there is the like contradiction or contrarietie betwixt S. Iames ſpeache and S. Paules. for though S. Paul ſay, man is iuſtified by faith, yet he neuer ſaith, by faith onely, nor euer meaneth by that faith vvhich is alone, but alvvaies by that faith vvhich vvorketh by charitie,Gal. 
                           •
                        . as he expoundeth him ſelf. Though concerning vvorkes alſo, there is a difference betwixt the firſt iuſtification, vvhereof S. Paul ſpecially ſpeaketh: and the ſecond iuſtification, vvhereof S. Iames doth more ſpecially treate. Of vvhich thingSee the annot. vpon the epiſtle to the Romans c. 2. v. 13.
                      els vvhere there is ynough ſaid.
                  The fathers in deede vſe ſometimes this excluſiue, ſola, onely: but in far other ſenſe then the Proteſtants. For ſome of them thereby exclude only the vvorkes of Moyſes law, againſt the Iewes: ſome, the vvorkes of nature and moral vertues vvithout the grace or knowledge of Chriſt,The manifold meaning of certaine fathers, vvhen they ſay, Only faith.
                      againſt the Gentiles: ſome, the neceſsitie of external good vvorkes vvhere the parties lacke time and meanes to doe them, as in the caſe of the penitent theefe: ſome, the falſe opinions, ſectes, and religions contrarie to the Catholike faith, againſt Heretikes and miſcreants: ſome exclude reaſon, ſenſe, and arguing in matters of faith and myſterie, againſt ſuch as vvil beleeue nothing but that they ſee or vnderſtand: ſome, the
 merite of vvorkes done in ſinne before the firſt iuſtification: ſome, the arrogant Phariſaical vaunting of mans ovvne proper vvorkes and iuſtice, againſt ſuch as referre not their actions and good deedes to Gods grace. To theſe purpoſes the holy Doctors ſay ſometimes, that only faith ſaueth and ſerueth: but neuer (as the Proteſtants vvould haue it) to exclude from iuſtification and ſaluation, the cooperation of mans free vvil, diſpoſitions and preparations of our hartes by praiers, penance, and ſacraments, the vertues of hope and charitie, the purpoſe of vvel-vvorking and of the obſeruation of Gods commaundements: much leſſe, the vvorkes and merites of the children of God, proceding of grace and charitie, after they be iuſtified and are now in his fauour: vvhich are not only diſpoſitions and preparations to iuſtice, but the meritorious cauſe of greater iuſtice, and of ſaluation.
                  
                     25. Rahab.]
                     S. Paul nameth faith, & S. Iames vvorkes, cauſes of iuſtification: but neither the one, faith only: nor the other, vvorkes only. This Apoſtle alleageth the good vvorkes of Rahab by vvhich ſhe vvas iuſtified, and S. Paul (11 Hebr.) ſaith ſhe vvas iuſtified by faith. Vvhich are not contrarie one to the other. for both is true, that ſhe vvas ſaued by faith, as one faith: and that ſhe vvas ſaued by her vvorkes, as the other ſaith. But it vvere vutruely ſaid, that ſhe vvas ſaued either by onely faith, as the Heretikes ſay: or by onely good vvorkes, as no Catholike man euer ſaid. But becauſe ſome Ievves and Gentil Philoſophers did affirme: they, that they ſhould be ſaued by the vvorkes of Moyſes lavv: theſe, by their moral vvorkes: therfore S. Paul to the Romans diſputed ſpecially againſt both, prouing that no vvorkes done vvithout or before the faith of Chriſt, can ſerue to iuſtification or ſaluation.
                  
                     26. Faith vvithout vvorkes is dead.]
                     Faith vvithout vvorkes is a true ſaith, but not auailable: as the body vvithout the ſpirit is a true body, though it be dead. S. Iames (as the Proteſtants feine) ſaith that faith vvithout good vvorkes is no faith, and that therfore it iuſtifieth not, becauſe it is no faith. for he ſaith that it is dead vvithout vvorkes, as the body is dead vvithout the ſoule, and therfore being dead hath no actiuity or efficacie to iuſtifie or ſaue. But it is a great difference, to ſay that the body is dead, and to ſay that is no body. euen ſo it is the like difference, to ſay that faith vvithout vvorkes is dead, and to ſay that faith vvithout vvorkes is no faith. And if a dead body be notvvithſtanding a true body, then according to S. Iames compariſon here, a dead faith is notvvithſtanding a true faith, but yet not auailable to iuſtification, becauſe it is dead, that is, becauſe it is onely faith vvithout good vvorkes.
                  And therfore it is a great impudencie in Heretikes, and a hard ſhift, to ſay that the faith of vvhich the Apoſtle diſputeth al this vvhile,Vvhat faith the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of: & that he knevv no ſpecial faith. is no true or proprely called faith at all. It is the ſame faith that S. Paul defined and commended in al the 11 chapter to the Hebrues, and the ſame vvhich is called the Catholike faith, and the ſame vvhich being formed & made aliue by charitie, iuſtifieth. Mary true it is, that it is not that ſpecial faith vvhich the Heretikes feine onely to iuſtifie, to vvit, vvhen a man doth firmely beleeue as an article of his faith, that him ſelf ſhal be ſaued. this ſpecial faith it is not vvhereof the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh. for neither he, nor S. Paul, nor any other ſacred vvriter in al the holy Scriptures euer ſpeake or knevve of any ſuch forged faith.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Againſt proud Maiſters and authors of Sectes. 5 Of the manifold ſinnes of the vnbrideled tongue. 13 The difference betvvixt proud, cōtentious, and vvorldly vviſedom, and that vviſedom vvhich is heauenly, peaceable, modeſt, and ſo forth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BE yee not ″ many maiſters my brethren,Mat. 23, 8. knovving that you receiue the greater iudgement, ✝ 
                     verse 2 For in many things vve offend al.Eccl. 14, 1. 19, 16. * If any man offend not in vvord: this is a perfect man. he is able alſo vvith bridle to turne about the whole body. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And if vve put bittes into the mouthes of horſes that they may obey vs, vve turne about al their body alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And behold, the ſhippes, vvhereas they be great, and are driuen of ſtrong vvindes: yet
 are they turned about vvith a litle ſterne whither the violēce of the director vvil. ✝ 
                     verse 5 So the tongue alſo is certes a litle mē
                  ber, &
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . vaunteth great things. Behold hovvlitle much' fire what a great vvood it kindleth? ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the tongue, is fire, a vvhole vvorld of iniquitie. The tongue is ſet among our members, vvhich defileth the vvhole bodie, & inflameth the vvheele of our natiuitie, inflamed of hel. ✝ 
                     verse 7 For al nature of beaſtes & foules and ſerpents & of the reſt is tamed & hath been tamed by the nature of man. ✝ 
                     verse 8 but the tongue no man can tame, an vnquiet euil, ful of deadly poiſon. ✝ 
                     verse 9 By it vve bleſſe God & the Father: & by it vve curſe men vvhich are made after the ſimilitude of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Out of the ſelf ſame mouth procedeth bleſſing & curſing. Theſe things muſt not be ſo done my brethrē. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Doth the fountaine giue forth out of one hole ſvveete & ſoure water? ✝ 
                     verse 12 Can, my brethren, the figge tree yeld grapes: or tho vine, figges? So neithercan it yeld ſalt and ſvveete vvater. can the ſalt water yeld' ſweete.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Vvho is vviſe and hath knowledge among you? Let him ſhevv by good conuerſation his vvorking in mildeneſſe of vviſedom. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But if you haue bitter zeale, and there be contentions in your hartes: glorie not and be not liers againſt the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 15 for this is notThe difference betwixt the humane vviſedom, ſpecially of heretikes: and the vviſedom of the Catholike Church & her children. vviſedom deſcending from aboue: but earthly, ſenſual, diueliſh. ✝ 
                     verse 16 For vvhere zeale and contention is: there is inconſtancie, and euery peruerſe vvorke. ✝ 
                     verse 17 But the vviſedom that is from aboue, firſt certes is chaſt: then peaceable, modeſt, ſuaſible, cōſenting to the good, ful of mercie and good fruites, not iudging, vvithout ſimulation. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the fruite of iuſtice, in peace is ſovved, to them that make peace.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     1. Many maiſters.] He meaneth principally Sect-maiſters that make them ſelues ſeueral Ringleaders in ſundry ſortes of new deuiſed doctrines: euery one arrogating to him ſelf to be maiſter,Many maiſters are many proud Sectmaiſters. and none ſo humble as to be a ſcholer, either to Gods Church and true Paſtors, or to other guides and authors of the ſaid ſectes. So did Zuinglius diſdaine to be Luthers ſcholer, and Caluin to be the folower of Zuinglius.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  By concupiſcence and loue of this vvorld, vve are made enemies to God: but vve ſhould rather humble vs to him, puniſhing our ſelues for our ſinnes. 11 Againſt detraction, and raſh iudging. 13 To remember alvvaies the vncertenti
                        •
                      of our life.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  FROM vvhence are vvarres & contentions among you? Are they not hereof? of your concupiſcences vvhich vvarre in your members? ✝ 
                     verse 2 You couet: and haue not, you kil, & enuie: and can not obtaine, you contend and vvarre: and you haue not, becauſe you aſke not. ✝ 
                     verse 3 You aſke, and receiue not: becauſe you aſke amiſſe: that you may conſume it on your cōcupiſcences. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Aduouterers,1. Io. 2, 15. know you not that the * frendſhip of this vvorld, is the enemie of God? Vvhoſoeuer therfore vvil be a frende of this vvorld: is made an enemie of God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Or do you thinke that the Scripture ſaieth in vaine: To enuie doth the ſpirit couet vvhich dvvelleth in you? ✝ 
                     verse 6 AndThe boldnes of Haeretikes adding here the vvord Scripture to the text thus, And the Scripture giueth greater grace.
                   giueth greater grace.Prou. 3, 35. 1 Pet. 5, 5. For the which cauſe it ſaith, God reſiſteth the proud, & giueth grace to the humble.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Be ſubiect therfore to God, but reſiſt the Deuil, and he vvil flee from you. ✝ 
                     verse 8 
                  Free vvil & mans owne endeuour neceſſarie in comming to God. Approche to God, & he vvil approche to you. Cleanſe your handes, ye ſinners: and ″ purifie your hartes, ye double of minde. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Be miſerable, and mourne, & vveepe: let your laughter be turned into mourning: and ioy, into ſorovv.1 Pet. 5, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * Be humbled in the ſight of our lord, and he vvil exalt you. ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  He forbiddeth detractiō, euil ſpeaking, ſlaundering. Detracte not one frō an other my brethrē.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   He that detracteth from his brother, or he that iudgeth his brother, detracteth from the Law, and iudgeth the Law. But if thou iudge the Lavv, thou art not a doer of the Lavv, but a iudge. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For there is one lavv-maker, and iudge that can deſtroy and deliuer.Ro. 14, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But thou, * vvhat art thou that iudgeſt thy neighbour?
               Behold novv you that ſay, To day or to morovv vve vvil goe into that citie, and there certes vvil ſpend a yere, and vvil traficke, and make our gaine ( ✝ 
                     verse 14 vvho are ignorāt vvhat ſhal be on the morovv. For vvhat is your life? It is a vapour appearing for a litle vvhile, and aftervvard it ſhal vaniſh avvay) ✝ 
                     verse 15 for that you ſhould ſay,Al promiſes and purpoſes of our worldly affaires are to be made vnder condition of Gods good liking & pleaſure: and it becommeth a Chriſtian man to haue vſually this forme of ſpeache in that caſe, if God vvil, if God otherwiſe diſpoſe not.
                   If our Lord vvil: and, If vve ſhal liue, vve vvil doe this or that. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But novv you reioyce in your arrogancies. Al ſuch reioycing, is vvicked. ✝ 
                     verse 17 To one therfore knovving to doe good, and not doing it: to him it is ſinne.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATION CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     8. Purifie your hartes.] Man (vve ſee here) maketh him ſelf cleane and purgeth his owne hart.Mans vvorking vvith Gods grace, is no derogation therevnto. Vvhich derogateth nothing to the grace of God being the principal cauſe of the ſame. Yet Proteſtants thinke vve derogate from Chriſts Paſsion vvhen vve attribute ſuch effects to our owne vvorkes, or to other ſecundarie helpes and cauſes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  By the damnatiō to come vpon the vnmerciful riche, he exhorteth the perſecuted to patience▪ and by their ovvne revvard, and by examples. 12 Not to ſvveare at all 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      talke. talke. 
                        •
                      In affliction, to pray: in proſperitie, to ſing: in ſicknes, to call for the Prieſts, and that they pray ouer them and anoile them vvith oile: and 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      the ſicke perſons confeſſe their ſinnes. 19 Finally, hovv meritorious it is, to conuert the erring vnto the Catholike faith, or the ſinner to amendment of life.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GOE to novv ye riche men, vveepe,A feareful deſcription of the miſeries that ſhal befall in the next life to the vnmerciful couetous men. hovvling in your miſeries vvhich ſhal come to you. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Your riches are corrupt: and your garmentes are eaten of mothes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Your gold and ſiluer is ruſted: and their iuſt ſhal be for a teſtimonie to you, and ſhal eate your fleſh as fire. You haue ſtored to your ſelues vvrath in the laſt daies. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Behold ″ the hire of the vvorkemen that haue reaped your fields, vvhich is defrauded of you, crieth: and their crie hath entred into the eares of the Lord of Sabboth. ✝ 
                     verse 5 You haue made merie vpon the earth: and in riotouſnes you haue nouriſhed your hartes in the day of ſlaughter. ✝ 
                     verse 6 You haue 
condemned preſented, and ſlaine the iuſt one: and he reſiſted you not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 Be patient therfore brethren, vntil the comming of our Lord. Behold, the huſband man expecteth the pretious fruite of the earth: patiently bearing til he receiueHe meaneth either fruite or raine. the timely and the latevvard. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Be you alſo patient, and confirme your hartes: becauſe the comming of our Lordis as hand. vvil approche'. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Grudge not brethren one againſt an other: that you be not iudged. Behold, the iudge ſtandeth before the gate. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Take an example, brethren, of labour and patience, the prophetes: vvhich ſpake in the name of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Behold vve accoūt them bleſſed that haue ſuffered. The ſufferance of Iob you haue heard, and the end of our Lord you haue ſeen, becauſe our Lord is merciful and pitieful.Mt. 5, 34 ✝ 
                     verse 12 But before al things my brethren, * ″ ſvveare not, neither by heauen, nor by earth, nor other othe whatſoeuer. But let your talke be, yea, yea: no,
 no: that you fall not vnder iudgement.The Epiſtle in a votiue Maſſe for the ſicke.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Is any of you in heauineſſe? let him pray. Is he of a cheereful hart? let him ſing. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Is any man ſicke amōg you? ″ let him bring in the prieſtes of the Churche, and let them pray ouer him,Mr. 6, 13 * ″ anoiling him vvith oile in the name of our Lord. ✝ 
                     verse 15 and ″ the praier of faith ″ ſhal ſaue the ſicke: and our Lord ″ ſhal lift him vp: and if he be in ſinnes, ″ they ſhal be remitted him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 
                  The Epiſtle in Maioribus Litanijs on S. Markes day, and in the Rogation daies. ″ Confeſſe therfore your ſinnes one to an other: & pray one for an other that you may be ſaued. ⊢ for the continual praier of a iuſt man auaileth much.the heretikes tranſlate, Acknovvledge your ſinnes. &c. So litle they can abide the very vvord of confeſsion. ✝ 
                     verse 17 * Elias vvas a man like vnto vs paſſible:3 reg. 17. and vvith praier ″ he praied that it might not raine vpon the earth,Eccl. 48. and it rained not for three yeres and ſixe monethes.Lu. 4, 25 ✝ 
                     verse 18 And * he praied againe:3. reg. 18, 41. and the heauen gaue raine, and the earth yelded her fruite.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 My brethren, if any of you ſhal erre from the truth, & a man conuert him: ✝ 
                     verse 20 he muſt know that he vvhich maketh a ſinner to be conuerted from the errour of his vvay, ″ ſhal ſaue his ſoule from death, andHe that hath the zeale of conuerting ſinners, procureth thereby mercie and remiſſion to him ſelf: vvhich is a ſingular grace. couereth a multitude of ſinnes.⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     4. The hire.]
                     The ſinnes crying to heauen. To vvithhold from the poore or labourer the hire or vvages that is due or promiſed to him for his ſeruice or vvorke done, is a great iniquitie, and one of thoſe fiue ſinnes vvhich in holy Vvrite be ſaid to call for vengeance at Gods hand, as vve ſee here, They be called in the Catechiſme, Sinnes crying to heauen. The other foure be, Murder. Gen. 18 v. 20. Vſurie, Exod. 22. v. 27. The ſinne againſt nature, Gen. 18. v. 20. The oppreſſion and vexation of vvidovves, pupilles, ſtrangers, and ſuch like, Ib. & Exod. 3. v. 9.
                  
                     12. Svveare not.]
                     Vvhat othes are lawful, vvhat are not. He forbiddeth not al othes, as the Anabaptiſts falſely ſay▪ for in iuſtice and iudgement vve may be by our lavvful Magiſtrate put to ſvveare, and may lavvfully take an othe, as alſo for the aduantaging of any neceſſarie truth vvhen time and place require, but the cuſtom of ſvvearing, and al vaine, light, and vnneceſſarie othes in our daily ſpeache do diſpleaſe God highly, and are here forbidden by the Apoſtle, as alſo by our Sauiour. Mat. 5.
                  
                  
                     14. Let him bring in the Prieſts.]
                     Heretical trā
                        ſlation againſt Prieſthod. The Proteſtants for their ſpecial hatred of the holy order of Prieſthod, as els vvhere often, ſo here they corrupt the text euidently, tranſlating Presbyteros, elders. As though the Apoſtle had meant men of age, and not ſuch as vvere by holy office, Prieſts. S. Chryſoſtom vvho knevv the ſenſe and ſignification of the Greeke vvord according to the Eccleſiaſtical vſe and the vvhole Churches iudgement, better then any Proteſtant aliue, taketh it plainely for Sacerdotes,
                     Neither their Elders (ſo called) nor their Miniſters, can be thoſe vvhō the Apoſtle here calleth, Preſbyteros.
                      that is, Prieſts li. 3 de Sacerdotio prope initium. And if they confeſſe that it is a vvord of office vvith them alſo, though they call them Elders, and not Prieſts: then vve demaund vvhether the Apoſtle meane here men of that function vvhich they in their nevv Churches call Elders. If they ſay no, as they muſt needes (for Elders vvith their are not deputed ſpecially to publike praying or adminiſtration of the Sacraments, ſuch as the Apoſtle here requireth to be ſent for) then they muſt needes graunt, that their Elders anſvver not to the function of thoſe vvhich in the nevv Teſtament are called Presbyteri in Greeke and Latin, and therfore both their tranſlation to be falſe and fraudulent, and alſo their naming of their nevv degrees or orders to be fond and incongruous.
                  If they ſay their Miniſters be correſpondent to ſuch as vvere called Presbyteri in holy vvrite and in the Primitiue Church, and that they are the men vvhom the Apoſtle vvi
                        ••
                     eth to be called for to
 anoile the ſicke & to pray for him▪ vvhy do they not then tranſlate Presbyter
                           •
                        s▪
                      Miniſters? 
                        •
                     hich they might doe vvith as good reaſon,They haue no reaſon to call their Miniſters by that name. as call ſuch as they haue taken in ſteede of our Catholike Prieſts, Miniſters. Vvhich vvord being in large acception common to all that haue to doe about the celebration of diuine things, vvas neuer appropriated by the vſe either of Scripture or of the holy Church, to that higher function of publike adminiſtration of the Sacraments and Seruice, vvhich is Prieſthod:Their Deacōs ſhould rather be called Miniſters. but to the order next vnder it, vvhich is Deaconſhip. And therfore if any ſhould be called Miniſters, their Deacons properly ſhould be ſo termed. And the Proteſtants haue no more reaſon to keepe the ancient Greeke vvord of Deacon▪ appropriated to that office by the vſe of antiquity, then to keepe the vvord Prieſt, being made no leſſe peculiar to the ſtate of ſuch onely as miniſter the holy Sacraments, & offer the Sacrifice of the Altar. But theſe fellovves folovv neither Gods vvord nor Eccleſiaſtical vſe, nor any reaſon, but me
                        •
                     e phantaſie, noueltie, and hatred of Gods Church▪
                     They ſhould keepe the name Prieſt, as vvel as deacon. And hovv litle they folovv any good rule or reaſon in theſe things may appeare by this, that here they auoid to tranſlate Prieſts, and yet in their Cōmunion booke, in their order of viſiting the ſicke, they commonly name the Miniſter, Prieſt.
                  
                  
                     14. Anoiling vvith oils.] Here is the Sacrament of extreme Vnction ſo plainely promulgated (for it vvas inſtituted, as al other Sacraments of the nevv Teſtament, by our Sauiour Chriſt him ſelf, and, as Venerable Bede thinketh and other auncient vvriters, the anoiling of the ſicke vvith oile Marc. 6. pertaineth therevnto) that ſome Heretikes, for the euidence of this place alſo (as of the other for good vvorkes) deny the Epiſtle.The Sacramēt of EXTREME VNCTION. Other (as the Caluiniſts) through their confidence of cunning ſhiftes and gloſes, confeſſing that S. Iames is the author, yet condemne the Church of God for vſing and taking it for a Sacrament. But vvhat diſhonour to God is it (vve pray them) that a Sacrament ſhould be inſtituted in the matter of oile, more then in the element of vvater? Vvhy may not grace & remiſſion of ſinnes be annexed to the one as vvel as to the other, vvithout derogation to God?
                  But they ſay,The heretikes ob
                           •
                        ections againſt the ſaid Sacrament, anſvvered: and vvithal it is proued to be a Sacrament. Sacraments endure for euer in the Church, this but for a ſeaſon in the Primitiue Church. Vvhat Scripture telleth them that this general and abſolute preſcription of the Apoſtle in this caſe, ſhould endure but for a ſeaſon? vvhen vvas it taken avvay, abrogated, or altered? They ſee the Church of God hath alvvaies vſed it vpon this vvarrant of the Apoſtle, vvho knevve Chriſts meaning and inſtitution of it better then theſe deceiued men, vvho make more of their ovvne fond gheſſes and cōiectures, grounded neither on Scripture nor vpon any circumſtance of the text, no
                        •
                      any one authentical author that euer vvrote, then of the expreſſe vvord of God. It vvas (ſay they) a miraculous practiſe of healing the ſicke, during onely in the Apoſtles time, and not long after. Vve aſke them vvhether Chriſt appointed any certaine creature or external element vnto the Apoſtles generally to vvorke miracles by. Him ſelf vſed ſometimes clay and ſpittle, ſometimes he ſent them that vvere diſeaſed, to vvaſh them ſelues in vvaters. but that he appointed any of thoſe or the like things for a general medicine or miraculous healing onely, that vve reade not for in the beginning, for the better inducing of the people to faith and deuotion▪ Chriſt vvould haue miracles to be vvrought by ſundry of the Sacraments alſo. Vvhich miraculous vvorkes ceaſing, yet the Sacraments remaine ſtill vnto the vvorldes end.
                  Againe vve demaund, vvhether euer they read or heard that men vvere generally commaunded to ſeeke for their health by miraculous mea
                        •
                     es. Thirdly, vvhether al Prieſts, or (as they call them) Elders, had the gift of miracles in the primitiue Church? No, it can not be, for though ſome had, yet al theſe indifferently of vvhom the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, had not the gift: and many that vvere no Prieſts, had it, both men and vvomen, vvhich yet could not be called for, as Prieſts vvere in this caſe. And though the Apoſtle and others could both cure men and reuiue them againe, yet there vvas no ſuch general precept for ſicke or dead men, as this, to call for the Apoſtles to heale or reſtore them to life againe. Laſtly, had any external element or miraculous practiſe, vnles it vvere a Sacrament,Remiſsion of ſinnes annexed to creatures. the promiſſe of remiſſion of al kinde of actual ſinnes ioyned vnto it? or could S. Iames inſtitute ſuch a ceremonie him ſelf, that could ſaue both body and ſoule, by giuing health to the one, and grace and remiſſion to the other? At other times theſe contentious vvranglers raile at Gods Church, for annexing only the remiſſion of venial ſinnes to the element of vvater, made holy by the Prieſts bleſſing thereof in the name of Chriſt,Holy vvater. and his vvord: and loe here they are driuen to hold that S. Iames preſcribed a miraculous oile or creature vvhich had much more povver and efficacie. Into theſe ſtraites are ſuch miſcreants brought that vvil not beleeue the expreſſe vvord of God, interpreted by the practiſe of Gods vniuerſal Church.
                  Venerable Bede in 9 Luc. ſaith thus. It is cleere that this cuſtome was deliuered to the holy Church by the Apoſtles them ſelues,
                     Holy oile bleſſed by the Biſhop. 
                     that the ſicke ſhould be anointed vvith oile conſecrated by the Biſhops bleſsing. See for this, and for the aſſertion & vſe of this Sacrament, S. Innocentius ep. 1 ad Decentium Eugubinum cap. 8. to. 1. Conc & Lib. 2. de viſitatione infirmorum in S. Auguſtine cap. 4. Concil. Cabilonenſe 2. cap. 48. Conc. Wormati
                           •
                        nſe cap. 72. to. 3. Conc. Aquiſgra. c. 8. Flcrentinum, and other later Councel
                        •
                     .The peoples deuotion tovvard ſuch hallowed creatures. S. Bernard in the life of Malachie in fine. This holy oile becauſe the faithful ſavv to haue ſuch vertue in the primitiue Church, diuers caried it home and occupied it in their infirmities, not vſing it in the Sacramental ſort vvhich the Apoſtle preſcribeth, as the Aduerſaries vnlearnedly obiect
 vnto vs: but as Chriſtians novv do (and then alſo did) concerning the vvater of Baptiſme, vvhich they vſed to take home vvith them after it vvas hallovved,The ſacramē
                        tal vvordes. and to giue it their diſeaſed to drinke
                  
                     15. The praier of faith.] He meaneth the forme of the Sacrament, that is, the vvordes ſpoken at the ſame time vvhen the partie is anoiled, vvhich no doubt are moſt auncient and Apoſtolike. Not that the vvord or praier alone ſhould haue that great effect here mentioned, but ioyned vvith the foreſaid vnction, as is plaine.
                  
                     15. Shal ſaue.]
                     The three effects of this Sacrament. The firſt effect of this Sacrament is, to ſaue the ſoule, by giuing grace and comfort to vvithſtand the terrours and tentations of the enemie, going about (ſpecially in that extremitie of death) to driue men to deſperation or diſtreſſe of minde and other damnable inconueniences. the vvhich effect is ſignified in the matter of this Sacrament ſpecially.
                  
                     15. Shal lift him vp.] Vvhen it ſhal be good for the ſaluation of the partie, or agreable to Gods honour, this Sacramēt reſtoreth alſo a man to bodily health againe, as experience oftē teacheth vs. Vvhich yet is not done by vvay of miracle, to make the partie ſodenly vvhole, but by Gods ordinarie prouidence and vſe of ſecond cauſes, vvhich othervviſe ſhould not haue had that effect, but for the ſaid Sacrament. This is the ſecond effect.
                  
                     15. They ſhal be remitted him.] Vvhat ſinnes ſoeuer remaine vnremitted, they ſhal in this Sacrament and by the grace thereof be remitted, if the perſons vvorthely receiue it. this is the third effect. S. Chryſoſtom of this effect ſaith thus: They (ſpeaking of Prieſts) do not onely remit ſinnes in baptiſme,
                     Prieſts (and not Elders) are the miniſters of this ſacrament. 
                     but aftervvard alſo, according to the ſaying of S. Iames. If any be ſicke, let him bring in the Prieſts &c. Li. 3 de Sacerd. prope initiū. Let the Proteſtāts marke that he calleth Presbyter
                           •
                        s, ſacerdotes: that is, Prieſts, and maketh them the onely miniſters of this Sacrament, and not elders or other lay men. By al vvhich you ſee this Sacrament of al other to be maru
                        •
                     lous plainely ſet forth by the Apoſtle. Onely ſicke men and (as
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      the Greeke vvord giueth) men very vveake muſt receiue it: onely Prieſts muſt be the miniſters of it: the matter of it is holy oile: the forme is praier, in ſuch ſort as vve ſee novv vſed: the effects be as is aforeſaid. Yet this ſo plaine a matter and ſo profitable a Sacrament, the enemie by Heretikes vvould vvholy aboliſh.
                  
                     16. Confeſſe therfore.] It is not certaine that he ſpeaketh here of ſacramental Confeſſion: yet the circumſtance of the letter vvel beareth it, and very probable it is that he meaneth of it: and Origen doth ſo expound it ho. 2 in Leuit. & Venerable Bede vvriteth thus, In this ſentence (ſaith he) there muſt be this diſcretion,
                     In hunc locum. 
                     that our daily and litle ſinnes vve confeſſe one to an other,
                     Confeſsion 
                     vnto our equals, and beleeue to be ſaued by their daily praier. but the vncleannes of the greater leproſie let vs according to the lavv open to the Prieſt, and at his pleaſure in vvhat maner and hovv long time he ſhal commaund, let vs be careful to be purified. But the Proteſtants fleing from the very vvord confeſſion in deſpite of the Sacrament, tranſlate thus, Acknovvledge your faultes one to an other. They do not vvel like to haue in one ſentence, Prieſts, praying ouer the ſicke, anoiling them, forgiuing them their ſinnes, confeſſion, and the like.
                  
                     17. He praied.]
                     Truthes vnvvritten and knovven by tradition. The Scriptures to vvhich the Apoſtle alludeth, make no mētion of Elias praier. therfore he knevv it by tradition or reuelation. Vvhereby vve ſee that many things vnvvritten be of equal truth vvith the things vvritten.
                  
                     20. Maketh to be conuerted.]
                     Conuerting of ſoules Here vve ſee the great revvard of ſuch as ſeeke to conuert Heretikes or other ſinners from errour and vvickednes: and hovv neceſſarie an office it is, ſpecially for a Prieſt.
                  
                     20. Shal ſaue.]
                     Our ſaluation attributed to men, vvithout derogation to Chriſt. Vve ſee, it derogateth not from God, to attribute our ſaluation to any man or Angel in heauen or earth, as to the vvorkers thereof vnder God, by their praiers, preaching, correction, counſel, or othervviſe. Yet the Heretikes are ſo foliſh and captious in this kinde, that they can not heare patiently, that our B. Lady or others ſhould be counted meanes or vvorkers of our ſaluation.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF BOTH THE EPISTLES OF S. PETER, THE FIRST, AND THE SECOND.
            
               OF S. Peter vve reade at large, both in the Goſpels, and in the Actes of the Apoſtles: and namely▪ that Chriſt deſigned him,
                  
                     •
                  . 10. v. 2. and alſo made him his vica
                  •
                (as S. Mathevv for that cauſe in the catalogue of the Apoſtles, calleth him Primus, the firſt, and all antiquitie. Princeps Apoſtolorum, the Prince of the Apoſtles) and that he accordingly executed that office after Chriſtes departure, plating the Church firſt among the Ievves in Hieruſalem and in al that countrey and coaſtes about, as Chriſt alſo him ſelf before had preached to the Ievves alone.
            But preaching at length to the Gentiles alſo, according to Chriſtes commiſsion (Mat. 28. v. 19.) and being novv come to Rome, the head citie of the Gentiles, from thence he vvriteth this Epiſtle to his Chriſtian Ievves, hauing care of them in his abſence, no leſſe then vvhen he vvas preſent: and not to the Ievves, that vvere at home, (belike becauſe they had S. Iames, or his ſucceſſor S. Simon Cleoph
                  •
               , reſident vvith them) but * to them that vvere diſperſed in Pontus,1 Pet. 1. Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia.
            And that he vvriteth it from Rome,1 Pet. 5. him ſelf ſignifieth, ſaying: The Church that is in Babylon ſaluteth you.
               See the Annotation 1 Pet. 5. v. 13. Vvhere by Babylon he meaneth Rome, as al antiquitie doth interpret him: not, that he ſo calleth the Church of Rome, but the heathen ſtate of the Romane empire, vvhich then, and 300 yeres after, vnto the conuerſion of Conſtantinus the Emperour, did perſecute the elect Church of Rome, in ſo much that the firſt 33 Biſhops thereof vnto S. Silueſter, vvere al Martyrs.
            For the matter vvhereof he vvriteth, him ſelf doth ſignifie it in theſe vvordes: This loe the ſecond Epiſtle I vvrite to you,
               2 Pet. 3. 
               my deereſt, in vvhich (Epiſtles) I ſtirre vp by admonition, your ſincere minde, that you may be mindeful of thoſe vvordes &c. So he ſaith there of both together. And againe of the firſt to the ſame purpoſe,1 Pet. 5. in an other place: I haue breefely vvritten, beſeeching and teſtifying that this is the true grace of God, vvherein you ſtand. For, there vvere at that time certaine Seducers (asSee the Annotatiō vpon S. Iames epiſtle c. 2. v. 21. S. Auguſt. alſo hath told vs) vvho vvent about to teach Onely faith, as though good vvorkes vvere not neceſſarie, nor meritorious. there vvere alſo great perſecutions, to compel them vvith terrour to denie Chriſt & al his religiō. He therfore exhorteth thē accordingly, neither for perſecution▪ neither by ſeduction to forſake it: though in the firſt, his exhortation is more principally againſt perſecution: and in the ſecond, more principally againſt ſeduction. The firſt epiſtle is noted to be very like to S. Paules epiſtle to the Epheſians, in vvordes alſo, and ſo thicke of Scriptures, as though he ſpake nothing els.
            The time vvhen the firſt vvas vvritten, is vncertaine: the ſecond vvas vvrittē a litle before his death, as is gathered by his vvordes in the ſame. c. 1. v. 14.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER THE APOSTLE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He comforteth them in their perſecutions (being novv by Baptiſme made the children of God) vvith the hope of their heauenly exh
                        •
                     ritance: 6 ſhevving hovv meritorious it is for them to be ſo conſtant in faith, 10 and confirming them therein vvith the authoritie of the Prophets and of the Holy Ghoſt▪ 15 Exhorting them to liue alſo accordingly in al holines. 15 conſidering the holines of God▪ the vprightnes of his iudgement, the price of their redemption by Chriſt, 22 and the vertue of the ſeede in them (
                        •
                     hich is grace regeneratiue in Baptiſme) foretold by the Prophet alſo.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PETER an Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt,
                     The Epiſtle In Cathedra S. Petri. Roma. Ian. 10.
                   to the electe ſtrangers of the diſperſion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Aſia, and Bithynia, ✝ 
                     verse 2 according to the preſcience of God the Father, into ſanctification of the Spirit, vnto the obedience and ſprinkling of the bloud of IESVS Chriſt: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 Bleſſed be God and the father of our Lord IESVS Chriſt,2 Cor. 1, 3. Eph. 1, 3. vvho according to his great mercie hath regenerated vs vnto a liuely hope,The Epiſtle for many martyrs. by the reſurrection of IESVS Chriſt from the dead, ✝ 
                     verse 4 vnto an inheritance incorruptible, and incontaminate, and that can not fade, conſerued in the heauens in you, ✝ 
                     verse 5 (vvho in the vertue of God are kept by faith vnto ſaluatiō) ready to be reuealed in the laſt time. ✝ 
                     verse 6 wherin you ſhal reioyce, a litle novv if you muſt be made heauy in diuerſe tentations: ✝ 
                     verse 7 that the probation of your faith much more pretious then gold (vvhich is proued by the fire) may be found vnto praiſe and glorie and honour in the reuelatiō of IESVS Chriſt: ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 8 vvhom hauing not ſeen, you loue: in vvhom novv alſo not ſeing you beleeue: and beleeuing you reioyce vvith ioy vnſpeakable and glorified, ✝ 
                     verse 9 receiuing the end of your faith, the ſaluation of your
 ſoules. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Of the vvhich ſaluation the Prophetes inquired & ſearched, vvhich prophecied of the grace to come in you, ✝ 
                     verse 11 ſearching vnto vvhich or vvhat maner of time the Spirit of Chriſt in them did ſignifie: foretelling thoſe paſſions that are in Chriſt and the glories folovving: ✝ 
                     verse 12 to vvhom it vvas reuealed, that not to thē ſelues, but to you they miniſtred thoſe things vvhich novv are told you by them that haue euangelized to you, the holy Ghoſt being ſent from heauen, on vvhom the Angels deſire to looke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 For the vvhich cauſe hauing the loines of yourChaſtitie not onely of body but alſo of minde, is required. S. Bede vpon this place.
                   minde girded, ſober, truſt perfectly in that grace vvhich is offered you, in the reuelation of IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 14 as children of obedience, not configurated to the former deſires of your ignorance: ✝ 
                     verse 15 but according to him that hath called you, the Holy one, be you alſo in al conuerſation holy: ✝ 
                     verse 16 becauſe it is vvritten:Leu. 11, 19. 20, 7 
                  You ſhal be holy, becauſe I am holy. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And if you inuocate the Father,Deu. 10. him vvhich * vvithout acception of perſons iudgeth according to euery onesGod vvil iudge men according to euery ones vvorkes, and not by faith onely. vvorke:Ro. 2. in feare conuerſe ye the time of your peregrination.Gal. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Knovving that 
* not vvith corruptible things,1 Cor. 6, 20. 7, 23 gold or ſiluer, you are redeemed from your vaine conuerſation of your fathersHe meaneth the errours of Gentility. or if he vvrite to the Iewes diſperſed, he meaneth the yoke of the Law vvith the fond and heauy additiōs of their later Maiſters, called Deuterôſes The Heretikes, to make it ſound to the ſimple againſt the traditions of the Churche, corrupt the text thus, Which you haue receiued by 
                           〈◊〉
                         of 
                           〈◊〉
                        . fathers.
                   tradition: ✝ 
                     verse 19 but vvith the pretious bloud as it vvere of an immaculate and vnſpotted lambe,Ro. 16, 25. Col. 1, 26. Tit. 1, 2. Chriſt, ✝ 
                     verse 20 * foreknovven in deede before the conſtitution of the vvorld, but manifeſted in the laſt times for you, ✝ 
                     verse 21 vvhich by him are faithful in God vvho raiſed him from the dead, and hath giuen him glorie, that your faith and hope might be in God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Making your ſoules chaſte in obedience of charitie, in the ſincere loue of the fraternitie from the hart loue ye one an other earneſtly: ✝ 
                     verse 23 borne againe not of corruptible ſeede, but incorruptible by the vvord of God vvho liueth and remaineth for euer.Eſa. 40, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 24 For al fleſh is as graſſe: and al the glorie thereof as the floure of graſſe. the graſſe is vvithered, and the floure thereof is fallen avvay. ✝ 
                     verse 25 But the vvord of our Lord remaineth for euer, and this is the vvord that is euangelized among you.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
               
                  Novv after their Baptiſme, vvhat muſt be their meate: 4 and being come to Chriſt, hovv happie they be abou
                        •
                      their incredulous brethren, according to the Scriptures alſo. 11 Wherevpon he beſeecheth them to ſhine in good life among the Heathen, ſo to procure their conuerſion: 13 to be obedient ſubiects to higher Povvers (hovvſoeuer ſome miſconſter Chriſtian libertie) 14 and ſeruants to obey their Maiſters. 19 And ſo, doing vvel, though they ſuffer for it. it is very meritorious, 21 vvhereas Chriſt alſo not onely gaue them example, 24 but alſo by his death hath made them able to liue iuſtly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LAYING avvay therfore al malice,The Epiſtle vpon Saturday in Eaſter weeke. and al guile, and ſimulations, and enuies, and al detractions, ✝ 
                     verse 2 as infants euen novv borne, reaſonable, milke vvithout guile deſire ye, that in it you may grovv vnto ſaluatiō. ✝ 
                     verse 3 if yet you haue taſted that our Lord is ſvveete. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vnto vvhom approching, a liuing ſtone, of men in deede reprobated, but of God elect and made honorable: ✝ 
                     verse 5 be ye alſo your ſelues ſuperedified as it vvere liuing ſtones,a ſpiritual houſe, ſpiritual houſes', a holy prieſthod, to offer ″ ſpiritual hoſtes, acceptable to God by IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For the vvhich cauſe the Scripture conteineth,Eſ. 28, 16. 
                  Behold I put in Sion a principal corner ſtone elect, pretious. and he that ſhal beleeue in him, ſhal not be confounded. ✝ 
                     verse 7 To you therfore that beleeue, honour: but to them that beleeue not,Pſ. 117. 
                  the ſtone vvhich the builders reiected, the ſame is made into the head of the corner:
                  Mt. 21. ✝ 
                     verse 8 and * a ſtone of offenſe,Act. 4. and a rocke of ſcandal, to them that ſtumble at the vvord,Eſ. 8. neither doe beleeuevvhereto alſo they are ordeined. wherin alſo they are put'.Ro. 9, 33. ✝ 
                     verse 9 But you are an * elect generation,Exo. 19. a
The Proteſtants can no more gather of this, that al Chriſtians be Prieſts: then, that al be kings: as is moſt plaine Apocalyp. 1, 6. and 5, 10. Thou haſt made vs a kingdom (or kings) & prieſts.
                   kingly prieſthod,Apoc. 1. a holy nation, a people of purchaſe: that you may declare his vertues vvhich from darkeneſſe hath called you into his maruelous light.Oſe. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  Vvhich ſometime not a people: but novv the people of God.
                  Ro. 9. 
                  Vvhich not hauing obtained mercie: but novv hauing obtained mercie.
                  Gal. 5, 16.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 My deereſt I beſeche you as ſtrangers & pilgrimes,The Epiſtle vpō the 3 Sunday after Eaſter. * to refraine your ſelues from carnal deſires which vvarre againſt the ſoule, ✝ 
                     verse 12 hauing your conuerſation good among the Gentiles: that in that vvherein they miſreport of you as of malefactors, by the good vvorkes conſidering you, * they may glorifie God in the day of viſitation.Mt. 5, 16▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 13 * ″ Be ſubiect therfore to euerySo is the Greeke, but the Proteſt, in fauour of temporal lawes made againſt the Cath. religion, tranſlate it very falſely thus, to al maner ordināce of man: thē ſelues boldly reiecting Eccleſiaſtical decrees as mēs ordinances. humane
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   creature for God:Ro. 13, 1. vvhether it be ″ to king, as excelling: ✝ 
                     verse 14 or to rulers as ſent by him to the reuenge of malefactors, but to the praiſe of the good: ✝ 
                     verse 15 for ſo is the vvil of God, that doing vvel you may make the ignorance of vnvviſe men to be dumme: ✝ 
                     verse 16 as free, & ″ not
 as hauing the freedom for a cloke of malice, but as the ſeruants of God. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Honour al men.In this ſpeache is often commēded the vnitie of al Chriſtians among them ſelues. Loue the fraternitie. Feare God. Honour the king.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 Seruants be ſubiect in al feare to your maiſters, not only to the good & modeſt, ″ but alſo to the vvaivvard. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For this is thanke, if for cōſcience of God a man ſuſtaine ſorovves, ſuffering vniuſtly. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For vvhat glorie is it: if ſinning, and buffeted you ſuffer? but if doing vvel you ſuſtaine patiently: this is thanke before God.The Epiſtle vpō the a Sunday after Eaſter. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For vnto this are you called: becauſe Chriſt alſo ſuffred foryou vs', leauingvs you', an example that you may folovv his ſteppes.Eſ. 53, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 22 
                  vvho did no ſinne, neither vvas guile found in his mouth ✝ 
                     verse 23 vvho vvhen he vvas reuiled,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   did not reuile: vvhen he ſuffred, he threatened not: but deliuered him ſelf to him that iudged him vniuſtly.Eſ. 53, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 24 vvho him ſelf * bare our ſinnes in his body vpon the tree:Mt. 8, 17. that dead to ſinnes, we may liue to iuſtice. by vvhoſe ſtripes you are healed. ✝ 
                     verse 25 For you vvere as ſheepe ſtraying: but you be conuerted novv to the Paſtor and Biſhop of your ſoules. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Spiritual hoſtes.]
                     Spiritual hoſtes and Prieſts. Here vve ſee, that as he ſpeaketh of ſpiritual hoſtes, vvhich euery Chriſtian man offereth, ſo he ſpeaketh not properly of prieſthod, vvhen he maketh al Prieſts, but of a ſpiritual prieſthod. Which ſpiritual prieſthod vvas alſo in al the Iewes: but the prieſthod (properly ſo called) vvas onely in the ſonnes of Aaron, and they offered the ſacrifices (properly ſo called) vvhich none beſides might offer.
                  
                     13. Be ſubiect.]
                     Obedience to temporal princes. Not onely our Maiſter Chriſt, but the Apoſtles and al Chriſtians vvere euer charged by ſuch as thought to bring them in hatred vvith Princes, vvith diſobedience to kings and temporal Magiſtrates.Ro. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . therfore both * S. Paul and this Apoſtle do ſpecially vvarne the faithful, that they giue no occaſiō by their il demeanure to ſecular Princes, that the Heathen ſhould count them diſobedient or ſeditious vvorkers againſt the States of the vvorld.
                  
                     13. To euery humans creature.] So he calleth the temporal Magiſtrate elected by the people, or holding their Souerainty by birth & carnal propagation,God inſtituted the Spiritual gouernemēs in more excellēt maner then the temporal. ordained for the vvorldly vvealth, peace, and proſperitie of the ſubiects: to put a difference betvvixt that humane Superiority, and the ſpiritual Rulers and regiment, guiding and gouerning the people to an higher end, and inſtituted by God him ſelf immediatly. for Chriſt did expreſly conſtitute the forme of regiment vſed euer ſince in the Church. He made oue the cheeſe, placing Peter in the Supremacie: he called the Apoſtles and Diſciples,Act. 1. giuing them their ſeueral authorities. Aftervvared * God guided the lot for choiſe of S. Marthias in Iudas place: and the Holy Ghoſt expreſly and namely ſeuered and choſe Paul and Barnabas vnto their Apoſtolical function:Act. 20, and generally the Apoſtle faith of al ſpiritual Rulers, The holy Ghoſt hath placed you to rule the Church of God.
                  
                  And although al povver be of God, and kings rule by him, yet that is no othervviſe, but by his ordinarie concurrence, and prouidence, vvhereby he procureth the earthly cōmodity or vvealth of men, by maintaining of due ſuperiority and ſubiection one tovvards an other, and by giuing povver to the people and Commonvvealth to chooſe to them ſelues ſome kinde or forme of Regiment, vnder vvhich they be content to liue for their preſeruation in peace and tranquillity. But Spiritual ſuperiority is far more excellent, as in more excellent 
                        •
                     ort depending, not of mans ordinance, election, or (as this Apoſtle ſpeaketh) creation, but of the Holy Ghoſt, vvho is alvvaies reſident in the Church (vvhich is Chriſts body myſtical, and therfore an other manner of Commonwealth
 then the earthly) concurring in ſingular ſort to the creation of al neceſſarie Officers in the ſaid Church,Eph. 4. euen to the vvorlds end, as S. Paul vvriteth to the Epheſians.
                  Leſt therfore the people, being then in ſo preciſe ſort alvvaies vvarned of the excellencie of their Spiritual gouernours * and of their obedience tovvard them,Hebr. 13. might neglect their dueties to Temporal Magiſtrates, ſpecially being infidels, and many times tyrants and perſecutors of the faith, as Nero and other vvere then: therfore S. Peter here vvarneth them to be ſubiect, for their bodies and goods and other temporal things, euen to the vvorldly Princes both infidels and Chriſtians, vvhom he calleth humane creatures.
                  
                     13. To the king as excelling.]
                     Heret. tranſlation. Some ſimple heretikes & other alſo not vnlearned, at the begining, for lacke of better places, vvould haue proued by this, that the king vvas head of the Church, and aboue al Spiritual rulers: and to make it 
                        •
                     ound better that vvay, they falſely tranſlated it, To the king as to the cheefe head.
                     The Kings excellencie of power is in reſpect of the nobilitie and lay magiſtrates vnder him. In the Bible of the yere 1562. But it is euident that he calleth the king, the precellent or more excellent, in reſpect of his Vicegerents vvhich he calleth Dukes or Gouernours that be at his appointment: and not in reſpect of Popes, Biſhops, or Prieſts, as they haue the rule of mens ſoules: vvho could not in that charge be vnder ſuch kings or Emperours as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of: no more then the kings or Emperours then, could be heads of the Church, being Heathen men and no members thereof, much leſſe the cheefe members. See a notable place in S. Ignatius ep. ad Smyrnenſes, vvhere he exhorteth them firſt to honour God, next the Biſhop, & then the king.
                  This is an inuincible demōſtration,Chriſtiā Princes haue no more right to be ſupreme heads in ſpiritual cauſes, then the Heathen. that this text maketh not for any ſpiritual claime of earthly kings, becauſe it giueth no more to any Prince then may and ought to be done and graunted to a Heathen Magiſtrate. Neither is there any thing in al the nevv Teſtament that proueth the Prince to be head or cheefe gouernour of the Church in ſpiritual or Eccleſiaſtical cauſes, more then it proueth any heathen Emperour of Rome to haue been. for they vvere bound in temporal things to obey the heathen being lavvful kings, to be ſubiect to them, euen for conſcience, to keepe their temporal lavves, to pay them tribute, to pray for them, and to doe al other natural duties: and more no ſcriptures binde vs to doe to Chriſtian kinges.
                  
                     16. Not as hauing.] There vvere ſome Libertines in thoſe daies, as there be novv, that vnder pretence of libertie of the Goſpel,Libertines. ſought to be free from ſubiection and lawes of men as now vnder the like vvicked pretence, Heretikes refuſe to obey their ſpiritual rulers and to obſerue their lawes.
                  
                     18. But alſo the vvaivvard.) The Vviclefiſtes and their folovvers in theſe daies, ſometimes to moue the people vnto ſedition,Deadly ſinnes of Princes or Superiors exempt not the ſubiectes frō obedience, as Wicleffe held. hold and teach that maiſters and magiſtrates loſe their authoritie ouer their ſeruants and ſubiects, if they be once in deadly ſinne, and that the people in that caſe neede not in conſcience obey them. Vvhich is a pernicious and falſe doctrine, as is plaine by this place, vvhere vve be expreſly commaunded to obey euen the il-conditioned, vvhich muſt be alvvaies vnderſtood, if they commaund nothing againſt God. for then this rule is euer to be folovved. Vve muſt obey God rather then men. Act. 5. 29.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The dutie of vviues and huſbands to ech other. 9 None to doe or ſpeake euil by their perſecutors, 15 but to anſvver them alvvaies vvith modeſtie, and ſpecially vvith innocenci
                        •
                     , after the example of Chriſt moſt innocēt: vvhoſe body though they killed, yet his ſoule liued and preached aftervvard to the ſoules in Hel (namely to thoſe in the time of Noës floud being a figure of our Baptiſme) roſe againe, and aſcended.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IN like maner alſo * let the vvomen be ſubiect to their 
                     •
                  uſbandes:Hovv vviues ſhould behaue them ſelues tovvard their huſbands. that if any beleeue not the vvord,Eph. 5, 28. Col. 3, 18. by the conuerſation of the vvomen vvithout the vvord they may be vvonne, ✝ 
                     verse 2 conſidering your chaſt conuerſation in feare.1 Tim. 2, 9. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Vvhoſe trimming let i
                     •
                   not be outvvardly the plaiting of heare,Againſt the proud, curious and coſtly attire of vvomē, vvhere in this il time of ours excedeth. or laying on gold round about, or of putting on veſtures: ✝ 
                     verse 4 but the man of the hart that is hidden, in the incorruptibilitie
 of a quiet and a modeſt ſpirit, vvhich is riche in the ſight of God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 For ſo ſometime the holy vvomen alſo that truſted in God,Gen. 18. adorned them ſelues, ſubiect to their ovvne huſbandes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 As * Sara obeied Abraham, calling him lord:

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vvhoſe daughters you are, doing vvel, and not fearing any perturbation.Hovv huſbands ſhould behaue them ſelues tovvard their vviues. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Huſbandes likevviſe, dvvelling vvith them according to knovvledge, as vnto the vveaker feminine veſſel imparting honour, as it vvere to the coheires alſo of the grace of life: that your praiers be not hindered.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 Andin faith in fine' al of one minde, hauing compaſſion, louers of the fraternitie,Pro. 17, 13. Mat. 5, 44. merciful, modeſt, humble. ✝ 
                     verse 9 * not rendering euil for euil, nor curſe for curſe: but contrariewiſe, bleſſing: for vnto this are you called, that you may by inheritāce poſſeſſe a benediction.Pſ. 33, 13▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  For he that vvil loue life, and ſee good daies: let him refraine his tong from euil, and his lippes that they ſpeake not guile. ✝ 
                        verse 11 Let him decline from euil, and doe good: let him enquire peace, and folovv it: ✝ 
                        verse 12 becauſe the eies of our Lord are vpon the iuſt, and his eares vnto their praiers: but the countenance of our Lord vpon them that doe euil things.
                  Mat. 5, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And vvho is he that can hurt you, if you be emulators of good? ✝ 
                     verse 14 But * & if you ſuffer ought for iuſtice, bleſſed are ye. And the feare of them feare ye not, & be not troubled. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But ſanctifie our Lord Chriſt in your hartes, ready alwaies to ſatiffie euery one that aſketh you a reaſon of that hope vvhich is in you: ✝ 
                     verse 16 but vvith modeſtie and feare, hauing a good conſcience: that in that vvhich they ſpeake il of you, they may be confounded vvhich calumniate your good conuerſation in Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For it is better to ſuffer as doing vvel (if the vvil of God vvil haue it ſo) then doing il.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 Becauſe Chriſt alſo died once for our ſinnes,The Epiſtle vpon friday in Eaſter vveeke. the iuſt for the vniuſt: that he might offer vs to God, mortified certes in fleſh, but quickened in ſpirit. ✝ 
                     verse 19 In the vvhich ſpirit comming he preached ″ tothoſe ſpirites them' alſo that vvere in priſon: ✝ 
                     verse 20 vvhich had been ″ incredulous ſometime, * vvhen they expected the patience of God in the daies of Noë,Gen. 6. vvhen the arke vvas a building:Mat. 24▪
                   in the vvhich, fevv, that is, * eight ſoules vvere ſaued by vvater.Gen. 7, 7▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 21 Vvherevnto Baptiſme being ″ of the like forme novv ſauethvs you' alſo: not the laying avvay of the filth of the fleſh, but ″ the examination of a good conſcience tovvard God by the reſurrection of IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 22 vvho is on the right hand of God, ⊢ ſvvallovving death, that vve might be made heires of life euerlaſting: being gone into heauen, Angels and Potentates and Povvers ſubiected to him.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     19. To them that vvere in priſon.] S. Auguſtine in his 99 Epiſtle in principio,
                     Chriſt in ſoule deſcēded vnto hel, vvhiles his body lay in the graue. con
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     eth this place to be exceding hard to vnderſtand, & to haue many difficulties vvhich he could neuer explicate to his ovvne ſatisfaction. Yet vnto Heretikes this and al other textes be eaſie, not doubting but that is that ſenſe vvhich them ſelues imagin, vvhatſoeuer other men deeme thereof. S. Auguſtine onely ſindeth him ſelf ſure of this, that Chriſts deſcending into Hel in ſoule after his death, is plainely proued hereby. Vvhich thing he declareth there, to be conformable to diuers other expreſſe vvordes of holy Vvrite, and namely to this ſame Apoſtles ſermon Act. 2. And at length he concludeth thus,The Caluiniſts denying the ſame, are (by S. Auguſtines iudgement) infidels. 
                     Quis ergo niſi infidelis negauerit 
                           •
                        uiſſe apud infer
                           •
                        s: Chriſtum? that is, Therfore vvho but an infidel, vvil deny that Chriſt vvas in Hel? Caluin thē (you ſee) vvith al his ſolovvers are infidels, vvho in ſteede of this deſcending of Chriſt in ſoule after his death, haue inuented an other deſperate kinde of Chriſts being in Hel, vvhē he vvas yet aliue on the Croſſe. S. Athanaſius alſo in his epiſtle cited by S. Epiphanius 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 77 in principio, and in his booke de Incarnatione Verbi propius initie, S. Cyril de re
                           •
                        t fide ad Theodoſium, Oecumenius, and diuers others vpon this place, proue Chriſts deſcending to Hel. As they likevviſe declare vpon the vvordes folovving. that he preached to the ſpirites or ſoules of mē det
                        •
                     ined in Hel or in Priſon.
                  But vvhether this vvord Priſon or Hel be meant of the inferiour place of the damned,Certaine difficulties whereof S. Auguſtine doubteth. or of Limb
                           ••
                         patrum called Abrahams boſome, or ſome other place of temporal chaſtiſement: and, to vvhom he preached there, and vvho by his preaching or preſence there vvere deliuered, and vvho they vvere that are called, Incredulous in the daies of Noe: al theſe things S. Auguſtine calleth great profundities, confeſſing him ſelf to be vnable to reache vnto it: onely holding laſt and aſſured this article of our faith, that he deliuered none deputed to damnation in the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and yet not doubting but that he releaſed diuers out of places of paines there.Purgatorie. vvhich can not be out of any other place then Purgatorie. See the ſaid Epiſtle, vvhere alſo he inſinuateth other expoſitions for explication of the manifold difficulties of this hard text, vvhich vvere to long to reherſe, our ſpecial purpoſe being onely to note briefely the things that touche the controuerſies of this time.
                  
                     20. Incredulous ſometime.] They that take the former vvordes,Vvhat vvere the incredulous perſons of vvhom the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh. of Chriſts deſcending to Hel, and deliuering certaine there deteined, do expound this, not of ſuch as died in their infidelitie or vvithout al faith in God, for ſuch vvere not deliuered: but either of ſome that once vvere incredulous, and aftervvard repented before their death: or rather and ſpecially of ſuch as othervviſe vvere faithful, but yet truſted not Noës preaching by his vvorke and vvord. that God vvould deſtroy the vvorld by vvater. Vvho yet being othervviſe good men, vvhen the matter came to paſſe, vvere ſorie for their errour, and died by the floud corporally, but yet in ſtate of ſaluation. and being chaſtiſed for their fault in the next life, vvere deliuered by Chriſts deſcending thither. and not they onely, but al others in the like conditiō. For the Apoſtle giueth theſe of Noes time but for an example.
                  
                     21. Of the like forme.] The vvater bearing vp the Arke from ſinking, and the perſons in it from drowning,Noës Arke & the vvater, a figure of chriſts Croſſe & Baptiſme. vvas a figure of Baptiſme, that likewiſe ſaueth the vvorthie receiuers from euerlaſting periſhing. As Nee (ſaith S. Auguſtine) vvith his, vvas deliuered by the vvater and the vvood, ſo the familie of Chriſt by Baptiſme ſigned vvith Chriſts Paſsion on the Croſſe. Li. 12. Cont. Fauſtum c. 14.
                     Ibid. c. 17. Againe he ſaith, that as the vvater ſaued none out of the Arke, but vvas rather their deſtruction: ſo the Sacrament of Baptiſme receiued out of the Catholike Church at Heretikes or Schiſmatikes hands, though it be the ſame vvater and Sacrament that the Catholike Church hath,Baptiſme receiued of Heretikes or Schiſmatikes, vvhen damnable, vvhen not. yet profiteth none to ſaluation, but rather vvorketh their perdition. Vvhich yet is not meant in caſe of extreme neceſsitie, vvhen the partie ſhould die vvithout the ſaid Sacrament, except he tooke it at an Heretikes or Schiſmatikes hand. Neither is it meant in the caſe of infants, to vvhom the Sacrament is cauſe of ſaluation, they being in no fault for receiuing it at the hands of the vnfaithful, though their parents and frendes that offer them vnto ſuch to be baptized, be in no ſmall fault. S. Hierom to Damaſus Pope of Rome, compareth that See to the Arke, & them that communicate vvith it,Ep. 57. to them that vvere ſaued in the Arke: al other Schiſmatikes and Heretikes, to the reſt that vvere drowned.
                  
                     21. The examination of a good conſcience.)
                     The ceremonies of Baptiſme, namely Abr
                              •••
                           ntio. &c.
                      The Apoſtle ſeemeth to allude here to the very forme of Catholike Baptiſme, conceining certaine interrogatories and ſolemne promiſes made of the articles of the Chriſtian faith, and of good life, and of renouncing Satan and al his pompes and vvorkes. vvhich (no doubt) hovvſoeuer the Caluiniſts eſteeme of them, are the very Apoſtolike ceremonies vſed in the miniſtration of this Sacrament. See S. Denys in fine Ec. hierarchia. S. Cyril li. 12 in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . c. 64. S. Auguſtine ep. 23. S. Baſil de Sp. ſancto c. 12 and 15. S. Ambroſe de ijs qui myſterijs initiantur 6. 2. 3. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  That they arme them ſelues to ſinne no more after Baptiſme, againſt the tentations of the Heathen, conſidering that the general and novv approcheth. 8 ſpecially tovvard their euen-Chriſtians to ſhevv their charitie, hoſpitalitie▪ and grace, doing al to the glorie of God. 1
                        •
                      And as for being perſecuted becauſe they are Chriſtians, to reioyce, conſidering the revvard that they ſhal haue vvith Chriſt, and damnation that they avoid thereby.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  CHRIST therfore hauing ſuffered in the fleſh, be you alſo armed vvith the ſame cogitation. becauſe he that hath ſuffered in the fleſh, hath ceaſed from ſinnes: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that novv not after the deſires of men, but according to the vvil of God he liue the reſt of his time in the fleſh. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For the time paſt ſufficeth (to accompliſh the vvil of the Gentiles) them that haue vvalked in riotouſnes, deſires, exceſſe of wine, banketings, porations, and vnlavvful ſeruices of Idols. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vvherein they maruel blaſpheming, you not concurring into the ſame confuſion of riotouſnes. ✝ 
                     verse 5 vvho ſhal render account to him, vvhich is ready to iudge the liuing and the dead. ✝ 
                     verse 6 For, for this cauſe alſo vvasIt hath the ſame difficulty and ſenſe that the other like wordes haue before, Chap. 3. See the annotation there v. 19. and S. Aug. ep. 69. & Oecumenius vpon this place.
                   it euangelized to the dead: that they may be iudged in deede according to men, in the fleſh: but may liue according to God in the Spirit. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the end of al
                     
                        •
                     is at hand. 
                  
                     •
                  ſhal approche'.
               ✝ Be vviſe therfore: and vvatch in praiers.The Epiſtle vpon Sunday next after the Aſcenſion. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But before al things,Prou. 10 hauing mutual charitie cōtinual among your ſelues: becauſe * 
                     •
                   charitie couereth the multitude of ſinnes.Ro. 12, ✝ 
                     verse 9 * Vſing hoſpitalitie one tovvard an other vvithout murmuring.Heb. 13. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * Euery one as he hath receiued grace,Ro. 12, 6. miniſtring the ſame one tovvard an other: as good diſpenſers of the manifold grace of God. ✝ 
                     verse 11 If any man ſpeake, as the vvordes of God. if any man miniſter: as of the povver, vvhich God adminiſtreth. that in al things God may be honoured by IESVS Chriſt: ⊢ to vvhom is glorie and empire for euer and euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 My deereſt, thinke it not ſtrange in the feruour vvhich is to you for a tētation, as though ſome nevv thing happened to you:The Epiſtle for a Martyr. ✝ 
                     verse 13 but communicating vvith the paſſions of Chriſt, be glad, that in the reuelation alſo of his glorie you may be glad reioycing.Mt. 5, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 14 * If you be reuiled in the name of Chriſt, you ſhal be bleſſed: becauſe that vvhich is of the honour,
 glorie, and vertue of God, and the Spirit vvhich is his, ſhal reſt vpon you. ✝ 
                     verse 15 But let none of you ſuffer as a murderer, or a theefe, or a railer, or a coueter of other mens things. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But if as a Chriſtian, let him not be aſhamed, but let him glorifie God in this name.Hier. 25, 29. ✝ 
                     verse 17 for * the time is 
                     •
                   that iudgement begin of the houſe of God. And if firſt of vs: vvhat ſhal be the end of them that beleeue not the Goſpel of God? ✝ 
                     verse 18 And * 
                     •
                   if the iuſt man ſhal ſcarſe be ſaued:Prou. 11, 31. where ſhal the impious and ſinner appeare? ✝ 
                     verse 19 Therfore they alſo that ſuffer according to the vvil of God, let them commend their ſoules to the faithful creator, in good deedes.⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     9. Charitie couereth.] Faith onely cannot iuſtifie,Not only faith. ſeeing that charitie alſo doth cauſe remiſsion of ſinnes. And ſaying charitie, he meaneth loue and charitable vvorkes tovvard our neighbours,Vvorkes of mercie. vnto vvhich vvorkes of mercie the Scriptures do ſpecially attribute the force to extinguiſh al ſinnes. See S. Auguſtine c. 69 E
                           •
                        chiridij and tract. 1. in ep. 1. Io. 
                           •
                        . 1. and venerable Bede vpon this place. And in the like ſenſe the holy Scriptures commonly commend vnto vs almes and deedes of mercie for redemption of our ſinnes. Prouerb. c. 10. Eccleſiaſtici 12. v. 2. Danielis 
                           •
                        . 4. v. 24.
                  
                  
                     17. That iudgement begin.] In this time of the new Teſtament,The better mē moſt afflicted in this life. the faithful and al thoſe that meane to liue godly (ſpecially of the Clergie) muſt firſt and principally be ſubiect to Gods chaſtiſement and temporal afflictions, vvhich are here called iudgement. Vvhich the Apoſtle recordeth for the comfort and confirmation of the Catholike Chriſtians, vvho vvere at the time of the vvriting hereof, excedingly perſecuted by the heathen Princes & people.
                  
                     18. If the iuſt.] Not that a man dying iuſt and in the fauour of God,The iuſt man him ſelf is hardly ſaued. can afterward be in doubt of his ſaluation, or may be reiected of God: but that the iuſt being both in this life ſubiect to aſſaults, tentations, troubles, and▪ dangers of falling from God and loſing their ſtate of iuſtice, & alſo oftentimes to make a ſtraite count, & to be temporally chaſtiſed in the next life,Againſt the vaine ſecuritie of only faith. cannot be ſaued vvithout great vvatch, feare, and trembling, and much labouring and chaſtiſement. And this is far contrarie to the Proteſtants doctrine, that putteth no iuſtice but in faith alone, maketh none iuſt in deede and in truth, teacheth men to be ſo ſecure and aſſured of their ſaluation, that he that hath liued vvickedly al his life, if he onely haue their faith at his death, that is, if he beleeue ſtedfaſtly that he is one of the elect, he ſhal be as ſure of his ſaluation immediatly after his departure, as the beſt liuer in the vvorld.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  He exhorteth Prieſts to feede their flockes, onely for Gods ſake and revvard of heauen, vvithout al lordlines. 5 the laie to obey: al to be humble one to
                        •
                     ards an other. 8 to be conſtant in the Catho. faith, conſidering it is not man, but that lion the Diuel that perſecuteth them, 9 as he doth the vvhole Church alſo, & that God vvil after a vvhile make them ſecure in heauen.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE ſeniors therfore that are among you,The Epiſtle for S. Apollinaris Iul. 23. I beſeche, my ſelf a fellovv ſenior vvith them and a vvitneſſe of the paſſions of Chriſt, vvho am alſo partaker of that glorie vvhich is to be reuealed in time to come: ✝ 
                     verse 2 feede the flocke of God vvhich is among you
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   prouiding not by conſtrainte, but vvillingly according to God:Deſire of Iucre, or to exerciſe holy functions for gaine, is a filthy fault in the Clergie, and therfore much to be auoided. neither for filthie lucre ſake, but voluntarily: ✝ 
                     verse 3 neither as 
                     •
                   ouerruling 
                     •
                   the Clergie, but made examples of the flocke from the hart. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen the prince of paſtors ſhal appeare, you ſhal receiue the incorruptible crovvne of glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 In like maner ye yong men be ſubiect to the ſeniors. And do ye al inſinuate humilitie one to an other, becauſe God reſiſteth the proude:
                  The Epiſtle vpon the 3 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. 
                  and to the humble he giueth grace. ✝ 
                     verse 6 * Be ye humbled therfore vnder the mightie hand of God,Prou 3. that he may exalt you in the time of viſitation:Iac. 4. ✝ 
                     verse 7 * caſting al your carefulnes vpon him,Iac. 4. becauſe he hath care of you.Pſa. 54, Mt. 6, 25 ✝ 
                     verse 8 Be ſober and vvatch: becauſe your aduerſarie the Deuil as a roaring lion goeth about, ſeeking vvhom he may deuoure. ✝ 
                     verse 9 vvhom reſiſt ye, ſtrong in faith: knovving that the ſelf ſame affliction is made to that your fraternitie vvhich is in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 10 But the God of al grace, vvhich hath called vs vnto his eternal glorie in Chriſt IESVS, he vvil perfite you hauing ſuffered a litle, and confirme, and ſtabliſh you. ✝ 
                     verse 11 To him be glorie and empire for euer and euer. Amen. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 By Syluanus a faithful brother to you, as I thinke, I haue breefely vvritten: beſeching and teſtifying that this is the true grace of God, vvherein you ſtand. ✝ 
                     verse 13 The Church ſaluteth you, 
                     •
                   that is in Babylon, coëlect: and Marke my ſonne.Ro. 16, 16. 1 Cor. 16, 20. 2 Cor. 1
                        •
                     , 12. ✝ 
                     verse 14 * Salute one an other in a holy kiſſe. Grace be to al you vvhich are in Chriſt IESVS. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     1. Seniors.]
                     
                        Senior in the vulgar tranſlation is often Prieſt or Biſhop. See Act. 
                              •
                           5.
                      Though the Latin, Senior, be not appropriated to holy order by vſe of ſpeache, neither in the Latin nor in our language: yet it is plaine that the Greeke vvord Preſbyter, vvhich the Apoſtle here vſeth, is here alſo (as commonly in other places of the new Teſtament) a vvord of Eccleſiaſtical office, and not of age, and is as much to ſay as Prieſt or Biſhop. For the Apoſtle him ſelf being of that order, ſpeaketh (as by his vvordes it is plaine) to ſuch as had charge of ſoules, ſaying, Feed
                           •
                         the flocke of God vvhich is among you.
                      Becauſe vve folow the vulgar latin tranſlation, vve ſay Seniors and Senior: vvhereas othervviſe vve might and ſhould ſay according to the Greeke, The Prieſts therfore I beſeech, my ſelf a follovv-prieſt vvith them. So doth S. Hierom read (Preſbyteros compreſbyter) and expound ep. 85. So tranſlateth Eraſmus, and Beza him ſelf.
                  
                     3. Ouerruling.] Not ſuperiority,Not Superioritie but tyrannie and lordlines is forbidden in the Clergie. preeminence, ſouerainty, or rule on the one ſide, not obedience, ſubiection, and inferiority on the other ſide, be forebidden in the Clergie: but tyrannie, pride, and ambitious domination be forbidden, and humility, meekenes, moderation are commended in Eccleſiaſtical Officers. the Greeke vvord here of ruling or ouerruling, being the ſame that our Sauiour vſeth in the Goſpel of the tyrannical rule of ſecular Heathen Princes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ſaying to his Apoſtles, that it ſhal not be ſo among them: according as here the prince of the Apoſtles teacheth his brethren the Eccleſiaſtical rulers.Mat. 20. v. 25.
                  
                  
                     3. The Clergie.] Some of the Engliſh nevv tranſlations turne it corruptly,Heret. tranſlation. 
                     Pariſhes: others heritages: both, to auoid the moſt knovven, true, and common vvord in al Chriſtian languages, to vvit, Clergie, a vvord, by vſe of al antiquity, & agreably to the holy Scriptures, made proper to the Spiritualty or Clergie, though in an other more vulgar acception it may agree to al Chriſts choſen heritage, as vvel of lay people as Prieſts. vvhich the Proteſtants had rather folovv,The name of Clergie and Clerke. becauſe they vvill haue no difference betvvene the laity & the Clergie. But the holy fathers far othervviſe euen from the beginning. Vvhereof ſee S. Cyprian ep. 4. 5. 6. &c. And S. Hierom ep. 2 to Nepotianus 
                        
                           •
                        . 5. vvhere he interpreteth this vvord. Therfore (ſaith he) Clericus, that is, a Clergie man, vvhich ſerueth the Church of Chriſt, let him firſt interprete his name, and the ſignification of the name being declared, let him endeuour to be that vvhich he is called. If 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     (Cle
                        •
                     us) in Greeke, be called in Latin, Sors, therfore are they called Clerici, that is, Clergie men, becauſe they are of the lot of our Lord, or becauſe our Lord him ſelf is the lot or portion of Clergie men &c.
                  
                  Vvhich calling no doubt vvas taken out of the holy Scriptures, Numer. 18. and Deutero, 18. vvhere God is called the inheritance.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . lot, and portion of the Prieſts and Leuites: and novv vvhen men be made of the Clergie, they ſay, Dominus pars haereditatis meae that is, Our Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. but ſpecially out of the nevv Teſtament, Act. 1, 17. 25. and 8, 21. Vvhere the lot or office of the Eccleſiaſtical miniſterie is called by this vvord 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Cle
                        •
                     us.Prieſts crownes. See in Venerable Bede the cauſes vvhy this holy ſtate being ſeuered by name from the Laity, doth vvear
                        •
                      alſo a crovvne on their head for diſtinction. Lib. 5. hiſt. Angl. c. 22.
                  
                  
                     4. Crovvne of glorie.] A
                        •
                      life euerlaſting ſhal be the revvard of al the iuſt,The heauenly crowne of Doctors and preachers. ſo the preachers & Paſtors that doe vvel, for their doing ſhal haue that revvard in a more excellēt degree, expreſſed here by theſe vvordes, Crovvne of glorie. according to the ſaying of Daniel c. 12. They that ſleepe in the duſt of the earth, ſhal avvake, one ſort to life euerlaſting, others to euerlaſting rebuke. but ſuch as he learned, ſhal ſhine as the brightnes of the firmament: and ſuch as inſtruct many to iuſtice, ſhal be as ſtarres, during al eternitie.
                  
                  
                     31. That is in Babylon.]
                     S. Peter vvriteth from Babylon, that is, Rome. The Proteſtants ſhevv them ſelues here (as in al places vvhere any controuerſie is, or that maketh againſt them) to be moſt vnhoneſt and partial handlers of Gods vvord. The aūcient fathers, namely S. Hierom in Catalogo de ſcriptoribus Eccleſiaſticis verbo Marcus:, Euſebius li. 2 c. 14 hiſt. Oecumenius vpon this place: and many moe agree, that Rome is meant by the vvord Babylon,Vvhy Rome vvas called Babylon. here alſo as in the 16 and 17 of the Apocalypſe: ſaying plainely, that S. Peter vvrote this Epiſtle at Rome, vvhich is called Babylon for the reſemblance it had to Babylon that great citie in Chaldaea (vvhere the Ievves vvere captiues) for magnificence, Monarchie, reſort and confuſion of al peoples and tongues, and for that it vvas before Chriſt and long after, the ſeate of al Ethnike ſuperſtition & idolatrie, & the ſlaughter houſe of the Apoſtles & other Chriſtian men, the Heathen Emperours thē keeping their cheefe reſidēce there. See S. Leo Ser. 1. in Nati. Petri & Pauli.
                  
                  This being moſt plaine,The Proteſtāts vvil haue Babylon to ſignifie Rome in other places but not here. and cōſonant to that vvhich folovveth of S. Marke vvhom al the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories agree to haue been Peters ſcholer at Rome, and that he there vvrote his Goſpel: yet our Aduerſaries fearing hereby the ſequele of Peters or the Popes ſupremacie at Rome, deny that euer he vvas there, or that this Epiſtle vvas vvritten there, or that Babylon doth here ſignifie Rome: but they ſay that Peter vvrote this Epiſtle at Babylon in (haldaea, though they neuer reade either in Scriptures or other holy or profane hiſtorie, that this Apoſtle vvas euer in that tovvne. but ſee their ſhameles partiality. here Babylon (ſay they) is not taken for Rome, becauſe it vvould folovv that Peter vvas at Rome &c. but in the Apocalypſe vvhere al euil is ſpoken of Babylon, there they vvill haue it ſignifie nothing els but Rome, and the Romane Church alſo, not (as the fathers interprete it) the temporal ſtate of the Heathen Empire there. So do they folovv in euery▪ vvord no other thing but the aduantage of their ovvne hereſie. See the Annotation vpon the laſt of the Romans v. 16. and vpon the 17 of the Apocalypſe. v. 5.
                  And as for their vvrangling vpon the ſupputation of the time of his going thither,The Proteſtants vvrāgle about the time of Peters being at Rome. and the number of yeres that he vvas there, & the diuerſitie that ſeemeth to be in the Eccleſiaſtical vvriters concerning the ſame, read B. Fiſher and other that ſubſtantially anſvver al ſuch cauils. And if ſuch contentious reaſoning might, take place, vve ſhould hardly beleeue the principal things recorded either in Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories, or in the Scriptures them ſelues. Concerning the time of
 Chriſts fleing into Aegypt, of the comming of the Sages to adore him, yea of the yeres of his age, & time of his death, al aūcient vvriters do not agree. and concerning the day of his laſt ſupper and inſtitution of the holy Sacrament, there is diuerſitie of opinions. Shal vve therfore inferre that he neuer died,Many things moſt true (euen in the Scriptures) are not agreed vpon concerning the time. and that the other things neuer vvere? Can the Heretikes accord al the hiſtories that ſeeme euen in holy Scripture to haue contradiction? Can they tel vs certainely, vvhen Dauid firſt came to Saul, and the like? doubt they vvhether the vvorld vvas euer created, becauſe the count of the yeres is diuers? Do they not beleeue that Paradiſe euer vvas, becauſe no man knovveth vvhere it is? and ſuch other like things infinite to rehearſe? Vvhich vvhen they vvere done, vvere plaine and knovven things in the vvorld: and novv for vs to call them to an account, after ſo many yeres, ages, and vvorldes, is but ſophiſtication and plaine infidelitie. And this ſect of the Proteſtants ſtanding onely vpon deſtruction. and negatiues, & dealing vvith our religion euen as Iulian, Porphyrie, and Lucian did, it is an eaſie thing for them to beſtovv their time in picking of quarels.
               
            
         
         
            THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER THE APOSTLE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Hovv much God hath done for them, making them Chriſtians: 5 and that they againe muſt doe their part, not hauing onely faith, but al other vertues alſo and good vvorkes, that ſo they may haue the m
                        •
                     re aſſurance to enter into the kingdom of heauen, 13 And that he is ſo careful to admoniſh them, knovving that his death is as hand, knovving alſo moſt certainely the 
                        •••
                     ming of Chriſt by the vvitnes of the Father him ſelf, as alſo by the Prophets. Concerning vvhom he vvarneth them that they folovv not priuate ſpirites, but the holy Ghoſt (ſpeaking nevv in the Church.)
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  SIMON PETER ſeruant and Apoſtle of IESVS Chriſt, to them that haue obtained equal faith vvith vs in the iuſtice of our God and Sauiour IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Grace to you and peace be accompliſhed in the knovvledge of God and Chriſt IESVS our Lord: ✝ 
                     verse 3 as al things of his diuine povver vvhich pertaine to life and godlines, are giuen vs by the knovvledge of him vvhich hath called vs by his ovvne propre glorie and vertue, by vvhom he hath giuen vs moſt great and pretious promiſes: that by theſe you may be
 made partakers of the diuine nature, fleeing the corruption of that concupiſcence vvhich is in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And you employing al care, miniſter ye in your faith, vertue: and in vertue, knovvledge: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and in knovvledge, abſtinence: and in abſtinence, patience: and in patience, pietie: ✝ 
                     verse 7 and in pietie, loue of the fraternitie: and in the loue of the fraternitie, charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 8 For if theſe things be preſent vvith you, & abound: they ſhal make you not vacant, nor vvithout fruite in the knovvledge of our Lord IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 9 For he that hath not theſe things ready, is blinde, and groping vvith his hād, hauing forgotten the purging of his old ſinnes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 Vvherfore, brethren, labour the more that 
                     •
                   by good vvorkes you may make ſure your vocation and election. for, doing theſe things, you ſhal not ſinne at any time. ✝ 
                     verse 11 For ſo there ſhal be miniſtred to you aboundantly an entrance into the euerlaſting kingdom, of our Lord and Sauiour IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 12 For the vvhich cauſe I wil begin to admoniſh you alvvaies of theſe things: and you in deede knovving & being confirmed in the preſent truth. ✝ 
                     verse 13 But I thinke it meete as long as I am in this tabernacle, to ſtirre you vp by admonition: ✝ 
                     verse 14 being certaine that the laying avvay of my tabernacle is at hand, according as our Lord IESVS Chriſt alſo ſignified to me, ✝ 
                     verse 15 And I vvil doe my diligence, you to haue often 
                     •
                   after my deceaſe alſo, that you may keepe a memorie of theſe things.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 For,The Epiſtle in the Transifiguration of our Lord, Aug. 6.
                   not hauing folovved vnlearned fables, haue vve made the povver and
                     
                        •
                     preſcience 
                  
                     •
                  preſence' of our Lord IESVS Chriſt knovven to you: butBy this it is plaine, that either Iohn, Iames, or Peter muſt be the author of this epiſtle. for theſe three onely vvere preſent at the Trāsfiguration. Mat. 17
                           •
                        .
                   made beholders of his greateneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 17 For,Mt. 17, 5 * he receiuing from God his father honour and glorie, this maner of voice comming dovvne to him from the magnifical glorie, This is my beloued ſonne in vvhom I haue pleaſed my ſelf, heare him. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And this voice vve heard brought from heauen, vvhen vve vvere vvith him in theYou ſee that places are made holy by Chriſts preſence, & that al places be not alike holy. See Annot. Act. 7, 33.
                   holy mounte. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And we haue the prophetical vvord more ſure: vvhich you doe vvel attending vnto, as to a candel ſhining in a darke place, vntil the day davvne, and the day ſtarre ariſe in your hartes: ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 20 vnderſtanding this firſt that no prophecie of ſcripture is made by 
                     •
                   priuate interpretation.2 Tim 3, 17. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For, * not by mans vvil vvas prophecie brought at any time: but the holy men of God ſpake, inſpired vvith the holy Ghoſt.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     10. By good vvorkes.] Here vve ſee, that Gods eternal predeſtination and election conſiſteth vvith good vvorkes:Good vvorkes muſt concurre vvith Gods predeſtination to the effecte thereof. yea that the certainty and effect thereof is procured by mans free vvill and good vvorkes, and that our vvel doing is a meane for vs to attaine to the effect of Gods predeſtination, that is, to life euerlaſting. and therfore it is a deſperate folly and a great ſigne of reprobate perſons, to ſay, If I be predeſtinate, doe vvhat I vvil, I ſhal be ſaued. Nay, the Apoſtle ſaith, If thou hope to be one of the predeſtinate (for knovv it thou canſt not) do vvel, that thou maiſt be the more aſſured to attaine to that thou hopeſt: or, make it ſure by good vvorkes. The Proteſtāts in ſuch caſes not much liking theſe vvordes, by good vvorkes,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . though the latin haue it vniuerſally, and ſome Greeke copies alſo, as Beza confeſſeth, leaue them out in their tranſlations, by their vvonted pollicie.
                  
                     15. After my deceaſe alſo.] Theſe vvordes though they may be eaſily altered by cōſtruction into diuers ſenſes not vntrue, yet the correſpondēce of the partes of the ſentēce going before and folovving,The heretikes (according to their cuſtom) exclude this ſenſe altogether by their falſe tranſlation. giue moſt plaine this meaning, that, as during his life he vvould not omit to put them in memorie of the things he taught them, ſo after his death (vvhich he knew ſhould be ſhortly) he vvould not faile to endeuour that they might be mindeful of the ſame. Signifying that his care ouer them ſhould not ceaſe by death, & that by his interceſsion before God after his departure, he vvould doe the ſame thing for them, that he did before in his life by teaching and preaching.Oecum. in hunc l
                           ••
                        . Gagn. This is the ſenſe that the * Greeke Scholies ſpeake of, and this is moſt proper to the text, and conſonant to the old vſe of this Apoſtle and other Apoſtolike Saincts and fathers of the primitiue Church.
                  S. Clement in his Epiſtle to S. Iames our Lordes brother, vvitneſſeth, that S. Peter encouraging him to take after his deceaſe the charge of the Apoſtolike Romane See,S. Peters Paſtoral care & protection of the Church after his death. promiſed that after his departure he vvould not ceaſe to pray for him & his flocke, thereby to eaſe him of his Paſtoral burden. To. 1 Concil. ep. 1. S. Clem. in initio. And S. Leo the Great one of his ſucceſſors in the ſaid See, often attributeth the good adminiſtration and gouernement thereof to S. Peters praiers and aſsiſtance: namely in theſe goodly vvorkes Ser 3 in anniuerſ. 
                           〈◊〉
                         aſſumpt. ad Pontif. We are much bound (ſaith he) to giue thankes to our Lord and Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, that hath giuen ſo great povver to him vvhom he made the Prince of the vvhole Church: that if in our time alſo any thing be done vvel & be rightly ordered by vs, it is to be imputed to his vvorkes and his geuernement,
                     Luc. 22. Io. 21. 
                     to vvhom it vvas ſaid, And thou being conuerted, confirme thy brethren: and to vvhom our Lord after his reſurrection ſaid thriſe, leede my ſheepe. Which novv alſo vvithout doubt the godly Paſtor doth execute, confirming vs vvith his exhortations, and not ceaſing to pray for vs, that vve be euercome vvith no tentation. &c.
                  
                  Yea it vvas a common thing in the primitiue Church among the auncient Chriſtians,The Saincts in heauen pray for the liuing. and alvvaies ſince among the faithful, to make couenant in their life time, that vvhether of them vvent to heauen before the other, he ſhould pray for his frende and fellovv yet aliue. See the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie of the holy virgin and Martyr Potamiaena, promiſing at the houre of her Martyrdom, that after her death ſhe vvould procure mercie of God to Baſilides one of the ſouldiars that ledde her to execution, and ſo ſhe did, Euſeb. li. 6. c. 4. Alſo S. Cyprian ep. 57 in fine. Let vs, (ſaith he) pray mutually one for an other, and vvhether of vs tvvo ſhal by Gods elemencie be firſt called for, let his loue continue, and his praier not ceaſe for his brethren and ſiſters in the vvorld. So ſaid this holy Martyr at that time vvhen Chriſtiās vvere ſo far from Caluiniſme (vvhich abhorreth the praiers of Saincts & praying to them) that to be ſure, they bargained before hād to haue the martyrs & other Saincts to pray for them. The ſame S. Cyprian alſo in his booke De diſciplina & habitu virginum, in fine, after a godly exhortation made to the holy Virgins or Nonnes in his time, ſpeaketh thus vnto them: Tantum tunc mementote noſtri, cùm incipiet in vobis virginitas honorari. that is, Onely then haue vs in remembrance, vvhen your virginitie ſhal begin to be honoured. that is, after their departure. Vvhere he inſinuateth the vſe of the Catholike Church in keeping the feſtiual daies and other dueties tovvard the holy Virgins in heauen.Feaſtes of holy Virgins. S. Hierom alſo in the ſame manner ſpeaketh to Heliodorus, ſaying, that vvhen he is once in heauen, then he vvil pray for him that exhorted and incited him to the bleſſed ſtate of the Monaſtical life. Ep. 1. c. 2.
                  
                  And ſo doth he ſpeake to the vertuous matrone Paula after her death, deſiring her to pray for him in his old age▪
                     Inuocation of Saincts. affirming that ſhe ſhal the more eaſily obtaine, the neeres ſhe is novv ioyned to Chriſt in heauen, in Epitaph, Paule in fine. It vvere to long to report, hovv S. Auguſtine deſireth to be holpen by S. Cyprians praiers (then and long before a Sainct in heauen) to the vnderſtanding of the truth concerning the peace and regiment of the Church. li. 5 de Bapt. cont. Donatiſtas c. 17. And in an other place the ſame holy Doctor alleageth the ſaid S. Cyprian ſaying, that great numbers
 of our parents, brethren, children, frendes, and other, expect vs in great ſolicitude and carefulnes of our ſaluation, being ſure of their ovvne. li. 1 de praedeſt. Sanctorum c. 14. S. Gregorie Nazianzene in his orations of the praiſe of S. Cyprian in fine, and of S. Baſil alſo in fine, declareth hovv they pray for the people, vvhich tvvo Saincts he there inuocateth, as al the auncient fathers did, both generally al Saincts, and (as occaſion ſerued) particularly their ſpecial Patrones. Among the reſt ſee hovv holy Ephrem (in orat. de laud. S. Deipara) praied to our B. Ladie vvith the ſame termes of Aduocatt, Hope, Reconciliatrix, that the faithful yet vſe, and the Proteſtants can not abide. S. Baſil ho. de 40 Martyribus in fine. S. Athanaſius Ser. in Euang. de S. Deipara in fine. S. Hilarie in Pſal. 124. S. Chryſoſtom ho. 66 ad po. Antiochenum in fine. Theodorete de curat. Grae
                           •
                        orum affectuum li. 8 in fine. Finally al the fathers are ful of theſe things: vvho better knevv the meaning of the Scripture and the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſt, then theſe nevv interpreters doe.Priuate phantaſtical interpretation
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     20. Priuate.] The Scriptures can not be rightly expounded of euery priuate ſpirit or phantaſie of the vulgar reader: but by the ſame ſpirit vvherevvith they vvere vvritten, vvhich is reſident in the Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  At not onely Prophets, but alſo falſe-prophets vvere in the old Teſtament, ſo novv likevviſe there ſhal be Maiſters of Hereſie, to the damnation of them ſelues, and of their folovvers. 4 And of their damnation he pronounceth by examples (as he comforteth the vertuous Catholikes or true beleeuers vvith the example of Lot) becauſe of their railing at their Superiors and Prelates, their blaſpheming of Catholike doctrine, their voluptuous liuing, their lecherie, their couetouſnes, their maner of ſeducing, and the perſons ſeduced, 20 for vvhom it had been leſſe damnable, if they had neuer been Chriſtians.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BVT there vvere alſo falſe
                     •
                   prophets in the people, as alſo in you there
* ſhal be lying maiſters vvhich ſhal bring in ſectes of perdition,1 Tim. 4. Iude. & denie him that hath bought them,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the Lord: bringing vpon them ſelues ſpeedie perdition. ✝ 
                     verse 2 AndHeretikes (of whom he prophecieth here) do gaine ſcholers, by preaching libertie, and by their owne licentious life, which is ſpecially ioyned to the hereſie of theſe daies. many ſhal folovv their riotouſneſſes, by vvhom the vvay of truth ſhal be blaſphemed. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and in auarice ſhal theyAl the ſweete wordes of heretikes, ſpeaking much of the vvord of the Lord, the Goſpel, IESVS CHRIST &c. are but termes of art to bie and ſel poore mens ſoules. vvith feined vvordes make merchandiſe of you, vnto vvhom the iudgement novv long ſince ceaſeth not: and their perdition ſlumbereth not. ✝ 
                     verse 4 For if God ſpared not Angels ſinning: but with the ropes of Hel being dravven dovvne into Hel deliuered them to be tormented, that they ſhould be reſerued vnto iudgemēt: ✝ 
                     verse 5 & he ſpared not the original vvorld, but
* kept the eight,Gen, 7. Noë, the preacher of iuſtice, bringing in the deluge vpon the vvorld of the impious.Gen. 19. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And * bringing the cities of the Sodomites and of the Gomorrheites into aſhes, he damned them vvith ſubuerſion, putting an example of them that ſhal doe impiouſly:Gen. 19, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 7 and * deliuered iuſt Lot oppreſſed by the iniurie and luxurious conuerſation of the
 abominable men. ✝ 
                     verse 8 for in ſight and * hearing he vvas iuſt: dvvelling vvith them vvho from day to day vexed the iuſt ſoule vvith vniuſt vvorkes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 Our Lord knovveth to deliuer the godly from tentation, but to reſerue the vniuſt vnto the day of iudgement to be tormented:The ſpecial properties of heretikes. ✝ 
                     verse 10 and eſpecially them vvhich vvalke after the fleſh in concupiſcence of vncleanneſſe, and cōtemne dominion, bold, ſelf-pleaſers: they 
                     •
                   feare not to bring in ſectes, blaſpheming. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Vvhereas Angels being greater in ſtrength and povver, beare not the execrable iudgemētfrom our Lord againſt them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 But theſe men as vnreaſonable beaſtes, naturally tending to the ſnare and into deſtruction,So heretikes blaſpheme the higheſt myſteries of our faith through ignorance. in thoſe things vvhich they know not, blaſpheming, ſhal periſh in their corruption, ✝ 
                     verse 13 receiuing the revvard of iniuſtice, eſteeming for a pleaſure the delightes of a day:coinquinationes & maecula, coinquinations and ſpottes, flovving in delicacies, in their feaſtings rioting vvith you, ✝ 
                     verse 14 hauing eies ful of adulterie and inceſſant ſinne: alluring vnſtable ſoules, hauing their hart exerciſed vvith auarice, the children of malediction: ✝ 
                     verse 15 leauing the right vvay they haue erred, hauing folovved the vvay of Balaam of Boſor, vvhich loued the revvard of iniquitie,Nu. 22, 23. ✝ 
                     verse 16 but * had a checke of his madneſſe the dumme beaſt vnder the yoke, ſpeaking vvith mans voice, prohibited the foliſhnes of the prophet.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 Theſe are fountaines vvithout vvater, and cloudes, toſſed vvith vvhirlevvindes, to vvhom the miſt of darkeneſſe is reſerued. ✝ 
                     verse 18 For, ſpeaking the proud things of vanitie, they allure in the deſires of fleſhly riotouſnes, thoſe that eſcape a litle, vvhich conuerſe in errour, ✝ 
                     verse 19 
                  Vvho euer promiſed more libertie to their folowers then Luther, Caluin, & the like, taking away penance, faſting, continencie or chaſtitie, keeping of vowes, neceſsitie of good vvorkes (becauſe faith doeth al) obedience to Eccleſiaſtical paſtors and Coū
                     cels, and ſuch like▪
                   promiſing them libertie, vvhereas them ſelues are the ſlaues of corruption. for
* vvherevvith a man is ouercome:Io. 8, 34. of that he is the ſlaue alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For if fleeing from the coinquinations of the vvorld in the knovvledge of our Lord and Sauiour IESVS Chriſt,Ro. 6, 16. they againe intangled vvith the ſame be ouercome:Mt. 12. 45. * the later things are become vnto them vvorſe then the former. ✝ 
                     verse 21 For it vvas better for them not to knovv the vvay of iuſtice, then after the knovvledge, to turne backe from that holy cō
                  maundement vvhich vvas deliuered to them. ✝ 
                     verse 22 For, that of the true prouerbe is chaunced to them,Pro. 26▪ 11. * The dogge returned to his vomite: and, The ſovve vvaſhed
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   into her vvallovving in the mire.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Th
                        •
                     ſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      Epiſtles 
                        •
                     e vvriteth to confirme them in the Apoſtles doctrine, and vvarnet
                        •
                      them of ſcorners that ſhal come, and denie Domeſday. 5 Whoſe vaine argument he anſvvereth, and giueth the reaſon of Gods ſo long patience, 10 exhorting to al holines of life in reſpect of that terrible day. 16 Finally giuing vvarning of ſuch as miſinterprete S. Paules Epiſtles & the other Scriptures, and that vve muſt not for any thing fall from the true faith.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THIS loe the ſecond epiſtle I vvrite to you my deereſt,in quibus in vvhich I ſtirre vp by admonition your ſincere minde: ✝ 
                     verse 2 that you may be mindeful of thoſe vvordes vvhich I told you before from the holy Prophetes, and of your Apoſtles, of the preceptes of our Lord and Sauiour. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Knovving this firſt, that * in the laſt daies ſhal come mockers in deceit,2 Tim. 3, 1. Iude, 18. vvalking according to their ovvne concupiſcences, ✝ 
                     verse 4 ſaying, Vvhere is his promiſe or his cōming? For

                     verse 5 ſince the time that the fathers ſlept, al things do ſo perſeuêre from the beginning of creature. for they are vvilfully ignorant of this, that the heauens vvere before, & the earth, out of vvater, and through vvater, conſiſting by the vvord of God: ✝ 
                     verse 6 by the vvhich, that vvorld then, being ouerflovved vvith vvater periſhed. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But the heauens vvhich novv are, & the earth, are by the ſame word kept in ſtore, reſerued to fire vnto the day of iudgemēt & of the perdition of the impious men. ✝ 
                     verse 8 But this one thing be not ignorāt of,Pſ. 89, 4 my deereſt, that * one day with our Lord is as a thouſand yeres, & a thouſand yeres as one day. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Our Lord ſlacketh not his promis, as ſome do eſteeme it:Ezec. 33. but he doth patiently for you,1 Tim. 2. * not vvilling that any periſh,Mt. 24. but that al returne to penance. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And * the day of our Lord ſhal come as a theefe in the vvhich the heauens ſhal paſſe vvith great violence,1 Theſ. 5. but the elementes ſhal be reſolued, vvith heate,Apoc. 3. and the earth and the vvorkes vvhich are in it, ſhal be burnt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 Therfore vvhereas al theſe thinges are to be diſſolued: vvhat maner of men ought you to be in holy conuerſations and godlineſſes, ✝ 
                     verse 12 expecting and haſting vnto the cōming of the day of our Lord, by vvhich the heauens burning ſhal be reſolued,Eſa. 65, 17. Apo. 21, 1. and the elementes ſhal melt vvith the heate of fire? ✝ 
                     verse 13 But vve expect * nevv heauens and a nevv earth according
 to his promiſes, in vvhich iuſtice inhabiteth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 For the vvhich cauſe my deereſt, expecting theſe things, labour earneſtly to be found immaculate and vnſpotted to him in peace:Ro. 2, 4. ✝ 
                     verse 15 and * the longanimitie of our Lord, do ye account ſaluation, as alſo our moſt deere brother Paul according to the vviſdom giuen him hath vvritten to you: ✝ 
                     verse 16 as alſo in al epiſtles, ſpeaking in them of theſe things, in the vvhich are 
                     •
                   certaine things hard to be vnderſtoode, vvhich the vnlearned and vnſtable depraue, as alſo the reſt of the Scriptures, to their ovvne perdition. ✝ 
                     verse 17 You therfore brethrē, foreknovving, take heede leſt ledde aſide by the errour of the vnwiſe you fal away from your owne ſtedfaſtnes. ✝ 
                     verse 18 but grovv in grace and in knovvledge of our Lord and ſauiour IESVS Chriſt. To him be glorie both novv and vnto the day of eternitie. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     16. Certaine things hard.]
                     The heretical proud ſpirit of priuate interpretation of Scriptures. This is a plaine text to conuince the Proteſtants, vvho (as al heretikes lightly doe and did from the beginning) ſay the Scriptures be eaſie to vnderſtand, and therfore may be not onely read ſafely, but alſo expounded boldly of al the people, as vvel vnlearned as learned: and conſequently euery one by him ſelf and his priuate ſpirit, vvithout reſpect of the expoſitions of the learned fathers, or expectation of the Churches, their Paſtors and Prelates iudgment, may determine and make choiſe of ſuch ſenſe as him ſelf liketh or thinketh agreable. For this is partly their ſaying, partly the neceſſarie ſequele of their foliſh opinion, vvhich admitteth nothing but the bare Scriptures. And Luther ſaid that the Scriptures vvere more plaine then al the fathers commentaries: and ſo al to be ſuperfluous but the Bible. Pra
                           •
                        fat. aſſert. art. damnat.
                  
                  Againſt al vvhich Diueliſh & ſeditious arrogācie, tending to make the people eſteeme them ſelues learned or ſufficient vvithout their Paſtors and ſpiritual rulers helpe, to guide them ſelues in al matters of doctrine & doubtes in religion:The Scriptures be hard, namely S. Paules epiſtles, ſpecially vvhere he ſpeaketh of iuſtificatiō by faith. the holy Apoſtle here telleth and forevvarneth the faithful, that the Scriptures be ful of difficultie, & ſpecially S. Paules epiſtles of al other partes of holy vvrite, and that ignorant men 
                        •
                     ad vnſtable or phātaſtical fellovves puffed to & fro vvith euery blaſt of doctrine and haereſie, abuſe, peruert, and miſconſter them to their ovvne damnation. AndDe fid. & op. c. 14 S. Auguſtine ſaith, that the ſpecial difficulty in S. Paules epiſtles, vvhich ignorant, and euil men do ſo peruert and vvhich S. Peter meaneth, is his hard ſpeache and much commendation of that faith vvhich he ſaith doth iuſtifie. vvhich the ignorant euen from the Apoſtles time, and much more novv, haue and do ſo miſconſter, as though he had meant that onely faith vvithout good vvorkes could iuſtifie or ſaue a man. Againſt vvhich vvicked collection and abuſe of S. Paules vvordes, the ſaid father faith, al theſe Canonical or Catholike epiſtles vvere vvritten.
                  But the Haeretikes here to ſhift of the matter, and to creepe out after their faſhion, anſvver,The Proteſtāts idle diſtinctiō betvvene difficultie in the Epiſtles and difficultie in the things. that S. Peter ſaith not, S. Paules epiſtles be hard, but that many things in them are hard. Vvhich may be to the Catholikes an example of their ſophiſtical euaſions from the euidence of Gods vvord. As though it vvere not al one to ſay, Such an author or vvriter is hard: and, There be many things in that vvriter hard to be vnderſtood. For, vvhether it be that the argument and matter be high and paſt vulgar capacitie, as that of praedeſtination, reprobation, vocation of the Gentiles, and iuſtifying faith: or vvhether his manner of ſtile and vvriting be obſcure: al proue that his epiſtles be hard, and other Scriptures alſo: becauſe
 S. Peter here affirmeth that by reaſon of the difficulties in them,The Greeke copies, haue both, ſome 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , in vvhich things: ſome 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , in vvhich epiſtles.
                      vvhether in the ſtyle, or in the depth of the matter, the ignorant and vnſtable (ſuch as Heretikes be) do peruert his vvritings, as alſo other Scriptures, to their ovvne damnation. Vvhereby it is plaine that it is a very dangerous thing for ſuch as be ignorant, or for vvilde vvitted fellovves, to reade the Scriptures. For ſuch conditioned men be they that become Heretikes, and through ignorance, pride, and priuate phantaſie, meeting vvith hard places of S. Paules epiſtles or other Scriptures, breede Haereſies.
                  And that not onely the things treated of in the holy Scriptures, but alſo that the very manner of vvriting and enditing thereof, is high and hard, and purpoſely by Gods prouidence appointed to be vvritten in ſuch ſort, ſee S. Auguſtine li. 2 de doct. Chriſt. c. 6. and ep. 119. S. Ambroſe ep. 44 in principio. S. Hierom to Paulinus ep. 103 c. 5. 6. 7. vvho alſo (ep. 65. c. 1.) ſaith,Not only the matter, but the ſtyle of the Scriptures is hard. that in his old age vvhen he ſhould rather haue taught then be taught, he vvent as far as Alexandria, onely to heare Didymus, and to haue his helpe for the vnderſtanding of the Scriptures, and confeſſeth vvith great thankes to the ſaid Didymus, that he learned of him that vvhich before he knevve not.Pſ. 118. Dauid ſaith, Giue me vnderſtanding, and I vvil ſearche thy lavv. The Eunuch in the Actes ſaid,Act. 8. Hovv can I vnderſtand vvith out an interpreter? The Apoſtles, til Chriſt opened their ſenſe to vnderſtand the ſcriptures,Luc. 24. v. 45. could not vnderſtand them. The holy Doctors by continual ſtudie, vvatching, faſting, and praying, had much a doe to vnderſtand them: that great clerke S. Auguſtine cōfeſſing in the foreſaid epiſtle 119. c. 21. that there vvere many moe things that he vnderſtood not, then that he vnderſtood. The Heretikes ſay the fathers did commonly erre▪ and hovv could ſuch great vviſe learned men be deceiued in reading and expounding the Scriptures, if they vvere not hard? and if they vvere hard to them, hovv are they eaſie to theſe nevv maiſters the Haeretikes? finally, vvhy do they vvrite ſo many nevv gloſſes, ſchol
                        •
                     es, commentaries, as a cart cannot carrie? Vvhy do Luther, Zuinglius, Caluin, and their Companions agree no better vpon the interpretation of the Scriptures, if they be not hard? vvhereat ſtumbled al the old heretikes & the nevv, Arîus, Macedonius, Vigilantius, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Berengarius, Vvicleffe, Proteſtants, Puritanes, Anabaptiſts, and the reſt, but at the hardnes of the Scriptures? They be hard then to vnderſtand▪ and Heretikes peruert them to their ovvne damnation.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF S. IOHNS THREE EPISTLES.
            
               OF S. Iohn vvas ſaid in the Argument before his Goſpel. Novv here folovv his three Epiſtles: one to al Catholikes (thoughHiginus ep. 2. to. 1. Cōcil. Auguſt. li. 2. Euang. quaeſt. q. 39. ſome auncients do cal it, Ad Parthos:) the other tvvo being very ſhort, vnto a certaine Ladie, & to one Gaius. The effect of al is, to vvitnes vnto them the certaintie of the Catholike faith, and to exhort them to continue ſtill in it: alſo to loue the Catholike Church▪ and ſo, neither to become heretikes, nor Schiſmatikes: but rather to auoid al ſuch, as the forerunners of Antichriſt, and to remember, that Catholikes neede not to goe to ſchole to any ſuch Maſters, hauing at home in the Catholike Church, the doctrine of the holy Ghoſt him ſelf, vvho vvas giuen to the Church viſibly in the beginning, to leade her into al truth, and to continue vvith her for euer. Therfore he ſaith▪ 
               That vvhich you haue heard from the beginning,
               1. Ioh. 2. v. 24. 
               let it abide in you. Likevviſe a litle after. v. 27. and ep. 2. v. 6. This is the commaundement, that as you haue heard from the beginning, you vvalke in the ſame, becauſe many ſeducers are gone out into the vvorld. and v. 8. & 9.
            And not only thus in general, but alſo in particular he expreſſeth the pointes vvhich the heretikes did then call in queſtion. Some vvere about Chriſt him ſelf. for they denied that IESVS is Chriſt, that he is the very ſonne of God, that he is incarnate. Ep. 1. c. 2. v. 22. and Ep. 2. v. 7. And againſt ſuch it vvas that he vvrote his Goſpel alſo, as he there ſignifieth. Ioh. 20. v. 31. Other pointes are about our iuſtification,De fid. & op. c. 14. againſt onely faith, and for good vvorkes, as alſo S. Aug. noted, vvhoſe vvordes vvere cited before. Herevpon he ſaith: If vve ſay vve haue ſocietie vvith God,
               1. Ioh. 
                     •
                   & 5. 
               and vvalke in darkenes, vve lie. Ep. 1. c. 1. Againe, He that ſaith he knovveth God, and keepeth not his commaundements, is a lier. Againe, This is the charitie of God, that vve keepe his cōmaundements, and his commaundements are not heauie. Finally, Children let no man ſeduce you, he that doth iuſtice, is iuſt, euen as he is iuſt. Ep. 1. c. 3. v. 7. 8. 9. likevviſe c. 2. v. 29. and in deede in all the three Epiſtles through out, he doth inculcate good vvorkes and keeping the commaundements, againſt the hereſie of only faith.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST EPISTLE OF IOHN THE APOSTLE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Good cauſe there is to beleeue the Apoſtles preaching. 5 And this is one point of their preaching, that to haue participation vvith God, vve muſt not onely beleeue, but alſo abſtaine from al mortal ſinne, 8 though vve al ſinne venially.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THAT vvhich vvas from the beginning, vvhich vve haue heard, vvhich vve haue ſeen vvith our eies, vvhich vve haue looked vpon, and our handes haue handled of the vvord of life: ( ✝ 
                     verse 2 and the life vvas manifeſted: and vve haue ſeen, and do teſtifie, and declare vnto you the life eternal vvhich vvas vvith the Father, and hath appeared to vs) ✝ 
                     verse 3 that vvhich vve haue ſeen and haue heard, vve declare vnto you, that 
                     •
                   you alſo may haue ſocietie vvith vs, and our ſocietie may be vvith the Father and vvith his Sonne IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And theſe things vve vvrite to you, that you may reioyce, and your ioy may be ful.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And this is the annuntiation vvhich vve haue heard of him,Io. 8, 12. and declare vnto you, That * God is light, and in him there is no darkeneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 6 If vve ſhal ſay that we haue ſocietie vvith him, and vvalke in darkeneſſe: vve lie, and do not the truth.Heb. 9. ✝ 
                     verse 7 But if we vvalke in the light, as he alſo is in the light: vve haue ſocietie one tovvard an other,1 Pet. 1. and * 
                     •
                   the bloud of IESVS Chriſt his ſonne cleanſeth vs 
                     •
                   from al ſinne.Apo. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 8 * If vve ſhal ſay 
                     •
                   that vve haue no ſinne,3 Reg. 8, 46. vve ſeduce our ſelues, and the truth is not in vs.2 Par. 6, 36. ✝ 
                     verse 9 If vve confeſſe our ſinnes: he is faithful & iuſt, for to forgiue vs our ſinnes, and to cleanſe vs
 from al iniquitie. ✝ 
                     verse 10 If vve ſhal ſay that vve haue not ſinned: vve make him a lier, and his vvord is not in vs.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     3. You may haue ſocietie.] S. Iohn ſhevveth manifeſtly, that vvhoſoeuer deſire to be partakers vvith God,No ſaluatiō but in the Societie of the Church. muſt firſt be vnited to the Churches ſocietie, learne that faith, and receiue thoſe Sacraments, vvhich the Diſciples receiued of the Truth it ſelf, conuerſant vvith them in fleſh. So ſaith Venerable Bede vpon this place. Vvhereby vve ſee there is no ſocietie vvith God in ſectes or ſchiſmes, nor any vvhere but in the vnitie, fellovvſhip, and communion of that Church vvhich can proue it ſelf to deſcend from the Apoſtles.
                  
                     7. The bloud of Ieſus.] Vvhether ſinnes he remitted by praiers, by faſting, by almes, by faith, by charitie,Many meanes & inſtruments of remitting ſinne, but al by the force & merite of Chriſts bloud applied by them. by ſacrifice, by Sacraments, & by the Prieſts, (as the holy Scriptures do plainely attribute remiſſiō to euery of theſe) yet none of al theſe do othervviſe remit, but in the force, by the merite & vertue of Chriſts bloud: theſe being but the appointed meanes & inſtruments by vvhich Chriſt vvil haue his holy bloud to vvorke effectually in vs. vvhich meanes vvhoſoeuer contemneth, depriueth him ſelf of the cōmoditie of Chriſts ovvne bloud, & continueth ſtill in ſinne and vncleanneſſe, vaunt he him ſelf neuer ſo much of Chriſts death. Vvhich point let the Proteſtants marke vvel, and ceaſe to beguile their poore deceiued folovvers, perſuading them, that the Catholikes derogate from Chriſts bloud, or ſeeke remiſſion othervviſe then by it, for that they vſe humbly the meanes appointed by Chriſt to apply the benefite of his holy bloud vnto them.
                  
                     7. From al ſinne.]
                     Al remiſſion of ſinnes is by the Paſſiō of Chriſt though by ſecū
                        darie meanes alſo. From original and actual, venial and mortal, a culpa & poena, that is, from the fault and the paine due for the ſame. V. Bede ſaith, that Chriſts Paſſion doth not onely remit in Baptiſme the ſinnes before committed. but al other aftervvard alſo done by frailtie: yet ſo, if vve vſe for the remiſſion of them, ſuch meanes as be requiſite and as Chriſt hath appointed, vvhereof he reckeneth ſome. Bede vpon this place. See S. Auguſtine alſo vpon this place to. 9. and S. Hierome li. 2 con.▪ Pelag. c. 3.
                  
                  
                     8. That vve haue no ſinne.] Vve gather by theſe vvordes and the former, that there be tvvo ſortes of ſinnes:Some ſinnes venial. one mortal, excluding vs from light and the ſocietie of God: an other venial, vvhich is found euen in thoſe that vvalke in the light, and are in the ſocietie of God. Alſo vve note againſt the Pelagians,A man may be truely iuſt, notvvithſtanding venial ſinnes. that vve be truely called the ſonnes of God, and ſo iuſt in deede, though vve be not vvithout al ſinnes, euery one of vs, as vvel iuſt as vniuſt, being taught and bound to confeſſe our offenſes, and to aſke pardon daily of God, by this petition of the Pater noſter, Forgiue vs our debtes. Therfore S. Auguſtine li. de natura & grat. c. 36. reckeneth vp al the holy Patriarches, Prophets, and renovvmed iuſt perſons, to haue been ſinners, euen vvhen they vvere in grace and Iuſtice: excepting alvvaies our B. Ladie, de qua propter honorem Domini, nullam prorſus, cùm de peccatis agitur,
                     S. Auguſtine excepteth our B. Ladie from ſinners. 
                     habere volo quaeſtionem. of vvhom, ſaith he, for the honour of our Lord. vvhen vve talke of ſinnes, I vvil haue no queſtion. And Pelagius aſking vvhat ſinnes Abel & ſuch iuſt men did commit,c. 3
                           •
                        . S. Auguſtine āſvvereth, that they might laugh ſometime immoderately, or ieſt to much, or couet ſomevvhat intēperatly, or plucke fruite ouer greedily, or in eating take ſomevvhat more then aftervvard vvas vvel digeſted,Examples of venial ſinnes. or haue their intention in time of praier ſomevvhat diſtracted, and ſuch like. thus in ſenſe S. Auguſtine. Vvhereby vve may learne vvhich be venial ſinnes, that conſiſt vvith true iuſtice &de 
                           〈◊〉
                         perſeuerās. c. 2. can not alvvaies be auoided euen of holy men in this life. In the booke de fide ad Petrum c. 41. are excepted from this common rule of ſinners, the children vvhich be nevvely baptized and haue not yet vſe of reaſon to ſinne either mortally or venially.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  If any ſinne mortally, he muſt not diſpaire. 3 To knovv God rightly, is not to beleeue onley, but to keepe his commaundements: 7 and that this is no nevv doctrine, but the very primitiue, though a nevv life it is. 9 Therfore he that beleeueth muſt alſo loue his brethren: 12 and that men muſt not loue the vvorld▪ but doe that vvhich God vvilleth. 18 Many are gone out of the Church and become Seducers al the miniſters of Antichriſt: but true Chriſtians muſt continue in their old faith, conſidering the revvard, and that they neede not goe to ſchole to any Heretike, the Holy Ghoſt himſelf being the ſcholemaſter of the Church, 29 he doth earneſtly inculcate iuſti
                        •
                     e and good vvorkes.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  My litle children, theſe things I vvrite to you, 
                     •
                   that you ſinne not. But & if any man ſhal ſinne, vve haue 
                     •
                   an
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   aduocate vvith the Father, IESVS Chriſt the iuſt: ✝ 
                     verse 2 and he is the propitiation for our ſinnes: and not for ours only, but alſo 
                     •
                   for the vvhole vvorldes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And in this vve know that vve haue knovven him, if vve obſerue his commaundements. ✝ 
                     verse 4 
                  
                     •
                   He that ſaith he knovveth him, and keepeth not his cōmaundements: is a lier and the truth is not in him: ✝ 
                     verse 5 But he that keepeth his vvord, in him in very deede the charitie of God is perfited: in this vve knovv that vve be in him. ✝ 
                     verse 6 He that ſaith he abideth in him: ought euen as he walked, him ſelf alſo to vvalke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 My deereſt, I vvrite not a nevv cōmaundement to you, but an old cōmmaundemēt vvhich you had from the beginning. The old cōmaundement is the vvord vvhich you haue heard.Io. 13, 34 15, 12. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Againe * a nevv commaundement vvrite I to you, vvhich thing is true both in him and in you: becauſe the darkeneſſe is paſſed, and the true light novv ſhineth. ✝ 
                     verse 9 He that ſaith he is in the light, and hateth his brother: is in the darkeneſſe euen vntil novv.
                     
                        •
                      Io. 3, 14. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * He that loueth his brother, abideth in the light, and ſcandal is not in him. ✝ 
                     verse 11 But he that hateth his brother: is in the darkeneſſe, and vvalketh in the darkeneſſe, and knovveth not vvhither he goeth, becauſe the darkenes hath blinded his eies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 I vvrite vnto you litle children, becauſe your ſinnes are forgiuen you for his name. ✝ 
                     verse 13 I vvrite vnto you fathers, becauſe you haue knovven him vvhich is from the beginning. I vvrite vnto you yong men, becauſe you haue ouercome the vvicked one. ✝ 
                     verse 14 I vvrite to you infantes, becauſe you haue knovven the Father. I vvrite vnto you yong men, becauſe you are ſtrong, and the vvord of God abideth in you, & you haue ouercome the vvicked one. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Loue not the vvorld, nor thoſe things vvhich are in the vvorld. If any man loue the vvorld, the charitie of the Father is not in him. ✝ 
                     verse 16 becauſeHovv al ſinne & tentation procede of theſe three, ſee S. Thomas Summe. 1. 2. quaeſt. 77. art. 5.
                   al that is in the vvorld, is the concupiſcence of the fleſh, & the concupiſcence of the eies, and the pride of life, vvhich is not of the Father, but is of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the vvorld paſſeth
 and the concupiſcence thereof. But he that doeth the vvil of God, abideth for euer.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 Litle children, it is the laſt houre, & as you haue heard, that
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Antichriſt commeth: now there are become 
                     •
                   many antichriſtes: vvhereby vve knovv, that it is the laſt houre. ✝ 
                     verse 19 
                  
                     •
                   They vvent out from vs: but ″ theyThey vvere of vs for the time, that is, of and in the Church: otherwiſe they could not haue gone out. but they vvere not of the cōſtāt ſort, or of the elect & predeſtinat: for then they had taried within, or returned before their death. vvere not of vs. for if they had been of vs, they vvould ſurely haue remained with vs: but 
                     •
                   that they may be manifeſt that they are not al of vs. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But you haue
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Chriſma. whereof Chriſt & Chriſtiās the vnction from the Holy one, and 
                     •
                   knovv al things. ✝ 
                     verse 21 I haue not vvritten to you as to them that knovv not the truth, but as to them that knovv it: and that no lie is of the truth. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Vvho is a lier, but he vvhich denieth that IESVS is not Chriſt? This is Antichriſt vvhich denieth the Father and the Sonne. ✝ 
                     verse 23 Euery one that denieth the Sonne, neither hath he the Father. He that confeſſeth the Sonne, hath the Father alſo. ✝ 
                     verse 24 You, that vvhich you haue 
Keepe that firmely & conſtantly vvhich you haue heard euen from the beginning, by the mouth of the Apoſtles: & not that only vvhich you haue receiued by vvriting. heard from the beginning, let it abide in you. If that abide in you vvhich you haue heard from the beginning, you alſo ſhal abide in the Sonne & the Father. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And this is the promis vvhich he promiſed vs, life euerlaſting.
                ✝ 
                     verse 26 Theſe things haue I vvritten to you concerning them that ſeduce you. ✝ 
                     verse 27 And you, the vnction vvhich you haue receiued from him, let it abide in you. And you haue no neede that any man teache you: but as his vnction teacheth you of al things, and it is true, and it is no lie. And as it hath taught you, abide
                     or, in it. in him. ✝ 
                     verse 28 And now litle children abide in him: that vvhen he ſhal appeare, vve may haue confidence, and not be cōfounded of him in his cōming. ✝ 
                     verse 29 If you know that he is iuſt, knovv ye that euery one alſoVve ſee it is Apoſtolical doctrine, that men may do or vvorke iuſtice, and that ſo doing they be iuſt by their workes proceding of Gods grace, & not by faith or imputation onely. vvhich doeth iuſtice, is borne of him.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. That you ſinne not.] S. Iohn (ſai
                        •
                     h V. 
                        •
                     ede vpon his place) is not contrarie to him ſelf, in that he ſeeketh here to make them vvi
                        •
                     hout ſinne▪ vvhom he ſaid in the laſt chapter could not be vvithout al ſinnes. but in the former place he vvarned vs only of our frailety, that vve ſhould not arrogate to our ſelues per
                        ••
                     ct innocencie: here he prouoketh vs to vvatchfulnes and diligence in reſiſting and auoiding ſi
                        •
                     nes, ſpecially the greater, vvhich by Gods grace may more eaſily he repelled.
                  
                     1. An aduocate.]
                     Hovv Chriſt is our only Aduocate. The calling and office of an Aduocate, is in many things proper to Chriſt, and in euery condition more ſingularly and excellently agreing to him then to any Angel, Sainct, or creature liuing. though theſe alſo be rightly and cruely ſo called, & that not onely vvithout al derogation, but much to the honour of Chriſts aduocation. To
 him ſoly and onely it agreeth to procure vs mercie before Gods face, by the general ranſom, price, & paiment of his bloud for our deliuerie, as is ſaid in the ſentence folovving, And he is the propitiation for our ſinnes, and n
                           •
                        t for ours onely, but for the vvhole vvorlds. In vvhich ſort he is our onely aduocate, becauſe he is our onely redeemer, and herevpon he alone immediatly, by and through him ſelf. and vvithout the aide or aſſiſtance of any other▪ man or Angel, in his ovvne name, right, and merites, confidently dealeth in our cauſes before God our iudge, & ſo procureth our pardon, vvhich is the higheſt degree of aduocation that can be.
                  Al vvhich notvvithſtanding▪
                     How Angels, Saincts, & men aliue are our aduocates. yet the Angels, and Saincts▪ and our fellovves aliue, may and do pray for vs, and in that they deale vvith God by interceſſion to procure mercie for vs, may iuſtly be called our aduocates: not ſo as Chriſt is, vvho demaundeth al things immediatly by his ovvne merites, but as ſecondary interceſſors, vvho neuer aſke nor obtaine any thing for vs, but per Chriſtum Dominum noſtrum, by and through Chriſt our common Lord, Aduocate, and Redeemer of mankinde. And behold hovv S. Auguſtine (tract. 1 in ep. Io. vpon theſe very vvordes) preuented the Heretikes cauillations. Sed dicit aliquis &c. But ſome man vvil ſay, Do not the Saincts them pray for vs? do not Biſhops then or Prelates and Paſtors pray for the people? Yet
                           •
                        
                      ſaith he: Marke the Scriptures, and you ſhal finde that the Apoſtles praied for the people, and againe deſired the people to pray for them, and ſo the head praieth for al,
                     Sainctes in heauen pray for vs. 
                     and the members one for an other. And likevviſe (leſt the Heretikes ſhould ſay, there is a difference betvvixt the liuing and the dead in this caſe) thus the ſame holy father vvriteth vpon the 85 Pſalme in fine. Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt doth yet make interceſsion for vs, al the Martyrs that be vvith him, pray for vs: neither vvil their interceſsion ceaſe▪ til vve ceaſe our gronings.
                  
                  In this ſenſe therfore vvhoſoeuer praieth for vs, either aliue or dead, is our aduocate. as S Auguſtine (ep. 59 to Paulinus circa med.) calleth Biſhops, the peoples aduocates, vvhen they giue them their benediction or bleſſing. So doth the holy Church call our B. Lady our aduocate, by the very vvordes of S. Irenaeus,Iren. li. 3. c. 33. & li. 5 poſt med. that you may ſee ſuch ſpeaches be no nevv inuentions of the later ages,The B. virgin is our aduocate. but Apoſtolical. The obedient Virgin MARIE (ſaith he) is made the aduocate of the diſobedient virgin Eue. And to confound the Proteſtāts plainely, in that they thinke or pretend that the aduocation or patronage of Saincts ſhould be iniurious to Chriſt, remēber that * our Sauiour acknovvledgeth Angels to be deputed for the protection (vvhich is nothing els but aduocation) of infants before the face of God,D. Hiero. in Mat. c. 18.
                      beſides the plaine examples in the old Teſtament Gen. 48. v. 16. Tob. 5. v. 27. &c. 12. v. 12. Dan. 10. And this not onely the Catholike Church,Angels are our protectors. but the very Engliſh Proteſtants them ſelues in their ſeruice booke and in the Collect of Michelmas day, profeſſe, and pray for the ſame protection or aduocation of Angels, and defend the ſame againſt their yonger brethren the Puritanes.
                  
                     2. For the vvhole vvorlds.] S. Auguſtine gathereth hereof againſt the Donatiſtes, and al other Heretikes,The Catholike Church is the only true Church. that vvould driue the Church into corners or ſome certaine countries, from the vniuerſalitie of al Nations (vvhereof it vvas named by the Apoſtles, Catholike) that the true religion, and Church, and conſequently the effect of Chriſts propitiation, death, and aduocation, pertaineth not to one age, nation, or people, but to the vvhole vvorld. S. Auguſtine vpon this place to. 9. tract. 1 in ep. Io.
                  
                  
                     4. He that ſaith he knovveth.]
                     Not only faith To knovv God here, ſignifieth (as it doth often in the Scriptures) to loue, that is, as in the laſt chapter, to be in ſocietie vvith him, and to haue familiar and experimental knovvledge of his graces. If any vaunt them ſelues thus to knovv God, and yet keepe not his commaundements, he is a lier, as al Caluiniſtes and Lutherans, that profeſſe them ſelues to be in the fauour of God by onely faith: affirming, that they neither keepe
                        •
                      not poſſibly can keepe his commaundements.
                  18. Many antichriſts.]Al Heretikes are antichriſts the forerūners of the great Antichriſt. The holy Apoſtle S Iohn (ſaith S. Cyprian) did not put a difference betvvixt one hereſie or ſchiſme and an other, not meant any ſort that ſpecially ſeparated them ſelues, but generally called al vvithout exception, antichriſtes, that vvere aduerſaries to the Church, or vvere gone out from the ſame. And a litle after, It is euident that al be here called antichriſtes, that haue ſeuered them ſelues from the charitie and vnitie of the Catholike Church. So vvriteth he ep. 76. nu. 1 ad Magnum. Vvhereby vve may learne, that al Heretikes, or rather Arch-heretikes be properly the precurſors of that one and ſpecial Antichriſt, vvhich is to come at the laſt end of the vvorld, & vvhich is called here immediatly before, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that peculiar and ſingular Antichriſt.
                  
                     19. They vvent cut from vs.] An euident note and marke, vvhereby to conuince al Heretikes and falſe teachers.The marke of al heretikes is, their going out of the Catholike ſocietie. to vvit, that being once of the common Catholike Chriſtian fellovvſhip, they forſooke it, and vvent out from the ſame. Simon Magus, Nicolas the Deacon, Hymenaeus, Alexander, Philétus, Arîus, Macedonius, Pelagius, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Luther, Caluin, and the like, vvere of the common ſocietie of al vs that be Chriſtian Catholikes, they vvent out from vs vvhom they ſavv to liue in vnitie of faith and religion together, and made them ſelues nevv conuenticles. therfore they vvere (as the Apoſtle here ſhevveth) antichriſtes, and vve and al that abide in the auncient fellovvſhip of Chriſtian religion, that vvent not out of their fellovvſhip, in vvhich vve neuer vvere, nor out of any other ſocietie of knovven Chriſtians, can not be Schiſmatikes or Heretikes, but muſt needes be true Chriſtian Catholike men. Let our aduerſaries tel vs, out of vvhat
 Church vve euer departed,The Catholikes can not be proued to haue gone out. vvhen, and vvhere, and vnder vvhat perſons it vvas that vve reuolted, as vve can tel them the yere, the places, the Ringleaders of their reuolt.
                  
                     19. They vvere not of vs.] He meaneth not, that Heretikes vvere not, or could not be in or of the Church, before they vvent out or fel into their hereſie or ſchiſme: but partly that many of them vvhich aftervvard fall out,Hovv Heretikes are of the Church, before they fall. though they vvere before vvith the reſt, and partakers of al the Sacraments vvith other their fellovves, yet in deede vvere of naughtie life and conſcience vvhen they vvere vvithin, and ſo being rather as if humors and ſuperfluous excrements, then true and liuely partes of the body, after a ſort may be ſaid not to haue been of the body at al. So S. Auguſtine expoundeth theſe vvordes in his commentarie vpon this place. tract. 3. but els vvhere, more agreably as it ſeemeth, that the Apoſtle meaneth, that ſuch as vvil not tarie in the Church, but finally forſake it to the end, in the preſcience of God, and in reſpect of the ſmall benefite they ſhal haue by their temporal ſmal abode there, be not of or in the Church, though according to this preſent ſtate, they are truely members thereof. Li. de corrept. & gr. c. 9 & de dono perſeu
                           ••
                        . c. 8.
                  
                     19. That they may be manifeſt] God permitteth hereſie to be, that ſuch as be permanent, conſtant,By hereſies conſtāt Catholikes are knovven. and choſen members and children of the Catholike Church, onely knovven to God before, may novv alſo be made manifeſt to the vvorld, by their conſtant remaining in the CHVRCH, vvhen the vvinde and blaſt of euery hereſie or tentation driueth out the other light and vnſtable perſons.
                  
                     20. Knovv al things.]
                     Euery good Catholike is ſufficiently taught by the Church to ſaluation. They that abide in the vnitie of Chriſtes Church, haue the vnction, that is, the Holy Ghoſt, vvho teacheth al truth, not that euery member or man thereof hath al knovvledge in him ſelf perſonally, but that euery one vvhich is of that happie ſocietie to vvhich Chriſt promiſed and gaue the Holy Ghoſt, is partaker of al other mens giftes and graces in the ſame holy Spirit, to his ſaluation. Neither neede any to ſeeke truth at Heretikes handes or others that be gone out▪ vvhen it is vvithin them ſelues and onely vvithin them ſelues in Gods Church. If thou loue vnitie (ſaith S. Auguſtine) for thee alſo hath he, vvhoſoeuer hath any thing in it, take avvay enuie, it is thine vvhich I haue, it is mine vvhich thou haſt. &c. Tract. 32 in Euang. Ioan.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  It is not for the ſonnes of God, to ſinne mortally, but for the ſonnes of the Diuel, vvherby they are knovven one from an other, & not by onely faith. 11 True faith is, that vve alſo loue our brethren, giuing both our life and ſubſtance for them. 19 Such vnfeined loue may haue great confidence before God. 23 becauſe the keeping of his cōmaundements doth much pleaſe him, vvhich conſiſt in faith and charitie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  See vvhat maner of charitie the Father hath giuē vs, that vve ſhould be named and beNot by nature, as Chriſt is: but by grace and adoption. the ſonnes of God. For this cauſe the world doth not knovv vs, becauſe it hath not knovven him. ✝ 
                     verse 2 My deereſt, novv vve are the ſonnes of God: & it hath not yet appeared vvhat we ſhal be. Vve know that whē he ſhal appeare, we ſhal be like to him: becauſe vve ſhalHovv we ſhal ſee God, & be like vnto him in the next life, ſee S. Auguſtine ep. 111. 112. & li. 12. de ciuit. Dei c. 29. ſee him as he is. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And euery one that hath this hope in him,This teacheth vs that mā ſanctifieth him ſelf by his free wil working together with Gods grace. S. Auguſtine vpon this place.
                   ſanctifieth him ſelf, as he alſo is holy. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Euery one that committeth ſinne, committeth alſo iniquitie:Eſ. 53, 4. and 
                     •
                   ſinne is iniquitie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * you knovv that he appeared to take away our ſinnes:1 Pet. 2, 24. * and ſinne in him there is none. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Euery one that abideth in him, 
                     •
                   ſinneth not: and euery one that ſinneth, hath not ſeen him, nor knovven him. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Litle children, let no mā ſeduce you. 
                     •
                   He that doeth iuſtice, is iuſt: euen as he alſo is iuſt.Io. 8, 44 ✝ 
                     verse 8 * He that committeth ſinne,
 is of the deuil: becauſe the deuil 
                     •
                   ſinneth from the beginning. For this, appeared the Sonne of God, that he might diſſolue the vvorkes of the deuil. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Euery one that is borne of God, committeth not ſinne: becauſe his ſeede abideth in him, and he can not ſinne becauſe he is borne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 In this are the children of God manifeſt, and the children of the deuil. Euery one that is not iuſt,The Epiſtle for S. Polycarpus, Ian. 26. is not of God, and he that loueth not his brother. ✝ 
                     verse 11 becauſe this is the annuntiation, vvhich you haue heard from the beginning,Io. 13. 15 * That you loue one an other.Gen. 4, 8 ✝ 
                     verse 12 Not as * Cain, vvho vvas of the vvicked, and killed his brother. And for vvhat cauſe killed he him? Becauſe his vvorkes vvere vvicked: but his brothers, iuſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Maruel not brethren,The Epiſtle vpon the 2 Sū
                     day after Pentecoſt. if the vvorld hate you. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Vve knovv that vve are tranſlated from death to life, becauſe vve loue the brethren. He that loueth not, abideth in death. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhoſoeuer hateth his brother: is a murderer. And you knovv that no murderer hath life euerlaſting abiding in him ſelf.Io. 15, 13 ✝ 
                     verse 16 * In this vve haue knovven the charitie of God, becauſe he hath yelded his life for vs: and vve ought to yeld our liues for the brethren.I
                        •
                     . 2, 15. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 17 * He that ſhal haue the ſubſtance of the vvorld, and ſhalEuery man is bound to giue almes according to his abilitie, when he ſeeth his brother in great neceſſitie. ſee his brother haue neede, and ſhal ſhut his bovvels from him: hovv doth the charitie of God abide in him?
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 My litle children, let vs not loue in word, nor in tongue, but in deede and truth. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 19 in this vve knovv that vve are of the truth: and in his ſight vve ſhal perſuade our hartes. ✝ 
                     verse 20 For if our hart do reprehend vs: God is greater then our hart, and knovveth al thinges. ✝ 
                     verse 21 My deereſt, if our hart do not reprehend vs, vve haue confidence tovvard God. ✝ 
                     verse 22 and
* vvhatſoeuer vve ſhal aſke,Mat. 21. 
                  
                     •
                   vve ſhal receiue of him: becauſe vve keepe his commaundementes,Io. 14. and doe thoſe thinges vvhich are pleaſing before him.1 Io. 5. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * this is his commaundement,Io. 17, 3. 13, 34. that vve beleeue in the name of his ſonne IESVS Chriſt: andLeſt any mā ſhould thinke by the wordes next before, onely faith in Chriſt to be commaunded or to pleaſe God, he addeth to ſaith the cōmaundemēt of charitie or loue of our neighbour. loue one an other, as he hath giuen cōmaundement vnto vs.Io. 14, 23. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And * he that keepeth his commaundementes, abideth in him, and he in him. And in this vve knovv that he abideth in vs, by the Spirit vvhich he hath giuen vs.
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
                  
                     4. Sinne is iniquitie.] Iniquitie is not taken here for vvickednes, as it is commonly vſed both in Latin and in our language, as is plaine by the Greeke vvord 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſignifying nothing els but a ſvvaruing or declining from the ſtraight line of the lavv of God or nature. So that the Apoſtle meaneth,Concupiſcence remaining after Baptiſme is no ſinne, vvithout conſent. that euery sinne is an obliquitie or defect from the rule of the lavv: but not contrarie, that euery ſuch ſvvaruing from the lavv, ſhould be properly a ſinne, as the Heretikes do vntruely gather, to proue that concupiſcence remaining after Baptiſme is a very ſinne, though vve neuer giue our conſent vnto it. And though in the 5 chapter folovving verſ. 17. the Apoſtle turne the ſpeache, affirming euery iniquitie to be a ſinne, yet there the Greeke vvord is not the ſame as before, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      by vvhich it is plaine that there he meaneth by iniquitie, mans actual and proper tranſgreſſion vvhich muſt needes be a ſinne. See S. Auguſtine cont. Iulian. li. 5 c. 3. S. Ambr. li. d
                        •
                      Apologia Dauid c. 13.
                  
                     6. Sinneth not.] Iouinian & Pelagius falſely;(as Heretikes vſe to doe) argued vpon theſe vvordes, and thoſe that folovv verſ.Heretical expoſition of Scriptures. 9: the one, that the baptized could ſinne no more: the other, that no man being or remaining iuſt could ſinne. But among many good ſenſes giuen of this place, this ſeemeth moſt agreable, that the Apoſtle ſhould ſay, that mortal ſinne doth not conſiſt together vvith the grace of God, & therfore can not be committed by a man continuing the ſonne of God. and ſo is the like ſpeache in the 9 verſe folovving to be taken.No man in grace ſinneth mortally. See S. Hierom li. 2 cont. louinianum c. 1.
                  
                  
                     7. He that doeth iuſtice.] He doth inculcate this often, that mans true iuſtice or righteouſnes conſiſteth in doing or vvorking iuſtice, and that ſo he is iuſt, and biddeth them not to be ſeduced by Heretikes,True iuſtice. in this point.
                  
                     8. Sinneth from the beginning.] The Diuel vvas created holy and in grace, and not in ſinne: but he fel of his ovvne free vvil from God. Therfore theſe vvordes, from the beginning, may be interpreted thus, from the beginning of ſinne, and ſo the Apoſtle vvil ſay, The Diuel committed the firſt ſinne.Hovv the Diuel ſinned from the beginning. Auguſtine li. 11 de eiu. Dei c. 15 expoundeth it. The moſt ſimple meaning ſeemeth to be, that he ſinned from the beginning of the vvorld, not taking the beginning preciſely for the firſt inſtant or moment of the creation, but ſtraight vpon the beginning, as it muſt needes alſo be taken in S. Iohns Goſpel c. 8. 44.
                  
                     22. VVe ſhal receiue, becauſe.]
                     Not ony faith. Let the Proteſtants be aſhamed to ſay, that vve obtaine al of God by onely faith, the Apoſtle here attributing it to the keeping of Gods commaundements. Note here alſo that Gods commaundements are not impoſſible to be kept, but vvere then, and are novv obſerued of good men.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  VVe may not beleeue al that boaſt of the ſpirit, but trie them, vvhether they teach Catholike articles of the faith (namely the incarnation of Chriſt:) vvhether their doctrine be not vvordly, and them ſelues diſobedient hearers of the Apoſtles. 7 Vee muſt loue one an other, conſidering the exceding loue of God in ſending his ſonne to ſaue vs. 17 An argument of perfect charitie is, if vve haue nothing in our conſcience to feare in the day of Iudgement. 19 And an argument that vve loue God is, if vve loue brethren.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MY deereſt, ″ beleeue not euery ſpirit, but ″ proue the ſpirites if they be of God: becauſe many falſe prophetes are goue out into the vvorld ✝ 
                     verse 2 In this is the ſpirit of God knovven. ″ euery ſpirit that confeſſeth IESVS Chriſt to haue come in fleſh, is of God: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and euery ſpirit ″ that diſſolueth IESVS, is not of God: and this is
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   antichriſt, of vvhom you haue heard that he commeth, and novv he is
 in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 4 You are of God, litle children, and haue ouercome him▪ becauſe greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 5 They are of the vvorld: therfore of the vvorld they ſpeake, and the vvorld heareth them. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Vve are of God.Io. 8, 47 10, 27. * He that knovveth God, heareth vs. he that is not of God, heareth vs not. ″ in this vve knovv the ſpirit of truth, and the ſpirit of errour.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 My deereſt, let vs loue one an other: becauſe charitie is of God. And euery one that loueth, is borne of God, & knovveth God.The Epiſtle vpon the firſt Sunday after Pentecoſt. ✝ 
                     verse 8 He that loueth not, knovveth not God: becauſe God is charitie.Io. 3, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 9 * In this hath the charitie of God appeared in vs, becauſe God hath ſent his only begotten ſonne into the vvorld, that vve may liue by him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 In this is charitie: not as though vve haue loued him, but becauſe he hath loued vs, and ſent, his ſonne a propitiation for our ſinnes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 My deereſt, if God hath ſo loued vs: vve alſo ought to loue one an other.Io. 1, 18. 1 Tim. 6, 16. ✝ 
                     verse 12 * GodNo man in this life, nor with corporal eies, cā ſee the proper eſſence or ſubſtāce of the Deitie. See S. Auguſt. ad Paulin. de vidēdo Deo. ep. 112. no man hath ſeen at any time. If vve loue one an other, God abideth in vs, and his charitie in vs is perſired. ✝ 
                     verse 13 In this vve knovv that vve abide in him, and he in vs: becauſe he of his Spirit hath giuen to vs. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And vve haue ſeen, and doe teſtifie, that the Father hath ſent his Sonne the Sauiour of the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvhoſoeuer ſhal confeſſe that IESVS is the Sonne of God, God abideth in him, and he in God. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And vve haue knovven and haue beleeued the charitie, vvhich God hath in vs. God is charitie: and he that abideth in charitie, abideth in God, and God in him. ✝ 
                     verse 17 In this is charitie perfited vvith vs, ″ that vve may haue confidence in the day of iudgement: becauſe as he is, vve alſo are in the vvorld. ✝ 
                     verse 18 ″ Feare is not in charitie: but perfect charitie caſteth out feare, becauſe feare hath painefulnes▪ and he that feareth, is not perfect in charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Let vs therfore loue God, becauſe God firſt hath loued vs. ✝ 
                     verse 20 If any man ſhal ſay, that I loue God: and hateth his brother, he is a lier. For he that loueth not his brother vvhom he ſeeth: God vvhom he ſeeth not,Io. 13, 34, 15, 12. hovv can he loue? ✝ 
                     verse 21 * And this commaundement vve haue from God: that he vvhich loueth God, loue alſo his brother. ⊢
               
               
                  
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     1. Beleeue not euery ſpirit.]
                     Heretical boaſting of the ſpirit. That is, Receiue not euery doctrine of ſuch as boaſt them ſelues to haue the ſpirit. For there be many falſe prophets, that is to ſay, Haeretikes, which ſhal goe out of the Church, and chalenge the ſpirit, and vaunt of Gods word, Scripture, and Goſpel, vvhich in deede be ſeducers.
                  
                     1. Proue the ſpirites.]
                     The Church only, not euery priuate man, hath to proue and diſcerne ſpirites. It is not meant by this place, as the Proteſtants vvould haue it, that euery particular perſon ſhould of him ſelf examine, trie, or iudge who is a true or falſe doctor, and which is true or falſe doctrine. But the Apoſtle here would euery one to diſcerne theſe diuerſities of ſpirites, by taking knovvledge of them to vvhom God hath giuen the gift of diſcerning ſpirites and doctrines (vvhich S. Paul expreſly ſaith is giuen but to ſome, and not to euery one, 1 Cor. 12.) and by obeying the Church of God, to whom Chriſt hath giuen * the Spirit of truth.Io. 14, 16. And this is onely the ſure way to proue the ſpirites and doctrines of theſe daies. And al they that would bring vs from our Paſtors and the Churches iudgement, to our owne priuate trial, ſeeke nothing els but to driue vs to miſerable vncertainty in al our beleefe.Caluin. as Caluin doth, who vpon this place ſaith, that priuate men may examine the general Councels doctrines.
                  
                     2. Euery ſpirit that confeſſeth.]
                     To confeſſe or deny any article which the Cath. Church teacheth, is at al times a certaine marke of Catholike or heretike. The Apoſtle ſpeaketh according to that time, and for that part of Chriſtian doctrine which then vvas ſpecially to be confeſſed, taught, & mainteined againſt certaine vvicked Haeretikes, Cerinthus, Ebion, and the like, that taught wickedly againſt the perſon and both natures of Chriſt IESVS. The Apoſtle therfore giueth the faithful people this token to knovv the true teachers of thoſe daies from the falſe. Not that this marke vvould ſerue for al times, or in caſe of al'other falſe doctrines, but that it vvas then a neceſſarie note. As if a good Catholike vvriter, Paſtor, or parents would vvarne al theirs, now in theſe daies, to giue care onely to ſuch teachers as acknowledge Chriſt our Sauiour to be really preſent, and ſacrificed in the B. Maſſe, & that al ſuch are true preachers and of God, the reſt to be of the Diuel, or to be counted the ſpirit of Antichriſt. Vvhich ſpirit of Antichriſt (he ſaith) was come euen then, and is no doubt much more novv in al Haeretikes, al being precurſors of that great Antichriſt vvhich ſhal come tovvards the later end.
                  
                     3. That diſſolueth.]
                     Many old hereſies that diſſolued Chriſt. To diſſolue, looſe, or ſeparate IESVS a ſunder, vvas proper to al thoſe old Heretikes that taught either againſt his Diuinitie, or Humanitie, or the Vnitie of his perſon, being of two natures, as Cerinthus, Ebion, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Manes or Manichaeus, Cerdon, Apelles, Apollinaris and the like. And this is one place by vvhich vve may ſee that the common Greeke copies be not euer authentical,The Greeke text corrupted by old heretikes. and that our old approued tranſlation may not alvvaies be examined by the Greeke that novv is, vvhich the Proteſtants onely folow: but that it is to be preſuppoſed, vvhen our old Latin text differeth plainely from the Greeke, that in old time either al or the more approued Greeke reading was othervviſe, and that often the ſaid Greeke was corrupted then or ſince by Heretikes or otherwiſe. For of the Greekes, S. Irenaeus li. 3. c. 18: among the Latin fathers, S. Auguſtine tract. 6. in fine, S. Leo ep. 10. c. 5, and Venerable Bede did reade as we doe. and this reading maketh more againſt the ſaid Heretikes, then that vvhich the common Greeke novv hath, to vvit, Euery ſpirit that confeſſeth not Chriſt to haue come in fleſh, is not of God. vvhich is alſo in effect ſaid before verſ. 2. And that therfore it vvas corrupted and altered by Heretikes, ſee the vvordes of Socrates alſo a Greeke vvriter, very agreable to this purpoſe.li. 9. 9. 3
                           •
                        . 
                     Neſtorius (ſaith he) being eloquent by nature, vvhich is often in Heretikes, accounted him ſelf therfore learned, & diſdained, to ſtudy the old interpreters, counting him ſelf better then them all: being ignorant that in S. Iohns Catholike epiſtle old (Greeke) copies had, EVERY ONE THAT DISSOLVETH IESVS, IS NOT OF GOD. So ſaith he, adding moreouer that ſuch as vvould ſeparate the diuinitie from the, diſpenſation of Chriſts humanitie, tooke out of the old copies this ſenſe. for vvhich the old expoſitours noted that theſe which would looſe IESVS, had corrupted this Epiſtle. See alſo the Tripartite li. 12. c. 4.
                  
                     6. In this, vve knovv.]
                     A ſure marke of true of falſe teachers. This is the moſt ſure & general marke to knovv the true ſpirites and prophets from the falſe: that thoſe vvhich be of God, wil heare and obey their Apoſtles and lavvful paſtors ſucceding the Apoſtles, and ſubmit them ſelues to the Church of God: the other, that be not of God, wil not heare either Apoſtle, paſtor, or Church, but be their ovvne iudges.
                  
                     17. That vve may haue confidence.] Confidence called in Latin Fiducia,
                     
                        
                           •
                         Againſt the Proteſtāts ſpecial faith and preſumptnoua ſecuritie of ſaluation. is neither alone with faith, nor a perſuaſion infallible that maketh a man no leſſe ſecure and certaine of his ſaluation, then of the things that vve are bound to beleeue, as the Proteſtants falſely
 teach: but it is onely a hope wel corroborated, confirmed, and ſtrengthened vpon the promiſes and grace of God, and the parties merites. And the vvordes both folowing & going before, proue alſo euidently againſt the Proteſtants, that our confidence and hope in the day of iudgement dependeth not onely vpon our apprehenſion of Chriſts merites by faith, or vpon his grace and mercie, but alſo vpon our conformitie to Chriſt in this life, in charitie and good vvorkes.2 Pet. 1, 10. And that is the doctrine of S. Peter vvhen he ſaid, Labour, that by good vvorkes you may make ſure your vocation and election. and S. Paules meaning, vvhen he ſaid, I haue fought a good fight,
                     2. Tim. 4. 7. 
                     there is laid vp for me a crovvne of iuſtice, vvhich our Lord vvil render to me in that day, a iuſt iudge.
                  
                  
                     18. Feare is not in charitie.]
                     The feare of God in iuſt men, cōn̄fiſteth with charitie. The Heretikes very falſly vnderſtand this place ſo, that Chriſtian godly men ought to haue no doubt, miſtruſt, or feare of hel and damnation. Vvhich is moſt euidently againſt the Scriptures, commending euery where vnto vs the awe and feare of God and his iudgements. Feare him (ſaith our Sauiour Mat. 10) that can caſt body and ſoul into hel. And Pſal. 118. Pearſe my fleſh vvith thy feare. Vvhich feare of Gods iudgements cauſed S. Paul & al good men to chaſtiſe their bodies,1. Cor. 9. leſt they ſhould be reprobate and damned.Prou. 28. And the vviſe man for this cauſe affirmeth him to be happie, that is euer fearful. And holy Iob faith,Iob c. 9. 
                     I feared al my vvorkes. And the Apoſtle, Vvith feare and trembling vvorke your ſaluation.
                     Phil. 2. Vvhich kinde of feare is euen in the iuſteſt men and moſt ful of charitie, conſiſting wel with the ſame vertue, and is called Filialis is timer, becauſe it is ſuch as the good childe ought to haue toward his father.
                  But there is a kinde of feare vvhich ſtandeth not with charitie,Vvhat feare agreeth not with charitie. and is cleane againſt hope alſo, that vvhich bringeth ſuch perplexitie and auxietie of conſcience, that it induceth a man to miſtruſt or deſpaire of Gods mercies. That ſeruile feare alſo vvhich maketh a man often to leaue ſinning and to doe the external vvorkes of iuſtice, not for any loue or delight he hath in God or his lawes,Seruile feare is not il. but onely for feare of damnation, though it be not il in it ſelf, but very profitable, as that vvhich helpeth toward the loue of God, yet it ſtandeth not with charitie neither, but is daily more and more leſſened, and at length quite driuen out by charitie. Of theſe kinde of feares then the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, and (as ſome expound) of the feare of men alſo, of vvhich our Sauiour ſaith, Feare not them that kil the body.
                     Mat. 10.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  They that loue God, muſt loue his natural ſonne IESVS, and his ſonnes by adoption, and keepe his commaundements, vvhich to the regenerate are light. 4 But not, vnles they continue in the Catholike faith, namely of this article, that IESVS is the ſonne of God, and therfore able to giue vs life euerlaſting, 14 and al our petitions, 16 and our praiers for al our brethren that ſinne not vnto death, dying in their mortal ſinnes by impenitence. Laſt of al, he vvarneth them not to communicate vvith idols.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHOSOEVER beleeueth that IESVS is Chriſt, is borne of God. And euery one that loueth him vvhich begat: loueth him alſo vvhich vvas borne of him. ✝ 
                     verse 2 In this vve knovv that vve loue the children of God: vvhen as vve loue God, and keepe his commaundementes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 For this is the charitie of God, that vve keepe his commaundements: * and ″ his commaundementes are not heauy.Mao. 11, 30. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Becauſe al that is borne of God,The Epiſtle vpon Dominica in albis or Low Sunday. ouercommeth the vvorld. and this is the victorie vvhich ouercommeth the vvorld, our faith. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Vvho is he * that ouercōmeth the vvorld,1 Cor. 15, 57. but he that beleeueth that IESVS is the ſonne of God? ✝ 
                     verse 6 This is he that came by vvater and bloud IESVS Chriſt: not in vvater only, but in vvater and bloud. And it is
 the Spirit vvhich teſtifieth, that Chriſt is the truth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 For there be ″ three vvhich giue teſtimonie in heauen, the Father, the Vvord, and the Holy Ghoſt▪ and theſe three be one. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And there be three vvhich giue teſtimonie in earth: the ſpirit, vvater, and bloud. and theſe three be one': ✝ 
                     verse 9 If vve receiue the teſtimonie of men, the teſtimonie of God is greater. becauſe this is the teſtimonie of God vvhich is greater, that he hath teſtified of his ſonne.Io. 3, 36. ✝ 
                     verse 10 * He that beleeueth in the ſonne of God, hath the teſtimonie of God in him ſelf. ⊢ He that beleeueth not the Sōne, maketh him a lier: becauſe he beleeueth not in the teſtimonie vvhich God hath teſtified of his ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And this is the teſtimonie, that God hath giuen vs life euerlaſting. And this life is in his ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 12 He that hath the Sonne, hath life. he that hath not the ſonne of God, hath not life.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 Theſe thinges I vvrite to you, that you may knovv that you haue eternal life which beleeue in the name of the ſonne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And this is the confidence which vve haue toward him: that,Mt. 7, 7. 21, 22. 1 Io. 3, 22. * vvhat ſoeuer vve ſhal aſke according to his vvill, he heareth vs. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And
                     or, if vve knovv. vve knovv that he heareth vs vvhatſoeuer vve ſhal aſke: vve knovv that vve haue the petitions vvhich vve requeſt of him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 He that knoweth his brother to ſinne a ſinne not to death, let him aſke, and life ſhal be giuen him, ſinning not to death. There is ″ a ſinne to death: ″ for that I ſay not that any man aſke. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Al iniquitie,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   is ſinne. And there is a ſinnenot to death. to death'. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Vve know that euery one vvhich is borne of God, ſinneth not: but the generation of God preſerueth him, and the vvicked one toucheth him not. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vve knovv that vve are of God, and the vvhole vvorld is ſet in vvickedneſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And vve knovve that the ſonne of God commeth: and he 
* hath giuen vs vnderſtanding,Luc. 24, 45. that vve may knovv the true God,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   & may be in his true ſonne. This is the true God, & life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                     verse 21 My litle children, keepe your ſelues ″ from Idols. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     5. His commaundements are not heauie.]
                     The cōmaundements poſſible to be kept. Hovv can the Proteſtants ſay that Gods commaundements can not poſſibly be fulfilled or kept in this life, ſeing the Apoſtle ſaith, they be not heauie: and Chriſt ſaith,Mat. 
                           ••
                        . 
                     his yoke is ſvveete, and his burden light? See for the ful vnderſtanding of this place.
 S. Auguſtine de perfectione iuſtitia c. 10. The Heretikes in fauour of their foreſaid errour,Heret. tranſlation. rather tranſlate, His commaundements are not
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     greuous; then, are not heauie.
                  
                  
                     7. Three vvhich giue teſtimonie.]
                     Three perſons & one ſubſtāce in the B. Trinitie. An expreſſe place for the diſtinction of three perſons, & the vnitie of nature and eſſence in the B. Trinitie: againſt the Arians and other like Heretikes, vvho haue in diuers ages found them ſelues ſo preſſed vvith theſe plaine Scriptures, that they haue (as it is thought) altered and corrupted the text both in Greeke and Latin many vvaies: euen as the Proteſtants handle thoſe textes that make againſt them.The Arians corrupt the text of Scripture. But becauſe vve are not novv troubled vvith Arianiſme ſo much as vvith Caluiniſme, vve neede not ſtand vpon the varietie of readings or expoſitions of this paſſage. See S. Hierom in his epiſtle put before the 7 Canonical or Catholike Epiſtles.
                  
                     16. A ſinne to death.]
                     Vvhat is a ſinne to death. A ſinne to death is an other thing then a mortal ſinne, for it is that mortal ſinne onely, vvhereof a man is neuer penitent before his death, or in vvhich he continueth til death, and dieth in it. I affirme (ſaith S. Auguſtine de correp. & grat. c. 12) that a ſinne to death is to leaue faith vvorking by charitie euen til death. So likevviſe in the vvordes before, a ſinne not to death, is not that vvhich vve call a venial ſinne, but any that a man committeth and continueth not therin til death.
                  
                     16. For that I ſay not.] If the ſinne to death vvhere of he ſpeaketh, be the ſinne vvherein a man dieth vvithout repentance, according to S. Auguſtines vvordes before rehearſed: then the praier vvhich he ſpeaketh of,Praier for the dead▪
                      muſt needes be praier for the dead. becauſe he ſpeaketh of praying, or not praying, for them that died in deadly ſinne, exhorting vs to pray, and encouraging vs to doe it vvith confidence to be heard, if vve pray, for them that departed this life not in deadly ſinne: and contrarivviſe in maner diſſuading & diſcouraging vs from praying for ſuch as continued in vvickednes euen til their liues end. And S. Auguſtine ſetteth dovvne the Churches practiſe agreable to the Apoſtles meaning,Some of the dead may not be praied for. li. 21 c. 24. de Ciuit. Dei. if there be any (ſaith he) that perſiſt til death in impenitence of hart, doth the Church novv pray for them, that is for the ſoules of them that ſo are departed? So ſaith he. And this is the cauſe, that Concilium Bracharenſe primum sap. 34 forbiddeth to pray for ſuch as die in deſperation, or kil them ſelues: and the reaſon, vvhy the Church forbeareth to pray for Heretikes that die in their hereſie, or mainteine hereſie vnto death and by their death.It is proued that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of praying for the dead.
                  
                  And that the place is moſt properly or onely meant of praying for the departed, this conuinceth, that neither the Church nor any man is dehorted here from praying for any ſinner yet liuing, not for: he remiſſion of any ſinne in this life: al ſinnes (of vvhat ſort ſoeuer) being pardonable, ſo long as the committers of them be in caſe and ſtate to repent: as they be, ſo long as they be in this vvorld. And vve ſee that the Church praieth, and is often heard, for Heretikes, Ievves, Turkes, Apoſtataes,The Caluiniſts blaſphemie, to auoid this ſenſe of the Apoſtle. and vvhat other infidels or il men ſoeuer, during their liues. And it is great blaſphemie that the Caluiniſtes vtter vpon this place: to vvit, that Apoſtaſie and certaine other ſinnes of the reprobate, can not be forgiuen at al in this life. Vvhich they hold, onely to auoid the ſequele of praying for the dead vpon theſe vvordes of S. Iohn, beſides that they muſt take vpon them preſumptuouſly, to knovv and diſcerne of Gods ſecretes, vvho be reprobate, and vvho be not, and according to that, pray for ſome, and not for otherſome▪ al vvhich is moſt vvicked and abſurd preſumption.
                  As for their allegation, that S. Ieremie the Prophet vvas forbidden to pray for the Ievves, and vvarned that he ſhould not be heard, Chap. 7. 11. 14: there is great difference. firſt, he had a reuelation by the vvordes of God, that they vvould continue in their vvickednes, as vve haue not of any certaine perſon, vvhereof S. Iohn here ſpeaketh. ſecondly, Ieremie vvas not forbidden to pray for the remiſſion of their ſinnes, nor had denial to be heard therein for any mans particular caſe, vvhereof the Apoſtle here ſpeaketh: but he vvas told that they ſhould not eſcape the temporal puniſhment and affliction vvhich he had deſigned for them, and that he vvould not heard him therein.
                  
                     21. From idols.]
                     Heret, tranſlation againſt ſacred images. It is ſo knovven a treacherie of Heretikes to trāſlate idola images (as here and in a number of places, ſpecially of the Engliſh Bible printed the yere 1562) that vve neede not much to ſtand vpon it. As this alſo is ſeen to al the vvorld, that they doe it of purpoſe to ſeduce the poore ignorant people, and to make them thinke, that vvhatſoeuer in the Scriptures is ſpoken againſt the idols of the Gentiles (vvhich the Prophet calleth Simulachra Gentium) is meant of pictures,Pſal. 113. ſacred images, & holy memories of Chriſt and his Saincts. Againſt ſuch ſeducers the ſecond ſacred Councel of Nice,The 2 Councel of Nice pronoū
                        ceth anathema, that is, a curſe againſt the Caluiniſts. called the ſeuenth Synode,Edit. Colō. an. 1567. decreeth thus Act. 4. pag. 122. Quicunque ſententias ſacrae ſcriptura de Idolis, contra venerendas imagines addu
                           •
                        unt, anathema. Qui venerandas imagines idola appellant, anāthema, Qui dicunt
                           •
                         Chriſtiani adorant imagines vt Deos, anathema▪
                      that is, Anā
                        thema to al them that bring the ſentences of holy Scripture touching Idols; againſt the venerable images, Anáthema to them that call the venerable images, idols. Anáthema to them that ſay, Chriſtiam adore images as gods.
                  
                  Novv in their later tranſlations the Heretikes perceiuing that the vvorld ſeeth their vnhoneſt dealing, corrected them ſelues in ſome places, and in this place haue put, idols, in the text: but to giue the people a vvatchvvord that the Churches images are to be compriſed in the vvord,
 idols,The Bible of the yere 1577. they haue put, images, in the margent. But concerning this matter, it is moſt euident that neither euery idol is an image,The great difference of idol & image. nor euery image an idol: and that, hovvſoeuer the origine or etymologie of the vvord, idol, may be taken in the Greeke, yet both the vvordes and the things be in truth and by the vſe of al tonges, far differing. The great dragon that the Babylonians adored (Dan. 14) vvas an idol, but not an image: the Cherubins in Salomons temple vvere images, but not idols▪ and the face of the Queene in her coine or elsvvhere, as Caeſars face vpon the coine that Chriſt called for, is an image, but not an idol▪ and the Heretikes dare not tranſlate that text of Scripture thus, Vvhoſe idol is this ſuperſcription? nor call the Queenes image, the idol of the Queene: nor Chriſt, the idol of his father: nor vvoman, the idol of the man: nor man, the idol of God▪ al vvhich in Scripture be named images for al that, and be ſo in deede, and not idols. vvhich conuinceth, that the Heretikes be falſe & corrupt tranſlatours in this place and other the like, confounding theſe tvvo vvordes as if they vvere al one.
                  But as for the hauing of images or purtraites of holy things, not onely in priuate houſes, but alſo in Churches,Sacred images in Churches, by Gods ovvne vvarrant. God him ſelf doth vvarrant vs,Exod. 25. vvho * cōmaunded euen the Ievves them ſelues (a people moſt prone to idolatrie, and that after he had giuen them a ſpecial precept of not hauing, making, or vvorſhipping of idols) to make the images of Angels (the Cherubins) and that in the ſoueraine holieſt place of adoration that vvas in the Temple, & about the Arke▪ yea and in reſpect of vvhich ſacred images partly, they did (as S. Hierom ſaith ep. 17 c. 3) ſo great reuerence to the holy place called Sancta ſanctorum. If they then vvere vvarranted and commaunded to make and haue in ſo great reuerēce the images of mere ſpirites or Angels, vvhoſe natural ſhape could not be expreſſed▪
                     The 2 Councel of Nice vvas gathered againſt Imagebreakers. hovv much more may vve Chriſtians haue and reuerence the images of Chriſt, his B. mother, the Apoſtles, and other Saincts, being men, vvhoſe ſhape may be expreſſed? So doth the ſaid Nicene Councel argue againſt the Heretikes vvhich at that time vvere the Aduerſaries of images.
                  And note here, that eight hundred yeres agoe, they vvere ſtraight counted Heretikes, that began to ſpeake againſt images, and that Councel vvas called purpoſely for them, and condemned them for Heretikes,The antiquitie of holy images. & confirmed the former auncient reuerence and vſe of ſacred images. vvhich began euen in our Sauiours time or litle after, vvhen good religious folke for loue and reuerence made his image, namely the vvoman that he healed of the blouddy fluxe. vvhich image vvas alſo approued by miracles, as the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie telleth, and namely Euſebius Eccl. hiſt. li. 7 c. 14.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         citato. vvho alſo vvitneſſeth that the images of Peter and Paul vvere in his daies. as you may ſee alſo in S. Auguſtine (li. d. conſenſ. Euangeliſt. c. 10) that their pictures commonly ſtoode together in Rome, euen as at this day. Of our Ladies image ſee S. Gregorie li. 7. ep. 5. indict. 2 ad Ianuar. & ep 53. In vvhom alſo (li. 7. ep. 109) you may ſee the true vſe of images, & that they are the bookes of the vnlearned, and that the people ought to be inſtructed and taught the right vſe of them,The vſe and fruite of holy images. euen as at this day good Catholike folke doe vſe them to helpe & increaſe their deuotion, in al Catholike Churches: yea the Lutherans them ſelues reteine them ſtill. S. Damaſcene vvrote three bookes in defenſe of ſacred images againſt the foreſaid Heretikes.
               
            
         
         
            THE SECOND EPISTLE OF IOHN THE APOSTLE.
            
               He commendeth the lady and her ſonnes for continuing in the old ſaith, bidding them ſo to doe hereafter alſo, leſt they loſe the revvard of their vvorkes in the day of iudgement: and to Ioue the true beleeuers, but vvith Heretikes to haue no ſocietie: expr
                     •
                  ſsing alſo the points then in controuerſie.
            
            
               
                  verse 1 
               THE Senior to the lady Elect and her children, vvhom I loue in truth, and not I onely, but alſo al that haue knowen the truth, ✝ 
                  verse 2 for the truth vvhich abideth in vs, and ſhal be vvith vs for euer. ✝ 
                  verse 3 Grace be vvith you, mercie, peace from God the Father, and from Chriſt IESVS the ſonne of the Father in truth, and charitie.
            
                ✝ 
                  verse 4 I vvas exceding glad, becauſe I haue found of thy children vvalking in truth, as vve haue receiued commaundement of the Father. ✝ 
                  verse 5 And novv I beſeeche thee Lady, not as vvriting a nevv commaundement to thee, but that vvhich vve haue had ″ from the beginning,Io. 15, 12. * that vve loue one an other.1 Io. 3, 11. ✝ 
                  verse 6 And this is charitie, that vve vvalke according to his commaundements. For this is the commaundement, that as you haue heard from the beginning, you walke in the ſame: ✝ 
                  verse 7 becauſe many ſeducers are gone out into the vvorld, which do not confeſſe IESVS Chriſt to haue come into fleſh: this is a ſeducer and an antichriſt.
             ✝ 
                  verse 8 Looke to your ſelues, that you loſe not the thinges vvhich you haue vvrought: but that you may receiue a ful
Revvard for keeping faſt the Catholike faith. revvard. ✝ 
                  verse 9 Euery one thatTo goe backe or reuolt from the receiued truth and doctrine Apoſtolical, it damnable. reuolteth, and perſiſteth not in in the doctrine of Chriſt: hath not God. He that perſiteth in the doctrine: the ſame hath both the Father, and the Sonne. ✝ 
                  verse 10 If * any man come to you,Ro. 16, 17. and bring not ″ this doctrine: ″ receiue him not into the houſe, ″ nor ſay, God ſaue you, vnto him. ✝ 
                  verse 11 For he that ſaith vnto him, God ſaue you, communicateth vvith his vvicked vvorkes.
             ✝ 
                  verse 12 Hauing moe thinges to vvrite vnto you: I vvould not by paper and inke: for I hope that I ſhal be vvith you, and ſpeake mouth to mouth: that your ioy may be ful. ✝ 
                  verse 13 The children of thy ſiſter electe ſalute thee.
            
               ANNOT.
               
                  6. From the beginning.] This is the rule of a Chriſtian Catholike man, to vvalke in that faith and vvorſhip of God vvhich he hath receiued from the beginning.To hold faſt the old receiued faith. Vvhich is that vvhich vve novv call according to the Scriptures, the tradition of the Apoſtles: that vvhich is come to vs from man to man, from Biſhop to Biſhop, and ſo from the Apoſtles. So ſhal a faithful man auoid ſeducers that riſe vp in euery age, teaching nevv doctrine.
               
                  10. This doctrine.]
                  To bring vvilfully an other doctrine then the Catholike Church ſetteth dovvne, is alvvaies a marke of ſeducers and Heretikes. The Apoſtles, and true Paſtors their lavvful ſucceſſors, and the Church of God in holy Councel, vſe to ſet dovvne the true doctrine in thoſe pointes vvhich Heretikes call into controuerſie. Vvhich being once done and declared to the faithful, they neede no other marke or deſcription to knovv an Heretike or falſe teacher by, but that he commeth vvith an other doctrine then that vvhich is ſet dovvne to them. Neither can the Heretikes ſhift them ſelues, as novv a daies they vvould doe, ſaying, ô let vs firſt be proueds Heretikes by the Scriptures, let them define an Heretike. No, this is not the Apoſtles rule. Many a good honeſt ſhepheard knovveth a vvoolfe, that can nor define him. but the Apoſtle ſaith. If he bring not this ſet doctrine, he is a ſeducer. So holy Church ſaith novv, Chriſt is really in the B. Sacrament, vnder forme of bread and vvine &c. If therfore he bring not this doctrine, he is a ſeducer, and an Heretike and vve muſt auoide him, vvhether in his ovvne definitions and cenſures he ſeeme to him ſelf an Heretike or no.
               
                  10. Receiue him not.] Though in ſuch times and places vvhere the communitie or moſt part be infected,Vvhen & wherein to cōuerſe with Heretikes, is tolerable: vvhen & wherein, it is damnable. neceſſitie often forceth the faithful to conuerſe vvith ſuch in vvorldly affaires, to ſalute them, to eate and ſpeake vvith them, and the Church by decree of Councel, for the more quietnes of timorous conſciences prouideth, that they incurre not excommunication or other cenſures for communicating in vvorldly affaires vvith any in this kinde, except they be by name excommunicated
 or declared to be Heretikes yet euen in vvordly coonuerſatiō and ſecular actes of our life, vve muſt auoid them as much as vve may, becauſe their familiaritie is many vvaies contagious and nolſome to good men, namely to the ſimple: but in matter of religion, in praying, reading their bookes, hearing their ſermons, preſence at their ſeruice, partaking of their Sacraments, and al other communicating vvith them in ſpiritual things. It is a great damnable ſinne to deale vvith them.
               
                  10. Nor ſay, God ſaue you.]
                  S. Iohn vvould not be in one bath with Cerinthus the Heretike. S. Iohn 
                     〈…〉
                   anotable ſtorie of this holy Apoſtle touching to is point out of S. Polycarpus, vvhich is this. There be ſome (ſaith he) that haue heard Polycarpe ſay, that vvhen Iohn the diſciple of our Lord vvas going to Epheſus, into a bath, to vvaſh him ſelf, and ſavv Corinthus the Heretikes vvithin the ſame, he ſo denly ſkipt out, ſaying that he feared leſt the bath ſhould fall, becauſe Corinthus the enemie of truth vvas vvithin. So ſaith he of S. Iohn, and addeth alſo a like vvorthie example of S. Polycarpe him ſelf: vvho on a time meeting Marcion the Heretike,The like zeale of S. Polycarpe, and other Apoſtolike men in not communicating with Heretikes. and the ſaid Marcion calling vpon him, and aſking him vvhether he knew him not: Yes, quoth Polycarpe, I knovv thee for Satans ſound and heire. So great feare (ſaith S. Irernaeus) had the Apoſtles and their diſciples to communicate in vvord onely,
                  Tit. 3. 
                  vvith ſuch as vvere adulterers or corrupters of the truth, as S. Paul alſo uvarned, vvhen he ſaid, A man that is an Heretike, after the firſt and ſecond admonition auoid. So far Irenaeus. If then, to ſpeake vvith them or ſalute them, is ſo earneſtly to be auoided according to this Apoſtles example & doctrines vvhat a ſinne is it to flatter them, to ſerue them, to marie vvith them, and ſo forth?
            
         
         
            THE THIRD EPISTLE OF IOHN THE APOSTLE.
            
               He commendeth Gaiues, for continuing in the truth, and for ſuſteining or ſuccouring true preachers, 9 noting Diotrepes for the contrarie, and praiſing Demétrius.
            
            
               
                  verse 1 
               THE Seniour to Gaius the deereſt, whom I loue in truth.
             ✝ 
                  verse 2 My deereſt, concerning al thinges I make my praier that thou proceede proſperouſly, and fare vvel, as thy ſoule doth proſperouſly. ✝ 
                  verse 3 I vvas exceding glad vvhen the brethren came, and gaue teſtimonie to thy truth, euen as thou vvalkeſt in truth. ✝ 
                  verse 4 Greaterpleaſure. thanke' haue I not of them, then that I may heare my children do vvalke in truth.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                ✝ 
                  verse 5 My deereſt, thou doeſt faithfully vvhatſoeuer thou vvorkeſt on the brethren,
A great grace to be beneficial to ſtrangers, ſpecially to them that be of our Catholike faith and ſuffer for the ſame. and that vpon ſtrangers. ✝ 
                  verse 6 they haue rendred teſtimonie to thy charitie in the ſight of the Church: vvhō, thou ſhalt doe vvel, bringing on their vvay in maner vvorthie of God. ✝ 
                  verse 7 For, for his name did they depart, taking nothing 
 of the Gentiles. ✝ 
                  verse 8 Vve therfore ought to receiue ſuch: that vve may be coadiutors of the truth.
             ✝ 
                  verse 9 I had vvritten perhaps to the Church: but he that loueth to beareIt ſeemeth (ſaith S. Bede) he vvas an Arch-heretike or proud Sectmaiſter. primacie among them, Diótrepes, doth not receiue vs. ✝ 
                  verse 10 For this cauſe, if I come,
                  That is, I vvil rebuke them and make them knovven to be vvicked. Bede.
               
               commonebo. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                I vvil aduertiſe his vvorkes vvhich he doeth: vvith malicious vvordes chatting againſt vs. and as though theſe thinges ſuffiſe him not: neither him ſelf doth receiue the brethren, and them that do receiue, he prohibiteth, and caſteth out of the Church. ✝ 
                  verse 11 My deereſt, do not imitate euil, but that vvhich is good. He that doeth vvel, is of God: he that doeth il, hath not ſeen God. ✝ 
                  verse 12 To Demetrius teſtimonie is giuen of al, and of the truth it ſelf, yea and vve giue teſtimonie: and thou knovveſt that our teſtimonie is true.
             ✝ 
                  verse 13 I had many thinges to vvrite vnto thee: but I vvould not by inke and penne vvrite to thee. ✝ 
                  verse 14 But I hope forthvvith to ſee thee, and vve vvil ſpeake mouth to mouth. Peace be to thee. The freendes ſalute thee. Salute the freendes by name.
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. IVDE.
            
               IN the Goſpel theſe are called Fratres Ieſu,
               Mat. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                
               the brethren of Ieſus: Iames and Ioſeph, and Simon, and Iude. Their father is called Alpha
                  •
               us,Mat. 1
                     •
                  . vvhere Iames is termed, Iames of Alphaeus:
               Mat. 1
                     •
                  . a
                  •
               d their mother, Maria Iacobi minoris. Marie the mother of Iames the yonger and of Ioſeph. Vvhich Marie in an other place being called Maria Cleophae,
               Ioh. 19. vve perceiue their father vvas named both Alphaeus and alſo Cleophas. And that this Cleophas vvas brother to Ioſeph our Ladies huſband,Euſeb. hiſt. li. 3. c. 10. Hegeſippus telleth vs. Therfore becauſe Ioſeph vvas called the father of Chriſt, his brothers children, vvere called the brethren, that is (according to the cuſtom of the ſcripture alſo) the kinſmen of our Lord: and not becauſe they vvere the children of Ioſeph him ſelf by an other vvife, much leſſe (as Heluidius the heretike did blaſpheme) by our B▪ Ladie the perpetual virgin MARIE. Hovvbeit ſome good authors ſay, that their mother Marie vvas the natural ſiſter of our Ladie, and that therfore they are called, Fratres Domini, the brethren of our Lord.
            
            Hovvſoeuer that be,Lu
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . three of them are reckened amōg the 12. Apoſtles, Iames, and Simon Cananaeus,Mat. 10. and Iude. Yea and that they vvere ſomevvhat more then Apoſtles, though leſſe then Peter, S. Paul ſignifieth, vvhere he ſaith ſpeaking of him ſelf and Barnabas: As alſo the other Apoſtles, and the brethren of our Lord, and Cephas. 1. Cor. 9.
            And as S. Luke calleth this Iude, Iude of Iames, ſo he calleth him ſelf in this Epiſtle of his, Iude the ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, and the brother of Iames.
               Mat. 10. S. Matthevv and S. 
                  〈…〉
               , as Lebbaeus alſo in the Greeke.Ma
                     •
                  . 3. His feaſt and his 
                  〈…〉
                Church keepeth Octob. 28. called Simon and Iudes day.
            
            His Epiſtle is an 
                  〈◊〉
                againſt a
                  •
                heretikes (as it vvere a Commentarie of 2 Pet. 2.) and namely (as * 
                  •
               . Aug. hath told vs) againſt thoſe,pag. 379. 646. vvhich miſconſtred S. Paules Epiſtles and held Only faith. vvhom he calleth therfore, Men that tranſferre or 
                     〈…〉
                   grace of God into rio
                     •
                  ouſnes▪
                v. 4. exhorting Catholikes to be conſtant and 
                  〈◊〉
                from their old faith, and to contend for the keeping thereof, v. 3. 
                  〈…〉
               . heretikes 
                  •
                ſaith he) ſegregate them ſelues from the Church and from 
                  〈…〉
                v. 19.
         
         
            
            THE CATHOLIKE EPISTLE OF IVDE THE APOSTLE.
            
               He exhorteth them to ſtand to their old faith, ſh
                     •
                  vving them by examples, that it is damnable not to continue and be conſtant: 8 inueighing againſt the lecherie, blaſphemie, apoſtaſie, banketing of the heretikes, 14 and that their damnation vvas long foretold. 17 Catholikes therfore to be vnmoueable, to reproue the obſtinate, to recouer al not deſperate, to confirme the vveake, and to liue them ſelues vertuouſly and vvithout mortal ſinne, vvhich by Gods grace they may doe.
            
            
               
                  verse 1 
               IVDE the ſeruant of IESVS Chriſt, and brother of Iames: to them that are in God the Father beloued, and in IESVS Chriſt preſerued, and called. ✝ 
                  verse 2 Marcie to you, and peace and charitie be accompliſhed.
             ✝ 
                  verse 3 My deereſt, taking al care to vvrite vnto you of your common ſaluation, I thought it neceſſarie to vvrite vnto you: beſeeching you to contend for the faith once deliuered to the ſainctes. ✝ 
                  verse 4 For there are certaine men ſecretely entred in (vvhich vvere long ago preſcribed vnto this iudgement) impious, transferring the grace of our God
Diuers Heretikes abuſe the libertie of Chriſtes grace and Goſpel, to the fulfilling of their carnal luſtes and cōcupiſcēces. into riotouſnes, and denying the onely Dominator, and our Lord IESVS Chriſt.2 Pet. 2. ✝ 
                  verse 5 * But I vvil admoniſh you, that once knovv al things, thatThis is our Sauiour, not Ioſuè, as S. Hierom noteth ep. 17. ſee Abac. c. 3. v. 18. IESVS, ſauing the people out of the land of Aegipt,Nu. 14, 37. * ſecondly deſtroied them vvhich beleeued not. ✝ 
                  verse 6 But the Angels vvhich kept not their principalitie, but forſooke their owne habitation, he hath reſerued vnder darkeneſſe in eternal bondes vnto the iudgment of the great day.Gen. 19. ✝ 
                  verse 7 As * Sodom and Gomorrhe, and the citie adioyning in like maner hauingexf
                     •
                  rnicat
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                fornicated, and going after other fleſh, vvere made an example, ſuſtaining the paine of eternal fire. ✝ 
                  verse 8 In like maner theſe alſo defile the fleſh, andSuch be heretikes, that wil not be ſubiect to any 
                     〈…〉
                   refuſe to obey the lawes either of Spiritual or Temporal rulers. in vvhich kinde (ſpecially in blaſpheming the ſupreme Spiritual Magiſtrate) the Proteſtants do paſſe. deſpiſe dominion, & blaſpheme maieſtie. ✝ Vvhen Michael the Archangel, diſputing vvith the Diuel, made altercation
 ″ for the body of Moyſes: he durſt not inferre iudgment of blaſphemie, but ſaid, Our Lordrebuke▪
                commaund' thee. ✝ 
                  verse 10 But theſe, vvhat things ſo euer certes they are ignorant of, ″ they blaſpheme: and vvhat things ſo euer naturally, as dumme beaſtes, they knovv, in thoſe they are corrupted.
             ✝ 
                  verse 11 Vvo vnto them,becauſe they▪
                vvhich' haue gone in the vvay of 
* ″ Ca
                  •
               n: and vvith the errour of * Balaam, haue for revvard povvred out them ſelues,Gen. 4, 8▪
                and haue periſhed in the contradiction of Corè.Nu. 22. ✝ 
                  verse 12 Theſe are in their bankets,Nu. 16. ſpottes, feaſting together vvithout feare, feeding them ſelues, cloudes vvithout vvater vvhich are caried about of vvindes, trees of autumne, vnfruiteful, tvviſe dead, plucked vp by the rootes, ✝ 
                  verse 13 raging vvaues of the ſea, foming out their ovvne confuſions, vvandering ſtarres: to vvhom the ſtorme of darkeneſſe is reſerued for euer. ✝ 
                  verse 14 And of theſe prophecied Enoch, the ſeuenth from Adam, ſaying, Behold our Lord is come in his holy thouſandes, ✝ 
                  verse 15 to doe iudgement againſt al, and to reproue al the impious, of al the vvorkes of their impietie vvherby they haue done impiouſly, and of al the hard thinges vvhich impious ſinners haue ſpoken againſt him. ✝ 
                  verse 16 Theſe are murmurers, ful of complaintes, vvalking according to their ovvne deſires, and their mouth ſpeaketh pride, admiring perſons for gaine ſake.
             ✝ 
                  verse 17 But you may deereſt, be mindeful of the vvordes vvhich haue been ſpoken before by the Apoſtles of our Lord IESVS Chriſt,1 Tim. 4▪
                ✝ 
                  verse 18 vvho told you, * that in the laſt time ſhal come mockers,2 Tim. 
                     •
                  . according to their ovvne deſires vvalking in impieties.2 Pet. 3. ✝ 
                  verse 19 ″ Theſe are they vvhich ſegregate them ſelues, ſenſual, hauing not the Spirit. ⊢ ✝ 
                  verse 20 But you my deereſt, building your ſelues vponyour▪
                our' moſt holy faith, in the holy Ghoſt, praying, ✝ 
                  verse 21 keepe your ſelues in the loue of God, expecting the mercie of our Lord IESVS Chriſt vnto life euerlaſting. ✝ 
                  verse 22 And theſe certes reproue being iudged: ✝ 
                  verse 23 but them ſaue, pulling out of the fire. And on other haue mercie in feare: hating alſo that vvhich is carnal, the ſpotted cote.
             ✝ 
                  verse 24 And to him that is able to preſerue you vvithout ſinne, and to ſette you immaculate before the ſight of his glorie in exultation in the comming of our Lord IESVS Chriſt, ✝ 
                  verse 25 to the onely God our Sauiour by IESVS Chriſt our Lord be glorie and magnificēce, empire and power before al worldes, and novv and for al vvorldes euermore. Amen.
            
               
               ANNOT.
               
                  9. For the body of Moyſes.]
                  Truthes vnwritten, and knowen by tradition. Vvhen, why, or hovv this altercation or combat was betwene S. Michael and the Diuel about Moyſes body, no man can declare. only this vve ſee that many truthes and ſtories vvere kept in the mouthes and hartes of the faithful, that vvere not written in Scriptures canonical, as this vvas among the Ievves.
               
                  10. They blaſpheme.] He ſpeaketh of Heretikes, who being ignorant in Gods myſteries and the diuine doctrine of his Church,Ignorāce maketh Heretikes blaſpheme. vvhen they can not reproue the things, then they fall to execrations, irriſions, and blaſphemies againſt the Prieſts, Church, and Sacraments, and vvhatſoeuer is godly.
               
                  11. Cain, Balaa
                        •
                     , Corè.] The Apoſtle vvould haue Heretikes ſpecially to be knowen by the reſemblance they haue,Heretikes 
                        ••
                     
                     ſembled to Cain, Balaam, and Corè. firſt to Cain, in that for enuy that his brothers ſeruice and ſacrifice was accepted and his reiected, ſ
                     •
                  ewe his ſaid brother, and was a fugitiue from the face and citie of God, vvhich is the Church. Secondly, by their reſemblance to Balaam, who for money was induced to curſe Gods people, as couetouſnes is commonly the cauſe that firſt maketh Heretikes and falſe Prophets. wherevpon S. Auguſtine ſaith, He is an Heretike that for temporal commodities ſake either coi
                        •
                     ath or folovveth nevv opinions. S. Auguſt. li. de Vtil. 
                        •
                     red. cap. 1. And laſtly by the reſemblance they haue vvith the auncient and notorious Schiſmatike Corè, and his companions, vvho forſooke the ordinarie Prieſthod appointed by God, and would needes doe ſacrifice them ſelues without lavvful calling.
               Such in deede be al Heretikes, and ſuch be al their ſacraments, ſeruice, and offices in their Church, as Cores vvere in his ſchiſmatical tabernacles. And as pride vvas the cauſe of his reuolting from the obedience of Moyſes and Aaron his Prieſts and true Gouernours: ſo is intolerable pride the cauſe of al Heretikes forſaking their lavvful Paſtors and Rulers, and namely of forſaking Chriſtes owne Vicar in earth, our true Aaron, as S. Bernard calleth him. De conſid. li. 2. cap. 8. To al ſuch forſakers the Apoſtle here giueth the curſe and Va due to the ſaid three, Cain, Balaam, and Corè, and telleth them that the ſtorme of darkenes and eternal damnation is prouided for them: moſt liuely deſcribing al Heretikes (as in ſome vve to our woe haue experience by their maners in our daies) in al this paſſage euen to the end of the epiſtle.
               
                  19. Theſe are they vvhich ſegregate them ſelues.]
                  Al Heretikes ſegregate them ſelues. The conditions in the later daies, that is, euer ſince Chriſts time, not of theſe onely of our age. For there were many that forſooke Gods Church and ſegregated them ſelues from the fellowſhip of the faithful euen in the primitiue Church: that vve may the leſſe maruel at theſe mens ſegregating them ſelues, and going out from the reſt into ſeueral ſectes, which S. Auguſtine therfore calleth Segregations.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE APOCALYPSE OF S. IOHN.
            
               THAT vvhich the old Teſtament foretold of Chriſt him ſelf, the Apoſtles could report the fulfilling thereof in the nevv Teſtament, by vvay of an hiſtorie, euen from his Conception to his Glorification. But of his Church, they could not doe the like: becauſe in their time it did but beginne: being to continue long after them, euen to the end of the vvorld, and then at length to be glorified, as Chriſt her Spouſe alreadie is, Herevpon God vvould haue S. Luke to report in the Actes of the Apoſtles, the ſtorie of the Churches beginning▪ and for the reſt of it to the end, (that vve might receiue this benefite alſo by the Apoſtles handes) he vvould S. Iohn to tell vs of it in this booke by vvay of a prophecie.
            Of vvhich booke S. Hierome ſaith:Hier. ad Paulin. 
               The Apocalypſe of S. Iohn hath as many ſacrament or myſteries, as vvordes. Yea more then that, In euery vvord there are hid manifold and ſundrie ſenſes. Therfore it is very litle that can here be noted, in reſpect. Yet to giue the good Catholike (vvhoſe comfort is here) ſome litle helpe, the booke may be deuided into fiue partes.
            The firſt (after the Pro
                  ••
               me) conteineth ſeuen Epiſtles from Chriſt novv in glorie,Ca. 1. 2. 3. to ſeuen Churches of Aſia,1 part. or (for, theſe he maketh al one) to the ſeuen Biſhops of thoſe Churches: meaning no to thoſe only, but to al his Churches & Biſhops throughout the vvorld: ſaying therefore in euery one of them, to al in general: He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches. As alſo in euery one he exhorteth vs to fight manfully (in this ſpiritual vvarfare of ours againſt ſinne) for the victorie, and in euery one accordingly promiſeth vs a revvard in heauen. But before this, in the beginning of euery one, be partly commendeth, partly reprehendeth, and exhorteth to penance. Vvhere this is much to be noted, and feared, that among ſo many, he reproueth ſomevvhat in al, ſaue only in tvvo, vvhich are the ſecond & the ſixt. In the beginning alſo of euery one, he taketh ſome peece out of the apparition going before, to frame thereof his ſlyle agreably to the matter of eche Epistle.
            After this admonition to Paſtors and their flockes:Ca. 4. to the 8. the ſecond part folovveth,2. vvherein the Church and vvhole courſe thereof from the beginning to the end, is expreſſed in the opening of a booke in Gods hand, and the ſeuen ſeales thereof, by Chriſt, for the vvhich, he ſeeth praiſe ſung novv in heauen and earth, not only to the Godhead, as before, but alſo (after a nevv manner) to Chriſt according to his Manhod. And here, vvhen he is come to the opening of the laſt ſeale, ſignifying Domeſday, he letteth that matter alone for a vvhile, and to ſpeake more fully yet of the ſaid courſe of the Church,Ca. 8. to the 12▪
                he bringeth in an other pagent (as it vvere) of ſeuen Angels vvith ſeuen Trumpets. The effect of both the Seales & Trumpets, in this: That the Church beginning and proceding, there ſhould be raiſed againſt it, cruel perſecutions, and peſtilent hereſies: and at length after al hereſies, a certaine moſt blaſphemous Apoſtaſie, being the next preparatiue to the
 comming of Antichriſt: After al vvhich, Antichriſt him ſelf in perſon ſhal appeare in the time of the ſixt ſeale, and ſixt trumpet, perſecuting and ſeducing (for the ſhort time of his reigne) more then al before him. The Church notvvithſtanding ſhal ſtill continue, and vvade through al▪ becauſe Chriſt her Spouſe is ſtronger then al theſe aduerſaries, vvho alſo ſtraight after the ſaid ſixt time, ſhal in the ſeuenth, come in maieſtie and iudge al.
            Of the vvhich iudgement,3▪
                differring yet a vvhile to ſpeake at large,C. 12. 13. 14. he doth firſt in the third part intreate more fully of the Deuils vvorking by Antichriſt and his companie againſt the Church, that the iuſtice of Chriſt aftervvard in iudging, may be more manifeſt.
            At length,4▪
                therefore in the fourth part he commeth to the ſeuen laſt plagues,C. 15. to the 21. the ſeuenth of them conteining the final damnation of the vvhole multitude ſocietie or corps of the vvicked, from the beginning of the vvorld to the end. Vvhich multitude, in the Goſpel and firſt Epiſtle of this ſame S. Iohn (as alſo in the other Scriptures commonly) is often called Mundus,
               1 Io. 2, 
               the vvorld,
               Apoc. 17. and here he calleth it partly, Meretricem, a vvhore or harlot, becauſe vvith her concupiſcence ſhe entiſeth the carnal and earthly men avvay from God: partly, Ciuitatem Babylon, the Citie of Babylon, becauſe it maketh vvarre againſt Hieruſalem the Citie of God, and laboureth to hold Gods people captiue in ſinne, as it vvas ſhadovved in Nabuchodonoſor & his Babylonias, leading and holding the Ievves vvith their Hieruſalem, in captiuitie, vntil Cyrus (in figure of Chriſt) deliuered them. But vvhether al theſe ſeuen plagues ſhould be vnderſtood (as the ſeuenth) of Domeſday it ſelf, it is hard to define. More like it is, that the firſt ſixe are to goe before Domeſday: but vvhether corporally and literally, (ſo as Moyſes plagued Egypt) or rather ſpiritually, it is more hard to define. Yet it ſeemeth more eaſie, to vnderſtand them corporally, as alſo the plagues vvherevvith Elias and his fellovv ſhal in the time of Antichriſt plague the vvicked (vvhich peraduenture ſhal be the ſame laſt plagues) vvhere of vve reade in this booke c. 11. v. 6. But not content to haue deſcribed thus the damnation of the vvhole adulterous & blouddy ſocietie, he doth alſo expreſly report of their three grād Captaines damnation, vvhich are theſe, Antichriſt, and his Falſe prophet, and the Deuil him ſelf the author of al this miſchiefe.
            Finally,5▪
                on the other ſide,C. 21. 22. in the fifth part he reporteth the vnſpeakeable and euerlaſting glorie, that the Church after al this ſuffering, ſhal by Chriſt her glorious Spouſe be aſſumpted vnto. And ſo he concludeth the booke.
         
         
            
            THE APOCALYPSE OF IOHN THE APOSTLE.The Church readeth this booke at Ma
                     •
                  tins frō the 3 Sūday after Eaſter vnto the 4.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  9. S. Iohn being baniſhed in the ile Patmos▪
                     The 1 part. Seuen epiſtles to the Churches. is commaunded to vvrite to the ſeum Churches of Aſia (ſignified by the ſeuen candleſtickes) that vvhich he ſavv vpon a Sunday, round about the Sonne of man: 13 vvhoſe maner of appar
                        •
                     
                     tion is deſcribed.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THE ″ Apocalypſe of IESVS Chriſt vvhich God gaue him,The Epiſtle vpon Michelmas day Septemb. 29, & on the Apparition of S. Michael Mai. 8. to make manifeſt to his ſeruants the thinges vvhich muſt be done quickly: and ſignified, ſending by his Angel to his ſeruant Iohn, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvho hath giuen teſtimonie to the vvord of God, and the teſtimonie of IESVS Chriſt, vvhat things ſoeuer he hath ſeen. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Bleſſed is he that readeth and heareth the wordes of this prophecie: andThere be many (ſpecially novv a daies) that be great readers, hearers and talkers of Scriptures▪ but that is not ynough to make them good or bleſſed before God, except they keepe the things preſcribed and taught therein▪ according to our Sauiours ſaying (Luc. 11.) Bleſſed are they that heare the vvord of God, and keep it. keepeth thoſe thinges Which be vvritten in it▪ for the time is nigh.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 Iohn ″ to the ſeuen churches vvhich are in Aſia. Grace to you and peace from * him that is,Exo. 3, 14. and that vvas, and that ſhal come, and ″ from the ſeuen ſpirites vvhich are in the ſight of his throne,Col. 1. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and from IESVS Chriſt vvho is the faithful vvitnes, the * firſt borne of the dead, & the prince of the kings of the earth,Heb. 9. vvho hath loued vs,1 Pet. 1. and * vvaſhed vs from our ſinnes in his bloud,1 Pet. 2. 
                  ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 6 and hath made vs * ″ a kingdom and prieſtes to God and his father, to him be glorie and empire for euer and euer. Amen. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Behold he commeth vvith the cloudes,Zach. 12▪
                   and euery eie ſhal ſee him, and * they that pricked him. And al the tribes of the earth ſhal, bevvaile them ſelues vpon him.Eſa. 44. yea, Amen. ✝ 
                     verse 8 * I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end,Apo. 21. 22, 13. ſaith our Lord God, vvhich is, and vvhich vvas, and vvhich ſhal come, the omnipotent.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 9 I Iohn your brother and partaker in tribulation, and the kingdom, and patience in Chriſt IESVS, vvas inBaniſhed thither for religion by Nero, or rather by Domitian, almoſt 60 yeres after Chriſtes Aſcenſiō. the Iland, vvhich is called Patmos, for the vvord of God and the teſtimonie of IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 10 I vvasI had a viſiō, and not with my corporal eies, but in ſpirit I beheld the ſimilitudes of the thinges folovving. in ſpirit ″ on the Dominical day, and heard behind me a great voice as it vvere of a trompet ✝ 
                     verse 11 ſaying, That vvhich thou feeſt, vvrite in a booke: and ſend to the ſeuen churches vvhich are in Aſia, to Epheſus, and Smyrna, and Pergamus, and Thiatîra, and Sardis, and Philadelphia, and Laodicia. ✝ 
                     verse 12 
                  The I GENERAL VISION of the 7 according to S. Ambroſe. And I turned, to ſee the voice that ſpake vvith me. And being turned I ſavv ſeuen candleſtickes of gold: ✝ 
                     verse 13 & in the middes of the ſeuen candleſtickes of gold, oneIt ſeemeth not to be Chriſt him ſelf, but an Angel bearing Chriſtes perſon, & vſing diuers ſpeaches proper to Chriſt. like to the Sonne of man, ″ veſted in apodére Sap. 18, 24. prieſtly garment to the foote, and girded about neere to the pappes vvith a girdle of gold. ✝ 
                     verse 14 and his head and heares vvere vvhite, as vvhite vvoole, & as ſnovv, and his eies as the flame of fire. ✝ 
                     verse 15 and his feete like to latten, as in a burning fornace▪ and his voice as the voice of many vvaters: ✝ 
                     verse 16 and he had in his right hand ſeuen ſtarres▪ and from his mouth proceded a ſharpe tvvo edged ſvvord: and his face, as the ſunne ſhineth în his vertue. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And vvhen I had ſeene him, I fel at his feete as dead. And he put his right hand vpon me, ſaying, Feare not,Eſa. 41, 4. 44, 6. * I am the firſt and the laſt, ✝ 
                     verse 18 and aliue, and vvas dead, and behold I am liuing for euer and euer, and haue the keies of death and of hel. ✝ 
                     verse 19 Vvrite therefore the thinges vvhich thou haſt ſeene, and that are, and that muſt be done after theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 20 The ſacrament of the ſeuen ſtarres, vvhich thou haſt ſeene in my right hand, and the ſeuen candleſtickes of Gold. ″ the ſeuen ſtarres, are ″ the angels of the ſeuen churches▪ and
                     S. Irenaeus alluding to this ſaith, The Church euery vvhere preacheth the truth, and this is the ſeuenfold candleſticke, bearing the light of Chriſt &c. Li. 5. aduerſ
                           •
                        haer.
                   the ſeuen candleſtickes, are the ſeuen churches.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
                  
                     1. APOCALYPSE.]
                     An admonition to the reader concerning the difficultie of this booke. 
                     Of the Apocalypſe thus vvriteth the auncient father Denys. Biſhop of Corinth▪ as Euſebius alleageth him li. 7 c. 20 hiſt. Eccl. Of this booke (ſaith he) this is my opinion, that the matter thereof is far more profound then my vvit can reache vnto, and I doubt not but almoſt in euery ſentence of it, there lieth hidden a certaine ſenſe exceding myſtical and maruelous, vvhich though I vnderſtand not, yet I conceiue that vnder the vvordes there is a deepe meaning, and I meaſure not the matter by reaſon, but attribute al to faith, taking it to be more high and diuine, then I can by cogitation compriſe: not reprouing that vvhich I vnderſtand not, but therfore I admire vvith reuerēce, becauſe my vvit can not attaine to it. Againe S. Auguſtine ſaith, that in the Apocalypſe many things are obſcurely ſpoken, to exerciſe the minde of the reader: and yet ſome fevv things left euident, that through them a man may vvith labour ſearche out the reſt, ſpecially for that the author ſo repeateth the ſame things in diuers ſortes, that ſeeming to ſpeake of ſundry, matters, in deede is found bus to vtter the ſame things diuers vvaies. li. 20 de Ciuit. Del c. 17.
                  
                  
                      Vvhich vve ſet dovvne here in the beginning, to vvarne the good Chriſtian reader, to be humble and vviſe in the reading both of al other holy Scriptures, and namely of this diuine and deepe prophecie: giuing him further to vnderſtand, that vve vvil in our Annotations, according to our former trade and purpoſe, onely or cheefely note vnto the ſtudious, ſuch places as may be vſed by Catholikes, or abuſed by Heretikes, in the controuerſies of this time, and ſome other alſo that haue ſpecial matter of edification, and that as breefely as may be, for that the volume grovveth great.
                  
                     4. To the 7 Churches.] That certaine numbers may be obſerued as ſignificatiue and myſtical, it is plaine by many places of holy Scripture,Numbers myſtical. and by the auncient Doctors ſpecial noting of the ſame to many purpoſes. Vvhereby vve ſee the raſhnes of our Aduerſaries, in condemning generally al religious reſpect of certaine numbers in our praiers, faſtes, or actions. Namely the number of Seuen, is myſtical; and prophetical, perfect, and vvhich (as S. Auguſtine ſaith.) the Church knovveth by the Scriptures, to be ſpecially dedicated to the Holy Ghoſt: and to appertaine to ſpiritual mundation, as in the Prophets appointing of Naam in to vvaſh ſeuen times in lordan, and the ſprinkling of the bloud ſeuen times againſt the tabernacle.The number of Seuen myſtical: ſpecially in this booke. 
                     li. 4 qu
                           •
                        ſt. in numer. q. 33, See li. 5. c. 5 de Gen. ad lit. & li. 5 queſt in Deuter. q. 42. Al theſe viſions ſtand vpon Seuens. ſeuen Churches, ſeuen Angels, ſeuen ſtarres, ſeuen ſpirites, ſeuen candleſtickes, ſeuen lampes, ſeuen trumpets, ſeuen vial
                        •
                     , ſeuen horne
                        •
                      of the Lambe, ſeuen hilles, ſeuen thunders, ſeuen heades of the Dragon, ſignifying the Di
                        •
                     el: ſeuen of the beaſt that is Antichriſt: ſeuen of the beaſt that the harlot rid vpon: finally the number alſo of the viſions is ſpecially marked to be ſeuen, in this booke, and euery time that this number is vſed in this prophecie, it hath a myſterie & a more large meaning, then the nature of that number is preciſely and vulgarly taken for. As vvhen he vvriteth to ſeuen Churches. it is to be vnderſtood of al the Churches in the vvorld: as the ſeuen Angels, for al the Angels or gouernours of the vvhole Catholike Church: and ſo forth in the reſt, becauſe the number of Seuen, hath the perfection of vniuerſalitie in it, as S. Auguſtine ſaith li. 5 qu
                           •
                        ſt. in Deuter. q. 42.
                  
                  
                     4. From the 7 ſpirites.] The Holy Ghoſt may be here meant, and ſo called for his ſeuen fold giftes and graces, as ſome expoſitours thinke. but it ſeemeth more probable that he ſpeaketh of the holy Augels, by comparing this to the like in the 5 Chapter folovving: vvhere he ſeemeth to call theſe,Grace & peace from God & the holy Angels. the ſeuen ſpirites ſent into al the vvorld, as S. Paul to the Hebrues (c. 1. 14) ſpeaketh of Angels. and ſo the Proteſtants take it in their cōmentaries: vvhich vve note, becauſe therevpon they muſt needes confeſſe that the Apoſtle here giueth or vviſheth grace and peace, not from God onely, but alſo from his Angels: though that benediction commeth one vvay of God, and an other vvay of his Angels or Sainctes, being but his creatures. And ſo they may learne, that the faithful often loyning in one ſpeache,God and our Ladie ſaue vs, and the like. 
                     God and our Lady, our Lord and any of his Saincts, to helpe vs or bleſſe vs, is not ſuperſtitious, but an Apoſtolical ſpeache. and ſo the Patriarch ſaid (Gen. 48. v. 16.) The Angel that deliuereth me from al euils, bleſſe theſe children. See the Annot. Act. 25, 28.
                  
                  
                     6. A kingdom and Prieſts.] As al that truely ſerue God, and haue the dominion and ſuperioritie ouer their concupiſcences and vvhatſoeuer vvould induce them to ſinne,Hovv al Chriſtians be both kings & Prieſts. be kings: ſo al that employ their vvorkes and them ſelues to ſerue God & offer al their actions as an acceptable ſacrifice to him, be prieſts. Neuertheleſſe, as if any man vvould therevpon affirme that there ought to be no other earthly povvers or kings to gouerne in vvorldly affaires ouer Chriſtians, be vvere a ſeditious Heretike, euen ſo are they that vpon this or the like places vvhere al Chriſtians, be called prieſts in a ſpiritual ſort, vvould therfore inferre, that euery one is in proper ſignification a Prieſt, or that al be Prieſts alike, or that there ought to be none but ſuch ſpiritual prieſts. for it is the ſeditious voice of Corè, ſaying to Moyſes and Aaron, Let it ſuffi
                           ••
                         you, that al the multitude is of holy ones, and the Lord is in the
                           ••
                        . Vvhy are you extolled ouer the people of the Lord! Num. 16.
                  
                     10. On the Dominical day.]
                     Difference of holy daies and vvorkedaies. Many notable pointes may be marked here▪ firſt, that euen in the Apoſtles time there vvere daies deputed to the ſeruice of God, and ſo made holy and different, though not by nature, yet by vſe and benediction, from other profane or (as vve call them) vvorke-daies.
                  Secondly,Sunday made holiday by the Apoſtles & the Churches authoritie. that the Apoſtles and faithful abrogated the Sabboth vvhich vvas the ſeuenth day, and made holy day for it, the next day folovving, being the eight day in count from the creation: and that vvithout al Scriptures, or cōmaundement of Chriſt that vve reade of, yea (vvhich is more) not onely othervviſe then vvas by the Lavv obſerued, but plainely othervviſe then vvas preſcribed by God him ſelf in the ſecond commaundement, yea and othervviſe then he ordained in the firſt creatiō,Other feaſtes ordained by the Church. vvhen he ſanctified preciſely the Sabboth day, & not the day folovving. Such great povver did Chriſt leaue to his Church, and for ſuch cauſes gaue he the holy Ghoſt to be reſident in it, to guide it into al truthes, euen ſuch as in the Scriptures are not expreſſed. And if the Church had authoritie & inſpiration from God,As Saturday was in memorie of the creation, ſo Sunday of Chriſts reſurrection. to make Sunday (being a vvorke-day before) an euerlaſting holy day: and the Saturday, that before vvas holy day, novv a common vvorkeday: vvhy may not the ſame Church preſcribe & appoint the other holy feaſts of Eaſter, Vvhitſuntide. Chriſtmas, and the reſt? for the ſame vvarrant ſhe hath for the one▪ that ſhe hath for the other.
                  Thirdly, it is to be noted that the cauſe of this change vvas, for that novv vve Chriſtians eſteeming more our redemption, then our firſt creation, haue the holy day vvhich vvas before for
 the remembrance of Gods accompliſhment of the creation of things, novv for the memorie of the accompliſhment of our redemption. Vvhich therfore is kept vpon that day on vvhich our Lord roſe from life to death,The Church vſeth not the Heatheniſh names of daies: but Dies Dominicus, feriae, Sabbatum.
                      vvhich vvas the day after the Sabboth, being called by the Ievves; vna or prima Sabbathi, the firſt of or after the Sabboth. Mat 28. Act. 10. 1 Cor. 16. Fourthly, it is to be marked, that this holy day by the Apoſtles tradition alſo, vvas named Domini
                           •••
                         die
                           •
                        , our Lordes day, or, the Dominike, vvhich is alſo an old Eccleſiaſtical vvord in our language. for the name Sunday is a heatheniſh calling, as al other of the vveeke daies be in our lāguage: ſome impoſed after the names of planets, as in the Romans time: ſome by the name of certaine Idols that the Saxons did vvorſhip, & to vvhich they dedicated their daies before they vvere Chriſtians. Vvhich names the Church vſeth not, but hath appointed to call the firſt day, the Dominike, after the Apoſtle here: the other by the name of Feries, vntil the laſt of the vveeke, vvhich ſhe calleth by the old name, Sabboth, becauſe that vvas of God, and not by impoſition of the heathen. See the marginal Annotation Luc. 24, 1.
                  
                  Laſtly obſerue,God giueth greater grace at holy times of praier & faſting. that God reuealeth ſuch great things to Prophets, rather vpon holy daies, and in times of contemplation, ſacrifice, and praier, then on other profaue daies. and therfore as S. Peter (Act. 10) had a reuelation at the ſix: houre of praier, and Zacharie (Luc. 1) at the houre of incenſe, and Cornelius (Act. 10) vvhen he vvas at his praiers the ninthe houre, ſo here S. Iohn noteth that he had al theſe maruelous viſions vpon a Sunday.
                  
                     13. Veſted in a Prieſtly garment.]
                     Prieſtly garments. He appeared in a long garment or veſtment proper vnto Prieſts (for ſo the vvord, poderes, doth ſignifie, as Sap. 18, 24) and that vvas moſt agreable for him that repreſented the perſon of Chriſt the high Prieſt, and appeared to Iohn being a moſt holy Prieſt, and vvho is ſpecially noted in the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie for his Prieſtly garment called, pé
                           •
                        alon or lamina. Euſeb. li. 3 hiſt. Eccl. c. 25. & li. 5 c. 23.
                  
                  
                     20. The ſeuen ſtarres.]
                     The true religiō manifeſt as the light on a candleſticke. The Biſhops are the ſtarres of the Church, as the Churches them ſelues are the golden candleſtickes of the vvorld: no doubt to ſignfie, that Chriſt preſerueth the truth onely in and by the lavvful Biſhops and Catholike Church, and that Chriſts truth is not to be ſought for,Mat. 5. 15▪
                      in corners or conuenticles of Heretikes, but at the Biſhops handes, and * vpon the candleſticke vvhich ſhineth to al in the houſe.
                  
                     20. The Angels of the Churches.]
                     Angels Protectors. The vvhole Church of Chriſt hath S. Michael for her keeper and Protector, and therfore keepeth his holy day onely by name, among al Angels. And as earthly kingdoms haue their ſpecial Angels Protectors, as vve ſee in the 10 Chapter of Daniel: ſo much more the particular Churches of Chriſtēdom.Biſhops & Prieſts are called Angels. See S. Hierom in 34 Ezech. But of thoſe Angels it is not here meant, as is manifeſt. And therfore Angels here muſt needes ſignifie the Prieſts or Biſhops ſpecially of the Churches here, and in them, al the gouernours of the vvhole & of euery particular Church of Chriſtendom. They are called Angels, for that they are Gods meſſengers to vs, interpreters of his vvil, our keepers and directors in religion, our interceſſors, the cariers and offerers of our praiers to him,Malach. 2, 7. and mediators vnto him vnder Chriſt, and for theſe cauſes and for their great digni
                        •
                     ie they are here and in * other places of Scripture called Angels.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  He is commaunded to vvrite diuers things to the churches of Epheſiu, S
                        •
                     yrna, Pergamus, and Thyatira: praiſing them that had not admitted the doctrine of the Heretikes called Nicola
                        •
                     ta, 22 and calling others by threates vnto penance: 26 and promiſing revvard to him that manfully ouercommeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  ANDThat vvhich before he vvilled him to vvrite to the church, he now vvilleth to be vvritten to the Angels or Biſhops of the ſame onely.vvhere vve ſee, it is al one, to the Church, and to the head or gouernour therof.
                   to the Angel of the Church of Epheſus vvrite, Thus ſaith he vvhich ″ holdeth the ſeuen ſtarres in his right hand, vvhich vvalketh in the middes of the ſeuen candleſtickes of gold, ✝ 
                     verse 2 I knovv ″ thy vvorkes and labour, and thy patience: and that thou canſt not beare euil men, and haſt tried them which ſay them ſelues to be Apoſtles, and are not, and haſt found them liars: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and thou haſt patience, and haſt borne for my
 name, and haſt not fainted. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But I haue againſt thee a fevv thinges, bicauſeBy this vve ſee is plainely refuted that vvhich ſome Heretikes hold, that a man once in grace or charitie can neuer fall from it. thou haſt left thy firſt charitie. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Be mindeful therfore from vvhence thou art fallen: and doe penance, and doe the firſt vvorkes. But if not: I come to thee, and ″ vvil moue thy candleſticke out of his place, vnleſſe thou doe penance. ✝ 
                     verse 6 but this thou haſt, ″ becauſe thou hateſt the factes ″ of the Nicolaïtes, vvhich I alſo hate. ✝ 
                     verse 7 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches, To him that ouercommeth, I vvil giue to eate of the tree of life, vvhich is in the Paradiſe of my God.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna vvrite, Thus ſaith * the firſt and the laſt,Apoc. 1, 17. vvho vvas dead, and liueth, ✝ 
                     verse 9 I knovv thy tribulation and thyThis Church repreſenteth the ſtate of them that are ſpoiled of their goodes, empriſoned, & manifoldly afflicted for the catholike faith. pouertie, but thou art riche: and thou art blaſphemed of them that ſay them ſelues to be Ievves and are not, but are the ſynagogue of Satan. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Feare none of theſe thinges vvhich thou ſhalt ſuffer. Behold the Deuil vvil ſend ſome of you into priſon that you may be tried: and you ſhal haue tribulation ten daies. Be thou faithful vntil death: and I vvil giue theeThe ſingular revvard of Martyrdom. the crovvne of life. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches, He that ſhal ouercome, ſhal not be hurt of theThe death of the body is the firſt death: the death of the ſoule, the ſecōd, vvhich Martyrs are ſureſt to eſcape of al men. ſecond death.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus vvrite, Thus ſaith he that hath the ſharpe tvvo edged ſvvord, ✝ 
                     verse 13 I knovv vvhere thou dvvelleſt, vvhere the ſeate of Satan is: and thou holdeſt my name, and haſt not denied my faith. And in thoſe daies Antipas my faithful vvitneſſe, vvho vvas ſlaine among you,The ſpecial reſidence of Satan is vvhere the faithful are perſecuted for Chriſtes truth▪ vvhere not to deny the Cath. faith for feare, is much here commended. vvhere Satan dvvelleth. ✝ 
                     verse 14 But I haue againſt thee a fevv thinges: becauſe thou haſt there, them that hold the doctrine of Balaam,Nu. 24, 14. 25, 2. vvho taught Balac ″ to caſt a ſcandal before the children of Iſrael, to eate and commit fornication: ✝ 
                     verse 15 ſo haſt thou alſo them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaïtes. ✝ 
                     verse 16 In like maner doe penance. if not: I vvil come to thee quickly, and vvil fight againſt them vvith the ſvvord of my mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 17 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches, To him that ouercōmeth I vvil giue the hidden manna, and vvil giue him a vvhite
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      calcul
                        •
                     
                     ̄
                     ▪
                   counter: and in the counter, a nevv name Written, vvhich no man knovveth, but he that receiueth it.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And to the Angel of the Church of Thyatíra vvrite, Thus ſaith the Sonne of God, vvhich hath eies as a flame of
 fire, and his feete like to latten. ✝ 
                     verse 19 I knovv thyNone of theſe are any thing vvorth vvithout the other. vvorkes, and faith, and thy charitie, and miniſterie, and thy patience and thy laſt vvorkes moe then the former. ✝ 
                     verse 20 But I haue againſt thee a fevv thinges: becauſe thou permitteſt ″ the vvoman * Iezabel,3 Reg. 18. vvho calleth her ſelf a propheteſſe, to teache, and to ſeduce my ſeruantes, to fornicate, and to eate of thinges ſacrificed to idols. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And I gaue her a time that ſhe might do penance: and ″ ſhe vvil not repent from her fornication. ✝ 
                     verse 22 Behold I vvil caſt her into a bedde: and ″ they that commit aduoutrie vvith her, ſhal be in very great tribulation, vnleſſe they do penance from their vvorkes: ✝ 
                     verse 23 and her children I vvil kil vnto death, and al the Churches ſhal knovv * that I am he that ſearcheth the reines and hartes,1 Reg. 16. and I vvil giue to euery one of youVvho 
                        〈◊〉
                      nor here that good vvorkes deſerue al utiō, as il workes damnation: and that it is not faith alone that God revvardeth but that faith vvhich vvorketh by charitie? according to his vvorkes.Pſ. 7, 10▪
                   ✝ 
                     verse 24 But I ſay to you the reſt vvhich are at Thyatira, vvhoſoeuer haue not this doctrine,Ier. 11, 20. vvhich haue not knowen thedepthes▪
                   depth' of Satan, as they ſay, I vvil not caſt vpon you an other vveight. ✝ 
                     verse 25 Yet that vvhich you haue, hold til I come. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And he that ſhal ouercome and keepe my vvorkes vnto the end: ″ I vvil giue him povver ouer the nations, ✝ 
                     verse 27 and
* he ſhal rule them vvith a rod of yron,Pſ. 2, 9. and as the veſſel of a potter ſhal they be broken, ✝ 
                     verse 28 
                  This great priuilege of Sa
                        •
                     cts riſeth of the povver and preeminence of Chriſt, vvhich his father gaue him according to his humanitie and therfore to deny it to Saincts, is to deny it to Chriſt him ſelf. as I alſo haue receiued of my father: and I vvil giue him the morning ſtarre. ✝ 
                     verse 29 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
                  
                     1. Holdeth the ſeuen.]
                     Chriſts care of his Church. Much to be obſerued, that Chriſt hath ſuch care ouer the Church and the Biſhops thereof, that he is ſaid here to beare them vp in his right hand, and to vvalke in the middes of them: no doubt to vphold and preſerue them and to guide them in al truth.
                  
                     2. Thy vvorkes, labour, patience &c.] Things required in a Biſhop▪ firſt, good vvorkes, and great patience in tribulation▪
                     Special vertues required in a Biſhop. next, zeale and ſharpe diſcipline tovvard offenders is here cōmended in them▪ thirdly, vviſedom & diligence in trial of falſe Apoſtles and preachers comming in ſheepeſkinnes: vvhere is ſignified the vvatchful prouidence that ought to be in them, that Heretikes enter not into their flockes.
                  
                     5. Vvil moue.]
                     Sinne is the cauſe that God taketh the Cath. faith from coū
                        tries. Note that the cauſe vvhy God taketh the truth from certaine countries, and remoueth their Biſhops or Churches into captiuitie or deſolation, is the ſinne of the Prelates and people. And that is the cauſe (no doubt) that Chriſt hath taken avvay our golden candleſticke, that is, our Church in England. God graunt vs to remember our fall, to doe penance and the former vvorkes of charitie vvhich our firſt Biſhops and Church vvere notable and renovvmed for.
                  
                     6. Becauſe thou hateſt.]
                     Zeale againſt Heretikes. Vve ſee here that of al things, Chriſtian people (ſpecially Biſhops) ſhould haue great zeale againſt Heretikes and hate them, that is, their vvicked doctrine and conditions, euen as God hateth them▪ for vvhich onely zeale, our Lord ſaith here that he beareth vvith ſome Churches and Prelates, and ſaueth them from periſhing.
                  
                      6. Of the Nicolaites.]
                     
                        Nicolaites the firſt Heretikes ſo called, as a paterne of Arians, Lutherans, and the like peculiar callings. Heretikes haue their callings of certaine perſons, as is noted at large Act. 11, 26. Theſe had their name of Nicolas, one of the 7 firſt Deacons that vvere choſen Act. 6. Vvho is thought to haue taught communitie of vvomen or vviues, and that it vvas lavvful to eate of meates offered to idols. Vvhich later point is ſuch a thing, as if one ſhould hold it lavvful to receiue the bread or vvine of the nevv Communion, vvhich is a kinde of Idolothytae, that is, idolatrous meates. for though ſuch creatures be good by creation, yet they be made execrable by profane bleſſings of Heretikes or Idolaters. And concerning the name of Nicolaites giuen here by our Lord him ſelf to thoſe Heretikes, it is a very paterne and marke vnto the faithful for euer, vvhat kinde of men they ſhould be,Balaam ouercomming Gods people by perſuaſion of lecherie and bellicheere, vvas a type of Heretikes. that ſhould be called after the like ſort, Arians, Macedonians, Neſtorians, Lutherans, Zuinglians, &c. See S. Hierom cont. Lucifer, in fine.
                  
                  
                     14. To caſt a ſcandal.]
                     li. 4. Antiq. c. 6. Ioſephus vvriteth that vvhen Balaam could not curſe Gods people, nor othervviſe anoy them, he taught Balaca vvay hovv to ouerthrovv them: to vvit▪ by preſenting vnto them their Heathen vvomen very beautiful, and delicate diſhes of meate offered to Bel-phego
                        •
                     : that ſo being tempted they might fall to heatheniſh maners and diſpleaſe God.2. Pet. 2, 15. Iuda v. 11. To vvhich craftie counſel of Balaam the Apoſtle reſembleth Heretikes fraude, vvho by offering of libertie of meate, vvomen, Church goodes, breache of vovves, and ſuch other licentious allurements, cauſe many moe to fall, then by their preaching.
                  
                     20. The vvoman Iezabel.] He vvarneth Biſhops to be zelous and ſtout againſt falſe Prophets and Heretikes of vvhat ſort ſoeuer,Zeale againſt Heretikes. by alluding couertly to the example of holy Elias that in zeale killed 450 falſe prophets of Iezabel,3 Reg. 18. and ſpared not Achab nor Iezabel them ſelues, but told them to their faces that they troubled Iſrael, that is, the faithful people of God. And vvhether there vvere any ſuch great vvoman then,Achab and Iezabel. a furtherer and promotour of the Nicolaites, vvhom the Prophete ſhould here meane, it is hard to ſay.
                  
                     21. She vvil not repent.] See free vvil here moſt plainely, and that God is not the proper cauſe of obduration or impenitence,Free vvil. God is not author of euil. but man him ſelf onely. Our Lord giueth ſinners ſo long life, ſpecially to expect their amendment: but Iezabel (to vvhom the Apoſtle here alludeth) vvould neuer repent.
                  
                     22. They that cōmit aduoutrie vvith her.]
                     They that communicate vvith Heretikes, ſhal be dāned vvith them▪
                      Such as communicate vvith Heretikes, ſhal be damned (alas) vvith them, for, not onely ſuch as vvere in their hartes, of Iezabels religion, or invvardly beleeued in Baal, but ſuch as externally for feare vvorſhipped him (vvhich the Scriptures call, bovving of their knees to Baal) are culpable▪
                     3 Reg. 19. v. 18. Ro. 11. as novv many bovv their knees to the Communion, that bovv not their hartes.
                  
                     26. I vvil giue him povver.] Obſerue that not onely Angels haue povver and regiment ouer Countries vnder God,Saincts alſo are Patrones, not only Angels. but novv for the honour of Chriſt humane nature, and for his miniſterie in the vvorld, the Saincts deceaſed alſo, being in heauen, haue gouernement ouer men and Prouinces, and therfore haue to doe vvith our affaires in the vvorld. Vvhich is againſt the Heretikes of theſe daies, that to take avvay our praiers to Saincts, vvould ſpoile them of many ſoueraine dignities, vvherein the Scriptures make them equal vvith Angels.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  He is commaunded to vvrite to the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicia: recalling them that erre to penance by threatening, but praiſing the reſt, and promiſing revvard to him that ouercommeth: 15 deteſting alſo the cold indifferent Chriſtian. 20 He ſaith that God knocketh at the doore of mens hartes by offering his grace, for to enter in to him that vvil open vnto him by conſent of free vvil.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  ANd to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, write, Thus ſaith he that hath the ſeuē Spirites of God, and the ſeuen ſtarres, I know thy vvorkes, that thou haſt the name that thou liueſt, and thou art dead. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Be vigilant, and confirme the reſt of the things vvhich vvere to die. For I finde not thy vvorkes ful before my God. ✝ 
                     verse 3 Haue in minde therfore in vvhat maner thou haſt receiued and heard:
 and keepe, and doe penance. If therfore thou vvatch not, * I vvil come to thee as a theefe,1 Theſ. 5, 2. 2 Pet. 3, 10. & thou ſhalt not knovv vvhat houre I vvil come to thee.Apo. 16, 15. ✝ 
                     verse 4 But thou haſt a fevv names in Sardis,Such as haue not cōmitted deadly ſinne after baptiſme. vvhich haue not defiled their garments: and they ſhal vvalke vvith me in vvhites, becauſe theyNote that there is in mā a vvorthineſſe of the ioyes of heauen, by holy life. & this is a cōmō ſpeache in holy Scripture, that man is worthy of God, of heauē, of ſaluatiō. are vvorthy. ✝ 
                     verse 5 ″ He that ſhal ouercome, ſhal thus be veſted in vvhite garmentes, and I vvil not put his name out of the booke of life, and I vvil confeſſe his name before my father, and before his Angels. ✝ 
                     verse 6 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaieth to the Churches.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia vvrite, Thus ſaith the Holy one and the True one, he that hath the * key of Dauid:Eſa. 22, 22. he that openeth, and no man ſhutteth: ſhutteth, and no man openeth. ✝ 
                     verse 8 I know thy vvorkes. Behold I haue giuen before thee a doore opened vvhich no man can ſhut: becauſe thou haſt a litle povver, and haſt kept my vvord, and haſt not denied my name. ✝ 
                     verse 9 Behold I vvil giue of the ſynagogue of Satan, vvhich ſay they be Ievves, and are not, but doe lie. Behold I vvil make them come and ″ adore before thy feete▪ and they ſhal knovv that I haue loued thee. ✝ 
                     verse 10 becauſe thou haſt kept the vvord of my patience, and I vvil keepe thee from the houre of tentation, vvhich ſhal come vpon the vvhole vvorld to tempt the inhabitants on the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 11 Behold I come quickely: hold that vvhich thou haſt, ″ that no man take thy crovvne. ✝ 
                     verse 12 He that ſhal ouercome, I vvil make him a piller in the temple of my God: and he ſhal goe out no more: and I vvil vvrite vpon him the name of my God, and the name of the citie of my God, nevv Hieruſalem vvhich deſcendeth out of heauen from my God, and my nevv name. ✝ 
                     verse 13 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And to the Angel of the Church of Laodicia vvrite, Thus ſaith
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Eccleſiaſtici 24, 9. 14. Col. 1, 15. Amen, the faithful and true vvitneſſe, * vvhich is the beginning of the creature of God. ✝ 
                     verse 15 I knovv thy vvorkes, that thou art neither colde, nor hote. I vvould thou vvere colde, or hote. ✝ 
                     verse 16 But becauſe thou art ″ lukevvarme, and neither cold nor hote, I vvil begin to vomite thee out of my mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 17 Becauſe thou ſaieſt, That I am riche, and enriched, and lacke nothing: and knovveſt not that thou art a miſer, and miſerable, and poore, and blinde, and naked. ✝ 
                     verse 18 I counſel thee to bye of me gold fire-tried, that thou maieſt
 be made riche: and maieſt be clothed in vvhite garmentes, that the confuſion of thy nakednes appeare not: and vvith eie ſalue anoint thine eies, that thou maieſt ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 19 I, * vvhom I loue,Prou. 3, 12. Heb. 12, 6. do rebuke and chaſtiſe. Be zelous therfore and doe penance. ✝ 
                     verse 20 Behold I ſtand at the doore andGod firſt calleth vpō man and knocketh at the doore of his hart: that is to ſay, offereth his grace▪ and it lieth in man to giue cōſent by free wil holpen alſo by his grace. knocke. if any man ſhal heare my voice, and open the gate, I vvil enter in to him, and vvil ſuppe vvith him, and he vvith me. ✝ 
                     verse 21 He that ſhal ouercome, I vvil giue vnto him to ſitte vvith me in my throne: as I alſo haue ouercome, and haue ſitten vvith my father in his throne. ✝ 
                     verse 22 He that hath an eare, let him heare vvhat the Spirit ſaith to the Churches.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III
                  
                     5. He that ſhal ouercome.] In al theſe ſpeaches to diuers Biſhops and their Churches,Doing vvel in reſpect of revvard. he continually encourageth them to conſtancie in faith and good life, by ſetting before their eies the revvard of the next life. And yet the Caluiniſts vvould haue no man do good in reſpect of ſuch revvard.
                  
                     9. Adore before thy feete.] You ſee this vvord of adoration is in Scriptures vſed for vvorſhip of creatures alſo,Adoration of creatures, called Dulia. and that to fall before the feete of holy men or Angels for duety and reuerence, is not idolatrie, except the proper honour due to God, be giuen vnto them. See the Annotations vpō the 19 & 22 Chapter concerning the Apoſtles proſtration before the Angel. And the Aduerſaries euaſion, ſaying that the adoration vvas of God onely: and that, before the feete of the partie, ſignifieth nothing els but, in his preſence, is falſe and againſt the phraſe of Scriptures. as 4 Reg. 4. vvhere the Sunamite adored Eliſaeus, falling dovvne before his feete▪ and 4 Reg. 2. the ſonnes of the Prophets adored him in the ſame ſort. and here this adoration can not be meant but of the Biſhop or Angel of Philadelphia, becauſe he promiſeth this honour as a revvard, and as an effecte of his loue tovvardes him, ſaying▪ 
                     And they ſhal knovv that I haue loued thee. And that vvhich he ſaith in the 22 Chapter, I fel dovvne to adore before the feete of the Angel: the very ſame he expreſſeth thus in the 19 Chapters, I fel before his feete to adore him: making it al one, to adore before his feete, and to adore him.
                  
                     11. That no man take thy crovvn
                           •
                        .]
                     Perſeuêrance in good & continuing to the end. That is, his crovvne of euerlaſting life and glorie, if he perſeuêre not to the end in faith & good vvorkes: othervviſe an other ſhal enter into his place, as Mathias did both to the dignitie of the Apoſtleſhip, & to the heauenly crovvne due for the vvel vſing and executing of the ſame function: vvhich Iudas might and ſhould haue had, if he had perſeuêred to the end. and as the Gentiles came into the grace and place of the Ievves. Other difficulties concerning this kinde of ſpeache are reſolued in Schoolemen, and are not here to be ſtoode vpon.
                  
                     16. Lukevvarms.] Zeale and feruour is commendable,Neuters of indifferents in religion. ſpecially in Gods cauſe: and the Neuters that be neither hote nor cold, are to Chriſt and his Church burdenous and lothſome, as lukevvarme vvater is to a mans ſtomake, prouoking him to vomite, and therfore he threateneth to void vp ſuch Neuters out of his mouth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               1. A doore being open in heauen,The 2 part. firſt, the booke with 7 ſeales: ſecōdly, 7 Angels with trumpets. he ſavv one ſitting in a throne, 4 and round about him foure and tvventie ſeniors ſitting, 6 and the foure beaſtes here deſcribed▪ 9 vvhich vvith the 24 ſeniors continually glorified him that ſate in the throne.
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe thinges I looked,THE 2 VISION. and behold a doore open in heauen,In which is repreſented vnto vs the glorie and maieſtie of God in heauen, and the inceſſant honour & praiſes of al Angels and Saincts aſsiſting him. Vvhich is reſembled in the daily honour done to him by al orders and ſortes of holy men in the Church militant alſo. and the firſt voice which I heard, vvas as it vvere of a trompet ſpeaking vvith me, ſaying, Come vp hither, and I vvil ſhevv thee the thinges vvhich muſt be done quickly after theſe. ✝ 
                     verse 2 Immediatly I vvas in ſpirit: and behold there vvas a ſeate ſette in heauen, and vpon the ſeate one ſitting. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he that ſate, vvas like in ſight, to the Iaſper ſtone, and the Sardine: and there vvas a raine-bovv round about the ſeate, like to the ſight of an Emeraud. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And round about the ſeate, foure and tvventie ſeates: and vpon the thrones, foure and twentie ſeniors ſitting, clothed about in vvhite garmentes, and on their heades crovvnes of gold. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And from the throne proceeded lightenings, and voices, and thunders: and ſeuen lampes burning before the throne, vvhich are the ſeuen Spirites of God. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And in the ſight of the ſeate, as it vvere a ſea of glaſſe like to cryſtall: and in the middes of the ſeate and round about the ſeateTheſe foure beaſtes, and the like deſcribed Ezaech, 1, by the iudgement of the holy Doctors ſignifie the 4 Euangeliſtes, and in them al true preachers▪ the man, Mathevv. the liō, Marke: the calle, Luke: the egle, Iohn? See the cauſes hereof in the Summe of the 4 Euangeliſt. pag. 1. S. Gregoin 1. Ezech.
                   foure beaſtes ful of eies before and behind. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the firſt beaſt, like to a lion: and the ſecond beaſt, like to a calfe: and the third beaſt, hauing the face as it vvere of a man: and the fourth beaſt, like to an egle flying. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the foure beaſtes, euery one of them had ſixe vvinges round about: and vvithin they are ful of eies▪ and they had no reſt day and night, ſaying, ″ Holy, Holy, Holy,
                  Eſ. 6, 3. 
                  Lord God omnipotent, vvhich vvas, and vvhich is, and vvhich ſhal come. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen thoſe beaſtes gaue glorie and honour and benediction to him that ſitteth vpon the throne, that liueth for euer and euer: ✝ 
                     verse 10 the foure and tvventie ſeniors fel dovvne before him that ſitteth in the throne, and adored him that liueth for euer and euer, and caſt their crownes before the throne, ſaying, ✝ 
                     verse 11 Thou art vvorthie O Lord our God to receiue glorie and honour and povver: becauſe thou haſt created al thinges, and for thy vvil they vvere and haue been created.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     8. Holy, holy. holy.] This vvord is thriſe repeated here, and Eſa. 6: and to the imitation therof, in the ſeruice of the holy Church,The Sanctus thriſe repeated. at Te Deum, and at Maſſe, ſpecially in the Preface next before the great myſteries, for the honour of the three perſons in the B. Trinitie, and that the Church militant may ioyne vvith the triumphant, and vvith al the orders of Angels, vvho alſo are preſent
 at the conſecration, and doe ſeruice there to our common Lord and Maiſter. as S. Chryſoſtom vvriteth li. 6 de Sacerdotie. and h
                           •
                        . 1. de verb. Eſa. to. 1. The Greekes call it, the hymne Triſagies, that is, Thriſe holy.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  4. S. Iohn vveeping, becauſe no man could open the booke ſealed vvith ſeuen ſeales: 
                        •
                      the Lambe that vvas ſlaine, opened it: vvhich being done, 8 the foure beaſtes and foure and tvventie ſeniors, vvith an innumerable multitude of Angels & al creatures, did glorifie him excedingly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv in the right hand of him that ſate vpon the throne,THE 3 VISION. aS. Gregorie taketh it to be the booke of holy Scripture. li. 4. Dialog. c. 42.
                   booke vvritten vvithin and vvithout, ſealed vvith ſeuen ſeales. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I ſavv a ſtrong Angel, preaching vvith a loude voice, Vvho is vvorthie to opē the booke, & to looſe the ſeales thereof? ✝ 
                     verse 3 And no man vvas able neither in heauen nor in earth, norHe ſpeaketh not of the damned in Hel, of vvhom there could be no queſtion: but of the faithful in Abrahams boſome, & in Purgatorie. vnder the earth, to open the booke, nor looke on it. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And I vvept much becauſe no man vvas found vvorthie to open the booke, nor to ſee it. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And one of the ſeniors ſaid to me, Vveepe not: behold 
So did Iacob (Gen. 49.) call Chriſt▪ for his kingly fortitude in ſubduing the vvorld vnto him. the * lion of the tribe of Iuda, the roote of Dauid, hath vvonne,Gen. 49, 9. to open the booke, and to looſe the ſeuen ſeales thereof.
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 
                  The Epiſtle vpon al-Hallovves eue. And I ſavv, and behold in the middes of the throne and of the foure beaſtes and in the middes of the ſeniors,So Chriſt is called for that he is the immaculate hoſt or ſacrifice for our ſinnes. a Lambe ſtanding as it were ſlaine, hauing ſeuen hornes & ſeuen eies: vvhich are the ſeuen ſpirites of God, ſent into al the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And he came, and receiued the booke out of the right hand of him that ſate in the throne. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And vvhen he had opened the booke, the foure beaſtes and the foure and tvventie ſeniors fel before the Lambe, hauing euery one harpes, and golden vials ful of odours, which are ″ the praiers of ſainctes: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and they ſang a nevv canticle, ſaying, Thou art vvorthie o Lord to take the booke, and to open the ſeales thereof:This maketh againſt the Caluiniſtes vvho are not cōtent to ſay that vve merite not, but that Chriſt merited not for him ſelf. Calu. Philip. 2. v. 9.
                   becauſe thou vvaſt ſlaine, and haſt redeemed vs to God in thy bloud out of euery tribe and tonge and people and nation,1 Pet. 2. ✝ 
                     verse 10 and * haſt made vs to our God ″kinges▪
                   a kingdom' and prieſtes, and vve ſhal reigne vpon the earth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I looked, and heard the voice of many Angels round about the throne,The Epiſtle in a votiue Maſſe of the holy Angels. and of the beaſtes & of the ſeniors: and the number of them vvas * thouſandes of thouſandes,Dan. 7. 10.
                   ✝ 
                     verse 12 ſaying vvith a loud voice, The Lambe that vvas ſlaine, is vvorthie to receiue povver, andriches▪
                   diuinitie', and vviſedom, & ſtrength, and honour, and glorie, and benediction. ⊢ ✝ 
                     verse 13 And ″ euery creature that is in heauen, and vpon the earth, and vnder the earth, and that are in the ſea, and that are therein: al did I heare ſaying, * To him that ſitteth in the throne, &Al the ſaid creatures are bound to giue honour, not onely to God, but to Chriſt as man, and our redeemer: & ſo they here doe. to the Lambe,Apoc. 4, 11. benediction and honour and glorie and povver for euer and euer. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the foure beaſtes ſaid, Amen. And the foure and tvventie ſeniors fel on their faces: and adored him that liueth for euer and euer. ⊢
               
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
                  
                     8. The praiers of Saincts.]
                     The Saincts in heauen offer our praiers to God. Hereby it is plaine that the Saincts in heauen offer vp the praiers of faithful and holy perſons in earth (called here ſaincts, and in Scripture often) vnto Chriſt. And among ſo many diuine & vnſearcheable myſteries ſet dovvne vvithout expoſition, it pleaſed God yet, that the Apoſtle him ſelf ſhould open this one point vnto vs, that theſe odours be the laudes and praiers of the faithful, aſcending and offered vp to God as incenſe, by the Saincts in heauen, that ſo the Proteſtants may haue no excuſe of their errour. That the Saincts haue no knovvledge of our affaires or deſires.
                  
                     10. A kingdom and prieſts.]
                     Spiritual kings and Prieſts. To ſerue God and ſubdue vices and ſinnes, is to reigne or to be a king ſpiritually, likevviſe to offer vnto him the ſacrifices of good vvorkes, is to be a prieſt after a ſort: though neither the one nor the other in proper ſpeache. See the Annotation before Chap. 1. v. 6.
                  
                     13. Euery creature.]
                     
                        Limbus Patrum and Purgatorie. He meaneth the creatures in heauen, as Angels and Saincts. the holy perſons in earth, and thoſe that vvere in Limbo, or be in Purgatorie (for of the damned in hel he can not ſpeake in this caſe:) laſtly, of the peoples in Ilands (here called the ſea) vvhich the Prophets vſe often to name ſeuerally, vvhen they foretel the ſpreading of Chriſts glorie through the vvorld. as Eſa. c. 49. Heare ye 
                           ••
                        andes and you people a far of▪ &c.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  1 Foure ſeales of the ſeuen being opened, there folovv diuerſe effectes againſt the earth. 9 vvhen the fifth ſeale vvas opened, the ſoules of martyrs deſire that the iudgement may be haſtened: 12 and at the opening of the ſixt, there are ſignes ſhovved of the iudgement to come.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv that the Lambe had opened one of the ſeuen ſeales, and I heard one of the foure beaſtes, ſaying, as it vvere the voice of thunder, Come, and ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I ſavv: And behold a vvhite horſe, and he that ſate vpon him had a bovv, and there vvas a crovvne giuen him, and he vvent forth conquering that he might conquer.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 3 And vvhen he had opened the ſecond ſeale, I heard the ſecond beaſt, ſaying, Come, & ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And there vvent forth an other horſe, redde: and he that ſate thereon, to him it vvas giuen that he ſhould take peace from the earth, and that they ſhould kil one an other, and a great ſvvord vvas giuen to him.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And vvhen he had opened the third ſeale, I heard the third beaſt, ſaying, Come, and ſee. And behold a blacke horſe, and he that ſate vpon him, had a balance in his hand. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And I heard as it vvere a voice in the middes of the foure beaſtes ſaying: Tvvo poundes of vvheate for a penie, and thriſe tvvo poundes of barley for a penie, and vvine and oile hurt thou not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen he had opened the fourth ſeale, I heard a voice of the fourth beaſt, ſaying, Come, & ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And behold a pale horſe: and he that ſate vpon him, his name vvas death, and hel folovved him. and povver vvas giuen to him ouer the foure partes of the earth, to kil vvith ſvvord, vvith famine, and vvith death, and vvith beaſtes of the earth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And vvhen he had opened the fifth ſeale: I ſavv ″ vnder the altar the ſoules of them that vvere ſlaine for the vvord of God, and for the teſtimonie vvhich they had. ✝ 
                     verse 10 ″ and they cried vvith a loude voice, ſaying, Hovv long Lord, holy & true, iudgeſt thou not and ″ reuengeſt thou not our bloud of them that dvvel on the earth? ✝ 
                     verse 11 And vvhite ſtoles vvere giuen, to euery one of themThis one ſtole ſignifieth the glorie or bliſſe of the ſoule onely. but at the day of iudgement they ſhal haue it doubled by adding the glorie of their body alſo. one: and it vvas ſaid to them, that they ſhould reſt yet a litle time, ″ til their fellovv-ſeruātes be complete, and their brethren, that are to be ſlaine euen as they.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And I ſavv, vvhen he had opened the ſixt ſeale, andThe tribulation that ſhal fall in the time of Antichriſt. behold there vvas made a great earth-quake, and the ſunne became blacke as it vvere ſacke cloth of heare: and the vvhole moone became as bloud: ✝ 
                     verse 13 and the ſtarres from heauen fel vpō the earth, as the figge tree caſteth her greene figges when it is ſhaken of a great vvinde: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and heauen departed as a booke folded together: and euery hil, and ilandes vvere moued out of their places. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the kinges of the earth, & princes, and, tribunes, and the riche, and the ſtrong, and euery bond-man, and free-man * hid them ſelues in the dennes and the rockes of mountaines. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And they ſay to the mountaines 
 and the rockes:Oſ
                        •
                     e. 10. * Fall vpon vs, and hide vs from the face of him that ſitteth vpon the throne,Lu. 23, 50. and from the wrath of the Lambe: ✝ 
                     verse 17 becauſe the great day of their wrath is come, and vvho ſhal be able to ſtand?
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
                  
                     9. Vnder the altar.] Chriſt as man (no doubt) is this altar, vnder vvhich the ſoules of al Martyrs liue in heauen,Conſecration of altars vvith Sainct
                           •
                         relikes. expecting their bodies, as Chriſt their head hath his body there already. And for correſpondence to their place of ſtate in heauen, the Church ſaieth commonly their bodies alſo or relikes neere or vnder the altars, vvhere our Sauiour: body is offered in the holy Maſſe: and hath a ſpecial prouiſo that no altars be erected or conſecrated vvithout ſome part of a Saincts body or relikes. Con
                           •
                        . Aſrican, can. 50. Carthag. 5. can. 14. See S. Hierom cont. vigilant c. 3. S. Auguſtine de ciuit. li. 8. c. 27. S. Gregorie li. 5. ep. 50. li. 1. ep. 52. li. 2 ep. 58. Vvher vnto the Prophet ſeemeth here to allude, making their ſoules alſo to haue their being in heauen, as it vvere vnder the altar. But for this purpoſe note vvel the vvordes of S. Auguſtine (or vvhat other auncient writer ſoeuer vvas the author thereof) Ser. 11 de Sanctis. Vnder the altar (ſaith he) of God I ſavv the ſoules of the ſlaine. What is more reuerent or honorable, then to reſt vnder that altar on vvhich ſacrifice is done to God, and in vvhich our Lord is the Prieſt: as it is vvritten, Thou art a Prieſt according to the order of Melchiſedec? Rightly do the ſoules of the iuſt reſt vnder the altar, becauſe vpon the altar our Lordes body is offered. neither vvithout cauſe do the iuſt there call for reuenge of their bloud, vvhere alſo the bloud of Chriſt is ſhed for ſinners. and many other goodly vvordes to that purpoſe.
                  This place alſo the vvicked heretike Vigilantius (as S. Hierom vvriting againſt him vvitneſſeth c. 2) abuſed to proue,Saincts be preſent at their tombes and relikes. that the ſoules of Martyrs and other Saincts vvere included in ſome certaine place, that they could not be preſent at their bodies and monuments (vvhere Chriſtian people vſed in the primitiue Church to pray vnto them, as Catholike men doe yet) nor be vvhere they liſt,The Caluiniſtes hereſie concerning the Saincts conſuted by S. Hierom long agoe. or vvhere men pray vnto them. To vvhich the holy doctor anſvvereth at large, that they be vvhereſoeuer Chriſt is according to his humanitie: for vnder that altar they be. Part of his vvordes be theſe, that you may ſee hovv this bleſſed father refuted in that Heretike the Caluiniſtes ſo long before they vvere borne. Dcſt thou (ſaith he) preſ
                           ••
                        ribe ſavves to God? Doeſt thou fe
                           •
                        ter the Apoſtles, that they may be kept in priſon til the day of iudgement, and be kept from their Lord, of vvhom it is vvritten, They folovv the Lambe vvhither ſoeuer he goeth.
                     Apoc. 14. 
                     If the Lambe be in euery place, then they that he vvith the Lambe, muſt be euery vvhere. And if the diuel and vvicked ſpirites gadding abrode in the vvorld vvith paſsing celeritie, be preſent euery vvhere: ſhal holy Martyrs after the ſheading of their bloud, be kept cloſe vnder an altar, that they can not ſturre out from thence? So anſvvereth this learned doctor.
                  Vvhich miſliketh our Caluiniſtes ſo much,They vnlearnedly accuſe S. Hierom a
                           •
                         an Vbiquiſte. that they charge him of great errour, in that he ſaith, Chriſt according to his humanitie is euery vvhere, as though he vvere an Vbiquetarie Proteſtant. Vvhere, if they had any iudgement, they might perceiue that he meaneth not, that Chriſt or his Saincts ſhould be perſonally preſent at once in euery place alike, as God is: but that their motion, ſpeede, and agilitie to be vvhere they liſt, is incomparable, and that their povver and operation is accordingly. vvhich they may learne to be the holy doctors meaning,Hovv S. Hierō ſaith, Chriſt & his Saincts are euery vvhere. by the vvordes that folovv of the Diuel and his miniſters: vvhō he affirmeth to be euery vvhere no othervviſe but by their exceding celeritie of being and vvorking miſcheefe novv in one place, novv in an other, and that in a moment. For though they be ſpirites, yet are they not euery vvhere at once according to their eſſence. And for our nevv Diuines it vvere a hard thing to determine,Iob. 1. hovv long Satan (that told our Lord he had circuited the earth) vvas in his iourney, and in the particular conſideration and tentation of Iob: and hovv many men he aſſaulted in that his one circuite. No, no. ſuch curious companions knovv nothing, nor beleeue nothing, but that they ſee vvith corporal eies, and teach nothing but the vvay to infidelitie.
                  
                     10. And they cried.] S. Hierom alſo againſt the ſaid Vigilantius reporteth, that he vſed an argument againſt the praiers of Saincts out of this place,That Saincts pray for vs, S. Hierom proueth againſt the Heretike Vigilantius. for that theſe Martyrs cried for reuenge, and could not obtaine. But vve vvil report his vvordes, that you may ſee how like one heretike is to an other, theſe of our daies to thoſe of old. Thou ſaieſt in thy booke (ſaith S. Hierom c. 3.) that vvhiles vve be aliue, one of vs may pray for an other: but after vve be dead, no mans praier ſhal be heard for an other: ſpecially ſeing the Martyrs aſking reuenge of their bloud, could not obtaine. So ſaid the Heretike. Againſt vvhich the holy Doctor maketh a long refu
                        •
                     ation, prouing that they pray much more after they be in heauen, then they did here in
 earth: and that they ſhal be much ſooner heard of God, then vvhen they vvere in the vvorld.
                  But for the Heretikes argument framed out of theſe vvordes of the Apocalypſe thus, Theſe Martyrs did not obtaine, 
                           〈◊〉
                         Saincts do not pray for vs: it vvas ſo friuolous, and the antecedent ſo manifeſtly falſe, that he vouchſaued not to ſtand about it. For it is plaine that the Martyrs here vvere heard, and that their petition ſhould be fulfilled in time appointed by God (vvherevnto they did and do alvvaies conforme them ſelues:) for it vvas ſaid vnto them, That they ſhould reſt yet a litle time, til &c. And that Martyrs praiers be heard in this caſe, our Sauiour teſtifieth Luc 18 ſaying, And vvil not God reuenge his elect that crie to him day and night? I ſay to you, he vvil quickly reuenge them. And if God do not heare the Saincts ſometime nor graunt their requeſtes, is it therfore conſequent that they do not or may not pray? Then Chriſt him ſelf ſhould not haue praied his father to remoue the bitter cuppe of death from him, becauſe that petition vvas not graunted.
                  
                     10. Reuengeſt thou not?]
                     Hovv Martyrs crie for reuenge. They do not deſire reuenge vpon their enemies for hatred, but of charitie and zeale of Gods honour, praying that his enemies and the perſecutors of his Church and Saincts, that vvil not repent, may be confounded: and that our Lord would accelerate his general iudgement, that ſo they might attaine the perfect crowne of glorie promiſed vnto them, both in body and ſoule: vvhich is to deſire the reſurrection of their bodies, vvhich then ſhal triumph perfectly and fully ouer the perſecutors that ſo cruelly handled the bodies of the elect, vvhich ſhal then appeare glorious to the enemies cōfuſion.
                  
                     11. Til their fellovv ſeruantes be complete.] There is a certaine number that God hath ordained to die for the teſtimonie of truth and the Catholike faith, for conformitie of the members to the head CHRIST our cheefe Martyr, and til that number be accompliſhed, the general condemnation of the vvicked perſecutors ſhal not come, nor the general reward of the elect.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The earth being to be puniſhed, 3 they are commaunded to ſaue them that are ſigned in their foreheads: 4 vvhich are deſcribed and numbered both of the Ievves and Gentiles, bleſsing God. 13 Of them that vvere clothed in vvhite ſtoles or long robes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſe things I ſavv foure Angels ſtāding vpon the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure vvindes of the earth that they ſhould not blovv vpon the land, nor vpon the ſea, nor on any tree. ✝ 
                     verse 2 
                  The Epiſtle vpon Al hallovves day. And I ſavv an other Angel aſcending from the riſing of the ſunne, hauing the ſigne of the liuing God: & he cried vvith a loud voice to the foure Angels, to vvhom it vvas giuen to hurt the earth and the ſea, ✝ 
                     verse 3 ſaying, Hurt not the earth and the ſea, nor the trees, tilIt is an alluſion to the ſigne of the Croſſe vvhich the faithful beare in their foreheads, to ſhevv they be not aſhamed of Chriſt. S. Auguſt. tract. 43. in Io.
                   vve ſigne the ſeruants of our God in their foreheades.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And I heard the number of them that vvere ſigned, an hundred fourtie foure thouſand vvere ſigned,Of al the tribes put together, ſo many, 144000. of euery tribe of the children of Iſraël. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Of the tribe of Iuda, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Ruben, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of God,He ſignifieth by theſe thouſands and the multitude folowing al the elect: but the elect of the Ievves, to be in a certaine number: the elect of the Gentiles to be innumerable. tvvelue thouſand ſigned. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Of the tribe of Aſer, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Nephthali, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Manaſſes,
 tvvelue thouſand ſigned. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Of the tribe of Simeon, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Leui, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Iſſachar, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Of the tribe of Zabulon, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Ioſeph, tvvelue thouſand ſigned. Of the tribe of Beniamin, tvvelue thouſand ſigned.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 After theſe things I ſavvThe elect of the Gentiles. a great multitude vvhich no man could number, of al nations, and tribes, and peoples, & tonges: ſtanding before the throne, and in the ſight of the Lambe, clothed in vvhite robes, andBoughes of the palme tree be tokens of triumph and victorie. palmes in their hands: ✝ 
                     verse 10 And they cried vvith a lovvd voice, ſaying, Saluation to our God vvhich ſitteth vpon the throne, and to the Lambe. ✝ 
                     verse 11 and al the Angels ſtoode in the circuite of the throne and of the ſeniors and of the foure beaſtes: and they fal in the ſight of the throne vpon their faces, and adored God, ✝ 
                     verse 12 ſaying, Amen. Benediction, and glorie, and vviſedom, & thākesgiuing, honour and povver, and ſtrength to our God for euer and euer. Amen. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And one of the ſeniors anſvvered,The Epiſtle for many Martyrs. & ſaid to me, Theſe that are clothed in the vvhite robes, vvho be they? & whence came they? ✝ 
                     verse 14 And I ſaid to him, My Lord thou knovveſt. And he ſaid to me, Theſe are they vvhich are come out of great tribulation, and haue vvaſhed their robes, and made them vvhite in the bloud of the Lambe.The glorie of Martyrs. ✝ 
                     verse 15 therfore they are before the throne of God, and they ſerue him day and night in his temple: and he that ſitteth in the throne, ſhal dvvel ouer them.Eſa. 49, 10. ✝ 
                     verse 16 * they ſhal no more hunger nor thirſt, neither ſhal the ſunne fall vpon them, nor any heate. ✝ 
                     verse 17 becauſe the Lambe vvhich is in the middes of the throne, ſhal rule them, and ſhal conduct them to the liuing fountaines of vvaters,Eſ. 25, 8. and * God vvil vvipe avvay al teares from their eies.Apo. 21, 4. 
                  ⊢
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  1 The ſeuenth ſeale being opened, there appeare Angels vvith trempets: 5 and vvhen an other Angel povvred out fire taken from the altar, vpon the earth, there folovv diuers tempeſtes. 7 In like maner, vvhiles foure Angels of the ſeuen ſound their trempets, there fall ſundrie plagues.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND vvhen he had opened the ſeuenth ſeale,THE 4 VISION. there vvas made ſilence in heauen, as it vvere halfe an houre. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I ſavv ſeuen Angels ſtanding in the ſight of God: and there vvere giuen to them ſeuen trompets. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And an other Angel came, and ſtoodeThe Prieſt ſtanding at the altar praying & offering for the people in the time of the high myſteries, Chriſt him ſelf alſo being preſent vpon the altar, is a figure of this thing, & therevnto he alludeth. before the altar, hauing a golden cenſar: and there vvere giuen to him many incenſes, that he ſhould giue of the praiers of al ſainctes vpon the altar of gold, vvhich is before the throne of God. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the ſmoke of the incēſesIf this be S. Michael or any Angel, and not Chriſt him ſelf, as ſome take it, Angels offer vp the praiers of the faithful, as the 24 Elders did chap. 5. for this vvvord, Saincts, is taken here for the holy perſons on earth, as often in the Scripture: though it be not againſt the Scriptures, that the inferior Sainct or Angel in heauē ſhould offer their praiers to God by their ſuperiors there. But hereby vve cōclude againſt the Proteſtants, that it derogateth not from Chriſt, that Angels or Saincts offer our praiers to God▪ as alſo it is plaine of Raphael Tob. 12, 12.
                   of the praiers of the ſainctes aſcended from the hand of the Angel before God. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And the Angel tooke the cenſar, and filled it, of the fire of the altar, and caſt it on the earth, and there vvere made thunders & voices and lightenings, and a great earthquake. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And the ſeuē Angels vvhich had the ſeuen trompets, prepared them ſelues to ſound vvith the trompet.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the firſt Angel ſounded vvith the trompet, and there vvas made haile and fire, mingled in bloud, and it vvas caſt on the earth, & the third part of the earth was burnt, & the third part of trees vvas burnt, and al greene graſſe vvas burnt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the ſecond Angel ſounded vvith the trompet: and as it vvere a great mountaine burning vvith fire, vvas caſt into the ſea, and the third part of the ſea vvas made bloud: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and the third part of thoſe creatures died, vvhich had liues in the ſea, and the third part of the ſhippes periſhed.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And the third Angel ſounded vvith the trompet, and a great ſtarre fel from heauen, burning as it vvere a torche, and it fel on the third part of the floudes, and on the fountaines of vvaters: ✝ 
                     verse 11 and the name of the ſtarre is called vvormevvod. and the third part of the vvaters was made into worme wod: and many men died of the vvaters, becauſe they vvere made bitter.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the fourth Angel ſounded vvith the trompet, and the third part of the ſunne vvas ſmitten, and the third part of the moone, and the third part of the ſtarres, ſo that the third part of them vvas darkened, and of the day there ſhined not the third part, and of the night in like maner. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And I looked, and heard the voice of one egle flying through the middes of heauen, ſaying vvith a loud voice, Vvo, vvo, vvo to the inhabiters
 on the earth: becauſe of the reſt of the voices of the three Angels vvhich vvere to ſound vvith the trompet.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The fifth Angel ſounding the tr
                        •
                     mpet, a ſtarre falleth. 3 The iſſuing forth of locuſtes from the ſmoke of the deepe pitte to vex
                        •
                      men, 7 and the deſcription of them. 13 The ſixt Angel ſounding, foure Angels are let looſe, 18 vvhich vvith a great troupe of horſemen do murder the third part of men.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND the fifth Angel ſounded vvith the trompet,Moſt vnderſtand al this of Heretikes. and I ſavvThe fall of an Arch heretike, as Arius, Luther, Caluin, out of the Church of God. Which haue the key of Hel to open & bring forth al the old condemned hereſies buried before in the depth. a ſtarre to haue fallen from heauen vpon the earth, and there vvas giuen to him the key of the pitte of bottomles depth. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he opened the pitte of the bottomles depth: and the ſmoke of the pitte aſcended, as the ſmoke of a great fornace: and the ſunne vvas darkened & the aier vvith the ſmoke of the pitte. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And from the ſmoke of the pitte there iſſued forthInnumerable pe
                        •
                     y heretikes folowing their Maiſters after the opening & the ſmoke of the bottomleſſe pit. locuſtes into the earth▪ and povver vvas giuen to them, as the ſcorpions of the earth haue povver: ✝ 
                     verse 4 and it vvas commaunded them that they ſhould not hurt the graſſe of the earth 
                     •
                   not any greene thing, nor any tree: but onely men vvhich haue not the ſigne of God in their foreheads. ✝ 
                     verse 5 and it vvas giuen vnto them that they ſhould not kil them: but that they ſhould be tormented fiue monethes: and their tormentes as the tormentes of a ſcorpion vvhen he ſtriketh a man. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And
* in thoſe daies men ſhal ſeeke for death,Apoc. 6, 16. and ſhal not finde it: and they ſhal deſire to die, & death ſhal flee from them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And the ſimilitudes of the locuſtes, like to horſes ″ prepared into battel: and vpō their heades as it vvere crovvnes like to gold: & their faces as the faces of men. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they had heare as the heare of vvomen: & their teeth vvere as of lions. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And they had habbergions as habbergions of yron, and the voice of their vvinges as the voice of the chariotes of many horſes running into battel. ✝ 
                     verse 10 and they had tailes like to ſcorpions, and ſtinges vvere in their tailes: and their povver vvas to hurt men fiue monethes.The cheefe Maiſter of heretikes. ✝ 
                     verse 11 and they had ouer them a king, the Angel of the bottomles depth, vvhoſe name in Hebrevv is Abaddon,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , In Engliſh, Deſtroier.
                   and in Greeke Apollyon: in Latin hauing the name Exterminans. ✝ 
                     verse 12 One vvoe is gone, & behold two vvoes come yet after theſe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And the ſixt Angel ſounded vvith the trompet: and I
 heard one voice from the foure hornes of the golden altar, vvhich is before the eies of God, ✝ 
                     verse 14 ſaying to the ſixt Angel which had the trōpet, Looſe the foure Angels which are boūd in the great riuer Euphrates. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the foure Angels vvere looſed, vvho vvere prepared for an houre, and a day and a moneth and a yere: that they might kil the third part of men. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the number of the armie of horſemen vvas tvventie thouſand times ten thouſand. And I heard the nūber of them. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And ſo I ſavv the horſes in the viſion: & they that ſate vpō them, had habbergiōs of fire and of hyacinth and brimſtone▪ & the heades of the horſes were as it were the heads of lions: & from their mouth procedeth fire, & ſmoke, and brimſtone.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 And by theſe three plagues vvas ſlaine the third part of men, of the fire and of the ſmoke and of the brimſtone, vvhich proceded from their mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 19 For the povver of the horſes is in their mouth, and in their tailes▪ for, their tailes be like to ſerpents, hauing heads: and in theſe they hurt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 
                  Pagans, Infidels, and ſinful impenitent Catholikes muſt be condemned alſo. And the reſt of men vvhich vvere not ſlaine vvith theſe plagues, neitherThis phraſe being the like both in greeke and latin, ſignifieth ſuch ſorowful & penal repentance as cauſeth a man to forſake his former ſinnes and depart from them. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . See the ſame phraſe. c. 2, 21, 22. & Act. 
                           •
                        . v. 22.
                   haue done penance from the vvorkes of their hands, not to adore Deuils and ″ Idols of gold and ſiluer and braſſe and ſtone and vvood, vvhich neither can ſee, not heare, nor vvalke, ✝ 
                     verse 21 & haue not done penāce from their murders, nor from their ſorceries, nor from their fornication, nor from their theftes.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
                  
                     4. Nor any greene thing.] The Heretikes neuer hurt or ſeduce the greene tree, that is, ſuch as haue a liuing faith vvorking by charitie,Vvho are ſeduced by Heretikes. but commonly they corrupt him in faith vvho ſhould othervviſe haue periſhed for il life, and him that is reprobate, that hath neither the ſigne of the Croſſe (vvhich is Gods marke) in the forehead of his body, nor the note of election in his ſoule.
                  
                     7. Prepared into battel.] Heretikes being euer ready to contend, do pretend victorie, and counterfeit gold:The manifold hypocriſie of Heretikes. in ſhape as men, as ſmothe and delicate as vvomen, their tongues and pennes ful of gall and venim: their hartes obdurate: ful of noiſe and ſhuffling: their doctrine as peſtiſerous and ful of poiſon, as the taile and ſting of a ſcorpion, but they endure for a litle ſeaſon.
                  
                     20. Idols of gold.] Here againe the nevv Tranſlatours abuſe the people, for idols ſaying images:
                     Her
                           •
                        t. tranſlation. the place being plainely againſt the pourtiates of the Heathen Gods, vvhich are here and in the Pſalme 95 called, damenia, Diuels.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  An other ſtrong Angel crying out, 3 ſeuen thunders do ſpeake. 6 The Angel ſweareth that there ſhal be time no more, but at the voice of the ſeuenth Angel the myſterie ſhal be fully accompliſhed, 9 He giueth Iohn a booke to deuoure.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv an other Angel,CHRIST the valiant Angel is here deſcribed. ſtrong, deſcending from heauen, clothed vvith a cloude, and a raine-bovv on his head, and his face vvas as the ſunne, and his feete aspillers a piller' of fire. ✝ 
                     verse 2 and he had in his hand a litle booke opened: and he put his right foote vpon the ſea, and his left vpon the land. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and he cried vvith a loude voice, as vvhen a lion roareth. And vvhen he had cried, the ſeuen thunders ſpake their voices. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And vvhen the ſeuen thunders had ſpoken their voices, I vvas about to vvrite: and I heard a voice from heauen ſaying to me: Signe the things vvhich the ſeuen thunders haue ſpoken: andMany great myſteries and truthes are to be preſerued in the Church, vvhich for cauſes knovven to Gods prouidence are not to be vvritten in the booke of holy Scripture. vvrite them not.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * the Angel vvhich I ſavv ſtanding vpon the ſea and vpon the land,Dan. 12, 7.
                  This vvas the maner of taking an othe by the true God. as 
                           〈◊〉
                         32.
                   lifted vp his hand to heauen, ✝ 
                     verse 6 and he ſvvare by him that liueth for euer and euer, that created heauen and thoſe things vvhich are in it: and the earth, and thoſe things vvhich are in it: and the ſea, and thoſe things vvhich are in it: That there ſhal be time no more: ✝ 
                     verse 7 but in the daies of the voice of the ſeuenth Angel, vvhen the trompet ſhal beginne to ſound, the myſterie of God ſhal be conſummate, as he hath euangelized by his ſeruantes the Prophetes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And I heard a voice from heauen againe ſpeaking with me, and ſaying: Goe, and take the booke that is opened, of the hand of the Angel ſtanding vpon the ſea and vpon the land. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And I vvent to the Angel, ſaying vnto him, that he ſhould giue me the booke.Ezec. 3, 1 And he ſaid to me, * Take the booke, and
By earneſt ſtudie and meditation. deuoure it: and it ſhal make thy belly to be bitter, but in thy mouth it ſhal beSvveete in the reading, but in fulfilling, ſomevvhat bitter, becauſe it cō
                     maūdeth workes of penance and ſuffering of tribulatiōs. ſvveete as it vvere honie. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And I tooke the booke of the hand of the Angel, and denoured it: & it vvas in my mouth as it vvere honie, ſvveete▪ and vvhen I had deuoured it, my bellie vvas made bitter, ✝ 
                     verse 11 and he ſaid to me, Thou muſt againe prophecie to Nations, and peoples, and tonges, and many kinges.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  S. Iohn meaſuring the Temple, 3 heareth of tvvo vvitneſſes that ſhal preache: 7 vvhom the beaſt cōming vp from the ſea ſhal kil, 12 but they riſing againe aſcend into heauen, 13 and ſeuen thouſand perſons are ſlaine vvith an earthquake: 15 and as the ſound of the ſeuenth Angel, the ſoure and tvventie ſeniors giue praiſe, and thankes to God.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there vvas giuen me a reede like vnto a rodde: and it vvas ſaid to me, Ariſe, and meaſure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that adore in it. ✝ 
                     verse 2 but the court vvhich is vvithout the temple, caſt forth, & meaſure not that: becauſe it is giuen to the Gentiles, & they ſhal treade vnder foote the holy citieThree yeres and a halfe▪ vvhich is the time of Antichriſts reigne and perſecution. two and fourtie monethes: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and I vvil giue to ″ my tvvo vvitneſſes, and they ſhal prophecie a thouſand tvvo hundred ſixtie daies, clothed vvith facke-clothes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Theſe are the two oliue trees and the tvvo candleſtickes that ſtand in the ſight of the Lord of the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And if any man vvil hurt them, fire ſhal come forth out of their mouthes, and ſhal deuoure their enemies. and if any man vvil hurt them: ſo muſt he be ſlaine. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Theſe haue power to ſhut heauen, that it raine not in the daies of their prophecie: and they haue povver ouer the vvaters to turne them into bloud, and to ſtrike the earth vvith al plague as often as they vvil.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen they ſhal haue finiſhed their teſtimonie: the 
The great Antichriſt. beaſt vvhich aſcended from the depth, ſhal make vvarre againſt them, and ſhal ouercome them, and kil them. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And their bodies ſhal lie in the ſtreates of theHe meaneth Hieruſalem, named Sodom and Aegypt for the imitatiō of thē in wickednes. So that we ſee his cheefe reigne ſhal be there, though his tyrannie may extend to al places of the vvorld. great citie, vvhich is called ſpiritually Sodom and Aegypt, vvhere their Lord alſo vvas crucified. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And there ſhal of tribes, and peoples, and tonges, and Gentiles, ſee their bodies for three daies and a halfe: and they ſhal not ſuffer their bodies to be laid in monuments. ✝ 
                     verse 10 and the inhabitants of the earthThe wicked reioyce, vvhen holy men are executed by the tyrants of the vvorld, becauſe their life and doctrine are hurdenous vnto them. ſhal be glad vpon them, and make merie: and ſhal ſend giftes one to an other, becauſe theſe tvvo prophets tormented them that dvvelt vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And after three daies and a halfe, the ſpirit of life from God entred into them. And they ſtoode vpon their ſeete, and great feare fel vpon them that ſavv them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And they heard a loud voice from heauen ſaying to them, Come vp hither. And they vvent vp into heauen in a cloude: and their enemies ſavv them. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And in that houre there vvas made a great earthquake: and the tenth part of the citie fel: and there vvere ſlaine in the earthquake names of men ſeuen thouſand: and the reſt vvere caſt into a feare, and gaue glorie to the God of heauen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 The ſecond vvoe is gone: and behold the third vvoe vvil come quickly. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the ſeuenth Angel ſounded with 
 a trompet: and there vvere made loude voices in heauen ſaying,The kingdō of this world vſurped before by Satan & Antichriſt, ſhal aftervvard be Chriſtes for euer. The kingdom of this vvorld is made our Lords & his Chriſts, and he ſhal reigne for euer and euer. Amen.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the foure and tvventie ſeniours vvhich ſitte on their ſeates in the ſight of God, fel on their faces, and adored God, ✝ 
                     verse 17 ſaying: Vve thanke thee Lord God omnipotent, vvhich art, and vvhich vvaſt, and vvhich ſhalt come: becauſe thou haſt receiued thy great povver, and haſt reigned. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the Gentiles vvere angrie, and thy vvrath is come, and the time of the dead, to be iudged, andTo repay the hire or wages (for ſo both the Greeke vvord and the latin ſignifie) due to holy men, proueth againſt the proteſtāts, that they did truely merite the ſame in this life. to tender revvard to thy ſeruants the prophets and ſainctes, and to them that feare thy name, ″ litle and great, and to deſtroy them that haue corrupted the earth.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the temple of God vvas opened in heauen: and the arke of his teſtament vvas ſeen in his temple, and there vvere made lightenings, and voices, and an earthquake and greate haile.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
                  3. My tvvo vvitneſſes.] Enoch and Elias,
                     Enoch & Elias yet aliue, ſhal preach in the time of Antichriſt. 
                     as it is commonly expounded▪ for, that Elias ſhal come againe before the later day, it is a moſt notorious knovven thing (to vſe S. Auguſtines vvordes) in the mouthes and hartes of faithful men. See li. 20 de Ciuit. Dei c. 29. Tract. 4 in Ioan. and both of Enoch and Elias, Lib. 1 de pec. merit. c. 3. So the reſt of the Latin Doctors. as, S. Hierom ad Pāmach ep. 61 c. 11. & in Pſal. 20. S. Ambroſe in Pſal. 45. S. Hilarie 20 can. in Mat. Proſpet li. vltim
                        •
                      de Promiſsionibus c. 13. S Gregorie li. 14. Moral. c. 11. & he. 12 in Ezech. Beda in 9 Marci. The Greeke fathers alſo, as S. Chryſoſtom he. 58 in Mat. & ho. 4 in 2 Theſſal. & ho. 21 in Geneſ. & ho. 22 in ep. ad Hebr. Theophylacte and Occumenius in 17 Matthai. S. Damaſcene li. 4 de Orthodoxa fide c. 27.
                  Furthermore, that they liue alſo in Paradiſe, it is partly gathered out of the Scripture Ecclici 44. 16. vvhere it is plainely ſaid of Enoch, that he is tranſlated into Paradiſe, as al our Latin exemplars do reade: and of Elias, that he vvas taken vp aliue, it is euident 4 Reg. 2. And S. Irenaeus ſaith, it is the tradition of the Apoſtles, that they be both there. li. 5 in initio. Dicunt Presbyteri (ſaith he) qui ſunt Apoſtolorum Diſcipuli. So ſay the Prieſts or Auncients that are the ſcholers of the Apoſtles. See S. Iuſtine q. 85 ad orthodoxos. Finally, that they ſhal returne into the companie of men in the end of the vvorld, to preache againſt Antichriſt, and to inutie both Ievves and Gentiles to penance, and ſo be martyred, as this place of the Apocalypſe ſeemeth plaine, ſo vve haue in part other teſtimonies hereof. Malac. 4. Ecclci 44, 16. 48, 10. Mat. 17, 11. See alſo Hyppolytus booke of Antichriſt and the end of the vvorld. Al vvhich being vvel conſidered, the Heretikes are to contentious and incredulous, to diſcredite the ſame, as they commonly doe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  4 The great dragen (the Diuel) vvatching the vvoman that brought forth a man childe, to deuoure it, God tooke avvay the childe to him ſelf, and fed the vvoman in the deſert. 7 Michael fighting vvith the dragon ouercōmeth him. 13 vvho being throvven dovvne to the earth, perſen
                        •
                     teth the vvomā & her ſeede.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND a great ſigne appeared in heauen:THE 3 PART.
                  This is properly & principally ſpoken of the Church: and by alluſion, of our B. Lady alſo. a vvoman clothed vvith the ſunne,The Dragons incredulous & perſecuting multitude, and Antichriſt the cheefe head thereof. and the moone vnder her feete, & on her head a crovvne of tvvelue ſtarres: ✝ 
                     verse 2 & being with childe, ſhe cried alſo traueling, and is in anguiſh to be deliuered. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And there vvas ſeen an other ſigne in heauen, and beholdThe great Diuel Lucifer. a great red dragon hauing ſeuē heades; & ten hornes: and on his heades ſeuen diademes, ✝ 
                     verse 4 & his taile drevvThe ſpirites that fall from their firſt ſtate into Apoſtaſie vvith him and by his meanes. the third part of the ſtarres of heauen, and caſt them to the earth, and the dragon ſtoode before the vvoman vvhich vvas ready to be deliuered: that vvhen ſhe ſhould be deliuered, he mightThe Diuels endeuour agaīſt the Churches children, and ſpecially our B. Ladies onely ſonne the head of the reſt. deuoure her ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And ſhe brought forth a man childe,Pſ 2, 9. vvho vvas * to gouerne al nations in an yron rodde: & her ſonne vvas taken vp to God and to his throne,Apoc. 2, 27. ✝ 
                     verse 6 & ″ the vvoman fled into the vvilderneſſe where ſhe had a place prepared of God, that there they might feede her a thouſand tvvo hundred ſixtie daies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And there vvas made ″ a great battel in heauen, Michael and his Angels fought vvith the dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels: ✝ 
                     verse 8 and they preuailed not, neither vvas their place found any more in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And that great dragon vvas caſt forth, the old ſerpent, vvhich is called the Deuil and Satan, vvhich ſeduceth the vvhole vvorld: and he vvas caſt into the earth, & his Angels vvere throvven downe vvith him. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And I heard a great voice in heauen ſaying: Novv is there made ſaluation and force, and the kingdom of our God, and the povver of his Chriſt: becauſe the accuſer of our brethren is caſt forth, vvho accuſed them before the ſight of our God day and night. ✝ 
                     verse 11 AndVvhen the Angels or vve haue the victorie, vve muſt knovv it is by the bloud of Chriſt, and ſo al is referred alvvaies to him. they ouercame him by the bloud of the Lambe, and by the vvord of their teſtimonie, and they loued not their liues euen vnto death. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Therfore reioyce ô heauens, and you that dvvel therein. Vvo to the earth and to the ſea, becauſe the Diuel is deſcēded to you, hauing great vvrath, knovving that he hath a litle time.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And after the dragon ſavv that he vvas throvven into the earth, he perſecuted the vvomā vvhich brought forth the man-childe: ✝ 
                     verse 14 and there vvere giuen to the vvoman tvvo vvinges of a great egle, that ſhee might flie into the deſert
 vnto her place, vvhere ſhe is nouriſhed forThis often inſinuatiō that Antichriſts reigne ſhal be but three yeres & a halfe (Dan. 7, 25. Apoc. 12, 2. 3. & in this chap. v. 6. c. 13, 5.) proueth that the heretikes be excedingly blinded vvith malice, that hold the Pope to be Antichriſt, who hath ruled ſo many ages. a time & times, & halfe a time, from the face of the ſerpent. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And the ſerpent caſt out of his mouth after the vvoman, vvater as it vvere a floud: that he might make her ″ to be caried avvay vvith the floud. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the earth holpe the vvoman, and the earth opened her mouth, and ſvvallovved vp the floud vvhich the dragon caſt out of his mouth. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the dragon vvas angrie againſt the vvoman: and vvent to make battel vvith the reſt of her ſeede, vvhich keepe the, commaundements of God, and haue the teſtimonie of IESVS Chriſt. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And he ſtood vpon the ſand of the ſea.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
                  
                     6. The vvoman fled.] This great perſecution that the Church ſhal flee from, is in the time of Antichriſt, and ſhal endure but three yeres and a halfe, as is noted v. 14 in the margent. In vvhich time for al that,The Church ſhal flee as to a deſert in Antichriſts time, but not decay or be vnknowen, no not for ſo ſhort a time. ſhe ſhal not vvant our Lordes protection, nor true Paſtors, nor be ſo ſecrete, but al faithful men ſhal knovv and folovv her: much leſſe ſhal ſhe decay, erre in faith, or degenerate and folovv Antichriſt, as Heretikes do vvickedly feine. As the Church Catholike novv in England in this time of perſecution, becauſe it hath no publike ſtate of regiment nor open free exerciſe of holy functions, may be ſaid to be fled into the deſert, yet it is neither vnknovven to the faithful that folovv it. nor the enemies that perſecute it: as the hidde company that the proteſtants talke of, vvas for ſome vvorldes together, neither knovven to their frendes nor foes, becauſe there vvas in deede none ſuch for many ages together. And this is true, if vve take this flight for a very corporal retiring into vvildernes. Vvhere in deede it may be, and is of moſt expounded, to be a ſpiritual flight, by forſaking the ioyes and ſolaces of the vvorld, and giuing her ſelf to contemplation and penance, during the time of perſecution vnder Antichriſt. And by enlarging the ſenſe, it may alſo very vvel ſignifie the deſolation and affliction that the Church ſuffereth and hath ſuffered from time to time in this vvildernes of the vvorld, by al the forerunners and miniſters of Antichriſt, Tyrants and Heretikes.
                  
                     7. A great battel.]
                     S. Michael fighting vvith the dragon. In the Church there is a perpetual combat betvvixt S. Michael (protector of the Church militant as he vvas ſometime of the Ievves Synagogue Dan. 10, 21) and his Angels, and the Deuil and his miniſters the perfect victorie ouer vvhom, ſhal be at the iudgement. Marke here alſo the cauſe vvhy S. Michael is commonly painted fighting vvith a dragon.
                  
                     15. To be caried avvay.]
                     Antichriſts attēpts to draw from the true faith. By great perſecution he vvould dravv her, that is, her children from the true faith: but euery one of the faithful elect, gladly bearing their part thereof, ouercome his tyranoie At vvhoſe conſtancie he being the more offended, vvorketh malicious attempts in aſſaulting the frailer ſort, vvho are here ſignified by the reſt of her ſeede that keepe the commaundemants, but are not ſo perfect as the former.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  1 A beaſt riſing vp out of the ſea, hauing ſeuen heades and ten hornes & ten diademes, 5 blaſphemeth God. 7 and vvarreth againſt the Saincts & deſtroieth them. 11 And an other beaſt riſing out of the earth vvith tvvo hornes, vvas altogether for the foreſaid beaſt, conſtraining men to make and adore the image thereof, and to haue the character of his name.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv ″ a beaſt comming vp from the ſea, hauing ſeuen heades, and ten hornes, & vpon his hornes ten diademes, and vpon his heades names of blaſphemie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the beaſt vvhich I ſavv, vvas like to a libarde, and his feete as of a beare, and his mouth, as the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gaue him his ovvne force and great povver. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And I ſavv one of his heades as it vvere ſlaine to death: and the vvound of his death vvas cured. And al the earth vvasThey that now folow the ſimpleſt & groſſeſt heretikes that euer were without ſeeing miracles, vvould then much more folow this great ſeducer working miracles. in admiration after the beaſt. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And they adored the dragon vvhich gaue povver to the beaſt: and they adored the beaſt, ſaying, Vvho is like to the beaſt? and vvho ſhal be able to fight vvith it? ✝ 
                     verse 5 And there was giuen to it a mouth ſpeaking great things and blaſphemies: and povver vvas giuen to it to vvorke tvvo and fourtie monethes. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he opened his mouth vnto blaſphemies tovvard God,No heretikes euer liker Antichriſt, thē theſe in our daies, ſpecially in blaſphemies againſt Gods Church, Sacraments, Saincts, miniſters, and al ſacred thinges. to blaſpheme his name, and his tabernacle, and thoſe that dvvel in heauen. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And it vvas giuē vnto him ″ to make battail vvith the ſainctes, & to ouercome them. And povver vvas giuen him vpon euery tribe and people, and tongue, and nation, ✝ 
                     verse 8 and al that inhabite the earth,Apoc. 3. 5 adored it, * vvhoſe names be not written in the booke of life of the Lambe, vvhich vvas ſlaine from the beginning of the vvorld.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 If any man haue an eare, let him heare. ✝ 
                     verse 10 He that ſhal leade into captiuitie,Gen. 9, 6 goeth into captiuitie: * he that ſhal kil in the ſvvord,Mt. 26, 52. he muſt be killed vvith the ſvvord. here is the patience and the faith of ſainctes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I ſavvAn other falſe prophet inferior to Antichriſt, ſhal vvorke vvonders alſo, but al referred to the honour of his maiſter Antichriſt. So doth Caluin & other Arch-heretikes peruert the world to the honour of Antichriſt, and ſo do their ſcholers alſo for the honour of them. an other beaſt cōming vp from the earth: and he had tvvo hornes, like to a lambe, & he ſpake as a dragon. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And al the povver of the former beaſt he did in his ſight: and he made the earth and the inhabitants therein, to adore the firſt beaſt, vvhoſe vvound of death vvas cured. ✝ 
                     verse 13 And he did many ſignes, ſo that he made alſo fire to come dovvne from heauen vnto the earth in the ſight of men. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And he ſeduceth the inhabitants on the earth through the ſignes vvhich vvere giuē him to doe in the ſight of the beaſt, ſaying to them that dwel on the earth, that they ſhould make ″ the image of the beaſt vvhich hath the ſtroke of the ſword, and liued. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And it vvas giuen him to giue ſpirit to the image of the beaſt, and that the image of the beaſt ſhould ſpeake:
 and ſhould make, that vvhoſoeuer ſhal not adore the image of the beaſt, be ſlaine. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he ſhal make al, litle & great, and rich, and poore, and free-men, and bond-men, to haue a character in their right hand, or in their foreheads. ✝ 
                     verse 17 and that no man may bie or ſel, but he that hath ″ the character, or the name of the beaſt, or the number of his name. ✝ 
                     verse 18 Here is vviſdom. He that hath vnderſtanding, ″ let him count the number of the beaſt. For ″ it is the number of a man: & ″ the number of him is ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
                  8. A beaſt comming vp.]
                     Many myſteries expounded. This beaſt is the vniuerſal companie of the vvicked, vvhoſe head is Antichriſt: & the ſame is called (Apoc. 17) the vvhoore of Babylon. The 7 heades be expounded (Apoc. 17) ſeuen kings: fiue before Chriſt, one preſent, and one to come. The 10 hornes be alſo there expounded to be to kings that ſhal reigne a ſhort vvhile after Antichriſt. This dragon is the Diuel, by vvhoſe povver the vvhoore or beaſt or Antichriſt vvorketh▪ for in the vvordes folovving (v. 3 & 4) Antichriſt is called the beaſt, to vvhom the dragon, that is, the Deuil giueth that povver of feined miracles▪ and as vve adore God for giuing povver to Chriſt and his folovvers, ſo they ſhal adore the Deuil for aſſiſting Antichriſt and giuing him povver.
                  7. To make battel vvith the ſaincts.]
                     Great perſecution by Antichriſt and his miniſters. He ſhal kil the ſaincts then liuing, Elias and Enoch, and infinite moe that profeſſe Chriſt, vvhereby vve muſt learne, not to maruel vvhen vve ſee the vvicked perſecute and preuaile againſt the iuſt, in this life. Then ſhal his great perſecution and crueltie trie the ſaincts patience, as his vvonderful meanes to ſeduce ſhal trie the ſtedfaſtnes of their faith,Their bleſſednes that continue cōſtant. vvhich is ſignified by theſe vvordes folovving, Here is the patience and the faith of ſaincts. And vvhen it is ſaid, They adored the beaſt, vvhoſe names are not vvritten in the booke of life of the Lambe, it giueth great ſolace and hope to al them that ſhal not yeld to ſuch perſecutions, that they are of Gods elect, and their names vvritten in the booke of life.
                  14. The image of the beaſt.]
                     The honour of Chriſts image is for the honour of Chriſt. They that novv refuſe to vvorſhip Chriſts image, vvould then vvorſhip Antichriſts. And vve may note here, that as the making or honouring of this image vvas not againſt the honour of Antichriſt, but vvholy for it, as alſo the image erected of Nabuchodo noſor, and the vvorſhip thereof vvas altogether for the honour of him, ſo is the vvorſhip of Chriſts image, the honour of Chriſt him ſelf, and not againſt him, as Proteſtants madly imagin.
                  17. The character or the name.]
                     Antichriſts triple honour againſt the honour of Chriſt. As belike for the peruerſe imitation of Chriſt, vvhoſe image (ſpecially as on the Roode or crucifixe) he ſeeth honoured and exalted in euery Church, he vvil haue his image adored (for that is Antichriſt, in emulation of like honour, aduerſarie to Chriſt) ſo for that he ſeeth al true Chriſtian men to beare the badge of his Croſſe in their foreheads, he likevviſe vvil force al his to haue an other marke, to aboliſh the ſigne of Chriſt. By the like emulation alſo and vvicked oppoſition he vvil haue his name and the letters thereof to be ſacred, and to be vvorne in mens cappes, or vvritten in ſolemne places, and to be vvorſhipped, as the name of IESVS is and ought to be among Chriſtian men. And as the ineffable name of God vvas among the Ievves expreſſed by a certaine number of 4 characters (therfore called Tetragrāmmaton) ſo it ſeemeth the Apoſtle alludeth here to the number of Antichriſts name.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                     The Proteſtāts by aboliſhing of Chriſtes image, & croſſe and irreuerēce to the name IESVS, make a ready vvay to the honour of Antichriſt.
                  
                  And here it is much to be noted, that the Proteſtants plucking dovvne the image of Chriſt out of al Churches, & his ſigne of the croſſe from mens foreheads, and taking avvay the honour and reuerence of the name IESVS, doe make roome for Antichriſts image, & marke, and name. And vvhen Chriſts images and enſignes or armes ſhal be aboliſhed, and the Idol of Antichriſt ſet vp in ſteede thereof, as it is already begonne: then is the abomination of deſolation vvhich vvas foretold by Daniel and our Sauiour.
                  18. Let him count.] Though God vvould not haue it manifeſt before hand to the vvorld, vvho in particular this Antichriſt ſhould be: yet it pleaſed him to giue ſuch tokens of him, that vvhen he commeth, the faithful may eaſily take notice of him, according as it is vvritten of the euent of other prophecies concerning our Sauiour.Io. 14, 29. 
                     That vvhen it is come to paſſe,
                     Antichriſts name ſecrete. 
                     you may beleeue. In the meane time vve muſt take heede that vve iudge not ouer raſhly of Gods ſecretes, the holy vvrite,
 here ſignifying, that it is a point of high vnderſtanding▪ illuminated extraordinarily by Gods ſpirit, to recken right and diſcipher truely before hand, Antichriſts name and perſon.
                  
                     18. It is the number of a man.] A man he muſt be, and not a Diuel or ſpirit, as here it is cleere, and by S. Paul 2 Theſſal. 2. vvhere he is called,Antichriſt ſhal be one ſpecial man, and of a peculiar name. 
                     the man of ſinne. Againe, he muſt be one particular perſon, & not a nūber, a ſucceſſion, or vvhole order of any degree of men: becauſe his proper name▪ and the particular number, and the characters thereof be (though obſcurely) inſinuated. Vvhich reproueth the vvicked vanitie of Heretikes, that vvould haue Chriſts ovvne Vicars, the ſucceſſors of his cheeſe Apoſtle, yea the vvhole order of them for many ages together, to be this Antichriſt. Vvho by his deſcription here and in the ſaid Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, muſt be one ſpecial man, and of a particular proper name, as our Lord IESVS is. And vvhoſoeuer he be, theſe Proteſtants vndoubtedly are his precurſors for as they make his vvay by ridding avvay Chriſts images, croſſe, and name, ſo they excedingly promote the matter by taking avvay Chriſts cheefe miniſter, that al may be plaine for Antichriſt.
                  If the Pope had been Antichriſt,The Pope can not be Antichriſt. and had been reuealed novv a good many yeres ſithence, as theſe fellovves ſay he is to them, then the number of this name vvould agree to him, and the prophecie being novv fulfilled, it vvould euidently appeare that he bare the name and number here noted▪ for (no doubt) vvhen lie commeth, this count of the letters or number of his name vvhich before is ſo hard to knovv, wil be eaſie▪ for he will ſet vp his name in euery place, euē as we faithful men do novv aduance IESVS. And vvhat name proper or appellatiue of al or any of the Popes do they finde to agree vvith this number, notvvithſtanding they boaſt that they haue found the vvhole order and euery of them theſe thouſand yeres to be Antichriſt, and the reſt before euen from S. Peter, forevvorkers tovvard his kingdom?
                  
                     1
                           •
                        . The number 666.] Foraſmuch as the auncient expoſitors and other do thinke (for certaine knowledge thereof no mortal mā can haue vvithout an expreſſe reuelatiō) that his name cōſiſteth of ſo many,Al ſcaming of letters to expreſſe Antichriſts name, is vncertaine. & ſuch letters in Greeke, as according to their maner of numbering by the Alphabete make 666, and foraſmuch as the letters making that number, may be found in diuers names both proper & common:Irem. li. 5 in fine. (as S. Irenaeus findeth them in Latinos and Teitan, Hippolytus in 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Aretas in Lampetis, & ſome of this age in Ludérus, vvhich vvas Luthers name in the Alman tōgue:) therfore vve ſee there can be no certaintie, and euery one frameth and applieth the letters to his ovvne purpoſe▪ and moſt abſurd folly it is of the Heretikes, to applie the vvord, Latinos, to the Pope: neither the vvhole order in common, nor euer any particular Pope being ſo called▪ and S. Irenaeus the firſt that obſerued it in that vvord, applied it to the Empire and ſtate of the Romane Emperour, vvhich then vvas Heathen, and not to the Pope of his daies or after him: and yet preferred the vvord, Teitan, as more agreable, vvith this admonition, that it vvere a very perilous and preſumptuous thing to define any certaintie before hand, of that number and name. And truely vvhatſoeuer the Proteſtants preſume herein of the Pope, vve may boldly diſcharge Luther of that dignitie. He is vndoubtedly one of Antichriſts precurſors, but not Antichriſt him ſelf.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  2 Virgins follovv the Lambe vvhitherſoeuer, ſinging a nevv canticle. 6. One Angel Euangelizeth the Goſpel: 8 an other Angel telleth the fall of Babylon: 9 the third declareth their tormants that haue adored the beaſt, Moreouer tvvo hauing ſickles, 15 one of them is commaunded to reape dovvne the corne, 18 the other to gather the grapes as in vintage, vvhich are troden in the lake of Gods vvrath.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I looked,The Epiſtle vpō S. Innocents day in Chriſtmas. & beholdChriſt, and the ſame number of elect that were ſigned chap. 7. a Lābe ſtoode vpon mount Sion, and vvith him an hundred fourtie foure thouſand hauing his name, and the name of his Father vvritten in their foreheads. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I heard a voice from heauen, as the voice of many vvaters, and as the voice of great thunder: and the voice vvhich I heard, as of harpers harping on their harpes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And they ſang as it vvere a nevv ſong before the ſeate and before the foure beaſtes, and the ſeniors, and no
 man couldlearne 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   ſay' the ſong, but thoſe hundred fourtie foure thouſand, that vvere bought from the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Theſe are they vvhich were not defiled vvith vvomen. For they are
One ſtate of life more excellēt then an other and virgins for their puritie paſſing the reſt, & alwaies accompanying Chriſt according to the Churches hymne out of this place, Quecunque pergis, virgines ſequuntur &c.
                   virgins. Theſe folovv the Lambe vvhitherſoeuer he ſhal goe. Theſe vvere bought from among men,This the Church applieth to the holy Innocents that died firſt for Chriſt. the firſt fruites to God and the Lambe: ✝ 
                     verse 5 and in their mouth there vvas found no lie. for they are vvithout ſpot before the throne of God. ⊢
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 6 And I ſavv an other Angel flying through the middes of heauen, hauing the eternal Goſpel, to euāgelize vnto them that ſit vpon the earth, and vpon euery nation, and tribe, & tōge, & people: ✝ 
                     verse 7 ſaying vvith a loud voice, Feare our Lord, and giue him honour, becauſe the houre of his iudgement is come:Pſ. 145. and adore ye him * that made heauen and earth, the ſea and al things that are in them,Act. 14. and the fountaines of vvaters.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And an other Angel folovved,Eſa. 21. ſaying, * Fallen fallen is that greatThe citie of the diuel, which is the vniuerſal ſocietie of the wicked miſbeleuers & il liuers in the vvorld. Babylon,Ier. 51. vvhich of the vvine of the vvrath of her fornication made al nations to drinke.Apo. 18.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And the third Angel folovved them, ſaying vvith a loud voice, If any man adore the beaſt and his image, and receiue the character in his forehead, or in his hand: ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  The great damnatiō that ſhal folovv them that forſake Chriſt & the Church, & worſhip Antichriſt or his image. he alſo ſhal drinke of the vvine of the vvrath of God, vvhich is mingled vvith pure vvine in the cuppe of his vvrath, and ſhal be tormented vvith fire & brimſtone in the ſight of the holy Angels and before the ſight of the Lambe. ✝ 
                     verse 11 and the ſmoke of their tormentes ſhal aſcend for euer & euer: neither haue they reſt day and night, vvhich haue adored the beaſt, and his image, and if any man take the character of his name. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Here is the patience of ſainctes, vvhichFaith is not ynough to ſaluatiō, without fulfilling of Gods cōmaū
                     dements. keepe the commaundements of God and the faith of IESVS.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 
                  The Epiſtle in a daily Maſſe for the dead. And I heard a voice from heauen, ſaying to me, Vvrite, Bleſſed are the dead which die in our Lord. ″ from hence forth novv, ſaith the Spirit, that they reſt from their labours▪ for their vvorkes folow them.
                ✝ 
                     verse 14 And I ſavv, and behold a vvhite cloude: and vpon the cloude one ſitting like to the Sonne of man, hauing on his head a crovvne of gold, and in his hand a ſharpe ſickle.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 And an other Angel came forth from the temple, crying vvith a loud voice to him that ſate vpon the cloude,Ioel 3. * Thruſt in thy ſickle,Mat. 13. and reape, becauſe the houre is come to reape,
 for the harueſt of the earth is drie. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he that ſate vpon the cloude, thruſt his ſickle into the earth, and the earth vvas reaped. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And an other Angel came forth from the temple vvhich is in heauē, him ſelf alſo hauing a ſharpe ſickle. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And an other Angel came forth from the altar, vvhich had povver ouer the fite: and he cried vvith a loud voice to him that had the ſharpe ſickle, ſaying, Thruſt in thy ſharpe ſickle, and gather the cluſters of the vineyard of the earth: becauſe the grapes thereof be ripe. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the Angel thruſt his ſharpe ſickle into the earth, and gathered the vineyard of the earth, & caſt it into the great
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      lacū. fat, trough, lake. preſſe of the vvrath of God: ✝ 
                     verse 20 and the preſſe vvas troden vvithout the citie, and bloud came forth out of the preſſe, vp to the horſe bridles, for a thouſand ſixe hundred furlongs.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     13. From hence forth novv.] This being ſpecially ſpoken of Martyrs (as not onely S. Auguſtine ſeemeth to take it,Beza. but the Caluiniſts them ſelues, tranſlating, in domino, for our Lords cauſe) the Proteſtants haue no reaſon to vſe the place againſt Purgatorie or praier for the departed, ſeeing the Catholike Church and al her children confeſſe,Praying for the dead, and vnto Saincts, at the altar. that al Martyrs are ſtraight after their death, in bliſſe, and neede no praiers. Vvhereof this is S. Auguſtines knovven ſentence, He doeth iniurie to the Martyr, that praieth for the Martyr. Ser. 17 de verb. Apoſt. c. 1. and againe to this purpoſe he vvriteth thus moſt excellently tract. 84 in Ioan. We keepe not a memorie of Martyrs at our Lords table, as vve doe of other that reſt in peace, that is, for the intent to pray for them, but rather that they may pray for vs &c.
                  
                  But if vve take the vvordes generally for al deceaſed in ſtate of grace, as it may be alſo, then vve ſay that euen ſuch, though they be in Purgatorie and Gods chaſtiſement in the next life, and neede our praiers,The place abuſed againſt Purgatorie, anſvvered. yet (according to the foreſaid vvordes of S. Auguſtine) do reſt in peace. being diſcharged from the labours, afflictions, and perſecutions of this vvorld, and (vvhich is more) from the daily dangers of ſinne and damnation, and put into infallible ſecuritie of eternal ioy vvith vnſpeakable comfort of conſcience. and ſuch in deede are more happie and bleſſed then any liuing, vvho yet are vſually in the Scriptures called bleſſed, euen in the middes of the tribulations of this life. Vvhereby vve ſee that theſe vvordes, from hence forth they ſhal reſt from their labours, may truely agree to them alſo that are in Purgatorie, and ſo here is nothing proued againſt Purgatorie. Laſtly, this aduerbe,á modo 
                     á modo, in Latin, as in the Greeke
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , doth not properly ſignifie, from this preſent time forvvard,Photius in Lexico. as though the Apoſtle had ſaid, that after their death and ſo forvvard they are happie: but it noteth and ioyneth the time paſt together vvith the time preſent, in this ſenſe, that ſuch as haue died ſince Chriſts Aſcenſion, vvhen he firſt entring into heauen opened it for others, goe not to Limbus Patrum, as they vvere vvont before Chriſts time, but are in caſe to goe ſtraight to bliſſe, except the impediment be in them ſelues. Therfore they are here called bleſſed, that die novv in this ſtate of grace & of the nevv Teſtament, in compariſon of the old faithful and good perſons.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.THE 4 PART
               
               
                  2 They that had novv ouercome the beaſt and his image and the number of his name,Of the 7 laſt plagues & final damnatiō of the vvicked. do glorifie God. 6 To ſeuen Angels hauing the ſeuen laſt plagues, are giuen ſeuen cuppes full of the vvrath of God.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv an other ſigne in heauen great and maruelous:The tribulations about the day of iudgement. ſeuen Angels hauing the ſeuen laſt plagues. Becauſe in them the wrath of God is conſummate. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I ſavv as it vvereBaptiſme. a ſea of glaſſe mingled vvith fire, and them that ouercame the beaſt and his image and the number of his name, ſtanding vpon the ſea of glaſſe, hauing the harpes of God: ✝ 
                     verse 3 and ſingingThe ſong of Moyſes and Chriſt, is the new Teſtamēt and the old. the ſong of Moyſes the ſeruant of God, and the ſong of the Lambe, ſaying, Great and maruelous are thy vvorkes Lord God omnipotent: iuſt and true are thy vvaies King of theSaincts vvorldes'. ✝ 
                     verse 4 Vvho ſhal not feare thee o Lord, and magnifie thy name? becauſe thou only art holy, becauſe al nations ſhal come, & adore in thy ſight, becauſe thy iudgements be manifeſt.
                ✝ 
                     verse 5 And after theſe things I looked,THE EIETH VISION. and behold the temple of the tabernacle of teſtimonie was opened in heauen: ✝ 
                     verse 6 and there iſſued forth the ſeuen Angels, hauing the ſeuen plagues, from the temple: reueſted vvith cleane and vvhitelinen ſtone', & girded about the breaſtes vvith girdles of gold.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   ✝ 
                     verse 7 And one of the foure beaſtes,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . gaue to the ſeuen Angels ſeuen vials of gold ful of the vvrath of the God that liueth for euer and euer. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the temple vvas filled vvith ſmoke at the maieſtie of God, and at his povver: and no man could enter into the temple, til the ſeuen plagues of the ſeuen Angels vvere conſummate.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  Vpon the pouring out of the ſeuen cuppes of Gods vvrath, on the land, the ſea, the fountaines, the ſeat of the beaſt, Euphrâtes and the aire: there ariſe ſundrie plagues in the vvorld.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I heard a great voice out of the temple, ſaying to the ſeuen Angels: Goe, and poure out the ſeuen vials of the vvrath of God vpon the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And the firſt vvent, and poured out his vial vpon the earth, and there vvas made a cruel and very ſore vvound vpon men that had the character of the beaſt: and vpon them that adored the image thereof.
                ✝ 
                     verse 3 And the ſecond Angel poured out his vial vpon the ſea, and there vvas made bloud as it vvere of one dead: and
 euery liuing ſoul died in the ſea.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the third poured out his vial vpon the riuers & the fountaines of vvaters: and there vvas made bloud. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And I heard the Angel of the vvaters, ſaying: Thou art iuſt ô Lord, vvhich art, and vvhich vvaſt, the holy one, becauſe thou haſt iudged theſe things: ✝ 
                     verse 6 
                  The great reuenge that God vvil doe at the later day vpon the perſecutors of his Saincts. becauſe they haue ſhed the bloud of the Sainctes and Prophets, & thou haſt giuen them bloud to drinke, for they are vvorthie. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And I heard an other ſaying: Yea Lord God omnipotent, true and iuſt are thy iudgements.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And the fourth Angel poured out his vial vpon the ſunne, and it vvas giuen vnto him to afflict men vvith heate and fire: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and men boiled vvith great heate, andThe deſperate and damned perſons ſhal blaſpheme God perpetually▪ vvhich ſhal be ſuch onely as do not repent in this life. blaſphemed the name of God hauing povver ouer theſe plagues, neither did they penance to giue him glorie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 10 And the fift Angel poured out his vial vpon the ſeate of the beaſt: and his kingdom vvas made darke, and they together did eate their tonges for paine: ✝ 
                     verse 11 & they blaſphemed the God of heauen becauſe of their paines and vvoundes, &
See chap. 9. v. 20 in the margent. did not penance from their vvorkes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the ſixt Angel poured out his vial vpon that great riuer Euphr
                     •
                  tes: and dried vp the vvater thereof that a vvay might be prepared to the kings from the riſing of the ſunne.
                ✝ 
                     verse 13 And I ſavv from the mouthThe dragon, is the Diuel: the beaſt, Antichriſt, or the ſocietie wherof he is head: the falſe-prophet, either Antichriſt him ſelf, or the companie of Heretikes and ſeducers that folovv him. of the dragon, and from the mouth of the beaſt, and from the mouth of the falſe-prophet
iſſue forth three three' vncleane ſpirites in maner of frogges. ✝ 
                     verse 14 For they are the ſpirites of Deuils vvorking ſignes, and they goe forth to the kings of the vvhole earth to gather them into battel at the great day of the omnipotent God. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Behold 
* I come as a theefe:Apoc. 3. Bleſſed is he that vvatcheth, & keepeth his garments,2 Cor. 5, 3. that he * vvalke not naked, and they ſee his turpitude. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he ſhal gather them into a place vvhich in Hebrevv is called
                     The hil of theaues, by S. Hieroms interpretation. 
                  Armagedon.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the ſeuenth Angel poured out his vial vpon the aire, and there came forth a loud voice out of the temple from the throne, ſaying: It is done. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And there vvere made lighteninges, and voices, and thunders, and a great earthquake vvas made, ſuch an one as neuer hath been ſince men vvere vpon the earth, ſuch an earthquake, ſo great. ✝ 
                     verse 19 AndThe citie or cōmonvvealth of the vvicked deuided into three partes: into infidels, Heretikes, and euil Catholikes. This citie is here called Babylō, vvhereof ſee the Annorat. vpon the next chapter v. 5. the great citie vvas made into three partes: and the cities of the
 Gentiles fel. And Babylon the great came into memorie before God,Ier. 25, 15. * to giue her the cuppe of vvine of the indignation of his vvrath. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And euery Iland fled, and mountaines vvere not found. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And great haile like a talent came downe from heauen vpon men: and men blaſphemed God for the plague of the haile: becauſe it vvas made exceding great.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  The harlot Babylon clothed vvith diuers ornaments, 6 and drunken of the blood of Martyrs, ſitteth vpon a beaſt that hath ſeuen heades and ten hornes: 7 al which things the Angel expoundeth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND there came one of the ſeuen Angels vvhich had the ſeuen vials, & ſpake vvith me, ſaying, Come, I vvil ſhevv theeThe final damnation of the vvhole companie of the reprobate, called here the great vvhoore. the damnation of the great harlot, vvhich ſitteth vponTheſe many vvaters are many peoples. v. 15. many vvaters, ✝ 
                     verse 2 vvith vvhom the kings of the earth haue fornicated, and they vvhich inhabite the earth haue been drunke of the vvine of her vvhoredom. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And he tooke me avvay in ſpirit in to the deſert. And I ſavv a womā ſitting vpon a ſcarlet coloured beaſt, ful of names of blaſphemie, hauing ſeuen heades, and ten hornes. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the vvoman vvas clothed round about vvith purple and ſcarlet, and gilted vvith gold, and pretious ſtone, and pearles, hauing a golden cup in her hand, ful of the abomination & filthines of her fornication. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And in her forehead a name vvritten, ″ Myſterie: ″ Babylon the great, mother of the fornications and the abominations of the earth. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And I ſavv the vvoman ″ drunken of the bloud of the Sainctes, and of the bloud of the martyrs of IESVS. And I marueled vvhen I had ſeen her, vvith great admiration. ✝ 
                     verse 7 I And the Angel ſaid to me, Vvhy doeſt thou maruel? I vvil tel thee the myſterie of the woman, and of the beaſt that carieth her, which hath the ſeuen heades and the ten hornes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 The beaſt vvhich thou ſavveſt,It ſignifieth the ſhort reigne of Antichriſt, vvho is the cheefe horne or head of the beaſt. vvas, and is not, and ſhal come vp out of the bottomeles depth, and goe into deſtruction: and the inhabitants on the earth (vvhoſe names are not vvritten in the booke of life from the making of the vvorld) ſhal maruel, ſeeing the beaſt that vvas, and is
 not. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And here is vnderſtanding, that hath vviſedom. The ſeuen heades: are ″ ſeuen hilles, vpon vvhich the vvoman ſitteth, and they are ſeuen kings. ✝ 
                     verse 10 Fiue are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come: & vvhen he ſhal come, he muſt tarie a ſhort time. ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the beaſt vvhich vvas, & is not: ″ the ſame alſo is the eight, and is of the ſeuen, & goeth into deſtruction. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And the ten hornes vvhich thou ſaweſt: areSome expound it of ten ſmal kingdoms, into which the Romane Empire ſhal be deuided, vvhich ſhal al ſerue Antichriſt both in his life and a litle after. ten kings, vvhich haue not yet receiued kingdom, but
doe ſhal' receiue povver as kings one houre after the beaſt. ✝ 
                     verse 13 Theſe haue one counſel and force: and their povver they ſhal deliuer to the beaſt. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Theſe ſhal fight vvith the Lambe, and the Lambe ſhal ouercome them,1 Tim. 6, 15. Apo. 19, 16. becauſe * he is Lord of lordes, and King of kinges, & they that are vvith him, called, and elect, and faithful. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he ſaid to me, The vvaters vvhich thou ſavveſt vvhere the harlot ſitteth: are peoples, and nations, and tonges. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And the ten hornes vvhich thou ſavveſt in the beaſt: theſe ſhal hate the harlot, and ſhal make her deſolate and naked, and ſhal eare her fleſh, and her they ſhal burne vvith fire. ✝ 
                     verse 17 forNot forcing or mouing any to folow Antichriſt, but by his iuſt iudgement, & for puniſhment of their ſinnes, permitting thē to beleeue and cōſent to him. God hath giuen into their hartes, to doe that vvhich pleaſeth him: that they giue their kingdom to the beaſt, til the vvordes of God be cōſummate. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the vvoman vvhich thou ſavveſt: is ″ the great citie, vvhich hath kingdom ouer the kinges of the earth.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     5. Babylon.]
                     The Proteſtāts here vvil needs haue Babylō to be Rome, but not in S. Peters epiſtle. In the end of S. Peters firſt Epiſtle, vvhere the Apoſtle dateth it at Babylon, vvhich the auncient vvriters (as vve there noted) affirme to be meant of Rome: the Proteſtants vvil not in any vviſe haue it ſo, becauſe they vvould not be driuen to confeſſe that Peter euer vvas at Rome, but here for that they thinke it maketh for their opinion, that the Pope is Antichriſt, and Rome the ſeate and citie of Antichriſt, they vvil needes haue Rome to be this Babylon, this great vvhore, and this purple harlot. for ſuch fellovves, in the expoſition of holy Scripture, be ledde onely by their preiudicate opinions and hereſies, to vvhich they dravv al things vvithout al indifferencie and ſinceritie.
                  But S. Auguſtine, Aretas, and other vvriters, moſt commonly expound it, neither of Babylon itſelf a citie of Chaldaea or Aegypt,By Babylon (according to al the fathers) is ſignified, partly the whole ſocietie of the wicked, partly the citie of Rome, only in reſpect of the terrene & heatheniſh ſtate of them that perſecuted the Church not of Rome, or any one citie, vvhich may be ſo called ſpiritually, as Hieruſalem before chap. 11 is named ſpiritual Sodom and Aegypt: but of the general ſocitie of the impious, & of thoſe that preferre the terrene kingdō and cōmoditie of the vvorld, before God & eternal felicitie. The author of the Commentaries vpon the Apocalypſe ſet forth in S. Ambroſe name, vvriteth thus: This great vvhoore ſometime ſignifieth Rome, ſpecially vvhich at that time vvhen the Apoſtle vvrote this, did perſecute the Church of God, but othervviſe it ſignifieth the vvhole citie of the Diu
                           •
                        l,
                     li. aduerſ. Iudan. 
                     that is, the vniuerſal corps of the reprobate. Tertullian alſo taketh it for Rome, thus, Babylon (ſaith he) in S. Iohn is a figure of the citie of Rome, being ſo great, ſo proud of the Empire, and the deſtroier of the ſaincts. Vvhich is plainely ſpoken of that citie, vvhen it vvas heathen, the head of the terrene dominion of the vvorld, the perſecutor of the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors, the ſeate of Nero, Bomitian, and the like, Chriſts ſpecial enemies, the ſinke of idolatrie, ſinne, and
 falſe vvorſhip of the Pagan gods. Then vvas it Babylon, vvhen S. Iohn vvrote this, and then vvas Nero and the reſt figures of Antichriſt, and that citie the reſemblance of the principal place (vvhereſoeuer it be) that Antichriſt ſhal reigne in, about the later end of the vvorld.
                  Novv to apply that to the Romane Church and Apoſtolike See, either novv or then, vvhich vvas ſpoken onely of the terrene ſtate of that citie, as it vvas the ſeate of Peter, vvhen it did ſlea aboue 30 Popes Chriſts Vicars, one after an other, & endeuoured to deſtroy the vvhole Church: that is moſt blaſphemous and fooliſh.
                  The Church in Rome vvas one thing,The Church of Rome is neuer called Babylon. & Babylon in Rome an other thing. Peter ſate in Rome, and Nero ſate in Rome, but Peter, as in the Church of Rome: Nero, as in the Babylon of Rome. Vvhich diſtinction the Heretikes might haue learned by S. Peter him ſelf ep. 1. chap. 5. vvriting thus, The Church ſaluteth you, that is in Babylon, coëlect, So that the Church and the very choſen Church vvas in Rome, vvhen Rome vvas Babylon, vvhereby it is plaine that, vvhether Babylon or the great vvhoore do here ſignifie Rome or no, yet it can not ſignifie the Church of Rome: vvhich is novv, and euer vvas, differing from the terrene Empire of the ſame. And if, as in the beginning of the Church, Nero and the reſt of the perſecuting Emperours (vvhich vvere figures of Antichriſt) did principally ſit in Rome, ſo alſo the great Antichriſt ſhal haue his ſeate there, as it may vvel be (though others thinke that Hieruſalem rather ſhal be his principal citie:) yet euen then ſhal neither the Church of Rome, nor the Pope of Rome be Antichriſt, but ſhal be perſecuted by Antichriſt, and driuen out of Rome, if it be poſſible. for, to Chriſts Vicar and the Romane Church he vvil beare as much good vvil as the Proteſtants novv doe, and he ſhal haue more povver to perſecute him and the Church, then they haue.
                  S. Hierom epiſt. 17. c. 7. to Marcella, to dravv her out of the citie of Rome to the holy land, vvarning her of the manifold allurements to ſinne and il life, that be in ſo great and populous a citie, alludeth at length to theſe vvordes of the Apocalypſe, and maketh it to be Babylon, and the purple vvhoore, but ſtraight vvay, leſt ſome naughtie perſon might thinke he meant that of the Church of Rome, vvhich he ſpake of the ſocietie of the vvicked only, he addeth: There is there in deeds the holy Church, there are the triumphans monuments of the Apoſtles, and Martyrs, there is the true confeſsion of Chriſt,
                     Ro. 1. 
                     there is the faith praiſed, * of the Apoſtle, and Gentilitie troden vnder foote, the name of Chriſtian daily aduancing it ſelf on high. Vvhereby you ſee that vvhatſoeuer may be ſpoken or interpreted of Rome, out of this vvord Babylō, it is not meant of the Church of Rome, but of the terrene ſtate, in ſo much that the ſaid holy Doctor (li. 2. aduerſ. Iouinian. c. 19.) ſignifieth, that the holines of the Church there, hath vviped avvay the blaſphemie vvritten in the forehead of her former iniquitie. But of the difference of the old ſtate and dominion of the Heathen there, for vvhich it is reſembled to Antichriſt, and the Prieſtly ſtate vvhich novv it hath, reade a notable place in S. Leo ſerm. 1 in natali Petri & Pauli.
                  
                  
                     5. Myſterie.] S. Paul calleth this ſecrete and cloſe vvorking of abomination,Myſterie. the myſterie of iniquitie. 2. Theſſal. 2. and it is called a litle after in this chapter verſ. 7. the Sacrament (or myſterie) of the vvoman, and it is alſo the marke of reprobation and damnation.
                  
                     6. Drunken of the bloud.]
                     This woman ſignifieth al perſecutors of ſaincts. It is plaine that this vvoman ſignifieth the vvhole corps of al the perſecutors that haue and ſhal ſhede ſo much bloud of the iuſt: of the Prophets, Apoſtles, and other Martyrs from the beginning of the vvorld to the end. The Proteſtants foliſhly expound it of Rome, for that there they put Heretikes to death, and allovv of their puniſhment in other countries: but their bloud is not called the bloud of ſaincts,Putting heretikes to death, is not to ſhede the bloud of ſaincts. no more then the bloud of theeues, mankillers, and other malefactors: for the ſheding of vvhich by order of iuſtice, no Commonvvealth ſhal anſvver.
                  
                     9. Seuen hilles.] The Angel him ſelf here expoundeth theſe 7 hilles to be al one vvith the 7 heads and the 7 kings: & yet the Heretikes blinded excedingly vvith malice againſt the Church of Rome, are ſo madde to take them for the ſeuen hilles literally, vpon vvhich in old time Rome did ſtand: that ſo they might make the vnlearned beleeue that Rome is the ſeate of Antichriſt,The Proteſtants madnes in expounding the 7 hilles, of Rome: the Angel himſelf expounding it otherwiſe. But if they had any conſideration, they might marke that the Prophets viſions here are moſt of them by Seuens, vvhether he talke of heads, hornes, candleſtickes, Churches, kings, hilles, or other thinges: and that he alluded not to the hilles, becauſe they vvere iuſt ſeuen, but that Seuen is a myſtical number, as ſometimes Ten is, ſignifying vniuerſally al of that ſort whereof he ſpeaketh, as, that the ſeuen heads, hilles, or kingdoms (which are here al one) ſhould be al the kingdoms of the world that perſecute the Chriſtians: being heads and mountaines for their height in dignitie aboue others. And ſome take it, that there were ſeuen ſpecial Empires, kingdoms, or States, that vvere or ſhal be the greateſt perſecutors of Gods people, as of Aegypt, (hanaan, Babylon, the Perſians, and Greekes, which be fiue-ſixtly of the Romane Empire which once perſecuted moſt of al other, and which (as the Apoſtle here ſaith) yet is, or ſtandeth. but the ſeuenth, then vvhen S. Iohn vvrote this, vvas not come, neither is yet come in our daies: vvhich is Antichriſts ſtate, vvhich ſhal not come ſo long as the Empire of Rome ſtandeth, as S. Paul did Prophecie. 2 Theſſa
                           •
                        . 2.
                  
                  
                     13. The ſame is the eight.]
                     Vvhat is the eight beaſt. The beaſt it ſelf being the congregation of al theſe vvicked perſecutors, though it conſiſt of the foreſaid ſeuen, yet for that the malice of al is complete in it, may be
 called the eight. Or, Antichriſt him ſelf, though he be one of the ſeuen, yet for his extraordinarie vvickednes ſhal be counted the odde perſecutor, or the accompliſhment of al other, & therfore is named the eight. Some take this beaſt called the eight, to be the Diuel.
                  
                     18. The great citie.] If it be meant of any one citie, and not of the vniuerſal ſocietie of the reprobate (vvhich is the citie of the Diuel, as the Church & the vniuerſal fellovvſhip of the faithful is called the citie of God) it is moſt like to be old Rome,The double interpretation of Babylon. as ſome of the Greekes expound it, from the time of the firſt Emperours, til Conſtantines daies, vvho made an end of the perſecution▪ for by the authoritie of the old Romane Empire, Chriſt vvas put to death firſt, and aftervvard the tvvo cheefe Apoſtles, & the Popes their ſucceſſors, and infinite Catholike men through out the vvorld, by leſſer kings vvhich then vvere ſubiect to Rome. Al vvhich Antichriſtian perſecution
                        •
                      ceaſed, vvhen Conſtantine reigned, and yelded vp the citie to the Pope, vvho holdeth not the kingdom or Empire ouet the vvorld, as the Heathen did, but the fatherhod and ſpiritual rule of the Church. Hovvbeit the more probable ſenſe is the other, of the citie of the Diuel, as the auth
                        •
                     r of the homi
                     
                        •
                     ies vpon the Apocalypſe in S. Auguſtine, declareth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  The fall of Babylon, her iudgement, plagues and reuenges: for the vvhich, 9 the kings, 16 and marchants of the earth that ſometime did cleaue vnto her▪ ſhal mourns bitterly: 20 but heauen, and the Apoſtles and Prophets ſhal reioyce.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND after theſe things I ſavv an other Angel cō
                  ming dovvne from heauen, hauing great povver: & the earth vvas illuminated of his glorie. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he cried out in force,Apo. 14, 8. ſaying, * Fallen fallen is Babylon the great: and it is become the habitation of Deuils, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the cuſtodie of euery vncleane ſpirit, and the cuſtodie of euery vncleane and hateful bird: ✝ 
                     verse 3 becauſe al nations haue drunke of the vvine of the vvrath of her fornication: and the kings of the earth haue fornicated vvith her: and the marchantes of the earth vvere made riche by the vertue of her delicacies.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And I heard an other voice from heauen, ſaying, Goe out from her my people: that you be not partakers of her ſinnes, and receiue not of her plagues. ✝ 
                     verse 5 Becauſe her ſinnes are come euen to heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Render to her as ſhe alſo hath rendred to you: & double ye double according to her vvorkes: In the cuppe vvherin ſhe hath mingled, mingle ye double vnto her. ✝ 
                     verse 7 As much as ſhe hath glorified her ſelf, & hath been in delicacies,
The meaſure of paines & damnation, according to the wicked pleaſures or vnlawful delites of this life▪ which is a fore ſentence for ſuch people as turne their whole life to 
                        ••
                     ſt and riot. ſo much giue her torment and mourning: becauſe ſhe ſaith in her hart,Eſ 47, 8▪
                   * I ſit a queene, & Widow I am not, and mourning I ſhal not ſee. ✝ 
                     verse 8 Therfore in one day ſhal her plagues come, death, and mourning, and famine, and vvith fire ſhe ſhal be burnt: becauſe God is ſtrong that ſhal iudge her.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 9 AndKings and Marchants are moſt encombered, dangered and drovvned in the pleaſures of this vvorld: vvhoſe vvhole life & traficke is (if they be not exceding vertuous) to finde varietie of earthly pleaſures. Vvho ſeing once the extreme end of their ioyes and of al that made their heauen here, to be turned into paines & damnation eternal, then ſhal houle & vveepe to late. the kings of the earth, vvhich haue fornicated vvith her, & haue liued in delicacies, ſhal vveepe, & bevvaile them ſelues vpon her, vvhen they ſhal ſee the ſmoke of her burning: ✝ 
                     verse 10 ſtanding farre of for the feare of her tormentes, ſaying, Vvo, vvo, that great citie Babylon, that ſtrong citie: becauſe in one houre is thy iudgement come.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And the marchātes of the earth ſhall vveepe, & mourne vpon her: becauſe no man ſhal bye their merchandiſe any more, ✝ 
                     verse 12 merchandiſe of gold and ſiluer and precious ſtone, and of pearle, and fine linnen, and purple, and ſilke, & ſcarlet, and al Thyne vvood, and al veſſels of yuorie, and al veſſels of precious ſtone and of braſſe and yron and marble, ✝ 
                     verse 13 and cynamon, and of odours, and ointement, and frankeincenſe, and vvine, and oile, and floure, & vvheate, and beaſtes, & ſheepe, and horſes, and chariotes, & ſlaues, and ſoules of men. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the apples of the deſire of thy ſoul are departed from thee, & al fat and goodly thinges are periſhed from thee, and they ſhal no more finde them. ✝ 
                     verse 15 The marchantes of theſe things vvhich are made riche, ſhal ſtand farre from her for feare of her tormētes, vveeping and mourning, ✝ 
                     verse 16 & ſaying, Vvo, wo, that great citie, vvhich vvas clothed vvith ſilke, and purple, and ſcarlet, and vvas gilted vvith gold, and pretious ſtone, & pearles: ✝ 
                     verse 17 becauſe in one houre are ſo great riches made deſolate: and euery gouernour, and euery one that ſaileth into the lake, and the ſhipmen, and they that vvorke in the ſea, ſtoode a farre of, ✝ 
                     verse 18 and cried ſeeing the place of her burning, ſaying, Vvhat other is like to this great citie? ✝ 
                     verse 19 And they threvv duſt vpon their heades, and cried vveeping and mourning, ſaying: Vvo, vvo, that great citie, in the vvhich al vvere made riche that had ſhippes in the ſea, of her prices: becauſe in one houre ſhe is deſolate.
                ✝ 
                     verse 20 
                  The Angels and al Saincts ſhal reioyce and laude 
                        •
                     od to ſee the wicked confounded, and Gods iuſtice executed vpon their oppreſſors & perſecutors▪ and this is that vvhich the Martyrs praied for, chap. 6. Reioyce ouer her, heauen, and ye holy Apoſtles and Prophetes: becauſe God hath iudged your iudgement of her. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And one ſtrong Angel tooke vp as it vvere a great milſtone, and threvv it into the ſea,Ier. 51. 63. ſaying, * Vvith this violence ſhalBy this it ſeemeth cleere that the Apoſtle meaneth not any one citie, but the vniuerſal companie of the reprobate, vvhich▪ ſhal periſh in the day of iudgement: the old prophets alſo naming the vvhole nūber of Gods enemies myſtically, Babylon▪ as Ierem. 
                           •
                        . 52.
                   Babylon that great citie be throwen, and ſhal novv be found no more. ✝ 
                     verse 22 And the voice of harpers, & of Muſicians, and of them that ſing on ſhalme and trompet, ſhal no more be heard in thee, & euery artificer of euery art ſhal be found no more in thee, and the noiſe of the mill ſhal no more be heard in thee, ✝ 
                     verse 23 and the light of the lampe ſhal no more
 ſhine in thee, and the voice of the bridegrome and the bride ſhal no more be heard in thee: becauſe thy marchantes were the princes of the earth, becauſe al nations haue erred in thine inchauntments. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And in her is found the bloud of the Prophets and Sainctes, and of al that vvere ſlaine in the earth.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                      The Saincts glorifying God for the iudgement pronounced vpon the harl
                        •
                     t, 7 the mariage of the Lambe is prepared. 10 The Angel refuſeth to be adored of S. Iohn. 1
                        •
                      There appeareth one (vvho is the word of God, and the King of kings and Lord of lords) ſitting on a horſe, vvith a great armie, and fighting againſt the beaſt and the kings of the earth and their armies▪ 17 the 
                        •
                     irdes of the aire being in the meane time called to deuoure their fleſh.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AFTER theſes things I heard as it vvere the voice of many multitudes in heauen ſaying,The Epiſtle for many martyrs. 
                  Allelu-ia▪
                  
                  ALLELVIA▪
                   Praiſe, and glorie, and povver is to our God: ✝ 
                     verse 2 becauſe true & iuſt are his iudgementes which hath iudged of the great harlot, that hath corrupted the earth in her vvhoredom, and hath reuenged the bloud of his ſeruants, of her handes. ✝ 
                     verse 3 AndThis often repeating of Allelu-ia. in times of reioycing, the Church doth folow in her Seruice. againe they ſaid, Allelu-ia. And her ſmoke aſcendeth for euer and euer. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And the foure and tvventie ſeniors fel downe, and the foure beaſtes, & adored God ſitting vpon the throne, ſaying: 
                     •
                   ″ Amen, Allelu-ia. ✝ 
                     verse 5 And a voice came out from the throne, ſaying: Say praiſe to our God al ye his ſeruantes: and you that feare him, litle and great. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And I heard as it vvere the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many vvaters, & as the voice of great thunders, ſaying Allelu-ia: becauſe our Lord God the omnipotent hath reigned. ✝ 
                     verse 7 Let vs be glad and reioyce, and giue glorie to him: becauſeAt this day ſhal the whole Church of the elect be finally & perfectly for euer ioyned vnto Chriſt in mariage inſeparable. the mariage of the Lambe is come, and his vvife hath prepared her ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And it vvas giuen to her that ſhe clothe her ſelf vvith ſilke glittering and vvhite. For the ſilke are 
                     •
                   the iuſtifications of Sainctes.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And he ſaid to me,Mat. 22▪ Lu. 14, Vvrite, * Bleſſed be they that are called to theThat is the feaſt of eternal life prepared for his ſpouſe the Church. ſupper of the mariage of the Lambe. ⊢ And he ſaid to me,Apoc. 22. 9. Theſe vvordes of God, be true. ✝ 
                     verse 10 
                  
                     •
                   And * I fel before his feete, to adore him. And he ſaith to me, See thou doe not: I am thy fellovv-ſeruant, and of thy brethren that
 haue the teſtimonie of IESVS. Adore God. For the teſtimonie of IESVS, is the ſpirit of prophecie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I ſavv heauen opened, and behold a vvhite horſe: and he that ſate vpon him, vvas called Faithful and True, and vvith iuſtice he iudgeth & fighteth. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And his eies as a flame of fire, and on his head many diademes. hauing a name written, vvhich no man knovveth but him ſelf. ✝ 
                     verse 13 * And he vvas clothed vvith a garment ſprinkled vvith bloud:Eſ. 63, 1. & his name is called,The ſecond perſon in Trinitie, the Sonne of the Vvord of God, vvhich vvas made fleſh. Io. 1. THE VVORD OF GOD. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the hoſtes that are in heauen folovved him on vvhite horſes clothed in vvhite and pure ſilke. ✝ 
                     verse 15 And out of his mouth procedeth a ſharpe ſvvord:Apoc. 2, 27. that in it he may ſtrike the Gentiles. And * he ſhal rule them in a rod of yron: and he treadeth the vvine preſſe of the furie of the vvrath of God omnipotent. ✝ 
                     verse 16 And he hath in his garment and in his thigh vvritten,Apo. 17, 14. *Euen according to his humanitie alſo. KING OF KINGES AND LORD OF LORDES.
                ✝ 
                     verse 17 And I ſavv one Angel ſtanding in the ſunne, & he cried vvith a loud voice ſaying to al the birdes that did flie by the middes of heauen, Come and aſſemble together to the great ſupper of God: ✝ 
                     verse 18 that you may eate the fleſh of kings, and the fleſh of tribunes, and the fleſh of valiants, and the fleſh of horſes & of them that ſit on them, & the fleſh of al freemen and bondmen, and of litle and great.
                ✝ 
                     verse 19 And I ſavv the beaſt and the kings of the earth, & their armies gathered to make vvarre vvith him that ſate vpon the horſe and vvith his armie. ✝ 
                     verse 20 And the beaſt vvas apprehēded, and vvith him the falſe 
                     •
                  prophet: vvhich vvrought ſignes before him, vvherevvith he ſeduced them that tooke the character of the beaſt, and that adored his image. Theſe tvvo were caſt aliue into the poole of fire burning alſo with brimſtone. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the reſt vvere ſlaine by the ſvvord of him that ſitteth vpon the horſe, vvhich procedeth out of his mouth: and al the birdes vvere filled vvith their fleſh.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     4. Amen, Alleluia.] Theſe tvvo Hebr
                        •
                     e vvordes (as other els vvhere) both in the Greeke & Latin text are kept religiouſly,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      & not tranſlated, vnles it be once or tvviſe in the Pſalmes. Yea and the Proteſtants them ſelues keepe them in the text of their Engliſh Teſtaments in many places.
                        Amen▪ Alleluia, not tranſlated. and maruel it. is vvhy they vſe them not in al places, but ſometimes turne, Amen, into, verely, vvhere of ſee the Annotation Ioan. 8. v. 34. and in their Seruice booke they tranſlate, Alleluia,
                      into, Praiſe ye the Lord▪
                      as though Alleluia had not as good a grace in the acte of ſeruing God, (vvhere it is in deede properly vſed) as it hath in the text of the Scripture.
                  The Church Catholike doth often and ſpecially vſe this ſacred vvord, to ioyne vvith the Church triumphant,
                        Alleluia often vſed in the Church, ſpecially in Eaſter time. conſiſting of Angels and Saincts, vvho here are ſaid to laude and praiſe God vvith treat reioycing, by this vvord Alleluia, and by often repetition thereof: as the Catholike Church alſo vſeth, namely in Eaſter time euen til Vvhi
                        •
                     -ſontide, for the ioy of Chriſts reſurrection, vvhich (as S. Auguſtine declareth ep. ad Ianuarium) vvas the general vſe of the Primitiue Church,Epiſt. ad Ian. c. 17. &c. 15. making a greater myſterie and matter of it, then our Proteſtants novv do. At other times of the yere alſo he ſaith it vvas ſung in ſome Churches, but not in al, and S. Hierom numbereth it among the hereſies of Vigilantius, That Alleluia could not be ſung but at Eaſter. Aduerſ. Vigilant. c. 1.
                  
                  The truth is, by the vſe of the Scriptures it hath more in it then, Praiſe ye the Lord, ſignifying vvith laude,It ſignifieth more then (as the Proteſtants trāſlate it) praiſe ye the lord.
                      glorifying, and praiſing of God, a great reioycing vvithal, mirth, and exultation of hart in the ſingers thereof, and that is the cauſe vvhy the holy Church ſaith, Laus tibi Domine, Praiſe be to thee ô Lord, in Lent and times of penance and mourning, but not Alleluia▪
                      vvhich (as S. Auguſtine alſo declareth) is a terme of ſignification and myſterie, ioyned vvith that time, and then vſed ſpecially in the Church of God, vvhen ſhe repreſenteth to vs in her Seruice, the ioyes and beatitude of the next life: vvhich is done ſpecially at Eaſter, by the ioyful celebrating of Chriſts glorious Reſurrection and Aſcenſion, after the penal time of Lent vvhich repreſenteth the miſerie of this life. See S. Auguſtine Ser. 1. & 5. c. 9▪ & 6. c. 9 de Diuerſis to. 10. and his ena
                        •
                     tation vpon the 148 Pſalme. for in the titles and endes of diuerſe holy Pſalmes this Alleluia is ful of myſterie & ſacred ſignification.
                        
                           •
                        Palſe tranſlation. Vvhere vve muſt aſke the Proteſtants, vvhy they haue left it out altogether, being in the Hebrue, ſaying neither Alleluia, nor, Praiſe the Lord, in the Bible 1577: & that nine times in the ſixe laſt Pſalmes.
                  Moreouer the ſaid holy Doctor li. 2 de doct, Chriſt▪ c. 11) affirmeth that Amen & Alleluia be not tranſlated into any other language,
                        Amen and Alleluia ſhould not be tranſlated into vulgar tongues. 
                     propter ſanctiorem authoritatem, for the more ſacred authoritie of the vvordes ſo remaining▪ and ep. 178. he ſaith that it is not lavvful to tranſlate them. Nam ſciendum eſt &c. for it is to be knovven (ſaith he) that al nations do ſing Amen and Alleluia in the Hebrue vvordes, vvhich neither the Latine man not the Barbarous may tranſlate into his ovvne language. See S. Hierom alſo epiſt. 137. And namely for our Nation, S. Gregorie vvil beare vs vvitnes that our countrie receiued, the vvord Alleluia vvith their Chriſtianitie,Al nations in the primitiue Church ſang Amen and Alleluia.
                      ſaying thus li. 27 Moral. c. 6. Lingua Britannia qua nihil aliud nouerat quim barbarum frendere, iamdudum in Diuinis laudibus Hebraeum 
                           ••
                        pit reſenare Alleluia. that is, The Britan tongue, vvhich knevv nothing els but to mutter barbarouſly, hath begone of late in Gods diuine laudes and praiſes to ſound the Hebrue Alleluia. And for Iurie, S. Hierom ep. 17. c. 7 vvriteth, that the huſbandmen at the plough ſang Alleluia, vvhich vvas not then their vulgar ſpeache. Yea he ſaith that in Monaſteries the ſinging of Alleluia vvas in ſt
                        •
                     ede of a bel to call them together ad Collectam. in Epitaph. Paul
                           •
                        e. c. 10.
                  
                  This vvord is a ſacred, Chriſtian, myſtical, and Angelical ſong. and yet in the nevv ſeruice booke it is turned into,The Proteſtāts profane this vvord by tranſlating it, and diminiſh the ſignification thereof. 
                     Praiſe ye the Lord, and Alleluia is quite gone, becauſe they liſt neither to agree vvith the Church of God, not vvith the vſe of holy Scriptures, no not vvith their ovvne tranſlations, but no maruel,Pſal. 136. that they can not ſing the ſong of our Lord and of Angels in a ſtrange countrie, that is, out of the Catholike Church, in the captiuitie of ſchiſme & hereſie, Laſtly, vve might aſke them vvhether it be al one to ſay Mat. 21, Hoſanna, &, Saue vs vve beſeeche thees vvhereas Hoſanna is vvithal a
                        •
                     vvord of exceding congratulation and ioy vvhich they expreſſed tovvard out Sauiour, euen ſo Alleluia hath an other maner of ſenſe and ſignification in it, then can expreſſed by, Praiſe ye the Lord.
                  
                  
                     8. Iuſtifications of Saincts. Here the Heretikes in their tranſlations▪ could not alter the vvord iuſtifications into ordinances,
                     Iuſtificatiōs are good vvorkes, not as the effectes of ſaith iuſtifying, but becauſe them ſelues alſo with faith iuſtifie a man. or conſtitutions, as they did falſely in the firſt of S. Luke, vvhereof ſee the Annotatiō there verſ. 6. but they are forced to ſay in Latin, iuſtificationes, as Beza: and in Engliſh, righteouſnes, (for iuſtifications they vvil not ſay in any caſe for fea
                        •
                     e of inconuenience▪) yea and they can not deny but theſe iuſtifications be the good vvorkes of ſaincts.Beza. but vvhere * they make this gloſe, that they be ſo called, becauſe are the fruites of effect of faith and of the iuſtice vvhich vve haue by onely faith, it is moſt euidently falſe, & againſt the very text, and nature of▪ the word. for there is no cauſe vvhy any thing ſhould be called a mans iuſtification▪ but for that it maketh him iuſt, ſo that, iuſtifications, be the vertues of faith, hope, charitie, and good deedes, iuſtifying or making a man iuſt, and not effectes of iuſtification, neither faith onely, but they al together be the very ornaments and invvard garments, beauty, and iuſtice of the ſoule, as here it is euident.
                  
                     10. And I fel.] The Proteſtants abuſe this place, and the example of the Angels forbidding Iohn to adore him being but his fellow ſeruant,S. Iohns adoring of the Angel, explicated againſt the proteſtāts abuſing the ſame. and appointing him to adore God, againſt al honour, reuerence, and adoration of Angels, Saincts, or other ſanctified creatures, teaching that no religious vvorſhip ought to be done vvto them. But in truth it maketh for no ſuch purpoſe, but only vvarneth vs that Diuine honour and the adoration due to God alone, may not be giuen to any Angel or other creature. S. Auguſt. de vera relig. cap. vltimo. And vvhen the Aduerſaries replie that ſo great an Apoſtle, as Iohn vvas▪ could not be ignorant of that point, not vvould haue giuen diuine honour vnto an Angel (for ſo he had been an Idolater) and therfore that he vvas not
 reprehended for that,The Proteſtāts are re
                           •
                        elled by their ovvne reaſon. but for doing any religious reuerence or other honour vvhatſoeuer to his fellovv-ſeruant 
                        〈◊〉
                      ve anſvver that by the like reaſon, S. Iohn being ſo great an Apoſtle, if this later kinde of reuerence had been vnlavvful and to be reprehended, as the Proteſtants hold it is no leſſe then the other, could not haue been ignorant thereof, not vvould haue done it.
                  Therfore they might much better haue learned of S. Auguſtine (q. 61 in Geneſ.) hovv this facte of S. Iohn vvas corrected by the Angel,S. Iohn erred only in the perſon, miſtaking the Angel to be Chriſt him ſelf, and ſo adoring him as God. and vvherein he errour vvas. In effect it is thus, That the Angel being ſo glorious and ful of maieſtie, preſenting Chriſts perſon, and in his name vſing diuers vvordes proper to God▪
                     Apoc. c. 1. as, I am the firſt and the laſt, and aliue and vvas dead, and ſuch like, might vvel be taken of S. Iohn, by errour of his perſon, to be Chriſt him ſelf, and that the Apoſtle preſuming him to be ſo in deede, adored him vvith Diuine honour: vvhich the Angel correcting, told him he vvas not God, but one of his fellovves, and therfore that he ſhould not ſo adore him, but God. Thus then vve ſee, Iohn vvas neither ſo ignorant, to thinke that any vndue honour might be giuen to any creature: not ſo il, to commit idolatrie by doing vndue vvorſhip to any Angel in heauen: and therfore vvas not culpable at al in his facte, but onely erred materially (as the Scholemen call it) that is, by miſtaking one for an other, thinking that vvhich vvas an Angel, to haue been our Lord:Eſa. 9 in Graco. becauſe he knevve that our Lord him ſelf is alſo * called an Angel,Malac. 3. and hath often appeared in the viſions of the faithful.
                  And the like is to be thought of the Angel appearing in the 22 of the Apocalypſe, vvhether it vvere the ſame or an other▪
                     S. Iohn ſinned not in this adoration. for that alſo did ſo appeare, that Iohn not tell vvhether it vvere Chriſt him ſelf or no, til the Angel told him. Once this is certaine, that Iohn did not formally (as they ſay) commit idolatrie, not ſinne at al herein, knovving al dueties of a Chriſtian man, no leſſe then an Angel of heauen, being alſo in as great honour vvith God, yea and in more then many Angels.An other explication of this place. Vvhich perhaps may be the cauſe (and conſequently an other explication of this place) that the Angel knovving his great greaces and merites before God, vvould not accept any vvorſhip or ſubmiſſion at his handes, though Iohn againe of like humilitie did it, as alſo immediatly aftervvard chap. 22. vvhich belike he vvould not haue done, if he had been preciſely aduiſed by the Angel but a moment before, of errour & vnduetifulnes in the facte. Hovvſoeuer that be, this is euident, that this the Angels refuſing of adoration, taketh not avvay the due reuerence and reſpect vve ought to haue to Angels or other ſanctified perſons and creatures, and ſo theſe vvordes, See thou doe it not,
                     The Proteſtāts by conference of Scriptures might finde 
                           •
                        eligious adoratiō of creatures. ſignifie rather an earneſt refuſal, then any ſignification of crime to be committed thereby.
                  And maruel it is that the Proteſtants making them ſelues ſo ſure of the true ſenſe of euery doubtful place by conference of other Scriptures, folow not here the conference and comparing of Scriptures that them ſelues ſo much of onely require. Vve vvil giue them occaſion and a methode ſo to doe, thus. He that doubteth of this place, findeth out three things of queſtion, vvhich muſt be tried by other Scriptures. The firſt, vvhether there ought to be or may be any religious reuerence or honour done to any creatures▪ taking the vvord religion or religious vvorſhip not for that ſpecial honour vvhich is properly and onely due to God,Aug. de vera relig. c. 55. as S. Auguſtine ſometimes vſeth it,Three points herein examined and proued by Scriptures. but for reuerence due to any thing that is holy by ſanctification or application to the ſeruice of God. The ſecond thing is, vvhether by vſe of Scriptures, that honour be called adoration in latin, or by a vvord equiualent in other, languages,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                      Hebrue, Greeke, or Engliſh. Laſtly, vvhether vve may by the Scriptures fall downe proſtrate before the things, or at the feete of the perſons that vve ſo adore. 
                        •
                     or of ciuil duetie done to our Superiors by capping,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . kneeling, or other courteſie, I thinke the Proteſtants vvil not ſtand vvith vs: though in deede, their arguments make as much againſt the one as the other.
                  But for religious vvorſhip of creatures (vvhich vve ſpeake of) let them ſee in the Scriptures both old and nevv: firſt,Pſ. 5. 137. vvhether the Temple,1 Religious vvorſhip of creatures. the tabernacle, the Arke, the propitiatorie, the Cherubins,Dan. 6. the altar, the bread of propoſition, the Sabboth, and al their holies,3 Reg. 8. vvere not reuerenced by al ſignes of deuotion and religion: vvhether the Sacraments of Chriſt,Ioſ. 7. Pſ. 98. 131. the Prieſts of our Lord, the Prophets of God, the Goſpel, Scriptures, the name of IESVS, ſuch like (vvhich be by vſe, ſignification, or ſanctification made holy) are not 
                        •
                     ovv to be reuerenced: and they ſhal finde al theſe things to haue been reuerenced of al the faithful,2 The ſame is called adoration. vvithout any diſhonour of God, and much to his honour. Secondly, that this reuerence is named adoration in the Seriptures, theſe ſpeaches do proue Pſ. 93. Adore ye his footeſtoole, becauſe it is holy. and Hebr. 11. He adored the toppe of his rod. Thirdly, that the Scriptures alſo vvarrant vs (as the nature of the vvord adoratiō giueth in al three tonges▪) to bowe downe our bodies,3 Falling proſtrat before the perſons or things adored. to fall flat on the ground at the preſence of ſuch thinges, and at the feete of holy perſons, ſpecially Angels, as Iohn doth here, theſe examples proue.Gen. 18. Abraham adored the Angels that appeared to him, Moyſes alſo the Angel that ſhewed him ſelf out of the buſh,Exod. 3. vvho vvere creatures, though they repreſented Gods perſon, as this Angel here did, that ſpeake to S. Iohn Balaam adored, the Angel that ſtoode before him vvith a ſvvord drawen.Ioſue 5. Num. 22.Adoring of Angels. Ioſuè adored falling flat downe
 before the feete of the Angel, calling him his Lord, knowing by the Angels owne teſtimonie, that it vvas but an Angel. Vvho refuſed it not, but required yet more reuerence, commaunding him to plucke of his ſhoes, becauſe the ground vvas holy, no doubt ſo made by the preſence onely of the Angel.
                  Yea not onely to Angels,Adoring of Prophets and holy perſons. but euen to great Prophets this deuotion vvas done, as to Daniel by Nabuchodonoſor,Dan. 2. vvho fell flat vpon his face before him, and did other great offices of religion, vvhich the Prophet refuſed not, becauſe they vvere done to God rather then to him, as S. Hierom defendeth the ſame againſt Porphyrie, vvho charged Daniel vvith intolerable pride therein, and the ſaid holy doctor alleageth the fact of Alexander the great, that did the like toor, Iaddus. Ioiadas the high prieſt of the 
                        •
                     evves. Hovvſoeuer that be (for of the ſacrifice there mentioned there may be ſome doubt, vvhich the Church doth alvvaies immediatly to God, and to no creature) the fact of the prophets (4 Reg. 2) to Elizeus, is plaine: vvhere they perceiuing that the double grace and ſpirit of Elias vvas giuen to him,4 Reg. 4. Iudith. 13. fel flat dovvne at his feete and adored. So did * the Sunamite. to omit that Achior adored Iudith, falling at her feete, as a vvoman bleſſed of God, and infinite other places.
                  Al vvhich thinges, by comparing the Scriptures, our Aduerſaries ſhould haue found to be lavvfully done to men, and Angels, and ſoueraine holy creatures. Vvhereby they might conuince them ſelues, & perceiue, that that thing could not be forbidden S. Iohn to doe to the Angel, which they pretend: though the Angel for cauſes might refuſe euen that vvhich S. Iohn did lawfully vnto him, as S. Peter did refuſe the honour giuen him by Cornelius, according to S. Chryſoſtoms opinion. he. 23 in c 10 Act. yea euen in the third chapter of this booke (if our Aduerſaries vvould looke no further) they might ſee where this Augel prophecieth & promiſeth that the Ievves ſhould fall dovvne before the feete of the Angel of Philadelphia and adore, See the Annot▪ there.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  An Angel caſteth the dragon (or diuel) bound, into the depth for a thouſand yeres, in vvhich the ſoules of martyes in the firſt reſurrection ſhal reigne vvith Chriſt, 7 After vvhich yeres, Satan being let looſe, ſhal raiſe Gog and Magog, an innumerable armie, againſt the beloued citie: 9 but a fire from heauen ſhal deſtroy them. 12 Then bookes are opened, and he that ſitteth vpon the throne, iudgeth al the dead according to their vvorkes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv an Angel deſcending from heauen,
See in S. Auguſtine (li. 20. de Ciuit. c. 7. 8. & ſeq.) the expoſition of this chapter. hauing the key of the bottomles depth, and a great chaine in his hand. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And he apprehended the dragon the old ſerpent, vvhich is the Deuil and Satan, and 
                     •
                   bound him for a thouſand yeres. ✝ 
                     verse 3 and he threvv him into the depth, and ſhut him vp, and ſealed ouer him, that he ſeduce no more the nations, til the thouſand yeres be conſummate. and after theſe thinges he muſt be looſed a litle time.
                ✝ 
                     verse 4 And 
                     •
                   I ſavv ſeates: and they ſate vpon them, & iudgement vvas giuen them, 
                     •
                   and the ſoules of the beheaded for the teſtimonie of IESVS, and for the vvord of God, and that adored not the beaſt, not his image, nor receiued his character in their foreheads or in their handes, and haue liued, and reigned vvith ChriſtQuid in millenari
                        •
                      numero niſi ad proferandam nouam ſobolem perfecta vniuerſitas praeſ
                        •
                     ita generationis exprim
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hinc per 
                        〈◊〉
                      dicitur, It regnabunt cū 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ill
                        •
                      a
                        •
                     nis, 
                        〈◊〉
                      regnum ſancta Eccleſia, vniuerſitatis perf
                        •
                     
                     c
                        •
                     ione ſo
                        •
                     iidatur. D. Gregor. li. 9. Moral. c. 1. a thouſand yeres. ✝ 
                     verse 5 
                  
                     •
                   The reſt of the dead liued not, til the thouſand yeres be conſummate. ″ This is
 the firſt reſurrection. ✝ 
                     verse 6 Bleſſed and holy is he that hath part in the firſt reſurrection. in theſe the ſecond death hath not povver: but 
                     •
                   they ſhal be prieſtes of God and of Chriſt: and ſhal reigne vvith him a thouſand yeres.
                ✝ 
                     verse 7 And vvhen the thouſand yeres ſhal be conſummate, 
                     •
                   Satan ſhal be looſed out of his priſon, and ſhal goe forth, and ſeduceS. Auguſtine thinketh that theſe do not ſignifie any certaine natiōs but al that ſhal then be ioyned vvith the Diuel and Antichriſt againſt the Church. li. 20. de Ciuit. c. 11. See S. Hierom in Exech. li. 11.
                   the nations that are vpon the foure corners of the earth,Ezec. 38, 14. 39, 2. * Gog, and Magog, and ſhal gather them into battel, the number of vvhom is as the ſand of the ſea. ✝ 
                     verse 8 And they aſcended vpon the bredth of the earth, and compaſſed 
                     •
                   the campe of the Sainctes, and the beloued citie. ✝ 
                     verse 9 And 
                     •
                   there came dovvne fire from God out of heauen, and deuoured them: ✝ 
                     verse 10 and the Deuil vvhich ſeduced them, vvas caſt into the poole of fire and brimſtone,
                     See S. Hierom in Exech. li. 11. vvhere both the beaſt and the falſe-prophet ſhal be tormented day and night for euer and euer.THE 6 VISION.
               
                ✝ 
                     verse 11 And I ſavv a great vvhite throne, and one ſitting vpon it, from vvhoſe ſightThey ſhal then be new, not the ſubſtā
                     ce, but the ſhape chāged. 2 Pet. 3. See S. Auguſtine. li. 20. de Ciuit. c. 14.
                   earth and heauen fled, and there vvas no place found for them. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And I ſavv the dead, great and litle, ſtanding in the ſight of the throne, andThe bookes of mens conſciēces, where it ſhal plainely be read vvhat euery mans life hath been. bookes vvere opened:Apoc. 3, 5. 21, 27. and * 
                     •
                   an other booke vvas opened, vvhich is of life: and the dead vvere iudged of thoſe thinges vvhich were vvritten in the bookes according to their vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 13 and the ſea gaue the dead that vvere in it, and death and hel gaue their dead that vvere in them, and it vvas iudged of euery one according to their vvorkes. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And hel and death vvere caſt into the poole of fire. This is the ſecond death. ✝ 
                     verse 15 AndSuch as doe no good workes, if they haue age and time to doe them, are not found in the booke of life. he that vvas not found vvritten in the booke of life, vvas caſt into the poole of fire.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
                  
                     2. Bound him;] Chriſt by his Paſſion hath abridged the povver of the Deuil for a thouſand yeres, that is, the vvhole time of the nevv Teſtament, vntil Antichriſts time, vvhen he ſhal be looſed againe, that is, be permitted to deceiue the vvorld, but for a ſhort time only, to vvit, three yeres and a halfe.
                  4▪ I ſavv ſeates.] S. Auguſtine (li. 20 de Ciuit. Dei c. 9) taketh this to be ſpoken, not of the laſt iudgement,Biſhops conſiſtories & iudicial power. but of the Sees or Conſiſtories of Biſhops and Prelates, and of the Prelates them ſelues, by vvhom the Church is novv gouerned. As the iudgement here giuen, can be taken no othervviſe better, then of that vvhich vvas ſaid by our Sauior Mat. 18. Whatſoeuer you binde in earth,1. Cor. 5. ſhal be bound in heauen▪ and therfore the Apoſtle ſaith, What haue I to doe to iudge of them that are vvith out?
                  4. And the ſoules.]During a thouſand yeres (that is the time ofthis militant Church) ſaints reigne vvith Chriſt in ſoule only. He meaneth (ſaith S. Auguſtine in the place alleaged) the ſoules of Martyrs, that they ſhal in the meane time, during thoſe thouſand yeres; vvhich is the time of the Church militant, be in heauen vvithout their bodies, and reigne vvith Chriſt. for, the ſoules (ſaith he) of the godly departed, are
 not ſeparated from the Church, vvhich is euen novv the kingdom of Chriſt. for els there ſhould be kept no memorie of them as the altar of God in the communicating of the body of Chriſt: neither ſhould it auaile to haſten to Baptiſme in the perils of death, for feare of ending our life vvithout it: nor to haſten to be reconciled, if vve fortune for penence or of il conſcience to be ſeparated from the ſame body. And vvhy are al theſe things done, but for that the faithful departed alſo be members of the Church? And though for an example the Martyrs be onely named here, yet it is mean
                        •
                      of others alſo that die in the ſtate of grace.
                  
                     5. The reſt liued not.]
                     The reſt are dead and damned in ſoule, during the ſame time. The reſt vvhich are not of the happie number aforeſaid, but liued and died in ſinne, reigne not vvith Chriſt in their ſoules during this time of the nevv Teſtament, but are dead in ſoule ſpiritually, and in body naturally, til the day of iudgement. S. Auguſt. ibidem.
                  
                  
                     3. This is the firſt reſurrection.] As there be tvvo regenerations, one by faith, vvhich is novv in Baptiſme: and an other according to the fleſh, vvhen at the later day the body ſhal be made immortal and incorruptible:The firſt reſurrection, of the ſoule only. ſo there are tvvo reſurrections, the one novv of the ſoules to ſaluation vvhen they die in grace, vvhich is called the firſt, the other of the bodies at the later day. S. Auguſt. li
                           •
                        . 20 de Ciui
                           •
                        . c. 6.
                  
                  
                     6. They ſhal be Prieſts.] It is not ſpoken (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. 20 de Ciuit. c. 10) of Biſhops and Prieſt
                           •
                         onely,
                     Prieſts, ſome proprely ſo called, ſome vnproprely. 
                     vvhich are properly novv in the Church called Prieſts: but as vve call al, Chriſtians, for the myſtical Chriſme or ointment,
                     1. Pet. 
                           •
                        . 
                     ſo al, Prieſts, becauſe they are the members of one Prieſt▪ of vvhom the Apoſtle Peter ſaith, A holy people, a kingly Prieſthod. Vvhich vvordes be notable for their learning that thinke there be none properly called Prieſts novv in the nevv Teſtament, no othervviſe then al Chriſtian men and vvomen, and a confuſion to them that therfore haue turned the name Prieſts into Miniſters.
                  
                     7. Satan ſhal be looſed.]
                     The binding and looſing of Satan, explicated by S. Auguſtine. In the vvhole 8 chapter of the ſaid 20 booke de Ciuitate Dei in S. Auguſtine, is a notable commentarie of theſe vvordes. Vvhere firſt he declareth, that neither this binding nor looſing of Satan is in reſpect of ſeducing or not ſeducing the Church of God: prouing that vvhether he be bound or looſe, he can neuer ſeduce the ſame. The ſame, ſaith he, ſhal be the ſtate of the Church at that time vvhen the Diuel is to be looſed, euen as ſince it vvas inſtituted. the ſame hath it been & ſhal be at al time in her children that ſuccede eche other by birth & death. And a litle after. This I thought vvas therfore to be mentioned, left any man ſhould thinke, that during the litle time wherein the Diuel ſhal be looſed, the Church ſhal not be vpon the earth, he either not finding it here vvhen he ſhal be le
                           •
                         looſe, or conſuming it vvhen be ſhal by al meanes perſecute the ſame. Secondly he declareth, that the Diuel to be bound, is nothing els but not to be permitted by God to exerciſe al his force or fraude in tentations: as to be looſed, is to be ſuffered by God for a ſmall time, that is, for three yeres and a halfe, to practiſe and proue al his povver and artes of tentations againſt the Church and her children, and yet not to preuaile againſt them. Thirdly this Doctor ſhevveth by vvhat great mercie our Lord hath tied Satan and abridged his povver during the vvhole millenarie or thouſand yeres, vvhich is al the time of the nevv Teſtament vntil then: & vvith vvhat vviſedom he permitteth him to breake looſe that litle time of three yeres and ſixe moneths,The ſhort reigne of Antichriſt. tovvard the later day, vvhich ſhal be the reigne of Antichriſt. Laſtly he ſhevveth vvhat kinde of men ſhal be moſt ſubiect to the Diuels ſeductiō, (euen ſuch as novv by tentation of Heretikes goe out of the Church) and vvho ſhal auoid it.
                  By al vvhich vve may confute diuers falſe expoſitiōs of old & late Heretikes▪
                     Millenarij or Chiliaſt
                           •
                        
                      firſt, the aūcient ſect of the Millenaries, that grounded vpon theſe thouſand yeres named by the Prophet, this hereſie, that there ſhould be ſo many yeres after the reſurrectiō of our bodies, in vvhich vve ſhould reigne vvith Chriſt in this vvorld, in our bodies, in al delites and pleaſures corporal, of meates, drinkes, and ſuch like, vvhich they called the firſt reſurrection. of vvhich hereſie Cerinthus vvas the author. Epiph. haer. 77. in fine. Hiero. C
                           •
                        mment. in c. 19 Mat. Auguſt. har. 8 ad Quodvul
                           •
                         Deum. Euſ
                        •
                     bius alſo (li. 3 hiſtoria c. 33) ſhevveth that ſome principal men vvere in part (though after a more honeſt maner cōcerning thoſe corporal delicacies) of the ſame opinion by miſconſtruction of theſe vvordes of S. Iohn.The Scriptures hard. Vvhereby vve learne and al the vvorld may perceiue, the holy Scriptures to be hard, vvhen ſo great clerkes did erre, and that there is no ſecuritie but in that ſenſe vvhich the Church allovveth of.
                  The late Heretikes alſo by the ſaid S. Auguſtines vvordes are fully refuted, affirming not only that the Church may be ſeduced in that great perſecution of the Diuels looſing,By S. Auguſtines foreſaid explication, is eurdently dedu
                           •
                        ed againſt the Proteſtāts, that the Churche can not erre, and that the Pope can not poſſibly be Antichriſt. but that it hath been ſeduced euen a great peece of this time vvhen the Diuel is bound: holding that the very true Church may erre or fall from truth to errour and idolatrie, yea (vvhich is more blaſphemie) that the cheefe gouernour of the Church is Antichriſt him ſelf, and the very Church vnder him, the vvhoo
                        •
                     e of Babylon: and that this Antichriſt, (vvhich the Scriptures in ſo many places, and here plainely by S. Auguſtines expoſition, teſtifie, ſhal reigne but a ſmall time, and that tovvard the laſt iudgement,) hath been reuealed long ſithence, to be the Pope him ſelf, Chriſts ovvne Vicar, and that he hath perſecuted the Saincts of their ſecte for theſe thouſand yeres at the leaſt. Vvhich is no more but to make the Diuel to be looſe, and Antichriſt to reigne the vvhole thouſand yeres, or the moſt part thereof, that is, almoſt the vvhole time of the Churches ſtate in the new Teſtamēt: (vvhich is againſt this and other Scriptures euidently, appointing that, to be the time of the Diuels binding:) Yea it is to make Antichriſt and the Diuel vveaker tovvard the day of iudgement then
 before,An inuincible demōſtration. and the truth better to be knovven, and the faith more common▪ the neerer vve come to the ſame iudgement: vvhich is expreſly * againſt the Goſpel▪ and this prophecie of S. Iohn.
                  Vve ſee that the ſectes of Luther,Mat. 24. Caluin, and other, be more ſpred through the vvorld then they vvere euer before,Lu. 18, 8. and conſequently the Pope and his religion leſſened, and his povver of puniſhing (or, as they call it) perſecuting the ſaid Sectaries, through the multitude of his aduerſaries, diminiſhed. How then is the Pope Antichriſt, Whoſe force ſhal be greater at the later end of the vvorld, then before? or how can it be othervviſe, but theſe Sect
                        •
                     Maiſters ſhould be Antichriſts neere precurſors, that make Chriſts cheefe Miniſters & the Churches cheefe gouelnours that haue been theſe thouſand yeres and more, to be Antichriſtes: 
                        •
                      and them ſelues and their ſectes to be true, that come ſo neere the time of the Diuels looſing and ſeduction & of the perſonal reigne of Antichriſt?
                  8. The campe of the Saincts.]The camp
                           •
                         of Saincts is the Catho. Church through the vvorld. 
                     S. Auguſtine in the ſaid 20 booke de Clui
                           •
                        . Dei cap. 11. It is not, ſaith he, to be taken that the perſecutors ſhal gather to any place, as though the campe of the ſaincts or the beloued citie ſhould be but in one place, vvhich in deede are no other thing but the Church of Chriſt ſpred through the vvhole vvorld. And therfore vvhereſoeuer the Church ſhal then be (vvhich ſhal be in al Nations euen them, for ſo much is inſinuated by this latitude of the earth here ſpecified) there ſhal the tents of ſaincts be, and the beloued citie of God, and there ſhal ſhe be beſieged by al her enemies, vvhich ſhal be in euery countrie vvhere ſhe is,As novv Heretikes in particular countries, ſo Antichriſt ſhal perſecute the Churches of al nations▪
                      in moſt cruel and forcible ſort. So vvriteth this profound holy Doctor. Vvhereby vve ſee, that, as novv the particular Churches of England, Scotland, Flanders, and ſuch like, be perſecuted by their enemies in thoſe countries, ſo in the time of Antichriſt, the Churches of al Nations. as of Italie, Spaine, France, and al other vvhich novv be quiet, ſhal be aſſaulted as novv the foreſaid are, and much more, for that the general perſecution of the vvhole, ſhal be greater▪ then the particular perſecution of any Churches in the vvorld.
                  
                  
                     9. There came dovvne a fire.]
                     Vvhat is mean
                           •
                         by fire from heauen. It is not meant of the fire of Hel (ſaith S. Auguſtine ib. c. 12) into which the vvicked ſhal be caſt after the reſurrection of their bodies, but of an extraordinarie helpe that God vvil ſend from heauen, to giue ſuccourſe to the Saincts of the Church that then ſhal fight againſt the vvicked: or, the very feruent and burning zeale of religion and Gods honour, vvhich God vvil kindle in the hartes of the faithful, to be conſtant againſt al the forces of that great perſecution.
                  
                     12. An other booke.] This is the booke of Gods knovvledge or predeſtination,The booke of euery mans workes, opened in the day of iudgement. vvherein that vvhich before vvas hid to the vvorld, ſhal be opened, and vvherein the true record of euery mans vvorkes ſhal be conteined, and they haue their iudgemēt diuerſly according to their vvorkes, and not according to faith only, or lacke of faith only. for, al infidels (as Turkes, obſtinate 
                        •
                     evves, and Heretikes) ſhal neuer come to that examination, being othervviſe condemned.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  Heauen and earth being made nevv,THE 5 PART. S. Iohn ſeeth the nevv citie Hieruſalem prepared and adorned for the ſpouſe of the Lambe. 6 The iuſt are glorified,The final glorificatiō of the Church. 7 and the vvicked thruſt into the poole of fire. 12 The vvall and gates and foundations of the citie are deſcribed and meaſured: 18 al vvhich are gold and cryſtal, pretious ſtones and pearles.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND I ſavv a nevv heauen and a nevv earth.Eſa. 63, 17. 66, 21. for
* the firſt heauen,The Epiſtle vpon the dedication of a Church. and the firſt earth vvas gone, & the ſea novv is not.2 Pet. 3, 13. ✝ 
                     verse 2 And I Iohn ſavvThe Church triumphant. the holy citie Hieruſalem nevv deſcending from heauen, prepared of God, as a bride adorned for her huſband. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And I heard a loud voice from the throne ſaying: BeholdThis tabernacle is Chriſt according to his humanitie. the tabernacle of God vvith men, and the vvil dvvel vvith them. And they ſhal be his people:Eſ. 25. 8. and he God vvith them ſhal be their God.Apoc. 7, 17. ✝ 
                     verse 4 and * God ſhalThis happie day ſhal make an end of al the miſeries of this mortalitie. vvipe avvay al teares from their eies: and death ſhal be no more. not mourning, nor crying, neither ſhal there be ſorovv any more,becauſe the vvhich' firſt thinges are gone.
               
                   ✝ 
                     verse 5 And he that ſate in the throne,Eſa. 43, 19. ſaid: * Behold I make al thinges nevv. ⊢ And he ſaid to me: Vvrite, becauſe theſe vvordes be moſt faithful and true. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he ſaid to me: It is done,Apoc. 1, 8. 22, 13. * I am Alpha and Omega: the beginning and the end. To him that thirſteth I vvil giue of the fountaine of the water of life, gratis. ✝ 
                     verse 7 He that ſhal ouercome,He that hath the victorie againſt ſinne in the Church militant, ſhal haue his revvard in the triumphant. ſhal poſſeſſe theſe thinges, and I vvil be his God: and he ſhal be my ſonne. ✝ 
                     verse 8 ButAl that commit mortal ſinnes and repent not, ſhal be damned. to the feareful, and incredulous, and execrable, and murderers, and fornicators, and ſorcerers, and Idolaters, and al liers, their part ſhal be in the poole burning vvith fire and brimſtone, vvhich is the ſecond death.
                ✝ 
                     verse 9 And there came one of the ſeuen Angels that had the vials ful of the ſeuen laſt plagues,THE 7 AND LAST VISION. and ſpake vvith me, ſaying: Come, & I vvil ſhevv thee the bride, the vvife of the Lambe. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he tooke me vp in ſpirit vnto a mountaine great and high: and he ſhevved me the holy citie Hieruſalem deſcending out of heauen from God, ✝ 
                     verse 11 
                  The glorie of the Church triumphant. hauing the glorie of God. and the light thereof like to a prerious ſtone, as it vvere to the iaſpetr ſtone, euen as cryſtal. ✝ 
                     verse 12 And it had a vvall great and high, hauing tvvelue gates, and in the gates tvvelue Angels, & names written thereon, vvhich areThe names of the Patriarches and Apoſtles honorable and glorious in the triumphant Church. the names of the tvvelue tribes of the children of Iſraël. ✝ 
                     verse 13 On the Eaſt, three gates: and on the North, three gates: and on the South, three gates: and on the Vveſt, three gates. ✝ 
                     verse 14 And the vvall of the citie hauing tvvelue foundations: and in them, tvvelue names, of the tvvelue Apoſtles of the Lambe.
                ✝ 
                     verse 15 And he that ſpake vvith me, had a meaſure of a reede, of gold, to meaſure the citie and the gates thereof, and the vvall. ✝ 
                     verse 16 AndSee S. Hierom ep. 17. touching this deſcription of the heauenly Hieruſalem, vvhich is the Church triū
                     phāt, teaching that theſe things muſt be taken ſpiritually, not car
                     
                        ••
                     ally. the citie is ſituated quadrangle-vviſe, and the length thereof is as great as alſo the bredth: and he meaſured the citie vvith the reede for tvvelue thouſand furlonges, & the length and height and bredth thereof be equal. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And he meaſured the vvall thereof of an hundred fourtie foure cubites, the meaſure of a man vvhich is of an Angel. ✝ 
                     verse 18 And the building of the vvall therof vvas of iaſper ſtone: but the citie it ſelf 
                     •
                   pure gold, like to pure glaſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And the foundations of the vvall of the citie, vvere adorned vvith al pretious ſtone. The firſt foundation, the iaſper: the ſecond, the ſaphire: the third, the calcedonius: the fourth, the emerauld: ✝ 
                     verse 20 the fifth, the ſardonix: the ſixt, the ſardius: the ſeuenth, the chryſolithus: the eight, the beryllus: the ninthe, the topazius: the tenth, the
 chryſopraſus: the eleuenth, the hyacinthe: the tvvelfth, the amethyſ
                     •
                  e. ✝ 
                     verse 21 And the twelue gates: there are twelue pearles, one to euery one: & euery gate vvas of one ſeueral pearle. & the ſtreate of the citie pure gold, as it vvere trāſpárent glaſſe. ✝ 
                     verse 22 AndAl external ſacrifice which now is neceſſarie
                        •
                     dutie of the faithful, ſhal then ceaſe and therfore there ſhal neede no material temple. temple I ſavv not therein. for our Lord the God omnipotent is the temple thereof,Eſa. 60, 19, and the Lambe. ✝ 
                     verse 23 And * the citie needeth not ſunne nor moone, to ſhine in it. for the glorie of God hath illuminated it, and the Lambe is the lampe thereof.Eſ. 60, 3. ✝ 
                     verse 24 And * the Gentiles ſhal vvalke in the light of it: and the kinges of the earth ſhal bring their glorie and honour into it.Eſa. 60, 11. ✝ 
                     verse 25 And * the gates thereof ſhal not be ſhut by day: for there ſhal be no night there. ✝ 
                     verse 26 And they ſhal bring the glorie and honour of nations into it. ✝ 
                     verse 27 There ſhalNone not perfectly cleā
                     ſed of their ſu
                        •
                     nes, can enter into this heauenly Hieruſelem. not enter into it any polluted thing, nor that doeth abomination and maketh lie,Apo. 20, 12. but * they that are vvritten in the booke of life of the Lambe.
               
                  ANNOTATION CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     18. Pure gold.]
                     The ſtate of glorified bodies.
                           •
                        
                      S. Gregorie (li. 18. Moral. 6, 28) ſaith, the heauenly ſtate is reſembled to gold, pretious ſtone, cryſtal, glaſſe, and the like, for the puritie, claritie, glittering of the glorious bodies: vvhere one mans body, conſcience, and cogitations are repreſented to an other, as corporal things in this life are ſeen through cryſtal or glaſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  The tree of life being vvatered vvith liuing vvater, yeldeth fruictes euery moneth. 3 There is neither curſe nor night in the citie. 6 The Angel that ſhevved Iohn al theſe things, refuſeth to be adored of him. 14 He telleth him that the iuſt ſhal enter into the citie, but the reſt ſhal be caſt forth. 18 Laſtly, 
                        •
                     e proteſteth and threateneth againſt them that ſhal preſume to adde to this prophecie, or take avvay from the ſame.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AND he ſhevved me a riuer ofvvater of life, 
                  
                     •
                   liuing water', cleere as cryſtal, proceding from the ſeate of God and of the Lambe. ✝ 
                     verse 2 In the middes of the ſtreate thereof, and on both ſides of the riuer,Chriſt is our tree of life: in the Church, by the B. Sacramé: & in heauen, by his viſible preſence and influence of life euer laſting both to our bodies and ſoules: of vv
                        •
                     ō Salomon ſaith, The tree of life to al that appr
                           •
                        he
                           •
                        d him. Prou. 3.
                   the tree of life, yelding tvvelue fruites, rendring his fruite euery moneth, and the leaues of the tree for the curing of the Gentiles. ✝ 
                     verse 3 And no curſe ſhal be any more: and the ſeate of God and of the Lambe ſhal be in it, and his ſeruantes ſhal ſerue him. ✝ 
                     verse 4 And they ſhal ſee his face: and his name in their foreheads.Apo. 21. Eſa. 60 ✝ 
                     verse 5 And * night ſhal be
 no mo
                     •
                  e: and they ſhal not neede the light of lampe, nor the light of the ſunne, becauſe our Lord God doth illuminate them, and they ſhal reigne for euer and euer. ✝ 
                     verse 6 And he ſaid to me,THE CONCLVSION. Theſe vvordes are moſt faithful and true. And our Lord the God of the ſpirites of the prophetes, ſent his Angel to ſhevv his ſeruantes thoſe thinges vvhich muſt be done quickly. ✝ 
                     verse 7 And behold I come quickly. Bleſſed is he that keepeth the vvordes of the prophecie of this booke.
                ✝ 
                     verse 8 And I Iohn vvhich haue heard, and ſeen theſe thinges. And * after I had heard and ſeen,Apo. 19, 10. I fel dovvneYou ſee it is al one to adore before the feete of the angel, & to adore the Angel: though, to adore him, 
                        •
                     e not expreſſed as in the 19 chap. See the an̄otatiō there v. 10.
                   to adore before the feete of the Angel vvhich ſhevved me theſe thinges: ✝ 
                     verse 9 and he ſaid to me, See thou doe not, for I am thy fellow-ſeruant, and of thy brethren, the prophetes, and of them that keepe the vvordes of this booke. Adore God. ✝ 
                     verse 10 And he ſaith to me, Seale not the vvordes of the prophecie of this booke. for the time is neere. ✝ 
                     verse 11 He that hur
                     •
                  eth, let him hurt yet: and he that is in filth, let him be filthie yet: and he that is iuſt,Man by Gods grace & doing good workes, doth increaſe his iuſtice. let him be iuſtified yet: and let the holy be ſanctified yet. ✝ 
                     verse 12 Behold I come quickly▪ and my revvard is vvith me,
* to render to euery manHeauen is the reward, hire, & repaiment for good workes, in al the Scriptures. yet the aduerſaries wil not ſee it. according to his vvorkes,Ro. 2, 6. ✝ 
                     verse 13 I am 
* Alpha and Omega,Apo. 21, 6. 1, 8. the firſt and the laſt, the beginning and the end. ✝ 
                     verse 14 Bleſſed are they that vvaſh their ſtoles: that their povver may be in the tree of life, and they may enter by the gates into the citie. ✝ 
                     verse 15 Vvithout are dogges and ſorcerers, and the vnchaſt, and murderers, and ſeruers of Idols, & euery one that loueth and maketh a lie.
                ✝ 
                     verse 16 I IESVS haue ſent mine Angel, to teſtifie to you theſe thinges in the Churches. I am the roote and ſtocke of Dauid, the bright and morning ſtarre. ✝ 
                     verse 17 And the Spirit & the bride ſay,Eſ. 55, 1. Come. And he that heareth, let him ſay, Come. And * he that thirſteth, let him come: and he that vvil, let him take the vvater of life gratis.
                ✝ 
                     verse 18 For I teſtifie to euery one hearing the vvordes of the prophecie of this booke, 
                     •
                   If any mā ſhal adde to theſe things, God ſhal adde vpon him the plagues vvritten in this booke. ✝ 
                     verse 19 And if any man ſhal diminiſh of the wordes of the booke of this prophecie: God ſhal take avvay his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy citie, and of theſe thinges that be vvritten in this booke. ✝ 
                     verse 20 ſaith he that giueth teſtimonie of theſe things. Yea I come quickely: Amen. 
                     •
                   Come
 Lord IESVS. ✝ 
                     verse 21 The grace of our Lord IESVS Chriſt be vvith you al. Amen.
               
                  ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
                  
                     11. He that hurteth.] It is not an exhortation, but a commination or threatening, that hovv far ſoeuer the vvicked increaſe in naughtines▪ God hath prouided anſvverable puniſhment for them.
                  
                     18. If any man ſhal adde.]
                     The curſe agaīſt adding or diminiſhing, is againſt Heretikes, not Catholike expoſitours. The author of the commentaries vpon this booke, bearing the name of S. Ambroſe, ſaith thus of this point. He maketh not this proteſtation againſt the expoſitours of his prophecie, but againſt Heretikes, for the expoſitour doth add
                           •
                         or diminiſh nothing, but openeth: the obſcuritie of the narration, or ſhevveth the moral or ſpiritual ſenſe. He curſeth therfore Heretikes, that vſed to adde ſomevvhat of their ovvne that vvas falſe, and to take avvay other things that vvere contrarie to their hereſies. So ſaith this auncient vvriter. And this vvas the propertie of them in al ages, and ſo is it of ours novv, as vve haue noted through the vvhole Bible, and as vve haue in ſundrie places ſet forth to the ſight of al indifferent readers, in the nevv Teſtament, that al the vvorld may ſee that the Apoſtles curſe is fallen vpon them, and may bevvare of them.
                  
                     20. Come Lord Ieſus.]
                     A breefe petitiō vnto IESVS Chriſt, to come quickly, as S. Iohn here ſpeaketh, and to iudge the cauſe of Catholikes & Proteſtants. And novv ô Lord Chriſt, moſt iuſt and merciful, vve they poore creatures that are ſo afflicted for confeſſion and defenſe of the holy, Catholike, and Apoſtolike truth, conteined in this thy ſacred booke, and in the infallible doctrine of thy deere ſpouſe our mother the Church, vve crie alſo vnto thy Maieſtie vvith tenderneſſe of our hartes vnſpeakable, COME LORD IESVS QUICKLY, and iudge betvvixt vs and our Aduerſaries, and in the meane time giue patience, comfort, and conſtancie to al that ſuffer for thy name, and truſt in thee. ô Lord God our onely helper and protector, tarie not long. AMEN.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A TABLE OF THE EPISTLES AND GOSPELS, AFTER THE ROMANE VSE, VPON SVNDAIES, HOLIDAIES, and other principal daies of the yere, for ſuch as are deſirous to knovv and reade them according to this tranſlation. And therfore the Epiſtles taken out of the old Teſtament are omitted, till the edition thereof.
            
               Vpon Sundaies, Imber Daies, and other Feries.
               
                  THE 1. SVNDAY in Aduent, Epiſtle pag. 415. Goſpel pag. 199.
               The 2. Sunday in Aduent, Ep. 419. Goſp. 18.
               The 3 Sunday in Aduēt, Ep. 533. Goſ. 
                     •
                  17.
               Vveneſday Imber in Aduent,The Epiſtles omitted are taken out of the Old Teſtamēt. Goſ
                     •
                   135.
               Fridday Imber in Aduent, Goſp. 136.
               Saturday Imber in Aduent, Ep. 554. Goſ. 143.
               The 4 Sunday in Aduent, Ep. 432. Goſp. 143.
               Chriſtmas eue, Ep. 38
                     •
                  . Goſp. 4.
            
            
               
                  CHRISTMAS day at the

                     firſt maſſe, Ep. 597. Goſp. 139.
                     ſecond Maſſe, Epiſt. 598. Goſp. 140.
                     third Maſſe, Ep. 603. Goſ. 216.
                  
               
            
            
               S. Steuen, Ep 305. Goſp▪ 66.
               S. Iohn the Euang. Goſp, 279.
               Childermas day, Ep. 724, Goſp. 5.
               S. Thomas of Canterburie, Ep. 608. Goſ. 248.
               The Sūday within the Octaue of Chriſtmas, Ep. 504. as on Twelfth eue. Goſp. 14. verſe 33 vnto 41.
               The CIRCVMCISION of our Lord, Ep. 597. Goſp. 140.
               Tvvel
                     •
                  th Eue, Ep. 504. Goſp. 6.
               The EPIPHANIE of our Lord called Tvvelfth day, Goſp. 5.
               The 1 Sunday after the Epiphanie. Ep. 412. Goſp. 141.
               The 2 Sunday after the Epiphanie, Ep. 
                     ••
                  3. Goſp. 220.
               The 3 Sunday after the Epiphanie, Epiſ. 413. Goſp. 19.
               The 4 Sunday after the Epiph. Ep. 414. Goſp. 20.
               The 5 Sunday after the Epiph. Ep. 542. Goſp. 35.
               The 6 Sunday after the Epiph. Ep. 546. Goſp. 36.
               The Sunday of Septuageſme, Ep. 443. Goſp. 56.
               The Sunday of Sexageſme. Ep. 489. Goſp. 159.
               The Sunday of Quinquageſme, Epiſt. 456. Goſp. 191.
               Vpon Aſh weneſday, Goſp. 15.
               Thurſday after Aſhweneſday, Goſp. 10.
               
                   Friday after Aſh weneſday, Goſp. 13.
               Saturday after Aſhweneſday, Goſp. 103.
               The 1 SVNDAY in lent, Ep. 481, Goſp. 9.
               Munday in the 1 weeke of lent, Goſ. 73.
               Tueſday, Goſp. 59.
               Vveneſday Imber, goſp. 32.
               Thurſday, goſp. 42.
               Friday Imber, goſp. 229.
               Saturday Imber. goſp. 48.
               The 2 Sunday in lent, Ep 549. Goſp. 48.
               Munday, Goſp. 243.
               Tueſday, goſp. 64.
               Vveneſday, Goſp. 56. verſ. 17. the ſame that is vpon the day of the Holy Croſſe.
               Thurſday, goſp. 186.
               Friday, goſp. 60.
               Saturday. goſp. 183.
               The 3 Sunday in lent, Ep. 521, goſp. 170.
               Munday, goſp. 146.
               Tueſday, goſp. 51.
               Vveneſday, goſp. 41.
               Thurſday, goſp. 147.
               Friday goſp. 225.
               Saturday, goſp. 242.
               
                  The 4 Sunday in lent, Ep. 505. Goſp. 232.
               Munday, goſp. 220.
               Tueſday, goſp. 239.
               Vveneſday, goſp. 245.
               Thurſday, goſp. 156.
               Friday, goſp. 250.
               Saturday, goſp. 242.
               PASSION Sunday, Epiſt. 621. Goſpel 244.
               Munday in Paſſion vveeke, goſp. 240.
               Tueſday, goſp. 239.
               Vveneſday, goſp. 245.
               Thurſday, goſp. 157.
               Friday, goſp. 252.
               Saturday, goſp. 254.
               PALME Sunday, before the benedictiō of the palmes, goſp. 58.
               At Maſſe, Ep. 528. Goſp. 74.
               Munday in holy vveeke, goſp. 253.
               Tueſday, goſp. 124.
               Vveneſday, goſp. 201.
               Thurſday, Ep. 449. Goſp. 256.
               Friday, goſp. 268.
               Saturday, Ep. 542 Goſp. 84.
               EASTER Day, Ep. 433. Goſp▪ 131.
               Munday in Eaſter vveeke, Ep. 319, Goſp, 211.
               Tueſday, Ep. 328. Goſp. 212.
               Vveneſday, Ep. 297, Goſp. 278.
               Thurſday, Ep. 311. Goſp. 274.
               Friday, Ep. 660. Goſp. 85.
               Saturday, Ep. 657. Goſp. 274.
               The 1 Sunday after Eaſter, called Lovv Sunday, Ep. 685. Goſp. 275.
               The 2 Sunday after Eaſter, Ep. 658. Goſp. 248.
               The 3 Sunday after Eaſter, Ep. 657. Goſp. 264.
               The 4 Sunday after Eaſter, Ep. 642. goſp. 264.
               The 5 Sund. after Eaſter, Ep. 642. go
                     •
                  . 265▪
               
               The Rogation daies, Ep 651. Goſp. 170.
               The Aſcenſion 
                     •
                  ue, Ep. 518. Goſp. 266.
               The ASCENSION day, Ep. 289. Goſp. 132.
               The Sunday vvithin the Octaue of the Aſcenſion, Ep. 662. Goſp. 263.
               Vvhitſun-eue, Ep. 347. Goſp. 260.
               VVHIT SVNDAY, Ep. 293. Goſp. 260.
               Mūday in whitſun vveeke, Ep. 319. Goſp. 223.
               Tueſday, Ep. 311 goſp▪ 248.
               Vveneſday Imber in whitſun weeke, Ep. 301. Goſp. 234.
               Thurſday, Ep. 310. Goſp. 162.
               Friday Imber in vvhitſū weeke, Goſ. 149.
               Saturday Imber, Ep. 393. Goſp. 147.
               TRINITIE Sunday, Ep. 411. Goſp. 85.
               The 1 Sunday after Pentecoſt, Ep. 683. Goſp▪ 153.
               CORPVS CHRIST 1 day, Ep. 449. Goſp. 235.
               The 2 Sunday after Pentecoſt, Ep. 681. Goſp. 181.
               The 3 Sunday, Ep. 664. Goſp. 182.
               The 4 Sunday, Ep. 400. Goſp. 148.
               The 5 Sund. Ep. 660▪s v. 8. vnto 15. Goſp. 12▪
               
               The 6 Sunday, Ep. 395. Goſp. 107.
               The 7 Sunday, Ep. 396. Goſp. 18.
               The 8 Sunday, Ep. 400. Goſp. 185.
               The 9 Sunday, Ep. 445. Goſp. 194. verſ. 41 vnto 47.
               The 10 Sunday Ep. 454. Goſp. 190.
               The 11 Sunday, Ep. 464. Goſp. 106.
               The 12 Sunday, Ep. 476. Goſp. 167.
            
            
               
               The 13 Sunday, Ep. 503. goſp. 188.
               The 14 Sunday, Ep. 509. goſp. 15.
               The 15 Sunday, Ep. 509. goſp. 556.
               The 16 Sunday, Ep. 517. goſp. 180.
               The 17 Sunday, Ep. 115. goſp. 63.
               Vveneſday Imber in Septēber, Goſp▪ 110.
               Friday Imber in September, Goſp. 157.
               Saturday Imber in September, Ep. 621. Goſp. 178.
               The 18 Sunday after Pentecoſt, Ep. 425. v. 4 vnto the 9. goſp. 22.
               The 19 ſunday, Ep. 519. verſ. 23 vnto the 29. goſp. 62.
               The 20 ſunday, Ep. 521. goſp. 227.
               The 21 ſunday Ep. 524. goſp. 52.
               The 22 ſunday, Ep. 526, Goſp. 62. verſ. 15 to the 22.
               The 23 ſunday, Ep 531. goſp. 23.
               The 24 ſunday after Pentecoſt. Ep. 536. Goſp. 68.
            
            
               For Saincts and Feſtiual daies, peculiar and proper.
               S. Andrewes Eue, Goſp. 217.
               S. Andrewes day, Ep. 408. Goſp. 10.
               S. Nicolas, Ep. 636. v. 7 to the 18. Goſp. 72. v. 14 to the 24.
               The CONCEPTION of our Ladie, Goſp. 3.
               S. Thomas the Apoſt. Ep. 516. Goſp. 275.
               
                  In Cathedra S. Petri Romae, Ep 655. goſp. 44.
               The Conuerſion of S. Paule, Ep. 315. Goſp. 54.
               CANDL
                     •
                  NAS day, Goſp. 140.
               S. Matthias, Ep. 290. Goſp. 29.
               The ANNVNCIATION of our Lady, Goſp. 135.
               S. George, Ep. 588▪ v. 8 to the 11. & p. 591. v. 10 to the 13. Goſp. 262.
               S▪ Marke, Goſp. 166.
               
                  In maioribus Litaniis vpon S. Markes day, Ep. 651. Goſp 170.
               SS. Philip. & Iacob. Goſp. 259.
               HOLY ROOD
                     •
                   day in Maie, or the Inuentiō of the holy Croſſe, Epiſt, 528. Goſp. 222.
               S. Barnabas day, Ep. 322. Goſp. 262.
               S. Iohn Baptiſts Eue, Goſp. 134.
               S. Iohn Baptiſts Day called Midſomer, Goſp. 137.
               SS. Peters & Paules eu
                     •
                  , Ep. 296. Go. 279.
               SS. Peter and Paules day, Ep. 324. goſ. 44.
               The Cōmemoration of S. Paul, Ep. 495. Goſp. 26.
               The VISITATION of our Lady, goſp. 136.
               S. Marie Magdalene, Goſp. 157.
               S. Iames, Ep. 432. goſp 57.
               S. Dominike, Ep. 592. goſp. 175.
               The TRANSFIGVRATION of our Lord, Ep. 667. Goſp. 48.
               S. Laurence. Ep. 486. goſp. 254.
               Aſſumption eue, goſp. 171.
               ASSVMPTION of our Lady, Goſp. 168.
               S. Bartholomew, Ep. 456. verſ. 26 to the 30. Goſp. 152.
               S. Levvis king of France, Goſp. 193.
               The Decoll. of S. Iohn Bapt. Goſp, 101.
               The NATIVITIS of our Lady, Goſp. 3.
               HOLY ROODE day in September, or the Exaltation of the holy CROSSE, Ep. 528. Goſp. 255.
               S. Matthevves eue, Goſp. 149.
               S. Matthevves day, Goſp. 22.
               Michelmas day, Ep. 698. Goſp. 50.
               S. Francis, Ep. 511, Goſp. 29.
               S. Dionyſius Areopagita, Ep. 343. Goſp. 152. as vpon Alhalovves eue.
               S. Luke, Ep. 484. Goſp. 166.
               SS. Simon and Iude, Ep. 518. Goſp. 262.
               Alhalovves eue. Ep. 708. Goſp. 152.
               ALHALOVVES day, Ep. 712. Goſp. 11.
               Al-
                     •
                  oules day, Ep. 466. Goſp. 230.
               S. Martin, Goſp. 171. verſe 33 to the 37.
               S. Clement, Ep. 531. Goſp. 70.
               S. Catharine, Goſp. 71. verſe 1 to the 14. vvhich is the Goſpel for holy virgins.
            
            
               For Saincts generally and in common.
               Apoſtles eue, goſp. 262.
               For a Martyr that is a Biſhop, Ep. 469. & 642. goſp. 181. and 45.
               For a Martyr that is no Biſhop, Epiſtle as vpon S. Georges day. goſp. 62.
               For one Martyr, Ep. 641. 662. goſp. 254. and 262.
               For many Martyrs, Ep. 393. 400. 481. 626. 632. 655. 713. 734. Goſp. 11. 29. 68. 152. 172. 199. 265.
               
               For a Cōfeſſor that is a Biſhop, Ep. 608. 615. 636. Goſp. 70. 72. 123. 171.
               For a Confeſſor that is no Biſhop, Ep. 432 and 531. Goſp. 175. 193. 254.
               For holy Abbots, Goſp. 54.
               For holy Virgins Martyrs, Goſp. 36. 71.
               For holy Virgins not Martyrs, Ep. 438. 488. verſ. 17, to the 3 of the chapter following. Goſp. as for holy Virgins Martyrs.
               For other holy vvomen not Virgins. Goſp. 36.
               For holy Vvidovves. Ep. 578. Goſp. as for holy vvomen not virgins.
               The DEDICATION of a Church, or CHVRCH HOLYDAY. Ep. 741. Goſp. 195.
            
            
               IN votiue Maſſes, that is, ſuch as are ſaid according to mens deuotion for diuers peculiar cauſes.
               Of the B. Trinitie, Ep. 493. Goſp. 263.
               Of the holy Ghoſt, Ep. 311. Goſp. 260.
               Of the Paſſion of our Lord, Goſp. 272.
               Of the holy Croſſe, Ep. 528. Goſp. 56.
               Of our B. Ladie, Ep. 598. Goſp. 135. 140. 171. 272.
               Of the holy Angels, Ep. 708. Goſp. 218.
               Of the bleſſed Apoſtles Peter & Paule, Ep. 301. Goſp. 54.
               For any neceſſitie, Goſp. 117.
               For remiſſion of ſinnes, Ep. 398. Goſp. 170.
               For chooſing of the Pope, Epiſt▪ 607. Goſp. 260.
               Vpon the Popes creation & coronation day, Ep. 655. Goſp. 44.
               Againſt ſchiſme, or for any neceſſitie of the Church, Ep. 518. Goſp. 266.
               Againſt the Paganes, Goſp. 170.
               In time of warre, Goſp. 68.
               For peace, Goſp. 275. verſ. 19 to the 24.
               Againſt the plague, Goſp. 147. as vpon Saturday in whitſun weeke.
               For the ſicke, Ep. 651. Goſp. 20.
               For Mariage, Ep. 521. Goſp. 53.
            
            
               In Maſſes of Requiem.
               Epiſt. 466. 550. 725. Goſp. 230. 234. 235. 251.
            
         
         
            AN AMPLE AND PARTICVLAR TABLE DIRECTING THE READER TO AL CATHOLIKE truthes, deduced out of the holy Scriptures, and impugned by the Aduerſaries.
            
               A
               
                  ABSOLVTION of a Prieſt. The excellencie of this power aboue the power of Angels & Princes. 47. 277. Vvhat is to looſe and binde. 47.
               Abſtinence. See Faſting.
               
                  Adoration of God, Latrîa: and adoration of creatures, Dulia. pag. 11. nu. 11. pa. 321. nu. 25. pa. 332. nu. 12. p. 633. nu. 21. Adoratiō of the Arke, Crucifixe, Images, Relikes, and the like. pag. 633. nu. 21. of Angels, Saincts, and holy perſons. pag. 706. 737 at large. 744 marg. S. Iohns adoring of the Angel, explicated. 736. 737. Vvhat is, to adore in
 ſpirit & truth, 218. Reuerence to holy perſons, euen to the kiſſing of their feete, 300.
               
                  Alleluia. 735 and 736 at large. Not to be tranſlated. ibid. The ſong both of the Chruch militant and triūphant. ibid. 734 marg. A word of maruelous ioy, and ſo vſed in the Churches ſeruice, euen in the primitiue Church. 736. Sung in our countrie at our firſt conuerſiō. ib. Sung in al Chriſtian Natiōs. ib. The Proteſtants had rather ſay, Praiſe ye the Lord. ib. In tranſlating ſixe Pſalmes they haue leſt it out nine times. ibidem.
               
                  Almes redeeme ſinnes &c. pa. 143. marg. 173. nu. 41. They procure vs patrones in heauen,☞ pag. 186. nu. 9. releaſe of paines after our death. 317 marg. increaſe grace. 486 marg. Great Almeſmen happie. pag. 353. nu. 35. pa. 486. nu. 6. 174 marg. 317 marg. Almes and hoſpitalitie to Preiſts and other holy men. 28. 163. marg. 186. 485. 486. 487. 511. 534. 588. 637. to Catholike priſoners. 341 marg. 600 m. See, Vvorkes. The more able, the greater muſt our almes be. 121 marg. Vvhen a man is bound to giue almes. 681 marg.
               
                  Altars. pag. 638. nu. 10. Altars ſanctified by the ſacrifice of Chriſts body.☞ pag. 67. Altar vvhy called table ſometime. pa. 638. Dedication or conſecration of altars vvith Saincts Relikes. 711.
               
                  Amen amen doubled, vvhat it ſignifieth. pa. 244. nu. 34. Amen not to be tranſlated & ib. 234 marg. 735. 736.
               
                  Angels, Protectors of men. pag. 52. nu. 10. pag. 326. nu. 15. 679. of countries, 701. of Chruches, ibidem. The Proteſtants alſo hold this againſt the Puritanes. 679. They helpe vs. pag. 604. marg. 541. S. Paules place of the religiō of Angels explicated. pag. 14. nu. 18. Praying to Angels. ibid. Peace from God and the holy Angels. 700. Nine orders of Angels. pag. 514. nu. 21. S. Michael patrone of the Church. 721. fighting vvith the dragon. ibid.
               Anoiling. See E. Entrem
                     •
                   V
                     •
                  cti
                     •
                  .
               
                  Antichriſt.
                  ☞ pag. 556. 557. 558. 718. 723 at large. vvhy ſo called pa. 558. He ſhal be one ſingular man. 556. nu. 3. p. 724. He ſhal come neere the vvorldes end. 557. nu. 4. His reigne three yeres and a halfe. p. 71. nu. 22. 29. 123 marg. 718 marg. 711 marg. 740. He ſhal aboliſh the Maſſe. p. 558. ſuffer no worſhip but of him ſelf only. p. 557. nu. 4. Al framing letters to expneſſe his name, vncertaine. 724. Heretikes his forerunners, ſpecially theſe of our daies. pa. 556. 558. 722 marg. 723. 741. The apoſtaſie of him & his from the Cath. Church. p. 556. His perſecution of the ſame. 720 marg. 721. 723. 741. His attempts to dravv from the true faith. 721. Many Antichriſtes, 556. The Pope can not be Antichriſt. p. 554 marg. pa. 557. p. 231 marg. 721 marg. 724. 740. The Proteſtants make S. Leo and S. Gregorie furtherers of Antichriſt. pa. 557. They place Antichriſt in the See of Rome in S. Paules daies. p. 557. 240 marg. Not to be vvith the See of Rome, is to be with Antichriſt. p. 323. 556. nu. 3.
               
                  Apoſtles. their name, dignitie, authoritie.☞ pag. 154. nu. 13. p. 37. nu. 11. p. 53. nu. 18. p. 488. Their number of Tvvelue myſtical. p. 94. nu. 14. p. 290 marg. Some of them more principal Apoſtles. p. 492. The actes of SS. Peter and Paul in two ſeueral tables. 374. 375. They left their vviues. p. 21. nu. 14. p. 55 marg. 191 marg. p. 148. nu. 38. So did S. Philip the Deacon. 354 marg. See Prieſts. They vovved pouertie. 55. nu. 27. p. 481. They made the Creede. 376. Their Creede. ibidem. Their learning, vviſedom, conſtancie, after they receiued the holy Ghoſt. 299. m. Their honour & dreade among the firſt Chriſtians. 300 and 301 marg. The Apoſtles precepts. 336 ma▪ 440. Apoſtolical traditions. See, Tradition. The ſtile of Apoſtolical ſalutation. 384. Heretikes vſurpe it to ſeeme Apoſtles. ibid▪ To be ſaluted only of them giueth grace ▪ 421 marg. The
 Popes office is called his Apoſtleſhip. pa. 520. The Apoſtles of diuers countries. 154. nu. 13. Their glorie in Heauen that conuert ſoules. 471. 529. m. 548 m. S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle. 432 marg.
            
            
               B
               
                  BAbylon,
                  ☞ vvhat it ſignifieth. 725 marg. 728 and 729 marg. 730. 732.
               
                  Baptiſme healeth the ſoule.☞ pa. 231. nu. 2. taketh away ſinne. 357. marg. it iuſtifieth. pag. 395 marg. p. 397. nu. 3 and marg. Neceſſarie to ſaluation except ſome caſes. p. 89. 224. nu. 5. Baptiſme of infants neceſſarie. p. 395. nu▪ 12. p. 440 nu. 14. The effectes thereof and of Confirmation differ pag. 313 nu. 17. Exorciſmes and other ceremonies of Baptiſme pa. 107. nu. 34 p. 314. nu. 38. pag. 661. nu. 21. Ephetha. 107 Abrenuntio. 661. The character thereof pa. 471 nu. 22 Baptiſme receiued of Heretikes and Schiſmatikes p. 661. nu. 21. Iohns baptiſme inferiour to Chriſts. pa. 8. nu. 11. p 87 marg. p. 89. nu. 8 p. 224 nu. 3
                     •
                  . p. 143 marg. 2
                     •
                  7 marg. 289 marg 347 marg The Proteſtants make them equal: and vvhy. 8. nu. 11. Names giuen in baptiſme, and vvhat maner of names. pa. 139. nu. 63. Vvhether Chriſt him ſelf baptized. 225 mar. Figures of Baptiſme. 231. 245 marg. 225 marg. 661. The ſending of the holy Ghoſt on vvhitſunday, called baptiſme 289 marg.
               
                  Beatitudes eight. pag▪ 11. marg.
               
                  Beza maketh God author of ſinne. p. 17. 266. controuleth the Euangeliſtes. pa. 139. 144 marg. 201. marg. 205. 314. imagineth according to his ſanſie corruptiōs of the Greeke text. 27 See the preface. He tranſlateth for Chriſts ſoule in hel his carcas in the graue. 296.
               
               
                  Biſhops.
                  ☞ their ſpiritual povver. p. 53. nu. 18 pa 
                     •
                  88. to puniſh Heretikes. ibid. Caluin confeſſeth the ſaid power ib. Their conſiſtories 739. They muſt be obeied pa. 43 nu 9 pa. 322 marg. 
                     •
                  98. marg. (See CHVRCH.) honoured & feared. 301 marg. their bleſsing. p. 27. p. 55. p. 616. They may deale in vvorldly affaires, and vvhen▪ pag. 177. 589. Superior to Prieſts and diſtinct in office. 166 marg. pag. 312. nu. 17. 332 marg pag. 528. pag. 596. though the names of Biſhop and Prieſt vvere at the firſt indifferently vſed. 352 marg. They only can conſecrate Biſhops, Prieſts, &c pa. 596. nu. 5. p. 332 marg. Biſhoping vvhy ſo called. pag 314. Biſhops viſitations 335 marg. Many vvorthie Biſhops that can not preache. 582. Special vertues required in a Biſhop. 703
               
                  Bleſsing of creatures effectual and operatiue pa. 79.☞ 233 marg. 109. 163 marg. 575 576. Bleſſing the table. pag. 575. Bleſſing a preeminence of the better perſon. p. 5
                     •
                  5 616 Biſhops & Prieſts belſsing ibid The fathers & mothers bleſsing pa 616. nu. 6. Bleſsing with the ſigne of the Croſſe, pa. 213. 576. Chriſt bleſſed the children, 113 mar. & his Apoſtles. 275 marg.
            
            
               C
               
                  CAluins blaſphemie againſt the diuinitie of Chriſt. pag 219 nu. 
                     •
                   p. 250. Againſt Chriſts ovvne merites pag. 529. 708. 605 marg. Againſt the ſaincts in heauen. pa. 187. that God is author of ſinne pa. 37. Concerning Chriſts ſuffering the paines of the damned & that he vvas abandoned of his father. 83 130 marg. Againſt remiſsion of ſinnes. 612 marg. 613▪
               
               
                  Caluiniſme tendeth to the abomination of deſolation 124.
               
                  Canonical houres pa. 320 pag. 296 marg. 55
                     •
                   marg. They anſvver to the time of Chriſts Paſ
                     ••
                  ion and agonies pag▪ 76 marg. 78. 80▪ 81▪ 82. 83. pag. 190 ma. See Praier.
               
               
                  Catholike. This name diſcerneth true beleeuers from Heretikes it is the ſurname of true Chriſtiās By this name. Heretikes them ſelues vnderſtād them of the Romane faith. pa. 324. S. Auguſtines
 high eſtimation of this name▪ ibid. The Proteſtants mocke at this name pag. 324. So did the Donatiſtes. ibid. Some leaue it out in the Creede, pag. 324. Some in the titles of the Catholike Epiſtles. pag. 641. The Catholike Epiſtles why ſo called. ib. & 377. Catholike termes & ſpeaches 584. 585. 588. To haue Catholike parents is a great bleſſing 587. Catholike Church. See Church. Catholike faith. See faith. The Catholike faith is taken from countries for ſinne. 703 The Catholike ſimple man is ſufficiently learned. 169. 177. 680. Catholike mens obedience to their Paſtors 322 m. to Councels. 339 Catholike aſſemblies to Gods ſeruice in time of perſecution. See perſecution.
               
               
                  Cenſures of the Church. See Eccleſiaſtical. Ceremonies vſed in the Church by Chriſts example.☞ pa. 247. External elements in the Sacraments pa. 506. S. Auguſtines eſtimation of the Catho. Churches ceremonies. pag. 506. he is falſely alleaged againſt them. ibid. They are not burdenous, but ſvveete and to edification. p. 506. They are neither Heatheniſh nor Iudacial. pag. 506. 507. The Apoſtles borovved ſome ceremonios of the Ievves law. 677. nu. 14.
               
                  Charitie the greateſt vertue, & more principal in our iuſtification then faith. 457. See Iuſtification. How faith worketh by charitie. 510.
               
                  Chaſt or ſingle life, Angelical. pa. 64 more apt for the ſeruice of God. pag. 142. nu. 38. pa. 439. nu. 5. pag. 440. nu. 32. See Prieſts. Holy Orders. Monaſtical life. It is not impoſſible. pag. 55. nu. 11. pa. 439. nu. 7. The Proteſtants complaine they haue not the gift. pa. 439. nu. 7. pag. 571. 597. Al may that vvil. pag. 55. nu. 11. p. 439. nu. 7. Chaſtitie of minde alſo is required. 656 mar. The Chaſtitie of Virgins, Vvidovves, maried folke, differ in merite and dignitie. pag. 37. nu. 8.
               CHRIST a Prieſt as he is man. See Prieſt. his deſcending into Hel. See Hel. He is the only Mediator. See Saincts. Hovv he maketh novv interceſſion for vs. 615. marg. Folovving of Chriſt diuerſely. 151. 163 m & 165. Chriſt & Meſſias and Anointed, al one. 218 marg. His maruelous grace in preaching. 147. m.
               The name of CHRISTIANS. p. 323. 324. True Chriſtian libertie. See Goſpel.
               
               CHVRCH the Spouſe of Chriſt, her other titles & prerogatiues pag. 572. Chriſts exceding loue and benefites tovvard her. pag. 522. The maruelous vnion betvvene them. 455 m. She vvas builded of Chriſts ſide. 273. gathered of al nations pag. 85. Vpholden by his continual protection. 39. 40 m. 703. Catholike or vniuerſal. 69 marg. pag. 213. pag. 324. 572. 96. marg. 212 marg. 679. 382. marg. 536. marg. The principal creature. pag. 522. Vvhat this article ſignifieth, I beleeue the Catholike Church. pag. 572. 227 marg. It is more blindnes not to ſee the Church, then not to beleeue in Chriſt. pa. 477. Heretikes blinder then the Ievves. ib. The vnitie therof. pag. 456. 501. nu. 9. pa. 519. 447. nu. 17. Chriſt praied for the vnitie therof. 266. ma. His coate vvithout ſeame a figure thereof. 272. marg. often cōmended. 658 marg. 419. marg. See Schiſme. The Proteſtants at the firſt auoided the name of Church, and thruſt it out of the Bible. pag. 521. 522 marg. It can neuer faile not erre. pag. 11. nu. 23. pag. 70. 85. 192. 238. nu. 68. pag. 261. 264 marg. 266. 267. 522. 523. 555. 572. 573▪ 721. 740. 303. m. 536. marg. The Proteſtants blaſphemie cōcerning the Churches apoſtaſie and reuolt from God. pag. 555. nu. 3. Chriſt vvithout his Church as the head vvithout a body. 514. marg. Alvvaies viſible, pag. 14. 290 marg. 295 marg. 296. 298 marg. 323. 555. 556. 572. 573. 701. Elias vvordes make nothing to the cō
                  trarie, pag. 411. The ſtate thereof in Antichriſts time. 721. Smal in the beginning & grovving great aftervvard. pag. 38. nu. 32. pa. 71, nu. 14. pag. 97. nu. 27. 31. 32. pag. 150. nu. 6. 7. 10. p.
 213. nu. 46. pag. 175 marg. 178 marg. 295 marg. 296. 298 marg. 316. ma. 536. marg. Her lavves, cuſtoms, & Gouernours muſt be obeied. p. 43. nu. 9. p. 51. marg. p. 53. 336. marg. 337. nu. 20. 450. nu. 2. 16. p. 471. nu. 24. p. 480. 550. 562. nu. 14. p. 639. 262. marg, She only hath the true ſenſe of Scriptures. pag. 477. 429. marg. She iudgeth al, and is iudged of none. p. 429. She iudgeth betwene canonical Scriptures & not canonical. p. 499. vvhich are Sacramēts, which not. 258. 259. She conſiſteth of good and bad. p. 9. nu. 12. p. 37. marg 38. 62 marg. 64. 74. 262 marg. not without vvrinkle in this life. p. 522. nu. 35. The ſeuenfold candleſticke in the Apocalypſe. 699 marg. The woman clothed with the ſunne, whom the dragon perſecuteth. 720 marg. The wife of the Lambe. 734. The campe of Saincts. 741. The true Church is proued by ſucceſſion. pag. 228. 520. 303 m. Chriſt left many things to be taught by the Church. 265. 717 marg. The cuſtom of the Church is a good anſwer againſt al wranglers 450. Out of the Church no ſaluation. p. 522. 676. p. 573. al blindnes & lacke of vnderſtāding. 95 marg. no praier auailable. 262 m. Chriſt head of the Church in a moſt excellent ſort. 514. 515. The B. of Rome the miniſterial head. 515. No temporal prince can be head 47. 64. 639. nu. 17. pa. 659. No woman. 280. 463. The Church, that is, the Prelates and cheefe Paſtors of the Church. 51 marg. 701 m. To contemne their wordes, is to contemne Chriſt. 262 marg. The Churches order of diuine ſeruice in reading the Scriptures, & that it is according to the primitiue Church. 268. in 288. 289 m. 382. 641. 698. See the table of Epiſtles and Goſpels at the end of the booke. Church militāt reſembleth the triumphant in heauen 707 m. and nu. 8. 736. The triumphant Church (called the new citie of Hieruſalem) & the ſtate and glorie thereof. 741. 742. 743. 635 marg.
               
                  Material churches. The building of them pa. 158. Dedication of churches, 250. Coſt in adorning them p. 78. nu. 8. 10. p. 106 nu. 11. p. 128. 256. God wil be honoured in them rather then els where p. 309. 471. nu. 11. p. 254 marg. How he dwelleth not in material temples. 309. 343 marg. Not to be profaned. p. 59 m. 118. 222. Our parents, and other neceſſities of poore men are ſometime to be preferred before the adorning of Churches. 106. 92. nu. 25.
               
                  Clergie. The name. p. 665. their difference from the Laitie. ib. nu. 3. The maner & dignitie of their calling. p. 330. nu. 4. p. 352 marg. Degrees of ſuperioritie among them ſelues and ouer other. p. 57 marg. 58. nu. 28. p. 206. nu. 24. p. 472. 492. 665. Their good life much edifieth. p. 14. nu. 17. their exemption and priuileges. p. 50. 416. They may not exerciſe holy functions for filthy lucre. 664 marg.
               
                  Commaundements,
                  ☞ poſsible to be kept. p. 30. 138. nu. 6. p 169. 260 marg. 682 nu 22 p. 686. 400 marg 415 marg. Keeping the commaundements profitable, and neceſſarie to ſaluation. 14. nu. 20. p. 440. nu. 19. p. 645. 54 marg. 114 marg 191. m. 725 m. They differ from Counſels. 114 marg. 191 marg. By keeping of them man is iuſtified. 138. 400 marg. Commaundements of men, what they are, and that they make nothing againſt the Apoſtles and Churches traditions. 406. See Tradition.
               
               Heretical lawes and doctrines are cō
                  maundements of men. 43. nu. 9. p. 106. Communion. The proteſtants Communion. p. 451. 452. 453. 454. They imitate not in the ſame, Chriſts inſtitution. ib. p. 451. much leſſe the Apoſtles traditions. p. 454. Comming to the Communion againſt our conſcience 442. They call it vnproperly the Cōmunion. p. 452. and the ſupper of the Lord. p. 451. nu. 20. Their communion bread profane. p. 453 n 29. Caluins bread 228. It is the very table & cuppe of Diuels p 448. & is accordingly to be abhorred. ibid.
               
                   
                  Communitie of life and goodes in the firſt Chriſtians, vſed now of the religious only. p. 296. not a commaundement, but a counſel only. ibidem.
               
                  Concupiſcence after Baptiſme is of it ſelf no ſinne without conſent.☞ p. 397. 399. 643. 682. It moueth to ſinne. 642. mar. How the Apoſtle calleth it ſinne. pag. 397. It maketh not al the actions of a iuſt man, ſinnes. p. 399. nu. 25.
               
                  Cōfeſsion in particular.☞ p. 8. nu. 6. p. 89. 276. 348 m. Secret or auricular cōfeſſion. p. 277. to a prieſt. 190. 277. 653. of al mortal ſinnes. 653. before the receiuing of the B. Sacrament. 453. The Engliſh Miniſters heare confeſſions. and abſolue, againſt their owne doctrine. pag. 277. See Penance.
               
               
                  Confeſsing of Chriſt, & his religion, highly eſteemed. 27. 702. m. See Faith. They that dare not confeſſe and profeſſe the Cath. religion, to whom they are like. 255 marg. To deny that thou art a Catholike, is to deny Chriſt. 269.
               
                  Confirmation other wiſe called Biſhoping.☞ pag. 314. It is a Sacrament. pag. 313. The grace and effect thereof. 241 m. 313. nu. 17. p. 514 marg. The old and new hereſies againſt this Sacrament. pag. 313. Chriſme or holy oile in cōfirmation. ib. Conſcience. Doing againſt our conſcience. p. 83. 109. 131. nu. 15. Horrour of conſcience for ſheding innocent bloud. 83. 131. nu. 15.
               
                  Continencie. See Chaſtitie. Examples of notable perſons that liued continently from vviues, 596. The continencie of maried folke for praier ſake. pag. 439. for the more worthie receiuing of the B. Sacrament. p. 463. Perpetual cō
                  tinencie of man ad wife. p. 439. 440.
               
                  Contrition. 483. See, Penance.
               
               
                  Corporals for the B. Sacrament. p. 84.
               
                  Councels. of what perſons they conſiſt. p. 336. They repreſēt the whole Church. ibid. Peter and his ſucceſſors preſidēts in Councels. p. 337. Councels of no force with out their confirmation. p. 337. Controuerſies in religion to be decided by Coūcels. p. 336. They haue the aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt. p. 337. 338. 138. nu. 3. 263. nu. 27. p. 265. 266. 388 marg. of Chriſt. 51 marg. 53. This aſſiſtance taketh not away due examination of matters and diſputation. pag. 138. nu. 3. p. 338. Al good Chriſtians reſt vpon their determinatiō. p. 339. How the aunciēt fathers eſteeme of general Councels. p. 338. The decrees of Coū
                  cels are diligently to be put in execution. 336. and 339 marg. Heretikes only blaſpheme them, and vvil not be tried by them. pag. 336. nu. 1. 338. 339. How later Councels alter the former. p. 337. nu. 13. 20. Heretical or Schiſmatical ſynodes p. 53. nu. 20. 339.
               
                  Counſels Euangelical. Things not commaunded as neceſſarie, but counſeiled as the better. p. 55. nu. 14. 21. p. 296. nu. 44. p. 440. tending to perfection, followed by religious men. p. 55. 114 m. See Vvorkes of ſupererogation. Religious.
               
               CROSSE.☞ The honour of the holy Croſſe. p. 273. 622. Called the ſigne of the ſonne of man. p. 69 m. The ſigne of the Croſſe in bleſſing. p. 213. 576. In Sacraments, and other halovved creatures, ibid, Vvhy in our forehead. 213. 712 marg. 511 marg. The Crucifixe or Roode with Marie and Iohn. pa. 337. The vertue of the ſigne of the Croſſe. 112. nu. 38. p. 577. The appearing thereof at the later day, ſhal no leſſe confound the Caluiniſtes then the Iewes, pag. 69 marg.
            
            
               D
               
                  DAies, diſtinction of daies. 418. one day more ſanctified then an other. See Feaſtes and Feſtiuities. The vveeke daies called feriae, not by their proſane names. 210. and 211 marg. 701.
               
                  Deacons. The election of the 7 Deacons. 304. 305. their office. ibid. See Orders.
               
               
                  Deuotion. vttered by external ſignes. 23. marg. 93 m. 198. 195. 219. nu. 14. pag. 530. 652. 116. marg. See Pilgrimage. God is ſerued and adored in ſpirit, notvvithſtanding external deuotion. 384, 228.
 Deuotion falſely of the Proteſtants called ſuperſtition. 343. marg. 344. Deuotion tovvard Relikes and holy thinges, a token of greater faith. 23. marg. 384. Holy vvomens deuotion. 132. 162. Marie Magdelens deuotion. 253. marg. Zachaeus deuotion tovvard Chriſt, 193. 195. Deuotion to ſee and to be neere to the B. Sacrament. 195. Kneeling at Verbum caro factum eſt, and, Et homofactus eſt. &c. 216. 219.
               
                  Doctors of the Church. pag. 232. nu. 34. Vve muſt haue regard to their doctrine. pag. 636. marg. 638. S. Auguſtines eſtimation of the holy Doctors, pag. 638. nu. 7. Their aureola or crovvne in heauen. pag. 534. nu. 1. pag. 665. The Heretikes contempt of them. 490. See Heretikes.
               
               Dulia. See Adoration.
            
            
               E
               
                  ECcleſiaſtical cenſures, pag. 47. 433. nu. 21. pag. 434. See Excommunication. Eccleſiaſtical power and iuriſdiction. pag. 47. 222. 488. 493 marg. See Biſhop. Clergie.
               
               
                  Elias yet aliue and ſhal be the precurſor of Chriſts ſecond cōming. pag. 30. 50. 112. 719.
               
                  Enoch alſo yet liueth. 630. & ſhal preache in Antichriſts time vvith Elias. 719.
               
                  Eremites vvhy ſo called. pag. 8. their profeſſion and life. ib commended by the example of Elias, S. Iohn Baptiſt, and Chriſt him ſelf, pag. 8. 112. 10. 30. 40. 90. 137 marg. 200 marg. Innumerable Eremites and Monkes in the primitiue Church. pag. 40. See Monkes and Monaſtical life.
               
               
                  Excommunication, a ſpiritual puniſhment. pag. 434. nu. 5. pag. 473. moſt terrible pag. 53. 247. nu. 22. pag. 303. 434. 566. Vvhen and vvhere to be executed. pa. 488. Excommunicate perſons to be auoided. pag. 435. 562. The Heretikes vſe a certaine ridiculous excommunication. pag. 247.
               
                  Extreme vnction, a Sacramēt. 506. 652. The preparatiue to this Sacrament. 101. marg.
            
            
               F
               FAith. See Iuſtification, vvorkes.
               
                  Faith only doth not iuſtifie.☞ pag. 19. 25. nu. 28. 54. marg. 64. nu. 11. 40. pag. 42 m 67. 74. nu. 1. 42. pa. 67. 88. marg. 118. and 119 marg. 120 marg. pag. 132. 138. nu. 6. pag. 397. 504. 611. nu. 9. pa. 633. 157 marg. 178 ma. 230 marg. 243. 663. 679. 681 marg. 682. 703 marg. 725. ma. 319 marg. 341. marg. 362. marg. 158. 169. nu. 28. pag. 263. 385. 388. nu. 26. pag. 456. marg. 457 marg. 483. marg. 517. and 524 marg. 551 marg. 564. marg. S. Auguſtines vvhole booke de fide & operibus, againſt only faith. 646. Only faith an old hereſie. pag. 314. nu. 18. pag 379. 646. 654. S. Iames calleth ſuch Heretikes, vaine men, and compareth thē to diuels. 645. m. S. Paules doctrine cōcerning faith & good vvorkes. 378. He often ioyneth faith and charitie. 587 marg. 600 marg. His vvordes of faith, miſconſtrued by old Heretikes and nevv. pag. 379. 389. 390. other Scriptures falſely alleaged for faith onely. 100. 188 marg. The Proteſtants ſpecial faith or vaine ſecuritie of ſaluation. pag. 403. 444. 445 marg. p. 632. pag. 393. nu. 24. p. 173 marg. 663. 684. 410 marg. 531. marg. See Saluation. The 7 Catholike Epiſtles vvritten againſt the hereſie of only faith. pag. 379. 640. 646. 674. Vvhy faith is ſo often named in the caſe of iuſtification. 502. See Iuſtification.
               
               In vvhat ſenſe ſome fathers ſay, Only faith, pag. 646. Hovv it is ſaid, Beleeue only. pag. 100. 161. marg. Vvhat maner of faith doth iuſtifie. pag. 334. marg. 385. 393. 509. 632. nu. 1. 6. pag. 646. nu. 24. pag. 389 m. 502 m. Faith may be had and loſt againe, vvhich the Proteſtants deny. 159. 410. marg. 565. marg. 606. ma. So may grace and charitie. 702. The Apoſtles analogie or preſcript rule of faith. pag. 413. 612. To hold faſt the firſt receiued ſaith of
 our Apoſtles and fathers. p. 37. nu. 25. p. 397. 423. nu. 17. p▪ 492. 496. nu 8. p. 584. 587. 591 to. 678 m. 689. ma. and. nu. 5. 10. 464 marg. 489 m. 495 m. 502 m. 636 m. External profeſsion of euery point & article of faith. p. 27. 28. nu. 37. pa. 109. nu. 35. 36. p. 176. 409. 630. nu. 34. Neuters or indifferent men, of no faith. pa. 33. 706. One mans faith obtaineth for an other. 22 marg. 150. nu. 20. The more deuotion the greater faith. See Deuotion. To beleeue vvithout ſenſible argumēt or reaſon, is a more bleſſed thing. 275 marg. 382 marg.
               
                  Faſtes or Faſting.
                  ☞ An acte of religion. p. 135 marg. 142. Meritorious. pag. 43. 466. A worke of iuſtice. p. 15 marg. The force thereof. 111 marg. Preſcript daies of faſting. 43. 330. 507. Imber daies. p. 25. nu. 38. p. 154. nu. 12. p. 330. Aërius the Heretike. p. 330. Faſting from certaine kindes of meates. p. 43. nu. 11. 18. pag. 106. 135 marg. 330. nu. 3. p. 417. 418. 574. 575. 582. nu. 23. S. Iohn Baptiſt and the Nazarates. 135 marg. Scriptures groſly abuſed by the proteſtants againſt the Churches faſtes. p. 43. 106. 417. 418. 441. 442. 540. 541. 573. m. 574. marg. and nu. 3. p. 575. 596. m. Heretical faſting. p. 142. nu. 37. pa. 541. 574. The Lent faſt, & the origin thereof. pag. 10. 90, nu. 12. It is ſinne not to faſt the lent. p. 10. It is an Apoſtolical tradition. ibidem, and 145 marg. It is the imitation of our Sauiours faſting. p. 10. By keeping thereof, true Chriſtians (ſaith S. Aug.) are knowen from infidels. ibid. The Doctors ſermons of Lent faſt. ib. Publike faſtes. 17. The Churches faſtes foreſignified by Chriſt him ſelf. 23 mar. S. Iohn Baptiſts and his Diſciples faſting. 24.
               
                  Feare. Many kindes of feare. 685. The iuſtent men doe feare. 685. See in F ſpecial faith. and the vvord. Saluation. Seruile feare not il, though not ſufficient. 685. 362 marg. feare of hel profitable. 173 marg.
               
                  Feaſtes or feſtiual daies.
                  ☞ pag. 7. nu. 16. pag. 250. nu. 22. p. 295. 335. 507. 638. 668. 700. prefigurated by the Iewes Feaſtes 239. marg. Scriptures groſly abuſed by the Proteſtants againſt the Churches Feſtiuities and Holidaies, pa. 418. 507. 540. Eaſter, vvhit-ſuntide. 295. 353. 467 marg. 507. 700. Sunday. 353. 467 marg. 507. 700. 250. 211 marg. called dies Dominica, becauſe of our Lordes reſurrctiō. 274 m. 700. 701. Greater grace giuen vpō theſe ſolemne daies. 701.
               
                  Free vvil. pag. 32 marg. 47. 55. nu. 11. pag. 58. nu. 16. pag. 72. marg. 74. nu. 34. pag. 142. 169. nu. 30. pag. 219. 236. 370. 387. nu. pag. 399. nu. 15. 19. pag. 406. 407. nu. 21. pag. 409. 466. 477. 482. 530. 568. nu. 4. pag. 590. 650. nu. 8. 179 marg. 704. 706 marg. 509 marg. 589 marg. Mans free vvil vvorketh vvith Gods grace. 477. 464 marg. 680 marg. 329 ma. 466. 519 m. 649 m. 650. God and his grace force no man. pag. 58. nu. 16. pag. 236. nu. 44. 400 marg. Gods grace maketh mans vvil more free. 243 marg. 706 m. Predeſtination, reprobation, concupiſcence, take not avvay free vvil. pag. 370. 399. 406. 407. 329 marg. 404 marg. 509 marg. The Iewes blindnes and reprobation vvas through their ovvne free vvil. 179 marg. 255 marg. 329. marg. 372 marg. 405 marg. So vvas their betraying and crucifying of Chriſt, and Iudas treaſon. 296. the refuſing of the Goſpel vvhen it is preached. 408. marg.
            
            
               G
               GOD, not author of ſinne. pag. 17. 36 marg. 37. 97. 142. nu. 34. pag. 296. nu. 23. pag. 385. 387. nu. 4. pag. 390. 406. 412. 643. 188 marg. 255 ma. 704. 730 marg. 404 marg. 642 marg.
               
                  See Reprobation. Free vvil.
               The meaning of thoſe places that ſound as though God vvere author of ſinne. 37. 97. 255 marg. 296. 730 marg. 308 marg. 390. 554 marg. Hovv the death of Chriſt vvas by Gods determination. 296. 300. marg.
               
                   
                  Goſpel. It is not only the vvritten vvord. pag. 109. nu. 35. pag. 384. 486. 549 m. See Tradition. The preeminence of the nevv Teſtamēt. 477. 615. 618. 620. 623. The true libertie of the Goſpel. 477. 508. 510. 566. nu. 9. pag. 643. 659. nu. 16. pag. 396 and 398. m. He ſuffereth for the Goſpel, that ſuffereth for any article of the Catholike faith. 109.
               Grace. See Free vvil.
               God offereth his grace, and man may refuſe it. 706. 408 m. 519. m. 635 m. To conſent therevnto is alſo by grace. ib. 589. mar. The valure of merites procedeth of Gods grace. See Merites. A man may fall from grace once had. 702. Grace or giftes called gratis data, 455 marg.
               
                  The Greeke text corrupted. c▪ 84. See the Preface.
               
            
            
               H
               
                  HAlovving or ſanctifying of creatures. pag. 576. The force of the ſame. 577. holy places. pag. 49. 309. 667 marg. See Pilgrimage. Church. The holy land. pag. 50. 309. 577. the holy Mount. 667 marg. holy bread. pa. 576. holy vvater. pag. 576. Holidaies. See Feaſtes. Holy things not to be profaned. See Sacrilege.
               
               
                  Hel, taken ſometime for Limbus Patrum. 296. Chriſt in ſoule deſcended into Hel. 187. 296. 518 marg. 661. to deliuer thence the fathers and iuſt men of the old Teſtament. 187. The Caluiniſts deny this article. 83. 661. S. Auguſtine calleth them Infidels that deny it. 661. 294 marg. Their heretical tranſlation for that purpoſe. 296. Feare of Hel profitable. 173 marg. 362 marg.
               Henoch. See Enoch
               
                  Heretikes. Vvho is an Heretike. pag. 599. Markes to knov thē. p. 19. 353. 566. 591. 684. Going out of the Cath. Church. pag. 337. 519. 520. 574. nu. 1. pag. 599. 189 marg. 678 marg. 679. 675. Diuers names of Sectes and Sectaries. 323. 648. Nicolaites a paterne of them. 704. Running not ſent. 61. 154. nu. 13. pag. 250. 330. nu. 2. pag. 409. 496. nu. 1. pag. 609. nu. 4. 248 marg. 489 marg. Their diſſenſion. pag. 31. 32. marg. 67. 94. 339. nu. 37. pag. 532. Preaching othervviſe & contrarie to the faith receiued. 455 marg. 496. 497. 565. 582 marg. Hypocriſie and ſvveete vvordes. 70. 154. nu. 26. pag. 384. nu. 7. pag. 490. 591. nu. 6. 9. p. 593. 669 marg. 716. 421 marg. 489. marg. Vanitie in preaching, and vaine glorie. 154. Preaching licentiouſnes and libertie. 669 marg. 670 marg. 704. Meretricious and painted eloquence. 582. nu. 17. p. 539 m. Teaching nevv doctrine. 565. 689. 636 marg. Nevv termes and ſpeaches. 584. 585. Vaunting great knovvledge ſpecially of the Scriptures. 154. 232. 488. nu. 4. pag. 566. 585. Their ignorance. ib. and pag. 121. nu. 24. pag. 670 marg. 695. Boaſting of the ſpirit. 684. Contempt of Councels and fathers. pag 338. 339. 499. 585. nu. 20. pag. 625. Corrupting of Scriptures. 475. 478. Denying the bookes of Scriptures and Doctors. pag. 645. nu. 14. pag. 345. nu 34. Controuling of the very text of Scripture, and the ſacred vvriters thereof. pa. 139. 205. 314. nu. 27. pag. 144 marg. Their foule ſhiftes and vvrangling to auoid the euidence of Scriptures. 219. 277. 672. 580. 581. 613. nu. 10. pag. 687. 313. Slaundering the Church. pag. 237. nu. 53. Hatred of the See of Rome. 423. Acknowledging no iudge of controuerſies. p. 472. 499. Deſpiſing of Rulers, ſpecially Eccleſiaſtical. 693 & 694 marg. Lacke of faith. 261. 492. 319 mar. Mutabilitie in faith and inconſtancie, pag. 471. 591. nu. 13. Voluptuouſnes. pag. 423. 693 marg. Seueral and ſecret conuenticles. pag. 71. 96 m. 213. 189 m. 695. Synodes. 53 nu. 20. pag. 339. Their Clergie or Eccleſiaſtical orders. p. 571. Hovv Hereſies profite the Church. 450. 680. Their many faithes. 520. many analogies & rules of faith. 414.
 Their doctrine, fables. 565. They come to naught, though ſupported a while by neuer ſo mightie Princes. 303 mar. Their markes agree to the Proteſtants. 599. They may be forced to the Cath. faith. p. 182. They may be puniſhed by death. p. 166. nu. 53. 731. nu. 6. p. 364 m. 626 m. To auoid their bookes, ſermōs ſeruice. 94. 599. Not to marie with them. 481. mar. Not to communicate with them. 598. marg. 599. 689. 690. The examples of S. Iohn, S. Polycarpe & other Apoſtolike men. 690. It is to dony Chriſt. 27. nu. 32. It is damnable. 704. Vvhen and wherein it is tolerable to conuerſe vvith them. 689. Their bookes to be burnt. pag. 350. They are iudged already. 224. Vvho are eaſily ſeduced by them. 716. Vvomē. 591. Vvomen great promotours of hereſie. 568. Zeale againſt Heretikes 497. 690. 703. 704. Arch-heretikes ſignified by the ſtarre that ſel from heauen. 715. m. Simō Magus the father of them al. p. 314. nu. 18. Their king, Abaddon. that is, deſtroier, 715. They are reſembled to Cain, Balaam, Corè. 695. 704. to the Diuel him ſelf. 244 marg. Al, the forerūners of Antichriſt. p. 123. 124. 240 marg. 556. 558. 679. 741. Falſeprophets, falſe chriſtes, lying maiſters, foretold in the new Teſtament. 119 marg. 68 and 69 and 669 marg. Many maiſters. 648. Many antichriſtes. 679, nu. 18. Rauening vvolues. 19. 353. Theeues not entring by the doore. 248 m. 250. Prophecied of, and liuely deſcribed by S. Paul, S. Peter, S. Iude, &c. 352. 573. 574. 669. 670. 672. 693. locuſtes. 715. The cauſes that men fall to hereſie. 565. mar. 583.
               
                  Heauen, ſhut vntil the Paſſion of Chriſt. p. 9. nu. 16. p. 621. marg. p. 633.
               
                  See Limbus patrum.
               Differences of rewardes and glorie in heauen. p. 37. 58. 430. 465. marg. 534. nu. 1. 259. marg.
               
                  See Merites, Vvorkes, Revvard.
               
                  Hoſpitalitie toward the afflicted for religion. 27 marg. 28. nu. 41. 505 marg.
               See Almes. Vvhat a heinous ſault it is, not to receiue and harbour Catholike Preachers and Prieſts. 163. marg.
            
            
               I
               IESVS, in Engliſh, Sauiour. 4 marg. This name is to be adored and reuerenced. 530. It worketh miracles. 112. 299▪ marg. The force thereof againſt Diuels. ibid. and 577. Anſvvers to the ſophiſtical arguments vſed by heretikes againſt the reuerence done to this name. 530. By irreuerence therevnto, they prepare the way to Antichriſt. 723.
               
                  Idols in al the Bible, ſignifie the falſe Gods of the Pagans. 687, 383 mar. The Caluiniſtes applying the word againſt ſacred Images, are condēned long ſince by the 2 Councel of Nice. 687.
               See Images. They are aſhamed of their tranſlating, image, for idol. ibid. Hereſies are the idols of the new Teſtament. pag. 448.
               
                  Images.
                  ☞ 345. 623. 687. 688. They haue Gods owne warrant. 623. 688. Their differēce from idols. 687. 688. Hovv they are adored. 530. 633. Their antiquitie. 24. 688. Their fruite and commoditie. 345. 688. Images of the B. Trinitie and of Angels. 345. Imagebreakers old cōdemned Heretikes by the 2 Nicene Councel. 687. 688. They are accurſed by the ſame Councel, that apply the places of Scripture that ſpeake of the Pagans Idols, againſt ſacred images. 687. Miracles wrought by the image of Chriſt. p. 24. The aboliſhing of Chriſts image, a preparatiō to ſet vp the image of Antichriſt. 723. The honour of Chriſts image is the honour of Chriſt him ſelf. 723.
               Indulgences. See Pardons.
               
                  Iuſtification,
                  ☞ or to be iuſtified, vvhat it ſignifieth. 387. nu. 13. The firſt and ſecond iuſtification. 387. The firſt iuſtification, of mere grace vvithout vvorkes. 392. 409. 412. nu. 32. 516. 389. marg. Iuſtification by vvorkes, pag. 16. 138.
 387. pag. 645. 646. 647. 682. 736. Not by faith only. See faith.
               
               Vvhat vvorkes iuſtifie not. pag. 390. nu. 20. 28. p. 392. 411. 632. nu. 6. 633. 499. marg. Iuſtification attributed to hope, charitie, &c. 402. 633. nu. 33. Charitie the principal vertue in iuſtification. 509. 566. Hovv the Proteſtants admit charitie & good workes to iuſtificatiō. 509. Vvhy it îs ſo often attributed to ſaith. 394. 632. 502▪ marg. 606. marg. S. Paules meaning vvhen he commendeth faith. 633. The iuſtice of faith. 408. True inherent iuſtice, not imputatiue. 14. 138. 139. 387. 390. 394. marg. 395. nu. 5. pag. 427. nu. 30. pag. 511. 513▪ marg. 517. mar. 519. mar. 524▪ marg. 543. 682. 398 marg. Hovv it is ſaid, None iuſt. 390. Hovv it is ſaid, Reputed to iuſtice. 391▪ marg. Increaſe of iuſtice. 744 marg. 396 marg. 550 marg. Hovv it is called Gods iuſtice. 383 marg. 390 nu. 22. pag. 480. 481. 531. Hovv Chriſt is our iuſtice. 427. The Proteſtants auoid the vvord, Iuſtifications. 138. nu. 6. p. 736. nu. 8. The iuſtice of Moyſes Lavv, vvhat, 408 marg.
            
            
               L
               
                  Ovr B. LADIE vvithout ſinne. 94. 395. 676.☞ Her perpetual virginitie. 4. 5. nu. 25. She vovved virginitie. 138. Her life, death, Aſſumption. pag. 291. Her bleſſednes. 171 marg. Her feſtiuities. 291. Her excellencie, titles, prerogatiues. 138. 139. 173. 221. 273. 291. 292. 171▪ marg. Her honour. 139. 291. 292. She is our Aduocate. 292. 679. our hope. 292. 548. marg. The meaning of the termes and titles giuen vnto her. 292. God and our Ladie ſaue vs. 337. The often ſaying of the Aue Marie. 138. The auncient fathers vſed the ſame. 291. 292. Holy Simeon prophecied of her ſorovves. 145. She vvas alvvaies partaker of ſorovves vvith Chriſt. ibidem. 272 marg. ful of deepe contemplations. 142. The meaning of Chriſts ſpeaches vnto her that may ſeeme hard. 221. nu. 4. & 5. The Proteſtants keepe no Holiday of her. 191. They keepe not the day of her death, as they doe of all other cheefe Saincts in the new Church of Englād. ibidem. They are not of thoſe generations that ſhe prophecied ſhould call her bleſſed. 136 marg. They derogate from her honour. 138. 295.
               
                  Laie men muſt not iudge of their Paſtors, of the ſenſe of Scriptures, of queſtions in religion. pag. 344. They muſt receiue the Sacraments &c. not at their owne hand, but of their Clergie and Paſtors. 40. nu. 19. 42. marg.
               
                  See Prieſts. Clergie.
               
                  Limbus patrum,
                  ☞ or Abrahams boſom. 186. marg. 187. 296. 633. 708 marg. 621. mar. A third place. 162. 708 marg. The iuſt men of the old Teſtament were not in heauen til Chriſts Aſcenſion. 186. Chriſt deſcended into Hel, to deliuer them. 187. See Hel Heauen.
               
            
            
               M
               
                  MAchabees Canonical Scripture, 138. See p. 250.
               MARIE See our B. Ladie. L.
               
                  Mariage a Sacrament. 55. nu. 6. p. 187. nu. 18. p. 221. nu. 2. p. 523. Indiſſoluble, both parties liuing. 14. 55. 113 marg. 116. 187. 221. 397. marg. 440. and not lawful after diuorce. ibidem. Honoured by Chriſts preſence. p. 221. Perfect & beſt without carnal copulation. 4. nu. 16. See Chaſtitie. Continencie. How it is honorable in al. 637. Inferior to virginitie and widow hod. 4. 438. marg. 439 marg. 440. See Chaſtitie. Mariage of Prieſts and votaries vnlawful. See Prieſts Vovv. Old hereſies againſt Mariage. 574. Catholikes falſely charged vvith the ſame. 574. 575. They eſteeme of mariage more then the Proteſtants. 523.
               
                  Martyrs, true and falſe p 13. p 457. No true Martyrdom out of the Cathol. Church. p. 457. Martyrdom a moſt acceptable ſacrifice. 592. Their reward, &
 glorie. 702 and 713 marg. How they crie for reuenge. 712. Their chereful and conſtant countenance before the perſecutors. 305 marg. Their comfort at the very time of death & torments. 309 marg.
               MASSE.☞ See Sacrifice.
               
               The word Maſſe. 447. The Liturgie or Maſſe of the Apoſtles. 330. of the Greeke fathers. ibidem. It is agreable to Chriſts inſtitution. 451. 452. 453. to the Apoſtles tradition, 454. to S. Paul concerning the praiers and petitions therein. 567. Kyrie eleiſon. 463. Gloria in excelſis. pag. 140 inner marg. Sanctus thriſe repeated. 707 and 708. Hoſanna. 61. Surſum corda. 463. The Canon. 267. The Pater noſter. 567. Agnus Dei. 217 inner marg. 453 nu. 29. Kiſſing the Pax. 423. Domine nō ſum dignus. 21. 453. nu. 29. Communio. 452. Hovv Antichriſt & his Miniſters ſhal aboliſh the Maſſe. 71. 124. nu. 14. pag. 558.
               
                  Mediator.
                  ☞ See Sainctes. Hovv Chriſt is the onely mediator. 568.
               
                  Merite and Meritorious. 72 marg. It hath correſpondēce and relation to merces, hire, or revvard. 13. 16. 112 marg. 430. 719 mar. 744 marg. 543 marg. Both the meaning and word are in the ſcriptures. 197 m. 198. 430. 639 m. 537 m. 705 m. 553 m. Vvhēce the merite of workes riſeth. 72 marg. 402. 411. 430. 594. 470. Difference of merites. 58. 37. 486. 430. 193 m. Vve merite not our firſt iuſtification. See Iuſtification. To be worthie, & to merite, is al one. 198. 197 m. 705. marg. 537 marg. 553 mar. The time of meriting is in this life only. 245 m. See vvorkes. The Proteſtants auoid the word merite. 639. The Caluiniſts deny Chriſts owne merites 529. 708 m.
               
                  Miracles,
                  ☞ neceſſarie to cofirme new doctrine. 27. nu. 1. p. 263. nu. 24. p. 298. nu. 82. p. 492. nu. 12. True miracles only in the Cath. Church. 50. nu. 19. 20. p. 124. nu. 22. Vvhen Heretikes may worke true miracles. p. 112. nu. 38. Forged or lying miracles. 7
                     •
                  . nu. 84. p. 559. nu. 9. p. 722 marg.
               
                  Miracles vvrought by application of creatures, by the name of IESVS, of the Apoſtles & other holy men, by Saincts and their relikes, S. Peters ſhadovv, S. Paules napkin. 112. 104. nu. 13 231. 261 298. 304. 312. 326. 350. 372. By touching Chriſt and vvhatſoeuer belonged to him. 93 marg. 106. 108.
               
                  Miracles in one place and at one time more then in other. 147. 231. 456 marg. Peculiar to certaine countries. 370 m. 372. The Proteſtants as faithles to beleeue ſuch miracles, as the old Pagans. 261. They attribute them to the Diuel as the heathen did. p. 24 in marg. They pretend Phariſaically Gods honour in derogating from the miracles of Saincts. 246 marg. The gift of miracles in the Church for edification. 132. Chriſts miracles ſignificatiue. 247 m.
               
                  Monkes & Monaſtical life. Vvhether they ſhould worke with their handes. 561. 562. They were ſhauen în the primitiue Church: and Nunnes clipped of their heare, 562. See Exemites. Religious.
               
            
            
               N
               
                  NAmes of CHRISTIANS. 323. of the authors of ſectes. ibid. of the firſt inſtituters of ſeueral religious orders. ibidem.
               Neuters. 33. 706.
               
                  Nouelties of wordes & phraſes. 584. not al new that are not in Scriptures, ibid. How they are to be tried nouelties of vvordes. ibid.
               
                  Numbers myſtical. 94. 700. The Proteſtants raſhnes in condemning numbers of praiers, faſtes, Maſſes &c. 700.
            
            
               O
               
                  ORiginal ſinne. See Sinne.
               
               
                  Orders.
                  ☞ The three holy orders boūd to chaſtitie. 571. Bigami excluded from holy orders. 570. 579. 596. Al ſeuen orders haue been from the Apoſtles time. 572. The inſtitution and office of Deacons. 305. Holy orders is a Sacrament.
 577. inſtituted by Chriſt at his laſt ſupper. 204. 452. giuen by impoſition of handes. 330. 332. 577. 586 marg. by a Biſhop not by the peoples voices. 332. It giueth grace. 586 marg. none to be admitted vvithout good examination. 579 marg. Praier and faſting at the time of giuing holy Orders. 154. 332. marg. See Imber daies.
               
               
                  Othes that are vnlavvful, muſt not be kept. pag. 38 marg. 361.
            
            
               P
               
                  PArdons or indulgences grounded vpon Chriſts ovvne vvordes. 474. vpon his example.☞ 210. 474. vpon his merites, and the mutual ſatisfaction of one for an other. pag. 538. practiſed by S. Paul. 473. 474. by the holy Biſhops of the primitiue Church. 474. A pardon is only a remiſſion of temporal puniſhment due for ſinne. 473. 474. 475. Vvhy pardons more common now then in old time, ibid. to whom this auctoritie of pardoning pertaineth. 47. nu. 19. pag. 473. 474. 475. 538. Al pardons are giuen in the vertue and name of Chriſt. 474.
               
                  Parents. The duety tovvard them. 142. 106. Carnal parents & frendes in what caſes leſſe eſteemed. 159 marg. 176 mar. 181 marg. duty tovvard our ſpiritual parents. 600 marg. See Prieſts.
               
               
                  Penance, is perfect repentance,☞ that is, not only amendemēt of life, but implying alſo confeſſion, ſorowful contrition, and paineful ſatisfaction. pag. 8. 30. 167 marg. That the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ſignifie this penāce. p. 
                     •
                  . 30. 171 marg 177 marg. 716 marg. 492 m. S Iohn Baptiſt firſt, then Chriſt, and his Apoſtles preached penance. 7. 8. 88 marg 143 marg. 295 marg. 352 marg. 366 marg. S. Iohn Baptiſts penance. 8. 156 marg. Marie Magdalens penance. 157 marg. The great penance in the primitiue Church. 475. 492 marg. The old Canonical diſcipline. ib. S. Paules chaſtening of his body by penance. 444. Temporal paine remaineth due, vvhen the ſinne is remitted. 635. Satiſfaction or workes of Penance. pag. 8. nu. 8. 143 marg. 195. 314. 454. 473. 482. 630. 645. nu. 
                     •
                  3. 717 marg. They derogat nothing from Chriſts ſatisfaction, but are requiſite becauſe of the ſame. 402. 473. 538. 611. The body chaſtiſed by penance, is a grateful ſacrifice to God. 413.
               The Sacrament of Penance. handled at large. 276. The neceſſitie thereof, as of Baptiſme. pag. 277. it is ſecunda tabula poſt naufragium. 277. The contempt thereof a ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. 33. nu. 31. The partes thereof, Contrition, Confeſsion, Satisfaction. 276. Vvhat is Contrition. 483. 294 marg. Luthers hereſie of Contrition. 483. It worketh ſaluation. ibidem. Vve are bound to confeſſe. 276. See Confeſsion. Al ſinnes may be remitted by this Sacrament. 613. 629. It is the old hereſie of the Nouatians to deny that Confeſſion to a Prieſt is neceſſarie, and his Abſolution 276. 277. See Abſolution. Prieſts. Gods wōderful mercy toward penitent ſinners. 183 marg. Penance before Baptiſme. 295 marg.
               
                  Perfection double: one in this life, an other in the life to come. 532. The ſtate of perfection. See Monaſtical life. Religious.
               
               
                  Permiſsion of ſome things that are not allowed or approued. 116. Toleration of the euil. 256.
               
                  Perſecution. Catholike mens comfort in perſecution. 26 marg. 154. 163 m. 202 m. 663. nu. 17. pag. 702 m. 723. nu. 7. Their ſecret aſſembling in perſecutiō. 71. Their praiſe in vvhoſe houſes ſuch Aſſemblies are kept. 325 marg. 342 marg. 421 marg. There ſhal be great perſecution of Catholike men tovvard the end of the vvorld. 122. and 199. marg. 727 marg. Conſtancie in perſecution neceſſarie. ibidem. marg. 706. highly commended. 702. marg. 723. To looke backe vpon their loſſes, is dangerous, 166.
               
                   To forſake al rather then the Cathol. faith is neceſſarie. 181 and 182 m. The better men moſt afflicted in this life. 663. The Church perſecuted by Heretikes, and cōtrariewiſe. 505 m. Fleeing in time of perſecution. 325 marg. wiſe euaſions to eſcape dāgers, by S. Paules example. 358. nu. 25. 359 mar. 341. nu. 37. pag. 364 marg. Not to forſake our Paſtors empriſoned. 529 marg. Happie Gailers that ſhew mercie to their Catho. priſoners. 341 marg. The courteſie of heathen officers in this caſe. 359 m. To conſent by any meanes to the perſecution of ſuch, is a great offence. 357 marg. Perſecutiō an occaſion of much good. 310 marg. The Church increaſed by perſecution. 316 marg.
               
                  Peter.
                  ☞ Cephas, Rocke, al one. 218 marg. 44. 47. 216. Chriſt by giuing him this name, deſigned him before hand to be the rocke & foūdation of his Church. ibidem. 47. nu. 18. p. 79. nu. 75. He promiſeth to build his Church vpon him, that is, his perſon, 46. 47. at large. He praieth that his faith ſhal not faile. 206. The Church vvas builded vpon him, & he receiueth the Primacie. 279. 516. nu. 20. pag. 654. Vpon him, not vpon his faith only or confeſsion. 45. 46. 47. Peters manifold dignitie & preeminence, 27. 40. 50. 52. nu. 1. p. 94. 128. 131 m. 150. 154. 161 m. 206. nu. 31. 224 m. 497. 500. nu. 7. p. 278 m. 326. 442. m. S. Paul ſubmitteth his doctrine to his approbation. 499. The keies giuen to him, & what authoritie is ſignified by them. 47. His authoritie to bind and looſe. 47. He doth practiſe his primacie. 292. 293. 303. marg. 337. 499. 501. nu. 9. pag. 654. His ſucceſſors the Biſhops of Rome haue the ſame primacie & authoritie. 45. nu. 17. p. 46. 47. 206. 280. 337. 499. 501. By the Rocke is ſignified not only Peters perſon, but his Chaire and See, the Church of Rome. 46. 47. He breaketh the Churches vnitie, that forſaketh this See or Chaire. 501. 520. Chriſt is the Rocke, foundation, and head of the Church on vvay, Peter an other way. 46. 514. 515. 516. Peters ſhip ſignifieth the Church. 150. He gouerneth and protecteth the Church continually. 304. 668. The Proteſtants and Puritans diſagree about his preeminence or primacie, 280 marg. They denied it before, and now confeſſe it. 280 marg. They derogate from Peter as much as is poſſible. 501. Beza thinketh the Greeke text of the ſcripture falſified in fauour of Peters primacie. 27. Their foliſh argumēts againſt Peters primacie. 312. 421 m. 501. Their impudent aſſertion that he was neuer at Rome. 422. 500. 665. For this purpoſe only, they deny that Babylō ſignifieth Rome. 665. Their wrangling about the time of his being there. 665. Their foliſh and greateſt reaſon againſt his being there. 421 marg. 422. He and S. Paul planted the Church at Rome. 288. 500. 383 marg. 421 mar. 370. He wrote from Rome. 665. He vvas crucified there, 280. A table of S. Peters Actes 374.
               
                  Pilgrimage pag. 6. 311 marg.☞ to the holy land in the primitiue Church. 49. to the holy Sepulchre. 85. to the memories of Saincts. 231. The deuotion of Pilgrimes and the maner of their deuotion in holy places. 158. nu. 44. pag. 85. See Relikes.
               
               
                  Pope. The ſucceſſion of Popes,☞ is an argument vſed by the Fathers, againſt Heretikes. 520. Popes 33 Martyrs. pag. 654. and pag. 556.
               Their roome and dignitie called an Apoſtleſhip, 520. Their ſupremacie. 280. 515. 572. The practiſe thereof by S. Leo the great. and S. Gregorie the great. 280. Hovv they refuſed the name of vniuerſal Biſhop. 280. The Councel of Chalcedon called the Pope vniuerſal Biſhop 280. They write them ſelues, Seruos ſeruorum Dei. 280. He is the miniſterial head of the Church vnder Chriſt 515. S. Peters ſucceſſor. 280. 520. Not to communicat vvith him, is to be againſt Chriſt or vvith Antichriſt. 33. nu. 30.
 See Antichriſt. The Pope can not be Antichriſt. 71. nu. 22. 29. pag. 231 marg. 554 marg. See Antichriſt. He may erre perſonally, not iudicially. 206. 253. 266. nu. 13. pag 388 m. p. 502. nu. 11. Vve may not reſpect the Popes perſon, but the priuileges of his office. 66. 67. 206. The priuileges and dignities of his office. See Roman Church, and Peter.
               
               
                  Praier. See Canonical houres. Long praier not forbidden. pag 16. nu. 7. To pray alwaies. 190 marg. The Churches collectes breife. 16. nu. 7. Seruice & praier in the Latine tōgue, much better then in the vulgar. 461. at large. S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle brought vs the ſeruice in the Latine tongue. 461. It vvas alwaies in Latine through out the vveſt Church. 463. Our people at their firſt conuerſion ſang Alleluia, not, praiſe ye the Lord. 463. Surſum corda. Kyrie eleiſon. ibidem. See Maſſe. The peoples priuat praiers in Latine. 462. It is not neceſſarie that they vnderſtand either publike or priuate praiers. 461. 463. They vnderſtand them not being in the Engliſh tong, neither are they any thing the more edified. 461. 463. Their intētion & deuotiō is as great, & acceptable in the one, as in the other. 462. 463. 43. hu. 8. pag. 61. They are edified and take profite of the Prieſts fū
                  ctions, though they neither heare nor ſee what he doth 134. and 135 m. They are taught the meaning of ceremonies and ſeruice, and doe knovv them perfectly in al Cath. countries. 461. 462. Latine praiers are and may be tranſlated. 462. S. Paules place falſely alleaged againſt the latin ſeruice or praier, explicated at large: and that he ſpeaketh of no ſuch thing, much leſſe againſt it. 460. 461. 462. 493. An other obiection anſwered, and vvhat it is to pray vvith the lippes only. 43. num. 8. Faith in praier. 643. Vvhat is to pray vvithout intermiſſion. 382 marg. 551 marg. Our Lords praier or the Pater noſter. 15. 170. It is the firſt and laſt in al the Churches praiers, and ſaid moſt often. The Aue Maria. See L. our B. Ladie. Praier for the dead. 361. 480. 687. The Saducees ſeeme to haue denied it 361. Aërius an old condemned Heretike denied it. Other mens praiers & interceſſions for vs. 150. 420 marg. Praying one for an other is of great force. 420 marg. 543. To pray for our perſecutors. 209. nu. 34. Publike praiers more auailable then priuat. pag. 471. The Prieſts praiers more auailable. pag. 610. At the time of praier ſpecially, God ſendeth comfortable viſitations. 319 marg.
               
                  Preachers that preach vvel, muſt liue accordingly. 104 marg. 112 marg. 386. marg. Catholike preachers in time of perſecution, vvhat is their comfort. 547.
               
                  Predeſtination and reprobation declared at large. pag. 406. 407. They conſiſt vvith free vvil. 370. 403. 406. 407. The myſterie of predeſtination and reprobatiō is humbly to be reuerēced, not curiouſly ſearched. 402. 403. 407. nu. 20. 21. 412. No man muſt by occaſion thereof be reachleſſe and deſperate in neglecting his ſaluation. 403. 406. 359 marg. Good vvorkes muſt concurre vvith Gods predeſtination. 668. Vvhat and how far we may and ſhould learne herein. 403. 412. Heretical and preſumptuous bookes of Predeſtination. 407. 412.
               
                  Prieſt. The name in al languages almoſt the ſame. 333. heretically changed into Elder. ibidem. The vvord Senior, Auncient, in the vulgar Latine tranſlation, is alvvaies in the Greeke, Presbyter, Prieſt. 334 marg. 664. 351 marg. His office and vocation. 609. 610. His dignitie. 609. They are called Angels. 701. They are coadiutors vvith, and vnder Chriſt, and worke in his name 92. 190. 444. 474. 480. 482. 429 marg. Their authoritie to remit ſinnes. 21▪ 24. 53. nu. 18. p. 92. 151. 162 m 190. 276. 480. 252 marg. The Proteſtants carpe at this authoritie, as the Iewes did at Chriſt for the ſame. 158 marg. They (and not lay
 men) are the diſpenſers of Chriſts myſteries. 40. nu. 19. 42 marg. pag. 109. nu. 6. pag. 321. nu. 40. pag. 463. nu. 34. pag. 4
                     •
                  0. He that deſpiſeth them, deſpiſeth Chriſt. 167 ma. The honour of Prieſthod. 67. 89 marg. 360. 578 m. Preeminence before other. 571. nu. 4 pag. 616. 566. nu. 20. pag. 484 marg. Hoſpitalitie and almes tovvard them. 163. marg. 533 marg. See Almes. Hoſpitalitie. The Proteſtants make it an odious and reprochful name. 67. nu. 13. pag. 130. They auoid the word in their Engliſh tranſlations of the nevv Teſtament. 333. Their perpetual continencie requiſite. 138. 570. nu. 2. pag. 579. 580. 589. nu. 4. 596. 437 marg. 569 marg. Mariage of Prieſts vnlavvful. 21. 570. at large. 575. contrarie to the auncient Canons. 571. to the Councel of Nice. 570. None euer lawfully maried after holy orders. 21. 570. Paphnutius and the Nicene Councel concerning this matter. 21. 570. Maried men being made Prieſts, muſt no more companie vvith their vviues: and that according to the example of the Apoſtles. 21. 290 marg. 444. nu. 5. according to the cuſtom of the primitiue Church. 570. 571. The Church may annexe perpetual chaſtitie to holy orders. 580. nu. 4. in the marg. The forbidding of ſuch perſons to marie, is no condemnation of Mariage. 575. Iouinians old hereſie could neuer induce any one Prieſt. to marie. 582. Vigilantius and his follovvers much like to the Proteſtants in this point. 570. See Vovv. Prieſts crovvnes. 665. Prieſts garments. 701. Prieſts ſome properly ſo called, ſome vnproperly. 740. Al Chriſtians are no more Prieſts, then they are alſo kings, that is, vnproperly: 657 marg. 700. 709. Their ſpiritual hoſtes. 658.
               CHRISTS Prieſthod and the excellencie thereof. 609. 610. 615. 616. 617. 618. 131. A Prieſt as he is man, not as he is God. 610. The Caluiniſts, either Arrians, or ignorant, in auouching the contrarie. ibid. His Prieſthod eternal, and hovv. 131. 617. 618. 619. & nu. 3. in marg. He concurreth ſtil in al prieſtly actions, and is the principal vvorker. 619 marg. He is not the only Prieſt of the nevv Teſtament. 609. 618. Many Prieſts of the nevv Teſtamēt properly and peculiarly ſo called, and their Prieſthod external, not only ſpiritual, 609. 616. 617. 618. 619.
               
                  Princes, hovv and wherein to be obeied. 64. 121. 197 marg. 415. 416. 658. 659. They may not vſurpe Eccleſiaſtical functions. 64. 403. 609. nu. 1. pag. 639. They haue no more right of ſupremacie in ſpiritual cauſes, then Heathen Princes. 659. Chriſt and his Apoſtles charged vvith diſobedience to Princes. 658 nu. 13. Peter & Iohn diſobeied the Magiſtrats cōmaunding them not to preach in the name of IESVS. 299 marg. So muſt Catholike preachers. ib. In things lavvful not to obey them, is a mortal ſinne. 415. Heretical tumultes & diſobedience againſt their Princes. 28. 488. Hereſies agaīſt rule & ſuperioritie. 416. 659. nu. 16. and 18. The obedience of Catholikes in al tēporal cauſes. 416. The deadly ſinnes of Princes & ſuperiors exempt not the ſubiectes from their obediēce, as the Vvi
                        ••
                     fiſtes teach. 659. Princes thē ſelues muſt obey & be ſubiect in matters of ſaith & religiō. 639. Al are vnder Peter & his ſucceſſors. 279. 280. 364 m. Their election & creatiō far inferiour to Gods inſtitution of the ſpiritual Magiſtrate. 658. The temporal Magiſtrate is called, an humane creature, and why. 658. nu. 13. Praying for kings and Princes, namely in the Maſſe. 566. marg. 567.
               
                  Proceſsion on Palme-Sunday. 61.
               
                  Proſperitie no ſigne of the true religion. 13. marg.
               Proteſtants. See Heretikes.
               
                  Purgatorie. 12. marg. pag. 34. 94. nu. 29.☞ pag. 121. nu. 24. pag. 187. 430. 431. 645. nu. 13. pag. 661. None not perfectly cleanſed, can enter into heauen. 743. marg. Purgatorie fire paſſeth al the paines of this life. 431. The ſame is releaſed by the praiers of the liuing. 317. A third place. 162. 708 marg.
 The Scripture abuſed againſt Purgatorie, anſvvered. 726. See Praier, Sacrifice for the dead.
            
            
               R
               
                  REconciliation to the Cathol. Church. 14. nu. 24. p. 471. nu. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     chiſme.
               
               
                  Religion. Men of no religion, 
                     •
                  uters, Atheiſtes. 33. Moſt happie that ſuffer any loſſe for religion. 114. m. 116. They that forſake their religiō to ſaue their landes, are like Eſau▪ 635. marg. See Perſecution.
               
               
                  Religious life. 561. Their profeſſion is according to Chriſts counſel, and the Apoſtles example. 55. 151. 191 marg. 296. nu. 44. to the Saincts of the primitiue Church. 410 marg. 296. Vigilātius hereſie againſt ſuch as forſooke al for Chriſt, 420 marg. Diuers Religions, of Dominicans, Franciſcans &c. are not diuers Sectes. 323. Their diuers rules and imitation of diuers holy men, is the imitation of Chriſt him ſelf, 531 marg. 547. Their liuing in common, Apoſtolical. 296. Their riſing in the night to pray. 79. nu. 41. Their bleſſing. 55. The contemplatiue life preferred before the actiue by our Sauiour him ſelf, in the perſons of Marie and Martha. 169. Both alvvaies in the Chruch. ibid. See Monkes and Monaſtical life. Eremities.
               
               
                  Relikes.
                  ☞ The touching of Relikes, their vertue, miracles. 23 m. 24. 100. 133. 309. 312. 326. 350. 372. 577. 622. The touching of Chriſts perſon or whatſoeuer belonged to him. 93 m. The hemme of Chriſts garment. 23 m. 24. 40 marg. 100. His ſepulchre. 85. 622. Mount Thabor and al the holy land. 49. 577 his holy Croſſe. See Croſſe. S. Peters ſhadow. 261. nu. 12 302. 304. his chaines. 326. S. Paules napkins, or the napkins that had touched his body. 350. His chaines. 61. nu. 12. 372. His bleſſing and vertue in the ile Malta. 372. His priſon and other memories there. 370 marg. The Relikes of S. Iohn Baptiſt, Elias, Abdias. 40. S. Steuens Relikes. 309. 312. S. Auguſtine of Relikes. 309. 312. S. Chryſoſtom. 261. 350. S. Hierom. 85. 133. 622. S. Gregorie. 372. nu. 20. The greater vertue of Relikes, the more is the honour of Chriſt. 261. 350. 246 marg. Saincts Relikes of greater force after their death. 350. Eliſeus body. 4. Reg. 13. Miraculous reſeruatiō of Relikes from putiefaction. 622. Relikes reſerued in the old Teſtament. 622. Vigilātius hereſie againſt Relikes, condemned of old, and refuted by S. Hierom. 133. 350. nu. 12. The deuotion of the old Chriſtians tovvard Relikes. 40. 372. 622. 274 marg. The deuotion tovvard Chriſts body vvhen it vvas dead. 131. 132. The Pagans abuſed holy Relikes, as the Proteſtants do novv. 40. Tranſlation of Relikes. 133. 631 marg. 307.
               
                  Reprobation. at large. 405. 406. Sinne is alvvaies the cauſe thereof. ib. 127 mar. It taketh not away free vvil. 406. 707. Hovv God raiſed Pharao. 406. 407. Hovv he is ſaid to indurat. ib. to giue vp into a reprobat ſenſe. 383 marg. 385. nu. 26. pag. 308 marg. See God. Free vvil. Predeſtination.
               
               
                  Reſtitution of goods il gotten. 195.
               
                  Revvard.
                  ☞ Differēces of rewards in heauē. 37. 193 marg. See heauen. Reſpect of revvard. 16. nu. 4. pag. 55. nu. 27 pag. 631 marg. 181 marg. 706 marg. Revvard, what it ſignifieth. 430. Reward for relieuing Catholike priſoners. 27 m. 28. nu. 21. 587 m. 588. for viſiting them in priſon. 587 m. for confeſſing of Chriſt openly. 27. for al workes of mercie. 181 m. for forſaking and loſing ought, for Gods ſake. 116. 191 marg. 202. m.
               
                  Rome called Babylon,☞ and vvhy. 654. 665. 730. 731. The Church there, neuer called Babylon. 654. 665. 731. The Proteſtants ſometime wil not haue Babylon to ſignifie Rome. 665. 730. Their malice in expounding the 7 hilles, of Rome, when the Angel him ſelf expoundeth it othervviſe. 731. The cōmendation of the Church of Rome, and the faith thereof. 381. 384. The Goſpel tranſported from
 Hieruſalem thither. 287. 348 marg. The Romane faith and the Catholike faith al one. 384. The Priuilege of that See, not to erre. 66. 67. 206. 250. nu. 3. Gods prouidence tovvards the ſame, more then to al other ſtates. 370. 556. That See is the rocke of the Church, and S. Peters chaire, and See Apoſtolike. 46. 47. 67. It ſtandeth vnmoueable againſt all Turkes, Tyrants, Heretikes, Schiſmatikes. 556. Princes and Emperours ſtand in awe thereof. 364 marg. The auncient fathers of al Countries ſought vnto it for reſolution of doubtes. 206. So ought al true preachers. 499. Heretikes only refuſe ſo to doe. 499. They hate this See. 423. They barke about it in vaine. 47. They place Antichriſt there in S. Paules time. 557. The great Apoſtaſie vvhich S. Paule ſpeaketh of 2 Theſ. 2 ſhal be from this See of Rome. 556. The Romans deuotion in viſiting the Churches and Martyrs Relikes in their Stations and Pilgrimages, is a ſigne of greater faith. 384.
            
            
               S
               
                  SAcraments.
                  ☞ ſeuen. 506. 259. See Confirmation. Penance. Orders. Mariage Extreme vnction. Few and eaſie in reſpect of the Ievves Sacramēts. 506. More effectual and beneficial. ibidem. 446. 623. 619 marg. 627. 228. External elements in the ſame, not burdenous, not Iudaical, nor Heatheniſh. 506. 228. Chriſt vſed external elemēts. 247. what is to adore in ſpirit. 228. S. Auguſtine falſely alleaged for tvvo Sacraments only. 506. Grace is giuen in & by the Sacraments, 224. 228. 276. 313. 357 marg. 393. 39
                     •
                   marg. 504. 577. 586 marg. 598 marg. 523. 627. 652. 653. 262 marg. 586 marg. They flovved out of Chriſts ſide, & thence haue their vertue. 273. Contempt of the Sacraments damnable. 157 marg. 321. 316 marg. Vve may not the leſſe eſteeme the Sacraments becauſe of the miniſters of them. pag. 4. nu. 3. pag. 89. nu. 9. The Sacraments firſt to be called for in ſicknes. 92.
               
                  The B. SACRAMENT of the altar. 236.☞ The great myſterie, and inſtitution thereof by our Sauiour. 78. 79. 125. 128. 201. 204. 449. 451. The Catholikes imitate Chriſtes inſtitution thereof and the Apoſtles traditon, the Proteſtants do not. 451. 452. 454. The Proteſtants haue taken avvay the B. Sacrament altogether. 452. 237. nu. 58. The real preſence. 78. 79. 128. 204. 205. 236. 237. nu. 55. pag. 238. 291. 446. nu. 16. pag. 447. 453. 624. 628. 466 m. The Goſpel ſo plaine for the real preſence, the Beza controuleth it. 205. 201 marg. Tranſubſtantiation. 79. 128. 238. nu. 66. pag. 220 marg. Chriſts miraculous & ſupernatural dealing with his body many vvaies, and that it is not to be meaſured by ſenſe and natural reaſon. 40. nu. 26. pag. 49. nu. 2. pag. 55. nu. 26. p. 121. nu. 24. pag. 132. 148. 236. nu. 52. pag. 238. 275. 276. 315 marg. 540. 632. Faith neceſſarie in this Sacrament. 128. The Proteſtants iudge thereof by ſenſe and reaſon. 238. They are like the groſſe Capharnaites. 238. To aſke, hovv it may be, is a Ievviſh vvord. 238. Their ſcoffing at it. 38. nu. 55. pag. 83. 103. nu. 3. 129 marg. The real preſence is by conſecration. 79. 128. 446. not by receiuing, or in the receiuing only ibidem. and 452. The Heretikes arguments anſvvered. 124 and 254 marg. Adoration of the B. Sacrament. p. 6. 21. nu. 8. pag. 453. 604. The honour thereof by ſolemne proceſſions. 61. by coſtly altars, chalices, ornaments. 78. 128. by cleane corporals. 84. by many other meanes. 453. 116 marg. The Angels are preſent. 707. nu. 8. It ſanctifieth the altar. 67. 309. nu. 33. It is the ſuperſubſtantial and daily bread, ſpecially deſired in the PATER NOSTER. 15. 16. The preeminēces thereof aboue Manna. 236. The wōderful effectes thereof in the receiuers. 237. 447. In what ſenſe it is called ſometime a figure. 79. nu. 26. Hovv it is both a figure and yet
 the thing it ſelf. 205. 604. How it is called bread after the conſecration, 79. 236. Vvhether S. Paul ſaying, the ſupper of our Lord, meane the B. Sacrament. 451. Receiuing in one kinde. 57 & 125 marg. 213. 236. 237 at large. The authoritie of Scriptures and primitiue Church for the ſame. 237. 295 marg 351 marg. It is indifferent, in one or both kindes, according to the Churches ordinance. 237. 259. The cauſes vvhy the Church appointed one kind. 237. The whole grace in one kinde, & therfore the people not defrauded. 237. The Heretikes arguments anſwered ibid. & 125 marg. Prieſts ſaying Maſſe, muſt receiue both kindes. 237. The puritie and preparation required to the worthie receiuing thereof. 222. 258. 453. nu. 27. 28. 29. Cōfeſsion of euery mortal ſinne, neceſſarie before we receiue. 453. Euil men receiue the true body & bloud, though vnworthily. 453. The danger and puniſhement of vnworthie receiuing. 453. nu. 27. pag. 454. nu. 30. 31. pag. 449 marg. It is both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, and vvhy. 78. 184.
               The SACRIFICE of the altar. 21. nu. 4. 204 and 447 and 616. 617. 623. 627. 628 at large. 228. nu. 23. 332. nu. 12. 638. Chriſt ſacrificed his body and bloud at his laſt ſupper. 79. nu. 28. 204. 205. The ſacrifice of the altar is the ſelf ſame that was vpon the Croſſe. 624. 628. Chriſt is often offered,☞ and in many places. 628. It is a commemoratiue ſacrifice, yet a true ſacrifice. 205. It ſucceded in the place of al the ſacrifices of the old Law. 447. num. 21. 617. 628. Chriſt did not take away al ſacrifice by the new Teſtament, but change them into a better. 617. 623. 628. The external religion of the new Teſtament is principally in the Sacrifice of the altar. 205. Chriſts eternal prieſthod conſiſteth in this ſacrifice. 617. The fathers cal it, the vnbloudy ſacrifice. 625. they call it the Maſſe. 447. Vvhy it is called the Eucharist. 638. The general redemption vpon the Croſſe, particularly applied in this ſacrifice. 629. The Caluiniſts argumēt againſt this ſacrifice, maketh no leſſe againſt the ſacrifices of Moyſes. 624. 205. nu. 19. Their argument againſt Chriſts body often offered and in many places, was anſwered by the fathers long agoe. 628. It is offered to God only. 332. in the memorie and honour of Saincts. 332. 454. 726. for the liuing and the dead. 454. 447. nu. 21. pag. 726. See Maſſe.
               
               
                  Sacrilege. Taking away of holy things or profaning them. 303. 222. 92 n. 25. In what caſes holy Ievvels and ornamēts may be broken and otherwiſe emploied. 78. nu. 10. pag. 92. nu. 25.
               
                  Sainctes know our doings & hartes,☞ & heare our praiers. 64. 184. 186. m. 187. 428. 457. m. They are as Angels. 198. They may be preſent with the liuing. 49. 110. m. at their ovvne tōbes & monumēts. 711. Praying to Saincts, & that they pray for vs. 380 m. 186. 304. 471. 668 at large. 679. 709. 711. 717. 309. m. They are our mediators an aduocates without any derogatiō to Chriſt. 471. 568. 678. 679. 714 m. How Chriſt is our only Mediator and only Aduocate. 568. 678. 679. The concluſion of al praiers is, Per Chriſtum Dominum noſtrum. 265 marg. The Proteſtants arguments anſvvered. 409. 607. 608. 611. nu. 9. 568. 678. Vigilantius their father & founder of this hereſie refuted by S. Hierom. 711. Hovv S. Hierom ſaith, that Chriſt & his Saincts are euery where. ibidem. Their Feſtiuities or holidaies. 7. nu. 16. 75. m. 507. at large. 668. Their memories or commemorations in the ſacrifice of the Maſſe. 332. 454. 726. Canonizing of Saincts. 7. Their miracles. 33. nu. 24. See Miracles. Relikes. The great honour of Saincts, and that it is no derogation to Chriſts honour. 55. nu. 28. pag. 350. nu. 16. pag. 553 marg. 577. 601. 653. 703 marg. 704. 714 marg. 720 marg. 742 marg. They are patrones of men and countries. 404. They are called ſauiours, redeemers, &c. vvithout derogation to Chriſt. 569.
 577. 653. 308 marg. our hope. 548 marg. God and our Ladie ſaue vs, & the like ſpeaches. 337. 700. To beleeue in Saincts. 409. nu. 14. pag. 601.
               
                  Saluation. No man ſure of his ſaluation but in hope. 263. 394. 402. nu. 16. pag. 403. 418. 433. 444. 493. 530. 393. marg. See F. The Proteſtants ſpecial faith.
               
               
                  Satisfaction. See Penance. Satiſfactorie vvorkes of one for an other. 474. 485. 538. Satiſfaction enioyned. 143 m.
               
                  Schiſme. Prefigured in the Ievves Schiſmatical temples. 166. 227. 228. 448. in Ieroboams calues and altars. 448. in Corè, Darhan, Abiron. 482. 695. contrarie to the vnitie of the Church 456 501. nu. 9. pag. 519. 520. deteſtable and ſacrilegious. 520. The beginning of al Schiſmes. 426 marg. In ſchiſme no vvorke auailable to ſaluation. 14. nu. 24. pag. 180. 263. nu. 4. pag. 457. num. 1. See Church.
               
               
                  Schiſmatikes, Schiſmatical ſeruice & ſermons to be auoided 94. 482. 590. 225 marg. Specially the Communion. 442. 447. 448. See Heretike and Hereſie.
               
               
                  Scandal. 112 marg 356. 386 marg.
               
                  Scripture Canonical and not Canonical diſcerned and iudged by the Church. 499. 500. See pag. 2 after the preface, S. Auguſtines ſentences cited at large. The Scripture and Church, Whether is elder and of more authoritie. 500. The Proteſtants deny many bookes of the Scripture, becauſe they are repugnant to their hereſies. See Heretikes. They many vvaies corrupt the Scriptures. See Heretikes. Priuate Phantaſtical interpretatiō of Scriptures. 669. 672. Al Heretikes and the Diuel him ſelf alleage Scriptures, but falſely. p. 5. nu. 25. p. 11. nu. 6. p. 34. 145 m. 162. nu. 20. p. 261. 402. 14. nu. 35. 39. pa. 613. 645. 651. nu. 12. p. 646. nu. 21. p. 682. 711. 740. Vvomē great tatlers & talkers of Scripture. 568. Not the great talkers and hearers thereof, but the doers are bleſſed. 698 m. The Scripture is ful of profound ſenſes, 232. 508. hard to vnderſtand, 151 marg. 311 marg. 558. nu. 6. pag. 613. nu. 4. pag. 672. 673. 661. nu. 19. p. 662 marg. 740. S. Paules epiſtles hard about iuſtification by faith, and therfore miſconſtrued of old and new heretikes. 389. 646. 672. The Epiſtle to the Romanes hard concerning predeſtination. 404 marg. The difficultie of the Apocalypſe. 699. The Proteſtants count al Scriptures eaſie for euery mā to vnderſtand by his priuate ſpirit, & therfore they reiect the Doctors expoſitiōs, & admit nothing but Scripture. 672. Their foliſh diſtinction that S. Paules epiſtles are not hard, but the matter he vvriteth of. ibid. The ſelf ſame ſcriptures, alleaged by the old heretikes and the Proteſtants, and anſwered by the fathers long agoe. 444. nu. 5. pag. 575. 646. 711. 712. The Scripture cōſiſteth in the true ſenſe therof, which is only in the Cath. Church. 477. nu. 6. p. 669. nu. 20. The bare letter killeth both Iew & Heretike. 477. They ſearche not the Scriptures deepely, but ſuperficially. 232. Vvho be the litle ones that beſt vnderſtand the Scriptures. 30. nu. 25. p. 169. nu. 21. The auncient fathers humilitie in reading and expounding the Scriptures. 67
                     •
                  . 5
                     •
                  8. 661. nu. 19. pag. 699. Catholike Doctors only are right handlers of the Scriptures. 590. The curſe for adding and diminiſhing thereof: and that it pertaineth to heretikes, not to Catholike expoſitors. 45. The interpretation of Scripture is called prophecie. 413 marg. when the ſame is according to the rule of faith. ibid. Of the tranſlating and reading the holy Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, of the difficultie of them, & vvith what humilitie they ought to be read, & of many others pointes concerning the ſacred Scriptures, ſee the Preface to the reader. The text corrupted by old heretikes. 684. 687. Scriptures haue not only a literal ſenſe, but alſo a myſtical and allegorical. 7. nu. 15. pag. 508. 607 marg. 614 marg. The Proteſtāts deride the myſtical interpretations of the
 auncient Doctors. 614 marg. The people may not iudge of the ſenſe of Scriptures, or of their Paſtors expoſitions. 344. The comfort and profite of Chriſtian Cathol. men in reading and hearing the Scriptures. 344. 419 marg. 592. Vvhat they finde in ſearching the Scriptures. 230. Not only Scriptures. but tradition alſo. 622. marg. 559. 592. 279 marg. 678 marg. 717 marg. The Apoſtles and Churches precepts. 336 marg. See Tradition. The Churches order in reading the Scriptures in her diuine Seruice. See CHVRCH.
               
                  Secte taken ſometime in good part, but novv in the euil. 373. 362 marg.
               
                  Simonie. vvhat, and vvhy ſo called. 314. Vvhat a heinous ſinne. ibid. nu. 22.
               
                  Sinne, original & actual, 395. nu. 14. 676. nu. 7. Al conceiued and borne in original ſinne, Chriſt excepted, and his B. mother. 395. No man liueth vvithout ſinne. 676. nu. 8. pag. 16. S. Auguſtine excepteth our B. Ladie. ibidem. Sinnes mortal and venial. 14. 16. 385. 643. 676. Not God, but the Diuel is author of ſinne. 36 m. See God. Hovv the Diuel ſinned from the beginning. 682. Cōcupiſcence cauſe of ſinne. 642 m. Al ſinne procedeth of three ſpecial things mentioned by S. Iohn. 677 marg. The lavv did not cauſe ſinne. 395. 398 m. Mortal ſinne excludeth grace and iuſtice. 682. Venial ſinnes conſiſt vvith grace and true iuſtice. 676. Examples of venial ſinnes. 676. How they are taken away without any Sacrament 258. they may be forgiuen after death. 94. Al remiſſion of ſinnes is by the Paſſion of Chriſt. 676. Many ſecundarie meanes & inſtruments of remiſſion, by which the Paſſion of Chriſt is applied. 676. Vvhat is meant by, Sinnes couered and not imputed. 392. Sinnes againſt the holy Ghoſt. 33. nu. 31. Sinnes crying to heauen. 651. No ſinne but in this life it may be remitted. the contrarie is the hereſie of the Caluiniſts. 686. See Penance. They are worſe in this point then the Nouatians. 613. Vvhat is (in S. Iohns Epiſtle) a ſinne to death. 687. Three degrees of ſinnes ſignified by the three dead that Chriſt raiſed to life. 100. Sinne the cauſe of ſicknes and other plagues. 132.
               
                  Spirit. To adore and ſerue God in ſpirit. 228. Boaſting of the ſpirit. 684. Not to credit euery ſpirit, and hovv to trie them. 552. The Church onely hath to diſcerne ſpirites. 684. The teſtimonie of the Spirit in vs. 402.
               
                  Superioritie and difference of degrees not forbidden. 57 marg. 165 marg.
               
                  Superſtition not allowed in the Catholike Church. 344. 539 marg. The Proteſtants falſely call deuotion, ſuperſtition. 344.
               
                  Supremacie of temporal Princes in matters Eccleſiaſtical, See Princes.
               
            
            
               T
               
                  Tithes due to God and his Prieſts. 615. Giuen by the inferior to the ſuperior. ibid. Paied in the Law of nature & Moyſes. ib. How due to the Prieſts of Chriſtes Church 616.
               
                  Tongues. Praiers in an vnknovven tōgue. See Praiers. The 14 chap. of the firſt to the Corinthians explicated concerning tongues. 460. The Proteſtants vaine boaſting of tongues. 457 marg. The three principal tongues in the title of the Croſſe of Chriſt. 271 marg. The holy Scriptures moſt conueniently preſerued in them. ibid.
               
                  Traditions not written.☞ 559. at large. 413. 414. 476. 612. 653. 279 marg. 353. 451. 454. 43. 106. 464 marg. 695. 591 marg. Apoſtolical traditions. 413. 414. 451. 476. 559. 560. 612. 464 marg. Particular traditiōs of the Apoſtles. the Lent. 12. 145 marg. the adminiſtration of the B. Sacrament. 451. 454. a commemoration & inuocation of Saincts in the Maſſe. ibid. praier for the dead. ibid. and 560. mingling water with wine. ibid. Baptizing of infantes. 559. the Apoſtles Creede. 560. See other particular traditions, pag. 454. 559. Pater
 noſter in the Maſſe. 567. keeping of Sunday, Eaſter, Vvhit-ſontide, &c. 43. 467 mar. How to know Apoſtolical traditions. 560. 559. Ignatius booke of the Apoſtles traditions. ib. The fathers eſtimation of traditions. 559. The Proteſtants hatred of the very name and ſuppreſſing the ſame in the text of holy Scripture. 559. 560 marg. They are called, Depoſitum. 414. 581 mar. deſcending from the Apoſtles by Biſhop and Biſhop vnto the end. 584. The Proteſtāts can ſhew no ſuch Depoſitum. 584. Heretikes conuicted by traditiō. 5. 559. Iewiſh and heretical traditions. 43. 106.
               
                  Tranſlation of the Bible into Greeke, called Septuaginta. 633. cited of the Euangeliſtes, and authentical in the Greeke Church, ibid. The authentical Latin tranſlation. 633. Beza preferreth it before al the reſt. See the preface. Tranſlatours of holy Scripture muſt be exacte and ſincere. 221. See the preface.
               
            
            
               V
               
                  VIrginitie, better then Mariage, more meritorious and grateful to God, fitter for his ſeruice. 4. 55. 440. 725 m. 356. The contrarie was Iouinians old condēned hereſie. 582. Virginitie coū
                  ſeled, not commaunded. 55. 440. 438 marg. See Mariage. Profeſſed virgins may not marie. See Vovv. The ſtate of virgins paſſeth the reſt. 725 m.
               
                  Viſions recorded in the Scriptures. 315. 318. 319. 368. 492. Viſions haue no credite with Heretikes, ſpecially with the Proteſtants. 319 marg. 492. Some haue been rapt to ſee the ſtate of the next life. 491 marg.
               Extreme vnction. See Extreme.
               
                  Vovv, an acte of ſoueraine worſhip. 169. Neuer true religion without vowes and votaries. ib. The Proteſtants haue abandoned al vowes and votaries. ib. Vow of monaſtical and religious life. 169. 304. Vow of Virginitie or chaſtitie, lawful, poſſible &c. 55. 580. 581. 582. Yong vvomen may vovv Religion. 581. Our B. Ladie vowed virginitie. 138. The daughters of Philip the Deacon were vowed virgins. 356. The Apoſtles vowed pouertie and profeſſed the religious ſtate of perfection. pag. 55. nu. 21. 27. Breache of vowes damnable. 304. 439. 440. It is to breake their firſt faith. 580. It is to goe after Satan. 581. It is the higheſt kinde of Sacrilege. 304. It is worſe then aduoutrie. 582. Vvhat virgins & widovves the Apoſtle allovveth to marie. 440. 581. Iouinian for perſuading Nunnes to marie, is called of S. Auguſtine. a monſter: & of S. Hierom, he and his folovvers, Chriſtian Epicures. 582. The Proteſtants call Iouinians hereſie, Gods word. 582. Vvhat vovves are unlavvful, and not to be kept. 361.
               
                  Vſurie not to be vſed among Chriſtians. 255. Spiritual vſurie in the better ſenſe. 74. nu. 27.
            
            
               W
               
                  VVidovvhod. 579 at large. This ſtate more bleſſed then the ſtate of matrimonie. 439 m. Their cōtinual praier & continencie. 578 m. The example of holy Anne. 141. 142. S. Ambroſe and S. Auguſtine wrote whole bookes in cō
                  mēdation of the ſtate of widowhod. 579. The Churches widowes called Diaconiſſae, and their office. 579. They muſt haue had but one huſband. ibid. The Caluiniſts moſt abſurd expoſitiō of theſe wordes, The huſband of one wife. 580. The Apoſtle forbiddeth not al yong widowes to vow. 581. See Continencie.
               
               
                  The vvord of God, is not only that vvhich is written in the Scriptures. 548. See Goſpel. Tradition.
               
               
                  Vvorkes meritorious of life euerlaſting.☞ 17. 177. 387. 430. 593. 594. 613. 703 mar. No workes of them ſelues, vvithout faith and the grace of God, are meritorious. 378. 594. Such are the workes that S. Paul excludeth from iuſtification.
 378. 387. 390. 411. 385. 499 marg. Vve preſume not vpon our owne workes or merites, as of our ſelues, but as of Gods grace. 516 marg. 594. The Proteſtants make no difference betwene Chriſtian mens workes done in grace, and the workes of Ievves & Pagans. 411. They are iniurious to Gods grace vvhich maketh vorkes meritorious. 594. The Scriptures which they falſely alleage, anſwered. 189. 402. Vve are iuſtified by vvorkes alſo, and not by faith only. 16. 643. 645 and 646 at large. 153 marg. 678 marg. 510 m. 538. m. See faith. Good workes before faith, though not meritorious, yet are preparatiues to the firſt iuſtification. 320. 389 m. That euery man ſhal be rewarded according to his vvorkes, is a cōmon phraſe in Scripture. 47. 386 marg. 387. 430. 656 marg. 744 marg. not according to faith only or lacke of faith. 741. nu. 12. Al good workes rewarded in heauen. 630 marg. 413. nu. 1. pag. 587. 524 marg. 543 marg. 191 marg. Heauen is due for them according to Gods iuſtice. 593. 594. 613. 553 mar. They giue great confidence before God. 630. 627 marg. Vvorkes may be done in reſpect of reward. 16. nu. 4. pag. 631. marg. pa. 444. The three workes of iuſtice. 14. 15. 16. Vvorkes of mercie how acceptable to God. 663. 317. m. 341 marg. See Almes. Vvorkes of perfection or ſupererogation. 444. 485. 168 m. See C. Euangelical Counſels. Vvorkes ſatiſfactorie. 143 m. See faith. Iuſtification. Merite. Revvard. Heauen prepared for them only that deſerue it by good workes. 58. nu. 23. pag. 73 marg. Vvithout good vvorkes a man ſhal be demned. 143 marg. 153 marg. 739 marg. The booke of euery mans workes opened in the day of iudgement. 741.
               Vvorldly frendes. 93. 94. 176 marg.
               
            
            
               Z
               
                  ZEale againſt heretikes. See Heretikes. in Gods cauſe: 706. nu. 16. pag. 741. nu. 9. Zeale in religion, counted of worldly men, madnes, 93. See Neuters. Zeale and ſeruor to heare and folovv Chriſt. 106. Zeale of ſauing ſoules. 150. 182. and 183 marg. 529 marg. 544 m. 651 marg. Zeale againſt ſinne. 433 mar. The madde zeale of heretikes. 342 m.
            
         
         
            THE EXPLICATION OF CERTAINE VVORDES IN THIS TRANSLATION, NOT FAMILIAR to the vulgar reader, vvhich might not conueniently be vttered otherwiſe.
            
               A
               
                  Abſtracted, Dravven avvay. pag. 642.
               
                  Acquiſition, Getting, purchaſing. pag 514.
               
                  Aduent, The comming. pag 69.
               
                  Adulterating, Corrupting. See pag. 475. 478.
               
                  Agnition, knovvledge or acknovvledging. p. 600.
               
                  Allegorie, a Myſtical ſpeache, more thou the bare letter. pag. 505. See the Annot. p. 508.
               
                  Amen, expounded pag. 244.
               
                  Anathema, expounded p. 405.
               
                  Archiſynagogue, expounded pag. 99.
               
                  Aſsiſt. pag. 135, ſignifieth the Angels ſtanding and attēding, alvvaies readie to doe their miniſterie.
               
                  Aſſumption, p. 165, Chriſts departure out of this vvorld by his death and Aſcenſion.
               
                  Azym
                        •
                     s, Vnleauened bread. p. 75.
            
            
               C
               
                  Calumniate, By this vvord is ſignified violent oppreſſion by vvord or deede. pag. 143.
               
                  Catechizeth, and Catechized. p. 510. He catechizeth that teacheth the principles of the Chriſtian faith: and they that heare and learne, are catechized, and are therfore called often in the Annotations, Catechumens.
               
               
                  Character, a marke or ſtampe. pag. 7
                     •
                  3.
               
                  Commeſſſations, Immoderate bankets, and belly cheere, vvith vvanton riotouſnes. p. 509.
               
                  Condigne, comparable. p. 400.
               
                  Contriſtate, This vvord ſignifieth to make heauie and ſad. pag 519.
               
                  Cooperate, ſignifieth vvorking vvith others, p. 401.
               
                  likevviſe Cooperation, Cooperateurs.
               
                  Corbana, expounded pag. 80.
            
            
               D
               
                  Depoſitum. p. 582. See the Annot. pag. 584. It may ſignifie alſo, Gods graces giuen vs to keepe, pa. 587. v. 14. Alſo v. 12 ibid. See the Annot.
               
                  Didrael. me, expounded pag. 49.
               
                   
                  D
                        •
                     minical day, Sunday. See Annot, p. 701. 702.
               
                  Donaries, giftes offered to God for his Temple, &c. 199.
            
            
               E
               
                  Euacuated from Chriſt, that is, Made voide and hauing no part vvith him. p. 508.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the croſſe euacuated, that is, made voide, cleane taken avvay. ibidem.
               
                  Euangelize, ſignifieth ſuch preaching of good tidinges, as cōcerneth the Goſpel. See the preface,
               
               
                  Eunuches, gelded men
               
                  Euro-aquilo. A north-eaſtvvinde. p. 368.
               
                  Exinanited, abaſed excedingly. p. 528.
            
            
               G
               
                  Gratis, an vſual vvord to ſignifie, for nothing, freely, for Godamercie, vvithout deſert.
            
            
               H
               
                  Holocauſte, a kinde of ſacrifice vvhere al vvas burnt in the honour of God. p. 625.
               
                  Hoſtes, ſacrifices. p. 445.
            
            
               I
               
                  Inuocated, called vpon, praied vnto. p. 316. Hereof vve ſay, Inuocation of Saincts, and to inuocate.
               
                  Iſſue, good euent. pag. 445.
               
                  Iuſtice, taken in the nevv Teſtament, not as it is cō
                  trarie to vvrong or iniurie, but for that qualitie vvhere of a man is iuſt and iuſtified. p. 391.
            
            
               N
               
                  Noophyte, expounded p. 569.
            
            
               P
               
                  Paraclete, expounded pag. 260.
               
                  Paraſceue, the Ievves Sabboth-eue, Good friday. p. 130. v. 43. See the Preface.
               
               
                  Paſche, Eaſter, and, the Paſchal Iambe. p. 201.
               
                  Pentecoſt, vvhitſuntide, & the ſpace of fifte daies.
               
                  Prefinition, A determination before. p. 517.
               
                  Prepuce, expounded pag. 387.
               
                  Preſcience, foreknovvledge. p. 294.
               
                  Preuaricatour, tranſgreſſor: and preuarication, trāſgreſſion. p. 386. 387.
               Loaues of Propoſition, ſo called, becauſe they vvere propoſed and for vpon the table in the Temple, before God. pag. 31.
            
            
               R
               
                  Repropitiate the ſinnes. pag. 605. that is, make a roconcillation for them.
               
                  Reſolution, the ſeparation of the body and the ſoule, the departing out of this life. p. 592.
               
                  Reſuſcitate the grace, that is, Raiſe, quicken, renew and reviue the grace vvhich othervviſe languiſheth and decaieth. pag. 586.
            
            
               S
               
                  Sabbatiſmt, A time of reſting and ceaſing from labours. pag. 607.
               
                  Sacrament, for myſterie. p. 513.
               
                  Sancta Sanctorum, The holies of holies, that is, the inmoſt and holieſt place of the Ievves Temple, as it vvere the Chauncel. pag. 621.
               
                  Superedified, Builded vpon Chriſt the principal ſtone pag. 657.
            
            
               T
               
                  Tetrarch, Gouernour or Prince of the 4 part of a countrie. p. 33.
               
                  Thrones, an higher order of Angles. p. 537.
            
            
               V
               
                  Victims, Sacrifices. p. 308.
            
            
               
                  The faultes correcte thus.
                  
                     Pag. 8.
                     1 Cor. 7.
                     2 Cor. 7.
                  
                  
                     38
                     Tetrach,
                     Tetrarch.
                  
                  
                     42
                     fifth vveeke,
                     firſt vveeke.
                  
                  
                     78
                     If the Sacrament,
                     In the Sacrament.
                  
                  
                     148
                     Matth. 9,
                     Matth. 19.
                  
                  
                     188
                     Scandale,
                     Scandals.
                  
                  
                     204
                     Ignat. ep. 5.
                     
                        ep. 7. Ibid. in 3 copies the Greeke ſet amis.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Reade
                  
                  
                     213
                     li. 39 de conſenſ.
                     li. 3.
                  
                  
                     215
                     Eighteth yere,
                     Eighth.
                  
                  
                     238
                     Tranſubſtantion,
                     Tranſubſtantiation.
                  
                  
                     409
                     Cathee. 17.
                     Catech. 18.
                  
                  
                     440
                     Continencie,
                     Incontinencie.
                  
                  
                     446
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     449
                     Is it not novv,
                     It is not novv.
                  
                  
                     552
                     Beguile v,
                     Beguile vs.
                  
                  
                     576
                     Euſebius li. 5. c. 2.
                     Theodorete.
                  
               
            
            LAVS DEO.
            
         
      
   