
      
         
            
            
            TWO
SERMONS
preached, the one at
Paules Croſſe the eight of
Ianuarie 1580. The other,
at Chriſtes Churche in
London the ſame day
in the after noone:
By Iames Biſſe maiſter of Art,
and fellowe of Magdalen

                  ••
               lledge in Oxenford.
            ¶Imprinted at London,
by Thomas Woodcocke.
1581.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipfull
Syr Iohn Horner, and Syr George
Rogers knightes; Iames Biſſe wiſheth
grace, mercy, and peace from GOD
our father, and from our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſte.
            
               WHen I had preached
theſe two ſermons
(right worſhipfull)
diuers of
my friendes requeſted
a Copie of
them: the which they craued earneſtly,
& at the laſt I graunted hardly.
I had ſmall leaſure to pen my
Sermons for them, and thought it
leſſe honeſtie, and as little curteſie to
denie them. But when through importunitie
they had gotten the vpper
hande, and receiued my Sermons
at my handes, they went preſently
after a viewe taken of them,
vnto the Printer to haue them publiſhed.
They vſed many reaſons to
perſuade me to yeeld therevnto, but

but when they coulde by no reaſon
moue me to agree to their attempt,
they proteſted that my Sermons
ſhoulde bee printed, though I were
neuer ſo vnwilling, they hauing the
copies in their handes: in the ende,
whē I could nothing preuaile with
them, but perforce was conſtrained
to yeelde to the publiſhing of theſe
my Sermons. I Purpoſed, as duetie
moued mee, to commend and commit
them vnto your worſhips, to
whom I doe acknowledge my ſelfe
diuers wayes much bounden: and
the rather was I mooued to hide
them vnder the winges of your
worſhips protection, becauſe your
fauour in mainteining the Goſpell,
your zeale to Gods worde, the regard
that you haue of Gods Miniſters,
is knowne, not to mee only,
who haue often times perceiued it,
but to all thē, which although they
know not you, yet both know & do

acknowledge your good deedes.
The Lorde powre downe his ſpirite
plentifully vpon you, kindle
more & more in you the true zeale
that alredy burneth, increaſe the
loue and good affection which you
haue toward the goſpel, that you being
pillers in the Church of Chriſt
militant, may alſo bee pillers in his
Church triumphant. And thus, deſiring
your worſhips to accept this
my ſimple and rude worke, with
my humble commēdations to you,
and to the vertuous Ladies your
wiues, I bid you hartily fare well,
from London this xix. of Ianuarie.
1580.
            
               Your worſhips to comma
                     •
                  nd
                     •
                  
in the Lord, Iames Biſſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               Iohn. 6. 27.
               Labour not for the meat▪ which periſheth,
but for the meat that endureth vnto euerlaſting
life. Which the Son
                     ••
                   of man ſhall
giue vnto you, for him hath God the Father
ſealed.
            
            
               DAuid a King and a
Prophet:Rom. 1▪
                a man after
Gods owne heart, the
firſt liuely branche of
the roote of Ieſſe, of
whoſe ſeed Chriſt was
made according to
the fleſh, & vpon whoſe throne, he doeth
and ſhal ſit for euer: although he were a
worme and no man, the outcaſt of the
people, a Pellicane in the wilderneſſe, an
owle in the deſert, a ſparowe without her
mate, alone vpō the houſe top: yet as the
heart deſireth the water brookes,Pſal. 102. ſo longed
his ſoule after the meate whiche endureth
vnto euerlaſting life, being more
precious vnto him than thouſandes of
gold and ſiluer, ſweeter than hony vnto
his mouth, and the honycombe vnto his
throte.Pſal. 119. For though the plowers had ſo
plowed vpon his backe, and made long

furrows: though the Lord ſo had troden
downe his ſoule vpon the earth, and layd
his honour in the duſt: though his God
had ſo exalted the horne of his enimies,
making them to ryde ouer his back, that
he, as it were entring into the kingdome
of deſperation, did cry: then haue I clenſed
my hearte in vaine, in vaine haue I
waſhed my handes in innocencie: and
againe will the Lord abſent himſelfe for
euer,Pſa. 73. & wil he be no more intreted? is his
mercie cleane gone for euer,Pſal. 77. and is his
promiſe come vtterly to an ende for euermore?
What, will he now forget to
bee gratious, and ſhutte vp his louing
kindeneſſe in diſpleaſure. Yet notwithſtanding,
when hee had beene in the
ſanctuary of the Lord, and ſo knewe the
ende of his enemies, and the cauſes of
thoſe thinges, he was filled with marow
and fatnes, his head was annointed with
freſh oile, his cup was ful, becauſe he had
dronken plentifully of the water of life,
and eaten abundantly of the bread of
heauen.Reuel. 10. For as Iohn did eate, not a leafe
only,Ezech. 3. but the whole booke & as Ezechiel

did eate, not a peece, but the whole role,
the which booke and role were ſweet as
honie in their mouthes. But the booke
made Iohns bellie bitter, and the role
brought heauineſſe to Ezechiels ſpirite,
that is, the word brought vnto thē both,
peace to the conſcience from the Lorde,
but warre to the bodie from the world.
So Dauids whole delight was in the law
of the Lord his God, to muſe and meditate
thereon, too exerciſe, and practiſe
himſelfe therein, both day and night, all
dayes & nightes of his life. Whoſe good
and godly example wee muſt followe
in labouring for meate, if wee will haue
the crowne of life, if wee will eate of the
tree of life, if we will eate of manna, that
is hid,Reuel. 2. &. 3. if we will haue that whiteſtone, &
in the ſtone a new name written, which
no man knoweth, but he that receiueth
it, if wee will ſtande in the middeſt of
the paradiſe of GOD, if wee will bee
cloathed in white aray, if wee will
haue our names in the booke of life, if
we will be a piller in the temple of God,

and neuer goe out, if we wil haue written
vpon vs the name of God,Heb. 12. and the name
of Ieruſalem, if wee will come to mount
Syon, to the citie of the liuing God, to
the coeleſtiall Ieruſalem, to the companie
of innumerable angelles, to the aſſembly
and congregation of the firſt
borne, which are written in heauen, to
God the iudge of al, to the ſpirits of iuſt
and perfect men, to Ieſus the mediatour
of the new taſtament, & to the blood of
ſprinckling that ſpeaketh better thinges
then the blood of Abel. For all other
meates periſh, they with vs, and we with
them, O then labour not for them: only
this meate, the foode of the ſoule doth
endure vnto euerlaſting life, it with vs,
and wee with it: O then, let vs all labour
for it. The children of Iſrael did eate
Manna in the wilderneſſe,Exod. 16. but they are al
dead:Ioſu. 5. Manna was not to bee founde on
the ſabboth dayes, Manna was full of
wormes, and ſtanke: Manna ceaſed,
when they had eaten of the corne in Canaan:
Manna was kept in a pot, for the
poſteritie.2. Chro. 5. But is was no where to bee
founde in the dayes of Solomon. But

they that are fedde with this bread, ſhall
neuer dye: it is to be founde at al times,
it neuer putrifieth, it neuer ceaſeth, for it
doeth endure, not to death, but to life,
and that to euerlaſting life, Hee that
drinketh of the water of Iacobs well,
ſhall thirſt againe:Iohn. 4. but he that drinketh
of the water, whiche the ſonne of man
ſhall giue vnto him, (whome God the
father to this purpoſe hath ſealed) ſhall
neuer thirſt agayne, but the water in him
ſhalbe a well of water, ſpringing vpp vnto
euerlaſting life:Iohn. 7. yea, out of his belly
ſhall flowe riuers of water of life. Wherefore:1. Chro. 11.
as Eleaſar and his two companions
did breake thorowe the mighty
hoſte of the Philiſtines, and brought water
out of Bethlehem for Dauid, euen
thorowe the hoſte backe againe, Dauid
longing after that water: right
ſo, let vs boldely and couragiouſly,
breake thorowe the middes of all our enemies,
both temporal and ſpirituall to
get this water,Mat. 11. and this bread of the
ſoule, of heauen, and of life, that it may
bee ſayde of vs, as our Sauiour ſpake of
the Iewes in the beginning of the goſpel:

the kingdome of heauen ſuffereth
violence, and the violent take it by force.
So zealous were they (O I wold to God)
ſo zealous were wee) too receiue Gods
mercy ſo freely offered, ſo greedie were
they, (O I would to God ſo greedy were
we) to imbrace, to loue, to obey, to follow
Gods word ſo purely preached. For
as the pewter pot, which the fire melteth
is not ſo ſoone conſumed, beeing full of
licour: as the glaſſe, which euery knock
breaketh, is not ſo lightly daſht in peeces
beeing full of water: ſo we, (though wee
conſume as the fat of lambes before the
preſence of the Lord, and be as drie ſtubble,
the Lorde a conſuming fire: though
we be more brickle then glaſſe, for glaſſe
being ſafely lockt vp, endureth long, but
we, kepe we our ſelues neuer ſo daintily,
neuer ſo warily, neuer ſo ſafely, come to
an end as a tale that is told. So wee I ſay,
being full fed with this foode, ſhalbee able
to abide all blowes, al knocks, & ſhall
quēch all the fyrie darts of the wicked, &
ſhall ſtand faſt in the euil day, & ſo ſtand,
that all the gates of hell, ſhal not once be

able to preuayle againſt vs. What better
reaſon can I geue then this? for it endureth
vnto euerlaſting life.
            But alas, as Eue was content to aduenture
the loſſe of Paradiſe, for an apple: as
Eſau was content to looſe his birthright,
& his fathers bleſſing for a meſſe of pottage:
as the children of Iſrael did loath
Manna, (Angels foode) & in their hearts
turned back to the fleſh pottes of Egypt:
as the Iewes at this time did ſeek Chriſt,
not for his doctrine, not for his miracles,
but chiefly for meate, becauſe hee
had fedde them, and ſo fedde them, that
they had more ſtore left, when they had
done, then when they beganne to eate:
So becauſe the dayes of Noe are come,
becauſe the dayes of Lot are come, becauſe
the dayes of the Sonne of man are
at hande, wee are weerie of the meate
that endureth vnto euerlaſting life,
and doe labour for the meate whiche
periſheth to ſerue the bellie,Luke. 17. the fleſhe,
ſinne, the worlde, and all is to ſerue
the Diuell.
            
               
For as it was in the dayes of Noah, ſo
ſhall it bee in the dayes of the ſonne of
man, they ate, they dranke, they maried,
and gaue in mariage, vnto the day that
Noah went into the Arke, and the flood
came and drowned them all: lyke as it
was in the dayes of Lot, they ate, they
drank, they bought, they ſolde, they plā
               ted,
they builte, they married, but in the
day that Lot wēt out of Sodom, the lord
rayned fire & brimſtone from heauen &
conſumed them all. There was neuer
more eating and drinking, I meane neuer
more ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe:
neuer more buying and ſelling. I ſay, neuer
more deceyt in buying and ſelling:
neuer more planting, I might truely ſay,
neuer more ſupplanting one of another:
neuer more marying, I woulde to God I
might not iuſtly ſay, neuer more whoring,
to conclude neuer more building, I
meane not building of Colledges, of almes
houſes, of ſchooles. there was neuer
leſſe: I pray you miſtake me not, I ſay,
neuer more building of priuate houſes,
which wee thinke ſhall continue for eeuer,
and call our houſes and our landes
after our owne names. So that wee may

iuſtly bewayle the madneſſe and miſerie
of this age, as Chryſoſtome did the folly
and fondneſſe of his tyme.Homil. 42. in Iohan. 
               Si ſecularibus
abſtinere iubemur, quae miſeria, quae amentia
eſt, ea a domino poſtulare quae habita, abiicienda:
deſiderare, in quibus nullam omnino
curam adhibendam praecipit? That is: if
wee are commanded to abſtayne from
worldly thinges, what a miſery, what a
madneſſe is it, to begge thoſe thinges at
the Lordes hands, which when we haue,
wee muſt caſt away: and to deſire thoſe
things, wherein the Lord commaundeth
vs to put no care at all.Tit. 2. Wherefore ſeeing
it may well be ſayde of vs Engliſhmen, as
Paule ſayde of the Cretians, euil beaſtes,
ſlowe bellyes: and ſeeing I may now truly
ſpeake with Paule: many walke, of
whome I haue told you often,Phillip. 3. and nowe
tell you weeping, that they are enemies
to the croſſe of Chriſt, whoſe ende is dā
               nation,
whoſe God is their belly, whoſe
glory is to their ſhame, whiche minde
earthly thinges: and ſeeing vppon good
occaſion,Rom. 16. I may exhorte you with Paule:
nowe I beſeeche you (brethren) marke
them diligently, whiche make diuiſion,

& offēces cōtrary to the doctrine which
you haue learned and auoyde them: for
they that are ſuch, ſerue not the Lord Ieſus,
but their owne bellies, & with fayre
ſpeech, & flattering, deceiue the hearts of
the people: this doctrine is as needfull &
neceſſary, nowe as it was in the time of
our Sauiour Chriſt, when he thus taught
the people, Labour not &c. Not onely to
diſſwade you frō laboring for the meate
which periſheth, but to perſwade you to
labour for that meat which doth endure
vnto euerlaſting life, The which wordes
conteine in them,The diuiſion. firſt a diſſwaſion, a dehortation,
a propoſition negatiue: Secondly,
a perſwaſion, an exhortation, or
concluſion poſitiue. Whervnto is annexed,
firſt, a reaſon taken from the perſon
that geueth, & the certainty of the thing
geuen: which the Sonne of man ſhal giue
vnto you: Secondly, a confirmation,
drawen from the office and function of
our Meſſias and Sauiour. For him hath
the Father ſealed, that is, appoynted and
conſecrated him to geue life vnto all thē
that labour for this meate.
            
               
IT had been ſufficient for our Sauiour:
onely to haue vſed the exhortation, labour
for &c, had he not perceiued them,
as we nowe ſee the worlde, to hunt & labour
for bellie cheere, as dogges doe for
carion, ſwine for draugh, horſes for prouender:
too bee wrapped and tyed in
theſe earthly thinges, (as the men of this
age are) like the fiſhe in the hooke, the
bird in the net, the conie in the hay: therfore
he beginneth with the dehortation.
Labour not, &c. And bicauſe a litle before
mention was made of meat, he ſpeaketh
figuratiuely, vſing the Metaphore of
meate, whereas hee might plainely haue
ſaide, care not for the bodie to fulfill the
luſtes of it, but care for your ſoules, to
poſſeſſe the kingdome of heauen. And if
he had onely vſed the affirmatiue, exhorting
thē to labour for meate, they might
haue been as groſſe in vnderſtanding
him, as his Diſciples were, who, when he
ſpake of the leauen of the Phareſies,Mat. 16.
thought hee had ſpoken of the leauen
of breade: as carnal as Nicodemus, who
when Chriſte tolde him a man muſte
bee borne agayne, thought a manne

ſhould goe into his mothers wombe againe:Iohn. 3.
as rude as the woman of Samaria,
who,Iohn. 4. when Chriſt ſpake of the water of
life, thought he had ſpoken of the water
of Iacobs well. Therfore, as hee vſeth a
metaphore beeing plaine, ſo to make it
more plaine, ſo to ſhew whereunto their
nature was bent, ſo to declare what they
ſhould labour for, hee vſeth both the affirmatiue
& the negatiue: but hee beginneth
with the negatiue, labor not, &c. As
if he ſhould haue ſayd: Wilt thou come
vpp into my holy hill? put of thy ſhoes.
Wilt thou come into my congregation?
cut of the foreskin of thy fleſh, or rather
of thy heart. Wilt thou haue my durable
coate made of ſkinnes? O ſonne of Adam,
caſt of thy breeches made of figge
leaues. Wilt thou bee clad with my garment?
caſt of thy ragged cloake with
blind Bartimeus. Wilt thou haue a ſalue
for thy wound? cut of thy rotten fleſhe.
Wilte thou haue a medicine for thy diſeaſes,
purge thy body. Wilt thou build?
plucke downe thy ruinous walles. Wilte
thou ſow? pluck out the weedes of thine
heart. Wilt thou put on a cleane ſhirte?

put of the foule. I will not put my newe
Wine into olde bottelles: I will not put
a peece of my new cloth, vpon the moth
eaten garmentes: my coate is without
ſeame from the top to the ſkirtes, I geue
all, or none. Wilt thou entertaine me Zacheus?
come downe from the wild figge
tree. Wilt thou doe good? decline from
euill. Wilt thou put on the armour of
light? caſt of the workes of darkeneſſe.
You cannot ſerue God and Mammon,
Chriſt and riches, you cannot labour for
the meate which periſheth, and for the
meate that endureth vnto euerlaſting
life. Were not a garment of linnen and
wollen: eate not with ſweete bread, and
ſower leauen: ſow not two ſorts of grain
in one fielde: goe not too plowe with an
oxe and an aſſe in one yoke: for they that
doe ſo, looke backe from the plough, &
are not fit for the kingdome of God. For
what felowſhip hath righteouſneſſe, and
vnrighteouſnes, what communion hath
light with darkneſſe,1. Cor. 6. what concord hath
Chriſte with Belial? what parte hath the
beleeuer with the infidel? what agreemēt
hath the temple of God with Diuelles?

GOd and Mammon, meate which periſheth,
and meate which endureth vnto euerlaſting
life, cannot ſtande together.
But let vs labour a little I pray you, for
this meate, a little is to be borne with.
What, know you not, that leauen, and a
little leauen, doth leauē the whole lump?
that a breache, and a little breache doeth
marre the ſale of a whole cloth? that a
ſcarre and a little ſcarre, doeth diſfigure
the whole face? that poyſon, and a little
poyſon, doth poyſon the whole bodie?
that Coloquintida, and a little Coloquintida,
doth infect the whole pot of pottage?
that a hole, and a little hole in a veſſell,
will let out al the licour? that fire, and a
litle fire, is able to burne a whole Citie?
Kiſſe the Sonne,Pſal. 2. (ſaith the Prophet) leaſt
he be angry, and ſo periſh from the right
way, if his wrath be kinndled, yea but a
little, Bleſſed are all they that put their
truſt in him. Make no pax of the worlde,
and haue no pax with the worlde, but
kiſſe the ſonne, make a pax of him, and
haue peace with him▪ Feare his wrath,
if it be kindled, yea but a litle, O bleſſed
are all they that put their truſt in him.

But alas,Math. 13. we are ſo far from labouring for
this meate, that whereas like good huſbandmen
we ſhould labour & dig in the
field, and ſell al that we haue, to buy that
field. Whereas like wiſe Merchant men,
wee ſhoulde labour and ſeeke for good
pearles,Math 7. and ſell all that we haue, to buy
that pearle of great price: We, like dogs
refuſe holy things offered, we turn about
and teare them that doe offer them: we
like ſwine, tread pearles vnder our feete,
and doe accounte this pearle, this holie
thing, the word of life, to bee vnto vs as
a ring of golde in a ſwines ſnoute. For
doeth the people delight to heare Gods
word? Behold yet they are like the deafe
adder, which ſtoppeth her eares, at the
voyce of the charmer, charme hee neuer
ſo wiſely. Or if they with delight doe
heare it, doe they vnderſtand it? behold
yet, they are like horſe and mule, which
haue no vnderſtāding, or if they heare it,
& vnderſtand it, do they obey it? behold
yet, they are vntamed colts, & vnweaned
heyfers. Or if they doe all theſe three,
heare, vnderſtand, obey, can they abyde
to be rebuked to their faces of their ſins?

Beholde yet they are like Herode, who
performed the 3 firſt,Mark. 6. but could not abide
the fourth. Doe they loue the bringers of
this woorde? beholde yet there is in England
an Adders broode, a generation of
Vipers. Doe they abide and ſtand faſt to
their profeſſion? Beholde yet they are
ſtarting aſide like a brokē bowe, they are
yet like the children of Ephraim, who be
yng harneſſed, and carrying bowes, did
turne themſelues back in the day of battel.
Nay doe the biſhops and miniſters ſo
goe in, and ſo goe out, before the people
of God, that the people ſeeyng them goe
before, doe follow after them, whereby
our father in heauen is glorified? Behold
yet many of them are like the eye, which
ſeeth all thinges and cannot ſee it ſelfe:
like the whetſtone which maketh the yron
ſharpe, but dull it ſelfe: like the
yron and flint, which make fire in the
tynder but are colde themſelues. I pray
GOD they bee not like thoſe fooliſhe
Carpenters in the dayes of Noah, who
buylded the Arke for Noah▪ but they
themſelues were drowned. Or if the Miniſters
and people doe ſeeme to liue as

they teach and are taught, doe they liue
ſo ſincerely, purely, and truely? I pray
God we be not found to bee ſtage players,
to be painted ſepulchers, Wels without
water, and cloudes without rayne.
For ſo rype is the hypocriſie of men in
theſe dayes, that they which beare the
fayreſt ſhew of godlineſſe, doe moſt deny
the power thereof. For euen they, theſe
holy men, or rather holow trees (I would
they were holie trees, which are alwayes
greene,) are like the faire redd morning,
which bringeth rayne at noone: Like the
calme water, which is moſt deepe: like
the greene graſſe, where the venemous
ſnake lieth, and the filthy curre maketh
his vrine. For they ſerue their bellies,
their fleſh, the world, and in heart doe labor
for that meat only, which periſheth.
We care not for our liues, our ſoules, our
ſelues, we are inferiour to bruite beaſtes.
Heare o heauēs, & harken o earth: (ſaith
the Lord) the oxe knoweth his owner,Iſay▪ 1. &
the Aſſe his Miaſters cribbe,Ierom. 8. but my people
doth not know me, & again, the ſtork
in the ayre doeth knowe her appointed
times, the tutele, the crane, the ſwallow,

obſerue the time of their comming, but
my people knoweth not the iudgement
of the Lord. But why doth the oxe know
his owner, & the Aſſe his maiſters cribb?
why doe the ſtorke, the turtle, the crane,
the ſwallowe, obſerue the time of their
comming? is it not for meate, for their
bodies, and for their liues? ſhoulde they
labour for their liues, & not we for ours?
For well ſaide Tullie to Caeſar: Non eſt
haec tua vita dicenda,
               Orati. per M. Marc. 
               quae corpore & ſpiritu
continetur: illa, inquam, illa, eſt vita tua
Caeſar, quae vigebit memoria ſaeculornm omnium.
&c. This is not to be called thy life,
which doth conſiſt of bodie and ſoule:
that, I ſay that, O Caeſar is thy life, which
ſhal endure thorow out all ages. &c. And
well ſaide Africanus to Scipio: Nou tu is
es,
               In ſomnio Scipionis. 
               quem fama iſta declarat: ſed mens cuiuſ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
is eſt quis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , non ea figura quae digito demonſtrari
poteſt. Thou art not he, Scipio,
whom this form and proportion of bodie
doth ſhew thee to be: and eche mans
minde is the man, not that figure and
ſhape of bodie, which may bee demonſtrated,
and poynted at with the finger.
We then in labouring for this corruptible
meate, doe neither labour to mainteine

our liues, nor yet too ſuſteine our
ſelues. For this is not our life: & wee are
not they, whom theſe ſhapes and formes
of our doe ſhew vs to be. Our ſoules are
our ſelues, & our ſelues, are our ſoules:
let vs then labour for our ſelues, that is,
for our ſoules.
            As the Lord did carie the Iewes, ſo doeth
hee offer too carie vs vppon Eagles
winges,Exod. 19. what whereas the deade carcaſe
is, we like young Eagles may reſort, but
wee will not bee carried. As Chriſt did
clocke for the Iewes, ſo he doth for vs to
come vnder his wings,Mat. 23. but wee will not
come.Pſalm. 19. We are like Eſops cocke, who
eſtemed more of one barley corne, thē of
al the precious ſtones in the world. The
heauens doe declare the glory of God,
the firmamēt ſheweth his handy worke,
the Elemēts obſerue their order, the ſun
doth reioyce to run his courſe: onely the
foundations of mans hearte, are out of
courſe,Ioſ. 10. only man doth diſobey gods wil.
The ſun once abode in the mids of heauen
for the ſpace of a whole day,2. Reg. 20. but
it was at the prayer of Ioſhua the ſunne
once went backe tenne degrees, but it
was at the requeſt of Ezechias:

but fleſh and blood doth ſtil ſtand in the
way of ſinners, ſtill walke in the counſell
of the vngodly, ſit ſtil in the chayre of peſtilence,
and ſtill goe backe from the
ſtreight way, & ſtreight path of the Lord.
if this foode were cleane taken from vs,
and were not to be found, as it hath byn,
wee might then ſeeme to haue ſome reaſon
to labour for the other meate. For
as Hanum king of Ammon,Chro. 19. tooke Dauids
ſeruāts, ſhaued their beards halfe of,
& cut of their garments by the halfe: ſo
thoſe ſhauers and ſhauelinges, thoſe barbours
and Barbarians of Rome, tooke away
half the Lords Supper from the people,
they might haue no drink. And took
the woorde of God from them, they had
not their meate. But now as Mary ſate in
her owne houſe quietly, & hearde Ieſus
preach: as in the dayes of Solomon, euery
man vnder his figge tree, & vnder his
vine tree, heard the lawe peaceably, euen
from Dan to Beerſheba: ſo nowe euery
man in his owne houſe may reade with
quietneſſe, and euery one vnder his figge
tree and vine tree with cheerefulnes and
ioyfulnes may heare the glorious goſpel

of Ieſus Chriſt, euen from the mount to
Barwicke, from Douer to S. Dauies, the
Lord be thanked for it, the Lorde continue
it, the Lord grant we be not vnthākfull,
& that we may labour for this meate
which endureth vnto euerlaſting life. But
that my ſpeech may more edifie, that it
may be mighty in operation, that it may
pearce and enter thorow, euen to the deuiding
aſunder of the ſoules and ſpirites,
of your ioynts & marrow: that you may
be pricked at the hearte, in hearing this
my ſermon,Act. 2. as the Iewes were at Peters
ſermon,2. Chron. 34. when they cried: Alas men and
brethren, what ſhall we doe? as Ioſiah
was hearing the lawe read by Shaphan,Iohn. 3.
when ye tare his clothes. As the King of
Niniuie was,Iud. 3. when he hearde the woord
by Ionas, & as Eglon king of Moab, whē
he heard the word by Ehud: who roſe vp
from their thrones & caſt of their Kingly
robes: that my talke may ſo be powdred
with ſalt, that it may giue ſauour vnto al:
to conclude, that my ſermon may be like
that precious oyntmēt, which was on Arons
head, ranne downe on his beard, &
to the very lower ſkirts of his clothing:

That it may touch head & foote, king &
ſubiect, hie & lowe, rich & poore, young
& old, bond, and free, man and woman:
Let vs firſt ſee what this meat is: ſecondly,
why we ſhould not labour for it: thirdly
let vs examine our ſelues, and this our
age, whether wee labour for this meate
or no.
            By meate is meant: not onely food for
the belly,What meate is here ment. which the erth bringeth forth,
as greene hearbe for the ſeruice of men,
wine to make glad the heart of man, oile
to make him a cheerefull countenance,
& bread to ſtrengthen mans heart: not
onely cloth for the back, & furniture for
bedding, which by Gods appoyntment
we receiue of dumbe creatures, as wooll
of ſheep, lether of oxen, fethers of foules,
ſilk of wormes: but alſo honour, promotion,
fauour, dignitie, woorſhip, countenance,
iolity, pride, ambition, auarice, riches,
ſurfetting, drunkenneſſe, and whatſoeuer
elſe is carnall, whatſoeuer is fleſhly,
whatſoeuer is worldly, whatſoeuer is
tēporal, whatſoeuer is not eternal, is called
meat which periſheth. The which Epithetan
is added both as a reaſō to with
draw vs from labouring for this meate,

becauſe it doth periſhe, and alſo to declare
a difference betweene the bodie &
the ſoule, & the meates of them both.
Lyra maketh this difference:Lyra in Ioh. 
               Cibus corporalis
perit, non ſpiritualis: Si enim cibus
corporalis maneat in propria forma, non nutrit,
ſed nocet cerpori: ſedſi nutriat, oportet
quod a propria natura pereat, & conuertatur
in membra: econuerſo cibus ſpiritualis
manet & Conuertit in ſeipſum ſumentem.
That is: the meate of the bodie doth periſh,
but not the meate of the ſoule: for
if the meate of the body ſhould abide in
it proper forme, it could not nouriſh, but
hurte the bodie: but if it nouriſheth, it
muſt looſe it proper nature, and bee
turned into the partes and members of
him that taketh it: whereas contrariwiſe
the meate of the ſoule doeth abide in it
owne nature, and turneth him that taketh
it into it ſelfe according to that ſaying
of Auguſtine ſpeaking as it were,Auguſt. in
the perſon of this meate: Non me mutabis
in te, ſed tu mutaheris in me. Thou
ſhalte not chaunge mee into thee, but
thou ſhalte bee chaunged intoo mee,
and another difference the ſame Lyra

maketh in this ſort: Panis vitae non ſolum
vitam conſeruat,
               Lira in Iohan. 
               ſed etiam dat ipſam de no▪
uo panis corporalis, vitam corporalem preexiſtentem
tantummodo conſeruat. The
bread of life, doeth not onely preſerue
life, but geueth life anew: but the meate
of the bodie onely preſerueth the life,
which is in the bodie: and let theſe ſerue
for two reaſons, to proue my ſecōd part.
That we ought not to labour for meate
which doth periſh, wherevnto, nowe I
come. In the beginning the Lorde God
tooke the man, & put him into the garden
of Eden, that he might keepe it and
dreſſe it:We ought not to labour for this meat. wherevpon as Peter Lombard
noteth, that man was made out of Paradiſe,
and afterwarde put into it, both
to ſignifie that he ſhould not long continue
there,Gen. 2. and alſo that Paradiſe was aſſigned
vnto him by grace, and not by
nature: ſo haue we to learne, that God
doeth ſo deteſt and abhorre idleneſſe,
that though then there was no neede of
labour,Lib. 2. diſt. 17. yet hee woulde haue Adam
there, not onely a keeper, but a dreſſer
of the garden.
            
               
For although at the firſt God made
euery plant of the fielde,Gen. 2. before it was in
the earth, and euery herbe of the fielde,
it grewe: (for the Lord had not cauſed it
to rayne vppon the earth, neyther was
there a man founde to till the grounde)
yet afterward God would haue the man
to keepe, labour, dreſſe and trimme the
garden, not in the ſweate of his face, not
in paine, not in ſorrowe, but in mirth, ioy,
pleaſure, and peace. Where ydle liuers,
loytring vacabundes, wilde rogues, begging
Friers, looſe libertines, carnall Anabaptiſtes,
ſnatchers from other mens
trenchers, they that liue in no vocation,
no arte, no trade, no ſcience, cannot
make this a ſhroude for their ſinne, or a
cloake for their knauerie: ſaying, we are
heare forbidden to labour: for this ſentence
of God pronounced againſt man,Gen. 3.
in the ſweate of thy face thou ſhalt eate
thy breade, was not onely a curſe, but a
commaundement. That euery man
ſhould labour in ſome vocation: that, as
Paule ſayth: he that woulde not woorke
might not eate.2. Theſſa. 3. For wee heare, ſayth
he, that there are ſome which walke among

you inordinately, and woorke
not at all, but are buſie bodies: therefore
them that are ſuch, wee warne and
exhort by our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that
they woorke with quietnes, and eate
their owne breade. For this commandement,
giuen to the Iewes from God
by Moſes: there ſhal be no begger among
you, was a commaundement, not
only to moue thē to pitie, to mercy to liberalitie:
but alſo to take away, & roote
out al loyterers, al ſhifters, al vagabunds,
all buſie bodies, all that liue in no vocation,
from the common wealth of Iſrael.
The ſlouthfull will not plow,Pro. 20. becauſe of
winter,Luk. 16. (ſayth Solomon) therefore ſhall
he begge in ſommer, but haue nothing.
But you will ſay, I will neyther plow nor
begge, I will ſhift with the vniuſt ſteward
(whom Chriſt commended) and ſay: dig
I cannot,Pro. 20▪
                and to begge I am aſhamed:
The breade of deceite (ſayth Solomon)
is ſweete to a man, but afterwarde his
mouth ſhalbe filled with grauell. Wherfore
we are not heere ſimplie forbidden
to labour, but this is forbidden both to
labour too carefully as the heathen doe,
or to labour for the meate of the bodie,

and care not for the meate of the ſoule
as the Athiſtes doe, which ſaye in their
heartes, there is no God. The Lord God
knowing the nature of man, aboue al other
vices, would be prone to gluttonie
and belly cheere, did firſt before al other
commandemēt, conſecrate & proclaime
an iniunctiō of tēperancy, & faſting thou
ſhalt not eate of the tree of knowledge
of good & euil. The breach of the which
commaundement did iuſtly and differently
not onely thruſt Adam and Euah
out of Paradiſe,Gen. 3. but cauſed the Cherubins
to be heat, and the blade of a ſword
ſhaken,Reuel. 3. to keepe the way of the tree of
life,Reuel. 20. for euer to keepe vs from it, had not
he which hath the keyes of the bottōles
who openeth, & no man ſhutteth, ſhutteth
& no man openeth: he who deuided
the red ſea, that we might eſcape frō the
Egyptiās: he who deuided the rock that
might haue water in the wilderneſſe, hee
who duided Iordā, that we might pas in
to the land of promiſe:: he who deuided
the earth that we might riſe againe, he
who diuided the cloudes and the heauens
with his bodye that wee might

might followe after him: he who onely
giueth to eate of the tree of life: had not
he I ſay, taken away the Cherubins, and
remooued the blade of a ſwoorde, too
make vs a plaine, direct, open, and ſafe
way to enter againe into Paradiſe, and to
taſte of the fruite of the tree of life.
But what cauſed Euah to eate of it? that
which doeth cauſe vs all too labour for
that meate which periſheth. Nitimur in
vetitum. We muſt deſire that, which we
are forbidden to doe: it was a fruite too
get knowledge, a proude mynde: a fruite
pleaſant to looke on, a wanton eye: a
fruite good for meate, a lickeriſhe tooth
of the woman. But that we may the better
vnderſtande, howe God is grieued,
when men labour for this belley meate,
let vs call to remenbrance the times of
olde, and thinke vppon the daies of late,
how the Lord hath executed his terrible
iudgementes and horrible vengeence,
how he hath abundantly poured out of
the violl of his wrath, whē men haue bin
in the middeſt of their mirth, of their
feaſting and banquetting. The people
ſate downe to eate and drinke and roſe

vp againe to play:Exod. 32 let me alone ſayth the
Lorde to Moſes, that my wrath may wax
hote againſt them,Num. 11. for I will conſume
them. And although God hearde the
prayer of Moſes, yet Moſes ſlewe of thoſe
belly Gods. 3000. men: agayne the people
luſted for meate, ſaying: who ſhall
giue vs fleſhe to eate, wee remember the
fiſhe that we had in Egypt for naught,
the cucumbers, the pepons, the leekes,
the onyons and garlike. But nowe our
ſoule is dried away, wee can ſee nothing
but this Manna: as now ſayth the Papiſts
where is our plentie of victuall? our feaſting,
our ſinging, our ringing, our pyping,
our dauncing? we ſee nothing, but
the bare Teſtament, nothing but this
manna ſayde the Iewes, nothing but
this Goſpell ſaye the Papiſtes, beholde
while the fleſhe was betweene their
teeth, before it was chewed, the wrath of
the Lorde was kindled, there was an exceeding
plague among them, that the
place was called Kibroth Hattanah, the
graues of luſt. When fel downe the houſe
vppon the Lordes of the Philiſtines? at
a banquette. When fell downe the

houſe vpon Iobs children? at a feaſt. Yea
at the time of our & banquetting, the diuel
is more buſy with vs, & hath eftſones
more power ouer vs: at a diner did the
diuel moue Herode to behed Iohn Baptiſt▪
& at a ſupper did Satan perſwade Iudas
to betray his maiſter, But what ſayth
Paul to vs of theſe things?1. Cor. 10. theſe things are
our examples, to the intēt we ſhould not
luſt after euil things, as they luſted: & al
theſe things came vnto thē for exāples,
& ar writtē to admoniſh vs, vpō whō the
ends of the world are fallē. But haue we
had no exāples of late? whō did the Lord
ſmite down in that terrible plague in Oxford,
not mockers of Gods ſeruantes, as
were the Philiſtines, not Idolaters, and
murmurers, as were the Iewes, but the
moſt religious, zealous, the godlieſt, the
ſtrongeſt, the beſt learned, amongſt vs,
iudges, ſherif, knight, eſquier, iuſtice, gē
               tleman,
ſcholler, & for zeale, for godlines
& learning, I may truly ſay, for the moſt
of them, as Dauid ſaid of Iſrael, the Lord
ſmot down the choſen men that were in
Oxford. But when was this done? euen
whē the meat was in our mouths at our
acte and proceeding a time of mirth, of

feaſting & bāquetting. I meane not that
ſcholers made the feaſts but their frends
then aſſembled, I come a litle nearer to
your remembrāce, was there not a great
feaſte and a greate aſſemblie in this
Citie, not of Herode and his courtiours,
but of many right noble perſonages,
when the Lord of late ſhooke not
London, not Englande onely, but
the moſt part of Europe with a terrible
earthquake? the earth at that time did
ſhake, and we for a time did quake, the
Lord ſhake the heartes of al engliſhmen:
What ſhall I ſay of theſe: they are (no
doubt) examples for vs, that in the middeſt
of our feaſting, we ſet not our minds
on our bellies, but remember our God
& think on that meate, which endureth
vnto euerlaſting life. If we ſo doe thē ſhal
we come to the marriage of the greate
kinges ſonne: the Lord graunt wee may
leaue our farmes, forſake our oxen, and
not ſuffer our wiues to make vs ſay I can
not come. Then ſhall we be partakers of
that feaſt with the prodigall ſonne: the
Lorde turne vs home from feeding of
ſwine and in hearte to cry for our ſinnes

father I haue ſinned agaynſt heauen, and
againſt thee, & I am no more worthy to
be called thy ſonne. Then ſhall we enter
with the .5. wiſe virgines into the bridegromes
chāber, the Lord graunt that we
haue lāps, that our lāps may haue oyle,
and that our oyle may burne. Man beefore
his fall,De ieiunio. might onely eate of the fruit
of trees, (as Tertullian noteth) afterwarde
the vſe of corne was lawefull for him,
conditionem conſciencie, ipſo ſitu corporis
approbante, the bodie allowing the ſtate
and condition of the conſience. For
mans concience being right and vpright
he looked vp towarde heauen, and pluck
the fruite of trees: but when the conſcience
of man was by ſinne caſt downe,
man turned his eyes toward, the ground
and made the graine of corne to bee his
meate, and ſo after the floode, not onely
fruite, not onely corne, but fleſhe was alſo
lawfull. The Lorde did alwayes prouide
according to the times and ſeaſons
and ages of mankind, ſufficient and conuenient
foode, Nay beholde the Lorde
feedeth the young rauens that call on
him: the foules of the heauen ſowe not,

reape not, nor gather into ther barnes,
yet they are fed,Pſal. 147. and by our heauenly father
they are fedde.Math. 6. The Lillies of the
fielde labour not, ſpinne not, yet
Solomon in all his royaltie was not clothed
like one of them. Thus then will
I reaſon: hath God care for beaſtes too
feede them, and for flowers too cloth
them, and will he not much more feede
and cloth vs? are they fedd and clothed
without ſowing, without reaping, without
carying, without ſpinning and labouring,
and ſhall not wee bee clothed
and fed, if wee ſowe, reape, cary, ſpinne,
and labour? Will God care for my rayment?
then much more for my body,
will he care for my bodie? then muche
more for my life. For the life is more
woorth then meate, and the bodie more
woorth then rayment. I will then care
neither for cloth, nor foode, nor bodie,
nor life, but I will firſt ſeeke the kingdom
of God, and the righteouſnes thereof,
and then I am fully aſſured, that all theſe
thinges ſhalbe miniſtred vnto me, thou
ſhalt not (ſaith the law) muſſel the mouth
of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne.

And again: if thou wilt finde a birds neſt
& the dam ſitting theron, thou ſhalt not
take the dam with the yong.Deut. 22. Doth God
take care for oxen? is God ſo mercifull
to birdes? & will he not take more care
for vs? will he not be more merciful vnto
vs. In the Cedars of Libanus (ſaith the
Prophet) the byrdes make their neſtes,
and the Fir trees are a dwelling for the
Storcke: the hie hils are a refuge for the
wilde Goates,1. Cor. 10. and ſo are the ſtony rocks
for the conies:Pſal. 104. the Lyons roring after
their pray, doe ſeeke their meat at God.
In the Sea are thinges creeping innumerable,
both ſmal and great beaſtes, there
goe the ſhippes, and there is that Leuiathan,
whom thou haſt made to take his
paſtime therein. Theſe waite all vppon
thee, that thou maiſt giue them meat in
due ſeaſon. Let not vs therefore labour
for this meate, let vs with prayer ſeeke
our meat at God,Pſa. 104. let vs waite vpon him,
and he will giue vs meate in due ſeaſon.
For our God, which layeth the beames
of his chamber in the waters, which maketh
the cloudes his chariot, and walketh

vpon the winges of the winde, is ſo
mercifull, that he ſuffereth his rayne to
fall vpon bad and good, his ſunne to
ſhine vpon iuſt and vniuſt. For it is hee,
that appoynteth the Moone for certain
ſeaſons, and by him the ſunne knoweth
his going downe. Hee couereth the heauen
with clowdes, he prepareth rain for
the earth, he maketh the graſſe to grow
vpon the mountaines, and greene hearb
for the ſeruice of men. He doth cōmand
the clowdes aboue, and open the dores
of heauen. Hee doeth ſend the firſt and
latter raine, his clowdes droppe fatnes,
hee onely maketh the vallies ſo full of
corne, that they laugh and ſing. If wee
aske bread of our earthly father, will he
giue vs a ſtone? if we aske fiſh, will hee
giue vs a ſerpent? if we aske an egge, wil
he giue vs a Scorpion?Luk. 11. Much more will
our heauēly father giue good things vnto
vs, if we labour for the meate that endureth
vnto euerlaſting life.Homil. 42. in Iohan. Chriſoſtom
woondreth, that men will preſume ſo
much, to begge corruptible meate at
Gods handes, ſeeing that among ſeauen
petitions in the Lordes prayer, ſixe are

for the ſpirit and ſoule, and but one (and
not that altogether) for the bodie. For
the firſt three: hallowed bee thy name:
thy kingdome come, thy will be done:
are for the ſpirit and ſoule, the three laſt,
forgiue vs our treſpaſſes, leade vs not into
temptation, deliuer vs from euill: are
alſo for the ſpirit and ſoule. Onely this
giue vs this day our dayly breade, is for
the bodie, and not for foode of bodie
onely, but for meate of the ſoule. Ceres
the goddeſſe of corne and bread: is placed
in the loweſt roome of the heathen
Gods and Goddeſſes, and her daughter
Proſerpina, was married to Pluto king of
hel. Let Ceres, bread, bellie, and bellie
cheere be laſt and leaſt accounted of vs.
As for her daughters, they are not virgines
to be married to the great kinges
ſonne, but harlots to be married to Belzebub
king of hell. Tertullian ſaith, that
although God after the flood did permit
the vſe of fleſh, yet to his people hee
inhibited the vſe of certaine meates:Li. 20. aduerſus Marcinnē. 
               conſilium
exercendae continentiae, a counſell &
practiſe to exerciſe their continencie. vii.
ſonnes with their mother, were by that

horſelech & bludſucker Antiochus moſt
cruelly put to death,2. Mach. 7. becauſe they would
not eate ſwines fleſhe agaynſt the commaundement
of the Lord. Moſes refuſed
to be called the ſonne of Pharaos
daughter,Heb. 11. and choſe rather to ſuffer aduerſitie
with the people of God, then to
enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon:
eſteeming the rebuke of Chriſt,Daniel. 10. greater
riches then the treaſures of Egypt. Daniel
woulde not defile him ſelfe with the
portion of the kinges meate, nor with
the wine that he dranke: he would haue
nothing but pulſe to eate, and water too
drinke. O yee adulterers and adultereſſes
(ſayth Iames) knowe yee not that the
frendſhip of this worlde is enmitie with
God,Iam. 4. & Iohn ſayth: if any man loue this
worlde,1. Iohn. 2. the loue of the father is not in
him. Lay not vp your treaſures therfore
on earth, where the moth fretteth, the
ruſt kankereth, the theefe breaketh thorowe
and ſteale: but lay vp your treaſures
in heauē. where there is no moth to fret,
no ruſt to kanker, no theefe too breake
thorow and ſteale. For is it not a great
folly to lay thy treſure in an Inne doubtfully,

whē thou maiſt lay it in thine own
houſe ſafely? folly to lay it in an houſe,
which together with thy treaſure thou
ſhalt leaue behind thee certainly, & not
in that houſe whither thou ſhalt go, find
thy treaſure aſſuredly, and abyde therin
perpetually? the faſhion of this worlde
paſſeth away, the heauens and the earth
waxe olde, as doth a garment: O let vs
then get that which endureth vnto euerlaſting
life. The heauens ſhal paſſe away
with a noiſe,2. Pet. 3. the elements ſhal melt with
heate, the earth and 
                  〈◊〉
                works therin
ſhalbe burnt vp, o let vs then labour for
that which the fire cannot conſume, &
which wil ſaue ourſoules frō euerlaſting
fire, If we would thinke vpon our name
that we are chriſtians, we would, vnles
we ſhould prooue our ſelues to be reprobates,
not ſo much labour for this
bellie meat. Firſt let vs remēber, that in
our baptiſme, we forſake the world, the
fleſh, & the 
                  •
               iuel, for baptiſme ſignifieth
not only the death and reſurrection of
Chriſt,Rom. 6. b
                  ••
                that we muſt dye to ſin, and
liue in newnes of life. How ſhal we (ſaith
Paul) that are dead to ſin, liue yet therin,

Knowye not that al we which haue bin
baptized into Ieſus Chriſt, haue bin baptized
into his death? we are buried then
with him by baptiſme into his death,
that like as Chriſt was raiſed from the
dead, to the glory of the father, ſo wee
ſhould walke in newnes of life. Secōdly,
as thou art a chriſtian, remember the eſtate
of thy lord & maiſter here on erth.
Doeſt thou brag of thy blood, thy progenitors,
thy houſe & ſtock? thy maiſter
came as of a pure, ſo of a poore virgine
eſpouſed to a poore carpenter, who for
lack of mony could haue no roome in
the Inne, who did offer to the Lorde a
paire of Pigeons, becauſe he was not able
to buy a lamb. Ierome noteth, that
only poore & ſinfull women are named
by S. Math. in the genelogie of Chriſt,
as Ruth a poore Moabitis,Ierom. & pore Mary
the carpenters wife, to ſignifie howe
Chriſt did vouchſafe to come of poore
womē, & came into the world to redeēe
pore ſinful perſons, doeſt thou brag of
the countrye Adam was made out of
Paradice, and Euah in Paradice, yet the
Diuell hadde more power ouer her

then ouer him: they had both one name
Adam,Gen. 5. reed earth: for this name, Adam
was not giuen by God only to the man,
but alſo to the woman. Thy maiſter was
not borne in Ieruſalem, whither the wiſe
men came, but in little Bethlehem, as it
was propheſied. Doeſt thou glory in
thy houſes, buildings, courtes, pallaces?
Thy maiſter was borne in a manger, the
foxes haue holes, and the birdes haue
neſtes, but the ſonne of man thy Lorde
had no where to reſt his heade on. Doeſt
thou boaſt of thy bagges, thy coffers, thy
welth? When thy maiſter woulde haue
payed tribute, Iudas bagge was emptie,
Peter muſt run and fetch a peece of monie
in the mouth of a fiſhe. Doeſt thou
deſire to be well ſpoken of, to haue the
good will of the world? There were generally
iii. diuerſe opinions of Chriſt: one,
which fleſh and blood could not reueale
that he was Chriſt the ſonne of God, an
other of ignorance, that he was Elias,
Ieremie, Iohn Baptiſt, or one of the prophets:
the third was of mallice, that hee
was a glutton, a drunkard, a bon companion,
a friend to Publicans and ſinners

a coniurer, a woorker by Diuels. But
what ſayth he? Woe bee vnto you when
all men ſpeake well of you,Luk 6. Why? For
ſo did their fathers to the falſe Prophets.
But reioyce when they ſpeake euil of you
for ſo did they to the true Prophets, reioyce,
and great ſhalbe your rewarde in
heauen. Finally, if you be a chriſtian remember
the reſurrection of thy mayſter
Ieſus Chriſt:Colloſſ. 3. and what of that? if you be
riſen with Chriſt (ſayth Peter) ſeeke thoſe
thinges that are aboue, where Chriſt ſitteth
at the right hand of God, I would
to God we were as prouident and carefull
to prouide foode for our ſoules, as
brute beaſtes are vigilant and paynefull,
to lay vp foode for theyr bodies. The
Emmot doeth lay vp in ſommer, foode
for winter.Adelp. 
               Iſtuc eſt ſapere (ſayth Syrus
in Terence) non quod ante pedes modo eſt,
videre: ſed etiam illa quae futura ſunt. This
is wiſedome, not to ſee thoſe things only
which lye before our feete, but to fore
ſee thinges that are to come.Ariſt. hiſt. animall. 40. But as the
fiſhe called Vrlica feedeth alwayes on a
ſtone, and being taken from the ſtone,
dyeth preſently: ſo we doe ſo cleaue vnto

to ſtones vntoo earthly thinges that
wee account life loſt, if they bee taken
from vs, or wee from them. Nay I
woulde to GOD wee did not thinke
theſe corruptible thinges, to bee meete
meate,Luk. 12. and ſufficient food for our ſoules:
and ſay with the rich mans ſoule, thou
haſt much goodes layde vppe for many
yeeres, liue at eaſe, eate, drinke, and take
thy paſtime. But hearken, O foole this
night perhaps thy ſoule ſhalbe taken frō
thee. O foole, thou heapeſt vp riches, and
canſt not tell who ſhalbe thine heire. O
foole,2. Chro. 12. Solomon made ſhields of gold, but
Rehoboam his ſonne,Iob. 10. made thē of braſſe
O foole, in one day the Arabians tooke
away Iobs oxen and his Aſſes, the fire of
God burnt vp his ſheepe & his ſeruants:
the Caldeans tooke away his cammelles
and ſlew his men. O foole it is more eaſie
for a cammell to goe thorowe the eye
of a needle, then for one that truſteth in
his riches to come to heauen: O foole
what ſhall it profit thee to win the whole
world, & looſe thine owne ſoule? O foole
what recompence canſt thou make to redreſſe
thy ſoule? o foole, thou art not aſſured
whether thou ſhall liue one houre

O foole, where thy treaſure is, there will
thy heart be alſo.Iames. 5. Goe to nowe yee riche
men (ſayth S. Iames) weepe and houle
for the miſeries, that ſhall come vppon,
you, your riches are corrupt, your garments
are motheaten, your gold and ſiluer
is cancred, and the ruſt of them ſhalbe
a witnes againſt you, & ſhall eate your
fleſh as it were fire, you haue heaped vpp
treaſures for the laſt dayes. Take heede O
yee rich and mighty, you ſee your calling,
howe that not many wiſe men after the
fleſh,1. Cor. 1 not many mighty, not many noble
are called, but God hath choſen the fooliſh
of this world to ouerthrow the wiſe,
the weake too confounde the ſtronger.
Why? that no fleſh ſhould reioyce in his
preſence. What then? that he that reioyceth,
ſhould reioyce in the Lord. Whom
did the Lord chooſe for a captaine? No
expert ſouldiour. but Gedeon a threſher:
whō made he ruler ouer Pharaos houſe?
none of the nobles, but Ioſeph a bonde
ſeruāt, whō made hee the firſt king of Iuda?
not any of a great houſe, but Saule of
the little tribe of Gemini, and of the
leaſt familie in the tribe. Whom made
hee to rule his people after Saule? no

Prince, but Dauid a ſhephearde: whom
had he to be his Prophet? None of their
Doctors, but Amos an heardman. Whō
had Chriſt to his diſciples? No ſcribes,
but ſimple fiſhers. Many widowes were
in Iſrael in the dayes of Elias, to none of
them was he ſent, but to a poore widowe
in Sarepta. To whom was the newes of
Chriſt his birth firſt brought? not to Herode,
not to Pilate, not Annas or Caiphas
but to ſhepheardes, yea, and very poore
ſhepheards, for they kept their ſheepe in
the field all night. God woulde not haue
his Altar made in a kinges court, but in
poore Oruan his threſhing flowre: the
Lorde would not haue his temple in Euphrata,
a plentiful ſoyle but in the wood,
a barren wilderneſſe. This was done that
God might haue al the glory. Of Sara being
barren came Iſaack: of Annah, whoſe
wombe was dead, came Samuel: of Elizabeth,
with whom it had ceaſed to be after
the maner of women, came Iohn Baptiſt.
And this was done, that GOD might
haue all the glory. The Lorde gate victories
for his people, with an Oxe goade,
with pitchers, with Rāmes hornes, with

a iawe bone of an aſſe, with one ſword,
with a ſtone out of a ſling, and this was
done that GOD might haue all the
glorie. Diſeaſes were healed by ſpittle,
by touching the hemme of a garment,
by a napkin, by a ſhadow, and this was
doone that GOD might haue all the
glorie.
            For there was no vertue in Shamgars
oxe goade, nor in Ionathans ſworde, nor
in Sampſons Iawe bone, nor in Dauids
ſtone, wherewith they ouercame the Philiſtines:
no vertue in Gedeons pitchers,
wherewith he ouercame Oreb and Zeb:
no power in the Trumpets of Rammes
hornes, wherewith the walles of Iericho
fell downe: there was no vertue eyther
in the hem of Chriſtes garment, or in his
ſpittle or in Paules napkin, or in Peters
ſhadowe, wherewith diſeaſes were cured:
no vertue in Aarons rod, wherewith the
duſt of Egypt was turned into lice: no
power in Moſes hand, wherewith the red
ſea was deuided: no vertue in the Prieſts
feete or Elias his mantle, wherewith Iordane
was deuided: yet all theſe thinges
were done by ſuch bare, baſe, weake, &

ſimple meanes, that no man ſhould truſt
in the arme of fleſh, that no man ſhould
ſeeke for any meate, that periſheth, and
that God in all things might only haue
the glory. Let vs now call to mind thoſe
excellent names and titles, wherwith the
holy Ghoſt in the holy bible doth name
vs: the remembrance and conſideration
whereof will ſomwhat withdrawe vs
from labouring for that meate, which
periſheth. Wee are called Angelles and
Saintes, Prieſtes, and a kingely prieſthoode.
Kinges, and a royall nation: ſeruauntes
of GOD, friendes of God,
ſonnes of God, heyres of GOD, and
fellowe heyres with Ieſus Chriſt: are
wee Angelles and Saintes? let vs then
ſeeke the thinges that are aboue. Are
we Prieſtes, and a kingly Prieſthoode?
let vs then offer vp our bodyes, a liuely
ſacrifice, and not labour for the meat
thereof. Are we kinges, and a royall
nation? let vs then lift vp our eyes to
heauen, and not caſt our faces down
to the earth: lyke abiectes and bondeſlaues.
Are we ſeruantes of God? wee
cannot ſerue God and riches. Are wee

friendes of God? the friendſhippe of
this worlde, is enmitie with God. Are
we ſonnes of God, heires of God, and
fellowe heires with Ieſus Chriſt? let vs
then with our brother the prodigal ſon
come home from feeding of ſwine, that
we may haue the beſt robe on our back,
a ring on our finger, ſhooes on our feet,
the fatte calfe killed for vs, to eate and
drinke, to ſinge, daunce, and be merye
with our elder brother Ieſus Chriſte,
who ſitteth in that houſe, which hath
many manſions, preparing roome for
vs. We were chaf, but now we are wheat:
we were droſſe, but now we are golde:
we were rauens, but now we are doues:
wee were goates, but now we are ſheep:
we were thornes, now we are grapes: we
were thiſtels, now we are lillies: we were
ſtraungers, nowe are we citizens: wee
were harlots, now are we virgins? hell
was our inheritaunce, nowe heauen is
our poſſeſſion: we were the children of
wrath, we are the ſons of mercie: Finally
we were bondſlaues to Satan, but nowe
we are heires of God, and coheires with
Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               
We were once fet home, from going
aſtray, let vs not agayne returne to the
wilderneſſe: the candel was once lighted
for vs, let vs not againe fall into darke
holes: wine & oyle were once powred into
our woundes, let vs not by wandring,
fal again into hands of theeues. We were
once founde: let vs not agayne looſe our
ſelues. Wee were once made aliue, let vs
not againe kil our ſelues. Chriſt was once
crucified for vs,Heb. 13. that we ſhould onely reioyce
in the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, whereby
the worlde is crucified to vs, and we to
the world, let vs not crucifie to our ſelues
again the ſonne of God, & make a mock
of him. The bodies of thoſe beaſts, whoſe
blood was brought into the holy place
by the hie prieſte for ſinne, were burnt
without the campe: therefore euen Ieſus,
that he might ſāctifie the people with his
owne blood, ſuffered without the gate.
What is this to vs? let vs therefore (ſaith
the Apoſtle) goe forth to him out of the
campe, for here haue we no continuyng
citie, but we looke for one to come. Wilt
thou (O man) go forth out of the camp?
Labour not ſo much to prouide meat for

the campe. The workes of the fleſhe are
manifeſt:Gal. 5. as gluttony, dronkenneſſe, &c.
They that doe ſuch thinges, ſhall neuer
inherit the kingdome of God. The
fruite of the ſpirite is temperancie, and
ſuch like, againſt ſuch there is no lawe:
For they that are Chriſtes, haue crucified
the fleſhe, with the affections, and the
luſtes: if wee liue in the ſpirite, let vs
alſo walke in the ſpirit. Woe be to you,
(ſaieth Eſay) that ryſe, to followe after
dronkenneſſe, and are ſtrong to drinke
wine.Eſai. 5. Wilt thou reſiſt the diuell? be ſober,1 Pet. 5.
and watch, ſaieth Peter: beware, take
heed (ſaieth our Sauiour) leaſt your harts
be ouerloaden with ſurfaiting and droukenneſſe,
and that ayde come on you
vnawares. Let vs then remember the
time that we are in, and the conſideration
hereof ſhall call vs from labouring
for this meate.1. Theſ. 5. Wee are not children of
the night, nor of the darknes, that that
day ſhould come on vs, as a thiefe: wee
are children of the day, and of the light:
therefore let vs not ſleepe, as other doe:
but let vs watch, and be ſober. For they
that ſleepe, ſleepe in the night, and they

that bee dronken, are dronken in the
night: but let vs, which are of the day
be ſober, conſidering the ſeaſon, it is
nowe time that wee ſhoulde ariſe from
ſleepe: for now is our ſaluation neerer,
thē whē we beleued it: the night is paſt,
and the day is come,Rom. 13. let vs therfore caſt
away the works of darkenes, & put on
vs the armour of light: ſo that we walk
honeſtly, as in the day, not in gluttony
and drunkenneſſe, not in chambering
and wantonneſſe, not in ſtrife and enuiing,
but put on the Lorde Ieſus Chriſt,
and take no thought for the fleſh, to fulfill
the luſts of it. Conſider the time, for
the deuill knoweth his time to be ſhort,
the yeares of his leaſe are now almoſte
expired, therfore now he will make hauocke.
Conſider the time: for the day of
the Lorde is at hand, let vs waite for his
cōming. Cōſider the time, we haue had
the Goſpel theſe xxii. ful yeres: by reaſō
now we ſhould be able to be taken for
tutors, to teach and gouern our ſelues.
The ſunne ſtoode ſtill in the middeſt of
heauen for a whole day, in the dayes
of Ioſua: neuer ſuch a daye of light,

as was in the dayes of Ioſua. The ſonne
of God hath holden his ſunn ouer this
Realm a long time, neuer ſuch a time of
light, as hath beene in the dayes of Elizabeth.
Many haue deſired to ſee that we
ſee, and could not ſee them: & to heare
thoſe thinges that we heare, but could
not heare them. But yet beholde, the
Niniuites, ſhall riſe, and ſhalbe able to
condemne vs: for they repented at three
dayes preaching. If ſuch preaching had
beene in Tyrus and Sydon, in Sodoma,
& Gomorrha, in the new found landes,
as hath beene in England, they woulde
haue brought forth more fruite of repentaunce,
then we haue done. Let vs
therefore (for it is time) with weeping
and faſting turne to the Lord our God.
The Iewes in token of contrition and
true repentaunce, did ſometimes were
ſackloth, ſometime tumbled in aſhes,
ſōtime did lye on the ground, rent their
cloths, ſhaued their heds, & powred out
water before the Lord, ſignifying that
they were like vnto water, which being
powred out, is troden vnder foote, runneth
away, and is dryed vp.
            Let vs rente our heartes,1. Sam. 7. and not

our garmentes, put on ſobrietie, and not
ſackloth, tumble in heauines, and not in
aſhes, lye in mourning, and not on the
ground: cut of the foreskin of our harts,
and not ſhaue the hayre of our heades:
powre teares out of our eies, and not
water out of buckets: let vs weepe, as
Ezechias wept, who turned his face to
the wall, and wept heauily: as Mary,
who fell downe behinde Ieſus, and wept
pitifully: as Peter, who remembring the
wordes of Chriſt, went out and wepte
bitterly. Wee are not commaunded to
faſt, eyther fortie dayes, as Moſes before
the law, as Elyas vnder the law, as Chriſt
after the lawe, or ſuperſtitiouſly, or hipocritically,
as the Papiſtes doe: but that
euery man may truly ſay with Paule:1. Cor. 9 I
chaſtiſe my body, & bring it vnder ſubiection
leaſt when I haue preached to others,
I my ſelfe become a caſtaway. The
Lorde will prouide for them that ſeeke
him.Marc. 8. The multitud was with Chriſt three
dayes, and had nothing to eate, yet they
were not hungry: bee ſtrong then, O
Sampſon, a dry iaw bone ſhall giue thee
water, before thou periſh: Faint not O

Iſrael, the Lord ſhall turne the hard rock
into a ſtanding water, and the flinte into
a ſpringing well, before thou periſh: diſpayre
not, Elyas, the Angelles of heauen,
the Rauens of the ayre ſhall feede
thee, before thou periſh. Die not, O
Daniel, if none in Babilon wil pitie thee.
Abacucke ſhalbe brought out of Iewrie
to bring thee meate, before thou periſh:
You cannot adde one cubit to your ſtature,
after this meat the Gentles labour▪
a ſparrowe doeth not fall downe to the
ground, without Gods prouidence, all
the hayres of your head are numbred. I
haue beene young, and now I am olde,
(ſayeth Dauid) yet I neuer ſawe the righteous
forſaken, nor his ſeede to begge
their bread. O care not then for to morowe,
the morowe ſhall care for it ſelfe:

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                The
day hath enough with his owne griefe
Let vs now examine our ſelues,Whether we labor for this meat, or noe. whether
we labour for this meate, or noe. And ſo
I come to my third part.
            If we conſider the great and gratious
benefits, wherewith God hath bleſſed
England: as peace, wealth, health, libertie,

plentie, victorie, the Goſpell, Preachers,
Gouernours, ſo noble and wiſe
counſaylours, ſo godly and ſo zealous a
Princes: England hath receiued much:
therefore of England much ſhalbe required.
England is not able to render (I
appeale to euery mans conſcience) one
for a thouſand, therfore is England very
much indebtted. O London, daughter
of England, thy ſiluer is become droſſe,
thy wheate, chaffe, thy gold, yron, thy
wine water, thy grapes, thorns, thy figs,
thiſtels: yet thou art taught the will of
thy father more then other thy ſiſters
of England: therfore, O London, with
many ſtripes (vnleſſe the Lord turne to
thee, & thou to him) and that ſhortely,
thou muſt needes be puniſhed. For we
al doe ſo draw iniquitie, with cordes of
vanitie, and ſinne, as with cart ropes, we
ſo ſtaine our ſelues with our own works
and goe a whoring with our owne inuentions:
as Iob in body, ſo we in ſoule
are ſo ſicke from the ſoule of the foote,
to the crowne of the head, that (had not
the Lorde reſerued a remnant amongſt
vs, had not oftentimes Aaron & Moſes,

Phinehes and Heſter ſtoode in the gap)
England ſhould haue beene, not like a
cottage in a vinyard, not like a lodge in
a gardē of coucumbers, but ſhould haue
beene as Sodom, and like vnto Gomorrha.
The Lorde may nowe iuſtly ſay to
England, as hee ſomtimes ſpake vnto
Babylon.Iſay. 47. Come downe, and ſit in the
duſt, O daughter Englande, thou ſhalt
no more be called tender, and delicate,
take the milſtones, & grind meale, looſe
thy lockes, make bare thy feete, vncouer
thy legs and thighs, paſſe through
the floodes, thy filthineſſe ſhalbe diſcouered,
thy ſhame ſhalbe ſeene, I will take
vengeaunce, and will not meete thee as
a man: for God hath not dealt ſo with
any nation, neither hath Aſia, Africa,
America, and the moſt parte of Europa
ſuch knowledge and preaching of his
lawes. England hath not drunken at the
hand of the Lord, the cup of his wrath,
the dregs of trembling, as France, Flanders,
and other her ſiſters haue done:
Yet beholde Engelande doeth ſtill
heape vp vengeaunce againſt the day of

vengeaunce▪ and doth not conſider, that
the long ſuffering of the Lord doth lead
herevnto repentance. If England would
repent, the Lord wold continue to bleſſe
her, to giue her victories ouer her enemies,
that neither opē enemies abrode,
nor priuy cōſpirators at hōe, ſhalbe able
to doe her violence. Siſera by Deborah,
a woman, ſhall haue a nayle knockt into
his skull. Holofernes by Iudith, a woman,
ſhal haue his head cut off. Abimelech
by a woman, ſhall haue a peece of a
milſtone breake his brainepan. By Elizabeth,
a woman, the Goates of Italy.
The wolues of Spaine, the cormorantes
of Rome. The Iriſh coltes, and the Foxes
of England, that are now in Ireland,
and all other her enemies ſhall ſo bee
brought to ſhame, that as Abimilech
cryed: O kill mee my page, that it bee
not ſayde,Iudg. 9. a woman hath ſlaine Abimelech:
ſo ſhall they cry, O kill vs, earth
deuoure vs, hilles couer vs, Sea ſwallowe
vs vp, that it be not ſayd, a woman
hath thus triumphed ouer vs. Let praiſe
& giuinges thankes, as a ſweet odorifferous
ſauour aſſend into the noſtrelles of

the Lord of hoſtes, for the victorie that
lately hee hath giuen to vs in Ireland.
Goe tell them, (if they haue any friende
heere) that thoſe Goates, Wolues, cormorantes,
Coltes, Foxes, ſhalbe ſo hunted
and bayted by an Engliſh Gray, that
not one of them ſhall be left to piſſe againſt
a wall. And wee ſaye, that Chriſt
ſpake of Herod, goe tell that Foxe, that
lyeth hidden, wee preach to day, yeſterday,
to morow, and will preache, vntill
the houſe of the Lorde bee made perfect.
God graunt we may ſo doe. This
is our hope, that though the Kinges of
the earth ſtand vp together againſt the
Lorde, and his annoynted ſeruaunt Elizabeth,
though they rore like Lions, and
ſtampe like fatte bulles of Baſhan: yet
the Lorde ſhall bruſe them with a rodde
of yron, and breake them in peeces, like
a potters veſſel. They ſhall bee like water
that runneth a pace, like a ſnaile, like the
vntimely fruite of a woman, lyke a tottering
wal, like a broken hedge: the lord
ſhal awake out of ſleep, as a giant refreſhed
with wine, & ſhal put them to a perpetual
ſhame. Ieroboā ſhal not be able to

pul in his hād: Iezabel ſhalbe hurled out
at a windowe: Ahab ſhalbe a portion for
dogs: The Lord ſhal ſo fight for England,
(if we repent) that his ſword ſhal ſurfeite
with fleſh, & his arrowes ſhalbe drunken
with blood. Wherefore (O England) I
woulde to God all England hearde my
voyce (& I would my voyce might ſinke
into your hearts, as it doth found in your
eares) It is time to leaue of labouring for
worldly pelfe, and to take the bread and
water of afflictiō with Michaiah:2. Reg. 22. to mingle
thy breade with aſhes, and thy drinke
with weeping, with Dauid: & to eate the
bread of Barley and beanes with Ezechiel.Ezech. 4.
As our Sauiour ſpake to the Iewes
of the Scribes and Phariſies, ſo ſay I to
you of the Papiſtes. Vnleſſe your righteouſneſſe
exceede the righteouſneſſe of
the Scribes and Phariſies, I meane Papiſtes
and Romaniſtes. You ſhall neuer
enter into the kingdome of GOD.
But alas for pitie, alas for ſhame, are not
many that beare the name of Proteſtantes,
and Goſpellers, inferiour too
them? We vſe our libertie as a cloake
of looſeneſſe, wee turne the grace of
God into wantonneſſe, and the glorious

goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt into lewdneſſe.
Are not wee come from the exceſſe, to
the defect? from blinde zeale, to wilfull
vngodlineſſe? from ignoraunce in darkneſſe,
to wickedneſſe in knoweledge?
from many Gods, to noe God? from
papiſme, to Athiſme? from ſuperſtition,
to irreligion? they did faſt often, we ſeldome:
they came to the Church in the
night, we ſcarſe in the day: they gaue
almes, we liue to our ſelues. I condemne
not al, I ſpeake of many. Did the Papſtes
theſe things for merit, for deſert, for ſatiſfaction,
& ſhould not we doe them of dutie,
of pittie, of pietie and charitie? They
did bona, but not bene: good things, but
to an ill ende. We now know what is bene,
let vs doe bona. Did they theſe things
in darknes? ſhould not wee doe them in
light? they in the night, & not we in the
day? they in blindnes, not we in knoweledge?
they in ſuperſtition, & not we in
religion? they to an ill end, & not we to a
good end? they at the commaundement
of man, of the Pope: not wee at the
commaundement of God, of Chriſte?
Nay, this is the ſaying of the worlde:

Doeth he frequent the Church? he is an
hypocrite: doeth he faſt? he wilbe ſaued
by his workes. Doth he giue almes? he is
a Papiſt. O miſerable worlde, wherein
prayer is counted hypocriſie: zeale is
counted folly: faſting and almes deedes
are counted poperie. But what is the
cauſe of this? becauſe we all labour for
that meate which periſheth. Do not the
Papiſts call vs looſe libertines, carnall
Goſpellers, wanton Epicures? doe not
they in their motions make this an
argument, to proue that they haue the
true Church? becauſe they faſt, praye,
giue almes more then wee: becauſe by
Papiſts, colledges haue beene founded,
churches erected, ſcholes builded, and
almes houſes ſet vp, and maintained: O
happy were we (for great ſhould our rewarde
be in heauen) if for the name of
Chriſt onely we were euil ſpoken of: but
if we contemne prayer, deſpiſe faſting,
abhorre almes deedes, pull from churches,
defraud the miniſters, throw down
almes houſes, gape after colledge lands,
pluck at their formes (as it is too true in
many Engliſhmē at this day) then I muſt

ſay, O miſerable wretches. Propter nos
male audit nomen Dei inter Gentes, inter
Papiſtas. By reaſō of vs the name of God
is blaſphemed among the Gentiles, among
the Papiſtes. Let our Sauiour Ieſus
counſaile vs: make you bags, which
waxe not olde, a treaſure that can neuer
fayle in heauen: let Paule giue you reaſons.
Firſt, godlynes is great gaine, if a
man be content with that hee hath. Secondly,
wee brought nothing into this
worlde, neither ſhall wee cary any thing
out.Luk. 12 Thirdly, they that wilbe rich, fal into
temptation,1. Tim. 6. & ſnares, & into many fooliſh
& noiſome luſts, which drown men
in perditiō & deſtruction. 4. the deſire of
mony is the roote of al euil, which while
ſome luſted after, they erred from the
faith, and pearced themſelues thorough
with many ſorowes. But I heare you ſay,
we labour for the meate of the ſoule: we
heare the word, we loue the Goſpel, we
imbrace the preachers thereof, we haue
forſaken the Popes yoke, and caſt of the
whores marke. I woulde to God many
did not ſo: euen for the meate that periſheth,
to keep their lāds, houſes, liuings,

libertie, countenance? the Goſpell hath
peace, quietnes, fruition of goodes▪ and
lands, I wil therfore be a Goſpeller. Satā
was deceiued in Iob. I fear, that if I ſhuld
ſay, as he ſaide, I ſhould not altogether
erre, I wold, I might▪ lord, doth this people
feare thee for nought? haſt not thou
made an hedge about them, made their
houſe, made their ſubſtance to increaſe
in the land? but ſtretch forth thine hand
and trouble that they haue, & they will
curſe thee to thy face. A man, & ſo God
may haue many friends in time of peace
& proſperitie: but in time of aduerſitie
& perſecutiō, thē is a friend tried. Wheat
& chaff wil go together, vntil they come
to the flayle: golde and droſſe will goe
together, vntill they come to the fire:
ruſt and yron will goe together, vntill
they come to the ſcourer: but then farewell
wheate, and farewel chaffe: farewel
gold, and farewel droſſe: farewell ruſt,
and farewell yron.Actes. 19. Are not now many
zealous for the Goſpell, as Demetrius
the ſiluer ſmith was hot in mainteining
Diana? was he ſo zealous, becauſe hee

loued Diana, or her religion? No, no:
but becauſe (as he confeſſed) he had his
liuing by making of ſhrines for the goddeſſe.
The young man wil folow Chriſt,
vntill he come to this, fell thy goodes:
then farewell Chriſt: take vp your croſſes
(ſaieth Chriſt) lay down your purſes,
and folow me. Why were the Prieſts of
Babilon (marke whether this bee not
true in the prieſts of Rome) ſo furious
againſt Daniell, ſpeaking againſt Bell?
was it for loue and zeale they bare to
Bell? no, no: there was ſpent vpon Bell
euery night 108. gallons of fine flowre,
40. ſheepe, and 60. gallons of wine. The
Prieſtes ſhould haue loſt this, if Bell had
gone down. This was the cauſe of their
fury zeale. They ſerued God Bell in the
day, but God belly in the night: wee
ſerue God belly day and night: they
ſayde: great art thou, O Bell, and with
thee there is no deceite: We cry, great
art thou O belly, and with thee there
is no deceite, thou eateſt vp all. Philopenus
is nowe euery where, who

deſired hee might haue a necke as long
as a Cranes necke. But where is Peter,
Andrew, Iames, Iohn, Mathew, who forſooke
all, and followed Chriſt? Yea, but
Zacheus gaue but halfe his goods to the
poore:De Zacheo. why did he not geue al? Becauſe
(as Chriſoſtome noteth) the other halfe
he reſerued, to render foure folde, if hee
had defrauded any man, as hee himſelfe
promiſed. Nay Chriſt ſhalbee welcome
among the Gergeſens,Math. 8. but if they looſe
an hogge, I pray you ſir departe, your
roome is better than your companie.
Great was the loue and zeale of Ornam,
who gaue bullockes to Dauid, and made
fire with his threſhing inſtrumēts.
                  
                     •
                  . Chro. 21. Great
was the loue and zeale of Elizeus, who,
when Elias called him,
                  
                     •
                  . Reg. 19. ſlewe oxen, & did
ſeeth them, with the inſtrumentes of the
oxen. But we muſt doe more then this, if
our right hand, or eye offend vs, we muſt
cut them off, and pull them out.
            What ſhall I ſay? the end of the world
muſt needs be at hand, becauſe that men
doe ſo loue thēſelues. To heare of warres
(ſaith our Sauiour) to haue peſtilence,Math. 24. famine,
earthquakes, theſe are but the beginnings

of ſorowe, but when beſides
theſe, iniquitie ſhal haue the vpper hand,
and the loue of men ſhall fayle, then behold
he is at the doores. In that the preachers
of gods word are ſo neglected, and
ſo litle prouided for,2. Reg. 18. doth proue that the
Lord is at hand, and wil ſhortly take vengeance.
I would all Magiſtrates, and Patrones
of benefices would folow the example
of good king Ezechias, who in the
firſt yeeare, yea, the firſt moneth of his
reigne, did command the people to giue
a part to the Prieſtes & Leuites, that they
might be encouraged in the lawe of the
Lorde. Liuinges are not geuen, they are
ſolde as common as oyſters at Byllingesgate.
This is the cauſe that Miniſters are
not, nor cannot be ſo liberal, as their predeceſſors
haue been: yea, this is the cauſe
why doltes, ignorant Aſſes, idle, & idole
Shepheardes haue the liuinges. I call thē
Idols: I wil proue it. They haue eyes and
ſee not, eares and heare not, handes and
miniſter not, tongues and ſpeake not: I
was about to ſay, they haue mouthes &
eate not, but then I ſhoulde haue ſlaundered
them: In this I confeſſe they are

not Idols. A good ſcholer, and an honeſt
godlie miniſter, will rather beg, then buy
your liuinges, O yee robbe Churches,
whoſe portion ſhalbe fire and brimſtone
too drinke: for you are the cauſes, why
many thouſands of ſoules haue periſhed:
of you, O the benefice mongers, ſhall be
required, not hand, for hand, or eye for
eye: but blood for blood, life for life,
and ſoule for ſoule. You make the miniſters
your ſeruing men, you make them
iourney men, they haue the name, you
haue the profite, they the ſtraw, but you
haue the corne, nay you haue ſome ſtraw
alſo. I could ſomwhat beare this, if here
by, they for whom Chriſt died, were not
famiſhed: therefore in bitterneſſe of
ſpirite, in griefe of hearte, in vexation of
conſcience, and in torment of my ſoule,
I ſpeake it: that euen nowe I doe ſee
as it were, Pharaoh king of Egypt riſing
vppe to condemne you. Who
when hee ſolde all the lande of Egypt,
gaue ſtraight commaundement, that
no one foote of the Prieſtes landes
ſhoulde bee ſolde.Gen. 47. Reade the hyſtorie.
Hadd hee ſuche care for Idolatrous

Prieſtes, and haue you no more care for
the Miniſters of Ieſus Chriſt? Are you
Proteſtantes, you Goſpellers, you Chriſtians?
You are Athiſtes, Epicures,
that ſay in your hearts there is no God.
But perhaps fewe are heere of whom
I ſpeake: let me vtter a few words to you
merchant men, whom I ſee preſent, and
ſo I will end. Although Mercurie, (who
was ſuppoſed to bee the God of merchants,)
had winges on his feet, and had
alwayes a cocke by his ſide, to ſignifie
that merchantes ſhoulde be ſwift in their
buſineſſe, ſhould be vigilant as the cock,
or riſe at the cocke crowing: yet labour
not to greedily, to carefully for this meat
for as the good hath in one hand a ſcepter
to giue kingdōs, wealth, & riches: ſo
he is pictured to haue in his other hand
a rod wrapt in ſnaks, to giue poyſon, ruine
and death: beware, leaſt while you
gape for the ſcepter, you receiue ſnakes.
And although your GOD is ſaide to
haue kylled Argos, who had a hundred
eies: leaſt Argos ſhoulde perceiue the
vniuſt dealying of the Merchauntes,
yet the Lorde your GOD lyueth,

who ſearcheth the corners, ſeeth the
bottome, heareth the motions, and
vnderſtandeth the thoughtes of your
heartes. But what ſayeth the Prophet?
All men ſhoulde prayſe the Lorde, but
aboue all other, merchantes are bound
to performe the ſame. For (ſayeth hee)
they that goe downe to the Sea in ſhips,Pſal. 107.
and occupie their buſineſſe in greate
waters, theſe men ſee the woorkes of
the Lord, and his woonders in the deepe.
And when there hee hath fully deſcribed
the woonders and woorkes of the Lorde
that they ſee, hee thus concludeth with
a vehement exhortation: O that men
woulde therefore prayſe the Lorde for
his goodneſſe, and declare the woonders
that hee hath done for the ſonnes
of men. Twoo thinges are required of
you (O yee Merchauntes) to prayſe the
Lorde, and too declare his woonders,
that you haue ſeene. vnto others. Forſake
not the Lorde by goyng too your
ſhippes: Remember the ſhippe that Ionas
was in. Beware howe you haue felowſhippe
with heathen men, with Infidels,

Athiſtes, and Papiſtes: becauſe Iehoſophat
king of Iuda,2. Chro. 20. ioyned with Ahaziah
king of Iſrael, to ſende ſhippes too
Tarſhiſh for gold, he was reprehended by
Eliezer, and his ſhippes were broken.
Take Chriſte into your ſhippes: when
Chriſt was not in the ſhippe with his
Diſciples, the ſhippe was almoſt drowned.
If Chriſt be in your ſhippe, let him
not ſleepe there: when he ſlept, the ſhipp
had almoſt periſhed. Keepe him waking
with prayer: ſinging with melodie in
your heartes too the Lorde. To conclude,
labour not for the meate which
periſheth: for then you ſhall periſh, but
labour for that meate which doth endure
vnto euerlaſting life: for then the
ſonne of man ſhall geue you euerlaſting
life: for hee is a Lambe, and hee is a Lion:
hee is a friend, and hee is a foe: hee
is a Ieſus, hee is a iudge, he is a Redeemer,
hee is a confounder: hee will not
bruiſe a broken reede hee will bruiſe
with a rodde of yron: hee hath water,
hee hath fire: hee hath heauen, hee
hath hell: hee hath Angels, he hath diuels:
he hath a ſcepter, he hath a ſword:

hee hath Vae woe: hee hath Euge, go
too: he hath Benedicti, Bleſſed, he hath
Maledicti, Curſed: he hath Venite, come,
hee hath ite, goe: hee hath a right hand,
hee hath a left hand: he hath ioy, he hath
ſorrowe: hee hath mercy, hee hath vengeance:
he doth geue euerlaſting death,
and euerlaſting life, to him therefore
with the Father and the
holie Ghoſt be geuen all
honor glory, &c.
Amen.
            An ende of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            The ii. Sermon.
            
               LAbour not for the meat that periſheth. &c.
            
            
               FOraſmuche as I haue
ſhewed you the braod
way, where you ſhulde
not walke, & the wide
gate, where you ſhould
not enter: it is reaſon
that I declare the narrowe
way, where you ſhould tread, and
the ſtraight gate, where wee all deſire to
paſſe thorow. Behold I haue opened vnto
you the woorkes of darkneſſe, which
you muſt ca
                  ••
                of, nowe I will geue you
the armour of light, which you muſt put
on. I haue dehorted you, and I hope thorowly
diſſuaded you from labouring for
the meate that periſheth: Nowe in
the tender mercie of God, in the bowels,
blood and wounds of Ieſus Chriſt, I exhort
you, and I truſt, I ſhal thorowly perſwade
you too labour for that meate

which endureth vnto euerlaſting life.
Wherefore as our Sauiour reprehended
Martha,Luke. 10. beeing carefull about many
things, in preparing the dinner, not ſimply
reprehending eyther her labour, as
her hoſpitalitie, but reprehended her becauſe
ſhe did not conſider the time, wher
in Chriſt taught Mary, and offered too
teach her, and becauſe ſhee preferred the
dreſſing of the dinner, to the hearing of
Gods woord, and afterwarde exhorted
her too followe the example of her ſiſter
Mary, who had choſen the better parte,
which neuer ſhould bee taken from her.
So after that I haue proued that we ſhuld
not labour for the meat which periſheth,
and that wee all are too carefull for many
thinges, not conſidering the t
                  •
               me, wherin
our Sauiour doth ſo mercifully offer to
teach vs: I muſt exhort you to chooſe the
better parte, which neuer ſhall bee taken
from you, that is, to labour for that meat
which endureth vnto euerlaſting life. For
although the Lord did raine fleſh as thick
as duſt,Exod. 16. feathered foules as the ſande of
the ſea, and Manna as the hoare froſt: yet
he would haue euery man to labour, and

gather it, one houſe might not gather
it for an other, one man might not ſell
it, or giue it to another: euen ſo euery
man muſt labour for this meate, gather
it for himſelfe be it neuer ſo plentie,
being farre better then Manna: for
Manna melted when the ſun did ſhine,
but this Manna, though heauen and
earth ſhould be on fire, and burne to aſhes,
continueth euer, endureth vnto euerlaſting
life.2. Sam. 6. Although we need not go
ſeeke the arke of GOD,2. Reg. 22. as Dauid did,
nor the booke of the law, as Ioſias did:
nor goe vp to Ieruſalem to worſhip, as
the Iewes did, nor deſire that one might
come from the dead, and teach vs, as
the glutton did: we cannot ſay the law
is in the mount with Moſes, who ſhall
goe vp, and fet it? wee cannot ſay (as in
the dayes of Queene Mary wee might)
it is beyond the ſeas, who ſhal goe ouer
and bring it vnto vs? yet we muſt not
be idle, negligent and careleſſe, we muſt
labour for it, although the worde be very
neere vnto vs, euen in our mouths &
our harts for to doe it,Deut. 30. as Moſes ſpak to
the Iewes: though the Lord hath put his

lawes in our mindes, and in our hearts
hath written them, he our God, and we
his people: euery man doeth not (or
ſhould not neede) teach his neighbour,
nor euery man his brother, ſaying: know
the Lord: but all knowe him, from the
leaſt to the greateſt, as Ieremy prophecied:Iere. 31.
yet muſt we labour for this meate.
Though Elyas cannot now ſay, I am left
alone,1. Reg. 19. Achab cannot ſay, there is but
one Michiah beſides my 400. Prophets:1▪ Reg. 22▪
               
though Elyas haue not onely Elizeus
for his ſcholler: nor Elizeus onely Eſay:
nor Eſay onely Ieremy: nor Ieremy onely
Daniell: nor Daniell onely Aggeus,
and Zacharias, nor the Lorde onely xii.
Prophets that haue written, nor Chriſt
onely eleuen good Diſciples, but the
Lord hath giuen the worde, and great
is the company of the preachers: yet
we muſt labour for this meat. Although
the Miniſters are not ſcattered abroade,
as Iohn in Aſia, Peter in Samaria, Phillip
in Alexandria, Thomas in Aethiopia,
Bartholomewe in India, Andrew in Scythia,
Simon in Perſia, Iudas in Meſopotamia,

Marcus in Colonia, Nathanaell
in Fraunce,1. Theodoret. Ioſeph of Aramithia in
Scotland, and Paule in England: but
the vniuerſities, and other places are
full of them: yet muſt wee labour for
this meate.Exo. 2. Although the Midwiues
neede not feare the kinge of Aegypt to
hide Moſes three monethes,Ioſh. 2. and afterwarde
to caſt him out. Rahab need not
to feare the king of Ierico, to hyde the
ſpies vnder ſtalkes of flaxe, and let them
downe at her window.1. Sam. 19. Michael need
not feare her father Saule, to let her huſband
Dauid downe at a windowe, and
to lay an Image in his bead.1. Reg. 18▪
                Obadiah
need not feare Queene Iezabell, to hide
a hundred Prophets in a caue.Act. 9. The Diſciples
need not feare the hye Prieſtes to
let downe Paule thorowe the wall, by
a rope, in a basket. Moſes need not
feare Pharao,Exod, 4▪
                and ſaye, I haue a
ſtutting tongue:Iere. 1. Ieremy need not
feare the Iewes, and ſaye, I am
a childe.Io. 1. Ionas need not feare the
King of Niniuie, and ſo for to runne

away both from him, & from the Lord:
but all the Miniſters of the Lorde are
mainteined, and preſerued: may vtter
the meſſage of their maſter, boldly with
out feare, and freely without daunger:
yet wee muſt labour for this meate, although
the Lorde hath broken the
bowe, and knapped the ſpeare in ſunder,
broken our ſwordes into mattocks,
and our ſpeares into ſithes: bleſſed
vs with the crowne of peace, and crowned
vs with mercie and louing kindnes:
yet muſt wee labour for this meate,Gene. 42. if it
were a time of derth, of ſcarcitie, of penurie,
thē we might haue ſome pretence
to labour for belly meate, as Iacob did
ſend into Aegypt for corne:1. Sam. 25. as Dauid
did ſend to Naball for victuall: then we
might ſeeme to haue ſome coulour of
cauſe to doubt. and to be ouer carefull,Num. 11.
as Moſes was, when he ſayde: ſhall the
ſheepe & thebeeues be ſlaine for them,
or ſhal al the fiſhe of the ſea bee gathered
for them, and ſuffiſe them? as King
Iehorams ſeruaunte, who mocked the
Prophet, prophecying the plentie of
corne to bee the next day? and ſayde,

though the Lorde woulde make windowes
in the heauen,2. Reg. 7. could this come
to paſſe? As Saint Andrew, who ſayde,
there is a little boy heere, which hath
fiue barly loaues, and two fiſhes, but
what are they amongſt ſo many?Io. 6. If I
ſay, we were brought into ſuch extremitie,
as they were, fleſhe and bloud
woulde be ready to doubt. But ſeeing
God hath bleſſed the fruite of our cattell,
the increaſe of our kine, the flockes
of our ſheepe, our basket, our dough,
ſeeing al his bleſſings are come vpon vs,
and ouertaken vs,Deut. 28. as hee promyſed to
them that feare him: why ſhould wee
labour to fulfill the luſtes of the fleſhe,
and take no care to prouide victuall for
our ſoules? I pray God thoſe things be
not the fall of England, which were the
vtter ruine of Sodome. They were iiii.
ſinnes:Ezech. 16. pride, pride aboundeth in England:
fulneſſe of bread, gluttony triumpheth
in England: idleneſſe: idleneſſe
is ſuccoured in Englande: contempt
of the poore, & beholde this ſin,

hath, as a Queene gottē the vpper hand
in England. Aboue all other vices. The
way to heauen is a narrow way, the gate
is a ſtraight gate: then wee muſt ſtriue
and labour to enter in. The kingdome
of heauē is a treaſure hid in the ground,
it is a pearle of great price in a far country:
then muſt we take our ſpade & dig:
then muſt we enter into ſhip, and paſſe
ouer the ſeas. We are in the Lords Vinyarde,
not they that ſleepe and are idle
ſhall haue their penny at night: but they
that worke and labour. Thou art promiſed
to haue, but thou muſt aske, and
haue: thou ſhalt finde, but thou muſt
ſeeke and finde: it ſhalbe opened vnto
thee, but thou muſt firſt knocke, and
then it ſhalbe opened. Knocke like the
womā of Canaan,Mat. 15▪
                who continued knocking,
although ſhee was three times repelled,
and the gate of mercie was ſhut
againſt her, not that ſhe ſhould not enter
in: but that with more earneſtnes,
deſire, and vehemencie ſhee myght
knocke, and euen prye thorowe the

chinkes of the gate: ſo muſt wee labour
by prayer for our meate, and though
we haue not our petitions at the firſt, ſecond,
and third knocking, yet we muſt
knocke:Act. 12. as Peter continued knocking
at the dore, before hee coulde come in.
Labour to ſee Chriſt,Luk. 19. as Zacheus, who,
being a man of worſhip, in the middes
of a citie, did climb vpon a wild Fig tree,
like a boy to ſee Chriſt, becauſe he was a
man of lowe ſtatute, and coulde not ſee
Chriſt for the preaſe.
            Let vs labour by fayth, as did the ſick
of the palſey, to come to Chriſt, who
ſeeing hee could not goe in at the dore,
for the multitude, was let down thorow
the roof of the houſe, which they vncouered.Mar. 2.
Let vs labor by faith to touch the
very hem of Chriſtes garment, as did
the woman, who had an iſſue of blood
twelue yeares, and had ſpente all her
money on Phiſitians.Mat. 9. If wee thus labour,
ſaluation wil come into Zacheus
houſe, the dropſie ſhall bee cured,
the iſſue of blood ſhalbe ſtopped. Remember
what a iorny the queen of Saba

tooke to come to heare the wiſedome of
Solomon:1. Reg. 10. Remember the trauell of the
Eunuche of Ethiopia, Candaces the
Queene of the Ethiopians chiefe gouernour,
who had the rule of al her treaſure,
and came to Hieruſalem to worſhip:Act. 8. Remember
the long iourney of the wiſemē
who came from the fartheſt parte of the
Eaſt to ſee Chriſt. The Iewes went vp euery
yeere to Hieruſalem,Mat. 2. the Papiſtes trauaile
farre and wide on Pilgrimage, to ſee
reliques, dead mens bones, monuments,
images, monaſteries, and ſuch like trumperie,
and they thinke theyr labour well
beſtowed.
            All theſe ſhall ryſe when the trumpet
ſhall ſound, and ſhalbe able to condemne
vs, if we will take no paines, ſuffer
no labour, moue ſcarſe a foote, to
heare the word of God, to receiue the
euerlaſting Nectar, and the heauenly
Ambroſia, to refreſh, to nouriſh, to cheriſh,
yea to preſerue our ſoules vnto euerlaſting
life. But what is meate in this
place? whatſoeuer pertaineth to the renuing
and amendment of this life, or to

The chiefeſt part wherof, is that, which
is hid from the wiſe and mightie of the
worlde, that which is receiued of the
poore and ſimple, that which is the
power of God vnto ſaluation, to euery
one that beleeueth the glorious Goſpel
of Ieſus Chriſt: and becauſe meat doth
not nouriſh a dead carcaſſe, we muſt labour
for fayth, the life of the ſoule: and
becauſe this meate cannot bee digeſted
in our ſoules, without the effectuall
operation of Gods ſpirit, we muſt
thirdly labour for the holy Ghoſt: who
is promiſed to be giuen to all them that
in a right and true prayer ſhall aske for
him of the Father in the name of the
ſonne, although hee deſcend not like a
doue,Mat. 3. as vpon our Sauiour, nor in the
forme of clouen and fierie tongues,Act. 2. as
vpon the Apoſtles. He is now to be ſent
not to be ſeen of our bodily eies: but into
our harts, where he cryeth, Abba, Father,
as the Apoſtle ſaith: becauſe we are
ſonnes,Gala. 4. God hath ſent forth the ſpirite
of his ſonne, into our heartes, which
cryeth, Abba, father. It is a true ſaying,
Bona magis carendo,
               Cicero. 
               quam fruendo ſentimus.
               
We better perceiue and feele the
commoditie of a thing, when we lacke
it, then when we haue it. For who doth
better conſider the benefit of the warm
fire, then he that is froſen with colde?
who doeth better thinke on the commoditie
of libertie, then the pryſoner?
who doeth better remember the vſe of
apparell, then he which is naked? who
doeth more eſteeme of meate, then hee
that is almoſt famiſhed? for after a
long colde winter, a little ſun ſhining is
fayre weather: after great ſorowe, one
dayes pleaſure is a paradiſe: after a long
bloody warre, a little peace is a merye
world: and after long hunger, browne
bread is good cheare.
            Now if wee could eyther thinke on
their extreame miſerie, who like the woman
of Canaan, like hungry dogs would
gladly picke vp the crummes, that fall
from our table, and can haue no more
of them, then the prodigall ſonne had
of the ſwines huskes: or at leaſt woulde
call to minde our owne miſerable famine,
when like poore Lazarus, wee lay

begging at the rich mans gate, dogges
hauing more mercy then men, and wee
no more ſatiſfied then Tantalus with his
apples. We would no doubt labour to
obtaine by Chriſt,Mat. 8. not houſes, or liuings
as that Scribe:Mat. 20. not to bee Lordes and
Dukes, as Iames and Iohn: not to haue
belly cheare, as in this place the Iewes
did: but for the meate of the ſoule,
which endureth vnto euerlaſting lyfe.
But what was our famine, how were
we vſed, or rather abuſed? Sower leauen
was put to our ſweete bread: Coloquintida
was caſt into our potage: chaf
thrown among our wheate: ſand mingled
with our dough: amongſt our gold
there was droſſe: wee had water for
wine: braſſe for ſiluer: the cuppe of the
whore, for the cup of the Lord: wormewoode,
for hony: gall for Manna: the
legende, for the Goſpell: wolues, for
ſhepheards: the inuentions of man, for
the commaundementes of God: man
for God: Antichriſt, for Chriſt: the ſon
of perdition, for the ſonne of GOD.
            Agayne, the worde was deliuered vnto

vs in a ſtraunge tongue: that neither
we could tel how to daunce, when
they blewe the pipe, nor how to behaue
our ſelues in battaile, when they did
ſound the trumpet:1. Cor. 14. neither the vnderſtanding
was bettered, nor the congregation
edified, nor the vnlearned, at
the giuing of thanks, coulde ſay Amen:
but they were Barbarians to vs, and we
Barbarians to them.
            Furthermore, the common people
might not reade the worde, they might
not once taſte of that heauenly foode,
vnleſſe the Prieſtes had firſt chewed it in
their own mouths: whoſe mouths were
full of bitterneſſe, whoſe throates were
open ſepulchres, whoſe teeth were venomous,
whoſe tongues were ful of deceite,
vnder whoſe lippes was the poyſon
of aſpes: who did eate vp the Lords
people as bread, whoſe feete were ſwift
to ſhedde the blood of Saints, but right
deare in the ſight of the Lorde is the
death of his Saintes.
            But why might not the people reade
the word, taſte this meate? they (forſooth)
gathered damnable errours, and

ſucked out thence deadly poyſon. Becauſe
our Sauiour ſayde:Mat. 13. it is giuen to
you to know the ſecreetes of the kingdome
of heauen, but to them it is not
giuen.Mat. 7. Becauſe hee ſayd again: giue not
that which is holy to dogges, neither
caſt ye your pearls before ſwine.
            Firſt,1. Chron. 13. I aunſwere, that Vzza for putting
forth his hande to holde the arke, when
the oxen did ſhake it,2. Chron. 26. died before the
Lorde: that Vzziah burned incenſe,
and was therefore ſtroken with a leproſie,
becauſe they vſurped the offices of
the Prieſtes and Leuites, contrary to the
expreſſe commaundement of God. But
if this was ſpoken to all,Io. 5. and be the dutie
of all Chriſtians, ſearche the ſcriptures.
I do not only ſay wo vnto thē, becauſe
they ſhut vp the kingdome of heauen
before men, they themſelues will
not goe in, nor ſuffer them to goe, that
would enter: but I exhorte them to remember
the blinde zeale of Chriſtes
Diſciples, in forbiddinge children to
come vnto him, rebuked: ſuffer little
children to come to mee, and forbidde
them not:Mat. 19. the blinde zeale of Ioſhua requeſting

Moſes to forbid Elead and Medad
to prophecie,Mat. 19. reprehended:Num. 11. I would
to God that all the Lords people were
Prophets.
            The blinde zeale of Iohn, willing
Chriſt to forbidde one to caſt out deuils
in his name,Luke. 9 miſliked, ſuffer him, hee
that is not againſt me, is with me. The
blind zeale of Nadab and Abihu, becauſe
they offered ſtraunge fire, condemned:
who becauſe they offered not
that fire, which came from heauen, but
ſtraunge fire, were deuoured of fire. An
euerlaſting fire is reſerued for thoſe,Leuit. 10.
which haue troaden vnder foote the
doctrin that came from heauen, & haue
brought in ſtraung doctrine, which neuer
was in heauen. As that fire, ſo this
meate came from heauen: in this they
differ, that fire endured onely to the
captiuitie of Babylon: but this meat endureth
vnto euerlaſting life. Wherfore,
though Peter, or Paule: though Gabriel,Gala. 10.
or Michael, Cherubim, or Seraphim,
teach any other thing, thē that we haue
receiued of the Lord, who came downe
from heauen, and brought this meate

from heauen, let him be accurſed: as I
ſaid before, ſo I ſay again: if any of theſe
bring any thing beſides that, which we
haue receiued of the Lord, let them, and
euery one of them, be accurſed. Secondly,
I anſwer, that though the ſpider doe
gather poyſon, where the Bee doth ſuck
hony, yet there is no poiſon in the ſweet
flower, but the corrupt humour that is
in the ſpyder, doth turne the ſweet iuyce
into poiſon: ſo there are no errours, nor
hereſies in the word of god, but the corrupt
& venomous nature of man, doth
turn the comfortable ſap of Gods word
into deadly poyſon. Now, if the ſpyder
gather poyſon, let not therfore the Bee
be driuen from the flowers: though the
ſons of Satan, doe gather errours, and
ſuck that which vnto them is poiſon: yet
let not therfore the children of GOD,
be forbidden to ſucke mylke, which
ſhall ſaue their ſoules. Chriſt is put both
for the fall, and alſo for the ryſing, agayne
of many in Iſraell:Luke. 2. he is a rock
to buylde on,2. Cor. 4. and hee is a ſtone that
will grind to powder:Mat. 21. if the Goſpell be
hid, it is hid to them that are loſt, it is

vnto ſome the ſauour of death,Rom. 9. vnto
death, to other ſome the ſauour of life
vnto lyfe. It is not giuen to them to
knowe the miſteries:Mat. 13. who are they, to
whom it is not giuen? it followeth, that
people, whoſe heart is waxed fat, whoſe
eares are dull of hearing, who winke
with their eies, leaſt with their eies they
ſhoulde ſee, and heare with their eares,
and vnderſtand with their heartes, and
ſhould returne, that I might heale them.
The Goſpell (ſaieth Paule) is the miſterie
hid ſince the world began, and from
all ages, but nowe is made manifeſt to
the Saintes of God, to whom GOD
would make knowne what is the riches
of his glorious miſterie among the gentiles.
Dogs muſt not haue that which is
holy. There is a dogge, which turneth about,
and teareth them that doe offer
holy thinges. Let not this dogge receiue
that holy thing. There is a dogge, that
cryeth with the woeman of Canaan,
trueth Lord, I confeſſe, that I am a dog,
yet the whelps may gather vp the crums
that fal frō the childrēs table: Chriſt wil
haue that holy thing to be giuen to this

dog. Caſt not pearls before ſwin. Truth,
if they bee foule, and treade them vnder
their feete, or if they bee waſht, and returne
backe too their wallowing in the
myre. But if wee which were ſwine, are
by the blood of Chriſte waſhed, and by
the water of regeneration ſanctified, &
of ſwine are made lambes, let vs haue
that pearl, we wil not tread it vnder our
feete. One Goſpell, yet diuerſly it worketh
in diuers mens heartes. Water wil
harden yron, and ſoften the earth. The
Sunne drieth clay, and melteth waxe:
the ſeede in good groūd, bringeth forth
increaſe: but ſowed among ſtones or
thornes, it bringeth foorth no fruit. The
fault is not in the ſeede, but in the ſoyle:
the Sunne to vs that haue cleare ſight is
comfortable: to the man that is poreblinde,
it is hurtfull. Blame not the
Sunne but the foole that will turne his
eyes towardes the Sunne. Suger to vs
that bee in health is ſweete: to the ſicke
of an Ague it is bitter: the Suger is not
bitter, his taſt is naught. Daintie meates
to ſome ſtomackes are wholeſome, to
others they are fulſome, the fault is not

in the meate, but in the ſtomacke. Euen
ſo Chriſte crucified, is to the Iewe
a ſtumbling blocke,1. Cor. 1. to the Grecian foliſhneſſe:
but to them that are called, he
is the power of God, and the wiſedome
of God: bee they Iew or Grecian, bond
or free, male or female. Wherefore,
thirdly I anſwere: though drunkardes
and toſſe pottes abuſe wine, yet wine is
profitable: though vſurers and couetous
men abuſe money, yet money is neceſſary:
though cutters and ſwinge-bucklers
abuſe weapons, yet weapons
are needfull. Right ſo, though the word
of God by Heretikes, and Athiſtes bee
abuſed, yet it is not to be forbidden. Becauſe
it giueth wiſedome euen vnto the
ſimple:Pſal. 119. becauſe it hath milke for babes,
and ſtrong meate for men: becauſe it is
a lanterne to our feet, and a light to our
pathes: becauſe it doth lightē vs that ſit
in darkneſſe, and in the ſhadow of death
and doth guide our feet into the way of
peace.Otho Cardinalis. Let them with Otho reaſon thus
abſurdly: the title ſet ouer Chriſts head
by pilat was written in Hebrew, Greek,

and Latine: therefore the worde muſte
be read in one of theſe tongues, wee
thus affirme:Gen. 19. that God, who did confounde
the tongues of all men at the
building of Babell, they before hauing
all one language: that God I ſay at the
beginning of the building of his church
did giue to his Apoſtles and ſeruantes,
not onely the knowledge of Hebrew,
Greeke, and Latine, but of all languages
in the worlde: that all tongues vnder
heauen, all nations vnder the Sunne
might, reade, heare, and pray, in their
owne language, in their owne mother
tongue.Cyprian. Wee therefore ſay with Cyprian
Non videndum eſt, quid aliqui ante
nos fecerunt, ſed quid ille, qui ante omnes
eſt, faciendum mandarit. We muſt not
care, what they haue doone which were
before vs: but what hee doeth commaund
to be doone, which was before
all. Let vs then remember our miſerable
eſtate, howe wee ſate downe and
wept, to remember Syon: howe we
ſought the word in ſtrange Countries,

howe the Goſpel was mingled with vanities:
how it was in a ſtrange language
how it was hid from the common people.
O let vs nowe then bee thankefull
vnto the Lorde, and that the world may
knowe that wee are thankefull, let vs
labour for that meate whiche indureth
vnto euerlaſting life.Iud. 16. As the Philiſtines
coulde not preuaile againſt Sampſon,
although his heyfer had betraied him,
and his hayre cut of, vntill they had
pluckt out his eies: ſo the Papiſtes could
by no means ſo ſone get the vpper hād,
as by pulling out the eyes of the people,
by taking from them their light, ſight,
knowledge, and vnderſtanding, making
them blinde,Marke. 8. not as whelpes, whiche ſee
after ix. dayes, not as the blinde man,
who ſawe men as trees: not as Paule
whoſe eies were open, yet ſawe nothing
by reaſon of his ſcales: but as blinde as
Moles,Gen. 19. as blinde as beetles, as blinde as
the men of Sodome, who coulde not
finde Lots doore: as blinde as the king
of Arams ſeruantes,2. Reg. 6. who came to bring
Elizeus to their maiſter, but were by
him, not ſeeing whither they wente,

brought into Samaria. But as the Lorde
opened the eyes of Hagar, that ſhe ſawe
the well of water: as he opened the eies
of Elizeus his man, that hee ſawe the
mountaines full of Chariots and horſes
of fier: as hee opened the eies of Paule,
that the ſcales fell from his eies: ſo hath
hee nowe opened our eies, that wee ſee
the wonderous thinges of his lawe, the
light of his truth, the brightneſſe of his
woorde, the ſhining beames of his glorious
Goſpell. Noah reioyced when hee
ſawe the Doue come in with a leafe in
her mouth, wherby he knew the waters
were abated: Ioſhua reioyced when hee
ſawe the Sun ſtand ſtill for a whole day,
whereby hee knewe his enimies ſhoulde
bee diſcomfited: Iſraell reioyced, when
hee ſawe the clowde, or the piller of fier
whereby hee knewe that by the Lord he
was guided. Elias reioyced when he ſaw
the clowde no bigger then an hande,
whereby hee knewe the earth ſhould be
watered: Ezechias reioyced when hee
ſawe the ſhadowe goe backe x. degrees,
whereby hee knewe his dayes were prolonged:
the wiſe men reioyced when

they ſawe the ſtarre, whereby they knew
that to Ieſus they ſhould be conducted.
The wiſe men reioyced when they ſawe
Chriſte in the manger: the ſhepheardes
when they harde the newes. Simeon,
when he imbraced him in his ſwadling
clowtes: Thomas, when hee felte his
woundes: Steuen, when he ſaw the heauens
open. Euen ſo iuſt cauſe haue wee
to lift vp our heartes and reioyce. For
many kinges, wiſe men, prophetes, fathers,
haue deſired to heare thoſe things
which wee heare, and coulde not heare
them, and to ſee thoſe dayes which wee
ſee, but coulde not ſee them. The Lorde
graunt, that as wee haue eies and ſee,
taſte and feele this meate. So we may
haue mindes to deſire it, and willes
to labour for it. Againe, remember,1. Sam. 13.
as the Philiſtines left neuer a whetſtone,
no ſpeare, onely two ſwordes, no
ſmith in all the lande of Iſraell, leaſt ſaid
they, the Hebrwes make them ſwordes
and ſpeares, and ſo preuaile againſt vs:
ſo the vncircumciſed Romanes, the Popiſh
ſhauelings, the ſuperſtitious, Egyptians,
Chirſtians without, & none within,
Iewes in the fleſh, & not in the heart,

Iſraelites in the letter, and not in the ſpirit,
who ſought praiſe of men, but none
of God, left very fewe whetſtones, few
ſwordes, that is, very few Teſtamentes
and Bibles, left fewe Smithes, that is
fewe builders in Gods Churche among
vs, leaſt the Proteſtantes, ſaid they, make
them ſwordes and ſpeares, and ſo preuaile
againſt vs. O let vs reioyce and
be thankful. For as Ionathan with one
ſwoorde ouercame the Philiſtines: ſo
Gods miniſters by one ſwoorde, the
ſworde of ſpirite, the worde of GOD,
haue pulled downe the power & kingdome
of Antichriſt. God graunt he neuer
riſe again in England. As waxe melteth
at the Sunne, as the fat of lambes
conſumeth before the fier: as the heate
dryeth vp the clowdes: as the Lion goeth
into his denne, when man goeth
foorth to his worke, as the Owle flieth
to his hole, when the day ſtarre appeareth:
as Dagon fell downe before the
arke of the Lord: as Bell & the Dragon
were deſtroied before the face of Daniell,
ſo the miſts of Egypt vaniſhed, the
Lions of Babilon were vanquiſhed, the
owles of Rome departed, the fat gre
                  •
               e
of Antichriſte melted, the Gods of

that Sunne of perdition were with vs in
Englande all deſtroyed, they al come to
nothing, when it pleaſed the Lorde too
ſende his fier, his heat, his ſonne, his day
ſtarre, his ark and his Daniell, that is, his
worde and miniſters amongſt vs. Let vs
then remember howe cruelly we were
handeled, and reioyce in the Lorde that
wee are ſo mercifully deliuered: but I
would to God that many were not ſory
for the departure of this whoore out of
England: loke you to your ſelues, chiefly
O ye merchants. For you may ſeeme to
haue moſt cauſe to lament for the fall of
that great ſtrumpet, For thus ſayth the
Angell:Apoca. 18. The kinges of the earth ſhal bewaile
her, and lament for her, which
haue committed fornication with her:
they ſhall cry, Alas, alas, the great citie
Babilon, that mightie citie: but why
ſhall they ſo lament? becauſe, ſaith hee,
they liued in pleaſure with her: yea chiefly
the merchantes of the earth (ſaith the
Angel) ſhall weepe and waile ouer her:
yea, euery ſhip maiſter, and all the people
that occupie ſhippes, and ſhipmen,
and whoſoeuer trafficke on the Sea, ſhal

ſtande a farre of and crye: Alas, alas,
that great citie. But why ſhal merchants
and all ſhipmen crie ſo? Becauſe no man
buyeth their ware any more: and by
that whore (ſaith hee) were made rich al
that had ſhippes on the Sea, by her
coſtlineſſe. Bee not ſory for her: marke
what the Angell ſaith in that place: O
heauen, reioyce of her, and the holy Apoſtles
and Prophetes, and pray vnto
the Lorde that ſhe neuer returne hyther
againe.1. Sam. 5. When Dagon fel downe before
the arke of the Lord: the firſt time, hee
was not broken: hee was ſet vp the ſecond
time, but then the head of Dagon
and his handes were broken of. That
whore of Babylon fell downe once in
the dayes of king Edward, and was ſet
vp again in the dayes of Queene Mary.
But nowe in the glorious raigne of our
Souereigne Elizabeth, ſhee is fallen
downe the ſeconde time, not only her
head, and her handes are broken of, but
wee hope that all her body is grounde
to powder: a curſe come to him that
ſhall goe about to ſet her vppe againe.

Curſed bee that man (ſaith Ioſhua) before
the Lorde, that ryſeth vp and buildeth
this Citie Ierico:Ioſh. 6. yet Hiell did
builde Ierico,1. Reg. 16. but a curſe came to his
whole ſtocke and houſe for it. So curſed
be that man before the Lorde, that
ſhall beginne to builde that towre of
Babell, that ſeate of Antichriſte in Englande
againe. But as the Lorde commaunded
Ieruſalem to be diſtroied, and
all the Iewes, though Iulian the Emperour
did with all his power aide them,
were not able to build it: ſo the Lord
hath throwne downe this whore: and
we truſt that all the kings of the earth
all Popes, all Prieſtes, all Monkes, all
Friers, all Nunnes ſhall not bee able to
lift her vp againe. She was in England
a glorious whore, & a gorgeous whore,
therefore her deſolation is more ſhamefull:
ſhe was in England an high whore,
and an heauie whore. Therefore her fal
is the greater,3. Reg. 9. as Iezabell was hurld out
at a windowe, eaten vp of dogges, only
her skull, the palmes of her hands, &
her feete remaining, the which the ſeruants
of Iehu buried: ſo wee thanke our

God, who hath throwne downe this
great Iezabell, and we pray that if any
thing of her be left, it ſhalbe buried. O
let vs then loue & embrace the Goſpel:
followe and obey the Goſpell, and continue
in our profeſſion to our liues end.
I ſay,1. Cor. 16. continue, abide, endure, ſtand faſt,
be ſtronge, quiet your ſelues like men.
You haue put your hāds to the plough
looke not back, leaſt you be iudged vnfit
for the kingdome of God. For not
euery one that runneth, but he that runneth
to the goale, hath the garland: not
euery one that entreth into a ſhip, but
hee that goeth ouer the Seas, bringeth
home treaſures: not euery one that worketh
in the vineyarde, but he that continueth
working vnto night hath the
peny: not euery one that fighteth, but
hee that ouercometh ſhall haue the
crowne: To conclude, not euery one
that beginneth well, but that endureth
vnto the ende, ſhalbe ſaued. Nowe
you follow the Goſpell: but I feare many
are like the ſnaile, who pulleth
in her hornes, if any man goe againſte
her: Nowe you laboure

for the meate of the ſoule: but you are
in your houſes, like the ſnaile, rather thē
you will looſe your houſes, I feare many
will fall from their ſtanding: I loue the
Goſpell ſaith the worldly man, but as
long as I am in my houſe, that is, as long
as I haue peace, and quietneſſe: but if
perſecution come, as lice forſake the
head when the man is dying: as rattes
forſake a houſe that is ruinous, or hath
no victuall, ſo will I leaue the Goſpell, if
it bring a ſwoorde, or warre, or take away
my goods.Marke. 14. All the Apoſtles forſooke
Chriſte in time of danger,2. Tim. 4. and
Demas did forſake Paule, and imbraced
this preſent worlde. But remember
this O man, Hee that loueth landes, liuings,
or life, more then the Goſpell, (it
is as true as the Goſpell, for it is in the
Goſpell) hee ſhall neuer come to heauen,Marke. 8.
bring hee neuer ſo manye keyes
from Rome in his hande:Matth. 19. but hee
that ſhall looſe life, or liuing for the
Goſpell (it is as true as the Goſpell,
for it is in the Goſpell) ſhall haue
for his liuing a kingdome, for his life,

a bleſſed, immortall, euerlaſting life
in heauen. Satan goeth about to winowe
you as wheate: ſtande faſt in the
faith, a lawe in your members, rebelleth
againſt the lawe of your mindes, ſtande
faſt in the faith: the fleſhe fighteth againſt
the ſpirite, ſtand faſt in the faith:
the worlde plucketh you by the ſleeue
to looke backe, ſtande faſt in the faith.
Athiſtes and Papiſtes, and other heretikes
are tripping at your heeles, ſtande
faſt in the faith, it is worth the noting:
that our Sauiour in the ſeconde and
thirde of the Reuelation,Reue. 2. &. 3. doeth ſeuen
times at the leaſt vtter theſe wordes, hee
that ouercommeth &c. There is life,
and all bleſſinges promiſed onely vnto
him that ouercommeth.
            Nowe the heauenly Manna is plentifull
in Englande, let vs prouide for
warre though it bee a time of peace,
let vs take our cloake though the ſunne
doeth ſhine: let vs prouide for a deare
yeere, though the victuall bee plentie:
I ſay ſtande faſt, and labour for this
meate, it bringeth therewith well fed

thereby, fatte and in good liking, you
may ſtande faſt in the euill day.Amos. 8. For
wee haue deſerued that plague, wherof
the Prophete ſpeaketh. I will turne
your feaſtes into mourning, and your
ſonges into lamentations, I will bring
ſackcloth on your loynes, and baldnes
on your heades, I will bring a famine in
to your land, not a famine of bread, or
thirſte for water, but a famine of the
worde of God.Act, 13. For if Paule and Barnabas
were heere, they might haue iuſt
cauſe to ſpeake againſt vs as they ſpake
againſt the Iewes: ſeeing, you put the
woorde of GOD from you, and iudge
your ſelues vnworthie of euerlaſting life
Loe, we turne to the Gentiles. Chriſt
may truly denounce theſe words againſt
vs (if he ſhoulde deale according to our
deſertes) the kingdome of God ſhall bee
taken from you and ſhall bee giuen to
a nation,Matth. 21. whiche ſhall bring foorth the
fruites thereof.Mathew. 21. Let vs amende, leaſt
Chriſte curſe vs as he curſed the figtree,
when hee came vnto it, being hungry,
and found nothing thereon, but leaues

onely, hee doeth hunger and thirſt after
our good workes, but beholde howe we
deceiue him,Luke. 13. for fruite wee offer him
leaues, a man came to the dreſſer of his
vineyarde, and bid him cut downe his
figge tree, becauſe he had come three
yeeres and founde no fruites thereon:
cut it downe (ſaith hee) why keepeth it
alſo the grounde barren? The dreſſer
anſwered: let it a lone this yeere alſo,
till I digge rounde about it, and doung
it. The Lorde hath come to his fig tree
of England: not three, but almoſt xxiii.
yeeres, and beholde, yet he findeth litle
fruite: and hee woulde no doubt cut it
downe, had not the dreſſer of this figge
tree, Ieſus Chriſte entreated him to let
it alone, that hee by his worde & his labourers,
might digge round about it &
doung it. Behold that hath been doone,
and yet this figge tree bringeth foorth
ſmall fruite, wee are like trees that haue
their heades in the grounde, and ſucke
all their iuice from the earth: wee are
like bruite beaſtes, who turne their faces
to the grounde: wee are not
like men, who ſhoulde turne our

countenances towardes heauen, thence
to fet our meate, and all good thinges,
which by promiſe we may haue for the
aſking. Wee are like the corne growing
on the houſe top, which withereth
before it bee plucked vp, whereof the
mower filleth not his hand, nor he that
bindeth vp the ſheues, his boſome. Our
Sauiour Ieſus, if hee were heere, ſhoulde
bee moued to weepe ouer England, as
hee wept ouer Ieruſalem, and ſay, O
England,Luke. 19. England, if thou hadſt euen
knowne at the leaſt in this thy day thoſe
thinges which belong vnto thy peace,
but nowe are they hid from thine eyes.
I ſpeake of many, I meane not all. O
England thou ſayeſt, the naturall branches
are broken of, that I might be graft
in through vnbeliefe they were broken
of,Rom. 11. and thou ſtandeſt by faith: bee not
high minded, but feare. For if God
did not ſpare the natural branches, take
heed leaſt hee will not ſpare thee. O remēber
thou man, thou doeſt not beare
the roote, but the roote doth bare thee
By Satā thou didſt fall, & by Chriſt thou
art raiſed vp, & ingraffed into the right

Oliuetree.Lombar. li. 2 
               Qui incitatorem habuit ad malum,
               Diſtinct. 21.
               reparatorem habuit ad bonum, ſicut hominis
peccatum, per alium habuit inuitium,
ita per alium habuit remedium. Hee
that had a tempter vnto euill, had a reſtorer
vnto good: as the ſinne of man
had a beginning by an other, ſo it had
alſo a remedie by an other.Ambroſe in Rom. 11. For very wel
(ſaieth Ambroſe) Non ſunt Iudei reprobati
a Deo, vt gentes entrarent, ſed ſeipſos
reprobos fecerunt, ſpernētes donum dei:
vnde occaſionem dederunt gentibus ad ſalutem:
quam extollentiam reperiri vult, vt
magis ſaluti congaudeatur, non aegretudini
inſultetur. The Iewes were not reiected
of GOD, that the Gentiles myght
come in, but they made themſelues reprobates,
contemning the gift of God:
wherby they gaue occaſion to the Gentiles
to ſaluation: the which hautines,
the apoſtle wil haue to be beaten down,
that they mighe the more reioyce at
their own ſaluation, and not inſulte ouer
the Iewes deſtruction. Take heede,
why were they caſt off: ſpernentes donum
Dei: becauſe they deſpiſed the gifte to
God. For if the word ſpoken by Angelles

was ſtedfaſt, and euery tranſgreſſion
and diſobedience receiued a iuſt
recompence of rewarde,Heb. 2. how ſhall we
eſcape, if we neglect ſo great ſaluation?
Propterea tantam adiecit,
               Theophil in 2. hab. 
               quod & mortis
deſtructio, & demonū interitus, & caelorū
imperium, cuncta haec exprolatis a deo ſermonibus
nobis ſunt parta. Therfore (ſaith
Theophilact, did the Apoſtle adde ſo
great ſaluatiō, becauſe the deſtructiō
of death, the death of deuilles, the
kingdome of heauen, all theſe thinges
are gotten for vs, by the worde, which
came from GOD Brag not, boaſt not
therefore. Pride made Herod to haue a
fall from his pulpet, and to be eaten of
wormes. Nay, beholde a greater fall:
pride made Nabuchadnezzar to bee a
beaſt: nay yet a greater fall: pryde did
thruſt Adam and Eue out of paradiſe.
And yet behold, I will ſhew one greater
fal, pryde did throwe Lucifer, and manye
Angelles moe out of heauen.
            What ſhall I ſay then? If GOD did
not ſpare his owne people the Iewes, if

hee did not ſpare Adam and Eue in
paradiſe: if he did not ſpare his bright
Angelles in heauen, will he ſpare vs?
if iudgement beginne at the houſe of
GOD,1. Pet. 4▪
                what ſhall the ende of them be,
that obay not the Goſpell? If the righteous
ſcarcſe be ſaued, where ſhall the
vngodly and ſinner appeare? did the
naturall braunches wither, and were
caſt into fire, what ſhall bee done to
the vnnatural? Did the green tree ſuffer,
what ſhall be done of the dry? Loe, I
beginne to plague the Citie (ſaieth
the Lorde) where my name is called vppon,Ierom. 25.
and ſhould you eſcape? let vs then
be humble, and feare. Let vs not deſpiſe
this great gift of GOD. That fire
onely was to be vſed in ſacrifice, which
came from heauen: Moſes muſt make
all things according to the patterne he
ſawe in the mounte:Exod. 25. GOD write the
lawes with his owne finger, that wee
ſhould make nothing of our ſelues, our
owne braines, our owne heades, our
owne pollycies, our owne inuentions.
Let vs then receiue this meate, which

came from heauen: and put nothing into
it, leaſt while we with the young Prophets,
thinke to gather good hearbes:
we gather, and caſt Coloquintida into
the pot. No water euer ſo good, as that
which came out of the rocke:2. Reg. 4. no meate
ſo delicate, as Manna, which came from
heauen: no wine ſo wholſome, as that
which Chriſt made of water: no oyle ſo
precious, as that which the Samaritan
had: no robe ſo coaſtly, as that whiche
the father gaue to the prodigall ſonne:
no bread, no foode, no meate, ſo profitable,
as this meate of the ſoule, which
doeth endure, and bring vs vnto euerlaſting
life. O contemne not this meate he
that deſpiſeth Moſes law, dieth without
mercie,Heb. 10. vnder two or three witneſſes: of
how much ſorer puniſhment, ſuppoſe
ye ſhall he be worthy, which treadeth
vnder foote the ſonne of God, counteth
the blood of the newe teſtament an vnholy
thing, wherwith he was ſanctified?
and doth deſpite the ſpirite of grace,
Theſe men crucifie to themſelues again
the ſonne of GOD, and make a mock
of him.
            
               
This meat is water to refreſhe vs, and
wine to cheare vs: it is bread to ſtrengthen
vs, & Manna to nouriſh vs: it is a
treaſure to enrich vs, and a pearle to adorne
vs, it is a leauen to heate vs, and
ſalt to powder vs it is a ſword to defend
vs, and fire to purge vs: it is a ſalue to
heale vs, and a lantorne to guide vs: it
is a trumpet to call vs, and wiſdome to
enſtruct vs: a way to directe vs, and lyfe
to reuiue vs. If wee haue this meat,
this leuen, this bread, this Manna, wee
ſhall haue no neede of Elizeus to encreaſe
our oyle, to augment our loaues,
we ſhall haue no neede of his meale, to
ſweeten our pottage: wee neede not to
waite at the gluttons gate, or ſende to
churliſh Nabal for foode. If wee haue
this treaſure, we neede not rob the Aegyptians:
if we haue this pearle, we ſhal
not neede the gold of Ophir: if we haue
this water, we neede not to drawe water
at Iacobs well. Naaman need not
waſh himſelfe ſeuen tymes in Iorden:
the ſick neede not to goe to the poole
Bethſida for helpe: we need not Elizeus
ſalte, or Moſes tree to heale the venomous

water: if we haue this ſword, Peter
may put vp his ſword into his ſheth:
if we haue this fire, we need not the fire
of purgatorie: if we haue this lantern,
we neede not the Lanterns of Gedeon,
to ouercome the Midianites: to conclude,
if we haue this trumpet, we ſhall
haue no neede of the Prieſts trumpets
made of Rams hornes, to pull downe
the walles of Ierico.2. Reg. 5. For by this meate
we ſhall doe all thinges, for it doth endure,
and will bring vs vnto euerlaſting
lyfe. O then labour for this meate,
and I ſpeake vnto you, as ſometyme
Naamans ſeruant ſpake vnto him, when
he refuſed to waſh himſelfe ſeuen times
in Iorden, as Elizeus willed him. Naaman
thus ſayde: are not Abanah, and
Pharapar ryuers of Damaſcus better
then all the waters of Iſraell? May not
I waſh me in them, and be healed? but
this man ſayde: if the Prophet had
commaunded thee a great thing, wouldeſt
thou not haue done it? how much
rather then, when he ſaith to thee, waſh
and be cleane? you are bidden to come
for the water of life, for the bread of

heauen. Doe not many ſay, there are other
meates at Rome, other waters at
Rome, better then all the meate and
water, that is now in England? O but
I ſay vnto you: if the Lord ſhould commaund
you to doe a great thing, ought
ye not to doe it? How much more then,
when he ſayth, labour for the meate,
which endureth vnto euerlaſting lyfe,
which I the ſonne of man will giue vnto
you? this is but aske, and haue: ſeek
and finde: knock, and it ſhall be opened.
Let vs aske, let vs ſeek, let vs knock,
let vs labour for this meate. Labour for
this meate, O you people, and pray vnto
the Lord, that his Miniſters put their
candell on a candelſticke with cherefulnes,
and not vnder a buſhell: labour for
this money, and pray vnto the Lorde,
that his merchantes may occupy with
aduauntage with faythfulneſſe, and not
to hyde it in the grounde: labour for
this ſeede, and pray vnto the Lord, that
his huſbandmen may ſowe it with painfulneſſe,
& not hoard it in their barnes:
Labour for this meate, and pray vnto

the Lord, that his Stewards may diſtribute
it with bountifulnes, and not
keepe it in their cloſets. Labour for this,
that is,Mat. 3. be earneſt, hot, zealous, firy. God
the Father did appeare in fire,Act. 2. God the
Sonne doth baptiſe with fire, God the
holy Ghoſt came downe in forme of
clouen and fiery tongues:Iere. 44. but alas, are
not yet the people as they were in the
time of Ieremy? they ſayde to him, the
word thou haſt ſpokē to vs, in the name
of the Lord, we wil not heare it of thee:
but we wil doe whatſoeuer thing goeth
out of our mouth, as to burne incenſe
to the Queene of heauen, and to purge
out drink offrings vnto her, as we haue
don, both we, and our fathers, our kings
and our princes, for then had we plenty
of victuall, and were well, and felt no
euil. Are not theſe the ſayings of the romaniſts,
and Papiſts? firſt to graunt, that
we haue the word of GOD: ſecondly,
to ſay, we will not ſo much as heare it:
thirdly, to follow their own inuentions.
Againe, are not theſe their arguments?
firſt of cuſtome wee haue done ſo, and

our fathers: ſecondly of a generalitie:
not we onely, but our fathers, our Princes,
and al haue done ſo? thirdly of their
belly, then we had plentie of victuall,
and felt no euill? and to whome would
they offer their ſacrifice? not to God,
but as the Papiſtes doe, to the Queene
of heauen. Aske the Papiſtes, how they
prooue their religion to be the trueth,
and they will drawe their argumentes
from antiquitie, from cuſtome, from vniuerſalitie,
and from the belly, as did
the Iewes in the dayes of Ieremy. Nay,
hath not the deuill rayſed vp Iehoiakim
from the dead, to burne the wordes,
that Baruch had out of the mouth of
Ieremy,Iere. 36. and Antiochus, to burne the
bookes of the law,1. Mach. 1. and delectation, to
know the bookes of the Prophets and
Apoſtles.Euſeb. li. 8. c. 
                     •
                  
                But beholde, I ſhewe you a
better way, and whome you ſhould folow.
When Moſes made the arke, euery
man was cōmaunded to bring ſomthing,
the people brought to much, and
were bidden to bring no more. And that
no man ſhould think, he were exempted
from Gods work,Exod. 3
                     •
                  . he that hath no gold

to bring, might bring Goates hayre, or
badgers skinnes: if a woman were not
able to buy a Lambe, it was accepted of
the Lord, if ſhe brought a payre of turtle
doues, or two young pigeons. Euery
man cannot be a head in this myſticall
body of Chriſt, to be a King. Euery
man cannot be an eie, to be a byſhop, euery
man cānot be a leg, to be a piller in
gods church: yet euery one may be a hād
to giue ſōwhat to the building therof, euery
one may be an eare to heare the
word, a tongue to prayſe the Lord, and a
mouth to receiue this meat which endureth
vnto euerlaſting life. whē the people
came home from Babila, they buylded
the temple of the Lorde, before they
builded eyther their own houſes,1. Eſdr. 3. or the
walles of the citie, they builded with one
hand, hauing weapons in the other. All
the people followed Dauid, to ſeek the
Arke of God, and all went with Solomon
to builde a temple vnto the Lord.
How did the Iewes deſire and loue this
meate,2. Eſdr. 8. when they heard Eſdras read the
law from morning to noone, and wept
bitterly. How did the people of Antioch

labour, when the rulers of the ſinagogue
(an example for officers to folow) came
to Paule,Act. 13. and his companions, and ſaid:
Men and brethren, if ye haue any word
of exhortation to the people, ſay on?
When they beſought Paule to preache
the ſame ſermon the next ſabboth day:
the nexte ſabboth daye, the whole
citie came together to heare the worde
of God.
            How did Cornelius labour? when he
wayted for Peters comming, he called
his friends and kinred into his houſe to
heare him?Act. 12. for we haue not done our
dutie if we our ſelues onely eate of this
meate, vnleſſe we cauſe them alſo to eat
that belong vnto vs: as Cornelius
brought his friendes to heare Peter
preach:Io. 1. as Andrew brought his brother
Simon: as Philip brought Nathanael, as
Iohn Baptiſt brought his Diſciples to
chriſt: I was glad, ſaith Dauid, when they
ſaid to me, we will goe into the houſe of
the lord. If we thus labour, the lord God
wil raiſe vp cunning workmen for his tē
               ple,
painfull labourers in his vineyard,
faithful paſtors of his flock, & good teachers

of his people, as when Moſes made
the Arke,Exod. 31. he called Bezaleel by name:
and when Soloman built the temple, he
rayſed vp Hyram of Tyrus, whome he
filled with his ſpirit, to work in timber,
ſiluer, braſſe and golde. But it is not vnknown
to vs, how the Popes ſhauelings,
and that fat Prieſt of Rome himſelfe,Nehem. 4. do
mocke vs while we are building, as Sauballat
mocked the Iewes, ſaying: what
doe theſe weake Iewes? will they fortifie
themſelues? will they ſacrifice? will
they finiſh it in a day? wil they make the
ſtones whole again out of the heapes of
duſt, ſeing they are burnt? ſōe deride vs,
as Tobiah the Ammonite, did mock thē
ſaying: although they builde, yet if a fox
go vp, he wil break down the ſtony wal.
Some come to vs, as the men of Samaria
came to Zerubbabel:Ezra. 4. we wil build with
you, for we ſeeke the Lord your God, as
you do. But he anſwered, & ſo doe we, it
is not for you, it is for vs to builde the
houſe vnto our God. Ye hypocrites, you
ſpeake good wordes to the people, but
as Abſolon, to ſteale away the hartes of

the people from Dauid his father: you
will proclaime a faſt: but, as Iezabell, to
kill Nabot: you will worſhippe Chriſt,
but as Herod to murther him: you wil
kiſſe Chriſt, but like Iudas, you will kill
Chriſt. You are knowne to the worlde,
O ye Gibeanits,Ioſh. 9. which fain your ſelues
Ambaſſadours to Ioſhua: bringing old
ſacks vpon your Aſſes, old bottelles for
wine, olde ſhooes and clouted on your
feete, olde rayment, dryed and mouled
bread.1. Reg. 14▪
                Doe you not knowe, that for all
their old ſtuf they were knowen at three
dayes end. Ieroboams wife diſguiſed her
ſelfe, and went to Ahiiah for her ſonne,
ſhe caried ten loaues, and cracknels, and
a bottell of hony: though Ahiiah were
blinde, yet he ſayd, come in thou wife of
Ieroboam. So you diſguiſe your ſelues:
you bring hony in your mouths, there is
none ſo blind, but he can ſay, come in,
or rather, come out thou ſonne of Antichriſt.Gen. 26.
You vſed vs (and ſo you hope
to doe again) as the Philiſtines vſed Iſaac,
when they ſtopped, and filled vp with
earth all the welles, which Abraham his
Fathers ſeruantes had digged for him.

The water for a time with earth may be
ſtopped: fire for a time with aſhes may
be couered: the ſonne for a time with
clowdes may be ſhadowed: but now
(the Lord be thanked) the erth is remoued,
and the water doeth runne: the aſhes
are conſumed, and the fire doeth
burne: the clowdes are diſperſed, & the
ſun doth ſhine. Now that we may long
enioy theſe benefits, the Lord continue,
& encreaſe the zeale of our ſoureigne,
that ſhee neuer ſet her minde on that
meat, which periſheth, not on any erthly
thing, as did good king Dauid, when
hee numbred the people, as did good
king Ezechias, when he bragged of his
treaſure to the Ambaſſadours of the
king of Babell:2. Sam. 24. but to continue in maintaining
the Lordes cauſe,2. Reg. 22. not like Ioaſh,
who did well all the dayes of Iehoida
the Prieſt,2. Chron. 23. and afterwarde fell from the
Lorde:2. Chron. 26. nor like Vzziah, who ſought
God as long as Zachariah the Prophet
liued, and afterward forſooke God: but
that as her dayes may be as the dayes of
heauen, ſo to her liues ende, ſhee may
labour for to keep among vs this meat

of our ſoules, for this meat hath no end,
but endureth vnto euerlaſting life. That
ſhe may ſtill haue before her eies the example
of Dauid, who before all thinges
did ſeeke the Arke of the Lord, & would
haue builte an houſe for his God, and
though he were forbidden, becauſe hee
was a man of blood, yet hee prouided
timber and ſtone, and commaunded
Solomon his ſonne to builde it. That Solomon
may bee in her remembraunce,
who builte the houſe of God, before he
built his owne courte.1. Reg. 6 The houſe of
God was 7. yeeres in buylding, but his
owne was thirteene yeeres: not that he
beſtowed more charges on his owne
houſe,2. Reg. 18. but with more haſt and ſpeede he
did builde a temple vnto the Lord. That
ſhe neuer ceaſe to follow Ezechias, who
firſt of all brake the Images, cut downe
the groues, and brake in peeces the braſen
ſerpent, that Moſes had ſet vp: that
ſhe thinke alwayes on Ioſiah, who being
a childe, beganne to ſeeke after the God
of Dauid his father,2. Chron. 34. and did purge Ieruſalem
and Iudah: that ſhe may alwayes

thinke on the commaundement of the
Lorde: when the kinge ſhall ſitte in the
throne of his kingdome,Deut. 17. then he ſhall
write him this lawe in a booke repeated
by the prieſtes: it ſhalbe with him, and
he ſhall reade therein al the dayes of his
life, that he may learn to feare the Lord,
his god, & keep al the words of this law,
and theſe ordinaunces for to doe them.
Now, for as much as meat doeth not
nouriſh, vnles it be receiued, & by fayth
we receiue it:Fayth. it cannot cheriſh vs, vnleſſe
it be digeſted, and by the heate of
fayth it is concocted: it cannot profit
vs, vnleſſe it be kept in our hearts, and
by fayth we retaine it: it doth no good,
vnleſſe we haue life, and the iuſt ſhall
liue by fayth. It is very neceſſarie, that
we labour for fayth, whereby we may
perfectly be nouriſhed, and well fedde
with this meate: there is nothing that
the deuill deſireth more, then to haue
fayth out of our heartes: therefore
hee planted vnbeliefe in the heartes
of Adam and Eue: for vnbeliefe they
were thruſte out of paradiſe: vnbeliefe
in the heartes of Moſes and

Aaron, for vnbeliefe they neuer came
into the lande of promiſe: vnbeliefe in
the heart of Zacharie, for vnbeliefe hee
was dumbe, vntill the thing came to
paſſe whereof hee doubted. Faith
is the euidence of thinges,Heb. 11. whiche
are not ſeene: vnto faith did Chriſt call
Mary: when he ſaide to her, touche me
not, for I am not yet aſcended to my father,Barnard ſup.
               Cum iam aſcenderit (ſaith Barnard)
tum tangi ab ea velit,
               Cant. ſer. 28. 
               aut poſsit? & vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
poterit, ſed affectu, non manu: voto, non ocu
lo: fide, non ſenſibus: woulde he, or could
he be touched of her, when hee was aſcended?
truely he coulde: but with
the hearte, not with the hande: with
prayer, not with the eie: with faith,
& not with ſēſes. By faith we ſee him as
the wiſe men:Ephe. 6. we imbrace him as Simeon:
we heare him as Mary, we touche
him as Thomas. Faith is the ſhield
whereby we quenche all the fierie darts
of the wicked:Iohn. 15. by faith our hartes are
purified:1. Peter. 5. by faith we reſiſt the deuill:Rom. 9. by
faith we are the children of Abraham:Io. 5.
by faith we ſhall not come to condemnation,
but ſhal paſſe from death to life.

no vertue by Chriſt ſo much cōmended
as faith: be it vnto thee according to thy
faith: thy faith hath made thee whole,
I haue not founde ſo great faith, no not
in Iſraell: O woman great is thy faith,
be it vnto thee euē as thou wilt: to faith
nothing is vnpoſsible. Whatſoeuer is
without faith is ſinne, and without faith
it is vnpoſsible to pleaſe GOD, on the
contrary parte, nothing doeth more
greeue the Maieſtie of Almightie Iehoua)
then incredulitie and vnbeliefe, all
the day long I haue ſtretched out my
hande,Eſay. 65. to an vnbelieuing people:Mat. 14. O
thou of litle faith why doſt thou doubt:Luk. 24.
to them that went to Emaus,Mar. 9. hee ſaide:
O fooles and ſlowe of heart to beleeue.Mat. 15.
Againe,Heb. 2. O generation incredulous, how
long ſhall I bee with you, how long ſhal
I ſuffer you? in his owne countrie, hee
coulde not do many myracles for their
vnbeliefe: the Iewes entred not into
his reſt: Why? for vnbeliefe let vs therfore
crie with the Apoſtles, Lorde increaſe
our faith:Luk. 17. and as the father of
the ſicke childe cried with teares:Mark. 9. Lord,

I beleeue, helpe my vnbeliefe, Now
becauſe faith is not reuealed vnto vs by
fleſhe and blood,The holy Ghoſt. but by the holy ghoſt:
let vs labour for him alſo, that this meat
by faith may worke effectually in vs:
let vs vtter vnto the Lorde ſtrong cryings,
and deepe ſighings for his ſpirite,
that our prayer may bee in his ſight as
the incence,Iohn. 14. and the lifting vp of our
handes,Luk. 12. an euening ſacrifice.Ioh. 16. For hee is
the ſpirite of trueth:Iohn. 15. the Maiſter and
Teacher of the faithfull:1. Col 17. the ſhewer of
thinges to come:Rom. 8. the witneſſe of Chriſt
the diſtributer of all giftes: the ſpirite
of adoption:2. Cor. 1. the pleadge of our inheritance:1. Cor. 12.
hee beareth vs witneſſe that we
are the children of God: hee helpeth
our infirmities, and maketh petition for
vs. No man ſaith, that Ieſus is the
Lorde, but by the holy Ghoſt: did not
the Diuelles (ſaith Chriſoſtome) name
Chriſte.Chriſoſt. in eodem loco. Somtime they named Chriſt,
ſaith he, for feare, not for loue: and ſomtime,
that the people might giue eare to
them, take them for profeſſours of the
goſpel, & ſo they might bring the people
through a colour of chriſtianity into

manifolde hereſies, but of ſinceritie, &
heartie good will they neuer named
him. So then no man can name
Chriſt louingly, & ſincerely, but by the
holy Ghoſte, we haue not receiued the
ſpirite of bondage to feare againe, but
the ſpirite of Adoption, wherby we crie
abba,Rom. 8. father. Wherefore, this is the
end of my exhortation, that you labour
for all theſe three, meate, faith, the ſpirit,
by heartie and earneſt praier. I meane
not to crie all day long as Baals Prieſtes
did. O Baall heare vs: O Baal heare vs.
Nor as the Epheſians cried for the ſpace
of two houres, great is Diana of the Epheſians.
But in hearte feruently and
ſtrongly, as Moſes, Phinehes, Manaſſes,
Ionas, our Sauiour Ieſus. Though our
praiers be ſhort, as was the prayer of the
poore publicane: God be mercifull to
me a ſinner: of the prodigall ſonne: father
I haue ſinned againſt heauen and
againſt thee, & am no more worthie to
bee called thy ſonne. Of Steeuen, Lord
Ieſu receiue my ſoule. Of our Sauiour
Chriſte, Father, into thy handes, I commit
my ſpirite, nay though wee vtter neuer

a worde, the Lord will heare vs: Moſes
ſpake neuer a woorde, when GOD
ſaide vnto him, why doeſt thou cry vnto
me Moſes: Anna ſpake neuer a word
when God heard her prayer, ſhe only
moued her lippes,1. Sam. 1. and Ely the Prieſte
ſaide, ſhe was dumbe. If we thus labour
for the ſpirite. we ſhal obteine him
and then our faith ſhall be fruitefull, thē
the meate in vs ſhalbe effectuall. The
word noriſheth, faith reuiueth, the holy
ghoſt quickeneth, the word ſaueth, faith
iuſtifieth, the holy Ghoſt ſanctifieth: the
worde bringeth vs to heauen, faith openeth
the dore, the holy Ghoſte placeth
vs among the holy Angels, to haue euerlaſting
life, which the ſonne of man ſhal
giue vnto vs.The reaſon. And this is the reaſon added
to the exhortation, being drawne
from the perſon that giueth, and the certaintie
of the thing giuen.1. Iohn. 1. Hee which is
called the word of God:Col. 10. the image of
God,1. Cor. 1. the power and wiſdome of God:
the Creator of all thinges:Iohn. 1. the ſearcher
of the heart:Mat. 9. the prince of life: the Lord
of glory:Act. 3. the prince of ſaluation: the
prince of faith:1. Cor. 2. the brightneſſe of the

glory and the ingraued fourme of gods
perſon:Heb. 2. the ſonne of God,Heb. 12. doeth heere
call himſelf the ſonne of man,Heb. 1. he whom
Peter confeſſed to be the ſonne of God:Mat 3.
hee whom the Angell named Ieſus: hee
of whom God the father witneſſed: this
is my beloued ſonn, in whom I delight,
heare him: hee when the very Diuelles
could not chooſe but confeſſe him to
bee the ſonne of God: doeth heere call
himſelfe the ſonne of man. Hee calleth
 himſelfe the ſonne of man, firſt, to teſtifie
that he tooke a very, true, and ſubſtantiall
nature of man, both body & ſoule,
vpon him: fleſhe of our fleſhe, bone of
our bone.Iohn. 1. 
               
                  Ʋerbum caro factum eſt. the
worde was made fleſhe: heere ſome
woulde proue that hee was not perfect
man, becauſe the worde was made fleſh,
that ſignifieth only the body: but theſe
men know not that fleſh in the ſcripture
ſometime ſignifieth the one part of mā,
as when Chriſt ſaide:Luk. 24. A ſpirite hath not
fleſh & bone as you ſee mee haue. Somtime
carnall luſtes and affections:Iohn. 3. as
whatſoeuer is borne of fleſhe, is fleſhe,
ſomtime it doth ſignifie the whole man

body and ſoule: as all fleſhe ſhall ſee the
ſaluation of GOD, that is, mankinde:
and againe,Eſay. 40. I will powre out of my ſpirite
vpon all fleſhe, that is, men. And ſo
in this place,Ioel. 2 the worde was made fleſh,
that is, man. Damnable therefore is the
hereſie of the Maniches,Manichai. who helde
that Chriſtes bodye was brought from
heauen, and put into the virgins womb:
damnable alſo is the hereſie of the Arrians,Arriani.
who ſaide that his body was made
of nothing, and that he had not his fleſh
of the virgin: Athanaſius willeth Epictetus
Biſhop of Corinth to ioyne theſe
wordes of the Angel in Matthewes goſpell,Matth. 1.
that which is conceaued in her
is of the holy Ghoſt,Athanaſius. with theſe wordes
of the Angell in Lukes Goſpel, that holy
thing that ſhalbe born of thee,Luk. 1. ſhalbe
called the ſonne of God: Chriſte was
conceaued in her, therefore his body
came not from heauen: Chriſte was
borne of her, therfore his body was not
made of nothing. Secondly, he doth cal 
himſelfe the ſonne of mā, ſignifiyng that
he was ſubiect to al infirmitity that happē
to man, ſin only excepted. For he was

hungry, he was thirſtie: he was werie, he
ſorowed, he wept, he did ſweate water &
 blood, he ſuffered the moſt vile and approbrious
death, the death of the croſſe.
Laſtly, hee calleth himſelfe the ſonne of
man, as though he were acounted the
vileſt man in the worlde. Beholde I who
was borne in a ſtall, laide in a manger,
poore, needy, contemned, whome they
call the Carpenter, and the Carpenters
ſonne: beholde I the ſonne of man, will
giue euerlaſting life vnto you.
            Nowe if the ſonne of man doth giue
euerlaſting life, howe is it that he made
this anſwere to Iames and Iohn,Matth: 20. to ſit at
my right hande, and at my left hande is
not mine to giue, but it ſhall bee giuen
to them, for whom it is prepared of my
father. Againe he ſhall ſay, Come ye bleſſed
of my father,Matth. 25. inioy you the kindome
of my father, He ſaith not my bleſſed,
nor my kingdome, but bleſſed of my
father, and the kingdome of my father,
and in the fifth of Iohn,Io. 5. hee ſaide: I can
doe nothing of my ſelfe. Wherfore if he
cannot giue to ſit at his right, or left
hande, if the kingdome bee not his,

if he can doe nothing of himſelfe, how
doth he heare promiſe euerlaſting life?
he ſaieth bleſſed of my father, the kingdome
of my Father, I can doe nothing
of my ſelfe, becauſe he woulde, as man
giue to the father all the glory. My father
hath appoynted theſe thinges to
giue before the beginning of the world,
I am not now to beſtow thē, they ſhalbe
giuen to them, for whom it is prepared
of my father.Io. 1. But yet this is true: as
many as receiued him, to them he gaue
prerogatiue to be the ſonnes of God, euen
to them that beleeue in his name.
We are ſonnes by nature, ſo we are the
ſonnes of Adam: we are ſonnes by diſcipline,
ſo we are the ſonnes of Chriſt, we
are ſonnes by adoption, and ſo we are
brothers to Chriſt, and ſonnes of God.
Heare doe the Papiſts gather, that euerlaſting
life is due vnto vs by deſert, becauſe
by labouring or working for the
meate of the ſoule, we get euerlaſting
life. I purpoſe not to entreat of the controuerſie:
Chriſt doeth take away all
doubt in theſe words following: whē he

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſaieth,Ephe. 2. that hee will giue this life: for
whatſoeuer we haue of gift, that is not
of merit. They are oppoſite, as Paule
ſaieth. By grace you are ſaued through
fayth, and that not of your ſelues, it is
the gift of God: yea, by euill workes
we deſerue death, and by good workes
we deſerue life: according to the Maxima
of the Logicians. But if I followe
Paule, I muſt deny the argument: for
the wages of ſinne is death,Rom. 6. but the gift
of God is euerlaſting lyfe, through Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord. Moſes did ſhewe
vnto the Iewes the lande of promyſe,
but hee could not bring them into it,
that was left for Ioſhua: euen ſo the law
is a ſcholemaiſter to bring vs to chriſt,
it cannot purchaſe euerlaſting lyfe, that
is left for Ieſus, whoſe office it is to giue
euerlaſting life: and therfore he was ſealed
of the Father: and this is the confirmation,
taken from the office and
functiō of Ieſus chriſt:Confirmation he ſaith of himſelf.
I came not into the world, to iudge the
world, but to ſaue the world. He came
not,Io. 12. as Herod thought, to put him out

of his kingdome: not to giue Dukedomes
and Lordſhippes, as Iames and
Iohn thought, not to reſtore the earthly
kingdome to Iſraell, as his Diſciples
thought: not to be a King, as the Iewes
would haue made him: not to call the
righteous, as the phariſeies thought,
but ſinners to repentaunce, as we all beleeue.
For to this purpoſe hath his father
giuen to him his ſeale, he hath ſealed
him.
            Hereby wee are able to anſwere all
obiections that the deuil & al the kingdome
of hell is able to lay againſt vs:
and ſay, if God be on our ſide, who can
be againſt vs: it is chriſt that iuſtifieth,
who ſhall condemne vs. Hee hath the
broad ſeale of his father to this purpoſe,
who can diſanull it? by this ſeale we are
ſealed alſo, as the Apoſtle ſaieth: grieue
not the holy ſpirite of God, by whome
ye are ſealed vnto the day of redemption,
by outward exerciſes we may doubt
of others:Ephe. 4. but by this ſeale, the prynte
whereof is in our hearts, we may aſſure
our ſelues of euerlaſting lyfe.
Doeſt thou ſacrifice, thou doeſt well:

ſo did Abel, and ſo did Cain: doeſt thou
prophecie? ſo did Samuell, and ſo did
Saul: art thou baptiſed? ſo was chriſt:
and ſo was Simon Magus: doſt thou cō
               municate?
ſo did Simon, and ſo did Iudas:
doſt thou pray in the temple? ſo did
the Publican, and ſo did the Phariſie▪
therfore the holy Goſt is a ſeale authentical
in our own hearts, wherby we may
examine, try, and proue our ſelues, whether
we be the ſonns of God, or reprobates.
Caine had a marke to be known:
Eſau being rough, was known from Iacob
being ſmoth: the Lord hath a mark
for his enemies, and the Lord knoweth
who are his. The Gileadite by Shibboleth,
was knowne from the Ephraimite
by Shibboleth: the 500. valiant men by
lapping water like dogges, were known
from the cowardes, who kneeled & lapped:
as Rahab was knowe by binding a
red corde about her window: as they
were ſaued that had the letter tau on
them, as the Angell paſſed from them,
that had the blood ſprinckled on their
poſtes:Ezech. 9. as they were not hurt that had
the ſeale of God in their foreheades,Reuel. 7. ſo

we are known, ſo we are ſaued▪ ſo the Angell
doth paſſe from vs, ſo we are not
hurt, which haue the ſeale of the holy
Goſt in our hearts, wherby we can boldly
call Chriſt our brother, and God our
Father. The foundation of God remayneth
ſure, and hath this ſeale: the Lord
knoweth who are his, and let euery one
that calleth on the name of Chriſt, depart
from iniquitie.2. Tim. 2. The Lord ſeale vs
vnto the day of redemption: the Lord
graunt we may alwayes labour for that
meat, which endureth vnto euerlaſting
lyfe: that we may labour for the word,
for fayth, and for the holy Ghoſt, that
wee may be fully aſſured of euerlaſting
lyfe, becauſe the ſonne of man, and the
ſon of God to that purpoſe is ſealed, appointed,
annointed, & cōſecrated of his
father: to whom with the holy ghoſt, 3.
perſons, and one immortall God, be all
honour, glory, praiſe, power, dominion,
authoritie, worſhip and Maieſtie, both
now and euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   