
      
         
            
            
            A compendious
olde treatyſe / ſhewynge / howe that we
ought to haue ye ſcripture in Englyſſhe / 
            ¶Thexcuſacyon of ye treatyſe
            
               Though I am olde / clothed in barbarors wede
               Nothynge garnyſſhed with gaye eloquency
               Yet I tell the trouth / yf ye lyſt to take hede
               Agaynſt theyr frowarde / furious freneſy
               Which recken it for a great hereſy
               And vnto laye people greuous outrage
               To haue goddes worde in their natyfe langage.
            
            
               Enemyes I ſhall haue / many a ſhoren crowne
               With forked cappes and gaye crooſys of golde
               Which to maynteyne ther ambicions renowne
               Are glad laye people in ignorance to holde
               Yet to ſhewe the verite / one maye be bolde
               All though it be a proverbe daylye ſpoken
               Who that tellyth trouth / his head ſhalbe broken
            
            
               depiction of four women at fountain
            
         
         
            
            ¶Vnto the Reader.
            
               GRace and peace: not that the
worlde geuyth / but from god
the father and oure ſauioure
Ieſu Chriſt with increace of ye
holy ſpryt be with the and all
that thurſte the truthe. Amen.
            Cōſyderynge the malyciouſnes
of oure prelatz and theyr adherentes whiche
ſo furiouſly barke ageynſt the worde of God / ād
ſpecially the new teſtamēt tranſlatyd and ſett forthe
by Maſter Williā Tyndale / which they falſely
pretēde to be ſore corrupte. That ye may knowe
that yt is not Tyndales tranſlacyō yt moueth thē
but only the inwarde malyce whiche they haue euer
had ageynſt the worde of God. I haue here
putt in prynte a tretyſe wrytten aboute the yere of
oure lorde a thouſande foure hundryd. By which
thou ſhalte playnly perceyue / that they wolde yett
neuer from the begynnynge admytte any tranſlaciō
to the laye people / ſo that it is not yt corrupte trā
               ſlaciō
that they withſtonde. For yf that were true
y• ydle bellyes wolde haue had leyſer I nowgh to
put forth another well trāſlatyd. But yt is theyr
awne myſcheuous lyuynge yt mouyth thē accordyng
as Chryſte ſayd Ihon̄ .iij. Euery man that
workyth euyll hatyth ye lyght / ner comyth to the
lyght leſt hys workes ſhulde be reproued. &c.
            Thus mayſt thou ſe that bycauſe theyr workes

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               ght and not bycauſe yt is euyll tranſlatyd / 

                  〈◊〉
                furiouſly reſyſte the worde of god whiche
is ye trew lyght. For yet was ther neuer none trāſlatyd
but other with falſhed or tyrāny they putt
yt downe. Wherefore I exhorte the reder not to

conſydre ād note the wordes but the maner. And
praye to god to ſende the rulers hartes to vnderſtōde
the trewth and further the ſame
and the god of all comforte be
with the Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Thys treatyſe more thā an .C. yere olde
            Declareth howe owre prealatis do ferre a myſſe
            Which of frowarde preſumpcion are ſo bolde
            To forbede the worde of god in englyſſhe
            For as the prophete ſayeth blyſſed he is
            That exercyſeth hym ſelfe diligently
            In ſcripture nyght and daye continuallyPſal. i.
            
         
         
            
               FOr to make vpon Anticriſt I take
figure of kyng Antioche of whome gods lawe ſpeakythe in ye boke
of Machabeijs / for right as kynge
Antioche came in ye ende well
nygh of the olde lawe / and brent
the bookes of gods lawe / and cōpelled the people
to do maumentry. So now Anticriſt ye kyng
of clergy that lynen worſe then hethen preſtes brē
               nerh
nowe nyghe thēde of the newe lawe and thevāgely
of Chriſt that is nyghe ye ende of the worlde
to deceyue well nyghe all the worlde and 
                  •••••
               
               ue
the ſeruauntes of god. For nowe god ſhal
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
we who wyll ſtande by hys lawe for Satan
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
prophetes ſaye is now vnbonde and hathe ben
CCCC. yeris and more for to in habit ower clergye / 

as he dyd the clergye of the olde lawe / but nowe
wythe muche more malyce.Ye may ſe it is no novelteis that the biſhops burne the goſpell. For as they dampned
Chryſt ſo nowe ower byſſhope dampne and
bren goddes lawe / for bycauſe it is drawyn into ower
mother tounge. &c. It owght to be and we ſavyd
ſhuld be as we ſhall preue by open euidence
thoroughe goddes helpe. Firſt we take witneſſe of
Boetius de diſciplina ſcolarium / that ſaythe that
childerne ſhuld be tawght in the bookes of Seneke.
And Bede expoundeth this ſainge / and ſaythe
that childerne in vertues ſhuld be tawght. For the
bookes of Seneke ben moralles ād for they be not
taught thus in there youthe they contynue ſtyll
euyll maneryd and be vnable to conceyue the ſubtyle
ſcience of trouthe ſaing / the wyſe man is as a
clean myrror newe pulliſſhed.Reade Robin hode ſaye oure maſters. Wiſdem ſhall not
enter into a wicked ſowle. And moche is herof the
ſentence of Bede. And Algaſell in his logyke ſaieth / 
the ſowle of mā is as a clene mirror newe pullyſſhed
in which is ſeyn lyghtly ye image of vertue.
And for the people hath not cunnynge in youthe
they have darke ſowles and blinded with ignorance / 
ſo that they proffyt not in vertue / but in falſnes
and malice and other vices and moche is ther of ye
matter. Sythen hethen philoſophers wolden the
people to proffit in naturall ſcience / howe moche
more ſhuld Chriſten clerkes wyll the pepyll to profyt
in ſciēce of vertues / for ſo wold gode. For whē
the lawe was geuyn to Moyſes in the mounte of
Synay / god gaue it to his people ī ther mother tō
               
               
                  ••
                of Ebrue / that all the people ſhuld vnderſtande

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               nd commaunded Moyſes to reade it to them
vntyll they vnderſtode it / ād ſo he did as it is playn
Deutero. xxxi. And Eſdras alſo redde it in theyr

mother tōge / fro morow vntyll none as it is playn
in the firſt boke of Eſdras Cap. viij. And he redde
it apertly in the ſtreate & the earys of ye people were
intentyſly gevyn therto / in ſo moche that the people
fell into greate weping for the miſkeping of the
lawe. Alſo goddes lawe ſaithe Deuter. xxxij. that
fathers ſhuld make the lawe knowen to theyr ſonnes
ād the ſonnes that ſhuld be borne of thē ſhuld
ryſe and teache theſe thynges to ther ſonnes. And
the holy apoſtle ſaynt Peter in ye fourth chapter
of his fyrſt booke ſpeakyth after this maner / ſayenge.
Who ſo euer ſpeake / ſpeake he as the wordes of
god: and every man as he hathe takyn grace
of knowing / ſo miniſtre he forthe to other men
It is wrytten playnly in the booke of noumbres
the eleventh chapter. When ye prophet Moyſes hade
choſen ſeuenty elder men / and the ſpryt of god
reſted on them and they propheſyed. Two men beſydes
them / Eldad / and Medad / propheſyed in ye
tentes / and Ioſue the miniſtre of Moyſes ſaid to
Moyſes / forbed thowe them.moſes letted no mā to propheſye. And Moyſes ſaid
what enuieſt thou for me? Who ſhall let yt all the
people propheſye / yf god gyue them his ſpirite?
Alſo it is redde in the goſpell that ſaynct Ihon
euangeliſt ſaid vnto Chriſt / lorde we ſhall forbyd

                  〈◊〉
                that caſtith oute ſpiryttes in thy name / whiche
folowith not vs.Luc. ix And Chriſt ſaid do not forbede / 
for who ſo is not agaynſt vs ys with vs. And vnto
the ſame agreyth well the propheſy of Iohe
                  •
               
which ſaynt Petre preachinge to the Iewes ſtrongly
allegyd as Luke recyteth in the ſecounde chapitre
of the actes of the apoſtles ſayenge after this
maner. That godde nowe in the laſt dayes ſhall
ſhedde out his ſpirite vppon every fleſſhe.
            
               
For god ſayeth your ſōnes and doughters ſhuld
prophecy / and your yonge men ſhall ſe viſyons.But they ſay only maſter doctor can vnderſtād ye ſcripture
And vpon whit ſondaye god gave knowlege of
hys lawe to dyuerſe natiōs with out annye excepcyons
in ther mother tonge / by the vnderſtādyng
of one tunge. And of thys it is notabyll ſithen the
laye people in the olde lawe had ther lawe in ther
mother tounge / yt the lay engliſhe people in ye newe
lawe haue it as all other nacyons hathe / ſythe
Chriſt bowght vs as he dyd other and hath
gevyn to vs y• ſame grace as to other. For ſainct
Peter. Actu. xi. was reprevyd for he had baptyſed
Cornelij / and hys felows yt were hethen mē.
And Peter anſweryd and ſaide. Yf god have gevyn
ye ſame grace to thē that he hatheto vs / who
am I that maye forbyde god? As who ſaythe it
lyethe not in ye power of men. Than who art thou
that forbyddeſt the people to have gods lawe in
ther mother tounge? we ſaye yt thou art Anticriſt
hym ſelf. For Paule ſaith .i. Corin. x. I wyll every
man to ſpeake with tounges / more for ſothe to
propheſy / alſo he ſaythe howe ſhall he ſaye Amen
apō thy bleſſyng that wortes not what thou
ſayſt. Apō thys ſaithe doctor Lyre. Yf the people
vnderſtōd the prayer of the preſt it ſhall the better
be ladde vnto god / and the more deuoutly anſwer
Amen.Here you re awne maſter Lyre yf ye will not here Paul. Alſo Paule ſaithe in the ſame chapter. I
wyll rather fyve wordes to be ſpokyn to the vnderſtandyng
of men then ten thouſande that they vnderſtande
not. And .lxx. doctors with other mo before
the incarnacion of Chriſte tranſlatyd the byble
owt of Ebrewe into Greke. And after the aſcē
               ſion
many 
                  •
               rāſlated all the byble in dyuerſe lāgages / as into ſpanyſhetunge frenſhetunge / and al

mayne / italy and by many yeres have hade it. It
was harde of a worthy mā of Almayn that y• ſame
tyme was a flēmyng whoſe name was Iames
Merlād which trāſlated all the byble into flemyſhe.
For whiche dede he was ſomōned be fore
the pope of great malyce. And the boke was takyn
to examinacion. And truely he approuyd it. And
then it was delyverd to hym agayne into confuſiō
of all hys enemys. Wurſhupfull Bede in hys
firſt booke callyd de geſtis Anglorū. chapter. iij.
rellyth that ſainct Oſwolde the Kyng of Northū
               berlande
aſked of the ſkottes an holy byſhoppe Aidā
to preache to his people / and ye kyng him ſelfe interpretyd
it in Engliſhe to the people. Sythē this
bleſſyd deade of this Kyng is alowede of all holy
Churche / whye not nowe owght it as well to be
allowed a man to reade the goſpell in Engliſſhe
to the people / ſythen that ſainct Paule ſaithe if ower
goſpell be hydde / it is hydde in thē that ſhalbe
dampned.A feareful ſayenge. And he ſaithe alſo he that knoweth
not ſhall not be knowyn of gode. And therfore venerabilis
Bede ledde by the ſpirite of gode trāſlated
a greate parte of the byble into englyſhe. Who
ſe originalles ben in many abbeys in yngland.
And Ciſtercienc. li. v. ca. xxiiij. ſaythe that the euuangely
of Ihon̄ was drawen into englyſhe by ye
foreſaid Bede whiche euuangely of Ihon̄ and other
goſpels ben yet in manye places of ſo olde englyſhe
that ſkant can annye englyſhe man reade
them. For thys Bede reygnyd in the yere of owen
lorde god .vij. hundred and .xxxij. Alſo Ciſterciencis.
li. vi. ca. i. ſaithe that kyng Alred ordyned opē
ſcolys of dyuerſe artes in Oxforde and he turnyd
the beſt lawes into his moder tounge and the pſal

               
                  •
               er alſo / he reyhgned in the yere of owre lorde god
viij. hundred .lxxiij. And ſainct Thomas ſayth
ſuper libr
                  ••
                politicorū expounyng this worde barbarus / y• barbarus is he yt 
               vndſtondyth not yt hereadyth
in his mother tōge. Wherfore the apoſtle
ſaith if I knowe not y• vertue of yt voyce to whome
I ſpeake I ſhalbe to hym barbarus / yt is to ſaye / 
he vndſtādeth not what I ſaye / ne I what he ſaith
And ſo all tho preſtes yt 
               vndſtōdē
                not what they
readyn by ther mother tonge be called barbarus / 
& therfore Bede dyd drawe into engliſſhe liberall
artes leſte engliſhe men ſhuld be come barbarus / 
hec Thomas. Alſo Lincoln. ſayth in a ſermō yt begynnyth
/ Scriptū eſt delenitis. Yf any preſte ſaye
he cāne not preache / one remedye is / reſigne he vppe
his būfyce.Reſigne in no wiſe but apō a good penſion Another remedy if he wyll not thus
/ recorde he in yt weke yt nakyd texte of the ſondaye
goſpell yt he have ye groſſe ſtorye & tell it to the people / 
yt is if he vndſtōd latē / & do he this every weke
in ye yere he ſhall profyt moche. For thus preachyd
ower lorde ſayinge / Ihon̄ .vi. The wordes
that I ſpeake to yowe be ſpirit & lyfe. Yf he do not
vndſtōde latē go he to one of his neyghbours yt
               vndſtondeth / which wyll charctably expoune it to
hym / ād thus edifye he his floke. Vpō this argueth
a greate clarke & ſaith / yf it be laufull to preache
yt naked texte to ye peple / it is alſo lefull to wryte
and read it to thē. Alſo ſyre Wylliā Thoriſby archebiſhope
of Yorke did do drawe a tretyſe in englyſhe
by a worſhypfull clerke whoſe name was

                  ••••
               ryke / in the whiche were conteyned the articles
of byleve / the .vij. dedly ſynnes / the .vij. workes
of mercy / the .x. cōmaundmētes.The ſame treatiſe is ī 
                  
                     •
                   church over agaynſt Lō
                  don ſtone at this houre And ſent thē
in ſmall pagynes to ye cōm
                  •
               n people to lerne it ād
to knowe it / of which yet manye a copye be in yngland.

Alſo Richerd the heremyte of Hampole drewe
into englyſhe the pſalter with a gloſe & the leſſons
of dirige ād many other treatyces / by y• whiche
many englyſhe men have ben greatly edyfyed
And they be curſed of gode yt woldē let ye people to
be lewder thē they ben. But many mē nowe be lyke
vnto ye frēdes of Hiob / yt whyles they enforſed
to deffende god they offendyd in him greuouſly.
And thowgh ſuche as be ſlayne do myracles / n
                  •
               
               
               
                  •••
               theles
they ben ſtynking matters. This ſayth
Richerd ye heremyt expounyng this verſe / Ne auferas
de oremeo verbū veritatis vſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                qua
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               .This propheſye of Chriſt muſt be fulfilled take hede And
Chriſt ſayth yt mē ſhuld deame thē ſelf to do greate

                  〈◊◊〉
                ſeruice to god in kylling of his people.
Arbitratur ſe obſequiū preſtare deo. &c. Alſo a
man of Lōdon whoſe name was Wyrynge hade
a byble in englyſhe of northē ſpeache whiche was
ſeyn of many men & it ſemyd to be .CC. yeres olde.
Alſo it is knowē to many mē in ye tyme of kyng Richerd
ye .ij. yt into a parlyamēt was putt a bylle by
thaſſent of .ij. archebyſſhoppes & of ye clergy to adnulle
ye byble yt tyme trāſlated into englyſhe with
other englyſſhe bookee of thexpoſiciō of yt goſpels
whiche whē it was harde & ſeyn of lordes & of ye
comōs. The duke of lācaſter Ihon̄ anſwered ther
to tyght ſharply ſaying this ſentēce / we wyll not
be refuſe of all other nacions. For ſythe they have
godes lawe whiche is ye lawe of ower belefe ī ther
owne lāgage / we wyll have owres in englyſſhe
who ſo ever ſaye naye.
                  
                     ••
                  pocriſie is the nature of all biſſhoppes. And this he affer
                  ••••
                with a greate othe. Alſo Thomas Arūdell ar
                  •••
               
               byſſhoppe of Caunterbury ſaid in a ſermō at weſt
meſter / or yt buryeng of Quene / Anne / yt it was
more ioye of her thā of any womā yt ever he knewe
For ſhe an alien borne hadde in englyſſhe all ye.
                  〈◊〉
               
               
goſpels wyth the doctors vpō them. And he ſaid
that ſhe had ſent thē to hym to examyn / ād he ſaid
that they were good and trewe. And he blamyd
in that ſermon ſharply the negligence of the prelats / 
and other mē / In ſo moche that he ſaide that
he wold leave vppe the office of Chaunceler and
forſake wordly buſynes / and gyue hym to fulfyll
his paſtorall office / for that he hade ſeyn / and redde
in tho bookes.Neuer truſt biſhop as lōge as he kepeth his poſſeſſions And after this promyſe he became
the moſt cruell enemy that myght be agaynſt
englyſhe bookes. And therfore as many men ſayne
god ſmot hym with a crueſt 'dethe as he didde
alſo Rycherd flemyng byſhoppe of lyncolne. And
yet ower byſſhoppes ben ſo indurate and ſo farre
ſtrayed from god that they have no grace one to
beware of another / but prowdly agaynſt all reaſons
and euidēce of gods lawes / and doctors ſentences / 
they brenne goddes wordethe whiche hathe
brought thys realme to vndoynge for ever but
if godes grace be the more / Wher is yt aunciēt blode yt was in england in theſe dayes. for thys cruell deade
is cauſe of peſtilence / hungers / warres / and that
alſo thys realme ſhalbe conqueryd in ſhort tyme / 
as ſainct Edward the kyng and confeſſor propheſyethe
in his booke that begynnith thus / Sāctus
Edwardus rex vidit ſpiritualibus oculis. ercete.
And therfore it were good to the Kyng and to other
lordes to make ſome remedy agaynſt this cō
               ſtitucyon
of Antechriſt that ſaythe it is vnlawfull
to vs englyſhe men to have in englyſhe goddes la
               
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               d therfore he brennythe and ſleythe thē that

                  ••••
               teyne thys good deade / Et nūc reges intelligite erudimini qui iudicatis rerram. and that is for default
that the kyng and lordes knowē not ne wyll
not knowether owne office in meātenāce of god &
hys lawe. For as ſainct Auſten ſaithe the Kyng

with hys knyghtes repreſentyn the godhede of
Chriſte and preſtes the manhode of Chriſte / Rex
eſt vicartus diuinitatis / et ſacerdos eſt vicarius
Chriſti humanitatis / hec Auguſtinus in de queſtionibus
veteris et noue legis .ca. xci. And
if the kyng wold deſyer to knowe perfetly his office / 
he maye fynde mē to ſhewe to hym bookes that
truely and perfetly ſhall informe hym to doo his
office to the pleſaunce of god. But thys canne not
he lerne of byſhoppys for they enforme hym after
Antichriſtes lawe and ordenaunce for hys lawes
nowe reignen.Biſhops will notte ache againſt their God their bely. Yet agaynſt thē that ſayn the
goſpell in englyſhe wold make men to erre / wore
they well / that we fynde in latyn lāgage more he
retykes then of all other langages / for the decre.
ſaythe .xxiiij. xciij. Quidam autem heretici / that
there be founden ſyxty laten heretykes. And if mē
ſhuld hate any lāgage for hereſy thē muſt they hate
latē But gode forbede yt any lāgage ſhuld be hated
for hereſy ſythē manye heretykes wer of ye diſciples
of ye Appoſtles. For ſainct Ihon̄ ſaithe they
have gon̄ owt of vs but they were not of vs. And
Paule ſaithe it behovythe hereſys to be / How Antichriſt is cauſe of al hereſies. & ātichriſt
makythe many mo heretykes then there ſhuld be
for he ſtoppythe ſo the knowyng of godes lawe / 
& punyſheth ſo them that he knowyth that have
it / that they dare not comen therof openly to have
trewe informacion / and thys makyth laye men yt
deſyrē & lovē to knowe godes law to goo to gy
                  ••••
               
in pryvyte / and conceyven by theyr owne w
                  •••••
               
many tymes hereſys the whiche hereſies in 
                  〈◊〉
               
tyme ſhuld be deſtroyed / yf men myght have free
comenyng openly / and but if this maye be hade
moche of ye people ſhall dye in hereſy / for it lyethe

               
                  〈◊〉
                in Antichriſtes power to deſtroye all englyſſhe bookes / for as faſt as he brennethe / other men
ſhall drawe / and thus the cauſe of hereſy and of ye
people that dyethe in hereſy is the frowardnes of
byſhoppes that wyll not ſuffer men to haue opyn
comounyng and fre in the lawe of gode and therfore
they be cowntable of as many ſowlys as dyen
in thys default / and are traytors to gode in ſtoppyng
of his lawe the whiche was made in ſaluacion
of ye people.Is not this turninge the rotys of ye tres vpward? And nowe they turne his lawe byther cruell conſtitucyons into dampnacion of the
people as it ſhalbe provyd apon them at the daye of
dome for godes lawe ſaithe / Stabūt iuſti in magna
conſtancia aduerſus eos qui ſe anguſtianerūt / 
et qui abſtulerunt labores eorum. &c. For that yt
other men laborē they brennē / Reade Sapien vi. and vij. and if owre clergy
wold ſtudy well this leſſen of ſapiēce to yt ēde / they
ſhuld mowe rede therin theyr oune dampnacion / 
but if they amend this defaulte with other defaultes.
Saithe not the holy man Ardemakan in the
booke of queſtions that ye wurſhupfull ſacramēt of
the alter maye be made in eche comē langage: For
he ſaithe ſo diden the appoſtles. But we covett
not this / but that Antechriſt geue vs leaue to haue
the lawe of ower beleue in engliſhe. Alſo they
that haue comonyd moche with ye Iewes / ſaye that
they haue in every lande that they be borne in / the
byble in ther mother tounge / that is Ebrewe. And
they be more practyſe therin than annye men / ye

                  〈◊〉
                the lewde men as the preſtes. But it is redde
in ther ſynagoges amonges the people of ther
preſtes to fulfyll ther preſtes office and to the edification
of the poraile / that for worldly buſines
and ſlew the maye not ſtudye it. Alſo the .iiij. evangeliſtes

wrote the goſpell in diverſe langages / as
Mathewe in Iurye / Marke in Italy / Luke in Achaie / 
and Ihon̄ in Aſie. And all theſe wrotte in ye
langages of the ſame contr
                  •
               ys / alſo Thobye ſaithe
Chap. xiij. that gode diſperged / ſpred / or ſcaterid yt
Iewes abrode among the hethen people that they
tellynge vnto they in the merveylles of godde: they
ſhuld knewe that there were none other gode / but
gode of Iſraell. And gode ordyned his people to
beleve his lawe wrytten among them in ther mothertounge / 
vt pater. Ge. xvij. and Exo. xiij. In ſo
moche the boke of Iudithe is wrytten in Calde ſpeche / 
vt peter per Hieronimū in prologo eiuſdē. Alſo
the bookes of Daniel / and of Eſdre ben wrytten
in Calde / vt pater per Hieroni. in prologis eorundē / 
alſo the booke of Iohelis in Arabyke ād Syre
ſpeche / vt pater per Hieroni. in prologo eiuſdē.
Alſo Ezechieſt the prophet propheſyed in Babylon / 
and lefte his propheſye vnder the mother tounge
of Babylon / vt pater per Hieronimū in prologo
eiuſdem Alſo the propheſye of Iſaie is tranſlated
into the tounge of Ethiope / as Hierom̄. cōcludyth
in primo prologo Gene. Then ſythen the darke
propheſyes were tranſlated amonges the hethen
people that they myght have knowledge of gode ād
of the incarnacion of Chriſt / moche more it owght
to be trāſlatyd to englyſhe people that have receivyd
the faythe and bounden them ſelfe to kepe it apon
payne of dampnacion / Mat. xxviij. ſythen Chriſt comm
                  •
               
               unded
his Apoſtles to preache his goſpell 
                  〈◊〉
               
all the worlde and exceptid no people nor lanage.
Alſo Origen tranſlated the byble owt of Ebrewe
into Greke with helpe of other in the yere
of owre lorde God .CCxxxiiij. Alſo Aquila

trāſlated it in ye tyme of Adriā ye emperowre in the
yere of oure lorde .C. xxiiij. / alſo Theodoſiō trāſla it
in ye tyme of thēperowre Contede .luij. yere after
Aquila / alſo Simacus trāſlated it in ye tyme of thē
               perowre Serene .xxx. yere after Theodoſion .viij.
yere after Simacus it was tranſlated the auctor
vnknowen in the tyme of Alexander the emperowre / 
And Ierome tranſlated it into latyn / vt in
cronicis Ciſtercienc. li. ij. ca. xxxij. And after that
Ierom hade tranſlated it into laten / he tranſlated
moche to women of the bible. And to the maydens
Euſtochia and Paula / he tranſlated the bookes of
Ioſue of Iudicum and Ruth / and Heſter / and
Eccleſiaſtes / Ieremy / Iſaie and Daniell / and
the .xij. prophetes / ād the .vij. canonyke epyſtylles
vt pater in prologo corūdem. And ſo all mē maye
ſe here by Ierō that it was neuer his entēt to bynde the lawe of god vnder his tranſlacion of laten
but by his owne dede gevythe leaue to tranſlate it
into every ſpeche for Ierom wrytythe ī his .lxxviij
epyſtle to this man Atleta / that he ſhuld enforme
his daughter in the bookes of the olde lawe and
the newe / Alſo in his .lxxv. epiſtle he wrytythe to ye
virgyn Semetriadis / that ſhe ſhuld for to encreaſe
her ſelfe in vertue rede nowe apō one booke / ād
nowe / apon another. And he ſpecifiethe vnto her
that ſhe alſo reade the goſpell / and the epiſtylles
of the Apoſtles. And thus Thenglyſhe men deſyre
to have the lawe of gode in englyſhe / But my lordes ſay yt 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   maketh me heretikes & peruerteth ſoules. ſythen it

                  •
               s callyd the lawe vndefyled cōuertyng ſowlys in
to clennes / lex dn̄i immaculata conuertens aīas / 
but Antechriſt ſaithe that it is corrupte with litterall
lettre that it ſleyth ſowlys takyng his auctorite
of Paule / that ſaithe / litera occidit ſpiritus audem

viuificat. That is ye Lettre of the ceremonyes
of the olde lawe ſleyth the Iewes / and them
that nowe vſen them / but the ſpirite of the newe lawe
quykenethe trewe Criſten men / ſythen Chriſt
ſaithe my wordes ben ſpritte and lyffe. Alſo we take
enſample of holy virgyns to love to reade the
goſpell as they didē / as Ratheryn / Cecyle / Lucye
Agnes / Margaret / whiche alegyd the holy goſpell
to the infidels / that ſlewe them for the keping
therof. Of theſe foreſaid auctorites it is provyd
laufull / yt bothe men ād women laufully may reade
and wryte gedes lawe in theyr mother tunge / 
and they that forfenden this they ſhewe them
ſelfes heyers and ſonnes of the firſt tormentors / 
and werſe / for they ſhewen them ſelfes the veraye
diſciples of Antichriſt / whiche hathe ād ſhall paſſe
all the malyce of tyrauntes that haue ben before
in ſtoppyng ād pervertynge of godes lawe whiche
deade engendrythe greate vengeaunce to fall
in this realme / but if it be amendid For Paule ſaithe
Roma. 1. The wrathe of gode is ſhewyd from
hevyn vpon cruelnes and vnryghtfulnes of theſe
men that with holden the trowthe of gode in vnright
wyſnes / Reuelatur enim ira dei ſuper omnē
impictarem et iniuſticiam hominum eorū qui veritatem
dei in iniuſtitia detinent. Now gode of hys
mercy geve vnto ower kyng / and to ower lordes
grace of trewe vnderſtandyng to amende this default
principally and all other / then ſhall we 
                  〈◊〉
               
we eaſely to be amendid. For vntyll it be amend
                  ••
               
there ſhall neuer be reſt and peace in thys realme
Who yt fyndythe or redythe this lettre put it furthe
in examinaciō & ſuffer it not to be hydde or deſtroyed / 
but multyplyed for no mā knoweth what

proffyt maye come therof. For he that compilede
it / purpo
                  •
               yth with goddes helpe to mayntayne i
vnto the deathe / yf neade be. And therfore all chriſten
mē and women / praye that the worde of god
maye be vnbounde / and delyvered from the power
of Antichriſt / and renne amonge his people.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Emprented at Marlborow in the lāde of Heſſen / 
be my Hans Luft / in the yere of owre lorde
M. CCCCC. and .XXX.
            
         
      
   