
      
         
            
               
               
APOCALYPSIS. A BRIEFE AND LEARNED COMMENTARIE VPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT Iohn the Apoſtle and Euangeliſt, applyed vnto the hiſtory of the Catholicke and Chriſtian Church.
            
               Written in Latine by M. FRANCIS IVNIVS Doctor of Diuinitie, and profeſſor in the Vniuerſitie of Heidelberge: And tranſlated into Engliſh for the benefit of thoſe that vnderſtand not the Latine.
            
               DEVT. 29. v. 29.
               The things that are ſecret, let them remaine vnto the Lord our God: but the things that are reuealed, are reuealed for vs and for our children for euer: that we may do all the words of this law.
            
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paules Church yard at the ſigne of the braſen ſerpent. 1592.
            
         
         
            
            
            VNTO THE RIGHT NOBLE PERSONAGE OTHO GRINALDIVS, FRANCISCVS IVNIVS SENDETH GREETING.
            
               NAture it ſelfe (moſt noble Grinald) hath taught the husbandmen that are skilfull in grafting, & inoculation, to fence the imps engrafted into the ſtocke, with clay, ſtraw, morter or lome mixt with chaffe vntill the plant haue got a juſt ſtrength, left by anie iniurie of the wether it might receiue hurt. The ſame thing hath God, the author of all wiſdome & of euerie good gift, of his exceeding mercie, towards all mankind, prouided cōtinually in ye husbādrie of his Church. For he hath both infuſed inwardly into his moſt excellent plants, that vi
                  •
               al ſap which is neceſſarie vnto cōtinuance, or rather vnto eternitie, as thoſe which are borne againe of his mightie word: & alſo by the couert of the ſame word, hath fenced thoſe that are plā
               ted in Chriſt againſt the iniuries that outwardly might happen vnto them. In this manner was that auncient Church of the Iewes confirmed of old by the holy ſeruaunt of God Daniell a moſt faithfull Prophet, againſt the violence & fraud of tyrants and of falſe prophets that were to come: And ſo alſo this our Church ſince the firſt comming of Chriſt, remaining in expectance of his ſecond and glorious appearance, hath euermore by all his good ſeruants, and eſpecially by this moſt holy Apoſtle and Euangeliſt S. Iohn, the diſciple whom Chriſt loued, bin preſerued againſt like, or alſo greater tempeſts: ſtrengthened

with his owne forces, and couered as with certaine eaues leaſt by this perpetuall ſhower of incommodities, it ſhould rot, or anie way drop through. For this Apoſtle, vndoubtedly inſpired of God, hath both mightily defended the truth of the doctrine, and perſon of Chriſt, and the loue of the Church from the venimous teeth and bitings of heretickes by his Goſpell, thereby adding an accompliſhment vnto the other holy and diuine Goſpels: and alſo hath in this booke of Reuelation maintained the faith and pacience of the ſaints, from the violent inuaſions of moſt cruell enimies, and of moſt falſe hypocrites. This diuine and wholeſome prouidence, moſt familiarly layd out vnto vs in this booke, Satan hath not ceaſſed from the beginning to oppugne, that he might plucke the ſame (if it were poſſible) out of the mindes of the godly and elect. For as he hath ſtriuen againſt the credit and authoritie of this booke verie much: ſo (when the authoritie thereof was eſtabliſhed) he went about by all poſſible meanes to corrupt the ſence and meaning of the Authour. What and howe mightie engines, howe cunning and daungerous vnderminings he hath employed to ſhake and ouerthrow the authority of this booke, many godly & learned men haue long ſince declared. He hath pretended the vncertaintie of the Author, the phraſe, ſtile, and arguments, and hath abuſed the labour of ſome good men to bring this his purpoſe to paſſe. What? is the Author vncertain of that booke which was committed vnto the cuſtodie of ſeuen Churches, and thoſe the moſt noble and renowned of all Aſia, and preſerued of them moſt religiouſly? It is a fable. For ſhall thoſe Epiſtles which were written vnto the onely Church of Rome, of Corinth, and the like, be of certaine and conſtant authoritie from the teſtimonie of that one Church vnto which they were written, and ſhall the authority of that booke be called into queſtion (if God will) which was written vnto ſeuen Churches? They that pretēd incongruity of ſpeech, verily ſhew themſelues to be of rude and ruſticall iudgement: who do not thinke that our ſpeech, as much as may be, ought to be attempered vnto the heauenly lawes. They obiect ſtrangeneſſe of the ſtile, the publicatiō of his own name, & the oftē repetitiō of the

ſame things. O worthie thetoricians! who wil not haue the ſtile to differ in a different matter. They thinke it agreeth with the modeſtie of S. Iohn to haue concealed his name: as if S. Iohn in this argument did not ſee it more materiall, that by diuerſe times expreſſing of his name, he ſhould (as Daniell did of old time) commend the credit and authority of the booke vnto poſteritie of time to come: then by ſuppreſſing his name to prouide for this imaginarie modeſtie whereof they ſpeake. Is it not as modeſtly done of S. Iohn, that he doth in expreſſe wordes profeſſe him ſelfe the Author of this booke: as when in the laſt chapter of his Goſpell, he doth by circumlocution deſcribe him ſelfe? Verely in neither booke did he erre from modeſtie: but did in both of them, by addition of his name, confirme the credit and authoritie of his writing, neceſſarily & for the publicke good of the Church. That they thinke the ſame thing is often repeated, is partly falſe, and partly where any ſuch repetition is, neceſſarie: which thing our interpretation ſhal declare. How neceſſarie this argument was in the Church of God, we declared in the verie entraunce: and no man will denie, that with cleane eys ſhal looke vnto the hiſtory of the Chriſtian church. Wherefore, albeit the authoritie of this booke ſeemed not ſo great vnto ſome good and godly men in times paſt, yet can not their particular iudgement ouerthrow the publike credit therof: but it is neceſſarie that the authoritie thereof ſhould in the Catholicke Church be accompted entire, beleeued, profeſſed, and preſerued. As for the meaning and ſence of the Author, what need many words? Here verely if any where elſe, that ſaying is true, how many heads, ſo many opinions. But this euill of ignorance, and diſſenting in iudgement, is partly borne with vs from the darkneſſe and infirmitie of our nature: and partly increaſed or heaped vp by ſingularitie of affection: which inconuenience that common aduerſarie of our ſaluation hath much increaſed, both by his owne practiſe, and by the indeuor of his miniſters and inſtruments. Therefore the darkeneſſe of that ignorance infuſed into our minds within, and ſcattered abroade without, hath for the moſt part affrayed good men, otherwiſe excelling in pietie, learning, vtterance, art, and authoritie, from

writing any thing in this argument, or at leaſt from publiſhing the ſame. This modeſtie I commend; but I follow it not. Why ſo? wilt thou ſay; I will ſhew in few wordes what cauſe mooued both others to require it of me, & me to write of this argumēt. So ſhall I (as I hope) both approue mine enterpriſevnto good men: & take away the ſuſpitiō of immodeſtie. There were therfore ſome good perſons that required this dutie at my hāds, for that (I will vſe their owne words) they eſteemed me to abound with good meanes to interpret this prophecie of the newe Teſtament, by reaſon of my continuall reading and diligent exerciſe in the old Teſtament. I as priuie vnto mine owne pouerty, excuſed my ſelf, refuſed the worke, and denied it earneſtly. But they replyed, that this modeſtie was counterfaited, appealed vnto their owne iudgements of me, and flatly charged me to do it of enuie. The importunitie of theſe men forced me much, eſpecially when I conſidered, that both in conference with my friends, & in ſcholaſticall diſputations (which I oftentimes held in mine owne houſe) I knew that ſome things had bene vttered by me, and both noted and taken in writing by mine auditours without my priuitie. Nowe, I ſee what happened in old time to the holy fathers, & what now a dayes alſo vnto ſome good men. They of modeſtie withdrew and ſuppreſſed their meditations, words, & writings: but by that means they opened a large field vnto the impudencie and audaciouſneſſe of others. For when yet their corps was ſcarcely buried, writings, capſodies & commēts were publiſhed in their names, as if they had bin authors of them, which either they neuer bred, or the other vnskilfully gathered, or impudently counterfaited. A moſt vnworthie act, and to be repreſſed by reuenge of the Magiſtrat. I had rather once be immodeſt in the iudgement of theſe men, then beget anie immodeſt perſon, which ſhould attribute vnto me his own inuentions and dreames. Of this expoſition I will ſay nothing, ſaue that I will acknowledge it to be mine owne, and that with mind not to boaſt my ſelf: but to prouide for afterwards, that no man aſcribe vnto me that which him ſelfe hath fained. I promiſe to ſay the truth whereſoeuer by the grace of God I am able: and to be brief in all things: leſt either I in writing, or good

men in reading, ſhould be ſaid to looſe their time. If any thinke otherwiſe then I do, their libertie of iudgement ſhall for me remaine vnto them. For I do not, as a iudge, giue ſentence vpon the worke of others: but as one that would furniſh the ſame feaſt, bring in my diſh amongſt them.
            This litle worke (moſt noble Grinald) I thought good to dedicate vnto you, for your owne ſake, for the publike, and for my ſelfe. For your ſake, that you may know and find, that I do with the conſent of many good men, vnfaynedly reioyce in your behalfe, for that godly care wherewith you are wont to examine both the word and iudgements of God, of which this booke is as a moſt plentifull treaſurie. For the publike cauſe, that the ſame your moſt holy ſtudie, which ſhortly (as I truſt) ſhall be profitable to this country, to all Germanie, and to the church, may by this ſmall light of my dedication be ſet in the ſight of all men, and may be of glorie vnto God moſt gracious and mightie, of example vnto good men, and of ornament vnto your ſelfe. For mine owne ſake, becauſe I am bound hauing bene honoured of you to honor you againe, a man moſt honorable by your owne deſert, and an ornament of your countrey of Germanie. Farewell. the 17. of March 1591.
         
         
            
            AN ADMONITION VNTO THE READER.
            
               LEaſt the ſhortneſſe of this Commentarie (gentle Reader) and thereby perhaps the hardneſſe of the ſame, might either hinder or diſcorage thee in the reading therof, I thought good to admoniſh thee of theſe few things. Firſt, the meaning of the Author was not to write any large or full volume at this time, but briefly, yet exactly, to ſet downe the method and order, & as it were the frame of this Prophecie: and ſo to diſtribute the ſame into diverſe branches and members, that all confuſion auoyded, thou mighteſt diſtinctly ſee to what part of the ſtorie of the Church, and to what point of time, euerie thing is to be referred. As for the matters contained herein, he thought it ſufficient in few words to note and interpret the ſame. Notwithſtānding my hope is, thou ſhalt find ſo much expreſſed briefly, as may in good part ſatiſfie thy deſire, and giue thee occaſion to conſider further of the particulars themſelues, when thou ſhalt ſee the ſence and meaning of them for thy direction. Many I know haue written more largely of this booke, whoſe labours are not to be contēned. Here breuity was ſought, that all things, that all things being in a maner at once ſet before thine

eye, thou mighteſt both more eaſily comprehend that which is ſayd, and better imprint it in thy memory. If thou ſhalt here find any thing different from the iudgement of others, let it not offend thee: conſidering that in myſteries of this ſort, it hath alwayes bene free for men of learning, and excelling in gifts, without either diſgrace to thoſe that went before them, or preiudice to them that follow after them, to deliuer that which they have receiued, and to commend the ſame vnto the iudgement of the Church. Now that thy labour may be with more eaſe, and with greater frute and delight; reade not the commentarie alone, but with preſent view and conſideration of that part of the text wherunto it doth appertaine: for which cauſe thou ſhalt finde the text and the commentarie belonging vnto it, alwayes printed vpon the ſame page. As for certaine words of Art which could not be auoyded, and ſome other vnwonted ſpeech, they ſhall I truſt nothing hinder thy proceeding, becauſe that which is obſcure in them at the firſt ſight, will by that which followeth be made lightſome and plaine vnto thee. It ſhall alſo be profitable for thee, when thou art entred into the reading of this litle worke, not to ſuffer thy ſelfe to be diſtracted or carried away by wearineſſe or vnconſtancie, vntill thou haue ſeene the end of the booke: that comparing all things together, thou mayeſt make accompt of thy labour and profiting herein: both for the truth of the matter propounded, and for thine vſe and frute by the ſame. Alſo it ſhall not repent thee, if not attaining to vnderſtand all things at the firſt reading, thou ſhalt for the excellencie of the matter, which alwayes bringeth ſome difficultie with it, not refuſe

to repeat it the ſecond, and if need rquire the third time. The often noting of the particular Chapters and verſes is more certainly to direct thee to that, the knowledge or remembrance whereof is neceſſarie vnto the preſent place, for thy further inſtruction. For the Tables I haue contracted them as I thought might be more commodious for thee. Vnto this commentarie of Iunius is added the briefe notes of Beza and others in a diuerſe character, and that in the margent of the text, whereunto thou art directed by the letters of the alphabet: as vnto the commentarie by arithmeticall figures. For the tranſlation of the text, I haue in a maner wholly vſed that which is moſt common and in euery mans hand: onely for plainneſſe ſake and more euidencie, I haue in ſome few places, framed the ſame vnto that later edition of the Latine, which as I thought, did more nearely approch vnto the originall Greeke copie. Thus commending thy ſtudies vnto the direction of Gods moſt holy ſpirit, I bid thee farewell in the Lord Ieſus. The 5. of Februarie, 1591.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     The order of time whereunto the contents of this booke are to be referred.
                     The yeare of Christ.
                  
                  
                     THe dragon watcheth the Church of the Iewes, which was readie to trauaile: She bringeth forth, flieth, and hideth herſelfe, whileſt Chriſt was yet vpon the earth.
                     1. &c
                  
                  
                     The dragon perſecuteth Chriſt aſcending into heauen, he fighteth and is throwne downe: and after perſecuteth the Church of the Iewes.
                     34.
                  
                  
                     The Church of the Iewes is receaued into the wilderneſſe, for three yeares and an halfe.
                     67.
                  
                  
                     
                        When the Church of the Iewes was ouerthrowne, the dragon inuaded the Catholique Church, all this is in the 12. chap.
                        The dragon is bound for 1000. yeares chap. 20.
                        The dragon raiſeth vp the beaſt with ſeuen heads, and the beaſt with two heads, which make hauocke of the Church Catholique and her Prophets for 1260. yeares after the Paſſion of Chriſt. chap. 13. and. 11.
                     
                     70.
                  
                  
                     
                        The ſeuen Churches are admoniſhed of things preſent, ſomwhat before the end of Domitian his raigne, and are forewarned of the perſecution to come vnder Traiane for ten yeares. chap. 2. and. 3.
                        God by word and ſignes prouoketh the world, and ſealeth the godly. chap. 6. and. 7.
                        He ſheweth forth exemplars of his wrath vpon all creatures, mākind excepted. chap. 8.
                     
                     97.
                  
                  
                     The dragon is let looſe after 1000. yeares, and Gregorie the vii. being Pope, rageth againſt Henry the third, thē Emperout. chap. 20. 
                     1073
                  
                  
                     
                        The dragon vexeth the world. 150. yeares, vnto Gregorie the ix. who writ the Decretals, and moſt cruelly perſecuted the Emperour Fridericke the 2.
                        The dragon by both the beaſts perſecuteth the Church, & putteth the godlie to death chap. 9.
                     
                     1217
                  
                  
                     The dragon killeth the Prophets after. 1260. yeares, when Boniface the viij. was Pope, who was the authour of the vi. booke of the Decretals: he excommunicated Philip the French king.
                     1295
                  
                  
                     Boniface celebrateth his firſt Iubiley.
                     1300
                  
                  
                     About this time was a great earthquake, which ouerthrew many houſes in Rome.
                     1301
                  
                  
                     
                        Prophecie ceaſſeth for three yeares & half, vntill Benedict the 2. ſucceeded after Boniface viij. Prophecie is reuiued. chap. 11.
                        The dragon and the two beaſts oppugne Propheſie. chap. 13.
                        Chriſt defendeth his Church in word and deede. chap. 14. With threats and armes. chap. 15. With ſingular iudgements. chap. 16.
                        Chriſt giueth his Church victorie ouer the harlot. chap. 17. & 18. Ouer the two beaſts. chap. 19. Ouer the dragon and death. chap. 20.
                        The Church is fullie glorified in heauen with eternall glorie, in Chriſt Ieſus. chap. 21. and 22.
                     
                     1305
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A Table containing the ſumme of this booke in three parts.
            
               1. The exordium, in which are theſe three, 
                     The inſcription of the booke, chap. 1. verſ. 1. 2. 3.
                     The ſalutation, verſ. 4. 5. 6. 7.
                     The calling of Iohn, and the authoritie of this Reuelation, verſ. 8. 18.
                  
               
               2. The argument or cō
                  tentes, in which is a 
                     Diuiſion of the whole into things preſent and things to come, chap. 1. verſ. 19. 20.
                     Narration of things
                           Preſent, written for inſtruction vnto the Churches that were At 
                                 Epheſus, Smyrna, Chapter 2.
                                 Pergamus, Thyatira, Chapter 2.
                                 Sardis, Philadelphia, Chap. 3.
                                 Laodicea,— Chap. 3.
                              
                           
                           To come
                                 Generall vnto the whole world wherein is 
                                       The calling of Iohn, & the authoritie of this reuelation confirmed from the perſon of him that calleth, God the Father, chap. 4. and God the Sonne, chap. 5.
                                       The workes of God, which are of three ſorts 
                                             Foretelling & foreſignifying of the miſeries that ſhould come vpon the world, chap. 6.
                                             Deliuerāce of the elect, who are ſealed with the ſeale of God before the euils prefigured ſhold be executed, chap. 7.
                                             Execution of Gods iudgements vpon 
                                                   Other creatures, chap. 8.
                                                   Mankind, by tribulation and ſlaughters, chap. 9.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Particular. As in the ſecond Table.** Particular belōging vnto Gods people, wherein is
                                       The calling of S. Iohn, and the authoritie of his reuelation, from the perſon of the Sonne of God, chap. 10.
                                       The hiſtorie of the
                                             Prophets, fighting for the ſpace of 1260. yeares: ſlaine, and raiſed vp againe in the church chap. 11
                                             Church
                                                   Of the Iewes, oppugned by the dragon, before trauell, and in trauell, and after trauell chapter 12.
                                                   Chriſtian & Catholike, in which are the
                                                         Battailes
                                                               Suſtained againſt the two beaſts, chap. 13.
                                                               Made vpon thē, in Chriſt, by
                                                                     Preaching, and working, chap. 14.
                                                                     Threates, chap. 15.
                                                                     Iudgements, chap. 16.
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         Victorie gotten by Chriſt ouer the
                                                               Harlot, chap. 17. 18.
                                                               Two beaſts, chap. 19.
                                                               Dragon, both before and after the thouſand yeares. chap. 20.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         Glorie, of the Church eternally triumphing, chap 21. and 22. vnto the ſixt verſe.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               3. The concluſion, which hath a
                     Confirmation, chap. 22. 6. 19.
                     Salutation. verſe 20. &c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ I HAVE NOT THOVGHT GOOD TO PVT forth any ſuch thing as yet, vpon the Reuelation, as I haue vpon the former bookes: notwithſtanding I liked well to ſet downe in the meane ſeaſon that, that I wrote a fewe yeeres ſince, concerning the authoritie of this booke. And this is it.
            BEcauſe ſome men haue of long time doubted of the authoritie of this booke, I will in fewe wordes confute thoſe argumentes, which are commonly brought to thu purpoſe, and after ſhewe mine owne opinion, and what I thinke. And I will recite the arguments in ſuch order, as Eraſmus hath paynfully and diligently gathered them together: whoſe iudgement ſeemeth to mee ſo vncertaine in this point (as it is alſo in many other) that no man can readily tell what opinion he was of, ſaue that after much a doe, he ſeemeth to bende this way, that hee is of opinion, that this booke is of ſome authoritie, though not of ſo good as the reſt of the bookes are which we receiue without any gaineſaying. Therefore let vs heare what hee ſayth. Hierome witneſſeth, ſayth he, that the Grecians in his time did not receiue the Reuelation. Dorotheus Byſhoppe of Tyrus, and a Martyr, in his abbridgement of liues recordeth that John wrote his Gospell in the Ile of Patmos, but maketh no mention of this booke. Athanaſius a Grecian in his catalogue doeth not ſay that this is Johns worke. Dionyſius of Alexandria, as Euſebius reporteth his wordes, in the ſeuenth booke of his Eccleſiaſticall historie, thinketh that this booke was written of ſome other John, who was a godly man. Euſebius him ſelfe ſo citeth this booke in diuers places of his historie, that hee doeth not flatly vouch it to be Iohns: but alleageth one Caius that was a good Christian in the fourth booke of his historie, who ſayeth it was written of one Cerinthus an heretike. Let this bee the first argument which I anſwere in this ſort. If we weigh the reaſons that moued thoſe men to reiect this booke, then wee ſhall ſee howe vndeſeruedly they did it. Againe as ſome did reiect it, ſo did the most part receiue it: in ſo much that Epiphanius reckoneth them amongst heretikes that did reiect it: as for Iustine the philoſopher, and Irene Byſhoppe of Lions which were both martyrs, and did not onely allowe it, but alſo wrote commentaries vpon it, I will not ſpeake of them. As for that that is alledged of Dorotheus, it is to no great purpoſe, for that he is thought to reiect it, becauſe hee ſpake not of it. As touching Athanaſius, Eraſmus him ſelfe witneſſeth that it is doubtfull whether that worke be his or no. Concerning Dionyſius wee will weigh by and by what hee ſayeth, when wee come to conſider of his reaſons. As for Catus (what man ſo euer hee was) hee is eaſily to be refuted euen by Dionyſius his wordes in the third booke of the Eccleſiasticall hiſtorie. As for Euſebius I make no account of him, for there are none learned, but finde want of iudgement in him. Nowe let vs come to the other argument. Hierome writeth (ſayth he) that certaine very well learned men found great fault and ſpake ſharply against the whole matter of this booke, as though there were nothing in it worthie the grauitie of an Apostle, but onely a common hiſtorie of things ſhadowed with certaine darke figures and hard kinde of ſpeaches. And moreouer that in the very ſentences them ſelues there was nothing that becommed the grauitie of an Apoſtle. Which I anſwere in this ſort: What learned men ſo euer theſe were, they are greatly to be blamed, in that they durſt be ſo bolde to ſpeake euill of that booke, which no doubt is very ſhort, if thoſe things be excepted, which are tranſlated worde for worde out of the Prophetes. Baſil, Gregorie, Cyril, Epiphanius, Irene, Hippolite, as Aretas witneſſeth, were not of this iudgement, which thought not onely as Dionyſius of Alexandria did, that ſome godly man wrote this booke, but alſo plainely vouched it to be Iohn the Apoſtle, which no doubt they would neuer haue done, if they had found no reſemblance

of the grauitie of an Apoſtle in it. And whether of theſe ſhall J count for the better learned? whether theſe men, which haue giuen recorde both of their ſingular godlineſſe, and excellent learning by publiſhing many workes, or thoſe men rather, whoſe onely names are ſcarcely heard of: and the reaſons they vſe, giue ſufficient proofe howe learned they were? They ſay there appeared no grauitie in this writer, and yet he hath taken euery what almost worde for worde out of the Prophets: they ſay he hath put downe a common historie. But howe can that be, ſeeing (a fewe things onely except) he maketh no relation of things past, but foretelleth things to come? And therefore they doe not onely not ſpeake that, that is trueth, but not ſo much as any piece or reſemblance of trueth.
            Nowe let vs come to the third argument: Hee is very curious (ſayth one) in ſetting downe his owne name, as though he ſhould indite an obligation, and not write a booke, which is not onely not vſed of any of the Apostles, but is alſo vnaccustomed of him ſelfe: for in his Gospel where he entreateth a great deale more modest matters, then theſe are, he neuer nameth himſelfe, but onely pointeth it out by ſome ſuch markes as theſe, the diſciple whome Jeſus loued. And Paul when he is enforced to ſpeake of his Reuelations, ſetteth out the matter vnder an other mans perſon. And yet this man, while he deſcribeth the ſecrete conference which he had with Angels, hath neuer done with theſe kinde of wordes, I Iohn. This reaſon mooued Dionyſius of Alexandria to thinke, that ſome other man wrote this booke. But what weake, and ſlender coniectures are theſe? litle did theſe good men conſider, that it was one thing to write an historie, and an other to ſet downe a prophecie: for the trueth of an historie hangeth not ſo much vpon the credite of the writer, as vpon other circumstances, but a prophecie: becauſe it foretelleth things to come, ſtandeth vpon the authoritie of him that reueileth it, and his that preacheth it, ſo that it is of neceſſitte to giue vs to vnderstande, both from whence that forewarning came, and who reueiled it, and who wrote it. Whereupon we ſee, that not onely in the beginning of prophecies, but alſo almost in euery viſion, there is nothing ſo curiouſly ſet downe as the Name of God who ſpake it, and the name of the Prophet who wrote it: Take for example, onely the Prophet Ieremie, who maketh mention of his name, at the leaſt an hundred times. And ſo was it requiſite for him to doe, that hee might not ſeeme to ſeeke lurking corners to hide him ſelfe in as the falſe prophets did. And what? doe we not finde from the ſeuenth Chapter of Daniel, that almost in euery verſe hee repeateth his owne name, and ſayth, I Daniel? And howe oft doeth Eſay repeate theſe wordes, Eſay the ſonne of Amos? But Iohn did not ſo in his Gospell. J graunt: for he wrote an historie, wherein that befell him, which befell to none other of the diſciples: for hee was occaſioned to ſpeake many things of himſelfe. Nay, Paul alſo did not ſo: In deede hee did not ſo, in any place where he handled not his viſions purpoſely, but whenſoeuer hee voucheth the excellencie of his miniſterie, howe boldly and howe magnifically doeth hee call himſelfe that Paul which was appointed to bee an Apoſtle, not of men, nor by men, but by Ieſus Chriſt? And howe? when hee reporteth thoſe his great combates, doeth hee take vpon him anothers man perſon? Nay let vs goe further: Iohns name is not to bee found (vnleſſe I be deceiued in my reckoning) aboue fiue times in all this worke: and thoſe wordes (I Iohn) but onely thriſe, to wit, chap. 1. verſe 9. and yet with an explication added to it, which may ſuffice aboundantly to put away all ſuspition of pride: and againe, chap. 21. verſe 2. and chap. 22. verſe 8. in both which places hee reporteth onely ſimply what he ſawe, to the ende, that no man might doubt of the trueth of his prophecie. Therefore, to make an ende of this reaſon in fewe wordes, that argument which Dionyſius maketh, is not onely vaine, but alſo argueth want of skill, and is in deede very ſlanderous: nay, I may ſay more, and ſay truely (without any malice to any as the Lorde is witneſſe) that this was too vnaduiſedly

ſpoken, where hee ſayeth, that the Euangeliſt is as curious in his often repeating of, I Iohn, as if he had bene writing an obligation, and no booke.
            Nowe to the fourth Argument: In all the Greeke copies that I haue ſeene, ſaith he, it was not intituled the Reuelation of Iohn the Euangeliſt, but, of Iohn the diuine, which is ſufficient to prooue it was Iohn the Euangeliſt: for all that are learned knowe that he was by excellencie, and by a prerogatiue as it were, called by this name The Diuine, of all the olde writers, becauſe neuer man wrote ſo plainely and diuinely of the diuinitie of Chriſt as he did. As for the other Iohn, who I thinke was a counterfaite, was not called by this excellent name Diuine, but an Elder.
            Nowe for the vnlikenes of his ſtile, and ſpeach, which that Dionyſius of Alexandria prooueth by three reaſons as Nicephorus recordeth, Eccle. lib. 6. cap. 23. firſt by the whole courſe and nature of his wordes, ſecondly, that whereas the Gospell and Catholike Epiſtle of Iohn, agree in very many pointes, this booke hath not one worke like. Laſtly, becauſe Iohn had an excellent gift of ſpeach, but this man is very clowniſh, barbarous, and tripped oft in his language. To the firſt I anſwere, that in ſo diuers a matter, it is no maruaile, to ſee ſo diuers a kinde of ſtile: for in the hiſtorie of the Gospell, and in the Epiſtles, though he ſpake as he was mooued by the holy Ghoſt, yet he ſpake what his minde led him: and here he is but the writer of ſuch things as hee heard and were deliuered him: In the other he ſomewhat maketh report of the hiſtorie, and ſometime teacheth, but in this he ſpeaketh of things to come, and in ſuch order of wordes as he is appointed: And ſhall we maruaile then that hee vſeth not one ſelfe ſame kinde of ſentences? Nay, what writer was there euer that was tied ſo ſhort? are not many things deliuered to him in the very wordes of the olde Prophets, euen in the ſame that Ezechiel, Daniel, Zacharie, Eſai, and other ſpake withall, by the direction of the ſelfe ſame Spirit, which ſpake the ſelfe ſame in them in olde time? And therefore it is no maruaile that he vſeth not ſo refined a kinde of ſpeach, as happely they would deſire, ſeeing he ſwarueth neither in ſpeache, nor in characters, from the Prophets which wrote in the Hebrewe tongue: and therefore there is leſſe cauſe of ſuspicion that it ſhoulde be any counterfeite worke ſlily crept into the Church.
            Nowe remaineth the laſt Argument, which ſeemeth to charge him that hee fauoureth the hereſie of the Chiliaſtes, whereupon diuers thought that Cerinthus made this booke and fathered it vpon ſome of the Apoſtles. But for mine owne part, though I graunt that the Chiliaſtes haue abuſed many teſtimonies out of this booke, yet I can not yeelde to that, and thinke that ſome heretikes ſhould make it, vnleſſe ſome man he able to ſhewe mee, that thoſe places can not ſitly he taken in any other ſenſe: or els what booke is there, that we may receiue? And that thoſe places are otherwiſe to be taken, diuers learned men haue ſhewed long agoe: ſo that the like hath be fallen this booke as did to the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, which ſome man reiected very obſtinately, becauſe it ſeemed to make for the Nouatians: where as in deede they ought rather to haue accuſed their owne ignorance. Moreouer, ſeeing Cerinthus had many other mad and wicked opinions, as that, hee denied that God made the worlde, and taught that Chriſt was borne of Marie, and Ioſeph, as all other men are borne, and maketh Chriſt, and Ieſus two diſtinct perſons: howe commeth it to paſſe that hee ſprinkled none of this Foule holy water amongst the reſt in this booke? But he was ſo farre from ſo doing, that contrariwiſe there may be diuers arguments taken out of this booke againſt thoſe errours: ſo that it may appeare by this one reaſon, that Cerinthus was not the authour of this booke. And againe, where as hee ſpeaketh of the thouſand yeeres, hee mentioneth no one iote of thoſe things, which Cerinthus ſo impudently chattred of. For where is there any mention of that ryote which Ceriathus talketh of? where is that cating? drinking? where are thoſe marriages and paſtimes? where are the ſacrifices and holy dayes

which ſhould be kept at Hieruſalem? Therefore this is a vaine and a fooliſh argument. And ſeeing theſe things are ſo, though I would not ſteffely ſtand in contention forthe authours name, yet I rather iudge it to be Iohn the Apoſtle, then any other mans: For beſides that it appeareth to be very aunctent, and the learnedſt and the godlieſt of the olde Fathers doubt not, but it was Iohns.
            Theſe coniectures alſo leade me to thinke ſo: for that I finde none of thoſe dayes to whome either prophecies ſo full of maieſtie, or ſo honourable a name of a diuine, may be aſcribed: and moreouer, that it ſauoureth of the worthineſſe and excellencie of an Apoſtle, to write to the Churches of Aſia, and not to one Church: Laſily, becauſe thoſe thinges which are here ſpoken of Patmos, agree wholy with that which the olde Fathers haue written with one conſent, concerning Johns bantſhment. And yet notwithſtanding if it may be lawfull to coniecture by the kiude of ſpeach it ſelfe, I would thinke it to be no mans ſooner then Markes, who was alſo called Iohn: hee is ſo like not onely in wordes, but alſo in diuers kindes of ſpeach, to the Gospell of Saint Marke, in ſo much that theſe two bookes haue almoſt one kinde of character. As for the booke it ſelfe, though I confeſſe that theſe myſteries are as yet very darke to me, yet notwithſtanding, ſeeing there appeareth in all partes of it a great maieſtie of the ſpirite of prophecie, and the very ſteppes and ſentences, yea and the wordes of the olde Prphets, ſeeing there are to be found in it manifeſt and mightie teſtimonies, both of the Diuiniete of Chriſt, and alſo of our redemption: And laſt of all, ſeeing that part of thoſe things are moſt manifeſtly come to paſſe, which were foretolde by him, as thoſe things which hee ſpake of the deſtruction of the Churches of Aſia, and of the kingdome of the whore, which ſitteth vpon ſeuen billes, I am perſwaded and thinke that the holy Ghoſts meaning was to heape vp together, in this moſt precious booke, all ſuch things, as by the forewarning of the olde Prophets remained to be fulfilled after the comming of Chriſt: and added alſo a fewe things, as hee thought expedient for vs. I graunt they are very darke, but that is no ſtrange thing in the Prophets writings, as especially in Ezechiels. But this is our fault, becauſe we take not diligent heede to things, but ouerſlip thoſe iudgements of Gods prouidence, which dayly are to be ſeene in his gouerning of the Church, by hauing our hearts too much ſet vpon our owne priuate affaires. To be ſhort, the Lorde knoweth what, and howe farre it is expedient for vs to knowe, and therefore in times paſt, he ſo dispoſed the light of his Prophets, as for his infinite wiſedome he ſawe it would bee profitable for his Church. And therefore godly men haue to ſearche and wade in theſe myſteries with feare and reuerence, ſo farre forth, as lawfully and profitably they may: and let all men reuerence the myſteries of God, which are comprehended in this booke, whether they knowe them, or knowe them not, rather then as many doe, either mocke at them, or defile them with their fantaſticall commentaries.
         
      
      
         
            THE REVELATION OF SAINT IOHN THE APOSTLE and Euangeliſt, with a briefe and learned commentarie, written by Franc. Iunius, &c.
         
         
            CHAP. 1.
            
               1 He declareth what kind of doctrine is here handled, 8 euē his, that is the beginning and ending: 12 Then the myſterie of the ſeuen candleſtickes and ſtarres 20 is expounded.
               
            
            
               THE An opening of ſecret and hidde things. reuelation of Which the Sonne opened to vs out of his Fathers boſome by Angels. IESVS Beza & others CHRIST, which God gaue vnto him, that he might declare vnto his ſeruants the things which muſt ſhortly be done: which he ſent, and ſignified by his Angel vnto his ſeruant Iohn; F. IVNIVS.
            
            2 Who teſtified the word of God, and the This chapter hath two principall parts, the title or inſcription, which ſtā
                  deth in ſteed of an exordium; & a narration going before the whole propheſie of this booke. The inſcription is double, general and particular. The generall containeth the kind of propheſie, the author, end, matter, inſtruments, and manner of communicating the ſame, in the firſt verſe: the moſt religious faithfulneſſe of the Apoſtle, as a publike witnesse, verſe 2. And the vſe of communicating the ſame, taken from the promiſe of God, & from the circumſtance of the time, verſe, 3. witneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and all thinges that he ſaw.
            3 Bleſſed is he that readeth, and bleſſed are they that heare the words of this prophecie, and obſerue thoſe things which are written therein: for the time appointed is at hand.
            
               
4 This is the particular or ſingular inſcription, wherein ſaluation is written vnto certaine Churches by name, which repreſent the Church Catholike: and the certaintie and truth of the ſame is declared, from the author therof, vnto the 8. ver. Iohn to the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia; Grace be vnto you, and peace; from him By theſe three times, Is, Was & Shalbe, is ſignifiaed this word lehouah, which is the proper name of God. Which 
                  Exod. 3. 14. is, and Which was, and Which is That is, from God the Father aeternal, immortal, immutable; whoſe vnchangeablenes S. Iohn declareth by a forme of ſpeech which is vndeclined. For there is no incongruitie in this place, where, of neceſſitie the words muſt be attempeted vnto the myſteries, & not the myſteries corrupted or impaired by the words. to come; and from That is, from the holy Ghoſt, which proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne. This Spirit is one in perſon according to his ſubſiſtencie; but in communication of his vertue, & in demonſtration of his diuine works in thoſe ſeuē Churches, doth ſo perfectly manifeſt himſelfe, as if there were ſo many Spirits, euerie one perfectly working in his owne Church. Wherefore after chap. 5. 6. they are called the ſeuen hornes and ſeuen eyes of the Lambe, as much to ſay, as his moſt abſolute power & wiſedome: & chap. 3. 1. Chriſt is ſaid to haue thoſe ſeuen Spirits of God: & cha. 4. 5. it is ſaid, that ſeuen lamps do burne before his throne, which alſo are thoſe ſeuen Spirits of God. That this place ought to be ſo vnderſtood, it is thus proued. For firſt grace and peace is asked by prayer of this Spirit, which is a diuine worke, & an action incōmunicable in reſpect of the moſt high Deitie Secondly he is placed between the Father and the Sonne, as ſet in the ſame degree of dignitie and operation with them. Beſides he is before the throne as of the ſame ſubſtance with the Father & the Sonne: as the ſeuc̄ eyes, & ſeuen hornes of the Lamb. Moreouer theſe Spirits are neuer ſaid to adore God, as all other things are. Finally, this is that power whereby the Lambe opened the booke, and looſed the ſeuen ſeales thereof: when none could be found amongſt all creatures by whom the booke might be opened cha. 5. Of theſe things long agoe M. Iohn Luide of Oxford wrote learnedly vnto me. Now the holy Ghoſt is ſet in order of words before Chriſt, becauſe there was in that which followeth, a long proceſſe of ſpeach to be vſed concerning Chriſt. the 
                  Theſe are the ſeuen ſpirits, which are afterward chap. 5 ver. 6. called the hornes and eyes of the Lambe, and are now made as a gard waiting vpō God.
                ſeuen Spirites which are before his Throne;
            5 And frō Ieſus Chriſt, A moſt ample & graue commendation of Chriſt, firſt from his offices, the prieſthood and kingdome: ſecondly from his benefits, as his loue towards vs, and waſhing vs with his bloud, in this verſe; and communication of his kingdome and prieſthood with vs: thirdly from his eternall glorie and power, which is alwayes to be celebrated of vs, ver. 6. Pinally from the accompliſhment of all things once to be effected by him, at his ſecond comming; what time he ſhall openly deſtroy the wicked, & ſhall comfort the godly in the truth ver. 7. which is that 
                  Pſal. 89. 38. faithfull

witneſſe, 1. Cor. 15. 21. Coloſ. 1. 18. that firſt begotten of the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of the earth; who loued vs, and waſhed vs from our ſinnes with his owne 
                  Heb 9. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 19. 1. Iohn. 1. 9. blood:
            6 And made vs 1. Pet. 2. 5. Kings and Prieſts vnto God euen his Father; to him be glorie, and power for euermore, Amen.
            7 Behold, he commeth with 
                  Eſa. 3. 14. Mat. 24. 30. Iude. 14. clouds, and euery All men. eye ſhall ſee him: yea euen they which pierced him through: and all the kinreds of the earth ſhall waile before him: Euen ſo, Amen.
            8 A confirmatiō of the ſalutation afore going, takē frō the words of God himſelfe: in which he auoucheth his operation in euerie ſingular creature, the immutable eternitie that is in himſelf, & his omnipotencie in all things: and concludeth in the vnitie of his owne eſſence, that Trinitie of perſons which was before ſpoken of. I 
                  Chap. 21. 6. & 22. 13. am I am he, before who there is nothing; yea by whō euery thing that is made, was made and who shall remaine though all they should perish. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the beginning and the ending, ſaith the Lord, that is, he Which is, and Which was, and Which is to come, euen that Almightie one.
            9 The narration, opening the way to the declaring of the authoritie and calling of S. Iohn the Euangeliſt in this ſingular Reuelation; and to procure faith and credit vnto this propheſie. This is the ſecond part of this Chapter, conſiſting of a propoſition, and an expoſition. The propoſition ſheweth, firſt who was called vnto this Reuelation, in what place, and how occupied. verſ. 9. Then at what time, and by what meanes, namely, by the Spirit and the word; & that on the Lords day; which day euer ſince the reſurrection of Chriſt was conſecrated for Chriſtians vnto the religion of the Sabboth: that is to ſay, to be a day of reſt, ver. 10. Thirdly, who is the author that calleth him, and what is the ſomme of his calling. I Iohn, who alſo am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdome and patience of Ieſus Chriſt, was in the yle called Patmos is one of the Iles of Sporas, whether Iohn was banished, as ſome write. Patmos, for the word of God, and for the witneſſing of Ieſus Chriſt:
            10 And I was rapt in Thus is that holy rauishment expreſſed wherewith the Prophets were rauished, and being as it were caried out of the world, were conuerſant with God: and ſo Ezechiel ſaith often, that he was caried from place to place of the Lords Spirit, and that the Spirit of the Lord fell vpon him. ſpirit on the 
                  He calleth that the Lords day, which Paul calleth the firſt day of the weeke. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Lords

day, and hard behind me a great voyce, as it had bene of a trumper,
            11 Of one that ſaid, I am 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that firſt and that laſt: &, That which thou ſeeſt, write in a booke, and ſend it vnto the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia, at Epheſus, and at Smyrna, & at Pergamus, and at Thyatira, and at Sardis, and at Philadelphia, and at Laodicea.
            12 The expoſition, declaring the third & laſt point of the propoſition (for th' other points are euident of themſelues) wherin is ſpokē firſt of the Author of this calling, vnto the 16 verſe. Secondly of the calling it ſelfe, vnto the end of the chapter. And firſt of all, the occaſion is noted in this verſe, in that S. Iohn turned himſelf towards the viſion: after is ſet downe the deſcription of the Author, in the verſes following. Then I turned backe to To ſee him whoſe voice he had heard. ſee the voyce, that ſpake with me: The deſcription of the Author, which is Chriſt: by the candleſtickes that ſtand about him, that is, the Churches that ſtand before him, and depend vpon his direction, in this verſe: by his properties, that he is one furniſhed with wiſedome and dexteritie to the atchieuing of great things, verſe 13. with auncient grauitie, and moſt excellent ſight of the eye, verſe 14. with ſtrength inuincible, and with a mightie word, verſe. 15. By his operations, that he ruleth the miniſterie of his ſeruaunts in the Church, giueth effect there unto by the ſword of his word, and enlightening althings by his countenance, doth moſt mightely prouide for euerie one by his diuine prouidence. verſe 16. and when I was turned, I ſaw ſeuen golden candleſticks:
            13 And in the midſt of the ſeuen golden candleſticks, one like vnto the Sonne of man, clothed with a garment downe to the feete, and girded about the pappes with a golden girdle.
            14 His head, and haires were white as white wooll, and as ſnow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;
            15 And his feete like vnto fine braſſe, burning as in a fornace: and his voyce as the ſound of many waters.
            16 And he had in his right hand ſeuen ſtarres: and out of his mouth went a ſharpe two edged ſword: and his face ſhone as the ſunne ſhineth in his ſtrength.
            
               
17 A religious feare, that goeth before the calling of the Saints, & their full confirmatiō to take vpon them the vocation of God. And when I ſaw him, I fell at his feete as dead. A diuine cō
                  firmatiō in this calling, partly by ſigne, and partly by the word of power. then he laid his right hand vpon me, ſaying vnto me, Feare not: A moſt elegant deſcription of this calling, contained in three things, which are neceſſarie vnto a iuſt vocation: firſt the authoritie of him that calleth, for that he is the beginning and the end of all things, in this verſe; for that he is aeternall and omnipotent, verſe 18. Secondly the ſumme of this propheticall calling and reuelation, verſe 19. Laſtly a declaration of thoſe perſons vnto whom this propheſie is by the commaundement of God directed in the inſcription thereof, verſe 20. I am that 
                  Eſa. 41. 4. and 44. 6. firſt, and that laſt,
            18 And which am aliue; but I was dead: and behold I liue for euermore, A men: and I haue the keyes of hell and of death.
            19 The ſumme of this propheſie, that the Apoſtle muſt write whatſoeuer he ſhould ſee, adding nothing, nor taking away any thing, as verſe 2. Here of there were two parts: one is a narration of thoſe things which are, that is, which then are at that time, contained in the ſecōd and third Chapters: the other part is of thoſe things which were to come, contained in the reſt of this booke. Write the things which thou haſt ſeene; both which are, and which ſhall come to paſſe hereafter.
            20 That is, the thing which was myſtically ſignified by the particulars of the viſion before going. The myſterie of the ſeuen ſtarres which thou ſaweſt in my right hand, & the ſeuen golden candleſticks, is this; thoſe ſeuen ſtarres are the By Angels, he meaneth the Miniſters of the Churches. Angels of the ſeuen Churches: and thoſe ſeuen candleſticks which thou ſaweſt, are the ſeuen Churches.
         
         
            CHAP. II
            
               
                  Iohn is commaunded to write thoſe things, which the Lord knew neceſſarie, to the Churches of Epheſus, 8 of the Smyrnians, 12 Of Pergamus, 18 and of Thyatira, 25 that they keepe thoſe things which they receiued of the Apoſtles.
               
            
            
               
1 F. IVNIVS. VNto The former part of this booke is cōpriſed in a narratiō of thoſe things which then were, as S. Iohn taught vs chap. 1. 19. it belongeth wholy vnto inſtructiō; & in theſe 2. next chapters, containeth ſeuen places, according to the nū
                  ber and condition of thoſe churches which were named before cha. 1. 11 figured verſ. 12. and diſtributed moſt aptly into their Paſtors & flockes, verſe. 20. which verſe of that Chapter is as it were a paſſage vnto this firſt part. Euerie one of theſe ſeuen places hath three principall members, an Exordium taken from the perſon of the Author: a propoſition, in which is praiſe and commendation of that which is good, reprehenſion of that which is euill: and inſtruction, containing either an exhortation alone, or withall a diſſuaſion oppoſite vnto it: and a concluſion ſtirring vp vnto attention, by diuine promiſes. And this firſt place is vnto the Paſtors of the Church of Epheſus. the Angel of the Church of Epheſus write; The exordium; wherein are contained the ſpeciall praiſes of Chriſt Jeſus the Author of this propheſie, out of the 16. and 13. verſes of the firſt Chapter. Theſe things ſaith he that holdeth thoſe ſeauen ſtarres in his right hand, and walketh in the middes of thoſe ſeuen golden candleſtickes.
            2 The propoſition, firſt commending the Paſtour of this Church, verſe 2. 3. then reprouing him, verſe 4. after informing him, and withall threatening that he will tranſlate the Church to another place; verſe 5. This commination or threat Chriſt mittigateth by a kinde of correction, calling to minde the particular vertue and pietie of that Church, which God neuer leaueth without recompence. verſe. 6. Concerning the Nicolaitans ſee after vpon the 15. verſe. I Know thy workes, and thy labour, and thy patience; and how thou canſt not beare them which are euill, and doeſt examine them which ſay they are Apoſtles, and are not, and haſt found them liars.
            3 And thou waſt burdened, and haſt patience; and for my Names ſake haſt laboured, and waſt not wearied.
            4 Neuertheles, I haue ſomewhat 
               To deale with thee for. againſt thee, which is, that thou haſt giuen ouer thy firſt loue.
            5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the firſt workes: otherwiſe I will come againſt thee ſhortly; and will remoue thy candleſticke out of his place, except thou amend.
            6 But this thou haſt, that thou hateſt the workes of the Nicolaitans; which alſo I hate.
            
               
7 The concluſion, containing a commaundement of attention, and a promiſe of euerlaſting life, ſhadowed out in a figure, of which Gen. 2. 9. Let him that hath an eare, heare, what the Spirit ſaith vnto the churches, To him that ouercōmeth, wil I giue to eat, of that tree of life which is in That is, in Paradiſe; after the manner of the Hebrew phraſe. the midſt of the Thus Chriſt ſpeaketh as he is Mediatour. Paradiſe of God.
            8 ¶ The ſecond place is vnto the paſtors of the church of the Smyrneans. The exordium is taken out of the 17. and 18 verſes of the firſt Chapter. And vnto the Angell of the Church of the Smyrna was one of the cities of Ionia in Aſia. Smyrnians write, Theſe things ſaith he that is firſt, and laſt, which was dead and is aliue:
            9 The propoſition of praiſe is in this verſe; and of exhortation ioyned with promiſe, is in the next verſe. I know thy workes, and tribulation, and pouertie (but thou art rich) and the blaſphemy of them, which ſay they are Iewes, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.
            10 Feare none of thoſe things, which thou ſhalt ſuffer: behold, it ſhall come to paſſe, that the diuell ſhall caſt ſome of you into priſon that ye may be tried; and ye ſhall haue That is, often yeares. For ſo commonly both in this booke and in Daniel, yeares are ſignified by the name of dayes; that God thereby might declare, that the ſpace of time is appointed by him, and the ſame very ſhort. Now becauſe S. Iohn wrote this booke in the end of Domitian the Emperour his raigne, as Iuſtinus and Irenaeus do witneſſe, it is altogether neceſſarie that this ſhould be referred vnto that perſecution which was done by the authoritie of the Emperour Traian: who began to make hauocke of the Chriſtian Church in the tenth yeare of his raigne, as the hiſtoriographers do write; and his bloudie perſecution continued untill Adrian the Emperour had ſucceeded in his place. The ſpace of which time is preciſely teny eares which are here mentioned. tribulation for ten dayes: be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life.
            11 The concluſion as verſe 7. Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit ſaith to the churches: He that ouercommeth, ſhal not be hurt See Chapt. 20. 6. of the ſecōd death.
            12 ¶ The third place is vnto the Paſtors of Pergamus. The exordium is taken out of the 16, verſe of the firſt Chapter. And to the Angel of the church which is at Pergamus was the name of a famous citie in old time in Aſia, where the Kings of the Aitalians were alwayes reſident. Pergamus write, Theſe things ſaith he which hath that ſharpe ſword with two edges.
            1

3 The propoſition of praiſe is in this verſe; of reprehenſion in the two following; and of exhortation ioyned with a conditionall threate, verſe 16. Now this Antipas was the Angell or miniſter of the Church of Pergamus as Aretas writeth. I Knowe thy workes, and where thou dwelleſte, uen where Satans throne is; & that thou keepeſt my Name, and haſt not denied my ſaith, euen in The faith of thē of Pergamus is ſo much the more highly commended, becauſe they remained conſtāt euen in the verie heate of perſecution. thoſe dayes when Antipas my faithfull martyr was ſtaine among you, where Satan dwelleth.
            14 But I haue a few things againſt thee; that thou haſt there them that maintaine the doctrine of 
                  Num. 24. 14. and 25. 1. Balaam, which taught Balac to put a ſtumbling blocke before the children of Iſrael, that they ſhould 
                  That which is here ſpoken of things offered to Idols, is meant of the ſame kinde which Paule ſpeaketh of 1. Co. 10. 14. eate of things ſacrificed vnto idolls, and commit fornication:
            15 Euen ſo haſt thou them, that maintain the doctrin of the Which follow the footeſteps of Balaam, and such as are abandoned vnto all filthines, is he ſhewed in the verſe a foregoing & is here ſignified by a note of ſimilitude And thus alſo muſt the 6. verſe be vnderſtood. For this matter eſpecially Irenaeus muſt be conſulted withal. Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.
            16 Repent, or elſe I will come againſt thee ſhortly, and will fight againſt them with the ſword of my mouth.
            17 The concluſion, ſtanding of exhortation as before and of promiſe. Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit ſaith vnto the Churches, To him that ouercommeth, will I giue to eate The bread of life, inuiſible, ſpirituall, and heauenly, which is kept ſecretly with God, from before all eternitie. of that 
                  He alludeth to that ſermō which we read of, Ioh. 6 and to the place we finde Pſalm. 105. 40. Manna that is hid, and will giue him a Arteas writeth, that ſuch a ſtone was wōt to be giuē to wreſtlers at games, or elſe that ſuch ſtones did in old time witneſſe the quitting of a man. 
               Which is a ſigne and witneſſe of forgiueneſſe and remiſſion of ſinnes, of righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe, & of puritie incorrupted, after that the oldman is killed. white ſtone, and in the ſtone a new A ſigne and teſtimonie of newnes of life in righteouſnes and true holineſſe by putting on the new man, whom none doth inwardly know, ſaue the ſpirit of mā which is in himſelfe, the praiſe wherof is not of 
                     〈◊〉
                   but of God. 
                     ••
                  . 2. 20. name written, which no man knoweth ſauing hee that receiueth it.
            
               
18 ¶ And vnto The fourth place is vnto the Paſtors of Thyatira. The exordiū is takē out of the 14. & 15. verſes of the firſt Chapter. the Angell of the Church which is at Thyatira write, Theſe thinges ſaith the Sonne of God, which hath eyes like vnto a flame of fire, and feete like to fine braſſe.
            19 I Knowe The propoſition of prayſe is in this verſe: of reprehenſion, for that they tollerated with them the doctrine of vnrighteouſneſſe and vngodlineſſe, is verſ. 20; the authors whereof though they were called backe of God, yet repēted not, verſ. 21. whereunto is added a moſt heauie threatening verſ. 22. & 23: of a conditionall promiſe, and of exhortation to hold faſt the truth, is in the two verſes following. thy workes and thy loue, and So he calleth thoſe offices of charitie which are done to the Saints. ſeruice, and faith, and thy patience, and thy workes, and that they are mo at the laſt, then at the firſt.
            20 Notwithſtanding, I haue a fewe things againſt thee, that thou ſuffereſt the woman lezabell which calleth her ſelfe a Propheteſſe, to teach and to ſeduce my ſeruants, to make them commit By fornication of ten times in the Scripture Idolatrie is meant. fornication, and to eat meates ſacrificed vnto idoles.
            21 And I gaue her ſpace to repent of her fornication, and ſhe repented not.
            22 Beholde, I will caſt her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with her, into great affliction, except they repent them of their workes.
            23 And I will kill her children with death: and all the Churches ſhall knowe that I am he which 1. Sam. 16. 7. Pſal. 7. 10. Iere 11. 20. and 17. 10. doeth ſearch the reines and hearts: and I will giue vnto euery one of you according vnto your workes.
            24 And vnto you I ſay, and the reſt of them of Thyatira, As many as hold not this learning, neither haue approued the He pointeth out the bragging of certaine men, which boaſted of their deepe that is plentifull and common knowledge which notwithſtanding is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                depth of Satan (as they ſpeake) I will I will ſpeake no worſe thing againſt you, being coment to haue showed you what I require to be in you. put vpon you none other burden.
            25 But, that which ye haue alreadie, hold faſt till I come.
            
               
26 The concluſion, wherein Chriſt aſſureth vnto his ſeruāts the communiō of his kingdom and glorie, in this verſe, and that following: and commaundeth an holy attention; in the laſt verſe. For he that ouercommeth and keepeth my workes vnto the end, to him will I That is, I will make him a king, by communion with me, and my fellow heire: as it is promiſed Mat. 19. 28. and 25. 34. Rom. 8. 17. and 1. Cor. 63. Epheſ. 26. and 2. Tim. 2. 12 and Apoc. 3. 21. and 44. giue power ouer the nations.
            27 
                  Pſal. 2. 9. And he ſhall rule them with a rod of yrō: and as the veſſels of a potter, ſhall they be broken: euen as I receiued of my Father.
            28 And I will The brightneſſe of greateſt glorie and honour, neareſt approching vnto the light of Chriſt, who is the Sonne of righteouſneſſe and our head. Matth, 4. giue him a morning ſtarre.
            29 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit ſaith to the Churches.
         
         
            CHAP. III.
            
               1 The fift Epiſtle ſent to the Paſtours of the Church of Sardis, 7 of Philadelphia, 14 and of the Laodiceans, 16 that they be not lukewarme, 20 but endeuour to further Gods glorie.
               
            
            1 The fift place is vnto the Paſtours of Sardis. The exordium is taken out of the fourth and 16. verſes of the firſt chapter. ANd vnto the Angell of the church which is at Sardis is the name of a moſt florishing & famous citie, where the Kings of Lydia kept their Courts. Sardis write, Theſe things ſaith he that hath thoſe ſeuen Spirits of God, and thoſe ſeuen ſtarres, The propoſition of reproofe is in this verſe: of exhortation ioyned with a threatning, in the two verſes that follow: & of qualification by way of correction, vnto the comfort of the good which yet remained there, verſe 4. I know thy workes: that thou haſt a Thou art ſaid to liue, but art dead in deed. name that thou liueſt, but thou art dead.
            2 Be awake and ſtrengthen the things which remaine, that are Other things, whoſe ſtate is ſuch, that they are now going, and vnleſſe they be cōfirmed, will perish forthwith. readie to dye: for I haue not found thy workes perfect before God.
            3 Remember therefore, what thou haſt receiued and heard; and hold faſt, and repent: 
                  Chap. 16. 13. 1. Theſ. 5. 2. 2. Pet. 3. 10. if thou wilt not watch, I will come againſt thee as a theef, and thou ſhalt not know what houre I will come againſt thee.
            
               
4 Notwithſtanding thou haſt a few perſons yet in Sardis, That is, who haue with all Religion garded them ſelues from ſinne and contagion, euen from the very ſhew of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as S. Iude exhorteth, verſ 23. which haue not defiled their garmēts, and therefore they ſhall walke with me in Pure from all ſpot, and ſhining with glorie So it is to be vnderſtood alwayes hereafter, as in the next verſe. white: for they are 
                  They are meet and fie, to wit, becauſe they are in ſtified in Chriſt as they haue truly shewed it: for he is righteous that worketh righteouſnes; but ſo, as the tree bringeth forth the fruit, Looke Rom. 8. 18. worthie.
            5 He that The concluſion, ſtanding vpon a promiſe; and a commandement, as before. ouer commeth, ſhalbe clothed in white aray, and I will neuer put his name out of the 
                  Chap. 20. 12. and 21. 27. Philip. 4. 3. booke of life; but I wil confeſſe his name before my Father, and before his Angels.
            6 Let him that hath an eare, heare, what the Spirit ſaith vnto the Churches.
            7 ¶ The ſixt place, is vnto the Paſtours of Philadelphia. The exordium is taken out of the 18. verſe of the firſt Chapter. And vnto the Angell of the Church which is at Philadelphia write, Theſe things ſaith he that is Holy, and True, which hath the All power of rule in commanding and forbidding, deliuering, and punishing. And the houſe of Dauid is the Church, and the continuall promiſe of Dauids kingdome belongeth to Chriſt. key of Dauid, which openeth and no man ſhutteth, and ſhutteth and no man openeth.
            8 The propoſition of prayſe is in this verſe, of promiſes, to bring home againe thoſe that wander, verſe. 9. and to preſerue the godly, verſe 10. and of exhortation verſe 11. I know thy workes: behold, I haue ſet before thee an open doore, and no man can ſhut it: becauſe thou haſt a litle ſtrength, and haſt kept my word, and haſt not denied my Name.
            9 Behold, I will I will bring thē to that caſe. make thē of the Synagogue of Satan, that is, them which call thēſelues Iewes and are not, but do lye: behold, I ſay, I will make them, that they ſhall come That is, fall downe and worſhip, either thee ciuillie, or Chriſt religiouſly, at thy feete, (and thus I had rather take it) whether here in the Church (which ſeemeth more proper to the argument of this place) or there in the world to come. For Chriſt verely ſhall fulfill his word. and worſhip before thy feet, and ſhall know that I haue loued thee.
            10 Becauſe thou haſt Becauſe thou haſt bene patient and conſtant, as I would my ſeruants should be. kept the word of my

pacience, therefore I will deliuer thee from the houre of tentation, which ſhall come vpon all the world, to trie them that dwell vpon the earth.
            11 Beholde, I come ſhortly: hold that which thou haſt; that no man take thy crowne.
            12 The concluſion, which cō
                  taineth a promiſe, and a cō
                  maundement. Him that ouercommeth, will I make a pillar in the Temple of 
                  See. 2. 7. my God; and he ſhall go no more out: That is, the new man ſhall be termed after his father, mother, and head Chriſt. and I will write vpon him the name of my God, and the name of the Citie of my God, (which is the new Hieruſalem, which commeth downe out of heauen from my God) and my new Name.
            13 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit ſaith vnto the Churches.
            14 The ſeuenth place is vnto the paſtours of the church of Laodicea. The exordium is takē out of the fift verſe of the firſt chapter. And vnto the Angell of the Church of the Laodiceans write, Theſe things ſaith Amē ſoundeth as much in the Hebrew tongue as Truth, or Trueth it ſelfe. Amen, that faithfull and true witneſſe, that Of whom all things created haue their beginning. beginning of the creatures of God:
            15 The propoſition of reproofe is in this verſe; whereunto is adioyned a threatening, verſe 16. with a confirmation declaring the ſame, verſe 17. and of exhortation vnto faith and repentance verſe 18. 19. whereunto is added a conditionall promiſe, verſe 20. I know thy woorkes; that thou art neither cold nor hote: I would thou wereſt-cold or hote.
            16 Therfore, becauſe thou art luke warme, and neither cold nor hote, it will come to paſſe, that I ſhall ſpew thee out of my mouth.
            17 For thou ſaiſt, I am rich, and increaſed with goods, and haue neede of nothing; and knoweſt not how thou art wretched, and miſerable, The ſpirituall miſerie of men is metaphoricallie expreſſed in three paints: vnto which are matched as correſpondent thoſe remedies which are offered verſ. 18. and poore and blind, and naked.
            18 I counſell thee to buy of me golde tryed by the fire, that thou mayeſt be made riche: and white raiment, that thou mayeſt be clothed, and that thy filthie nakedneſſe doe not appeare: and

annoint thine eyes with eye ſalue, that thou maiſt ſee.
            19 As many as I loue 
                  Prou. 3. 12. Hebr. 12 5. I rebuke and chaſten: be Zeale is ſet againſt thē which are neither hote nor cold. zealous therefore and amend.
            20 Behold, I ſtand at the doore, and knocke, This muſt be taken after the manner of an allegorie, as Iohn. 14. 23. If any man heare my voyce and open the doore, I will come in vnto him, and will ſuppe with him, and he with me.
            21 The concluſion, conſiſting of a promiſe, as chap. 2. verſ 26. & of an exhortation. Hitherto hath bene the firſt part of the booke of the Apocalypſe. To him that ouercommeth, will I graunt to ſit with me in my throne, euen as I ouercame, and ſit with my Father in his throne.
            22. Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit ſaith vnto the Churches.
         
         
            CHAP. IIII.
            
               1 Another viſion containing the glorie of Gods Maieſtie: 8 Which is magnified of the ſoure beaſtes, 10 and the ſoure and twentie Elders.
               
            
            1 F. IVNIVS. 
               Hereafter foloweth the ſecōd part of this booke, altogether propheticall, foretelling thoſe things which were to come, as was ſaid before Chap. 1. 19. This is deuided into two hiſtories: one common vnto the whole world, vnto the ninth Chapter: and another ſingular, of the Church of God thence vnto the 22. Chapter. And theſe hiſtories are ſaid to be deſcribed in ſeuerall bookes, Chapter. 5. 1. and 10 2. Now this firſt verſe is as it were a paſſage frō the former part vnto this ſecond: where it is ſaid, that the heauen was opened, that is, that heauenly things were vnlocked; and that a voyce as of a trumpet ſounded in heauen, to ſtirre vp the Apoſtle, and call him to the vnderſtanding of things to come. The firſt hiſtorie hath two partes, 
                     〈…〉
                   cauſes of things done, and of this whole Reuelation, in this and the next Chapter: An other of the Actes done, in the next foure Chapters. The principall cauſes according to the diſtinction of perſons in the vnitie of the diuine eſſence, and according to the oeconomie or diſpenſation thereof, are two. One the beginning which none can approch vnto, that is, God the Father, of whom is ſpoken in this Chapter: The other, the Sonne, who is the meane cauſe, eaſie to be approched vnto, in reſpect that he is God and man in one perſon: of whom Chapter 5. AFter this I looked, & behold, a doore was open in heauen; and the firſt voyce which I heard, as it were of a trumpet talking with me, ſaid, Come vp hither, and I will ſhewe thee the

things which muſt be done hereafter.
            2 And The manner of Reuelation, as before. 1. 10. immediatly I was rapt 
               
                  Looke Ch. 1. 10 in the Spirit; A deſcription of God the Father, and of his glorie in the heauēs, framed vnto the maner of men; by his office, nature, companie attē
                  ding, effect, inſtruments, and euents that follow afterwards. In this verſe he is preſented in office a iudge, as Abraham ſayd Gen. 18. which is declared by his throne, as an enſigne of iudgement, and his ſitting thereupon. and behold, a throne was ſet in heauen, and one ſate vpon the throne.
            3 By his nature, in that he is the Father, moſt glorious in his owne perſon, and with his glorie ouer ſhining all other things. And he that ſate, was to looke vpon, like vnto a Iaſper ſtone, and a Sardine; and there was a raine bow round about the throne, in ſight like to an Emeraude.
            4 By the companie attending about him, in that, as that moſt high iudge, he is accompanied with the moſt honorable attendaunce of Prophetes and Apoſtles, both of the old and new Church, whom Chriſt hath made to be Prieſts and Kings, Chap. 1. 65. 10. And round about the throne were foure and twentie thrones, and vpon the thrones I ſaw foure and twentie Elders ſitting, clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crownes of gold.
            5 By effectes, in that moſt mightely he ſhaketh all things by his voyce and word, as Pſalme 29. 3. and with the light of his ſpirit and prouidence peruſeth and paſſeth through all. And out of that throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voyces: and there were ſeuen lampes of fire burning before the throne, which are the ſeuen Spirits of God.
            6 By inſtruments vſed, in that he both hath a moſt readie treaſu
                  
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   it were a worke-houſe excellentlie furniſhed with all things, vnto the executing of his will, which things flow from his commandement; as is repeated Chapter 15. 2: And hath alſo the Angels moſt readie adminiſters of his counſels and pleaſure vnto all partes of the world; continuallie watching, (in this verſe) working by reaſon, otherwiſe then the inſtrumēts without life laſt mentioned; couragious as Lyons, mightie as Bulles, wiſe as men, ſwift as Eagles, verſe 7. moſt apt vnto all purpoſes, as furniſhed with wings on euerie part, moſt pearcing of ſight, and finally pure and perfect ſpirites, alwayes in continuall motion, verſe 8. Alſo before the throne there was a ſea of glaſſe like vnto criſtall: and betweene the throne, & the things that were round about the throne,

               were foure beaſtes full of eyes before and behind.
            7 The firſt beaſt was like a Lyon, and the ſecond beaſt like a Bull, and the third beaſt had a face as a man, and the fourth beaſt was like a flying Eagle.
            8 And the Euery beaſt had ſixe wings. foure beaſtes had eche one of them ſixe wings about him, and they were full of eyes within; and they ceaſed not By euents, in that for all the cauſes before mentioned. God is glorified both of Angels as holy, Iudge, omnipotent, eternall, and immutable verſe 8. and alſo after their example, he is glorified of holy men (verſe 9.) in ſigne and in ſpeach verſe 10. 11. day nor night, ſaying, Holie, Holie, Holie Lord God almightie, Which Was, and Which Is, and Which Is to come.
            9 And when thoſe beaſtes God is ſaid to haue glorie, honour, kingdome, and ſuch like, giuen vnto him, when we godlie and reuerentlie ſet forth that which is properlie and onely his. gaue glorie, and honour, & thankes to him that ſate on the throne, which liueth for euer and euer,
            10 Three ſignes of diuine honour geuen vnto God; proſtration or falling downe, adoration, and caſting their crownes before God; in which the godlie, though made kings by Chriſt, do willinglie emptie them ſelues of all glorie, moued with a religious reſpect of the maieſtie of God. The foure and twentie Elders fell downe before him that ſate on the throne, and worſhipped him that liueth for euermore, and caſt their crownes before the throne, ſaying,
            11 The ſumme of their ſpeach: that all glorie muſt be giuen vnto God: the reaſon, becauſe he is the eternall beginning of all things, from whoſe onely will they haue their being, and are gouerned, & finally in all reſpectes are that which they are. Thou art 
                  Chap. 5. 12. worthy, O Lord, That is, that thou ſhouldeſt challenge the ſame to thy ſelfe alone. But as for vs, we are vnworthie that euen by thy goodneſſe we ſhould be made partakers of this glorie. And hitherto hath bene handled the principall cauſe vnapprocheable, which is God. to receiue glorie and honour, and power: for thou haſt created all things; and by thy will they are, and haue bene created.
         
         
            CHAP. V.
            
               1 The booke ſealed with ſeuen ſeales. 3 which none could open, 6 that Lambe of God 9 is thought worthie to open, 12 euen by the conſent of all the companie of heauen.
               
            
            
               
1 A paſſage vnto the ſecond principal cauſe, which is the ſonne of God, God and man, the mediatour of all, as the eternall word of God the Father, manifeſted in the fleſh. This chapter hath two parts: one that prepareth the way vnto the Reuelation by rehearſall of the occaſions that did occurre, in the firſt foure verſes. Another, the hiſtorie of the Reuelatiō of Chriſt, thence vnto the end of the chapter. 
               F. IVNIVS. ANd I ſaw at the That is, in the very right hand of God. right hād of him that ſate vpon the throne, Here are ſhewed the occaſions for which this principall cauſe, and his Reuelation was alſo neceſſarie: the ſame are three: the firſt a preſent viſion of the booke of the counſels of God, concerning the gouernment of this whole world, which booke is ſaid to be laid vp with the Father as it were in his hand: but ſhut and vnknowen vnto all creatures, in this verſe. The ſecond is a religious deſire of the Angels of God, to vnderſtand the myſteries of this booke, verſ. 2. whereof ſee 1. Pet. 1. 12. The third is a lamentation of S. Iohn & all the godly moued by the ſame deſire, verſ 4. when they ſaw that it was a thing vnpoſſible for any creature to effect: which is declared in the third verſe. a booke written within, and on the backſide, ſealed with ſeuen ſeales.
            2 And I ſawe a mightie Angell, which proclamed with a loud voyce; Who is worthie to open the booke, and to looſe the ſeales thereof?
            3 Thus, neither of them that are in heauen, nor of them which are in the earth, &c. And this I like better. Now this enumeration of partes is ſufficient to the denying of the whole. For of the creatures, one ſort is in heauē, aboue the earth; another in the earth; and another vnder the earth, in the ſea, as is after declared, verſe 13. But none in heauen, nor on earth, neither vnder the earth, was able to open the booke, neither to looke therein.
            4 I therefore wept much, becauſe no man was founde worthie to open, and to read the booke, neither to looke thereon.
            5 The ſecond part of this chapter, in which is ſet down the Reuelatiō of the Sonne; as before was ſaid. This part conteineth firſt an hiſtorie of the manner how God prepared S. Iohn to vnderſtand this Reuelation, in this verſe. Secondly, the Reuelation of the Sonne himſelfe, vnto the ſeuenth verſe. Thirdly, the accidents of this Reuelation, in the reſt of the Chapter. The manner how is here deſcribed in two ſortes, one frō without him, by ſpeech in this verſe. Another within, by opening the eyes of S. Iohn (which before were held) that he might ſee, in the verſe following. Then one of the Elders ſaid vnto me, Weepe not: behold, that 
                  Gene. 49. 9. 
               That is, The moſt mightie and moſt approued Prince: according to the vſe of the Hebrew ſpeech. Lion which is of the tribe of Iuda, that roote of Dauid, hath gotten the victorie, that he might open the booke and looſe the ſeuen ſeales thereof.
            
               
6 I looked therefore, and loe, The ſumme of the reuelation. Chriſt the mediatour taketh and openeth the booke, verſ. 6. 7. Therefore in this reuelation is deſcribed the perſon of Chriſt; in this verſe. His fact, in the next verſe. The perſon is thus deſcribed. Chriſt the mediatour betweene God, Angels, & men, as the eternall word of God; & our redeemer: as the Lambe of God, ſtanding as ſlaine, and making interceſſion for vs by the vertue and merite of his euerlaſting ſacrifice, is armed with the Spirit of God in his owne perſon, that is, with the power & wiſdome of God eſientially vnto the gouernment of this whole world. betweene the throne, and the foure beaſts, and in the midds of the Elders, ſtood a Lambe as though he had bene killed, which had ſeuen hornes, and ſeuen eyes, which are thoſe ſeuen ſpirits of God, ſent our into all the world.
            7 The fact of Chriſt the mediatour, that he commeth vnto the throne of the Father, of which chap 4. and taketh the booke out of his hand to open it. For that he opened it, it is firſt expreſſed chap. 6. 1. &c. He came, and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that ſate vpon the throne.
            8 Now follow in the end the accidents of the reuelation laſt ſpoken of: that all the holy Angels and men did ſing vnto him: both the chiefe, verſe 9. 10. and common order of Angels, verſe 11. 12. & of all things created, verſe 13. the princes of both ſorts agreeing therunto, verſe 14. And when he had taken the booke, the foure beaſts and the foure and twentie Elders fell downe before the Lambe, hauing euerie one The ſymbols or ſignes of praiſe, ſweet in ſauour, and acceptable vnto God. See chap. 8. 3. harpes and golden vials full of odours, which are the 
                  Looke cha. 8. 3. prayers of the Saints:
            9 And they ſung a No common ſong. new That is, compoſed according to the preſent matter: the Lambe hauing receiued the booke, as it were with his feete, and opened it with his hornes; as is ſaid in the Canticle. ſong, ſaying, The ſong of the Nobles or Princes ſtanding by the throne, conſiſting of a publication of the praiſe of Chriſt, and a confirmation of the ſame, from his benefites, both which we haue receiued of himſelfe (as are the ſuffering of his death, our redemption vpon the croſſe by his bloud, in this verſe: and our communion with him in Kingdome and Prieſthood, which long ago he hath granted vnto vs with himſelfe) and which we hereafter hope to obtaine; as our kingdome to come, in Chriſt; in the verſe following. Thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the ſeales thereof; becauſe thou waſt killed, & haſt redeemed vs to God, by thy bloud, out of euery kinred, and tongue, & people, and nation.
            10 And haſt made vs vnto our God 
                  Chap. 1. 6. 1 Pet 2. 9. kings & prieſts, and we ſhall raigne ouer the earth.
            
               
11 The conſent of the common order of Angels anſwering in melodie vnto their princes that ſtood by the throne. Then I beheld, and I heard the voyce of many Angels round about the throne, and about the beaſts and the Elders, A number finit, but almoſt infinit, for one infinit in deed, as Dan. 7 10. and their number was 
                  Dan. 7. 10. 
               By this is ment a great number. ten thouſand times ten thouſand, and a thouſand thouſands:
            12 Saying with a loud voyce, Woorthy is the Lambe that was killed, to To haue all praiſe giuen to him as to the mightieſt and wiſeſt, &c. receiue power, and riches, and wiſedome, and ſtrength, and honour, and glorie, and praiſe:
            13 The conſent of all the cōmō multitud of the creatures. Alſo all the creatures which are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the earth, and in the ſea, and all that are in them, heard I, ſaying: Vnto him, that ſitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the Lambe be praiſe, and honour, and glory, and power, for euermore.
            14 A confirmation of the praiſe before going, from the conteſtation of the Nobles, expreſſed in word & ſignes, as once or twiſe before this. And the foure beaſts ſaid, Amen; & the foure & twenty Elders fell downe (vpon their faces) & worſhipped him that liueth for euermore.
         
         
            CHAP. VI.
            
               1 The Lambe openeth the firſt ſeale of the booke, 3 the ſecond, 5 the third, 7 the fourth, 9 the fift, 12 and the ſixt, and then ariſe murders, famin, peſtilence, outcries of Saints, earthquakes, and diuers ſtrange ſights in heauen.
               
            
            1 This is the ſecond part of this firſt hiſtory (which I ſaid was common, & of the whole world) of the works of God in the gouernmēt of al things. Of this part there are generally three mēbers, the foreſignifying, the caution, & the execution of all the euils which God powreth out vpon this world, which hath moſt hardly deſerued of him. The foreſignifying is ſet downe in this chapter: the caution for preſeruing the church, is in the next chapter: and the execution is deſcribed chap. 8. & 9. In euery part of the foreſignifying there are three branches: the ſeuerall & expreſſe calling of S. Iohn, to prepare himſelfe to take knowledge of the things that were to be ſhewed vnto him in the opening of the ſeales: the ſigne; & the word expounding the ſigne. And albeit, the expres calling of S. Iohn, be vſed onely in foure of the ſignes, yet the ſame is alſo to be vnderſtood in the reſt that follow. The author of theſe foreſignifying is the Lambe, as that word of the Father, made the mediator, opening the ſeales of the booke. The inſtruments are the Angels in moſt of the viſions, who expound the ſigne, & the words therof. Now this firſt verſe containeth an expres calling of S. Iohn to marke the opening of the firſt ſeale. 
               F. IVNIVS. AFter I ſaw, when the Lambe had opened the firſt of the ſeales; and I heard one of

the foure beaſts ſay, as it were the noyſe of thunder, Come and ſee.
            2 Therefore The firſt ſigne ioyned with declaration; is that God, for the ſinnes and horrible rebellion of the world, will inuade the ſame: and firſt of all will as a farre off with his dartes of peſtilence moſt ſodainelie, mightely and gloriouſlie, beate downe the ſame as iudge, and triumph ouer it, as conquerour. I beheld, and lo, there was preſent a white horſe, and he that ſate on him, had a bow, and a crowne was giuen vnto him, and he went forth conquering, and that he might conquer.
            3 And The ſecond ſigne ioyned with words of declaration, (after the expreſſe calling of Iohn as before) is, that God being prouoked vnto wrath by the obſtinacie and hard heartednes of the world not repenting for the former plaugue, as ſetting vpon the ſame at hand, will kindle the fire of debate amongſt men, and will deſtroy the inhabitants of this world, one by the ſword of another. when he had opened the ſecond ſeale, I heard the ſecond beaſt ſay, Come and ſee.
            4 And there came out another horſe, that was red, and power was giuen to him that ſate thereon, to take peace from of the earth, & that they ſhould kill one another; and there was giuen vnto him a great ſword.
            5 The third ſigne with declaration, is, that God will deſtroy the world with famine, withdrawing all prouiſion: which is by the figure ſynecdoche comprehended in wheat, barly, wine and oyle. And when he had opened the third ſeale, I heard the third beaſt ſay, Come and ſee: Then I beheld, and lo, a blacke horſe; and he that ſate on him, had balances in his hand.
            6 And I heard a voice in the middes of the foure beaſts ſay, A Hereby is ſignified what great ſcarcitie of corne there was, for the word here vſed is a kind of meaſure of drie things, which it in quantitic but the eighth part of a bushell, which was an ordinarie porcion vſed to be giuen to ſeruants for their ſtint of meat for one day. meaſure of wheat for a peny, and three meaſures of barly for a penie; I had rather diſtinguiſh and read the words thus, and the wine and the oyle: thou shalt not deale vniuſtly. In this ſenſe; likewiſe the wine and the oyle ſhalbe ſould a verie little for a pennie. Thou ſhalt not deale vniuſtly; namely when thou ſhalt meaſure out a verie little for a great priſe: ſo is the place euident: otherwiſe that is moſt true, which the wiſe man ſaith, that who ſo withholdeth the corne ſhalbe curſed of the people. Prouerbs 11. 26. and the oyle, and wine hurt thou not.
            
               
7 The fourth ſigne ioyned with words of declaration, is that God will addict the fourth part of the world indifferētly, vnto death and hell, or the graue, by al thoſe meanes at once, by which before ſeuerally and in order he had recalled their mindes vnto amendmēt. Vnto theſe are alſo added the wild & cruell beaſts of the earth, out of Leuit. 26. 22. Thus doth God according to his wiſdome diſpence the treaſures of his power, iuſtly towards all, mercifully towards the good, and with patience or long ſufferance towards his enimies. And whē he had opened the fourth ſeale, I heard ye voice of the fourth beaſt ſay, Come & ſee
            8 And I looked, and behold, a pale horſe; and his name that ſate on him was Death, and Hell folowed after him; and power was giuen vnto them ouer the fourth part of the earth, to kill with ſword, and with hunger, and with death, and by the beaſts of the earth.
            9 The fift ſigne, is that the holy martyrs which are vnder the altar whereby they are ſanctified, that is, receiued into the truſt and tuition of Chriſt (into whoſe hands they are committed) ſhall crie out for the iuſtice of God, in an holy zeale to aduance his kingdome, & not of any priuate perturbation of the minde, in this and the next verſe, and that God wil, in deed, ſigne, & word comfort them, ver. 11. And when he had opened the fift ſeale, I ſaw vnder the altar, the ſoules of them that had bene killed for the word of God, & for the teſtimonie which they maintained.
            10 And they cried with a loud voice, ſaying, How long, Lord, which art holy and true, doeſt thou not iudge, and auenge our blood, requiring the ſame of them that dwell on the earth?
            11 Then long As before 3. 4. white robes were giuen vnto euerie one, and it was ſaid vnto them, that they ſhould reſt yet for a little ſeaſon, vntill their fellow ſeruants, and their brethren that muſt be killed euen as they were, were Vntill their number be fulfilled. fulfilled.
            12 The ſixt ſigne, the narration whereof hath two parts, the ſigne and the euent. The ſigne is, that the earth, heauen, and the things that are in them, for horror of the ſins of the world vpō thoſe moſt heauy foretellings of God, & complaints of the ſaints, ſhalbe ſhaken moſt vehemently, trēbling in horrible manner, and loſing their light, in this verſe: falling from on high, verſe 13. withdrawing themſelues and flying away for the greatnes of the trouble, verſe 14. So holyly do all creatures depend vpon the will of God, and content themſelues in his glorie. And I beheld when he had opened the ſixt ſeale, and lo, there was a great earthquake, and the ſunne was as blacke as So they called in old time thoſe wouē works that were of haire. ſackecloth of

haire, and the moone was all made like blood:
            13 And the ſtarres of heauen fell vnto the earth, as a figge tree caſteth her greene figs whē it is ſhaken of a mightie winde.
            14 And the heauē departed away, as a ſcrole, when it is rolled vp, and al the mountaines & yles were moued out of their places:
            15 The euent of the ſigne afore going: that there is no man that ſhal not be aſtoniſhed at that generall commotion, flie away for feare, and hide himſelfe, in this verſe, and wiſh vnto himſelfe moſt bitter death, for exceeding horror of the wrath of God, and of the Lambe, at which before he was aſtoniſhed. Now this perplexitie is not of the godly, but of the wicked, whoſe portion is in this life, as the-pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, Pſalm. 17. 14. Not that ſorrow which is according vnto God, which worketh repentance vnto ſaluation, whereof a man ſhall neuer repent him; but that worldly ſorrow that bringeth death, 2 Cor. 7. 9. as their vviſhings doe declare: for this hiſtorie is of the vvhole world, ſeuered from the hiſtorie of the church, as I haue ſhewed before Chapt 4. 1. And the Kings of the earth, & the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe captaines, and the mightie men, and euery bondman, and euery free man, hid themſelues in dennes, and in the rockes of the mountaines;
            16 And they ſaid to the mountaines & rocks, Theſe are words of ſuch as deſpaire of their eſcape: of which deſpaire there are two arguments; the preſence of God and of the Lambe, prouoked to wrath againſt the world, in this verſe; and the conſcience of their owne weakenes, whereby men feele that they are no way able to ſtand in the day of the wrath of God, verſe 17. as it is ſaid. Eſay. 14. 27. 
               
                  Eſay. 2. 19. Hoſe 10. 8. Luke 23. 30. Fall on vs, and hide vs from the preſence of him that ſitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe.
            17 For the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to ſtand?
         
         
            CHAP. VII.
            
               1 The Angels comming to hurt the earth, 3 are ſtayed vntill the Elect of the Lord, 5 of all tribes were ſealed. 13 Such as ſuffred perſecution for Chriſts ſake, 16 haue great felicitie, 17 and ioy.
               
            
            
               
1 The 2. mēber of this part is a preuenting of dāger, as we diſtinguiſhed the ſame before ch. 6. 1. that is, of the cautiō whereby God took care before hand & ꝓuided for his; that after the example of the Iſraelites of old Exod. 8. 23. the faithfull might be exempted from the plagues of this wicked world. This whole place, is a certaine interloquution & bringing in, for this whoſe chap. by occaſion of the prediction and argument of the ſixt ſeale. For firſt that euill is preuented in the elect, vnto the 9. verſe. Then thanks are giuen by the elect for that cauſe, ver 10. 11, 12. Laſtly the accompliſhment of the thing is ſet forth, vnto the end of the Chapter. The firſt verſe is a tranſition, ſpeaking of the Angels which keepe theſe inferiour parts from all euill, vntill God do command For (as it is excellently figured by Ezechiel cha. 1. 11. 12.) their faces and their wings are reached vpwards, continually wayting vpon and beholding the countenance of God for their direction, and euery of thē goeth into that part that is right before his face: whither ſoeuer the Spirit ſhall go, they go, they ſtep not out of the way, that is, they depart not ſo much as a foot bredth from the path commanded them of God. 
               F. IVNIVS. AFter that, I ſaw foure Angels ſtanding vpon the On the foure quarters or coaſts of the earth. foure corners of the earth, holding the foure winds of the earth, that no winde ſhould blow vpon the earth, neither on the ſea, That is, neither into the aire, into which the tops of trees are aduāced. neither on any tree.
            2 Now God prouideth againſt the danger of his elect, by commandement, ver. 2. & 3. and by ſigne or figure, both for thoſe of the nation of the Iewes, thence vnto the 8. verſ. and alſo them of the Gentils verſ. 9
                     •
                  . And I ſaw Not onely another, or differing in number from the cōmon Angels of God, but alſo in eſſence, office & operation excelling all Angels: that is Chriſt Ieſus the eternall Angell or word of God, and mediator of the couenant. So hereafter Chap. 8. 3. and 10. 1. 5. another Angel come vp from the Eaſt, which had the ſeale of the liuing God; and he cried with a loud voyce to the foure Angels, to whom power was giuē to hurt the earth, and the ſea, ſaying,
            3 Hurt ye not the earth, neither the ſea, neither the trees, till we haue ſealed the ſeruants of our God in their foreheads.
            4 And I heard the number of them, which were ſealed; and there were ſealed That is, of the Iewes a number certaine in it ſelfe before God, & ſuch as may be numbred of vs: for which cauſe alſo the ſame is here ſet downe as certain. But of the elect which are of the Gentiles the number in deed is in it ſelfe certaine with God, but of vs not poſſibly to be numbred, as God Gen. 15. 5. and often elſewhere, and Eſay figured moſt excellently Chap. 49. and 60. This therfore is ſpoken with reſpect, when a certaine number is put for one vncertaine conferre this with verſe 9. an hundreth

and foure and fortie thouſand of all the tribes of the children of Iſrael.
            5 Of the tribe of Iuda, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Of the tribe of Ruben, were ſealed twelue thouſand: of the tribe of Gad, were ſealed twelue thouſand:
            6 Of the tribe of Aſer, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Of the tribe of Nephthali, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Of the tribe of Manaſſes, were ſealed twelue thouſand:
            7 Of the tribe of Simeon, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Here the tribe of Leui is reckoned vp in common with the reſt, becauſe all the Iſraelits were equally made prieſtes with them in Chriſt, by his prieſthood. chap. 1. 6. and 5, 10. and Rom. 12 1. and 1. Pet. 2. 9. The name of Dan is not mē
                  tioned, becauſe the Danits long before forſaking the worſhip of God, were fallen away from the fellowſhip of Gods people, vnto the part of the Gētiles. Which euil manie ages before Iacob foreſaw, Gen. 49. 18. for which cauſe alſo there is no mention made of this tribe in the firſt booke of the Chronicles. Of the tribe of He skipped Dan, and reckeneth Leui. Leui, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Of the tribe of Iſſachar, were ſealed twelue thouſand: of the tribe of Zabulon, were ſealed twelue thouſand:
            8 Of the tribe of Of Ephraim, who was Ioſephs other ſonne, and had the byrth right giuen him, whereof he is called Ioſeph. Ioſeph, were ſealed twelue thouſand: Of the tribe of Beniamin, were ſealed twelue thouſand.
            9 After theſe things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, See before vpon the 4. verſe. which no man could number, of all nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, and they As Prieſts, kings, and glorious conquerours by martyrdome: which things are noted by their proper ſignes in this verſe. ſtood before the throne, and before the Lambe, clothed with long white robes; and palmes in their hands.
            10 The praiſe of God, celebrated firſt by the holy men, in this verſe: then by the heauenly Angels, in the two verſes following. And they cryed with a loud voice, ſaying, Saluation commeth from our God, that ſitteth vpon the throne, and from the Lambe.
            11 And all the Angels ſtood round about the throne, and about the Elders, & the foure beaſts; and they fell before the throne on their faces, and worſhipped God,
            12 Saying, Amen. Praiſe, and glorie, and wiſedome,

and thankes, and honour, and power, and might, be vnto our God for euermore, Amen.
            13 A paſſage ouer vnto the expounding of the viſion, of vvhich the Angel enquireth of S. Iohn, to ſtir him vp vvithall, in this verſe: & Iohn in one forme of ſpeech, both acknowledgeth his owne ignorance, attributing knowledge vnto the Angel, and alſo in moſt modeſt maner requeſteth the expounding of the viſion, Then one of the Elders ſpake, ſaying vnto me; What are theſe which are arayed in long white robes? and whence came they?
            14 And I ſaid vnto him, Lord, thou knoweſt. The expoſition of the viſion, wherin the Angell telleth firſt the acts of the Saints, that is their ſufferings, and worke of faith in Chriſt Ieſus, in this ver. Secondly their glorie, both preſent, which conſiſteth in two things, that they miniſter vnto God, and that God protecteth them, verſ. 15: and to come, in their perfect deliuerance from all annoyances, verſ. 16. and in participation of all good things, which euen the memorie of former euils ſhall neuer be able to diminiſh, verſ. 17. The cauſe efficient, and which containeth all theſe things, is onely one, euen the Lambe of God, the Lord, the Mediator, and the Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus. And he ſaid to me, Theſe are they, which came out of great tribulation, and haue waſhed their long robes, and haue made them white in the blood of the Lambe.
            15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and ſerue him He alludeth to the Leuites, which ſerued day and night, for elſe there is no night in heauen. day and night in his Temple; and he that ſitteth on the throne will Or, vpon them: wherby is meant Gods defence & protection as it were towards thē, who are as ſafe, as men in the Lords tentes. ouer ſhadow them.
            16 
                  Eſay. 49. 10. They ſhal hunger no more, neither thirſt any more; neither ſhall the ſunne light on them, neither any heate.
            17 Becauſe the Lamb, which is in the middes of the throne ſhall feede them, and ſhall lead thē vnto the liuely fountaines of water; and 
                  Eſay 25. 8. Chap. 21. 4. God ſhall wipe away all teares from their eyes.
         
         
            CHAP. VIII.
            
               1 After the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, 3 the Saints prayers are offered vp with odours. 6 The ſeuen Angels come forth with trumpets. 7 The foure firſt blow, and fire falleth on the earth, 8 the ſea is turned into bloud, 10. 11 the waters waxe bitter, 12 and the ſtarres are darkened.
               
            
            
               
1 Hee returneth to the hiſtorie of the ſeales of the booke, which the Lambe openeth. The ſeuenth ſeale is the next foreſignification, and a preciſe commaundement of the execution of the moſt heauie iudgements of God vpon this wicked world: which foreſignification being vnderſtood by the ſeale, all things in heauen are ſilent, and in horrour through admiration, vntill commaundement of execution be ſeuerallie giuen of God vnto the adminiſtres of his wrath. So he paſſeth vnto the third member, of which I ſpake before in the ſixt Chapter and firſt verſe, which member is of the execution of thoſe euils wherewith God moſt iuſtly determined to afflict the world. 
               F. IVNIVS. ANd when hee had opened the ſeuenth ſeale, there was ſilence in heauen, about halfe an houre.
            2 Now followeth the third braunch of the common hiſtorie, as euen now I ſayd: which is the execution of the iudgements of God vpon the world. This is firſt generallie prepared, vnto the ſixt verſe; then by ſeuerall partes expounded according to the order of thoſe that adminiſtred the ſame, vnto the end of the Chapter following. Vnto the preparation of this execution are declared theſe things: firſt who were the adminiſters and inſtrumentes thereof, in this verſe; ſecondly, what is the worke both of the Prince of Angels giuing order for this execution, thence vnto the 5. verſe, and of his adminiſters, in the ſixt verſe. The adminiſters of the execution are ſayd to be ſeuen Angels: their inſtruments, trumpets, whereby they ſhould as it were ſound the al'arme at the commaundement of God. They are propunded ſeuen in number, becauſe it pleaſed not God at once to powre out his wrath vpon the rebellious world, but at diuerſe times, and by peece meale, and in ſlow order, and as with an vnwilling mind to exerciſe his iudgementes vpon his creatures, ſo long called vpon both by word and ſignes, if happily they had learned to repent. And I ſaw the ſeuen Angels, which Which appeare before him as his miniſters. ſtand before God; and to them were giuen ſeuen trumpets.
            3 This is that great Emperour, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, our King and Sauiour: who both maketh interceſſion to God the Father for the Sainctes, filling the heauenly ſanctuarie with moſt ſweete odour, and offering vp their prayers, as the Calues and burnt ſacrifices of their lippes, in this verſe: in ſuch ſort as euerie one of them (ſo powerfull is that ſweete ſauour of Chriſt, and the efficacie of his ſacrifice) are held in reconcilement with God and themſelues made moſt acceptable vnto him, verſe 4. And then alſo out of his treaſurie, and from the ſame ſanctuarie powreth forth vpon the world the fire of his wrath, adding alſo diuine tokens thereunto: and by that meanes (as of old the harauldes of Rome were wont to doe) he proclaimeth warre againſt the rebellious world. Then another Angell came, and ſtood before

the altar hauing a golden cenſer; and much odoures was giuen vnto him, to offer with the prayers of all the Saintes vpon the golden altar, which is before the throne.
            4 And the ſmoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saintes, Our prayers are nothing worth, vnleſſe that true and ſweete ſauour of that onely oblation be eſpecially and before all things with thē, that is to ſay, vnleſſe we being firſt of all iuſtified through faith in his Son, be acceptable vnto him. went vp out of the Angels hand, vnto the preſence of God.
            5 Then the Angel tooke the cenſer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and caſt it into the earth: and there were made voyces, and thundrings, and lightenings, and earthquake.
            6 This is the worke of the adminiſters. The Angels the adminiſters of Chriſt, onely by ſound of trū
                  pet and voyce (for they are onely as haraulds) do effectually cal forth the inſtruments of the wrath of God, through his power. Hitherto haue bene things generall. Now followeth the narration of things particular, which the Angels ſix in number wrought in their order, ſet out vnto the nineteenth verſe of the next Chapter: and is concluded with declaration of the euent which followed vpō theſe things done in the world, in the tenth and eleuenth Chapters. And the ſeuen Angels, which had the ſeuen trumpets, prepared them ſelues to blow the trumpets.
            7 The firſt execution at the ſound of the firſt Angell, vpon the earth, that is, the inhabitants of the earth (by metonymie) and vpon all the fruites thereof: as the comparing of this verſe with the ſecond member of the ninth verſe, doth not obſcurely declare. So the firſt Angel blew the trumpet, and there was haile and fire, mingled with bloud; and they were caſt into the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt vp, and all greene graſſe was burnt vp.
            8 The ſecond execution, vpon the ſea, in this verſe, and all things that are therein, in the next verſe. Then the ſecond Angell blew the trumpet, and as it were a great mountaine, burning with fire, was caſt into the ſea; and the third part of the ſea became bloud.
            9 And the third part of the creatures, which were in the ſea, and had life, dyed; and the third part of ſhips were deſtroyed.
            
               
10 The third execution vpon the flouds and foūtaines, that is, vpon al freſh waters, in this verſe: the effect where of is, that manie are deſtroyed with the bitterneſſe of the waters, in the verſe following. Then the third Angell blew the trumpet, and there fell a great ſtar out of heauen, burning like a torch, and fell into the third part of the riuers, and into the fountaines of waters.
            11 The name of the ſtarre is called This is ſpoken by metaphor, of the name of a moſt bitter herbe, and commōly knowne: vnleſſe perhaps a man following thoſe that note the deriuation of wordes, had rather expound it adiectiuelie, for that which by reaſon of bitterneſſe can not be dronke, or which maketh the liquour into which it is powred, more bitter then that anie man can drincke the ſame. wormewood: therefore the third part of the waters became wormewood; and manie men dyed of the waters, becauſe they were made bitter.
            12 The fourth execution vpon thoſe lightſome bodies of heauen, which miniſter vnto this inferiour world. After the fourth Angell blew the trumpet, and the third part of the Sunne was ſmitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third part of the ſtarres; ſo that the third part of thē was darkened, and the third part of the day did not ſhine, and likewiſe the night.
            13 A lamentable prediction or foretelling of thoſe parts of the diuine execution which yet are behind: which alſo is a paſſage vnto the argument of the next Chapter. Of all theſe things in a manner Chriſt him ſelfe expreſſely foretold Luke 21. 24. &c. and they are common plagues generally denounced, without particular note of time. And I beheld, and heard one Angell flying through the middes of heauen, ſaying with a loud voyce, Wo, wo, wo, to the inhabitants of the earth, from the ſoundes remaining of the trumpets of the three Angels, which yet muſt blow their trumpets.
         
         
            CHAP. IX.
            
               1 The fift Angell bloweth his trumpet, 3 and ſpoyling locuſtes come out. 13 The ſixt Angell bloweth, 16 and bringeth forth horſemen, 20 to deſtroy mankinde.
               
            
            
               
               The fift execution vpon wicked mē inhabiting the earth (as a little before the Angell ſavd) wrought by the infernall powers, is declared in this place vnto the eleuenth verſe. And after it the ſixt execution, thence vnto the nineteenth verſe. And laſtly is ſhewed the common euent that followed the former executions in the world, in the two laſt verſes. 
               F. IVNIVS. THen the fift Angell blew the trumpet, and I ſaw a That is, that the Angell of God glittering with glorie, as a ſtarre fell downe from heauen: Whether thou take him for Chriſt, who hath the keyes of hell of himſelfe, and by Princely authoritie, Chapter. 1. 18. or whether for ſome inferiour Angell, who hath the ſame key permitted vnto him, and oc-cupieth it miniſterially, or by office of his miniſterie; here and Chapter 21. ſo the word falling is taken Gene. 14. 10. and 24. 64. and Hebr. 6. 6. ſtarre fall out of heauen vnto the earth; The key was giuen to this ſtarre. For thoſe powers of wickedneſſe are thruſt downe into hell, and bound with chaines of darkeneſſe: and are there kept vnto damnation, vnleſſe God for a time doe let them looſe. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Iud. 6, and of this booke Chapter. 20. the hiſtorie of which Chapter, hath agreement of time with this preſent Chapter. and to that Angell was giuen the key of the By the bottomleſſe pit, he meaneth the deepeſt darkenes of hell. bottomleſſe pit.
            2 Vnto this is added, the ſmoke of the helliſh and infernall ſpirites, all darke, and darkening all things in heauen and in earth. Theſe ſpirituall darkeneſſes are the cauſes of all diſorder and confuſion. For the deuill at a time certaine (whereof verſe fiue) ſent theſe darckeneſſes into his kingdom, that he might at once, and with one impreſſion ouerthrow all things, and peruert if it were poſſible the elect themſelues. By this darkneſſe all ſpirituall light, both actiue as of the Sunne, and paſſiue, as of the ayre which is lightened by the Sunne, is taken away: and this is that which goeth before the ſpirites: it followeth of the ſpirites themſelues. And he opened the bottomleſſe pit, and there aroſe a ſmoke out of the pit, as the ſmoke of a great fornace; and the Sunne, and the ayre were darkened by the ſmoke of the pit.
            3 A deſcription of the malignant ſpirites inuading the world, taken from their nature, power, forme and order. From their nature, in that they are like vnto certaine locuſtes, in quickeneſſe, ſubtletie, hurtfulneſſe, number, and ſuch like, in this verſe. From their power, for that they are, as the Scorpions of the earth, of a ſecret force to do hurt. For our battell is not here with fleſh and bloud, but with powers, &c. Epheſ. 6. 12. This place of the power of the deuils, generally noted in this verſe, is particularly decla-red afterwardes, in the three next verſes. And there came out of the ſmoke Locuſts vpon the earth; and vnto them was giuen power, ſuch as the Scorpions of the earth haue.
            
               
4 Here that power of the deuils is particularly deſcribed, according to their actions and the effectes of the ſame. Their actions are ſayd to be bounded by the counſell of God: both becauſe they hurt not all men, but onely the reprobate (for the godly and elect, in whom there is any part of a better life, God gardeth by his decree) whom Chriſt ſhall not haue ſealed, in this verſe; and alſo becauſe they neither had all power, nor at all times, no not ouer thoſe that are their own, but limited in manner and time by the preſcript of God, verſe 5. So their power to afflict the godly is none, & for the wicked it is limited in acte and in effect, by the will of God: for the manner was preſcribed vnto them, that they ſhould not ſlay but torment the wretched world. The time is for fiue monethes, or for an hundred and fiftie dayes, that is, for ſo many yeares, in which the deuils haue in deede mightilie peruerted all things, in the world; and yet without that publique and vnpuniſhed licence of killing, which afterwards they vſurped when the ſixt Angell had blowen his trumpet, as ſhall be ſayd vpon the thirteenth verſe. Now this ſpace is to be accounted from the end of that thouſand yeares mentioned chapter 20. 3. and that is, from the Popedome of that Gregorie the ſeuenth, a moſt monſtrous Necromancer, who before was called Hildebrandus Senenſis: for this man being made altogether of impietie and wickedneſſe, as a ſlaue of the deuill, whom he ſerued, was the moſt wicked firebrand of the world he excommunicated the Emperour Henry the fourth: went about by all maner of trecherie to ſet vp and put downe Empires and Kingdomes, as liked himſelfe: and doubted not to ſet Rodolph the Swedon ouer the Empire in ſteed of Henrie before named, ſending vnto him a crowne with this verſe annexed vnto it, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho, that is, The Rocke to Peter gaue the crowne, and Peter Rodolph doth renowne. Finally, he ſo finely beſtirred him ſelfe in his affaires, as he miſerably ſet all Chriſtendome on fire, & conueyed ouer vnto his ſucceſſours the burning brand of the ſame; who enraged with like ambition, neuer ceaſed to nouriſh that flame, and to in kindle it more & more: whereby Cities, Common weales, and whole kingdomes ſet together by the eares amōgeſt themſelues, by moſt expert cutthroates, came to ruine, whiles they miſerably wounded one another. This terme of an hundred and 50. yeares, taketh end in the time of Gregorie the ninth, or Hugolinus Anagnienſis (as he was before called) who cauſed to be compiled by one Raymond his chapleine and confeſſour, the body of the Decretals, and by ſufferance of the Kings and Princes, to be publiſhed in the Chriſtian world, and eſtabliſhed for a law. For by this ſleight, at length, the Popes arrogated vnto themſelues licence to kill whom they would, whiles other were vnwares; and without feare eſtabliſhed a butchery out of many, the wicked Canōs of the Decretals, which the trumpet of the 5. Angell had expreſly forbidden, & had hindered vntill this time. The effectes of theſe bloudy actions are declared vpon the 6 verſe: that the miſerable world lāguiſhing in ſo great calamilities, ſhould willingly run together vnto death, and preferre the ſame before life, by reaſon of the grieuouſneſſe of the miſeries that oppreſſed them. But it was cōmanded thē, that they ſhould

not hurt the graſſe of ye earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree: but onely thoſe mē which of haue not the ſeale of God in their foreheads.
            5 And to them it was giuen that they ſhould not kill them, but that they ſhould be vexed fiue monethes; and that their ſhould be as the paine that commeth of a Scorpion, when he hath ſtung a man.
            6 
                  Chap. 6. 16. Eſay. 2. 19. Hoſe. 10. 8. Therefore in thoſe dayes ſhall men ſeeke death, and ſhal not finde it; and ſhall deſire to dye, and death ſhall flie from them.
            7 The forme theſe helliſh ſpirites and adminiſters, is ſhadowed out by ſignes & viſible figures in this ſort: that they are verie expert & ſwift: that whereſoeuer they are in the world the kingdome is theirs: that they menage al their affaires with cunning & skil, in this verſe: that making ſhew of mildnes and tender affection to draw on men with all, they moſt impotently rage in all miſchief: that they are moſt mightie to doe hurt, verſe 8. that they are freed from being hurt of any man, as armed with the colour of Religion and ſacred authoritie of priuilege: that they fill all things with horrour, verſe 9. that they are fraudulent: that they are venimous and extremelie noyſome, though their power be limited, verſe 10. All which things are properly in the infernall powers, and communicated by them vnto their miniſters and vaſſals. The forme of the locuſtes was like vnto horſes prepared vnto battell; and on their heads were ſet as it were crownes, like vnto gold, & their faces were like the faces of men.
            8 And they had haire as the haire of women; and their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons:
            9 They had alſo habbergions, like to habbergions of yron: and the ſound of their wings was like the ſound of charets, when many horſes run together in battell:
            10 Alſo they had tayles like vnto Scorpions; and there were ſtings in their tayles; and their power was to hurt men fiue monethes.
            11 The order of the powers of maliciouſneſſe: that they are ſubiect vnto one infernall king, whom thou mayeſt call in Engliſh the deſtroyer: who driueth the whole world both Iewes and Gentiles into the deſtruction that belongeth vnto him ſelfe. And I cannot tell whether this name haue reſpect vnto the Etvmologicall interpretation of Hildebrand, by a figure often vſed in Scripture: which albeit it may otherwiſe be turned of the Germaines (as the ſence of cōpound wordes is commonly ambiguous) yet in very deede it ſignifieth as much as if thou ſhouldeſt call him the firebrand, that is, he that ſetteth on fire thoſe that be faithfull vnto him. Now they had a King ſet ouer them, which

is the Angell of the bottomleſſe pit; whoſe name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greeke is called Apollyon, that is, the deſtroyer.
            
            12 A paſſage vnto the next point, and to the hiſtorie of the time following. One wo is paſt, and behold, yet two woes come after this.
            13 The ſixt execution done vpon the world, by the tyrannicall powers thereof, working in the foure partes of the earth, that is, in moſt cruell manner executing their tyrannous dominion through the whole world: and killing the miſerable people without puniſhment, which before was not lawfull for them to doe in that ſort, as I ſhewed vpon the fourth verſe. This narration hath two partes: a commaundement from God, in the fourteenth verſe: and an execution of the commaundement, in the verſes following. ¶ Then the ſixt Angel blew the trumpet, The commaundement giuen by Chriſt him ſelfe, who is gouernour ouer all. and I heard a certaine voyce from the He alludeth to the altar of incēſe, which ſtood in the courte which the prieſts were in, ouer againſt the Arke of the Couenant, hauing a vayle betwixt them. foure hornes of the golden altar, which is before God,
            14 Saying to the ſixt Angell, which had the trumpet; As if he ſhould haue ſayd, theſe hitherto haue bene ſo bounde by the power of God, that they could not freely runne vpon all men as themſelues luſted, but were ſtaved and reſtrained at that great floud of Euphrates, that is, in their ſpirituall Babylon (for this is a Periphraſis of the ſpirituall Babylon, by the limites of the viſible Babylon long ſince ouerthrowne) that they might not commit thoſe horrible ſlaughters, which they long breathed after. Now, goe to, let looſe thoſe foure Angels, that is, adminiſters of the wrath of God, in that number that is conuenient to the ſlaughtering of the foure quarters of the world: ſtirre them vp, and giue them the bridle, that ruſhing out of that Babylon of theirs, which is the ſeate of the wicked ones, they may flee vpon all the world, therein to rage and moſt licentiouſly to practiſe their tyrannie, as God hath ordeined. This was done when Gregorie the ninth by publique authoritie eſtabliſhed for law, his owne Decretals; by which he might freely lay traynes for the life of ſimple men. For, who is it that ſeeth not that the lawes Decretall moſt of them are ſnares to catch ſoules withall? Since that time (O good God) how great ſlaughters haue there bene? how great maſſacres? All hiſtories are full of them: and this our age aboundeth with moſt horrible and monſtrous examples of the ſame. Looſe the foure Angels, which are bound at the great riuer Euphrates.
            
               
15 The executiō of the commandement, is in two pointes: one, that theſe butcherers are let loſe, that out of their tower of the ſpirituall Babylon they might with furie run abroad thorough all the world, as well the chiefe of that crue which are moſt prōpt vnto all aſſayes: in this verſe; as their multitudes, both moſt copious, of which a nū
                  ber certaine is named for a number infinit, verſe 16. and in themſelues by all meanes fully furniſhed to hide and to hurt, verſ. 17. as being armed with fire, ſmoke & brimſtone, as appeareth in the colour of their armour which dazeleth the eyes of all men: and haue the ſtrength of Lyons to hurt withall, from which (as out of their mouth) the firie, ſmokie, and ſtinking darts of the Pope are ſhot out, verſ. 18. The other point is, that theſe butcherers haue effected the commaundement of God by fraude and violence, in the two verſes following. Thē the foure Angels were looſed, which were prepared at an houre, at a day, at a moneth, and at a yeare, to ſlay the third part of men.
            15 And the number of the troupes of horſemen were twentie thouſand times ten thouſand: for I heard the number of them.
            16 I alſo ſaw horſes in a viſion, and them that ſate on them, hauing firie habbergions, and of Iacinth, and of brimſtone; & the heads of the horſes were as the heads of Lyōs: & out of their mouthes came forth fire and ſmoke and brimſtone.
            18 By theſe three was the third part of men killed, that is, by the fire, and by the ſmoke, and by the brimſtone, which came out of their mouthes.
            19 For their power is in their mouthes, and in their tayles: That is, they are harmefull euery way: on what part ſoeuer thou put thine hand vnto them, or they touch thee, they do hurt. So the former are called Scorpions, verſe 3. for their tayles are like vnto Serpents, hauing heads, wherewith they hurt.
            20 Now remaineth the euent, (as I ſayd vpon the firſt verſe) which folowed of ſo many and ſo grieuous iudgements, in this moſt wicked world: namely an impenitent obfirmation of the vngodly in their impietie and vnrighteouſnes, though they feele themſelues moſt vehemētly preſſed with the hād of God: for their obſtinate vngodlines is ſhewed in this verſe; and their vnrighteouſneſſe in the verſe following. Hitherto hath bene the generall hiſtorie of things to be done vniuerſally in the whole world: which becauſe it doth not ſo much belong vnto the Church of Chriſt: is therefore not ſo expreſſely diſtinguiſhed by certaintie of time and other circumſtances: but is wouen, as they ſay, with a ſlight hand. Alſo there is none other cauſe why the hiſtorie of the ſeuenth Angell is paſſed ouer in this place, thē for that the ſame more properly appertaineth vnto the hiſtorie of the Church. But this is more diligently ſet out according to the times thereof, Chapter. 11. and 16. as ſhall appeare vpon thoſe places. And the remnāt of the men which were

not killed by theſe plagues, repented not of the workes of their hands, that they ſhould not worſhip diuels, and 
                  Pſal. 115. 4. and 135. 15. images of gold and of ſiluer, and of braſſe, & of ſtone, and of wood, which neither can ſee, neither heare, nor go:
            21 Neither repented they of their murthers, nor of their ſorceries, neither of their fornication, nor of their theftes.
         
         
            CHAP. X.
            
               1 Another Angel appeareth clothed with a cloud, 2 holding a booke open, 3 and crieth out. 8 A voice from heauen commandeth Iohn to take the booke, 10 He eateth it. 
                  F. IVNIVS.
               
            
            1 Now S. Iohn paſſeth vnto the other propheticall hiſtorie, which is of the Church of God, as I ſhewed that this book ſhould be diſtinguiſhed, chap. 4. 1. This ſtorie reacheth hence vnto the two and twentieth chapter. And this whole chapter is but a tranſition from the common hiſtorie of the world, vnto that which is particular of the church. There are in this tranſition or paſſage, two preparatiues, as it were, vnto this church ſtorie, compriſed in this whole chapter. One is the authoritie of Chriſt, reuealing his myſteries, and calling his ſeruant, vnto the ſeuenth verſe. The other is S. Iohn his calling proper vnto this place, and repeated from before; vnto the end of the chapter. Authoritie is giuē vnto this reuelation, by theſe things: Firſt, by the perſon of Chriſt, appearing from heauen in his habite and countenance, ſtrong, readie, glorious, ſurueying all things by his prouidence, and gouerning them by his omnipotencie, verſe 1. Secondly, that he brought not by chance, but out of a booke, this open reuelation ſet forth vnto the eye, to ſignifie the ſame vnto the ſea, and land, as Lord ouer all, verſe 2. Thirdly, that he offered the ſame not whiſpering or muttering in a corner (as falſe prophets doe) but crying out with a loud voice vnto them which ſleepe: and with a lioniſh and terrible noiſe rouſed vp the ſecure: the verie thunders themſelues giuing teſtimonie thereunto, verſe 3. Laſtly for that he confirmed all by an othe, verſe 5. 6. 7. THen I ſaw Chriſt Ieſus: ſee chap. 7. 2. another mightie Angel comming downe from heauen, clothed with a cloud; & the raine bow was ouer his head, & his face was as the ſunne, & his feet as pillars of fire.
            2 And he had in his hand a Namely a ſpecial booke of the affaires of Gods church. For the booke that conteineth things belonging vnto the whole world, is ſaid to be kept with the creator, chap. 5. 1. but the booke of the church, with the redeemer, and out of this booke is taken the reſt of the hiſtorie of this Apocalyps. little book open, and he ſet his right foote vpon the ſea, and his left on the earth,
            
               
3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a lyon roareth: and when he had cryed, ſeuen thunders vttered their voyces.
            4 A godly care is laudable, but muſt be ioyned with knowledg. Therefore nothing muſt be taken in hand but by calling; which muſt be expected and waited for of the godly. And when the ſeuen thunders had vttered their voyces, I was about to write: but I heard a voice from heauē ſaying vnto me, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   cloſe. Seale vp thoſe things which the ſeuen thunders haue ſpoken, and write them not.
            5 And the Angel which I ſaw ſtand vpon the ſea, & vpon the earth, This was a geſture vſed of one that ſweareth. which men do yet now adayes vſe. lift vp his hand to heauen,
            6 And ſware by him that liueth for euermore; which created heauen, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the ſea, and the thinges which therein are, Neither time it ſelfe, nor the things that are in time: but that the world to cōe is at h
                     •
                  d, which is altogether of eternitie & beyond all times. that There shall neuer be any more time. time ſhould be no more.
            7 But in the days of the Wherof cha. 11. 15. & 16. 17. voyce of the ſeuēth Angel, when he ſhall blow the trumpet, the myſterie of God ſhalbe finiſhed, as he hath declared to his ſeruants the Prophets.
            8 The other part of this Ch. concerning the particular calling of S. Iohn to the receiuing of the propheſie following: which is enioyned him, firſt by ſigne in three verſes; then in plaine words, in the laſt verſe. Vnto the ſetting forth of the ſigne belong theſe things: That S. Iohn is taught from heauen, to demand the booke of propheſie, in this verſe: for theſe motions and deſires God doth inſpire: that demanding the booke, he is charged to take it in a figuratiue manner, the vſe whereof alſo is expounded, verſe 9. (as Ezech 2. verſ. 9.) whence this ſimilitude is borrowed: laſtly, for that S. Iohn at the commandement of Chriſt tooke the booke; and found by experience that the ſame as proceeding from Chriſt was moſt ſweet; but in that it foretelleth the afflictions of the church, it was moſt bitter vnto his ſpirit. And the voyce which I heard frō heauen, ſpake vnto me againe and ſaid, Go and take the litle booke which is open in the hand of the Angel, which ſtādeth vpō the ſea & vpon the earth.
            9 So I went vnto the Angel, and ſaid to him, Giue me the little booke. And he ſaid vnto me, Take it, and eate it vp; and it ſhall make thy belly bitter, but it ſhall be in thy mouth ſweet as hony.
            10 Thē I took ye litle book out of the Angels hād, and did eat it vp; & it was in my mouth ſweet as

hony: but whē I had eatē it vp, my belly was bitter
            11 A ſimple and plaine declaratiō of the ſigne before going, witneſſing the diuine calling of S. Iohn, and laying vpō him the neceſſitie thereof. And he ſaid vnto me, Thou muſt prophecie againe before people and nations, and tongues, and many Kings.
         
         
            CHAP. XI.
            
               1 The temple is commanded to be meaſured. 3 The Lord ſtirreth vp two witneſſes: 7 whom the beaſt murthereth, 9 and no man burieth them. 11 God raiſeth them to life. 12 and calleth them vp to heauen, 13 The wicked are terrified. 15 By the trumpet of the ſeuenth Angel, the reſurrection 18 and iudgement is deſcribed.
               
            
            1 The authority of the intended reuelation being declared, together with the neceſſitie of that calling which was particularly impoſed vpō Iohn: hereafter followeth the hiſtorie of the eſtate of Chriſt his church both conflicting or warfaring, & ouercomming in Chriſt. For both the true church of Chriſt is ſaid to ſight againſt that which is falſely ſo called, ouer the which Antichriſt ruleth; Chriſt Ieſus ouerthrowing Antichriſt by the ſpirit of his mouth: and Chriſt is ſaid to ouercome moſt gloriouſly vntill he ſhall ſlay Antichriſt, by the appearance of his comming, as the Apoſtle excellētly teacheth. 2. Theſ. 2. 8. So this hiſtorie hath two parts: One of the ſtate of the church conflicting with temptations, vnto the 16. chap. The other of the ſtate of the ſame church, obteining victorie, thence vnto the 20. chap. The firſt part hath two mēbers, moſt conueniently diſtributed into their times, whereof the firſt conteineth an hiſtorie of the Chriſtian church for 1260. yeres, what time the Goſpel of Chriſt was, as it were, taken vp from amongſt men into heauen: the ſecond conteineth an hiſtorie of the ſame church vnto the victorie perfected. And theſe two members are briefly, though diſtinctly, propounded in this chap. but are both of them more at large diſcourſed, after in due order. For we vnderſtand the ſtate of the church conflicting, out of chap. 12 & 13. and of the ſame growing out of afflictions, out of the 14. 15. & 16. chap. Neither did S. Iohn at vnwares ioyne together the hiſtorie of theſe two times in this chap. becauſe here is ſpoken of propheſie, which all confeſſe to be but one: iuſt & immutable in the church, & which Chriſt commanded to be continual. The hiſtorie of the former time reacheth vnto the 14. verſ. the latter is ſet downe in the reſt of this chap. In the former are ſhewed theſe things: the calling of the ſeruants of God in 4. verſes: the conflicts which the faithfull muſt godly vndergo in their calling, for Chriſt & for his church, thence vnto the 10. ver. and their reſurrection, & receiuing vp into heauen, vnto the 14. verſe. In the calling of the ſeruants of God, are mentioned two things: the begetting and ſetling of the church in two verſes: and the education thereof in two other verſes. The begetting of the church is here commended vnto S. Iohn by ſigne and by ſpeech: the ſigne is a meaſuring rod; and the ſpeech a commandement to meaſure the Temple of God, that is, to reduce the ſame vnto a new forme: becauſe the Gentiles are alreadie entred into the Temple of Ieruſalem, and ſhall ſhortly defile and ouerthrow the ſame vtterly. 
               F. IVNIVS. THen was giuen me a reede, like vnto a

rodde; and the Angel ſtoode by me, ſaying, Riſe Either that of Ieruſalem which was a figure of the church of Chriſt, or that heauenly exemplar, whereof verſe 19. but the firſt liketh me better, and the things following doe all agree thereunto. The ſence therefore is, Thou ſeeſt all things in Gods houſe, almoſt from the paſſion of Chriſt, to be diſordered: and that not onely the citie of Ieruſalem, but alſo the court of the Temple is trampled vnder foote of the nations, and of prophane men whether Iewes or ſtraungers: and that onely the Temple, that is, the bodie of the temple, with the altar, and a ſmall companie of good men which truely worſhip God, do now remaine, whom God doth ſanctifie and confirme by his preſence. Meaſure therefore this, euen this true church, or rather the true type of the true church, omitting the reſt and ſo diſcribe all things from me, that the true church of Chriſt may be, as it were, a very little center: and the church of Antichriſt as the circle of the center, euerie way in length and breadth compaſſing about the ſame: that by way of propheſie thou mayeſt ſo declare openly, that the ſtate of the Temple of God, and the faithfull which worſhip him, that is of his church, is much more ſtreight then the church of Antichriſt. and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worſhip therein.
            2 As if he ſhould ſay, it belongeth nothing vnto thee, to iudge thoſe which are without, 1. Cor 5. 12. which be innumerable: looke vnto thoſe of the houſhold onely, or vnto the houſe of the liuing God. But the He ſpeaketh of the outer court, which was called the peoples court, becauſe all men might come into that. court which is without the temple That is counted to be caſt out, which in meaſuring is refuſed as prophene. ſhut out, and mete it not: for it is giuen vnto the To prophane perſons, wicked, and vnbeleeuers, aduerſaries vnto the Church. Gentiles; and the holy citie ſhall they tread vnder foote, Or a thouſand two hundred and threeſcore dayes, as is ſaid in the next verſe: that is, a thouſand two hundred and threeſcore yeeres, a day for a yeere, as often in Ezechiel and Daniel: which thing I noted before 2. 10. The beginning of theſe thouſand two hundred and threeſcore yeeres, we account from the paſſion of Chriſt, whereby (the partition wall being broken downe) we were made of two, one, Epheſ 2. 14. I ſay one flocke vnder one ſhepheard, Ioh. 10. 16 & the end of theſe yeres preciſely falleth into the Popedome of Boniface the eight, who a little before the end of the yeere of Chriſt 1294. entred the Popedome of Rome, in the feaſt of S. Lucie (as Bergomenſis ſaith) hauing put in priſon his predeceſſour Coeleſtinus, whom by fraude, vnder colour of oracle, he deceiued: for which cauſe, that was well ſaid of him, Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, mortuus eſt vt canis. That is, He entred like a foxe, reigned like a lion, and died like a dog. For if from 1294. yeeres thou ſhalt take the age of Chriſt which he liued on the earth, thou ſhalt finde there remaineth iuſt 1260. yeares, which are mentioned in this place, and many others. two and fortie moneths.
            
               
3 But I had rather tranſlate it illud then illam, the temple then the cittie: for God ſaith I will giue that temple, & commit it vnto my two witneſſes, that is vnto the miniſters of the word, who are few indeed, weake and cō
                  temptible: but yet two, that is of ſuch a number as one of them may helpe another, and one confirme the teſtimonie of another vnto all men, that from the mouth of two or three witneſſes euerie word may be made good amongſt men 2. Cor. 13. 1. I wil giue the ſame vnto my two witneſſes, & they ſhal They ſhall exerciſe their office inioyned by me by the ſpace of thoſe thouſand two hundred and ſixtie yeares, in the middeſt of afflictions though neuer ſo lamentable; which is figuratiuely ſhewed by the mourning garment. prophecie a thouſād two hū
               dreth and threeſcore daies, clothed in ſackcloth.
            4 Theſe That is, the ordinarie and perpetuall inſtruments of ſpirituall grace, peace and light in my Church, which God by his onely power preſerued in this Temple. So Zach. 4. 3. are the two oliue trees, and two candleſtickes, ſtanding before the God of the earth.
            5 The power and efficacie of the holy miniſterie, and which is truely Euangelicall, is declared both in earth and in heauen, protecting the adminiſters thereof, and deſtroying the enimies, in this verſe, vertue indeede diuine, moſt mightily ſhewing forth it ſelfe in heauen, earth, and the ſea, verſe 6. as it is deſcribed 2. Cor. 10. 4. according to the promiſe of Chriſt, Mar. 16. 17. And this is the ſecond place (as I ſaid before) of the combats which the ſeruants of God muſt needes vnder goe in the executing of their calling, and of the things that follow the ſame combats. In the combats or conflicts are theſe things: to ouercome, in theſe two verſes; to be ouercome and killed, verſe 7. After the ſlaughter follow theſe things: that the carkaſſes of the godly are layd abrode, verſe 8. being vnburied, are made a matter of ſcorne, together with curſing and bitter execrations, verſe 9. and that therefore gratulations are publikely and priuately made. verſe. 10. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouthes, and deuoureth their enimies: for if any man will hurt them, thus muſt he be killed.
            6 Theſe haue power to ſhut vp heauen, that it raigne not in the dayes of their prophecying; and haue power ouer the waters to turne them into bloud, and to ſmite the earth with all maner plagues, as often as they will.
            7 That is, when they haue ſpent thoſe thouſand two hundred and ſixtie yeares mentioned verſe 2. and 3. in publiſhing their teſtimonie according to their office. And when they haue When they haue done their meſſage. finiſhed their teſtimonie,

               Of which after, chap. 13. &c. That beaſt is the Romaine Empire, made long ago of ciuill, Eccleſiaſticall: the chiefe head whereof was then Boniface the eight, as I ſaid before: who lifted vp himſelfe in ſo great arrogancie (ſaith the author of Faſciculus temporum) that he called himſelfe Lord of the whole world, as well in temporall cauſes as in ſpirituall. There is extant of that matter, written by the ſame Boniface, moſt arrogantly, ſhall I ſay, or moſt wickedly ca. vnam ſanctam. extra. de maioritate & obedientia; and in the ſixt of the decretals (which is from the ſame author) many things are found of the ſame argument. the beaſt that commeth vp out of the bottomles pit, ſhall He ſhall perſecute moſt cruelly the holy men, and put them to death, and ſhall wound & pierce through with curſings, both their names and writings. And that this was done to verie manie godly men by Boniface and others, the hiſtories do declare, eſpecially ſince the time, that the odious and condemned name amongſt the multitude, firſt of the brethren Waldenſes or Lugdunenſes, then alſo of the Fraticells, was pretended, that good men might with more approbation be maſta
                     •
                  red. make war againſt them, & ſhall ouercome them, and kill them.
            8 And their corpſes ſhall lie in the 
                  That is, openly at Rome: where at that time was a moſt great concourſe of people, the yeare of Iubilie being then firſt ordained by Boniface vnto the ſame end, in the yeare of Chriſt one thouſand three hundred, example whereof is read Chapter 1. Extra. de poenucntijs & remiſsionibus. So by on act he committed double iniurie againſt Chriſt, both aboliſhing his truth by the reſtoring of the type of the Iubilie, and triumphing ouer his members by moſt wicked ſuperſtition. O religious heart! Now, that we ſhould vnderſtand theſe things of Rome, S. Iohn himſelfe is the author, both after in the ſeuenteenth Chapter almoſt throughout, and alſo in the circumſcription now next following, when he ſaith, it is that great Citie (as Chapter 17. 18. he calleth it) and is ſpiritually tearmed Sodome and Egypt: and that ſpiritually (for that muſt here againe be repeated from before) Chriſt was there crucified. For the two firſt appellations ſignifie ſpirituall wickedneſſes: the latter ſignifieth the ſhew and pretence of good, that is, of Chriſtian and ſound religion. Sodome ſignifieth moſt licentious impietie and iniuſtice; Egypt moſt cruell perſecution of the people of God; and Ieruſalem ſignifieth, the moſt confident glorying of that Citie, as it were in true religion, being yet full of falſhood and vngodlineſſe. Now who is ignorant that theſe things do rather and more agree vnto Rome, then vnto any other Citie? The commendations of the Citie of Rome for manie yeares paſt, are publikely notorious, which are not for me to gather together. This onely I will ſay, that he long ſince did verie well ſee what Rome is, who taking his leaue thereof vſed theſe verſes:

                        
                           Roma vale, vidi, ſatis eſt vidiſſe: reuertar
                           Quumleno, meretrix, ſcurra cinaedus aero.
                        
                        
                           Now farewell Rome, I haue thee ſeene: it was inough to ſee:
                           I will returne when as I meane, baud, harlot, knaue to be.
                        
                     
                  
                ſtreets

of the great citie, which After a more ſecrete kind of meaning & vnderſtanding. ſpiritually is called Sodō & Egypt, Namely in his members, as alſo he ſaid vnto Saul, Act. 9. 5. where alſo our Lord was crucified.
            9 And they of the people and kinreds, and tongues, & Gētiles ſhall ſee their corpſes That is, for three yeeres & an halfe: for ſo manie yeeres Boniface liued after his Iubiley, as Bergomenſis witneſſeth. three dayes and an halfe, and ſhall not ſuffer their carkaſſes to be put in graues.
            10 And the inhabitants of the earth, So much the more ſhall they by this occaſiō exerciſe the iolities of their Iubilie. ſhall reioyce ouer them, & be glad; and ſhall ſend gifts one to another: becauſe theſe two Prophetes The Goſpel of Chriſt is the afflictiō of the world; & the miniſterie therof, the ſauour of death vnto death, to thoſe that periſh. 2. Cor. 2. 16. vexed them that dwelt on the earth.
            11 The third place as I noted before, is of the riſing againe of the Prophets from the dead, and their carrying vp into heauen. For their reſurrection is ſhewed in this verſe; their calling and lifting vp into heauen, in the verſe following. But after That is, what time God ſhall deſtroy that wicked Boniface. three daies & an halfe, That is, the Prophets of God ſhall in a ſort riſe againe, not the ſame in perſon (as they ſay) but in ſpirit; that is, in the power & efficacie of their miniſterie, which S. Iohn expreſſed before verſ. 5. and 6. And ſo the prophecy that is ſpoken of Elias, is interpreted by the Angel to be vnderſtood of Iohn the Baptiſt, Luke 1. 17. For the ſame Boniface himſelfe, who ſought to kill and deſtroy them, was the fire of Gods mouth (which the holy miniſterie ſheweth and exhibiteth) deuoured, and died miſerablie in priſon, by the indeuour of Sarra Columnenſis, and Nogaretus a French knight, whom Philip the faire king of France ſent into Italie but with a verie ſmall power. the ſpirit of life cōming from God, ſhal enter into thē; & they That is, the moſt grieuous heat of afflictions and perſecutions ſhall ſtay for a while, for the great amaze that ſhall ariſe vpon that ſodaine and vnlooked for iudgement of God. ſhall ſtand vp vpon their feete: & great feare ſhall come vpon them which ſhal ſee them.
            12 After this they heard a great voice from heauen, ſaying vnto them, Come vp hither. And They were called by God into heauen, and taken out of this malignant world, into the heauenly Church, which alſo lyeth hidden here in the earth, to exerciſe their calling ſecretly: as of whō this wretched world was vnworthy. Heb. 11. 38. For the Church of the wicked is by compariſon called the earth or the world; & the Church of the godly, heauen. So in ancient time amongſt the godly Iſraelits; ſo amongſt the Iewes in the dayes of Manaſſes & other kings, whō the earth refuſed that heires of heauen, we reade that they lay hidden as heauen in the earth.
               
they aſcended vp to heauen in a cloud, Yet could they not hinder the ſecret ones of the Lord (as the pſalmiſt calleth them, Pſal. 83. 4.) but that they went on forward in his worke. and their enimies did ſee them.
            13 Bergomēſis ſaith, in the yere of our Lord 1301 this yeare a blaſing ſtarre foretelling great calamitie to come, appeared in heauen: in which yeare vpon the feaſt of S. Andrew, ſo great an earthquake ſuddenly aroſe, as neuer before: which alſo continuing by times, for many dayes, ouerthrew many ſtately houſes. This ſaith he of the yeare next folowing the Iubilie: which S. Iohn ſo many ages before, expreſſed as it were word for word. And the ſame houre was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the citie fell, and in the earthquake was ſlain in number ſeuen thouſand men: and the reſt were ſore feared, They were in deed broken with preſent aſtoniſhmēt of mind, but did not earneſtly repent as they ought to haue done. and Glorified God by confeſſing his Name. gaue glorie to the God of heauen.
            14 He paſſeth vnto the ſecond hiſtorie, which is the ſecond part of this Chapter. S. Iohn calleth theſe the ſecond and third wo, hauing reſpect vnto Chap 9. 12. The ſecond wo is paſt, and behold the third wo will come quickly.
            15 Of whoſe ſounding the trumpet Chriſt expreſly foretold. ch. 10. 7. & this is the ſecond part of this chap. containing a general hiſtorie of the Chriſtian Church, frō the time of Boniface the 8. vnto the cōſummatiō of the victory declared by voice from heauen. In this hiſtorie there are three branches: a preparation by the ſound of the Angels trumpet: a narration by the voyces of heauenly Angels & Elders: and a confirmation by ſigne. Then the ſeuenth Angel blew the trumpet, & there were great voyces in heauen ſaying, The narration hath 2. parts; an acclamation of the heauēly creatures, in this verſ. and, both an adoration by all the Elders, verſ. 16. & alſo a moſt ample thanks giuing, ver. 17. 18. The ſence of the acclamation is, Now the Lord is entred on his kingdom, & hath reſtored his Church, in which moſt mightily recouered from the profanation of the Gentiles, he may glorifie him ſelf. Namely, that, which the Lord ordained when firſt he ordained his Church, that the faith of the Saints doth now behold as accōpliſhed. The kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Chriſts, who ſhall raigne for euermore.
            16 As before 7. 11. This giuing of thāks is altogether of the ſame cōtent with the words going before. And the foure and twentie Elders, which ſate before God on their thrones, fel vpon their faces, and worſhipped God,
            17 Saying, We giue thee thankes, Lord God almightie, Which art, and which waſt, and which art to come: for that thou haſt taken vnto thee thy great might, and haſt entred thy kingdome.
            
               
18 A ſpeech of the Hebrew lā
                  guage, as much to ſay, as, the Gentiles being angry, thine inflamed wrath came vpon thē, and ſhewed it ſelfe frō heauē, occaſioned by their anger and furie. And the Nations were angrie, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they ſhould be iudged, and that thou ſhouldeſt giue reward vnto thy ſeruants the Prophetes, and to the Saintes, and to them that feare thy Name, both ſmall and great, and ſhouldeſt deſtroy them, which deſtroy the earth.
            19 Then the temple of God was This is the confirmatiō of the next prophecie before going by ſignes exhibited in heauen, and that of two ſortes, where of ſome are viſible, as the paſſing away of of the heauen, the opening of the Temple, the Arke of the couenant appearing in the Temple, & teſtifying the glorious preſence of God, and the lightnings: others apprehended by eare and ſuch more dull ſences, which beare witneſſe in heauen and in earth to the truth of the iudgements of God. opened in heauē, & there was ſeen in his Tēple the Arke of his couenant: & there came lightnings, & voyces, and thundrings, and earthquake, and great hayle.
         
         
            CHAP. XII.
            
               1 A womā
                   2 appeareth trauelling with child, 4 whoſe child 
                  F. IVNIVS. 
                  the Dragon would deuour, 7 but Michaell ouercommeth him, 9 and caſteth him out, 13 & the more he is caſt downe & vanquished, the more fiercely he exerciſeth his ſubtleties.
               
            
            1 Hitherto hath bene the generall prophecie, comprehended in two partes, as I ſhewed vpon the 11. chapter. Now ſhalbe declared the firſt part of this prophecie, in this & the next chap and the latter part in the 14. 15. and 16. chapters. Vnto the firſt part, which is of the conflicting or militant Church, belong two things: The beginning and the progreſſe of the ſame in conflictes and Chriſtian cōbats Of which two, the beginning or vpſpringing of the Church is deſcribed in this chap. & the progreſſe thereof in the chap. following. The beginning of the Chriſtian Church we define to be from the firſt moment of the cōception of Chriſt, vntil that time wherein this Church was as it were weyned and taken away frō the breaſt or milk of her mother: which is the time when the Church of the Iewes with their Citie & Temple was ouerthrowne by the iudgement of God. So we haue in this chapter the ſtorie of 69. yeares & vpwardes. The partes of this chap. are 3. The firſt is, the hiſtorie of the conception & bearing in wombe, in 4. verſes. The ſecond, an hiſtorie of the birth, frō the 5. verſ. vnto the 12. The third is, of the woman that had brought forth, vnto the end of the chap. And theſe ſeuerall parts haue euery one their cōflictes. Therfore in that firſt part are two things contained, one the cōception & bearing in wōbe, in 2. verſes: & another of the lying in waite of the Dragon againſt that which ſhould be brought forth, in the next 2. verſes. In the firſt point are theſe things; the deſcription of the mother, verſ. 4. and of the dolours of childbirth, verſ. 2. all ſhewed vnto Iohn from heauen. ANd there appeared a great wonder in heauen:

               A type of the true and holie Church, which then was in the Nation of the Iewes. This Church (as is the ſtate of the holy Church Catholike) did in it ſelfe ſhine about with glory giuē of God, troad vnder feete mutabilitie and chāgeableneſſe, and poſſeſſed the kingdome of heauen as the heire thereof. A woman clothed with the Sunne, and the Moone was vnder her feete, and vpon her head a crowne of twelue ſtarres.
            2 And For this is that barren woman that brought not forth, of which Eſa. 54. 1. & Gal. 4 27. ſhe cried out for good cauſe, & was tormented at that time; when in the iudgement of all ſhe ſeemed neare vnto death, and in manner ready to giue vp the ghoſt, by reaſon of her weakeneſſe and pouerrie. being with child, ſhe cried trauelling in birth, & was pained ready to be deliuered.
            3 And there appeared another wonder in heauen: That is, the deuill or Satan (as is declared, verſe 9) mightie, angrie, and full of wrath. for behold a great red Dragon hauing Thereby to withſtand thoſe ſeuen Churches before ſpoken of, that is, the Catholique Church; and that with kinglie furniture and tyrannicall magnificence, ſignified by the crownes ſet vpon his heades, as if the ſame without controuerſie belonged vnto him by proper right: as alſo he boaſted vnto Chriſt, Mat. 4. 9. See after, vpon chap. 13. 1. ſeuen heads, & More then are the hornes of the Lambe, or then the Churches are: ſo well furniſhed doth the tyrant brag himſelfe to be, vnto all manner of miſchief. ten hornes, and ſeuen crownes vpon his heads:
            4 After the deſcription of Satan followeth his actions that is, his battell offered vnto the Church, partly to that which is viſible, wherein the wheat is mingled with the chaffe, and the good fiſh with that which is euil; a good part hereof, though in appearāce it ſhined as the ſtarres ſhine in heauen, he is ſayd to thruſt downe out of heauen, and to peruert: for if it were poſſible, he would peruert euen the elect, Mat. 24. 24. and partly to the elect members of the holy Catholique Church, in the ſecond part of this verſe. Many therefore of the members of the viſible Church (ſaith S. Iohn) he ouerthrew and triumphed vpon them. His taile drew the third part of the ſtarres of heauen, and caſt them to the earth. And the Dragon He withſtood that elect Church of the Iewes, which was now readie to bring forth the Chriſtian Church, and watched for that ſhe ſhould bring forth. For the whole Church, and whole bodie is compared vnto a woman: and a part of the Church, vnto that which is brought forth, as we haue noted at large vpon Cant. 7. 6. ſtood before the womā, which was readie to be deliuered, Chriſt myſticall (as they call him) that is, the whole Church, conſiſting of the perſon of Chriſt as the head, and of the body vnited thereunto by the ſpirite, ſo is the name of Chriſt taken. 1. Cor. 12. 12. to deuour her child, when ſhe had brought it forth.
            
               
5 The ſecond hiſtory is of the Church deliuered of child: in which firſt the conſideration of the child borne, & of the mother is deſcribed in two verſes: ſecondly the battaile of the Dragon againſt the young child, & the victorie obteined againſt him, in three verſes following: laſt of all is ſung a ſong of victorie, vnto the twelfth verſe. Now S. Iohn in conſideration of the child borne, noteth two things; for he both deſcribeth him, and his ſtation or place in this verſe. So ſhe brought foorth a That is, Chriſt the head of the Church ioyned with his Church (the beginning, roote, and foundation whereof is the ſame Chriſt) indowed with kinglie power, and taken vp into heauen out of the iawes of Satan (who as a Serpent did bite him vpon the croſſe) that ſitting vpon the coeleſtrall throne he might reigne ouer all. man child, which ſhould rule all Nations with a rod of yron: and her child was taken vp vnto God and to his throne.
            6 The Church of Chriſt which was of the Iewes, after his Aſſumption into heauen, hid it ſelfe in the world as in a wilderneſſe, truſting in the onely defence of God, as witneſſeth S. Luke in the Actes of the Apoſtles. And the woman fled into the wildernes, where ſhe hath a place prepared of God; that Namely the Apoſtles and ſeruantes of God, ordeined to feede with the word of life, the Church collected both of Iewes and Gentiles; vnleſſe any man will take the word alerent, imperſonally, after the vſe of the Hebrwes, in ſteed of aleretur: but I like the firſt better. For he hath reſpect vnto thoſe two Prophets, of whom chapter 11. 3. as for the meaning of the 1260. dayes, looke the ſame place. they ſhould feed her there a thouſand, two hundreth and three ſcore dayes.
            7 And there was a battell fought in heauen, Chriſt the Prince of Angels, and head of the Church, who beareth that yron rod, verſe 5. See the notes vpon Dan. 12 1. In this verſe is a deſcription of the battell; and of the uictorie, in the two verſes following. The Pſalmiſt had reſpect vnto this battell, Pſal 68. 19. and Paul, Epheſ. 4. 8. & Col. 2. 15. Michaell and his Angels fought againſt the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels.
            8 The deſcription of the victorie, by denying of one thing in this verſe, and by affirming the cō
                  trary in the next verſe. As that Satan gained nothing in heauen, but was by the power of God throwen down into this world, wherof he is prince: Chriſt himſelfe and his elect members ſtanding ſtill by the throne of God. But they preuailed not, neither was their They were caſt out, ſo that they were neuer ſeene in heauen any more. place found any more in heauen.
            9 And that great Dragō was caſt out, that old ſerpent, which is called the deuil and Satā, which deceiueth all the world: he was euen caſt into the

earth, and his Angels were caſt out with him.
            10 Then I heard a loud voyce in heauen, ſaying, The ſong of victorie or triumph, containing firſt, a propoſition of the glorie of God and of Chriſt, ſhewed in that victorie: ſecondly it containeth a reaſon of the ſame propoſition, taken from the effects, as that the enemie is ouercome in battell, in this verſe, and that the godly are made conquerours (and more then conquerours, Rom. 8. 37.) verſe 11. Thirdly a concluſion, wherein is an exhortation vnto the Angels, and Saints; & vnto the world a Prophecie of great miſerie, and of deſtruction procured by the deuill againſt mankinde, leſt himſelfe ſhould ſhortlie be miſerable alone, verſe 12. Now is come ſaluation, and ſtrength, & the kingdome of our God, & the power of his Chriſt: for the accuſer of our brethrē is caſt down, which accuſed them before our God day and night.
            11 But they ouercame him by the bloud of that Lambe, and by that word of their teſtimony, and they He is ſayd in the Hebrew tōgue, to loue his life, that eſteemeth nothing more precious then his life: and on the other ſide, he is ſayd not to loue his life, who doubteth not to hazard is, whenſoeuer neede requireth. loued not their liues vnto the death.
            12 Therefore reioyce, ye heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Wo to the inhabitāts of the earth, and of the ſea: for the deuill is come downe vnto you, full of great wrath, knowing that he hath but a ſhort time.
            13 Now when The third part: an hiſtorie of the woman deliuered, conſiſting of two members, the preſent battell of Satan againſt the Chriſtian Church of the Iewiſh Nation, in foure verſes: and the battell intended againſt the ſeede thereof, that is, againſt the Church of the Gentiles, which is called holy by reaſon of the Goſpell of Chriſt, in the two laſt verſes. the Dragon ſaw that he was caſt downe vnto the earth, he perſecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child.
            
            14 That is, being ſtrengthened with diuine power, and taught by oracle, ſhe fled ſwiftly from the aſſault of the deuill, and from the common deſtruction of Ieruſalem, & went vnto a ſolitarie Citie beyond Iordan called Pella, as Euſebius telleth in the fift Chapter of the third booke of his Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie: which place God had commaunded her by Reuelation. But to the woman were giuē two wings of a great Eagle, that ſhe might flie from the preſence of the Serpent into the wilderneſſe, into her place, where ſhe might be nouriſhed for a Into that place which God had appointed for her.
               
               That is for three yeares & a halfe: ſo the ſame ſpeach is takē Dan. 7. 25. This ſpace of time is reckoned in manner frō that laſt & moſt grieuous rebellion of the Iewes, vnto the deſtruction of the Citie and tēple: for their defectiō or falling away began in the 12. yeare of Nero; before the beginning whereof, many foreſignes and predictions were ſhewed from heauen, as Ioſephus writeth lib. 7. cap. 12. and Hegeſippus lib. 5. cap. 44. amongeſt which this is verie memorable, that in the feaſt of Pentecoſt not onely a great ſound and noyſe was heard in the Temple, but alſo a voyce was heard of many out of the Sanctuarie, which cried out vnto all. Let vs depart hence. Now three yeares and a halfe after this defection was begun of the lewes, and thoſe wonders happened, the Citie was taken by force, the Temple ouerthrowne, and the place forſaken of God: and this compaſſe of time S. Iohn noted in this place. time, and times, and halfe a time.
            15 That is, he inflamed the Romanes and Nations, that they perſecuting the Iewiſh people with cruell armes, might by the ſame occaſion inuade the Church of Chriſt, now departed from Ieruſalem and out of Iudaea. For it is an vſuall thing in Scripture, that the raging tumultes of the Nations ſhould be compared vnto waters. And the Serpent caſt out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood; that he might cauſe her to be caried away of the flood.
            16 That is, there was offered in their place other Iewes, vnto the Romanes & nations raging againſt that people: and it came to paſſe thereby that the Church of God was ſaued whole from that violēce; that moſt raging floud of perſecutiō which the Dragō vomited out being altogether ſpent in the deſtructiō of thoſe other Iewes. But the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and ſwalowed vp the flood, which the dragō had caſt out of his mouth.
            17 Being ſet on fire by this meanes, he began to be more mad, & becauſe he perceiued that his purpoſe againſt the Chriſtiā Church of the Iewiſh rēnant was come to naught: he reſolued to fall vpō her ſeed, that is, the Church gathered alſo by God of the Gentiles, & the holy members of the ſame. And this is that other branch, as I ſaid vpō the 13. ver. in which the purpoſe of Satā is ſhewed, ver. 17 and his attēpt. ver. 18. Thē the dragon was wroth with the woman: and went to make warre with the rēnant of her ſeed, which keepe the cōmandemēts of God, and which haue the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt.
            18 That is, as a moſt mightie tēpeſt he ruſhed vpō the whole world (whoſe Prince he is) to raiſe the floudflous & prouoke the natiōs, that they might by their furious billowes toſſe vp & down, driue here & there, & finally deſtroy the Church of Chriſt with the holy mēbers of the ſame. But the prouidēce of God reſiſted his attēpt, that he might fauour the Church of the Gētiles yet tēder & as it were greene. The reſt of this ſtory of the Dragō is excellētly proſecuted by the Apoſtle S. Iohn hereafter in chap. 20. For here the dragō endeuoring to do miſchief, was by God caſt into priſō. And he ſtood on the ſea ſand.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XIII.
            
               1 The beaſt with many heades is deſcribed, 8 which draweth the moſt part of the world to Idolatrie. 11 The other beaſt riſing out of the earth. 15 giueth power vnto him.
               
            
            1 The Apoſtle hauing declared the ſpringing vp of the Chriſtian Church, and the ſtate of that Church from which ours taketh her beginning, doeth now paſſe vnto the ſtorie of the progreſſe thereof, as I ſhewed in the entrance of the former Chap. And this hiſtorie of the progreſſe of the Church and the battailes thereof, is ſet downe in this Chapter, but diſtinctly in two partes; one is of the ciuill Romane Empire, vnto the tenth verſe. Another of the body Eccleſiaſticall or Propheticall, thence vnto the end of the Chapter. In the former part are ſhewed theſe things: Firſt the ſtate of that Empire, in foure verſes; then the actes thereof, in three verſes; after, the effect, which is exceeding great glorie, verſe 8. And laſt of all is commended the vſe: and the inſtruction of the godly againſt the euils that ſhall come from the ſame, verſe 9. 10. The hiſtorie of the ſtate, containeth a moſt ample deſcription of the beaſt firſt intire, verſe 1. 2. and the reſtored after hurt, verſe 3. 4. 
               F. IVNIVS. THen I ſaw a beaſt riſe On the ſand whereof ſtood the deuill practiſing new tempeſts againſt the Church, in the verſe next before going: what time the Empire of Rome was endangered by domeſticall diſſentions, and was mightily toſſed, hauing euer and anone new heads, and new Emperours. See after, 17. 8. out of the ſea, which had ſeuen heads, and Hauing the ſame inſtruments of power, prouidence, and moſt expert gouernement, which the Dragon is ſayd to haue had. Chapter 12. 3. ten hornes, and We read in the 12. Chapter and 3. verſe, that the Dragon had ſeuen crownes ſet vpon ſeuen heads: becauſe the thiefe auoucheth himſelfe to be the proper Lord and Prince of the world: but this beaſt is ſayd to haue ten crownes, ſet vpon ſeuerall not heades but hornes: becauſe the beaſt is beholden for all vnto the Dragon, verſe 2. and doth not otherwiſe raigne, then by law of ſubiection giuen by him, namely, that he employ his hornes againſt the Church of God. The ſpeach is taken from the auncient cuſtome and forme of deali
                     ••
                   in ſuch caſe: by which they that were abſolute kings did weare the diad
                     •
                  me vpon their heades; but their vaſſals and ſuch as raigned by grace from them, wore the ſame vpon their hoodes; for ſo they might commodiouſly lay downe their diademes when they came into the preſence of their Soueraignes: as alſo the Elders are ſayd, when they adored God which ſate vpon the throne, to haue caſt downe their crownes before him. Chapter 4. 10. vpon his hornes were ten crownes; & vpon

his heads 
                  Contrarie to that, which God of old cō
                     manded ſhould be written in the head peece of the high Prieſt, that is Sanctitas Iehouae. Holineſſe vnto the Lord. The name of blaſphemie impoſed by the Dragon, is (as I thinke) that which Saint Paule ſaith in the ſecond Chapter of his ſecond Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians verſe 4. He ſitteth as God, and boaſteth him ſelfe to be God. For this name of blaſphemie both the Romane Emperours did then challenge vnto themſelues, as Suetonius and Dion doe report of Caligula and Domitian: and after them the Popes of Rome did with full mouth prefeſſe the ſame of themſelues; when they challenged vnto themſelues ſoueraignetie in holy things; of which kinde of ſayings the ſixt booke of the Decretals, the Clementines, and the Extrauagants, are very full. For theſe men were not content with that which Anglicus wrote in his Poëtria, (the beginning whereof is, Papa ſtupor mundi. The Pope is the wonder of the world) Nec Deus es, nec homo; ſed neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art not God, ne art thou man, but neuter mixt of both; as the gloſe witneſſeth vpon the fixt booke: But they were bold to take vnto themſelues the very name of God, and to accept it giuen of others: according as almoſt an hundred and twentie yeares ſince, there was made for Sixtus the fourth when he ſhould firſt enter into Rome in his dignitie Papall, a pageant of triumph, and cunningly fixed vpon the gate of the Citie he ſhould enter at, hauing written vpon it this blaſphemous verſe.

                        
                           Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
                           Et merito in 
                                 •
                              erris crederis eſſe Deus.
                        
                        
                           By oracle of thine owne voyce the world thou gouernſt all,
                           And worthely a God on earth, men thinke and do thee call.
                        
                     
                  
                  Theſe and ſixe hūdred the like who cā impute vnto that modeſtie whereby good men of old would haue themſelues called the ſeruauntes of the ſeruauntes of God? Verely either this is a name of blaſphemie: or there is none at all.
                the name of blaſphemie.
            2 And this beaſt which I ſaw, was Swift as the Leopard, eaſily claſping all things, as the Beare doth with her foote, and tearing and deuouring all things with the mouth as doth the Lyon. like a Leopard, and his feete like a beare, & his mouth as the mouth of a Lyon: That is, he lent the ſame vnto the beaſt to vſe when he perceiued that himſelfe could not eſcape, but muſt needes be taken by the hand of the Angell, and caſt into the bottomleſſe pit, Chapter 20. yet did he not ſo abandon the ſame vtterly from himſelfe, but that he might vſe it as long as he could. and the Dragon gaue him his power, and his throne, and great authoritie.
            
               
3 This is the other place that appertaineth to the deſcription of the beaſt of Rome: that beſides that naturall dignitie, and amplitude of the Romaine Empire, which was ſhadowed in the two former verſes, there was added this alſo as miraculous, that one head was wounded, as it were, vnto death, and was healed againe, as from heauen, in the ſight of all men. This head of Nero the Emperour, in whom the race of the Caeſars fell from the Imperiall dignitie, and the gouernment of the Common weale was tranſlated vnto others: in whoſe handes the Empire was ſo cured and recouered to health, as it ſeemed vnto all ſo much the more deepelie rooted and grounded faſt, then euer before. And hence followed thoſe effectes, which are next ſpoken of: Firſt, an admiration of a certaine power, as it were, ſacred and diuine, ſuſteining the Empire and gouerning it: Secondly, the obedience and ſubmiſſion of the whole earth, in this verſe: Thirdly, the adoration of the Dragon, and moſt wicked worſhipping of deuils, confirmed by the Romane Emperours: Laſtly, the adoration of the beaſt himſelfe, which grew into ſo great eſtimation, as that both the name and worſhip of a God was giuen vnto him, verſe 4. Now there were two cauſes which wrought in the mindes of men this Religion: the ſhew of excellencie, which bringeth with it reuerence: and the ſhew of power inuincible, which bringeth feare. Who is like (ſay they) vnto the beaſt? Who ſhalbe able to fight with him? And I ſaw one of his heades as it were wounded to death; but his deadly wound was healed; and all the world wondred and followed the beaſt.
            4 And they worſhipped the Dragon which gaue power vnto the beaſt; and they worſhipped the beaſt, ſaying, Who is like vnto the beaſt! who is able to fight with him!
            5 The ſecond member conteining an hiſtorie of the actes of the beaſt, as I ſayd verſe 1. The hiſtorie of them is concluded in two pointes, the beginning, and the manner of them. The beginning is the gift of the Dragon, who put and inſpired into the beaſt both his impietie againſt God, and his immanitie and iniuſtice againſt all men, eſpeciallie againſt the godlie and thoſe that were of the houſhold of faith, verſe 5. The manner of the actes or actions done, is of two ſortes; both impious in minde, and blaſphemous in ſpeach againſt God, his Church, and the godlie, verſe 6. and alſo moſt cruell and iniurious in deedes, euen ſuch as are done of moſt raging enemies, and of moſt inſolent and proud conquerours, verſe 7. And there was giuen vnto him a mouth, that ſpake great things and blaſphemies; and power was giuen vnto him, Namely his actions, and manner of dealing. As concerning thoſe 42. monethes, I haue ſpoken of them before chapter. 11. 2. to doe for two and fourtie monethes.
            6 He therfore opened his mouth vnto blaſphemie

againſt God, to blaſpheme his Name, That is, the holy church, the true houſe of the liuing God. and his tabernacle, That is, the godly in ſeuerall, who hid themſelues frō his crueltie. For this bloodie beaſt, ſurcharged thoſe holy ſoules moſt falſly with innumerable accuſations, for the name of Chriſt, as we reade in Iuſtine Martyr, Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius, Euſebius, Auguſtine, and others: which example the later times followed moſt diligently, in deſtroying the flocke of Chriſt: and we in our owne memorie haue found by experince, to our incredible griefe. Concerning heauen, See chapt. 11. 12. and them that dwell in heauen.
            7 It was alſo giuen vnto him to make warre with the Saints, and to ouercome them; and power was giuen him ouer euerie kinred, and tongue, and nation.
            8 Therefore all that dwell vpon the earth, ſhall worſhip him, That is, ſuch as are not from euerlaſting elected in Chriſt Ieſus. For this is that Lambe ſlaine, of which chapt. 5. 6. Theſe words I doe, with Aretas, diſtinguiſh in this manner: Whoſe names are not written euen from the laying of the foundations of the world, in the booke of life, of the Lambe ſlaine: and this diſtinction is confirmed by a like place, hereafter, chapt 17. 8. whoſe names are not written in the booke of life of that Lambe, which was ſlaine from the beginning of the world.
            9 The concluſion of this ſpeech of the firſt beaſt, conſiſting of two parts, An exhortation to attentiue audience, in this verſe: and a foretelling, which partly conteineth threatnings againſt the wicked, and partly comfortes for thoſe which in patience and faith ſhall waite for that glorious comming of our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt, verſe 10 If any man hath an eare, let him heare.
            10 If any lead into captiuitie, he ſhall go into captiuitie: 
                  Gen. 9 6. Matth. 26. 52. if any kill with a ſword, he muſt be killed by a ſword: here is the patience and the faith of the Saintes.
            11 The ſecond member of the viſion, concerning the Eccleſiaſticall dominion, which in Rome ſucceeded that which was politique, and is in the power of the corporation of falſe prophets, and of the forgers of falſe doctrine. Wherefore the ſame beaſt, and the ſame bodie or corporation is called of S. Iohn by the name of falſe prophet, chapt. 16. 13. & 19. 20. The forme of this beaſt is firſt deſcribed, in this verſe, then his acts, in the verſes following: and the whole ſpeech is concluded in the laſt verſe. This beaſt is by his breed, a ſonne of the earth (as they ſay) obſcurely borne, and by litle and litle creeping vp, out of his abiect eſtate. Then I ſawe an other beaſt comming

vp out of the earth, That is, in ſhew he ſēbled the Lambe (for what is more milde, or more humble then to be the ſeruant of the ſeruants of God?) but in deed he played the part of the Dragon, and of the Wolfe. Matth. 7. 15. For euen Satan changeth himſelfe into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11. 14. and what ſhould his honeſt diſciples and ſeruants do? which had two hornes like the Lambe, but he ſpake like the dragon.
            12 The hiſtorie of the actes of this beaſt, containeth in ſumme three things, hypocriſie, the witneſſe of miracles, and tyrannie: of which the firſt is noted in this verſe, the ſecond in the three verſes following; the third in the ſixteenth and ſeuenteenth verſes. His hypocriſie is moſt full of leaſing, wherby he abuſeth both the former beaſt and the whole world: in that albeit he hath by his cunning, as it were by lime, made of the former beaſt a moſt miſerable 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or anatomie, vſurped all his authoritie vnto him ſelfe, and moſt impudently exerciſeth the ſame in the ſight and view of him: yet hee carrieth him ſelfe ſo, as if he honoured him with moſt high honour, and did in verie good trueth cauſe him to be reuerenced of all men. And doth exerciſe the power of the firſt beaſt before him, and cauſeth the earth, and them which dwell therein, 
                  For vnto this beaſt of Rome, which of a ciuill Empire is made an Eccleſiaſticall hierarchie, are giuen diuine honors, and diuine authoritie: ſo far, as he is beleeued to be aboue the Scriptures, which the gloſſe vpon the Decretals declareth by this deuilliſh verſe,
                  Articulos ſoluit, ſynodumque facit generalem.
                  That is,
                  
                     He changeth the Articles of faith, and giueth authoritie to generall Counſelles.
                  
                  Which is ſpoken of the Papall power. So the beaſt is by birth, foundation, ſeate, and finally ſubſtance one: onely the Pope hath altered the forme and manner thereof, being him ſelfe the head both of that tyrannicall Empire, and alſo of the falſe prophets: for the empire hath he taken vnto him ſelfe, and thereunto hath added this cunning deuiſe. Now theſe wordes whoſe deadly wound was cured, are put here for diſtinction ſake, as alſo ſometime afterwards: that euen at that time the godly readers of this prophecie might by this ſigne be brought to ſee the thing as preſent: as if it were ſaid; that they might adore this verie Empire that now is, whoſe head we haue ſeene in our owne memorie to haue bene cut off, and to be cured againe.
                to worſhip the firſt beaſt, whoſe deadly wound was healed.
            
               
13 The ſecond point of the things done by the beaſt is the credite of great wonders or miracles, appertaining to the ſtrengthening of this impietie; of which ſignes ſome were giuen from aboue, as it is ſaid that fire was ſent downe from heauen by falſe ſorcerie, in this verſe. Others were ſhewed here below in the ſight of the beaſt, to eſtabliſh idolatrie, and deceiue ſoules: which part S. Iohn ſetteth forth, beginning (as they ſay) at that which is laſt; in this manner: Firſt the effect is declared in theſe words. He deceiueth the inhabitants of the earth. Secondly, the common maner of working, in two ſorts: one of miracles, For the ſignes which were giuen him to do in the preſence of the beaſt; the other of the words added vnto the ſignes, and teaching the idolatrie confirmed by thoſe ſignes, Saying vnto the inhabitants of the earth, that they should make an image vnto that beaſt which &c. Thirdly, a ſpeciall manner is declared, That it is giuen vnto him to put life into the image of the beaſt: and that with ſuch a kinde of quickning that the ſame both ſpeaketh by aunſwere vnto thoſe that aske counſell of it, and alſo pronounceth death againſt all thoſe that do not obey nor worſhip it: all which things often times by falſe miracles through the procurement and inſpiration of the diuell, haue bene effected and wrought in images. The hiſtories of the Papiſts are full of examples of ſuch miracles, the moſt of them fained, many alſo done by the deuill in images, as of old in the ſerpent, Geneſ. 3. 1. By which examples is confirmed not the authoritie of the beaſt, but the truth of God and of theſe propheſies. And he doth great wonders, ſo that he maketh fire to come downe from heauen on the earth, in the ſight of men;
            14 And deceiueth them that dwell on the earth, by reaſon of the ſignes, which were giuen to him to do in the ſight of the beaſt; ſaying to them that dwell on the earth, that they ſhould make an That is, images, by enallage or change of the number; for the worſhip of them euer ſince the ſecond councell of Nice, hath bene ordeined in the church by publique credite and authoritie, contrarie vnto the law of God. image of the In the Greeke the word is of the datiue caſe, as much to ſay, as vnto the worſhip, honour and obeying of the beaſt; for by this maintenance of images, this pſeudopropheticall beaſt doth mightily profit the beaſt of Rome, of whom long ago he receiued them. Wherefore the ſame is hereafter very fitly called the image of the beaſt, for that images haue their beginning from the beaſt, and their forme or manner from the will of the beaſt, and haue their end and vſe fixed in the profit and commoditie of the beaſt. beaſt, which was wounded of the ſword, and did liue againe.
            15 And of this miracle of the images of the beaſt (that is, which the beaſt hath ordeined to eſtabliſh idolatry) which miraculouſly ſpeake, and giue iudgement, or rather marueilouſly, by the fraud of the falſe prophets, the Papiſts books are full fraighted. And it was giuen to him to giue To giue life, as Iannes & I ambres imitated the wonders that Moſes wrought. life

vnto the image of the beaſt, and that the image of the beaſt ſhould ſpeake; and to cauſe that as many as would not worſhip the image of the beaſt, ſhould be killed.
            16 The third place, is a wicked and moſt inſolent tyrannie, as was ſaid before, vſurped ouer the perſons of men, in this verſe; and ouer their goods and actions, in the next verſe. For he is ſaid, both to bring vpon all perſon a tyrannous ſeruitude, that as bondſlaues they might ſerue the beaſt: and alſo to exerciſe ouer all their goods and actions, a pedlerlike abuſe of indulgences and diſpenſations (as they tearme them) amongſt their friends; and againſt others, to vſe moſt violent interdictions, and to ſhoote out curſings, euen in naturall and ciuill, priuate and publike contractes, wherein all good faith ought to haue place. Alſo he maketh all, both ſmall & great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receiue That is, their Chriſme, by which in the Sacrament (as they call it) of Confirmation, they make ſeruile vnto themſelues, the perſons and doings of men, ſigning them in their forehead and hands: and as for the ſigne lest by Chriſt (of which Chap. 7. 3.) and the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme they make as void. For whom Chriſt hath ioyned vnto him ſelfe by Baptiſme, this beaſt maketh challenge vnto them by his greaſie chriſme, which he doubteth not to preferre before Baptiſme, both in authorite and in efficacie. a The marke of the name of the beaſt. marke in their right hand or in their foreheads:
            17 And that no man may That is, haue any free trafficke, or entercourſe with men, but they onely which ſhall haue this annointing and conſecration of clerkly tonſure, as they call it. Read Grarian de conſecrat. diſtinct. 5. c. omnes; cap. ſpiritus &c. of theſe matters. buy or ſell, ſaue he that hath the Here the falſe prophets doe require three things, which are ſet downe in the order of their greatneſſe, a character, a name, and the number of the name. The meaning is, that man that hath not, firſt their annointing and clericall tonſure or ſhauing; ſecondly holy orders, by receiuing whereof is communicated the name of the beaſt; or finally hath not attained that high degree of pontificiall knowledge, and of the lawe (as they call it) Canonicall, and hath not as it were made vp in accompt and caſt the number of the myſteries thereof: for in theſe things conſiſteth the number of that name of the beaſt. And this is excellently ſet foorth in the next verſe. marke, or the name of the beaſt, or the number of his name.
            
               
18 That is, in this number of the beaſt conſiſteth that popiſh wiſedome, which vnto them ſeemeth the greateſt of all others. In theſe words S. Iohn expoundeth that ſaying which went before of the number of the beaſt, what it hath aboue his marke or accogniſance, and his name. Theſe things (ſaith S. Iohn) the marke and name of the beaſt, doe eaſily happen vnto any man: but to haue the number of the beaſt, is wiſdome: that is, onely the wiſe and ſuch as haue vnderſtanding can come by that number; for they muſt be moſt illuminated doctours that attaine thereunto: as the words following do declare. Here is wiſdome. Let him yt hath vnderſtā
               ding coūt the nūber of the beaſt: for it is the How great & of what denomination this nūber of the beaſt is, by which the beaſt accounteth his wiſdome, S. Iohn declareth in theſe words; Doeſt thou demand how great it is? it is ſo great that it occupieth the whole man; he is alway learning and neuer commeth vnto the knowledge thereof: he muſt be a man in deede that doth attaine vnto it. Askeſt thou of what denomination it is? verily it ſtandeth of ſixe throughout, and perfectly ariſeth of all the parts thereof in their ſeuerall denominations (as they terme them:) it ſtandeth of ſixe by vnities, tennes, hundreds, &c. ſo as there is no one part in the learning and order pontificiall, which is not either referred vnto the head, and, as it were, the top thereof, or contained in the ſame: ſo fitly doe all things in this hierarchie agree one with another, and with their head. Therefore that cruell beaſt Boniface the eight doth commend by the number of ſix thoſe decretals which he perfected: in the proaeme of the ſixt booke. Which booke (ſaith he) being to be added vnto fiue other bookes of the ſame volume of decretals, we thought good to name Sextum, the ſixt; that the ſame volume by addition thereof, containing a ſenario, or the number of ſixe books (which is a number perfect) may yeeld a perfect forme of menaging all things, and perfect diſcipline of behauiour. Here therefore is that number of the beaſt, who powreth from himſelfe all his parts, and bringeth them all backe againe vnto himſelfe by his diſcipline in moſt wiſe and cunning manner. If any man deſire more of this, let him ſearch the gloze vpon that place. I am not ignorant that other interpretations are brought vpon this place: but I thought it my dutie, with the good fauour of all, and without the offence of any, to propound mine opinion in this point. And that for this cauſe eſpecially, for that it ſeemed vnto me neither probable nor like to be true, that the number of the beaſt, or of the name of the beaſt, ſhould be taken as the common ſort of interpreters do take it. For this number the beaſt teacheth, giueth out, imprinteth, as a publique marke of ſuch as be his; and eſteemeth that marke aboue all others, as the marke of thoſe whom he loueth beſt. Now thoſe other expoſitions ſeeme to be farre remoued from this propertie and condition of that number: whether you reſpect the name Latinus, or Titan or anie other. For theſe the beaſt doth not teach, nor giue foorth, nor imprint, but moſt diligently forbiddeth to be taught, and audaciouſly denieth: he approueth not theſe, but reproueth them: and hateth them that thinke ſo of this number, with an hatred greater then the hatred of Vatinius.
                nū
               ber

of a man: and his number is ſixe hundreth, ſixtie and ſixe.
         
         
            CHAP. XIIII.
            
               1 The Lambe ſtandeth on mount Sion, 4 with his chaſt worshippers. 6 One Angel preacheth the Goſpel: 8 an other foretelleth the fall of Babylon: 9 the third warneth that the beaſt be auoyded. 13 A voyce from heauen pronounceth thē happie who die in the Lord. 16 The Lords ſickle is thruſt into the harueſt. 18 and into the vintage.
               
            
            1 The hiſtorie of the church of Chriſt being finiſhed for more then a thouſand and three hundreth yeres, at which time Boniface the eight liued, as before hath bene ſaid: there remaineth the reſt of the hiſtorie of the conflicting or militant Church from thence vnto the time of the laſt victorie, in three Chapters. For firſt of all, as the foundation of the whole hiſtorie, is deſcribed the ſtanding of the Lambe with his armie and retinue, in fiue verſes: after, his worthie actes, which he hath done and vet doth, in moſt mightie manner, whileſt he ouerthroweth Antichriſt with the ſpirit of his mouth, in the reſt of this Chapter, and in the two following. Vnto the deſcription of the Lambe are propounded three things, his ſituation, place and attendancie: for the reſt are expounded in the former viſions, eſpecially vpon the fift Chapter. 
               F. IVNIVS. THen I looked, and lo, a Lamb As readie girt to do his office (as Actes 5. 56.) in the middeſt of his Church, which afore time mount Sion did prefigure. ſtoode on mount Sion, and with him As before 7 2. This retinue of the Lambe is deſcribed firſt by diuine marke (as before 7. 2.) in this verſe. Then by his diuine occupation, in that all and euerie one in his retinue moſt vehemently & ſweetly (verſ. 2.) do glorifie the Lambe with a ſpeciall ſong before God and his elect Angels: which ſong fleſh & bloud cannot heare, nor vnderſtand, verſe 3. Laſtly by their deedes done before, and their ſanctification, in that they were virgins, pure from ſpirituall and bodily fornicatiō, that is, from impietie & vnrighteouſnes; that they folowed the Lambe as a guide vnto all goodneſſe, and cleaued vnto him: that they are holy vnto him, as of grace redeemed by him: that in truth, & in the ſimplicitie of Chriſt, they haue exerciſed all theſe things; ſanctimonie of life, the direction of the Lamb, a thankful remēbrance of redēption by him: finally (to conclude in a word) that they are blameleſſe before the Lord. ver. 4. & 5. an hundreth, fourtie and foure thouſand, hauing his Fathers Name written in their foreheads.
            2 And I heard a voyce from heauen, as the ſound of many waters, and as the ſound of a great thunder: and I heard the voyce of harpers harping with their harpes:
            3 And they ſung as it were a new ſong before the throne, and before the foure beaſts, and the Elders: and no mā could learne that ſong, but

the hundreth, fourtie and foure thouſand, namely they which were bought out of the earth.
            4 Theſe are they, which are not defiled with women; for they are virgins: theſe follow the Lamb, whither ſoeuer he goeth: theſe are bought from amongſt men, to be as firſt fruites, holy vnto God, and to the Lambe:
            5 And in whoſe mouthes is found no guile: for they are without ſpot before the throne of God.
            6 The other part (as I ſaid on the firſt ver.) is of the actes of the Lambe, the manner whereof is deliuered in two ſortes; of his ſpeach and of his factes. His ſpeaches are ſet forth vnto the 13. verſe of this chapter; & his factes vnto the 16. chapter. In the ſpeach of the Lambe, which is the word of the Goſpel, are taught in this place theſe things: The ſeruice of the godly conſiſting inwardly of reuerence towards God; and outwardly of the glorifying of him: the viſible ſigne of which is adoration verſe 7. The ouerthrowing of wicked Babylon, verſe. 8. and the fall of euerie one of the vngodly which worſhip the beaſt, verſe 9. 10. 11. Finally the ſtate of the holy ſeruants of God both preſent, verſe 12. and to come, moſt bleſſed, according to the promiſe of God. verſe 13. ¶ Then I ſaw This Angell is a type or figure of the good and faithfull ſeruaunts of God, whom God eſpecially from the time of that Boniface the eighth, hath raiſed vp to the publiſhing of the Goſpell of Chriſt, both by preaching and by writing. So God firſt, neare vnto the time of the ſame Boniface vſed Peter Caſſiodorus an Italian; after, Arnold de villa noua, a French man; then Ockam, Dante, Petrarch; after that Iohannes de rupe caeſa a Franciſcane; after againe, Iohn Wickliffe Engliſh-man, and ſo continually one or another, vnto the reſtoring of the truth, and enlarging of his Church. another Angel fly through the mids of Heauen, hauing an euerlaſting Goſpell, to preach vnto them that dwell on the earth, and to euery nation, and kinred, & tongue, and people,
            7 
                  Pſal. 145. 6. Saying with a loud voyce, Feare God, and giue glorie to him: for the houre of his iudgement is come: and worſhip him that made 
                  Act. 14. 15. heauen and earth, & the ſea, and the fountaines of waters.
            8 And there followed another Angel, ſaying, 
                  Eſay. 21. 9. 
               That is, Babylon is deſtroyed by the ſentence and iudgement of God: the execution where of S. Iohn deſcribeth chap. 18. And this voyce of the miniſters of Chriſt hath continued ſince the time that Babylon (which is Rome) hath by deliberate counſell and manifeſt malice oppugned the light of the Goſpell offered from God. Babylon that great citie is fallē, it is fallen: for

ſhe made all nations to drinke of the wine of the 
                  Ieremie. 51. 8. Chap. 18 2. 
               Of her fornication, whereby God was prouoked to wrath. wrath of her fornication.
            9 ¶ And the third Angel followed them, ſaying with a loud voyce, That is, ſhall not worſhip God alone, but ſhall transferre his diuine honour vnto this beaſt, whether he do it with his heart or counterfaiting in ſhew. For he (ſaith Chriſt) that denieth me before mē, him will I deny before my father & his Angels, Matth. 10. 32. And this is that voyce of the holy miniſterie, which at this time is verie much vſed of the holie and faithfull ſeruaunts of God. For hauing now ſufficiently found out the publicke obſtinacie of Babylon, they labour not anie longer to thunder out againſt the ſame: but to ſa
                     •
                  e ſome particular member by terror (as Saint iude ſpeaketh) and to plucke them out of the publicke flame: or elſe by a vehement commiſeration of their eſtate, to leade them away; they ſet before them eternall death, into which they ruſh vnwares, vnleſſe in goodtime they returne vnto God: but the godly which are of their owne flocke, they exhort vnto patience, obedience, and faith in the Lord Ieſus, and charge them to giue light, by their example of good life, vnto others. If any man worſhip the beaſt and his image, and receiue his marke in his forehead, or on his hand,
            10 He alſo ſhal drink of the wine of the wrath of God, euen of the mere wine, which is powred into the cup of his wrath; and ſhalbe tormented with fire and brimſtone in the ſight of the holy Angels, and in the ſight of the Lambe.
            11 And the ſmoke of their tormēt ſhal aſcend vp for euermore: and they ſhall haue no reſt day nor night, which worſhippe the beaſt and his image, and whoſoeuer receiueth the print of his name.
            12 The patience, ſanctification and iuſtification by faith: the conſequents whereof are, reſt, felicitie, and glorie eternall, in the he auenly fellowſhip of God and his Angels. Here is the patience of the Saintes here are they that keep the commandements of God, and the faith of Ieſus.
            13 Then I heard a voyce out of heauē, ſaying vnto me, Write; Bleſſed from henceforth are the dead which die That is, for the Lord. in the Lord, Yea, ſaith the Spirit for they 
                  Heb 4. 10. reſt from their labors, & their By workes, is meant the reward which followeth good workes. works follow them.
            
               
14 The ſecond part of this Chapter, as I ſaid verſe 1. Of the actes & doings of Chriſt in ouerthrowing of Antichriſt and his Church, by the ſpirit of his diuine mouth: ſeing that hauing bene called backe by word both publiquely and priuately vnto his dutie, and admoniſhed of his moſt certaine ruine: he yet ceaſſeth not to maintaine and protect his owne adherents that they may do him ſeruice: and to afflict the godly with moſt barbarous perſecutions. Of thoſe things which Chriſt doth, there are two kindes; one common or generall, in the reſt of this Chapter; another particular, againſt that ſauage and rebellious beaſt, and his worſhippers, in the 15. and 16. Chapters. That common kinde, is the calamitie of warres, ſpread abroad through the whole earth, & filling all things with bloud, & that without reſpect of any perſon. This is figured or ſhadowed out in two types, of the harueſt and vintage. Since the time that the light of the Goſpell began to ſhine out; and ſince prophecie or preaching by the grace of God was raiſed vp againe, how horrible warres haue bene kindled in the world? how much humane fleſh hath bene throwne to the earth, by this diuine reaping? how much bloud (alas for woe) hath ouer flowne for theſe three hūdred yeares almoſt? all hiſtories do crie out, and this our age (if euer before) is now in horrour, by reaſon of the rage of that ſickle which Antichriſt calleth for. In this place is the firſt type, that is, of the harueſt. ¶ And I looked, and behold Declaring his fierceneſſe by his colour, like vnto that which is in the white or milke circle of heauen. a white cloud; and vpon the cloud ſate one like vnto a man, As one that ſhall raigne from God, and occupie the place of Chriſt in this miſerable execution. hauing on his head a golden crowne, and in his hand a That is, a moſt fit and commodious inſtrument of diuine execution, deſitoving all, by hewing and thruſting thorough: for who may ſtand againſt God? ſharpe ſickle.
            15 Chriſt giueth commaundement, in this verſe, and the Angell executeth in the next verſe. And another Angell came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voyce to him that ſate on the cloud, 
                  Ioel. 3. 13. Thruſt in thy ſickle & reape: for the time is come for thee to reape: for the 
                  Matth. 13. 39. harueſt of the earth is ripe.
            16 And he that ſate on the cloud, thruſt in his ſickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
            17 The other type (as I ſayd verſ. 14) is the vintage; the manner whereof is one with that which went before, if thou except this, that the grape gathering is more exact in ſeeking out euery thing, then is the harueſt labour. This is therefore a more grieuous iudgement, both becauſe it ſucceedeth the other, and be cauſe it is vnderſtood to be executed with greater diligence. Thē another Angell came out of the tē
               ple, which is in heauē, hauing alſo a ſharpe ſickle.
            
               
18 And another Angell came out from the altar, which had power ouer fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the ſharpe ſickle, & ſaid; Thruſt in thy ſharp ſickle, & gather the cluſters of the vineyard of the earth: for her grapes are ripe.
            19 Therefore the Angell thruſt in his ſharpe ſickle on the earth, & cut downe the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, and caſt them into that great wine preſſe of the wrath of God.
            20 And the wine preſſe was troden without the Citie, That is, it ouerflowed very deepe, & very farre & wide: the ſpeach is hyperbolical or exceſſiue, to ſignifie the greatnes of the the ſlaughter. And theſe be thoſe pleaſant fruits forſooth, of the contēpt of Chriſt, and deſiring of Antichriſt rather then him, which the miſerable, mad, and blind world doth at this time reape. & bloud came out of the wine preſſe, vnto the horſe bridles, by the ſpace of a thouſand and ſix hundreth furlongs.
         
         
            CHAP. XV.
            
               1 The ſeuen Angels hauing the ſeuen laſt plagues. 3 They that conquered the beaſt prayſe God. 6 To the ſeuen Angels, 7 ſeuen vialles full of Gods wrath, are deliuered.
               
            
            1 This is that other place of the actes of Chriſt, as I noted before 14. 14. Now therefore is ſhewed a ſingular worke of the iudgement of God, belonging to the ouerthrow of Antichriſt and his forces: of which diuine worke the preparation is deſcribed in this chapter: and the execution, in the next. The preparation is firſt ſet downe generally and in type, in this verſe: and is after particucularly ſet forth, in the reſt of the chap. 
               F. IVNIVS. AFter I ſaw another ſigne in heauen, great and marueilous; Thoſe ſeuen Of which chap. 8. & 9. in powring forth the plagues of the world: for euē theſe plagues, do for the moſt part agree with thoſe. Angels which haue the ſeuen laſt plagues: for by them is fulfilled the wrath of God.
            2 There are two parts of the narratiō: one the conſeſſiō of the Saints glorifying God, whē they ſaw that preparatiō of the iudgemēts of God, vnto the 4 ver. another the vocatiō, inſtructiō, & cōfirmatiō of thoſe inſtrumēts which God hath ordained for the executiō of his iugemēts, in 4. other verſes. And I ſaw This part of the viſion alludeth vnto that ſea or large veſſel of braſſe, in which the prieſts waſhed thēſelues in the entrāce of the tēple: for in the entrance of the heauenly temple (as it is called verſ. 5.) is ſaid to haue bene a ſea of glaſſe, moſt lightſome and cleare, vnto the cōmoditie of choiſe: mixt with fire, that is, as containing the treaſurie of the iudgements of God, which he bringeth forth and diſpenſeth according to his owne pleaſure: for out of the former, the Prieſts were cleanſed of old: & out of this the vngodly are deſtroyed now, chap. 4. 6. as it were a glaſſie ſea, mingled

with fire; and That is, the godly martyrs of Chriſt, who ſhall not giue place euen in miracles vnto that beaſt: of theſe ſee before chap. 13. 17. and 14. 9. 10. them that had gotten victorie ouer the beaſt, and his image, and his marke, and the nomber of his name, Glorifying God, from the particular obſeruation of the weapons and inſtruments of Gods wrath, floting in that ſea of glaſſe. ſtand at the glaſſie ſea, hauing the Harpes of God,
            3 And they ſung the That ſong of triumph which is Exodus 152. ſong of Moſes the 
                  So is Moſes called for honours ſake, as it is ſet forth Deut. 34. 10. ſeruant of God, and the ſong of the Lambe, ſaying, This ſong hath two partes: one a confeſſion, both particular, in this verſe, and generall, in the beginning of the next verſe: another, a narration of cauſes belonging to the confeſſion; where of one kinde is eternall in it ſelfe, and moſt preſent vnto the godly, in that God is both holy, and alone God: another kinde is future and to come, in that the clect taken out of the Gentiles (that is, out of the wicked ones and vnbeleeuing, as Chapter 11. 2.) were to be brought vnto the ſame ſtate of happineſſe, by the magnificencie of the iudgements of God, in the next verſe. Great and marucilous are thy workes ô Lord God almightie: iuſt and true are thy 
                  Pſal. 145. 17. 
               Thy doings. wayes, ô King of Saintes.
            4 
                  Iere. 107. Who ſhall not feare thee, O Lord, & glorifie thy Name: for thou onely art holy; & all Nations ſhall come and worſhip before thee: for thy iudgements are made manifeſt.
            5 The ſecond part of the narration (as was noted, verſe 2) wherein firſt the authoritie of the whole argument and matter thereof is figured by a forerunning type of a Temple opened in heauen, as Chapter 11. 19. namely that all thoſe things are diuine and of God, that proceede from thence, in this verſe; Secondly, the adminiſters, or executours, come forth out of the Temple, verſe 6. Thirdly, they are furniſhed with inſtruments of the iudgements of God, and weapons fit for the manner of the ſame iudgements, verſe 7. Finally, they are confirmed by teſtimonie of the viſible glorie of God, in the laſt verſe. A like teſtimonie whereunto was exhibited of old in the law, Exodus 40. 34. And after this, I looked, and behold, the temple of the tabernacle of teſtimonie was open in heauen.
            6 And the ſeuē Angels came out of the tēple, which had the That is, commandements to inflict thoſe ſeuen plagues. Here is the figure called Metonymia. ſeuen plagues, clothed in Which was in old time a ſigne of the Kingly or Prieſtly dignitie. pure

and bright linnen, and hauing their breaſts This girding was a ſigne of diligence; and the girdle of gold was a ſigne of ſinceritie, and truſtines in taking in charge the cō
                  maundements of God. girded with golden girdles.
            7 And one of the Of theſe before chap. 4. 7. foure beaſtes gaue vnto the ſeuen Angels ſeuen golden vialles, full of the wrath of God, who liueth for euermore.
            8 And the Temple was filled with ſmoke proceeding from the maieſtie of God, and from his power, and None of thoſe ſeuen Angels might returne, till he had performed fully the charge committed vnto him, according to the decree of God. no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the ſeuen plagues of the ſeuen Angels were fulfilled.
         
         
            CHAP. XVI.
            
               2 and 17 The Angels powre out the ſeuen vialles of Gods wrath giuen vnto them, and ſo diuerſe plagues ariſe in the world, 18 to terrifie the wicked, 19 and the inhabitants of the great Citie.
               
            
            1 In the former Chapter was ſet downe the preparation vnto the worke of God: here is deliuered the execution thereof. And in this diſcourſe of the execution, is a generall commaundement, in this verſe; then a particular recitall in order of the execution done by euery of the ſeuen Angels, in the reſt of the Chapter. This ſpeciall execution againſt Antichriſt and his crewe, doth in manner agree vnto that which was generally done vpon the whole world, Chapter 8. and 9. and belōgeth (if my coniecture faile me not) vnto the ſame time. Yet herein they do differ one from another, that this was particularly effected vpon the Princes and ringleaders of the wickedneſſe of the world; the other generally againſt the whole world being wicked. And therefore theſe iudgements are figured more grieuous then thoſe. 
               F. IVNIVS. THē I heard a great voyce out of the Temple, ſaying to the ſeuen Angels, Go your wayes, & powre out the ſeuen vialles of the wrath of God vpon the earth.
            2 The hiſtorie of the firſt Angell, whoſe plague vpon the earth, is deſcribed almoſt in the ſame wordes with that ſixt plague of the Egyptians. Exod. 9. 9. But it doth ſignifie a ſpirituall vlcer, and that torture or butcherie of conſciēce feared with an hote yron, which accuſeth the vngodly within: & both by truth of the word (the light whereof God hath now ſo lōg ſhewed forth) and by bitternes, ſtirreth vp and forceth out the ſword of Gods wrath. The firſt Angell therefore went, & powred out his viall vpō the earth: & there fell a noyſome,

and a grieuous ſore vpon the men, which had the See chap. 13. 16. marke of the beaſt, and vpō them which worſhipped his image.
            3 The ſtorie of the ſecond Angell, who troubleth and moleſteth the ſeas, that he may ſtir vp the conſciences of men ſleeping in their wickednes: ſee chapter 8. 8. After the ſecond Angell powred out his viall vpon the ſea, and it It was turned into rotten and filthy bloud, ſuch as is in dead bodies. became as the bloud of a dead man: and euery liuing thing that liued in the ſea, dyed.
            4 The ſtorie of the third Angel, ſtriking the riuers, in this verſ. who proclaming the iuſtice of God, cōmendeth the ſame by a moſt graue compariſon of the ſins of mē with the puniſhmēt of God: which is common to this place, and that which went before. Wherefore alſo this prayſing is attributed vnto the Angell of the waters, a name common to the ſecond and third Angels, according as both of thē are ſayd to be ſent againſt the waters, albeit the one of the ſea, the other of the riuers, in two verſes. Then the third Angell powred out his viall vpon the riuers and fountaines of waters; and they became bloud.
            5 And I heard the Angell of the waters ſay, Lord, thou art iuſt, Which art, and Which waſt, and Which ſhalt be; becauſe thou haſt iudged theſe things.
            6 For they ſhed the bloud of the Saints, and Prophetes, and therefore haſt thou giuen them bloud to drinke: for they are worthy.
            7 A confirmation of the prayſe before going, out of the ſanctuarie of God; whether immediatly by Chriſt, or by ſome one of his Angels: for Chriſt alſo is called another Angel. Chap. 7. 2. 3. 8. and 10. 1. And I heard another out of the Sanctuarie ſay, Euen ſo, Lord God almightie, true and righteous are thy iudgements.
            8 The ſtorie of the fourth Angell, who throweth a plague vpon the heauen and vpon the Sunne, of which Luke 21. 26. the effectes whereof are noted two. The one peculiar, that it ſhall ſcorch men with heate, in this verſe. The other proceeding accidentally from the former, that their furie ſhall ſo much the more be enraged againſt God, in the next verſe: when yet (ô wonderfull mercie and pacience of God!) all other creatures are firſt ſtricken often and grieuouſly by the hand of God before mankind, by whom he is prouoked as the things before going do declare. And the fourth Angell powred out his viall on the Sunne, and it was giuē vnto him to torment men with heat of fire,
            9 And men boyled in great heat, and blaſphemed

the Name of God, which hath power ouer theſe plagues; and they repented not, to giue him glorie.
            10 The ſtorie of the fift Angell, who ſtriketh the kingdome of the beaſt with two plagues: abroad with darkneſſe; & within with biles and dolors moſt grieuous, throughout his whole kingdome: that thereby he might wound the conſcience of the wicked, and puniſh that moſt peruerſe obſtinacie of the Idolaters: whereof aroſe perturbation, and thence a furious indignation and deſperate madneſſe, raging againſt God, and hurtfull vnto it ſelfe. Thē the fift Angel powred out his viall vpō the throne of the beaſt, & his kingdome became darke, and they gnawed their tongues for ſorrow:
            11 And blaſphemed the God of heauen for their paines, and for their ſores, & repented not of their workes.
            12 The ſtorie of the ſixt Angell, diuided into his act, and the euent thereof. The act is, that the Angell did caſt out the plague of a moſt glowing heate, wherewith euen the greateſt floudes and which moſt were wont to ſwell and ouerflow (as Euphrates) were dried vp, by the counſell of God, in this verſe. The euent is, that meere madneſſe wherewith the wicked are enraged, that they may ſcorne the iudgements of God, and abuſe them furiouſly to ſerue their owne turne, and to the executing of their owne wicked outrage. Then the ſixt Angell powred out his viall vpon the great riuer The bound of the ſpirituall Babylon, and the fortreſſes of the ſame, as Chapter 9. 14. Euphrates; & the So the Church of the vngodly, and kingdome of the beaſt is ſayd to be left naked, all the defences thereof, in which they put their truſt, being taken away from it. water thereof was dried vp, That is, that euen they that dwell furtheſt off, may with more commoditie make haſt vnto that ſacrifice which the Lord hath appointed. that way might be prepared for the Kings that ſhould come from the Eaſt.
            13 And I ſaw come out of the mouth of the That is, the deuill, as Chapter 12. 3. Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Whereof Chapter 13. 1. beaſt, & out of the mouth of that That is, of that other beaſt, of which Chapter 13. 11. for ſo he is called alſo Chapter 19. 20. and 20. 10. falſe prophet, That is, euerie of them bent their whole force, and conſpired, that by wonders, word, and worke they might bring into the ſame deſtruction all Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the world, curſedly bewitched of them by their ſpirites, and teachers of the vanitie and impuritie of the beaſt that committed fornication with the Kings of the earth. And this is a right deſcription of our times. three

vncleane ſpirites Croaking with all importunitie, and cō
                  tinually day & night prouoking & calling forth to armes, as the trumpets and furies of warre: as is declared in the next verſe. like vnto frogges.
            14 For they are the ſpirites of deuils, working miracles, and go vnto the Kings of the earth, & of the whole world, to gather them to the battell of that great day of God Almightie.
            15 A Parentheſis for admonition, in which God warneth his holy ſeruants who reſt in the expectation of Chriſt, alwayes to addreſſe their mindes vnto his comming and to looke vnto themſelues, that they be not ſhamefully made naked, and circumuented of theſe vncleane ſpirits, & ſo they be miſerably vnprepared at the comming of their Lord, ſo Matth 24. 26 and 25. 13. (
                  Chap. 3. 31. Matth 24. 44. Luke. 12. 39. Behold, I come as a theefe. Bleſſed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments, leaſt he walke naked, and men ſee his filthines.)
            16 Namely the Angell, who holily according to the commaundement of God, was to doe ſacrifice: notwithſtanding that thoſe impure ſpirites doe the ſame wickedly, as ſeruants not vnto God, but vnto that beaſt, that hath ſeuen heades. He therefore gathered them together into a place, called in Hebrew That is (to ſay nothing of other expoſitions) the mountaine it ſelfe, or mountaine places of Megiddon. Now it is certaine by the holy Scripture, that Megiddon is a Citie and territorie in the Tribe of Manaſſes, bordering vpon Iſſacar and Aſſer: and was made famous by that lamentable ouerthrow of king Ioſias, whereof 2. Reg. 22. 30. and 2. Chronic. 35. 22. and Zach. 12. 11. In this mountaine countrey God ſaith by figure or type, that the kings of the peoples which ſerue the beaſt, ſhall meete together: becauſe the Gentiles did alwayes caſt that lamentable ouerthrow in the teeth of the Church of the Iewes, vnto their great reproch: and therefore were perſwaded, that that place ſhould be moſt fortunate vnto them (as they ſpeake) and infortunate vnto the godly. But God here pronounceth, that that reproch of the Church, & confidence of the vngodly, ſhall by himſelfe be takē away, in the ſelfe ſame place where the nations perſwaded themſelues, they ſhould mightily exſult and triumph againſt God and his Church. Arma-gedon.
            17 ¶ The ſtorie of the ſeuenth Angell vnto the end of the Chapter, in which firſt is ſhewed by ſigne and ſpeach, the argument of this plague, in this verſe: and then is declared the execution thereof, in the verſes following. Thē the ſeuenth Angel powred out his viall into the From whence he might moue the heauen aboue, and the earth beneath. ayre: and there came a loude voyce out of the Temple of heauen That is, from him that ſitteth on the throne, by the figure called Metonymia.
                from the

throne, ſaying, That is, Babylō is vndone, as is ſhewed verſe 19. and in the Chapters following. For the firſt onſet (as I might ſay) of this denunciation, is deſcribed in this Chapter: and the laſt, conteining a perfect victory, is deſcribed in thoſe that follow. It is done.
            18 Now is declared the execution (as I ſayd, in verſe 17.) and the things that ſhall laſt come to paſſe in heauen and in earth, before the ouerthrow of the beaſt of Babylon: both generally, verſ. 18. and particularly in the curſed Citie, and ſuch as haue any familiaritie therewith, in the three laſt verſes: And there were ſounds, and lightnings and thunders, and there was a great earthquake, ſuch as neuer was ſince mē were vpon the earth, I ſay ſo mightie an earthquake.
            19 That ſeat or ſtanding place of Antichriſt. And that great Citie was rent into three partes, and the Cities Of all ſuch as cleane vnto Antichriſt, and ſight againſt Chriſt of the Nations fell and that great That harlot, of whom in the Chapter next following. Now this phraſe, to come into remembrance, is after the cōmon vſe of the Hebrew ſpeach; borrowed from men, and attributed vnto God. Babylon came in remembrance before God, 
                  Iere. 25. 15. that he might giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fierceneſſe of his wrath.
            20 And euery yle fled away, and the mountaines That is, were ſeene no more, or were no more extant. A borrowed Hebraiſme. were not 
                  Appeared not, which the Hebrewes vtter after this ſort, were not, Gen. 5. 24. found.
            21 The maner of the particular execution, moſt euidently teſtifying the wrath of God by the originall and greatneſſe thereof: the euent whereof is the ſame with that which is Chapter 9. 13. and which hath bene mentioned in this Chapter, from the execution of the fourth Angell hetherto: that is to ſay, an incorrigible pertinacie of the world in their rebellion, and an heart that cannot repent, verſe 9. and 11. And there fell a great haile, as it were of the weight of a As it were about the weight of a talent: and a talent was threeſcore poūd, that is, ſixe hundreth groates, whereby is ſignified a marueilous and ſtrange kind of weight. talent, out of heauē vpon mē; & mē blaſphemed God, becauſe of the plague of the haile: for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
         
         
            CHAP. XVII.
            
               1 That great whore is deſcribed, 2 with whom the Kings of the earth committed fornication. 6 She is drunken with the bloud of Saintes: 7 The myſterie of the woman and the beaſt that carrieth her expounded: 11 their deſtruction. 14 The Lambes victorie,
               
            
            
               
1 The ſtate of the Church militant being declared, now followeth the ſtate of the Church ouercomming & getting victorie, as I ſhewed before in the beginning of the tenth chapter. This ſtate is ſet forth in 4. Chap. As in the place before going I noted, that in that hiſtory the order of time was not alwayes exactly obſerued; ſo the ſame is to be vnderſtood in this hiſtorie; that it is diſtinguiſhed according to the perſons of which it treateth; and that in the ſeuerall ſtories of the perſons is ſeuerally obſerued the time thereof. For firſt is deliuered the ſtorie of Babylon deſtroyed, in this and the next chapter, (for this Babylon out of all doubt, ſhal periſh before the two beaſts and the dragon.) Secondly is deliuered the deſtruction of both the two beaſts, chap. 19. And laſtly of the dragon, chap. 20. In the ſtorie of the ſpirituall Babylon are diſtinctly ſet forth, the ſtate therof in this chapter and the ouerthrow done from God, chap. 18. In this verſe & that which followeth, is a tranſition or paſſage vnto the firſt argument, conſiſting of a particular calling of the Prophet (as often heretofore) & a generall propoſition. 
               F. IVNIVS. THen there came one of the ſeuen Angels, which had the ſeuen vials, and talked with me, ſaying vnto me, Come hither: I wil ſhew thee The ſentence that is pronounced againſt this harlot. the That is, that damnable harlot, by a figure called bypal large For S. Iohn as yet had not ſeene her. Although another interpretation may be borne; yet I like this better. damnation of that great whore that ſitteth vpon many waters;
            2 With whom haue cōmitted fornicatiō the Kings of the earth, & the inhabitants of the earth are made drunkē with the wine of her fornicatiō.
            3 Henceforth is propounded the type of Babylon, and the ſtate thereof, in 4. verſes. After, a declaration of the type, in the reſt of this Chap. In the type are deſcribed 2. things, the beaſt (of whom chap. 13) in the 3. verſe: and the woman that ſitteth vpon the beaſt, verſ. 4. 5. 6. The beaſt in proceſſe of time hath gotten ſomewhat more then was expreſſed in the former viſion Firſt in that it is not read before that he was apparelled in ſcarlet, a robe imperiall and of triumph. Secondly, in that this is full of names of blaſphemie: the other caried the name of blaſphe my only in his heads. So God did teach that this beaſt is much increaſed in impietie and vniuſtice, and doth in this laſt age, triumph in both theſe more inſolently and proudly then euer before. So he caried me away into the wildernes by the Spirit, & I ſaw a woman ſit vpon a A skarlet colour, that is, with a red and purple garment: and ſurely it was not without cauſe that the Romish clergie were ſo much delighted with this colour. skarlet coloured beaſt, full of names of blaſphemie, which had ſeuen heads, and ten hornes.
            4 And That harlot, the ſpirituall Babylon, which is Rome. She is deſcribed by her attire, profeſſion, and deeds. the woman was In attire: moſt glorious, triumphant, moſt rich, and moſt gorgious. arayed in purple and

skarlet, and glittering with golde, and precious ſtones, and pearles; In profeſſion: the nouriſher of all, in this verſe; and teaching her myſteries vnto all, verſe 5. ſetting forth all things moſt magnificently: but in deed moſt pernitious, beſotting miſerable men with her cup, and bringing vpon them a deadly giddineſſe. and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of the abominations, & filthineſſe of her fornication;
            5 Deceiuing with the title of religion, and publike inſcription of myſtery: which the beaſt in times paſt did not beare. And in her forehead a name written, A Myſterie; An expoſition: in which Saint Iohn declareth what manner of woman this is. that great Babylon, that mother of the whoredomes, and abominations of the earth.
            6 In deedes; She is red with blood, and ſheddeth it moſt licentiouſly; and therefore is coulored with the blood of the ſaincts: as on the contrarie part, Chriſt is ſet forth imbrued with the blood of his enimies, Eſay 63. 1. And I ſaw the woman drunken with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Ieſus: & when I ſaw her, A paſſage vnto the ſecond part of this chapter, by occaſion giuen of Saint Iohn, as the words of the Angell doe ſhew, in the next verſe. I wondred with great maruell.
            7 The ſecond part or place, as I ſaid verſe 1. The enarration of the viſion, promiſed in this verſe, and deliuered in the verſe following. Now there is deliuered firſt an enarration of the beaſt, and his ſtorie, vnto the 14. verſe: After, of the harlot, vnto the end of the chapter. Then the Angel ſaid vnto me, Wherfore maruelleſt thou? I will ſhew thee the myſterie of the woman, and of the beaſt that beareth her, which hath ſeuen heads, and ten hornes.
            8 The ſtorie of the beaſt hath a triple deſcription of him. The firſt is a diſtinction of this beaſt from all that euer haue bene at any time: which diſtinction is contained in this verſe: The ſecond is a deliniation or painting out of the beaſt by things preſent, by which he might euen at that time be knowne of the godly: and this deliniation is according to his heads, verſe 9. 10. 11. The third is an hiſtoricall foretelling of thinges to come, and to be done by him: and theſe are aſcribed vnto his hornes, verſ. 12. 13. 14. This beaſt is that Empire of Rome, of which I ſpake chapter 13. 11. according to the mutations & chaunges whereof, which then had alreadie happened, the holy ghoſt hath diſtinguiſhed and ſet out the ſame. The Apoſtle diſtinguiſheth this beaſt from all others in theſe wordes: The beaſt which thou ſaweſt, was and is not. For ſo I expound the words of the Apoſtle for euidencie ſake: as I will further declare in the notes following. The beaſt that thou haſt ſeene,

               The meaning is, that beaſt which thou ſaweſt before (chapter 13. 1.) & which yet thou haſt now ſeene, was, was (I ſay) euen from Iulius Cęſar, in reſpect of beginning, riſing vp, ſtation, glorie, dominion, manner and ſtocke, from the houſe of Iulius: and yet is not now the ſame, if thou looke vnto the houſe and ſtocke: for the dominion of this familie, was tranſlated vnto another, after the death of Nero; from that other vnto a third, from the third vnto a fourth, and ſo forth, was varied and altered by innumerable changes. Finally, the Empire is one, as it were one beaſt: but exceedingly varied by kinreds, families, and perſons It was therefore (ſaith Saint Iohn) in the kindreds or houſe of Iulius: and now it is not in that kindred, but tranſlated vnto another. was, and is not: As if he ſhould ſay, Alſo this ſame that is, ſhall ſhortly not be: but ſhall aſcend out of the depth, or out of the ſea (as was ſaid chapter 13. 1.) that is, ſhall be a new ſtocke from amongſt the nations without difference: and ſhall in the ſame ſtate go vnto deſtruction, or ruine, and periſh: and ſo ſhall ſucceſſiuely new Princes or Emperours come, and go, ariſe and fall, the bodie of the beaſt remaining ſtill, but toſſed with ſo manie and often alterations; as no man can but maruell that this beaſt was able to ſtand and hold out, in ſo many mutations. Verely no Empire that euer was, toſſed with ſo many changes, and as it were with ſo many tempeſts of the ſea, euer continued ſo long. and ſhall aſcend out of the bottomles pit, and ſhall go into perdition, and the inhabitants of the earth ſhall wonder (whoſe names are not written in the booke of life from the foundation of the world) That is, as manie as haue not learned the prouidence of God, according to the faith of the ſainctes ſhall maruell at theſe grieuous and often changes: when they ſhall conſider, the ſelfe ſame beaſt, which is the Romaine Empire, to haue bene, not to be, and to be, & ſtill moleſted with perpetuall mutation; and yet in the ſame to ſtand and continue. This, in mine opinion, is the moſt ſimple expoſition of this place, confirmed by euent of the things themſelues. Although the laſt change alſo, by which the Empire, that before was ciuile, became Eccleſiaſticall, is not obſcurely ſignified in theſe words: of which two, the firſt exerciſed crueltie vpon the bodies of the ſainctes: the other alſo vpon their ſoules: the firſt by humaine order and policie, the other vnder the colour of the law of God, and of religion, raged and imbrued it ſelfe with the blood of the godly. when they behold the beaſt that was, and is not, and yet is.
            9 An exhortation preparing vnto audience, by the ſame argument, with that of Chriſt: He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. Wherefore for mine owne part, I had rather reade in this place, Let there be here a minde, &c. So the Angel paſſeth fitly vnto the ſeconde place of this deſcription. Here is the minde that hath wiſdome. The

               
                  Verie children know, what that ſeuen hilled citie is, which is ſo much ſpoken of, & wherof Virgil thus reporteth, And compaſſed ſeuen towers within one wall: that citie it is, which, when Iohn wrote theſe things, had rule ouer the Kings of the earth: It was, and is not, and yet it remaineth to this day, but it is declining to deſtruction.
                ſeuen heads, are This is the painting out of the beaſt by things preſent (as I ſaid before) whereby S. Iohn endeuoured ſo to deſcribe the ſame, that he might both be knowne of the godly in that age, and be further obſerued and marked of poſteritie afterwards. This delineatiō hath one type, that is, his heads; but a double deſcription or application of the type: one permanent from the nature of it ſelfe: the other changeable, by the working of men. The deſcription permanent, is by the ſeuen hills, in this verſe; the other that fleeteth, is from the ſeuen kings, verſe 10. 11. And here it is worthie to be obſerued, that one type hath ſometimes two or more applications: as ſeemeth good vnto the holy Ghoſt to expreſſe either one thing by diuerſe types, or diuerſe things by one type. So I noted before, of the ſeuen ſpirits chap. 1. 4. Now this woman that ſitteth vpon ſeuen hilles, is the citie of Rome, called in time paſt of the Graecians 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. of ſeuen tops or creaſts, & of Varro ſepticeps, i. of ſeuen heads (as here) of her ſeuen heads; and of others ſeptemcollis. i. ſtanding vpon ſeuen hilles. ſeuen mountaines, whereon the woman ſitteth:
            10 The beginning of theſe kings or Emperours is almoſt the ſame with the beginning of the Church of Chriſt, which I ſhewed before chap. 11. 1. Namely from the yeare 35. after the paſſion of Chriſt, what time the Temple and Church of the Iewes was ouerthrowne. In which ye are it came to paſſe by the prouidence of God, that that ſaving, The beaſt was, and is not, was fulfilled before that the deſtruction of the Iewes immediatly following, came to paſſe. That was the yeare from the building of the citie of Rome 809. from which yeare S. Iohn both numbreth the Emperors which thitherto had bene, when he wrote theſe things; and foretelleth of two others next to come: and that with this purpoſe, that when this particular prediction or foretelling of things to come, ſhould take effect, the truth of all other predictions in the Church, might be the more confirmed. Which ſigne God of old mentioned in the Law, Deuter. 18. and Ieremie confirmed. chap. 28. 8. They are alſo ſeuen Kings, Whoſe names are theſe: the firſt Seruivs Sulpttius Galba, who was the ſeuēth Emperor of the people of Rome; the ſecond Marcus Saluius Otho; the third, Aulus Vitellius; the fourth, Titus Flauius Veſpaſianus; the ſift, Titus Veſpaſianus his ſonne, of his owne name. fiue are fallen, 
                  Flauius Domitian ſonne of the firſt Veſpaſian. For in the later ende of his dayes S. Iohn wrote theſe things: as witneſſeth Irenaeus lib. 5. aduerſus haereſes.
                & one is, Nerua. The Empire being now tranſlated from the familie of Flauius. This man raigned only one yeare, foure moneths, and nine days, as the hiſtorie writers do tell. and another is not yet come: & whē he cōmeth, he muſt cōtinue a ſhort ſpace.
            
               
11 This is ſpokē by the ſigure ſynecdoche, as much to ſay, as that head of the beaſt which was and is not, becauſe it is cut off, & Nerua in ſo ſhort time extinguiſhed. How manie heads there were, ſo many beaſts there ſeemed to be in one. See the like ſpeech in the third verſe of the thirteenth chapter. And the beaſt that was, and is not, is Nerua Traianus, who him ſelfe in diuerſe reſpects is called here the ſeuenth & the eighth. the eight, and is Though in number & order of ſucceſſion he be the eighth, yet he is reckened together with one of theſe heads, becauſe Nerua and he were one head. For this man obtained authoritie together with Nerua, and was Conſull with him, when Nerua left his life. one of the ſeuen, Namely to moleſt with perſecutions the churches of Chriſt, as the hiſtories do record, and I haue briefly noted chap. 2. 10. and goeth vnto deſtruction.
            12 The third place of this deſcription, as I ſayd verſe 8. is a propheticall prediction of things to come which the beaſt ſhould do; as in the words following & Iohn doth not obſcurely ſignifie, ſaying, which haue not yet receiued the kingdome &c. For there is an antitheſis or oppoſition betweene theſe kings, and thoſe that went before. And firſt the perſons are deſcribed, in this verſe; then their deedes, in the two verſes following. And the ten hornes which thou ſaweſt, are That is, ariſing with their kingdomes, out of that Romaine beaſt: at ſuch time as that politicall Empire began by the craft of the Popes greatly to fall. ten Kings, which yet haue not receiued the kingdome, but ſhall receiue power, as Kings Namely, with that ſecond beaſt, whom we called before a falſe prophet, which beaſt aſcending out of the earth, got vnto him ſelfe all the authoritie and power of the firſt beaſt, and exerciſeth the ſame before his face, as was ſaid chapter 14. 11. 12. For when the politicall Empire of the Weſt began to bow downewards, there both aroſe thoſe ten Kings, and the ſecond beaſt tooke the oportunitie offered, to vſurpe vnto him ſelfe all the power of the former beaſt. Theſe kings long ago, many haue numbred and deſcribed to be ten, and a great part of the euents plainely teſtifieth the ſame in this our age. at one houre with the beaſt.
            13 That is, by conſent or agreement: that they may conſpire with the beaſt, and depende vppon his becke. Their ſtorie is deuided into three parts, counſelles, actes, and euents. The counſels ſome of them conſiſt in communicating of iudgements and affections: and ſome in communicating of power, which they are ſayd to haue giuen vnto this beaſt, in this verſe. Theſe haue all one mind, and ſhall giue their power, and authoritie vnto the beaſt.
            
               
14 Theſe ſhall fight with the With Chriſt and his church, as the reaſon following doth declare: and here are mentioned the facts and euentes which followed for Chriſt his ſake, and for the grace of God the Father towards thoſe that are called, elected, and are his faithfull ones in Chriſt. Lambe, & the Lambe ſhall ouercome them: 
                  Chap. 19. 16. 1. Tim. 6. 15. for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and they that are on his ſide, called, and choſen, and faithfull.
            15 This is the other member of the enarration, as I ſaid ver. 7. belonging vnto the harlot, ſhewed in the viſion, ver. 3. In this hiſtorie of the harlot, theſe three things are diſtinctly propounded; what is her magnificencie, in this verſe, what is her fall, & by whom it ſhall happen vnto her, in the 2. verſes following: & laſtly, who that harlot is, in the laſt ver. This place which by order of nature ſhould haue bene the firſt, is therefore made the laſt, becauſe it was more fit to be ioyned with the next chapter. After he ſayd vnto me, The waters which thou ſaweſt, where the whore ſitteth, That is, as vnconſtant and variable as are the waters. Vpon this foundation ſitteth this harlot as a queene, a vaine perſon vpon that which is vaine. are peoples, & multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
            16 And the The ten kings, as verſ. 12. The accompliſhment of this fact & euent is dayly increaſed in this our age, by the ſingular prouidence and moſt mightie gouernment of God. Wherfore the facts are propounded in this verſe; & the cauſes of them in the verſes following. ten hornes which thou ſaweſt vpon the beaſt, they ſhall hate the whore, and ſhall make her deſolate and naked, and ſhall eate her fleſh, and burne her with fire.
            17 A reaſon rendred from the chiefe efficient cauſe, which is the prouidence of God, by which alone ſaint Iohn by inuerſion of order affirmeth to haue come to paſſe, both that the kings ſhould execute vpon the harlot that which pleaſed God; & which he declared in the verſe next before going: & alſo that by one conſent & coūſel they ſhould giue their kingdome vnto the beaſt &c. ver. 13. 14. for as theſe being blinded haue before depended vpon the becke of the beaſt that lifteth vp the harlot, ſo it is ſaid that afterwards it ſhal come to paſſe, that they ſhal turne back, and ſhal fal away from her, when their hearts ſhalbe turned into better ſtate by the grace & mercy of God. For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his decree, and to be of one conſent, & to giue their kingdome vnto the beaſt, vntill the wordes of God be fulfilled.
            18 And the woman which thou ſaweſt, is that That is, Rome, that great city, or only citie (as Luſtinian calleth it) the king & head wherof was thē the Emperor, but now the Pope, ſince that the cōdition of the beaſt was chāged. great citie, which hath dominion ouer the Kings of the earth.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XVIII.
            
               2 The horrible deſtruction of Babylon is ſet out. 11. 16. 18. The marchants of the earth, who were enriched with the pompe and luxuriouſneſſe of it, weepe and waile: 20 But all the elect reioyce for that iuſt vengeance of God.
               
            
            1 The ſecond place (as I ſayd before 17 1) of the hiſtorie of Babylon, is of the wofull fall and ruine of that whore of Babylon. This hiſtoricall praediction concerning her, is threefold. The firſt a plaine & ſimple foretelling of her ruine, in three verſes; the ſecond a figuratiue prediction by the circumſtances, thence vnto the 20. verſe. The third, a confirmation of the ſame by ſigne or wonder, vnto the end of the chapter. 
               F. IVNIVS. ANd after theſe things, I ſaw an 
               Either Chriſt the eternall word of God the Father, (as often elſewhere) or a created Angel and one deputed vnto this ſeruice, but thoroughly furniſhed with greatnes of power, & with light of glorie as the enſigne of power. Angell come downe from out of heauen hauing great power; ſo that the verie earth was lightned with his glorie.
            2 And he cried our mightily with a loude voice, The prediction or foreſhewing of her ruine, containing both the fall of Babylon, in this verſe; and the cauſe thereof vttered by way of allegorie concerning her ſpirituall and carnall wickedneſſes, that is, her moſt great impietie and vniuſtice, in the next verſe: her fall is firſt ſimplie declared of the Angell, and then the greatnes thereof is ſhewed here by the euents; when he ſaith it ſhalbe the ſeate and habitation of diuels, of wild beaſts, and of curſed foules, as of old Eſay. 13. 21. and often elſewhere. ſaying, 
                  Chap. 14. 8. Eſa. 21. 9. Ierem. 51. 8. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great citie, and is become an habitatiō of deuils, and the hold of all foule ſpirits, and a cage of euerie vncleane and hatefull byrd.
            3 Becauſe all nations haue drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, & the Kings of the earth haue cōmitted fornication with her, and the marchants of the earth are waxed rich by the abundance of her voluptuouſneſſe.
            4 The ſecond prediction, which is of the circumſtances of the ruine of Babylon: of theſe there are two kindes: one going before it, as that beforehand the godly are deliuered, vnto the ninth verſe: the other following vpon her ruine, namely the lamentation of the wicked, and reioycing of the godly, vnto the twentith verſe. And I heard another voice from heauen

ſay, Two circumſtances going before the ruine, are commanded in this place, one is, that the godly depart out of Babylon: as I mentioned chap. 12. to haue bene done in time paſt, before the deſtructiō of Ieruſalem: this charge is giuen here, & in the next verſe. The other is that euery one of thē occupie themſelues in their own place, in executing the iudgements of God, as it was commanded the Leuits of old, Exod. 32. 27. and that they ſanctifie their hands vnto the Lord, ver. 6 7. 8. Go out of her, my people, that ye be Of this commandement there are two cauſes: to auoid the contagion of ſinne, and to ſhun the participation of thoſe puniſhments that belong thereunto. not partakers of her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues.
            5 For the heape of her ſinnes doth He vſeth a word which ſignifieth the folowing of ſinnes one after another. & riſing one of another in ſuch ſort that they grew at length to ſuch an heape, that they came vpeuen to heauen. reach vp vnto heauē, & God hath remēbred her iniquities.
            6 The prouocation of the godly, & the commandement of executing the iudgements of God, ſtand vpon three cauſes, which are here expreſſed: the vniuſt wickedneſſe of the whore of Babylon, in this verſe; her curſed pride oppoſing it ſelfe againſt God, which is the fountaine of all euill actions, verſ 7. and her moſt iuſt damnation by the ſentence of God, verſ. 8. Reward her, euē as ſhe hath rewarded you; & giue her double according to her works: and in the cup that ſhe hath filled to you, fill her double.
            7 So much as ſhe hath glorified her ſelf, and liued in pleaſure, ſo much giue ye to her of torment and ſorow: becauſe ſhe ſaith With herſelfe. in her heart, I ſit as a queene, and am I am full of people & mightie. no widow, and ſhall I ſhall taſt of none. ſee no mourning.
            8 Therefore ſhall her plagues come in Shortly, and at one inſtant. one day, death, and ſorow, and famine; and ſhe ſhalbe burnt with fire: for the Lord God which condemneth her is mightie.
            9 Then The circumſtances following the fall of Babylon, or the conſequents thereof (as I diſtinguiſhed them verſ. 4.) are two. Namely the lamentation of the wicked, vnto the 19. verſe: and the reioycing of the godly, verſ. 20. This moſt ſorowfull lamē
                  tation, according to the perſons of them that lament; hath three members, the firſt whereof is the mourning of the kings and mightie men of the earth, in two verſes: The ſecond is, the lamentation of the marchants that traffique bv land, thence vnto the 16. verſe; The third is, the wailing of thoſe that merchandize by ſea, verſ. 16. 17. 18. In euerie of theſe the cauſe & maner of their mourning is deſcribed in order, according to the condition of thoſe that mourne: with obſeruation of that which beſt agreeth vnto them. the Kings of the earth ſhal bewaile

her, and lament for her, which haue committed fornication, and liued in pleaſure with her, when they ſhall ſee the ſmoke of her burning,
            10 And ſhall ſtand a farre of for feare of her torment, ſaying, Alas, alas, that great citie Babylon, that mightie citie: in one houre is thy iudgement come.
            11 The lamentation of thoſe that trade by land, as I diſtinguiſhed immediatly before. Alſo the marchāts of the earth ſhal weepe & waile ouer her: for no man buyeth their ware any more:
            12 The ware of gold and ſiluer, and of precious ſtone, and of pearles, and of fine linnen, and of purple, & of ſilke, & of skarler, and of all maner of Thyne wood, & of all veſſels of yuorie, and of all veſſels of moſt precious wood, and of braſſe, and of yron, and of marble,
            13 And of cinamon, and odours, & ointments, and franckenſence, & wine, & oile, & fine floure, and wheate, and beaſts, and ſheepe, and horſes, and charets, and ſeruants, and ſoules of men.
            14 An apoſtrophē or turning of the ſpeach, by imitation, vſed for more vehemencie, as if thoſe merchāts, after the maner of mourners, ſhould in paſſionate ſpeech ſpeake vnto Babylon, though now vtterly fallen and ouerthrown. So Eſa. 12. 9. and in manie other places. And the By this is meant that ſeaſo, which is next before the fall of the leafe, at what ſeaſon frutes ripen, and the word ſignifieth ſuch fruites as are longed for. apples that thy ſoule luſted after, are departed from thee; and all things which were fat and excellent, are departed from thee; and thou ſhalt find them no more.
            15 The marchants of theſe things which were waxed rich by her, ſhall ſtand a farre of from her, fo feare of her torment, weeping and wayling,
            16 And ſaying, Alas, alas, that great citie, that was clothed in fine linnen and purple, and skarlet, and glittered with gold, and precious ſtone, & pearles! That in one houre are ſo great riches come to deſolation.
            17 The maner of mourning vſed by thē that trade by ſea. Alſo euerie ſhipmaſter, and all the people that occupie ſhips, and ſhipmen, and whoſoeuer trafficke on the ſea ſhall ſtand a farre off;
            18 And cry, whē they ſee the ſmoke of her burning, ſaying, what city was like vnto this great city?
            
               
19 And they ſhall caſt duſt on their heads, & cry weeping, and wayling, and ſay; Alas, alas, that that great citie, wherein were made rich all that had ſhips on the ſea by her coſtlineſſe, is in one houre made deſolate.
            20 The other conſequent vppon the ruine of Babylon, is the exultation or reioycing of the godly in heauen and in earth, as was noted verſe, 9. O heauen, reioyce ouer her, and ye holy Apoſtles and Prophets; becauſe God hath puniſhed her, to be reuenged for your ſakes.
            21 The thirde prediction (as I ſayd verſe 1.) ſtanding of a ſigne, and the interpretation thereof; the interpretatiō therof is in 2. ſorts, firſt by a ſimple propounding of the thing it ſelf, in this verſe; & then by declaration of the euents, in the verſes folowing. Then a mightie Angell tooke vp a ſtone like a great milſtone, 
                  Ier. 51. 63. and caſt it into the ſea, ſaying, So ſhall that great citie Babylon be caſt with violence, and ſhall be found no more.
            22 The euents are two, & one of them oppoſit vnto the other for amplification ſake; There ſhalbe (ſaith he) in Babylon no mirth nor ioy at all, in this and the next verſe: but all heauie and lamentable things, from the bloudie ſlaughters of the righteous, & the vengeance of God comming vpon it for the ſame. And the voyce of harpers, & muſicians, & of pipers, & trumpetters ſhalbe heard no more in thee; & no crafts-man, of whatſoeuer craft he be, ſhal be found any more in thee: and the ſound of a milſtone ſhall be heard no more in thee.
            23 And the light of a candle ſhall ſhine no more in thee and the voyce of the bridegrome & of the bride ſhalbe heard no more in thee: for thy marchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine inchantmēts were deceiued al natiōs.
            24 And in her was found the That is, ſhed by bloudie maſſacres, and calling for vengeance. bloud of the Prophets, That is, proued and found out, as if God had appointed a iuſt enquirie concerning the impietie, vnnaturalneſſe, and vniuſtice of theſe men. and of the Saints, & of all that were ſlaine vpon the earth.
         
         
            CHAP. XIX.
            
               1 The heauenly company praiſe God, for auenging the bloud of his ſeruants, on the whore. 9 They are written bleſſed, that are called to the Lambes ſupper. 10 The Angell will not be worshipped. 11 That mightie King of kings appeareth from heauen. 19 The battell, 20 wherein the beaſt is taken, 21 and caſt into the burning lake.
               
            
            
               
1 This chapter hath in ſumme two partes: one tranſitorie or of paſſage vnto the things that follow, vnto the tenth verſe: an other hiſtorical of the victory of Chriſt gotten againſt both the beaſts, vnto the ende of the chapter: which I ſayd was the ſecond hiſtorie of this argumēt chapter 17. 1. The tranſition hath two places; one of praiſing God for the ouerthrowe done vnto Babylon in foure verſes: and another likewiſe of praiſe, and propheticall, for the comming of Chriſt into his kingdome, and his moſt royall mariage with his Church, thence vnto the 10. verſ. The former praiſe hath three branches, diſtinguiſhed after the auncient manner of thoſe that ſing: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, an inuitation or prouokement in two verſes: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a reſponſe or anſwere, in the third verſe: and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a cloſe or ioyning together in harmonie: all which I thought good of purpose to diſtinguiſh in this place, leaſt any mā ſhould with Porphyrius, or other like dogges obiect vnto S. Iohn or the heauenly Church, a childiſh and idle repetition of ſpeach. AFter theſe things I heard a great voice of a great multitude in heauen, ſaying, Praiſeye the Lord. 
               The propoſition of praiſe with exhortation in this verſe, and the cauſe thereof, in the next verſe. Hallelu-iah, ſaluation, and glorie, and honour, and F. IVNIVS. power be to the Lord our God.
            2 For true and righteous are his iudgements: for he hath condemned that great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the bloud of his ſeruaunts at her hand.
            3 And againe they ſaid, The ſong of the Antiphonie or reſponſe, containing an amplification of the praiſe of God, from the perpetuall and moſt certaine teſtimonie of his diuine iudgement: as was done at Sodome and Gomorrha. Geneſ 19. Hallelu-iah: & her ſmoke roſe vp for euermore.
            4 And the foure and twentie Elders, and the foure beaſts fel downe, and worſhipped God that ſitteth on the throne, ſaying, Amen, Hallelu-iah.
            5 The ſecond place of praiſe (as I ſaid verſ. 1.) which firſt is commaunded from God in this verſe: and then is in moſt ample manner pronounced of the creatures, both becauſe they ſee that kingdome of Chriſt, to come, which moſt they deſire verſe. 6, alſo becauſe they ſee that the Church is called forth to be brought home into the houſe of her husband by holy mariage, vnto the fellowſhip of his kingdome verſ. 7. 8. Wherefore S. Iohn is commaunded to write into a booke the Epiphonema, or acclamation ioyned with a diuine teſtimonie verſ. 9. Then a voyce came out of the Out of the Temple from God. as 11. 19. throne, ſaying, Praiſe our God, all ye his ſeruants, and ye that feare him, both ſmall and great.
            
               
6 And I heard Without the Temple in heauen. like the voice of a great multitude, and as the voyce of many waters, and as the voice of ſtrōg thundrings, ſaying, Hallelu-iah: for the Lord that almighty God doth now reigne.
            7 Let vs be glad and reioyce, and giue glory to him: for the marriage of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath Namely, vnto that holy marriage, both her ſelfe in perſon in this verſe, & alſo furniſhed of her ſpouſe with marriage gifts princely & diuine, is adorned and prepared, in the next verſe. prepared her ſelfe.
            8 And to her is granted, that ſhe ſhould be arayed with As an enſigne of kingly and prieſtly dignitie: which dignitie Chriſt beſtoweth vpon vs, chap. 1. 6. pure fine linnen and ſhining; for the fine This is a gift giuen by the husband for marriage ſake, and a moſt choiſe ornament which Chriſt beſtoweth vpon vs as vpon his ſpouſe. linnen is the Good workes which are liuely teſtimonies of faith. righteouſnes of the Saints.
            9 Namely the Angell, as appeareth by the next verſe. Then he ſaid vnto me, Write, 
                  Matth. 22. 2. Bleſſed are they which are called vnto the ſupper of the marriage of the Lambe. And he ſaid vnto me, Theſe words of God are true.
            10 The particular ſtorie of this verſe is brought in by occaſiō, and as it were beſides the purpoſe, that Saint Iohn might make a publike example of his owne infirmitie, and of the modeſt ſanctimonie of the Angell, who both renounced for him ſelfe the diuine honors, and recalled all the ſeruants of God, vnto the worſhip of him alone: as alſo 22. 8. And I fel down before his feet, 
                  Chap. 22. 2. to worſhip him: but he ſaid vnto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow ſeruant, & of thy brethren, which haue the Which are cō
                  manded to beare witneſſe of Ieſus. teſtimonie of Ieſus. Worſhip God: for the teſtimonie of For Ieſus is the marke that all the prophecies shoote at. Ieſus is the ſpirit of prophecie.
            
               The ſecond place of this Chapter (as I ſaid verſe 1.) is of the victorie gotten by Chriſt againſt both the beaſts: in which firſt Chriſt is deſcribed as one readie to ſight, vnto the 16. verſe: then is ſhewed the battell to be begunne, thence vnto the 18. verſe: laſtly is ſet forth the victorie, vnto the end of the chapter. In this place do ſhine forth moſt excellent properties of Chriſt, as our heauenly iudge and reuenger, according to his perſon, companie, effectes and names After I ſaw Properties belonging to his perſon, that he is heauenly, iudge, faithfull, true, iuſt, in this verſe: ſearching out all things, ruling ouer all, to be ſearched out of none, verſe 12. the triumpher, and the verie eſſentiall word of God, verſe 13. heauen open, & behold, a white horſe, & he that ſate vpon him, was called,

faithfull and true, and he that iudgeth and fighteth righteouſly.
            12 And his eyes were as a flame of fire; and on his head were many crownes: and he had a name written, that no man knew but him ſelfe.
            13 And he was clothed with a garment dipt in blood, and his name is called, THE VVORD OF GOD.
            14 The company or retinue of Chriſt, holy, innumerable, heauenly, iudiciall, royall and pure. And the hoſtes which were in heauen, followed him vpon white horſes, clothed with fine linnen white and pure.
            15 The effects of Chriſt prepared vnto battel, that with his mouth he ſtriketh the Gentiles, ruleth and deſtroyeth. And out of his mouth went forth a ſharp ſword, that with it he ſhould ſmite the heathen: for he ſhall 
                  Pſalm. 2. 9. rule them with a rod of iron: and, he it is that ſhall tread the wine preſſe of the fierceneſſe and wrath of almightie God.
            16 The name agreeing vnto Chriſt according to the former properties, expreſſed after the manner of the Hebrewes. And he had vpon his garment, and vpon his thigh a name written, 
                  Chap. 17. 14. 1 Tim. 6. 15. THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
            17 The ſecond member, as I ſaid verſe 11. A reprochfull calling forth of his enimies vnto battaile: in which not thē
                  ſelues (for why ſhould they be called forth of the king of the world, or prouoked being his ſubiects: for that were not comly) but in their hearing, the birds of the aire are called to eate their carkaſſes. Then I ſaw a certaine Angel ſtand in the That is openly & in ſight of all: as Num. 25. 4. and 2 Sam. 12. 11. ſunne, who cryed with a loud voyce, ſaying to all the ſoules that did flie through That is, through this inferior heauen, & which is nearer vnto vs: an Hebrew phraſe. the midſt of heauen, Come, and gather your ſelues together vnto the ſupper of the great God,
            18 That ye may eate the fleſh of kings, and the fleſh of hie Captaines, and the fleſh of mightie men, and the fleſh of horſes, and of them that ſit on them, and the fleſh of all freemen, & bondmen, and of ſmall and great.
            19 The third member (as was ſaid verſ. 11.) of the victorie obtained by Chriſt. Vnto this appertaineth two things, his buckling with the beaſt, and his forces, in this verſe: and the euent moſt magnificent, deſcribed after the manner of men in the verſes following. All theſe things are plaine. After I ſaw the beaſt, & the Kings of the

the earth, and their hoſtes gathered together to make battell againſt him that ſate on the horſe, and againſt his armie.
            20 And the beaſt Namely that beaſt with ſeuē heads, of which before, chap. 13. 1. and 17 3. was taken, and with him that That is, that beaſt with two heads, of which 13. 11 Looke more ch. 16. 14. falſe prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceiued them that receiued the beaſts marke, and them that worſhipped his image: Theſe both were caſt aliue into a lake of fire, burning with brimſtone.
            21 And the rēnant were ſlaine with the ſword of him that ſate vpon the horſe, which commeth out of his mouth; & all the foules were filled with their fleſh.
         
         
            CHAP. XX.
            
               1 The Angell 2 bindeth Satan for a thouſand yeares: 8 Being looſed, he ſtirreth vp Gog and Magog, that is, priuie and open enemies, againſt the Saints, 11 but the vengeance of the Lord cutteth off their inſolencie. 12 The bookes are opened, by which the dead are iudged.
               
            
            1 Now followeth the 3. place, of the propheticall hiſtorie, which is, of the victorie wherby Chriſt ouercame the dragon, as I noted chap. 17. 1. This place muſt neceſſarily be ioyned with the end of the 12. chapter, and be applied vnto the iuſt vnderſtanding thereof. This chapter hath 2. parts: one of the dragon ouercome, vnto the 10. verſe: the other of the reſurrection and laſt iudgement, vnto the end of the chapter. The ſtorie of the dragon is double. Firſt of the firſt victorie, after which he was bound by Chriſt: vnto the 6. verſe. The ſecond is of the laſt victorie, whereby he was throwne downe into euerlaſting puniſhment, thence vnto the 10. verſ. This firſt hiſtorie happened in the firſt time of the Chriſtian Church, when the dragon throwne downe from heauen by Chriſt, went about to moleſt the newe birth of the Church in the earth. chap. 12. 17. 18. For which cauſe I gaue warning that this ſtorie of the dragon, muſt be annexed vnto that place. 
               F. IVNIVS. AFter I ſawe an Angell come downe from heauen, hauing the key That is, of hell, whither God threw downe the Angels which had ſinned, and bound them in chaines of darkeneſſe to be kept vnto damnation. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Iud. 6. of the bottomleſſe pit, and a great chaine in his hand.
            2 And he tooke the dragon that old ſerpent, which is the deuill and Satan, and he bound him

for The firſt wher of (continuing this hiſtory with the end of the 12. chap.) is the 36. yere frō the paſſiō of Chriſt, whē the church of the Iews being ouerthrown Satan aſſayed to inuade the Chriſtian Church gathered of the Gentiles, and to deſtroy part of her ſeede chap. 12. 17. The thouſandth yeare falleth preciſely vpon the times of that wicked Hildebrand, who was called Gregorie the ſeuenth, a moſt damnable Nicromancer and ſorcerer, whom Sathan vſed as an inſtrument, when he was loſed out of bonds, thence forth to annoye the Saincts of God with moſt cruell perſecutions, and the whole world with diſſentions, and moſt bloudie warres: as Benno the Cardinall reporteth at large. And this is the firſt victorie gotten ouer the dragon in the earth. a thouſand yeares.
            3 And he caſt him into the bottomleſſe pit, which he ſhut vp, and ſealed vpon him, that he might deceiue the people Namely with that publique and violent deceipt which he attempted before. chap. 12. and which after a thouſand yeares (alacke for woe) he moſt mightilie procured in the Chriſtian world. no more, til the thouſand yeares were fulfilled: for after that he muſt be looſed for Which being once expired, the ſecond battaile and victorie ſhall be; of which verſe. 7. 8. a litle ſeaſon.
            4 A deſcription of the common ſtate of the Church of Chriſt in earth, in that ſpace of a thouſand yeares, for which the deuill was in bonds: in which, firſt the authoritie, life, and common honour of the godlie is declared, verſ. 4. ſecondlie newneſſe of life is preached vnto others by the Goſpell, after that ſpace verſ 5 finallie he concludeth with promiſes. verſ. 6. Then I ſaw For iudgement was committed to them, as to mē
                  bers ioyned to the head: not that Chriſt, office was giuen ouer to thē
                
               This was a type of the authoritie of the good and faithfull ſeruants of God in the Church: taken from the manner of men. thrones: and they ſate vpon them, and iudgement was giuen vnto them; and I ſaw the ſoules of them that were Of the Martyrs, which ſuffered in thoſe firſt times. beheaded for the witneſſe of Ieſus, and for the word of God, and which did Of the Martyrs which ſuffered after that both the beaſts were now riſen vp. chap. 13. for there theſe things are expounded. not worſhip the beaſt, neither his image, neither had taken his marke vpon their foreheads, or on their hands: and they ſhall liue, and raigne with Chriſt a thouſand yeare.
            5 Whoſoeuer ſhall lye dead in ſinne, and not know the truth of God. But the reſt of the dead men They ſhall not be renewed with that newneſſe of life by the inlightning of the Goſpell of the glorie of Chriſt. For this is the firſt reſurrection, by which the ſoules of the godlie do riſe from their death. In the ſecond reſurrection their bodies ſhall riſe againe. ſhall

not liue againe, vntil the thouſand yeares be finiſhed: this is the firſt reſurrection.
            6 Bleſſed and holy is he, that hath part in the firſt reſurrection: for on ſuch the That wherby both bodie and ſoule, that is, the whole man is addicted and deliuered vnto eternall death. So chap. 2. 11. ſecond death hath no power: but they ſhall be the Prieſtes of God and of Chriſt, A returne vnto the intended hiſtorie by reſuming the words which are in the end of the 4. verſe. and ſhall raigne with him a thouſand yeare.
            7 The ſecond hiſtorie, of the latter victorie of Chriſt, as was ſaid verſ. 1. in which are ſummarily deſcribed the worke, ouerthrow, and eternall puniſhment of Sathan. And when the Of which I ſpake verſe 2. Then therefore ſhall be giuen vnto him libertie to rage againſt the Church, and to moleſt the Saints for the ſinnes of men; vnto whom the faithfull ſhall haue aſſociated them ſelues more then was meete, taſting with them of their impuritie of doctrine and of life. thouſand yeares are expired, Satan ſhalbe looſed out of his priſon,
            8 The worke or act of Sathan (which is the firſt member as I diſtinguiſhed in the verſe before going) to deceiue the whole world, euen vnto the vttermoſt nations thereof: to arme them againſt the people of God, in this verſe, and to beſiege and oppreſſe the Church, with his whole ſtrength, in the verſe following. And ſhall go out to deceiue the people, which are in the foure quarters of the earth: euen 
               
                  Ezek. 39. 2. Gog & Magog, to gather them together to battell, whoſe number is, as the ſand of the ſea.
            9 They went vp therefore into the As if he ſaid, inſomuch that the whole face of the earth, how great ſoeuer it is, was filled. plaine of the earth, and they compaſſed the tents of the Saints about, & the beloued citie: but The wrath of God, conſuming the aduerſaries, and ouerthrowing all their enterpriſes, Heb. 10. 27. And this is the ſecond member, mentioned verſ. 7. the ouerthrow of Sathan. fire came down frō God out of heauen, & deuoured them.
            10 The third member is, eternall deſtruction againſt thoſe that are ouercome: as I noted in the ſame place. And the diuel that deceiued thē, was caſt into a lake of fire & brimſtone, where that beaſt and that falſe prophet was; and they ſhalbe tormented day and night for euermore.
            11 The ſecond part of this Chapter, in which is deſcribed the iudge, in this verſe, and the laſt iudgement in the verſes following. Then I ſaw a great That is, a tribunall ſeate moſt princelike and glorious: for ſo doth the Greeke word alſo ſignifie. white throne, and

               That is, Chriſt, before whom when he commeth vnto iudgemēt, heauen and earth ſhall periſh for the greatneſſe of his maieſtie, 2. Pet. 3. 7. 10. &c. one that ſate on it, from whoſe face fled away both the earth and heauen, and their place was no more found.
            12 And I ſaw the dead, both great and ſmall ſtand before That is, Chriſt the iudge. 2. Cor. 5. 10. God: and the As it were our bookes of reckening or accompts: that is, the teſtimonie of our conſcience, and of our workes, which by no meanes can be auoyded. This is ſpoken after the maner of men. bookes were opened; and 
                  Chap. 3. 5. and 21. 27. Philip. 4. 3. another booke was opened, which is the booke 
               The booke of the eternall decree of God, in which God the Father hath elected in Chriſt according to the good pleaſure of his will, thoſe that ſhall be heires of life. This alſo is ſpoken according to the maner of men. of life; and the dead were iudged by thoſe things, which were written in the bookes, according to their workes.
            13 This is a preuention or an anſwere vnto an obiection: for happily ſome man will ſay, but they are dead, whom the ſea, death, and the graue hath conſumed: how ſhall they appeare before the iudge? Saint Iohn anſwereth, by reſurrection from death, whereunto all things (howſoeuer repugnant) ſhall miniſter and ſerue at the commandement of God, as Dan. 12. And the ſea gaue vp the dead, which were in her; and death and hell deliuered vp the dead, which were in them: and they were iudged euerie man according to their workes.
            14 The laſt enimie which is death ſhalbe aboliſhed by Chriſt (that he may no more make any attempt againſt vs) 1. Cor. 15. 26. and death ſhall feed vpon the reprobate in hell for euermore; according to the righteous iudgement of God, in the next verſe. And death & hell were caſt into the lake of fire: which is the ſecond death.
            15 And whoſoeuer was not found written in the booke of life, was caſt into the lake of fire.
         
         
            CHAP. XXI.
            
               2 He deſcribeth new Hieruſalem deſcending from heauen. 9 The bride the Lambes wife, 12 and the glorious building of the citie, 19 garnished with precious ſtones: 22 whoſe temple the Lambe is.
               
            
            
               
1 Now followeth the ſecond part of the hiſtorie propheticall, (as I ſaid chap. 1. & 11. 1.) Of the future eſtate of the church in heauen after the laſt iudgement, vnto the 5. verſe of the next chapter. In this are two thinges briefly declared: The ſtation, ſeate, or place thereof verſe. 1. Then her ſtate and condition, in the verſes following. Before the ſtate of the church deſcribe 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſet downe the ſtate of the whole world: that there ſhal be a new heauen and a new earth, as Eſay 65. 17. and 66. 12. and 2. Pet. 3. 19. and this is the ſeate or place of the church, in which righteouſnes ſhall dwell. 
               F. IVNIVS. AFter I ſaw 
                  Eſay 65. 17. and 66. 22. a new heauen, & a new earth: for the 2. Pet. 3. 13. firſt heauen, & the firſt errth were paſſed away; and the ſea was no more.
            2 The ſtate of this glorious Church, is firſt deſcribed generally vnto the 8. verſe, and then ſpecially and by partes, in the verſes following. The generall deſcription conſiſteth in a viſion ſhewed a farre of, verſe 2. and in ſpeach ſpoken from heauen. In the generall theſe things are common; that the church is holy, new, the workmanſhip of God, heauenly, moſt glorious, the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and partaker of his glorie, in this verſe. And I Iohn ſaw that holy citie the new Ieruſalem come downe from God out of heauen, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.
            3 The church is deſcribed by ſpeach firſt of an Angell in two verſes, then of God himſelfe, in foure verſes. The Angels ſpeach deſcribeth the glorie of the church by the moſt familiar cohabitation of God therewith, by communication of all manner good things according to the couenant, in this verſe: and by remouing or putting farre away of all euill things, in the verſe following. And I heard a great voyce out of heauen, ſaying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with men: and they ſhall be his people, and God himſelf ſhall be with them, their God.
            4 
                  Chap. 7. 17. Eſay. 25. 8. And God ſhall wipe all teares from their eyes: and there ſhalbe no more death, neither ſorow, neither crying; neither ſhall there be anie more paine: becauſe the firſt things are paſſed.
            5 In the ſpeach of God himſelfe deſcribing the church, is firſt a certaine exordium or entrance, verſe 5. Then followeth a magnificent deſcription of the church, by the preſent and future good things of the ſame, in three verſes following. In the exordium God chalengeth vnto himſelf the reſtoring of all the creatures, of which verſe 1. and witneſſeth the calling of Saint Iohn vnto the writing of theſe things, in this verſe. And he that ſate vpon the throne, ſaid, 
                  Eſay. 43. 19. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Behold, I make all things new: and he ſaid vnto me, Write: for theſe wordes are faithfull and true.
            
               
6 And he ſayd vnto me, ¶ The deſcription of the Church is of three ſorts; by aboliſhing of old things: by the being of preſent things in God, that is, of things eternall: and by the communication of all good thinges with the godly, verſe 6. If ſo be they ſhal ſtriue manfully, verſ. 7. But the reprobate are excluded from thence, verſe 8. they were; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I 
                  Chap. 1. 8. and 22. 13. will giue to him that is a thirſt, of the well of the water of life freely.
            7 He that ouercommeth, ſhall inherite all things, and I will be his God, and he ſhall be my ſonne.
            8 But the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, and the abominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and ſorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars ſhall haue their Their lot, and inheritance as it were. part in the lake, which burneth with fire & brimſtone, which is the ſecond death.
            9 A tranſition vnto the particular deſcribing of the heauenly church: by the expreſſe calling of Saint Iohn in this verſe, and his rapting vp by the Spirite, in confirmation of the truth of God, in the verſe following. Then there came vnto me one of the ſeuen Angels, which had the ſeuen vials full of the ſeuen laſt plagues; and he talked with me ſaying, Come: I will ſhew thee the bride, the Lambs wife.
            10 And he caried me away in the ſpirite to a great and He meaneth the place and ſtately ſeate of the church, ſhadowed out in a mountaine. and high mountaine, and ſhewed me A type of that church which is one, ample or catholike, holy, celeſtiall, built of God, in this verſe: and glorious, in the verſe following. This type propounded generally, is after particularly declared verſe 12. &c. that great citie, that holy Ieruſalem, deſcending out of heauen from God;
            11 Hauing the glorie of God: and her ſhining was like vnto a ſtone moſt precious, as a Iaſper ſtone, that is cleare as cryſtall,
            12 A particular deſcription (as I noted verſe 2.) of the celeſtiall church: firſt by the eſſentiall partes of the ſame) vnder the ſimilitude of a cittie, vnto verſe 22. Secondly by forraine accidents, vnto the end of the chapter. Thirdly by the effectes in the beginning of the next chapter. the eſſentiall parts, are noted the matter and the forme in the whole worke; of theſe the ſuperficies and foundation of the wall are intire partes (as they vſe to be called:) which parts are firſt deſcribed in figure, vnto the fourteenth verſe, and afterwards more exactly. And it had a great wall and high, and had

               According to the number of the tribes, of which chapter 7. For here the outward part is attributed vnto the old teſtament, and the foundation vnto the new teſtament. twelue gates, and at the gates He meaneth the Prophets, who are the meſſengers of God, & watchmen of the Church. twelue Angels, and names written, which are the names of the twelue tribes of the children of Iſraell.
            13 On the Eaſt part there were three gates, and on the North ſide three gates; on the South ſide three gates, and on the Weſt ſide three gates.
            14 And the wall of the citie had That is, foū
                  dation ſtones, according to the number of the gates, as is ſhewed verſe 19. twelue foū
               dations; and in them the Names of the twelue Apoſtles of the Lambe.
            15 A tranſition vnto a more exquiſite deſcription of the parts of the church, by finding out the meaſure of the ſame, by the Angel that meaſured them. Alſo he that talked with me, had a golden reede, to meaſure the citie withall, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
            16 The meaſure and forme moſt equall: in two verſes. And the citie lay A foure ſquared figure hath equall ſides, and oueright corners, and therefore the Graecians call by this name thoſe things that are ſteadie, and of continuance, and perfect. foure ſquare, and the length is as large as the bredth of it; and he meaſured the citie with the reede, vnto twelue thouſand furlongs: and the length, and the bredth, and the height of it are equall.
            17 And he meaſured the wall thereof, an Which number is twelue multiplied by twelue. hundreth fortie and foure cubites, by the meaſure of a man, that is, of the He addeth this, becauſe the Angell had the shape of a man. Angell.
            18 The matter moſt pretious and glittering, which the preſence of God maketh moſt glorious. And ye building of the wal of it was of Iaſper: and the citie was pure gold, like vnto cleare glaſſe.
            19 And the foundations of the wall of the citie were garniſhed with all maner of precious ſtones: the firſt foundation was Iaſper: the ſecond of Saphire: the third of a Chalcedonie: the fourth of an Emeraude:
            20 The fift of a Sardonix: the ſixt of a Sardius, the ſeuenth of a Chryſolite: the eight of a Beryl: the ninth of a Topaze: the tenth of a Chryſopraſus: the eleuenth of a Iacynth: the twelfth of an Amethyſt.
            21 And the twelue gates were twelue margarites,

and euerie gate is of one margarite, and the By ſtreete, he meaneth the brodeſt place of the citie. ſtreete of the citie is pure gold, as the ſhining glaſſe.
            22 And I ſaw no temple therein: for the Lord God almightie & the Lamb are the Temple of it.
            23 The ſecond forme of particular deſcriptiō (as I ſaid v. 12.) from forrein & outward accidents: which are theſe, Light from God himſelfe, in this ver. glorie frō men, verſe 24. perfect ſecuritie frō all harme, verſe 25. Finally ſuch truth and incorruption of glorie (verſe 26.) as can beare and abide with it, nothing that is inglorious, verſe the laſt. 
               
                  Eſa. 60. 19. And this citie hath no need of the ſunne, neither of the moone to ſhine in it: for the glorie of God did light it: and the Lambe is the light of it.
            24 
                  Eſa. 60. 3. And the people which are ſaued, ſhall walke in the light of it: and the Kings of the earth ſhall bring their glorie and honor vnto it.
            25 
                  Eſa. 60. 11. And the gates of it ſhall not be ſhut by day: for there ſhall be no night there.
            26 And the glorie, and honor of the Gentiles ſhall be brought vnto it.
            27 And there ſhall enter into it nothing that infecteth, neither whatſoeuer worketh abomination, or ſpeaketh lyes: but they onely which are written in the Lambes 
                  Eſa. 3. 5. and 20. 12. Phil. 4. 3. booke of life.
         
         
            CHAP. XXII.
            
               1 The riuer of water of life is shewed, 2 and the tree of life. 6. 7. Then followeth the concluſiō of this prophecie, 8 where Iohn declareth, that the things herin contained are moſt true: 13 And now the third time repeateth theſe words, All things come from him, who is the beginning and the end.
               
            
            1 F. IVNIVS. 
               Here is abſolued and finiſhed the deſcription of the eccleſtiall Church (as I ſhewed before, chapter 21. 12.) by the effects in fiue verſes, and then this booke is concluded, in the reſt of the chapter. The effects proceeding from God who dwelleth in the Church, are theſe: the euerlaſting grace of God, in this verſe; the eternall liuing of the godly, as chap. 2. 7. the eternall frutes which the godly bring foorth vnto God, them ſelues, and others, verſe 2. freedome and immunitie from all euill, God him ſelfe taking pleaſure in his ſeruaunts, and they likewiſe in their God, verſe 3. The beholding and ſight of God: and ſealing of the faithfull for all eternitie, verſe 4. the light of God, and an euerlaſting kingdome and glorie, verſe 5. AFter he ſhewed me a pure riuer of liuing water, cleare as criſtall, proceeding out of

the throne of God, and of the Lambe.
            2 And in the midſt of the open place thereof, and on either ſide of the riuer, was the tree of life, bearing twelue manner of fruites; and bringing forth fruite euerie moneth, and leaues to heale the nations with.
            3 And there ſhalbe no more any curſed thing; but the throne of God and of the Lambe ſhall be in it; and his ſeruants ſhall ſerue him:
            4 And they ſhall ſee his face; and his Name ſhalbe in their foreheads.
            5 
                  Eſa. 60. 19. And there ſhalbe no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the ſunne: for the Lord God giueth them light; and they ſhall reigne for euermore.
            6 This whole booke is concluded & made vp, by a confirmation, and a ſalutation. The confirmation hath 3 places; The words of the Angell vnto the 15. verſe; the wordes of Chriſt verſe 16. 17 and the obteſtation made by Saint Iohn from druine authoritie, thence vnto the twentith verſe. By the ſpeach of the Angell this prophecy is cō
                  firmed, vnto the eight verſe: and then he ſpeaketh of the vſe of this booke, in the verſes following. The prophecie is firſt confirmed by the Angell from the nature thereof, that it is faithfull and true: Secondly from the nature of the efficient cauſe, both principall which is God, and inſtrumentall, which is the Angel in this verſe. Thirdly, from the promiſes of God concerning his comming to effect al theſe things, and concerning our ſaluation, verſe 7. Fourthly from the teſtification of Saint Iohn himſelfe, verſe 8. The reſt of the ſpeach of the Angel tending to the ſame end, Saint Iohn interrupted or brake off, by his vnaduiſed act of worſhiping him, in the ſame verſe: which the Angel forbidding, teacheth him that adoration muſt be giuen not to him, but onely to God: 
                     〈◊〉
                   for himſelfe, that he is of ſuch nature and office, as he may not be adored: which thing alſo was in like manner done chap. 19. 10. And he ſaid vnto me, Theſe words are faithfull and true: and the Lord that God of the holy Prophets hath ſent his Angell to ſhew vnto his ſeruāts the things which muſt ſhortly be fulfilled.
            7 Behold, I come ſhortly. Bleſſed is he that obſerueth the wordes of the prophecie of this booke.
            8 And I Iohn am he which ſawe and heard theſe things: and when I had heard and ſeene, 
                  Chap. 19. 10. I fell downe to worſhip before the feete of the Angell which ſhewed me theſe things.
            9 But he ſayd vnto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow ſeruant and of thy brethren

the Prophets, & of them which obſerue the words of this booke: worſhip thou God.
            10 The Angell returneth vnto his former ſpeech: in which he teacheth the vſe of this book both towardes our ſelues in this & the next verſe: and in reſpect of God for declarations of his truth, thece vnto the fifteenth verſe. Moreouer he ſaid vnto me, That is, propound this prophecie openly vnto all, & concoale no part of it The contrary whereunto is commaunded Eſa. 8. 16. and Dan. 8. 26. Seale not vp the words of the prophecie of this booke: for the time is at hand.
            11 An obiection preuented. But there will be ſome that will abuſe this occaſion vnto euill, and will wreſt this ſcripture vnto their owne deſtruction, as Peter ſaith. What then? ſaith the Angell, the myſteries of God muſt not therefore be concealed, which it hath pleaſed him to communicate vnto vs. Let them be hurtfull vnto others, let ſuch be more and more vile in them ſelues, whome this ſcripture doth not pleaſe: yet others ſhall be further cōformed thereby vnto righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe. The care and information of theſe may not be neglected, becauſe of the voluntarie and malicious offence of others. He that doth hurt, let him do hurt ſtil: and he which is filthie, let him be filthie ſtill: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous ſtill: and he that is holy, let him be holy ſtill.
            12 The ſecond place belonging vnto the vſe of this booke, as I ſayde verſe 10. Alſo (ſayth God by the Angell) though there ſhould be no vſe of this booke vnto men: yet it ſhall be of this vſe vnto me, that it is a witneſſe of my trueth, vnto my glorie; who will come ſhortly to giue and execute iuſt iudgement, in this verſe; who haue taught that all theſe things haue their being in me, in the thirteenth verſe; and haue denounced bleſſedneſſe vnto my ſeruaunts in the Church, verſe 14; and reprobation vnto the vngodly, verſe 15. And behold, I come ſhortly; and my reward is with me, 
                  Rom 26. to giue euerie man according as his worke ſhall be.
            13 I am 
                  Chap. 18 17. & 21. 6. Eſa. 41. 48 12. 4. and 44 6. Alpha and Omega, the beginning & the end, the firſt and the laſt.
            14 Bleſſed are they, that do his commaundements; The bleſledneſſe of the godly, ſet downe by their title and intereſt thereunto; and their frute in the ſame. that they may haue intereſt in the tree oflife, and may enter in through the gates into the citie.
            15 But without ſhalbe all dogges, and enchanters, & whoremongers, and murtherers, and idolaters, and whoſoeuer loueth or maketh lyes.
            
               
16 The ſecond place of confirmatiō (as I ſayd verſ. 6.) is the ſpeech of Chriſt ratifying the vocatiō of S, Iohn, and the authoritie of his calling & teſtimonie, both frō the condition of his owne perſon, being God and man, in whō all the promiſes of God are Yea & Amen. 2. Cor. 1. 20. and alſo frō the teſtification of other perſōs: as by the acclamation of the holy ghoſt, who here is as it were an honourable aſſiſtant of the marriage: of the Church as the ſpouſe: and of euerie of the godly as members: and finally from the thing preſent, that of their own knowledge & accord, they are called forth vnto the participatiō of the good things of God, verſ. 17. I Ieſus haue ſent mine Angell, to teſtifie vnto you theſe things in the Churche: I am that roote and that of ſpring of Dauid, and that bright morning ſtarre.
            17 Both the Spirite and the bride ſay, Come. And let him that heareth ſay, Come: and let him that is a thirſt, come: and 
                  Eſa. 55. 2. let whoſoeuer will, take of the water of life freely.
            18 The obteſtation of S. Iohn (which is the third place of the cō
                  firmation, as was noted ver. 6.) ioyned with a curſe or execration, to preſerue the truth of this booke entire & vncorrupted, in two verſes. For I proteſt vnto euery mā that heareth the words of the propheſie of this booke; If any mā ſhall ad vnto theſe things, God ſhall ad vnto him the plagues, that are written in this booke:
            19 And if any man ſhall take away from the words of the booke of this prophecie, God ſhall take away his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy citie, & out of thoſe things which are written in this booke.
            20 A diuine confirmation or ſealing of the obteſtation: firſt from Chriſt auouching the ſame, and denouncing his comming againſt all thoſe that ſhall put their ſacrilegious hands thereunto: then from S. Iohn him ſelfe, who by a moſt holy prayer calleth Chriſt to take vengeance of them. He which teſtifieth theſe things, ſaith, Surely; I come quickely, Amen. Come therefore Lord Ieſus.
            21 The ſalutation Apoſtolicall, which is the other place of the concluſion, as I ſayd verſ. 6. and is the end almoſt of euerie Epiſtle: which we wiſh vnto the Church, and to all the holy and elect members therof, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, vntill his comming to iudgement. Come Lord Ieſus and do it. Amen, againe Amen. The grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt be with you all. Amen.
            
               God onely be honor and glorie.
            
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   