
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The bayte
& ſnare of Fortune.
            Wherin may be ſeen that money
is not the only cauſe of miſchefe
and vnfortunat endes:
but a neceſſary mean to
mayntayne a vertuous
quiet
lyfe.
Treated in a Dialoge betwene
man and
money.
            ¶Imprinted at London, by
Iohn Wayland, at the ſigne
of the Sunne oueragainſt
the Conduite in Fleteſtrete.
            Cum priuilegio per 
                  •
               ep
               
                  •
               e
                  ••
               ium.
         
         
            
            The Prologe.
            
               SAynt Paule Doctor of veritie, ſayeth that
Auarice is the Roote and beginnyng of all euylles:
Algates the men of this tyme preſent, be therto much
enclined. For of all Eſtates fro the hygheſt vnto the
loweſt, all geue theyr ſtudy vnto Auarice, and euery
one deſyreth to haue golde and ſyluer: and for to haue
the ſame they trauayle nyght and daye, by water and
by landꝭ, thynkyng therin to fynde quietnes and reſt, whiche ſhal neuer
be: For in ryches is neuer reaſt. The more that a man hath thereof the
more he deſyreth. For Auarice of the owne nature is vnſaciable, accordyng
to the ſaying of the Sage in the fift Chapter of Eccleſiaſtes. The
couetous man is neuer ſatiſfied. And Horace the Poete ſayeth that the
Coueteus man is alwayes anhungred. And S. Ierome ſayeth that the
looue of worldely goodes is vnſaciable. And Boece in his thyrd booke
of Conſolacion ſayeth that if the man whiche is auaricious had all the
worlde in his dominacion, he woulde not be content: for euer he woulde
deſyer to haue worldly goodes more and more, and principally money,
whiche neuer ſhoulde be noyons vnto man wer not his couetiſe, whiche
euer 
                  •••
               nneth mans harte: For God hath made the ſyluer as well as other
thynges for the ſeruice of man. vnto whome he hath made all thing
ſubiect. But whan the man ſetteth his appetite, and deſyreth to get money
otherwyſe than by ryght and conſcience, that may be called auarice
whiche hath dominion vpon the man aboue reaſon: and ſo it appeareth
that 
                  〈◊〉
               : whiche ſhoulde be mayſtres is the ſeruaunt, and ſhe that ſhould
be ſubiecte, is the ladye, whiche is great blyndnes in man.
            Th
                  •
               s is money mayſtres of the man, and man to money is ſubiecte,
and is therwith ſo abuſed, that he doeth more therefore than for his maker,
or for the health of his ſoule: O faulte of wiſdome, o fault of reaſon,
O faulſe couetiſe thou art cauſe of the perdicion of many men, thou
art ca
                  •
               ſe that infinite euyls be dayly committed in this mortall worlde.
And now to ſhew more playnly that men be enclyned to gather money,
and conſequently be ſubiecte to the ſame, I haue put here in wrytyng a
queſtion made betwene Man and Money, by maner of a Diſputacion,
whiche vary in theyr wordes the one agaynſt the other: For
money woulde ſhewe his great power, and
man ſpeaketh agaynſt hym.
But after great
diſputacion
the man abydeth vanquiſhed becauſe of his
couetous mynde, co
                  ••
               eſſing that it is a
great felicity to haue money
in poſſeſſion.
(⸫) (⸫)
         
      
      
         
            
            The Baite and Snare of Fortune.
            
               Money begynneth.
               
                  
                     O All mankynde deſyrous of honour,
                  That woulde of worldly welth haue iouyſ
                        •
                     aunce
                  Cum hyther to me that am of wurthy valour.
                  I am the prince pereleſſe in puiſſaunce
                  My name is money, that haue in gouernaunce
                  All wurthy faytes to loſe or els to bynde:
                  Ech
                        •
                      man requyreth to haue myne acquayntaunce,
                  For good Fortune by my frendſhip they fynde.
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     o lorde there is, lady, nor chorle of kinde,
                  What for my power and wiſe circumſpeccion,
                  That they ne beare to me a louing minde,
                  And gladly would lyue vnder my proteccion:
                  What man of himſelfe by might or wiſe inſpection,
                  Without my meane can wurke a worthy dede▪
                  
                  None doubtles, for I ſet all in good direccion:
                  Who lacketh money is not like to ſpede.
               
            
            
               Man aunſwereth.
               
                  WYth boaſting wordes thy ſelfe how doeſt thou lau
                        •
                     e,
                  Preſumpcion in thee appereth to be great:
                  Thou art falſe money, full of deceit and fraude.
                  In vaunting wordes is ſet thy full conceite,
                  Of curſednes thou art the chiefe receit:
                  I am the man that ſhall it proue anon,
                  Againſt thy pride ſo ſhall I lay a bayte,
                  And caſt thée forth a bone to pike vpon.
               
               
                  In all the lawes and bokes many one
                  I finde how thou art roote of all miſchief,
                  Through thee full many a wight hath miſgone:
                  For vnto man thou art ſo dere and lyef,
                  That he becummeth a robber, and a thief,
                  For thee forſaking God and algoodnes,
                  And hanged is at laſt for thee with great reprief:
                  This wage be winneth by thy worthines.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  MAn I perceiue thou ſpeakeſt without thy boke▪
                  
                  But I ſhall aunſwere to thy fooliſhnes:
                  Thy wit is nought it ſtandeth all a croke,
                  Thy tounge is racle, thy wit is rechles
                  
                     
Thus to reporte of me ſuche wickednes
                  That neuer knowingly againſt thee did ne ſpake:
                  With me to diſpute thy minde is great (I geſſe)
                  Speke what thou wilt, and anſwere ſhall I make.
               
               
                  Vnto my faite good hede if thou doe take,
                  Who lacketh me he liketh not eaſely,
                  Diſpleaſure and thought doth bring him vnto wrake
                  And ploungeth his hert full ofte in fantaſye:
                  Marchandiſe he ſeeth to ſell, and faine would bye
                  But I am away that euer doe the dede.
                  Than ſinketh his thought in depe melancoly
                  Diſtreſſe and dolour doth cauſe his hert to blede.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  THou ſpeakeſt inough but holde me yet excuſe
                  Thy worde to beleue, for al thine appetite
                  On leaſing is ſet, that man were well abuſed
                  That woulde for thy boſt, and wordes white
                  Haue in the fauoure, loue, or els delyte:
                  For whoſ lyſt to liue at libertie
                  And of diſpleaſure and trouble would be quite
                  Oughte as fro a ſerpent fro thy loue to flie.
               
               
                  All wickednes is wrought by meane of thee
                  As Robberies, rapine, vſury, and ſtrife
                  With fraude, flattery, diſceite and ſubtiltie
                  Brawling and barat, with all miſordered lyfe.
                  Thou raiſeſt debate betwixe the man and wife
                  Thou cauſeſt man oft to ſweare bloud, armes, and braynes
                  And ſodainly at laſt he dieth vpon a knife
                  All for thy loue, thys is a goodly gaynes.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THou ſpeakeſt not well, I tell thee man againe,
                  For who that hath me is honoured as a lorde,
                  A knaue can I make for nede a captaine
                  The great man ſhall lowte (and neuer to remorbe)
                  Vnto the villayne, the wiſe man ſhall accorde
                  Lowly to the foole, his bonet to auale
                  With maſter Doctour in mouth at euery worde
                  And knee to grounde to boote him of his bale.
               
               
                  
                  But he that lacketh my frendſhip in his male
                  Had he the ſtrength of Samſon in his time,
                  The tongue of Tully for to tell his tale,
                  And Salomons wit liuing without crime,
                  Yet for he hath no helpe nor ſuccoure by me
                  The people in play ſhal point him with the finger
                  Loe there goeth a ſemeſypher in algoriſme,
                  There goeth a wretch, a foole, and a barat bringer.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  WEre it not tath I haue intelleccion
                  Reaſon and wiſdum to knowe what is what,
                  Thy fooliſh preſumcion and hardy obieccion
                  Would bring me in doubte what for this or that,
                  Whether I ſhould beleue thy wordes or nat:
                  By iuſt probacion yet truſt I for to finde
                  Good matter inough thy boaſting and barat
                  Clerely to confounde, and make thy reaſon blynde.
               
               
                  Ful oft I thinke and muſe in my mynde
                  Vpon thy faite thou curſed creature,
                  Encombred thou haſt full many of mankynde,
                  As well is founden written in Scripture:
                  Such fantaſie men haue vnto thy falſe figure
                  And ſo deſire thy curſed acquaintaunce
                  That the poore ſoule may ſeke his aduenture,
                  So doſt thou draw them to the diuils daunce.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  BE ſtil man I ſay, for I haue litel Ioye
                  Thus to heare thee Iangle as he that taketh no hede.
                  Who builded London that named was newe Troye
                  But I puiſant peny, that eche man cloth and fede.
                  Euer groweth grace out of my gromel ſede
                  Yorke, Lincolne, Linne, Leyceſtre, Lichfelde, and Lancaſire
                  I bilded Briſtow, Bremingam and Barwik vpon twede
                  Dureīme, Darby, Dorceſtre, Douer, and Dancaſtre.
               
               
                  Wincheſtre, Walden, Worceſtre, Ware, Warwik & Weſtcheſtre
                  Cambryge, Carleil, Couentre, Calais, and Canterbery
                  Bath, Boſton, Bedforde, Bokinghā, Roeſton, and Rocheſter
                  Medlā, Mancheſtre, Malmeſburi, Stawmforde, & Tukeſbury
                  
                     
Southamtō, Sandwith, Sud
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     y, ſa
                        ••
                     t Albōs & Saleſbury
                  Northamton, Newarke, No
                        ••
                     nghā, New Ca
                        ••••
                      vpon Tine
                  Great cauſe may I haue, for to be glad and m
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     ,
                  Sith theſe and thouſandes moe be made by me and mine.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  TO heare thy wordes it is a w
                        •••
                     nes
                  For neuer was noble C
                        •
                     t
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊◊◊〉
                     ,
                  But by the occaſion of thy 
                        •••
                     ſ
                        •
                     dnes
                  Hath been deſtroied ful many 
                        〈…〉
                      C
                        ••••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Howbeit mankinde by great ſubtil
                        ••
                     e▪
                  
                  By diligent laboure and politike prudente
                  Through out the world in euery countrey
                  Hath made many Cities and townes 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Not by thy meane, but by experience
                  Of his pregnant wiſdum in eche op
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     cion▪
                  
                  He made and forged thee by high and 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     
                  
                  Of earth that is matter moſt vile 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Thou geueſt to thy ſelfe a great 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  As profitable to man, which is eche 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Full many a fayre Citie to vtter 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  By thee hath been brought, that 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Money
               
                  GReatly haſt thou erred as manner well a
                        •••
                     ſ
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Me thus to rebuke, and vtterly diſpiſe,
                  Full litel reaſon is in thy head compriſed
                  Me thus to reproue it is no gentil gu
                        •
                     ſe.
                  Great lordes and ladies that be both good and wiſe
                  And al degrees haue me in lane and fauour
                  And gladly a meane would finde and deuiſe
                  My kinde acqueintaunce to purchaſe euery houre.
               
               
                  Thou knoweſt how god the high 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Of earth hath formed man after his 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Of al the worlde he made him gouernoure
                  And after that, I wil not kepe in cage
                  How man made me with croſſe and crowned 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Out of the earth wherof himſelfe he came,
                  Why ſhould man be contrary to me in his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Sith he came of the earth and I came of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Man.
               
                  AS in this caſe thou ſayeſt me trouth in dede,
                  God hath made man of erth a vyle ſubſtaunce
                  This do I beleue as parcell of my crede
                  But than god gaue him ſoule made to his owne ſemblance.
                  With many faire giftes he did him than aduaunce
                  Endowed him with vertue, grace, wyſdome, and reaſon,
                  To order him and his, and do his obſeruaunce
                  Vnto god his maker, whan time requireth and ſeaſon.
               
               
                  A thinge vnreaſonable art thou not worthy two peaſon
                  Vnworthy to be compted of gods high creacion
                  But mā him ſelf the made, whan grace was with him geaſon
                  As nought out of nought, by curſed inſtigacion
                  Of ſubtil Sathanas that gaue him informacion:
                  Than welth, grace and goodnes their roumes gan to reſigne,
                  Thy pride amonges Princes toke ſuch a dominacion
                  That many royall royalmes ben brought vnto ruine.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THough doeſt great wrong ſo ſtrongly me to blame,
                  That god hath made man of the .iiii. Elementes.
                  To ſerue him as his lorde, I fully graunt the ſame,
                  In Geneſis written the mat
                        •
                     er euident is:
                  And man hath made me (what nede theſe argumente
                        •
                     )
                  In ſemblable wyſe to ſerue him at his nede,
                  Liuing by reaſon▪ and as conuenient is
                  Preſeruing his ſoule from vice in worde and dede.
               
               
                  Whan god formed man (thy ſelfe thou mayſt it rede)
                  He gaue him fre will that he in all goodnes
                  Might make here in erth his profit and his ſpede
                  Of me and all other creatures more and les:
                  Syth man hath reaſon, and will of his lightnes
                  Miſuſe me, putting his ſoule in ieopardy,
                  Should I be blamed▪ for his vnſtablenes
                  No god forbid, there is no reaſon why?
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  BE ſtill falſe money, and vnderſtand my ſawes
                  Ful curſed art thou, and made all in diſpite,
                  
                     
Of reaſon, of right, decrees, and all good lawes:
                  For after that man had made the for delite
                  The golden world furthwith was quenched quite,
                  What time all ioye was to the people rife
                  No croſſe nor coyne of the not worth a myte
                  Had they that tyme, and ledde a mery lyfe.
               
               
                  Their Marchandiſe they gaue man chylde and wyfe
                  One thinge for an other by way of Innocence,
                  Al riches was commune without barat or ſtrife
                  Treſours men hated as deth or peſtilence:
                  Ful ioyouſly they lyued without concupiſcence
                  Of the, that art nowe the cauſer of all vyce.
                  Thy curſed coyne and inconuenience
                  So brenneth mennes hertes with fyre of auarice.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THy wordes as Iapes ought wel to be recompted
                  For by thy ſpeche Iſe thou wouldeſt ſuſteyne
                  That one man than, an other not ſurmounted:
                  It is not trouth, for it appereth playne
                  Howe ſum were ſubiectes, and ſum were ſoueraigne,
                  Record I rake in the olde teſtament
                  Of Nembroth the great, as kinge and Capitaine
                  That had great people to him obedient.
               
               
                  Wherfore I ſiluer, as thing expedient
                  Was ſought out and coyned, mankinde to ſuccoure,
                  None Emperoure there is, King, Duke, ne Regent
                  But I muſt vpholde his dignitie and honoure:
                  Who maynteyneth Iuſtyce but myne excellent power?
                  Who poniſheth myſdoers that doe the poer oppreſſe,
                  Who wageth the ſeruaunt who paieth the ſouldeour,
                  But I pu
                        ••
                     ſant 
                        •
                     eny that doth all wronges redreſſe.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  NAy leaue out rebres, and ſay that do all wrong,
                  For when truth is tried that wyl be the concluſion.
                  Is Iuſtice doen by money: for ſhame ſtop thy tong,
                  Such wourdes to pronounce it a great abuſion:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ay Iuſtice by money is brought to clere confuſion.
                  But noble wiſemen that reaſon haue in ſtore
                  
                     With connyng and conſcience, and caſt for no colluſion
                  By theſe is Iuſtice exalted evermore.
               
               
                  But by falſe mean theſe depe men in lore,
                  Haue oft a croſſed cloude caſt afore their ſight,
                  That neuer a true letter written them before
                  Can be vnderſtand, ſo ſtopped is the lyght:
                  The poore mā hath his matter made wrong out of the right,
                  And thervpon is geuen falſe iudgement:
                  Thus iuſtice by thee reuerced lyeth vpright,
                  And law depe in the dyke is dryuen down and drent.
               
            
            
               Money
               
                  AS for an anſwer, I ſay vnto thee man,
                  Parte of thy wordes be true, I doe conſent,
                  Saying that the lawes be ended now and than
                  By great learned men of wiſe entendment.
                  But who ſo euer before them doth preſent
                  His righteous matter without my help in hande
                  His caſe vp ſo downe is caſt incontinent,
                  The grounde therof they can not vnderſtande.
               
               
                  But he that hath treaſure, golde, ſiluer, houſe and lande,
                  He ſhall be obeyed as lord with yonge and olde,
                  That man may leade the world well in a bande.
                  For eche man to him geueth, and ſayeth, good mayſter holde.
                  Who ſo hath De quibus, hath pleaſures manyfolde,
                  Him nedeth not to care for children ne for wife,
                  For trouble or vexacion, for hunger or for colde,
                  He taketh no thought, but leadeth a mery life.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  The more we diſpute, the falſer doo, I fynde
                  Thy wordes peuiſh peny, for man without meaſure
                  Hath payne for thy ſake, though his deſirous mynde.
                  Bothe nyght and daye with all his buſie cure,
                  Ouer hylles and dales (alas poore creature)
                  He rydeth, he runneth, and ouer ſea he ſayleth,
                  He dyggeth, he delueth, and dolour doth endure
                  For peny, yet his peine ſumtime him nought auaileth.
               
               
                  If man would marke wel how peny him preuayleth,
                  A mer'uaylous thyng it wer for to conſider.
                  
                     To ſerue hys maker both nyght and day he fayl
                        •
                     th,
                  But mynde of money hym draweth he careth not whyder
                  He renneth for money now hyther and now thyder,
                  More daungerous in dede thou arte and poyſonable
                  Than is the venym of ſerpent, toade, or ſpyder,
                  Through mynde of money is man made myſerable.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  IF man woulde be content with ſuffiſaunce
                  Of worldly ſubſtaunce, hauiour, and ryches
                  He ſhoulde for certayne lyue without greuaunce,
                  Without ſuthe trauayle, peyne, and buſines,
                  Happy ſhoulde he bee me peny to poſſes,
                  To lyue for euer in ioy, diſporte and pleaſure.
                  And yf hym lyſt, ſo gouerne hym doutles,
                  To be without all rancour and diſpleaſure.
               
               
                  But ſith he cannot be content with meaſure,
                  Much trauaile and payne behoueth it him to take
                  Pennies to purchaſe with riche ſubſtaunce and treaſure.
                  Quietnes and reſt for me he doth forſake,
                  with trauaile and paine he is content to wake
                  Becauſe he knoweth my puiſſaunt excellence
                  Me to aſſemble with meanes that he can make,
                  He doeth him endeuour with all his diligence.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  HE that on money ſo fixeth his entent
                  More wicked he is than euer was Iudas,
                  Leading his life in ſorow and tourment,
                  And euer a bydyng a miſerable caas,
                  Of vi
                        •
                     es an heape, he hath both more and laſſe,
                  As couetiſe and pride, with claſping nygardy,
                  Trechery alſo him ſhall not ouerpas,
                  Enuy nor wrath, nor wretthed vſury.
               
               
                  In him is neyther law, prudence, nor pollicy
                  To do a good dede he neuer can haue leaſure:
                  All grace and goodnes haue leaue to paſſe by,
                  His mynde is ſet hollie of riches to haue ſeaſure,
                  In deteſtable vites is ſet his only pleaſure,
                  And goodes for to aſſemble in great aboundaunce,
                  
                     
Wherof he hath no mynde againe to make diſſeaſure,
                  But poore men to puniſhe vnto the ou
                        •
                     traunce.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  TO heare thee ſpeake, it ſemeth plaine in dede
                  That man without me with ſinne is neuer blent:
                  That is not ſo, nowe take vnto me hede.
                  Whan Sathā with ſubtiltie doeth mannes mynde preuent,
                  And than of his lyghtnes inclineth his entent
                  Aduertence to geue vnto his falſe temptacion,
                  And after doeth the dede with foule and vile conſent,
                  Shall I beare the blame for his abhominacion?
               
               
                  Nowe marke well my ſaying, after the worldes creacion
                  Firſt was made Adam, as father of mankinde:
                  Who fell not long after to preuaricacion.
                  His makers commaundement as creature vnkinde,
                  Right ſinfully he tranſgreſſed, ſo pride made him blynde:
                  Cain after mourdered Abel the meane tyme was not long.
                  That tyme was I vncoyned, therfore man chaunge thy mind
                  To blame me of all euils, in dede thou doſt great wrong.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  This is a faire excuſe if it might be ſo taken,
                  Yet infinite euils thou cauſeſt and offence:
                  Goddes high commaundement for thee is oft forſaken,
                  His lawes be broken by diſobedience.
                  Men drawe to them Money with all their diligence,
                  By barat, by ſubtiltie, by rapine and deceyt:
                  The poore thou defouleſt by forſe and violence,
                  That beg muſt he nedes, thou holdeſt him ſo ſtraite.
               
               
                  Enuy thou raiſeſt among them that be great,
                  That many Royalmes therby decay and be deſtroyed,
                  Slaine are the Captaynēs, and wrath lyeth in awayte
                  Til cities and townes are periſhed and annoyed:
                  On miſery and miſchief thus money is employed,
                  For money man applieth him to all abhominacion.
                  Grace and good maners for thee he doeth auoyde:
                  No reaſon can be layed to this, nor replication.
               
            
            
               
               Money.
               
                  If I lacked reaſon againſt thee to reply,
                  My matter wer lyke ful porely to be ſtayed,
                  Yf all theſe euilles and wretched miſery
                  Myght be founde in me that thou haſt to me layed
                  In thee wer than the ryght, it myght not be denayed:
                  But man of his nature he is ſo myſerable
                  with all the worldes wealth he can not be appayed
                  His mynde euermbreis ſo inſaciable.
               
               
                  The deuylles temptation to him is acceptable
                  That Creſus the kyng was not ſo couetous:
                  In all his dedes than is he varyable,
                  A brawler, a baratour, and oft ſedicious
                  And yet wurſt of all he is ſo letherous
                  That he 
                        〈…〉
                      conſumeth in fowle fornication.
                  Beware yet I aduiſe him, for pockes be perylous,
                  Leaſt theyr vnclenly corroſgues hym cal to conſummation.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  YF I of my lyghtnes would to thee condeſcende,
                  Thou wouldeſt blaſe thyſelf as creture good and true.
                  Nay glutton, the wynde ſtandeth in an other ende:
                  Thou makeſt women wanton, and to auoyd vertue,
                  For thee they ſell theyr bodyes, and ſo they do enſue
                  With vicious lyuyng theyr ſenſuall appetite:
                  Yet lechery at laſt theyr bale ſumtyme doeth brue,
                  That oft they lyue in dolour after theyr foule delyte.
               
               
                  Spouſe
                        •
                     reche with ſum is counted not a myte,
                  So money may be gotten they care not how or what:
                  Fyne keuerchefes as ſilke, and ſmockes as ſnow ſo white,
                  Hattes, kyrtles, gounes & gyrdles, this geat muſt nedes be gat
                  With brouches, beades, and ringes, and who ſhal pay for that?
                  The huſbandes be ſo poore, they lacke both golde and gages:
                  To 
                        •
                     inde therfore ſum frendſhip where florens be more fat,
                  Oft fall they to aduoutry, and breake theyr mariages.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  ANd I make aunſwere apertly yet agayne
                  That thy woordes be neyther true nor ſtable:
                  I am in no wiſe cauſe▪ I tell it thee for certayne
                  
                     
Though woman by her wit and mynde that is mutable
                  Doe otherwiſe than right, as frayle and variable,
                  Two thinges in women make hourely theyr inuaſion,
                  Enducinge them euer to warkes vituperable:
                  For of all vertue theſe two be chief abraſion.
               
               
                  The fyrſt may be called the falſe perſwaſion
                  Of Sathanas that neuer ceaſeth them to aſſayle:
                  The other is ambition, theſe two be the chief occaſion
                  That man nor woman in vertue can preuayle,
                  And womens heartes of nature be ſo frayle,
                  Light as the leaf, and mouyng as the wynde,
                  Redy to conſent to thinges of none auayle,
                  That they of afterclaps haue no thought nor mynde.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  FVll curſed art thou money and muche vnfortunate,
                  And founden waſt thou fyrſt in euyll time and tyde,
                  The kardes, the dice, and other plaies inordinate,
                  By thee ben vp brought, wherby God is renyed,
                  And newly with blaſphemies and othes crucified.
                  By thee are committed vices out of numbre,
                  His poore ſoule to peryſh to man thou art a gyde,
                  And death with euill ende at laſt him doth obumbre.
               
               
                  Thou teacheſt him the maner his ſoule to encombre,
                  Wherby he renieth God, and wilfully offendeth,
                  For thee by night and daye withouten ſlepe or ſlombre,
                  All vices he auaunceth, no vertue he entendeth.
                  The poore for all his pouertie by thee his porcion ſpendeth,
                  The world goeth to wretchednes by thee, and to deſtruction.
                  By thee to fowle enormitie all goeth, and there it endeth,
                  For to all wretched wickednes thou art induction.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THou ſpeakeſt I perceyue without conſideracion.
                  So cruelly to blame me of all enormitie:
                  Mine armes in dede thou blaſeſt in an homely faſhion.
                  Marke well my wurdes a whyle now I pray thee,
                  Where ſeeſt thou any man that is of grauitie
                  Blaſpheming his God, or ſwearing by his name?
                  Neuer in thy life, this leſſon take of me,
                  But riotours and rybaldes that haue no dread of ſhame.
               
               
                  
                     
The wiſe man that loueth his honour and good fame
                  Blaſphemyng his maker thou ſhalt hym neuer here,
                  In play, diſporte, and paſtyme, in gladnes and in grame,
                  He hath reſpect to ſadnes, his reaſon is ſo nere.
                  But baratours and brayneles brybours met in fere,
                  Theyr maker they diſmember, and on his name they wunder,
                  At table, at tauerne, at churche, and euery where:
                  Great horror is to hear, howe they rent hym aſunder.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  THou myghteſt be a minion to kepe good company,
                  For tounge thou haſt ynough thy matter to ſuſteyne:
                  If I vnto thy purpoſe conſent woulde or applie,
                  Thou wouldeſt ſay here that Ieſus our kyng and ſouerayne
                  Is not by thee offended, yes yes, I tell the plaine,
                  By night of tunes a million, and muche more by the daie.
                  Who woulde to thee geue credence a foole he wer certaine,
                  For thou art full of ficcion, thy wurdes be falſe alwaie.
               
               
                  But anſwer nowe my queſtion penie I thee praie,
                  That thinkeſt thee ſo myghty, ſo ſterne, ſo gay and ſtoute:
                  Yelde me a ſolucion to this that I ſhall ſaie,
                  Concerning a matter wherof I ſtande in doute:
                  Thou ſayeſt that by thy maiſtrie thou bringeſt muche aboute,
                  And of thy wurthie valour great 
                        •
                     oſt doeſt thou blowe:
                  What is thy puiſſaunt power, I praie thee ſpeake it oute?
                  For this is all the matter that I woulde of thee know.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  WEll doe I vnderſtand thy purpoſe and intention,
                  And alſo perceiue theffect of thy demaunde:
                  It is not ſo harde, nor of ſo high inuencion,
                  But yf thou wer in Tems in midwarde of the ſande,
                  I ſhoulde full well aſſayle it ere thou mighteſt cum to land▪
                  
                  My valour and power thy queſtion is to knowe,
                  It is no littel matter thou ſhalt it vnderſtande,
                  I am of noble fame, beloued with high and lowe.
               
               
                  Vpon the churche of God great ſubſtance I beſtowe,
                  The miniſters that ſeuer hym be all at my wages:
                  The poore haue my ſuccour in hunger, froſt, and ſnowe,
                  I feede both horſe and man in holy pilgrimages.
                  
                     
For faier yong luſty maydens I purchaſe mariages:
                  Whan Churches and chapels be falling in dekay,
                  I muſt make reparacion: with maſters and with pages
                  My helpe muſt nedes be had, or els there is no pay.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  WIth wordes thou wouldeſt ſuſteine that no good dede
                  Is doen without thee, thine aide, or aſſiſtens:
                  Which all I denye, and ſhall it proue for nede
                  That euer been thy wordes vnworthy of credence:
                  Vntrue art thou euer, and by thy falſe pretens,
                  Doeſt teache men the trace of all iniquitie.
                  Prouoking him euen to inconueniens,
                  And plounging his heart in great perplexitie.
               
               
                  Affirme wouldeſt thou faine by thy peruerſiti
                        •
                     .
                  That man cannot be ſaued from endles paine
                  Without thy fauour, thine aide and amitie,
                  Wherin I ſay no reaſon doeth remaine:
                  Full many a ſoule (more pitie it is certaine)
                  Is damned by thee to euerlaſting fire.
                  And many one moe in ioye ſhould euer raigne
                  If they ſhould leaue thy loue in hote deſier.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  REgarde man and conſider as reaſon wil diſcerne,
                  How I as of my ſelfe can nothing doe ne ſay:
                  In thee lieth al the dede, that haſt me to gouerne,
                  Wherfore if thou of thy lightnes thee liſt by night or day
                  To leade me that am blinde no ſtreite but croked way,
                  The fault if we fall is thine, not mine in dede.
                  To order me aright it is no childes play,
                  Looke therfore ere thou leape, the better ſhalt thou ſpede.
               
               
                  I am the poſt and piller vnto all Adams ſeede,
                  The father of the faith ſumtime is made by me,
                  The Pope I meane, Gods vicar, and captaine of his crede,
                  Great Emperours and Kinges I crowne in mageſtie,
                  Duke, Marquiſe, earle, baron, and Lordes of eche degree.
                  Riche Cardinals, Archbiſhops, the biſhop and his Deane,
                  Abbot, Priour, proueſt, the bailife with his fee
                  All that haue promocion may thanke me and my meane.
               
            
            
               
               Man.
               
                  O Money full of vanitie, thou makeſt me all diſmayed,
                  Conſidering and knowyng thy fraude and faculties,
                  Wherwith full nere the worlde is deſtroyed and decayed:
                  Men be I graunt full of vice and vanities,
                  In townes, in boroughes, in caſtels and cities:
                  But this notwithſtandyng at laſt Atropos kerueth
                  A ſunder theyr heartes, as ſhe that without pitie is,
                  So goeth the corps to earth, the ſoule as it deſerueth.
               
               
                  By arrogance oultrageous thy tounge on vanting ſwerueth,
                  Saving that by money be pourchaſed high eſtates,
                  Bothe Emperour and Kyng at laſt by death he ſterueth,
                  That auayleth it then theyr floreyns and ducates?
                  Eche prince and prelate the darte of death chekmates.
                  Record may be taken of Ceaſar and Pompeus,
                  Of Alexander, of Arthure, and Hector paſt theyr dates,
                  Of Charlemayn, gentle Ioſue, and Iudas Machabeus.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THy wyſedome to redreſſe, and ſpirites to reuiue,
                  And of thy troubled reaſon to make a reformacion,
                  Of Adam thy fyrſt father ſumwhat I ſhall diſcryue.
                  Immortall was he made by God at his creation,
                  But after that by Sathanas ſubtyl inſtigacion,
                  He fed hym with the frute, therwith he dyd tranſgreſſion,
                  And ſo becam he mortal, for death tooke dominacion
                  And mortall ſtill continueth of man the hole ſucceſſion.
               
               
                  Sith death on father Adam thus tooke his fyrſt poſſeſſion,
                  He proudely executeth his priuilege eche houre
                  On prelate, prince and poore man he vſeth his oppreſſion,
                  Indifferently he dealeth as wel with ryche as poure,
                  As ſoone the young as olde he dayly doeth deuour.
                  To caytyfes he is comfort for al diſeaſe he cureth.
                  Aboue all kynges and Capitanes he is a conqueront,
                  His pryde ſhall neuer periſh whyle the worlde endureth.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  O money all thy wurdes I do well vnderſtand,
                  But nothyng to my pourpoſe doe I in them eſpy,
                  Thy ſayinges to deny ſtyll will I take in hand,
                  
                     
And ſum what on thy backe of charge yet lay ſhall I.
                  I knowe to thyne opinion eche perſon will applye,
                  For al men are glad to haue thyne alliaunce,
                  The poore is deceyued, the ryche hath gaynes therby,
                  Men fauoure thy faulſe fygure and haue therin affiaunce.
               
               
                  The rychman oppreſſeth the pore by his puiſſaunce:
                  And whan the poore fyndeth hym ſelf at indigence,
                  Wrongfully intreated and dryuen to penaunce,
                  His reaſon than he leaſeth, his wit and intelligence,
                  Turmentyng hymſelf by great impacience:
                  His maker he blaſphemeth, all halowes he deſpyteth.
                  And who cauſeth all this inconuenience,
                  But mony, that euer to miſchyfe men encyteth.
               
            
            
               Mony.
               
                  THe ryche peraduenture oppreſſeth nowe and than,
                  The pore man in dede: but who is cauſe of this?
                  Couetiſe and auarice the daughters of Sathan,
                  Euermore entiſing a man to w
                        •
                     cke amis:
                  The Church they deſpoyle, the poore the poſte may kis,
                  For nothyng they leaue hym, to plaine hym nought auayleth.
                  Shal I than beare the blame? no lay it where it is:
                  Laye the blame on rapine that ſo vniuſtly dealeth.
               
               
                  I knowe it of trouth, whan drede mannes mynde aſſayleth.
                  When he draweth in age to fall in pouerty,
                  Conſidering howe peny in purſe hym much preuaileth,
                  As neybour that is neceſſary in eche neceſſity,
                  His fauour and affection enclyneth muche to me,
                  And good reaſon why: for who that may not haue
                  To helpe hym in his age, in carefull caſe is he,
                  An hundred tymes a day he wyſheth for his graue.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  INough haſt thou pronounced, nowe ſhal I thee confounde:
                  By thee as I haue ſayde, was loſt the worlde of golde.
                  But no we marke wel the wurdes that I ſhal tel thee rounde,
                  By thee the gentyll Ieſus vnto the Iewes was ſolde,
                  Whych after his great paynes and paſſions manyfolde
                  Was ſtretched on a tree, and naked therto nayled,
                  Beſt aied he was by Iudas, for thyrty penies tolde,
                  Thy curſed coyne with couetiſe ſo ſtrongly him aſſayleth.
                  
                     
Great cauſe hath now the S
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     ot to wepe & to bewaile it,
                  That euer thou waſt founden or fro the erth out tried:
                  For to haue been vnborne it had hym more auayled,
                  Than to haue 
                        •
                     eought the treaſon wherby his maſter died.
                  But where is now the traytour, the thefe, the homicide▪
                  
                  With Sathan and his feres in the infernall glede.
                  In perdurable paynes behoueth him to abyde,
                  For loue of thee faulſe money loe thus he hath his mede.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  
                     I Se thy hart is great, with wurdes thou woldeſt defame me
                  Reproching me that Ieſus ſhould be by me betrayed:
                  With helpe of curſed Iſcariot vniuſtly doeſt thou blame me,
                  Thou doeſt miſtake the matter, vntruly haſt thou ſayed,
                  Thou layeſt on me the blame, but holde thee man appayed,
                  The trouth of the ma
                        •
                     ter I ſhal to thee expres.
                  Three cauſes of his death in dede there may be layed,
                  That he was ſoulde by treaſon as fyrſt I wyll confes.
               
               
                  The Iewes wer much diſdaynous and ful of wickednes,
                  Al ſoubtilties they ſearched, they ſet their falſe intent
                  To death to haue him iudged they brought their falſe witnes
                  Vnto their Prouoſt 
                        •
                     ylate their prince they dyd preſent,
                  Who to his condemnacion dyd finally conſent,
                  For drede to be depriued and put out from his office,
                  Though ſound were none occaſion, on Chriſt he gaue ſentence
                  Great crymes are thus committed by meane of auarice.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  SO perfitely diſpute agaynſt thee can not I,
                  But thou doeſt aſſoyle the ſame incontinent.
                  To all my wurdes full wel thou doeſt reply.
                  With apprebacion right conuenient.
                  And ſo I do perceyue as by mine owne iudgement▪
                  
                  If man with his money would be ſo reaſonable
                  To vſe it in vertue, and with a good entent,
                  The vſage therof ſhuld neuer be dampnable.
               
               
                  But when man of him ſelfe is ſo inſaciable
                  To couet worldly goodes without reaſon or meaſure,
                  Ful wretched is he doubtles, and more than miſerable
                  Of his abhominacion it is a great diſpleaſure,
                  
                     
A man to haue money, welth, and worldly treaſure
                  In vertue to auaunce him, and vices to auoyde:
                  Of his welth and welfare all other may haue pleaſure,
                  So he him croſſe from couetiſe for doubte to be acloyde.
               
            
            
               Money.
               
                  THree thinges there be to man as venim poyſonable
                  Whan they be all aſſembled the man for to aſſayle:
                  The fyrſt is age the croked with ſtouping limmes vnſtable,
                  On man he daily crepeth, no watching may auayle:
                  And ſicknes is the ſecond that doeth the ſtrength to fayle,
                  The colour he conſumeth, all pleaſure he ſubdueth,
                  The thyrde is paynfull pouertie, theſe thre be ſhreude catayle.
                  Whan theſe be met in man theyr metyng ſore he rueth.
               
               
                  I ſay for my concluſion, all ſolace him enſueth
                  That hath of pence plentie to take whan time requireth,
                  He may lyue out of daunger, for euer his ioye renueth,
                  But poore men that be penyles melancholy them fyreth,
                  The poore oppreſt with pouertie ful of this death deſyreth,
                  So dulleth him his dolour, of God taketh he no hede,
                  That after all his miſery he wretchedly expireth
                  To ſteale, to beg or borow, man is compelled for nede.
               
            
            
               Man.
               
                  VVorldly goodes by ſuffiſaunce to man is neceſſary,
                  To take them at his nede and ſerue him in goodnes,
                  But yet he muſt regarde, for drede his welth miſcary,
                  That all his goodes be got by way of rightouſnes.
                  Let God alwayes be ſerued before all buſines,
                  In gatheryng of his goodes man may not vſe deceate,
                  Goodes kept agaynſt al right, fy fy on ſuch ryches,
                  The pore muſt be relyued with clothyng, drinke and meate.
               
               
                  Pride maye not bee exalted becauſe the goodes be greate,
                  In ſumptouſnes of clothing let meaſure be a mean,
                  Let reaſon ſhape the faſhion, not ouer large ne ſtrayte,
                  All prodigall expences is wiſedome to refrayne.
                  For he that is exceſſiue a caytyfe ſhal remayne.
                  Whan Right hath gadered riches, let Reaſon than expende it
                  In vertue, to the honour of God our ſoueraine,
                  So order we our money that God be not offended.
               
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            The Author.
            
               REgarde well all my Lordes that ſhall this treatiſe reade
               Of man and his money, this is the diſputacion,
               Great reaſō make they both, who to the ſame taketh hede,
               Euer him boaſteth money as high in reputacion,
               Recording vp his valour, but man mak
                     ••
                   de
                     •
                  ega
                     •
                  ion.
               Vnto all men my reaſon I ſay as I haue thought,
               Solas is moſt in ſeaſon whan ſiluer is vnſought.
            
            
               By penny to preferment many a man is brought
               In borough, towne and citie, all men of eche eſtate
               Enforce them ſelfe to pleaſe him, the poore is ſette at nought,
               Succour he ſeketh, but ſiluer and he be at debate.
               Therfore to make concluſion I ſay now at my gate,
               Of great good dedes my Money full manye be done doubtles,
               Neuertheles yet is it cauſe of many a wyckednes.
               Explicit nomen authoris.
            
            
               Good Counſayle
               
                  GEt thy goods truly, Spende them preciſely.
               Set thy goods duly, Lende thou them wiſely.
               True getting, Ciſe ſpending,
               Due ſetting, Wiſe lending,
               Haue 
                     •
                  e little or much, Kepeth a manne full rutche
               Vntyll hys endyng.
            
            Finis.
            
         
      
   