
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A ſchole of wiſe Conceytes, Wherin as euery Conceyte hath wit, ſo the moſt haue much mirth, Set forth in common places by order of the Alphabet.
            
            Tranſlated out of diuers Greke and Latine Wryters, by THOMAS BLAGE ſtudent of the Queenes Colledge in Cambridge.
            
               Printed at London, by Henrie Binneman, dwelling in Knight rider ſtreate, at the ſigne of the Marmayd. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            The names of the Authors vſed in this Booke.
            
               LAurentius Abſtemius.
               Aulus Gellius.
               Plinius Secundus Nouocomenſis.
               Nicolaus Gerbellius Phorcenſis.
               Petrus Crinitus.
               Angelus Politianus.
               Aeſopus.
               Gabrias.
               Gulielmus Gowdanus.
               Anianus.
               Ioannes Antonius Campanus.
               Horatius.
               Gerardus Lew.
               Poggius.
               Bebelius.
               Braſitanus.
               Adrianus Barlandus.
               Eraſmus Roterodamus.
               Hermanus.
               Rimitius.
            
         
         
            
            Virtutū non minus quàm literarum ſplendore clariſsimo viro D. Guilielmo Cheſter equiti aurato, ſalutem, & in agnita veritate conſtantem zelum, à Domino IESV, vnico omnium piorum ſeruatore, Thomas Blage Cantabrigienſis optat, atque ex animo precatur.
            
               
                  OMnes qui hac tempestate elucubrationum ſuarum, fructu aliquo Reipub. prodeſse volunt (vir ornatiſſime) id mihi polliceri videntur, imò praeſtare meritò debent, vti omnino aliquid in lucem proferant, quod ad Christiani hominis inſtitutum, aut alioqui ad bonos mores componendos pertineat. Me verò ſi quiſpiam rogitet cur 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               potiſſimum transferre aggrediar, huic ita reſponſum volo: Quia tātum in ſe 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               diſciplinae ad corruptiſſimos noſtri ſoeculi mores emēdandos complectantur, adeo vt vel minimi quispiam iuditij, in his aliquantiſper verſatus, meliora proſequi, deteriora fugere diſcat: at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hoc citra laborem, quod in locos communes redigantur, & vnicui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   rei ſua Fabula (quantum

potui) vere accommodetur. Proinde amicorum praecibus compulſus, hoc opus aggredi, abſolutum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in lucem aedere, Patronum aliqucm mihi quaerere decreui, ſub cuius anguſto nomine hic Libellus exiret: cum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   animi oculos, huc, illuc, non parum volutaſsem, tu mihi tandem prae alijs magis arriſisti, tum nonnullis de cauſis, quas impreſentiarum omitto, tum quia inter caeteros clariſſimae huius Ciuitatis ornatiſſimes vires, nominis tui ſplendor benè audiat: ſaxit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnipotens Deus, vt indies, quoad fieri poteſt, vna cum nomine cuncta foeliciter cedant. Accipe igitur pro tuo in nos ſtudio, haec (licet exigua) & remiſſis interim grauioribus curis, haec leniora perlege. Gratius enim animi mei 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , aut luculentius meae ergate obſeruantiae ſymbolum dare nequeo. Supereſt vt Chriſtum Ieſum comprecemur, tibi vt & vitam, & incolumitatem largiatur, & iſtum animum quem indidit, ſemper in maius prouehat. Ʋale. Cantabrigiae vigeſimo Decembris. Anno partae ſalutis 1569.
         
         
            
            Ad eundem 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
         
         
            
            A Dialogue betwene the Author and the Printer.
            
               Author.
               AS I did muſing lie,
               with ſundrie thoughtes oppreſt,
               Séeking to ſalue my carefull minde,
               of paine to be redreſt:
               And pondring how my youth
               full ydiely I had ſpent,
               In ſcilence only wrapped vp,
               my minde it did torment.
               From darkneſſe vnto light
               I thought it beſt to call,
               By ſetting forth ſome little booke,
               which profite might vs all.
               And that I did intende
               is brought now to effect.
               At ydle houres I did it penne
               as time would me direct.
               The worke you plainely ſée,
               frende Printer what it is,
               Declare if printing it deſerue,
               and what there is amis.
            
            
               Printer.
               Your meaning I perceiue,
               your purpoſe I allowe,
               
                  
In that you are ſo diligent
               to proſecute your vowe.
               And as in ages all,
               thoſe haue their prayſes due,
               Which painfully do runne their race,
               and idleneſſe eſchue:
               So can I not miſlyke
               your noble enterpriſe:
               Which ſéeke to helpe your countreymen,
               with this your fyne deuiſe.
               But ſhall I tell you playne,
               herein what is my mynde?
               Be thinke this worke was done before,
               and it in print I fynde:
               For Eſope as you knowe,
               already engliſht is:
               And what doth yours, but taſte of him?
               naught do I ſée but his.
            
            
               Author.
               This briefly vnderſtande,
               that Eſope is not laſt
               In this my booke, nor only he
               alone doth ſtande agaſt:
               But ſundry writers elſe
               aboute him here do ſtande,
               Both wittie, learned, eloquent,
               
                  
as hath ben tane in hande.
               Beſides, if well you marke,
               comparyng that with myne,
               It is as neare as Eaſt to Weaſt,
               and droſſe to Syluer fine.
               Vncomely tales in that are founde,
               and moſt abſurde to reade,
               Of reaſon voyde, of mirth bereft,
               to no good ende they leade,
               No head nor foote in them is had,
               but ſet confuſedly,
               On Eſope falſly forged tales,
               what man can it denye?
               As in the lyfe of Xanthus wyfe,
               and others he doth write
               So rudely, falſly, fooliſhly,
               how then ſhould this delite?
               Of Eſope that I write,
               the Greeke text doth allowe.
               Diſſenting cleane from that you thinke,
               let this content you nowe.
               In common place it is reduced,
               applying as I myght,
               So truely, vnto euery thing
               his proper place and right.
               From nintéene authors elſe,
               I haue ſelected out,
               
                  
Their fine deuiſe, their ſayings wiſe,
               their pleaſant déedes and ſtout.
               The truth hereof you heare,
               firſt trie, then iudgement giue:
               If contrary you finde to this
               then do not me beleue.
            
            
               Printer.
               I haue compared ſince
               your doings vnto his,
               And contrarie to that I thought,
               I fynde that nowe it is:
               Beſides vncomely tales,
               and falſly forged Fables,
               Wherwith his booke repleniſht is,
               perceyue I many bables.
               For yours and his do farre
               in euery caſe diſſent,
               I ſée from whom you doe deriue,
               your doings and intente.
               To anſwer your demaund
               full readie am I preſt,
               And will hereafter when you liſt,
               accompliſhe your requeſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the gentle Reader, in the commendation of Fables.
            
               AS I reuolued in my minde the ſundrie kindes of Writers, which for the profit of Man haue put in remembrance their imaginations, they that haue writ Fables are to be accounted with the reſte: for they haue not onely wonderfully delighted the harts of men, but alſo haue more allured them to doe thinges both good and profitable with their Fables, than Philoſophers with their preceptes. For they with ſuch a ſweetneſſe do ſo pierce the hartes of the Readers, and by ſimilitudes do declare (whiche are of much force to moue affection) what men ought to take, and what to refuſe, that thereby they are compelled, againſt their wils to agree vnto them. For the minde is diſdaynfull to heare, neyther will it eaſely abyde things profitable and honeſt, excepte they bee poudered with ſome merry ieſte Hereunto beareth witneſſe a certein Orator of Athens, who on a tyme ſpeaking to the Athenians, when he perceyued them leſſe attentiue, required them

that they would vouchſafe to heare a Fable: they were contented: then he began thus: Ceres, the Swallowe and the Egle ſometime iorneyed togither, when they were come to a riuer, the Swallowe flue ouer, and the Eele ſwam through the riuer: when he hadde ſo ſayd he held his peace, then they aſked him what Ceres didde? Your Gods (quod he) are offended at you whiche will not heare them that counſell you for your profit, but if they tell any tales ye heare them willingly. What force fables are of to moue affection, I could declare by many examples, yet will I propound but three. The inhabitants of Samos would haue put their ruler to death, whome Aeſope diſſuaded ſaying: As a Foxe paſſed ouer a riuer, he was driuen into a ditch wher he ſtucke ſo faſt in the mudde, that he could not eſcape, whō the flies ſtinged: the Hedgehog ſeing him there, moued with compaſſion, aſked him if he ſhoulde driue the flies from him. No (quod he) for theſe are full with my bloud and can litle trouble me, but if thou ſhouldeſt dryue them away, other hunger ſterued flies wil occupie their romes, and ſuck out all the bloud that is left within me. The like shall happen to you O Samians,
               
for if ye ſlaye your Ruler whiche is ſo wealthie, ye muſt needes choſe others, which whiles they enriche them ſelues, shall poll you of all that this man hath left: wherwith all the Samians being moued, left off their purpoſe. By the like meanes was Tiberius Caeſar perſuaded, when he appointed for euery day Magiſtrates, wherevpon (as Ioſephus telleth) the Countrey of Iurie was gouerned by Cratus and Pilatus onely by the ſpace of twentie yeares. For (as Statius ſaith) he that ruleth but a litle while, sheweth ſmal fauour to the people. The Himerians ſomtime minded to choſe Captaine of their armie Phalaris the tyrant of Agrigentum, whome Steſichorus the Poet with this Fable diſcouraged from their purpoſe, ſaying: A horſe fed alone in a medow, at length came a Harte thither and ſpoyled it: wherevpon the Horſe tooke the aduiſe of man, by what meane he might be reuenged, to whome the man ſayde: If thou wilt take a bytte in thy mouth and ſuffer me armed to gette vpon thy backe, whoſe counſell he followed, and by his helpe put the Harte to flight and became the conquerer, but from that tyme forth he could not rid his mouth from the

byt nor the man from his backe. Euen ſo (ſayde Steſichorus) the like shall happen to you, if ye choſe Phalaris your captayne, for your enimies ye shall ſubdue, but ye shall be in bondage to this Tyraunt for euer: with which wordes the Himerians being diſcouraged, forſoke the counſell to choſe ſuche a Captayne, what time the people of Rome ſeparated themſelues from the Senators, bicauſe they payd tribute and were combred with warfares, did not Agrippa Menenius turne them from their purpoſe with this fable? Sometime (quoth he) ye Romaines, the members of man perceyuing the belly to be ſlouthfull, fell at variance with her and determined to giue her no longer any ſuccor. It happened, that, bicauſe they denied her nouriſhment, they became faynt, whervpon they were at one againe. In like maner the Senate and people of Rome are as the belly and members, whiche neede one of anothers helpe, and as by diſcord they perishe, ſo by concord they are of ſtrength: By whiche Tale the people turned from their purpoſe and became friends again with the Senate. Therfore not without good cauſe both the Greeke and Latin Poets, as Heſiodus and

               Horace, haue mingled ſuch Fables amongſt their workes, and alſo the chiefeſt and famous Philoſophers, as Plato, Ariſtotle, and Plutarche, with many moe, haue highly comended them, whoſe opinion was, that they much auayled to the inſtruction of a moral and ciuill lyfe: wherefore Leouicenus and 
                  Ʋalla, of late writers the beſt lerned, did trā
               ſlate Fables out of Greke into Latin, which they knew would be to their prayſe, and to the delight and profite of others: Neyther were they deceyued, for they are dayly redde of moſt learned men. I can not therefore perceyue, why by tranſlating theſe Fables, I should be defrauded of the prayſe due to me, whiche other haue had, excepte we be ſo ſpitefull, that to vs that is not lawful, which with great commendation to the Grecians and Latiniſtes is allowed. Fare well.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The firſte Fable, of the Penance of the Wolfe, the Foxe, and the Aſle.
            
               THe Wolfe, the Foxe, and Abuſe of the ſimple. the Aſſe ſometyme iournied togyther towardes Rome, to obtayne remiſſion of theyr ſinnes: In the way (bycauſe they thought the Pope woulde be otherwyſe occupied, that he might not intende them) they agréed to be ſhriuen one of an other, and to ſuffer Penance at their diſcretion. The Wolfe therfore made hys confeſſion to the Foxe in this manner: That he ſawe a ſowe which had .xij. pigs, the which walked alone in the fields, wallowing in fatneſſe, and ſuffered hir pigs at home to ſtarue: wherfore he deuoured the ſowe, bycauſe of hir heynous offence in forſaking hir yong ones: and after, being moued to pitie, he killed alſo the pigs, to ridde them out of their payne, and eate them vp: This he tolde with teares, deſiring to know what penance he ſhoulde doo therfore. In fayth (quod the Foxe) thy

fault is not great, ſay once a Pater noſter and then thou ſhalt be pardoned. Straight after, the Foxe began his confeſſion thus: A countryman had a Cocke of the game, which bet and vanquiſhed all other cocks néere about, who with his ſhril crowing, troubled in euery quarter, not onely the hole, but alſo the ſicke perſons, eſpecially thoſe which had the headake, whoſe pride I could not well away with: as I founde him therfore on a tyme abroade with the hens, I caught him, and caried him awaye to my hole, where I deuoured him: for which déed the Hens kackled againſt me, & troubled me with their crying: I therefore to reuenge the iniurie done vnto me, tore manye of them in pieces and eate them: herein I confeſſe that I offended, therfore I require pardon. Herevnto the Wolfe ſayd: Thou didſt well in qualifying the noyſe and pride of the Cocke and Hens, and therfore it is but a ſmall fault, yet will I ioyne thée thys penance, That the thrée frydayes following, thou eate no fleſhe, if thou canſt get none: for I wil ſhewe thée as much fauoure, as thou didſt to mée. Well nowe Sir ſayde they to the

Aſſe, let vs heare thy confeſſion, who began thus: My moyling & drudgery which I endure, is not vnknowen to you my Lords, as in carying of corne ſacks, ſtone, woode and water, yet once I offended, whereof I repented me ful oft: For a ſeruaunt of my Lordes, apointed ruler ouer me, being once a cold, a ſtrawe appeared oute of hys ſhoo, whiche I ſnatched away from hym, whereby he tooke greate harme and colde of his féete. Therfore be mercifull vnto me, and ioyne me ſome penance. But they ſayd, what haſte thou done thou thefe? Mary fye on thée, by thy meanes that ſeruant had ſuch hurte of his féete, that we thinke he is dead thereof, whereby thy ſoule is damned, and therefore thy bodye ought not to eſcape ſcotte frée, then they killed and deuoured him.
            
               Morall. The mighty and riche men in lyke maner do pardon one another, but to the poore they are harde harted and inexorable.
         
         
            2 Of the Spider and the Gowte.
            
               A Spider nigh wéeried with continuall Abūdanc
                     •
                   ſometyme
                     •
                   perillous. laboure, ceaſſed of hys woorke & walked

abroade for diſport: whom the Goute met, and accompanied as faſt as he could, though it were with muche payne: when that dayes iourney was nigh at a pointe, they approched neere to a little town called Tuche, where they determined to ſéeke fit lodging for their purpoſe. The Spider tooke litle héede but turned into the houſe of an excéeding riche man, where on euery ſide he ſet vp his ſtreamers. Thē were ſtraight at hande, thoſe lyke Diuels in a playe, which caſt downe his webs, and as faſt as he ſet them vp in any parte of the houſe, they were ſwept downe: he coulde not worke ſo cloſely, but it was founde out, ſuch was his miſerie, that in a houſe of ſo much wealth and abundance, he only wanted and was thruſt downe. But the Goute went like a begger, (whiche cauſed him to be the longer without lodging) at length he gotte him to the cottage of a poore man, where when he had layde him downe to reſte, it is not to be tolde what miſerie he endured: his ſupper was coorſe bread, and a Cup of cold water to drinke, when he was drye: hys bed to reſté hys wéerie bones vppon, was a harde boorde

ſtrewed without either boughs or graſſe, but thinly with a litle ſtrawe. I need not ſhewe, how ill agréed ſo harde a bed and ſo rude an hoſte, to ſo tender limbes, and to his ſkin as ſoft as ſilke. When the day ſtarre was ſcarſe riſen, the Goute and the Spider mette againe. Then the Spider firſt declared his nights yll reſte, and how ofte he ſhifted his place: ſomtime vpbraiding the Maiſter with too much niceneſſe, ſometyme with the double diligēce of the ſwéepers. Ah (quod the Goute) the pouertie of myne hoſte is incredible: for if I had leiſure, I could ſhew thee ſpots both black and blew, that my bed as harde as the Adamant, hath imprinted in my ſofte ſkin. Then they tooke counſaile thus once agayn, That the Spider ſhould goo to the poore mans cottage, and the Goute to the riche mans houſe, wherevnto they bothe agréed. When it waxed darke, they came neere to a Citie, and the Goute remembring well hys appointment, faire and ſoftly went into an excéeding riche mans houſe, where he hid him ſelf: whom when the Maiſter had ſcarſe ſée ne, Ieſu GOD, wt what harty good will, what kindneſſe,

and with what names dyd he entertayne him: ſtraightway, he was layde vppon beds of Doune, hys bolſters ſtuffed with ſoft partriche feathers. I will not ſpeake of the wynes, as ſwéete & darke wynes, wynes of Leſbus and Campania, birdes that féede on grapes, pheſants, and partie coloured birds: to conclude, there was no kinde of pleaſure that his fantaſie lacked. The Spider went into a poore mans cottage and began hys webs on euery ſide, from wall to wall he hanged them vp, he followed his buſineſſe with hande & féete, he brake it downe and ſette it vp agayne, and that he beganne he ended: and to tel you at a woorde, he was Lorde and King alone, crafte and pollicie he feared none, for his building was ſo high, that he was without the reche of a broome. Not long after the Gowte ſpake with the Spider, to whom he magnified his pleaſures, hys happineſſe and riches: The Spider lykewiſe wonderfully prayſed hys kingdome and libertie in building: They concluded therfore, that whyther ſo euer they iourneyd, the Gowte ſhould lodge at the riche mans houſe, and the Spider at the poore

mans cottage.
            
               Mor. Some ſorte of men ſpéede better in ſome place than others, and rich mens houſes are a manſion place for diſſeaſes: but where leaſt riches are, there is moſt libertie.
         
         
            3 Of an Aſſe, the Trumpeter, and a Hare, the Meſſanger.
            THe Lyon King of foure féeted beaſtes, Abiectes. hauing warre with the Foules, ſette his armie in aray, ready to ioyne battaill with them: whom the Beare aſked what furderance the ſluggiſh Aſſe, or the fearefull Hare would be, to winne the fielde, bycauſe he ſawe them amongſt the other Souldiours. He aunſwered hym: The Aſſe with the ſounde of hys Trumpette, ſhall encourage the Souldiours to fighte: and the Hare, bycauſe of hys ſwiftneſſe, ſhall be a Meſſanger.
            
               Mor. None is ſo vile, but he is good for ſome thing.
         
         
            4 Of an old man.
            A Certen deuoute man counſailled an Abſtinēce olde man to leaue of the luftes of the

fleſhe, wherevnto he hadde bene outrageouſly gyuen. He aunſwered him: Holly Father, I will obey your reuerende and holeſome preceptes, for I perceyue that Venerie doth much hurte me, neyther am I able to followe that trade any longer.
            
               Mor. Many abſtayne from vyces, wherein they are nooſeled, not for the loue of God or goodneſſe, but bycauſe of infirmitie, and feare of puniſhment.
         
         
            5 Of the Shepherd and the Sea.
            AS a ſhéepherd kept his flocke néere the Sea ſide, and ſaw it calme, he deſired Affliction. to be a Marchant venturer, wherevppon he ſolde his ſhéepe and bought Dates, and wayed his Anker. It happened, that a ſodayne tempeſte aroſe, and that the ſhippe was in daunger of drowning, ſo that they were fayne to lighten it of all the burden, ſcarſe able to eſcape emptie: Shortly after, as one paſſed by on the Sea ſhore (for then by chaunce it was calme) he maruelled to ſée it ſo ſtill, wherevpon he ſaid, The Sea longeth againe for Dates, and therfore it is ſo calme.
            
               Mor. Miſerie maketh a man warier.
         
         
            
            6 Of an Heremité and a Souldiour.
            A Certen Heremite, being a man of Agrement perforce. godly liuing, exhorted a Souldiour to leaue of the warfare in this world, which waye very few withoute offending God and hurte of their ſoule, do walke in, and to gyue him ſelfe to quietneſſe, and prepare for his ſoules health. I will Father (quod the Souldier) do as ye will me, but truthe is, that in theſe dayes Souldiours maye neyther demaunde their wages, though it be very ſmall, ne yet take any praie.
            
               Mor. Many for ſake their wicked lyuing, bycauſe they can vſe it no lōger.
         
         
            7 Of the Foxe and the Bramble.
            AS a Foxe climbed a hedge, hys féete Ayde. ſlipped, who (as he was falling) caught holde on a bramble to ſtaye hym: wherefore when he hadde torne hys féete with the prickes thereof, being in payne, he ſayd to the Bramble: woo is me, for I came to thée for helpe, who haſte hurte mée worſe: not ſo (quod the Briar) thou waſt deceyued, for I catche euery thing, and thinkeſt thou to lay holde on me?
            
               
               Mor. Some are ſo fooliſhe as to require ayde of thoſe whiche naturally are bent to hurte.
         
         
            8 Of a Wagtayle and a Pheſant.
            
               THe Wagtayle wente to the Pheſant and ſayd: Ah wretche, why doeſt thou Accuſing an other. not wype thyne eyes but letteſt them cō
               tinually ſtande with water? the ſtenche of thyne eyes make thée lotheſome. The Pheſant herewith being wrothe, aunſwered, How dareſt thou check me, which art ſo vyle an outcaſte? Thy tayle hath the palſy, and art thou buſie to note my fault? Go mende thy owne firſt, and then mayſt thou better heale me. The Wagtayle hearing this, departed aſhamed.
            
               Mor. Hée that will condemne an other, muſt firſt be cleare him ſelfe.
         
         
            9 Of the Miſe and the Frogs.
            
               THe Miſe on a tyme contended with the Frogs for the kingdome of the Ambition. Marſhes, wherevppon they proclamed open warre. The battaill being ioyned, at the firſt onſet they behaued themſelues ſo valiauntly, that the victorie was doutful.

The wyly Mouſe lurking in the graſſe, priuilie as it were oute of an Ambuſhement, aſſauted the Frogge. But the frog being of ſtrength more puiſſaunt, incourage and leaping more valiaunt, with open warre prouoked hys enimie: Their ſpeares were bulruſhes. It happened, as they were fighting, that a kight eſpied them a farre of, who incontinently made ſpéede vnto them: but theſe noble warriours, being earneſt in fighting, & nothing regarding themſelues, were ſnatched vp, and torne in pieces by the Kight.
            
               Mor. The lyke happeneth to ſeditious Citizens, whiche being inflamed with the greedie luſtes of bearing rule, whiles they ſtryue eyther with other, who ſhal be hed officer, do hazard their goods, and commonly their liues.
         
         
            10 Of the beaſtes and the birds.
            
               THere was ſometyme a battaille betwene Ambodexter. the beaſtes and the birds, the victorie was vncertain, for both hoped wel, yet much feare and daunger was, on eyther party. The Batte thinking the birds to be the weaker ſide, left their companie,

and tooke parte with their enimies. The birds by the conducting and gouernement of the Egle wonne the fielde. The Batte was condemned for a runawaye, and baniſhed the companie of all birds, and that from thenceforth he ſhoulde neuer flye by day lighte, and this was the onely cauſe, that the Battes flie but by night.
            
               Mor. He that will not take parte of the ſowre, ſhall not taſte of that which is ſweete.
         
         
            11 Of the Pecocke and the Nightingale.
            
               THe Pecocke complayned to Iuno, Siſter and wyfe to Iupiter, bycauſe the All things as god will. Nightingale ſong ſo ſwéete, and ſhe hirſelfe for hir horſeneſſe, was a bywoorde to all men. To whome Iuno ſayde: Euery one hath his propre gifte of GOD: The Nightingale in ſinging, but thou in colours of feathers paſſeſt all other birdes, euery man muſte be contente with hys eſtate.
            
               Mor. What God ſendeth, receyue it thankfully, neyther ſeeke thou further, for God doth nothing vnaduiſedly.
         
         
            
            12 Of a yong man that ſong at the buriall of hys mother.
            
               A Certen man wepte and lamented for All things not decent. his wyfe being caried to burying, but hys ſonne did ſing: whom his Father rebuked, as he had ben madde that he would ſing when hys mother went to buriall, whereas he oughte with him to be heauy and lamente. Why Father (quod he) if thou haue hyred theſe Prieſtes to ſing, why arte thou angry with mée that ſing for nothing? That is no parte of thy office ſayd his Father, but belongeth to the Prieſt.
            
               Mor. All things are not ſéemely for all men.
         
         
            13 Of Heauen and Earth.
            
               ON a tyme Heauen poured on Earthe Anger. many ſtormes, lightning, and thundring, wherewith he oppreſſed it. But ſhe being angry, called the Aire to hir, and ſayd Brother I praye thée meddle not betwixt Heauen and me, for I meane to ouerthrowe him, bycauſe he hath wrought me ſuch iniurie, that I would fayne by all meanes be reuenged. Ah ſiſter (quod the

Aire) do not ſo, but pacifie thy wrath, for though that Heauē haue vexed thée now, you ſhal an other time be mery togyther. Yet Earth being impatient, woulde not yelde, but armed him ſelfe and began too warre with heauen. The aire beholding that, ſent ſuch a darke miſte, yt the earthe coulde not diſcerne where heauen was. This darkneſſe continued ſo long betwene heauen and earth, till the earthes fury was paſt: after which time the aire ſent oute his windes, whiche draue away the miſt.
            
               Mor. All men ought to quenche fire, and not to kindle it.
         
         
            14 Of a Lyon in loue with a Countreymans daughter.
            
               A Lyon enamoured with a Countreymans Armed alwayes. daughter, deſired hir greatly, whervpon he requeſted hir father to giue hir to him in mariage. What (quod the man) ſhould I mary my daughter to a beaſte? Then the Lyon frowned & grinded his téeth at him, wherewith the countreyman being afraid, went from his former talke, & ſayd: I would gladly match
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
            
            
               
grée, that as I occupie the daye, ſo thou maiſt runne thy race in the night. Let vs obey oure Creator, and be not lofty ouer me, but ſuffer mée to gyue light in the daye, and to preſerue the good creatures of the Lorde. The Moone herewith beyng more vexed, departed in a chafe, and called to hir the ſtarres, of whiche ſhe gathered a great armie, and beganne battaile with the Sunne, againſt whom ſhe ſhot hir arrowes, and endeuored with hir dartes to ſtryke him. But the Sunne be
               
                  •••
                aboue hir and at the vauntage, came downe, and with a ſwoorde deuided the Moone in two, & threw down the ſtarres, ſaying: In lyke maner I will vſe thée, as often as thou arte rounde: whereof (as reporte goeth) it came to paſſe, that the Moone continueth not alwayes full, and that the ſtarres do vſe to fall. The Moone therfore hauing the ouerthrowe, was aſhamed and ſayde: Better it is, when I am full to be deuided, than altogyther to be aboliſhed.
            
               Mor. Lykewyſe many proude perſons would be Rulers alone, and can not abyde to haue any their better or

lyke to them.
         
         
            17 Of the Spyder and the Swallowe.
            A Spider offended with the Swallow, Attempt not aboue thy capacitie. bycauſe ſhe deuoured the flies which were his meate, hanged vp hys webbes afore the hole, (from whence the Swallowe ſhould flie) to take hir. The Swallow flew forth and caried away ye webbe with the weauer. Then the Spider hanging in the aire and perceyuing his death to be at hande, ſayde: Iuſtly haue I thys deſerued, which did thinke to catch great birds, when without great labor I could ſcarſe get the ſmalleſt thing that flieth.
            
               Mor. Attempt nothing aboue thy capacitie.
         
         
            18 Of a Dogge and a Wolfe.
            AS a Dogge ſlept in a court before the houſe of hys maiſter, a Wolfe came Attendance. ſodenly and caught hym: whome, as he would haue killed, the Dogge beſought, ſaying: Good maiſter ſpare me nowe bycauſe I am leane & thinne as thou ſéeſt, but if thou wilt tary, there ſhall be within theſe fewe dayes a great mariage kept

at my Lordes, where I will ſo fill me and make me ſo fat, that then I ſhall doe thée more good. The Wolfe crediting his wordes, let him goo. Shortly after, the Wolfe came and founde the dog ſléeping vpon the houſe toppe, to whom he called as he ſtoode beneath, willing him to performe his promiſſe: Nay verily (quod the Dog) but if from henceforth thou finde me ſléeping without doores, tary not at all vpon hope of any mariage.
            
               Mor The burnt hand euer after feareth the fire.
         
         
            19 Of the Aſſe and the Foxe.
            AN Aſſe put on a Lyons ſkinne and Bablers. walked abroade, putting all other beaſtes in feare, who on a tyme ſéeing a Fox, endeuoured to make him alſo afrayed. But hée (for by chaunce he heard him braye) ſayd to him: Thou knoweſt well that I would haue trembled at thée, if I had not heard thy braying.
            
               Mor. Some vnlearned men whiche outwardly beare coūtenance, through their babling are reproued.
         
         
            
            20 Of the Egle and the Pye.
            THe Pye ſometyme deſired the Egle, to make him one of his friends of hys houſholde, bycauſe the beauty of hys body deſerued it, and alſo the redineſſe of his ſpeach to do meſſages: I woulde ſo doo, ſayd the Egle, but I feare leaſt that which I ſpeak within doores, thou wouldeſt preache it abroad on the houſe tops.
            
               Mor. Keepe no bablers nor teltales in thy houſe.
         
         
            21 Of a Nightingale fearing the Kite.
            A Nightingale eſpying a Kyte flying abroad in the aire, & making a great crying was ſore afrayde, to whome the Tyruſtie ſayde: Feare not ſiſter, for this preparation to fight & theſe threatnings will light at length, eyther on a little mouſe, or a chicken, we muſt take héede of the Hanke, whoſe gripes we ſhal firſt féele, ere we heare his voyce.
            
               Mor. Quiet and cloſe men are more to be dreaded, than threatners & great pratlers.
         
         
            
            22 Of a Countreyman that would paſſe ouer a Ryuer.
            A Coūtryman ready to paſſe a ſtreame, which by chaunce was ſodenly ryſen, with late rayne that fell, ſought the ſhallow. When he had aſſayed that parte of the Riuer which was calmeſt, he founde it déeper than he ſuppoſed: agayn, where it was rougheſt, there he foūd it ſhalloweſt, than he bethought hym whyther he might committe hys life to the calmeſt place of the water, or to the rougheſt.
            
               Mor. Dread thoſe leſſe whiche are full of wordes and threatnings, than thoſe that ſay nothing.
         
         
            23 Of a Harte and a Vyne.
            A Hart eſcaping the hunters, lay hidde Benefactors. vnder a vine. When they were a litle paſt hir, ſhe ſuppoſing ſhe lay ſafe, began to féede on the vine leaues. Which being ſtirred, the Hunters returned: and iudging (as it was in déede) ſome beaſte to lurke vnder the leaues, they with their arrowes ſlew the harte: who as ſhe lay a dying, ſayd thus: Rightly am I ſerued, for I ought not to haue hurte that which

ſaued me.
            
               Mor. They which do any wrong to their benefactors, are puniſhed of god.
         
         
            23 Of a man bitten with a Dog.
            A Certen man being bitten by a Dog, wente aboute ſéeking for helpe. At Benefits yll beſtowed. length one met hym, who as ſoone as he vnderſtood what he would, ſayde to him: If thou wouldeſt be healed, thou ſhalt néed no ſurgion: only let ye dog which bit thée licke the bloud from thy ſore, for better remedie than this can not be founde. The other ſmyling at him ſayd: If I do ſo, I ſhall be bitten of Dogs dayly more and more.
            
               Mor. Naughty men hauing receyued good turnes, are the ſooner ready to render diſpleaſure.
         
         
            24 Of an Aſſe that ſerued an vnkinde Maiſter
            AN Aſſe ſerued a certen man many Benefites il rewarded yeares, in which time he neuer offended him. It happened afterwarde, being heauy laden, that he ſtumbled in a rough way, and fell vnder hys burthen. Then his cruell Maiſter bette him ſore, and in

ſpite of his harte forced him to ryſe, calling him a ſlouthfull and ſluggiſh beaſt: but this poore wretch thought thus with him ſelfe: Miſerable is my eſtate, which haue happened to ſo vnkinde a Maiſter, for though I haue ſerued him a long time without diſpleaſing him, yet doth he not forgyue me this one faulte, in recompēce of the good ſeruice that I haue done him.
            
               Mor. This Fable is againſt thoſe, which forgette the benefites that they haue receyued, and greuouſly puniſhe the leaſt offence of their benefactors toward them done.
         
         
            25 Of the Mouſe that ſet the Kight at libertie.
            A Mouſe eſpied the Kight taken in a Foulers grin, on whom he toke compaſſion, (though he were hys moſte enimie) and gnewe the knots in pieces, and ſet him at libertie. The Kight remembring the good turn no lōger than it was in doing: When he perceyued him ſelfe looſe, layd holde on the poore Mouſe, and with his talents tore him in pieces.
            
               Mor. Wicked men in like manner

are wont to recompence theyr benefactors.
         
         
            26 Of a Huſbandman pricked by a Bee.
            A Huſbandman being ſtoong by a Bée, maruelled that oute of the ſelfe ſame Benefites. mouth ſo ſwéete iuyce procéeded; and ſo grieuous a ſting. The Bée aunſwered, the more beneficiall I am, ye more I hate them, which do me wrong.
            
               Mor. The more good men doo, the leſſe iniurie they endure.
         
         
            27 Of the tree Abrotanum and the Hare.
            THe propertie of Abrotanum, is to drawe oute any thing that ſticketh faſt, with the helpe of Auxangia. Wherfore on a tyme came a Hare halting to him, for a thorne which ſtuck in his foote, and ſayde: O Phiſitian both of body and ſoule, take pitie on me and helpe me, and forthwith ſhewed his right foote. This trée being moued with compaſſion, put him ſelfe vpon the wounde, brought oute the thorne and healed it. Wherfore the Hare remembring thys benefite, caried dayly a flaggō of water on his ſhoulders,

and watered the roote of the trée, wherby he cauſed it to continue freſh and gréene.
            
               Mor. Let vs alwayes gladly ſerue our benefactors.
         
         
            28 Of the Crowe and the Dog.
            AS the Crowe was offering ſacrifice Benefites for aduaū
                  tage. to Minerua, ſhe bad the Dog to hir good cheare, but he aunſwered hir: Why doeſt thou beſtowe ſacrifice to no purpoſe? For the Goddeſſe ſo hateth thée, that ſhe ſuffereth thée to haue no credit in any diuination. To whome the Crowe ſayd, for that cauſe the more do I ſacrifice vnto hir, that I might get hir fauour agayne.
            
               Mor. Many for aduauntage, feare not to benefite their enimies.
         
         
            29 Of a Hunter and a Partriche.
            A Hunter hadde caught a Partriche, Betraying. whiche as hée would haue killed, ſhe beſought him pardon for hir lyfe, & to ſet hir at libertie, promiſing to bring to hys net many Partriches: The Fouler anſwered hir redily agayn, ſaying: I think that nowe thou arte more woorthy of

death: bicauſe thou haſt giuen thy woord to betray thy friend.
            
               Mor. He whiche goeth about by deceyt to vndoo his friend, runneth headlong into miſerie.
         
         
            30 Of the Dolphin and the Eele.
            A Certeyne Dolphin finding an Eele in the ſea, purſued after hir, whome Beware of memyes. when he had often caught, but could not holde, bycauſe of hir ſlipperneſſe, he was wonderfull ſory. But the Eele being diſpoſed to mock him, and therby to eſcape, ſpake craftely to the Dolphin: I am ſorie for thée, that thou art too muche wéeryed and gréeued with ſwimming after mée, but thy labor is loſt: for in the déepe waters thou ſhalte neuer take mée, but goe with me into the mudde, and thou ſhalte haue mée at thy pleſure. The fooliſh Dolphin being in a chafe, and alſo gréedie of his praie, began to ſwim after hir, intending vtterly to deſtroy hir: when the Ele had led the Dolphin into ſhallow places ſhe wounde hir ſelfe into the mudde, and ſayd: Come vp to me, for I ſhal be ſtayed by the rootes of herbes, & thou ſhalt haue

thy deſire of mée. The Dolphin gaue a ſkip to catch the Eele, but ſhe ſkipt into the mud, and ſhe ſtack faſt on dry groūd: In the meane tyme came a Fiſher, and ſtrake him thorough, wherof he dyed.
            
               Mor. He that goeth with his foe, it is no maruell if he fall.
         
         
            31 Offayre Trees, and deformed.
            MAny Trées grewe togyther in one grounde, tall, ſtreight, and withoute Beautie. knottes, amongſt whom there was one trée low, crooked and knotty, whome for his deformitie the other mocked. It hapned that the lord of the ſoyle wold buylde an houſe, for whiche he commaunded all thoſe trées to bee cutte downe, ſaue that which for his ſhortneſſe and miſhapyng, woulde diſfigure the houſe: when the other were he wed downe, the euill fauoured trée ſayd thus with himſelfe: Of thée Nature wil I no longer complayn, that I am miſhapē, ſeing that ſuch fayre trées are always in daunger.
            
               Mor. Lette no man bée gréeued in that beautie hurteth many.
         
         
            
            32 Of a Lyoneſſe and the Foxe.
            THe Fore oftentymes vpraided ye Lioneſſe, that ſhe had but one whelpe at a tyme, truthe it is (quod ſhe) but then that is a Lyon.
            
               Mor. Beautie cōſiſteth not in plentie, but in vertue.
         
         
            33 Of an Aſtronomer and a Trauailer.
            A Certen Aſtronomer diligently vewing the ſtarres, vnwittingly fell into Boasters. a well, but a Trauailer by chaunce comming by, and ſéeing him ſighing, ſayde: Doeſt not thou ſée the earth, whiche gaueſt thy minde vpward?
            
               Mor. Many boaſt that they knowe of things to come, not knowing what preſently happeneth.
         
         
            34 Of Scholers.
            A Certeine Whéele wright had ben often deluded by Schollers, that were bagabūds, which came to him for almes ſaying they had greate ſkill in Magike, and that they could doe many thyngs: of which number, ther came one a begging to his doore, in the name of a Maiſter of

the ſeuen liberal Arts, to whom he ſayd: My friende, were not you here the laſte yeare? No (quod the Scholer:) departe therfore (quod he) & come no more here, for I will giue thée nothing. The Scholler was offended, & aſked why he ſpake in the ſingular number to him, béeing a Maſter of the ſeuen liberall Artes, and a Magitian. He anſwered: I know much more than thou doeſt: for with one handiecraft labour I fynd me, my wyfe and children, but thou with thy ſeuen Artes canſt not fynde thy ſelfe, but goeſt a begging. Wherefore thou oughteſt to reuerence me, and not I thée. When hée had ſo ſayde, the Scholer departed, well mocked.
            
               Mor. It is a folly too boaſt of any title, where as knowledge wanteth of that which is profeſſed.
         
         
            35 Of a Boaſter.
            A Certein ragged and yll fauored man came into a Tauerne, and bicauſe he was lightly regarded, began to boaſt of his nobilitie, that he deſcended of an auncient houſe, to whome one aunſwered:

Auaunt knaue with thy nobilitie, oure Millers Aſſe is more noble than thou, for he goth with a man wayting on him, but thou goeſt without.
         
         
            36 Of a Boaſter.
            A Certein man who hauing trauailed far, returned into his coūtrey, & made great vaunts of his manly acts yt he had done in many places, eſpecially yt he had daunced a daūce at Rhodes, that none of yt place could: for proof wherof, he ſayd, yt he had to witneſſe thē which wer there preſent, to whom one of them that ſtoode by, anſwered: Sir, if this be true, what needeth witneſſe, there ſtands Rhodes, and there is thy daunce.
            
               Mor. All talke is ſuperfluous, except we haue preſent proofe.
         
         
            37 Of the Mole.
            THe Mole a blynd beaſt, ſayde ſometyme to hir mother: I ſée a Mulbery trée, & ſtreight after, I ſmell a gret ſauor of Frankincenſe: but the third time ſhée ſaid, I héere the noyſe of the fall of an yron pellet: hir mother anſwered: As far

as I perceiue, thou lackeſt not onely thy ſight, but alſo thy ſmelling and hearing.
            
               Mor. Some brag they can doo things impoſſible, & in the leaſt are reproued.
         
         
            38 Of the birth of Hilles.
            THe talke was ſomtime that the hills did trauayle, whereof men hearing, Boaſtiag. came thither, and ſtoode gaping aboute wayting for ſome monſtrous thing, not without great feare. At length the hilles were deliuered, and broughte foorth a Mouſe: wherat there fel ſuch a laughter amongſt thē, yt they were redy to ſowne.
            
               Mor. Crakers will promiſe greate matters, but ſcarſe perform the leaſt.
         
         
            39 Of the Frog and the Fox.
            A Frog came foorth of the mariſhes into the wood amongſt wild beaſts, and ſayd ſhée was well ſéene in phiſicke, and that hir cunning was as good as Hipocrates, or Galenes: all beaſts gaue credit, only the For mocked hir ſaying: ſhal ſhée be counted ſkilful in phiſicke, whoſe lips bée ſo pale? Let hir firſt heale hir ſelfe. And thus the Fore mocked hir. For the

mouth of a Frog is of a ſkye colour.
            
               Mor. It is mere folly to profeſſe that wherof thou haſt no ſkill.
         
         
            40 Of a Pecock ſpoyled of his feathers by a Souldier.
            A Pecoke boaſted too a Souldyer that had decked his hat with Eſtriche feathers, that ſhe had much fairer feathers: and to verifie hir ſaying, ſhe ſpreade abroade hir tayle: The Souldiour therewith being inamored, caught and ſpoyled hir, wherewith he dacked his helmet: Then the Pecoke ſayd to hirſelfe: wo is me wretch & foole, too ſhew ſo precious a thing to a ſpoyler, which I ought to haue kept cloſe.
            
               Mor. By boaſting of precious things many are ſtirred to become théeues.
         
         
            42 Of the Kidde and the Wolfe.
            AS a Kid looked out of a windowe, he eſpyed a wolf paſſing by, vpon whom Boldneſſe. he rayled: Ah vngracius perſone, ſayde the wolf, it is not thou that taunteſt me, but thy ſafe holde.
         
         
            
            42 Of the Sunne and the Northeaſt winde.
            SOmetyme the Sunne and the Northeaſt winde contended, who was the ſtronger, whervpon they agréed to proue their ſtrength on a wayfaring man, that he might haue the victorie whiche cauſed him to caſt away his wallet. Firſte the Northeaſt winde with ſharpe ſtormes & bitter blaſtes aſſayed him: He ſtayed not a whit therefore, but as he wente, he wrapped hys clothes double about hym: When the Sun was come to his courſe, by litle & litle in ſpreading his beames, hée calmed the wind, then was this man in ſuch a heate and ſwet, that he puffed & blowed excéedingly, and at length by the outragiouſneſſe thereof, being fainte, he could go no further, but got him into the coole ſhadowe, caſting away his wallet, and ſat him downe vnder a thicke wood: by which euident token, the Sunne was conquerer.
            
               Mor. Looke afore thou leape, for though thou be ſtrōg, yet perhaps another is ſtrōger than thou, if not ſtronger, yet craftier, with his pollicie to gyue thée the foyle.
         
         
            
            43 Of a Foxe and women eating of a Hen.
            THe Foxe paſſing by a farme houſe, eſpied a great route of women eating Hens ſumptuouſly prepared, but (God wot) there was no talke amongſt them, to whom ſhe ſayd: what crying and barking of dogs would be after me if I ſhold doo as ye doo? Thou wicked beaſt (quod an old woman) we eate that is our own, but thou ſtealeſt from others.
            
               Mor. We may not be ſo bolde with other mens goods, as ye right owners.
         
         
            44 Of a Dog and Wolues.
            A Great barking Dog was a ſore enimie to the Wolues, for when they would haue entred the citie, he kept them out: wherfore they alſo hated the dogge, whom they would fayne haue killed. At length they ſent two Ambaſſadours to ye Dog, deſiring him to come abroad into ye fields, and they would make him their king, bycauſe he was mighty and valiaunt: The fooliſh curre conſented & went with them, whom they brought ſafely to ye other wolues that tare him in pieces.
            
               Mor. Hée that will be hardy, let him kéepe him ſelfe in a ſure defence.
         
         
            
            45 Of the Pecocke and the Crane.
            THe Pecocke and the Crane ſomtyme Bragging. ſupped togither, & amōgſt other talke, the Pecocke bragged muche of his fayre tayle, deſpiſing the Crane: he graunted yt ſhe was a faire birde in that pointe, yet was he able with his ſtoute flying, to enter amongſt the clouds, when ſhe coulde ſcarſe flye to the houſe toppe.
            
               Mor. Let not one thinke ſcorne of another, euery one hath his proper gift & vertue: for he that wāteth thy qualitie, perhaps hath yt which thou lackeſt.
         
         
            46 Of a Knight which had a brauling wife.
            THere dwelt a Knight at Florence, deſcended Brauling Women. of a noble bloud, whiche had a wayward and brauling wife that dayly went to hir ghoſtly Father, to whom ſhe complayned of hir huſbāds demeanure: for which he much blamed the Knight. It happened not long after, that ſhe deſired hir ghoſtly father to ſet hir & hir huſband at quiet, wherevppon he called him to ſhrift, ſaying, that if he came, he doubted not but to make them friendes againe. The Knight agréeing, the other required

him to make declaration of his faultes. In fayth (quod ye knight) it ſhall not néed, for I know that my wife hath often tolde thee al that euer I did, yea and more too.
         
         
            47 Of Arion and the Dolphin.
            
               ARion was an auncient man, & came of a noble linage: he could ſing to the Brute beaſtes kinder than men. harpe: he was borne in the citie of Methimne in the Iſle of Leſbus, whom Periander King of Corinthe loued for his cunnings ſake, from whom he departed to ſée the famous countrey of Sicilie and Italie. When he was come thyther, & had well delighted the eares, and contented the minds of moſt mē in thoſe partes, he gayned greatly, and liued in pleaſure & loue of all men. Afterwarde hauing gathered much ſubſtance, he minded to returne to Corinth, whervpon he hired a Corinthian ſhip and mariners of that coaſte, bycauſe he hoped to find friendſhip at their hands. The Corinthians receyued him, and laū
               ched into the déepe, who being gréedy of this great praie of money, tooke counſell to kill Arion. He vnderſtanding of hys deſtruction, gaue them al the money that

he had, praying them only to ſaue his life. But being paſt hope and ſore afrayde, he requeſted that before his death, he might put on his apparell and take his Harpe & ſing a mourning ſong to cōfort hys harté withall: The Mariners (though they were hard harted and cruell) deſiring to heare him, graunted his petitiō. He being clad as he was accuſtomed, ſtanding in y• hinder part of the ſhip, ſong with a loude voyce, the ſong called Orithium. In the end of his ſong, as he ſtood with his harpe and in his clothes, he caſt him ſelfe intoo the Sea. The ſhipmen nothing doubting but that he was drowned, kept on their voyage. But a ſtraunge and wonderfull thing happened, for a Dolphin ſodeynly ſwam by & receyued him, caried hym on his backe aboue the water, and brought him ſafe & ſoūd to Tenarus, in the land of Laconia: frō whēce Arion went ſtraight to Corinthe, and ſhewed him ſelfe to King Periander, and howe he was caried of the Dolphin, declaring all that happened.
            The King little beleeued this, but commaunded him ſafely to be kept til ye truth were tried. The mariners were ſought

for (and Arion ſent out of the way) who being brought before the king, he demaū
               ded of them (making no ſemblant that he had knowledge of Arion) whyther they hearde any thing of him in the parties whence they came: they aunſwered, that when they ſet foorth he was in Italie, and liued wel there, and was highly eſtéemed in the cities: and alſo was excéeding rich. Whiles they thus ſpake, in came Arion with his Harpe, hauing on the ſame apparell wherewith he lept into the Sea, wherby the ſhipmē being amazed, & pricked in conſcience, could not denie it.
            
               Mor. In brute beaſts we ſhall ſomtyme finde more friendſhippe, than in couetous men, which care for nothing but riches, neyther haue any ſparke of humanitie, but the only phiſnomie.
         
         
            48 Of a Kid and a Wolfe.
            
               A Kid ſtraying frō the flock, and being purſued by a Wolf, turned backe to Buſie bodies. him & ſayde: O wolf, bycauſe I am perſuaded yt thou ſhalt eate mée, play firſt on thy pipe that I may daunce, leaſt I die in ſorow: As the wolf was playing and the

Kid daūcing, ye dogs heard it & chaſed the wolf: who ſayd to the kid: I haue well deſerued this, for I ought not being a cooke, to counterfet a minſtrell.
            
               Mor. They whiche regarde not that wher vnto thei are naturally inclined, but aſſaye that which to others belongeth, fall into aduerſitie.
         
         
            49 Of the Crab and the Foxe.
            
               A Crab fiſh came forth of the ſea & fed, the Foxe being hungry & ſéeing him, caught him: who being ready to be deuoured, ſayd: I am wel ſerued, which being a fiſhe of the ſea, would liue on land.
            
               Mor. Thoſe mē are iuſtly miſerable, yt forſaking their proper ſciēce, doo medle wt that, which becommeth them not.
         
         
            50 Of the Aple tree and the Pomegranat tree.
            
               THe Pomgranat and the Apple trée cō
               tended aboute their beautie: When they hadde continued long in ſtryfe togyther, a buſh, which was their neighbour, often hearing them, at length ſayd: It is tyme friends to be at one.
            
               Mor. The vileſt perſons ſometyme will medle in their betters matters.
         
         
            
            51 Of a Dog and his Maiſter.
            
               A Certen man had a Dog whome he alwayes fed with his owne handes, Cauſers of euill. bycauſe he ſhould loue him the more, and when he was bound he looſed him: But yet he cōmaunded hys ſeruant to tye him vp, and beate him, to the ende the dogge might perceyue he loued him, & that hys ſeruant did not. The dog taking it gréeuouſly to be dayly tied and beaten, ranne away. Whom when his maiſter rebuked as a churle and forgetfull of all his benefites, that he would run away from him which loued him ſo, and fed him, whome he neuer bound nor bet. Ah ſir (ſayd the dog) that your ſeruant doth at your commaundement, I count it done by you.
            
               Mor. Thoſe are euill doers, whiche are cauſers of euill.
         
         
            52 Of the Turtle.
            
               A Certen Turtle being a widowe, lyued Chaſtitie. in great heauineſſe for the death of hir mate, but ſhe remayned chaſt: whō other birds pitying, deſired hir to abyde with them, where vnto at length ſhe conſented: They made hir the beſte chéere

they could, but ſhe ſéeing their abhomination and whoordom, forſooke them, and led the reſt of hir lyfe in chaſt widowhed.
            
               Mor. Who proteſteth chaſtitie, muſt ſet his mynde on no worldly affaires.
         
         
            53 Of a ſcolding Woman.
            
               A Certein man had a ſcold to his wife, A charm for Scolds. whiche alwayes brauled with him, what ſoeuer he did, whiche the more hée bet hir, the more fierce ſhée was. When he ſaw that ſtripes would not preuayle, he attempted an other way, for as often as ſhée chid, he played on a payre of Bagpypes, wherof he had no ſkill. When hée had ſo done, ſhe was more fierce: but at lengthe he continuing his playing, ſhée daunced for anger, & in the end ſhe ſtroke the Bagpype out of his hād. But he tooke it agayne, and played, wherwith ſhée being chafed, ran oute of the doores, ſaying, that ſhée woulde not endure his wickedneſſe and dronkenneſſe. The next day ſhe began hir ſcolding afreſhe, but hir huſband played as he was wont. Then the womā declared that ſhe was ouercome, and left of hir curſing, promiſing hir huſhand

to become moſt gentle vnto him, ſo that he woulde lay away his Bagpype.
            
               Mor. Malaperte women by dyuers wayes muſt be charmed.
         
         
            54 Of two Haukes and a Quayle.
            TWoo haukes being confederate togither, cōdeſcēded to deuide their praie Chooſe the least euill. equally. When they hunted on a tyme, they caught a Quayle from hir neſt, too whom they ſayd: Chooſe whether we ſhal eat thée alone, or elſe bring vs to thy neſt that wée may eate thy yong ones wyth thée. The Quayle aunſwered: I am in trouble on euery ſide, and what I ſhall doo I can not tell: it is better to fall into theyr handes alone, than to dye with my yong ones: but before they killed hir, ſhe ſayd: Better it is to ſuffer a little harme than a woorſe.
            
               Mor. Of two euills the leaſt is to choſen.
         
         
            55 Of the Wolfe and the Crane.
            THe Wolfe ſometyme hadde killed a ſheepe, which as hée gréedely deuoured, Churle. by chaūce the bones ſtuck faſt in his

throate: hée trauayled far and néere ſéeking for help but founde none, for all mē iudged hym well ſerued for his greedyneſſe. At length by fayre flattring words, and greater promyſes, hée allured the Crane too thruſt his long neck intoo his throate, and to plucke out the bone that ſtucke faſt. When the Crane had ſo done he required a rewarde: But the Wolfe laughed him to ſcorn, ſaying: Be packing thou patch, canſt thou not be cōtent with thy lyfe, thou arte bounde to thanke mee therfore: for had I liſt, I might haue bitten off thy necke.
            
               Mor. All is loſt that is put in a riuen diſhe.
         
         
            56 Of the Fiſher and the litle fiſhe.
            A Fiſher caſt his hookes into the water Certentie. bayted wyth fleſhe, wherewith he caught a litle fiſh, the priſoner beſoughte him to releaſe him, now being ſo little, and too lette hym growe bygger, that héereafter hée might haue the more commoditie of him: Nay ſayde the Fiſher, I will not bye the pigge in the poke, for I vſe too take what preſently I can get.
            
               
               Mor. Leaue not the bird in the hand, for that in the buſhe.
         
         
            58 Of a Foxe that woulde kill a Henne ſittyng.
            THe For being entred a countreymās houſe, found a Henne ſitting on Egs in the neſt, whiche beſought him, ſaying: I pray thée kill me not now being leane, tary a while till my chickens be hatched, which thou mayſt eat without any toothake being yong: Ah (quod he) I were not woorthy too be called a For, if now being hungry, I would forſake my praie that is redy, vpon hope of chickens which are not yet oute of the ſhell: I haue ſtrong téeth, which are able to grynd the hardeſt fleſhe that is. And when he had ſo ſayd, he deuoured the Henne.
            
               Mor. He is not wiſe, which vpon vncertayn hope of greater things, wyll let go that which he hath preſently.
         
         
            58 Of the Frogs and their King.
            THe Frogs being frée beſought Iupiter too giue them a kyng, hée laughed at Common people. theyr fooliſh petition, neuertheleſſe they

continued theyr inſtante ſute ſo long, that at the length they forced hym therevnto. He caſt them down a beame, which with the fall thereof made a great noyſe in the water. The Frogs being afrayde hild their peace, and did homage to their king, and approched by litle and litle nerer vntoo him. At length they boldly hopped vp and downe on him: and thus their fooliſh kyng became a laughing ſtock vnto them. Then called they on Iupiter ageyne, deſiring of him a valiant king-He ſent them the Storke, who walked lyke a ſtoute champion through the Marſhes killing and deuouring as many Froggs as he met. At euen when the Stork was gone too reſt, they came foorth of their holes, hoarſly crying, but to a deade man, for Iupiter his wil was, ſeing they were not content with a mercifull kyng, that they ſhould be oppreſſed with a tyrant.
            
               Mor. The like hapneth too the common people, which hauing a merciful and gentle Prince & iudge hym a daſtard and ſlouthful, and pray that they may haue a ſtoute prince. Ageyne hauing a valiant Prince, they diſpraiſe

his crueltie, prayſing the others clemency. Eyther it is, that wée are not cōtented with things preſent: or that is true, ſeldome commeth the better.
         
         
            59 Of the Colyer and the Fuller.
            A Colyer ſometime deſired a Fuller to dwell with hym in houſe togyther: Company. Nay (ſayd the Fuller) this neyther pleaſeth me, nor yet is for my profite. For I feare greately leaſt that whiche I make cleane, thou ſhouldeſt raye as blacke as a coale.
            
               Mor. Wée are héereby warned too kéepe company with thoſe that be of a perfect honeſt lyfe, and to ſhunne the felowſhip of leude men, as a noyſome plague.
         
         
            60 Of a Shepherd which kept a Wolf amongeſt his Dogges.
            A Shepherd finding a Wolues whelp, brought him home, and kept him among his doggs that were a ſauegarde for the ſhepe, which being well growne, began to kil ſhéepe, and to teach the dogs to eate with him, whiche thing the ſhepherd marking, killed the Wolf, but yet

he could not make the dogs leaue killing of ſhéepe. Then ſayd the ſhepherd, worthily am I thus ſerued, bycauſe I put a Wolfe amongſt the Dogs, whiche hath taught them too kill ſheepe.
            
               Mor. The fellowſhip of euill men corrupteth good manners.
         
         
            61 Of the Rauen and Wolues.
            A Rauen ſometyme folowed Wolues ouer manye high hills, wherfore hée required to be part taker of theyr praie, bycauſe he had ſo far followed them, neither had left their cōpanie. The Wolues made light of hym, bycauſe he followed not thē, but their praie, & in yt he wold as ſoon deuoure the harts of wolues, if they ſhould be ſlayn, as of any other beaſt.
            
               Mor. We muſt always mark not yt we doo, but of what mynde we are in doing.
         
         
            62 Of the father and his ſons.
            A Huſband man had many yong men Concord. to his ſons, which wer always at variāce, whom hée diligently endeuored to vnite in loue toogether, and bycauſe hée wold plainly opē to thē the incōueniēces

of theyr diſcord, hée brought a bundell of ſmall ſticks, whiche he cōmaunded them to bynde with a little corde, and then to breake it in péeces: they being but yong and weake, did their good wyll to breake it, but coulde not preuayle: Then theyr father looſed it, and gaue euery of them a little rod therof, which euery one according to his ſtrength did eaſily breake: and foorthwith he ſayde to them: Sonnes, if ye would agrée, and ſticke thus one to an other, no man were able to vanquiſhe you: but if ye be eyger to hurt and purſue one an other with mortal hatred, ye ſhal ſoone be a praie for your enimie.
            
               Mor By concord ſmall thyngs encreaſe. By diſcord great thyngs waſt and conſume.
         
         
            63 Of Bulles and a Lyon.
            THer were foure Bulls which agréeed to ſticke one too an other as well in wealth as in woe, whome the Lyon perceiued féeding together, and therfore was afraide too aſſaile them though hée were verie hungry: but in the ende he deuiſed by ſome crafty way to ſeuer them: whom

after they were parted he ſoon tore them in péeces.
            
               Mor. Nothing is ſurer than concord and diſcord maketh the mighty weak
         
         
            64 Of a Lyon which begged of the Wolfe part of his praie.
            THe Wolf and the For entred felowſhip, Conſenting perforce. and went a hunting, to whome, as they were diuiding the Harte whiche they had taken, the Lion came by chaūce, and chalenged the third part of the praie, bycauſe he was king of foure footed beaſtes: but the Wolf denyed it: then the Lion being angry, layd hold on the Wolfe with his clawes, and plucked the ſkinne cleane from his head, and made it redde, whereby the Wolfe eſcaped ſearſe with his life. After the Lion turned to the For and ſayde: What ſayeſt thou? Forſooth my lorde the Kyng (quod he) I graunte not only ye third part, but alſo the whole Hart vnto you: What (quod the Lion) hath any body taught thée to anſwere ſo wyſely: Yea ſir, (ſayde the Fore:) The redde hatte which you put on my fellow the Wolfe hath taught me.
            
               
               Mor. Better it is ſometime to graūt a part than to léeſe the whole.
         
         
            66 Of a Snayle.
            THe Snayle being offended that he cō
               tinually Content in thy ſtate. abode in moyſt and low places, deſired the Egle, (of whome he had heard, that ſhée flewe ſo hygh, that ſhée myght beholde the greateſt parte of the Earth on euery ſide) to cary hym vp on high, wherby he myghte at once beholde both Hilles and Gaileys, the Fields and ſhe Sea. Whiche thing, when the Egle hadde quickly done, ſhee caſt him downe, whereby he fell on the grounde, and was daſhed in péeces.
            
               Mor Let no mā exalt himſelf higher than his ſtate & nature doth require.
         
         
            67 Of the Doue and the Kyte.
            IN time paſt the Doues kept war with the Kyte, whom bicauſe they woulde banquiſhe, they choſe the Hauke too bée theyr Kyng. When hée was come to the kingdome, hée was rather a mortall enimie to them than a King, he caughte and deſtroyed them as faſt as the Kite. Then

the Doues were wonderful ſory for that they had doone, and iudged it muche ſafer for them to haue endured the perpetuall warres of the Kite, than the tyrānie and oppreſſion of the Hauke.
            
               Mor. Let no man bée too much grieued wyth hys eſtate, for nothyng is bleſſed on euery ſyde.
         
         
            68 Of a Husbandman.
            A Certeyne huſbandman was diſcontented, that he dayly ploughed his earth, and could attayn no great wealth through his toyling, & had ſéen ſome ſouldiers whiche when warre was broken vp, had ſo encreaſed theyr ſubſtance, that they went wel apparailed, fared ſumptuouſly, and liued in all pleaſure. Wherevppon hée ſolde his Sheepe, Goates, and Dxen, and bought horſe and Armoure, and went a warfare, where, bycauſe he played not the man as he ought, he was ſpoyled of al that he had & wounded ſore: then he miſliked warfare, and mynded to occupye marchandiſe, hoping for greater gayne & leſſe payne: when he had ſold his Farme, and laded his ſhyppe with marchandiſe,

he launched out into the déepe, where ſodeynly there aroſe a great tempeſt of weather, the ſhyp was drowned, and he with all his companie were caſte away.
            
               Mor. Let euery man be content with his eſtate, ſeing that miſerie is euery where at hand.
         
         
            68 Of the Hare and the Fox.
            THe Hare and the Foxe made theyr peticions too Iupiter, the one deſired ſwiftneſſe to his ſubtiltie, the other ſubtiltie to his ſwiftneſſe: Iupiter aunſwered them: In the begynning of ye world, wée gaue euery beaſte his propre gifte bountifully: now if one ſhould haue had all, other had ben wronged.
            
               Mor. God hath beſtowed his gifts ſo indifferently vpon euery mā, that we ought with our ſtate to be ſatiſfied.
         
         
            69 Of the Elme and the Oſier.
            THere ſprong vp an Elme in the bank Contention with ſuperiours. of a Riuer, whiche mocked an Dſier that grew next him, for his weakeneſſe, bicauſe that with the leaſt beating of the

water he moued, but of his own ſtrēgth and ſtoutneſſe he boaſted excedingly, and howe that he had continued there many yeares not able to be ſhaken by the violence of the water. It hapned on a tyme, that by force of the waues he was brokē downe, and caried away by the ſtreame: Then the Dſier mocked hym, ſaying: Whither away neyghbour, wilte thou nowe forſake me? Where is nowe thy ſtrength become?
            
               Mor. Thoſe men are wiſer that giue place to their betters, than they that doo contende and haue a fowle ouerthrowe.
         
         
            70 Of the Serpent and the Crab.
            THe Serpente and the Crab being entred friendſhip, liued together. The Crab being a true meaner, exhorted him to leaue off his gyle: but he would not obey him: the Crab therfore watched him, when he was a ſléepe, and as well as hée coulde preſſed hym downe and ſlue hym, be ſéeing the ſerpent when he was deade, ſayd: Thou oughteſt afore too haue bene ſtrayght and ſimple, and then thou hadſt

eſcaped this puniſhment.
            
               Mor. They which go craftily to their friends, doo rather hurt them ſelues.
         
         
            72 Of the Hart and the Wolfe.
            A Hart ſometyme accuſed a Shepe before the Wolfe, that he ought hym a buſhell of wheate: The Shéepe in very déede knew nothing of this, yet for feare of the Wolfe promyſed payment. A day was ſet, which being come, the Hart put the Shepe in remembraunce therof, ſhe denyed it, excuſing that promiſe too bee made for feare of the Wolues preſence. Forced promiſes are not to be kept.
            
               Mor. It is a clauſe of the lawe, force muſt haue the repulſe by force. But thereof cometh a new ſentence: It is lawfull to paye craft with the lyke.
         
         
            73 Of a Feller of woode.
            AS a Woodfeller was cuttyng wood néere a riuer ſide, he loſt his axe, who being vncertayne what to doe, ſate hym downe on the riuers banke and wepte. But Mercurius vnderſtanding the cauſe, & moued with pitie, diued vnder the water,

broughte vp a golden axe, and aſked him, if that were it whiche he loſte: Hee denyed it too bée his: then hée dyued ageyne, and brought vp one of Siluer, the whiche hée refuſed too bee his, then hée dyued the thyrde tyme, and tooke vp his Axe, whiche he acknowledged to be his which he loſt. Mercurius perceyuing him too bée a iuſt man and a true, gaue them all vnto hym, who foorthe with came too hys fellowes, and ſhewed them what hadde happened vnto hym. One of them bycauſe hee woulde alſo trye it, came to the Ryuer, and caſt in his Axe willingly: then ſatte hym downe and wepte.
            Vnto whome when Mercurius had appeared, and vnderſtode the cauſe, he lykewyſe dyued, and broughte vp a golden Axe, whiche he aſked, if hée hadde loſte: He reioycing, dyd affirme it too bee his. Whoſe impudent and manyfeſt falſhod Mercurie perceyuing, neyther gaue hym the golden axe, nor his owne.
            
               Mor. How muche GOD loueth the ryghtuous, ſo muche hée hateth the vnryghtuous.
         
         
            
            73 Of the Cocke and the Foxe.
            THe Foxe béeing ſometyme very hungry, thoughte by ſuttletie too get his pray amongſt the Hennes, which by the conduction of the Cocke were flowne into a hygher trée than hée coulde clymbe: whervpon he came to the Cocke, whome he gently ſaluted, and ſayde: What makeſt thou ſo hygh? Haſt thou not hearde the newes of late, whiche are ſo good for vs? Verely (quod the Cocke) I heard nothing: but I praye thée what are they? The Foxe ſayde: I am come hyther to make thée pryuie of oure ioy: For there was lately a generall Counſell helde of all Beaſtes, wherein was concluded a continuall peace betwéene all Beaſtes: ſo that nowe withoute any manner of feare, moleſtation, or laying awayte of any, euery one may walke where as he liſt in ſafetie and quietneſſe, therefore come downe and lette vs kéepe holy this day. The Cocke perceyuing the ſubtiltie and crafte of the Foxe, ſayde to him: Thy tydings are very good, whiche alſo I do lyke well: and foorthwith he ſtretched out his necke, and looked a farre off,

as though he ſawe ſome ſtraunge thing, whom the Foxe aſked, what he eſpied? The Cocke aunſwered, I ſée two dogges comming amayne with open mouth: the Fox there wt quaking for feare bad them Adieu, for tyme it is for me to be gone, & foorthwt tooke him to his féete: What ſir (quod the Cocke) whyther runneſt thou? what feareſt thou? thou néedeſt doubt nothing, if this peace be concluded: verily (quod ye Fox) I can not tell whither theſe Dogs haue heard of this decrée or not. Wherby one craft was paid with ye like.
         
         
            74 Of a deceyuer.
            THere was a certeyn man who ſowed leade and other trifles in a péece of lether, as though it had ben ſom Iewel, & in the ſight of a riche marchaunt & other men, he priuilie threw it to the ground, & after tooke it vp agayne, inquiring if any had loſt it: This riche man being couetous, came and affirmed it to be his: to whom the deceyuer ſayd: Is it a precious thing as it ſéemeth? The Marchaunt auouched it to bée. Mary (quod the other) thou ſhalt not haue it agayne except thou

giue mée .x. Crownes for a reward, which he willingly gaue, & forth with departed & opened the leather, but he perceyuing it to be a ſmall trifle, went to the Deceyuer, alleaging yt he was beguiled, wherefore he threatned to hang him, excepte he reſtored the .x. Crownes. Why (quod the deceyuer) didſt thou craftly and falſly ſaye it was thine? and he caught holde on his hand and would haue brought him before ye maior to trie their honeſtie, but ye marchaūt plucked back his hand & ran away.
         
         
            75 Of a Foxe caught by a Dog, whyles ſhe fayned hir ſelfe dead.
            A Foxe counterfeyting that ſhe was dead, to the ende to entrap the birdes which ſhould come to hir as to a dead carcaſe, being walowed in durt, did lie with hir face vpwarde in a field, wayting for Choughes and Rauens, & ſuche like gréedy birdes, whiche ſhe would deuoure. It happened a dog to come by, whiche ſnatched at hir and with his téeth tore hir. Wherat ſhe ſayd: I am worthily ſerued, for whiles I endeuoure ſubtilly to catche birds, my ſelf am caught by an other.
            
               
               Mor. They which lie in wayte for other, ought not to be gréeued if they bée entrapped them ſelues.
         
         
            76 Of a Boy and a Theefe.
            A Boy ſat wéeping on the brinke of a Well, whom a Théefe demaūded the cauſe thereof. Mary (quod he) as I drew water my rope brake, and a pot of gold is fallen in. This théefe beléeuing him, put of his clothes and lept into the Well to ſéeke it: which, bycauſe he founde not, he came vp again, where he coulde neyther ſée the Boy nor his cote, for the Boy was gone with it.
            
               Mor. Hée that vſeth deceipt, ſomtime is deceyued.
         
         
            77 Of the Thruſhe.
            THe Thruſh made his vaunts yt he had won the friendſhip of the Swallow, to whom his mother ſayde: Thou arte a foole ſonne, if thou think to liue with hir, ſéeing eyther of you deſireth contrarie places, for ſhe abideth in hot places, but thou in colde.
            
               Mor. Make not thoſe thy friendes, whoſe liuing diſagréeth from thine.
         
         
            
            81 Of the Aire and the vvinde.
            THe Aire on a time cited the winde before the Iudge & maker of all things, and ſayd: O Lorde of all things, beholde and take pitie of me, ye haue placed me Prince lyke inough, for which I giue you thanks, bycauſe ye haue appointed me to be the life of all liuing things, but herein I was deceyued, for this wind doth make me ſo cold and intemperate, therefore I ſay to him, if he preſume frō hencé foorth to blowe vpon me, I will choke him: to whom the Creator ſayd: Aire thou ſayſt ill, though the winde make thée colde and toſſe thée, yet he maketh thée holſome and temperate. If the wind blew not on thée, thou ſhouldeſt be corrupt, lothſome, infected and hated of all men: wherfore thou oughteſt to loue him whiche preſerueth thy health, wherewith the Aire was at one with the Winde.
            
               Mor. We ought to loue, and paciently ſuffer them which correct vs.
         
         
            82 Of a Trauailer.
            A Wayfaring man hauing trauayled farre, vowed, if he found any thing to Couetouſneſſe.
               
offer the half thereof to Mercurius. He found a bag full of Almonds and Dates, whiche he tooke and eate: but the Date ſtones and ſhells of the Almonds he layd vppon an Altare, ſaying: Thou haſte O Mercury, my vowe, for with thée I partake both the outſide & the inſide of that I found.
            
               Mor. The Fable is againſt couetous men, whiche for couetouſneſſe deceyued the Gods.
         
         
            83 Of a Woman and a Hen.
            A Certen Widowe had a Hen, whiche day by daye laid an egge: ſhe ſuppoſing, if ſhe gaue hir more barley, that ſhe would lay twiſe a day, did ſo: but the hen being fat, could not lay once a day.
            
               Mor. Sometime they looſe the preſent commoditie, which through couetouſneſſe ſéeke after more.
         
         
            84 Of a couetous man.
            A Couetous man hauing ſolde all hys goods, made a wedge of golde, whiche in a certein place he buried togither wt his ſoule & mind, to which he dayly went

to ſée it: One of the workmen watching him on a time, and perceyuing what was done, digged vp the wedge and caried it away: afterward he came, who ſéeing the place empty, began to lament and plucke him ſelf by the haire. Whē one ſaw him thus wéeping, and vnderſtoode the cauſe thereof, he ſayd: Friend be not ſory, for hauing golde, thou hadſt it not, take therfore a ſtone, and hide it for thy gold: and ſuppoſe that it is golde, and it ſhall be all one to thée, for as I perceyue, whē it was golde, thou didſt not occupie it.
            
               Mor. It auayleth nothing to be endued with poſſeſſions, except we haue the vſe thereof
         
         
            81 Of the Chough and the Doues.
            A Chough ſéeing Doues in a certeyn douehouſe wel kept, coloured him ſelf white, and wēt thyther, bicauſe he would be partaker of their foode. They as long as he helde his peace, ſuppoſing him to be a Doue, receyued him into their companie. But he forgetting him ſelf on a time chatted, whoſe nature they then knowing, bette him and draue him away: Of

which meate being depriued, he returned to ye Choughs: they bicauſe of his colour not knowing him, draue him frō féeding with them: ſo coueting both, enioyed neyther.
            
               Mor. We muſt be content with our owne, conſidering that couetouſneſſe, beſides that it nothing auayleth, ſometime is the cauſe to looſe the preſeut good that we haue.
         
         
            82 Of the Dog and the ſhadowe.
            AS a Dog by chaunce ſwam ouer the Riuer, he caried in his iawes a piece of fleſh. The ſunne then ſhyning, as cō
               monly it happeneth, the ſhadowe thereof appeared in the water: which when hée had ſéene, ſuppoſing it to be another piece of fleſh, ſnatched gréedely thereat, & ſo loſt that he had in his iawes. The Dog being ſtroken at the harte, bothe with the loſſe of his fleſhe and alſo of his fooliſhe hope, barked thus in his language: Ah wretch, whiche lackedſt a meaſure in thy gréedie deſire. Thou hadſt inough and too much hadſt thou not doted, nowe throughe thy follie thou haſt nothing left thée.
            
               
               Mor. We are warned of modeſtie and wiſedome, in deſiring and eſchuing of things, and to vſe a meane in our deſires.
         
         
            88 Of a couetous Ambaſſadour,
            ACertē couetous man being ſent Embaſſadour for his countrey to another Citie, there were ſtraigth at hand trumpeters to welcome him, and to delight his eares with muſicke, hoping thereby to fill their purſes with money. He ſent them woord, it was now no time to play bycauſe his hart was heauy for the death of his mother: the Trumpeters deceyued of their purpoſe, departed ſorowing. Then a friende of his hearing of his ſorowe, came to ſée and comforte him, and aſked him, how long it was ſince his mother died? Forty yeares (quod he) then his friende vnderſtanding the wilie deceyt of the Ambaſſadoure, laughed excéedingly.
            
               Mor. This Fable belongeth to couetous men, which ſtudie all the wayes to the wood to ſaue their money.
         
         
            
            89 Of a couetous man dying.
            AS a couetous man lay a dying, and vnderſtood that at length he ſhoulde cary nothing with him, he turned him to his friendes and neyghboures whome he ſawe preſent, and ſayd: Learne of mée, whiche al my life time haue endeuoured to gather goods, that ye trauaill not too much too heape vp riches: for of ſo many Acres of land, of ſo much precious apparell whiche with ſo great ſweating I haue gotte, I ſhall haue but a hole of fiue foot, and one ſhéet, wherwith being dead, I ſhall be couered.
            
               Mor. It is a fooliſhe and miſerable thing to beſtowe ſo much labor in gathering of goods, whiche (whyther we will or not) we muſt quickly leaue.
         
         
            90 Of a Rauen taken by Dogs.
            TWo Rauens féeding on a carcaſe, had torne away two great gobbets of fleſh, which thei purpoſed to cary through the Aire: but Dogs comming ſodenly vpon them, the one of them leauing hys piece of the carcaſe, ſtraight flewe farraway from the ſight of them: The other

gréedie of his praye, and ſtaying to let goe his piece, was taken by the dogs: Who ſéeing that he ſhould preſently die, ſayde: Ah wretche and vnhappie packe that I am, whiche for ſo ſmall a commoditie léeſe ſo many pleaſures of life.
            
               Mor. Inſaciable gréedineſſe hath commonly bene the vndooing of couetous men.
         
         
            91 Of a Gote and a Dog.
            
               A Gote being hungrie, deſired to enter a Gardin where he ſawe gréene potherbes: but a Bandog, whom the Gardiner had ſet to be kéeper, would not giue him leaue, but ſwore his death if he ſtepped in. The Gote aunſwered, why doeſt thou forbid me to eate that, whiche auayleth thee nothing? I wil in no wiſe do this (quod the Dog) bycauſe it is my naturall diſpoſition.
            
               Mor. This Fable ſheweth the nature of couetous men which haue plenty of many things, whereof they haue no vſe, neyther ſuffer others to enioy it.
         
         
            92 Of a couetous mā that eate vvithered Apples.
            
               A Couetous man had gathered many Apples and faire, ſuche as the Poets

report to haue bin in the Gardins of Alcinous and the Heſperians: whiche he did ſo ſpare, that he durſt eate none, excepte they began to periſhe. His ſonne being very liberall, brought his fellowes very often into the Apple loftes, ſaying: Take of theſe what ye will, but touch not them that are periſhed, for my father wil haue them ſerued alwayes after meate, which thing they willingly obeyed.
            
               Mor. Nothing is more miſerable than a couetous man whiche kéepeth for others that whiche God hath lent him to vſe.
         
         
            93 Of a Ieſter and a Biſhop.
            
               A Certē Ieſter came in the calends of Ianuarie to a Biſhop, who was very Couetous Prelats. rich, but couetous: Of whom he begged a piece of gold for a new yeares gift. This Prelate ſayd that he was mad, in that he ſuppoſed to haue ſo muche money giuen him for a newe yéeres gifte. Then the fellow begged a piece of ſiluer, but he ſayd that was too much. Agayn, he required of him ye leaſt coyne of braſſe: but whē be could not obtayn y•, he ſayd: I pray thée

yet (reuerend father) at the leaſt, beſtow thy bliſſing on me in ſteade of a preſent. Then ſayde the Biſhop: Knéele downe ſonne that I may bliſſe thée. Nay, then (quod hée) I care not for your bliſſing, if it be ſo good cheape, for if it had bē worth a farthing, you would not haue graunted it to mée.
            
               Mor. This is againſt Biſhops and Prieſts, whiche ſette more by riches than all holy miſteries of the Church.
         
         
            94 Of a Prieſt which buried his Dog.
            
               A Countrey Prieſte dwelling in Tuſcia, who was very riche, had a litle Dogge whom he dearely loued: whiche, when it died, he buried in the churchyard. Whereof the Biſhop of that Dioceſſe being aduertiſed, and being couetous, ſuppoſing thereby to get ſome great ſum of money, therevppon he ſomoned the Prieſt to appeare before him. He knowing well the pretence of the Biſhoppe, tooke with him fifty pieces of golde, and came to the Biſhop, who layde ſore to his charge the burying of his Dogge, for which he commaunded hym to priſon.

The Prieſte (as he was riche) ſo beyng witty withall, humbly aunſwered him, ſaying: Reuerend Father, if your holyneſſe vnderſtoode the ſinguler wiſdome of my Dogge, ye woulde nothing maruell that he was buried amongſt men: For his wit paſſed mans reaſon, as well in his life time as at the houre of hys death. What is this (quod the Biſhop) that thou ſayeſt? Forſothe (quod the Prieſt) he made a Wil at his latter end, and knowing your neceſſitie, he bequethed you fifty pieces of golde, whiche I haue brought with mée. The Biſhoppe, when he had receyued the money (being well pleaſed) ſent away the Prieſte vnpuniſhed.
         
         
            95 Of a Shepherd that encouraged his flocke againſt the Wolfe.
            
               A Shepherd whiche had a great flocke of Gotes and ſhéepe, ſéeing his flocke dayly to be a praie to the wolf, and to decreaſe, he gathered them all togyther, & wt long talke exhorted them not to feare the wolfe (ſéeing they were moe in number, and beſides that fenced with hornes, which ye wolf lacked) but that they would

at once withall their might defēde thēſelues frō his aſſault, promiſing thē his own ayde to the vttermoſt. They being herewith encouraged, did promis and ſweare that they would not ſtir an ynche for the wolf. But ſhortly after when they heard that the wolf came, they were ſo afrayd, that the ſhepherds wordes coulde by no meanes ſtay them from running away. Then ſayde the Shepherd to him ſelfe: it is not poſſible that nature ſholde be altered.
            
               Mor. Dull heads and cowards are afraid, not only of the ſight, but alſo of the report of their enimies, neyther cā they be encouraged to manhood by any talke of their Captayne.
         
         
            96 Of a Fiſher and fiue Fiſhes.
            THere were fiue Fiſhes, yong, fat, and luſtie, whiche ſwam in a créeke of the Counſell. ſea, whom a Fiſher eſpying that paſſed by, ſet his nets to take them. They ſéeing that, ſayde: It is good that we ſtrongly ſwimme togither and breake thoſe nets, that hereafter they may deceyue no more fiſhe, for we are ſtrong, and this we may

ſtoutely do. Then an auncient and witty Sturgion lying at reſte in the water, and hearing this, ſtarted vp ſaying: litle ones, your intent is fooliſhe, therefore I counſell you, if ye will be ſafe, to auoyde the nets, otherwiſe when ye are faſte in them ye will be ſory. Theſe Fiſhes being yong, and truſting in their owne ſtrength, deſpiſed the counſell of the elder, and they ſwamme togither ouer the nets, minding to breake them, but the nets yelded, and their ruſhing did not preuayle, ſo that, when they were taken, they mourned, lamented and ſyghed to late.
            
               Mor. It is good to beléeue our elders, which are wiſer than our ſelues.
         
         
            97 Of the Owle.
            SOmetime the moſt part of birds went to the Owle and deſired hir no longer to abide in holes of houſes, but rather in the boughs of trées, where is ſwéeter ſinging. And incontinently they ſhewed hir a yong Oke newe ſprong vp, ſmall and tender, where ſhe might ſitte very

ſoftly, and builde hir neſt: ſhe woulde not agrée therto, but gaue them counſell not to credite the yong plante, for it woulde beare in tyme to come, birdlyme, whiche would be their deſtruction. They being a light kinde of birdes and often flitting, deſpiſed the good coūſel of the Owle: but when the Oke was growē, it was brode and full of boughes: then the birdes togither did flie amongſt the boughs, there they tooke their pleaſure, hopped vp and downe, played and ſong togither. In the meane time the Oke brought forth birdlime. Then the ſmal birds all too late repented, that they refuſed that holſome counſell: and this is the cauſe (men ſay) why all birdes, as ſoone as they ſée the Owle, come cluſtering about hir, follow hir, ſit aboute hir and flie with hir, for they remembring that counſell, accounte hir wiſe, and come aboute hir by flockes, that they might learne wiſdome and knowledge of hir.
            
               Mor Deſpiſe not the counſel of him that giueth it a right.
         
         
            
            98 Of a Fox.
            A Foxe being caught in a ſnare, when Counſell for priuate gayne. ſhe had eſcaped with hir tayle cut of, was aſhamed of hir life, where vppon ſhe pretended to perſuade other Foxes therto, ſo as by a cōmon miſchiefe ſhe myght couer hir owne ſhame: When ſhée had aſſembled them all togither, ſhe coūſelled them to cutte off their tayles, alledging that they were not onely vncomely but alſo a ſuperfluous burthen: One of the Foxes aunſwered hir: Truely ſiſter, yf this thing were not only for thy profite, thou wouldſt not counſell vs thertoo.
            
               Mor. Wicked men gyue counſell too their neighbours for no good will, but for their owne aduantage.
         
         
            99 Of the Lyon and the Gote.
            A Lyon by chaunce eſpyed a Gote vpō 
               Crafty mē
                an high rock, whom he counſelled rather to come downe and féed in the gréene medow: ſo wold I ſayde the gote, if thou were thence, for thou geueſt me counſell, not for my pleaſure, but to ſlake thy hunger.
            
               Mor. Credit not euery mans talke,

for ſome counſel not to profit thée, but themſelues.
         
         
            100 Of a Fox taken by a Countryman.
            A Foxe being taken by a Countryman Craftie men. of whoſe Hens he had kylled many, with flattering woords beſought hym to ſet him at libertie, ſwearyng deuoutely that thencefoorth he would neuer do him harme. The Countryman aunſwered, I woulde willingly forgiue thée, and let thée go ſafe and ſounde, but that I know thée to be craftie, and a promiſe breaker, and I certenly know, that thou canſt not hinder mée béeing deade, but I myſtruſt thée being alyue.
            
               Mor. We muſt giue no credit to falſe and craftie men.
         
         
            101 Of a Woman that woulde dye for hir Husband.
            A Certeyne chaſte Matrone that loued hir huſbande well, was grieued at Craft of women. the heart for the ſickeneſſe of hym, wéeping and mournyng much: & bycauſe hir hearty good will might appéere the more, ſhée beſought death, if néedes he woulde

haue hir Huſbande, rather too take hir and to excuſe him: whiles ſhe thus ſpake, ſhe eſpied Death with his lotheſome lookes approching, wherewith ſhe beyng agaſt, and already repenting, ſayd: I am not that body which thou ſeekeſt, he lyeth in the bed whom thou cameſt to ſlea.
            
               Mor. No man loueth hys friende ſo well, but he loueth hym ſelfe better: Néere is my coate, but neerer is my ſkinne.
         
         
            102 Of a Lyon being olde.
            THere was a Lion which in his youth Crueltie requited. through his fierceneſſe had purchaſed the diſpleaſure of many: whereof in hys olde age hée receyued iuſt puniſhement. Euery beaſt in recompence of their hurt requited hys quarell: The Bore wyth his tuſke, the Bull ſtrake him with hys horns, and eſpecialy the Aſſe, (béeing inflamed to caſt off the name of a cowarde) with chyding and kickyng, couragiouſly didde beate him. The Lion then wayling lamentably ſayde: Thoſe whome ſometime I haue hurt, pay me agein with the ſame meaſure, and not without a cauſe:

Agein, thoſe to whome ſometyme I haue done good, requite not now my goodneſſe, but rather vniuſtly are my foes: greate was my follie when I made ſo many my enimies, but greter, in that I truſted falſe friendes.
            
               Mor. When thou art in proſperous eſtate be not lofty nor fierce, if fortune once frown or looke awry, they whom thou haſte hurte, ſhall reuenge theyr quarell: if thou haue fréends, put a differēce betwene them, ſome are frends not too thée, but too thy table, and to thy fortune, which as the wynde turneth, will turne, and happye ſhalte thou be if they be not thy foes.
         
         
            103 Of an Egle and a Conie.
            SOmtime an Egle buylt hir neſt in an high trée, who by chaunce eſpyed yong Rabbettes a farre off féeding, whiche he ſnatched vp, and caried to his yong ones to féede on. The Conye with flatteryng woords beſoughte him to reſtore his ſon. But the Egle ſuppoſing him being but a ſmall beaſte, and earthly, by no meanes able to hurt him, tore thē in péeces with

hir clawes in the ſight of the Conie, and gaue thē to hir yong ones to make merie withall. The Conies heart earning ſore at the death of hir Rabbets, woulde not let it reſt vnreuenged, but digged vp by the rootes that trée where hir neſt was, which with the leaſt blaſt of winde was ouerthrowne: By which meanes the Egles yong ones being without feathers, and not able to flie, fell to the grounde, and were deſtroyed. Which thing not a little comforted the Conie.
            
               Mor. No man bearing him ſelfe ſtiff of his owne ſtrength, ought to deſpiſe the weaker, ſeing ſometyme the feeble do reuenge the wrong don to them by the mightie.
         
         
            104 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
            IT hapned that Hares hering a ſtrange Courage. roaring in the woode, all trembling began ſwiftly to runne away: In running they ſtayed at a mariſhe, being in doute what to doe, ſéeing danger on euery ſyde: and to encreaſe theyr feare they eſpied Frogs there drowned. Then one wyſer than the reſt ſayd: Wherfore are we ſo

fondly afraid? Let vs take a good hart, for ſwiftneſſe in rūning we lack not, but only a couragious ſtomack, as for this hurly burly we néed not fear but ſet it light.
            
               Mor. In all things take a good hart: ſtrength without courage is but dead: for the cheefe heade of ſtrength is hardineſſe.
         
         
            105 Of the Bee and Inpiter.
            THe Bée whych as men think, was the firſte make of Waxe, came ſometyme Curſing. to ſacrifice to the Gods, whoſe oblatiō to Iupiter was a houſe of hony, wherwith Iupiter reioycing, commaunded hir petition whatſoeuer it were, to be graū
               ted. Then the Bée aſked thus: moſt puiſant god of al gods, I beſech thée graūt to thy handmayde, that who ſoeuer cōmeth to the hyue to ſteale away hir hony, may forth with dye as I haue pricked him. Iupiter being abaſhed at hir requeſte, bycauſe he loued mankinde farre aboue all other, at lengthe ſayde to hir: Be thou contente if thou ſting hym that ſtealeth thy honye, that thou mayſt leeſe thy ſting and foorthwyth dye, and that in thy ſting

thy lyfe may lye.
            
               Mor. We curſe oure enemyes, but it commonly lyghteth on oure owne heads.
         
         
            106 Of a hart and a Lyon.
            
               A Harte eſcaping Hunters, entred a Daunger. caue, where he chaunced on a Lyon, by whome he was taken: As he was dying, he ſayde: Woe is mée, that fléeing from men, haue happened on the cruelleſt of all beaſts.
            
               Mor. Many men auoyding ſmal dangers, runne into great.
         
         
            107 Of the Towne Dogs.
            
               A Great route of Towne dogs courſed ſore a Country dog which ran away and durſt not reſiſt: at the laſt he turned ageyne and ſhewed his téethe to them, then they all ſtoode ſtill, and durſte not come néere him, where as the Capteine generall of the hoſte was preſente, who turned to his ſouldiers, & ſayd: Felowes, this ſighte warneth vs not to flée, ſéeing we ſée more daunger to them that runne away, than to thoſe that reſiſt.
         
         
            
            108 Of two Pots.
            TWo Pots ſtoode togither on a bankthe Dealyng. one was of earth, the other of braſſe, which both were ſodeinly caught by the force of the ſtreames, the earthen Pot fering to be broken went ſwiftlieſt, whom the Braſen potte comforted, willing him to feare nothyng: for he coulde take heede ynough, that they ſhoulde not knocke togither. Nay (ſaid the other) I knowe well inough, whether the Riuer beate thée agaynſt mée, or mée againſte thee, I ſhall be in hazarde on euery ſide. Therfore haue I determined to kéepe no companie with thée.
            
               Mor. Better it is too deale with thy fellowe, than with thy better, for the myghtyer man can ſooner hurte thée, than thou him.
         
         
            109 Of the Swanne ſvngying at the poynt of death.
            
               A Swan being nere at the poynt of death, was aſked of the Storke, why Death. he ſoong ſweter, being nigh his death, (which all other beaſts do ſo much hate) than in all his lyfe tyme before, ſeing at

that tyme he ought to be ſory: the Swan aunſwered: Bicauſe from hencefoorth I ſhall not bée troubled with ſéekyng for meate, neither ſhall I neede to feare the Foulers ginne.
            
               Mor. Wée are warned hereby not to feare death, being by that bereft from all miſeries.
         
         
            110 Of an Olde man whych ſet Trees.
            
               A Man of very old age, was mocked of a yong man, bicauſe he planted trées, wher of he ſhold neuer ſée fruite: The old man aunſwered: Neyther thou perhaps ſhalte gather fruite of thoſe whiche thou goſt about to ſet. Shortly after the yong man fell out of a trée, whiche he clymbed to gather beries, and brake his necke.
            
               Mor. Death ſpareth no age.
         
         
            111 Of the Pheſaunt and the Pecocke.
            THe birds ſomtime being at debate about Debate. a certen election, at length choſe the Pheſant and the Pecocke, who alſo ſtraue for their prerogatiue, and about it conſumed their ſubſtance. Then ye birdes

aſſembled before the Egle, to whom they ſhewed their election, crauing that hée as an indifferent Judge would confirme it. The Egle, bicauſe he would perfectly vnderſtand the caſe, ſent for them both to heare them. The Pheſaunt beganne his tale thus: Oryghtuous iudge howe paſſing faire a birde I am thou mayeſt perceyue, howe ſwéete alſo my fleſh is, it is not vnknowne, wherefore I thinke my ſelfe worthy of the Lordſhippe. Then the Pecocke layde for hym ſelfe thus: Moſte gracious Lady, the woordes whiche the Pheſaunt hath alleaged are vntrue, for in beautie I farre exceede him, beſydes that my varyable tayle of ryght chalengeth this honor, & forthwith ſhe ſpred out hir tayle: When the Egle had heard both their argumentes, hée began firſt with the Pecocke, and ſayd: In ſetting vp thy tayle thou haſte diſprayſed thy ſelfe, for thy filthy féete declare thée vnworthy to bée ruler: Then turning to the Pheſant he ſayde: bycauſe thou art weake and alwayes weeping, and further canſte not ſing, I depriue thée alſo of this office. And ſo both were put out.
            
               
               Mor. They which wil be lords muſt not ſtriue.
         
         
            112 Of the Ape and the Brocke.
            THe Ape came to a Brocke to borowe Dettes. an Hundreth markes, bycauſe hée woulde occupie beyonde the Sea, promyſing him halfe the gayne: the Brocke aunſwered, I am content, if thou canſte fynd ſufficient ſureties for payment, with an Oblygatyon of theyr handes. The Ape broughte the Bugle and the Bull to bée his ſuretyes, and left the obligation in the cuſtodie of the Horſe, and went on his iourney, but neuer returned. The Brocke ſéeing hym ſelfe thus deluded by the Ape, did demaunde the dette of the ſureties, but they ſcorned hym, wherefore hée complayned vnto the Judge, and ſhewed the obligation, who compelled the ſureties to paye it, but they euer after perſecuted the Brocke, and wounded him ſore.
            
               Mor. He that boroweth not, kéepeth hym ſelfe oute of ſtryfe and greate trouble.
         
         
            
            113 Of the Dog and the Cocke.
            THe Dog & the Cock entred friendſhip & iorneyd togither: when night drew Deceyte. néere, the Cocke flew vp into a trée, and reſted, but the dog ſlept at the roote of the hollow trée. It hapned that the Cocke, as he was wōt, crowed in the night ſeaſon, whome the Fox hearing, ranne towarde him, and as he ſtoode on the grounde, he prayed the Cock to come downe, bicauſe he greately deſired to embrace ſo trim a ſinging birde: the Cocke bade him that he ſhoulde firſt wake the porter, whiche ſlept at the root of the trée, and that when he had opened he woulde come downe: as the Foxe ſought meanes too call hym vp, the Dog ſtarte vp and tore him in pieces.
            
               Mor. Wyſe men wil by pollicy ſend their enimies to myghtier than themſelues.
         
         
            114 Of the Foxe and the Storke.
            
               A Foxe ſometyme bad a Storke to ſupper, when the ſeruice was broughte in, the Foxe ſet broth on the table, which bycauſe it was thyn, the Storke aſſayed to picke vp with his bill, but coulde not,

whiche the Foxe eaſily licked vp: the other thus deluded, departed with muche ſhame. Within few days after ye Stork returned and likewiſe bade the Fox too ſupper: A glaſſe full of meate was ſet on the boorde, which bycauſe it had a narow necke, the Foxe might well looke on and be hungry, but he coulde not once licke his lips withall, which the Storke with his bill eaſely pulled out.
            
               Mor. Laughing, ieſting, craftie and deceytfull dealing muſte be requited with the like.
         
         
            115 Of a Frier, a Layman, and the Wolfe.
            
               A Certaine religious man of the order Deceytfull perſons. of S. Anthonie, begged of a Huſbandman a portion of corne, for which he promiſed to warrant all that he had, eſpecially that his Shéepe that yere ſhould bée ſafe. The coūtryman giuing credit to his promiſes, lette his Shéepe ſtray abroade where they liſt, wherof the greteſt number a Wolf deſtroyed: the Farmer therwith chaſing, when the nexte yeare the gatherer came for corne, did not only denie

him his almes, but alſo blamed him for his fooliſhe promiſes. Why what is the matter (quod hée)? The other aunſwered, his ſhéepe were deſtroyed by the Wolfe: What the Wolf? (ſaid he) ſurely that is a naughtie beaſt, truſt him not, but beware of him: for he would not only deceiue S. Anthony but alſo Chryſt him ſelfe, if hée could. It is therfore follie to credit thoſe whoſe marke that they ſhoote at is onely to deceyue.
         
         
            116 Of a Parat.
            
               A Parat being brought out of the Eaſt partes into the Weſt, where no ſuch Deſerts rewarded. birds are wont to bréede, maruelled that he was more eſtéemed there, than in his natiue countrey: for hée was kepte in a Cage of yuorie wrought wyth Syluerwire, fed with moſt ſwéete meate, which thyng happened not to other birdes of the weſt partes, whiche in beautie and ſpeaking as farre excelled. Then the Turtle béeing ſhutte vp in the ſame cage, ſayde: This is not maruel woorthy, for no man in his owne countrey is rewarded as hée deſerueth.
         
         
            
            117 Of an Aſſe.
            SOmetyme an Aſſe ſerued a Gardiner Deſire of new things of whoſe crueltie he complayned to Iupiter beſeching him to haue a new maiſter. Iupiter graunted his requeſt, & put him to a tyler, whō bicauſe he laded hym with much heuier burdens, he miſlyked: He therefore prayed Iupiter yet once ageyne, to ſhift hys ſeruice from hym to a gentler Mayſter. The God ſmyled at hys follie, yet the Aſſe continued ſo long an earneſt ſuter, that he forced him therto. Thē he ſerued a Curryer, whoſe trade when the Aſſe had well perceiued, he repented, ſaying: Ah wretche that I am, which can be contented with no maiſter, for now I haue got ſuche a one, which as I ſuppoſe, will alſo currie my ſkin.
            
               Mor. Things preſente we neuer allow, but ſeeke for new.
         
         
            118 Of waxe that deſired hardneſſe.
            THe Wax lamented that he was made Deſire that is fit. ſoft, & in danger to be hurt with euery light ſtroke. On a time he eſpied yt tyles were made of earthe, muche ſofter than hée was, who by the heate of the fire were made ſo harde, that they continued

many yéeres, he likewiſe caſt himſelf into the fire, hoping therby to come to that perfection of hardneſſe that they were: but the Waxe ſtreight way béeing melted, conſumed away.
            
               Mor. We are forbiddē to couet that which is contrary to our nature.
         
         
            119 Of a Pacient and a Phyſitian.
            
               A Phyſitian tooke vppon him to cure a Pacient, who at length dyed: then Dyet. ſayd he to the Pacientes kinſfolke: this man caſte hym ſelfe awaye for lacke of good dyet.
            
               Mor. Hée that vſeth quaffing and lyueth inordinatly, ſhall neuer be olde, or elſe ſhall haue a very ſhorte lyfe.
         
         
            120 Of an Aſſe carying an Image.
            AN Aſſe caryed an Image of ſiluer on his ſhoulders, whiche euery one that Dignitie. met it, did worſhip: wherwith béeing inſolent, he woulde no longer be an Aſſe: then was it tolde hym that hée was no God, but caried an Idoll.
            
               Mor. They that are placed in dignity ought to know that they are men.
         
         
            
            121 Of a Fiſher.
            
               A Fiſher fiſhed in a certē ryuer, where he ſpread abroade hys nets and compaſſed in the water, tying a ſtone to eyther of his ropes, and thus continued beating the water that the Fiſhes ſhooting by, might vnawares fall into his nets: which one of the inhabitauntes thereabout ſéeing, rebuked him for troubling ye riuer, that he ſuffered it not to haue the cléere water: he aunſwered: Excepte the riuer be thus troubled, I ſhoulde dye for hunger.
            
               Mor. The Rulers of Cities doo moſt of all enriche them ſelues, when they ſtirre vp diſcord amongſt the people.
         
         
            122 Of the Belly and other members.
            THe members of man perceyuing the Diſcord. Belly would not worke, fell at variaunce with him and denied their helpe any longer. It happened, that they began to faynt, the cauſe whereof they perceyued to bée: that the Belly, hauing receyued ye meate, did equally parte it to euery member, whervpon they became friends agayne.
            
               
               Mor. Great things by diſcorde decaye, but ſmall things by concorde are of force.
         
         
            123 Of the Frog and the Crab.
            
               A Frogge ſéeing a Crab ſwimming by the water ſide, ſayd: What is he ſo ylfauoured and foule, that dare trouble my water? ſéeing I am mightie and ſtrong, I will put him to flight. When he had ſo ſayd, he lept vpon the Crab ſaying: why waſt not thou aſhamed O wretch, to enter into my reſting place? Didſt not thou bluſh being ſo foule and ſo black, to defile the cleare water? The Crab, as his maner is, began to go backe and ſayde: I pray thée ſiſter ſay not ſo, for I would be at one with thée, therfore come not thus vpon mée. The Frog ſéeing him go back, ſuppoſed that he did it for feare of him, whereby he waxed more fierſe againſt him, ſaying: Drawe not back thou filth, for thou maiſt not eſcape, this day will I giue thy fleſh to the fiſh, and incontinent he ſkipped vpō him to kill him. The Crab ſéeing the preſent daunger turned about, and with his clawes byt the Frog & tore him in pieces.
            
               
               Mor. Euery man, as much as in him lieth, let him ſtudie to auoyde warre and diſcord.
         
         
            124 Of a Leopard and an Vnicorne fighting with a Dragon.
            THe Leopard ſometime fought with ye Dragon, againſt whome (bycauſe he could not preuayle) he beſought the Vnicorne to ayde him, and ſayd: Thou art a goodly beaſt, expert in fighting & valiaūt, wherfore I pray thée helpe me. The Vnicorne hearing this commendatiō of himſelf, aunſwered: Thou ſayſt truthe, for I haue ſkill in fighting, and therfore I wil valiauntly defende thée, for when ye Dragon ſhall open his mouthe, I will thruſt him into the throte with my horne. Whē they were both come to the Dragon, the Leopard gaue the onſet, truſting to the ſtrength of the Vnicorne, but the Dragō fought with them & ſpit fire at them. The Vnicorne ſéeing him open his mouth ran haſtely to thruſt him through, but he caſt his head at one ſide, whereby ye Vnicorne miſſing him, ſmot his horne faſt into the ground and died.
            
               
               Mor. Hée that wil fight for another, ſéeketh his owne deſtruction.
         
         
            125 Of the enuious Dog and the Oxe.
            
               A Dogge lay ſléeping in a racke full of hey, thyther came an Oxe to féede. Despite. The Dog ſéeing him comming, barked & for bad him. To whom the Oxe ſayd: the Diuell choke thée with this thy deſpite, which neyther canſt eate hey thy ſelf, nor yet will ſuffer me.
            
               Mor. Many are of that diſpoſition, yt they will grudge others that, whiche they for lacke of wit can not attayne vnto.
         
         
            126 Of a yong Man.
            
               A Certen yong Man eſpied an old man going crooked like a bent bow, whom Despiſe nothing. he aſked if he would ſell a bowe? Haſte thou (quod hée) any néede to looſe thy money? If thou liue til my age, nature ſhal giue thée a bowe without money.
            
               Mor. The faultes of age are not to be laughed at, bicauſe no man, if he liue, can eſcape it.
         
         
            
            127 Of a Countryman and Peares.
            
               A Certein gluttonous man tooke hys iourney to go to a Wedding wherevnto he was biddē. By the way he found an heape of peares, but none of them he touched, albeit he was excéeding hungry, which in cōtempt he made water on, for he thought ſcorne of ſuch meate, going to ſo good cheare. But as he paſſed on his way, he came to a ſtreame lately riſen with rayne, whiche without daunger of his life he could not paſſe ouer, therefore he returned home againe: and by the way he was ſo hungry (bicauſe of his lōg faſting) that if he had not eatē the peares that he piſſed on, ſéeing there was nothing elſe, he had famiſhed.
            
               Mor. Deſpiſe nothing, for what is ſo vile or baſe, that will not at one time or another ſerue for ſome purpoſe?
         
         
            128 Of a man that refuſed Clyſters.
            
               A Certen rich German fell ſick, to whō 
               Desprayſers of Phiſicke. came many Phiſitians to cure him, (for to hony come flies by heapes) amōgſt whome one helde opinion that he muſt take a Clyſter, if he woulde récouer hys

health: The pacient hearing this (bicauſe hée had neuer taken any ſuch medicine) was wood angrie, and commaunded all ye Phiſitians to be put out of doores, ſaying that they were mad, whiche would miniſter to his tayle, when his head aked.
            
               Mor. All holſome things ſeeme tedious to them which neuer aſſayed thē.
         
         
            129 Of a Deceyuer.
            
               A Certein poore man being ſick, vowed to the Gods, if he might recouer hys Diſſemblers. health, an hundred Oxen in ſacrifice: the Gods (bicauſe they would trie him) made him whole. When he was well, bicauſe he had no Oxen, he made an hundred Oxē of paſte, which on the Altar he ſacrifiſed. The Gods meaning to puniſh him therfore, appeared to him in a dreame, & ſayd: Go to the ſea ſhore in ſuch a place & there thou ſhalt find an hūdred talents of gold. This fellow when he awaked, reioyſing greatly, went to the place yt was ſhewed him and ſought for it, where he was takē by Pirates, whome he prayed for his liberty, promiſing thē a M. talents of gold, but to him they gaue no credit, but caried

him away and ſolde him for a M. Grotes.
            
               Mor. God hateth diſſemblers & lyers.
         
         
            130 Of a Cat and Miſe.
            
               A Cat hearing that there were many Diſsimulation. Miſe in a certein houſe, came thither: of which, thoſe that ſhe caught ſhe deuoured: The Miſe ſéeing them ſelues dayly diminiſhed, agréed togither to come down no more, leaſt they ſhould al be deſtroied: for if the Cat come not hither (ſayd they) we ſhall be ſafe. The Cat perceyuing the Miſe deſcended not, thought by deceyt to take them, and climbed vp on a beame, wheron ſhe hanged hir ſelf, fayning to be dead, whom one of the Miſe, as he looked downward eſpied, and ſayd to him: verily my friende, though I knewe thou were dead, yet would I not come downe.
            
               Mor. A wiſe man once deceyued through the falſhood of a wicked man, will neuer after credite hys diſſimulation.
         
         
            131 Of the, Wolf and the Sheepe.
            
               A Wolfe being bitten by Dogs and euill entreated, laye proſtrate along:

he lacking meate, eſpied a ſhéep, whome he deſired to bring him ſome of the running water to drink, ſaying: If thou wilt giue me drink, I will prouide meate my ſelf ſhe aunſwered: if I giue thée drink, thou wilt eate mée.
            
               Mor. This Fable is againſt an euil body, whiche by diſſimulation lyeth in wayte.
         
         
            132 Of the ſicke Aſſe.
            THe report was, that the Aſſe lay ſick, nigh at the point of death, there came both the Wolues and Dogges to viſite him, and demaunded of his Sonne, howe his Father dyd, he aunſwered (looking through the chinkes of the doore) better than ye would.
            
               Mor. This Fable ſpeaketh of them, that fayne to take heauily the death of other, where as they wiſhe them dead long before.
         
         
            133 Of a Foxe.
            
               A Foxe came into a Vineyarde where he eſpyed faire cluſters of Grapes which were ripe, of them fayne would he

eate, and bicauſe they were paſt his reach, he thought to find ſome ſhift to gette them: but perceyuing his labor to be loſt, and that by no meanes he could ſatiſfie his deſire, he turned his ſorowe into ioye, ſaying: Thoſe Cluſters be yet to ſoure to eate, for they would ſet my téeth on edge.
            
               Mor. It is wiſdome to diſſemble that he careth not for that whiche he knoweth he can not get.
         
         
            134 Of a man that would kil a Hog.
            IT was a cuſtome in a certeyn Citie of Picene in Italie, that he whiche killed a Hog in Winter ſhould bid his neighbours to ſupper. Now there was one which minded to kill a Hog, but lothe he was to be at any charges, wherevppon he aſked the aduiſe of his Godfather, how he might ſhifte of the expences. Tell abroade (quod hée) to morow, that this night there was a Hog ſtollen from thée. It happened the ſame night, (he nothing miſtruſting it) that one verily conueyed a Hogge from him. In the morning whē he roſe, he looked for his hogs, wherof miſſing one, he wént incōtinent to his Godfather, and cried a loude, that one of

his Hogs were ſtollē. Wel done (quod hée) thou playeſt y• wiſe fellow, for ſo I taught thée to ſpeake: the other ſwore by all the Gods he did not lie. I conne thee thāk (ſayd his Godfather) thou followeſt wel my coū
               ſell. The other for all that did ſweare and ſtare the more that it was true. Thou arte to be cōmended (quod hée) for I for warned thée ſo to ſaye, and my counſell was good. The other ſeing him ſelfe thus flouted, departed heauily.
         
         
            135 Of the Egle that cited al maner of birds.
            THe Eagle called togither all manner of wildfoule: which being aſſembled, as he Diſobedi
                  
                     •
                  nce. corrected certein faultes, there came Hunters which ſet abroade their nets to catche the birds. The Egle ſeing the preſent daū
               ger, made proclamation by his criers, that all ſhould follow the banner of the Egle, & flie with hir, if they would eſcape: then as many as flew with hir eſcaped, but ſome gluttonous & diſobediēt, who beholding the pray & coueting it, flew into ye nets, wherin being entangled, they cried piteouſly.
            
               Mor. Hée that will not obey, falleth into miſchief.
         
         
            
            136 Of a Satyr and a wayfaring Man.
            
               A Satyr, which in old time was counted Double tonged. God of the Woods, walking abroade, found a wayfaring mā couered with ſnow & nigh dead with cold: on whom taking pitie, he brought him into his denne & made a fire & cheriſhed him. It happened that the Satir eſpied him breathing on his hands, wher of demaūding the cauſe, he anſwered: to heate his hands. And being ſet downe to meate, the trauayler blowed on fried barley that was on his trencher. He aſked againe, why he did ſo? to coole it (quod he.) Thē the Satir draue him out of his denne, & told him that he would harbor none that had ſo variable a mouth.
            
               Mor. Deale not with that man, which hath a double hart, or is vnſtable in hys wordes.
         
         
            137 Of a tyrannous Griffon.
            THe Griffon ſometime tooke vppon him Do as ye woulde be done vnto. the gouernement of a Realme, whiche with Tyrannie he ruled, commaunding that no Straunger ſhould bye or ſell any thing amongſt them. Secondly, that none ſhoulde come from other Countreys to them. Thirdly, that none of hys ſubiectes.

ſhould trauell to other places: Theſe thrée things being ſtraightly executed, he liued in pleaſure and waxed riche, whereof he neuer gaue any thing. It happened that his Countrey was deſtroyed by lightning and tempeſtes, wherefore hys Citizens cried out, that they might trauaile abroade, leaſt they died for hunger. Then he ſent Ambaſſadoures to other Nations, deſiring to ſell them of their marchādiſe and barter them at their pleaſure. But they denied it, bycauſe he neuer would ſell any thing to thē: then he required that they woulde come with their ware to him, but they woulde not. Laſt of all he prayed them to receyue him and his people being then in miſerie: but they ſayd: Thou wouldeſt neuer come till néede made thée, therefore we will not receyue thée. Then hée and his people being thus reprobate, died miſerably.
            
               Mor. We muſt doo, as we woulde be done vnto.
         
         
            138 Of a Pie and a Cuckow.
            
               A Pie eſpying a Cuckow lurking amōgſt the boughes of a trée, ſuppoſed it to be Doubt the worſt. a Hauke, wher with being moued, flewe away:

which thing other birdes néere at hād beholding, mocked the Pie, that in ſtead of a Hauke, ſhe flew frō the Cuckow, ſhe anſwered: I had rather be mocked of you, thā my friends ſhould wéepe for mée.
            
               Mor. It is better to miniſter occaſion for our foes to laugh at, than our friends to wéepe at.
         
         
            139 Of a Serpent.
            
               A Serpent being troden vpon by many, Dreadfulneſſe. made his moane to Iupiter, but he ſayd to him: If thou hadſt ſtinged him whiche firſt kicked thée, the next would neuer haue attempted it.
            
               Mor. They which withſtande their aſſaulters, become a terror to others.
         
         
            140 Of the rule of womē of their huſbands.
            
               A Certein man caried about through the Dread without need. whole worlde a paire of bootes, whiche he woulde giue that man who feared not his wife. He could find none a great while, which would take them. But at length a Countreyman receyued them, to whome he ſayde: Soft lette me put them in thy boſome and wype them. But the Coūtryman

(bycauſe his ſhirt was new & white) ſayd: I dare not leaſt my wife taūt me for blacking my ſhirt: thē he tooke away the bootes & bet him therwith, ſaying: Get thée hence in the Diuels name, bicauſe thou dreadeſt thy wife for a litle trifle, thou didſt meane to deceyue me of my bootes, and he ſtraight way departed. But I think he hath not yet beſtowed them iuſtly of any man.
         
         
            141 Of a woman.
            
               A Certen Woman had a dronkard to hir huſband, from whiche vice (bicauſe ſhe Dronkenneſse. would rid him) ſhe vſed this pollicie: She watched him when he was dronken heauy a ſléepe, & like a dead man without féeling, and tooke him on hir ſhoulders, caried him into the churchyard, layde him in a graue & departed. When ſhe ſuppoſed that he was ſober, ſhe went and knocked at the head of the tombe, who aſked, who knocketh at the doore: his wife aunſwered, I am here, and haue brought meate for the dead. Ah (quod hée) bring mée rather ſome drink thā meat, thou doeſt trouble me in ſpeaking of meate and no drinke. The good woman ſtroke hir breaſt and ſayd: woe is mée wretch, for my

craft will do no good: thou my huſband art nothing mended, but become worſe, ſo that this diſeaſe hath got an habit in thée.
            
               Mor. We muſt not continue in euill déeds, for cuſtome ſometime créepeth on a man.
         
         
            142 Of the Bore and the Countryman.
            THere was a Bore which routed vp the corne, whoſe eare a Countreyman cut Dulſpirited. off. It chaunced he came againe the ſecond time, then he cut off his other eare. When he came yet againe, he caught him & caried him into the citie and gaue it his Attorney to make mery withall. At the feaſte when he was broken vp, his hart was not ſound. Then his Maiſter was wrothe with the Cooke therfore. Sir (quod the Countrymā) it is no maruell yt his hart is not here, for I think the fooliſh Bore had no harte, for if he had had any, he would not haue come ſo oft into my corne to his coſt. Then all the gueſtes laughed excéedingly at his fooliſhneſſe.
            
               Mor. Many liue ſo without ſpirite or boldneſſe, that it is doubtfull whether they haue a harte or not.
         
         
            
            143 Of a Gnat.
            
               A Gnat in the Winterſeaſon, ſuppoſing 
                  
                     •
                  ducation 
                     〈◊〉
                   youth. that he ſhould die for hunger and cold, came to a Hyue of bées, of whom he deſired meate & lodging, promiſing (if they would graunt it him) to teache their children the arte of Muſicke. Then one of the Bées aunſwered: I had rather my children learned ſome trade whiche can kéepe them from hunger and colde.
            
               Mor. We are warned to bring vp our children in thoſe ſciences, whereby they may be able to get their liuing.
         
         
            144 Of a Noriſher of Bees.
            
               A Certein man, when the Owner was abſent, came to the place where hony 
                  
                     •
                  nimie. was made, and ſtole away an hony combe: the owner at his returne ſéeing the hiues emptie, ſtode vp and ſought if ought were left. The Bées returning from féeding, and fynding him there, pricked him with their ſtings, and handeled him very yll. Then he ſayde to them: O vile beaſtes, whiche haue lette eſkape vnhurt him whiche hath ſtollen your honycombes, and ſtrike me which take care ouer you.
            
               
               Mor. Some men through follie cannot beware of their enimies, and driue back their friends, as ſuch that lay awayte to deceyue.
         
         
            145 Of many creeping Wormes and Beaſtes.
            MAny créeping beaſtes ſat a ſunning, amōgſt whom the cockatrice was, who cryed aloude: Who ſo dare fight with mée, let him come foorth. The Snayle cam forth to fyght with hir: as they were togyther ſtriuyng, ye Cockatrice would haue bit the Snaile, and poyſoned him, but he drew his hed into his ſhell that ſhe coulde not touch him, afterward the Snayle came forth and bit the ſerpent, wherby ſhe was ouercome. Not long after, ſhe being agein encoraged, excuſed hir ſelf, that ſhe was not valiantly ouerthrowne: wherfore ſhe ſayd: If there were any other warrior amongſt thē, ſhee would reuenge hir ſelf, and make him run away. The Hedgehog hearing this came foorth, who was full of prickles, whom the Serpent aſſaulted, but the Hedgehog pricked hir ſore, and wounded hir, wherof ſhe was aſhamed: but a Frog willing to be reuenged

of the Serpente, wente on hir, and would haue ſlayn hir, but ſhe though wearie hardned hir heart, and tooke the Frog and deuoured him.
            
               Mor. Hée is a foole which being vnarmed, will aſſault his enimie.
         
         
            143 Of the Kings fiſher.
            THe Kings fiſher is a ſolitarie birde, always liuyng in the ſea, whiche as it is ſayd, taketh heede of mens huntings, & therfore buildeth hir neſt vpon the rocks in the ſea, who on a tyme being redie to bréed, did make hir neſt: As ſhe was gone out to hir paſtyme, it chaunced the ſea to ariſe (being ſtirred wyth a boyſterous wynde) aboue hir neſt, whiche being drowned, hir yong ones periſhed. Shée at hir returne, ſeyng what hadde happened, ſayde: Wo is mée wretche, whiche fearing to be betrayed on lande, haue runne to this which is more deceiptfull.
            
               Mor Some men taking héede of their foes, doo vn wyttyngly happen vppon friendes who are muche crueller than theyr enimies.
         
         
            
            147 Of the Apes and the Libard.
            IN the lande of the Moores there is great ſtore of Apes, whoſe enimie by kynde is the Lybarde, whome bycauſe hée can not match with ſtrong arme (ſeing they clymb into high trées) hee practiſeth this pollicie againſt them: he layeth himſelf along vnder the boughs, and ſtretching out his legs faineth himſelfe deade. At whiche ſight the Apes that ſit in the trées, doo much reioyce, then they ſuppoſing hym to be deade, ſende out a ſcoute watch to deſcrie the truth: The Ape commeth tripping warely and ſoftely, who perceiuing no tokē of life, bicauſe the Libard in al pointes counterfeteth a deade carkas, boldely ventureth to go vpon him: the other Apes ſéeing his boldneſſe, al feare ſette aparte, come downe, and leape vpon him, which he quietly endureth: at length when they haue in contempte kicked him ſo long that they are nigh wearie: he ſtarteth vp ſodeynly, and one with his téeth, an other with his nayles, he teareth in péeces and deuoureth.
            
               Mor. Wée ought chiefly to eſchue that enimie, whiche fayneth his ſtrength to fayle.
         
         
            
            148 Of the Henne and the Fox.
            A For entred into a poultrie houſe, wher he ſaw a Henne on hir neſt being ſicke, whom he aſked, how ſhe did: Ah (quod the Hen) I ſhould do much better (ſiſter) were thou gone.
            
               Mor. The preſence of our enimies doth much hurte vs.
         
         
            149 Of two Enimies.
            TWo men hating one an other deadly, ſayled together in one ſhip, wherof the one ſatte in the foreparte of the ſhip, the other in the hinder parte thereof, ſodeinely there aroſe a tempeſt, which put the ſhip in hazarde: then he that ſet in the ſterne, aſked the maſter which part of the ſhyp ſhold firſt be drowned, the ſterne (quod he:) then he ſayd: My death ſhal nothing gréeue me if I may ſee myne enimie die before mée.
            
               Mor. Many men care not what harme they haue, ſo that they may ſée theyr enimies before them hurte.
         
         
            150 Of the Crow and the Rauen.
            THe Crowe enuied the Rauen bycauſe by him men tooke diuination, fór which

he was ſuppoſed to for ſhew things to com: wherupon he eſpying trauailers by, flewe vp into a trée, where ſhée ſtoode and cryed lyke a Rauen: They at hir crying turning aſyde and wondring, at the laſt vnderſtanſtanding the truth, one of them ſayde: Let vs be going fellows, it was the Crow that cried, and ſhe hath no ſoothſaying.
            
               Mor. Thoſe men whiche ſtriue with their betters, beſides that they are neuer able too matche them, deſerue to bée laughed at.
         
         
            151 Of the Wolfe and the Foxe.
            THe Wolfe hauyng muche prouiſyon Enuie. of meate, liued at eaſe, to whome the Foxe came and demaunded the cauſe of his eaſe: the Wolfe perceiuing that he enuied his good fare, fayned ſickeneſſe too bée the cauſe thereof, and hée prayed the Foxe, too beſeech the Gods for his health: The Foxe being grieued that his purpoſe woulde not proſper, went to a Shepeherd, and willed him to go to the Wolues denne, where ſodeinly he might take his enimie that liued voyde of care: the ſhepeherde aſſaulted the Wolfe, and ſlue him, the Fox poſſeſſed his

denne with al the good chere, but he enioyed it no long time, for the ſame Shepeherde caught him likewiſe.
            
               Mor. Enuie is a lotheſome thing, and hée that is the cauſe thereof commonly maketh a rod for his owne tayle.
         
         
            152 Of the Couetous man and the Enuious.
            TWoo men made their prayer to Iupiter, a Couetous man and an enuious, who ſent Apollo to them to ſatiſfy their deſires, he gaue them free libertie to deſire vppon this condition, that what ſoeuer the one required, the other ſhuld receiue double. The couetous man was long in doute, bycauſe he thought nothing was ynough: at length he aſked no ſmall thyng, hys companyon receyued double ſo muche. The Enuious man requeſted one of his owne eyes to be put out, greately reioycing that his fellow ſhoulde loſe bothe.
            
               Mor. Couetouſneſſe neuer ſayth ho: as for Enuie nothing is more mad, which wiſheth him ſelfe miſchief to hurte another withall.
         
         
            
            153 Of the Wolfe and the Aſſe.
            THe Wolfe and the Aſſe were ſawyers togither, but the Aſſe wrought aboue, and the Wolfe beneath, who ſought occaſion to ſlea his fellowe, wherfore he ſayd: Ah wretched Aſſe, why doeſt thou caſt duſt into myne eyes? Forſooth (quod he) I doo not, but rule it after my knowledge: if it pleaſe thee to ſawe aboue, I will beneath. Tuſhe (quod the Wolfe) I ſée what thou doſt, if thou caſt any more into my eyes I will plucke oute thine: when he had thus ſaide, the Wolfe blew harde, that the duſt might flie vp in to his felows eyes, but the timber ſtaying it, it fell into his owne: wherewith béeing ſore troubled, he ſware, that he would ouerthrow the porters, but ſodeinly it fell, and killed the Wolfe.
            
               Mor. Miſchief commonly lighteth vpon the pate of the Author.
         
         
            154 Of the Lyon and the Wolfe.
            THe Lyon béeing ſtricken in age fell ſicke, and laye in his denne, all beaſtes ſaue onely the Foxe came to viſite theyr Kyng: Wherevppon the Wolfe hauyng

oportunitie, accuſed the Foxe vnto the Lyon, as one that ſette naught by hym béeing theyr Lorde, for whiche cauſe hée came not to ſée him: By chaunce the Foxe came in, and hearde the latter ende of the Wolues tale. Then the Lyon roared ageynſte the Foxe, who incontinent crauyng ſpace too make aunſwere, ſayde: which of all thoſe that are here preſent, hath done ſo muche good as I, which haue trauayled farre and néere to ſeeke a remedie for thée of the phyſition, which I haue lerned: Then the Lion commaunding him foorth with to tel the medicine, he ſayde: The Wolues ſkin being yet alyue, to be plucked from his backe and put warme about thée, is the medicine and onely remedy. As the wolfe lay along, the Fox laughed at him, ſaying: It becommeth not thee to prouoke thy lord to wrath, but to fauour and good will.
            
               Mor. Hée whiche continually diggeth pits, at length turneth him ſelfe therein.
         
         
            155 Of the Harte and the Oxen.
            
               A Harte being purſued of a Hunter, ran Eſcaping of dangers hard. into an Oxe ſtall, praying the Oxen to hide him in their rack: they tolde him that

there was no ſafe harboring, for both their maiſter and his ſeruants woulde come thither: He anſwered that he was ſafe inough ſo that they woulde not bewray him: the ſeruāt came in, & miſtruſting nothing to be hid in the hey, departed: the Hart was excedingly glad, and feared nothing. Then one of the Oxen older and wiſer than the reſt, ſayd to him: It is an eaſy matter to deceiue him, that is as blinde as a Mole, but if thou eſcape our maiſter, which hath an hundred eyes, I will warrant thée: Streight after came in the maiſter to redreſſe his ſeruāts negligence, looked rounde aboute, and groping in the rack, felt the horns of the Hart, & cryed out for his ſeruantes, who ſtraight way came, tooke the beaſt and ſlue him.
            
               Mor. When one is in perill, it is harde to fynde a place to hyde him in, eyther it is that Fortune toſſeth the oppreſſed, or that being afrayd, and vncertaine what to doe, thorough follie they betray them ſelues.
         
         
            156 Of the Cock and the Cat.
            
               A Cat ſometyme being hungry came to Euill me
                     •
                  
                deuoure a Cock, whome bycauſe ſhée

had no iuſt cauſe to hurt, layd to his charge his great noiſe that he was wont to make, bycauſe that with his ſhrill crowing, he did let men of their reſt in the night: the Cock replied that he was therof giltleſſe, ſéeing by that meanes he raiſed vp men to theyr dayly trauell: It is but loſt labor (ſayd the Cat) to pleade thus: for thou treadeſt thy mother, neither art thou ſo content, but thou medleſt with thy ſiſter: the Cock being readie to purge him ſelfe of that fault, the Cat waxed more eger againſt him, ſaying: thou ſtriueſt againſt the ſtreame, for this daye I will bee thy préeſt.
            
               Mor. If any man would beat a dogge, he ſhall ſoone fynde a ſtaffe. The euill man by hooke or by crooke, if he liſt will throw thee downe.
         
         
            157 Of the Countryman and the Serpent.
            AS a Countryman walked aboute his grounds, he found a Serpēt in the ſnow nigh deade with colde, whiche hée pitying 
                  
                     ••
                  ill for 
                     ••
                  od. much, brought home, and layde him by the fires ſyde. The Serpent by reaſon of the fire, came again to his ſtrēgth and venim,

coulde no longer endure the heate, but filled all the Cottage with his hyſſing. The Countryman gotte vp a ſtake, and ranne at hym, wherwith he ſtroke him, and then tooke him vp for that diſpleaſure, ſaying: Wylt thou thus recompence my curteſy? Goeſt thou aboute to deſtroy him that ſaued thy lyfe?
            
               Mor. It chanceth often, if a man ſaue a théefe from the gallowes, hée will ſooneſt ſéeke his death, and on whom men beſtowe moſte labour, of him they ſhall reape leaſt good.
         
         
            158 Of a Seruant which caſt his Maſters Aſſe from a Rock.
            
               A Certeine Huſbādmans Seruāt threw From eui
                     •
                   to Worſe. downe his maiſters Aſſe hedlong from an high Rock, that hée might not dayly bee forced to driue him too and fro, but hée told his maiſter, that hée fell down him ſelfe: wherefore his maiſter dydde cauſe hym to beare all thyngs on his ſhoulders, which the Aſſe was woont before to carrie. The which thyng the euill ſeruant markyng, ſayd: I was not well aduiſed when I ſlue

my innocent fellow, which eaſed mée of ſo great trauaile, I am thus worthily ſerued.
            
               Mor. Whyles fooles would auoyde any euill, they fall into woorſe.
         
         
            159 Of the Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormoraunt.
            THe Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant entred fréendſhip togither, and determined 
                  
                     •
                  xerciſe. to liue lyke merchants, whervppon the Bat borowed money, and ſhipped it, the Bramble toke garmentes, and the Cormorant Braſſe, and ſailed together. It chanced a greate ſtorme too aryſe, that the ſhip was drowned, and all their goods loſt, and they eſcaped to lande: ſince which time the Cormorant ſitteth on the ſea ſhore, to ſée if the ſea will caſte vp the Braſſe any where. The Bat fearing his creditours, ſheweth not his head by day light, but goth to feede by nyght: And the Bramble doeth catche hold of the garments of ſuch as are paſſers by, ſéekyng if hée can fynde hys owne.
            
               Mor. Wherevnto wée doo apply our ſelues, in tyme to come wée followe the ſame.
         
         
            
            160 Of the Worme.
            THe Worme that lurketh in the durte Experiēc
                     •
                  
                went abrode vpon lande, and ſaid to all beaſts, that ſhée was as learned a phiſitian for medicines as euer was Poeen phiſitian to the Gods: Why (quod the Foxe) canſte thou cure others, & canſt not heale thy ſelfe of thy lameneſſe?
            
               Mor. All talke is in vaine, except experience haue ben had before.
         
         
            161 Of a Dog and a Butcher.
            SOmetime a Dogge had ſtolne a péece of fleſh from a Butcher in the market, and ſtreight ran away: the Butcher being cold at the heart with the loſſe of the thing, firſt helde his peace: then remembryng hymſelfe, cried out after him, ſaying: O vile théef, for this time runne ſafely, thou goeſt ſcotfrée for thy ſwiftneſſe, but hereafter I will watche thée narrowtier.
            
               Mor. The burnte hande feareth the fyre.
         
         
            162 Of Cockles.
            
               A Countreymans ſonne roſted Cockles, whome as he heard hiſſing, he ſayd: O

O euill beaſts whiche when youre houſen be burnt do ſing.
            
               Mor. All things done out of due order, are to be diſcommended.
         
         
            163 Of the Aſſe and the Fox.
            THe Aſſe the Foxe being entred friendſhip, 
                  
                     ••
                  lſhod in 
                     ••
                  lowſhip. went forth a hunting, whom a Lion méeting, the Fox ſéeing the preſent danger, went to the Lion' and promiſed to deliuer ye Aſſe into his hands, ſo that ſhe might ſcape ſcotfrée: the Lyon agréed: then ſhe led the aſſe, and cauſed him to be trapped in a net: but the Lion ſeing him ſo faſt, that he might not eſcape, firſt layd hold on ye Foxe, and after he ſerued the Aſſe likewiſe.
            
               Mor. They which betray their felows vndoo them ſelues vnawares.
         
         
            164 Of a Dog and the Aſſe.
            A Bandog (whiche is able too vanquiſhe 
                  
                     •
                  alſe wit
                  
                     ••
                  ſse. not only Wolues, but alſo Beares) had iornied a long way with an Aſſe which caryed a ſacke full of bread. As they wente on their way, a tempeſte aroſe, then the Aſſe hapned on a medow, where withgood graſſe he filled his belly full: but the Dog

deſired the Aſſe to giue him a little péece of bread leaſt he ſterued: he not onely denied him that, but alſo ſcoffingly counſelled him to feede on graſſe with him. In the meane tyme the Aſſe eſpying the Wolfe cōming, beſought the Dog to ayde him. Nay (quod he) thou didſt counſel me to feede on graſſe to ſlake my hunger, ſo I will thee to defend thy ſelfe with thy yron heeles agaynſt the Wolfe.
            
               Mor. They which aide not them which néede help, are wont to be deſtitute of the ſuccor of others in the time of néede.
         
         
            165 Of the Dog and the ſheepe.
            A Dog brought an action ageinſt a Shéep for a lofe of bread which he ought him, the ſheepe denied it, wherupon they ioyned iſſue, then the Dog broughte in the Kight, the Wolfe, and the Rauen to beare witneſſe to the debt, who affirmed it for truth: the Shéepe was condemned, whome the Dog caughte, and pulled the ſkinne from his backe.
            
               Mor. It is well knowne, that by falſe witneſſe many are oppreſſed and ouercome.
         
         
            
            166 Of an Aſſe.
            THere was an Aſſe amongeſt the Cumanes, whiche was weary of his bondage, 
                  
                     •
                  aults. who by chaunce brake his coller and ranne awaye into the Forreſt, where hée founde a Lions ſkynne, whiche hée made fitte for his bodie, and thus behaued hymſelfe lyke a Lyon, puttyng bothe men and peaſtes in feare with his tayle: For the Cumanes knewe not a Lion. In this wyſe hée liued there a good while, bothe counted and dreaded for a fierſe Lyon, vntyll that a certayne Straunger comming vnto that Citie, (whiche oftentymes hadde ſéene both a Lion and an Aſſe,) and therefore eaſy to be known, perceyued by his long hanging eares, and other euidente ſygnes, that hée was an Aſſe, (whom hée did wel beat with a ſtaffe, and deliuered hym to his maiſter. In the meane tyme the Cumanes laughed excéedingly at the Aſſe, whiche was ſuppoſed lately to be a Lion, eſpecially thoſe whom hée had welnigh driuen out of their wyttes.
            
               Mor. Wée can hardely hide thoſe faultes, whiche wée haue vſed from oure chyldhood.
         
         
            
            167 Of a wicked Man and the Diuell.
            A Wicked mā hauing committed many Faultes puniſhed. heynous offences, for which he was often apprehended and committed to priſon, where he was kepte very ſtraightly, beſought the helpe of a Diuell, whiche often had ayded and deliuered him out of trouble. At length he was taken again, who (as he wonted) required ſuccoure of the Diuell: who came to him, carying a great bundell of ſhooes on his ſhoulders and ſayd: friend, I can helpe thée no longer, for I haue trotted to ſo many places for thy deliueraunce, that I haue worne out all theſe ſhooes, and I haue no money left me to bye any more, wherfore thou muſt néedes periſhe.
            
               Mor. Lette vs not beléeue alwayes to ſcape ſcotfrée with our faultes.
         
         
            168 Of a Camell.
            WHat time the Camell was firſt ſéen, Familiaritie. he was much dreaded, and bicauſe of his hugeneſſe, men fled from him. But in proceſſe of time, his tamneſſe being knowen, they tooke a good hart and came to him: afterward vnderſtanding the beaſtes courage, they ſo farre forth deſpiſed him, that

they put a byt in his mouth, and deliuered him to be driuen by boyes.
            
               Mor. Cuſtome & dayly cōpanie, make terrible things to be litle ſet by.
         
         
            169 Of the Foxe and the Lyon.
            THere was a Foxe which had not ben vſed to the ſight of a Lion, whome when he ſawe by chaunce once or twiſe, he quaked for feare and fled away: As he mette him ye third time, he ſtood nothing in doubt of him, but boldly approched and ſaluted him.
            
               Mor. Familiar conuerſation maketh men bold, euen with thoſe whome they were afrayd afore to looke on.
         
         
            170 Of a Hinde calfe.
            SOmetime a Hinde calfe ſayd to a Hart, Father thou art borne greater and ſwifter 
                  
                     •
                  eare. than Dogges, thou haſt hornes alſo to reuenge thée, why then doeſt thou ſo feare them? where at he laughed, ſaying: Thou telleſt truthe, but I know this one thing, that as ſoone as I heare the Dogge barke, I am fayne to flie away, but how it cometh I can not tell.
            
               
               Mor. They which of nature are fearefull, by no perſuaſion can be boldned.
         
         
            171 Of the Lyon and the Frogge.
            A Lyon hearing a voyce, came foorth leaping, wherewith ſodenly afrayde, he ſtood ſtill, wayting for ſome ſtraunge ſight: at length a litle Frogge came forth of the water: whome when the Lion had eſpied, (all feare ſet a parte) he came néerer and daſhed him in pieces with his foote.
            
               Mor. This fable for biddeth vayn feare.
         
         
            172 Of the Egle.
            THe Egle for his beautie preferred him ſelfe before all other birds, which thing al did affirme that it was true, but the Pecock ſayd to him ſelfe: Thy feathers make not thée beautifull, but thy bill and thy talands, bicauſe none of vs dare cōtend with thée about their beautie for feare of them.
            
               Mor. Mightier mens affaires are prayſed of many, more for feare than truthe.
         
         
            173 Of a Dog fearing the Rayne.
            A Certein Dog as oft as it rayned, durſt not come foorth of the houſe, and being

demaunded of an other Dog why he did ſo, aunſwered: bycauſe ſometime I was ſealded with hot water.
            
               Mor. They which haue taſted of great euils, are afrayd of the ſmalleſt.
         
         
            174 Of a Cock.
            A Cock being taken by a Foxe, eſcaped from him very hardly. Not long after, he ſawe a Foxes ſkin, wherewith beyng ſore afrayd, ran away, whome other birds mocked that he was afrayd of nothing. Ah (quod hée) if ye had bin in the Foxes gripes as I haue bin, ye would be afryad of his foote ſteps, how much more of his ſkin?
            
               Mor They whiche haue eſcaped great daungers, dread the leaſt.
         
         
            175 Of a ſick man and the Phiſitian.
            A Sick man being demaūded of the Phiſitian how he did, aunſwered: that he Flatterie. ſwette more than néeded. Well (quod the Phiſitian) that is good. The ſecond time being aſked, how he did, ſayd: I ſhiuer and quake ſore: that is good (quod the other.) The third time he demaunded his patient as before, who aunſwered, that he had the

dropſy: that is alſo good ſayd the Phiſitian. Then one of the houſehold aſked him, how hée did: in fayth (quod hée) through ſo many good things I periſh.
            
               Mor. We ought chiefly to abhorre thē which only ſpeake to delight the eare.
         
         
            176 Of the Rauen and the Foxe.
            A Rauen ſometime hauing got his pray, made a great noyſe in the boughes, whom the Foxe ſéeing thus reioyſe, ranne vnto hir and ſayd: I gréete you with al my harte, I haue often heard reports to be vntrue, but now in déed I find it: for as I paſſed by this way, by chaunce I eſpied thée in a trée, I am therfore come vnto thée, being offended with reporte: for they ſaye that thou art blacker than pitch, but in my ſight thou art whiter than ſnowe. In my iudgement thou paſſeſt the Swā, thou art fairer than white Iuie: If thy voyce were agreable to thy beautie, I would ſooner acounte thée the Quéene of al birds. The Rauen allured with this ſmoothe tale, prepared him ſelf to ſing. In the meane while the praye fell out of his bill, whiche the Foxe caught vp, laughing excéedingly, whereof the ſilly

Rauen being aſhamed, repented his follie.
            
               Mor. Eſchewe vaynglorie, and that venemous ſecte of Flatterers may eaſely be auoyded: but if thou couet to be magnified, Maiſter Paraſite wil wayte on you at an ynche.
         
         
            177 Of a man and his two Wiues.
            
               A Certen man of middle age being daintily brought vp, whoſe hayre was halfe Fellowſhip of women. black halfe graye, maried two wiues at once in the ſpring tune, whereof the one was yōg, the other old, which both dwelled togither in one houſe: the elder bicauſe ſhe wold allure him only to loue hir, dayly kē
               med his head, & plucked out yt black haires. The yonger likewiſe (bicauſe ſhe woulde entiſe him to hir, from the olde womans companie) plucked out his white haires. At length betwene them, they had plucked off ſo much haire, that he became balde and a common mocking ſtocke.
            
               Mor. Nothing is better for olde men, than to leaue the companie of women, eſpecially thoſe that be yong, excepte he wil be cloyed.
         
         
            
            178 Of a Souldiour.
            
               A Certein Souldiour being bidden of his Flying of daunger. fellowes, to helpe them at a certen Citie of Italie, which fell away from the king of Fraunce, aunſwered them: If the right Lord of the ſoyle ſhal beſiege the citie, who ſhall bring vs helpe? They ſayd: The king of Fraunce. Then the Souldiour climed vp on a Tombe and cried thrice with a loude voyce, O king of Fraunce but when no anſwere was giuen him, he turned to them that had him, ſaying: I will not come thither, when hée that ſhould helpe mecā not heare me requiring ayde. The other which went thither, were beſieged of the Lord of the towne, which being wonne, they were taken and killed.
            
               Mor. They are fooles which like Harebraines put themſelues in daunger.
         
         
            179 Of Trauailers.
            TWo men iourneid togither, whereof Fellowſhip. the one founde an Axe, the other warned him that he ſhoulde not ſaye, I haue found, but we haue founde. Straight after, as they came togither to thoſe whiche

had loſt it, he which had the axe, following his fellow which iorneyed with him, ſayd: we are vndone, nay (quod the other) ſaye I am vndone not wée: for when thou founddeſt the axe, thou didſt ſaye, I haue founde, not wée.
            
               Mor. They whiche were no parteners in proſperitie, are no ſure friendes in miſerie.
         
         
            181 Of a Lyon and a Beare.
            
               A Lion and a Beare hauing got a Hindcalfe Fighting. did fight togither for him. When they had long fought and were giddy and wearie, they laye downe to reſt. But the Foxe went aboute them, and ſéeing them layd flat with the Hindecalf in the midſt, ranne betwene them and tooke away the Calfe, they might ſée him, but coulde not ariſe, wherefore they ſayd: what fooles are we to labor for the Foxe?
            
               Mor. Fooles lay the pooles, but wiſe mē haue the fiſhe.
         
         
            182 Of a rich man and his ſeruaunt.
            
               A Riche man hadde a dulhead to his ſeruaunt, whom he vſed to cal the king of Follie.
               
fooliſh: He being often offended with hys wordes, thought he would be euē with his maiſter, and on a time he turned again to him and ſayde: I woulde I were King of fooles, then in all the worlde there were no greater kingdome thā myne, yea and thou alſo ſhouldeſt be in ſubiection to mée.
            
               Mor. Al things are full of follie.
         
         
            183 Of a woman that bet hir Huſband.
            
               A Certen Woman of a manly courage, Fooles. hadde ſhrewdly beaten hir Huſbande, which was a coward and dolte, bicauſe the Kight had ſtollē one of the chickens, which ſhe going foorth, left him to tende: wherefore when his Wife was abſent agayne, he tyed all the chickens to one thréed, and kept them more diligently, leaſt the Kight ſhould ſnatche any of them whiche he was put in truſt to kéepe: but the Kight comming ſodenly, caught one in his clawes, whiche as he would haue caried away, he drew vp all the reſt togither into the Aire. This wretched huſband remembring that for one chickē loſt he was ſo yll handeled of his wife, was afrayde of more miſchief to come, and thought it therfore better to die,

thā to trie his wiues fury again. Now this witty woman had put certen figs in a litle pot, wel dreſſed with hony and ſwéet ſpices, whereof ſhe warned hir wiſe huſbande, whoſe lickerouſneſſe ſhe feared, yt he ſhould not taſte thereof, bicauſe preſente poyſon was in them. Hir huſband willing to die, did eate vp all the figs, ſuppoſing that to be the beſt way to die & to eſcape his wiues anger. When the woman came home and knew that the Kight had ſnatched away al hir chickens, ſhe tooke vp a ſtaffe and determined to beate hir huſband, bicauſe he kept the chickens ſo yll: to whome hir fooliſh huſband ſayd: I praye thée wife beate me not now being ready to die, for I haue eaten vp all the poyſon in the glaſſe, to puniſh my ſelfe for my faulte. Then the woman turning hir anger into laughter, forgaue hir huſband, whiche for kéeping hir chickens yll, otherwiſe contented hir.
            
               Mor. There is no fitte remedie againſt fooles.
         
         
            184 Of Fiſhers.
            SOmetime Fiſhers went a fiſhing: wherwith Fortune. being weary and hadde caught nothing,

they were very ſorie and minded to departe: forthwith a Tunny being chaſed by an other great fiſhe, ſkipped into their boate, whom they tooke & departed merily.
            
               Mor. Fortune commonly giueth that, which by cunning can not be got.
         
         
            185 Of a riche man and a poore.
            
               A Certen man being maruellous weary Fortune frowneth on the poore. of the great abundance of his riches, offered a begger an. 100. crowns, if he wold go to Fortune (whiche dwelled in the furtheſt partes of the world) and beſeche hir in his name to beſtowe no more goods vppon him. The poore man being agaſt bicauſe of the trauaill of ſo long a iourney, refuſed at the firſte: but afterwarde chaunging his minde, and promiſing that he would goe, the riche man ſayd he would giue but. 90. The poore man ſuppoſing it to be a ſmall rewarde for ſo great paynes, firſt woulde not agrée therevnto, but after requiring 90. the rich man could hardly be perſuaded to giue him. 80. The begger refuſing that ſumme, and after requiring it, the other rebated always ten frō the number which he offred, till it came but to ten pieces.
            
               
At length the begger, whiche refuſed. 100. Crownes, being forced by pouertie, tooke the. 10. Crownes, and went vnto Fortune, whome with many prayers he beſought to giue no more goods to the riche man, but rather that ſhe would be bountiful to him, which from his tender age had liued in continuall pouertie, whō fortune aunſwered: I haue determined to double yea & treble the riche mans goods whiche ſent thée whether he will or not, but thée will I make to liue continually in extreme pouertie: beſides that, thou ſhouldeſt neuer haue had y• 10. Crownes which thou receyuedſt, had I not ben very faſt a ſléepe.
            
               Mor. Againſt a miſerable perſon Fortune always frowneth, but to a Fortunate perſon ſhe is cōtinually beneficiall euen againſt his will.
         
         
            186 Of a Phiſitian.
            
               A Phiſitian hauing the cure of a ſick mā, whoſe chaunce was to die, ſayd to them Friendes. which caried the corps, this mā if he had refrayned wine & taken cliſters, had bin aliue at this day: thē one of thē that were by anſwered: Sir your aduiſe ſhoulde haue ben ſhewed whē it might haue done good, & not

now when it is too late to call him backe.
            
               Mor. Friendes ſhould helpe in time of néede.
         
         
            187 Of the Countryman and the Mouſe.
            THere was a Countreyman very poore, but yet ſo merie conceyted, yt in his moſt miſerie he forgat not his natural pleaſantneſſe. It happened that his ferme houſe by chaunce was ſet on fire, whiche burned ſo ſore, that he miſtruſted ye quenching, which with heauie chéere he beheld. In the meane time he eſpied a Mouſe running out of the ferme, which made haſt to eſcape burning. The Countryman forgetting his loſſe, ran after the mouſe, caught him, and flong him into the midſt of the fire ſaying: Thou vnthankfull beaſt, in time of my proſperitie thou dwelledſt with me, now bicauſe Fortune is chaunged, thou haſt left my houſe.
            
               Mor. Thoſe are no true friends which cleaue to thée like a burre in thy felicity, but in aduerſitie ſwiftly runne away.
         
         
            188 Of the Lyon and the Hogge.
            THe Lion intended to get him a companion, wherevpon many beaſtes deſired

to be matched with him, yea and inſtantly required it, but he ſette light by them, and choſe only yt hog into his fellowſhip, wherfo being demaūded ye cauſe anſwered: this beaſt is ſo faithfull that he neuer forſaketh his friends or fellowes in the greateſt daū
               ger that can be.
            
               Mor. We ſéeke the friendſhip of thoſe men which in time of néed cleane to vs, and not thoſe which giue vs the ſlippe.
         
         
            189 Of the Dog that deuoured the ſheepe.
            
               A Certen ſhepherd gaue his Dog charge Friendſhip fayned. ouer his ſhéep to looke to thē, for whiche he fed him with the beſt meate. Neuertheleſſe the Dog often killed a ſhéepe and deuoured him, whiche when the ſhepherd had eſpied, caught the Dogge and woulde haue killed him. Why (quod the dogge) wouldeſt thou deſtroy me? I am one of the houſhold, ſtay the wolf rather which continually lyeth in wayte to deſtroy thy ſhéep. Nay (quod the ſhepherd) I think thée rather worthy of death than the wolf, for he is my open enimie, but thou vnder the colour of friendſhip doeſt dayly decreaſe my flocke.
            
               
               Mor. They are more greuouſly to be puniſhed which vnder ye pretence of friēdſhip do hurt vs, than thoſe whiche ſhewe them ſelues to be our open enimies.
         
         
            190 Of the Larke.
            
               A Lark being caught in a net, wept and ſayd: Woe is mée wretch and vnhappy Gayne. birde, for I haue taken from no man either gold, ſiluer, or any other precious thing, but for a litle grain of corne I muſt die.
            
               Mor This fable is againſt thoſe which for a trifling gayne put them ſelues in daunger.
         
         
            191 Of a wilde Aſſe.
            
               A Wild Aſſe ſéeing a tame Aſſe in a ſūny place, went to him and accounted him bliſſed, bicauſe he had good féeding and was in good lyking: after ward ſeing him beare burthens, and the horſekéeper follow, ſtryking him with a ſtaff, he ſayd: I think thee now no more happy, for. I ſée yt with much ſorow thou enioyeſt this felicitie.
            
               Mor. Gayn full of miſerie and daunger, is not to be followed.
         
         
            
            192 Of the Théefe and the Dog.
            
               A Théefe ſomtime offred a Dog a piece of bread to ſtop his mouth withall, to whom he anſwered: I know thy pretence, thou giueſt me a piece of bread to leaue my barking, but thy gift I vtterly abhorre, for if I receyue this bread, thou wilt carie away all things out of this houſe.
            
               Mor. Take héede that for a litle lucres ſake thou looſe not a great thing: beware how thou truſteſt euery man: for ſome there are whiche vnder a colour, not only will pretende friendſhip in worde, but alſo in déed.
         
         
            193 Of the Wood and the Countryman.
            WHat time as trées had their proper language, a Countryman came into the Woode and required a handle for his Axe, they graunted his requeſte. When he had well mended his Axe, he began to cut downe the trées: then the Wood al too late repented his gentleneſſe, and was full ſory that he had made a rod for his owne tayle.
            
               Mor. Take héed whō thou pleaſureſt, for many hauing receyued good turnes, haue abuſed it to ye deſtructiō of ye giuer.
         
         
            
            194 Of a Country man and a Counſeller.
            
               A Certaine countreyman being in lawe vp to the eares, came to a Counſeller, to the end that by his help he might winde him ſelfe out of the lawe. But this Counſeller being otherwiſe occupied, ſente hym woorde that he had no leyſure to talk with him now, praying him to returne an other time. The Countreyman accounting him for his ſure friend, came often, but coulde not ſpeake with him. At length he returned ageyne and brought with him a yong ſucking Kid and fat, with which he ſtood at the Lawyers gate, and often plucked him to make him bleate: the Porter (whome his maſter commaunded to open the gates to them that broughte preſentes) hearyng the voyce of the Kid, ſtreight way opened the gate, and bade him come in: Then the Countryman turned to the Kid, and ſayde: I thank thée my little Kid, for thou art the cauſe that I come in ſo lightly.
            
               Mor. Nothing is ſo hard, but with gifts it is mollifyed.
         
         
            195 Of Iupiter.
            WHat tyme as Iupiter made a feaſt at a mariage, al beaſts brought in their

preſents, euery one after his habilitie, among whom the Serpent was: with a roſe in his mouthe, whiche he offered: Iupiter ſeeing him, ſayde aloude, euery mans beneuolence I williugly accept, but thine in no wiſe I will receiue.
            
               Mor. The wiſe man may well geſſe that the wicked offer nothing without a crafty pretence.
         
         
            195 Of Flies.
            FLies flew into a hole ful of honie, wherof they did eate: their féete ſtucke faſt Gluttonie therein, that they coulde not eſcape, who being nigh choaked, ſayde: Ah wretches, which for a little meate doe periſhe.
            
               Mor. Gluttonie is the cauſe of muche euill to many.
         
         
            196 Of Landbirds and Waterfoules.
            THe Birds of the lande were offended that the Waterfoules did féede both on water and on lande, whervpon they ſente for them, and after communication hadde, they gaue thē warnyng to medle no more vpon lande, vpon payn of their liues. Dere ſiſters (quod they) this talke lyketh not vs

very well, neuertheleſſe if ye will voucheſafe to take parte with vs, our hearts ſhal be much lightened, and we the better contented to obey your requeſt. The Birds of the lande by reaſon of theyr gluttonie, deſiryng to eate of the meate in the water, flew altogither with them into the water, but bicauſe they coulde not ſwimme, they were in great hazard of drowning, wherfore they beſoughte them to take pitie on them: the Waterfoules being mercyfull, tooke them vp on their backes, and brought them to lande: for whiche déede the Landbirdes gaue vnto the Waterfoules frée libertie to feede bothe on the water and on the lande.
            
               Mor. Gluttonous perſons thynke all too little that goeth beſides their owne mouth.
         
         
            197 Of the Egle and the Rauen.
            AN Egle came down from an high rock Glorieng. and light on a lambs back, which thing the Rauen ſéeing, deſired to counterfet him in his dooings, and diſcēded vppon a Ram, where bicauſe his claws ſtuck faſt, he was caught and caſt out to play withall.
            
               
               Mor. Let no man account of himſelfe by an other mans manhod, but by his own power. Cut thy cote after thy cloth.
         
         
            198 Of two Yong men.
            TWo yong mē came into a Cookes ſhop as though they woulde haue boughte God knoweth all. meate, the Cooke béeing occupied, the one ſtole a péece of meate out of the baſket, and gaue it his felow to hide vnder his garmēt: the Cooke perceiuing y• a péece of fleſh was gone, accuſed them bothe of theft: then hée that tooke it, ſwore by Iupiter he had it not: the other that had it, ſwore that he tooke it not, wel (quod the Cooke) the théefe I know not, but he that you haue ſworne by, bothe ſawe and knoweth the théefe.
            
               Mor. If we haue ought offended, men know it not ſtreight way, but God that rideth on the heauens and beholdeth the depthes of the ſea, ſéeth al things: if men would remember this, they woulde offende leſſe.
         
         
            199 Of Money.
            SOmetyme Money being demaunded of vertue, why ſhe rather went to the euill Goods euil gotten. than the good, aunſwered: bycauſe good men

brought vp in thy ſchoole neuer learned too lye and for ſwere, and to occupy vſurie, and to robbe others, for theſe things are wont to draw me vnto them: forſooth (quod vertue) I had rather that my ſcholers lyued in pouertie, than they ſhoulde defile them ſelues with theſe vices, for both of them haue a ſhort ende: the good leauing euerlaſtyng glorie vpon earth, flie vp to the kingdome of heauen: but the euill with ſlaunder ynough, leauing their riches, ſhal go downe to the bottome of Hell.
            
               Mor. Gather riches after no yll way, for it will not only bring in this lyfe an euill reporte, but alſo after death perpetuall torment.
         
         
            200 Of the Thorne and the wilde Gote.
            
               A Wild Gote ſomtime came to a Thorn which was new ſprong vp, whereof he fed him ſelfe ful: Not long after, the Gote remembring the good taſte of the Thorne, returned vnto it, mynding to féede thereof as before, but the Thornes being hardned, ſtoocke faſt as ſhée would haue ſwallowed them in hir throte & the roofe of hir mouth: The Gote with payne thus vexed, ſpake

opprobriouſly ageynſt the Thorne, ſaying: Ah wretche, thy beginning was good, but now thou haſt little vauntaged me.
            
               Mor. Many men likewiſe begin wel, but their end is yll, whereby they bring the curſe vpon them.
         
         
            201 Of a Gote and a Vine.
            
               THe Vine ſayd to the Gote, thou hurteſt me by ſhearing my leaues: thou knoweſt I am no graſſe, but though thou doo me this harme, I will prouide great plentie of Wyne to ſacrifice thée to the Gods.
            
               Mor. Commonly a man helpeth hym, to whome he would do ſome miſchiefe.
         
         
            202 Of the Ant.
            
               AN Ant being thirſtie came to a wel to drinke, wherin by miſchaunce he fell, Good turne. whiche a Doue far off eſpying, caſt downe a bough from an high tree, and holpe him: the Ant clymed vp theron, & eſcaped. Immediatly after, a Fowler ſet vp his nettes to catche the Doue: then the Ant for to recompence his benefactoure, came ſoftely ſtealyng on the Fowler, and bit his foote, wherby the Doue flew away.
            
               
               Mor. We muſt requite a good turne with the like.
         
         
            203 Of a Gardiner.
            
               A Gardiner taking a Mole wold haue kil Good Will. led bir, to whome ſhe ſaide, I pray thée good maiſter, kill not me thy poore ſeruant which haue ſo faire a ſkin, and doth digge vp thy gardins for nothing: Ah (quod the Gardiner) thou ſhalt not pacifie me with theſe flattering words, bycauſe that in digging vp my gardins ageinſt my will, as thou ſayeſt, thou rooteſt vp al the herbes to feed thy ſelf, & to bring me to beggers ſtate.
            
               Mor. In all things the good will of men is to be marked.
         
         
            204 Of Miſe that would hang a bell aboute a Cats neck.
            
               THe Miſe aſſembled together and tooke Great talkers. counſel by what policie or cunning they might eſcape the Cats wyles: then one which in age and experiēce paſſed the reſt, ſayd: I haue found a way which ſhall ſaue vs harmleſſe from ſo greate dangers, if yée will be ruled by mee: lette vs hang a Bell aboute hir necke, by the ſounde whereof, wée ſhal know and perceyue the comming

of the Catte: then all with one voyce commended his counſel as good, and ſayde, they muſt ſo doe. Then an other elder than the reſt ſtarte vp, commaunding ſilence, and ſayde: I alſo allowe this opinion, but who will be ſo hardie, that dare hang the Bell about the Catts neck? but when euery one refuſed to do it, their talke was in vaine.
            
               Mor. Many cōmend thoſe things that ought to be done, but few are founde to execute the ſame.
         
         
            205 Of Fiſhers.
            
               ON a tyme Fiſhers drew their nets out of the ſea, whiche they perceiuing to be Griefe for ſodaine chaunce. heauie, reioyced greately, ſuppoſyng they had a great multitude of Fiſhes, but when they drew the nette to lande and founde a great ſtone but few Fiſhes, they waxed heuie, not for the ſmall number, but bicauſe it fel out otherwiſe than they iudged: then one of the company being an auncient mā ſayd: let vs not be grieued: for ſorow waiteth vpon pleaſure, and therfore we ought to be ſory in ſome thing, bicauſe we reioyced ſo much before.
            
               Mor. We ought not to be greued, being

defeated of our purpoſe.
         
         
            206 Of the Tygre and the Foxe.
            
               A Hunter purſued wylde Beaſtes with dartes, wherevppon the Tygre commaunded all other beaſts to depart, and he only would end that fight: the Hunter ſtil caſt his dartes, the Tygre foorthwith was wounded: As hée fled out of the fielde and drewe oute the darte, the Foxe aſked who had ſo ſore wounded ſo valiant a beaſt: he aunſwered, that the doer he knew not, but by the greatneſſe of the wounde, he toke it to be ſome man.
            
               Mor Strong men for the moſt part are more hardy than néedeth, but cunning paſſeth force, and policie ſtrength.
         
         
            207 Of the wolfe and the Sow.
            
               AS a Sowe was ready to farrowe, the Haſtineſſe Wolfe came vnto hir, promiſyng to be a ſafegarde for hir yong Pigges: ſhe anſwered: Of thy ſeruice I haue no néede, but if thou wilte be accoūted religious, or ſhewe mée any pleaſure, I pray thée depart further from mée, for with thyne abſence thy ſeruice ſhall ſtande mée in better

ſtede than with thy preſence.
            
               Mor. All men deſerue not credit in all things: for many promyſe their endeuor not for thy ſake, but for their owne commoditie.
         
         
            208 Of a Cat.
            
               A Certein man hadde a great Chéeſe in a ceffer, which a Mouſe had taſted, therfore by the coūſel of a friend of his, he ſhut in the Cat there, which after ſhe had killed the Mouſe, deuoured the whole Chéeſe.
            
               Mor. Thoſe oughte to bée no kepers, which can no leſſe hurt vs than our enimies.
         
         
            209 Of a Man that would trye his Wiues mynde.
            
               A Certein crafty man deſirous to vnderſtande his Wiues mynde, bycauſe ſhée Haſty 
                     〈◊〉
                  . had often ſayd that ſo derely ſhee loued him that if ſhée might wiſh ſhée would redéeme his life with hir death, he willingly let fall vpon both their bare féete a burning ſtick. Then the woman being in paine, and forgetting the loue ſhe bare to hir huſbande, didde ſhake off the burning ſticke from hir féete onely.
            
               Mor. Credite not women when they

ſay they loue their huſbands better than themſelues.
         
         
            210 Of the Cock and the Capon.
            
               A Cock and a Capon dwelled together in a poultry houſe, but the Cock was lord of the Hens, and the Capon fed amongſt them: It happened that a Fox caught this Cock, and deuoured him, and his combe he touched not, but kept it ſafe and brought it to the Capon, ſaying: O brother capon, thy fellow is dead, wherfore I haue broughte thée his combe euen for pure loue which I beare to thée, nowe if it pleaſe thée to come downe, I wil crown thée, that thou mayſt take the regiment of the Hens as the cock dyd: the Capon being ambitious & gréedie of promotiō, flew down from his rooſt, and cam to ye Fox, who reioycing therof, caught the Capon incontinent, and killed hym.
            
               Mor. Take hede how thou credit al mē.
         
         
            211 Of the Fouler and the Larke.
            
               A Fowler ſet his nets for birds, whom ye Larke a far of eſpying, aſked him what he did, he anſwered, yt he built a Citie, then he went a good way back, and bid himſelfe: the Lark crediting his woordes came to the

nette and was taken: too it the Fowler ranne, to whom the Larke ſayd: Friend, if thou buylde ſuche a Citie, thou ſhalte fynde fewe dwellers therein.
            
               Mor. Houſes and Cities then chiefly become deſolate, when the Rulers are buſy bodies.
         
         
            212 Of a Gooſe.
            
               THere was a Gooſe whiche day by day layde a golden Egge: hir maiſter deſirous Hast maeth wast. in all the haſte to be riche, killed the Gooſe, hopyng that there was ſome hidden Treaſure within hir: and then finding hir emptie, the wretche was amazed, and after mourned and ſyghed, that he had loſte both his hope and ſubſtance.
            
               Mor. Wee muſte meaſure oure affections and that we be not to haſtie, for haſt maketh waſt, and he that all wold haue, ſometyme loſeth all.
         
         
            213 Of a woman and hir Louer.
            
               A Lewde woman wept bitterly for hir louer ready to depart from hir, whom Harlots. ſhe had nere polled of al that he had: whervppon hir neighbour demaunded the cauſe

why ſhée wept ſo comfortles, for ſooth (quod ſhée) his departing doth not greue me, but the cloke which I left him to put on.
            
               Mor. Harlots loue not their louers, but their Money.
         
         
            214 Of a Serpent and a Husbandman.
            
               A Serpent lurking in the entry of a huſbandmans Hatred. houſe, ſlue his boye, for whome his parentes mourned muche, but his father for ſorow tooke an axe, went out & would haue killed the Serpent, the Huſbandman ſeeing him looke vp, made haſt to ſtrike hym, but he miſſed him, for he ſtroke the mouth of his hole: when the Serpente was gone in and the Huſbandeman thinking that he had forgot the wrong, he came and ſet bread and ſalte before his hole, but the Serpent ſoftely hiſſing, ſayde: Hereafter neither truſt or friendſhip ſhall bee betwéene vs as long as I ſee a ſtone and thou thy ſons graue.
            
               Mor. None forgetteth hatred or vengeance as long as he ſéeth the cauſe of his gréefe.
         
         
            215 Of a Man and a Woman twice maried.
            
               A Certain man hauing buried his wyfe, whiche hée loued wel, and maried a widow

which dayly layd in his diſh the mālyneſſe of hir former huſband: he bycauſe he wold be euē with hir, daſht in hir teeth his other wiues honeſt behauiour and chaſt liuing. It happned on a time, when ſhe was angry, a begger came too the dore, & aſked theyr almes, to whome ſhe gaue a peece of Capon which ſhe for hir owne ſupper and hir huſbandes boyled, ſaying: I giue thée this for the ſoule of my firſt huſband: Hir good man hearing that, called the poore mā and gaue him the reſt of the Capon, ſaying: I giue thée this for the ſoule of my Wyfe that is dead: By whych meanes either ſpytyng other, at length had nothing for theyr ſupper.
            
               Mor. We muſte not fight with thoſe that can reuenge their quarell.
         
         
            216 Of a Wolfe and Dogs.
            
               A Wolfe eſpyed twoo Dogs, which were kéepers of the flock of ſhéepe, fighting together, and with theyr byting tearyng eche other, was in good hope that he might ſafely aſſaulte the ſhéepe. Therefore with greate violence he ran vpon the ſhéepe, and tooke a fat one quickly, with whiche he fled

away ſpéedily. The Dogs ſeing that, lefte off their ſtryfe, and ouertooke the Wolfe runnyng away, whome they wounded ſo ſore that he could ſcarce eſcape: but ſtreight after being demaunded by an other Wolf why he ſette on the flocke alone, where ſo ſtrong reſiſters were? In fayth (quod he) I was deceyued by their mutuall fighting.
            
               Mor. The hatred whiche we beare to ſtraungers, are woont to ſet at one the debate betweene neighbours.
         
         
            217 Of the Countryman and the Horſe.
            
               A Countryman draue by the way a ſpare Helpe in neede. Horſe, and an Aſſe ſore laden wyth packs, the Aſſe being weary with trauayling, prayed the Horſe if he would ſaue his lyfe, to eaſe him ſomewhat of his burthen, the Horſe thoughte ſkorne and denyed his helpe: It hapned as they trauayled on in their iorney, yt the Aſſe being ouerladen, fel vnder his burthen & dyed: then his maſter layde al ye aſſes burthen & eke the ſkin vpon the horſe, wherwithall his backe began to crack: Ah wretch yt I am, ſayd the Horſe, I am thus iuſtly ſerued, bycauſe lately I refuſed to help the poore laboring Aſſe.
            
               
               Mor. We muſt help oure frends that are in miſerie, for part of our riſing our country claimeth, and part our friends.
         
         
            218 Of a Fox that fell into a Well.
            
               A Foxe being falne in to a Well, and at the poynt to be drowned, beſought the Wolfe which was on the welles brink to caſt downe a rope and helpe him vp: The Wolfe ſayd: How felleſt thou in here? Ah (quod the Foxe) this is no time to tell thée, but when thou haſt drawne me out, I wil ſhew thée all things in order.
            
               Mor. Men in danger had néed of preſent help, & not ſpend the tyme in ydle talke.
         
         
            219 Of a Pig and his fathers will.
            
               A Pig wept muche for the death of his parents, but when he had red his will Heritage. and founde that a greate heape of Acornes and many buſhels of meale were left him, he held his peace: and being aſked why hée wept no more, anſwered: The meale and the Acornes haue ſtopped vp my mouth.
            
               Mor. A greate heritage cauſeth the heyres quickely to leaue theyr mourning.
         
         
            
            220 Of the Cockatrice and Seawolf.
            THe Cockatrice on a time went to the Hipocriſie. ſea ſide in the clothing of a Monke, and called to him the Wolf ſaying: O brother, ſince thou waſt marked with the ſigne of the croſſe, thou art become a perfecte Chriſtian, I pray thee therefore come vnto mee, and inſtruct me in the faith of Chriſte, that I may be baptized, and therby eſcape euerlaſting iudgement, and haue fruition of eternall ioye. The Wolf fiſhe marking him well and knowing what he was, ſayde: O thou Hipocrite, a coule maketh not a Frier, thy wordes are full of wickedneſſe and craft, neyther entendeſt thou to be baptized of me, but rather thou wouldſt begyle and poyſon mée: therfore I wil not heare thée, and forth with he ſwam away, and left him all aſhamed.
            
               Mor. Beware of thoſe which come in ſhéeps clothing outwardly, but in wardly are rauening wolues.
         
         
            221 Of the Wolf and the Dog.
            
               A Wolf met a dog by chaunce very early Home is homely. going through a Wood, whō he curteouſly ſaluted, being very glad of his cō
               ming:

at length he aſked him by what meanes he was in ſo good lyking: he aunſwered, that his maiſter loued him dearly, for whē he fawned on him, he ſtroked him, and fed him with meate frō his table, and that he neuer ſlept by daylight: moreouer, time would not ſerue to tell how muche I am made off by all the ſeruauntes. Mary ſayd the Wolfe, thou arte happie in déede, which haſt ſo good and ſo louing a maiſter, if I might dwell with him, I would think my ſelfe the happieſt of all liuing beaſtes. The Dog perceyuing the Wolf very deſirous to chaunge his accuſtomed trade of liuing, promiſed his help to bring it to paſſe, that he might be retayned to his maiſter, ſo that he were content to become tamer, & to liue in bondage: The Wolfe was content and it pleaſed him well to walke towarde the Towne. By the way they had very pleaſaunt talke, but when it waxed light day, the Wolfe perceyued the Dogs necke worne bare, wherevppon he aſked him, what ment this bareneſſe of his neck, he aunſwered, the cauſe is, that when I was fierce, I barked at my friends as well as my fees, and ſometime did byte them,

wherewithall my Maiſter not well pleaſed, did beate me often, forbidding me to aſſaulte any, ſaue a théefe or a Wolfe, and by this meanes I am tamer and cary the mark in remembraunce of my fierceneſſe: the Wolfe hearing him ſay ſo, told him he would not bye his Lords loue ſo deare, ſaying, farewel therfore, for I eſteeme my libertie far better than this bondage.
            
               Mor. Better is a drie morſell in a lowe houſe where a man is ruler, than in the kings pallace to fare delicatly, and to be in ſeruitude: for libertie in the courte hath no place.
         
         
            222 Of a Lynnet.
            
               A Certē Linnet was kept vp daintily by Hunger. a rich man, who much delighted in his ſinging. It happened in time of dearth, that many poore birds came to ye Linnet & aſked his almes, but nothing would he giue thē, ſaue of the fragments & broken meate that was lefte, whiche he cared not for, but the birds reioyſing therof, eate it vp ſwéetely.
            
               Mor. It is an yll diſh, which a man wil refuſe when he is hungry.
         
         
            223 Of a Mule.
            
               A Mule being fat and pricked with prouender, Honor. cryed aloude and ſayde: My

Father is a ſwift running horſe, and I am altogither like him, but once when he ſhold néedes runne, and in running ſtayed, he ſtraight way remembred that he was an Aſſes foale.
            
               Mor. Though time bring a man to promotion, yet ought he not to forget his eſtate, for this life is vnſtable.
         
         
            224 Of a King and Apes.
            
               A Certein King of Egipt appointed Apes to be taught to daunce, whiche as no beaſt is of liker fauoure to a man, ſo none counterfaiteth better or willinglier a man in his dooings. They hauing learned very quickly the arte of dauncing: on a daye appointed they beganne to daunce and were clad with the richeſt purple. Their dauncing delighted the companie a long time, vntill a merie conceyted fellow caſt down amongſt them nuts, whiche he priuily had caried in his boſome: the Apes had no ſooner ſeene the nuts, but forgetting ye daūce, became as they were afore time: of dauncers, Apes, byting and tearing their clothes, in pieces, & fighting togither for the nuts, not without great laughter of ye beholders.
            
               
               Mor. The giftes of Fortune chaunge not a mans diſpoſition.
         
         
            225 Of Oxen.
            
               A Heardman entred the ſtable and ſaw the Oxen ſkipping for ioy, he therefore axed them the cauſe of their ioy, they anſwered: Our hope is to ſpende this daye in the goodly leaſues. Why (quod hée) What thing hath brought you to this hope? We dreamed ſayd they, it ſhould be ſo: Ah (quod hée) giue no credit to ſuch dreames, whiche ye are like to finde vntrue, for I dreamed that ye ſhould ploughe to daye, and mens dreames are wont to be truer thā beaſtes.
            
               Mor. Nothing is ſo ſoone begyled, as the hope of men.
         
         
            226 Of a Hogge.
            
               A Hog was blamed of a ſhéep that he yelded no profit to his Maiſter, of whome he was ſo diligently fed: ſéeing they gaue him milke, wooll and lambes. He aunſwered: when I am dead, my fruite commeth in, for he féedeth me for a purpoſe.
            
               Mor. None wil take paynes without hope of reward.
         
         
            
            227 Of a man which hid a treaſure.
            A Certein rich man hid a treaſure in the wood, wherof none knew but his Godfather, whom he greatly truſted. But whē he came within few dayes after to ſée it, he found that it was digged vp & caried away: he therfore iudged (as it was in deed) that his Godfather had taken it away: he went and ſpake with him, ſaying: Godfather, I will alſo hide a. 1000. crownes more where my treaſure is. Hée being deſirous to gayn more, brought again the treaſure and layd it where it was: whē the true owner came ſhortly after thither and found it, he tooke it home with him and went to his Godfather and ſayd: Thou promiſie breaker, beſtow no more labor in vayne to goe to the treaſure, for thou ſhalt find it no more.
            
               Mor It is an eaſy thing to deceyue a coueious man with hope of money.
         
         
            228 Of the Pigarde and the Egle.
            THe Pigard ſometyme being purſued by a Hauke, flyed to the Eagle for ſaliegard, Humilitie. ſaying: Thou arte great and mercifull, therefore came I to thée for ayde and

ſuccoure, which am ſmall and weake, crauing that I may be vnder the ſhadowe of thy wings, to defende me from the furie of my enimie. The Eagle moued with pitie and compaſſion, ſayd: Bicauſe of thy lowlineſſe and imbecillitie abyde with mée, & feare nothing as long as thou arte in my companie.
            
               Mor. They that are mightie, ought to defende the méeke and lowly.
         
         
            229 Of the Dog and the Cooke.
            A Dog brake looſe and ranne into a kitchen, Heart. where he ſtole away a Harte whiles the Cooke was otherwiſe occupied, who turning about and ſéeing him running, ſayd: Truſte me, where ſoeuer thou become, I will watche thée, for thou haſte not taken a harte from mée, but rather gyuen me a harte.
            
               Mor. Often harmes are warnings to a man.
         
         
            230 Of a man ſtoned.
            A Certeyn man being ſtoned to death of the people, roſe agayne: who beyng

aſked of one, what did moſt gréeue him in that ſtoning, ſayd: Nothing ſo much as the ſtone which one did throwe whome I ſuppoſed to be my friende, although it touched mée not.
            
               Mor The hurte done by our friendes doth more gréeue vs, than that whiche our enimies doe.
         
         
            231 Of a ſheep crying.
            A Shéep being caught by a Dogge which was keeper of the flocke, made a great crying, but being taken by the Wolfe, did not crie at all: who being demaunded of the ſhepherd, why ſhe did ſo? aunſwered: It greeueth me more to be hurt of the dog, which ſhould be my kéeper and friend, than of the Wolfe, who naturally is my foe.
            
               Mor. The hurt by them of the houſhold done, more hurteth than that whiche is done by ſtraungers.
         
         
            232 Of a Rauen and a ſerpent.
            A Rauen lacking meate, ſée a Serpente ſléeping on a ſunnie banke, at whome Hurtfull gaine. he ſlewe downe and caught him vp: who turned again and byt him: the Rauē therwith

nighe dead ſayde: Ah wretch that I am, which haue found ſuch a gaine wherof I periſhe.
            
               Mor. This fable is againſt him, which by finding a treaſure, hath put him ſelfe in daunger of his life.
         
         
            233 Of a poore Man.
            A Certeyn poore Man had nothing but a Hurtful things. houſe vnderſet with ſhores, whiche was like to fall. It happened on a tyme as he returned from the fieldes, he found it fallen, and bicauſe he had not wherewith to ſet it vp agayne, he was ſo muche troubled in his minde, that he fell to mourning and wéeping out of meaſure. But as this poore man thus made his moane, he eſpied a braſen pot, whiche many yeares had ben hidden in the Wall, lying amongeſt the ſtones and rubbiſhe, which when he hadde taken vp and opened, he founde it full of golde, wherwith his hart hopping for ioy, he left off his wéeping.
            
               Mor. Sometime that we thinke hurtfull, turneth to oure great profite and commoditie.
         
         
            
            234 Of a learned man not eſteemed.
            A Certeyn learned man being bidden to 
                  
                     •
                  eſting. the feaſie of a Prince, and commaunded to ſit down in the neathermoſt roomes, when the other gueſtes had great fiſhes ſet before thē, but to him very ſmall ones, he did eate none, but put them firſte one after an other to his mouth, thē to his eares, as though he would demaunde ſome thing of them, & after layde them downe whole & vntouched in the diſhes again: whome the maiſter of the feaſt aſked why he did ſo? he aunſwered, two yéere agoe in theſe parties my father through ſhipwracke was caſt away, and what became of his body I could not afterwards knowe, I did therefore demaunde of theſe litle fiſhes if they could tel any tydings of him, but they aunſwered, yt at that time they were not bredde: wherefore I muſt aſke the greater Fiſhes. The Prince hearing ſo merry a ſaying, commaunded of the greater fiſhes to be ſet before him, and euer after he placed him amongſt his chiefeſt gueſtes.
            
               Mor. Amongſt vnlearned mē, learning is not ſo profitable to the learned as is pleaſaunt and mery talke.
         
         
            
            235 Of a Phiſitian.
            A Nolde Woman being troubled with Ignorāce. payn of hir eyes, bargained with a Phiſitian for a certen ſumme of money to pay him if he healed hir: if not, he ſhould haue nothing. The Phiſitian went about his cure, who dayly came and anoynted bir eyes, but ſhe (that houre he dreſſed hir) cold ſée nothing: then hée at his departure, caried ſome thing out of the houſe. The olde woman ſée hir ſtuff dayly decreaſe, ſo that whē ſhe was healed, ſcarſe any thing was left, to whom when the Phiſitian came & required his bargain, bicauſe ſhe could ſée clearely, and thereof brought witneſſes, ſhe ſayd: Truely I rather ſée leſſe than before, for whē I was blind I could ſée much ſtuff in my houſe, but now that I can ſée, as thou ſayſt, I perceyue nothing of yt which I had.
            
               Mor. Wicked perſons not knowing what they doe, ſpeake often againſt them ſelues.
         
         
            236 Of Dogs.
            A Certen man had two Dogs, whereof ye one he taught to hunt, the other to kéep his houſe, if it chaunced the hounde to catch any thing, he whiche kept him was partaany

thing, he whiche being offended, caſt oft in his fellowes téeth that he dayly tooke payres, and the other did nothing, and yet he was fed with his trauaill: his fellowe aunſwered and ſayde: Blame not me but my Maiſter, whiche neuer taught me to labor, but to eate that an other hath ſwet for.
            
               Mor. Yong men which know nothing, are not to be blamed, ſeeing their Parents brought them vp ſo.
         
         
            237 Of a Sheep waſting Corne.
            A Huſbandman complayned that ye ſhéep deſtroyed all his Corne, wherevppon Immodeateneſse. 
               Iupiter commaunded the ſhéep to féed temperately, and bicauſe they obeyed not his will, the Wolfe was appointed to afflicte them moderately. But when the ſhepherd complayned that all his flocke was killed by the Wolfe, Iupiter was offended, and bad the Hunter kil the Wolf, which thing he quickly did.
            
               Mor. No immoderate thing is continuall.
         
         
            
            238 Of the Owle and the Larke.
            THe Larke came to the Owle and ſayd: Impoſsible promiſes. Deare ſiſter, I pray thée beare me companie to morowe at noone, for my louer deſireth to ſee me by Sunne light: Nowe if I be matched with thée, I ſhall ſéeme more beautifull. The Owle promiſed to be there, for he was aſhamed to ſticke with hir for ſo ſmall a trifle. When day was vp and the Sunne did ſhyne very cleare, the Larke wayted for him, but the Owle durſt not appeare by Sun light, bicauſe ſhe could not ſee, and therfore came not, wherwith ye Lark being offended, alwayes after abhorred and purſued hir: wherefore the Owle flieth not by daye for feare of the Lark, but ſeeketh his meate by night.
            
               Mor. None ought to promiſe that, which he can not performe.
         
         
            139 Of the Reed.
            THe Réed was diſpleaſed that not onely all other trées, but alſo ſometime graſſe Inconſtācy did beare a neſt, but he only of that honour was depriued: he therefore prayed a litle birde to build hir neſt vpon him, ſo would I (quod ſhe) but I miſtruſt thy inconſtācy,

for I wil not build my childrens houſe vpon ſo tickliſh a foundation.
            
               Mor. We ought not to commit our ſelues or our children to inconſtant perſons.
         
         
            240 Of the Eele.
            THe Eele ſayd to a Serpent, why do mē purſue me rather than thée, ſéeing we are ſo néere kin and ſo like? Mary (quod hée) If they hunte mée, they ſeldome ſcape ſcot frée.
            
               Mor. They are leaſt hurt, whiche vſe to reuenge their iniuries
         
         
            241 Of the Crowe and the Sheep.
            
               A Crowe lighted on a ſhéeps back & made a great noyſe, then ſayde the ſhéepe: If 
                  
                     •
                  nnocēcie. thou ſhouldeſt do ſo to a dog, thou mighteſt chaunce catch copper. Yea (ſayd the Crow) I know with whome I deale, for I am to the pacient gréeuous, and to the angry pleſaunt.
            
               Mor. The wicked ſtriue cōtinually with the féeble and ſimple folke: the innocent is troden vnder foote, but no man gaynſayeth the vngodly, if he be ſtout.
         
         
            
            242 Of the Ape and the Foxe.
            THe Ape prayed the Foxe to giue him a Inough hath none piece of his tayle to couer his buttockes withall, bicauſe that whiche to him was a burthen, would ſtande him in good ſtéede and do him much worſhip. The Foxe aunſwered and ſayd, that ſhe hadde nothing too much, and ſhe had rather ſwéep the ground therewith, than it ſhoulde couer the Apes buttockes.
            
               Mor. Some haue great ſcarcitie, and ſome haue great plentie, yet fewe riche men are ſo well bent as to helpe the poore with any thing of their exceſſe and ſuperfluitie.
         
         
            243 Of the Frogs and the Sunne.
            THe Frogges reioyſed at the mariage 
                  Ʋayne ioye. of the Sunne, to whome one ſayde: O wretched kinde, if we only feare the ſunne beames, who will abyde hym if he gette children?
            
               Mor. This Fable is agaynſt thoſe, which ignorauntly reioyce at their owne harme.
         
         
            
            244 Of a Wolf fallen into a pit.
            
               A Foxe eſpying a Wolfe fallen into a hole, did laugh, and reioycing ſkipped about the brinkes of the Pit, calling him fooliſh beaſte, which would not beware of mens deceytes. As he thus wantonly ſcoffed, the earth fayled, and caried him headlong in alſo: whome the Wolfe ſéeing to fall, ſayd: I ſhall nowe cary a great comfort of my death to hell, bicauſe I ſée the Foxe, (whiche mocked me) periſhe with mée.
            
               Mor. We ought not reioyce at an others miſerie, ſeing we may fal into the ſame likewiſe.
         
         
            245 Of two Hogs.
            
               A Certeyn man had two Hogges which bare ſo mortall hatred one toward another, that dayly they tore eche other with their téeth: but when their Maiſter killed one of them, the other was wonderfull glad, ſéeing that his enimie ſhould die incontinent: within fewe dayes after, when he him ſelfe was drawen to death, he tormēted him ſelf, ſaying: Woe is me wretch, Why did I ſo reioyce ouer my enimies

death, whome ſo ſoone I do followe too the ſame ende.
            
               Mor. None ought too reioyce, no not ouer the deathe of his enimie, ſéeyng it is euident that all muſt dye.
         
         
            246 Of a Wolf that put on a Shepes skin.
            
               A Wolfe put on a Shéepes ſkin, and was Iudging outwardly conuerſant amongſt the Shéepe, of whom he dayly deuoured one, which thing when the ſhepherd had eſpyed, he hanged him vp in an high trée, then other ſhepherds aſked him why he hóong vp a Sheepe: Ah (quod he) the ſkin as ye ſée is a ſhéepe, but in his déedes he was a Wolfe.
            
               Mor. Men muſte not be eſtéemed after their apparell, but after their woorkes, for many are vnder ſhéepes ſkinnes rauening Wolues.
         
         
            247 Of the Elephant.
            AS the Lyon paſſed by the wilde beaſts through the deſert, they made theyr obeiſance to him as King of beaſts, only the Elephant bowed not his knée, bicauſe hée could not, but ſome beaſts enuying him, reported yll of him to the Lion, hée ſente for him foorthwith, and ſayd: Why art thou ſo

ſtubborne, that thou doeſt not thy dutie as the reſt? My Lord, according to my power I honour thée, but I can not knéele bicauſe I lack knées. The Lion ſayde, if thou doe it in thy harte, it ſuffiſeth: wherefore he condemned hys accuſers, and promoted the Elephant.
            
               Mor. We ought to gyue no iudgement, before the truthe be tried.
         
         
            248 Of an Aſſe.
            THe Aſſe in the winter ſeaſon was much troubled for ye extréeme colde yt he ſuffered, Labor. & yt he liued only by ſtrawe, whervpon he wiſhed for the ſpring tide, that he might féede of the ſwéete graſſe. When the ſpring was come, his Maiſter being a potter, compelled him to carry clay into his workehouſe and wood to the furnace, and thence to cary bricke and tyle into diuers places: wherewith being anoyed, he longed for ſommer, hoping thē to take his eaſe when his maiſter was buſie in his harueſt: but then he caried wheate into the barne, and from thence home, and had no reſt: wherefore he thought if Autūne were once come to haue an ende of his trauaile: but he could not yet be eaſed of hys trauaile, but

as then caried wine, fruit and wood: then he deſired for froſt & ſnow again, yt at the laſt he might haue ſome eaſe of his trauaile.
            
               Mor. In this life there is no time voyde of continuall labour.
         
         
            249 Of a Countryman and Bees.
            A Certen Countryman kept an Hiue of Bées, by which he became rich: neuertheleſſe Learning. he was oftē ſtong when he fetched away the hony cōbes, wherewith being offended, he threatned the Bées ſaying: If hereafter ye touche me I will ſurely ouerthrowe you & driue you away. What (quod the Bées) thou canſt be content to gather ye ſwéete, but arte loth to taſt of the ſoure: be quiet, or we will forſake thée. It happened, when he came again to gather hony, a Bée ſtong him, wherewith being mad, he ouerthrew the hiues, thē the bées forſooke him, wherby ye couetous churle fel into pouerty.
            
               Mor. Who ſo will haue gayne, muſt endure ſome payne.
         
         
            250 Of a Husbandman and a Poet.
            A Certen Huſbandman came to a Poet, whoſe groundes he tilled, whome bycauſe he found alone ſitting amongſt his books, aſked him by what meanes he could

liue ſo ſolitarie? Mary (quod he) I was not alone afore thou cameſt here.
            
               Mor. Learned men which dayly are in company of ſuch as they are, be neuer alone, but when they are amongeſt the vnlearned.
         
         
            251 Of a Rich man vnlearned, and a Poore man learned.
            A Certein man being rich but vnlerned, mocked a learned mā which was poore, bicauſe that he hymſelf with his owne trauaile hadde gathered muche goodes, but he which was ſo learned was in great penurie: No maruaile (quod hée) bycauſe thou haſte ſtudied to gather Riches, but I haue endeuored to get lerning, which doth farre excell riches. Hereupon there fel a contention betwéene the riche man and the learned, whither lerning or riches were more excellent, which coulde not be ended ſeyng both had many fauorers, but the rich man had moſt: At length by this meanes it was knowne that learning excelled riches, thorough ciuile diſcord being bothe compelled to liue in baniſhment, when they could cary nothing a waye with them of their ſubſtance

they went away into an other citie, where the learned man was hyred to teach for a great ſtipende, and had in honour and eſtimation: but he which was rich, through pouertie being fayne to beg his bread from doore to doore, confeſſed that in his opinion he had erred.
            
               Mor. The gifts of Fortune, bycauſe they paſſe too and fro, are farre ſubiect to the gifts of the mynde, whiche are proper and euerlaſting.
         
         
            252 Of a Parat.
            A Parat dwelling in a kings court was aſked of other birds, why ſhée was ſo highly eſtemed? Who aunſwered, bycauſe I haue learned to ſpeake as a man.
            
               Mor. Wée muſt learne good and liberall ſciences if we wil be had in honour and eſtimation.
         
         
            253 Of the Pike and the Tenche.
            AS a certein Fiſher angled, he ſo bayted Learne by others. his hooks that the Fiſhes could not perceiue them, whiche the Pyke & the Tenche ſéeing, were very deſyrous of it: but the Pyke being ſubtil ſayd to the Tench: This

This Bayte ſéemeth to be good and delicate, yet I think it is layd to deceyue fiſhes withall, therfore let vs forſake it leaſt we periſhe through the luſtes of gluttonie. In fayth (quod the Tenche) it were a folly to leaue ſo good a morſel for feare of nothing: I will firſt trie it and make mery with it, and looke thou what will hap. As he ſwallowed the Bayte, he felt the deceyte of the hooke and wold fayne haue retired, but the Fiſher firſt plucked him vp, then the Pyke ſwam away and ſayd: Lette vs learne by our fellowes miſchance, leaſt we periſhe.
            
               Mor. Happy is hée, whom other mens harmes do make to beware.
         
         
            254 Of a Mermayd and a Lechour.
            
               A Certen ſhameleſſe and lecherous perſon ſayling on ye ſea, eſpied a moſt beautifull Mermayde, after whome he luſted ſo much, that he prouoked hir to lecherie, but ſhe did ſing much ſwéeter and prepared hir ſelfe to beguyle thys Marchaunt, ſaying: as I perceyue thou loueſt mée, but if thou wilt haue thy pleaſure of me, come into the water, and it ſhall be at thy commaundement. This fellow was ſo enflamed wt
               
luſt, that he cleane forgot his owne eſtate, and therefore ſkipped into the Sea to hir: She ſéeing that, left him in great daunger and ſwam away.
            
               Mor. This Fable willeth vncleane men to beware that they likewiſe periſh not through the beautie of a womā.
         
         
            255 Of a Ielous man.
            
               A Certeyn Ielous man maried a Wife, Leudeneſse of women. whom he knew vnhoneſt, wherevpon he deliuered hir to a truſty friend of his to keepe, promiſing him a great reward, if he kept hir ſo ſafely, that by no meanes the bonde of wedlocke were broken. When he had tried hir a fewe dayes and perceyued that ſhe might hardly be kept ſafe, bycauſe through hir ſubtiltie he was night ouercome, went to hir huſbande and told him that he would not take ſo great charge vpon him, ſéeing that Argus himſelfe, with an hūdred eyes, were not able to kéepe hir by cōſtraint: he ſayd moreouer, if he might be put to choyſe, he had rather by the ſpace of one whole yeare, dayly carry into the fieldes a ſackefull of fleas, and turne them all to graſſe, and bring them home agayne

at euening, thā one day too haue the charge of a leude woman.
            
               Mor. No kéeper be he neuer ſo diligent can kéepe ſafely a wanton mynion.
         
         
            256 Of a Liberall man.
            
               A Frank and Liberall man toward all Liberalitie. mē, trauailing far, fel amōgſt théeues, who ſtanding about him, and ready to ſlay him, one of them cried out: kill not this man which hath much holpen me, for ſomtime he did not only receiue me gētly into his houſe, but alſo noriſhed me being ſick, and cauſed a phiſitian too looke vnto me, with which woords his felowes relenting, ſuffted him to depart vnhurt..
            
               Mor. As far as we may, we ſhoulde do good to all men.
         
         
            257 Of a Couetous man.
            
               A Very harde head bought a riche farme and plentifull, whiche was ſet withal kinde of Trées that bare fruite, which yelded to the former lord greate abundance of frute, although it were vnfenſed and common for all trauailers: the new lord ſuppoſing that if it were dreſſed better and looked

too, it would beare fruite more aboundantly, tooke great paynes about it, and incloſed it with thicke hedges and walles, & appointed kéepers to watch it, but it being ſo diligently tended, yelded litle encreaſe. Then God being aſked wherof this came, aunſwered thus: Thou art the cauſe of ſo great euill, bicauſe thou kéepeſt on euery ſide the fields fenced with hedges & ſtrong walles: ſometime I gaue great encreaſe bicauſe many required much, but now ſéeing it ſerueth thee alone, why doeſt thou aſke ſo much?
            
               Mor. God gyueth plenty to a liberall man, bycauſe he might ſupplie the neceſſitie of many.
         
         
            258 Of the Dog and the Lyon.
            
               A Dog by chaunce met with a Lyon, to Libertie. whom he ſayd meryly, what wandreſt thou (O miſer) through woods and deſerts nighe pined for hunger? Marke how fatte and trim I am: I neuer take payns for it, but get it ydelly Truthe it is (ſayd ye Lyō) that thou fareſt well, yet thou (O foole) art in bondage, ſerue thou which canſt ſerue, for I am frée and will not ſerue.
            
               
               Mor. In euery thing liberty farre excelleth.
         
         
            259 Of the Lynnet and the Boy.
            
               A Bey aſked a Linnet in whome he had a ſingular delight, and had fedde hym fat with good meate, why he would not returne into the cage whence he went out? Bycauſe (quod hee) I might féede at my owne pleaſure, not at thine.
            
               Mor. Libertie is to be prefered aboue all dainties.
         
         
            260 Of a Foxe and a Crocodile.
            THe Foxe and the Crocodile dyd ſtryue about their Nobilitie: The Crocodile 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . layd for him ſelfe many proud things concerning the worthineſſe of his aunceſters, that they had prices in games. Whereat the Foxe laughed, ſaying: Trulye friend, though thou neuer namedſt that, yet it appeareth by thy ſkin, that thou haſte bin a great dooer in old time.
            
               Mor. The thing it ſelfe reproueth lyers of their falſhood.
         
         
            
            261 Of the Shepherd and the Huſband men.
            
               A Boy kept ſhéep in a great paſture, who three or foure tymes dyd crye in ieſte that the Wolfe was come: whiche thing cauſed the Huſbande men (oute of euery Quarter of the Countreys) to aſſemble there. It chaunced verely, that the Wolfe came at length, and the Boy called for help as before, but they being oft deluded, wold not once ſtirre out of their doores, whereby the ſheepe were all deſtroyed.
            
               Mor. He that vſeth lying, though he chaunce once to tell a truthe, ſhall not ſoone be credited.
         
         
            262 Of Mercurius.
            
               IVpiter commaunded Mercurius to beſtow amongſt craftes men the medicine to make them lye, which when he had well ſtamped and meaſured, he poured it equally vpon euery one. The ſhoomaker only remayned, on whom (bycauſe muche of the medicine was left) he poured all in the morter: whereof it came to paſſe, that all craftes men are lyers, but moſte of all are ſhoomakers.
            
               
               Mor. This Fable is againſt lying workmen.
         
         
            263 Of an old Man and his Sonne.
            
               A Certeyn olde Man being thruſt out of 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                doores by his Sonne, liued in an Hoſpitall. On a time he eſpied his ſonne trauayling that way, whom he prayed, that at the leaſt he would ſende him two towels of all his linnen, for which he had ſwet full ſore: who being at length moued with his Fathers prayers, commaunded a litle Boye his ſonne, to fetche his Grandfather ye linnen that he required. The Boy being witty and worthy of ſuch a father, brought but one, whom his Father rebuked bycauſe he brought not two as he was bidden: forſoth (quod hée) I kéepe the other for thée, yt when thou arte old and liueſt in an Hoſpitall, I might ſende it to thée.
            
               Mor. Looke what loue we beare toward our Parentes, the ſame will our children beare toward vs.
         
         
            264 Of the Falcon and the Cock.
            
               A Certen Knight had a Falcon, of whom Liue in 
                     •
                  hy vocation. he much reioyced, whome he alwayes

caried on his fiſte, and fed him well, but on a tyme he lette hys Falcon flie, bycauſe he would cal hir to his hand, and whiſtled for hir, but the Falcon would not came down. A Cock ſéeing this, exalted him ſelfe, ſaying: What doe I poore wretch alwayes liuing in durte and myre, am I not as fayre and as great as the Falcon? Sure I will light on hys gloue and be fedde with my Lords meate. When he had lighted on hys fiſte, the Knight (though he were ſory) yet ſomwhat reioyced & tooke the Cock, whom he killed, but hys fleſhe he ſhewed to the Falcon, to bring him againe to his hand, which the Falcon ſéeing, came haſtily too it.
            
               Mor. Let euery man walke in his vocation, and let no man exalte him ſelfe aboue his degrée.
         
         
            265 Of the Camell.
            
               A Camell being weary of his eſtate, cō
               playned that the Buls had goodly hornes, but he him ſelfe had no defence to reſiſte other beaſtes: He therefore beſought Iupiter to gyue hym hornes alſo: Who laughed at his fooliſh requeſt, whereof not

only he was denied, but alſo had his eares cropped.
            
               Mor. Lette euery man be content with his calling, for as ſome hunte after better fortune, they happen to worſe.
         
         
            266 Of the Aſſe, the Ape, and the Mole.
            THe Aſſe complayned that he lacked hornes, and the Ape that he wāted a tayle. Peace fooles (quod the Mole) for I am blind alſo.
            
               Mor. Some are not content with their eſtate, but if they wayed well other mens miſfortunes, they woulde quietlier endure their owne.
         
         
            267 Of the Snayle and Frogs.
            A Snayle eſpied many Frogs féeding in one poole togither, ſo light and nimble, that they would eaſely leape euery where, then he accuſed nature for creating him ſo ſlowe a beaſt, and for carying ſo great a burthen, that ſcarce he could ſtirre withal: But when he perceyued the Frogges to be deuoured of Snakes, and to be in daunger of euery trifle, he cōforted him ſelfe ſaying: Oh how much better is it to cary a burthē,

which may be a ſafegarde agaynſt al weathers, than to be ſo oft in daūger of death?
            
               Mor. We muſt not be gréeued with the gifts of nature, which are ſometime more for our profite, than we can vnderſtand.
         
         
            268 Of a rich man.
            A Riche man had two daughters, wherof Loue of money. the one died, at whoſe buriall he hyred women to lament: the other ſayde: What wretches are wée, for to vs this mourning belongeth, but we can not ſkill thereof, and they which haue nothing to doo there with, how pitifully doe they wayle? To whom hir mother ſayde: Maruell not daughter, if they lament ſo, for they doe it bicauſe of money.
            
               Mor. Some men for loue of money feare not to picke aduauntage from an others miſerie.
         
         
            269 Of the Nightingale and the Hauke.
            A Nightingale ſitting vppon a trée, dyd Lucre. ſing as he was wonte, but the Hauke ſéeing him and lacking meate, flew at the Nightingale, whiche being ready to be killed, beſought the Hauke not to deuoure

him, bicauſe ſhe coulde not ſuffiſe to fill his belly, but he ought, lacking meate, to fall to greater birds. Nay (quod he) then were I mad, if I ſhoulde let goe that I am ſure of, and purſue that I ſée not.
            
               Mor. Some men are ſo fooliſh, that vpon hope of greater things which are vncertaine, put away that they haue preſently.
         
         
            270 Of a mad Man.
            A Certein mad Man wandring through Cities, cryed aloud that he had wiſdom Madneſſe. to ſell, then one offered money and required it, to whome he lent a blowe and gaue him a long thréed, ſaying: Thou ſhalt be wiſe if thou kéepe thée as farre from mad men, as this is long.
            
               Mor. We muſt haue nothing to do with mad men.
         
         
            271 Of a Prieſt and his Boy.
            A Prieſt gyuen to belly good chéere, deliuered Madſeruaunts. to his Boy ten fat thruſhes put vpon a Spit to be roſted, ſaying that he ſhoulde eate them all at a byt, if he lette them fall into the aſhes. Within a ſhort

while after, when he returned (for he was gone out to doo certein buſineſſe) he founde the boy crying, who being demaunded why he wept, aunſwered, bicauſe he could eate but nine when they fell into the aſhes, requeſting that he might not be forced to eat the tenth bycauſe he was full ſwolne more than inough. The prieſt being offended, as well with the madneſſe of the boye, as bycauſe he ſaw that he had loſt his ſupper, led the boy without the threſholde of the doore, and ſhewed him thrée ways, ſaying: Chooſe which of theſe thou wilt, for here thou ſhalt not lodge this night.
            
               Mor. Wee ought not too kéepe madde ſeruants in oure houſe.
         
         
            272 Of a Foxe.
            AS a Fore paſſed ouer a Riuer, hée was Magiſtrates. driuen into a ditche, where he ſtucke ſo faſt in the mudde that he coulde not eſcape, whom the flies ſore ſtinged. The Hedgehog ſéeing him there, tooke compaſſion on him, and aſked him whether he ſhold driue the flyes from him: No (quod he) theſe are full with my bloud, and can little trouble me, but if thou ſhouldeſt driue them away,

other hūger ſterued flies will occupie their roomes, and ſucke out all the bloud that is left within me.
            
               Mor. Olde Magiſtrates muſt remayne in their office,
         
         
            273 Of an Aſſe.
            AN Aſſe bare great malice to a Hogge which dwelt with his maiſter, bicauſe he did nothing, & yet was fed with diuers kindes of meates and became dayly fatter, but he him ſelfe continually drudging dyd fare hardly, whereby he was ſo leane, that he could ſcarſe goe. But at length when he ſawe his fellow caried to the Butchers to be killed for mans meate, he ſomewhat reuiued and ſayd: Ah, this is the end that mē take ſuch paynes in féeding a Hog. O how far better is it to be an Aſſe, than a Hog?
            
               Mor. We ought not to enuie thoſe, whom we thinke happy, whereas that cloked felicitie, to many is cauſe of miſerie.
         
         
            274 Of a yong man.
            
               A Certein yong man whiche ſhould marie Mariage. a Wife, being demaunded whyther

he would haue hir, turned him to his friēds and neyghboures preſent, ſaying: Why ſtand ye lyke dumbe men, why doe ye not praye God to helpe mée this day? for if we praye God helpe them that nyſe where no daunger is, how much more ought ye now to praye for mée, to whome ſo great daunger is at hand?
            
               Mor. They whiche marie, enter into great daunger.
         
         
            275 Of Iupiter.
            
               IVpiter celebrating a mariage, receyued Meane life. all beaſts vnto the feaſte, only ye Snayle made ſlow haſt, the cauſe whereof he maruelling at, aſked him why he came not to the feaſt? he anſwered: My houſe is deare to mee and excellent: whereat Iupiter béeing angry, gaue ſentence that he ſhoulde cary his houſe about him.
            
               Mor. Some men had rather liue hardly at home, than daintily abroade.
         
         
            276 Of a Foxe and a Weaſel.
            THe Foxe had ſo long tyme faſted without getting any maner of praye, that he

looked very leane and thin, and by chaunce crept through a narrow hole, into a vault of corne, where when hee had well fed, hée aſſayed to go foorth ageine, but his belly being ful let him: the Weſill ſéeing him a far off ſtruggling to get out, coūſelled him if he would get out, to come as freſh and faſting as he went in. This fable reherſeth Horace thus:
            
               Sometyme did paſſe a narrow hole,
               a hungrie Foxe and thin,
               To come vnto a vaulte of wheate
               where eaſly he got in:
               And being full, coulde not repaſſe,
               to whome a Weaſill ſpake,
               Come fastyng foorth as in thou wentst,
               this way needes must thou take.
            
         
         
            277 Of an Apple tree.
            AN Apple trée mocked ye Oliue trée that he bare ſmall beries, ſeing ſhe brought foorth ſo great Aples, that hir boughs could hardly bear thē: ſodainly ther aroſe a wind, and all the Apples almoſt, bycauſe of their weyghte and vyolence of the tempeſt fell downe, and hir boughes were broken, but the Oliue trée ſtoode whole: then ſayd ſhée

to hir ſelf, how far better had it bin for mée to haue borne leſſer frute?
            
               Mor. Wée oughte to be contente with ſmall things, ſeyng abundance of riches can not bée enioyed without great danger.
         
         
            278 Of the Flye and the Ant.
            THe Flie ſtriued with the Ant about his nobility, the Fly alleaged that ſhe was of a noble bloud, and that ſhe flyed, dwelts in Kings pallaces, fared deyntily, there vnto idelly atchieuing, and the Ant to be baſe born, to créepe on the earth, to liue in holes to gnaw on corne, and to drink water. The Ant replied that ſhe was no baſe born, yet contented with hir birthe, the Flie to be a vagabund, hir ſelfe none, ſhe taſted of corne and running water, the Fly of bakemeats and ſwéete wine, and ſhe got not hir liuing ydelly, but with trauaile: furthermore the Ant to be always merry in ſafetie, beloued of all men, beſide that an example of labor, the Flie to be in danger, hatred, and ſpited of all men, yea & a figure of ſlouthfulneſſe: the Ant to be mindefull of Winter, and to lay vp this prouiſion, the Fly to liue from day to day, and in the winter to be hungry,

or elſe die for hunger.
            
               Mor. A meane life, quietly out of checking, is better thā a delicate life in much trouble.
         
         
            279 Of a Husbandman and his Dogs.
            
               A Huſbandman wintered in the Countrey a good many dayes: at length he Maiſters. began to want his neceſſary things. Firſte he began to kill his ſhéepe, after his gotes, laſt of all his Oxen, to kéepe life and ſoule togither, bicauſe he was nighe pyned with hunger. The Dogs ſéeing that, determined to ſaue their lyues by running away, for they ſuppoſed in that he ſpared not his oxē, whiche for huſbandry he occupied, that he would ſerue them with the like ſauſe.
            
               Mor. Take héede in what houſe thou ſerue for hyre, ſome maiſters are moſte vncurteous, whiche in their rage care not what miſchief or diſpleaſure they doo to their ſeruaunts.
         
         
            280 Of the Lampurne and the Crocodile.
            
               THe Lampurne on a tyme finding the Meading with ſtrā
                  gers. broude of a Crocodile, killed them all, & departed. When the Crocodile returned &

found hir yong ones dead, ſhe was out of meaſure ſory, and deſired by all meanes poſſible to reuenge their death, wherevpon ſhe went armed to deuoure the Lampurn, but on a tyme ſhée found a cruell ſerpent and venomous, and ſhe ſuppoſed it to be the Lampurn, whō ſhe aſſayled, ſaying: Ah wretche, nowe canſt thou not eſcape, thou haſt without cauſe ſlayn my ſonnes, therfore now I wil diſpatch thée: the ſnake aunſwered, take héede of me, for I am no Lāpurne but a venomous Viper. Ah (quod the Crocodile) thou canſt not deceyue mée, for thou art no Snake but a Lampurn, and altogither like to one, and therefore I will kill thée, but as ſhe went to ſlaye him, the ſerpent prepared him ſelfe, byt hir, and alſo poyſoned hir.
            
               Mor. No man ought to fight with him whom he knoweth not.
         
         
            281 Of a Lyon and a Mouſe.
            
               IT happened that a Lyon (wearied with Mercy in Princes. running and heate of the weather) layde him downe to reſt in the ſhadowe vnder the gréene trées, who being ſodenly waked with a flocke of Miſe that ran ouer his

backe, caught one amongſt the reſt. Thys poore priſoner beſoughte him earneſtly to ſet hym at libertie, ſaying that he was altogither vnworthy to ſtirre him to anger. The Lyon conſidering it wold be no commendation for him to ſlay ſo ſmall a beaſt, let him go frée. Not long after it chaunced as the Lyon ran through the thick wood, he fell into a net, well might he roare, but eſcape he coulde not: This Mouſe hearyng the Lyon ſo lamentably roaryng, ſtreighte way knewe his voyce, and crepte in at the holes of the earth, and diligently ſought for the knots of the ſnare: which hauing foūd, he gnew in pieces, by whiche meanes the Lyon eſcaped out of the net.
            
               Mor. Mighty men muſt vſe mercy, for Fortune changing as the wynde, euen the ſtouteſt at a tyme may néede helpe of ye baſeſt: therfore a wiſe mā though it lay in his power to hurt any mā, ought to feare that, he that feareth not that, doteth greatly: and why ſo? Though it be ſo, yt bering thée bold of thine office thou careſt for no mā, the day may come that thou maiſt be aferd. It is not vnknown what hath hapned to noble and mightie

Princes, who haue not only bin glad to ſéeke ayde of moſt vile perſons, but alſo haue feared their diſpleaſure.
         
         
            282 Of the Wolfe and the Lambe.
            
               AS a Wolfe was drinking at the head Might. of a ſpring, he eſpied a Lambe farre beneath alſo drinking of the ſame Spring, wherat grudging, ran haſtily to the Lābe and roughly rebuked him for troubling the ſpring. The Lambe al trembling beſought him to ſhe we cōpaſſion on him, being therof giltleſſe, alleaging that bycauſe he drank farre beneath him by no meanes he coulde trouble hys drinking, neyther yet ment it. The Wolfe hauing determined euen at the firſte ſight, the death of ye Lābe, threatned hym moſte rigorouſly, ſaying: Thy labor is in vayne to aſke pardon, for thou art alwayes my enimie, thy Father, thy mother, and all thy curſed kinred are willingly my foes: but this daye I will be reuenged of thée.
            
               Mor. The mighty if he be diſpoſed to hurt, eaſely findeth occaſion thereto. A ſmall thing is a great faulte, if a man deale with his Superiours.
         
         
            
            283 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
            THe Hares ſometime aſſembled and bewayled Miſerie of others eaſeth ſome. their life as full of daunger and feare, that they were deuoured by men, dogs, and Eagles, and many other: whervpon they decréed that it was better once to die, than all their life to be in feare: then they ruſhed to the marſheward, as thoughe they would fall therein and be choked: but Frogs whiche ſat on the banks, hearing a noyſe of running, ſkipped into it. Whiche thing one of the Hares wyſer than the reſt ſéeing, ſayd: ſtay fellowes & do your ſelues no harme, for there are other beaſtes more fearfull than wée.
            
               Mor. Wretched men are comforted by the miſerie of others being greater.
         
         
            284 Of a Swanne.
            
               A Rich man brought vp a Swanne and a Gooſe togither, but not both to one Muſick. purpoſe, for the one ſhold ſerue to ſing, the other for the table. When the tyme was come that the gooſe ſhold doe that for which he was kept vp, it chaunced to be night, ſo that one coulde not be knowen from the other, and the Swan was caried, away inſtead

of the gooſe, who ſoong a ſong at ye beginning of hir death, by whiche ſhe ſhewed hir nature, & by hir ſweete ſinging eſcaped death.
            
               Mor. Cōmonly Muſicke prolongeth life.
         
         
            285 Of a Moore.
            
               A Certen mā bought a Moore, who thinking that the blackneſſe of his ſkinne Nature. hapned through the negligence of his firſt Maiſter, tooke him home and ceaſſed not cōtinually to waſhe him with ſuche things as would make him white, by which meanes he ſo vexed the poore ſlaue, that he brought him into a ſickneſſe, his ſkin remayning ſtill as black as before.
            
               Mor. Nature will abyde as it was firſt.
         
         
            286 Of a Horſeman and a Husbandman.
            
               A Horſeman required a Huſbandmā to Neceſſity catch a Hare, whiche he tooke in hys handes and aſked the price, and foorthwith ſet ſpurs to his horſſe: but the Huſbandmā ſayd: Make no haſte, for I will giue it thée for a preſent.
            
               Mor. This Fable toucheth thoſe which refuſe their own vpon neceſſitie.
         
         
            
            287 Of a Man and his Dog.
            
               A Certen man hauing forgot to ſhut the doore where the Hens rooſted: When Negligence of ſeruaunts. he aroſe in the morning, founde that they were all killed and caried away by ye Fox: He was wroth therefore with the Dog, bicauſe he had not well tended hys goods, & bet him ſore. Why, (quod he) if thou haſt bin negligēt in ſhutting the doore, for whō the Hens layd egs, and hatched Chickens, is it any maruell if I being in a dead ſléepe and haue no profit by thē, did not perceyue the Foxe comming?
            
               Mor. We muſt neuer hope to haue diligent ſeruaunts, where the maiſter is negligent.
         
         
            288 Of a Foxe.
            
               A Fox durſt not aſſaulte by night a flock of Hens for feare of a Dogge which he knew to lodge amongſt them: but when Neighbor he vnderſtood that they were gone to an other place to companie with other Hens where no dog was, ſuppoſing to obtayn his purpoſe went thither and killed them all.
            
               Mor. It is better to haue a good and couragious neighboure dwelling néere,

than cowardly kinſmen.
         
         
            289 Of foure footed Beaſtes.
            WHen war was proclaimed betwene No ayde, no fellows. foure footed beaſtes, and foules: The Beaſtes made a league with the Fiſhes, that by their ayde they might be defended from the rigorouſneſſe of the Foules. Whē they looked for helpe at their hands, the Fiſhes ſent their Ambaſſadoures to declare that they could not come by lande vnto thē.
            
               Mor. Make not thoſe thy fellowes, which can not helpe in tyme of néede.
         
         
            290 Of a Souldiour and his Horſe.
            THere was a Souldiour whiche hadde a Newe things beſt. paſſing fine horſe, and bought an other in goodneſſe nothing like vnto him, whom more nicely he kept than the firſte: Then ſayd he to his fellow, why doth my Maiſter keepe me paſſingly aboue thée, ſéeing I am not to be compared to thée, neyther in cōlineſſe, ſtrength, nor ſwiftneſſe? He anſwered him: This is the courſe of the worlde, that new gueſtes are beſt welcome.
            
               Mor. Suche is the madneſſe of men, that they preferre newe things afore

old, though they be worſer.
         
         
            291 Of the Kid and the Wolfe.
            A Gote going abroade to feed, ſhut vp hir yong Kid at home, charging him not to Obedience. open the doore till hir returne: The Wolf by chaunce hearing that, after hir departure knocked at ye doore, fayning the voyce of the Gote, and bad him open it. The Kid perceyuing his pretence, denied to open the doore, ſaying: Though thy voyce be like a Gotes, yet I ſee a Wolfe throughe the chinkes.
            
               Mor. It is good for childrē to obey their Parents, yong men to be ruled by age.
         
         
            292 Of a Chicken caught by a Kight.
            A Hen hauing many chickens did greatly feare leaſt the Kight ſhould catch thē, wherevpon when ſhe ſawe the Kight, ſhe gathered them often vnder hir wings to ſaue them from their enimie. But one day eſpying the kight flying toward hir, ſhe called hir chickens togither, which al came quickly at their dāmes clocking, onely one excepted, which deſpiſing hir calling, whyles ſhe coueted to eate a corne of wheat, was ſnatched vp in the clawes of the cruel Kight into the Aire.
            
               
               Mor. They whiche obey not their Parents cōmaundement, fall into miſerie.
         
         
            293 Of a Philoſopher.
            A Philoſopher of the ſecte of Cynicus in Offences vnpuniſhed. chyding being ſtricken, was not onely ther with cōtented, but alſo rewarded him that ſtrake, with a piece of ſiluer: Whiche thing whē all that were preſent maruelled at, & ſayd that he was worthy to be beaten ageyn, ah (quod hée) ye knowe not what I haue done now, but herafter ye ſhal know: not long after as that ſtryker would haue beaten an other (for he hoped to gayn ſomwhat) he receyued his deaths wounde, and féeling death to come vppon him, he ſayd: how much better had it bin for me to haue bin ſtriken again of the Philoſopher, than to be rewarded with a ſiluer peny?
            
               Mor. When offenders ſcape ſcot frée, it doth thē ſomtime more hurte thā puniſhment.
         
         
            294 Of the Foxe and the Egle.
            ON a tim a yong Fox wandring frō hir Oppreſsion of poore. hole, was ſnatched vp by an Eagle, thē he cried for his Dāme to haue ayde of hir: She hearing hir yong one crie out, came haſtily running and beſought the Eagle to

ſet him at libertie: The Eagle hauing got that praie, would not departe withall, but caried it vp to hir neſt. The Foxe deſirous to be reuenged, caught vp a firebrand, following after him to ſette fire on his neſt: when ſhe had climbed vp into the trée, ſhe ſayd to him: Saue thée and thy chickens if thou cāſt. The Egle fearing to be burnt, prayed hir to take pitie of him and his litle ones, and what ſoeuer he hadde of his, he would reſtore.
            
               Mor. By the Eagle is vnderſtoode the mighty and men of ſtout courage. By y• Foxe the poore, whom the riche are earneſtly bēt with forged crimes to charge and ſlaunder: yet the Antes, when their anger taketh effecte, though they be a weake people, ſometyme their iniurie wreakes very well.
         
         
            295 Of an Oliue Tree.
            AN Oliue trée maruelled yt a wild Vine Ouer ha
                  
                     ••
                  ineſse. which grew néere vnto him, had ſhooted vp ſo high in ſo ſhort time, that he was far higher than hée which had continued many péeres in one place: but winter cōming on, the wild vine withered away. Then the Oliue ſayde: We ought not enuie thoſe

things that ſhoote vp apace, whoſe ende is ſo ſoone at hand.
            
               Mor. Things ſoon ripe, are ſoone rotten.
         
         
            296 Of the Mouſe and the Cat.
            A Flocke of Myſe had their abiding in a hollow wall, wherèout by chaunce péeping, they eſpied a Catte, whiche ſatte in a chaumber lookyng grimly, and hangyng downe hir head. Then ſayde one of them: This beaſte ſeemeth very gentle and ſimple, for hir countenaunce pretendeth holyneſſe, I will therfore go ſpeake with hir, & contract a perfect league of friendſhip with hir that ſhal neuer be broken. Whē he had ſo ſayd, he came nerer vnto hir, whom the Catte caught and tore in pieces: the other ſéeing that, ſayd: Verily, verily, wee muſt not credit ſmooth lookes.
            
               Mor. Wée muſt not iudge any man by his countenaunce, but by his good woorkes: for in a ſhéepes ſkin oft are wrapped rauening wolues.
         
         
            297 Of the Kyte and the Hauke.
            THe Kyght contended wyth the Hauke before the Egle aboute his excellencie, Outward iudgemēt. alledging that for the greatneſſe of his bodie hée ought to be preferred. The Hauke

ageyne ſayde, that the ſtature ought not to be conſidered, but the ſtrength. Then the Egle ſayd, Goe ye on hunting, & whyther of you ſhall bring me the worthier praie, I will iudge him chiefeſt: but when the kight had brought a litle mouſe, the Hauk a pigeon, the Eagle ſayd: How much bigger the doue is than the mouſe, ſo muche I declare thée Hauke to excell the Kight.
            
               Mor. Men muſt be iudged by their valiaunt actes, not their huge ſtature.
         
         
            298 Of Cocks and a Partriche.
            
               A Certen man hauing Cocks at home, bought a Partriche, whom he put with Pacience. them to feed, but ſhe being beaten & driuen from their company was very ſory, ſuppoſing that for being a ſtranger ſhe was thus handled: but ſeing them ſhortly after fight one with an other, ſhe left off ſorrowe and ſayd: Hereafter, if I ſee them fighting, I will not be gréeued.
            
               Mor. Wiſe men paciently ſuffer wrōg of ſtraungers, perceyuing that they abſtayne not from their natiue Countrymen.
         
         
            
            299 Of the Sowe and the Dog.
            
               A Sowe mocked a Spaniell, bycauſe he Pacience for gayne. vſed to faune on his maiſter, whiche ſo oft had beaten him, and plucked him by the eares, to teache him to hunte. Thou madde body (quod the Dogge) thou knoweſt not what I haue gayned by theſe ſtripes, for hereby doe I eate the ſwéete Partriches & Quayles.
            
               Mor. We muſt not be gréeued if our Maiſter beate vs, for thereof iſſueth plentyfull goodneſſe.
         
         
            300 Of a Lambe and a Wolfe.
            
               A Lamb ſtanding in an highe place, rayled Pacience perforce. on the Wolfe as he paſſed by beneath, calling him naughty beaſt and rauening: to whom the Wolfturning ſayd: Thou doeſt not taunte me, but the toure whereon thou ſtandeſt.
            
               Mor Some ſuffer wrong of vile perſons, for feare of greater men.
         
         
            301 Of a Flie.
            
               A Flye by chaunce fell into a fleſhe pot, wherein being nighe choked, ſayd

to himſelfe, beholde I haue eats and dronk ſo much, and ſo wel waſhed me, that now being ſo full I am content to dye.
            
               Mor. A wiſe man will ſtoutely beare out that which by no meanes can bée auoyded.
         
         
            302 Of a Wolfe and the Lyon.
            THe Wolfe and the Lyon being entred frendſhip together, did ſeek their liuing: when the Wolfe heard the baying of ſhéep, hée ſayde: Truſte to it friende, wée ſhall haue meate anone: When he therfore by folowing the noyſe of Shéepe, was come to the penne, he founde it well fenſed, and the Dogs néere a ſléepe: Then he returned to the Lyon, ſaying: It pleaſeth me not that at this tyme wee eate of ſhéepe, for they are very leane, let them growe fatte, and wée will returne when they be fat.
            
               Mor. The Fable noteth thoſe, which being lette of their purpoſe, doo alleage that they would not.
         
         
            303 Of the Ape and his two ſonnes.
            THe report is, that if the Ape chaunce to haue a twinne, ſhée loueth the one, and 
                  
                     •
                  arentes.
               
hateth the other: It came to paſſe, that ſhe had two at a clap, who by chaunce béeing put in feare, bicauſe ſhe would eſcape the preſent daunger, carried that ſhe loued in hir armes, which as ſhe ran headlong, ſhe daſhed ageynſt a rock, and ſlue it, the other whiche ſhe hated, ſat on hir rough backe, and went ſcot frée.
            
               Mor. It chaunceth commonly that parents bring that chyld to naught whom they make wanton, & whome leſſe they cocker, to proue a valiant & good man.
         
         
            304 Of an old man which caried an Aſſe.
            IT was talked ſometyme amongeſt the Pleaſe euery body. Popes Secretaries, that thoſe men whiche framed their lyfe after the opinion of the common people, were in a myſerable bondage, bycauſe it was impoſſible to pleaſe euery one, ſeing they are of ſundry iudgements. To whiche opinion one told, that there was an olde man whiche went to market, with his ſonne to ſell an Aſſe, whiche he draue vnladen before him. As he paſſed on his way, there were men labouring by in the fields, which blamed the old man, bycauſe that neither he nor his ſonne

did ryde on the Aſſe whiche went empty, ſéeing the one for his age, the other for hys infancie had néede to be caried. Then the old man ſet his ſonne on the Aſſe and him ſelf went by on foote, which thing other ſéeing, ſayd that he doted for letting his ſonne ryde whiche was ſtronger, and hée being old woulde followe on foote: forth with he chaunged his minde and ſet off his ſonne & ryd him ſelfe. When he had ridden a litle further, other met him, who blamed him, yt he hád no regard to the age of his litle ſon, but would let him follow him as a drudge, and him ſelfe being his Father did ride on the Aſſe: where with he being moued, ſette his ſonne alſo on the Aſſe. Not long after he was aſked by other, whoſe ye Aſſe was: Mary (quod hée) it is myne: then they rebuked him that he had no pitie on his poore Aſſe, but to ſet two on him, ſeeing one was ſufficient. Then the man being troubled with ſo ſundry opinions, & ſeeing he coulde not be in quiet, but ſtill was checked, he bound the foure Aſſes feete togither, and on a ſtaſt caried him on his owne ſhoulders & his ſonnes to market: whereat all men wondring, laughed excéedingly, blaming

both their follies, eſpecially the Fathers. The old mā there with chafed, went to the riuers ſide and caſt his Aſſe bounde into the water and ſo loſt him and returned home: by which meanes the ſilly old man deſirous to content euery body, coulde pleaſe none, but loſt his Aſſe.
         
         
            305 Of a ſumptuous feaſt of the Lion.
            THe Lion made a ſumptuous banket to all other brute beaſts, wherein Hens & Thruſhes and ſuch like birds were dreſſed, ſome roſted, ſome ſoddē. This feaſt pleaſed very well the dog & the Cat and other beaſtes that deuoure fleſh, but the reſt whatſoeuer féede on graſſe and barley, iudged this feaſt as vnſauerie.
            
               Mor. It is harde to content the diuers opinions & fantaſie of ye cōmon people.
         
         
            306 Of the Plantin and the Ape.
            PLantin is an hearbe profitable to heale a quartain, whereof an Ape hearing, which hadde a Sonne vexed with that diſeaſe and coulde not be cured thoughe ſhe had ſpent much vpō Phiſitians, came vnto one Macer and ſayd: I haue wandred far &

nere, and can fynd no helpe for my ſonne, but now I haue found thée whom I know to be a greate phiſitian: therefore giue mée thy counſell, that I may get help for my ſon of the quarterne. Then Macer bycauſe he woulde bée iuſtified therin, ſayd: Take foure roots of Plantine, and giue them the pacient and he ſhal ſoone be cured: the Ape hearing that, prepared the medicine which he miniſtred, and therwith healed him.
            
               Mor. Let vs ſeeke out a lerned phiſitiā if we woulde be reſtored to health.
         
         
            307 Of the Firre Tree and the Buſh.
            THe report was ſomtime, that the Firre trée deſpyſed the Buſhes, and boaſted Pleaſure. of his owne tall ſtature, that he was placed in houſes, and too beare a ſayle in the ſhips: but the Buſhes to be low, vile and good for nothing: then they framed him this anſwer: thou beaſteſt much (O Firre trée) of thy goodneſſe, and ſkorneſt our euils, beſides this thou concealeſt thy miſchief, and paſſeſt ouer oure good fortune, but when thou ſhalt be cut downe with the axe, how gladly woldeſt thou be like vnto vs which are voyde of care?
            
               
               Mor. Felicitie hath euils to accōpany hir, as miſery hath good things. In ſūme, this is ſafe and voyd of care, the other is neuer out of feare nor voyd of daunger.
         
         
            308 Of the Sowe and the Bitch.
            THe Sowe and the Bitch contended about Perfectiō. their nobilitie: The Bitch alleaged that of all foure footed beaſtes ſhe was the fruitfulleſt. The Sowe quickly replied ſaying: Seeing thou ſayſt ſo, knowe thou, that thy whelpes be borne blinde?
            
               Mor. Things are not iudged by quick ſpéede, but by full perfection.
         
         
            309 Of the Dog and the Aſſe.
            WHen the Dog fauned on his Lord or Perſeueraunce in his vocation. the ſeruaunte, they ſtroked him with their hands and made much of him: which thing the Aſſe marking well ſighed déeply, being weary of his eſtate, yea & he thought it vniuſtly appointed that the Dog ſhould ſo be beloued of all men, as to be fed at his maiſters table, and therevnto to attayne with eaſe and playe: contrarywiſe, himſelf to cary packs, to be whipped, to labour without ceaſſing, and yet neuertheleſſe to be hated of all men: Seeing theſe things

come to paſſe by fauning, he purpoſed to followe that trade of liuing being ſo profitable: and watching a conuentent time, when his Lorde returned home, bicauſe he would put the thing in triall, he ran afore to méete him: incontinently he lept on him and knocked at him with his héeles. Then his maiſter cried out for help, which thing his ſeruaunts hearing, ranne ſpéedily to him: & the fooliſh Aſſe whiche thought him ſelfe ciuill and curteous, was well beaten with a ſtaffe.
            
               Mor. All men can not doe all things, neyther all things become all men. Let no man meddle aboue his capacitie, nor go about that, whiche he is moſt vntowardly in.
         
         
            310 Of a Camell and Iupiter.
            A Crooked Camel required horns of god, whom for his euill pretence, God mocked, Petitions. and from thencefoorth cropped his eares, and made his head ſmaller, wherby he myght ſéeme altogether deformed.
            
               Mor. Wée oughte to require of GOD that which is ſéemely.
         
         
            
            311 Of an Oxe.
            AN Oxe was offended, that Nature had giuen him ſtrength withoute any defence, bicauſe he lacked weapons, whiche he thought better than ſtrength: he therefore beſought Iupiter that he would vouchſafe to giue him horns, which when he had obtained, he forthwith repented him of his petition: For afore béeing naked, hée was frée, and could be caught by none, but now that he had horns, he was caught in a ſnare and ledde to Ploughe, and compelled to great paines.
            
               Mor. Wée muſt aſke nothing of God, but that wée vnderſtand will do vs good.
         
         
            312 Of the Weſill and the Myſe.
            THe Weaſil through age lacking ſtrengthe, and not able to hunte the Miſe as he was wonte, he therefore to practiſe ſome ſhift, hid himſelf in a heape of meale, thinking therby eaſily to catche them: the Myſe gréedie of the meale, ranne into it, and were all deuoured by the Weaſill.
            
               Mor. Where thou canſte doo no good with a Lyons ſkin on thy backe, put on a Foxes ſkinne.
         
         
            
            313 Of the Crowe and the Pitcher.
            A Crowe being thirſty, found a Pitcher of water, whiche bycauſe it was déeper than he coulde well reache, he aſſayed to poure out the water, but he could not preuayle, then gathered hee ſtones on the ſande, which he caſt in, whereby the water was rayſed higher, and he drank thereof.
            
               Mor. Sometime that whiche can not be done by ſtrength, may be by pollicie and counſell.
         
         
            314 Of a Lyon and a Fore.
            A Lion being taken in a ſnare, endeuoured with all hys force to breake the bandes: the harder he plucked, the ſtraighter he was helde. The Foxe hauing an errande that way, and ſéeing this, ſayde: O King, by no ſtrength mayeſt thou eſcape hence, but by pollicie, for the ſnare muſt be lette out and looſed, and not drawen in. Which whē the Lion had done, he ſtraightway looſed the ſnare wherewith he was bound, and eſcaped frée.
            
               Mor. Pollicie is farre better than ſtrength.
         
         
            
            315 Or a Wolfe being hungry.
            A Wolfe in hys olde age not able any Poore and riche. more to hunte, was ſore a hungred, neither could he finde any kinſman or friende which would helpe him with meate. As he therefore wandred throughe a great Woode heauyly, he chaunced vpon a dead carcaſe of an Oxe, whiche he had ſcarſe begonne to teare, but a companie of other wolues, rauens, and crowes came thither & prayed him to receyue them as hys friends to partake of his praie: Then the Wolfe ſayd to him ſelfe: behold me whome lately my brethrē and ſonnes regarded not, now ſtraunge beaſtes reuerence, and deſire my friendſhip, but they doe not this honour to mée, but to the Oxe.
            
               Mor. A poore man is hated of all men, but the rich are honoured.
         
         
            316 Of the Horſſe and the Harte.
            THe Horſſe kept warre with the Harte, Pouertie prayſed. and being often driuen from his meate and put to the worſte, he lamentably deſired the ayde of men, with whome he came into the fielde: then he that afore hadde the ouerthrow, became cōqueror: but his enimie

being ouer come, and ſubdued, he him ſelfe became bond too man, fayne too carye him on his back, and a bit in his mouth. Of this fable writeth Horace.
            
            
               A Hart in fight excelling much
               the horſſe, from meate him draue,
               The ſtrife was long, but horſe was fayn,
               the help of man to craue.
               The byt he tooke with merry cheere,
               ſtraight vanquiſht was his foe,
               His Ryder yet he durſt not caſt,
               nor yet his byt forgoe,
               So he that dreadeth pouertie,
               and can not vſe a meane,
               Shall leade his life in ſeruitude,
               and looſe his freedom cleane.
            
         
         
            317 Of Geeſe.
            
               THe Géeſe and the Cranes deſtroyed a péece of grounde, whereof the country men hearing, came ſodainly vppon them, the Cranes eſpied them and flewe away, but the géeſe, bycauſe of the myght of their body not able to eſcape were taken.
            
               Mor. When a towne is woonne, the poore eſcape eaſily, but the rich are taken captiue: for riches in warfare, are rather a burthen, than a commoditie.
         
         
            
            318 Of the Ape and his yong ones.
            
               IVpiter ſent out a precept, commaunding Praiſe not thy ſelfe. all liuyng things to appeare before him, that he mighte giue iudgement whoſe ofſpring were the beſt fauored: ye beaſts came running, the birds flying, and the Fiſhes ſwymming thither. Laſte of all came the Ape, and with him his yong one, at whoſe ylfauoured buttockes euery one laughed. Tuſh (quod the Ape) whom pleaſeth God Iupiter ſhall haue the victorie, yet in my iudgement this my chyld is faire, and therfore of right before al other to be preferred: whereat Iupiter alſo ſmyled.
            
               Mor. We & ours ſeeme good in our own eies, but of vs & our doings, let other iudge.
         
         
            319 Of Mariners.
            
               IT hapned as many Maryners were ſayling Prayer. on the ſea, that there aroſe a greate tempeſt ſodeinly: then euery one prayed to his God for helpe, but one amongſt the reſt ſayde: Ye know not what ye pray, for before theſe gods can goe to the Lorde for oure ſuccoure, wée ſhall periſhe thorough this ſtorme: therefore I do thinke it beſte to pray vnto that God which withoute the helpe of any other can deliuer vs from this

preſent daunger: Then they cried to almighty God for helpe, and ſtraight way the ſtorme ceaſed.
            
               Mor. We muſt not ſéeke for helpe at the foote, when we may go to the head.
         
         
            320 Of the Owle.
            
               IN the aſſemblie of birds, the Eagle ſayde that he would chooſe the yong ones of other Prayſe of our owne. birds to ſerue in his court: and when euery one ſtroue to preferre his owne, the Owle ſayd: I pray thee (O Quéene) receiue myne, which in beautie paſſe all the reſte: why (quod the Egle) what beauty are thy ſonnes of? The Owle aunſwered: Of the ſame that I my ſelfe am: Then all the birds laughed excéedingly.
            
               Mor No child is ſo deformed, which to his parents ſeemeth not faire.
         
         
            321 Of a Foxe and a Dog.
            
               A Fox being courſed by a Dog, and euen at ye point to be caught, hauing no way Prayſe another for aduaūtage to ſhift him ſayd: why woldeſt thou deſtroy mee thou dog, ſeeing my fleſh thou canſt not eate? Goe catch rather that hare (for there was one thē hard by) whoſe fleſh mē iudge to be ye ſweeteſt: the dog harkned to ye counſell of the Fox, & let him goe free, purſuing

the hare, whom bycauſe of hys wonderfull ſwiftneſſe he could not ouertake. Not long after, the Hare mette with the Foxe, blaming him for ſetting the Dog at him. The Fox anſwered him: I maruell what thou meaneſt to accuſe me, whiche prayſed thée ſo greatly: what wouldeſt thou haue ſayd, if I had diſprayſed thée?
            
               Mor. Many vnder the colour of prayſing, deuiſe vtter vndoing to ſome men.
         
         
            322 Of the Wolfe and Porkupine.
            
               ON a time the Wolf being hungry had Preparation. a good fanſy to deuoure a Porkupine, whom bicauſe of his ſharpe pricks he durſt not aſſayle, but inuented a craftie wyle to trap him in, coūſelling hym not to trouble his backe with ſo many weapons in tyme of peace, ſéeing that other Archers carried none with them but when they go to warfare: Nay (quod the Porkupine) we muſt ſuppoſe that there is no tyme voide of war ageinſt a Wolfe.
            
               Mor. A wiſe man ought always to be armed ageinſt ye aſſaults of his enimies.
         
         
            323 Of an Old man loth to dye.
            
               A Certeine olde man deſired death which Preparatiō to die. came to take his lyfe from him, to ſpare

him till he might make his will, and prouide all other neceſſaries fit for ſuche a iorney: whom Death aunſwered: Why haſt not thou prepared thy ſelf being ſo oft warned by me? Mary (quod he) I neuer ſawe thée afore? Why (quod Death) when I dayly tooke, not onely thoſe whiche were of lyke yeares to thyne (of which number very fewe remayne) but alſo yong men, children and babes, was it not ſufficient warning that thou art mortal? when thy eyes wared dimmo, thy hearing thick, other ſenſes dayly decaying, & thy body being woorſe and woorſe, did I not tell thée that I was néere at hand? and yet thou ſayeſt thou haſt no warnyng: wherefore I will no longer prolong the tyme.
            
               Mor. We muſt direct our life, as though death were alwayes before our eyes.
         
         
            324 Of a Dog brought vp to hunting.
            
               A Certeine man brought vp his Dog in Preſente gayne remembred. hunting, whome bycauſe hée was olde he pricked forward, but in vayne it was, for his pace was ſlacked, he could make no great haſt. It chaūced that he caught a wild beaſt, which bycauſe he was toothleſſe, ſlipped

from him, whom his maiſter rebuked muche for that fault, and bet him alſo: the Dog aunſwered, that of ryght he ought to pardon him, bycauſe he was now olde, but when he was yong he did his endeuor couragiouſly: but I perceiue ſayd he, that with out profite nothing pleaſeth you, when I was yong and luſtie, thou madeſt much of me, but now that I am old, thou caſteſt me off for Hauks meate: when I got any pray I was welcome, but now that I am ſlow and toothleſſe, I am put back: but if thou were a good maſter, for my good déeds that I haue done, thou wouldeſt cheriſhe me in my age.
            
               Mor. A good turn once paſt is ſoone forgotten, if it be to come it is not much regarded, if there bée any profit preſently, it is well remembred.
         
         
            325 Of a Man which plucked vp a Hedge.
            
               A Certeine man rayled ageinſt a hedge, Preſeruers. wherewith his vyne was encloſed, bycauſe it was barren, which he cut vp & caſt away as a thing vnprofitable. Then the Vyne lying opē, & made common both for men & cattaile, was waſted by euery body.

The Lord of the Vine ſeing this, blamed hym ſelfe of follie, ſeyng ſo fooliſhly he had remoued the hedge yt preſerued his grapes.
            
               Mor. They whiche preſerue thinges, though they ſéeme ydle, do no leſſe than they whiche haue gathered them togyther with their trauaile.
         
         
            326 Of the Aſſe and the Lyon.
            THe Cock ſometyme fed with an Aſſe, to whō as the Lion was cōming, ye Cocke Preſumption. crowed out aloude, and the Lion ſtraightway fled (for men ſaye) he is afeard at the crowyng of a Cocke. The Aſſe ſuppoſing that he ranne away bicauſe of hym, went ſtreyght after the Lyon, whome when hée had ſo farre purſued that they were without the hearing of the Cocks crowing, the Lion returned and deuoured him, who as he was dying, cryed out: Ah wretche and madde body that I am, for I am borne of none that were warriors, and wherefore haue I ruſhed into the hoſte?
            
               Mr. Many men aſſaile their enimies which vpon ſet purpoſe do humble them ſelues, by the whyche meanes they are ſlayne.
         
         
            
            327 Of Cocks.
            AS two Cocks fought together for the Pryde. Hens, the one put the other to flyghte, which hid him ſelfe in a darke corner: But the cōqueror flew vp to an high wall, wher he ſtoode and crowed aloude: forth with an Egle flewe at hym and caught hym: ſince which time, he that hid himſelf did treade the Hens without feare.
            
               Mor. God withſtandeth the proude, but on yt lowly he poureth his goodneſſe.
         
         
            328 Of the Horſe and the Aſſe.
            SOmetyme a Horſſe decked wyth fayre trappers and a ſadle, greatly neyghing, ran thorough a hygh way, whoſe running an Aſſe laden by chaunce dyd let, he all raging and chewyng his bit for anger, ſayd: Ah lither lurdeyn, why withſtandeſt thou the Horſe? Giue place or I will tread thée downe: the Aſſe durſte not once bray, but quietly auoyded. It happened as the Horſe ran his race, his hoofe brake, who then being paſte running or making any ſhewe, was ſpoyled of his ornamentes, and after ſolde to a Tanner. The Aſſe ſéeing him coming with a Tanner, ſayde vnto him:

What good ſir, how hapneth this kynde of wéede? where is thy gilt ſaddle, thy ſtudded trappers and glittering brydle? Thus it is fit my friende to happen to euery one that is proude.
            
               Mor. Many men in their proſperity are ſo puft vp with pride, that they clean forget them ſelues and al modeſtie, but for their preſumption they ſoone ſuffer aduerſitie.
         
         
            329 Of a Crane.
            
               A Crane ſéeing an Egle flying vp as high as the ſunne, and to behold it perfectly, he ſayd to himſelf: I am as faire and great as the Egle, I will therefore flie vp to the Sun, and looke vppon it as ſtedfaſtly as the Egle, and after I ſhal be eſtéemed as highly as ſhe: but as he mounted vp toward the ſtarres, his ſtrengthe was gone thorough wearineſſe, neyther could he flie vp to the Sun: yet ſuch was his pride, that he would not come downe, but began to mount vpward ſtill. But being thus combred, that be neither coulde ſtay himſelfe, neither flie to the ſunne, he fell downe.
            
               Mor. Who ſo clymbeth higher than he ſhould, falleth lower than he would.
         
         
            
            330 Of Iupiter and the Rauen.
            ON a tyme Iupiter myndyng too create a Proude of an others purſe. king of the foules, appoynted a day of aſſemblie, to the ende that hée whiche was comlieſt ſhold be appoynted king. The Rauen hearing therof, and knowing his owne deformitie, gathered together diuers feathers and decked himſelf, that he was goodlyeſt of all. When the day appoynted was come, the foules aſſembled together: then Iupiter would haue made the Rauen king bycauſe of his gayneſſe, whereat the other diſdayning, plucked euery one his feathers from him, whereof he being ſpoiled was a Rauen as before time.
            
               Mor. He that hangeth on another mans ſléeue, if he chaunce to fall from him, all the world ſhall know what he is.
         
         
            331 Of a Flea and a Lyon.
            THe Flea came to the Lyon and ſayde: Falles of pride. Neyther feare I thée, neither arte thou ſtronger than I, but I pray thée what is thy ſtrength? thou ſcratcheſt with thy nayles, and with thy téethe thou byteſt, ſo doeth a woman fyghting wyth hir huſband: but

in ſtrength I farre excéede thée, and if thou wilt, let vs go fight. The Trumpet being blowen, the Flea ſtucke faſte aboute his noſethrills byting: but the Lyon with hys owne nayles tore him ſelfe til he was chafed: The Flea hauing ouercome the Lion ſounded the Trumpet, and reioyced: but as he flew away, he was entangled in a Copweb: and being redy to be deuoured, he lamented that hée ſtroue with the greateſt beaſts, & now to bée kild by a vile Spyder.
            
               Mor. This fable is ageinſt thoſe which vanquiſhe greate men, and are vanquiſhed by meane perſons.
         
         
            332 Of the Pecock and the Chough.
            WHen the birds woulde make them a king, ye Pecock prayd them to chooſe Princes. him for his beautie: when they ſo mynded, the Chough began to ſay: if in thy raigne ye Egle purſue vs, how wilt thou help vs?
            
               Mor. Princes muſt be choſen not onely for their beautie, but alſo for their ſtrength and wiſedome.
         
         
            333 Of a Man and a Dog.
            
               A Certein man had prepared a ſupper, to whiche hée badde certein of his friends,

whoſe Dog likewiſe deſired another Dog, ſaying: Friend, come and ſuppe with mée. Which Dog being come in at the doores, & ſéeing ſuch great chéere toward, reioyced greatly and ſayd to him ſelf: Oh what ioye hath hapned mée of late, for I ſhall fill my belly ſo full, that I ſhall not be hungry to morrow: and as he wagged his tayle for ioye, bicauſe he truſted in hys friende, the Cooke ſeing him thus do, caught him by the legs and caſt him out of the window: whē the Dog was fallen, he roſe vp quickly and ran howling away: As he went a dog met him, and aſked him what good chéere he had to ſupper, the dogge aunſwered: I was ſo out of meaſure dronk, that I knew not the way whereout I came.
            
               Mor. We muſt not truſt to thoſe which promiſe vs a good turne of an other mans gifte.
         
         
            333 Of a Heardman.
            AS a Heardman kept a Heard of Buls, he loſt a Calf, whom in euery deſert he ſought a long tyme, but when he could not finde him, he prayed to Iupiter, promiſing if he would ſhewe hym the Théefe whiche

ſtole his Calfe, to offer a Gote in ſacrifice to him. It hapned as he walked in a groue of Okes, he found that his calf was deuoured by the Lion, whereat trembling for feare, he caſt vp his handes to heauen and ſayd: God lupiter I promiſed to giue thée a kid if I found ye Théefe, now if I eſcape his hands, I wil vndertake to giue thée a Bul.
            
               Mor. This Fable is againſt vnluckie men, that lacking ought, praye to finde it, whiche hauing founde, they ſéeke to auoyde.
         
         
            334 Of the Lyon and the Foxe.
            WHat time the Lion fell ſick, al beaſts came to viſite him, only the Fox ſtacked his comming, to whome the Lion ſent his Ambaſſadours to ſummon him to appere before him, bicauſe his only preſence would much delight the king, beſides that, ſuſpicion of daunger there is none, firſte, bicauſe the Lion is his chiefeſt friend, therfore deſireth greatly to ſpeake with him: againe, he lay ſore ſick, ſo as if he ment to hurte him, he hadde no force thereto. The Fox wrote again, wiſhing recouerie of his health, for which he woulde praye vnto the

Gods, but in no wiſe he would come to ſée him: for he was afrayde of the foote ſteps, whiche all looked toward his Denne, but none backward, by which it was euidēt, ye many beaſts came in, but none returned.
            
               The aunſwer of the crafty Fox
               vnto the Lion ſent, Horace.
               
               Which in his Den lay very ſick,
               to ſhew is my intent:
               Bycauſe the tract of many beaſts
               I finde to enter there,
               But none of them returns agayne,
               which giues me cauſe of feare.
            
            
               Mor. Take héed how thou truſteſt promiſes, whiche except thou doo, thou ſhalt oft be beguyled: for of words, & déedes a man may firſt coniecture & after iudge.
         
         
            335 Of a man created Cardinall.
            A Certein merry conceyted fellowe, hearing Promotiō. his friend to be created Cardinal, came to gréete him for his promotion: he lofty & ſwelling with pride, coūterfayting that he knewe not his olde friende, aſked who he was: the other being ready in his merry aunſwer, ſayde: I pitie thée and others that come to ſuche promotion, for as

ſoone as ye haue got ſuche honours, ye léeſe ſo your ſight, feeling, and other ſenſes, that ye cleane forget your old friendes.
            
               Mor. Some being promoted to dignitie, deſpiſe their old acquaintaunce.
         
         
            336 Of the Foxe and the Gote.
            THe Foxe and the Gote beyng bothe thirſty, deſcended into a Well to drink: Prouidēce after they hadde bothe dronk their fill, the Gote looked round about to get out, to whō the Foxe ſayd: Be of good chere, for I haue found a ſhift to help vs both out, for if thou wilt ſtand vpright & leane on thy forféete, and pitch thy hornes faſt to the Wall that I may climbe vp on thy backe, when I haue got foorth, I will alſo drawe thee foorth: The Gote with all his harte followed his aduiſe. When the Fox therby had ſkipped out of the well, he leſted about the brinks thereof, reioyſing much, for whiche he blamed the Fox that hée broken promis with him. Nay (quod the Foxe) if thou hadſt as much witte as thou haſt haires in thy beard, thou wouldeſt not haue gone downe into the Well before thou haddeſt well pondered how to come out.
            
               
               Mor. Wiſe men will firſte for ſée the ende of a thing, and after enterpriſe it.
         
         
            337 Of Field Miſe.
            
               A Flocke of Fielde Miſe appointed to gnawe downe an oke full of maſt that they might haue their meate the redier, ſo as they neede not ſo oft runne vp and down for it. Then one wiſer than the reſt forbad thē, ſaying: If we deſtroye our nouriſher, who ſhall giue foode to vs and our ſeede in time to come?
            
               Mor. A wyſe man ought not onely to beholde things preſent, but alſo things to come.
         
         
            338 Of a Flea.
            AS a Flea was byting a mā, he was taken, who aſked what he was, ſeeing he Puniſhmē
                  
                     •
                   of vices. fed of him: aunſwered, he was of that kind of beaſtes, which as nature ordeyned, liued by that meanes, praying him not to kill him, bycauſe he could not do muche harme, whereat the man laughed, ſaying: I will therfore the ſooner kil thée, bicauſe it is not lawfull to hurt any, eyther muche or litle.
            
               Mor. We muſt not fauour the wicked,

whither their treſpas be ſmall or great.
         
         
            339 Of the Sheepe and the Shepherd.
            
               A Shéepe ſometime rayled on the Shepherd, Rayling. bicauſe he could not be cōtēt with the milke that ſhe gaue him for his foode & his ſōnes, but he did fliece him of his wooll. The ſhepherd offēded with this talke, lead hir Lambe to the ſlaughter: What (quod the ſhéepe) canſt thou doo me any worſe villanie? Yea (quod the ſheperd) that I can, for I may ſlaye thée and caſt thee out to be torne in pieces by Wolues & Dogs: then the ſheepe durſt not mutter, being afrayd of ſome further inconuenience.
            
               Mor. We ought not to be angry with God, if he ſuffer our goods and our children to be taken frō vs, ſéeing he is able more gréeuouſly to puniſhe bothe the quicke and the dead.
         
         
            340 Of Frogs.
            
               TWo Frogs fed in the mariſhes, it hapned that Sommer that the water dried Raſhneſse. vp, wherevpon they forſoke it and ſought another, at length they found a déepe well: which when they hadde ſeene, the one ſayd

to the other: Lette vs goe downe into this Well. Nay, ſoft (quod his fellowe) howe ſhall we get vp again, if the water be dried vp here?
            
               Mor. We ought to enterpriſe nothing vnaduiſedly.
         
         
            341 Of a Fiſher.
            
               A Certein Fiſher being but a noouice in that arte, tooke his pypes and his nets and went to the Sea, and ſtanding on a rocke, played firſt with his pype, ſuppoſing that by his ſwéete melodie the fiſhes would daunce: but when he had long tryed yt way and could not proſper, he layde downe his pype and tooke vp his net, which he caſt into the Sea, wherin he drewe many fiſhes. When he had emptied his nette and ſawe them ſkipping, he ſayd: Oh wicked Creatures, when I piped, ye would not daunce, & now that I haue left off, ye begin to ſkip.
            
               Mor. This fable is againſt thoſe which do any thing without aduiſement, and out of tyme.
         
         
            342 Of the Ape and the Foxe.
            
               IN the aſſemblie of brute beaſtes, the Ape daunced, for which he was created King.

The Foxe enuying him, brought him to a place where he had eſpied fleſhe in a ſnare, to whom he ſhewed that he hadde founde a treaſure which he coulde not haue bycauſe by the lawe it is the kings right, willing him to take it bycauſe he was king. The Ape went raſhly in, and forthwith was caught in the ſnare: Then he accuſed the Foxe of treaſon toward his perſon. Why (quod the Foxe) ſhalt thou be King ouer beaſtes, which art ſo mad?
            
               Mor. Hée which goeth raſhly to worke, falleth haſtely into miſfortune.
         
         
            343 Of a Doue.
            
               A Doue being very thirſty, eſpied in a certeine place a pot of water painted, which he ſuppoſing to be verely, flew with great force, and vnawares daſhed againſt the table, wherewith ſhe brake hir wings, fell to the grounde, and was caught vp by one that paſſed by.
            
               Mor. Some men for great ioye, vnaduiſedly taking matters in hand, do therby caſt them ſelues away.
         
         
            344 Of a Currier and a Hunter.
            
               ON a time a Currier came to a Hunter to bye a beares ſkin, for which he drew

money to haue paid. In faith (quod the hunter) preſently I haue none, but to morrow I wil go a hunting, and if I chaunce to kil a Beare, thou ſhalt haue his ſkinne. The Currier (to refreſh his ſpirites) went into the foreſt with him, and bycauſe he would the better behold the paſtime betwene the Hunter and the Beare, he climbed into an excéeding highe trée. The Hūter went boldly to the Beares Denne, who put in hys dogs and rouzed him. It happened that the Beare ſhunned hys blowe and foorthwith ſtrake the Hunter to the grounde: who knowing the nature of the beaſt to bee, to take pitie of a carcaſe, helde his breath and fayned him ſelf to be dead. The beare ſmelled at him euerywhere, & perceyuing by no meanes any life in him, departed away. When the Currier ſaw that the beaſt was gone, and that there was no daunger, he came downe out of ye trée and went to the Hunter, whom he bad ariſe, and afterward demaunded what the Beare ſayde in hys eare? He warned mée (quod he) that hereafter I ſell not a Beares ſkinne, before I haue caught him.
            
               Mor. We ought not accounte that we

haue not, as ſure as that we haue.
         
         
            345 Of the Beauer.
            THe Beauer is a foure footed beaſt, commonly liuing in pooles, whoſe members Regard of health. Phiſitians occupie: who beyng purſued & ready to be taken, and knowing the cauſe of his perſecution, cuts of hys priuie members, and caſts it to them whiche followe him, whereby he eſcapeth.
            
               Mor. Wiſe men hauing regard of their health, ought to ſpare for no coſt.
         
         
            346 Of the Houpe.
            THe moſt parte of birdes were bidden to the Mariage of the Eagle, there the Regard of gaye clothes. Houpe was ſet vp aboue the reſte, bicauſe of his faire Crowne and goodly feathers, whereat the other birds diſdayned, for that he vſed to tumble in dunghils and in the fylth.
         
         
            347 Of the Beame.
            A Great piece of Timber being caried in a Carte, rebuked the Oxen that they Reioyſing. went ſo ſlowly, ſaying: Come for ſhame ye ſlouthfull luſkes, your burden is but light. Thou mockeſt vs (quod the oxen) yet doeſt

thou not knowe what hangeth ouer thy head: we will ſoone caſte off this lode, but thou ſhalt beare a wayte till thou be ready to breake. Then the Beame repented, and from thence foorth durſt not once ſhoote out a rayling woord againſt them.
            
               Mor. Lette no man reioyce ouer an others miſerie, ſeeing he may be ſubiecte to greater.
         
         
            349 Of the Lion, the Bore, and the Rauens.
            THe Lion ſometime prepared to fight againſt the Bore: wherfore the Rauens beheld them from aboue, that they might forthwith deuoure him whiche was ouercome. But they became friēds again, & the other were diſapointed of their purpoſe.
            
               Mor. We ſhould not reioyce at an other mans harme.
         
         
            350 Of a Wolfe.
            A Wolfe being old and not able any longer Religious men. to hunte, gaue him ſelfe to religion: put vpon him a Monks attyre, and begged meate from doore to doore: and being rebuked by another Wolfe, ſayde: What wouldeſt thou I ſhould doe? My téeth are oute, and runne I can not, wherefore I

miſtruſt otherwiſe how to liue.
            
               Mor. Many addict them ſelues to Religion bicauſe they cā not otherwyſe liue.
         
         
            351 Of a Beare.
            AS a Beare ſcolded by chaunce with his Repētance to late. Wife, he thruſt out hir eyes, but after repēting, he was ſo greeued therwith, that he byt of his nayles. And when in talking he ſayd, that for ye loue he bare to hir he had caſt away his beſt defēce: What good (quod his wife) doth this to mée? Thou ſhouldeſt haue done this before thou ſcratchedſt out my eyes.
            
               Mor. After harme done it is too late to repent, ſeeing that which is done, can not be vndone.
         
         
            352 Of a ſimple Countryman.
            THere was a Countryman which as he came frō market, heard two Cuckoes Reward for well doing. aunſwering one an other out of two ſundrie woods. And when the Cuckoe of the other wood had néere put to ſilence his countrycuckoe, he lighted off hys horſſe & climbed a tree, and as well as he could, he holpe his countrycuckoe with his crying. In the

meane time a Wolf deuoured his horſſe: thē was he fayn to go home on foote, where he complayned to his neighbours, how for the honour of his country he had holpe his Cuckoe, whereby he had ſuſteyned great loſſe. Then they all with one accorde payd his damages, ſuppoſing that it was not fit that any ſhould receyue hinderance, which had trauelled for their common wealth.
         
         
            353 Of the Egle and the Dorre.
            A Hare being purſued by an Eagle, ran into the hole of a Dorre, requiring ſuccour Reuengement. of him. The Dorre beſought the Eagle not to kill his ſuppliaunt, deſiring him for mightie God Iupiters ſake not to deſpiſe his weakneſſe: but ſhe being diſpleaſed, wafted at ye Dorre with hir wings, and ſnatched away the Hare, which ſhe deuoured. The Dorre flew after the Eagle, to learn where hir neſt was: When he was come at it, he rolled downe the egs & brake them. She was ſore diſpleaſed that any durſt enterpriſe to do it: yet ſhe made hir neſt the ſecond time in an higher trée, there the Dorre ſerued hir agayne as before. Then the Eagle being altogither in doubt

what to do, flew vp to Iupiter to whom ſhe is conſecrated, and layde hir thirde brood in his lap, committing them to his cuſtodie. But y• Dorre roiled togither a ball of dung whiche he caried vp and lette fall into Iupiters boſome, who roſe vp to ſhake off the Dung, & forgetting the egs caſt thē downe, by meane wherof they were brokē. When Iupiter vnderſtood by the Dorre that he had done this to be reuenged of the Eagle, for ſhe had not only iniuried the Dorre, but alſo committed wickedneſſe againſt Iupiter him ſelfe, he tolde the Eagle when ſhe returned, that the Dorre was the cauſe of hir woe, and that he did it iuſtly. Therefore Iupiter, bicauſe he would not haue the kind of Eagles to be ſcant, counſelled the Dorre to be at one with the Egle: but bycauſe he would not be perſuaded, Iupiter appointed the Eagles to breade in that time, when the Dorres appeare not.
            
               Mor. Deſpiſe no mā, ſeing there is none but being prouoked can reuenge himſelf.
         
         
            354 Of the Storke and the Swallow.
            
               THe Strorke ſomtime built in the top of a Toure, & a Swallow with in, which

for ioy that ſhe had yong ones, made great thattering, wherewith the Storke was offended, bicauſe he could take no reſt with his yong ones, for hir great noyſe. Whē ye Swallow was abroade, he plucked down hir neſt and killed hir yong, who being returned to hir neſt, made great ſorrowe for that miſchaunce, but bicauſe ſhe knew not the doer, ſhe reuēged it not. Shortly after, the Swallow made a new neſt and hadde yong, for ioy of whom ſhe agayn chattered. But the Storke being newly diſquieted, called to hir, ſaying: I will ſerue thee and thy birdes agayne as lately I did, excepte thou leaue of thy chattering that I may take my reſt. The Swallow hearing this, was greatly inflamed to be reuēged: wherfore on a time when the Stork was a ſleep in hir neſt, the Swallow ſet fire thereon & burnt hir and hir chickens to aſhes.
            
               Mor. We ought to doo no wrong to our inferiours leaſt priuily they hurt vs.
         
         
            355 Of the Town Mouſe and the Coūtry Mouſe.
            
               IT pleaſed a town Mouſe for his recreation Riches. to walke abroad into the coūtry, whō when the cuntry Mouſe had eſpied, he deſired

him home to his houſe, where al things were made ready, and to ſupper they went: he brought out all his prouiſion of victuals that he had layd vp againſt the winter, to make this iolly gueſte ſome daintly théere. The towne Mouſe frouning thereat, diſalowed much the ſcarcitie of the Countrey, and forthwith commended the plentie of the Citie. As he returned to the Citie, he brought with him the country Mouſe, to the ende to accompliſhe his craking wyth effecte: They fell to their meate, whiche ſumptuouſly the towne Mouſe had ready prepared. And as they were merry togyther: in the midſt of their feaſt they heard the noyſe of a key in the locke, there was quaking and trembling with a great hurly burly, and happy was hée that could eſcape ſooneſt. The country Mouſe vnaccuſtomed to ſuch flights, beſides that ignorant of the place, ſcaped very narrowly. When the ſeruaunt was gone, the towne Mouſe returned to the feaſt and called for the country Mouſe: He being yet afrayd, came créeping out, and after deſired by the Towne Mouſe to fall to his meate, he aſked, whyther this were a cōmon cuſtome with him?

Yea (quod hée) it is dayly, and therefore not to be wayed: What dayly? ſayd the country Mouſe. I promiſe you, theſe dainties taſt more of the ſowre than of the ſwéete: for my part I had rather liue like a begger quietly, than with theſe delicates in ſuche ieoperdie.
            
               Mor. Riches truly make a ſemblant of pleaſure, but if thou conſider them earneſtly, they are not without much daū
               ger and penſiueneſſe.
         
         
            356 Of the Mule and the Horſle.
            
               A Mule eſpied a Horſſe gorgeouſly decked with a gilt byt, a faire ſadle, & purple trappers, at whoſe Fortune he enuted much, ſuppoſing him to be happy, bicauſe he alwayes fared well, and went gayly: contrarywiſe, his owne eſtate in compariſon of his to be miſerable. For (quod hée) I am ouerladē with the packſadle, and I am dayly drudge to cary burthens. But ſhortly after, he eſpied the horſſe returning from battaile ſore wounded, then he accounted his owne eſtate better than the horſes, ſaying: I hadde rather get my liuing hardly with my dayly labour, and to be cladde in

vile aray, than after ſuch faire and trim apparell to be in daunger of my life.
            
               Mor. We muſt not enuie Kings and Princes bicauſe of their wealth & ſubſtance, ſéeing they are ſubiecte to many moe perils than poore men are.
         
         
            357 Of a Deuill.
            
               A Deuil wādring through the world (as his maner is) marked a certeine yong man reioyſing at the death of his parents, whereat he was very gladde: but going a litle further he wept, ſéeing an other very heauy at his Fathers buriall, who beyng demaūded the cauſe of ſo diuers affections, aunſwered: The laughing of the ſonne for the death of his parēts, declareth that thoſe being riche are deade, of whiche number very fewe eſcape our handes: but the wéeping is a token of the fathers pouertie: and the kingdome of Heauen, for the moſte parte, is wont to belong to thoſe whiche are poore.
            
               Mor. Too much riches do cary a man downe to hell.
         
         
            
            358 Of the Birds.
            THe Birds were greatly afrayd leaſt the Rich enimies. Dorres ſhould kill them with ſhooting off Bals, bicauſe they heard that they had rolled togither a great heape of bals. Feare not ſayd the Sparrow, for how ſhall they ſhoote bals at vs that flie in the aire, when they can not carry them on earth but with much toyle?
            
               Mor. We néede not feare the riches of our foes, when we ſee they lacke wit.
         
         
            360 Of an Oxe and a Bullock.
            AN Oxe being well ſtrykē in age, dayly Riottouſneſse. went to plow. It hapned yt a yong heyfer whiche neuer had laboured, fetched his friſkes in the paſtures not farre off, and ſcorned the toyling of the older, boaſting much of his own libertie, that he had taſted neither yoke nor chayn, but y• others necke was worne bare with labor. The Oxe preſently anſwered nothing: not long after he eſpied this royſter led to be ſacrificed, then hee ſayd thus to him: What end hath now thy eaſy life? Thy careleſſe liuing at harts eaſe hath brought thee to ye axe, I think now thou wilt rather counſel me to labor thā to

idleneſſe, which is the cauſe of thy death.
            
               Mor. To leade an honeſt life there néedeth trauell: the Sluggard and hée that is bent to riottous liuing, ſhall come to that which he would be lothe.
         
         
            361 Of Birds.
            THe Birds tooke counſell to chooſe them 
                  
                     •
                  ulers. ſundrie Kings, bicauſe the Eagle alone was not able to gouerne ſo many flockes: which thing they had put in execution, had not the Crowe warned them to leaue off their purpoſe: who being demaunded the cauſe, why ſhe thought it not meet to chooſe many Kings, aunſwered: Sooner is one ſack filled than many.
            
               Mor. It is better to bée vnder the dominion of one than many.
         
         
            362 Of a wicked Man.
            
               A Wicked Man went to Apollo whiche is in Delphus, to trie his cunning, for 
                  
                     •
                  ecretes 
                     •
                  nowen to 
                     •
                  od. whiche purpoſe he tooke a Sparowe with him in his hande, which vnder his cloke he hidde: who as he ſtood néere to the golden table in Apollos temple, aſked the GOD, ſaying: O Apollo, that whiche I holde in

my hande, is it a liue or dead? If he hadde ſayd dead, he would haue ſhewed the Sparow aliue: if aliue, he woulde haue ſtrangled it and ſhewed it dead. But God Apollo knowing his wicked pretēce, ſayd: whither thou wilt, doo: for it is in thy power eyther to ſhewe him aliue or dead.
            
               Mor. God can not be deceyued, neyther is any thing hid from him.
         
         
            363 Of a Boy that would not learne.
            
               A Boye whiche hated learning, being brought by his Father into a Schoole, could not be enticed by any faire meanes of his Maiſter, to ſpeake the firſt letter of the Alphabete: Then ſayde his Maiſter, open thy mouth, for that this Letter requireth, but he gaped and ſpake not. The Maiſter ſeeing his labor loſt, bad him ſitte amongſt his fellowes, warning them to perſuade him to ſpeake onely this Letter: then his ſchoolefellows exhorted him in the beſt maner that they coulde, ſaying: Is it ſuch a payne to ſayd A? Nay (quod the Boy) but if I ſpake that, he would make me learne B. and ſo the reſt. But neyther my maiſter nor my Father ſhall haue the power to

make me learne.
            
               Mor. They which are vnwilling to learne, can neuer be forced to it.
         
         
            364 Of the Doue and the Crowe.
            
               A Doue being fed in a douehouſe, was 
                  
                     •
                  eruaunts. excéeding proude of hir fertilitie: The Crowe hearing therof, ſayd to hir: Friend, brag no more hereof, for the more thou bréedeſt the more care thou heapeſt.
            
               Mor. Amongeſt ſeruaunts, thoſe are moſt miſerable, which in time of their bondage get many children.
         
         
            365 Of the Aſſe and the Calfe.
            
               AN Aſſe and a Calfe fed togither in one paſture, by chaūce they heard the ſound of a bell, which they ſuppoſed to be a ſigne that their enimies were at hand, to whom the Calfe ſayde: Let vs be packing hence fellowe, leaſt our enimies take vs priſoners. Nay, flie thou hence rather (quod the Aſſe) whom they vſe to kill and eate, for I care not, I know this, where ſoeuer I become my life ſhall be to cary burdens.
            
               Mor. Let not ſeruaunts feare muche to chaunge their maiſters, leaſt the laſt be

woorſer than the firſt.
         
         
            366 Of the Bat and the Weaſell.
            
               A Bat by chaunce fell to the ground, and Shiftes. was caught by a Weaſell, who ready to be killed, beſought him to ſaue his life: but he ſayd, that he could not let hir eſcape, bicauſe he naturally hated all birdes: ſhe aunſwered, yt ſhe was no bird but a mouſe, whereby ſhe was louſed. Again falling an other time & being taken by an other Weſell, ſhe prayed that he would not deuoure hir. Nay (quod hée) I am an enimie to all Miſe: ſhe aunſwered that ſhe was a Bat & no Mouſe, whereby ſhe eſcaped again: and ſo it chaunced that by changing hir name twice ſhe got hir pardon.
            
               Mor. We muſt not always ſing one ſong, ſeing they that turne as the world doeth, commonly eſcape daunger.
         
         
            367 Of the Foxe and the Cat.
            
               IT hapned amongſt other talke that the Foxe had with the Cat, he bragged that hée had ſo ſundrie kinds of ſhifts, yt hée could fil a bag withal. For my part (quod ye Cat) I haue but one to truſt vnto at a pinche:

As they were thus in their talke, a great route of Dogs came haſtily running vpon them: Then the Cat ſkipped vp into an highe trée, but the Fox being incloſed with the dogs, was caught.
            
               Mor. One counſell ſo it be true and of force, is better than many wyles.
         
         
            368 Of a Marchant and a Ievve.
            
               A Certein prodigall fellowe hauing waſted all his Fathers goods, applied his minde to practiſe deceyte. It happened on a time, that he wrapped a piece of ordure in a cloute and brought it into the market, ſaying that he had a precious thing whiche was of ſuche force, that if any man taſted the leaſt crumnie therof, he ſhold haue fulfilled what ſoeuer he thought of. But a Jewe, whoſe maner is priuily to marke al things, thought, if he did buy it, that he would haue in his minde many Townes and Lordſhips, when he taſted of it (bycauſe he would be excéeding riche) He came therfore ſecretly vnto him and aſked the price, whervnto this prodigall fellow ſayd: Auaūt, thou ſhalt not buy it, for thy clothes declare, that thou art not able. The Jewe

ſayd to him, how knoweſt thou? Tell mée the price, he aunſwered. 700. Crownes: the Jewe payd him the money, vpon cōdition, that if he had ſayd true, he ſhould enioye it: but when he had taſted it, he ſpit it out, and ſayd it was ordure. Then the ſeller hauing performed his promiſe, pleaded the cauſe before the maior, and enioyed the money.
         
         
            369 Of a Carter.
            
               A Certein Carter aſked his wagon, why Sick folks that whéele which was worſt made ſo much creaking, ſéeing none of the reſte dyd ſo? The waggon aunſwered: Sick folkes are wayward, and alwayes complayning.
            
               Mor. Diſeaſes cauſe men to cōplayne.
         
         
            370 Of an old Woman.
            
               MEn commonly will (if through their follie any miſchaūce happen to them) Sinners. laye the blame to Fortune or the Deuill, to excuſe them ſelues, they doo ſo much follow their appetites: wherewith the Deuill not contented, when by chaunce he eſpied an olde woman climbing a tree, whēce he perceyued ſhe was like to fall, and then the faulte would be layde on his necke, he

called for witneſſes, to whom he ſayd: Behold, that ſame old womā hath climbed that trée without my conſent, where I ſée ſhe will fall: beare witneſſe therfore with me that I counſelled hir not to goe vp. Immediatly ſhe fell: then being demaunded why ſhe climbed that trée, anſwered, the Deuil forced me: then he brought foorth his witneſſes, and proued that ſhe did that without his aduiſe.
            
               Mor. Thoſe men deſerue no pardon, which voluntarily ſinning, blame Fortune or the Deuill therfore.
         
         
            371 Of the Nightingale and the Rauen.
            ON a ſolemne feaſtday the Eagle bad ye birds to dinner: after it was done, the Singing. Egle called forth the Nightingale, whome he bad to ſing ſome melodie to lighten their hartes withall. She forthwith ſoong ſwéetly, that it delited the hearers. In the meane time a Rauen paſſing by and hearing this, ſayd: I will alſo ſing with ye Nightingale, for I haue a baſe voyce which ſhal be heard farre off, and hée began to crooke very lothſomely, which cauſed the Nightingale to hold hir peace. The other birds were offended with the Rauen for troubling ye feaſt:

then the Egle commaunded him, eyther to departe or to hold his peace, but he anſwered that he would ſing, & for hir he would not ſtir an ynch. The Egle cōmaunded him again to auoyd, which bicauſe he ſtubbornly diſobeyed, was cōmaunded to be ſlayn.
            
               Mor. It is vayne to ſing, where the hearers are vnwilling.
         
         
            372 Of the Doue and the Pie.
            THe Pie aſked the Doue what was the Simplicitie. cauſe that ſhe alwayes built in one place where hir chickens were always taken away: ſhe aunſwered, ſimplicitie.
            
               Mor. Good men are eaſely beguyled.
         
         
            373 Of an Aſſe and Frogs.
            AS an Aſſe laden with wood paſſed thorough a marſhe, by chaunce he ſlipped Slouthfulneſse. and fell, who not being able to aryſe, lamē
               ted & ſighed, but the Frogs which were in the marſhe, hearing him ſighing, ſayde: What wouldſt thou doo ſirra, if thou hadſt continued here ſo long as we haue, whiche for ſo ſmall a time doeſt ſo mourne?
            
               Mor. This talke may any man vſe to a ſlouthful perſon, which for a litle paynes is troubled, being able eaſely to ouercome great affaires.
         
         
            
            374 Of the Pellican.
            THe Gooſe and the Duck made ſomtime a great feaſt, to the whiche they bad all tame Foules, but to ſette out their Supper, they went into the wilderneſſe and found the Pellican, whome they brought with them to their banket. Whē the feaſt was done, they all beſought the Pellican to abide with them and not to liue ſo ſolitarily in ſuche penurie, who at length being ſomewhat perſuaded, continued a few dayes with them and made great bankets: but when he would haue prayd, he was interrupted with their chattering: wherfore he left their company, and liued the reſt of his life in ſolitarineſſe.
            
               Mor. Who ſo will ſerue God truly, muſt doe it alone quietly.
         
         
            375 Of the Smith and his Dog.
            
               A Certein Smith had a whelpe, whiche Sluggards all the while he ſtroke on his yron, did ſlepe: but when he went to meate, the dog would ſtraightway ariſe & eate the crums that fell from the table, or bones, or any thing elſe. Whiche thing the Smith marking well, ſayd to his Dog: Thou wretch,

I cā not tell how to handle thée, for whiles I am buſie in my worke, thou lieſt ſnorting and ſléeping, but when my téeth goe, thou ſtarteſt vp and waggeſt to mée thy tayle.
            
               Mor. Idle ſluggardes which liue of an other mans ſweate, muſt be puniſhed according to the rigour of the law.
         
         
            376 Of the Bull and the Mouſe.
            
               A Mouſe did byte a Bull by the foote, and Strength. ſtraightway ran into his hole: the Bul ſhaked his hornes and ſought for his enimie, but ſée him he could not: then ye mouſe laughed him to ſcorne, ſaying: Bicauſe of thy ſtrēgth deſpiſe not euery body, for now a ſilly Mouſe hath hurte thee, & ſcaped frée.
            
               Mor. Let no man regarde his enimie.
         
         
            377 Of a Weaſell.
            
               A Weaſell came into a Smiths ſhop, & Stryfe. licked on a fyle which lay there, wherwith hir tong being torne, bled very much: She reioyced greatly, ſuppoſing to cary away ſomething from the yron, vntill hir tong altogither was worne away.
            
               Mor. This fable is againſt thoſe which

in ſtrife hurt them ſelues.
         
         
            378 Of Hares.
            THe Hares ſometime holding war with the Eagles, required ayde of the Foxes: but they aunſwered, we would helpe you, but that we knowe what ye are, and with whom ye fight.
            
               Mor. They whiche ſtriue with their betters, ſet litle by their owne health.
         
         
            379 Of the Ramme and the Bull.
            THere was a Ramme amongs many others which with ſtrēgth of his hornes and his head, at the firſt conflict eaſely ſubdued al the reſt, whom bicauſe none durſt meete (he had ſo often the victorie) he ſwelled with pride and chalenged the Bull to fight: but at the firſt onſet when he ruſhed againſt the Buls forehead, he was ſtricken again ſo vehemētly, that he was nie dead, & then ſayde: Ah foole, what haue I done? Why haue I prouoked ſo mighty an aduerſarie, to whome nature hath made mée vnequall?
            
               Mor. We muſt not ſtriue with our betters.
         
         
            
            380 Of the Quayle and the Larke.
            THe Quayle bicauſe of preſeruation of Societie. his kinred, deſired to haue a league of amitie with ye Goſſehauke, wherfore he deſired the Larke to make his commēdations, and to require peace with him on his behalf. The Larke did the meſſage honeſtly, wherwith the Goſſehauke being troubled, aunſwered: This requeſt is hard to graūt, neuertheleſſe I will that the Quayle come with thée vnto mee and ſpeake for hir ſelf: The Larke ſhewed hir this aunſwer, who much reioyſing therof, went to the Hauke to confirme the league, who being rauiſhed with the ſight of them, forthwith deuoured them both.
            
               Mor. None ought to match him ſelfe with his better.
         
         
            381 Of the Nut tree, the Aſſe, and the Woman.
            
               A Certeine Woman queſtioned with a Stripes. Nut trée growing by the high way ſide, which was alwayes pelted with ſtones by paſſengers, why he was ſo mad, yt the more he were beaten, the more encreaſe he yelded, the Walnut aunſwered: Remember you not the old Prouerbe? The Nut trée ye Aſſe, & the Womā, are al vnder one law:

which thrée will doo nothing well without great ſtore of ſtripes.
            
               Mor. Some men make a rod oftentimes for their own tayle.
         
         
            382 Of the Beare and the Bee.
            
               A Beare ſometime ſtinged of a Bée, was ſo wood angry thereat, that with hys Suffering wrong. nayles he tore in pieces the hyues where the Bées made hony: The Bas ſeing their hiues plucked down, their food caried away, & their yong ones ſlayn: ruſhing al at once, aſſayled the Beare, and nighe ſtong him to death. He hardly ſcaping from them, ſayde to himſelf: how much better had it bin for mee, paciently to haue ſuffered the ſtinging of one Bée, than to prouoke ſo many enimies againſt mee?
            
               Mor. Sometime it is farre better to ſuffer wrong done by one, than in requiting it to procure many foes.
         
         
            383 Of the Sovve and the Dog.
            THe Sowe and the Dog taunted eyther other: The Sowe ſwore by Venus, 
               Tauntes. that without doubte ſhe woulde teare the Dog in pieces: Hee aunſwered hir againe

flowtingly, ſaying: Ye ſweare very well by Venus, for ye ſhewe that ſhée loueth you well, bicauſe that taſting thy filthy fleſhe, ſhe ſuffereth thée not at al to enter hir temple. The Sowe ſayd: For this cauſe it appeareth that the Goddeſſe loueth mée the more, for him that either killeth or hurteth mée, ſhe vtterly abhorreth: as for thée, eyther aliue or dead, thou ſauoureſt yll.
            
               Mor. Wiſe Oratours cunningly conuert to their own prayſe the tauntes of their enimies.
         
         
            384 Of a Boy and his Mother.
            
               A Boy ſtole his Fellowes Booke out of the Schoole, whiche he brought to his Theft. mother: but ſhe corrected him not therefore, but rather made much of him: Who waxing elder, ſtole greater things: and at a time being taken with the manner, he was ſtraightway led to execution, whome his mother followe and lamented: but he prayed the Hangman that he might talke a woorde or two in his mothers eare, who ſtraightway layde hir eare to his mouth, which he with his téeth byt off: his mother and diuers others rebuked him that he had

not only played the théefe, but alſo vſed villanie to his mother. She (ſayde hée) is the cauſe of my vndoing: for if ſhe had chaſtiſed me when I ſtoale the Booke, I had not new bin led to hanging.
            
               Mor. Faults which are not at the firſte corrected, do increaſe greater.
         
         
            385 Of Mercurius and Tyreſias.
            
               MErcurius deſirous to knowe, whether the prophecie of Tyreſias were true, he ſtole his oxen in the countrey, and came to him in the likeneſſe of a man into the citie, and lodged with him. Tyreſias vnderſtanding his oxen to be loſt, went abroade and tooke with him Mercurius, to conſider by diuination of the théefe, whom he bad to tell him what birde he did ſée: he aunſwered that he ſawe an Eagle on the left hand, flying toward the right hande, he ſayd that he had nothing to doo with hir. The ſeconde tyme Mercurius tolde him, that he ſawe a Crowe ſitting vpō a trée, ſometime looking vp, ſometime leaning downe, who as ſoone as he vnderſtoode it, ſayde: This Crowe ſweareth by heauen and earth, that if thou wilt, I ſhall receyue my oxen.
            
               
               Mor. This kind of talke any mā may vſe againſt a théefe.
         
         
            386 Of a theeuiſh Partriche.
            
               A Partriche ſometime in the abſence of an other bird, ſtale hir egs: who returning to hir neſt and ſéeing it robbed, was full heauy, ſhe went about ſeeking ſo long till at length ſhe found them and the théef, whereof ſhe ſhewed the Iudge, who cited the théefe, and craftily examined him therof: He vtterly denied it, wherof the Iudge could giue no ſentence for lack of witneſſe, but the accuſer ſayd to him: thou oughteſt to torment him till he confeſſe the truthe. Nay (quod the Iudge) thou ſhalt proue that thou ſayeſt, that I may iudge therof right, or elſe I will martyr thée with him. Then ſhe bicauſe no profe was made, was tormented, and the fellony enquired off. In the ende the théefe declared al, and many other theftes whiche he had committed, whereof the Iudge commaunded to hang him vp out of hand.
            
               Mor. Who ſo accuſeth any one, lette him firſt examin him ſelf, whether he be

of like faulte gyltie.
         
         
            387 Of the Hauke and the Cuckoe.
            THe Hauke ſometime mocked the Cuckoe, bicauſe that being as big bodied as hée, and in colour like him, for his faynte courage he did liue by wormes, and not by the ſwéete fleſh of other birdes. Not long after, the Cuckoe eſpied the Hauke hang out of a high Toure, being caught in purſuing Pigeons, to whom he ſayde: Howe farre better hadde it bin to haue hunted wormes, than other mens birds?
            
               Mor. Their life is ſafer, that being voyd of perill are content with their owne, thā thoſe which by coueting other mens goods come in daunger.
         
         
            388 Of a Grammarian teaching an Aſſe.
            
               A Certein Grammarian boaſted that he was ſo paſſing fine in his arte, that if Time. he might haue a ſufficiēt reward, he would take vpō him to teach not only childrē, but alſo Aſſes. The Prince hearing of ye mans raſhneſſe aſked him whither he thought he could teach an Aſſe within ten yeares, if he gaue him. 50. Crownes. The ſhameleſſe

man aunſwered, that he would not refuſe to be ſlayne of him, if in that ſpace the Aſſe could not write and reade. His friendes hearing of this, maruelled & rebuked him, bicauſe he had promiſed to doe a thing, not only hard, but alſo impoſſible: & they did feare, leaſt when the time had bin expired, he ſhould be ſlayne of the King: whome he anſwered: Before this tyme be come out, either the Prince, the Aſſe or I will die.
            
               Mor. Delay of time is cōmonly wont to be a helpe, for thoſe whiche ſtande in daunger.
         
         
            389 Of a man that would trie his friends.
            THere was a certein man very riche and Trying of friends. liberal, which had many friends whom often times he hadde bid to ſupper, to the which willingly they came, and bicauſe he might ye better know, whither they would be truſtie in time of néede, he aſſembled thē togither & told them that he had foes lately vpſtart, which he meaned to deſtroy, praying them therfore to arme themſelues and come with him to reuēge his quarell: then euery one began to excuſe him ſelfe ſauing two, which he accounted for his friendes, &

afterward loued them dearely, but the other he reiected.
            
               Mor. The beſt trier of friendes is aduerſitie.
         
         
            390 Of a yong man and an old.
            
               A Certen old man eſpied a yong man gathering of his frute, whome he gently Trye all wayes. entreated to come downe from the trée, and not to purloyne his goods: but he ſpake to the winde, for he lightly regarded his age and his woords. Ah (quod the olde man) I haue hearde, that not onely in woordes, but alſo in herbes force conſiſteth, wherevpon he began to pluck the leaues and caſt them at him. The yong man ſéeing him doe ſo, laughed out of meaſure, ſuppoſing that hée doted, to driue him downe with leaues. The olde man willing to aſſaye him by gentle meanes, when he perceyued that he coulde nothing preuayle, ſayde: I will proue what ſtones will doo, for in them men ſaye, there is vertue: and forthwith filled his lap with ſtones which he caſte at the yong mā, and perforce made him come downe and departe.
            
               Mor. A wiſe man ought to aſſaye all

manner ways, before he take any weapon in hande.
         
         
            391 Of the Lyon and the Bull.
            
               A Bull being afrayde of a Lyon, fledde Trouble. away, and by chaūce met with a Gote, who with frounting coūtenaunce threatned to ſtrike him with his hornes, to whome the Bull full of wrath, ſayd: It is not the knitting of thy browes feareth mée, but yt the fierce Lion is ſo néere at my héeles, thou ſhouldeſt féele what it were to medle with a Bull, and to renew his wounde.
            
               Mor. To the ſorowfull ought no more miſerie be added, who that hath bin once in trouble, hath taſted ſorowe inough.
         
         
            392 Of a Larke,
            
               A Certeine Larke by chaunce builded hir neſt in a piece of wheat, that was ſomwhat Truſt in thy ſelfe. riper than other: whence hir yong ones were not able to flie when the corne was yellowe. As ſhe was going foorth to ſéeke meats, ſhe warned thē if any noueltie hapned to be done or ſayd, to marke it wel,

and at hir returne to certifie hir thereof, after hir departure, the owner of the corne came thither, and ſayd to a yong man hys ſonne: Séeſt not thou, that this corne is rype and néedeth labourers? to morrowe therfore by breake of the daye, goe to my friends, deſire thē to helpe me in wt my harneſt: when he had ſo ſayde, he departed. When the Larke returned to hir yong ones, they came fluttering about hir, and prayed hir out of hande to haſte and carry them away: for the owner had ſent to his friendes, willing them to come the nexte morning to reape his corne: She bad them be of good cheare and feare nothing, for if the Lorde of the ground haue remitted the matter to his friends, to morrowe it ſhall not be cut downe: The nexte day ſhe flew abroade again for meate, the Lord wayted for his bidden friendes, the Sunne waxed hot, but nothing was done, neyther any friende of his came. Then ſayde hée to his ſonne, I ſée well that theſe my friendes for the moſt part are loyterers, let vs therfore entreate our kinſfolks and neyghbours to morrowe betimes to come: hir Chickens were then afrayd and tolde it to their mother:

ſhe bad them to leaue of feare & care, for none of alliaunce would be ſo obedient as to come at a becke, eſpecially to labour, take you héed only, if ought be ſayd agayn. The nexte morning ſhe went abroade as before, his kinſfolks left the work vndone: The owner ſéeing that, ſayd to his ſonne: Adieu both friendes and Couſins, bring thou to morrowe at the breake of the daye two ſickles, one for mée, another for thée, & we with our owne handes will reape it. When hir yong ones told hir this, ſhe ſaid: It is time to be packing, for that he ſayde without doubte ſhall come to paſſe: for on him that ought it, the labour is turned, not where it was required: and thus the Lark ſhifted hir neſt, and the corne was reaped. Hereof Ennius writeth theſe two Verſes:
            
               This ſentence in thy minde,
               beare thou in any wiſe:
               Looke for no helpe of friends,
               where thy helpe may ſuffiſe.
            
         
         
            393 Of a Foxe taken.
            
               A Foxe being taken in the ſnares of a Countryman, of whoſe Hens he hadde

killed many, deſired a Cock (of whom only he was ſéene) that he would eyther bring him a knife to cut the ginne, or elſe ſay nothing to his maiſter till he had gnawne it a ſunder with his téeth. The Cocke promiſed both, went quickly to his maiſter & told him that the Foxe was faſt in the ſnare, whome the Foxe eſpying to come with a club to kill him, ſayd: Ah vnhappy wretch & foole that I am, which beléeued the Cocke would keepe my counſell, of whoſe wiues I haue killed ſo many.
            
               Mor Neuer truſt thoſe, whome we haue greatly hurt.
         
         
            394 Of an Aſſe.
            
               A Certen poore man whiche had nothing but a barell of wine and an Aſſe, hadde Trusting mortall things. maried his only daughter to a certein yong man, promiſing him ſomewhat in franke mariage, which he thought to gather of his wine and the Aſſe (for he had determined to ſell them) but the next night after that the bridall was kept, the Aſſe died, who as he was dying, brake ye veſſell with his héeles, and ſpilt the wine.
            
               
               Mor. We muſt put no truſt in tranſitorie things.
         
         
            395 Of one that played the part of Chriſt.
            
               A Certen Countryman playing the part of Chriſt in a playe, was beaten and euill Truthe hateth ieſting. entreated of the Iewes, wherfore he flong away the croſſe and ſayd: The Deuil be your God, for I wil not. Then a Baker tooke his part, whome the Iewes likewiſe did handle opprobriouſly: whiche thing the pacient ſuffered: but another ſayde to him, Meale ſtealer: then the Baker aunſwered, hold thy tong, or elſe I wil ouerthrow thée with my croſſe.
            
               Mor. Truthe can abyde no geſting, neyther men that are giltie will willingly heare of any ieſting of their dooings.
         
         
            396 Of the Harte.
            
               A Harte beholding him ſelfe in a cleare 
                  Ʋayne deſires. water, allowed muche his faire forehead and broade hornes, but the ſmalneſſe of his legs he condemned. As he was thus viewing and iudging, there came a Hūter vpō him: the Hart fled away very ſwiftly,

the Dogs purſued him: but being entred into a thick wood, his horns were wrapped faſte in the boughes: then he prayſed his legs and diſprayſed his hornes, which cauſed him to be taken.
            
               Mor. Things whiche do hurte we doe hunte after, but good things we deſpiſe, we wiſhe for blyſſedneſſe before wée know where it is: Riches and promotion we ſéeke for, wherin we think that felicitie doth conſiſte, but in thē is much trauell and penſiueneſſe.
         
         
            397 Of a Countryman and Hercules.
            
               A Countrymans Carte ſtucke faſte in a déepe mire: ſtraight way he beſought helpe of Hercules. To him an anſwer was giuen: Thou dolt whip on thy horſſe, & lift thou forward thy whéeles, and then call on Hercules, and he will be ready at hand.
            
               Mor. Vayne requeſtes doo not auayle, which God wil not heare, helpe thy ſelf, and then God will helpe forward.
         
         
            398 Of a byting Dog.
            
               A Certein man had a Dog whiche often Vainglory times had byt many, whervpon he tyed

a clog on his necke, that men might take héede of him. The Dog ſuppoſing that to be giuen him for a commendation of his courage, deſpiſed his companions: then one of them tolde him of his blindneſſe, that he wore that clog with ſhame, and not with honour.
            
               Mor. A vaynglorious foole ſometyme counteth that to be his prayſe, which is vtterly to his ſhame.
         
         
            399 Of the Hog and the Horſſe.
            
               A Hog eſpied a barded Horſe, which was ſet out to warfare well appointed, to 
                  Ʋaliaunt death. whom he ſayd: Whether makeſt thou ſuch haſt, thou foole, perhaps thou ſhalt be ſlayn in battaile: The horſſe aunſwered him, though thou doe nothing worthy of prayſe, but being fat lieſt wallowing in the myre, yet a little knyfe thy lyfe ſhall diſpatche, where as great renoume after my deathe I haue.
            
               Mor. It is better to die valiauntly, than to prolong thy life led wickedly.
         
         
            400 Of the Swan and the Crowe.
            THe Rauen enuied the Swanne for his 
                  Ʋndefiled lyfe. whiteneſſe, whome with all pollicie he

endeuoured to defile and make black: and bicauſe he could not work his will whiles the Swan waked, he practiſed it when ſhe ſlept. Wherefore he came in a night the Swanne ſléeping on hir neſt, and with his blackneſſe polluted hir & made hir blacke. When day was vp and the Swanne awaked, ſhe ſawe hir ſelfe thus painted, ſhe waſhed hir ſelfe continually, till ſhe became faire.
            
               Mor. Who ſo will be bliſſed, lette him kéepe him ſelfe vndefiled.
         
         
            401 Of a Thruſh.
            
               A Thruſh being caught with birdlyme of a Fouler, did torment hir ſelfe, ſaying: 
                  Ʋndoing him ſelfe. The pangs of death greeue me not ſo much, as that my owne things are my deſtruction: for men ſaye, that birdlime is made of Thruſhes doung.
            
               Mor. Then are men moſt gréeued, whē their own doings do ſlay them.
         
         
            402 Of the Lion and the Mouſe.
            
               A Lion ſometime caught in a ſnare, was 
                  Ʋnequall mariage. ſo entangled, that he could not winde out him ſelfe, wherevpon he deſired the

Mouſe to gnawe a ſunder the ginne, promiſing a recompence for his good turne. Which thing when the Mouſe had quickly done, he required the Lion to giue him his daughter in mariage: the Lion (to requite his benefactor) graunted hir vnto him. When the new maried wife was come to hir Huſbande, by chaunce not ſéeing him, trode on him, and burſt him all to pieces.
            
               Mor. All mariages and matches vnequally made, are not to be allowed.
         
         
            403 Of a Ryuer.
            
               A Certeyne Ryuer checked hys headſpring, Vnthankfulneſse. as being a ſtanding water, neyther hauing any fiſhes, but him ſelf he highly commended, bycauſe he bred goodly Fiſhes, and pleaſauntly ranne throughe the valleys. The head ſpring fretting at the vnthankfulneſſe of the Ryuer, ceaſed his wonted courſe, whereby the Riuer wanting bothe hys Fiſhes and hys pleaſaunt noyſe, dried vp.
            
               Mor. Some claime as their owne, whatſoeuer they doe, robbing GOD of his honour, from whom al goodneſſe doth procéede.
         
         
            
            404 Of a Serpent.
            
               A Serpent beyng ouerwhelmed with a A wiſe Ape. great ſtone, deſired a man that trauailled that way, to roll off the burden from hym, promiſing to gyue hym a great treaſure if he would doo it. Whiche when the gentle fellow hadde done, the Serpent did not only breake his promiſſe, but alſo ſayd the man was worthy to die. As they thus ſtroue, it happened that the Ape paſſed that way, who being choſen iudge betwéene them, ſayde: I can not ende ſo great ſtryfe betwene you, excepte I ſée firſte howe the Serpent ſtood vnder the ſtone. When the man had layd the ſtone vpon the Serpent, he ſayd: I thinke that vnthankfull beaſte ought to remayne vnder the ſtone.
            
               Mor. Vnthankfull men are worthy of no good turne.
         
         
            405 Of a man that brake an Image.
            
               A Certeyne man had a woodden Image, whom he prayed to beſtow ſome benefite Wicked men. on him, but the more he prayed, the more he liued in pouertie: Where with he being angry, caught his Image by ye legs, and floong him agaynſt a wall, where with

his heade being broken, greate abundance of golde came out, whiche as he gathered, he ſayd: thou art froward as I think, for whiles I did reuerence thée, thou didſt mée no good, but when thou waſt well beaten, thou haſt yelded much riches.
            
               Mor. A naughty man will doe muche more good by beating than by honoring him.
         
         
            406 Of an Aſſe and a Rauen.
            AN Aſſe hauing a galled back, fedde in a medow, on whom a Rauen did ſit and picked at his ſore, whereat the Aſſe brayed and ſkipped: The horſkeeper ſtanding a far off, laughed thereat, whome as a Wolfe paſſing by eſpied, he ſayd: Alas, if we poore wretches ſhould doe ſo much, we ſhould be purſued: but at him they laugh.
            
               Mor. Wicked men only peeping abroad are forthwith knowne.
         
         
            407 Of a Dog.
            
               A Certen rich man, much giuen to hunting, did kéepe many dogs, wherof one bit his ſonne, that he dyed: Their maiſter béeing wroth, cōmaunded to ſlay not only the man killer, but alſo all the reſte: then ſayd one of them, one hath offended, but all

are puniſhed.
            
               Mor The wickedneſſe of one, often hurteth many.
         
         
            409 Of the Nourſe and the Wolfe.
            A Woman ſomtime had a chyld to nurſe, whom ſhe thretned to caſt to the Wolf except he left his crying. It happened that the Wolfe paſſing that way, hearde what ſhée ſayde: wherevpon being in good hope, he wayted ſtill at the doore. The chylde at length béeing ſtilled, fell a ſléepe, the Wolf returned faſtyng into the couerte with a Flea in his eare. The ſhée Wolfe aſked for his pray. Mary (quod he ſighing) I was deceyued, a Nurſe promiſed to caſt me a boy that cryed, but ſhe dyd not.
            
               Mor. No credit is to be had in a womā.
         
         
            410 Of a Woman that wept.
            THere was a yong Woman whoſe huſband lay at the poynt of death, whome with theſe words hir father comforted ſaying: Daughter, vexe not ſo much thy ſelfe, for I haue prouided thée a huſband, much fayrer than he is, which ſhall ſoone driue away thy longing for this: but this woman would not harken to hir fathers talke, but blamed him for making mencion ſo haſtily

but when hir huſband was dead, ſhe aſked hir father, wéeping, if the yong man were néere, which he ſayd ſhould be hir huſband.
            
               Mor. The loue which women haue to their huſbands ſoone weareth away, after they be dead.
         
         
            411 Of a Woman beaten.
            A Certeyne Woman ſore beaten of hir huſband, fained hir ſelfe deade, to make him afrayd, for ſhée hild hir breath, and lay with hir face vpward, not once ſtirring: This wiſe man knowing well the fetches of women, ſayd: The deade beaſt muſt bée flayde, and he caught vp a knife, and began to flaye the ſkin from hir feete: ſhée perceyuing the ende of hir diſſimulation, plucked back hir feete, and ſtraightway aroſe.
            
               Mor. Womens wyles are practiſed in vayne againſt wiſe men.
         
         
            412 Of the Widow and the grene Aſſe.
            A Certeyne Wydow being weary of leading a ſingle lyfe, deſired too mary, but ſhée durſt not, bycauſe ſhée feared the mocking of the people, which reported euill of thoſe that were twiſe maried: but hir godmother ſhewed hir by this pollicie, howe lightly rumors are to be regaded: ſhée commanded

hir to take the white Aſſe ſhe had, and cauſe him to be paynted gréene, and thē to leade him through euery ſtreate, which thing at the firſt ſight was ſo wondred at, that not only children, but alſo old mē, moued with this ſtrange Wonder, followed the Aſſe, to behold him, which being dayly led through the citie, they ceaſed to wonder at. Then ſayd hir godmother, the like ſhall happen to thée, for if thou mary, thou ſhalt for a few days be a byworde to the people, but within a while after, there ſhal not be a word ſpoken of it.
            
               Mor. No thing is ſo wonderfull, that in continuance of time will not ceaſe to be wondred at.
         
         
            413 Of the hare and the Fox.
            THe Hare iudged him ſelfe worthy to be preferred before the Foxe, bycauſe in Wiſdome ſwift running hée far paſſed him: the Fox aunſwered, I haue a more excellent wit, wherby I do oftner begyle the Dogs, than thou with thy ſwiftneſſe.
            
               Mor. Wiſdom farre paſſeth ſtrength or ſwiftneſſe.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               ¶ The firſte Fable of the penance of the Wolfe, the Fox, & the Aſſe. fol. 1.
               2 Of the Spyder and the Goute. fol. 3.
               3 Of the Aſſe, the Trumpeter, and a Hare, the meſſanger fol. 7.
               4 Of an olde man. eodem.
               5 Of a Shepherde and the Sea fol. 8.
               6 Of an Heremite and a Souldier fol. 9.
               7 Of the Fox & the Bramble eodem
               8 Of a Wagtayle & a Pheſaunt 10.
               9 Of the Myſe and the Frogs eodem
               10 Of the Beaſtes and the Birdes 11
               11 Of the Pecocke and the Nyghtingale 12
               12 Of a yong mā that ſong at the buriall of his mother 13
               13 Of Heuen & Earth. eod.
               14 Of a Lion in loue with a Countreymans daughter 14
               15 Of a Gourde and a Pine tree. 15
               16 Of the Sunne and the Moone 16
               17 Of the Spyder and the Swallow. 18
               18 Of a Dog & a Wolf. eo.
               19 Of an Aſſe & a Fox. 19.
               20 Of the Egle & a Pie. 20
               21 Of a Nightyngale fearyng the Kyte. eodē.
               22 Of a Countryman that would paſſe ouer a Ryuer. 21
               23 Of a Hart & a Vine. eo.
               24 Of a man bitten with a Dogge. 22
               25 Of an Aſſe that ſerued an vnkinde maiſter. eod.
               26 Of the Mouſe that ſette the Kyte at libertie 23.
               27 Of a Husbandmā pricked by a Bee. 24
               28 Of the tree Abrotanum and the Hare eodem.
               29 Of the Crowe and the Dog 25
               30 Of a Hunter and a Partrich. eodem.
               31 Of the Dolphin and the Eele 26
               32 Of fayre Trees and deformed,

27
               32 Of a Lyoneſſe and the Foxe. 28
               33 Of an Aſtronomer and a Prauailer. eodem
               34 Of Scholers. eodem
               35 A boaſter 29
               36 Of a Boaſter 30
               37 Of the Mole. eodem
               38 The birth of Hilles. 31
               39 Of the Frogge and the Foxe. eodem
               40 A Pecock ſpoyled of his feathers by a Souldier 32
               41 Of the Kydde and the Wolfe. eodem
               42 Of the Sunne and the Northeaſt winde. 33
               43 Of a Foxe and women eating of a Hen 34
               44 A Dog & Wolues, eodé
               45 The Peacocke and the Crane. 35
               46 Of a knight which had a brauling wyfe. eodem
               47 Of Arion & the Dolphin. 36
               48 A Kid and a Wolf. 38
               49 The Crab and Fox. 39
               50 Of the Apple tree and the Pomegranate tree. co.
               51 Of a Dog and his mayſter. 40
               52 Of the Turtle. eodem
               53 Of a ſcolding womā 41
               54 Of two Haukes and a Quayle 42
               55 Of the Wolfe and the Crane eodem.
               56 Of the Fyſher and the litle Fiſhe. 43
               57 Of a Foxe that woulde kill a Henne ſitting. 44
               58 Of the Frogs and theyr Kyng eodem
               59 Of the Colyer and the Fuller. 46
               60 Of a Shepherd whiche kept a Wolf amongſt his Dogges eodem
               61 Of the Rauen and the Wolues. 47
               62 Of the Father and his ſonnes codem
               63 Bulles and a Lyon 48
               64 Of a Lyon which begged of the Wolfe parte of of his pray. 49
               65 Of a Snayle. 50
               66 Of the Dooue and the Kyte codem
               67 A Husbandman 51
               
                  
68 Of the Hare and the Foxe. 52
               69 Of the Elme and the Oſiar eodem.
               70 Of the Serpent and the Crab. 53
               71 Of the Harte and the Wolfe 54
               72 Of a feller of Wood. eo.
               73 Of the Cocke and the Foxe. 56
               74 Of a Deceyuer. 57
               75 Of a Foxe caughte by a Dog, whyles ſhe fayned hir ſelfe dead. 58
               76 Of a Boy & a thefe. 59.
               77 Of the Thruſhe eodem
               81 Of the Ayre and the Wynde 60
               82 Of a Trauayler. eodem
               83 Of a womā & a Hen. 61
               84 Of a couetous mā eod.
               85 Of the Chough and the Doues 62
               86 Of the Dogge and the ſhadow. 63
               87 Of a couetous Ambaſſadour 64
               89 Of a couetous man dying 65
               90 Of a Rauen taken by Dogs eodem.
               91 Of a Gote & a dog. 66
               92 Of a couetous man that eate withered Aples. co.
               93 Of a leſter and a Biſſhop 67
               94 Of a Prieſt which buried his Dog. 68
               95 Of a Shepherd that encouraged hys flocke ageinſt the Wolfe. 69
               96 Of a Fiſher and fiue Fiſhes 70
               97 Of the Owle. 71
               98 Of a Foxe. 73
               99 Of the Lyon and the Goate eodem
               100 Of a Foxe taken by a Countryman 74
               101 Of a Womā that wold die for hir husbād. eodē.
               102 Of a Lyon being old, Folio 75
               103 Of an Eagle and a Come. 76
               104 Of the Hares and the Frogs. 77
               105 Of the Bee and Iupiter. 78
               106 Of a Harte and a Lyon 79
               
                  
107 Of the town dogs. 78.
               108 Of two Pots. 80
               106 Of the Swan ſingyng at the point of deth. eo.
               110 Of an olde man which ſet Trees 81
               111 Of the Pheſant and the Pecocke. eodem.
               112 Of the Ape and the Brocke 83
               113 Of the Dogge and the Cocke 84
               114 Of the Foxe and the Storke eodem
               115 Of a Frier, a Layeman, and a Wolfe 85
               116 Of a Parat. 86
               117 Of an Aſſe. 87
               118 Of Waxe that deſyred hardneſſe. eodem
               119 Of a Pacient and a phiſitian. 88
               120 Of an Aſſe carying an Image. eodem.
               121 Of a Fyſher. 89
               122 Of the Belly and other members. eodem
               123 Of the Frogge and the Crabbe. 90
               124 Of a Leoparde and an Vnicorn, fighting with a Dragon. 91
               125 Of the enuious Dogge and the Oxe. 92
               126 Of a yong man. eodē
               
               127 Of a countryman and Peares. 93
               128 Of a man that refuſed Clyſters. eodem
               129 A Deceyuer. 94
               130 A Cat & Myſe. 95
               131 Of the Wolfe and the Sheepe codem.
               132 Of the ſick Aſſe. 96
               133 Of a Foxe. eodem
               134 A man that would kil a Hog. 97
               135 Of the Egle that cited all manner of Birds. 98
               136 The Satyre and the Wayfaringman. 99
               137 Of a tyrannous Gryffon. eodem.
               138 The Pye and the Cuckoe. 100
               139 A Serpent. 101
               140 The rule of womē ouer their husbands. eod.
               141 Of a Woman. 102
               142 The Bore & the Coū
                  tryman. 103
               143 Of a Gnat. 104
               
                  
144 A noriſher of bees. eo.
               145 Many creeping Wormes and Beaſts. 105
               146 The bird called Kings Fiſher. 106
               147 The Apes and the Libard. 107
               148 The Henne and the Foxe 108
               149 Two enimies. eodem.
               150 The Crowe and the Rauen eodem
               151 The Wolf & Fox. 109
               152 The Couetous man & the Enuious. 110
               153 The Wolfe and the Aſſe. 111
               154 The Lyon and the Wolfe eodem
               155 The Hart & Oxen. 112
               156 The Cocke and the Catte 113
               157 The Countryman and the Serpent. 114
               158 A Seruant which caſte his mayſters Aſſe from a Rocke 115
               159 The Bat, the Bramble, & the Cormorant. 116.
               160 Of a Worme. 117
               161 A Dogge and a Butcher. 117
               162 Of Cockles 117
               163 The Aſſe & Foxe. 118
               164 The Dogge and the Aſſe eodem
               165 The Dogge and the Sheepe. 119
               166 Of an Aſſe. 120
               167 A wicked man and the Druell. 121
               168 Of a Camell. eodem
               169 The Fox & Lion. 122.
               170 Of a Hind calfe, eod
               171 The Lyō & Frog. 123
               172 The Eagle. eodem
               173 Of a Dog fearyng the Rayne. eodem.
               174 Of a Cocke 124
               175 A ſick man and a phyſitian eodem
               176 The Rauen and the Foxe 125
               177 A man and hys twoo vvyues 126
               178 Of a Souldier. 127
               179 Of Trauailers. eodem.
               181 A Lion & a Beare. 128
               182 A ryche man and hys Seruaunt. eodem.
               183 Of a vvoman that bet hir Husband. 129
               
                  
184 Of Fiſhers. 130
               185 A Ryche man and a poore 131
               186 A Phyſitian 132
               187 The Countryman and the Mouſe 133
               188 Lyon and the Hog. eo.
               189 The Dog that deuoured the Sheepe 134
               190 Of the Larke. 135
               191 The wyld Aſſe. codem
               192 Theef & the Dog. 136
               193 The Woodde and the Countryman. codem
               194 The Countrymā and a counſeller 137
               195 Of Iupiter. codem
               195 Of Flyes. 138
               196 Landbirds and Waterfoules codem.
               197 The Egle and the Rauen 139
               198 Two yong men. 140
               199 Of Money. codem.
               200 The Thorne and the wilde Gote. 141
               201 Of the Goate and the Vine. 142
               202 Of the Ant. codem.
               203 A Gardiner. 143
               204 Of Myte that woulde hang a Bell about a Care neck. codem
               205 Of Fiſhers 144
               206 The Tygre and the Foxe 145
               207 The Woolfe and the Sowe codem.
               208 A Catte. 146
               209 A man that wold trye his wiues mynde. codē.
               210 The Cocke & the Capon 147
               211 The Fouler and the Larke codem
               212 Of a Gooſe 148
               213 A woman and hir Louer codem
               214 A Serpent and a Huſbandman 149
               215 A man and a woman twice maryed. codem
               216 A Wolfe & Dogs. 150
               217 The Countryman and the Horſe. 151
               218 A Foxe that fell into a Well 152
               219 The Pyg and his Fathers will codem.
               220 The Cockatrice and Sea wolfe. 153
               221 The wolf & Dog. cod.
               
                  
222 A Linnet. 155
               223 A Mule. codem
               224 A King and Apes. 156
               225 Of Oxen. 157
               226 A Hogge. codem.
               227 A man which hidde a treaſure 158
               228 The Pygarde and the Egle. codem
               229 The Dogge and the Cooke 159
               230 A man ſtoned codem
               231 A Shepe crying. 160
               232 The Rauen and the Serpent codem
               233 A poore man 161
               234 A learned man not eſteemed 162
               235 A Phyſitian 163
               236 Of Doggs. codem
               237 Of a Sheepe waſtyng Corne. 164
               238 Of the Owle and the Larke. 165
               239 The Reede. cod.
               240 The Eele 166
               241 Of the Crow and the Sheepe. codem
               242 The Ape & Fox 167
               243 The Frogges and the Sunne codem
               244 A Wolfe fallen into a pitte 168
               245 Two Hoggs. cod.
               246 A wolfe that put on a Sheeps skinne. 169
               247 The Elephant. codem
               248 Of an Aſſe 170
               249 A Countreyman and Bees. 171
               250 A Husbandman and a Poet. codem
               251 A rich man vnlearned, and a poore man learned 172
               252 A Parat. 173
               253 Of the Pyke and the Tenche codem
               254 A Mermayde and a Leachour 174
               255 A realous man. 175
               256 Of a Liberall mā. 176
               257 A couetous man. cod.
               258 Of the Dogge and the Lyon 177
               259 Lynet & the Boy. 178
               260 Fox & Crocodil. cod.
               261 The Shepherd and the Husbandmen. 179
               262 Of Mercurius cod.
               263 Of an olde Man and his Sonne 180
               
                  
264 The Faulcon and the Cocke codem
               265 Of the Camell. 181
               266 The Aſſe, the Ape, and the Mole 182
               267 The Snaile and Frogges. codem
               268 Of a riche man. 183
               269 The Nightingale and the Hauke codem
               270 A madde man 184
               271 A prieſt & his boy. co.
               272 Of a Foxe 185
               273 Of an Aſſe 186
               274 A yong man. codem.
               275 Of Iupiter 187
               276 The Foxe & the Weaſyll codem
               277 Of an Apple tree. 188
               278 The Fly & Ante. 189.
               279 A Husbandeman and his Dog. 190
               280 The Lampurne & the Crocodile codem.
               281 A Liō & a Mouſe. 191
               282 The Woolfe and the Lambe 193
               283 Of the Hares and the Frogs 194
               284 Of a Swanne. codem.
               285 Of a Moore 195
               286 A horſman and a huſbandman codem
               287 A mā & his dog. 196
               288 Of a Foxe codem.
               289 Of Foure footed Beaſtes 197
               290 A Souldiour and his Horſe codem
               291 The Kydde and the Wolfe 198
               292 A Chicken caught by a Kyght odem
               293 A Philoſopher. 199
               294 The Foxe and the Egle. codem
               295 Of an Oliue tree. 200
               296 The Mouſe and the Catte 201
               297 The Kyghte and the Hauke codem
               298 Of Cockes and a Partriche. 202
               299 Of the Sowe and the Dogge 203
               300 A Lamb & a wolf. co.
               301 Of a Flye. codem
               302 A wolf & a Lion. 204
               303 The Ape and his two ſonnes codem
               304 An olde man that caryed an Aſſe 205
               
                  
305 A ſumptuous feaſte of the Lyon 207
               306 The Plantine and the Ape codem
               307 The Firre tree and the Buſhe. 208
               308 Of the Sowe and the Bitche 209
               309 The Doggs and the Aſſe codem.
               310 Of a Camell and Iupiter. 210
               311 Of an Oxe. 211
               312 The Weaſill and the Myſe codem.
               313 The Crowe and the Pitcher 212
               314 The Lyon & Fox. cod.
               315 Of the Wolfe beeing hungrie 213
               316 Of the Horſe and the Harte. codem
               317 Of Geeſe 214
               318 The Ape and his yong ones 215
               319 Of Maryners. codem.
               320 Of the Owle. 216
               321 A Foxe & a Dog. codē.
               322 The Wolfe and Porkupine 217
               323 Of an olde man lothe to dye codem
               324 Of a Dog brought vp to Hunting 218
               325 Of a man which plucked vp a Hedge 219
               326 The Aſſe and the Lyon 220
               327 Of Cocks. 221
               328 Of the Horſe and the Aſſe. codem
               329 Of a Crane 222
               330 Iupiter and the Rauen 223
               331 The Flea & a Lion. co.
               332 The Peacocke and the Chough. 224
               333 A man & his Dog. cod.
               333 A Heardman. 225
               334 The Lyon and the Foxe. 226
               335 A man created Cardinall 227
               336 The Fox & Gote. 228
               337 The Field Miſe 229
               338 Of a Flea. codem
               339 The Sheepe and the Shepherd 230
               340 Of Frogs codem.
               341 A Fiſher. 231
               342 The Ape & Fox. cod.
               343 Of a Doue 232
               
                  
344 The Currier and the Hunter. eodem
               345 The Beauer. 234
               346 The Houpe. eodem.
               347 The Beame eodem
               349 Of the Lyon, the Bore, and the Rauens 235
               350 A Wolfe. eodem
               351 Of a Beare 236
               352 A ſimple Countreyman eodem
               353 The Eagle and the Dorre 237
               354 The Storke and the Swallow 238
               355 The town Mouſe and the Coūtry Mouſe. 239
               356 Of the Mule and the Horſe. 241
               357 Of a Deuill. 242
               358 The Birds. 243
               360 Of an Oxe and a Bullocke. eodem
               361 Of Birdes. 244
               362 A wicked Man. eod.
               363 A Boye that woulde not learne. 245
               364 The Doue and the Crowe 246
               365 Of the Aſſe and the Calfe. eodem
               366 The Bat and the Weaſyll. 247
               367 The Fox and Cat. eod.
               368 The Marchaunt and the Ievve. 248
               369 A Carter. 249
               370 An olde Women. eod.
               371 The Nightingale and the Rauen 250
               372 Of the Doue and the Pye. 251
               373 Aſſe and Frogs. eod.
               374 The Pellican 252
               375 Of the Smyth and his Dogge. eodem
               376 Of the Bull and the Mouſe. 253
               377 A Weaſyll eod.
               378 Of Hares. 254
               379 The Ram & Bull. eod.
               380 The Quayle and the Larke. 255
               381 The Nut tree, the Aſſe, and the Woman. eodem.
               382 Beare and the Bee. 256
               383 Sow and the Dog. eod.
               384 The Boy and his Mother. 257
               385 Of Mercurius and Tyreſias. 258
               386 Theuiſh Partrich. 259
               
                  
387 Of the Hauke and the Cuckoe. 260
               388 A Grammarian teaching an Aſſe. eodem.
               389 A man that would try his friends. 261
               390 Of a yong man and an olde. 262
               391 A Lyon and a Bul. 263
               392 A Larke. eodem
               393 A Foxe taken 265
               394 Of an Aſſe. 266
               395 One that played the part of Chriſt. 267
               396 The Harte. eod.
               397 The Countryman and Hercules. 368
               398 The byting Dog. eod.
               399 Of the Hogge and the Horſſe. 269
               400 Of the Swan and the Crowe. 270
               401 The Thruſhe. eodem.
               402 Of the Lyon and the Mouſe. eodem.
               403 Of a Ryuer. 271
               404 The Serpent. 272
               405 A man that brake an Image. eodem.
               406 An Aſſe & Rauē. 273
               407 Of a Dog. eod.
               408 The Nourſe and the Wolfe. 274
               409 Of a woman that did weepe. eodem.
               410 Of a woman beaten. folio. 275
               411 The Wydowe and the greene Aſſe. eod.
               412 The Hare & Fox. 276
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight-ryder ſtréete, at the ſigne of the Marmayde. Anno Domini. 1569. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            
               
                  OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT.
               
            
            
         
      
   