
      
         
            
            
            THE BLAME OF KIRK-BVRIALL, TENDING TO PERSVVADE CEMITERIALL CIVILITIE.
            FIRST PREACHED, THEN PENNED, and now at laſt propyned to the Lords inheritance in the Presbyterie of Lanerk, by M. William Birnie the Lord his Miniſter in that Ilk, as a pledge of his zeale, and care of that reformation.
            
               MATT. 8.22.
Follow me, and let the dead bury the dead.
            EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT CHARTERIS PRINter to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE (TRVELY) NOBLE, IAMES MARQVES OF HAMMILTON, EARLE of Arrane, Lord Auen, Aberbroth, &c. the Shiriffe principall of Clydiſdaill, and Prouoſt of Lanerk, True felicity wiſhed, both here and hence from God in Chriſt Ieſus.
            THere is nothing wherein the Antichriſtian crew is found more condemnable (Noble Marques) nor that by their lin-ſey-wol-ſey confuſions, they haue dared clamp the ſincere twiſt of Gods trueth, with the torne clouts of their brain-ſicke ſuperſtitions, inſtanced eſpecially in their many fold ſepulchromany. Whoſe blame therefore we blaſe, that ſuch cullours of Aſdod remaine not ſo ſtandered out, euen in Iſraels campe, vnder this our proteſted reformation. But to award the malignance of any gain-ſaid affection, I ſtrong-hold my ſelf (by this nuncupation of you) vnder your Marqueſhips Mecenatiſme. For as by the foſter-father-hood of ſuch high callings, Gods Altar-mens trauels in his own trueth, ought to be ſteil-bowed▪ ſo theſe great-good gifts of nature and grace, in body and minde, that God hes garnelled vp in you, does plentifully promit that comfort to vs. For (to Gods glory I ſpeak, beſide theſe perſonal parts of ſuch vigorous talnes in ſtatur & ſtrength, ſo dexterouſly kythed by a peereles pauſty in all campeſtrial prowes, and paſ-tyming exployts, that (if I may ſay it) by a grace-full Gygantiniſme, the commonly dough
                  •
               y are become your dwarfes) your minde (which is more) thogh yet adoleſcent, is ſo magnifickly inner-manned▪ that in rauerſing theſe forraine territories (as ye Heroikly intend) ye can ſe no ſingular thing, that in ſome compēdious Micro-coſmo-graphy does not ſhine in your ſelf. And

therefore, althogh the Magogick negotiation of Schittim (the bordel of both the whordomes) hes ſhip-wreaked the ſoules 
                  •
               f ſome, almoſt of your rank, yet being ſo mainly munitioned with that panoply of God, I hope to ſee your triumph ouer ſuch temptations: As happily did your heauen-dwelling Father of incorruptible memory. For ſo long as ye reſolue to loyalize the loue of your ſoule to the Lord, and of your body to the betrothed breaſts of that Lady that ought it, the gates of hell ſhall not preuaill. But leaſt ye prolong too long the iuſt experience of theſe high expectations, that Kirk and Country conceiues of you, be intreated (my good Lord) to retrinch and abridge your forain tary: that ſo not onely the viduity of vs your wel willing followers by your fairing away, may be remoued: but alſo the pinching langour of theſe two your dayly beed-Ladies: your Mother, to wit, the mirrour of all godly graue matroniſme, and your Spouſe now the yong fruteful Matriarch of that multi-potent Marqueſad. So ſhall Dauid enioy his owne Ionathan, and Iſraell, now in his growing need his mediating Ioſeph, of all men now-adayes moſt skant: But the Lord by his paſport of protection giue your Lordſhip continuall conuoy to your rinks end. And grant that 
Coelum non animum mutet qui trans mare currit.
            
            
               The inceſſant Orator to God for your Lordſhip M. W. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The blame of Kirk-buriall.
            
               The propoſition of the matter, Chap. I.
               
                  THere be three ſeuerall ſtations that the diuine Prouidence by degrees hes aſsigned to man, wherby he may mount to immortalitie: Firſt the wombe, a manſion for nine moneths: next the world that indureth to diſſolution: laſt the graue, the tabernacle of bodilie reſt vnto the reſurrection: to the conſideration of the firſt two whereof, althogh Philoſophy may auaile (as Phyſick for our incarnation, and Ethick for our worldlie well) yet to the ſcience of the laſt, the Graue, Theologie is onelie ſufficient, as a ſubiect that farre ouer-reaches Natures reaſon. For we ſee that howſoeuer the Corinthian error that doubted, or Saducean heriſie denied the reſurrectiō, in our chriſtian Kirk ſeeme extinguiſhed: yet the practiſe of manie in buriall proceſſe, argues not onlie irreſolution, but incredulitie, whereof kirk-buriall is badge: as wherein by a ſacrilegious conuerſion they make Gods Sanctuarie their Golgotha, that is, the Kirk a caluarie or cairne of dead mens ſkulles. Which ſinne, leſt it ſeeme to walke ſafely vnder protection of the Kirks conniuence, or of the commons conceat that counts it indifferent, I intend to decypher, beginning at burials definition.
            
            
               The definition of Buriall. Chap. II.
               NOw Buriall I finde to be that religious ceremonie whereby our defunct bodies are interred vnto the reſurrection. For as in deing deſtruction is reſembled,Caluine in Act. 9 37. ſo by buriall (that is the reuerſion of life) immortalitie is repreſented. I call it a ceremonie, in reſpect it is not of that eſſentiall neceſsitie to chriſtian welfaire, as without the which we will be prejudged of the reſurrection. For although caſually euen the godly may fall vnder the in lake of funerall exequies, yet of burial neuer: For whatſoeuer element ſhall diſſolue this elementall body in this mother duſt,Ionas. 2. Lucan 
                        ••
                     . the ſame is his tombe: and muſt repledg him at the requiſition of the great day: as did the Whale in the type Ionas. For as Lucanus to Ceſar ſaye▪ (who after the Pharſalian defeate of Pompey his 
                     •
                  oſt 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
inhibite to burne,Viues vpon the Cittie of God 1. lib. 12 cap. that is after the Romane vſe to bury the ſlane, Capit omnia tellus quae genuit, coelo tegitur qui non habet venam. The which tranſuerſed meanes,

                     The earth is ready to receiue her broode,
                     And heauens will couer when leame tombes cannot do ide.
                  
And Virgil affirmes that whom the world neglectes vnburyed nature in tombes.De Cini. Dei Wherefore Auguſtine refuting the Heathen (who for the miſery of the vnburied Goſpellers, inflicted by the Gothes at the ſaccadge of Rome, inferred the diſcredite of the Goſpell it ſelfe) makes anſwere that buriall is rather a ſolace to the liuing nor ſubſidie to the dead: and ſo but a ceremony. But ſuch a one, that withall remember it is ſo religious, that althogh it be not among the pointes of Gods abſolute and immediate worſhip,2. Sam. 2.5. yet as opportunity ſerues, it is religiouſly and conſcientiouſly to be cared for. As it hes euer beene, not by the Kirk onely, but by the very world: who in many outward thinges hes beene accuſtomed to murgean and apiſhly to imitate the Kirks holy ceremonies, thogh neither in ſubſtance nor the right ſence. For in the Greeke lawes of Solon, the latine of Numa, and Romane of Iuſtinian we find a rigorous vigour againſt buriall violation. According as whereſoeuer immortality it beleeued, the ſame is in force:Le
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                      in hiſt 
                        •
                     auig. in Braſiliam. in ſuch ſort that among the lately diſcouered Braſilians (people whoſe bellies otherwiſe are burials to foes whom they eate) yet for their friends they digge graues, though not to our forme in length but to their owne in hight: ſo that the defunct is rather ſet in a tun nor tombe, ouer end on their feet, the more viuely to teſtifie their faithleſſe hope of the reſurrection.
            
            
               Of the end of buriall. Chap. III.
               BVt the faithfull who reſts rightly perſwaded, does religiouſly celebrate buriall for the conſcience of a double duety. The firſt being due to the dead, the other to the liuing. The due we ought to the Lords dead is the buriall honour: the which as part of their remuneration among men, for their good life ſhould follow them as deing in the Lord. Apoc. 14.13. So that the faithfull as forfoghten in the weariſome warfair of this militant life, after the victory of diſſolution, ſhould be ſtreeked downe in graue the down-bed of reſtfull repoſe. Where otherwiſe the depriuation

thereof, or debarring there from hes euer beene inflicted as a moſt ignominious puniſhment againſt the moſt criminall. According to the law imperial againſt parricids and ſuch.Ierem. 2
                        •
                     . And in the diuine law, no buriall was the aſſes burial the portion of rebellious Ioachas: wherefore the burial dueties by the old latines were called Iuſta: ſuch a juſtum due to each man as burials neceſſity by natures right required. For to defraude the moſt landles liuer on 
                     ••
                  e, at leſt of his ſeptipedall inheritance ſo equally proportioned to all by death, without partiality in mettage, it were a ſhameleſſe ſacriledge. Againe in reſpect of the liuing the right vſe of buriall is expreſly profitable: were it but for the hatching of hope, and foſtring of faith, in the article of riſing againe from the death. For as in Eccl. 12. the graues periphraſe (beth gnolam) ſignifies the ſecular houſe: ſo ſhall it no longer be inhabite then the tyme come, (when by him that liueth for euer) tyme ſhall neuer be more. Reuel. 10.6. For the giuing vp of the godlies ghoſt may featlie be compared to three-thinges: firſt it reſembles the Propheticall rauiſhments that Ierome, Ezechiel and others had: and Paul ſpeaks of 2. Cor. 12. for the ſoule in diſſolution (as the Pſalmiſt ſaies pſal. 90) flees vpward with the winges of immortalitie to the owne element (Heauen) to be with him that gaue it, repledging the body to her mother earth, Eccleſ. 12, till ſuch time as the ſpirit return to inveſt her corps as a garment of glorie thenceforth for euer. Againe, Diſſolution is like that matrimoniall deſertion, that vppon mutuall conſent the Apoſtle i. Corinth. vij. for a time permites to the farther and freer vſe of faſting and praying. For the body in graue, growing vp to incorruption, and the ſoule in heauen confirmed in immortality, ſhall joyfullie at laſt joine in full glorification. The which without both (that is bodilie incorruption,1. Cor. 15. and ſpirituall immortality) is not made vp to perfection. For euen as Zippora (thogh Moſes wife) in her Madianitiſh maners, was not meet to joine with Iſrael Exo. 5. til after the farther tryall of time ſhe was better prepared. Exo. 18. So this our carnall carion is not meet for a heauenly match, til in the graue it be trained to the incorruptible eſtate. And laſt it is likened by the Apoſtle firſt Cor. xv. to a ſeed: which thogh by death it be ſown incorruption diſhonour, and weaknes in the grauely fielde of the graue, yet hauing fructified to incorruption, glory and power, ſhall at la
                     ••
                  
                  
in the Lords harueſt, be glaned in, by his Angel with the ſharpe ſicle. Apoc. 14. and reaped vp to the fruition of ſoueraine felicity for euer. For although death in his legacie regiſtrate in the 12. of the Preacher, bequeathing the ſpirit to God that gaue it, doth deliuer the body but to the owne duſt, yet the vigour of that teſtament does but indure to the terme-day of generall refreſhment. Act. 3. for the Innes of eternity are alreadie arled in for our farther aſſurance,Hiero. ad pammach. by our two faithfull furriours (Enoch and Elias) the Lords exemed ones to the ſame end. So then for honour of the dead, and hope to the liuing (if to the firſt we be not fraudulent, nor among the ſecond faithleſſe) we muſt grant the debt of buriall duetie.
            
            
               Of the generall abuſe of Buriall ceremonies. Chap. IIII.
               NOw this duety in reſpect it is diſcharged in ceremonies (in any kynde whereof, it hes euer beene impoſſible to keepe meaſure without the direction diuyne) what ſort here are lawfull, vnder compariſon with the lawleſſe it reſts to define. And firſt all buriall ceremonies may be reduced to two ranks: for ſome are funerals, ſeruing for preparation to; and ſome ſepulchrals, ſeruing for placing in the graue the defunct. The ceremoniall variety of both, whereof my labor were infinite, let be vaine to deſcryue. For to giue but a glance in funerall, the Greke and Romane did burne their dead, in rogo, as they ſtyled their funerall fire; the Indean with Got-ſeame did beſmeare, the Schithean ſwallied, the Egiptian pickled with bryme, but the Gerrens a Schithian ſect, after exinteration beſpyced their gutleſſe goodſirs: that ſo ridiculouſly,Sylli. 13. lib. by corruptible meanes they might aſſay to reteene fugitiue incorruption,Cicer. lib. 2. de leg. and lib. 3. de tuſcu quaeſt. as Lucian in his Dialogue de luctu: And Silius Italicus the Poet in his 13 booke doe teſtifie of many ſuch fooliſh feats. Againe in ſepulchrals, the variety is found no leſſe vaine, euery Nation ſeruing it ſelfe with the owne vowſtie deuiſe. For firſt according to the number of the elements, ſo hes the ſepulchrall receptacles of humane bodies fourefold bene found. Some choſing the floting fome for their tombe, as among others the African Lotophagians, others preferred to wither in the aire, as of old not a few in Egypt and Ethiopia, that ſo preuenting the ſtinck of putrifaction by ſcowdring their skins in the Sunne,

they might reſerue their dead friends extant to be ordinar accombents with them at their tables. And (which more deſerues mockage) ſometyme the mony leſſe Ethiopian by ingadging his reaſted parent vpon reuerſion might releeue his want. Yea, and the fire (although fearce) hes not bene forborne, as to the which in defraude of the wormes many hes be taught their body both bone and lyre. That ſo pitchering vp their onely relict aſſes in vrnes, they might make a proud thought a very poore pompe. And althogh the worlds reſt in common with the Kirk hes made choiſe of the moulds of their mother earth (as the graue onely deſigned by God, warranted by the words exemples, and keeping beſt relation to our reſurrection, as out of whoſe lare onely we may properly be ſaide to riſe) yet in the vſage thereof how infinitly men hes deborded, Hiſtories records.
            
            
               Of the due direction in Buriall. Chap. V.
               BVt leſt I ſhoulde (as ſome doe) in telling vyce, teach it, I will turne me rather to teach as I can, what, or what not the Kirk ſhould doe, nor toomely to talke what hes beene done abroad by the world in this earand: except ſo far as by outward exemples we may confrōt our preſent confuſions, wherat I aime. And becauſe nowadayes buriall is ordinarilie traduced as a ſcriptureleſſe thing, and ſo amongſt indifferents to be vſurped at the vnſtayed arbitriment of men, how and where both they wil haue it: I will here appeale men from their pet-wils, nowhere elſe but to the wordes authoritie. For although to theſe that are without ſpirituall ſpectacles, euery minute of our ſepulcromany ſeme not in expreſſe ſcripurall termes to be condemned (being to the ſpirit of God as parenticide was to the Law giuer,Licurgus. againſt the which he gaue no law, leſt he ſhold not ſuppoſe ſuch inhumane an abomination) yet by his grace, I ſhall diſcouer their particular conuiction in euery corrupt abuſe by the ſame. And firſt I would men wiſt that the word, Gods ſword, as it is ſaid Hebr. 4.12. ſo it is found to be twin-edged. For by the one edge which is of expres warrant from poſitiue lawes it cuttes,Hieromi. in Iſa. 66. and by the other as equiualent, which is of collected conſequences, it carues and conuinces the catiue conſciences of the criminall. For although the ten words of Moſes tables, ſeeme onely to ayme at the ten broad

ſinnes, that negatiuely they inhibite, yet there are none of their infinite broode and of-ſpring, that may not be particularly repledged to his mother kinde: and ſo incurre the reuerence of ſome one of the Decalogue lawes. But in reſpect the caſes of ſin, are become ſo infinite and intricate that ſome like mangrels doe participat of diuers kindes: and others ſo ſubtilly twiſted by the deuill, that yet they reſt vnacknowledged. For this cauſe the Lord hes ſupplied the generality of his law as the text, by his remanent word as the commentar. By the benefite whereof we may eaſily particularize our ſubtilleſt ſinnes whatſoeuer: and that by two ſpeciall meanes. Firſt by the rule of Analogie, and next by the benefite of example. To the twitch of the which, where expreſſe warrant wants, we muſt either qualifie or controle our proceedings, as we ſhall doe in this our particulare anent buriall. That what we ſee therin neither anſwerable to Analogie nor exemple of the word we may conclude it is ſin.Quint. lib. 1 Now Analogy in any thing is that conuenient proportion, whereby euery part is correſpondent to the whole. As in muſical inſtruments, thogh there be many different ſtrings yet muſt they al be tuned to harmonical proportion which is the Analogie: otherwiſe the ingratious diſcord in the eare of the leaſt ſtring, wil mar al the mirth. Now ſcriptural Analogie is two fold, the one is of faith, the other of manners. That of faith is the platforme of knowledge that directs vs aright in all, and euery one of the articles of the ſame, the which by verſing and ſearching the Scriptures may ſo be conceiued in the minde of the faithfull, that in faith they need not erre. And this Analogy the Apoſt. Ro. 12.6 ſpeaks of: where he ſeems to deſigne the Apoſtolical creed that Tertulian calles the Canon or Analogy of faith. The which alſo 2. Tim. 2. he commendes vnder the name of the paterne of wholſome words. Againe the Analogy of maners is that platform of right, that we oght to obſerue in euery our action, according to the warrand of the will of God. And this Analogy by ſearching and verſing of Gods law Pſal. 1. the canon of our conuerſation may be ſo learned by the conſcience that for lake of knowledge we need not ſin. And this the Pſalmiſt very frequently calles the path way of God. As Pſa. 17. and 27. and 119. Now this Analogy of manners wherewith here we haue only ado, being the morality or the law, exacts thre things in euery our

action. Firſt that the matter done, be good; next that the maner of doing be wel; and laſt in both that we euer ayme at the right end. As in our own particular we ſhall expone. And firſt for burial, it is an action and a good action as being anſwerable to both the general tytles of Moſes two tables, piety and charity: that it ſhold be done no chriſtian wil contrauert: but in the other two, how the ſame may be wel, and to the right end: that is formall and direct, there ſtands the queſtion. In the which cace a chriſtian duety wer to conſult. Firſt with their conſcience the regiſter of the wordes Analogy. The which if a chriſtian of knowledg wold but vouch ſaue to do, he ſhold ſoone finde the oracle of Analogy for his information. But now moſt men alas are ſo deeply addicted to affection, that they neyther make count nor queſtion how or where they ſhould bury: contrare whom one day their criminall conſcience will crye judgement, except they repent. And if thou loth to hear conſcience, yet liſt to hear the direction of the words Analogy to thy reformation. Where firſt learn, that howſoeuer the form and end of al actions ar to be examined by the general inſcription of the law (loue) how to wit we haue therein reſpected. Firſt that ſouerane loue we oght to God, and next that proportionall loue we oght to our neighbor: yet in matters of this kinde (and al ſuch ſpecially that conſiſts in ceremonies) there is particular analogy to be obſerued that the Apoſt. 1. Cor. 14. ſets down. Who willes al things, and conſequently burial ceremonies to be conformed to honeſty & order laſt verſ. and the end to tend to edification v. 26. vpon the which Analogicall rules, then we ſhal firſt controle the cuſtoms of mens burials, & conclude what by Analogy is lawful.
            
            
               Againſt the contempt of buriall and inſufficiency of buriall yardes. Chap. VI.
               THe firſt rule that directs the forme, containes two cautions, & that for good cauſes. For according to the forked foly vſed in buriall, which either is contemned, or elſe ouer caried in pomp, this rule does reſtraine both: by ranging contempt vnder the rule of honeſty and pomp, vnder the rule of order, that they no wayes exceede. Now as for buriall contemptes, if we peruſe humane hiſtories, as namely Caelius, Cicero in his Tuſculan queſtions, Crinitus, and diuers others: we ſhall finde them haue many conſpirators: whereof we ſhall recite ſuch as make for vs. We reade

of the Albanes that of the defunct tooke no care at all: The Sabeans vſed them for fulzie: The Troglodites for mockage: The Hircanes expoſed them to dogges, that for the nonce they nuriſhed. But among the firſt of this crew were the doggiſh Cyniks, who would in no ſort conſent to be buried. As we read of Minippus and Diogenes of whom it is recorded, that being to dye, he directed his corps to be expoſed. And being admoniſhed that ſo he ſhould be torne by birds and beaſts, did reiyre a taunt, in requyring a cudgell to be coutched beſide, whereby to weare his wirriers away. And being inſiſted with that it would be to ſmall vſe, ſince death was but ſenſleſſe: why then (ſaid he) are ye ſoliſt what befall a ſenſleſſe carrion? But this kinde of reprobate Philoſophy rather becomes renigat mindes then chriſtian men. For if reprobates were by the Kirk knowne (as they are with God barred vp from hope) ſo might they juſtly be debarred from the benefite of chriſtian buriall. And this Cyniciſme although we ſeeme not to profeſſe, yet if we walke the land abroad we will finde many folke not flyting free in it. For our Kirk-courtes or yardes, are become more lyke pwind-folds nor burials: as being ordinarly be dunged by peſtring and paſturing brute. Not far from ſubſcryuing the deſperat legacy of ſome that can be content to beſtow their bowke to the burroughmure, if God wold take the ſoule. According to the conceaty reſolution of Theodore, who being by the tyrant Lyſimachus minaſſed with the gibbet,Viues on the Citty of God chap. 12. anſwered that his own minzeons only had it to feare and not he, to whom all was one, whether to putrifie aboue, or vpon, or within the earth. But as this a buſe is contrare to the Apoſtles decencie commanded, ſo is it alſo againſt the common law that prouids buriall to be had in holy reputation. So that to empty the bladder,O to. friſing. lib. 4. let be the belly about buriall (as they called it minxiſſe in patrios cineres) was reput nefas, that is iniquitie, let be inciuilitie. And for this cauſe the faithfull after Conſtantine (who firſt ſerued edicts of liberty to edifie temples, whereas before the Kirks had alwaies beene ſerued onely with holy Innes) in founding of Kirks, taking the type at Ieruſalems temple, did among the reſt counterfaite the courts by Kirk yardes, the which for this commanded decencie they dedicated to buriall vſe. The which therefore by the Greeks (as thereby appeares the workes beginners)

were called Caemiteria. And that not without Emphaſe, ſeeing (as Atheneus ſayes) it was the name before of ſleeping celles for ſtrangers: and ſo the alluſion wanted not edification. And albeit the reaſon of the reſt of the reſemblance betwixt Temple and Kirk, as of the Quier to the holieſt place within the vaile, &c. cannot ſo eaſily be eſpyed, yet the reaſon of this may well by this rule of decency, according whereto ſince we haue a Country law of our owne extant, enacted for reparation of ruinous Kirks,Marie Par. 9 Act. 76. Iames 6. Parl. 15. Act. 232. and their yardes, it is the part of all Paſtors to vrge the benefite of it, that ſo our common burials becomming ſeemely cemiteries, our Kirk buriers may be depriued of the pretence of their infenſibility and profanation. For the Apoſtles mynde is in his rule, that natures abſcenities be decently couered and oueruailed with her mothers mouldes.
            
            
               Againſt ſeculare pompe in Funerals. Chap. VII.
               THe other extremity that commes againſt the Apoſtles order is pompe. The which as it is found more common, ſo it brings with it more perturbation. But for the more particular deciphering thereof, we ſhall range it in two rankes: the one ſort of it being ciuile or ſeculare, the other ſuperſtitious. Againe the firſt, according to the duplicity of burial ceremonies, is found double. For partly in the funerals, and partly in the ſepulchrals of men it is to be ſeene. In funerall pompe if we ſhould view the cuſtomes of antiquity, and ballance the ſame with theſe of our dayes, as in few thinges we will be found inferiour, ſo in ſome far to ſurmounte them in vanity. To be ſhorte for commoditie of this our preſent compariſon, vnder the olde names of Funerall offices, we ſhall ſet downe the whole auncient funerall proces, and confer it with ours of the new now. All the which ceremonies for memory may be ranked in two ſortes. Whereof ſome did in common concerne the whole funerall preparation:Seneca. the generall ouerſight whereof, appertained to their Libitmarii, that is funerall men, that among the reſt had the cure of funerall feaſts. Now heerein althogh we inlake the officers,2 Sam 5. yet is not the office intermitted: for their buriall bankets we haue not learned to imitate onely, but in our aruelles to exceede, where rather in the day wherein a good one or great one falles, as being a breach of Gods

hand in his Kirk, ſhould be celebrate with faſt and meaſurable mourning. The ſecond ſort of their ceremonies, were employed about the defuncts perſone, conſiſting in three pointes. Firſt in mourning for the dead, next in addreſſing the corps for the graue, and laſt in his conuoyance thither. In mourning beſide the intereſſed that made it in earneſt, they had their made out mourners of the feminine ſex, that beſt could do it: whom they ſtyled Praefi
                        •
                     ae. And theſe the Preacher 12.5. ſeemes to reſpect in mentioning the mourners of the ſtreetes. But in this alſo we are more antick nor antiquity: for in ſteed of humane teeres that beſt can expreſſe the owne ſmart, ſome will haue trumpets; and in ſteed of mourning in the duſt, as they did oft-tymes, we mumchance and mourgean in ſuch dilicate duilles, better feated for wowing nor woing, that heires or widowes neuer dallies more nor vnder their duilles. But the Lord will haue at ſuch hypocryſie in the end. The next point of their perſonall funerals, was their peremptor preparation to the graue, conſiſting in two ceremonies: for before that by the Libutinarian cure the dead was weind,Suer. in the pollinctors inbalmed, and Sandapilarianes beſpiſed, the corps of the great, and this alſo is ſuperſtitiouſlie ſometyme exceded among ſome of the beſt rank: on whom after Anatomicall exinteration, Apotheticary applications are ſo exceſſiuely employed, that oft tymes ſuch prodigall profuſion of arromaticall gummes (if they were otherwiſe charitably beſtowed) might make ſundry poore indifferently rich. Now the laſt funerall duety appertained to the Veſpilones, or bear-men, whoſe peculiare calling was (beeing followed in rankes by the Acoluthiſts their friends,Domit. wherof now the Roman Biſhops hes bereft them) to cary their corps in their coffins to the graue. Such as wee ſee mentioned in Luke 7.14. But among the reſt alſo, how far this auncient ſimplicity is mueterate, who beholdes our great burials may eaſily conſider. For althogh the death by all men ſhould be thoght to be a kynde of defeat from God, yet our Heroik burials are oft led lyke a martiall triumphe, wherein the toutting of trumpets, trampling of ſteades, and trouping of men ranking themſelues vnder ſtately ſtanderts, and punicall pinſels, diſplayed for whiuering in the winde, may ſufficiently teſtifie the dedolence of men, as if by an vndantoned courage they would quarrelouſly demand the combate

in reuenge of the dead. And as if the worme (man) were able to ſtand out againſt the thunder-bolts of death delaſhed by God. but alas, if in death we could count our juſt kinſh we might rarather diſmay and feare. For although in the kingdome of the ſecond comming we ſhall triumph with our head Chriſt, ouer the ſtingles graue. 1. Cor. 15. yet as firſt being by death defeat, the firſt fall is ours euen to the duſt. Ge. 3. Wherein for our due deſert here we deſerue with Chriſts theues to haue our legges broken, rather nor in pompe our badges borne. For looke how far fellonie may glory in her fetters, ſo far may we in our funerals wherewith we but feard death. For as ſome Gentiles, where gold is vernaculous and plentifull, their catiues thogh therewith enchained,Tertul. de habitu muliebri. yet remanes catiues: ſo to vs, thogh our graue were of enamelled gold, yet it is but our graue, the monument of our common miſery, that by diuine mercy onely may be remedied without farther meanes. And as a blood-guſh made Iulian at laſt, to knowe Chriſt,Euſeb. Eccleſ. hiſtor. and Alexander (thogh the maine Monarch) his mortality (againſt the which he had beene be flattered before) ſo if we be not frentick, our funerals ſhould teach vs our tranſitory eſtate. For of all pride this pompe I eſteeme it moſt perillous, in reſpect that if the world will haue by it the graue reſtored to her victory, God for a meeting to the world will reſtore death to his ſting. For a document therefore againſt the which, the Lord did cloſly conuey the body of his owne diſſolued Moſes, from being the object of ſuch feckleſſe oſtentation and perillous pompe. Deut. 34. The which ſeeing in that great one the Lord did not allow, why ſhould our far leſſe ones lawleſlie claime it? And this for that ciuile pompe that in buriall funerals is found blameable.
            
            
               Againſt ſeculare or ciuile pompe in ſepulchrals. Ch. VIII.
               THe ſepulchrall pride of men is nothing inferiour. For (although before we deduced, that among al the elements the earth to be the moſt ſeemely ſepulcher, yet) in the vſage thereof the earthlings hes laboured to tranſcend the earth in pryd, as in a touch we ſhall ſhowe. The name ſepulcher as it is in common vſed for all graues, ſo it implyes two ſeueral kindes. Whereof ſome are peculiare to ſome perſons onely, and others common to all. Again of the peculiar ſort, ſum ar proper to ſingular perſons only

and others to mo, yet being of one ſort or family. To the proper kynde of ſepulchers (as in the world, yet for the moſt part out of the Kirk) the choiſe of place hes beene (as many where it remaines) indifferent: euen ſo in the Kirk to the death of Sara it ſeemes to haue beene, at what tyme Abraham firſt to eſchew that promiſcuous confuſion, and for a more actual poſſeſſion of his promiſed Canaan, vnder his pilgrimag, did acquyre a field for his conſtant buriall Gen. 23. wherein he and his Sara, Iſaac and his Rebeka, Jacob and his Lea, three maryed matches in others armes attendes the reſurrection. Gen. 48. And although the eſtate of Gods gathering Kirk then requyred the decency and order of common buriall, yet we finde the neceſſity thereof neuer holden abſolut. For as among diuers neceſſities the meaneſt muſt yeeld, ſo Iacob, hauing his head homeward from Sechem to Mambre (where his father dwelled at his ſepulcher) and within one dayes trauell to his rinks end, ſuſtening in his campe a double irruption by death (in the firſt whereof, he was depriued of Debora his vmwhile mothers Nurce; in the other of Rachel, the wife of his choiſe) to auoyde the ſuſpition of ſuperſtitious curioſitie, he yeelds to the moſt preſent neceſſity, and ſuffers the treto ly wher it fell. Eccle. 11. by entombing Debora at the oake of Bethel, and Rachel in the way to Ephratah without farther cariage Gen. 35. So then we ſee that euen after the inſtitution of common buriall, the vſe of proper vpon neceſſity (which beeing lawleſſe can bring no diſorder) was neuer inueterat nor thoght vnlawfull. For as ſound doe they ſleepe by the mure edge that are folded vp in the fauour of God (though it were by the Peſt) as in the moſt ſtately tombe.Quid. For as fiſhe in euery ſea is at home, ſo we in euery earth, if we be the Lords, to whom the earth and her implements do all appertaine. Pſal. 24. And as this conſideration ſerues to confound the ſuperſtitious opinion of the prerogatiue of ſome ſepulchrall places, for their hallowed moulds, ſo does it for the blame (by the way) of theſe farland conuoyences of the dead to their homed tombes, defrauding the weary corps of the deſired reſt. For althogh vpon ſome propheticall reſpects, Iacob and Ioſeph both, commanded their cariage from Egypt to Canaan, Gen 50. yet without the like cauſe, their caſe is no warrant. Let men therefore rather tranſlate their curioſitie of ſepulchrall care,

in a ſerious cure, how they may be gathered vp aright to their grandſirs in God, and in the common faith of our father Abraham. In doing whereof we ſhall be bleſſed with the bed-fellowſhip of Ieſus in our buriall lare, where euer it be. Otherwiſe if thy graue were of gold, yet it is but the gate of hell.
            
            
               Of the diuers kindes of pompous ſepulchers. Chap. IX.
               THe proper ſort of ſepulchers, the world (as I ſaid) hes labored to make them proudly proper: ſo french hes men beene in their faſhions. For many to eternize their ſoone forgot memory, and to gaine the vogue of this vaine world, hes prepared Pyramides of pomp, others pillers of pride, ſome mouſolies of maruel.Laert. lib. 1. As if ſuch ſupercilioſity, could ſweeten the bitter ſwarfes of their ſowre death, the wickeds greateſt euill. But, as oft it occurres (according to the prouerb, that he that hountes doth not ay roſt) ſo it may befall others that did Pharao Cenchres (that drowned King of Egypt) who hauing a ſepulchrall Pyramide elabored by the panefull taske of Gods people, wherein he deſingde to ly,Ioſeph Anti. lib. 2. yet his funerals was found in red-ſea floode. And as both the name of a Pyramide did ſignifie, and the forme reſemble fire, ſo is he now for his pride plotted with Pluto in the flame of hel. For ofttymes what men does propoſe in pride, God diſappointeth in his diſpleaſure.
            
            
               Of the common and allowed ſort of Buriall. Chap. X.
               THe comon kinde of ſepulchers are more anſwerable to Pauls order, and to that ſort of the Saints communion, that conſiſts in lying together in graue. Yet they are found diuers. For ſome hes beene acquyred▪ and as conquiſhed to that vſe: as Abrahams caue in Makpela. Gen, 23. And Akeldama Matt. 27. Others were munificently dedicate. As Iehoſaphats vaile by Ieruſalem. In the which ſome, out of Ioel 3. hes conjectured that the conuocation of the great day ſhould be. Other parts againe are found of olde mortified to that vſe: lyke Caluary: ſo called (as ſome thinke) from Adams brane-pan, there found, if all be true that is alledged. Of ſome one of the which ſorts are all Coemiteries or cloſtered places, wherein our bodies being keeped from the carnage of beaſts, are lade a part to the reſurrection. For ſepelire (though Durand

thinke it to be from ſine pulſis) yet I take it to be from ſe-palliare, that is,Duaren. de benef Eccle. to couer apart, as our buried bodies be. Now this ſepulchral communion for the commonty of it, none ſhould contemn. For althogh the place remane common, yet to auoyde confuſion of rankes the ſepulchrall preparation (I thinke) may be different. For true honours monuments ſhould euer haue place. And what vertue hes win in this world, ſhould not be ſuffered to dy with death. And therefore Rachael, the joy of her Iacob, is not onely buried, but by a diſtinct monument memorized. Gen. 35. with the ods of a piller that Debora wantes. And Iudaes Kings the types of the great King, dwelt after death in Dauids princely tombe. 1. K. 62.Ioſeph. Ant, lib. 7. ca. 1
                        •
                     . The mighty Machabees were monumented in Modine their owne mount. 1. Mac. 9. Ioſeph. ant. 13. But this licence is to be onely allowed vpon a three folde condition. Firſt of perſonall diſcretion, whereby this kynde of honour may redound onely to the honorable in God For as the graue of Eliſha wold not contain the ſouldiers corps. 2. King. 13. No more ſhould the graue of the godly honourable be profaned with the graceleſſe ginge. The next caution is to keepe diſtinction of place, that men preſume not to ſeeke honour where God onely ſhould; for feare of his jelouſie, who cannot abyde Dagon to play jake fellow-lyke. And ſen God hes taken in the Kirk for his owne Innes, let it ſuffice thee, lyke a doore-keeping Dauid. Pſal 84. or a watchman Vrias. 2. Samuel 11. to ligge in the court without. Yea, ſen all the earth is before vs that wee may ly where wee will choiſe, if nothing can content our greede but the Lords peace, we are guilty with Achab of Naboths wine-yarde. The laſt caueat is moderation: that in making thy monument thou keepe ſuch a meaſure that it become not another Mauſoly, that is, the worlds ninth maruell. For as that ſepulchrall monſter that Queene Artimiſe made to her husband Mouſolus the Carian Kirk (from whom the reſt of that ranke of ſepluchers were named Mauſolies) was expoſed to the ſalt taunts of dogged Diogenes, ſo may all that ſort of ſepulchromany be ſet vp to the mockage of others.Enclan. in di
                        •
                     lo. Mauſ. & Diog. For let the world thinke it but a fond foly to belliſhe the out-ſide of a within rotten tombe, with beauty and braueries exceſſe. But if thou muſt haue a monument mak thy choiſe of any of the two lawfull ſortes, that before the Kirk-buriall crop in,

being but of the neweſt come-ouer antiquity, was onely in vſe. For ſome there was that to the imitation of Abraham,Durand. de Camit. made vp little caues or voltes, for buriall vſe Such as we finde, not a fewe abroade about our oldeſt Kirkes, no doubt after the example of the Excedrall domicils that, ſerued the Prieſts for reueſteries,Ioſeph. 
                        〈◊〉
                      bello Iu
                        ••
                     . lib. 6.6. or Garderobs in the lewiſhe Temple. And becauſe they were but adjacent and incontiguous, being but ſeuerally ſet as to-falles to the continent Kirks, they got therefore among vs the name of of Iles, that yet they keep. And this kynde may content our moſt honourable. That ſo they may ly, if they liſt, lyke vnto Leuites in compaſſe round about the Lords houſe. The other ſorte of ſepulchrall monuments were tombes: that beeing tumorous aboue for better capacity, were after the counterfoote of Ioſephs arke. Gen. 50. Conforme to the which cuſtome (although now meane men be worſe to content) we ſee ſundry of our crowned Kings, whoſe monuments yet remanes in the Ile Columb-kill,Hector Boe. Chron. to haue beene Kingly entombed in the Court not the Kirk. An vſe with vs at leaſt vnkend (as thereby appeares) within this laſt periode of tyme containing fiue hundreth of yeares. So then ſeeing our Nobles now may be as of olde they were then ſo honourablie eaſed, with ones princely Iles or tombes, why ſhould they wilfully incurre vnneceſſar profanation, by burying in Kirks? An vſe that onely Papiſtry hes hatched as anone we ſhall ſhowe. And ſeeing ſome (euen of all ſortes) in the light of the Lord hes begunne to reforme, let the reſt in the loue and feare of God follow. For if they be happie that leades others to righteouſneſſe. Daniel 12. ſurely that felicity ſhall be imparted to the faithfull followers.
            
            
               Of ſuperſtitious pomp in buriall. Chap. XI.
               THus hauing deciphered (ſo farre as ſerues this turne) the inciuility of this their ciuile pomp, reſts to ſpeake of that which is ſuperſtitious. A matter of more ado,Bellarm. de purgat. as wherin the Lord is more immediatly injured nor in the other. For as throughout the Antichriſtian worlde, the exorbitance of ſuperſtitious exequies are found infinite (as in their bel-ringinges, lampe-lighting, dirige ſinging, incenſe burning, holy watering, letanie praying, ſoule-maſſing, vigilles keeping, and ſuch other geare may

be ſeene) ſo we that will be called Chriſtians, and hes proteſted to forleit that lore, and to be reformed, yet in our ſepulchrals, at leaſt, we adheere too much to that old deformity. For as among them the wel deſeruing by the purſe, and liberality in legacy, was in vſe to be Kirked vp in burial: ſo here, which is more our head-ſtrong ones, whoſe deſeruing hes bene but ſacrilegious Kirk-robbing doth clame to no leſſe. So that althogh they ſeeme to make nyce in praying for dead, yet vpon the dead they will or elſe not: in bowing their knee no where elſe but on their forbeers bellies: which ceremony how ſib it is to the old ſuperſtition, I wold they could count. For ſuperſtition is lyke ſome ſerpents, that though they be couponed in many cuttes, yet they can keepe ſome lyfe in all: right ſo ſuperſtition that can hang by one haire, does liue in this point. And if we chock it not quyte, perhaps it ſhall hatch more. And in end it may be that it out-reaſon thee thus. If thou haſt attained to that ſepulchrall prerogatiue, to ly in the Kirk, why ſhould thou want that olde priuiledge to be prayed for in death▪ And if thou be to ly at the Altar, how wanrſt thou a Prieſt to ſay thy ſoule Maſſe?Virgilius. Beware of this cloſter logick. For if once thou bee led to a going in it thou ſhalt bee drawen to a running with it in end. So eaſie is the diſcent of Auerne.
            
            
               How Kirbburiall ſuperſtition crop in. Chap. XII.
               Againſt the poyſon of this Papiſtry, there are two preſeruatiue conſiderations that may aware it. Firſt if we will but weigh whence and when this corruption crop in, next how ackwart it is againſt our Analogy, and the words warrant. For firſt howſoeuer this ſuperſtition is (now long) becomme moſt penny-rife Papiſtry, yet among Papiſts it is not home-bred. But the foly of it is firſt to be fathered on the olde Heathen. VVho wanting well grounded hope of heauen, and ſufficient horror of hell, became plunged in infinite errors anent the eſtate of the dead. For firſt hauing diuided the world in men good or bad,Aug. de ciuit & Viues on it lib. 9. cap. 11. as we doe: they ſubdiuided both againe in two rankes. As the good in theſe of the beſt ſort, whom for their merit they made Gods: and in a ſeconder good ſort, to whom although they allotted the Flizean fields, yet ſo that they reſerued them to a care of the reſidue relicts heere, vnder the name Lares. VVho in our tong are Brunies

the which by vulgar deceiued vote, were ſpirits employed for the benefite of our militant mortality heere. Their bad againe were lykewiſe of two rankes. The firſt was the worſt ſorte: who as the beſt of the good were their Eudaemonies, ſo theſe as the worſt were repute Cacodaemones, or incarnate deuilles,Virg. 6. Aere. to whom they aſſigned the pitte of Pluto for priſon. The next were the not ſo bad: who being not Lares, but Laurae or Lemures, that is, bogils or Gaiſtes, were by the world adjudged to ſuch a purgatoriall pennance, that wandring in a vagarant eſtate about graues and alriſh deſerts, they were ſuſpended till their pennance was ended from eliſean repoſe. To remeede the which miſery ſuperſtition (the foſter mame of all error) tooke frankely in hand. For to purchaſe repoſe to ſuch reſtleſſe ſpirits, they began to conſecrate the burials of the dead to their deader Gods. Inſcryuing their tombes with a trigram of D. M. S. a diton that meaned, Dus manibus Sacrum, as if they ſaid, this tombe is conſecrate holy to the graue Gods. And for farther effectuating of their purpoſe they diſcharged a double duety; Firſt in the celebration of certaine funerall feſtiuities to the honour of the graue Gods Manes. And theſe they called Necia. The next were their ſacrifices for the dead, and theſe were either Iuſta, and ſuch as were common for al,Cyril. lib: 2, de leg b. or Paren talia and peculiare for parents or friends. VVhich being done to them all was thoght well. To the which proceſſe if we ſhall collation the Roman cuſtome this day, we ſhall finde them yet in ſuch hote tread, that though in profeſsion they be but papiſts, yet in practiſe the are pagans to. For firſt in ranking the world, they are both alike: for thogh to the good they giue heauen, yet to the beſt (their canonized ſaints) they pray, and makes heathen gods.Bellarm. de purgat. And as to the worſt ſort of the wicked, they adjudge hell, yet to the not ſo bad, they likewiſe allot a purgatorie, wherein they alledge the ſoule muſt ly vpon reuerſion at leaſt, of ſome trentals of maſſe, according to the purſſe-merite of men wherin how rightly they reſemble the olde rite let the world judge. For though they keepe a ratryme of letanies (lyke the old Iuſta) to all, yet to their purſſe-friends parentals are keeped peculiare. And for ſepulchrall conſecration, they are ſo farre from miſſing one jot of their leſſon, that they haue rather learned more nor their maſter had. For they cannot onely take in hand to conſecrate the ſepulchrall

monuments of their ſuppoſed ſaints, to become the ſaid ſanctuaries of God:Againſt the 48. an. of th
                        •
                      Counſ. of W
                        •
                     rm. an. 815. but by ſymoniacall tranſſubſtantiation they can ſet out againe the ſame ſanctuary in ſeale to be a ſepulcher, that is to ſay, a necromanucal amphitheater rather nor a theologie ſchoole, where either God muſt get his way, or be content to dwell in a dedicate Innes to Idoles, and remaine among the loathſome graues. So then ſen the ſource of this ſuperſtition is from the old Heathen (the which in running through Rome is made the more muddy) as thou would not ſeeme to patronize ſuch papiſticall paganiſme, by de neuer by thy buriall in Kirk.
            
            
               Of the tyme when Kirk-buriall was receiued. Chap. XIII.
               FOr the tyme when firſt this prat came in practiſe, the ſearcher will finde it but an after-ſhot of antiquitie: as the back-treading of tymes will teache For throughout the firſt foure thouſand yeares it reſted vnknowen: In reſpect that during the formeſt two from Adam to Abraham (whoſe Hiſtories the firſt eleuen chapters of Geneſis compryſes) wherein although the fathers at that tyme did neyther want (I doubt not) places of publicke worſhippe nor buriales, yet ſen wee neyther reade of Kirks nor buriales, me kill leſſe of Kirk-buriales. The next two to Chriſt, wherein lykewiſe we finde rather Kirk types nor Kirkes, but all free of buriall. For according as we may equally almoſt, ſubdiuyde that tyme in foure fiue-hundreths of yeres periodes: In the firſt whereof there was onely Altares of worſhippe to the Tabernacle: the which continued in the next to the Temple: and the Temple in the thirde to the ſecond Temple, the vvhich vvith the ſynagogues did occupy the laſt. Now if any Hiſtorie either ſacred or profane in fragment or full in the Kirk or the vvorlde, did euer mention buriall at Altar or Tabernacle, in Temple or Synagogue, I will giue ouer the pleay. VVhere contrary wayes, the ceremoniall vncleanneſſe by the touche of the dead contracted, ſeemes highlie to importe againſt that profanation. But leauing theſe Leuiticales to the owne tyme, let vs proceede in the progreſſe of tyme, wherein the conſtant ſilence of the inſuſpect auncients does teſtifie their misknowledgment and diſclamation of the ſame: as a ſuperſtition that is not onely late, but (as many of the Papiſticall punkes

hes ſecreetly ſlipped in the Kirk, without ſolemnitie: And but then at laſt when the Kirk beganne to growe no better worthie, but to become a buriall: as being a denne of theeues, deſeruing the Lords cord-tawes. And if I were poſed of my pettie opinion heerein, as I am ſure, the moſt pure fiue hundreth yeares of Chriſt was free of this euill; as whereof the formoſt three hundreth the Kirk had no Kirkes till Conſtantines edict. And in the fourth hundreth likewiſe wherein Emperour Honorius tranſporting the miraculouſlie diſcouered relictes of Steuen and others, for the farther honourable commemoration, did lay them in no Kirk, but neere the Cittie walles of Ieruſalem. Yea, in the ſixth hundreth and fourtie foure, we finde an inhibitiue Canon againſt all Kirk-buriall in the counſell of Bracaren. A token that but then that repreſſed corruption beganne to peepe out, that long after became ſtrong. So I doubt not but that it was in the dyſemelleſt dayes onely that it came in, as a late birth: to witte after the error of purgatory, praying and maſſing for the dead, worſhipping of Saintes and their relictes, and hallowing of mouldes. For ſo ſoone as the Kirk-ground came by the opinion of holy prerogatiue for ſoules helpe, the oportunity and priuiledge was both ſought and boght to ly there. Lyke the money-changers, who thoght to ſpeed better by their troke in the temple nor any where elſe: whoſe tables as the Lord ouer-threw, ſo may he juſtly our temple-tombes. But (to come as neere as conjecture may lead to Kirk-burials beginning) there hes bene two kinde of Kirks in our chriſtian world (althogh now tyme and commodity of reformation may inueterat the platte) for ſome are common as builded vpon the publick charge that of old were called Parochials, compriſing for the moſt part a millenarie of people. As in our Country plat and parochial diſtribution we may commonly ſee. The other ſort againe was peculiar and more priuate,Durand. de Eccleſ. of two kindes likewiſe. For ſome were particularly appertaining to ſuch religious places as were deſtinate to the irreligious ſwarmes of Monks and Friers. The which ſort in artificial curioſity exceded al others. The reſt wer chapels founded by ſecular men that had might, according to the blind zeal of the tym, for their priuate eaſe and ſuperſtitious ſhowe to haue a peculiare Prieſt of their owne like Micah Iudg. 17. Now Kirk-burial althogh it be now come

without bluſh, yet it brake not in bradelings, but as it were by degrees, and ſome ſhame. For firſt the monaſticall Kirks by it were defiled, as theſe that were neuer cleane. For as (according to the old ſaying) all thinges were ſet to ſeale at Rome, ſo was Kirk-buriall by that Romaniſt rable, who with Eſau ſelling Gods grace made the people with Micah to buy Gods curſe in that caſe. And althogh at firſt they made nyce & long held their Abbay burials royall and onely for Kinges, by whom they were founded: yet in end they were for pryce expoſed to the Ranget. But ere all was done, about the play end this pryde waxed ſo populare, that all kynde of Kirkes became as common as the Kirk
                     •
                   ſtyles. Whereby by many that Hereſie is yet acclaimed for heritage, thogh of late conqueſt. Whoſe afterling entry falling out in the dreg of all tymes (wherein the world lay beſotted, and ſwattering in all ſorte of ſuperſtition) doth render it not onely ſuſpect, but alſo may ſerue for ſatiſfaction to ſuch as vſes to ſay they muſt ly with their fathers, of whoſe abſence to ſpeake ſparingly, better it were thou let them ly and followed them not in all things: For as the moſt part in many actions lyke this, hes for their beſt pretence their ignorant ſimplicity: So (I doubt not) if now they had life in their boulke, they would yet ryue ſheets, breake beares, tumble downe tombes, with Pauls ſpirit at Liſtra, to teſtifie their reclamation of ſuch profanity. Act. xiiij.
            
            
               What Analogy we ſhould obſerue in our burial. ch. XIIII.
               THus hauing bewrayed whence and when Kirk-buriall corruption crop in: Reſtes the other point for full reſolution to ſhowe how far it is againſt the Analogie of maners, as the word meanes. For as by the Apoſtles general rule of order and decency we ſee what we ſhould not, ſo by particular inſtances of this Analogie out of the word, let vs heare what we ſhould, whereof we finde a perfite direction: for there is nothing requyred for the due direction in buriall, that although not in precept, yet of ſet purpoſe, otherwiſe is not ſet downe. But firſt we haue to diſtinguiſhe betweene theſe buriall ceremonies, that being legal, were ſubiect to Abrogation, and ſuch as Analogie does reſerue inchangeable. For of the firſt that onely concernes funerals, we read two thinges diſcharged, the duety of mourning, and corporal

addreſſe to the graue. In mourning (beſide the motion naturall that we read in Abraham for his Sa
                     •
                  a. Gen. 23. and ſhould be in al) there was a ceremoniall ſorrowing for common edification. Which though by Egiptians, it was keeped in the exceſſe of ſeuenty dayes (as no hopeleſſe Gentile, to whom death is ſo great an euill, can keepe meaſure) yet the mourning in Iſraell was but made in a ſabboth of dayes, contenting them with the teinde of Egypts tyme. For as Ioſeph did firſt enjoine Iacobs mourning to ſabbaticall Gen. 50. in remembrance of that eternall ſabboth wherein our teeres for euer ſhall be wyped away) the ſeaſon of ceremoniall ſorrow was ſo limited thereafter as Eccle. 22.Auguſt. de Ci
                        •
                     i. Dei. Herodian 4. lib. and Amon 19. teſtifies. Againe the ceremonies of preparation were partly vſed in embalming, and partly in baptizing (that is) in the Iudaicall manner of bathing the bodyes of their dead. The which both hes beene of olde vſe, both in Kirk and world. As witneſſes Ennius his verſe,
Tarquinii corpus bona femina lauit & vnxit.
Affirming the corps of ſticked Tarquin to be both bathed and balmed. But for the ceremony of enbalming vſed in the Kirk, it was at two tymes: to wit, immediatly before firſt, and then immediatly after the expyring of lyfe. The firſt wee ſee in the 26. Matt. employed by Matte on Chriſt verſ. 12. And this ceremony in the miraculous age of the Apoſtles was made a ſymbole for faith of their power to heale the ſick,Damaſcen. tractat. de Ortho. ſid. that as before Chriſt that oyle ſerued to cheriſhe expectation, ſo after for application of him who was the annoynted to the faithfuls comfort. Iam 5.14. from whence afterward ſuperſtition fand out a feckleſſe ſacrament. Againe their dead they did likewiſe annoynt. As to this vſe Nicodemus did buy his Alloes and Mirrhe. Ioh. 19. But the Lord who on the Croce hade made conſummation, by his prouidence preuenting that oportunity, would not be buryed with ceremony, but ſimply after the Iewiſh Analogicall maner, that is, the type taine away. Confer Ioh. 19▪40. with Mark. 15. as for their baptiſmes and waſhing ceremonies, them they vſed as in lyfe, for legal purification. So in death, for bathing a ceremonie that at the firſt hand was not inueterate. For in Acts 9. we read that before Tabitha was lade vp, ſhe was waſhen. This cuſtome the Apoſtle reſpects. 1. Cor. 15. in mentioning the baptiſed for dead.

verſ. 29. for to the Heb 6.2. where moe ſorts of baptiſme is mentioned nor one, the type and the ſubſtance (that is) the legal ſort of baptiſme, that did reſemble, and the Euangelicall that was reſembled are both contained in the words homonimie. The vſage of the which ceremoniall rites,Ieruſ. 6. part of purificat. hee may reade that liſt in the Iewiſhe Thalmudes. As for vs that by the law of chriſtian liberrie are fred, hauing now fruition of the bodie, we haue not the vſe of the ſhadowe. For although they for their ſuſpended expectation of the brydgromes comming, had vnder the Law to mourne in his abſence, yet ſen to vs his kingdom is come, that ceremonial ſorrow we ſhould tranſcharge in joyful hymnes, according to the vſe obſerued to haue bene in ſome chriſtian funerals by Ierome.Ierom. in the life of Paule the Hermite And if mourne we will, yet doe as Chriſt bade the women therein, Luke xxiij. that is, mourne nor for death the dore of hope now, but for ſinne deathes mother: that ſo our ſorrowe may vent at the right vaine. For ſen death is bereft of his ſting in Chriſt, it becommes but a paſſage to lyfe. And ſen for their cryſme we haue gotten ſelfe. Chriſt, and for their baptiſme ours, let vs not be content to change the corps with the ſhadow. And this for the old ceremoniall vſe ſubject to abrogation, wherein if we doe but the vaile away, there will remaine the ſimple ſort that analogy requires: for in burial betwixt that they did, either in funerals or ſepulchrals and that vve ſhould yet doe, the moueable ceremonie was onely the ods: that is, in being cloathed in cleane linnene with Chriſt, Ioh. 19.40. and caried in a coffine, lyke the man of Nain Luke 7.12. we may be laide (not in the Kirk, as contrare al Analogie, but) in a comely, cloſſe, clean, competent Kirk-ile or yarde, that ſo aſſociating our ſelues with the predeceſſor ſaints, and not by ked in with the belly-god beaſtes, that blindes the world with buriall in Kirk, we may riſe with the reſt, in comely array to our reſt for euer.
            
            
               All buriall actions ſhould tend to edification. Ch. XV.
               THis for the Apoſtles rule touching that honeſtie and order required in the analogicall vſe of our buriall. Reſts now the analogicall end that we ought to aime at, which he calles edification, 1. Cor. 14.25. which ſeeing in al things he commends, Ergo in burial. Now edification is but a borrowed word, for our buildings

are ſpirituall. For as Salomons many thouſand artificers were exerciſed about the building of the materiall temple:Ioſeph Ant. lib. 8 cap. 7. ſo muſt we the many millions of the greater nor Salomons men, be occupyed in making vp the ſpirituall, and in ſquairing our ſelues as the Lords lyuely ſtones: that being ſounded on all ſides, we may ſoane aright in the Lords aſlare work the which is our edificatiō And this in reſpect of the oportunity of application can no where be more peremptorly promoued nor in buriall, the which beſide that it beares in hand (euen in death) immortall hope (as being but a gathering vp of Gods ſaints to their fathers Gen. 25. a ſleep. 1. Theſſ. 4. a ſeede j. Cor. xv. a reſt from our trauels. Appo. 19. &c.) it is a moſt powerfull preacher of mortification and humility. And ſo,Concil. Colō part. 7. cap. 5. mekill better it is to be in the houſe of mourning nor joy, that as the one ſerues but to tickle our luſtfull appetytes yet the being in the other will abate all carnall affection. Exemple whereof we may finde euen in excommunicate Iſhmael, who thogh he could not abyde his borne brother Iſaac, during the lyfetyme of their common father Abraham, yet the ſore ſight of that ſaint his ſyres death, did ſo tawne the truculent turke that he became content to partake in the common paines of his fathers funerals with the ſon of promiſe. For but the remembrance onely of death or buriall and their conſequences (that Eccleſiaſ. calles our laſt things) is an effectuall 
                     •
                  wband of affection and reſtraint to ſin. To the which vſe S. Ierome made his mort-head to ſerue. And ſurely if we could but ſufficiently make our vſe of that anotomicall deſcription of our immortality and miſery, that the preacher ſets down Eccle. 12 in ſuch enigmaticall poeſie, that as it paſſes all humane elegance & eloquence, ſo I think it wold make our craw-down fedrum fal, and make vs ſit downe in the duſt of mortification. But, alas, the mynds of men are ſo elſ-where bewitched, that againſt this Analogical end that we ſhold propoſe for edification, in ſteed to mortify by burial ſhowes, they moſt exceede in pryde therein. So that mens nuptial feſtiuities ar ofttimes exceeded by their necial folies in making their burials with the tempter. Matt. 4. a mont to ſhow worldly glory, rather nor with the Preacher to teach this worlds vanity. For burials now are become the occaſion not onely of the brugling brags of men, but of the contemp alſo of Gods hous and ſeruāts. And wheras burials ſhold flow the hony of edification (as

did the medicinall graue of Hyppocrates the honey of health) they are rather whyles▪ like Herods, whoſe birth day as it was Iohn Baptiſts buriall. Matt. 14. ſo was his buriall day tragicall to the noble Iewes: whom to get himſelfe mourned, he made to be ſlane. Ioſeph. anti. lib. 17 chap. 8. So then ſen Kirk-buriall is at the beſt excuſe but pryde, as being a clame of exemption from common caſe, and conſequently againſt edification, the Apoſtles right end, I conclude it is ſin.
            
            
               Of buriall exemples. Chap. XVI.
               NOw hauing found by Analogies lyne Kirk-buriall beyond ſquare, it reſtes to rype vp the rule of exemple. The ſecond of the two meanes, that the Lord hes employed for our eaſier information in his obedience. For as by propheticall inſtruction we are taught what we ought to do, ſo by exemples inſtance we are ſhowen how the ſame hes beene done by others: for authentick exemples are the very practiſed ſpeculation of the Law it ſelfe. Wherein the ſpirit is ſo plentifull, that there is no caſe of our conuerſation,Ierome on Daniel. that may not either be qualified or controled by ſcripturall exemples; ſeeing they are of two ſortes. For ſome are to be noted as improper, that being certaine ſingular actions of ſome odde men, whoſe warrand if it wanted not, yet being at leaſt extraordinarly vouchſafed, they could requyre no ordinare imitation. Such as the patriarchall polygamie, &c. For as the Lord ſaid to his two diſciples (that after the counterfoote of Elias 2. Kinges 1. would haue commanded a conſuming fire to come downe, againſt the in hoſpitall Samaritanes. Luk. 9.) They are caried with an vnknowne ſpirite, that would imitate anomalous exemples. And this ſort (that thou be not deceiued) the indytement of Analogy will eaſily diſcerne from proper exemples: whoſe vſe is onely ſet downe for vs. 1. Cor. 10. the which likewiſe are of two ſortes. For as the Lords lawes are either imperatiues of good or inhibitiues of ill: ſo are the exemples conforme. For ſome are of imitation to perſwade good, and others of abſtinence to diſſwade euill. And therefore they are to the Apoſtle types. 1. Cor. 10. that is, exemples anſwerable to the law the Architype from heauen. And ſo throgh this conformity of Canonick exemples to Authentick law, exemples becommes no leſſe nor

lawes. Where through we ſee that not onely the fiue bookes of Moſes beares the tytle of the lawe, but the whole bookes of the old Teſtaments Bible alſo Ioh. 10.34. and xv. 25. that ſo wee may learne to count the compryſed exemples for conſecrate lawes. For like as the ſanctification and obſeruation of the Dominicall day (although it had no more warrand nor Dominicall and Apoſtolical exemples, yet) the ſame does importe a vigorous neceſſitie of law to imitation For euen as in a ſea-fairing flot, the formeſt by ſaile doth fuir before with lantern and flag as fade whom the reſt ſhould follow: or lyke the eagle in ſore, trayning her yong to flee: ſo did our auncient admirals and fathers of faith peſtere the righteous paths, for the vſe of our exemplare imitation. But for our purpoſe; let vs licere looke what light of exemplare lawes in buriall hes beene borne before, for vs to followe. And firſt as in the word there is nothing more frequent nor buriall exemple, in all the which there is a tenorall proceſſe ſo equally and vnchangeably euery-where obſerued, that they are not onely injurious, that count it without ſcripturall direction, but alſo vnjuſt that would infringe anywayes the old forme, that in funerals we finde was ſimple, without pompe or pryde, and in ſepulchers was ſober, without ſuperſtition or profanation of any place appointed for Gods publick worſhip. So that this one-fold Analogie ſo euenly obſerued, did juſtly deſerue in deed the pragmaticall power of a perpetuall law. For ſen firſt we finde the primitiue paterne of buriall proponed by Abraham: next without interruption of the ſame a perpetuatl practiſe in Iſrael; and laſt a peremptor confirmation thereof by Chriſt, it can be no leſſe nor a law to continue for euer. And to begin at the originall inſtitution, we finde it firſt ſolemnly ſet downe in the conſecration of Abrahams conqueſt caue, where he deſignes it for buriall vſe. Gen. 25. and ſo beginnes the firſt (at leaſt expreſſe) Cemiteriall law. For then the faithfuls father for poſterities exemple, will not lay nor be laide in Mambre, where the altar was, but in Makpelachs caue onely competent thereto. In the which Hiſtory (beſide the literall ſenſe that ſo planely does ſpeake againſt altar graues, and for cemiteriall ſimplicitie) there is an elegant allegory gathered for farther explanation. VVhereby the caue in the field end may import, that a place ſhould be ſet apart for a monument

of memento mori: in looking whereon we may learn to loath this lyfe,Benzo in hiſt noa
                        •
                      orbis. that once we muſt leaue. And ſo like ſome American Kings, whoſe cuſtome is to comburie their concubines in tombe with themſelues, ſo muſt we our old-mans affections before we diſſolue. Againe for the proceſſe of afterling practiſe we finde it preciſe to the paterne as the owne poſitiue law. For till this day in 
                     •
                  ury the reſerued veſtigies of the ſynagogues ſepulchers,Ier. in locis hebraicis. are euer ſeene in ſome apart place from thence where Gods ſanctuaries was. So that Ieruſalem, howſoeuer memorable for the many-fold monuments of Peeres and people both (which beſides the peculiar of Princes, prophets or prieſts) had foure ſorts common to people: as the brok Kedron for Citizens, Aceldama for ſtrangers, Caluarie for the crucified, and Topheth or gehenna for Idolaters.) yet all were without the verie cittie wals, let be the temple. And ſo farre in the fieldes end, that not onely for a religious reſpect were they ſeparated from the places of God, but in a politick conſeate alſo from their owne, in permitting no cittie buriall. And therefore is it that the Lord does at Nain meete the corps caryed vvithout as not lavvfull to be laide vvithin the cittie, Luke 7. Conforme to the which wee finde ſome Roman lawes,Criuit lib 2. as by Emperour Hadrian, all cittie buriall was forbid vnder the vnlaw and amerciament of fiftie crownes. And this auncient policie wee perceiue practiſed in the ouldeſt of our owne countrey Kirkes: that not vvithout interuall are ſituate from townes. for the farther conuenience of Kirk-courtes for buriales. And this cuſtome (I thinke) the Author of the Heb. 13. regards in alluſion:
                     Ioſep. Ant. lib. 8.
                     Iero. in locis hebraicis.
                   vvho reaſons that in reſpect the Lord did ſuffer (and lykewaies was buryed) without the cittie campe, that we therefore ſhould goe without to get him where he is. And although Iudaes Kings by princely prerogatiues aboue populare priuiledge were laide in the latte of Dauid with himſelfe in Sion, that makes not againſt. For the middle Ieruſalem (that was then the temples towne) was incluſiuely walled apart by it ſelfe, and diſtinct from Dauids cittie in Sion.Durand. de Caemit. So that if men be ſo nyce of their owne neſt and dwelling (that althogh once the vſe was to bury at home in their houſe graue, yet to auoyd the deads flewer they were conſtrained to bury abroad) why ſhould we preſume to be ſo prodigall of the place appoynted for the Lords repare?

For what euer in this caſe is ciuilly abſurde, can neuer be anſwerable to eccleſiaſticall honeſtie and order. Now laſt this buriall conſtitution of Abraham, as it was cuſtomable to his kynde, ſo was it confirmed by Chriſt in the conformity of his buriall action, as if that had bene but the type of this So that as Ioſeph and Nicodeme, executors of the exequies of Chriſt made conſcience to keepe that cuſtome: So Iohn in his 9. calles it (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) that is, the Iewes manner,Origen. contra Celſum. thenceforth chriſtianly to be obſerued as being conſecrat by Chriſt, whoſe ſepulcher was for the ſame cauſe, ſimple and at the cittie ſide. Where through we ſee that this kinde of imitatiue exemples are but as as many founded laws to forfait, without fauour all forme of Kirk-burial. For althogh that according to Iſidore his deſtruction theſe exemples be not leges,
                  Lib. Etym. 5. that is, written as laws, but exemples for vs, yet by the generall name they are (iura) that is, rights to be obſerued ſen to that vſe they are inſert. For ſeeing that law (that we call ius) is either naturall, ciuile or nationall: it followeth, that theſe kynde of expreſſed exemples of ſimple buriall muſt be lawes: as being firſt naturall, as we may read of the Emmet, and bee, who buries their dead, but without their hyues: and ciuile, as we heard before both of the cuſtome and conſtitution keeped againſt cittie buriall, let be of the Kirk: and laſt, of nations, for Kirk-buriall is a thing neuer heard of before, nor without Antichriſtianiſme. Therefore the ſame muſt ſerue for an irrefragable legiſlation. The which by Abrahams primitiue inſtitution becomming Ius publicum, or a common law: and by Iſraels practiſe Plebiſcitum,Aug. on Iohn tract. 12. or the common concluſion: and by the common confirmation at laſt, obtained by the conformity of Chriſts buriall thereto, becommeth a conſtitution, implying the edge of an edict for our perpetuall imitation. As the very word that Iohn wayles herein (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) doth importe, not onely a cuſtome but a conſtitution alſo.
            
            
               What houſe a Kirk is and how far by buriall it is profaned Chap. XVII.
               THe contrare kinde of exemples that negatiuelie are ſet down to exhort to abſtinence from their imitation reſts to conſider. For as by negatiue laws we are forbidden, ſo by the conform exē
                  ples we muſt forbear the vnlawful actions of mē which the Lord

hes ſet as on the ſhalde ſhoare, lyke beakens to warne the ſhipwreake of ſoules: but in this our particulare, although there be nothing more plentifully ſcriptured nor buriall exemples, yet ſuch a conſtant conformity hes euer beene keeped therein, that lay aſide ceremonies, wee may imitate any of all without error. And althogh the barbarity of Kirk-buriall (as of old vnknown) be without particular exemple, yet ſen it is but Kirk profanation, we finde againſt it prohibitiues anew, for the generall. For the more commodious application whereof, it were heere requiſite once to define what kinde of houſe a Kirk is, that ſo men may make conſcience to vſurpe the ſame againſt the owne vſe. What it is we may read, as it wer, in that Architectoral deliniation of the Lords paſſe ouer parlor Mar. xiiij. the which (as it is deſcriued firſt in dimenſion to be high and large, next in apparrell to be comely prepared. And laſt, for that tyme at leaſt particularly conſecrate to the Paſſe ouer vſe) So telles it that Bethel the domicile of God, muſt be firſt an Eccleſie or Kirk, a tabernacle for the congregations repare,Durand de Eccleſ. that is, of ſuch competent capacity as may eaſily containe the particular flock. Next that it be for bewtie a Baſilick or temple, fit for contemplation of Gods promiſed preſence there. Matt. xviij xx. which bewty (although it muſt keepe bounds of chriſtian ſimplicity, yet) no warrand will allow emulation in houſes humane, according to the Centuries conſcience Matt. 8.8. whoſe roofe he acknowledged (with himſelfe) vnworthy to receiue the Lord. For as Dauid diſdained to dwell in a palice of Cedar while the Lords Arke remaned in tents. 2. Sam 7. ſo Salomons palice (how princely ſo euer) yet was it magnificently exceeded by the houſe he builded to God.Ioſeph. Anti. lib. 2. cap 2. Bernard. in apolog. 1. King. 8. and 9. But this elegance (without exces) and comelineſſe (without curioſity) I vrge, becauſe, alas, although the vmwhile zeale of Gods houſe did eate the godly vp with Dauid. Pſal. 69. Yet now it is contrarily come to paſſe, that the zeal of the godleſſe does eat vp Gods houſe,Auguſt. de ſermone Dei in monte. his portion and all. And ſin, that in our owne experience hes beene oft puniſhed by the Prophecy of Haggai. 1.4. &c. And laſt the Kirk muſt be according to the patern an oratory or houſe of prayer. Iſa. 56.7. that is, deſtinate to the onely end of Gods worſhip. So then vnder theſe three conditions (to wit, of amplitude, ornacy; and vnproſtitude chaſtity to any other vſe

nor the owne) but ſpecially the laſt it becommes a Kirk. As for that, all Kirk-worſhippe is vnder one compriſed in the name of prayer by the Prophet, there is a triple cauſe. Firſt for that originall encoenie or dedication prayer, vttered at the temple conſecration, it became after intituled alwayes the houſe of prayer. j. King 8. and conſequently euen ſo Kirks, becauſe (beſide that the olde holy places vnder the law had lyke the annoynted perſons a miſtick meaning ſeruing to Catechiſe in the knowledge of Chriſt) they caryed alſo ſome materiall reſemblance of ſuch Goſpell places, as ſhould be ſet apart for the worſhip of God. As firſt the Apoſtles Analogicall alluſion of Altar and temple worſhippe then to Kirk miniſtration now imports. j. Cor. 9. and next was acknowledged by the ſelfe Iewes, in ſupplying the defects of the ſecond temple by building ſynagogues. Acts. xv.xxj. And laſt alſo the righteous accommodation of the Prophecy it ſelfe Iſa. 567▪ may proport. For there ſuch a houſe of prayer is proponed that ſhould be Catholicklie patent to all people of the vvorld: vvhich onely is competent to the Euangelicall temple. Mark. xj.xvij. So then for conſcience of that autentick conſecration, that in common may concerne all the Oratories of God,Gratian. Deciet part. 2. chriſtians ſhould not lyke curſed ones and Papiſts, vſurpe them to a ſiniſter vſe. For they in conſecrations being more not ſuperſtitious, admitting the vncouth exerciſe of buriall, are contrare themſelues, and prodigally profane. Againe the Kirk is called the houſe of prayer, becauſe no pointe of Gods vvorſhip, can either be ſeaſoned or ſanctified without prayer, as teſtifies the Apoſtle j. Tim. 4.5. And laſt the Kirk is ſo called for the wordes homonimie, or variety of ſenſe for (
                     
                        •
                     ephillah) that wee expone prayer (lyke the roote that it ſprings from) does import more. For althogh the 90. Pſa. in number be intituled a praier, yet from the matter it is rather a preaching: ſo that this way to be the houſe of prayer by figure, is to be dedicate to the adminiſtration onelie of the publict points of kirk-worſhip. The which points (as being alſo the onely vndenyable and viue marks of a viſible Kirk) are but three: to wit, the word, ſacraments and diſcipline, as if wee looke throgh the rent vaile we may ſoone perceiue. For althogh there was without the temples inner-uaile a variety of ceremonial vtenſiles to be ſeene, yet within and before the Arke of preſence

there was but three pledges of perpetuall monument conſigned: the tables of the law▪ the ſacramentall vrne, and the rod of Aarons rule, ſhadowes of that trinity of the token
                     •
                   that only may tel vs vvhere the true Kirk is Heb 9. VVhere the Apoſt. mentioning the golden cenſor with all (wherin Iohn in the Reuel. places the odoriferous prayers of the ſaints) means the ſame that we ſay: that neither word, ſacramēts nor diſcipline can be in ſeaſon without prayer. So then to reſume that parlor or place that is competentlie ſpatious & ſpecioſe in outward forme, and ſpiritually pleniſhed with no implements but the owne proper three, is the onlie Bethel and dedicate houſe to God And to aſſume, but burial-kirks are not ſuch: Ergo. The Aſſumpion may be ſene in the miſuſe of the foreſaid all three kirk properties. For firſt by kirk-buriall kirk-bounds are ſo miſtrammed, and in many places either ſo eatten vp vvith intaking Iles, or the paſſage ſo impeſhed with thorter ſome throughes: or at the leaſt, the pauement ſo partiallie parted to paticulare men, that if they cleaue to that they haue calked, the people that reſts (as by a proude purpreſture poſtponed) muſt byde at the dore. Againe, the cullors of their comelines are become ſo vncouth, that in ſtead of Baſilick beautie there is oft to be ſeene the badges of buriall in black dolie duill. And the the more to ſkar away chriſtian contemplation, ye will finde for object to your eye the conuoyſances of knights, portracts & pinſels of men. So that Gods ſeemely ſanctuarie beeing tranſferred to the (vvithout vvhited, but vvithin rotten) ſepulchers of men odious to Chriſt Matth. 23. becommeth in populare opinion thereby the alriſhe Innes of bogles and Gaiſts. So that many for that preſumed feare dare not enter alone in the Kirk. But ſeeing as Tertulian ſayes,Tertul. de reſurrect. carnis that ſepulchers are but mortuorum ſtabula, that is, ſtables for the dead, there can be nothing more incompatible nor the ſame thing to be made an buriall beere, and to remaine a Kirk both at once. As by weighing the ſcripturall equiuocations, that are beſtowed on both Kirk and graue, maybe conſidered. For as the Kirk hes many names in common with heauen (as Bethel, and the port of heauen. Geneſis xxviij. &c.) Euen ſo the graue (beſide the twelfe names wherewith it is commonly called, as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (ſometyme the name of Gehenna, for the boulkes of many muddy men that fell in that greene) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
Sepulchrum, Sepulchretum, Mauſolium, Dormitorium,Dur. de caem. Iero. on the 2. Chro 33. Monumentum, Tumulus, Vrna, Spelunca Buſtum) it hes yet ſeauen names more, that by ſcripturall equiuocation are common with hell. So that the originall words of the text may be exponed to meane of either. And firſt in Prouerb. 30.16. it is called Schaol,R. Ioſ. Ben Leui. that is a place of inſatiable apetyte. Next is Abaddon, or of perdition. Pſal. 89.49 Thirdly Zal-maneth, the ſhadow of death. Pſal. 107. Fourthly Erets Tachtau, the loweſt parts of the earth. Pſal. 86 13. Fifthly Tit Hauon, or myrie clay. Sixtly Borſchaon, the pit of tumult both mentioned in the 40. Pſalme 3. verſe. And laſtly it is alſo called Bor Schachath, that is, the pit of corruption Pſal. 55.24. All the which as they agree to the graue as the graue and gate of Hell, ſo doe they by the ſame figure to the golfe it ſelfe. And by conſequence, to make Bethel, or Gods houſe (which ſhould be lyke heauen) the place of inſatiable appetyte, or of corruption, perdition, the ſhadowe of death, a pit of tumult, a myrie clay, &c (as in deed the Roman Kirk-buriers doe) in a Gigantomachy, they preaſe to commix the heauen with the hell. And laſt for the vſe, who ſees it not thereby ſo miſerably tranſferred from the owne to an vncouth vſe, that verie lyke theſe Herodians that mingled their ſacrifices with bloode, Luke chap. viij. they pelmell the dead with the liuing all in one Kirk. For ſen buriall action is of that nature that it needeth no prayer, if we ſhall inuey the ſame in prayers houſe, what doe we elſe but par-take with the profane in their Paganicall papiſtrie, that prayes for the dead? And ſo by impropriating the Lords prayer houſe to be a burial-Kirk we incurre profanation.
            
            
               Documents againſt Kirk profanation. Chap. XVIII.
               BVt to aware that ſore ſin of profanation, there are three kinds of documents in the regiſter of God, that maye make vs forbeare: Symbolicall, to witte, ceremoniall and hyſtoricall. All the which vve ſhall at leaſt touch by the inſtance of ſome exemples. Of the firſt kinde there is one Exod. 3. For ſeeing the Kirk is that burning Buſſe, vvhereof the boundes that were neere about by diuine preſence were holy, how mal-apert are men to aproche not onely ſhodde, but with ſhod-ſhooles to ſeug
                     •
                   vp the ſanctury-ground? The ceremoniall ſorte among Moſes his Leuiticals

we finde frequent. For beſide that buriall in Kirk may be counted with the lintſey wolſey confuſions, or like the commixtion of ſundrie ſeeds) it may be put with the legal pollutions contracted from the dead: the which was of ſuch ſpeciall profanatiō, that to approch the Tabernacle vnder that kinde of vncleannes, was puniſhed with anathematicall excommunication. The reuerence of the which law we ſee Ioſeph is ware to incur, euen with Pharao, tovvard whom (for all his ovvn credite) being vncleaned by the dead, he is enforced to imploy the domeſticks of court, to ſute his libertie of going vp to Canaan, to burie his father. And hence is this old vſe wherby the dore-cheeks of the dead wer deſigned vnclean by the funeral cypres vvherwith they wer deckt, as the burning of bedſtray of the defunct does yet: a reaſon whoſe reſpect may reſtraine kirk buriall, ſeeing it is but kirks pollution. And laſt, for hiſtoriee of puniſhed profanation (beſide diuers among the Prophets,2. Macca 3. Ioſ ben Gor. Eb. cap. 1. as of Huza 1. Sam. 6. and Huzia 2. Kings 26) among the profane, the exemples thereof are infinite. As one of Heliodore, who (maſgre the Prieſt) making violent irruption in the Temple was ſcourged by God, and plagued with impotency till the Prieſt prayed. But (beſide theſe propheticall, apocriphall, or profane proues) there is a popular experience that long ſince hes founded the opinion, that beſide the profanation of the whol Kirk was odious. The ſacriledge but of a Kirk-ſtone (though it were hid in a ſtrong hold) were better nor a cannon of battery to brangle downe all. Then to conclude, ſen the Lords Kirk is to vs no leſſe then our Altar of lyuelie offerings Rom. xij. j. the tabernacle of our congregation. j. Cor. xj xvij. our arke of Gods preſence. Matt. xviij.xx. or temple of his worſhippe. j. Cor. xiij.xiiij. our ſynagogue for the Lector of the law and exhortation thereon. Act. xiij.xv. our Paſſe ouer parlor, let no perſon preſume to incurre this cryme of this profanation. The which as the arch-ſynagogues of olde did puniſhe with apo-ſynagogie; ſo ſhould Kirk-paſtors now ding it with the diſcipline rod.
            
            
               Refutation of all obiections making in ſhowe for Kirk-buriall. Chap. XIX.
               THis ramaſſe of theſe reaſons in the by gone diſcourſe being thus made it were tyme to ſtint here: were not the great hartted

patrones of this creaſed cauſe, hes reſting ſome rag-footed reſons that we muſt refute, that when their be masked kirk-buriall ſhall be be-reft of her fig-tree buskings, they may either reſt at the trueth, or lyke renigate recuſants refuſe without reaſon. For all they can bring for buriall in Kirk, is builded vp vpon the ſandy foundation of three gripleſſe grounds For firſt there is a crafty ſort that pretends reaſon from the cauſes nature: next there is a comberſome kynde, that vnder cullour of a right claime playes captane play. And laſt the confuſed commons, does argue from their owne vſe and others exemple. The firſt ſect againe hes two ſorts to reaſon the cauſe: The pan-ſauoring Papiſt, and the dangerous indifferent. For to the firſt no buriall is bleſt eneugh,Remiſts in Apoc. ca 9. that is not among the memorials of martyres, and canonized ſaintes for their ſoules helpe in Kirk: In the which religious reaſon (although both dead prayer and purgatory might be taine in to refute, yet) I will not digreſſe, but hold on the point. So then where they alledge that religious buriall ſhould be in religious place, and conſequently in the Kirk, they faill in their following:Durand. de Ecceſia. as by their owne domeſticke diſtinction of hallowed places may appeare. For (fen ſome they call ſacred as quiers, and others ſancta or holy, as Kirks: a third ſort religious as buriall courts) it will rather follow that buriall an action of the religious ranke onely ought to be reſtrained from the whole Kirk to the court without. For indeed (to ſpeake lyke no Papiſt) properly no place by it ſelf is more holy nor others, for al the earth is the Lords Pſa 24 1. yet in a metonimicall meaning, the continent Kirk is called ſacred or holy for the ſeruice of God contained therein,Conci. Gang and ſhould be ſecluded therefore from all other vſe. For what proceeding ſo euer we purpoſe to approue before God, he propones as a condition to obſerue oportunity in doing of meete tyme and place, to theſe that would finde him a thankfull maſter: according to the document giuen in his cenſure of the exchange in the temple. Matt. 21 For althogh theſe marchants might be excuſed through their religious pretence, whoſe vent was to furniſh the far land Iewes, being vnprouyded of a demiſicle for the Tabernacles tribute Exod. 30. and a turtle for the ſin offering. Leuit. 5. Yet for their prepoſterous choiſe of the place they are condemned. For vpon the di
                     •
                  ray of making prayers houſe a caue of knaues▪ their

doome was to be ſcourged away for all their religious excuſe. whereinto I could wiſh this ſort to take head: for to preſume vpon the prerogatiue of buriall, for being in Kirk-place, it were a braine-ſick brade.Greg. anſ. to Auguſt Biſh. of Canterb. For as Gregory ſayeth, we ought not to loue the thing for the place, but the place for the thing it ſelf. And if otherwiſe it were, why doe they ſo part
                     ••
                  lly ſtep-barne the purſſe-miſerable poore from ſuch a ſoul-helpe? but hereof eneugh. Our indifferents againe are well dangerous. For in making all place alike lawfull for buriall laire, they caſt in the Kirk as it were to the mends. Like ſerpenting ſatan that could abide no tree vn-taiſted in all the garden. Gen. 3. But the reaſon of this rackleſſe aſſertion I could neuer read: but by the contrare (ſen indifferencies are things whoſe action imports intereſt neither to faith nor good maners) miſnurtered Kirk-buriall is not indifferent.Auguſt. ad 
                        〈…〉
                     . 11
                        •
                     . VVhat if a man would but minte to burye a body in the preſence chamber of a Prince? would not the kempes of the corps-guarde not onely account him as cluniſhe, but cudzell him alſo for his capped conſeate, and ſuch idiot indifferencie? and yet it is more to miſuſe the cabinet of God. And ſuppoſe that it were by nature to be ranked among indifferentes, yet it cannot remaine of that kynde. For by the Apoſtles law 1. Corinth. 10. all indifferent libertie is bounded by edification and neighbourly loue, the which in Kirk-buriall a man cannot keepe; becauſe it breedes a kynde of contempt of the ſecluded ſorte, and a ſtumbling offence to the tender. And although it was long (yet louſelie) held as indifferent in the doylde dayes, yet beeing now but vmwhile, and as an hes-beene, ſhould neuer be more. In reſpect of the Kirk-ſence and inhibition ſerued at the inſtance of God againſt Kirk-buriall by our nationall aſſemblie, conueened in the ſpirit of God about the firſt reformation. The vigour whereof ſhould ſtrike vpon all that are not Kirk out-lawes, vnworthie of the communion of ſaints: And this for the craftieſt ground from the cauſes nature. The next ſquader that commes in, are captanes of cheef, who when they haue proudly prefaced their anceſter kirk merite, they ſacrilegiouſly will vſurpe a poſſeſſiue pronoun, and with a full mouth ſay, this kirk, or at leaſt this kirk-laire is mine. And ſo wil conclude, by the law, I may ly here▪ But the inſpection of peeces will finde this talke toome. And this kinde as of moſt

cumber is of two ſortes: the firſt are the patrons of the laick eſtate: the reſt are but portioners and poſſeſſors of old (as they alledge) of a Kirk-buriall place. The patron doeth reaſon his right to proceed of the reſeruation of a buriall priuiledge at the founding and dedication of their Kirks by their forebeares; wherein (I think by their leaue) they play faſt and louſe. For what is it elſe to dedicate the ſame thing a Kirk, and yet deteene it a buriall,De cult. ſan. lib. 3. cap. 4. but to giue with the one hand, and to grippe againe with the other? Lyke Bellarmine who with a jugling diſtinction maks kirks as they are temples to appertaine to God, but as they are baſilice that is, ſumptuous buildings to appertaine to the ſaintes of their dedication, the which gif-gaffing with God is the verie ſimonicall ſin of Anani and Saphira his wyfe, puniſhed with perdition. Acts. 5. Againſt the which Eſopes taile may well ſerue for a tant, whoſe colzer and fuller taking vp an Innes, in reſpect of their contrare cullours could not lodge together. For the colzear by cowming the walkers whyte webs did weary him away to ſhift for himſelf: As by our col-blacke behauiour heerein we are lyke to doe to God. And if we looke to the law of Cherem, that is, of things deuoted to God. Leuit. 27.29. we ſee what we once annex to the crowne of Chriſts Kingdome, the vnion is ſo indiſſoluble that neyther preſcription of tyme, vſucapion of perſon, nor bout-gate of circumſtance can giue a regreſſe; if this greedie worlde could be induced to beleue. So it rightly we reaſon the patronall right, their tittle beeing onerous and not lucratiue,1. Sam. 2. Platina & Polidore Vug. in the life of Clement 
                        •
                     . they ought the Kirk a plane patrociny and protection of law. But vvhen by the contrare vnder this patronage pretence, they eyther pinche the patrimony, or yet the Kirk-place, of Laik patrones they becomme but lawleſſe publicans, lyke Hophnees vvith elcrookes to minche and not Samueles, to menſe the offerings of God: Or otherwaies like the templarian Knights, who beeing ſometimes the kempes of the Kirkes, became at laſt the contemptuous tramplers of her liberties and robbers of her rents.Nico de Mil. in his repert. au
                        ••
                     um. But this kind of patronage, though it leane on a law, yet (by olde canons) it wants place in burial that by ſpecial exēption hes beene euer remitted to the ſpirituall barre, onely meete for buriall deciſions. And this for the Patrones pretences, which I pray God it may haue power as much for to mooue their affectiones, as it is

able to conuince their conſcience. Againe the kyndely claime by poſſeſſion that ſome cleaues to (that they will haue ſo done old that the antiquitie is forgot) does reſt yet to reſolue. But firſt I would demand at this ſort (as did the King at the garmentleſſe gueſt, that being called and not choſen came to the wedding Mat. 22.) how came they there? for once they muſt grant me the Innes was the Lords: but how their intruſion hes ejected God out, aduyſe with their anſwere till the great day, or elſe in tyme with remorſe repoſſeſſe. And if they claime tytle, condiſcend of the kynde. For the Iewes doe compriſe all titular rights vnder one of three: acquiſition, like Abrahams (in the conqueis of the caue Gen. 23.) Heredation, like Iſaacs (ſucceding thereto) lucrifaction, like Iacobs, whoſe wealth was the winning of his owne hand-hammers. But none of theſe ſorts can compaſſe the Kirk. For if they call it conquies or the penny-worth of their pecunial pryce, that is but ſimony ſold & ſacriledge boght. Is it their heirſhip by anceſter right? they ſucceed to a vice by inqueſt of error. For ther can be no cedence to ſuch a ſucceſſion. And laſt, for to win ſuch a wagde, ſen none can propone ſuch a pryſe, I think ſhame ſhold neuer let them ſay it. The beſt then remaines, that what heerein by cauillation, with Zacheus, they doe vnjuſtly poſſeſſe, they male at leaſt (within him) to the intereſſed Kirk, an one-fold redreſſe in the feare of the Lord. The camſhoch commons now at laſt coms in a rere warde to debate the cauſe: who rather flytes nor formes reaſon, ſome from domeſtick vſe, others from exoticke exemple. For vſe as their greateſt gunne, they would ſeeme to ſay ſome what: alledging to a moſt auncient cuſtome of keeping the predeceſſor lare in buriall.
                     
                        •••
                     rian. de
                        •
                     . part 2. To beeme-fill the which they may bring (I confeſſe) ſome canons of counſels: But what makes this for the cauſe? for thogh I ſhould admit as lawfull, ſuch earneſt adherence to paternall graue, yet ſen the Kirk is no buriall at all, how can it be claimed by thee throgh thy forbears? Or by what reaſon did the firſt of thy vpward lyne that lyeth in the Kirk, leaue off his forbeares laire that lay in the yarde, if not farther yond? But this reaſon I may rightly regyre: that ſen the firſt followers of that foly in buriall Apoſtaſie, ſhaping themſelues ſchiſmatick Kirk-ſepulchers, did lawleſly leaue the auncient laire of their better aduyſed elders, they are vnworthy of imitation. And to pretend

conſcience of keeping vſe in miſuſe, thou wantſt both right wit and ſound information. For ſuppoſe (by the Apoſtles order 1. Cor. 14.) the loue of parental laire be indifferently lawful, yet the neceſſitie was neuer abſolute, as we ſhew before; no not in the lawfull place, let be in the Kirk. For althogh Jacob ſeeme to vrge it Gen. 49. and that to entertaine his poſterity in full hope to returne (whereof the thre patriarchall burials were a ſpecial pledg) yet did he it without ſuperſtitious reſpect to Macpelaes caue. Witnes himſelfe: in laying his departed Rachael, thogh not farre from M
                     •
                  mre in Eprathaes way. Gen. 25. and Ioſeph: whom the congregation conueyed (not to his fore-fathers caue) but to Sechem. Ioſ. 24. the Propheticall pledge of his double portion. Gen. 28. As for Ieroboams Prophet, whom for his preuarication they pretend to haue beene puniſhed with the depriuation of his paternall ſaire. 1 King, 13. the Lords wordes meanes more then they marke. For (as the 25. verſe may commen: the 21.) the ſenſe is, that being preuented by death (as he was by the lyons lench) he ſhould neuer ſee home nor ly in the common laire by a peaceable death. Otherwiſe the penalty of his preſumption in the want of the vſuall laire, had beene but ſlight, ſeeing buryed he was. So then vnder sko
                     •
                  gh of the conſcience ſcruple, to adheare to this vncouth vſe, it were but conceate and no conſcience. For beſide the vnneceſſity of keeping this cuſtome, the conſideration of the impoſſibility of it ſhould reſolue the doubts in reſpect of ſucceſſional multiplications. For as neither all Adams children, no nor Iaphets Gentiles, can be contained in graue with themſelues, what tombe could intumulate any entyre race of folks.Durand. de Caen it. And therfore in temple foundations (becauſe nature in graue craues elbow-roume, and abhorres to be rufled with ouer frequent diſcouery) becauſe the center Kirk was both incompetent and incapable of the congregations dead, there was alwayes a circumferent yarde of thirty foote in compaſſe at leaſt, or more, if the occation of farther confluence requyred, ſet apart to burial bounds in common to all. But if thou would ſtand vpon a parentall ſocietie in graue (ſeeing the deſerters deſerues to be deſerted) ſeeke vpward to them that moſt Analogically liued in the pureſt times: whoſe exemple thou may imitate with leſſe hereſie hazard. For as in ciuile entries to heritage, if it be for the better, men can make

leap-yeare of their father and ſeeke farther vppe: why may not thou in this caſe biſſextile ſome bodily forebeares, that ſo thou may enter to the moſt immaculate aunciety and fathers of faith, whom all thou wilt finde not in the Kirk but in her courts buryed? as I reede you doe, or elſe in errour thou ſhalt more erre. For ſince vſe is an euill ruſe vvhere warrand is avvay, let reaſon ouer-rule and ordour reforme. The ſconce againe that they carie of others exemple, is rather found an excuſe for the fact, nor a reaſon for it. But the wyte makes a wrong no more the better, nor did the trajection of our firſt parents fall Geneſ. chap. 3. on the author of it ſathan, auailed vvith God. For in ſifting out their ſinne to the far end (from Adam to Eua, from her to that euill one at laſt) as he did puniſhe all by proportion (the ſeducing ſerpent with a curſe, the inducing Eua with a croſſe of ſubjection and the grinding paines of her birth, the ouer eaſily adduced Adam with the care and ſweatty labours of this militant lyfe) So may the Lord doe in this proces of ours. For as the ſymoniacall ſeducers, that firſt lade this block before the blinde, with the immediate tranſmitters of Kirk-burial tradition, for this tymes exemple deſerues at leaſt, at the handes of God both a croſſe and a curſſe: the very ſame they may juſtly alſo incurre, that does obſtinatly inſiſte in the trace of ſuch foole-hardy footſteps. For the which cauſe then, ſeeing in authentick exemples are but Egiptian reedes that doe harme the hand of him that leaneth on, we ſhould looke how we ſhould liue by the law, and not to goe louſe by lawleſſe exemples. And this far for ſuch patrociny that Kirk-buriall procutors doe vſe pragmatically to pleade. But the practicians now keepes vp for the as good, a reaſon in oddes, that lyke a pittard hes more pith nor all the reſt whatſoeuer, that they vſe to take from the vſe of a forehammer. The concluſion whereof in their clubbe-law, doth oft tymes make the Kirk-dore fling on the floore. And althogh to beligger the lodgings of mē, for feare of their murther-holes, they wil looke ere they loupe, yet to enforce the Kirk-houſe (as if God had no gunnes) there are many of ſmall feare. But to refute a reaſon ſo rough, ſince it doeth paſſe our paſtorall reach, in humble reuerence we remitte the ſame to the ciuile power, as by right appertaines. That they who by calling ſhould be the foſter-fathers of the Kirk, Iſa. 49.

may by the rod of their charge, repreſſe ſuch vnreaſonable inſolence, as they will anſwere to him that ſet them in ranke. And becauſe that a publict law would beſt ridde the martch (if ſo be that ſuch feete may come ſo farre ben) I doe preſent this petition on the knees of the Kirk to his Highneſſe ſelfe, that according to our expectation founded vppon his Majeſties gratious reſponſe (not far from the Aſſemblies ſute heere-anent) he wold procure an inacted law to beem fill the Kirk acts againſt Kirk-buriall: whereby ſecluding all from the Kirk-laire, the great ones and good ones whom qualitie and condition does exeeme from popular caſe, may in tyme begin to talke of a tombe, or elſe a new Ile for buriall vſe.
            
            
               A recapitulation of ſome former reaſons againſt buriall in Kirk. Chap. XX.
               NOw here ere I end, for the more populare application I will contriue an clench of ſome former reaſones in ſylogiſtick forme: by the which ſelf-momus may ſee Kirk-buriall blame vndenyablie induced: and that men may in familiar vſe, as it were, beare the ſame about at their belt. For (beſide that wee haue ſhowen it a prat of proud pryde. chap. xj. &c. before) we may proue it alſo to be not onely a ſhamefull ſuperſtition, but alſo a moſt peruerſe profanation. And firſt to be ſuperſtition I proue it this way. All action that is atouer and againſt the ſtatute of the Lord is but ſuperſtition (for ſo the very etimologie of the word doth beare: for ſuperſtitio is quaſi ſupra ſtatutum. (Dei) that is aboue or at ouer, or againſt the ſtatute of God) but Kirk-buriall is aboue, yea, againſt the ſtatutes of God, Ergo, it is ſuperſtition. The aſſumption I proue: All that is againſt the wordes Analogie is againſt the ſtatute of God (as none will deny) but Kirk-buriall is againſt the words Analogie. Ergo, it is againſt the ſtatute of God. The aſſumption I proue: All action that is againſt the Apoſtles rule of decency and order in the manner of doing, and edification in the end, is againſt Analogy (for theſe things he does requyre j. Cor. xiiij. 26. and 40. verſ.) but Kirk-buriall is found to be ſuch Ergo, it is againſt the wordes Analogie. The aſſumption yet I proue in partes. Firſt it is againſt Analogicall order of buriall▪ read the 15. chap. before. Next it is againſt Analogicall decency,

read chap. 18. Laſt it is againſt Analogicall edification read chap. xvj. Ergo againſt Analogie, and conſequently it is ſuperſtition. Againe I reaſon, al actions that is againſt the authentick exemples of the word, that like lawes are commended to vs for ordinar imitation, are ſuperſtition. 1. Cor. 10. but Kirk-buriall is ſo, Ergo it is ſuperſtition. The aſſumption I proue by induction of tyme. chap. 14. and perſons. chap. 17. So that we haue there clearely proued that before the tyme of Antichriſts diſcouery Kirk-buriall was vnknowne, and againſt the conſtant tennor and Analogie of coemiteriall exemples that are contained in ſcripture: the which we haue ſufficiently prouen to haue the force of a law, and of neceſſitie to be followed chap. xvj. So then ſince Kirk buriall is againſt ſcripturall Analogie and exemple, it is ſuperſtition. Againe that it is profanation, it is lykewiſe manifeſt by the wordes Etimologie: for profanum being quaſi antevel extra farum, is that that is vnholied, and depryued of ſanctification. And ſo contrare to the Greek word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which being (as many think) from a privatiue particle 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that ſignifies the earth meanes a ſanctified or ſeparate thing from earthly vſe to an holy end. So then I reaſon all tranſferrence of a ſeparate thing from an holy end to a common vſe is profanation. chap. xviij but Kirk-buriall is ſuch. Ibid. Ergo profanation. Againe all Paganiſme or Papiſtry is profanation: but Kirk-buriall is both. cap. xij & xiij. Ergo profanation. So theſe with the reſt of my vnrecited reaſons cloſes vp this concluſion, vſe Kirk-buriall no more. Againſt the which what ſpirit will gaine ſay but that of contradiction that Angels cannot perſwade Whereby ſome do prattle of buriall rather nor learne to dye. But if old canons were to vrge (whereby men was prouided to bury but where they payed their teynds) I ſee not where a great ſort of our cumber ſomeſt Kirk-buriers ſhould ly: who being to
                     •
                  -maſters of the teynd
                     •
                   themſelues hes for-faulted their freedome of all ſort of laire. But the Lord let the world ſee what ſacril
                     ••
                  g
                     •
                   and profanation is, that being forewarned of the day of euill in making redreſſe, they may ſeeke to be redreſſed in the redeeming Lord.
            
            AMEN.
            
         
      
   