
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The ſeconde part of the Secretes of Maſter Alexis of Piemont, by hym collected out of diuers excellent aucthours, and newely tranſlated out of Frenche into Engliſhe, with a generall Table, of all the matters conteined in the ſaied Boke.
            By Willyam Ward.
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngſton: for Nicholas Englande. Anno domini. M.D.lx.
         
         
            
            
            The tranſlatour to the Readers.
            
               IN the ediciō of the firſt parte of the worthie ſecretes, of the reuerend Senior Alexis of Piemont, it was promiſed you (gentill readers) euen of hym ſelf in his Epiſtle, that he would labour in the collecciō of others, tried and experimented, for the vtilitie, profite, and pleaſure of all ſoche, as either delited in theim, or would by theim be eaſed, of ſoche infirmities, as thei might caſually haue been greeued withall. You heard alſo the cauſe, why he would communicate thoſe ſecretes with the worlde, whiche vndoubtedly ſprong of a godlie zeale, towarde the common cace of all menne. I therefore (bicauſe he hath kept touche, performing his promes, in collectyng a ſeconde part) could no leſſe dooe herein, then I did in the firſte parte, that is to ſaie, no more to ſpare my labour in tranſlatyng it, into our natiue toungue, nor hide the commoditie of ſo excellente thinges, from thoſe that haue not the vnderſtandyng of the Frenche tongue, then I did before. And bicauſe you ſhould

not haue onely, the hed without the taile, that is, the biginnyng without the ende, you ſhall haue here, no leſſe good and profitable matters (althoughe not ſo many) then was preſented you in the other, as by your iudgement in readyng, you ſhall eaſely perceiue.
         
      
      
         
            THE Second parte of the Secretes of Maſter Alexis of Piemont, by him collected out of diuers and excellent Authors.
         
            To make whey as clere as well water.
            
               TAke wheie and heate it on the fier, but lette it not boile: then ſprinkle it with a Sponge weate in ſtrong vinaigre, or vergeous, or els the iuice or licour of Orenges, and ſo ſtrain it in a piece of clothe made like a little bagge, doeyng ſo diuers times, vntill it be clere. But note, that the bagge muſt not be made cleaue at euery time: but you muſt powre it alwaies vpon the ſkomme of it, and it will become as clere as Amber.
         
         
            To make very good Aqua vite.
            
               TAke Wine that is not to olde, that is to ſafe of a yeare or ſomwhat more or leſſe, and let it be very good, hauing a good odour: and diſtille it in a veſſel of glaſſe hauing a long necke about ſixe foote long, with a very ſmall and ſlowe fier, and take it vp togither whiles it commeth furth faſt, that is to ſaye, whan one droppe tarrieth not for another, and it ſhalbe very good and pleaſant, for there ſhalbe nothing els but onely the parte of the Wine very ſubtile and fine, true it is that it ſhal not be very hote, nor burne ſo muche as other Aqua vites doe.
         
         
            To make Armes or tables of Pictures alwaies bright ſhining.
            
               TAke verie ſtronge Vinaiger and Alome and beate the Alome into pouder and mingle it with the Vinaigre: and than rubbe therwith the armes or tables and they will be alwaies bright, or els anoint thē with the marow of a Deere.
         
         
            To make blacke Ynk very good.
            TAke a pound and a halfe of raine water, with three vnces of the waightteſt Galles you can finde, bruſe them into ſmall peeces and poore them into the ſaid water and let it ſtande two daies in the ſunne. Then put to it two vnces of Romaine vitriolle wel colored and beatē ſmall, and mixe all well togither with a ſticke of a Figge tree, & leaue it againe two daies more in the Sunne. Finally put to it an vnce of Gomme Arabicke that is eleere and bright and beaten into pouder, and an vnce of the pill of Pomegranades, and than boile it a little with a ſlowe fier: that doen ſtraine it, and kepe it in a veſſell of Leade or Glaſſe, and it will be very blacke and perfite good.
         
         
            To make Greene Ynke.
            TAke Verdegris elect & fayer, and make it into paſt with a little ſtrong Vinagre and diſtilled water of Grene galle, and let it drie, and whan you will write with it tēper it with the ſame water of greene gall putting to it a little gomme Arabike.
         
         
            For Oxen that piſſe Bloode.
            TAke three vnces of Phaſioli that be redde, and ſixe drammes of Pepper, & the ſeede of brome, and make thereof 
                  •
                poulder, and giue him drinke of it euery daie with white wine vntill he be hole, putting three vnces of the ſaid poulder to two quarte
                  •
                of the ſaid wine, and giue it him euerie daie three times.
         
         
            
            To make Oile of Vitriol.
            TAke the Vitriol and make it into Lime, than put into Aqua vite, and let the water couer it, than diſtille it, firſt with a very ſmall fier, augmenting it by little and little vntil al become out. Then take out the Aqua vite by Balneum mariae with the water that is ſkant warme. This doen diſtil againe the Oile, and if at the beginning there come any water, put the ſaid Oile into ſome veſſell and ſet it in the Sunne: but it were muche better to ſet two veſſels well cloſed togither one vpon another, and the water beyng in the Sunne will come and cleaue vnto the veſſell that is vppermoſt, and therfore you ſhall take awaie the ſaid veſſell and ſet to another, and by this meane you ſhall purge awaie all the ſaid water, and the Oile ſhall remaine not onely pure & nete, but alſo more delicat, than the comon Oile of Vitriol.
         
         
            To make white Teeth.
            TAke Limons, and make diſtilled water of thē, and waſhe your Teeth with it, for it is a ſoueraine thing, or if you will not make the water, take the licour of them which is alſo good for the ſame purpoſe, but the water is moche better, bicauſe it is finer, ſo that in diſtilling, it loſe not his force.
         
         
            For the ſame.
            TAke lees of wine called Tar
                     •
                  arum, and put it in a veſſell of Marble, and ſtop it ſurely, then burie it in the ground, and let it remaine there vntill it become water, and then take it out, and rubbe your teeth with it, and thei will waxe very faire. Take alſo the water that falleth at the beginning of the diſtillacion of ſalte Peter and Alome, and rubbe your teethe therwith. If you take alſo the roote of Mallowes, and rub your teeth with it euery daie, thei will be bright, white, and faire without hurting the gommes. Or if

you take a cruſte of wheaten bread, and burne it euen to coales, and then hauing made it to pouder, ſkower your teeth withall, and waſhe them afterwarde with cleane and faire water, either of the Welle or of the Conduite, thei will bee white, for it is a thing experimented.
         
         
            To take awaie ſpottes from the face.
            TAke twoo vnces of the licour of Limons, and twoo vnces of Roſe water, twoo drammes of ſiluer ſublimed, and as moche of Ceruſe, put al togither, and make it like an ointmente, and anointe your face therwith at night, when ye go to bedde, and in the morning whan you are vp, anoint it with butter. This is proued.
         
         
            For the ſame.
            TAke the white of an Egge, and ſturre it with ſome thing, vntill it bee taurned to water, then take an vnce of the ſame water, and halfe an vnce of ceruſe, and two drammes of quicke ſiluer, and a dramme of camfire, and mengle it all together and ſo annoint your face with it.
         
         
            For the ſame.
            TAke iiij. vnces of vitriol, and thre vnces of Salt peter, & an vnce of the rubbiſh or ſkale of ſteele, and diſtille all togither putting to it halfe an vnce of Camfire, and waſhe your face with it euery daie.
         
         
            For the ſame.
            TAke halfe a pounde of the roote of Serpentin
                  •
                called in latine Dracuntium or comonly Serpentaria, whiche hath certaine great red graines ioyned togither in a lompe, or els a ſtalke of a reede, and half a pound of a Lily roote, and aſmuche of with Malowes, and ſeeth thē all togither in raine water, then beate them in a morter of Marbel, and put to it fower

vnces and a halfe of oile of Tartre, and the marowe of a Deere, and ſixe drammes of Camfire, and ſo mixe all togither, and annoint your face therwith.
         
         
            To take away little red Pimples from a mans face.
            TAke fiuetene newe laied Egges, and put them whole into ſtrōg Vinaigre, then take them out and breake them euen with the ſame Vinaigre in putting to it an vnce of Senuey, then diſtille them with ſome veſſell of Glaſſe, and waſhe your face with the water at night when you go to bed, and againe in the morning waſh it with ſodden water wherin muſt be Bren and Mallowes. This is experimented.
         
         
            To make a water that taketh awaye the ſpottes of the face and maketh it faier and bright, and kepeth the handes and mouth that they chappe not or waxe full of chinkes.
            TAke a white Pigeon, and plucke of his fethers,Fraxinella, is called alſo Corrigiola, an herbe vvhich renneth on the ground like graſſe, Mainardus ſaith it hathe leaues like an Ashe and therfore is called Fraxinella. then pluck out the guttes and garbage of him, and cut of his head and feete, then take three good handfuls of Fraxinella, and two pounde of Milke, and three vnces of Creame, and ſixe vnces of oile of ſweete Almondes, and let it be newe and freſh, and put all this togither and diſtille it in a veſſell of Glaſſe, and waſhe your face and handes euery daie with the ſame water, and they wilbe alwaies white, ſofte, and with out any ſpottes or pimples, as in the middes of Somer.
         
         
            To make the face faire.
            TAke Fraxinella, and make water thereof in a Lembick, and waſhe your face well with theſame euery daie.
         
         
            A water to make the face faire.
            TAke the white of an Egge, and make water therof in a Lembick, and waſhe your face with it aſmuch and as often as you li
                  ••
               .
         
         
            
            To make a water that maketh the face white and ſhinyng.
            TAke the milke of an Aſſe, and Egge ſhelles, and make thereof diſtilled water, and waſhe your face with it, & it will be white faire & gliſtring.
         
         
            A water to make the face redde.
            TAke the legge of an Oxe or Calfe, that is to ſay from the knee douneward, and take of the ſkin and the hoofe frō it, and then breake all the reſt in pieces, that is to ſaie the bones, the ſenewes and the marowe, and diſtill it, and ſo waſhe your face with the water that cometh of it euery morning.
         
         
            To make a kinde of white to make the face faire, called in Frenche Blanchet.
            TAke twoo vnces of Dragantum, and diſſolue it with the white of an Egge well beaten: than put to it halfe an vnce of Borace, with aſmoche of Ceruſe, and aſmoche Camfire, and mingle all togither, and make thereof little flatte balles, and when you occupie of it, tempere it in ſome Roſe water, and anoint your face with it at night when you go to bed, and in the morning waſhe your face, with water of the flowers of Beanes, or els ſeeth Bren in well water, and waſhe your face with all.
         
         
            To make an other better, whiche maketh the face white and gliſteryng.
            TAke twoo vnces of the ſkimme of ſiluer, and a pound of white vineigre very ſtrong, and boile them togither vntill thei be diminiſhed of twoo thirdendels: Then take twoo drammes of Camfire, twoo of alome, twoo of Boras, and as moche oile of Tartre, and ſeeth them in Roſe water. Then take of theſe twoo licours, that is to ſaie, of the ſaid vineigre, and of the other, as moche of one as of the other, and mingle them togither, and rubbe your face with it as

moche as you will, and beſides that it maketh the face white and gliſtring, it taketh awaie all maner of ſpottes and pimples from it.
         
         
            A water to make the face redde and gliſteryng.
            TAke an vnce of fiſhe glue, and an vnce of Rock alome, and twoo vnces of Verzine, and put thē into a quarte of water, that is to ſaie. xxviij. vnces, and let them remaine in infuſion three daies, and then ſeeth them, and ſtrain out the water, and kepe it in a veſſell of glaſſe as you will.
         
         
            To make an other maner of the ſame, whiche the Frenche men call Blanchet.
            TAke twoo drammes of ſiluer ſublimed, and put it into a violle of water that holdeth a quarte, and ſeeth it vntil it decreaſeth of the tenth part. Then put to it halfe an vnce of Ceruſe, and a dramme of Camfire and of Boras, and the licour or iuice of a whole Limon, and mingle all togither, and let it ſeeth with a ſlowe fire, the ſpace of ſeuen howers. But you muſt note, that this, bicauſe of the ſiluer ſublimed maketh by long vſing it, the teeth ſomewhat blacke, and at the laſt to fall out, it maketh alſo a ſtinking breath, and hurteth the ſenewes and the brain.
         
         
            To make an other Blanchet that maketh the face white, and of a ruddie colour, and hurteth not as the other aforeſaied doeth.
            TAke two vnces of Boras, fower vnces of Ciche Peaſon bruſed, that is to ſaie, without the huſkes, and fower vnces of Phaſiols, and aſmoche of Beanes, and make theim all into pouder, and the galle of a Bulle, and the yelkes of fiftene egges, and a quarte of white wine, and put all togither to diſtille, and waſhe your face with the water in the morning.
         
         
            To make an other Blanchet, whiche is called roiall that is the beſt, and the excellentest of all other.
            
               TAke a good handfull of the flowers of an Oliue tree, and a handfull of the flowers of an Eldern tree, a handfull of white roſes, a handfull of the flowers of Orenges, and an other of Gelſemines, and twelue newe laied Egges, twelue grene Figges and freſhe gathered, and twelue Snailes, one dramme of Camfire, an other of Alumen deſquamatum, twoo drammes of Boras, halfe a dramme of Alome, fower penie weight of Alumen plumae, otherwiſe called in Latin Tricbiti
                     •
                  , eight penie weight of ſiluer ſublimed, an vnce of redde waxe, a good handefull of white Lilies, and diſtille all the flowers when thei bee grene in their ſeaſon, and alſo the Figges, Snailes, and the egges, and mingle all theſe waters togither, and put a parte half of the ſame water, and kepe the other halfe, and put it into a veſſell of glaſſe, and mingle into it all the other thinges, and let them bee firſte made into pouder, and put to alſo the waxe, then ſet it in the ſunne, and leaue it there vntill all become like vnto waxe, then take it out with a white linen clothe, and take fiftene Egges and ſtille theim in the ſame water, and powre all this cōpoſicion into the ſaied water diſtilled, with a pound of rawe Honie, and ſet it again in the Sunne, and let it remaine there vntill the water bee dried vp, and it will bee parfite good. And afterward when you will occupie it, take aſmoche of it as a Wheate corne, and anointe your face with the water that you did ſette aparte, that is to ſaie, that of the flowers: and it will proue a merueilous thing.
         
         
            To take out the wrinkles of the face.
            TAke a little of the wood of a white Vine, or els a little of Brionie, and ſtampe it with a drie Fig that is fa
                  •
               te, that is to ſaie paſtie, and anointe your face with it, and then go walke till you ſweate: for if you ſhould not ſweate, the Vine would take of the ſkin, and the Brionie make you blacke.
         
         
            
            To make beare ſlacke in comming forthe, or growing in yong men, as well on their beard as in other partes.
            TAke a raſour that is made of copper, mixt with Auripigmentum, otherwiſe called Arſnic or Orpine, in the melting of it, ſo that it bee incorporated togither, and ſhaue the bearde or heare withall, and it ſhall neuer growe again, or if you heate the ſaid raſour of copper in the fire, and quenche it in the blod of a Salamander, or els in the milke of Sowthiſtles. If alſo you rubbe the place where you will not that heare ſhall growe, with the bloode of a fiſhe called a Tony, it will done the like. Alſo if you take Beanes and ſeeth theim in water, and waſhe the place euery daie with that water, the heare will not growe, or at the leaſt long or thei came forthe.
         
         
            To make heare growe in euery place of the body where you will.
            TAke greate greene Liſardes, or ſea Frogges, and cutte of their heddes and their tailes, and drie the reſte in an Ouen, and make pouder of it. Then take the yelke of an Egge, and make Oile thereof, and mengle all togither diligently, that is to ſaie, the pouder and the oile, and anoint the place with it, where you will heare ſhall growe, and thei will come for the ſhortly.
         
         
            To make heares blacke.
            TAke a Combe of Leade, and kembe your hedde with it alwaies, and the heares will be blacke. Take alſo Crowes egges and make oile of thē and laie a combe of horne in it, and let it remain there till it hath dronke vp all the oile, then take it out, and kembe your hedde with it, and by continuall vſing of it, your heare will be blacke.
         
         
            To make a water that will make the face redde and gliſteryng.
            
               TAke a pound of Aqua vite of three ſeethinges, an vnce of Braſill that is good, ten Cloues orientall, and ten graines of Naſturtium, otherwiſe called Carda
                     ••
                  , in Engliſh Creſſes or toune Kerſe, and fiue graines of Cubi
                     •
                  es, and ſtampe all togither verie ſmall, then put it into a veſſell of glaſſe with the Aqua vite, and ſtoppe it ſure, and boile it a little, and then diſtill it in Balneo Marie, or with a verie ſmall fire, and it ſhall be in his perfection.
         
         
            To die or colour heere.
            TAke half an vnce of Aqua fortis, ſixe penie weight of good 
                  ••
               lu
                  •
               r, and ſixe vnces of Roſe water, and waſhe your hedde with it. Take alſo Litarge, and of the aſhes of Nettles and mingle them togither, and rubbe your heere with it.
         
         
            To take awaie the euill ſauour of the breath.
            TAke Cheruile, Mirre and Cyperus, called of the Apoticaries Iū
                  
                     •
                  us odoratus, as moche of one as of the other, and make theim into pouder, then take Roſen, and of all this pilles, and drinke theim in your wine.
         
         
            To get awaie the heares from the iye browes.
            TAke the galle of a he Gote or of a ſhe Gote, but the he Gote is better, and dooeth it ſoner, and rub your iye browes, and the heare will 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ly fall awaie.
         
         
            To die or to colour all kinde of metall or ſtone, into the colour of golde without golde.
            TAke ſalte Armoniac, white Vitrioll, ſtone ſalt, and Verdegris, and make all into a verie fine pouder, and 
                  •
               a
                  •
               e of this pouder vpon the metal, or ſtone that you die or colour, vntill it hee couered ouer with it: then put your ſtone or metall into the fire, and leaue it there a good ho
                  •••
               , then take it out and quenche it in vrine or piſſe newly made.
         
         
            
            For to make Iron or Steele ſofte.
            YE ſhal take the iuyce of Hemlocke, and put the yrō or ſteele beynge redde hoate into it three or foure tymes, and let it remayne in it, vntyll it be thorowe colde. Take alſo oile and put into it ſeuen times ſome molten Leade, and then quenche the yron in it at the ende of foure or fiue times.
         
         
            To harden Yron or Steele.
            TAKE the iuice of Melanthiū
                otherwiſe called Nigella romana, or the herbe called Mouſe eare, and quench your Iron hote therin three or foure times.
         
         
            To make Figges ripe quickly.
            LET the Fygges come to theyr parfyte greatnes than pryke theym with a pinne, and rubbe thyem wyth a lytle Oyle oliue, then bynde theym about wyth Greene Olyue leaues, ſo that they maye be couered round about with them, and ſo let them ripe in what place you will.
         
         
            To make Hennes laie Egges all the winter.
            TAKE the toppes of Netles when they beginne to haue ſeede, and drye theym, and gyue the Hennes a litle of it with Bren and Hempe ſeede and they ſhal laie euery day an Egge.
         
         
            To make a Glue or paſte that holdeth as faſt as a naile.
            TAKE Pixe Greca, and Roſen, & the pouder of burned Brycke whyche is called Ceruſe, and mengle al togither, and heate it when you wil occupie it, and whan it is cold it will hold as faſt as a naile.
         
         
            To take avvaye all maner of ſpottes.
            TAKe a Tenche and ſeeth him muche vntill he be diſſolued into water almoſt, and waſh the ſpotted clothe therewyth oftentymes. Than take Bren, and boile it likewiſe in the ſame water, & waſh the cloth againe therwith.
         
         
            
            To cauſe that a womans Breſtes waxe not great of ſwellinge.
            TAKE a Fiſhe that is called Squatina, in Engliſhe a Soale and cleaue hym in the myddle, and laye hym vppon the womans Breaſtes, and they ſhall not encreaſe bygger. And yf they be greate and bygge they ſhall aſwage and waxe leſſe.
         
         
            To purge Honnie with out fier.
            TAKE the rawe Honie and put in a veeſſel of ſtone well leaded wythin and large, and couer it well with a Paper and let it ſo ſtande, and euery thirde or fourth daye vncouer it, and take oute the ſkim that is vpon it, and by this meanes it purgeth better then with fier.
         
         
            To ſtenche the menſtrual blood of women.
            TAKE a Toode and binde him with a lytle bande, and bange it aboute the womans necke that hath that infyrmyte, and in fewe dayes ſhe ſhalbe cleered of it.
         
         
            To keepe Roſes freſhe all the yeare.
            TAKE the Roſes whan they be halfe open, and gather theym in the eueninge wyth a knife, and in the nyght folowing ſet them in the aier abrod, and in the morning put theym in a veſſel of earth well leaded wythin, and ſtoppe it well, and couer it wyth drie ſande.
         
         
            For the ſame.
            TAKE the buddes of Roſes whan they beginne to open, and take a reede that is yet growinge, and cleane it a lytle that you maye put in the buddes, and let them remaine ſo, and whan you wil take them out cut the reede, and put the buddes in luke warme water, and they ſhalbe as faire as in Maye.
         
         
            To take awaye or diſſolue a boile or Kernell in the grine, or the wreſting of a ſenewe.
            
               TAke a Tode and binde vpon the boile and it will diſſolue it in ſhort ſpace.
         
         
            To dreſſe and trim Oliues in one daie.
            TAke the Oliues whan they be greene, and cut them a little on the ſide, than put them in water with Lime and Aſhes: but note that you muſte haue twiſe aſmuche Aſhes as Lime, as if you take halfe a pound of Lime, you muſt haue a pound of Aſhes, and let them lie a ſtiepe in it the ſpace of xxiij houres, than take them out, and waſhe them fiue or ſixe times in luke warme water, than put thē in ſome veſſell of ſtone or Glaſſe as you wil with ſalte water and ſo kepe them as long as you liſt, and they will be very good.
         
         
            To preſerue and keepe Peches or other Fruite.
            TAke Peches or other Fruites that you will kepe, in the faire and drie wether, and open them in the middes, & take out the ſtone, and laie them a daie to drie in the ſunne: than take ſodden ſugar well purged and rubbe theim ouer with it, and the nexte daie ſet them in the Sunne againe, and rubbe them with the ſaid ſugar as oft as thei drie vntill they haue gathered a cruſt vpō them, than kepe them at your pleaſure, and it will be an excellent and parfite thing.
         
         
            To cauſe meruelous Dreames.
            TAke the bloode of a Lampwink or black plouer, and rubbe your temples, with it and ſo goe to bedde, and you ſhall ſee merueilous thinges in your ſleepe, or els if you eate at nighte a little of the herbe Solan
                     •
                  , or Veſicaria, or ſome Mandragora, or elles of the herbe called in Greeke Hyoſcyamos, in Latine it hath theſe names Al
                     •
                  ercum, Appollinaris, and Symphoniaea, in the Frenche Iuſquiame, and in the Engliſhe ſome call it Henban, and you ſhall ſe in the nighte goodly thinges in your dreame.
         
         
            
            To make a woman beare Children.
            TAke Ceruſe and Frankenſens, and waie as muche of the one as of the other, and after you haue companied with her, put the ſame into her matrice. Alſo if you geue her drinke of Mares milke, or to eate the lower parte of the belly of a Hare, or the Genitories or ſtones of a hee Goate, after her menſtruall purgation is come vnto her, it ſhall profite her muche vnto conception.
         
         
            To heale and cure Horſes of the Skabbe.
            FIrſt you muſt let him blood, then take Brimſtone, Quickſiluer, Hony, liquide Pitch, Salt, the iuice of Hemlocke, Vinaigre, Alome, Helesbore, ſofte Sope, Oile, Sutt of a Chimney, Hogges dong, and Lime, and mingle al togither, and anoint the place with it where the Skabbe is, and within fewe daies he ſhal be healed and cleane.
         
         
            To heale the Kinges euill, a diſeaſe called in latine Siruma.
            TAke a great Tode a liue, and whan the Moon
                  •
                draweth towarde the comunction of the ſunne, cutte of all the legges from him, and put him about the necke of the patiēt, and it wil do him muche good. Take alſo the hoofe of an Aſſe and burne it, and ſaie it vpon the ſore, for it is very good and profitable for ſuche a ſicknes.
         
         
            To make one that is poiſoned to vomite the poiſon.
            TAke two graines of Pazar, whiche is a ſtone tha
                  •
                commeth out of Portugal, and is grene 
                  •
                tawnie ſomewhat obſcure gliſtering and light and 
                  ••
                breaking it, it is within of the colour of aſhes, and giue it him to drinke with a little milke, and incontinent he ſhall vomite by the poiſon, if there be any.
         
         
            To make a Candell that cannot be pu
                  •
                ou
                  •
               .
            
               TAke Virgine waxe, and Brimſtone well purged, aſmuch of the one as of the other, and melt it togither and make therof a Cādel, the which will neuer be put out vntill it be burned and conſumed to the ende.
         
         
            To make a Candell of Yre to burne.
            TAke a Candel of Ware made as is afore ſaid, and take ſome Brimſtone and coles, and ſtampe them very ſmall, and fifte them thorow a linen cloth, then heate the candell, and rubbe it ouer wel with the ſame pouder vntill it waxe vnto & cruſt rounde about it as thicke as the backe of a knife and couer it with a paper, then 
                  ••
                it at the ende of a guttour of your houſe, and let it remaine there till the yee be rounde about it a finger thicke whiche will be within two or three daies, than take it of and it will burne as though it were of waxe onely, this is a thinge tried and experimented.
         
         
            To make that fruite ſhall take what forme or facion you will.
            TAke a piece of woode and cutte it after the forme and facion that you will your fruite ſhal haue, but let it be as bigge as the fruite is whan it is ripe, then take ſome plaſter tempered with water, and put it about the wood a finger thicke, and lette it drie, and it will incontinent waxe drie, than take it of, and whan the fruite is not yet comen to his full greatnes, binde it faſte about this ſame forme, and leaue it ſo remaining vntill it be ripe, and it will be after that forme and facion. If you will alſo write vpon it, dreſſe the letters after this maner and forme made of plaſter, and they ſhalbe legible.
         
         
            To make that rootes ſhall haue what forme you will.
            TAke greene rootes, but let thē be great and thicke like radiſhe rootes, or the roote of Bryonix, and ſuch

like, and trim them with a knife as you ſhall thinke the beſt facion. Then ſet them in the ground againe, vntill they haue gathered vpon them a ſkinne 
                  〈◊〉
                in this maner maie a man make conterfete Mandragora, in trimming them with a knife into the ſhape of a man, and than putting them againe into the grounde with the head dounward, and with a little barley or mill vnder them whiche will cleaue and ſticke faſte to the hed of the roote and ſeeme like heare: but you muſt note that to make theſe Mandragora, you muſt take the rootes of Bryonia.
            
         
         
            For to write letters vpon a mans body or face that ſhall neuer be rubbed out.
            YOu muſte go into the ſtooues or hote houſes whiche be very hote, and when you are in a ſweate write vpō your bodie with what inke you will, then cut the ſkin with a ſharpe raſour, and fill the cuttes with earth of what colour you will, and leaue them ſo and incontinent by reaſon of the greate heate the ſkin will cloſe & ſhut vp togither and the letters or figures that you haue made vpon your fleſhe will remaine for euer.
         
         
            For the ſame, but ſomwhat eaſier.
            TAke Aqua fortis of Golde, and the beaſtes that 
                  •
               e called Cantharides, and putte them to
                  •
               ither xxiiij. houres, then with a penne very ſmall write what you will vpon the ſkinne, and leaue it ſo, and by and by ther will riſe certaine little white bladders or puſhes where you touched with the water, and that will remaine and abide for euer.
         
         
            To make one haue a good memorie.
            TAke a Tooth or the lefte legge of a Badger or Brock as ſome call it, and as other ſome name it a Grey, and binde it about your righte arme nexte vnto the fleſh. Take alſo the gall of a Partri
                  •••
               ,

and rubbe your temples with it that it maie ſoke into the ſkin and fleſhe, ones in a moneth, and it will make you haue a good memorie.
         
         
            To make that no Dogge ſhall barke at you.
            TAke a blacke Dogge and plucke out one at his eies and holde it in your lefte hande, and by reaſon of the ſauour and ſmell thereof the Dogges will not barke at you.
         
         
            To make all thinges ſ
                  •
               eme Blacke and Greene in the night.
            TAke the blacke inck of a Fiſhe called a ſkuttle, called Atramentum Sepiae, & take alſo Verdegrice, and mingle bothe togither, and put them in a lampe with the wieke, and ſet it a fier in a chā
               bre, where there is no other light but that, and al that is in the ſaid chambre walles and all ſhal ſeeme partly Greene, and partly Blacke, whiche is a meruelous thing to ſee.
         
         
            To die Heare into a Greene colour.
            TAke freſhe Capers, and diſtill them, and waſhe your heare with the water of thē in the ſunne, and they will become greene.
         
         
            To dreſſe or to kepe fleſhe in Somer.
            TAke the fleſhe and ſeeth it, but let it not be to muche ſoddē, than take it of from the fire, and ſtreine out the water, and ſet it in the ſhadow the ſpace of an houre for to drie, in a place where the winde commeth, then take an earthen pot with white Vinaigre that is ſtronge, and take ſome Geniper ſeede well ſtamped, and Salt, and caſt it vpō the fleſhe: and than put it into the Vinaigre, and ſette the pot in ſome colde place, as a cane or 
                  •
               ollex, and remoue euery daie the fleſhe within the pot, & let it ſtād and remaine ſo as longe as if pleaſeth you, and whan you will eate of it, ſeeth it a little, as if you will 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
maie eate it ſo, for it is a thing very ſweete & delicate.
         
         
            To make an inſtrument called Cauterium wherwith ſores are burned, whiche ſhall raiſe the ſkin without any greefe or paine.
            TAke ſofte ſope, and vnſlekt Lime that hath not ben wet aſmuche of the one as of the other, and mingle them togither: and whan you will vſe of it, if the ſkin be not broken, laie a little piece of lether vpon it with ſome ointment and leaue a hole in the middes of the greatneſſe that you will the wound ſhal be, and put in the ſame hole aſmuch of the inſtrument as a whete corne & let it remaine ſo, and within three or fower houres it wil make a hole without any paine. But if the ſkin be rotten, as of a felon or cattes heare, it ſhall ſuffiſe to waſhe the place before you laie to the Cauterium, with ſtrong Vinaigre, and within an houre it will raiſe the ſkinne without anie griefe or paine.
         
         
            To make Steele cut Yron as it were Lead.
            TAke the Steele and purge it well, than take of theſe wormes that breede in the grounde, and make of them ſome diſtilled water in a Lembeck, than take the iuice of Radiſhe rootes, aſmuch of the one as of the other and quenche the ſteele in it beyng red hote, fower or fiue times, than make kniues, Swordes, or daggers of it, and they ſhall cut Yron, as it were leade.
         
         
            To make red Yn
                  •
               ke.
            TAke ſtronglie boiling hote, and put it in the ri
                  •
               e or barke of Braſill, and lette it coole, than take eight vnces of the ſaide lie, and an vnce of Braſill ſkraped with a piece of glaſſe, & put it to alſo a little Alome. Than put it in a diſhe vpon the hote aſhes, and let it boile well the ſpace of an houre, and occupie it at your pleaſure and the incke ſhalbe very

good: but note that it is not good, but whan it is freſh and recent, that is to ſaie, made of a daie or two, at the moſt.
         
         
            For the ſame, and eaſier.
            TAke an vnce of the ſame wood ſkraped with a piece of glaſſe, and take ten vnces of water, and powre the ſkraped Braſill into it, and let it remaine ſo the ſpace of ſeuen houres, than ſeeth it, and let it diminiſh of the fower partes three, and it will be redde hauing a good luſtre. And if you let it deminiſh of more then three partes, it will be red and ſanguine.
         
         
            To make Bones ſofte.
            TAke bones that be holowe in the middes, as of the legges of beaſtes, and take the iuice of Alexanders, of milfoile, of radiſhe rootes, of horehounde, and Vinaigre, aſmuche of the one as of the other, and fill the bones with theſe iuices, and ſtoppe them wel yt nothing goe out; than buried it in Horſe donge as long as you wil, and the longer they be in it the ſofter will they waxe.
         
         
            To kepe Grapes freſhe all the winter.
            YOu muſte gather the Grapes whan it is faier and cleere wether, and that it hath not rained a good while before, than muſte you make them cleane, that is to ſaie, take out the rotten graines that be in them: than take pitch, and ſet it vpon the fire vntill it boile, than take the grape, and put the ende that it hangeth by into it, & let it remaine ſo a while, and then let it drie in the ſunne the ſpace of two daies. Finally laie theim vpon wheate ſtray that one touche not another, and they will kepe ſo good and freſhe all the yeare.
         
         
            To make Melons or Coucombers ripe before their ſeaſon.
            
               FOr to haue Melons, Coucombers, or other like fruite ripe before their ſeaſon, you muſt plante or ſet them in pottes or other veſſels, and euery thirde or fourth daie water thē at the roote with hote water, and whan the wether is cloudy or colde ſette them before the fire, and whan the ſunne ſhineth and is faire wether, ſet them in the Sunne: Thus doynge you ſhal haue Melons, and many other like fruitos ripe before their ſeaſon.
         
         
            To take awaie the holes or markes of the ſmall Pockes.
            TAke very ſtronge Vinaigre, and make thereof ſome diſtilled water, and waſhe your face with it one daie, and the nexte daie folowinge, take Bren, Mallowes, and water and boile all togither vntill it be diminiſhed of the halfe, and waſhe your face with it that ſame daie, and the next daie waſhe it againe with the water of the diſtilled Vinaigre, and the nexte daie with the other water made with the Bren and Mallowes, and cōtinue ſo vntil the markes or holes begon, whiche will be very ſhortly. Alſo if you take Egge ſhelles, & diſtill them, and waſhe your face with the water at night whan you go to bed, and in the morning with the other of Bren and Malowes as is aboue reherſed.
         
         
            To make the handes white.
            TAke an Oxe gall, and take halfe a ſponefull of it in the ing
                  •
               ning with wel water, and waſhe your handes with this little of the gall, and they will become moiſt, ſofte, and very white. Take alſo Sope, and purge it wel, than take of the roote of Iris, and dry it in an ouen and make pouder of it, the whiche you ſhall mixe with the Sope well purged and ſo waſhe your handes withal, and they wil be ſofte and white. Take alſo Sope well purged, and take the Aſhes of a 
                  〈◊〉
               , and mixe them well togither, vntill they be well

incorporated the one with the other: and waſhe your handes with it in the morning, and thei wil be moiſt, ſofte & white as ſnowe, which thing is experimented.
         
         
            To make an odoriferous and ſweete ſmelling greſe that kepeth the lippes and handes from thinkes and chappes, and kepeth them moiſt, and ſofte.
            TAke a pounde, that is to ſaie, twelue vnces of Calues greaſe, or the Deere ſuet that is yong, and the ſuet freſh. Than take ſixe vnces of Maioram, and ſtampe them all well togither, and make thereof little halles, and ſprinkle them with a little good White or Claret wine, that hath a good odour. Than put them in ſome veſſell, and couer them well, that the good odour of the Maioram go not out, and ſo ſet them in the ſhadow the ſpace of fower and twenty houres ſomwhat more or leſſe, than put them in water and ſeeth thē leiſurely: and than draine it againe. Take alſo nine vnces of Maioram, and ſtampe it with the ſame greaſe, and make litle balles of it, which you ſhall ſprinkle ouer with Wine, and put it in another veſſell cleane, the which you ſhal alſo ſet it in the ſhadowe the ſpace of xxiiij. houres, and than put water to it againe, and ſeeth it, and ſtraine it. And do ſo fower or fiue times, adding to it alwaies nine vnces of Maioram, and ſprinklinge it with good Wine, you maie alſo put to it a little muſke, or ciuette, thus doyng you ſhall haue a very excellent thing, to keepe the lippes and handes from chappes or chinckes and from all great colde.
         
         
            For to make a ſweete Suet called in Frenche and Italian Pommade in latin Pomatum.
            TAke a pounde of Deeres ſuet, or if you can not get of that, the greaſe of a kidde, three vnces of barrous greaſ
                  •
               , and 
                  ••
               . vnces of the marowe of a bucke, and purge it cleane of all filthe, and take out the little ſkinnes, veines, and gri
                  •
               e
                  ••
                that are 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
then waſhe it with good white Wine ſo often vntill the wine remaine cleere, and the greaſe white, than ſtraine out al the Wine, and let it ronne abrode vpon a table. This don take eight Appian apples or as many Pepins, and pare them well bothe with out and within, and ſtampe them. Than take halfe an vnce of Cloues, two drammes of Nutmegges, ſixe graines of ſpike of india, and foure pound of Roſe water, and mingle all togither with the greaſe, and ſet it to ſeeth in a couered pot, with a ſlowe fire and let it ſeeth vntill the Roſe water be almoſt conſumed. Then ſtraine it and put it into another veſſell waſhed three or foure times with Roſe water, then adde to it foure vnces of white waxe well purified and purged, and ſixe vnces of ſweete Almondes. Then ſette it on the fire againe 
                  ••
               ely vntil it be molten, and then take it from the fire and ſtraine it, and put it into another veſſell waſhed 
                  •
               ith Roſe water. Finally after it is congeled and 
                  •
               axen harde, take aſmuche muſke as you will with 
                  〈◊〉
                Roſe water, and other odoriferous waters, and mingle them togither with a peſ
                  •
               ell of woode, and and keepe it in a veſſell of Glaſſe, and ſet it in the ſhadowe toward the Northe, and if you put to it a little 
                  
                     ••
                  orax liquida, it wil be as good for the ſkurfe or ſkabbe, as to keepe the handes faire.
         
         
            To make that flies ſhall not tourment or trouble Horſes in Somer.
            TAke the leaues of Gourdes, and ſtampe them, and ſo rubbe the Horſes with it euery morning and at nighe whan it is hote, or els take leeſe of wine, and rubbe them with it, and the flies ſhall not tourment 
                  ••
               r 
                  •
               oxe them no more than in the middes of winter.
         
         
            To keepe Figges greene all the yeare.
            YOu muſte gather them whan they are ripe in the faire wether and at none daies, to the intēt that they maie be drie from all dewe, and putte

them in a faire veſſell of ſtone or earth the mater or ſubſtance whereof muſt be very fine, and that the figges touche not one another, then couer them diligētly, that they haue no maner of ayer, and put them ſo in wine, and they will be greene as long as the wine is good, whiche thing hath bene proued.
         
         
            For to make that Pommegranates ſhal not open.
            TAke three great flint ſtones whiche are in the botom of riuers, vncouer the earth from the roote of the tree and laie the ſtones vpon the roote, and couer it with the earth againe as it was before. Alſo if you plant nighe vnto the tree Squilla, the Pomgranates will not open.
         
         
            For to keepe wine ſweete all the yeare.
            TAke a veſſel wel pitched within and without, and put the wine into it before it boile in the fat, and ſtoppe the ſaide veſſell well, that it take no ayer, and then laie it in a riuer as deepe as you can that the veſſel maie be couered with water, and let it remaine ſo a moneth without remouing it, then take it out, and ſet it where you wil. Thus doynge the Wine ſhall be ſweete and good all the yeare, and thicke like muſt.
         
         
            For wine that will not keepe longe.
            TAke two or three egges, and if it be claret wine take onely the yelke of it, & if it be white wine, take onely the white of an Egge, and take thre vnces of flint ſtone of a riuer that runneth ſwift, and make it into pouder, and two vnces of Salt made into very ſmall pouder, and mingle all togither. Then put the Wine into another clene veſſell that hath no o
               
                  •
               our or ſauour: this done caſt into it all this compoſition, and mengle it with the wine fiue or ſixe times a daie, during the ſpace of three or fower daies. But note that you muſte make this prouiſion before it be vtterly corrupt & putrified: for if it were wholly corrupt

and ſpilled, this would auaile nothing but were 
                  •
               ime and labour loſt.
         
         
            To cauſe that wine ſhall not be to ſtronge.
            TAke a piece of Salt lard, and tie it with a greate threed at the Bung hole within, and let the lard touche onely the vpper parte of the veſſell. Thus doyng the Wine will neuer be ſtronge bicauſe of the 
                  •
               ard and ſalt which letteth and hindereth the ſeparation and attenuation which giueth force & ſtrength to the wine.
         
         
            To make Vinaigre.
            TAke the fruite of the tree called in latine Cornus, in frenche Corneillier, there be none of them in England and therefore it lacketh an Engliſhe name, the ſaide fruite is like vnto Oliues but they be redde, and ſomwhat longer, take of them whan they be redde, take alſo Blackberies before they be ripe, and drie them, and make them into pouder, and with 
                  •
                little ſtrong Vinaigre, make of them litle balles, the which you ſhal drie in the ſunne. Then take the wine and heate it, and whan it is hote but into it this compoſition, and it wil turne incontinent into ſtrong Vinaigre, whiche thing is experimented.
         
         
            To make Vinaigre with water.
            TAke xxx. or xl. pounde of wilde peares, and lette them lie three daies on a heape in ſome veſſell, and then ſprinkle or water thē euery daye with a little water the ſpace of xxx. daies, and it ſhal be as good Vinaigre and as ſtrong as if it were of Wine▪ 
               
                  •
               lſo if you take grapes, and wring out the wine with your handes, and put the cell into ſome veſſell and put water vpon it, it will be 
                  •
               igre and ſharpe.
         
         
            To make Vinaigre with periſhed wine or wine that is marred.
            
               TAke corrupt and rotten wine, andbo
                  •
               le or ſeeth it, and take of al the froth or ſkimme that it maketh in boiling, and let it remaine on the fire til it be diminiſhe of the third parte. Then put it in a veſſell, wherin ſtrong Vinaigre hath bene, and put to it ſome ſerfoile, and couer the veſſell well that it take no aier at all, and in ſhort time it will be good and ſtrong Vinaiger.
         
         
            To take awaie the ſauour of the mouldines or putrefaction of the wine.
            TAke Medlers well made ripe in ſtrawe, and opē them in four partes & binde them with a threde, and hange them within the bunge of the veſſel that they maie be all couered with the wine, and let them remaine ſo a moneth, than take them out, and you ſhall take awaie alſo the euil odour of the wine.
         
         
            To make wine haue a good odour.
            TAke an orenge, or a citron that is not to great, and take Cloues orientall and ſette them in the orenge or citron vntill it be almoſte full, and ſo put it into the veſſell of wine, but let it not touche the wine: then ſtoppe vp your veſſell ſure that the odour goe not out.
         
         
            To make that Leekes ſhall be great.
            TAke many ſeedes togither and ſet them in Goates donge and let them growe and ripe, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous thing.
         
         
            To make tadſtooles or muſheroms growe.
            CUt a Popler tree harde to the ground, and then take hote water with leuain in it, and caſt it vpon the roote and within three or foure daies the tadſtooles wil growe about the foote of the Popler tree where you did caſt the water, and they ſhall be good to eate.
         
         
            To make that all maner of Codware ſhal ſeeth quickly.
            
               TAke the ſeedes that you will ſowe, as Peaſon, Phaſiols, Lintelles, and ſuche like, and before you ſowe them, ſprinkle them with ſalte peter and than ſowe them whan you will, and thoſe that 
                  •
               rowe of that ſeede, will ſeeth ſoner, and eaſelier then 
                  ••
                her will do.
         
         
            To haue greene Flowres all the yeare.
            TAke yonge plantes of floures in Somer and ſet them in ſome place very hote, as in ſtoues or hote houſes, & leaue them ſo, for by the meanes of the greate heate, they will growe to their parfite bignes, & in the middes of winter beare their floures, whiche thing is tried and proued.
         
         
            To make Corne, and podware to growe greater than they are wont to doe.
            TO make Corne and podware, as Wheate, Rie, Mille, Ciche peaſon, and all other like to growe greater than ordinarily they do, you muſt ſowe 
                  •
               hem in a fielde where Squilla is planted, bicauſe that this Squilla is hote, and conſequently giueth heate vn
               
                  •
               o the ſeedes, and ſo maketh them growe greater then they comonly doe.
         
         
            To make that fruites ſhall not rotte vpon the tree.
            TAke a Naile, and heate it glowing hote in the fire, and dri
                  •
               e it into the foote of the tree, or if you wil not do ſo, make a hole in the ſame place with a Percer, and leaue it ſo, for at that hole all the ſuperfluous ſucke or iuyce wil come out, which is the 
                  〈◊〉
                that the fruites rotte vpon the tree.
         
         
            To make letters than can not be reade onles the Paper be put in water.
            TAke Rochealome, and make it into pouder thā put it into a little water, and write what you will with it vpon white Paper, and let the let
               
                  •
               er
                  •
                drie of thēſelues, and whan you will reade them▪
               
put the Paper into cleere water, and the letters vpward, and you ſhall reade them as if thei were writen with incke, bicauſe the water maketh the Paper ſomwhat blacke, or rather grey, and the Alome ſhineth, by reaſon of the whiteneſſe of it, whiche is a meruelous thing and proued.
         
         
            To make letters that can not be reade but at the fire.
            TAke ſalt Armoniack, and make thereof pouder very ſmal, and put it in water, than write what you will with it vpon Paper, and lette it drie. And whan you will reade it, holde it before the fire, and you ſhall reade very wel. Alſo if you take the ſuck or iuice of a Limon or Dinyon, and write withall, a man can not reade it but at the fire.
         
         
            To make that Aqua vite ſhall receiue all the vertues and ſtrength of Medecines.
            TAke foure vnces of Aqua vite, and putte it in a veſſell of Glaſſe with a ſtreight and narrowe mouth, but yet great and thicke of Glaſſe, then take Medicamētes elect well dried and cut very ſmall, & put thē in the ſame glaſſe vnto the Aqua vite & ſtoppe well and ſurely the mouth of the Glaſſe with the ſtopple, and than with white waxe vpon it: finally take what veſſell or pot you will and fill it with hote aſhes ſo that there be n
                  •
                fire in it, and burie this veſſell of Aqua vite in the ſame Aſhes.
         
         
            To make that a woman ſhall eate of nothing that is ſet vpon the table.
            TAke a little greene Baſil, and whan men bring the diſhes to the table put it vnderneth them, that the woman perceiue it not: for menne ſaye that ſhe will eate of none of that whiche is in the diſhe wher vnder the Baſill lieth.
         
         
            To make Oile of Roſes, or other Odoriferous Herbes.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               TAke a violle of Glaſſe very thinne, and of thre partes, fill two with oile oliue very good and cleane, & fill the reſt with Roſes, or the herbe wherwith you will make the oile. Than ſette the violl or glaſſe in the ſunne, and couer it well firſt, and let it ſo reſt three or foure daies, than take it out of the ſunne, and take out al the roſes, and al the oile, and wring them well, that all the oile maie come out of them, then caſt them awaie and put the oile againe into the violl, and fill it a newe with freſhe roſes, and ſet it in the ſunne other foure daies. Than take them awaie, and wring out the oile, and put in other freſhe roſes, doyng thus foure or fiue times you ſhall haue an oile as odoriferous as the roſes them ſelues.
         
         
            To make that the Mothes and Vermine ſhall not eate nor deſtroie clothes and apparell.
            TAke Wormwoode, or Southernwoode, the leaues of a Cedar tree, and valerian, and laie them in your coffers or preſſes where your clothes be, or in the pleytes of your garmentes, and you ſhall ſee that they will not hurt them, bicauſe theſe leaues and herbes are bitter of taſte, and the ſauour or ſmell is very ſtrong, whiche the vermine do abhorre, and can not abide.
         
         
            For to make that wilde beaſtes ſhall not hurt you.
            FOr to be aſſured and ſafe from wilde Beaſtes, as Wolues, Beares, and ſuch other like, take the greaſe of a Lion, and annointe your ſelfe therwith ouer and ouer, and go hardely wher you will and no beaſt ſhall hurte you, but as ſone as they ſmell the ſauour of the greaſe, they will runne awaie. And if by chaunce you meete with a wolfe, or other wilde beaſt, ronne not awaie but with a good corage go euen to him that he may ſmel the greſe that you are anointed with all; and he will flie.
         
         
            For to be aſſured and ſafe from Serpentes.
            
               TAke the ſuck or iuice of a radiſh roote, and anoint your handes with it, then take the Serpentes in your handes, and they will not bite nor ſting you, bicauſe of the ſubtilite and fineſſe of this iuice, but will die almoſt in ſmelling onely the ſauour.
         
         
            To take awaie the paine and greefe of the Goute.
            TAke a greate foule called a Vultour, in latine Vultur, and take the ſkinne of her righte beele and laie vpon the right foote of the patiēt, then take the ſkinne of the lefte heele, and laie it vpon his lefte foote, and incontinent you ſhall ſee that in halfe an houre the paine will goe awaie. Whiche is a meruelous thing.
         
         
            For to ſee wilde Beaſtes in a Dreame.
            TAke the hart of an Ape, and laie it vnder your heade, whā you go to bed ſo that it touche your head, and you ſhall ſee meruelous thinges, and all kindes of beaſtes, as Liōs, Beares, Wolfes, Apes, Tigres, and other ſuche like.
         
         
            For to make Silke white.
            TAke Brimſtone and burne it, & holde the Silke ouer the ſmoke of it, & it will incontinent waxe white. Alſo if you wil haue a Roſe of diuers colours, holde him ouer the ſmoke of Brimſtone burning, and it will be red, white, and Cremſine, and wil be faire, but it ſhall loſe his ſweete ſauour.
         
         
            To make an herbe growe that ſhal haue many and diuers odours and ſauours.
            TAke one graine of lettiſe ſeede, one of ſuccorie, one of alexanders, one of baſille, one of a leeke, and another of perſely, and plant them all togither in one hole, ſo that one touche not another and you muſt plante them in horſe donge; or Oxe donge, or of any other beaſte, ſo that there be no earth at all, & there will growe an herbe that ſhall haue the ſmell,

of Lettuſe, Alexāders, of Succorie, of Baſil, of leekes, and of Perſlie, and this is a thing proued.
         
         
            To make an Apple or ball that prouoketh ſleepe.
            TAke wild Poppy, the iuice of Mandragora, and leeſe of wine aſmuch of the one as of the other, and a little ciuet, and of all this make a rounde ball, and hold it in your hande, and ſmell to it, and it will make you ſleepe wonderfully.
         
         
            To make a barraine woman beare children.
            TAke of theſe little ſeafiſhes with many feete called in Latine Polipi or Polypodes, and roſte them vpon the embers without oile, and let the woman eate of them, and it ſhall profite and helpe her very muche, hauing in the meane time the company of a man.
         
         
            To make heares growe vpon a bald hed.
            TAke oile of Tartre, and warme it, and rubbe your hed with it, or other places wher you will heare ſhall growe, and within viij. or ten daies the heares wil come furth as thicke as before, and not onely make thoſe heares to grow which be fallen: but alſo maketh other to encreaſe more then there was afore, and whiche is more, if you rubbe the paulme of your hande with it, heares will growe there as well as in any other place.
         
         
            To make a water that dieth or coloreth copper into the colour of Golde.
            TAke the gall of a male gote, and another of a female gote, and a little Arſenick aſmuch vntill you ſe there is inough, and diſtille al togither, and wete and temper your copper in this water, but let the copper be firſt well ſkoored, and incontinent it will turne into the colour of Gold.
         
         
            To make oile of Brimſtone.
            
               TAke ten egges and ſeeth them till they be hard, then take of the ſhels and caſte the white and them awaie, ſo that there remaine nothing but the yelke, whiche you ſhall ſtampe, and take aſmuche brimſtone by weight, and make thereof pouder, and mengle all well togither: and ſo diſtill it with a ſlowe fire, and it wil be very good.
         
         
            For to make ſalt Armoniac.
            TAke a pounde of mans bloode, and two pounde of the bloode of an Oxe or other beaſte, and ſixe pound of well water, and mingle all togither: than ſtreine it with a linen cloth very harde & ſtraigte and ſet it on the fire where you ſhall leaue it vntill the water be conſumed, and that which ſhall remaine wil be good ſalt Armoniac.
            
         
         
            For to make Boraſe.
            TAke two vnces of Alome, and temper it with two vnces of ſalt Alcall whiche menne vſe to make glaſſe withall, then put it into ſome veſſel of tinne, and ſeeth it with a ſougth fire the ſpace of halfe an houre, and than take out the water, and take two vnces of ſalt Gemma beaten in pouder, and aſmuche of ſalt Alcall, and two pound of virgin Honny, and a pound of Cowe milke, amd mingle all togither with water, and ſet it three daies in the ſunne, and it will be made.
         
         
            For to make Corall.
            TAke the Hornes of a white male Goate, and make thē very cleane, then take a good ſharpe knife, and ſkrape them finely that the ſkrapinges maie be like pouder, then take pieces of Aſhe, and burne them, and of there aſhes you ſhall make lie which you ſhal ſtraine three times in a linen clothe, and put the ſkrapinges of the horne into it and mixe it well togither, and let it ſo remaine in infuſion

fiuetene daies. Then take ſome Vermillion made in pouder, and a little water and mengle it togither with the ſaid pouder, then you ſhall make the Corall with your handes, or as you will and let it drie: then polliſh it with the wheele or turne, and it will be like naturall Corall.
         
         
            To die Yron in the colour of Gold.
            
               Melancie, is an Ilande called melos one of the 
                     •
                  iclades.TAke Alome of Melancie, and beate it into pouder, then take a little ſea water, and mingle it togither: then heate your yron hote and ſteepe it in the ſame water, and ſet it a daie in the ſunne, and it will haue the colour of Gold.
         
         
            For to make Yron ſtrong and faire as ſiluer.
            TAke ſalt armoniac, and make it into pouder, and mingle it with vnſleckt lime, than put it in colde water, and mixe all well togither, this don heate your yron redhote, and deepe it in the ſaid water, and it wil become as white as Siluer.
         
         
            For to make a water that will take out incontinent letters from the Paper.
            TAke a pound of blewe vitrioll, three pound of ſalt peter, and foure vnces of vermillion & fiue pound of Alome, and ſtampe them all togither, and make thereof a poudre, and ſtille it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe with a ſmall fire, and there will come out two maner of waters the firſte white, and the ſecond greene. If you take a little of the firſte and laie it vpon the lefe of Paper writen, rubbing it with a greene clothe ſome what courſe or roughe, it will take awaie the letters from the paper, and leaue it as white, as if there had neuer ben incke vpon it. Alſo if you take of the ſaid water and heate it, and holde a ſheete of paper writen ouer the ſmoke of it, it wil become incontinent like as it had ben writen ten yeare before.
         
         
            To take a ſpotte of Oile out of Clothe.
            
               TAke oile of Tartre, and laie it vpon the ſpot, and take it of by and by againe, then waſhe it well with luke warme water, and three or four times with colde water, and the cloth will be as nete and as cleane as whan it was newe, and before the oile fell vpon it.
         
         
            To ſtanche the Bleeding at the noſe.
            TAke great Ciche peaſon, and laie them vpon a Tile in the fire vntill they be drie, and then make pouder of thē very fine, and put of it in his noſe, and the bleeding will ceaſe.
         
         
            To breake botches, impoſtumes, cartarres, or ſores, comming in the throte.
            TAke the drie dong of an Aſſe, and of ſwallowes, and make therof pouder, and put of it in water, or in wine hote, and gargel or waſh your throte oftentimes with it and you ſhal be deliuered.
         
         
            To take an Yron or arrowe hed out of a wounde.
            TAke the leaues of Palma Chriſti, and ſtampe thē, and at night laie of the iuice or ſucke of it vpon the wounde, and in the morning you ſhall finde the wounde ſo wide and large, and the yron or arrow hed ſo diſcouered that you maie take it out with your fingers.
         
         
            To make that yong Children ſhall haue no paine or greefe in their teeth.
            TAke an olde Cocke and cut of his combe, and take of the blood that commeth of it and rubbe their gommes with it, & they ſhall neuer feele paine.
         
         
            For to make a cleere voice.
            TAke the floures of an Elder tree, and drie them in the ſunne, but take heede they take no moiſture or wette, then make pouder of theim, and drinke of it with white wine euery morning faſting.
         
         
            
            For to faſten loſe teeth.
            TAke Frankenſens, Maſtick, and the pilles of Pomegranates, aſmuch of one as of the other, and make thereof a pouder: and whan you goe to bed, waſhe your teeth with a little good wine, then take of the ſaide pouder, and laie it vpon your Teeth, and they will waxe faſt and ſure in ſhort ſpace.
         
         
            For the Emorawdes.
            TAke a Torteſe, and put him in a pot well ſtopt vpon the fire, and let him alone vntill he be all burnt, then take the pot from the fire and take out the Torteſe, and make him into pouder: then firſt waſhe the Emorawdes with white wine very hote, then laie vpon them ſome of the ſaide pouder and in two or three times he ſhalbe healed.
         
         
            For one that hath his Sight troubled.
            TAke the lunges or lightes of a Barrow hogge with all the appurtenances, and ſeeth it in water, and whan it is ſoden let him holde his eies ouer the ſmoke of it, and in three or foure times doyng he ſhal be cured of that trouble.
         
         
            For one that is abroke or bruſten.
            TAke of the roote of Symphiton petreon, in Engliſh Bugle or Camfrey, and put of it into the bread that he eateth euery daie, and let him eate euery day of the ſaid roote either rawe or roſte, and it ſhal be a very healthfull thing for his diſeaſe.
         
         
            For one that hath his Coddes ſwollen.
            TAke Rue, and ſtampe it, and laie it vpon his Coddes, and immediatly thei will aſwage their ſwelling, whiche thing is ſufficiently proued.
         
         
            To make a woman that is wont to haue daughters to beare Sonnes alſo.
            
               KNow you that it is a hadde thing for a barraine woman to beare Children, and a greate gifte and grace of God to obtaine it, bicauſe the cauſes of ſterilite and baraineſſe be diuers, and without nomber: but to make a woman that beareth alwaies Doughters to beare alſo Sonnes, it is a thing very eaſy, and hath good ſucces, and hath ben diuers times proued. Wherefore if you will that your wiſe ſhall haue male children, eate an herbe called in Engliſh Mercurie, in Italie Mercorella, in French Mercuriale or Ferolle, whiche hath onely two ſeedes like vnto the genitories of a manne, and make her alſo eate of it before you company with her, and eate both of you the right ſtones of ſome beaſtes and of the ſkraping of an Elephantes toth.
         
         
            To make that the handes ſhall not chinke nor cleaue.
            TAke a Radiſhe roote, & make him hollow within vnto the bottom then take thre vnces of oile of Roſes, and an vnce of Turpentine or more, according to the greatneſſe of the Radiſhe, and then couer the ſaid radiſhe and leaue it in the hote aſhes or embers, vntill it be halfe conſumed, than take it out, and anoint your handes with it.
         
         
            For to make a mans Berde blacke.
            TAke Aqua fortis, and a peny weight of fine Siluer, and melte it in the ſaide water by the fire, and whā you wil occupie of it anoint the beard at the rootes of the heare with oile of Roſes, and with a ſpong wete your beard, ſo that you touche not the fleſhe, and lette it drie, than waſhe it with lie, wherein there hath be mirabolans and Pommegranades ſodden.
         
         
            To make a woman beare Childrē although it be not alwaies aſſured, yet it is the beſt remedy that can be founde.
            
               FIrſte cauſe the woman to be purged well and giue her ſome water of the baines of Aquario, or other mine of Brimſtone, then lette her eate of the fleſhe of a hare, and the man alſo as muche as is poſſible, that is to ſaie, leauing all other kinde of fleſh, thē take ye kinde of that Mercurie, that hath curled or wrinkled leaues, mugwort or mother wort, valerian, and make therof long, or round morſels without paſt, with greaſe, ſpices, cheeſe, and egges, and let her eate nothing els in the morning with breade three times a weeke continually, and let her drinke good wine, and parfume her ſelfe three daies togither with Frankenſens, Bay leaues, Nutmegges, Bengwine, & a little Muſke, and let the huſbād alſo take three morninges ſome of this poudre folowing. Take the ſmall ſkraping of Cipres, a dramme & a halfe of toune Creſſes, called in latine Naſturtium, long Pepper, Nutmegges, fine wood of Aloe, of eche of them half a peny weight, and the kidney and ſtones of a hedgehogge, dried and not burned, and make therof a pouder the which you ſhall take at three times with Malmeſey, and remaine viij.This ſtone is called in greke Acti
                  
                     •
                  es, and hath many goodly vertues, as you maie reade in Hermolaus barbarus in corollario. daies without the companie of her, and after hauing companied with her, let her ſleape, and carry vpon her lefte arme an Egle ſtone, not of the comō ſorte but of thoſe that be as hard as ſteele, and lette her alſo keepe euery daie vpon the reines of her backe a newe laide egge beaten with fiue or ſixe droppes of ſtrong blacke Vinaigre, and remoue it euery daie.
         
         
            To make a woman laboring, to bring forth her Child that can not be deliuered.
            TAke of the ſaid Egle ſtone, called in latine Lapis Aquilinus, and binde it vpon the lefte thigh of the woman, then giue her to drinke three vnces of white Lilies, and ſhe ſhall be deliuered incontinent in adding to it a little Safran and ſugar, and make her to vomite and neeſe. And if ſhe

be not deliuered for all this, or if the childe be dead in her body long afore, you muſt make this compoſition followyng, which is a thing experimēted. Take three handefuls of greene Maioram, and aſmuche of greene yſope, and ſtampe them togither, and preſſe them vntill you gette out three vnces of iuice, the whiche you ſhall ſtraine, and giue it her warme to drinke faſting, and let her eate nothing in fiue houres after, & ſhe ſhal be deliuered of her Childe without doubt, and if ſhe be not ſhe ſhall die, bicauſe ſhe is to weake, or els you muſt cut the Child out, bicauſe it may lie ouerthwart, and except theſe two caſes, ſhe ſhal not faile but be deliuered.
         
         
            For to make teeth that doe ake to fall out.
            TAke the roote of Crowe foote, called in latine Ranunculus, gathered in Maie, and drie it a little in an ouen, and keepe it all the yeare. Then take a litle of it beyng beaten or ſtamped, alſo take a little pitche made with clammy Turpentine, and put the ſaid roote in the hole of the ſaide toth that aketh, and if it haue no hole, put it vpon the toppe of the ſaid tooth, and laie the ſaide pitch vpon it, ſo that it be faſt to it, and let it remaine ſo three houres, and in two or three times doyng it at the moſt, the tooth wil fall in pieces within eight daies.
         
         
            A remedy for the falling ſicknes.
            TAke wheate ſlower, and kneath it with dewe gatherid in the morning on midiomer daie, & make therof a cake, the whiche you ſhall bake, and giue the patient to eate of it, and he ſhalbe healed.
         
         
            Againſt the Plage.
            TAke three vnces of the licour of the innar rin
                  •
                of an Aſhe tree and ſ
                  •
               ill it with three vnces of white wine, & giue the pacient drinke of it euery iij. houres, & within xxiiij. houres he ſhalbe cured.
         
         
            
            For the ſame.
            TAke three vnces of Walnuttes that be not yet full ripe, prepared and diſtilled, at midſomer, and let him that hath the plage drinke of it, and he ſhall be hole: but it ſhall be better to take the outward pilles of the Walnuttes in September whan thei be blacke, ſo that thei be not rotten, and diſtille them, and giue the pacient a glaſſe full of it to drinke, and let it be luke warme before he be lette blood, and this ſhall help him muche.
         
         
            For the putrefaction of the teeth.
            TAke the rootes of an herbe called in latine Pes Alexandrinus, and cut them very ſmal, and diſtill them with the beſt wine you can get, and holde a ſpone full of the water in your mouth, and you ſhall finde eaſe and remedy in ſhorte ſpace: for this healeth ſore and currupt teeth, and maketh them cleane: And beſides that, it helpeth much in purging and clenſing awaie of al maner of filth of the mouth.
         
         
            For the ſtinking of the breath, and to make the teeth white.
            TAke a pounde of ſkimmed Hony, halfe a pound of Aqua vite, three vnces of Lignum aloe, two vnces of gomme Arabick, Nuttemegges, Galingale, Cububes, Cinamome, Maſtick, Cloues, Spic, and Lauander newe, anna three drammes, two drammes of Amber beaten, mixe all this togither, and ſtill water of it in a limbeck, & this water will take awaie the ſtinking of the breath, whiten the teeth and maintaine helth long.
         
         
            A water to make cleane teeth.
            TAke ſalt Armoniac, and ſalt Gemma, three vnces of eche one, an vnce and a halfe of Alumen Such
                     •••
                  
                  num, and diſtil it, or temper it in two pounde of water, the ſpace of eight daies, and with this licour

diſtilled, or ſo tempered, you ſhal rubbe your teeth and they will be white.
         
         
            Another water to whiten teeth.
            TAke a pounde of ſalt well purged, and beaten, an vnce of Alumen Glaciale, and diſtill it in a limbeck, and mingle an vnce of the water, with an vnce of Plantaine water, and rubbe your teeth with the compoſition, and with cotten, and they will bee white and cleane.
         
         
            To take awaie the ſmell of Garlike, Leekes, or Onyons.
            AFter that you haue eaten Garlike, Leekes, or Onions, take the rote of Beete, and roſt it vnder embers, and eate it, and you ſhall ſee the effect: or els eate a piece of the roote of Zeduaria, and you ſhall not ſmell at all, and this is eaſier to be don than with the roote of Beete.
         
         
            A principall remedie for the flixe or laxe.
            TAke Panike beaten and ſtamped, and giue the patiēt drinke of it with claret wine, and he ſhall be cured. The ſaide Panike beyng alſo ſodden with Goates milke, and eatē twiſe a daie, at morning and night before meales, it worketh the like operatiō.
         
         
            For to make that heares ſhall not growe.
            TAke the ſkinnes or huſkes of greene Beanes, and make a plaiſter of them, and laie vpon the places where you wil that heare ſhal not grow, and if there be any they will fal of and grow no more.
         
         
            A very profitable remedie for the hardeneſſe of wemens breaſt after they be brought a bed.
            YOu muſt take wheate Bran, and ſeeth it with the iuice of Rue, and laie it vppon her breaſtes that be hardened after her liyng doun, and thei will waxe ſofte and ſupple. The like remedy is alſo

very good againſt the biting of Venimous beaſtes.
         
         
            For Apoſtumes, Botches, Cankers, or other ſwellinges.
            TAke Barley and Bran, and ſeeth them vntill they be like vnto a plaiſter very thicke, and laie it vpon the ſore and it ſhall help muche.
         
         
            To make wemens milke encreaſe.
            TAke Fenell ſeede, and ſeeth it in barley water, and giue the woman drinke of it, and her milke ſhall encreaſe abondantly. Alſo the broth or water that Ciche peaſon be ſodden in, is verie good for the like thing.
         
         
            To know whether there be any water in the wine or no.
            TAke rawe Peares, and pare theim and make them cleane, and cut them in the middes, or els take Mulberies, and caſt them into the wine: and if they ſwimme vpon the wine, it is pure & cleane without water, but if they ſinke to the bottom, theris water mixte with wine.
         
         
            To make Vinaigre.
            MEn make Vinaigre putting the wine in ſome veſſell, wherin Vinaigre hath ben before, and ſetting it in the ſunne, or by the fire, or putting into it newe and cleane tiles or brickes heate or made hote in the fire.
         
         
            To make drie Vinaigre, whiche maie be caried wher a man will.
            TAke wilde Cherries, whan they begin to waxe ripe, but the fruite of the tree called Cornus in latine, is better, and Mulberies or Blackberies whan they be redde, or the great greene Grape, & the wilde Acorne before it be ripe, and ſtampe all this 
                  •
               ogither, then take the beſt Vinaigre you can gette, and

incorporate all the ſaid thinges togither, and make of the paſt little loues, whiche you ſhal drie in the ſunne, and whan you will make Vinaigre, ſtiepe of the ſaide paſt in wine, and it will be good Vinaigre.
         
         
            Another compoſition for the ſame.
            TAke greene Grapes & ſtampe them, putting to thē ſome vinaigre, & a make paſte or dowe therof, whereof you ſhall make little loues and drie them in the ſunne: And whan you will make Vinaiger, ſtiepe theſe loues in as moche wine, as you ſhall ſee will ſuffiſe, and you ſhall haue ſtrong vinaigre.
         
         
            To make Roſe Vinaigre very ſweete and odoriferous.
            TAke good white Vinaigre, and put into it freſh and newe redde Roſes, or els drie, keping al togither in a veſſell well leaded within the ſpace of fourty daies, than take out the roſes, and but them into another veſſell, and keepe them in a colde place.
         
         
            To make Vinaigre of Graine.
            TAke an vnce of poudre of Graine, wherewith menne die fine clothe and put it into a ſufficient quantite of Vinaigre, and keepe it in the ſunne certaine daies in a veſſell leaded, and well couered, than keepe alſo togither, without ſeparating the Vinaigre from the Graine, and it will be the excellenteſt vinaigre of al, bicauſe the graine is very ſweete of ſauour and odoriferous, hartie, and hote, and for this cauſe it tempereth and moderateth the great colde of the Vinaigre.
         
         
            A preſeruatiue in time of Peſtilence or plage, and againſt all Ven
                  •
               m or poiſon, and biting of a madde Dogge.
            IF you eate before your meales, a Walnutte or two, two drie Figges, and ſome leaues of Gardine Rue, with a corne of ſalt, it will be a good preſeruatiue in the 
                  •
               ime of a plage, and againſte all

poiſon that a man eateth it. And the ſame beyng ſtamped and laied to the biting of a madde dogge it healeth it, ſo do Nutmegges alſo worke the like effect.
         
         
            Againſt ſtinking vermine called Pinneſes.
            
               They that haue trauailed in Frāce 
                     ••
                  owe what pinneſes be.YOu muſt anoint well the place wher you doubt this vermine will breede, with oile oliue mixte with the iuice of wormewoode, and there will breede none.
         
         
            To purge Coler and Fleame.
            TAke ſome little noſegaies of Colewortes, and put them in ſeething water, and leaue them in it after it hath begon to boile, while a man wil goe fiue or ſixe p
                  •
               ſe, then take them out of the water, and ſtampe them, and take the iuice of thi, and ſtraine it thorow a linen clothe, and kepe it in an earthen veſſell the ſpace of a night in the aire abrode, then put to it ſome cornes of Salt, and a littel Commine cut ſmall or minſed. Nowe, he that will purge him ſelfe, and take this medecine, muſte goe to bedde ſupperleſſe, and waſhe well his legges, handes, and armes with hote water, and drinke the ſaide iuice ſo made, in the morning, and walke vpon it three or foure houres, and whan he hath luſt to vomite, lette him vomite and he ſhall caſte vp ſo muche Coler and Flegme that it ſhalbe a meruelous thing to ſe. And beſides this, this iuice will purge alſo his head.
         
         
            A remedie to keepe flies from fleſhe.
            IF you laie an Onion vpon the fleſhe, there will neuer flie come neere the fleſhe as farre as the ſauour of the onion extendeth.
         
         
            To keepe Fleſh all the ſomer without corrupting.
            COuer the Fleſhe in Meale, Flower, or Bran, and it ſhall not marre in a longe time. The like ſhalbe done if you caſt vpon the fleſhe Coriander ſeede beaten and mingled with Vinaigre.
         
         
            
            To knowe if a Melon be good.
            MEn ſaie comonly that a Melon is good whan the taile is bitter, and the head of him harde, and is very heuie.
         
         
            To kill and deſtroie Flees.
            TAke Penniriall whan it is in bloſſome, and burne it where the flees be, and the ſmell of that will kil and deſtroie them.
         
         
            To ripe a botch, impoſtume, felon or cattes heare, or any ſwelling ſore.
            TAke Hogges ſuet or greaſe, or els Larde, and laie it vpon the ſore or Botche, and it will ripe incontinent. Alſo be that hath many life or nittes in his hedde, anointing and rubbing it well with the ſaid ſuet or lard they will die. Alſo the oile of Laurell or baies will do the like.
         
         
            An excellent waſhing for the teeth.
            TAke the floures of Pōmegranades, and ſeeth them in Wine, and take of this wine in your mouth for it hath the vertue of reſtraining & faſtening the gommes ſwollen, and to make the fleſhe fine.
         
         
            To make abaite for riuer fiſhe.
            TAke the blood and the fleſhe of a calfe and minſe it togither, and put it in a veſſell, and let it remaine ſo the ſpace of ten daies, and then occupie it.
         
         
            A remedie that no kinde of herbes ſhal be hurt or corrupted by flees or liſe.
            WIth the Herbes that you will ſowe you muſt ſowe alſo roket, or els waſhe the ſeedes of the Herbes that you will ſowe in the iuice of Singreene, and whan the herbes be come by they ſhal neuer be hurt nor corrupted by liſe nor flees.
         
         
            
            To driue awaie the ſtinking Vermin called Puneſes.
            If you ſteepe Rue in water, and ſprinkle your houſe or place where this vermine is you ſhall driue them all awaie. Alſo yf you laie in your bedde ſteede a braūche of hempe, you ſhall not be moleſted with Pinaiſes. Alſo rubbing your bedde ſteede with liquid or ſofte pitch whiche ſome thinke to be tarre, and the iuice of wilde Cowcombers, and the Pinneſes that be there will die. Likewiſe if you rubbe your bedſtead with Squilla, ſtamped with Vinaigre or with the leaues of a Cedar tree ſodden in oile, you ſhal neuer feele Pinneſe. The like ſhalbe don if you rubbe your bedſteed, with fiſhe glue ſodden. Alſo if you ſette vnder the bedde a paile full of water, the Pinneſes will not trouble you at all.
         
         
            For to Kill and destroie Flies.
            TAke white Elebore, and ſteepe it in milke or ſodden wine, than put to it ſome Auripigmentum otherwiſe called Arſenick or orpine, & ſprinkle your houſe with it, and you ſhall deſtroie all the flies. Alſo the decoction of Eldern caſt about the houſe worketh the like effect.
         
         
            Another waie to Kill and deſtroie Flees.
            WOrmwoode, or wild Cowcomber rootes ſtieped in ſea water, deſtroieth flees: ſo doth the water wherein M
                     •
                  lanthium otherwiſe called Nigella Romana hath ben ſtieped, caſting it about your houſe. Alſo if you boile or ſeeth the water with Roſe cakes, or with hempe ſeeds, and caſting it about your houſe it will do the like.
         
         
            For one that hath eaten venimous tadſtooles or Muſheroms.
            THere is no preſenter remedy for him that hath eaten venimous Muſheroms or Tadſtooles, than to make him vomite as ſone as maie bee

poſſible in giuing him drinke the rootes of the leaues of Rue well ſtampt, and of Organy, and Hony, and after that, the vſe of Triacle which ſhal be very good, and Mithridatum with ſtrōg vinaigre,Oximellū ſcylliticum, is hony and vinaigre ſoden togither, hauing the rootes of Scylla ſtieped in it. or with Oximellum ſcylliticum, or els with Aqua vite. Alſo to eate raw Garlike helpeth muche in ſuch a cace, which the moſt parte of the peiſantes of the countrey doe, vſing it in ſteede of Triacle.
         
         
            For to confite Muſheroms or tadſtooles, ſo well that a man maie eate them without any danger.
            SEyng that Muſheroms or Tadſtooles are ſo pleaſant in taſte that menne can not abſtaine from them, lette them learne at the leſt waye the meane to aſſure thēſelues from the danger that maie enſue, doyng as foloweth. Firſte of all ſeeth them with wild peares, or with the leaues of the tree that beareth the ſaid peares. And if you can finde no wild peares, you maie do it with garden peares, ſo that they be naturally ſower and ſharpe, and ſucke as can not well be eaten but thei muſt be roſted, and you maie take them either drie or greene, and they will take awaie all the danger of the venime or poiſon.
         
         
            A remedy againſt the ſtinging of waſpes, or Bees.
            TAke Oxe dung ſprinkled ouer with Vinaigre, or els take Mallowe leaues ſo vſed with Vinaigre, or in touching the ſtinging with an yron, it is done alſo with the milke of Figges.
         
         
            To make wemen haue a quicke and ſpeedy deliuery of their Children, and without paine, or at the l
                  •
               ſte very little.
            TAke leaues of Dittany, and ſtampe thē, or els make pouder of them, and giue the womā that laboreth drinke of it with a little water, and ſhe ſhalbe deliuered incontinent, and without any great paine or greefe,
         
         
            
            To take of wartes from the handes.
            TAke as many Ciche peaſon as there be wartes, and tutche eche of them with one of the Ciche peaſon, ſo that euery peaſe tutch his wart, then wrappe vp the ſaide peaſon in a little clout, and caſ
                  •
               e them behinde you, and al the wartes will drie vp.
         
         
            For the diſſenterie or flixe of the Stomacke.
            TAke greene beanes, poddes and al, and ſeede them with water and Vinaigre, & eate theim ſo poddes and all, and that ſhall ſtoppe you.
         
         
            To faſten the Gommes, and loſe teeth.
            TAke a little Mirre, and temper it with Wine and oile, and waſhe your mouth with all, & you ſhall ſee a wonderfull experience. The Mirre alſo killeth the wormes in a mans body, and beyng chewed in the mouth maketh a ſweete breath.
         
         
            To take awaie the toth ache.
            TAke Yſope, and make thereof a decoction with Vinaigre, and it being hote waſhe your mouth withall, & the paine of the teeth ſhall go awaie. The Yſope alſo beyng ſtampt, and incorporated with Honie, and a little Nitrum, killeth the wormes in a mans body.
         
         
            Another remedy for to heale the tooth ache.
            BOile frogges with water and vinaigre, & waſh your mouth with the decoction, and it will be very profitable for the paine of the teeth.
         
         
            To make Heare growe.
            TAke three quicke Frogges, & burne them aliue in a pot, and mingle the aſhes that you make of them with hony or with tarre, whiche is farre better, and rubbe the place with it where you ſe there groweth no heare, and in ſhorte ſpace it will growe abondantly.
         
         
            
            To make Heare blacke.
            TAke leches or blood ſuckers, and let them rott the ſpace of three ſkore daies in red wine or vinaigre in ſome veſſell of leade, and anoint the heares with it in the ſunne, and thei will become black.
         
         
            To kill the wormes in the teeth, and to take awaie the ſtinking of the teeth.
            TAke a hundred frogges, and drie them al night in an ouen, ſo that they maie be made into a pouder: and put to it aſmuche ſalt beaten into pouder, & rubbe your teeth with it, & it will kill the wormes, and take awaie the euill ſauour of the teeth.
         
         
            To heale puſſiue and broken winded Horſes.
            TAke molin or longwort, and make therof a pouder, and giue it the horſe to drinke with his water, and it ſhal not onely take awaie the cough: but alſo heale him if he be altogither puſſife and broken winded. Alſo Gencian will doe the like, whiche thing is ſufficiently proued and tried.
         
         
            To preſerue a man from vomiting on the ſea.
            YOu muſt drinke the iuice of Wormewood, and you ſhalbe quite from ſuch paine, and vexation of vomiting.
         
         
            A remedy againſt the biting or ſtinging of Serpentes.
            TAke Aſhe leaues, and ſtampe them, and laie them vpō the place that is ſtonge, or els get out the iuice of them, and giue him drinke of it, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous effect, bicauſe that the Serpent is ſo great enemie vnto the Aſhe tree, that he would rather goe thorow the fire, then to paſſe by an Aſhe.
         
         
            For them that ſpitte Bloode.
            TAke fine Rie flower, and make thereof a cake, and whan it is bake giue it the pacient to eate,

as hote as he maye endure it, and it ſhal do him great eaſe.
         
         
            A remedy againſt the wormes in yong Children.
            
               Lupines, is a kinde of 
                     •
                  ulſe corne.TAke drie Lupines, and make flower of them, and kneath it with Hony and laie it vpon the ſtomacke of the Childeland it will heale him.
         
         
            A remedy for the flixe or Laxe.
            TAke greene Acornes and ſtampe them a little with the ſkinne and all, and with the endes of the yong and tender leaues, and make thereof diſtilled water in a limbeck, and giue the paciēt drink of it, and it ſhalbe a very good remedy.
         
         
            For the running of the vrine that is to ſaie for one that can not holde his water.
            TAke the ſmall endes of Oken leaues, and ſeeth them in Claret wine, and then ſtampe theim, and make a plaiſter of them, and laie it hote vpon the yarde of the pacient, & ſhortly he ſhalbe cured.
         
         
            For thoſe that can not keepe their meate but vomite it vp againe continually.
            TAke the tender leaues of an aſhe tree, and ſeeth them in ſtrong Vinaigre, and then ſtampe thē, and make therof a plaiſter, whiche you ſhal laie vpon the ſtomack of the pacient, or vpon his belly and he ſhalbe greatly eaſed of his diſeaſe.
         
         
            To make that Antes, or Emettes ſhall not eate the figges vpon the tree.
            TAke a kinde of Onyons, called in latine Cepa Scylliticae, & ſtampe them with Barrowes greaſe or lard, and anoint the foote of the plant a hādfull or two of height, and the Antes will not goe vp into the tree, and this muſt you do in Marche.
         
         
            To make Hore heares blacke.
            
               TAke mulberie leaues, vine leaues, & the leaues of a redde figge tree, and boile them with raine water, and waſhe your head with it, and the heares wilbe blacke.
         
         
            For the tooth ache.
            TAke the rootes and leaues of Chickwood, and boile them in water, with the whiche you ſhall waſhe your mouth, and hold it in your mouth a certaine ſpace, and it will take awaie your paine.
         
         
            To deſtroie Liſe and other ſmall beaſtes, that do waſt and marre the herbes in gardins.
            LEt a woman that hath her flowers walke three or foure times in the allees, and all the vermine will fall doune deade.
         
         
            A remedie for Deafneſſe.
            IF a man be Deffe by ſome accident and not by nature, take the iuice of Colewortes mixte with warme water, and droppe it into his eares, and he ſhal finde a meruelous eaſe and remedy.
         
         
            Againſt the ſtinging of Scorpions.
            TAke Penniriall either drie or greene, and ſtampe it with good wine, and make thereof a plaiſter, which you ſhal laie vpon the wounde or ſtinging of the Scorpion, and he ſhal be ſafe, and healed.
         
         
            A remedy that the Sunne ſhall not hurt you ſhining vpon your head, whan you go any Iornaie.
            IF you put a little branche of Penniriall in eche eare, the Sunne ſhall neuer make your head ake whan it ſhineth vpon it.
         
         
            A remedie for the Horſneſſe of the voice.
            IF by colde you be Horſe, take Penniriall, and ſeeth it in water, and take of it at night whan you go to bed, a diſhefull ſomewhat hote, with a

little ſugar molten in it, and doing this three or foure times, you ſhalbe ridde of your Horeſneſſe, and haue a clere voice.
         
         
            A remedie for them that can not piſſe.
            TAke fiue or ſixe leekes, and frie thē in the oile of Scorpiōs, and then ſtampe them and make of them a plaiſter and laie it vpon their coddes as hote as they maie endure it. Alſo the beard or heare of Leekes will doe the like, if ther bee dried, and made in pouder, and giuen thē to drinke in white Wine, and will make the grauell, and ſmall ſtones to come out.
         
         
            To make a baite to ketch wilde Geeſe and wilde Duckes, and all other ſort of foule.
            TAke the ſeede of Belenge and the rootes alſo, and ſteepe theim in water the ſpace of a daye and a night with the ſeedes: than ſeeth the ſaid thinges with the water that thei were ſteeped in, ſo that the ſeede maie well drinke and ſoke vp the ſaide water: than laie the ſaid ſeede or graine in the places where wilde Duckes and wild Geeſe are wont to reſt, and they will eate this graine or ſeede thus prepared and therupon will ſleepe as they were drunke and in the meane time you maie take them with your hādes▪ but there muſt be a great quātite of this Belenge ſpecially for wilde Geeſe. This maie alſo ſerue to take al other maner of foule that go togither in ſholes or cō
               panies. Men vſe to ſeeth this graine with brimſtone and laie it in the places where birdes and foule are wont to feede and al that eate of it, wil fall doune and die: but to kepe them that they die not, you muſt giue them to drinke oile oliue, and ſhortly after they will reuiue againe.
         
         
            To make that Dogges ſhall neuer be madde, and a remedie for them if they be madde, beyng bitten of wilde Dogges or wolues.
            
               IF you cut of the Dogges taile within thirty or fourty daies after he is whelpt, he ſhall neuer be madde, onles he be bittē of ſome madde dogge or wolfe: for if he be bittē, you muſt giue him to eate the ſpace of thirty daie continually Hennes dunge with breade or other meate, laiyng vpō the place ſo bitten, a plaiſter, of the rootes of wild Roſes, and put a colla
                  •
                of it about his necke, and in the wound ſome Garlike or Onyons ſtampt, and if you be nighe vnto the ſea, caſte him into it euery daie twiſe or thriſe, ſo that he maie thorowly waſhe, and continue ſo the ſpace of twenty daies, bicauſe the ſea water hath a vertue againſt the madneſſe of Dogges.
         
         
            To make that flies ſhall not vexe or trouble Dogges.
            TAke the greene outward ſhale of Walnuttes, and ſtampe them, and anoint the dogge with it where the flies vexe him, and ſpecially in the eares, and the flies ſhall not tutche him.
         
         
            A remedy to keepe Dogges from Flees.
            RUbbe the Dogges ouer with oile oliue, and they will die incontinent, or els take the roote of Belenge and ſeeth it water, with the which you ſhall waſhe the Dogges, and if there be any flees they will die, or if you take the iuice of the leaues of it, and rubbe them with it twiſe or thriſe. The like effect will the water of Toruiſque worke, if you waſhe the Dogges well with it, but true it is that thei muſte be waſhed afterward with cleane water, for if the dogge ſhould tutche that water with his tonge, it wold hurt him, bicauſe it is very venimous.
         
         
            To purge Dogges whan they be ſicke.
            IF dogges haue any wounde, you muſt heale thē with molten pitche mixte with oile oliue, and rubbe the wounde euery daie with it. If thei be otherwiſe ſicke you muſt purge them, in gi
                  •
               ing them

drink whey of goates milke. This don ſeeth a ſhewes head, ſkin, and heare and all, and put a little Gi
                  •
               ger in it, and make them eate it hote with the broth and al togither.
         
         
            To heale mangy Dogges.
            IF you kill a calf, take the blood of him hote, and ſm
                  •
               re it vpon the dogge where he hath the diſeaſe, and whan that is drie plaſter him ouer againe with calues blood warme as it is whan it commeth from the calfe, & this muſt be done diuers times. And thē waſhe him well with lie made with the aſhes of the ſhrubbes or twigges of Vines. It ſhall be alſo good to caſte him ſome time into the fattes or tubbes wher they die cheuerell, and there waſhe him well, for that clenſeth meruelouſly, ſome waſhe Dogges in the water that mirre hath bene ſtioped in. It ſhalbe good alſo to take a little good plaſter of Paris with aſmuche of the ſeede of Alegre
                  •
               , and ſtampe them wet togither, and mingle them with molten pitche, and anoint the Dogge with that, whiche is alſo good for menne.
         
         
            To 
                  •
               ake wartes from the handes.
            TAke earth and kneth it with Dogges piſſe, and laie it vpon the Wartes, and they will drie vp and conſume awaie.
         
         
            To make the Teeth white.
            TAke Goates horne and burne it, and make therof pouder, and rubbe your teeth with it, and they will be white, and will alſo faſten and confirme the Gommes.
         
         
            To take awaie the paine of the eyes.
            TAke the Langes or Lightes of a 
                  •
               idde hote as they be taken out of his belly, and laie them vpon the eies of the pa
                  •
               ient, and it ſhall take his paine fr
                  ••
                him.
         
         
            
            For him that is ſtong with a Salamander.
            TAke Roſen prepared and compounde with Honie in maner of an electuarie, and let him drink it with the decoction of Nettle leaues: But he that by fortune hath eaten of a Salamander muſt vomite, in giuing him drinke diuers times oile, and making him ſharpe gliſteres, for to drawe the venim out, and to comfort his harte after, in giuinge him good triacle and mithridate, and that his meate be fat fleſhe of yong beaſtes.
         
         
            For one that hath dronke Leches or bloodſuckers.
            GIue him drinke of ſome brine, and the iuice of Beetes with Vinaigre, and you ſhall kill the beaſt, that hurteth ſo that it choketh the pacient ſticking faſt at the mouth of his ſtomacke.
         
         
            For one that is ſtonge with the beaſt called in latine Pſalanx which is a kinde of Liſard called Stellio.
            YOu muſte ſinge and plaie vpon diuers inſtrumentes, and make the pacient to daunce continually vntill he be healed.
         
         
            For one that is bitten with a madde Dogge.
            YOu muſte vſe all diligence to get immediatly the Liuar of the ſame madde dogge, and let the pacient eate it hote roſted,Cucurbitulae, be certaine cuppes that ſurgeons doe vſe to dra
                     •
                  e out bloode with by ſkariſſyng the ſkin called cupping. and aboue all thinges you muſt enlarge the wounde with a raſour, and cut away al the torne and periſhed fleſh, and cauſe the blood to iſſue out abondantly becauſe it bringeth the venime with it: And to drawe out blood alſo with little cuppes wel flamed, called Cucurbitulae, & to giue him garlike, onyons and other like thinges to eate, and to drinke Milke, and good, ſweete wine.
         
         
            A remedy for him that is ſtonge with ſome Venimous Beaſt.
            TO get the Venim out of the fleſhe & the blood of him that is ſtong venemouſly in any maner

of ſorte, the beſte and the chiefeſt remedy that can be founde, is to ſucke out the Venim with a mās mouth: but you muſt note that he that ſhall ſucke it out maie not be faſting, but muſt haue eaten ſome thing, ſpecially fatte and greaſie thinges his belly full. Then hauing waſhed his mouth with good wine, let him take into his mouth ſome oile oliue, and let him beginne to ſuck: Then to enlarge the place that was ſtong, with a raſour, that the venim may come the better out, and ſet theſe cuppes called Cucurbitulae, vnder with muche ſtame for to drawe it out. This done make him a plaiſter vpon it with Garlike and Onyons ſtampt ſmall, and waſhe the place with hote vinaigre, The diet of the paciēt muſt be the blades or leaues of leekes, garlike and Onions, with Pepper and ſalte inough, and muche bread, good wine with organy, and the ſeedes of Nettles, Baie berries, and Genuper berries, the fleſhe of Hedge hogges of the lande, and citrous with their ſeede.
         
         
            To preſerue a man from Poiſon.
            TAke drie Figges, and eate them with Walnuttes, or rawe Citrōs, the ſeedes of nauewes which is a kinde of rape drunke with wine, or els the leaues of Calamint, and Terra ſigillata, and ruddle or red chalke, in taking of al theſe thinges a dramme at a time, and like wiſe the leaues of Rue eaten with a walnut, two drie figges, and a corne of ſalte, vſing daily theſe ſimples you ſhall be preſerued from poiſon. As concerninge compoundes, the principall of all Antidotes or conterpoiſons is mithridate and triacle, for in taking euery daie the quantite of a Haſill nut of Triacle there ſhall neuer Poiſon hurte you.
         
         
            To driue awaie all venimous beaſtes from your houſe.
            TAke Iuniper, the ſeede of Agnus caſtus, the ſhelles of riuer creuices, Hartes horne, the greaſe or ſuet

of a Bucke, Kerſe or toune Creſſes, Organy, and Dittany, and make of all theſe droges a dowe or paſt, and whan you will vſe it occupie it, burne it, for where as the ſmoke thereof goeth the beaſtes will voide awaie.
         
         
            Againſt all poiſon, eaten or drunke.
            HAuing knowledge that any man is poiſoned, the chiefe remedie is to make him vomite the poiſon, in giuing him oile oliue luke warme to drinke, alone, or mixte with water, & if you haue no Oile, giue him Butter with hote water, or with the decoction of line ſeede, or the ſeede of nettles, or of Scinigrecum, and all theſe thinges purge the venim as well dounewarde as vpward after hauinge made him vomite diuers times, you muſte purge him with ſharpe gliſters douneward: then giue him water mixte with Honie, and alſo olde Wine ynough to drinke. But if you can get good Triacle or Mitridate, they are the principall againſt poyſons with Terra ſigillata, Acorne ſhels, and giue him of it in good wine. Let his meate be the fatte fleſhe of olde beaſtes, and fatte brothes, ſpecially of Hennes and fatte fiſhe, and lette him not ſleepe, & in continuyng this meanes he ſhall be deliuerid, by the helpe of God.
         
         
            Againſt all Venim or Poiſon.
            TAke a quantite of Flies, and drie theim, and make pouder of them, and giue it him that is poiſoned to drinke in wine, and immediatly he ſhalbe cured.
         
         
            A remedy whiche king Nicomedes vſed that no poiſon ſhould hurt him.
            TAke Iuniper Berries, Terra ſigillata or ruddle, of eche of them two drammes, and make it in to pouder very ſmall, the whiche you ſhall mixe

with hony, or oile oliue, and ſo kepe it. And whan you will occupie it, take the biggeneſſe of a haſell nut of it at a time, with water mixt with hony, and you ſhalbe aſſured not to bee poiſoned, for in eatinge poiſoned meate after it, as ſone as it is in your ſtomacke, there will come vpon you a vomiting, ſo that you ſhalbe conſtrained to caſt vp the meate and the poiſon togither: but if there be none in your meate, the ſaid preparatiue will not hurt you at all.
         
         
            A ſecret or remedy, not to be ſtonge of Scorpions.
            CArry about you of the roote of Polimonia, or Polimonium, and you ſhall neuer be ſtong of Scorpions, and if you be ſtong with them they ſhall do you no hurt.
         
         
            A remedy not to be ſtong of weſpes or Bees.
            TAke Mallowes & ſtampe them with oile oliue, and where as you anointe your ſelfe with the vnction, neuer flies, Weſpes, nor Bees will tutche you.
         
         
            To make what quantite of ſtrong Vinaigre you will.
            TAke Squilla, which is a kinde of an Onyon, and take the leaues of from it, & tie it vpon a threde, and leaue it fiue or ſixe daies in the aier. Tha
                  •
                plonge it into the veſſell of wine that you will make Vinaigre of, and there muſte be ſo muche voide ſpace in the veſſell that the Squilla, maie not tutche the wine beyng tied by the bong, and let it hange ſo fiue or ſixe daies, and the Wine wil become ſtronge and ſharpe, and will turne into good Vinaigre.
         
         
            For one that hath eaten venemous muſheroms or Tadſtooles.
            THe cheefeſt thing is, that he be made to vomite in giuing him drinke oile oliue, and lie made of the Aſhes of the ſhrubbes of vines, or of the brā
               ches of a wilde peare tree, with ſalt and vinaigre tempred

with water. Hennes Egges alſo be good beyng drunke with Vinaigre tempered with water. And theſe remedies be good for any man that hath drunke Plaſter, or eaten any thinge that choketh, or him to whome ſome manne hath giuen menſtruall blood to drinke, as wicked wemen ſome time doe.
         
         
            To be aſſured and ſafe from all Sorcerie and Enchantement.
            TAke Squilla, and tie it vpon the principall gate or doore of your houſe, and you ſhall aſſure all the inhabitantes in it from all ſorcerie and enchantmentes. Alſo this Squilla, aſſureth and kepeth al plantes and trees that are about the houſe, where it is planted or ſet, from all noiſomneſſe and infection of the ayer.
         
         
            Againſt lightning and tempeſt.
            IN the place where there is tied the ſkinne of a beaſt called in latine Hyena, or of a Cocodrille,Hyppopotamus, is a beaſt liuing in the riuer of Nile hauing feete like an oxe his back and mane like a horſe, a winding tayle and tuſked like a Bore, and neyeth like a horſe. or of a Hyppopotame, or of a ſea Calfe or ſeale the lightening tempeſt and thonder will neuer fall there, nor likewiſe vpon a haye tree nor figge tree.
         
         
            To keepe that fruites ſhall not fall before they be ripe.
            IF you tie wilde Figges vpon the trees in your Garden from the whiche your fruite falleth, it ſhall not onely not fall doune, but alſo theſe figges will keepe them ſafe.
         
         
            To keepe that weſels and other like beaſtes ſhall not eate nor deſtroy Poultrie.
            RUbbe your Pultrie with the iuice of Rue or herbe grace, and the Weſels ſhall do them no hurt, alſo if they eate the Lunges or lightes of a Foxe, the Foxes will not eate them.
         
         
            
            To make Flaxe as ſofte as Silke.
            TAke what quantite of Flaxe you will that is good and faire, & kembe it as ready to be ſponne: Then take freſhe and recent Calues dunge as muche as will ſuffiſe to paſte ouer the ſaide flaxe, and lette it be well waſhed after it hath remained fiue or ſixe houres ſo ſoked and couered with the dunge, and it will be as ſofte as ſilke, & maie be ſponne as fine as a man will.
         
         
            To heale the paine of the Head.
            TAke Maioram, and preſſe out the iuice of it, and let the pacient take of it into his Noſe.
         
         
            To heale lippes that be clefte and full of chinkes by meanes of colde or winde.
            TAke gomme Arabike, and Dragant, aſmuch of the one as of the other and make pouder of it, and incorporate it with Oile of Violettes, and anoint your lippes therwith.
         
         
            To heale handes that be full of Chappes by colde or winde.
            TAke maſtike, frankences, newe waxe, and oile of roſes, & make of all this an vnguent or ointmēt, and anoint the chappes or chinkes of your handes, and they will immediatly be hole.
         
         
            To grinde Golde and Siluer.
            TAke the cutting or paringe of beaten Golde the value of halfe a croune, than take ſome gomme Arabick aſmuche as two beanes, and ſtiepe it in ſo little water that it ſkant becouered ouer, and leaue it ſo a night: than braie it a little vpon a marble ſtone, and put to it the Golde by litlle and little, and incorporate it well with the gomme. Then braie it ſlightly the ſpace of two houres, in gathering it vp vnder the ſtone that grindeth it: for in ſpreading it abrode much of it is loſt, and with a penſill weate the Golde rounde about, for ſeare leſſe it

ſhould drie: for you ſhould loſe it bicauſe of the gomme that maketh it to drie vp: Then you ſhall take half an vnce of ſalt peter, whiche you ſhall put in a little c
                  •
               fer or caſket of yron, and put to it ſo muche water that it maie be ſcant couered, and boile it on the fire ſkimming it well, then ſtraine it with a double linen cloth and thicke, and let it coole, and it will congele and be white: Then braie it with the Golde the ſpace of an houre and a halfe, and than it is grounde. This don take it vp with a fine penſill, and putte it in a cuppe or goblet of glaſſe, and reſolue all into water. Than muſt you haue ready three or foure cuppes of Glaſſe for to empty the water in from hand to hand: then put the water vpon the Golde, and with the ende of your finger waſhe it well with the Gomme and ſalt peter, and you ſhall empty the water from hand to hand into the cuppes of glaſſe. Alſo you muſte haue ready ſome ſhelles cleane and drie for to put it in: and the Golde beyng well waſhed in the cuppe or goblet, let there be a little water in it, and ſturre the Golde with a pinne, and you ſhall empty by little and little in the diſhe all that quantite whiche you thinke you will cut of, and make thereof ſuche meaſure that you maie haue your money againe. And you muſt knowe that there is alwaies half in half gotten vpon it. And in emptiyng it mixe it well togither, to the ende that the courſe maie goe to the bottom and mingle it not with the fine, for you ſhould do hurte vnto your worke and your ſelfe wronge: but keepe it, for you maie grinde it ones againe, and whan it is in the diſhe, you ſhall holde it ouer a flambing cole, not letting it reſt ſtill but remouing it faire and ſoftly and it will waxe drie, & ſeeme fayrer to the eye. And thā kepe it from all filth, & duſt.
         
         
            To make faire Verdegriſe after the newe facion.
            TAke ſtrong Vinaigre, and viij. vnces of the ſiling or ſkales of Copper well made cleane from all duſt, foure vnces of Baye ſalt, two vnces of
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
         
         
            
               
it, and than facion what bede ſtones you will, & make the hole of them little, and lette them drie well in the ſunne, and if you bake them in an ouen, they wil dure longer, and will be ſtronger. Than giue them a light colour with hole armenick, & the white of an egge, & laie ſiluer foile very fine vpon them, but weate it firſt with water: and then poliſh thē with a dogges tooth, and make them gliſter and ſhine. Then take the ſhearinges or paringes of parchement that be white and not colored or painted, and waſhe them with luke warme water, and boile them in a newe potte, vntill they be well ſodden, and ſomewhat ingroſſed & waxen to a ſubſtance or body, then ſtraine them finely, and whan you will occupie them about your worke, lette them be luke warme: Than take your Perle and put it vpon the ende of a needle, or ſome other fine or ſmal yron, to the intent the hole be not ſtopt, and ſo plonge it into the ſaid parchemēt glue, & take it out quickly againe, and turne it round that the glue maie not reſt in one place of it, but that it maie be of like thickneſſe rounde about the Perle, and if it appeare not thicke inough vnto you, dippe it in againe, and it will ſhewe better, that is to faie the whitneſſe will ſhine vnder the glue, & will make a certaine obſcure marke with in, and gliſtering without, ſo that it ſhall ſeeme a naturall colour of a Perle. And whan you ſhall compare him with a naturall Perle, this ſhal appeare alwaies fairer to the eye, bicauſe it hath more gloſſe and luſtre and ſhalbe roūder. And for to make theſe your Perles to be more eſteemed keepe them in little boxes, and ſhewe but a fewe of them at ones, and if you will win muche you muſt make many of them.
         
         
            To imprent medalles in boſt with Dragagant.
            TAke ſixe vnces of Dragagant, and ſtiepe if in ſtrong Vinaigre the ſpace of three daies. Then ſtampe or beate it well, and ingroſſe it into a

bodie or ſubſtance with pla
                  •
               ter ground very ſmal, and if you will make them of other colours, put into it what pouder you will, be it white or Orpimēt, ſo that the paſt maie be ſomewhat harde, and all well incorporated togither. Then take your hollow formes or mouldes, and annoint them a little, and fil them with the ſaide paſte, and preſſe it well doune, and let it drie in the ſunne, & you ſhall haue the printe of your molde neete and fine. And of this paſt you maie make alſo other workes as you will as bedes ſtones or other.
         
         
            To make a paſt meete and good to make all maner of medalles or pictures in moulde.
            TAke the bones of the legges of all ſorte of beaſtes, and put them in a pot after they be broken: and couer them well, and ſe
                  •
                them in a bricke makers fourneſe. And whan they be cold again ſtampe them and braie them very ſmall. This done take the floure or offall of yron that is beaten from it whan it is hote and waſhe it well & cleane, and whan it is drie againe, ſtampe it and braie it very ſmall vpon a marble ſtone, and weate it much with ſtrong vinaigre vntill it bee like as it were an ointment, then put it in a pot well couered, and ſet it in the ſaid fournaiſe: and whan it is cold braie it againe vpō the marble, arrowſing & watring it with a little Aqua vite, and let it drie, and it is made. This don, you ſhal take a diſhe full of the ſaid floure or offall of yron, and two diſhes full of the firſt pouder, and incorporate thē well togither, and when you wil make the paſt for to make your medalles in the moulde, weate the ſaide pouder with ſalt water, Vinaigre, Piſſe, or Lie, and mingle and incorporate wel all togither, and then frame your medalles in the moulde, and let them drie. This done caſt in your mettall, or what you will make, and your medalles ſhalbe very faire and nete.
         
         
            To make medalles, and figures chaced and imboſſed,

with Fiſhe glue.
            
               Fishe glue is that whiche Ioyners do vſe comonly.TAke a ſliſe of fiſhe glue or more or leſſe, & beate it well with a hammer vpon a flint ſtone, than waſhe it well in freſhe water, and finally with luke warme water, and than put it in a newe pot, and put ſome cleere water vpō it, and let it ſtiepe a night, then put a little fire or embers in a chafing diſhe, and boile all in this little pot faire and ſoftly the ſpace of an houre and more, vntill you maie perceiue that it is incorporated, or els proue it otherwiſe in puttinge a droppe vpō your naile, & if it bide firme, faſt & cleane, take it from the fire, and caſte it vpon your medalles that you haue made ready, and let them be in this maner following. Take your chaced and imboſſed medalles, and laie rounde about theim a little waxe candell, to the intent that the glue fall not by, and anoint it: with hony, and laie on the glue ſo thicke that all the imboſſing maie be couered: than ſet it in the ſunne, and let it be equall, and ſo let it drie, and whan it is dried inough, it wil lenſe it ſelf from the medalle, and will be as thinne and as fine as paper and all the liniamentes very well ſeene and perceaued be thei neuer ſo ſubtile and ſmall, and will haue a good gloſſe or luſtre, and folde them, & bowe them which waie you will and they wil not breake, and if you will alter the colour of them, colour the water with Saffran or verdegriſe, ſo that it be ſkant colored, and vſe this water to ſeeth the glue in, ſo that it be not to thicke: for than your worke would be to groſſe, and not faire to looke to, and you maie alſo giue it a colour within ſide or paynt it without, and it wilbe a very faire thing.
         
         
            To make a Greene, Yellow, Redde and Blewe colour without thickneſſe, for to write with vpon Paper.
            TAke Verdegriſe groſly beaten, and put it in a violl with Vinaigre very ſtrong, and put to it

alſo a little Gomme arabike and a little iuice of Rue, & the violl beinge ſo full, ſtoppe it, & ſet it in the ſunne the ſpace of xv. or xx. daies, or els boile it vpon the fire, and than ſtraine it, and let the verdegriſe be well molten: this done put it into the violle againe, and keepe it well from duſt, and whan you will occupie any of it, ſturre it wel togither that it maie be thicke and troubled, and write or paint with it, and it will be a faire greene. For to make the redde take hedde lie, and put into it ſome verzine cut in ſmal pieces, and let it ſteepe therin a night: then put to it a little alome, and boile it vntill it decreaſe of the thirde parte: then ſtraine it, and keepe it againſt you will occupie it. And whan you will put it in effecte, take aſmuche as ſhall ſerue you, and boile it againe, and put to it ſome Gomme Arabick, and the more you put in the redder and cleerer it wil be, but let it be hote, and if you will haue it cleere, pot into it a little Alome beaten, but very little at ones, & you ſhal make what colour you will, redde, darke, or bright. For to make the yellowe, take little apples of Spinceruin, not fully ripe, and ſtampe theim groſſely in a morter: then ſtiepe them in hed lie, and ſeeth them vntill they decreaſe and diminiſhe of the third part, and ſtraine them finely: and then ſet again on the ſaid broth, and put into it a little Alom beaten, and whā you ſee it begin to boile take it from the fire, for els it would all go out, and ſtraine it ones againe, and ſo keepe it againſt ye haue neede of it, and whan you will occupie it, ſturre it and trouble it, and laie it on any thing you will very thinne, and you ſhal make a faire yellow whiche ſhall continew a long time, and if you adde to it a little Saffran, it will be liuelier and brighter. For to make the Blewe, take Palma Chriſti, that commeth out of Germanie whiche is like the flower of woad, and ſtiepe it a nighte in piſſe, and in the morning braie it vpon a marble ſtone, and put amonge it a little vnſicked lime aſmuche as you ſhall

thinke good, according as you ſhal ſee the colour come cleere or dimme, and temper or ſtiepe it with nothing els but with piſſe, and it wil continue a yeare or more alwaies of one colour, and whan you will put it in effect, ſturre and trouble it well within the violle: and take a pen or a penſill and weate it, and you ſhall ſee a faire Blewe: and if you will giue it a gloſſe or luſtre, ſtiepe it with the ſaide piſſe, and ſome Gomme arahicke.
         
         
            To make a piece of violet cloth to write or paint vpon.
            TAke of theſe litle apples of walwort tree which comonly groweth on dike ſides, and ſtampe thē in a morter, and after they be well ſtāped, leaue them in ſome warme place, vntil thei rotte and putrifie, then ſtampe them again, and get aſmuch iuice out of them as you cā by preſſing them in a preſſe, hauing firſt made ready your peeces of cloth cleane and fine, and old, and take half a diſhe full of quicke lime, and weate it in a baſen, ſo that whā it is wel weate, there maie be two or three diſhes full of water aboue the lime, and no more, and poure it out handſomely that it maie be cleere, and ſtiepe therin your peeces of cloth well, then take them out and drie them in the ſhadow. This done, take ſome cleere water, and putte ſome Alome into it, and boile it, and ſeeth your peeces in it the ſpace of a Credo: then take them out, and let them drie in the ſhadow, and whan they be drie, ſtiepe them in the ſaid iuice two or three times, and at euery time let them drie in the ſhadowe, and in the winde vpon a net, and let them be flatte to the intent that the colour ronne not at one ſide, and they ſhalbe made and well colored, and ſo keepe them well from duſt, and from the aier that the colour go not of. And this is the perfite and true ſecrete to trimme and dreſſe peeces that men make to paint vpon, and to take all maner of colour, and is the meane, that the excellēt painter Iohn the Euangeliſt did vſe. For to make another colour of

violet, take little apples of a mirtle tree very ripe, and ſtampe them, and preſſe them vnder a preſſe, and get out the iuice of them, and ſtiepe your ſaid peeces in it, and drie them in the ſhadow. For to make a greene piece, and of diuers colours for to paint on, take Verdegriſe ground ſmal, and ſome ſaffron, and temper it with ſtrong vinaigre, and put to it aſmuch more iuice of Rue, then ſtiepe againe the ſaide pieces in piſſe and drie theim, this done plonge theim three or iiij. times in the ſaid colour, and drie them in the ſhadow. Take alſo half a quarter of orpiment, & two vnces of ſtrong lie, and a little braſſe of the fouleſt you can get, half an vnce of Verdegriſe, an vnce of Geniper berries well ſtamped, & put all togither, and ſeeth it vntill it be a quarter diminiſhed. Thē ſtiepe your pieces in the ſaid compoſitions, and drie them in the ſhadow as before, and you ſhall make a faire changeable colour. If you wil make alſo a faire grene, take the leues of the herbe called in latine Raphanitis, whiche is a kinde of lilly or flower deluce, called of the Frenchmen Lis celeſt
                     •
                  s: ſtāp them well, and get out the iuice of them, and put into it a little Alome ſtamped, and it wil be the cleerer, and ſtiepe your pieces therin oftētimes, & they will receiue the colours, and then drie them as before. But if you wil make thē of a ſanguine colour, you ſhal make this fore ſaide colour with graine, wherin you ſhall ſtiepe your pieces. If you will make them Blewe, take the floures of Line, or of the fore named Raphanitis, & do as before. And whan you wil take of the colour frō euery piece, you ſhall haue a little gommed water, and weat the piece a little with it, and wring it well, and you ſhall haue aſmuche colour as you will, and ſo vſe of it with a Penſill whan you will.
         
         
            To get oile out of Talchum artificially, and of his owne ſtrength.
            TAke ſixe pound of Talchum, and beate it ſmal, & put it in a pot not baked nor leadid within, but thick
                  •
               
               
and greate of earth, and put of the ſaid Talchum into it vntill the pot be ful: then ſet the couer vpō it and binde it well with wier, and ſtoppe the ſaide pot well with Lutum ſapientiae, and lette it well drie and ſo put it in a furneiſe of bricke, or lime keele neere vnto the mouth where the fire reuerberateth, and whan you will take it out, beware that it breake not. This don
                  •
                braie it ſmall vpon the marble vntill it be like vnto flower, and do it quickly, to the intent it take not muche aier, and put it in a little ſacke pointed at the bottome like a gelley bagge, and laie vpon it a cuppe of glaſſe or ſome other well leaded and glaſed within, which may be meete to receiue the ſaide oile. Then lette it doune into a wel with a corde about a two pardes, or a yarde and a halfe from the water, and very nighe vnto the wall, but that it tutche it not, and remoue it not in xx. or xxv. daies. Then if you ſe that it hath begon to caſt ſome oile you maie take it out of the well, and ſette it in ſome moiſte place, that is to ſaie in the corner of a ſellar, for feare leſt the aier or the winde or any kinde of beſt ſhould hurt it. And leaue it ſo longe in the ſaid place vntill all the licour become out of i
                  •
               : Then take the lees that remaineth, and diſtil it thorow a lembick with a ſmall fire augmenting it little and little vntill by the force of the fire all come out that maie comme, and it is called of the Alkemiſtes the fire of Talchum. Nowe the firſt that is gotten out by the humidite and moiſtnes, is called the earth, and is very medicinable. The ſecond is the very richeſſe of the Alkemiſtes: And I will ſaie vnto you that many whiche profeſſe Alk
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               ni
                  •
                haue ſought this ſecrete, and haue done in all thinges as is here writen, and yet coulde neuer finde this meanes to giue it this great humidite, and of ſuch abondance and with ſo long time: And for aſmuche as the mater in it ſelf is very ſtiffe and drie, ſo wil it haue great moiſtneſſe and in abondāce. And bicauſe it hath had great and it muſt needes haue muche moiſtneſſe,

and hauinge had theſe partes there is made of it two Clementes, ſeparated as you ſee. Then take this laſt lees, and ſtampe it in a morter, and put it in a pot or cawdron pouring vpon it ſome well water, and let it boile a certaine ſpace, and then ſtraine it, and waſhe your body with it, and you ſhall ſe your ſkinne wil be very white, and will heale a manne of all maner of ſkabbes and ſkurt, and ſwelling of the legges. And in vſing the ſaide water for to waſhe your handes with, you ſhall haue them ſofte and cleane from all ſpottes or frackles. This is the parfite waie & meal
                  •
               e to make oile of Talchum, whiche hath many properties of the whiche the Dutcheſſe of Sauoye did vſe and occupie. And who ſo euer vſeth this licour, it will take awaie Freckles, Spottes, Wartes, ſkarres of woundes, or cuttes, and other markes, and in ſhort ſpace you ſhall ſee a meruelous experiēce of it. It maketh white teeth, and taketh oute the wrinkles of the face: And t
                  •
                you drinke of it two or three droppes with Wine or pottage, it will make you haue a ſweete breath, if it co
                  •
               ne bicauſe of the ſtomack. It comforteth the mother and cauſeth a good appetite, and reſtoreth into his nature euery euill ſtomacke that is marred by ſome accident or occaſion of 
                  ••
               ckenes. And finally muche deſired of the Alkemiſtes: for in putting into the ſaide oile ſome Mercurie well purified it congeleth incontinent and will endure the hammer, and this is very true.
         
         
            To make that all mettall ſhall ſeeme like Siluer.
            TAke of Aqua fortis ſeparatiua, and put into it the value of viij. pence or ſiluer well beaten thinne with a hamer, and ſo cut it in ſmall pieces, and ſet the violle vpon the coles for to heate it a little, and it will incontinent melte in the water: Then take it from the fire, and put into it ſome Tartare or lees of white wine beaten into pouder ſmal, and put ſo much into it that it maie ſuite and drinke by the ſaid water,

and you ſhal make a dowe or paſt, wher with you ſhal rubbe all maner of metall what you will, and it ſhall ſeeme white as it were fine ſiluer.
         
         
            For to take muche Fiſhe, and to make a light in the night.
            TAke a certaine quantite of theſe little wormes that ſhine and flie in the night, and diſtil them in a Lembick of glaſſe with a ſlowe fire, and put the water that commeth of them in a violl of glaſſe, or ſome round apple of glaſſe that is cleere & bright, and put into it foure vnces of quick ſiluer purged, that is to ſaie, paſſed thorowe leather or kiddes ſkinnes, and ſloppe wel the glaſſe that no water come into it. Then place it handſomely in the middle of the nett, ſo that nothing breake, and than caſt your nette into the water, and it will make a goodly and cleere light and ſhining, and all the fiſhes that ſee this light will runne in a ſhole togither, and will fall into the net: for all fiſhe naturally taketh pleaſure to runne towarde the light. And carriyng alſo the ſaid round apple of glaſſe in the night it will giue a great light. It will do the like alſo in a chamber.
         
         
            To make a mixte ſtone whiche beyng weated with ſpettle, maketh fire.
            TAke quicke lime, & ſalt peter fined diuers times, 
                  
                     •
                  utia alexandrina not prepared, calamint, aſmuch of the one as of the other, quicke brimſtone, and Camfire, of eche of them two partes. And let all theſe thinges be beaten or ſtamped ſmall & ſifted thorow a ſarce or ſeeue. Then put the ſaid pouders in a newe linen cloth and binde them hard. This done take two greate goldſmithes croſettes or melting pottes, & put the ſaid pouders in them, & ſet the one vpon the other mouth to mouth, and binde them faſte with wier, and Lutum ſapientiae ſo that it maie ſake no maner of ayer & drie them in the ſunne, and whan the ſaide pouder is

dry, it will be yelow. This done ſet the croſet in a furneiſe of bricke or lime, & whan it is cold againe take it out, and you ſhall finde your ſubſtance of the colour of bricke, and it ſhal be parfite and good. And whan you vſe of it for to make a fire or light a candell, weate it with a droppe of water, or with a little ſpettle, & incontinent put to it your matche, & it wil light and burne. And whan you will quench it againe, blowe it as you blowe out a candell and you ſhall blow it out.
         
         
            To make a Verniſh of Maſtick, to lay vpon paintinges made with oile.
            TAke two vnces of harde Maſticke, and an vnce of the oile of a firre tree. Thā take a little new pot, & put the maſtick into it beaten or ſtampt; and ſo melte it with a little fire. This done put into it the oile, and let it boile a little, and ſtirre it ſtill togither, and let it boile almoſte nothing, bicauſe the Verniſhe would be to clammie: and to knowe if it bee ſodde inough, put into it a Hennes fether, & if it burne by and by, it is a ſigne that it is made, keepe it wel frō duſt. And whan you will occupie it, let it remaine in the ſunne vntill it be hote, and whan it is drie againe it will giue a very faire gloſſe or luſtre.
         
         
            To make that a white ſkinne ſhall haue blacke ſpottes of the colour of a leopard or panther and alſo to make grey heare blacke.
            TAke Litarge of ſiluer one vnce, ij. vnces of quick lime, and three baſins ful of water, and ſeeth al this in a newe little pot wit
                  •
                a ſmall fire, vntill it waxe warme. Then take it from the fire, mixyng it alwaies with a ſticke, and it will be made. Then take a Penſill of Hogges briſtels, and marke your white ſkinne with ſpottes as you ſhall thinke good, one ſpotte here and another there, one nighe vnto an other, and ſome what great according to your ſkinne. Then drie them in the ſunne, & whan the ſkin is drie,

beate it with a wande and you ſhall ſee the ſpottes dimme of the colour of Taunie. And if it be not well colored to your minde you maie doe it ones againe touching the ſame places you did before, & the colour will be liuelier, this doyng you ſhal come to your purpoſe. And this colour keepeth alwaies, and giueth a good odour. Alſo laiyng the ſaide matter vpon the heares of a mans head or berde that is grey, it will make them blacke.
         
         
            To make good oile of Nutmegges.
            TAke two or three pounde of Nutmegges, and cut them ſmall, and ſtampe them well, then put them in a pan and heate them mixyng, them alwaies togither. This done, you ſhall put them into a canueſſe or ſtrōg linen cloth, and put them in a preſſe, and preſſe theim well, and gette out all the licour of them, whiche wilbe like Man
                     •
                  a. And then ſkrape it from the Canues bagge aſmuche as you can with a knife, then put it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe and ſtoppe it well, but ſet it not in the ſunne although it ſeeme euil fauored: for it will waxe cleere and faire of it ſelf with in ten or xv. daies, and is worth thriſe as much as the Nutmegge it ſelfe. And this oile hath great vertue for to chafe and heate, and in annointing the ſtomacke warme, it ſwageth the paine of the mother, and Sciatikes.
            
         
         
            To make parfite oile of Spike.
            TAke the floures of ſpicke nete and parfite, and in quantite aſmuche as you maie get, and ſtāpe them well, then put them in a little canues bagge ſtrong, and preſſe them vnder a preſſe as harde as you can, and take it vp togither diligētly although it ſeeme iuell fauored, and put it in a ſtrong veſſell of glaſſe: but ſet it not in the ſunne, for it will be cleere of it ſelf, and waxe faire and bright, and wil haue a very ſharpe odour of Spike. And by like meane maie you

make oile of Lauander, and ſerue your turne with it in many thinges, bicauſe it is very hote ſharpe, and conforteth the ſtomake, and if a man put ſome of it in well water, it wil ſmell al of it whan a man waſheth his handes with it. And of this water menne vſe fo
                  •
                ſweete Balles and many other thinges.
         
         
            To make odoriferous oile of Storax.
            TAke a bottell of double glaſſe, and put into it a pounde of oile of ſweete Almondes, and foure vnces of Storax, groſſely broken and cleane, and put it into it, ſtopping it well. Then ſette it vpon the hote embers vntill the Storax be molten, then take it from the fire, & beyng ſo hote as it is put into it halfe an vnce of Maſtick made into pouder, and whan it is colde, ſtraine it diligently preſſing and wringing well the bottom. And if you will make it more odoriferous you ſhal adde to it ſome Bengewine, and two vnces of cloues, and it will be perfite.
         
         
            To make an odoriferous oile of Bengewine.
            TAke a pounde of good Bengewine, and beate it ſmall, and put it in a limbecke well glewed and cloſed with paſt, or els into ſome violl of glaſſe, ſo that you maie put in your hande, and let it bee ſhalowe and not very depe, bicauſe the oile maie mounte vp with eaſe. And put therevpon twoo pounde of roſe water, and incorporate it well togither: this doen, ſet on the couer of the Limbecke, and trimme it ſo well that it maie not breath out. Then giue it a ſlowe fire, in ſoche wiſe that ye maie gette out ſome water, and augmente your fire little and little, vntill the oile begin to come forthe, and by and by chaunge the recipient or receptorie, pouring out the 
                  〈◊〉
                water into ſom violle, and then giue it a good and quicke fire, vntill you thinke you haue drawē out three vnces and a half of oile, and kepe it in ſome violle of glaſſe well ſtopte, and leaue it in the Sunne the ſpace of. viij. daies, and

it will be parfite and good. And thus maie you make oile of Storax, and if you putte to it fower vnces of Storax, it will be the better.
         
         
            To make good oile of Ladanum.
            
               Take a pounde of good Ladanum, and cut it as ſmall as you can, and put it in a pot of Copper, and put into it ſixe vnces of Roſe water, fower vnces of Oile of ſweete Almondes, this doen ſeeth it faire and ſoftly the ſpace of twoo howers, and ſtraine it ſo often vntil the oile waxe clere, and it wil be perfite and good oile of Ladanum. And firſt of al in taking awaie the yearth, if you knewe that it were not cleane, take the ſaid Ladanum, and cut it ſmall, and put it in Roſe water vpon the fire for to melte it, then take it of againe, and let it ſtand and reſt, the ſpace of halfe an hower, and gather togither that is vpermoſte with a ſpone, and putte it again into Roſe water, vntill it be thorowe colde, and than make and compounde it as before.
         
         
            ¶To make oile of Orenge flowers, and other ſwete flowers.
            TAke freſhe and cleane flowers of Orenges one pounde, and put them in a great violl of glaſſe at the fire, and put to them a pound and a half of ſwete Almonde oile, and a little burned Alome, & three graines of Ambergriſe, ſixe graines of Muſke, ſixe ſcruples of Camfere, and braie them after the accuſtomed maner. Firſt of all the Muſke, then the Amber, with fine Suger as moche as a Beane, tempered with a little Roſe water, and braie the Camfire alone with Sugar, and put it in laſte, but lette there not bee to moche of it, bicauſe that the ſauour of it is to ſharpe, and put in but a little at ones, for you maie alwaie adde to, but you can not diminiſh it, whē it is ones in. And let not the violl be to full, to the entent you maie mixe and tourne vp and doune the compoſicions,

for to incorporate them, and leaue theim in the Sunne, eightene or twentie daies, vntil a moneth bee paſte, and it will bee parfite, and that the flowers maie ſeeth the more in the oile, then ſtrain theim, and wring them well, and put theim again into the violle in the Sunne, the ſpace of twoo or three daies, vntill it purifie. This dooing you ſhall haue a merueilous oile, and of a very good odour, and if the flowers ſeme vnto you but a fewe, you maie put other vpon theim, and thei will augmente the odour: by this meane you maie take of all ſortes of ſwete flowers, and haue oile of diuers ſortes, vſing the meanes aforeſaied.
         
         
            To make a parfume ſodainly in a chamber, where a ſicke man lieth.
            TAke a little yearthen potte, and putte into it a Nutmegge, twoo ſcruples of the ſticke of Cloues, twoo ſcruples of the ſticke of Sinamome, fower ſcruples of Storax calamitae, Roſe water, or water of Spike, or ſome other ſweete water, and ſeeth it. Then put it in a pot ſharde, with a fewe hote aſſhes and coales vnder it, and ſet it in the chamber, and the ſmoke thereof ſhall giue a very ſweete amiable and hartie ſauour.
         
         
            To make long and rounde parfumes, to burn
                  •
                in a chamber.
            
               TAke ſixe vnces of Timiama, twoo vnces of Ladanum, three vnces of Storax ſolidae fiue vnces of Frankencens, an vnce of Bengewine, a pounde of ſwete coales, eight vnces of Dragant. And of al this make a very ſmall poulder: but you ſhal put the coales, and the Dragant to ſtepe in Roſe water, or ſome other ſwete water, and leaue theim ſo the ſpace of three daies. Then ſtampe theim in a morter, and put into them all the poulders, and ſtampe theim ſo that thei maie be well incorporated togither. Then

put in the coles ſtamping alwaies, and incorporating it, and put ſo moche in of it, that the paſte waxe ſomewhat harde. And then make your parfumes long and round as you will, and drie them well in the ſhadow. And if you will not beſtowe ſo moche coſt vpon them, take the lees and bottome that remaineth, of ſome ſweete odoriferous waters, and make thereof a poulder, and thei ſhall be good, putting to them a little Timiama, the whiche will multiplie your woorke, and make a good odoure, and if you put to it a little Camfire, thei will make a noiſe in burning, as it were cracking.
         
         
            To make a fine and ſwete pouder of Cipres.
            TAke foure vnces of Cardamomum or toun Kerſe, two vnces of Storax ſolida, two vnces of Frankenſence, thre vnces of drie red Roſes, an vnce of Sandalum citrinum, three vnces of Bengewine, two vnces of Cloues, a pounde and a half of cleane Egge ſhels, eight graines of muſke, ſixe ſcruples of Cāfire, and of al theſe drogges make pouder, eche of them by it ſelfe, and let the pouder of the Egge ſhelles be very fine, than put the Cāfire molten into the ſaid pouder, and the Muſke braied ſmall with a little fine Sugar, and let all be wel incorporated togither in the morter, and ſifted ſmall, and ſo all made into fine pouder, and keepe it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe that it take no aier, for it wold loſe ſome of his odour. You maie make alſo of it another ſort no leſſe good & of another colour. Take redde oxe dung in the moneth of Maie, and drie it wel, and make thereof very ſmall pouder ſifted, and not
                  •
                that of it ſelfe it will giue a very good ſauour alone without any other thing with it: for in that ſeaſon of Maie all maner of flowres ſmell pleaſantly. And he that knews not what it were would iudge it to be a pouder made of a thouſand herbes: notwithſtanding put into it ſome of the foreſaid pouders ſuche as yo
                  •
               
               
ſhall thinke good, and alſo put to it ſome Muſke, Ambergriſe, and Camfire, after as you wil make it good.
         
         
            To grinde Ambergriſe for to put with other drogges, to giue them a good odour, and to make little markes and ſpottes vpon beades.
            TAke aſmuche Ambergriſe as you will, at the leaſt a graine, & take a droppe of oile of ſweete Almondes, or of Gelſemines, or of the or of the oile of Ben, whiche the parfumers do comonly vſe in all their parfumes and odours, for of it ſelfe it hath no ſauour at all, but giueth an odour vnto all thinges where it cōmeth, and neuer waxeth euill at any time, and if peraduēture you had neither one nor the other, take two Almondes, and ſtampe them, and take the iuyce of them, and braie the Amber with it, and if you will get out muche of it, lette the ſaid Amber ſtiope a night in the oile: then braie it very ſmall: for the more you bray it, the more it worketh his effect in mingling it with muſke, and other ſweete drooges. And if you will make ſweete and odoriferous markes upon a paier of beades, take fiue vnces of dragant, and 
                  •
               reye it in roſe water the ſpace of three daies with aſmuche water as will be aboue it foure fingars, then br
                  •
               ſe it vpō a morter, and put to it two vnces of Ladanum, two Nutmegges, & an vnce and a halfe of Storax ſolida, and aſmuche of fine Cinamome, half an vnce of Spicknard
                     •
                  . And let al theſe thinges be made in pouder very final, and ſifted thorowe a ſeeue or ſarce, and incorporated with the dragant. And whan they be well incorporated, you ſhal put to them ſome good muſke of Leuant, that is to ſay eight graines, and ſixe graines of Ambergriſe, three graines of Ciuet, two ſcruples of Cāfer, & braie al wel in the maner aforeſaid with the ſaid oile, & wel let it be incorporated with the ſaid paſt or dowe. And if it be not hard to your minde, for to caſt it into a facion and to make the whole in it, let it remaine ſo

a daie or two vntill you maie well handle it. Than facion your beades for to make markes vpon them with it, in making two little roſes of ſiluer vpon the corners of the holes for ſo keepe them from the heate or ſweating of the handes, and ſo drie them in the ſhadowe, and whan you hold the beades in your handes, it will giue a meruelous odour and ſweete ſmell, and ſhalbe a pece of worke for Ladies, gentill wemen, and perſonages of greate eſtate: for in keping them amōg their clothes, they ſhall take the odour of it.
         
         
            To make fine Muſcardines, white and Redde.
            TAke what quantite you will of white Dragant, and ſliepe it in Roſe water, that it be well couered with it the ſpace of two daies: Then ſtampe it well in a morter, and make it into a body or maſſe with flower of Amilum or barley that is fine and cleane, and a little fine Sugar, and as muche pouder of Maſtick as will lie vpon a penny, and a little Muſke well broken a ſonder, and make hereof paſte or dowe, the whiche you ſhall remoue and ſtirre vp and doune betwixte your handes beyng faire and cleane, vntill all be well incorporated togither: And if you put to it a little Irios, and white Sanders the white ones ſhall be the beſt, & if you put to it redde Sanders they wilbe redde, or els ſome dragons blood. This done cut them very ſmall, and drie them i
                  •
                the ſhadow, and make them ſo fine that they maie be like ſande, and than they ſhall be made ſo that you maie vſe them as you will.
         
         
            To make counterfete Camfire.
            TAke foure vnces of white Verniſhe, two vnces of Maſtick, and aſmuche of white Encens, two dragmes of true Camfire, and lette all be made into fine pouder: then take the whites of foure egges, and a little Aqua vite, and ſo beate it well togither that it become in a fome, then incorporate wel the ſaid

thinges togither, & facion your little balles or loues, and ſette them in the ſunne during the ſigne of Leo, the ſpace of fiuetene or twentie daies, as long as you ſhall thinke good, and it will come into ſuche perfection, as that whiche is conterfeted in Conſtantinoble.
         
         
            To make the berde growe, and to keepe that the heares fall not of.
            TAke as many Bees as you ſhall thinke good, whan menne do emptie the Hiues, and burne them in a fire pan, and make a very fine pouder of them, and incorporate them togither. Thē you ſhal make ſome oile of greene Liſardes that be drouned in comon oile colde, and ſhall put it in a bottle of glaſſe before the fire, and make it boile vntill the Lizardes braſt, than take it of and ſet it in the ſunne the ſpace of xv. or xx. daies, and keepe it ſo with the beaſtes in it and it will be an oile as cleere as fine Gold, and will keepe wel. Incorporate the ſaid pouder with this oile, and anoint morning and euening the bare place wher you will that the beare ſhall not fall of, and they will not fall awaie, but growe aboundantly. But firſt you muſt make ſome lie with the aſhes of vines, and boile in it theſe three herbes, that is to ſaie, Capillus veneris, Agrimonie, and Edera arborea, of eche of them fiue handfuls, and whan it is ſodden, ſtraine it, and keepe it from duſt, and waſhe your head with it twiſe of thriſe a weke, and whan it is drie anoint your ſelf with this ointment, & by the meanes of this waſhing the heares will growe thicke and longe: for it augmenteth the length of them, and kepeth them from falling. This hath bene experimented and proued of diuers menne, that haue bene very pild and balde.
         
         
            To get away the heare, from what place you will.
            TAke foure vnces of freſh quick lime, an vnce of orpimēt in pouder, a pottle of ſtrong lie, & put al this

into a pot, and put to it the ſaide pouders, and boile it ſo long vn
                  •
               ill it waxe thicke, or els deepe a Duckes fether into it, and if it pill or fall of, than it is ſodden, and mixe it oftentimes, and in ſeething it will waxe into a body or maſſe, then keepe it in a potte leaded within, and whan you will, ſpreade it abrode handſomely, and laie it with meaſure vpon the place wher you will the heare ſhall fall of. But anoint firſte the place with oile of ſweete Almondes, then laie vpon it the ſaide compoſition, and you ſhal not feele the heate at all, or els very little. But if in cace you ha
                  •
               e a fine or tender ſkin, that cauſeth you to feele the h
                  •
               ate that you can not ſuffer it, but if you can endure it, it will the ſoner worke his effect. Otherwiſe, take two vnces of roſe water, an vnce of Plantaine water, halfe an vnce of fine ſugar, and put them togither, and weate your face with it, and incontinent the heate wil ceaſe. And you maie make this medecine euery ſecond daie vntill you haue your intent and purpoſe. And if you feare to do that whiche hath bene experimented, make theſe others, that is to ſaie, take ſalt Armoniack, and the gall of a he Goate, and braie them togither, and anoint the place frō whence you will take the heares, and thei will fall awaie. You ſhall take alſo the iuice or ſucke of the roote of Celidonia, and a little orpiment, the iuice of Iuie, and Antes, or Emettes egges with a little Vinaigre, and incorporate all togither, and anoint the place with it and tho heares will fal away, & if it greeue you, weate it with the aforeſaid water, and you ſhal a laie the heate of it.
         
         
            To make hore beares blacke.
            TAke fiue flagons full of raine water, and ſeeth it with ſtrong Aſhes, & put into it ſome Litarge of Gold the quantite of ſixe vnces, with a handfull of a blacke figge tree leaues, and as much of ſage, and let it ſeeth vntil it be diminiſhed of a quarter, and

than it is done and made, waſhe your heade with this compoſition twiſe a weeke, and whan your head is drie againe, take the iuice of ſage, and put into it an vnce of tartre or leeſe of redde wine, and half an vnce of the litarge of gold, and haue ready a combe of leade whiche you ſhall anoint with the ſaide iuice and ſo kembe your head and your bearde well with it, and they will become incontinent blacke, vſing the ſaide combe with the ſaid iuice and pouder, whiche thinge hath ben proued. For the like effect you ſhall take oile of tartre, and heate it, & whan you haue waſhed your head and dried it againe, you ſhall anoint your combe with the ſaide oile, and ſo kembe your heade in the Sunne a good while, or els anoint your ſelfe with a ſponge for to make your heares black, and do it twiſe or thriſe a day, & in a weke you ſhall haue your heares as blacke as euer they were, and the like maie you do to your beard, and if you will haue it ſauour ſwetely vſe at the ende ſome oile of Bengewine for to anoint the cōbe withal, for it helpeth likewiſe to the blacking of the heares, and is of good ſauour. This is an excellent ſecret. For the like alſo, take white Hony, and diſtill it in a Limbeck of glaſſe, with a ſharpe fire, and keepe that licour that commeth of it, and waſhe your head with it, and what it is drie againe, anoint your ſelf with it & the heare will be blacke. Take alſo good Saffran, & incorporate it well with yolkes of Egges 
                  •
               oſted, and a little Honny, and you ſhall make of it, as it were a maner of ointment, with the which you ſhal anoint your head or berd morning and euening, and continuyng ſo a moneth at the leaſt in waſhing your ſelfe often, the heares will 
                  ••
                of the colour of Gold: but firſt anoint the kōbe with oile of bitter Almondes, and do that while ye are in the ſunne, and the heares will be bright and faire as Gold. Take alſo the roote of ſuccorie, and ſeeth it with lie, and in continuyng of it, it will make your heares white, and drie your ſelfe

in the Sunne, and waſhe your ſelfe twiſe a weeke, and boile alſo in the lie ſome commune lickerous, and whan your heare is drie againe, parfume theim with quicke brimſtone, and they will become of the colour of Gold. To make alſo hore heares blacke, take black Sope, and quicke lime, and ſome litarge of Golde, and make thereof as it were an ointment, and rubbe your heares with it, and continue ſo a while according as you ſhall ſee neede, and whan they be become blacke, leaue theim ſo, and if they returne to be white againe, doe as before. Alſo for to make them Redde, beyng hore and white, take three handfuls of Walnutte leaues, and a handfull of the pilles of Pomegranades, and diſtill them in a limbeck of glaſſe: then waſhe onely your white heares and not your face, for you ſhould than make it blacke, and doyng thus the ſpace of fiuetene daies, it will continue a moneth, and you ſhall haue your heare Redde. Take alſo grounde wormes burned, and make thereof pouder, alſo the leaues of a blacke Figge tree, and make thereof a fine pouder, and temper it with oile of almondes, and they will be Blacke. Now to make them growe a paſe and quickly, take a certaine quātite of Hennes egges, and ſeeth them whole in water: than take out the yelkes, and frie thē in a friyng pan without any other thing, vntill there come furthe of theim ſome humidite and moiſture: then take them of and putte them in a little bagge, and preſſe them in a preſſe, and get out all the ſubſtance that maye come out of them: then burne an oxe horne, and make thereof pouder, and incorporate it with the ſaid licour, and put to it alſo goates turdes 
                  •
               urned: and ſo anoint the 
                  •
               are place with the ſaide cō
               poſition diuers times, and the heares will growe incontinent after.
         
         
            To make white heare in the ſhadowe: without the ſunne, and ſhall become white and ſhining like ſiluer.
            
               TAke of the roote of the greater centory three vnces with two vnces of gomme Arabick and aſmuche of Dragant and Alome, a pound of Venitien Sope, a pound of Alumen fecis albae, and haue ready firſt xxv. pounde of riuer water, and put into it of this roote of Centorie cut with a fewe of his leaues whiche you ſhall boile vntill the water diminiſhe of the thirde parte, then lette it ſtand in the ſunne the ſpace of fiuetene daies, and boile in it all the ſaide thinges, and than it is called of the Frenche menne and Italians Blonde a la venitiane. And in the morning whan you pleaſe waſh your heare wel with it, and wrappe or binde theim vp in a Naptkin or kerchief, and whan nighte cometh you ſhall waſhe theim ordinarily, and putte into it this your lie of the herbe called vitriol, & then wipe them drie where you thinke good, be it in the ſunne or by the fire, and do this twiſe or thriſe a weeke, and your heares will be white and ſhine as it were ſiluer.
         
         
            A ſofee dowe or paſte as it were Pomatum, to waſhe the handes, and whan the mouth, Noſe, Lippes, or Handes do chincke or chappe, and it keepeth the fleſhe ſofte and ſweete.
            TAke white Almondes, Alumen fecis, flower of Amilum of eche of them ſixe vnces, white Pine apple kernels, cleane ſeedes of Gourdes, and Be
                  ••
               ne flower, of eche of theim foure vnces, pouder of Cloues, Storax ſolida in pouder, and Macaleb in pouder of eche of them three vnces, with twoo vnces of white Salte beaten, a pound of white Honnie, and aſmuche of veniſe Sope, a ſcruple of Muſke and as muche of Ciuet, the whites of tenne Egges. Firſte take the Almondes, and Pine apple kernels, with the ſeedes of Gourdes or Melons that be very white and neat, and ſtampe thē well in a morter. And note that all the importance is that they bee all well

ſtamped very ſmall: then put in the Alumen fecis, and ſtampe them well, than put in the Honie and incorporate it well togither with the peſtle, And after this, you ſhall put in the ſope cutt in ſmall pieces, and incorporate them diligently, this don, put in two pound and a half of the herbe called Brionia, & temper all well. Put all this into a newe pot, and leaue it ſo couered a daie, then ſet it on a fire of coles with out ſmoke, and lette it ſeeth the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, and ſturre it alwaies in the pot with a wodden ſpone, that it cleaue not to the bottome, and ſo take ſome euill ſauour, then take it from the fire, and poure it out into a greate earthen pan. Then put into it the foreſaide ſlower, and that beyng well incorporated, put in the pouder of Cloues, and all the other pouders togither and all beyng well incorporated, couer it cloſe that it maie take no aier, and lette it remaine ſo the ſpace of ten daies. Then put into it the Macaleb, the muſke and the ciuet braid and beaten very ſmall, and incorporate all well togither with a ſliſe, this done put in the egges beaten, ſo that they become as it were a ſkim or frothe, and then put in the ſalt, and mixe al well togither, in ſuche wiſe that the whole maie be well incorporated. And then the paſte or dowe wilbe of a Graie colour, and odoriferous, and is called Imperiall ointment, bicauſe it is a thing noble and full of vertu, and a man maie vſe alwaies of this precious odour which conforteth the memorie, and if you vſe it to waſh your handes and face with, it will giue a ſweete ſauour to them, and maketh the fleſhe delicate and ſofte, white and well ſaudring, and cloſeth vp quickly al maner of cleftes, chinkes or chappes of the mouth, handes and lippes. And if you will not waſhe your ſelfe with it, anoint yourſelf morning and euening, and you ſhall incontinent b
                  •
                healed, for this hath bene many times proued by experience.
         
         
            White Pomatum, fine and ſweete for great lordes.
            
               TAke thirty or twenty Appiane apples, or other tendre and mellowe Apples and diuide them in to foure partes, and make them cleane within 
                  •
               nd without. Then take Cloues, and Sinamome, & flicke the apples full of it as they were larded, & ſo laie thē in roſe water, that thei maie be couered ouer with the ſaid water, and put into it ſixe Nutmegges, with two drammes of Mace, and lette them thus lie a ſtiepe the ſpace of ſixe daies, and lette them he well couered. Then take Hogges greaſe, & take of from it the little ſk
                  •
               nne that is vpon it, and cut it very ſmall, and put it to purge in freſh and cleere water three or foure daies and change the water twiſe a daie, and put it the laſt time to ſtepe in Roſewater, or ſome other ſweete water, and by this meanes it ſhal be wel purged and purified, and ſhal not haue but a good ſauour and odour, then take three or foure pound of the ſaid greaſe, and put it in a pot or other veſſell that is not greaſie, nor ſauoreth euill, and put the apples cut in peces as they are into the ſaid pot or veſſell, and adde therto an vnce of the oile of Orenges, and of the water whiche the Frenche men call Eau de 
                     •
                  afe, whereof we haue ſpoken in the firſte parte of this worke, or ſome other ſweete and odoriferous water, ſo that all maie be vnder the water, and boile them an houre or more with a ſlowe fire, vntill the Apples be well ſodden, and then breake theim well with a woodden ſliſe, that they maie bee turned as it were into a broth, this done paſſe theim through a ſtrainer, and then ſtraine them hote againe thorow another finer and cloſe ſtrainer: and whiles it is thus hote, put into it three vnces and a half of white waxe cut very ſmall, and two vnces of white Sandalum made in pouder very fine and mixt togither vntill it be all well incorporated: and whan it is colde, waſhe it with roſe water vntill it be very cleere, and this Pomatum wil be as white as ſnowe. And after it is waſhed, you ſhall put to it eight graines of Muſke, and foure

graines of Ambergriſe that bee very ſmally ground, and ſo incorporate well al togither, and leaue it in the aier abrode the ſpace of fiue or ſixe nightes, and the Pomatum wilbe parfite good and odoriferous, And if you will not haue it thus perfite, you maie put leſſe drogges to it as Muſke and Amber: but here note and vnderſtand that we haue made of it diuers times, and neuer lefte of this order aforeſaid, and it hath been excellent parfite and good. There is alſo another ſorte of it whiche ſerueth for euery hote diſeaſe, and for to anoint the handes, the mouthe, and noſe, as is afore ſaid. Take two vnces of ſheepe ſuet, and an vnce of Goates ſuet, and choppe it ſmal, and melt it, and then ſtraine it thorow a ſtrainer, and put into it three vnces of newe waxe, and two vnces of the oile of ſweete Almondes: And melte all this on a ſlowe fire, mixyng and ſturring it alwaies: than take it of, and adde to it foure ſcruples of Camfire broken, and mingle it ſtill togither vntill it be colde, and ſo keepe it, and anoint your ſelfe withall diligently. There is another better than this and well allowed & proued, whiche is made as followeth. Take newe waxe, the ſuet of a he goate, and the marowe of an Oxe, of eche of them an vnce and a halfe, an vnce of the oile of Saint Iohns wuit, and aſmuche of oile of Roſes, and aſmuche ſalt beaten very ſmall: but cut the ſuet and marowe and melt them, and ſtraine them, this don ſet them vpon a ſlow fire, ſo that they maie not be ſkant warme: and putte the waxe beyng cut in peces, with the ſaide oile and ſalt, and mingle them well togither with your ſliſe of woode. Then take it from the fire, and put into it ſixe ſcrupules of Camfere, ſomewhat beaten, and mixe it alwaies vntill it bee colde. Then keepe it in yearthen cuppes leaded within. And the older it is, the better it is. Menne vſe of it for all maner of hote diſeaſe, for chappes or chinckes of the Noſe, Mouth, Lippes, or handes, and for kibes on Childrens heeles, and alſo

for a felon or cattes heare, for in anointinge theim with this, they will goe awaie, and alſo taketh awaie the paine, as it hath bene well proued many a time.
         
         
            For thoſe that haue a ſtinking breath, bicauſe of the ſtomacke.
            
               TAke an vnce of Sage, and make thereof pouder, three vnces of Roſemarie ſloures, halfe an vnce of Cloues, two drammes of fine Sinamom, two Nutmegges, two graines of Muſke, and make them all into pouder: Then take aſmuche purified Honnie as ſhall bee ſufficient to knethe the ſaide pouders, or to incorporate theim well togither, this done, put it in a boxe of earth and lette it remaine in the Sunne foure or fiue daies, and it will be parfite. Then take of it in the morning faſting halfe an vnce, and as muche at night, to the intent it may confort the meate, that it corrupt not nor putrifie in the ſtomacke, and in vſing it oftentimes you ſhall be cured, and deliuerid from the euill ſmel of the breath.
         
         
            To make one haue a good ſtomacke, that hath a naughty one.
            
               TAke Abrotonum, Rue, Penniriall, fine Minte of eche of them a handfull, and two pintes of white Wine, halfe a pounde of white Honny, and boile it vntill it be ſodden inough, and putte therevnto ſome pouder of Sinamom and Cloues, of eche halfe an vnce. This done ſtraine it, and keepe it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe, againſt you haue neede of it, and tak
                  •
                thereof in the morning the height of two or three fingers in a glaſſe, and lette it be ſomwhat luke warme, and it will confort your ſtomacke, but vſe it not to muche.
         
         
            
            A remedy for him that can not keepe his meate in his ſtomake, without vomiting.
            TAke Quinces, and make theim cleane within and without, and ſeeth them in ſtrōg vinaigre, then ſtampe them in a morter, and put into thē a little muſtard ſeede beaten into poudre, & ſo incorporate well all togither, & lay it hote vpon a linen cloth putting vpon it ſome pouder of Cloues, & lay it vpon his breaſt, and in doyng this three or foure times, he ſhall keepe his meate without vomiting.
         
         
            To make a naturall white Skinne.
            TAke a poūde of diſtilled vinaigre, with as much water of Gourdes, and put them into two violles, then put into the violl with the Vinaigre an vnce of Litarge beaten very ſmall, and into the violl with the water of Gourdes, an vnce of ſalt Gemma, and ſet theſe two violles vpō a tile nigh vnto the fire, and let them boile an houre: then plucke the tile back, and let them coole: this done ſet them in the ſunne the ſpace of eight daies, & than keepe thē vntill you haue neede of them. And whan you will vſe of them, take a diſhe or goblet, and put as muche of the one as of the other into the ſaide diſhe or cuppe, and it will become as white as milke, and ſo waſh your face with it with a ſponge, rubbing well the fleſhe, and it will waxe as white and as ſoft as cotton, and delicate to tutche, and of meruelous effect. But if you will make it redde and ſhining, take a poūd of white vinaigre diſtilled twiſe: for it ſhall be the better, and put it into a little violle, and put into it an vnce of redde Sanders, cut and beaten, and ſo made into a very fine pouder. This done ſeeth it on the fire the ſpace of half an houre, and put into it a little Alome beaten, for it will augment the gloſſe of it, and if you will haue it of a good odour or ſauour for any great Lord or prince, you maie put to it two grains of Muſke or Ciuette, than ſprinkle or

weate it a little with a ſponge, and if perchaunce it be to redde, you maie put into it a little Alome, and it wil ware cleere, and ſo you ſhall make a faire ſhining redde of it, whiche will make a ſweete fleſhe or ſkin.
         
         
            To make the fleſhe or ſkin faire and bright.
            TAke a pound of white tartre, half a pound of Talcum, & aſmuche ſalt, and put al into a pot not bake or aneled, & couer it. This don binde it with wier, and ſet it to calcine in a keell of lime or of bricke, thā take it out, and braie it ſmall vpon a marble ſtone. After this put it into a little bagge pointed at the ende like an Ipocras bagge, and hange it in a moiſt place that it tutch nothing, and that to much enter not into it, & ſet vnder it ſome cup of glaſſe to receiue the oile that ſhall come out of it the ſpace of fiuetene or xx. daies & more or leſſe occording as it ſhalbe in a moiſt place: and keepe this oile as a treaſure. And firſt waſhe your ſelf with lie or water and whan you are drie againe, weate a ſponge or a linen cloth in the ſaide oile, and rubbe your ſkinne finely with it, and you ſhal ſee that euery ſpot wil go of, be it ſunne burning or any other impediment, and wil make your fleſhe white, ſoft and clere. And in continuing this you ſhal attaine to your purpoſe in fewe daies. And if you will make an other ſorte of it, whiche men vſe newly in Veniſe, take two long white Gourdes, and thre diſhes full of Faſils the blacke ſpottes or eies at the ende, as thei call them: beyng taken awaie, with the cromme of three white loues, and ſtepe thē in milke one night, and then take a diſhefull of the ſeedes of Melons, with half a diſhful of peche kernels made cleane of their ſkinne or pille, and a pound of white Pine apple kernels, and let all be well ſtampt in a morter eche one a parte, and two great pigeons, the which you ſhal cut in pieces a liue, taking out onely the bowels, and ſo ſet all to diſtil togither in a limbeck of glaſſe, and vſe of the ſame water

that cometh thereof and it will make your ſkinne and fleſh faire & ſoft, as it hath diuers times bene proued.
         
         
            To cleere and m
                  •
               ske cleene the face from all maner of ſpottes.
            TAke two pounde of turpentine of Veniſe, and twelue newe laide egges of the which you ſhal onely take out the white, and diſtill all togither in a limbeck o
                  •
                glaſſe twiſe, then put into the ſaid water ten ſcruples of Camfere beaten, and diſſolue it wel in water, than take an vnce of the ſaid water, and aſmuche of the water of a torteiſe, and put all togither, and waſhe well your face with it diuers times and it will waxe cleane and cleere from ſpottes.
         
         
            To take awaie a ringworme tetter, or ſpottes and other markes, or els a priuie marke in the body by birth.
            TAke a pound of Salnitrum, and aſmuche tartre of white wine, and ſtāpe eche of them be it ſelfe very ſmall, and then incorporate thē togither, and ſifte them in a fine ſarce ſo that all maie bee well mixte togither, then putte the ſaide pouder in a potte of yearth, made pointed like a Sugre lofe, and ſo cloſe and ſtraight togither, then ſette a hote cole vpon the toppe of it, vntill it burne and conſume of it ſelfe, and it ſhal be the ſalt nitrum bicauſe that the moſt
                  •
                ſubtill and moiſt partes, and the groſſe parte whiche is the tartre, will calcine of it, and wilbe like a cake, the whiche you ſhall breake in ſmall peces in a diſhe, and put ſome warme water vpon it, ſo that all maie turne into water, and for to make the thing neter, you ſhall diſtill the ſaid water in a guttur of felt, and then the water wilbe cleere. This done you ſhall put the water into a newe potte, ſetting it vpon the hote coles or aſhes that it maie ſkant ſeeth, vntill almoſt all the water be dronke vp: Then you ſhall take the pouder whiche remaineth in the bottome, for it is the bontie and beſt of al your work, then take a viall of Sirope, & put in to it foure vnces of diſtilled vinaigre, with an vnce of Aqua vite of three diſtillinges: This done put

into it of the ſaid pouder, incorporating it well togither, & leaue it three daies in the ſunne well ſtopt: and in the morning whan you riſe, and at night like wiſe waſhe the ſpottes of your body and they wil go awaie ſhortly and neuer growe again, and it wil make your ſkin white and faire where you waſh it with this water. Alſo for the ſame effect, take white wine 
                  ••
               es, and ſet it in ſome corner of your houſe vpō the pauement, and let it there drie well: then burne it in a pot ſhard or fire pan, vntill you maie make pouder of it. This done put it into a bagge of the faſhiō of a gelley bagge in ſome moiſt place that it tutche no wall, & ſet vnderneth it a cup of glaſſe to receiue the oile that wil come out of it within xx. or xxx. daies, and keepe it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe as a precious thing, and anoint your face therwith, and the markes or ſpottes will vaniſhe awaie in ſhort ſpace, ſo that your fleſh & ſkin ſhall become ſofte. And if you will haue it odoriferous or well ſauoring, put into it ſome Cloues. And to take awaie lentilles from your face, and that quickly, take fiue or ſixe oxe galles, and two pound of Alome, ſixe vnces of fine ſugre, and eight limons cut very ſmall, diſtill all this in a limbeck of glaſſe, and put into the ſaid water an vnce of ſublime beaten into ſmal pouder & ſo put it in a veſſel of glaſſe, & let it ſtand in the ſunne the ſpace of ten daies and than it will be parfite, than maie you waſh the lentilles with it, with a little faſt ſpōge rubbing hard the fleſhe, and they will go of in ſhort time, and ſo your face ſhal remaine white & faire. You maie alſo take the fire pan, and hete it hote, and laie vpō it a diſh full of wheate to roſt, then ſtāpe it hote as it is, and ſtraine it and ſo get out the licour of it, and rubbe the lentilles with it and they will ſhortly go of.
         
         
            To take awaie red rubies that growe in the face by reaſon of the heate of the Liuer.
            TAke hogges ſuet wel purified & brimſtone aſmuch of thone as of thother w
                  •
                thother water diſtilled of

a Peche tree and ferne, and incorporate all togither with a ſlowe fire, and make therof an ointment wherwith you ſhall annoint your ſelfe diuers times, and they will go awaie. In the meane time abſtain
                  •
                from wine and all hote thinges: and to take awaie a ringeworme, take celydoine early in the morning, and ſtampe it betwene two ſtones, and laie it vpon the place, and in vſing this oftentimes you ſhal ſhortly be healid.
         
         
            To take of from the handes or feete the hardneſſe of the fleſhe gotten by labour.
            TAke newe waxe, Verdegriſe, and Blanc raſil, of eche of them an vnce, & half an vnce of ſublime, two drammes of burned Alome, two vnces of oile of roſes, and all this beyng braid very ſmal, make therof an ointmēt with a ſlow fire: This done weate the wart or hard fleſhe in water, or hote lie, and pare it handſomely with a raſor, and ſo laie of this ointmēt vpon it with a plaſter, and continuyng this ſame, it will go awaie. You ſhall take alſo the flowre of line ſeede, and with ſtrong Vinaigre you ſhal make a paſt or dowe ſomewhat hard, and vſe to laie it vpon the hard fleſh and it wil ſhortly drie vp. You ſhall take alſo greene waxe, and ſpreade it vpon a plaiſter, and lay it vpon the place, beyng firſt weated with water, then cut the hard fleſh as finely as you can, & in vſing this, it will kill the roote, ſo that it ſhall growe no more.
         
         
            Another ſecret to take away wartes or hard fleſh that growe betwene mens toes.
            TAke the greateſt Singreene of Walles, & take of the little outward thin ſkin that is vpon it, and laie the ſaide herb
                  •
                vpon the wart or harde fleſh betwene the toes that it maie lie right vpon it & do this fiue or ſixe times in the morning and euening, and they will go awaie all though they were neuer ſo old, weate them well and pare them aſmuche as you

can, and take of the ſaide herbe and make iuice of it, and put into it a little burned Alome, and incorporate it togither, and laie vpō it a little burned Alome, & incorporate it togither, & laie little weate pieces vpon the place that it maie bee alwaies freſhe, and within ten or twelue daies, the wart or hard fleſh wilbe gone ſo that you ſhall feele it no more. A man maie make yet another meanes, take the ſtaulkes of Brionia or wilde Gourdes, and burne them, and make fine aſhes of theim. Then take the leaues of the ſaide Brionia or wilde Gourdes, and of the leaues of Molin or Longwort, and of his floures and ſtampe theim, and ſo get out the iuice. This don, take of the ſaid aſhes, and put aſmuche of it into the ſaid iuice, as will make it like vnto anoyntment: and therwith anoint your wartes and hard fleſhe, and they will goe awaie and neuer growe againe. If you take alſo the floures of Molin or Longwort and diſtill them in a Limbeck of glaſſe, and weate them often with the water, and than taking the ſaid floures and breaking them betwene two ſtones, and laie them vpō the place of the wartes binding them with ſome linen cloth, and doyng it oftentimes they will conſume awaie.
         
         
            To make letters of Gold and Siluer emboſſed.
            TAke two or three garlike heades and pille them and make them cleane and ſtampe them, and get out aſmuche iuice of them as you can, and put a little inck into it vntill it be black, or els a little Saffran in pouder without inck, and write with the ſame iuice great letters, or other: and lette them drie, then go ouer them againe ones more, for to make thē of the greatnes that you will haue them, this done let it drie, and whan you will-laie the Golde vpon theim, heate it againe with your breath and ſo laie it on: but the Golde muſte be in leaues. Then couer the letter lightly with cotton and rubbing them a little you ſhal

take of all that cleaueth not vpō the letters. And thus doyng your worke will remaine of Golde and emboſſed, whiche wilbe a very faire thing to ſee.
         
         
            To make a deuiſe or armes or other thinges, vpon a violett or a roſe.
            TAke ſalte Armoniac, and braie it in a morter with vinaigre, and a little Sugre candy, and keepe it in a boxe, then take the roſe, or Violet, or gelly floure, and dreſſe the little leaues faſtened togither with red waxe, in ſuche wiſe that they maie be equall. Then with a penſill very fine, make what deuiſe or armes you will, & let it drie an houre or more, and than laie gold or ſiluer vpon it in foile, and preſſe it doune a little with cotton, ſo that whiche cleaueth not on, will goe awaie and your worke ſhall remaine faire.
         
         
            Sope to get out all ſpottes of cloth.
            TAke a pound of Alome and burne it, ſixe vnces of pouder of Ireos, and lette all be well beaten in pouder togither. Then take two pounde and a half of white ſope, and half an oxe gall, and the white of an Egge or two, and incorporate them well togither: Then take the Alome and the pouder of Ireos, and incorporate them all togither, and putte into theim a little Salnitrum or ſalt peter: This done put into it aſmuche of the ſaid incorporated Sope, as will make it haue a ſubſtance or bodie: to the intent that ye may facion and make rounde balles in a good ferme and faſt paſte or dowe, and ſo drie theim in the ſhadow and not in the ſunne, bicauſe the ſunne is contrary to it. And if you make them for to ſell, make them by meaſure, and by weight, and whan you wil take out your ſpot, weate ar
                  ••
               e the clothe vp and doune: then rubbe it well with the ſope, and cloth againſt cloth: This don you ſhall waſhe it with colde water vntill the water were cleere: and if you think it be not out al togither,

lette the clothe drie, and do ones againe as you did before, and the ſpottes will go out.
         
         
            Another like ſecret.
            TAke a pounde of white Sope of Veniſe, the yelkes of ſixe Egges, and halfe a ſponefull of beaten Salt, and aſmuche iuice of Beetes as will ſuffiſe to incorporate the ſaide Sope, and make thereof a cleauing paſt, whereof you ſhall forme and make your balles, and let them drie in the ſhadowe, and whan they be drie weate your clothe vp and doune with cleere water, and then rubbe it with ſope, and waſhe it as is a fore declared, and the ſpottes will goe awaie.
         
         
            Another like.
            TAke a pounde of white Sope cutte very ſmall, the Gall of an Oxe, or he Goate Alumen catinum, of eche of them an vnce, the yelkes of two Egges, and a fewe aſhes very fine, and incorporate well al togither with the ſope in a morter, and ſo make thereof paſte, whereof you ſhall make balles and doe as before is ſaid.
         
         
            Another meane.
            TAke the Gall of an olde Oxe, and a pounde of Fenigreke made in pouder, a pounde and a half of white ſope, three flagōs of ſtrong lie, & put al togither and ſeeth it on a ſlowe fire vntill it diminiſhe of the halfe. Then waſhe what ſpotte you will with it refreſhing it diuers times with colde water and it will take it awaie.
         
         
            Another meanes for ſpottes, of fatte or Oile.
            TAke a pounde of rocke Alome, and as muche freſhe vnſleck lime, ſixe vnces of Alumen fecis, three pounde of white Sope cutte ſmall, foure

pound of cleere water, and let it boile a certaine ſpace in ſome veſſell that is not fatty, and than ſtraine it, and whan you will occupie of it, let it be luke warme, and weate the ſpottes with the ſaide water on bothe ſides of the cloth, and the cloth togither: then waſhe it with cleere water, and the ſpottes will be gon, then waſhe it againe with a little Sope and freſhe water, and at the ſecond or third time, they will without all peraduenture go out. Alſo for ſpottes you maie take two pintes of renning water, the Gall of an oxe, four vnces of Alom De fece burnt, and three vnces of Alumen fecis broiled, and two ſcruples of Camfer, and put all togither, and ſeeth it, vntill half be diminiſhed: Then ſtraine it, and waſhe what ſpottes you will with it, and within twiſe or thriſe waſhing, they will go out.
         
         
            To take ſpottes out of Skarlate or Veluet, without burting the colour.
            TAke the herbe called Lauaria, of the Apoticaries Condiſi, and get out the iuice of it, and laie it vpon the ſpot the ſpace of two or three houres, thē waſhe it well with warme water, and if you thinke the ſpot not well taken awaie, do it ones more, and if the clothe be not died in graine, put to it a little ſope, with another little quantite of the ſaide iuice, and incorporate it well, and ſo waſhe the ſpot with it, and it will go out.
         
         
            To take ſpottes out of white ſilke or Veluet in griene or Crimſen Veluet.
            TAke ſtronge Aqua vite of three ſtillinges, and weate the ſpot with it vp and doune: then take the white of a newe laide Egge, and ſpreade it vpon the ſpot, and ſo ſet it in the ſunne to drie. This done waſh it trimly with freſhe and cleere water, and ſo wring well the ſpotte betwee
                  •
               e your handes, and it will go out, and do this twiſe at the leſt: for the colour will not periſhe nor decaie. Alſo for a cloth in graine,

take Alome water, and waſhe well the ſpotte with it, rubbing it harde clothe againſte clothe, this dooen, waſhe it againe with clere water, and in twiſe doing it, it will goe out. Alſo for the like effecte, take roche Alome, Tartre of tonnes, and white Sope, of eche of them three vnces, and make theim into very fine pouder: this doen, take twoo Oxe galles, and an yearthen pot that is not in any wiſe fattie or greaſie, and putte into it hādſomely at your diſcrecion, and ſo ſette it on the fire, and when it beginneth to ſeeth, caſt in by and by the oxe gall, and the pouder, and let it ſo boile vntill it be diminiſhed of the third or fourth part. Then waſhe the ſpot with this water three or foure times and at euery time drie the cloth. And finally renewe it with freſhe water, and you ſhall ſee the effect.
         
         
            To take out a ſpot of inke or wine of a wollen or linen clothe.
            TAke the iuice of Limons, Orenges, or citrons, and wete the ſpot with it diuers times, letting it drie at euery time, this done waſhe it with hote water, and it will go out. Vſe alſo white Sope with white Vinaigre, and the ſpot of inck will eaſely goe out.
         
         
            To reſtore the colour to a cloth, that hath loſt it in taking out a ſpotte.
            TAke a pound of Tartre of white wine, and calcine it in a fornaiſe of bricke, vntil it be white, and take an vnce of it, than take a pint of ſtrōg Vinaigre and cleere, and put the ſaid pouder into it, & ſo ſet it on the fire. And whan it beginneth to boile, take it by and by of, and it is made: Then weate by little and little, the place that hath loſ
                  •
               e his colour 
                  ••
               
               ners times, and the colour will come againe.
         
         
            A water to take all maner of ſpottes out of clo
                  •••
                of any colour.
            
               TAke two olde oxe galles, and two ſcrupules of rocke Alome, and aſmuche of Alumen fecis, foure vnces of Tartre of white wine, one ſcruple of Camfire, and ſtampe all togither very ſmal: This don take two flagons of cleere water, and put al togither, and ſo ſeeth it with a ſlowe fire vntil it make no more froth or ſkim. Then putte into it three vnces of Aqua vite of three diſtillinges, and ſo keepe it in ſome veſſel of glaſſe vntill you will occupie it. And if the ſpotte be in ſkarlate, take a corner of the ſame cloth, and weate it in the ſaid water, and rubbe well twiſe or thriſe the ſpotte, and than waſhe it againe with cleere water, and it will goe out. The like maie you doe in al ſortes of colored clothe, in taking a little of the like colored clothe, or other that is nighe vnto the colour weating it and rubbing as is afore ſaide, and it ſhalbe done.
         
         
            To driue awaie Flies, Spiders, Scorpions, and other Vermine from your houſe.
            TAke what quantite of Lapwinkes feathers you will, and burn
                  •
                them in your Chamber, and whan ſuche Vermine ſhall ſmell this ſauour they will not abide.
         
         
            Againſt Gnattes whiche ſtinge men in the night.
            TAke Comine, and chewe it well, and anoint your handes, your face and al your body if it be poſſible with ye iuice that ſhalbe in your mo
                  •
               th and the flie feeling this ſauour whiche is troubleſome vnto him, will not moleſt you at all. And if you will driue them out of your houſe, and that thei comme not into your chamber, take Commine, and make therof pouder very fine, the whiche you ſhall incorporate with good white wine, and take a burgeon of a vine, or other branche hauing greene leaues vpon it, and ſteepe it in the ſaide wine, and ſo ſprinkle your windowes and doores of your chamber, or the place wher

you will not haue them come in. And alſo ſprinkle of it a long vpon the walles: for in ſmelling this ſauour they can not abide. If you will alſo driue awaie flies, take Santonicum or Lauander cotton, and the leaues of Eldern trees, with ſome Comine, and ſeeth it with water, and ſprinkle your houſe with it or your chambre, and they ſhall not trouble you, for the ſauour of the water is very contrary vnto theim, but beware you laie no baite for them to giue them occaſion to enter in boldely, for afterward thei will not greatly care for the ſauour of it.
         
         
            A very excellent Secret, for to take out ſpottes or hard fleſhe gotten by labour.
            
               TAke ſalte peter, Blewe vitrioll and Verdegriſe, of eche of them two vnces, two vnces of Alumen Sucharinum, and halfe an vnce of vnſleckt Lime, and lette all be made into pouder, then diſtill it in a limbeck of Glaſſe. True it is, that the firſte water is not verie good: but the ſeconde will bee excellent good to waſhe theim withall often times, and they will drie vp by l
                  •
               ttle and little, ſo that you ſhall not perceiue it. You maie take alſo ſome pouder of Euphorbium or Euphorbius, tempered with lie, and oile of Tartre, and incorporate it well, and ſo ſoke the ſpottes or harde fleſhe with it, and cutte it as neere as you can, and laiyng this medicine vpon it you ſhalbe hole. Take alſo the water that falleth from the vignes after they bee cutte, and waſhe the Wartes oftentimes with it, and they will were awaie leauing the ſkinne cleane with out any blacke ſpottes. You maie make alſo pouder of Cantharides, and incorporate it with Roſen & Pitche, and make therof a plaiſter whiche you ſhall laie vpon your Wartes and hard fleſhe, and you ſhall kill their roote, ſo that thei wil drie vp of themſelues, and will go awaie without any paine. Take alſo glaſſe heaten

ſmall, and waſhe it, and take the fineſt of it, and mixt it with a little womans milke and ſome leuaine of wheate, and make thereof a plaiſter, firſt cutting the wart or hard fleſhe & paring of the head of the warte, and ſo laie it vpon it at night, and in oftentimes vſing this, they will go awaie.
         
         
            To take oile or greaſe out of a cloth of what colour ſo euer it be, without any droppe of water.
            TAke ſome ſheepes feete, and make them verie cleane: then ſeeth them and eate theim, & keepe the right bones, the which you ſhall burne, and make therof a cleane and fine pouder. This don heate the ſaid pouder and laie it vpon the ſpot, and let it remaine in the ſunne, and whan you ſee that the pouder beginneth to waxe black, take it by and by of, and put other freſhe vpon it, and doe this ſo often that you ſee the pouder no more blacke, and than the ſpotte wil be gone, and the colour of the cloth not periſhed.
         
         
            Balles of Sope for Barbers of diuers ſortes and ſauours.
            FIrſte you muſte note that the Sope is purged and purified two maner of waies. The firſt is the venitian Sope beyng3 cut ſmall muſte be put in a pot that is not fatty, nor hauing any euill ſauour, and put into it ſome roſe water or other ſweete waters, or els in this maner folowing: Take well water and put into it cheuers of cipers, and ſeeth it a good while, than ſtraine it, & it wil be very odoriferous and ſweete: or els putte in the floures of mirtle tree, of Orenge tree, Cedar tree, Spicke, Lauander, Agnus caſtus, Sticados, beyond ſea Violettes, Sage, and ſuche other odoriferous floures or herbes, as Ced
                  ••
               , Baie, our ladies glooues, Minte, Maioram, Time, and other ſweete herbes, and make of all this a compoſition, & ſo make a ſweete water of diuers ſauours, and ſo ſeeth it a little: This done take of the ſope that

ſwimmeth aboue with a Spoone, and laie it vpon a newe Tile, and it wil incontinent be drie and ſhal remaine neate and cleane, bicauſe the water hath taken awaie al the filth and vnctuoſite of the ſope, and therfore will be faire and white without any euil ſauour, hauing augmented the good ſmell of it. And this maie you keepe againſt you haue neede of it: And this is the very true purging and purifiyng of it, mary it diminiſheth it of an vnce or a little more in the pounde. Alſo another maner is, that you muſte cut the ſope very ſmall or els grate it, and drie it in the ſunne or in an ouen, and make thereof pouder paſſing it thorowe a fine ſarce. This don weate it with Roſe water or water of Spicke, and lette it drie in the ſhadow or in the winde, or els for to make it ſoner, cutte your ſope and ſtampe it, and nothing els, and put vnto it ſome pouder of Irios, Storax, and a little Camfire, and beate it all togither, and then make your Bals, and ſo you maie incontinent after diſtribute them. True it is that thei be not of any great value. But for to incorporate the odours in the ſope for Barbers balles, you muſt take ſixe vnces of the ſaid ſope, and ſtampe it wel in a morter, and put into it all theſe thinges folowing made into fine pouder, for in this lieth the honour and perfection of your worke. An vnce of Labdanum, foure vnces of Macaleb, an vnce of Aniſe, three Nutmegges, Maioram, drie Roſes, Cipres pouder, of eche of them halfe an vnce, three vnces of cloues, ſixe vnces of Irios, eight vnces of the flower of Amylum, with aſmuche of Storax liquida, as will lie vpon a peny, three graines of Muſke, or foure at the moſte, ſixe ſcruples of Camfire, with a little of the fineſt Sugre that you can get. And lette all theſe thinges be well ſtamped, and incorporated with in the Sope, & you ſhall make a paſt or dowe ſome what faſt or ferme, of the whiche you ſhal forme and make greate or ſmall balles as you ſhall thinke beſt, and let them drie in the ſhadowe and they will be

parfite. For to make alſo of another ſorte, take two pound of the foreſaid ſope, and ſtampe it wel, then put into it the iuice of Macaleb about two vnces, and for to knowe it, note that it is like a corne of whete, and of the ſame colour, but ſomewhat round & a little greater. And for to get out the iuice of it, ſtiepe it in Roſe water, or other ſweete water, & let it remaine in it vntill it ſwell. Then ſtampe it and put it in a linen cloth, and ſtraine it hard, and the white iuice that commeth out of it, is the iuice of Macaleb, and of the ſauour of Macaleb, and the reſt that remaineth you ſhal drie and make of it pouder, the which you maie alſo occupie bicauſe it hath the like vertue & the ſauour of violettes: with that you ſhall take two vnces of Cloues, three vnces of Irios, an vnce and a halfe of Ladanum, an vnce of Storax, & all this beyng made into very fine pouder, let it be incorporated into the Sope, & you ſhal make a paſt or dowe ferme & faſt, whereof you ſhall forme and facion your balles ſetting them to drie in the ſhadow. To make alſo balles of white ſope, take fiue pound of the ſaide ſope, and put into it foure vnces of Irios, two vnces of white Sandale, three vnces of the floure of Amylum, an vnce of Storax, & make al this into pouder; and ſtampe well altogither, & ſtiepe it a little in Roſe water, or muſkt water, and you ſhal make of it a good paſt, wherof you ſhal forme & make your balles euē as you will. Alſo for to make thē ſimple & good, take iiij. pound of the ſaid white ſope▪ with v. vnces of the pouder of Irios, two vnces of cloues, iij. vnces of the pouder of Macaleb, & incorporate them well togither in a morter with the water of Trefle or of ſpike, and you ſhall make a forme and faſt dowe, whereof you maie make your balles, and they will be very ſoone drie.
         
         
            To counterfeite all maner of greene leaues which ſhall ſeeme naturall.
            TAke greene leaues of what ſort you will, and ſkrape or bruſe the biggeſt ſtrekes that be like

ribbes vpon the leafe the cōtrarie waie, with a knife. Then make this colour folowing. Take comon oile or the oile of line, or other licours that make ſmoke, and burne them in a lampe, and ſette ouer them a pot for all the ſmoke will ſtick and cleaue round about it: This done gather togither the ſame ſmoke, and temper it in a diſhe with a little oile or Verniſhe, and incorporate it well togither. Then with the ſaide colour you ſhall blacke the leafe on the ſide where you haue bruſed and ſkraped the great ribbes with a linē clothe or cotton, and turne the leafe vpon the Paper double and with your hande or with a piece of Clothe preſſe doune ſomewhat lightly the ſaide leafe, vntill you be aſſured that it hath leaft the colour vpon the Paper. Then take it of handſomely, and you ſhall finde all the print and deuiſe of the ſaide leafe to bee as it were naturall, yea, euē vnto the leaſt vaine or ribbe, ſo that you ſhall thinke it faire, and with all the naturall ſignes and markes, and if you will make it greene according to his nature: take Vinaigre very ſtrong, verdegriſe, gomme arabick, bladder paſt, called in Frēch paste de veſsre, and put all togither and ſeeth it, and it will be greene as we haue before ſaide, and with the ſaid water you maie make al theſe leaues greene, and it will bee faire to ſee, for to make a painting fryſed or rough about your chamber, ye ſpecially in winter time.
         
         
            To make a Paper burde of beaten and ſtampt Paper for mouldes and hollow thinges.
            TAke the ſhearinges of white paper, and ſee that it be nete and cleane and ſpecially with parchemēt, and ſtiepe it in cleere water the ſpace of ſixe or eight daies. Then putte theim againe into a pot that is not greaſie with other cleere water, & ſeeth them the ſpace of two houres. This done take thē out of the pot with as little moyſture as you cā poſſible, & ſo ſtampe thē i
                  •
               
               
a morter as ſmall as you can, for they will make your worke ſo muche the finer. Then putte them in a little bagge whiche you ſhall ſteepe in cleere water, and if you ſhould leaue them there a yeare, they would continue ſtil, in changing the water ones a weake: This done haue ready mouldes of leade or earth, for they be both good, ſo that thei be cleane with in, then you ſhal take this chopt paper and in wringing it a little and caſting out the water, you ſhall put it on the moulde and preſſe it doune diligētly hauing a ſponge in your hande for to preſſe it the better aboue, and to drinke or ſoke vp the water. Then ſette it in the Sunne or in a hote houſe, and whan they be drie, they will come of eaſely of them ſelues from the moulde. And by this meanes you ſhall make your picture faire and nete, and liuely as is your moulde. And if the paper be beaten ſmall inough, they will be like plaſtre, & as white as paper: and if you will paint theim or giue theim a luſtre, giue thē firſt one couer ouer with ſtrong glut, that is to ſaie, of that that painters occupie in their worke, and whan it is drie, laie ſuche colours vpon it as you ſhall ſee to bee moſte meeteſt, and it will bee a goodly thing to ſee theim with ſome liniamentes of Gold, as frier Cherubin did.
         
         
            To giue a faire gloſſe vnto Pictures or figures painted.
            TAke a pounde of white and fatte roſen, with two vnces of Plomme tree gomme, twoo vnces of Turpentine of Veniſe, two vnces of oile of line. And take firſt the Roſen, and melt it, & ſtraine it hote as it is, and ſteepe the gomme in Cōmune oile vntill it be molten: then ſtraine it, and putte the oile and the Turpentine togither in a little pot of earth that is not greaſie, & ſet it on a ſlowe fire: and mingle it alwaies in the pot vntill it be all well incorporated togither, and take it from the fire and keepe it, and

whan you will occupie it, let your pictures or Images be nete and cleane, and let this verniſhe be ſome what hote, and ſo laie it vpon your ſaide pictures euen as menne do other Verniſhe, and it will be a very faire pece of worke and haue a good gloſſe. And for to make another Verniſh whiche ſhalbe incontinent drie after you haue laide it on: take Frankenſens of the male-kinde called Olibanum, and writing verniſhe, that is to ſaie, Sandracha, whiche is Genuper gomme, according to your diſcretion, and make therof a pouder the fineſt that you can, and incorporate it togither. Then take Turpentine of veniſe, and put it in a little pot that is not fatty, and melt it, then put it into the ſaide pouders by little and little incorporating them well togither, but lette it not be to ſofte, and ſo ſtraine it hote through a ſtrainer. And whan you will occupie of it let it be hote, and ſpreade it abrode thinly, and your worke ſhalbe very ſhining, and will bee drie incontinent. Alſo for to make a licour whiche menne vſe for to verniſh vpon pictures, take oile of line, and diſtill it in a limbeck of glaſſe. Thē take three vnces of verniſh of Amber that is faire, and an vnce of the ſaid oile, and incorporate it well togither vpon a ſlowe fire, & whan you will occupie it, let it be hote as verniſh is, and you ſhall haue a good ſucceſſe and iſſue of your worke as well in wood as in linen clothe, and other worke, doyng it handſomely.
         
         
            To make another maner of greene water cleere.
            TAke the little Apples of Nerpru
                     •
                  
                whan they be ripe and blacke, and breake them, and put them in a pot that is not fatty, and put to them a littell Alome beaten, and ſet it in a hote place the ſpace of ſixe or eight daies, and it will boile and worke as wine dothe in the fat. This done ſtraine it into a cannals vnder a preſſe, & ſo get out the ſubſtance of it, and put into it a little Almaine blewe: and it will make

you a faire greene, and if it ſeeme vnto you to darke, you maie put to it a little Alome, and ſo put the ſaide compoſition in a bladder, and drie it in the ſhadowe, and you ſhall haue a very faire paſte or dowe, not ſo ferme or faſt as that wherof we haue ſpokē afore▪ but yet bothe be good.
         
         
            To take out a deuiſe made in a mould, with blacke Sope.
            TAke a pounde of blacke waſhinge Sope, with ſtrong lie, and ſeeth it vntill it be diminiſhed of two thirdendeales, and keepe it ſo, but whan you will drawe out the deuiſe from the naturall, and that you haue not leiſer to do it, do thus. Take of the ſaide Sope ſoden, and Sope ouer your Paper handſomely, then laie it vpō the deuiſe or picture that you will drawe out, and preſſe it ſoftly with your hande, and holde it faſte, & the moulde wil take all the deuiſe: ſo that you maie drawe it at your pleaſure and eaſe in another maner: or els make a caſe of woode, and paſt a pece of Paper vpon it: then binde the deuiſe vnto it laiyng the mould vpon the Paper, and holding it in the ayer you ſhall ſee all the deuiſe, and doe what you will with it, and ſo ſhall you come to the ende of your purpoſe. But if you will make the Paper ſhine for to drawe out the left thing that is, take very fine Paper, and anoint it with the oile of line, and rubbe it well, doyng ſo diuers times, and the oile will goe of, and ſo let it drie in the ſhadow: for a man maie write vpon it with inck and with other colours.
         
         
            To make cleaue the heares, and to drie vp the ſweate vnder the arme holes.
            TAke litarge of gold made into pouder very fine, and whan you haue ſweate in ſomer time, or at any time els, take a little of the ſaide pouder betwene your fingars, and rubbe your arme holes,

breaſt, and other partes with it, and ſpecially where you haue ſweate, or where you ſmell an euill ſauour, for incontinent after by the vertue of this pouder, all the ſweate will drie vp, and in ſhorte time will make cleaue the heare whiche is knotted with the ſweate, and will keepe it nete and cleane, ſo that it ſhall no more ſauour iuell but wel, and in vſing ofte this pouder, cauſeth that you ſhall not ſweate ſo muche in that place, neither doth it hurte you, nor ſtaineth neither your fleſhe nor ſhorte. This ſecreate is very excellent and gueſen.
         
         
            To make Roſes, Floures, Gillefloures, and of all other ſortes, white, redde, greene, yellowe, and incarnate in ſhort ſpace.
            TAke fatte yearth or claie aſmuche as you will, and drie it ſo well in the Sunne that you may make a fine pouder of i
                  •
               . Then putte it into the veſſell wherin you will plante your Violettes, Roſes, or white naturall floures, for to make theim growe of an other colour. Then plante in the ſaid pouder thoſe that you will haue not ſuffring thē to feele any other moiſture than this that followeth. If you will haue them redde, take water, and ſeeth in it ſome Braſile cut very ſmall, and lette it ſeeth vntill it be diminiſhed of the thirde or fourth part, and water by little and little morning and euening the earth with this redde water beyng colde, and giue it no other water then this, vntill you thinke it hath taken effect and wrought as you would haue it. And if you will make theim Greene, take litt
                  ••
                Apples of Nerprum whan they bee thorowe ripe, and if you will haue them Yelowe take them whan they be not ripe, and breake thē a little, & ſeeth theim in water, and the firſte will be Greene, and the other that bee not ripe will be Yellow. And with the ſaid water, water your earth, and the floure will growe of the ſame colour,

and water it vntill the plant or roote be thorouly watered, whiche wil be, in continuyng it the ſpace of xv. or xx. daies. And if you will make them black, you ſhal make the water with gall and vitrioll, as menne doe make incke, and if you doe water the earth with it as you doe the other, the white floure will growe black, but leaue it not abrode in the night time, for feare of the dewe. True it is that all the whole floure will not be of that colour: but partly, ſo that it will take parte of twoo colours. If you will make them of three colours, water them in the morning with one colour on one ſide, and at night with the ſame colour on the other ſide: then in the morning on one ſide with another colour, and at night with the ſame colour on the other ſide, ſo that it be watred in the morning and euening with two maner of colours, in changing the ſides: for there as you haue watred in the morninge with one colour put nothing at night but on the other ſide, and in doyng thus you ſhall haue your floure of three colours, and of this plante you maie make as many as you will, for this hath bene proued.
         
         
            To make trees of all ſortes to growe whiche ſhall bring furthe fruite; farre greatter then comonly they doe.
            TAke the halfe of a plate of yron that is olde and ruſtie, and ſpecially thinne: for if it were thick, you could do no good with it, and trimme the ſaid iron plate after the maner of a cornet, and weate it within with brine, to the intent it maie ſoone ruſt, and let it haue a little hole on the pointed ſide. This done put into it your ſeede or kernell that you wil ſet, be it Peche, Apple, Pere, Plumme, or other fruite, and laie them all with the yong ſpring turned toward the point of the cornet. Then put to his bottome made of the ſame plate of iron, and let it be well cloſed and ſodred without and within, ſo that it maie haue no

aier but at the ſide of the point wher by you ſhall water and ſprinkle it with brine: And ſo plant it in the grounde the point vpward in the moneth of September or Octobre, to the intent that the grounde maye rott the cornet: for whan the ſeedes or kernels ſo encloſed in do feele the moiſture, and be ſwollen inough, thei begin to caſt out the yong ſpringes and the roote, and wreeth and turne ſomuche a boyt the ſaid plate of iron that they perce it thorow vnderneth, bicauſe that the rootes are ſharpe pointed and harde, and turne ſo muche about, that with the helpe of the earth whiche rotteth the iron, thei make little holes, and ſo enlarge thē ſelues by little and little, & the buddes or ſpringes turne alſo and taketh the ſauour of this brine and colour of the yron, and whan the ſaide ſpring or budde will come furth, it is by force, and ſo they come all out at one time, and waxe great incomming out, & cleaue faſte and ioyne all togither: ſo that all thei make but one plant, and growe great meruelouſly, whiche will be faire to ſee.
         
         
            To ſoften and mollifie Oliues with lie, in leſſe then eight houres.
            TAke greene Oliues and lately gathered, and that thei be not bruſed in any wiſe, bicauſe thā they will periſh ſhortly after, and will not continue aboue eight or ten daies, but the ſo
                  •
               ter you put them in the lie, the better they will bee in faſt and ſauour, and the ſofter alſo. Wherfore do it quickly and make the lie out of hand. And for to make a buſhell of it, take a buſhell of the aſhes of Oke very ſtrong, and the third parte of a buſhell of freſhe vnſleckt lime, and incorporate them bothe well togither, ſprinkling it with a little freſh water, ſo that there may riſe no duſt of the aſhes or lime, and that it be well cloſed together and be hote and chafed the ſpace of two houres. This done putte it into ſome veſſell of earth or woode that

hath a hole vnderneth, and ſturre it as muche as you maie. Then caſte vpon it three or foure pailes full of hote water, and lette it droppe out by little and little, and whan you haue gotte out of it about twoo pailes full, you ſhal caſt vpon it two other pailes full of colde water. And ſo vſe the matter that you maie haue two pailes full of the ſaide lie, and ſo putte your Oliues into it, and leaue them in it vntill you ſee that they go to the bottome, where you ſhall proue them after this maner. Take one of them, and breake him with your Teeth, and if you ſee that he come from the kernell, and that he bee ſomewhat yellow. Then take theim by and by out of the water, and putte them into freſh water, and chaunge it three or foure times one after another, and ſtraight waie pille them, and take them out of one water to putte them in another, and leaue theim not vncouered with water, bicauſe then they will be ſoone blacke, and loſe the faire colour that giueth them ſo goodly a ſhewe beſide the good ſauour that thei haue, whiche ſeemeth a thing almoſt againſt nature, to ſee an Oliue with the leafe to be of the ſame colour that it was vpon the tree. Leaue them in freſhe water three or foure daies changing the water twiſe a daie, and if you change it foure or fiue times in the daie, they wil bee ſofte and ſweete in two daies, and you maie eate of them with Salt and Vinaigre, and after you haue made the brine and is colde, put them into it, and within two daies you maie eate of them, for they wil be good. But note, that if the Oliue haue tutched no water, it will haue alwaies a tendre ſkin, and wilbe ſofte to eate, but if it haue tutched the water, it muſt be ſtieped the more, and would neuer be ſo delicate to eate, bicauſe he would haue the rine tough and harde, although it be faire and greene. You maie alſo dreſſe them another maie, take theim drie, and that they haue tutched no water, and ſtiepe them in brine the ſpace of a moneth then change them into another

kewe brine, the ſpace of fiueten or twētie daies: then make vnto them a thirde brine good and ſtrong, and they wilbe ſofte: but of this men vſe not.
         
         
            To make a water that will die or colour althinges be it bone or woode.
            TAke ſtrong white Vinaigre, and put it into a veſſell of Glaſſe, and put into it of the filing of Copper, with ſome blewe vitrioll, rock Alom, and Verdegriſe, and leaue it ſeauen daies in infuſion: then boile it in ſome veſſell, and boile what thing you will in it, as wood or bone, and it ſhall take what colour you will
                  •
                But note that in ſteade of Verdegriſe you maie putte in what colour you will, that is to ſaie, redde, yellowe, or other, with a little rocke Alome.
         
         
            A water to make Teeth white.
            
               TAke a pounde of comon Salte, eight vnces of rocke Alome, halfe an vnce of ſalt peter. And all this beyng made into a fine pouder with a hādfull of ſage, and aſmuche of Lentiſcus cut very ſmall and halfe a diſhfull of blacke Berries, and ſo diſtill all this in a limbeck of glaſſe, and whan the water is come out, change the recipient, and ſette vnder another giuing it a ſharper fire, and the finer parte of it will come out. And if you thinke good to mingle it, at your diſcretion bee it, but it ſhalbe the ſtronger. Then keppe it in ſome veſſel of thicke glaſſe, and welſtopt: & whan you wil make your teeth while, make them firſte cleane from meate or other thinges that maie ſticke in them, and ſpecially the white filthe that is about them, with a point of a knife. Then you ſhall haue a tooth piko
                  •
                of the wood called Lentiſc
                     •
                  s, or of ſome other little ſticke, and weate i
                  •
                in the ſaide water, and ſo rubbe your Teeth with it, and they

will incontinent be as white as Iuorie, and will continue ſo a long time without hurting them at all, but rather will make you haue good gommes, and faſten the teeth in the ſaide gommes. If you will alſo make another ſorte for to make cleane your teeth, take the ſharpe huſke of a cheſtnut whan it is ripe, and drie it, and make therof a pouder then take aſmuche more of the ſeede of nettles made alſo into a fine pouder, and incorporate them well togither. And whan you will make your teeth cleane, rubbe theim with the ſaide pouder, and that will ſette ſuche a beate in the gommes, that ſkant you ſhal be able to ſhut your mouthe, by reaſon of ſo greate abondance of water that will come out of your mouth, but it will doe you n
                  •
                hurt: for in taking a little Roſe water into your mouthe, and a little Sugre candy, & ſo refreſhing it ther with, the paine will paſſe awaie incontinent.
         
         
            The true ſecret and maner howe to ma
                  ••
                beyond ſea Azure, or els for all tutches or paragon. Alſo for to make ſtrong paſte, for to incorporate the Azure ſtone in it called Lapis laſuli, and to take it out againe in his time, and whan you thinke good.
            HAue firſt ſome cleere & nete Turpentine foure vnces with ſixe vnces of faire Roſine, and aſmuch of faire Pix greca, three vnces of faire Maſtick, and aſmuch of cleere newe ware, an vnce and a half of Line ſeede purified, or an vnce of oile of bitter Almondes. But you ſhall take firſte a newe pot of earth well leaded, and wette, and putte into it the Turpentine vpon a fire of embers ſomewhat ſlowe, vntil it be molten, ſturring it alwaies with a wooden ſpoone made after the facion of an Apoticaries ſliſe, and whan it is well molten, putte into it by little and little the Roſine cut as ſmall as is poſſible: then putte into it by the ſame meanes the Pix greca, & the maſtick

beaten and ſtampt three or foure times: and then the waxe beyng cut very ſmall, mingle it well with the ſaid ſliſe or ſpoone vntill all be well incorporated togither, and aboue all thinges ſee that there bee but a little fire, for otherwiſe it would burne, and the fire would take it bicauſe they be all hote thinges, & ready and apt to be kindlid. This done put the oile into it: true it is that the oile of line ſeede, is muche better thā the oile of Almondes, not withſtanding you maie put in of that whiche is moſt comodious, and let your pot ſo ſtande on the fire, that the ſaide compoſition maie wawme and bubble a litle the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, or more if neede be: and whan the ſaide paſt is ſodden, you ſhall knowe it by this experience. Take a ſpoone of woode and ſturre it wel about with it, then take it out, and make two or three droppes of it into a diſhe of freſhe water, and if the droppe ren a brode in the water, it is a ſigne that it is not ſodden inoughe, and therefore ſeeth it more vntill the droppe keepe togither in the water. Alſo you maie proue it this waie, weate your fingars in the water, and wring the ſaide droppe, & if it ſtretche out a long in drawing it out, & vnlouſe it ſelf, thā it is a ſigne that it is ſoddē inough, and than take it from the fire, & empty it ſo hote as it is, into a bagge ſharpe pointed at the bottome like a gelley bagge beyng firſt weate in hote water, and let the paſt droppe into a baſin beyng ſette in a paile full of freſhe water, and do it diligently and circumſpectly to the intent that all maie come out, and wringe the bagge betwene two ſtickes, and it wil the ſoner come out. And whan it's cold againe, take it out of the water, and toſſe it vp and downe betwene your handes, vntill you be ſure there is no more water in it. And if by reaſon of the heate it did cleaue to your handes, anoint your handes with oile of line ſeede, well purified as we will declare after in the chapter of purified oile. After that you haue well rubbed it betwene your

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
handes, and well cleanſed from the water, than keepe it alwaies in freſhe water, and note, that if it bee in ſomer you muſt change the water euery day, or euery two daies ones. And in thus doyng it will keepe viij. yeare, beyng alwaies good and ſtrong.
         
         
            To make the ſecond paſte, ſofter for beyond ſea Azure.
            TAke foure vnces of faire Turpentine, ſixe vnces of faire Roſin, ſixe vnces of clere Pix greca, an vnce of faire Waxe, three quarters of oile of line ſeede, and ſeeth it like as the other was in the chapter before: true it is, that it is ſoner ſodden, bicauſe it is ſofter, that is to ſaie, it will make you ſoner Azure than the firſte, whiche is muche ſtronger, but if you woulde labour for Azure with bothe theſe paſtes, lette the ſofter bee alwaies the firſte, and if the ſtone be not of perfiteſt hauing veine of Gold, giue it neuer bothe the paſtes: But note, that in theſe two paſtes conſiſteth the true arte to knowe well the parfite beyond ſea Azure, for therein lieth the gaine and the loſſe, and therefore do it diligently and wiſely.
         
         
            To purifie the oile of line ſeede for the Azure.
            TAke what quantite of oile of line ſeede you ſhall thinke good, ſo that it bee faire and cleere of a yellowe colour like Gold, and put it in a horne of Glaſſe, or in an Oxe horne that hath a hole in the bottome, and putte vpon it ſome freſhe water, and ſturre it well with a ſticke, than 
                  •
               ette it ſtande ſtill a little while, and open the hole vnderneth, and lette out the water, doyng ſo ſeauen or eight times, or vntill the water come out as cleere as whan you did put it in: and in this maner men purifie the ſaid oile, then keepe it in ſome veſſell of Glaſſe, againſte you haue neede of it. And if paraduenture you can not gette of of the ſaide Oile, take the oile of bitter Almondes, for

you maie vſe and occupie it without and more purifiyng: true it is that it coſteth more, and yet is not ſo good as the other, but for a ſhifte. And note well that whan you heare ſpeake of oile, it is of this purified oile.
         
         
            Lie for to waſhe beyond ſea Azure.
            TAke eight or ten handfuls of the aſhes of vines well ſifted, and put it into ſome veſſell that holdeth at the leaſt a paile full and a halfe of water and thath hath a hole in the bottome, and ſo order it that the water maie rēne out, and that the aſhes kepe in, and ſtoppe the hole without ſide. Then put in the ſaid aſhes and preſſe it doune aſmuche as is poſſible, this done powre vpon a paile full of hote water by little and little, and open it not vnderneth vntill the water begon to the bottom: And than let it out as faſt as it will, & keepe this firſt water in a veſſell of glaſſe, and diſtill it thorowe a felt, that is to a bande of olde white cloth, then diſtill it againe with a piece of felt, or white cloth, and than it wil be nete, cleane and purified, and keepe it well from duſt in ſome veſſel leade within. Then put another pailefull of hote water in to it, and lette it out as before you did the other, and keepe alwaies of theſe twoo ſortes againſt you haue neede. This done do it the thirde time in the like maner, and put eche of theſe waters or lie by them ſelues, the firſt is ſtrong, the ſecond weaker, the third is weakeſt of all and ſweete, of the whiche lies menne do vſe for to waſhe the fore ſaide paſte with all whan the Azure will not come out, as you haue learned before. Nowe whan you will occupie of this lie, take of all three ſortes aſmuche as you ſhall thinke good. A man maie make yet another maner of lie, to waſhe the paſte with, and to purge it from his vnctuoſite and fatnes. Take aſmuche calcined Tartre as you will, and boile it in cleane water the ſpace of a quarter

of an houre or more, then lette it go doune to the bottome & keepe it ſo cleere: for you maie occupie it whan the paſt is vnctuous or fatty, and alſo for to waſhe the beyonde ſea azure, for aſmuch as it augmēteth lighteneth the colour of it. It is alſo good for to heale the ſkabbe, ſkurfe, and laſarie, if a man vſe to waſhe him ſelf with it, and maketh all the body cleane and white.
         
         
            How the Veſſell ought to be, wherin all the waters are put that the azure is waſhed with.
            THe veſſell muſte be of earth bake and anelled, and well leaded, and poliſhed in the bottome, and if it be not of earth, it maie be of Copper or Laton well poliſhed at the bottome, and lette it haue three pipes or conduites, one in the middle, another ſomwhat lower, and the thirde within two fingars of the bottome. And if you thinke that it is not yet azure, let it ſtande eight or tenne daies vntill it be well ſettled, and you ſhalt ſee at the bottome a little azure. Then waſhe it with freſh water as you did the other, and ſo put it with the other, or els kepe it a part, for it is faire and good.
         
         
            The firſt parte howe to knowe the vertues, good
               
                  〈◊〉
                and ſignes of Lapis laſuli, and to make true 
                  ••
               yonde ſea Azure moſt perfectly and expertly.
            W
                  •
               ate firſt the ſaide ſtone with ſpettle or water, and ſette a piece of white cloth before it, and you ſhall ſee it giue in it a faire luſtre of a Violet colour, whiche ſhall comforte your 
                  •
               ight. And if you will make the proofe to know if it be fine, take a little of it, and laie it vpon hote embers and make it flame, thē take it out, & if you ſee that it is not altered, it is a ſigne that it is good, and if it chāge not at all, it is of the fineſt, bicauſe it feareth not the fire, but rather augmēteth his true and parfite colour. If you will make another proofe, laie it vpon a fire panne, or vpon ſome other yron, and ſo heate it on a

flambe and then quenche it with white vinaigre very ſtrong, and take it of, & if you ſee that it hath not loſte nor changed the colour, it is of the beſt, and if it take colour againe it is of the fineſt and moſte parfite. And if a manne could get of this ſeconde, which encreaſeth his colour, he might ſell it for three or foure crounes the vnce, but very little of it is to be had that wil kepe his natural colour, but will change ſome thing in the triyng. And you muſt note, that in making theſe trials with fire, if the ſtone do not keepe wholly his naturall b
                  •
               ate, the azure ſhall not be of the faireſt, but of the meane ſort. To know whan it is pouder, whether it be good or no, take a Goldſmithes melting pot, and put a little of it, into the ſaid pot at your diſcretiō, and ſet it on the fire and let it flame & heate, and then let it coole againe. And if it bee not good it will melte like glaſſe, but if it be good it wil remaine vnmoltē in his owne ſubſtance and eſſence, & although it bee in pouder, it will yet be good, and if incace it were but halfe good, and halfe badde, the badde will melte, and become like a cake, and the ſtone will remaine in his ſtate and colour ſtill. And this fraude and deceit is comonly wrought of them that ſell it, and therfore lette euery manne beware of it. And of all the three ſortes of Azure, you ſhall get out for euery pound of ſtone, I meane of that which endureth ye cimentes aboue ſaid, about a fiue vnces and a halfe of Azure, and the firſte which ſhalbe the fineſt will be ſolde for xij. or xiij. du
               
                  •
               ates an vnce, the ſecond for iij. or iiij. crownes, and the third a crowne. Than ſhall you take out the laſte whiche is called cinders whiche is of no great value, & yet neuertheles it wil beare the coſt & charge of your paſt, and by this meanes you maie giue iudgement of the gaine and profits of your worke. But if it were of thoſe ſtones whiche in triyng of them do decreaſe and loſe their colour, a manne can not make ſo muche no
                  •
                ſo fine: but if you will take paine for to fine theim the

more, you muſt giue them the paſt, as it ſhalbe declared afterward. True it is that it diminiſheth much in weight. But that is good, true, and parfite, whiche is full of veines of Gold, and ſhining: and that is it that ſuſtaineth and abideth liuely all cimentes of fire, of Vinaigre and alſo all other triall.
         
         
            The maner howe to prepare the ſtone Lapis laſuli, and to calcine it whan you will grinde it.
            TAke the ſaid ſtone, that is to ſaie, that whiche hath the veines of Gold, and whiche hath ben in cimentes and fore ſaide profes, and breake him into pieces as bigge as Haſel nuttes, and waſhe theim in hote water, then putte theim into a Goldſmithes melting pot and ſette it on the embers, and make theim redde hote and flaming, then take them out one after another, & quenche them in white Vinaigre diſtilled thorow a felt three or foure times, or els quēche them in the vrine or piſſe of a yong child that is in health: And then diſtilled in the maner aforeſaid: but note that Vinaigre is better, and make this calcination ſixe or ſeuen times, for in ſtamping it, it will breake the better, and bee the eaſier to grinde: whereas if it were not well calcined a manne could ſkant ſtampe it, bicauſe it caſteth it ſelfe within the Copper. But the other which can not endure the fire, and remaineth not in his proper colour beyng putte in cimentes, ye needs not ſo calcine thus, bicauſe it would loſe all the meanes of his vertue and colour, and ſo ſhoulde you loſe bothe your labour and your time.
         
         
            To gette out the Gold of Lapis laſuli, after it is grounde.
            TAke of the ſaide ſtone prepared, and broken in a morter of Copper, and braie it verie ſmall vpon a Porphire, and let there not be leſſe then a pound of it: and putte an vnce of purified Mercurie

in the ſaid pouder, and put this pouder in a linen cloth and wring or ſtraine it hard, and the ſiluer will leape out bringing the Golde with it. This done putte the ſaide matter into a Golſmithes melting pot, and ſette it on the fire, and the Mercurie will flie out and turne into ſmoke, and the Gold will remaine at the bottom of the pot, and make of this little quantite of Golde, what you will, for it is fine in all parfection: but truly there is no greate gaine or profite to get out the Gold after this ſorte: but neuertheleſſe I thought it good to giue you the knowledge of it, bicauſe the waie and meane is eaſy ynough. Yet I will tell you that this Gold whiche is within the ſaid ſtone,VVhat beyonde ſea Azure is. is the very true beyond ſea Azure: For it augmenteth his gloſſe or luſtre, and the trimneſſe, and in painting it is very ſofte vnder the Penſill, and ſpreadeth abrode verie ſoftely. For to ſtampe the ſtone afterward beyng calcined or not calcined, take it and ſtampe it in a morter of Copper couered, then paſſe it thorowe a ſiue verie fine, and couer it ouer: for this is the fineſſe, beautie, and goodneſſe of it.
         
         
            The maner howe to make the licour wherwith menne braie the Lapis laſuli, for to make beyond ſea Azure of.
            
               TAke three or foure glaſſes full of well water, and diſtill it thorow a felte that there may not be, not paſt three glaſſes ful of it in al, and put it in a little newe potte, and put as muche as an Egge of rawe Honny to it, ſo that the water maie bee as it were yellowe, and lette it ſeeth ſo muche vntill there 
                  •
               iſe no more ſkomme or frothe: for than it is ſodden, and you maie take it frome the fire and keepe it in a Violle. This done, take fine Dragons blood aſmuche as a Nutmegge, and braie it vpō a Porphire ſtone, with a little of the ſaid honnied

water, and kepe it in another violl or glaſſe, and adde vnto it aſmuche of the ſaide water that it come of a Violet colour, and that is the licour that menne vſe, but keepe it well from duſt. But if the ſtone, out of the whiche you will get your Azure haue a violet colour liuely and parfite, put to it the ſaid licour that it maie make a Pecockes colour, that it be not of to hie a colour, and that it be rather cleere then redde. And if the ſtone haue to much colour, let your licour be of a dark and cleere colour, and if the ſaid ſtone haue a cleere colour, let your licour be of more high colour. But note that you muſt applie al theſe ſortes of colours to your fantaſie and minde, in adding to the matter or ſubſtāce little or inough according as you ſhall ſee the colours. Take alſo of that Dragons blood whiche the Goldſmithes doe vſe: true it is that comonly they vſe that whiche they call Lachrima: but take of that that is in pouder. There be ſome that grind & braie it with two partes of the foreſaid lie, and one part of Dragāt: other make it with Bdellium, tempered with a little water, and then it is good.
         
         
            The maner howe to braie or grinde the Lapis laſuli vpon a porphire ſtone, and the ſignes of the ſame.
            TAke of the ſaide pouder beaten and ſifted, and begin to braie or grinde it, ſprinkling it by little and little with the ſame licour, and that it bee well cloſed, and kepte togither as ſtreight as poſſible for beyng at large you ſhould loſe muche of it, and beyng cloſe it will braie the better. Nowe, you muſte braie and grinde a pounde of the ſaide ſtone, at twiſe or thriſe, and no leſſe, and you maie not be leſſe than ij. houres about it at euery time, if you wil haue your monie out of it, and ſo ſprinkle it rounde aboute with the ſaide licour to the intent it maie not cleaue to the ſtone in grinding it. And note, that you maie beſtowe a hole glaſſe full of the ſaid licour about one pound of

the ſtone. And whan you haue ground one part of it take it awaie, and grinde the reſt in the ſame place if it be poſſible, and take heede that you put none other water to it than the ſaid licour. And if you will know whan it is ground inough, put a little of it betwene your teeth before, and if you feele it cracke as it were pouder, than it is well grounde. But in the meane time beware alſo that it be not grounde ſo ſmall that it loſe his colour, but let it be indifferently wel groūd. And to drie the ſaide ſtone after all is grounde, laie it vpon a cleene ſtone, & drie it in the ſhadowe out of the ſunne for the ſunne is hurtful vnto it. And whan you think that it is drie, tutche it with your fingars, & if it turne into pouder like yearth or drie claie you muſte take it awaie, and in not taking it away, it would not hurt it. But if it be drie and turne eaſely into pouder: than take it awaie, and ſo it is a ſigne that the pouder is fatty with Honny, and therefore muſte you purge and purifie it, to the intent it maie come in due time out of the paſte. And to waſhe afterward this ſaide Azure, take a Barbers baſen or a litle baſen of earth, made for the purpoſe, whiche muſte be well poliſhed with in euerie where and in the bottome, and ſo putte the Azure into it, than putte into it ſome ſweete lie whiche we haue ſpoken of before, and let it be aboue it about the height of foure fingars, and waſhe it wel with your hande, and than lette it ſinke doune to the bottome vntill it be well ſettled: than poure out faire and ſoftly the ſaide water into the veſſell before mentioned, and lette it drie a little in the ſhadowe in the ſaide Baſen. This done take it out circumſpectly and diligently, and ſpreade it abrode vpon the Porphire ſtone, and lette it ſo drie thorowly: Then putte it among the paſte for to incorporate it in this maner following.
         
         
            To incorporate Lapis laſuli in the ſtrong paſt, or other ſoft, after that it is grounde.
            
               TAke a pound of Lapis laſuli whan it is ground, & ordered as is aforeſaid, and take alſo a pound of the ſtrong paſt which is the firſt, & waſh it wel with your handes on the out ſide, than cut it in ſmal peces, & put them into a little pot wel leaded within & ſo ſtiepe it, then ſet it vpō the hote embers, & ye ſhall melt the ſaid paſt: but take good heede that it frie not, & if paraduē
               ture it ſhould frie, put into it a droppe of the fore ſaid oile, & by and by it wil leaue friyng. And whā the paſt is well moltē take the little ſticke or ſkliſe that you did occupy whan you made the paſt, & annoint it with the ſaid oile, & whan the paſt is turned mixe it wel, and in the meane time another ſhal put in by little & little the foreſaid pouder prepared, as men do oile vpon ſalades & neuer leaue turning of it ſo lōg as there is any, but yet a little at ones, & with the ſkliſe incorporate it togither a long time vntil you ſe that the pouder be wel mixed with al, that nothing may be ſeene out of ye paſt, but al wel faſtened & perced in. And whā you ſee this, by & by take the pot ſo boiling, & poure it into a baſen of cold water, and euē furth with make the ſaid pot as cleane as you can with the ſkliſe, that there remaine nothing in it, & whan the ſaid paſt is colde ſo that you may handle it with your hande, annoint your handes with the fore ſaid oile, & if you ſee that the paſt is well died & colored it is a good ſigne, & with your handes ſo anointed toſſe the paſt vp & doun the ſpace of an houre & a half, drawing it out alwaies in lēgth & ouerthwart again, to thintēt that if it had made any hollow bladders within it might be al the better brought into one maſſiue body or ſubſtance. And note, the more you remoue it vp & doun in your handes, ſo muche the more ſhall you get out of it in waſhing it. This done make it into the forme of a long or round lofe, as you ſhall thinke good, than put this paſt into a bacin well polliſhed, & cleane with cleane & freſh water that is cleere inough, & let it ſo ſoke ye ſpace of x. or xv. daies or more

for the more it ſoketh the fairer ſhall it be & the parfiter, and wil eaſeliar and ſoner come out of the paſte.
         
         
            To get beyond ſea Azure out of the paſte.
            TAke the paſt prepared, & waſhe it handſomely and wel without with your handes in the ſaide colde water, than put it into a baſen, the botome whereof you muſt anoint with the afore ſaid oile, & that the ſaid baſe be at the bottom very fine & wel leaded: this don, poure vpon it ſome luke warme water that is ſkant warm, & let it be two fingars aboue ye paſt, & if the ſaid water were diſtilled thorow a felt, it would be muche better, & for to be aſſured, you ſhall waie the paſt after it is waſhed, to the intent you may know what to do, & how much you ought to take out of it, in cōſidering with your iudgement the oile that maie paraduēture be entred in in hādling it, & ſo leaue it in the ſaid water luke warme the ſpace of a quarter of an houre if it be in ſommer, but if it be in winter, leſſe. Then remē
               ber to empty out al theſe waters into the foreſaid veſſell, hauing three gutters or pipes, & whan you voide out the firſt water, put in other luke warme water, to the intent that the paſt may be the ſofter, & ſo by little & little the good will come out. For if you would haue it out al at ones, you ſhuld do your thinges euill. Remoue & ſturre faire & ſoftly the paſte with the foreſaid ſtick or ſkliſe. And if in cace the paſt ſhuld cleaue to the bottom, annoint your handes, & turne it handſomly & ſo often vntill the water begin to waxe blew, & whan you ſee the water colo
                  •
               ed & died, empty it out vpō the other, holding & ſuſtaining vp the paſt with the little ſtickes or ſkliſes, to thintent that it cleaue no more to the botom of the baſin, & knowe, that very little of the firſt Azure that cōmeth out wil ſtaine & colour a great deale of water. And whan ye paſt is in the way to rēder & giue out the Azure, it wil caſt out as it were certain blew beames of ye ſunne. And thā you ſhall empty out ye ſaid water vpō the other, & whā you empty ye water

that is in the baſen, ſtraine it thorow a ſtrainer for to ſaue certaine little peces of paſt, if in cace there ſhould come any among the Azure, and ſo will it come the cleaner and purer. This done put from hand to hand ſome luke warme water vpon the paſt and turne pre
               
                  •
               ily the ſaide paſt with your fore ſaid ſtickes, leiſourly and handſomely, ſpecially at this beginning for feare leſt the paſte ſhould loſe and vndoe it ſelfe and ſo render and giue out all the Azure at ones: whiche thing would be to no purpoſe, neither could you afterward ſort it, or order it. After you haue thus turned it foure or fiue times, take vp togither your paſt, and you ſhal ſee howe muche there is come out, for of the firſt there ſhould come furth foure or fiue vnces & a half, & that is to be vnderſtand if the Lapis laſuli, be of the fineſt, and there ſhould no leſſe come out. And bicauſe it is the firſt, ſet it a part by it ſelfe: for it is the true beyond ſea Azure. By this ſame maner and waie continue to get out the ſelf like azure which ſhal be the ſecond, and ſet it alſo a part, and you ſhall get out of it three or foure vnces. Keepe this ſame order and meane in getting out the thirde with this ſame water alwaies luke warme, and that the cold water be ſkant out, & ſturre it with your foreſaide ſtickes. After, it ſhall be at your diſcretion to get out the fourth whiche is called Cenders or Cinerarius of the colour of aſhes, and if you wil haue it out, the water muſte bee ſomewhat hoter, and than it will bee of greye or aſhe colour. And herein you muſt wring and preſſe hard the paſte with the ſtickes, and if it wil not come out with the water, giue it a little of the fore ſaid lie: This done put al the Azures ſeuerally 
                  •
               y themſelues for the one wil marre another els, and ſpecially the laſt. And heere you muſt vnderſtand that before all theſe Azures be gotten out you muſte beſtowe about it eight houres, and before they will ſtrike to the bottome, it will be no leſſe than ten or twelue houres, for therin lieth your gaine, and

ſo empty the water diligently. And if in giuing it the lukewarme water, the Azures will not come out but in a ſmall quantite, giue it twoo partes of water and one parte of ſweete lie, & if yet it come neuer the more giue it a greater quantite of lie: And yet if therfore it will not come out, giue it cold lie, but if not withſtanding all this it will not come out as you would haue it, take a pot, and put into it ſome aſhes of vines, and cleere freſhe water, and ſeeth it the eight parte of an houre: then pore it out and let it ſtand to cleere it ſelf, but let it be ſomewhat ſharpe in taſte vpon the tonge. And ſhall you make for the laſt remedie, ſpecially for to get out the laſt Azure. You maie alſo take of it hote for to waſhe the paſte with, and than caſt it awaie for it is no more worth any thing, and note, that in getting oute theſe Azures conſiſteth either your loſſe or your gaine. Now the ſtickes or inſtrumetes of woode that menne vſe in the paſte muſte be of bore or other fine woode, and about the breadth of twoo handes or more, and a fingar thicke or a little more, and greater at the vpper ende and flat like a Amande.
         
         
            Of what colour the Azures are whan they come out of the paſte, and what ſigne or token they ſhewe.
            THe manifeſt ſigne and token of the firſt Azure whan it commeth out, is, that it ſeemeth ſomwhat courſer & thicker thā the other, which is bicauſe of the veines of Golde that are in the ſaide ſtone. The ſecond ſhalbe finer and thinner but you ſhall not ſee ſo good a colour in it. The thirde ſhall ſeeme vnto you more fine and thinne, but it ſhall be paler of colour, and cleerer and open, and that is to be vnderſtād whan the Lapis laſuli is good and parfite. The price of the colours hath bene before ſpoken of. The ſtone coſteth ordinarily ſixe or eight crounes the pounde, according to the places. And if the ſtone bee

good and fine (as it ought to be) a man ſhall get out of it at the leaſt all compted ten vnces and a half, and the ſtone be not ſo fine, you ſhall get out at the leaſt eight vnces. Yet neuertheles y• ſlone maie be ſo euill that ye ſhal gaine nothing at al, but rather be a great loſer.
         
         
            The maner how to waſhe, and purifie the Azures as ſoone as they are gotten out of the paſte.
            WHan you haue gotten them out of the paſte, and haue taken out the water, put vpon thē ſome ſweete lie that is cleere, and waſhe thē handſomely with your handes. And ſo ſhall you do to euery ſorte of the Azures, eche one by him ſelf, and empty out eche of the waters a part, and let the ſaid waters ſettle before you put them into their baſens, and waſhe thē ſo often vntill they be cleanſed from al maner of greaſe or fat of the paſt. Than renſe them three or foure times with freſhe & cold water to the intēt they may be the more purified & made cleane.
         
         
            To purifie parfitely the Azures with the yelkes of Hennes egges.
            TAke the yelkes of fiue or ſixe egges of hennes that haue ben nurriſſed and fedde with corne, & not with graſſe, and perce the yelke with ſome ſharp pointed thing, and ſprinkle it heere and there, as men do oile vpon ſalades, vpon the Azures a little vpon eche ſort, and do ſo in euery baſen, and incorporate well togither with your hande the egge with the Azure, than waſhe it again with ſtrōg ſweete lie, and waſhe it ſo long vntill you ſee it come out as cleere as you did put it in: thā rinſe it three or foure times with freſh water, and this is the true waſhing & the parfite purifiyng which giueth a gloſſe vnto al azures, & this ſecret doe all the excellent maſters vſe, and aboue all thinges let the water alwaies ſettle before you empty it out into the other baſins, for you ſhould diminiſh to muche the great maſſe of Azure. There is yet another goodly ſecret for to giue a gloſſe vnto the ſaid azures,

which is vnknowen to many men, and that is whan the Azure is wel waſhed and purified, as is before mē
               tioned. Take the gall of a bull, and breake it vpon the Azures, as you did the yelke of the Egge according as the Azure is, vpon euery ſort. Then rubbe them we
                  •
               l with your hand and waſhe them as before. And note, that all theſe maners of purifiynges are made one after another, whan the Azures bee out of the paſte▪ and you ſhall make all the ſaid purifiynges diligently handſomely and leyſourly in the baſen. And this is a very excellent ſecret.
         
         
            The maner howe to ſtraine the Azures, after they be purified, made cleane and waſhed.
            IT is neceſſarie to ſtraine beyond ſea Azure, & other alſo, if happely there be any greaſe or filt or any peces of the paſt remaining in it: for theſe Azures muſt be meruelous well ordered and trimmed, as we haue heere before mentioned. And therfore you ſhall do thus. The laſt water that you ſhal giue them after they be purified, you ſhall paſſe it thorow a ſarſe or ſiue: then thorow another that is finer, and the laſt time thorowe a ſtrainour, and whan you will make this waſhinges, alwaies let the water ſtand vntill it bee cleere, or els you ſhall take vp the water by little and little with a ſponge, but take heede that the Azure entre not into the ſponge, After that you haue taken al the waters thus vp, let the Azures be in their baſins, and let them drie in the ſhadow and not in the ſunne, for it is not good for it. And ſpecially keepe all your worke from duſt & al other immundicites & filth: and whan they be drie take them vp diligētly eche one by him ſelfe, & ſo put them in bagges of leather in the ſmootheſt ſide, & whan it is boſid vp rubbe it wel with your handes, for it is made fine by that meanes. And ye longer it remaineth made, the better colour it getteth whan you hold it in the aier, and if you wil fine again your azures for to make thē of a greater price & vaine,

you muſt put them ones again to incorporate into the ſtrong paſt, following the maner and order before declarid, and let them remaine ſo three daies: then take them out in like ſorte as we haue ſhewed you before: And the oftener you do thus, the finer it will waxe. It is true that it will diminiſhe alwaies in the weight: but yet for to put it in worke, one vnce wil go as farre as three vnces of the other, and therfore you muſt bee diligent in all thinges, & ſpecially in the waſhinges, leaſt you ſhold loſe your labour. And alſo be ware and vigilant to knowe the ſtone, to make your cimentes, and to compound your paſtes.
         
         
            To make black Sope for clothes, with all the ſignes and tokens that it giueth and maketh in beiling.
            TAke thirty pounde of vnſleckt white lime, if you can get it, and that is in greate hole peces and not in pouder, and foure ſkore and tenne pounde of the ſtrongeſt aſhes you can finde. Then order & dreſſe the aſhes rounde about the lime, in forme and maner of Morter, and ſprinkle with a broome weate in water the ſmall peces of lime a little at ones and often, to the intent that the fire maie enter into it, and whan it is well mollified and augmented by reaſon of the heate whiche is in it, let there bee two of you, the one to incorporate well with a ſpade or ſhouell the lime with the aſhes, and the other to ſprinkle water with the broome well vpon it & round about it, to the intent there riſe no pouder or duſt of it. And lette all ſo well be mixed, that a man may not knowe or diſcerne the lime from the duſt or aſhes, and water it ſo much round about, that in taking a handfull of the ſame matier, and in wringing it, it cleaue togither. And whan you ſee that it raiſeth no more pouder or duſt, giue it no more water. This done cloſe vp togither all this morter with your ſpade, and lette it ſo remaine in a heape twoo or three houres, for it

heateth and boileth beyng in a heape, and whā it maketh chinkes or cleftes about it, it is a ſigne that it is riſen. And if it be in cold weather you maie couer it, for feare that it take no colde and ſo loſe his heate, for than it would make no good magiſtrale. Whan all this is done, ſtraine the ſaid mater in a veſſell of earth hauing a hole in the bottome, beyng couerid with a little ſtrawe, and a diſhe ouer it, to the intent that the mater maie runne in time: and whan you putte it in preſſe egally euery where as muche as you can, and lette it be alwaies euen aboue: then poure vpō it ſome hote water, or els do as followeth, as I my ſelfe doe. Make ready ſixe or eight pailes full of the ſtrained lie, and poure it on the veſſell I meane of the firſt whiche is good, and at the firſt put in two or three pailes full, the whiche beyng ſunke doune, put in as much more, and open not the hole in the bottome, vntil al the mater be drunke vp: then let it runne out by little & little, and bicauſe you maie the better knowe the firſte, the ſeconde and the third, take an Egge newe laide, and binde it rounde about with a threede and as the magiſtrale lie commeth out, put the Egge into it, and whiles the egge remaineth aboue, put it al into a veſſell, for it is the firſt whiche you ought to make muche of. And whan the egge ſinketh in the lie, put that ſecond by it ſelfe: and if you can gette of the firſt fo
                  •
               rty pounde, you ſhall get of the ſeconde thirtie, and of the thirde twentie, and of the fourth aſmuch as you will: And let all theſe be put by them ſelues: & if you couer them well that they do not euaporate nor breath out, they will continue alwaies a yeare beyng ſtill good, whan you haue done take xxx. pound of the firſt, and ten of the ſecōd, and put them togither and looke well if the egge remaine aboue, & if it appeare not muche, weaken it no more, for it ſhalbe wel ſo. And note, that vnto three pound of the ſaide lie, you muſte haue one pound of oile, and in pouring it in ſturre and mixe it

well with a ſtick, for feare that the oile be not hurt by the violence of the ſaide lie: And make this compoſition at night, to the intent that it maie remaine in infuſion all the night: then in the morning ſeeth it the ſpace of ſeuen or eight houres or more, according as the quantite is great or little: for whan it is aboue a hundreth pound, it muſt ſeeth ten houres or more: and whan it beginneth to ſeeth and ſwell much, take it by and by from the fire, and ſturre it alwaies aboue vntill it beginne to boile ſoftly. And in the meane time ceaſe not to ſturre it, for feare it burne to the bottom. And whan you make the compoſition in a caudron, let it neuer be full by a hand breadth, bicauſe it riſeth and ſwelleth alwaies in ſeething, and the oile would bee loſte: and mixyng it oftentimes the oile incorporateth with the lie, and ſeedeth the ſooner. And whan it hath ſodden about eight or nine houres, you maie beginne to aſſaie and proue it, and ſee that you keepe alwaies a little of the firſte and of the ſeconde for all occaſitions that maie chaunce. And whan it hath boiled vnto the ſaide houre, you ſhall ſee it waxe thicke, and make the bubbles in ſeething long and thicke. Than maie you beginne to make your profe and aſſaie. That is to ſaie, in taking a little of it with a ſpoone, and putting it into a little earthen diſhe, and lette it coole, then cut it with a little ſticke, and if it cloſe togither againe, it is a ſigne that it is ſodden inough: and if it doe not cloſe togither againe, it is not, and therefore finiſhe the ſeething of it. And make many of theſe proofes and aſſaies. And whan it is ſodden, take the fire from vnder it, and ſo take it of, and ſette it in ſome coole place, and whan it is colde you maie occupie of it, and it will be good and parfite. And if you make it with cleere oile although it bee ſtrong, it is all one: but if you make it with oile parcht or thicke, it will not bee verie cleere. One of the beſte ſignes that you maie ſee in it whan it beginneth to

waxe into a thicke ſubſtance, is that in taking of it vp with a ſpoone, the thredes or little ſtrekes doe breake without ſhrinking vp again, & this is a ſigne that it is ſodden inough. And whan you haue taken vp a littel, and haue lette it coole and ſo cut it, and than if it be ferme and faſte on the ſides, and in ſetting it vp it tarry vpright, than it is ſodden. And if after an houre it were not ſodden, that is to ſaie, that it had not the ſinewe, put vpō it a little of the firſt magiſtrall a little at ones, and ſo lette it boile an houre or a halfe. And than you ſhall make againe the like aſſay or proofe as before, and if it ſhewe you not good ſignes, you ſhall put yet a little more to it vntil you make it haue a faſt and ſolide bodie, & let it be not to ſoft nor to hard. And he that hath experience of this knoweth what is to be done in ſeeyng it boile onely. And whan you ſee that it is well take it from the fire.
         
         
            The ſignes that Sope giueth in ſeething, if it be to harde, or to ſofte, whether it be liquide or white.
            IF whan the the Sope is ſodden you would take it out, and that you ſee it white, and in making the proofe or aſſaie it waxe harde, note, that than it is verie good, & if you will haue it ſtrong take it of, for beyng made it returneth to his colour againe, but it remaineth ſtill ſtrong. But if it bee to ſtrong, it is not to be commmendid, for it waxeth hard, and ſo goeth in pieces whan you would occupie it, ſo that you ſhall be faine to ſeeth it againe, and to make it returne into a good and meaſurable ſorte, for beyng ſo ſtronge or hard it fretteth to muche the clothes and conſumeth theim. And by my Counſell you ſhall ſette it on the fire againe, but putting firſte into the caudron a little of the third or fourth magiſtrale lie, togither with a little oile, & ſo boile it, This don put in the ſtrōg ſope, & al wil incorporate togither, & let it ſo ſeeth an houre, and you ſhall ſee that it will not be ſo ſtrong or hard.

And indeede it is better whan it is ſomewhat ſofter. It is a thing of greate importance to know with the tong what there lacketh in the boiling. Take your ladle and ſturre it well about: and then take a little vpon your fingar, and putte it vpon the ende of your 
                  ••
               ng, and you ſhall Iudge of your ſelf what there lacketh, for if it be ſtronge beyonde meaſure, you ſhall thinke that a cole of fire had tutched your tonge: but if it be not to ſtrong, it will not ſeeme vnto you ſo burning ſharp in tutching it with your tonge. And whan it is ſo ſtrong it hath neede of the fourth magiſtrale lie with a little oile. And if it were to ſoft (which thing you ſhall alſo knowe by your tonge) it hath neede of the firſt magiſtrale lie, & giue it theſe mixtures a little 
                  •
               t ones, to the intent that it be not let or hindred from ſeething, & mingle it in faire & ſoftly. It is alſo a great ſigne and token that the ſope is ſtrong, whan it breaketh in little pieces, and leaueth muche magiſtrale lie in the bottom of the veſſell, where it remaineth long: but whan it is ſofte and euill ſodden, it maketh as it were a certaine gelley: than you ſhall putte into it a little of the firſte magiſtrale, and boile it vntill it bee well ſodden, and waxe hard and firme, but whan it is ynough it will drawe towarde the colour of greene waxe ſome what darke and obſcure, and that ſhalbe whan the ſope is ſomewhat ſofte, and not muche ſodden. The ſigne and token that ſtrong ſope ought to haue whan it is well ſodden and indifferētly inough, is, that it will haue the colour of Marmelade, & drawe ſomewhat toward a Violet, and ſhall be obſcurely gliſtering, and haue a faire floure vpō it, and ſhalbe good and parfite. But whan the black ſope is become ſomewhat white and ſtrong giue it a little oile, or els ſome of the third magiſtrale lie, & that a little at ones, leaſt you weaken it to muche, and ſo it ſhould loſe his ſtrength: for than you ſhould giue it more oile, and more of the firſt lie, and ſo there ſhould bee great danger

in it. And therfore beware and ſee that you beſtow and diſtribute wel your lies. But in this cace you ſhal giue it a little oile, and in boiling it, it will be whiter, and ſofter. After this, continue with the firſt lie, and lot it be hote and a little at ones, and prouing it often times as we haue ſaide afore, you ſhall by & by know that it will be well trimmed and ordered. And whan it ſhalbe to muche ſodden, or burnt, the ſigne or token ſhalbe whan it is ſo ſtrong and white out of meaſure, that it is burned. Than muſt you giue it ſome water onely, or ſome of the fourth lie hote, not boiling it any more, or at the leaſt very little, & by this meanes you maie parfitely atchiue and come to an ende of your worke. And alwaies whan you will adde or put to it any mater vpō the caudron, boile it euermore a little, bicauſe it wil incorporate the ſooner: And make often times your profes and eſſaies. And if your worke go well, do no more in it, but be diligent and circumſpect in taking it from the fire, and take it ſo hote as it is out of the caudron. For to make afterward the Magiſtrale, you ſhall do thus: whan you haue gotten out the firſt, which kepeth or beareth the Egge aboue, which wilbe about nine pintes, and of the ſeconde that beareth not the Egge, a thirdendeale, whiche is three pintes, and of the thirde the halfe whiche wilbe three half pintes, and of the fourth aſmuche as you will: for of that menne vſe not muche, and as nighe as you can kepe them all by themſelues and couered, bicauſe they will ſo keepe well inough. True it is that ſome men are wont to put them all togither, that is to ſaie one meaſure of the firſt, one of the ſecond, and half a meaſure of the third, and ſomewhat leſſe, & one meaſure of oile, whiche are in all three meaſures and a halfe, and by this meanes you maie multiplie aſmuche of it as you will. After you haue thus ordered and dreſſed it, in the caudron, make fire vnder it, ſo that it may be but ſkant luke warme, and ſturre it alwaies in the

caudron with your ladle, to the intēt that the oile maie incorporate, & perſe thorow the magiſtrale: then leaue it al the night in infuſion, and giue it fire again in the morning, and whan it is hote ſturre it well that it may incorporate togither. And note, that it muſt boile ten or twelue houres, and wil not make any lie at the bottome, and in boiling lift vp your ladle a high, and it will make long ſtrekes like threede the ſpace of ſixe houres, and then will beginne to faſten and cloſe vp it ſelf, and will make ſtrekes whiche beyng broken will returne vpward againe, & that is a ſigne that it is not yet ſodden inough: but whan they breake not neither returne backward but remaine faſt and whole than it is ſodden, and therfore you ſhall take it from the fire, for this is the true ſigne & token of it. The other ſigne is, whan it is cold cut it in little rolles, and if they ſtād vpright and not fall, it is a ſigne that it is made. Laie of it oftentimes vpon your tonge before it be ſodden, and if you feele it to ſtrong giue it a little of the third or of the laſt magiſtrale, according as you ſhal perceiue it to be ſtrong, or els little or inough after as you ſhal ſee it hath nede. If you ſee it to white and ſtrong, giue it a little oile at ones, and it will alter & turne. Whan it is almoſt ſodden and that it make a gelley, giue it a little of the ſecond or of the third, according as it ſhall haue neede by your Iudgement. If it paſſe his ordinarie time or houres in ſeething, and that it faſten not neither cloſe it ſelfe, giue it a little of the firſt: but lette not the ſope be to ſtrong, therefore aſſaie it firſt: for that were no ſmall fault. But if it be not to ſtrong nor to white, and yet doe not faſten and cloſe it ſelfe, you maie giue it of the firſt, as we haue ſaide, and if it be ſomewhat ſtrong, you maie giue it of the ſeconde after the accuſtomed maner. Whan it is almoſt ſodden and maketh as it were a gelley, and is ſtrong, and not beyng white, giue it a little of the fourth, but yet very little at ones, to thintent you take not awaie

to muche of his force. But whan it is almoſt ſodden and is very white, giue it a little oile, and it will bee well. Whan it ſhould be ſodden and that the houre or time of his ſeething is paſte, and is neither ſtrong nor white, giue it a little of the firſte or of the ſecond, or of the other, after as you ſee it ſtronge more or leſſe, and it will returne into a good ſtate, and muſte boile fayre and ſoftly, for feare it ſticke not to the bottome, and burne by the reaſon of to muche fire: for ſuche a fire is of great importance. The fourth lie, is not ſet a worke but whan it maketh as it were a gelley, and is ſtrong and to rawe. There bee ſome good Maiſters & worke men, that put in the ſecond magiſtrale with the oile, to the intent that the oile mighte not bee ſo muche hurt by his ſtrength, and then they putte in a little of the third, and then a little of the fourth, and after that a little of the firſte: but there is no hurte in that, for there bee meaſures in it, and theſe mixtions are made in the preſence of other menne, whan the maiſter will not ſuffer it to bee knowen, for feare leaſte that other ſhould eaſely learns it. The good and parfite magiſtrale lie will beare alwaies an egge ouerthwart, and wayeth euer more twiſe as muche as water doeth, and contrarie wiſe whan it is leſſe ſtrong it wayeth leſſe, and the oile waieth as muche as the fourth. If you order and appoint the ſaide lie
                  •
                by meaſure, giue euer the aduantage to the oile foure or ſixe for the hundred, if you will haue it fatte and faire: for he that is well experimented in it knoweth well in boiling what is needefull to it, be it oile, lie, or any other thing. Whan you will make white Sope, keepe and vſe the ſame meane and waie, & whan it is more than half ſodden, put into it ſome ſalt, according to the meaſure & quantite of it, and let it boile a little: then take it out of that caudron, & put it into another, & whan it beginneth to boile put in againe more ſalt,

and let it ſeeth to his parfite meaſure. This done, ſet it to drie in a plaine and euē place, and cut it in peces, for it will be parfite good. Menne make the like with Soda, as they do vſe at veniſe, the ſalt muſt be groſſely beaten, and ten pound of it for the hundreth, and mixe it with it all about, and put in but a little at ones.
         
         
            To heale the Skurfe.
            TAke the roote of the herbe callid in latin Panis porcinus, and ſkrape or grate it, and putte it in a little pot, and put to it ſixe vnces of oile of roſes and let it ſeeth well, and whan it beginneth to boile put in ſixe vnces of litarge of Gold, and a dragme of Precipitatum prepared, and lette it remaine a little on the fire, mixyng & ſturring it ſtill, and alſo afterward vntill it be cold: then anoint the ſkuruy head with it and ſtrowe vpō it like ſpice a little floure of the graine called Lupines, and ſome beane floure mixt togither, and ſo put a coife vpon his head, and that ſhall ſuffice ones a daie in doyng it three daies togither. And if the heares fall not of them ſelues, pull theim out by little and little, and within twelue or thirtene daies he ſhall be cured. Alſo another waie, take Sage, Roſemarie, our Ladies glooues, Camomille, and Panis Porcinus, cut this very ſmal, of eche of them a handful, boile them vntill they be ſodden inough and that the vertue and ſtrength bee remained in the wine, than ſtraine it and preſſe well the herbes, and waſhe the ſkabby head with the ſaide wine and drie it well, this done make a fine pouder of a piece of fleſhe of a yong Bulle, and ſtrowe it vpon the head like ſpices, and binde the coife vpon his head, doyng this ones a daie, and plucke euerie daie ſome of the heares awaie, for they will die awaie by little and little of themſelues. And do thus ſo often vntill you ſee his head nete and 
                  •
               leane, and than ſhall he be thorowly whole. There is yet another ſecreat wherof menne make little or none

accompt, and yet neuertheles if you proue it you ſhall finde a meruelous effect of it. Take three pound of old larde of a barrow hogge, and laie it to ſtepe two daies in ſtrong Vinaigre, and lette it be couered ouer with the ſaid vinaigre: this don wrappe it in three or foure ſheetes of paper, and vpon that two or three leaues of Cabbedge, and laie it vnder the hote embers or aſhes whan you couer your fire, & there let it lie two houres or more or leſſe, according as the fire was great, or as long vntill you thinke it be roſte inough: then take it out of the fire, and make it cleane, and ſtraine out the greaſe of it, paſſing it thorow a linē cloth, and by and by put into it a quarter of an vnce or more or leſſe of Verdegriſe braied very ſmall, according as the infirmite ſhal be great or ſmall, and incorporate it well togither with a ſticke the ſpace of an houre, vntill it beginneth to waxe colde, to the intent that the Verdegriſe deſcende not al to the bottome, and keepe this greaſe as a precious thing: and the older it is, the better operation it maketh. And annoint the head of the patient with it, euery ſecond night, and waſh alſo his head twiſe or thriſe a weeke with ſweete lie, with a handfull of leane bran boiled and drie it well againe, and anoint his head againe, putting the coife vpō his head and none other, and whan you haue annointed it three or four times, the roote of the heare wilbe ripe, and you maie plucke alwaies ſome out in waſhing, and they will come of eaſely and without paine. And if in cace they would not come of eaſely neither with force, care not for that: for the diſeaſe hath not perced thither and therfore let them alone: for ſome time thei bee not dangerous: but if they were infected or hurt with the diſeaſe they woulde be loſe and fall of or els 
                  •
               aſy to bee pluckt of, bicauſe that the ointment doth 
                  •
               ipe the roote, and whan the head is all bare, without heare and made cleane, feare not: for all the heare wil 
                  •
               ome againe fairer than euer they were, and he ſhall

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
be cured and ſound. This hath bene oftentimes proued, and hath wrought well almoſt in all menne: for you muſt know that there are foure kindes of ſkurfes, the one is more groſſe and fleſhy than the other, and therfore marueile not, if you finde ſo many diuers receiptes: for there be many menne that heale the ſkurfe whiche know it not: but if it be the ſkurfe looke vpon his naile, & if there be a blacke circle about the white at the roote of the naile, and the greater the circle is, the worſe kinde of ſkurfe it is, and therefore you ſhall vſe the remedies aforeſaid, and lette him not eate any hogges fleſhe nor eigre or ſharpe thinges, and with the helpe of God he ſhalbe healed. Take alſo a great liſard or two, and drowne theim in comon oile, and than ſeeth them vntill they cōſume, and with this oile anoint his head oftentimes, and the heare will come ſo faſte and ſuche great quantite, that he ſhall not tell what to do with theim. There is alſo another remedy for to heale the ſimple ſkurfe. Take of the greaſe of a male hogge as muche as you will, and ſome ſtronge vinaigre for a third part, and half an vnce of ſalt beaten and ſtampt, and boile it with a ſmall fire vntill all the vinaigre be conſumed: then take it from the fire, and put into it all theſe pouders folowing: verdegris, alome of the rocke burned, of eche of them two drammes, brimſtone and ſuet of eche one a dramme, and pigeons dong, and let al be well incorporated togither, and anoint his head with it ones a daie, and waſhe it twiſe or thriſe a weeke, and boile in the lie the roote of Lapathum or Rumex, in engliſh Sorrell, and ſtraine it, and then waſhe him with it, and whan it is drie again, anoint him a freſh. Of the foure kindes of ſkurfe the firſte is called Porrig
                     •
                   farinoſa, flowery or white ſkurfe, the other Furfurea or Furfuroſa, bicauſe it hath the colour of bran and ſkales like vnto bran, the third Viſcoſa, clāmy or cleauing like bird lime, and the fourth Lupinoſa, bicauſe it is like the graine called lupin
                  •
               s.

And in the forme and matter the one is drie, the other moiſt, the one vlcerous, & the other without vlcers, & here of it followeth that the one is more ſharpe and ſmarting than the other, for the cauſes of the ſkurfe are groſſe humors corrupt & clammy, whiche ſomtime is brought with vs euen from our mothers wombe, & ſome by euill gouerning of our ſelues in our life, the moiſt ſkurfe is with brode ſores, & the drie wt cruſtes.
         
         
            An excellent and a tried water for the ſkabbe.
            TAke a violl full of wel water or Roſe water, or els of other ſweete water, as though you wold make it for ſome noble man, & put into it an vnce and a half of ſiluer ſublimed that is beatē very ſmal, half an vnce of ſalt. This done, ſette it before the fire vpon a tile, to the intent that the violl take no hurt in boiling, and let it boile vntill all the length of the necke of the viol be decreaſed. Then take it of, & whan it is cold, put into it the whites of three newe laide egges well beaten that they haue no more viſcoſite or clammyneſſe in them, and put alſo into it the iuice of foure Limons, and of two ſoure Orenges, & let al be well incorporated togither in the ſaid violl, and ſturre it well, whan you haue thus done leaue it in the ſunne two or three daies & it will be made. And in this maner is the ſaid water made, & thus men vſe it. At night whan you go to bedde waſhe your ſelfe onely about the iontes with a ſponge weate in the ſaide water, and then wryng & preſſed harde, waſhe your ſelfe 
                  •
               ligthly ouer with the ſaid ſponge. This ſaid water wilbe as white as milke and odoriferous, and where as you waſhe your ſelfe with it there it will make the ſkinne white, & do thus euery ſecond night, and where there is any ſkurfe or cruſt, weate it with this water roſid about not touchyng the cruſt, for that would greeue you. You maie make another water ſimpler, & without dāger. Take a glaſſe or violl as before, and fill it with water, & put into it two vnces of rocke alome, half an vnce of ſiluer

ſublimed, and aſmuch ſalte, and all beyng beaten into pouder very ſmall, boile it as the other before was, vntill it be decreaſed beneth the necke of the viol: then ſtraine it handſomely, and occupie it as before the other was: for by this meanes the ſkabbes will come out at the iointes, and will incontinent drie vp, leauing your fleſhe and ſkin nete and faire, as it hath ben oftentimes proued.
         
         
            A remedie for any burning or ſkalding, either by fire or by hote water, or any other caſuall chaūce what ſo euer it be.
            TAke vnſleckt lime aſmuch as you will, & ſlecke it in comon oile, and take it out as drie as you can poſſible, and incorporate it with oile of Roſes, and it will be as it were an ointment, wherwith you ſhall anoint the place that is burned or ſkalded, and it wil ſhortly eaſe the paine and greefe, and heale within ſixe or eight daies, not leauing any marke or ſkarre vpon the ſkin. Alſo for the ſame effect. Take an vnce of litarge of gold, and ſeeth it in white wine and a little Vinaigre, than take it of, and make thereof a very fine pouder. Take alſo an vnce of butter, and aſmuche oile of Roſes, and waſhe it foure or fiue times in freſhe water: than take halfe an vnce of Blanc raſill burned, and the yelke of a new laid Egge, and a little fine ſugar, and incorporate all togither with a little Roſe water, and ſpread this ointment vpon a linen cloth, and it will profite you very muche. Another for the ſame. Take ſome ſtrong white Vinaigre, and the white of a newe laide egge, with the iuice of the rine or bark of an eldern tree, and mingle al togither, and w
                  ••
               e ſome peces of linen cloth in it, and laie them vpon the burned place one after another, and you ſhall be hole, and whan you will heale vp the wound, take a little of the ſecond rine or barke of an eldern tree, and get out the iuice of it, and a little pouder of 
                  ••
               ankenſens,

a little oile of roſes, and a little newe waxe, and make therof as it were an ointment, and ſpreade it vpon the peeces of linen cloth, and laie them vpon the burned place, and you ſhal ſee that thei wil conſolidate and heale vp in ſhort time. For to make afterwarde an ointment to the intent that the conſolidation and cloſing vp maie be faire: take tenne vnces of oile of Roſes, two vnces of newe Waxe, and ſet them on a ſlowe fire, and whan theſe thinges be moltē, put into it two vnces of Minium, in engliſhe Sinople, red lead, or Vermillion, and foure vnces of Litarge, and let all be made into a very fine pouder, and make it to come into a ſubſtance or body, and laie it vpō the ſore, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous effect. There is yet another meane & remedy for any burning that is, take old larde of a male hogge, and choppe it well, thē take a flagon of white vinaigre that is very ſtrong, and let the lard ſeeth in it the ſpace of two houres: then take it from the fire, and let it coole, and take of the greaſe that is vpō it, and wring it hard with your hand, that all the vinaigre maie go out and none remaine in it: This done keepe it in an earthen pot leaded, and the older it is the better it will be, bicauſe it doth his operation ſooner. And whan any man burneth him ſelfe, let him take of the ſaide greaſe, and annoint the place with it and the paine will ceaſe. In the meane time you muſt haue made ready the heare of a hare chopped or cut as ſmall as is poſſible, and whan you haue anointed it, ſtrowe of the ſaide heare vpon it as it were ſpice, and let it remaine ſo. And whan you anoint it again at night, and in the morning anoint it vpon the other ointment, whiche you vſed before, and then caſt on more heare as before, and take it neuer of vntill it come of, of it ſelfe, whiche wil be within ſixe or eight daies, and the thing healed perfitly without any mark or ſkarre. And note heere that at the beginning of the euill, 
                  •
               he oftener you anoint it, the more the paine

will decline awaie, and the patient ſhall feele greate allegement and eaſe, and ſhal be mery. And for to take awaie the paine out of the hand, and to doe a meruelous cure, as ſoone as the incōuenient ſhall haue happened ſkrape a little larde of a barrowe hogge vppon it, and doe it quickly, for in doyng it with ſpeede you ſhall perceiue it frie, as though it were in a friyng panne, and the pacient ſhall feele greate eaſe, and the paine will ceaſe. Laie to it of this at the beginning three or foure times in an houre, and the patient ſhall receiue greate conſolation and comforth. This ſecret is good, and ought not to be contempned, al though it be no great matter.
         
         
            To make pilles of Turpentine.
            TAke an vnce of turpentine of veniſe, and waſhe it well with borage water, or with ſome other cordiall waters, eight or ten times as you ſhall thinke good. Then take three vnces of fine ſugar beaten ſmall, and incorporate it well togither by little and little: for that taketh away the viſcoſite and clammineſſe of it, in ſuche ſorte that it cleaneth not togither: and at the ende you ſhall leaue a little of it without incorporating it, in the paſte: for it ſhalbe alwaies good to take at any time, & neuer periſheth: and whan you will take of it, you maie do with it at your pleaſure. And this paſt hath one excellencie in it, that is, that it cleaueth not to a mans fingars, but maie alſo be chewed ſo that it will not ſticke nor cleaue to the palate or rofe of a mans mouth. And whan you haue made them, take a little ſinamome mixte with ſugar, and rolle them in it: then hardely take thē at all times and houres, for they will worke maruelouſly in flegmatike, and colerike ſtomackes, and ridde men from many inward paſſions, and will cauſe a good appetite, and the vrine of the man ſhall giue an odour as it w
                  •
               re marche violettes.
         
         
            
            An electuarie of Nerprum, that is to ſaie, a ſolutiue Iulep meruelous good for the Gout.
            TAke theſe little fruites of Nerprū
                about the ende of September, whan they be thorowe ripe, and haue had a white froſte, and gather them early in the morning, and ſtampe them a little in a morter, ſo that they be ſkant broken, and put theim in a pot or ſome other veſſell leaded within, that hath no ſauour of any thing, and couer them well, and ſette them in a hote place to confite the ſpace of eight or tenne daies, then preſſe out the iuice and ſubſtance of theim the moſte that you can: and for euery pounde of the ſaide iuice you ſhall putte in a pounde of purified honnie. This don, ſet them on the fire, and boile them ſlowly vntill they be ſodden, and aſſaie vpon a peece of Paper, if the droppe remaine faſte togither it is ſodden inough, if it runne abrode it is not ſodden inoughe: Than take it from the fire, and putte into it an vnce of Sinamome, and two vnces of Ginger both well braied and beaten, and incorporate it well togither ſo hote as it is, and ſo keepe it in boxes wel couered, and the older it is, the better. Take of this before your meales a ſponeful as wel in the morning as at night, and keepe your ſelfe ſpecially out of the ayer, and ſo it will do muche good to them that haue the gout more than to any other, bicauſe it eaſeth the paines verie much, and doth good thorow out all the body likewiſe by reaſon of the euacuation.
         
         
            To make giltinges vpon leather whiche ſhal ſeeme like Gold, and laiyng theim vpon Siluer or glaſſe, they ſhall appeare to be Gold in dede.
            TAke a newe potte well leaded of the ſame bigneſſe that you will make your worke, make alſo a fourneiſe of the height of the pot, for feare that the fire gette not into it, bicauſe it is almoſt like vnto artificiall fire, and therefore you muſt

take heede. This done, take three pound and foure vnces of line ſeede and ſeeth it ſlouly in the ſaid pottes vntill it bee ſodden, and if you will know whan it is ſodden, 
                  〈◊〉
                into it a hennes fether, and take it out again incontinent, if the fethers go of in it, it is ſodden inough, otherwiſe lette it ſeeth, and whan it is ſodden inough, putte into it eight vnces of Roſen, and Sandrac, that is to ſaie, Vermix ſuche as ſcriuenats vſe, foure vnces of Aloe epaticum: and all this beyng well beaten and ſtamped very ſmall, put it in ſturring and mixing it with a ſticke and if all come togither in a maſſe, be not therfore abaſhed, but augment the fire, and neuer leaue ſturring it: for in feeling the greate heate, theſe thinges will melte, and become liquide. And then let theim boile ſlowly a good while: hauing ſo done take an aſſaie of it vpon a pece of paper, or vpon your naile, as menne comonly do, whan they will know if the Iulep be well ſodden: or els betwene your fingars to ſee if it bee thicke inough or no, and if you thinke it be to cleere you ſhall put to it, for two daies, an vnce and a halfe of Aloe ſucotrinum, whiche giueth it a colour ſomewhat darker, and the worke ſhall not be ſo bright or cleere: but putte to it alſo ſo muche the leſſe of Sandrac as you ſhall that it is ſodden. This don pluck backe the pot by and by from the fire, and let it ſtande where any flābe is, bicauſe it draweth vnto it ſelf the heate, & ſo the fire wold burne it all: thē empty it out hādſomely before it be cold, into a coople of little bagges pointed at the ende, one within another like Ipocras bagges. And the mater that is not molten will remaine in the bagges, whiche wil be more then the halfe, and that will no more bee any thing worth for that purpoſe, and by this meanes you ſhall haue made your verniſhe for to gilte with all, whiche will keepe very well and long, and the older it is, the better operation it hath, keepe it therefore well from all maner of duſte, and lette it not droppe or runne out.

And note, that the Aloe is it that giueth the yellow colour to it and maketh it looke like Gold, and the other thinges make it thicke. And if you will make it exceding firme and faſt, whan the oile is ſoddē, beyng put in by meaſure, you ſhall take out of it as much as you thinke good, then go foreward in your worke, and whan it is ſodden, there will not be of it aboue three or foure pound, and that is the leſte you can make at a time: and yet neuertheles thoſe that medle with the making of it, make xl. or lx. pound at a time, and kepe it for their neceſſitie. And if you wil laie it vpon glaſſe or tinne, either the matter muſt be hote or els the glas or tinne, and it muſte be laide abrode vpon it with a penſill, and ſo ſhal you haue a faire pece of worke.
         
         
            An experimented oile againſt poiſon.
            TAke three pound of old oile oliue, and deuide it into three ſondry veſſels, and to one pound put three handfulles of Hypericon, in engliſhe ſaint Iohns wort, and leaue it in the ſunne eight daies, thē boile it in Balneo mariae the ſpace of twelue houres, which is made as we wil ſhewe you afterward. This don you ſhall ſtraine it hard, in pouring vpon it ſome good wine, as Maluoiſie, and after that put alſo to it three handfuls of the ſaide herbe, and a pound of the ſaid oile, and ſo ſet it viij. daies in the ſunne as before, in boiling it afterward twelue houres in Balnea mariae, and wring and ſtraine it harde again as before, wherunto you ſhal put three handfuls of the ſeed of the ſaid herbe, and a pound of the ſaide oile. This done do as before, with ſtraining it in the ſunne, and in Balneo mariae, you ſhal alſo after this put into it theſe drogges following, as gentian Crocodilium, an herbe (after Pliny) like the thiſtle called Camaelion niger. Ruellius ſuppoſeth it to be that whiche is called comonly Carlina or Cardina, Zeduaria, Ariſtolochiarotunda, Tormētill, white Dittany, Sandall of all ſortes, boile Armenik, prepared,

of eche of them two vnces, and putte all the ſaide thinges in a great glaſſe, the ſpace of ten daies in the ſunne. Hauing thus done, you ſhal ſeeth thē thirtene houres in Balneo mariae, & ſtraine them afterward very hard: then ſhall you adde to it ſaffran, Aloe, Spicinardi, Reubarbari electi, of eche of them ſixe drammes, and ſet them in the ſunne again the ſpace of ſixe daies, & boile them a new in Balneo mariae, foure & twenty houres, & make the ſame expreſſion & ſtraining that you did before, whereunto you ſhall put an vnce & a half of good Mitridatum, & than it is made: and beyng thus made, kepe it for your neceſſite & neede, for it is a very ſoueraine thing againſt poiſon taken at the mouth, & hath a ſecret property againſt the plage, & for wormes. M
                  •
               n vſe it alſo in anointing al the poulſes, & the hart, that is to ſaie the left ſide, then couer all his body and lette him alone with the hote linen clothes vntil he fal into a greate ſweate. And this hath bene proued diuers times. Now Balneum mariae is thus made, you muſt ſet a caudron full of water on the fire, & in the ſame water a great glaſſe ſuche as men ſtill with all, wherin to you muſt put all your thinges to boile. And make your caudron of water ſo boile that the thinges in the glaſſe maie alſo boile, and bicauſe that water in the caudron cōſumeth, you muſt fill it vp again alwaies, and lo heere is Balneum mariae.
            
         
         
            For the heate or burning of the vrine.
            TAke the ſeede of purſelane, of wilde ſuccory, and garden ſuccory of eche of them two drammes, the floures of Nenuphar, and of Violettes, of eche of theim a dramme, an vnce of the ſeede of white P
                     •
                  rpadol, two vnces of the ſeede of Sebeſt
                     ••
                  , half a dramme of Iuſquiama alba, a dramme of ſaffran, fiue drammes of Lignum dulce, ten drāmes of the berrie of a pine apple tree, and boile all this in ſixe pound of water, vntill it be decreaſed of the third part, then ſtraine it, and take ſixe vnces of this ſtraining with an vnce of Iulep of

violettes, and drinke it luke warme euery morning at the breake of the daie, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous effect, within foure daies.
         
         
            A water of a maruelous and excellent vertue to bring againe the ſighte of the eies, to him that hath loſt it, or is diminiſhed by ſickenes or any other accident or chaunce.
            TAke three drammes Tutia, made in pouder very ſmal, and aſmuche Aloe Epaticum in pouder, two drāmes of fine ſugar, ſixe vnces of roſe water, ſixe vnces of good white wine, rather ſweete than other wine: but true it is y• to ſwete is not cōmendable. Mixe al this togither, & put it in ſome cleane veſſel of glaſſe, & beyng wel cloſed and ſtopt, ſet it in the ſunne a moneth togither continually, mixyng & ſtirring togither all the ſaide thinges at the leſte ones a daie, to the intent they maie incorporate well togither. This don take of the ſame water, & put certaine droppes of it vpon your eies morning and euening, & in continuyng ſo a certaine ſpace, it will cauſe the ſight to come again as clere, and as pure as it was before. And this was made and ordained by a conſultation and counſell aſſembled of the wiſeſt & beſt phiſitions of all Italie, to bring the Emperour of Conſtantinoples ſight again the yeare 1438. whan he was at the ſinode and concile of Ferrare with pope Eugene the fourth, and his ſight came againe vnto him, as faire as euer it was, by the meane of this water.
         
         
            To remedy or help bloodſhotten eyes comming by any Reume, fluxion, or ſuche other like cauſe.
            TAke the toppes or endes of Wormewood, whiche is an herbe well inough knowen, and ſtampe it, mixyng it with the white of an egge, and roſe water, & make thereof as it were a plaiſter, and ſpreading it vpon a linen cloth whiche you ſhall laie vpon the eye where the blood is, or els vpon bothe. And doe this at night whan you go to bedde, and the nexte morning

take it of, and you ſhall ſee that this plaiſter ſhal haue drawen to it ſelf all the blood and all the redneſſe that was in your eyes, and ſo you ſhall be quite of it.
         
         
            To take awaie the yellow Iaundiſe from the face of euery man to whome it is happened be reaſon of the gall runne and ſhedde about the body.
            TAke a greate white Onyon and make a hole wher he buddeth out, caſting awaie the greene of it, and putte into this hole as muche good triakle as the quantite of a cheſtnutte, but lette this triakle bee incorporated with halfe an vnce of ſaffron beaten, and let him roſt by little and little nighe vnto the fire, for feare that he burne not or roſt to muche, or els take ſome filth of the aſhes. And whan he is roſted inough, laie him in a white linen clothe and wringe him hard that the iuice maie come out. And let the pacient drinke of the ſame iuice in the morning faſting, three daies togither, and the Iaundiſe will go awaie. Alſo for the like effect. Giue him to drinke a dramme and a half of Scolo pendria in engliſh hartes tong, well made in pouder, with white wine luke warme euery morning faſting, the ſpace of twenty daies togither and all the yellownes and paleneſſe will goe awaie. The like effect worketh Lapatium acatum, ſodden with his rote. And likewiſe the wine wherin valerian hath ben ſodden, beyng dronken in the morning faſting, healeth the ſplene and the liuar, whiche many time
                  •
                are the cauſe that maketh the gall to renne and ſpread abrode, as we haue afore ſaid.
         
         
            To make come out of the eares any thing that i
                  •
                by chaunce fallen into them, or hath purpoſely bone put in.
            TAke the herbe Marmorella, and ſtampe it, and put of the iuice into the eares of the pacient, for it hath the vertue and ſtrēgth to drawe out any thing that is in them.
         
         
            
            For the tooth ache.
            TAke the little graines or ſeedes that come of the herbe or ſhrubbe called in latin Fuſaria, or Euonimos, or Anonymos, ſome there be that ſaie it is the tree called Anagyris, whiche is an herbe or ſhrubbe very pleaſant to ſee to, and hath a faire yellow floure, but a very horrible and ſtinking ſauour, looke Dioſcorides, in his third booke the. 142. chapiter. Take of the ſeedes hereof if you can get them, if not, take ſome of the roote, and make of it a pouder: This done, take a little drie or greene organie, and boile al this in ſtrōg vinaigre vnto the third part of it. Then waſhe your mouth with this vinaigre as hote as you may endure it, and incōtinent you ſhalbe healed. Alſo for the ſame greefe, take Cloues, honny roſat, & aqua vite aſmuch of the one as of the other, then put it al togither into a little pot, and take of the ſaide compoſition in your mouth on the ſide where the tooth greeueth you, and hold it ſo a certaine ſpace of time, and the paine will ceaſe.
         
         
            To make an a king tooth to fall out of him ſelf, without any inſtrumentes or yron tooles.
            TAke wheate floure, and mixe it with the milke of the herbe called in latine Herbalactaria, in french Tintima
                     •
                  ll
                     •
                  : or herbe a laite in Engliſh Spurge that hath milke in it, in greeke Tithymalos, whiche is an herbe well inough knowen, and thereof make as it were a paſt or dowe, with the whiche you ſhal fill the hole of the tooth, and leaue it in it a certain time, and the tooth will fall out of it ſelf. Alſo if you waſh your mouth euery moneth ons with wine wher in the roote of the ſaide herbe hath bene ſodden, you ſhall neuer haue paine in your teeth. Alſo the decoction or pouder of the floures of a Pomegranate tree, beyng put in your mouth and betwene your gommes faſteneth the teeth.
         
         
            
            An electuarie for the head, which conſerueth the memorie, cleereth the ſight, and conforteth the ſtomack.
            TAke the floures of Bugloſſe, of Borage, & of Roſemarie, of eche of them a pound, take alſo fenell ſeede, anniſe ſeede, the ſeede of ſea fenell, and Siler of the hils of eche of them ſixe vnces, with an vnce of fine cinamome. Beate & ſtampe al that ought to be beaten and ſtamped, and ſift al thoſe thinges that muſt be ſifted. This done mingle them togither & make thereof an electuarie, of the whiche you ſhall take in the morning the bigneſſe of a cheſtnutte, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous operation, for this is come from a great perſonage.
         
         
            Againſt the pildneſſe or baldneſſe of the head, and to lette that the heares either of the head or berd, ſhall not fall of.
            TAke the rotes of bramble or blackbery buſh called in latin Rubus or Sentis, of the kinde that beareth floures at the firſt, & the rootes of nettles. Then take pigeōs dung, and burne it into very aſhes, haue alſo ſome aſhes of Vines, with the whiche you ſhall boile the ſaide rootes, and make therof ſome lie, and waſhe your hedde with it and alſo your berd, and the heares wil not fall of. Alſo for the ſame effect, take honny, fenigreeke, and the eyes clipt or ſhoren of from a bramble or blackberie buſhe, aſmuche of the one as of the other, and incorporate them well togither, and diſtille them in a lembick, & kepe the water of thē, and if you will diſtill a fewe broome floures withal it will make you aberne heares, weate and moiſte your head and berde the daie time in the ſunne, & at night when you go to bedde, and the heares will not fall awaie. Alſo for the like matter diſtill in a lembick the herbe called in latin Siſymbrium aquaticum, in engliſh water creſſes. And of the water that you gette of it, you ſhall make yet another diſtillatiō with agrimonie, Capillus veneris, roſemary, ſage, and cloues, of eche a handfull,

and let the diſtillation be made in Balneo mariae, and in oftentimes waſhing your ſelf with ſuche water your heare ſhall fal no more away, as many men haue proued and tried.
         
         
            An ointment to cure the ſkurfe.
            TAke good old lard, at your diſcretion, and enterlard it roūd about with roſemary, like a pece of roſt meate, & let there be a good quātite of roſemary, then putte it to roſt on the fire turning it faire & ſoftly. This done you ſhall take and ſaue the greaſe that droppeth frō it, in a driping pan, & caſt it hote as it is into a diſhe full of cold water in waſhing it very well, and whan you haue well waſhed it, putte it into another cleane diſhe, and ſo ſhall you the greaſe thus taken vp faire and neate. Hauinge thus done, waie the greaſe, and if there be a pound of it, you ſhal put to it two vnces of fine ſugar well beaten, & vpon that aſmuche verdegriſe pulueriſed as the quantite of a haſell nutte, and foure deme
                  •
               s of quick ſiluer, with aſmuche ſoote of an ouen of the hardeſt▪ as the quātite of a haſell nutte: but let it be well pulueriſed & made in pouder. This ended, incorporate all togither, 
                  •
               it will be a very good ointment, wherwith you ſhall anoint the firſte morning the head of the pacient, and leaue it ſo anointed vntill the nexte morning: th
                  •
               n waſh his hedde with lie that is not to ſtrong but ſomwhat temperate, then anoint it againe, & let i
                  •
                alone ſo vntill the third morning, & do thus nine morninges in waſhing and anointing it, and it will be as neete as a perle. Alſo bitter almondes blanched and ſtāped, and laid as it were a plaiſter vpon the head of the patient, it will eaſely heale the ſcurfe, changyng and renewyng the plaiſter certaine daies.
         
         
            To kill liſe, and nittes in the head.
            TAke the pouder or ſcraping of Had
                  ••
               s horne, and make the pacient to drinke of it, and there will no liſe nor nittes breede in his head, but 
                  ••
                you 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
the ſaide pouder vpon his head, all the liſe and nittes will die.
         
         
            For one that can take nothing at the mouth, or els to make him goe to the ſtoole, and to ſweate well.
            FIrſt the pacient muſt be well rubbed with hote linen clothes, from the head to the foote, and muſt be very warme kept in his bedde, thē giue him this ointment following. Take aſmuche pepper as will lie vpon a grote, and put it into halfe a glaſſe full of vinaigre and oile, aſmuche of the one as of the other, and let it be very warme, and anoint all his body ouer with it, & let him be well couerid in his bedde: and than ſhall he ſweate, and go well to the ſtoole.
         
         
            To heale thoſe that haue the diſeaſe of the Splene.
            TAke Lignum aloe, and make therof a pouder, and put it in ſome maner of brothe, or wine, aſmuch as wil lie vpon a grote, and lette him take of it three morninges togither. Alſo the ſeede of an Aſhe tree doth the like, and the roote of Palma chriſti, if it be eaten nine morninges faſting.
         
         
            For the paine of the ſide, or colike.
            BOile a hādfull of Roſemary with water, wherwith you ſhall temper the wine of the pacient, and let him drinke none other water. Alſo for the like. Take a dogge, and keepe him xv. daies in a chambre, and giue him onely lambes or motton bones to gnawe, then take of his excremendes, and drie it in the ſunne, and make therof a pouder, and giue the patient to drinke of it euery morning halfe an vnce in white wine hote, and doyng this three morninges, he ſhall be deliuerid of the paine, as it hath bene oftentimes tried. Alſo for the like effect, take the dung of a blacke aſſe as hote as you maie finde it whan it commeth from him, and ſeeth it in white wine that is not

ſweete, wringing well the dunge into the wine. Of this make warme gliſters for the pacient: for it is the beſt, and the apteſt remedy, that can be found for ſuch a diſeaſe: as many notable menne, worthy of credite, haue affirmed. Likewiſe for the ſame diſeaſe, it ſhall profite muche if he eate euery daie, or foure times in the weeke foure peche kernels eche daie. Thus doing he ſhall neuer feele paine of the colike. This ſecrete was had firſt of a Iewe. There is yet another remedy eaſier then al the reſt, and that is, you muſt take foure Garlike heades, and boile them in a little pot with a pint of good white wine, and lette it ſeeth well. Then take a glaſſe full of this wine, aſmuche as you maie endure to drinke, and ſo goe to bedde, couering your ſelfe well, and you ſhall feele incontinent great eaſe. If you take alſo an vnce of the rote of Imperatoria made in pouder, with white wine hote, faſting, the paine will incontinent go awaie.
         
         
            For him that can not piſſe.
            TAke the ſtones and kernels of Peches and meddlers, aſmuche of the one as of the other, and make them into pouder very fine, and ſift it in a ſarce: this done take fine Sugar the weight of all this, and mengle all togither, and the pacient drinke of it in good white Wine, and incontinent he ſhall make water.
         
         
            For one that is broke by reaſon of any trauaile, either riding poſte, or by any other accident or chaunce.
            TAke ſalt Armoniak and Roſen, of eche of them two vnces, and ſtiepe it in Vinaigre the ſpace of xxiiij. houres, and diſſolue it by the fire, ſo that it burne not: Then mixe with it halfe an vnce of pouder of Cipres, and halfe an vnce of Gall, and make thereof as it were a Ciraene. True it is, that theſe gommes ought not to be thorowly molten. And

if it be in winter ſo that the Ciraene be to hard, put into it a droppe of maſtic, and then ſpreede it abrode vpon the rupture or the place a broke, and chaunge it ones in foure daies, and you ſhall ſee a meruelous operation.
         
         
            To take away the paine, and to heale the Goate.
            TAke a little whelp of a brake, that hath a while begon to ſee, and the fatteſt that you can finde, and ſkalde him like a Pigge, and take out the guttes and garbage at one of his ſides: This done, take Nettles ſtamped, with two vnces of Brimſtone, foure yelkes of egges, & four vnces of turpentine, and incorporate all togither, and put it into the whelpes belly ſowyng vp ſurely the hole for feare leſt the compoſition ſhould runne out: then roſt him with a temperate fire, and receiue the greaſe that cōmeth of him and anoint the place of the Goute with it: for it will bring great eaſe, and ceaſe all maner of conuulſions of the ſinewes or muſkles, and paine of crampe that maie be felt in a manne with this remedie many haue not onely eaſed the paine of the Gout, but haue alſo healed it & put it cleane awaie. Alſo for the like effect. Take a newe pot, and fill it half full with oile, & the other half with good white wine, & put ſome Nettles into it the which you ſhall ſeeth, and laie them as hote vpon the place as the pacient can endure, & in twiſe or thriſe vſing this, the goute ſhalbe cleane driuē away.
         
         
            Againſt the hote Goute.
            FOr aſmuche as there is two maner of goutes, the one hote and the other cold, you ſhal make this medicine following for the cold one, take the iuice of great reiſins, & ſugar roſat of eche of thē an vnce, with ſugar made with Bugloſe, fiue vnces of Diapruni ſoluti
                     •
                  i, an vnce of Reubarbari electi, and mingle al theſe thinges togither with a Iulep of Violettes, & make therof a compoſition, of the whiche

you ſhall take halfe an vnce euery morning an houre before daie, and in ſhort ſpace you ſhalbe healed.
         
         
            A meruelous and very good water for diuers infirmities and diſeaſes.
            TAke an vnce of Frankenſens of the male kinde called in latin Olibanum, & aſmuch of Sarcocolla, ſixe vnces of Aloe epaticum, good and cleere hōny, the iuice of Plantain, white Roſen, of eche of theſe three vnces, & ſtampe them al wel togither, & mingle them. This don, put them into a great veſſel of glaſſe meete to diſtil in, well cloſed & luted about, and diſtill theſe thinges in a lēbeck as we haue before declared, holding the recipient cloſe vnderneth wel luted roūde about the mouth, to thintent there may no breath go out, & giue it a ſlowe fire, that the matter mount not vpward: for it would marre, if you made it not deſcēd incontinent, in weating the mouth with riuer, well, or conduite water. And this water that commeth out is a wonderfull water for all the infirmities & weakneſſe of the members: for I haue ſeene the experience of it vpō a yong maide that had brokē her arme: whether it were that it was not wel dreſt, or by any other occaſion, I know not, but with in four daies it began to putrifie and to rot, in ſuche wiſe that the phiſitions and ſurgeons would haue cut it of: But by the coūſell of maiſter Seraphin, this water was laid to it (which is made in foure or fiue houres,) & after they had well waſhed and rubbed her arme, and the bandes that ſhe was bound with al, in laiyng it vpō the broken place and wounde, ſhe was cured within fewe daies after. In diſtilling this water you muſt vnderſtand that at the ende it chāgeth colour, and than you muſt chaūce the recipient, bicauſe the laſte would marre the firſt which is very good, & hauing ended your diſtillation, you ſhall take vp the lies, or the gomme whiche hath no leſſe vertue thē the water. And if you make pouder of it, it will be good for putrified woundes.
         
         
            
            For one that can not ſlepe nor take his reſt either for paine in the head or other like cauſe.
            TAke oile of violettes with the yelke of an egge, & womans milke, as much of the one, as of the other, and hauing mengled all togither, make thereof a plaiſter, and laie it either vpon his forehed or vpon his eyes, and the paine ſhall ceaſe, and deſire of ſleepe ſhall come vpon him.
         
         
            To conſolidate and cloſe vp the chappes or chinkes of the mouth.
            TAke Honny and the drie marrow of a Hogge, and mingle it togither heating it a little at the fire in a little potte, and ſo anoint your lippes with it.
         
         
            A water to keepe the handes delicate and ſoft.
            TAke ſmall Limons, drie Figges, and the roote of Enula campana, aſmuche of the one as of the other, and make them very fine and ſmall: then put to it a handfull of ſodden wheate, & ſeeth it with a ſlowe fire in one parte of vinaigre, and two partes of riuer or fountaine water, and lette it ſeeth a little, and then take it of, and keepe it couered that no duſte come into it. Waſhe your face with this water oftentimes, and you ſhall ſe a meruelous triall of it.
         
         
            An excellent water, and of ſmall coſt, for to waſh a mans face, and to keepe it in one ſtate alwaies.
            TAke the floures of Orenges, incarnation Roſes, the floures of thornes as muche of one as of the other, except of the thornes whiche muſt be leſſe in quantite. And beyng all diſtilled togither: keepe the water of them, which is very precious.
         
         
            To take out the wrinkles of the face.
            TAke an olde Capon, and plucke of his fethers, and cut him a long the backe, and dreſſe it as it were to eate. Then fill him full of little yellow

Limons cut very ſmall, and the fenell ſeede, and put all this togither in a limbeck with a moderate fire. And than waſhe your face with the water that commeth out of it, and the wrinkles will go awaie.
         
         
            To mantaine and keepe the face without wrinkles.
            TAke a newe fire pan of iron, and ſette it on the fire, and whan it is very hote, ſprinkle it with good white wine, and ſo parfume your face ouer the ſmoke of it, and than wipe it with fine white linen clothes: this done, ſet the pan vpō the fire again and a little Mirrhe vpon it, and ſo perfume your face again ouer it, and in the meane time keepe your ſelfe couered ſo that the ſmoke may not go away from you. This done binde vp your face in ſome linen clothes and ſo goe to bedde and ſleepe. And this you muſt doe ones in fiuetene daies.
         
         
            To heale a ſwollen face, and that is hurt or marred by reaſon of ſome ſtrange ſkorching, which onely chaunceth whan the ſubline is not good.
            TAke the iuice of Barba Iouis, in Engliſh Singreone, and rubbe your face with it twiſe or thriſe a daie, you maie doe the like with the iuice of Purcelane, but if your face were to muche marred or hurt, take xl. or l. yelkes of egges, and put them in a friyng pan vpon a great fire, and get ſome oile out of them, wherwith you ſhall anoint your face.
         
         
            To know whether the ſublime be good or no, or whether it be made with arſenick.
            I Haue ſhewde you in the firſt chapiter of the ſixt 
                  •
               ooke in the firſt part of my ſecretes, the maner of ſubliming quick ſiluer as it ought to be ſublimed. Now for aſmuch as many menne haue not this maner to make ſublime: thei muſt buy it ready made: and therfore I thought it good to ſhew you the meane

and waie howe to know whether it bee good or no, or whether it bee made with Arſenick: for all the ſublimes that are made with Arſenick, deſtroie comonly the face, and make it ſwell. Take therfore of ſublime the quantite of a beane, and caſt it vpon the hote coales, and if it be good it will burne, and will make a blewe flame: but if it make any other colour, it is not good.
         
         
            To take letters out of Paper.
            TAke Salnitrum, and blewe Vitrioll, a pound of eche one, and diſtill them, then take a ſponge, and weate the letters with the ſame water, and they will eaſely go of. Alſo for the like effect, take pouder of white bones, and two vnces of plaſtre, & ſtampe it very ſmall, and mingle theim bothe togither, and temper it with the yelke of an egge, and anoint the letters with it, and let it ſo drie, and then ſcrape them with a pen knife, and the Paper wil remaine white.
         
         
            To renewe olde and worne Letters.
            TAke Galles, and ſtampe them a little: then laie thē a ſtiepe one daie in good white wine. This done diſtil them, and with the water that commeth of them, you ſhall weate handſomely the letters with a little cotton, & they wilbe freſhe & newe again, in ſuch wiſe that you may eaſely read them.
         
         
            To mollifie or to make ſofte Iuorie and bones to worke what thing on them or with them.
            TAke ſtrong vinaigre, and Sage, and boile the Iuorie and the bones, in it and thei wil be ſoft. Alſo for the like effect, take blewe Vitrioll and ſalt prepared, and all beyng made into a pouder verie fine, diſtill it, and keepe the water of it, and than laie your Iuorie and bones in it, and leaue theim ſo half a daie, and they will be ſoft: Then put them three daies in the iuice of Beetes, and thei will be tender, ſo that

you maie make of theim what you will. And whan you wil harden them againe, laie thē in ſtrong white Vinaigre.
         
         
            To take out the markes that are comonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to knowe them, and alſo ſuche as many men carrie vpon their bodies, for diuers cauſes.
            FOr to make ſuche caracters or markes, thei firſt drawe the forme or figure of them vpō the fleſh: then with a ſharpe raſour, thei lance the fleſhe vpon the ſaide marke, muche like vnto cupping that Surgeons do vſe, & whan the blood is come out, they take of the pouder of the ſmoke that Printers do vſe, or els of coales beatē very fine, & ſo rubbe the cut well with it, and then are thei wel & ſurely marked. Nowe for to take out theſe markes, you muſte cut open the fleſh again & in ſteede of the foreſaid pouder or coales, you ſhal put into the place ſome Blanc raſil well pulueriſed, or els ſome floure of wheate well blu
                  •
               ted or ſifted, and let it ſo drie, & by this meanes all the markes well go awaie, be the blewe or black, and the place al nete and as faire as euer it was.
         
         
            For one that is ſtong with a Scorpion.
            IF you can get the Scorpion that did ſtinge you, in cutting of his feete and his taile, and letting him die vpon the place where he prickt you, he will drawe all the venim vnto him. Any other Scorpiō wil do the ſame being bruſed betwene two ſtones, and putting to it a little Sage and ſalt. Alſo for the like, let three or foure droppes of a greene figge fal in or vpon the wounde and the venim will not abide.
         
         
            For one that is ſtong with waſpes, or Bees.
            STampe Mallowes, and laie theim vpon the place where he is ſtong, or els take flies ſtamped with a little durt.
         
         
            VVhan a man is tutched or poiſoned of a ſpider.
            
               TAke the Aſhes of the woode of a figge tree with ſalt ſtamped, and laie it vpō the place. Alſo take Mallowes, and ſeeth it and with the decoction of them weate the place, or els with ſea water.
         
         
            For one that hath eaten toodes or the ſpetile that commeth from them, whiche is a deadly thing.
            MAke the patiēt vomite, in giuing him to drink ſome oile oliue with vinaigre tempered with water. This done, giue him to drinke often times after his vomiting the beſt claret wine that can be gotten, and two drammes of the rootes of reedes, cauſing him to runne exceſſiuely, for to take away the heauines or vnluſtines that the venim cauſeth him to haue.
         
         
            To heale cleft or kibed heeles.
            TAke Dragant, and Galban
                     ••
                  , aſmuch of the one as of the other, and make therof a pouder, then take newe Waxe, oile of Violettes, and a little Goates ſuet, or Oxe tallowe, and melt it on the fire: then put in the ſaide pouders and make of all this an ointment, wherewith you ſhall anoint your heeles, and the will be hole incontinent.
         
         
            To heale the cankre that happeneth vpon the yard of a man, or in the nature of women.
            TAke an vnce of rocke alome, and halfe an vnce of verdegriſe with ſmithes water: and put it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe, and ſeeth it two houres, then ſtraine the ſaid water, and kepe it in ſome kinde of veſſell for to occupie at your neede.
         
         
            To heale a foundred Horſe.
            TAke an Onion and ſtampe him: then ſtiepe him a good while in ſtrong Vinaigre, then take the ſaid Onion thus ſtampt and imbibed with the Vinaigre, and make the Horſe ſwallowe it do
                  •••
                this done, caſt the Vinaigre, wherin the ſaid Onion

laied into the noſetrels of the horſe, and 
                  •
               e ſhall forthwith be cured.
         
         
            To kill the bottes in horſes.
            TAke a good handfull of Agrimonie, and make the horſe eate it earely in the mornyng, and then let hym tarie faſtyng, and without meat vntill noone, doe this fower or fiue daies, and he ſhall be healed.
         
         
            For a horſe that cannot ſtale.
            GIue hym to drinke hote water, that is more then luke warm
                  •
               , and he ſhall ſtale.
         
         
            For a horſe that is cloied or prickte with an naile.
            TAke out the naile, and when his foote is well made cleane, make a little hole euen vnto the quicke fleſhe, where the naile touched, then fill it vp againe with Roſen: and with a hotte yron, melte ſome Pitche vpon it: This doen, laie ſome Cotten vpon it, and ſhooe hym well, and then feare not to ride hym after where you will.
         
         
            To make a horſe to haue a good hoofe.
            TAke Oxe dung, and temper it with Vin
                  •
               gre, and at night laie it hotte vpon his feete, and wrappe them vp in ſome cloutes, to the intent
                  •
                that the heate maie kepe in, whiles it maketh his operacion, and by and by it will be a good hoofe.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               TO make wheie as clere as well water. Folio. 1.
               
               TO make verie good Aqua vite. Idem.
               To make armes or Tables of pictures alwaies bright ſhinyng. Idem.
               To make blacke ynke verie good. Idem pag. 2.
               
               To make grene ynke. Idem pag. 2.
               
               For Oxen that piſſe blood. Idem pag. 2.
               
               To make oile of Vitrioll. Fol. 3.
               
               To make white tethe. Idem.
               For the ſame, idem.
               To take awaie ſpottes from the face. idem pag. 2.
               
               For the ſame. idem.
               For the ſame. idem.
               For the ſame. idem.
               To take awaie little redde pimples from a mannes face. Fol. 5.
               
               To make a water, that teketh awaie the ſpottes of the face, and maketh it faire and brighte, and keepeth the handes and mouthe, that thei chappe not or waxe full of chinkes. Idem.
               To make the face faire. Idem.
               A water to make the face faire. Idem.
               To make a water that maketh the face white and ſhinyng. Idem pag. 2.
               
               A water to make the face redde. idem.
               To make a kinde of white to make the face faire, called in Frenche Blanchet. idem.
               To make an other better, whiche maketh the face white and gliſteryng. idem.
               A water to make the face redde and gliſteryng▪ Fo. 7.
               
               To make an other maner of the ſame, whiche the Frenche men call Blanchet. idem.
               To make an other Blanchet, that maketh the face white, and of a ruddie colour, and hurteth not as the other aforeſaied doeth. idem.
               To make an other Blanchet, whiche is called roiall, that is the beſt and the excellenteſt of al other. idem
               
                  To take out the wrinkles of the face. idem pag. 2.
               
               To make heare flacke in commyng foorthe, or growyng in a yong manne, as well on their beard as in other partes. Fol. 9.
               
               To make heare grows in euery place of ye body, wher you will. idem
               To make heares blacke. idem.
               To make a water that will make the face redde and gliſteryng. idem.
               To die or colour heare. idem pag. 2.
               
               To take awaie the euill ſauour of the breath. idem.
               To get awaie the heares from the iye browes. idem.
               To die or colour all kinde of metall or ſton
                     •
                  , into the colour of golde, without golde. idem.
               For to make yron or ſteele ſoft. Fol. 11.
               
               To harden yron or ſteele. idem.
               To make figges ripe quickly idem.
               To make Hennes laie egges all the winter. idem.
               To make a glewe or paſte, that howeth as faſte as a naile. idem.
               To take awaie all maner of ſpottes. idem.
               To cauſe that a womannes breaſtes waxe not great
                     •
                   or ſwellyng. idem pag. 2.
               
               To pourge honie without fire. idem.
               To ſtenche the menſtruall blood of women. idem.
               To kepe roſes freſhe all the yere. idem.
               For the ſame. idem.
               To take or diſſolue a boile or kernell in the griue, or the wreſtyng of a ſinewe. idem.
               To dreſſe and trimme Oliues in one daie. Fol. 13.
               
               To preſerue and kepe Peches or other fruict. idem.
               To cauſe merueilous dreames. idem.
               To make a woman beare children. idem pag. 2.
               
               To heale and cure horſes of the ſcabbe. idem.
               To heale the kynges euill, a deſeaſe called in Latine Struma. idem.
               To make one that is poiſoned, to vomite the poiſon.
               
                  To make a candell that cannot be put out. idem.
               To make a candell of ice to burne Fol. 15.
               
               To make that fruicte ſhall take what forme or facion you will. idem.
               To make that rootes ſhall haue what forme you will. idem.
               For to write letters vpon a mannes body or face▪ that ſhall neuer be rubbed out. idem. pag. 2.
               
               For the ſame, but ſomewhat eaſier. idem.
               To make one haue a good memorie. idem.
               To make that no dogge ſhall barke at you. Fol. 17.
               
               To make all thynges ſeme blacke and greene in the night. idem.
               To die hear
                     •
                   into a grene colour. idem.
               To dreſſe or to kepe freſhe in Somer. idem.
               To make an inſtrument called Cauterium, wherewith ſores are burned, whiche ſhall raiſe the ſkin without any grief or pain. idem. pagi. 2.
               
               To make ſteele cut yron as it were leade. idem.
               To make redde ynke. idem.
               For the ſame, and eaſier. Fol. 19.
               
               To make bones ſoft. idem.
               To kepe Grapes freſhe all the Winter. idem.
               To make Melons or Conconibers ripe before their ſeaſon. idem.
               To take awaie the holes or markes of the ſmall Pockes. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make 
                     •
                  he handes white. idem.
               To make an odoriferous and ſwete ſmellyng greaſe, that kepeth the lippes and handes, from chinkes and chappes, and kepeth them moiſte, & ſoft. Fo. 21.
               
               For a ſwete ſuete called in Frenche and Italien, Pomade, in Latine. Pomatu
                        •
                     . idem.
               To make that flies ſhal not tourment or trouble houſes in Somer. idem.
               To kepe Figges grene all the yere. idem.
               For to make that Pomegranates ſhall not 
                     •
                  pe. fo. 23.
               
               
                  For to kepe wine ſwete all the yere. idem.
               For wine that will not kepe long. idem.
               To cauſe that wine ſhall not be to ſtrong. idem. pa. 2.
               
               To make vineigre idem.
               To make vinaiger with water. idem.
               To make vinaiger with periſhed wine, or wine that is marred. idem.
               To take awaie the ſauour of the mouldines, or putre faccion of the wine. Fol. 25.
               
               To make wine haue a good odour. idem.
               To make that Lekes ſhall be greate. idem.
               To make tadſtooles or Muſheroms growe in a. idem.
               To make that all maner of codware ſhall ſeeth quickly. idem.
               To haue grene flowers all the yere. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make corne to growe greater, then thei are wont to doe. idem.
               To make that fruictes ſhall not rot vpon the tre. idem
               To make letters that cannot be read, vnleſſe the Paper be put in water idem.
               To make letters that cannot be read, but at the. fo. 27
               
               To make that Aqua vite ſhall receiue all the vertues and ſtrength of medicines. idem.
               To make that a woman ſhall eate of nothyng, that is ſet vpon the table. idem.
               To make oile of roſes, or other odoriferous her. idem
               To make that the Mothes and vermine ſhall not eate nor deſtroie clothes and apparell. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make that wilde beaſtes ſhal not hurt you. idem.
               For to be aſſured and ſafe from ſerpentes. idem.
               To take awaie the pain and grief of the goute. fo. 29.
               
               For to ſee wilde beaſtes in a dreame. idem.
               For to make ſilke white. idem.
               To make an herbe growe, that ſhall haue many and diuers odours and ſauours. idem.
               To make an apple or ball that prouoketh. idem. pa. 
                     
                        •
                     .
               
               To make a barrain woman beare children. idem.
               
                  To make heares growe vpon a balde hedde. idem.
               To make a water that dieth or coloureth Copper, into the colour of golde. idem.
               To make oile of Brimſtone. idem.
               For to make ſalt Armoniac Fol. 31.
               
               For to make Borace. idem.
               For to make Corall. idem.
               To die yron into the colour of golde. idem. pag. 2.
               
               For to make yron ſtrong, and as faire as ſiluer. idem.
               For to make a water, that will take out incontinent letters from the paper idem.
               To take a ſpot of oile out of clothe idem.
               To ſtanche the bleedyng at the noſe. Fol. 33.
               
               To breake botches, impoſtumes, Cartarres, or ſores commyng in the throte. idem.
               To take an yron or arrowe hed out of a wound. idem
               To make that young children, ſhall haue no paine or grief in their teeth. idem.
               For to make a clere voice. idem.
               For to faſten loſe teeth. idem. pag. 2.
               
               For the Emeraudes. idem.
               For one that hath his ſight troubled. idem.
               For one that is abroke or bruſted idem.
               For one that hath his coddes ſwollen. idem.
               To make a woman that is wont to haue daughters, to beare ſonnes alſo. idem.
               To make that ye hands ſhall not chink or cleaue. fo. 35.
               
               For to make a mannes beard blacke. idem.
               To make a woman beare children, although it be not alwaies aſſured, yet it is the beſte remedie that can be founde. idem.
               To make a woman labouryng, to bryng foorthe 
                     〈◊〉
                   childe, that cannot be deliuered. idem. pag. 2.
               
               For to make teeth that one ake, to fall out. Fol. 37.
               
               A remedie for the fallyng ſickneſſe. idem.
               Againſt the plague. idem.
               For the ſame. idem. pag. 2.
               
               
                  For the putrefaccion of the teeth. idem.
               For the ſtinkyng of the breath, and to make the teeth white. idem.
               A water to make cleane teeth. idem.
               An other water to whiten teeth. Fol. 39.
               
               To take awaie the ſmell of Garlike, Leekes, or. idem
               A principall remedie for the flixe or laxe. idem.
               For to make that heares ſhall not growe. idem.
               A verie profitable reamedie for the hardneſſe of womennes breaſtes, after thei be brought a bed. idem.
               For Apoſtumes, Botches, Cankers, or other Swellynges. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make womennes milke encreaſe. idem.
               To knowe whether there bee any water in the wine or no. idem.
               To make vinaiger. idem.
               To make drie vinaiger, whiche maie be carried wher a man will. idem.
               An other compoſicion for the ſame. fol. 41.
               
               To make roſe vinaiger very ſwete and odorife. idem.
               To make vinaigre of graine. idem.
               A preſeruacion in tyme of Peſtilence or plague, and againſt all venime or poiſon, and bityng of a madd Dogge. idem.
               Againſt ſtinkyng vermin called Puneiſes. idem pa. 2
               
               To pourge coler and fleame. idem.
               A remedie to kepe flies from fleſhe. idem.
               To kepe fleſhe all the ſommer without corrup. idem.
               To knowe if a Melon be good. fol. 43.
               
               To kill and deſtroie flees. idem.
               To ripe a botche, impoſtum, felon, or cattes heare, or any ſwellyng ſore. idem.
               An excellent waſhyng for the teeth idem.
               To make a baite for riuer fiſhe. idem.
               A remedie that no kinde of herbes ſhall bee hurte, or corrupted by flees or lice. idem.
               To driue awaie the ſtinkyng vermine called pu. idē.
               
                  For to kill and deſtroie flies idem. pag. 2.
               
               An other waie to kill and deſtroie flees. idem.
               For one that hath eaten venemous tadſtooles, or muſheromes idem.
               For to confite Muſheromes or tadſtooles, ſo well that a man maie eate thē without any daunger. fol. 45.
               
               A remedy againſt the ſtinging of waſpes or bees. idē.
               To make women haue a quicke and ſpeadie deliuerie of their children, and without pain, or at the leaſte verie little. idem.
               To take of wartes from the handes idem pag. 2.
               
               For the diſſenterie or flixe of the ſtomacke idem.
               To faſten the gommes; and loſe teeth idem.
               To take awaie the tothe ache idem.
               An other remedy for to heale the tothe ache idem.
               To make heare growe idem.
               To make heare blacke fol. 47.
               
               To kill the Wormes in the teeth, and to take awaie the ſtinkyng of the teeth idem.
               To heale puſſiue and broken winded horſes idem.
               To preſerue a man from vomityng on the ſea idem.
               A remedy againſt the bityng or ſtinging of ſerp. idem.
               For them that ſpit blood. idem.
               A remedy againſt the wormes of yong chlid. idē. pa. 2.
               
               A remedy for the flixe or laxe. idem.
               For the runnyng of the vrine, that is to ſaie, for one that cannot holde his water. idem.
               For thoſe that cannot kepe their meate, but vomite it vp again continually. idem.
               To make that Antes, or Emettes ſhal not eat the figges vpon the tree. idem.
               To make hore heares blacke idem.
               For the toth ache Fol. 49.
               
               To deſtroie liſe and other ſmall beaſtes, that doe wa
                     ••
                   and deſtroie the herbes in gardens idem.
               A remedy for deafneſſe idem.
               Againſt the ſtinging Scorpions idem.
               
                  A remedy that the Sunne ſhall not hurt you, ſhinyng vpon your hedde, when you go any iourney. idem.
               A remedy for the hoarſneſſe of the voice. idem.
               A remedy for them that cannot piſſe idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make a baite to catche wilde Geeſe, and wilde Duckes, and all other ſort of foule. idem.
               To make that Dogges ſhall neuer bee madde, and a remedie for them if thei bee madde, beyng bitten of madde Dogges or Wolues idem.
               To make that flies ſhall not vexe or trouble do. fo. 51.
               
               A remedie to kepe Dogges from flees idem.
               To pourge Dogges when thei be ſicke idem.
               To heale mangie Dogges. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To take wartes from the handes. idem.
               To make the teeth white idem.
               To take awaie the paine of the iyes idem.
               For hym that is ſtong with a Salamander Fol. 53.
               
               For one that hath drunke leches or blood ſuckers. idē.
               For one that is ſtong with the beaſt, called in Latine Pſalanx, whiche is a kind of Lizard called Stellio idē.
               For one that is bitten with a madde Dogge idem.
               A remedy for hym that is ſtong with ſome venemous beaſt idem.
               To preſerue a man from poiſon. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To driue awaie all venemous beaſtes frō your. idem.
               Againſt all poiſon, either eaten or drunke. Fol. 55.
               
               Againſt all veneme or poiſon idem.
               A remedy which Nicomedes vſed, that no poiſon ſhould hurte hym idem.
               A ſecrete or remedy, not to be ſtong of Scorpi. idē pa. 2
               
               A remedy not to be ſtong of waſpes or Bees. idē.
               To make what quantitie of 
                     ••
                  ong vinaigre you. idē.
               For one that hath eaten venemous Muſheromes, or Tadſtooles idem.
               To be aſſured and ſaffe from all Sorcerie and enchauntement Fol. 57.
               
               Againſt lightnyng and tempeſt idem.
               
                  To kepe that fruictes ſhall not fal before the be ri. idē.
               To keepe that Weſelles and other like beaſtes, ſhall not eate nor deſtroie Poultrie. idem.
               To make flaxe as ſoft as ſilke. idem. pa. 2.
               
               To heale the paine of the hedde idem.
               To heale lippes that bee clefte and full of chinkes, by meanes of colde or winde. idem.
               To heale handes that be ful of chappes, by cold. idem.
               To grinde golde and ſiluer idem.
               To make faire verde griſe after the newe faciō. fol. 59
               
               An other waie briefer for to haue Verdegriſe. idem.
               To make a paſt or dowe of Amber, for beades. fol. 61.
               
               To counterfete perles that ſhall ſeme naturall. idem.
               To imprent medalles imboſſed with draga. idē. pa. 2.
               
               To make a paſte mete and good, to make all maner of medalles or pictures in moulde. Fol. 63.
               
               To make medalles, and figures chaced and imboſſed, with fiſhe glewe. idem.
               To make a Greene, Yellowe, Redde, and Blewe colour without thicknes, to write with vpō. idē. pa. 2.
               
               To make a pece of violet clothe to write or paint. idē.
               To get oile out of Talcum artificially, and of his owne ſtrength. Fol. 67.
               
               To make that all mettall ſhall ſeme like ſiluer. fol. 69
               
               For to take moche fiſhe, and to make a light in the night. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make a Mixte ſtone, whiche beeyng weated with ſpettle maketh fire. idem.
               To make verniſhe with Maſticke, to laie vpon paintynges made with oile. Fol. 71.
               
               To make that a white ſkin ſhall haue blacke ſpottes of the colour of a Leoparde or Panther, and alſo to make graie heare blacke. idem.
               To make good oile of Nutmegges. idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make parfecte oile of Spike. idem.
               To make odoriferous oile of Storax Fol. 73.
               
               To make an odoriferous oile of Bengewine. idem.
               
                  To make good oile of Ladanum Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make oile of Orenge flowers idem.
               To make a parfume ſodainly in a chamber where a ſicke man lieth Fol. 75.
               
               To make longe and rounde parfumes to burne in a chamber idem.
               To make a fine & ſwete pouder of Cipres. idem. pa. 2.
               
               To grinde ambergriſe for to putte with other Drogges, to giue them a good odour, and to make little markes and ſpottes vpon beades. Fol. 77.
               
               To make fine muſcardines, white and redde. idē. pa. 2
               
               To make counterfaicte Camphire idem.
               To make the bearde growe, and to kepe that the heares fall not of Fol. 79.
               
               To get awaie the heare from what place you wil. idē.
               To make hore heares blacke Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make white heare in the ſhadowe: without the Sunne, and ſhall bee come white and ſhinyng, like Siluer. fol. 81.
               
               A ſofte dowe or paſte as it wer Pomatum, to waſhe the handes, and when the mouthe, noſe, lippes, or handes dooe chincke or chappe, and it kepeth the fleſhe ſofte and ſwete. fol. 83.
               
               White Pomatum, fine & ſwete for great. idem. pa. 2.
               
               For thoſe that haue a ſtinkyng breath, bicauſe of the ſtomacke. fol. 87.
               
               To make one haue a good ſtomack, that hath a naughtie one. Idem.
               A remedy for hym that cannot keepe his meate in his ſtomacke, without vomityng. idem. pa. 2.
               
               To make a naturall white ſkin idem.
               To make the fleſhe or ſkin faire and bright Fol. 89.
               
               To cleare and make cleane the face from all maner of ſpottes. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To take awaie a ryngworme, tetter, or ſpottes and other markes, or els a priuie marke in the honie by birthe. idem.
               
                  To take awaie redde rubies that grow in the face, by reaſon of the heate of the liuar. Fol. 91.
               
               To take of from the handes or feete, the hardneſſe of the fleſhe, gotten by labour Idem. pag. 2.
               
               An other ſecrete to take awaie wartes or hard fleſhe, that growe betwene mennes toes Idem.
               To make letters of gold and ſiluer emboſſed. Fol. 93.
               
               To make a deuiſe or armes, or other thynges, vpon a Violet, or a Roſe Idem. pag. 2.
               
               Sope to get out all ſpottes of clothe Idem
               An other like ſecrete Fol. 95.
               
               An other like Idem.
               An other meanes Idem.
               An other meanes for ſpottes, of fatte, or oile Idem.
               To take ſpottes out of of Skarlate or Veluet, without hurtyng the colour Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To take ſpottes out of white ſilke or Veluet in grain, or Crimſen Veluet Idem.
               To take out a ſpotte of Ynke or Wine, of a Wollen or Linen clothe Fol. 97.
               
               To reſtore the colour to a cloth, that hath loſt it in takyng out a ſpotte Idem.
               A water to take all maner of ſpottes out of clothe of any colour Idem.
               To driue awaie Flies, Spiders, Scorpiōs, and other vermine from your houſe Idem. pag. 2.
               
               Againſt gnattes, whiche ſting men in the night. idem
               A verie excellent ſecrete for to take out ſpottes or hard fleſhe by labour, called in Latine Callum Fol. 99.
               
               To take oile or greaſe out of a clothe, of what colour ſo euer it be, without any droppe of water. idē. pa. 2.
               
               Balles of Sope for Barbers, of diuers ſortes and ſauoure Idem.
               To counterfaicte all maner of greene leaues, whiche ſhall ſeme naturall. Fol. 101.
               
               To make Paper borde of beaten Paper, and ſtampte Paper for mouldes and hollewe thynges. Fol. 103.
               
               
                  To giue a faire gloſſe vnto Pictures or Figures painted Idem. pa. 2.
               
               To make an other maner of grene water cleare. 105.
               
               To take out a deuiſe made in a moulde, with Blacke Sope. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To make cleane the heares, and to drie vp the ſweate vnder the arme holes Idem.
               To make Roſes, flowers, Gilliflowers, and of all other ſortes, white, redde, grene, yellowe, and incarnate, in ſhort ſpace Fol. 107.
               
               To make Trees of all ſortes to growe, whiche ſhall bryng foorthe fruicte, farre greater then commonly thei doe Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To ſoften and mollifie Oliues with Lye, in leſſe then eight houres Fol. 109.
               
               To make a water that will Die or colour all thinges be it bone or woo
                     ••
                   Fol. 111.
               
               A water to make teeth white Idem.
               The true ſecrete and maner how to make beyond ſea Azure, or els for all tutches or Paragon. Alſo for to make ſtrong paſte, for to incorporate the Azure ſtone in it, called Lapis Laſuli, and to take it out a
                  
                     ••
                  ain in his tyme, & when you thinke good. idē. pa. 2.
               
               To make the paſte, ſofter for beyonde ſea azure. 113.
               
               To purifie the oile of Lineſeede for the azure. idē. pa. 2
               
               Lye for to waſhe beyonde ſea azure Fol. 115.
               
               How the veſſell ought to bee, wherein all the waters are put that the azure is waſhed with. Idem. pa. 2.
               
               The firſte parte howe to knowe the vertuous, goodneſſe, and ſignes of Lapis Lazuli, and to make true beyonde Sea Azure mooſte parfectly and expertly. Idem.
               The maner howe to prepare the ſtone Lapis Laſuli, and to calcine it when you will grinde it. Fol. 117.
               
               To get out the gold of lapis Lazuli, after it. idē. pa. 2.
               
               The maner how to make the licour wherewith men braie the lapis Laſuli, for to make beyond ſea. 119.
               
               
                  To knowe whether the ſublime bee good or 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or whether it be made with Arſenick Idem.
               To take letters out of Paper. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To renewe old and worne letters Idem.
               To mollifie or make ſoft Iuerie and bones, to worke what thyng you will on them, or with them. Idem
               To take out the markes that are commonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to knowe theim, and alſo ſoche as many men carrie vpon their bodies, for diuers cauſes Fol. 159.
               
               For one that is ſtong with a Scorpion. Idem.
               For one that is ſtong with Waſpes or Bees. Idem.
               When a man is touched or poiſoned of a ſpider. idem
               For one that hath eaten Todes, or the ſpettle that tō
                  meth frō thē, which is a dedly thyng. Idem. pag. 2.
               
               To heale cleft or kibed heeles Idem.
               To heale the Canker, that happeneth vpon the yarde of a man, or in the nature of a woman. Idem.
               To heale a foundred horſe Idem.
               To kill the wormes in horſes Fol. 161.
               
               For a horſe that cannot ſtale Idem.
               For a horſe that is 
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ied with a neile in ſhoyng. idem
               To make a horſe to haue a good hoofe. Idem.
            
            Finis tabulae.
         
         
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngſton: for Nicholas Englande.
            
         
      
   