
      
         
            
            
               
               Baculum Familliare, Catholicon ſiue Generale.
            
            A BOOKE OF THE making and vſe of a Staffe, newly inuented by the Author, called the Familiar Staffe.
            
            
               As well for that it may be made vſually and familiarlie to walke with, as for that it performeth the Geometrical menſurations of all Altitudes, Longitudes, Latitudes, Diſtances and Profundities: as many myles of, as the eye may well ſee and diſcerne: moſt ſpeedily, exactly and familiarly without any maner of Arithmeticall calculation, eaſily to be learned and practiſed, euen by the vnlettered.
            Newlie compiled, and at this time publiſhed for the ſpeciall helpe of ſhooting in great Ordinance, and other millitarie ſeruices, and may as well be imployed by the ingenious, for meaſuring of land, and to a number of other good purpoſes, both Geometricall and Aſtronomicall: By IOHN BLAGRAVE of Reading Gentleman, the ſame wellwiller to the Mathematickes.
            
               The vſe of which Familiar ſtaffe is alſo ſo generall that it readily performeth all the ſeuerall vſes of the Croſſe ſtaffe, the Quadrate, the Circle, the Quadrante, the Gunners Quadrante, the Trigon, euery one in his owne kinde, and with no leſſe methode and facillitie, both for Sea and Land.
            
            
               depiction of cannons with 'familiar staves'
            
            
               LONDON Printed by Hugh Iackſon dwelling in Fleeteſtreete a litle beneath the Conduit, at the ſigne of S. Iohn the Euangeliſt.
            1590.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable Sir Fraunces Knolles Knight, Treaſurer of her Maieſties Houſehold, and of her Highneſſe moſt Honourable priuie Counſell.
            
               WHen that I had (right Honourable) with an earneſt intent to proceede very farre in the Mathematikes publiſhed my late booke of the Mathematicall Iewell, dedicated euen of meere duety, vnto the right Honourable Lord Burleigh, Lord high treaſurer of England, whom from the aboundance of my hart I can not but with your Honours good fauour, as a Myrror of Iuſtice and pietie, a Patterne of true Honour and Nobilitie, not onely at this time againe, but during life, in all my good actions to remember. Yet not long after eſpying my yeares to run on, the world to ſlip away by me, whiles I was occupied in theſe ſtudies that brought nothing but delight: and withall remembring thé example of the ſilly Graſhopper, and the ſaying non ſemper erit eſtas. I began in maner to droupe and languiſh, as one out of hope, and euen vpon point either to giue them ouer, or to attend them at more leaſure, which of all thinges thoſe ſtudies may not like becauſe they rather more earneſtly require a mans whole indeuour, Sticking faſt in this mammering of diſpaire, your Honour beyond all exſpectation or cogitation of mine, drawes me forth of the poore countrie Cabin where obſcurely I lurked, into your more open preſence, and there ſo adorned and beautified me with your Honourable curteſies and fauour, ſo renoumed my name at the Court amongſt perſons of high regard, and (not content therewith) without any leaſt deſart of mine, of purpoſe, as I take it, to encourage me to proceed: thereby not a litle bewraying your Honours hidden skill and ſecret good will to the Mathematicke ſciences, moſt liberally beſtowed on me a yearely penſion or ſtipend: that verifying the old Adage: Honos alit artes, I was enforced againe to my former Byas, and ſo much the more ſtrongly, to the end that your Honour conceaued opinion of me, and fauourable auouchments in my behalfe, ſhould not be vtterly made void, earneſtly bending vpon thoſe pointes which may moſt helpe or forward Nauigators for their long voyages and new diſcoueries being now almoſt prepared and in point, to furniſh them with ſuch familiar inſtruments and precepts, carrying no leſſe facilitie then this treatiſe doth, that them ſelues ſhall bee able to ſtrengthen their owne nauigations, in whatſoeuer arte may aſſiſt them: But leſt

in the meane time whiles I am thus buſied; euen to the vttermoſt of that leaſure which this diuers world alloweth me, I ſhould be thought to ſleepe of your Honour, of whom I haue beene ſo many waies fauourably incyted, I could not but exact ſo much intermiſſion from thoſe waightie actions, as to ſeeke about in my Mathematicke ſtorehouſe, for ſome ready preſent wherewith I might the whiles ſhew my ſelfe broad waking vnto your H. And all ſodeinly as I was toſſing and ſeeking, me thought I hard the freſh ſound in mine eares of the peece of Ordinance I ſaw your H. ſhoote off at Greyes this laſt ſommer. Thereupon I ſought no further, but ſeeing your H. both by your honourable office and courſe of yeares to carry a ſtaffe, with that conceite bent my head wholy to metamorphoſe that inſtrument which by chaunce I then ſhewed vnto your H. & others there: vnto a Mathematicall ſtaffe, fit for ſo noble a mind as your H. hath, euen frō your firſt knighthood, wonne in the field, hetherto carried, and dayly expreſſeth, by diuers ſuch noble and martiall exerciſes. And the ſame ſtaffe cleane void of all loftie floriſhes, ſinguler eaſie to be conceiued, euen for the vnlettered, to learne and worke by, without any manner of arithmeticall calculation, although I know your H. moſt aboundantly farre to exceede any ordinary Arithmetician, and not deuoid of ſome partes Geometricall. Which ſtaffe, as effectually framed as my ſelfe and my man (whom purpoſly to forward theſe actions, I haue euer ſince your Honours ſaide liberalitie beſtowed, retained) cold without any firſt patterne contriue: I moſt humbly preſent to your H. together with this treatiſe of the vſe thereof, beſeeching God to proſper your H. in all your, honourable actions.
            
               Your Honours moſt humble at command,
Iohn Blagraue.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the Chapters and Contentes of this preſent booke following.
            
               Chap. 1. WHat mooued the Author at this time to publiſh ſo much of this inſtrument, & his vſe as he now ſetteth foorth.
               Chap. 2. Of the imperfections of the croſſe ſtaffe, called by Gemma Friſius Baculus Geometricus and by howe much this Familliar Staffe exceedeth it and all other inſtrumentes hetherto deuiſed, to like purpoſes both for ſufficiency and facillity.
               Chap. 3. Of the framing and faſhioning of this notable inſtrument called the Familiar Staffe.
               Chap. 4. How you ſhall in a ſingular ſort ſet degrees on the leuel of the running ſtaffe, and alſo on his Graduator, together with the pointes of the Gunners quadrant.
               Chap. 5. How by this Familiar Staffe to leuell or try, whether a peece of ground be leuell whereon to plant your peece of ordinance.
               Chap. 6. How by this Familliar Staffe to mount a piece of ordinance by points of the Gunners quadrant.
               Chap. 7. By what meanes a certaine Table is to be made, therby to know how farre any piece wil ſhoot at random, being mounted to any point of the gunners quadrant.
               Chap. 8. Hauing made a Table of Randomes to ſome one piece according to the precept in the laſt chapter. How by this Familiar Staffe, to make the ſame table ſerue for any other piece, without any Arythmeticall calculation Angular eaſie.
               Chap. 9. If a Wall or Tower were to be ſcaled, and that you may come vnto the baſe of it without daunger, How by this Familiar ſtaffe ſpeedely to get the height thereof, thereby to make your ſcaling ladders according.
               Chap. 10. To performe the laſt chap. Where you dare not come neere the baſe of the Tower for daunger of ſhot, or let by reaſon of ſome deepe mote or ditch.
               Chap. 11. How by this Familiar ſtaffe to performe the laſt chap. another way more exact for long diſtances, the more ſafely to keepe you out of daunger of ſhot of the Fort, whiles you are in action.
               Chap. 12. How you ſhall knowe by this Familiar ſtaffe, the depth vnder the iuſt leuell of your eye, of the baſe of any Tower vnapprochable, when the ſame baſe is to be ſeene.
               Chap. 13. To know the length of the ſcaling ladder to reach ouer the ditch to the toppe of the wall or tower.
               Chap. 14. How at any ſtation, eyther by the ſtanderd or running ſtaffe, the angle of ſtation or poſition betweene any two markes or places, is to be taken two ſeuerall wayes.
               Chap. 15. How (in manner of the firſt and playneſt meanes mentioned in the laſt chapter, to take the angle of poſition) to get the

moſt exact diſtance of a caſtle or fort from you, though the ſame fort be two or three myles off or more, whereby you may know how to place your mayne battell, as neere as may be, yet without danger of ſhot from the Fort, and alſo in what ſpace you may march to the ſame, when you will.
               Chap. 16. Of the Geometricall ground and familiar proofe therof, whereon the whole working by this familiar Staffe dependeth.
               Chap. 17. How to performe the fifteenth chapter with more facility by meanes of the ſecond manner of taking the angle of poſition mentioned in the 14. chap.
               Chap. 18. In caſe that a Caſtle or Fort were digged out of ſome rocke or ſcituate in ſome valley betweene two hilles, admitting but ſome narrowe comming vnto it, and therefore enforcing your ſtations to be one directly behinde another, How yet by this Familiar Staffe you ſhall attaine the diſtance of the ſame from you.
               Chap. 19. How you ſhall performe the 15. chap. Where the diſtance of the fort or caſtle is very farre off, & the ground being vneuen with hilles, dales, and rockes, hath no one leuell plaine ſufficient to make two ſtations for ſo great a diſtance.
               Chap. 20. If in a night you, haue ſecretly gotten with your army neere any Fort, and that you would with more ſpeede then in the 15. or 17. chap. is ſhewed, knowe the diſtance whether you are neere ynough to plant your ordinance for battery.
               Chap. 21. If you ſhall ſee two Fortes of the Enemies within viewe, and would knowe how farre they are in ſunder, and whether there may be paſſage for an Army betweene them without daunger of ſhot from thoſe Fortes, or to get the length and breadth of any Fort a farre off, thereby to gather, of what receite the ſame Fort is, or to get the width of a Riuer fronting any Fort, keeping your ſelfe a farre off without daunger of ſhot.
               Chap. 22. If in a Fort or Hauen on the ſea coaſt, or abroad on the playnes on the ſea bankes, you ſhall ſee any ſhippes a farre off, ſayling towardes you, or any Army approching by land: howe you ſhall alwayes be prouided in ſuch ſpeciall places, that in a moment almoſt, and with ſmall helpe you ſhall know how farre they are from you, and by that meanes ſpeedily finde when they ſhall be commen within the randome or point blancke of the ſhot.
               Chap. 23. If an Army on the land, or an Nauy on the ſea ſhall be as farre off as you may ken, making towardes your Fort. To knowe by helpe of this Familiar Staffe, how faſt their gate is, and in what time they ſhall (according to that gate) come within reach of your ſhot.
               Chap. 24. If ſtanding on the ſea bankes, you ſee your ſhippe of warre at the ſea purſuing another ſhippe of the enemie, to know (by helpe of this Familiar Staffe) how farre, and how much the one

getteth of the other in ſayling, whether he be likely to ouer take the enemy, and in what time.
               Chap. 25. Your ſelfe planted on the toppe of an high rocke, clyft, or Tower by the ſea ſide, To knowe by this Familiar Staffe, howe deepe the leuell of the water is vnder you.
               Chap. 26. If a Gunner keepe a Blockehouſe, or haue a piece or two of ordinance, planted on the toppe of ſome very high clift by the ſea ſide, how by this Familiar Staffe, he himſelfe without any helpe at all, ſhal moſt eaſily and ſpeedely in a moment, get the diſtance of any ſhippe at the ſea, making towardes him, or paſſing a long and that moſt exact, for ſo farre as the randome of any great piece will extende.
               Chap. 27. If a man were priſoner with the enemy, Howe being in the toppe of a Tower on the leades, or out of his priſon windowe he might by this Familiar Staffe knowe the deepth to the grounde, to ſee if he were able with any deuiſe to let himſelfe downe without daunger.
               Chap. 28. If a Fort or Tower ſtand vpon an high hill, How by this Familiar ſtaffe to know the ioinct and ſeuerall heightes both of the hill and tower.
               Chap. 29. If being at the ſea you would caſt ancor as neere ſome Fort or Harborrowe as you might be free from reach of their ſhot, How by this Familiar Staffe you ſhall exactly get the diſtance thereof, or the diſtance of any other ſhippe from your ſhippe beeing both fleeting at once on the wilde ſea.
               Chap. 30. How by this Familiar Staffe to carry the leuell of one place to any other, neceſſary for ſuch as ſhall vndermyne a Fort, to knowe alwayes how deepe they are. Or for ſuch as would try whether waters may be brought from one place to fortifie another.
               Chap. 31. How by helpe of this Familiar Staffe, you ſhall cary a myne vnder the ground, and ſet barrelles of gunpouder directly vnder any Tower or chiefe place of any Caſtle or Fort.
               Chap. 32. How a Captayne may by this Familiar Staffe, ſet in Plat or Mappe any Prouince of the enemies Countrie.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Heere beginneth the Booke of the readie, eadie, and pleaſant vſe of this new Inſtrument, called the FAMILIAR STAFFE.
            
               CHAPTER. I.
               
                  What moued the Author at this time to publiſh ſo much of this Inſtrument and his vſe, as he now ſetteth forth.
               
               
                  IT was my good hap to be at the manſion place of my moſt honorable fauorer the right Ho. Sir Frances Knolles knight, called Greyes Court in the Countie of Oxenford in Summer laſt, where the right excellent and moſt noble Lorde, Robert Deuorax Earle of Eſſex, his grandſon beeing expected that day, it pleaſed his Honor to paſſe the time, or rather as it might be iudged, to ſtirre vp by his example the couragious minded knights and Gentlemen his ſonnes, naturally apt inough of themſelues to patrizate, imitate, or rather to excéede in all ſuch magnanimous exerciſes, there to contend with the right worſhipfull and valorous Gentleman, Sir William Knolles knight, his ſonne & heire, in ſhooting with a ſmall péece of ordinance at a marke, which péece was there ready on her carriage, appointed at that time together with another great péece, not long before the Spaniſh kings, called a Saker, which the ſayde ſir William to his high deſerued commendations, then lately had brought home

from the winning of ye Groyne in Spaine, & many other ſmal ſhot there alſo ſet readie on the leads of the houſe, with trains of gun pouder to be ſhot off, to welcome the ſaid noble Earle: ſending forth amidde the regions of the aire the excéeding ioy that was there taken of the ſafe and happie arriuall of his nobleneſſe, from the then late deſperate voiage performed into Portingale.
               At this time after his H. and his ſayd ſonne and heyre had each of them ſhot, I being at hand, was demanded a queſtion or two of getting the diſtance of the marke wherto they ſhot. And the ſayde Sir William Knolles was alſo verie deſirous and inquiſitiue of me, in what time himſelfe might learne ſkill ſufficient for that purpoſe. Of which ſo iuſt and wiſhed occaſion I was right glad, and the rather when I conſidered with my ſelfe, how theſe dangerous times threaten to ſet our great ordinance mightily on worke, and how needfull & appertinent it is to the ſhooting in them certaynly and ſpeedily, to get the diſtance of the marke they ſhoote at, as well for annoying of the enemie, as ſparing of ſhootes ſpent in waſt. So that I was in manner aſſured, that no Treatiſe was like to be more acceptable vnto his H. (next vnto bookes of ſincere religion) then ſuch as ſhould tend towards the defence and ſafe keeping of this his natiue Countrie. Wherein it is wel knowen, euen to any that leaſt know him, how forward his H. hath alwais bin and continueth euerie waie whatſoeuer. That olde age and graie hayres cannot yet daunt or holde him backe from the face of that enemie that ſhould inuade the ſame, or offer violence or hurt to the perſon of our moſt gracious ſoueraign Ladie and Queene Elizabeth, whome God graunt long to raigne ouer vs to his glorie. Conſidering alſo what no ſmall want of ſome one perfect meane, Generall for all theſe actions yet remained after ſo great a number of both Latine & Engliſh authors, writing of ſo ſundrie waies to attaine Altitudes, Longitudes, Latitudes, Diſtances and Profundities, ſome by the Quadrate, ſome by the Trigō, ſome by the Croſſe Staffe, ſome by the Cyrſte, ſome by the Quadrante, ſome by the bare

bare rule or Squyre, ſome by plaine ſtickes and ſtations, ſome one waie ſome another. And amongſt them all, no one inſtrument ſufficiently apt for all purpoſes, neither yet to doe any of theſe feates in all pointes, or almoſt in anie point of himſelfe, without the continuall & readie vſe of the fiue partes of Arithmetike. Which in the vnlearned Gunner is not alwayes to be had: nor hauing it, eaſie for him to performe, eſpeciallie in ſuch buſie times, when the buzzing of dangerous buſineſſe amongſt the multitude, ſhall bring the beſt learned and ſkilfull man out of his numbers: beſides the number of preceptes ſo toile ſome, the manifolde abſurdities admitted, ſo loathſome. Upon al theſe iuſt occaſions I was in maner forcibly drawen at this time to bend the fabrication and vſe of this ſo noble inſtrument wholie vpon theſe cauſes, which I had for three or foure yeeres before determined to haue publiſhed in a more ample ſorte, almoſt as generall for a number of matters of Geometrie, as my Iewel is for matters of Attronomie, Coſmographie and Nauigation, which I yet meane to doe, but that I dare make no more promiſes in print, vntill I haue finiſhed the ſecond part of my Iewell, ſo often ſince required at at my hand, being fiue yeres paſt: which yet this buſie world ſuffereth me not to bring forth, although I contend to looſe no manner of time.
            
            
               Chap 2.
               
                  Of the imperfectiōs of the Croſſe ſtaffe called by Gemma Friſius, Baculus Geometricus, and how much this Familiar ſtaffe exceedeth it and all other Inſtrumentes hitherto deuiſed to like purpoſes, both for ſufficiency and facillity.
               
               FOr that I haue bene acquainted with diuerſe willing wits deſirous of knowledge, wanting the rudiments of Geometry, whereby they might be enabled to make choiſe of ſuch inſtruments as might be ſubiect to feweſt errors and abſurdities, to haue bene marueilouſly in loue with the croſſe ſtaffe

and that altogether, becauſe it yeldeth his vſe with that facillity, though but in matters at hand. For which cauſe, I thought good euen of zeale and good will to all ſuch willinge young practiſers, to waſte this Cap. for their good, to aſſure them how weake and to ſmall purpoſe the croſſe ſtaffe is, in reſpect to be imployed in any weighty ſeruice, ſcarce doing any thing well, and that not much aboue a bowe ſhute of, whereas this my familliar ſtaffe ſhall performe them no leſſe exacte at a mile, 2. or 3. diſtante, if the marke bee ſuche that the eie may cary it ſtrongly.
               There haue bene from time to time beſids the croſſe ſtaffe diuerſe other inſtruments, deuiſed for theſe kindes of ſeruiſable meſurations, as in the Cap. before I mentioned: of which the Geometricall quadrate was thought to be the beſt, as it ſeemeth to me by G. Friſius, who often vpbraydeth the ſame quadrate with his ſtaffe, when he had in as much as mighte be doen, reduced the croſſe ſtaffe to all yerfection, letting it then to lacke no commendations, ſaying euen at the firſt entraunce to the vſe of it, lib. de radio aſtro. & Geomet. cap. 5. Dimenſionibus longitudinum altit. latit. & diſtantiarum antecellit radius reliqua inſtrumenta ad ſimilem vſum excogitata facillitatem habens longe maiorem & copiam. But by G. Friſius good ſauour, I ſee no cauſa why it ſhould carry any of thoſe commendations, more then for the facillity in vſe, and for this, wil aske no better iudge then him ſelfe. For in taking of an altitude, which is ſimply the beſt thing it can doe, if the ſtaffe be not directed leuell with the horrizon, then cannot the croſſe bee parallell to the vpright, and therefore breedeth error as him ſelfe confeſſeth in the ſame 5. Cap. ſaying: Vnum a paucis notatum intollerabiles inducit errores. Si quidem Radius in dimenſionibus per directam lineam, & quaſi ad normam tendere debet verſus lineam quam metiri ſtatuimus, ſiue ea ſit longitudinis fiue latitudinis, what can a man aske more then direct conſeſſion, yet after he ſayeth againe by way of auoidance in the ſame Cap. Neque vereri de bes paruum

a norma deflexum qui nullum inducere poteſt errorem ſenſu perceptibilem. But by his fauour againe though a litle holding from the leuell, can breede no great error in the altitude or latitude. Yet that very ſmal error, there cōmitted: ſhall growe to ſomewhat in the longitude or diſtaunce: being he teacheth no other way in manner, to get a diſtance but by the altit. or latit. of ſome thing at thextreame of the diſtance firſt obtayned, multiplyed into the length. Which in a long diſtance will multiply that inſenſible error to become intollerable as he termeth it. But what ſhould we talke of longe diſtances, when as he maketh a prouiſo, we ſhall deale with none by theſe wordes in his 5. Cap. or the like in effect. Nihili eſſe quantum diſtes a re menſuranda, verum opus eſt diſtantia non admodum longa. And then were wee as good to be without his ſtaffe in my opinion, as to entertaine him on ſuch ſtreight conditions. But now to remedy thoſe errors in altitudes, he ſayeth in one place you may ſette the ſtaffe leuell by a thredd and plummet aplied to the croſſe. In erectis quidem appenſo perpendiculo▪
                   Yet in another place he thinketh that, too comberſome, ſaying thus. Qua in re, ſufficit rudius oculi indicium ac examen. As for latitudes tranſuerſe: remedy he coulde finde none, ſaying: In tranſuerſis vero, viſui credere oportet. Yet for all theſe things he could not holde but conclude towards the ende of his firſt practiſes. Cap. 2. Itaque nulla in parte ſuperatur aſcala Geomet. verum multis modis ſuperat, quin ipſe radius, ſcala quo que quaedam eſt geometrica, tanto praeſtantior quanto maiorem prebet vſum, he ſhould haue ſaid facil orem vſum and then he had ſayd ſomewhat, for taking away his facillity, you take away his chiefe goodnes. The quadrate, the plaine ſtationes which ſtickes, the bare rule or ſquire, being wel handled, will do much more, as wel in great as ſmall diſtances, onely they want the like facillitie in vſe. Yea and G. Friſus him ſelfe for all his great boſtes before let fall was driuen ere he ended his booke to ſeeke another waye for his matters in maner quadrate wiſe, by hanging his croſſe

Staffe, as it were by the haire of the head, with his armes abroade, and then is his ſo well boaſted facillitye quite gone: Beſides that, the longeſt parte of your goodly inſtrumente is brought then to halfe the length of the croſſe, and a ſmall length of the ſtaffe, which in a ſtaffe of 5. foote length will bée but 15. inches, and in a ſtaffe of 9. or 10. foote, which no mans height can poſſibly reach to vſe in that manner without a ladder, the longeſt part will be little aboue 2. foote, and of that length though the facillity remained, a man might as eaſelye wilde a quadrate. And now conſidering that halfe the croſſe and 3. quarters of the ſtaffes length, is by this meanes abiect and to no vſe, who would carry all that wood about with him, except the weather were cold. Therefore to conclude, let no man be led away with the facillity of the Croſſe ſtaffe, or of any inſtrument, rather let him thinke no pains too great that produceth an exacte truth. And where as G. Friſius ſayeth, that his ſtaffe is quaedā ſcala geometrica, I ſay that my Staffe is not quaedam, but ſumma ſcala geometrica, that be is nobiliſſimū trigonū geometricū. For what may be doen by Triangles in Geometry, whole volumes do teſtifie, and my ſelfe in another treatiſe of this ſtaffe at ſome other time will partely manifeſt. And I ſay that he ſhalbe quoddam quadratum Geometricum and quidam radius Geometricus, and performe the vſe of his Radius more effectually then it performeth the quadrates vſe. What ſhould I ſay, it is Baculum Catholicon ſiue generaliſſimum, and ſhal recompence the tractable facillity of the croſſe ſtaffe, with his familiar palpaple vſe, as well in his performance of theſe menſurations, as his daily vſage for an ordinary and familiar walking ſtaffe. For which cauſe I haue named him Baculum Familliare, the Familliar ſtaffe.
            
            
               
               Chap 3.
               
                  Of the framing and faſhioning of this noble inſtrument, called the Familiar ſtaffe.
               
               
                  THis ſtaffe conſiſteth of two ſeuerall partes, or rather two ſeuerall ſtaues, the one I call the ſtanderd ſtaffe, the other the running ſtaffe. Both in manner like, very plaine to conceaue: being each but as it were, two ſtreight rulers iointed together, to open and ſhutte euen like an ordinary paire of compaſſes.
               The ſtanderd ſtaffe is here repreſented by this figure A B C, hauing his two legges or limmes A B and A C, ioyncted at A, each legge conſiſting of 3. rules, or narrow boordes 5. foot in length, of breadth and thicknes conuenient to carry it ſelfe ſtreight, of ſome ſuch wood as wil beſte keepe from warping, glewed and wrought together, ſo that both legs A B and A C being ſhutte cloſe: ther may be within it a concanity of one ynch and an halfe ſquare quite through to containe the running ſtaffe for eaſy carriage. After this: for eaſier handling in vſe, let this ſtanderd ſtaffe be brought into an 8. ſquare. And either lette the round or pomell of the ioincte A be of 4. inches diametre at the leaſte, hauing a ſcrewed pinne of yron throughe the centre with a ſcrewed boxe on the vnder

                   ſide to faſten or locke faſt the ſtaffe being open at anie angle or width: or els let ther be a third rule or graduator, like vnto that of the running ſtaffe, which is far more ſure if you may conuey him into the roome, and ſo may the ioynte A. be as ſlender as you will. Within the hollowneſſe of this legge are two channelles made in the vpper and lower ſides parrallell, to their fiduciall or centre lines: by or in which, two boltes or péeces of woode, vz. M. & N, do ſlippe to & fro carrying either two ſight pinnes halfe rounde, theyr plaine ſides running cloſe to the ſtaffe, euen with the fiduciall or centre lines, hauing each a pretie button or pearle on the top, thereby to direct the eie to anie marke: or els two halfe round deepe holes or ſockets, into which two like ſight pins or anie other kinde of ſightes may be put at anie time when you ſhall vſe them: other two like ſight pinnes, you muſt haue fixed néere vnto the centre, their flatte halfe rounde ſides euen alſo with the fiducial lines, on each

leg one. Thoſe two bolts or péeces carrying the two running ſight pins muſt haue each of them a ſpring of mettall, to cauſe them runne the more pleaſant, & alſo a ſcrewpin at all times to faſten them at anie part of the ſtandardeslegge. So much for the ſtandard ſtaffe.
               The running ſtaffe repreſented in this figure by E. D. F. is ye verie like to the ſtandard, being alſo but the like two legs or limmes D. E. and D. F. ioynted at D. each made of thrée rules or narrowe boordes of foure foote length and better, and of breadth and thickneſſe, conuenient to fill the hollownes of the ſtandard ſtaffe, hollow as the former, not eight ſquare, but foure ſquare. Herein it differeth, that at the point G. of the ſide D. E. twentie inches from D. the parte G. F. ſhall bee to take off and on with helpe of a ſquare ſocket or ſome ſcrewe, made in the end G. of the parte T. G. to be taken off, when it is to be vſed as ye Gūners quadrant, or to be ſet on at E. to inlarge the ſide D. E. as occaſion ſhal ſerue. Alſo at the point G. there muſt be ioynted another light foure ſquare hollowe ruler, viz. G. H. equall in length to G. F. which (the inſtrument ſhut together) muſt fall into the channels of G. F. and E. I. This ſquare ruler G. H. I call the Graduator, becauſe hee yeeldeth degrees. The centre of this graduators ioynt G. ſhall be euen with the middeſt of the breadth, and his length ſhal be ſuch, that taking D. I. in the ſide D. E. iuſt equall to D. G. and the running Staffe opened exactly to a ſquare angle, as here you ſee, that the extreame of the graduator, viz. H. which I will hence forth cal his Apex, may but iuſtly touch the point I. making there a right angled Aequicrurall triangle. And let the graduator haue at his Apex H. ſome deuiſe with a ſocket or payre of chéekes, or elſe annexed to ſome ſuch running bolt, as before in the ſtandard carrieth the ſightes, and a ſcrew pin to faſten him in anie parte of the ſide.
               There muſt be in thecentre D. a pinne turning round, hauing either an halfe round hole, quite thorough, to fit vpon the ſight pins which the running bolts of the ſtandard do carrie, or elſe an halfe round pin ſtanding out to fit into the halfe

round holes or ſockets of thoſe boltes. You muſt haue alſo for each ſide of this running Staffe, one running ſight or wing (as they call it) like vnto thoſe of the Croſſe Staffe, as in this figure you may ſée, & alſo two fixed ſight pins for eache end of

                     A Supporter.
                  
each ſide one parallel to the fiducial lines, which for diſtinction ſake, I will call ſight pegs: and muſt be ſo planted, that they may riſe and fall into the ſides, ſuffering the wings to ſlip ouer them when occaſion ſerueth. And if the ſtandard it ſelfe had on each legge the like paire of ſight pegs, it were not amiſſe.
               Your inſtrument thus prepared neatly in all pointes, as a workman can better of himſelfe tell how, then if I ſhoulde write much more. You ſhal diuide each legge of either of theſe ſtaues into as many inches as they will containe, beginning from the centres A. and D. and euerie inch, into eight partes, which partes ſhall ſignifie feete, paces, perches, pike lengths, or anie other kinde of meaſure that you ſhall vſe: ſo ſhall the fiue ſoote length of the legs A. B. and B. C. of the ſtandarde, containe each 480. equall partes, and the ſides D. E. and D. F. of the running Staffe as many like partes as it may containe, all which to be ſubdiuided againe, each into foure equall partes, and ſet numbers vnto them, encreaſing by tens, each ſorte of diuiſion drawen to his ſeuerall ſpace limbe-like, as vſually workemen can doe full well. Thus is your inſtrument

fully finiſhed, ſauing for his degrees, which in the next Chapter I will ſhew.
               Other neceſſaries there are appertinent, as a threed and plommet for the running Staffe, or els in ſtead thereof (which is much better both for vſe and carriage) ſome pretie rule of mettall, equall in length to D. G. heauy towardes the lower end, mouing pliant, ſometimes on the centre D, and ſomtimes on a pinne ſet on the hanging ſide of the ſtaffe, thereby at anie time to ſet him perpendicular to the Horizon. A copartner at all times to helpe, for that the inſtrument is great, a couple of ſupporters, if you will, which neede not be curious, they may be made of two ſtiffe ſtickes three or foure foote long, nayled together about three or foure inches from the vpper ende, ſo that they may open and ſhut vpon the nayle, making a forke aboue to reſt the ſtaffe in, as in this figure you ſee, or any other deuiſe you like better. But if anie man deſire to haue this Familiar Staffe made in a leſſe or more ſlender proportion then this before deſcribed, thereby to be more neate and fit for a dayly walking ſtaffe. Then let him haue no running ſtaffe at all, but ſet the graduator in the ſtandard it ſelfe, and haue a ſmall thyrd foure ſquare ruler, with a centre hole, in all reſpects like the one ſide of the running Staffe, looſe, to vſe at pleaſure. For ſo ſhall it be ſufficient enough for anie purpoſe, onely the running Staffe helpeth to doe all things with more ſpeede and facilitie, which two ſtandards alſo made in this ſorte may as well performe. For the one may ſerue in ſteade of the ſtandard, the other as the running Staffe.
            
            
               Cap. 4.
               
                  How you ſhall in a ſingular ſorte ſet degrees, on the leuell ſide of the running ſtaffe, and alſo on his Graduator, together with the points of the gunners quadrant.
               
               HAuing had the inuention and vſe of a geometricall inſtrument not much vnlike this my Familiar ſtaffe, nere theſe

7. yeares, but of much ſmaller ſize then my good wil deſired, becauſe I could neuer conclude with my ſelfe, how to compas conueniently without comber, the degrées of the circle thereon: neither yet what foot or reſt to cary him on, in vſing him, vntill now this ſuddeine occaſion miniſtred by my honorable frends in the 1. Chap. mentioned, did new ſett a ſharpe edge on my dull witts: yea although I conferred ſondry times with diuerſe mathematically geuen about the ſame. As for the foote or reſte which I coulde neuer deuiſe but very great and more comberſome then the ſtaffe it ſelfe, requiring a ſpare body to cary it: Now I meane that ſpare body ſhall ſupplye the vſe or ſtead thereof: as heareafter ſhall appeare, but for the graduacion you ſhall thus after a ſingular ſorte ſupply.
               The running Staffe framed, as in the laſt Chap. I wil call the ſide D E (whereon the graduators apex muſt run to and fro) the leuel ſide, becauſe in al queſtions for the moſt part it muſt be carried leuell with the horrizon. The ſide D F I will call the hanging ſide, becauſe in euery leuell the plum line muſt hang directty by it: the piece G F being taken from the ſide D F I will call the iointe piece, this knowen: you ſhall on ſome plain boorde of two foete bredth draw a ground line, vz. M F then on ſome point thereof, vz. D erecte the perpend: D K of 2. foote length at the leaſt: Wherein you ſhall ſette the pointe I. xx. inches iuſte from D, and likewiſe G as much from D, in the groundline D F, then on D with the quantity D K, deſcribe the ſemy circle M K L and on G with the quantity O I, deſcribe the ſemy circle N I F. This doen deuide the ſemy circle M K L into 180. degrees, and euerye degree into ſixe partes at the leaſt, with blinde notes: you ſhall alſo on the centre D with the quantity D I deſcribe the quadrante I G, which you ſhall deuide into 12. equall partes, which are called the 12. pointes of the gunners quadrante, and euery of thoſe 12. partes, againe you ſhall ſubdiuide into other 12. partes, which are called the minutes of a gunners quadrante, ſo haue you 144. partes.
               Thus is your ground plot laide, whereby to ſet on all your

graduations. Wherefore you ſhall now bring your runninge Staffe prepared as in the laſt Chap. & opening it to a ſquare angle, (which is doen when the apex of the graduator is fixed to the pointe I of the leuell ſide) place him now on this figure his centre D, on the point D of this figure, and ſo conſequently I vpon I, G vpon G, F vpon F &c.
               
                  The tipe of graduating this inſtrument, commended by the Author, to the ingenious matthematicall minded gentleman, Maſter Auditor Hill.
               
               The vppermoſt ſide of the graduator you ſhall deuide into 90 degréees, by a rule laide from D on euery diuiſion of the quadrante K L, and the vndermoſte ſide into the 144 partes of the gunners quadrante, by the quadrante I G in like manner: So is your graduator furniſhed with his partes, yf you draw certaine parallell lines, limbe like as the manner is, and adde but numbers to each of them: but now to ſet graduation in the leuell ſide D E you ſhall kéepe the hanging ſide D F, ſure fixed on the groundlyne M F keeping his former place, & bring the leuell ſide euen with it, ſhutting in the graduator cloſe out of ſight: then ſhall you open him againe till his fiduciall line doe cut one degrée aboue L of the ſemicircle M K L, and there lifte vp the graduator til his apex doe touch the leuel

ſide. Marke that touch point, for one degrée: then open the leuell ſide vnto 2. degrées aboue L, and there bring the graduators apex againe to touche, marke that touche pointe in the leuel ſide, for 2. degrées, and ſo doe from degrée to degrée of the whole ſemicircle M K L, marking ſtill the touch points in the leuell ſide, and you ſhall finde that the apex will touch that leuell ſide euer in the ſemicircle N I F but when you are once paſte 10. or 15. degrées, you ſhall make notes in like manner for euery ſubdiuiſion of eache degrée, and let theſe degrees be placed either in the vpper or lower flatte of the leuell ſide, it is no great matter which, and numbred from E ending at D with 180. degres, for note, that the euen partes mentioned in the laſt Chap. muſt be ſet on the inner or ſhutting flats of both ſides of this running Staffe.
            
            
               Chap 5.
               
                  How by this Familiar Staffe to trie whether a peece of ground be leuell, whereon to plant your peece of ordinance.
               
               
                  I Perceiued by that ſmall practiſe I ſawe in ſhooting, mentioned Of leuelling. in the firſt Chapter, that it is needfull to place a peece of Ordinance to be ſhot, on a leuell plot of ground, yt one wheele of theyr carriage goe not higher then another, leaſt in her recoile it make her ſhoote awrie: firſt ſticke ſome woodden pin in the ground, and reſting the centre of your running ſtaffe, (ſet at the ſquare angle) theron: lifting vp the hanging ſide, by helpe of a threed and plommet or plum rule, vntill the leuell ſide be exactly placed leuell with the Horizon: then ſhall you from that woodden pin extend a threed or line, euen by that leuell ſide of the Staffe ſo placed, and with another pinne alſo thruſt into the ground, there faſten it, then keeping ſtill the centre of your ſtaffe on his firſt pinne, turne about the leuel ſide ſomewhat wide from the line you haue ſtrained between the two pins, and there in the very like manner place another threed or line extended from the ſaid firſt pin by the leuell ſide

of the Staffe, and let the ſame be holden ſtiffe out with a third pinne: now laying your eie nere the ground, by theſe two lines or threeds ſo extended, you ſhal ſee whether any part thereof be higher then the leuell, to bee pared awaie, or lower, to bee filled vp E. A. N. is the running Staffe A. the firſt pin K. the ſecond, I. the third A. K. and A. I. the two threds or lines extended leuell with the Horizon P. the cie leuelling by the threeds, O. an hillocke to be pared awaie. 
               
            
            
               Chap. 6.
               
                  How by this Familliar Staffe to mount a peece of ordinance by pointes of the Gunners quadrate.
               
               HAuing by the laſt chap. leuelled the ground, whereon your Of mount
                        •…
                     
                   ordinance is to be planted, next followeth to know how to mount your peece vnto any point deſired, which is moſt eaſie: For your running Staffe ſet at this ſquere, pulling awaie the ioynt peece of the hanging ſide, ſo is that ſide the ſhorter by more then halfe. Then putting his leuell ſide into the peece vp to the verie apex of the graduator, there let it bee holden euen and leuell, with the bottome or loweſt ſide of the concauitie

                     A peece leuelled at point blanke.
                  
of the peece, then lifting vp or weighing downe the peece till the threed and plummet, or plumme rule, hanged out of the centre doe reſt euen with the fiduciall line of the hanging ſide, ther is your peece ſcituated leuel with the Horizon neither mounted nor embaſed anie point or minute, but euen at point blanke, as they call it. After this, if the peece be eleuated neuer ſo little aboue that leuell, then doeth

your thred and plummet or plum rule, ſhew on your gunners ſcale (appointed in the fourth Chapter, on the inner ſide of the graduator) to what point or minute the peece is eleuated for to ſhoote at randon, as they call it, yea, and if need be, it ſheweth you on the vpper ſcale of the graduator, the ſame randon

                     A peece mounted to ſhoote at randon.
                  
by degrées of the circle, which for anie thing I can ſee, might be applied to this purpoſe as wel as the gunners points.
            
            
               Chap 7.
               
                  By vvhat meanes a certaine table is to bee made, thereby to knowe hovv farr any peece vvill ſhoote at randon, beinge mounted to any poinct of the gunners quadrante.
               
               LEt no man thinke that I pretend to ſhewe the arte of ſhooting in great ordinance, being in deede a matter that I neuer tooke occaſion ſo much as to thinke of, before this time, but for that matter, do aduiſe euery man to repair vnto Tartaglia, which is lately engliſhed by M. Cyprian Lucar, & publiſhed. Who hath ſet down diuerſe ſingular conceites & obſeruances about the ſame, only to the end to ſharpen your taſt for the fruit of this my worke following. I thought good to preſent you with this inſtance out of Tartaglia, which in the next Chapter I meane alſo to applie to my Staffe. He giueth but a glance in his firſt booke, 1. Colloquie, that anie one peece being mounted from point to point, and minute to minute of the gunners quadrate, and the randomes or diſtances in paces of that peece taken at euerie ſeuerall mounting, and noted in a table (being carefully dealt in) would ſerue to know the randoms of any other péece likewiſe eleuated from point to point: if you do but know anie one ſhoot at anie one point eleuated of that other peece. For looke what proportion the ſhoot of any point of the firſt, beareth vnto any other point of the ſame peece. The like ſhall the randomes of anie two like pointes of the ſecond beare one to another.
               
                  
As for example: If the firſt péece ſhoote fortie paces at the firſt point, fiftie at the ſecond, ſixtie at the third, &c. Then if you ſhoote one ſhoote in another péece, which at the firſt point happily ſhooteth but thirtie fiue paces, and that by this one ſhoote knowne of this ſecond péece, you would before hand know how farre he ſhould ſhoote being eleuated to the third point. In this caſe you muſt by the rule of three (ſaith Tartaglia) ſeeke out a number in that proportion to thirtie fiue, as ſixtie is to fortie, which you ſhall finde 52. ½. paces: and ſo much ſhall this ſecond péece ſhoote, eleuated to the third point, if that Inſtaunce of Tartagliaes be true in it ſelfe. Although many ſecret accidents beſides may much alter it, as that the pouder at each ſhoot be like good & like much, the pellet of like waight, the péece of one temper, and ſuch like. For Tartaglia writeth amongſt many other experiments ſingular well by him diſcuſſed, which I am not any way to meddle with, that a péece being cold, ſhooteth not ſo farre at the firſt ſhoote, as with like charge hee doth at the ſecond or third being then temperatly hote: And after when ſhe is ouer hote with ſhooting, ſhe beginneth to ſhoote ſhorter againe: and ſheweth the reaſons thereof.
            
            
               Chap. 8.
               
                  Hauing made a table of randoms to ſome one peece according to the precepts in the laſt Chapter. How by this familiar ſtaffe, to make the ſame table ſerue for any other peece without any arithmetycall calculation.
               
               TRuely this inuention is very new: for it came into my Of prop
                        ••
                     
                     tion. head but euen as I was writing the laſt chapter, where you are taught Arithmetically to performe the ſame. But my familiar ſtaffe will not haue you troubled with numbers in ſuch daungerous times. Wherefore hauing your table made by ſome one péece exquiſitly ſhot in, and one ſhoote giuen of ſome other péece at ſome one certaine point or minute perfectly made. So haue you alwaies, as in the laſt

Chapter is ſhewed three numbers giuen: two out of your table: and the third is the ſhoote of the péece in action. You ſhall ſeeke the one of your two table numbers (it is no matter which) in the right legge of the ſtanderd ſtaffe, and thereto by helpe of the mouing ſight pin, place the centre of the running ſtaffe, ſet at his ſquare angle, or any other leſſe angle it is not materiall what: and direct the leuell ſide vnto the centre of the ſtanderd: There hold him till ye haue pulled too or thruſt out the left legge of the ſtanderd, ſo that it cut in the hanging ſide of the running ſtaffe your other table number. There wreſt the ſtanderd faſt at that angle by his centre ſkrew. Laſtly, ſeeke in the ſaid right legge of the ſtanderd the number of paces of the ſhoote giuen, and thither by helpe of the ſaid ſight pin, remoue the centre of your running ſtaffe, keeping his former angle, and his ſaid leuell ſide, directly ſtill with the centre of the ſtanderd, and queſtionleſſe the left legge of the ſtanderd ſhall there cut off in the hanging ſide of the running ſtaffe, the iuſt number of paces deſired.
               For example, it is admitted in the laſt Chapter, that the ſhoote of a peece eleuated vnto the firſt point was thirtie fiue paces, by which I would know how farre that peece would ſhoote, being mounted at the third point: I ſeeke in the Table there mentioned for ye ſame firſt point, there according to ye laſt chapter I finde fortye paces, and alſo for the  third point I finde ſixtie paces, which had, I ſeeke the biggeſt of thoſe table numbers, viz. 60. on the right legge of the ſtanderd: it endeth at B there I place the centre of the

running ſtaffe, being ſet at a venture at the angle C B A and apply his leuell ſide B A euen with the centre A of the ſtanderd, and there on his hanging ſide B C I ſeeke the other table number, that is fortie, at C. thither I bring the left legge of the ſtanderd to cut, and there locke him faſt to kéepe the angle C A B. That done I ſeeke the number of paces of the ſhoote giuen, that is to ſay thirtie fiue, on the ſaid right legge of the ſtanderd, that is to ſay at E and thither I remoue the centre of the running ſtaffe his leuell ſide, keeping ſtill the centre A and in both the ſtaues their angles before ſet C A B & A B C vnſtirred, and there doe I ſée the left legge of the ſtanderd to cut off in the running ſtaffe at D fiftie two ½ paces, the Random of this ſecond péece at the third point deſired: in all reſpectes the ſame which in the laſt Chapter you found by Arithmetike. So that vpon the matter you haue now learned the rule of thrée by Geometry, and is demonſtrated in Eucl. lib. 6. Propo. 10.
            
            
               Chap. 9.
               
                  If a Wall or Tower were to be ſcaled, and that you may come vnto the haſe of it without daunger, How by this familiar ſtaffe ſpedily to get the height thereof, thereby to make your ſcaling ladders according.
               
               IT hapneth often that it is thought more conuenient to win Of altit a towne or fort by ſcaling with ladders and ſuch like, then to batter it with ordinaunce. In ſuch a caſe where the walles may be come to, without daunger, it is ſo eaſie and common to get the height by any inſtrument, that I could ſcarſe ſpare it a roome, but that it may ſerue as a ground, or firſt introduction to the reſt. This my familliar ſtaffe as in the 2. chap. I ſaide, may be vſed in moſt caſes, eyther as himſelfe, or as the quadrante or circle, or as the quadrate, or as the croſſe ſtaffe, or as the gunners quadrant: and in this caſe indifferent to them all. For if you take your running ſtaffe ſet at his ſquare

angle, and apply the leuell ſide to your eye, lifting vp the centre till the line and plummet out of the centre do hange iuſtly on the 45. deg. or 6. gunners poinct of the graduator, which are both in one ſtreight line, what vpright ſoeuer you ſée, then euen with the leuell ſide the height thereof is equall to the diſtannce from you. In ſo much that when at any time you ſhall by this inſtrument or any other finde the altitude of the ſunne 45. deg. if then you runne and meaſure the ſhaddow of that tower or wall, the ſame ſhall be equall to the height therof, as moſt aucthors affirme, but in very déede it ſhall be leſſe then the height by ſo much as one quarter of a degrée cōmeth to, as in the treatiſe of my new Aſtronomicall ſtaffe not yet extant ſhall appeare: in the meane time take the ſhaddow at 44 ¾ degrées high, and the ſame ſhall be your deſire.
               But now, if you will doe it croſſeſtaffe wiſe, then ſet the extreme of the leuell ſide of the running ſtaffe to your eye carrying it ſquare to the vpright, as néere as you can, the hanging ſide vpwards and parallell to the wall, and go in or out ſo, till you may ſée the toppe of the vpright, euen with the toppe of the hanging ſide, and there ſhall you finde the diſtaunce to the  wall equall to the height thereof, as before. And if you place the wing in the middeſt of the hanging ſide, and by that ſée the

toppe from the extreme of the leuel ſide, then is the diſtance to the vpright double to the height, if at a fourth part from the centre, then is the diſtance 4. times the height, &c. For example in this figure the running ſtaffe ſet at his ſquare angle, and carried ſquare to the wall as you ſée: if you go in or out till you might ſee the toppe P of the tower R P euen by the extreames E and F there ſhall the diſtance from your ſtanding to the tower be equall to P S, then adding thereto your height viz. R S, you haue the height deſired. And if you chuſe your ſtation ſo that you ſée P by the extreame E of the leuel ſide and the wing H: and that H be one 4 part of D F from D, then is E S foure times the height P S, becauſe D H is foure times in D E: in like manner H being ſet at halfe or a third part, &c.
            
            
               Chap. 10.
               
                  To performe the laſt cap. Where you dare not come neere the baſe of the tower for daunger of ſhot or let by reaſon of ſome deepe mote or ditch.
               
               I Will firſt in this Chap. ſhewe 
                     〈…〉
                   by this familiar Of altitu ſtaffe to do this feate after 
                     〈…〉
                   mer almoſt of the Croſſe-ſtaffe, which many 
                     〈…〉
                   ell, and in the next chap. after his owne faſhion, a 
                     〈…〉
                   may as well be applied to a wall or vpright approchable.
               Take your running ſtaffe ſet at his ſquare angle: and place the wing of his hanging ſide neere about the middeſt thereof, or as occaſion ſhall ſerue: fixed: then applying your eye to the extreame of the leuell ſide, directed right againſt the wall or tower in manner of thel laſt chap. chuſing you a ſtation ſomewhat farre from the wal, where from thextreame of the leuell ſide you may ſée the toppe of the wall, by the ſayd wing before fixed: which done, then ſhall you place the running ſight of the leuell ſide from his extreame towards the Centre, halfe or a quarter, or iuſt ſo much as the ſayde wing before fixed in the hanging ſide is placed from the Centre of the ſtaffe, and there

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
let this wing alſo be fixed. Then chuſe you a ſecond ſtation (going in towards the wall) carrying the inſtrument plum as before, till you may againe ſee the toppe thereof by both theſe fixed wings. Laſtly, meaſure the diſtance betweene both your ſtations for the ſame ſhall be eyther the whole, the halfe, or quarter of the height of the wall you ſeeke, according as you did ſet the laſt wing from thextreame of the leuell ſide, eyther the whole, the halfe, or quarter the length of the firſt wing from the Centre, adding thereto when you haue doone the height of your eye aboue the baſe of the vpright.
               For example, Admit you placed the wing of the hanging ſide 120. euen partes from the centre of the ſtaffe, viz. at H by which at the firſt ſtation viz M and thextreame of the leuell ſide of your ſtaffe, viz. E you ſée the toppe of the wall of the tower, viz. P by the viſiall line E P. That done, then place the wing of the leuell ſide E D one halfe of D H (being 120. parts as is ſayd) viz. 60. euen partes from E at I, and ſéeke you a ſtanding nearer to the tower P R, where you may euen by the winges H and I ſée P the toppe thereof againe viz. at N, 
                   then meaſuring the diſtance betwéene your ſtations M and N which admit to be 20. foote. I conclude becauſe D H 120. parts is twiſe ſo much as E I 60. parts that the height of the tower

from the toppe vnto the height or leuell of mine eye, viz. P S is twiſe 20. foote, viz. fortie foote: and if néede be you may vſe the helpe of the 5. or 6. note of the 15. chap. following.
               But here I can no longer delay, but warne you of two things in this working, both which, G. Friſius halfe wineketh at in the vſe of his Croſſe Staffe, becauſe he would haue it commended forſooth for facillity. But I haue euer deteſted that facillity that ſhould produce any abſurdity. The one is, that the hanging ſide of our inſtrument be parallel to the wal, the other, that your eye in both ſtations be ſett in one leuell, that is to ſay, no higher aboue the baſe in the one ſtation, then in the other, both which are fowle faults to be admitted, if the vpright ſhould be far of: yet are eaſely ſalued with a little paines. And I earneſtly exhort euery practiſer in theſe actions, to defy that eaſe, that ſhould ſhame him ſelfe & bringe his arte in queſtion: a notable faulte amongſt moſte of our land meaſurers in theſe daies, I meane thoſe that meaſure by platt, who partly by want of skill in Geometry, partly by want of perſeuerance and knowledge in other ſciences and faculties, wherwith a perfect ſurueior ought to bee adorned and furniſhed: and chiefly by want of induſtry, paines and diligence, doe bring them ſelues and a moſt excellent Science into diſdaine and obloquy, when as ſeldome two of them can produce one meaſure or like plat of one ſelf groūd, and that which more is, ſcarce one of them ſhal agre with him ſelfe. I meane produce at his ſecond meaſurement either the ſame platt or the ſame meaſure which he did at the firſt. But God willing when ſo euer I ſhall goe in hand to write againe of this inſtrument, I ſhall ſett downe moſte certaine ſalues for euery ſore in thoſe caſes. In the meane time, to retourne vnto the two errors, that might accreaue to this matter we haue in hand: they are eaſely ſalued with no pains at all in reſpect: becauſe the greatnes of the Staffe requireth an aſſiſtaunte or partner at the further end: who ſhal diſcharge you thereof. The firſt is eaſie remedied by a plum line, or rather a plum rule mentioned in the third Chapter, applied to

the hanging ſide, as in the ſecond Chapter was ſaide, which your partner may eaſely guide whiles he ſtayeth theend for you, eſpecially hauing an halberd pitched in the ground to help him reſt his hand ſteddy. The ſecond as eaſy ſalued by a ſpare halberd, or a ſtaffe pitched ſomewhat farther in towards your vpright then your ſecond ſtation ſhall be: which halberd ſhall haue a bright marke viz. Q placed on it, euen with your eie at the firſt ſtation, by which marke Q you and your partner may eaſely direct the leuel ſide of your inſtrument at both ſtations of one height. Note that whatſoeuer is before written of altitudes, the ſame doth G. Friſius, Chapter ſeuenth de Rad. Geo. conuert to the latitudes or diſtaunces betwéen two markes, towers or trées, willing you to beare the croſſe aſide, and not vpright, and to take care that you ſtand ſquare to the latitude as néere as you can, ſaying, a litle awry will doe but a litle harme. You may not doubt do it as well by this Familiar Staffe, as by the Croſſe Staffe: but I will not bid you to do ſo much as a little harme, leſte you doe a litle more, and then all ſtarke naught. I meane to teach you a better way in my 21. Chapter.
            
            
               Chap. 11.
               
                  How by this Familiar Staffe to performe the laſt Chapter another way, more exacte for long diſtaunces, the more ſafelye to keepe you out of daunger of the ſhotte of the forte, vvhiles you are in action.
               
               
                  HItherto we haue but as it were borrowed the precepts of the Croſſe Staffe to fitt the fancy of ſome, who I hope will not deny but that this my Familliar Staffe performeth Of altitude. them with no leſſe facillity, and no great alteration: yet as in the laſt Chapter I ſayd, my earneſt care of exacte trothes will not ſuffer me to aduiſe you to relye vpon them, for anye altitude aboue a bowe ſhoote of, as in the ſecond Chapter I touched, for many cauſes too long here to recite. But in

caſe the vpright be far from you, whoſe height you ſeeke, then ſhall the proper and naturall working of this my Familliar Staffe ſerue your turne much better in this manner. You ſhall firſt by helpe of two ſtationes as in the fiftéenth, ſeuentéenth or twenty Chapter following is taught, get the diſtaunce from you to the baſe of the wall or tower, viz. howe many féete, yards, paces, or other meaſure, it is from your firſt ſtation: thoſe reckon on the leuell ſide of your runninge Staffe from the centre, and thereto place the wing fixed: that one, ſet that wing to your eie (placed iuſt ouer your ſtation) directing the centre of your Staffe to the wall, and let your partener kéepe the hanging ſide plumne by the plum rule, and with al, be reddy with his hand to moue the wing of the hanging ſide, by direction of your eie, ſo much aboue the centre till your ſelfe may from the ſayd winge at your eie, by this ſecond wing ſée the toppe of the wall or tower. Then ſée what euen parts are contained betwéene the centre and this ſecond wing on the hanging ſide, for ſo many ſéete high is the toppe of the tower aboue the leuell of your eie.
               
               For example, admitte you had by the fiftéenth, ſeuentéenth or twenty Chapter following, found the diſtance from the ſtation N in this figure, vnto the poincte of the towre leuel with

your eſe viz. S. to be an hundreth pace or fiue hundreth foote, all is one, but that in getting the altitude of any thing, the rekoning had néede to be kept in féete, though for diſtances or longitudes, paces, perches, pike-lengthes, or any other may ſuffice: thoſe hundred paces I reckon on the leuell ſide of the Staffe, they end at I. where I place the wing. Then directing the centre of my Staffe, viz. D. to the towre or wal, I cauſe my partner to lifte vp the wing of the hanging ſide, vntill it come directly betwéene I and the towre top, viz. at H then I looke on the Staffe what euen partes I finde betwéen the ſighte H and the centre D, admit I finde eight. Therefore I conclude, that wall or tower to be eight paces highe, which is forty foote, and in this working you ſhall take helpe if néede bée of the fifte or ſixe notes of the fiftéenth Chapter following.
            
            
               Chap. 12.
               
                  How you ſhall know by this familiar ſtaffe, the depth vnder the iuſt leuell of your eye, of the baſe of any tower vnaprochable when the ſame baſe is to be ſeene.
               
               SUch may be the aduantage of the ground whereon wee make our ſtations, that the leuell of our eye may be much Of profunditie. aboue the baſe, and then are we not ſatiſfied for the height of the vpright, if it be vnaprochable: wherefore when you haue by the laſt Chapter gotten the height of the wall or towre aboue the leuell of your eye: note then ſome marke on the wall, euen with that leuell: and ſo may you as eaſily and by the ſelfe ſame meanes get the depth of the baſe vnder the leuell, as in the laſt Chapter you got the height of the toppe aboue the leuell. There is no difference in the worke, but that you muſt turne the extreame F of the hanging ſide of the ſtaffe dounewards, and ſet the wing thereof iuſtly betwéene the wing I, and R the baſe of the towre, that is to ſay at X as in the laſt Chapter you did ſet it at H betweene I and the top of the towre P, and the partes of the ſtaffe betweene the centre

                  D and the wing at X ſhall be your deſire. Which added to the former height P S maketh vp the full height from the toppe to the baſe, that is P R.
               
               But where the ground hath no great aduantage of the vpright, I would neuer wiſh you to make two workes of one, for if it be leuell with the baſe of the towre, it is a ſmall matter to lay your ſelfe downe and worke the laſt Chapter cloſe by the ground: if it be lower then the baſe, then place the leuell of your eye no more aboue it, then that it may direct to the baſe: ſuch like ſmall matters he that could not of himſelfe prouide for, I would not haue him allowed for an executioner of theſe ſeruices.
               
               Note, that if you liſt not in this working to turne the hanging ſide of your ſtaffe downewards, or that the ground will not admit it to ſinke ſo low as the leuell of your eye marked on the towre, you may worke it as well and eaſily, kéeping the hanging ſide vpwards, in ſuch maner as in the twentie ſixe Chapter following is taught: and then muſt you kéepe the centre of the ſtaffe ouer the ſtation N and direct the extreme E of the leuell ſide towardes the towre or vpright, as by the bare inſpection of the triangle I V O of the figure of the ſame twentie ſixe Chapter: you may eaſilye conceaue.

The quantitie I. V. of the ſtaffe, ſhewing the depth of the point C vnder X the leuell of the eye in that figure as here the quantitie D X ſheweth the depth of the point R vnder the point S leuell with the eye in this figure.
            
            
               Chap. 13.
               
                  To knowe the length of the ſcaling ladder to reach ouer the ditch to the toppe of the wall or tower.
               
               THe height of the wall or tower together with the diſtance thereof from your ſtation firſt had by the 11. and 15. chapters and helpe of the 12. then meaſure from that ſtation directly towardes the tower till you come at the out ſide of the ditch where the foote of the ladder muſt ſtande, take that meaſure out of the whole diſtance, keepe the remaine, and then as in the 30. chap. ſhall be ſhewed, prooue with your leuell whether the footing of the ladder be no higher or lower then the baſe of the wall, if it be higher, then take it out of the height, if lower, adde it thereto, and keepe that number alſo. Nowe ſhall you reckon the firſt number kept on the leuell ſide of your ſtaffe, ſet at his ſquare angle, and the ſecond number kept on the hanging ſide, and there make notes then applying the ioynctpeiſe or any part of the ſtanderd betweene thoſe notes you may thereon tell with a ſticke as they ſay, howe many foote long your ladder ſhall he.
               For example in the figure of the 11. chap. T is the footing of the ladder, M the ſtation, M T meaſured and taken out of M R leaueth R T the firſt number kept, this point T is ſo far vnder the leuell of the eye, as W T or S R commeth to, therefore adde it to P S, ſo haue you R S your ſecond number kept, and thoſe two numbers reckoned on the ſeuerall ſides of the running ſtaffe as is ſayd, and the ioynctpeiſe layde betweene them yeildeth you the Hypothenuſa P T which muſt needes be the length of the ſcaling ladder deſired.
            
            
               Chap. 14.
               
                  How at any ſtation either by the ſtanderd or running ſtaffe the

angle of ſtation or poſition betweene any two markes or places is to be taken two ſeuerall wayes.
               
               
                  I Am not ignorant that an angle of poſition in Geography 
                  Of tal angles. is the angle comprehended betweene the viſuall line directed vnto any place appointed, and the meridian line of your being. But if we call the angle made by two lines iſſuing from one place or ſtation vnto other two places, an angle of poſition (though happily more aptly to be termed an angle of ſtation) the matter is not great, being it is the angle of poſition or placing of the one place from the other in reſpect of your ſtation. This angle ſhall moſt caſely by this familiar ſtaffe two waies be taken, the firſt eaſie and familiar to  conceaue, the ſecond more eaſie and familiar to be performed.
               For the firſt way ſuppoſe P your place of ſtation and N and T the two places or markes whoſe angle of ſtation or poſition you ſeeke. Let your partner and you get ech of you your ſupporter mentioned in the 3. chap. on which two ſupporters, you ſhall ſo reſt the one legge of your ſtaffe, viz. A C. (his centre iuſt ouer your ſtatiō marke, viz. ouer P yt you may by the ſight pinnes, or pegges of that legge ſée the one of your places, vz. N:
                  
there looke that leg of your ſtaffe lye faſt on his reſt, leauing that to your partners charge by his ſteddy holding of his ſupporter both with hand and knee. That legge ſo ſetled euen with the mark N, you ſhall gentlye open the other legge A B lifting it vp and downe withall, vntill by the two toppes of the ſight pinnes of that legge A B you may ſee the other mark T, and there with your centre ſcrew pinne, locke your ſtaffe faſt at that angle T A N: for the ſame is the angle of ſtation or poſition deſired. And if you take this angle by the running ſtaffe in this manner, then doth the graduators apex alſo ſhew you the degrees which that angle contayneth on the leuell ſide of the ſtaffe. But for your ſupporters, it is not materiall to make ſuch reckoning of them as to be choiſe about them: for two ſtickes pulled out of an hedge, knit together with a point towardes the one ende may ſerue for a ſhift. Or if a Captayne haue but his halberd, let him ſticke it faſt in the ground vpright, and with his garter tye the one ende of the legge of the ſtaffe thereto, he may then vſe the other at his pleaſure without helpe. Or ſometimes he may reſt him to a tree, or on the very barrell of the Cannon. In theſe caſes I would haue no man tyed to precepts, but be ready to ſupply as occaſion ſhall miniſter.
               Now for the ſecond waie, let year ſtation be P. and let L. & T. be the two places or markes, whoſe angle of poſition you ſéeke. Sticke your dagger or anie ſtick vpright in the ſtation marke P. in the ground, and thereon reſt the centre, viz. A. of the ſtandard or running ſtaffe. Then applie your eie vnto the extreame of his one legge, viz. to B. and let your partner apply his eie to the extreame of the other leg, viz. to C. each of you opening his leg by little and little ſo wide, till your ſelfe ſee the mark T.
                  
by the ſight pins or pegs of the leg  
                  A. B. & your partner ſée the marke L. by the ſights of the legge A. C. & there wreaſt faſt your Staffe at that angle C A. B. for the ſame is equall to the angle T. A. L. by Eucly. lib. 1. propoſ. 15. which is the angle of poſition betwéene the marks T. and L. deſired. And if you performed it by the running ſtaffe, then ſhall the graduators aper, as before among the degrees or graduation of the leuell ſide, ſhew you alſo what that angle is, and how many degrées of the circle it containeth. Yea, your partner and you may as well and more ſpeedily doe it without anie dagger or reſt, but that a reſt may happilie guide the centre of the ſtaffe iuſt ouer the marke. Note alſo, that in taking the angle in this manner by the running ſtaffe, let the leuell ſide be firſt directed to his marke, and let him that directeth it, pull the apex of the graduator to and fro, till his partner finde the hanging ſide opened euen with the other marke.
            
            
               Chap. 15.
               
                  How (in manner of the firſt and plaineſt meanes, mentioned in the laſt Chapter, to take the angle of poſition) to get the moſt

exact diſtance of a Caſtle or Fort from you, yea though the ſame Fort be tvvo or three miles off or more, vvhereby you may knovv hovv to place your maine battel as neere as may be vvithout danger of ſhot from the Fort, and alſo in vvhat ſpace you may march to the ſame vvhen you vvill.
               
               ALL this while we haue about altitudes reckoned vppon feete or paces at the greateſt, but now ſhall we for longitudes Of longitude or diſtance. or diſtances, deale (& that as certainly) with paces, perches, pike lengths, or miles, which commeth neere the ſubſtance of our pretence, and ſhall be farre more eaſie then the premiſes.
               Firſt come to the place where the ground ſerueth you beſt to place your Canon, there make a marke for your firſt ſtatition, then ſend ſome ſpare bodie a conuenient diſtance off, that waie, which you finde the ground fitteſt, ſo it be not directlie backwards or forwards, to ſet you vp another mark for your ſecond ſtation. Which done, you ſhall with your ſtandard ſtaffe after the firſt manner of the laſt Chapter, take the angle of poſition betweene your ſecond ſtation, and ſome one pinacle or other notable marke of the Caſtle or forte, thereat locke your ſtaffe by helpe of the centre ſcrewe at that angle that you may carry him ſafely without ſagging, vnto your ſecond ſtation. This done, you ſhall goe to the other ſtation, meaſuring the diſtance betweene with a wyre chaine, morice pikes, or how you will, but moſt exactly, be ſure. Thoſe perches or pike lengths you ſhal reckon on that leg of your ſtanſtard ſtaffe, which you before directed to your ſtation, by the euen parts and numbers theron ſet: and to the end of that rexkoning place, the running bolt or ſight of that legge, and there fixe him by help of his ſcrew pin. Then place your ſtaffe again at this ſecond ſtation on his ſupporters, ſo that this fixed ſight pin be directly ouer the marke of the ſecond ſtation, and the centre end directed towards the firſt ſtation, which your partner ſhall ſupport, and lifte vp the other legge withall, putting to and fro the running fight of that legge by your commandement

and direction, vntill that your ſelfe doe finde the foreſayd marke, hole or pinacle, directly euen with the knops or tops of both the running ſight pins. And then looke what number of partes you finde there ſhewed in that further legge by the ſecond ſight pin: ſo many paces, perches, or pike lengths is that marke or pinacle frō your firſt ſtation.
               
                  gunnery diagram
                  
                     
                        P. the firſt ſtation where you woulde place your Canon
                        K. or rather N. the ſecond ſtation.
                        T. a marke in the tower to bee battered.
                        R. and S the two ſupporters,
                        A B C the ſtandard ſtaffe placed on his ſupporters,
  
                              his centre A at the firſt ſtation placed ouer the marke P,
                              his one legge A C directed to the ſecond ſtation at K
                              his other leg A B to the marke T in the tower.
                              T A C, the angle of poſition taken at the ſtation P.
                           
                        
                     
Admit the diſtance betweene the ſtations P and K, to be fortie perches or pike lengths that number fortie I ſeeke in the legge A C, it endeth at N, there I ſet the running ſight N fixed, which at this ſecond ſtation K, I place iuſt ouer K, directing the centre A to P (the angle of poſition B A C vnſtirred) M. the running

ſight of the other legge, ſet directly, betweene the pinacle T, and the ſight N: ſo ſhall the number of partes comprehended betweene A and M on the leg A C, ſhew you the exact diſtance from the firſt ſtation A, vnto the pinacle, in ſuch meaſure as you meaſured between your ſtations P and K.
               
               Many things might be noted, which in halfe a daies practiſe will be eaſier found, then though I ſhoulde write many nights.
               1 Firſt, the greater diſtance that your two ſtations are in ſunder, except they be vnreaſonable much further then the marke: the more certaine is your working.
               2 The ſharper that the angle is made betweene the legges of the Staffe, as for example, F A K in this ſecond figure or the blunter, as G A K: The greater diſtance of the ſtations is required: otherwiſe the point of Croſſing either at F or G, will hardly appeare.
               For theſe cauſes you muſt vſe as much diſcretion in pointing your ſecond ſtation as the ground  will allow you. The beſt is, when your marke maketh an equicrurall triangle with your ſtations or neare about, as D A N and this requireth leaſt diſtance betweene your ſtations. Wherefore if you may chuſe your ground, point your ſecond ſtation ſo, that you neuer open the legges of your ſtaffe much more or leſſe then the right angle, though you make your ſtations the ſhorter: a litle leſſe is alwaies beſt, but neuer much bigger then a right angle if you can poſſible chuſe: if ſo, then make your ſtations the longer.
               4. If you meane to get an exact diſtance, you had néede (yea by your beſt poſition) let the diſtance betweene your ſtations be no leſſe then one eight part of the diſtance to your

marke as neare as you can imagin. Otherwiſe you ſhall hardly get the true point of croſſing, as you may perceiue at H: or at the leaſt let it be neuer leſſe then one twelſe parte: either of which are eaſie to be had in a ſmall ground, and will ſerue for a great diſtance: for fortie pearches is but a reaſonable diſtance for two ſtations, and are to be found commonly in a ſmall cloſe, and yet that is the eight part of a myle of a thouſand pace, and it is the twelfth part of your common longeſt vſuall myles.
               5 Other ſmall conceites are to be noted as if the diſtance of the ſtations in the laſt example were ſo ſmall, that in account on the legge A C of your ſtaffe it falleth out ſo neare the handle, that the running ſight N might not be brought thereto: then may you ſet your ſight N at double that number, and when you haue done, take halfe the number found on the legge A B betweene A and the ſight M for youre diſtance deſtred, or if you ſet him at thriſe or foure times, and in the end take a third part or quarter of that you finde, all commeth to one paſſe. Yea if the diſtance be very ſhort, you may reckon euery tenne but for one, and then if you r
                     ••
                  ct one cyphare from euery number your ſtaffe is readie figured to your contentinent.
               6 One thing I had almoſt forgotten: for as in rekoning the diſtance of your ſtations on the legge A C you ſhall euer be rather led to encreaſe your ſcale, as in the fift note I ſhewed, eſpecially, for ſhort diſtances or longitudes, as they call them: So contrary wiſe for long diſtances, when as the mark deſired is a myle or two from you, except your ſtations bee made much the larger, you ſhall be driuen to place halfe, or a third, or a quarter of your ſtationary diſtance betwéene A and N: and then take the double, treble, or quadruple of that you finde betweene A and M, for your deſire, as in ſteade of the fortie perches betwéene P and K to haue ſet twentie or ten euen partes betwéene A and N. Yea, or if your ſtations had béene fortie ſeuen: (here becauſe fortie ſeuen is not eaſily parted into a quarter becauſe of the fraction) you might firſt

worke by a quarter of the euen number, that is to ſay of fortie, and then worke by the ſeuen by it ſelfe, and adde the two productes, as if by ten you found an hundreth perches, you muſt take foure hundreth for thoſe: and then working by the odde ſeuen, you ſhall get ſeuentie more to bee added to foure hundreth, ſo is your whole diſtance foure hundreth and ſeuentie.
               Alſo you muſt prouide to haue two bright markes flickering ouer both your ſtations till you haue done, that you bee aſſured iuſtly to take your leuell.
            
            
               Chap. 16.
               
                  Of the Geometricall ground, and familar proofe thereof, wheron the vvhole working by this familliar Staffe dependeth.
               
               AS I haue thought it very requiſite to ſhew the grounde platte of theſe precepts in hand, ſo it were in vaine for mée here to iterate any expoſitions or diffinitions of vſuall termes Geometricall, ſince they are now a dayes very common, and are of Euclide and diuerſe other recited, and of me in my Mathematicall Iewell 1. booke ſufficiently declared. Underſtand therefore that if in any triangle you drawe a line parallell to any one ſide, the ſame line ſhal cut of a triangle like, & equiangled to the former. For example within the triangle A B C let there bee  drawen the line D E parallell to C B I ſay that ye triangle A D E is equiangled to the triangle A B C, that is to ſay, the angle

                  E is equall to the match angle B, and the angle D to the angle C, and the angle A of the one, to the angle A of the other, for the angle A is common to both, & alſo the triangle A D F, ſhall be like to the triangle A B C, that is to ſay, what proportion the ſides of A D E beare one vnto another, the like proportion doe the ſides of A B C beare one to another. For Familiar proofe of the firſt, open your compaſſes at auenture, and with one ſcantlet on the centres B and E, deſcribe two ſeuerall arches cutting the ſeuerall ſides, encluding the ſame angles B and E, as you ſee F G and H I, and thoſe two arches you ſhall finde by your compaſſe to be iuſt equall the one to the other, and therefore of neceſſity the angles F and B ſubtended by thoſe arches are equall: in like manner may you proue the angle D to be equal vnto the angle C, and being the angle A common to both, therefore the triangles are equiangled, if you deſire more artifyciall proofe, repaire to Euclide lib. 1. propoſ. 29. and lib. 6. propoſ. 5. 6. and 7. Likewiſe for Familiar proofe of the ſecond, deuide any one ſide of the triangle A B C into ſome nomber of euen parts, admiſte the ſide B C into ten equall parts, then deuide the match ſide of the other triangle into the like number of parts, viz. D E into ten equall parts alſo, then meaſure with your compaſſe how many of thoſe parts of B C are contayned in the ſide A B of the triangle A B C, and you ſhall be ſure to finde the like nūber of the parts of D E in the match ſide A E of the triangle A D E, and as many parts of B C as are in A C, ſo many parts of D E are in A D: therefore are they ſaide to be like and proportionall. This Familiar proofe I haue thought beſte for my Familiar Staffe: for artificial proofe ſéeke Euclide, lib. 6. propo. 4. 5. 6. and 7. Euen ſo in the figure of the laſt Chapter at the ſecond ſtation K, the leg A B of your ſtanderd Staffe doth cut the maine triangle T K P or rather

                  T N A by the line M A parallell to the ſyde  
                  T A, making within the iurisdiction of the Staffe, the triangle N M A equiangled, and like to N T A. Therefore being that N A is appointed ſo many euen partes as K P containeth euen perches, it followeth of neceſſity, yt what euen parte you finde betwéene M A, there muſt alſo be ſo many euen perches in T A, which is the longitude or diſtance deſired. Note that the letter A wanteth in this figure at the ſtation K.
               
               Note alſo that if in the former figure you drawe the line O P parallell to A C, and R S parallell to A B, they ſhall make a litle triangle in the bely of A B C, viz. K L M equiangled, and like to A B, yea and euery triangle that you can picke out in the ſame figure is equiangled, and like to A B C, and therefore each of them to other. Thus haue I opened you a great breach, which if you throughly entre and poſſeſſe, you may be able alwaies to atchieue theſe maiſtres without booke at all times of neede.
            
            
               
               Chap. 17.
               
                  How to performe the fifteenth Chapter with more facillity by meanes of the ſecond manner of taking the angle of poſition mentioned in the 14. chap.
               
               LEt no man be amazed at this working for it is all one in Of longit
                        •…
                      or diſtan
                        •…
                     
                   ſubſtance with the 15. Chapter, but oppoſitely performed, which in diuerſe partes of the Mathematickes produceth the ſame troth as the direct way doth. For many times Oppoſitorum eadem eſt ratio, if I ſhall familiarly ſhewe you the difference it may be compared vnto a cupple of men going together towardes one place, the one with his face forwardes, the other backwardes, the matter is no more difficult, therefore marke it well. Let P and K be your two ſtations, & T the tower whoſe diſtance you ſéeke from  your firſt ſtation P. You ſhall therefore at P with your ſtanderd ſtaffe after the ſecond manner of the 14. chap. take the angle of Poſition betweene T and your ſecond ſtation K, or rather L directly ouer it, as in this figure you ſée C A B, and locke faſt your ſtaffe at that angle of poſition, for it is the oppoſite angle of T A L, and equall vnto it by Eucl. lib. 1. propoſ. 15. as in the 14. chap. was ſhewed. Then repayre vnto your ſecond ſtation K, meaſuring the exact diſtaunce betwéene

your ſtations with ſome wyer cheyne or moryce pykes, and according to that meaſure place the running ſight of that leg of the ſtaffe, which at P was directed to K, viz. at L. This ſight L there fixed, you ſhal now place directly ouer your ſecond ſtation, by reſting it on your dagger or ſome ſticke ſtuck into the ground, and let your partner (applying the centre of the ſtaffe to his eye) direct the ſame legge againe to the firſt ſtation P by helpe of the ſight pegges, as here you ſee. And then your ſelfe ſhall mooue too and fro the running ſight of the other legge vntill you may place it ſo that by it you may ſee the tower T, euen with the ſight before fixed at L, viz. at O, by the viſuall line O L T. To conclude then, I ſay, that the euen part of the ſtaffe cut by the ſight O, ſhall ſhew you the exact diſtance of the tower T from your firſt ſtation P. The certainty hereof may well be prooued by the laſt chap. for the angle L A O is all one with the angle N A M becauſe the ſtaff is faſt lockt to that angle, and therefore equall to T A L being but the oppoſite angle of N A M the angle A L O being alſo oppoſite to T L A, is therefore equall vnto it by Euclyde lib. 1. propoſ. 15. and when two angles of any tryangle are equall vnto two angles of another tryangle, the thirde angles can not chuſe but bee equall by Eucl. lib. 1. propoſ. 26. then ſéeing the tryangle L A O is equiangled to L A T therefore of neceſſitie they muſt be like, and their ſides proportionall by Eucl. lib 6. Prop. 4. and A T bereath that proportion to A L as O A doth to A L of the tryangle O A L, as if within the tryangle A T L you did ſet the tryangle A L O you ſhould eaſily conceaue. Or if you turne the figure vpſide downe, then ſhall the working ſeems all one with that of the fiftenth Chapter, the Angle A M N being equall to A L O.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. 18.
               
                  In caſe that a Caſtle or fort were digged out of ſome rocke, or ſcituate in ſome valley betweene two hilles, admitting but ſome narrow comming vnto it, and therefore enforcing your two ſtations to be one directly behind another. Hovv yet by this familiar staffe you ſhall attaine the diſtance of the ſame from you.
               
               FIrſt come as neare the wall as you can without danger, Of longitu or diſtance ſo that it be not ouer neare, and take your running ſtaffe ſet at his ſquare angle, and both the winges placed on the hanging ſide. Apply the extreame of his leuel ſide to your eye, carrying him as leuell as you can, and there looke where aboute you may place the vpper wing to ſee the toppe of the wall, but yet at ſome euen number of fiues or tennes be ſure becauſe of after reckoning. The vpper wing ſo placed to remaine fixed, then let your partner and you together ſettle your ſtaffe a litle further or neare (his hanging ſide kept plumbe) till you may from the extreame of the leuell ſide, ſee the higheſt part of the wall or tower euen with the ſaid fixed wing. Marke that ſtation on the ground. Then goe backe a good quantitie, and there chuſe another ſtation, doing in the very ſame manner with the other wing, placing him alſo fixed at ſome euen ten or fiue. Then meaſure exactly the diſtance betwéene thoſe two ſtations: For looke ſo many times as the euen partes or diſtance betweene the two winges, are contained amongſt the euen partes from the centre of the ſtaffe to the vpper wing: ſo many times is the meaſurement betweene your two ſtations contained in the whole length betwéene your furtheſt ſtation and the wall.
               
                  
                  
               
               As for example, admitte that the diſtance betwéene the ſtations M and N were twentie pearches, and that at the inner ſtation N you ſet the one wing, to wit L at two hundreth perches from D the centre of the ſtaffe, and there fixed. And at M the outer ſtation, you ſet the other wing, that is to ſay H at an hundreth and fiftie partes. Your ſtations M and N ſo choſen, that at N you ſee the toppe of the towre, to wit P, by the viſuall line E L P, and at M, by the viſuall line E H P. The number of euen partes (by taking an hundreth and fiftie out of two hundreth) I finde fiftie, betweene the winges L and H. Now I conclude becauſe L H that is to ſay fiftie, is foure times contained in L D: two hundreth therefore foure times the diſtance of M N that is, foure times twentie perch is the true diſtance from M the outermoſt ſtation vnto the towre, to wit, the length of M R.
               
               Another way is thus, get the altitude of the towre top aboue the leuell of your eye, that is to ſay of P S by the ninth or tenth Chapter, which had, reckon the ſame on the hanging ſide of your running ſtaffe, and thereto ſet the wing fixed, admit at H. Then chooſe you a ſtation as farre from the towre as you thinke good, admit at N, there direct your ſtaffe againſt the towre as before, kéeping the ſtation N directly vnder

your eye, and your eye no higher leuell then S, then moue the wing of the leuell ſide, that is I to and fro, till you may by both the ſightes I and H, ſee the top of the towre that is to ſay P. Then looke how many euen partes are betweene T and D, for ſo many paces is the diſtance from your ſtation at N to the towre.
               Note that if there be no wall or towre high inough for the exact working of this Chapter farrinough off: you may make a ſhift to it, by two markes of the wall in latitude, that is to ſay in the length of the wall: for that the working by the altitude and latitude is al one, as in the end of the tenth Chapter was noted, ſo you can direct your ſtaffe ſquare thereto: but if you happen not to direct him ſquare, you miſſe ſo much of your diſtance to the wall as maketh vp the ſquare: as for example. If T P were a wall, and that aiming at the ſquare, you ſhould direct your ſtaffe to the marke W thinking the ſquare to be there, I ſay you ſhall in ſtead of the diſtance E W, get the diſtance E S, ſuch is the certaintie of your croſſe ſtaffe working, which you can not auoid becauſe of neceſſity, as in the ſecond Chapter was ſaid In tranſuerſis viſni oredere oportet.
               
            
            
               Chap. 19.
               
                  How you ſhall peerforme the 15, Chapter, vvhere the diſtance of the fort or caſtle is verie far off, and the ground being vneuen vvith hils, dales and rockes, hath no one leuell plaine ſufficient to make two ſtations for ſo great a diſtance.
               
               IF ſome valley happen betwéene your firſt ſtation, and that place where you woulde willingly, according to the Of longitu or diſtance
                  
third note of the 15 Chapter. Plant  your ſeconde ſtation, as here you ſée in this figure deſcribed, a déep bottome betwéen the ſtations P and K. In this caſe you ſhal by a third ſtation made on the plaine, whereon the firſt ſtation is, viz. at Q. and help of the firſt, get the diſtance of the fartheſt ſtation K, beyond the ſayd vallie, in ſuch ſorte, as in the 15. or 17. Chapter is taught, or as in the next Chap. ſhalbe ſhewed. And ſo ſhall you haue the diſtance of your 2. long ſtatiōs P and K, as exactly as though they were in one plaine to bée meaſured with a line. And by this meanes, though the valley be neuer ſo déepe betwéene your two maine ſtations P and K, it ſhall not hinder you, but that you may at them procéede to get the moſt exact diſtance to the forte or tower, in all reſpects as in the 15. or 17. Chap. was done, euen as though the ground had bene all one planne.
            
            
               Chap. 20.
               
                  If in a night you haue ſecretlie gotten with your armie neere anie forte, and that you woulde with more ſpeede then in the

15. or 17. Chapter is ſhewed, know the diſtance whether you are neere inough to plant your ordinance for batterie.
               
               NOw commeth in the readie vſe of the running ſtaffe, for Of 
                        〈◊〉
                      or 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   which cauſe I ſo named him. And in this Chapter reſteth the ſwéete vſe of this inſtrument, therefore marke it well. This matter reſteth wholie vppon the diligent furtherance of many helpers both of men, and horſes alſo, if you will, according to the prouerbe, Fit cito per multas praeda petita manus. There is no more cunning in this, then was in the fiftéene Chapter: rather leſſe. But that you muſt haue diuerſe to execute it: that is to ſaie, a couple (with horſes if you will) to ſpeed them to the ſecond ſtation, there by helpe of the runninge ſtaffe, to take the angle of poſition betwéene the firſt ſtation, and ſome turret of the forte, whiles your ſelfe and your partner are as buſie at the firſt ſtation with your ſtandarde ſtaffe, taking the poſition angle between  the ſame turret and the ſecond ſtation, which wyll moſt ſpeedely bee done by the ſeconde meanes of the 14. Chapter, and fie vpon reſtes or ſupporters nowe we are in haſt. The whiles alſo let two other ſpeedilie running with a wier chaine, get the exact meaſure betweene the two ſtations: or if the forte be far off, or the ground vnleuell, it will not be amiſſe to get the diſtance between thoſe two ſtations by a thirde ſtation, in manner of the laſt Chapter. Which diſtance either way moſt exactly

gotten, let him that keepeth the firſt ſtation reckon it on one of the legges of the ſame ſtandard ſtaffe, it is no matter, which (for now we be in haſt, wee muſt not be too curious in precepts) and to the end of that reckoning, let him place the running bolt or ſight, fixed with helpe of his ſcrewe. And if by this time his partener bee not come from his ſecond ſtation, then let him take a nagge and gallop to meet him, taking ſpeciall care that either of them locke their ſtaues faſt at the angles of poſition before taken, leaſt they ſhould ſtart with this haſtie carriage. Now then when they are met, if he that came from the ſecond ſtation, doe but clap the centre of the running ſtaffe on the ſight pin of the ſtandard before fixed, guiding it ſo that his one ſide cut the centre of the ſtandard, extending his other ſide croſſe the ſtandards other legge. Looke at that croſſing what partes you finde, for the partes on the ſtandard are the diſtance from your firſt ſtation to the forte, and the partes of the running ſtaffe, are the diſtance of the ſecond ſtation, to the ſame fort deſired, which is ſo much more then the ſtandard could doe of himſelfe, beſides the ſpeed, yet for all your haſt, the notes of the 15. Chapter muſt be regarded. And thus much farther, that you enlarge the leuell ſide of your running ſtaffe with the ioynt peece of the hanging ſide taken off, if cauſe ſo require.
               For example: admit C A B to be the angle of the poſition, taken by the ſtandard at the firſt ſtation, and D E A the angle of poſition, taken by the running ſtaffe at the ſecond ſtation, and that on the one leg A B of the ſtandard, the point H, reckoned from A, expreſie the diſtāce between the two ſtations meſured: there ſhall the 
                  
running bolte or ſight pin be ſet, and thereon the centre E, of the running ſtaffe A E D his one ſide, lying euen with the ſtandards legge A B, and cutting his centre A, ſo doth the other E D cut off in the legge A C at D the diſtance of the tower from the firſt ſtation. And in the point D of the ſide. E D of the running ſtaffe cut off by the ſtandards leg A C, ſheweth the diſtance of the tower from the ſecond ſtation.
            
            
               Chap. 21.
               
                  If you ſhall ſee two fortes of the enemies within viewe, and woulde know how farre they are in ſonder, and whether ther may be paſſage for an army betweene them without danger of ſhatte from thoſe fortes. Or to get the length and breadth of any Forte a far off, thereby to gather of what receite the ſame forte is. Or to get the width of a riuer fronting any fort, keeping your ſelfe a farre off without daunger of ſhotte.
               
               FIrſt you ſhall by the fiftéenth, ſeuentéenth, nineteenth, or Of lati laſt Chapter, get the ſeuerall diſtances of the ſame fortes from your ſtation appoincted, ſeeke the one diſtance in the one legge, the other diſtaunce in the other legge of your ſtanderd Staffe, and to each ſett the running ſighte pins fixed, then pitching againe at the ſame ſtation, take with your ſtanderd Staffe the angle of poſition between thoſe fortes by the fourtéenth Chapter, and there wreſte him faſte to keepe that angle ſure. Laſtly place the centre of the running Staffe on one of the ſaid fixed fight pinnes, applying alſo one of his ſides vnto the other ſighte pin, and the number of that ſide of the running Staffe, there touching that other ſight pin is the diſtaunce betwene the two forts deſired. Or you might apply the ioincte piece or any parte of the running Staffe betwéene the ſight pinnes, but that it is not ſo eaſy to rekon as from the centre it is.
               In like manner may you get the diſtaunce betweene two trées or two towers in one forte, and thereby get the length

or bredth of the ſame forte, and be able by that meanes to deſcrie of what receit the ſame is. Alſo the bredth of any riuer by taking two markes, as trées, buſhes, or buildings on each ſide of the riuer one. But you are by this neuer the neare, to know the diſtance betweene two ſhippes on the ſea, as other writers and thoſe no ſmall ones, do teach you by a like precepte arithmeticall, except thoſe ſhippes lie at ancor that they ſtirre not, yet in the twenty foure Chapter following, I ſhall ſatisfie you for that.
               For example, admitte the diſtaunce of the one forte founde to bee fiue hundred paſe from your ſtation, the other ſixe hundred paſe: the firſt viz. fiue hundred I rekon on the one legge of the ſtanderd,  there I ſette the ſighte pinne viz. at E, the ſecond viz. ſixe hundreth I reckon on the other legge of the ſtanderd, there I ſet the other ſighte pin viz. at D. That doen, I take the angle of poſition betweene both thoſe fortes, or rather ſome two principall towers of them, which admitte to be the angle C A B, there I lock the ſtanderd Staffe, then clapping the centre of the running Staffe on the ſight pin before fixed at E, I directe his owne ſide vnto the other ſight pin fixed at D, and the quantity thereof betwéene D and E, ſheweth me the diſtaunce betweene the two fortes or towers deſired. In like manner the diſtaunce betweene two trées, is to be had or betwéene any two marks whatſoeuer.
               This is another maner of working for latitudes then that which the Croſſe Staffe yieldeth: the manner whereof I noted vnto you in the end of the tenth Chapter.
            
            
               
               Chap. 22.
               
                  If in a fort or hauen on the ſea coaſt, or abroad on the plaines on the ſea banckes, you ſhall ſee anie ſhips a farre off ſayling towardes you, or any armie approching by lande. Howe you ſhall alwaies be prouided in ſuch ſpeciall places, that in a moment almoſt and with ſmall helpe, you ſhall know how farre they are from you, and by that meanes ſpeedily finde when they ſhall be commen within the random or pointe blancke of your ſhot.
               
               IN ſuch dangerous times when any aſſault of an army by Of lo or diſt land or of ſhips by ſea is expected againſt any fort or hauen, you ſhall appoinct in the ſame hauen or fort two certaine towers fartheſt diſtant, in ſtead of your two ſtations. Their exact diſtaunce you ſhall alwayes haue in a reddineſſe gotten by the laſt chap. Let one of theſe towers be called the firſt ſtation the other the ſecond. In this firſt tower you ſhall haue alwayes your ſtanderd readie placed by ſome kind of ſteadfaſt ſupporter, his one legge directly on the other tower or ſtation, not to be eaſely wreſted aſide from that poſition, the other leg next the enemy at liberty. In the ſecond tower let the running ſtaffe be alwaies readily placed in like manner, his one ſide ſtedfaſtly on the firſt ſtation, his other ſide next the enemie at liberty. Your inſtruments thus exactly placed, alwayes readie at your two ſtations, and the certaine diſtaunce betwéene them foreknowen, your worke is at any time almoſt performed ere you begin. Let your ſelfe at the firſt ſtation, and ſome practizd body at the ſecond, guide the looſe legs of your inſtrumentes directly ſtill vpon the mayne toppe of ſome principall ſhippe, or formoſt Auncient of the army, and let a third man within a little after he ſhall perceaue both your eyes layde to your inſtruments with a trumpet or horne, giue a ſhort blaſt: and immediatly vppon the inſtant of the blaſt, let both of you locke faſt your inſtruments at thoſe angles, which angles had

and taken both at one inſtant of the blaſt giuen. Let each of the obſeruers come from their towers and bring their inſtrumentes to méete together as ſpeedily as they can, and clapping one vppon another in ſuch manner, as in the 20. chap. was done, you ſhall there immediatly deſery how farre that ſhippe or army was off at the blaſt giuing.
               But becauſe it may be long ere two can come out of the toppes of towers to meete: beſides that, becauſe it is harde bringing ſuch an inſtrument downe ſtayers, or letting it downe with a rope for feare of ſagging or ſlipping of the angles taken. Therefore to remedie this, let him that obſerueth in the firſt tower, haue a ſpare running ſtaffe, beſides the ſtanderd ſtaffe wherewith he obſerueth: And let him that giueth the blaſt, bee placed néere about the middeſt betwéene theſe two ſtation towers. And when the blaſt is giuen let him in the ſecond tower that obſerueth with the running ſtaff, looke what degrée of the graduation on the leuell ſide of his ſtaffe, the graduators Apex doth ſhew, and report it with a loude voyce to this middle man: And let him report it againe to the obſeruer in the firſt tower or ſtation, who hauing the ſayde ſpare running ſtaffe ſhall immediatly ſet it by the ſame degrée and minute reported vnto the very ſame angle that the running ſtaffe at the ſecond tower is at, and therewith worke in all reſpects as before euen as though the other running ſtaff had beene brought to him.
               But if any man will obiect, what if there bee not two towers in the hauen, then I ſay it is likely there is but one Church, and that it is a ſmall matter in ſuch daungerous times to make ſcaffoldes with boordes on houſen toppes for ſuch good purpoſes.
               Alſo in the very like ſpéedie manner, you may worke with a cople of ſtations readie pitched on the ſea bankes: withall you muſt euer haue regarde to the notes of the 15. chap.
            
            
               
               Chap. 23.
               
                  If an army on the land, or a Nauie on the ſea, ſhall be as farre off as you may ken making towards your Fort. To know by helpe of this Familiar ſtaffe: How faſt their gate is, and in what time they shall according to that gate, come within reach of your shot.
               
               THis matter very little differeth from the laſt chap. For your two ſtaues being readie planted in their towers or Of m
                        •…
                      in long
                        •…
                     
                   ſtations as there is ſhewed. Firſt take the diſtance of the army or Nauy, as farre as you can poſſibly ken them, at a blaſt or ſound giuen by the middleman, whoſe charge ſhall further be for this purpoſe to tourne vp a mynute glaſſe or two, ſo ſoone as he hath giuen his blaſt, and to kéepe them running. Then after a quarter of an howre or 15. mynutes or more or leſſe time as you will, and as the occaſion requireth, prepare your ſelues to take the diſtance of that nauy or army at another ſhort blaſt giuen in the very ſame maner as before. Now hauing gotten the diſtance of the ſhippe or army this ſeconde time: & alſo vpō report of the middle man how many mynutes were paſſed betweene his two blaſtes giuen, you may eaſely know by the difference of the two diſtances taken, how much they be come nearer at this ſecond blaſt then they were at the firſt, for ſo much do they ſaile or come on in ſo many mynutes, and according to that rate you may eaſily caſt how much they ſayle in an howre, and conſequently howe many howres or mynutes it will be, if holding on their way they approch you, and in how many mynutes they will be within the randome or poinct blancke of any great piece, and rather then to be deceaued leaſt the winde or ſtate of the ſeas ſhould alter, you māy make more tryalls ere they come neere that.
               But in ſtead of mynute glaſſes, which as they ſaye, they vſe at the ſea, I ſhould like better of a clocke or watch that ſhould turne the hand quite round about the dyall euery houre to ſhew the exact mynute I haue ſéene ſuch readie made.
            
            
               
               Chap. 24.
               
                  If ſtanding on the ſea bancks, you ſee your ſhip of war at the ſea purſuing another ſhip of the enimy, to know how far by help of this Familliar Staffe, & how much the one getteth of the other in ſayling, whether he be like to ouertake the enimy, and in what time.
               
               THis matter differeth litle from the working of the laſt Of motion both in lō
                     gitude and latitude. Chapter, onely it asketh more helpe. For you had néed to haue at the firſt towre or ſtation thrée ſtanderd ſtaues, and foure obſeruors, and at the ſecond tower or ſtation two running ſtaues, and two obſeruors all ready pitched and placed, as in the two & twenty Chapter was taught, in ſuch ſort, that one paire, that is to ſay, one ſtanderd Staffe, and one running Staffe doe wholy attend vpon your ſhip, the other payr vppon the enemies ſhippe, and the odde ſtandard Staffe to attend them both, by helpe of two obſeruors, to kéepe alwayes the angle of poſition betweene the two ſhippes, and al of them to locke faſt their angles at the inſtante of a blaſt giuen, and then by the two and twenty Chapter to get the diſtaunce of ether ſhippe from you, and by the one and twenty, and helpe of the angle of poſition, the diſtaunce of either ſhip from other at the time of the blaſte. Then after a quarter of an howre or certaine minutes compleate, they muſt al to worke agayn by warning of a ſecond blaſte, as well for the diſtances of eche ſhippe from you, as of one of them from the other. Then comparing the differences of ech kinde together, you haue by the one (that is to ſay) by their ſeuerall diſtances from your ſtation in that number of minutes, as were betwéene the two blaſtes geuen, the certainty of each of their gates, in ſo much time by the laſt Chapter, and by the two ſeuerall diſtances of ech ſhippe from other at both times, you may by taking the bigger out of the leſſer, know how much the one ſhippe hath

ether gotten or loſte of the other, and according to that rate of time, caſt how ſoone the one ſhall ouertake the other, if the wind and ſtate of the ſeas alter not, or they alter not theyr courſe. For which cauſe you ſhall make ſome more trialles in the very like manner as oft as you ſhall thinke good.
            
            
               Chap. 25.
               
                  Your ſelfe planted on the toppe of an high rocke, clift, or tower, by the ſea ſide. To knowe by this Familliar Staffe howe deepe the leuell of the water is vnder you.
               
               IT is moſt common vppon the ſea coaſte to haue highe rocky Of pro
                        •…
                     
                     dity. cliftes. If therefore you woulde from the top of anye ſuch knowe how déepe directly vnder you, that the leuell of the water is, you ſhall eſpy ſome marke in the bottome of the ſea bancks or next clifte, euen with the edge of the water the neareſt vnto you that you can eſpy. But if there be none neare inough, then let ſome ſhip be lette purpoſely at ancor nere vnto you, the diſtaunce of which ſhip, you ſhal get by two pretty ſtationes, ſuch as the toppe of the rocke may yielde by the fiftéenth or ſeuenteenth Chapter. Or if the rocke or clifte bee ſo ſtiepe and ſharpe, that it yield you not ſtation inough on the toppe, ſee then if you can diſcene to ſome lower part of the rocke for a ſecond ſtation, or any way by any rule in this booke, helpe your ſelfe to the diſtaunce of the ſhippe from your ſtation on the hill toppe. Which had, take your ſtanderd ſtaffe, and let him at a true ſquare angle by helpe of your running Staffe: there locke or wreſte him faſte that he ſtart not from his ſquare, Then place him ſo, that his one legge bee leuell or parallell to the horrizon, the other perpendiculer ſette by a plumme line, his centre ouer your ſtation. Your ſtanderd ſo placed, then your partner and you directing the leuell legge towards the ſhippe or marke: you ſhall between you moue the running ſighte pinnes of both legges to and fro in ſuch ſort, till by them you ſee the ſaide marke or ſhippe where

ſhe lieth at ancor, there wreſte the ſight pinnes faſt. Then ſette the centre of the running Staffe on the ſight pin of the leuell legge, directing his one ſide to the middle or centre of the other ſight pin, his other ſide euen with the centre of the ſtanderd. There locke the running Staffe faſt at that angle, and marke what number of the running Staffe is there cut off by the centre of the ſighte pin. For if that be equall to the diſtaunce of the ſhippe or marke before gotten, then doth that ſighte pinne ſhew your deſire, if otherwiſe then moue the running Staffe faſt lockt at the ſaid angle to and fro, the centre of the ſtanderde by helpe of the ſighte pinne whercan hee rideth, vntill there be cutte off in the ſaide ſide of the runninge Staffe, the exacte diſtaunce of the ſaid ſhippe or marke before found. And then ſhal the pointe of cutting ſhewe you on the ſtanderd the very height of your eie aboue the leuell of the water deſired.
               This matter would haue an example. Admitte firſt on the cliſte A, whoſe depth to the leuell of the water is A B, that you finde the diſtaunce from your eie on the toppe of the clifte, to the ſhip ſett from you at ancker one hündreth twenty perches, viz. I C, and hauing ſette vp your ſtanderd Staffe, viz. O V I faſte lockte to his ſquare angle, his one legge viz. IV, perpendiculer, his other viz. O V leuell, his centre V ouer the 
                  
ſtation, viz. A as before is ſaide, then by remouing his ſighte pinnes to ſuch two places, viz to I and O, that by your eye you finde the ſhippe directly in one line by them both, viz. in the line I O C, and that the ſighte pinne in the perpendiculer legge, viz. I doe ſhewe 100. partes, the other in the leuell leg three hundreth partes. Now take your running Staffe and ſette the centre thereof on the ſighte pinne O, and directe his owne ſide vnto I, and his other ſide euen with the centre V of the ſtanderd, and there locke him faſt at that angle. And if now you finde on the running Staffe betweene O and I the iuſt number of the diſtaunce I C, viz one hundreth twentye, then doth I V ſhew the exacte number of perches of I B deſired. But in very déede you ſhall finde betweene I and O, thrée hundreth ſixtéene ⅕ or thereabouts, which is more then one hundreth twenty. Therefore you ſhall moue the ſight pin O, together with the running Staffe inwards towards V, vntill ſuch time as you finde but iuſte one hundreth and twenty betwéene I and O, and then ſhall you haue but thirty eight iuſt betweene I and V, your deſire. For thereby I conclude that the depth from I to B is thyrty eyghtperches.
               This Chapter ſeemeth more painefull at the firſt ſhewe, then it wil be when it is rightly vnderſtoode, and that you haue made experience thereof by an example or two the beſt is, it is needefull to bee doen but once for al, in anye one place.
            
            
               Chap. 26.
               
                  If a Gunner keepe a block houſe, or haue a piece or two of Ordinance planted on the toppe of ſome very high clifte by the ſea ſide. How by this Familliar Staffe he him ſelfe without any helpe at all, ſhall moſt eaſily and ſpeedily in a moment get the diſtaunce of any ſhip at the ſea, making towards him or paſſing along, and

that moſt exacte, for ſo far as the randome of any great piece will extend.
               
               TRuely this Chapter on ſuch cliftes and places on the ſea Of longitude or diſtance frō an high. coſte, which are very high aboue the water (as many ſuch there are) is the moſt neceſſarie and ready for a gunne of all the reſt. But if it be not high aboue the ſea, it is leaſt worth: And the higher, ſo much it is the better for this purpoſe, and alſo for the Gunner, as it ſhould ſeeme vnto me by Tartaglia who ſaith in his firſt booke, ſecond Colloquy, that a peece either mounted or embaſed from the leuel of the Horizon ſhooteth with more force and further, then it wil, being ſhot leuell. The chiefe ſubſtance of our practiſe in this, conſiſteth in the exact finding of the leuell of the water vnder your ſtation on the clifte toppe: For which cauſe I promiſed the laſt Chapter. Whereas others haue left it very abſurdly to be done with a line and plummet of lead let down from the clift toppe: as though euery clift or any clift almoſt would admit ſuch palpable facillitie.
               Well, to the purpoſe. In ſuch a ſet place you ſhall haue alwaies your ſtation ready prepared, with the depth of the leuell of the water knowne by helpe of the laſt Chapter: and there your ſtandard ſetled at his ſquare angle, and alwaies ready pitched in maner of the laſt Chapter, on ſome ſuch reſt that he may ſpeedely be turned which way ſoeuer any ſhippe commeth, keeping him ſelfe ſtill plumbe and leuell, the ſight pinne of the perpendiculer ſide, fixed faſt with his ſcrue at the euen part, anſwering the hight of your ſtation aboue the water, your ſtandard ſtaffe thus alwaies ſet in a readineſſe, your worke is done in manner ere you beginne. For ſo ſoone as you eſpye any ſhippe making neare to your coſte, direct the extreame of the leuell legge of the ſtandard to the ſhippe, and clap on the centre of your running ſtaffe, to ride on the fired ſight pinne of the hanging legge, and there lifting vp or downe the one ſide of the running ſtaffe cloſe by the ſaid leuell

legge directed to the ſhippe, vntill by the ſight pegges of that ſide of the running ſtaffe you ſee the ſhippe. Then ſhall the euen part of that ſide of the running ſtaffe, cut by the leuell legge of the ſtanderd, be the diſtaunce of the ſhippe deſired, al which by this figure you may perceaue.
               
               
                  A the ſtation on the clifte N VI, the ſtanderd Staffe alwaies ready placed thereon his leuel legge V N directed to the ſhippe G approching, I the ſight of the ſtanderds hanging leg, whereon the centre of the running Staffe is placed, whoſe one ſide I N, directed cloſe by the ſtanderds legge V N to the bottome of the ſhippe, G is cutte off by V N at N. Thereby I conclude that the euen parts betweene I and N ſheweth the diſtaunce from your eie to the ſhip viz. I G deſired.
               Note that the other ſide of the running Staffe is to no vſe in this practiſe. And one thing more I thought good to warne you off, that in placing of your ſight pin I, you haue a care of the riſing or falling of the leuell of the water by reaſon of the tides. For which cauſe, you had neede to haue ſome ſpeciall markes purpoſely ſette in the bottome of the next clifte or ſea

bancks, by which you may at any time gather how much the water is riſen, or fallen, and according to that riſing or falling you muſt fixe the ſighte put I higher or lower when you begin your worke.
               Note that this Chapter and the laſt alſo, mighte as well haue bene performed in manner of the twelfth Chapter, by turning the extreame of the hanging ſide of the ſtaffe downewards if the place doe admitte, and happily that courſe maye ſéeme the more familiar, and propper way for profundities although both come to one paſſe.
            
            
               Chap. 27.
               
                  If a man were priſoner with the enemie, how being in the top of a tower on the leads, or out of his priſon window, hee might by this Familliar Staffe know the depth to the ground, to ſee if he were able with anie deuice to let himſelfe downe without danger.
               
               FOr this purpoſe, yea, or almoſt anie precept of altitudes, an inſtrument of ten inches long, is as good as one of ten foot, Of profundity. and ſuch a one a man might priuily haue conueyed vnto him, and eaſily wilde it in a chamber. You ſhall out at a windowe by the eightéenth Chapter, or from the toppe of the leads, by the fiftéenth or ſeuentéeth chapter, get the direct diſtance from you of ſome tower next yours, which ſuppoſe were XC, whoſe baſe C you may ſée out at your windowe, viz. IX, then place your inſtrument plum and leuell towardes that tower XC, in ſuch ſort as was done in the laſt Chapter. But contrariwiſe to the laſt Chapter, place that diſtance IX, gotten on the leuell ſide at O fixed. Then putting vp or downe the ſight pin of the hanging ſide, viz. I, till by it and the ſight pin

                   
                  O, you may ſée the baſe of that tower, viz. C, by the vſuall line IOC. There I ſaie, ſhall the ſight pin I ſhew you the deapth of the tower XC, viz. from x the leuell of your eis, vnto C the baſe, and ſo high from the ground you may preſume that your ſelſe are in that roome where you are priſoner. Let your ſelfe downe and you can, ſauing your necke peece.
               Happily this Chapter were more eaſily performed by turning the hanging ſide of the Staffe downwards, according to the note in the end of the laſt Chapter, becauſe the inſtrument is ſmall, and may eaſily reſt in the one end.
            
            
               Chap. 28.
               
                  If afort or tower ſtand vpon an high hil how by this Familiar ſtaffe, to know the ioynt and heights both of the hill and tower.
               
               TO helpe vs for want of a figure, you ſhall admit that Y 
                  Of 
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        〈◊〉
                      of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   were the top of the hill, and baſe of the tower, and PY the the tower ſtanding thereon. Which granted. The firſt thing you ſhall doe, get the diſtante from your ſtanding, viz. N, vnto the point S leuell with your eie, directly vnder the baſe of the

                   tower, by the eightéenth Chapter. But if the hil and tower be farre off, then if by the fiftéenth or ſeuentéenth Chapter you get the diſtance IY, and by diſcretion take ſomwhat leſſe then that for the diſtance IS, a little error in that longitude wil not hurt vs for the altitude. This diſtance IS anie waie gotten, you ſhall reckon the ſame on the leuell ſide of your running Staffe ED directed to the hill, and there ſet the one wing, viz. I, and from it direct your vſuall line to the towers baſe, viz. to Y, and ſet the other wing on the hanging ſide directly betwéen I and Y at V. I ſaie the number at V ſhewed by that wing, is the height of the hill deſired, viz. of YS, and if from I you direct your vſuall line againe to the top of the tower on the hill, viz. to P. Then ſhal the wing on the hanging ſide cut at H, where agayne you ſhal haue the whole height both of tower and hill viz. of PS, and the diſtance betwéene H and V ſheweth the height of the tower PY ſeuerall.
            
            
               Chap. 29.
               
                  If being at the ſea, you would caſt ancor as neere ſome fort or harbour, as you might be free from reach of their

ſhot, how by this Familiar Staffe you ſhall exactlie get the diſtance thereof, of the diſtance of anie other ſhip from your ſhip, being both fleeting at once vppon the wilde ſea.
               
               THis is the moſt curious matter which we had to deale withall, and as ſleightly dealt in by other writers, whoſe whole deuice hetherto, hath béene to looke from the top of the ſhip wherein they are, vnto the bottome of the other ſhip, performing it after the ſame reaſon that in my 26. Chapter is ſhewed. For they appoint the knowen length of the maſt of their ſhip, in ſtead of the knowen height of the clift in that 26 Chapter. And to make the matter ſeeme of more account, they call this a diſtance gotten at one ſtation. A goodly thing: as who ſaith that the ſquare angle, which they imagine at the bottome of the maſte, and the length of the maſt knowen, is not in all reſpects a ſecond ſtation, as it were readie, made to theyr hand. Let me alwaies haue a reentangled triangle to deale with, and I will neuer aſke you but one ſuch ſtation, for all that I haue before written. But now looke yet neerer vnto the matter, and though the ground of this their working is vnfallible, yet ſee to how ſmall purpoſe, and in manner abſurd, theyr precept is in this. For if (as in the fourth note of the foureteenth Chapter I ſhewed) the ſecond ſhip bee diſtant aboue ten or twelue maſts length, their working is of ſmall account, euen on plaine ground: but then conſider the tottering of the ſhip on the water, they ſhall be forced for want of ſteddy taking of the angle euen totalliter errare. For which cauſes I cannot content my ſelfe to deliuer this matter ſo ſleightlie, as that I thinke it to anie purpoſe to be done in anie ſhip, but rather by helpe of two ſhippes, or in a calme one ſhip and help of the cockbote. Let both thoſe ſhips bee grapled or linked together with a ſtrong rope or cable, and let ſailers and ſternes men, keep the ſhip with ſide winds, and labouring the ruthers or ſtearnes at the full length of the rope, facing the fort, harborow,

or other ſhip, whoſe diſtance you ſeeke, and at the two ends of thoſe two ſhips fartheſt diſtant, let the ſtandard ſtaffe

                     Heere ſhould ſtand the picture that is in the 27. Chapter.
                  
in the one, and the running ſtaffe, in the other, bee placed with two obſeruors to each ſtaffe, to take the angle of poſition, after the ſecond manner of the foureteenth Chapter, betweene the ſayde forte and his fellow obſeruors, in the other ſhip ſodenly at a blaſt giuen, as was done in the 22. Chapter, there locking faſt their inſtruments, and haſting by haling in the ſhips to bring them together, they ſhall deſcrie the diſtance to the forte deſired, in ſuch ſort as in the 20. or 22. Chapter was done, or without haling the ſhippes together by reporting the angle taken one to another, and help of a ſpare running ſtaffe, as in the end of the ſaid 22. Chapter is ſhewed. For the length of the cable and both ſhips knowen, yeldeth the diſtance betweene your two ſtations.
               And for the more ſpéedy and ſure taking of thoſe angles, let each paire of obſeruors hang a verie white cloth vnder the centre of their inſtruments. In this figure H and G are the two ſhips linked together with a cable rope, and F is a ſhip at ſea, whoſe diſtance they ſéeke.
               Note that if a man be ſo ſtraight driuen, that he hath no helpe but one bare ſhip, then let him doe it in the verie lyke manner, placing his obſeruors at both endes of the ſhip, as far

of as may be, which ſhall performe his deſire: much more certayne then from the top of the maſt. And if anie man woulde doe it from the maſt, then let him take the angle downe to the bottome of the ſhip with a ſea Aſtrolabe, and after ſet his running ſtaffe to the ſame angle, & his ſtandard ſtaffe to a ſquare angle, and then performe it in manner of the ſiue and twenteth Chapter.
            
            
               Chap. 30.
               
                  How by this familiar ſtaffe to carry the leuel of one place to any other, neceſſarie for ſuch as ſhal vndermine afort, to know alwaies how deepe they are: or for ſuch as would trie whether waters may bee brought from one place to fortiſie another.
               
               THis matter is verie eaſie, requiring more diligence then ſkill. For if you ſet the leuell ſide of your ſtaffe leuel with the Horizon, by helpe of a plumme line, and hauing a couple of aſſiſtants to carie two poles before you, with bright marks ſliding vp and downe on them. Then all the matter conſiſteth in the diligent noting of the riſing or falling of the ground, by helpe of thoſe moueable marks carrior from place to place on thoſe poles, vntill you come to your waies end: and then ſhal you compare them together, whether is the greater of all the riſings or all the fallings, each added ſeuerally together into a groſſe ſumme: For if they be equall, then the leuell at the end is equall to the leuell at the beginning: if vnequall, thē difference ſheweth the difference of the riſing or ſinking accordingly.
               And if you ſhould carrie the leuelmany miles, to the intent to lead water in a conduite, then for the fall thereof, you muſt haue alſo a regarde of the roundneſſe of the maſſie globe of the earth and water. Of which I ſhall at ſome other time more at large ſignifie.
            
            
               
               Chap. 31.
               
                  How by helpe of this familliar Staffe, you ſhall carrie a mine vnder the ground, and ſett barrells of gunpowder directlye vnder any towre or thiefe place of any caſtle or forte.
               
               THis is no rare matter neither harde to performe. Firſt gette the exacte diſtaunce to the ſame towre from the place where you meane to begin your mine, by the fiftéenth, ſeuentéenth, or twenty Chapter. Then ſincke your ſelfe into the ground at the mouth of the mine, as much vnder as you think méete, and there by two plumlines from aboue pitched directly vppon the middle of the towre, ſette the leuell ſide of your running Staffe vnder ground directly vppon the towre, by which direction you ſhall cary your mine ſtreight till you come almoſt there. And if you be hindred that you can not digge ſtreight in any place, by meanes of ſome rocke make a ſquare, retourne by direction of your Staffe, till you are paſt the ſame rocke, and you muſt of neceſſity when you come almoſt there, make two or three ſquare retournes out of the way, and ſtill bring your ſelfe to your direct way againe, to the end to ſtay the force of the powder for iſſuing directly backe out of the ouen or caue cloſed vp, thereby hindring his exploite. So kéeping your note booke certainly of your goings aſide out of the direct way, you may by the like ſquare angles retourne againe iuſt as much vnto the ſame, and then procéed direct againe. And alſo keeping notes how you goe either ſhallow or deep, in manner of the laſt Chapter, you ſhal at the laſt both knowe when you are gone ſo far as the diſtance firſt taken aboue ground amounted to: and alſo how deepe or ſhallow you are from the bottome of the towre to be blowen vp.
            
            
               Chap. 32.
               
                  How a Captaine may by this familiar ſtaffe, ſett in platte or mappe any prouince of the enemies countrey.
               
               THis matter is all ready handled of many writers to be don by the circle, quadrante, or croſſe Staffe, but ſpecially by

the circle, and is in our Engliſhe tongue publiſhed by diuerſe namely, Maſter Digges, William Boorne, Maſter L
                        •••
                     r, and others, vnto whom I therefore refer you for the circumſtaunce, becauſe they ſhall not bee idle the whiles. Onely thus much I thoughte good to note vnto you, that look what angles of poſition they take by theyr cyrcle, the ſame may you and your partner more ſpeedily take by the ſecond manner of the foreteenth Chapter, and your running Staffe, and note the degrées of euery angle or poſition in a booke or tables as they doe. And when you haue thoſe angles noted, and would reduce them into mappe, if you can not otherwiſe more readily doe it, then take paines in ſuch manner as they teach, by helpe of that ſmall cyrcle, which they call, and fitly a protuactor, in the mean while till I may haue a wiſhed time to write of this my Inſtrument more at large. Then will I teache you to lay a ſide your detractor, and ſhewe you more knacks then I dare at this time to name or make promiſe of for my owne quiet ſake, leaſte I ſhould be by ſome importimacyes interrupted from the ſeconde part of my Iewell, which I woulde moſte gladly bring forth with as conuenient ſpéede as may bee.
            
         
         
            
            An Appendix of the author, touching ſome alteration of this Familliar Staffe.
            
               HAuing on the foure and twentieth of Ianuary laſt, preſented the coppy of this ſmal treatiſe in written hand, together with ye Staffe, framed in ſuch manner, as in the third and fourth Chapter is ſhewed. It pleaſed his Honor within two daies after, to ſee triall of ſome of the concluſions in Gréene wich parke. Upon the good liking whereof, his H. ſhewed the ſame to diuerſe, both Noble, Hondrable, and worſhipfull, in the Courte: and withall deliuered me againe the written coppy, as a thing which he thought more méete to be made publike, for the benefite of his countrey, then to be referued to his owne priuate vſe. But I well nowd that the generall opinion of the greater number of beſt iudgement, was, to haue him made in two ſeuerall ſtaues, in ſuch manner as in the ende of the thirde or fourth Chapter I noted, thereby to haue them both of a more conuenient tractable quantity. Which I more willingly conſente vnto, becauſe I finde ſome wante of a thirde ſlippinge rule in the ſtāderd Staffe, like unto the graduator of the running Staffe, to keep him ſure and ſtedfaſt in working: which after the firſt fabrication may not be wel conucied.
            But now if ſhe ſhall like of this alteration of our Staffe: there are alſo many things of the third and fourth Chapter to be quite altered.
            The firſt is, that you haue two ſeuerall channells in the hollowneſſe of your Staffe, the vndermoſt for the graduator, and the bolte leading his apex to and fro: the vppermoſte for the running bolts that muſt carry your ſighte pinnes to and fro, which bolts ſhall alſo now haue your wings or broad

ſights of braſſe (appointed to the running Staffe) ſo annexed vnto them, that they may folde or ſhut into the Staffe, when you carry it.  Secondly the graduators of theſe ſeueral ſtaues ſhall haue no maner of degrées or graduation vppon them except you liſt.
            Thirdlie there ſhall be no ioincte piece like vnto G F to bee taken off and on, but both legges ſhall bee whole and ſounde quite through.
            Fourthly, wheras the chiefeſt cauſe of the ioincte piece G F was in reſpecte to be taken off, when the running Staffe was to be vſed for the leueling or mounting of a piece of ordinunce, in manner of the ſixth Chapter. We ſhall ſupply that vſe (though both legges of the Staffe be whole) by ſetting the gunners points on the leuell ſide D E, by helpe of a quadrant, deſcribed on the pointe G, as in the fourth Chapter you did ſette them on the graduator G H, by helpe of a quadrant deſcribed on the pointe D. the Saffe ſtanding ſtill at his ſquare angle. Orels (which I think better) you may ſet the Staffe vnto the angle of forty fiue degrées, and there faſten him, and then on N deſcribe a quadrante, and thereby ſette on, either the twelfth gunners points, or the 90. degrées on the ſide D E as before, and ſo ſhall a line drawen from G to the middle pointe of the twelfth, bee perpendiculer to D E: for which cauſe you ſhall now number them, from that middle pointe, but vnto ſix on either ſide, becauſe the one half of theſe twelue pointes, ſhal nowe ſerue for mounting a piece vnto the ſixth

poincte, which as Tartaglia ſtteth downe is the furtheſt randome, the other halfe ſerueth for embaſing your piece vnto the ſixt point, vnder the leuell or pointe blancke, in all reſpects to be vſed as in the ſixt Chapter is ſhewed, ſauing that now the hanging ſide D G F muſt be turned vpwards, which there was turned downwards, and the angle F D E ſette at the angle of forty fiue degrees, which there was ſet at the ſquare angle.
            Note that if you 
                  ••
               ſte, you may ſette the pointes of mounting, beyond the ſee point, as far as the length of the ſide D E will extende.
            
               Touching the proportion and the timber fit for this Staffe.
               I Thought it not amiſſe to note, that making your Inſtrument into two ſeueral Staues, the fitteſt proportion that I like, is, that each legge of your Staffe be fiue or ſixe feete in length, one inche bread, and one inche and an halfe thicke to receaue the channells.
               The one channell for the graduator to be ſhutte into, off, halfe inche wide, the other for the bolts of the running ſights, to ſlip to and fro in: of one quarter of in inche wide, and the three cheekes encloſing theſe two channels, to bee eche one quarter inche thicke: ſo is your whole inch and halfe thicknes beſtowed.
               Now for him that will beſtowe coſt, let each of theſe legs be made of fiue rule pieces, that is toſay, three, to ſerue for the ſaid thrée cheekes, which muſt be of peare tree or plum tree, as well for tough ſtrength, as to receaue the grauinge, the other two pieces ſerue to fill vp or backe the channelles which muſt be of Cedar, or ſome ſuch very light and ſtronge wood, to the end your Staffe be not ouer heauy. Alſo for a Captaine it may be faſhioned, out to a ſharpe pointe aboue the iointe (not much vnlike the number of a paire of common

fire tongs) to the end, toreceaue thereon the hed of a pike or leading Staffe.
               Or if anie man will beſtowe ſomewhat leſſe coſt, then let each leg bee made but of thrée rule péeces, and haue but one channel, the two out ſides of peare trée; the middlemoſt of ceader as before. But then he muſt haue ſome forecaſt, that the boltes for his running ſight pins, and the bolt that leadeth the graduators apex to and fro, may all runne and worke theyr wils in that one channell, which I know may be done.
               Laſtly, for the common ſort that will beſtow little coſt, let each leg be made but of one péece, keeping the former breadth and thickneſſe, and let the channell or channels bee cut out of the whole woode, but then make him not ouer long, leaſt hee ſagge. For aſſure your ſelfe, the more péeces he is made of, the ſtronger he is from ſagging, and the ſurer from warping. And howſoeuer hee bee made, let him at the leaſt be brought to an eight ſquare, or rounded, for the more pleaſant handling.
               To conclude, anie thing here ſet downe for haſt without figures, that may not bewell conceiued or gathered by the premiſes, my ſelfe will be moſt readie to giue directions for, vpon anie ſmall requeſt. I ſhall eaſily bee heard of about maiſter Treaſurers lodging in the Court, or at Swallowfield by Reading, where I dwell. There dwelleth a verie arteficiall workeman in Hoſier lane, called Iohn Reade, who can further you, whoſe helpe I haue vſed about one or two of theſe ſtaues.
            
            
               Touching Marine cauſes.
               AMongſt many that tooke view of my Familliar Staffe at the Court, the right noble and wopſhipfull Knight, Sir George Carew, Knight Marſhall of England, and chiefe Captaine of the Ile of Wight, tooke no ſmall notice of his neceſſarie parts, and requited me inſtantly to apply him as well for the vſe of the ſea, as I had don for the land: which amongſt a number of other Aſtronomicall and Geometricall concluſions,

I meant to haue reſerued for ny ſecond edition. But yet to ſatiſfie his Worthineſſe and others of like affection: let it be knowen, that for taking the altitude of the Sunne, Moone, or Starre. If you put a ſhort pegge into the centre of your Staffe, and reſt the ſame peg on the very vtter corner of your eie, and then open the legs of your ſtaffe, vntill (with your eie ſo reſted on the ſame peg, and your other eie cloſed) you ſée by the one leg or his ſight pin, the brim or parting of the ſea from the element: by the other leg, the Sunne, Moone, or Starre deſired, there ſhall the graduators apex ſhew you, among the degrées or graduation of the Staffe, the altitude deſired.
               Note that your Staffe being ſhut almoſt cloſe, you may by a thred faſtned to the Apex, pull the Staffe open it pleaſure.
               Then for taking the diſtance of two Starres or Planets, which as I take it, is a ſecond matter vſed at ſea. You cannot poſſibly (as I gather) do it better by the Croſſe ſtaffe it ſelf, thē you and your partner may doe it, after the ſecond manner of the fourtéenth Chapter before.
               I coulde alſo ſhewe you meanes, by applying the extreame of the leuell ſide to your eie, and pulling the graduators apex towards you, how you might take the altitude or diſtance of ſtarres by ſinking of the hanging ſide, by lyttle and little from the ſquare angle, in mae
                     •
                  er, Croſſe ſtaffe wiſe: but theſe things, with a number other
                     ••
                  r haſt I let paſſe, preſuming that the ingenious wil eaſily finde thē out of thēſelues.
               To make a finall end, if for theſe Marine cauſes you make my ſtaffe no longer, then their common Croſſe ſtaues are, I ſee no cauſe, but it is as readie, and my be handled with as much facilitie as their Croſſe ſtaffe. And if yet there remaine anie doubt or defect, I make no doubt, but vppon aduertiſements thereof to ſupplie it.
               Farewell my Familliar Staffe, commend me to mine old acquaintance Richard Stockwel, Gumer of the Ile of Gernſie, if thou méete him, tell him thou art priuided to ſatiſfie him of al our communication had at Greyes this laſt Summer, and let him lodge thee in the ſtored ſhrine of all his pretie conceits.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   