
      
         
            
            
            
            
               THE TRVE MANER of Electing of Popes.
            Written by a French Gentleman, reſident in Rome at this laſt Election.
            Faithfully tranſlated according to the French Copie.
            
               With a Liſt of all the Cardinalls therein aſsiſting and others.
            AT LONDON, Printed by Val. S. for Nathaniell Butter. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            To my Lord the Duke of 
                  Ʋandoſme
            
            
               MY moſt honourable Lord, the late departure of our L. P. Clement the 8. hath adminiſtred vnto me a ſubiect and opportunity during the vacancie, to ſearch out more particularly all points about the election of Popes, and the formes of proceeding therein, as well ancient as moderne, iudgeing it a very inconuenient matter, that we ſhould be ſo addicted to the inveſtigation of the leaſt ſtrange antiquities, as ſome doe, employing their whole ſtudie herein, and to be ignorant of that which occurreth in our owne times, and in other things which touch and more neerely concerne vs. I made therefore a little memoratiue, with intent onely that it ſhould haue been for mine owne particular vſe, that vpon any default of my memory heereafter, I might haue had recourſe to the ſame: But my dutie, (for the honour you vouchſafe me, in being inquiſitiue after my ſtudies, & hauing a care of the ſame) obliging me to giue you aduiſe herein, you did not only deſire to ſee it, as you haue alwaies an incredible affection to vnderſtand, and be acquainted with al honeſt and commendable maters,

with a ſpirit and courage which ſurmounteth your yeares: but further hauing ſeen the ſame, you thought it expedient, that it ſhould bee publiſhed and imprinted: It being not altogether impertinent to my relations of Rome, which before I preſented to you, reduced as they ſaiy, within the length of a little foote; according to the proportion of my age of fourteene yeares. It ſhall bee therefore you, my good Lord, to whome they that reade this Treatiſe, and take any contentment therein, muſt giue thanks; euen as on the contrary, they that out of a prowd humor, diſdaine and contemne whatſoeuer is not done by themſelues, ſhall haue ſomthing to ſay againſt you, and not againſt me, that doth but onely obey and obſerue your will and pleaſure, as I ought to doe; hauing no other reference heerein, but to demonſtrate by all meanes poſsible, that I am,
            
               My Lord,
               Your thrice humble and moſt obedient ſeruant, Hierome Bignon.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A briefe Treatiſe touching the Election of the Pope.
            
               
                  CHAP. I. Divers maners, wherein heretofore they have proceeded to the Election of the Popes.
               
                  THe maner of creating and chooſing the Popes at Rome, hath bin divers, according to the diverſitie of times.
               Some will needes affirme, that at the beginning he that was preſent Pope, deſigned and ordained his ſucceſſour: and that Saint Peter after this maner eſtabliſhed Saint Clement, to governe and rule the Church after him. But that ſo reſting without an other example, and not being followed afterwards, one can make no rule nor order of it, the ſame hauing taken no effect: becauſe Saint Clement ſucceeded not Saint Peter, but Linus, and after him Cletus: and Saint Clement was but the third after Saint Peter: We likewiſe find it written, that Linus and Cletus were alſo choſen by Saint Peter; not for ſucceſſors,

nor to be intentiue on prayer and preaching, neither to haue pontificall iuriſdiction, but onelie for ayde and aſſiſtaunce in externall and temporall matters. And that Saint Clement woulde not embrace this eſtabliſhment, ſo much in modeſtie, as by diuine inſpiration, for feare leſt the example of ſuch a nomination ſhould bee drawne to a cuſtome in ſucceeding times, and that therby the power and authoritie of the Church might bee diminiſhed in chooſing or inſtituting of a Paſtor: As alſo by the Canon of the Apoſtles 76. And by the Counſell of Antioch, Chap. 23. it is not lawfull for a Biſhop, being at the point of death, to chooſe and appoint in his place a ſucceſſour. By which, it may be gathered, that this cuſtome was vſurped by ſome Biſhops, of whome there are diuers examples. Certaine it is, that after Saint Clement, all the Popes were made and created by the voyce and ſuffragation of the Clergie and Chriſtian people of the Cittie of Rome, and by the Biſhoppes of other Prouinces that then were there. The which was obſerued till the ſchiſme that fell out betweene Damaſus and Vrſicinus, about the yeare of our Lord, 369.
               For Damaſus being then choſen Pope, by one part of the people and Clergie, and Vrſicinus by another, and both of them ſupported by their fauorites: they both were deſirous to hold and maintaine this dignitie, which cauſed great factions and ſedition, and went ſo farre, that they came to handblowes: So that one day, there was an hundred ſeauen and thirtie dead bodies left in a Church; for which cauſe, the Emperour afterward interpoſed

his authoritie, in caſe of any ſuch ſciſme hereafter ordaining him, whom he would haue to be Pope. And in this ſort was Damaſcene eſtabliſhed by the authoritie of the Emperour Vaelentinian. And not long after, there occurred the like diuiſion, betweene Eulalius and Bonifacius, and great ſedition was raiſed within the Cittie of Rome vppon this occaſion, and Symmachus the Gouernour not being able to appeaſe or ſet downe anie order for the ſame, in the ende by the meere authoritie and power Imperiall of the Emperour Honorius, Boniface was made Pope. This dignitie hauing bene before, as it were ſequeſtred for the time, by the Emperour, and committed to the Biſhop of Spoleti, that then was during the feaſt of Eaſter. And ſo there grew then diuiſion betweene Symachus and Laurentius: the which king Theodorick, making knowne, in an aſſemblie helde at Rauenna, hee confirmed Symachus.
               
               And afterwardes the cauſe of ſciſme ceaſing, to preuent the tumult and diſorder that might grow thervpon, the Emperour was alwaies wont in ſuch elections to bee preſent. And it came to this point, that an election of the Pope, made by the people and Cleargie, was not auayleable, except it were ratified and confirmed by the Emperour: in that hee elected, durſt not proceede to his conſecration, without the Princes will and conſent, vnto whom, for the right, and prerogatiue of confirmation, a certaine ſumme of money was giuen.
               
                  This maner of proceeding continued, while the daies of the Emperour Conſtantine, the 3: who beeing mooued by the good and holie life of Pope Benedict, 2. which was in the yeare, 686. he ſent vnto him a conſtitution, by which it was ordained & decreed, that whoſoeuer afterwards ſhold be choſen, by the cleargie and people of Rome, he was incontinently to bee reputed for the true Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt, without attending therein the authoritie of the Emperour of Conſtantinople, or of the Exacque of Italie, reſident in Ravenna.
               
               Afterwards in the yeare 773. Pope Hadrian the firſt, in the counſell of Lateran, wherin there was 153. Biſhops aſſembled in the Church of Saint Sauiour in Rome, with their aduiſe and conſent, gaue the power of electing and chooſing pope to Charlemaine King of France, who was afterwards made Emperour, for driuing the Lombards out of Italie: But this continued no long time, becauſe after that the Emperour Loys the debonaire Sonne to Charlemaine, releaſed this royall prerogatiue, in the dayes of pope Paſchall the firſt, and remyſed vnto the Cleargie, and people of Rome, the full and free power of creating and electing of Popes, which continued and tooke place, for a long time after. But pope, Leo S. hauing bin maintained in the ſeate with armes, by the Emperour Otho the 1. in recompence of his benefit, and being offended with the in conſtancie & mutability of the people, he tranſferred all the authoritie of creating and making popes, vnto the perſon of the Emperour Otho the 1. about the yeare, 963.
               
               
                  
                  Othos ſucceſſors vſed this authoritie and priuiledge til the time of the Emperour Henry the 4. vnder whom pope Gregory the 7. called before Hildebrand: who was choſen in the yeare 1073. ſurrendred the ſame prerogatiue again, vnto the clergie, and people of Rome, and preſently after, pope Paſchall 2. hauing remiſed it into the handes of the Emperour, Henry 5. hee incontinently after reuoked the ſame againe.
               In the yeare 1509. Pope Nicholas 2. in the counſell of Latran. 4. made a Decree touching the election of Popes, importing thus much: that firſt the Cardinall Biſhops would treate amongſt themſelues of the election, conferring afterwardes with the other Cardinalles about the ſame, and ſo the election by them made, to be approoued and conſented vnto by all the people, and cleargie of Rome, vſing theſe words: Vt Cardinalis Epiſcopi diligentiſſime ſimul de electione tractantes, mox Chriſti clericos Cardinales adhibeant: ſic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      reliquus clerus, & populus ad conſenſum nouae electionis accedat: And yet for all this, the Emperors would not afterwards giue vp this their right, and pretention, as we haue before declared. And then by little and little this prerogatiue came to the hands of ſo many Cardinalles onelie, as well thoſe that were Biſhops, as others, that were Prieſts and Deacons.
               At laſt, Gregorie 1
                     •
                  , in the Counſell of Lyons, in the yeare 1274. inſtituted the manner of the Popes election, by the Cardinalles: which were all to bee ſhutte and encloſed in one place, called the

Conclaue, in the towne where the precedēt pope ſhould depar: ſo that no body might goe in, nor come out, or conferre, by letters, meſſengers, or otherwiſe, with the ſame Cardinalles, while they had created a Pope, to whome they brought, and deliuered their ordinarie refection at a window: And if in the ſpace of three dayes ſithence their entrance, they had not agreed vppon an election, it is ſaid, that for fiue daies after, they were to haue but onely one diſhe at dinner, or ſupper: And after this, if they yet continued longer without making an election, they were to haue nothing giuen them, but bread, wine, and water, while they had choſen a Pope: After the deceaſe of the pope, they were to deferre their ſeſſion for 10. dayes, to expect, and attend for the abſent Cardinalles, before they entred into the Conclaue: Although notwithſtanding, entrance was not forbidden thē, ſo they came afterward, the matter being yet entire, and not treated of. The ſame was confirmed by Pope Clement the 5: who by his conſtitution forbad that ſuch a forme ſhould not be corrected, changed, nor altered by the Cardinalls in Sede Vacante, and that nothing might be added or taken from it, in any ſort whatſoeuer: But by a Bull of Pope Clement the 6. there was ſome moderation, as wel for the forme of the Conclaue, wherin they were permitted to make ſeparations, & to furniſh celles for eache Cardinall, with tapiſtries onely, as for the meate they were to haue brought them. It remaineth therfore, that wee a little more particularlie touche the forme, and order, which is vſed at

this day, in ſuch an election, and all that which palſeth, and is performed in the Conclaue.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of the forme, and order, which they vſe and proceede in at this preſent, to the election of a Pope.
               PReſently after the Pope is departed, yea and euen when they ſee, or that they haue aduertiſement from the Phyſitions that hee is at the laſt caſt, the Cardinalls which are then in Rome, aſſemble together in the priuy Conſiſtory, to conſult for the gouernment of the towne, and to prouide for the affaires of the vacancie: & then the ſeate being vacant, they are apparelled in Coqueſts Rochettes, & Mozzettes without Copes, in ſigne of Iuriſdiction, the people of the towne all in armes, guarde at the gates of the Cittie, the Cardinalls Pallaces, and in other quarters.
               The day after the Cardinalles reaſſemble together in the ſame place, for the like effect, and to determine of ſuch affaires as then occurre, as alſo to prouide, for the preparation & adopting of that which is neceſſarie for the holding of Conclaue.
               Afterwards they carrie the corps of the deceaſed Pope ordinarilie into S. Peters Church, except the departed pope, made choice of his ſepultur in ſome other place. Therto all the Cardinalles preſentially aſſiſt, which are at the aſſemblie: the dead body is reueſted with Pontifical ornaments, & laid vpon a bedſtead in the Church, or ſome chapell of the ſame, where the people come & kiſſe his feete.
               In the daies following, the Cardinalls ſolemnize

the Popes obſequies: and there is a convention in the veſtrie of Saint Peters, wherin the Princes Embaſſadors do vſe to enter, making their remonſtrations, & motions touching the Election to be performed. During the vacancie, the great Chamberlain gouerns Rome. But ſo ther is no expedition nor diſpatch of any thing admitted in the Apoſtolicall Chancerie, while there be a new Pope. And in briefe, as ſoone as the Pope hath yeelded vp his breath, the Vice-chāceler taketh the Bulls or Seales, cauſeth thē publiquely to be broken, raſed out, & that ſide to be taken away of them, wheron the deceaſed Popes name was written, ſo that they cannot be ſealed withall. And the other ſide wheron are grauen the heads of Saint Peter and Paule, they wrap within a linnen cloth, which he layeth vp in ſome caſket, with his ſeale, & cōmitteth them into the hands of the Chamberlaine. Whoſe office, together, with that of the Penitentiaries, continueth during the vacancy: And if they ſhould chance to die, the Cardinalles might diſcharge the ſame, for the time onely of ſuch a Vacancie.
               
               Nine dayes after the Popes death, they celebrate the Maſſe of the Holy Ghoſt, and beeing finiſhed with ſinging the Hymne, Veni ſancte Spiritus, they enter into the Conclaue.
               The Conclaue at Rome, is in a place ioyning to Saint Peters Churche, within the Popes Pallace, in Sixtus his Chapell, as bigge as a great Church, where is portraied the laſt Iudgement, and it was the excellent worke-manſhip of Michael Angelo: which chapell they ſet forth after the manner of a

Domitorie in Convents, but that there are many great allies, and ſome more leſſe, & narrower, and with the order of celles, or little cabinets, wherin the Cardinalls lie. To the which Conclaue, the chappell of Pauline, & the great Royall Hall abutt, and are adioyning, beeing as it were a part of the ſame. The gates, lower windows, and all acceſſes, are ſo mured, and cloſed vp, that one cannot talke, or communicate with any of thoſe within.
               When they are entred into the Conclaue, they aſſemble together in the chappell Pauline, where they conſult of all things which concerns the gouernment of the Conclaue, & the ſame day, they take the oaths of the Officers, deputed for the guard of the Conclaue, as well of thoſe without, as of them within.
               At the beginning, after they are entred, the Cō
                  claue remains open, for ſome little time, and then Princes Ambaſſadours vſe to go in, and make their recommendations, and ſollicitations in fauour of him, or them, whom they knowe to be beſt liked, and affected by their Princes.
               After this, the Conclaue is ſhut, and then no man may any more goe in, nor communicate in any ſort, with any one without, neither by letters, meſſengers, nor otherwiſe: nor likewiſe go out, till there be a new Pope created, except ſome Cardinall chaunce to arriue, who alwayes during the Conclaue, may haue free entrance.
               And yet this is to be obſerued, that all Cardinalls are not priuiledged to enter in, except they be Byſhops, Prieſts, or Deacōs, at the leaſt, for Cardinals

Subdeacons, haue no voice therin, nor are admitted any entrance: And yet we finde that the Cardinall of Auſtria, beeing but a Subdeacon, entred into the Conclaue of Sextus 5. by reaſon of a warrant or briefe that hee had from Gregorie. 13. by meanes of which, it was graunted him, and the which hee ſhewed and preſented, when they would haue denyed his entrance.
               Euery day the neceſſarie prouiſion is brought them, which they giue them in at a window, or by the wicket of the gate, before which there is treble garde, wherof the neereſt to the gate, conſiſtes of the Prelates that are in Rome, who looke that none may communicate with thoſe that are incloſed in the Conclaue, and for this cauſe, they ſearche the Veſſells and platters, to ſee whether there bee not any letters hidden in the ſame.
               Euery Cardinal within the conclaue, can haue no more, but two men to ſerue him, whom they call Conclauiſtes.
               
               The conclaue being cloſed, the day following the Deane of the Cardinalls after the celebrating of Maſſe, adminiſtreth the holie Communion to all the Cardinalles.
               After this the Conclauiſtes aſſemble together, in the Chapell Pauline, before the maiſter of the Ceremonies, who taketh notice of them, and ſees whether they do not execute their appointed number.
               Alſo at the beginning the maiſter of the ceremonies reades the Bull of Pius 4. wherein it is expreſſed, that the Cardinalls entring into the Conclaue, ſhould bee ſworne.
               Euery daye in Paules Chappell, one of the Cardinalls

celebrates the Maſſe of the Holy Ghoſt, and ſo they proceede to the election of the Pope: which for the moſt part alſo is performed after two manners, one by Scrutinie, & the other by Adoration.
               The ſcrutenie is held after this ſort: euery Cardinall writes within a certaine billet of paper, his voice and choice, and at the end of Maſſe, he putteth it into the great challice of Gold, which ſtandeth vpon the Altar: Then al the billets are powred forth vpon a little table, which for this purpoſe is ſet before the Altar: There are three of the Cardinalls, which in the ſight, and preſence of all the reſt, vnfold theſe little rulles, or billets, pronouncing aloude his name, who hath ſubſcribed to euery of them, and the Cardinalls write & ſet downe in a ſheet of paper, the nūber of the voices which euery one hath, to know who hath moſt.
               Where by the way we muſt note, that to chooſe, & create a Pope, there muſt cōcurre two thirds of al the Cardinals voices in the cōclaue by the conſtitutiō of Pope Alexāder, 3. ſet down in the Chap. Licet de vitāda de electione, in the Decretals: For if in ſuch a ſcrutenie, ther is not any one, with whō the two thirds accur; at the ſame inſtāt they caſt al the billets into the fire, & by this means the affaire is referred ouer to ſome other time, whē they make and recommence an other ſcrutenie in the ſame forme: the which, by reaſon of this, vſeth to be repeated & reiterated many times, while theſe two thirds occurre in one perſon. The which falls out very ſeldome, by way of ſcrutenie: ſo as they are vrged to haue recourſe to adoratiō. Notwithſtanding,

the want of voices in ſcrutenie is ſometimes ſupplied by the Acceſsi, ſo called: which is, when thoſe that gaue their ſuffragation & voice by billet to ſome other, they now giue it to him whom they ſee to haue moſt voices, & ſing theſe wordes; Accedo ad Cardinalem talem: from whence that word of Acceſsi came. And to the ende that no fraud may be committed herein, he that giues his voice by ſuch Acceſſion, ſayes; Let them looke on my billet, which hath on the toppe ſuch a deuiſe: And that by this, on may know that he had nominated an other: And this is for feare, leaſt it ſhould happen, that he which had giuen his voice by billet to one, might giue it again by this forme of Acceſſe to an other: which would be two voices in one mans perſon, inſtead of one.
               The billets they vſe, are made after his faſhion: The Cardinall that giues his voice, takes a leafe of paper, folded into diuers plightes, and vpon the laſt he writes his owne name: and in the two firſt, he cauſeth the Cardinalls name to whom he will giue his voice to be written by his Conclauiſe, in this maner: Ego Eligo in ſummum pontiſicem Reuerendiſſ. Dominum meum Cardinalem. N. Afterwards they chooſe the billet at both endes: vpon which they alſo ſet ſome deuiſe at the Cardinalls pleaſure, that without vnfolding the ſame, it may bee known, by the external deuiſe.
               There is yet an other kind of ſcrutenie, which they call open, or apertis vocibus, which is, when the Cardinalls being aſſembled together, declare aloude him, whom they chooſe.
               
                  The other maner, which is Adoration: is, when the Cardinalles being aſſembled together in the Chappell, turne towardes him, whom they deſire to be made Pope, doing reuerence vnto him, and bending the knees very lowe, and when they ſee that the two thirds are gone to this maner of Adoration, The Cardinall thus adored, is made Pope.
               And though this maner of Election, be referred to that which is called by the auncients, and in the cannon law, per inſpirationem, and that they ſay, it is the way of the holy Ghoſt, which was, whē all with one voice without any treatie, or precedent ſcruteny, and without any formalitie, concurre, as it were by diuine inſpiration, to ſay, that ſuch a one muſt bee made Pope, it being thus equally deſigned by euery one.
               Notwithſtanding this forme of Adoration is not eſteemed by many, ſo lawfull, and auaileable as ſcrutenie: becauſe by meanes of contentions, and partialities, there may be ſome fraude or violence committed therein, in that the weaker ſide may be drawne to Adoration by the example of thoſe more mightie, and thoſe fearful, induced by them more reſolute. And oftentimes it hapneth, that thoſe who would haue conſented to the Electiō of ſome one, by free voice, ſeeing this generall and violent concurrance in Adoration, they ſuffer themſelues to be caried away with the violence of this ſtreame. That by this they may demonſtrate, how they haue a part in ſuch an Election, and they will not bee the laſt herein, for

feare of diſpleaſing and incurring his diſpleaſure who ſhould be choſen.
               All this is performed in Paules Chappell, in the ordained place, for the Popes Election. Ther was heretofore a third manner of the Popes Election, by forme of comprimiſe: & this was, when all the Cardinalls vppon ſome amongſt them, to whom they wholy referred themſelues, for the chooſing and Electing of him, whom they ſhould iudge moſt capable: but this faſhion, though it be one of the three manners of Election approued of in the Chap: Quia propter, de Electione, in the Decretalls, is more vſed at Rome: wherof ſome giue this reaſon, becauſe this power of nominating a Pope after the death of Alexander the 5. being giuen to Baltaſar Coſſa, then Cardinall of S. Euſtachio, hee made himſelfe Pope, ſaying: Ego ſum papa. And he was called Iohn, the 23.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. III. What is obſerued, when the Elestion is performed, and after.
               VVHen the two thirds of the voices concur in one perſō, be it by ſcrutenie ſecret, or open, by meanes of Acceſſe, or by way of Adoration, he out of doubt is truly Pope. Notwithſtanding the other Cardinalls alſo, vſe to giue their conſent thereunto. And then the chiefe Cardinal Biſhop, all the other being ſet, pronounceth, and declareth in the name of all the Colledge, that he chooſeth ſuch an one for Pope. And demādeth of him how he is affected, and willing to vndertake the ſame, which he hauing declared, and accepting of the Election, all riſe vp to gratifie him: and at the ſame inſtant, putting on his Rochet, they cauſe him to ſit downe in a prepared ſeate, which is placed before the table, neere the Altar, they giue him the fiſhers ring, & cauſe him to deliuer and make knowne, by what name he wil be called.
               This forme of changing name, was brought in, receiued and vſed, ſince the time of Pope Iohn the 12. who was choſen in the yeare, 155: he being before called Octauian: yet diuers aſcribe this inſtitution to Pope Sergius, 2. who was in the yeare, 844.
               Hauing therfore declared what name he wil take vpon him, he vſeth to ſubſcribe to the conſtitutions,

which had bene agreed vppon, and ſworne vnto, by all the Cardinalls, before the election, & to ſigne certaine ſupplications, and requeſts.
               In the mean while, the chiefeſt of the Cardinal Deacons, opening a little windowe, from whence the people which attend, may ſee, and be ſeene, he ſhewes forth a Croſſe, pronouncing theſe words, with a loud voice; Annuncio vobis gandiū magnū: Papam habemus. Reuerēdiſſ. Cardinalis E
                        •
                     orētinus electus eſt in ſummū Pontificē, & elegit ſibi nomen, Leo 2.
               
               This being done, he is diſveſted of his common garments, which belong to the clearks of the Ceremonies, and reveſted with all the habits Pontificall, and cauſing him to ſit vpon the Aultar, all the Cardinalls a rowe doe him reuerence, in kiſſing his feete, hands, and mouth.
               During this entercourſe of Ceremonie, all the gates of the Conclaue are opened, the barres, and walls which cloſed and mured the paſſages, gates, and windows, are broken down, & ouerthrowen: & the Souldiers entering confuſedly, as it were by force, take & pill whatſoeuer they meete withal in their way. And this is the reaſō, that when any one is declared Pope, the Conclauiſtes do all they can, to ramaſſe, & lay cloſe vp, and get together, all the beſt things that belong to their Cardinall: And in in like maner the people vſe to ruſh into his houſe that is choſen, & to pillage the ſame.
               At the ſame time, the newe Pope is carryed into Saint Peters Churche, followed with the Channons and Singing men of the ſame Churche, which ſing; Ecce Sacerdos Magnus?
               
               
                  And after hee hath proſtrated himſelfe on the earth, and made his prayer, hee is placed vpon the great & high Pontificall Chayre, where, Te Deum laudamus is ſaid: There againe before the holy aſſemblie, & multitude of people, which come thither in great preaſſe, hee is adored by the Cardinalls, Biſhops, Prelates, and others. And then hee giueth generall Abſolution, and his Benediction to euery one, with much Solemnitie, & Ceremonies; which graunt full Indulgence: and incontinently after he is carryed into Saint Peters Pallace, highly reuerenced by euery one, and whereof hee receiues ſuch contentment, as euery one may eaſilie iudge.
               Some daies after, with great Pomp, and Magnificence, the new Pope is ſolemnely Crowned, in an eminent place, which is before the Porche of Saint Peters, vpon a ſcaffolde, richly adorned and ſet forth, and there is put vpon his head, the Hara, or triple Crowne, called Regnum.
               
               
                  Sigiſbert, and Aimoinus write, that this crowne being enriched with many precious ſtones, and other beautifull ornaments, and being ſent to Clouis King of France, by the Emperour Anaſtace, Clouis ſent it againe, for a preſent and gift, to the Church of Saint Peters in Rome.
               
               This Crowne is ſet on the Popes head, by the chiefeſt of the Cardinall Deacons, to whom this office is appropriate, and then many other notable Ceremonies are performed: and amongſt others, ſome putting fire to towe, cryeth out aloude: Pater ſancte, ſic tranſit gloria Mundi; Omnis caro ſaevum,

& omnis gloria eius ſicut flos agri. From thence hee goes on Proceſſion to Saint Iohn Laterans, accompanied with all the Cardinalls, and Prelates which are in Rome, with all his Officers, and with manie others, Lordes and Gentlemen, and this Proceſſion is on horſebacke, after the manner of a magnificent entrie, with great Pomp and Solemnitie: the Order, Forme, and Magnificence whereof, would bee to long here to repreſent. At the ende of this Proceſſion, the Pope vſeth to feaſt all the Cardinalls.
               There is an other thing about Conſecration, which is performed, when the choſen Pope, had not before bene conſecrated Byſhop, in which caſe there are alſo many other Solemnities vſed, about this Conſecration.
            
            
               
               The election of Pope Leo the 11. placed at this preſent in the Cathedrall ſeate.
               With a liſt of ſuch Cardinals as were there, and aſsiſted at this ſolemnitie, and of all the reſt that haue place in Rome Conclaue.
               
               
                  POpe Clement the 8. called before Hippolitus Aldobrandin, Cardinall of Saint Pancrace, & great Penetentiarie, was after the deceaſe of Innocent the ninth choſen Pope, the thirtie day of Ianuarie, 1592. He held the ſeate for the ſpace of thirteene yeeres, one Moneth, and fiue dayes. A father verie memorable, and recommendable for his great piety, deuotion, and charity, with other high and rare vertues, as alſo for his ſingular prudence in the management of affaires: He departed the third day of March about ten a clock at night.
               After his deceaſe, all ceremonies and ſolemnities requiſite in ſuch a caſe, as well for his buriall, as others, were obſerued, with many aſſemblies, and congregations in the vſuall places.
               The Conclaue was ſo prepared, that there was no Celles in Sixtus the fourth his Chappell, as before there was woont to bee: but all the Celles and Chambrets were addreſſed and prepared in the greateſt part of Saint Peters Pallace: That is to ſay, in the firſt, ſecond, and third hall, within the

hall of the Conſiſtorie, Leonine, and Gregorian, and in the moſt of the chambers of the Pallace.
               The Cardinals entred into the Conclaue, the fourteenth of the ſame Moneth of March, and there was of them to the number of three-ſcore and one. The Scrutenie was diuerſe times ſet on foote, and many Cardinals propounded. And amongſt others, my Lord Cardinall Baronius, who at the beginning had thirtie voices, and in the daies following, they amounted to the number of ſeuen or eight and thirtie, which was not yet a ſufficient number to make the two thirds: although it was a thing which he no wayes contended after, but on the contrarie eſtranged himſelfe from it as much as might be, doing whatſoeuer hee could to hinder this proceeding. There was alſo ſome others propounded, againſt whom, excluſions and oppoſitions were made: But the firſt day of Aprill, when they came to mention my Lord Cardinall of Florence, there was preſently ſuch a concurrence, & conſent on all parts, that without making any ſcruple or doubt in the matter, they being in Paules Chappell, the place ordained for ſuch elections euery one ran to adoration, and it was begun by my Lord Cardinall of Ioyeuſe.
               
               And at ſo great a promptitude, alacritie, and harmonie of all willes, that we neede not to doubt but it was a verie diuine inſpiration: euen they themſelues, who (as was ſuppoſed) would haue beene ſome obſtacle, and that had attempted and made ſhew of ſome ſuch matter, concurring therein with their full conſent, becauſe there was no

bodie, that would either heare or adheere vnto them. And thus the ſame day, being the firſt of Aprill, about ſeuen a clocke in the dawning, my Lord Cardinall of Florence, or de Medices, was choſen Pope, and tooke vpon him the name of Leo the eleuenth.
               SInce the publiſhing of this Relation, newes is come by diuerſe letters of the death of this Leo: and of an other Election in hand: who (as it is ſuppoſed) was made away by poyſon: but becauſe there is yet no vndoubted certaintie of the ſame, I would bee loath to publiſh any priuate aduertiſements, or to ſet that for infallible truth, which is onely grounded vpon ſurmiſes: wherefore it will bee better to attend ſome further aduertiſement, when I wil be readie (curteous Reader) to acquaint thee withall. In the meane while be ſatisfied with this which hath beene deliuered by an eye witneſſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A Liſt of the Cardinalls aſsiſtants: and thoſe abſent are marked with a ſtarre.
            
            
               1 Du Perron a French-man, Biſhop of Eureux.
               
               2 Tarugi a Florentine, aged 81. yeares.
               3 Sfoudrato, Nephew to Pope Gregorie the 14.
               4 Platto, a Milaneſe, 56. yeares of age.
               5 Scraſino Oliuario.
               
               6 Bianchetto, a Bologneſe of 52. yeares.
               7 Biſhop of Cracouia.*
               8 Viſconte, a Milaneſe of 58. yeares.
               9 Sanneſio.
               
               10 Aquauiua, a Neapolitane of 52. yeares.
               11 Montalto, Nephew to Pope Sixte the fifth, of 38. yeares.
               12 Sauli a Geneuoiſe, of 66. yeares.
               13 Charles Emanuel Pio of Sauoy.
               
               14 Roias.*
               15 Ginuſio.*
               16 S. Clement, borne at Montferrat, of 58. yeares.
               17 Gueuarre.
               
               18 Buffalo.
               
               19 Bellarmine, a Tuskan and Ieſuite of 64. yeares.
               20 Lorraine.*
               21 Mantica of Friali, of 64. yeares.
               22 Baronius, a Neapolitane of 66. yeares.
               23 Come, Deane of the Cardinals Biſhops of Hoſtia,
                  
borne in Come, a Towne of Lonibardit, of 78. yeares.
               24 Madruſſo, Biſhop of Trante.
               
               25 Camerin, of the Dukedome of Spolette, a towne vnder the Papate of 64. yeares.
               26 Pallotta, borne in Montalte in Italie.
               
               27 Sourdis, a French-man, of 34. yeares.
               28 Monopoli.
               
               29 Beuilaqua Ferrarois, of 38. yeares.
               30 Gallo, borne in the Marq: of Ancone, a Towne vnder the Pope, of 32. yeares.
               31 Verone, a Venetian of 76. yeares.
               32 S. Ceſaree, Nephew to Aldobrandin.
               
               33 Conti, Biſhop of Ancone.
               
               34 S. George, about 50. yeares of age.
               35 Diatriſtano, a Bohemian, of 38. yeares.
               36 Delfino, Biſhop of Vincence.
               
               37 D'Oria.
               
               38 Toſco, of 66. yeares.
               39 Aldobrandin, a Florentine, Nephew to Pope Clement the 8. laſt deceaſed, about the age of 34. yeares.
               40 Sforſa, a Roman, of 48. yeares.
               41 Borgheſe of Siene, of 58. yeares.
               42 Borromee, a Milaneſe, of 42. yeares.
               43 Valente.
               
               44 Monte, of 57. yeares.
               45 SSti, fourth Nephew to Pope Innocent the 9. of 38. yeares.
               46 Ioyeuſe, of the renowned familie of the Ioyeuſes, and Protector of the French affaires.
               47 Pinello, a Genowaiſe, of 66. yeares.
               
                  48 Ferneſe, a Roman.
               49 Spinello.
               
               50 Sapata.*
               51 Arigona, a Milaneſe of 63. yeares.
               52 Agucchio.
               
               53 Deti, kinsman to the laſt Pope deceaſed by the mothers ſide.
               54 Eſt, a Ferrareſe of 38. yeares.
               55 Iuſtinian, a Genowaiſe, of 58. yeares.
               56 Giury, a French-man, of 56. yeares.
               57 Bandini, a Florentine of 52. yeares.
               58 Florence, or De Medices, a Florentine of 69. years, or thereabout.
               59 Auila, a Spaniard, Protector for Spaine.
               
               60 Perreti.
               
               61 S. Marcel, a Genowaiſe of 62. yeares.
               62 Montelpero, borne in the Marquiſate of Ancone, Generall of the Auguſtines, of 60. yeares.
               63 Gondy.*
               64 Ceſis, a Roman, of 48. yeares.
               65 Parauicino, a Roman, by originall a Griſon, the Almaine Protector, of 58. yeares.
               66 Tauerna.
               
               67 Pamfilio.
               
               68 Aſcoli, born in Corregio in Lombardie, of 66. years.
               69 Colonne, a Roman.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   