
      
         
            
            
            Mr. GEORGE
BLACKWEL,
(Made by Pope Clement 8. Arch
               priest
of England) his Anſweres
vpon ſundry his Examinations:
Together, with his Approbation and
taking of the Oath of Allegeance:
And his Letter written to his Aſsiſtants,
and brethren, moouing them not onely
to take the ſaid Oath, but to aduiſe
all Romiſh Catholikes ſo
to doe.
            ¶IMPRINTED AT
London by Robert Barker,
Printer to the Kings moſt
Excellent Maieſtie.
1607.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               THE
FIRST EXAMINATION
OF Mr
George Blackwell Arch
Prieſt, aſsigned by the Pope
for England.
               Taken at Lambeth by the most
Reuerend Father in God, the
L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury
his Grace and ſome others, the
25. day of Iune, 1607.
               
                  
                     BEeing demanded,
                  M Blackwel was apprehended neere Clerken well on Midſummer day at night, viz. 24 Iunij.
Whether his name
were Blackwel, He anſwered
out of a place
of 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Chryſostome writing
vpo thoſe words,
Eſtote prudentes ſi
                        〈…〉
                     t
ſerpentes, & ſimplices ſicut columbae; That
before hee came into trouble, he was to vſe
all caution for the preſeruation of his head,
that is, of his faith: but now that he is apprehended,
hee is to deale ſimply without

any duplicitie. And there upon he acknowledged
his name to bee George Blackwell,
and that he was Arch-Prieſt, which Office
hee hath borne about nine or ten yeeres.
               Georgius Blackwellus
Archipres-byter.
            
            
               ¶The ſecond Examination of
M. Blackwell taken at
Lambeth, &c. the 26.
of Iune 1607.
               
                  HEe confeſſeth, he hath not
his Pardon, but ſayth that
he laboured to haue obtained
it: but no man durſt
mooue for it, his name being
ſo knowen.
               Being demanded, How hee durſt take
ſuch an Office vpon him as he hath, to direct
and command, firſt her late Maieſties,
and now the Kings Subjects without their
conſent, hee anſwereth; That it was layd

vpon) him without his ſeeking for it: That
hee vndertooke onely to keepe the Prieſts
in order, and to ſtay all vnlawfull attempts
ſo farre as he was able &c.
               Georgius Blackwellus
Archi presbyter.
            
            
               ¶The third Examination of
M. Blackwell, taken at
Lambeth, &c. the laſt day
of Iune 1607.
               
                  MAſter Blackwell being required
to deliuer his knowledge

                     〈…〉
                  hing a Booke lately
come forth, Intituled, Quaeſtiones
duae de ſacris alienis non
adeundis, ad vſum praxim
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , Angliae breuiter
explicate: concerning the occaſion, and
authour of it, ſaith, that as he thinketh,
M. Parſons is the authour of it; and that he
ſo thinketh, by reaſon of the ſubſcription,
R. P. and vpon no other information.
               
                  
That the occaſion of the treatiſe (as he
ſuppoſeth) was a certaine ſhort Pamphlet
of a ſheete and an halfe, as hee gueſſeth,
written by Thomas Wright a Prieſt, conteining
certaine reaſons, to prooue it lawfull
for Recuſants, to goe to the Church here
in England; which reaſons being ſent to
Rome (but not by this Examinate, nor
with his priuitie) were anſwered in ſuch
ſort, as in the ſaid Treatiſe doeth appeare.
               Being hereupon demaunded, whether
the ſaid treatiſe written by M. Parſons as aforeſaid,
bee generally receiued by the
Prieſtes here in England, as conteining a
true deciſion of the points it handleth: he
anſwereth, that the ſame notwithſtanding,
unuſ quiſ que abundat in ſuo ſenſu, as he ſuppoſeth,
&c.
               Georgius Blackwellus,
Archi-presbyter.
            
            
               
               ¶The fourth Examination of
M. Blackwell, taken at
Lambeth, &c. the firſt of
Iuly 1607.
               Maſter Blackewell confeſſeth,
               
                  THat he was appointed Archprieſt
by Henry Cardinall
Caietane, as appeareth 
                     〈…〉
                  
the ſaid Cardinals Letter, beginning,
The effect of this Breue and of the other, is ſet downe in the latter end. 
                  Scitum est &c. and
dated from Rome the 7. of March, 1598.
               That the ſaid Cardinall together with
the ſaid Letter, ſent vnto him certaine inſtructions
for his direction, and better execution
of his Office, the firſt whereof beginneth
thus, Cùm praecipua intentio ſuae ſanctitatis
ſit, &c. They bare the ſame date
with the ſaid Letter, viz. 7o. Martij, 1598.
               That hee receiued the ſaid Letter and
inſtructions the 9. day of May following,
viz. anno 1598.
               That vpon the receit thereof, hee acquainted
two Prieſts with the contents of

them, and from that time forward did execute
his Office for peace, and for reſtraint
of the ſtubbornneſſe of ſome.
               That in Nouember following, another
Letter was directed vnto him from the ſaid
Cardinall, beginning, Admodum Reuerende,
&c. and bearing date 10. Nouember,
Anno. 1598.
               That the yeere after he receiued a Breue
from Pope Clement the 8. for the Confirmation
of his Office. The Breue began
thus: Ad futuram rei memoriam, &c. and
bare date 6o Aprilis, Anno 1599.
               That hee made the ſame knowen vnto
ſome of his Aſsiſtants; that the ſame yeere
hee receiued certaine Spirituall Faculties
from Cardinall Caietane, in number, eight:
which he ſent vnto ſome of his Aſsiſtants.
The Faculties were thus intituled, Facultates
concedendae Sacerdotibus, &c. and his
Letter which he ſent vnto his Coadiutors,
began thus: Dilectiſs. Coadintores, iam tandem
à ſuperioribus deducta est ad me poteſtas
communicandi facultates, &c. My beloued

Coadiutors, now at the laſt, is brought vnto
me from my Superiours, authoritie to
graunt Faculties, &c.
               
                  Memorandum, that the Copies of all the
ſaid Breues and Letters were in the hands
of the L. Archbiſhop of Canturbury, and
acknowledged to be true by M. Blackwell.
               
               Georgius Blackwellus, Archi-presbyter.
            
            
               ¶The fift Examination taken
at Lambeth, &c. the ſecond
of Iuly 1607.
               Maſter Blackwel confeſſeth,
               
                  THat he receiued another Breue
from Clement the 8. beginning,
Cùm nobiliſsimum Angliae Regnum,
&c. and dated from S.
Makes in Rome, 17. Auguſti Anno 1601.
               That he publiſhed the ſaid Breue, wherin
hee is declared to bee Arch-prieſt in the
whole Realme of England, and to be placed
by the ſame authority the Prefect ouer
all the Catholikes in England. This Breue,
                  
he ſaith, did afterwards appeare vnto him,
to haue beene vnlawfully ſent into this
Realme.
               That certaine Bookes being printed
Permiſſu Superiorum, hee certified the Catholikes,
that they might with a ſafe conſcience
reade them, as not being within
the compaſſe of the ſayd Breue.
               
               That hee receiued from Rome another
Breue, beginning, Venerunt nuper ad Nos
nonnulli Sacerdotes Angliae, being dated,
5. Octob. 1602.
               That he publiſhed the ſaid Breue, which
had been publiſhed before, and printed by
the diſcontented Prieſts that procured it.
               That he gaue order for generall prayers
to bee had for the good ſucceſſe of that
which was intended by himſelfe in his
prayers: which was not (as hee ſayth) for
any good ſucceſſe towards the Rebels in
Ireland in the late Queenes time: but foraſmuch
as there was a certaine report giuen
out of the Infanta her being with
childe, that ſhee might haue a ſafe deliuerance:

adding, that he euer deteſted
thoſe courſes in Ireland.
               
               That vpon the late Queenes death,
when his Maieſtie was proclaimed King, he
was very ioyfull; ſent wine to a bonfire not
farre from him: and afterwards, fearing
ſome euill intent, becauſe hee perceiued
ſome, who had been alwayes too forward
in diſobedient attempts, to goe with great
attendance vpon them in gallantrie, hee
divulged his letters of perſwaſion and commaundement
(ſo much as lay in him) to all
Catholikes and Prieſts, that in any wife
they ſhould be quiet, and attempt nothing,
but liue as became Subiects, in duetiful and
peaceable obedience.
               That vpon the publiſhing of the othe of
Allegeance made the laſt Seſsion of this
preſent Parliament, he divulged his iudgement
and direction for the lawfulneſſe of
the taking of that oath: and many Prieſts
did concurre with him in opinion therein,
though there were ſome that diſſented.
               That when M. Singleton was baniſhed,

this Examinate, as fearing that his former
direction ſhould be diſliked in Rome, did
deliuer vnto him the reaſons of ſuch his opinion,
and directions to be imparted euen
vnto the Pope himſelfe, if occaſion ſhould
require.
               That matters were handled with ſuch
ſpeede, as that M. Singleton in his iourney
towards Rome met a Breue from this Pope
Paul the fifth, at Sienna, comming towards
the Low Countries, to be ſent from thence
hither.
               That after the departure of M. Singleton,
this Examinate not contenting himſelfe
with that which he had committed to
his relation, prepared one purpoſely, to
haue been ſent to Rome with all his reaſons
in writing: and in the meane while, till his
ſayd meſſenger might be ready, he wrote
his Letters and reaſons with a more ſpeedy
paſſage, to haue ſtayed all directions or
Breues againſt the taking of the ſayd oath
of Allegeance.
               That when his ſayd Letters were come

to Rome, none durſt preſent his reaſons to
the Pope: that M. Singleton ſent him word,
how he himſelfe hauing had ſpeach with
the chiefeſt Cardinals, and moſt of the learned
men in Rome, did finde them to be in
opinion contrary to this Examinate: and
that his this Examinates ſayd opinion is
condemned already in Salamanca, as hee
hath been informed.
               That afterwards the ſayd Breue which
M. Singleton met at Sienna, came to this
Examinate: but with no more particular
direction to him, then to all other Catholikes.
               That this Examinate hauing receiued
the ſaid Breue, as others likewiſe had, did
ſhew the ſame vnto ſome perſons: but hee
ſayeth, that hee did neuer publiſh it: and,
that he hath bin challenged both at home,
and from abroade, and greatly blamed in
that reſpect: adding, that when ſome haue
vrged him in that behalfe, his anſwere was,
that he would not thruſt his head into the
halter wilfully: and that therefore hee vtterly

denyeth theThis Letter cō
                     teineth the publication of the ſaid Breue, againſt the taking of the oath aforeſaid. Letter ſhewed vnto him
dated 28. Septem. 1606. to haue proceeded
from him, or that euer hee had any knowledge
of it, but ſayeth it was falſely giuen
out in his name.
               Georgius Blackwellus,
Archi-presbyter.
            
            
               ¶The ſixth Examination taken
at Lambeth, &c. the third
of Iuly 1607.
               
                  BEing demaunded, whether
vpon the receipt of the ſayd
Breue laſt mentioned, his former
opinion for the lawfulneſſe
of the taking of the ſayd oath of Allegeance,
be altered: After a due time of
deliberation he ſaith, that his ſaid opinion
is not altered by the ſaid Breue, or by any
other reaſon which hitherto he hath ſeene.
               Being further asked, whether hee doe

hold this a lawfull oath to be taken by Catholiques
in England, and whether hee
himſelfe, if he ſhalbe required, will take the
ſame, he ſaith, that the oath carying that
ſenſe,
                     His Maieſties ſpeech in the Parliament, letter C. pag 1. Their point of doctrine is that arrogant and ambitious Supremacie of their Head the Pope, whereby he not only claimes to be Spirituall head of all Chriſtians, but alſo to haue an Imperiall ciuill power ouer all Kings and Emperors, dethroning and decrowning Princes with his foote as pleaſeth him, and diſpenſing and diſpoſing of all Kingdomes and Empires at his appetite. The other point which they obſerue in continuall practiſe, is the aſſaſſinates and murthers of Kings, thinking it no ſinne, but rather a matter of ſaluation, to do all actions of rebellion and hoſtilitie againſt their naturall Soueraigne Lord, if he be once curſed, his ſubiects diſcharged of their fidelity, and his Kingdom giuen a pray by that three crowned Monarch, or rather Monſter their Head. which his Maieſties
words, touching the doctrine
of the Church of
Rome in that behalfe, do
ſeeme to import in his
ſpeech before the Lords
& the reſt in Parliament,
19. Martij 1603. His
iudgement is, That the
ſame may and ought to
be taken by al the Catholikes
in England, and that
he himſelfe, if it ſhalbe tendered vnto him,
will not refuſe to take it.
               And hereupon he wiſhed, that he might
but haue ſpoken with Maſter Drury before
his death: in that he vnderſtandeth his
life had bene preſerued, if he would haue
taken that oath.
               Being further demaunded, foraſmuch

as his ſayd former opinion for the lawfulneſſe
of taking the ſaid oath is not altered,
whether he can be content, to write to the
Prieſts as much as heretofore he hath deliuered
vnto them by word of mouth, touching
that his opinion: he ſaith, that when
he firſt deliuered his ſaid opinion, hee did
relie vpon certaine reaſons ſent by him to
Rome, (the briefe whereof he hath before
ſet downe in one of his former Examinations:)
and that, his opinion continuing the
ſame it was before, he could be content to
write as much concerning the lawfulneſſe
of taking the ſayd oath, as before hee hath
deliuered in ſpeech to ſome Prieſts, were
it not, that hee ſhould therein ſubiect
himſelfe to great oppoſition: and therefore
now addeth, that relying vpon his
Maieſties ſayd words, as formerly hee did,
and now perceiuing, how the Parliament
did purpoſely auoyd in the penning of the
ſayd oath, to call into queſtion the Popes
authoritie to Excommunicate, but did only
intend to preuent the daungers which

might enſue by the ſuppoſed doctrine of
ſuch inferences, as thereupon haue beene
made, and are mentioned in that oath; he
can be content to publiſh in writing vnder
his ſeale to all the Catholique Prieſts in
England, that in the ſenſe aboue by him
expreſſed, he thinketh it lawfull for them
to take the ſayd oath: and doth himſelfe
take the ſame accordingly: viz.
               
               
                  IGeorge Blackewell doe truely and ſincerely
acknowledge, profeſſe, teſtifie, and
declare in my conſcience before God and
the world, That our Souereigne Lord King
Iames is lawfull and rightfull king of this
Realme, and of all other his Maieſties Dominions
and Countreyes; And that the Pope,
neither of himſelfe, nor by any authoritie of the
Church, or See of Rome, or by any other
meanes with any other, hath any power, or
authoritie to depoſe the King, or to dispoſe any
of his Maieſties Kingdomes or Dominions,
or to authorize any forreine prince to inuade or
annoy him, or his countreys, or to diſcharge any

of his ſubiects of their allegeance and obedience
to his Maieſtie, or to giue licence, or leaue
to any of them to beare armes, raiſe tumult, or
to offer any uiolence or hurt to his Maieſties
royall Perſon, State, or gouernment, or to any
of his Maieſties ſubiects within his Maieſties
Dominions.
               Alſo I doe ſweare from my heart, that notwithstanding
any Declaration or ſentence of
Excommunication or Depriuation made or
granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope,
or his Succeſsours, or by any Authoritie deriued,
or pretented to be deriued from him, or his
See against the ſaid King, his Heires or Succeſsours,
or any abſolution of the ſaid Subiects
from their Obedience; I will beare faith and
true allegeance to his Maiestie, his Heires
and Succeſſors, and him and them will defend
to the uttermoſt of my power against all conſpiracies
and attempts whatſoeuer, which ſhall
be made againſt his or their Perſons, their
Crowne and Dignitie, by reaſon or colour of
any ſuch Sentence or Declaration, or otherwiſe,
and will doe my beſt endeauour to diſcloſe and

make knowen unto his Maieſtie, his Heires
and Succeſſours, all Treaſons and traiterous
conſpi
                     〈…〉
                  ies, which I ſhall know or heare of to
be againſt him or any of them.
               And I doe further ſweare, That I doe from
my heart abhorre, deteſt, and abiure, as impious
and hereticall, this damnable doctrine and
poſition, That Princes which be excommunicated
or depriued by the Pope, may be depoſed
or murdered by their Subiects, or any other
whatſoeuer.
               And I doe belieue, and in conſcience am reſolued,
That neither the Pope, nor any perſon
whatſoeuer, hath power to abſolue mee of this
Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge
by good and full Authoritit to be lawfully ministred
vnto mee, and doe renounce all Pardons
and Dispenſations to the contrarie.
               And all theſe things I doe plainely and ſincerely
acknowledge and ſweare according to
theſe expreſſe words by me ſpoken, and according
to the plaine and common ſenſe and underſtanding
of the ſame words, without any
Equiuocation, or mentall euaſion, or ſecret reſeruation

whatſoever. And I doe make this
recognition and acknowledgment heartily,
willingly, and truely, upon the true faith of a
Chriſtian: So helpe me God.
               
               George Blackwell Arch-prieſt.
            
            
               ¶The ſeuenth Examination,
taken at Lambeth, &c. the
4. of Iuly 1607.
               
                  MAfter Blackwell being vrged
to explicate himſelfe more
fully touching the ſenſe hee
relieth vpon out of his Maieſties
words 19. Martij 1603. ſince publiſhed
in print: in that he may ſo vnderſtand
them, as notwithſtanding his oath formerly
taken, that duety which is expected is
no way ſatisfied: becauſe his Maieſties
meaning is euident, that he doeth account
it to proceede from appetite, and raſhneſſe
in any of the Biſhops of Rome whoſoeuer,
who preſuming to excommunicate any

King, ſhall by the ſame either abſolue his
Subiects from their obedience, or excite
them to beare Armes againſt him, or authorize
them to lay violent hands vpon his
Perſon, or to ſtirre vp any ſedition or tumult
within his Kingdome, or to asſiſt any
that ſhall make ſuch Attempts either againſt
the King, or the State of the Kingdome:
               Hee anſwereth for the further opening
of his meaning, That no lawfull Excommunication
can 
                     •
                  roduce ſuch effects, nor
ought to inforce the ſame. And he further
ſaith, Firſt, that he is verily perſwaded in
his conſcience, that the Biſhop of Rome wil
neuer Excommunicate his Maieſtie; and
yet that if he ſhould ſo do, and in the ſame
take vpon him to diſcharge his Maieſties
ſubiects of their allegeance, or require them
to beare Armes againſt him, or to offer violence
vnto his Royall perſon; he this Examinate
would neuertheleſſe for his owne
part continue his Maieſties faithfull Subiect:
and that in his iudgement, all Catholikes

ought to concurre, with him therein,
notwithſtanding any thing in the ſayd Excommunication
that might be inſerted or
threatned againſt thoſe Catholikes, that
ſhould ſo doe. For he verily thinketh, and
therein is reſolute, that no lawfull Excommunication
can bee iuſtly denounced or
publiſhed againſt his Maieſtie, that can or
ought to worke any ſuch effects: but that
all his Maieſties Subiects, the ſame notwithſtanding,
doe continue obliged vnto
him, as fully to all intents and purpoſes, as
euer they were before, or as if the ſayd Excommunication
had neuer bene either framed,
denounced, or publiſhed.
               Georgius Blackwellus
Archi-presbyter.
            
         
         
            
            ¶M. BLACKWELS
Letter to the Prieſts his brethren
for the lawfulneſſe of taking
the Oth of Allegeance.
            
               
                  
                     7. Iuly 1607.
My very reuerend Abetaiſtants and
deare Brethren,
                        M. Blackwell being ſent for to Lambeth the eighth time, vpon ſome ſpeeches with him, did thinke it fit to write to his Aſſiſtants the 
                           •
                        u
                           〈…〉
                        e in generall of all his former examinations: as by the letter it ſelfe doth appeare.
                  
                  
                     YOu knowe how many yeeres I
haue paſsed ouer among you in
much tribulation, and how often
vnder God his holy protection
I haue eſcaped dangers, albeit they were
ſtill imminent, and hanging ouer my head.
But now of late it hath pleaſed our gracious
Lord to ſuffer me to fall into the mouth of one,
who long hath gaped after me: for the ſaſetie
of whoſe ſoule, if I be as carefull, as he hath
been forward vpon the apprehenſion of my
body, I ſhall but performe the duety of a good
Chriſtian. I thanke God, that in all my afflictions,
of twelue dayes cloſe impriſonment,
and of eight Examinations at Lambeth, I

haue giuen no occaſion to any perſon to ſpeake
euill of me; neither (as I trust) ſhall I runne
vpon your hard cenſures for any thing I haue
done. I muſt confeſse, but not without much
griefe, that in the courſe of my Examinations,
I espied great defects of ſincere dealing among
our ſelues: for the Lord Archbiſhop made an
heauie preſent vnto me of his holineſse Briefs,
and of the copies of my Letters about the publication
of the ſame, with ſuch other preſsing
euidences of all my proceedings, that I could not
auoide, without a reproachfull note, and much
diſcredite, the force of trueth in the points obiected
againſt mee. But the urging ſupereminent
point was, to knowe, whether I had altered,
or reteined ſtill the continuance of my
former opinion about the lawfulneſſe of taking
the Oath of Allegeance: For anſwere; finding
what hatred, and iealoufneſſe wee haue incurred,
in the opinion of his Maieſty and the State,
for the refuſall of the Oath; and thereupon
making a reuiew of the reaſons, drawing mee
into the former publike approbation thereof;
and relying vpon very mouing conſiderations

deliuered by his Maiestie the nineteenth
of March, An. 1603. which are now in print:
And further, being informed how the Parliament
did purpoſely auoid to call into queſtion
the authoritie of the Pope to Excommunicate,
but did onely intend to preuent the dangers
which might enſue by the ſuppoſed doctrine of
ſuch inferences as thereupon hath beene made,
and are mentioned in that Oath: Vpon theſe
reſpects & others, I granted and made knowen
the admittance of my former Opinion, and did
accept of the Oath of Allegeance, and haue
taken the ſame, word for word, as it is ſet down
in the Statute. Afterwards, falling into ſpeech
of Excommunication, I deliuered my minde:
Firſt, that I thought his Holineſſe would not
at any time Excommunicate his Maieſtie:
Secondly, that no lawfull Excommunication
can or ought to produce, or to enforce ſuch grieuous
effects as haue beene made, and are mentioned
in that Oath: Thirdly, that if any ſuch
Excommunication ſhould come from his Holineſſe,
that, by the vertue thereof, it ſhould be
thought that his Maieſties ſubiects were diſcharged

of their Oathes and duties of Allegeance,
or that they were bound to beare armes
againſt him, or to offer uiolence unto his
Royall Perſon, or to commit any treacherie or
treaſon againſt any of his Dominions; I would
holde my ſelfe neuertheleſse, for my part and
eſtate, bound by the Lawe of God to continue
his Maieſties moſt loyall and faithfull ſubiect.
And my iudgement further is, that all good
Catholikes ought to concurre with me herein,
and to doe the like. For this is my conſcience
and reſolution, that no lawfull Excommunication
can be iuſtly denounced and publiſhed by
the Pope againſt his Maieſtie, which can or
ought (as I haue ſayd) to inculcate, command
or worke, and bring foorth any ſuch effects.
And that all his Maieſties Subiects, the ſame
notwithſtanding, (if any ſuch ſhould euer happen)
doe ſtill continue as firmely obliged to his
Maiestie to all intents and purpoſes, as they
were euer obliged at any time before, or as if
ſuch an Excommunication had neuer beene
thought of, framed, denounced, or publiſhed.
And therefore not knowing whether euer I

ſhall haue opportunitie againe to write unto
you, I haue thus at large diſcharged my conſcience
in this matter: perſwading my ſelfe, that
you (my Aſſiſtants & deare brethren) wil take
the oath, as I haue done, when it ſhall be offered
unto you; and that you will inſtruct the
lay Catholikes, that they may ſo doe, when it is
tendered them. So ſhall we ſhake off the falſe
and grieuous imputations of Treaſon, & Treacheries:
So ſhall lay Catholikes not ouerthrow
their estates: ſo ſhall we effect that, which his
Holineſſe deſireth, that is, to exhibite our dueties
to God and our Prince. Surely this will
bring us gaine, and increaſe of many comforts.
And ſo to conclude in the Apostle his
wordes, Charitas mea cum omnibus vobis
in Chriſto Ieſu. Amen.
                  
                     From the Gate-houſe. 7. Iulij 1607.
                     
Georgius Blackwellus Archipresbyter
& protonotarius Apostolicus.Here his Seale was fixed.
Endorced,
To my reucrend Aſſiſtants and louing
brethren.
                  
               
            
            
               
8. Iulij. 1607.
            This being read in the preſence of Maſter
Blackwell,
               It was thought fit, for the auoyding of ſome inconuenience, that M. Blackwell ſhould acknowledge this his Letter before ſome of the Lords, whereusto he very willingly yeelded. he doth acknowledge it to be
his owne hand writing, and to be agreeable
to his Conſcience and Iudgement,
voluntarily by him ſet downe, without
any indirect meanes vſed, or conſtraint.
            
               R. Cant: T. Elleſmere Canc. T. Dorſet.
H. Northampton. Salisburie.
E. Wotton. Iul. Caeſar.
            
         
         
            
            THE SVMME
OF THE BREVES
before ſpecified vpon diuers
occaſions in the former
Examinations.
            
               ¶The effect of the first Breuè mentioned
in the fourth Examination
beginning, Scitum eſt, &c.
               
                  THe ſumme of this Briefe
is, that the Pope bade
Cardinall Caietane, the
Protectour of the Engliſh
Nation, by the example
of the Colledge
at Rome, to thinke of ſome courſe for concorde
amongſt Prieſts in England: that
thereupon, after ſome deliberation by the
Cardinall and others, it was thought fit by
the Pope, that there ſhould bee a ſubordination
conſtituted for the gouerning of
the Prieſts of the Engliſh Nation, both in

England, and Scotland, and M. Blackwell
was appointed to bee the Arch-prieſt ouer
them: that his authority was to direct, admoniſh,
reprehende, and chaſtiſe thoſe
Prieſts; to depoſe, remooue, and change
them from one reſidence to another; to
conuent any Prieſt before him; to ſummon
many together; to be the chiefe ouer them
aſſembled; and to correct them by Eccleſiaſticall
cenſures: that for the better managing
of the affaire, twelue Aſsiſtants ſhould
be choſen: that he & his Aſsiſtants ſhould
write to Rome euery ſixe moneths, of the
ſtate of their matters, for the Popes better
information: that one particular ende of
this ſubordination was, for the mainteining
of peace and vnion betwixt the Secular
Prieſts and the Ieſuits; becauſe they the
ſaide Ieſuites doe trauaile for ſupporting
of the Engliſh cauſe, by erecting Seminaries,
&c. it being the deceit of the deuill, for
any to ſtirre vp emulation againſt them:
and that if any ſhall weaken this concorde,
he may either be reformed, or corrected.
            
            
               
               ¶The ſumme of the Cardinals inſtructions
to the Arch-prieſt, mentioned
in the ſaid Examination, is
as followeth:
               THat the Popes intention by the ſayd
ſubordination, being, that the Archprieſt
and his Aſsiſtants ſhould preſerue
peace, they ſhould informe him (the
Protector) of ſuch as were contentious:
that the Arch-prieſt ſhould do nothing of
any great importance, without the counſell
of his Aſsiſtants, if it might be had that
thenceforward none ſhould giue faculties
to the Seculars but the Arch-prieſt, nor to
the Ieſuites, but their Superiours that neither
the Arch-prieſt nor his Aſsiſtants,
ſhould vſe their authoritie, but when it was
neceſſarie: that if any thing were amiſſe among
the Ieſuites, the Arch-prieſt and his
Aſsiſtants ſhould deale with their Superiour;
and finding no redreſſe, ſhould write
either to the Protector, or to the Generall

of the Ieſuites: that the Arch-prieſt in cauſes
of greater importance, ſhould vſe the
aduiſe or the Superiour of the Ieſuites, becauſe
hee was a man of great experience in
the affaires of England: that they ſhould
ſend their Letters to the Preſident of Doway
to bee conueyed to Rome: that the
Arch-prieſt ſhould do his beſt for the compounding
of the controuerſies betwixt the
Prieſts of Wisbich, and others: that the
Arch-prieſt ſhould, as he thought fit, place
and diſplace Prieſtes for their reſidence in
houſes of Catholikes.
            
            
               ¶The ſumme of the Cardinals letter,
mentioned in the Examination
aforeſayd, beginning Admodum
Reuerende, &c.
               IT ſeemeththat the Archprieſt with ſome
that approoued his ſubordination, together
with the Ieſuites, did write a Letter
of thankeſ-giuing to the Cardinall, ſignifying
vnto him, that the ſame was commonly

here receiued: whereunto the Cardinall
for anſwere relateth the great ioy,
which the Pope had in that behalfe. But
withall, he taketh notice of ſome oppoſition
and contradiction againſt it, wherewith
he ſaith the Pope was grieuouſly moued:
and therefore requireth the Archprieſt
in the Popes name, to ſend true information
thereof, with the names of the
contenders and cauſes of the reluctation:
and wiſheth him not to faint for meeting
with ſome difficulties, and contradiction in
his regiment.
            
            
               ¶The ſumme of the Breue ſent by
Pope Clement the 8. mentioned
in the Examination aforeſaid,
and beginning, Ad futuram
reimemoriam, &c.
               THere hauing growen many diſputations,
and difficulties againſt the ſubordination
of the Arch-prieſt, and againſt

the Cardinals authoritie ſo to aduancehim;
The Pope doeth in this Breue
acknowledge all to haue bene done by the
ſaid Cardinall at his direction: & doth furthermore
by the plenitude of his Apoſtolicall
Authoritie for remoouing of all afterqueſtions,
of his certaine knowledge and
meere motion, ratifie all that the Cardinall
had done: pronouncing all voide that
hath, or might bee attempted to the contrarie.
            
            
               ¶The effect of ſome of the faculties
mentioned in the ſaid Examination,
viz.
               TO abſolue in the Kingdomes of England,
Scotland and Ireland, from all
cenſures, referued by the Bull of Caena
Domini: to graunt Apoſtolicall benediction,
with plenarie Indulgence, to thoſe
whome they had reconciled: to change
ſimple vowes to another good vſe, except
the vowes of Chaſtitie and Religion: to

diſpenſe with Marriages in the third and
fourth degree: to hallow Veſtments and
other things appertaining to the ſacrifice
of the Maſſe, beſides thoſe that require
Chriſme: to giue licence to Catholikes to
reade Bookes of controuerſies, written in
Engliſh by Catholikes: to diſpenſe with
Prieſts when they cannot without danger
carie their Breuiaries, and ſay their Seruice,
to ſupply the ſame by repeating ſome
Pſalmes, or other prayers which they can
ſay by heart.
            
            
               ¶The effect of the Breue ſent from
Pope Clement the 8. mentioned
in the fifth Examination, and
beginning, Cùm Nobiliſsimum
Angliae Regnum, &c.
               THe Pope in this Briefe doeth ſummarily
recite the effect of his two former
Briefes, touching the cauſes of
them both: hee taketh particular notice
of the great oppoſition, that continued betwixt

the Secular Prieſts, M. Blackwel and
his Adherents, as alſo of the Treatiſe of
Schiſme, written by one of M. Blackwels
part againſt the reſt of the Secular Prieſts.
Likewiſe that M. Blackwel would not recall
the ſaid Treatiſe of Schiſme, which
cauſed greater ſtrife: that the Secular
Prieſts vpon his two Briefes before mentioned
were quiet: that the Adherents to
the Arch-prieſt did notwithſtanding their
ſaid quietnes, terme them Schiſmatickes,
which they complaining of, the Arch-prieſt
would not reforme, except they the Seculars
would giue ſome ſatisfaction, before
they receiued the benefite of abſolution:
that thereupon the former diſſentions began
to bee more hote: that the Seculars ſo
mooued, appealed to Rome, and made
their griefes knowen: And therefore the
Pope doth in a ſort blame the Arch-prieſt,
telling him that he gaue him that Authoritie
to edification, and not to deſtruction,
to feede the flocke and gouerne them, not
as by force but gently, not to tyrannize ouer

the Cleargie, but to bee an example to
his flocke: and after ſome other admonitions
and precepts for a Church gouernour
to obſerue, he doeth aduiſe him to mingle
curteſie with his ſeueritie, and chargeth
him that he do not, either by word or writing,
condemne any man, but after mature
deliberation: that he ſuffer no contentious
Bookes to be publiſhed, but vſe his beſt endeuour
for compounding controuerſies, as
ſoone as they ariſe. Alſo he admoniſheth
the Prieſts, which did adhere to the Archprieſt,
to ſtudie for peace, not to arrogate
too much to themſelues, nor condemne others
of their brethren, nor offend them
either by word or writing. The ſame
courſe alſo he holdeth to the Prieſts in oppoſition,
perſwading them to concord, and
to forgiue one another, and telling them,
that he admitteth not of their Appeale, becauſe
hee foreſaw it would miniſter matter
of further contention: hee ſuppreſſeth the
ſaid Treatiſe of Schiſme, commanding that
no ſuch matters ſhould bee written from

that time foorth or divulged, or kept in
the hands of any, vnder paine of Excommunication:
the name of Schiſme he aboliſheth,
prohibiting the mentioning of it,
vnder the like penaltie: and ſo after diuers
perſwaſions to Charitie and carefulneſſe in
their dueties, he endeth.
            
            
               ¶The ſumme of the Breue ſent from
Pope Clement the 8. mentioned
in the fifth Examination, and
beginning, Venerunt nuper
ad Nos, &c.
               NOtwithſtanding the ſaid laſt Breue,
the diſcontented Prieſts did proſecute
their Appeale, and ſent ſome to
Rome to that effect: where their cauſe being
heard after a ſort, the Pope did write
to the Arch-prieſt, admoniſhing him, that
heeſhould vſe the Authoritie giuen him
warily, and wiſely: that hee ſhould not exceede
his faculties, as in ſome things hee

had done: that from thence forward hee
ſhould not exerciſe his Authoritie vpon
Prieſts not brought vp in the Seminaries,
or vpon Lay-men, nor haue any facultie to
inflict cenſures, or to make Statutes, nor to
proceede againſt any of the Prieſtes appellant
which went to Rome, except firſt hee
receiued direction ſo to doe: from the Protector,
nor take away or ſuſpend the faculties
of the Prieſtes appellants without the
conſent of the ſaid Protector, nor remoue
the reſidence, without great cauſe. Alſo
he commandeth him in the vertue of his
obedience, to vſe his Authoritie without any
offence, and with more quietneſſe,
peace and concord, and that hee ſhould
not intermeddle any further in any matter
with the Prouinciall of the Iefinites, or any
other Religious perſon in England, leſt
new diſcordes might arife; nor that hee
ſhould write any thing touching his regiment
to any of the Ieſuites, either in Rome
or in any other place, but to him or to the
Protector. Furthermore he maketh it lawfull

to the Rectors of the Colledges, to giue
their Letters teſtimoniall for their Schollars
of the Societie, to the Arch-prieſt, and taketh
order for their entertainment in England:
he commandeth the Archprieſt, that
as the places of his Aſsiſtants become void,
three of the Appellants ſhould bee admitted
to them: but the Almes beſtowed
bountifully in England, ſhould be rightly
diſtributed; that hee ſhould admit of Appeales,
as there was cauſe, to be deuolued
to the Protector. Hee condemneth and
prohibiteth all Bookes, wherein there is any
thing againſt the Inſtitution of the Ieſuites,
or againſt any of their Perſons, commanding
that none ſuch ſhould be hereafter
written in the behalfe of either ſide, vnder
paine of Excommunication: and ſo
admoniſhing the Arch-prieſt, and all other
Religious perſons and Prieſts to peace and
humilitie, he finiſheth his Breue.
            
            
               
               ¶The effect of the Breue ſent from
Pope Paulus the fift, and mentioned
in the fift Examination.
               THis Breue conteineth a reſolution againſt
M. Wrights reaſons for going
to the Church, mentioned in the third
Examination; and likewiſe an admonition
againſt the receiuing of the oath of Allegeance;
but no cenſure is inflicted vpon
any that ſhall notwithſtanding take the
ſaid othe.
               IT hath beene thought fit to publiſh
the premiſſes, to the ende,
that they who peraduenture will
make doubt of ſome thing therein
conteined, may be ſatisfied (if they
list) from M. Blackwel himſelfe
now priſoner in the Gate-houſe.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   