
      
         
            
            
            A verye excellent and profitable
Booke conteining ſixe
hundred foure ſcore and odde experienced
Medicines, apperteyning
vnto Phiſick and Surgerie, long tyme
practyſed of the expert and Reuerend Mayster
Alexis, which he termeth the fourth and
finall booke of his ſecretes, and which in hys
latter dayes hee dyd publiſhe vnto a vniuerſall
benefit, hauing vnto that
tyme reſerued it onely vnto
himſelfe, as a moſt priuate
and precyous
treaſure.
            Tranſlated out of Italian into Engliſhe
by Richard Androſe.
            Humilia la anima tua a Dio: a gran ſignori
fa riuerentia, & al gridar del pouero inclina
le orecchie.
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Henry Denham.
1569.
         
         
            
            The glory of the Honorable, is,
the feare of God.
            
               QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT
            
            Alla ſommita della virtu ſiperuene,
non per grandezza, ma per humilita.
Dio contrastà a gli ſuperbi, & agli
humili dona la ſua gratia
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOrable,
Fraunces Lorde Ruſſell, Erle
of Bedford, one of the Queenes Maieſties
priuie Counſell, and Knight of
the moſt Honorable order of the Garter:
Richard Androſe wyſheth health,
long lyfe, wyth much encreaſe
of vertue
and honor.
            
               ALTHOVGH
(Right Honorable)
on the one ſide the
excellency and worthineſſe
of your calling
telleth me that
I may not preſume
to craue defence of
this my poore trauaile
at your Lordſhips
hands: and on
the otherſide, the
meanes & baſeneſſe
of mine owne eſtate
in ſuch ſort feare me, that I cannot without red cheekes
offer ſo ſmall a Mite vnto ſo Noble a perſonage: yet the
common report and opinion of your ſinguler clemency
and maruellous affection towards the aduauncement of
good letters and godly exerciſes, doe not a little mooue
and prouoke mee to commit this my ſimple tranſlation
vnto your Honorable protection. For as the Souldier
which hath beene trayned, and of long time practiſed in

martiall feates, & warlike affayres ſeeketh commonly for
his owne credite, to ſerue vnder ſome noble and valiaunt
Capitayne, whoſe experience excelleth therein: euen ſo
he that hath beene brought vp in the ſtudie of knowlege,
and meaneth by manifeſting ſome proofe to benefite his
Countrie therby, endeuoreth to procure the pratronage
and defence for the ſame, of ſuch as are knowne to be fauores
& mainteyners of ſuch profeſſions. Wherfore being
moſt aſſured not only by common report, but alſo by
certaine knowledge (right honorable) that thoſe good and
commendable exerciſes which are to our Country beneficiall,
and to our bodies needefull, are of your Lordſhip
eſpecially commended, I am the bolder to dedicate the
fruits of my weake paines in this ſimple trauaile to your
honorable patronage and defence. An olde rule that I
read (my good Lord) in Cicero, being a yong ſcholer, which
was, that I muſt accommodare ſermonē ad perſonam, maketh me
to cut of all my ynckhorne termes, & flattering inſinuations
in wryting to your honor, knowing that I haue to
doe with ſuch a one as hath out of Chriſtes precepts learned
to ſeeke for veritie, and not for vanity, for ſubſtance
of matter, and not for ſuperfluous eloquence in words. I
had rather (my ſinguler good Lorde) too bee ſomewhat
colde in prayſing and be adiudged ingratefull, then your
honor ſhould be to whot in reading, and condemne me
for a byting flatterer, and ſo deale with me as I haue read
that Noble Emperour Sigiſmond ſometime dealt with hys
kingly Dog, to whom he gaue a good rounde box on the
eare, bicauſe he flattered him to his face: the Paraſite
ſaying, why ſtrike you me Emperour? the Noble Prince
aunſwered, why byteſt thou me flatterer? There be my
very good Lord, many ſuch nippers, nay rather byters in
Princes and noble houſes in theſe dayes, that haue not Sigiſmonds
reward as a buffet for their adulation: but rather
yerely ſtipends for their doggiſhe fawning and flattering

of Noble perſonages, but theſe Regios Canes (for ſo the
Philoſopher termeth them, I commit eyther to the mercie
of God to conuert, or to his iuſtices as byting Dogges
to be entreated. In the dedication of this my rude tranſlation
vnto your honor, I ſeke not to illuſtrate your excellent
vertues, which were an infinite trauayle, or to
paint out mine owne ſkill or cunning which were vaine,
but rather to benefite my Country, & to eaſe my Countrymen
of their griefes and maladies, by conuerting that
which before was onely knowne vnto Phiſitians and Italians
into their owne natiue ſpeeche and mother tongue.
Although the tranſlator be ſimple, and his knowledge
not great, yet I doubt not but the worthyneſſe of the
matter ſhall counteruayle the ſimplicitie of the perſon,
if there be any carping Momus that will ſooner reprehend,
then take paines to amend this my ſimple exerciſe, let
him remember the olde Prouerb. Ne ſutor vltra crepidam. I
beſeech your honor to accept and receyue this my ſmall
trauayle, as a teſtification of the ſinguler good affection
I beare vnto your Lordſhip, and it ſhall not onely prouoke
me to take paines and occupie my ſelfe in weightier
matters, but alſo binde me continually to pray vnto
the almightie for the preſeruation of your Lordſhips
helth, with the dayly encreaſe of vertue
and honour, to his heauenly pleaſure,
and your ſinguler contentation.
            
               Your Lordſhips Orator,
R. Androſe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Mayſter Alexis of Piemont
vnto the Reader.
            
               IT hath béene a very auncient opinion of Philoſophers
(worthy Readers) that there is giuen
vnto man of nature, a deſire to vnderſtand, for they
ſuppoſed, that oure ſoules in taking imperfection,
through the vniting with yt ſubſtance, by the meane
of vnderſtanding, ſhould approch the neerer to recouer
their winges alreadie loſt, and to returne vnto
their priſtinate perfection: but foraſmuch as diuers
of them, were inclined to ſundrie wayes of vnderſtanding, ſome referre
the occaſion vnto the ſtarres, other vnto the predomination in
our bodyes, more of one humor then of an other. Ariſtotle diſtinctly
notwithſtanding, ſeemeth to attribute euery thing in this, vnto our
election, which through the pretext of ſome felicitie, or profite, doth
diſpoſe vs to practiſe rather one thing then an other. But verilye
which of them ſoeuer is true, the inclination of my natiuitie, I haue
alwayes knowne to haue beene giuen to the vnderſtanding of diuers
things, and eſpecially of thoſe, which apperteyne vnto the cure of
mens bodies. And to put it in executiō, I diſpoſed my ſelfe to trauaile
diuers Countries, and to be conuerſaunt with diuers ſortes of people,
not omitting with all induſtrie thorowly to ſearch out the vnderſtanding
of the ſecretes of many nations, and with them likewiſe to
make experience, by putting them into practiſe, by reaſon whereof in
ſhort ſpace, through the recouery of helth, which the people did feele,
I became ſo famous, that I obſcured the names of the moſt expert
Phiſitions that were, through which occaſion I haue beene reſorted
vnto as it were with infinite kinds of Nations, with exceeding reuerence,
vnto my great credit. And although for all things, I rendered
thankes vnto the diuine bountie, yet my iuuenile minde was not
voyde of euerie ſparkle of ambition and glorie. I wrote them in the
yeares paſſed, certaine tryfling things, part whereof were of my ſecretes
(although weake) belonging vnto phiſick, part vnto the bewtifying
of women, and part vnto other practiſes, to manifeſt vnto
the worlde that I had knowledge in miſticall thinges, whereby I
conceyued to obtaine greater glorie, then much to helpe, hauing alwayes
reſerued in the priuieſt partes of my heart as a moſt precious
treaſure, the profound ſecrets of the Art of healing, and the true experience
of the ſame, for the which I haue bene alwayes had in eſpeciall
veneration. Neyther was their any (although a moſt deare
friend) that might get of me any ſmall intelligence of my ſecretes, ſo
much I deſired not to haue any part of my glorie or reputation deminiſhed.
And bicauſe euerye mans operations, are directed vnto

ſome laudable ende, or that we accompt worthie of commendation,
I being incited long ſince, and of my deare friendes requeſted, that
I woulde for a vniuerſall benefite vnto all the worlde, reduce into
lyght, theſe my ſecretes, to the ende they might profite the abſent,
and thoſe which are farre diſtant from the Region where I inhabit.
I refuſed to accept anye one part of their perſwaſions, accounting
him vnwiſe, which to benefit other, would depriue himſelfe of his degree,
and dignitie, ſo much was I blinded in worldly glorie. But being
nowe come to that age, in the which it is neceſſarie by the courſe
of nature, to yeelde my ſoule vnto God, being nowe impotent, and
thinking it the duetie of one man to doe good vnto another, and moſt
of all in matters of phiſick, which are communicated vnto vs of God
for a vniuerſall commoditie: I haue eſteemed it not my part or dutye
to preferre my peculier profite, before that of all the worlde, for in ſo
doing I muſt haue ſuppoſed and beleeued to haue committed a great
error, if I had not yeelded my ſelfe culpaple, and repented mee, to
haue hidden from the whole worlde, ſuch a benefite vnto this preſent.
And therefore calling vnto memorie the perſwaſions once made
vnto me, of the noble and worthie knight maiſter Francuccio Mongio,
touching this matter, and alſo examming mine owne conſcience,
I coulde no longer abſteyne from wryting and publiſhing them to
adorne therewith the worlde, bicauſe otherwiſe dying, I ſhoulde
worthily haue beene accompted not inferiour vnto an homicide: as
alſo to eſchue the crymes of auaritious perſons, who hauing hidden
their treaſures in the grounde, and Death ſurpriſing them, remayne
buried togither with their ſubſtaunce, and depart out of the world, in
the diſpleaſure both of God and man. Therefore if my firſt concluſion
and purpoſe to write, was of ambition and vaine glorie, as is
the propertie of yong minds, little regarding yt which they are bound
vnto: This other ſhall not diſſent from the duetie of a chriſtian, & one
full of compaſſion towards mankind: that is to publiſh & diſpoyle my
ſelf of all thoſe ſecrets, vnto an vniuerſal cōmodity which hither vnto
I haue kept with my ſelf as moſt dere and precious, & being deſirous
to accompliſh the ſaid decree, hauing gathered al my experienced medicines,
I haue thought good to ioyne them togither, with thoſe
whych were printed in time paſſed, which although they were not
of ſuch importaunce, neuertheleſſe they are things both of ſkill, and
credit, whereof hauing gotten a volume, and read it ſundrie times,
I haue found them ſo altered and corrupted, that with difficultie I
might be perſwaded to beleeue that they were mine, they were ſo
wholy altered, except only in name. And hauing in part corrected the
volume of the ſuperfluous, and thinges of little account added vnto
it, being well pervſed, I haue ioyned therewith this my laſt labor
of the fourth and finall Booke of my ſecretes, which all, are things
apperteyning vnto ſundrie and dyuers diſeaſes of mans bodye, hauing
reſerued it as a treaſure vnto thys preſent, wherein maye

be read ſixe hundred foure ſcore and odde, very excellent and moſt approued
experiences, all true, and euery of them proued as it were infinite
times, with infinite ſortes of people, and haue alwayes beene
found effectuall. Neyther looke you for any other thing of me in time
to come: Firſt, bicauſe in theſe my trauayles (as I haue alreadie
ſayde, I haue ſpoyled my ſelfe of all that euer I experienced: ſecondly,
in that I am ſo olde, as within ſhort ſpace, you maye ſuppoſe to
vnderſtande rather of my departure out of lyfe, then to receyue of me
any other thing, if their be not written ſomewhat vnder my name, of
ſome malicious perſon to deceaue you withall, and to encreaſe the volume
without any profite. I will not omit to aduertiſe the Readers,
that they deceaue not themſelues through my examples, working
theſe medicines wythout the counſell & wholeſome aduertiſements
of ſome expert Phiſition, for I neuer wrote them to that ende, ſince
from my tender age, contynually I haue applied the ſtudie of good
letters, in ſuch ſort that the ſecretes of ſciences are not hidden vnto
me, neyther is there any Cannon of Phiſick that I haue not verie
well vnderſtood: and therefore haue knowne with the age, with the
ſeaſons, and with conuenient time to applie and vſe them: Beſides
the knowledge to aduertiſe one if neede were to be let bloud, and an
other to be purged, and hauing proceeded in this manner, there was
neuer any Pacient of mine, that hath not obtayned his due remedie.
You therfore (vnto thoſe I ſpeake which vnderſtand not the cannons
of Phiſicke) when occaſion happeneth to vſe my ſecretes, take the
counſell of ſome expert Phiſition, to the ende you may attayne the
benefite. Bicauſe in not knowing to compound, applye, and miniſter
them as you ought to doe, you may ſlaunder the Phiſition that hath
healed many. Accuſtome therefore to take counſell of ſuch Phiſitions
as are honeſt, and that practiſe the Art without fraude: for there are
ſeene of that profeſſion many, which being giuen to prattle, and tell febles
to deceaue the people, doe vitupcrate the experiences, with ſaying
that they are wicked, and ſuch lyke. Not conſidering that ſicke
perſons are not cured with trifles, as affirmeth the worthy Cornelius
Celſus, but with experimented medicines, not newly found out
(if well they vnderſtoode the Art.) And aſſure your ſelues, that by
practiſing theſe ſecrets which I ſet openly foorth (as is conuenient)
and preparing them with diligence, and with choſen ſimples, alwaies
they will worke according to your intent, for in this booke there
is nothing mencioned, which hath not beene many times
practiſed, and founde true, through the grace of
Almightie God, vnto whome be giuen
all praiſe, and glorie, worlde
without ende.
         
         
            
            A breefe Table or demonstration to finde
out all ſuch ſecrets or medicines as are contayned
in this laſt and fourth part of Alexis.
            
               A Remedie againſt miſtes or cloudes, and other impediments
which offende the ſight. Fol. 1.
               To kill wormes that gnaw and eate the heare. fol. 1.
               To deſtroy ſcurfe or ſcales in the head. fol. 1.
               Againſt the falling away of the heare from the bearde or
head, called in Italian Tigna. 2.
               To heale Ringwormes. 2.
               Another for the ſame. 2.
               A remedie againſt the Itche. 2.
               Another for the ſame. 2.
               Againſt rubbing, or itch, which commeth in the night. 3.
               Againſt the chapping of the lippes. 3.
               Againſt the chapping of the feete. 3.
               Another for the ſame. 3.
               For the ſame. 3.
               Againſt ſweate which ſtincketh. 3.
               Againſt the ſtinch of the toes. 4.
               Againſt bruſes of or about the eares. 4.
               Another for the ſame. 4.
               To heale a Weſt that riſeth vpon the eie liddes. 4.
               To take away blewneſſe or blackneſſe of the eie liddes. 4.
               To make nayles which are rotten to fall. 4.
               Another for the ſame. 5.
               For the ſame. 5.
               Againſt bruſes of the nayles. 5.
               A plaiſter to heale burgeons or puſhes. 5.
               A remedie for ſuch as haue out their fundament. 5.
               To remedie the crampe in children. 5.
               A remedie againſt the falling ſickneſſe. 6.
               Againſt the griefes of the ſkull. 6.
               To comfort the hart. 6.
               For the tooth ache. 7.
               
                  
To mitigate euery kinde of griefe. 7.
               Another for the ſame. 7.
               To heale the diſeaſe called Gonorrea: 7.
               Againſt the flixe of the bodie. 8.
               A medicine to heale the flixe of the liuer. 8.
               To ſtop the flowers of a woman. 8.
               Againſt the diſeaſe Gonorrhea. 9.
               And excellent ſirope to heale the French pockes. 9.
               A playſter to heale the dropſie. 9.
               Againſt red ſpots in the ſkinne. 10.
               To ſtay heare that it fall not away. 10.
               A remedie againſt pimples or ſpottes in the face. 10.
               To remedie a fretting itch and rough or ſcalie ſpots. 10.
               To make heare to grow againe. 11.
               A remedie againſt the falling away of heare, called in Italian
Aree. 11.
               A remedie to heale Chilblaines which are properly in the
ioyntes of the fingers through colde, called in Italian,
Buganze, or the itche. 11.
               To heale beatings or bruſings. 11.
               To purge the fleume of the Matrix. 11.
               A remedie againſt the peſtilence. 12.
               To heale the Ptiſicke. 12.
               To remedie the diſeaſes called Diſsinteria and Diarrhea,
and the bloudie flixe of women. 12.
               Againſt the redneſſe of the face and noſe. 12.
               To heale the Pleuriſey and putrifaction of the matrix. 12.
               Againſt the difficultie of taking breath, and opilation of
the liuer and lunges, and a vehement cough. 13.
               To make heare growe againe where it is fallen away. 13.
               To prouoke ſweate and to heale the plague. 13.
               Againſt the paine of the liuer, ſtomack and milt. 13.
               To heale Ringwormes, or the Morphew. 13.
               Againſt the diſeaſe called Nauſea. 14.
               To cauſe the naturall places of women to purge. 14.
               
                  
To heale the hoarceneſſe and ſtraightneſſe of the breſt occaſioned
of euill humors. 14.
               A remedie to cauſe a woman, to bring forth the dead creature,
or the ſkin that the childe is wrapped in, called in
Italian Secunda. 14.
               To cure the diſtillation of vrine. 14.
               Againſt redneſſe and dropping of the eies. 15.
               To remedie the broken coddes of children. 15.
               Againſt the bitings of mad dogges. 15.
               To remedie the vntemperate heate of the liuer. 15.
               To expell ſadneſſe. 15.
               To remedie an olde inueterated cough. 16.
               Againſt the paine of the ſtomacke, and the diſeaſe called
Nauſea. 16.
               To remedie the ſtinking or chappes of the toes. 16.
               Againſt the paine of the ſtomacke. 16.
               To heale the perillous flix and excoriation or raſing of the
bowels, called Diſsintiria. 17.
               Againſt the Cholike. 17.
               A remedie for him whoſe fundiment is out, to cauſe it to
abide in. 17.
               To heale broken Kibes. 17.
               To drawe out thornes or anye other thing faſtned in the
fleſh. 18.
               To take away Wartes. 18.
               To remedie the ſtinking of the mouth. 18.
               To remedie the paine of the loynes. 18.
               To remedie the difficultie of pyſsing, and payne of the
Bladder. 19.
               To heale one that cannot keepe his water. 19.
               To remedie the comming out of the matrix. 19.
               To heale the itch and hardneſſe of the matrix. 19.
               To remedie the windineſſe of the Matrix. 20.
               To heale the paine of the heade, occaſioned through the
French diſeaſe. 20.
               
                  
To cauſe heare to grow where it is fallen away. 20.
               To remedie eyes that be bloud ſhot. 20.
               To heale the flix of the bodie and ſpitting of bloud. 20.
               To remedie the Ptiſicke. 21.
               An oyntment to heale the ſtiffeneſſe or ſhrinking of Sinowes,
called Spaſmus, comming of a wound taken of
ſome venemous beaſt. 21.
               To make milke come into a womans breſts. 21.
               To remedie the diſeaſe called in Italian Fuoco Saluatico,
and in Engliſh S. Anthonies fire. 21.
               A verie excellent remedie againſt winde in the left ſyde,
called in Italian Melancholia mirachiale. 21.
               Another for the ſame. 22.
               To remedie the want of ſleepe through frenſie. 22.
               To heale the falling ſickneſſe. 22.
               To heale the trembling or ſhaking of the members. 22.
               To remedie the teares, or itch of the eyes. 23.
               To heale the ſounding of the eares. 23.
               To remedie the yoxe or hicket. 23.
               To remedie the beating, trembling of the bodie, and the
diſeaſe called Sincope. 23.
               To drie vp the milke of the breſtes. 24.
               To make ſoft or flagging breſts to become harde. 24.
               To remedie the vomiting of children. 24.
               To remedie the paine of the ſtomacke which happeneth
with ſharpe belkings. 24.
               To remedye the bloude or milke engendred in the ſtomacke.
24.
               To remedie the opilation of the liuer. 25.
               To heale the Iaundice. 25.
               To remedie an olde paine of the liuer, and of the bellye
and ſides, with the ſhorte ribbes called Hypochondrium.
25.
               To remedye the hardneſſe of the Liuers, wyth the Iaundice.
25.
               
                  
To heale the flixe of Vrine. 25.
               To prouoke vrine. 26.
               To remedie the burning of the vrine. 26.
               To remedie the paine of the Bladder. 26.
               To heale the Collick. 27.
               To remedie the flixe of the bodie. 27.
               Another for the ſame. 27.
               To remedy the ſtrainings called in Italian Pondera. 28.
               Another. 28.
               To prouoke the flowers, and Secunda vnto women. 28.
               Another for the ſame. 28.
               An other moſt excellent remedie for the ſame. 28.
               To remedie the paine of the Matrix appoſtumated thorowe
groſſe humors. 28.
               To heale the payne of the Matrix, happened thorowe
winde. 29.
               To heale the prefocation of the Matrix. 29.
               To remedie the comming out of the Matrix. 29.
               To remedie the itche of the purſe of the teſticles. 29.
               To heale the paine of the Hemerhodes. 29.
               To remedie the hardneſſe or ſtifneſſe of the ioyntes. 30.
               To heale the Sciatica. 30.
               To remedie the griefes, and inueterated ſwellings of the
knees. 30.
               To take away ſwellings after the Goute ceaſeth. 30.
               To driue away venimous Beaſtes. 31.
               To take away ſpottes out of the ſkinne. 31.
               To heale Ringwormes. 31.
               To remedie the wanne ſpecks, or pimples of the face. 31.
               To remedie the opilations of the liuer & of the milt. 32.
               To remedie the baldneſſe of the heade. 32.
               To ſtop bleeding at the Noſe. 32.
               Againſt the excoriations, and griefes of the bodie. 32.
               To heale the flixes of the ſtomacke and bowels. 33.
               To heale the iſſuing forth of the Fundiment. 33.
               
                  
To heale ſtreynings. 33.
               Againſt the belkings of the ſtomacke. 33.
               Againſt Chilblaynes, or Kibes. 33.
               Againſt hardneſſe of the Milt, and of other members, and
the Palſey. 33.
               To remedie the griefe of the loynes and bellie. 34.
               To heale the pimples in the face, 34.
               Againſt windineſſe of the Bellie. 34.
               To cauſe a woman to auoyde the ſkinne that the childe is
wrapped in, called in Italian Secondina. 34.
               An excellent preſeruatiue againſt the Peſtilence and dropſey.
35.
               To remedie the yexings of the ſtomacke and vomitings,
& loſſe of appetite, occaſioned through cold humors. 35.
               To heale the Quarterne ague and all agues, which by nature
continue long time. 35.
               Againſt the Peſtilence. 35.
               To heale the flix called Diſsinteria. 36.
               To reſtore the appetite that is loſt. 36.
               To take ſpots away that grow in the eies. 36.
               Againſt the pleuriſey. 36.
               A medicine for women which through fatneſſe can not
conceyue. 36.
               Againſt the Hemerodes. 36.
               To take away Wartes. 37.
               To remedie the infection of the ſkinne. 37.
               To accelerate the birth. 37.
               To remedie the Quinſey. 37.
               To heale the Cough. 37.
               To make a leane perſon become fat. 38.
               To make a fat perſon become leane. 38.
               To heale Wartes or harde knobbes. 38.
               To heale the Cough. 38.
               To remedie the cough of children. 39.
               To take white ſpots from the nayles. 39.
               
                  
To remedie the flegmaticke humour in the bladder and
reynes. 39.
               To remedie the flixe of vrine. 39.
               To remedie the dropſey. 39.
               To remedy the griefes & bloude retained in the matrix. 40
               To heale the burnings or inflammations of the gout. 40.
               To heale the Ptiſicke, or an olde Catarre, the cough and
other defectes of the lunges. 40.
               To procure the birth of dead Creatures, and to remedie
the ſtingings of venemous beaſtes. 40.
               To remedie all the paſsions of the ſinowes. 40.
               To heale the itch. 41.
               To remedie the paines of the ſtomacke and of the milt,
and the windineſſe of the body. 41.
               To heale the griefes and hardneſſe of the milt. 41.
               To comfort the braine, or to heale the Apoplexia, and the
Collick. 41.
               To remedy the white flixes, & coldneſſe of the matrix. 42.
               To heale the Collick and difficultie of pyſſing. 42.
               To heale the cōming out & prefocation of the matrix. 42.
               To driue away the heauineſſe of the minde, to accuate the
ſenſes, and to make a good memorie. 42.
               To remedye the congelation of the milke within the
breſts. 43.
               To heale the falling of the Vuula. 43.
               Againſt the fulneſſe of the ſtomack, and Ptiſick. 43.
               To remedie the retention of the skin called Secunda, and
to cauſe the auoyding thereof. 43.
               To heale Warts. 43.
               To ſtop the flix of bloud in women. 43.
               To ſtop the white flix of the matrix. 44.
               To heale a Quarterne Ague. 44.
               Againſt the Ptiſick. 44.
               To remedie the redneſſe of the face. 44.
               To heale the Sciatica. 44.
               
                  
Againſt wheales or bliſters of the face. 45.
               To recouer a loſt appetite. 45.
               To take awaye moles and ſpottes which children take in
their mothers bellie. 45.
               To heale the yelowe Iaundice. 45.
               To remedye the griefes of the heade, which through the
beating of the artiers, do not ſuffer one to take ſlepe. 46.
               To heale the Ptiſicke occaſioned of groſſe and viſcous humors.
46.
               Againſt grauell or any other viſcous matter ingendred in
the raynes. 46.
               To drie vp the milke of the breſtes. 46.
               To heale children that haue wormes. 47.
               To mittigate all kindes of griefes. 47.
               To cauſe milke to diſcende into the breſtes. 47.
               Againſt yexings occaſioned through cruditie of the ſtomacke.
47.
               To remedie the ſtinking of the breath, happened by eating
of Garlicke, or ſuch like meates. 47.
               To heale the bitings of mad dogges. 48.
               To prouoke the flowers vnto a woman. 48.
               An excellent remedie againſt the dropſey. 48.
               Againſt the falling ſickneſſe. 48.
               Againſt the weakeneſſe of the ſtomack through colde. 48.
               To remedie the deſire to vomit, and to reſtore the appetite
that is loſt. 48.
               Againſt the bitings of all venemous beaſtes. 49.
               Againſt the miſtes, droppings, and redneſſe of the eies. 49.
               Againſt the hardneſſe and ſwelling of the liuer or milt. 49.
               To purge the matrix of a woman. 49.
               Againſt the Ptiſick. 49.
               To remedie olde inueterate griefes of the heade. 50.
               Againſt Hemerodes that appeare not. 50.
               Againſt drie choughes. 50.
               To remedie the griefes of the Hemerodes, and the chappings

of the Fundiment. 50.
               Another for the ſame. 51.
               To heale the windineſſe and other paſsions of the Matrix. 51.
               To remedie the diſeaſe of the pleuriſey. 51.
               To heale the diſeaſe called Tigna. 51.
               To remedy the grief of the breſts, & to cauſe milke to diſcend 52.
               Againſt water and windineſſe in the teſticles of children. 52.
               To heale ſcabbed hands occaſioned thorow the french diſeaſe. 52.
               To ſtop the ſuperfluous bloud of the flowers. 52.
               To heale ſhronken and ſtiffe ſinowes. 52.
               To remedie the euill countenaunce which proceedeth of the
dropſey. 53.
               To remedie the euill colour of the face. 53.
               Againſt the inflamation of the liuer. 53.
               To remedie the miſtes or dimneſſe of the ſight. 53.
               To remedie the want of hearing. 54.
               Againſt the trembling of the hart. 54.
               Againſt the impediment of ſmelling. 54.
               Againſt wormes in children. 55.
               Againſt great and ſwollen gummes. 55.
               Againſt the opilations or other defectes of the liuer. 55.
               To remedye Moles or ſignes which children haue when they are
borne. 55.
               To heale the comming forth of the Nauill of children, and the
ruptures within them. 55.
               To remedie the retention, and to cauſe a woman to auoyde the
skin called Secundina. 56.
               Againſt the griefes and ſwellings of the Matrix, accaſioned thorowe
ventoſitie after the birth. 56.
               Againſt the prefocation of the Matrix. 56.
            
            
               Here beginneth the Table for the ſeconde booke.
               Againſt putrified or rotten wounds. 1.
               To remedie bruſes or ſtripes of the ioyntes. 1.
               To heale a Fiſtola. 1.
               To remedie moyſt ſores or ſcabbes in childrens heads. 1.
               To heale the Itche. 2.
               
                  
To remedie olde ſores of the legs. 2.
               Againſt the hardneſſe & ſtifneſſe of ſinewes occaſioned through
wounds. 2.
               To take away thornes or any other thing faſtned in the fleſh. 2.
               To diſſolue deade bloude, happened through ſtripes, or falling
from ſome high place. 3.
               An other which worketh the ſame effect. 3.
               Againſt impoſtumes and griefes of the Hemerodes. 3.
               To ſtop the bleeding of wounds. 3.
               To diſſolue the bloude congealed in the bodye, cauſed through
wounds or other accidents. 4.
               To remedie feſtred and inflamed wounds. 4.
               To heale wounds wherein are faſtened thornes, or other ſuch like
things. 4.
               To remedie cankers in wounds. 4.
               To remedie the kings euill. 4.
               Againſt the kings euill in children. 5.
               Againſt all ſores and angrie puſhes, as the Canker or the diſeaſe
Phadagena. 5.
               To waſh away ſpots and red pimples or wheales in the face. 5.
               To heale ruptures within one, happened through falling from
an high place, or of ſome other cauſe, and to diſſolue the congealed
bloud. 5.
               Againſt ſores of the noſe, & of the mouth, and alſo of the french
pockes. 6.
               Againſt wounds that penetrate. 6.
               To take away the blackneſſe of wounds. 6.
               Againſt griefes occaſioned through rupture, or vnplacing of
bones, or in the members. 6.
               To diſſolue the blackneſſe of the skin happened through ſtripes,
or other cauſe, and for to heale the ſores of the naturall places
of women, and ſwellings of the breſts. 6.
               Againſt all kindes of flixes of bloud, and to heale the hurtes of
the bowels and of the bladder. 7.
               Againſt the ſwelling and griefe of a mans yarde. 7.
               Againſt the kings euill. 7.
               
                  
Againſt putrified gummes. 7.
               To take away the putrification of wounds. 7.
               Againſt vicious humors, which are cauſed of the itch, or like effectes
betweene the fleſh and the skin. 8.
               To heale wounds quickly. 8.
               To heale that kind of breaking out that is like vnto a Leproſie. 8.
               To heale broken bowels of children. 8.
               Againſt pimples or knobbes of the legges, and naturall places of
women, with redneſſe and burning. 8.
               To remedie the gallings of the feete and cankers. 9.
               To heale olde ſores. 9.
               To remedie a blit or blaſt, and to heale cankers. 9.
               To cauſe nayles that be ſcaly to fall away. 9.
               A remedy againſt the infection of the lunges and the Ptiſick. 9.
               To heale the ſores of the mouth, and throte. 9.
               To heale Ringwormes, Cornes, and ſores of the feete. 10.
               Againſt the flix of the bloud of Emerodes, and ſores of the priuie
members. 10.
               Againſt the putrifaction of the gums, and ſores of the mouth. 10.
               Againſt blites and waterie ſcabbes that are in the heades of children.
10.
               Againſt wounds and all putrified olde ſores. 10.
               Againſt Colericall impoſtumations, as blytes and blaſtes, and
ſuch like. 10.
               To remedie the griefes of the bowels, and watry ruptures. 11.
               Againſt the griefes of the ioynts. 11.
               To heale the broken bowels of children. 11.
               To heale the ſcorchings made with fire, and fretting ſores. 11.
               To remedie the hurts of the ſcull. 11.
               To heale corroſiue hurtes called commonly the Wolfe. 12.
               Againſt wounds and ruptures of the naturall places of women,
and to ſtop the flix of bleeding of the noſe. 12.
               For to heale one that falleth from ſome high place. 12.
               To ſtop the bloud of the Matrix, and of the vrine, & of wounds,
and to heale the black pimples of wheales in the legs. 12.
               To ſtop the bleeding of wounds. 12.
               
                  
Againſt the flix of the bloud of the Emerodes. 13.
               Againſt the Hemerodes and creſtie ſwellings of the fundiment
and redneſſe of the face. 13.
               Againſt ſpitting of bloud. 13.
               Againſt the reptures of the feete and of the handes, occaſioned
through the French diſeaſe. 13.
               Againſt the burnings of fire. 13.
               To heale eares that auoyde matter. 14.
               Againſt ſcabbes and itche. 14.
               Againſt the Leproſie. 14.
               Againſt itch and ſwelling of the Hemerodes. 14.
               To heale Cankers. 14.
               To heale the ſores of the naturall places of women. 14.
               To heale griefes of the eies, and to make cleare the ſight. 15.
               Againſt the gladneſſe of the feete, or other partes of children. 15.
               To mundifie purified wounds. 15.
               Againſt griefes of the Neck through ſtrips, or other occaſions. 15.
               To remedie the diſeaſe Panaritio. 16.
               Againſt the chaps of the Fundiment, and ſpots in the face. 16.
               Againſt the ſwellings and ſores of the Hemerodes. 16.
               To remedie the flix of the bloud of the Hemerodes. 16.
               To heale the ſwellings of a mans yearde. 16.
               To heale deepe ſores in the legges. 17.
               Againſt the griefes, ſores, putrifection and ſtinch of the eares. 17.
               To heale chappes in the heads of the breſts or teates. 17.
               To heale ſores of the legs happened through ſcaldings. 17.
               To heale a weſt growing on the eye lids. 17.
               To take awaye the grief of the eyes which hapneth of aſtripe. 18.
               Againſt chappings of the lippes, and of the heades of Womens
breſts. 18.
               Againſt chaps vnder the tongue. 18.
               Againſt a Fiſtola growing in a womans breſt. 18.
               To remedie the impoſtumation of a mans yarde, and windineſſe
of the bottome of the bellie. 18.
               Againſt hote impoſtumations of the teſticles. 19.
               Againſt colde impoſtumations of the teſticles. 19.
               
                  
Againſt the diſcending of the intrels into the purſe of the teſticles.
19.
               To remedie a rupture or breaking. 19.
               To draw bloud from the Hemerodes. 20.
               To ſtop the flix of the bloud of the Hemerodes. 20.
               Againſt rupture of the hands & feete cauſed through colde. 20.
               To cloſe vp wounds. 20.
               To generate fleſh in wounds. 21.
               Againſt bruſings within the fleſh and armes. 21.
               Againſt the ſhrinking of ſinowes. 21.
               Againſt the hurts of the ſinewes and arteries. 21.
               To heale the pricking or cuttings of ſinewes. 22.
               Againſt paine of the ſinewes. 22
               To eaſe the paine of wounds. 22.
               Againſt the ſuperfluous fleſh of wounds & worms of the ſame. 22.
               To take away the blackneſſe of wounds. 22.
               To remedie the diſeaſe Panaritio. 23.
               To open ripe impoſtumes. 23.
               Againſt feſtred cankers. 23.
               To heale ſores that are moyſt and hard to cloſe. 23.
               Againſt fretting ſores. 24.
               To heale ſore tetters. 24.
               A verie excellent water for tetters. 24.
               Againſt burnings or ſcurfes in the face, which appeare like vnto
a Leproſie. 25.
               An other. 25.
               To heale ſore legges. 25.
               To heale legs that are hard, ſwollen, and ſore. 25.
               To heale the burnings of fire before they bladder. 25.
               To heale one that is fallen from ſome high place. 26.
               To heale one that with a fall hath hurt one of his members. 26.
               To preſerue a member that is ſtricken, from impoſtumation. 26.
               To take away the ſignes that remaine of blowes or ſtripes. 26.
               To heale bruſings of the nayles. 26.
               To heale ſores proceeding of itche in the naturall places of women.
27.
               
                  
Againſt the ſores of the mouth of the matrix happened in procreation.
27.
               Againſt burning ſores of the matrix of women with childe. 27.
               Ao heale the prickings of ſinewes. 27.
               An excellent and precious oyntment to heale the rupture of the
ſeull. 29.
               To molifie hardneſſe. 29.
               A moſt precious oyle to heale a wound in .xxiiij. houres. 29.
               Againſt ſpitting of bloud, through ruptnre of a vaine. 30.
               To heale ſores of the legs. 30.
               An other for the ſame. 30.
               Againſt all inflammations of the raynes, and the running of
them. 30.
               To heale ſores that are inflamed. 31.
               Againſt ſtripes or bruſings. 31.
               To heale Panaritio, and euery other griefe which happeneth vnto
the endes of the fingers. 31.
               To heale ſcurſe or ſcales in the head, beard, or browes. 32.
               To remedie the ſcortications of children through occaſion of vrine,
or of ſome other ſharpe humor. 32.
               To remedye the running of the raynes occaſioned of a ſharpe
cauſe, and to heale the ſcortications which they make. 32.
               To remedie ſpots and markes, and to take away all ſuperfluous
growing of fleſh in any part of the bodie. 32.
               To heale ſores of the breſts. 33.
               To make oyle of Balme, which hath theſe vertues following. 33.
               To heale wounds of the legs happened of ſcaldings. 34.
               To cloſe vp wounds. 34.
               To heale ſores which through drie diſtemperature of thoſe parts
can not be healed. 34.
               To remedie dolorous ſores of the ioyntes. 35.
               To remedye bruſings and ſores happened of ſtrypes, or otherwyſe.
35.
               To heale the hardneſſe of the feete. 35.
               To remedye dolorous ſores happened through colde diſtemperature.
35.
               
                  
To take away ſuperfluous fleſh which groweth in wounds 36.
               To heale ſores that happen thorow wormes. 36.
               To heale ſores happened of broken bones. 36.
               To remedie the gummes of the French diſeaſe. 37.
               To kill wormes in children. 37.
               An other for the ſame diſeaſe. 37.
               A very precious water for diuers infirmities. 37.
               An oyle like vnto Balme, very profitable for diuers ſores. 38.
               Againſt ſuperfluous winde in the left ſide, called in Italian Melancholia
mirachiale, and the diſeaſe called Sincope. 39.
               To preſerue from the peſtilence. 39.
               A Ceare cloth for ſore and ſwollen legs. 40.
               To remedie the commotion of the brayne through falling from
ſome high place, or thorow other occaſions and cuttes, when
thorow the blowes men loſe their ſpeach. 40.
               To remedie the falling ſickneſſe in children. 41.
               To heale the euill habite, & to cure them that haue the ſplen. 41.
               A preſeruatiue againſt the peſtilence. 41.
               To remedie the diſcending of a Catarre through coldeneſſe of
ſtomack. 42.
               To remedie the Kings euill. 42.
               To heale many infirmities with oyle of Sulphur. 42.
               To heale ſcalie or rough handes happened through the French
diſeaſe. 44.
               An other for the ſame. 44.
               Againſt Melancholie. 44.
               To mittigate the paines of the french diſeaſe in any member. 45.
               To remedie the milt that is hardened. 45.
               To preſerue from the gout. 45.
               To heale the face of ſcurfe or ſcabbes. 46.
               Againſt the chappes in the hands through heate of the liuer. 46.
               To heale one that is ſtiptike of body. 46.
               To heale one that cannot piſſe through fleugme. 47.
               To purge the heade by the noſe, after the vniuerſall purging of
the whole body. 47.
               To ſtop the flix of a Catarre. 47.
            
            
               
               Here beginneth the Table for the thirde booke.
               To heale a windie impoſtume. 1.
               To remedie the ioynts that are out of their place. 1.
               To mollifie hardneſſe. 1.
               To heale a rupture of the guttes. 1.
               To remedie the griefe of the Matrix. 2.
               A maruellous powder for the weakeneſſe of the ſight. 2.
               To heale ruptures, or burſtings. 3.
               To ſtaye the heare that falleth. 4.
               To heale ſwelling of the arme through letting of bloud. 4.
               To remedie the ſwelling of the legges. 4.
               To heale the ſwelling of the body, and of the legs, through colde
humors. 4.
               To cauſe good fleſh to grow in wounds. 4.
               To heale ſore legges. 5.
               To heale the diſeaſe called in Italian, Fuoco ſaluatico. 5.
               To heale bones that are broken in the head in few dayes. 5.
               To mollifie hardened ſinewes. 5.
               To mundifie Fiſtuloes, and other putrified ſores. 6.
               A moſt precious oyle to remedie all ſores and griefes. 6.
               To heale the cloutes or ſpots in the face. 6.
               To make the ſight cleare. 7.
               To heale ſore breſts. 7.
               To heale little red ſpeckes in the face. 7.
               A moſt excellent pouder to comfort the ſight, and all the defects
of the heade, of the ſtomacke, and the diſeaſe called Scoromia
and Vertigo, and the palſey, and all inward diſeaſes. &c. 8.
               To heale the griefe of the raynes, of the loynes, of the heade, and
the diſeaſes of the Matrix. 8.
               To heale thoſe that haue the Ptiſick. 9.
               An odour againſt the ſame diſeaſe. 9.
               A fumigation for the ſame diſeaſe. 9.
               To ſtop a hote Catarre. 9.
               To ſtay a colde Catarre 9.
               
                  
To heale the ſame diſeaſe. 10.
               To heale thoſe that be Melancholike, and are in a fury or rage. 10.
               An oyntment to remedie the ſores of the noſe. 11.
               To ſeperate or deuide a corrupted bone from the ſound. 11.
               To heale one which by ſcratching with his nayles hath made a
ſore. 11.
               To remedie the burning of the vrine. 11.
               An other for the ſame diſeaſe. 12.
               An other for the ſame diſeaſe. 12.
               To reuiue one that is fallen thorow the falling ſickneſſe. 13.
               A more excellent remedie againſt expoiſments than is common
Triacle. 13.
               To heale a thinne Catarre. 14.
               To cauſe a pellet of a Dagge of Piſtolet which is in the fleſhe to
come forth. 14.
               To remedy a ſwelling or payne that happeneth after a wound is
healed. 14.
               To purge a wouude, and to drawe out that which was faſtened
therein. 14.
               To heale bruſings of the head with broken bones or without. 15.
               To draw out things faſtened in the fleſh as thornes & ſuch like. 15.
               To heale the kings euill and other harde impoſtumes. 15.
               To remedie the paine of the back. 15.
               To heale the redneſſe of the noſe. 16.
               To heale one that ſpitteth bloude throughe the rupture of a
vayne. 16.
               To heale the euill colour of the face, and the Ptiſick. 16.
               To heale ſores in the naturall places of women. 16.
               To heale the knobs which remaine in the ioynts after the paiue
of the gout. 16.
               To remedie the ſtinch of the mouth. 17.
               To heale the creſtie growings of the fundiment. 17.
               To heale the collick. 17.
               To heale the palſie of the tongue. 18.
               To remedie the payne of the head proceeding through a hote or
colde cauſe. 18.
               
                  
To remedie the griefes of the head and neck. 18.
               To remedie the dimneſſe of the ſight. 18.
               To heale the paine of the flanke. 19.
               To heale a burning canker called in Italian, Fuoco ſaluatico. 19.
               To purge the Matrix of women. 19.
               To ſtop the flix of the bloud of the Hemerodes. 19.
               To heale the coldneſſe of the matrix. 20.
               To drie vp the ſuperfluous humiditie of the Vuola and of the
gummes. 20.
               To take ſpots from the face. 20.
               To heale a Ringworme. 20.
               To heale the flix of the bellie. 21.
               To heale the paine of the loynes. 21.
               To heale thoſe that piſſe in their beds. 21.
               To heale the ſores of the feete. 21.
               To kill wormes in the eares. 22.
               To remedie the hurts of the eares happened through entring of
water into them. 22.
               To heale ſores that are ingendred in the eares. 22.
               To diſſolue impoſtumes vnder the eares. 22.
               To heale the ſtripes of the eyes. 23.
               To remedie the loſſe of appetite vnto meate. 23.
               A maruellous remedy againſt ſores and wounds. 23.
               To preſerue one from poyſoning. 23.
               Againſt the bitings of venemous beaſtes. 23.
               Againſt the ſtinch of the noſe. 24.
               To heale the griefes of the fundiment. 24.
               Againſt the impotencie of the Genetale member. 24.
               To heale an impoſtumed collick. 24.
               Againſt the biting of a mad dog. 23.
               Againſt indurate impoſtumes, periſhed Condilomi and hardened
breaſtes. 25.
               To diſſolue an impoſtume vnder the eare. 25.
               To diſſolue the kings euill, and euery hard impoſtumation. 26.
               Againſt trembling through ſome melancholy humor. 26.
               A confection to heale miſtes or dimneſſe of the ſight. 26.
               
                  
Againſt the weakeneſſe of the ſight. 27.
               An other for the ſame purpoſe. 27.
               To keepe the belly ſollible in the infirmitie of the eies. 27.
               Againſt the inflamation of the eyes. 28.
               To heale the griefe of the eies. 28.
               An other for the ſame effect. 28.
               To heale ſtripes of the eies, and extention of the nuck. 29.
               To other for the ſame. 29.
               To remedie the Litargie. 29.
               To heale the incontinencie and dropping of vrine. 29.
               Againſt the hardneſſe of the ſplene. 30.
               To heale an olde flix of an womans flowers. 30.
               Againſt ſtinging of Bees. 30.
               To heale the inflammation of a mans yarde. 30.
               A remedie againſt coldneſſe, and debilitie of the raines, the paine
of the back, and want of appetite vnto a woman. 30.
               To remedie vomiting occaſioned of cold humors. 31.
               Againſt the ſtreynings when a man cannot go to the ſtoole. 31.
               To rmedie deafneſſe or want of hearing. 31.
               To heale bruſes about the eyes without launciug or inciſion. 31.
               To heale watrie or dropping eyes. 32.
               An excellent pouder for the ſame diſeaſe. 32.
               To heale the griefes of the eyes. 32.
               To heale the ſores of the eares that offende the hearing. 32.
               Againſt the griefe of the loynes and of the eyes. 33.
               Againſt difficultie of taking of breath thorow coldneſſe. 33.
               To heale a drie cough. 33.
               Againſt the hardneſſe of the matrix. 33.
               Againſt the falling of the Vuola, and ſwelling of the pallet. 33.
               Againſt the comming out of the nauill of children. 34.
               To heale the palſey. 34.
               Againſt the debilitie of ſinewes. 34.
               Againſt redneſſe of the legges. 35.
               To remedy the printes of blowes that remaine. 35.
               Againſt ſwellings of the face. 35.
               To keepe heare from growing white. 35.
               
                  
To heale the itch of children. 35.
               An other for the ſame. 35.
               Againſt trembling or ſhaking. 36.
               Againſt ſtinch of the mouth through rotten teeth. 36.
               To heale the white flixes in women. 36.
               To heale the relapſation of the gummes. 36.
               To heale chaps in the fingars. 36.
               To heale a windie impoſtumation. 37.
               To heale the euill diſpoſition which commeth before the dropſey,
and the abſtruction of the Meſaraicall vaines. 37.
               Againſt the flix of vrine. 37.
               To remedy the impotencie of the Genitall member. 38.
               To heale ſores of the Bladder. 38.
               To heale the diſeaſes of the raines. 38.
               To heale rupture within the body. 39.
               To take away the blackneſſe of skarres. 39.
               To kill wormes in the body. 39.
               To preſerue one that hath taken poyſon. 39.
               A medicine to heale the Qninſey. 39.
               To remedy the vnquietneſſe of agues and to prouoke ſleepe 40.
               To heale the flix called Diſenteria. 40.
               An other glyſter moſt precious for the ſame diſeaſe. 40.
               An other for the ſame. 40.
               An other for the ſame, of very great efficaſie. 40.
               To cauſe Hemerodes to open. 41.
               Againſt ſcorchings of fire. 41.
               To preſerue one from the gout. 41.
               Againſt the belkings of the ſtomack. 41.
               To cauſe a woman to bring forth a dead creature. 41.
               To heale the dropſey and opilation of the liuer. 42.
               An emplaiſter to heale the rupture of the ſcull. 42.
               An other for the ſame. 42.
               Againſt the paine of the Collick. 42.
               To heale the itching or ſcabbes of the fundiment. 42.
               To remedie the paines and burnings of the fundiment 42.
               To heale the diſeaſe called Iliaca paſsio. 43.
               
                  
An other remedie for the ſame diſeaſe. 43.
               To remedie the iſſuing out of the fundiment. 43.
               To heale one that cannot keepe his vrine. 43.
               To remedie the comming out of the matrix. 43.
               Againſt the growing of fleſh out of the nayles. 44.
               To cauſe skalie nailes to fall. 44.
               To take away the blackneſſe that remayneth in skarres. 44.
               Againſt bloud that is congealed within one. 44.
               Againſt the difficultie of taking breath. 44.
               To remedie the congelation of milke within the breſts. 45.
               Againſt the ſubuerſion of the ſtomack. 45.
               For one that hath loſt his voyce. 45.
               To remedie the hardneſſe of the ſplene. 45.
               Againſt empoyſonments. 45.
               To heale the flixes Diſentericall or Lientericall. 45.
               To draw out thornes or arrow heads out of the fleſh. 46.
               For women that be barren. 46.
               Againſt the Collick. 46.
               Againſt the infection of the skinne. 46.
               To cauſe a woman to bring forth a dead creature. 46.
               Againſt the creſtes of the piles in the fundiment. 46.
               To remedye a tongue aggrauated, which through ouermuch
moyſture pronounceth not well. 47.
               To heale the paine of the Collicke. 47.
               To drie vp milke in the breſts. 47.
               To diminiſh the fleugme of the body and to augment bloud. 47.
               A remedye to cauſe conception. 47.
               To heale paine in the feete. 48.
               To heale Wheales. 48.
               To heale inwarde ruptures. 48.
               To remedie griefes proceeding through going out of the ioyntes
and to heale ſwellings. 48.
               To heale the paine of the ſplene and the Ptiſick. 48.
               To remedye the puntures of bones or ſtingings of deade Serpentes.
49.
               To take away wearineſſe after great labor & griefe of mēbers. 49.
               
                  
To heale one that lotheth meate. 49.
               To heale percuſsions of the eyes 49.
               To remedie the paine of the ſplene. 49.
               Againſt the griefes of the body. 49.
               To heale the pluriſey. 50.
               To remedy the ſtinking at the noſe, and difficultie of hearing. 50.
               To heale the ſcorchings of fire. 50.
               To diſſolue the creſtes of the French diſeaſe. 50.
               Againſt ſwellinges of womens bellies that make them to ſeeme
with childe. 51.
               To clenſe the face from ſpots. 51.
               To heale the torſions and griefes of the belly. 51.
               To remedy the burning or heate of vrine. 51.
               To remedy percuſsions or falling vpon the ribbes or back. 52.
               Againſt burning occaſioned of colde. 52.
               To heale wheales or bliſters in the face. 52.
               To make skarres become fayre of colour. 52.
               To take away the bleachneſſe of blowes. 53.
               Againſt the ſwellings of Percusſions. 53.
               To heale thoſe that haue paine in their liuer. 53.
               To heale the paine of the breſtes, which happen after the birth
of a childe. 53.
               Againſt the ſcurfe of the heade. 54.
               To heale a pluriſey by ſpitting 54.
               Againſt moyſt ſores. 54.
               To heale wounds, which after they are whole burſt out a newe,
by reaſon of a putrified bone. 54.
               To heale the creſtie ſwellings of the piles. 54.
               Againſt euill diſpoſition through coldneſſe of the ſtomacke. 55.
               To heale the loſſe or diminiſhing of ſmelling. 55.
               To cauſe that heare ſhall not grow againe. 55.
               To heale cleftes or chappings of the fundiment. 55.
               Againſt retention of vrine in Agues. 56.
            
            Here endeth the Table.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the fourth and laſt part of
the Secretes of the Reuerende
Maister Alexis of
Piemount.
            
               The first Booke
               
                  A remedie againſt miſtes or cloudes, and other impediments
which offend the ſight.
                  TAke Eyebright water, Fennell water, red Roſe water,
and Celendine water, of eche an ounce: of the iuice
of Rew, and of Roſemarie, of eche two drammes, of
Gum Serapine half a dramme, of the gaule of a Partridge
or Kite, two ſcruples, mingle them, and make your medicine
according to Arte, and vſe to put of it many times into
the eye.
               
               
                  To kill wormes that gnaw and eate the heare.
                  TAke a quantitie of the ſéedes or rootes of marſhe Mallowes,
and boyle them a little, then let it coole, and of the Mucillage
which ſhalbe taken thereof, you ſhall annoynt the heare. The
like effect is ſéene by annointing the heare with the Mucillage
made of the leaues of Willowes.
               
               
                  To deſtroy ſcurfe or ſcales in the head.
                  TAke a quantitie of the flower of Cicers, and of the ſéedes of
marſh Mallowes bruſed and diſſolued with vinegar, then
annoynt the head, and afterward waſh it with the decoction of
Béetes, and toppes of Mulbery trées. Or elſe take of the berries
of Ben, and of the flower of beanes, of eche like quantitie, boyle
them in water, with the which you ſhall waſh the head.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the falling away of the heare from the bearde
or head, called in Italian Tigna.
                  TAke of the pouder of the rootes of Ireos, called Flowerdeluce,
and of the ſoote of a chimney, of eche like quantitie,
mixe them with olde oyle, and annoynt the heade: or elſe take
of Ariſtologia, of Verdegreſe, of Sal Armenick, of Bdellium,
of muſtard ſéede, of Gum Dragant, of ech like quantitie,
braye them and mingle them with the oyle of wheate, and vinegar,
of both as much as ſufficeth, and adde therevnto a little
Honye.
               
               
                  To heale Ringwormes.
                  TAke of yellow brimſtone, of the berries of Ben, of ech a like,
and being brayed, mixe them with Turpentine, and ſo annoint
the ſore.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of the Aſhes of Garlicke burnt, and mixed with hony,
annoynt the place: or elſe take Styrax liquida, mingled
with vinegar, and annoynt the ſore: It helpeth alſo to annoynt
it with the Gum of bruſed Almondes. If the Ringwormes ſhal
be vlcerous, take of Incenſe, of Gum Dragant, of Brimſtone,
of Aloes, of ech a dramme: of Gum Arabicke two drammes,
mixe them with vineger, and ſo annoint.
               
               
                  A remedie againſt the itche.
                  BRay the toppes and heades of Poppie, and mixe them with
vinegar, and ſo annoint the place: or elſe diſſolue Aloes being
beaten with Endiue water, and it will doe the like.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of the leaues of Sene one handfull, boyle them with
water of Roſes, and Smallage, and a little vinegar, and
waſh the ſore. It helpeth alſo to waſh it, with Sea water warmed:

or elſe with the decoction of wilde Cucombers, reduced
into water.
               
               
                  Againſt rubbing, or itch, which commeth in
the night.
                  AFter that the euacuation of the bodie is made with purgation,
or by letting of bloud: you ſhall annoint it with Aloes,
and Myrrhe diſſolued in water of hony. It helpeth likewiſe to
take Aloes, with the flowres of Lentilles, and mixe them with
vinegar and honie: or elſe waſh the place where ye itche is, with
water of Smallage: or with the lées of vineger by it ſelfe alone.
               
               
                  Againſt the chapping of the lippes.
                  TAke dried lées of white wine called Tartar, and burne them
in the fire, and temper them with Roſin and greaſe of an
Hen, or Ducke, medled with a little hony, and ſo vſe it.
               
               
                  Againſt the chappings of the feete.
                  ANnoint them with the greaſe of a Goate, or of a Cowe, or
with the oyle of an Hinde, and you ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of wax, of oyle Siſamine, of Turpentine, of Stirax liquida,
of eche like quantitie: mixe euery thing togither, and
laye therof vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  TAke of Gum Dragant poudred, thrée drammes, of Polipodie
rootes one dramme and a halfe, of Charabe, of Incenſe,
of ech halfe an ounce, of Turpentine ſixe drammes, bray euerie
thing, and with the oyle of an Hart make an oyntment.
               
               
                  Againſt ſweate which ſtincketh.
                  ANnoynt the bodie with water of Mirtels, drawne through
a Lembicke: or with water in which Allum is diſſolued. It

worketh the like effect, to annoint the bodie with the pouder of
ſaunders, or with the pouder of Ciperus and Roſes. Or with
the aſhes made of the leaues of Lillies and Myrrha.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſtinch of the toes.
                  TAke ofred Roſes one pound, of Galles, of Spicknard, of Ciperus,
of Myrrha, and of Allum, of ech ten drammes, make
thereof little cakes, or Paſtelli, with roſe water. And after diſſolue
them, and ſo annoint when néede requireth.
               
               
                  Againſt bruſes of or about the eares.
                  YOu muſt marke if it be néedefull to drawe bloud from the
bruſe, then annoint the place with this oyntment. Take of
Teruce, of Smalledge ſéede, of ech like quantitie, bray them and
with hony make an oyntment.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of quick Brimſtone, called Sulphur viuum, of Myrrha,
of Incenſe, of ech like quantitie, pouder them, and being
mixed with liquide Pich, lay it vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale a Weſt that riſeth vpon the eye liddes.
                  TAke waxe, and being well warmed, put thereof oftentimes
vpon the griefe. Or elſe take flies, the heades of them being
plucked of, and with the bodies rub the ſore.
               
               
                  To take away blewneſſe or blackneſſe of the
eye liddes.
                  TAke of gréene Chéeſe newly ſalted, and being cut in ſlyces,
lay thereof vpon the griefe, or elſe ſtampe Wormwood, and
make therof a playſter with the iuice of a Radiſh, and then vſe it.
               
               
                  To make nayles which are rotten to fall.
                  TAke Sulphur being poudred, and mixe it with hogs greaſe,
and put it vpon the place.
               
               
                  
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke liquide Pich, Waxe, Colofonie, Roſin, of quicke Sulphur,
and of Salt, of eche like quantitie, and make thereof a
plaiſter.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  TAke Propolios,Bitume, otherwiſe called, Aſpalto, is a kinde of naturall lime or claye. Waxe, Bitume, of eche two drammes, of
quicke Sulphur one dramme, and make a plaiſter.
               
               
                  Againſt bruſes of the nayles.
                  TAke leaues of Mirtels when they are tender, and leaues of a
Pomegranate trée, and being well brayed, put of it vpon the
nayle, and binde it faſt.
               
               
                  A plaiſter to heale burgeons or puſhes.
                  TAke of Camomill flowers a handful, of the flowers of marſh
Mallowes, of gréene Rew, and of Mallowes, of eche two
handfulles, of Leuen one ounce, of Pepper a dramme, of common
Salt one ounce and a halfe, of Figges thrée, boyle the aforeſaid
things, then bray them, and put therevnto of the oyle of
Camomill ſixe ounces, and being well incorporated, make therof
a plaiſter.
               
               
                  A remedie for ſuch as haue out their fundament.
                  TAke of Mumia, of Hipoquiſtidos, of Licium, of Galles,
of the ſhels of Oiſters being burnt, and make a fine pouder,
but annoint firſt the fundament with oile Oliue, and afterward
you ſhall put of the aforeſaide pouder vpon the gutte.
               
               
                  To remedie the crampe in children.
                  TAke of Marigoldes,Ligustrū is that which we call Priuet or Pimpret. and boyle them in water vntil they be
tender, and with the ſaid decoction waſhe the childe, and then
annoint him with oyle of Lillies, or Liguſtrum.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A remedie againſt the falling ſickneſſe.
                  TAke of white Incenſe called Olibanum, of Maſticke, of
Spiknarde, and of Squinant, of ech thrée ounces, of Galbanum,
of Oppopanack, of ech half an ounce, of Viſchus quercinus,
one ounce, of Amber halfe a ſcruple, of Pionie ſéedes
halfe a dramme, of the ſéedes of wilde Rewe one dramme, of
Labdanum two drammes, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of eche
halfe an ounce, of Caſtor, of Coperous, of eche halfe a dramme,
bray euerie thing verie well, then diſſolue the Gums with the
oyle of Rew, and incorporate them with the Viſchus, working
them well with your handes, and medling therewith the pouders,
and in the ende adde therevnto the Amber: Of which, take
as much as ſhalbe ſufficient, and ſpread it vpon Lether, or a new
linnen cloth, and the heares being ſhauen away, lay the plaiſter
vpon the crowne of the head.
               
               
                  Againſt the griefes of the ſkull.
                  TAke of the Roſin of a Pine trée that is white, ten drammes,
of the pouder of Aloes one ounce, mixe them togither, and
boyle them with a ſoft fier: and after adde of Gum Elemi one
ounce, and make a Cerote, which you muſt laye vpon the place
where the griefe is.
               
               
                  To comfort the hart.
                  TAke of white and red Saunders, of red Roſes, of red and
white Coral, of Spodium, of Camphora, of ech a dramme,
of the flowres of Borage, of Bugloſſe, of Violets, of Mirtels,
and of Roſemarie, of eche halfe a handfull, of the parings of
Ceder apple, of white and red Ben, of eche one dramme: of
Nutmegs, of Spicknard, of yt bone of a Harts hart, of Cloues,
of Cubebes, of Laurell leaues, of Setwall, of Baulme, of Lignum
Aloes, of Baſill ſéedes, of eche halfe a dramme, of Muſke,
of Amber, and of Saffron, of eche halfe a ſcruple: braye euerie
thing and make a little bag of Crimoſine ſarcenet, and vſe to
weare it vnder the left breſt.
               
               
                  
                  For the tooth ache.
                  TAke of long Pepper, white pepper, Cubebes, Staphiſager,
of the rindes of ye roots of Mulberie trées, of the rindes of the
rootes of Mandrake, of the rindes of the rootes of Caphers,
of Pelitorie, of Henbane, of eche two drammes, braye all theſe
togither, and boyle them in fiftene ounces of red wyne, vntill
one halfe of the wine be conſumed: then ſtraine it, and with the
ſaid decoction being warme waſh the téeth.
               
               
                  To mitigate euery kinde of griefe.
                  TAke of oyle of yellow Violets, of oyle of ſwéete Almonds, of
oyle of Siſamine, & freſh butter, of ech one ounce and a half,
of poudred Saffron one ounce, of white Waxe one ounce and a
halfe, of Dill ſéedes, of Camomill flowers, and of the fat of a
Duck, of eche two ounces, thrée whites of raw Egges: diſſolue
the oyle and the waxe with the fat, and after mixe with them
the other ingredience being poudred verie ſubtilly, and ſo make
an oyntment.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of oyle Oliue ſixe ounces, of Saffron two drammes, ſix
yelks of raw Egges, mixe them altogither, and then take of
Barly flower, of the flower of Amidum, of ech thrée drammes,
of freſhe butter halfe an ounce, of Bdellium, two drammes, of
wine that is ſodden, foure ounces: boyle all theſe ſaide things in
a Leaden veſſell,Gonorrea, ſignifieth the fluxe of naturall ſeede of man or woman going away vnwittingly. vntill they become thicke, and applie thereof
hote vnto the griefe.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called Gonorrea.
                  TAke of Fenegreke ſéedes, and boyle them in water vnto
the conſumation of the thirde part. And giue vnto the pacient
for the ſpace of thrée or foure dayes, foure ounces thereof
to drinke euery morning, and he ſhall be cured.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the flixe of the bodie.
                  TAke of Origanum, of Sumack, of Mirtels, of Corianders,
of Camomill flowres, of eche one handfull: of Pomegranate
flowres, with the ryndes and fruite, of the ſeedes of Roſes,
of eche halfe a handfull: of the pilles of Ireos rootes, of the
rootes of Mulberies, and of the rootes of Virga paſtoris, of eche
two handfuls: bray euerie thing a littell, and cauſe them to be
boyled in red wine ſo long, that the wine be cleane conſumed:
theſe things being put into a fine little bagge, let the diſeaſed
perſon ſet himſelfe thereon, and let the bagge be as hote as he
may ſuffer it.
               
               
                  A medicine to heale the flix of the liuer.
                  TAke of Agrimonie one handful, of Squinant two handfuls,
of Spicknard, of Liqueris, of eche halfe a handfull, of Mace,
of Maſticke, of eche halfe an ounce: of Lignum Aloes thrée
drammes of Myrobolani Emblici,
                     Myrobolani, a kinde of fruite growing in India, like vnto plummes, of which be diuers ſorts, they are to be had at the Apothecaries. and Chebuli, of ech one
dramme and a halfe, of Bole Armenia, of Lapis hematitis, of
Terra ſigillata, of eche ſixe drammes: of Coriander ſéedes preperated
one ounce and a halfe, of Spodium, two drammes, of
drie Roſes one ounce, of the flower of Barlie two ounces, of the
filings of Iron preperated one dramme, of the compound of the
thrée kindes of Saunders made without Camphora, halfe an
ounce, of oyle of Maſticke, and of Mirtels, of eche as much as
ſufficeth. Pouder the aforeſaid herbs & parch the Myrobolani
a little, and being finely beaten, take the other things being alſo
in pouder, and adding therevnto the oyles, put them altogither
in a veſſell on the fier, and make therewith a plaiſter, which
you ſhall applie vnto the right ſide, ſo that it maye reach from
the breſt vnto the ſtomacke.
               
               
                  To ſtop the flowers of a woman.
                  TAke of vnhuſked Lentilles, one pounde, of Burſa paſtoris,
and of Plantine, of eche thrée handfuls, of Aſſes dung, and

of Gotes dung dried, of eche one ounce & a halfe, of Olibanum,
and of Dragons bloud of eche twelue drammes, of drie Mints,
of Acatia, of Hipoquiſtidos, of Licium, of eche one ounce,
of Geſſum, foure ounces, of whites of Egges fiue, of Beane
flower thrée ounces,Geſſo, a kinde of plaister called in Latine Gypſum. of the iuice of Plantine as much as ſufficeth,
make a plaiſter in this maner: take the Lentils and the
dungs groſſely beaten, and mixe them with the iuice, but let the
Geſſum remaine infuſed in vinegar a whole daye, and after
mixe it with the other ingredience.
               
               
                  Againſt the diſeaſe Gonorrhea.
                  TAke of mundified Liqueris, of Alchechengi berries, of
Iuiubes, of the rootes of marſh Mallowes, of eche halfe an
ounce, of Mellon ſéedes one ounce, of the iuice of Liqueris fiue
drammes, braye them a little, and boyle them in foure pintes of
water of Mellons, and Alchechengi, vntill the fourth part of
the water be conſumed, and being ſtreyned, kéepe it to giue vnto
the ſicke to drinke.
               
               
                  An excellent ſirope to heale the French pockes.
                  TAke of the wood of Lignum vitae foure ounces, and of the
barke nine ounces, of Reubarbe two drammes: of Cardus
benedictus, two ounces, of the water of Bettony, of Lupils, of
Barlie, and of old Malmeſie, of eche foure pounds: of Sene of
Alexandria, foure ounces, bruſe the foreſaide thinges, and let
them ſtande infuſed in the waters and the Malmeſie a whole
night: then let them boyle vnto the conſummation of the third
part, and being taken from the fire let it be ſtrayned, of which
decoction you muſt drinke foure ounces morning and Euening,
foure houres before meate: alwayes prouided that the
partie which is ſicke be purged before he obſerue the diet.
               
               
                  A plaiſter to heale the dropſie.
                  TAke of the Dung of a Goate dried one pounde, of Commin
two drammes, of the rootes of wilde Cucombers, of Nightſhade,

ſhade, of ech two ounces, of Barlie meale one pounde, of Vinegar
wherein Iron is quenched, as much as ſufficeth, make a
plaiſter with boyling the rootes in Liée, and laye it on the bellie.
               
               
                  Againſt red ſpots in the ſkinne.
                  DIſtill water of Creſſes in the end of May, and being mixed
with honie. Dip therin pieces of Linnen cloth, and lay them
vpon the foreſaide ſpottes, and as they drie, dip them agayne
and laye them on the ſpots, and you ſhall ſée the effect. If you
bray the ſéede, and mixe it with vinegar, and put it vpon the ſaid
diſeaſe, it doth the like.
               
               
                  To ſtay heare that it fall not away.
                  TAke the iuice of Creſſes, and annoynt the roots of the heares
and they will not fal. The like effect ſhall you ſée if you waſh
them with the decoction of the rootes of Nightſhade, and of Muſtard
ſéede boyled in wine: or elſe the waſhing of them with the
iuice of the ſtalkes of Phillirea, which alſo cauſeth where it is
fallen, to grow againe.
               
               
                  A remedie againſt pimples or ſpottes in the face.
                  TAke a quantitie of the ſéedes of Nigella well brayed, and
mixe them with flower and hony, and make thereof a liniment,
wherewith you muſt annoynt the ſpots at night when
you go to bed, & in the morning waſh them with Perſly water.
               
               
                  To remedie a fretting itch and rough or ſcalie ſpots.
                  TAke a quantitie of Nigella ſéedes, a little bruſed, and boyle
them in vinegar vntill the decoction come to a ſubſtance of
thickneſſe, then adde therevnto of oyle of Nuts, and make it in
manner of an oyntment, with the which annoynt the place at
night when you go to bed. The like effect is ſéene by vſing the
meale of Orobo mixed with the iuice of the rootes of Pionie.
               
               
                  
                  To make heare to grow againe.
                  TAke of the Kernels of Haſill nuts, and being well ſtamped,
mixe them with the greaſe of a Swine, and of a Beare, and
annoynt the bare place.
               
               
                  A remedie againſt the falling away of heare, called
in Italian Aree.
                  TAke of the meate of Walnuts, and chewe it well in your
mouth, then take it out, and preſently lay it on the place.
               
               
                  A remedie to heale Chilblaines which are properly in the
ioynts of the fingars through colde, called
in Italian, Bugunze, or the itch.
                  BOile in water the ſéedes of Orobo a little bruſed, and if with
the decoction you bath the Chilblaines, they ſhall be healed,
but if you waſh the whole body, it will take away the itche. The
like effect to remedie the Chilblaines, is made with the leaues
of Verbene, brayed with the ſewet or greaſe of a Swine.
               
               
                  To heale beatings or bruſings.
                  TAke of Paritorie, of Mallowes, of Wormwood, of Motherwort,
of Percelie, of hulled Beanes, and boyle them in water,
and then being taken out, frie them in a Frying pan, and
in the ende boyle them in newe wine ſodden, and make thereof
a plaiſter. The like effect doth the water of wilde Time diſtilled
through a Limbeck, in the which you muſt wet péeces of
Linnen cloth, and then applie them vnto the griefe or ſore.
               
               
                  To purge the fleume of the Matrix.
                  TAke the leaues and ſtalkes of Paritorie in the ende of May,
and being brayed, diſtill them through a Limbeck, and you
ſhall giue of the water vnto the woman to drinke faſting thrée
ounces morning and Euening continually by the ſpace of eight
or ten dayes: it is an opener alſo of the opilations or ſtoppings

of the liuor, and milte, and purgeth the reynes and bladder.
               
               
                  A remedy againſt the peſtilence.
                  TAke of the rootes of Dog Fennell, and make them in pouder,
and giue thereof vnto the ſicke perſon, the quantitie
of a crowne to drinke, being diſſolued in vinegar if he féele a
great heate, but if he féele rigor or coldneſſe, giue it him with
Wine, and it will driue away the poyſon: which is ſuppoſed alſo
to be done by Pympernel, if the rootes be boyled in wine, and
giuen vnto the ſicke perſon to drinke.
               
               
                  To heale the Ptiſicke.
                  TAke of Pimpernel brayed in pouder two ounces, of the water
of gréene Pimpernell newlye diſtilled, and of ſugar as
much as ſhalbe ſufficient, and make a Lectuarie, which the ſicke
perſon ſhal vſe, by taking two drammes at a time. Vnto the like
effect is giuen the water of Veruene, and for the difficultie of
taking breath.
               
               
                  To remedie the diſeaſes called Diſsinteria and Diarrhea,
and the bloudie flixe of women.Diſsinteria and Diarrhea, are perillous flixes with excoriations and raſing of the bowels, called bloudy flixes.
                  
                  TAke of the ſtone called Hematitis, of Boale Armenia, of
eche a dramme, let them be finely poudred and grinded vppon
a Marble ſtone, and being well medled with two ounces of
Plantine water, you ſhall giue it vnto the ſicke to drinke.
               
               
                  Againſt the redneſſe of the face and noſe.
                  DIſtill in Balneo Mariae, the floures of Applegrefts, which
you muſt gather when they are well opened, and with the
water which ſhall be diſtilled therof, you ſhall Morning and Euening
waſh the places.
               
               
                  To heale the Pleuriſey and putrifaction
of the matrix.
                  TAke and diſtill in the ende of May the herbe called Burnet,
and of the water which you ſhall make, cauſe the ſicke perſon

to drinke Morning and Euening foure ounces, and within
ſhort ſpace he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Againſt the difficultie of taking breath and opilation
of the liuer and lunges, and a vehement
cough.
                  TAke of the herbe called Liuerwort, or Lungwort, and drie
it, and put therevnto of Aniſe ſéedes, of the lunges of a Foxe
dried in the aire, and of Fennell ſéedes, of Liqueris, of Enula,
of Gynger, of eche like quantitie, the aforeſaide thinges being
well brayed, you muſt ſearce them finely, and put therevnto of
ſugar the weyght of them all, and make thereof a Lectuarie,
whereof the pacient muſt drinke morning and Euening.
               
               
                  To make heare grow againe where it is fallen away.
                  TAke of the leaues of Radiſhes, and boyle them in water
with aſmuch more of the rootes of Dog Fennell, vntill they
be well ſodden, and with the decoction, you ſhall waſhe the places
from whence they be fallen.
               
               
                  To prouoke ſweate and to heale the plague.
                  TAke of the herbe called Rape, with the roots of Plantine the
leſſer, and knot graſſe, of eche halfe a handfull, braye them
wel, and boyle them in vinegar, & ſtraine them thorow a linnen
cloth, wherof being giuen vnto the ſicke perſon to drinke when
he goeth to bed, cauſeth him to ſweate out all euill humors.
               
               
                  Againſt the paine of the liuer, ſtomacke, and milt.
                  TAke of the oyle of Roſes foure ounces, of Raponticum, in
pouder halfe an ounce, of Waxe as much as ſufficeth, and
make thereof a playſter, which you muſt applye hote vnto the
place of the griefe.
               
               
                  To heale Ringwormes, or the Morphew.
                  TAke of the leaues of Elders, of Eleborus niger, & of Wine
tempered with vinegar and honye, and adding therevnto a

little of a ſquill, boyle them, and then annoint the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt the diſeaſe called Nauſea.Nauſea, diſpoſition or will to vomit, lothing or abhorring of things.
                  
                  TAke of the herbe called Sauorie, being finely beaten, and let
it be ſupped faſting with a new layd egge rearely roſted, and
it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To cauſe the naturall places of women to purge.
                  DRie of the herbe called Tanſey, and being very finely brayed,
giue therof to drinke in Wine the quantitie of halfe an
ounce.
               
               
                  To heale the hoarceneſſe and ſtreightneſſe of the
breſt occaſioned of euill humors.
                  TAke of Taxus barbatus, of Fennell, and of Liquerice, of
ech like quantitie, and boyle them in water or wine, vntyll
they be tenderlye ſodden, then ſtraine them thorowe a Linnen
cloth, and mixe them with ſugar, and giue thereof vnto the ſicke
perſon to drinke.
               
               
                  A remedie to cauſe a woman to bring forth the deade
creature, or the ſkin that the childe is wrapped
in, called in Italian Secunda.
                  TAke the roots of white Diptamus, of Gentian, of Ariſtologia
rotunda, of eche like quantitie: bray them into pouder,
and mixe therwith the iuice of Diptamus, and put therevnto of
Artemeſia poudred, and making thereof ſuppoſitories, applye
them vnto the necke of the Matrix.
               
               
                  To cure the diſtillation of vrine.
                  TAke of Epithimus what quantitie you thinke good, and
boyle it in good wine, and oyle oliue, and then taking it out of
the veſſell, lay it hote betwéene the Nauil and the priuie members,
and he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt redneſſe and dropping of the eyes.
                  TAke of the bloſſomes which growe out of the plantes of the
Beanes before they be yellow, and diſtill them in Balneo
Mariae, and take of the ſaide water, and drop thereof into the
eyes at night, and it will drie vp all ſuperfluous humiditie, and
remedie the redneſſe. The water of Taxus barbatus worketh
the like effect in waſhing the eyes therewith. It helpeth likewiſe
to waſhe the eyes with the water of Tormentill, into which is
put a little of preparated Tutia.
                  
               
               
                  To remedie the broken coddes of children.
                  TAke of the rootes of Enula in the ende of May, or betwéene
the middeſt of Iulie and September, and of the water of
them, being diſtilled thorow a Lembick, cauſe the ſick to drink
two or thrée ounces, both morning and Euening.
               
               
                  Againſt the bitings of mad Dogges.
                  TAke of the rootes of Gentian one dramme, of Mirrha two
drammes, of the eies of burnt Crabbes two drammes, boile
altogither in wine, and being ſtrayned, giue a cup full thereof
thrée mornings continually vnto the partie that is bitten. Then
waſh the wound with ſea water: but firſt you muſt laye ſome
of the pouder thereon to draw out the putrified bloud.
               
               
                  To remedie the vntemperate heate of the liuer.
                  TAke of Liuerwort, of Garden and wilde Endiue, of eche a
handfull, of Mayden heare halfe a handfull, boyle them in
water with a little ſugar, and being clarified, put vnto the decoction
a little of the wine of Pomegranates of an indifferent
taſte, and giue the partie to drinke therof certaine dayes.
               
               
                  To expell ſadneſſe.
                  TAke of the herbe called Cranes beke, of Rew, of Pulegium,
of eche like quantitie, bray them into pouder, and with
ſugar make little morſels and vſe them.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie an olde inueterated cough.
                  TAke of dried Horehounde thrée poundes, put it into a newe
glaſed earthen pan, and put therevnto ten poundes of fountaine
water, and boyle it vntill the thirde part be conſumed, then
ſtraine it into another pan, and put therevnto of good honie one
pound and a halfe, and of the pouder of pepper halfe an ounce:
and then boyle it againe ſo long that the thirde part be conſumed,
and it become thicke. Kéepe it in a veſſell of glaſſe, of the
which the ſicke perſon ſhall take morning and euening, and at
middaye, a ſpoonefull at a time.
               
               
                  Againſt the paine of the ſtomacke and the diſeaſe
called Nauſea.
                  TAke of Rue, of Smallage, of Dill, and of Comin, of ech like
quantitie: boyle them in a pounde and a halfe of wine, then
put therevnto of olde oyle thrée pound, boile it againe, and being
taken from the fire, you ſhall dip therein ſo much of vnwaſhed
wooll as ſhall be ſufficient to compaſſe the ſtomacke: and the
diſeaſed perſon beyng layd vpright, you ſhall laye it vpon him,
and after one houre you ſhall take awaye the ſaide wooll, and
make it cleane, and annoint the pacient againe with Oleum
Nardinum, and then cauſe him to walke a little.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſtinking or chappes of the toes.
                  TAke and boyle freſh Veale in Vinegar, and put it into the
chappes, or elſe rub the place with the pouder of Mirrha, or
Beniomin finely brayed.
               
               
                  Againſt the paine of the ſtomacke.
                  TAke a quantitie of gréene Peach leaues well brayed, and
mixe therewith olde greaſe being verie well purified, then
ſpread it vpon a linnen cloth, and applie it vnto the ſtomacke
in manner of a playſter.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the perillous flix and excotiation or raſing
of the bowels, called Diſsintiria.
                  TAke the ſpinie part of an hedgehog, and burne it, then beat
it into pouder, and if the ſicke perſon be without an Ague,
giue him it to drinke with wine, but hauing an Ague giue it
with water, and by the ſpace of ſixe dayes continually you ſhall
cauſe him to drinke one of the ſaide heades, and he ſhalbe hole:
or elſe take of the rennet of an Hare the quantitie of an Haſill
nut diſſolued in wine or Goates milke, and giue it the ſicke perſon
to drinke: or elſe take a liue Hare, and hauing cut the throte
thereof, take that hote bloud, and boyle it in broth, and cauſe
the ſicke to eate thereof, conſidering notwithſtanding, that if
the ſicke perſon auoyde bloud downeward, to braye the toppes
of Male Nettels, and of the iuice mixed with colde water or Vinegar,
you ſhall giue therof to drinke thrée dayes continuallye
vnto the ſicke perſon.
               
               
                  Againſt the Cholike.
                  TAke a gréene Plouer, and burne it with his fethers, and of
the aſhes you ſhall giue the ſicke to drinke: or elſe take of
Mintes as much as you may holde in thrée fingars, of Fennell
ſéedes two ounces, pouder them, and giue thereof to drinke vnto
the ſicke perſon one dramme in ſixe ounces of warme wine.
               
               
                  A remedie for him whoſe fundiment is out, to
cauſe it to abide in.
                  WAſhe it as often as it cōmeth forth with warme wine, in
the which is boyled Veruene, and mixe it with a little
Lie, which is not verie ſtrong. It helpeth alſo to annoint it with
liquide Pich, and ſo put in.
               
               
                  To heale broken Kibes.
                  TAke and lay vpon them the lunges of a Ramme: or elſe the
aſhes of Battes, or Rattes, or of carthwormes mixed with

oyle and layd vpon the ſore. It helpeth alſo to take the aſhes of
the téeth of an horſe, and lay it on them. If they be not broken,
lay vpon them Allum brayed with vinegar.
               
               
                  To draw out thornes or any other thing faſtned
in the fleſh.
                  LAye vppon the place a ſpunge or locke of wooll waſhed in
hote vrine, and it ſhall doe the effect: or elſe take the bodie or
head of a Lucert opened in the midſt, and layd vpon the place.
To doe the like effect, take nettle rootes brayed with ſalt, and
laye them on the hurt: or elſe the rootes of Agrimonie brayed
and layde theron.
               
               
                  To take away Wartes.
                  WHen you kill a Pigge, waſhe the Warts with that hote
bloud, letting it drie vppon them, then preſentlye after
waſhe them, and they will be hole.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſtinking of the mouth.
                  ACcuſtome to take of this mixture following, that is to ſaye,
of Pulegium dried, of Serpillum or Origanum, of eche
lyke quantitie, cauſe them to be finely poudred and mixed with
Honie, and when you go to bedde, waſh your mouth with good
wine, in the which Maſticke is boyled, or elſe waſhe it with good
wine, in the which are ſodden the leaues of Cinquefolie.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the loynes.Ferola, is an herbe like vnto big Fenneſt, it may be called Fennell Giant, or herbe Sagapene.
                  
                  TAke of quicke Sulphur what quantitie you thinke good, and
being brayed into pouder mixe it with the fatte, or ſewet of
what beaſt you ſhall thinke good, and then annoint. It helpeth
alſo to take the ſéedes of wilde Mintes brayed, and mixed with
Wheat flower, lay it on them: or elſe to bray the gréene leaues
of Ferola in wine, and to laye them thereon.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the difficultie of pyſsing and paine
of the bladder.
                  TAke of Pulegium, of Spikenarde, of Folium, of ech lyke
quantitie: being ſomewhat brayed, you ſhall put them into
a little bag, and being warme, applie it vnto the griefe. It helpeth
alſo to take Horehounde, boyled it wine and water, and
being ſtrayned, giue it vnto the ſicke perſon to drinke.
               
               
                  To heale one that cannot keepe his water.
                  TAke of Snayles called Africani, that is, ſuch as are without
their ſhelles, and being burned, giue the partie oftentimes
to drinke thereof in wine. It helpeth alſo to drinke the
braines of an Hare in wine, & to eate the reines of the ſaid beaſt.
               
               
                  To remedie the comming out of the Matrix.
                  FIrſt you muſt diſſolue with the iuice of wormwood Aromatical
ſpices, as Gallia muſchata, & Lignum Aloes, and therwith
annoint vnder the Nauil. Then take Rew, Caſtor, Artemeſia,
of ech like quantitie, boyle them in good wine vntill two
parts be conſumed, and being ſtrained, giue thereof the drinke.
Then cauſe the Matrix to be put in with ones handes verye
ſoftly, and cauſe hir to be ſet in a bath in the which are boiled, of
Roſes, of Pomegranat flowers, called Balauſtie, of Sumack,
of the rindes of Pomegranates, of Galles, of Mirtels, of the
leaues and inward barke of an Oke, and of Cipres nuts.
               
               
                  To heale the itch and hardneſſe of the Matrix.
                  TAke of Camphora, of Litharge, of Baye berries, as much
as you thinke good, and with the white of an Egge, make a
ſuppoſitorie, and put it into the Matrix. The pouder of Fenegreke
mixed with the bloude of a Gooſe, and annointing the
place therwith, healeth the hardneſſe of the Matrix.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the windineſſe of the Matrix.
                  TAke of Mallowes, of Pellitorie of the wall, and being boyled
in water, make a bathe for the woman, and after you
ſhall put vpon hir bodie this plaiſter following being warme.
                  Take of the iuice of Taxus barbatus, and of Rapes, and being
mixed with the Meale of Barlie, make therof a plaiſter.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the head, occaſioned through
the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Aloes Epatice, one ounce, of the rootes of Pimpernell,
and Bugloſſe, of eche a handfull, boyle all theſe in thrée
pintes of water, vntill two parts thereof be conſumed, and that
which remayneth, you ſhall deuide in foure partes to giue him
in ſteade of a ſirop, it will purge him, and ceaſe the paine.
               
               
                  To cauſe heare to grow where it is fallen away.
                  TAke and burne Acornes of an Oke, and mixe the pouder
with the fat of a Beare, and annoint the place.
               
               
                  To remedie eyes that be bloud ſhot.
                  TAke of the milke of a Goat that is bloud warme, and therewith
fomentate the eies: or elſe bray the leaues of Verbena,
with a little ſalt, and therewith emplaiſter the eyes, that all the
night they may be ſhut, and the day following take it awaye,
and continuing thus certaine dayes, he ſhall be hole.
               
               
                  To heale the flix of the bodie and ſpitting of bloud.
                  TAke of Gum Dragant, Gum Arabicke, of Sanguis Draconis,
of Bole Armenia, Amidum, of Spodium, of eche
foure ſcruples: of the ſtone called Hematitis grounded vpon a
Marble, of the iuice of Plantin, of Poppie, of Mumia, of Acatia,
of Hipoquiſtidos, of eche thrée drammes, of ſirrop of
Roſes as much as ſufficeth, meddle them well togither, and
make thereof a lectuarie.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the Ptiſicke.
                  BRaye Bettonie, and mixe it with Honie, and make therof a
lectuarie: or elſe beate Pine Apple kirnels, which are clean
and new, and with ſoden wine, and clarified Hony, labor them
ſo long in the Morter, that they come vnto the forme of Hony,
and vſe to take thereof. It helpeth alſo, to take the lunges and
hart of a wilde gooſe boyled, and to eate thereof.
               
               
                  An oyntment to heale the ſtiffeneſſe or ſhrinking of
ſinowes, called Spaſmus, comming of a wound
taken of ſome venemous beaſt.
                  TAke of the meale of Line ſéedes, of the meale of Barlie, and
of Orobi, of eche thrée ounces, of the meale of Beanes one
ounce, of Honye a pounde: of white vinegar thrée ounces: of
hard Pitch ſixe ounces: of Swines greaſe thrée ounces, mixe
all togither, and make therof an oyntment.
               
               
                  To make milke come into a womans breſts.
                  TAke Dill and boyle it well in water, and of the decoction
you ſhall giue vnto the woman to drinke morning and euening
foure ounces at a time, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the diſeaſe called in Italian Fuoco ſaluatico,
and in Engliſh S. Anthonies fire.
                  TAke of Burre rootes, and of Sage leaues, and braye them
verie well, and make therof a plaiſter which you muſt laye
vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  A verie excellent remedie againſt winde in the left ſide,
called in Italian Melancholia mirachiale.
                  TAke of red Roſe leaues ſixe ounces, of Ciperus fiue drams,
of Cloues, of Aſarum, of Maſtick, of Spicknarde, of eche
ſixe drammes, of Mace, of Cardamomes, of Nutmegs, of eche
one dramme, braye and mixe them togither: Then take of Myrobolanes
                     
called Emblici one pounde, the which you muſt
boyle in ſeuen pintes of water, vntill two parts therof be conſumed,
ſtraine it and put vnto the decoction one pound of Hony,
then boyle it againe, vntill it be as thicke as Hony, then put it
vnto the ſpices before mentioned, and mixe them togither with a
ſpatter made of Willow, or of a Pomecitron trée, and aromatize
it with halfe a ſcruple of Muſke, and vſe it in electuarie.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of Capillus Veneris, called in Engliſh Maiden heare,
of Bugloſſe, of Reiſons, of eche one handfull, of Lignum
Aloes, of Spicknarde, of Maſticke, of eche two drammes, of
Epithimum, of Polipodie, of Borage, of eche halfe an ounce,
of the iuice of Pome royals, one ounce and a halfe, of Sugar
two pounds, make therof a ſirop, and aromatize it with white
Amber, and vſe it.
               
               
                  To remedie the want of ſleepe through freneſie.
                  SHaue away the heare with a Raſer, and annoint the heade
with the froth or fome which ſwimmeth vpon Creame, and
be ſhall ſléepe forthwith.
               
               
                  To heale the falling ſickneſſe.
                  TAke of the Lungs of a Wolfe, and waſhe them with good
red wine, then boyle them, and dreſſe them with Cordiall
ſpices, and giue it in meate vnto the ſicke perſon, and he ſhalbe
healed: or elſe take of Opoponack, of Caſtoreum, of Sanguis
draconis,
                     Castoreum in Engliſh ſignifieth the Beuer ſtones much vſed in medicine. of Antimonie, of ech like quantitie, bray them
and giue therof vnto the ſicke perſon two ſcruples, in what maner
you will, and this ſhall be the quantitie whenſoeuer he taketh
it, and you ſhall ſée the ſucceſſe therof to be maruellous.
               
               
                  To heale the trembling or ſhaking of the members.
                  ANnoynt the crowne of the heade and the places that are
grieued with oyle of Cinnamonde, and cauſe the diſeaſed

perſon to take two drammes of the water that is made of mans
or Swines bloud, brought vnto putrifaction with Aqua vitae,
and after diſtilled, and of this you muſt giue him to drinke many
times in a Moneth.
               
               
                  To remedie the teares, or itch of the eyes.
                  TAke of Aloes Epatici, two drammes, infuſe it in ſwéete
wine, and of Roſe water, as with the reſt will fill a Cup:
and therwith waſhe the eyes, or elſe fomentate them with the
water of Stecados.
                  
               
               
                  To heale the ſounding of the eares.
                  TAke of the leaues of Nightſhade, and taking out of the iuice
diſtil therof into the eares. Alſo take ye oile of Irinum, mixed
with Vinegar, and put thereof hote into the eares. Likewiſe
take Eleborus halfe ſodden in Vinegar, and being put into the
eares, it healeth the paine. Alſo take the iuice of white onyons,
and mixe it with like quantitie of hony, and put therof into the
eares. The like effect is done with the iuice of Léekes mixed
with womans milke, and put therof into the eares.
               
               
                  To remedie the yoxe or hicket.
                  TAke of the iuice of Quinces, and of hony, of eche one pound
and a halfe, of Vinegar thirtene ounces and a halfe, boyle
them togither, and put therevnto of Ginger thrée ounces, of
white Pepper one ounce, and vſe it. Or elſe braye Rewe and
diſſolue it in white wine, and drinke it. It helpeth alſo to take
Comin ſéedes, or Daucus, or Spica Celtica, or Pulegium, giuen
in drinke.
               
               
                  To remedie the beating, trembling of the bodie
and the diſeaſe called Sincope.
                  TAke of Coſtus,
                     Sincope ſignifieth ſwounding, of Folium, of Calamus Aromaticus, of
Cloues, of eche one ounce, of Galles, of Acatia, of Roſe
leaues, of Spodium, of the Nuts of India, of Olibanum, of

eche halfe an ounce, beate them and ſearce them, and with the
iuice of Quinces well ſodden make thereof a lectuarie with ſugar,
of the which you ſhall giue vnto the ſicke perſon the quantitie
of an Haſill nut at a time.
               
               
                  To drie vp the milke of the breſtes.
                  BAth the breſts with the decoction that is made with ye leaues
of Coleworts: or elſe annoint with the iuice of Plantine the
heades or teates of the breaſts, and it will drie them preſently.
               
               
                  To make ſoft or flagging breſts to become hard.
                  TAke the ſhelles of a Partridge egges, and braye them well,
and mixe them with yellow waxe, and annoint the breſtes:
or elſe annoint the heads of the breſts with the firſt menſtruous
bloud of a woman, and it will haue effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the vomiting of children.
                  TAke a quantitie of dried Rew, and halfe as much Incenſe,
mixe them and make therof a pouder, and giue it to be drunken
with ſirrop of Roſes, or Wine.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the ſtomacke which happeneth
with ſharpe belkings.
                  CAuſe the ſicke perſon to take a dramme or two of Agarici
trociſchati in forme of Pilles, or otherwiſe, then let him
drinke a litle wine, and he ſhall be hole.
               
               
                  To remedie the bloud or milke engendred in
the ſtomack.
                  GIue the party a quantity of ye iuice of Smallage with hony:Poſca, a drinke made of Grapes after they be preſſed.
or elſe giue him to drinke Aſſa fetida, with Gum Serapine
in wine well watered, the quantitie of halfe a dram at a time.
Aboue al remedies this helpeth, to drinke the milke or rennet of
an Hare: or elſe the flowers of the herbe Heliocriſo, or Poſca.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the opilation of the liuer.
                  CAuſe the ſicke perſon to eate amongſt his meates drie figs
with Pepper: or elſe giue him to eate the ſéedes of Cuſcuta,
preſerued with fine ſugar.
               
               
                  To heale the Iaundice.
                  TAke Iuie when it hath flowers, and boyle it in white wine,
which is neyther to ſower nor to ſwéete, and giue it the ſicke
perſon to drinke ſeuen mornings faſting. It helpeth alſo to giue
him to drinke foure ounces of the herbe called Cinquefolio:
                  
               
               
                  To remedie an olde paine of the liuer, and of the
bellie and ſides, with the ſhort ribbes
called Hypochondrium.
                  TAke Wormwoode and boyle it in wine,Hypochondrium, the fore parte of the bellie and ſides, about the ſhort ribs, and about the nauill, vnder which lyeth the Liuer, and spline. and put vnto the ſaid
wine, oyle of Nuts, or of Spiknarde, and annoint the place.
               
               
                  To remedie the hardneſſe of the Liuers,
with the Iaundice.
                  TAke of oyle of Roſes one ounce and a halfe, of the iuyce of
Wormwoode, of Olium nardinum, and Maſticke, of eche
halfe an ounce, of the pouder of Squinantum of Spodium of
Caſsia lignea, & of Cauda equian, of eche two drammes, of wax
as much as ſufficeth, and make thereof an oyntment, with the
which you ſhall annoint vpon the liuer, with your hande, being
firſt waſhed with vinegar: and your ſtomacke with your hand,
being annointed before with oyle of Maſtick.
                  
               
               
                  To heale the flixe of Vrine.
                  TAke of Spodium of Lignum Balſamum of Coſtus, of
ſaunders, of Porcelane ſéedes, of gum Dragant, of gum Arabick,
of Amidum, of the rotes of Rubea Tinctorum of Berberies,
of the ſéedes of Endiue, of bole Armenick, of eche foure
drammes, of Suger one ounce. Beate all theſe things and

ſearce them, and make a lectuarie thereof with honie of Roſes,
as much as ſuffiſeth, of the which you ſhall cauſe the perſon to
take euerie morning, one ounce. Then annoynt the backe, and
the place of the raines with Triacle, and Roſe water, mixed togither.
To remedie this griefe is commended alſo, Porcelane,
Pomegranets, and Burſa Paſtoris giuen in meates.
               
               
                  To prouoke vrine.
                  GIue the ſéedes of Serpillum vnto the ſicke perſon to drinke
in white wine: or elſe boyle in water the rootes of Carlina,
                     Serpillum is wilde Time.
and make him to drinke thereof. It helpeth preſently to giue
him to drink in wine the rootes of Filipendola,
                     Carlina is wild Hartichokes. or elſe the ſeeds
of Trifollie.
                  
               
               
                  To remedie the burning of the vrine.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Citrons, and Gourdes the huſkes taken
away, of eche foure drammes, of Lettice ſéedes, and Porcelane
ſéedes, of eche two drammes, of the iuice of Liqueris one
dramme, of Roſes halfe a dramme, of Acorus one dramme, of
the fruit of Mirtelles, and of Lentils mundifielde, of eche one
ſcruple. Braye all theſe togither, and with the iuyce of Porcelane
make little rounde cakes, waying a dramme a péece, of
the which you muſt giue one at a time vnto the ſicke perſon to
drinke. It helpeth alſo to vſe Sebeſtians in meates: or elſe the
ſéedes of Lettice and of Porcelane eaten in good quantitie with
Sugar, or giuen in drinke.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the Bladder.
                  BOyle in water the leaues of Lawrell, and being taken out,
put them in a bagge, vpon the which the ſicke perſon muſt
ſit as long as it is hote. Or elſe boyle ſmallage, and ſtraine it,
and giue him foure ounces therof to drinke with the flowers of
wilde Commin, and he ſhall be healed.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the Collick.
                  TAke of Sentorie the leſſer, of Camomill, of Rew, of Dill, of
eche one handfull, of Annis ſéedes, of Fennell, of Commin,
of Carawaies, of Ameos, of Bay berries, of eche halfe a handefull,
of the pulpe of Coloquintida bounde in a péece of Linnen
cloth two drammes, of ſault Gemma one dramme and a halfe,
boyle all thoſe aforeſaide things in as much water as ſhall ſuffice:
then take of the decoction being ſtrayned one pounde, of
oyle of Rew thrée ounces, and of oyle Benedictum one ounce,
and make thereof a Gliſter. It helpeth alſo to take faſting one
dramme of this confection following. Take of dried Rew ten
drammes, of Ameos, of Commin, of Origanum, of Perſeley,
of bitter Almonds, of Pepper, of Calamint, of Daucus, of long
pepper, of Calamus Aromaticus, of eche two drammes, of
Bay berries, of Caſtor, of gum Serapine, of Opoponacke, of
eche thrée drammes, make a lectuary with hony: the which hath
not his like to diſſolue windineſſe, or ventoſitie.
               
               
                  To remedie the Flixe of the bodie.
                  TAke a quantitie of the middle red barke or rynde of a Cheſtnut
trée, and boile it in water vntill two partes of the trée be
conſumed: and giue that which remayneth vnto the ſicke perſon
to drinke.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of Myrtle berries finely beaten twelue drammes, of
Roſe leaues, of Spodium, of Sumacke, of the thrée kindes
of Saunders, of Balauſtie, of gum Arabick, of eche one dram
and a halfe, of the ryndes of Pomgranats burned ſeuen drammes
of Coriander ſéedes infuſed in Vineger and burned foure
drammes of Sorell ſéedes, of Plantin, of Roſes, of eche two
drammes, bray them and waſh them with the iuyce of Agreſta,
or of Quinces, and Vineger, then drie it and after mixe the
powders with the 
                        •…
                     iua of Quinces and Vineger, and make
thereof a Lectuarie.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the ſtrayninges called in
Italian Pondera.
                  TAke Coleworts,Pondera, ſignifieth a great deſire to go to the ſtoole without effect. and boile them in water, then take them out
and frie them in oyle, and cauſe the ſicke perſon to ſit ouer it.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke and put vpon coales in a hole, a Baſon in the which is
Colophonie, Frankincenſe, and Tyrpentyne, of eche lyke
quantitie: and let him ſit ouer it, to receiue the fume which procéedeth
from vnder him.
               
               
                  To prouoke the flowers,Secunda or Secundina, is the skin wherein the childe is wrapped in. and the Secunda
vnto women.
                  TAke the heades of Garlick, and boyle them in water, and
cauſe the woman to ſit ouer it, to receyue the fume from
beneath.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke Caſsia Lignea, and Rubea Tinctorum, and the black
rynde of Caſsia Fiſtula, beaten into verie fine powder, and
giue the quantitie of a dramme thereof to drinke at once. The
flowers of Policaria brayed, and diſſolued in white wine, being
giuen to drinke worke the like effect.
               
               
                  An other moſt excellent remedie for the ſame.
                  TAke of Gentiana, of Pulegium, of eche two drammes, of
Nigella one dramme, of drie Figges as much as ſufficeth:
make a ſuppoſitorie and put it into the place of nature, and it
will prouoke the flowers without griefe.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the Matrix appoſtumated
through groſſe humors.
                  TAke and boyle the rootes of Ariſtologia Longa, in water,
and with the decoction bath the place of the griefe: It helpeth

alſo to doe the lyke, the rootes or fruite of Ieneper.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the matrix happened
through winde.
                  ANnoynt the place with oyle of Cinamond, myxed with oyle
and common waxe, or elſe giue vnto the woman to drinke,
of the rootes of Doronici or of Ciperus, with good white wine,
the quantitie of a dramme at a tyme.
               
               
                  To heale the prefocation of the matrix.
                  ANnoynt the necke within the matrix with oyle of Margerum,
or with Olium Muſtellinum, or with the oyle of
white Lillies, in the which is diſſolued a little Muſke.
               
               
                  To remedie the comming out of the matrix.
                  EMplayſter the matrix with the leaues of Netles, and it will
bring it vnto his place:Bitume, is a certayne glewie earth founde in the pr
                           •
                        tes about Bahilon, which is called alſo Aspaltum. or elſe take of Bitumen, that is, of
Aſpaltum two partes, of Oxe dung one parte, bray them and
make a fumigation vnder it.
               
               
                  To remedie the itche of the purſe of the teſticles.
                  ANnoynt the place firſt with the iuyce of Walwort which is
warme, and when it ſhall be drie of it ſelfe, vpon it annoynt
with oyle of Roſes wrought a long ſpace vpon a plate of leade
with a peſtell of lead. Or elſe take of gum Dragant, of Sulfur
Citrine, of Litarge, of eche like quantitie, bray them well and
mixe them with Vinegar, putting therevnto a little Opium,
and therewith annoynt the diſeaſed place.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the Hemerhodes.
                  ANnoynt the place with Liquide Vernice, and preſently it
will helpe, or elſe take the yolke of an egge, and of the fat of
an Henne which is made liquide, with a little oyle of Roſes and
Saffron, and mixe them all in a Potinger which muſt ſtand in
colde water, and therewith annoynt the place.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the hardneſſe or ſtifneſſe of
the ioyntes.
                  TAke of the dregges of Olium Irinum, and of the oyle of
Lynſeades, of the Muſcillage of Fenegreke, of the fat of a
Ducke, of the marrow of the ſhankes of a Calfe, of the rootes of
wilde Cucombers, of the greaſe of a blacke Henne, of Armoniacke,
of eche like quantitie, diſſolue the Armoniacke wyth
oyle and waxe, and putting thervnto the other things, make an
oyntment. It helpeth alſo to annoynt the diſeaſed with the oyle
of Trifolie when it is rype.
               
               
                  To heale the Sciatica.
                  AFter the purging of the bodie, it is very good to draw bloud
from the foote of the diſeaſed ſide by the vaine Malleole,
which is vpon the inſtep, and then to put vpon the Sciatica a
péece of linnen cloth bathed in Aqua vitae. It helpeth alſo to annoynt
the place with oyle of Iuie drawne out by Alchemiſtri.
The diſeaſe is alſo cured by eating fryed Iuie in Frytters the
ſpace of nine dayes faſting. The like effect is ſéene by taking
the rootes of Tormentill being finely brayed, and miniſtred in
the Winter, with Iuie water, and in the Sommer with conſerue
of Roſes. It is in vſe alſo to take two partes of ſea water,
and one part of good white Wine, and a dramme of the pouder
of the rynds of ſowre Pomegranates, and being mixed to make
thereof a gliſter, and it will heale the griefe.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefes, and inueterated
ſwellinges of the knees.
                  TAke of Goates dung, and mix it with the meale of barly, and
make a playſter with Vinegar and water, and put it vpon
the ſwelling.
               
               
                  To take away ſwellings after the Goute ceaſeth.
                  TAke of the aſhes of burned Oyſter ſhelles, and of the aſhes
of Spongies, and of Dodder, as muche as you thinke good,

boyle them in ſharpe wine with a little water, and therewith
waſh the féete: but firſt you muſt fomentate them with a péece
of a milſtone burned and quenched in vineger. It helpeth alſo
to fomentate the place with the decoction of ſtichwoorte and to
emplaiſter the ſame.
               
               
                  To driue away venimous Beaſtes.
                  TAke Bdelium, Serapine, Piche, Hartes horne, or the hoofe
of a Goate, or Brimſtone & Incenſe, and perfume the place:
the like effect is done by ſmoking the place with the hoofe of an
Aſſe.
               
               
                  To take away ſpottes out of the ſkinne.
                  ANnoynt them with the warme blood of a blacke Henne, and
they ſhall be hole: or elſe take Eleborus, of Incenſe, of Liquide
piche, of eche like quantitie: braye them, and mixe them
with oyle of Ceder apples, and Vinegar, and worke therewith.
It remedieth alſo to rub the ſpottes with the rootes of Mandragora
ſtanding in the Sunne fiue daies continually. It healeth
likewiſe to take the water of Radiſhes diſtilled through a Limbecke,
and therewith to waſh the ſpottes, or elſe to annoynt the
ſkinne with the meate of Orobo mixed with Honie.
               
               
                  To heale Ringwormes.
                  BVrne a péece of courſe Linnen, and when it is kindled, put it
vpon a plate of cleane Iron: or elſe in a diſhe, and there it
will leaue a certaine humiditie, with the which, annoynt the
Ringwormes, and it will heale them. Or elſe take of the Gum
of a wilde Pineapple trée, and put therevnto Honie, and Vinegar,
and annoint the place.
               
               
                  To remedie the wanne ſpeckes, or pimples
of the face.
                  TAke of a Hare new killed, and with the bloode thereof while
it is warme annoynt, and it will helpe. Or elſe annoynt

them with Cinamond beaten, mixed with hony. Alſo take the
greaſe of a Ducke in the which is mixed waſhed Litarge, and
annoynt the place, and it worketh the like effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the opilations of the liuer
and of the milt.
                  TAke of Calomus Aromaticus one pounde, bray it a little,
and infuſe it in a ſufficient quantitie of Vinegar, and then
boyle it in that ſame Vinegar vntill halfe therof be conſumed:
then ſtraine it well thorow a linnen cloth, and put vnto the decoction
of good hony ſixe ounces, and boyle it vntill it come to
the ſubſtance of a ſirrop: wherof you muſt vſe to take morning
and euening faſtyng, the quantitie of an ounce and a halfe, at a
tyme, and you ſhall haue your deſire.
               
               
                  To remedie the baldneſſe of the head.
                  TAke a quantitie of Sothernwoode, and put it vppon kindled
Coales to burne, and being made in powder, mixe it with
Oyle of Radiſhes, and annoynt the balde place, and you ſhall
ſée a great experience.
               
               
                  To ſtop bleeding at the Noſe.
                  TAke of the yelow ſedes which grow in the middeſt of Roſes,
of Sanguis draconis, of Terra, Sigillata, of Armenick, of
eche one dramme, of the heares of an Hare burned, one dramme
and a halfe, beate all theſe into fine pouder, & make a bagge bathed
in the white of an Egge, with ſome of the foreſaide pouder
being put therin, & ſo put it into the noſe, and it wil doe the effect.
               
               
                  Againſt the excoriations, and griefes of the bodie.
                  TAke of the herbe called Alchimilla,
                     Gallitricon is an herbe that maketh one neeſe. braye it and take out the
iuyce by a linnen cloth, then take of Gallitricon, and of
Hipericon made in powder, and being medled, giue thereof to
drinke. Or elſe take of choſen Agrick two drammes, binde it in
a linnen cloth, and boyle it in water, with Mallowes, Violet

leaues Paritarie, and Porcelane, of eche one handefull: Then
take a pounde of the ſaide decoction, of oyle Oliue, thrée ounces,
and make a Gliſter, which you ſhall finde maruellous good.
               
               
                  To heale the flixes of the ſtomack and bowels.
                  TAke of good Vinegar a poſſenet full, and boyle therin of Ariſtologia
rotunda halfe an ounce, of Cloues half an ounce
brayed groſely, and with a ſponge infuſed in the decoction, you
muſt bath the ſtomack and the nauill.
               
               
                  To heale the iſſuing forth of the Fundiment.
                  TAke of Taxus Barbatus, and of the flowers of Pimpernell,
of flower Deluce, as much as you pleaſe, boyle them
in wine, and being taken out, emplayſter the place about his
Fundiment, and it will returne vnto the place.
               
               
                  To heale ſtreynings.
                  TAke of Baſill, and boyle it in Vinegar, and Oyle, vntill it
bée verie tender, and with the decoction bath the place.
               
               
                  Againſt the belkings of the ſtomack.
                  TAke of the flowers and rindes of Pomegranets, and beate
them into pouder, then boyle them in Vinegar, in the which
you muſt infuſe a ſponge, and with bathing the ſtomacke the
paine will ceaſe.
               
               
                  Againſt Chilblaynes, or Kibes.
                  TAke the rines of Pomegranets, and braye them well, then
boyle them in wine, and being well beaten, put it vpon the
griefe, and you ſhall ſée a verie trim effect.
               
               
                  Againſt hardneſſe of the Milt, and of other members,
and the Palſey.
                  TAke of the gréene leaues of Bearefoote, eight ounces, of Sauine,
of Sage, of Mallowes, of Margerome, of Roſemarie,

of Pulegium, of Motherwoort, of Wormewoode, of Sothernwoode,
of eche two handfulles, of cloues ſixe ounces, of Cinamonde
halfe an ounce, of Commin two ounces, of Galingale,
thrée drammes, of Incenſe, and of Maſticke, of eche foure
drammes, of white Waxe, eyght ounces, of good wine thrée
pintes. Boile all theſe a foreſaide things vntill the wine be conſumed,
then take it from the fire, and put vnto it the waxe, and
make an Oyntment, with the which annoynt where néede requireth.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefe of the loynes and bellie.
                  TAke water Mintes and drie them, and make pouder therof,
and giue two drammes of that vnto the ſicke perſon to
drinke in thrée ounces of the water of Radiſhes, and you ſhall
ſée a happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale the pimples in the face.
                  ANnoint the face with the oyle of the ſéedes of Bombace, and
it will clenſe the face from the ſpeckes or pimples.
               
               
                  Againſt windineſſe of the Bellie.
                  TAke of Annis ſéedes, of Fenell ſéedes, and of the rootes of
Bruſcie, and of Suger, of eche like quantitie, make pouder
thereof, and giue vnto the ſicke perſon a ſponefull to drinke
in good wine, and it will heale him.
               
               
                  To cauſe a woman to auoyde the ſkinne that the
childe is wrapped in, called in Italian
Secondina.
                  TAke of the flowers of Marigoldes, and being dried make
pouder of them, and put thereof about a great waxe candell,
and being lighted make therewith a fumigation vnto hir place
of nature, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  
                  An excellent preſeruatiue againſt the Peſtilence
and Dropſey.
                  TAke one ounce of the iuyce of gréene nuttes, of the iuyce of
Agrimony halfe an ounce, of the iuice of Rew thrée drams,
of the iuice of Iſope thrée ounces, of the iuice of Hempe foure
ounces, meddle them togither, then take of the ſaide mixture
halfe an ounce, of Mumia halfe a dramme, of Sugar Candy
halfe an ounce, of Sugar Roſate one dramme, make a lectuarie,
of the which, diſſolue in good wine the quantitie of a Cheſtnut,
or elſe in Bugloſſe water, or of the flowers of Marygolds,
and many nights when you go to bed, vſe to drinke therof.
               
               
                  To remedie the yexings of the ſtomacke and vomitings,
and loſſe of appetite, occaſioned
through cold humors.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Cardamomes, and of Lignum Aloes,
like quantitie, and being finely beaten, drinke a dramme
thereof in good ſwéete wine two houres before you eate meate,
and if you adde therevnto Annis ſéedes, it will reſtore the appetite
which is loſt.
               
               
                  To heale the Quarterne ague and all agues, which by
nature continue long time.
                  TAke of Cardus benedictus, one dramme, and being made
in pouder, you ſhall cauſe the pacient to drink it a quarter of
an houre before his fit take him, then couer him well in his bed,
and you ſhall ſée a maruellous effect: or elſe giue him to drinke
thrée ounces of the water of the ſame herbe diſtilled in Maye, it
will cauſe him to ſweate abundantly, and ceaſe his paine.
               
               
                  Againſt the Peſtilence.
                  TAke of the rootes of Tormentill finely poudred, one dram:
of Triacle halfe a dramme, diſſolue it in Sorrell water, and
giue it vnto the diſeaſed to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the flix called Diſsinteria.
                  GIue vnto the ſick perſon one dramme of the pouder of Tormentill
rootes to drinke with good red wyne, and in taking
it oftentimes he ſhall be healed.
               
               
                  To reſtore the appetite that is loſt.
                  TAke of the ſéeds of Spire Trifolie, & boile them in wine, and
giue the ſicke perſon to drinke therof thrée dayes continually,
morning and euening, and preſently after, giue him to
drinke a dramme of pouder of Ginger, diſſolued with vinegar,
then cauſe him to be well couered in his bed, & he ſhalbe whole.
               
               
                  To take ſpots away that grow in the eyes.
                  BOyle in wine the flowres and rootes of Valerian, and diſtill
of that wine being cold into the eyes, and you ſhall ſée a preſent
ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt the pleuriſey.
                  DIſtill in the midſt of Auguſt through a Limbeck the rootes
of Valerian, and bathe in the water péeces of Linnen
cloth, and put them hote vpon the euill: alſo if you giue the pacient
therof to drinke, it will heale him.
               
               
                  A medicine for women which through fatneſſe
can not conceyue.
                  TAke of the herbe Bettonye, and make it into pouder, and
giue vnto the woman one dramme to drinke thereof, in
halfe an ounce of the water which is diſtilled of the ſame herbe,
and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  Againſt the Hemerodes:
                  TAke of the wood of Vines and make aſhes thereof, and being
diſſolued in vineger, annoynt the place oftentimes and
it will heale them, or elſe take of the ſtope, or caulking which

they take out of olde ſhippes with the Piche, and being put into
a hole with coales make thereof a ſmoke, and cauſe the ſicke
perſon to ſit thereon and he ſhall be whole. It helpeth alſo to
boyle the leaues of Colewortes with water and butter, and let
the pacient ſit ouer it to receyue the fume, and he ſhal be healed.
               
               
                  To take away Warts.
                  TAke of the water which diſtilleth from the Vines, at ſuche
time as they be cut, and with that mixe the water which is
wont to remayne in the leaues of Okes, and waſhe them often
therewith.
               
               
                  To remedie the infection of the ſkinne.
                  TAke of the rootes of Vines, and boyle them in water wyth
the ſéedes of Fetches and Fenegreke, and therewith waſh
the place.
               
               
                  To accelerat the birth.
                  TAke out the iuyce of Vine leaues, or elſe boyle them in good
whyte Wine, and giue foure ounces thereof vnto the woman
to drinke, eyther of the one, or other.
               
               
                  To remedie the Quinſey.
                  TAke out the meate of an Orenge, and fill it with Hennes
dounge, then put therevnto oyle of Roſes and a little Saffron,
and boyle it vpon a fyre of coales, and when you haue
taken it from the fyre, bray it and make thereof a playſter, and
binde it vnder the throte, hauing firſt well purged the bodye.
               
               
                  To heale the Cough▪
                  
                  TAke of Tyrpentine, and of clarified Hony, of eche like quantitie,
and being mixed with an Egge ſomewhat ſodden, giue
it vnto the pacient to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  To make a leane perſon to become fat.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Orobo, and after you haue dryed them
at the fyre braye them, and mixe them with Hony: and of
the mixture you ſhall giue vnto the ſicke perſon euery morning
the quantitie of a Nut faſting, or elſe take of the meale of Amidum,
and of Sarcocolla of eche fiue ounces, mixe them with
Butter and make thereof a paſte, the which you ſhall bake vntyll
you can make pouder thereof: of the which pouder for the
ſpace of many dayes, giue ten drams at a time vnto the perſon
to drinke.
               
               
                  To make a fat perſon become leane.
                  TAke foure ounces of warme Vineger, and put therein a
quantitie of the pouder of Pepper, and giue it vnto the partie
to drinke many mornings faſting, and he will become leane,
or elſe giue him to drinke euerie morning of the Wine of ſower
Pomegranates,Oximel is a medicine made of hony and water ſodden togither. two ſcruples with Oximell, or water.
               
               
                  To heale Wartes or harde knobbes.
                  TAke of the aſhes made of the wood of a Wyllowe, and mixe
it with the ſower pulpe of a Ceder apple, and make thereof
a playſter, and laye it vppon them and they will bée healed.
It helpeth lykewiſe to annoynt them with the bloud or dounge
of a Ratte diſſolued in vineger, or elſe with water of the wood of
Vines, that commeth of them when they are burnt in the fyre:
or elſe rub them oftentimes with the leaues of Porcelane.
               
               
                  To heale the Cough.
                  TAke of Lyneſéedes, and put them into a warme Cup that
they may drie, of Reyſons the ſtones being taken out, of ech
foure ounces: of ſwéete and bitter Almondes, of Pine kernels
mundified, with two ounces of roſted Nuttes, of the rootes of
Ireos, of Roſyn, of eche two drammes: of Incenſe, of Maſtick,
of Myrrha, of Saffron, of eche one dramme, braye them all,
and with the milke of an aſſe, make little rounde cakes or rolles

and being dried make pouder therof, and with hony make a
lectuarie, of the which you ſhal giue vnto the pacient a dramme
at a time with a littell ſmall wine, morning and euening, and
let him kéepe a little therof continually vnder his tongue.
               
               
                  To remedie the cough of children.
                  TAke of ſwéete Almonds blaunched, as many as you pleaſe,
braye them well, and diſſolue them with Fennell water
diſtilled through a Limbecke, and putting Sugar therevnto,
boyle it vntill it become thick, and giue it vnto children to eate.
               
               
                  To take white ſpots from the nayles.
                  TAke of quicke Sulphur, and being brayed, mixe it with
Turpentine and Pitch, and put it vpon the nayles: or elſe
put thereon of Myrrha beaten with liquide Piche, and it will
doe the effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the flegmaticke humor in the
bladder and reines.
                  TAke of the herbe called Linarea, the rootes and flowers, and
boyle them in water, and giue the ſicke perſon to drinke, of
the decoction foure ounces, morning and euening, and it wyll
conſume the fleume in thoſe partes, conſidering notwithſtanding,
that ſuch a remedie helpeth when the diſcending of the
humors in thoſe places, happen through a colde cauſe, and not
of a whote.
               
               
                  To remedie the flix of vrine.
                  TAke the rootes of the herbe aforeſaide, and bray them well,
and put them in maner of a plaiſter betwéene the nauill,
and the lower place of the belly, and it will heale it.
               
               
                  To remedie the Dropſey.
                  TAke the rootes of the herbe called Hirundinaria, of ſome it
is called Aſclepiade, and being brayed, infuſe them a

whole night in wine: then boyle them vntill the thirde part be
conſumed, & giue vnto the diſeaſed partie euerie morning foure
ounces thereof to drinke, and cauſing him to be well couered in
his bed that he may ſweat, you ſhal ſée a maruellous good effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefes and bloude retayned in
the Matrix.
                  BOyle the foreſayde herbe in white Wine, and taking the
fume therof from beneath, aſſoone as the woman ſhalbe taken
from the fire, you ſhall ſée an expedite proofe.
               
               
                  To heale the burnings or inflammations of the goute.
                  TAke a quantitie of the meale of Barlie, of the ſéedes of
Quinces halfe as much: bray them and mixe them with
vinegar, and lay it vpon the griefe.
               
               
                  To heale the Ptiſicke, or an olde Catarre, the cough
and other defectes of the lunges.
                  TAke of Iſope one handfull, of drie figges foure, of Rewe a
little, boyle them togither in water and a little honie, and of
the decoction being warme, giue a glaſſe full vnto the ſicke perſon
to drinke faſting.
               
               
                  To procure the birth of dead Creatures, and to remedie
the ſtingings of venemous beaſts.
                  IN the beginning of September gather the berries of Iuniper,
when they be rype, and being a little bruſed, diſtill
them thorow a Limbeck, and giue the woman foure ounces to
drinke therof, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To remedie all the paſsions of the ſinewes.
                  TAke Lauander, and cut it verie ſmall with his flowres, and
being diſtilled through a Limbecke, giue two ounces at a
time to drinke of the water that ſhall be gotten therof: waſhing
the head alſo with the ſayd water, then drie it, and it will helpe
verie much the ſinewes.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the itch.
                  TAke of Lapacium acutum, or of Sorell, and boyle it in
water, and waſh therwith the diſeaſed perſon: or elſe take
of the rootes of Laurell, and being wel brayed with Salt and
bread, annoint therwith the bodie. The like effect is done with
the decoction of Agrimonie and Sage, made with raine water,
and waſhing therwith the ſicke perſon.
               
               
                  To remedie the paines of the ſtomacke and of the
milt, and the windineſſe of the body.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Louage, of Cinnamond, of Rapontici,
of Galangale, of eche like quantitie, and with Sugar
make a confection into little tablets, and giue therof vnto the
ſicke perſon, making him to drinke a little wine after it, and it
will worke a verie good effect.
               
               
                  To heale the griefes and hardneſſe
of the milt.
                  TAke of the rootes of white Lyllies, of Beare foote, of marſhe
Mallowes, of eche thrée ounces, braye them and boyle them
in halfe a pynt of oyle Oliue,Apoplexia is a ſickneſse engendred of groſse humors, filling the receptories of veſſels of the braine, and therfore depriueth of feeling, ſpeech and mouing. vntill it become thick, then ſtraine
it thorowe a linnen cloth, and putting therevnto Wax, make
an Oyntment, wyth the which you ſhall annoynt the place
of the griefe or ſwelling, warming it morning and euening.
               
               
                  To comfort the brayne, or to heale the Apoplexia,
and the Collick.
                  TAke of the flowers of Lyllies that grow in the playnes, ſuch
quantitie as you will, and infuſe them to become tender in
Wine, by the ſpace of foure wéekes, then caſting away the
flowers, diſtill the Wine fiue times, of the which you muſt
drinke a little with ſixe graynes of Pepper, and a little Lauander
water, and you ſhall be ſafe from the Apoplexia. And waſhing
therewith your forehead and the hynder partes of your

head it comforteth the brayne, and cauſeth a good memorie, and
the quantitie of a ſponefull thereof, being dronke healeth the
paynes of the Collick.
               
               
                  To remedie the whyte flixes, and coldneſſe
of the Matrix.
                  TAke Margerom and diſtill it in the ende of May by a Limbeck,
and cauſe the woman to drinke of the water that ſhall
be gotten therof thrée ounces at a tyme, and ſhée ſhall be whole.
               
               
                  To heale the Collick and difficultie
of pyſſing.
                  TAke of the leaues of Hoarehound, of the flowers of Roſemarie,
of Liquerice, of Perſely ſéedes, of eche halfe a handfull,
of Reyſons, of Prunes, and of Iuiubes of eche one ounce, of
the foure common hote ſéedes fiue drammes, of Radiſhes foure
ounces, boyle them with water and a little wine of Pomegranates,
vntill halfe be conſumed, then ſtrayne it, and with Sugar
make it pleaſaunt, of the which, cauſe the ſicke partie to
drinke two ounces at a time.
               
               
                  To heale the comming out and prefocation
of the Matrix.
                  TAke a quantitie of Balme leaues, and drye them, and cauſe
the woman to drinke thereof in broth or wine, & ſhe ſhall be
healed. It helpeth alſo the prefocation of the Matrix, to take the
water that is diſtilled of the ſaid herbe, and to drinke therof.
               
               
                  To driue away the heauineſſe of the minde, to accuate
the ſenſes, and to make a good memorie.
                  TAke Balme and braye it, & ſtipe it till it become ſoft in good
wine in an earthen veſſell well couered and ſtopped, then
diſtill it by a Limbeck, and euery morning giue vnto the ſicke
perſon a ſpoonefull to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the congelation of the milke
within the breſts.
                  TAke of the leaues of Mintes, & boile them in as much wine,
and oyle as ſhall be ſufficient: and being taken out, braye
them and laye them vpon the hardneſſe in maner of a plaiſter.
               
               
                  To heale the falling of the Vuula.
                  TAke of Rew, and of Coriander ſéedes in pouder, and boyle
them in water of Mintes, and with the ſayde water being
colde, cauſe the ſicke perſon to gargariſe, and he ſhall be hole.
               
               
                  Againſt fulneſſe of the ſtomack, and Ptiſick.
                  TAke and boyle a Capon, and with it a handfull of the herbe
Mercurie, and take a potinger of the broth, and put therein
ſome ſugar, and giue it the ſicke partie to drinke, and it will
heale the griefe.
               
               
                  To remedie the retention of the skin called Secunda,
and to cauſe the auoyding therof.
                  TAke a quantity of the herbe Mercurie, and bray it, and with
oyle of Roſes or white Lillies, mixe it well, and make a
Peſſarie with a peece of fine Linnen cloth, and applie it vnto
the necke of the Matrix.
               
               
                  To heale Warts.
                  RVb the Warts with the herbe Mercurie, or with the iuice
therof, and they ſhalbe healed, or elſe with the herbe Purcelane.
               
               
                  To ſtop the flix of bloud in women.
                  TAke a quantity of the herbe Milfollie, and bray it, and being
put into the place of nature, you ſhall ſée a preſent remedie:
or elſe put hote Millium into a litle bag, and cauſe the woman
to holde it vnto hir hippes, and the paine will ceaſe.
               
               
                  
                  To ſtop the white flix of the Matrix.
                  TAke of the flowers of the herbe Eruca, and beate them into
pouder, and mixe therewith the like quantitie of the herbe
called Mouſe eare, or Chickwéede, and of Origanum, and
with halfe the quantitie of Sugar make a lectuarie in little
rowles, and cauſe the ſicke to eate thereof: or elſe boyle the
leaues of Trifolie in wine, and giue thereof to drinke: or elſe
of the water of the ſaid herbe diſtilled in Maye. The water of
deade Nettles, the quantitie of thrée ounces being dronke, doth
heale the like infirmitie. The like alſo is done by a fomentation
made vnto the lower parts with the decoction of the moſſe
of trées.
               
               
                  To heale a quarterne Ague.
                  TAke of Aſarabacca one dramme, and make pouder therof,
and giue it vnto the ſick partie to drinke in white Wine, one
houre before his fit take him, for within a ſhorte ſpace it will
purge him eyther vpwardes or downewards and heale him.
               
               
                  Againſt the Ptiſick.
                  TAke of Filipendola rootes, and of Gentiane, of eche one
dramme, beaten into pouder, vſe to drinke thereof manye
times in water of Hony, and it will heale you.
               
               
                  To remedie the redneſſe of the face.
                  TAke of the leaues of yong Fennell, of olde Swines greace,
of eche lyke quantitie, mince them well together wyth a
a knyfe, then braye them a little, and at night annoynt the
face: and in the morning waſhe the face with Perſely water,
and it will worke a verie good effect.
               
               
                  To heale the Sciatica.
                  TAke of Strawberies, foure handfulles, boyle them in as
much water as ſhall ſuffice, and bathe therewith the place

of the griefe, and after annoynt it with this oyntment. Take
of Vnguentum dealthea, one ounce, of Hony, halfe an ounce,
of Waxe, one dramme, mixe them and make an oyntment
thereof, which by vſing will make a maruellous effect.
               
               
                  Againſt wheales or bliſters of the face.
                  TAke in the midſt of ſpring time of the leaues of an aſhe trée,
bray them, and let them ſtande to mollifie fiue dayes in Vineger,
then diſtill them in Balneo Marie, and with the water
waſhe contynually the face the ſpace of thrée wéekes, and it will
be whole.
               
               
                  To recouer a loſt appetite.
                  TAke of Galingale, of Pepper, of Parſely ſéedes, of eche two
drammes, make pouder therof, and with newe Hony make
a Lectuary: of the which take morning and euening, the quantitie
of a ſponfull, two houres before meat.
               
               
                  To take away moles or ſpots which children take
in their mothers bellye.
                  TAke in the Moneth of March the rootes of Auens, togither
with the leaues, and being brayed, diſtill them thorowe a
Limbecke, and with the water that ſhall be drawen thereof,
waſh often the ſpots, or Moles, and they will be healed.
               
               
                  To heale the yelow iaundice:
                  TAke of Artemeſia, of Scolopendria, of eche one handfull,
of Wormwood the third part of a handfull, boyle them in
white wine that is not ſharpe, neyther ſwéete, vntill the thirde
part be conſumed, putting the Wormwood vnto it in the ende,
and adding thervnto of Sugar, cauſe the ſicke partie to drinke
foure ounces therof continually the ſpace of nine dayes euerye
morning in ſteade of a ſirop, and he ſhall be healed.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the griefes of the heade, which through
the beating of the artiers, doe not ſuffer
one to take ſleepe.
                  TAke of Wormwood well brayed and boyled in water, and
binde it vnto his temples vpon the griefe: which preſently
will mitigate the paine, and cauſe him to take a pleaſant ſléepe.
               
               
                  To heale the Ptiſick occaſioned of groſſe and
viſcous humors.
                  TAke of Gentian, of Calamus aromaticus, of ech halfe an
ounce, of Ariſtologia longa, one ounce: beate them into
fine pouder, and mixe therewith honye of Roſes, and make a
lectuarie, of the which you ſhall giue vnto the ſicke perſon a
ſpoonefull, in the Morning two howres before he eate meat, and
you ſhall ſée a happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt grauell or any other viſcous matter ingendred
in the reynes.
                  TAke of marſhe Mallow rootes foure ounces, of Butter one
ounce and a halfe, of hony thrée ounces, of raine water as
much as ſufficeth, braye the rootes, and putting euerye thing
into a poſſenet, boyle them vntill the rootes be well ſodden, and
being taken from the fire, ſtraine it through a linnen cloth, or
ſearce, and cauſe the ſicke perſon to drinke ſixe ounces thereof
faſting, let him vſe this certaine dayes, and you ſhall ſée a verie
happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To drie vp the milke of the breſtes.
                  TAke a new earthen pot to boyle with, and annoint it with
oyle Oliue, and put therein as much Tyrpentine as you
pleaſe, then ſet it to the fire, and let it boyle a little: after put into
it two pieces of linnen cloth, which may drinke vp the Turpentine,
then ſpread them vpon a boord, and put vppon them of
the pouder of Olibanum, and apply them vnto the breſt where
the dugges begin, and you ſhall haue your purpoſe.
               
               
                  
                  To heale children that haue wormes.
                  TAke of Aloes, of white Diptamus, of Gentian, of worme
ſéede, of eche one ſcruple, of Butter as much as ſufficeth,
make therewith an oyntment, with the which you muſt fill
halfe a Nuts ſhell, and binde it vpon the nauill of the childe,
and in one night it will remedie him, it is a thing well proued.
               
               
                  To mitigate all kindes of griefes.
                  AFter the Moneth of Maye is paſſed, take of the coddes that
Elmes bring forth among their leaues, and take out the
water within them, and put it into a veſſell well ſtopped, and
ſet it in the ſunne twelue dayes, then annoint therewith euery
part that is grieued, and it will make a happy ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To cauſe milke to diſcende into the breſts.
                  TAke of the herbe and ſéeds of Dill, boile them with Lentils,
and giue the broth therof to drinke, and it will cauſe a maruelous
effect: or elſe giue hir the oile of Annis ſéedes with Fennell
ſéedes, and you ſhall haue a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt yexings occaſioned through cruditie of
the ſtomacke.
                  VNto Annis ſéedes boyled in wine and then dried, put therevnto
of Cinamond, and of Maſticke, of eche like quantitie:
and being made into fine pouder, vſe it in your meates as a
medicine that hath bene prooued.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſtinking of the breath, happened by
eating of Garlicke, or ſuche like meates.
                  TAke a quantity of the rootes of Béetes, and roſt them in hote
embers, and being eaten, they will do the effect: or elſe for
the like cauſe giue the partie to eate raw Beanes, or Rew.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the bitings of mad dogges.
                  TAke of the leaues of Figtrées, of the flowers of Camomill,
and of Garlicke, of eche like quantitie, braye them, and applie
them plaiſter wiſe vpon the euill.
               
               
                  To prouoke the flowers vnto a woman.
                  TAke of Labdanum as much as ſufficeth, make thereof a
Peſſarie: and mixe therein of the pouder of Myrrha, and of
the iuice of wake Robin, and applie it vnto the place of nature,
and you ſhall ſée a verie good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  An excellent remedie againſt the dropſey.
                  TAke of Aſſarum one ounce, infuſe it in a little Barrell of
ſwéete wine by the ſpace of thrée Moneths, then ſtraine it,
and caſt away the Aſſarum, and giue of the wine to drinke
morning and euening vnto the ſicke perſon, and you ſhall ſée
a maruelous ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt the falling ſickneſſe.
                  TAke of Labdanum, of Caſsia lignea, and of the iuice of
Wormwood clarified, of eche one ſcruple: braye them togither,
and make thereof thrée pilles to take one houre after
ſupper, and vſe to doe the like many times.
               
               
                  Againſt the weakeneſſe of the ſtomacke through colde.
                  TAke of Caſsia lignea, of Maſticke, of Fennell ſéedes, of
eche halfe a dramme: and béeing beaten togither, make
a pouder, and giue it to drinke faſting, being diſſolued with the
iuice of Wormwood.
               
               
                  To remedie the deſire to vomit, and to reſtore the
appetite that is loſt.
                  GAther Centorie the leſſer, at ſuch tyme as it beginneth to
flower, that is in the end of Iune, & being minced ſmal togither

with the flowers, diſtill it through a Limbecke, and of the
water which ſhall be diſtilled, giue thrée ounces vnto the ſicke
perſon to drinke thereof morning and euening faſting, and it
will heale him. It healeth alſo the Collick, and cauſeth the procreation
of deade creatures.
               
               
                  Againſt the bitings of all venemous beaſts.
                  TAke an Onyon, and braye it with freſhe Rewe, Salt, and
Hony, of ech like quantitie, put it vpon the biting. And it is
maruelous.
               
               
                  Againſt the miſtes, droppings, and redneſſe
of the eyes.
                  TAke of the flowers of Cherie trées at their time, diſtill them
in Balneo Mariae, and put of the water into the eyes of the
diſeaſed, morning and euening colde, and it will worke the
intent.
               
               
                  Againſt the hardneſſe and ſwelling of the
liuer or milt.
                  TAke Iuie and make it tender by infuſing it ten dayes in
wine, vntill it become rotten. Then boyle it vntill the wyne
be conſumed: ſtrayne the iuice, & mixe it with oyle Oliue, and
waxe, & make an oyntment, wherewith annoint the ſwellings.
               
               
                  To purge the Matrix of a woman.
                  TAke of Gum Serapine, of Myrrha, of Cithorie, of eche like
quantitie, braye them, and with oyle of Camomill, and hony,
diſſolue them, and make therof a plaiſter, and hauing made
a ſuppoſitorie, put it into the place of nature.
               
               
                  Againſt the Ptiſick.
                  TAke of Saffron one ſcruple, of Muſke halfe a graine, mixe
them, and diſſolue them in good wine, and giue it vnto the
ſicke partie to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie olde inueterate griefes of the head.
                  TAke of Gum Arabick, of Myrrha, of Saffron, of Euphorbium,
of eche thrée graynes: braye them all togither, and
mixe them with the white of an Egge well beaten, then applye
therof vnto the temples and forehead, and preſently you ſhall
haue helpe.
               
               
                  Againſt Hemerodes that appeare not.
                  TAke of the herbe Cinogloſſa, and diſtill it by a Limbecke,
and of the water that ſhall be taken thereof, giue vnto the
diſeaſed to drinke the quantitie of thrée ounces in the morning,
and he ſhalbe hole, but if they ſhall be apparant and come forth,
waſh them often with péeces of cloth bathed in the ſame water,
and they will be healed.
               
               
                  Againſt drie choughes.
                  TAke wilde Daucus, and boyle it in wine with the rootes alſo,
vntill they be thorowly ſodden, putting therevnto a little
quantitie of drie figges: then ſtraine it, and giue the ſicke perſon
to drinke of the wine oftentimes, and he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefe of the Hemerodes, and the
chappings of the fundiment.
                  TAke of Bole Armenick, of Gum Arabicke, of Maſticke, of
Sanguis draconis, of Myrrha, of drie Roſes, of the flowers
of Pomegranates, of eche thrée drammes: make of all theſe a
pouder, then take of freſh butter one ounce, of oyle of Roſes
thrée ounces, of the iuice of the leaues of Léekes thrée drammes,
of the iuice of Filopendola foure ounces: ſet the iuices, butter,
and oyle vnto the fire, and boyle them vntill the iuices be conſumed:
then put therevnto the other things being beaten into
fine pouder, and make therewith an oyntment to annoynt the
griefe.
               
               
                  
                  An other for the ſame.
                  TAke of the greaſe of a Ducke and of a Hen, of eche one
ounce, of oyle of Roſes two ounces, of waxe thrée drammes,
of the yelkes of rawe egges one, of Opium in pouder one
dramme, of Saffron halfe a dramme, mixe them all togither,
and make therof an oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale the windineſſe and other paſsions
of the Matrix.
                  TAke of Gallia muſchata, of Labdanum, of Nutmegs, of
Caſtor called in Engliſhe a Beuer, of the rennet of an
Hare, of Bdelium, of eche two drammes, of Baye leaues, of
Spikenard, of Maſticke, and of Mirtell beries, of eche two
ounces, of Oleum Nardinum, ſixe ounces, of oyle of Nutmegs
one ounce, of white waxe thrée ounces, diſſolue the waxe
with the oyle, and put therevnto the other things being finely
brayed, and in the ende put vnto it the Nutmegs, and make an
oyntment without fire, and making rolles of Piche annoynt
them with this oyntment, and put them into the conceyuing
place of the woman.
               
               
                  To remedie the diſeaſe of the pleuriſey.
                  TAke of the flowers of red Poppie, which grow amongſt
Wheate, and drie them in the Sunne, and hauing made
them into pouder, giue a little therof vnto the ſicke in his meats
and drinkes. Then annoint the place of the griefe with oyle of
Liſartes being warme, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called Tigna.
                  TAke Nuts with their ſhels, drie them vppon a Hearth,Tigna, a diſeaſe which cauſeth the heare of the beard or head to fall away. and
make them into pouder, then mixe it with olde Larde of a
ſwine without ſalt, and therewith annoint the griefe, and preſently
it will be healed.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the griefe of the breſtes, and to cauſe
milke to diſcende.
                  TAke of Percely rootes, and of the rennet of an Hare, of ech
halfe an ounce, of Storax calamite, thrée drams, of new
oile of ſwéete Almonds thrée ounces, of Barly meale one ounce
and a half, make therwith a plaiſter, and lay it vpon the breſts.
               
               
                  Againſt water and windineſſe in the teſticles
of children.
                  TAke foure rootes of white Lillies, of Line ſéedes, of Beane
flowres, of eche one ounce, of Comin, of Daucus, of eche
foure drammes, of Brimſtone one dramme: of the fruite of
Ciperus halfe an ounce, of Bdellium diſſolued in vinegar
two drammes, of oyle of Camomill ſixe ounces, boyle the roots
and bray them: and with the water of the decoction boyle the
meale, and mixing all togither, make a playſter, and applie it
colde vnto the griefe.
               
               
                  To heale ſcabbed hands occaſioned through the
French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the leaues of Nettles one handfull: of Cinamonde,
and of Cloues, of eche two drammes: boyle them in water,
and bathing the handes in the fume therof, they will be hole.
               
               
                  To ſtop the ſuperfluous bloud of the flowers.
                  TAke of the herbe called Virga paſtoris, and make it in pouder,
and giue two drammes therof to drinke in a potinger
of the broth made with Peaſon, and it will ſtoppe: or elſe boyle
it in vinegar, and being brayed, applie it vnder the nauill, in
maner of a plaiſter, and it will worke the like effect.
               
               
                  To heale ſhronken and ſtiffe ſinewes.
                  TAke of Ceruce, of Roſin, of olde oyle, of eche one ounce, of
Gum Amoniack, of Galbanum, of the confection Ciphodea,
                     
of eche one ounce: of waxe foure ounces. Make an
ointment and vſe it.
               
               
                  To remedie the euill countenance which proceedeth
of the Dropſey.
                  AFter the body is well purged, the ſicke muſt take morning
and euening before meate, one of theſe morſels folowing.
Take of the pouder of Dia lacca, of the pouder of Dia curcuma,
of eche one dramme, of the ſéedes of Southiſtle two
drammes, of Lignum Aloes, of Cloues, and of Saffron, of
ech halfe a ſcruple, of Sugar fiue ounces: diſſolue the Sugar
with water of Agrimonie, and make the confection into rolles,
euery one conteyning one dramme and a halfe.
               
               
                  To remedie the euill colour of the face.
                  TAke of the rootes of Turneps, and of the rootes of Acorus,
and being waſhed, diſtill them with a Limbeck, and of the
water that ſhalbe drawen therof cauſe the ſicke to drinke fiue
ounces at once, continuallye the ſpace of fiftene dayes before
meate, and you ſhall ſée a verie good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt the inflammation of the liuer.
                  TAke of the iuice of Endiue thrée ounces, of the iuice of Liuer
wort two ounces, of mundified Tamarindes ſix drams,
of red Saunders in pouder one dramme and a halfe, of fine
Sugar as much as ſufficeth, diſſolue the Sugar, with the Tamarindes,
and make a lectuarie: of the which, the ſicke partie
muſt take one ounce euerie day.
               
               
                  To remedie the miſtes or dymneſſe of the ſight.
                  TAke of Rape ſéedes, and make Comfets therwith, as you do
of Annis ſéedes, of which the ſicke vſing to eate, ſhall finde
maruellous eaſe: or elſe take of the aſhes of the heads of Swalowes
two drammes, of good Honie thrée ounces, of the iuice
of Fennell one ounce: put them into a viall of glaſſe couered

cloſe at the top, then boyle it in Balneo Mariae vntill halfe be
conſumed: and of that which remayneth, drop into the eyes
early in the morning, and a little before ſupper, and at night
when he goeth to bed, let him vſe this euerie day.
               
               
                  To remedie the want of hearing.
                  TAke of white Eleborus, of Saffron, of Sal niter, of Caſtoreum,
of eche one dramme, of Vinegar, of good Hony,
of eche one ounce: boyle all theſe togither, and dipping therein
a locke of wooll, put it warme into the eare.
               
               
                  Againſt the trembling of the hart.
                  TAke of Cloues, of Cinamond, of ech two ſcruples, of white
Ben and red, halfe a dramme, of Saffron halfe a ſcruple,
of Graines, of Ginger, of Galingale, of eche halfe a ſcruple,
of Iacints, of Smeralds, of Saphires, of the bone of an Harts
hart, of eche one ſcruple, of Golde leaues ſixe, of Margarites
preperated two drammes, of Conſerue of Roſes, and of Bugloſſe,
of eche one ounce and a halfe. Beate into pouder euerye
of the foreſaide thinges by himſelfe, then put them altogither
into a Morter with halfe a pounde of Sugar, and put therevnto
halfe a pound of the ſirop of the rindes of Ceder apples, and
make a lectuarie, of the which, the ſicke muſt take early in the
morning, and at after noone, and one houre before he ſup, the
quantity of half a ſpoonefull at a time, and after it, let him drink
two ſpoonefuls of wine aromatized that is ſwéete and pleaſant.
               
               
                  Againſt the impediment of ſmelling.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Nigella infuſed in vinegar one ounce,
being firſt dried in the Sunne: of Caſtor, of Nutmegs, of
eche one dramme, of the ſéedes of white Ben, and red Ben, of
Galingale, of white Pepper, of Origanum, of Calamint, of
eche two ſcruples: of Coſtus, of Serapine, of Rew, of Baſill
ſéedes, of eche one ounce. Make pouder therof, and binde it
in a fine linnen cloth, and ſmell often vnto it.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt wormes in children.
                  TAke of Gotes milke halfe a potinger, and quench therein
a péece of burning Iron. Which milke being giuen vnto
the childe to drinke, will cauſe him to auoyde the wormes from
beneath.
               
               
                  Againſt great and ſwollen gummes.
                  CAuſe the partie to kéepe many times in his mouth the iuice
of Purcelane: or elſe the Brine of white Oliues, which are
not ripe, being warme: or elſe let him holde in his mouth oyle
of Lentils. After this it auaileth to ſprinkle the gummes with
the pouder of the ruſt of Iron or Copper: or with the pouder
of Plantine ſéedes.
               
               
                  Againſt the opilations or other defectes of the liuer.
                  TAke and diſtill through a Limbeck Dodder, at ſuch time as
it bringeth forth ſéedes, and giue to drinke thrée ounces of
the water that is diſtilled, vſing to take it morning and euening,
and you ſhall ſée an excellent ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To remedie moles or ſignes which children haue when
they are borne.
                  TAke of the rootes and of the herbe Auens, and diſtill them in
the ende of May through a Limbeck, and with the water
waſh the childe often in thoſe places, and it will heale him.
               
               
                  To heale the comming forth of the nauill of children,
and the ruptures within them.
                  TAke of the herbe Perfoliaton, and braye it, and put it vppon
the nauill of children oftentimes, and you ſhall ſée the
effect. The like effect is ſéene, if you take a péece of linnen cloth
and being burned, to lay it vpon the nauill with a little oyle Oliue.
The pouder of the ſéedes of the ſaid herbe giuen in wine,
or in milke vnto children, healeth the ruptures within them.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the retention, and to cauſe a woman to
auoyde the skin called Secundina.
                  TAke and boyle in white wine the flowers of Pulegium, and
being ſtilled, giue the woman foure ounces therof to drinke
faſting, and if that be not ſufficient, put therevnto a little of
the iuice of Léekes. It helpeth to the lyke intent to giue the
woman foure ounces of the iuice of Borage.
               
               
                  Againſt the griefes and ſwellings of the Matrix,
occaſioned through ventoſitie after
the birth.
                  IF ſhe be without an Ague, and knoweth the griefe to procéede
of ventoſitie. Take of Muſtarde ſéedes, or of Rape
ſéedes, and boyle them in water, and therwith make fomentation
vnto the place. But if it happen through inflammation, or
through euill purging, with an Ague, cauſe the woman to
drinke a dramme of the pouder of Pionie rootes in broth: or elſe
boyle in broth of the flowers of Camomill, and cauſe hir to
drinke therof.
               
               
                  Againſt the prefocation of the Matrix.
                  MAke pouder of the leaues of Gourdes, and take a dramme
thereof, and being diſſolued in good wine, giue it hir to
drinke, and at euerie time that ſhe drinketh thereof, ſhe ſhall
finde a maruellous effect.
               
               The ende of the first
Booke
            
            
               
               Of the fourth and laſt part of
the Secretes of the Reuerende
Maister Alexis of
Piemount.
               The ſecond Booke
               
                  Againſt putrified or rotten wounds.
                  TAke of the iuice of bruſed leaues one pounde, of the
iuice of Semper viue, and of Ariſtologia longa, of
eche thrée ounces, of Verderame, and Ariſtologia rotunda,
of eche one ounce, of oyle Oliue thrée ounces,
of Waxe as much as ſufficeth: make an oyntment, and worke
therwith, and you ſhall haue your deſire.
               
               
                  To remedie bruſes or ſtripes of the ioynts.
                  TAke of the herbe called Maudlenwort, and boile it in water,
and being taken out braye it, and applie it vnto the bruſed
place, which with reſoluing the bloude that is there congealed,
will heale it.
               
               
                  To heale a Fiſtola.
                  TAke of the rootes of Gladiola one ounce well brayed, and
put therevnto of Verderame, and of oyle of Tartar, of eche
one dramme, and put therof into the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie moyſt ſores or ſcabbes in childrens heads.
                  TAke of white Sope foure ounces, of Paritarie thrée ounces,
of Sulphur viuo, thrée drammes, braye them altogither,
and with the iuice of the foreſaide herbe make a liniment:
and the heares being ſhauen awaye, annoynt therewith the
childes heade: and the next day following, waſh the head with

Sope, in the which ſhall be mixed the foreſayd herbe, and vſing
it thus certaine times, he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  To heale the itch.
                  TAke of oyle of Nuts, of the iuice of Fumiterre, of ech thrée
ounces: with Waxe make an oyntment, with the which,
after he is waſhed, if the diſeaſed be annoynted, he will be hole.
               
               
                  To remedie olde ſores of the legges.
                  TAke of Ariſtologia longa, and of Aloes Epatice, of eche
one ounce: make them into pouder, and with Hony of Roſes
worke it into a paſte, and put therof vpon the ſores, but before it
be applied therevnto, mundifie them with oyle of Tartar, or
with the decoction of Myrrha, and within fewe dayes he wyll
be hole.
               
               
                  Againſt the hardneſſe and ſtiffneſſe of ſinewes occaſioned
through woundes.
                  TAke twelue Frogges, of Swines greaſe, one pounde, of
oyle of Bayes two pounde, of Bay berries made in pouder
two ounces, of white incenſe in pouder one ounce, boile all theſe
togither vntill the bones of the Frogges be ſeperated from the
fleſh, then ſtraine them thorow a linnen cloth, & make an oyntment.
Wherwith annoynt the diſeaſed member at night when
the partie goeth to bed, and then wrap it with the ſkin of a dog.
And in the morning waſhe it with this decoction following.
Take of the rootes and leaues of Agrimonie, of the rootes of
Mallowes: boile them in water vntil they be tender, and waſh
the member oftentimes therewith, and you ſhall haue good
ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To take out thornes or any other thing faſtned
in the fleſh.
                  TAke of the rootes of the herbe Narciſſus, and of the meale of
Cockell, as much as you will, braye them and mixe them
with Hony, and put them on the euill.
               
               
                  
                  To diſſolue dead bloud, happened through ſtripes,
or falling from ſome high place.
                  TAke of Commin and Salt of eche one ounce, of Hony foure
ounces, make your pouder, and put it into a poſſenet, or
earthen boyling pot with the Hony, and let it boile a little, then
annoynt the griefe therwith, and you ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Another which worketh the ſame effect.
                  TAke of Wormewood that is gréene thrée handfulles, of the
gréene leaues and rootes of Conſolida two handfulles, of
Camomill, of Mellilote, of eche one handfull, of the meale of
Fenegreke, and of Linſéedes, of eche thrée drammes: of the
meale of Beanes foure ounces, of the meale of Barlie, and of
groſſe Branne, of eche one ounce and a halfe, of Daucus, of
Annis ſéedes, of eche one dramme and a halfe, of oyle of Camomill,
of white Lillies, of Roſes, and of Butter, of eche ſixe
drammes, of Saffron one ſcruple, make a plaiſter and applie
it vnto the griefe, and you ſhall ſée a verie excellent experience.
               
               
                  Againſt impoſtumes and griefes of the Hemerodes.
                  TAke a white onyon well roſted in the embers, make it very
cleane, and being brayed, mixe it with the meale of Fenegréeke,
of Linſéedes, and of Camomill flowers as much as ſufficeth,
and put therevnto a little Butter, and foure graynes of
Saffron, and lay it vpon the griefe. It helpeth alſo the paynes
of the eares cauſed of colde or groſſe humors.
               
               
                  To ſtop the bleeding of woundes.
                  TAke of the herbe called Alchimilla, and of Sanicola, of
eche one handfull, boyle them in raine water: then take of
earth wormes brayed, and ſtrained thorow a linnen cloth into
the decoction. Of the which, the partie drinking foure ounces
at a time morning and euening, you ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  
                  To diſſolue the bloud congealed in the body, cauſed
through wounds or other accidents.
                  TAke of Alchimilla, of Fennell, of Sage, of Perſly, of ech
one handfull: of Annis ſéedes, of Fennell, of Iſope, and of
Euula Campana, of eche two ounces: boyle all theſe in two
pintes of water vntill the thirde part bée conſumed, and drinking
oftentimes of the ſaide decoction, you ſhall ſée a maruellous
experience.
               
               
                  To remedie feſtered and inflamed woundes.
                  TAke of the iuice of the herbe called Pimpernell and of Semperuiue,
of eche halfe a pounde, of oyle Oliue one pounde:
put them all into a veſſell to boyle, vntill halfe be conſumed,
then put therevnto of Butter foure ounces, of Verderame
halfe an ounce: make therof a verie perfite oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale woundes wherein were faſtened thornes,
or other ſuch like things.
                  TAke of the iuice of Pimpernell that beareth red flowers,
and mixe therwith of Diptamus, and of the ſtone Calamitis,
and make a plaiſter with Swines greaſe, and applie it vnto
the wounds, and you ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  To remedie cankers in wounds.
                  TAke of the rootes of Bruſci, and make pouder therof, which
being put into the wounds will heale them. Or elſe put vpon
them the iuice of Marygoldes the greater. Or the herbe Taxus
barbatus burned and made in pouder, and ſo layde vpon the
Cankers.
               
               
                  To remedie the Kings euill.
                  WAſhe the ſore and wartes with the decoction of the rindes
of Caphers: then take a Serpent, and hauing cut away
his head and tayle, put the other part into an earthen pot that

hath holes in the bottome, and being well luted both aboue and
beneath, put vnto it an other pot as a receiuer, which you ſhall
cauſe to ſtand vpon a pot filled with water, which ſhall boyle
ſo long vntill the Serpent be diſſolued into oyle, vnto the which
adding the pouder of the rootes of Capers, annoynt the griefe
eight dayes therwith, and it ſhall be healed.
               
               
                  Againſt the Kings euill in children.
                  TAke of the iuice of Sothernwood, and of marſh Mallowes,
and of the Mucillage of the kernels of vnripe grapes, of ech
like quantitie: lay them being all mixed togither vpon the ſore.
But if it be hard, diſſolue in the ſayde iuices, of Gum Armoniack
or of Bdelium, and vſe it as a plaiſter vpon the euil, and
you ſhall ſée a happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt all ſores and angrie puſhes, as the Canker
or the diſeaſe Phadagena.Phadagena is a running canker or pocke which in ſhort ſpace eateth the fleſh to the bones.
                  
                  TAke of the decoction of the rootes of Liquerice, and in that
boyle the leaues, ſéedes and rootes of Matriſilua, vntill the
decoction become as thicke as Honye, then laye it vppon the
wounds, and it will drie them maruelouſly, it is a verie approoned
medicine.
               
               
                  To waſh away ſpots and red pimples or wheales
in the face.
                  DIſtill with a Limbecke of glaſſe in Balneo Mariae, the
flowers of Matriſilua in the beginning of Iune. And with
the water that ſhall be diſtilled, waſh the face often, and he ſhall
haue his intent.
               
               
                  To heale ruptures within one, happened through falling
from an high place, or of ſome other
cauſe, and to diſſolue the congealed
bloud.
                  TAke of Cinquefoyle in the middeſt of May, with the rootes,
and being brayed, diſtill in a Limbeck, of which water giue

foure ounces to be drunke at one time in the morning faſting,
and alſo in the euening: and it is maruellous.
               
               
                  Againſt ſores of the noſe, and of the mouth, and
alſo of the French pockes.
                  TAke of the iuice of common Houndes tongue, and of the
iuice of Plantine, of eche thrée ounces: of Lyée two
drammes. Make firſt your pouder, and then thicken it at the
fire, and vſe it: but if they be the French ſores or ſwellings:
take of the foreſaid iuices made thicke, and putting therevnto
of Oximel ſquilliticum, worke of it vpon the ſores, and you
ſhall ſée a ſingular effect.
               
               
                  Againſt wounds that penetrate.
                  TAke of the iuice of Sanicola, and being diſſolued with water
of Cerfolium, giue the wounded to drinke therof, and
within ſhort ſpace he ſhalbe healed: or elſe giue the water of the
ſame herbe diſtilled in the middeſt of May to drinke, and it doth
the like effect.
               
               
                  To take away the blackneſſe of wounds.
                  TAke a quantitie of Rocket, and take out the iuice, and béeing
mixed with the gall of an Oxe, annoynt therewith, it
will cauſe the place to ſéeme white.
               
               
                  Againſt griefes occaſioned through rupture, or vnplacing
of bones, or in the members.
                  BOtle in water of ye rootes of Rocket, and being brayed, make
a plaiſter, and lay it vpon the place, & the intent will follow.
               
               
                  To diſſolue the blackneſſe of the skin happened through
ſtripes, or other cauſe, and for to heale the ſores
of the naturall places of women, and
ſwelling of the breſtes.
                  TAke of the herbe called Craines bill, and diſtill it in the ende
of Maye, and of the water which ſhall come thereof waſhe

little bagges of linnen cloth, and put them into the woundes
thrée or foure times a day. And for the breſts, the herbe Aſclepiade
brayed and layd vpon them, is verie good.
               
               
                  Againſt all kindes of flixes of bloud, and to heale the
hurts of the bowels and of the bladder.
                  TAke out the iuice of the herbe called Cauda equina, and
being mixed with a little iuice of Endiue, giue foure ounces
therof vnto the ſicke to drinke euery morning. The like effect
is done by drinking the water of the foreſayde herbe diſtilled
with a Limbecke.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſwelling and griefe of a mans yarde.
                  WIth the water of the aforeſaide herbe diſtilled thorowe a
Limbeeke, you ſhall kéepe the member being 
                        〈◊〉
                      waſſhed
with linnen clothes bathed in the ſame water. 
                        〈◊〉
                      you
ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  Againſt the Kings euill.
                  TAke of liquide Piche, of waxe, of vrine of children, and of
meale of Barly, of eche as much as you pleaſe: mixe them
togither, and putting therevnto a little oyle Oliue, lay thereof
many times vpon the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt putrified gummes.
                  TAke and boyle Iſope in water, with the which waſhe the
gummes, and they will be hole.
               
               
                  To take away the putrifaction of wounds.
                  TAke of the iuice taken out of the rootes of Incenſaria, and
mixe it with Turpentine and waxe, and hauing made an
oyntment, laye it vpon the wounds, and you ſhall ſée the ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt vicious humors, which are cauſed of the itch,
or like effects betwene the fleſh and the skin.
                  TAke of Alchimilla, of Camomill flowers, and of the herbe
Iaccea of ech one handfull: boyle them in good wine, of the
which giue to drinke foure ounces eyght mornings continually
faſting, in which ſpace let the diſeaſed waſhe the infected
parts twice, and he ſhall be hole.
               
               
                  To heale wounds quickly.
                  TAke of the toppes of the leaues called Coltes foote, and annoynt
them with Hony, and lay them vpon the wound, and
as ſoone as they be drie, put on other freſh ones. And continuing
ſo thrée dayes, you ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale that kinde of breaking out that is like
vnto a Leproſie.
                  TAke of the iuice of Lapathum acutum, or of Sorell, mixe
it with oyle of Nuts, and Turpentine, of eche like quantitie,
then boyle it and ſtraine it thorow a linnen cloth, and put
therevnto of Tartar in pouder the thirde part of one of the foreſaide
partes,Tartar ſignifieth dried leyes of wine, in Engliſh is called Argill, wherof be .ij. ſorts, white and red. and make an oyntment, with which annoint the
griefe, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To heale broken bowels of children.
                  TAke of water of Lentils, and take out the iuice, and waſhe
therein little bagges of linnen cloth, and lay them vpon the
rupture: putting firſt the bowell into his place, and by drinking
after it the pouder of Alchimilla certaine daies, he ſhalbe hole.
               
               
                  Againſt pimples or knobbes of the legges, and naturall
places of women, with redneſſe
and burning.
                  TAke in Maye the leaues and ſtalkes of Louage, and being
brayed, diſtill it in a Limbecke, and with the water waſhe
péeces of linnen cloth, and lay them vpon the infected partes.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the gallings of the feete and cankers.
                  TAke of the fruite of Liguſtrum, braye it, and take out the
iuice, with the which waſh the ſores, and they will be hole.
The water of the flowers of the ſame fruite diſtilled and applied
vnto cankers, worketh a marueilous effect.
               
               
                  To heale olde ſores.
                  TAke of the iuice of the leaues of white Lillies, with a little
vinegar and hony, vnto the quantitie of the iuice, and being
boyled, lay therof on the ſores.
               
               
                  To remedie a blit or blaſt, and to heale Cankers.
                  TAke of Lunaria, and of Pimpernell, of eche like quantitie,
take out the iuice, and waſh therewith the infected partes,
and they will be hole.
               
               
                  To cauſe nayles that be ſcaly to fall away.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of wilde Mintes, of Linſéedes, of eche
like quantitie: bray them, and mixe them with honye, and
laye therof oftentimes vppon the nayle, and you ſhall ſée the
ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  A remedie againſt infection of the lunges,
and the Ptiſick.
                  TAke of the leaues and ſéedes of marſh Mallowes, and boyle
them in milke or wine: of the which, giue the ſicke to
drinke euery morning, and he will be hole.
               
               
                  To heale the ſores of the mouth, and throte.
                  TAke of the leaues of marſh Mallowes, and boyle them in
wine and Honye, putting therevnto Roche Allum, and
being ſtrayned, let it ſtande to coole, and with that decoction
cauſe the diſeaſed to waſh his mouth and his throte oftentimes,
and it will heale him.
               
               
                  
                  To heale Ringwormes, Cornes, and ſores of the feete.
                  TAke liquide Allum, and boyle it in hony, and with that annoint
the foreſaid griefes, and it will heale them. Alſo the
water of Hony diſtilled, healeth and mundifieth the woundes
being layde vnto them with péeces of linnen cloth waſhed in it.
               
               
                  Againſt the flixe of the bloud of Emerodes, and
ſores of the priuie members
                  TAke of Mellilote, of Fenegréeke, and of Linſéedes, of eche
like quantitie, braye them and mixe them with the white of
an Egge, and make a plaiſter, and lay it vpon the ſoré.
               
               
                  Againſt the putrifaction of the gummes, and
ſores of the mouth.
                  TAke of the leaues of Mintes and boyle them in wine, and
a little vinegar, let it coole, and with the decoction waſh well
your mouth, and it will helpe the téeth, purge the corruption
of the gummes, and make a ſwéete breath.
               
               
                  Againſt blites and waterie ſcabbes that are
in the heads of children.
                  MAke of the iuice of Mintes, and put thervnto of Brimſtone
and vinegar well mixed togither, and with a fether dipped
in the ſayd linement, annoynt the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt woundes and all putrified olde ſores.
                  TAke of Milfollie, and of Sanicola, boyle them in water,
and ſtraine them thorowe a linnen cloth, and with the decoction
mixe the meale of Fenegréeke, with like quantitie of
the fat of a Gote, and halfe as much oyle Oliue. Diſſolue them
at the fire, and putting waxe therevnto make an ointment.
               
               
                  Againſt colericall impoſtumations, as blytes and
blaſtes, and ſuch lyke.
                  TAke of the flowers of water Lillies, of Roſes, and of Violets,
boile them in wine of Pomegranates, vntill the wine

be conſumed, and of the herbes being brayed and colde, lay vppon
the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefes of the bowels, and
watry ruptures.
                  TAke water Lillie flowers when they are ripe and perfite,
and diſtill them in Balneo Mariae, and of the water giue
the ſicke to drinke, two ounces thereof morning and euening
by the ſpace of ten or twelue dayes, and it will heale him.
               
               
                  Againſt the griefes of the ioynts.
                  TAke of Reyſons and mundifie them from the kirnels, and
braye the polpe with the leaues of gréene Rew, and applye
it vnto the euill.
               
               
                  To heale the broken bowels of children.
                  TAke of Paritarie, of Cinquefoyle, of Camomill, of Iermaunder,
of eche one handfull: boyle them in water, with
the which, make a bath for the childe, and hath him therein
thrée houres a day, by the ſpace of thrée dayes, and let him drink
in the bath halfe an ounce of Perfoliaton, and being come out
of the bath, let him be annoynted with this oyntment. Take
of oyle of Camomill one ounce and a halfe, of the ſéedes of
Perfoliaton in pouder two ounces, put therevnto of Waxe,
and make an oyntment, of the which annoynting the childe by
the ſpace of eight dayes, you ſhall haue good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale the ſcorchings made with fire,
and fretting ſores.
                  TAke Perforata, and being brayed, put it vppon the burnings
and ſores and you ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  To remedie the hurts of the ſcull.
                  TAke of the iuice of Pimpernell, and waſh therein péeces of
linnen cloth, and put them oftentimes vpon the hurt, and it
will be quickly healed.
               
               
                  
                  To heale corroſiue hurts called commonly the Wolfe.
                  TAke of the leaues of Plantine one handfull: of Pomegranate
flowers, of the nuts of Ciperus, of the wood and fruite
of Balme, of Allum Zuccarino, of eche one ounce: of Mummia
halfe an ounce, boyle them togither in Plantine water,
and in the ende of the decoction put vnto it of Camphora one
dramme, and with the decoction waſh the griefe often. It helpeth
likewiſe to waſh the ſore with water of Radiſhes.
               
               
                  Againſt wounds and ruptures of the naturall places
of women, and to ſtop the flix of bleeding
of the noſe.
                  DIſtill in a Limbecke in Iune, the rootes of Léekes, and in
the water diſtilled, waſhe péeces of linnen cloth, and put
them vpon the ſore. Waſh likewiſe Bombace in it, and put it
into the noſe, and it will ſtop the courſe of the bloud.
               
               
                  For to heale one that falleth from ſome high place.
                  TAke of Tanſey, of wilde Tanſey, and boyle it in water
and Salt, and giue vnto the ſicke to drinke of the decoction
and you ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To ſtop the bloud of the Matrix, and of the vrine,
and of wounds, and to heale the blacke
pimples or wheales in the legs.
                  IN the midſt of Maye diſtill through a Limbecke the leaues
of an Oke: and of the water giue ſixe ounces vnto the ſicke
to drinke, and he ſhall be healed of the ſayde griefes, and if in
the ſaid water you wet the Tow of Hempe, or peeces of linnen,
and waſh the pimples or red legges inflamed, the medicine wil
be effectuous.
               
               
                  To ſtop the bleeding of wounds.
                  TAke of the doung of Pecockes, and diſſolue it with water of
Sage diſtilled when it hath flowers, putting therevnto a

little Muſke, and dipping a little Bombace in the ſaid mixture,
binde it vpon the wounde.
               
               
                  Againſt the flix of the bloud of the Emerodes.
                  BRaye Scabious and put it vppon the Hemerodes, and it
will doe the effect. Or elſe boyle the foreſayde herbe with the
rootes of Taxus barbatus, and let the pacient receyue the
fume from beneath.
               
               
                  Againſt the Hemerodes and creſtie ſwellings of the
fundiment, and redneſſe of the face.
                  TAke of the iuice of blinde Nettles, and annoynt the places,
and you ſhall haue your intent. Bath alſo the creſtie impoſtumations
of the fundiment with péeces of linnen cloth dipped
in the iuice, or in water diſtilled of the ſayde herbe, and they
will be healed. And ſo likewiſe a red face.
               
               
                  Againſt ſpitting of bloud.
                  TAke and boyle wilde Time in vinegar and Hony, and giue
the diſeaſed foure ounces of the decoction to drinke euerye
daye: or elſe take the iuice of the ſayde herbe, and being mixed
with vinegar, cauſe the ſicke to drinke halfe an ounce thereof,
and it will heale him.
               
               
                  Againſt the ruptures of the feete and of the hands occaſioned
through the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke a Squill, deuide it and boyle it in olde oyle vntill it
be tender, then braye it in a Morter vntill it be brought to
the forme of an ointment, with the which annoint the ruptures.
               
               
                  Againſt the burnings of fire.
                  BAthe oftentimes in the daye the place of the burning with
péeces of linnen cloth dipped in water of Taxus barbatus
diſtilled through a Limbecke: or elſe with Barbers lie, and it
will be hole. The like effect is done by annoynting it preſently

with Hony, which cauſeth that the member become not full of
bladders, nor grow to be vlcerous.
               
               
                  To heale eares that auoyde matter.
                  TAke a quantitie of Turpentine, with the like of oyle, and
Hony mixed togither, and put therof into the eare, and you
ſhall ſée a maruellous effect.
               
               
                  Againſt ſcabbes and itch.
                  TAke of the leaues and flowers of Taxus barbatus, diſtill
them in a Limbecke, and in the water that ſhall be diſtilled,
waſh peeces of linnen cloth, and put them often vppon the infected
part.
               
               
                  Againſt the Leproſie.
                  TAke of Tapſia, of Eleborus niger, of Muſtarde ſéedes, of
Nigella, of Paritorie, of eche one dram, of Euphorbium,
of Scammonie, of Sandarack, of eche fourtene graynes, of
Coſtus, of Coloquintida, of Rew, of Mandrake, of Staphiſagria,
of Sal niter, of eche halfe a ſcruple: being well mixed,
braye them into pouder, and being diſſolued in vinegar waſhe
the infected place, and you ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt itch, and ſwelling of the Hemerodes.
                  TAke of the leaues and rootes of Tormentill, and béeing
brayed, boyle them in vinegar, and therwith waſh and emplaiſter
the infected places.
               
               
                  To heale Cankers.
                  BRay the rootes of Turbit into pouder, and being mixed with
Hony, lay it vpon the ſores, and you ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  To heale the ſores of the naturall places of women.
                  TAke Veruene, and diſtill it in the ende of Iune, and with
the water that ſhall be diſtilled, waſh thoſe places, and kéepe
therein a péece of linnen cloth bathed with the ſame water.
               
               
                  
                  To heale griefes of the eyes, and to make cleare the ſight.
                  WAſh the eyes with the foreſaid water, and diſtill of it into
them many times a day, and you ſhall ſée a trim ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt the galdneſſe of the feete, or other
parts of children.
                  TAke leaues of Semperuiue, and being well brayed with
the larde of a Swine, and oile of Roſes being made liquide,
ſtraine it thorow a linnen cloth, and the iuice which ſhalbe gotten
thereof boyle with white wine, and in the ende, put thervnto,
of Maſtick, and of Incenſe, of eche one dramme: and
therewith annoint the places.
               
               
                  To mundifie putrified wounds.
                  TAke of dead Nettles beaten into fine pouder, and of Ariſtologia,
of eche like quantitie: and the thirde part of one
of theſe of Verderame: mixe them togither with the iuice of
the herbe Sanicola, and oyle Oliue, and make a plaiſter and
vſe it with good lucke.
               
               
                  Againſt griefes of the necke through ſtripes,
or other occaſions.
                  TAke of Maſticke two ounces and thrée drammes, of oyle of
Roſes, and of waxe, of eche one pounde, of the marrowe of
an Hart one pound, of the fat of Chickens one pound, of the fat
of a Gooſe one pound, of the greaſe of a Sow two poundes, of
the Mucillage of Fenegreke nine ounces, of Linſéedes, and of
the iuice of marſh Mallowes as much more as of them all: of
Camomill a little bundell, of Dill ſeuen little braunches. Bray
the Maſticke, and being mixed with oyle of Roſes, boyle it with
a ſoft fire, and mixe the iuices with the waxe in an other veſſel,
then ſtraine them all, and put therevnto the Maſticke with
the oyle of Roſes, and mixe them at the fire, putting therevnto
the wxxe. And being taken from the fire, put the ointment into
a veſſel of glaſſe. Which you muſt apply in maner of a plaiſter.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the diſeaſe Panaritio.Panaritio, is a diſeaſe which often breedeth in ones fingars.
                  
                  TAke of the leaues of an Oke, and braye them well with
Sope, and laye them on the griefe: or elſe bray marſh Mallowes
with Barrowes greaſe and crummes of bread, and lay
therof vpon the euill. It helpeth alſo to annoint the place wyth
the filth of the eares. Alſo it healeth to take Reyſons, the kernels
taken out and brayed with Incenſe, & laid vpon the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt the chappes of the fundiment, and
ſpots in the face.
                  TAke of the oyle drawen out of the ſéedes of Bombace, and
bath often the place of the fiſſures therwith. It helpeth likewiſe
the blackeneſſe and ſpots of the face. Alſo the pouder of a
dogges head burned and layd thereon, healeth the ſaid griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſwellings and ſores of the Hemerodes.
                  TAke of Terebinthe one ounce and a halfe, of Birdelime
two ſcruples, of Tutia of Alexandria thrée ounces, of Litarge
of Siluer, of Ceruſe, of Coperous, of eche two ounces,
of Plantin ſixe drammes, of olde oyle one pounde, braye thoſe
things which are to be brayed, and then mixe them togither,
and with the ſaide mixture annoint the place vntill it be healed.
               
               
                  To remedie the flix of the bloud of the Hemerodes.
                  TAke the iuice of Léekes and giue thereof vnto the ſicke to
drinke: or elſe annoynt the Hemerodes with the fat of a
Swan. It helpeth alſo to burne a ſpunge not waſhed, and being
made into pouder, to giue thereof vnto the ſicke to drinke:
or elſe to cauſe him to drinke of the rennet of an Hare or of an
Hart in ſtrictiue water.
               
               
                  To heale the ſwellings of a mans yarde.
                  TAke the fat of the reynes of a ſhéepe, and put therevnto the
pouder of a Pummace ſtone burned, and of ſalt finely beaten
in pouder, and put thereof vpon the ſwolne & ſore member.
               
               
                  
                  To heale deepe ſores in the legges.
                  TAke the gall of a Swan, of Turpentine, and of Ceruſe as
much as you pleaſe, and being well medled, annoynt the
place often therwith: or elſe take the bones of the Iawes of a
Swanne, or of an Hog, burne them, and lay of the aſhes vpon
the ſore.
               
               
                  Againſt the griefes, ſores, putrifaction and
ſtinch of the eares.
                  TAke of the iuice of Rew, and boile it in the rinde of a Pomegranate,
and diſtill thereof into the eares: or elſe mixe the
gall of an Oxe, or of a Gote in a veſſell of earth, and being
made hote vpon the embers, put therof into the eares. It helpeth
alſo to take the gall of a Gote mixed with the milke of a
Cowe, and put warme into the eares.
               
               
                  To heale chappes in the heades of the breſts or teates.
                  TAke of the ſhell called Blatte Bizantie, and burne it, and
mixe the aſhes with Butter, waſhed with Roſe water, and
put therof vpon the ſore, and in ſhort ſpace it will heale them.
               
               
                  To heale ſores of the legs happened through ſcaldings.
                  TAke of olde oile thrée ounces, of white waxe, and of Ceruce,
of eche two ounces, of the fat of a Wether halfe an ounce,
of Minium, of Lye, of eche halfe an ounce, of Sanguis draconis,
and of Camphora, of ech thrée drammes. Mixe them all
togither, and make a Cerote according to Arte.
               
               
                  To heale a weſt growing on the eye liddes.
                  TAke drie figges and boyle them in wine and Hony, then
braye them well, and put therevnto a little Galbanum, and
lay therof vpon the euill: or elſe put theron of Caſtor diſſolued
with Hony: or of the aſhes of a burnt Swallowe mixed wyth
Hony, and he ſhall haue his intent.
               
               
                  
                  To take away the griefe of the eyes which
happeneth of a ſtripe.
                  TAke the yolke of an Egge, and mixe therwith ynke and oyle
of Roſes, and cloſing the eye, laye vpon it a péece of lynnen
cloth dipped in the ſame mixture, and it will be hole: or elſe
waſhe the eye with the water that procéedeth from gréene
Willowes when they be cut, and it will worke the like effect.
               
               
                  Againſt chappings of the lippes, and of the
heads of womens breſts.
                  TAke the braine of a Gooſe, and meddle it with the braynes
of an Hart, and annoynt the lippes: or elſe take of Litarge
of Siluer, of Myrrha, of Ginger, of eche as you pleaſe: and
make thereof pouder, and with Virgin waxe, Hony, and oyle
Oliue, as much as ſufficeth, make an oyntment, which will be
maruelous. But before you lay on the ointment, waſh the lips,
with ſpettle, and then with a little péece of linnen cloth lay the
oyntment vpon the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt chappes vnder the tongue.
                  TAke Inke and mixe it with the pouder of Hermodactiles,
and laye it vpon them. And in the beginning take Sal Armoniack
and beate it finelye, and laye of the pouder vppon
the griefe.
               
               
                  Againſt a Fiſtola growing in a womans breſt.
                  FIrſt waſh it dailye with warme wine, wherein hath bene
boyled Myrrha, then take of Sarcacolla, and of Aloes of ech
as you pleaſe, and being brayed, mixe them with Honye, and
hauing made therwith a little bag, put it into the Fiſtola. Taking
héede, that if it heale not, you put vnto it the gall of an
Hen, or of ſome other creature, and leyes of olde wine, and
with this, moſt certainly you ſhall haue your purpoſe.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the impoſtumation of a mans yarde, and
windineſſe of the bottome of the bellie.
                  AFter you haue done the vniuerſall regiment of letting of
bloud, annoynt the member with Aloes diſſolued in wine.
And to driue away ye ventoſitie of the belly, vſe to fomentate the
place with the water of the decoction of Ariſtologia rotunda.
                  
               
               
                  Againſt hot impoſtumations of the teſticles.
                  TAke of the meale of Beanes, of the meale of Barlye, the
leaues of Henbane, of eche as you pleaſe, braye them and
mixe them with the ſayde meales, and oyle of Roſes, and laye
them vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  Againſt colde impoſtumations of the teſticles.
                  TAke of the pulpe of Reyſons, of the meale of Beanes, and
of the pouder of Commin, meddle them with Honye, and
make a plaiſter: or elſe take wilde Calamint brayed with Leuen,
Salt, and Butter, and make therof a plaiſter. It helpeth
alſo to emplayſter the place with the meale of white Cicers
mixed with Hony.
               
               
                  Againſt the diſcending of the intrales into
the purſe of the teſticles.
                  TAke of Acatia, of the nuts of Cipres, of Marferon, of drie
Rew, of Bay berries, of Galles, of Gum Arabick, of eche
twentie drammes, bray them and ſearce them finely. And if he
be of a ripe age, make a plaiſter with the glew of a fiſhe diſſolued
in vinegar. If it be a childe, make the plaiſter with the Mucillage
of Pſillium. And let him drinke wine tempered with
the decoction of Cipres nuttes.
               
               
                  To remedie a rupture or breaking.
                  TAke of the filing of Iron, of the heares of an Hare, of eche
one ounce and a halfe, of Cipres nuts thrée drammes: of

                     Mummia, of Sanguis draconis, of Incenſe, of ech one dram.
Make Pilles therof with the iuice of Millifollie: of the which,
giue vnto the ſicke perſon a dramme or ſomewhat leſſe at a
time, after his age. And at night when he ſhall take them, lay
vpon the rupture a plaine péece of Lapis calamitis.
                  
               
               
                  To draw bloud from the Hemerodes.
                  TAke a locke of wooll and dip it in the iuice of Ciclaminus,
and lay it vpon the Hemerodes. It helpeth alſo to put thereon
the iuice of Onyons with the gall of an Oxe.
               
               
                  To ſtop the flix of the bloud of the Hemerodes.
                  TAke an Ele, and hauing taken out the guts, cut of the head
and tayle, and reſerue only the middle part, and being wel
waſhed, bray it and put it into a poſſenet well leaded, and let it
boyle, preſſing it often downe with a ſpatter, and gather the
fat which ſhall come thereof, with which annoynt the Hemerodes,
and caſt vppon them the pouder of Filopendola rootes,
but if the Hemerodes doe not appeare, dip a locke into the ſayd
fat, and ſprinkle it with the ſayde pouder, and put it into the
fundiment.
               
               
                  Againſt rupture of the hands and feete cauſed
through colde.
                  TAke of the fat of a Beare, and annoint the griefe therewith,
or elſe take ſea Crabs and burne them into aſhes, and mixe
therwith Hony, and annoint the ſore. It helpeth alſo to annoint
with Hony mixed with the hoofe of an Aſſe burned into aſhes.
Sandarack dried is verie good to remedie the ſame griefe: or
elſe Charabe brayed and diſſolued with oyle of Roſes.Charabe, is the true kinde of Amber, which ſerueth for medicines.
                  
               
               
                  To cloſe vp wounds.
                  LAye vpon the woundes pouder made of the leaues of an
Oke, and preſentlye they will be hole: or elſe take the
flowers of Taxus barbatus brayde and layde vpon the ſore. It

helpeth alſo to boyle the tender toppes of Iuye in wine, and
being brayed to laye them vppon the woundes in maner of a
plaiſter. Alſo the leaues of Willowes brayed and layde vppon
the woundes, doe heale them.
               
               
                  To generate fleſh in wounds.
                  TAke drie Piche, and make thereof fine pouder, and put it
vpon the ſore. The like effect doth the pouder of Incenſe, or
Iuie, giuen by themſelues: or the pouder of Polley of the
mountaine, or the leaues of the Pinetrée, or of an Elme.
               
               
                  Againſt bruſings within the fleſh and armes.
                  TAke and boyle Vecches or Orobo in wine, wherein firſt
hath bene decocted Saffron, and being brayed, vſe it as a
plaiſter vppon the ſtripe or bruſe. It auayleth alſo to annoynt
the place with oyle of Reubarbe. Or elſe to laye the leaues and
rootes of Enula vpon it in maner of a plaiſter.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſhrinking of ſinewes.
                  TAke Salt and Brimſtone brayed, and being medled wyth
Hony, laye therof vpon the griefe. It auaileth alſo to drinke
a dramme of the iuice of Gentian tempered with water: or
elſe to make an Imbrocation vpon the place with the decoction
of Sumack. It remedieth alſo to make a plaiſter of meale and
Hony, and to laye vpon the griefe: or elſe the pouder of the
ſtones of Reyſons mixed with vinegar, and therewith to annoint
the place. The like effect is done to emplaiſter the diſeaſed
place with Rewe well brayed.
               
               
                  Againſt the hurts of the ſinewes and arteries.
                  TAke Oyſters with their ſhelles, and braye them, and adde
thereto of Myrrhe, of Incenſe, and of Fig duſt medled togither,
and laye therof vpon the ſore. It helpeth alſo to take and
braye the fleſh of ground Snayles, and being medled with fig
duſt to lay it vpon the hurt.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the prickings or cuttings of ſinewes.
                  TAke Salt and boyle it in oyle, putting therevnto of Turpentine,
and ſo laye it vpon the punture, and it will prohibit
ſhrinking: or elſe laye vpon it this plaiſter following. Take
of Diaquilon one pound, of Gum Ammoniack, half a pound,
of Maſticke, and of Incenſe, of eche one dramme: of yelow
waxe halfe a pounde, and therwith make a plaiſter. It remedieth
alſo the ſwellings of the ſinewes, to take the fleſhe of a
Ducke, or the gall of a Wolfe layd vpon them in maner of
a plaiſter.
               
               
                  Againſt paine of the ſinewes.
                  BAthe the place with warme lye, and giue the partie thereof
to drinke, and the paine will ceaſe.
               
               
                  To eaſe the paine of wounds.
                  TAke of the meale of Lupines, and of Barlie, of eche lyke
quantitie, and with warme water or lye, (if it be in a place
of ſinewes,) make a plaiſter, and laye it thereon.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſuperfluous fleſh of wounds and
wormes of the ſame.
                  LAye vpon it the pouder of Aſſa fetida, and it will take it awaye:
or elſe take the aſhes of burned wooll, and lay it theron.
It helpeth alſo to take the pouder of wilde Calamint, or of
Scordeon which will conſume the fleſh, and cauſe the wormes
to die.
               
               
                  To take away the blackneſſe of wounds.
                  TAke of the iuice of Rew, and mixe it with Hony, therewith
annoint the place, putting therevnto of the gall of an Oxe.
The like effect is done by taking the fat of an Aſſe and annointing
the place therwith: or elſe boyle in Hony a péece of freſhe
Chéeſe without Salt, and put it vpon the wound.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the diſeaſe Panaritio.
                  TAke the bloſſomes of wylde Vmes with Nigella, and therwith
emplayſter the place. It helpeth alſo to laye vpon it the
iuice of Liquerice.
               
               
                  To open ripe impoſtumes.
                  TAke gréene Nettle ſéedes, and Salt, and being brayed togither,
put it vpon the Impoſtume. The like is done by taking
the yelowe part of the dung of a Cocke mixed with the
yolke of an Egge and a little Saffron, and layd vpon the Impoſtume:
or elſe take the roote of Narciſſus, and being brayed
with Hony and Meale of Orobo, make a plaiſter and vſe it.
Alſo the dung of a wood Doue mixed with Meale of Cockle,
and boyled with wine, being layd vpon an Impoſtume, doth
open the ſame.
               
               
                  Againſt feſtred cankers.
                  TAke of Inke, of Auripigmentum, of quicke Brimſtone,
and of Salt Gemma, of eche like quantitie, diſſolue the
foreſayde thinges in vinegar, and put them into an earthen
poſſenet that is not glaſed, and cloſe it well that the fume maye
not go forth, and boyle it vntill it become aſhes, then make
pouder of it, and waſh it with vinegar that is warme, and put
of the ſayd pouder vppon the ſore, preſently at the quenching.
And after, lay of this ointment vpon the ſore. Take of red Hony
clarified, of the fat of a Gote, of the filings of Copper mixed
therwith, and ſo make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale ſores that are moyſt and hard to cloſe.
                  TAke of the tops of Figtrées, burne them & make aſhes therof,
or infuſe them in water certayne howres. And being
ſtrained, put vnto it freſhe aſhes, renuing it in ſuch ſort diuers
times. And with the ſaid water waſhe the ſayd ſore oftentimes
a daye, and put of this pouder following vpon it. Take of the

aſhes of Oyſter ſhelles two drammes, of Aloes Sicotrine
brayed one dramme, and put therevnto of the aſhes of Sea Vrchins,
and medle it togither with Swines greaſe, and you
ſhall ſée a good ſucceſſe: or elſe put into the wounde the flowers
or ſéedes of Dill burned, and they will doe the like. Alſo it helpeth
to take the herbe Virga paſtoris, and bray it, and then to
put therof into the wound.
               
               
                  Againſt fretting ſores.
                  TAke of oyle of Radiſhe rootes, and of Salt, bray them togither,
and lay them plaiſter wiſe vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale ſore tetters.
                  TAke of waxe,Cinabrium is that which is called Vermilion. of Cinabrium in pouder, and of oyle of Roſes,
as much as ſhalbe ſufficient. Make therof an ointment:
Or elſe bray Cockle and Brimſtone, and mixe them with Vinegar,
and make an oyntment.
               
               
                  A verie excellent water for tetters.
                  TAke of Roche Allum, of Sal niter, of eche one ounce, bray
them into pouder, then ſtrayne them thorowe a linnen
cloth, of quicke ſiluer one ounce, working it verie much with
a peſtell. Then put it into a Still of glaſſe with a long necke,
and heate it at the fire, vntill it begin to boyle, then cloſe well
the mouth of the Still, and let it boyle vntill it ceaſe of it ſelfe.
Then take it from the fire, and let it coole, ſprinkling it wyth
ſtrong vinegar, after ſet it vnto the fire againe to boyle, and
breaking the veſſell take out the pouder within it, and take of
the iuice of Celendine purified at the fire, and of ſtrong vinegar,
of eche halfe a pounde. Medle all togither, and being boyled,
diſtill them through a Felt. And reſerue the water to kyll
teſters. The like effect is done to waſhe the place of the Ringwormes
or tetters in the euening when you go to bed with water
of Turpentine diſtilled, with holding at his face a verie fine
cloth. In the morning waſh it with warme Perſly water, and
then with Roſe water, and the effect will be maruellous.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt burnings or ſcurfes in the face, which
appeare like vnto a Leproſie.
                  TAke of quick Brimſtone one ounce, of Camphire one dram,
of the bones of a Cuttle one ounce, of the marrow of a Calfe
two drammes, braye them all ſeperately by themſelues, and
meddle them in a pounde of Roſe water, and halfe a pounde of
the water of Lillies, and ſet it in the Sunne, ſtirring it euerye
day with a ſticke, and therwith annoint the ſore.
               
               
                  An other.
                  TAke of Litarge one ounce, of Camphire and of Ceruce, of
eche one once and a halfe, of quicke Brimſtone one ounce,
of Camphire one ſcruple: of Swines greaſe that is freſhe and
ſtrained two ounces, of the iuice of Quinces one ounce, braye
thoſe things that are to be brayed by themſelues, and then
meddle them all in a Morter, and kéepe it in a veſſell of glaſſe
vntill you will occupie it.
               
               
                  To heale ſore legges.
                  TAke of Coltes foote, braye it, and lay it vppon the ſores: or
elſe take the iuice of Agrimonie, and waſhe therein péeces
of linnen cloth, and put them vpon the ſores, and preſently you
ſhall ſée the experience.
               
               
                  To heale legges that are hard, ſwollen, and ſore.
                  WHen by the vſing of other medicaments the griefe is not
healed, make a fumigation vnto the legge with Vermilion
and Incenſe, as they vſe to doe vnto the French diſeaſe,
filling your mouth with Wine, and kéeping the leg couered,
that it maye receyue the perfume, and by vſing it to twyce or
thrice at the moſt, it will be hole.
               
               
                  To heale the burnings of fire before they bladder.
                  WAſh the burnt place often with colde lye: or elſe annoynt
it preſently with Hony, but if it be ſore, annoint it with

Inke, and it will be hole: or elſe take aſhes of the dung of Pigeons
burned, and mixed with oyle of Roſes and waxe, as
much as is ſufficient, make thereof an oyntment, and laye it
vpon the ſores.
               
               
                  To heale one that is fallen from ſome high place.
                  TAke colde water and drinke therof preſently: or elſe take a
dramme of the pouder of Bittonie, and drinke it with water.
It helpeth alſo to take of Lacca, of Myrrha, of Saffron,
of eche two drammes, of Fenegréeke, of Caſtor, of eche halfe
a dramme: of Bole Armenick thrée drammes, bray them into
pouder, and giue thereof to drinke oftentimes with wine well
mixt with water.
               
               
                  To heale one that with a fall hath hurt one
of his members.
                  TAke of Branne, and of Salt well brayed, and with Honye
make a playſter, and put it vpon the ſore: or elſe make pouder
of the barke of a Pine trée, and with oyle of Mirtels, and
waxe, make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To preſerue a member that is ſtriken, from
impoſtumation.
                  LAy vpon it Terra ſigillata: or elſe emplaiſter it with the
leaues of Sumack, and you ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  To take away the ſignes that remaine of blowes
or ſtripes.
                  ANnoynt the place with the iuice of Radiſhes, or elſe with
Hony, in which is diſſolued the ſéedes of Radiſhes brayed.
It helpeth alſo to annoynt the place with Honye and Salt
medled togither.
               
               
                  To heale bruſings of the nayles.
                  TAke Onyons and mixe them with the iuice of Barlie boyled,
and lay therof vpon the ſore: or elſe bray the ſéedes of

wilde Mintes, and with Hony make a liniment, and if there
be put vnto it Linſéedes well brayed, and layd vpon the nailes
that be bruſed, they will be hole.
               
               
                  To heale ſores proceeding of itch in the naturall
places of women.
                  TAke of the tender leaues of an Oliue trée, and of Iuie, and
of a Bremble, and of ſwéete Pomegranates, braye them
well and diſſolue them with olde wine, then take a péece of
freſh rawe fleſh, and couer it with the foreſayde leaues being
brayed, and ſo let hir kéepe it in hir naturall place one night. In
the morning let it be taken out, and waſh the place within with
the decoction of Mirtels made with wine, and doing thus, within
few dayes ſhe will be hole.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſores of the mouth of the Marrix
happened in procreation.
                  TAke drie Roſe leaues brayed, and waſhe them with wine,
and annoint therwith a ſuppoſitorie made of the heares of
an Hare, and put it into the Matrix, and waſh it with a ſharpe
Lotion.
               
               
                  Againſt burning ſores of the Matrix of women
with childe.
                  TAke ſwéete Almonds brayed, and mixe them with the marrow
of an Oxe, and boyle them in water, putting therevnto
a little meale, and being colde, annoynt the Matrix within
therwith. And after waſh it with the decoction of Mirtels.
               
               
                  To heale the prickings of the ſinewes.
                  THe hurts of the ſinewes happen eyther through ſtripes, or
bicauſe they are pricked, or foyned with ſome ſharpe thing,
or that they are cut with a ſworde or knife, or ſome ſuche like
inſtrument, and through the ſharpe féeling thereof they cauſe
men to incurre into verie great paines. If therefore the ſinew

be pricked or ſtricken, it is neceſſarie to open the place with two
ſtraite inciſions, to thende the humor may iſſue out, and if the
bodie be full of bloud, then muſt you let the veine bloude, but if
it be full of euill humors, it is neceſſarie to purge it, but if there
be made no inciſion, the paine may be mitigated, by giuing iſſue
vnto the putrified matter, in vſing ſomentation vnto the
place nigh vnto the pricking, with oyle of verye ripe Oliues
that is as hote as maye be ſuffered: or elſe lay vppon the place
warme Turpentine, in ſuch perſons as are of tender complections,
but in ſtrong bodies, and of hard fleſh, lay vpon the place
the pouder of Euphorbium mixed with olde oyle: or elſe take
of vinegar nine ounces, of liquide Piche one pound, of Oppoponack
two drammes. Diſſolue the gum in vinegar, and mixe
therwith the Piche, and lay it vpon the punture. It helpeth alſo
to take quicke Brimſtone with olde Leuen, or the iuice of
Wertworth with the ſaide Leuen layde vpon the ſore. Or the
dung of a wood Doue, or Serapine, put vppon the punture.
Taking héede, that if the place of the punture doe not putrifie,
to vſe this Cerote following. videlicet. Take of olde oyle one
ounce, of waxe thrée drammes, of Euphorbium, one dramme,
mixe them and worke therwith. You may alſo lay vpon it Propolios
by it ſelfe, and it will much auayle, if the ſinewes
be vexed with inflammation, ſo that they putrifie, put vppon
them this Cataphaſme. Take of Barlie meale, and of Beane
meale, or of Orobo, and boyle them with Lie, and Oximel,
and lay it vpon the inflamed member. If the member be vncouered
through the wound, it can not then ſuſtaine the ſayd medicines
bicauſe they are very ſharpe. It ſhall be neceſſarie therfore
to put vpon the wound Lime that hath bene oftentimes
waſhed, and diſſolued with a good quantitie of olde oyle: or elſe
Turpentine of the Firre trée, with the leaues of Centorie the
leſſer, brayed and mixed togither: or elſe put thereon the oyntment
called Tutia ſimplex, but if the wound be dolorous, bath
the places about it with olde oyle that is warme, and lay vpon
it vncleane wooll, or oyle mixed with vinegar. Mundifie the

wounds with wooll dipped in ſodden wine, or elſe vſe theſe
rolles diſſolued in ſodden wine. Take of Allum thrée drammes,
of Incenſe halfe an ounce, of Mirrha one ounce, of Vitriol
two drammes, of the flowers of Pomegranates one ounce
and a halfe, of the gall of a Bull ſixe drammes, of Aloes one
ounce, and make therof little paſtels with wine.
               
               
                  An excellent and precious oyntment to heale the
rupture of the ſcull.
                  TAke of Oppoponack, of Bdellium, of Ammoniack, of
eche thrée drammes, of Roſen, of Gum Elemi, of eche
one ounce, of Olibanum, of Myrrha, of Sarcacolla, of
eche one dramme and a halfe, of oyle of Roſes foure ounces,
of Waxe two ounces. Firſt diſſolue the Gummes with
Vinegar, and ſtraine them: in the ende mixe with them the
other thinges finelye made in pouder, and make thereof an
oyntment.
               
               
                  To mollifie hardneſſe.
                  TAke of the reſidence of Oleum Irinum, of oyle of white
Lillies, of oyle of Siſamine, of oyle of ſweete Almondes, of
eche one ounce, of Saffron in pouder one dram, of the greaſe
of a Badger one ounce, of white waxe two ounces, of Roſen
foure ounces. Make a Cerote according vnto Art.
               
               
                  A moſt precious oyle to heale a wounde in
xxiiii. houres.
                  TAke of the flowers of S. Iohns wort, of the flowers of
Roſemarie, of eche one handfull, put them togither into a
glaſſe, and fill it with perfite oyle, and cloſe well the mouth of
the glaſſe that no aire go out, then let it ſtande in the ſunne, the
ſpace of thirtie dayes, & in cléere nights alſo. And when the oyle
ſhall haue gotten the colour of the flowers, ſtrayne it, and put
vnto it of Gynger one dram, and a little Saffron diſſolued in
good wine, then ſet it in the Sunne againe the ſpace of. xviij.

dayes, and annoynt the woundes with the ſayde oyle being
warme, twyce a day, and you ſhall haue your effect.
               
               
                  Againſt ſpitting of bloud, through rupture
of a veine.
                  TAke of the iuice of Plantine, of the iuice of Pimpernell, and
of Burſa paſtoris, of eche ſixe ounces, of Eole Armenick
one pounde, of Gum Arabick burned, and of Gum Dragagant,
of eche one ounce, of Amilum, of Sanguis draconis, of
Terra ſigilata, of Acatia, of Spodium, of Hipoquiſtidos, of
the beries of Mirtels, of ech ten drams, of glew of Parchment,
made with ye iuice of ſower grapes two ounces, boyle the iuices
with the foreſayde things brayed: in the ende put them into the
Morter, & worke them a good ſpace togither, putting therevnto
the whey, & make an oyntment thereof to annoynt the breſt.
               
               
                  To heale ſores of the legges.
                  TAke of the ſewet of a Wether ſixe ounces, of oyle of Roſes,
of eche two pounde, of Vinegar eyght ounces, of newe
Waxe, ten ounces, of Litarge brayed foure ounces, of Terebinthe,
of Roſin, of eche two ounces, bray altogither in a veſſell
vntill the vinegar be conſumed, alwayes ſtirring it with a
ſticke, vntill it become a Cerote.
               
               
                  An other for the ſame.
                  TAke of Turpentine thrice waſhed with Sorell water, foure
ounces, one rawe yelke of an Egge, mixe them well, and
put therevnto of the iuice of Smallage foure ounces, and boyle
it vntill it come vnto the forme of an oyntment. Then take of
Ariſtologia, of Centaurie the leſſer, of Gentian, of eche two
drammes: pouder them and make an oyntment.
               
               
                  Againſt all inflammations of the reynes, and
the running of them.
                  TAke of oyle of Siſamine, of Violets, and of Roſes, of eche
one ounce and a halfe, of Ceruce, of Olibanum, and of

Maſtick, of eche one dramme, of Camphire one ſcruple, of the
meale of Amilum ten drammes, of Roſe water one ounce, of
whites of Egges twelue, of white Waxe fiue ounces, of Bole
Armenick ten drammes: diſſolue the Waxe with the oyles,
and when it is colde, mixe the other things that are in pouder,
and make an ointment to annoint the reines.
               
               
                  To heale ſores that are inflamed.
                  TAke of burnt Leade one pounde, of Litarge brayed one
ounce, of Ceruce waſhed halfe an ounce, of vinegar, and
Hony of Roſes, of eche one ounce, of oyle of Roſes thrée ounces,
of the yolkes of raw Egges thrée, make an ointment in the
morter and vſe it.
               
               
                  Againſt ſtripes or bruſings.
                  TAke of the rootes of Conſolida the greater and leſſer one
pound, of the meale of Beanes foure ounces, of Camomil,
and of Mellilot, of eche two ounces, of Butter thrée ounces, of
the iuice of Wormwood and of Comin, of eche one ounce, boyle
the rootes vntill they be tender, then put vnto them the other
things, and bray them well, and make a plaiſter, and laye it
vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale the Panaritio, and euery other griefe
which happeneth vnto the endes
of the fingars.
                  TAke of oyle of Maſtick, of oyle Oliue, of eche two ounces,
of Antimonie one dramme, of Ceruce waſhed, of Leade
burned, of Tutia preperate, of eche halfe a dramme, of white
Waxe one ounce, of white Turpentine of the Pinetrée waſſhed
thrice with white wine one ounce. Diſſolue the Waxe
with the oyle and Turpentine, and then put vnto them the
other things that are in pouder, and make an ointment.
               
               
                  
                  To heale ſcurfe or ſcales in the head, bearde,
or browes.
                  TAke of the leaues of an Elme when they be tender, braye
them, and with a preſſe get out the iuice, with the which annoint
the ſore, and it will be hole for certaintie.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſcortications of children through
occaſion of vrine, or of ſome other
ſharpe humor.
                  TAke of Litarge brayed one ounce, of oyle of Violets thrée
ounces, of the whites of Egges one, of the iuice of Plantine,
and of Semperuiue the leſſer, of eche ſixe drammes.
Make an ointment and ſtirre it well in the Morter, and annoynt
colde all the griefes that come of heate as rawneſſe of
ſkin and ſuch other.
               
               
                  To remedie the running of the reynes occaſioned of
a ſharpe cauſe, and to heale the ſcortications
which they make.
                  TAke of the iuice of Virga paſtoris, of the iuice of Plantine,
and of the iuice of Compherie, of ech two ounces, of Camphire
one dramme, thrée whites of Egges: of the meale of Amidum
two ounces, of Ceruce one ounce, of Litarge halfe an
ounce, of Incenſe preparated with Roſe water ſixe ounces,
make an oyntment in a Morter of Leade, and being colde annoynt
the yarde vnder the ſtring.
               
               
                  To remedie ſpots and markes, and to take away all
ſuperfluous growing of fleſh in any
part of the body.
                  TAke of the rootes of wilde Cucumbers, of white Nyll, of the
rootes of Coloquintida, of eche one ounce, of Ceruce, of
Litarge, of Tartar, of eche one dramme and a halfe, of the
rootes of Canes that are gréene, of Serapine, of Pigeons

dung, of eche two ſcruples, of oile of Siſamine, of oile of wheat,
and of Iuniper, of eche one ounce and a halfe, of white waxe
two ounces, of the iuice of Orenges foure ounces, of the
whites of Egges one, of Camphire one dramme. Braye the
rootes and boyle them with the oyles vntill they be almoſt tender,
and then ſtraine them. Then take the iuice of Orenges,
and the Camphire, with the white of the Egge, and mixe well
theſe thrée things togither, then put the waxe into the ſaid oyle,
and when it is diſſolued, let it ſtande to coole, and in the ende
meddle them altogither, braying thoſe thinges that are to be
brayed, and make an oyntment, with the which annoynt the
place warme, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To heale ſores of the breſts.
                  TAke of Hony ſixe ounces, of the meale of Barlie one ounce
and a halfe, of the yolkes of raw Egges two, of Myrrha, of
Sarcacolla, of drie Roſes, of eche one dramme, boile the meale
with Hony, then put vnto it the other things in pouder, & vſe it.
               
               
                  To make oyle of Balme, which hath theſe
vertues following.
                  TAke of cléere Turpentine one pounde, of white Incenſe
foure ounces, of Gum Elemi ſixe ounces, of Bay berries
foure ounces, of Maſticke, of Galingale, of Cinamonde, of
Cloues, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of eche one ounce: bray the
foreſaide things groſſely, and mixe them with Turpentine,
and put them all into a Stillitorie of Glaſſe with the receyuer,
and diſtill them with a little fire, there will come forth the
firſt water, and the ſeconde of much value called Balme waters,
in the ende will come forth the moſt perfect called Balme.
This oyle healeth wounds, eſpecially thoſe of the ſinewes, the
Canker, Fiſtolaes, Leproſie, and the diſeaſe called Noli me
tangere, in touching the place twice a day with the ſaide oyle.
It healeth a Carbuncle or Boch, and all kinde of Poyſon. And
being put into wounds, it bringeth out broken bones, and healeth

ruptures, and annointing the temples therwith, it helpeth
the memorie.
               
               
                  To heale wounds of the legges happened of ſcaldings.
                  TAke of oyle Oliue thrée ounces, of white Waxe, and of Ceruce,
of eche two ounces, of the ſewet of a Wether one
ounce and a halfe, of Minium, of Lie, of eche halfe an ounce,
of Sanguis draconis, and of Camphire, of ech thrée drammes,
meddle them all togither, and make an oyntment, and laye it
vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To cloſe vp woundes.
                  TAke of oyle of Roſes, of gréene oyle Oliue, of eche ſixe
drammes, of oyle of Mirtils, of Vnguentum populeonis,
of eche thrée ounces, of Plantine leaues, of Solatrum, of eche
two handfulles, bray the herbe and mixe euery thing togither,
ſtirring them well euery day, in the ende ſtrayne them thorow
a Boulter or linnen cloth, and put vnto the ſtrayning, of waxe
foure ounces, and diſſolue it at the fire, ſtirring it with the ſpatter,
and while it is warme, put therevnto of Litarge of golde
and of ſiluer, ſixe ounces, of Braſſe burned thrée drammes, of
Ceruce two ounces, of Camphire one dramme, of Tutia preparated
two drammes, of burnt Lead ſixe drammes. Worke
them in a Morter of Lead the ſpace of two howres, and make
an oyntment, vſing it with good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale ſores which through drie diſtemperature
of thoſe parts cannot be healed.
                  TAke of Barlie water ſixe ounces, of Mallowe leaues boyled
in water two ounces, of meale of wheat halfe an ounce,
of the polpe of Almonds brayed two ounces, of clarified Hony
one ounce, of Saffron half a ſcruple, of Swines greaſe a little.
Braye them all and make a plaiſter, then take of oyle Oliue
two ounces, of Turpentine halfe an ounce, of Waxe as much
as ſufficeth, make a liniment: firſt put of the liniment into the

ſore, with péeces of linnen cloth, and vpon that put the plaiſter,
and within ſhort ſpace you ſhall haue your intent.
               
               
                  To remedie dolorous ſores of the ioynts.
                  TAke of oyle drawen out of waxe by Alcumiſtrie, and of oyle
of yellowe waxe, and put thereof into the ſore, and it wyll
worke a maruelous effect: or elſe put about the ſore, cloutes
dipped in oyle of Brimſtone boyled, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To remedie bruſings and ſores happened of
ſtripes, or otherwiſe.
                  TAke of Turpentine waſhed ſixe ounces, of white Waxe
fiue ounces, of Maſtick two ounces, of Vernice, of Sarcacoll,
of Roſen, of eche one ounce, bray thoſe things that are
to be brayed, and hauing made pouder, diſſolue the Turpentine
with the waxe, and put thereto the pouders, and make an
oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale the hardneſſe of the feete.
                  TAke of the Mucillage of marſh Mallow ſéedes, of the Mucillage
of Colewort ſéedes or Cabiſhes, of eche one ounce,
of the fat of a man, of the fat of a Beare, and of a Greye, and
of freſhe Butter, of eche halfe an ounce, of Waxe as much as
ſufficeth, make a ſoft oyntment and annoynt the knobbes.
               
               
                  To remedie dolorous ſores happened through
colde diſtemperature.
                  TAke of Turpentine two pound, of Brickes or boyled ſtones
ſixe ounces, of Maſtick, of Storax, of ech one ounce. Burne
the Brickes and quench them in oyle, and being brayed, mixe
them with the other things, and diſtill them by a Limbecke,
the firſt liquor that commeth forth will be water, the ſeconde
and thirde will be oyle apt to heale ſuch ſores: or elſe vſe in this
caſe oyle of Turpentine by it ſelfe, and it will make a very happie
operation.
               
               
                  
                  To take away ſuperfluous fleſh which groweth
in woundes.
                  THe intent of the Phiſition is to drie it vp with medicines
which doe not fret, as with Tutia, Antimonie, Galles or
barke of Incenſe, theſe ſayd mettals being waſhed and decocted,
bathe firſt the fleſh with this decoction, and then you may
applie them vnto it. Take of Incenſe, of Maſticke, of eche one
dramme, of Roſe leaues, of Mirtils, of Rew, of eche half an
ounce, of Sage halfe a handfull, of Roche Allum one dram,
boyle them in water and waſh the fleſh therwith, and then put
on the pouder aboue written: and if you can not drie it with
the ſaid remedies, take of water of Plantine, of Roſes, and of
Nightſhade, of eche foure ounces, of Opium one ſcruple, of
crummes of breade two ounces, of Argentum Solimatum,
foure ſcruples, worke the Sublimate well vppon a marble,
then mixe all togither, and boyle them vntill halfe the water
be conſumed, then ſtraine it thorow a groſſe linnen cloth, and
put the thred or bagges, and lockes into the ſaid water, boyling
them a little, and then expreſſe it ſomwhat, and reſerue it to put
vpon ſuperfluous fleſhe that groweth, vntill it be conſumed.
               
               
                  To heale ſores that happen thorow wormes.
                  TAke of Ceruce, of Polij montani, of eche halfe an ounce,
of liquide ſhip Piche, as much as ſufficeth, mixe altogither
in a morter, and make a liniment, conſidering that if the
wormes be generate through the euill habite of the bodye you
muſt vſe vniuerſall medicines to conſume the ſuperfluous humiditie,
as by letting of bloud, and by drinking water of Guacum,
and vppon the ſore put Vnguentum Roſatum with
Precipitate, or Vnguentum Apoſtolorum.
                  
               
               
                  To heale ſores happened of broken bones.
                  TAke and braye the rootes of Dog Fennell dried, and making
pouder thereof, put it into the ſore. Likewiſe the rootes

of Ireos, of Ariſtologia rotunda made in pouder doth helpe
them: or elſe take Oppoponack with water of Sulphur, and
touch the broken bone therewith, and it will ſequeſtrate it, and
cauſe the bone to come forth.
               
               
                  To remedie the gummes of the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the rootes of wilde Cucumbers, of the rootes of Ireos,
boyle them vntill they be tender, of the which take one
pounde. Then take of Ammoniack, of Serapine, and of Galbanum,
of eche two ounces, of Storax liquida one ounce and
a halfe: of the fat of a Beare, of Butter, of eche one ounce, of
quicke ſiluer not extinct two ounces, make a plaiſter and put it
vpon the gummes.
               
               
                  To kill wormes in children.
                  TAke of red Corall, of the meale of Lupines, of the horne of
an Hartburned, of Nigella, of eche one ſeruple, of oyle of
Roſes, of oyle of Wormwood, of eche one ounce. Put them all
into an Orenge, being made hollow at the top, and boyle them
in hote embers: then expreſſe it, with the which expreſſion annoynt
the ſtomack and nauill of the childe, and put vpon it the
rinde of the Orenge roſted, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Aloes Cicotrine, of the rootes of white Diptamus,
of Gentian, of Worme ſéede, of the ſéedes of Purcelane, of
eche halfe a dramme, of the gall of a Bull halfe an ounce, of
Scammoney one ſcruple. Bray them and mixe therwith Butter:
with the which fill the ſhelles of two Nuttes, and binde
one vpon the ſtomack, and an other vppon the nauill. It will
kill the wormes, and cauſe them to auoyde beneath.
               
               
                  A verie precious water for diuers infirmities.
                  TAke of Cloues, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, of Maces, of Setwell,
of Galingale, of long Pepper, and of rounde, of the

ſprigges of Iuniper, of the rindes of Ceder apples, and of Orenges,
of Sage, of Baſill, of Roſemarie, of Margerome, of
Mintes, of Bay berries, of Pulegium, of Gentian, of Calamint,
of Elder flowers, of white Roſes and red, of Spike, of
Lignum Aloes, of Cubebes, of Cardemomes, of Cinamond,
of Camepitios, of graines, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Maſtick,
of Olibanum, of Aloes Epatici, of drie figges, of Reyſons,
of the ſéedes and leaues of Dyll, of the ſéedes of Artemeſia,
of Dates without ſtones, of ſwéete Almondes, of Pine
kirnels, of ech one ounce, of Hony the weight of them al. Bray
them and mire them with Aqua vitae thrice the quantitie of all
the reſidue, and put them into a Still well luted, and let them
infuſe the ſpace of two dayes, and put vnto it the Recipient,
and lute it well, putting it vnto the fire: then chaunge the Recipient
after ye haue drawen the firſt and ſecond water, which
haue one ſelfe vertue, that is to heale the wounds being applied
vnto them with péeces of linnen cloth, they heale alſo the Cankers,
the Fiſtolaes, Carbuncles, & the diſeaſe called Noli me
tangere. And putting a drop thereof into ſore eyes, within the
ſpace of nine dayes it healeth them. And a drop being dronke
with white wine, healeth the diſeaſe of the reines. It helpeth alſo
the Hemerodes, waſhing them with the ſayd water. It helpeth
the griefes of the Matrix by drinking two drammes in
broth, waſhing with the ſayd water all the places that are ſore
through any colde cauſe, and contraction of the ſinewes, and it
healeth all colde infirmities. The thirde water that ſhall be
drawen, will be of a red colour, and thereof muſt be miniſtred
continually the ſpace of halfe a ſpoonefull at a time. It helpeth
Leproſies, Dropſies, Ptiſickes and the colde Goute.
               
               
                  An oyle like vnto Balme, very profitable
for diuers ſores.
                  TAke of cléere Turpentine .iij. pound, of Incenſe, of Lignum
Aloes, of ech thrée drammes, of Maſtick, of Cloues, of Galingale,
of Cinamond, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of Gum Elemi,
                     
of eche two drammes, braye thoſe thinges that are to be
brayed, and put them into a Still of Glaſſe, and let it ſettle the
ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes. Then diſtill it vpon the embers, firſt
with a ſoft fire, then encreaſe the fire ſo much that al the things
be diſtilled. And taking it out put it once againe to diſtill in an
other Stillitorie, cauſing it to ſtande in infuſion, and hauing
ſet the Still in Balneo Mariae, you ſhall diſtill thrée liquors:
the firſt will be a cléere water, and will ſwim vppermoſt: the
ſecond liquor will be an oyle through more diſtillation, and putting
thereto a ſufficient quantitie of fire, you ſhall get out the
thirde oyle. The ſayde oyle with annoynting, helpeth ſore ſinewes,
and by annointing Cankers and Fiſtolaes therwith,
it helpeth them verie much, and with touching the ſores, it
cauſeth them to cloſe vp. It helpeth the Leproſie, the Carbuncle,
and drinking a drop or two in broth or in wine, it healeth
the paſſions of the Matrix, and all inward griefes, it draweth
out periſhed bones, being put into the wounds, it healeth them,
and annointing the temples, it maketh a good memorie.
               
               
                  Againſt ſuperfluous winde in the left ſide, called in
Italian Melancholia mirachiale, and the
diſeaſe called Sincope.Sincope ſignifieth ſwounding.
                  
                  TAke of red Roſes thrée ounces, of Ciperus two drams and
a half, of Cloues, of Maſtick, of Spikenard, of Aſarabacca,
of eche one dramme, of Maces, of Cardamomes, of Nutmegs,
of eche halfe a dramme, bray euerye thing, and put thereto of
Myrobolanes Emblici halfe a pounde, boyle all togither in
foure pounds & a halfe of water, vntill two parts be conſumed,
then ſtraine it, and put therevnto of Hony halfe a pounde, and
boyle it by decoction, and in the end put in the ſpices, and make
a lectuarie: of the which giue vnto the ſick two drams at a time.
               
               
                  To preſerue from the peſtilence.
                  TAke two Egges & make a hole vpon the top of ech of them,
then take out the whites, and put into them ſo much whole

Saffron, as they may be ſilled vnto the middle, and let them be
couered with other halfe ſhelles of Egges put vpon them, then
let them boyle vpon the fire vntill they become red, then braye
them with all the ſhelles, and put therevnto of white Diptamus,
of Tormentil, of eche thrée drammes, of vomiting nuts
one dramme and a halfe, of the ſéedes of Rocket the quantitie
of the beaten Egges. Braye them all once agayne, and put
therevnto of good Triacle the weight of all the receit except the
Egges, and make a Lectuarie. Of the which, giue two drams
in the morning when the pacient riſeth, before he go to labor.
               
               
                  A Ceare cloth for ſore and ſwollen legges.
                  TAke of Camphire one ounce, of Minium, of Litarge, of
eche two pounds, of burnt Lead one pounde, of Tutia ſixe
ounces, of oyle Oliue, of oyle of Roſes, of eche fiue pounds, of
Aqua vitae ſixe ounces, of waxe as much more. Set the oyles
vnto the fire, and being warme, put vnto them the Litarge,
the Minium and the Lead, and worke it with a ſpatter, vntill
it be come vnto the heigth of waxe, in the ende put in the Aqua
vitae and the waxe, and boyle them, putting in laſt of all the
Camphire, and hauing made a Cere cloth, vſe to kéepe it vppon
the ſore, and you ſhall ſée a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the commotion of the brayne through falling
from ſome high place, or through other occaſions
and cuttes, when through the
blowes men loſe their
ſpeach.
                  TAke of red Roſes, of the leaues and fruite of Mirtelles, of
Pomegranate flowers, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Gallia
Muſchata, of Lignum Aloes, of eche one dramme, of
Meale of Barlie, thrée ounces, boyle them in red wine, and
Roſe water, as much as ſufficeth, and in the ende put therevnto
one graine of Muſke, and make a plaiſter to laye vppon the
head, cutting firſt away the heares with a ſharpe raſor.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the falling ſickneſſe in children.
                  TAke of gréene Smiraldes, of red Corall, and of the ſéedes of
Pionie, of eche thrée drammes, of Storax calamite, of
Roſemarye flowers, of Bittonie, of Cobwebbes, of eche one
dramme, of Iuie berries halfe a dramme, braye them, and incorporte
them with the gum of an Oke, and make a plaiſter,
and put it vppon the cloaſure of children, and cauſe it to be
kept thereon vntill it fall away of it ſelfe.
               
               
                  To heale the euill habite, and to cure them
that haue the ſplene.
                  TAke of the filing of Stéele preperate in vinegar ſixe drams,
of Citrack, and of Gum Ammoniack, of eche halfe an
ounce, of ſirop of Biſantius as much as ſufficeth, make a lectuarie,
of the which, take halfe a ſpoonefull at a time faſting.
               
               
                  A preſeruatiue againſt the peſtilence.
                  TAke of Saffron, of Setwell, of Tormentil, of Diptamus,
of eche one ounce, of Triacle, of Mitridate, of Sugar, of
Bugloſſe, of eche eight drammes, with the ſirop of the pilles of
Pome Citrons, make a lectuarie. Of the which, giue to preſerue
the partie according to his age. Bicauſe if he be aboue
the age of .xv. yeares, giue him two drammes in the morning
before meate with white wine, and after it, gyue him to maſtice
Coriander ſéedes. If he be of the age of .xiiij. yeares, giue
him a dramme and a halfe. And being vnder the age of .xiiij.
yeares, giue him a dramme, and when he goeth out of the
houſe, let him holde in his mouth a little of the ſayde lectuarie.
In curing the plague, the foreſaid confection muſt be giuen, as
ſoone as he féeleth himſelfe to haue the Ague, within the ſpace
of .xxiiij. howres with the water of Sumack the quantitie aforeſaide
according vnto age. It helpeth alſo all colde infirmities,
or griefes, miniſtred with wine, or with Aqua vitae, hauing
firſt made the vniuerſall remedies, as purging, letting of
bloud and ſuch like.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the diſcending of a Catarre through
coldneſſe of ſtomack.
                  TAke of red Roſe leaues one dram, of Spikenarde, of Spica
Celtica, of eche halfe a dramme, of choſen Cinamonde, of
Maces, of Nutmegs, of eche one dram, of maſticke, of verye
perfite Turpentine, of eche two ſcruples, of clarified Hony as
much as ſufficeth. Bray them, and mixe euery thing, and make
therof a lectuarie.
               
               
                  To remedie the Kings euill.
                  TAke Vitriol and put it vpon the coales, and let it boyle and
caſt ſpume ſo long, that it become red. Then braye it, and
put it to diſſolue in Aqua vitae, and being taken out, let it drie.
And thus doe thrée times. In the ende put it into a fine péece of
linnen cloth, and let it hang in a moyſt place with a potinger or
ſome other Recipient vnder it, for it will caſt oile like vnto oyle
of Tartar. Take as much of the ſayde oyle, as of Aqua vitae,
and bathing therein a ſponge, binde it vppon the ſore, and in
ſhort ſpace it will breake it.
               
               
                  To heale many infirmities with oyle of Sulphur.
                  TAke and giue two drops of oyle of Sulphur to drinke in the
decoction of Pionie & Bettony the quantity of thrée ounces,
it will heale the falling ſickneſſe. If there be giuen of the ſayd
oyle to drinke in a little quantitie of Wormwood water, it will
cauſe the appetite to come again. They ſhalbe healed of Agues
which in the beginning of their fits drinke of this oyle with the
decoction of Roſemarie, and of Wormewood. Take and boyle
of the leaues of Germaunder brayed in wine, and of Pimpernell,
and mixe therwith the rootes of Comphrey the greater, of
S. Iohns wort, of Mirtels, of Centaurie, of Calamus aromaticus
brayed, and waſhe therein little bagges, and put
them into the woundes, and you ſhall ſée a maruellous effect.
Take and boile in water a quantitie of Agrimonie, and of Rie,
and of the decoction giue two ounces to drinke at once with a

drop of the ſayd oyle: to kill the wormes in children. Take and
boyle Garlicke in wine, of the which cauſe the pacient to drink
two ounces with a little of the ſayd oyle to prouoke vrine. Take
and boyle a Radiſh in wine, and put thereto a little of the ſayd
oyle, of Triacle, and of Mitridate, and giue it to be drunke,
and waſhe the dolorus place, and it will heale the plague. Boile
of Roſemarie, of Celendine, of the rootes of Calamus Aromaticus,
of Baſill, of Saffron, of eche a ſmall quantitie, in
wine, with the which waſh the hands, the féete and the heade
thrice a day, it will heale Melancholie, and adding therevnto a
little of the ſaid oyle, giue it to be drunke. Likewiſe the oyle being
drunke with the decoction of Agrimonie, healeth the Ptiſick,
and giuen with the water of Ireos, & with Hony, it helpeth
the Dropſey. It conſerueth the radicall humiditie being miniſtred
with Malmeſey. And being giuen to drinke with water of
Margerome, it healeth all the defects of the head, or with water
of Balme, and of Bugloſſe. And alſo it healeth the griefes
of the head,Vertigine, Scotomia, diſeaſes of the head when with dimneſſe of ſight all things ſeeme to go rounde. the diſeaſe Vertigine and Scotomia, if the body be
purged, and then the ſayd oyle be giuen to be drunke with water
of white Lillies, it helpeth the Litargia. It prohibiteth dreaming
in ſléepe, being giuen to drinke with water of Gourdes
and Poppy. It healeth the Apoplexia giuen with Aqua vitae,
the bodye being firſt purged. Being miniſtred with Fennell
water, and of Siler Montanus, it healeth the weakeneſſe of
the ſight. Being giuen with water of Quinces, it prohibiteth
vomit: and with water of Burſa paſtoris, it ſtayeth the vomiting
of bloude. Being giuen with water of Millifolie, and of
Taxus barbatus,
                     Litargia, is a ſore diſeaſe of the braines. it helpeth the Hemerodes, and other defects
of thoſe places. Giuen to drinke with water of Tamariſci, it
helpeth the milt. And being giuen to drinke with water of Radiſhes,
and Sea brembles, it expelleth grauell, In touching putriſied
ſores therwith, it healeth them. And likewiſe annointing
that part of the head which aketh, therwith, and giuing thereof
to drinke after and before meate with Malmeſie, or ſome other
Capitall water, it cauſeth the paine to ceaſe.
               
               
                  
                  To heale ſcalie or rough hands happened through
the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Vitriol Romanum two drammes, of quicke ſiluer
one dramme, mortifie the quicke ſiluer with ſpettle, and being
wel ſtirred in the morter, annoint the palmes of the hands,
and being annointed with the ſaid ointment, annoynt them after
with Vnguentum Roſatum of Meſue, and the diſeaſe wil
be healed.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of Cloues two ounces, of Cinamonde as much more,
of leaues of Nettles one handfull, put them into a veſſel full
of water to boile, vntill the fourth part be conſumed, and being
taken from the fire make a ſomentation, couering the ſores
with a linnen cloth, and receyuing the fume vnto your palmes
as hote as you can abide it, by the ſpace of halfe an houre, that
is in the morning when you riſe, and at euening when you go
to bed, and in doing ſo the ſpace of .xv. or .xx. dayes you ſhall be
hole.
               
               
                  Againſt Melancholie.
                  TAke of Lignum Aloes, of Cloues, of Cardamomes, of Spica
Celtica, of eche two drammes, of Borage flowers, of
Bugloſſe, of Roſes, of eche two drammes, of roſted nuts two
drams, of leaues of Sene, of ſwéete Almonds, of Iuiubes, of ech
one ounce, of Lapis Armenia preperated thrée drams, of Annis
ſéedes,Doromici, is a roote brought out of Mauritania good for the ſtomack. of Fennell ſéedes, of eche two ounces, of Saffron two
ſcruples, of the bone of an Harts hart, of Doronoce, of Setwell,
of Iacincts, of Smiralds, of Saphires, of Baſill ſéedes,
of eche one ſcruple, of Margarites preperated two drammes:
make a lectuarie with Honye of Violets boyled, as much as
ſufficeth, and decoct it with the iuice of Germaunder, of Iuie,
and of Bugloſſe, of eche one ounce and a halfe, vntill the iuice
be conſumed. Of which confection take a dramme and a halfe

in a little white ſwéete wine aromatized, morning and euening
two houres before meate.
               
               
                  To mitigate the paines of the French diſeaſe
in any member.
                  TAke of oyle of Camomill, of oyle of Dill, and Roſes of eche
one ounce, of Greppola, of Ceruce, of Litarge, of eche
one ounce, of quicke ſiluer extinct with ſpettle halfe an ounce,
of waxe as much as ſufficeth, meddle all togither, and make
an ointment, with the which being colde, annoint the payned
member, and you ſhall haue a happie remedie.
               
               
                  To remedie the milt that is hardened.
                  TAke of Gum Ammoniack, of Aſſarum, of the ſéedes of
Agnus caſtus, of Rew, of Citrack, of Calamus Aromaticus,
of Iſope, of the flowers of Tamariſcus, of eche one
ounce, of the rinds of Capparus rootes, of Nettle ſéedes, of Annis
ſéedes, of Smalledge, of Cinamond, of eche two drammes,
of good Hony as much as ſufficeth. Make a lectuarie, of which
let the diſeaſed take halfe a ſpoonefull in the morning two
houres before meate, and you ſhal haue your intent. Alſo while
he taketh the lectuarie, let the milt be annoynted, with this
vnder written oyntment twice a daye faſting. Take of oyle of
Capers, of oyle of Rew, of Camomill, and of ſwéete wine, of
ech one pound,Felce is the filthie oyle that is in the flankes or neckes of ſheepe. of the rootes of marſh Mallowes, of Mallowes,
and of Felce, of eche halfe an ounce. Bray well the rootes, and
boyle euery thing, vntill the wine be conſumed, and put therevnto
of the rootes of Rew well brayed, and of ſtrong vinegar,
of eche one pounde: boyle them once more, vntill the vinegar
be conſumed. And being ſtrained, put therevnto of Oppoponack,
of Galbanum, of Bdellium, and of Ammoniack, of
eche two ounces. Diſſolue the Gummes in ſtrong vinegar,
boyled a little, and with waxe make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To preſerue from the goute.
                  TAke of Mirrha, and of Aloes Epatici, of Lignum Aloes,
of Cinamond, of Maſtick, of Reubarbe, of ech two ſcruples,

of Muſke one graine, of Oximel ſimplex as much as ſufficeth,
make a paſte of pilles, of the which, take euery other morning
one pill the quantitie of a ſcruple, and you ſhall ſée a maruellous
effect.
               
               
                  To heale the face of ſcurfe or ſcabbes.
                  TAke of Camphire two drammes, of waſhed Ceruce, one
ounce, of red Cicers halfe a pound, of the pulpe of Melons
one pound, of the egges of Swallowes tenne, of Margarites
two drammes, of the ſéedes of Bombace thrée drammes, of
common Salt two drammes, of the iuice of Limons foure ounces,
of the lyes of white wine halfe an ounce, pouder thoſe
things that are to be poudred, and put them all to be diſſolued
in ten pounde of water of Lapacium acutum the ſpace of two
dayes, then put them into a Limbeck, and draw out the water,
with the which waſh the face thrée or foure times a day, and
it will make it cleane.
               
               
                  Againſt the chappes in the hands through
heate of the liuer.
                  TAke of oyle Oliue, of yelow waxe, of the fat of a Ducke, or
of an Hen, of the ſilth that is in wooll before it be waſhed, of
the Mucillage of Quince ſéedes, of Sterche, of Gum Dragant,
of eche as much as you pleaſe, make an oyntment, wherwith
annoynt the palmes.
               
               
                  To heale one that is ſtiptick of body.
                  TAke of white wine thrée pounds, of the leaues of Sene eight
ounces, put them to diſſolue in the ſaide wyne the ſpace of
twentie and foure houres, then ſtraine it, and in the ſtrayning
put vnto it of Corranes two pound, of fine Sugar one pound,
boyle it vntill the wine be conſumed, and reſerue the Coranes,
of the which giue the diſeaſed one ounce or a little more to eate
before meate, according as he ſhall be bound, and you ſhall ſée
a maruelous effect without any griefe.
               
               
                  
                  To heale one that cannot piſſe through fleugme.
                  TAke of the heades or ſhelles of Egges, out of the which
Chickens be iſſued, and bray them finely, giuing a dramme
therof to drinke in good white wine, and preſently he wil make
water.
               
               
                  To purge the head by the noſe, after the vniuerſall
purging of the whole body.
                  TAke of Margerome, of Sage, of eche one dramme, of white
Pepper, of Nigella, of Cubebes, of eche two ſcruples, of
Cloues, of Nutmegs, of Pellitorie, of eche halfe a dramme, of
Turpentine, of waxe as much as ſufficeth. Make as it were
a little bagge or tente with a thred faſtened vnto it, that you
maye at your pleaſure put it and take it from your noſe.
               
               
                  To ſtop the flix of a Catarre.
                  TAke of Cloues, of Cinamonde, of Maſtick, of Maces, of
Mirrha, of eche one dramme and a halfe, of the fruite of
Cipres, of red Corall, of Pomegranate flowers, of eche ſixe
graines, bray them, and with Roſen make a Cerote, and ſhauing
away the heares of the cloſure of the head with a Raſor,
lay it theron certain dayes, and it will cauſe a maruellous eaſe,
ſo that the intemperance of the heade procéede not of heate. Bicauſe
in ſuch a caſe the hote ſpices be taken awaye, and thereon
be layde onely Cloues, Roſe leaues, Myrtell berries, and
ſuch like.
               
               
                  Againſt the debilitie of nature and all other
infirmities.
                  TAke of leaues of Golde a hundred, of Margarites, of Maces,
of Agarick, of the flowers of Bugloſſe, of Borage, of
vnwrought ſilke, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Sage, of Lignum
Aloes, of Polipodie, of all the Saunders, of the rootes
and ſéedes of Pionie, of eche halfe an ounce, of the iuice of Liquerice

one ounce, of choſen Reubarbe, of the pulpe of Pome
Citrons, of eche halfe an ounce, of Piſtaches, of mundified
Pine kernels, of ſwéete Almonds, of Reyſons, of Pennets, of
eche fiue ounces, of the fleſhe of a Capon ſixe ounces, of the
fleſhe of Partriges one pound, of Triacle, of oyle of Turpentine,
of eche two ounces, of red Roſes fiftene drammes, of the
iuice of Roſes, of the coddes of Roſes, of eche ſixe drammes, of
the leaues of Sene tenne drammes, of white Tartar eyght
drammes, of the flowers of Stecados, of Bittonie, of Cinamond,
of Doronici, of Folium, and of the rindes of Pome
Citrons, of all kindes of Myrobolanes, of red Corall, of the
fragments of Iacincts, of eche thrée drammes, of Ciperus, of
Cardamomes the greater, of Lapis laſuli, and of the ſtone
Armenia preperated, of white Incenſe, of Margerome, of
Myntes, of eche two drammes, of Balme, of red and whyte
Ben, of Setwall, of eche one dramme and a halfe, of Spikenard,
of Saffron, of Amber, of Cloues, of Nutmegs, of Ealingale,
of eche one dramme, of Muſke halfe a dramme, of Sugar
vii. pounde and a halfe, of perfite Aqua vitae, xv. pound. Diſſolue
the Margarites, and the Iacincts in the iuice of Limons,
and reſerue them in a Viall well cloſed: worke the leaues of
Gold vpon a Marble with Hony vntill they become as it were
one liquor, then preſerue it alſo in a Viall well cloſed with putting
into it a little Aqua vitae. The other things which are to
be made in pouder, braye them togither, and putting them into
a great Still of Glaſſe with all the receit, cloſe it with diligence,
& bury it in Grapes that be preſſed, or in Pigeons dung,
or Horſe dung by the ſpace of fourtie dayes, let only the necke
therof be out vncouered, then diſtill it according to Arte. And
kéepe the water which ſhalbe diſtilled in a great Still of Glaſſe
well cloſed, as a precious thing and of great value, bicauſe thrée
or foure drops therof being drunke with wine, healeth all cold
infirmities as well within the body as without. If the infirmities
procéede of a hote cauſe, being giuen with Endiue water,
to drinke, it healeth all griefes. And giuing ſixe drops thereof

with ſwéete wine, it reſtoreth the defect or want of nature. It
helpeth maruelouſly the plague, for drinking therof euery morning
when you go out of the houſe fiue or ſixe droppes with a
little ſtrong wine, and waſhing your handes, noſe, and face
therwith, it preſerueth from the peſtilence, and being infected
with the euill, yet by touching the Boches, or Carbuncles therwith,
it is of verie great effect. It helpeth likewiſe the Palſey,
and the falling ſickneſſe, if with the ſaid water the nape of the
necke be waſhed.
               
               
                  To remedie the falling away of the heare from
the head or bearde.
                  TAke of ſwéete lye, that is, of that which is not ſtrong, as
much as you thinke ſufficient to waſh your heade, and put
therein of Ariſtologia rotunda, of the rootes of Rew, of eche
halfe an ounce, of Gentiane, of Reupontici, of eche thrée
drammes, of Centaurie two drammes, boyle them vntill the
thirde part be conſumed, and therwith waſh the heade. And after
annoynt it with this oyle. Take of the rootes of Ireos, of
Squilla one ounce, of Centaurie the leſſer, halfe an ounce, of
Mirtels one ounce, of Cloues one ounce and a halfe, of oyle of
bitter Almonds one ounce. Put all theſe things into a veſſell
of Glaſſe, and being well cloſed, boyle it in Balneo Mariae, the
ſpace of ſixe houres with a ſoft fire, and ſet the oyle in the ſunne,
with the which, annoynt the diſeaſe after you haue waſhed it
with the lye aforeſaid, and at night when you go to bed.
               
               
                  To remedie the diſeaſe called Vertigo.
                  TAke of Nutmegs,Vertigo, is a diſeaſe of the head, wherein it ſeemeth to a man that he ſeeth things turning. of Cloues, of eche halfe a dramme, of
Setwall two ſcruples, of Gentian one ſcruple, of red Roſes,
of yellowe Saunders, of eche one dramme and a halfe, of
Aloes Cicotrini ſixe drammes, of choſen Reubarbe thrée
drammes, braye euery thing ſeperately into pouder by it ſelfe,
and when they are medled, wet it by ſprinkling thereon a little
Roſe water, and then let it drie, and thus doe ſeuen times: then

with ſirop of Violets make a paſte of Pilles, of the which, take
a ſcruple in the euening one houre before meate, and you ſhall
ſée a verie great eaſe.
               
               
                  To cauſe heare to grow againe, and to keepe
them from falling away.
                  TAke of choſen Mirrhe, of Aloes, of Labdanum, of eche
two ounces, of Folium, of Mirtell berries, of Capillus
Veneris, of the flowers of Liguſtrum, of eche two handfulles,
braye them well and mixe them: and take of oyle of bitter Almonds,
of oyle of Siſamine, and of Alchanna, of ech two ounces,
mixe euery thing togither, and being put into an earthen
veſſell glaſed, with a ſtraite mouth, and cloſed well with Lutum
ſapientiae, burie it in horſe dung .xv. dayes: then diſtill it
and kéepe the water, and the oyle that ſhall be drawne, to annoynt
the rootes of the heare, and it will make a verie ſpéedye
and happie effect.
               
               
                  Another remedie for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Efftes fiue, of Piche ſixe ounces, of Propolios or
Virgines waxe foure ounces, of Capillus Veneris, of Mirtell
berries, of eche ſixe handfulles, of Sothernwood eight ounces,
put the Efftes into a veſſell to drie in an ouen, then braye
the thinges that are to bée brayed, and diſſolue thoſe that
are to be diſſolued, then take of the greaſe of a Beare one
pound, and put all the receite into a Still of Glaſſe, and being
well cloſed, ſet it in the Sunne, or elſe in horſe dung thirtene
dayes, then diſtill it according vnto Arte, and the water and
oyle that ſhall be drawen, reſerue to occupie as you doe the other
aforeſaide.
               
               
                  Another of like vertue.
                  TAke of Saffron two ounces, of Aloes, of Mirrhe, of eche
thrée ounces, of Labdanum foure ounces, of oyle of bitter
Almonds, and of the fat of a Beare, of eche ſixe ounces, of the

heads of flies made in pouder eight ounces, mixe them all togither,
and doe with them as is already ſayd of the other, and of
euery of them you ſhall ſée a maruellous effect.
               
               
                  To take away the ſpots and ſcurfe happened
through the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of white and blacke Elleborus,
                     Elleborus albus, is an herbe called Lingwort, the roote wherof is called neeſing pouder. Elleborus niger, is an herbe called Beares foote. of eche one handfull,
of the leaues of Lapatium acutum two pounde, of wilde
Cucumbers thrée ounces, of the pulpe of Melons with the
ſéedes thrée pound, of the pulpe of Limons, and of the iuice of
them foure pound. Put them into a Limbeck of glaſſe, and let
it ſtande to ſettle thrée dayes, and being diſtilled, waſhe with
the water the ſcurfe or ſpots, and it will heale them.
               
               
                  Another pleaſant remedie for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of gréene Lupines one pounde, of the rootes of white
Lillies ſixe ounces, of bitter Almondes two pounde, of the
iuice of Paritorie thrée pounde, put them all into a Still, and
preſently diſtill them before they putrifie, and the water, and
the oyle that ſhalbe drawen, vſe it as is ſayd of the other before.
               
               
                  Another againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Sal niter thrée ounces, of oyle of bitter Almondes
two pounde, of Squilla halfe a pounde, of the meate of Limons
one pound, diſtill them as is aforeſaide of the other, and
worke the oyle with good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  Againſt the dilatation of the ſight of the eye.
                  TAke of Celendine water, of Fennell, of Eyebright and of
Roſes, of eche foure ounces, of Sarcacolla, of Rew, of ech
one dramme, of Gum Serapine halfe a ſcruple, of the gall of
an Ore one dramme and a halfe, boyle them all togither, and
being diſtilled, put therof twice a day into the eye.
               
               
                  
                  To preſerue the teeth from putrifaction.
                  TAke of the ſhelles of burnt Oyſters made in pouder thrée
drammes, of Sandarack foure drammes, of the rootes of
Ireos two drammes, of the rootes of Ariſtologia, of Gentian,
of Centaurie the greater, of eche two drammes. Braye euery
thing ſeperately, then mixe them togither, and with Oximel
ſquilliticum as much as ſhalbe ſufficient, make little paſtils
with the which you may rub the téeth, and waſh them with water
of Squilles, diſſoluing the little cakes in wine, and you ſhall
ſée a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  To faſten the teeth which are redie to fall through
the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke Plantine water and mixe it with oyle of Brimſtone,
and touch therwith the gummes, and after they be mundified,
take of Plantine leaues, of the tender leaues of wylde
Oliue trées, of Sage leaues, of eche halfe a handefull, boyle
them in olde white wine, and waſh therewith the gummes of
the ſicke many times.
               
               
                  Againſt the fluxes diſſentericall in the
French diſeaſe.Dyſenteria is a flixe and fretting of the guttes.
                  
                  TAke a potinger that may containe a pound of Gotes milke,
and quenche therein two or thrée ſtones of the Sea being
burned, and with that milke make gliſters: or elſe take of the
iuice of Plantine, of oyle of Mirtels, or of Roſes Omphacine
as much as ſufficeth, and make thereof a gliſter.
               
               
                  To remedie the paines of the throte happened
through the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the leaues of Liguſtrum, of Plantin, of the tops and
ſtalkes of Mulberies, of the tender leaues of the wilde Oliue,
of eche one handfull, of Roche Allum one ounce: boyle
them in as much water as ſhall be ſufficient vnto the decoction

of the herbes, then with that which is ſtrained being colde, let
the pacient waſh his mouth oftentimes, and he will be hole, neuertheleſſe
if the diſeaſe ceaſe not at theſe medicines. Thē take
of Verderame the quantitie of a Beane, & of Roch Allum like
quantitie, and braye them well in a Morter of Braſſe ſo long
with Roſewater, or Plantine water, that the water take the
colour of Verderame, with the which, touching the ſore with a
little Bombace dipped therein, you ſhall ſée a preſent remedie.
               
               
                  To remedie the puſhes in the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the pouder of Dill ſéedes, and of the ſcales of Braſſe
preperated, of ech like quantitie, and lay thereof vppon the
ſore: or elſe take a dram of Precipitate preperated, and mixe it
with an ounce of Vnguentum Roſatum of Meſue, and lay it
vpon them: if they be malicious, and giue not place vnto ſuch
medicines. Take of the greaſe of an Hog two ounces, of Incenſe,
of Aloes, of ech one dram, of quick ſiluer two drammes,
mortifie the quick ſiluer, and bray it in a morter, making therof
an oyntment, and worke it. And for a finall remedie for thoſe
that are verie malignant, vſe the oyntment Egiptiacum with
Sublimate medled therwith.
               
               
                  To heale knobbes in the naturall places of women.
                  TAke of the pouder of Scabioſe, of Tormentill, of eche one
dramme, of Iuorie in pouder and burned, of red Corall, of
eche two ſcruples, of Bole Armenick one dramme, of Incenſe
one ſcruple, of Mel Roſarum, of ſirop of Mirtels, and of
wine of Pomegranates, of eche halfe an ounce, meddle them
in a Morter, and with Bombace dipped in the ſayd oyntment,
touche the diſeaſed place: or elſe take of Turpentine waſhed
with Scabioſe water, of Mel Roſarum, of eche one ounce, of
pouder of Scabioſe, and of Tormentill, of eche one dramme,
of Bole Armenick, of Iuorie burned, and of Marts horne burned,
of Aloes, of eche halfe a dramme, of the meale of Cockell
two ſcruples, meddle them, and dip therein a ſuppoſitorie, and

put it into the naturall place, and if they be difficult to heale,
with the foreſaid medicines, then mixe with the pouders Vnguentum
Iſis or Diapampholigos, or Diapalma, and put
it into the naturall place.
               
               
                  To heale the ſcurfe or ſcalles in the head,
beard, or browes.
                  TAke of Ammoniack preperated in vinegar one ounce, of
Aſſa fetida one dramme, of burnt Lime, or made red, two
ſcruples, make a paſte, and put it euery day vpon the ſore, and
if it enduceth itche, vſe pacience and ſcratch not. They vſe alſo
to heale them with oile of Sulphur or of Vitriol: or elſe take of
Arſenick and worke it vpon a Marble, and then poure it into
a Baſen with vinegar vntill the vinegar remayne vppermoſt,
then ſet it in the ſunne to become drie, and thus doe thrée times.
And as many times more infuſe it in pure water and let it drie.
The which vſe, firſt waſhing with ſpettle a little Bombace,
and putting thereto a verie little quantitie of the ſaide pouder,
touch once the ſcurfe or ſcales. In like maner preperate Oripigment,
but take héede that you laye a verie little of the pouder
vpon the ſore, that it maye not fret or conſume very much.
               
               
                  Againſt knobbes or wheales of the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Plantine water, and of Roſewater, of eche one
pound, of Roch Allum, of Argentum ſublimatum, of ech
two drammes, bray the Allum and the Sublimatum, and put
it with the waters into a glaſſe, and take a Cirdyron, and ſet
it vpon firie coles, and let the glaſſe boyle vppon it vntill halfe
the water be conſumed, then let the pouder ſettle, and kéepe the
water which will come forth cléere in a veſſell of glaſſe, and
when you will vſe therof temper a part of it with a tripple portion
of Roſe water, or of Plantine, or more, and touche therewith
the knobbes or wheales, and if the wheales or knobbes be
in the face: firſt you muſt vſe eaſie remedies, as to annoynt
them with the ſcum of the decoction of Guacum, or elſe wyth

Sope by it ſelfe: or elſe with Precipitate mixed with Vnguentum
Roſatum Meſue, or with the oyle of Scorpions, or with
the fat of a Gote and of a Hen.
               
               
                  To take away the blackneſſe of wounds.
                  TAke the gréene rootes of Celendine the greater, and braye
them with Brimſtone, and annoint therwith the place, and
if the cicatrices or ſcarres be red, take of Ceruce, of Litarge of
Siluer waſhed, and diſſolue it with the iuice of wilde Grapes,
or with the iuice of Limons, and at night annoint the place.
               
               
                  To cauſe heare to grow.
                  TAke of Malmeſey, of childrens vrine, and of Cowes milke,
of eche one pound, of Hony halfe a pound, mixe them in a
Limbeck, and draw out the water, with the which, waſhing
the head, it cauſeth the heare to grow.
               
               
                  Againſt the prefocation of the Matrix.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Pioney, of the ſéedes of Agnus, and of
Calamus aromaticus, of eche one dramme, of Siler Montanus,
of drie Rew, of Commin, of ech two ſcruples, of Daucus,
of Ameos, of Annis ſéedes, of Fennell, of Carowayes,
of Ciperus, of eche halfe a dramme, of Calamint, of the ſéedes
of Rocket, of eche one ſcruple. Bray them into pouder, and
with the ſirop of Calamint, make of euerye dramme ſeauen
pilles, of the which, the woman muſt take thrée at one time, in
the morning one houre before ſhe eate, ſhe muſt vſe to doe it
euery other day.
               
               
                  To purge melancholie humors, and to remedie the
paine of the head and ſtomack.
                  TAke of Polipodie two pounde, of the leaues of Sene .xxv.
ounces, of Tamarindes one pounde, of Reyſons without
kirnelles fiue ounces, of Damaſke Prunes .xxxv. of Borage
flowers, and of Violets, of eche two handfulles, of Mayden

heare foure handfulles, of Melon ſéedes foure ounces, of choſen
Cinamonde one ounce and a halfe, of Ginger, of Salt
Gemma, of eche ſeuen drammes, of the iuice of Lupines foure
pounde, of the iuice of Endiue two pound, of raine water thirtie
pounde. Mixe euerye thing togither, and boyle them according
vnto Art, vntill the fourth part be conſumed: then ſtrain
it, and make into the ſayd decoction twelue infuſions of freſhe
Roſes gathered in the morning, and for euery infuſion put in
ſeauen pounde of Roſes, and in the ende put therevnto of fine
Sugar eight pounde, and make a ſirop. The vſe of which is to
giue foure ounces, or more or leſſe after the diſpoſition of the
perſon that ſhall vſe it, diſſolued with Cordiall waters, or with
water of Lupilles, and Fumiterrie.
               
               
                  An excellent remedie for to heale the
French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Nutmegs, of Cardamomes, of Maſticke, of Cubebes,
of Graines called in Latine Grana Paradyſi, of
Cinamond, of Nuts of India, of eche one ounce, of the thrée
ſortes of Saunders, of red Roſes, of Fumiterrie, and of the
flowers of Borage, of eche two ounces, of the ſéedes of Bugloſſe,
of Endiue, of ech one handfull, of all the kindes of Myrobolanes,
of ech one dram, of the ſéedes of Coloquintida, of Bdellium,
of Agarick, of choſen Turbit, of eche two drammes, of
choſen Reubarbe halfe an ounce, of Manna one ounce and a
halfe, of Camphire two drammes, of Muſke and of Amber, of
eche one dramme. Braye thoſe thinges that are to be brayed,
groſſely, and put them to diſſolue in .viij. pound of Aqua vitae
the ſpace of .xxiiij. houres, and then diſtill it with a ſoft fire by a
Limbeck, putting therevnto two pounde of Sugar, and in the
ende put to it the Muſke and Amber. Of the which water giue
vnto the ſicke perſon thrée drammes euery day continually the
ſpace of fourtie dayes, if he be not weake, and you ſhall ſée a
maruellous effect.
               
               
                  
                  To purge one that hath the paine of the
French diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Turbit halfe an ounce, of Diagredium one dram
and a halfe, of Diadragant one ounce, of white Ginger two
drammes, of Hermodactills two drammes, of Manna granata
one dramme and a halfe, of Carthamus ſéedes halfe an
ounce, of the iuice of Quinces one ounce, of the iuice of preparated
Roſes one ounce, of the iuice of Sage thrée ounces, of
Iuy water two ounces, of fine Sugar eight ounces, make a
confection in morſels, of the which, giue the pacient to purge
with halfe an ounce, in the morning early, and you ſhall ſée a
verie good effect.
               
               
                  To cauſe the feuers Perhiodicae to ceaſe after
they be prolonged.Febres Perhiodicae are Agues which come by courſe or fits.
                  
                  INfuſe the leaues of Wormwoode in water the ſpace of ten
houres, then take out the ſaid leaues, and caſt them awaye,
and ſet the ſaid water to boyle, vntill the halfe be conſumed, of
the which, giuing foure ounces vnto the ſicke, he ſhall ſweate
in ſuch ſort that all the Feuers wil ceaſe which happen through
colde humors.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe which haue the eye liddes infected
of ſharpe or ſalt humors.
                  TAke of raine water and fill an earthen pot therewith that
conteineth in quantitie ſixe pound, & ſet it vpon the fire, and
when it beginneth to boyle, caſt into it of Sugar Candie, and
of Verderame, of eche one ounce, of common Salt in pouder
as much more, and after they haue boyled a little ſpace, take away
the pot from the fire, and let it ſettle, and being ſtrayned,
reſerue the cléere water to waſhe the eye lyddes, and put vpon
it this ointment, take of Butter that is freſh one ounce, of Tutia
preperated one dramme, of Aloes halfe a dramme, of Ambergréece
one ſcruple, make pouder thereof, and the Butter

being heated, meddle therewith the other thinges, and make
therof an oyntment.
               
               
                  Againſt the falling ſickneſſe of children, and to heale
the head of Catarres, happened through
colde cauſes.
                  TAke of Mirrhe, of Labdanum, of ech one dramme, of Storax
Calamite, one ſcruple and a halfe, of Cloues two ſcruples,
of Maſtick and of Nutmegs, of eche two drammes,
make a plaiſter, with braying thoſe things that are to be brayed,
and mixing them with the Gum of an Oke, lay it vpon the
cloſure of the pacients heade, the heares being firſt cut awaye
with a raſor.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe which piſſe a bed.
                  TAke the bladder of a Gote or of a ſhéepe, burne it vppon a
tyle on the fire, and giue the pacient to drinke with water
and vinegar: or elſe boyle the teſticles of an Hare in good wine,
and giue him to drinke of the ſame wine. It helpeth alſo to
cauſe him to drinke before ſupper, a little Ney or Mirrhe with
wine, and to annoint him vnder his yarde with the earth of a
Smithes mill.
               
               
                  To heale the choking of the Matrix when it can
not returne againe.
                  TAke of gréene Rew, and bray it well, and mixe it with Honie,
and dip wooll therein made in forme of a tent, and put
it into the fundiment, and preſently it will be awaked, and returne
againe into hir ſelfe.
               
               
                  To purge the hote goute.
                  TAke of the Myrobolanes called Emblici, Chebuli, and
Indi, of ech two drammes, of Reubarbe, of Scammoney,
of eche halfe a dramme, of Aloes waſhed one dramme, of red
Roſes, of Maſtick, of eche two ſcruples. Make a paſte of pilles

with the iuice of Roſes. Of the which, giue the pacient to take,
in the morning made and proportioned in thrée pilles.
               
               
                  To remedie the difficultie of piſsing through
the impediment of fleume.
                  TAke of the herbe Clinopodium one handful, of the worms
called Horſe flies dried in an Ouen, two drammes, boyle
them in good white wine, vntill the thirde part be conſumed,
and giue foure ounces thereof vnto the pacient to drinke two
houres before meate, and you ſhall ſée a verie good effect.
               
               
                  To heale ſore and inflamed legges.
                  TAke of Ceruce, of Litarge, of eche fiue pounde, of white
waxe two pounde, of oyle Oliue twentie pounde: boyle it
with a ſoft fire, and make a ceare cloth to lay vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefe of the pleuriſie when one is
ſtopped that he cannot ſpit.
                  TAke of Loch de pino, two ounces, of Diapenideon one
dramme and a halfe, of the pouder of the rootes of Enula
Campana, and of the rootes of Ireos, of eche two drammes, of
the iuice of Liquerice two drammes and a halfe, with as much
ſtrop of Horehound as ſufficeth, and to make it more ſtronger
to purge the breſt, in ſteade of the Gum, put in Nettle ſéedes.
               
               
                  To purge the breſt of the pleuriſie and Ptiſicke.
                  TAke of Gum Ammoniack one dramme and a halfe, of
Saffron halfe a dramme, make fiftene pilles with Oximel
ſquilliticum, of the which, cauſe the diſeaſed to take euerye
morning one.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe of the pleuriſie.
                  TAke of Nettle leaues, of Mallowes, of Camomill, of Flax
ſéedes, of eche two handfulles, of Mirrhe two drammes, of
Ammoniack one dramme and a halfe, boile them in two parts

of water and one of vinegar, and make a fomentation vnto the
diſeaſed part. And it will reſolue the impoſtume, it will facilitate
the ſpettle▪ and mitigate the paine.
               
               
                  A liniment to remedie the diſeaſe of the pleuriſie.
                  TAke of white Lillies, of ſwéete Almonds, of eche one ounce,
of the greaſe of a Hen, of freſhe Butter, of eche halfe an
ounce, of Mucillage of Fenegreke, and of the iuice of Mallow
rootes, of ech thrée drammes, of Storax Calamite two drams,
of the pouder of Ireos rootes, of Enula, of eche thrée drammes,
of Saffron halfe a dramme, of waxe as much as ſufficeth, make
a liniment, with the which let the ſicke annoint the place of his
griefe warme, morning and euening faſting.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of oyle of Linſéede two ounces, of Ammoniack, of
Mirrhe, of eche one dram and a halfe, diſſolue the Gummes
in vinegar, and with waxe make an ointment.
               
               
                  Another verie approued remedie for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the white dung of a Dog one ounce, of Comin two
drammes, of the fat of a Gooſe, or of a Hen two ounces, of
the iuice of Coleworts as much as ſufficeth, braye euery thing,
and make a plaiſter, which being extended vppon a Colewort
leafe, and being warmed, lay it vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine and inflammation of the Milt.
                  TAke of the dung of wood Doues one handfull, of Scolopendria,
of the rindes of the rootes of Capers, and of Mellilot,
of eche halfe an ounce, of Camomill, of Calamus aromaticus,
of eche one handfull and a halfe, of Cloues two drammes, of
Euphorbium two ſcruples, boile them in an earthen pot with
two parts of water and one of vinegar, vntill the thirde part
be conſumed, and with Sponges or a Felt dipped therein, fomentate
the place with it warme.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie or heale thoſe that haue the ſplene or
quarterne agues.
                  TAke of the aſhes of a whet ſtone, or of the wormes called
Millepedi, in Engliſh Sowes or Horſe wormes, of both
one dram, of ſirop de Biſantijs one ounce, of Oximel ſquilliticum
halfe an ounce, with aperetiue waters, cauſe the pacient
to receiue it early in the morning, and you ſhall ſée a maruellous
good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe that haue the ſplene, and
paine in the liuer.
                  TAke of the filinges of Stéele preperated in vinegar ſixe
drammes, of Citrack, of Gum Ammoniack of eche halfe
an ounce, of ſirop de Biſantijs, as much as ſufficeth, make a
lectuarie, and cauſe the ſicke to take the quantite of a ſpoonefull
at one time.
               
               
                  To heale the falling from ſome high place.
                  TAke of Camomill, of Wormwood, and of Wheate Bran,
of eche halfe a handfull, boyle them in wine, and being
brayed, boyle them once againe in Hony, and lay it vppon the
bruſed place.
               
               
                  To heale ſpots in the eyes.
                  TAke of the iuice of Wormwood well ſtrained, and put it into
the eye: or elſe take of the iuice of Celendine, as much as
you pleaſe, and put thereto of olde wine and of Salt, and being
diſſolued and well mixed, put therof into the eye. It helpeth alſo
to diſtill into the eye of the gall of an Hare, for that taketh away
all miſtes or darkneſſe from the eyes.
               
               
                  To remedie teares or droppings of the eyes.
                  TAke of Aloes one ounce, of Roſes foure ounces, of the iuice
of Wormwood two ounces, of ye iuice of Borage one ounce,

of the iuice of Plantine as much more, of grounde Iuie one
ounce, and of ſcraped Liquerice the like weight. Diſtill them
in a Glaſſe veſſell in Balneo Mariae, then ſtrayne it thorow a
cleane and fine linnen cloth, and drop therof into the eies when
you go to bed.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the herbe called Millifollie brayed, and mixe it with
a little pouder of Incenſe, let it ſtande to diſſolue in good
white wine the ſpace of .vii. dayes, and being ſtrayned in the
euening, diſtill one or two drops therof into the eye.
               
               
                  To renew the ſight of olde men.
                  TAke a little Hony, put it into a glaſſe veſſell, and put therevnto
of the galles of Corkes, of Hares, of Cles, and of
Carmorantes, let them ſtand in the ſunne the ſpace of thirtie
dayes, and as many more nights in the aire, and by diſtilling
of the ſaid liquor into the eyes, you ſhall ſée a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  To remedie the redneſſe and paine of the eyes.
                  TAke the lunges of a Ramme, and lay it hote vpon the eyes,
and it will ceaſe the griefe and redneſſe.
               
               
                  To heale ſore and bloudſhotten eyes.
                  TAke of Tutia preperated, of Maſtick, of Sarcacoll, of Gum
Arabick, of eche like quantitie. Make pouder thereof and
diſſolue them with Roſe water,Vertigo, is a ſickneſſe in the head wherein it ſeemeth to a man that be ſeeth things turning. and diſtill of the ſayde water
into the eyes.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called Vertigo, and ſwelling of
the arme, by reaſon of letting of bloud.
                  TAke a quantitie of white Horehound, of Rew, of Penyrial,
and a little Salt, put them to boyle in an earthen pot with
water vntill the thirde part be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and
put vnto it a quantitie of Hony, and boyle it againe, vntill it

become thicke. Of the which, giue the pacient to take one or
two ſpoonefuls the ſpace of ſeuen mornings, and he wil be hole.
               
               
                  Againſt coldneſſe of ſtomack, and to cauſe a
good colour.
                  TAke of Ginger, of Pepper, of Cinamond, of Peritorie, of
Pionie, of Enula, of eche fiue ounces, of the filings of Iron
preperated, the weight of all the reſt, braye them all togither,
and let the ſicke take therof in all his meates.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſes of the ſtomacke.
                  TAke of Annis ſéedes two ounces, of Ginger one ounce, of
Saffron halfe an ounce, of Comin one ounce, of Cinamond
as much more, of white Sugar two ounces, bray them all into
pouder, and giue therof vnto the ſicke to take with his meates.
               
               
                  To heale the paine in the body called the Colick.
                  TAke of Sage, of Artemeſia called Mugwort, of Smallage,
of eche like quantitie, boyle them in good wine, vntill the
thirde part be conſumed, and being ſtrayned, giue the ſicke to
drinke foure ounces or ſomewhat more at one time, and he wil
be hole.
               
               
                  To heale the flixe of bloud.
                  TAke a Hennes egge, and make an hole vppon the top, and
take out the white, and fill it with beaten Pepper, then
burne it in the fire, and make it into pouder, and being mixed
with Wheate meale, make little fritters, and bake them, giue
the ſicke partie to eate twice a day therof faſting.
               
               
                  To heale the flix and excoriations of the bellie.
                  TAke of Cinquefoyle, and take out the iuice, and giue it the
ſicke to drinke: or elſe diſſolue the ſéedes of Carawayes in
good wine, and giue it the ſicke to drinke. The pouder of the
herbe called Virga paſtoris, giuen faſting in wine doth ſtoppe
the flyxes.
               
               
                  
                  To take away wrinkles out of the face.
                  TAke of Sothernwood, diſtill it in a Limbecke, and with the
water waſh the face.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the teeth.
                  TAke of the ſhauing of Hartes horne, and after it is well
boyled in water, kéepe therof in your mouth: or elſe take of
Pepper, of Pellitorie, of the rinde of Pomegranates, and
Millifolie, boyle them in ſtrong vinegar, and being put into a
little bag, lay it warme vpon the place of the griefe.
               
               
                  To heale ſwollen gummes.
                  TAke of Rew, and being well brayed with Hony and Salt,
put it vpon the gummes, and you ſhal ſée a verie good effect.
               
               
                  To heale the ſtone in the bladder.
                  TAke of the vrine of a Gote, and giue it the pacient to drink,
the ſpace of nine dayes, and he ſhall be hole: or elſe giue
him to drinke of the bloud of a Foxe. It helpeth likewiſe to take
the roote of Cinquefoyle, of Enula, of Capillus veneris, of
Sancta Maria, of Saxifrage, and of the herbe Stichwort boiled
in white wine, and giuen to drinke: or elſe take gréene
berries of Iuy, of ground Iuy, of Percely of Alexandria, of
ech halfe a handfull, bray them and diſſolue them in good wine,
and giue it to drinke faſting.
               
               The ende of the ſeconde
Booke
            
            
               
               Of the fourth and laſt part of
the Secretes of the Reuerende
Maister Alexis of
Piemount.
               The thirde Booke
               
                  To heale a windie impoſtume.
                  TAke of gréene Rew, of Commin, of Annys ſéedes,
of Caraway ſéeds, of Ameos, and of Smallage of ech
halfe an ounce, of olde oyle twiſe as much, put them
all into a veſſell, and boyle them in water, and wyth
the oyle that remayneth, annoynt the impoſtume, and binde
vpon it a little warme Towe, and euery day before you laye
on the playſter, or annoynt it, make fomentation vnto the
place in this maner. Take of common aſhes, of the leaues of
Bayes, of Camomyll, of Commin, of Rew, of Annys ſéedes,
of Fennell, of Carawayes, and boyle them in water, and put
therein of rawe yarne, and with that fomentate the place of the
impoſtume.
               
               
                  To remedie the ioynts that are out of their place.
                  TAke of the meale of Orobo, of french peaſe, of Fig duſt, of
ech half an ounce, of Maſtick, of Gum Arabick, and of Dragant,
of Ceruce, of eche one ounce, of Mummie, of Boale
Armenick, of eche halfe an ounce, hauing made powder therof,
mixe them with the whyte of an Egge, and laye thereof
vpon the ioynt.
               
               
                  To mollifie hardneſſe.
                  TAke of Bdellium, of Oppoponack, of ech halfe an ounce,
diſſolue them in Wine, and put thereto of Swines greaſe,

thrée ounces, of the fat of a Gooſe, and of a Hen, of eche one
ounce: of the meale of Fenegréeke, and of Linſéedes, as much
more, of Incenſe, of Maſtick, of eche halfe an ounce, of the
rootes of marſhe Mallowes, and of Hartes horne burned, and
put into a glaſſe with olie: and being boiled in Balneo Mariae,
diſſolue the meales with the ſaide oyle and greaſe, and ſtirring
it with a little water, bray thoſe things that are to be brayed,
and then meddle all them togither, and make a playſter, putting
thereto of Waxe.
               
               
                  To heale a rupture of the guttes.
                  TAke of Comfrey the greater, of the fruite of Cipers, of
Gum Dragant, of Gum Arabick, of Maſtick, of Boale
Armenick, of Sanguis Draconis, of Mumia, of Colophonie,
of eche two drammes, of the heares of an Hare finely cut, one
dramme: of ſodden Wine as much as ſufficeth, bray the ſaide
things and mixe them with ſodden Hony, then make a playſter
and laye it vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefe of the Matrix.
                  TAke of Spiknard, of Squinant, of Nutmegs, of Cardamomes,
of Galingale, of Setwall of eche halfe a dramme, of
Cinamond, of Gynger, of Cloues, of Maces, of Folium, of
Lignum Aloes, of Maſtick, of Cubebes, of Saffron, of Carret
ſeeds, of Ameos, of Caſſia Lignea, of al the Mirabolanes,
of Calamus Aromaticus, of eche two drammes: of Annys
ſéedes, of Carawaies, of Baſyll, of Perſelie, of common ſalt,
and of white Suger, the weight of all the reſt, and make therof
pilles, or lozenges, and cauſe the woman to vſe of them.
               
               
                  A maruellous powder for the weakeneſſe
of the ſight.
                  TAke of Caraway ſéedes, of Annys ſéedes, of Dyll, of Ameos,
of Perſelie, of Smallage, of Fennell, of Bettonie,
of Comin, of Calamint, of Penny Ryall, of Iſope, of Spiknard,

of Gynger, Salgem, of Rewe, of Centrum galli, of
eyebright, of Incenſe, of Maſtick, of Saffron, of all the Mirobalanes,
of Folium, of Baſyll, of Cardamomes, of Galingale,
of Sothernwood, of Sage, of Dittanie, of Pimpinell,
of the Berries of Geneper, of Myntes, of Origanum, of Celendine,
of the ſéedes of Pſillium, of Cubebes, of Nutmegs,
of eche two drammes, braye them all into pouder, which, vſe
with your meates, but greater quantitie in Winter then in
Sommer: the vſe of this pouder healeth all colde diſeaſes in
the head, it doth ſharpen the wyt, and make a good memorie.
               
               
                  To heale ruptures, or burſtings.
                  TAke of Pyche of Spaine, two ounces, of Pyche of ſhippes
foure ounces, of Aloes Cicotrine, of red waxe, of Henbane,
of eche two ounces, of Maſtick, of Incenſe, of Galbanum, of
Oppoponack, of Gum Serapine, of eche as much more: of
Pomegranat flowers, of Gawles, of Corrall, of Lapis hematitis,
of eche two ounces, of Euforbium, of Ariſtologia
Longa, and Rotunda, of Sanguis Draconis, of Boale
Armenick, of eche one ounce, of Tyrpentine two ounces, of
mans bloud ten ounces, boyle the ſayde bloude as long as you
would veale, and being taken out, braye it, and mixe it with
Fiſhe glewe, diſſolued in water, and put vnto it the gummes
diſſolued alſo in water, with the other things made in pouder,
and in the ende the Tirpentine. Then let it ſtande and coole,
and caſt it vpon a Marble ſtone annoynted with oyle Oliue,
and make a playſter, and lay it vpon the rupture: Then cauſe
the partie to vſe thys lectuarie morning and euening before
meat the quantitie of halfe an ounce at a time. Take of Maſtick,
of Incenſe, of Sandarack, of Annys ſéedes, of the leaues
and rootes of wylde Hartichokes of eche one ounce, of Roſes,
of Pomegranat flowers, of eche as much more, of red Corall,
of the heares of an Hare burned, of Gum Arabick, of Cipres
Berries, of Lacca of the rootes of Geneper burnt, of eche
twelue ounces, of Pſillium burned, of Sanguis Draconis, of

Boale Armenick, of Veeches, of eche one ounce, of fine Sugar
two pound, make a lectuarie.
               
               
                  To ſtaye the heare that falleth.
                  TAke of Spikenard halfe an ounce, of the leaues of Mirtels,
one handefull, of Aloes, and of Beniomin of eche two
drammes, of the ſéedes of wylde Myntes, one ounce and a
halfe: of the rootes of Walwoort one handfull: of the leaues of
Sene two drammes, boyle all theſe in halfe a Kettle of olde
Wine, vntill the thirde part be conſumed, and with the decoction,
waſhe often the rootes of the heares.
               
               
                  To heale the ſwelling of the arme through
letting of bloud.
                  TAke of wheate meale as much as you pleaſe, and with Honie
and Mylke make a playſter, and laye it vpon the ſore,
or elſe take the leaues of Brioney, and being made warme
with water, binde it vpon the diſeaſed arme.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſwelling of the legges.
                  TAke of the iuice of Walwoort, of Waxe, of Vineger, of
Barlie meale of eche lyke quantitie, boyle it and make a
playſter, and binde it vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale the ſwelling of the bodie, and of the
legges, through cold humors.
                  TAke of Bittony, of Pimpernell, of whyte Hoarehound, of
Fennell rootes, of Smallage, and of red Waxe, of ech like
quantitie, boyle them all in a ſufficient quantitie of water, vntill
the thirde parte be conſumed, and giue the ſicke to drinke
foure ounces thereof euery daye, putting vnto the water two
pound of Hony.
               
               
                  To cauſe good fleſhe to growe in woundes.
                  TAke of the greaſe of a Hen, of a Gooſe, of a Swine, of hony,
of eche one ounce, of wheate meale, and of the pouder of

Incenſe, of eche halfe an ounce, of Aloes, of quick Lyme a little,
of the iuice of Coalewortes as much as ſufficeth, make an
oyntment, and put it vpon the ſore, or elſe take of Incenſe, of
Maſtick, of Aloes, of the Pytche of Spayne, of Ariſtologia
rotunda, of Ireos, of eche ſixe ounces, make a powder of
euerie thing, & with oyle Oliue and Wax make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale ſore legges.
                  TAke of newe Wax two ounces, of Tyrpentine halfe an
ounce, boyle them togither, and put into it the milke of a
woman, that gyueth ſucke, and a little ſtrong Vineger, and
make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called in Italian,Fuoco ſaluatico, is a diſeaſe wherein it an exceeding burning.
Fuoco ſaluatico.
                  TAke of Incenſe halfe an ounce, of Ceruce, and of Wax,
of eche as much more, of oyle of Roſes, and Violets of eche
one ounce, of Wax as much as ſufficeth, make an oyntment
and annoynt the knobbes, or elſe take of oyle Oliue two ounces,
of Tirpentine, and of Butter, of eche one ounce, of Wax
halfe an ounce, make an oyntment and vſe it.
               
               
                  To heale bones that are broken in the
head in fewe dayes.
                  TAke of Tirpentine one pound, boyle it a little, and ſtrayne
it, and put it againe vpon the fire, and adde therto of ſtrong
Vineger one pounde, and beyng made hote ſtraine it agayne,
then ſet it vpon the fyre, and put vnto it of Waxe fiue
ounces, of ſaint Iohns worte in powder two ounces, boyle
it well, and ſtrayne it, and when it is colde take it out, and
waſh it with the milke of an Aſſe, or of a woman that giueth a
childe ſucke, and vſe it vnto all broken bones, and ſores of
the heade.
               
               
                  To mollifie hardened ſinewes.
                  TAke of oyle of Foxes, and of Cammomyll, of eche two
ounces, of oyle of Linſéedes, of Coſtus, of Ireos, of Euphorbium,
                     
of Nardinum, of Wormewood, and of the filth of
the oyle that is in wooll, of ech one ounce, of Vnguentum marciatom
ſixe ounces, of Swines greaſe as much more, of Wax
one ounce and a halfe: make an oyntment, and annoynt the
place warme.
               
               
                  To mundifie Fiſtuloes, and other putrified ſores.
                  TAke of Agrimonie in pouder, and of a thinne péece of lether
finely burned of eche two ounces, of quick lime one ounce,
of Verderame as much more, mixe euery thing togither, and
hauing made an oyntment vſe it.
               
               
                  A moſt precious oyle to remedie all
ſores and griefes.
                  TAke of Gum Arabick, of Rubea Tinctorum, of Roſen, of
oyle of Bayes, of Incenſe, of Mirrhe, of the fat of an Hen, of
oyle of Iuniper, of Gynger, of long Pepper, of Cloues, of
Cinamond, of common Pepper, of Imperatoria, of Calamus
Aromaticus, of Lignum Aloes, of Piche, of the Gum of a
Damſin trée, of a Peare trée, and of a Cherie trée, put all theſe
things into a Still of Glaſſe, and diſtill the oyle by Alcumiſtry:
or elſe take of Tyrpentine one pound, of Incenſe two drams,
of Lignum Aloes one dramme, of Maſtick, of Cloues, of Galingale,
of Cinamond, of Saffron, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes,
of eche one dramme, of drie figges ſixe drammes, meddle all
togither, after you haue brayed thoſe thinges which are to bée
brayed, and put them into a Limbeck or Still of glaſſe, and
cloſe it well, then diſtill it with a ſoft fire, and then you maye
put vnto it of Lignum Balſamum, of Carpo Balſamum, and
of Gum of Iuy, of eche one dramme, and reſerue the oyle that
ſhall be drawen, to vſe for the foreſaid euils.
               
               
                  To heale the cloutes or ſpots in the face.
                  TAke of Tutia preperated thrée drammes, of Camphire ſixe
drammes, of Cloues as much more, of Aloes Epatice
                     
thrée drammes, of Sanguis draconis foure drammes, of Verderame
one dramme, braye thoſe things that are to be brayed,
and make pouder thereof, then meddle them with waters of
Bittonie, of Roſes, of Fennell, and of Rew, of eche ſixe ounces,
of good white wine fiue ounces, worke them well togither
the ſpace of an houre, then ſet them in the ſunne in a glaſſe veſſell
the ſpace of one daye, and being ſtrained, drop thereof into
the eyes.
               
               
                  To make the ſight cleare.
                  TAke of Siler Montanus, of Fennell, of Roſemarie, of
Rew, of Celendine, of Bittonie, of eche halfe an ounce, of
Eyebright two ounces, of Sugar nine ounces. Braye euerye
thing into pouder, and vſe morning and euening to take a little
therof.
               
               
                  To heale ſore breſts.
                  TAke of Sage, of Wormwood, and of Margerome, of eche
halfe a handfull, boyle them in white wine, and with that
wine waſh the ſores, and vpon it laye the ointment: Or elſe
take of blacke Beanes parched, and make pouder therof, and
mixe it with raw Hony and vſe it.
               
               
                  To heale little red ſpeckes in
the face.
                  TAke of meale of Lupines, of bitter Almondes, of Baurack,
of Radiſh ſéedes, of Cabage ſéedes, of the milke of Figges,
with the iuice of Fenegréeke, and of Linſéedes, make a liniment,
firſt waſhe the place where the ſpeckes be with a linnen
cloth dipped in warme water, and rub the place vntill it become
red: then morning and euening annoynt them with the
liniment. Speckes are healed by annoynting them with the
oyle of the ſéedes of Bombace.
                  
               
               
                  A moſt excellent pouder to comfort the ſight, and all the
defects of the head, of the ſtomack, and the diſeaſe called
Scotomia and Vertigo,Scotomia and Vertigo, are diſeaſes of the head which make all things ſeeme to go rounde. and the palſie, and all
inwarde diſeaſes, it conſumeth the ſuperfluous
humiditie of the braine, it
helpeth the memorie: it was
vſed of Frederick
the Emperour.
                  TAke of Carawaye ſéedes, of Annis ſéedes, of Ameos, of
Perſlye ſeedes, of Smallage ſéedes, of Fennell ſéedes, of
Bittonie, of Comin, of Calamint, of Pulegium, of Iſope, of
Spiknard, of Pepper, of Ginger, of Sage, of Rew, of Centrum
galli, of Eyebright, of Incenſe, of Maſtick, of Saffron,
of all the Myrabolanes, but the greater quantitie of the Citrines,
of Cinamond, and of Squinant, of ech halfe an ounce,
of Margerome, of Folium, of Baſill, of Cardamomes, of Galingale,
of Liquerice, of eche two ounces. Bray them into verie
fine pouder, of the which vſe to take in all your meates, but
more in the winter than in other parts of the yeare.
               
               
                  To heale the griefe of the reynes, of the loynes, of the
head, and the diſeaſes of the Matrix.
                  TAke of gréene Sauine fiue ounces, of the fruites of Cipres,
lxv. drammes, of Roſemarie flowers, of Millifollie, of Matricaria,
of Fenegreke, of Linſéedes, of eche ſixe ounces, infuſe
the ſaid herbes to become tender by the ſpace of thrée days
in water, then put there vnto of oyle nine ounces, and boyle it
vntill the water be cōſumed, & being taken from the fire, ſtrain
it thorow a linnen cloth, and put it vnto that that is ſtrayned,
of Waxe, of Piche of Spaine, of Turpentine, of Galbanum,
of Maſtick, of eche fiue ounces, of Storax Calamite, of Spiknard,
of eche one pounde, of Balme foure ounces. Bray thoſe
things that are to be brayed, and mixe euerye thing togither,
and working it with the ſpatter, make an ointment.
               
               
                  
                  To heale thoſe that haue the Ptiſick:
                  TAke of Nigella parched, of Grana tinctorum, of eche one
dramme and a halfe, of the rindes of Pomecitrones dried
thrée drammes, of Cloues two drammes and a halfe, of Lignū
Aloes two drammes, of Balme, of dried Margerome, of eche
one dramme, of red Roſes two ſcruples, make pouder thereof
and lay it vpon the cloſure of the forepart of the head.
               
               
                  An odour againſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of pure Labdanum, two ounces, of Storax Calamite,
of Gallia Muſchata, of eche halfe an ounce, of Lignum
Aloes, of Cloues, of eche one dramme, with the Mucillage
of Gum Dragagant drawne with Margerome water,
make as it were a Naſtalle,
                     Nastalle, is a medicine to make one to neeſe. and faſten a thred vnto the toppe,
that you may put it into, and drawe it out of the noſe.
               
               
                  A fumigation for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Ariſtologia rotunda, of Incenſe, of Maſtick and
of Cloues, of eche fiue drammes and a halfe, of yelow Arſnick
thrée drammes, with butter or fat of a Cowe, make little
Cakes in forme of Lupines, of which put into the fire, and receiue
the fume by the mouth and noſe.
               
               
                  To ſtop a hote Catarre.
                  TAke of Sterche, of Gum Dragant, of hulled Beanes, of
the ſéedes of white Poppie, of the rindes of Gum Arabick,
of Bole Armenick, after you haue brayed them make Pilles,
with the Murillage of Pſillium, and Quince ſéedes, in maner
of Lupines, and let the partie holde often therof in his mouth.
               
               
                  To ſtay a colde Catarre.
                  TAke of Storax Calamite, of Cipres nuts, of Maſtick, of
Incenſe, of Labdanum, of Amber, of eche one dramme,
of ſcraped Liquerice, of Reyſons, of ech one dram and a halfe,

make likewiſe Pilles therof like vnto Lupines, and cauſe the
ſicke to kéepe therof in his mouth as well by day as by night: or
elſe make theſe more ſtronger, take of Spiknarde one dram,
of Maſtricke two drammes and a halfe, of Bole Armenick
waſhed with Roſe water two drammes, of Gum Dragant, of
Gum Arabick, of eche one dramme, of Sugar Candie one
ounce, with the ſirop of Lillies make Pilles in forme of Lupines,
and vſe them in manner as you doe the other aforeſaide.
               
               
                  To heale the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of Diadragantum frigidum, one ounce and a halfe,
of Pennets two ounces, of Loch de prino foure drammes,
of Dates two, of Reyſons without kirnels halfe an ounce, of
Ireos two drammes, of the ſéedes of Mallowes, of the ſéedes of
Bombace, of eche one dram, with the ſirop of Mayden heare,
make a lectuarie, of the which the ſicke perſon ſhall take often
into his mouth, and ſhall from time to time ſwallow it downe
by little and little.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe that be Melancholick, and are
in a furie or rage.
                  TAke of Borage flowers, of Bugloſſe, of Sorell ſéedes, of
Scariola, of Endiue, of Violets, of Mayden heare, of Politricon,
of Gallitricon, of eche two drammes, of Piſtaches
foure ounces, make an infuſion by the ſpace of .xxiiij. houres,
in the iuice of Borage, and put thereto of Pine kernels mundiſted
thrée ounces, of the rinds of the Miriobolanes, called Indi,
one ounce, of Iacinctes, of Smeraldes, and of Saphires, of ech
one dramme, of the boane of a Hartes heart, of Doronnoci, of
Setwall, of eche two drammes and a halfe, of Lapis armenis,
of Lapis lazuli preperated, of eche two ſcruples, of white Suger
one pound and a halfe, boyle the Suger at a ſoft fyre, with
a pounde of the iuice of Pome ryalls, vntill the iuice be conſumed:
And when it beginneth to coole, adde vnto it the powders,
in the ende, put vnto it foure graynes of Amber, and of Muſke

two graynes, and make a lectuarie, of the which cauſe the ſick
partie to take morning and euening two houres before meate,
hauing firſt made the vniuerſall remedies, as purging, letting
of bloud. &c.
               
               
                  An oyntment to remedie the ſores of the noſe.
                  TAke of Ceruce, of Lead burned, of eche one ounce, make
powder, and waſhe it, and with oyle of Mirtels make an
oyntment, and vſe to annoynt the noſe.
               
               
                  To ſeperate or deuide a corrupted bone
from the ſound.
                  TAke of gréene Figs two, of Rew one handefull, bray them
togither, and make little cakes, and reſerue them: And
when it ſhall be néedefull to vſe thereof, braye them, and put
of the ſayde pouder into the ſore, and it will cauſe the good bone
to become whyte, and the periſhed will appeare black.
               
               
                  To heale one which by ſcratching with his nailes
hath made a ſore.
                  TAke of Litarge two ounces, of Ceruce, halfe an ounce, of
Boale Armenick thrée ounces, of burned Lead halfe an
ounce, of Terra ſigillata two ounces, of vineger, and of oyle
of Roſes, as much as ſuffyceth to make an oyntment.
               
               
                  To remedie the burning of vrine.
                  TAke of Lettys ſéedes, of Porcellane, of eche two ſcruples,
of the ſéedes of white Poppie, one ounce and a halfe, of the
ſéedes of Scariola, of Sorell, of Endiue, of eche one dram, of
the pulpe of Damaſke Prunes, of the pulpe of Sebeſtians, of
eche two ounces, of Barlie flower thrée ounces, of Pennets,
foure ounces, of Spodium one dramme, of Gumme Dragant,
of ſcraped Liquerice, of Gumme Arabick, of eche two
drammes, of Sugar Candie ſixe ounces, of Sugar Roſet. viii.
ounces, of Mucillage of Sebeſtians ſeuen ounces. Make pouder

of thoſe things that are to be brayed, and mixe them with
the Sugar and Pennets, and boyle them all in foure ounces of
the iuice of ſwéete Pomegranates, vntill the iuice be conſumed,
and make therof a lectuarie.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of the iuice of the flowers of water Lillies, of Violets,
and of the iuice of Virga paſtoris, of eche two ounces, of
Barly flower fiue ounces, of red Saunders, of Violet flowers,
of eche halfe an ounce, of Endiue ſéedes, of Lettice, of Scariola,
of Purcelane, of eche two drammes, of Saffron, and of
Spike, of eche one ſcruple, of whites of Egges two, bray them
all with the flower, and with a little oyle of gréene Oliues, in
a Morter of Lead and a Peſtell of the ſame, medling togither
the ſayd things to make a liniment to annoint the reynes, and
vnder the member: or elſe take of Vnguentum Sandalinum
of Populeon, of eche halfe an ounce, of Camphire halfe a
dramme, mixe them with the iuice of Semperuiue, and make
an ointment: or elſe take of the yolkes and whites of Egges
thrée, of oyle of Roſes omphacine one ounce and a halfe, of the
flower of Barlie one ounce, of Saffron one ſcruple, of preperated
Corianders, of Sorell ſéedes, and of Mirtels, of ech halfe
a dramme, braye all the things in a morter with a peſtell of
Leade, adding thereto in the ende of Vnguentum Populeon
one ounce, and annoint therwith as is aforeſaide.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke the white of a new layde Egge, of Camphire halfe a
ſcruple, of the milke of a woman which hath brought forth
a daughter, of the mucillage of Pſillium, and of white Sief
without Opium, of eche as much as ſufficeth, cauſe to bée
ſquirted therof into the pipe of the mans member. And then
take of the flowers of water Lillies, of Violets, and of Mallowes,
of eche one handfull, boyle them in water vntill the
thirde part be conſumed, and warme in the ſaide decoction the

Gether of a Lambe, and lay it vpon the loweſt part of the bellie,
and about the nether parts of his yarde, vntill the ointment
become colde, and working thus certaine times, you ſhall ſée
a maruelous helpe.
               
               
                  To reuiue one that is fallen thorow the
falling ſickneſſe.
                  TAke of the iuice of Rewe halfe an ounce, of Caſtor one
dramme, mixe them togither, and in the liquor bath little
lockes of wooll, and put them into the noſe, and you ſhall ſée a
preſent effect.
               
               
                  A more excellent remedie againſt empoyſments
than is common Triacle.
                  TAke of Iuniper berries, of Cloues, of Nutmegges, of the
rootes of Enula, of eche two drammes, of the rootes of Ariſtologia
longa, and rotunda, and of Gentian, of eche ſixe
drammes, of Purcelane ſéedes, of Sorell, of Doronici, of
white Ben and red, of eche one dram, of the bone of an Harts
hart, of Lignum Aloes, of white and red Corall, of the ſhauings
of Iuorie, of Bay berries, of Maſtick, of eche two ſcruples,
of Rew one dramme, of drie Figges, of Reyſons, of the
pulpe of Dates, of eche one ounce, of Cinamond, of Liquerice,
of eche halfe an ounce, of Tormentill, of Cardus ſanctus, of
white Dittanie, of eche thrée drammes, of ſwéete Almondes, of
Pine kirnels, and of the common ſéedes, of eche one ounce, of
Troſſes of Agarick ſixe drams, of Dog Fennell two drams,
of Terra ſigillata, and of Terra Militenſe, of Bole Armenick,
of eche two ounces, of common Mummia, of Setwall,
of eche one dramme, of Camphire halfe a dram, of Dia trion
Sandalon, and of Diarhodon Abbatis, of eche two drams,
of the rindes of Ceder apples, of the fragments of Smiraldes,
of eche one dramme, of Muſke one ſcruple, of Mitridate two
ounces.
               
               
                  
                  To heale a thinne Catarre.
                  TAke of Plantine water one pounde, of Roſe water thrée
ounces, of red and white Saunders, and of Cloues, of ech
one dramme, of Camphire halfe a dramme, of vinegar of Roſes
foure ounces. Make pouder of thoſe things that are to be
brayed, and meddle them togither, then make hote a plate of
Iron, and ſtrewe vppon it ſome of the ſame pouder in a cloſe
Chamber, that the ſicke perſon may receyue the fume by his
noſe and mouth.
               
               
                  To cauſe a pellet of a Dagge or Piſtolet which is in
the fleſh to come forth.
                  TAke Bittonie and braye it well, and meddle it with the fat
of an Hare, reducing it into the forme of an oyntment, and
cauſe it to be kept vpon the wound, and in ſhort ſpace you ſhall
ſée the pellet iſſue forth.
               
               
                  To remedie a ſwelling or paine that happeneth
after a wound is healed.
                  TAke of Oleum Nardinum, of oyle of Caſtor, of oyle of
Turpentine, of oyle of Coſtus, of oyle of Wormwood, of
oyle of Rew, of Vnguentum Aragon, of Althea, of Marciaton,
of the greaſe of a Rauen, of eche two ounces, of Ireos in
pouder, of Linſéedes, and of Fenegreke, of eche one ounce, of
Ariſtologia longa and rotunda, of eche halfe an ounce, of
Waxe as much as ſufficeth, make a liniment thereof, and vſe
it with happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To purge a wound, and to draw out that which
was faſtened therein.
                  TAke of Incenſe, of Maſtick, of Spaniſhe Pich, of eche one
ounce, of the fat of a Ram two ounces, of oyle Oliue as
much more, of the iuice of Plantine, of the iuice of Taxus barbatus,
of Elders, and of Scabioſe, of eche one ounce, mixe all
theſe with fiue whites of Egges, and make an oyntment.
               
               
                  
                  To heale bruſings of the head with broken
bones or without.
                  TAke of Salt, of Hony, or olde white wine, of Sulphur, and
of Bittonie, of eche like quantitie, braye them and make a
plaiſter therof, and lay it vpon the ſore, and if there be a bone
broken, that the bloud be entred in at ſome ſmall fiſure, then
take of the meale of Rie, and of the meale of Otes, of eche fiue
drammes, of the iuice of Plantine one dramme and a halfe, of
Lapacium acutum one dramme, and make a plaiſter thereof
with good Malmeſey.
               
               
                  To draw out things faſtned in the fleſh, as
thornes and ſuch like.
                  TAke of the rootes of Polipodie, and being well brayed with
Barrowes greaſe as much as ſufficeth,Farfara, an herbe called tuſsilago. make a plaiſter,
and lay it vpon the place: or elſe take of Farfara, and braye it
with Barrowes greaſe as is before ſaide, and lay it vpon the
ſore, and preſently it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To heale the Kings euill and other harde impoſtumes.
                  TAke of Muſtarde ſéede, of Nettle ſéede, of Sulphur, of the
ſpume or fome of the Sea, of Ariſtologia, of Bdellium, of
Ammoniack and of olde oyle, of eche like quantitie, bray all
things that are to be brayed, and diſſolue the Gummes in vinegar
and make a plaiſter.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the backe.
                  TAke of the iuice of Millifolie, and put it into a viall of glaſſe
well cloſed and luted, then put it into an Ouen to boile, and
after it is taken out, you ſhall finde in the Viall oyle, with the
which, annointing the back, or any other place that is grieued,
you ſhall ſée a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the redneſſe of the noſe.
                  TAke of Borax two drammes, of the meale of red Ceche
peaſon as much more, of Camphire one dramme, of the
flower of Beanes as much more, braye them into fine pouder,
and with the iuice of Onyons, or with clarified Hony make an
ointment, and annoint the place: or elſe, braye the ſtone of an
Oxe gall or Bulles, and with the oyle of Pech ſtones make an
ointment for the ſaid paine. It helpeth alſo to infuſe Beanes to
become tender in vinegar, the ſpace of eyght dayes, and being
taken out and dried, make pouder therof, then diſſolue it with
the white of an Egge, and annoint therwith the noſe.
               
               
                  To heale one that ſpitteth bloud through the
rupture of a veine.
                  AFter the diuerſions or vniuerſall purgings as the cure requireth,
are made by the Phiſition. Giue the diſeaſed to
drinke one dram and a half of Lapis hematitis in pouder, in as
much Plantine water as ſufficeth, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To heale the euill colour of the face, and
the Ptiſicke.
                  DIſtill from the Moneth of Iune vntill September, the
rootes of Pollipodie of the Oke, and giue the ſicke to drinke
at one time thrée or foure ounces in the morning, and you ſhall
haue your intent.
               
               
                  To heale ſores in the naturall places of women.
                  DIſtill in a Limbecke in Iune the rootes of Léekes, and with
the water that ſhall be diſtilled, waſh the ſores or ruptures,
bathing therein péeces of linnen, or little bagges, and put them
into the place.
               
               
                  To heale the knobbes which remaine in the ioynts
after the paine of the goute.
                  TAke a Storke, and pull off the fethers, and the garbidge being
taken out, fill it with all the ſorts of fatts that you may

haue, except the fat of a Swine, and put them into the bodye
of the ſaid bird, then dreſſe it, and lay it to roſt, kéeping vnder
it a veſſell to receyue the dripping which ſhall come therof, and
if you take the ſaid fat or drippings, and put it into another of
the ſaid Storkes, and lay it to roſte againe, it will be the better,
then put it into a veſſell of glaſſe, or earth that is glaſed,
and let it ſtande in the ſunne the ſpace of one day, then kéepe it
as a precious liquor to annoint the knobbes in the ioyntes.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſtinch of the mouth.
                  TAke of Sage two ounces, of Roſemarie flowers halfe an
ounce, of Cloues fiue drammes, of Cinamonde one dram
and a halfe, of Nutmegs one ſcruple, bray euerye thing, and
with Honie make a lectuarie, and giue thereof in the morning
halfe a ſpoonefull, and then drinke a little red wine, wherein is
boyled a little Sage, and thus doe euery daye vntill you haue
your purpoſe.
               
               
                  To heale the creſtie growings of the fundiment.
                  TAke of the herbe Peritorie and bray it, with the herbe Millifolie,
putting thereto a little Salt, and being brought to
the forme of a plaiſter, lay it vppon the place: or elſe bray an
Onyon, and put thereto a little Capillus Veneris, and of the
rootes of Ariſtologia rotunda, and being medled togither, lay
it vpon the ſore in maner of a plaiſter.
               
               
                  To heale the Collick.
                  TAke of the leaues of Dodder a handfull and a halfe, of the
leaues of wilde Mallowes one handfull, of the Larde of an
olde Hogge one pound, braye euery thing well in a morter of
Marble, and being ſomewhat warme, make a plaiſter vppon
the bellie, where the paine is. And with this giue him to drinke
fiue or ſixe ounces of oyle of ſwéete Almondes, with which is
mixed foure or ſixe drops of perfite Aqua vitae.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To heale the palſey of the tongue.
                  TAke drie Figges and mundifie them from their ſkinnes,
then take a dram of their pulpe, and put therto ſixe graines
of perfite Euforbium, and hauing brayed it, meddle them togither,
and let the ſicke perſon holde the quantitie of a little
Beane vnder his tongue, and let him ſpit often.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the head proceeding
through a hote or colde cauſe.
                  TAke of the rootes of Brionie and bray them, and boile them
in olde oyle, and a little wine, and with the ſayde oyle being
warmed annoynt the place of the griefe: or elſe take of the
oldeſt oyle you can get, & mixe therewith thrée or foure graines
of the pouder of Euforbium, and annoynt the ſore place, the
bodie being firſt purged, and then purging the dead, by drawing
vp into the noſe the iuice of Rew. Taking héede that if the
paine doe happen through a hote cauſe, hauing firſt purged the
bodie, or let it bloud by the veine, annoynt the griefe with this
liuiment folowing. Take of the iuice of ſower Grapes two
ounces, of the dregges of ynek halfe an ounce, of Saffron fiue
graynes, meddle them together, and make a liniment.
               
               
                  To remedie the griefes of the head and neck.
                  TAke of the oile of ſwéete Almonds thrée ounces, of the meale
of marſhe Mallowes, halfe an ounce, of Waxe as muche
as ſufficeth, make an oyntment at the fyre, with the which being
warme, annoynt the ſicke morning and euening.
               
               
                  To remedie the dimneſſe of ſight.
                  TAke of the rootes of Radiſhes in the euening, taken at that
preſent out of the earth, & being made cleane cut them in the
middle with a knife, and put them into a verie cleane diſhe, and
let the rootes lye with their cuttes downewarde, then let them
ſtande a whole night in the ayre, and of the water that ſhall

diſtill from them into the diſhe, drop into the eyes, and you ſhal
haue great eaſe, or elſe making water of Gum Cerapine,
drawne by Alcumiſtrie, and diſtilling thereof into the eyes, it
will make a maruellous effect in taking awaye the dimneſſe
and other defectes of the eyes.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the flanke.
                  TAke of the lyuer of an olde ſea Vrchen and drie it, and being
made in pouder, giue the ſicke to drinke thereof in warme
broth the quantitie of a dram faſting, and you ſhall ſée a maruellous
effect, and boyle with oyle Oliue nettle leaues, and putting
thereto a little Saffron, laye it vpon the place of the griefe
in maner of a playſter.
               
               
                  To heale a burning canker called in Italian,
Fuoco ſaluatico.
                  TAke of whole Beanes one handful, of the Branne of Barly
as much more, of the leaues of Mallowes two handfuls,
boyle them in as much water as ſufficeth, vntill the halfe be
conſumed, and with the ſayde decoction waſhe the ſore twice a
daye, that is, morning and euening, and then annoynt it with
thys oyntment. Take of Lytarge in pouder one ounce, of oyle
Oliue ſeuen ounces, mixe the Lytarge with the oyle in a Potynger,
and put therto of whyte Wine, alway ſtirring it with
a ſpatter, vntill it come to the forme of a liquide oyntment,
with which annoynt the ſore.
               
               
                  To purge the matrix of women.
                  TAke of the leaues of Tanſey, and drie them, and bray them
into pouder, of the which cauſe the woman to drinke halfe
an ounce in good whyte wine, and it will purge the matrix
commodiouſly: the lyke effect doth the iuice of Paritorie giuen
do drinke.
               
               
                  To ſtop the flixe of the bloud of the Hemerods.
                  TAke of the flowers of Taxus barbatus, of the ſéedes of
Bombace, and of Plantine ſéedes, and boyle them in ſharp

Wine, and waſh often thoſe partes, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To heale the coldneſſe of the matrix.
                  TAke of Pulegium, in the time when it hath flowers, and
hauing diſtilled it by a Limbeck, giue to drinke of the water
that ſhall be drawne, two ounces for euery time, in the morning
faſting, and laſt at night, and you ſhall haue your intent:
it will alſo prouoke the termes.
               
               
                  To drie vp the ſuperfluous humiditie of the Vuola
and of the gummes.
                  TAke Pulegium, and boyle it with drie figges in vinegar,
and with the ſaid decoction gargarize, and waſh often your
mouth, and you ſhall ſée a happie ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To take ſpottes from the face.
                  TAke of Allum Succarine thrée ounces, of freſh butter two
ounces, of oyle of Tartar one ounce, meddle euerye thing
togither, and make it in forme of an oyntment. With the
which, the ſpace of eyght dayes, at night when you go to bed,
annoynt the cloutes or ſpots: and in the morning waſhe them
with warme water wherein hath bene boiled Bran of wheate.
It helpeth likewiſe to bray the rootes of white Lillies, and with
Hony and white Waxe to make an ointment, and therwith to
annoint the place: or elſe take a Bottel of glaſſe, and fill it with
Roſemarie flowers, and cloſe it with new Waxe, and burye it
halfe in ſande, and couer the vpper part with a cup, and let it
ſtande ſo the ſpace of one moneth, and you ſhall ſée the flowers
turned into water, the which ſtraine and kéepe in a veſſell well
cloſed, as a precious thing to worke the effect aforeſaid.
               
               
                  To heale a Ringworme.
                  AFter you haue purged the bodie of colericke humors, put
into the wound of the iuice of the tender leaues of a wilde
Oliue trée, or the leaues themſelues well brayed: or elſe take

two or thrée neſtes of Waſpes, and a handfull of the combes
of Bées, with all the yong in them, and braye them well,
and putting thereto a little Hony, make a liniment to put into
the fore. And this of his owne nature doth heale any ſuch euill.
               
               
                  To heale the flixe of the bellie.
                  TAke and drinke the bloude of a Ducke, and it will doe the
effect: or elſe take the flowers of Filberds, and drie them
in an ouen, then braye them into pouder, and giue the ſicke a
dramme therof to drinke in good wine. And the liuers of roſted
Pullets giuen vnto the ſicke to eate, doe very much helpe.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the loynes.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Aſparagus, and of Commin, of eche
one dramme, bray them, and with good wine giue the ſicke
to drinke. The like effect worke the ſéedes of Perſeneps giuen
to drinke: or elſe two drammes of Enula Campana rootes
giuen in wine. It helpeth likewiſe to make fomentation vnto
the place with liquide Piche, Sulphur viuum, and Salt boyled
togither, and dip therein newe ſhorne wooll vnwaſhed, and
as hote as you can ſuffer it, laye therof twice a daye vppon the
ſore: or elſe lay onely vppon it quick Brimſtone brayed, mingled
with greaſe and made warme.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe that piſſe in their beddes.
                  TAke of the hoofes of a Bore or tame Hogge, and giue the pacient
to drinke therof in red wine, or in broth. It helpeth alſo
ſo take the tongues of thrée Géeſe, and being roſted to eate
them. As alſo to giue to drinke being made in pouder of Snayles
founde out of their ſhelles in wine, and you ſhall finde that
they will worke a maruelous experience.
               
               
                  To heale the ſores of the feete.
                  TAke a quantitie of the Aſhes made of Hennes dunge, and
being medled with Hony, make thereof an oyntment, and

it will heale thoſe ſores, or elſe take the harde ſhell of a Tortys
burned, and laye the aſhes diſſolued with Wine and oyle vpon
the ſayde ſores, and it healeth them. As alſo doth the lyke
effect, to take the oyntment made of Shéepes ſewet diſſolued
with Waxe, adding thereto a little roche Allum.
               
               
                  To kyll wormes in the eares.
                  TAke of the ſéedes and gréene leaues of Hempe, & taking out
the iuice, put thereof warme into the eares, and you ſhall
ſée the effect. Or elſe, take the Gawle of a Bull, of clarified
Hony, of eche lyke quantitie, and boyling it in an earthen veſſell,
meddle it well togither, and reſerue it in a Viall of Glaſſe,
and when néede requireth, being a little warme, put thereof
with wooll into the eare, firſt cleanſing the eare from filthe.
               
               
                  To remedie the hurtes of the eares happened
through entring of water into them.
                  TAke a quantitie of Gum Iuy, & of the iuice of black Béetes,
and of the iuice of a Bremble, meddle them togither, and
being made warme, put therof into the eares, and it will ceaſe
the payne, and dry vp the water, it helpeth alſo the griefes of
the eares, to take the gawle of a Swine, and being mixed with
the iuice of Léekes, and warmed, to put therof into the eares.
               
               
                  To heale ſores that are ingendred in the eares.
                  TAke a Pomegranat, and hauing taken out the meat within,
fill it with Hony, and let it boyle well in the embers
with a ſoft fyre, and put of that being whot into the eares.
               
               
                  To diſſolue impoſtumes vnder the eares.
                  TAke of the meale of Lynſéedes, as much as you think good,
and boyle it in oyle, and Hony togither, putting thereto of
Salt, and aſhes made of a wylde Figge trée, and laye it vpon
the ſwelling in forme of a pultace. The lyke effect is done, to
take Gladian rootes beyng boyled, and brayed with ſalt, and
layde vpon the griefe.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the ſtripes of the eyes.
                  TAke of Byttonie leaues verie well brayed, and binde them
vpon the place of the ſtrype, and you ſhall ſee a verie good
effect. It helpeth alſo to meddle with meale of beanes womans
Milke, and to make it in forme of a playſter, and to lay it vpon
the ſore eye.
               
               
                  To remedie the loſſe of appetite vnto meate.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Speare Trifalie, & boile them in wine,
and by the ſpace of thrée dayes continually cauſe the diſeaſed
to drinke halfe a Cup of the decoction, then let him drinke
one dram of Gynger infuſed in Vineger thrée other dayes, at
the ſame houre, and let him be well couered in his bed when
he beginneth to ſweat, and you ſhall ſée a maruellous ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  A maruellous remedy againſt ſores and woundes.
                  TAke of the oyle of Momordica two ounces, of the oyle of
ſaint Iohns worte one ounce,Bufalo, is a beaſt like to a horſe. of the marrow of a Bufalo
halfe an ounce, put all theſe togither into a ſtill of glaſſe well
cloſed, and beyng luted ſet it to the fyre, and after it is reduced
to a forme within ye ſtill, work it with maruellous good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To preſerue one from poyſoning,
                  YOu muſt take héede that you eate not things of ſtrong fauor,
or of a verie ſwéete taſte, bicauſe that the bitterneſſe &
ſtinch of poyſons in this maner is wont to be couered, for the
ouer ſwéete, ſower or ſalt thing mixed with poyſon doth hide the
bitterneſſe of it. At what time therfore you ſhall haue any ſuſpect
to haue drunke poiſon, drinke preſently after it of the ſéeds
of Turneps, or of the rootes in Wine, or of Neppe, and you
ſhall be ſafe.
               
               
                  Againſt the bitings of venemous beaſts.
                  TAke of Onyons and braye them, and meddle therewith of
Salt, and Hony, as much as you pleaſe, & make it in forme

of an oyntment, and lay it vpon the ſore, and it will take away
the paine, and remedie the poyſoning.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſtinche of the noſe.
                  TAke of the confection which is put into Triacle called Hedicroo,
diſſolue it in wine, and annoynt within the noſe
oftentimes, and you ſhall obtaine your intent.
               
               
                  To heale the griefes of the fundiment.
                  TAke of the tender leaues of Henbane, and of Purcelane,
and of crummes of bread infuſed in wine, the yolke of an
Egge roſted hard, of eche like quantitie, of oyle of Roſes as
much as ſufficeth, braye them all: then fomentate the place
with the decoction of Roſes, and of Mellilot, and laye vpon it
the Cataplaſme aforeſaid.
               
               
                  Againſt the impotencie of the Genitale member.
                  TAke of raw Cicers, of mundified Pine kirnels, of ech two
ounces, of the ſéedes of Rocket, and of Pepper, of eche one
ounce, of Hony as much as ſufficeth. Make a lectuarie, and
cauſe the ſicke partie to take two drammes therof at a time in
good wine. It helpeth likewiſe to take of Pepper, of Pine kirnels,
of Percely, of the Piſell of an Hart, and of Turpentine,
of eche like quantitie, being brayed, mixe them with Hony,
and vſe it as you doe the other: or elſe drinke in the morning
a potinger of Gotes milke warme, as it is milked, and put
therein two or thrée drammes of the pouder of Cloues.
               
               
                  To heale an impoſtumed Collick.
                  CAuſe the partie to be let bloud in the veine Baſilica, and if
by chaunce there follow preſently retention of vrine, draw
bloud out of the veine Saphena, and lay vppon the griefe this
oyntment. Take of waxe fiue ounces, of oile of Camomill two
ounces, of oile of Roſes as much more, of the meale of Beanes
halfe an ounce, of the yolkes of Egges fiue, with the Mucillage
of Linſéedes, make an ointment.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the biting of a mad dogge.
                  TAke of Vinegar one pound and a halfe, of Pich one pound,
of Oppoponack three ounces, boyle the Pich in Vinegar,
with the which diſſolue the Oppoponack, and being layd vppon
the biting, it will not ſuffer the wound to cloſe, and this is
a conuenient medicine againſt knobbes of hard fleſh. Wherefore
vnto women or children you muſt make ſuch a medicine
liquide with Oleum irinum, and vſe it.
               
               
                  Againſt indurate impoſtumes,Condilomi, are certaine thinges that faſten the ſkinne, which couereth the childe in the mothers bellie. periſhed Condilomi
and hardened breſtes.
                  TAke of Litarge of ſiluer, of Lime, of eche one pounde, of
Manna, of Incenſe thrée ounces, of white waxe as much
more, of Galbanum one ounce and a halfe, of Allum and of
Turpentine, of eche one ounce and a halfe, of Ireos and of Coperus,
of eche ſixe drammes, of Gawles, and of Mirrhe, of
eche eyght drammes, of Hony eyghtene ounces, of oyle foure
pounde and a halfe, put the Litarge and the Lime vnto the
oyle, and boyle them, laboring them with the ſpatter, and when
it ſhalbe thicke, put thereto the white waxe, the Turpentine,
and the Galbanum firſt ſodden in hony: and being mixed, and
taken from the fire, adde thereto the other things in pouder:
or elſe take of Bitume, of Litarge, of eche foure pounde and
a halfe,Bitume, a kinde of naturall lime or Claye. of oyle Oliue ſeuen pound and a halfe, boyle them togither,
and put thereto of waxe fiue ounces, of Galbanum,
and of Mirrha, of eche as much more. Make therof a plaiſter.
               
               
                  To diſſolue an impoſtume vnder the eare.
                  TAke of ſwines greaſe ſixe ounces, of Waxe two ounces, of
the whytes of rawe Egges two, of Hony as much as of
the Egges, of Figge duſt as much as ſufficeth: Diſſolue the
Waxe with the greaſe, then put thereto the whytes of the
Egges by little and little, then meddle therewith the Hony and
meale and vſe it.
               
               
                  
                  To diſſolue the kings euill, and euery
hard impoſtumation.
                  TAke of Salt Peter one pound, of Lytarge of Siluer, as
much more, of the filthe of oyle veſſelles foure pounde, of
Galbanum foure pound and a halfe, braye the Salt, and the
Lytarge, and putting thereto the filthe, braye it agayne, and
ſet it to boyle in an earthen veſſell, laboring it often with a ſpatter,
and when it doth not cleaue to the fingers, take it from the
fyre, and bray the Galbanum with a peſtell of wood, and meddle
and diſſolue them togither, and being wrought vpon Marble,
kéepe it to vſe when néede ſhall require, it will be verye
maruellous.
               
               
                  Againſt trembling through ſome
melancholy humor.
                  TAke of Pine kernels two drammes waſhed with warme
water, of ſwéete Almondes, of Reyſons, of Piſtaches, of
eche one dramme, of Gynger, of Saffron, of whyte and red
Ben, of Setwall, of the ryndes of Pomecitrones, of Balme,
of eche one dram, of Margarites, of red Corrall, of Cloues, of
Maces, of Cardamomes, of eche halfe a dramme, of yelowe
Saunders, of Gum Dragant, of Eum Arabick, of eche two
ſcruples, of Sugar ſixtene drammes, diſſolue the Suger with
Balme water, and make a confection in morſels, of the which
the ſicke muſt take euery euening the quantitie of a Cheſtnut,
two houres before ſupper.
               
               
                  A confection to heale miſtes or dimneſſe of the ſight.
                  TAke of the iuice of Fennell halfe a pounde, of the iuice of
Rew, of the iuice of Selendine, and of Margerom, of eche
halfe an ounce, mundifie them all, and take of clarified Hony
one pound: boyle them togither vnto a iuſt heigth, & put therto
of Eyebright one ounce and a halfe, of Fennell ſo doe halfe
an ounce, of Maces, of Cubebes, of Cinamond, of long Pepper,

and of Cloues, of eche two drammes, make them into
pouder, and meddle them and make a lectuarie, of the which
cauſe the Patient to take at night when he goeth to bed halfe
a ſponeful: notwithſtanding let him leaue to take it in the ſommer
when the weather is hote, or elſe temper it with ye greater
part of Sugar Roſet. Then take of Fennell waters diſtylled
through a Limbeck, of Margerom, of Celendine, of Rew, of
eche two ounces: in the which waters diſſolue of Saffron one
dramme, and of Antimonie two drammes, diſtill it thorowe a
Felt, and of the water that ſhall be drawne, drop into the eyes
twice a daye.
               
               
                  Againſt the weakeneſſe of the ſight.
                  AFter the purging of the bodye, take of the leaues of Bettonie,
of Rewe, of Eyebright, of Annys ſéedes, of Cinamonde,
of Gynger, of Cardamomes, of Fennell ſéedes, of
Percely, of 
                        
                           •
                        ilermontanus, of Origanum, of Hiſſope, of
Cubebes, of Liqueris, of eche one dramme, of Sugar vnto
the quantitie of the other things, then make them all into pouder,
and being mixed together make a lectuarie, of the which
let the patient take halfe a ſponefull, two houres after ſupper.
               
               
                  An other for the ſame purpoſe.
                  TAke the Eyebright two ounce, of Fenegreke fiue drams,
of Mace, of Cubebes, of Cinamond, of long Pepper, of
Cloues of eche one dram, then ſearce them, and make a lectuarie
with a pound of clarified Hony, and of the iuice of Fennel,
and of boiled Celendine clarified, of ech half an ounce, boyle the
iuices with the Hony, vntill they become thick, and in the ende
adding thereto the pouders, make a confection.
               
               
                  To keepe the belly ſollible in the infirmitie
of the eyes.
                  ACcuſtome to take dyuers times, or often, that is to ſaye,
euery day faſting, a dramme and a halfe of this confection:

take of Mirabolanes emblici, and Citrini, of ech two drams,
of good Turbith one dram, of Gynger, two drammes and a
halfe, of Cinamond one dram, of Nutmegs two drammes, of
Annys ſéedes, of Fennell ſéedes, of eche thrée drammes, of
Sugar the weyght of them all, make a pouder thereof, and
with Sugar diſſolued in Fennell, or Eyebright, water, make
a lectuarie.
               
               
                  Againſt the inflamation of the eyes.
                  HAuing firſt thorowly purged the bodye, take of mundified
Barlie, of Quince ſéedes, and of Camomill flowers, of
eche halfe an ounce, of Fennell ſéedes two drammes, boyle
them in water vntill the fourth part be conſumed, then ſtraine
it, and therewith waſhe the eyes, and if with this you obtayne
not your intent, put ther vnto of whyte Sief without Opium,
and vſe it.
               
               
                  To heale the griefe of the eyes.
                  TAke of the Buddes of Vines, and taking out the iuice meddle
therewith the yolke of a rawe Egge, and being well
tempered waſhe the Temples, and laye it vpon the eye. This
alſo helpeth. Take of Tutia of Alexandria halfe an ounce, of
Maſtick, of Incenſe, of Aloes Epatici, of eche one dramme,
of Camphire one ſcruple: of the iuice of ſower Grapes one
pound, hauing made pouder of thoſe things that are to be brayed
meddle them togither,Collirion is a medicine for the eies. and make a Collirion, and applie
it vnto the eye.
               
               
                  An other for the ſame effect.
                  TAke of Boale Armenick halfe a dramme, of Sanguis Draconis,
of Gum Dragant, of Gum Arabick, of eche two
drammes, bray them finely, and ſearce them, and meddle them
with halfe a pound of Roſe water, and being put into a Viall
of Glaſſe, boyle it in Balneo Mariae, that it touch not the bottome
of the veſſell, the ſpace of an houre: then take it from the

fyre, and letting it ſtande ſo the ſpace of a daye, ſtraine it, and
put thereof into the eyes, waſhing them alſo often with water
of Fenegréeke diſtilled through a Limbecke, and it will be of a
maruellous effect.
               
               
                  To heale ſtripes of the eyes,Nucae, is the vppermost part of the head, and ſome take it for the rough of the mouth. and extention
of the nuck.
                  TAke of Tutia, of Saffron, of Mirrhe, of eche one dramme,
with the iuice of Rewe, and of Margerom, make a Collirion,
and put thereof into the eyes.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of Boale Armenick one ounce, of Tutia, of Sanguis
draconis, of Gum Arabick, of eche halfe an ounce, bray
them, and ſearce them, and meddle them with a pound of Roſe
water, and put it into a Vyall of Glaſſe, and ſuſpend it in Balneo
Mariae, that it touch not the bottome of the veſſell, nor the
ſides about the bottome, and cauſe it to boyle by the ſpace of
halfe an houre, and being taken from the fyre, put thereto two
drammes of the Wine of Pomegranates that is cleare, and
letting it ſtande ſo a whole daye, put thereof afterwarde into
the eyes.
               
               
                  To remedie the Litargie.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of Agnus caſtus, of Smallage ſéedes, and
of Sage leaues, of eche one handfull, of Salt water as
much as ſufficeth, boyle them and fomentate the hinder part
of the head with the decoction.
               
               
                  To heale the incontinencie and dropping
of vrine.
                  TAke of Balme and of water Mintes, and boyle them in
good wine, and being giuen to drinke, it remedieth the making
of water by drops, and if of the ſaide herbes boyled, you
make a plaiſter, and laye therof betwéene the nauill, and the

bottome of the belly, it is vnto thoſe that cannot kéepe their water
an excellent remedie.
               
               
                  Againſt the hardneſſe of the ſplene.
                  CAuſe the ſicke to drinke often in good white wine of the
ſéedes of Ben, called Ghianda vnguentaria, and you ſhal
ſée a verie good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale an olde flix of a womans flowers.
                  THe iuice of Barberies giuen to drinke, purgeth a womans
Matrix, and ſtoppeth olde flixes, but if the Farberies be giuen
a woman to drinke, they will doe the like effect, and alſo
helpe all the other flixes of the bodye.
               
               
                  Againſt ſtinging of Bees.
                  TAke a péece of linnen cloth, and waſh it in diſtilled Borage
water, and lay therof often vpon the ſtinging, and it will
take away the paine.
               
               
                  To heale the inflammation of a mans yarde.
                  TAke of the leaues of Bruſcie, braye them, and boyle them
with Roſe water, and a little wine, then take them out,
and make a playſter, laying it vppon the member, and you
ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  A remedie againſt coldneſſe, and debilitie of the reines,
the paine of the backe, and want of appetite
vnto a woman.
                  TAke of Perſenep rootes as many as you pleaſe, let them be
faire and great, and cut away the tops, and take double as
much of Sugar, and put them into an earthen pot of water,
and boyle them with a ſlow fire vntill they begin to waxe tender,
then lay them vpon a Gyrdion that they maye coole, then
pare them and take out their pithes, and after put them into a
new carthen pot glaſed, and put thereto as much good clarified

Hony as will couer them, then boyle them vntill the Hony doe
thorowly penetrate euery part of them. Then take them from
the fire, and put into them of Cloues two parts, of Cinamond,
and of Ginger one part, bray them and meddle them with the
rootes, of the which the ſicke partie eating faſting one ounce at
a time, ſhall finde a maruelous effect.
               
               
                  To remedie vomiting occaſioned of colde humors.
                  TAke of ſwéete Pome rials, and boile them wel in two parts
of water, and one of Hony, and being taken out, boile them
once againe in Hony only, and then put them into a veſſell of
glaſſe, and poure vppon them as much clarified Hony, that
they may be couered, and adde vnto them theſe Spices. Take
of Cloues, of Cinamond, of Ginger, of Cardamomes, of Pepper,
of eche a like, ſuch quantitie as you thinke conuenient for
the quantitie of the apples, and vſe to eate of them, and they
will be verie effectuall.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſtreynings when a man cannot
go to the ſtoole.
                  TAke of Maudlen wortes, and boyle them in tart wine, and
make fomentation from beneath. It helpeth alſo to ſtop the
bloud of the Hemerodes.
               
               
                  To remedie deafneſſe or want of hearing.
                  TAke of ground Iuy, bray it, and take out the iuice, and being
a little warmed, diſtill thereof at diuers times into the
eares.
               
               
                  To heale bruſes about the eyes without launcing
or inciſion.
                  TAke of Saffron halfe a dramme, of oile of Roſes one ounce,
one yolke of an Egge, bray the Saffron, and meddle them,
and lay therof vpon the eye.
               
               
                  
                  To heale watrie or dropping eyes.
                  AFter the bodye is thorowly purged, take of the rindes of
Incenſe, of Tutia well preperated with Margerome water,
of Mirrhe, of eche one dram, of red Corall as much more,
with Fennell water as much as ſufficeth, braye thoſe things
that are to be brayed, and make a Collirion, with the which
waſh the eyes.
               
               
                  An excellent pouder for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of burnt Antimonie fiue drams, of Tutia of Alexandria
preperated three drammes, of Lignum Aloes burned
halfe a dramme, of the ſtones of Dates burned into coles thrée
drammes, bray all theſe things into verie fine pouder, and hauing
tempered them with Roſe water, drie them in the ſunne:
then take of Muſke one graine, of Amber as much more, temper
them with Roſe water, and being dried, beate them with
the foreſaide things, and braye them into a verie fine pouder,
which you ſhall vſe after vnto the eyes.
               
               
                  To heale the griefes of the eyes.
                  TAke of Incenſe well brayed halfe an ounce, waſhe it in
warme water, and let it ſtande ſo the ſpace of two houres,
then with Fennell water make a Collirion and vſe it. It helpeth
maruelouſlye to take a dramme of the vitriature or glaſing
of veſſels made in pouder, and being medled with oyle of
the ſéedes of Bombace, to put it into the eye.
               
               
                  To heale ſores of the eares that offend the hearing.
                  HAuing purged the bodie thorowly, take of ſmall wine ſomewhat
ſwéete, of childrens vrine, of eche one ounce, boyle
them with one ounce of Hony medled therwith, and put therof
into the eares. After the ſore is mundified, take of Incenſe,
of Sarcacoll, of Mirrhe, and of Aloes, of eche one dramme,
diſſolue them in wine, and dip therein tentes, and put them into

the eares: or elſe vſe this remedie. Take of the droſſe of tried
Iron often waſhed with vinegar, and made into pouder, of
Bole Armenick, of the barke of Incenſe, of Sarcacoll, of
Mirrhe, of Aloes, of eche one dramme, diſſolue them in wyne
and vſe them.
               
               
                  Againſt the griefe of the loynes and of the eyes.
                  TAke of the oyle made of Nuts of India that is old, and with
that annoint the ſicke perſon, and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  Againſt difficultie of taking of breath through
coldneſſe.
                  TAke drie Figges and boyle them in wine, and meddle therwith
of the pouder of Nuttes of India, and giue to drinke
thereof euery daye, and it will worke maruelouſly. Alſo the
water of Origanum being drunke by thrée ounces at a time,
helpeth.
               
               
                  To heale a drie cough.
                  TAke a quantitie of Béetes, and boyle them, and put thereto
of ſwéete Almondes, and of the iuice of ſwéete Pomegranates,
of eche lyke quantitie, and giue thereof to eate, and you
ſhall finde a maruellous helpe.
               
               
                  Againſt the hardneſſe of the matrix.
                  TAke of the herbe called Origanum, and boyle it in Wine,
and meddle therewith of oyle Oliue, and bathe therein péeces
of linnen cloth, and put of them often into the natural place
of the woman.
               
               
                  Againſt the falling of the Vuola, and ſwelling
of the Pallate.
                  TAke of Origanum in the month of Iune, and braye it, and
dyſtill it through a Limbeck, and with the water let the patient
Cargarize, and waſhe hys mouth thrée or foure tymes
a day.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the comming out of the nauill
of children.
                  TAke of the herbe called ſaint Iohns wort, and make a playſter
braying it verie well, and binde it vpon the Nauill, and
you ſhall ſée helth enſue.
               
               
                  To heale the palſey.
                  TAke of Calamus aromaticus, two ounces, of Stecados
Arabice one ſcruplé, of Calamint, of Origanum, of Annys
ſéedes, of Fennell ſéedes, of Cinamond, of ech thrée drams,
of Hiſſope, one ounce, of Fennell rootes, of Perſely rootes, and
of Sparagus, of eche halfe an ounce, of Sage, of Balme, of
Bettoney, and of Auens, of eche one handefull, of Sugar one
pound, make a ſirop, according vnto Art, of the which cauſe
the diſeaſed to take one ounce and a halfe at a time, with water
made of the infuſion of Nutmegs.
               
               
                  Againſt the debilitie of ſinewes.
                  TAke a Gooſe, and pull it, and hauing taken out the guttes,
waſhe it within, then take halfe a Fox, and halfe a Catte,
that are fat, and breake the bones of them both, and bray them
well, and put therto of Tyrpentine, of Serapine, of Bdellium,
of Roſyn, of earth wormes dried, of eche halfe an ounce, meddle
euery thing, and fill the bodye of the Gooſe, putting thereto
of Sage, of Roſemarie, of eche one handefull, of Caſtor one
dramme and a halfe, of Geneper berries halfe an ounce, and
if a Gooſe be not able to conteyne ſuch a quantitie fill two, and
ſowe them well, and roſte them with fyre made of the wood of
Bayes, or of Geneper, or of Vines, let the firſt that droppeth be
caſt away, but that dropping which afterward foloweth kéepe
to annoynt the partes that haue ſinewes, and alſo the vppermoſt
part of the head.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt redneſſe of the legges.
                  IN the Moneth of May take of the leaues and ſtalkes of Lonage,
and braye them, and diſtill them thorowe a Limbeck,
and bathe péeces of linnen clothe in the water, that ſhall be diſtilled,
and laye it vpon the legges, and you ſhall ſée a preſent
ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To remedie the printes of blowes that remaine.
                  TAke a quantitie of drie leaues of Margerom, and making
pouder thereof, meddle therewith Hony, and annoynt the
ſwollen or rankled place. The lyke effect is done with the iuice
of the ſame, if the place be annointed, for it will diſſolue the dead
bloud vnder the ſkinne.
               
               
                  Againſt ſwellings of the face.
                  TAke wylde apples, or crabbes in the ende of Iune, and diſtill
them thorow a Limbeck, and with the water that ſhall
be diſtilled waſhe often the face, and the intent will follow.
               
               
                  To keepe heare from growing white.
                  IN the ende of May take of the herbe called Balme, and diſtill
it thorow a Limbeck, and of the water that ſhall be diſtilled,
drinke twice a daye two ounces at a time, and likewiſe
waſh the heare, and you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To heale the itch of children.
                  TAke and braye a handfull of gréene Myntes, and laye it in
Lie one whole day to become tender, and with the ſayde
Lie waſhing the children, and you ſhall heale their itch.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of oyle of Roſes one ounce, of Storax liquida, halfe
an ounce, of common Salt one ſcruple, and a little of the
iuice of Limons, meddle them all well togither with a ſpatter,
and annoint therewith.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt trembling or ſhaking.
                  TAke of the oyle of Gum Iuy, of the oyle of Cherua, of eche
one ounce, of oyle of Roſes, of Bdellium, of Serapine, of
Oppoponack, of Maſticke, of eche halfe an ounce, of oyle of
Foxes and of Bayes, of ech one ounce and a half, of the fat of a
Ram, and of a Gooſe, of eche two ounces, diſſolue the fat with
Roſe water and Vinegar as much as ſufficeth, and mixing
therwith the other things, make an ointment, with the which,
annoint the vppermoſt part of the head, and the other weake
members.
               
               
                  Againſt ſtinch of the mouth through rotten teeth.
                  DIſtill thorow a Limbeck in the middeſt of Maye the toppes
of wilde Mintes, and with the water that ſhall be diſtilled,
waſh often the mouth of the diſeaſed.
               
               
                  To heale the white flixes in women.
                  TAke of the flowers of Rocket, and of Mouſe eare, and of
Origanum, vnto a iuſt quantitie, beate them into pouder,
and adde thereto of Sugar halfe the quantitie of them all, and
make thereof morſels, of the which, let the woman eate, and
it will worke a maruellous effect.
               
               
                  To heale the relapſation of the gummes.
                  TAke of Mirrhe as much as you pleaſe, and being diſſolued
in wine and oyle Oliue, waſh therwith the gummes, and
you ſhall ſée a moſt true experience, if you vſe it oftentimes. It
helpeth alſo to take the water of wilde Mintes diſtilled through
a Limbeck, and often therwith to waſh the gummes.
               
               
                  To heale chappes in the fingars.
                  TAke of the rootes of Pollipodie, and bray them verie well,
and meddle them with Hony, and annoint the ſore, and you
ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  
                  To heale a windie impoſtumation.
                  TAke of gréene Rew, of Fennell, of Comin, of Annis ſéedes,
of Ameos, of Carawayes, of Smallage ſéedes, of eche fiue
drammes, of olde oyle fiue pounds, put them all into a Viall of
Glaſſe, and boyle them verie well in Balneo Mariae, and with
that oyle annoynt often the place.
               
               
                  To heale the euill diſpoſition which commeth before
the Dropſey, and the obſtruction of the
Meſaraicall veynes.
                  TAke of the iuice of Wormwood halfe a pound, of Spiknard
one dramme, of Cinamond two drammes, of Sugar halfe
a pound, make pouder of thoſe thinges that are to be poudred,
and being well meddled togither, giue two ounces therof vnto
the ſicke perſon at a time with Wine or broth.
               
               
                  Againſt the flix of vrine.
                  TAke of Prunes fiue, of Corianders, of Mirtels, of eche two
drammes, of Roſes, of water Lillie flowers, of eche foure
drammes, boyle them in water, and take of the ſayd decoction,
and of the iuice of the buddes of Vines, of eche foure ounces, of
Sugar ſixe ounces, make a ſirop, of the which take two ounces:
or elſe make this other which is of a maruellous effect.
Take of the rootes of Vngula Cabalina, of Vmbelicus Veneris,
of Virga paſtoris, of Plantine, of Burfa paſtoris, of
Liuerwort, of Rew, of Scariola, of eche one handfull, of Violet
flowers, and of Nenuphar flowers, of Lettis ſéedes, and of
Purcelane ſéedes, of eche one ounce, of white Poppie ſéedes
halfe an ounce, of Ieiubes, and Sebaſtians tenne, of red Roſes,
of red Saunders, of eche halfe an ounce, of hulled Barlye
two ounces, of Sugar two pounde. Make a ſirop according to
Arte, of the which, giue vnto the diſeaſed perſon euerye morning
the quantitie of one ounce before meate, at leaſt by two
houres.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the impotencie of the Genitall member.
                  TAke of the ſéedes of whyte Onyons, of Satirion, of Date
flowers, of Olibanum, of the braynes of Sparrowes, of
eche two ounces, make pilles therof with hote water, vnto the
quantitie of a Cyche peaſe, of the which giue the patient to take
fiue or ſixe at a time, and no more, and you ſhall ſée a verie
good effect.
               
               
                  To heale ſores of the Bladder.
                  TAke of mundified Pine kernels dryed one ounce, of mundified
Piſtaches halfe an ounce, of the pouder of Liqueris
two drammes, of the ſéedes of whyte Poppie halfe an ounce,
of the common ſéedes mundified as much more, of Lettis, and
Endiue ſéedes, of eche one ounce and a halfe, of Reyſons thrée
ounces, of Cinamond two drammes, of Sugar the weight of
them all, make loſenges, or morſelles, the weight of halfe an
ounce a péece: of the which let the ſick perſon take one at a time
before meat, and let him drinke after it a little wine.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſes of the reynes.
                  TAke of Fylberds, of Pine kernels mundified, of Gum
Dragant, of Gum Arabick, of the iuice of Liqueris, and
of Pennyts, of eche ten drammes, of the ſéedes of Mercurie, of
bitter Almondes, of the foure greater colde ſéedes, of eche fiue
drammes, of the ſéedes of Quinces, of Mallowes ſéedes, of
Porcellane ſéedes, of the ſéedes of whyte Poppie, of red Roſes,
and of the ſéedes of Plantine of ech thrée drams, of the ſéedes of
wyld Fennell, of Smallage, of the Garden and of the Mountaine,
of Annys ſéedes, of Henbane, of Rocket, of Saffron, of
Apium, of eche two drammes, make a confection with ſodden
Wyne, mixing therewith of Muſke, and of Saffron two
Crowne weight, of the which let the diſeaſed take the quantitie
of a Beane, with Plantine water.
               
               
                  
                  To heale ruptures within the body.
                  FRom the Month of Iulye vnto September, the rootes of
Enula are to be diſtilled, the leaues are to be diſtilled in the
ende of Maye, the water of the rootes being diſtilled, and giuen
the ſicke to drinke morning and euening, two or thrée ounces
at a time, will doe the effect, of the water of the leaues there is
not accuſtomed to be giuen to drinke, except onely as much as
may be conteyned within an Egges ſhell.
               
               
                  To take away the blackneſſe of
ſkarres.
                  TAke of the iuice of Rocket, and of an Oxe Gawle of eche
lyke quantitie, meddle them togither, and annoynt the
ſkarres many times, and you ſhall ſée a verie excellent ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To kyll wormes in the body.
                  TAke of Ferne rootes, and hauing made fine pouder thereof
take a dram, and beyng diſſolued in Wyne giue to drinke
thereof, and it will kyll them all.
               
               
                  To preſerue one that hath taken
poyſon.
                  TAke Filipendola and diſtill it in the ende of May that is
the herbe and the rootes a little bruſed, and of the water
drinke foure or ſixe ounces at a time, and it will preſerue you
from daunger. It helpeth alſo againſt the peſtilence.
               
               
                  A medicine to heale the Quinſey.
                  TAke of the iuice of Strawberies, and of Plantine water,
of eche eyght ounces, of Hony of Roſes two ounces, of the
iuice of Mulberies one ounce, of Dogges dunge that is white,
of Pomegranat flowers, of ech one dram, meddle euery thing
togither, and cauſe the ſicke to gargarize himſelfe often therewith.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the vnquietneſſe of agues,
and to prouoke ſleepe.
                  TAke in the beginning of May, the plants of Mallowes, and
bray them with the ſtalks and rootes, and diſtil them thorow
a Limbick, and with the water that ſhall be diſtilled, rub the
ſick parties féete, and it will induce reſt, and take away drithe.
               
               
                  To heale the flixe called Diſenteria.
                  TAke foure ounces of the iuice of Plantine, & meddle it with
water of Taxus Barbatus, and being made warme make
a glyſter. Then giue him to eate of old ſugar Roſet ſixe drams,
of conſerue of Quinces made with ſpices one ounce, of red
Corrall two drammes, of Charabe one dram, meddle euery
thing, and giue the ſick perſon ſixe drammes therof faſting, and
ſo you ſhall obtayne your intent, perſeuering to vſe it certayne
dayes.
               
               
                  An other glyſter moſt precious for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke of whyte Incenſe, of Sanguis draconis, of Terra ſigillata,
of Boale Armenick, of eche one dram, of Saffron
halfe a dramme, make fine pouder of the foreſayde things, and
medling them with foure ounces of the iuice of Plantine, and
a little of the water of parched Barlie, make thereof a glyſter.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  IT helpeth the Diſenteria, to drinke the iuice of Sorell with
wine, and the iuice of Marſh Mallowes alſo being drunke
doth the like effect. To drinke alſo in the morning faſting thrée
ounces of Borage water,Terra Samia, is that which the Apothecaries call Terra Sigillata. helpeth the ſaid diſeaſe: alſo it helpeth
with more efficacie to drinke the iuice of Burſa paſtoris.
                  
               
               
                  Another for the ſame, of verie great efficacie.
                  TAke of Hipoquiſtidos, of Pſillium, of Terra Samia, of
vnripe Gawles, of Acatia, of eche eyght drammes, with

raine water make little Cakes, of the which, giue the ſicke to
take two drammes at a time with the decoction of Riſe: or elſe
make a gliſter.
               
               
                  To cauſe Hemerodes to open.
                  TAke the gall of Gote, or of a Cowe, and meddle it with
the iuice of Anagardus, and annoynt the place, and the
intent will follow: or elſe infuſe rawe Onyons in vinegar of
Squilles, and lay therof vpon the place.
               
               
                  Againſt ſcorchings of fire.
                  IN the ende of Iune take Rapes with the rootes and braye
them, and diſtill them thorow a Limbeck, and with the water
waſh the ſcorchings, and although it will engender ſcurfe
or ſcabbes, let it not be taken away, but with continuance of
waſhing you ſhall ſée a manifeſt remedie.
               
               
                  To preſerue one from the goute.
                  TAke of the rootes of Roſemarie, and hauing boyled them
verie well in vinegar, if with the ſayd decoction you waſhe
your féete, it will preſerue you from the Goute.
               
               
                  Againſt the belkings of the ſtomack.
                  TAke Rew leaues and diſtill them in the middeſt of Maye,
and of the water let the pacient drinke morning and Euening
two or thrée ounces, and you ſhall ſée the ſucceſſe: and alſo
it will expell the ventoſitie of the bodie.
               
               
                  To cauſe a woman to bring forth a dead creature.
                  TAke Willow leaues in the middeſt of May, and hauing diſtilled
them thorowe a Limbeck, giue the woman to drinke
thereof the quantitie of foure ounces, and it will cauſe hir to be
deliuered of the dead creature.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the Dropſey and opilation of the liuer.
                  TAke of Elder flowers that are verie ripe, and diſtill them
in Balneo Mariae, and of the water that ſhall be diſtilled,
cauſe the diſeaſed to drinke morning and euening thrée ounces
at a time, and you ſhall ſée an excellent ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  An emplaiſter to heale the rupture of the ſcull.
                  TAke of Plantine ſéedes thrée ounces, of Lapacium acutum
foure ounces, of the meale of blacke Beanes as much
as you pleaſe, braye them into pouder, and boyle them with
verie ſtrong wine, and lay therof twice a day vpon the wound.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of Gum Elemi thrée drammes, of pure Roſen foure
ounces, of waxe ſixe ounces, of oyle of Roſes two ounces
and a halfe, of Armoniack two ounces, of Tirpentine thrée
ounces and fiue drammes, of Rye meale as much as ſufficeth,
with wine and waxe make a plaiſter.
               
               
                  Againſt the paine of the Collick.
                  TAke of Origanum one ſcruple, and being made into pouder,
giue it to be drunke in good wine, and you ſhall ſee the
effect. It helpeth alſo to giue to drinke of the wine made of the
decoction of Horehounde the quantitie of thrée ounces.
               
               
                  To heale the itching or ſcabbes of the fundiment.
                  TAke a quantitie of a Bricke that is in the top of a fornace,
that hath bene burned a long time, bray it into pouder, but
firſt waſhe it with common water, and then with Plantine
water, and after meddle it with oile of Mirtels and white wax,
& hauing made therof an oyntment, vſe it vnto the fundiment.
               
               
                  To remedie the paines and burnings of the fundiment.
                  TAke the yolke of a roſted Egge that is hard, & being brayed,
diſſolue it with white wine, and oyle of Roſes, of eche as

much as ſhall ſuffice, and laye it vppon the ſore. It helpeth alſo
to take thrée drammes of the pouder of Roſe leaues, two yolkes
of roſted Egges brayed, and incorporate them with white
wine, and being meddled therein Vnguentum Roſatum,
therewith to annoint the place.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called Iliaca paſſio.
                  TAke of Sumack, and of Comyn, bray them togither, and
meddle them with Oximell, and giue the diſeaſed to drinke
a dramme thereof.
               
               
                  Another remedie for the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke a quantitie of the iuice of the leaues or budds of vines,
and cauſe the appaſſionated to drinke thereof.
               
               
                  To remedie the iſſuing out of the Fundiment.
                  TAke a quantity of Lentill leaues, and expreſſe the iuice from
them, and annoynt therewith the fundiment, or elſe take
gréene gawles, and boyle them in wine, and being ſodden make
them into pouder, and put thereof into the fundiment.
               
               
                  To heale one that can not keepe his vrine.
                  TAke of the braynes of an Egle the quantitie of a peaſe, of
the fat of a Gooſe as much more, of Gum Arabick vnto the
ſame quantitie, being medled togither ſwallow thereof, as you
would doe a pill: or elſe, take the Teſticles of an Hare, and
boyle them in good ſwéete Wine, and giue thereof to drinke. It
helpeth alſo to take a little Calamint, and Mirrhe brayed, and
giue thereof vnto the ſick to drinke in good wyne.
               
               
                  To remedie the comming out of the matrix.
                  WAſhe the matrix with the iuice of Acatia, or of Rubea
tinctorum, or of Lentilles, or of Sumack, and it will returne
it into her place.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the growing of fleſhe out of the nayles.
                  TAke of Gawles, of the ryndes of ſower Pomegranats, of
the droſſe of red Braſſe, of drie Figges burned, of ech like
quantitie, bray euery thing, and mixe them with hony, and put
thereof into the ſore, morning and euening.
               
               
                  To cauſe ſkalie nailes to fall.
                  TAke of the Gum of an Oke, of Sandaraca of Fenegréeke,
of eche two ounces,Cantarelle, a vermin like vnto Bees that ſing, called of the Apothecaries Cantarides. of Cantarelle, of Tapſia of eche one
ounce, of vineger as much as ſuffiſeth, meddle them, and make
a playſter, braying thoſe things that are to be brayed, and put
thereof into the nayles.
               
               
                  To take away the blackneſſe that remayneth
in ſkarres.
                  TAke a quantitie of the roote of whyte Brione and black, and
boile it in oyle, as long as it yéeldeth iuice, and therwith annoynt
the place: the ſkarres that remayne of Kingwormes annoynt
with the greaſe of an Aſſe: or elſe with the ſéede of Rocket
brayed and diſſolued in the Gawle of a Gote, or of an Oxe.
               
               
                  Againſt bloud that is congealed within one.
                  TAke a quantitie of the rennet of an Hare, or of anye other
beaſt, and giue thereof to drinke in vineger, it helpeth alſo
to take Time, or Sauorie, giuen to drinke with the like liquor.
               
               
                  Againſt the difficultie of taking breath.
                  TAke of the pouder of the rootes of Ariſtologia rotunda,
and giue thereof the ſicke to drinke with water. It helpeth
alſo to take a quantitie of ſilke wormes, and being put into an
earthen pot well cloſed, to ſet it into an Ouen vntil the worms
be drie, and being brayed meddle hony therewith, and giue the
ſicke to drinke thereof a ſponefull at a time.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the congelation of milke within the breaſts.
                  TAke a rawe Egge, and being medled with Vnguentum
roſatum, annoynt the breſtes. It helpeth maruellouſly the
bynding of the bodie, if being diſſolued with Oyle of Roſes, the
breaſtes be often annoynted therewith.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſubuerſion of the ſtomach.
                  TAke thrée partes of the iuice of ſower Pomegranates, of the
iuice of Mintes one part, boyle them in a veſſell of earth
glaſed, working it alwayes with a ſpatter, vntill it become
thick, and being taken from the fyre, giue the pacient a ſponefull
thereof to eate before meate.
               
               
                  For one that hath loſt his voyce.
                  TAke of the iuice of Coalewortes medled with hony, and
giue it vnto the ſicke: or elſe take of Linſéedes burned and
brayed and finely ſearced, of fat Reyſons without the ſtones,
of mundified Pine Kernels parched, of cleane Nuts, of eche
lyke quantitie, braye them and meddle them with hony, of the
which holde often vnder the tongue.
               
               
                  To remedie the hardneſſe of the ſplene.
                  TAke of the fat of a Crane, and meddle it with vinegar of
Squilles, and after the ſick perſon is come out of the Baine,
annoint the region of the ſplene, and it will helpe maruelouſly.
               
               
                  Againſt empoyſonments.
                  TAke of Rape ſéedes, of Calamint, and of Terra ſigillata, a
little of euerie one, and hauing meddled them togither, giue
thereof to drinke, and the poyſon or biting of any venomous
beaſt will not hurt him.
               
               
                  To heale the flixes Diſentericall or Lientericall.
                  TAke a fiſh called a Gogin roſted, without ſalt, and giue of
it the ſicke to eate many times, and you ſhal ſée helth folow.
               
               
                  
                  To draw out thornes or arrowe heads out of the fleſh.
                  TAke a quantitie of a Cuttle, and being well brayed, laye
therof vpon the griefe in maner of a plaiſter, which thorow
a ſecret vertue that it hath, will draw them forth, as alſo Sea
Crabbes doe, being brayed and layde vpon the griefes.
               
               
                  For women that be barren.
                  TAke the nature of a female Hare made into pouder after it
is dried, and giue it the woman to drinke in good wine, and
preſently after let hir companie with hir huſbande, for ſhe will
be apt to be conceyued with childe.
               
               
                  Againſt the Collick.
                  TAke of the fat of a Peacock, of the iuice of Rew, and of
Hony of eche like quantitie. Meddle them and wyth Wine
giue them the pacient to drinke: or elſe being diſſolued in oyle,
or broth, make a gliſter, and preſently you ſhall ſée the remedy.
               
               
                  Againſt the infection of the ſkinne.
                  TAke the bones of a Peacocke and burne them, and being
brayed, diſſolue them with vinegar, and annoynting the
place often therwith, you ſhall ſée the effect.
               
               
                  To cauſe a woman to bring forth a dead creature.
                  TAke of the rootes of Enula in the ende of Maye, or elſe from
the Moneth of Iulie vnto September, and diſtill them thorow
a Limbeck after they be brayed, and of the water that ſhal
come forth, you ſhall giue morning and euening vnto the pacient
to drinke two or thrée ounces at a time, and the effect will
folowe.
               
               
                  Againſt the creſtes of the piles in the fundiment.
                  TAke of Millifolie, and of Paritorie, and being meddled with
ſalt, braye it verie well, and lay it vpon the ſore. It helpeth

alſo to take of Capillus veneris in pouder, of Onions, and
of Ariſtologia rotunda, of eche as much as you pleaſe, and
being brayed togither, lay them vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To remedie a tongue aggrauated, which through ouermuch
moyſture pronounceth not well.
                  TAke of Muſtarde ſéede, and bray them, and being meddled
with good Hony, giue the ſicke therof to holde in his mouth
the quantitie of an Haſell nut, and giuing it to be ſucked for an
olde cough, it is of a maruelous efficacie.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the Collick.
                  TAke a quantitie of the liuer of a Porpoſe, and being boyled,
take the oyle therof, with the which annointing the place
where the paſſion is, it is of a verie excellent operation, and it
is knowne to worke the like effect in all other griefes occaſioned
through coldneſſe.
               
               
                  To drie vp milke in the breſts.
                  CAuſe the woman to vſe in hir meates the ſéedes of Smalage,
and likewiſe the herbe ſodden after what maner you
pleaſe. The like effect is done, by taking the ſéedes of Nigella
ſodden in wine, and giuen to drinke.
               
               
                  To deminiſh the fleugme of the bodie, and to
augment the bloud.
                  LEt the partie that is in ſuch ſort eate euerye morning faſting,
ſeauen drammes of ſmall Reyſons faſting, and the
effect will follow.
               
               
                  A remedie to cauſe conception.
                  SOme Phiſitions affirme, that Orientall Amber helpeth vnto
conception, notwithſtanding I eſtéeme, as by experience
alſo I haue prooued, that it is but a weake remedie. Therfore
annoynting a pencell with Oyle of Balme, and touching the

mouth of the matrix therewith, it is a verie perfite medicine
vnto generation, taking héede notwithſtanding, that it be not
a counterfeit oyle, but true, which you ſhall know in this maner,
take a drop thereof and caſt it into a Cup of water, if it go
vnto the bottome it is perfite, or if you drop it vppon a wollen
cloth it will make no ſpot.
               
               
                  To heale paine in the feete.
                  TAke of the leaues and flowers of Mugwort, and meddle
them, braying therwith Swines greaſe, and emplaiſter the
place of the griefe, and you ſhall ſée the ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale Wheales.
                  TAke a quantitie of wylde Mintes, and with leuen as much
as ſufficeth, being brayed togither, make a playſter, and lay
it vpon the ſore, and in a ſhort ſpace, it will make it ripe & hole.
               
               
                  To heale inward ruptures.
                  TAke of Germander, brayed in a Morter with a peſtell of
wood, and infuſe it in good white or red wine, that is a ſtringent,
and giue the patient thereof many times to drinke, and
certainely it will worke a maruellous effect vnto all ruptures
within the bodie.
               
               
                  To remedie griefes proceeding through going out of
the ioyntes, and to heale ſwellings.
                  TAke Agrimonie and braye the tender partes thereof very
well, and lay them vpon the ſore place in ſtead of a playſter,
and you ſhall ſée it worke a fayre and quick ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To heale the paine of the ſplene and the Ptiſick.
                  TAke of the iuice of Strawberies, and meddle it with hony,
and adding thereto a little quantitie of whyte Pepper, giue
it vnto the ſicke partie.
               
               
                  
                  To remedie the puntures of bones or ſtingings
of dead Serpents.
                  TAke of the vpper partes of Gladian, and making pouder
thereof meddle it togither with wine, and binde it vpon the
ſtingings, and it will deliuer you of the poyſon.
               
               
                  To take away wearineſſe, after great labor and
griefe of the members.
                  TAke Hoarehound, and hauing taken out the iuice thereof,
meddle it with Oyle of Roſes, and with the linement annoynt
the partes, and preſently you ſhall be whole.
               
               
                  To heale one that lotheth meate.
                  TAke of the leaues of Dyll and boyle them in water, of the
which giue the partie to drinke foure ounces and a halfe,
and it will heale the lothſomneſſe, & ventoſitie of the ſtomack,
and ſmelling vnto the herbe newly gathered with the ſeede, it
will cauſe the yoxing to go from him that is moleſted therwith.
               
               
                  To heale percuſsions of the eyes.
                  TAke freſhe Bettony and boyle it, and beyng taken out and
ſtrayned, braye it, and with the ſayde herbe make a Cataplaſme
vppon the place of the Percuſſion.
               
               
                  To remedie the paine of the ſplene.
                  TAke Cammomyll flowers and make them into pouder, of
the which giue the diſeaſed to drinke morning and euening,
one dramme at a time, in thrée ounces of whyte Wine, and a
little of a childes vrine, not as yet come to pollution, and continuing
this certayne dayes, it will reſtore the ſplene vnto hys
former health.
               
               
                  Againſt the great griefes of the body.
                  TAke of Sinckfoyle, of Pulegium, and of Poppie leaues,
of eche like quantitie: boyle them in Wine, and fomentate
the place of the griefe, and the intent will folow.
               
               
                  
                  To heale the pluriſey.
                  TAke of the leaues of wylde Mallowes, and boyle them in
Oyle, and beyng taken out, bray them in a Morter, and put
them into a péece of linnen cloth, and applie it vnto the place of
the griefe, and preſently it will cauſe the paine to ceaſe.
               
               
                  To remedie the ſtinking at the noſe, and
difficultie of hearing.
                  TAke of the iuice of Iuy leaues, and put therof into the noſe,
and it will doe the effect: or elſe, for hearing, diſtill the ſaide
iuice medled with wine, and of the liquor that ſhall be diſtilled
drop into the eares, and you ſhal ſée within a little ſpace, a maruellous
helpe.
               
               
                  To heale the ſcorchings of fire.
                  TAke of Serpillum one ounce, of Litarge of ſiluer thrée ounces,
of Roſes as much more, braye them in a Morter, and
put thereto waxe, of Beares greaſe, and of Hartes greaſe,
halfe a pound of them all, boyle euery thing, and being ſtrayned,
kéepe it for a liniment.
               
               
                  To diſſolue the creſtes of the French diſeaſe.
                  TAke the greaſe of an Hen, and of a Ducke, of eche fiue
drammes, of the marrow of a Calues bones, of the marrow
of a Cowes bones, and of freſh butter, of eche thrée drammes,
of Storax liquida foure drammes and a halfe, of the fat of a
Calfe ten drammes, of Hiſopus humida one ounce and a
halfe, of oyle of Camomill, of Oleum irinum, of ſwéete Almonds
and of Maſtick, of ech fiue drams, of Mucillages made
of the rootes of marſh Mallowes, of Enula, and of the rootes of
Ireos, of ech one ounce, of Armoniack, of Bdellium, & of Serapine,
of ech one dram and a half. Boyle theſe rootes with the
Gummes in water, and a little vinegar, vntill the Mucillages
be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and make a Mucillage. The which

you ſhall meddle with thother things, except the Hiſopus humida,
and the Storax. And boyle them vntill the Mucillages
be conſumed, then ſtraine them all, and meddle therewith of
Turpentine one ounce and a halfe: of Saffron one dramme,
of waxe as much as ſufficeth, and put therevnto the Hiſopus
and the Storax, and one ounce of extinct Quickſiluer, and
make a Cerote, and vſe it, and you ſhall finde it maruelous.
               
               
                  Againſt ſwellings of womens bellies that make them
to ſeeme with childe.
                  TAke of Parſenep ſéedes, and being brayed, make pouder of
them, and with wine giue the woman therof to drinke, the
quantitie of one dramme at a time morning and euening faſting,
and it will doe the effect.
               
               
                  To clenſe the face from ſpottes.
                  TAke of the rootes of Ireos two drammes, of the rootes of
Eleborus niger one dramme, bray them into pouder, and
meddle them with Hony, and at euening when you go to bed
annoint the face, & waſh it in the morning with warme water.
               
               
                  To heale the torſions and griefes
of the bellie.
                  TAke halfe a dramme of Ireos pouder, and being medled in
ſharpe or ſowre wine giue it the ſicke to drinke, and if it be
put into the medicines that purge the bodye, he ſhall féele no
torſions as long as he is a purging.
               
               
                  To remedie the burning or heate of vrine.
                  TAke of yolkes of Egges with their whites, thrée, of Oyle
Onfacine one ounce and a halfe, of the flowre of Barlie one
ounce, of Saffron one ſcruple, of Corianders preperated, of
Sorrell ſéedes, of Mirtell berries, of eche halfe a dramme. Bray
euerye thing in a Leaden Morter with a peſtell of the ſame,
meddling therwith of Vnguentum populeon one ounce, and

make an ointment, with the which being colde, annoynt the
partes betwixt the teſticles and the fundiment, and it will be
of a marueilous efficacie.
               
               
                  To remedie percuſsions or falling vpon the
ribbes or back.
                  TAke of Litarge, of Roſen, of eche one ounce, of Gum Armoniack,
of Ceruce, of eche halfe an ounce, of Galbanum,
of Incenſe, of eche thrée drammes, of oyle of Roſes and
of Mirtels, of ech as much as ſufficeth, of waxe a little, meddle
them and make a Cerote, and being layde vpon the bruſe, you
ſhall ſée a ſodeine and marueilous effect.
               
               
                  Againſt burning occaſioned of colde.
                  TAke of the iuice of a Mulberie trée, and meddle it with lyke
quantitie of oyle Oliue, wherwith annoynt the burnt places,
and they wilt be hole. It helpeth alſo to boyle the leaues of
Rew in oyle, and being ſtrained to annoint the place.
               
               
                  To heale wheales or bliſters in
the face.
                  TAke of Mirrhe, of Coſtus, of Caſsia lignea, of eche like
quantitie, after they be brayed, meddle them with Honye,
and annoint the ſore at euening when you go to bed, and in the
morning waſh it with water made with Branne that is hote:
or elſe annoint it with the meale of Orobo meddled with water
and Hony. The Meale of Otes diſſolued in vinegar, and
the place annoynted therewith doth the like effect. It helpeth
alſo to annoint the place with the bloud of ones armes faſting.
               
               
                  To make ſkarres become fayre of colour.
                  TAke of the greaſe of an Aſſe, or of a Calfe, and putting therto
of Mirrhe, of oyle, & of Saffron, meddle them and kéepe it
in a braſen veſſell, and being a little warmed, annoynt therewith
the ſkarres. It helpeth alſo to annoynt the ſkarres with

the Gawle of a Sea Scorpion, and you ſhall ſée a verie happie
ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  To take away the bleachneſſe of blowes.
                  TAke the pyll of a Radiſhe, and being brayed and diſſolued
with Hony, annoynt the place. It auayleth alſo to braye
grene Smallage, and being medled with the white of an Egge
to lay it vpon the place. The iuice of Tapſia, is of a preſent efficacie,
medled with the pouder of Incenſe, and Ceruce, and ſo
applyed vnto the ſore.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſwellings of Percuſsions.
                  TAke of the gawle of an Ewe, and being medled with the
milke of a woman, laye it vpon the ſore: or elſe take the
doung of a Swine, and drie it betwene two diſhes in an Ouen,
then bray it, and mixe it with Oyle, and it will worke the effect
beyng applyed vnto the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale thoſe that haue paine in
their lyuer.
                  CAuſe the ſick to drinke of the iuice of Cicorie, or of Endiue
in brothe, or with water of Hony: euen ſo likewiſe the ſaid
herbe doth help being dried and the pouder giuen to drink. Alſo
Iuy brayed with Endiue into pouder and giuen to drinke dot
                        •
                     
the like effect. And ſo do the rootes of a Maple trée braied and giuen
to drinke the quantitie of an ounce and a halfe, with ſwéete
wine: or elſe a quantitie of Spica Celtica giuen in drink, worketh
a manifeſt remedie. It helpeth to take the fleſhe of thrée
Snayles, and being brayed and diſſolued with foure ounces of
red wine, to giue it to drinke.
               
               
                  To heale the paynes of the breſts, which happen
after the birth of a childe.
                  TAke a quantitie of Egge ſhelles, and being brayed into pouder,
meddle therewith of the yolkes of ſodden Egges thrée:

of Saffron, and of oyle of Roſes, of ech a little, make a Cerote,
and laye it vpon the breſt.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſcurfe of the head.
                  TAke of Oyle of Nuts, and of Oyle Oliue, of ech lyke quantitie,
and hauing firſt waſhed the head, annoynt it with the
ſayde Oyle, and with twice annoynting, the ſcurfe will bée
conſumed.
               
               
                  To heale a pluriſey by ſpitting.
                  TAke a quantitie of the ſhelles of Haſell Nuttes, and being
brayed into pouder with Oximel ſimplex, and Iulep of
Violets as much as ſufficeth, it will cauſe the ſick perſon to auoyde
ye pluriſey by ſucking therof ſo that you ſhal ſée the effect.
               
               
                  Againſt moyſt ſores.
                  TAke of the rootes of Ciperus, and being brayed into pouder,
put of the pouder into the wound. It helpeth alſo to burne
the ryndes of drie Gourdes, and to put of the pouder into the
ſores: ſo likewiſe doth the pouder of Dyll flowers: or elſe, the
pouder of 
                        〈◊〉
                      leaues of a Cipres trée, or the fruits therof brayed
with Wine, and layd vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale woundes, which after they are whole
bruſt out a newe, by reaſon of a putrified
bone.
                  TAke of the pouder of the rootes of Dog Fennell, and put
it therin, and it will cauſe the ſhiuers of bones to iſſue forth.
Alſo the ſéedes of Henbane brayed with Lime do helpe. Or elſe
take the leaues of Figges brayed with wilde Poppie, and boyled
in Potage, and layd vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  To heale the creſtie ſwellings of
the Piles.
                  TAke of Verdegreaſe, of Allum, of the droſſe of Braſſe double
the weight of the other things, braye them, and make

them liquide with vinegar, and make therof a liniment. Alſo
it helpeth to take of the heades of Menewes burned and roſted
Onyons, medled togither and layd vpon the ſore.
               
               
                  Againſt euill diſpoſition through coldneſſe
of the ſtomack.
                  TAke of the rootes of Enula two ounces, of Fennell ſéedes
one ounce and a half, of Pepper one ounce, of Perſly ſéedes
halfe an ounce, of Rocket ſéedes one ounce, of Seſelios one
dramme, of clarified Hony one pound, meddle them and make
a lectuarie, of the which giue the pacient two ſpoonefuls in the
morning, and at euening when he goeth to bed with good wine.
               
               
                  To heale the loſſe or diminiſhing of ſmelling.
                  CAuſe him to ſmell often vnto ſtrong ſauors, purging the bodie
notwithſtanding vniuerſally, let him ſmell therefore
vnto Origanum medled with vinegar and Salt: or elſe vnto
Caſtor, or Beniomin diſſolued in vinegar: or Muſtarde 
                        〈◊〉
                     
with vinegar or Ptarmaca, or Elleborus niger, or the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of the herbe Ciclamen put into the noſe.
               
               
                  To cauſe that heare ſhall not grow againe.
                  ANnoint the place where you would not haue heare to grow
with the warme bloud of an Hare as ſoone as it is killed,
and vppon that annoynt with wilde Nettle ſeedes brayed, and
diſſolued with oyle Oliue: or elſe with the braines of Battes
brayed and diſſolued with womans milke, annoint the place.
               
               
                  To heale cleftes or chappings of the
fundiment.
                  TAke of Vermilion and of Mirrhe, and make fomentation
vnder it. It helpeth alſo maruelouſlye to take Vermilion
brayed, and meddled with Pomata, or with oyle of Roſes,
and therwith to annoint the fundiment in the chappings.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt retention of vrine in Agues.
                  TAke a quantitie of the leaues of Garden Violets, and make
a plaiſter with them after they be ſodden, and lay it vppon
the bottome of the bellye: or elſe roſte an Onyon, and being
hote, lay it vpon the ſaid place, and your intent will follow.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                     ••
                  printed at London by Henrie
Denham, dwelling in Paternoster
Row, at the
ſigne of the
Starre.
            
               OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT
            
            Anno Domini. 1569.
            
         
      
   