
      
         
            
            
            A
DIRECTION
FOR THE PLANTATION
IN
VLSTER.
            
               Contayning in it, sixe principall
thinges, Viz.
               1. The securing of that wilde Countrye to the
Crowne of England.
               
               2. The withdrawing of all the charge of the
Garrison and men of warre.
               3. The rewarding of the olde Seruitors to
their good content.
               4. The meanes how to increase the Reuenue
to the Crowne, with a yearely very great
somme.
               5. How to establish the Puritie of Religion
there.
               6. And how the vndertakers may with securitie
be inriched.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by Ed. Allde
for Iohn Budge, dwelling at the great
South doore of S. Paules
Church. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE MIGHTYE
and High renowned Prince,
HENRY, Prince of great
Brittaine, all happines.
            
               MIghtie and High renowned
PRINCE, the fourth parte of
Ireland, depopulated VLSTER, but
now redeemed, deliuered and quite
acquitted by the Kinges Maiesties
(your most louing Fathers) wonderfull
wisdome & industrie, from the vsurping tyrannie
of Traytors, & from a long & a most lamentable captiuitie:
Dispoyled, she presents her-selfe (as it were) in a
ragged sad sabled Robe, ragged (indeed) there remayneth
nothing but ruynes & desolatiō, with a very little
showe of any humanitie: of her selfe she aboundeth with
many the very best blessings of God: amongst the other
Prouinces belonging to great Brittaines Imperial
Crowne, not much inferiour to any. Thē regard her, for
vnto your Highnesse it belongeth chiefely to regard her.
            
               
Fayre England, she hath more People then she can
well sustaine: goodly Vlster for want of people vnmanured,
her pleasant fieldes and rich groundes, they remaine
if not desolate, worsse.
            Would your Excellencie with fauourable respectes,
but countenance the Action, then the neuer-satisfied
desires of a fewe, should not quite disgrace and vtterly
ouerthrowe the good and exceeding good purposes of
many, but with an excellent Plantation it would be
Peopled plentifully, yea fortified and replenished with
such and so many goodly strong Corporations, as it
would be a wonder to beholde: Without which it is not
possible (for I say what certainely I knowe) so sufficiently
to secure that wilde Countrie any long time. The
desire wherof hath caryed (or rather violently drawne
me to this presumption) I being a playne Country-man
and one of the Vndertakers in Farmannagh.
            
            If my endeauours may in any respect be so auailable;
that fayre successions, long posteritie may at length beholde
her with securitie in some proportion beautified,
then I shall be of many, the most happy, especiallie if
your Highnesse shall giue good acceptance to these my
desires. The Almightie GOD of Heauen blesse and
preserue your Excellencie still and euermore, with those
his super-exceding graces.
            
               Your Excellencies
most humble suppliant:
Thomas Blener hasset.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            For the Plantation
of VLSTER.
            
               EXcellent and High
Renowned Prince, since
such time as it hath pleased
the Lord Treasurer to
referre the Peticion of M.
Henry Honnings, vnto the
Irish Commissioners, for the vndertaking
of threescore thousand Acres of the Escheated
Lands in the North of Ireland, to bee
planted by certaine English Gentlemen, of
which my selfe being one, considering the
greatnes of the Action, to satisfie my selfe I
passed the Seas, and not farre from the Lyfford
I found that very worthy Gentleman,
Sir Arthur Chichester, the Kings Lord Deputie
with other Commissioners, surueying

those escheated Lands from the Church
Lands, and from their Lands who haue hitherto
bene loyall.
            I being there conuersant with some of the
chiefe Knights and Captaines, desired of
them to know the cause why they themselues
were not forward to vndertake those
profitable seates and rich grounds: I was answered,
that to build Castles and Fortes was
chargeable, neither then if there should be
a Mannor erected with twentye or fortye
Tennants, would they and it secure their
goods: for although that Castle or Forte
would serue for a sufficient refuge to preserue
their liues vpon any extremitie, yet the
cruell wood-kerne, the deuowring Woolfe,
and other suspitious Irish, would so attend
on their busines, as their being there should
be little profitable vnto them. For an example:
Sir Tobye Cawlfield he dwelleth in Charlemount
a Forte of many other the best, and
well furnished with men and munition: yet
now (euen in this faire calme of quiet) his
people are driuen euery night to lay vp all
his Cattle as it were in warde, and doe hee

and his what they can, the Woolfe and the
Wood-kerne (within Calieuer shot of his
Forte) haue often times a share: yet I do verily
beleeue, no man keepeth better order,
aswell for the safeguard of himselfe and his
neighbors, as for the gouernment of al those
parts about him.
            The like I haue obserued in many other
places▪ and to speake the truth, all men there
in all places doe the like, and that within the
English Pale (as they a long time haue cald
it) Sir Iohn King he dwelleth within halfe a
mile of Dublin: Sir Henry Harringtō
                within
halfe a mile on the other side thereof, Fewe
men that euer I haue seene better seated for
much good Soyle: they also doe the like, for
those sore named enemies, doe euery night
suruey the Fields to the very wals of Dublin,
whatsoeuer is left abroad is in danger to be
lost: so they cannot for the foresaid causes
contriue any thing to much profit, although
it hath bene inhabited a long time.
            The consideration whereof satisfied me
with the impossibilitie of planting a Mānor
vnder the protection of any strong built

Castle; but after that I had trauailed amōgst
the meere Irish, and had sufficiently informed
my selfe with their conditions, their nature,
and manner of life, I found it most certainely
impossible by such kinde of plantation
to improue any thing with security, to any
great profit, neither any with whome I
conferred, would or could set downe how
with security any thing might be vndertaken.
            Therefore the principall studd of this
frame must be wrought with a tennor more
substantiall then hath bene hitherto by any
one mencioned.
            I acknowledge and see it sufficiently, that
many Castles and fortes well fortified, doth
and wil restraine the violence of such a scattered
people as they are, being at this present
altogether without men of conduct or
armour, but I thinke those Castles & Fortes
more necessary in time of warre; for then
thereby the Cattell of the Rebels are cut off,
and they are inforced to vnite themselues
into many strong troopes, otherwise the garisons
of those places would bereaue them

of all their victuals, and hinder their commerce,
and all their other intentions
whatsoeuer, for they cannot be strong ynough
at one instant in euery place to encoūter
the force of those millitary garrisons,
who are maintained at a great rate (as I
thinke) out of the Exchequer: for these vndertakers
to plant themselues so in this time
of quiet, I doe verily beleeue it would be to
small auaile, and not the best way to secure
themselues with their goods, and that wilde
country to the Crowne of England; for although
there be no apparant enemy, nor any
visible maine force, yet the wood-kerne
and many other (who now haue put on the
smiling countenaunce of contentment) doe
threaten euery houre, if oportunitie of time
and place doth serue, to burne and steale
whatsoeuer: and besides them there be two,
the chief supporters of al their insolencie, the
inaccessable woods, & the not passible bogs:
which ot subiect to our desires is not easie,
and that not performed, it is not possible to
make a profitable, improuement, no not by
any meanes in any place.
            
               
Moreouer the frowning countenance of
chance and change, (for nothing so certaine
as that all thinges are most vncertaine) doth
also incite a prouident vndertaker to lay
such a foundation, as it should be rather a
violent storme then a fret of foule weather
that should anoy him. A scattered plantation
will neuer effect his desire: what can the
countenance of a Castle or Bawne with a
fewe followers doe? euen as they at this
present doe: which is nothing to any purpose.
            What shall we then say? or to what course
shal we betake our selues? surely by building
of a wel fortified Towne, to be able at any
time at an houres warning with fiue hūdred
men well armed, to encounter all occasions:
neither will that be sufficient, except that be
seconded with such another, and that also (if
it may be, as easily it may) with a third: so
there will be helpe on euery side, to defend,
& offend: for as in England, if a priuy watch
be set, many malefactors are apprehended,
euen amongst their cuppes: so there when
the spaces in the Woods be cut out, and the

bogges be made somewhat passible, then
these new erected townes intending a reformation,
must often times at the first set a
vniuersall great hunt, that a suddaine search
may be made in all suspitious places, for the
Woolfe and the Wood-kerne, which being
secretly and wisely appointed by the gouernors,
they with the helpe of some Irish, well
acquainted with the holes and holdes of
those offenders, the generallitie shall search
euery particular place.
            For an example, the fourth day of March,
the Lyfford, the Omigh, they in Farmanagh,
Donganon, and Colrayne, shall on that day
send forth from euery one of those places,
an hundred men; which fiue hundred men
shall as then make search in all, or in all the
most suspitious places: and by being at one
instant dispersed with furniture fit for such
busines, they shall discouer all the Caues,
holes, & lurking places of that country, euen
for an hundred miles compasse: & no doubt
it will be a pleasant hunt, and much preyeHassets Hunt.
               
will fall to the followers: for what dooth escape
some, will fall to the hands of others,

and bring such a terror, that the woolfe himselfe
will not dare to continue his haunt,
where such so suddaine incursions shall be
vsed, although it be but once in a moneth:
the charge none, the pleasure much, the profit
more: then may they make inclosures, &
venture their Cattell abroad, for to starue in
the night doth ouerthrow the feede of the
day, with the generall improuement and
chief profit, for the feeding of al kind of Cattle:
then may they sowe, mowe, plant, thriue
& be merry, for this kind of planting wil not
onely supplant those domesticall enemies,
but there will be out of those townes fiue
thousand well armed men, to encounter any
forraine enemy, that shall offer arriuall to
inuade, whereby his Maiestie shall shortly
haue little neede of those so chargeable garrisons:
For these vndertakers will easily restraine
the mutinies of them at home, and
confront the power of any inuader whatsoeuer,
and those good fellowes in trowzes, I
meane the euery where dispersed creatures
in the creats, seeing this course, they will no
longer hearken after change, nor entertaine

the lurking wood-kerne, as now they doe.
            Throughout all Ireland where there be
Fortes and garrisons in paye, if all those
places were planted with this kinde of vndertaking,
& the old worthy Soldiers, who
in those places haue garrisons in pay, with
euery one of their Soldiers, if they were rewarded
with the fee simple thereof, to them
& to their heires, paying after one life yearely
vnto his Maiestie a fee-farme, as the other
vndertakers doe: but these Captaines and
Soldiers would haue their pay continued,
otherwise they shall not be able to proceede
with the charge of planting, and
then other lands there next adioyning laide
also to such places, that many might ioyne
with them to erect corporations: which may
be performed now ten times better cheape
then it wil be heerafter: their security would
be much better, and the societye farre excell,
& so the charge of the garrisons might
be withdrawne, the olde worthy warriour
who hath gone already through with the
brunt of that busines, shall with a good satisfaction
be rewarded, and all Vlster a whole

hundred times better secured vnto the
Crowne of England: for the generation of
the Irish, (who doe at this time encrease ten
to one more then the English, nay I might
well say twenty) will neuer otherwise be
sufficently brideled: of all which I would satisfie
your highnes by an example.
            The Lyfford, whereas there be an hundred
Soldiers in pay, (as is reported) which cannot
come vnto lesse then a thousand pounds
yearely, and if there were in that kingdome
many such, it would amount vnto a great
somme by the yeare, and many of them peraduenture
like this, able indeed a smal time
to withstand the first or second assault of a
weake enemie. But if the Lyfford and the
Lands adioyning neere thereunto, were vndertaken
by many, their many helping
hands (euery man respecting his owne profit)
they would not regard charge, not be
weary with labor and paines to frame a perpetuall
security, and good successe to their
businesse: and so there might out of dout by
that goodly riuer side, be laid out so much
land, (besides the Gouernours and Soldiers

allowance) as the vndertakers would cleere
all that pay, and the like in many such other
places: and giue vnto the Crowne a hundred
poūds yerely for a fee-farme for euer, which
would rise in that kingdome, to every great
masse, and the great charge of the garrisons
withdrawne. I might say the like of the Omigh,
of Dongannon, and of many such other
places, and so there would be in stead of popery
true religion; & a comfortable society,
whereas at this present, there is small apparance
and much defect of them, and of all
other the chiefest things to make the life of
man happy, onely plenty of good victuall
excepted.
            How exceedingly wel standeth Ardmath,
better seate for rich soyle there cannot bee,
but so poore, as I doe verily thinke all the
houshold stuffe in that Citty is not worth
twenty pounds, yet it is the Primate of all
Ireland, & as they say for antiquitie, one of
the most antient in all Europe: it is also of so
small power as forty resolute men, may rob,
rifle, and burne it: were it a defenced corporation
it would soone be rich and religious,

and the security would make one acre more
worth then now twenty be. At this present
it is a most base and abiect thing, not much
better then Strebane, & not able to restraine,
no, not the violence of the Woolte. Moreouer
many be the commodities of this kinde
of vndertaking a scattered plātation, for many
vndertakers to be dispersed three score
miles in cōpasse, alas they shal be now at the
first like the vnboundsticks of a brush fagot,
easie to be gathered, hewen and had to
the fire, neither shall there be true Religion,
sweete society, nor any comfortable security
amongst them, no, nor any other the
principall respectes and commodities that
mans life desireth, as they who there now
doe liue do know very well: but in one and
the selfe-same estate for many to be bound
vp together in the band of one hope, so as
all must be but one, It must be the power of
some great Monarch, who receiuing more
blowes then benefites, shall buy the vnbinding
of this fagot, at a much greater rate then
will be for his gaine or reputation.
            But some peraduenture will say here is

much speech of corporations, but nothing
how the Lands which lyeth farre remote,
which these vndertakers must take vp, shall
be vsed, for it will be very inconuenient that
vnto this corporation all the commodities
of that great quantity of ground shal be presently
transported, both for the distance of
the place, and other discommodities: and it
is expected that there should be Manors
erected, & not that one corporation should
containe so great a circuit. My answere is,
that the corporation shall containe all that
quantity of ground, for when they therein
haue framed the country to their desires,
then there shall be by these vndertakers
many Manors erected, and after the first
or second yeare, most of the houses within
this corporation built by these vndertakers,
(for euery man according to the quantity of
his land must put to his aide) although these
houses shall be still their owne, yet then,
when the great Huntes before mentioned,
haue reduced the country to such passe, as in
the seueralties of euery man, their Cattell
may be in security, then most of those buildings

in the corporation shall be left, and euery
man of the vndertakers shall build on
his demeanes a strong Mannor house, and
certaine Tenements for his Tenants about
him, on such Lands as he shall allot them by
coppy of Court role, or otherwise, to them
and their heires for euer: and within the corporation,
euery one of the vndertakers shall
stil retaine his mansion house, there to dwel
at his pleasure, and all the other of his houses
there, shall be set ouer vnto tradesmen; as
Shoomakers, Smithes, Carpenters, Weauers,
and such like: so in Sommer he may remain
with his tennants in the country, and in winter
with his farmers the tradesmen in the
corporation, which I hope to see a faire well
gouerned and a very strong Citty, which
will serue at all times to defend them and all
their moueables, if inuasion or any other violent
storme should come: so all the land
farre remote shall be built and inhabited
with good security.
            On this word Myne is a strong warrior, euery
man for his owne will aduenture farre,
the Mercinary Rutter will often times haue

his charge empty with men, when his purse
shall be full with dead payes. This my valiant
and prouident warriour Myne, he will
rather increase then decrease his nomber,
he doth watch and ward night & day without
ceasing. Therefore in this our vndertaking,
let all the people be such as shall enioy
euery man more or lesse of his owne, and if
they were such as had no other estate then
there, it were the better.
            But I feare, if many shall peruse this recital,
most of them wil be vtterly deterred with
the charge, saying, it is easie to be spoken,
but to their capacitie very difficult to be performed,
and so they will withdrawe themselues
& their conceits from imbracing that
which I would haue them entertaine cherefully
in the best fashion. Therefore I doe incite
them to consider, that all those great
and sumptuous buildings which former ages
haue left vnto euerlasting posterity, were
not erected any where, where continuance
of peace had improued all thinges to a high
rate and great price, but the originall of all
nations, was where and when the Lands and

all the commodities of those places were of
small worth. To enter into the perticular
heereof would be rather tedious then necessary.
            There be twelue of vs vnder the assignation
of the right honorable, Gilbert Earle of
Shrewesbury, who intend by the help of almighty
God to imploye a good part of our
substance, and bestowe our best indeuours
therein: for discoursing will not doe it, it
must be a paineful hand, & a discreet minde
furnished with knowledge and much experience:
we cannot enioy the happy Elizian
fields, but by passing ouer the blacke riuer
Stix: for heauen wil not be had without some
tribulation, neither may we feede vpon the
delicates prepared in a rich and plesant banquetting
Gallery, except we doe straine our
feete to passe vpon the first & second staire:
so difficult is the thing that we intend, Demidium
toti, qui bene caepit, habet. If any thing
seeme difficult, rouse vp thy spirit, and put
to both thy hands. Great thinges without
much labor can not be obtained: Rome was
not built in one day, but this in fiue yeares

may be performed without admiration, especially
if all these planters do draw closely
together without dissentiō, or muteny: therfore
there must especiall regard be had, that
in this corporation the chiefe Gouernor be
of wisdome, wealth, and authoritie, such a
one as wil be obeyed, yet will conferre with
other, and not be too much addicted to his
owne conceits: without gouernment there is
nothing but confusion: so many heads so
many opinions. Let all the vndertakers haue
recourse vnto the consultations, the meanest
may sometimes bring foorth a necessary
knowledge, therefore let euery mans opinion
be heard, but let the Gouernor with his
assistants determine, and let all the rest consent
thereto, or endure condigne punishment.
            And as for thee that puttest diffidence in
the assurance, which thou shalt haue from
his Maiestie, thou needest not trouble thy
head therwith, there hath bene already two
suruaies to know the parcels and precincts
exactly: no doubt vpon the deuision there
will be proclamation, that whosoeuer can

iustly and apparantly claime any part of
those Lands to these vndertakers by Pattent
assigned, he shall then within some conuenient
time put in his claime or else be silent for
euer.
            So before thou doost charge thy selfe any
way, thy portion shall be cleere, or else thou
shalt haue some other that shall be voide of
all incombrance.
            Furthermore, to comfort thy fearefull spirit,
there thou shalt haue many good neighbors,
for all they thy countrymen that are already
there estated with part of those Lands,
of which there be many of the chiefe in that
kingdome, they are hearty well willers vnto
al vndertakers, both for that your good proceedings
will second, and as it were fortifie
their already beginnings: and they be indeede
Gentlemen of such sort and quality, as
they speake alwaies what they thinke, and
performe what they speake. They doe not
after the fashion of this age carry bread in
the one hand and a stone in the other; but
they haue a sword alwaies ready to mainetaine
truth and equity; besides a very excellent

course of proceeding by law: And to
knit thy affection more firmely to the hope
of thy well doing there, I doe insure thee,
there be excellent warriors, and they such
worthy men as wil willingly backe thy busines,
& in time of need violently abate the violence
of any that shal intēd thy trouble: so
Mars himselfe shall protect thee, & perhaps
Mercury too: & if thou beest honestly content
with that which is thine, thou mayest
there liue and neuer trouble the Lawyer, and
thou shalt finde it to be a great blessing. All
which I haue written to encourage thy fainting
spirit, which rather then faile wil obiect
the charges thither, and the danger, which is
nothing so much as amongst good fellowes
it is, to be beastly drunke at home.
            To conclude, what art thou? one whome
kindenes, casualty, or want of wit hath decayed?
make speede, get thee to Vlster, serue
God, be sober, if thou canst not gouerne, be
gouerned, thou shalt recouer thy selfe, and
thy happines there will make thee reioyce
at thy former fortunes.
            Art thou rich, possessed with much reuenue?

make speed without racking of rents,
or other offenciue meanes; thou shalt doe
God and thy Prince excellent seruice. Thou
hast the three brayded bande which will
binde Beares, vse there thy talent, it will
be quickely a million.
            Art thou a poore indigent fellow? and hast
neither faculty nor mony? goe not thither,
for though there be plenty of all thinges,
thou shalt starue there, Loyterers and lewd
persons in this our new worlde, they will
not be indured. Art thou a Tradesman? a
Smith, a Weauer, a Mason, or a Carpenter?
goe thither, thou shalt be in estimation, and
quickely inriched by thy indeauours. Art
thou an husband man, whose worth is not
past tenne or twenty pounds? goe thither,
those new Manor-makers will make thee a
Coppy holder: thou shalt whistle sweetely,
and feede thy whole family if they be six for
six pence the day. Art thou a Gentleman
that takest pleasure in hunt? the Fox, the
Woolfe, and the Wood-kerne doe expect
thy comming: and the comely well cabbazed
Stagge will furnish thy feast with a full

dish. There thou shalt haue elbowe roome,
the Eagle and the Earne and all sorts of high
flying fowles do attend thee. Art thou a
Minister of Gods word? make speed, the haruest
is great but the laborers be fewe: thou
shalt there see the poore ignorant vntaught
people worship stones and sticks: thou by
carrying millions to heauen, maiest be made
an Archangell, and haue whiles thou doost
liue for worldly respects, what not. So Vlster
which hath bene hitherto the receptacle
and very denne of Rebels and deuowring
creatures, shall farre excell Munster, and the
ciuellest part of all that country, and peraduenture
in ciuility and sincere Religion, equal
euen faire England herselfe, with a christian
and comfortable society, of neighbourhood,
& so they at the leastIn all Ireland three hundred
thousand soules, besides Children (which
are no lesse in number) may come vnto the
true knowledge of God, and by faith in Iesus
Christ may be freede from euerlasting
damnation. So the Kings maiestie shall be
disburthened of a very great charge out of
the Exchequer, the Country safely secured

vnto the Crowne, and we his Maiesties subiects
inriched by our endeauours, which
God of his vnspeakeable mercy graunt, for
his deere sonne Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
            
               The Conclusion, contayning
an exhortation to England.
               
                  
                     FAyre England, thy flourishing
Sister, braue Hibernia,
(with most respectiue termes)
cōmendeth vnto thy due consideration
her yongest daughter, depopulated
Vlster: not doubting (for it cannot but
come vnto thy vnderstanding) how the long
continuance of lamentable warres, haue raced
& vtterly defaced, whatsoeuer was beautifull
in her to behold, and hath so bereaued
all her royalties, goodly ornaments, & well
beseeming tyers, as there remaineth but
onely the Maiesty of her naked personage,
which euen in that plite is such, as whosoeuer
shall seeke and search all Europes best

Bowers, shal not finde many that may make
with her comparison. Behold the admirable
worth of her worthines! euen now shee
giues the world to vnderstand by testimoniall
knowne sufficiently to all that knowe
her, that if thou wilt now but assist her with
meanes to erect her ruynes, she will nourish
thee with much dainty prouision, and so furnish
thee, as thou shalt not neede to send to
thy neighbour-kingdomes for corne, nor
to the Netherlands for fine Holland: shee
will in requitall of thy kindenesse prouide
those thinges, with some other, such as thy
heart most desireth. Art thou ouerchargde
with much people? Vlster her excellency
will imbrace that thy ouerplus in her amourous
sweete armes: she will place them as it
were by Euphrates, and feed them with better
Ambrosia then euer Iupiter himselfe
knew.
               Then proclaime, & let all the inhabitants
of spatious Brittane know, that (in respect euen
of their own good) it is conuenient and
most necessary that euery one of thē should
in some proportiō put to his assistance: didst

thou, and were thy people indeede willing?
with Horse, with men, with munition, and
money, oftentimes, and euer anon to abate
their insolency, whose pride sought to bereaue
from thee and them, your right and
interrest in her fields and forrests? true it is,
and some thousands, no doubt thou didst
imploy to keepe her from the captiuity of
traytors: do then, and let thy people willingly
finish the worke which you so valiantly
haue (although not performed) yet brought
to such passe as now there remayneth nothing
but how to couer her nakednes, & to
furnish her coastes with corporations and
other such meanes, as heereafter there shall
be no doubt of change or chance, but that
she may repose her selfe in such sweete security,
as her beautifull bosome shall by peace
& plenty abound with so many dainty goodly
thinges, as it will be a wonder to behold.
Some of thy most louing and welbeloued
children, to their great glory and euerlasting
renowne, with feruent mindes, they haue taken
this taske in hand, thinking it no small
honor for thē to aduenture their liues, their

liuings, and all their indeauours therein.
               The County of Farmannagh, sometime
Mack Gueres country, reioyce: many vndertakers,
al incorporated in minde as one, they
there with their followers, seeke & are desirous
to settle themselues. Woe to the Wolfe
and the Wood-kerne; the Ilands in Loughearne
shall haue habitations, a fortified corporation,
market townes, and many new erected
Manors, shall now so beautifie her
desolation, that her inaccessible Woods,
with spaces made tractable, shall no longer
nourish deuowrers, but by the sweete society
of a louing neighbourhood, shall entertaine
humanity, euen in the best fashion.
Goe on worthy Gentlemen, feare not, the
God of heauen will assist & protect you, the
rather for that simply of your selues, you do
desire to performe so honourable an action.
And they the successors of high renowned
Lud, will there reedifie a new Troy. Their
spatious coffers haue the receipts of Englands
treasure, and the continuall resplendancy
of his Maiesties presence doth so illustrate
with the neuer-discending-beames of

his euer-respecting fauour, their super-exceeding
good, that all whatsoeuer by imagination
may be thought of, or by pollicy of
man be deuised, so much absolutely haue
they from thence, therefore they wil not capitulate
the fresh and flourishing County of
Colraine, with the exceeding bounty ol the
Band that may suffice. They haue Ocanes
Country,The Riuer of the Band.
                   and whatsoeuer Irelands Eden can
affoord, and therefore euen in respect of
their owne reputation, they of them selues
wil performe this the most honourable action
that euer they attempted. Therefore let
Colraine reioyce, for the heart of England
(London herselfe) will no doubt make her
more beautifull then many, and furnish
Loughfoyle with a goodly fleete. O powerfull
Englād! no doubt if thou wilt extend
the bounty of thy liberall hand, to other
lesse able to performe such designes, then
they also will vndertake the other Counties,
so as within three yeares their endeauours
shall bring thee and thine altogether
out of doubt, euer heereafter to be charged
with any taxation for her defence: for certainly

so she shall shortly be able rather to
lend then to borrow aide.
               Let not then these kinde vndertakers
want any kinde of kindenesse. Little doe
many of thy inhabitants, care to spend a
pound or two to passe away one houre (as
it were) at a merry meeting; and presently it
is forgotten. Let euery one of worth giue
but his crowne to this honourable intention
and merry meeting, it shall remaine as a
crowne of glory to euerlasting posterity, and
free euery one of them peraduenture from
the expence of many pounds. And this
Trophy of al thy triumphs the most renowned,
obtained with the liues of many thousands
of thine (as the euery where dispersed
sculles of slaine men doe there at this present
manifestly declare) if it be now neglected,
they thy next neighbours & those the Princes
and people far remote, wil suppose thee
very poore both in power and pollicy. And
thus (faire England) hauing laid before thy
amiable eyes, how naked Vlster may be
relieued, deckt, and richly adorned, and thy
selfe certainely disburdned of much charge:

I referre the effecting thereof to the Kings
most excellent Maiestie, who hath power
to commaund, and will no doubt
prouide for Vlsters
prosperity.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   