
      
         
            
            
            The Fortreſſe of Fayth,
defended both by the Scripture, and
Doctors, gathered by the learned
German Bodonius. And tranſlated
out of Latine into Engliſh
by Edward Crane.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            ¶IMPRINTED AT LONODN,
in Fleteſtreat by VVylliam Griffith.
Anno Domint. 1570.
            ¶Cum Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
               
                  woodcut depicting eagle
               
            
            
               2. Eſdras. cha. 7.
               ¶There is no iudge more iuſt then God,
and there is none more wyſe then the
moſt higheſt.
            
         
         
            
            ¶TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
and my ſinguler good Lady and myſtres,
Lady Anne Duches of Sommerſett
her grace: your humble ſeruaunt
Edward Crane wiſheth long lyfe
wyth preſeruation of
wealth and honour.
            
               AS in all Artes and Sciences,
(moſt honorable Lady) crafti
concluſions & diueliſh enuē
               ſions
haue ſnbtilly crept in,
& diſeatfully peruerted the
naturall and true vſe therof,
in lyke caſe, ye and much more, ſuch falſe
inuaſions from tyme to tyme, haue not let
to aſſay the ſnbuerſion of the true & ſincer
Religion, for ſuch hath bene, and is the fond
and foolyſh phanſie of dyuers, that they
can neuer content themſelues to ground
their ſure fayth and Religion on gods holy
word, and ſuch electe veſſels as he hath choſen
for the better declraring & expounding
therof. But ſeking other meanes and wayes,
than thoſe that god hath appoynted, at the
length growe not onely themſelues to great
confuſion, but blind and diſceaue the poore
and ſimple wittes of their hearers if more
be not the great mercy of god. To their

euerlaſting damnations,Math. 23. ſuch they are that
Chriſt calleth blind guides, whom he cryeth
woe vnto, for if the Blind lead the Blind
then fall they both into the pytte. They followe
the trade af Iuglars, who by diſceauing
the eyen maketh that to appeare which in
deede is not. But of theſe hipocrtitical
VVolues inueſted in Lammes ſkinnes our
Sauiour hath geuen vs ſufficient admonition
& warning. Vnder the pretence of ſincer
lyfe they bolſter vppe and mayntayne a
huge heape of ſinne and no maruayle for
when man forſaketh his maker and cleaueth
to himſelfe what can come therof but
ſinne and diueliſhnes. For ſuch as is the tree
of neceſſitie ſuch muſt be the frute, for who
hath gathered fygges of Bryers, or Reaſons
of thornes. But the chefe occaſions of this
blind fancie of man, may well bethought to
haue bene chefely too. The one is Philowtie
or ſelfe Loue, the other avariſe or couetouſnes,
for if we were not ouerwhelmed and
drowned in our owne conceyptes, we would
well conſider our owne weakenes, and if we
knewe our ſelues then would we not leaue
the trew word of God and ſtick to our ſelues
wherfore not in vayne ſayth the Ethnike
Poet, this is a golden ſentence which came

from heauen 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : Knowe thy ſelfe.
Yf we had this knowledge, then would wee
not promiſſe farther then we were hable to
performe, then would we not leaue the trew
way, and ſeeke by wayes, then would we not
leaue the doore of the Sheapefold, and clime
vppe other wayes. Then would we not forſake
the holy ſcriptures, & cleaue & adhere
to our owne inuenſions.Lib. Retract. Therfore right wel
ſayth Auguſtine caueant ergo &c. Let ſuch
take hede leſt that by their lippe wiſedome
they voyd thēſelues of the croſſe of chriſt,
and ſo ſtumble at the ſtombling block, they
follow not the example of Paule, for he ſaith
Quod accepi, id tradidi vobis, that which I
haue receaued that doe I preach and deliuer
vnto you, he dorſt go no farther then his
commiſſion extended vnto, for he knewe
himſelfe to be no maſter, but a meſſenger,
But theſe men wilbe meſſengers accompted
and yet they be maſters, for they frame their
meſſadge other wayes than their charter or
commiſſion giueth them libertie, if in the
world it be accompted treaſon for the Embaſſadour
to do other meſſadge then that is
giuen him of his Prince, then what Treatours
are theſe to the Prince of Princes, and
Lord of Lordes, who ſayth he that addeth

or deminiſheth one iote from his word, heapeth
to himſelfe damnation. And becauſe
man is thus blinded in his owne conceypte
and is ſo deceaued in himſelfe, therfore doth
he leaue the troth, and imbrace falſhod, therfore
doth he forſake God and his word, and
ſticke to himſelfe and his owne imaginations?
The ſecond cauſe of theſe blind errours
may well be thought to be coueteouſnes of
priuate gayne and lucare, for there can be
no better credence or profe than experiēce
it hath bene well tried in this our age, ye as
alſo in the ages paſt what gaynes and riches
haue bene gotten by ſuch vayne, vngodly,
and vnlawefull practiſes as hath bene vſed,
ſaluation hath bene made trafficke & marchandies
to be bought and ſold with mony
Remisſion and forgeuenes of ſinnes, which
coſt our Sauiour Chriſt his moſt precious
bloud, by receauing of pardons and therfore
well paying, was often tymes graunted. I
nede not to reherſe all ſuch deteſtable enormities,
and couetous poolinges of chriſtian
ſoules as hath bene in vere, and all vnder the

                  •
               oulloure and pretence of pure and trewe
Religion: VVhich is as much to ſaye a binding
and cooplinge of vs and our Fayth to
Chriſt and gods holy word for it came of

               Religio to bind agayne.Etymologye. But wheras they
ſhoulde binde vs to Chriſt they looſe vs
from him and bynd vs to theire vayne imaginations,
fooliſh fancies, and deuelyſh traditions,
and yet in any wiſe muſt they be
called, Chriſtes vicares on earth, and faythfull
ſeruaunts, but this practiſe is no newe
thing for euer ſince the beginning the Deuell
could turne himſelfe into an angell of
light otherwiſe his perſwaſions woulde not
be followed neither could he get his praye,
theſe men maye well bee compted to be of
a Crokidelles kynd, who in the riuer neele
when he wanteth his pray, hath no waye to
get the ſame but by diſimulatiō for he fayneth
himſelf to wepe & lament til ſuch time
he getteth the man into his daūger which being
moued with pitie cometh to viſet hym,
but then greedely doth he deuouer him, but
theſe are worſe then Crokydelles, for he deuoureth
but the body, but theſe deuouer
both body and ſoules, and all for the fylling
of their owne purſes, and ſatisfying of their
couetous minde if then theſe bye wayes
ought to be left, then let vs followe the hye
and beaten way: Let vs onely imitate our
Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt and his moſt holy appoſtles,
for he ſayth exce dedi vobis exemplum
               
behold I haue geuen you an example, ſo that
we ought to frame our ſelues after his example,
our lyues after his lyfe, and ſo we ought
to interpretate as he hath geuen vs autoritie
and commisſion: therfore theſe holy doctors
and interpretators of the holy ſcriptures,
which haue indeuored themſelues to
declare and expound the hid myſteries of
the holy ghoſt which alſo from time to time
haue bene approued and allowed to be right
and trew expoſitors. would well be conſidered
and followed. Therfore haue I gathered
together in this lyttle volume the interpretation
of our moſt auncient Fathers vppon
certaine places: wherof moſt doubtes both
haue, & dayly do ariſe and for the better confirming
of their credite I haue ſet before
their words, ſuch textes of the holy ſcriptures
as they do moſt ground vpon, and in
theſe fewe queſtions you may eaſely and wel
perceaue what falſe and erronious opinions
haue bene rayſed of the reſt, therfore God
graunt vs ſo to waye and diligently conſider
hereof that we may truely knowe his bleſſed
will and pleſure as alſo frame our liues and
workes therafter to his glory & to the helpe
of our poore brothers necesſitie. Amen.
            
               ¶Your graces moſt humble
ſeruaunt
E. Crane.
            
         
         
            
            ¶THE EPISTLE TO
the Reader.
            SIth that, (gentell Reader) in this our
age we do plainely ſee many Bookes and innumerable
ſorte therof to be ſetforth, which do not
onely cleane ouerthrowe the mind of the Reader:
But alſo do allure and drawe thee in, into ſchiſmes,
and moſt peſtiferous ſectes: Therfore I did think
                  •
               
it would be a more fitte worke to renewe the olde
moniments, and workes, of our Fathers, which by
occaſion of tyme, and raſhnes of writers, haue bene
peruerted, then to ſetforth any new matter. And ſuch
workes ought moſt chefely to haue credite geuen to
them, which haue there original of our excelent roote
and ſtocke: and which doth flowe out of a good
ſtone, and runne out of a moſt excellent fountaine or
welſpringe, as are thoſe which be drawne out of the
Buttries of the old Catholike Doctors, which vnder
the choyſe of wordes haue powred (out the deuine
ſpirite) in ſuch ſorte, that all the worlde maye
eaſely vnderſtand, and chuſe an immortall lyfe: as
alſo knowe what is good, and what is euill, and as
ſone as like vnto diligent and paynefull Bees, you
haue drawne out the ſwete hony more precious then
Roſemarie out of the ſwete flowers of our holy Fathers
and hath layed them vppe in the hyue of your
minde, there is no doubte but that you ſhall haue
floddes of water of lyfe, ſeſoninge, and with force
watering the poore thirſtie Church of our Sauiour
Chriſt, farthermore euery purpoſe or Arte hath his
princes of whom it is led by, as of capitaines which
doth moſt ſone and with great expidition bring our
purpoſe to that effect which otherwiſe our wittes
would hardly comepaſſe, as I knowe him which is
ſetforth or fygured to me by the ſhape of an other
which goeth or paſſeth by ſo in our lyfe we ſhall ſone

addicte our ſelues to followe other mens examples,
as it is ſayd of old liuely examples ſticketh in ye mind
wherof as Heronimus doth witnes the Romanes
did follow as leaders & capitaynes, the Camillians
the Fabricians, and the Scipians: The Philoſophers,
hath apoynted maiſters of there Arte. Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, and Ariſtotle. The
Poets do followe Homere, Virgill, Menander,
and Terens, The hiſtorians Thucidides, Saluſt,
Herodatus, and Liuius. The Orators Licias,
Graccus, Demoſthenes, and Tullie. The Painters
or caruers, Appelles, Dedalus, Iaſon. But
we which labour for and ſeeke the moſte excellent
giftes of the mind and the knowledge of Chriſtian
doctrine, haue ſo many and ſo great examples of our
moſt worthy forfathers that we lacke nothing pertayning
to thaugmenting or eſtabliſhing of a Chriſtian
lyfe. Sith that therbe an innumerable number of
interpretors or Prophets of the word of God, and
Canonicall ſcriptures I thought good out of ſo
great a number to chuſe certayne which both by ſinceritie
and purenes of doctrine by integritie of manners,
by vehimens of teachinge. By ſharpnes of
wtte doth both much affect and delight as alſo make
vs wel inſtructed prepared and Armed not that the
doctores themſelues would haue vs farther to credite
or beleue them then they do agree with the holy
Scriptures, as Auguſtine doth witnes in many places,
but chefely in his booke of (Retractiones) wh
                  ••
               
he ſayth, I nether can, nor ought to denye. But as
there were in my forfathers, ſo there are in my, ſo
many and huge workes many things which by iuſt
iudgement and without any temeritie may well be
erected, but they haue made Arroes and dartes agaynſt
theſe Antechriſtes in the Church. For neuer
ſince the dayes of the Apoſtles vnto this our tyme,

vpon whom the endes of the worlde are come, the
Church of Chriſt hath bene free from thoſe enemies,
althought continually the truth remaineth inuincible,
yet falſhood doth neuer leaue of taduaunce her
ſelfe agaiſt it, if in this world there might be the end
of lying, the Church of Chriſt ſhould be in quiet.
But this moſt deteſtable euill, and ſinne, doth neuer
reſt to knocke at the harte of man, and with, ſuch
argumentes as one woulde not thinke, to diſquiet
the Catholike fayth, therfore it is neceſſary for the
folowers of the troth, wiſely to forſee theſe captious
Arguments, and being vncouered and brought to
light, with the mallet of veritie and truth to beate
them downe, yea and euen to the death, and bloudſheding
for verities ſake,Eccle. 4. to fight againſt them, and
chefely becauſe the holy Scriptures doth admoniſh
and ſaye,Roma. 16. Be not diſmayed or aſrayd to ſpeake the
word for thy ſoule, and for the troth euen to death,
for Paule doth deſire the Romanes to marke them
which cauſe diuiſion and geue occaſions of euill contrary
to the doctrine which they had learned and to
auoyde them, for they that are ſuch, ſerue not
the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, but their owne bellies, and
with ſweete preaching and flattering wordes, diſceaue
the hartes of the innocents, it may be that the
Apoſtle did admoniſh the Romaines that they ſhold
not be wauering in faith and in the word, that they
ſhould ſhonne and put away Heritikes and ſeducers
of ſoules. But it is commaunded vnto vs that we
ſhould preach the word, and ſhould ſtand to it at all
times and ſeaſons, we ſhould correcte, we ſhoulde
perſwade, we ſhould chide and chaſten them withall
patience and doctrine, for the time ſhall come, and
now it is, when they ſhall not away with true and
wholſome doctrine, but ſhall get them maſters according
to their owne deſires which haue itchchinge

eares and which turne their hearing and ſence from
veritie and truth, vnto fables. Therfore the Apoſtle
doth exhorte vs to watch, to labour, and to do the
workes of true goſpellers, let that terrible ſentence
of S. Chriſoſtome neuer be out of our eares, ſaying,
he is not onely a Treatour to veritie, that doth openly
ſetforth a lye in ſtead of troth, but he alſo that
doth not freely without feare ſpeake the troth. Auguſtine
ſaith the like in his Epiſtle to Caſulan: who
ſoeuer for feare of any power doth hide the truth,
ſuch a one doth prouoke the wrath of god vpon him,
becauſe he doth more feare man then God. But
gentle Readers I do beſech and perſwade you that
do wiſely and ſimply loue the wordes of troth, that
you do not contemne this treaſure that you haue
now in your handes, but both to loue it and ſet it forwarde,
for this one little Booke doth declare that
which being contayned in many volumes, would be
hard tattaine vnto, and this ſhall lead you to vnderſtand
and perceaue other hid ſecretes of the Scriptures
and by thenſtruction herof, you maye eaſely
iudge the ſciſmes and ſubtelities, of the damnable
companye. This Boke ſhall wake them that ſleepe
ſhall ſpurre forward them that runne, and ſhall
conuerte you withall your harte vnto the
liuing God, & ſhall after one vnſpeakable
ſorte, where as nowe you ſee as it
were in a glaſſe in the darke,
make you ſee the troth face
to face: Thus gentle
Reader farwell, &
take in good
parte I beſech thee, theſe
my ſimple doinges.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶Of the fall of Adam, and of originall
ſinne. liber. Gene. 20.
               
                  WHerfore as by one man ſinne
entred into the worlde,Roma. 5. and
death by the meanes of ſinne.
And ſo death went ouer all
men in ſo much that all men
ſinned. &c.
               By a man came death,1. Cori. 15. and by a man
came the reſurrection of the dead, for as
by Adam all dye euen ſo by Chriſt ſhall all
be made alyue. &c.
               
                  ¶Auguſti. lib. againſt fortunate
in the diſputation.
                  I Say that ther was frée will in him that
was firſt made and created,Free will was in the firſt man. he was ſo
made, that nothing could reſiſt his will
if he would haue kept the preceptes and
cōmaundements of God: But afterwarde
of his owne frée will and mind he ſinned,
but we be caſt into a neceſſitie, that come
of his ſéede and ſtocke,Gala. 5. therfore ſo long as
we do beare the image of an earthly man,Roma. 8.
that is,Gene. 2. ſo long as we walke after the fleſh,
which is called the olde man,Gene. 3. we haue a
neceſſitie of our cuſtome, that we do not
that that we would.The lawe of ſinne.
                  
                  
                     
But the grace of God hath inſpired his
loue into vs and hath made vs ſubiect vnto
his owne will: to whom it is ſayd you
be called into libertie, and the grace of
God hath deliuered me from the lawe of
ſinne and death, the lawe of ſinne is that
whoſoeuer ſinneth ſhould dye we be deliuered
from this lawe when wée beginne
to be iuſt, the law of death is by the which
it is ſayd vnto man, thou art earth, and in
to earth thou ſhalt returne. For of it we
men are ſo made, becauſe we be earth, in
to earth we ſhall returne againe for the
deſart of ſinne in the firſt man, but by the
grace of god, which doth deliuer and make
vs frée from the lawe of ſinne and of death,
being turned to righteouſnes we be ſo deliuered,
that afterward that fleſh that dyd
torment vs in paines remayning in ſinne:
ſhal in the reſurrection be geuen vs againe
and ſhall by no aduerſitie or contraritie
trouble or hinder vs to kepe Gods commaundements
and precepts.
                  God made man from the beginning &
left him in the hande of his owne counſell
he gaue him his commaundements and
precepts:Eccle. 15. if thou wilte obſerue the commaundements:
and kepe acceptable faithfulnes

foreuer, they ſhall preſerue thée. He
hath ſet water and fyre before thée, reach
out thine hand vnto which thou wilt: Before
man is lyfe and death, good, and euel,
loke what him liketh ſhalbe geuen him.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſti. lib. of the newe
ſoinge. cap. 8.
                  WHat fréewil can do,Freewil is ſufficient vnto euell. not being helped,
in Adam it is declared: vnto euell it
is ſufficient but not vnto good, vnles
it be helped of God, for the firſt man receaued
fréewill fully and the Lord ſet before
him as the Scripture ſayth: fyer and water:
and ſayd put thine hande vnto which
thou wilt: he dyd chuſe fyer and left the
water. Behold the iuſt Iudge: that hée
choſe being frée he had. He woulde haue
euell, and euell folowed him, behold farther,
that iuſt Iudge doing mercie: For
when he dyd ſée, that man, by th'abuſe of
his fréewill, had in himſelfe as in a Roote
had damned all his progenie and ſtocke:
he beinge not requeſted or deſired came
downe from Heauen, and with his humilitie,
healed mankinde which periſhed
through his owne pride thoſe that went

aſtraye he brought vnto lyfe, ſtraungers
he brought and lead vnto a countrey: therfore
let not man glory in himſelfe, but let
him glory in him that made him.
                  The beginning of mans pride, is to
fall away from God:Eccle. 10. and why? his harte
is gone from his maker, for pride is the oraginall
of all ſinne.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſti. lib. of correption
and grace. Cap. 10.
                  IT is demaunded of vs, what our opinion
is,Of y• grace that was giuen to Adam before his fall. as touching the gift that was geuen
vnto the firſt man, which certainly was
made perfect without any vice. Therfore
we do ſurely confeſſe, and rightly beleue,
that God, the Lord of all, which created
all thinges verie good, and forknew that
euel would come of good, and that it wold
be more honour and glory vnto himſelfe,
to make of euell good againe then not to
ſuffer euell to be, dyd ſo ordayne and appoynt
the lyfe both of Angell and man:
that in it he might firſt ſhewe what their
fréewill could do, without grace, ſecondly
what his great mercy was of it ſelfe, thir
                        •
                     
                     ly
what his iuſt Iudgement could & would

do not being reſtrayned by mercye.
                  ¶Cap. 11. The firſt man had not this
grace, that he ſhould neuer haue a will to
be euill, but he had that grace in which if
he would haue remayned, he ſhoulde neuer
haue bene euell, without, that grace,
for all his frée will he could not be good.
But by his frée will he might leaue that
grace, therfore God would not haue him
to be without his grace, whom he left in
fréewill, becauſe fréewill is ſufficient to
euell but not vnto good, vnleſſe it be helped
of the euerlaſtinge goodnes, which
helpe if man had not forſaken of his fréewill,Grace gyuen the electe after their fall.
he had euer bene. But he forſooke,
and was forſaken, the helpe was ſuch that
he might leaue it when he would, and in
which he might remaine if he would, this
is the firſt grace that was geuen vnto the
firſt Adam, but it is of more ſtrength and
efecacie in the ſecond Adam: the firſt is
that man might be iuſt, if he would. But
the ſecond is more, for by it man is made
to haue a will and ſuch a will as is ioyned
with a feruent loue ſo that volupteouſnes
of the fleſh wiſhing and deſiring contrary
to the ſpirite, we do ouercome and conquer
be the ſpirite, by this grace giuen of God,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
we haue not onely a power, and ſtrength▪
but alſo a will and deſire both to receau
                        •
                     
good and to remaine in good, ſo that we
haue both will, and power, which was
not in the firſt man, God gaue him a helpe
without which he could not remaine, if
he would, but for to haue a will he left 
                        〈◊〉
                     
in his owne power and fréewill, therfore
he might haue remayned, if he would, becauſe
he gaue him an helpe by the which
he might, and without which he could not
but becauſe he would not remaine, by thée
liuing God. It was his faulte, whoſe reward
ſhould haue bene if he would haue
remayned, he had power if he would. But
he had not will to his power, for if he had,
he had ſtill remayned if he would, which
not to will came of his owne fréewill,
which then was ſo frée, that it might chuſe
either good or euill. Therfore theſe two
ſentences that differ betwene themſelues
muſt with a vigilant eye and diligently
be conſidered, Poſſe non mori, et non poſſe
mori. two cannot dye, and not two can
dye, too cannot ſinne, and not too can ſinne▪
too cannot leaue good, and not too can leaue
good. The firſt man had potuit non peccare,
potuit non mori, potuit non diſſerrere
                     
                     bonum, that is to ſaye? He might not haue
ſinned, he might not haue died, he might
not haue leaſt good: But ſhall we ſaye,
non potuit peccare, he could not ſinne, that
had ſuch a frée will,Gene. 3
                           •
                        . or non potuit mori.
He could not dye. To whom it was ſayd,
it thou doſt ſinne thou ſhalt dye the death
or not, potuit bonum diſſerrere, he coulde
not forſake and leaue good, ſith that by
ſinne he left it and is therfore dead, therfore
the firſt libertie was, poſſe non peccare,
too cannot ſinne, but the ſecond is
greater, non poſſe peccare, he cannot ſinne,
the firſt immortalitie was, poſſe non mori,
he might not haue died. But the ſecond
ſhalbe a great deale and much bigger he
cannot dye, the firſt power and ſtrength to
remayne in felicitie, was Bonum poſſe
non diſſerrere: He might not haue lefte
good for he might haue choſen, but the ſecond
ſhalbe Bonum non poſſe diſſerrere, he
can not leaue good.
                  ¶Cap. 12. Now after, that great libertie
was vtterly loſt, for the deſert of
ſinne, our great infirmitie muſt be helped
and reſtored by ſome more excellent gifts.
for it pleaſed god that he might extinguiſh
& put out the pride of mans preſumption,

that is to ſay of man, that no fleſh ſhould
glory before him, but of his owne deſerts
which he might haue had, but now hath
loſt: and by that he might haue had them▪
but that he hath loſt thē y• is by his frewil,
wherfore now he remaynes onely to be
deliuered by the grace of his Sauiour,
therfore let not the vniuſt glory or pride in
themſelues, becauſe they haue not wherof
to be proud, nether the iuſt ought to pride,
becauſe they haue not their owne glorye
but receaue it of an other to whom they
ſaye,Pſalme. 3. thou art my worſhippe and the lifter
vp 
                        •
                     f my head. Therfore the Lord would
not haue his beloued to glory or triumphe
in their owne ſtrength, but in him, that
doth not onely geue them ſuch helpe as he
gaue to the firſt man,To remayne in good commeth onely of God. without they could
not ſtand if they would: But alſo worketh
this will in them: therfore both power &
will to remayne in euerlaſting ioye is giuen
them by the larges and frée gifte of
Gods grace,The work of God in mans will. their will is ſo inflamed and
ſetforward of God his ſpirite, that therfore
the can becauſe they wyll, and therfore the
will becauſe God worketh in them will.
For if the Lord ſhould leaue them to their
owne will and libertie, in the infirmitie▪
                     
of this lyfe, wherin notwithſtanding the
muſt, for the correction of their pride,
exerciſe vertue, as in the helpe of God,
without which they could not ſtand, they
might haue remeaned, if they would neither
God neded not to worke in them wil,
but nowe amongſt ſo many tentations
their will by infirmitie muſt nedes fall,
and therfore now they cannot remayne,
becauſe of infirmitie they cannot haue a
will, or els cannot ſo will, as they ought:
Therfore the weakenes of mans will, is
prouided for and lead by the guidinge of
Gods grace, and therfore although it be
weake and infirme yet it will not bewearied,
neither will by any aduerſitie be ouerthrowne,The wil of a good man is derected by ye grace of God.
it is ſo brought to paſſe, that
the will of man, being full of inbecilitie
and weakenes. Yet doth remaine in the
lytle goodnes by the vertue and gifte of
God, wheras the will of the firſt man being
ſtrong and hole, hauing alſo the benifite
of fréewill could not remaine in one
more large goodnes, he ſuffered the ſtrong
man to do what him liſted, but the weake
he hath helped that by his gifte the ſhould
both haue a wil for good and alſo remaine
therin,Luke. 22. as ſayth Chriſt▪ I haue prayed for

thée that thy fayth fayle not, it is vnderſtand
to be ſayd vnto him that is build vpon
the rocke: and the man of God hath
not only found mercy that he might be
faythfull,1. Cori. 1. but alſo that hsi fayth ſhould
be ſtedfaſt that he that doth reioyce ſhould
reioyce in the Lord.
               
               
                  ¶S▪ Auguſtine in his Epiſtle
to Paulinus.
                  LEt them not ſtumble at the ſtumbling
block: ſuperſticiouſly or preſūpteouſly,
defending & mayntayning nature
and fréewill, as haue done the Philoſophers
and wiſemen of this world, which
haue taught that of their owne will they
could liue well and bleſſedly: Let ſuch
take hede leaſt by the wiſedome of words,Againſt ye defendours of freewill.
or rather gloſinge therof they make the
croſſe of Chriſt in vaine, and this is to
ſtumble at the ſtumbling blocke: for ſith
that nature could not remayne and kepe
her ſelfe in that integritie and perfect ſtate
wherin ſhe was created, neither without
the grace of God could preſerue that lyfe
that was giuen her, how now without
the grace of God can ſhe receaue it againe

being once loſt.
               
               
                  ¶S. Auguſtine in the Epiſtle
to vatal, 107.
                  IF we will truly defend fréewill,Our frewil is made fre by ye grace of God. let vs
not put away that wherof it is made frée,
for he that putteth away grace wherby
our fréewill is made frée to decline from
euell, and to do good, ſuch on will yet
haue his fréewill ſtill to remaine in bondage,
and not frée.
                  Therfore Saule ſayd vnto Dauid,
                     1. Re. 16. bleſſed
art thou my ſonne Dauid in doing thou
ſhalt do, and in ſtrength, thou ſhalt haue
ſtrength.
                  Man being in honour,Pſal. 4. 8. and not hauing
vnderſtanding, was compared to brute
Beaſtes, and is made like vnto them.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſti. of Geneſi.
lib. 8. Cap. 6.
                  NEther he yt made althings very good
and precious,Obedience is the greateſt vertue. in Paradiſe made any
euell. But the euill that happened
vnto man, was the tranſgreſſion and breakinge
of the precept & commaundement

it was therfore expedient and neceſſary,
that man being vnder God, ſhould haue
ſome thing prohibited and forbidden him,
that by his obedience the Lord might be
knowne, honored, and worſhiped: which
vertue of the reſt is the chefeſt, ſo that the
greateſt vice that is in a reſonable man is
diſobedience, and to haue a will to vſe his
owne power, and ſtrength: to his great
deſtruction. Therfore man ſhould not haue
knowne, that he had a Lord ouer him a
ruler or ſuperiour, if he had not bene commaunded
ſomwhat:The tree of knowledge of good & euell. therfore that trée was
not euell, but it was called the trée of
knowledge of good and bad, ſo that if after
the reſtraynt man ſhould eate therof,
in it ſhould be the breaking of the commaundment
that by th'experience of punniſhment
man might learne what difference
was betwene the goodnes of obedience,
and the euell of diſobedience: Farther
you muſt not thinke this to be ſayd in
a figure, but that it was in déede a very
trée of woodde, at that this man was not
giuen it for the woodde or for the frute that
grue theron, but for the matter that
ſhould followe if he dyd touch it.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Auguſti. againe.
Cap. 1. 3.
                  THE ſinner dyd couet and deſire
nothing elles, but not to be vnder
the rule and gouerment of God,
when he committed that which I would
to God, he had neuer committed, he ought
onely to haue had reſpect and to haue conſidered
the precept and commaundement
of his Lord and ruler: which if he had
onely conſidered what elles ſhould haue
bene conſidered but the will of God, what
elles ſhould haue bene preferred before
mans will but Gods will, the Lord why
he commauded it lyes in himſelfe, but the
ſeruaunt ſhould haue done that he was
commaunded.
                  ¶God created man to be vndeſtroyed,Sapi. 2.
yée, after the image of his owne lykenes
made he him: neuertheleſſe, thorow enuie
of the Deuell came death into the
world: and they that hold of his ſide, do
as he doth.
               
               
                  ¶S. Auguſtine in his Enchiridion,
cap. 104.
                  
                     
IT was requiſit and neceſſary that man
ſhould at the firſt be ſo made and created,The creation of ye firſt man Adam
that he might haue power either to
do good or euel, nether without reward fo
                        •
                     
well doing, neither without poniſhment
for euell doing. But afterward it ſhalbe
ſo, that he ſhall not haue will to do euell
neither therfore ſhall he want fréewill: fo
                        •
                     
his fréewil ſhalbe the more frée that it ſha
                        〈…〉
                     
not at all ſerue ſinne, but the order is not
to be ouerpaſſed, in which God woulde
ſhew, how good it was, that man might
ſinne although it is better that he cannot
ſinne, for the firſt immortalitie was that
he might dye. But the ſecond ſhalbe greater
that he ſhall not dye.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſti. Cap. 105.
                  THe firſt ſtate man loſt by fréewill,Adam loſt immortalitie by freewill.
but the ſecond ſtate he getteth by
grace, if he had not ſinned, the firſt
ſtate he had of deſerte, albeit not without
grace: for ſith that fréewill was ſo apt to
ſinne it was not ſufficient to kepe righteouſnes,
without the helpe of the grace of
God: for as to dye is in a mans owne
power when he liſt, as wt too much eating,

or with not eating at all he may kyll himſelfe
if he will, but cannot helpe himſelfe
againe without medicine, ſo man in Paradiſe
leauing righteouſnes by his owne
wyll was ſufficient to kyll himſelfe: But
to ſaue himſelfe he was not ſufficient
without the great mercy and grace of God
Thus farre as touching fréewill.
               
            
            
               ¶Of honoring of ſayntes.
               I Am the Lord and this is my name and
my glory will I giue to none other,Eſai. 42. neither
myne honour to grauen Images.
Behold old things are come to paſſe and
new things I do declare, and or euer they
come I tell you of them.
               I am he,Eſai. 43. before whom there was neuer
any God, and their ſhalbe none after me,
I am euen, I am the onely Lord and beſide
me ther is no Sauiour.
               I am the firſt and the laſt,Eſai. 44. and beſides
me there is no God who is lyke vnto me.
               Come vnto me all you that labour and
are heauie laden,Math. 11. and I will refreſh you.
               Aſcribe vnto the Lord,Pſalme. 29 worſhippe and
ſtrenght geue vnto the Lord the honour
due vnto his name: worſhippe the Lord

with holy worſhippe.
               And they made a Caulfe in Oreb,
                  Pſalme. and
honored a grauen Image and turned the
glory of the liuing god into the ſimiltitude
and lykenes of a Caulfe that eateth heye,
they haue forgotten God that ſaued them.
               Sée whether ſuch things be done there
whether the Gentiles themſelues deale ſo
falſly and vntruly with their Gods,Ieremi. 2. which
yet are no Gods in déede. But my people
haue giuen ouer their hie glory for a thing
that may not helpe them and much farther
he ſayth in that Chapiter.
               Put away the ſtrange Gods that are
in among you,Gene. 35. and be cleane, and change
your garments for we will ariſe and goe
vp to Bethel.
               Heare O Iſraell the Lorde our God is
Lord onely.Deut. 6.
               
               This is our God,Barauch. 3. and there ſhall none
other be compared vnto him, it is he that
hath found out all wiſedome and hath giuen
her vnto Iacob his ſeruaunt, and to
Iſraell his beloued, afterward dyd he ſhew
himſelfe vpon earth, & dwell among men.
               Becauſe they haue turned the troth of
God into a lye,Roma. 1. and haue worſhipped and
ſerued the creature, rather then ye Creator

which is bleſſed for euer. Amen.
               Through him,Roma. 11. by him, and in him,
are all thinges. To him be honour and
glory foreuer. Amen.
               
                  ¶Auguſti. lib. of true Religion
Cap. the laſte.
                  LEt vs not loue viſſible ſightes, leaſt
flying from veritie, and louinge ſhadowes,
we be caſt into darkenes, let
vs not ground our Religion vpon our
phantaſies, for better is a lyttle that is
true, then a great deale fained of our owne
mind. Let vs not haue Religion of worſhipping
of dead men, for if they haue liued
godly, it is not to be thought that ſuch
do ſéeke honour: But they wiſt that we
ſhould honour him, by whoſe gyfte, wée
may be made partners of their euerlaſting
ioye. Therfore they are to be worſhipped
for example ſake, and not to be prayed vnto
for Religion: For this is the working
of our ſaluation, that the power of God
and his conſubſtantiall wiſedome coeternall
with the Father would voutſafe to
take the nature of man, by which he might
teach vs that, that is to be honored of man

that is to be honored of all reaſonable cretures,
and that we ſhould beleue that the
moſt excellent Angelles,We ought to worſhip one onely God. and miniſtringe
ſpirites of God do wiſhe that with them
we ſhould worſhippe and honour the lyving
God, by whoſe contemplation and
ſight they be bleſſed, for we be not bleſſed
by beholding and looking one the Angels,
but by the beholdinge of God, for whoſe
ſake we do loue the Angelles: therfore
we do honour them in louing of them, and
not in ſeruing of them, neither in building
of Temples and Churchches to them for
they would not haue themſelues ſo to be
honoured of vs, for we our ſelues beinge
good are the Temples of God,Apo. 19. therfore
it is well written that the Angels them
ſelues do forbid man to honour them. But
to honour and worſhippe one onely God,
vnder whom both they and we remayne
as fellowe ſeruauntes.
               
               
                  ¶Hillarie vpon Math. canon. 27.
                  BEcauſe y• fóoliſh Virgins,Eueri man ſhall beare his owne burden. their lamps
being extincte and gone out, coulde
not go méete the Bridegrome, they
deſired and prayed the wiſer virgins to

lend them oyle, to whom they made anſwere,
that they could giue them none,
leaſt paraduenture they ſhould not haue
ſufficient for al, wherof we be taught that
other mens workes and merites cannot
helpe vs, for euery man muſt buy oyle for
his owne Lampe.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine vpon the 15. Pſalme
50. verſe.
The hill of God. &c.
                  I Haue lyft vp mine eyes vnto the hilles
from whence commeth my ſaluation,
neither yet commeth my helpe from the
hilles or of the hilles. But from and of
the liuing God that made both Heauen
and earth.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine in Opere imperfecto.
vpon Mathi. Capite. 32.
                  TEll me O thou foolyſh prieſt?Wee ought not to truſt in creaturs is not
the Goſpell of Chriſt dayly preached
to the people in the Churchches, and
is it not daily tought? then if being tought
them it doth not profitte them, how can it

ſaue them being hanged about their necks
Father whether is the ſtrenght and operation
of the Goſpell in the figures of letters,
or in the vnderſtanding of the ſences,
if it be in the figures, then is it wel hanged
about their neckes? But if it be in vnderſtanding
then is it better to put it into thy
harte,Aut. 29. then to hange it about thy necke,
other meaning to ſhew themſelues more
iuſt do hang the Goſpell about the hems
and ſkertes of their garment, or at their
heyre or lookes: O deteſtable impietie &
vngodlines, which will rather ſhew godlines
in their garments outwardly then in
the precious bodye of Chriſt: For he that
is not ſaued by eating and receauing his
bodye, wilbe ſaued by the holines of the
hemes of his garments: deſpairing in the
great mercies of his goodues, doth put his
truſt in the coote or gowne of a Temperall
or wordly man. But what will they ſaye,
O dyd not Paule giue his handkercher and
gerdell to heale the weake? Yes certainly,
before the knowledge of god was knowne
in man, it was neceſſary & reaſon that by
the godlines of man Gods power might
be knowne:Marc. 7. But now it is madnes ſith
that now we knowe the power of God

what is it neceſſary that we ſhould know
it by the power of man, another doth thus
interpretate this place ſaying? By the obſeruations
of times and dayes delatinge
at large their wordes and earneſtly teaching
that by conuerſaſion of health and
ſaluation, of whom Chriſt ſpake, in vaine
they worſhippe me teaching the precepts
and doctrine of man: for they magnifie the
hemmes and ſeames of their clothes. For
when they prayſe the ſuperfluous obſeruations
of their owne righteouſnes, to be
pleaſing vnto God they do as it weare
magnifie the ſeames of their clothes.
               
               
                  Exodus. 20.
                  THou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen
Image, nor y• likenes of any thing
y• is in heauen aboue, nor in y• earth beneth
neither in the waters vnder the earth, for
I am the Lord thy God ſtrong & Ielous.
                  I am the Lord your God,Deut. 2. 8. you ſhall not
make to your ſelues any Idole or grauen
Image, neither ſhal you ſet a ſtone in your
land to worſhippe it.
                  You ſhall ouerthrow their Alters,Deut. 7. and
breake downe their pillers, cut downe
their groues & burne their grauen Images

with fyer for thou art an holy people v
                        •
                     
                     thy
Lord thy God.
                  Curſed be the man that maketh an
                        •
                     
carued or molten Image, an abhomination
vnto the Lord, the worke of the hand
                        •
                     
of the hole craftes man and putteth in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
ſecret place, in like caſe theſe places which
are too many to reherſe. 3. Para. 33. Pſalm
105. Pſalme. 96. Eſai. 30. Deut. 6. Deut. 32.
1. Reg. 7. Mala. 3.
               
               
                  ¶Iohn Chriſoſtome vpon Math.
Homelie. 45. Cap. 23.
                  HOw will you flye the iudgement 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Hell & damnation: By the building
your graues or Sepulcres of the
ſaintes, or rather by purging your hartes
from rancour and maliſe? wyll God iudge
as man iudgeth, man iudgeth man by
worke, but God iudgeth the harte? What
righteouſnes is this to honour the ſaintes
and holy men, and to contemne ſanctitte
and holines. The firſt degree of godlines
is firſt to loue godlines & then the godly,
for the ſaints were not before ſanctitie or
holines, but holines was before the ſaints.
Therfore wel do they honour y• righteous

or iuſt that doth tread vnderfoote or ſpurne
at iuſtice or righteouſnes: how will you
eſcape? will the ſaintes whoſe graues and
moniments you adthorne and decrée deliuer
you, the ſaintes cannot be frendes to
them to whom the Lord is enemie: for
can the familie or houſhold be inquiet, if
the Lord or maſter be againſt it? Howe
will you eſcape? will paraduenture a bare
or vnfrutefull name deliuer you becauſe
you do ſeme to be the people of God? what
doth it profite that harlot, if ſhe be called a
chaſt woman and is not, ſo ſhall it nothing
auayle the ſinner, if he be called or name
the ſeruaunt of God: In the end how wil
you auoyd or eſcape,The honor of God is not in ontwarde workes. the punniſhment of
Hell fyer: which do build Churches and
yet do not followe the fayth of the ecleſiaſticall
truth. Which read the Scriptures
and yet do not beleue them, which name
the Prophets, and Apoſtelles, and Martirs
and yet do not imitate the Martirs,
nor follow their confeſſion. Neither haue
you hard him that ſaith,Math. 7. not euery one that
ſayth vnto me Lord Lord, ſhall enter into
the kyngdome of Heauen, but he that doth
the will of my father which is in Heauen:
For as all that do call on the Lord are not

the Lordes ſo not all that name the Apoſtelles
and Martirs are true worſhippers
of them, but they do truly worſhippe
and honour them that imitate and follow
their workes and fayth.
                  I am thy Lorde God and Sauiour
worſhippe none other God but me:Exo. 15.
                  
                  Do not turne vnto Idoles neyther
make you fayned Gods for I am the Lord
your God.Leuit. 19.
                  
                  Among the Gods there is none lyke
vnto the Lord,Pſalme. 87 and there are no workes
lyke vnto thy workes, all nations that
thou haſt created ſhall come and worſhip
before the Lorde: and ſhall glorifie thy
name, becauſe thou art great and doinge
great thinges, and thou art the onely God
and God alone.
                  
                     Manoah ſayd vnto the Angell of the
Lord we will kepe thée ſtill,Iud. 13. vntil we haue
made ready a kydd and haue ſet it before
thée. And the Angell of the Lord ſayd vnto
Manoah, though thou make me abyde
I will not eate of thy bread, and if thou
wilt offer a burnt offering thou muſt offer
it vnto the Lord. &c.
                  And I wyll ſpeake my iudgementes
with them.Hie. 1. &c.
                  
                     
Haſt not thou ſene what he hath done.Hie. 2.
Curſed be the man that truſteth in man.Hie. 17.
                  
                  He that loued vs and waſſhed vs from
our ſinnes.Apo. 1. 3.
                  
                  Their is but one God and one mediatour.1 Timo. 2.
&c.
                  Though their be many Gods and many
Lordes yet to vs is there but one God,1. Cor. 8.
for the better vnderſtanding of the caſe
Read theſe places at large and you ſhall
find the wordes moſt playne.
               
               
                  ¶Iohn Chriſoſtomes Homelie of the
profect of the Goſpell. Thom. 6.
                  THe woman of Canaine came and
praied vnto Chriſt for her daughter:
which then was poſſeſſed of a deuel
crying after him with a loud and ſhryll
voyce and ſayd haue mercy vpon me Lord
for my daughter is ſore vered of a Dyuell:
Behold the ſtrange & Barberus woman,
and an outcaſt from the lawe of the Iewes
& what was ſhe otherwiſe then a dogge &
ſuch a one as was not worthy to haue her
requeſt and deſire graunted her for ſayth
Chriſt it is not fitte to take the bread from
the children and to caſt it vnto dogges.

Yet notwithſtanding for the continuall
feruentnes of her prayer ſhe is made worthy
not only to be number among the children
which before was coumpted as a
dogge,Euerye maus own praier doth moſt pleaſe God. but was alſo ſent away with great
prayſe and commendacion at Chriſt his
hand, for he ſayd, O woman, great is thy
fayth: then ſith that Chriſt himſelfe ſayd
great is thy fayth we nede no farther demonſtration
or inquiſitiō, of this no mans
glory and commendation ſo that hereby
you ſée that ſhe which was vnworthy by
continuance of prayer is made worthy
and we more playnely learne, that wée
our ſelues praying do more profite vs the
                        •
                     
when other men pray for vs? this woman
cryed and the diſiples came vnto him ſaying
ſend her away for ſhe crieth and yaleth
after vs: and vnto them he ſayd I am not
ſent but vnto the loſt ſhéepe of Iſraell: But
when ſhe herſelfe came and continually
cryed ſaying Lord, yet the whelpes do eate
of the cromes of their maſters table, then
he rewarded her and ſayd, be it vnto thée
as thou wilt: Now you ſée how he dyd
denye when others prayed, but when ſhe
herſelfe came and faythfully prayed and
cryed conſtantly, vnto him, he graunted

her piticion, for vnto them he ſayd I am
not ſent but to the loſt ſhéepe of the houſe
of Iſraell. But vnto her he ſayd great is thy
fayth, be it vnto thée euen as thou wilte,
ſo likewiſe in the beginning and at the
firſt he did not anſweare:The ſilēce of the Lord to the Cananite. But when ſhe
came once twiſe, & thriſe: then he graunted
her requeſt and in the end he teacheth vs
that he dyd driue of and prolonge his anſweare:
not meaning therby to dryue her
away: But that he might openly and to
all men ſetforth and declare the pacience
of the woman, for if he had prolonged the
tyme for her repulſe and to dryue her awaye
he would not haue giuen to her, her
requeſt at the laſt: and we ſhould not haue
knowne the conſtant and vnwaueringe
fayth of the woman from the beginninge
vnto th'end: for his diſciples ſayd: ſend
her away Lord: for ſhe calleth and cryeth
after vs: you heare her voyce onely, but I
ſée her mind and know what ſhe will ſay:
I will not that the treaſure of her mynde
and harte: ſhould be hidde and vnknowne:
But I tary & hold my peace that it might
be ſetforth: and openly knowne to euery
man: conſidering we be not ignorant of
all theſe thinges: although we be ſinners

and vnworthy to receiue the benifites and
goodnes of God: Yet let vs not be weary
of praying neither let vs diſmay our ſelues
although we lacke interceſſours and aduocates
knowing that he himſelfe is our
refuge and healpe: and let vs come with
a good corrage and cherefully vnto the
Lord: neither if he do differre or prolonge
the tyme let vs ſo go away & leaue of for
we knowe that it commeth of his great
mercy and good will vnto vs ſo to deferre
and prolonge.
                  Farther we nede no aduocates or ſpokeſmen
with God:In y• ſame Homelie. neither nede we to make
many cerymonies to blinde other mens
eyes:with God we nede no ſpokeſmen. But although thou art alone and
hath no ſpokeſman and by thy ſelfe prayeth
hartely vnto god: thou ſhalt not be void
of thy purpoſe neither the Lord wyll ſo
ſone graunt and giue vs our requeſt when
other men prayeth for vs, as when wée
pray for our ſelues ye although we be full
of ſinnes.
               
               
                  ¶The ſame vpon Geneſis
Homelie. 52.
                  WE be conſtrayned to reherſe all this
ſtory that we may learne: that wée
do not ſo much profite our ſelues: By

the prayers of others as when we do pray
our ſelues and chefely when with a vigilant
and wakefull mynd we pray, for ſhe
hauing the diſciples to pray for her did not
auayle any thing at all, vntyll ſhe came
herſelfe and with her owne mouth requeſted
his mercy.
                  Why haue you left the Lord of Iſraell,
                     Ioſue. 22.
buylding and Alter of ſacrilege, and leauing
the honour of the true God.
                  This euill be farre from vs,Ioſue. 22. that we
ſhould goe from the Lord and leaue his
ſteppes, buildinge Alters for burnt offerings
and ſacrifices otherwiſe then to the
true Lord.
                  The Lord is my rocke,2. Reg. 5. my ſtrenght
and my Sauiour, my ſtrong God and I
wil truſt in him my buckler y• horne of my
ſaluation. My lifter vp, and my refuge
which will deliuer me from iniquitie.4. Reg. 5.
                  
                  I do well know that there is none other
God on the earth but onely in Iſraell.
                  
                  Their gold and ſiluer ſhall not deliuer
them in the day of the fury and wrath of
the Lord.Ezech. 7. &c.Ezech. 20.
                  
                  We ſhalbe as the Gentilles and nations
of the earth honouringe ſtockes and
ſtones:Ezech. 26. I lyue ſayth the Lorde becauſeMore at large it doth apere.
                     
with a ſtrong hand and ſtretched out arme
and in fury and wrath will raigne ouer
you, &c.
               
               
                  ¶Iohn Chriſoſtome. To. 1.
                  VVE ſay theſe thinges: that you ſhould
not onely heare?wee ought to folow y• maners of ye ſainctes. But that you ſhould
alſo followe that which you heare, that is
to ſaye canſtancie and all righteouſnes
that no man for deſperation of himſelfe
ſhould dye, albeit heretofore the body hath
bene ſlouthfull, that euery one of vs cannot
place our hope in our owne godlines
and in tegritie of manners: But only in
the mercies of God.
               
               
                  ¶Cirill in his Booke of
Treaſure. 4. Cap. 2.
                  FArthermore they that are iuſtified by
the righteouſnes of God,No righteouſnes commeth to vs of man. kepinge the
gift, they obſerue the cōmaundements
but to make others iuſt and righteous thei
cannot, for no man being ſanctified by the
perticipiation and receauing of the holy
ghoſt? of his owne will and power can
giue the ſame vnto others, for it is onely

the fountayne and welſpring of godlines
that can do it: for we ſée that the Angels
are ſanctified by the perticipiation of grace
but they are neuer found to haue giuen or
imparted that godlines vnto men. Neither
bleſſed Moſes being ſet to ouerſée the
lxx.Nume. 11. elders dyd himſelfe giue the ſpirite of
God to them, but as it is written, God
came downe in a cloude and toke of the
ſpirite that was vpō him & gaue it vnto ye
lxx. elders, therfore ſuch as are ſanctified by
grace may kepe that godlines: But to in
parte or giue it to others they cannot, for
the ſonne of God dyd not iuſtifie or ſanctifie
his diſciples as of his owne power being
a ſonne,Iohn. 20. but as the fountaine and
roote of righteouſnes being in that reſpect
God himſelfe he ſayd take ye the holy
Ghoſt.
               
               
                  ¶Clement in his 5. Booke to
Iames the Lordes brother.
                  CErtainely what thing is ſo vngodly,It is an vngodli thing to gyue thankes & to praye to ſtockes or ſtones and vayne Images.
what is ſo vngrate a thing as to receaue
a benifite or good turne of god:
and to geue thankes therfore vnto ſtockes
and ſtones: Therfore he waſhed and vnderſtand
your ſaluation from whence it

commeth, for God hath mede and lacketh
no mans helpe, neither requireth he any
thing, neyther of any man can he be harmed.
But it is we that muſt be helped
and reliued, it is we that may be hurte or
harmed of him and not he of vs.
               
               
                  ¶Clement in the ſame place &
Booke afore reherſed.
                  WE honour viſible Images as wée
ſhould honour God himſelfe, which
certaynely is falſe for if truly you wil
honour the Image of God, doinge well
to man thou ſhalt honour his Image for
in euere man is the Image of God,what is the true Image of God. but
the ſimilitude of god is not in euery man:
But it is onely in ſuch as haue a lowely
ſpirite and pure minde, therfore if you wil
honour the Image of God, the truth is to
do well, and vnto man which is created
and made to the Image and likenys of
God:The honoring of god to geue meate to the hungery, drinke
to ye thirſtie, clothes to the naked, harbour
to ye harbourles: & this is only that, that is
giuē vnto ye Lord god. Then what maner
of honoring the Lord is this? to runne to
Images of ſtones and ſtockes? and to vnprofitable

and dead figures: honoringe,
them, and contemning man in whom the
verie character & Image of God apeareth
in dede: Yea rather be ſure hereof that he
that doth murther, that doth committe
Fornication or adulterie, or doth any other
thing to the hurte and harme of man:
In all ſuch thing he doth diſhonour the Image
of God, for it is great diſhonour to
God to haue man hurte or harmed: Therfore
vnderſtand that this is the inwarde
perſwaſion of the Serpent that doth perſwade
you to be godly in honouring theſe
vnſenſible and dead ſtockes: and not to
be vngodly in contemning or neglecting
our duetie, to the ſenſible and reſonable
creature, and very Image of God in dead
man.
                  When you ſhall paſſe ouer Iordayne
and come into the land of Chanaan & driue
away all the inhabiters therof,Nume. 23. and breake
their titels, and throw downe their Images,
and leaye waſt all their proud and
mightie thinges.Eſaie. 6.
                  
                  Who dare then make a God, or faſſhion
an Image that is profitable for nothinge,
behold all the fellowſhip of them
muſt be brought to confuſion, and truely

the workemaſters of them are men, they
ſhall all be gathered together, they ſhall
ſtand & tremble & be confounded one with
another. &c. Read the Chapiter and ſée
farther.
                  Vnhappye are they & among the dead
is their hope,Wiſdo. 13. that call them Gods which
are but the workes of mens handes: Gold
ſiluer, and the thing that is found out by
cunning, ye ſimilitude of beaſts, or of any
vayne ſtone that hath bene made by hand
of old. Read alſo the xv. Chapiter, where
more at large you ſhall find this declared.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtin in his 10. Booke intituled
De ciuitate Dei.
                  VVOrthyly are ſuch called bleſſed as
are in Heauen in the preſence of
God his ſeate: which by the participiation
of their creatour are made to reioyce:
by his euerlaſtingnes and eternitie are
made ſtrong: by his truth are made bleſſed
and holy, and becauſe we here are mortall
and miſerable, they do mercifully loue vs
that we might be with them immortall
and bleſſed: But they would not that we
ſhould pray or ſacrifice vnto them: but only

vnto him: to whom both they and we do
ſacrifice and pray: for we with them, and
they with vs together are one Citie vnto
the Lord,Pſalm. 80. as it is ſayd in the Pſalme. O
thou Citie of the Lord glorious things are
ſayd of thée.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine vpon Iohn Hart.
23. Chapiter. Cap. 5.
                  THis is Chriſtian Religion that we
ſhould worſhippe one only God and
not many Gods:All holines commeth of one only God. becauſe none can
make the ſoule bleſſed, but one only God
by the participiation of God, the ſoule is
bleſſed, and not by the gift of another holy
or bleſſed ſpirite, neither yet by the gift of
an Angell is it ſanctified: for thou ſhalt
not be made bleſſed of an Angell: But
of whom the Angell is bleſſed, of him
ſhalt thou receaue bleſſing. Therfore who
ſo ſhal honour or pray vnto ſainctes either
to be mediatours or ſpokeſmen betwene
God and vs, either who ſo hopeth to haue
their requeſtes fulfilled at their handes is
farre diſceyued and tranſgreſſeth the holy
will and commaundement of his Lorde
and maker.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of repentaunce and confesſion in three
ſorts, that is towards God, Brotherly,
and Publike confeſsion towards God.
               I Haue made my faulte knowne vnto
thée,Pſalme. 31. and myne vnrighteouſnes haue I
not hidden, I haue ſayd I wyll confeſſe
mine vnrighteouſnes againſt my ſelfe vnto
the Lord, and thou haſt remitted the
vngodlines of my ſinne.
               I confeſſe mine owne iniquitie,Pſal. 50. and my
ſinne is euer before me to thée onely haue
I ſinned and done euill in thy ſight.
               Confeſſe your ſelues vnto the Lorde,Pſal. 50.
becauſe he is good, and his mercy endureth
for euer.
               If we do confeſſe our ſinnes,1. Iohn. 1. God is
faythfull and iuſt, that he may remitte our
faultes, & to purge vs from all iniquitie.
               
                  ¶Brotherly confesſion.
                  IF thou offereſt thine offeringe at the
Alter,Math. 15. and there remembreſt, that thy
Brother hath ought againſt thée, leaue
there thine offereng before the Alter, and
go firſt to be reconſiled vnto thy Brother,
and then come and offer thine offering.
                  
                     
Confeſſe your ſinnes and offences one
to another,Iames. and pray one for another.
                  Forgiue thy Brother that hurteth or
offendeth thée,Eccle. 28. & then when thou prayeſt
thy ſinnes ſhalbe forgiuen the, one man
reſerueth wrath to another, and ſeketh
vengeance of God, ſeing he hath not mercie
one a man lyke vnto himſelfe, and yet
aſketh mercy for his owne ſinnes.
               
               
                  ¶Publike confesſion and
Excomminication.
                  IF thy brother haue ſinned againſt thée,Math. 18.
goe and correct him betwene him and
thée, if he heare thée, then haſt thou
wone thy Brother: but if he will not
heare thée, then take to thée one or two
that in the mouth of two or thrée witneſſes
might ſtand all troth, and veritie, and
if he harken not to them declare it to
the Church, if he giue no eare vnto the
Church, then accompt him as an ethnicke
and hethen. &c.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſt. to Seleucian
Epiſt. 105.
                  
                     
REpentaunce is a dayly payne and
punniſhment of good and faythfull
men by the which we do knocke
our breſt and ſaye, forgiue vnto vs our
debts. &c. And in theſe wordes humbling
our ſoules dayly we do repent vs of our
ſinnes.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſt. in his third Sermond
vpon the natiuitie of our Lord.
                  NOthing maketh true repentaunce
but the hatred of ſinne and the loue
of God, when thou doſt ſo repent
that in thy minde thy ſinne doth ſéeme
bitter vnto the, which before in thy lyfe
dyd ſeme ſwete and pleaſaunt vnto thée,
and when that which before dyd delight
thy body, doth now trouble and diſquiet
the ſame, then doſt thou fithe aright, and
ſaye onely to the Lord, haue I ſinned and
done euill in thy fight. &c.
               
               
                  ¶Chriſoſtome vpon the Epiſtle to
the Hebrues. Honiely. 31. Cap. 12.
                  IT is a good thing, that a man ſhould confeſſe
and acknowledge his faultes and
continually to haue them in memory,

for there is no greater remedie for them,The continual remē
                        braunce of our ſinnes is profitable.
then the continuall memory therof, and
nothing maketh man more to flye euill,
therfore let vs perſwade our ſelues that
we haue ſinned, and let not onely our
tongue pronounce it, but let alſo our conſcience
confeſſe it, and let vs not only ſay
we be ſinners, but let vs call to accompt
and well remember euery ſinne particularly:
I do not commaund thée that thou
ſhouldeſt openly ſhew thy ſelfe and accuſe
thée to others, but I will that, that thou
ſhouldeſt obey the prophet,Too ſayth theſe wordes Ca. 4. which ſayth.
Reueyle and open thy lyfe to the Lorde,
therfore before God confeſſe thy ſinnes,Pſal. 36.
and before the true iudge with prayer pronounce
thy faultes, not with the tongue,
but with the memory of thy conſcience,
and then truſt that thou ſhalt obtayne
mercy, if continually thou doſt beare in
minde and memory thy ſinnes thou ſhalt
neuer pretend or thinke euil to thy neighbour.
               
               
                  ¶Chriſoſtome vpon the Pſal.
Miſerere. Home.
                  
                     
DEclare and open thy ſinnes that
thou mayſt waſh them awaye,The Profet of confeſſion. if
thou béeſt aſhamed to tell them to
any man, then dayly repeate and record
them in thy minde, I do not commaund
thée to tell them to thy ſeruaunt which
will ſhame thée with them, but to God
which healeth thée to them, if thou doſt
not confeſſe thy ſinnes, doſt thou thinke
that God doth not know them, will he
demaund of thée whether thou haſt offended,
when thou dideſt he was preſent,
when thou committeſt thy ſinne he knoweth
it, thou waſt not aſhamed to ſinne
and offend, yet thou art aſhamed to confeſſe
thyne offences, therfore in this lyfe
confeſſe thy ſinne that in the lyfe to come
thou mayſt haue reſt.
               
               
                  ¶Ambros of the repentaunce of
Peter th'apoſtle. 46. Sermond.
                  PEter burſt out a wepinge,Math. 26. yet with
his mouth he ſayd nothing, I finde
that he wept,The confeſſion of Peter thapoſtle. but I find not what
he ſayd, I read of his teares, but what
ſatiſfaction he made I read not, truly Peter
wept & held his peace, for that which

is repented is not excuſed, yet that ſinne
which cannot be defended and mayntayned,
may be waſhed awaye for teares do
waſh away the ſinne: Which to confeſſe
in wordes weare ſhame, therfore teares
are ſinnes of repentaunce, and forgiuenes
neither do they ſhame the demaunder but
purchaſeth his requeſt, inwarde, teares,
are after a ſorte prayers, which although
by outward requeſt they demaund not for
giuenes yet they deſerue it they tell not
there cauſe and yet they do obtayne mercye,
and teares are more profitable then
babling with the lyppes, for talking may
erre. But teares vnfayned cannot erre,
wordes oftentimes doth not declare the
hole cauſe fully, but weping doth fully
declare the affection, and therfore Peter
dyd not ſpeake with wordes by which he
dyd ſinne, by which he dyd abanden and
forſake fayth, left vſing them in his confeſſion
ſyth he had vſed them in his denial
he ſhould not be thought to haue confeſſed
aright from the harte and therfore he dyd
rather confeſſe his ſinne by teares and
lamentation then by outwarde wordes,
therfore when we do ſinne we muſt firſt
lament and bewayle our ſinnes, and then

praye faythfully, ſo that by this example
we do learne how to confeſſe our faultes
ſo that the Apoſtells denyinge of Chriſt
is profitable vnto vs, and his amendment
twiſe more profitable for our learninge
and inſtruction.
               
               
                  ¶S Hieron. vpon Math.
Chappiter. 16.
                  ¶And I will geue the keyes of the
kyngdom of Heauen to thee. &c.
                  THis place the Biſhops and prieſtes
not vnderſtandinge dyd ſomewhat
aſcribe vnto themſelues of the pride
of the Phariſies, ſo that they thought they
coulde both damne innocents, and ſaue
themſelues being ſinners, wheras before
God there lyfe is called to accompt and
not the ſentaunce of the prieſt. We read
in Leuiticus of leapers, wher they be commaunded
to ſhewe themſelues to the
prieſtes. Not that the prieſt coulde chuſe
the Leoproſye.
                  But that by his knowledge he could deſarne
who was, a leaper & who was not.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Ambroſius lib. of Cayine
and Abell.
                  SInnes are remitted by Gods worde,
wherof the Prieſtes and Leuites are
interpreters onely.
               
               
                  ¶Iohn Chriſoſtome, Tom. 6. Sermond
vpon repentaunce and confeſſion.
                  NOw it is not neceſſarye to confeſſe
onr ſelues to preſent witneſſes and
in thy cogitation and thought make
confeſſion of thy ſinnes without any witneſſe
and let God onely behold thy confeſſion,
for he will not ayde thée with thy
ſinnes. But, if thou doſſe confeſſe them
he geueth remiſſion therof.
               
               
                  ¶The ſame To. 7. Ho. 9.
of Repentaunce.
                  THis is a place of medicine, and not
of Iudgement it giueth not puniſhment
but the remiſſion of ſinnes
that thou ſholdeſt only confeſſe thy faults
and offences vnto God aboue.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Ciprian lib. of the fall
of man.
                  THe ſeruaunt cannot remitte that,
that is committed againſt the Lord
and Maiſter.
                  Turne to the Lord & leaue thy ſinnes
and praye before thē face of the Lord,Eccle. 17. and
ſo ſhalt thou leſſen thine offences, turne
to God, and flye from thy ſelfe and from
thine owne righteouſnes &c.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine vpon Iohn tract.
                  
                     Et tibi dabo claues Regni &.
                  
                  THe Rocke was not called Petra or
a Rocke of Peter,
                     Math. 12. but Peter toke his
name of Petra? That is to ſaye, a
Rocke, euen as, Chriſt taketh not his
name of a Chriſtian, but a Chriſtian of
Chriſt, therfore the Lord ſayd, vpon this
Rocke will I build my Church becauſe
Peter ſayd, thou art Chriſt the ſonne of
the liuing. Therfore vpon this Petra and
Rocke which thou haſt confeſſed, I will
build ſayth Chriſt my Church, and the
Rocke was Chriſt▪ vpon the foundation

                     Peter alſo himſelfe dyd build, and no man
can laye other foundation then that, that
is alredye layde which is Ieſus Chriſt. &c.
                  
               
               
                  Auguſtine vpon the Lords words
in Math. Sermond. 13.
                  THou, ſayth he, arte Peter, and vpon
this Petram or Rocke which thou
haſt confeſſed, I vppon this Rocke
which thou haſt acknowleged ſayinge,
thou arte Chriſt the ſonne of the
liuing God. Will I build my Church as
who woulde ſaye I will build thée vpon
me, and me vpon thée for men buildinge
on themſelues ſayd I am of Paule. I am
of Apollo, I am of Cephas, he is Peter,
But others which would not be builded
vpon Peter ſayd. I am of Chriſt, and the
Apoſtle Paule when he hard that he was
choſen and Chriſt forſaken, is, ſayth he,
Chriſt deuided? Is Paule crucified for you?
And are you Baptiſed in the name of
Paule? Wheras it is not ſo in Paule neither
in Peter: But in the name of Chriſt,
that Peter the man might be builded vppon
Petram thy Rocke and not Petra the
Rocke, vpon Peter the man. &c. As farther

he ſayde, Lorde, if it be thou, commaund
me to come vppon the waters to
thée for I cannot do this in my ſelfe but
in thée, he dyd confeſſe what his owne
ſtrenght was of himſelfe, and what he
was of him,We can do all thinges but by the Lordes ſtrenght & power. by whoſe will he dyd beleue
he could do that, that infirmitie & weakenes
of mans nature could not do, therfore
if it be thou commaund me, which when
thou haſt commaunded ſhalbe done that
which my ſtrenght cannot achiue and do
by preſuming, thou canſt in commaundinge,
and the Lord ſayd come, and without
any doubte Peter at the word of the
commaunder, and at the preſence of him
that ſuſtayned him without any tarying
leapt into the waters and walked one
them, ſo that he could do this that the
Lord commaunded not of himſelfe, but of
the Lord,Ephe. 5. for you weare ſome time darkenes,
but now are you light in the Lorde,
that no man can do, in Paule, no man in
Peter, nether in any other of the Apoſtles,
that is he hable to performe and do in the
Lord, therfore dyd Paule well contemninge
himſelfe, and aduaunſing or commending
him for I, ſayth he, was not
crucified for you. &c.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Theophilactus vpon
Iohn. Cap. 8.
                  TO remite ſinnes is onely the propertie
of God,To remitte ſinnes is only in the power of God. therfore he ſayth, euery
one that ſinneth is ſeruaunt
vnto the ſinne, and you are therfore ſeruauntes
becauſe you haue ſinned, farther
becauſe it was likely they would ſaye, albeit
we be bond men to ſuch ſeruitude,
yet haue we ſacrifices and prieſtes which
will purge vs from our offences, and he
ſayth that they alſo are ſeruauntes, for all
men, ſayth he, he haue ſinned, and haue
nede of the grace of God,Roma. 3. therfore your
prieſtes ſith they haue ſinned, they be ſeruauntes
and bondmen to ſinne hauinge
no power to remit ſinnes,Hebrae. 5. which S. Paule
with playne wordes doth teſtifie. The
prieſt hath nede to offer for himſelfe as
well as for the people becauſe he alſo is
ſubiect to infirmitie the ſeruaunt ſayth he
tarieth not in the houſe, that is to ſaye,
he hath no power to put out any man, becauſe
he is not the maſter of the houſe,
but the ſonne is Lorde of the houſe, and
euer remayneth in the houſe, for in my

Fathers houſe ſayth he are many manſ
                        •
                     
                     ons,
therfore your Prieſtes which are ſeruauntes
haue no power to forgiue or remitte
ſinnes, but I the ſonne which abide
in the houſe with power and principality,
ſith I am Lorde of the houſe, giue you all
your libertie, for all thinges are myne,
and I am of lyke and equall power and
ſtrenght with my Father, and if I do
make you frée then with true libertie are
you redéemed.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine vpon the Epiſtle
of S. Iohn. tract. 2.
                  ¶I write vnto you little Children becauſe
your ſinnes are forgiuen you
thorowe his name.1 Iohn. 2.
                  
                  BVt by whoſe name are our ſinnes
forgiuen?Sinnes ar forgiuen bi the name of God only. by the name of Auguſtine?
Or by the name of Donatus? You
maye ſée what Auguſtine is and lykewiſe
Donatus, neither are your offences remitted,
by thée of Paule nor of Peter, for when
they did deuide the Church, and dyd deſire
to ſeperate the vnitie into partes, charity
as a mother bringing forth her littelones

doth in the Appoſtle open her bowelles,
and bewayling them with teares calleth
them backe againe to one name, which
would haue made to themſelues manye
names and repelleth them from her loue
that Chriſt might be beloued ſaying was
Paule crucified for you, either weare you
baptiſed in his name?1 Cor. 1. What ſayth ſhe?
I will not that you ſhoulde be mine but
with me, be with me, for we are all his
which dyed for vs which was crucified for
vs.
               
               
                  ¶Origen vpon Math.
Hom. lia, 1.
                  ¶Thou art Peter and vpon this
Rocke. &c.
                  BEcauſe Biſhoppes and Prieſtes do
take aduantage of this texte, ſaying
that they haue receaued of Chriſt
thoſe keyes of the kyngdome of Heauen
ye 
                     Peter had becauſe ye ſuch as were boūd
of them on earth,He only hath ye power that Peter had that doth his workes. were alſo bound in
Heauen, and thoſe that were loſed one
earth of them, were loſed in Heauen,
that is to ſay had remiſſion of their ſinnes
it is to be thought that they ſaye well it

they do the workes of Peter. wherfore it
was ſayd to him, thou arte Peter. &c. If
the powers of hell do not preuaile againſt
them then are they ſuch as the Church of
Chriſt is builded and eſtabliſhed vpon,
otherwiſe, it is a ſkorne, that we ſhould
ſaye that he that is bound in the bandes
of his ſinnes and draweth his ſinnes like
a longe corde,1 Thi. 3. and is laden with the yoke
of his offences, becauſe onely that he is
called a Biſhoppe to haue ſuch power and
authoritie,The workes of a Biſhoppe. that ſuch as are here loſed of
him are alſo loſed and made frée in Heauen,
or that they that he byndeth are
bound in Heauen alſo, therfore let the
Biſhoppe, that bindeth or loſeth another
be irreprehenſible, let him be the huſband
of one wyfe, ſober, chaſt, decent, full of
hoſpitalitie, hable to teache, no Wyne
bibber, no runner vp and downe, but
modeſt. No brauler, not coueteous of
money, gouerninge well his houſholde.
Hauing his children ſubiect in al chaſtitie.
If he be ſuch one, he wyll not vniuſtlye
binde vpon earth, neither without iudgemente
vnloſe or make frée, but if there be
any man, that I may ſo ſaye. A Peter and
ſhall thinke that he can ſo binde, that it

ſhalbe bound in Heauen, and y• he can ſo
loſe that it ſhalbe loſed in Heauen, he deceaueth
himſelfe not vnderſtand the meaninge
of the ſcriptures. But beinge inflamed
with his pride falleth into the
iudgement of the Deuill.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the Sacrament of Chriſtes
Body and bloud.
               I Am the Bread of lyfe that came downe
from Heauen,Iohn. 6. and whoſoeuer ſhall
eate of this Bread ſhall lyue euerlaſtingly,
and the Bread that I wyll giue
you, is my fleſh, for the lyfe of the world.
               The Cuppe of Bleſſinge, which we
bleſſe, is it not the communication of
Chriſtes bloud?1 Cor. 10. and the Bread which we
breake is it not the participaſion of the
Lordes bodye? Becauſe many are one,
and one body, which do participate of one
Bread and one Cuppe.
               So often as you ſhall eate this bread
and drinke of this Cuppe,1 Cor. 11. you ſhall ſhew
the Lordes death vntill his comminge
againe.
               
                  ¶The words of Beda, and Auguſtine
as touching the Sacrament of the altare.
                  
                  ¶The Cuppe of bleſſing. &c. 1 Cor. 10.
                  THis which you ſée on the Altare of
the Lord, thother night you dyd ſe,
but what it was, or what was the
meaninge therof, or of howe worthy a
thinge it was a Sacrament, you haue not
yet hard, therfore that which you ſawe, is
Bread and wyne which your eyes can
teſtifie. But your fayth doth requier to be
inſtructed, that the Bread is the Body of
Chriſt and the Wyne his bloud, this
is ſhortly ſpoken & paraduenture it doth
ſatiſfie your Fayth, yet it would haue farther
enſtruction. For the Prophet ſayth,
vnleſſe you do beleue you ſhall not vnderſtand,
therfore now you may ſaye vnto
me you haue commaunded vs to beleue
then teach vs to vnderſtand,Eſaie. 6. for paraduenture
this thought may riſe in your minds.
We know from whence our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt dyd receaue his fleſh, of the virgine
Marie being an infant he was nurſed and
receaued ſucke, he dayly grew in age, vntill
he became a young man, of the Iueſſe
he ſuffered perſicution. and being hanged
on Croſſe was theron crucified, he was

Buried and the third daye he roſe againe,
aſſendinge into Heauen thether hath he
lifte vp his body. From whence he ſhall
returne to iudge both the quicke & dead,
and at this preſent there he is ſitting one
the right hand of God the Father, then
how is the bread his body, and the wyne
his bloud. Bretherne therfore theſe are
named Sacraments, becauſe in them
there is one thing ſene and another thing
vnderſtode therby, that which you ſée
hath a corporall & bodyly ſhape & figure,
but that which is vnderſtand hath a ſpirituall
fruite and commoditie, therfore if
thou wilt vnderſtand the Body of Chriſt
harke what the Apoſtle ſayth to the faithfull,1 Cor. 12.
you are the Body of Chriſt and the
members,we are the Bodye of Chriſt. therfore if you are the Body
of Chriſt and members therof, then your
miſtery and Sacrament is ſet on the table
of the Lorde and yet you take it for the
Lordes Sacrament, and you anſwere Amen,
to that which you are, and by your
anſwere therto you do ſubſcribe, therfore
thou heareſt the Body of Chriſt, and in
anſwering Amen thou art a member ther
of, if thy Amē be ture, why thē is this done
in the figure we take away nothinge of

our owne, then heare what the Apoſtle
ſayth againe, for when he ſpake of this
Sacrament he ſayd. We beinge many
are made one Body and one bread, vnderſtand
and reioyce, godlines, trueth,
charitie and vnitie, in theſe beinge one
bread we many are one Body, conſider
that the bread is not made of one corne
but of many, when you were euill intreted,
then you were as it were ground,
when you are baptiſed, you are as it were
kneded & put together. When you haue
receaued the ſanctifiing of the holy Ghoſt
you are as it were, baked. Therfore be
that, that you ſée, and receaue and take
that, that you are. This the Apoſtle ſayd
aſtouchinge the bread, euen ſo bretherne
conſider of the wyne wherof it is made
wyne,Actor. 4. for many Berries and Grapes
growe in one cluſter,Howe the wyne is made. but the Ieuiſe and
liquor therof doth runne into one vnitie
and ſubſtaunce, ſo our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
hath ſealed vs. And hath made vs being
a miſterie of peace t'apertayne vnto him,
and the Sacrament of our vnion he hath
conſecrated in his moſte bleſſed table.
Whoſoeuer receaueth the Sacrament of
vnitie, and keapeth not the bond of peace,

receaueth it not to his profitte, but as a

                        •
                     itneſſe againſt himſelfe.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine vpon Iohn
tract. 26. Cap. 6.
                  HE that eateth my fleſh and drinketh
my bloud remayneth in me and I in
him,Iobn. 6. this is to eate that foode, and to
drynke that drinke to remayne and abyde
in Chriſt, and to haue Chriſt abiding in
him. And by this we ſée that he that abydeth
not in Chriſt, and in whom Chryſt
abideth not, wtout dout doth not ſpiritually
eate Chriſt neither drinketh his bloud
although carnally and viſible with his
teath he do receaue the Sacrament of the
body and moſt precious bloud of Chriſt.
                  Chriſt entred not into the holy place
made with handes which were examples
of true thinges,Hebreos. 9 but he aſſended into heauen
that now he might apeare in the
fight of God for vs, not that he ſhoulde
oftentimes offer vp himſelfe. &c.
                  Thou waſt afflicted with penury and
ſcarſenes and god gaue thée Manna for
meat with both thou & fathers knew not:Detro. 8.
that he might ſhewe vnto thée that not

only by bread man liueth, but by euery
worde that commeth out of the Lordes
mouth.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine quinquam.
Pſalme. 89.
                  WHen the Lord ſpake of his Bodye.
He ſayd vnleſſe a man eate my fleſh
he cannot haue lyfe euerlaſting, and
farther ſayth. The wordes that I ſpake
vnto you are ſpirite & lyfe, therfore vnderſtand
ſpiritually what I haue ſayd vnto
you. You ſhall not eate this body which
you ſée neither ſhall you drinke that bloud
that they will ſhed which ſhal crucifie me
but I haue commended vnto you the Sacrament
which being vnderſtand ſpiritually
ſhall gue you lyfe.
               
               
                  ¶Libro ſententiarum Auguſtine.
                  HE eateth the Bread of lyfe, and
drynketh of the cuppe of eternitie
that abydeth in Chriſt, for he that
is diſceuered from Chriſt, neither doth
eate Chriſts fleſh nor drinke his bloud, although
dayly he receaueth the Sacrament
to the iudgement of his great preſumption.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Origen in Leuiti. Homelie. 7.
                  VNderſtand that they are figures that
are written in the holy ſcripture, and
therfore as ſpirituall and not as carnall,
vnderſtand and examine that, that
is ſayd therin. for it carnally you do vnderſtand
them they do hurte you and not
nurriſhe you. There is both in the olde
Teſtament a letter that kylleth as alſo
in the new Teſtament, if hit be not vnderſtande
ſpiritually for if thou doſt followe
the letter where as it is ſayd, vnleſſe
you eate my fleſh and drinke my bloud.
This Letter kylleth you, wilt thou that
I ſhewe in the ſcriptures another Letter
that kylleth he, ſayth he. That hath not a
ſworde let him ſell his coate and buye a
ſword, behold this Letter is of the Goſpell,
and yet it kylleth. But according to
the meaning and ſprite you vnderſtand it
it killeth not, but ther is therin contayned
a quickninge ſpirite, and therfore
whatſoeuer is written either in the lawe
or in the Goſpel ſpiritually vnderſtand as
ſpirituall,Luc. 22. for he that is ſpirituall iudgeth
all things & is himſelfe iudged of no man.
               
               
                  
                  ¶In the ſame place Homeli. 9.
                  ANd thou that art come to the true
Biſhoppe that hath apeaſed Gods
wrath to thée wardes by his owne
bloud.The fleſhe and Bloud of the word of God. And hath reconſiled thée to the Father,
ſticke not onely to the bloud of the
fleſhe. But rather learne the bloud of the
worde, and heare what he ſayth himſelfe
for this is my bloud, that ſhalbe ſhed for
you in remiſſion of ſinnes.
               
               
                  ¶Bernard vpon Qui habitat
Verſe 3. Sermond. 3.
                  VNleſſe you eate the fleſhe of the
Sonne of man and drinke his bloud
&c. And they ſayd this commaundment
is hard and they al went backward.
But what is to eate his fleſh & to drinke
his bloud but to communicate with his
Paſſions, and to follow that conuerſation
which he lead in the fleſh, which the Sacrament
offered one the Alter doth ſignifie
where we do receaue the Lords Body,
that as we ſée the fourme of Bread enter
into our bodies we knowe therby what

conuerſation he had one the earth, that
he doth enter into vs to dwell by fayth in
our hartes. For when righteouſnes entreth
into vs, he entreth that of God is
made our righteouſnes. &c.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine of the Lorder wordes
according to Luc. Sermond. 8.
                  GIue vs this daye our dayly Bread.
When I ſpake of the Sacrament
I tolde you, that before the words
of Chriſt that, that is offered is called
Bread, but after Chriſtes wordes be ſpoken
then is it not called bread but the bodye,
where as he ſayth our bread he ſayth
it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Superſubſtantiall Bread. that is to ſaye, ſuperſubſtantially
is it not the Bread that entreth into
the Body. But it is the Bread of euerlaſting
lyfe that ſuſtaineth the ſubſtaunce
of our ſoules.
               
               
                  ¶Chriſoſtome Tome. 1. Homelie. 1.
ex Capi. 15.
                  THE Sacrament of Peace is that
Sacrament that doth not agre with
the ſeking of money and Simony,The Sacrament of peace.
                     
for if Chriſt dyd not ſpare himſelfe for our
ſakes, whoſe ſuffering and death we are
not worthy of, if we ſpare not our ſoule
for which Chriſt gaue himſelfe, and yet do
we ſpare our monye? Therfore let no Iudas
nor vſerrer approche to this Table,
wherof both ſhall periſhe by the deſire of
money and Braſſe. Wherfore let vs flye
this pitte neither let vs think it ſufficient
to our ſaluation that if thou doſt robbe &
ſpoyle infaunts and widowes to offer thy
golden Challies beſette with precious
ſtones in this Table, wilt thou honour
this ſacrifice, then offer thy ſoule for which
Chriſt was offred and make that golden.
For if thy ſoule hée a lompe of leade,
what ſhall the Golden Veſſelles prophitte
thée, and ſurely that Table
was not of ſiluer, neither was the Cuppe
of golde wherin Chriſt gaue to his Diſciples
his moſt precious bloud, it were they
all moſt precious and honorable becauſe
they weare repleniſhed wyth the holy
Ghoſt, will thou honour the Body of
Chriſt, then diſpiſe him not when he is
naked, and ſeme not to clothe him in the
Church, and to ſuffer him to ſtarue and
dye for colde abrode, for he that ſayd this

is my body, and did alſo fulfill by his word
the dead ſayd alſo you ſawe me a hungred
and dyd not fede me, and foraſmuch as
you dyd it not to one of theſe litleones,The bodye in the Sacrament.
you dyd it not to me this body of Chriſt
doth not want clothing and our outward
Raiment, but it requiteth a cleane ſoule.
But this body of Chriſt which is the companye
of the poore, would be harbroued
& carefully cloched, therfore let vs learne
to ſinowe Chriſt, and to honour him according
to his will as he would be honored,
for he that is honored, doth delight
to be honored, with that honour which he
moſt requireth, and not with that honour
as liketh vs beſt. Euen ſo Peter thought
that he dyd honour Chriſt well when he
would not ſuffer Chriſt to waſh his féete,
which certainely was contrary, therfore
honour him as he wil, deſtribute thy goods
and ritches to the poore, in the Table of
Chriſt thou nedeſt not veſſeles of golde
but bring with thée a pure, ſincere, and
golden hac
                        •
                     e anſwere me here to, what
auaeleth it if thy Table be throw out beſette
with plate and yet thou dyeſt for
hunger. Therfore firſt fede the hungrye,
and afterwarde of the ſurpluſage make

honorable veſſelles for the Table, For
what proffitte commeth if thou maketh
a golden Challeſſe, and 
                        〈…〉
                     
therin ſo much as a little cold water, therfore
ſo honour Chriſt as he wilbe honored
and ſo receaue the Sacrament as he wold
thou ſhouldeſt receaue it, 
                        〈◊〉
                      that 
                        〈◊〉
                     
otherwiſe, is in haunger of Hell 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  This man after he had offred one offringe
for ſinne euerlaſtingly ſitteth one
the right hande of God,Hebre. 10 hereafter loking
tyll his enimies he made his 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  With one oblation hath de euerlaſtingly
fulfilled he offringe,Hebre. 9. for thoſe that are
ſanctified. For where is the remiſſion of
ſinnes,Eodem loco there is no more offring for ſinne.
                  But by his owne bloud he entred 
                        〈◊〉
                     
into the holy place, and there found Remiſſion.
&c.
                  That he ſhoulde not often offer by
himſelfe as dyd the hye Prieſt. &c.
               
               
                  ¶Auguſtine the. 10. Booke
Deciuitote Dei, Cap. 5.
                  THE viſible ſacrifice is a teſtimony of
an inuiſible ſacrifice,Etimologie, of the worde. that is to ſaye a
holy ſigne.
               
            
            ¶FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            IMPRINTED AT LONDON
in Fleteſtreat at the ſigne of the Faucon
by VVylliam Gryffirh, and are
to be ſolde at his ſhoppe in S.
Dunſtones Churchyarde.
            Anno Domini. 1570.
            
               woodcut depicting griffin
            
            
            
         
      
   