
      
         
            
            
            THE MANNERS, LAWES, AND CVSTOMES OF ALL NATIONS. Collected out of the beſt Writers by IOANNES BOEMVS AVBANVS, a Dutch-man. With many other things of the ſame Argument, gathered out of the Hiſtorie of Nicholas Damaſcen. The like alſo out of the Hiſtory of America, or Braſill, written by Iohn Lerius. The faith, religion and manners of the Aethiopians, and the deploration of the people of Lappia, compiled by Damianus à Goes. With a ſhort diſcourſe of the Aethiopians, taken out of IOSEPH SCALIGER his ſeuenth booke de Emendatione temporum.
            
            
               Written in Latin, and now newly tranſlated into Engliſh. By ED. ASTON.
            AT LONDON, Printed by G. Eld and are to bee ſold by Francis Burton. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS TRVLY HONORED FRIEND, SIR WALTER ASTON OF TIXAL, IN the County of Stafford; Knight of the honorable order of the Bath.
            
               HONORED SIR.
            
            
               SEeing that it is an vſual and commendable cuſtome amongſt all writers, to dedicate their workes (once brought to perfection) to ſome worthy perſonage or other, to whom they are moſt deuoted, vnder whoſe patronage and protection they may better paſſe without controulment. And hauing now at laſt (more for the benefit of ſuch as are vnskilful in the Latin tongue, then any priuate reſpect of mine owne, other then my recreation) tranſlated theſe ſeueral writers into our vulgar language, by whoſe trauels, & indeauours, the maners, faſhions & formes of gouernment of forraine and remote nations are plainely diſcouered; to each ſtudious and iudiciall reader, to the deſerued commendations of the Authors themſelues, the expelling of barbarous ignorance, and the inriching, and inlightning of the Chriſtian world, with the knowledge of all parts thereof. And withall deliberatly weighing with my ſelfe, to whom (amongſt ſo many worthies of our daies) I might direct, and conſecrate theſe my labours, of whom I might conceiue ſome hope of acceptance, and a willingneſſe to ſupport the burthen of my weake building. I could bethinke my ſelfe of none ſo fit, nor ſo worthie, as your ſelfe (right worthie Sir,) both in regard that the manifold fauours beſtowed vpon the poore houſe from whence I had my beeing, by you,

and your memorable Aunceſters, and the taſte that my ſelfe haue had of your good will to all your welwiſhers, and for that alſo the variety of matter herein contained, may happily yeeld ſome delight, if you vouchſafe to peruſe it, imboldneth me humbly to preſume, in theſe rude & rugged lines, to manifeſt my ardent deuotion and affectionate zeale I owe, & of duty ought to owe, vnto your honored ſelf. And though the meaneſſe of the gift, through the indigeſted phraſe and ill compoſture, can no way merit the leaſt place in your good likeing, yet was the poore mans ſacrifice, made with ſalt, as acceptable to the Romane gods, as the rich mans incence, and Sineta's cold water, proceeding from a willing heart, (hauing no better meanes to ſhew his duty and deuotion) as highly regarded, and as bountifully rewarded by King Artaxerxes as the richeſt preſents the Perſians did offer him. Accept then (I beſeech you) theſe my poore preſentments, & by your accuſtomed fauour, ſo to giue life to them, and me, that they may paſſe (vnder your protection) free from detraction, and my ſelfe be incoraged to proceed to other enterpriſes, for the aduancement of your fame, and attayning to my ſelfe the expected end of al my labours, which is, to be inrolled in the Catalogue of your welwillers.
            Thus crauing pardon for my preſumption, I humbly take my leaue,
            
               And reſt euer truly deuoted to your honored name. ED. ASTON.
            
         
         
            
            To the friendly Reader.
            
               IF the reading of Hiſtories be ſo neceſſary, & benefic al to al ſorts of people, as they be rightly termed, by ſome the mirrors, and maiſters of our life, ſhewing, and teaching vs by the lawes and gouernments of other nations and common-weales, what orders and inſtitutions are fitteſt to bee ordayned, and obſerued in our own for the eſtabliſhment of perfect peace, maintainance of diuine worſhip and excerciſe of moral vertues.
            I doubt not (good courteous Reader) but the commendation of this Worke, and other Hiſtories of like argument, expreſſed at large by the Author in his preface, will paſſe ſo currant with thee, as thou wilt willingly conclude with him, That there is nothing more pleaſant, more profitable, nor more prayſe worthy, then truly, legendo, aut peregrinando, either by reading or trauelling, to know and vnderſtand the ſituation, lawes, cuſtomes, religion, and forme of gouernement of each ſeuerall Prouince in the world. And ſeeing alſo that (beſides our ſloth and home-lou'd idleneſſe) there be ſo many rubbes, and impediments to hinder and deterre vs from trauell, as it is, in a maner, vtterly neglected, and we thereby depriued of the one halfe of our vnderſtandings: how much more industrious ought we to be, (for ſupply of that defect) to buſie our ſelues in reading the reports of ſuch Writers, (both an
                  •
               ient and moderne) as haue ſpent moſt part of their times in that kind of exerciſe, and do (as it were) proffer vs their hands to lead and conduct vs through each ſeuerall country.
            In which rancke, mine Author, and thoſe auncient and famous writers, out of which this collection is gathered (though it cannot bee denied but that there hath beene 
                  •
               uch alteration of ſtares ſince their daies, as there is almoſt no one country in the world that doth wholy

retaine the ſelfe ſame cuſtomes & ceremonies by them deſcribed) are not in the meaneſt regard, nor their ſayings in any wiſe to be contemned, in regard of the number of late writers, who though ſome of them haue beene men of that fame and repute, and withal ſo perfect and abſolute in their relations, as they haue come farre neerer vnto the truth of our preſent eſtate, yet is there no reaſon that a multiude of Mandiuels that wander abroad in this pampletting age in the habite of ſincere Hiſtorioghraphers (like Aſſes in Lyons skins) ſhould dazell and dim the glory of the other, or cancel and deface their opinions ſo autenticke and anciently receiued. For mine owne part I muſt confeſſe my inſufficiency, truely to diſcerne betwixt the one and the other, yet thus much I may preſume to ſay in the behalfe of mine Author, that (to my weake vnderſtanding) in al the courſe of his bookes, he inforceth no vntruths to make them ſeeme probable, nor meere probabilites for true, but relateth things doubtful as he found them written by others, and ſo leaueth euery man to his diſcretion, to giue credit as hee ſees cauſe: And although hee maketh mention of ſome ceremonies & cuſtomes vſed in certaine countries, which ſeeme ſo abſurde, monſtrous and prodigious, as they appeare vtterly voide of credit yet is there no cauſe that that ſhould diſtaſt any one, conſidering that (as hee well noteth in the concluſion of his third booke) all people are not indued with like ciuility, and that there is as great difference in mens liuings as in their collours.
            The pleaſure which I tooke by peruſal of theſe ſeuerall collections, and the profit that I conceiued might thereby redound both to my ſelfe and others, together with the approbation of my indeauours and commendation of the workes by ſome worthy, and worthily reſpected friends, whoſe Iudgements doe farre exceed mine owne, incouraged mee to vndergoe the buſineſſe, and to proceed in that I had already begunne with more alacrity, which after much labour I haue now at length finiſhed, and ſuited in this ragged liuery, and made him to ſpeake in a phraſe though not eloquent, yet I hope plaine and intelligible. And albeit a tale may be much improued by a formal manner of telling, yet gold is more eſteemed of for his goodneſſe then for his collour, and the worthineſſe of the worke ought to bee of more regarde then the elegancy of the phraſe, the one beeing the ſubſtance, the other but the ſhadow.
            
               
As for the nice curioſity of ſuch word-weighing Crittickes, as will ſooner find two faults in another, then amend one in themſelues: I little eſteeme, either of them or their cenſures. But if (for want of other matter to quarrell at) any Momus ſhould accuſe my pen for mercenarie: I proteſt, I may truly anſwer them with the very words of mine Author, that what I haue done, was not Spe lucri ulſius, neo popularis aurae ambitione, verumenimuero tam libero, & plane otioſo ſtudio, quam rei ipſius mira dulcedine at que vtilitate.
            
            If I haue omitted or miſconstrued any abolete words or ſentences for their harſhneſſe and ill coherence, or erred in ſetting downe the true quantitie of weights and meaſures, (for auoyding whereof I haue moſt commonly vſed the Latine words themſelues) or in deſcribing the diſguiſed apparell of ſundry people, as namely thoſe rude ſauages called Tovovpinambaltii, beeing ſo different from all other nations, as (keeping the ſence (I could hardly adapt them to our owne Engliſh phraſe, or if I haue ſhewed my ſelfe too affectionate in the commendation of our owne country, in my inlargement added to the chapter of England, where I ſuppoſed mine Author was too ſparing: or (to bee ſhort) if in the confeſsion of the Aethiopians faith, or the Epiſtles written from Preſter Iohn to the Pope, and kings of Portugall, or in any other place, or by any other meanes, I haue ought miſtaken, or ſquared from the true meaning of the writers: Bee pleaſed (courteous and friendly Reader) in humanity patiently to paſſe them ouer, and impute ſuch errors and eſcapes, rather to the want of knowledge of the truth, than want of will to expreſſe the truth.
            And ſo concluding (with this one onely aduertiſement that if in the whole courſe of theſe bookes, thou meete with any thing that, in thy opinion, doth ouermuch exalt the ceremonies of the Church of Rome, thou wilt conſider, that the Author was an abſolute Papist, as well thou mayſt perceiue, and therefore of likelihood would by all meanes he could, aduance and make the beſt of his owne Religion: nor did I thinke it the part of a Tranſlator, by marginall notes to ſuppreſſe his opinions, but in this place rather to forewarne thee, which (as the Prouerbe ſayth) doth fore-arme thee, how to giue credit in thoſe caſes. I commit theſe my labours to thy fauour able conſideration, and thy ſelfe to Gods holy protection: Resting thine in what he is able,
            
               ED. ASTON.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE AVTHORS PREface to the Reader.
            
               THE moſt famous and memorable lawes, cuſtomes, and manners of all nations, and the ſituation of each ſeueral Countrie, which Herodotus the father of Hiſtories, Diodorus Siculus, Beroſus, Strabo, Solinus, Trogus Pompeius Ptolomy, Pliny, Cornelius Tacitus, Dionyſiuss Afer, Pomponius Mela, Caeſar, Ioſephus, and of later Writers, 
                  Ʋincentius, Aeneas Syluius, (who was afterward Pope Pius the ſecond) Antonius Sabellicus, Iohannes Nauclerus, Ambroſius Calepinus, Nicholas Perottus in his books intituled, Cornucopiae, and many other famous Hiſtoriographers, haue confuſedly, and (as it were) by parts commended vnto vs in their Commentaries: I haue (good diligent Reader) as my leyſure would ſerue, collected, abridged, digeſted, and compacted together in this The cauſe why he writ this booke. ſhort and compendious Breuiary: wherein you may eaſily finde what euer you haue occaſion to looke for; which I haue effected, not in expectance of gaine, nor affecting popular prayſe, but freely, and without other recompence, then the pleaſure and profite the thing it ſelfe bringeth with it. And herein I haue expreſſed as well the cuſtomes of auncient time, as thoſe which be in vſe at this day; as well the good as the bad, in differently: that both lying open before thine eyes, by their examples thou mayſt follow and imitate in the courſe of thy life, thoſe which be honeſt, holy, and commendable, and auoyd thoſe which be diſhoneſt and ſhameful. And hereby thou ſhalt perceiue (good Reader) in what perfection and happineſſe we now liue at this day, and how fimply, rudely, and vnciuilly our forefathers liued, from the Creation of the world to the generall Floud, and for many ages after. When as

they, vſing no money, no merchandize, but equalling one benefit with another, had nothing proper to themſelues, but ſea and land as common to all, as the aire and firmament. No man then gaped after honor and riches, but euery one contented with a little, liued a rurall, ſecure, and idle life, free from toyle or trauell, accompanied with one or more wiues and their ſweet children, hauing no other houſe than the heauens, the ſhadow of a tree, or ſome homely cabbin: their meate was then the fruite of trees, and milke of beaſts; their drinke water, and their clothing, firſt, the vtmoſt rinde or broade leaues of trees, and afterwards the skinnes of beaſts vnhandſomly ſtitched together. They were not then encloſed in and immured in walles, nor defended with ditches, but wandring abroad at their willes, with their cattell, not then compaſſed in incloſures, repoſed their bodies where euer night tooke them, ſleeping ioyfully and ſecurely without feare of theeues or robbers, wherof that age was ignorant.
            All which things afterwards crept in and inſued of mens variable willes, emulation and diſſonant deſires, when fruites gotten without labour beeing inſufficient to ſuſtaine ſuch multitudes, and other things growing defectiue, and for the repelling and repreſſing the often incurſions and fierce aſſaults of beaſts and forraine The cauſe why people inhabited neere together. people, they were conſtrained to gather themſelues into multitudes, to ioyne their forces together, and to apportion themſelues certaine limits and territories wherein to liue; where (ioyning and vniting their houſes for neighbourhood) they beganne to liue a more ciuill and popular kind of life, to fence and fortifie themſelues with wals and trenches, and to ordaine lawes, and elect magiſtrates for the maintenance of peace and tranquilitie amongſt them: And then they began to prouide for their maintenance, not onely by husbanding their grounds, or following their flockes, but by ſundry other exerciſes, and new inuented arts, to paſſe by ſea with their nauies into forren nations: firſt, for tranſporting of companies to inhabit new-found countries, and then for trafficke and trading one with another: to traine vp horſes for the cart, of copper to make coyne, to cloth themſelues more curiouſly: to feed more daintily, to haue more humanity in their ſpeech: more ciuilitie in their conuerſation, more ſtate in their buildings, and in all

points to be more mild, more wiſe, and better qualified: and laying aſide all groſſe barbariſme, and beaſtly cruelty, abſtayning from mutuall ſlaughter: from deuouring of humane fleſh, from rapine and robberie, from open and inceſtuous coupling of children with their parents, before indifferently vſed: and from many more ſuch enormities, applyed their reaſon and ſtrength to recouer the The earth recouered from hir firſt rudenes and barren neſſe, and made fertile. earth, which (beeing then either ouergrown with thicke woods, ouerrunne with wild beaſts, or ouerflowed with ſtanding waters) lay rude, barren, deſert, vnfrequented, and inconuenient for mans dwelling, and (with their induſtrie and labour) playning and purging it from heapes of ſtones, rootes of trees, and ſuperfluous waters, made it fertill and very delightſome to behold. And allowing the plaines and champion grounds for tilling, and the leſſer hilles for vineyards, did ſo manure & dreſſe the earth, (with inſtruments made for the purpoſe) as it brought foorth both corne and wine in aboundance, which before yeelded nothing but acornes and wild apples, and thoſe alſo ſparingly produced.
            The valleys they beautified and adorned with moſt delectable gardens, and well watered medowes, leauing onely the toppes of mountaines for woods, and aſſigning ſo much ſoyle for the increaſe of fruite, as they ſcarce left ſufficient for fuell and fodder. Then they began to people all places more plentifully, to erect new buildings, of ferme houſes to make hamlets, of boroughes great citties, to build temples in valleys, towers on mountaine tops, to encompaſſe their fountains with hewed marble ſtones, & inuironing them with plants on all ſides for ſhadow, deriued their running waters thence into their cities, through pipes & conduits: to ſearch deepe in the ground for water, where naturally it was wanting: to hold in and reſtraine the ſtreames and violent riuers, with dams and bankes of earth, which before would often flow at large, to the great deſtruction of the Inhabitants, and (that they might bee paſſable, and no hidderance or impediment to mens buſineſſe) to build ouer them ſtrong and ſtately bridges, vppon bending Arches or Pyles faſtened and firmely rampered in the ground, to caſt downe Rockes in the ſea, which whilome were woont to bee daungerous for ſaylers, to make hauens, inroades, and harboroughes both in Ilands, and on the Continent.
            
               
To digge Dockes and Rodes, wherein ſhippes might reſt in ſecuritie, free from danger of wind or weather. And ſo diligently to decke and garniſh all things both by land and ſea, that the earth (as now it is) compared to his former filthineſſe and deformitie, may be thought to be an other earth, different from that it was before, and not much vnlike that moſt delectable garden, out of which our vnfortunate firſt founders Adam and Eue were eiected The earth compared to Paradiſe. for tranſgreſſing the diuine commandement.
            Moreouer, many moſt noble Diſciplines, and liberall Arts, were by men found out, which (that they might remaine to all poſteritie) were by diuers Characters, and new-inuented notes of letters, committed to bookes and tables, and did ſo farre exempt and aduance them beyond all humane condition, as they might haue beene thought rather to leade the moſt bleſſed liues of deified men, then men indeed.
            Had not Satan the Prince of the world, and enemie of mankind, (by ſowing his moſt peſtilent Cockles amongſt the good corne) confounded their moſt intire and happie eſtate. For he ſeeing the multitude of people increaſe, and the pleaſure of the world held in better eſtimation, ſtirred vp with enuie, firſt found them guiltie to themſelues for committing damnable ſins, and afterwards made them with curioſitie to affect the knowledge of future and heauenly things, from the obſcure anſwers of Oracles: And to the end he might aboliſh all knowledge, of one true and onely God, and The true God forgotten. trouble all mankind with ſome notable euill: he taught them the prophane worſhip of falſe gods and goddeſſes, cauſing them to commit idolatrie, and do reuerence vnto them, making the Delphian Temples in one place, the Euboian in another; in another the Naſamonian, and the Dodoman okes (by his diuelliſh inſpiration) to vtter foorth Oracles. By which means he procured that diuine honors were attributed to Saturn in Italy, to Iupiter in Creet to Iuno in Samos, to Bacchus in Thebes and India, to the Sun and Moone, (vnder the names of Iſis & Oſyris) in Aegypt: to Veſta in Plurality of gods, & which god was worſhipped in each ſeueral country Troy: in Affricke to Pallas and Triton: to Mercury (vnder the name of Teutas) in Fraunce and Germany: to Mynerua in Himettū & Athens: to Apollo in Boeotia, Rhodes, Chius, Patura in Lycia,

the leſſer Phrigia and Thimbra. To Diana in Delos and Scythia; To Venus in Cyprus, Paphos, Gnydos, and Cythera: to Mars in Thrace, to 
                  Ʋulcan in Lipara and Lemnos, to Priapus in Lampſacus neere Helliſpont, and to others in many other places, whoſe names (for their rare inuentions and great benefits beſtowed vpon their people) were then moſt freſh in memory.
            Moreouer alſo, after Chriſt Ieſus, the true Sonne of the liuing Jeſus Chriſt reduced the world from error. God, appearing in fleſh, and pointing out to the erring multitude the perfect path-way of ſaluation, by his word and example, exhorting to newneſſe of life, to the glory of his heauenly father, and ſending his Diſciples forth into all the world, by their wholſome doctrine and preaching, had confounded their damnable idolatry, and ſpread abroad a new religion, and new inſtitutions of life, yea and preuailed ſo much, as being receiued of all nations in the world, there could nothing more be deſired for the obtayning of true felicity: when Satan returning into his former malice, and going about to circumuent, and get againe his habitation in mens curious hearts, which before (by the comming of Chriſt) hee was forced to forſake, reduced ſome into their former errors, and ſo corrupted and blinded others with new hereticall opinions, as it had beene better for them, neuer to haue taſted the truth, then ſo ſodainely and maliciouſly to forſake the knowne way of ſaluation. For now at this day all the people of Aſia the leſſe, Armenia, Arabia, Perſis, Siria, Aſſiria and Media, and in Affrick, the The large Countries of the Mahometans. Aegiptians, Numidians, Libians and Muritanians. In Europe, all thoſe of Greece, Miſia and Thrace, vtterly abiecting Chriſt, obſerue and with all honor and deuotion adore, that moſt accurſed and Epileptical Makomet and his damnable doctrine. The Scythians (which at this day bee called Tartars) a very large and populous nation, dee, ſome of them worſhip the Idols of their Emperor Cham: ſome the ſtars, and ſome others the true and onely GOD, at the preaching of Saint Paul: the people of India and Aethiopia, which bee vnder the gouernment of Preſtor Iohn, hold the faith of Chriſt, but in a manner that is far different from ours. But the ſincere and right beliefe of our Sauiour Chriſt, wherewith (by his ſpeciall grace) the whole world was once illumined, is retained onely in Germany, Italy, France, Spaine, England, Scotland,

Ireland, Dacia, Liuonia, Pruſſia, Polonia, Hungaria, and of the inhabitants of the Iſles of Rhodes, Scicilia, Corſica, Sardinia and of ſome few beſides. So far hath that moſt cruel enemy of mankinde preuailed, by bringing in ſuch diuerſity of manners, ſuch hatefull and damnable ſuperſtitious abuſes in ceremonies and ſacred things, that whileſt euery nation contendeth by ſtrongeſt arguments to prooue that the GOD which they worſhip and adore is the true and great GOD, and that they onely goe the The diuerſitie of worſhipinge is the ſeminarie of diſtention. way of eternall happineſſe, and all others the by-path that leadeth to perdition.
            Whileſt alſo euery ſect indeauoureth to aduance and ſet forth themſelues, it inſueth that (each one perſecuting other with mortall enmity and deadly hatred) it is not onely daungerous to trauell into forraine nations, but in a manner vtterly bard and prohibited, which I perſwade my ſelfe is the cauſe, that the names of bordering nations beeing ſcarce knowne to their neerreſt neighbors, whatſoeuer is either written or reported of them, is now accounted fabulous and vntrue: the knowledge whereof The Greeke Philoſophers firſt glory. notwithſtanding hath euer beene reputed ſo pleaſant, ſo profitable and ſo praiſe-worthy, as it is moſt manifeſt, that for the loue and deſire thereof onely, without other cauſe at all, very many forſaking father and mother, wife and children, countrie and kin (and that which is more) neglecting their owne health, haue aduentured through great difficulties and daungers, care and troubles, long and tedious iourneies into forraine nations, onely to furniſh themſelues with experience. So as it is vndoubtedly true that not in theſe daies onely, but almoſt from the beginning of the world, All thoſe haue bin generally eſteemed men of greateſt authority, wiſdome and learning, and by open conſent haue beene elected and choſen Maiſters and Gouernours, Councellors and Iudges, Captaines and Controllers, who hauing The law-giuers firſt authority. ſometimes trauelled ſtrang countries, haue knowne the manners of many people and cities, for euer as thoſe auncient Philoſophers of Greece and Italy, which were firſt founders of ſundry ſects wherin they inſtructed their Diſciples & Schollers, as namely Socrates, of the Socratick ſect, Plato, of the Academicke, Ariſtotle, of the Peripatick, Antiſthines of the Cynick, Ariſtyppus, of the Cyrenaicke,

               Zeno of the Stoicke, and Pithagoras of the Pithagoricke. As alſo thoſe old law-giuers Minos and Rhodomanthus to the men of Creete, Orpheus to thoſe of Thrace, Draco & Solon to the Athenians, Licurgus to the Lacedemonians, Moſes to the Iewes, Zamolxis to the Scythians, and many others which wee ſee haue ſet down to their people diuers preſcript ceremonies & ciuil diſciplines: inuented not of thoſe ſeueral ſects, diſciplines and lawes, within their city walles, but learned and brought them from the Caldeans themſelues (beeing the moſt wiſe men of the world) from the Indian Philoſophers, the Brackmans & Gymnoſophiſts, The Caldeanes the wiſeſt men in the world. and from the Aegiptian Prieſts, with whom ſometimes they were conuerſant. To conclude, wee plainely perceiue that thoſe moſt renowned worthies, Iupiter of Creete (who was reported to haue meaſured the world fiue times ouer) and his two ſonnes of like diſire and ſucceſſe, Dionyſius, ſurnamed Bacchus, and valiant Hercules and Theſeus his imitator, Iaſon with the reſt of the Greekes which went with him for the golden Fleece, wether-beaten Vliſſes and Aencas the outcaſt of Troy, Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes, Alexander the Great, Hanibal the Carthaginiā, Mithrydate king of Pontus (expert in the language of fifty nations) the great Antiochus and innumerable other Romane Princes and Gouernors, the Scipios, the Marii, the Lentuli, Pompey the Great, Iulius Caeſar, Octauian Auguſtus, the Conſtantines, Charles, Othones, Conrades, Henries and Frederickes, haue by their warlike expeditions into forraine nations, purchaſed vnto themſelues an euerlaſting fame and immortal memory. Wherefore ſeeing there is ſo great pleaſure and profit in the knowledge of countries, and of their manners, and alſo ſeeing it is not in euery mans power, nor yet lawfull for many cauſes, for euery one to trauel and behold lands far remote: thou maiſt (good gentle reader) as wel by reading comprehend & vnderſtand, the moſt renowned cuſtomes of al nations, and the ſeueral ſytuation of each country, expreſſed in this booke, and that as readily, & with as much pleaſure, as if, taking thee by the hand, I ſhold lead thee through euery nation one after an other, & faithfully relate vnto thee, in what place, and vnder what kind of gouernment, each nation haue liued heretofore and now doe liue.
            Nor would I haue thee diſtaſted or carried away, for that by ſome too ſeuere reformer, it may bee obiected and laide in

my teeth, that I haue produced for new and for mine owne, a matter written long agoe, and heretofore handled of no leſſe then a thouſand Authors, and that I haue vſed only their words without alteration: But if thou diligently marke my purpoſe, thou ſhalt find that (in imitation of that liberal houſhoulder, to whom Chriſt in the Goſpell compared euery learned ſcribe) I haue preſented thee (my kinde gueſt) with ſome things, as well out of mine owne braine, as wholy extracted from the hidden treaſure of my bookes, and not onely with borowed and vnknowne ſtuffe, but with ſundry new dainties of mine owne deuiſing.
            Farewel, and what euer thou findeſt herein accept in good part.
         
         
            To the Reader in commendation of this worke.
            
            NOt Soline, Pliny, Trogus, nor Herodotus of worth,
            Not Strabo beſt Geographer that Cretiſh Iſle brought forth:
            Not true hiſtorian Siculus, nor yet Beroſus ſage,
            Nor any other writer elſe within this latter age:
            Not Siluius (after Pius Pope) the ſecond of that name,
            Nor yet Sabellicus (whoſe workes deſerue immortal fame)
            In volums large doe touch ſo neere the ſtate of th' viniverſe
            As doth the Author of this booke in ſewer words reherſe:
            For here each part of Aſiae ſoile diſtinctly you may find,
            Th' Arabians, Perſians and the Meades, the Scythians & the Inde,
            The Sirian and Aſſirian, and all the Parthians race,
            The Getes and Dacians (Europs Scythes) the people ecke of Thrace:
            The Sauromates, and thoſe which in Pannonia doe remaine
            The Germaine, the Italian the French and thoſe of Spaine:
            The Iriſh and the Britiſh Iſles (of Iſlands all the beſt,
            And Affricke nations al (which firſt old Affrican poſſeſt)
            The Aethiops and the Carthage men, and thoſe of Aegipt-land,
            And al the people that doe dwel, on the dry Libian ſand.
            And many more inhabitants of diuers Iſles beſide,
            And where the ſect of Mahomet moſt chiefly doth abide:
            What ample large and ſpatious lands doe honor Chriſt their head,
            And through what kingdomes of the world his faithfull flocke are ſpread.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The manners, lawes and cuſtomes, of all Nations. LIB. 1.
            
               
                  The true opinions of Diuines, concerning mans originall. CAP. 1.
               
                  WHen the diuine Maieſtie (vpon the firſt day of Creation) had finiſhed this great 
                     Ʋ
                     Ʋhy the world is ſo called. and wonderfull Architecture of heauen and earth, (which of his beauty and elegant forme, is called the world,) and all things contained within the compaſſe thereof, vpon the ſixt day hee created man, of purpoſe that hee might haue all other things in full fruition, and be Lord and Gouernour ouer them, and making him the nobleſt of all other Creatures, hee indued him with celeſtiall vnderſtanding, and named him Adam, of the redde 
                     The originall and appellation of Adam. earth or claye whereof he was framed. And to the end he ſhould not bee alone, the Lord (caſting him into a dead ſlumber) tooke a ribbe from out his ſide, and framing woman thereof, gaue her vnto him as his wife and companion, and placed them in the pleaſanteſt part of all the earth, watered on all parts with moſt pleaſant riuers, and delectable fountaines, which place for the euer freſh and pleaſant aſpect, was of the Greekes called Paradice, 
                  Paradice. wherein for a ſpace they liued a moſt bleſſed life, free from all euill, the earth producing all things of her owne accord: But no ſooner had they tranſgreſſed the commandement

of their maker, but that they were expelled from that moſt ſacred ſeat and happy habitation, & thruſt into the earth to till the ſame, out of which they were taken, The fertilneſſe of the earth why i
                        •
                      was reſtrained. which being, then for a curſe, reſtrained of her former fruitfulneſſe, and bringing forth nothing willingly, they got their liuings with ſweate and ſorrow, their bodies being become ſubiect to heat and cold, and all kinde of infirmities; Their firſt begotten ſonne they called Cain, the ſecond Abell, after whom they had many other children. So Cain the firſt begotten of Adam. that the world growing richer in age, and the earth more inhabited, as the multitude of people increaſed, ſo did wickedneſſe waxe more rife, and men growing worſe & worſe, accounting iniury for innocencie, and the contempt of Gods maieſty for piety, were come to that height of iniquity, that God in all the world ſcarce finding Noah only, (whom for the reparation of mankind he thought fit to be preſerued with his houſhold) ſent the generall deluge, The generall deluge, and how long it continued. which drowning all the world, deſtroyed the fowles of the aire, and all liuing creatures breathing vpon the face of the earth, ſome few ſeed pares only excepted, defended by the Arke from the force of the floud. After the rage of the waters had continued for fiue months ſpace, the Arke reſted vpon the hils of Armenia, and Noah & his company going Noah ſent his children and kindred to inhabite other countries.
                   forth into the earth, (by Gods ſpeciall grace & aſſiſtances) in ſhort time, the almoſt, extinguiſhed eſtate of all mortall creatures was repared. And Noah, becauſe all parts of the earth might be re-peopled, ſent his ſonnes, nephews, and kinſfolke, with their companies to dwell, ſome into one country, ſome into an other. Into Aegipt (according to the opinion of Beroſus) he ſent Eſennius with the Colonies of Cham: Tritamen into Lybia and Cyrene, and Iaphet Priſcus Attolaa, to inioy the reſt of Affrick. Into Eaſt Aſia hee

ſent Canges, with ſome of the ſonnes of Gomer Gallus, Sabus, ſurnamed Thurifer went into Arabia foelix: Arabus ruled in the deſerts of Arabia: and Petreius in that part of Arabia called Petreia. Chanaan hee placed in Damaſcus in the confines of Paleſtine: In Europe hee made Thuyſco King of Sarmatia, from the riuer of Tanais, to the riuer of Rhene, to whom were ioyned the ſonnes of Iſtrus, and Meſa, with their brethren, who had the gouernment from the hill Adulas, to Meſſembria Pontica. Vnder whome Tyrus, Archadius and Aemathius gouerned in Italy, Gomerus in France: Samotes poſſeſſed that part of France betwixt the riuers Garunia and Sequana, and Iuball was Lord of the Celtibers.
               That ſhort and vntimely alienation of the children The cauſe of the variety of toungs and manners. from their progenitors, (of whoſe life and manners they had little taſte) was cauſe of all the diuerſity which inſued; for Cham, beeing conſtrained to flye with his wife and children, for ſcorning and deriding his father, ſeated 
                     The exile of Cham. himſelfe in that part of Arabia, which was afterwards called by his name, where hee left no religious ceremonies to his poſterity, as hauing receiued none from his Father: whereof inſued, that, as in tract of time, diuerſe companies beeing ſent out of that coaſt, to inhabite other countries, and poſſeſſing diuerſe partes of the world, (for the reiected ſeede did exceedingly increaſe) many of them fell into inextricable errors, their languages were varyed, and all knowledge and reuerence of the true and liuing God, was vtterly forgotten and aboliſhed, in ſo much as many of them might well bee ſayd to liue a life ſo vnciuill and ſo barbarous, as hardly could there Men liued like beaſts. any difference bee diſcerned betwixt them and brute beaſts.
               
                  
Thoſe which went into Aegypt, admiring the motion and brightneſſe of the heauenly lights, and aſcribing a certaine God-head to the Sunne and Moone, began to worſhip The Sunne and Moone worſhipped. them for gods, calling the Sunne Oſyris, and the Moone Iſis, the Ayre they reuerenced vnder the name of Iupiter: the Fire of Vulcan: the Skye of Pallas: and the Earth of The Moone called Iſis, the Sunne, Oſyris: the Ayre, Iupiter; the Fyre, Vulcan; the Sky, Pallas; and the Earth, Ceres. 
                  Ceres, giuing diuine honors vnto other things likewiſe, vnder diuerſe other names and appellations; Nor did that black clowde of darkneſſe, hang onely ouer the land of Aegypt, but what countries ſoeuer were firſt inhabited by the off-ſpring of Cham, were vtterly ouer-whelmed in ignorance of true pietie, and wholy inthralled in Satans ſlauerie. Neither was there euer land the mother of more Colonies, then that part of Arabia, wherein curſed Cham 
                  Arabia, the mother of many Colonies. and his crew remained; ſo great was that deſtruction which the vntimely baniſhment of one man brought to all man-kinde.
               Whereas on the contrary part, the iſſue of Sem and Iaphet, 
                  The iſſue of Sem and Japhet. being lawfully inſtructed by their parents and elders, and contented to liue in their owne limits, wandred not abroad into all parts of the world as thoſe others did, VVhy the worſhip of the true God remained with ſo few. which is the cauſe that the deſire of the truth, I meane the worſhip of the true God and godlineſſe, was (vntill the comming of the Meſſias) priuately practiſed in one country onely.
            
            
               
                  The falſe opinion of the Ethnicks concerning mans originall. CAP. 2.
               BVT the ancient Philoſophers, (beeing voyde of The two-fold opinion of the Philoſophers concerning the world. knowledge of the true God-head, haue written long

ſithence many Hiſtories of Nature,) haue otherwiſe thought of mans originall: for ſome of them were of opinion, that the world was without beginning, and incorruptible, and that the ſtock of humaine kinde hath beene for euer. Some others ſuppoſed both world, and worldly men to haue beginning, and to be likewiſe ſubiect to corruption, for, (ſay they) at firſt the nature of heauen and earth being mingled together and vnſeperated, had one onely forme or Idaea, out of which chaos each body being ſeperated from other, the world attained this ſhape it now carryeth: the ayrie being in continuall motion, the firye part thereof, for his lightneſſe, required the vppermoſt ſeate, and by the ſame reaſon, the Sunne, and all other ſtarres obtained their courſes; That part which was mixt with moyſture, by reaſon of his weight, remained ſtill in Light things tend vpwards, and heauie things downewards. his propper place, which being than mingled together, of the moyſt part thereof was made the ſea, and the harder part became earth, though then ſoft and ſlimy; which afterwards growing harder and thicker by the heate of the ſunne, the force of the heate by little and little ſwelling and puffing vp the ſuperficies, or vttermoſt part thereof, The naturall creation of liuing creatures. there were in many places diuerſe humors congealed together, wherein appeared certaine putrifactions couered with thin skinnes or filmes, as wee may perceiue by experience in the fennes & ſtanding waters of Aegipt, when as the heate of the ayre vpon a ſodaine warmeth the cold earth: ſo that heate abounding in moyſture, cauſed generation, and a certaine winding ayre incompaſſing the moyſture, preſerued that from danger by night, which by day was made ſolide by the heate of the ſunne: ſo as in the end thoſe putrifactions being brought to perfection, &, as it were, their time of birth drawing neere; the skins wherewith

they were couered, beeing burned and broken, they brought foorth the formes of all creatures: of which, thoſe that did moſt participate of heate, tooke theyr place in the vppermoſt region, and became flying fowles, thoſe which were moſt neere vnto the nature of the earth, became ſerpents, and other earthly creatures, and thoſe of the watery condition, were allotted the Element of the ſame nature, and were called Fiſhes.
               But when the earth (with heate and wind waxing euery day dryer then other) ſurceaſed from bringing forth the greateſt ſorts of creatures, thoſe which ſhee had already produced, brought forth others of the ſame kinde, by mutuall commixtion one with another.
               And in this manner did thoſe Philoſophers affirme, The barbarous manner of liuing of the firſt people. that men had their beginnings likewiſe, and that they, (ſeeking the fields for ſuch foode, as herbes and fruites of trees did naturally yeeld them) liued a wilde, vnciuill, and brutiſh kinde of life.
               And being much annoyde with beaſts (the better to reſiſt them) partly mooued with feare, and partly for their The diuerſitie of toungs how it came. common profit, gathered them-ſelues into companies, and ioyning their forces together, ſought out fit places for themſelues to dwell in. That the ſound of mens mouthes being firſt confuſed, and diſordered, by little and little became a diſtinct and intelligible voice, and gaue vnto euery thing his proper name. And that men being placed and diſperſed into diuerſe parts of the world, vſed not all one, but diuerſe languages, and for euery language diuerſe caracters of letters. That the firſt company of men gaue beginning to euery country wherein they liued. And that thoſe men which were firſt ſo procreated (being

vtterly voyde of ſuccour and ayde of any thing, and not knowing how to gather the fruites of the earth, and to lay them vp and keepe them, to ſerue their neceſſitie, lead ſo hard a life at the firſt, as many of them periſhed in winter by cold or famine, who afterwards growing wiſer by experience, found them out holes and caues in the Men made wiſer by danger. ground, both to auoyde the extremity of colde, and to preſerue fruites to defend them from famine. And hauing found out the vſe of fire and other things profitable, and all other commodities of mans life beeing made manifeſt vnto them: and finally making neceſſity the miſtreſſe of Neceſſitie the the miſtreſſe of labours. their labours, they commended to their memories the knowledge of all things; to whom were giuen as helpers, hands, ſpeach, and excellencie of minde.
               Now thoſe which (attributing nothing to Gods prouidence) were of opinion, that man had this manner of The firſt men were the Aethiopians. beginning, did hold alſo, that the Aethiopians were the firſt of all mortall men, vſing this coniecture for their reaſon, that the country of Aethiopia, by reaſon of the vicinity and neereneſſe of the heauens, did before all other lands begin to waxe warme, the earth from the beginning lying long ſoaked in water: whereof it happened, that of that firſt temperature of heate and moyſture, man himſelfe being firſt begotten, would with a better wil hold that place wherein hee was borne, than to goe ſeeke ſtrange countries, all other places beeing vtterly vnknowne vnto him.
               Wherefore beginning there, (yet firſt ſpeaking a word or two, in generall of Affricke one of the the three parts into which the world and this my preſent worke is diuided) wee will firſt ſpeake of the ſituation of Aethiopia, and of the cuſtomes and orders vſed in that country, and

afterwards wee will treate of all other lands in order as they lye, with what diligence we may.
            
            
               
                  Of the ſcituation and perfection of the world. CAP. 3.
               
                  OVr Anceſtors (as Oroſius reporteth) were of The earth deuided into three parts: opinion, that the circle of the whole earth, incloſed within the borders of the Ocean, is in the forme of a Triangle, and that there be three parts thereof, Affricke, Aſia and Europe. Affricke is deuided from Aſia by the riuer Nilus, which running from the South into Aethiopia, and paſſing Affrick deuided from Aſia. by Aegipt, maketh it exceeding fruitfull by his ouer-flowing, and diſchargeth himſelfe into the ſea, in no leſſe then ſeauen ſundry places.
               The Mediterranean ſea deuideth Europe from Affrick, Europ deuided from Affricke. which (according to Pomponius Mela) making breach into the earth from the Weſt Ocean, about Gades Iland and Hercules pillers, is not there in bredth aboue ten miles ouer. Aſia is ſeperated from Europe by the riuer Tanais, Aſia deuided from Europe. which flowing from the North almoſt into the middle of the poole of Maeotis, meeteth there with the ſea, called Pontus, which parteth the reſt of Aſia from Europe; Affricke is bounded vpon the Eaſt with the riuer Nilus, and vpon all other parts with the ſea, it is ſhorter then Europe, The ſcituation and qualitie of Affricke. and broder when it ioyneth to the ſea, and fuller of hills, and holding on a crooked courſe towards the Weſt, by little and little growing ſharper and narrower, is then the narroweſt when it is neereſt to an end. As much of Affricke as is inhabited, is wonderfull fertile, but the greateſt part thereof lyeth deſert, being eyther couered with drye

barren ſands, forſaken for the vicinitie of the Sunne, or annoyde with ſundry ſorts of hurtfull creatures. Vpon the North it is compaſſed with the Lybian Sea, with the The incommodities of Affrick. Aethiopian on the ſouth, and with the ſea Atlantick on the weſt. The whole country of Affrick was inhabited from the beginning, but of foure ſundrie ſorts of people whereof two (as Herodotus writeth) were borne & bred in that countrey, Affrick inhabited by homebred people and ſtrangers. and the other two were ſtrangers: the homebred and naturall countrimen are the Carthagenians and the Aethiopians, the one inhabiting in the north of Africk, & the other in the ſouth. The ſtrangers be Pheniceans and Grecians. The ancient Aethiophians and Egiptians (if all be true which they report of themſelues) were at firſt rude and barbarous, and feeding commonly like bruite beaſts with hearbes and wilde fleſh, vſing neither manners, lawes nor gouernement, but wandring and ſtraying abroad without conſideration or regard, and vtterly deſtitute of any certaine habitation, repoſing themſelues whereſoeuer they were benighted: But afterwards beeing made more ciuill and humane, by Hercules (who is ſaid to haue brought Colonies The people of Affrick made more ciuill by Hercules. into that Country) and making themſelues houſes of thoſe ſhippes wherewith they had before ſayled into Libia, they beganne to dwell and inhabite together. But of this we will ſpeake more at large hereafter.
               The ſoyle of Affricke is vnequally inhabited, for the The qualitie of the ſoyle of Affrick. South part thereof, by reaſon of the exceeding heat, lyeth for the moſt part deſert, and that part which lyeth next vnto Europ is very populous, the fruitfulnes of their ground The fruitfulneſſe of the ground. is admirable and wonderfull, as yeelding to the husbandman, in ſome places a hundred fould increaſe.
               It is ſtrange that is reported of the fruitfulnes of Mauritania The wonders of Affrick. in Affricke, that there be Vines bigger then two men

can fatham, and cluſters of Grapes of a cubite in compaſſe, that there be ſtalkes of wilde Parſley, wilde Fennell, and thiſtles of twelue cubits in length, and of a wonderfull thickneſſe, much like vnto the Indian Cane, the knots or ioynts whereof will fill eight buſhels, there are alſo herbes called Sperage, of no leſſe notable bigneſſe: Their Cipres trees, about the hill Atlas be of an exceeding height without knots, and with a bright leafe: but of all, their Cytron tree is the moſt noble, and of the Romaines accounted moſt daintie. Affricke breedeth Elephants and Dragons, which lying in waite for other beaſts kill all they can catch, VVhat kind of beaſts are bred in Affrick as Lyons, Libards, Bufles, Goates and Apes, whereof there bee great ſtore in many places.
               There bee alſo beaſts like Camels and Panthers, and beaſts called Rhizes, which bee like vnto Bulls. And (according to the opinion of Herodotus) that country breedeth horned Aſſes, beſides, Dragons, Hyaenaes, Porcupines, wilde Rammes, and a kinde of beaſt begotten betwixt the Hyaena and the Wolfe, (which is ſome-what bigger then the ordinary kinde of Wolues) Panthers, Storckes, Egles, Eſtridges, and ſundry kinds of Serpents, but eſpecially the Ceraſtes which hath a little body, and hornes like a Ramme, and the Aſpe which is little likewiſe, but very venimous, againſt whoſe miſchiefe the Ratte a very little creature, is by nature oppoſed for a remedy.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Aethiopia, and the ancient cuſtomes of that Country. CAP. 4.
               
                  EThiopia is deuided into two regions, whereof one lyeth in Aſia, the Two Aethiopias. other in Affricke: That in Aſia is now called India, and is waſhed on One Aethiopia is now called India. the Eaſt with the red and Barbarian Sea, and lieth Northward next vnto Libia and Aegipt, vpon the weſt it hath the inner Libia, and vpon the ſouth it ioyneth to the other Aethiopia, which is bigger and more ſouthward. This Aethiopia in Affrick, is ſo called of Aethiops the ſonne of Vulcan, who gouerned there (as Plinie is of opinion) or elſe of the Greeke word (aitho) which ſignifieth to burne, and (ops) which is the countenance, becauſe that country is parched and burned, by reaſon of the neereneſſe of the ſunne: for the heat there is exceeding great and continuall, as being directly vnder The qualitie of Aethiopia. the Meridian line. Towards the weſt it is mountanous, full of ſand and grauell in the middle, and deſert in the eaſt. It containeth many ſorts of people of diuerſe and monſtrous countenances, and horrible ſhapes. They were thought to bee the firſt people that liued, and that they The Aethiopians were the firſt people. being in that country naturally bred, continued free-men, and were neuer ſubiect to ſlauery: the gods were there firſt honoured, and ſacred ceremonies ordained: they had The gods firſt worſhipped in in Aethiopia. a double vſe of letters, for ſome letters were called holy, and were only known to the Prieſts, & the other ſerued for VVhat letters the Aethiopians vſed. the common people, nor were there formes of letters ſuch as thereof could ſillables bee framed, but either like ſome

liuing creature, or the outward parts of mens bodies or reſembling ſundry inſtruments of worke-men, and euery figure or forme of letter had his proper ſignification, as by the Hawke was ſignified ſwiftneſſe, miſchiefe and craft by the Crocadile, watchfulneſſe by the eye, and ſo like-wiſe of other things. Who-ſo-euer of their Prieſts was moſt troubled with vaine viſions, him they accounted the moſt holieſt, and creating him for their King adored him as though he were either a God, or at the leaſt giuen them The election of their Kings. by diuine prouidence, and yet his ſupreame authority exempted him not from the obedience of their lawes, but that hee was to doe all things according to their ancient cuſtomes, and not to reward or puniſh any man himſelfe, but vpon whome ſoeuer he intended to take puniſhment, to him hee ſent the executioner, to preſent him with the ſigne of death, which was no ſooner viewed by him to whome it was ſent, but forthwith (who euer he were) hee would goe home to his owne houſe, and there procure The obedience of the Ethiopians. his owne death: for ſo great honour and affection did the ſubiect beare to his ſoueraigne, that if it happened at any time by an accident the King to bee weakned or faint in any one part of his body, all his friends and followers would of their owne accord weaken that part in themſelues, accounting it an odious thing, that their King ſhould be lame or blind of one eye, and all his friends not to bee in like manner blind and lame alſo.
               Their cuſtome was alſo (as is reported) that their King being dead, all his friends would willingly depriue themſelues of life, accounting that death moſt glorious, and the ſureſt teſtimony of true frindſhippe: The people by reaſon of the neereneſſe of the heauens went for the moſt The apparell of the Ethiopians party naked, couering onely their priuities with ſheeps

tayles, and ſome few clothed them-ſelues with skinnes, ſome of them alſo wore breeches made of haire: their greateſt imployments were about their Cattell: their ſheepe bee very little and of a hard and rough fleeſe: Their exerciſe. their Dogges bee little likewiſe, but very ſharpe and eager: Millet and Barley are their cheefeſt graines, which ſerueth them both for bread and drinke, and they haue no kinde of fruites vnleſſe it be Dates, and thoſe be very rare alſo: Many of them liued with hearbes and the ſlender rootes of reedes, they eate alſo fleſh, milke and cheeſe: The Iſle of Meroê was once the head of the kingdome, the forme thereof is like vnto a ſheeld, and it lyeth along Meroê was once the Kings ſeate. by the riuer of Nylus, for the ſpace of three thouſand ſtadia.
               The Sheapheards that Inhabited that Ile were great huntſmen, and the husbandmen had mines of gold: Herodotus ſaith, that thoſe people of Aethiopia, which be called Macrobij, eſteemed more of braſſe than of golde, Gold accounted baſer then braſſe. for their gold they put to ſuch baſe and vile vſes, as the Embaſſadors of Cambyſes King of Perſia, being ſent thether, ſaw diuerſe offenders fettered in priſon in chaines of gold. Some of them ſowe their ground with a kinde of pulſe, and ſome others plant the Lote tree, they haue Hebon wood and Pepper in great aboundance, Elephants they hunt and eate, they haue alſo Lyons, Rhinocerots, (which bee enemies to the Elephant) Baſilisks, Libbards, and Dragons, which winding and intangling themſelues about the Elephants, deſtroy them by ſucking out their bloud. There is found the Iacint ſtone, and the Chriſophraſus, (which is a greene ſtone mixt with a golden brightneſſe) there is Cynamon gathered likewiſe: Their weapons were bowes made of wood that was parched in The Aethiopian armor.
                  
the fire, and foure cubits in length; their women were good warriors, the moſt of them hauing their lips thruſt through with a ring of braſſe. Some of the Aethiopians worſhipped The religion of the Ethiopians. the Sunne at his riſing, and inueighed bitterly againſt him at his going downe; many of them caſt their dead bodies into riuers, ſome other put them into earthen veſſels or glaſſe veſſels, and kept them in their houſes for the ſpace of a yeare; during which time they reuerenced them very religiouſly, offering vnto them the firſt fruits of their increaſe.
               Some ſay, that thee that did moſt excell others in comlineſſe of body, skill in breeding cattell, ſtrength and riches, him they elected for their King. And that they had an ancient lawe, that the Prieſts of Memphis, might when The authority of the Prieſts. they pleaſed, depriue the King of his life (by ſending vnto him the meſſenger that caryed the ſigne of death) and ordaine an other to raigne in his ſteed. They beleeued that there was one immortall God, and that hee was maker of Their gods. the world, and gouernor of all things, any other God they eſteemed mortall, who was their vncertaine King, as is ſaid. And hee that beſt deſerued of their citty, him next vnto their King they reuerenced as God. And ſuch was the ſtate of Aethiopia at the beginning, and for a long continuance, theſe their cuſtomes and manners of their nation. But at this day, as Marcus Antonius Sabellicus; (out of The new cuſtomes of the Aethiopians or Indians. whoſe hiſtory wee haue taken moſt matters, which wee treate of both in this and the bookes following) ſaith, that hee had intelligence from ſome that were borne in thoſe countries, that the King of Aethiopia (whome wee call Pretoian or Presbiter Ioan, or Ioan, and they Gyam, 
                  Preſtor Iohn King of that Aethiopia which is in Aſia. which in their language ſignifieth mighty,) is ſo potent a Prince, that hee is ſayd to haue vnder him as his vaſſalls

three-ſcore and two Kings. And that all their great Biſhops and ſtates of all thoſe kingdomes, are wholy guided by him, at whoſe hands the order of Prieſthood is obtained, which authority was by the Pope of Rome giuen and annexed to the Maieſty of their Kings, and yet hee himſelfe is no Prieſt, nor neuer entred into any holy orders. There be a great number of Archbiſhops, and euery one of them, (who euer hath the leaſt) hath twenty Biſhops vnder his iuriſdiction. The Princes and other Biſhops of great dignity, when they goe abroad haue carried before them, a croſſe, and a golden veſſell filled with earth, that the ſight of the one may put them in minde of their mortality, and the other of our Sauiours paſſion.
               Their Prieſts are ſuffered to mary for procreations ſake, but if they bury one wife, it is vtterly vnlawfull for them to Their Prieſts marry once and no more. mary an other. Their Temples are very large, and farre richer then ours, and for the moſt part builded vp to the topp arch-wiſe. They haue many religious houſes and families of holy orders, as Antonians, Dominicks, Calaguritans, Auguſtines, and Macarians, who be all arrayed by permiſſion of their Archbiſhops, with apparell of one coulour: Next vnto Almighty God, and his Mother the bleſſed Virgin Mary, Saint Thomas ſurnamed Didimus, 
                  Saint Thomas held in great reuerence. is chiefly honoured in that country. They hold an opinion, that their great King whom they call Gyam, was ingendred of King Dauid, and that the race of that one family hath continued euer ſince, hee is not black as moſt of the Aethiopians are, but rather white. The citty Garama is now the Kings ſeate, which conſiſteth not of Bulwarkes and houſes with ſtrong wals, but of tents or tabernacles made of fine flaxe or ſilke, imbrodered with purple, and placed in decent and ſeemely order.
               
                  
The King according to his cuſtome, liueth for the moſt part abroade, not contayning himſelfe within the circuite of the Citty, aboue two daies together, ether becauſe they account it abſurde and effeminate, or that they are prohibited by ſome lawe.
               They haue in redineſſe vpon any little occaſion tenne The power of the Ethiopian Kings. hundred thouſand men, well inſtructed in feates of armes, fiue hundred Elephants, beſides an infinit number of Horſes and Camels.
               There be alſo throughout the whole kingdome certaine ſtipendary families, the iſſue whereof haue a gentle inciſion made in their skinne, and bee marked with a hot iron with the ſigne of the Croſſe. In warres they vſe bowes, ſpeares, cotes of male, and helmets: the order of Prieſthood VVhat weapons be vſed in their wars. is in greateſt dignity, next vnto whome are the ſages or wizards, whom they call Balſamati and Tenquati. They eſteeme much alſo of innocency and honeſty, accounting them the firſt ſtep to wiſdome, the Nobility are the third in honor and dignity and the ſtipendary the laſt: the Iudges diſcerne of cauſes of life and death: but referre the decree to the Praefect of the citty, who is called Licomagia, who alwaies repreſentes the perſon of the King: written lawes they haue none, but iudge according to equity and right. If any man bee convicted of adultery hee ſhall pay for his The puniſhment for adultery. puniſhment the fortith part of his goods, but the adultereſſe ſhal receiue a domeſticall reuenge by her husband, for he ſhall puniſh her whome it doth moſt concerne. The husbands aſſigne dowers for their wiues, requiring noe portion with them. There women are attired with gold Husbands aſſigne dowers for their wiues (wherof that country doth much abound) pearles alſo, and ſilke, both men and women weare garments downe to the

feete, with ſleeues, and not open in any place, all colours are alike vnto them, except blacke, which is there vſed onely for mourning garments.
               They bewaile the dead for the ſpace of forty dayes. The ſecond courſes in their greateſt banquets conſiſt of raw fleſh, which beeing finely minced into ſmall peeces, and ſtrawed ouer with ſweete ſpices, they feed vpon moſt hungerly: wollen cloath they haue none, inſteed wherof they are clothed either with ſilke or flax: they vſe not all one language, but diuers, and diſtinguiſhed by diuers names. They exerciſe them-ſelues eyther in husbandry or about cattle, they haue euery yeare two harueſts & two ſummers. All the people of Lybia from this Aethiopia or India, to Mahomet worſhipped in Libia. the vtmoſt part of the weſt, honour the impiety of Mahomet, and liue in the ſame kinde of religion, that thoſe Barbarians practiſe, which are now in Aegipt, and bee called Moores (as it is thought) of their wandring or ſtraying abroad: for that country of Libia alſo was no leſſe hatefull than the Saraſins, in thoſe accurſed times, wherein was the greateſt alteration in humaine matters, the manners of people, loue of deuotion, and names of all Nations, being for the moſt part changed.
            
            
               
                  Of Aegipt and the ancient cuſtomes of that country. CAP. 5.
               
                  EGipt a region in Affricke, or (as ſome will haue it) next adioyning to Affricke, The denomination and deſcription of Aegipt. was ſo called of Aegiptus the brother of Danaus King of Argyues, before which time it was called Aeria: This country (as Plinie in his firſt booke

witneſſeth) ioyneth Eaſtward to the red ſea, and to Palaeſtyne; vpon the Weſt it hath Cyrene, and the reſidue of Affricke, and extendeth from the South to Aethiopia, and from the North to the Aegyptian ſea. The moſt famous citties of that country, were Thebes, Abydos, Alexandria, Babilon, and Memphis (now called Damiata) and the great citty Cayrus or Alcir, which is the Soldans ſeate; In Egypt (as Plato reporteth) it doth neuer raine, but the riuer of Nylus ouer-flowing the whole land once euery yeare, after the ſummer Solſtice maketh the whole country fertill and fruitfull: Egypt of many is accounted amongſt the number of Ilands. The riuer Nylus ſo deuiding it, that it proportioneth the whole country into a triangular forme; inſomuch that of many it is called Delta, for the reſemblance it hath vnto that Greeke letter. The Egiptians were the firſt that fained the names of The Aegiptians had their beginning from the Aethiopians. twelue gods, they erected Altars, Idols, and Temples, and figured liuing creatures in ſtones, all which things doe plainely argue that they had their originall from the Aethiopians, who were the firſt Authors of all theſe things, (as Diodorus Siculus is of opinion). Their women were wonte in times paſt to doe buſineſſe abroad, to keepe tauernes and victualling houſes, and to take charge of buying The Aegiptian women do the offices of men, and men the offices of women. and ſelling: and the men to knit within the walles of the citty, they bearing burthens vpon their heads, and the women vppon their ſhoulders: the women to piſſe ſtanding, and the men ſitting; all of them for the moſt part ryoting and banquetting abroad, in open wayes, and exonerating and disburdening their bellyes at home. No woman there taketh vppon her the order of Prieſt-hood of any god or goddeſſe.
               They enter not into religion to any of their gods, one

by one, but in companies, of whom one is their Biſhoppe or head, and hee beeing dead, his ſonne is elected in his ſteede: The male children ayde and ſuccour theyr parents by the cuſtome of their country, freely and willingly, and daughters are forced to doe it, if they bee vnwilling.
               The faſhion of moſt men in funerall exequies is to rend the hayres off theyr heads, and to ſuffer their beards Their manner of funerals. to growe vncutte, but the Aegyptians did let their lockes growe long, and ſhaue their beards ſhort, they kneaded Circumciſion vſed by the Egiptians. theyr Dowe with theyr feete, and made morter with their hands. Theyr cuſtome was (as the Greekes were of opinion) to circumciſe them-ſelues and their children: they write theyr letters from the right hand to the left; and men wore two garments, the women but one: they had two ſorts of letters, the one prophane, the other holy, but both of them deriued from the Aethiopians. The Prieſts ſhaued their bodyes euery third day, leaſt they ſhould hap to bee polluted with any filthe, when they did The cleanneſſe of the Prieſts. ſacrifice: they wore paper ſhooes, and linnen veſtiments euer new waſhed, and alleagded that they were circumciſed, for no other cauſe, but for cleanlineſſe ſake, for that it is better to bee cleane then comely. The Aegyptians ſowed no Beanes, nor would eate any that grew in other Beanes an vncleane graine with the Egiptians. countries; and their Prieſts were preciſely prohibited the ſight of them, as beeing an vncleane kinde of graine. The Prieſts waſhed them-ſelues in colde water, thriſe in the day time, and twiſe in the night. The heads of their oblations they eate not, but curſing them with bitter execrations, eyther ſould them to ſtrange Marchants factors, or if none would buy them, they would throw them into the riuer of Nylus.
               
                  
their ſacrifices were with oxen and calues that were very cleane.
               It was not lawfull for the women to doe ſacrifice, no though they were conſecrated to their God Iſis: They liued of meate made of a certaine corne which they call Wheate, and drinke wine made of Barley, for grapes there The Aegiptians wine. are none growing in that country. They eate raw fiſh dried at the Sunne, and ſome powdred in brine, and birds alſo, but altogether rawe, but the richer ſort feed vpon Quailes and Duckes. When many are aſſembled together at meat, and that they be aroſe from dinner or ſupper, one of them caryeth about, vpon a little Beere or Cheſt, the picture of a dead body, eyther made of wood, or elſe much reſembling a dead corpes, in painting and workmanſhip, of a cubite or two cubits long, and ſhewing it vnto euery one of the gueſts, ſaith vnto them: In your drinkings and meriments behold this ſpectacle, for ſuch ſhall you bee when you are dead. Yong people bow and giue place to their elders when they meete them in the way, and ariſe from their ſeates to ſuch as come to them, wherein they agree with the Lacedemonians. Thoſe which incounter in the The Aegiptians ſalutations. wayes ſalute one another with congee below the knee: They are clothed (as I haue ſaid) with linnen garments fringed about the legges, which they call Caſſilirae, ouer which they we are a little ſhort white garment like a cloake, VVollen garments contemned. as it were caſt ouer the other: for wollen garments are ſo contemned, as they are neither worne in temples, nor ſerue for winding ſheetes. Now, becauſe all thoſe famous men which haue heeretofore excelled in any one kinde of learning or myſtery, and which haue conſtituted and left behinde them lawes and ordinances for other nations to liue by, went firſt vnto the Aegyptians,

to learne their manners, lawes and wiſdome (in which they excelled all nations of the earth) as Orpheus, and after him Homer, Muſaeus, Melampodes, Dedalus, Licurgus the Spartane, Solon the Athenian, Plato the Philoſopher, Pythagoras of Samos, and Zamolzis his diſciple, Eudoxus alſo the Mathematitian, Democritus of the cittie of Abdera, Inopides of Chios, Moſes the Hebrew, and many others, as the Aegiptian Prieſts make bragges, are contained in their ſacred bookes, I thinke it very conuenient to ſpend ſome little time further in deſcribing the manner of liuing of the Aegiptians, that it may bee knowne what one or more things, euery one of thoſe worthy men, haue taken from the Aegyptians, and tranſported into other countries, for Many ceremonies vſed in Chriſtian religion, borrowed from the Egiptians. (as Phillippus Beroaldus writeth vpon Apuleus Aſſe) there be many things tranſlated from the religion of the Aegiptians into the Chriſtian religion, as the linnen veſtments, the ſhauing of Prieſts crownes, the turning about in the Altar, the ſacrificiall pompe, the pleaſant tuning notes of muſick, adorations, prayers, and many other more like ceremonies.
               The Egiptian Kings (as Diodorus Siculus writeth in his ſecond booke) were not ſo licencious as other Kings, whoſe will ſtandeth for a law, but followed the inſtitutions and lawes of the country, both in gathering money, and in their life and conuerſations. There was none of any ſeruile condition, whether hee were bought with money, or borne in that country, that was admitted to waite and attend VVhat ſeruants attended vpon their Kings. vpon the King, nor any other, but onely the ſonnes of the worthieſt Prieſts, and thoſe aboue the age of twenty yeares, and excelling others in learning, to the end that the King beeing mooued at the ſight of his ſeruants, both day and night attending vpon his perſon, ſhould commit

nothing vnfit to be done by a King, for ſeldome doe the rich and mighty men become euill if they want miniſters to foſter them in their euill deſires. There were certaine howers appointed euery day and night, wherein (by the permiſſion of their lawe) the King might confer with others. The King at his riſing receaueth all the letters and ſupplications that bee ſent or brought vnto him, and then pauſing and conſidering a while what is to be don, he giueth anſwer to euery ſuter in order as they came, ſo as all things bee done in their due and conuenient time. This done after he hath waſhed his body in the company of his greateſt ſtates, and put on his richeſt robes, he ſacrificeth vnto his Gods: There cuſtome was that the cheefe Prieſt, when the ſacrifices were brought before the Altar, and the King ſtanding by, praied with a lowde voice The Prieſts praſied the good Kings diſpraiſed the bad. in the hearing of the people for the proſperous helth and all good ſucceſſe of their King that maintaines iuſtice towards his ſubiects, and more particularly to relate his vertues, as to ſay that he obſerued piety and religion towards the Gods, and humanity to man, then to call him continent, iuſt, and magnanimous, true, bountifull and brideling all his affections, and beſides, that, that hee laid more eaſie puniſhments vpon offendors, then their crimes required, and beſtowed fauours beyond mens deſeruings, and holding on this prayer, at length he purſueth the wicked with a curſe, and freeing the King from blame, layeth al the fault vpon his miniſters, which perſwade him to doe euill: Which done he exhorteth the King to leade a happy life and acceptable to the Gods, and alſo to follow good faſhions, and not to do thoſe things which euill men perſwade him to, but ſuch as cheefely appertaine to honour and vertue. In the end after the King hath ſacrificed a bull to the Gods, The Prieſt recyteth out of their ſacred

bookes, certaine decrees and geſts of worthy men, wherat the King being mooued ruleth his kingdome holily and iuſtly according to their examples.
               They haue there times appointed and prefixt not onely when to gather riches, and to iudge acording to their auncient lawes, but alſo when to walke, when to waſh, when to lie with their wiues and when euery thing elſe is to bee done: They vſed but ſimple diet as hauing nothing The Egyptians ſimple diet. vpon their tables but Veale and gooſe, they were alſo limited to a certaine meaſure of wine that would neither fill their bellies nor intoxicate their braines. In a word the whole courſe of their liues, was ſo modeſt & ſo temperate as they ſeemed, to be guided rather by a moſt skilful Phiſition for the preſeruation of their healths then by a law-giuer.
               It is ſtrange to ſee after what ſort the Aegyptians lead their liues, for they liued not as they would themſelues, but as the law allowed them; but it is much more admirable to ſee how that their Kings were not permitted to condemne others, nor yet to inflict puniſhment vpon any offendor, being moued therevnto either through pride, malice, or any vniuſt cauſe whatſoeuer: but liuing vnder a law like priuate men, thought it no burthen vnto them, but rather eſteemed themſelues bleſſed in obeying the law: for by thoſe which follow their own affections, they ſuppoſed many things to be cōmitted, that might breed vnto themſelues both danger & damage: for though they know they do amiſſe, yet notwithſtanding they perſiſt ſtill in error, being ouercome either with loue, or hate, or ſome other paſſion of mind, whereas thoſe which liue with vnderſtanding and aduiſe, offend in few things. The Kings vſing ſuch The Kings ſafety much regarded. iuſtice to their ſubiects, did ſo purchaſe the good wills of them all, as not only the Prieſts, but all the Egiptians, were more carefull of their Soueraigne, then of their wiues or

Children or any other princes elſe: and when one of thoſe good Kings die all men bewayled him with equall ſorrow How the Egyptians be wayle their dead Kings that were good. and heauineſſe of heart, and renting their clothes and ſhutting vp their Temples, frequented not the market, nor obſerued ſolemne feaſtes, but defiling their heads with earth for the ſpace of ſeuenty and two daies, and girding themſelues about the pappes with fine linnen, both men and women walked about together, by two hundred and three hundred in a Company, renewing their complaints, and in a ſong renumerating the vertues of their King one by one, during which time they abſtayned from fleſh of beaſts, from all things boyled, from wine and all ſumptuous fare, and alſo from all manner of oyntments and bathes, yea their owne propper beds, and all womens companie, bewayling for thoſe daies as much as if they had buried their owne children, In which meane ſpace all things being prouided for the funerall ſolemnities, vpon the laſt day they How their Kings be buried. incloſed the corpes in a coffinne and placed it at the entrance of the Sepulcher, where vſually was made a breefe narration of all things done by the King in his life time, and euery one had then liberty to accuſe him that would: the Prieſts ſtood by, commending the Kings good deeds, and all the multitude of people that were preſent at the funerals, applauded his praiſe worthy actions, and with bitter exclamations rayled againſt his miſdeeds, whereof it hapned that moſt Kings (through the oppoſition of the people) wanted the due honour and magnificence of Burial, the feare whereof conſtrayned them to liue iuſtly and vprightly in their life times: and this for the moſt part was the manner of liuing of the auncient Kings of Aegypt. Aegypt is diuided into many partes, euery part whereof The auncient gouernment of the Egiptians. is called by the Greeke word (Monos) and is gouerned

by a Praetor or Mayor, who hath rule ouer al the people of that Prouince: The Aegiptians deuide their tribute, or cuſtome money which is payd them by forrainers in three parts: the greateſt part whereof belongeth to the colledge of Prieſts, which are of great authority with the inhabitants, both in regard of their ſeruice to their gods, as alſo for their doctrine, where-with they inſtruct others, and part of this portion they beſtow in miniſtring their ſacrifices, and the reſt to increaſe their priuate eſtates, for in no caſe would the Aegiptians haue the worſhip of their gods omitted, nor doe they thinke it fit, that they that be miniſters of common councell, and profit, ſhould want things neceſſary to liue vpon: for the Prieſts in all weighty buſineſſes bee aſſiſtant to the King, both by their labour and councell, as well in regarde of the knowledge they haue in the ſtarres, as by their ſacrifices, foretelling things to come. Moreouer they ſhew out of their ſacred volumnes the actes and geſts of worthy men, by which the Kings may know in their deſignes, how things are likely to ſucceed, and it is not ſo with the Aegiptian Prieſts, as it is with the Greekes, that one man, or one woman ſhould haue charge of their ſacrifices, but there bee many that bee conuerſant about the worſhip and honour of their gods, which leaue the ſame charge of holy miſteries to their children: they be all of them freed and diſcharged from tribute, & poſſeſſe the ſecond place of honor and eſtimation after their King.
               The ſecond portion of the tribute money commeth to the Kings, which ſerueth them for the wars, for their maintenance, and alſo to reward valiant and worthy men for their proweſſe and good ſeruice, by which meanes it commeth to paſſe, that their owne people are vexed with no kind of tribute: The Captaines and Souldiours haue the

third part, to the end that hauing ſuch wages, they might haue more ready and willing mindes to vnder-goe all perils and dangers of warfare.
               Their common-wealth alſo conſiſteth of three ſorts of common people, of husbandmen, ſhepheards and craftsmen. Their commonwealth conſiſteth of three ſorts of people, husbandmen, ſhepheards and labourers. The husbandmen buy their ground at an eaſie rate of the Prieſts, of the King, or of the Souldiours, and apply their husbandry without intermiſſion, all their time from their infancie, by which meanes they are farre more expert in husbandry then others, both for the precepts they receiue from their parents, as alſo by reaſon of their continuall practiſe. The ſheapheards likewiſe receiuing the charge and skill of keeping cattell from their fathers, follow that kinde of exerciſe for all their life long: And arts and ſciences amongſt the Aegiptians are moſt exquiſite, and brought to the higheſt ſtraine of perfection, for the Egiptian tradeſmen, (without intermedling in publicke affaires) exerciſe no other labour but ſuch onely as is eyther permitted by the law, or taught by their fathers, ſo as neither the enuy of the teacher, nor ciuill hatred, nor any other thing whatſoeuer, can hinder them from that courſe of life they haue entred into.
               The Egiptians cenſured not of things at hap hazard, but with reaſon and diſcretion, for they eſteemed things How their iudgments were giuen. rightly done to be very beneficiall for mans life, and that the onely way to auoyde euil, was to puniſh the offenders and to ſuccor the oppreſſed, but that the puniſhment due for an offence ſhould bee forborne in regarde eyther of meede or money, they held to be the vtter confuſion of their publicke life, and therefore they ſetled the beſt and choiſeſt men of the moſt famous citties, as at Heliopolis, Memphis, & Thebes, and ſet them as iudges ouer the reſt,

which ſeſſions of Iudges were thought to be nothing inferior to the Iudges of Areopagus in Athens, nor to the Senate or councell of the Lacedemonians, eſtabliſhed long time after them: when theſe Iudges (being thirty in number) were aſſembled together, they made election of the worthieſt man amongſt them, to bee their chiefe Iudge or Iuſtice, in whoſe abſence the whole company aſſembled, appointed an other Iudge to be his ſubſtitute: Theſe Iudges were all maintained at the Kings coſt, but the cheefe Iudge was farre better allowed then the reſt, who alwayes had hanging about his neck in a chaine of gold, bedeckt The chiefe Iudge weareth the ſigne of Truth about his neck. with diuers precious ſtones, an Image which they called Truth: and when they were ſet in Iudgment, the Image of Truth being laid before them by the chiefe Iudge, and all their lawes (which were contained in eight volumes) placed in the middle of the Iudges: their maner was, that the accuſer ſhould ſet downe his accuſation in writing, & the maner of the iniury, or loſſe, committed and done, and how much he eſteemed him-ſelfe damnified: then was there a time allotted for the accuſed to anſwer his aduerſaries accuſations by writing, and eyther to purge himſelfe that he did not the iniury, or to auerre that what he did was iuſtly done, or that the wrong or loſſe hee did was not of ſuch value as was ſuppoſed: after this the plaintiffe replied, and the defendant made anſwer to his replication. So as the pleading of both parties being twiſe heard, after the Iudges had examined and reaſoned of the matter in controuerſie, the chiefe Iudge turning the ſigne of Truth towards him that had truth of his ſide, pronounced the ſentence, and this was the maner of their Iudgments. And now becauſe occaſion is offered to ſpeake of the Inſtitution of their lawes, I thinke it not impertinent to our purpoſe, to make mention of the ancient lawes of the Egyptians:

that thereby we may know how farre they excelled others both in order and vtility. And firſt of all, periured perſons The lawes of the Egiptians. againſt periurd perſons. were puniſhed with death, as thoſe which had committed a double offence, both in violating their duty towards the gods, and in breaking and aboliſhing faith and truth amongſt men, which is the chiefeſt bond of humaine ſociety: if a Traueller finde one that is ſet vpon with theeues and robbed and beaten, or ſuffered any other iniury, and doth not ſet to his helping hand to ayde him (if it lye in his power) hee ſhall dye for it, but if hee could not aſſiſt him, then ought hee to make the theeues knowne, and to proſecute the iniury with his accuſation; which if hee doe not he ſhall be whipped with a certaine number of ſtripes, and bee bard from all ſuſtenance for three whole dayes together: Againſt ſalſe accuſers. hee which accuſeth an other falſely, and is called in queſtion for it, ſhall vndergoe the puniſhment prouided for falſe accuſers: and all the Aegiptians were at certaine times conſtrained to giue vp theyr names in writing to the Preſidents and Gouernors, and what trade of life they exerciſed, in dooing whereof, if any ſay vntruly, or liued by vnlawfull gaine, hee was puniſhed with death: if any one kill eyther free-man or ſeruant willingly, he ſhall dye for it by the lawes: which regarding not the quallity of the eſtate, but the heynouſneſſe of the deed, and the euill mind of the dooer, deliuer men from euill, ſo as by reuenging the death of ſeruants and ſlaues, free-men may liue in more ſecurity.
               The paines of death were not afflicted vpon fathers which A law againſt parents that murdered their children. had ſlaine their ſonnes, but they were inioyned to ſtand for three daies and three nights about the dead corps (the publike watch ſtanding by to ſee it done) for they thought it vniuſt to depriue him of life that was author of his ſonnes life: but

rather that he ſhould be afflicted with continuall griefe and repentance of the fact, whereby others might ſhunne the like offence. To Paracides was impoſed a moſt exquiſite A law againſt Pariacides. and extreame puniſhment, for the lawe was, that the liuing body and the dead corps ſhould be bound together ioynt by ioynt, vpon ſharpe Pikes or ſtakes, and burned vpon a heape of thornes, adiudging it to be the moſt heynous offence that could bee amongſt men, for one to doe him to death violently, of whom hee had receiued life. If any woman great with child were adiudged to dye, her death was deferred till ſhe was deliuered, for they thought it meere iniuſtice, that an infant which committed no euill ſhould periſh with the guilty, or that two ſhould bee puniſhed, whereas but one offended. Thoſe which in Offenders in the warres puniſhed with ſhame. warres did eyther breake theyr array, or would not obey their Leaders and Captaines, were not puniſhed with death, but with the reproch & ignominy of all men, which diſgrace after they had blotted out by their vertue and valiant acts, they recouered their former eſtate and dignities, and that law brought it to paſſe in continuance of time, that men accounted that diſhonour to bee the greateſt euill could hap vnto them, and much more greeuous then death. Thoſe which reuealed any ſecrets to their enemies, had their toungs cut out; and thoſe which clipped money, or counterfetted any falſe coyne, or altered it eyther in weight or faſhion, or ſtamped it with letters, or defaced the letters, or forged any falſe deeds, were puniſhed with the loſſe of both their hands: for they thought it fit, that that part of the body ſhould ſuffer puniſhment during life, that was cheefe inſtrument in the offence, and that others alſo being warned by their miſeries and calamities, might abſtaine from the like lewdneſſe.

There were very ſharpe puniſhments inflicted vpon thoſe that had abuſed any woman, for he which defloured a free A law against adultery and fornication. woman had his members cut off, for that vnder one fault hee had comitted three hanous offences which were iniury, corruption of bloud, and confuſion of children; he that was taken in wilfull adultery had a thouſand ſtripes with rods, and the adulterous woman had her noſe cut off, by which diſgrace her beauty was blemiſhed, and ſhee puniſhed in that part of her face which did moſt addorne it. It is reported that Bocchoris was the maker of thoſe lawes which partaind to ciuill conuerſation amongſt men, which lawes Bocchoris their law maker. allow that if one lend mony without ſpecialty, and the debitor deny that hee borrowed any, the creditor muſt ſtand to the debiters oath: for an oath is held of great moment as being a religious act: and certaine it is that thoſe which often ſweare doe abrogate their faith and credits, and therfore they will ſweare but ſeldome, leaſt they looſe their reputations and names of honeſt men, moreouer the ſame lawe-maker (concluding all faithfulneſſe in vertue) iudged, that men ought by good meanes to accuſtome themſelues to honeſty, that they may not bee thought vnworthy of truſt, for hee thought it wrong to thoſe to whome mony was lent with-out oath not to performe their faith by ſwearing, whether the goods be their Mens bodiesnot liable to their debts. owne or noe: The vſury which was agreed vpon by writing, forbad that the double forfeture of the thing lent ſhould be exacted: and all payments were ſatiſfied by the debitors goods, but his body might not be deliuered to the creditor, for they thought fit that onely their goods ſhould be ſubiect and lyable to their debts, and their bodies addicted to the Citties, whoſe ayde and aſſiſtance they had neede of, both in warres and peace; neither was it

thought fit that the ſouldiors which ventured their liues, for their countries ſafty, ſhould bee thruſt in priſon for intereſt: which law is ſuppoſed to bee tranſlated by Solon to the Athenians, and by him called Siſachthia, prouiding that men ſhould not looſe their liues for the Cittizens vſury: more-ouer the particular law and toleration for theeues amongſt the Aegiptians, was, that thoſe that did ſteale ſhould bring their names in writing to the cheefe Preeſt, and inſtantly diſcloſe the theft, or robbery vnto The law againſt theeues. him. In like ſort they which had their goods taken from them, muſt write vnto the cheefe Prieſt, the time, day, and houre that hee was robbed, by which meanes the theft being eaſily found out and diſcouered, he which was robbed ſhould looſe the fourth part of that which was ſtolne, which fourth part ſhall bee giuen to the theefe, and the reſt reſtored to the owner: For the lawgiuers opinion was that ſeeing it was vnpoſſible that theft ſhould altogether bee prohibited, men ſhould looſe rather ſome portion of their ſubſtance, then all that was taken from them.
               The manner of their marriages is not all alike with Their marriaages. the Aegiptians, for it is lawfull for the Preeſts to marry but once, but the reſt may marry as oft as they will, according to their deſire, and ability; and there are no children accounted baſtards, noe though they be begotten of ſuch bond-ſeruants as be bought with mony, for they hold that the father is the onely author of their childrens birth, and the mother to be but the receptacle, and to yeeld norriſhment The ſmall coſt beſtowed in bringing vpchildren. to the infant.
               It is moſt incredible to ſee with what ſmall and eaſie coſt the Aegiptians bring vp their children, for the noriſh them with the roots of bulruſhes, & other like roots, raked

and roaſted in hotte embers, and with hearbes growing in fennes and mooriſh grounds, ſome-times boyld, ſometimes broyld on the coales, and ſome-times rawe. They neuer wore ſhooes, but goe for the moſt part naked, by reaſon of the temperature of the country: ſo as all the coſt that a father beſtoweth vpon his childe till hee bee of full age, exceedeth not twenty Drachmas. The Prieſts inſtruct children both in that learning which they call holy, and in the other which appertained to knowledge and common inſtruction, and they bee very intentiue, and exceedingly bent to the ſtudy of Geometry and Arithmatick. They ſuffer them not to vſe eyther wreſtling or muſick, ſuppoſing the dayly vſe of wreſtling to be vnſure and dangerous, and that thereby their bodyes are made more feeble and weake, and muſicke they condemned as vtterly Muſick diſalowd of the Egiptians. vnprofitable and hurtfull in making their mindes effeminate: They cure their diſeaſes eyther by faſting or vomitting, which they vſe eyther dayly, or euery third day, How the Egiptians cure the diſeaſed. or fourth day, for they are of opinion, that all diſeaſes had theyr beginning from ſurfetting, and that therefore that is the beſt phyſicke to recouer health, which taketh away the cauſe of the diſeaſe: Souldiers and trauellers are cured for nothing, for the Phiſitians liue of the reuenews of the common-wealth, and therefore are forced by the law to cure the diſeaſed, after the ſtrict forme ſet downe by the beſt Phiſitians and moſt approoued writers: And the Phyſition that followeth the rule of that ſacred booke, though hee cannot cure his patient, yet is hee blameleſſe, but if he cure him by any other meanes then is ſet downe in that booke, hee ſhall dye for it: for the maker of that law was of opinion, that there could not a better courſe of curing bee found out, then that which was inuented,

and obſerued for long time by ancient Phyſitions.
               The Aegiptians worſhip diuerſe creatures beyond all meaſure, not onely while they be liuing, but when they be The Aegiptians worſhip diuers ſorts of creatures. dead alſo, as Cattes, Rattes, Dogges, Hawkes, the birds called Ibis, Wolues and Crocadiles, and many more of like kinde: neither be they aſhamed to profeſſe open honour vnto them, but account it as commendable and lawdable for them to doe it, as to doe their ſeruice to the gods, in ſo much as they will goe about into citties and other places, carrying with them Images of thoſe beaſts, vaunting and glorying what creatures they haue adored, at the ſight whereof, all men in manner of ſupplyants, doe reuerence vnto the Images. When any of theſe beaſts die, they wrappe the carcaſe in linnen cloth, and annoynt it with Salt, beating their breſts with bitter exclamations, and annoynting it againe with the Iuiſe of Cedar tree, and other odoriferus oyntments, that it may keepe the longer, they bury it in their hallowed places. Hee that willingly killeth any of thoſe creatures, ſhall haue iudgment of death for it: but if a man kill the Ibis or the Cat, either willingly or at vnawares, the whole multitude fall vpon him, tormenting and killing him without mercy or iudgment. The terror whereof inforceth the beholders to lament his death, and to auerre that the beaſt was kild without any fault of his owne. Theſe beaſts be kept with great coſt and charge within the circuit of their Temples, by men of no ſmall account, eating fine flower and porredge made of Oate-meale, which in their banquets are mingled with milke: They giue them Geeſe alſo dayly both ſodde and broylde: and catch birds for thoſe which eate raw fleſh. To conclude they bee all nouriſhed with maruelous great charge and diligence: and their deaths as

much bewayled of the people as the deaths of their owne Sonnes, yea and their funeralls are farre more ſumptuous than their ability can afford; in ſo much as when Ptolomaeus Lagus was gouernour of Aegypt an oxe dying for age in the City of Memphis, hee which had the charge of keeping him beſtowed a great ſumme of mony vpon his buriall, which was giuen to him to defray that charge, beſides fifty talents of ſiluer which he borowed of Ptolomy.
               
               Theſe things which we haue ſpoken of, perhaps, will ſeeme ſtrange to ſome, but no leſſe ſtrange will it ſeeme to any that ſhall conſider the ceremonies of the Aegiptians in the buriall of thé dead: for when one dyeth there all his The ſtrange kind of burials amongst the Egiptians. neere friends and kinsfolkes defile and ſpoyle their heads with earth, and goe round about the Citty wayling, vntill the dead body be buryed, in which Interim they nether waſh themſelues nor drinke wine, nor eate any meate but that which is very vile and groſſe, nor yet weare any good apparrell: They haue three formes or kinds of buriall, for ſome be buried ſumptuouſly, ſome indifferently, and ſome baſely: In the firſt manner of buryall is ſpent and layd out one talent of ſiluer, in the ſecond twentie minae, and ſome ſmall coſt is beſtowed in the laſt. Thoſe which haue charge of the funeralls (which courſe of life decendeth from their aunceſtors as by Inheritance) bring the funerall expences in writing to the houſhoulders, demanding at what rate they will haue the funeralls performed, and the bargaine being made, and concluded betwixt them the body is deliuered vnto them to be buried, at the charge agreed vpon: And then the Gramarian (for ſo he is called) the body being laid in the ground, marketh and aſſigneth out a place about the flanck how farre from the left part the inciſition muſt bee made, after that, hee which is called

the breaker vp or vnboweler, openeth his ſide with a ſharp Aethiopian ſtone, ſo wide as by the law is permitted, which done he inſtantly runneth away as faſt as he can, all the ſtanders by following after, curſing him, and throwing ſtones at him, for they eſteemed thoſe men worthy of hate, which had mangled or miſuſed the body of their friend: but thoſe which haue charge and ouerſight of the body, which they cal Salitores, they account worthy of honour and eſtimation, this done they carry the dead corpes into the Temple before the Prieſts, who ſtanding by the dead body, on of them plucketh out of the hole, or wound in his ſide all the entralls, except the kidneyes and heart, al which an other waſheth away with red wine, compounded with odoriferous ſpices and perfumes, after that they annoynt the whole body, firſt with iuyce of Cedar tree, and other pretious oyntments for thirty daies ſpace and more, and then they rub it ouer with mirhe and cinamon and other like ſtuffe, wherby it is not only preſerued the longer but yeeldeth a ſweet ſauour alſo: the body being thus dreſſed, they deliuer it to the dead mans kinsfolke, euery part of him, yea the heaires of his browes and eie lidds, being ſo preſerued, as the forme of his body remaineth whole, as though he were not dead but a ſleepe: before the body be interred the funerall day is declared to the Iudges and the dead mans friends ſaying, that vpon that day the dead body is to paſſe ouer the fens: the Iudges being aboue forty in number aſſemble them ſelues together, and ſit vpon a round ſcaffold, beyond the poole, then is there a ſhippe prouided for that purpoſe, and brought thither by thoſe to whome the charge is committed, and before the body bee laid in the coffin, euery one hath liberty that will to accuſe the party deceaſed, and if hee bee proued to bee an euillliuer, the iudges proceed to ſentence, wherby they adiudge

that his body ſhall bee depriued of Sepulture: and if any one accuſe him vniuſtly, hee ſhall bee ſeuerely puniſhed: but if no one accuſe him, or that it is euident that hee was accuſed falſely and of malice, his kindred leauing off their mourning, fall to prayſing him, yet ſpeaking nothing of his ſtock and parentage, as the Greekes are accuſtomed to doe, (for the Aegiptians account them-ſelues all noble alike,) but beginning at his child-hood, they recite his bringing vp and education, the beginning of his life and learning, and from that aſcending to his mans eſtate, they remember his religion and deuotion towards the gods, his Iuſtice, his Continency, and all his other vertues, and then inuocating the infernall gods, they beſeech them to place him amongſt the Saints, to which requeſt all the multitude make anſwer, extolling the dead-mans worth and renowne, as if he ſhould liue for euer below amongſt the bleſſed: which done, each one buryeth his friends in his owne proper ſepulcher, and thoſe which want ſepulchers, bury them in the ſtrongeſt walls of their houſe, ſetting the cheſt wherein the body lyeth on the one end. But thoſe which are forbidden buryall, eyther for vſury, or ſome other offence, are buryed at home without a coffin, whom his poſterity (growing of better ability, and ſatiſfying for his miſdeeds) doe afterwards bury very ſolemnly.
               The Aegyptians cuſtome is to giue the bodyes of their dead parents as pawnes to theyr creditors, and thoſe children The bodies of dead parents giuen to their creditors. that redeeme them not, ſhall bee diſgraced and want ſepulture them-ſelues: one may iuſtly maruell to ſee, how the authors of all theſe ordinances, did not onely prouide for things profitable for mans life, but alſo regarded thoſe things which appertained to the honour and buryall of

dead bodies, in ſo much that by this meanes, mens liues were diſpoſed as much as might be to good manners.
               The Greekes, which by their fained fables, and Poeticall fictions, farre exceeding truth, deliuered many things of the rewards of the godly, and puniſhment of the wicked, could not with all their writings draw men to vertue, but were rather derided and contemned themſelues: But with the Aegiptians, due puniſhment being rendred to the wicked, and commendation to the iuſt, not in ſhew, but in ſubſtance, they did euery day admoniſh both the good and the bad, what things were profitable for them, for they ſaw before their eyes, that to euery one, according to his deeds was giuen a remembrance of his merits or demerits, which was a cauſe that all men immitated the beſt courſe of life, and ſtroue to doe well: for thoſe are not to bee eſteemed the beſt lawes whereby men become rich, but whereby they prooue honeſt, and wiſe. And thus much of the Aegiptians: and now of the reſidue of the people of Affricke.
            
            
               
                  Of the Carthaginians and other people of Affricke. CAP. 6.
               
                  OF the Carthaginians there bee many and ſundry nations: The Adrimachidae (which bee a people of middle Libia) border vpon Aegypt, and vſe the ſame cuſtomes the Aegiptians The Adrimachidae. doe, they are attired like other Carthaginians, the wiues weare vpon each of their legges a bracelet of braſſe, and ſuffer their locks to grow long:

They take the vermine from out their heads and kill them with their teeth and then throw them away, which no other Carthaginians doe but they onely.
               There is none but Vergins giuen to the King in marriage, and of thoſe which like him beſt he taketh his pleaſure. The Naſamons (a great and ſtout nation and ſpoylers of ſuch ſhippes as they finde intangled in the ſands,) The Naſamons in the Summer time leaue their flocks by the ſea-ſide and goe abroad to gather dates at places where be great ſtore of date trees and thoſe very faire and fruitefull, where plucking off the fruits from the trees, before they be ready, they dry them and ripen them at the Sunne, and then ſteep them in milke and eate them. They haue many wiues a peece with whom they lye openly in all mens ſight, almoſt in the ſame maner that the Maſſagetae doe (which bee a people of Scythia in Aſia:) The manner of the Naſamons, is, that when one firſt marrieth a wife, the Bride lyeth The Maſagetae. with all her gueſts one after another to performe the The Naſomans and their marriages. act of generation, and euery one as they play their part, preſent her with ſome reward or other, which they bring with them for that purpoſe: Their ſwearing and diuination which they vſe, is by thoſe men which were accounted the beſt & iuſteſt among them while they liued, and when they ſwere the tuch the tombes of thoſe men, and diuine nere vnto their monuments, wher when they haue finiſhed their prayers they fall a ſleepe, and what vaine dreame ſoeuer is repreſented vnto them in there ſleepe, that they firmely beleeue to bee reuealed vnto them by thoſe men, and ſo put it in practiſe accordingly. When the plyght How the propheſy. their trothes one to another, each one taketh a Cuppe from the others hand and drinketh all that is in it vppe, but if they haue no drinke, then they take duſt from the

ground and lick that vp: The Garamantes (which be people of middle Lybia alſo, and dwell aboue the Naſomons) The Garamantes. abandon the ſight and conuerſation of all other people: weapons for warre haue they none, neither are they ſo hardy as to defend them-ſelues if they bee aſſaulted: and about the ſea coaſt, towards the ſunne ſetting, dwell the Macae (which bee a people in Arabia-foelix) and border The Macae. vpon the Naſomans: theſe people ſhaue the crownes of their heads round, and ſuffer all the reſt of the hayre to growlong. And in their warres, in ſteed of Armor, they weare the skinnes of ſuch Eſtridges as keepe in caues vnder ground.
               The Gnidanes (be a people bordring vpon the Macae) the women whereof haue the skirts of their garments The Gnidanes. garded and trimmed with welts made of beaſts skinnes, which (as is reported) are giuen vnto them by thoſe men which haue laine with them (for euery one which lyeth with a woman there, muſt giue her one of thoſe gardes) and ſhe which hath the moſt welts vpon her garment is accounted the beſt woman, as beeing beloued of moſt men. The Machliae (which bee a people inhabiting The Machlyes and Auſes. about the Moore in Affricke called Triton) weare long haire vpon the hinder parts of their heads: and the people called Auytes vpon the forepart. The Virgins of this country vpon the yearly feaſt of Minerua, and in honor of that goddeſſe, deuide themſelues into two parts, and fight one ſide againſt the other (without any cauſe at all giuen) with ſtones and clubs, alledging, that in ſo doing, they obſerue their country guiſe, in honor of her whom we call Minerua, and thoſe virgins which dye of their wounds, they call falſe virgins: but ſhee that beſt beſtowed her ſelfe in the fight, is preferred before all the other virgins, and adorned

with Greekiſh armor and a creſt or plume made of mettal of Corinth, and ſo placed in a Charriot, and carried in triumph round about the fenne. The men accompany with women confuſedly like beaſts without reſpect of kindred or bloud, and when a woman hath nouriſhed her child that hee is luſty and ſtrong with whome he dwelleth and is maintayned (for the men meete together euery third month to chooſe their children) his ſonne he is euer after reputed. The Atlantes (ſo called of the hill Atlas neere which they dwell,) haue none of them any proper The Atlantes. names. They curſe the ſonne at his vpriſing, blaming and reprehending it becauſe his heate deſtroyeth both them and their country, they eate no fleſh nor are troubled with any dreames or viſions.
               The people of Affricke called Paſtoritij, liue of fleſh and milke, and yet abſtaine from the fleſh of kine, becauſe the Aegiptians doe nether eate ſwines fleſh, nor reare any kine: The Paſtoritij. And the women of Cyrene thinke it vnlawfull to ſtrike them, by reaſon of Iſis the God of Aegipt, in whoſe honor they Celebrate both faſting & feaſting daies, but the women of Barcas do not only abſtaine from fleſh of kine, but from ſwines fleſh alſo: & theſe women when their children be of the age of foure yeares, ſinge the vaynes vpon the crownes of their heads, and their temples with wooll that is new ſhorne, to the end that they ſhould bee neuer after offended with fleme or rume, deſcending from their heads, by which meanes they ſay they bee very healthful: when they ſacrifice for their firſt fruites, they cut off the eare of a beaſt and caſt it to the top of a houſe, and after breake his necke; and of al the Gods they only do ſacrifice to the Sun and Moone: All the people of Affricke bury their dead as the Graetians doe, the Naſomones excepted, who bury

them ſitting, for there when one beginneth to yeeld vp the ghoſt, they cauſe him to ſit, leaſt he ſhould die with his face vpright: Their dwelling-houſes are made of young ſprouts or ſprigs of lentiſh trees, wound and wrethed one about another.
               The Maxes weare their heare vpon the right ſide of their heads long, and ſhaue the left ſide, They paint their bodies The Maxes. with red lede or vermilion, alleadging that they had their beginning from the Troyans.
               The women of Zabices which border vpon the Maxes, The zabices. play the wagonners in the warres.
               The Zigantes (where Bees make great abundance of The zigantes. honny, and much more is reported to be made by art) be all of them dyed with red leade, and eate Apes and Munckies, of which they haue great ſtore, liuing vpon hills. All theſe people of Libia liue a rude, and Sauage kind of life, All theſe people of Libia be Sauadge people. and for the moſt part without dores, like beaſts contented with ſuch foode as they finde abroad, eating nothing that is tame and bred at home, and hauing no other garments to couer their bodies but goats skins: Their greateſt Potentates haue no citties, but turrets ſtanding neere vnto waters, wherein they lay vp ſuch things as they leaue for their prouiſion: They ſweare their ſubiects once euery yeare to their allegiance, and obedience to their Prince, and that they ſhall be louing to their equalls and perſecute al ſuch as refuſe to be vnder their gouernment, as theeues. There weapons are anſwerable to their country and their cuſtomes, for they themſelues beeing light and nimble of body, and the country (for the moſt part) plaine and euen, do neither vſe ſwords nor knyues nor any other weapons in their warres ſauing onely euery one three darts and a

few ſtones in a letherne budget; and with thoſe they will fight and conflict, both when they incounter, and in the retraite; being by practiſe made perfect to throw therein ſtones and darts right at a marke. They obſerue neither law nor equitie towards ſtrangers.
               The Trogloditae (which the Greekes call ſhepheards, becauſe they liue by cattell) elect their King from out the The Trogloditae. people of Aethiopia: wiues and children they haue in common, the King onely excepted, who hath but one wife, and euery one that commeth to him, preſenteth him with a certaine number of cattell. At ſuch time as the wind ſtandeth in the Eaſt, about the canicular or dog dayes, which ſeaſon is moſt ſubiect to ſhowers, they eate bloud and milke mixt together, and boyled: and when their paſtures be parched, and burned away with the heate of the Sunne, they go downe into the mooriſh grounds, for which there is great contention amongſt them. When their cattle be either old or diſeaſed, they kill them, and eate them; for of ſuch conſiſteth their chiefeſt ſuſtenance.
               Their children be not called after the names of their parents, but aftet the names of Buls, Rammes, or Sheepe, and thoſe they call fathers and mothers, becauſe their daily nouriſhment is yeelded by them, and not by their naturall parents. The meaner ſort of people drinke the iuice of Holly-tree, or ſea-ruſh; and thoſe of the better ſort the iuyce that is ſtrayned out of a certaine flower which groweth in that countrey, the liquor whereof is like vnto the worſt of our Muſt.
               They neuer continue long in one place, but remooue and flitte often into diuers Regions, taking with them

whither ſoeuer they go their flockes and heards of cattell: they be naked on all parts of their bodies but their priuities, which be couered with skinnes. All the Trogloditae circumciſe their priuie parts, like the Aegyptians, excepting thoſe which are lame: they remoue often into ſtrange Countreys, and are neuer cutte or ſhauen with razour from their infancie.
               Thoſe Trogloditae which are called Megauares, vſe for their armour, round ſhields made of raw oxe hides, and clubbes ſtudded with yron, and ſome vſe bowes and lances. They haue little regard how they burie the dead, for they vſe no other ceremonies in their funerals, but wrappe the dead corps in Holly twigges, and then binding the necke and legges together, put the carcaſe into a hole, and couer it ouer with ſtones, ſetting vpon the heape of ſtones a Goates horne in deriſion, and ſo depart from it, beeing neuer touched with any griefe, though hee were neuer ſo neere a friend.
               They contend and fight amongſt themſelues, not (as the Greekes do) for anger or ambition, but onely for their victualls: and in their conflicts they firſt throw ſtones, till ſome of them be wounded, and then taking their bowes in hand, (wherein they be very expert) they fight it out, till ſome of them be ſlaine.
               And the auncient and graueſt women giue end vnto thoſe controverſies, who preſſing boldly into the middle of the multitude without any danger, (for it is not lawfull to hurt them by any meanes) the men foorthwith ceaſe off their ſtrife. Thoſe which for age bee vnable to follow their flockes, tye their owne neckes to an oxe tayle, and ſo ſtrangle themſelues to death.
               
                  
And if any be vnwilling to dye, he is forced to it by his fellowes, but firſt he ſhall haue warning thereof, and this kind of death they account a great benefit vnto them: thoſe alſo which be ſick of feuers, or of any vncurable diſeaſe, are ſerued in like ſort, for they account it the greateſt miſery that may be, for any one to inioy his life, that can doe nothing worthy of life: Herodotus writeth that the Trogloditae make them hollow Caues in the ground to dwell in, and that they haue no deſire to poſſeſſe riches, but rather addict themſelues to wilfull and voluntary pouerty: that they onely are delighted and glory in one kinde of ſtone, which we call Hexacontalithus (which is a little precious ſtone with diuerſe corners): that they eate the fleſh of Serpents: and that they ſpeake not any intelligible language, but in ſteed of ſpeach make a kinde of noyſe or howling, rather then ſpeach.
               In that Aethiopia which lyeth aboue Aegipt dwell another kinde of people, which be called Rhiſophagi: theſe The Rhiſophagi barbarous people liue onely vpon the rootes of weedes, which when they haue cleane waſhed, they bruſe & teare a peeces with ſtones, till they waxe ſoft and clammy, and then make it into cakes like vnto tiles, and bake them againſt the ſunne, and ſo eate them: and this kinde of meat is theyr onely food all their life time, for they haue great aboundance thereof, and it is very pleaſant and delectable in taſte, ſo as peace is there perpetually maintained, and yet they fight notwithſtanding, but it is onely with Lyons which ranging out of the deſerts to ſhunne the ſhade, and to prey vpon other leſſer wild beaſts, deſtroy many Aethiopians comming forth of the fens: and ſurely that nation had beene vtterly deſtroyed by Lyons, had not nature afforded a defence againſt them: for at ſuch time as the

Dogge-ſtarre ariſeth and appeareth in their Horizon, the winde being calme, there flyeth into thoſe parts an innumerable multitude of Gnatts, which offend not the people, becauſe they flye from them into the Fennes and mooriſh grounds, but doe ſo annoy the Lyons with their ſtings, and terrifying them with their humming and buſſing, as they compell them all to depart out of thoſe Regions.
               Next vnto theſe are the Ilophagi and the Spermatophagi; the Spermatophagi liue without labour, by gathering The Ilophagi and Sparmatophagi. the fruites which fall from trees in Summer time; and when fruites are gone, they eate a certaine herbe which they finde growing in ſhadie places: where-with they be ſuccourd in theyr need. But the Ilophagi, their wiues and children feede them-ſelues by clyming into Tree toppes, and plucking off the tender buddes from twigges and branches, which is their onely ſuſtenance, by continuall vſe and practiſe whereof, they grow ſo expert in clyming, that (a thing ſtrange to bee reported) they will skippe and hoppe from tree to tree like birds or ſquirrells without danger, and truſting to their lightneſſe and nimbleneſſe of their bodyes, aſcend to the very top of ſlender branches: and if at any time their footing fayle them, yet will they claſpe theyr hands about the twiggs, and ſo ſaue and defend them-ſelues from falling, and though by ſome miſchance they ſhould fall, yet receiue they no hurt, by reaſon of the lightneſſe of theyr bodyes: Theſe people goe alwayes naked, and haue theyr wiues and children in common: They fight one againſt another, onely for places to liue in (being weaponed with ſtaues,) and domineere and exult greatly ouer thoſe they vanquiſh.
               
                  
They die for the moſt part by famine, whem their ſight faileth they are depriued of that ſence wherewith they ſought their food. In an other part of the region dwell thoſe Aethiopians which bee called Cyneci, they bee few in number, but of a different life from all the reſt, for they inhabit the wood-land, and deſolate countrie, The Cyneci. wherein be but few fountaines of water, and they ſleepe vpon the tops of trees for feare of wilde beaſts: Euery morning they goe downe armed to the riuer ſides, and their hide themſelues in trees amongſt the leaues, and in the heate of the day, when the Beefes and Libbards, and diuers other kindes of wilde beaſts, goe downe to the riuers to drinke, and that they bee full and heauie with water, theſe Aethiopians deſcen'd from the trees and fall vppon them and kill them with ſtaues baked at the fire, and with ſtones and dartes, and then deuide them amongſt their companies and eate them: By which cunning deuiſe they deuoure many of thoſe beaſts, and ſometimes (though but ſeldome) they are foyled and ſlaine themſelues.
               And if at any time their cunning faile them, and that they want beaſts to eate, they take the hides of ſuch beaſts as they haue eaten before, and plucking of the haires laie the hides in ſteepe, and then drie them before a ſoft fire and ſo deuiding to euery one a ſhare, ſatisfie themſelues with that. Their young boyes (vnder the age of foureteene yeeres) practiſe throwings at markes, and they giue meate to thoſe onely which touch the marke, and therefore beeing forced thereto by famine, they become moſt excellent and fine darters.
               
                  
The people called Acridophagi border vpon the deſert, the men bee ſomething ſhorter, or lower of ſtature, The Acridophagi. then other Aethiopians, beeing leane and marueilous blacke.
               In the ſpring time the Weſt and South-weſt windes, blow an infinite number of ſlies called Locuſtes out of the deſerts into their Country, which bee exceeding great, but the collour of their wings is foule and lothſome: Theſe Aethiopians (as their cuſtome is) gather out of places there-abouts great ſtore of wood and other ſorts of fuell, and laie it in a great large valley, and when, at their wonted time (as it were) a whole cloude of Locuſts bee carried by the windes ouer the valley, they ſet fire on the fuell, and with ſmoke ſtiphle and ſmother to death the Locuſts which flie ouer it? ſo as they fal downe vnto the earth in ſuch aboundance as are ſufficient to ſerue the whole countrie for victualls: and theſe beeing ſprinckled with ſalt (which that country plentifully yeeldeth) they preſerue for a long ſpace, beeing a meate very pleaſant vnto they taſte. And ſo theſe Locuſts bee their continuall ſuſtenance at all ſeaſons, for they neither keepe cattell, nor eate fiſh, beeing farre remote from the ſea, nor haue any other maintenance whereof to liue.
               They bee nimble of body, ſwift of foote, and ſhorte of life, ſo as they which liue the longeſt exceede not aboue fortie yeeres, their end is not onely miſerable but alſo incredible, for when old age creepeth and commeth vppon them, there doth certaine lice with winges of a horrible and vglie ſhape, ingendring in their bodies, knaw out, and deuour their bellies,

guts and intralls and in a ſmall time their whole bodies: and he which hath the diſeaſe doth ſo itch & is ſo allured to ſcrach as he receiueth thereby at one and the ſame time both pleaſure and paine, and when the corruption cometh forth, and the lyce appeare, he is ſo ſtirred with the bitterneſſe and anguiſh of the diſeaſe as hee teareth his owne fleſh in peeces with his nayles with great wayling and lamentation; for ſo great is the number of thoſe vermine iſſuing out of the wounds, heape vppon heape, running as it were out of a veſſell full of holes, as they cannot be ouercome, and by this meanes they die a very miſerable death, the cauſe whereof is ether the meate they liue vpon, or the vnholeſomeneſſe of the aire. Vpon the vtmoſt parts of Affricke towards the South dwell a people, which the Greekes cal Cinnamimi, but of their neighbouring Barbarians they bee called wild or vplandiſh people: Theſe haue The Cinnamini very great beards; and for the defence of their liues, breed vp great number of Maſtiues and wild dogs; for from the Summer troppicke to the middle of winter, an infinite number of Indian Beefes come into their country, the cauſe of their comming is vncertaine; whether it bee that they fly from other wild beaſts which purſue them, or for the want of feeding, or that they doe it by inſtinct of nature (all which are wonderfull) but the true cauſe is vnknowne: from theſe the people defend them-ſelues with their dogges, their owne forces being inſufficient to withſtand them, and kill many of them; ſome whereof they eate freſh, and ſome others they powder vp for their prouiſion afterwards; and with theſe dogges they take many other beaſts in like ſort.
               The laſt people, and the vtmoſt towards the South bee

the Ichthiophagi, which inhabite in the gulph of Arabia, The Ichthiophagi. vpon the frontiers of the Trogloditae, theſe carry the ſhape of men, but liue like beaſts: they be very barbarous and go naked all their liues long, vſing both wiues and daughters common like beaſts: they be neither touched with any feeling of pleaſure or griefe, other then what is naturall: Neido the diſcerne any difference betwixt good and bad, honeſty and diſhoneſty.
               Their habitations are in rockes and hills, not farre from the ſea, wherein they haue deepe dennes, and holes, the paſſages in and out being naturally very hard and crooked.
               The entrances into theſe holes, (as if nature had framed them for their vſe,) the Inhabitants damme vp with a heape of great ſtones, wherewith they take fiſhes as it were with nets; for the flowing of the ſea (which hapneth euery day twiſe about three of the cloke and nine of the Cloke) ſurrownding the borders neere vnto the ſhore, the water increaſing very high and couering all places, carrieth into the continent an innumerable company of diuers ſorts of fiſhes, which ſeeking abroad for ſuſtenance at the ebbing of the ſea are by thoſe ſtones ſtayd vpon dry land, thoſe doe the inhabitants make haſt to gather vp, and taking them lay them vpon the rockes againſt the noone Sunne, till they be ſcorched with the heate thereof; and when one ſide is ſcorched inough, they turne the other: when they bee thus broyled againſt the Sunne, they take all the meate from the bones and put it into a hollow ſtone and mingling there-with the ſeede of holly tree, bake it therein, and make them a moſt pleaſant meate, for the meate beeing ſo mingled

they faſhion it into Cakes like long Tyles, and drying them a little againſt the Sunne, ſitte downe and eate them with great pleaſure, and not a proportioned quantity thereof, but euery one as much as they can eate. This meate they haue alwayes in a readineſſe, as it were out of a ſtore-houſe, the ſea affoording it in aboundance in ſteed of bread, whereof the land is barren: But when by the raging of the ſea, thoſe places which bee neere vnto the ſhore, bee drowned for diuerſe dayes together, ſo as they fayle in theyr faculty of fiſhing (at which time they ſuffer great penury of victualls) then they gather certaine great ſhell-fiſhes, and bruiſing their ſhells in peeces with ſtones, feede vppon the meate which is within, beeing very like vnto Oyſters. And when this raging of the ſea, by force of the windes, is of ſo long continuance, as that they can finde none of thoſe ſhelfiſhes, then they betake them-ſelues to fiſhe bones and ſharpe finnes, which are reſerued for a time of neede, the tenderer and neweſt ſorte whereof they knaw with their teeth, and bruiſe the harder with ſtones, and ſo eate them like vnto brute beaſts: they eate commonly a great company together (as I haue ſayd) and cheere one another with an vntuneable ſong, and after that, the men accompany with women, each one with her hee firſt lighteth vppon: and beeing voyde of all care, by reaſon of the aboundance of meate which they haue in readineſſe, beſtowe themſelues in this manner foure dayes together, and vppon the fift day they flocke together in troupes to the riuers to drinke, making a diſordered and confuſed noyce as they goe.
               This their gooing to drinke, is not much vnlike the

going of neate to water: when their bellyes are ſo full of water as they are ſcarſe able to returne backe they eate no more that day, but euery one beeing full of water, and ſtrouting out as though hee would burſt, lyeth downe like a drunken man to ſleepe. Vpon the laſt day they returne againe to their fiſhing, and ſo paſſing ouer their whole liues with ſuch ſimple and ſlender dyet, they ſildome fall into any diſeaſe, yet they bee ſhorter liued then wee, for their vncorrupted nature accounteth it their chiefeſt felicity and ſummum bonum to appeaſe hunger, expecting pleaſure from no other thing: and this is the manner of liuing of thoſe people which dwell within the gulph.
               But thoſe which dwell without the gulph, liue farre Men free from all paſſions of the minde. more ſtrangely, for they neuer drinke, and are naturally voyde of all paſſions of the minde; And beeing, as it were, reiected by fortune from all places fitte for habitation, and caſt into deſerte and deſolate countries, indeuour themſelues wholy to fiſhing.
               They deſire nothing that is moyſt, and eate their fiſhes halfe rawe, not that they would thereby auoyde thirſt, but in a ſauage manner, contented with ſuch foode as fortune affoordes them, ſuppoſing their greateſt happineſſe to conſiſt in wanting nothing they deſire, or is fitte for them.
               They bee ſayde alſo to bee indued with ſuch extraordinary patience, as if one ſhould drawe his ſworde Patient people. and ſtrike them, they would not ſeeke to auoyde the ſtroke, but willingly ſuffering themſelues to bee iniured and beaten, they doe nothing but onely looke backe vppon him that ſtrooke them, without ſhewing the leaſt

ſigne of anger, or compaſſion of their owne miſery. Speach they haue none, but in liew thereof, make ſignes with their fingers, and by nodding their heads, what things they want, and what they would haue.
               Theſe people doe generally loue peace, not dooing any thing to annoy others, which kinde of life though it bee ſtrange and admirable, yet hath that nation for a long time retained it, beeing eyther therevnto accuſtomed by continuance of time, or elſe compeld by neceſſity. Their places of abode be not like the Ichthiophagi, which dwell within the gulph, but in diuerſe faſhions, for ſome haue theyr lodgings in hoales, ſituate to the North pole, wherein they bee defended from the heate of the Sunne, both by the ſhade and the ſoft winde, and coole murmuring ayre: for thoſe places which lye oppoſite to the South, are for heate like vnto fornaces, therefore vnpoſſible to be dwelt in.
               Thoſe which dwell againſt the North pole, make them houſes (to auoyde the heate) of Whales crooked ribbes, The Amazons moſt warlike women. (whereof there bee many in that ſea) ſet hollow one againſt an other, and couered ouer with rett or ſea-weed, neceſſity compelling Nature to finde out Arte for her owne defence: and this is reported to bee the life of the Ichthiophagi, which dwell without the gulphe.
               It remaineth to ſay ſomewhat of the Amazons (which in former time were ſayd to dwell in Libia:) their women were hardy, ſtrong, and valiant, and liued not after the manner of other women, for their cuſtome was for a certaine ſpace, to exerciſe them-ſelues in feates of armes, for preſeruation of theyr Virginity, and the time of warre-fare once ended, then to couple themſelues with men in mariage for cauſe of procreation,

the women onely did gouerne and exerciſe all publicke offices, and the men tooke charge of things within doores like our women, making themſelues vaſſals and ſlaues vnto women, as being very expert in the warres, in gouernment, and in all publicke buſineſſes, whereof the men themſelues were ignorant. When an infint is borne, he is giuen to the father to bee nouriſhed and brought vp with milke and other things anſwerable to his age: and if it be a man child, they eyther baniſh him, or kill him forthwith, or elſe breake his right arme ſo ſoone as he is borne, thereby to make him vnfit for the warres: But if it be a woman childe they ſinge off her breſts in her infancie, alledging that great breſts would hinder them in the warres, and therefore of the Greekes they be called Amazons, becauſe they want their breſts: they bee ſaid to inhabite the Iſle Heſper, which is ſo called, as being ſcituated towards the Weſt, this Iſle is in the Moore called Triton, which ioyning to the ſea, is alſo called Tritonia, of a riuer that floweth into it: It bordereth vpon Aethiopia, and the hill Atlas, the greateſt mountaine of all that country: It is very large, and produceth diuerſe ſorts of trees, vpon the fruit whereof the Inhabitants liue.
               There bee many Goates alſo and other cattell, whoſe Milke and fleſh they feed vpon. They bee altogether deſtitute of Corne, nor doe they know the vſe thereof if they had it.
            
            
               FINIS. Lib. 1.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               
                  Of Aſia, and the moſt famous Nations thereof. CAP. 1.
               
                  ASIA an other part of the tripartite world, is ſo called of Aſia the daughter of Oceanus and Tethis, wife of Iapetus, 
                  Aſia why ſo called. and mother to Prometheus, or (according to the opinion of others) of Aſius the ſonne of Manaeus Lidus.
               
               It is ſituated in the Eaſt part of the world, and is bounded vpon the Weſt with two riuers, Nilus and Tanais, the Euxine ſea, and part of the Mediterranian ſea, and vpon the other three parts with the Ocean, which vppon the Eaſt is called Oceanus Eous, vpon the South Indicus, and North Scithicus: The hill Taurus (in a manner) deuideth the whole continent in the middle, which lying directly Eaſt and Weſt, leaueth one part thereof towards the North, and the other towards the South, which two parts are by the Greekes called the Inner Aſia, and the vtter Aſia.
               This hill in many places is three thouſand ſtadiae in breadth, and as long as all Aſia, beeing about forty and fiue thouſand ſtadia, from the vttermoſt edge of the ſea beyond Rhodes, vnto the furthermoſt parts of India and Scythia towards the Eaſt. Aſia is deuided into many partes, whereof ſome bee bigger, ſome leſſer, and euery part is diſtinguiſhed from other by a peculiar name: but ſo large and wide is the whole compaſſe of ground,

contained vnder the name of Aſia, as it alone is thought, to comprehend as much land as all Affricke and Europe, the other two parts of the world: The ayre is there very temperate, and the ſoyle fertile, and therefore it aboundeth with all kinde of cattell: It containeth many Prouinces and regions.
               Vppon that ſide which bordereth vppon Affricke, lyeth Arabia, which is ſituated betwixt Iudaea and Aegipt (and according to Plinie) is deuided into three parts, one part whereof is called Petrea, or ſtony Arabia, which vpon the North and Weſt ioyneth vpon Syria, and is incloſed with Arabia deſerta on the one Arabia deuided into three parts. ſide, and Arabia foelix on the other, Panchaia, and Sabaea are alſo by ſome ſuppoſed to bee comprehended within the compaſſe of Arabia. Arabia is ſo called of Arabus the ſonne of Apollo by Babylo: the people whereof be ſcattered and diſperſed wide and broad, and are much different one from an other, both in their cuſtomes, and their apparell: the heire of their heads they neuer cut, but tye it vp with fillets and head-laces, & their beards they ſhaue cloſe to the skinne: they tranſferre not their arts and occupations from one to another, as wee doe, but there, each one exerciſeth his fathers trade and courſe of life, and the Nobleſt man hath the gouernment ouer all the reſt: all things they poſſeſſe goe in common to their The Arabians lye with their owne mothers and daughters. whole kindered, and one wife ſerueth all that family, for hee which firſt entreth into the houſe and ſetteth his ſtaffe at the doore, lyeth firſt with her, but ſhee ſleepeth all night with the eldeſt, by which meanes they bee all brothers one to another, they lye alſo with their owne mothers, and ſiſters without any reſpect at all.
               
                  
And yet the adulterer is puniſhed with death, and the lying with one of anothers kindred, is adultery, but all thoſe which be of one houſe or kindred, be termed legitimate.
               They celebrate their feaſts for almoſt thirty dayes together, wherein two of their kinſmen that be good Muſitians, giue their attendance in turnes, firſt one, then an other. Theyr citties and townes liue peaceably and quietly together without walls, and fortreſſes for defence: they vſe oyle made of the graine Seſamina, & are very rich and abounding with all other things. Theyr ſheepe bee of a white fleece, and theyr neate of a tall ſtature, but horſes No horſes in Arabia. they haue none, the want whereof is ſupplyed with great ſtore of Camels. Gold, ſiluer, and many ſorts of ſweete and odoriferous oyntments are peculiar to that country, Braſſe, Iron, Cloth, Purple, Saffron, Pepper, and all workes ingrauen in mettell or ſtone, are brought thether from other places: theyr dead bodyes they accompt more abiect and vile then dung, and the carcaſe of their King they bury in a dung-hill; they be very carefull to preſerue their reputations and promiſes with men, and they confirme theyr leagues of friendſhip in this manner following. When a peace and agreement is concluded betwixt two, a third man ſtanding in the middle betwixt them both, ſtriketh them vpon the palme of their hands, about the longeſt fingers, with a ſharpe ſtone till hee draw bloud, then taking a little flock from each of their garments, hee annoynteth with the blood ſeauen ſtones, which be laide before them for that purpoſe, in dooing whereof hee inuocateth the names of Dioniſyus and Vrania: this done, he which is the mediatour for the peace, and attonement, (the frendes of both parties being preſent) cauſeth the ſtranger (or the Cittizen (if the matter bee betwixt

cittizens) to put in ſureties to continue that truce, and the league the parties, which contract the friendſhip, thinke fit and iuſt to be obſerued.
               Their onely fuell is the branches of Myrrhe, the ſmoke whereof is ſo noyſome and hurtfull, as it would breede incurable diſeaſes, if they preuented them not, by burning a ſweet incenſe or gumme called Storax: the ſmell whereof allayeth the contagion of the ſmoke. The Prieſts firſt ſlay the beaſts they intend to ſacrifice, and then go to gather Cynamon, ſtrictly obſeruing, that they gather none before Sunne-riſing, nor after the Sun-ſetting: and when they haue appeaſed their gods with the ſacrifice, hee which is chiefeſt amongſt them, diuideth the heape of branches which they haue gathered that day, with a forke conſecrated for that vſe, then do they dedicate a part of thoſe branches to the Sunne, which (if the diuiſion made were equal) will be inflamed with the beames of the Sunne, and take fire and burne of their owne accord. Some of thoſe people which liue hardly, feed vpon ſnakes, and bee therefore called Ophiophagi: they be neither vexed with care, nor troble of mind. The people called Nomades, haue great ſtore of Camels, which ſerue them both in their battels,, and to carry burthens. The people called Debae be ſome of them ſhepheards, & ſome exerciſe themſelues in husbandry, the country abounds with gold, inſomuch as they find oftentimes amongſt the clods of earth, certaine round balles of gold as big as acorns, of which they make themſelues iewels and brooches, very pleaſant to behold, and weare them about their necks and arms. They ſell gold to their neighboring nations for three times the price of braſſe, & twiſe the price of ſiluer: both for the ſmall account they make of gold, and for the great deſire they haue to trafficke with other people.
               
                  
Next vnto theſe be the Sabaei, which be rich in Frankincenſe, Myrrhe, and Cynnamon: Some hold, that there be Balme trees growing in the confines of this countrey, it aboundeth with ſweet Canes, and odoriferous Dates: there is alſo a ſerpent bredde in that countrey, of an handbreadth in length, whoſe ſting or biting is deadly, and hee lyeth altogether vnder the rootes of trees. The exceeding ſmell and ſweet ſauour of things growing there, breedeth a ſtupiditie and dulneſſe in their ſenſes; which they cure with the perfume of a certaine lyme or pitch, called Bitumen, and the beard of a bucke Goate. All matters in controuerſie are there referred to the King. Many of the Sabaei are husbandmen, and ſome of them are wholy occupied in gathering ſpices, which grow vpon trees. They vſe trafficke into Aethiopia with ſhippes couered with lether, their fuell is the barke or rind of Cynamon, which is of the nature of wood.
               The Metrapolitan and chiefe citie of this kingdome, is ſituated vpon an hill, and is called Saba: their Kings are of one kindred, and raigne by ſucceſſion, to whom the multitude yeeld honours indifferently, as well to the bad, as to the good. They neuer dare venter out of their Court, or chiefe citie, fearing leſt they ſhould be ſtoned to death by the common people, by reaſon of an anſwer which they receiued long ſince from one of their Oracles. At Saba, where the King keepeth his Court, be ſiluer iewels, and pots of gold of all ſorts, the beds and three-footed ſtooles haue ſiluer feete, and all the houſhold ſtuffe is ſumptuous and rich beyond credit. The porches and galleries alſo bee vnderpropped with great pillars, the heads whereof are ſiluer and gold, the roofes and dores being ſet with golden boſſes, intermingled with pretious ſtones, do manifeſt the

ſumptuous decking of the whole houſe: for here one place ſhineth with gold, another with ſiluer, another with pretious ſtones, and Elephants tooth, and with many other ornaments beſides, of great woorth and eſtimation: theſe people haue for many ages flowed in perpetuall felicitie: for they bee vtterly voyde of ambition and deſire to poſſeſſe other mens goods, which bringeth many to ruine.
               The people called Garraei be no leſſe rich then theſe, The Garraei. for almoſt all their houſhold-ſtuffe is of gold and ſiluer, and of Iuorie, whereof they make the threſholds, roofes, and walles of their houſes.
               The people called Nabathaei, of all men be moſt continent, The Nabathaei. in getting riches they bee very induſtrious, but much more carefull in keeping them: for hee that diminiſheth his priuate eſtate, hath publicke puniſhment. And on the other ſide, hee is honoured and exalted, that increaſeth his patrimonie.
               The Arabians vſe in their warres, ſwords, bowes, launces, and ſlings, and many times axes alſo. That accurſed ſtocke of the Sarraſins, which were the greateſt ſcourges that euer happened to mankind, had their beginning in Arabia, and (as it is very credibly thought) a great part of the Arabians, became followers of the Sarraſins ſect, and tooke their name. Yet now they haue betaken them to their old names againe. The Arabians that dwell about Aegypt, liue for the moſt part by ſtealing, truſting in the ſwiftneſſe of their Camels.
            
            
               
               
                  The manners and cuſtomes Of Panchaia: and of the manners of the Panchaians. CAP. 2.
               
                  PANCHAIA is a Region of Arabia, Diodorus Siculus calleth it an Iland of Panchaia aboundeth with Frankinſence. two hundred Stadia in bredth, and that there be in it three ſtately Citties, that is to ſay, Dalida, Hyracida, and Oceanida, the whole countrie is fruitfull enough, liuing onely where it is ſandie. It aboundeth with wine, and with frankinſence, of which there is ſo great ſtore, as is ſufficient to ſerue all the world for ſacrifices: it yeeldeth much myrrhe alſo, and other odoriferous ſpices of diuers kinds, which the Panchaians gather, and ſell to the Marchants of Arabia, of whom others buy them, & tranſport them into Phaenicia, Syria, and Egypt; from whence they are conveyed into all parts of the world.
               The Panchaians vſe Chariots in the warres; for ſo they haue bin alwaies accuſtomed: their common-wealth is diuided into three degrees of people: firſt, the Prieſts, who poſſeſſe the prime place, to whome the artificers are added: the husbandmen haue the ſecond, and ſouldiers the third, to whom the ſhepheards be annexed. The Prieſts be gouernours and rulers ouer all the reſt, to whom the deciding of controuerſies, and arbittement of all publike affaires, and iudiciall cauſes are committed, (puniſhment of death onely excepted.) The husbandmen imploy themſelues onely in tilling, and manuring the ground; the increaſe whereof goeth in common to all. Out of the huſbandmen there be ten elected by the Prieſts, which bee moſt expert and induſtrious in husbandrie, to bee

Iudges ouer the reſt, aſwell for the exhortation of others, in the art of husbandrie, as for the diſtribution of their fruites. The ſhepheards likewiſe bring all their increaſe, as well of ſuch things as appertaine to ſacrifices, as of all things elſe, to the publike vſe, ſome by number, and ſome by weight: in doing whereof they be maruellous preciſe: and no one there poſſeſſeth any thing in priuate to himſelfe, but only their houſes and gardens: for the Prieſts receiue all the cuſtome and tribute-money, and all other things elſe whatſoeuer into their cuſtodie, making diuiſion thereof, as occaſion requireth: whereof two parts is euer due vnto themſelues. The Panchaians bee clothed in ſoft garments; for the ſheepe of that countrie differ much from others in ſoftneſſe and fineneſſe of wooll, both men and women weare ornaments of gold, adorning their neckes with chains, their hands with bracelets, their eares with eare-rings, like the Perſians, and their feet with new ſhooes of diuers colours. The ſouldiers are maintained onely to defend the countrie from forraine inuaſions: the Prieſts liue more ſumptuouſly, and in far greater delights then others, wearing for the moſt part fine lightlinnen veſtiments downe to the foot, and ſomtimes garments made of the beſt and pureſt wooll.
               Vpon their heads they haue myters wrought and imbrodered with gold: and in ſtead of ſhooes, ſandals of diuers colours, wrought very artificially. They weare ornaments of gold alſo (like women, excepting eare-rings) and be for the moſt part continually conuerſant about the ſeruice of their gods, reciting their worthy and memorable deeds, in laudes and hymnes. They deriue their pedegree from Iupiter Manaſſes, alledging, that when hee was conuerſant Iupiter was baniſhed into Panchaia. with men, and gouerned the whole world, hee was

baniſhed into Panchaia. The country abounds with gold, ſiluer, braſſe, tin, and iron, of which it is not lawfull to carry any out of the Iland: neither is it tollerable for the Prieſts to ſtir out of their holy Temples; for if any of them be found abroad, it is lawfull to kill them. Many oblations of gold and ſiluer, which were long ſince offered and dedicated to their gods, they preſerue in their temple, the doores whereof are of a very curious building, beſet with gold, ſiluer, and yuorie. The bed for their god is all of gold, being ſixe cubits in length, and foure in bredth, and of a rare and wonderfull workmanſhip: In like maner, the table for their god (which is placed neare vnto his bed) is equall vnto it, both for ſtate, quantity and coſt. They haue one great and magnificent temple, which is all erected of white ſtone, The great Temple in Panchaia vnderſet with great pillars, & carued columnes, the length thereof is two acres, and the breadth anſwerable to the length: It is adorned with goodly Idols of their gods, compoſed and framed with admirable art and cunning. The Prieſts that haue charge of the ſacrifices, haue their houſes about the temple: and all the ground round about the temple, for the ſpace of two hundred Stadia, is conſecrated to the gods, and the yearely reuenew thereof ſpent in ſacrifices.
            
            
               
                  Of Aſſyria, and how the Aſſyrians liue. CAP. 3.
               ASſyria a countrey in Aſia, is ſo called of Aſsur the ſon of Sem (as Saint Auguſtine is of opinion.) It is

now called Syria, and hath vpon the Eaſt, India, and part of Media, vpon the Weſt the riuer Tygris, Suſiana vppon the South, and the hill Caucaſus on the North. They haue ſeldome any raine in Aſſyria, but what graine ſoeuer the countrey affordeth, is obtained by the waterings and ouerflowings of the riuers, which they do not naturally of their owne accords, as in Aegypt, but by the labour and induſtrie of the inhabitants: and yet by this ouerflowing the ground there is ſo exceeding fruitfull, as it yeeldeth two hundred, and in the moſt fertill ſoyle, three hundred-fold increaſe: the eares of their wheate and barley beeing foure fingers in breadth, and their pulſe and millet in height like trees. Theſe things though they bee certainely knowne vnto them to be true, yet Herodotus would haue them ſparingly reported, and with good deliberation, as beeing ſcarce credible, eſpecially if the relation bee made to thoſe which neuer ſaw them.
               They haue great ſtore of Dates, of which they make hony Hony & wine made of dates. and wine, they vſe boates in their riuers made in faſhion of a round ſhield, not ſeuered with fore-decke and ſterne, The Aſſyrians botes. as other boates be, but made (beyond the Aſſyrians in Armenia) of willow, or ſallow tree, couered ouer with raw lether. The Aſſyrians weare two linnen garments, one Their apparell, hanging downe to the foote, and the other ſhort, ouer which they weare a white ſtole. Their ſhooes be ſuch, as the Thebans were wont to weare: they ſuffer their haires to grow long, and trimme them with head-tyres: when they go into publike places, they annoynt themſelues with oyntments: euery one weareth a ſignet-ring on his finger, and a ſcepter in his hand, in which is ſet an apple, a roſe, or lilly, or ſome ſuch like thing: for they hold it baſe and vndecent, to carry it without ſuch a ſigne or cogniſance in it.
               
                  
Of all their lawes which were in force in that countrey, this ſeemeth moſt worthie to be remembred: That the maides, aſſoon as they were mariageable, were (once euery Virgins that be mariageable be ſold to their husbands. yeare) brought into a publike place, and there offered to be ſold to ſuch men, as had any diſpoſition to marry: and firſt, the faireſt and moſt beautiful virgins were ſet to ſale, and after them, thoſe which through defect of their beauties, or their bodies, were not onely not vendible and marketable, but which no man would marrie gratis, were married away with that money, the faire ones were ſold for.
               
                  Herodotus ſaith, that this cuſtome was heretofore obſerued in Venice in the confines of Illiria (as hee heard it credibly reported by others.) And Antonius Sabellicus in like manner affirmeth, that whether this cuſtome bee yet obſerued in that countrey, he is not very certaine: But ſure I am (ſaith he) that in Venice (which at this day for riches, is the moſt flouriſhing ſtate of the world) amongſt other good orders of their cittie, it was ordained, that baſtard virgins that were gotten out of wedlocke, and fondlings that were expoſed and laid abroad to the aduentures of the world, ſhould be brought vp in ſome cloſe place, at the common charge of the cittie, and there inſtructed in ſome hard diſcipline, vntill they were mariageable, and that then thoſe which were moſt beautifull, and well brought vp, ſhould be married without dowrie, either vnto ſuch as had eſcaped ſome great perill, or ſome dangerous diſeaſe, or broken their vowes: and that ſome Freemen alſo regarding their modeſtie and beautie, would marie them without dower, and euer thoſe which were moſt beautifull, were married with leſſe portion then the foule ones, although they were as well brought vp as the other.
               
                  
An other law of the Babylonians being very profitable and worthy to be remembred was this, ſeeing they excluded A law excluding Phiſitions and how they cured the ſick. all Phiſitions from amongſt them, it was ordained, that he which began to bee ſicke, ſhould aske councel of thoſe concerning his diſeaſe, that had ſuffred the like infirmity themſelues, and that had tried ſome medicine for the recouery of their healthes: ſome others write that their cuſtome was to bring the ſicke perſons into a publicke place, where the law commanded them, and that thoſe which once had been ſicke themſelues, and were recouered ſhould goe and viſit the diſeaſed perſons, and teach them by what meanes they were cured.
               The Aſſyrians bewaile the dead, as the Aegiptians doe: and when one hath laine with his wife all night, neither of them toucheth any thing before they haue waſhed themſelues. The cuſtome heretofore amongſt the Babylonians was, that the women wold once in their life times lie with ſtrangers, beſides their husbands: the maner wherof was thus: They would come a great company of them togither very reuerently and ſolemnly vnto the temple of Venus, each one hauing her head bound, and wreathed about with garlands, and then the ſtranger with whom ſhee deſired to lie, laied vnder his knee, as he kneeled in the Tē
                  ple, ſuch a ſum of money as he thought fitting, which being conſecrated to Venus, he leaueth behind him, & ryſing vp, taketh the woman into a place a little diſtant from the Church, and there lieth with her: There were ſome families among the Aſſyrians which liued only vpon fiſh, dried at the ſun, and bruiſed in a morter, which being moulded and laid togither, & ſprinckled with water, they made into lumps, like loaues, and drying them at the fire, vſed to eate them in ſteed of bread.
               
                  
They had three head officers amongſt them, one of The officers amongst the Aſſyrians. ſuch as had beene ſouldiours and were put to their penſion: an other of the nobility and elders, and the King which was head ouer them all: They had their ſouth-ſaiers likewiſe, which were called Chaldei, which were like vnto the Prieſts of Aegipt, and ſacrificed to their gods: Theſe Chaldei ſpent their whole liues in the ſtudie of Philoſophy, they were great ſtarre-mungers, and ſometimes by their diuinations, ſometimes by their holy rimes, they would defend men from misfortunes. They could truly and faithfully interprete Augurations, Dreames and Prodigies, not learning their inſtructions in ſuch things of maiſters and tutors, as the Greekes did, but receiuing thē from their parents as their inheritance. The children were taught and excerciſed in learning at home, that by the continuall care of their parents, they might better profit themſelues. They Chaldei were not variable and doubtful in their opinions of naturall cauſes, as the Greekes were, where euery man was of a ſeueral minde, and euery writer yeelded reaſons, repugning one an other, but they all by one general and vniforme aſſent, ſuppoſed the world to be eternal, and that it neither had beginning, nor ſhal haue end, and that the order and ornament of al things is eſtabliſhed by a diuine prouidence: That the Celeſtiall bodies be not moued of their owne accord, or by ſome accidentary motion, but by a certaine law and immutable decreee of ſome god-head: They marke by long obſeruation the courſe of the ſtars, by whoſe ſpeculatiō they propheſied of mens future fortunes: They imagined the planets to be of great power, and eſpecially Saturne, ſuppoſing the ſunne to be of moſt beauty, and of greateſt vertue, and that Mars, Venus, Mercury and Iupiter, were to be obſerued

more then the reſt, for that they hauing each one his proper and peculiar motion, foreſhewed things to come, and were the true interpreters of the gods: And of this they were ſo fully perſwaded, as they called theſe foure ſtars al by the name of Mercury: They foretold many things to come both hole-ſome and hurtful, by winds, ſhewers, heate, comets, eclipſe of Sunne & Moone, earthquakes, and by ſundry other ſignes and prodigies beſides: And they imagined that there were other ſtars ſubiect & inferior to theſe planets, of which ſome wandred in our Hemiſphere, and ſome in that which is vnder vs: beſides this they held the like error that the Aegiptians did, and fained to themſelues twelue gods, attributing vnto each of them a month & a ſigne in the Zodiake: They propheſied of many things that ſhould happen to their Kings, as foreſhewing to Alexander the victory he ſhould haue in the fight with Darius: to Hircanor, Seleucus and to other ſucceſſors of Alexander: and many things after that to the Romaine ſucceſſors, whoſe euents proued true. They write alſo of foure and twenty other ſtars, whereof twelue be beyond the Zodiake, towards the North, and the other twelue towards the South, of which, thoſe which appeare to our view, they ſuppoſe to haue dominion ouer the liuing, and the other to pertaine to thoſe which be dead: Theſe things & other circumſtances haue thoſe Chaldeans ſet forth to mens ſight, as they haue noted by long obſeruation, alleaging that this their doctrine hath continued for the ſpace of three and forty thouſand yeers, from the firſt inuentiō therof to the reigne of Alexander: which allegation of theirs were a very groſſe & impudent fable, vnleſſe we ſhould interprete, that the time of each yeere were but a month, as was amongſt the Aegiptians.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Iudaea and of the cuſtoms, lawes and inſtitutions of the Iewes. CAP. 4.
               
                  PAleſtine which is alſo called Iudaea, is a perticular Prouince of Syria, ſytuated The limmits of Paleſtine. betwixt, Caeloſiria, and Arabia Petrea, vpon the Weſt it is waſhed with the Aegiptian ſea, and vpon the Eaſt with the riuer of Iordan: This land, the bookes of holy Bible, and Ioſephus their imitator, called Canaan, a land abounding with many riches, as hauing Iudaea, or Paleſtine called alſo Canaan. plenty of fruites, famous waters; and being well furniſhed with balme: It is ſcituated in the very middle of the world, and is therefore very temperate, neither to hot nor to cold, which for the temperature of the elements the Iſraelites, or Hebreues (being a very ancient people, and with whom alone from the firſt Creation of mankinde the knowledge and worſhip of the Heauenly and true God, and the firſt forme of ſpeech remained) eſteemed to be that which was promiſed by God to their 
                     Canaan promiſed to Abraham and his ſeed.
                   fathers Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob; a land flowing with milke and hony.
               And therefore in the fortith yeere after the children of Iſraells departure out of Aegipt, vnder the conduct of their valiant captaine Ioſua; they obtained the dominion thereof by force of their armes vanquiſhing and expelling one and thirty Kings, which raigned in that 
                     The Iſraclites lawes ordained by Moſes. Contry: The Iſraelites retaine, and liue vnder thoſe

laws, which they receiued frō 
                  Moſes their firſt captain, & althogh for many ages before Moſes daies they liued without written law, with great deuotion & ſanctity, obtayning the truth by diuine Oracles, and by the acuteneſſe & magnanimity of their mindes, and vnderſtandings, yet that great diuine Moſes, thought that no City could long continue in ſafety, without the practiſe of law and equity.
               And therefore when by rewarding the good, & puniſhing the wicked, he had ſufficiently exhorted his people to imbrace vertue and eſchew vice, he propoſed vnto them other lawes and ciuel ordinances, founded vpon thoſe ten chiefe heads and grounds of lawes, pronounced by God himſelfe in mount Sina, & written in two Tables; of which lawes (being ſo many, as they alone wold be ſufficiēt matter to fill a whole volume) I will onely touch thoſe which be moſt worthy of remēbrance, & they that deſire to know the reſt, let them read Ioſephus & the bookes of the Bible.
               Firſt Moſes ordained, that young children as ſoone as Moſes lawes.
                   they were able to conceiue, ſhould bee inſtructed in the lawes, ſeeing they contained in them the beſt kind of diſcipline: That whoſoeuer blaſphemed the name of God, ſhould hang all a whole day, & be caſt out at night without burial: That no ſacrifice ſhould be ſolemnized vvith money gotten by whoredome: That there ſhould be 7. chiefe gouernors in euery city, which were moſt noted for Iuſtice & vviſdom, & that two of the leuitical Prieſts ſhold ſit in iudgment with them, & if in diſcerning cōtrouerſies, the Iudges would not condiſcēd to that which vvas right, the vvhole matter ſhould be decided by the diſcretion of the Prieſt & Elder: That the teſtimony of one man ſhould not be currant to conuince an other of any crime, nor yet of tvvo, vnleſſe their honeſties vvere approued, but

the teſtimonie of three ſhould ſtand, and yet neither ſlaue nor woman ſhould be ſufficient witneſſe, becauſe in one the baſeneſſe of his fortune, in the other the weakneſſe and lightneſſe of her ſexe, might rightly bee ſuſpected: that the fruite of trees new ſet or planted, ſhould not bee medled withall before the fourth yeere, and that then they ſhould pay for tithes the tenth part of the increaſe: That neighbours and ſtrangers ſhould haue ſome part alſo, and that the reſidue ſhould remaine to him that planted them. That they ſhould ſow cleane ſeed vpon their grounds and not mingled, becauſe the land would not like with ſeed of two ſorts: That trauellers ſhould not bee reſtrained and interdicted from fruites, but that they might gather as much as they pleaſed and their preſent neceſſity required, and that if they were aſhamed to take it the owners ſhould offer it vnto them: That the woman that gained vnlawfully, or married her ſelfe to an other, beſides her lawfull husband ſhould not bee regarded as a wife: That ſhee that was ſuppoſed to bee a Virgine, and was found defiled in her bodie with any man, and conuicted of the crime, ſhould either bee ſtoned to death, or burned aliue.
               If one deflowred a Virgin eſpouſed to an other man, though ſhe conſented, yet both parties ſhould ſuffer extreame puniſhment, and if he rauiſhed her forcibly, that then onely the author of the iniury ſhould bee puniſhed: That, if a man die and leaue no children behinde him, his widdow ſhould marry the brother of her deceaſed huſband, and by that matrimony bring forth iſſue to ſucceed them in their ſtocke: but if the brother refuſed to marry her, hee ſhould ſhew the cauſe of his refuſall before the elders, and if his cauſe were approued good, hee ſhould

haue liberty to marry whom he pleaſed: That they ſhould bewaile and lament for the dead, for the ſpace of thirty daies, and no more, which time he thought ſufficient for a wiſe man to lament the loſſe of his friends: That the ſonne which was iniurious to his parents ſhould be hanged without the Cittie: That the enemy that was ſlaine in battaile ſhould not want buriall: That if a creditor receiue a pledge or pawne of a poore man, hee ſhould reſtore it againe before night: That if one buy one of his kindred as a ſlaue, the bond-ſeruant ſhold be free the ſixth yeere after: That hee that found gold or ſiluer, ſhould make proclamation thereof by the mouth of the Crier: That if cattell went aſtray, they ſhould either be brought backe to the right owner, or elſe kept till the right owner were knowne: That no Iſraelite ſhould make or temper any poyſon, nor buy any that was made elſewhere: And that he which mingled poyſon, to the end to poyſon an other, beeing conuicted of the offence ſhould drinke the ſame poiſon himſelfe: That he which wilfully and wrongfully pulleth out an other mans eye, ſhould bee puniſhed with the loſſe of an eye: That if a bull kill a man with his horne he ſhould bee ſtoned to death, and his fleſh caſt aaway and not eaten: That a thing committed to an other to keepe, ſhould be kept warily as a thing holy: That the ſonne ſhould not bee puniſhed for the fathers offence, nor the ſonnes offence be imputed as a fault in the father: And theſe were the domeſticall lawes ordained by Moſes, and in warfare theſe following: That before warre were offerred, the goods wrongfully taken away ſhould be demanded againe, by Ambaſſadors and Heralds, and if they were not reſtored, that then (if they pleaſed) they might warre lawfully: That the whole charge and gouernment

of the warres, ſhould be committed to him that moſt excelled others in ſtrength and wiſdome: that the ſtrongeſt ſouldier of all the campe ſhould be ſent as Ambaſſador: That if the enemie were beſieged, their fruite trees ſhould be ſpared, for the trees themſelues (if they could ſpeake) would certainely reprehend and reproue him that deſtroied them. That the conqueror might kill all ſuch as were rebels, but the reſt which he ouercame & vanquiſhed ſhould be made tributary and pay yeerely penſions: That during the time of war no woman ſhould touch her husbands priuities, nor no man his wiues: that it ſhould be vtterly prohibited for the Iſraelites to eate bloud: That thoſe which were either infected with leaproſie, or which had cauſed any fluxure of their natural ſeed ſhould be expelled the city.
               Menſtruous women, in like manner, were kept out of the city, for ſeauen daies after the beginning of their diſeaſe, and might returne in the eight: and ſo many daies were they forced to abſent themſelues, that had their houſes defiled and polluted with any dead body: That the Prieſt ſhould ſacrifice tow evve Lambs for him whoſe naturall ſeed flovved from him in his ſheepe, and that the party ſhould be waſhed in cold water: and by the ſame ſacrifice was he purged and hallowed that had laine with his wife at vnlawfull and prohibited times: That a woman after ſhe was deliuered of a child, if it were a man child, ſhould be reſtrained from comming to the Church for the ſpace of forty daies, and if it were a woman child, for the ſpace of eighty daies.
               That he that ſuppoſed his wife to be vnchaſt ſhould for a certaine meaſure of barley meale called aſſarim, and, that then the wife being placed at the poſtes

of the temple, ſhould ſweare after the Prieſt, whether ſhee had defiled her chaſtitie or no; and if ſhe ſwore falſe, ſhee ſhould dye for it, hauing her right hamme diſioynted, and her wombe putrified, but if ſhee were chaſte and ſwore truly, ſhe ſhould bee deliuered of her childe in the tenth month, without harme of her wombe, and that then the Prieſt of God blotting out her name from out the ſcedule, ſhould giue her drinke out of a potte with a wide mouth. That the paines of death ſhould bee inflicted for adultery, inceſt, and the ſinne of Sodome. That the Prieſt that was lame or weakned in his body, ſhould be forbidden to aſcend the Altar, and that hee ſhould be maintained notwithſtanding with the holy oblations. That if the Iewes attained to the land of Chanaan, they ſhould ſuffer their grounds to lye lea and vnplowed euery ſeuenth yeare: that ſuch fruites as the earth did naturally produce, ſhould euery fortith yeare, (which was called the yeare of Iubily) be common, as well to ſtrangers and forreners, as to their owne kindred; and that, in that yeare, money which was owing ſhould be releaſed and forgiuen, ſlaues and bondmen made free and infranchiſed, and poſſeſſions gotten with ſmall coſt, reſtored to their firſt owners. With theſe inſtitutions and ordinances both for home and abroade did Morſes inſtruct the Iſraelites, not long before his death, adding more-ouer a ſolemne prayer for the good ſucceſſe of thoſe that obſerued and fulfilled his lawes and ordinances, rightly, and as they ought, and bitter execrations, and curſes againſt the tranſgreſſors and offenders thereof.
               And laſt of all, hee bound the people with an oath, that they ſhould for euer obſerue and keepe thoſe diuine, and humaine lawes which he had inſtituted and ordained,

and that if any one did violate them, they ſhould not ſuffer him to goe vnpuniſhed: And now ſeeing it is manifeſt that there was neuer any people more ceremonious and religious then the Iſraelites, I thinke it worth while, briefly to expreſſe the manner of their ſacrificing, as it was firſt ordained.
               The Iewes had two ſorts of ſacrificing from the beginning, The manner of the Iewes oblations. the one whereof was done by the better ſort of people, and that they called Holocauſtus (that is a ſacrifice layde whole on the Altar) and was done in this manner, hee which intended to doe ſacrifice eyther with Oxe or Lambe, or what thing elſe hee meant to offer (for the beaſt which hee ſacrificed muſt bee a male beaſt, and of one yeare old,) brought the beaſt to the Altar, and then the Prieſt powring forth and ſprinkling the bloud of the ſacrifice vppon the Altar, and cutting the oblation in peeces, burned it whole vpon the Altar.
               The other ſort of ſacrificing, was for the common people, wherein they offered beaſts of aboue a yeare old, the bloud whereof beeing ſhedde, and the kidnees, fatte and ſuet, ſet on fire on the Altar, the hearts and right legges were giuen to the Prieſts, and the reſidue, they, for whom the ſacrifice was ſolemnized, did eate within two dayes after. Thoſe which were poore might offer two Pigions, or two Turtle Doues, whereof the one ſerued for a whole burnt ſacrifice, and for the other, the Prieſts did caſt lottes. Hee which offended vnawares, did ſacrifice for ſatiſfaction of that ſinne a Yew Lambe of an yeare old, or elſe a Kidde, and thoſe which were guilty of any ſecret fault in them-ſelues, were (by the very letter of the law) to bee purged by offering vp a Ramme. The fleſh of which oblations, whether they were publicke or

priuate, the Prieſts did eate in the Temple: one meaſure containing a peck of the fineſt flower, was allowed for the oblation of a Lambe, for a Ramme two, and for a Bull three: There was alſo allowed Oyle, which was powred vppon the ſacrifice: A Lambe was publickly ſacrificed euery morning and euening, and vppon euery ſeuenth day, which was called their Sabbaoth, and which (by their law) they held moſt holy, there were double ſacrifices offred vpon their Altars: In the beginning of the month were offered for reconciliation, two Oxen, ſeauen yearling Lambes, one Ramme, and one Kidde, to which were added two Kiddes more, the one whereof was ſent out of the bounds of the Citty, and there offered as a ſatiſfaction for the ſinnes of the multitude, and the other was burned skinne and all in the pureſt place of the ſuburbes of the Citty.
               The Prieſts gaue a Bull ſanctified for that purpoſe, and a Ramme for a whole burnt ſacrifice. There was alſo other ſacrifices mingled with ordinary ceremonies, and holy dayes, ſuch was the fifteenth day of the month (which the Macedons called Hyperueretheus:) and vppon the returne of Autumne, they fixed their Tents or Tabernacles, and keeping that day holy, offered yearely whole burnt offerings, the dooers thereof vppon the moneth Xanthicus, which is Aprill, carryed in their hands the boughes of Myrrh, Willow, Palmes, and Peach tree; where-vppon the yeare tooke his beginning vppon the day of the full Moone, the ſunne then entring into the ſigne Aries.
               
               And becauſe at that time the people of Iſrael were deliuered out of the land of Egipt, they ſacrificed the miſticall

Lambe, and celebrated the feaſts of vnleuened bread, or ſweete bread, in the full Moone, ſome few dayes after: vpon which dayes were euer burned, for a whole burnt ſacrifice, two Bulls, one Ramme, and ſeauen Lambes, wherevnto was added one Kidde, for ſatiſfaction for their ſinnes: in the ſecond day of Sweete-bread, were offered the firſt parts of their fruites, and a meaſure of Oyle, and in the beginning or ſpringing of their fruites, a Lambe for a whole burnt ſacrifice. Their dayes of Penticoſt alſo were certaine, which time they called Aſarthan, that is to ſay Quinquageſima, or the fifteeth day: and then they offered leauened bread made of drie meale; two Ewe lambes, two Calues, and two Rammes for a whole burnt offering, and two Kiddes in recompence of their miſdeeds: The The opinion of Heathen writers concerning the Iewes. Heathen writers diſagree from the Eccleſiaſticall, concerning the Iewes, and Moſes their Captaine: for Cornelius Tacitus, in the one and twentith Booke of his Diurnalls, attributing the departing of that people out of the land of Aegipt, not to Gods diuine will and power, but to neceſſity, writeth thus of them. The ſcabbe and noyſome itch beginning in Aegipt, ſaith hee, Boch
                        •
                     ris the Aegiptian King deſired a remedy in the Temple of his god Hamon, where hee was admoniſhed to purge his kingdome, and to baniſh thoſe people (meaning the Iewes) which were hatefull to their gods, into other countries: Wherevpon they beeing expulſed, and a great multitude of them which had the ſcabbe leaſt ſitting together in waſte and deſolate places, moſt of them beeing almoſt blinde with weeping, Moſes, one of thoſe which were baniſhed among the reſt, admoniſhed them not to expect any helpe of goddes, or men, but onely

to relye and commit them-ſelues wholy to him as their guide and Captaine, wherevnto they aſſented and agreed, and ſo beeing vtterly ignorant what would become of them, tooke their iourney at aduentures, wherein aboue other things they wanted water, and that they watching all night in the open fields, not farre from deſtruction, ſaw a flocke of wylde Aſſes going from feeding, and ſitting downe vpon a rocke ouer-growne with thick woods, theſe Moſes purſued and tooke, and therevpon and to the end that he might for euer bee aſſured of that people, he gaue vnto them new lawes and ceremonies, contrary to all other nations: for thoſe things which wee hold for holy, they account as prophane, and allow of thoſe things which with vs are poluted.
               They hollowed and worſhipped within their houſes the picture of a beaſt, the ſight whereof expelled both thirſt and error, and ſacrificed a Ramme in deſpite of the god Hamon: they offer alſo an Oxe in deriſion of the god Apis, which the Aegiptians worſhip vnder the forme of an Oxe: They abſtaine from Swines fleſh for auoyding the ſcabbe, becauſe that beaſt is dangerous for that diſeaſe.
               They reſt vppon the ſeuenth day, becauſe that day brought end to their labours: and yeelding to ſlouthfulneſſe, the ſeuenth yeare alſo is ſpent in Idleneſſe, the honor whereof is by others attributed to Saturne, by reaſon of hunger and faſting: their bread is altogether vnleauened: theſe lawes how euer they were brought in, are there defended: and though mercy and firme faith are in great requeſt amongſt them, yet they carry deadly hatred againſt all other nations. They bee ſeperated in their banquets, and ſeuered in their beds: They are much

giuen to luſt and yet they abſtaine from the company of women of other nations, but hold nothing vnlawfull amongſt them ſelues.
               They ordained circumciſion of their priuities, that by that difference they might bee diſcerned from others, and the firſt leſſon they learne is to contemne the gods: The ſoules of thoſe which were ſlaine in battell or by puniſhment, they ſuppoſe to be eternall.
               They haue the like regard of Hell and perſwaſion of Heauenly things: on the other ſide the Aegiptians worſhippe diuers beaſts and wrought Idols, but the Iewes in their hearts and minds acknowledge but one onely God, accounting thoſe prophane which faine or pourtray the images of their gods in the forme of men. Theſe and many other things hath Cornelius Tacitus and Trogus in his Three ſectes of the Iewes, ſeauen and thirty booke, written of the Iewes. Three ſects of the Iewes were ſeuered and diſtinguiſhed one from another by their vſuall manner of liuing, which were the The Phariſes, Pharaſies, the Sadducees and the Eſſeians: The Pharaſies liued very auſterely and ſparingly, inſtituting new traditions, by which they finiſhed and aboliſhed the traditions of Moyſes: They carried in their forheads and vpon their left arme certaine frontlets and papers, wherein was written that decalogue, which the Lord ſayd, thou ſhalt haue, as it were, hanging betwixt thine eyes, and in thy hand, and theſe they called Philacteries of the Greeke word Philatein, which ſignifieth to fullfill the law.
               Theſe alſo faſtned the edges of their veſtures to the reſt of their garments with thornes, that beeing pricked therewith as they went, they might remember Gods commandements.
               
                  
They thought all things to bee done by GOD and by deſtiny, and that to doe or neglect things that were lawfull and iuſt, conſiſted in the will of man, but yet that in all things fate was a furtherer, whoſe effects they eſſteemed to proceed from the motion of the Heauenly bodies.
               They would neuer contradict their elders nor ſuperiours: They beleeued the general iudgement, that al ſoules were incorruptible, that onely the ſoules of the good did flitte and remoue into other bodies, vntill the reſurrection and laſt iudgement, and that the ſoules of the wicked were detained and impriſoned in euerlaſting dungeons: and theſe were called Phariſes, becauſe in their habits and liuings they differed from the common diſpoſition of other men.
               The Saduces denied fortune and deſtiny, ſaying that The Saduces, God ſaw all thinges, and that it was in the will of man to do either good or euill; they denied that the ſoules after this life ſuffered eyther puniſhment or pleaſure: they denied alſo the reſurrection of the dead, ſuppoſing their ſoules and bodies to periſh together, nor did they hold that there were any Angels, and yet they receiued the fiue bookes of Moſes; they were ſeuere without meaſure and nothing ſociable amongſt themſelues, for which ſeuerity they named themſelues Saduces, that is to ſay iuſt.
               But the Eſſeians liued altogether a monaſticall life, vtterly The Eſſeians. deſpiſing wedlocke and the company of all women, not becauſe they thought it fitte by forbidding carnall copulation, to deſtroy the ſucceſſion of mankind, but that they ſhould beware of womens intemperance, ſuppo, ſing no womā to be faithfull & true to her husband. They had all thinges in common; oyntments and bathes they

accounted a reproach, and eſteemed a deformity in their trimming, to bee an ornament vnto them, ſo as they were alwayes arrayed in white garments: they had no certaine citty, but dwellings in euery place: They ſpake no prophane words before the ſunne riſing, but praied for his riſing, and after that, workt vnto the fift houre, then waſhing their bodies in water, they eate together with few words: They accounted an oath as periury, and allowed none to be of their ſect vnder a yeares probation: and after the firſt yeares tryall, when they were admitted, they tryed their manners other two yeares alſo, in which time if they were found in any ſinne, they would driue them away from them, that eating graſſe like beaſts, they might repent till their deaths. When ten of them ſat together no one would ſpeake if nine of them were vnwilling, they would not ſpit in the middle, nor on the right ſide: They obſerued their ſabboth ſo religiouſly, that vpon that day they would not ſo much as purge their bellyes: They carryed with them a wodden Pickax, where-with they digged a hoale in the earth in ſome ſecret place to eaſe them-ſelues in, and couered themſelues diligently with their long garments, leaſt they ſhould doe iniury to the diuine lights, for which cauſe alſo they filled the hole againe preſently. They were long of life, by reaſon of the ſimpleneſſe of their dyet, for they liued for the moſt part with Dates, they had no vſe of money, and they adiudged that death the beſt which happened to a man for Iuſtice ſake. They hold, that all ſoules were created from the beginning, and incorporated for a time in mens bodies, and that the good ſoules after they departed from the bodyes, liued beyond the Ocean, where ioy is reſerued for them, and that the euill ſoules are aſſigned boyſtrous

and ſtormie places towards the Eaſt: Some of them could foretell things to come, and ſome vſed the company of wiues, but very moderatly, for they ſuppoſed, that if they ſhould altogether abſtaine from women, the whole ſtocke of humaine kinde would periſh. There dwell in Syria at this day Greekes, which bee called Gryphoni, Iacobites, Neſtorians, and Saraſins, and two people of the Chriſtian Religion, which bee the Syriani and the Marouini; the Syrians ſacrifice as the Greekes doe, and were ſome times obedient to the Church of Rome, but the Marouini agree with the Iacobites, and vſe the ſame language and writing the Arabians doe. Theſe ſundry ſorts of holy men inhabite the hill Libanus, the Sarraſins dwell about Ieruſalem, they be valiant in warre and expert in husbandry. The Syrians bee vnprofitable people, and the Marouines moſt valiant men, though they be few in number.
            
            
               
                  Of Media, and of the manners of the Medes. CHAP. 5.
               
                  MEDIA a region in Aſia, is ſo called (as Solinus reporteth) of Medus the ſonne Media, why ſo called. of Medea, and Aegeus King of Athens, and the people thereof be called Medi: But Ioſephus is of opinion, that they be called Medes of Medeus the ſonne of Iaphet.
               
               This Region (according to Ptolomeus) is bounded vpon the North with the Hyrcan ſea, vpon the Weſt with the great Armenia, and Aſſyria, with Perſia vpon the South,

and on the Eaſt with Hircania and Parthia. Their chiefeſt exerciſe, and which is almoſt peculiar to that nation, is ſhooting and riding: Their Kings in ancient time were of great authority, their head attires, their round caps, and their garments with ſleeues, remooued with the Empire and gouernment vnto the Perſians. It was proper to the Median Kings to haue many wiues, which cuſtome was ſhortly put in practiſe amongſt priuate men, in ſo much as it was not lawfull to haue leſſe then ſeuen wiues. In like manner it was thought fitting for women to haue many husbands, and to haue leſſe then fiue they deemed a miſerie. The Medes make leagues and confirme friendſhip after the maner of the Greekes, and alſo by ſtriking their armes about the ſhoulder blade, and then to lick vp each others bloud. That part of Media which is towards the North, is barren, and therefore they make them a kinde of paſte of Apples, dryed and bruſed in morters, bread of roſted Almonds, and wine of the rootes of hearbes, and liue for the moſt part vpon the fleſh of wilde beaſts.
            
            
               
                  Of Parthia, and the manner of liuing of the Parthians. CAP. 6.
               
                  THe Parthians which were baniſhed out of Scythia, and obtained this country The confines of Parthia. by deceit, called it after their names Parthia: It hath vpon the South Carmania, on the North Hyrcania, on the Weſt Media, and Aria on the Eaſt: The countrie is full of woods and hills, and very barren of

fruites: The people during the time the Medes and Aſſyrians poſſeſſed the Empire, were accounted baſe and of no credit nor eſtimation, but when the kindome of Media was tranſlated to the Perſians, this people alſo as a barbarous nation without name, was a prey vnto the vanquiſhers, and laſtly became ſubiect to the Macedonians: but in tract of time they grew of ſuch vertue and valour, and were ſo proſperous and ſucceſſfull in their deſignements, that they gouerned not onely the countries neere adioyning, but making warre againſt the Romaines, (which then were conquerors of all Countries,) ouerthrew them with great deſtruction and ſlaughter of their men. Plinie reckoneth foureteene kingdomes vnder Foureteene kingdomes vnder the Parthians. the gouernment of the Parthians: Trogus attributeth vnto them the Empire of the Eaſt, as if they had made diuiſion of the whole world with the Romaines: This people after their reuolting from the Macedonian Empire, were gouerned by Kings, which were all called Arſaces of Arſax their firſt King, next vnto the Maieſtie of their Kings was the order and gouernment of the people, out of which were elected both Captaines for the warres, and Gouernors in time of peace.
               They haue a mixt language borrowed of the Medes and Scythians, and compounded of them both: at the firſt their habites were anſwerable to their abilitie, and after their owne country faſhion, but waxing richer, they were as curiouſlie clothed as the Medes, their weapons were after the cuſtome of theyr owne countrey, and like vnto the Scythians.
               Their armies conſiſt not of free-men, as in other nations, but for the moſt part of ſlaues, which ſort of baſe people doe dayly increaſe, for they bee all bondmen

borne, and no power of manumiſſion permitted them, yet bee they brought vp with as great care and induſtry as if they were free-men, and taught both to ride and ſhoote, and euery one, as hee is in riches, traineth vp and ſetteth forth with the King, when hee goeth into the warres a great company of horſe men according to his abilitie, in ſo much as when Antonius made warres vpon the Parthians, and the Parthians incountring him with fifty thouſand horſemen, there were not found in all that whole troupe aboue eight hundred free-men: They cannot indure the ſingle combate, nor to remooue the aſſault from Citties beſieged, but their chiefeſt fight is with their horſes running forward, or turning backward, and ſome-times alſo they faine them-ſelues to flye, that thereby they may wound thoſe which vnwarily purſue them: The ſigne of battell is not giuen them with a trumpet, but with a Timbrill, or Drumme, neither can they indure long fight, for ſurely they were not to bee reſiſted, if their courage and continuance were anſwerable to the aſſault and firſt brunt of the battell, and often-times they will leaue the battaile in the very heate of the conflict, and ſhortly after returne againe and begin a freſh, ſo as when the enemy thinketh himſelfe moſt ſecure, he is oftentimes in greateſt danger: The munition for their horſe-men are Brigandines, or coates of maile imbrodered, and with ſuch bee their horſes harneſſed likewiſe. In times paſt they had no other vſe of ſiluer nor golde then in their weapons: All of them haue many wiues, being mooued therevnto with the pleaſure of the variety of women, nor is there a more greeuous puniſhment for any offence, then for adultery, and therefore they forbid their wiues not onely to banquet with other men, but euen the very

ſight of them alſo. There bee ſome of opinion, whereof Strabo is one, that if the Parthians cannot beget children of their wiues them-ſelues, they will giue them in mariage to their friends, thereby to raiſe them iſſue to ſucceed them. They eate no other fleſh but what they get by hunting, and they be euer carryed on horſe-back, for they ride to their banquets, they buy and ſell, conferre together, and execute all publicke and priuate offices on horſ-back. And this difference in the dignities and degrees of the people is very ſinguler and worthy to bee noted, that thoſe which bee of a ſeruile and baſe condition, goe euer on foote, but the better ſort of people and free-men ride continually.
               The fleſh of their dead bodyes inſteed of buriall is commonly rent in peeces and deuoured, eyther of byrds or dogges, and they couer the bones, when they be bare, with earth. They haue their gods in great reuerence and regarde: they bee of a haughty and proud diſpoſition, ſedicious, deceitfull, and malepart, and very violent in all their actions, but yet women bee ſomewhat more courteous then men, they bee alwayes buſied eyther in externall or ciuill broyles: They bee naturally ſlowe of ſpeach, and farre more apt for action then vtterance. They will neither bragge of their proſperity, nor diſpaire in aduerſity: they obey their Princes for feare, not for ſhame; they bee much giuen to luſt, and of a ſparing dyet, and there is no truſt nor confidence to bee repoſed in their words nor promiſes, but ſo farre as is expedient and behouefull for themſelues.
            
            
               
               
                  The manners and cuſtomes Of Perſia, and of the manners, lawes, and ordinances of the Perſians. CHAP. 7.
               
                  PERSIA a country in the Eaſt, is ſo called of Perſis the ſonne of Iupiter and The Confines of Perſia, and why ſo called. 
                  Danaé, of whom alſo Perſepolis the Metrapolitan and chiefe Citty of that nation, taketh his name, and the people thereof be called Perſians: This country (as Ptolomeus writeth in his fift booke) is bounded on the North with Media, on the Weſt with Suſiana, on the Eaſt with the two Carmanias, and on the South with the Perſian ſea. Their chiefe townes were Aximia, Perſepolis and Dioſpolis. The Perſians beleeue in Heauen, and in Iupiter: they haue the Sunne alſo in great veneration, whom they call Mitra, and worſhip the Moone, Venus, the Fire, Earth, Water, and windes, as gods and goddeſſes: They haue neither Temples, Sanctuaries, nor Idols, but doe their ſacrifices The Perſian gods. without doores, in ſome high place, with great reuerence and deuotion, hauing the hoaſt for ſacrifice brought to the Altar, with a crowne or garland on his head: they ſacrifice to their gods nothing elſe but the heart of the oblation, neither do the gods (as they ſuppoſe) require more at their hands, and yet the cuſtome of ſome in that countrie is, to put the Intralls of the ſacrifice into the fire alſo: when they ſacrifice, they make a fyre of drye wood, the barke or rinde being firſt pulled of, and then caſting vpon the wood ſome ſweet tallow or ſuet, and infuſing a little oyle thereon, ſet it on fire, not blowing with their mouths but with bellowes, for if any preſume to blow the fire with his mouth, or throw therin any dead carcaſſe, or any other

filthy thing, hee dyeth for it. The Perſians neither waſh themſelues in water, nor piſſe, nor ſpitte into it, nor throw any dead carcaſſe into it, nor prophane it any other kinde of way, but worſhip it moſt religiouſly, and that in this manner. When they come to a lake, riuer, or brooke, they make a little ditch or pond, ſeuered from the other water, and there they kill the ſacrifice, hauing ſpeciall regarde that none of the other water bee touched with the bloud, leaſt all ſhould be polluted: this done, and the fleſh layde vpon a mirtell or lawrell tree, the Prieſts or Magi make a fire with little twiggs, and therewith burne the ſacrifice till it be conſumed, and then ſprinkling and infuſing it with oyle mingled with milke and hony, they pray for a long ſpace together, not to the fire, nor water, but to the earth, holding in their hands all the while a bundle of Mirtle rods. They create their Kings out of one family, and hee which is not obedient vnto the King, hath his head and armes cut off, and is caſt out without buriall. Polycritus reporteth, that al the Perſian Kings haue their houſes builded vpon hills, and that there they hide all the treaſure, and tribute which they exact of their ſubiects, for a monument The Perſians create their Kings all of one family. of a well gouerned ſtate: And that of the people that dwell vpon the ſea coaſt, they exact ſiluer, and from the inhabitants of the middle part of the land, ſuch other commodities as the country affoordeth, as colour, medicines, wooll, or ſuch like, and ſomtimes cattel alſo: It is not lawfull for the King to put any man to death for one onely cauſe, nor for one Perſian to commit any heynous offence againſt another of his owne family or kindered: The Perſians haue many wiues a peece, and keepe diuerſe concubines beſides, for increaſe of iſſue, and the Kings reward thoſe moſt liberally, that haue begot moſt

children in a yeare, nor bee their children once brought into their fathers ſight, before they bee fiue yeares of age, but all that while are brought vp with their mothers, chiefly for this cauſe, that if any of them in thoſe yeares of education, ſhould miſcarry and dye, their loſſe ſhould be no greefe or moleſtation to the father. They celebrate their mariages all at one time of the yeare, that is, in the vernall Aequinoctium, and the Brides-groome eateth nothing the firſt night he lieth with his wife, but an Apple or the marrow of a Cammell. The Perſian children from the firſt yeare of their age to the foure and twentith, practiſe nothing but riding, ſhooting, throwing the dart, and chiefly to learne to ſpeake the truth. Their ſchoole-maiſters are men of great continencie and ſeuerity, and ſuch as ſometimes in rime, ſome-times in proſe, rehearſe vnto them (for their inſtructions) tales and hiſtories, containing the commendations of their gods, and the deeds of worthy men. They haue a place appointed them to practiſe in, whether they are ſummoned by the ſound of ſome winde inſtrument at vſuall houres, and their teachers are often demanded and examined by others, how their children do profit. They practiſe running alſo, chooſing one of the Princes ſonnes to be their Captaine and guide, & the field wherein they run their races, is at the leaſt thirty ſtadia in length, and that they may the better indure both heate and cold, they often exerciſe themſelues in ſwimming and wading ouer great waters, inſomuch as they will eate their meate and go about their husbandry, and other buſineſſe, with weapons in their hands, and wet garments on their backs: their meate is the gumme, or turpentine that iſſueth out of Firre trees, Acornes and wilde Peares, but that which they vſually eat after their runing & other exerciſes

of their bodies, is a kinde of heard bread, and ſalt herbes called garden Creſſes, and fleſh either broyled or boyled, and their vſual drinke is water: They hunt alwaies on horſbacke with darts, bowes and ſlings. In the fore-noone they either plant trees, dig vp rootes, make weapons, or practiſe fiſhing: their children be addorned with gold and many other dainties. The ſtone Pyropus (which is a kind of Carbuncle ſtone of a firy redneſſe) is with them in great eſtimation, & therefore they apply it not to any dead bodie, nor yet the fire, for the great honor & reuerence they yeeld vnto it: from the twentith yeere vnto the fiftith, they be ſouldiours and follow the warres: they haue no vſe of pleading, neither doe they buy or ſell any thing: They bee armed in the warres with a kinde of target in form of a wheele, and beſides their quiuer of arrowes they haue weapons called ſangars, and ſhort ſwords, caps with high crowns, and on their breaſts rough breſt-plates ful of skales: The Princes weare a kind of garment that is three double about their ſhoulders, and cotes with ſleeues hanging downe to their knees, the out-ſide whereof is of diuers collours and the lyning white: In the Sommer time, the Perſians be clothed in purple, and in winter in changeable collours: The head attires for their Prieſts or Magi be like vnto Biſhops miters: The common people bee clothed with two coates, hanging downe to the middle of their legs, and a great bundel of linnen cloath bound about their heads: Their beds and pots be trimmed with gold & ſiluer: They conſult of no ſerious matter but when they be halfe drunke, eſteeming that conſultation to be more firme thē that which is with ſobriety, & deliberatiō; kinſmen & equals ſalute one an other with a kiſſe, & the baſer ſort of people reuerence their betters by bowing their bodies vnto them.
               
                  
They bury their dead bodies in the earth, annoynting them firſt with wax, but their Prieſts or wiſe-men they caſt out without burial to be deuoured of birds; their cuſtome was alſo for ſonnes to lie with their owne mothers, and theſe in times paſt were the manners and cuſtomes of the Perſians. Herodotus alſo reciteth more of their maners, very worthy of remembrance: as, that it was held a horrible and heynous offence, to laugh, or ſpit before the King: That they ſcoffed at the Greekes, who were of opinion that the gods tooke their original from men: That whatſoeuer was vnlawful to be done, was by them thought vnfitting to be ſpoken: That it was a vile thing to bee in debt, but to lie was moſt abhominable: That they did not bury their dead bodies, before they were pulled in peeces by dogges, and (which in the opinion of other nations was thought moſt abſurde) that parents being brought to pouertie, might get money by being Pandars to their owne daughters, which cuſtome was alowed amongſt the Babylonians alſo.
               The Perſians at this day being ouercome by the Sarraſins, and infected with the madneſſe of Mahomet, liue altogether in darkeneſſe: It was once a warlike nation, and had for a long ſpace the gouernment of the Eaſt: but now for want of excerciſe in armes, it fayleth much of his ancient glory.
            
            
               
               
                  Of India, and of the monſtrous and prodigious cuſtomes and manner of liuing of the people of India. CAP. 8.
               
                  INDIA, a Country in the Eaſt, and the vtmoſt bound of all Aſia, is ſo vaſt and The diſcription and bigneſſe of India. large a country, as it is thoght to be the third part of the whole world: Pomponius writeth, that it is as much in compaſſe by the ſea ſhore as a ſhip will ſaile in forty daies and forty nights with a full winde: It is called India of the riuer Inde, where it finiſheth his courſe vpon the Weſt part, and beginning at the meridionall ſea, ſtretcheth out vnto the vttermoſt part of the Eaſt, extending Northward to the hill Caucaſus: It containeth ſundry ſorts of people, and hath ſuch great aboundance of Cities, and walled townes Fiue thouſand Cities and 
                        〈◊〉
                      walled townes in India. therein, as ſome are of opinion, that there is no fewer then fiue thouſand, nor may it ſeeme ſtrange, that it hath ſo great numbers of people and Cities, conſidering that the Indians of all other people neuer departed from their natiue ſoile. The moſt famous riuers in that Country are Ganges, Indus and Hypanis, but the greateſt of them is the riuer Ganges: The Country by reaſon of the Weſterne windes is moſt holſome: they haue two harueſts in the yeere, and the wind bloweth Eaſterly all winter: wine they haue none, although there be that affirme, that the Muſican ſoile yeeldeth ſome wine: in the South part of India is great ſtore of Narde, Cynamon, Pepper and Sugar-cane,

as in Arabia, and Aethiopia: It produceth Ebon-trees, Parrots and Vnicornes: and aboundeth with precious ſtones, as Berrils, Chryſophaſes, Adamants, Carbuncles, Lychnites, Pearles and Vnions: There be two Sommers, as it is ſaid: the winds be gentle and calme, and the ayre temperate: they haue plenty of ground and aboundance of water, & therefore ſome of them, & namely the Muſicans, liue till they be a hundred and thirty yeers of age, & the people called Seres be longer liued then they: Al the Indians weare long lockes, and colloured, either The long liues of the Jndians. blew or yellow. Their trimming is for the moſt part with precious ſtones, and they be not clothed al alike, but ſome in wollen and ſome in linnen garments: ſome goe altogither naked, ſome couer onely their priuities, and many of them haue for their apparel the barkes or rines of trees, made flexible and bending towards their bodies: Their bodies, for the moſt part be blacke, for by the diſpoſition of the ſeed generatiue, they be of ſuch how in their mothers wombes, as thoſe be which begot them, & their ſeed of generation is black like the Aethiopians: they be tall of ſtature and very hardy & valerous: they be very frugal & thrifty in their liuing: They be curious in their apparel as I haue ſaid, & abſtaine greatly from theft: they vſe no written The Jndians haue neither written lawes nor learning. lawes, nor know any letters, but adminiſter al things by helpe of their memories: and by reaſon of their ſimple and thriſty manner of liuing, all things ſucceed very proſperouſly with them: They drinke no wine but in their ſacrifices, for their vſuall drinke is made of Ryce and Barley, and their meate for the moſt part is thinne Rycepottage: That there is great ſimplicity in their couenants, and contracts, may well be gathered by this, that the people bee not litigious nor giuen to quarrelling,

for they haue no lawes to recouer a thing committed or left in an other mans keeping, neither do they need witneſſes or ſeales, but credit one an other ſimply without intent of fraud or guile. In ſo much as they will leaue their houſes when they goe abroad with the doores open and no body in them: All which be manifeſt ſignes that they be maruelous iuſt and continent: no man there may bee admitted to liue alone, & to dine and ſup when he pleaſeth himſelfe, but they ought to eate and drinke all at one houre, for ſuch things they coniecture doe beſt diſpoſe them to ſocial & ciuil conuerſation. They excerciſe their bodies by rubbing thē with combes made of ſweet wood for the purpoſe, & addorne themſelues with Ebon-wood: In making their tombes and ſepultures, they bee very ſparing, and in their apparel maruellous coſtly and curious, for beſides gold, precious ſtones & very fine linnen cloth, or cambricke, wherewith they be arraied, they carry about with them fans or ſhadowes, to preſerue their beauties from the ſun. For they are ſo deſirous to ſeeme faire, as they do al things that appertaine to the beautifying of their faces: truth & vertue are with them much eſteemed, and they yeeld no more honor to old men then to others, vnleſſe they excell others in wiſdome: They haue many wiues, ſome wherof they buy of their parents for a yoke of oxen, ſome they marry for obedience ſake, ſome for cauſe of procreation, & ſome for pleaſure and voluptuouſneſſe, and vnleſſe their husbands inforce them to liue chaſt, it is lawful for thē to play the harlots at their pleaſure: No Indian doth ſacrifice or burn incence with a garland vpon his head, neither do they cut the throats of the ſacrifices, but ſtrangle thē to death, that their offrings to their gods may be whole and not maimed: he that is conuicted of

falſe witneſſe bearing, hath the vtmoſt ioynts of his fingers cut off, & he which depriueth an other of any member, is not only puniſhed with loſſe of the like member, but hath his hand cut off beſides, and to depriue an artificer of hand or eye is death: the body of their King is committed to the keeping of hyreling women, who only haue Their Kings are committed to the keeping of women. the cuſtody and charge of him, & none elſe do euer come into his preſence, and if any of theſe women kil the King when he is drunke, for her reward, ſhe ſhall marry his ſucceſſor, and their ſons do euer ſucceed them in their Kingdomes: It is not lawfull for the King to ſleepe in the daytime, and hee is conſtrained to change his lodging at certaine houres in the night, for feare of treaſon. If hee be not in campe, he oftentimes goeth abroad, and ſitteth in Iudgement and heareth cauſes: and if it be at ſuch a time as his body is to be rubbed with a rubbing combe, he hath three to rub his body and heareth cauſes all the while: He iſſueth forth alſo ſometimes to doe ſacrifice, and ſometimes to hunt, and then he is compaſſed about, and incloſed with a great troupe of women, after the manner of Bacchus, his gard remaining without the Court gate, and the way into the houſe is couered with cords, and ſnares, and if any one offend with any of the women which ſtay at home, he ſhall die for it: The King when hee hunteth hath going before him, drums, timbrils and little bels, and when he hunteth in parkes and incloſed grounds, he is aſſiſted with two or three women armed, and when in foreſts and open fields, he ſhooteth from an Elephant: ſome of the women ride in chariots, ſome on horſebacke, and ſome on Elephants & in that maner they make wars: alſo they be excerciſed in al kind of weapōs, but therin they much differ from our women. There be ſome writers that

affirme that the Indians worſhip ſhewry Iupiter, the riuer Ganges, and the ſpirits of men deified, and that when the King waſheth or ſhaueth his beard, they celebrate that time very ſolemnly, and ſending great gifts, ſtriue one to an other, who ſhall ſhew the greateſt pompe, ioylity and magnificence: The whole people of India were heretofore The people of India once deuided into ſeauen orders. deuided into ſeuen orders, the firſt whereof was the order of Philoſophers, who though they were feweſt in number, yet in honor and dignity with their Kings, they excelled all others: Theſe Philoſophers were freed from The firſt was the order of Philoſophers. all labours, they ſerued no man, nor were ſerued of others, and for that they were beloued of the gods, they receiued of priuate men al things neceſſary for them to do ſacrifice, and to bury the dead bodies: There were great Propheſiers and negromancers, and therefore had many gifts and honors beſtowed vpon them, for that by their knowledge the Indians receiued great commodity, for they would aſſemble themſelues togither in the beginning of the yeere, and then foretell of drought, raine, winds and diſeaſes, and other accidents, the knowledge whereof was exceeding profitable vnto the people, ſo as both the King & people hearing what occurents were likely to happen that yeer, might thereby the rather auoide future euils, & follow ſuch courſes as by probability might proue good, and no other puniſhment was inflicted vpon any of thoſe Philoſophers that prophiſied falſly, but onely that he was put to perpetual ſilence: The ſecond order is of husbandmen, The ſecond order of huſbandmen. which are the greateſt in number, and be freed from the wars, and from al other imployments whatſoeuer, and beſtow there whole time onely in tilling the grownd: no enemy doth either wrong them, or rob them, but eſteeming them to be euer buſied for their common good, ſorbeare

to doe them any iniury or damage, by which means the husbandmen, liuing voide of feare, and tilling the land in ſecurity, their labors yeeld them great plenty of increaſe: they come not at all into the Cities, but liue altogether in fields with their wiues and children; They pay tribute vnto their Kings (for all India is gouerned by Kings) and it is not lawfull for any priuate perſon to poſſeſſe any grownds without tribute, and beſides this tribute they yeeld vnto their Kings the fift part of the increaſe of all their fruites.
               The third order conſiſteth of ſhepheards of all ſortes, which liue neither in Cities nor villages, but in tents and The third order is of ſheepheards. tabernacles, and practiſe hunting and fowling, whereby the country is free and ſafe both from rauenous birds and wild beaſts, for by this excerciſe they make all India more ciuill, abounding otherwiſe with many and diuers ſorts both of birds and beaſts, which would be much hurtfull to the husbandman: Artificers ſupplie the forth Artificers the fourth order. place, whereof ſome are occupied in making weapons and armour, ſome in making inſtruments for husbandry, and ſome in prouiding things neceſſary for themſelues: theſe be not onely free from tribute, but haue all their bread corne allowed them by the King.
               Souldiers be the fifth in order, but the ſecond in number, they bee excerciſed in all manner of warlike diſcipline, The fifth of of ſoudiers. and be wholy deuoted to armes, and both they their Horſes and Elephants, be wholy maintained at the Kings coſt and charge.
               The ſixth order is of Tribunes, or Protectors of the commons: Whoſe ſpeciall office is to ſpie and inquire, Tribunes in the ſixth order. what things are done throughout all India, and to make report thereof vnto the King.
               
                  
In the ſeuenth rancke be thoſe which bee of the common The common Councell the ſeuenth order. Councell, they be the feweſt in number, but in Nobilitie and vnderſtanding they exceede all the other Orders: out of this Order be elected the Kings Councellors, which are to gouerne the common-wealth, and to diſcern and iudge in doubtfull matters: Princes moreouer, and captaines are choſen out of this company. The common-wealth of India beeing thus diſtributed into theſe ſeuen Orders, it is not lawfull for a man of one Order, to marry a wife out of another Order: neither is it lawfull for any one to alter his function; as for a ſouldier to become a husbandman, or for an artificer to play the Philoſopher. There be alſo certaine Preſidents or head Officers appointed amongſt the Indians, to defend and protect aliens and ſtrangers from iniury, and oppreſſion: and theſe (if any ſtrangers be ſicke) are to procure Phiſitians to cure them, and if they dye, they muſt bury them, and giue their money and goods to their neareſt friends: The Iudges determine controuerſies, and puniſh offenders: there be none of the Indians of ſeruile condition; for it is ordained by a law, that none of No ſlaues amongſt the Jndians. them ſhall be ſeruants; and ſo all being free-men, are worthie of equall right and honor, ſo long as they neither go about to excell others, nor to iniure any man, but ſettle themſelues to indure all chances of fortune alike. For it ſeemeth a ridiculous thing, that lawes ſhould bee miniſtred to all alike, and that their fortunes ſhould not bee alike alſo.
               But now becauſe there bee ſundrie ſorts of people in India, which by reaſon of the ſpatiouſneſſe and large extent of the Countrey, differ both in forme and language: all of them therefore do not liue in that ciuil manner, as I haue here declared.
               
                  
but ſome are of a more barbarous and rude behauiour, of which ſort ſome be ſituated towards the Sun-riſing, and be much giuen to breeding cattell, or other ſuch like courſe of life: and ſome liue altogether in mooriſh grounds, and feede on raw fiſhes, which they take by going out in botes made of Canes or Reedes, that be ſo great, that a bote is made of the ſpace that is betwixt two ioynts of the reede. Theſe Indians weare garments made of flags or ſedge, that groweth in riuers, which they plat together, and make in faſhion of a matte, and weare them as an armour for their bodies.
               Next vnto theſe Eaſt-ward, be certaine Indians, which The Padae kill their friends when they be ſicke. be heardſ-men, or breeders of cattell, and be called Padae, they feed on raw fleſh, and are ſayd to liue in this manner: when any citizens, either man, or woman is ſick, their moſt neareſt and familiar friends kill him, alleaging, that his languiſhing in ſickneſſe would make his fleſh corrupted and vnwholeſome for thoſe which ſhould eate it: and although he deny himſelf to be ſick, yet they wil not pardon him, but kill him foorth with, and feed vpon him: and in ſuch manner as men are vſed by men, be women that bee ſicke dealt withall by women, that be their neareſt friends: And ſuch alſo as liue in health till they be old, be then killed and eaten by their friends: and therefore, both for this cauſe, and for that they be killed when they be ſicke, there be very few of them that liue till they be old. Another ſort of Indians haue a cuſtome different from thoſe which I haue ſpoken of, for they kill no creature, they neither ſow nor plant, nor prouide houſes, but liue onely by herbes: They haue a certaine graine much like vnto millet, which naturally ſpringeth out of the earth in a huske or codde, which they gathering, cod and all, boyle them and eate

them: when any of them falls ſicke, hee goeth into ſome deſert place, and there lyeth downe, and whether he languiſh or die, no one regardeth him: and alſo theſe Indians which I haue ſpoken of, accompany with women in the ſight of all people, after the manner of beaſts.
               In India bee certaine Philoſophers called Gymnoſophiſts, The Cymnoſophiſts. which (as Petrarch writeth) inhabite the vttermoſt and ſhadie parts of the region, and going euer naked, which is the cauſe they be ſo named. And wandring all abroad in the wilderneſſe, do there teach Philoſophie: abiding in one place from the Sunne-riſing, till his going downe, euer fixing their eyes, and beholding the circle of the brighteſt ſtarre: ſeeking out ſome ſecrets in the fierie globe. They will ſtand vpon their feete all day long, vpon the hote ſands, without ſhew of any griefe at all, patiently induring both the cold of the ſnow, and the heate of the Sunne.
               Amongſt whom be people called Brachmans; who (as Didimus their king writ to Alexander king of Macedon, when he was minded to make warre vpon them) do liue very vprightly and ſimply. They be not allured with delectations of any novelties, nor deſire any thing elſe, but what the law of nature inforceth them: their diet is nothing daintie, not ſuch as to ſatisfie their luxurie, is ſought out in all places, but ſuch as the earth produceth without labour or toyle furniſheth their tables with wholeſome and vnhurtfull diet, by which meanes they be very healthfull, and vnacquainted with the names and nature of ſundrie diſeaſes. No one imploreth helpe of another, where no one liueth to himſelfe, but all in common. They haue no ſuperiour, but be all equals, and therefore voide of enuie and emulation: for the equality of pouerty maketh

them all rich: condēnations they haue none, becauſe they do nothing worthie of correction: nor be they led by any law, for that they commit no crimes: onely this one law is generall to them all, not to tranſgreſſe the law of nature, which nouriſheth labour and induſtrie, exerciſeth no auarice, and flyeth idleneſſe: They giue not their bodies to luſt, thereby to weaken them, and they poſſeſſe all things they deſire not, eſteeming couetouſneſſe to bee a plague and ſcourge moſt cruell, which impoueriſheth all thoſe ſhee layeth hold on, and finding no end of obtayning, the more rich ſhee groweth, the more is her beggerie. The Sunne yeeldeth them heate, the deaw moiſture, the riuers aſſwage their thirſt, and the earth affoordeth them beddes; where carke and care approch not neare their couches, nor be their minds wearied or vexed with vaine cogitations. Pride hath no power amongſt them, being al men of one condition: nor is any one oppreſſed with other bō
                  dage, but only this, that their bodies proſtrate themſelues to do ſeruice to their ſoules. They make neither lime nor bricke wherwith to build them houſes, but rather chuſe to inhabite in holes digged in the earth, or vnder the hollownes of hils, where they neither feare force of winds, nor rage of tempeſt: but ſuppoſe that the couerings of houſes are not ſo ſure a defence againſt ſhowers, as their holes, whereof they haue a double vſe; for they ſerue them for houſes while they liue, and for buriall when they die. Coſtly apparell they haue none, but couer their members with ruſhes, or to ſpeake more truely, with ſhamefaſtneſſe. Their women be not adorned to pleaſe others, neither do they affect more beautie then they bee borne with: the men accompany with women, not for luſt, but for loue of increaſe.
               
                  
They haue no war, but continuall peace, which is confirmed not by force, but by friendſhip: the father followeth not his ſonne to his ſepulchre, nor is there any monuments made for the dead, nor the aſhes of their burned bodies incloſed in coſtly coffins, which things they account as a puniſhment, not as an honour vnto them.
               Theſe Brachmans (as is ſayd) bee not oppreſſed with any peſtilence or other diſeaſes, becauſe they defile not the ayre with their beaſt-like acts: but with them, nature is euer agreeable to the ſeaſon, and the Elements hold on their courſe without offence: a ſparing and moderate diet is their pureſt Phiſicke, which is a readie medicine, not onely to cure, but to preuent all diſeaſes whatſoeuer. Paſtimes and Enterludes they affect not, but when they would view any ſpectacle, they remember the monuments of things done, and bewayle them as moſt ridiculous.
               They be not delighted (as many of vs be) in old wiues tales, but in the goodly order of the frame of the world, and the diſpoſition of naturall things: they haue no trafficke into other Countries, nor do they ſtudie the art of Elo quence and Rhetoricke, but haue one ſimple and common Dialect amongſt them, teaching them only to ſpeake the truth. They frequent neither Court nor Scholes, whoſe doctrine, beeing repugnant, defineth nothing certain and ſtable. Some of theſe people account honeſtie their Summum bonum, and ſome pleaſure. They kill no harmeleſſe beaſt to performe their diuine Ceremonies, ſaying, that God accepteth not of ſacrifices made with the bloud of things polluted, but that he is rather delighted in the vnbloudy ſacrifice, and appeaſed by prayer, for they hold that God is like men in this, to be delighted in his own likenes.
               
                  
In India alſo be a people called Catheae, the men The people called Cathiae. of that countrie haue many wiues, who (when their huſband is dead) appeale to the iudgement of certaine graue Iudges, and plead their deſerts towards their deceaſed huſbands, and ſhe that by the ſentence of the Iudges is approued to haue beene moſt officious and deare to her husband in his life time, goes away reioycing at her conqueſt, and attiring her ſelfe in her beſt apparell, aſcendeth the pyle, and layeth her ſelfe downe by the bodie of her huſband, imbracing and kiſſing it, and contemning the fire, (when it is put to the pyle) in reſpect of her chaſtitie, ſhe is there, with the carcaſe of her dead husband conſumed to aſhes, and all the other wiues ſuruiue with ſhame and infamie. Their children be not brought vp in their infancy according to the will of their parents, but at the diſcretion of ſuch as are publikely inioyned to that buſines, who by their office are to looke into their features and diſpoſitions, and if any be found ſlow or dul-ſpirited in their nonnage, or decrepit or weake in any part of their bodies, they ſuffer them to liue no longer, but kill them out-right. They marry their wiues, not by wealth or Nobilitie, but by beauty: and not ſo much for pleaſure, as for procreation of children.
               In ſome part of India is a cuſtome vſed, that thoſe that are not able, by reaſon of pouertie, to place their daughters in mariage, ſhould bring them in the prime and flower of their age into the common market-place, playing before them with pipes, and other inſtruments of muſick, where the multitude beeing ſummoned and aſſembled together the maid comming neere vnto them, firſt vncouereth the hinder part of her bodie, vp to the ſhoulders, and after that the fore-part, and then if any one conceiueth

liking of her, ſhe is giuen him in mariage. Megaſthenes writeth, that vpon certaine hils in India, be a manner of people with heads like dogs, armed and fenced with nayles, and Monſtrous and prodigious people. clothed with beaſts hydes: they haue no humane voyce, but a ſound like the hoarſe ſnarling or barking of dogges. Thoſe which liue about the riuer of Ganges, eate no meat at all, but liue onely by the ſmell of wild apples. And when they trauell into other places remote, they take of thoſe apples with them, that the ſmell of the apples may preſerue their liues: but if at any time their bodies receiue any noyſome or ſtinking ayre, they die inſtantly: and ſome of theſe people were ſayd to liue in Alexanders campe. Wee reade of ſome people in India that haue but one eye, and of otherſome that haue ſuch long ears, as they hang down to their heeles, and that they may lye downe and infold themſelues in either of their eares, by the hardneſſe wherof they pull vp trees by the rootes: that there be ſome alſo that haue but one foot, and that ſo broad, as when they lye with their faces vpwards, the ſhadow of their foot defendeth them from the heate of the Sunne. You may read in Cteſias the Cnidian Phiſitian, of certaine women, that bring foorth children but once in their life time, and that their childrens heads become hoarie or gray, as ſoone as they be borne: and that there is a kind of people whoſe haires be hoarie or gray in their youth, and waxe blacke in their age, and yet they liue longer then we do. It is ſayd alſo, that there is another ſort of women, which bring forth children when they be fiue yeares of age, and liue not aboue the age of eight yeares. There be ſome people that haue no neckes, and haue their eyes in their ſhoulders, and beſides thoſe which I haue alreadie ſpoken of, there be certaine wild people liuing in woods, with heads like dogges,

and their bodies couered with rough haire like briſtles, and make a very hideous and terrible noyſe: but theſe things and others of like kind, which are ſpoken and written of India, and of the ſundrie ſorts of people therein, (becauſe he that ſhould giue credit vnto them, behooued to be of a very ſtrong beleefe) are to be reported more ſparingly, leſt thoſe which reade forraine writings, ſhould be more nice, vnleſſe they be mooued thereunto with great earneſtnes, to giue credit to thoſe things, which are in a manner apparent before our eyes.
               The Cathaeians do now inhabit that part of India, which The Cathaeians lyeth betwixt Gedroſia, and the riuer Indus, which by them is now called Cathaia. The people be of the Scythians race, in whom may be perceiued great alteration of manners, from that the Scythians were in the beginning, if all be true which Armenius Aitonus reported of them in his Hiſtorie: For (ſaith he) they be very wiſe, and report of themſelues, that of all men they onely ſee and diſcerne with two eyes, and that all other people bee altogether blind, or of one eye at the leaſt. The quickneſſe of their wittes is great indeede, but their boaſting and oſtentation is greater.
               They be generally perſwaded, that they excell all men in the ſubtiltie and knowledge of arts: they be naturally white and pale of complexion, with little eyes and no beards, they vſe letters in forme like vnto the Romain letters: ſome of them be blinded in the folly of one ſuperſtition, and ſome in another; but all be voide of the true religion: for ſome adore the Sunne, ſome the Moone, ſome Idols made of mettall, and many of them an oxe: through which diuerſitie of falſe worſhipping, monſtrous ſuperſtition is diſperſed throughout the whole nation. They haue

no written lawes, nor know not what faith is, and though they ſhew great wit in their works, yet haue they no knowledge thereby of diuine matters. They be a timerous kinde of people, and feare death greatly, yet they make warres, but it is with more policie then fortitude. They vſe darts in their warres, and other ſorts of weapons, which to people of many other nations be vnknowne. They haue paper money foure-ſquare, and ſtamped with the Kings Image, which when it waxeth old, they change with the king for coine that is new ſtamped: their houſhold ſtuffe is of gold, ſiluer, and other mettal. They haue very litle oyle, and with that the kings do onely vſe to annoynt themſelues. And thus much of the Indians, now will we ſpeake of the Scythians, which be next vnto the Indians.
            
            
               
                  Of Scythia, and of the barbarous manners of the Scythians. CAP. 9.
               
                  SCythia, a countrie in the North, was ſo Scythia, why ſo called. called of Scytha, the ſon of Hercules, (as Herodotus reports:) but according to Beroſus, it was ſo called of another that was begotten of Scythia, of old Araxis, who was the wife of Noa. Theſe people at their firſt originall poſſeſſed but a ſmall portion of ground, but afterwards by their vertue and valor, increaſing by litle and litle, and ſubduing many nations, they obtained in the end great glory and gouernment: for firſt they beeing few in number, and contemned for their baſenes, contained themſelues about the riuer Araxis, but after they had gotten them a valiant Prince to be their king, they amplified

their poſſeſſions: ſo as now they enioy all the vplandiſh, and hilly Countries, vnto Caucaſus, and all the champion ground vnto the Ocean, and Maeotis poole, and other places euen to the riuer of Tanais; from whence Scythia ſtretcheth out in length towards the Eaſt, the hill Imaus lying in the middle, and diuiding it into two parts, maketh thereof as it were two Scythias, whereof one is called Scythia within the hill Imaus, the other, Scythia without Imaus.
               The Scythians were neuer inuaded, or at the leaſt neuer vanquiſhed by any forraine gouernement: for they forced Darius king of Perſia moſt ſhamefully to retire and flie from Scythia: they killed Cyrus with all his hoaſt, they ouerthrew the Captaine of Alexander the Great, with all his Companie: and as for the Romanes, they might well heare of them, but they neuer felt their forces. The people be of great ſtrength of bodie, and very rude both in their wars and workes.
               The Scythians at the firſt were not diſtinguiſhed into Companies, nor ſeuered one from another, for that they neither poſſeſſed any grounds, nor had any ſeates or houſes to dwell in, but wandered through wilderneſſe and deſart places, driuing their flockes and heards of beaſts before them, and carrying their wiues and children with them in carts. They were ſubiect to no lawe, but liued iuſtly one with another of their owne accords, and no offence throughout their whole nation was accounted more haynous then theft, becauſe their cattell lay abroad in all mens ſight, not incloſed with walles or hedges. They vſed neither gold nor ſiluer: milke and honie was their vſuall meate: they defended their bodies againſt the extremitie of cold with the skinnes of myce or rattes, and

other wilde beaſtes. And the vſe of wooll and woollen garments was vnknowne vnto them.
               This was the manner of liuing of moſt of the Scythians, but not of all: for many of them, as they bee farre diſtant from others in dwellings, ſo be they as different in their manner of liuing, as maintaining cuſtomes peculiar to themſelues; of which hereafter wee will relate in particular: for as yet we ſhall ſpeake of ſuch cuſtomes as be generall to them all.
               Moſt of the Scythians delight in humane ſlaughter, for The Scythians delight in humane ſlaughter the firſt man a Scythian taketh in the warres, his bloud he drinketh, and of all thoſe which he ſlayeth in battell, hee preſenteth the heades to the King: for the heades beeing cut off, how euer he tooke them, he ſhall be partaker of the prey, but not otherwiſe. And he cutteth off the head round like a circle about the eares, and then ſhaketh out al which is within the skull: after this he pulleth off the skinne from the bodie, and mollifying it with his hands, like the hyde of a beaſt, vſeth it as a mantle, and hangeth it at his bridle raines, triumphing and glorying of ſuch a prey. And hee which hath the moſt of thoſe mantles, is adiudged the worthieſt man. There be many alſo which ſow mens skins together, like beaſts skinnes, and thereof make them ſhort garments or cloakes, and weare them. Some others flea the right hands of their ſlaine enemies, and with the ſame make couerings for their quiuers: and many flea the whole bodies, and ſtretching out the skinnes vppon blockes of wood, carrie them about vpon their horſes: the heads being cut off in this manner, as I haue ſayd, they couer the vtmoſt ſide of them with Oxe leather, and thoſe which be rich, guild them within with gold, and ſo vſe them for pots to drinke in.
               
                  
And ſuch men of eſtimation as giue intertainement to ſtrangers, will ſhew vnto them, that thoſe were the heades of ſuch men as they had vanquiſhed in the wars, bragging thereof as a point of great man-hood. Once euery yeare all the Princes and gouernors of the region, fill a pot full of wine, of which all the Scythians which haue ſlaughtered any of their enemies, do drinke, but they which haue done no notable exploit, taſt not thereof, but ſit by without honor or regard, which among them is the greateſt ignominie that may be. And thoſe which haue committed the moſt ſlaughters, ſhall drinke of two pots which they haue there readie prouided for the purpoſe. Their gods which they worſhip and adore, are the virgin Veſta as principall: next vnto her, Iupiter and Tellus, (for Tellus they ſuppoſe The Scythian gods. to be the wife of Iupiter) after theſe they honor Apollo, Venus, Mars, and Hercules: but they thinke it not fit to make Idols, Altars, or Temples, to any of theſe gods or goddeſſes, but onely to Mars, to whom they ſacrifice euery hundreth captiue, to the reſt of their gods they ſacrifice beaſts, and eſpecially horſes. Hogges are in no account amongſt them, neither breed they any throughout the whole region. When the King puniſheth any man by death, hee ſpareth none of his male-children, but ſlayeth them all, but he hurteth no woman-kind.
               When the Scythians confirme friendſhip, or make a league or peace one with another, they put wine into a great earthen pot, and then cutting ſome part of their bodies which make the peace, with a knife, or with a ſword, they mingle their bloud with the wine: after that, they dip their ſwords, arrowes, axes, and iauelins into the cuppe, which when they haue done, they vow friendſhip one to another with many proteſtations.
               
                  
And then is the wine drunke vp, not onely by thoſe which make the league, but all their followers and partakers, which bee of moſt dignitie and eſtimation, drinke of it alſo. The maner of buriall of Kings which is vſed of the people, that inhabite about the riuer of Gerrus, where Boryſthenes is now nauigable, is in this maner: when their King is deceaſed, they digge a great foure-ſquare hole in the earth, and there lay him for a ſpace, after that they take the dead bodie and bowell it, and ceare it with waxe, and fill it full of ozier branches bruſed, a ſweet perfume called red Stirax, the ſeed of percely, ſmallage, and annis-ſeeds, and ſo ſow it vp againe, and then putting the carcaſe into a cart, they conuey it into another country, where it is vſed as before, and ſo interred.
               But the Scythians cut off their dead kings eares, clip his How the Scythians bury their kings. haire round, cut his armes about, wound him in the forehead and noſe, ſtrike his left hand through with a dart, and then carry the carcaſe into another nation, which is vnder their gouernment, the people whereof attend vpon them vnto another country. And when they haue beheld all nations, and the kings corps with them, they leaue it to bee buried of thoſe people that inhabite the vttermoſt parts of their kingdome; who when they haue put it into a coffin and laid it vpon a bed, they ſticke downe certaine ſpeares, and laying him vpon the ſpeares, couer him with a coat: then do they ſtrangle one of his ſtrumpets which he loued moſt dearely in his life time, one groome, one cooke, one horſe-keeper or muletor, one ſergeant; one butler, or cupbearer, and one horſe, and bury them altogether, with golden cups, and the firſt fruites of all their increaſe in the ſpatiouſneſſe of the Tombe or Sepulchre And when hee hath lyen there a yeare, they take the moſt neere of the

kings houſhold ſeruants: (and all the Scythian ſeruants attending on the king he free borne, and by him commanded to ſerue: and no ſeruant bought with money doth miniſter to the king.)
               And after they haue ſtrangled fiftie of theſe men-ſervants, and as many of the beſt horſes, the mens bowels beeing firſt taken out, and their garments ſtretched abroade, and ſowed together, they ſet vp, round about the circuit of the Kings tombe vppon arched worke, thoſe fiftie horſes, and the ſeruants ſitting vppon their backes: ſo as they may ſeeme afarre off to the beholders, like a troupe of horſemen keeping their dead King. And this is the maner and cuſtome of interring and ſepulture of their Kings in Scythia.
               Priuate men alſo obſerue a certaine cuſtome in their burials: for when one dyeth, all his neighbours laying him in a cart, carrie him about to his friends, and each one of his friends receiuing him, maketh a banket, as well to his neighbours and kinsfolke, as to the reſt which accompany the coarſe. His bodie beeing thus carried from place to place, for the ſpace of fortie dayes, is then interred, his head beeing firſt emptied and cleane waſhed: aboue the bodie they ſet three ſtickes bending one towards another, vppon which they ſet wollen cappes, as many as they can, and then they put the carcaſe into a cheſt or coffin, made of one tree like a trough, and ſet it vnder the cappes, and ſo fill vp the coffin with bright ſtones.
               The men of Scythia do neuer waſh themſelues, but their wiues infuſing water vppon their bodies, rubbe them againſt a rough ſtone, with Cypreſſe, Cedar, or the wood of Frankinſence, and after their bodies are rubbed, and beginne to ſmell, they beſmeare their faces ouer

with medicines or oyntments; theſe oyntments make them to haue an odoriferous ſme
                     ••
                   And the next day after, they remooue thoſe medicines, and make their faces cleane and bright againe.
               Their manner of ſwearing and miniſtring an oath to others, is by the Kings throne, whereby if any one be conuinced of periurie, (by the Deuinors which make triall thereof, with willow rods or wands) hee is put to death without delay, and forfeiteth all his goods to thoſe which prooued him periured.
               The Maſſagetae, a people of Scythia in Aſia beyond the The Maſsagetae Caſpian ſea, in apparell and liuing be very like vnto theſe Scythians, and therefore ſuppoſed of many to be Scythians indeed: They fight both on foote and horſe-backe, and in both ſorts of fight be almoſt invincible. Their weapons be darts and ſpeares, and a certaine ſword or weapon which they vſually weare about them, called a ſangar, they vſe gold in their belts, ſword-hangars, and head attires, and in guilding their pottes: they put vppon their horſes breaſts, breſt-plates of gold, their bridles and trappings be all of gold, and their ſpeeres be poynted and their quiuers trimmed with Braſſe, for of Iron and ſiluer they haue no vſe. Euery one hath his wife, and they accompany with women openly, which is vſed by no other Scythians, but onely they, if they be iuſtly accounted Scythians: for when any one there luſteth after another woman, he hangeth his quiuer at his chariot, and lyeth with her without ſhame. The people haue no time prefixt them how long they ſhal liue, but when one waxeth old, his friends aſſemble together, and ſacrifice him with certaine ſheepe, and boiling the fleſh together make a banket thereof. And this kind of death they account moſt bleſſed: but they eat none

which die by any diſeaſe, but bury them in the ground, eſteeming them damn
                     ••
                  , becauſe they could not be ſacrificed. They neither ſow nor plant any thing, but liue of beaſts and of fiſhes, which the riuer Araxis affoords abundantly: their vſuall drinke is milk. Of the gods they worſhip only the Sun, to whom they ſacrifice horſes, thinking it fit to ſacrifice a beaſt of the greateſt ſpeede, to a ſtarre of the ſwifteſt courſe. The people called Seres in Scythia, of all The Seres in Scythia. others liue moſt curteouſly and quietly among thēſelues, they auoid the company of all other men but themſelues, and deſpiſe the intercourſe of merchandize with other countries: for their merchants haue no communication for buying and ſelling with ſtrange Merchants, but onely ſet downe a price vpon their goods, and deliuer them by racke of eye, without buying any thing of others: with thē is neither, whore, adulterer, nor theefe brought to triall: neither is any man there put to death at any time: but the feare of their lawes with thē is of more force, then the conſtellatiō of their natiuities. They inhabit in the very beginning of the world, and that they may the better liue chaſtly, they be neither afflicted with canker or corruption, nor with haile or peſtilence. When a woman is conceiued with child, no man requireth her company, nor till ſhe be purified: no one eateth vncleane fleſh: they know no ſacrifices, and all men iudge of themſelues according to iuſtice and right: wherefore they be not chaſtiſed with ſuch puniſhments, as are inflicted vpon men for their offences, but liuing a long ſpace yeeld vp their breaths without ſickneſſe.
               The Tauro-Scythians (ſo called of the hill Taurus about The Tauro-Scythians. which they dwel,) ſacrifice al thoſe which ſuffer ſhip wrack vnto a virgin which they worſhip as a goddeſſe: as alſo all the Greeks which be brought thither, in this manner.
               
                  
After they haue finiſhed their praiers, they cut off his head whom they meane to ſacrifice, and (as ſome ſay) throw his truncke head-long downe a Rocke (for their Temple is ſcituated vpon a ſteepe Rocke) which done they naile the head vpon a croſſe or gybbet. Some agreeing that their heads bee faſtned to a croſſe, as is ſaid, doe notwithſtanding deny that their bodies be throwne head-long down a Rocke, but affirme that they bury them in the grownd.
               The ſpirit or goddeſſe to whom they doe-ſacrifice, they terme to be Iphigenia the daughter of Agamemnon. Euery one likewiſe cutteth off the heads of his enemies, which he taketh in the warres and carrieth them home to his houſe, and fixing them vpon poles ſetteth them vpon the higheſt part of his houſe, and for the moſt part vpon the funnel of the chimney, and the reaſon why they ſet them ſo high, is for that they ſay the heads be the keepers and watchmen ouer the whole houſe: theſe people liue by rapine and ſtealth, and by the wars. The Agathirſi be a very The Agathirſi. exquiſit and well addorned people, their garments for the moſt part be of gold. Their women bee common to them all, ſo as they be all coſins and kinsfolke one to an other, there is neither enuy nor ſtrife amongſt them, but in their liuing they much reſemble the Thracians.
               The Neury vſe the Scythian cuſtomes: theſe in the Summer before Darius expedition, were conſtrained (for The Neuri. the multitude of ſerpents which ingendred in their ſoile) to alter their ſeate: they perſwades themſelues ſo firmely, as they will ſweare it to bee true, that for certaine daies euery yeere they become Wolues, and againe after a while returne into their former habite and ſhapes.
               
                  
The Anthropophagi (that it is to ſay eaters of mans fleſh) vſe the moſt ſauage and rudeſt manners of all men: The Anthropophagi. they haue neither lawes nor ordinances to liue vnder, they exerciſe themſelues about cattel: there garments be like the Scythians, and they haue a language proper to themſelues.
               The Melanchlaeni goe all of them in blacke attire, The Melanchlaeni. (which is the cauſe they be ſo called) and as many of them as feed onely on humaine fleſh, liue after the manner of the Scythians.
               The Budini be a great and populous nation, there Bodies be rediſh or yelowiſh, and their eyes gray like Cats: The Budini. The City Gelon (the people whereof be called Gelloni) is the chiefe city of their Nation: They ſolemniſed certaine feaſts euery third yeere in honour of Bacchus. They were once Greekes, but being remoued from thence they ſeated themſelues in this Country, and their language they now vſe is a mixt ſpeech betwixt the Scythian and Greeke tonge: The Budini differ from the Gelloni both in life and language, for the Budini being borne in the Country, breed vp cattel and eate ſuch fruites and herbes as the coūtry naturally produceth, but the Gellony excercyſing husbandry liue vpon corne, and plant orchards, & gardens, & be nothing like the Budini, either in collour or countenance: The country is wel ſtored with trees, & out of a great and huge poole which they haue, they take Ottors, Beuers & many other wild beaſts, of whoſe skins they The Lyrcae. make themſelues clothes. The Lyrcae line only by hunting which is on this manner, they clime vp into the tops of trees (which be very plentiful in that country) and there lie in waite for wild beaſts: each huntſman hath his dog and his horſe, which be taught to couch down low vpon their

bellies, the better to intrappe the wild beaſt, and after hee which is in the tree top hath ſpied the beaſt and ſtroke him with a darte, hee leaueth the tree and purſueth him on horſe-backe, with his dogge, vntill hee haue taken him.
               The Argyphaei inhabite vnder the bottoms of high The Argyphaei. hils, they bee a kind of people that bee balde from their birthes, both men and women, they haue flat noſtrells, a great chinne and a ſpeech peculiar to themſelues: They be apparelled like the Scythians, and liue by fruites of trees, little caring for cattell, whereof they haue no great ſtore: They lodge vnder trees, and in the Wintertime they weare white caps, but none in the Sommer: There is none that will wronge them, for they bee accounted a ſacred people, poſſeſſing no weapons of defence: They determine ſuch controuerſies as ariſe amongſt their neighbours, and whoſoeuer flyeth vnto them is in ſafety.
               The Iſſedones were reported to vſe this cuſtome, when The Iſſedones. any man had his father deceaſed, all his kinsfolke preſented him with beaſts, which when they had killed and cut in ſmall peeces, they chopped his dead father that inuited them to the banket in peeces alſo, and mingling all the fleſh together made thereof a ſolemne feaſt, then would they take the dead mans head and flea it, and put out all the braines within the skull, and couering it with gold, vſe it as an Idoll doing vnto him yeerely ceremonies and ſacrifices: theſe things did the ſonne to the father, and the father would doe to his ſonne as the Greekes celebrate the daies of their natiuitie.
               Theſe people alſo bee accounted iuſt, and that the

wiues bee of equall ſtrength with their husbands: And ſuch heretofore were the manners of the Scythians: but afterwards being ſubdued by the Tartarians, they followed their faſhions, and liue now like vnto them, and bee all called by one name Tartarians.
            
            
               
                  Of Tartaria, and of the cuſtomes and power of that people. CAP. 10.
               
                  TARTARIA (which according to Vincentius is alſo called Mongal) is ſcituated The ſcituation of Tartaria. in the North-eaſt part of the world, and hath vpon the Eaſt the land of the Cathaians and Solangans, vpon the South the Sarraſins, the Naymans vpon the Weſt, and is compaſſed on the North with the Ocean ſea: it is called Tartaria of the Riuer Tartar which runeth through it, and the Country for the moſt part is verie Tartaria why it is ſo called. mountanous and full of hilles: as much of it as is Champion, is ſo mingled with ſand and grauell, as it is very barren, but onelie where it is watered with running waters, which bee very rare and geaſon: And for this cauſe it is much of it deſert and vn-inhabited with people.
               There be no Cities or great townes in the whole country, but onely one called Cracuris: and wood is ſo ſcarce in moſt places there, as the inhabitants be conſtrained to burne and boile their meate with horſdung & beaſts dung. The weather there is very intemperate and moſt ſtrange,

for in the Summer-time they haue ſuch horrible and terrible thunders and lightnings, as many men die for very feare: it is euen now maruellous hot and by and by there will be extreame cold and ſnowes: and the ſtormes and winds oftentimes bee ſo boyſterous, as people bee not able to ride againſt them, but that they blow men downe from their horſes, pull trees vp by the rootes, and doe the people many and great dammages: It neuer raineth there in Winter, and but ſeldome times in Sommer, and then ſo ſmall a raine as it ſcarce moyſtneth the earth.
               The Country otherwiſe aboundeth with all kinds of Tartaria aboundeth with cattaile. beaſts as Camels, Oxen and ſuch like, and laboring beaſts and Horſes in ſuch aboundance, as it is thought that all the reſidue of the world hath ſcarce ſo many beſides. Tartaria was firſt inhabited of foure ſundry ſorts of people, Foure ſorts of Tartarians. one ſort whereof were called Iecchamongall, that is to ſay great Mongals, the ſecond Sumongall which is watry Mongals, and thoſe called themſelues alſo Tartars of the riuer Tartar, neere which they dwelled, the third were called Merchat, and the fouth Metrit, they had all like forme and lineaments of body, and ſpake all one language.
               The ancient Tartarians were of a rude behauiour, and liued without manners, lawes or other ornamentes of life, and beeing of an obſcure name, and very baſely eſteemed of amongſt all the Scythians, followed their cattaile, and paide tribute vnto them for their dwellings.
               Shortly after, this people being deuided as it were into certaine tribes or kindreds, were firſt ruled by captaines, who had the ſole gouernment ouer them, they paying

tribute notwithſtanding to their next bordering neighbours the Naymans: But when by a certaine Oracle they had elected and created Canguiſta their firſt King, hee taking Canguiſta firſt King of Tartaria.
                   vpon him the Empire, did firſt aboliſh the worſhip of all euill ſpirits and falſe gods, and made an Edict that all the Nation ſhould worſhip the true God, by whoſe prouidence hee would haue all men thinke, that hee receiued his Kingdome. Hee commanded likewiſe that all that by their age were able to beare armes, ſhould bee ready to attend the King at a certaine daie, where when they were aſſembled, the army was diſtributed in this manner. Firſt that the Decurions which were captaines ouer tenne ſouldiours, ſhould obey the centurions, which were captaines ouer an hundred foote-men, the centurions ſhould be obedient to thoſe which were Captaines and Coronels of a thouſand men, and thoſe againe ſhould be at the command, of thoſe which were gouernors of tenne thouſand: and then to trie the ſtrength of his Empire, and to haue experience of his ſubiects hearts, hee commaunded that ſeuen of thoſe Princes or Gouernours ſonnes, which ruled the people before hee was ordained King, ſhould bee ſlaine by the hands of their owne fathers.
               This command of the King the fathers fulfilled (although it ſeemed very bitter and cruel) both for feare of the multitude, and alſo for religions ſake, for they verily beleeued that the God of Heauen was firſt author and inſtituor of their Kingdome, and that if they ſhould not performe his command, they ſhould not onely tranſgreſſe and violate the law of a King, but the law of God alſo. Canguiſta being thus fortified, and putting confidence in his power, firſt ſubdued by battaile the Scythians,

which were next vnto him, and made them tributary, and with them, all thoſe to whom the Tartarians themſelues before that time paide tribute: from thence going forward to people more remote, he had ſuch proſperous and happy ſucceſſe in the warres, as hee ſubdued with his forces all Kingdomes, Countries and Nations from Scythia to the Sunne ryſing, and from thence to the mediterranean ſea, and beyond, ſo as now he may iuſtly be ſaid, to bee Lord and Emperour of all the Eaſt: The Tartarians of all men be moſt deformed in body, they bee for the moſt part little men, hauing great eyes ſtanding farre out of their heads, and ſo much couered with eye-lids, as the ſight or opening of the eye is maruellous little: their faces be broad and without beards, except that they haue ſome few ſtragling haires vpon their vpper lips and chinnes, they be all of them commonly ſlender in the waſte, and ſhaue all the hinder partes of their heades from one eare to the other, and vppe to the crowne, they weare the reſt of their haires long like vnto our women, of which long haire they make two ſtrings or cords, bynding or winding them ouer both their eares, and in this manner be all Tartarians ſhaued, and all thoſe people alſo which liue amongſt them.
               Moreouer they be very nimble and actiue of bodie, good horſe-men, but bad footemen, and they neuer goe afoote, but the pooreſt of them, whither euer he hath occaſion to goe, rydeth either on horſe or oxe-backe; their women ride alſo vpon geldings, and ſuch as will not ſtrike or kicke: their bridles bee richly decked with gold, ſiluer and precious ſtones.
               They hold it a glorious thing to haue little belles

hanging about their horſe neckes, they haue a very ill fauoured and clamerous kinde of ſpeech: for when they ſing they howle like Wolues, and when they drinke they ſhake their heades, and they drinke very often and for the moſt part vntill they bee drunke, for to bee drunke they account a great commendations vnto them.
               They neither dwell in Citties nor Townes, but in the fields vnder tents and Tabernacles, after the auncient cuſtome of the Scythians. They bee (for the moſt part) all ſhepheards and heardſmen: In Winter they lie in the plaine and champion grounds, and dwel vpon the hilles in Sommer, liuing there vpon the profits of the paſtures; They make themſelues manſion places in manner of tents or pauillions, either of little ſprouts or twigges, or elſe of cloath ſuſtained vp with ſmall timber, in the middle whereof they make a rounde window, which ſerueth both to giue light and to let out the ſmoke, and they make fires for all vſes, the men take great delight in ſhooting and wreſtling. They bee wonderfull good huntſmen, and be armed from the toppe to the toe when they goe a hunting, and when they ſee any wilde beaſt, they preſently incloſe him in rounde about on euery ſide, and ſtopping and hindering him with dartes, kill him and ſo take him by that meanes: bread they haue none, and therefore they haue no vſe of bakeing, neither doe they vſe any towelles, napkins nor tableclothes: They beleeue that there is one God, and that hee is the maker and author of all things viſible and inuiſible, yet doe they not worſhip him with any ceremonies or religious rites, but rather making themſelues certaine Idoles, either of cloth or of ſilke in the forme

of men, and placing them vpon each part of their Pauilions, pray vnto them to bee defenders of their Cattell, and giuing them great reuerence, offer vnto them of the milke of al their ſheepe and Cattel, and before they begin eyther to eate or drinke any thing, they ſet part thereof before thoſe Idoles: what beaſt ſoeuer they kill to eate, they lay his heart in a platter all night and in the morning boyle it and eate it, they worſhippe alſo and doe ſacrifice vnto the Sunne, the Moone, and the foure elements, and moſt religiouſly adore Cham their King and Lord, eſteeming him to bee the Sonne of God, and to him the doe ſacrifice and attribute ſo much honor, as they ſuppoſe him to be the worthieſt man in all the world, nor will the ſuffer any one els to bee compared vnto him: all other people they do ſo much contemne and deſpiſe, and thinke them-ſelues ſo farre excelling others in wiſdome and goodneſſe, as they ſcorne to ſpeake vnto them, but dryue them from them with rebukes and diſdaine.
               They call the Pope and all Chriſtian men dogges and Idolaters becauſe they worſhippe ſtockes and ſtones, they bee much giuen to Diuiliſh and Magike arts, and obſeruing dreames haue their wiſe men to expound and interpret them, who do aske and receiue anſweres of their Idols, for they perſwade them-ſelues that GOD hath conference with their Idolls, and therefore they doe all things by Oracles, they obſerue certayne tymes, and eſpecially when the change of the Moone is, yet they doe worſhipppe nor honour no one time beefore another, eyther by Feaſting or Faſting, but eſteeme of all alike.
               The Tartarians bee ſo much giuen to coueteouſneſſe

and auarice, as when any one of them ſeeth a thing, that hee hath a deſire to, if hee may not haue it by the good will of the owner, hee taketh it by force, ſo it bee not belonging to one of their owne country men, ſuppoſing it lawfull ſo to doe, by the commandement and ordinance of their Kings, for they haue this power giuen them by Canguiſta and Cham their firſt Kings, that what Tartarian ſoeuer, or Tartarian ſeruant, ſhall finde vpon the way any horſe, or meete any man or woman not hauing the Kings paſport, or letters of ſafe-conduct, hee may challenge them to him-ſelfe and euer after vſe them as his owne.
               They will lend no mony to thoſe that want, but for an exceſſiue and intollerable gayne, as taking a penny for tenne pence for euery monthes vſe, and vſury vpon vſury if the payment bee deferred, and they moleſt and greeue thoſe which bee tributary vnto them, with ſuch payments and exactions, as it was neuer reade of any nation that did the like, It is incredible to bee reported how they couet and extort, as if they were lords of all, but giue nothing, not ſo much as an almes to beggars, yet in this they are to bee commended, that they exclude and put backe noe gueſt that commeth to them to dinner or ſupper; but rather inuite them and giue them to eate very curteouſly and charitably.
               They bee of a very vncleane diet, for they haue neither table-clothes nor napkins as is ſayde, neither doe they waſh their hands, bodies nor apparell. They make no bread for they eate none, neither doe they eate hearbes or any kinde of graine but the fleſh of all beaſts, as dogges, cattes, horſes and rattes, and to ſhew their barbarous

cruelty and deſire of reuenge, they ſome-times roſt or broyle the bodies of their captiue enemies vpon the fire, and in their ſollemne bankets teare and deuour them with their teeth like wolues; and ſauing their bludds, power it into a potte and drinke it, and ſome-times alſo they drinke milke, the country yeeldeth noe wine, but what is brought to them from other places, and that they drinke moſt greedily, they eate the vermine from one anothers heads, or other places, in eating whereof they vſe to ſay theſe words ſic inimicis noſtris faciam, this wil I doe vnto our enemies.
               It is accounted a great offence, that eyther meate or drinke ſhould bee ſpoiled, and therefore they throw not their bones to dogges before they haue taken out the marrow, they be ſo ſparing and niggardly as they will eat no beaſt while he is whole and ſound, but when they bee lame or begin to languiſh, either through age or ſome other infirmity.
               They bee exceeding frugall and thrifty and content with a little, inſomuch as they will drinke in the mornig a bole or two of milke, and ſome-times neither eate nor drinke more of all the day after. The men and women bee almoſt apparelled alike, for the men weare How the Tartarians are apparrelled. ſhallow Miters vpon their heads, made blunt before, and a taile or labell hanging downe behind, of a hand bredth in length, and as much in bredth; and that they may ſtay vpon their heads, and not bee blowne of with the winde, they haue ſtrings ſowed to them about the eares; and thoſe they tie vnder their chins. The maried women weare vpon their heads a certaine round cappe, made like a basket of a foote and a halfe in length, and plaine vpon

the toppe like a barrell, wrought eyther of party-coulered ſilke, or of Peacocks fethers, and adorned about with great ſtore of golde and precious ſtones, vpon the reſt of their bodyes they weare ſuch garments as their abilities bee able to affoord them, the richer ſort of women goe in Purple and ſilke, and their husbands likewiſe: their coates bee of a very ſtrange faſhion, for the ſlitte or hole whereby they put them off and on is vppon the left ſide, and buttoned with foure or fiue buttons. In the Summer they weare black garments, and in Winter and rainy wether, white, and their clothes come downe no lower then their knees: they weare garments alſo made of skinnes, but not as wee doe with the hayrie ſide inwards, but with the fleſh ſides towards their bodyes, and the hayrie ſides outwards, ſhewing the hayre for comlineſſe and decencie: maides by their apparell can hardly bee diſcerned from marryed women, nor the marryed women, be diſtinguiſhed from the men, for there is no great difference betwixt them, eyther in habite or behauiour, for all weare breeches alike. When they prepare themſelues to the warres, ſome of them couer their armes (which otherwiſe bee naked) with yron plates lincked together with Letherne thongs, and ſome with diuerſe foldes of Lether, with which alſo they make defences for their heads: ſhields they haue none, and but few of them eyther launces, or long ſwords: yet they haue ſwords, but not aboue the length of ones arme, and made with an edge vpon the one ſide like back-ſwords wherwith when they fight, they ſtrike with that ſide which is ſharpe, they be very light and perfect horſe-men, and maruelous good archers, and he is accounted of the greateſt courage

and valour which is moſt obedient vnto gouernment.
               They ſerue in the warres without wages, and bee very ſubtil and cunning both in the warres and other buſineſſes, and ready to take vpon them any charge, or to vndergoe any matter of importance whatſoeuer, the Captaines and gouernors enter not into the battell them-ſelues but ſtanding aloofe incourrage & exhort their ſouldiers diligently, foreſeeing and conſidering what is neceſſary to bee done, and to the end their army may ſeeme the greater, and more terrible to the enemy, they bring their wiues and children into the army with them, and ſometimes the images of men ſet faſt vpon horſes, nor do they thinke it a diſgrace for them to fly if it bee either behouefull, or neceſſary: when they ſhoote they diſarme their right armes, and then their darts fly with ſuch vehement forces, as they will perce any kind of armor: they begin the battell in order, and keepe their aray in retyring euen, then deſtroying and ſlaying with their darts their enimies which purſue them, and if they perceiue the number of thoſe which purſue them to bee but ſmall, they ſodainly returne into the battell, wounding with their darts both men and horſe, and euen then they get the greateſt conqueſt, when they were thought to haue beene conquered: When they intend to inuade or make warre vpon any country, they deuide their army into ſundry companies and giue the aſſaulte on euery ſide, ſo as they can hardly bee incountred or reſiſted, nor any of the inhabitants eſcape; and by this policie they haue alwaies the victory in their owne owne hands.
               And they vſe their victory very proudly and cruelly ſparing neither old men, women, nor children, but put all to the ſword without difference, artificers onely

excepted, which they reſerue to worke for them. They deuide them to bee ſlaine by the Centurions, aſſigning to euery ſeruant for his part of the ſlaughter, tenne, or more, or leſſe, as the number of the Captiues bee, which when they haue butchered with Axes, like Swine, for a greater terror to others, they take euery thouſand Captiue, and turning his head downe-wards, hang him vp by the heeles vppon a ſtake made faſt in the ground, in the middle of thoſe which bee ſlaine, as if hee ſhould then admoniſh and aduiſe his friends, whilſt the moſt of thoſe murtherers, approching to the ſlaine bodyes, doe with their mouthes ſwill vp the bloud which ſpringeth from their greene wounds.
               They keepe their faith and promiſe with none, how euer they bee obliged vnto them, but rage towards their owne ſubiects in this manner, and farre more greeuouſly: It is lawfull for them to deflowre as many young Virgins as they will or can get, and thoſe which bee any thing beautifull, bee carryed away with them, and conſtrained to ſerue continually in extreame penurie of all things. The Tartarians of all men be moſt incontinent, for although they may marry as many wiues as they will, or as they bee able to keepe, and that they bee not forbidden mariage with any degree of affinitie, or conſanguinity (mothers, daughters, and ſiſters onely excepted) yet bee they exceedingly giuen to the ſinne of Sodome, accompanying both with their owne ſex and with beaſts, as vilely as the Sarraſins, without eyther difference or puniſhment: They account not the woman which they marry for their wife, nor yet receiue her dower before ſhee hath had a childe, and if ſhee bee barren it is

lawfull for them to put her a way and to marry another. And this is ſtrange, that although many women haue but one husband, yet they neuer fall out for him amongſt them-ſelues, although one bee preferred before another, and hee ſleepeth now with one, and by and by with another, and euery one of theſe wiues haue their abyding place by them-ſelues, and euery one keepeth her owne family. They liue moſt chaſt from other mens wiues, for as well the men as women which bee taken in adultery, ſuffer death by their lawe: thoſe men which bee not trayned vp in the warres, keepe Cattell in the fields, practiſe hunting and wreſtling, without doing any other domeſticall buſineſſe but commit all to women vpon whoſe care it reſteth to prouide all things neceſſary both for victualls and clothing.
               This nation obſerueth many ſuperſtitions, for to put a knife into the fire, or at the leaſt to let it touch the fire, or to pull fleſh out of a potte with a knife, is held a great offence, moreouer they cut nothing with a hatchet neere vnto the fire, leaſt they ſhould hurt it any manner of way, for they honour the fire moſt religiouſly, perſwading them-ſelues that there-with all things ought to bee purified and clenſed.
               They greatly abhore to lay either their body or armes, when they ſleepe or take their reſt, vpon a whippe where-with they driue their horſes, (for ſpurres they vſe none) or to tuch their darts with a whip; and yong men doe not onely auoyd the killing of birds, but the taking of them alſo: they will not beate a horſe with his brydle nor breake one bone with an other, nor yet ſpend ether meate or drinke out of meaſure and eſpecially milke, noe one dare piſſe within his pauillion or manſion houſe, for if

any one doe it abſtinately, he is put to death without mercy, but if neceſſity conſtraine one to doe it, as oftentimes it happeneth, then the tent or pauilion wherein it was done, and all things within it, ought to bee purged and clenſed, on this manner: Firſt they make two fires three paces diſtant one from another, betwixt which they faſten two forkes or iauelins vpright in the ground, by each fire one, then drawing a cord from the one fire to the other, they carry forth through the middle of the iauelins, as it were through a gate, all things which are to be purified, two women (to whome the buſineſſe is committed) ſtanding vpon the other ſide, one ouer againſt an other, caſting water vpon the ſtuffe, and muttering out certaine verſes to themſelues.
               No ſtranger is admitted into the kings preſence, of what eſtate or dignity ſoeuer he be, and be his buſineſſe of neuer ſo much importance, vnleſſe he bee firſt purified: he that ſpurneth with his foote at the threſhould of the pauillion, wherein the Emperor, or any Prince dwelleth, is ſlaine in the very place: moreouer if any one bite a bit of any thing which he cannot ſwallow downe, but is forced to vomit it vp againe, all the people fall vpon him, and digging a hole vnder his pauillion drag him through it, and ſo kill him moſt cruelly, there bee many other ſuch friuolous things which they account as ſins that cannot bee purged, or appeaſed, but to kill a man, to enter vpon another mans poſſeſſion, to take other mens goods violently, without right or equity, and to neglect the commandements of God, they account as little or no offences.
               They beleeue that after this life they ſhall liue eternally in an other world, but what that world is they cannot deſcribe, and that they ſhall there

be rewarded according to their merits. When any one is ſick, and draweth neere vnto death, they ſet a ſpeare at the tent doore, wherein hee lyeth, with a black cloth at the end of it, to the end that thoſe which paſſe by, ſeeing it, may forbeare to enter in, and no one dare come in though hee be called, if he ſee the ſpeare: but when the ſick perſon is dead, all his family meeting together carry the coarſe priuily out of the tent, into a place (choſen before for the purpoſe) where is made a great large pit, in which pit they build a little pauillion, and ſet in it a table furniſhed with diuerſe diſhes of meate, then ſetting thereat the dead corps attired with rich and gorgious garments, they forthwith couer them altogether with earth, he hath alſo one labouring beaſt, and one trapped horſe buried with him: The great men chooſe out one ſeruant in their life time, vpon whom they ſet their owne marke, with a marking yron, to bee intombed with him when hee is dead, and this they doe, that they may make vſe of them in an other world. After all this, the mans friends that is dead take an other horſe, and killing him, and eating his fleſh, and then filling the hide full of haye, and ſowing it vp againe, they ſet it vpon foure ſtakes vpon the topp of the Sepulcher, to ſhew that there the dead man lyeth, which done, the women burne the horſes bones for the expiation of the dead mans ghoſt. But the richer ſort cut the horſe hide into ſlender thongs, and extending them in length, meaſure out there-with a circuite of ground round about their dead friends Sepulcher, beleeuing that the dead man ſhall obtaine ſo much ground in an other world, as by his friends ſhall bee meaſured out vnto him, with thoſe thongs: all theſe ceremonies performed, vpon the thirtith day they leaue of their mourning.
               
                  
There be ſome Tartarians which be a kind of Chriſtians but very bad ones, and theſe to haſten their fathers deaths Some Tartarians are Chriſtians, but very bad ones. when they waxe old, cram and feed them with fat meate, and when they be dead burne them, and gathering vp the aſhes as cleane as they can, eſteeme them as a very precious relicke, ſeaſoning their meate daily therewith. Now with what pompe and iollity the Tartarians after the death of their King, elect and appoint another in his roome, becauſe it is ouer-troubleſome to be writ at large, and perhaps as tedious to be read, I will vnfold in few words: the Princes, Dukes, Barons, and all the people of the kingdom, How the Tartarlans elect their Kings. aſſembling themſelues together in a place in the open fields, fitte and accuſtomed for that purpoſe, place him to whom the kindome is due, (either by ſucceſſion or election) in a throne of gold, and all of them proſtrating themſelues before him, cry out with a lowd voice, and with one conſent, in this maner. We wiſh, will, and command thee, to be our gouernor, to whom hee anſwereth; If you will haue it ſo, I muſt needs be content, but then be you ready to do what euer I command, to come when I call you, to goe whether I ſend you, and who euer I bid to be ſlaine to do it without feare, and to giue and commit all the whole kingdome into my hands: and when they haue anſwered, we are ready and willing: he ſaith againe vnto them; you ſhall hereafter ſtand in as much awe of my word, as of my ſword, at which ſpeach the people giue a great applauſe: then the Princes taking him from his Kingly throne, and cauſing him to ſitt downe humbly vpon a cloth laid vpon the ground, ſay thus vnto him; looke vpwards towards heauen and acknowledge God, and behold downwards the cloath, whereon thou ſitteſt, if thou gouerne well, thou ſhalt haue all things according to thine owne

deſire, but on the other ſide, if thou rule naughtily, thou ſhalt bee ſo humbled and ſpoiled of all thou haſt, as thou ſhalt not haue left thee ſo much as this little cloth, whereon thou ſitteſt: which ſaid they giue vnto him that wife which he loueth beſt, and lifting them vp both together vpon the cloth, ſalute him as Emperour of all the Tartarians and ſhe as Empreſſe, then is hee forthwith preſented with gifts from all people, ouer whom hee is Emperour, and all thoſe things which the dead King leſt behind him, be brought vnto him likewiſe, of which the new Emperor giueth vnto each Prince ſome, and commandeth the reſt to bee kept for himſelfe, which done, hee diſſolueth the company: all things be in the Kings hands and power, no man can or dare ſay this is mine, or that is his, nor no one may dwell in any part of his dominion, but where hee is aſſigned; the Emperor himſelfe diſtributeth a proportion of land to the Dukes, the Dukes to thoſe which bee Captaines of thouſands, the Captaines of thouſands to the gouernors of hundreds, the gouernors of hundreds to the rulers of ten, and the rulers of ten, diſtribute to all the reſt. The ſeale which the King vſeth hath this inſcription, Deus in coelo & Chuichuth Cham in terra: the ſtrength of God, and Emperor of all men. He hath fiue very ſtrong and puiſſant armies, & fiue Dukes by whom he maketh warr with all that refiſt him, hee neuer ſpeaketh with the Legats or embaſſadors of other nations, nor admitteth them into his preſence, vnleſſe both they & their gifts (for without gifts they dare not come) be firſt purged by certaine women aſfigned to that buſineſſe: he anſwereth in the middle of the people, and all men to whom he ſpeaketh ought to liſten vnto him, kneeling vpon their knees, when & how long ſoeuer his ſpeech be, and ſo diligently to attend his words

as they miſconſter not his meaning in any point, for it is not lawfull for any to alter the Emperours words, nor in any ſort to contradict or gaine-ſay the ſentence hee pronounceth: hee neuer drinketh in any publick aſſembly, nor yet any other Tartarian Prince, vnleſſe ſome doe ſing and play vnto him vppon a harpe before hee drinke, and men of great worth when they ride, are ſhadowed with a certaine fanne or curtaine, faſtned to a long ſpeare and caried before them, which cuſtome is ſaid to be vſed alſo by the women: And theſe were the cuſtomes and maner of liuing of the people of Tartary, about two hundred yeares ſithence.
               The Georgiani (whom the Tartarians ouercame much about that time) were worſhippers of Chriſt; obſeruing The Georgians a kinde of Chriſtians. the cuſtome of the Greeke Church, they dwelt neere vnto the Perſians, and their dominion extended a length wayes, from Paleſtine to the Caſpian hilles: they had eighteene Biſhopricks, and one Catholicke or vniuerſall Biſhop, who was inſteed of a Patriarch: at the firſt they were ſubiect to the Patriarch of Antioch, the men be very warlike, their Prieſts heads bee ſhauen round, and the lay-men foure ſquare; ſome of their women were trained vp in the warres, and ſerued on horſeback. The Georgians hauing diſpoſed their armies, and entering into the battell, were wonte to carouſe a gourd as bigge as ones fiſt, filled full of the beſt wine, and then to ſet vpon their enimies with greater courage: The Cleargie bee much addicted to vſury and ſymonie; there was mutuall and perpetuall enmity betwixt the Armenians and them. The The Armenians were Chriſtians likewiſe, till they were vanquiſhed by the Tartarians Armenians were Chriſtians alſo, vntill the Tartarians, after they had ſubdued the Georgians ouer-came them likewiſe, but they diſagreed in many things from the faith,

and approoued faſhion of the true Church: they knew not the day of our Lords natiuitie, for they obſerued no feaſts, nor no vigils, nor yet the foure Ember weekes, they feaſted not vpon Eaſter Eue, alledging that Chriſt roſe from the dead, about the euening of that day: they would eate fleſh vpon euery Friday, betwixt the feaſts of Eaſter and Penticoſt, yet they faſted much, beginning their faſt ſo ſtrictly and preciſely in Lent, as they would neither vſe oyle, wine, nor fiſh, vpon Fridayes and Wedneſdayes throughout the whole Lent, holding it a greater ſinne to drinke wine on thoſe dayes, then to lye with a ſtrumpet in a brothell houſe: Vpon Mondayes they abſtained wholy from all meates, vpon Tueſdayes and Thurſdayes they did eate once, and receiued no ſuſtenance at all vpon Wedneſdayes and Fridayes, but vpon Saterdayes and Sundayes they would eate fleſh, and refreſh themſelues well. They would not celebrate the office of the Maſſe throughout all Lent but vpon Saterdaies and Sundaies, nor vpon Fridayes throughout the whole yeare, for thereby (as they were of opinion) they brake and violated their faſts: Infants moreouer of the age of two months, and all others whatſoeuer were indifferently admitted to their communion, and they put no water into the Sacrifice. In the vſe of Hares, Beares, Choughes, and ſuch other like creatures, they imitated the Iewes, as well as the Greekes, they celebrated their Maſſes in glaſſe and wodden Chalices, and ſome hauing no paraments nor Prieſt-like veſtiments at all, ſome of them alſo wore Miters belonging to Deacons or Subdeacons: both Clergie and Lay-men, allowed of vſury and Symony, as well as the Georgians: the Prieſts exerciſed themſelues in Diuinations and Negromancie, they vſed more drinking then lay men, and all of them

had, or might haue wiues, but after the death of one wife, as well lay-men as the clergy men were prohibited to marry againe, the Biſhops gaue liberty to any to put away their wiues that were ſound in adultery, and to marry an other: they beleeued not that there is a purgatory, and obſtinately denyed that there was two natures in Chriſt. The Georgians report, that they erred in thirty articles from the right path and diameter of Chriſtian religion.
            
            
               
                  Of Turcia, and of all the manners, lawes and ordinances of the Turkes. CHAP. 11.
               
                  THat country which is now called Turcia or Turkie, hath vpon the Eaſt the greater Armenia, The limits of Turkie. and extendeth to the Cilicke ſea, vpon the North it is bounded with the Euxine ſea: Aitonus calleth it Turquia, it conſiſteth of many Prouinces, as Lycaonia, wherein Iconium is the chiefe towne; Cappadocia, where Ceſaria is chiefe citty of the Prouince; Iſauria where Seleucia is head; Licia now called Briquia: Ionia now called Quiſcum, wherein ſtandeth the citty of Epheſus, Paphlagonia where Germanopolis, and Lenech where Trapezus be chiefe cities: All this vaſt country which is now called Turcia, is not inhabited by one onely people, but by Turkes, Greekes, Armenians, Turkie inhabited by people of ſundry nations. Sarraſins, Iacobitans, Neſtorians, Iewes & Chriſtians, all of them for the moſt part, liuing after the lawes and inſtitutions, which that falſe Prophet Mahomet a Sarraſin, ordained for the people of Arabia, in the yeare of Mahomet his parentage. our Sauiour Chriſt 631. This Mahomet ſome ſay was an Arabian, ſome a Perſian, but whether he was it is doubtfull, but his father was certainly a worſhipper of euill ſpirits

& his mother an Iſmaelite, and therfore not ignorant in the true law: now whilſt his father and mother inſtructed him in both their lawes, they diſtracted the boy, and made him doubtfull and wauering betwixt both, ſo as being trained vp in both religions, when hee grew of mans eſtate, he followed neither of them, but being a very craſty fellow, & of a ſubtill wit, and long conuerſant with Chriſtians, he framed and inuented out of both thoſe lawes, a religion moſt dangerous and pernicious to all mankinde. Firſt he affirmed, that the Iewes did very ill in denying that Chriſt ſhould be borne of a Virgin, ſeeing that the Prophets, men of wonderfull ſanctity and integrity of life, & indued with the ſpirit of God, did long before propheſie and ſoreſhew that it ſhould be ſo, and that hee was to bee expected: on the other ſide, he condemned the Chriſtians folly, in beleeuing that Ieſus the deereſt friend of God, & borne of a Virgin, would ſuffer reproches & puniſhments of the Iewes: Martinus Segonius Nouomontanus hath written thus of the Sepulcher of Chriſt our King and Lord. The Sarraſins and Turkes (ſaith he) (by the ancient preaching of Mahomet) laugh the Chriſtians to ſcorne, which attribute any honor to that Sepulcher, affirming that the great Prophet Chriſt proceeded from the ſpirit of God, that he was voide of all earthly blot or ſinne, and that hee he ſhall come to be iudge of all people, but that they may approach vnto his true Sepulcher, they vtterly deny, becauſe his glorious body, conceiued by the diuine ſpirit, was altogether impaſſible: thus much hath Segonius written, & more to the ſame purpoſe, which the Mahometans are wont to caſt in our teeth, with as much folly as impiety: when that falſe Prophet Mahomet had infected his people & nation, with theſe peſtilent euils, he made & eſtabliſhed a law, and (leaſt by men of vnderſtanding it might be

reſiſted and abrogated) hee ordained a capitall puniſhment againſt the breakers thereof, commanding and decreeing in his Alcaron, that no one ſhould preſume vpon paine of death to diſpute thereof, by which ordinance and decree, it appeared moſt euidently, that in that law was no ſincerity, which as a hidden miſtery hee couered and ſealed vp ſo cloſely, that all men were forbidden to meddle with it, ſo as the people ſhould not by any meanes know what that was which hee had done. In the dooing Sergius the Munck a helper of Mahomet.
                   whereof, and in ſetling his new ſect, hee chiefly vſed the councell and helpe of Sergius a Monke, and a Neſtorian heretick: and to the end his law might be more populer and better eſteemed of all nations, hee tooke ſome-thing Mahomets lawes compounded of diuerſe ſects. out of all ſects, of euery nation, holding firſt that Chriſt is much to bee praiſed, and affirming him to bee a man of great ſanctity, and of ſingular vertue, and that hee was of more then humaine condition, calling him ſometimes the word, ſome-times the ſpirit, and ſome-times the very ſoule, life, or breath of God, and that hee was borne of a Virgin: then did he greatly extoll the Virgin Mary, aſſenting to the myracles written by the Euangeliſts, ſo farre as they diſagreed not from his Alcaron. The Goſpels hee ſaid were corrupted by the Apoſtles Diſciples, and therefore ought to be corrected by his Alcaron, and the more to win and allure the mindes and affections of the Chriſtians vnto him, he would needs bee baptiſed by Sergius, and then to procure the good-will of other ſects, he denied the Trinity with the Sabellians, affirming with the Manechees, that there were but two perſons in diuinitie: hee denied that the Sonne is equall to the Father with Eunomius; with Macedonius he held that the holy Ghoſt is a creature: with the Nicholites, that it is lawfull for one

man to haue many wiues, and hee allowed of the old Teſtament, although (ſaid he) it is faulty in many places: with theſe circumſtantiall tales, he couered an incredible allurement wherewith mens mindes bee ſoneſt intyſed, which was, the giuing to his people free liberty and power to purſue their luſtes and all other pleaſures, for by theſe meanes, this peſtilent religion hath crept into innumerable Nations, ſo as now how few the number of true beleeuers is, in reſpect of the great multitude of misbeleeuers, may well bee gathered by this. That not all Europe profeſſe Chriſt, but the greateſt part thereof, together with all Aſia and Affricke, beleeue in Mahomet and his accurſed religion.
               The Sarraſins which firſt imbraced the impiety and madneſſe of that falſe prophet Mahomet, inhabited in that part of Arabia which is called Petrea, there where the land vpon the one ſide ioyneth to Iudaea and Aegipt, and they bee called Sarraſins of a place called Sarracus neere vnto the people called Nabathei, or (as they themſelues would haue it) of Sara the wife of Abraham, wherevpon they yet perſwade themſelues, that of all men they bee the ligitimate and ſole ſucceſſors of the diuine promiſe. Some of them were husbandmen, ſome followed their flockes, but the greateſt part were ſouldiors, and beeing hired and retained by Heraclius to ſerue in the Perſian warres, and finding themſelues deceiued by him, after hee had obtained the victory, they (incenced with ire and ignominie) departed thence into Syria, hauing a Mahomet for their captaine and councellor, where they won Damaſcus, and then, their army and prouiſion neceſſary for the warres increaſing more and more, they made warres vpon Aegipt and brought it to ſubiection, after

that they ſubdued Perſis, Antioch and Ieruſalem, and ſo augmenting and increaſing euery day both in fame and force, voide of all feare of any that could reſiſt them, the Turkes, a cruell and barbarous nation of Scythia, beeing by their neighbours expulſed from the Caſpian hilles, deſcending by the narrow paſſages of the hil Caucaſus, firſt into Aſia the leſſe, and after that into Armenia, Media and Perſis, by their force and armes brought all thoſe people vnder their ſubiection and gouernment, when the Sarraſins to defend the confins of their Country, went forth to meete the Turkes, but being not able to make their partie good and to encounter them, they were in very ſhort time brought to ſuch deſperations, as they were contented the Turkes ſhould raigne with them in Perſia, ſo as the would imbrace the faith of Mahomet: ſo as whether nation had the greater loſſe can hardly bee iudged, either they that departed from ſuch a Kingdome, or thoſe which for deſire of rule were forced to receiue ſo peſtilent a religion.
               And both Nations beeing thus bound with the bonds of one religion, were for a ſpace ſo confounded in name, as there was no difference betwixt Turkes and Sarraſins, yet now the name of Turkes is onely knowne and the other vtterly aboliſhed and forgotten: There bee diuers ſorts of horſemen that ſerue in the warres amongſt the Turkes: As firſt the Thimarcini, which bee ſuch The manner of the Turkes warfare. as dwell in Citties and pay tribute, and are to the number of foureſcore thouſand: and theſe by the Kings leaue and permiſſion poſſeſſe (in the nature of pay or wages) townes, villages and caſtles, each one as hee deſerueth, and bee euer readie at the call of the Senſachus

(that is hee, that is captaine of that Prouince to whom they pay tribute:) they bee now deuided into two armies, one in Aſia, the other in Europe, vnder the conduct of two great captaines, whereof one gouerneth in Aſia and the other in Europe: Which captaines in their Countries ſpeech bee called Baſſaes: the other ſort of ſouldiers bee naturall, and are called Aconiziae: Theſe ſerue in the warres without wages, and alwaies goe before the company of footmen for prey, yeelding the fifth part of their prey vnto the King, in the name of the chiefe captaines or generalls part of the bootie, and of theſe there be about the number of ſome fortie thouſand.
               The third ſort bee the Charrippi, the Spahiglani and the Soluphtari, the beſt of which bee they Charippi, and the moſt famos ſouldiors in dignity; theſe continually attend vpon the King, and be about eight hundred in number, all elected out of the Scythians and Perſians, and of no other nation elſe, and theſe are to fight venterouſly, in the preſence of the King when need requireth.
               The Spahi and Soluphtari, are ſuch as at the firſt when they were children attended vpon the King to doe ſome vile and diſhonourable buſineſſe, but when they once become to bee of mans eſtate, the King giueth them power to marry wiues, ſo as they growing greater by their wiues dower and by their wages, doe for the moſt part execute the Office of Orators, garding and attending vpon each ſide of the King, when hee goeth abroade, and of theſe there bee a thouſand and three hundred: out of this order be elected, for the moſt part, all the chiefe Gouernours, and men of great authority and dignity.
               
                  
There bee three orders of footemen, firſt the Ianizaries, Three ſorts of footmen. who while they be young vnder the age of twelue yeeres, bee elected out of the whole Empire by the Serchers, Inquiſitors or Muſter-maiſters, and for a ſpace trained vp in military diſcipline in publicke places of excerciſe, and then ſent into the warres cloathed in ſhort garments, and round cappes, turning vpwards, and armed with ſhields, ſwords and bowes, theſe defend the camps and beſiege Citties, and are more in number then twentie thouſand.
               The Aſappi be of the ſecond order, which be footmen armed with a light armor, they vſe ſwords, ſhields & long ſpeares, and weare red caps to diſtinguiſh them from the Ianizaries, theſe gal the enemies horſes in battaile, and the number of them is anſwerable to the greatneſſe of the army, and at the leaſt 4000. of them goe with the King, and it is decreed that their wages ſhall ſurceaſe, when the wars are ended. The regall army conſiſteth of two hundred thouſand fighting men, but the company of footmen, which be either voluntaries, or ſuch as haue bin diſmiſſed from the wars, and bee ſommoned to ſerue againe, ſerue without wages, & with theſe be mixed ſlaues, pages, skullions and drudges, carpenters, pioners and victuallers of the campe. Theſe make waies euen and plaine in rugged and rough places, build bridges ouer riuers & pooles, erect Rampires and Bulwarkes againſt the enemie, and make all others things ready, which be profitable for the aſſaulting and conquering of Citties: Vſurers, Bankers, Exchangers and Brokers that ſell garments for ſouldiors, and an infinite rabble of ſuch like people, follow the campe alſo, leaſt any thing ſhould bee wanting that is neceſſary for the ſouldiors.
               
                  
But their is no one thing ſo much to bee admired and wondred at in that people, as their celerity in action, their conſtancy and perſeuerance in dangers, and their obedience of gouernment: for they looſe their liues for the leaſt offence that is: they wil ſwim deepe riuers and whitlepits, clime the ſteepeſt hils, and when they be commanded run head-long through thicke or thin, rough or ſmooth, not ſo much regarding their liues as the will of the commander: they moſt patiently endure both watching and want, their is no ſedition, no tumult, no clamors or outcries rayſed in their armies, and in the night time there is ſuch continual and huſht ſilence in their campes, as they wil rather ſuffer captiues to eſcape, then to haue any tumults or hurly burly raiſed amongſt them.
               Of all men now liuing the Turkes make warres moſt orderly, ſo that it needs not ſeeme ſtrange to any, what the cauſe ſhould bee that hath raiſed them to this height at this day, that about two hundred yeeres ſince there was no nation like them. For it may bee truely ſaid of them that they bee an inuincible Nation, vnleſſe they bee vanquiſhed by ſome great plague or peſtilence, or elſe by ciuill deſſention amongſt themſelues.
               The ſouldiours bee attired verie comely, wearing nothing that is vndecent or vnhoneſt: in their ſaddles and bridles is neither curioſitie nor ſuperfluity, and none of them goe armed but when they be in fight, and at other times they haue their armour carried after them in cariages. They vſe no Standards or Enſigns, but Launces, vpon the tops whereof hang downe certaine threeds of diuers ſundrie collours, by which each captaine is knowne of his company, yet they vſe drummes and phyſes to ſummon and incite them to fight: the battaile

finiſhed, all the army is ſet in readineſſe, and viewed by the Regiſter (who is one of the noble men) that they may know, who and how many were ſlaine in the fight, and for the ordaining of others in their places.
               In all their aſſemblies and banquets they pray for the ſouldiours, but more deuoutly for ſuch as were ſlaine in defence of their country, eſteeming thoſe happy and bleſſed, that died not at home, amidſt the ſorrow and lamentations of their wiues and children, but abroad amongſt the out-cries of their enemies, clattering of armour, and ſhattering of ſpeares.
               They deſcribe, extoll and chaunt out the victories of their anceſtors, thinking thereby to make their ſouldiours more forward and couragious: Their buildings and dwelling houſes bee made for the moſt part of timber and morter, and very few of ſtone, vnleſſe the houſes of great men, Bathes and Temples, which be commonly builded of ſtone, & yet there be ſome of the Plebeians, or common people, of ſuch exceeding wealth, as ſome one alone is able of himſelfe to furniſh and ſet forth a whole army, but beeing (as indeed they are) very frugal, and ſhunning all ſumptuouſneſſe, they cheriſh humility, and patiently indure this voluntary pouerty. And for this cauſe they vtterly renounce all pictures, and ſo much abhorre and deteſt the caruing of Images, as they terme Chriſtians Idolaters, becauſe they bee delighted in theſe things, contending that they affirme the truth in ſaying ſo: They vſe no ſeales at all to their letters, neither the King nor no man elſe, but giue credit ſo ſoone as they heare the name of him that ſent it, or view the ſtile of the writer, neither is there any vſe of belles, no not ſo much as any of the Chriſtians that dwelleth amongſt

them are once permitted to vſe them. They play at no game for money or any thing elſe, but perſecute all gameſters with many ignominies and reproaches, no man of what dignitie, eſtate or condition ſoeuer hee is of, deſireth to ſit vpon any ſtoole, forme or ſeate, to ſuſtaine him from the ground, but diſpoſing and placeing his bodie, and garments, in comelie and decent order, ſitteth him downe vpon the ground, as children doe: The table wherevpon they eate their meate, is made (for the moſt part) of an oxe-hide, or of a ſtagges skin vndreſt and the haire on, beeing made rounde and ſome foure or fiue handfull in breadth, and with many iron rings ſowed vnto the ſides thereof, through which they put a leatherne thong, by which deuiſe, it is opened, ſhut and carried like a purſe.
               No one doth enter into any houſe, Church or other place wherein they may ſit, but they muſt firſt put off their ſhooes, for they account it vnhoneſt and vndecent, for any one to ſit with his ſhooes on, and therefore they vſe ſuch manner of ſhooes as they can eaſily put off and on.
               The places wherein they ſit either in their houſes or Churches are couered with courſe woollen blankets, or elſe with mats, and ſometimes by reaſon of the baſeneſſe and vncleanneſſe of the places, they be borded or plancked. Both men and women weare long and large garments, made open with a ſlit before, that they may the better couer, and bend themſelues when they purge their bodies of their naturall excrementes, in doing whereof, they bee very preciſe that they turne not their faces towardes the Sunne ryſing, which way the doe turne themſelues when they pray, they bee very carefull

likewiſe, that in doing thereof, no one ſee them, leaſt their ſhamefull and vncleane partes ſhould bee diſcouered, the men make water as the women doe with vs, bending themſelues, for if any man doth piſſe ſtanding, hee is of all men held either for an Idiot or an hereticke: They bee compelled by a law, to abſtaine from wine as the nurſe, garder, or ſeminary of all ſinne and filthineſſe, yet they eate grapes and drinke Muſte.
               They abſtaine likewiſe from all ſwines fleſh and ſwines bloud, and from all carraine, and things that die Friday a ſolemne holy day with the Turkes. of themſelues, eating all other things that bee to bee eaten and mans meate, the Turkes keepe Friday holiday with as much deuotion and religion, as wee do our Lords day, or the Iewes their ſabboth.
               In euery Cittie is one principall Church, into which vpon that day in the after-noone, all people aſſemble themſelues to praier, and praier beeing ſolemnly ended, they haue a ſermon, wherein they acknowledge one God and that there is none like or equall vnto him, and that Mahomet is his faithfull Prophet.
               All the Sarraſins or Turkes ought to pray euery daie fiue times, with their faces towardes the Sunne ryſing, and before they goe to praier to haue their bodies perfectly cleere, and decently to waſh both fundament, yarde, hands, armes, mouth, eares, noſtrils, eyes and the haires of their heads, and laſt of all their feete, and this they ought to do more ſtrictly & preciſely, after their companying with women, and purging their bodies, vnleſſe they bee either ſicke or traueling, but if at any time water bee wanting to waſh in, which happeneth but verie ſeldome, or neuer (for that in euerie Cittie

be baths for that purpoſe) then they ſupply the want thereof with the duſt of cleane and freſh earth: and hee which is defiled with any pollution, permits no one (as much as is poſſible) either to ſpeake vnto him, or yet to ſee him before he be waſhed and made cleane: they faſt fiue weeks in euery yeare very ſtrictly, neither eating nor drinking any thing of all the day before Sunne-ſetting, nor accompanying with women: but from the Sunne going downe, vntill his riſing the next morning they ſpend the whole time at their pleaſures, in eating, drinking, and venerie: vppon the ſixtieth day from the beginning of their faſt, they celebrate their Paſſe-ouer, in memory of the Ramme, which was ſhewed vnto Abraham for a ſacrifice in his ſonnes ſteade: and in memorie of a certaine night, wherein they dreame their Alcoran was giuen them from heauen.
               The Turkes ought once euery yeare alſo to go to the Temple which is in Mecha, both for the profeſſion of their religion, as alſo to yeeld the annuall honors due vnto Mahomet, whoſe ſepulchre is there kept and worſhipped.
               The Sarraſins force no man to forſake their faith, and Religion, neither will they perſwade any one to theirs, although their Alcoran command them, to afflict, and by all meanes to proſecute their aduerſaries in Religion and their Prophets. Whereof it commeth to paſſe, that in Turkie dwell people of all Sects and Religions, and euery Sect doth ſacrifice vnto his God, according to their owne cuſtomes.
               Moreouer; there is no great difference betwixt the Prieſtes, and the lay-people, betwixt their Temples, and their ordinarie habitations and dwelling houſes: for it is ſufficient for the Prieſtes to know the Alchoran,
                  
and what things appertaine to prayer, and the worſhip of their law, without ſpending any time in meditations, or obtaining of learning, neither do they take vpon them the cure of ſoules, or care of churches: Sacraments they haue none, they make no obſeruation of Relickes, ſacred Veſſels or Altars, but poſſeſſing wiues, children and families, apply their time like lay-men, in husbandrie, merchandize, buying and ſelling, hunting, and ſuch like labours and exerciſes, to get their liuing: there is nothing vnlawfull for them to do, nor any thing prohibited: they be freed from ſeruitude and exactions, and be reuerenced and honoured of all men, as thoſe that vnderſtand the ceremonies of their law, gouern their churches, and be able to inſtruct others. They haue many and great ſcholes, wherein, be great multitudes inſtructed in the ciuil lawes ordained by their kings for the gouernement and defence of their kingdome, of whome ſome be afterwards made rulers of Churches, and ſome of other ſecular offices.
               In that ſect be diuers ſorts alſo of religious perſons, of which, ſome liuing in woods and deſerts, flie the fellowſhip and conuerſation of all men: ſome other liuing in citties, practiſe hoſpitalitie towards poore trauellers, allowing them houſe-room and lodging at the leaſt, if they haue not meate to refreſh them, for they themſelues liue by begging. There be ſome others likewiſe, that wandring through the citties, carrie wholeſome and freſh water in certaine bottles, giuing thereof to drinke to euery one that demandeth. For which religious act, if any one giue them any thing, they will receiue it, though they deſire nothing at all, carrying ſuch boaſt and oſtentation of ſanctitie and religion, both in their words and deeds, manners and behauior, as they may rather be thought Angels then

men, and euery one carieth a certain badge or ſigne, wherby he may be diſcerned of what profeſſion hee is of. The Sarraſins or Turkes be very ſtrict obſeruers and maintainers of Iuſtice: for he that ſheddeth another mans bloud, ſhall haue the like puniſhment himſelfe: he that is found in adulterie, ſhall (together with the adultereſſe) be ſtoned to death without mercie or delay: there is an expreſſe puniſhment alſo for fornicators; for hee that is found guiltie of fornication, ſhall ſuffer eight hundred ſtripes with a whip: A theefe for the firſt and ſecond offence ſhall ſuffer the like puniſhment; for the third fault he ſhall haue his hand cut off, and his foote for the fourth: he which iniureth another ſhall make him ſatisfaction according to the quantitie of the wrong done. In caſe of extortion of goods and poſſeſſions, it is ordained by a law, that the thing required ſhall be prooued by witneſſes, and that the defendant ſhall purge himſelfe by his oath. They admit no witneſſes, but ſuch as be honeſt and fit perſons, and whoſe teſtimonie may be taken without oath. There bee throughout the whole nation diuers Inquiſitors or ſearchers, who finding out thoſe that neglect the forme of prayer, to which they are all inioyned, afflict and puniſh them, by hanging about their neckes, a table or paper with many foxe tayles, and ſo leading them throughout the citie, diſmiſſe them not, vntill they haue payd a certaine ſumme of money for ther libertie. And this ignominie and reproch is accounted an extreame puniſhment: no one that is of full age, may liue vnmarried, and euery one may haue foure lawfull wiues, and (mothers and ſiſters onely excepted) may marry whom they liſt, without reſpect of kindred, and beſides the foure lawfull wiues, they may haue as many concubines as they pleaſe, or be able to maintaine: and as wel

the children that be borne of their concubines, as of their lawfull wiues, ſhall equally inherit their fathers goods, only this is obſerued, that one ſonne ſhall haue as much as two daughters: no one may keepe two or more wiues in one houſe, nor yet in one cittie, for auoyding of ſcolding, contention, and vnquietneſſe that would bee amongſt them: but in euery city they may keepe one, and the husbands háue liberty to be diuorced from their wiues three ſundrie times, and ſo oft to take them againe: and the woman diuorced may ſtay with her husband that receiueth her againe, if ſhe pleaſe. The Turkiſh women be very decent in their apparell, vpon their heades they weare myters, ſet vpon the top of their veiles, wherwith their heads beeing bound in a comely faſhion, one ſide or edge of the veile hangeth downe vpon the right or left ſide of their heades, wherewith if they go from home, or come into their husbands preſence at home, they may foorth-with couer or maske their whole faces, but their eyes: for the wife of a Turke dare neuer come where a company of men be gathered together: neither is it lawfull for them to go to markets to buy and ſell. Likewiſe in their great Temple, the women haue a place farre remote from men, and ſhut vp ſo cloſe, as no one can come to them, nor hardly ſee them. Which cloſet is not allowed for all women, but onely for the wiues of noble men or heade Officers, and that onely vpon Friday, at their noone-tide prayer, which they obſerue with great ſolemnitie (as is ſaid) and at no times elſe. There is ſeldome any ſpeech or conference betwixt men and women, in any publike place, it beeing ſo out of cuſtome, as if you ſhould ſtay with them a whole yeare, you ſhold hardly ſee it once, but for a man to ſit or ride with a woman, is accounted

monſtrous: married couples do neuer dally or chide in the preſence of others, for the husbands do neuer remitte the leaſt iot of their authoritie ouer their wiues, neither will the wiues omit their obedience towards their husbands. The great Lords that cannot alwaies tarry with their wiues themſelues, depute and ſet Eunuchs to be keepers ouer them, which obſerue and watch them ſo warily, as it is vnpoſſible for them to talke with any man but their husbands, or to play falſe play with their husbands.
               To conclude, the Sarrafins yeeld ſo much credit to Mahomet and his lawes, as they promiſe aſſured happines and ſaluation to the keepers thereof: to wit, a paradiſe abounding with all pleaſures, a garden ſituated in a pure and temperate Climate, watered on all parts with moſt ſweete and delectable waters, where they ſhall enioy all things at pleaſure; dainties of all ſorts to feede them, ſilkes and purple to cloath them, beautifull damfels euer readie at a call to attend them with ſiluer and golden veſſels, and that Angels ſhall bee their cuppe-bearers; and miniſter vnto them milke in golden cuppes, and red wines in ſiluer.
               And on the other ſide, they threaten hell, and eternall damnation to the tranſgreſſors of his lawes. And this alſo they firmely beleeue, that though a man haue beene neuer ſo great a ſinner, yet if at his death, he onely beleeue in God and in Mahomet, he ſhall be ſaued.
            
            
               
               
                  The manners and cuſtomes Of the Chriſtians, and of their originall, and Cuſtomes. CAP. 12.
               
                  CHRIST Ieſus (the true and euerlaſting Sonne of God the Father omnipotent, the ſecond Perſon in the holy, indiuidual, coequall, and eternall Trinitie, by his incomprehenſible decree and myſterie hidden from the world, to the end that hee might raiſe and reduce vs miſerable, and vnfortunate wretches, loſt and forlorne by the diſobedience of our fore-fathers Adam and Eue, and therefore for many ages exiled and excluded out of the heauenly countrie, and in heauen to repaire the auncient ruine of Lucifer, and the Angels for pride expelled thence, (for ſupply of which vacancie we were chiefly created,) was, one thouſand, ſixe hundred and ten yeares ſince (by the co-operation and working of the holy Ghoſt) conceiued man, and borne in Iudaea of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, being of the houſe and lineage of Dauid: from the thirtith yeare of whoſe age vnto the 34. (at which time through the enuie and hatred of the Iewes, he was crucified,) he trauerſed ouer all the land of Iudaea, exhorting the Iewes, from the ancient law of Moſes; and the Gentils, from the prophane worſhip of Idols, vnto his new doctrine and religion: thoſe followers which he could get, he called his diſciples; out of which, electing twelue, and appearing vnto them aliue after his death, (as hee had fore-told them he would) he gaue them commiſſion, that as his Legats and Apoſtles, they ſhold go into all places of the world, and preach to all people ſuch things as they had ſeene and learned of him. Simon Peter (who long before

was by Chriſt ordained chiefe head & ruler of his Church after him, when (after the receiuing of the holy Ghoſt) the Apoſtles went ſome to one people, ſome to another to preach, as they were allotted and ſent) came firſt to Antioch, where conſulting and erecting a Church, or chief ſeat or Chaire for the practiſe of Religion: he, with many other of the Apoſtles which often repaired vnto him, celebrated a Councel; in which, amongſt other things, it was decreed, that the profeſſors and imbracers of Chriſts doctrine, and true religion, ſhould after him be called Chriſtians. This chiefe Chaire of the Church beeing afterwards tranſlated from Antioch to Rome, he and his ſucceſſours were very carefull and vigilant to reduce the Chriſtian religion (being as yet indigeſted, vnpoliſhed, and little practiſed) and the profeſſors thereof into better order & vniformity Out of the law of Moſes, (which Chriſt came not to aboliſh, but to fulfill) out of the ciuill and politick gouernment of Romans, Greeks, and Aegyptians, and out of both ſacred and prophane rites, lawes, & ceremonies of other nations, but moſt eſpecially by the wholeſome doctrine and direction of Chriſt Ieſus, and the inſpiration of the holy Spirit: when they had vndertaken this buſines, and ſaw that not only among the Hebrewes, but in al other nations elſe, the people be diuided into religious and laitie, and that all of them by an excellent ſubordination, are in dignity and degrees different one from another: as that the Emperor of Rome was Monarch of the whole world, and that next vnto him were Conſuls, Patricians, & Senators, by whoſe direction and aduice, the ſtate and common-wealth was well gouerned. Again, that in euery other country of the world were Kings, Dukes, Earles, Preſidents, Lieutenants, Deputies, Tribunes of ſouldiers, Tribunes of the common-people,

Praetors, Captains, Centurions, Decurions, Quaternions, Sheriffes, Treaſurers, Ouer-ſeers, Portars, Secretaries, and Sergeants, and many priuate people of both ſexe. That in the temple of the fained gods, the king was chiefe ſacrificer, and that there were Arch-Flammins, Proto-Flammins, Flammins, and Prieſts. That alſo amongſt the Hebrewes the High Prieſt was chiefe ſacrificer, vnder whome were inferiour Prieſts, Leuites, Nazareans, Extinguiſhers of lights, Exorciſts, Porters, Clerkes, and Singers. That amongſt the Greekes were Captaines of thouſands, Captaines of hundreds, Captaines of fifty, Gouernours ouer ten, and rulers ouer fiue: and that beſides theſe, as wel amongſt the Greeks as Latines, there were diuers ſorts of conuents, and religious houſes both for men and women, as the Sadduces, Eſſeyes, and Phariſies, amongſt the Iewes: the Salij, Diales, and Veſtales amongſt the Romanes. All the holy Apoſtles, (as Peter, and thoſe which ſucceeded him in the chaire of Rome) agreed & eſtabliſhed, that the vniuerſal, Apoſtolike, moſt holy, and high Biſhop of Rome ſhould euer after be called the Pope, that is to ſay, the father of his countrie: and that he ſhould proceede and gouerne the Catholike Romane Church: as the Emperour of Rome was Monarch ouer the whole world, and that as the Conſuls were next in office and authoritie to the Emperour, and were euer two in number, ſo ſhould there bee foure Patriarkes in the Church of God, that in degree and dignitie ſhould be next vnto the Pope: whereof one was ſeated at Conſtantinople, another at Antioch, the third at Alexandria, and the fourth at Ieruſalem. That the Senators of Rome ſhould be expreſſed by Cardinals, that ſuch Kings or Princes as gouerned three Dukedomes, ſhould be equalled with Primates that ſhould gouerne theree

Archbiſhops, and that the Archb. or Metrapolitans ſhold be compared to Dukes: that as the Dukes had Earles vnder them, ſo ſhould Biſhops be vnder the Archbiſhops.
               That Biſhops likewiſe ſhould be reſembled vnto Eatles, their Aſſiſtants and Suffragans vnto Praeſidents, and Provoſts vnto Lieutenants: Arch-prieſts ſhould ſupply the place of Tribunes of the ſoldiers: for Tribunes of the people were ordained Chancelors, and Arch deacons were put in the place of Praetors: for Centurions were placed Deanes, pariſh Prieſts for Decurions and other Prelates, and Miniſters for Aduocates and Atturneys: Deacons repreſented the Aediles, sub-deacons the Quaternions, Exorciſts the Duumuiri, hoſtiarii or dore-keepers, the treaſurers, readers, ſingers, and Poets, the Porters of the Court, and Acolites, and Prieſts, Miniſters, the Secretaries & Taper-bearers: decreeing, that all theſe ſundry Orders of Church-officers ſhould be called by one generall name, VVhereof the Clergie be ſo called. 
                  Clerkes, of the Greeke word (Cleros) a lotte, or chance, whereby at firſt they were elected out of the people for Gods part, or portion of inheritance. This done, they ordained, that ſeuen ſorts of theſe Clerkes ſhould be of more ſpeciall name and note then the reſt, as hauing euery one his peculiar function, habit and dignitie in the church, and that they ſhould be alreadie to attend vpon the altar, when the Biſhop of Rome doth ſacrifice, to wit, the Pope himſelf, Biſh. Prieſts, Deacons, Subd. Prieſts, and ſinging men.
               The office of Biſhops, is to giue orders, to veile virgins, to conſecrate Biſhops, to confirme children by impoſition of hands, to dedicate Temples, to degrade Prieſts frō their functions, and to put them in againe vpon their reformation, to celebrate Councels, to make Chriſmes & vnctiōs, to hallow veſtiments and Church veſſels, and to do any

other things which meaner Prieſts may do as well as they, as to cathechiſe and baptize, to make and conſecrate the Sacrament of the Altar, and to communicate it to others, to pronounce abſolution to the penitent, to reſtraine the ſtubborn, and to preach, and declare the Goſpel of Chriſt.
               The crownes of their heades muſt bee ſhauen round like the Nazareans, and they ought neither to weare lockes, nor long beards: they are bound to perpetuall chaſtitie, and they haue the command and preheminence ouer other prieſts: their liuings and maintenance ought to be onely of firſt firuites, tythes, & oblations: nor may they meddle or buſie themſelues in worldly matters, their apparell and conuerſation ſhould be decent, comely, & honeſt, and they are tyed onely to ſerue God and the Church, and to occupy and employ themſelues ſeriouſly in reading the holy Scriptures, that thereby they may perfectly know al things which belong to Chriſtian Religion, wherin they are bound to inſtruct others.
               There be diuers conuenticles, and houſes of religious perſons, both men & women, as Benedictines, Friars preachers, Franciſcans, Auguſtines, Bernardines, Antonians, Ioannites, Carthuſians, Praemonſtratentians, Carmelites, Ciſtertians, & many others, euery one of which Orders, haue diſtinct habits and cuſtomes different one from another, by the rules which they haue priuatly ſet downe, and preſcribed for themſelues to liue vnder. And all of theſe profeſſe perpetuall chaſtity, obedience, and wilfull pouertie, & liue for the moſt part a ſolitary life: for which cauſe they were called Monkes, as men liuing a monaſticall kind of life. Some of theſe Orders haue for their heads and gouernors of their houſes and ſocieties, Abbots: ſome Prouoſts, and ſome Priors, but the Biſhops be onely ſubiect to the

Biſhop of Rome: moſt of theſe Orders we are hoodes or cowles, though not all of one colour, and abſtaine wholy from fleſh. Biſhops when they offer vp the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, were cōmanded by that ſacred Synod, to bee attired in holy veſtures; which for their perfection are borrowed out of the law of Moſes: & of theſe garments be 15. to wit, the Sandals, the Amice, the long Albe that reacheth down to their anckles, the Girdle, the Stole, the Maniple, the purple Coate with wide ſleeues, the Gloues, the Ring, the Linnen garment called Caſtula, the Napkin or Sudary, the Pall or Cope, the Myter, the Crozier ſtaffe, & a chaire ſtanding nere the altar for him to ſit in: of theſe 15. church-ornaments, ſix were made common, as well to other inferiour Prieſts, as to Biſhops, that is to ſay, the Amice, the long Albe, the Girdle, the Stole, the Manuple, & the Caſtula: beſides theſe 15. ſundry ſorts of garments, the Pope (by the donation of the Emperor Conſtantine the Great) weareth in the celebration of the Maſſe, all the Robes vſed by the Emperors of Rome, as the ſcarlet coate, the ſhort purple cloake, the ſcepter, and the triple Diadem, and with theſe he is arrayed in the Veſtry: when he ſaith Maſſe vppon any ſollemne feſtiuall dayes, and from thence goeth to the Altar attended with a prieſt on his right ſide, and a Deacon on his left, before him goeth a ſub-Deacon, with a book in his hand ſhut, two taper-bearers, & one with a cenſor burning incenſe: when he approcheth nere to the Altar, hee puts off his myter, and kneeling down with his attendants vpon the loweſt ſtep, pronounceth the Confitcor, or publike confeſſion of ſinners, and then aſcending vp to the altar, he openeth the booke and kiſſeth it, and ſo proceedeth to the celebration of all the ceremonies belonging to that ſacrifice, the ſub-deacon reading the Epiſtle, and the deacon the Goſpell.
               
                  
Biſhopps, and all other eminent Prieſts, bee likewiſe bound to prayſe God euery day ſeuen times, and to vſe one certaine order and forme of prayer, and not onely to do ſo themſelues, but to giue commandement to all inferior Prieſts whatſoeuer, vnder their charge and iuriſdiction to do the like, as to ſay Euenſong in the afternoone, Compline in the twy-light, Mattins in the morning, and their houres at the firſt, third, ſixt, and ninth houre of the day, and that all this (if it be poſſible) ſhould be done in the Church, humbly kneeling or ſtanding before the Altar, with their faces towards the Eaſt: The Lords prayer, and the Apoſtles Creed were then vſed to be ſayd, as they are now at this day.
               Saint Hierome (at the inſtance of Pope Damaſus) diſtributed and digeſted the Pſalmes by the dayes, aſſigning to euery houre his proper Pſalmes and their number, as nine at nocturns vpon holy dayes, and 12. vpon working daies, for the laudes at Mattins fiue, fiue at euen-ſong, and at all other houres three: and it was chiefly he, that diſpoſed and ſet in order the Goſpels, Epiſtles, & all other things which as yet be read out of the old & new Teſtament, ſauing only the hymnes. Damaſus diuiding the Quire of ſinging men into two parts, appointed them to ſing in courſe the Anthemes written by S. Ambroſe Biſhop of Millaine, & added Gloria Patri to the end of euery Antheme. The Toletan & Agathon Councels allowed the leſſons & hymnes which be read before euery houre: The prayers, grails, tracts alleluias, offertories, communions in the Maſſe, anthems, verſicles, tropes, and other things ſung and read to the honor of God in the office of the Maſſe, as well for the day as night, were penned by S. Gregory, Gelaſius, Ambroſ. and diuers others of the holy Fathers, not all at once, but at diuers times.
               
                  
The Maſſe (for ſo is that ſacrifice called) was celebrated at the firſt in that ſimple furniture and plaine manner, as it is now vſed vpon Eaſter Eue. Pope Celeſtinus added the Prieſts manner of entrance to the altar, the Gloria in excelſis was annexed by Teleſphorus, the hymne which begins et in terra, was compoſed by Hillarie Biſhop of Poictiers, and was afterwards by Symachus ordained to be ſung.
               The ſalutations taken out of the booke of Ruth, which the prieſt pronounceth 7. times in the Maſſe, by ſaying, Dominus vobiſcum, were appointed by Clement & Anacletus: Gelaſius diſpoſed the reſt to the offertory, in the Order they be now vſed, except the Sequentiae which are ſaid after the Maſſe, and theſe Nicholas added, & the Apoſtles Creed which Damaſus annexed vnto them out of the Conſtantinopolitan councell. The Sermon which is preached to the people, by the prieſt or deacon ſtanding in a pulpit, vppon holy-daies, was rather vſed by tradition, after the examples of Nehemias or Eſdras then inſtituted by any other, in which Sermon the people that be preſent at Maſſe, bee admoniſhed to communicate, as in duty they are bound, and that they ſhould imbrace mutual loue, that they ſhould be purged from their ſins, & not be polluted with vices, when they receiue the Sacrament of the altar: and for that cauſe he concludeth his Sermon, with the publike confeſſion of ſinners: he declareth moreouer vnto them the contents of the old and new Teſtament, and putteth them in mind of the ten Commandements, the twelue Articles of our beleefe, the ſeuen Sacraments of the Church, the liues and Martyrdomes of Saints, the holy-dayes, and faſting daies inſtituted and ordained by the Church, the vices and vertues, and all other things neceſſarie for a Chriſtian to know.
               
                  
Pope Gregory added the Offertory to the Maſſe, and Leo the Prefaces, Gelaſius and Sixtus the greater and leſſer Canons, and Gregory the Lords prayer out of the Goſpell of Saint Mathew: Martial, Saint Peters Diſciple, inſtituted, that Biſhoppes ſhould giue the benediction: and Innocentius, that inferior Prieſts ſhould offer the Pax: Agnus Dei was adioyned by Sergius, the Communion by Gregorie, and the Concluſion, in theſe wordes, Ite, miſſa eſt, Benedicamus Domino, or Deo gratias, was inuented by Pope Leo.
               
               The twelue Articles of our Faith, which the holy Apoſtles The Creed. haue commanded euery one, not onely to acknowledge, but moſt conſtantly to beleeue, be theſe following: The firſt, that there is one God in Trinitie, the Father Almightie, Maker of heauen and earth: the ſecond, That Ieſus Chriſt is his onely begotten Sonne our Lord: the third, that he was conceiued of the holy Ghoſt, borne of the Virgin Mary: the fourth, that he ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried: the fift, that he deſcended into hell, and the third day roſe againe from the dead: the ſixt, that he aſcended into heauen, and that there hee ſitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: the ſeuenth, that he ſhall come againe in glorie to iudge both the quicke and the dead: the eight, that there is a holy Ghoſt: the ninth, that there is a holy Catholike Church: the tenth, that there is a Communion of Saints, and remiſſion of ſinnes: the eleuenth, that there is a reſurrection of the fleſh: and the twelfth, that there is an eternall life after death in another world.
               The tenne Commandements which were written with the finger of God, and deliuered by the hands of his 
                     The 10. Commandements.
                   ſeruant Moſes, to the people of Iſrael, and which he willed

vs to obſerue and keepe, be theſe following. The firſt, to beleeue, that there is one God: the ſecond, not to take the name of God in vaine: the third, to keepe holy the Sabbath day: the fourth, to honour our fathers and betters: the fift, to do no murther: the ſixt, not to commit adulterie: the ſeuenth, not to ſteale: the eighth, not to beare falſe witneſſe: the ninth, not to couet other mens goods: and the tenth, not to deſire another mans wife, nor any thing that is his.
               The ſeuen Sacraments of the Church, which bee included The ſeuen Sacraments. in the laſt fiue Articles of our faith, and which the holy Fathers haue commanded vs to beleeue, be theſe following: Firſt, Baptiſme, and this Sacrament heretofore (as it was eſtabliſhed by a canonicall ſanction) was not miniſtred vnto any, (vnleſſe vpon very vrgent neceſſitie) but vnto ſuch as were afore-hand well inſtructed in the faith, and ſufficiently catechiſed and examined thereof ſeuen ſundrie times, to wit, vpon certaine dayes in Lent, and vppon the vigils of Eaſter, and Penticoſt, beeing the vſuall times for conſecration in all Pariſhes. But this Sacrament beeing aboue all the reſt moſt neceſſarie vnto ſaluation, and leaſt any one ſhould depart out of this life, without the benefit thereof, it was ordained, that as ſoon as an infant was borne, he ſhould haue God-fathers procured for him, to be his witneſſes or ſureties, and that then the child, beeing brought by his God-fathers before the church doore, the Prieſt, (ſtanding there for the purpoſe) ſhould demand of the child, before he dippe him in the holy Font, whether he will forſake the Diuell and all his pompes, and whether he ſtedfaſtly beleeue all the Articles of the Chriſtian faith, and the God-fathers affirming on his behalfe, the Prieſt bloweth three times in the

Infants face, and when he hath exorcized and catechized him, he doth theſe ſeuen things in order vnto the child: firſt, he putteth hallowed ſalt into his mouth, ſecondly, hee annointeth his eyes, eares, and noſtrils with earth moyſtened with his ſpittle, thirdly, (giuing him his name after which he ſhall be called) he marketh him with the ſigne of the croſſe vpon his breaſt and backe with hallowed oyle: fourthly, inuocating the name of the bleſſed Trinitie, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt, (in whoſe name all other Sacraments are miniſtred) three times, he dippeth or ducketh him into the water, or elſe powreth water vpon him three times in forme of a croſſe: fiftly, (dipping his thomb into the holy Chryſme) he ſigneth his fore-head with the ſigne of the croſſe: ſixtly, hee couereth him with a white garment: and ſeuenthly and laſtly, putteth into his hands a burning candle.
               It was ordained by the Agathon Councell, that Iewes before they were baptized, ſhold be inſtructed in the Chriſtian faith nine moneths, and faſt forty daies, and that they ſhould refuſe all their ſubſtance, make free their bond-ſeruants, and put from them their children, (if they had any ſuch) as were circumcized after the lawe of Moſes: and fo
                     •
                   thoſe cauſes it is no maruell, that the Iewes bee ſo hardly induced to receiue the Sacrament of Baptiſme.
               2. The ſecond Sacrament, is Confirmation, which is giuen onely by the Biſhop in the Church before the altar, to children of fourteene yeares of age or vpwards, and if it may be, while they be faſting; in this manner: All the children which come to be confirmed, beeing there preſent with their god-fathers, the biſhop (hauing ſaid a prayer ouer each of them) dips his thombe into moiſt Chriſme,

ſigning euery one of their foreheads with the ſigne of the croſſe, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, and for their better remembrance, and to the end they ſhould not require this Sacrament againe, he giueth euery one a blow vpon his right cheeke, and then the Godfathers (for feare leaſt the moiſt vnction ſhould runne off or be wiped away through negligence or careleſſeneſſe) bind their foreheads with a linnen cloth, (which they bring with them for that purpoſe) and that cloth they may not put off vntill the ſeuenth day after. And ſuch force haue the holy fathers attributed to this Sacrament, as if a man diſlike of his name he tooke in his Baptiſme, in taking of this Sacramēt he may haue it changed into an other name by the Biſhop.
               3. The third Sacrament is the Sacrament of holy orders, which in the primitiue Church was likewiſe miniſtred by the Eiſhop, and that only in the month of December, but now it is miniſtred at ſix times in the yeer appointed for that purpoſe, that is to ſay vpon the Saterdaies of al thoſe 4. feaſts called Ember weekes, which were ordained for that end, vpon the Saterday called (Sitientes) which is the Saterday before paſſion Sunday, & vpon the eue of the bleſſed Paſſouer: and then to men only, and to ſuch whoſe condition of life, bability of body, & quality of minde is ſufficiently knowne and approued: There be ſeuen orders of Prieſts or (according to ſome) nine, all of which (as the holy fathers haue euer bin of opinion) haue imprinted in their hearts, by their holy orders, ſuch ſpecial caracters of grace, as they be euer after held holy & ſanctified: which be ſinging men or organiſts, doorekeepers, readers; Exorciſts, Prieſts, Miniſters or Acolits, Subdecōs, Deacons, Prieſts & Biſhops, & yet it is held to be but one

Sacrament, not many, by reaſon of the finall office, which is to conſecrate the Lords body: Euery one of theſe nine orders of Prieſts hath his peculiar office in the Church, & ornaments allowed him by the Toletan councel, to diſtinguiſh him from the reſt, for the doore keepers, or ſextons are to defend and keepe the Churches, and to open & ſhut them, and therefore a key is giuen vnto them when they be ordained: to the readers that haue power to read the old Teſtament, and holy hiſtories, is giuen a booke; the office of Exorciſts is to diſpoſſeſſe ſuch as bee poſſeſſed with euil ſpirits, and haue a booke giuen vnto them, wherein be contained thoſe exorciſmes for a marke to ſignifie that office. The office of the Acolites is to ſet the candleſticks vpon the Altar, and to light the tapers, as alſo to ſet in redineſſe the vyoles or pots of water, & to carry them away when maſſe is done, and therefore be they manifeſted by carrying a candleſticke with a taper in it, and an empty vial or cruet. The Subdeacons are to take the oblations to handle the chalice and patin, and make them ready for the ſacrifice, and to adminiſter wine and water to the Deacons in the vials, and therefore the Biſhop giueth them a chalice and a patin, and the Archdeacon, cruets ful of wine & water, and a towel. The Deacons proper function is to preach the word of God to the people, and to be aſſiſtant to the prieſts in the holy miſteries of the Church, and to them is giuen the booke of the New-Teſtament & a ſtole caſt croſſe ouer one ſhoulder like a yoake. The power of the prieſts is to conſecrate the Lords body, to pray for ſinners, and (by enioyning them penance) to reconcile them againe vnto God, and therefore is he honored with a chalice ful of wine, a patin with the hoaſt vpō it, a ſtole hanging on both ſhoulders, and the linnen garment called Caſtula.

What is giuen to Biſhops at their conſecrations, you haue heard before, and they be euer ordained & conſecrated, about three of the clocke on the Lords day at the celebration of the office of the maſſe, before the reading of the Goſpel, by three other Biſhops whereof the Metrapolitan to be one, who doe it by laying there hands, and a booke vpon his head: In the primitiue Church there was little difference betwixt Biſhops and other prieſts, for al of them by common conſent did ioyne together in the gouernment of the Church, til ſuch diſſentions grew among them, as euery one would call himſelfe not of Chriſt, but rather of him by whom he was baptiſed, as one of Paule, an other of Apollo, a third of Cephas. And therefore for the auoiding of ſchiſmes, & maintayning an vniformity in the Church, the holy fathers though it neceſſary to eſtabliſh a decree that al which ſhould euer after be baptiſed ſhold he called by one general appellation Chriſtians, of Chriſt, and that euery Prouince ſhould bee gouerned by one Prieſt, or more, according to the quantity & bigneſſe, who for their grauity and reuerence ſhould be called Biſhops, and they ſhould gouerne and inſtruct both lay people & clergy that were vnder their charge, not after their owne wils and pleaſures as was vſed before, but according to the preſcript rules, canons and ordinances of the Church of Rome and holy Councels, and then by the permiſſion & furtherance of good and holy Princes, all Kingdomes throughout the Chriſtian world were deuided into Dioceſſes, the Dioceſſe into Shires and Counties, and they againe into ſeueral parriſhes, which good and godly ordinance both for clergy and laytie, is yet of that validity & eſtimation as the people of euery village yeeld there obedience to their pariſh Prieſt, the pariſh Prieſt to the

Deane, the Deane to the Biſhop, the Biſhop to the Archbiſhop, the Archbiſhop to the Primate or Patriarch, the primate or Patriarch to the Legate, the Legate to the Pope, the Pope to general councels, and general councels only vnto God.
               4 The fourth Sacrament is the moſt holſome Sacramēt of the body & bloud of our Lord & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, & euery prieſt that is duly called & ordained according to the rules of the Church, and intendeth to conſecrate, may (by obſeruing the vſual forme of words vſed in the conſecration) make the true body of Chriſt of a peece of wheaten bread, and of wine his right and perfect bloud. And this Sacrament the ſame Lord Ieſus Chriſt in the night before he ſuffered his bitter paſſion, did celebrate with his diſciples, conſecrating it, and ordaining that it ſhould euer after be celebrated and eaten in remembrance of him. It behoueth euery one that receiueth this Sacrament to bee ſtrong in faith, that he may beleeue and credit theſe thirteene things following: Firſt that he beleeue the tranſmutation or tranſubſtantiation of the bread and wine into the body and bloud of Chriſt: Secondly that though this be done euery day, yet is not the body of Chriſt thereby augmented: Thirdly that the body of Chriſt is not diminiſhed, though it be eatē euery day: Fourthly that though this Sacrament be deuided into many parts, that yet the whole and intire body of Chriſt remaineth in euery little particle: Fiftly, that though it be eaten of wicked & malicious men, yet is not the Sacrament thereby defiled: Sixtly, that to thoſe which receiue it worthily, & as they ought, it bringeth ſaluation, & eternal damnation to thoſe which receiue it vnworthily: Seuenthly, that when it is eaten it conuerteth not into the nature & property of him that

eateth it, as other meate doth, but rather conuerteth the eater into the nature of the Sacrament rightly, that being eaten it is taken vp into heauen without hurt: Ninthly that in euery little forme of bread and wine is comprehended the great and incomprehenſible God and Man Chriſt Ieſus: Tenthly that one and the ſame body of Chriſt is receiued and taken at one moment in diuers places of diuers men, and vnder a diuers forme: Eleuenthly, that the ſubſtance of the bread being turned into the true body of Chriſt, and the ſubſtance of the wine into his bloud, the natural accidents of bread and wine doe yet remaine, and that they are not receiued in forme of fleſh and bloud: Twelfthly, that vnto thoſe that eate it worthily, it bringeth twelue great commodities, which are expreſſed in theſe verſes following.
               
                  Inflammat, memorat, ſubſtentat, roborat, auget
                  Hoſtin ſpem, purgat, reficit, vitam dat, & vnit,
                  Confirmat fidem, minuit, fomitem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      remittit.
               
               The effect whereof is, that the hoaſt inflameth, remembreth, ſuſtaineth, ſtrengthneth and augmenteth our hope. It purgeth, refreſheth, quickneth and vniteth: It confirmeth our faith and mitigateth and vtterly quencheth in vs all concupiſcence.
               Laſtly, that it is wonderfull good and profitable for all thoſe for whom the prieſt ſpecially offereth it as a ſacrifice, be they liuing or dead, and that therefore it is called the communion or Sacrament of the Euchariſt: In the beginning of Chriſtian religion, & yet in ſome places, there was conſecrated at one time ſuch a loafe of bread, as being afterwards cut into ſmall mamocks by the prieſt, and laid vpon a ſawcer, or plate, might well ſerue all the

communicants that were preſent at the ſacrifice, and at that time did Chriſtians communicate thereof dayly. And afterwards they were limitted to receiue it only vpon ſundaies, but when the Church perceiued that this ſacrament was not taken euery ſunday ſo worthily and with ſuch due obſeruation as was ſitting, it was ordained that euery Chriſtian man of perfect reaſon & vnderſtanding, ſhould with all diligence he could, and with his beſt preparation both of body and ſoule, receiue the ſame thrice a yeere, or at the leaſt euery yeere once at Eaſter, as alſo when hee found himſelfe in any danger of death, as a ready preparatiue againſt al perils, by which name it is often called.
               5 Matrimony (which is a lawfull coniunction of man and wife, inſtituted and ordained by the law of God, the law of nature, & the law of nations) is the fift Sacrament: and the holy fathers in Chriſtian piety haue commanded, that but one marriage ſhall be ſolemnized at one time, and that it ſhal not be done in ſecret, but publikely, either in the Church or Church-porch, but moſt commonly in the Church-porch, where the prieſt meeting the parties that are to be married, firſt asketh of the man, and then of the woman whether they be willing to be contracted, who anſwering that they are content and agreed (which is a thing moſt neceſſary in that Sacrament) he taketh them by the right hands, & ioyning them togither in the name of the bleſſed and indeuided trinity in vnity, the Father Sonne, and holy Ghoſt, hee admoniſheth and exhorteth them, that being euer mindefull of this vnion and holy communion they neuer after forſake one an other, but to liue in mutual loue, honor and obedience one to an other, that they ſhould not deſire one an others company for luſt, but for procreation of children, and that they ſhould

bring vp their children honeſtly, carefully, and in the feare of God, this done he marrieth them with the ring, and ſprinkleth holy water on them, and then putting on his ſtole which is thither brought him, he leadeth them into the church, and cauſing them to kneele humbly before the Altar, there bleſſeth them (if they were not bleſſed before) the woman when ſhe is married hath her haire tied vp with a red fillet or headband, and a white veile ouer it, without which veile or head couer, it is neuer lawful for her after that time to goe abroad, or to be in the company of men: There be twelue impediments that hinder marriage before it be ſolemnized, and diſſolue it after it is contracted, that is to ſay, the error or miſtaking of either party, the breach of ſome condition, kindred, a manifeſt offence, diſparity of religion, violence or forcible rauiſhment from their parents, holy orders, breach of reputation, publike defamation, affinity, and diſſability to performe the act of matrimony.
               6 The ſixt Sacrament of the church is penance, which is giuen by Chriſt as a ſecond repaire of our ſhipwrake, and euery Chriſtian man is bound vndoubtedly to belceue, that this Sacrament conſiſteth of theſe foure things, to wit, repentance for ſins paſt, cannonical confeſſion, abſolution, and ſatisfaction: for he that will be partaker of this Sacrament muſt firſt of al repent & be ſorrowful in his very ſoule, that through his grieuous and heinous ſins hee hath loſt that purity and innocency which he once had, either by the Sacrament of Baptiſme, or by this Sacramēt formerly receiued, & his griefe muſt be ſo hearty & effectual, as he muſt thereby aſſuredly hope to bee reconciled againe vnto God, then muſt he humbly acknowledge, and make verball recitall vnto ſome reuerent prieſt his confeſſor

(as vnto the vicar and miniſter of God) of al thſe ſins & offences, as were cauſers of the loſſe of that innocency, & ſtirred vp the wrath of God againſt him, & then let him firmly beleeue, that ſuch power and authority is giuen by Chriſt vnto his prieſts & miniſters on earth, that they can cleerely abſolue him from al ſuch ſins as he confeſſeth & is heartily ſory for. Laſtly for a ſatisfaction & amends for al his ſins, let him with alacrity & cheerefulnes vndergo & do whatſoeuer his confeſſor ſhall enioyne him, beleeuing moſt ſtedfaſtly that he is abſolued from al his ſins, as ſoone as the prieſt hath pronounced the words of abſolution.
               7 The ſeuenth and laſt Sacrament is the Sacrament of extreame vnction, which is miniſtred with oyle, which for that purpoſe is yeerely conſecrated and hallowed in euery Dioceſſe by the biſhop himſelfe vpon the thurſday before Eaſterday as the holy Chriſine is cōſecrated by the prieſt. This Sacrament according to the councel of the holy Apoſtle Saint Iames, & the inſtitutiō of Pope Felix the 4. is miniſtred only to ſuch as are at the point of death & of ful age, and not then neither, vnleſſe they deſire it, and by the preſcript form & repeating of the words of the Sacramēt, & often inuocation of the Saints thoſe parts of the body being annointed which are the ſeats of the fiue ſences, ſeeing, hearing, taſting, ſmelling and touching, and are the chiefeſt inſtrumēts in offending, as the mouth, eyes, eares, noſe hands and feet; the holy fathers haue bin euer of this opinion, and firme beleefe, that he which is ſo anointed & receiueth it worthily, is not only thereby remitted & purged frō al his light and venial ſins, but is either ſodenly reſtored to his former health, or elſe yeeldeth vp his ſpirit in more tranquility and peace of conſcience.
               The feſtiual daies which were cōmanded to be obſerued in

The feſtiuall dayes which were commanded to be obſerued in the Church throughout the yeare, begin with the The feſtiuall dayes, throughout the yeare. Aduent of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: In which by the inſtitution of Saint Peter (in the month of December,) the continuall exerciſe of faſting and prayer was commanded for full three weekes and a halfe together, before the feaſt of the Natiuity of our Lord, with vs called Chriſtmas, which with all ioy and ſolemnity is celebrated all the laſt eight dayes of December. The yeare is deuided into 52. weekes, the weekes into twelue months, and euery month (for the moſt part) into thirty dayes: vpon the firſt day of Ianuary the Church celebrateth the circumciſion of our Lord, according to the law of Moſes: Vpon the third day after is repreſented vnto vs, how our Sauiour Chriſt, by the adoration of the three Kings, and his beeing Baptiſed of Iohn in the riuer Iordane, laid the foundation of the new law: vpon the ſecond of February is ſhewed how his imaculate mother, ſhewing her ſelfe obedient to the ceremonies of the Iewes, preſented her ſonne Ieſus in the Temple, and was purified, in memory whereof there is on that day a ſolemne proceſſion vſed by the Church, and all the tapers and wax lights bee then hallowed: Vpon the 25. day of March is repreſented vnto vs the Annuntiation of the birth of Chriſt to the Virgin Mary, by the Angel; and how he was conceiued in her wombe by the inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, at which time is commended vnto vs alſo the remembrance of the forty daies, which our Sauiour, when he liued here on earth amongſt vs, vouchſafed to faſt, willing vs likewiſe to faſt that time after his example, & then to celebrate his paſſion and death, which willingly he offered himſelfe to ſuffer, to enfranchiſe and redeeme vs from the thraldome and ſlauery of the diuell. Vpon the laſt day

of which feaſt (which often falleth out in Aprill) is ſolemniſed the greateſt of all feaſts, how Chriſt hauing conquered death deſcended into hell; where after hee had ouercome the Diuell he returned aliue againe to his Diſciples and in a glorified body appeared vnto them. In May is ſolemnized his Aſcenſion into Heauen, by his owne vertue in the ſight of al his Diſciples, at which time by the ordinance of Saint Mamertine Biſhoppe of Vienna it was inſtituted that throughout the whole Chriſtian world Pilgrimages and proceſſions ſhould bee vſed vpon that day from one Church to an other. In Iune, and ſometimes in May is the feaſt of the comming of the Holy Ghoſt, who being before promiſed was on that day infuſed vpon all the Diſciples of our Sauiour Chriſt appearing vnto them in the forme of fiery tongs; by vertue whereof they ſpake and vnderſtood the languages of all nations. The eight day after is the feaſt of the bleſſed Trinity, and then out of the firſt decretal of Pope Vrban the ſixt, the feaſt of Corpus Chriſti was inſtituted and with great ſolemnity generally celebrated the fifth day after Trinity Sunday, as a perpetual memoriall of the moſt wholeſome Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt, by him bequeathed vnto vs in his laſt ſupper, vnder the formes of bread and wine, and continually of vs to be ſeene and eaten after his departure: vpon the fifteenth day of Iuly wee are put in minde (by a new feſtiuity) of the departure of the bleſſed Apoſtles according to their ſeueral alotment, the twelfth yeare after the aſſention of our Lord into heauen, to preach the Goſpell vnto all nations of the world: The death of the Mother of Chriſt is celebrated the fifteenth day of Auguſt and her natiuity the eight of September: How, being preſented in the Temple, ſhe continued in the dayly ſeruice of

God, from three yeares of age till ſhee was maryageable, is ſhewed the one and twentih day of nouember: vpon the eight day of December the Church reuerenceth her immaculate conception of her long barren parents. And the ſecond of Iuly how paſſing ouer the Mountaines ſhee viſited her Coſin Elizabeth. There are likewiſe holy-daies dedicated to the memory of the twelue Apoſtles, of whom ſome were martirs, ſome confeſſors, and ſome Virgins, as namely the twenty foure of February to Saint Mathias, the twenty fiue of Aprill to Saint Marke the Euangeliſt, on which day Saint Gregory ordained the litanies, called the greater litanies, to be ſaid. To Saint Philip and Iacob, the elder, the firſt of May, to Saint Peter and Paul, the twenty nine of Iune, the twenty foure day of which moneth is dedicated to the natiuity of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, the twenty fiue of Iuly to Saint Iames the younger, to Saint Bartholemew the twenty foure of Auguſt, to S. Mathew the twenty one of September, the twenty eight of October to S. Simon and Iude, the laſt of Nouember to Saint Andrew, the twenty one of December to Saint Thomas, and the twenty ſeauen of the ſame month to the Euangeliſt Saint Iohn, the next day before Saint Iohns day is dedicated to Saint Seeuen, the firſt Martir and the next after to the bleſſed Innocents: the tenth of Auguſt to Saint Lawrence: the twenty three of Aprill to Saint George: To Saint Martin and S. Nicholas onely of all the confeſſors are dedicated particular feaſts, to the one the ſixt of December, to the other the eleuenth of Nouember: the twenty fiue of nouember to Saint Katherne the Virgin, and to Saint Mary-Magdalen the ſecond of Iuly. They haue likewiſe appoynted one day to be kept Holy and dedicated to all the bleſſed Angells, in the name of Saint Michells feaſt the Arch-Angell and the

firſt of Nouember, as a generall feaſt and common ſolemnity to all the Saints and elect of God.
               Furthermore vpon euery ſeuenth day, called by the name of Sunday, they haue commanded all Chriſtians, (as the Iewes did on their Sabboth) to abſtaine from all ſeruile labours, which day they muſt onely ſpend in the ſeruice of God, and hearing of Maſſe in the Church, to heare the Goſpell and precepts of faith explained and taught by the Prieſts in their Sermons, and to pray and make ſatisfaction to God for all ſuch offences, whereby wee haue cauſe to feare that wee haue in the other ſixe dayes any way prouooked the wrath of God towards vs. In times paſt euery fift day was in this manner kept holy, but leaſt wee ſhould ſeeme to leane vnto the cuſtome of Idolaters, who on that day did ſacrifice to Iupiter, it was otherwiſe determined. Moreouer the Prieſts and people did vſe euery Sunday and Thurſday, before Maſſe, to goe on proceſſion about the Church, and then the Prieſts ſprinckled holy water vpon the people, and this ceremony did Pope Agapite inſtitute, in remembrance of the Aſcention of Chriſt in that glorious day of his reſurrection, which is celebrated with a perpetuall feſtiuitie, Sunday after Sunday, as it were by ſo many Octaues all the yeare about. All the Cleargie and people by the inſtitutions of the Church, were wont to watch all thoſe nights which went before the principall ſolemne feaſts, but in reſpect of ſundry enormous ſcandalls and crimes committed in the darke, by lewde people, vnder pretext of watching, that vſe was taken away and prohibited, and inſteed thereof the day immediatly before euery ſuch ſolemne feaſt, was commanded to bee faſted, which faſting dayes doe yet retaine the name of Vigils.
               
                  
The ancient Fathers haue determined, that the Church ſhall repreſent vnto vs foure things in her yearly ſeruice, from Septuageſima ſunday (ſo called of the ſeauenty dayes included between that & Eaſter) the Church repreſenteth vnto vs, the faſt of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, his paſſion, death and buriall, and beſides theſe, the miſerable fall of our forefathers, as alſo thoſe groſſe errors of mankinde, through which being drawne from the knowledge and worſhip of the true God, they haue fallen to the prophane worſhip of Idols, and malicious diuels, together with the ſlauiſh, and intollerable ſeruitude, which the people of Iſrael were ſubiect vnto vnder Pharoa King of Egipt, for which cauſe the bookes of Exodus and Geneſis are read in the ſeruice of the Church, which all that time weareth a mourning habite both in her ſeruice and ceremonies: from the Octaues of Eaſter, till the Octaues of Whitſuntide, the Church celebrateth the Refurrection and Aſcention of Chriſt, and the comming of the Holy Ghoſt, and withall the redemption and reconciliation of mankind, to God the Father by his ſonne Chriſt, of all which the Reduction of the children of Iſraell to the land of Promiſe was a figure; wherfore the bookes of the New Teſtament are then read, and all things expreſſe mirth and reioycing. From the Octaues of Whitſunday till Aduent (which is twenty weekes and more) wee are appointed to celebrate the miracles and conuerſation of our Sauiour Chriſt, whileſt hee liued amongſt vs in the world, as likewiſe that long peregrination of mankinde, from generation to generation, ſince the redemption of the world, euen to the laſt day thereof; Wherefore in reſpect of the multitude of vncertainties, through which wee are toſſed like a ſhip in the raging ſea, the Church exceedeth neither in ioy nor ſadneſſe, but

to the end that we ſhould walke warily, and be able to reſiſt all turbulent ſtormes, ſhe readeth for our inſtruction and hartning, diuerſe bookes of the New and Old Teſtament.
               Moreouer, from the time of Aduent to the feaſt of the Natiuity wee are put in minde of the time betwixt Moſes and the comming of the Meſſias, in which interim mankinde beeing aſſured of their ſaluation by him, out of the law and Prophets, did with moſt ardent deſire expect his comming and future raigne ouer them, for which cauſe they haue cauſed the Prophets to be read, and this time to be faſted, that the Church being inſtructed in the one, & exerciſed by the other, ſhould both worthily and ioyfully as it were with one continuall ſolemnity, celebrate the natiuity of Chriſt her Sauiour (which alwayes falleth the weeke after Aduent) till Septuageſsima, receiuing him into the world with all deuotion, and with condigne ioy and exultation, accepting the firſt apparance of their ſaluātiō. The Oratories or Temples which are vſually called Churches, they would not ſuffer to be erected without licence of the Biſhop of the Dioceſſe, whoſe office is (after all things neceſſary for the buildings bee prepared, and the place where it ſhall ſtand agreed vpon) to bleſſe the firſt corner ſtone of the foundation, to put on it the ſigne of the croſſe, and to lay it Eaſtward towards the Sunne riſing, which done, it is lawfull for the workemen to lay on lime, and to goe on with their building. This Church is to bee built after the forme of mans body, or of a croſſe: The Quire in which the high Altar is to bee placed, and where the Clergie doe ſing (whereof it is ſo called) muſt repreſent the head, and it is to bee built towards the Eaſt, and to bee made rounder and ſhorter then

the reſt of the building, and becauſe the eyes are placed in the head, it is therefore to be made more lightſome, and to be ſeperated from the body of the Church, with barres as it were with a neck: adioyning herevnto, muſt ſtand a ſteeple, or more properly two, on eyther ſide one, inſteed of eares, and in theſe ought bells to be hanged, to call and ſummon the people by their ſound to diuine ſeruice. The lower part of the building muſt be euery way ſo diſpoſed, as that it may aptly expreſſe and repreſent the armes and feete, and the reſt of the body, with a conuenient length and breadth. There ought to bee alſo a priuate roome with partitions, which is vſually built vnder one of the Turrets, hauing a doore opening into the Quire, in which the holy Veſſels, ornaments and other neceſſaries belonging to the Church may bee kept: This priuate roome is called the Veſtery. There muſt bee two rowes of pillars, vppon the toppes whereof the roofe muſt reſt and bee ſupported; and the Altars muſt leane to the lower parts.
               The Altars are alwayes to bee decently couered with two linnen clothes, hauing a croſſe ſet vpon them, or a ſhrine, containing the Relicks of Saints, two Candleſticks on each end, and a booke. The walls both within and without muſt bee fretted and carued with variety of ſacred Images: In euery pariſh Church there muſt be a hollow Font ſtone, in which the hollowed water to baptize withall is preſerued and kept. Vpon the right ſide of the Altar muſt ſtand a Pix or Cuſtodia, which is either ſet vp againſt the wall, or carued out of it, in which the bleſſed ſacrament of Chriſts body, holy oyle to annoint the ſick, & Chriſme for thoſe which are baptiſed, is to be kept faſt ſhut vppe: Furthermore in the mideſt of the Church muſt be placed

a pulpit, out of which the Curat on feſtiuall dayes teacheth the people all things neceſſary to ſaluation: The Cleargie onely are permitted to ſit in the Quire, and the laitie in the body of the Church, yet ſo deuided, as that the men take place on the right ſide, and the women on the left, both of them behauing them-ſelues modeſtly and deuoutly, and diligently auoyding whatſoeuer is oppoſite to good manners and Chriſtian religion: In the Primitiue Church the manner was both for men and women to ſuffer their haire to grow long without cutting, and to ſhew their naked breſts; nor was there much difference in their attire. Saint Peter the Apoſtle did firſt command, that men ſhould cut their hayre, and women ſhould couer their heads, and both ſhould bee apparelled in diſtinct habites: That there ſhould bee layde out to euery Church a peece of ground, in which the bodyes of Chriſtian people, deceaſed, ſhould be buried, which peece of ground is called the Church-yard, and is hallowed by the Biſhop, and hath all the priuiledges belonging to the Church it ſelfe.
               The funeralls of the departed are not ſolemnized in all places alike; for ſome weare mourning apparell ſeauen dayes together, ſome nine, others thirty, ſome forty, ſome fifty, ſome an hundred, and ſome for the ſpace of a whole yeare. The Toletan Councell hath decreed, that the dead body ſhall be firſt waſhed and wraped in a ſhrowd or ſearcloth, and ſo carried to the graue with ſinging by men of the ſame condition, as Prieſts by Prieſts, and lay folkes by lay folke, and that a Prieſt ſhould goe before the coarſe incenſing it with Franckincence, and ſprinckling holy water on it, and that it ſhould bee laide in the graue with the face vpwards, the feete to the Eaſt, and the head

to the weſt, the Prieſt vſing certaine imprecations all the while the Sexton is couering the dead body with earth. And to ſhew that a Chriſtian is their buried their muſt be erected at the gate a croſſe of wood with a wreath of Iuy cypreſſe or bayes about it. And theſe bee the inſtitutions of the Chriſtian religion.
            
            The end of the ſecond booke.
         
         
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               
                  Of the moſt famous countries of Europe the third booke. CAP. 1.
               
                  NEXT vnto Aſia order induceth mee to ſpeake of Europe, the third part of the world, which is ſo called of Europa the Europe why ſo called. daughter of Agenor King of Phaenicia, who was rauiſhed by Iupiter & brought into Creet.
               It is bounded on the Weſt with the Atlanticke ſea, with The limits of Europe. the Brittiſh Ocean on the North, on the Eaſt with the riuer Tanais, the poole of Maeotis, and the ſea called Pontus

(which is the Sea betweene Moeotis and Tenedos) and The commendations of Evrope. with the Mediterranean Sea on the South.
               The ſoyle of Europe is of diuerſe ſorts and qualities, very aptly befitting the vertue and diſpoſition of the people of each ſeuerall Prouince, euery one transferring the commodities of their owne countries vnto other nations: for Europe is all habitable, ſome little part onely excepted, which (by reaſon of the extremity of colde) can hardly bee indured, which is that part that is neereſt vnto the riuer Tanais, and the poole of Meotis, as alſo thoſe that dwell vpon the banckes of Boryſthenes, which liue altogether in Chariots.
               That habitableſt part of the Region which is alſo extreame cold and mountanous, is very hardly inhabited, and difficult to dwell in, and yet all the difficulties and extremity thereof is well mitigated and appeaſed by honeſt and good gouernors, euen as wee ſee thoſe Greekes which dwell vppon mountaines and rockes, liue indifferently well, by reaſon of their great care and prouidence of Ciuilitie, Artes, and vnderſtanding how to liue.
               The Romaines alſo receiuing vnto them many people out of thoſe cragged and cold countries, (or vnfrequented for other cauſes) which naturally were barbarous, inhumaine and inſociable, haue ſo reclaimed them, by mingling them with other people, as they haue learned thoſe rude and ſauadge people to liue together ſoberly and ciuilly.
               The Inhabitants of ſo much of Europe as is plaine and hath a naturall temperature, are apt to liue orderly; for thoſe which dwell in temperate and fortunate Regions, be quiet and peaceable, but the rough and difficult places are inhabited by quarrellous and cumberſome people,

and yet all of them participate their commodities one with an another, ſome helping and furniſhing others with weapons, ſome with fruites, and ſome with arts and inſtructions of manners; the inconueniences and hinderances which happen to thoſe that vſe not this reciprocal ayd is moſt apparant, for that the other by meanes of this mutuall intercourſe of commodities are of ſufficient power & puiſſance to carry weapōs, wage war, and defend themſelues, ſo as they bee neuer vanquiſhed, vnleſſe by a greater number. And this commodity alſo is incident and naturall to all Europe, as that it is plaine and euen, and diſtinguiſhed with hils, wherby it is in al parts limitted, wel ordered, ciuill and valiant: and (that which is more) well diſpoſed to liue in peace and tranquillity: ſo as what firſt by the Grecian forces, next by the Macedonians, and laſtly by the Romaines, no maruaile though it hath atchiued great conqueſts and notable victories, by which it plainely appeareth, that Europe is ſufficient of it ſelfe, both for war and for peace, as hauing a competent and ſufficient number of able fighting men, and husbandmen and Cittizens enough beſides.
               Evrope moreouer aboundeth with the beſt fruites and thoſe which be moſt profitable for mans life; and all manner of mettells whereof is any vſe, beſides odors for ſacrifices, and ſtones of great worth, by which commodities, both poore and rich haue ſufficient meanes to liue: It yeeldeth alſo great ſtore of tame Cattell, but very few rauenous or wild beaſtes.
               And this is the nature of Evrope in generall, the firſt Particular part whereof Eaſt-ward is Greece.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Greece and of Solons lawes which hee made for the Athenians and which were after eſtabliſhed by the Princes of Greece. CAP. 2.
               
                  GReece (a country of Europe) was ſo called of one Graecus, who had the gouernment of that country: It begineth at the The diſcription of Greece. ſtraights of Iſthmus, and extending north and ſouth, lyeth oppoſite to that part of the Mediterranean ſea which is called Aegeum, on the Eaſt, and on the Weſt to the ſea Ionium: as the hill Apennyne deuideth Italy in the middle, ſo is Greece ſeperated and deuided with Mountaines called Thermopilae, the toppes of the hills ſtretching Thermopilae. in length from Leucas and the Weaſterne ſea, towards the other ſea which is Eaſtward.
               The vtmoſt hills towards the weſt bee called Oeta, the higheſt whereof is named Callidromus, in whoſe valley there is a way or paſſage into the Maliacan gulfe, not aboue threeſcore paces broad, through which way, (if no reſiſtance bee made) a whole hoſte of men may bee ſafely conducted: but the other parts of thoſe hills bee ſo ſteepe, craggy and intrycate as it is not poſſible for the nimbleſt foote-man that is to paſſe ouer them: there hills bee called Thermopilae, of the piles or bankes that ſtand like gates at the entrance of the hills, and of the hot waters that ſpring out of them: by the ſea ſide of Greece ly theſe regions, Acarnania, Aetolia, Locris, Phocis, Baeotia and The Region of Greece. Eubaea, which are almoſt annexed to the land: Attica and Peloponeſus runne further into the ſea than theſe

other countries do, varying from the other in proportion of hills: and vpon that part which is towards the North it is included with Epirus, Phirrhaebia, Magneſia, Theſſalia, Phithiotae and the Malican gulfe.
               The moſt famous and renowned citty of Athens, the nurſe of all liberall ſciences and Philoſophers, (than the Athens, and why ſo called. which there is no one thing in all Greece of more excellency and eſtimation,) is ſcituated betwixt Achaia and Macedonia, in a country there called Attica, of Atthis the Kings daughter of Athens, who ſucceeded Cecrops in the kingdome and builded Athens.
               Of this Cecrops it was called Secropia, and after Mopſopia of Mopſus. And of Ian the ſonne of Xutus, or (as Ioſephus writeth) of Ianus the ſonne of Iaphet, it was called Ionia: and laſtly Athens of Minerua, for the Greekes call Minerua Athenae: Draco was the firſt that made lawes Dracoes lawes to the Atheninians. for the Athenians, many of which lawes were afterwards abrogated by Solon of Salamin, for the too ſeuere puniſhment inflicted vpon offenders: for by all the laws which Draco ordained, death was due for euery little offence, in ſuch ſort as if one were conuicted but of ſloth or Idleneſſe, hee ſhould die for it, and he which gathered rootes or fruits out of an others mans grounds, was as deepely puniſhed as thoſe which had murdered their parents. Solon deuided the citty into ſocieties, trybes or wards, according The citty of Athens diuided into ſocieties by Solon. to the eſtimation and valuation of euery ones ſubſtance and reueneus, In the firſt rancke were thoſe whoſe ſubſtance was ſuppoſed to conſiſt of five hundred medimni: thoſe which were worth three hundred medimni, and were able to breed and keepe horſes, were counted in the ſecond order, and thoſe of the third degree were equall in ſubſtance to the ſecond, the charge of keeping horſes

onely excepted: And of theſe orders were all magiſtrates and high officers (for the moſt part) ordained, and, thoſe which were vnder theſe degrees were in the fourth rancke, and were called mercenary, and were excluded from all offices, ſauing that they might haue the charge of pleading and decyding cauſes: This inſtitution of ciuill gouernment, Seruius Tullius is ſuppoſed to haue followed and imitated at Rome.
               Moreouer Solon appointed a Senate or Councell conſiſting of yearely Magiſtrates, in Areopagus: (though The councellin Areopagus. ſome haue reported that Draco was the founder of that aſſembly) And to the end that hee might take away all occaſion of ciuill diſſention, that might happen at any time afterwards, and that the inconſiderate multitude ſhould not trouble the iudiciall ſentences, by their doubtfull acclamations, (as vſually they did,) out of thoſe foure trybes that were then in Athens, hee made choyſe of foure hundred men, an hundred out of euery trybe, giuing them power to approue the acts and decrees of the Arreopagites, if they were agreeable to equity, if other-wiſe to councell them and annihilate their doings: by which meanes the ſtate of the citty (ſtayde as it were by two ſure anchors) ſeemed ſecure, vnmoueable and of likelyhood to continue: if any were condemned for parricide, or for affection and vſurping the cheefe gouernment, they were excluded (by Solons lawe) from bearing rule, and not there onely, but all thoſe alſo were barred and prohibited to beare offices, that if any ſedition were ſet a foote in the citty, ſtood neuter, and tooke nether part: for hee thought it an argument of a bad Cittyzen, not to bee carefull of the common good and peace of others, when hee him-ſelfe hath ſetled his owne eſtate and deſignes in ſafety:

Amongſt the reſt of Solons acts this is moſt admirable, whereby he graunted liberty that if any woman had married A ſtrange law for women. a man vnable to beeget children, ſhee might lawfully, and without controulement, depart from him and take vnto her any one of her husbands kindred whome ſhee liked beſt.
               Hee tooke away all vſe of mony-dowries from amongſt them, ſo as a woman might take nothing with her from Mony dowries forbidden. her fathers, but a few clothes and other trinkets of ſmall worth, ſignifying thereby, that marriages ſhould not bee made for mony, but for loue and procreation of children, leaſt their euill life might bee a blotte and skandall vnto them after their deaths.
               If any man ſlaundered his neighbour, ether at the ſolemnization of their diuine ceremonies, or at their ſeſſions and publike aſſemblies, hee was fined at foure drachmas: Againſt ſlaunderers. Hee graunted power and authority vnto Teſtators, to diſpoſe and bequeath legacies of mony, and goods amongſt whome they pleaſed: whereas before (by the cuſtome of the country) they were not to bequeath any thing from their owne families, and by this meanes friendſhippe was preferred before kindred, and fauour before allyances: Neuertheleſſe this was done with ſuch caution and prouiſion, that noe one could graunt ſuch legacies, beeing mooued there-vnto either through their owne franticke madneſſe, or by the ſubtill and vndermyning perſwaſions of other, but meerely of his owne accord and good diſcretion.
               Hee forbad all mournings and lamentations at other mens funeralls, and enacted that the ſonne ſhould not bee bound to releeue his father, if his father had not

brought him vp in ſome arte, or profitable occupation: nor that baſtards ſhould nouriſh or releeue their parents, and his reaſon was this, that hee which forbeareth not to couple with a ſtrumpet, giueth euident demonſtration, that he hath more care of his owne ſenſuall pleaſures then of the procreation of children, and thereby hee becommeth vnworthy of reward or releefe of ſuch children, if the fall into pouerty.
               Beſides theſe, Solon iudged it meete, that the adulterer The puniſhment for adultery. apprehended in the deed doing, might lawfully be ſlaine: and that he that forced and rauiſhed a free-borne Virgin, ſhould be fined at ten Drachmas. He abrogated and tooke away their ancient cuſtome of ſelling their daughters and ſiſters, vnleſſe they were conuinced of whoredome: and amongſt others of his acts and decrees, theſe are likewiſe to be found: that whoſoeuer was victor in the games of Iſtmos, was rewarded with an hundred Drachmas: and he that got the beſt in the games of Olimpus, had fiue hundred: He that killed a Dogge-wolfe, had fiue Drachmas out of the common treaſury: but hee that killed a Bitch-wolfe had but one: for the rewarde due for ſlaying the Dogge-wolfe was the worth of an Oxe, and the price of a ſheepe for killing the ſhee-Wolfe: and their ancient manner was to perſecute theſe kinde of beaſts, as enimies to their cattell and grounds.
               He ordained that the children of ſuch as were ſlaine in the warres, ſhould be brought vp at the common charge, A law for the maintenance of ſouldiers children. (that men by that meanes, beeing aſſured that their children ſhould bee cared for, though themſelues miſcarry, might bee more throughly incouraged to fight, and behaue themſelues valiantly and venterouſly:) commanding alſo, that thoſe which loſt their eyes in the warres, ſhould

euer after be ſuſtained by the common purſe: and withall A law for the benefit of Orphanes and VVards. he very worthily prouided, that the ouerſee-ers or they that had the ward of Orphanes ſhould not keepe together in the ſame houſe with the childrens mothers, and that none ſhould be gardians that might by poſſibility inherite the Orphanes goods, if they ſhould hap to die during their nonage and wardſhip. Furthermore he forbad all Iewellers to reſerue in their cuſtody the ſtampe or ſeale of any ring, after they had ſold it. And that hee which putteth out an others eye ſhould looſe both his owne eyes: adiudging it alſo a capitall offence for any one to take vp that which is none of his owne and keepe it to himſelfe.
               Furthermore hee eſtabliſhed that Princes or rulers being found drunke, ſhould be puniſhed with preſent death: aduiſing the Athenians likewiſe, to reckon and account their daies according to the courſe of the Moone.
               Of all fruites and commodities, he only permitted wax and honey to bee tranſported out of Attica into other countries: and he eſteemed no man meete or worthy to be made free of the Cittie, vnleſſe he were an artificer and would with his whole familie come dwell at Athens, or ſuch as were doomed from their natiue ſoile to perpetuall exile and baniſhment: Theſe lawes being ingrauen and recorded in woodden tables, were by Solon eſtabliſhed to continue for a hundred yeeres, preſuming that if the City were ſo long inured with them, they would euer after remaine without alteration: but Herodotus is of opinion that theſe lawes which Solon made for the Athenians, were enacted but for ten yeeres continuance.
               Now that theſe lawes might be eſteemed more ſacred and bee more carefully obſerued and kept. Solon, after

the manner of other law-giuers which fathered their ſtatutes and decrees vpon ſome one god or other, as Draco had done before him, auouched that Minerua was the author and inuentor of his lawes, and ſo cauſed both the Senatours and people to ſweare themſelues to the performance therof, at a ſtone which ſtood in the Senate-houſe.
               The Athenians were not ſtrangers at the beginning, The original of the Athenians. nor was their City firſt inhabited by any rabble of wandring people, but in the ſame ſoile they now inhabite, their were they borne, and the ſelfe ſame place which is now their ſeat and habitation, was alſo their original and foundation.
               The Athenians were the firſt that taught the vſe of clothing, and of oyle, and of wine, inſtructing thoſe Their inuentions. which formerly fed vpon acornes, how to plow, plant, ſow and gather fruites: In a word, Athens may iuſtly bee termed the temple and ſanctuary of learning, eloquence and ciuil conuerſation.
               The three lawes which Secrops enacted againſt women, 
                     The three lawes made by Cecrops againſt women.
                   (for the appeaſing of god Neptunes wrath, for that by womens ſuffrages Neptune was ſcorned, and Minerua preferred before him) were then in force and obſerued, which were theſe. Firſt, that no woman ſhould enter into the Senate-houſe. Secondly, that no child ſhould be called after his mothers name, and the third that no one ſhould call women Athenians, or women of Athens, but women of Africa.
               Thoſe which were ſlaine in the warres (according to How the Athenians bury thoſe which are ſlaine in the warres. 
                  Thucydides) were buried in this manner following. Firſt they pitched vp a tent, or pauillion three daies before the funerals, wherein were put the bones of thoſe which were

ſlaine, euery one laying ſome thing (what he thinketh fitteſt) vpon his dead friends relikes, thereby to know him againe, then were the bones of al thoſe which were ſlaine of each ſeuerall tribe, incloſed in cheſtes, or coffins made of cypres tree, and euery coffin carried by a ſeueral coach, or carre belonging to the tribe, whereof the dead parties were: after this there was an empty bed, or herſe brought with them, purpoſely for ſuch as were miſſing, and could not be found amongſt the ſlaine bodies, which done, all thoſe which were preſent, as well Citizens as ſtrangers, indifferently, conueied them forth, and interred them in a publike monument, or ſepulcher neere vnto Caliſtus tombe, in the ſuburbes of the City (the women all the while weeping and lamenting the loſſe of their friends) which is the vſuall place for buriall of all ſuch as periſh Marathron is a city not far from Athens. in battaile: vnleſſe they were of the Citie of Marathron who for their ſingular and extraordinary valor and proweſſe were intombed in their owne City.
               When they were thus interred, ſome one choyſe Cittizen, eſteemed for his wiſdome, and by reaſon of his dignity and worth fit for ſuch an imployment, was elected and aſſigned, to pronounce a funerall oration, or ſermon, in the due commendation of thoſe which were ſlaine: which being ended euery one departed to his ſeuerall home.
               And this was there vſuall forme of buriall of ſuch as were ſlaine in the warres.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Laconia and of the cuſtomes and ordinances of the Laconians or Lacedemonians. CAP. 3.
               
                  LACONIA (a Prouince in Peloponeſus) is alſo called Ocbalia, and Lacedemonia, of Lacedemon the ſonne of Iupiter and Taygete, by whom a famous and mighty City was builded in that country, and called after his name Lacedemon: This Citty was likewiſe called Sparta of Spartus the ſonne of Phoroneus, and was the Palace or Court of Agamemnon.
               
               When Lycurgus that famous Philoſopher, brother vnto Lycurgus law giuen to the Lacedemonians.
                   King Polydictes, gouerned in Laconia, (as tutor or protector vnto his brother Polydictes ſonne) hee altered the ſtate of that City and Country, and adorned them with wholeſome lawes and good ordinances, the people wherof before his time were the worſt mannered, and had the Eight and twenty Elders elected, Democratia. leaſt gouernment (both in their owne cariages & towards ſtrangers) almoſt of al the people of Greece, as vſing no commerce, cuſtome nor conuerſation with other people.
               
                  Lycurgus therefore couragiouſly taking the matter vpon him, abrogated and diſanulled all their auncient lawes, ordinances and cuſtomes, and in their ſteed inſtituted lawes more ciuill and much more lawdable: And firſt he elected certain of the moſt ancienteſt, wiſeſt & ſageſt men of al the common-wealth, to conſult and aduiſe with the Kings (whereof there were euer two created) of all matters of ſtate and gouernment, which were choſen of purpoſe

to be Arbitrators and indifferent vmpires betwixt the power of the Kings, and the force of the multitude, to the end that neither the one ſhould rebel through contumacie and ſtubborneſſe, nor the other oppreſſe by reaſon of their gouerment and greatneſſe: of theſe Seniors or elders (according to Ariſtotle) there were eight and twenty, who were euer aſſiſting and aiding the Kings, carefully prouiding that neither the gouernment of the people ſhould be of two great force, nor that the Kings ſhould tyrannize ouer the commons, and that all the reſt of the multitude ſhould be made acquainted with whatſoeuer was decreed by this order.
               Many yeeres after this, vnto the gouernment of the Olygarchia or gouernment of the Tribunes, people was added the power and authority of the Ephori, or Tribunes (which were Protectors of the liberties and benefits of the commons againſt the power of the Nobles) which kinde of gouernment in the Greeke tongue is called Oligarchia, that is the gouernment of a few: and this manner of gouernment was purpoſely ordained as a bridle, or reſtrainte vnto the adminiſtration of the Kings and Elders when they ſeemed ouer violent and outragious towards the commons, and was annexed vnto the other, in the hundreth yeere after the death of Lycurgus, when Theopompus raigned in Lacedemonia.
               One inſtitution ordained by the Olygarchia, or Protectors of the cōmons, was the diuiſion of their grounds, for thoſe Protectors perſwaded the multitude of the commons, that euery one ſhould yeeld vp al the grounds they formerly had in their poſſeſſion & occupation, & that thē to each one ſhold be diſtributed an euen & equal portion. For their opinion was that euery Citizen ſhould contend

to excell others in vertue and vnderſtanding, and not in riches and ryoting. The whole land was therefore deuided into nine and thirty thouſand parts, the fields adioyning The diuiſion of their land by the Olygarthy. to the City and belonging to the Citty into nine thouſand, and the reſt of the land which lay in the country, and was occupied by farmers, was three times as much & more: ſo that euery portion was ſuch as would yeeld ſeuenty meaſures of corne caled Medimni yeerely to a man, and to a woman twelue. Lycurgus was once in a minde to make like diuiſion of all moueable goods, but fearing the enuy that for that cauſe might inſue (for many ſeemed to take it diſcontentedly) hee forbore to doe it, The vſe of money prohibited and iron money made. yet he vtterly tooke away all vſe both of ſiluer and gold from amongſt them, and brought in iron money, and ſtamping it croſſe wiſe like the letter X commanded that it ſhould be of little value, whereby all occaſion of ſtealing was auoided: and to the end that the iron, whereof that money was coyned, ſhould not be deſired for other purpoſes, he cauſed it when it was burning and glowing hote, to be quenched with vineger, that being thereby mollified and ſoftned, it might ſerue to no other vſe: This done he reiected all arts, as things meere vnprofitable and friuolous, which were then eaſie to be reiected, for the vſe of ſiluer and gold being once prohibited, the artificers departed thence of their owne accord, conſidering that iron coyne would ſtand them in no ſteed in other places.
               After this (that he might vtterly extirpate and roote out of the City all ryotting and exceſſe) he inſtituted publike feaſts, wherein he commanded that both poore and rich ſhould ſit and eate together in one place, and at one table, without difference or exception of perſons:

And if any came to that diet, in that publike place, ſo gallant and gorgeous that his queaſie ſtomake would not ſerue him to eate with ſuch companions, or that he would not be pleaſant at his meate, hee was chidden and reuiled of all thoſe that ſat at the Table with him, as an vnthrift, and a waſter, by which ordinance all pompe and ſumptuouſneſſe was vtterly auoided: at this inſtitution the great and welthy men beganne to grudge and repine, and were ſo much incenſed againſt him, as in a rage they violently ruſhed vpon him and ſtrooke out one of his eyes with a ſtaffe, wherevpon hee ordained that no Spartane whatſoeuer, ſhould euer after that time come to meate with any ſtaffe or other weapon. This their manner of dyeting together, they called (Philias) which is as much to ſay as friendſhip, for doubtleſſe it was an argument of publike friendſhip and great humanity, and might well be tearmed (Phiditia) that is fellowſhip, or fraternitie: beſides that by this their dyeting together, they were very much giuen to ſparingneſſe and parſimony.
               Thoſe which by reaſon of their ſacrifycing, or hunting were abſent from their meales, were permitted to dine and ſup at home, but all others ought to bee there preſent, all excuſes ſet apart, and euery one allowed for the vpholding and maintaining of this common diet, yeerely, a certaine meaſure full of fine meale or flower called Medimnum, eight meaſures called (Corus) full of wine, fiue pounds of cheeſe and two pound and a halfe of figs.
               Children alſo frequented this common banquetting place, as the ſchoole or vniuerſity of temperature and all

ciuil diſcipline, for there they accuſtomed to commune and confer together ſoberly ad diſcreetly, their they learned to ieſt and bourd pleaſantly and merily, and to quippe and taunt one an other without ſcurility or offence.
               The Spartans in their wiuing, and accompanying with women (by reaſon of their continuall warres) regarded not chaſtitie, ſo much as procreation and increaſe of iſſue, and the husbands were ſo louing and Men called their wiues their miſtreſſes. obſequious to their wiues, as they would call them their miſtreſſes.
               Maides practiſed and exerciſed themſelues in running, wreſtling, throwing ſtones, ſlinging and darting, that Maides exerciſes. (flying and ſhunning idleneſſe, and all womaniſh niceneſſe) they might bee thereby more ſtrong and luſtie, and better able to indure the paines of child-bearing: in doing which excerciſes, they went naked like boies in ſight of all men, and would daunce and ſing at ſolemne feaſts in the preſence of young men: which nakedneſſe was neither inconuenient, nor diſhoneſt, for they were couered with ſhamefaſtneſſe, without the leaſt touch of impudency or wantonneſſe: and hereof inſued a towardneſſe and naturall aptneſſe in the women of Laconia, for any action: They which liued ſingle and were neuer married, were excluded from thoſe publike games and exerciſes of naked virgins, and (the more to diſgrace them) were conſtrained to goe naked themſelues about the market place in the winter ſeaſon, leaſt they ſhould haue as much honour, and eſtimation with young men as thoſe had which were married.
               The marriageable virgins were maried, or rather ſtolne away perforce, and the bride being conducted into her

chamber, ſheared the haire of her head cloſe to the skin, and then the bride-groome going in to her, vnlooſeth her girdle, and accompanieth with her in the night time onely, without once ſeeing her in the day time, before he hath got her with child. The care and regard of their children and iſſue was committed to worthie men, and it was lawfull for any old man (for cauſe of increaſe and procreation) Old men that had young wiues permitted young men to lye with thē. to bring ſome young man that was honeſt and well thought of, to lye with his wife, and if ſhe conceiued with child by the ſtranger, he would repute it as his owne child, and bring it vp as his owne, nor was it accounted a ſhame for any to perſwade ſuch old men that had chaſt wiues, and fit to bring foorth children, that they might bee with them to bring foorth ſeed out of ſo good a ſoyle: for they laughed at the folly of ſome people, that would put their mares and bitches to couple with the beſt makes they could get, (of their kind) ſometimes for hire, and ſomtimes for loue and fauour, and to keepe their wiues ſo warily vnder watch and ward, that none might lie with them but themſelues: whereby their iſſue be either mad and diſtracted, or otherwiſe very weake and feeble, vnfit for any exerciſe.
               Parents might not bee allowed to educate and bring vp their owne children themſelues; but ſo ſoone as they were borne, they were brought into the ſtreetes amongſt the people, vnto a certaine place there called (Ieſchen) where they were nouriſhed, vntill they were of ſome ſtature, and then the formes and lincaments of their bodies, were peruſed by certaine ouer-ſeers, and whoſoeuer was allowed by theſe ouer-ſeers, had aſſigned vnto him one of thoſe 9000. portions of ground, into which the ſoile belō
                  ging to the city was diuided: but thoſe which were weake

and deformed, weare brought vnto a ſteepe rocke not far from Taygetum, called Apotheca, where they were throwne down headlong as vnprofitable for the commonwealth. The women vſed not to waſh their children with water, but with wine, by the application of which liquour, it is moſt certaine, that their bodies would be weakned and made feeble, if they were any wiſe ſubiect to the falling euil, nor would they apply any thing to them, to ſtrengthen and keepe their naturall heate, nor wrap them in ſwathing clothes, or vſe them to whittles, or rattles, but brought them vp in ſolitarie and darke places, and therfore (by reaſon of this ſeuere education) many people of other nations would haue their children nouriſhed and brought vp by Lacedemonian nurſes.
               Theſe children when they accompliſhed the age of ſeuen yeares, began to exerciſe themſelues in the companie of their equals, and to get ſuch learning as was neceſſarie for them, attaining to all other diſciplines by their owne induſtrie and indeauor, they were ſhorne and ſhauen to the skin, and went bare-footed, and bare legged, and when they were twelue yeares of age, they allowed them one cote, but they were prohibited bathes, and all things elſe that might nouriſh their naturall heate: the beds whereuppon they tooke their reſt, were made of reedes, wherein (in the winter time) they accuſtomed to put a kind of thiſtles which they called Licophona's. There was one created and ordained to be gouernor and tutor ouer the children, whom they called Iren: this Iren taught them of the bigger ſort, to get and prouide wood and fuell, and the leſſer ſort to ſteale and carry it away, to intrude themſelues into the company of their betters, when they were at their bankets, and from thence to filtch and purloine what they

could get, and thoſe which were apprehended and taken in the deed doing were whipt and driuen away, not for becauſe it was an offence to ſteale, but for that they did it not warily and aduiſedly. Some he would command to ſing, ſome other to propoſe ſubtill and witty queſtions, the anſwerers whereof muſt be both ſharpe and ſudden, and if any were found negligent in performing their exerciſe, the Iren would bite them hard by the thombe in the way of correction. Moreouer, they were taught to vſe graue ſpeeches, but ſuch as were mixed with ſome mirth: and in few words to comprehend whole ſentences, in ſuch manner as it was an vſuall prouerb to ſay, That it is more eaſie to play the Philoſopher, then to imitate the conciſe manner of ſpeaking of the Lacedemonians.
               It is worth the labour to expreſſe and ſet downe the exerciſes of each ſeuerall age, and what contention and emulation was amongſt them, who ſhould moſt excell in vertue. The whole people were diſtinguiſhed into three companies or quires, according to their ages, and firſt, the troupe or aſſembly of old men, (when in their ſolemne ſacrifices they began to ſing) pronounced with a ſhrill voice theſe words following, We were once young and luſtie, to whom the young men following after, make this anſwer, And we now are young and luſtie, and thereof you ſhall make trial if you pleaſe. And laſtly, the Quire of children comming hindermoſt, pronounce and ſay, We ſhall once be as good as you and better.
               
                  Plutarch reports, that a certaine modulation and meaſure in muſicke, which was obſerued and practiſed by the Laconians, continued vntill his time, and which they were accuſtomed to ſing to their fluites or pipes, when they ſet vpon their enemies. Thucidides alſo (the reporter of this

Laconian inſtitution) hath written, that thoſe muſicall ſongs, and harmonie ſet vnto their flutes, were vſed in the wars, but hee denyeth, that they were vſed in any ceremonies of Religion, or for the performance of diuine ſeruice, nor yet thereby to encourage mens minds, or to incite and prouoke them to fight, (as the hornes and trumpets were wont to do amongſt the Romaines) but that at their meeting together, they might enter into the battell by little and little, as it were, with equall and meaſured paces, and not to ſuffer their orders and ranckes to be broken or ſcattered.
               There is a verſe extant of the Lacedemonian Poet, whereby it appeareth, that the Spartans vſed not onely the fluite and pipe in the on ſet of their battels, but the muſicall ſound and conſent of the harpe alſo. Which cuſtome may ſeeme to be deriued from the Cretans.
               
                  Herodotus writeth, that Haliattes King of Lydia, in the warres hee made againſt the Mileſians, had not onely pipers and minſtrels in his campe, to delight his eare, but (a thing vnfit to be reported, becauſe it ſeemes ſomewhat incredulous) the daintieſt fare that could be gotten by any poſſible meanes whatſoeuer. The Romaines (beſides the noyſe of hornes and trumpets) beganne their battell with exceeding great clamor and ſhowting of ſouldiers, which is farre different from that which Homer writeth of the people of Achaia: For they (ſaith hee) guarding and defending their forces, enter into the battell with quietneſſe and ſilence.
               The French-men (as Polybius and Liuie report) vſe dancing, tripping of the toe, and ſhaking their ſheelds ouer their heades: and there be ſome barbarous people that enter into battell with howling and crying: by which variety

of cuſtomes wee may gather, that but few other nations follow and imitate the Spartans in their conſorts and ſymphony in muſicke, which they vſe in their wars.
               Moreouer, the Spartans faſhion was to keepe their haire and beards long from their youth, according to that memorable and worthie ſaying of the Law-giuer himſelf, which was, That mens bodies bee much more beautifull and comely, when their heades bee thicke growne with haires, and ſmoothly combed, then otherwiſe they would bee, if their haire were ſhaggie, rugged, vncombed, and neglected.
               The King when he beginneth battaile, ſacrifiſeth a ſhee-goate to the Muſes: They vſe one certaine and ſtrict kind of liuing, both at home, and in the warres: For they held, that they were not borne onely to themſelues, but for the good of their Countrie: They practiſed no gainefull and commodious arts, but were wholly employed in the ſtudie of matters belonging to martiall diſcipline; ſpending their ſpare time in ſollemne banquettings, by which meanes it came to paſſe, that (as Plutarch hath very well noted) the Spartans neuer would; or if they would, yet they knew not how to liue priuately, with a ſelfe-regard, but were wholly deuoted to the common good of their countrie.
               The Spartanes as they differed from all other nations The manner of electing officers. in many other things, ſo did they in giuing their voyces for electing of Officers: For there were a few picked out from the reſt to vndergo this buſineſſe, who were incloſed in a Chamber next adioyning to the Councel-houſe, where they ſhould neither ſee nor bee ſeene of any, and then as the names of the Competitors were particularly drawne out one after another, and at happe-hazard

they did diligently marke and obſerue the applauſe and aſſent of the people vnto euery name, aduiſedly noting and ſetting downe in a table, who had the greateſt applauſe, and who the leaſt, which beeing afterwards openly reade, it was thereby knowne which of the competitors had the moſt voyces.
               Furthermore Lycurgus was the firſt that (remoouing all ſuperſtition) permitted the Cittizens to bury the dead bodies in the cittie, allowing thē plots of ground about the Temples, wherein to erect their monuments: but it was not lawfull for any one to engraue or imprint the name of either man or woman vpon their ſepulcher, but the names of thoſe onely which were manfully ſlaine in the wars: nor to lament for thoſe which were dead aboue the ſpace of eleuen dayes.
               The citizens moreouer were reſtrained from trauelling into other countries, leſt they ſhould bring into their cittie ſtrange cuſtomes and manners: and all ſtrangers and trauellers which arriued there, were bar'd and excluded from out their citty, (vnleſſe their preſence were profitable to the common-wealth;) leſt (as Thucydides ſaith) forraine nations ſhould learne, and be partakers of the Laconian diſcipline, which may iuſtly be tearmed a very inhumane part; or elſe (as Plutarch writeth) leſt by the mutuall concourſe and paſſage too and fro of ſtrangers, new ſpeeches and languages might creepe into the cittie, from whence might proceed new iudgements, and diſſonant deſires, which to the common-wealth would bee matters moſt pernitious and dangerous. Young men hee allowed to weare but one coate throughout the whole yeare, nor might any one go finer, or fare more daintily then others did. He commanded, that nothing ſhould be bought with

readie money, but by exchange of wares and commodities: & that children (when they were of the age of twelue or fourteene yeares) ſhould not be ſuffered to come into the market-place or chiefe part of the cittie, but were brought into the fields, to the end they ſhould not ſpend the prime of their youth in luxurie and wantonneſſe, but in labour and painfulneſſe, ordaining that they ſhold haue nothing layd vnder them to ſleepe vpon, and that they ſhould eate no pottage nor gruell, nor once returne into the cittie before they were men.
               He ordained alſo, that maydes ſhould be married without portions, to the end that none ſhould couet wiues for their wealth, and that husbands might carrie the more ſeueritie ouer their wiues, when they could not vpbraide them with the greatneſſe of their portions, and how much they were aduanced by them: that men ſhold be eſteemed honourable, not for their riches and greatnes, but for their age and grauitie; for old age was held in more reuerence and reputation amongſt the Spartans, then in any other countrie beſides.
               To the Kings he granted power ouer the wars: to the Magiſtrates, iudgements and yearely ſucceſſions: the keeping and cuſtodie of the lawes to the Senate, and to the people, power and authoritie both to elect the Senat, and to create Magiſtrates whom they pleaſed.
               Now for becauſe theſe new lawes and inſtitutions (all former cuſtomes beeing diſſolued and abrogated) ſeemed very harſh and difficult, he fained, that Apollo of Delphos was the author and inuentor of them, and that frō thence (at the commandement of that god) hee brought them to Sparta, thinking thereby, that the feare and reuerence of religion, would vanquiſh all rediouſneſſe and irkeſomneſſe

of vſing them. And finally, (to the end his lawes might remaine and continue to all eternitie) he bound and obliged the cittizens by an oath, that they ſhould alter none of thoſe lawes which he had made and eſtabliſhed for them, vntill he himſelfe returned back vnto them; alledging, that he intended to go to Delphos, to aske counſell of the Oracle there, what he ſhold alter or adde to his lawes, which done, he tooke his iourney to Creete, and there liued in perpetuall exile, commanding, when he lay vppon his Lycurgus exild himſelf voluntarily. death-bed, that as ſoone as he was dead, his bones ſhould be caſt into the ſea, leſt by any chance they might be conueyed to Lacedemon: whereby the Spartans might ſuppoſe themſelues abſolued and releaſed from that oath which they had taken, not to alter thoſe lawes before his returne vnto them.
               It is not amiſſe in this place to deſcribe, and ſet foorth, what honors and dignities the Spartans were wont to giue to their Kings. And firſt, they had two Orders or Eſtates of Prieſts, attending vppon them to do ſacrifices, one of the Lacedemonian Iupiter, and the other of the celeſtiall Iupiter: and their law of armes was, that vpon what people or country the Kings intended to make warres, it reſted not in the power of any of the Spartans, to prohibite or gaine-ſay it: for if they did, they offended ſo haynouſly, as they would hardly purge themſelues: that in their marching and ſetting forward to the warres, the kings ſhould go foremoſt, and be laſt in the retraite. And that they ſhould haue an hundred choice and ſelect men to be their guard: that in their expeditions and ſetting forward on their voyages, they might haue what beaſt they would for ſacrifice, and that they might take to themſelues the hides and skins of the beaſts that were offered. And theſe were

their priuiledges in the warres. And the honors and dignities attributed vnto them in time of peace, were theſe, when in their Common-wealth, any banquets were made for the death of any great man, the Kings ſhould ſit downe firſt, and be firſt ſerued, and that they two alone ſhould haue betwixt them twice as much meate, as all thoſe that ſate with them, beſides the skinnes of all beaſts ſacrificed. Moreouer, in the Kalends of euery moneth, they had each of them a beaſt giuen them from out the reuenues of the cittie, to be ſacrificed to Apollo, a meaſure of fine wheate flower called Medimnum, containing ſixe Modia, and a meaſure of wine, called a Laconian quart.
               In the beholding of ſingle combats, the Kings preceded and gouerned certaine places, hauing for their aſſiſtants what Cittizens they pleaſed: And each king might chooſe two Pitheans, which were ſuch as were wont to be ſent to Delphos to aske counſell of the Oracle, and theſe did commonly diet with the Kings. The Kings allowance when they came not to meales in the vſuall place, was, two meaſures full of fine flower called Chaenices, or Chaeniae, (which is much about halfe one of our peckes) and a meaſure full of wine called Cotyla, that is as much as Sextarius, (which is about a pinte and an halfe Engliſh:) but when they were preſent, they had double in quantitie as much of euery thing as all the reſt that ſate with them.
               The Kings were to determine who ſhould be husbands of orphane maydes, whoſe parents were deceaſed, whether he to whome the father bequeathed her, or hee on whome the mother beſtowed her: they had power alſo ouer common wayes, and ouer ſuch as made adopted ſons againſt the kings minds: they had ſeates in the Councell or Senate-houſe, (which conſiſted of 28. Senatours,)

wherein they might ſit at their pleaſures: but if they would not come thither, then two of the Senatours which were moſt neere and deare vnto them, repreſented their perſons, and had power to pronounce to voyces or ſuffrages for the Kings, and two other for themſelues. And ſuch were the honors and dignities giuen to the Kings, by the Common-wealth of Sparta, while they liued, and when they were dead, theſe following.
               Firſt, certaine horſ-men proclaimed and divulged the Kings death, throughout all Laconia: the like was done alſo by certaine women which walked vppe and downe about the cittie, ſtriking and beating vpon pots or kettles: which done, there muſt of euery houſe two, (one man and one woman, and both free-borne) be ſtayned, ſoyled, and defiled with weeping and lamenting, which if they refuſed to do, they were ſeuerally puniſhed.
               The Lacedemonians vſed the ſame orders in their Kings Funeralles, as the barbarous people of Aſia did: for in this manner did moſt of thoſe barbarous people bury their Kings.
               The death of the King beeing thus divulged, the cittizens of Sparta ſummoned all their friends and kinsfolkes out of all the Countrey of Lacedemonia to the funerall. And after many thouſands both of them and of their ſeruants, as alſo of the Spartans themſelues, were there aſſembled, (both men and women mingled together:) they lamented and wept, beating and ſtriking vppon their forheads, and roaring, and howling moſt bitterly, concluded their lamentation with this ſaying: That this laſt deceaſed king was the beſt of all their kings. And if any of their kings were ſlaine in the wars, they faſhioned and pourtrayed an image like vnto him, and (laying it vpon a bed very richly

furniſhed) ſpent ſome ten dayes in the interring thereof, during which time there was continual vacation and ceaſing from proſecuting lawes, and exerciſing iuſtice in places iudiciall, nor was there any Seſſions of Magiſtrates or Officers in all that time, but continuall lamentation and bewayling. And in this the Lacedemonians agreed with the Perſians: for when the Lacedemonian King was dead, he which ſucceeded him, pardoned and releaſed euery Spartane of all his debt, what euer it was, that he owed either to the King or Common-wealth. And ſo likewiſe in Perſia, he which was newly created king, remitted and forgaue vnto all the Cittizens their tribute which they owed.
               In this alſo the Lacedemonians imitated the Aegiptians: for in Lacedemonia, as wel as in Aegipt, both Cryers, Minſtrels and Cookes ſucceeded their fathers in their arts and occupations,; ſo as a Cooke was begott by a Cooke, a Trumpetter by a Trumpetter, and a Cryer by a Cryer. Nor did any intrude themſelues into another mans function or calling, but perſeuered and continued in their fathers trade and vocation.
            
            
               
                  Of the Ile of Creete, and of the cuſtomes moſt common amongst the Cretenſians. CAP. 4.
               
                  CREETE, (which is alſo called Candy The diſcipline of Creete.) is an Iland-ſituated in the Mediterranian ſea, and very famous and renowned for hauing in it an hundred Citties. This Iland (as Strabo writeth) is compaſſed vppon the north with the Aegean & Creetiſh ſea, and with the Libican or Africane ſea vppon the

South: it lyeth towards Egila, and Cythera vpon the weſt, and hath vppon the Eaſt the Ile Carpathus, which lyeth in the midſt betwixt Rhodes and Creete.
               The whole Iland containeth in length two hundred and ſeuentie myles, and fiftie myles in breadth: and the circuite or compaſſe round about the Iſland, is fiue hundred, eightie and eight myles. The moſt renowned Citties of Creete, be Gortyna, Cydonea, Cnoſſus, and Minois or Minon, which is the Kings ſeate: And of all the hilles in the countrey, the hill Ida is moſt famous, as beeing of an exceeding and wonderfull height, the length whereof (as Apollodorus ſaith) is two thouſand, and three hundred Stadia, and fiue thouſand and more in compaſſe: but Artimedorus ſaith: That it is not ſo much in compaſſe by a thouſand ſtadia.
               
               In Creete liue no noyſome or offenſiue creatures, No venimous creatures in Creete. there be neither Serpents, nor owles bredde, and if any be brought thither from other places they dye inſtantly. There be aboundance of Goates, but few or no Deere at all: it yeeldeth great ſtore of the beſt and daintieſt wines, and produceth an herbe called Diptamus (which is a byting and drawing hearbe, and by vs called Dittanie, Dittander, or garden Ginger:) and the Alunoſa, which beeing eaten, is a preſent remedie againſt extreame hunger. It bringeth foorth alſo the poyſoned and venimous Sphalangi: and a pretious ſtone called Idaeus Dactylus.
               
               It was firſt called Cureta, of the Inhabitants of Curetes, and now by contraction, Creete: Some others ſay, it was called Creete of one Cres, (who was ſonne vnto Iupiter king of the Curetes) and ſome, of Crete the Nymph, who was daughter to Heſperides.
               
               The people (at the firſt) were very rude and barbarous,

till Rodomanthus reduced them to more ciuilitie and better manners, after whome ſucceeded Minois, who adorned and furniſhed them with more equitie and iuſtice. Plato ſayth, that the Lacedemonians and other auncient citties of Greece, deriued their lawes and ordinances from Creete.
               But the good eſtate of that nation, was ouerthrowne and turned vp-ſide downe, firſt, by the gouernement of Tyrants, and afterwards by the robberie and warres of the people of Cilicia: For the Cretans were very ſtudious in diuers ſciences, and deſirous of libertie, which they eſteemed their Summum bonum, and ſuppoſed they poſſeſſed all ſuch things as were not ſubiect to the wanton luſts, and vnlawfull deſires of Tyrants.
               They had a great care, prouident reſpect, and regard of Concord and Amitie, as they be mortall enemies to Diſcord and Sedition, which are the nurſes and foſterers of Couetouſneſſe, and vnſatiable deſire of riches: and therefore the people of Creete in auncient time, liued very moderately and ſparingly: their children frequented thoſe meetings and aſſemblies, which they called Greges. And their young men (when they came to mans eſtate) haunted and celebrated publike feaſtes, practiſing feates of armes, for the good and generall commoditie of the Common-wealth, and exerciſing and inuring their bodies (in their youth) to all kind of labour and extremitie whatſoeuer, as heate, and cold, ſtormes and tempeſts, both by ſea and by land, to runne through thicke woods and vn-euen pathes, to prouoke and ſtirre vppe brawles and contentions in places appoynted for their exerciſes: To bee skilfull and experienced in ſhooting and darting and vſually to practiſe and frequent a certaine forme of

dancing in armour and weapons, inuented by Pyrrhus, and therefore called the Pyrrichan dancing or vaulting, in which dancing they vſed to bow and bend their bodies, the better to ſhunne and auoide weapons and wounds: Their garments were ſhort Clokes or Caſſockes, and ſoldiers ſhooes; and they eſteemed of weapons and armour, as moſt rare and pretious gifts.
               Moreouer, they were ſo skilfull and expert in ſea-faring matters, as that it was an vſuall Prouerbe, if one diſſembled, that hee knew not that which hee knew right well, to ſay, No more is a man of Creete acquainted with the Sea.
               All Marriages were made and ſolemnized betwixt equals: and it was lawfull and tolerable for Virgins to chuſe and elect them husbands out of that troupe of young men: But the cuſtome was, that their husbands ſhould not take them from their fathers houſes, before they were fit to gouerne an houſe, and play the good houſ-wiues at home: And their dower was, (if they had any brother) the one halfe of the patrimonie.
               Children by their law were inſtructed in learning, ſinging and muſicke, and brought to the Feaſtes called (Syſſitia) where men were aſſembled, and there made to ſitte downe vppon the ground, apparelled in baſe attire, and to fall out and brawle amongſt themſelues; and the boy of the beſt courage was made captaine ouer the whole companie: And euery one as hee was of power, got the moſt companions vppon his ſide. Then would they go a hunting, and practiſe running. And vppon certaine dayes, the whole companie of children were put together, and taught to ſing to the pipe and harpe, as is vſed in warres.
               
                  
Some report, that the cuſtome of this countrey-people was, to note their luckie and fortunate dayes with a white ſtone, and their diſmall and vnhappie dayes with a blacke, though other-ſome aſcribe this cuſtome to the Thracians.
            
            
               
                  Of Thrace, and of the barbarous manners of the people of Thrace. CAP. 5.
               
                  THRACIA (which is now called Romania) is a Region of Europe, and accounted as part of Scythia: It lyeth next vnto Macedonia on the one ſide, hauing vppon the North the riuer Iſter, the ſeas called Pontus and Propontis vpon the Eaſt, and the ſea Aegaeum on the South. It was once called Scython: and after that Thracia, of Thrax the ſonne of Mars, or elſe of the peoples rudeneſſe, and barbarous manners: for the Greeke word (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) ſignifieth rudeneſſe and inciuilitie.
               This Countrey (as Pomponius writeth) hath neither fruitfull ſoyle nor temperate ayre, vnleſſe in ſome places neareſt vnto the ſea ſide: for it is maruellous cold and hardly bringeth foorth any fruite that is planted or ſowed: for there be few trees which yeeld any increaſe at all, and though they haue many vines, yet the grapes neuer ripen and come to perfection, vnleſſe they be couered with leaues, to keepe the ayre and cold from them.
               The Citties of Thrace which heretofore were of greateſt

fame and renowne, were Apollonia, Aenos, Nicopolis, and Bizantium, (which was afterwards called Conſtantinopole, of the Emperour Conſtantine) who reedified and inlarged it, making it the chiefeſt ſeate of his moſt glorious Empire, and the head Cittie of all the Eaſt) Perinthos alſo, Lyſimachia, and Calliopolis. The chiefeſt riuers are Hebrus, Neſſus, and Strymon, and the greateſt and higheſt hilles, Haemus, Rhodope, and Orbelus.
               The countrey is very populous, and the people very fierce and barbarous, in ſuch manner as if they were all ſubiect vnto the gouernement of one man, or that they were all of one mind, they were then (as Herodotus the father of Hiſtories, is of opinion) a people inuincible, and the moſt valiant of al Nations: but becauſe this is too hard a matter to bee hoped for, and too vnpoſſible to be expected, therefore be they weake and of little force.
               In Thrace be many and diuers Regions, diſtinguiſhed by ſeuerall names, but all of them indued with like manners and opinions: the Getae and Tranſi onely excepted, and the people that dwell aboue Creſtonae: of which three ſorts of people, the Getae are of opinion, that they ſhall neuer die, but that (after their departure out of this lyfe) they goe inſtantly vnto Zamolxis their god: This Zamolxis was once the Diſciple of Pythagoras, who (vppon his returne into Thrace) perceiuing how rudely, vnciuilly, and ſottiſhly the Thracians liued, (hee himſelfe beeing formerly inſtructed of the manner of gouernement in Ionia) taught and furniſhed them with manners, lawes, and ciuill inſtitutions, and after perſwaded them, that thoſe which kept and obſerued his lawes and ordinances iuſtly, and as they ought, ſhould after their deaths come vnto him into a place, where he would ſtay for them, and that there they

ſhould euer liue and enioy his preſence & all other things that good were, by which meanes (hauing ſetled in them a conceit of his god-head) he withdrew himſelfe from their ſight, and (vaniſhing away they knew not whether) left thē in a great deſire and longing after him. And vnto this Zamolxis their god do the people as yet ſend meſſengers, the manner of which ſuperſtition is thus, firſt they elect by lot one to vndergoe that buſineſſe, and (putting him into a ſhip furniſhed with fiue watermen or owers) they inſtruct him in thoſe things which they cheefly want, and which he ſhall deſire of their God & ſo ſend him away: Then doe they giue charge vnto the mariners, that ſome of them ſhal hold three darts or iauelins vpright, and the reſt to take the meſſenger that is ſent to Zamolxis by the legges and armes, and to hoiſe and toſſe him vp vpon their pikes or iauelin points, & then if he die ſodenly they imagine that their god is appeaſed and well pleaſed with them, but if he die not inſtantly, but languiſh and linger long, then they accuſe the meſſenger as a wicked and lewde fellow. Whom after they haue accuſed and blamed they forthwith ſend an other, giuing vnto him the like charge vnto the firſt.
               Theſe Thracian Getae when it lightens and thunders, ſhoot arrowes and fling dartes vp towards heauen menacing and threatning, as it were reuenging themſelues of God, and for that they beleeue that there is no other God in deed but theirs.
               The Trauſi agree with the Thracians in all other things, ſauing onelie concerning their birthes and deathes: wherein this is their order. As ſoone as a child is borne into the world, preſently all his kinsfolke

and friends flocke about him, bewayling greatly his natiuity, and ſaying, that ſeeing he is borne, he muſt of neceſſity ſuffer and indure all humaine and worldly calamities, and againe, when one is departed out of this life, they commit him to the ground with great ioy and exultation, ſhewing what and how many euills he hath eſcaped, to liue for euer in eternal happineſſe.
               But thoſe which dwell beyond the Creſtonae haue many wiues a yeere, and when a man dieth, there is great controuerſie amongſt his wiues (all their friends being accited to giue their iudgements of the matter) which of thoſe wiues was beſt beloued of her husband, and ſhe that is adiudged to haue beene deereſt vnto him in his life time (which ſhee eſteemeth a great honour vnto her) is both by the men and women, adorned and gallantly decked vp and ſo brought vnto her husbands tombe, and there killed by one of her own deereſt friends, and interred with her dead husband, all the other wiues lamenting, and accounting that a great croſſe and diſgrace vnto them.
               All other Thracians in generall ſell their children openly, nor be virgins there reſtrained from accompanying with their neereſt kin, no not with their owne fathers, but may lie with whom they pleaſe, and yet husbands be very chary of their wiues chaſtity, for they buy them of their parents with great ſummes of money, and the ſigne them in the forheads with certaine markes, which kind of marking is held a very generous and worthy thing: but to be without thoſe markes is an argument of ignominy and baſeneſſe: where diuers maides are to be married, thoſe which be moſt beautifull be firſt taxed and prized, and beeing once prized their parents will not by any

meanes giue them in marriage for leſſe money then they were rated at: and when all the faireſt bee bought, then thoſe which be deformed be ſold at more eaſier prices, ſo as in concluſion all goe away.
               In their banquets both men and women ſit round about a fire, whereinto they caſt the ſeeds of certaine herbes, which grow in thoſe parts, the very ſmell and ſauour whereof doth ſo ſtop and ſtifle them, as their ſenſes be dulled, and they as pleaſant and iocund as if they were merry drunke. To liue idlely, and by theft, they account an honeſt courſe of life, but to labour and husband the ground, they hold baſe and ignoble. The gods which they chiefly worſhip and religiouſly adore, be Mars, Bacchus, Diana and Mercury, but they ſwere onely by Mars, accounting him as the author, and orignall of their race.
               The people of Thrace exceed all other men in bigneſſe and ſtature of body, their eyes be gray, their lookes grim, frowning and menacing, their ſpeech terrible, and themſelues long of life. Their buildings be very low and baſe, & their diet is nothing dainty: they haue no vines, but great ſtore of apples: the King is elected as well by the voices of the commons, as by the nobility: and they elect ſuch a one as is of approued good manners, ſingular clemency and (by reaſon of his age) of very great grauity, and one that hath no children, for hee which is a father, is not admitted amongſt them to bee a gouernor, bee his life and conuerſation neuer ſo vprigh
                     •
                   and lawdable, and if at any time in all his raigne, he chance to haue a child, he is therfore depriued of his gouernment: For by no meanes will they admit that their Kingdome ſhould become hereditary: and though the King be neuer ſo iuſt and rightfull.

Yet will they not allow him the whole power in his owne No King admitted that hath children becauſe their Kingdome ſhal not be hereditary. hands, and to rule as he liſt himſelfe, but he muſt bee aſſiſtwith forty Rectors or Iudges, to the end he ſhould not be ſole Iudge in capital cauſes, and if the King himſelfe bee found faulty of any offence he is puniſhed with death, yet not with ſuch a death as any one ſhall lay violent hands vpon him, but (by the common conſent of all) he is depoſed The King that offendeth is famiſhed to death. from his Kingly authority, and then famiſhed to death, whom (when hee is dead) the great men bury on this manner.
               Firſt they lay forth his body vpon the ground for the ſpace of three daies, and then fall to banquetting and ſlaying of all ſorts of beaſts for ſacrifices, which done they weepe ouer him, burne his body and bury his bones in the ground, and laſtly vpon his monument they proclaime and ſet out combats of all ſorts, and eſpecially the Monomachia, which is the ſingle combat or fighting of two hand to hand.
               The armour and weapons which (as Herodotus writeth) they vſed in the warres againſt Darius, were helmets made of foxes skinnes, ſouldiours coates, and ſhort caſſockes ouer them, and vpon their legges they were buskins made of fawnes skinnes, their weapons wore dartes, targets, ſhort poyniardes and bowes, wherein they bee ſo skilfull and expert as they alleadge that they were the firſt inuentors of that weapon: Their language and the Scythians is al one.
               
                  Pliny writeth, that all Thrace was once deuided into fifty Stratageas, which are counties or captainſhips: that part of Thrace which was once called Getica (where Darius the ſonne of Hydaſpis was wel-nigh ouerthrowne)

is now called Valachia of the Flacci a family of Rome. For the Romaines after they had ouercome and vtterly vanquiſhed the Getes, ſent thither a Colony vnder the conduct of one Flaccus, wherevpon the countrie was firſt called Flaccia, and afterwards by corruption Valachia, which opinion carrieth more likely-hood of truth, for that the Romaine language is yet ſpoken in that Countrie, but they ſpeake it ſo corruptly, as a Romane can ſcarce vnderſtand it, the Romaine letters alſo bee there vſed, ſauing that the forme or faſhion of the letters is ſomewhat alterred, their rites and ceremonies of Religion doe ioyntly agree, cohere, and are all one with the Greekes.
               The Daci afterwardes poſſeſſed this Countrie, of whom for a certaine ſpace it was called Dacia, but now it is enioyed by the Almaines, the Siculi, and the Valachians.
               The Almaines or Teutones were a verie valiant and hardie people, ſent thether out of Saxonie, by Charles the Great, who in their owne naturall language and dialect were called Seibemburges, of the ſeuen Cities which they inhabited. The Siculi or Sicilians were an ancient people of Hungaria, and ſuch as (abandoning their owne Countrie) firſt came thither from out of Scythia, and ſeated themſelues in that Countrie.
               Of the Valachians were two ſortes of people, and of two ſundrie factions, the Dragulae and the Dani, otherwiſe called Davi (for there doe ſome Greeke writers reporte, that the Getes and Daui, were the names of ſeruantes, which in times paſt came thither from other places.
               
                  
The Dragulae being neither equall nor matchable to the Danes, nor able to make their partie good with them (not much aboue a hundred yeere ſince) brought the Turkes into that coūtry, by whoſe force & armes the Dani were almoſt vtterly killed and vanquiſhed, had not that valiant man Iohn Huniades brought aide vnto them, who reſcuing them, and recouering the land againe from the enemy, tooke ſeiſure thereof for himſelf: the chiefe excerciſe of the Valachians is husbandry and keeping of cattaile, which argueth and declareth the originall of that people: They pay tribute to the Kings of Thrace, and but once to euery King, and then (by the Kings declaration) each family giueth him an oxe in the name of a tribute: and the number of families in Valachia, is ſaid to be aboue ſixtie thouſand: Thoſe which be commanded to goe to the warres and refuſe to goe, are puniſhed with death.
               Valachia vpon the Weſt bordereth vpon Tranſiluania, and runneth Eaſt-ward into the Euxine ſea, vpon the North-eaſt and North it ioyneth to Ruſſia, and vpon the South it is waſhed with the riuer of Iſter, about which whatſoeuer thoſe wandring people be that therein inhabite, the ayre is very intemperate and cold, and their winter in a maner continuall, the ſoile in Valachia was heretofore very barren, yeelding them but ſlender ſuſtainance, and their chiefe defence againſt raine and ill wether, was either reedes or leaues, they would goe ouer great pooles and waters vpon the Iſe, and their victuals was ſuch wild beaſts as they could catch: manſion houſes or ſet places of abode they had none, but reſted where euer they were weary.
               Their diet was very vile and baſe, by reaſon of the

horrible intemperatneſſe of the aire, and they went alwaies bare-headed.
            
            
               
                  Of Ruſſia or Ruthenia, and of the latter manners and cuſtomes of the Ruſſians. CAP. 6.
               
                  RVSSIA (which is alſo called by two other The diuiſion and bounds of Ruſſia. names Ruthenia and Podolia) is deuided into three parts (viz) Ruſſia Alba, Ruſſia ſuperior, and Ruſſia inferior. That part which extendeth in lengthwiſe towards Sarmatia or Poland, is bounded North with the riuer Peucis, towards the Eaſt lieth the riuer Moſcus, and Weſt-ward are Liuonia and Pruſſia, the furtheſt partes of Germany.
               The bounds and limits of the Ruthenians or Roxallanians (for by that name they bee alſo called) at this day, is the ſpace of eight daies iourney ouer, from the riuer Tanais to the North Ocean, and from the Germaine Ocean (which they call the Balthean ſea) to the Caſpian ſea, is the ſpace of aboue ninty daies iourney.
               The country is ſo fertill and fruitfull, as though the ſoile bee but rudely and vnhusbandlike tilled, and corne throwne vpon it will yeeld increaſe three yeeres together, One ſeed time yeeldeth three harueſts. and that without plowing the two latter yeeres, for the corne which ſhedeth at reaping, will be ſeed ſufficient to yeeld an other harueſt, and the ſecond a third likewiſe: and the graine which it produceth groweth vp a ful perch in height; There is ſuch great ſtore of Bees in Ruſſia, that Ruſſia aboundeth with Bees. for want of hiues and hollow trees, they build in rockes

and holes of the earth, there is great ſtore of the baſt Meth and waxe, which is, carried thence into diuers other countries in great aboundance.
               The Ruſſians ſtore not their ponds and pooles with fiſh, becauſe (as they ſay) fiſhes doe their naturally breede, and multiply by the influence of the heauens. In a certaine lake there called Katzibe (when the wether is drie) is ſalt gotten, for which there is much warre betwixt the Ruſſians and the Tartarians, and it is very ſtrang which is reported, that in the Country of the Chelmenſes, if the armes and braunches of pine trees, be cut off from VVood turned 
                        •
                     nto ſtone. the trees, and lie vpon the ground for the ſpace of two or three yeeres, they will bee hardned and turned into ſtones: there is alſo good plenty of chalke.
               And towardes the riuer Tanais and Maeotis poole, groweth great ſtore of ſweete cane or reed, called Callamus Aromaticus, or Callamus Reuponticus, and many other herbes and rootes which bee not found in other places.
               There chiefe Citty and Kings ſeat is called Moſcouia, it is ſeitutated vpon the riuer Moſcus, and is foureteene miles in circuit: coine or ſtamped ſiluer they haue none in that City: and in the middle of the market place, ſtandeth a foure-ſquare ſtone, vpon the toppe whereof, hee that can clime vp and aſcend, and in performance thereof, bee not violently thruſt downe by others, obtaineth the principality and gouernment of all the City: wherevpon oftentimes ariſe great contentions and debate amongſt the people, each one indeauouring to ſupplant his corriuall, that himſelfe may aſcend: The Country is ſo populous and ſtrong, that not long ſince, in a certaine warlike aſſembly in the Kings campe, were numbred

and reckoned a hundred and twenty thouſand horſemen, euery one whereof were able to leade an armie.
               In their warres they vſe bowes (which weapon by longe vſage is moſt familiar and proper to that nation) and launces of twelue foote long: their horſemen which ſerue in compleat armour, weare iron breſt-plates vpon their brigandines or cotes of maile, with the belly or middle ſtanding out: In ſteed of helmets, they haue hattes made ſharpe vpon the crowne, and this kinde of horſemen bee more ſeruiceable and in greater requeſt in the warres, then footemen.
               Some foote-men fight with a certaine weapon called Scorpio, becauſe it is like a ſcorpion, wherewith they ſhoote ſmall arrowes or quarrels (it is the ſame which the Italians call Baliſta, and with vs a Croſſe-bow, Stocke-bow, or Tiller) ſome others doe vſe for to ſhoote leaden bullets out of brazen peeces, after the manner of the Almaines.
               The Ruſſians cannot indure for to haue their Gouernors called Kings, but Dukes, as beeing a name more The Ruſſians cannot indure to call their Gouernor a King, but a Duke as a name more popular. popular, and hee that is Duke hath the dominion and gouernment ouer the whole nation, betwixt whom and the Nobles, there is no difference in their apparell, ſauing that the Duke weareth a cappe ſome-what higher then the reſt: Their garments bee of all collours ſauing blacke: and both men and women are apparelled in fine linnen caſſockes or ſhirtes, hanging downe to their knees.
               This garment they trimme and garniſh rounde about the necke with gold and redde ſilke, it is wide and looſe and but little differente from thoſe which the Grecians

weare: the like alſo is worne by the Turkes and all the Northerne people, but that the Ruthens garments haue wider ſheeues, and bee hemmed or garded with gold about the breaſts and ſhoulders, & edged or welted round about the skirtes with Otters skinne.
               None but onely the wife, lamenteth and bewaileth the death of her husband, and then is her head couered with a white linnen cloath, hanging downe to her elbowes: the richer ſort of people haue a banket made them vpon the forteeth daie after the funeralls, in remembrance of him that is dead, but the poorer ſorte bee feaſted fiue times within the fortie daies: the daies of their deathes be likewiſe obſerued, wherein they celebrate yeerly feaſtes. And thoſe which ſuruiue keepe a regiſter of all their friends which bee dead, to the end they may know vpon what daies the obites and Annuall feaſts are to bee celebrated, for euery one that is departed: the dead bodies bee buried and interred with weeping and lamentation.
               The women vſually hange at their eares pearles and precious ſtones, which in men is not ſo commendable but onelie while they bee children, and then it is decent inough: a woman that hath had two husbands may bee thought chaſte, but ſhee that hath beene thrice married, is condemned as lewde and laſciuious, and yet it is no impeachment to mens credits though they haue had three wiues.
               Maides before mariage ſuffer there haire to hange down behinde them, but when they bee married they couer it carefully, and men cut theirs ſhort, rounde about their eares, eſteeming all trimming of there haires to be a reproach vnto them.
               
                  
This Nation is generally addicted to venery and drunkenneſſe, for to bee drunke they hold a glory vnto them, and eſteeme of luſt and laſciuiouſneſſe as of a thing lawfull, and commendable, ſo as the marriage bed be not defiled. Vſury alſo is there very common and vſuall, and not held to bee deceite in any one, not ſo much as in the Clergie.
               A great part of the Ruſſians be bond-men and ſeruile, Many Ruſſians make themſelues bondmen. and that willingly, for many of them, and thoſe ſometimes of the better ſort, ſet to ſale themſelues, their wiues and children, other, for becauſe they may thereby liue more idlely, or enioy greater pleaſure.
               The inferior prieſts weare blacke copes (after the manner of the Gretians) and the better ſort of them weare white, hauing hanging at their breaſts, tablets or bullions, wherein bee written the decalogue or precepts of the law diuine. The holy Virgins, or Nunnes (whereof there is but one family or order, which is the order of Saint Anthonie the Abbot) by the ordinance of the ſame Saint Anthonie their author and firſt founder, bee apparelled in blacke ſtoles.
               The Ruſſians haue a ſpeech peculiar to themſelues, but whether it bee the Scythian tongue or no I am not able for to Iudge, their letters are not much vnlike the Greeke caracters: they doe for the moſt part learne muſicke and gammer after the Greeke manner, and haue all other arts in contempt.
               Touching matters of faith, they beleeue as the Greekes doe, vſe like ceremonies in their ſeruice, and like honour to the Saints. There bee twelue men choſen and elected for to doe Iuſtice and determine controuerſies, whereof

one firſt ſearcheth out the quality of the crime, and then maketh report thereof to his fellowes, and ſometimes to the Duke himſelfe. And if the matter bee of greater weight or difficulty, then can well bee diſcerned and decided by that councell, or that it reſts doubtfull, ſo as the accuſed cannot bee conuicted, then the defendant is inforced to try the matter with the plaintife by combat, and hee which is vanquiſher ſhall haue double the value in money of the vanquiſhed as the wronge ſuppoſed to be done, was valued at.
               They bee very much giuen to husbandry, they plow with horſes, and their ſoile is very fruitfull of all things but wine, there drinke is a kinde of beere or ale made of millet and barley boyled together, which kinde of liquor is moſt commonly drunke in all the Northerne partes. They make oyle of hempe-ſeed, poppie and nuts: oliue trees they haue none, nor is the iuſe or liquor thereof brought thither from other countries, Ruſſia breedeth many ſorts of wilde beaſts, whereof diuers bee of rich furres, and highly commended of ancient writers: there is great ſtore of fiſh, amongſt which, is a moſt excellent one called Seldis, which is taken in a lake called Pareſlacus, and is very like the fiſhes that bee caught in the lake Benacus (which is a lake neere Betrona in Italie.)
               In Ruthenia be ſeuen famous lakes, and nine great riuers, one of which is by ſome coniectured to bee the riuer Boryſthenes by reaſon of the wonderfull things they report of the bigneſſe and nature thereof.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Lithuania, and of the manner of liuing of thoſe people. CAP. 7.
               
                  LITHVANIA ioyneth vpon the Eaſt vnto Poland, it is nine hundreth miles about, and the greateſt part thereof is either moores, fennes or woods, which is the cauſe that it is very hard Lithuania is full of moores and fennes. and difficult to come vnto, and in a manner inacceſſible, all the whole country being ouerflowed with mooriſh waters.
               There is no other fit or conuenient time for merchants, ſtrangers, to trade and trafficke in this Country, but in winter, onely then the fennes beeing all congealed, and frozen together, and the ice of an exceeding thickneſſe and couered with ſnow, euery place is paſſable, and all the whole country beeing of a ſea, they can finde no more certaine way to any place, but as they be guided by the ſtarres.
               In Lithuania bee very few townes, citties or villages: the inhabitantes chiefeſt wealth is cattaile, and skinnes of diuers kindes of wilde beaſts, as of the Harmoline and Zobelline, whereof there bee great plentie in that country: Of waxe and honey there is great aboundance, but they haue no vſe of money. The women haue their chamber-mates & friends by their husbands permiſſion, & thoſe they cal helpers or furtherers of matrimony,

but for a husband to commit adultery is held diſgracefull and abhominable: Marriages there bee very eaſily diſſolued, by conſent of both parties, and they marry as oft as they pleaſe.
               This people is ſo different from all other nations in their manner of liuing, as they hold with the abſurde opinion of Ariſtippus, which is, that honeſtie conſiſteth not by nature but by cuſtome: Wine is very ſcarce and geaſon amongſt them, the want whereof is ſupplied with milke, by reaſon of the great aboundance of beaſts, and there bread is browne, beeing neither ſifted nor boulted, they ſpeake the Slauonian language as the Polonians doe, which language is common to many other nations beſides, whereof ſome follow the rites and ceremonies of the Romaine Church, as the Polonians, the Dalmatians, the Croatij and the Carni: ſome others the Greeke Church, as the Bulgarians, Ruthenians and moſt of the Lituanians, and ſome againe hold certaine opinions differring from both Churches, as the Bohemians, Morauians and Boſnienſes, of which ſome follow the opinion of Iohn Huſſe, and many others the ſect of the Manachies: and there bee ſome which as yet continue ſtill in their paganiſme and ſuperſtitious blindneſſe, by worſhiping of Idols, and ſuch bee many of the Lithuanians.
               
                  Ierom of Prage who (in the time of Pope Eugenius the forth of that name) preached the goſpel in the country, & was the firſt that acquainted vs with the manners and ceremonies of that people (before that time vtterly vnknowne vnto vs) reported that diuers of the Lithuanians (amongſt whom hee firſt arriued) had certaine ſerpents

euery houſe-hold one, to whom they ſacrificed as to their houſe-hold-gods, and that hee wrought ſo farre with the worſhippers of them, that they deſtroyed and killed them all, one onely excepted, which could not bee burned: ſome others worſhipped the fire, and from it receiued their diuinations, and many others the Sunne, in the forme of a huge iron mallet, accounting that to bee there guide, and giuing it to name Magnus.
               
               Theſe people bee oftentimes ſubiect to the King of Poland: the chiefe Citie of the Region is called Vilna, it is a Biſhops ſeate, and as bigge as all Cracouia with the ſuburbes: the houſes whereof ioyne not together, but ſtand one a good diſtance from an other, as they doe in the Countrie, hauing orchardes and gardens betwixt them.
               There bee in it two very ſtronge caſtles or holdes, one ſcituated vpon a hill, and the other lower vpon the plaine or champion ground: This cittie of Vilna is diſtant from Cracouia, the chiefe citie of Poland, one hundred and twenty miles.
               About the Citie there are certaine Tartarians haue places aſſigned them for to dwell in, who tilling and manuring the ground after our manner, doe labour and carry commodities from one place to an other.
               They doe ſpeake the Tartarian tongue and worſhip the Religion of Mahomet.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of Liuonia, Pruſſia, and of the ſouldiors called Mariani in Spaine. CAP. 8.
               
                  LIVONIA (now profeſſing the true and ſincere religion) ioyneth Northward vnto Ruthenia, and the borders of Sarmatia, or Poland. The Tartarians a people of Scythia, haue made often incurſions, into that Country: The people of Liuonia were firſt made pertakers of the Chriſtian religion, by ſouldiors of Spaine called Mariani of Marianus, whereas before they acknowledged and adored no other god, but euill ſpirits.
               There hath beene very much controuerſie and wars about the poſſeſſion of that countrie, ſometimes one, ſometimes an other getting the vpper hand and gouernment.
               It is inuironed vpon the Weſt part thereof with the Sarmatian ſea, and with a gulph of an vnknowne bigneſſe, the mouth whereof Weſtward is not very farre from Cimbrica Cherſoneſus, the which is now called Dacia or Denmarke: about this gulphe Northward there doth dwell or inhabite a ſauadge and wilde kinde of people, which (beeing voide of any language vſed in other lands) doe exchange there Merchandiſe by ſignes and beckes: Pruſſia (the inhabitantes whereof bee called Pruteni) pertaketh now with Germania and Sarmatia, which countries it incountreth vpon the Weſt.
               
                  
This land (if Ptolomeus report a truth) is waſhed with the famous Riuer Viſtula, from the Cittie Tornum to Gedanum, where it falleth into the Baltean ſea, it lyeth beyond Germany, and reacheth from the riuer Viſtula, to the Sarmaticke Ocean.
               Vpon the Eaſt and South, is the Prouince of the Maſſouitae, (the inhabitants whereof be Polanders) and the Saxons vppon the Weſt: Pruſſia is an exceeding fruitefull countrey, well watered, and very populous. It is pleaſant withall, and abounding with cattell, there is very good fiſhing, and much hunting. Iornandes writeth, that this land was inhabited by a people called Vlmerigi, at ſuch time as the Gothes remooued from the Iland of Scandinavia, into the continent and maine land: And Ptolomeus reporteth, that the Amaxobij, the Aulani, the Venedes, and the Gythones, dwelt neere the riuer Viſtula or Wixell.
               The people of this Countrey were worſhippers of euill Spirits, vntill the time of the Emperour Fredericke the ſecond: and than our Ladies ſouldiers, which bee alſo called Deiparini, or Mariani, after they had loſt the towne of Ptolomais in Siria, returned into Germanie, and beeing men of haughtie and noble ſpirits, and very expert in feats of armes; and to the end their courages ſhould not be danted, and they out of vſe by ouer-much idleneſſe, they came vnto the Emperor, declaring vnto him, that the people of Pruſſia which border vpon Germanie, were vtterly ignorant of the Chriſtian Religion, and that they made often incurſions vppon the Saxons, and other their bordering neighbours, ſtealing from them whole heards of cattell: ſhewing him moreouer, that they had a deſire to ſuppreſſe that barbarous nation; wherunto the Emperor conſented, and gaue the kingdom to his two brethren, as their

lawfull inheritance, if they could conquer it by armes: the Dukes & Gouernors of Maſſouia, (which before had proclaimed themſelues Lords of that land) ſurrendred their eſtates and titles foorthwith to the Emperours brothers; which gift was thankefully taken by the Emperour himſelfe, who commending his brothers intent, gaue vnto them what letters and commiſſion they deſired, ſigned with the golden ſeale. Theſe breethren prouiding themſelues for the warres, in a ſhort time brought vnder their ſubiection, all the Countries which were vnder the Pruſſian gouernement, on each ſide the riuer Viſtula; who beeing conquered by battell, willingly ſubmitted themſelues to their ſubiection, and imbraced the true faith, and Chriſtian Religion therewithall, exchanging their ſpeech for the Almaine toung. Nere vnto the riuer Viſtula grew an Oke where the victors atchieued the conqueſt, and there they firſt erected a Caſtell, which ſhortly after (as many things in time grow great of ſmall beginnings) grew vppe into a great towne, and was called Maryburge: it is now the chiefe cittie of the Countrey, and his ſeate which hath the gouernement of that whole order of ſouldiers; which holy order of warfare, had his beginning from the Almaines, and there is none but Almaines, which enter into that order or bond, and thoſe too muſt be nobly or worſhipfully deſcended: at their entrance into that order, they are enioyned to be alwayes in readines to fight againſt the enemies of the holy Croſſe of Chriſt: they be cloathed in white caſſockes, with blacke croſſes ſowed on them, all of them ſuffering their beards grow long, but onely ſuch as be Prieſts, and are employed in their ſeruices. The ſouldiers in ſteade of the Canonicall houres, repeate the Lords prayer, for they bee altogether vnlearned, yet bee

they very rich, and their power as great as if they were Kings. They haue many conflicts with the Polonians, for incroaching vppon the Confines of their countrey, in which ſometimes they haue the better, and ſometimes the worſe, and they will neuer refuſe to ſubmit all their forces to the hazard of the warres, what euer the euent or ſucceſſe be.
               There is a little Region bordering vppon Pruſſia, and Samogithia. Lithuania, called Samogithia, it is cloſed and enuironed round about with woods and waters, and is fiftie myles in length: the people thereof be very tall, and of a comely ſtature, and yet very vnciuill, and of rude behauiour: they marry as oft as they will, and without reſpect of kindred or blooud: for the father beeing dead, the ſonne may marry his ſtep-mother; and one brother deceaſed, his other brother may marry his wife. Money they haue none; their buildings be baſe and low, and their houſes for the moſt part made of hempe ſtalkes and reedes, and faſhioned like boates or helmets, vppon the ridge or toppes whereof is made a window to giue light to the whole houſe, and in euery houſe is but one fire, which is euer burning, both to dreſſe their meate and drinke, and other neceſſaries belonging to their bodies, as alſo to expell the violence of cold, which is there very vehement and extreame, a binding froſt continuing for the moſt part of the yeare. Theſe houſes haue no chimneys in them, for all the ſmoke goeth out at the window.
               The people bee much inclined to diuination and witchcraft: the god in whome they repoſe moſt confidence and truſt, and which they eſpecially honour and adore, is the Fire, which they perſwade themſelues to be moſt holy, and euerlaſting, becauſe it is fedde with continuall fuell,

and there was a fire kept euer burning by the Prieſts vpon the top of a high hill neere vnto the Riuer Meuiaſa.
               
                  Vladiſlaus King of Poland, (who firſt reduced that nation to the Chriſtian Religion) quenched that fire, and ouerthrew the turret wherein it was kept, together with all the woods, which the people of Sarmatia held to be as holy as the fire, and worſhipped them with as much deuotion, and Religion, eſteeming and accounting them to bee the dwellings and habitations of the gods, according to the ſaying of the Poet:
               The gods inhabited and kept the woods.
               Nor did they worſhippe and reuerence the fire and woods onely, but euery other thing likewiſe, which vſually remained and abidde in the woods, as birds, and wilde beaſts: and if any one violated and contemned their witchcrafts and Inuocation of diuels, their heads and feete would incontinently cloſe and ſhrinke together, by the deceipt and illuſion of their euill ſpirits. Within the woods each family had a place or hearth, wherein they kept a fire for all that family; in which fire their cuſtome was, to burne their dead bodies, with their horſes, ſaddles, and beſt garments: firmely beleeuing, that in that place thoſe which be dead and burned, meet together in the night, and therfore they made them ſettles or benches to ſit vppon of Corcke tree, and placed them in readines, the beſt meath, and a kind of meate made of paſte like vnto a cheeſe, for them to eate.
               Euery yeare vppon the firſt day of October all the people of the whole countrey aſſembled and mette together in thoſe woods, and there (vſing all kind of deuotion) celebrated a ſollemne Feaſt, each family feeding in his owne cottage, vppon the daintieſt fare, and moſt delicious

viands they could get. At which feaſt they ſacrificed by the fireſides, vnto all their goddes, and eſpecially vnto one who me they called Percumo, which in their language ſignifieth thunder.
               Their language is all one with the Lithuanians, and the Polonians, for the Prieſts preach vnto the people in the Polonian tongue: they obſerue the Cuſtomes of the Romane Church, although there be ſome Ruthens towards the South, and Muſcouites which dwell farre north, which obſerue the Ceremonies of the Greeke Church, yeelding their obedience to the Biſhoppe of Conſtantinople, and not to the Biſhop of Rome. Vppon the North ſide of this Countrey lyeth Muſcovia, it is fiue hundred miles in compaſſe, rich in ſiluer, and vppon all ſides ſo garded, enuironed, and defended with ſuch ſtrong holds, as not only ſtrangers, but their owne natiue countrey-men, be interdicted and prohibited to paſſe in and out at their pleaſures without the Dukes letters of ſafe-conduct. The countrie is euen and plaine, no hils but great ſtore of woods and mariſh grounds: it is watered with many great riuers, as Occa, Volha, Dzuvina, Boriſthines and Dinaper, and therefore affoordeth as many fiſhes and wild beaſts as Lithuania, from which it differeth not much, neither in cuſtomes nor ſituation, ſauing that it is ſomewhat colder, becauſe more North-ward, and therefore bee their cattell little and ſmall, and for the moſt part halting and lame of their lims.
               The Metrapolitane and chiefe Cittie of the Region, is Moſcua, it is twiſe as bigge within the compaſſe of it, as Prague in Bohemia, the building is of timber as all their other Citties bee, it hath many ſtreetes and lanes, but they ſtand ſtraggling with broad fieldes betwixt them,

the riuer Moſca runneth through the middle of it, and diuideth it into two parts, and in the middeſt of the Cittie ſtandeth a caſtell or tower, builded vppon leuell ground, wherein be ſeuenteene turrets, and three bul-warkes or Blocke-houſes, ſo ſtrong and ſo ſtately, as there be but few ſuch to bee found: within this Caſtell bee ſeuenteene Churches, whereof thoſe three which be dedicated to our bleſſed Ladie, Saint Michael, and Saint Nicholas bee walled about with ſtone, but the reſt be made of timber: there is alſo in it three large and ſpatious Courts, for Noblemen and Courtiers to ſpend their time in, a ſtately and beautifull pallace alſo for the Duke to dwell in, builded after the Italian faſhion, but not very large.
               The Countrey containeth many famous Dukedoms, out of which, vppon any occaſion, in the ſpace of three or foure dayes, they will get together in a readineſſe two hundred thouſand able men: Their vſuall drinke is water and meath, and a certaine leauened or ſowre liquor, which they call Quaſſatz: they plow with woodden ploughes, and harow their ground with branches of trees, or thorns. Their corne (by reaſon of continuall cold) ripeneth but ſlowly, and therefore they drie it in hote houſes, and ſo threſh it.
               Againſt the extremitie of cold, they vſe diuers ſpices, and make a kind of water to drinke of oates, hony and milke; ſo ſtrong, that they will ſometimes be drunke with it: Wine and oyle they haue none; and to auoide drunkenneſſe, the Gouernour of the countrey forbiddeth the drinking of all ſtrong drinkes, vppon paine of death, except twiſe or thrice in a yeare, and then it is tolerable for them to be drunke.
               They haue ſiluer coyne of two ſortes, a bigger, and a

leſſer, it is not made round, but ſomewhat long, and with foure corners: This coyne they call Dzuvingis.
               
               They ſpeake the Slauonian language, and in religion follow the Greeke Church: Their Biſhops bee vnder the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, and by him bee confirmed. They be all Chriſtians ſauing the Koſannenſes, which worſhip Mahomet, like the Sarraſins: there dwell ſome Scythians alſo towards the North, which ſpeake their owne language, and worſhip Idolles, and one Idoll aboue the reſt, which they call Zlota baba, that is to ſay, the image of an old woman made of gold: this Idoll they do ſo highly reuerence and adore, as euery one that paſſeth by it, falleth downe and worſhippeth it, offering thereunto a haire from their garments, if they haue nothing elſe to offer.
               And although the Slauonian toung be generally ſpoken throughout the whole nation, yet is there ſo great difference in their ſpeech, (it beeing ſo mixt, confounded and corrupted with other languages) as they can hardly vnderſtand one another.
               In the time of Idolatrie they had one high Prieſt or Biſhop which they called (Criue) his dwelling was in the cittie Romoue, ſo called of Roma. And this cuſtome was generall to all the whole nation, not onely to ſell their ſeruants and ſlaues, like beaſts, but their ſonnes and daughters likewiſe, yea & ſometimes themſelues, ſuffering thē to be carried into other countries, in hope of better meanes to liue: for in their owne, their diet was groſſe and bad.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Polonia, and of the latter cuſtomes of the Polonians. CAP. 9.
               
                  POLONIA, a vaſt countrey of Europ, is ſo called of his plaineneſſe and eeuenneſſe, for (Pole) in the Slauonian toung, which is ſpoken by the Polanders, ſignifieth plaine, leuell, or eeuen: it is otherwiſe called Sarmatia: Vppon the Weſt it bordereth vpon Sleſia, vpon Pruſſia and Maſſouia vpon the North, vppon the Eaſt lyeth Ruthenia, and Hungaria on the South.
               The hill Carpathus (which is there called Crapack) diuideth the Countrey into two parts, whereof that part which is next vnto Saxonie and Pruſſia, is called the greater Polonia, and the other the leſſer, lying ouer againſt Ruſſia and Hungaria.
               The whole kingdome is diuided, as it were, into foure ſeuerall and diſtinct Prouinces, all which the king viſiteth euery yeare, in courſe one after another, and each of them maintaineth the king and his whole court for three moneths together, but if he ſtay longer then three months in any one part of the kingdome, it is at their choice whether they wil yeeld him any further maintenance or no.
               The kings ſeate is the great and famous cittie Cracouia, where is preſerued and kept all the wealth of the kingdome and all the other citties are meane and ſimple in compariſon of it: moſt of their houſes be made of rough ſtone, rudely compacted and heaped together, without mortar or clay, and dawbed with mudde: the countrey is full of woods, and thickets, the people bee prudent and

wiſe, courteous towards ſtrangers, and exceeding great drinkers, (as moſt of your Northerne people bee) yet is there ſmall ſtore of Wine, as hauing no Vines in all the whole country: inſteed whereof they drinke a kinde of counterfet Ale made of Wheat and other graine, for the ſoyle is very fertile, and affoordeth great ſtore of wheat, it is alſo very commodious and fitte for feeding, yeelding large grounds for beaſts to paſture in. There is very good hunting, as namely of wilde horſes, which haue hornes like Harts, and the wilde Bull, which the Romaines call Vrus: mettall mines there bee none but onely of Ledde, but Salt is there digged out of the ground in ſuch aboundance, as no one thing yeeldeth more cuſtome to the King then that doth: and there is ſo-great ſtore of honey both in Poland and Ruſſia, that they haue not ſpare places ſufficient wherein to keepe it, for all their trees and woods bee couered blacke ouer with Bees. The forme of their letters is much like vnto the Greeke Character, their ceremonies of religion are indifferent betwixt the Romaine and the Greeke Church, and both men and women in their apparrell doe much reſemble the Greekes.
            
            
               
                  Of Hungaria, and of the inſtitutions and manner of liuing of the Hungarians. CAP. 10.
               
                  HVNGARIA is the ſame which was once called Pannonia, although it was not ſo The limits of Hungaria. large and ſpacious a countrye when it was ſo called, as now it is, all betwixt the

the riuer Laytha and the riuer Savus, is knowne by the name of the inferiour or lower Pannonia. Hungary beyond Danubius reacheth vnto Poland and comprehendeth all the country which was inhabited by the Gepidae and Daci, ſo as the limits of the Empire is now farre larger then the name of the nation.
               This land (as auncient writers report) is deuided into nine parts or diuiſions, which in the Germaine tongue bee called (Hagas,) euery one whereof is compaſſed and incloſed with walls, made of blockes or piles of oakes, beech or fyr tree fixed faſt in the ground, twenty foote high and twenty foote broade. The ſoyle is full either of hard ſtones or ſtiffe clay, and all the vallies bee couered ouer with turfes, vpon the borders or marches of the land, bee many trees or ſhrubes planted and ſet, which beeing cut vp and caſt away will not-with-ſtanding beare leaues and floriſh.
               Euery one of theſe nine circles or diuiſions of ground, bee twenty Germaine miles diſtant one from another, although they bee not all of one length, but ſome one ſhorter than other ſome, and in euery part of them bee Citties, Caſtells and Villages, builded in ſuch good order and vniformity, as a man may bee heard ſpeake from one Caſtell Towne or village to another.
               Their buildings be compaſſed and incloſed with ſtrong walls, but their gates bee ouer narrow for them to goe in and out at their pleaſure, to ſteale and filch from others. Euery one of thoſe Circles or incloſed portions of ground called hagges, were wont to giue ſignes vnto others of euery accident, by the ſound of a trumpet.
               The Pannones (long ſince called Paeones) were firſt that inhabited that land, after whome it was poſſeſſed

by the Huns a people of Scythia, and after them by the Gothes, which came out of the Ilands of the Germaine ocean: when the Gothes were gone it was poſſeſſed by the Longabards, which came from Scandinauia an iland of the Ocean alſo; And laſtly by the Hungarians, who came from out the other Hungaria in Scythia, which is not farre from the head of the riuer of Tanais, and is now called Iuhra: This Scithian Hungary is a miſerable could country, as being ſcituate wholy vnder the Frigid zone, it is trybutary to the Duke of Muſcouy: the tribute which the inhabitants pay is neither gold nor ſiluer, (for thereof they haue none) but rich Skins and furres of ſundry wild beaſt as of Sabells and ſuch like.
               They neither plow nor ſow, nor haue any kind of bread, but liue only vpon fleſh of wild beaſts and fiſh, and drinke water: and their lodgings bee cabbins made of twigs and bowes, in groues and thicke woods: wherevpon it inſueth that men liuing in woods with wilde beaſts, weare neither linnen nor wollen garments but skins only either of harts beares or wolues. Some of them addore the Sunne, ſome the Moone and other Starrs, or what euer firſt commeth to their vew; they haue a proper and pecular language to themſelues.
               They fiſh for coralls that grow in the ſea, and fiſhes called Balenae of whoſe skins they make coaches and purſes, They haue exceeding fat Bacon whereof they ſell much to other nations. Vpon that ſide of this Hungary in Scythia which is neereſt vnto the Ocean, bee ſundry little hills or cliffes, vpon which certaine fiſhes called Mors or death fiſhes, making offer by meanes of their teeth, to clime to the toppe of the rockes, when they bee almoſt at the higheſt their hold fayleth them and they

fall downe and kill themſelues with the fall. Theſe fiſhes doe the Inhabitants gather vp and eate, reſeruing their teeth which bee very white and broad, which they exchange with ſtrange Merchants for other commodities, of theſe fiſh teeth bee made very good kniues hafts.
               But Hungaria in Europe hath vpon the weſt Auſtria and Boemia, vpon the South that part of Illyria which is next to the Adriatticke ſea; vpon the Eaſt lyeth Seruia (once inhabited by the Triballii and Miſii) and now of many called Sagaria) and vppon the North and Northeaſt, Poland and Muſcouie. The chiefe Citty and Kings ſeate is Buda, ſo called of Bada the brother of Attila: the ſoyle of the country (ſo much thereof as is errable) is very fertile, and there bee many veines of gold and ſiluer. It is ſtrange that is reported by the Inhabitants, that there is a riuer in Pannonia, whereinto if Iron bee often-times dipped, it will bee turned into Copper. The men weare garments that bee made hollow about the ſhoulders, and linnen coates or ſhirts vnder them, the collers whereof appeare about their necks higher then their vppermoſt garments, and bee wrought with ſilke and gold: They bee indifferent what manner of ſtockings they weare, for that they euer haue buskins ouer them. They be very curious in annointing and trimming of their haire, and they euer go in linnen hatts, which they ſildome put of, or once remooue from their heads, vnleſſe when they ſit ſtill and bee idle: but womens peticotes bee made more ſtraiter to their bodyes then mens coates bee, and reach higher towards their chinnes to couer their neckes and breaſts, ouer which they weare gownes, and their faces bee masked with linnen Veales richly wrought and imbrodered, ſo as you can ſee no part of them but

their noſes and eyes: Their heads be couered with linnen kerchers or coyfes ſet with pearls and precious ſtones, and they as well as men weare buskins that come vp to the calues of their legges. Their time of mourning in Hungary is for ſome a yeare, and for ſome two, and they ſhaue of their beards all but the vpper lippe: They iudge of matters concerning the true religion according to their law: but in diſciding of other matters, their courſe is (if the matter in queſtion be difficult or doubtfull, and cannot other wiſe be determined) that the plaintife or defendant ſhall fight it out by combat in the preſence of the King or his deputy, who is to iudge of the victory, for of his tryall by batell death doth not alwaies follow, for it is conqueſt ſufficient for one, if his enimy ether faint, or fight vnwillingly or fly out of the liſts appointed for the combat: The horſemens fight in Hungary is firſt with lances and then with ſwords, and foote ſoldiars fight naked on all parts but their priuities; They haue a proper ſpeach but not much differing from the Boemian language, and though they haue a forme of letters of their owne, yet vſe they altogether the Roman character. They be a cruell kind of people, very hardy & valiant in war, & much more fit to fight on foote than on horſebacke: They be vnder the gouernment of a King or rather a Duke, that hath Kingly authority: They vſe barbed horſes in the wars, but weare light armor themſelues, and they fight one after another, and not all together. And ſurely there is no one Chriſtian country in the world that hath held warres ſo long againſt the Turke, as the Hungarians haue don; the other Hungary in Scithia which is the mother of this Hungary, is almoſt like vnto this in language and manners, ſauing that the people bee more barbarous and liue ſtill in Idolatry.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Boemia, and of the manners of the Boemians. CAP. 11.
               
                  BOHEMIA is a country on the North ſide The limits of Boemia. of Germanie, and included in the limits of Germany, it hath vpon the Eaſt Hungaria, Bauaria on the South, Noricum on the weſt, and Poland on the North: It is (in a manner) as broad as it is long too, and about three dayes iourney either way, beeing on all ſides compaſſed and inuironed with the Hircanian wood, as with a naturall wall. Through the middle thereof runneth the riuer Albis, and an other riuer called Multauia, vpon the banckes whereof ſtandeth that goodly Citty Praga, the chiefe and Metropolitan City of the whole nation: The country affoordeth great ſtore of Wheate and Barley, and aboundeth with all kinde of victualls, both fleſh and fiſh, Oyle there is none, neither there nor in any other part of Germany, nor doth it yeeld much Wine, but great ſtore of Beere, and that of the beſt of any other country, which for the goodneſſe is carryed thence as farre as Vienna in Auſtria.
               The Boemians notwithſtanding they bee hemmed and compaſſed round about with Germaines, yet doe they not ſpeake the Germaine language, it beeing expelled thence by the comming of the Dalmatae, for their Chronicles report (as Volateranus affirmeth) that two brethren borne in Croatia, departing thence, and ſeating themſelues one in Boemia, the other in Poland, altered the countries both in their names and languages, and yet

there bee many in Boemia at this day, that obſerue and retaine both the language, and ancient cuſtomes of the Germaines: for in their Sermons the Germaine tongue is ſpoken, and the Boemian in their funerals. And Friars Mendicant of all others onely, had power heretofore when there was any Friars there, to preach & inſtruct the people in what language they liſted. The people be very licencious, as hauing no ſtrict lawes nor ſtatutes to reſtraine them, but euery one doth what beſt pleaſeth himſelfe, without controulement, for they haue reiected the authority and rites of the Romaine Church, and receiued the Waldenſian doctrine, which they defend tooth and naile: This doctrine not many yeares ſince was firſt preached by one Hus, and by him generally receiued, whereby the traditions of the Romaine Church, are at this day there, vtterly neclected and derided, for this is now their practiſe of religion: Firſt they eſteeme of the Biſhop of Rome no otherwiſe then of other Biſhops, denying him to be of any more reuerence and authoritie than other Biſhoppes are, holding alſo that there is no difference among Prieſts, and that it is not the dignity of Prieſthood that maketh one better, but his deſerts and well liuing. That ſoules as ſoone as they bee departed out of the bodyes, goe inſtantly eyther to perpetuall paines, or eternall pleaſures. And that there is no Purgatory at all, to purge and purifie them of their ſinnes after this life. To pray for the dead they account fooliſh and abſurde, and a thing inuented onely for the profit of Prieſts.
               The Images of our Sauiour Chriſt and of his Saints, they vtterly abandon and contemne, and deride and ſcoffe at the Benedictions and hollowings of Water Palmes, or any other things whatſoeuer: They hold that the religion

and practiſe of Fryers mendicant, was inuented by the Diuell: and that the Prieſts ought to bee poore and not to poſſeſſe mony nor ſubſtance, but to liue onely of the almes of the people: that euery one hath free power and liberty to preach and expound the word of God: That no mortall ſinne is in any ſort to bee tollerated, although by the committing of that ſinne a greater inconuenience may bee avoyded, and that hee that is conuinced of deadly ſinne, is not worthy to poſſeſſe and inioy any ſecular office nor Church dignity, nor is fit to be obeied: confirmation and extreame vnction they exclude from the number of the Sacraments, and eſteeme of auricular conſeſſion as friuolous and vayne, and that it is ſufficient to acknowledge their ſinnes vnto GOD ſecretly in their chambers.
               That Baptiſme is to be miniſtred with water onely without any commixtion of holy oyle: That Church-yards are vayne and ſuperfluous, & inuented onely for coueteouſneſſe, and that no one place is fitter for buryall than other, (for that the whole world is the vniuerſall Temple and open Sanctuary of God,) And that thoſe which build and erect Churches, Monaſteries and Oratories do goe about to reſtraine and limit Gods power and Maieſty: That Preeſts Veſtiments, Ornaments for the Altar, Palls, ſurplices, Chalices, Patines and ſuch other like veſſells, are trifles and traſh of no moment, and that the Prieſt hath power to conſecrate the body of our Lord at all times, and in euery place, and to miniſter it to thoſe which deſire it, and that it is ſufficient onely to prouonce the words of conſecration.
               That we ought not to pray to Saints to be interceſſors for vs vnto Chriſt, and that it is loſt time that is ſpent in

ſinging or ſaying the Canonicall houres. That no dayes ſhould be kept holy from labour, but the Lords day only; that no feaſt daies ſhould bee celebrated in honour of the Saints, and that (by the inſtitutions of the Church) faſting is of no merit, The report alſo is, that the Boemian Prieſts do miniſter the Sacrament of the body of our Lord, vnto infants and to all others indifferently, vnder both formes, which is a greater ſacrifice than that which is vſed in the Church of Rome, and one George Poggebratius is ſaidt o be the Author of this Miniſtration: One Picardus comming out of France, infected this nation with this monſtrous and abhominable madneſſe, for hee hauing intiſed a great number of the baſer ſort both of men and women, to bee his followers, inſtructed them to goe naked, and (as the author of all licentious liuing) called them Addamites, by whoſe inſtructions venery was openly practiſed without difference of kindred or allyance, and many other moſt horrible offences: ſome of which ſect are ſaid to remayne as yet, for there bee ſome Bohemians (which bee therefore called Gruebenhamer) which chooſe out for the excerciſing of their religion, vautes and hollow caues in the ground, and when their Prieſt (according to their cuſtome) hath pronoūced this part of Geneſis creſcite et multiplicamini et replete terram, that is, increaſe and multiply and repleniſh the earth, inſtantly they put out all their lights and fall to their lechery in the darke, euery man with the woman hee firſt lighteth vpon, without reſpect of age or kindred, and when they haue finiſhed their buſieſſe they light their lights againe, and goe euery one into his owne place and ſo bee their ceremonies ended. This execrable cuſtome of that damnable ſect, is not much different frō thoſe feaſts called Bacchanalia, which are firſt celebrated

in Hetruria and afterwards in Rome, by women in the night time, who hauing pampered them-ſelues with wine, and banketting, accompanied with men in ſecret corners without difference or reſpect either of kindred or age, whereby grew ſuch confuſion, as oftentimes the mothers were defiled by their owne children, and many other enormous villanies were perpetrated and done, which they tooke their beginning as from the warehouſe of all wickedneſſe. The ringleaders of this prepoſterous celebration were firſt cut of at Rome, when Quintus Martius, Philippus and Poſthumius Albinus were conſulls (as Sabellicus reporteth in his firſt Aenead and ſeauenth booke) but this irreligious impiety and horrible hereſie of the Boemians, could not bee extirpated and rooted out, in the raigne of foure Kings, Veneceſlaus, Sigiſmundus, Albertus and Vladiſlaus although they oppoſed them-ſelues againſt it with all their force and power.
            
            
               
                  Of Germany and of the cuſtomes of the Germaines. CAP. 12.
               
                  GERMANY is the largeſt nation of all Europ, it lieth farre North, and is deuided The ancient limits of Germany. from France with the riuer of Rheyne, from Rhetia and Pannonia with the riuer Danubius, from Sarmatia and Dacia with certaine hills, but more with the feare which one nation hath of the other, and vpon all other ſides it is incloſed with the ocean: But the limits of Germany at this day exceed theſe bounds & extend further, comprehending vnder that name Rhetia, Vindelitia, Norica & the vpper Pannonia, the Alpes, part of Illiria & euen to the gates of the Citty of Trent. All the country of Belgia in

like ſort, (which was heretofore vnder the French gouernment) and all about the riuer of Rheyne, are vnited to the Germaines, imbracing both their law and language, and forgetting, or not daring, or elſe ſcorning to call themſelues French: The Heluetians likewiſe by little and little haue almoſt loſt both their name and ſpeach, and become perfect Germaines, & Germany challengeth as her own, a great part of tranſalpine France: beſides all theſe the ſouldiers of Germany haue (within the ſpace of three hundred yeares) brought vnder their ſubiection the Prutenia barbarous and cruell nation, waining them from the worſhiping of Idols, to their owne language, and the Chriſtian religion: this country therefore as now it is, compared vnto what it was before, it will appeare that it hath added more to it ſelfe from forraine nations, then was formerly comprehended in his owne limits.
               All Germany was once deuided into two parts, wherof Germany deuided into ſuperior and inferior. that part which is neareſt vnto the Alpes, was called the higher Germany, & the other the lower which lieth northward and towards the Ocean: this partition doth yet continue, and the higher part is now called Alemania (as ſome thinke of a certaine lake or riuer called Alemanus) and each of theſe parts conſiſteth of ſundry Prouinces, for the higher Germany (going vpwards from the riuer Moganus, which runneth along by Franconia) containeth Dauaria, Auſtria, Styria, Atheſis, Rhetia, Heluetia, Sueuia, Alſatia, and the Prouince of Rheine, vnto the citty Mentz in Almania. The inferior or lower Germany hath in it Franconia (a good part wherof towards the South is held to be in high Germany) Haſſia, Lotharingia, Brabant, Gelderland, Zeiland, Holland, Fryſland, Flanders, Weſtphalia, Saxonie, Dacia, Peninſula, Pomeranià, Liuonia,

Pruſſia, Sletia, Morauia, Boemia, Myſnia, Marchia, and Thuringia.
               Germany (although ſome parte thereof ſeemed better than other) was firſt (as Cornelius Tacitus writeth) for the moſt part ether ouer-growne with woods, or rouer-flown with waters, being more baſe and barren to wards France, and more ſubiect to ſtormes and tempeſts towards Noricum Styria, & Pannonia, ſo that it yeelded neither fruite nor grayne, onely it bred good ſtore of cattell, but ſuch as were both little and low: gold and ſiluer it affordeth none, and therefore as a poore and baſe county, it was diſpiſed and very little regarded. But ſurely Cornelius was either much deceyued, or elſe the country is much altered from what it then was, for Germany at this day, is ſo pleaſant and ſo plentifull of all things, ſo beautified, ſtrengthened and addorned, with famous Citties, ſtrong Caſtels and ſtately buildings, as it is nothing inferior either to France Spaine or Italy, for the heauens ſmyle vpon them, the fields affords them ſtore of fruites, the Sunne ſolaceth him ſelfe amongſt her hills, ſhee hath whole mountaines of vynes, woods at wil, and all kinde of graine in abundance, being watred on all ſides with Rhene, Danubius, Moganus, Albis, Neccharus, Sala, Odera, and with many other great and famous riuers and brookes: there be fountaines like-wife of ſweete waters, hot bathes and mines of Salte, and it is equall to any other country for all ſorts of mettals yea all Italy, France, and Spaine, ſtore them-ſelues with ſiluer and other mettalls out of Germany: and there is ſome gold gotten, ſo as if thoſe old writers were now liuing, and beheld the preſent eſtate of Germany, as now it is, they would doubtleſſe thinke it ſtrange and wonder to ſee ſuch alteration, to perceiue each place ſo holſome and

conuenient to dwell in, the ayre ſo temperate, the ſoyle ſo fertile, ſuch aboundance of wine, and all kinde of graine, ſuch planting of trees, ſuch beautifull buildings of Citties, Temples and Sanctuaries, ſuch aduancement of religion, ſuch ciuility amongſt cittizens, decencie in apparell, experience in feates of armes, ſuch furniture and prouiſion for warres, and ſuch ſtore of all manner of ornaments, beſides the extraordinary ſincerity and perfection of the Peeres and Nobility, if (I ſay) they beheld and marked all theſe things well, I am of opinion they would not condemne the ground as barren, rude, ill fauoured, or little beholding to the heauens, yea they ſhould ſee how true that ſaying is; That good things are ſpoiled for want of workemanſhip and well husbanding: the ayre is there more calme and temperate in winter, then in other countries, and therefore it produceth more excellent fruites, yet be their ſummers more intemperate, through which intemperature many of thoſe fruites be often-times corrupted and ſpoiled, beſides there bee many venemous beaſts, and other, creatures pernitious and hurtfull to the inhabitants, and yet for all this, is it hardly to bee iudged, what Prouince may be compared vnto it, much leſſe preferred before it.
               The reaſon why this country aſſumeth the name of Germany, is, for that there is ſuch a ſympathy and concordance Germany why ſo called. amongſt all the people, both in the diſpoſition of their bodies, their manners and courſes of life, as all of them agree and liue together like brothers and equalls. It was firſt called Teutonia of Tuiſco the ſonne of Noe, and Alemanin, of Mannus his ſonne, who were ſaid to be the firſt authors and originall of that nation: though ſome be of a contrary opinion, and affirme, that Germany was

firſt inhabited by ſuch as were there bred and borne, and not by ſuch as were brought from other places; of which opinion is one which hath written thus.
               
                  
                     Well ſituated toward the North, d
                           •
                        th lye the Germaires ſoyle,
                  
                  
                     A people famous through the world, that neuer fell the foyle
                  
                  
                     Of forren foes: no heate nor cold, nor paines can them moleſt,
                  
                  
                     For that they ſcorne to ſpend their time in idleneſſe and reſt.
                  
                  
                     Borne certes in that land they were, with firſt that were aliue:
                  
                  
                     Nor but from Demogorgons loynes can pedigree deriue.
                  
                  
                     Thoſe did the Greekes Adelphi name, whom Latins Germans call:
                  
                  
                     Becauſe in vnity and loue, they liue like brethren all:
                  
                  
                     A name which vnto noble hearts doth yet grea honor yeeld,
                  
                  
                     Large lims hath la
                           •
                        iſh nature lent, their huged trunkes to weld,
                  
                  
                     Vnto their bodies anſwerable, that be both tall and ſtraight:
                  
                  
                     Their necks and all their body elſe is Alablaſter white,
                  
                  
                     Their eyes their haires and buſhie locks of yellow coulor be,
                  
                  
                     In temperature their members all and bodies doe agree:
                  
                  
                     What inwardly is thought or meant, their outward voice forth showes
                  
                  
                     Their toungs be traytors to their hearts, their ſecret to diſcloſe.
                  
                  
                     Their ſpeach is not effeminate but loſtie bigge and ſtrong,
                  
                  
                     So that their valiant warlike hearts, may knowne be by their tong,
                  
                  
                     They loue to wander much ahroad, to hunt and eke to ride,
                  
                  
                     And ſome by Arts and Sciences, their liuings doe prouide,
                  
                  
                     Some Bacchus tender budding ſprouts do winde on naked piles,
                  
                  
                     And ſome do till the fertile earth that barren was ere wh
                           •
                        les,
                  
                  
                     Some men in trauell much delight their youthfull dayes to ſpend,
                  
                  
                     And other to Mineruaes lawes their courſe do wholy bend.
                  
                  
                     Or hoyſing vp their ſailes aloft do cut through forren flouds,
                  
                  
                     And ſtore their wants with ſundry ſorts of far-fetcht ſtrangers goods.
                  
                  
                     If forren foes be wanting, then within themſelues thcile iar,
                  
                  
                     A light occaſion will ſuffice to ſtir them vp to war,
                  
                  
                     And all the while that cruell Mats doth bloudy flag diſplay,
                  
                  
                     They hold it then no iniury to rauish, filch and prey.
                  
                  
                     Some in Hircinian woods delight to hunt the tusked Bore,
                  
                  
                     And ſome the brazen-footed Hart with yelping Hounds to gore,
                  
                  
                     
                     Through forreſts, woods and mountains ſome purſue the cruell Beare,
                  
                  
                     And ſome with Eaulcons talents ſeeke the ſilly birdes to teare:
                  
                  
                     And pluming of their fethers cleane diſperſe them in the ayre.
                  
                  
                     No enterprice ſo doub
                           •
                        full is, but they will hazard all.
                  
                  
                     Nor can the feare of grifley death th
                           •
                        i
                           •
                         valian
                           •
                         mindes appall,
                  
                  
                     If wrongs be done, they ſeeke reuenge: but fo their countries good,
                  
                  
                     Or kin or friends, they will not ſtick to ſpend their deereſt bloud.
                  
                  
                     The
                           •
                         conſtant be in Chriſt his faith, and him do duly ſerue:
                  
                  
                     Nor from ſincere religion, doe ſela or neuer ſw
                           •
                        rue,
                  
                  
                     Their dealings honeſt, true, and iuſt, all lying they deteſt,
                  
                  
                     And euermore their toung declares whats hidden in their breſt.
                  
               
               The Germaines before they began their battels, vſed to chaunt forth a ſong or holy hymne, in honor of Hercules, holding opinion that he was once in that country: when they ioyned battell they would crie out with a moſt greeuous and clamourous noyſe, not ſo confuſed and diſſonant, as terrible to their enemie. Their eyes bee (for the moſt part) blew, their lookes ſterne, and their hayre red or yellow, they be tall of ſtature, and naturally very ſodaine and head-long in all their enterpriſes, but they cannot away with much labour and toyle, nor can they indure heate and thirſt, ſo well as the Frenchmen can, but cold they can indure paſſing well. Of gold and ſiluer they made no account, for the plate and Iewels of ſiluer which were ſent them from forraine Princes, they eſteemed as baſe and vile as earthen veſſels: But ſince by trafficke and trading with other countries, the vſe thereof hath crept in amongſt them. And there bee ſome hold opinion, that there is neither ſiluer nor gold gotten there as yet, and but ſmall ſtore of Yron, which was the cauſe that they vſed no ſwords in the warres, but long Speares or Iauelins with ſhort Yron pikes, being a very fit and handſome weapon to fight withall both aloofe and neere at hand.
               
                  
Their horſemen fought with ſhields and thoſe ſhort ſpeares, and footmen with ſtones and darts, and both of them naked, or in little ſhort gabberdines or caſſacks: the ſouldiers were diſtinguiſhed and knowne one from an other by the coulour of their ſhields, which were painted with ſelect and curious coulours, and but few of them wore either priuie coates, helmets, or head-peeces. Their horſes were neither well ſhapt nor ſpeedie paced, nor could they runne the ring, or career like Italian horſes, but onely ſtraight forward: hee that loſt his ſhield in fight was ſeuerely puniſhed, for hee was vtterly excluded from their ſacrifices, and not admitted to come into the Senate or Councell houſe, and many were ſo deeply touched with that indignitie, as they would violently procure their owne deaths, rather then indure ſuch diſgrace.
               Their Kings were elected for their worth and Nobility, and their power and authority was not altogether free, but limitted and reſtrained: the worthieſt ſouldiers, and men of greateſt valour, and ſuch as could effect more by their good examples, then by all their force and authority, were ordained leaders and conductors of their armies. There was none had power to chaſtice, beat, or puniſh an other, but the Prieſts only, for they held that reuengment belonged only vnto the gods, whoſe miniſters the Prieſts were. They would pourtray the Images of their gods, and carry them with them into the warres, as a ſpeciall incouragement to fight. And their friends and kinsfolke likewiſe were placed neere vnto the battell, that in their preſence they might either atchieue a glorious victory, or end their dayes with honor: and their parents, wiues and children were eye-witneſſes of their valor and proweſſe, and euer as any of them that fought were wounded, they

were brought vnto their mothers and wiues, and other friends that were lookers on, who were euer readie and willing to heale and cure them, and to ſupply the ſoldiers with victualles, exciting and encouraging them to fight manfully: through which exhortations (as ſome haue written) the battell hath renewed and begunne a freſh, when the ſouldiers were almoſt ſpent and wearied out: for they eſteemed their women to be of great ſanctitie and prouidence, and therefore their Councels were not to be contemned, nor their aduiſes deſpiſed. Vppon certaine dayes they vſed to ſacrifice men vnto Mercurie, and beaſts to Mars and Hercules, and they were generally giuen to ſorcerie and witch-craft.
               Trifling and pettie cauſes were managed and decided by the Rulers and Magiſtrates of the citties; but all great buſineſſes and difficult affaires, were handled by the whole body of the city in generall. They would neuer begin any buſines, but when the Moone was either in the change or in the full, and they reckened their computation not by the dayes, but by the nights.
               They came armed into the Councell-houſe to decide controuerſies, and to maintaine the right of cauſes, and hee vppon whoſe ſide the ſentence paſſed, and was conmended, had a Iaueling ſhaken and brandiſhed againſt him; which manner of ſentence giuing, they accounted to be moſt honorable, and againe thoſe whoſe cauſes were nought, were condemned by the Iudges frownes and ſterne lookes.
               All traytors an
                     •
                   turne-coates, and ſuch as fled to the enemie, were hanged: Sluggards, daſtards, and ſuch infamous perſons, and thoſe that had any noyſome diſeaſe, were laid vpon a hurdle, and dragged till they were dead.
               
                  
No Magiſtrate would execute any publike or priuate buſineſſe, but when he was armed: there was great emulation amongſt them about their diet, and they were incredibly giuen to affectation, for he carried the greateſt credit and eſtimation amongſt his friends and neighbours, that was beſt attended and accompanied with young gallants, when hee went abroad about any buſineſſe. If the Prince that was Generall or Leader of the armie, departed out of the field without victorie, he liued in diſcredite and infamie all his life time after, for the Prince fighteth only for victorie, and the other Noblemen for the ſafetie of the Prince.
               They would oftentimes take occaſion to make warres without cauſe giuen, onely becauſe they could not indure to liue quietly and peaceably. For they held it a point of ſloth and ſluggiſhneſſe, to get their liuing by their labors, if they might get it by warres, though it coſt them their liues: if they had no warres, the valianteſt men of them all, ſpent their times wholy in eating, drinking, and ſleeping; committing both houſes and husbandrie to the care and guidance of old men and women.
               So as it ſeemeth ſtrange to ſee two ſuch contrarie diſpoſitions in one people, to be both louers of idleneſſe, and yet enemies to peace and quietneſſe. Their dwellings were in villages, and euery one in ſeuerall houſes, their apparell, ſhort caſſockes, or ſouldiers coates, buttoned together with claſpes, or pinned with thornes, and the richer ſort were knowne and diſtinguiſhed from others by their clothes: for they wore their coates ſo cloſe to their skins, as you might plainely perceiue the perfect proportion of each lim and member, and the ſelfe ſame faſhion of apparell which ſerued men, was worne by women likewiſe.
               
                  
Moſt part of the Germaines which dwelt towards the Eaſt and North ſide of the countrie, contented themſelues with one wife a peece, ſome few excepted which had many; and the wife was not indowed by the husband, but the husband by the wife; nor was their dowers of ſuch dainties as were onely fit to make them fine and gay, but of ſuch things as they had moſt vſe of, as yokes of oxen, horſes, with their furniture, ſhields, ſwords, Iauelings and ſuch like.
               The women were wonderful chaſt and modeſt, and their lookes nothing want on to procure allurements: they frequented no banquets nor common feaſts, ſo as (though the nation were very populous) there was few women found offending in adulterie; but if any were thereof conuicted, her owne husband would pull her headlong out of his houſe ſtarke naked, before her neighbours and friends, and whip her round about the towne, nor was there any place for pardon for ſuch laſciuious ſtrumpets, no not their youth, beautie, nor riches could any whit priuiledge them, or reconcile them to their husbands. It was not tolerable for any one to ſcoffe at vice, for thereby they thought they both corrupted others, and were corrupted themſelues. And as euery woman had but one bodie and one life, ſo ſhould ſhe haue but one husband, nor ought ſhe to haue any idle cogitation or wanton deſire, as if ſhee more regarded the act of matrimonie, then her husbands loue: ſo as more good was done by their manners and examples, then in other places by wholeſome & ſtrict lawes. Yong men were not very prone to luſt, & eſpecially when their youthfull dayes drew to an end, and maides were not married til they were of good yeares, that they might bee more ſtrong and able to beare children.
               
                  
Murder was puniſhed with a certaine number of cattell, The puniſhmēt for murder. which the murtherer muſt giue to al the dead mans friends as a ſatisfaction for his death: They were very deſirous to diet together, and to keepe good hoſpitalitie, accounting it an vnhoneſt and vndecent part to forbid any one their houſes or tables. Rewards were willingly taken and giuen, nor would they vpbraide any one with that they had giuen, nor thinke themſelues in any matter beholding for what they receiued.
               They would ſpend whole nights and dayes in drinking Drunkenneſſe a commendation amongst the Germaines and carowſing, eſteeming and accounting it a credit to be drunken: and oftentimes after their gluttonie and gormandize, they would brall and fall out one with another, exchanging ill words, and ſometimes blowes, whereof oftentimes inſued mayming and murder. They conſulted of all ſerious matters, touching both warre and peace, amidſt their banquets, deeming their iudgements more acute, and themſelues more carefull at that time, then at any other, and more fit to vndergo any notable enterpriſe.
               The people were plaine and ſimple, without craft, diſſimulation or cunning, and eaſily drawne to lay open and diſcouer the very ſecrets of their hearts: They would call to mind the day after, what they had done before, conſidering of the matter more deliberatly, when they knew not how to alter it, ſhewing then what their intent was, when they could not be deceiued.
               They drunke a corrupt drinke made of barly, in ſtead of wine, but thoſe which dwelt nere vnto great riuers had wine brought them out of other countries: their meat was ſimple and groſſe, as wild apples, new dow, thicke milke, or clottered Creame: but their drinke was much more immoderate: They delighted to behold and ſee young

men naked, amongſt ſwords and ſpeares, and other militarie weapons belonging to warre, and to ſee how finely and nimbly they could deliuer themſelues out of the danger of them, the often practiſe whereof made them skilful, and their agilitie and skill was a great ornament vnto them. They were ſo exceedingly giuen to dicing, as when they had loſt all that euer they had, they would aduenture their owne liberties vppon one chance at dice; and if they The Germains were great dicers. loſt, they would willingly become ſlaues, and ſuffer themſelues (though neuer ſo ſtrong and luſtie) to be bound and ſold like beaſts. They diuided the yeare into Winter, Spring, and Sommer, making no recknning of Autumne, by reaſon of their ſcarcitie of wine and fruites.
               In their Funerals they made little ſhew of ſorrow, by weeping and outward lamentations, but the dolor and griefe of their hearts continued long, and women onely bewayled the dead, it being enough for men to remember them. And theſe in times paſt were the cuſtomes of the Germaines, and their manner of liuing.
               But how much they bee altered from what they then The later manners of the Germanes. were, (as well as other nations) may bee gathered by this their preſent eſtate: for now the whole ſtate and condition of the Germaines, conſiſteth of foure ſortes of people: the firſt ſort or Order is the Clergie, which be of two ſorts likewiſe: that is to ſay, ſecular Prieſts, and religious perſons; The Germains diuided into foure ſorts of people whereof the firſt is the Clergie. both of them beeing indowed with great and large rents, reuenues, and riches, and held in great honour and eſtimation wirh the people, both for that they offer ſacrifice vnto God, extoll the prayſes of the Saynts, and haue cure of ſoules; as alſo for that they vnderſtand the Scriptures and holy Writ, bee able to interpret and expound them, and leade a ſingle life; for thoſe which haue not all

theſe good parts in them, are deſpiſed and contemned of the vulgar ſort of people: And euery order of religious perſons, haue their garments made of their owne faſhion, very decent and comely: The ſecular, or lay-Prieſtes weare looſe Coates, for the moſt part black, or ruſſet, and linnen myters on their heads, not very high crowned, but ſticking cloſe about their eares. And when they go abroad, they caſt about their neckes, for decencies ſake, a broade lace, either of ſilk or linnen, which hangeth downe on each ſide their ſhoulders: Vpon their ſhooes are pumps: they weare Pantofles or Sandals, putting them off euer when they come home.
               Moſt of them liue very idlely, beſtowing little time in obtaining learning, but ſpending all the after-noones in gaming and drinking. The inferiour Prieſts, if any one iniure them, complaine vnto their Biſhoppe, and ſometimes to the Court of Rome: whereby they worke their owne ſecurity, and condigne puniſhment is inflicted vpon the offenders.
               The ſecond eſtate or condition is of the Nobilitie, wherof The ſecond order is of the Nobilitie. there bee many degrees; as Princes, Earles, Barons, and Knights, which is the loweſt degree of that Order: the Princes excell all the other degrees, as well in dignitie and bloud, as in power and ſtrength, as hauing very large lands and ample poſſeſſions.
               The Earles, Barons, and other Nobles liue diſperſed abroade in the countrie, ſome in one place, ſome in another, flowriſhing like ſo many flowers in a greene field. But that which is very ſtrange & worthy to be obſerued in the Nobilitie, is this, that both Princes & Earls acknowledge a ſoueraignty: & yeeld their obedience vnto the Emperor; ſo oft as neceſſitie, or the Emperour himſelfe requireth it: and

yet the Knights ſay, that they be exempted, and that they will not ſerue any one, nor ſuffer thoſe which be vnder thē to ſerue, but for wages and ſtipend, yet notwithſtanding they acknowledge and ſay, that the Romaine Emperour is their Soueraigne Lord and Gouernor. The Nobilitie in generall, thinke it a great diſcredit vnto them, and a blemiſh vnto their kindred and houſe, to exerciſe merchandize, or any mechanicall art, or to take a wife from among the common people, or that is their inferiour, or to liue in a ſtrange citty like townſ-men: for they (skorning all company and commerce with cittizens) liue freely with their wiues and families, in ſtately caſtels, ſtrong holdes, and beautifull pallaces, ſituated ſome vppon mountaines, ſome in woods, and ſome in champion countries. Some of the Nobles frequent the Courts of Kings and great Princes, and follow the warres, and ſome others liue at their owne houſes vppon their Rents and reuenues.
               They be much giuen to hunting, affirming, that by continuall cuſtome, and their auncient libertie, they only are allowed to hunt, and all other interdicted and depriued of that pleaſure; for, for a priuate man to hunt either hares, ro-buckes, kids, hynd-calues, or ſtagges, in ſome place is puniſhed with the loſſe of his eyes; and in ſome other places with the loſſe of his head: but it is lawfull for euery one that can, to take ſuch wild beaſts that be noyſome and hurtfull.
               Moreouer, they fare daintily, and be ſumptuouſly cloathed, as well men as women, both at home and abroade, beeing decked and adorned with gold, ſiluer, and ſilkes of ſundry colours: When they walke abroad they are attended with a troupe of their friends and familiars, and they may eaſily be knowne and diſcerned from the common-people,

onely by their gate, it is ſo graue and demure: They neuer go farre from home but on horſe-backe, for to take a iourney on foot they account a great diſhonor vnto them, and a plaine demonſtration of pouertie: but if they ſtand in want of any thing, they will ſtraine courteſie to take it from others, either priuily or by force. They ſeldome go to law with any one for iniuries done vnto them, but rather gather a troupe of their friends together, and reuenge themſelues, either by fire, ſword, or rapine: therby compelling the wrong-doers to make what ſatisfaction they thinke good.
               They be proude, turbulent, and couetous, practiſing how to get Church-mens goods by deceit, and wracking their ſlaues and clownes of the country, with an vnrelenting authoritie. It is almoſt incredible to be ſpoken, how they vexe, pill and poll thoſe miſerable and vnfortunate caytiues, & ſurely Germany were an hundred times more happie, if thoſe Centaures, worſe then Dionyſius and Phalaris, were either vtterly expelled the land, or at the leaſt, their tyranny and power ſo reſtrained & abridged, as they might be inforced to liue priuate like vnto the Nobility in Heluetia. The 3. eſtate or order of the Germaines, is of citizens and townſ-men: and of theſe, ſome be onely ſubiect The third order is of cittizens. to Caeſar, and ſome to other Princes and Prelates of the church. Thoſe which yeld obedience to the Emperor, haue many priuiledges, lawes, and cuſtomes common to themſelues: and euery yeare (by the voyces of the cittizens) is one chiefe magiſtrate elected; who for his yeare hath a ſoueraign authority ouer them all, and hee of himſelfe hath power to puniſh any one of the ſame order with death.
               When an offence is cōmitted, the offendor is brought before the magiſtrates elected, where beeing ſette in

councel, the accuſer is called for, who hauing ſet downe his accuſation, the defendant hath free liberty to plead for himſelfe; and when both parties be heard, at large, the Iudges proceed to ſentence, which is not by any courſe of law (for that theſe manner of magiſtrates be ignorant of the lawes) but as they be induced by reaſon, and as the cuſtome hath beene afore-time in like caſes: the like forme of Iudgement is vſed in ciuill cauſes likewiſe, ſauing that in ciuill and criminall cauſes, the party accuſed may appeale vnto Caeſar, which offenders in other cauſes may not doe.
               In euery Imperiall Citty bee two ſorts of Citizens, the Citizens deuided into two ſects. one of Gentlemen, the other of Plebeians: the Plebeians or comminalty of the city, be occupied in trading and keeping ſhops, but the Gentlemen (which bee alſo called Patritians) liue only vpon their patrimony & reuenewes, in as good faſhion as the Nobility or Knights of the country do, if any of the comminalty wax ſo rich, that he (either by cuſtome or commerce) will intrude himſelfe into the ſociety of Gentlemen, he is (notwithſtanding his wealth) diſcarded their companies, whereof it proceedeth that each of theſe orders of Citizens, haue for many yeeres, continued in there owne eſtate without alteration. And yet for all this the adminiſtration and gouernment of their commonwealth, is commune and permitted as well vnto the Plebeians as Patritians, ſo as the communalty is no way in ſubiection to the gentility, but euery one hath his owne ſubſtance in ſafety, with free liberty (not tranſgreſſing their lawes) to liue as they liſt: and Iuſtice is miniſtred (for the moſt part) throughout al the whole country, by men which haue little learning or none at al, for in euery City (and in many townes likewiſe) bee elected 12.

Iudges, which be ſuch as be moſt notorious for vprightneſſe and integrity of life, not reſpecting whether they be learned or no, which twelue muſt of neceſſity take vpon them the office of Iuſtice and Iudgement, for which they expect no other wages nor reward, but onely honour, and they be ſo diligent in performing their duties therein, that (for the common good) they will not ſticke to neglect al priuate affaires and buſineſſe whatſoeuer (be they neuer ſo vrgent) to obſerue the times appointed for Iudgment and hearing of cauſes. And they bee all of them ſworne to miniſter Iuſtice vnto euery one, according to right and equity, from whoſe ſentences in times paſt, they would neuer appeale, eſteming it a great indignity vnto them, to contradict the decrees of ſuch men as executed their offices gratis, but now adaies appeales be vſuall, which were the more tollerable a great deale, if the Iudges to whom the appeales be made, would in their Iudgements obſerue the cuſtomes of the former Iudges, but their doinges are ſo little regarded, that their ſentences, though neuer ſo iuſt and vpright, be retracted and wholy altered, onely becauſe they ſeeme to repugne their written lawes, whereby the Iudges of the former rancke, are vndeſeruedly taxed of ignorance, their good indeuours reprooued, and blemiſhed, and the parties to bee releeued oftentimes oppreſſed: which kinde of Iudgement, how corrupt it is, themſelues may eaſily perceiue.
               Furthermore the Citizens liue and accord together very familiarly and friendly, meeting and aſſembling themſelues, ſometimes in publicke places, ſometimes in priuate houſes, where they ſpend their time, ſome in buying and ſelling, ſome in conferrence one with an other, ſome in feaſting and banquetting, and ſome in gaming

and diſporting, in all which ſundry actions can hardly be diſcouered any deceite or contention.
               They be very curteous and affable, for at all times and in all places, bee they men or women, ſo often as they meete together, ſo often doe they ſalute one an other. Vpon working daies they be very frugall and ſparing, both in their diet and apparell, but vpon feſtiuall daies they will goe more gallantly and far more daintily. Thoſe which labour eate foure times a day, and playmen but twiſe; the mens apparell for the moſt part is wollen, and the womens linnen, and each of them ſo much differrent one from an other, both in collour and faſhion, as you ſhall hardly finde one man or one woman apparelled like an other, for they be ſo new fangled as they will fall into euery new faſhion, imitating the Italians, but more vſually the French men, from whom now of late yeeres, the men haue gotten their broad noſed ſhooes, their coates with wide hanging ſleeues cut, and wouen cappes (which they call Pyrethia) And not long ſince, they wore ſhooes with ſharpe ſnoutes, ſhort coates clooſe to their bodies, and hoods with tayles or flappes behinde: This ſparingneſſe in apparel heretofore vſed by men, is now deſcended vnto women and by them practiſed, for whereas they were wonte to weare many kerchers vpon their heads, which made their heads ſeeme great, by reaſon of their many folds of linnen, they now weare but one onely: They bee alſo more modeſt in all their other clothes then heretofore, they haue beene in a manner vtterly reiecting gold, ſiluer and pearles, and all ſumptuous garding of their garments with rich furres and ſilkes.
               I need not ſpeake of their long traines carried vp behind them, which (though they were common) bee now

onely worne of the Nobility, and the women be now ſo decent and comely cloathed, as they cannot iuſtly bee reprehended for any thing they weare, ſauing that ſome womens gownes bee ouer wide and to much hollowed about the necke.
               In their funerals and celebration of their friends obites, they be attired in blacke, and their time of lamentation is thirty daies, within which ſpace they doe ſacrifice for them three times, the firſt day, the ſeuenth day and the thirtith day.
               They be ſo deuout and religious a people, that euery artificer before he begin his worke, wil goe to the Church and heare maſſe, yea both men and maide ſeruants be by their maſters compelled therunto, for they hold it a beaſtly and hatefull thing, for any one to neglect his ſeruice to God, either for idleneſſe, or for any buſineſſe whatſoeuer. In giuing almes they be very charitable, for there is almoſt no City but it hath in it a couent of Mendicant Friers, and a common houſe to releeue and harbor poore Pilgrimes and ſtrangers. There bee alſo ſoſtred and brought vp many yong youths that haue left their owne countries and fathers houſes, to attaine learning in Germany, of which ſort of ſtriplings and yong ſtudents, you ſhal ſee ſo many in one City as you will thinke it ſtrange how they ſhould be maintained; And theſe bee onely nouriſhed and brought vp, by the almes and charity of the Citizens, and goe ſinging from houſe to houſe for victuals, whereof they haue inough giuen them, for becauſe they frequent the Church daily, and helpe the Prieſts to ſinge maſſe, and bee afterwards made prieſts themſelues.
               In euery pariſh is one publike houſe or free ſchoole,

wherein as well theſe, as the Cittizens ſonnes, be brought vp in learning, their maiſters and tutors be ſuch as bee both learned and vertuous, who chaſtice thoſe which be ſhrewde, or neglect their learning, ſometimes with words and ſometimes with ſtripes.
               Their dwelling houſes for the moſt part be ioyned together, and builded according to euery mans ability, ſome high, ſome low, but al aptly and conueniently diſpoſed for their trading, the rich mens houſes be builded ſtately with lime and ſtone, and poore mens with timber and morter, and all of them couered either with tile or ſlate, which whether it be done for ſtate, or to preuent danger of fire I am not able to ſay.
               In Saxony and diuerſe other places beſides, they couer their houſes with ſmooth ſhingles, which maketh their building ſeeme more baſe and more ſubiect to burning: The ſtreets (for the moſt part throughout all the Cities of Germany) be paued with flint ſtone, and vpon the gates of euery City ſtand high turrets or watch-towers, wherein (in the day time) be placed certaine skouts, to giue notice vnto the warders below, by the ſound of a trumpet, of all horſemen they perceiue comming towards them, to the end, that hauing warning afore-hand, they may bee more prouident to prouide for the ſafety of the city: Their cities (for the moſt part) be defended both naturaly & artificially, being ſcituated either vpon the tops of hils, or by winding riuers, ſuch as be ſcituated vpon the plaine ground, be compaſſed and immured with ſtrong wals and trenches, & defended with innumerable towers and bulwarkes: the fields alſo about many of their cities be ſo incloſed on all ſides with deepe and large ditches, as they ſerue for a ſufficient defence againſt the inuaſion of forraine enemies.
               
                  
The fourth laſt and loweſt eſtate of the Germaines, be The fourth order is of huſbandmen. of ſuch as dwel in country villages, and follow husbandry, and be therefore called clownes or bores, whoſe eſtate and condition of all others is moſt hard and miſerable, for they liue baſely by themſelues, vtterly ſeperated from all other ſorts of people, ſo as they haue no fellowſhip with others, but their owne families and their cattaile. Their dwelling houſes be low cottages made of timber and clay, and couered with ſtraw, their bread is meane and courſe, their meate either oatmeale pottage or ſodden beanes or pulſe, and their drinke is either water or whey: their apparell a Canuas frocke (ſuch as our Carters vſe in England) high ſhooes or ſtartvps and coloured caps.
               Theſe clownes be a very turbulent, toylſome and beaſtly kinde of people, they carry into Citties neere adioyning them, all their fruites and increaſe that arriſeth from their corne and cattaile (other then what their Landlords haue, for they themſelues doe ſcarce taſte of any fruite of their trauaile that good is) where they ſell them, and make their prouiſion of ſuch things as they haue need of, for amongſt them dwel few artificers or none at all. Euery village hath a Church in it, whether in the forenoone vpon holy daies, all the people reſort to heare ſeruice, and in the after-noone, ſome of them meete togither in one place or other, where they fall to chopping and chainging, or conferring of other buſneſſe, the youth fall a dauncing after the minſtrels, and old men a tipling in tavernes: and none of theſe clownes will goe abroad amongſt other people, but with weapons about them, for they haue their ſwords ready at all aſſaies: Euery village chooſeth out two or foure of the moſt ſubſtantial

men amongſt them, whom they call their maiſters, theſe be indifferent men to decide contentions and controuerſies growing by contracts, and haue the diſpoſing and ordering of their little common-wealth next vnto their Land-lords, for it is they that haue the ſole gouernment and authority ouer them all, other then what is by them permitted to theſe choſen praefects, which in their vulgar tongue they call Sculteti. Theſe clownes liue in great drudgery and ſlauery vnder their Land-lords, for they plow their grounds, ſow their ſeedes, get in their harueſt, prouide them fuel, repaire their houſes, skoure their ditches, and maintaine their fencing: in a word, there is no ſlauery whatſoeuer, but is wholy impoſed vpon thoſe bores, nor dare they for their liues once refuſe to doe any thing their Land-lords command them, for if they doe they ſhall be ſoundly puniſhed, and yet there is no one thing that oppreſſeth them more neerely, then that the farmes they poſſeſſe be none of their owne, but that (notwithſtanding they be euery way elſe ſlaues vnto their Land-lords) they muſt pay vnto them yeerely a great part of their corne and graine for rent: And theſe bee generally the manners of the Germaines at this day and this their courſe of life.
            
            
               
                  Of Saxony and how the Saxons liued in times paſt and how they now liue. CAP. XIII.
               SAXONIA (a particular Prouince of Germany) is bounded vpon the Weſt with the riuer Viſera or (as The limits of Spaine. ſome will haue it) with the riuer of Rheine, vpon the

North with Dacia and the Baltean ſea, with Franconia on the South (againſt which lie oppoſite a longth-wiſe Boiarie and Bohemia) and with Pruſſia on the Eaſt within which bounds and limits how many ſundry ſorts of people, diſtinguiſhed by ſundry names, be at this day comprehended, and included, may eaſily be vnderſtood by the precedent deſcription of Germany, all which are ſaid to liue vnder the Saxon law.
               This country was named Saxony of a people called Saxons, who (according to the opinion of ſome writers) Saxony why ſo called. were the remnant of the Macedonian army, which followed Alexander the Great, and at his death were diſperced into all parts of the world. Some others affirme that they were wandring Britans, and ſuch as had no certaine habitations, and that they forſooke their natiue ſoile to ſeeke them better ſeates, and getting ſhipping and arryuing in Germany, expelled thence the Thuringij and poſſeſſed their land. For at the firſt the people of Saxony were turbulent and troubleſome, il and ouerthwart neighbours vnto all thoſe which dwelled neere vnto them, yet were they at home peaceable and quiet, and maruellous vigilant and induſtrious for the good of their country and common-wealth, beſides that they had a very prouident care and extraordinary regard, for doing any thing that ſhould be a touch or debaſement to their ſtockes, or againſt their honours, holding it a ſtaine and pollution to their bloud to marry with women of other nations, or with any inferior to themſelues, and indeuouring their vttermoſt to make themſelues a people proper and naturall without mixture of other nations, and onely like vnto themſelues; whereof inſued that though the number of them were great, yet in their externall habites, in

the ſtature and proportion of their bodies, and collour of their haire, they were almoſt all alike.
               The Saxons were deuided into foure ſorts or differences The Saxons deuided into noble-men free-men, libertines and ſlaues. of people, which were noble men, freemen, libertines (that is ſuch as had beene ſlaues, and obtained their freedome and manumiſſion) and bound-men or ſlaues, and to the end that each of theſe orders might remaine in his owne Eſtate, it was eſtabliſhed by a law, that no man of one eſtate, ſhould marry or take to wife a woman of an other, but that the Nobility ſhould match with nobility, the free-men with free-men, the manumitted with thoſe which were manumitted and the ſlaues with ſlaues: the penalty for the tranſgreſſing of which law was preſent death. They had many good and holeſome lawes for the puniſhment of malefactors.
               They were vpright in condition, ſincere in life, and of vncorrupted and irreprehenſible manners, doing nothing but what was profitable, honeſt and agreeable to the lawes of nature: all which had beene ſufficient for their ſaluations, if withall they had knowne and beleeued in the true and euerliuing God. But they were great Idolaters, worſhipping trees, and fountaines of water, but more eſpecially a huge ſtock of wood ſet vp an end, which they accounted for a god, calling it in their language (Irminſaul) that is to ſay a vniuerſall and generall piller or colume, whereby all other things are ſuſtained & held vp: Mercury alſo they obſerued and honoured as a god offring vnto him vpon certain daies humaine ſacrifices, nor Merccury obſerued as a god by the Saxons,
                   did they hold it fit or lowable (by reaſon of the great dignity and diuinity of their gods) to include them in Temples and Churches, nor to figure them in the proportion of men, but they conſecrated vnto them, woods & groues,

calling them after their names, and they neuer peruſed thoſe ſecret and miſticall places, but with great deuotion and reuerence: Witchcraft and ſocery was much in practice amongſt them. Their manner of taking aduiſe whether a thing were to bee done or not done, was thus, firſt they would cut from a fruite tree, diuers little ſprigs or young ſprouts, marking and diſtinguiſhing them each from other, with certaine notes or differences, and ſo caſt them ſodainely and at aduentures vpon a white garment.
               And then (if the conſultation were general for them al) the prieſt, if priuate, the goodman of the houſe-hold, lifting vp his eyes towards heauen, and praying to their gods, taketh vp thoſe branches one by one, and layeth them downe againe three ſundrie times, and euer as hee taketh them vp, he expoundeth and interpreteth what is to be done, according to the note or impreſe written vpon them; and then if the prieſt or good men of the houſe forbid it to bee done, they aduiſe no more of the matter that day, but if they allow it, the people were ſo ſtronge of beleefe as they would put the proiect in practiſe what euer they euent proued: they gathered and coniectured of many things by the chirping and flying of birds, and oftentimes made experiment of forewarnings and admonitions of horſes, which (to preſage of things to come) were nouriſhed and kept in thoſe woods and groues dedicated to their gods.
               Theſe horſes were white and neuer did any manner of worke, and (beeing coupled together and ſet before the holy Chariot) they were attended and followed either by the prieſt, the King or chiefe ruler of the city, who diligently marcked and obſerued their neying,

whynying and ſtoming, and this manner of prediction or foreſhewing of things to come, was of all others in greateſt credit and eſtimation, both by the Princes, prieſts and people, for they held them to bee the miniſters of the gods, and partakers of their diuine councels.
               They vſed alſo an other ſort of ſooth-ſaying or witchcraft, whereby to know aforehand what ſucceſſe they ſhould haue in the warres, which was in this manner: when they tooke a captiue of any nation againſt whom the waged battaile, they compelled him to fight with one of their owne people, and as the victory went betwixt them two ſo would they iudge of the inſuing warres. The Emperour Charles the Great was the firſt, that by continuall warres, compelled this impious people to admit the Chriſtian religion, which both they and all other Germaines doe now moſt religiouſly adore.
               In Saxonie be many ſumptuous and Princely palaces, and magnificent and ſtately Temples, Churches and Monaſteries, as one in Alberſtandium conſecrated to our bleſſed Ladie, whereinto neuer entreth any prophane or vnhallowed perſon, but onely ſuch as bee profeſſed in Religion A Temple in Alberſtade de dicated to our Lady. and to the ſeruice of God, except vpon Aſhwedneſday, and then is there one of the people brought into the Church, who muſt euer bee ſuch a one, as in the eye of the world is of moſt wicked and abhominable life and conuerſation, this man beeing brought into the Church all in blacke, and his head couered, is placed where hee may heare maſſe, which beeing duely ſolemniſed, hee is caſt out of the Temple, and inforced to wander vp and downe the citie bare-footed, all the time of Lent, viſiting all the Churches one after an other,

during which time, he is maintained by the prieſts, and by them brought againe into the Church vpon Eaſter-day, where (hauing firſt an almes giuen him which he offerreth with great deuotion to the Church) after the conſecration of the oyle, he is expiated and hallowed by the whole Clergie, and ſo diſmiſſed. This man they commonly called Adam, comparing him for his innocency, vnto Adam our firſt father and founder, who was voide of all ſinne, and by him they ſuppoſe their city to be purged and purified.
               The ſoile of Saxony is very fruitfull of all things but wine, and hath diuers mines of ſiluer and baſſe: toward Goſleria, and in many places beſides be brine-pits, and fountaines of ſalt water, whereof they make a fine white and moſt delicate ſault, which yeeldeth them a large commodity yeerely.
               They haue great ſtore of barley and wheate, whereof they make very fine white bread, and a kinde of ale or The Saxons immoderate drinkers. beere to ſupply the want of wine, which they drinke ſo immoderatly and out of meaſure, as when they bee at their feaſts and bankettings, and that their ordinary cups and drinking glaſſes will not hold ſufficient for them to carouſe at one draught, thoſe which doe giue attendance at the table, will ſet before them a great paile full of that drinke with a diſh in it, wiſhing euery one to bee their owne skinkers and ſo to drinke what they pleaſe, and it is almoſt incredible to report how much of that liquor thoſe immodeſt and druken people will deuoure and ſwallow vppe at one ſitting, vtging and inforcing one an other to drinke, till they bee worſe then bruitiſh ſwine, not thinking they haue enough, when they are ſo drunke as they lie wallowing in their

owne vomit, but euen then they will ſticke cloſe to it night and day, vntill they be ſober againe, and he which drinketh moſt, and out ſitteth them all, is not onely highly extolled and commended of the reſt, for that notable exploite, but alſo in ſigne of victory and triumph, hath giuen him a garland or noſegay made of roſes and ſweete flowers, or elſe ſome other reward for which they contended.
               This their wicked and beaſtly cuſtome of drinking, is now (the more pity) diſperced ouer all Germany, ſo as all of them in generall, doe now drinke ſtronge wines as liberally, as the Saxons doe their ale, to their inſpeakeable hindrance and hazard of their healthes, in ſuch ſorte, as (not content to doe ill themſelues) if any ſtranger or other come into the roome where they bee drinking, they will riſe vp and reach him their cuppes, perſwading him very earneſtly for to ſit downe and to beare them company, accounting him their enemy if hee looke for much bidding or inuiting, or refuſe to drinke, without ſhewing iuſt cauſe, which hatefull diſorder is oftentimes the cauſe of bloud-ſhed and murther.
               Theſe quaffing Saxons fare very hardly and ſluttiſhlie, for their vſuall meate is ſmall guttes or chitterlings dried, rawe onyons, fat bacon and ſalte butter, and they ſeeth their meate vpon ſunday to ſerue them all the weeke after.
               They feed not their young children as we do, with pap or pottadge made of milke and flowre, but with more ſolide and ſtronger meates, which is firſt champed or chawed in the nurſes mouth, and ſo giuen the children to ſwallow downe, which kinde of diet when they be young maketh them more ſtronge and luſty, and better able to indure extremities.
               
                  
The Saxons haue a peculiar language to themſelues, but in their apparel and other things, there is no difference betwixt them and the Germaines.
            
            
               
                  Of Weſtphalia, and of the manner of Iudgement ordained for the Weſtphalians by Charles the Great. CAP. 14.
               
                  WESTPHALIA is comprehended and included within the bounds and limits The bounds of VVeſtphalia. of Saxony, hauing vpon the Eaſt the riuer of Rhene, Viſurgus or Viſera vpon the Weſt. Frizland and Holland vpon the North, and vpon the South the hils of Haſſia, which Ptolomeus calleth Obnobij; out of which hils ſpringeth the riuer Amaſis, which running by the two renowned cities, Padeburne & Monaſterium, diuideth the Prouince as it were into two parts, and ſo paſſing by Frizland is carried into the ſea.
               There is alſo the riuer Sala which is famous for the notable ouerthrow of Druſus, ſonne in law to Auguſtus: This country (as Strabo writeth) was firſt inhabited by a people called Dructerij, and (as others write) by the Sicambry: This people beeing ſubdued by Charles the French King, ſurnamed Charls the Great, was by him induced, or rather inforced to imbrace the Chriſtian religion, whereto they 
                     Secrete Judges ordained by Charles the Great ouer the VVeſtphalians.
                   were hardly drawne; and being a mutinous and rebellious people, euer when they rebelled, they would returne againe to the worſhipping of Idols, nothing regarding the true faith, nor their othes whereby they were obliged to obſerue and keepe it, which when Charles perceiued, to

the end that he might bridle and reſtraine their temerity and raſhneſſe, with feare of corporall puniſhment, he ordained ſecreat Iudges, and gaue them full power and authority to execute Iudgement at their pleaſures, without tryall or purgation, vpon all ſuch as had either violated their oths, abrogated their faith, or otherwiſe committed any notable villany: In chooſing of which Iudges he had a ſpeciall care and regard, to elect iuſt and vpright men, that the guiltleſſe and innocent might not be puniſhed without cauſe. This law and manner of execution thereof, ſtrooke a great terror into the Weſtphalians, and at length inforced them to continue in the faith, ſeeing before their eyes both noble men and meane men hanged and truſt vp in trees without any accuſation or trial at all, and vnderſtanding that they were executed either for breach of their faith or ſome ſuch other heinous offence. This kinde of Iuſtice or martiall law, is yet in force and is called, Iudicium vetitum, or Iudicium occultum, a hidden or ſecret ſentence, and the Iudges or executioners of that law, be called Scabini, who be now growne ſo preſumptuous and inſolent, as they would challeng and vſurpe the like liberty and iuriſdiction ouer all Germany.
               They haue ſecret cuſtomes and hidden lawes, knowne to few more then themſelues, whereby they doome men to death, and it is very hard to finde out their manner of proceedings, for neither feare nor reward can allure any one of them to reueale their ſecrets.
               The maior part of thoſe Scabini be not diſcouered what they are, but goe vp and down the country (like Promooters) noting mens faults, and accuſing them for their offences in places of Iudgement; and arraiging them (as their cuſtome is): which done the malefactors be condemned,

& their names inroled in a catalogue, and ſo deliuered to the Iunior Scabini, to whom the execution belongeth, by which meanes many euil doers looſe their liues, that neuer knew of their condemnations.
               But this their manner of Iudgement, is now much altered and degenerated from his firſt perfection, for ſometimes very baſe and meane perſons be admitted into that office, and thoſe whoſe power and function was onely to find out offenders, and puniſh miſdeameanors, doe now buſie and occupy themſelues in al other ordinary buſineſſes. The country of Weſtphalia is cold, and very bare of wine and al kind of graine, their bread is brown & courſe, and their drinke or beere made of barley, for the wine which is brought vnto them by the riuer of Rhene, is maruelous deere, and therefore little vſed, vnleſſe of the wealthier ſort of people. The natural inhabitants be both warlike and witty, whereof inſueth this prouerbe. That Weſtphalia breedeth more flatterrers then fooles, it is vnder the iuriſdiction of the Biſhop of Colen.
            
            
               
                  Of Franconia and of the nature and cuſtomes of that Country. CAP. 15.
               
                  FRANCONIA, or Eaſt France is a Franconia why ſo called. part of Germany, & ſcituated in the very heart & middle of the country, it was ſo called of the Sycambrians, who expelling thence the Alani in the raigne of the Emperor Valentinian, were after called Franci. It is inuironed on the ſouth with Sueuia & Boioaria, with the riuer Rhene on the weſt, vpō the eaſt lieth The bounds of Franconia.
                  
Bohemia, and Haſſia, and Thuringia, (two Prouinces of Saxonie) vppon the North. This countrie is on all ſides ſo incloſed with huge thick woods, and cragged mountains, as the paſſage into it is both dangerous and difficult, yet within it is very euen ground, garniſhed and adorned with an innumerable ſort of Citties, walled townes, and fortified Caſtels and Villages. It is inuironed round about with the Hyrcanian wood, which with his high hilles incloſeth and defends it on all ſides like a naturall wall; and through it runne Sala, Thuberus, Neccharus, and the nauigable Riuer Moganus. Theſe Riuers paſſe by many wide and large Valleys, vppon the bankes whereof on both ſides be planted great ſtore of vineyards, which yeeld wines ſo rare, and of ſo great worth, as they be tranſported into other countries far remote.
               The land is fertile enough, and not ſandy and ouergrowne The fertility of Franconia. with Fearne, as (Aeneas Syluius reporteth) ſauing that part of the countrie which is now called Norica, or in ſome places neere vnto riuers.
               It yeeldeth great increaſe of barley, wheate, and all other kind of graine and pulſe, and no one part of Germanie affoordeth ſo many and ſo great Onions, Rape rootes, and Rape ſtalkes as this doth: beſides, about Babenburge grow ſuch great ſtore of Lycoras rootes, as they be caried away by cart loades.
               It is full of gallant medowes, and goodly Orchards, very populous and abounding with beaſts, there is much fiſhing by reaſon of the multitude of Riuers, and better hunting, for the great ſtore and varietie of wild beaſts: for the Princes preſerue them of purpoſe in woods and foreſts, making them ſtables and dennes to lye in, and to defend them from winters boyſterous and cold ſtormes,

allowing them meate alſo if need be, and no priuate man may be ſuffered to take or hunt any of theſe beaſts.
               The whole countrie of Franconia is vnder the dominion The Princes of Franconia. of fiue princes, whereof two be ſecular or lay Princes, that is to ſay, the Burgraue of Norinburg, and the Count Palatine of Rhene, and the other three bee eccleſiaſticall Gouernors, to wit, the Biſhops of Babenburg, Herbipolis, and Magnus.
               The Biſhop of Herbipolis holdeth his Duke-dome, by The Biſhop of Herbipolis, one of the Princes of Franconia. hauing a naked ſword, and an enſigne or flag placed before him vppon the altar, while he is at Maſſe. And the firſt day that he entreth into the Metrapolitan or chiefe cittie, and taketh vppon him the Epiſcopall ſeate, he is vſually attended with a great troupe of gallant and excellent horſ-men: and when he is admitted and entred into the cittie, he lighteth off his horſe in the very gate of the cittie, and there diſrobeth himſelfe of his vppermoſt garment, and putteth on a poore and baſe coate, and girdeth himſelfe about the waſt with a cord: and in this humble manner bare headed and bare handed, he goeth vp into the pallace, vnto the Canonicall or Regular Prieſts, who after they haue done their fealtie vnto him, exalt and inſtall him in his ſeate, but before his inſtalment, hee is conducted to the picture of ſome deuout Biſhop that is dead, where he is ſeriouſly and earneſtly admoniſhed to follow and imitate his examples, who being elected of a poore ſtudent, did notwithſtanding gouerne the State of the Church vprightly, & as it ought. And none of the linage of either Dukes or Earles may poſſeſſe this Cathedrall ſea, but onely ſuch as be of the inferior Order of Nobilitie: not for that it is not ſufficient to maintaine a Prince, (for the poſſeſſions and reuenues bee very large and great) but becauſe none may enioy the

Biſhoppricke, but onely ſuch as be canonicall or regular perſons, which are for the moſt part of the meaneſt degree of Nobilitie. To be Biſhoppe of Herbipolis, is a title of maruellous great dignitie and honour: and when a Biſhop is new created, the cuſtome is, that at his firſt entrance into his Biſhoppricke, he ſhould progreſſe ouer all his dominion, and viſit all the townes and villages which pay him tyth, and in euery towne he bringeth out into the ſtreetes whole hogſheads of wine, with diſhes for euery one to drinke that will.
               The Franconians do nothing differ from the reſt of the Germanes, either in their apparell or ſhape of their bodies: They be very laborious, and none of them giuen to idleneſſe, but the women as wel as men plant in vineyards, and yet (by reaſon of their pouertie) they ſell their wines, and drink water themſelues: Beere they cannot indure nor will haue any brought vnto them, yet in Herbipolis vpon faſting daies, thoſe which will drinke no wine, may buy it in dockes and roades without the cittie, to drinke in ſteade of water.
               The people be inſolent, arrogant, and proude, contemning all others in reſpect of themſelues, and ſo much giuen to cauilling and brawling, as no ſtranger can indure to ſtay with them, vnleſſe he can flatter and diſſemble, and behaue himſelfe diſcreetly and ſoberly: but thoſe which can indure their floutes and taunts, and pocket vp their iniuries with patience, may ſafely dwell with them: for ſuch they account and eſteeme honeſt and ſufficient men, and permit them to marry wiues, and enter into conſanguinitie with them, by which meanes many Suevians, Bavarians, and Haſſians do dwell, and continue in Franconia.
               
                  
They be very deuout, and religiouſly giuen, and yet ſubiect to two horrible and execrable vices, which are, ſwearing and filching: for they will glorie and vaunt themſelues in blaſphemie, and horrible prophanation, and account ſtealing, a thing honeſt, commendable, and lawful, becauſe long vſed as a cuſtom. They obſerue many ſtrange ceremonies, which I wil here ſet downe for the more credit and better approbation of ſuch things as be written and reported of them by ſtrangers.
               In the nights of thoſe fiue dayes of Aduent, which go immediatly before the day of our Lords Natiuitie, all the children of the towne, both men-children, and women-children, go vppe and downe the ſtreetes from one houſe to another, knocking and beating at euery ones doore, wiſhing them a happie and proſperous new yeare, and ſhewing them in a ſong, that the birth-day of our Sauiour Chriſt is nigh approching, and euery houſhold giueth them either apples, peares, nuttes, or money, or ſome other thing that they can beſt ſpare.
               But with what ioy and exultation, the birth-day of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt is ſolemnized in their churches, both by Prieſts and lay-people, may be vnderſtood by this Ceremonie following: for then they place vppon the Altar the image of a young child, in repreſentation of the new birth of the babe Ieſus; which done, the young men and maydes daunce and hoppe round about the Altar, and thoſe which be married, and old folkes ſing a ſong or hymne: which kind of ceremonie is not much vnlike to the triumph and exultation, which (as Poets faine) was vſed by the Coribants in a caue in the mountaine Ida, about the image of their god Iupiter. In the Kalends of Ianuarie (which by their computation is the beginning of the yere)

is a ſollemne meeting of friends and kinsfolkes together, who ioyning their hands, and lifting them vp to heauen, with one heart and conſent, pray for a proſperous and happie new yeare, ſpending all that day in pleaſant congratulation, meriments, and drinking. Which done they ſend new yeares gifts to their friends which bee abſent, which gifts, the Romaines in their Feaſtes dedicated to Saturne, (which were ſolemnized about that time) called Saturnalitia, and by the Greekes, they be called Apophoreta, that is to ſay, preſents or things giuen to gueſts to bee carried away with them.
               This cuſtome and ceremonie of theirs, was deſcribed by the Author of this booke, in theſe verſes following:

                     
                        O Chriſt the Word of Father deare, &c.
                     
                     
                        In honor of thy bleſſed birth we celebrate eight dayes:
                     
                     
                        All which we ſpend in holy hymnes, and chanting forth thy prayſe.
                     
                     
                        And following thy examples true, we gifts do often ſend
                     
                     
                        Fat Capons, Hares, or ſome ſuch thing vnto each louing friend:
                     
                     
                        Fine wafers stampt with Images and Pictures rarely ſignd:
                     
                     
                        Or basket full of Oranges, doth argue friendly mind:
                     
                     
                        Ten Oranges that plumde and topt be with greene boxen creſt,
                     
                     
                        And ſpices rare of ſundry ſorts in honor of this Feaſt.
                     
                  
Vpon the Feaſt day of the Epiphany of our Lord commonly called Twelfte-day, euery family maketh a cake of flower, hony, ginger, and pepper, and therewith they elect and chooſe them a King, in this maner following: the good-wife of the houſe kneadeth and maketh the cake, and in the moulding ſhee putteth a penny into it, without conſideration into what place of the cake ſhe putteth it, but euen at aduentures, then doth ſhe rake away the fire

and bake it vppon the harth, and when it is baked, ſhee breaketh it into as many peeces, as there be men in the whole houſhold, and ſo diſtributeth vnto euery one apart, aſſigning one part thereof vnto Chriſt, another to our bleſſed Ladie, and three portions more to the three Wiſemen, for, and in the name of an almes. And in whoſe part ſoeuer the penny is found, him doe the reſt ſet in a chaire, and lifting him vp on high three times, with great iollity and mirth, they ſalute him as their king: and all the while hee is lifted vppe, hee hath in his right hand a peece of chalke, with which he maketh a great many croſſes vppon the roofes of their chambers and parlours; and theſe croſſes they haue in great eſtimation, thinking, that by them they eſcape many dangers.
               And there is no houſe throughout the whole countrey of Franconia, eſpecially if it be a dwelling houſe, but in ſome one of theſe twelue nights which bee betwixt the Natiuitie of our Lord, and the Epiphany, it is perfumed either with Frankinſence, or ſome other ſweet ſmelling perfume, againſt the deceits and illuſions of Diuels and Sorcerers.
               It were in vaine to mention in particular, in what manner of Epicuriſme, the Franconians ſpend the three daies next before Lent, if you knew what generall and wilfull madneſſe poſſeſſed all the reſt of Germanie at that time, (wherein the Franconians do equall them,) and in what licentious manner all of them then liue, for all thoſe three dayes the Germaines practiſe nothing elſe, but eating, drinking, and playing, plying it ſo luſtily, as though they ſhould neuer eate or drinke more, or, as if (with the Epicure) they ſhould ſay, I will take my pleaſure, I will eat and drinke my belly full to day, for to morow I ſhall die.
               
                  
Euery one will inuent ſome new deuice or other to delight their minds and ſenſes withall, and to hold them in admiration, and to the end they ſhould not bluſh, nor be daſhed out of countenance, in acting their apiſh toyes and interludes, they maske their faces, and change their habites, the men wearing womens apparell, and the women mens, ſome repreſent Satyres, and ſome play the diuels part, beeing made blacke with woade or inke, and cloathed in loathſome apparell like Diuels indeed. Some others go ſtarke naked, imitating the Prieſts of Pan, of whome (I thinke) the Germanes haue learned that yearely cuſtome of doting and vnnaturall madneſſe. This their manner of reuelling differeth not much from the Feaſtes called Lupercalia, which the noble young Romane gallants were wont to celebrate in the moneth of Februarie, in honor of the Licaean Pan. For as thoſe Romane youths went round about the Cittie naked, and their faces beſmered with bloud, laſhing all they met with cords and whips, in rude and barbarous manner moſt loathſom to behold, euen ſo the Germaines ſtrike thoſe they meete, with bags ſtuft full of ſand or aſhes.
               There is a ſtrange cuſtome vſed in many places of Germany vppon Aſh-wedneſday: for then the young youth get all the maides together, which haue practiſed dauncing all the yeare before, and carrying them in a cart or tumbrell, (which they draw themſelues in ſtead of horſes,) and a minſtrell ſtanding a top of it playing all the way, they draw them into ſome lake or riuer, and there waſh them well fauouredly.
               What the reaſon of this ceremonie is, I cannot perceiue but as I coniecture, they imagine the doing of this, to be a purgation and ſatisfaction to God, for practiſing ſuch

light and wanton behauiour, vppon Sundayes and Holydayes, directly againſt the Canons and precepts of the Church.
               In the middle of Lent, at which time they be commanded by the Church to reioyce, the youth of Germany where the Authour of this preſent Worke was borne, make an Image of ſtraw, reſembling the picture of Death; and hanging it vppon aſpeare, carry it vp and downe the ſtreetes, with great ſhowting and exclamations, and many giue them good intertainment, offering them ſuch things as they vſually eate, as peaſon, milke, and mellow peares; and when they be wel refreſhed, they returne home again: but ſome others on the contrarie part, giue them Iohn Drums intertainment, reuiling and beating them away frō their houſes, deeming the picture of death to bee ominous and a foretelling of their deaths indeed. The like cuſtome to this, is vſed by the Franconians, and at the ſame time: for there the young men take an old cart wheele, and couer it all ouer with ſtraw, and then (being a great troupe of them together) they cary it to the top of a high hil, where, after they haue ſported themſelues moſt part of the day, vnleſſe the cold driue them ſoone home, in the euening they ſet it on fire, and ſet it going downe the hil burning, beeing a ſight able to aſtoniſh the beholders, that know not what it meanes: for it tumbleth into the valley all of a flaming fire, with ſuch a pudder, as if the Sunne or Moon ſhould tumble downe from heauen.
               Vppon Eaſter day, ſome one of the wealthieſt amongſt them, cauſeth certaine cakes to be made, and giueth one or two of them to the young men, and as many to the maydes, and when they be all mette together a little before night, in a plaine medow, in the preſence of an infinit

number of ſpectators, thoſe which bee moſt nimble of footmanſhip, runne for thoſe cakes, the yong men againſt yong men, and the maides againſt maides.
               Then haue they their ſolemne ceremonies at the dedication of their pariſh Churches, which (by the Inſtitutions of the Church) ought to be ſolemnized by all the pariſhioners, once euery yeare, with great ioy and banqueting: to which ſolemnization come many yong men out of other pariſhes, not for any deuotion they beare vnto the Churches, but onely to dance, drinke, and reuell, for their manner of comming argueth little deuotion, but rather an intention to brawle and quarrell, for they come all well weaponed, and Minſtrils playing before them, and often-times they fall out and goe together by the cares, and part with crackt crownes. The like kinde of meetings and aſſemblies we haue in many places of England, which we call wakes.
               Vpon Munday, Tueſday, and Wedneſday in Rogation weeke, or croſſe weeke, (when as generall Letanies and Proceſſions are vſed to bee ſaid ouer all the Chriſtian world) there meete together at one Church in moſt parts of Franconia, many croſſes (for by that name bee the whole company of pariſhioners called that goe the preambulation with the Proceſſion, and haue a banner with the ſigne of the croſſe caried before them) & when many ſeuerall croſſes or companies be mette together in one Church, they ſing not altogether, but each ſeuerall company hath a ſeuerall quire, and a ſeuerall place to ſing by themſelues.
               The yong men and maides bee arrayed in their holy day apparell, with wreaths or garlands of flowers about their heads, and willow ſtaues in their hands: The Prieſts

and Miniſters of the Church ſtand by giuing diligent eare to their ſinging, and which of the Quiers they thinke haue ſong ſweeteſt, and made the beſt melodie, they adiudge that the other Quiers ſhall giue vnto them certaine bowles of Wine.
               And vpon Whitſunday this is their order: euery one which hath either a horſe of his owne, or can borrow one, doe meete in one place, and ride together, to view the bounds, and limits of their fields, hauing with them a Prieſt, with the body of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt put in a purſſe, and hanging at his neck, and all the way as they ride they ſing and pray, beſeeching God of his great mercy, to defend and preſerue their corne, and to ſend ſuch temperate and ſeaſonable wether, as they may receiue the fruits of the earth to their comfort and ſuſtentation.
               Vpon Saint Vrbins day, all the Vintners and maiſters of Vineyards, ſet a table either in the market ſteed, or in ſome other open and publick place, and couering it with fine napery, and ſtrawing vpon it greene leaues and ſweete flowers, doe place vpon the table the Image of that holy Biſhop: And then if the day bee cleare and faire, they crowne the Image with great ſtore of Wine, but if the wether prooue rugged and rainie, they caſt filth, mire, and puddle water vpon it, perſwading themſelues that if that day be faire and calme, their grapes (which then begin to floriſh) will prooue good that yeare, but if it bee ſtormie and tempeſtious, they ſhall haue a bad vintage.
               Vpon Saint Iohn Baptiſts day at night, in euery village and ſtreete in Germany be common fires, (or as wee call them heere in England bone-fires) about which all the people gather together, both men, women and children, dancing and ſinging, and vſing many other ſuperſtitions,

as wearing vpon their heads garlands made of Mugwort and Veruin, and flowers in their hands wreathed and pleated together in faſhion of a ſpurre, (which wreathes they call military ſpurres) and they dare not looke vpon the fire, vnleſſe they looke through thoſe ſpurres, firmly beleeuing that by that meanes their eyes be preſerued all the yeare after from all paines and diſeaſes, and euery one as he goeth away, throweth the garland hee wore about his head into the fire, vſing this coniuration, Goe thy way and burne, and all my ill luck periſh and burne with thee. The like faſhion is vſed by the Biſhop of Herbipolis ſeruants and courtiers, for they cauſe a great fire to bee made before the tower, which ſtandeth vpon a hill aboue the citty of Herbipolis, and throw into the fire many wodden hoopes bored full of holes, which when they bee all of them on a red fire, they put crooked ſtickes into the holes of the hoopes, and cunningly and forceably hoyſe them vp into the ayre a great height, ſo as they flying from the top of the hill ouer the riuer of Moganus, which runneth vnder the hill, ſeeme to bee firie Dragons, to thoſe which neuer ſaw the like before.
               At the ſame time of the yeare their manner is to make earthen potts, with ſo many holes in them as they will hardly hold together, and theſe potts doe the maides buy and couer them round about with red Roſe leaues, and then put Candles into them, and hang them vpon the toppes of the houſes, inſteed of Lanthornes: the yong men at that time bring into their villages each one a Pine tree, with all the little ſhootes and vndermoſt branches lopped off, and garniſhing and triming the vpmoſt boughes with little hoopes, garlands, glaſſes and glittering rayes or plates of golde or copper

they ſet their trees faſt in the ground, where they muſt ſtand all ſummer, reſembling many poles in England.
               In Autumne when their Grapes wax ripe, they gather not their Grapes one, one day, and an other an other day, but all the owners of a Vineyard are appointed to pull their Grapes all at one time, to continue pulling till they haue all done that Vineyarde, for they haue not power to pluck them when they pleaſe them-ſelues, but when they be allowed by thoſe to whom the tithe is due: And theſe tithe-maiſters appoint ſuch a hill of Grapes to bee got ſuch a day, and ſuch a Vineyard ſuch a day, and their tithes be euer brought by the owners of the Vines, into the valley at the hill foote; but thoſe which neglect to gather their Grapes at the time appointed, ought and are inforced, whether they will or no, to carry the tithe into the Lords Wine-preſſe, at their owne coſt and charge: But about the citty of Herbipolis, the owners of tithes bee more preciſe, for they (diſtruſting that the Vine maiſters will not tithe truly) ſet a boy ouer euery one of them, to marke their manner of tithing, and to ſee that their maiſter haue his due, and when harueſt is done, and all the Grapes gathered, all thoſe boyes meete together in the field, and euery one beeing couered all ouer with ſtrawe, and a Torche or two in his hand, they kindle their Torches a little before night, and ſo come ſinging with their Torches burning into the citty. And in this ſort they ſay they burne and make cleane Autumne.
               The Franconians celebrate the feaſt dayes of the two pillers of the Church Saint Martin and Saint Nicholas, with great ioy and triumph, but after a diuerſe maner, for the one is ſolemnized in Churches and Altars, the other in victualing houſes and tauernes: and there is 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
throughout all the whole country be hee neuer ſo needy, or neuer ſo niggard, but vpon Saint Martins day hee will haue ſome roſte meate, or boild meat, and it be but Hogs intrailes, or Calues intrailes, & glut themſelues with wine, for then they taſt of their new wines, from which till that time they haue abſtained; and all their houſholds drinke wine with them: and vpon this day in Herbipolis and in diuerſe other places beſides, is much wine giuen to the poore for charity: then haue they their publike ſhewes and paſtimes, as to haue two or three Boares put into a place together, and to behold them fight and teare one another with their tuskes, till their guttes traile about their heeles, deuiding the fleſh when the Boares bee dead, ſome to the common people, and ſome to the Magiſtrates.
               But vpon Saint Nicholas day, all the yong fry and Schollers, chooſe out three amongſt them, one to repreſent the perſon of a Biſhop, and the other two Deacons, he which is elected in the place of a Biſhop, is ſolemnly vpon that day conducted into the Church by all his Schoole-fellowes, decked and trimmed with a Biſhops Miter, and all his other ornaments, and ſo ſitteth in place of authority, as Lord and Protector ouer them all the while Maſſe is in ſaying, and when the ſacrifice is finiſhed, hee chooſeth out a few of them from amongſt the reſt, and hee and they goe ſinging vp and downe the towne from houſe to houſe, collecting and gathering money, and alleadging that the money they gotte by this meanes, is not taken as an almes or beneuolence, but giuen franckly for the maintenance of the Biſhop.
               Vpon Saint Nicholas Eeue Parents will aduiſe their children to faſt, and the more to incite them there vnto

they perſwade them, that if they ſet their ſhooes vnder the table ouer night, what ſo euer they ſhall finde in them in the morning, is ſent them from that bountifull Biſhop Saint Nicholas, which cauſeth the children to faſt ſo truly and ſo long, as their parents bee faine to compell them to eate for being ſick with ouer long faſting: and theſe bee the moſt vſuall cuſtomes of the Franconians; theſe their annuall ceremonies.
            
            
               
                  Of Sueuia, and how the people of that country liued heretofore, and how they now liue. CAP. 16.
               
                  SVEVIA a Prouince of Germany, is at this day limitted and bounded vpon The limits of Sueuia. the Eaſt with Baioaria, vpon the Weſt with Alſatia and the riuer of Rhene, it hath the Alpes vpon the South, and Franconia on the North. Sueuia (as Antonius Sabellicus is of opinion) was ſo called of a certaine people called Sueui, who departing from that part of Scythia, which is now called Liuonia & Pruſſia, obtained this country to dwell in: which opinion Sueuia, why ſo called. of Sabellicus, Lucan ſeemeth to confirme, where he ſaith: He brought the yellow Sueuians from the vtmoſt Northern coaſt: Before it was named Sueuia, it was called Alemannia, of the lake Lemannus which is alſo called Lauſanenſis. Sueuia is the vtmoſt part of all Germany, and is watered with two notable riuers Rheine and Danubius, whereof the one running ſlowly falleth into the ſea Weſtward, the other running a contrary courſe, paſſeth by many regions, and falleth at length into the ſea called Pontus.
               
               
                  
The country is ſome part of it plaine and euen, and ſome part cragged and mountanous, and all of it fertile and fruitfull, ſauing lakes, mountaines and woods. There be great ſtore of woods, and therefore very good hunting, and eſpeciall good fowling, by reaſon of the multitude of riuers and lakes: Of cattell there bee great abondance, and plenty of all kinde of graine, it is alſo full of gallant and flouriſhing valleis, watered and manured with brookes, riuers and running waters, ſome running one way, ſome an other, ouer-flowing and fatting the ſoyle: all which disburthen themſelues either into Rhine or Danubius. The land is very wholſome and healthfull, and well repleniſhed with ſtately cities, townes and caſtels, aſpiring towers likewiſe, walled and fortified both by arte and nature: and for the aduancement of Chriſtian religion, it is ſufficiently furniſhed with beautifull and rich temples, pariſh Churches and Chappels, Biſhops Pallaces, Colledges, and monaſteries, containing ſundry orders of religious perſons, both men and women: vpon the hills bee mines of Siluer, Yron, and diuerſe other mettals: it is very populus, and the people very hardy, ſtrong & valerous; they be tall of ſtature, yellow haird, faire and welfauoured, and marueilous ingenious, ſo as Plutarch concludeth them in a word, for the moſt famous people of all Germany.
               The glory and fame of this people grew once to that height, as they obtained the Empire and gouernment of the world, and in that honour and renowne continued for one age, but afterwards beeing deſtitute and depriued of their Princes, I know not how it came to paſſe, whether by the fickleneſſe and variety of fortune, or by their owne folly and ſloth, but their gouernment ceaſed, and their power and ſtrength in ſhort time became ſo

weake and feeble, as they could hardly hold their owne and defend themſelues, much leſſe extend their fame to her former greatneſſe, in ſuch ſort as noe one conſidering their preſent eſtate, would thinke that euer they had beene Lords and Gouernors of the world.
               
                  Iulius Caeſar in the fourth booke of his commentaries, writeth of this people thus. The Sueuians (ſayth hee) the worthieſt and warlikſt people of all Germany, are ſayd to haue a hundred Citties, great Burrowes or townes, out of euery of which hundred citties & townes yearely is furniſhed and ſet forth to the warres a hundred thouſand armed men, well appoynted, Theſe hundred thouſand men wage warrs abroad, and be maintayned by thoſe which remaine at home, and at the yeares end returne home againe to husbandry, and ſend forth as many more of thoſe which were at home, ſo as going to the warres and remayning at home in courſe, they bee all well excerciſed is husbandry and skilfull in feats of armes, and hauing noe grounds nor poſſeſſions priuat to them-ſelues, they yeeld reciprocall Maintaynance one to another, for it is not lawfull for them to remayne and abyde in one place longer than one yeare.
               Their vſuall foode is bread, milke and fleſh, they bee much giuen to hunting, as well for their dayly excerciſe and liberty of life, which they much regard, (for they bee neuer from their infancy vnder the rule and correction of any or conſtrayned to doe any thing againſt their wills,) the practiſe of hunting alſo maketh them more feerce and couragious, and their bodies more ſtrong & able to indure all extremities, as (although they dwell in a very cold clymate) they will waſh and bath them-ſelues in cold riuers,

and weare no other garments but skins, and thoſe ſo little, as the moſt part of there bodies bee ſtarke naked, if any marchants trafficke thether, it is more to buy ſuch things of them as they haue got by the warres, than for any great deſire the Sueuians haue of their commodities: beſides they haue great ſtore of laboring beaſts, more than they haue vſe for, which the French men much deſire, and pay deere for them, and thoſe beaſts which with them bee naturally froward, ilfauored and almoſt good for nothing, by much vſe and handling bee made fit and able both to draw and carry, or to be imployed in the warres: for their horſes be ſo well mand and taught, as when the skirmiſh is at the hotteſt, their riders for their better adrantage, will oftentimes skippe of their backes and fight on foote, and finde their horſes againe in the very ſame place they were left, when they haue occaſion to vſe them: nor doe they eſteeme any one thing more ilde or more ilbeſeeming them, than to ride vpon horſes that bee harneſſed, or haue ſaddles on their backes, by continuall vſe whereof (though they bee but few) they dare and boldly will aduenture to incounter with a troope of armed men and harneſſed horſes, though the number of them bee very great.
               The Sueuians will ſuffer no wines to bee brought vnto them, ſuppoſing that the drinking of wine maketh men more effeminate, and leſſe able to indure labour: they hold it a generall commendations to them, to haue their There may no, wines bee brought into Suevia, feelds and territories of their citties large and wide, ſignifying thereby that their forces bee not able to maintaine ſuch a multitude of citties, for which cauſe in Sueuia the feelds be ſaid to extend a thouſand and ſix hundred paces from their citties on euery ſide.
               
                  
                  Cornelius Tacitus writing the ſcituation of Germany, and the manners of the people, ſpeaketh thus of the Sueuians, The Germaines (ſaith hee) haue diſtinguiſhed the greateſt part of Germany, by ſundry names and nations, although they be al called by one general name, Sueuians, and the property of that people is to plat their lockes, and then to knitt and bind them vp on a knot, by which marke and token the Sueuians be diſcerned and knowne from other Germaines, and the Freemen from ſlaues: There vſe is to turne vp their curled lockes, vntill they waxe ſo old that their haire grow white, and oftentimes they will bynde it on a knot vpon the crowne of their heads, in doing whereof the better ſort of people bee moſt curyous.
               They obſerue a certaine time by tradition from their fathers, (which ceremony they eſteeme ſo reuerent as they dare not omit it) that all the people of one ſtocke or kindred, aſſemble themſelues and meete together, in a certayne woode (conſecrated and made holy after their faſhion) there to doe ſacrifice, which (as a moſt barbarous and horible ceremonie and deteſtable ſacrifice) is euer ſolemnized by killing of a man: This woode, or holy groue they reuerence another way alſo, for there is none of them will aduenture to goe into it, vnleſſe he bee bound hand and foote with a corde, that they may perceiue the power of their Gods, and if any of them happen to fall, it is not lawfull for him to be taken vp, or to re-enfore himſelfe to riſe againe, but hee muſt bee rowled or tumbled thither vpon the ground: And all this their ſuperſtition tendeth to no other ende, but to know thereby the originall of their nation, where God the gouernor of all things is, and of all inferior things that are in ſubiection, and

yeeld obedience vnto that God. Some of the Sueuians as Cornelius alſo reporteth doe ſacrifice vnto Iſis: And as for all their other cuſtomes, though heretofore neuer ſo peculiar, they bee now common to all the reſt of the Germanes: But ſo it is, that at this day, not onely the manners of the Sueuians, but almoſt of all other nations elſe, bee changed and turned cleane topſie turuy, and (that which is moſt to bee lamented) alterred from better to worſe, for now moſt of the welthieſt men of all Sueuia bee marchants, and a great company of them compact and confederate them-ſelues together, euery one disburſing a ſumme of mony to bee imployed in Marchandize, wherewith they doe not onely buy vp and get into their hands ſpices, ſilkes and other things of great value, which bee brought thither by ſea from forren countries, but ſometimes alſo they will deale with things of ſmall worth, as ſpoones, needles, ſpectacles, and puppets, and many ſuch like tryfles and trinkets, ingroſſing vp much wine and graine likewiſe, which manner of trafficke is not to bee commended, for it is not onely greeuous and hurtfull to crafts men and husband men (who bee conſtrayned to ſell their wares and commodities to theſe grypers, (as I may terme them rather than Marchants,) before they can make the beſt profit of them, when neede ſhall afterwards inforce them to buy the ſame of them againe for dubble the price,) but preiudiciall alſo to all the whole country in generall.
               For whereas the people were wont to make their prouiſion of ſuch things as they wanted, from their neighbour Princes, at the cheapeſt rate, they haue ſo fed and bribed thoſe corrupt Princes and gouernors of the contry,

that nothing ſhall be bought but of themſelues, either in Stutgardia, or in other places where they keepe Marts and faires. And yet thoſe rich men doe not traffick themſelues but by their ſeruants and common factors, who gathering in the moneys disburſed with the increaſe, yeeld an account thereof, at ſuch time as they bee called therevnto, rendring vnto euery man truly and faithfully his owne money, and his part of the gaine.
               The common people of Sueuia doe moſt of them practiſe dreſſing of Toe and ſpinning, which maner of worke Much cloth made in Sueuia. they apply ſo buſily, and vſe ſo generally, as in the winter time in ſome parts of Sueuia, you ſhall not only ſee maids and women, but men and boyes alſo with Spindles and Diſtaffes in their hands: They make a kinde of cloth, the warpe whereof is linnen, and the oofe ſilke, which they call (Pargath) and an other manner of cloth which they call (Golſch) and that is all linnen, of theſe manner of clothes they make great aboundance, for it is knowne to bee true, that the Vlmenſes onely doe make euery yeare a hundred thouſand of theſe clothes, and if ſo many bee made in one part of the country, which is but a handfull in reſpect of the whole, one may eaſily coniecture that the number which is made in the whole land is almoſt infinite. Theſe clothes bee carryed to nations farre from them, and eſpecially twiſe a yeare to Franckford Marte, from whence the people of Sueueland receiue great cuſtome and tribute. Moreouer (as euill things bee often-times mingled with good, and no one thing is perfect in all points) the Sueuians be meruailous lecherous people, the women as willing to yeeld as the men to aske, yea both ſides bee apt to ſlide, but ſlow to repent; and ſurely I thinke, that this vice is generally fauoured,

both in Sueuia and throughout all Germany, for neither there nor in any other part of Germany, is any puniſhment inflicted, nor any one excommunicated by the Eccleſiaſticall cenſure, either for open fornication, adultery, nor yet for rauiſhing of women: And thereof ariſeth this Prouerbe, that Sueuia onely is able to yeeld whores inough for all Germany, as well as Franconia affendeth good ſtore of theeues and beggars, Boemia hereticks, Bauaria pilferers and ſlaues, Heluetia Butchers and Bawdes, Drunkards in Saxonie, periurers in Friſia and Weſtphalia, and gluttons about the Rheine.
            
            
               
                  Of Bauaria and Carinthia, and of the lawes and cuſtomes of thoſe people heretofore, and how they liue at this day. CAP. 17.
               
                  BAVARIA, a Prouince of Germany, is ſo named of a people called Auarij Bauaria, why ſo called. by putting therevnto the letter B, who being a remnant of the Huns, expelled thence the Norici, and poſſeſſed their country. It is alſo called Boioaria of a people of Ciſalpine France called Boij, who were once ſaid to inhabite thoſe parts, before which time it was called Noricum.
               Vpon the Eaſt thereof lyeth Hungaria, and Sueuia vpon The bounds of Bauaria. the Weſt: Italy ioyneth vnto it vpon the South, and Franconia and Boemia vpon the North. The famous riuer: Danubius comming from Sueuia runneth through Bauaria, and vnder the name of Bauaria at this day, is comprehended Auſtria, Stiria, and Cari
                     •
                  thi
                     •
                  , the people

whereof bee all a like both in life and language: whereas heretofore it contayned noe more than that onely which was called Noricum. That good and holy King Lucius King of Britaine, was the firſt that inſtructed them in the Chriſtian religion, and after him Saint Rupertus, and laſtly they were confirmed in the faith by Boniface Biſhoppe of Moguntinum.
               Bauaria is deuided into foure Biſhoppes ſeas, that is to ſay, Saltzburga, Patauia, Phriſinberge and Ratisbon, it hath in it more famous Citties than are in any one prouince of Germany beſides, the Metropolitan wherof is Saltzburge heretofore (as is ſurmiſed) called Iuuania: Schiren was once the Dukes ſeate, but now it is tranſlated to Bauaria heretofore gouerned by Kings but now by Dukes. Monachium.
               This land before it was reduced into a Prouince, was gouerned by Kings of their owne nation, vntill the raigne of Arnolphus the Emperor: And as all the Kings of Parthia were named Arſaces, and the Aegiptian Kings Ptolomies, ſo was euery king of Bauaria called Cacannus but after it was ſubued by Arnolphus and annexed to the Empire the gouernment was committed to Dukes, which manner of gouernment remayneth ſtill: and all the Dukes for many ſucceſſions together, haue beene elected out of that moſt worthy and renowned family of the Agilolphingij.
               
               The manners and cuſtomes of that people may bee vnderſtood, The lawes vſed in Bauaria which they receiued when they receiued Chriſtianity. by the lawes which were giuen them when they firſt receiued the right faith of Chriſt, wich were theſe following: firſt that if a freeman borne would beſtow any thing towards the maintenance of the Church, whether it were lands mony or goods, hee ſhould make a deed thereof in writing, and ſeale and ſubſcribe it with his owne

hand and ſeale, and put to the names of ſixe witneſſes to confirme it, and then deliuer it as his deede in the preſence of the Biſhoppe, by which act both hee him-ſelfe, and all his poſterity were vtterly bard for euer after to inioy or repoſſeſſe the ſame againe but by permiſſion of the Church: And whatſoeuer was ſo giuen to the maintenance of Gods holy Church, was committed to the Biſhoppes cuſtody, and by him defended and protected: If any one wronged the Church or any thing there-vnto belonging, hee incurred the iudgement of God, the diſpleaſure of holy Church, and was conſtrayned (ether by the King or Prince for the time being) to render reſtitution, and forfeted three ounces of gold beſides, but if he denied the fact, he was brought before the Altar and there in preſence of Preeſt and people, ſwore and depoſed what wronge hee had done and of what value: He that perſwaded another mans ſeruant to runne away from his Maiſter, (were he man-ſeruant or maid ſeruant) was inforced to fetch him againe, and to put an other into his place as a pledge till he came, and was fined at fifteene ſhillings beſides.
               If a ſeruant did priuily burne any Church goods, hee had his hand cut off, and his eyes puld out, that he might neuer after ſee to commit the like villanie, and the maiſter of ſuch ſeruant made good the value of that which was burnt: But if a Freeman commited ſuch a fault, he reſtored againe the full value of the loſſe, and forfeted for his folly three pound; and if hee denyed the fact, hee was to purge him-ſelfe by the othes of twenty foure men; who ſtanding by the Altar before the defendor of the Church, layed their hands vpon the holy Euangeliſt, and ſwore whether they thought him faulty or noe.
               
                  
If an offendor tooke ſanctuary for refuge he was ſecure, nor was it lawfull for a Maiſter to fetch his ſeruant thence, otherwiſe to hurt him, for if hee did, the Iudge would compell him to pay forty ſhillings to the Church, as a recompence for infringing his priuiledges: Hee that iniured any one that was in any inferiour order in the Church, made ſatiſfaction with twiſe the value of the iniury done, which was paide ouer vnto his parents or neereſt friends: But if the wrong were to one of an higher order, he paide three times the value.
               Hee that killed a Prieſt, forſeited and paid forthwith to the Church where he was Miniſter, three hundred peeces of gold, and he that killed a Deacon, two hundred; and if he were not able to pay ſuch a ſumme of money; hee was deliuered both himſelfe, his wife, and children into bondage and ſeruitude, and detained in ſlauery, vntill he could make ſhift to pay the money. No one might offer violence to a Biſhop although hee did him wrong, but might make his complaint, and commence his ſuite before the King, Duke, or commons, whether it were for homicide, fornication, or conſenting to the enemy; and if it was prooued that he would haue brought in enemies to inuade the country, or ſought the ſpoyle of thoſe he ought to preſerue, he was either depoſed or baniſhed.
               Hee that contrary to the lawes of the Church, married a recluſe or Nun out of her Cloyſter, was compelled to reſtore her thither againe, and to leaue her where hee found her: and the Biſhop (by the Dukes aſſiſtants) would thruſt her into the Nunry againe whether ſhee would or no, and the man (if there were no hope of his amendment) was baniſhed the country.
               It was not lawfull for either Prieſt or Deacon to keepe

in his houſe any ſtrange woman, leſt by often companie and familiaritie with her, he might happe to be polluted, and ſo offer an vnworthie ſacrifice vnto God, and the people be plagued for his offences. If any difference or controverſie aroſe betwixt Prieſts, Deacons, or other Clergie men, the Cannon law committed the deciding thereof to the Biſhops: farmers, husbandmen and ſeruants payd tribute and tyth to the Church, euery one according to his abilitie, as euery tenth buſhel of graine, euery tenth perch of land, euery tenth faggot, the tenth part of their honey, and for euery foure pullets fifteene egs. They were bound alſo to bring ſtone, timber, and lyme for the reparations of the Churches, but yet with this ſpeciall care, that no man ſhold be taxed more then he was wel able to indure.
               If any one were falſe vnto his Duke, and by treaſon procured enemies into the Prouince, or betrayed any Cittie, and was thereof conuicted by three witneſſes, all his goods were confiſcate to the Duke, and the Duke had power to vſe him at his pleaſure: but to the end that no one ſhould be ouerthrowne or ſpoiled by anothers enuie or malice without cauſe, there was this prouiſion made, that the accuſed might challenge the ſingle combat with one of his accuſérs; and if he ouercame the other he ſcaped free, and forfeited nothing. He that killed his Duke, was killed himſelfe, and all his goods confiſcate for euer without redemption: and he that ſtirred vp ſedition againſt him, forfeited to the Duke 600. ſhillings. When an armie was conducted into the enemies land, the ſouldiers had no cauſe to fall out amongſt thēſelues for prouiſion; for euery one might take what would ſerue his turn: but he which wrangled without cauſe, was forced either to yeeld himſelfe to the law of armes, in that caſe prouided, or ſuffer fifty ſtripes with

a truncheon before his Lieutenant. And the Lieutenants and Gouernors were to haue a ſpecial care euery one with in his limits or county, that the ſouldiers did not ſpoile & prey vppon the enemie, before they were commanded by the Duke: for if any fault were committed through their negligence, they were to make it good. If a free-man damnified, or wronged another, he was conſtrained to make good as much as the party was hindred, and was amerced beſides at 40. ſhil. but ſuch offences were death in ſeruants, and their maſter made reſtitution for them, becauſe they forbad them not the committing of ſuch crimes. If a ſeruant ſtole or purloyned any thing from the ſoldiers in the campe, and was therof conuicted, he loſt his hand for that offence, and his maſter notwithſtanding reſtored the value of the goods ſtolne: and a free-man for ſuch a fault, was mulcted at forty ſhillings ouer and aboue the due reſtitution of the thing ſtolne.
               If any one were commanded by the king or duke to kill another, and he did it, the king or duke which commanded him, ought for euer after to defend and protect him from danger: & if the king or duke which was his protector died his next ſucceſſor did take vpon him the like warrantie and protection of that man. If the Duke were ſo ſtubborn and rebellious as to contemne and deſpiſe the decrees of the king, he was depriued of his Duke-dome, and was vtterly void of all hope euer to recouer his former eſtate and dignity. If the Duke had a ſon ſo froward, fooliſh, or arrogant, as (through the counſell and abetting of lewd and euil perſons) he went about to depoſe his father from his gouernment, ſo that his father were yet well able to gouerne, to conduct an armie, to get vp vpon his horſe, and to carry armes, and was neither deafe nor blind, & well able to performe

the kings command, he was diſ-inherited, and for euer after vncapable of the Dukedome; or, (if his father pleaſed) he was baniſhed to perpetuall euile for offending his father in ſo high a degree againſt the law.
               He that by raſhneſſe, indiſcretion, or drunkenneſſe bred a ſcandall in the Dukes Court, forfeited forty ſhillings, and was for euer after lyable to make good the value of the inconuenience that aroſe of that ill example: but a ſeruant for ſuch a fault loſt his hand.
               If any thing were found in the Dukes Court, and taken vp, and concealed one night vnreuealed, it was accounted theft, and ſuch an offendor forfeited into the Dukes Exchequer fifteene ſhillings, becauſe the Dukes houſe was accounted a publike houſe.
               He that detracted, or by his ill ſpeeches depraued the Dukes gouernement, was puniſhed at fifteen ſhillings: and forced to finiſh and make perfect all that he was commanded to do, that all pleas or ſuites might be diſpatched and ended euery fifteenth day, in each ſeuerall Countie of the countrie; for the doing wherof, all the free-men aſſembled together, and they which neglected the meeting, forfeited fifteene ſhillings: the Iudge (to the end hee might do iuſtice, and iudge vprightly) had a booke of the law lying open before him, which ſerued as a rule and pattern wherby to iudge of all controuerſies.
               And if the inditement were without partialitie, and that he iudged vprightly without reſpect of perſons, or rewards, hee then had, and enioyed to himſelfe the ninth part of the compoſition, but if the iudgement were partiall, or ſmelled of briberie; he forfeited the double value of that which by his falſe ſentence and corruption, was payed, and was fined moreouer at forty ſhillings.
               
                  
He which killed the Duke, payd either vnto his friends or vnto the king for compoſition, 1460. ſhillings, whereof his friends had ſix hundred. And it was euer obſerued, that the compoſition for the death of the Duke, was three times as much as for the death of any of his friends.
               The Agilolſingi (out of which family the Dukes be euer created) had the fourth part of the compoſition, and then the Huoſi, the Trozzi, the Sagavi, the Hahilingi, and the Aennonni had the one halfe of that which remained. Hee that killed a free-man, payd (either vnto the Duke or vnto his parents that was ſlaine) 8. pounds, hee that put out a free-mans eye, or cut off his hand or foot, payed 40. ſhillings: he that lamed him payd 12. ſhillings, and for a maim 20. ſhillings, for a wound 3. ſhillings, for ſtriking out a cheeke tooth, or grinding tooth 12. ſhillings, and for euery other tooth 6. ſhillings. They were very ſtrictly forbidden to moleſt or hurt ſtrangers, in ſo much as he which iniured any of them, payd vnto the party grieued the double value of the wrong ſuſtained, and beſides forſeited 8. pounds into the Dukes Exchequer: & he that ſlue a ſtranger, forfeted an hundred pounds in gold. If a ſeruant moleſted or ſold a free-man, & were complained of to the Iudg, he eſcaped not without ſome great puniſhment, as the loſſe of hand or eye. Libertines which had bin manumitted & made free, had more eaſie compoſitions by the one halfe, then thoſe which were free-born. All inceſtuous mariages were there vtterly prohibited, ſo as it was not lawful for any man to marry his firſt wiues mother, his ſonnes wife, his daughter-in-law, his ſtep mother, his brothers or ſiſters daughter, his brothers wife, or wiues ſiſter: and thoſe which offended in any of theſe points, all his goods were confiſcate by the Iudge.
               
                  
hee that prophaned the Lords day with any manner of worke, after the firſt warning and admonition, had fiftie laſhes vpon the backe with a whip, and if he offended againe the ſecond time; he forfeited the third part of all his goods, and for the third offence he loſt his libertie: for it is fitting, that he which will not be free vpon that day, ſhold be a ſlaue for euer after. A ſeruant for labouring vpon the Lords day was beaten, but if he held on his courſe without amendement, his right hand was cut off. And a ſtranger for the like fault, hauing beene warned aforehand, paid 12. ſhillings. He that detained a freeman againſt his will in ſeruitude and bondage, or forcibly tooke away his inheritance or goods, was forced to reſtore what euer hee violently tooke away, and forfeited forty ſhillings beſides. If any one lay with another mans wife that was a free-woman, he payed vnto her husband 7. pounds for amends, and if he were taken in the deed doing and ſlaine, his death was not to be reuenged.
               He that committed fornication with a free-woman by her conſent, and refuſed to take her to his wife, payed 12. ſhillings. If a ſeruant offered violence to a free-woman, his maſter deliuered him to the womans father to be puniſhed, who might iuſtly kill him if he pleaſed. He that rauiſhed or ſtoale away a free-woman, without her parents conſent and her owne, forfeited 11. ſhillings, and if ſhee that was ſtoln away were manumitted, he forfeited 8-ſhillings, but if ſhe were a ſeruant, the forfeiture was but 4. ſhillings. If a free-man put away his wife being a free-woman without iuſt cauſe, he paid vnto her parents 40. ſhillings, and duly repayed vnto the woman her dower and full portion, ſhe brought with her, according to the family out of which ſhe came. If a freeman were troth-plight to a freewoman,

and afterwards forſooke her and married another, he paid vnto the wenches parents 24. ſhillings, & brought twelue men to ſweare with him, that he forſooke her not for any fault of hers, nor for any malice he bore to his parents, but onely for the great loue and affection he bore vnto the other. He which ſtole away another mans wife, reſtored her againe, and payed eight pounds vnto her husband for amends. If a bond-woman gaue a potion to a woman that was with child, to procure an abortiue, ſhee had two hundred laſhes with a whippe; and if ſhe were a free-woman that tempered the poyſon, ſhee loſt her freedome, and became a ſlaue for euer. If a woman with child were ſtrucken and brought forth an abortiue, and died her ſelfe of the blow, he or ſhe that ſtrucke her, was reputed and taken as an homicide, and if the woman liued, and the abortiue not liuing at the time of the ſtroke giuen, the partie that gaue the blow, payd her twenty ſhillings: but if the abortiue had life, the forfeiture then was fiftie Weregelds, three ſhillings, and a Tremiſſis. If a Free-man ſtole any thing out of the Dukes Court, Churches, ſhoppes, worke-houſes or Mils, which be publike places of reſort, he was conſtrained to ſweare what the value of that was which he ſtole, and was forced to reſtore nine times the worth, or elſe to fight hand to hand with the party grieued, or his champion. If a theefe were taken ſtealing in the night and ſlaine, his death was not reuenged: and hee that allured, perſwaded, or inticed another mans ſeruant to ſteale from his maſter, or otherwiſe to wrong him, and was thereof detected, was condemned as a theefe, and paid nine times as much as the maſter was damnified: the ſeruant alſo reſtored what he tooke away, and was openly whipped beſides, with two hundred ſtripes, but the maſter ſuffered no preiudice.
               
                  
And all felons for all thefts whatſoeuer, were brought before the Iudge, and ſuffered ſuch puniſhment as the law ordained in ſuch caſes: but they firſt made compoſition and ſatisfaction out of their owne goods, vnto thoſe they had wronged ſundry times, before they were adiudged to die for ſtealing. He that bought any thing in the Prouince, was firſt diligently to enquire, whether it was ſtolen or no: for he which bought ſtolne goods was bound to reſtitution, and forfeited twelue ſhillings into the Dukes Exchequer. The ſame penaltie was inflicted vppon him that took any ſtolne goods committed to the charge or cuſtodie of another. And no man could make compoſition with a theefe, but before the Iudge: for he which did it in hugger mugger of purpoſe to conceale the theft from the Iudge, was accounted and puniſhed as a theef himſelfe. As oft as any contention aroſe amongſt them, about the bounds or limits of their grounds, there were certaine ſurveiors appointed to view and find out the auncient meares and markes betwixt land and land; againſt which preſcription, or long continuance of poſſeſſion was of no force: and if no markes could be found, then he that ſold the land, ſhewed the meare-ſtones to the Surveyors: but if the controuerſie were ſuch, as it could not otherwiſe be decided, and the parties appeaſed, they then fought it out hand to hand: And no one partie might ſet downe a new meare ſtone or marke, without the conſent of the other, and that in the preſence of the Surveior: for if a free-man offended herin, he was fined at ſixe ſhillings, and a ſlaue was openly whipped with two hundred laſhes. If one free-man pulled down the wall or ditch of another free-man, he forfeited 3. ſhillings, and vnto the party grieued, as much as he was damnified, and he which pulled downe either poſt, pillar, beam,

or rafter, forfeited 3. ſhillings likewiſe, and 12. pence for either ſhingle or tyle, or any other part of the houſe, beſides reſtitution for the loſſe ſuſtained.
               It was not lawfull for any one to take a pledge or diſtreſſe without the Dukes permiſſion: for hee which did, was forced ſafely to reſtore the pledge or morgage ſo taken to the owner, and payd vnto the Duke 40. ſhillings for a fine: and if the thing ſo morgaged or diſtrained, happned to miſcarrie in his hands, hee then made ſatisfaction to the owner, at the diſcretion of the Iudge. He which cut downe another mans ſtanding corne that was ripe, paid for compoſition ſixe ſhillings; and if he denied the fact, he was depoſed himſelfe, and produced ſixe men to bee ſworne with him, that hee tooke a true oath. Hee which deſtroyed another mans corne or graine by inchantment or ſorcery, and was thereof conuicted, forfeited 12 ſhillings, and was forced to prouide food for his whole family, that had his corn ſo deſtroyed, for all the yeare following, and reſtored vnto him ouer & aboue, the value of that which was deſtroyed: but if he denied the fact, he then either purged himſelfe by the oath of 12. men, or by battell. If any man either by his meanes or abetment, inticed another mans ſeruant to run away from his maſter, he was inforced to bring him again, and forfeited for a man ſeruant 12. ſhillings, and ſix ſhillings for a maid: but if he denied it, he purged himſelfe either by the oath of a full Iury, or by combat.
               No one might either kill or hurt another mans cattell, though he found them in his owne grounds dammagefeſant, but he might impound and detaine them, vntil he had made it knowne vnto the owner, or vnto his neighbours, what loſſe he had ſuſtained, and then the owner of the cattell was to ſet him foorth as much other ground, as that

which was eaten. In gathering in of their harueſt, euery one that was damnified by an others cattaile, was recompenced by the owner of the cattaile, who ought not to make the offence greater then it was, but he which killed an other mans cattaile in breach of this law, tooke the dead carkaſſe himſelfe, and gaue vnto the owner an other beaſt as good as his was. If hee ſtrooke out his eye, he paide vnto the owner the third part of the price, that the beaſt was worth, and if he cut off either taile or eare, hee paide twelue pence & a tremiſſis for euery horne. But hee which committed any of theſe outrages, either for hatred, contempt, or deſpite, his penalty was doubled, hee which tooke an other mans horſe or oxe to keepe for hire, and loſt him by his owne default, paide the full price for him, and had no hire, but if hee purged himſelfe by his oth, that the beaſt was not loſt by his neglect, then hee had the hide allowed him.
               Hee which receiued into his houſe an other mans goods (were it gold, ſiluer apparell or any thing elſe) either to ſell or to keepe, and that his houſe, together with thoſe goods were burned by miſfortune, if hee would depoſe that his owne goods were burned with them, and that hee had no profit nor commodity by thoſe goods ſo committed vnto him, hee made no reſtitution for them.
               If a houſe were on fire, and one making ſhew to quench the fire, did ſteale and purloine any thing thence, he paide fouretimes the value of that which he ſtole, and made compoſition beſides according to the Statutes.
               If a thing was in contention betwixt two to whom the propertie belonged, it was not lawfull for any one whatſoeuer either to giue it or ſell it, vntill it was decided

to whom the right property did appertaine. If a woman buried her husband and remained a widdow afterwards, ſhe had an equall portion with one of his children, both of the goods and of the yeerely profit of the liuing, but if ſhee married an other husband, ſhe then tooke ſuch goods onely as ſhe had of her owne, and her dower, and departed the houſe the ſame day ſhee married, and that portion which was allotted vnto her, after the death of her husband, during her widdow-hood, was equally deuided amongſt her children.
               If a man had children by diuers wiues, they all of them equally inherited, but the mothers children inherited ſuch goods onely as belonged vnto her, and the ſonne of a bond-woman might not inherit with the ſonne of a free-woman. If a man died without iſſue and made no will, his wife ſo long as ſhee kept her ſelfe widdow, enioyed the one halfe of all her husbands goods, and the other halfe remained to his kinsfolke: But if ſhe died, or married againe, ſhee then preſently departed, and carried with her ſuch goods onely as were her owne, and due vnto her by the law, and that part which ſhe had was diſtributed to her husbands kinsfolkes likewiſe. If either man or woman died and neither deuiſed their goods by teſtament, nor gaue them away in their life time, and had no kindred liuing within ſeuen degrees, then were all their goods confiſcate and eſcheated into the Dukes Exchecker. He which ſold any thing and tooke money for it, was to confirme the ſale either by writing, or in the preſence of two witneſſes at the leaſt, and no ſale was firme and good, vnleſſe hee which ſold it did it voluntarily and vnconſtrained. Hee which ſold an other mans goods without the owners conſent or priuity, reſtored the ſame

againe, and an other as good as that was beſides, but if the thing ſo ſold could not be gotten againe, then he paide two other things as good as that was which he ſold. Hee which bought any thing and gaue earneſt for it, was forced to ſtand to his bargaine, vnleſſe the other party were willing to releaſe him, or elſe he loſt the thing hee gaue earneſt for, and paide the full price agreed vpon, notwithſtanding: If a man ſold a thing which was nought, hee was conſtrained to take it againe at any time within three daies, or elſe hee was depoſed and brought one other to ſweare with him, that hee knew not of the fault, and ſo the bargaine ſtood currant.
               If a bond-man purchaſed his free-dome by his owne purſe, and not with his maiſters money, and the deceite were diſcerned, hee was reſtored againe to his maiſter, becauſe his maiſter receiued no other thing for him, but that which was his ſeruants, which hee knew not of. And the ſame law that was in buying and ſelling, was likewiſe in exchanging.
               If any one entred into an other mans ground, and claimed it for his owne, hee paide for his raſhneſſe ſixe ſhillings, and reſtored the ground to the owner againe: A witneſſe produced to giue teſtimony, neither could nor ought to bee reſiſted, vnleſſe in caſe of one that is dead, in which caſe hee was to make good his euidence by battaile, and if he hap to get the victory, hee was then creditteds, and no longer impugned. If there were many witneſſe, then one was elected by lot to ſweare, and the manner of his oth was thus: I am elected as a witneſſe, and I offer my ſelfe to be depoſed, and as God ſhall helpe mee and him whoſe hand I hold, I am produced as a witneſſe to ſpeake the truth, touching this matter now in queſtion,

and then ioyning all their hands together to ſweare and proteſt the truth, hee alone holding in his other hand one other that ſweareth with him, depoſed as ſeemeth him good, and if hee ſwore falſe and was conuicted of periury, hee reſtored and made good vnto the partie damnified by his falſe oth, as much as hee was hindred thereby, and paide twelue ſhillings more for compoſition, or elſe defended his innocency by battaile.
               If one champion killed the other in battaile, if he were a free-man, then the party that vniuſtly procured him to vndertake the combate, paide twelu ſhillings for compoſition, but no more. He which ſolde any thing from a freeman that was dead and buried, paide vnto his parents or friends forty ſhillings, and reſtored that which hee ſtole away. He that murthered a freeman ſecretly, caſting his body either into a riuer or other baſe place, whereby hee was depriued of due ſunerals and exequies, did firſt pay forty ſhillings, and afterwards a were-geld. If a freeman was ſlaine and caſt into a riuer, or into the ſea, and after his body hapt to be caſt vpon ſhore, if any one tumbled him into the water againe, hee forfeted forty ſhillings. And if a ſeruant or bond-man were ſo ſlaine and caſt vp, then hee which aduentured to throw him in againe forfeted nine pounds. Hee which ſlue a man and tooke his apparell from him, paide twiſe the worth of his apparell, and hee which cut or mangled the carcaſſe of a dead man paide twelue ſhillings for euery member hee ſo cut or mangled. Hee which found the body of a dead man, and out of his compaſſion affoorded it buriall, leſt it ſhould bee deuoured by beaſts or birds, the friends or maiſter of the dead man gaue him twelue pence for his paine. He which remoued an other mans ſhip or boate out of his place,

reſtored vnto the owner either the ſame againe in as good plight as it was, or an other as good. But if he tooke it out of the water, and concealed and denied it being aſked, it was accounted as theft, and he then paide for it as if he had ſtole it: He which ſtole a hound reſtored him backe againe, or an other as good and paide ſixe ſhillings beſides, and three ſhillings for a ſheap-heards cur: And theſe were the lawes that the Bauarians liued vnder not many ages ſince, and diuers of them be yet in force at this day.
               The Bauarians be earneſt & deuout Chriſtians, & wil goe on pilgrimage by great troups, to Churches and Monuments a far off, and eſpecially to a Temple in Aquiſgrane: And within their owne Prouince there be two notable & famous places, both for miracles of the Saints, & great concourſe of pilgrimes, which are the bleſſed Virgin Mary of Ottinga and Saint Wolfangus. The country yeeldeth no vines, vnleſſe ſome few in the ſouth part therof, for it is ful of mountaines and great woods, the trees whereof affoord great plenty of Acornes, and wilde Apples, by which meanes they haue great ſtore of hogges, ſo as Bauaria furniſheth other countries of Europe with as many ſwine, as Hungary doth with oxen, and the people themſelues bee very hoggiſh and perticipate of a ſwyniſh nature, ſo as in compariſō of al other Germans, they may iuſtly be tearmed barbarous and fauadge, and ſurpaſſing al others in two horrible and abhominable vices, that is to ſay cruelty, and theft: Their apparel is for the moſt part blew, and they goe more commonly in bootes then in ſhooes: vpon that ſide of Bauaria towards Auſtria, lieth part of Carinthia & part of Stiria: Carinthia is a mountanous country, and bordereth Eaſt-ward vpon the people called Carni, and vpon the Weſt & South vpon Stiria, & ſo reacheth to the Alpes of Italy, and Forum Iulij.
               
                  
In Carinthia bee many fruitfull valleies and hils for wheat and other graine, there be many great meeres and riuers, the chiefe whereof is the riuer Drauus, which running by Stiria and Pannonia falleth into Danubius, and is not much inferior to the riuer Savus.
               This country is vnder the dominion of the Archduke of Auſtria, and when a new Prince is ordained and taketh vpon him the gouernment of their common-weale, they obſerue a ſtrange ſolemnity, the like whereof is not vſed in any: other country, the manner of it is this. In a large valley neere vnto the towne of Saint Vitus, are remayning The manner how the Carinthians elect their Duke. the ruines of a decaied City, neere vnto which place in a plaine field ſtandeth there on end a great marble ſtone, and when a new Archduke is to be created, a country clowne (to whom that office deſcendeth by inheritance) ſtandeth vpon the ſtone, hauing vpon his right hand a blacke Cow in Calfe, and a Mare vpon his left, ſo leane as ſhe is nothing but skinne and bone, and round about him ſtand a great rable of country people, and others gazing at him, in which interim a great multitude of nobles and gentlemen in gallant and ſumptuous attire, hauing the enſignes of principality carried before them, conduct the new Prince towards the ſtone, the Prince himſelfe beeing meanely arrayed in a clownes cap, high ſhooes and a ſheap-heards ſtaffe, and ſeeming indeed rather a ſilly ſheap-heard then a powrefull Prince: when the clowne vpon the ſtone perceiueth him comming ſo gallantly attended, hee crieth out with a lowde voice in the Slauonian tongue (for the Carinthians be Slauonians) who is this that commeth ſo proudly? to whom the whole multitude make anſwere that the Prince and gouernor of the country is comming, what is hee (ſaith the

clowne) is hee a iuſt and vpright Iudge? Doth hee regard the welfare of his county? Is hee of a free condition and worthy of honour? Is he a profeſſor and defendor of the Chriſtian religion? And all the people 
                     ••
                  erre that hee both is and will be ſuch a one, then the clowne againe demaundeth: how or by what right hee can diſplace him from his ſeate, to whom the maiſter of the Dukes houſehold anſwereth and ſaith: the Duke ſhall giue thee for thy ſeat ſixty pence and theſe two beaſts which ſtand on each ſide of thee, beſides that thou ſhalt haue all the Dukes apparel he now weareth, and both thou and all thy family ſhall for euer after be free from tribute, which ſaid the clown giueth the Duke an eaſie blow vpon the checke, willing him to bee an vpright Iudge, and ſo receiuing the rewards promiſed, hee departeth from the ſtone, and the Duke getteth vp into his place, and there drawing a naked ſword, and brandiſhing it round about vpon euery ſide, he ſpeaketh vnto the people, and promiſeth them to bee an equall and iuſt Iudge and gouernor, the report is alſo that they giue him drinke in a clownes cap, which hee drinketh in token that euer after hee will bee ſober, and continent.
               After this hee goeth thence to the Church of Solemnenſis, that is ſcituated vpon a hill neere adioyning, and is dedicated to our bleſſed Lady, and called after her name, and there hee heareth maſſe, which done hee putteth off the baſe attire which hee wore till then, and putting on a coate armor, hee banketteth and feaſteth with his nobles, and laſtly hee returneth againe into the ſame field, and there ſitteth in Iudgement, doing right vnto euery one, and caſting and reckoning his yeerely reuenewes.
               This honour of inueſting the Prince is giuen vnto

clownes, for becauſe they were the firſt in that country that imbraced the Chriſtian religion, the Nobility and Princes remayning in error vntill the time of Charles the Great, in whoſe daies they were baptized, and became earneſt followers of the faith likewiſe.
               The Duke of Carinthia was maiſter of the Emperors A ſeuere puniſhment againſt theeues. hounds, wherevpon the deciding of all controuerſies and contentions, concerning huntſman and hunting, was referred vnto him. And when any one is accuſed before the Emperor for any ſuch cauſe, he muſt anſwere his accuſors in the Slauonian tongue. They haue an other cuſtome in that Prouince which is chiefly put in vſe about the towne called Klagen concerning theft, which is moſt ſtrickt & ſeuere; & withal very vnreaſonable, for there if one be but ſuſpected of theft he is inſtātly truſſed vp, & the next day after hee is hanged they inquire of the ſuſpition, and then if hee prooue guilty in deed, they ſuffer him to hang ſtil, vntil hee rot and fal downe peecemeale, but if it appeare that he was vniuſtly put to death, then is he buried, and his funerals performed at the common coſt of the citty. The Carinthians weare for the moſt part cloakes made of ſuch wooll as their owne country ſheepe beare, and ſelfe colloured, and cappes vpon their heads, their language is the Slauonian tongue.
               But the Stirij be a more rude and ruſticall kinde of people, The diſcription of Stiria. hauing maruelous great throates, yea their throat boales are ſo bigge as they are an impediment vnto their ſpeech, and that which is more (if it bee truely reported of them) the women that giue ſucke will caſt their throates behinde their backes like a wallet, to the end they ſhould not hinder their children in their ſucking: the cauſe of this ſtrume or great throates, they attribute to the

water and ayre whereof they drinke, and bee nouriſhed. The Stirians reſemble the Germaines both in ſpeach, habit and behauiour, excepting thoſe that dwell about the riuer Dravus, that ſpeake the Slauonian tongue. There is much Salt made which they carry into other countries, and exchange it for other commodities. There bee alſo mines of Iron and Siluer, though but little gotten, which happeneth through the negligence and careleſneſſe of the Princes and gouernors.
               This country was once called Valeria, it is very mountanous and craggie, excepting the Eaſt part thereof next vnto Pannonia, and there it is very plaine and euen.
            
            
               
                  Of Italy, and of the manners of the Italians: of Romulus alſo and his ciuill inſtitutions. CAP. 18.
               
                  ITALY a Region of Europe, was firſt Italy firſt called Heſperià, and then Ocnotria. called Heſperia, of Heſperus the brother of Atlas, who beeing expelled by his brother, left his name both vnto Spaine and Italy: But Macrobius is of opinion, that it was called Heſperia of the ſtarre Heſperus, which is their euening ſtarre. It was alſo called Oenotria, either for the goodneſſe of the wine which is made in Italy, for Ocnum in Greeke ſignifieth wine) or elſe of Oenotrius King of the Sabines. And laſtly it was named Italy of Italus King of Scicily, who taught them the Arte of husbandry, and gaue them lawes to liue vnder, for he comming into that part wherein Turnus afterwards raigned, called it after his name, as is

prooued by Virgil in theſe verſes thus tranſlated by maiſter Phaer.
               
               
                  There is a place the Greekes by name Heſperia do call,
                  An ancient l
                        •
                     nd, and fierce in warre, and fruitfull ſoyle withall:
                  Out from Oenotria they came that firſt did till the ſame,
                  Now Italy men ſay 'tis cald ſo of the Captaines name.
               
               But Timaeus and Varro hold opinion, that it was called Italia, of the great ſtore of goodly Buls which bee there Italy why ſo called. bred, aboue other places, for Bulls in the ancient Greeke tongue were called Itali. That part of Italy which is next vnto the mouth of Tyber is called Latium, euen as that part is called Auſonia (according to Ariſtotle) which is next vnto the Tyrrhen fea.
               Italy is in forme like a croſſe, and ſituated betwixt the Adriattick and the Tuſcan ſea; and extending from the Alpes and the hill Appenine, reacheth vnto the citty Rhegium, and the Brutian ſhores: Towards the end it deuideth it ſelfe into two parts, whereof the one looketh into the Ionian ſea, and the other into the Scicilian: in the vtmoſt part whereof ſtandeth the citty Rhegium.
               The length of Italy from Auguſta Praetoria, paſſing by The length of Jtaly. Rome and Capua to the citty Rhegium, (according to Solynus) is a thouſand and twenty miles, and the bredth where it is broadeſt, foure hundred and ten miles, and a hundred thirty and ſix where it is narroweſt, hauing as it were a belly ietting further out then the reſt, in Agro Rh
                        ••
                     ith, which now is confined with the riuer Rubicon, ſliding by the ſide of the Adriaticke ſea:
               Italy is deuided into many Regions, for from the riuer Jtaly deuided into many Prouinces. Varus to the riuer Macra is Liguria, where Genoua is the chiefeſt citty: from Macra then to Tyber is Hetruria, the Metropolitan citty whereof is Piſa; from Tyber vnto Lyris

is that part of Italy called Latium, wherein ſtandeth Rome: and the citty Antium (which wee call Netnut) is ſituated within the prouince vpon the ſhore ſide: from Lyris vnto the riuer Sarnus is Campania, where Naples is chiefe citty: from Sarnus to Silarus, is the country called Picentum, the two greateſt townes whereof bee Surrentum and Salernum, betwixt Silarus and Laius is Lucania, of which prouince the moſt notorious townes bee Peſtum and Buxentum, with vs called Beluedere: from the riuer Laius to the promontory of Leucopetra, is the country called Brutium, wherein ſtandeth the citty of Rhegium Iulium: from the promontary of Leucopetra to the promontory of Iapigium, otherwiſe called Salentinum, is the borders or frontires of great Greece, wherein are ſituated the two famous citties Croton and Tarentum: from Iapigium to Brunduſium is Calabria, wherein is Hydruntum: from the citty Brunduſium to the hill Garganus now called Saint Angelus hill, is Apulia, wherein ſtand the citties Barium or Barry & Salapia: from the hill Garganus to the mouth of the riuer Sarnis, is the country of the Frentani, in which Prouince Iſconium is chiefe citty: frō the riuer Sarus to the riuer Apernus is the coaſt of the Marrucini, and therein is the citty Orton: from Apernus to the riuer Aeſius, whilom the vtmoſt bounds of Italy dwell the Piceni, whoſe citty is Ancona: from Aeſius (or Aſius as others write it) to Rubicon, the latter confines of Italy, bee the Senones, whoſe chiefeſt townes are Phanum fortunae, Piſaurum and Ariminum: from Rubicon to the mouth of the riuer Padus, liue the people called Boij, amongſt whome is the citty Rauenna: betwixt Padus and Tilta vemptum, is the Venetians country, wherein ſtandeth the famous and renowned citty of Venice: from Tilia vemptum to Natiſon, are the

people called Carni or Foroilienſes, and in that prouince is Aquileia: from Natiſon to Arſia are the Iapyges and Iſtri and therein is the citty of Tergeſtum, and the riuer Formio which is now the vtmoſt limits of all Italy.
               The hill Appenyne deuydeth all Italy as it were into two clymates or regions, leauing the one part towards The hill Apenine deuideth Italy into two parts. the weſt and South, and the other towards the North and Eaſt: This hill taketh his beginning from the Alpes, and from thence runneth into Liguria, and after that it parteth Ciſalpine France and Picenum, from Hetruria and Sabinia and ſo paſſeth to the Citty Ancona, from whence it auerteth his courſe and extendeth into Apulia, and the hill Garganus, ſeperating the countries of the Marucini, the Peligni, and the Frentini, from Latium and Campania, and ſo finiſheth his race from the hill Garganus, when it commeth to the promontory of Leucopetra, hauing vpon the one hand Apulia, Calabria, the confines of great Greece and Picenum, and the Lucani and Brutij vpon the other. Italy of all other countries is moſt wholſome and healthſome, both for ſweeneſle of the ayre and temperature of the heauens, it aboundeth with all ſorts of mettall, The praiſe of Jealy. 
                  Ceres adorneth her feelds, and Phoebus dallyeth vpon her hills: the forreſts, parkes and chaſes bee ſafe and ſecure for paſſengers, and repleniſhed with goodly trees of ſundry kinds, which yeeld great variety of fruites and commodities to the inhabitants: of wynes and oyles there is plenty, and exceeding great ſtore of all ſorts of grayne, their ſheepe cary very fine fleeces, and their oxen and bulls of all other places bee moſt beautifull, their riuers, lakes, and pooles be cleere and full of fiſh, and delightſome: of hauens and port townes there bee great abundance, the land her ſelfe in ſundry places making (as it were) Roades

and breaches into the ſea, for the exceeding deſire ſhee hath to auaile man-kinde, whereby ſhe becommeth (as I may ſay) the lappe and boſome, that openeth and offereth trafficke and trading into all countries, ſo as ſhee is iuſtly Italy the nurſe of all nations. termed of ſome, the nurſe of all other nations, and elected by Gods diuine prouidence, as parent and Princeſſe of all other Prouinces, and ſuch a one as ſhould gather together vnder one head, and gouernment, all diſperſed dominions, and ſhould aſſwage and mitigate the rage and rudeneſſe of many barbarous people, and (by the diuine helpe of learning and the Latine toung) ſhould vnite and bring to ſociable conference, all nations, though neuer ſo different in life and language: for to paſſe ouer many people and kingdomes which the Romaines haue wone and The commendations of Rome. conquered with their armies and cloquence, the Citty of Rome alone is as amply ſtored with examples of all vertues, as the Grecians with all their eloquence are with precepts, yea they themſelues deuining (as it were) that their land ſhould become the head and gouernor of all others, when they ſurnamed one part therof great Greece.
               In a word, it was not without the diuine prouidence ordained, that where that moſt wiſe and omnipotent God had reiected all other nations, it pleaſed him to make that the chiefe Empire, fortreſſe and defence of all people, that ſhould afterwards bee the ſeate, throne and chaire of the head of Gods Church, and the Chriſtian religion: The The ſtature and complexion of the Italians, and how they differ. Italians differ much amongſt themſelues both in countenance and ſtature, for in Ciſalpine France, and about the gulfe of Venice, the people be of a pale complexion, neat in their apparell, and curious in their ſpeach: but the inhabitants of Hetruria, Latium, Campania, Lucania and the Brutij be of a more browne and ſwartie complexion, and

their haire black, in ſtature they be lower and withall very leane, and in apparell and ſpeech more plaine and ſimple. The Piceni and thoſe which dwell on the skirts of the Adriatticke ſea, vntill you come to great Greece, haue much reſemblance to the former, but in Apulia, Calabria, and in the vppermoſt parts of Italy towards Greece, their ſpeach and behauiour doth little differ from the Greekes.
               Throughout all Italy, and in a manner throughout all Europe, it is not lawfull for any man to haue more wiues than one, and all diuorſes betwixt man and wife, had their originall from the Citty of Rome, for there it was that Spurius Carbillus, complaining of his wiues barrenneſſe, was the firſt that euer was diuorſed from his wife. The Cittizens heretofore conſiſted of three ſorts of people, Three ſorts of Cittizens. that is to ſay, ſlaues, libertines (which were ſuch as were once ſlaues, and were manumitted and made free) & freemen. The freemen were likewiſe deuided into three orders Three orders of Free-men. or ranks, to wit, the Plebeians, the Equeſtri, and the Patritij; the ſolemnizing of their ſacrifices and ſacred rites was committed to Prieſts and Flamins, beſides whom they had diuerſe colleges and ſocieties of religious perſons, wherof ſome did ſacrifice to one God, and ſome to an other. The Dictator was moſt honored of all other officers, and bore The Dictator their chiefest officer. the greateſt ſway amongſt them, from whom no appeale was ſufferable, for he bearing a Kinglike gouernment, they had no higher officer to whom they might appeale: the dignity of the Dictator continued but halfe a yeare, & for the moſt part they came to that high office by degrees, as being firſt Queſtors or Treaſurers, then Aediles, or ouer-ſeeers, & after that Praetors or chiefe Iuſtices, then were they made Conſuls, then Cenſors, & then they attained to the higheſt office of all, which was Dictatorſhip. But yet it did not alwaies neceſſarily follow, that the Dictator had born

all thoſe offices before recited, for he was oftentimes elected out of ſome inferior office for his valor & worthineſſe, yet he had chiefeſt power and authority ouer all thoſe ciuill gouernors, as likwiſe ouer all officers that bore rule in the warres, for in military affaires they had their degrees of gouernors, aſwell as in domeſticall buſineſſes, for there the cōmon ſoldiors yeelded obedience to the Centurions, the Centurions to the Tribunes, the Tribunes to the Lieutenant, the Lieutenants or deputies to the Conſuls, or vnto their Vice-preſidents by them aſſigned to rule in their ſteeds, and all theſe together with the Captaines and conductors of horſmen, were ſubiect to the authority of the Dictator. In warres that were lawfully begun, ſouldiors might continue for the ſpace of ten yeares, if in all that time they neuer skirmiſhed with the enimy, nor were ſommoned away to wage wars in other countries. Beſides this lawfull making of wars, whereof I now ſpeake, there was an other ſort of warfare called Cauſaria, which was when the army for ſome reaſonable cauſe was diſmiſſed, and the campe remooued. This latter maner of warfare as it was not ſo honorable as the firſt, yet did it carry with it no touch of ignominy nor diſgrace, becauſe they were called thence for ſome ſpeciall cauſe; Seruius Tullius ordained, that none ſhould be ſoldiors but ſuch as were betwixt the age of ſeuenteene yeares, and eight and forty: thoſe which were men of peace went alwaies in gownes, and the ſouldiors in ſhort caſſocks and coate armors. When they intended to make battell againſt any country, they would firſt ſend an herald or officer at armes to denounce warrs, and being once entred into it, they might not leaue it but for ſome lawfull cauſe.
               All the citties of Italy were either confederats with Rome, or ſuch as were newly inhabited by thoſe that came out

of Rome, and were called Colonia, or Municipia, which were ſuch Citties as had liberties and priuiledges proper Three ſorts of Citties. and peculiar to themſelues: of which ſort ſome were made by plurality of voyces, and ſome otherwiſe, and thoſe Citties called Municipia, were euer gouerned by their owne decrees, but the Citties called Coloniae were accounted as members of Rome, and liued vnder the Romaine law. In the citties or corporations called Municipia, where there were Burgeſſes and Free denizens together, their chiefeſt officers were called Decurions, which were the ſame that Senators were at Rome. The order of the Patritij were diſtinguiſhed from the Equeſtri by their purple robes, and the Equeſtri were knowne from the Plebeians, by their gilden garments, if he which had the chiefeſt authority, and bore the prerogatiue royall amongſt them, had miſdemeaned himſelfe, his cauſe was diſcerned by the whole body of the citty, and the hearing and determining of all other capitall offences, was committed to certaine Iudges elected by lots to that dignity, out of that band of ſouldiers which were aſſiſtants to the Magiſtrates in matters of life and death for that yeare: The deciding of all ciuill contentions, belonged to the Praetor of the Centumuiri, and ſo in like ſort other crimes were committed to the conſideration of other Magiſtrates: And ſuch generally were the manners and cuſtomes of all the people and citties of Italy, which inſtitutions and forme of gouernment, they receiued from Romulus.
               
               Now Romulus (after he had finiſhed and perfected the walls, ditches, forts of defence, and all other neceſſary buildings of the Citty of Rome:) ordered and diſpoſed the ſtate of the citty in manner following. Firſt hee deuided the whole multitude of people into three parts or

ranckes, ſelecting out of euery of thoſe orders or degrees, How Romulus diſpoſed the cittizens of Rome into ſundry orders and degrees. the chiefeſt and worthieſt men to gouerne and rule the reſt. After this he made a ſubdiuiſion, diſtributing each of thoſe three ſeuerall parts into ten equall and indifferent portions, and ſetting as gouernours ouer euery portion the beſt and moſt ſubſtantialeſt men amongſt them; hee called the three greater parts Tribes, and the leſſer Curiae or wardes: the gouernors of the Tribes hee likewiſe called Tribunes, and the Preſidents of the wardes, Centurions: The Curiae or wardes were laſtly deuided into leſſer bands, called Decuriae, and their wardens or leaders he named Decurions.
               All the people beeing thus deuided into Tribes and The ground deuided into thirty equall parts. wardes, he then made like partition of the land, deuiding it into thirty equall parts or portions, and allotting vnto euery ward their part thereof, he reſerued onely ſo much for himſelfe, as was ſufficient for him wherein to build Temples and places for ſacrifices, leauing alſo ſome little in common to them all: And thus this firſt partition both of the people and ground, wrought a common equalitie amongſt them. This done, he made a ſecond diuiſion of the people onely, giuing vnto euery one ſtipends and honors, according to the worthineſſe and dignity of their perſons, and ſeuerring thoſe which were honorably deſcended, and of approued vertues, and that were wealthy withall, and had iſſue to inherit after them, from thoſe which were poore, needy and ignoble, hee named thoſe men of baſeſt and meaneſt condition Plebeians, and the Nobility he called Patres or fathers, whereof inſued, that the whole diſcent and poſterity of the Patres, were euer after them called Patritians.
               When Romulus had thus ſeperated the better ſort of

people from the worſe, the rich from the poore, the noble from the ignoble, he then ordained them lawes to liue vnder, allotting vnto euery of them their proper offices and functions, according to their degrees and calling. To the Patritij he gaue power to doe ſacrifice, to beare offices, to The office of the Patritij. decide controuerſies, and to ſee that euery one had his right, to participate with him in the gouernment of the common-weale, and to haue a vigilant regard and prouident reſpect of the ſafty of the citty: the Plebeians or comminalty (both for that they were poore and wanted experience) were eaſed from bearing offices, and onely imploied ſome in husbandry, ſome in feeding of cattell, and ſome in handy-crafts, or other profitable trades. And to the end that all theſe ſeuerall ſorts of people ſhould liue peaceably, and free from contention one with an other, and neither the poore iniured by the rich, nor the rich enuied by the poore, hee committed the Plebeians to the care of the Patritians, permitting euery one of the comminalty to chooſe one of the Patritij whom hee pleaſed, for his Aduocate and defendor, calling that a Patronage or protection. How the Patritians and Plebeians behaued themſelues one towards another. And thus the poore being taken into the protection of the Patritians, he inſtituted for them both, their proper duties one towards an other, which was that the Plebeians ſhould reuerence their patrons, and the patrons defend their clients whom they had taken into protection, and ſo he vnited them together in friendly affection and ciuill coniunction, making it vnhoneſt and vtterly vnlawfull for either of them to accuſe the other, or for the one to giue teſtimony againſt the other, or that there ſhould be any hatred or enmity betwixt them; by which meanes, vnity and mutuall concord was moſt firmly ſetled and eſtabliſhed amongſt the Romaines.
               
                  
After this hee elected an hundred Councellors, out of the Patritians, the maner of their election was this; Firſt hee himſelfe aſſigned and nominated one to bee his viceroy, The Centumviri elected, which were after called Senators of Rome. or Lieutenant in the gouernment of the commonwealth, when he went to the warres, out of the confines of his owne country: then hee commanded the Tribes to chooſe out of euery Tribe three, of the beſt eſteeme amongſt them, for grauity, wealth and honor: after which nine ſo elected by the tribes, he likewiſe commanded the Curiae or wards, that euery warde ſhould chooſe three of the Patritians, whom they thought moſt fit for that purpoſe, which done, adding to the ninety elected by the thirty wards, the nine that were choſen by the three Tribes, and that one chiefe Captaine or Commander aſſigned by himſelfe, they all of them made vp the compleat number of a hundred Councellors, which number of Councellors were by the Romaines in ſhort time after their inſtitution called the Senate of Rome, and they themſelues for their reuerence and authority called Fathers, and for theit age and grauity Senators: Moreouer after all this, hee elected out of the moſt generous and renowned families, three hundred yong men, of the choyſeſt and ſtrongeſt The election of three hundred yong men called Celeres. amongſt them, which were firſt prickt and nominated by the ſuffrages of the Curiae or wards, euery warde nominating ten as in the former election of the Senators, and this their election was afterwards by him confirmed: And thoſe three hundred young men ſtood euer in readineſſe about him as a Court of garde to defend his perſon, and were all of them called by this generall name Celeres, for their ſpeedineſſe and readineſſe at all aſſayes to execute the Kings command.
               
                  
Furthermore, the offices and duty of the King were preſcribed as followeth; Firſt by his authority regall hee The office of the King. was chiefe head and principall gouernor of ſacrifices, ſepulchers and temples conſecrated to diuine ſeruice, wherin he ought not doe any thing that redounded not to the glory of their gods: next hee was in duty bound to obſerue and keepe the lawes and cuſtomes of his country, he had alſo power to ſommon a Senate, to aſſemble the commons, and in military affaires, hee had chiefe Empire and command ouer all: To the Senate was giuen power The office of Senators. and commiſſion to heare and determine all complaints and controuerſies that were brought before them, which was done by voyces of the Senators, and the ſentence was euer giuen on his ſide that had the moſt voyces.
               The Plebeians or cominalty had alſo theſe three priuileges, The priuileges of the Plebeians. to create Magiſtrates, to make lawes, and determine of warres when the King was ſo pleaſed, nor was this power abſolute in themſelues, but it muſt euer bee approued and allowed by the Senate, neither yet had euery perſon his perticular voyce, but euery warde was called ſeuerally, and that which was agreed vpon by the maior part of the words, was referred to the conſideration of the Senate. But now this manner of giuing voyces is changed and altered in moſt places, for neither hath the Senate power to diſcerne and giue allowance of the ordinances and decrees of the commons, but rather the commons haue authority to alter or allow the ſtatutes eſtabliſhed by the Senate.
               By this diuiſion of Romulus the three hundred yong men of his garde called Celeres, did not onely accompliſh The office of Celeres. his commands in matters concerning the ciuill eſtate and gouernement of the Citty, but they had alſo the

managing of military affaires, ſo as when the King intended to rayſe an army, it was needeleſſe for him to create Tribunes oner the Tribes, decurions ouer the wards, or gouernors and praefects of his horſe men: but it was inough for him to commande the Tribunes, and they the centurions, and then the Decurious by their inſtructions were to bring forth ſuch ſouldiors as they thought fitteſt for that purpoſe, by which meanes they would be altogether in redineſſe at an inſtant: He elected alſo a thouſand fighting-men which (as ſome write) he called Milites, becauſe they were a thouſand in number.
               And then the more to ſhew his Maieſty, and to bee The Milites elected. thought more honorable in the eyes of his people, hee aſcribed and tooke vnto him-ſelfe tytles, markes and ornaments of Empire and honour, as to goe in ſumpteous attyre, and to haue euer going before him twelue Sergeants or Miniſters of execution, which hee called Lictores, 
                  The lictores ordayned. carying euery one a bunch of rods in their hand: In ordering theſe Sergeants or executioners to march before him, it may ſeeme his intent was by them (being in number twelue) to repreſent the twelue Augures or ſouth ſayers, which told him by diuination and coniectures of things to come, which manner of diuiners he called Vultures, though ſome bee of opinion that in that ceremony he immitated the Hetruſſi or Tuſcans, who being Twelue ſorts of people in number, when by generall conſent they elected a cheefe Magiſtrate, that ſhould haue the ſoueraigntie ouer them, euery one of thoſe twelue Trybes or ſorts of people, would preſent vnto their gouernor ſuch a Sergant, Bedell ot apparytor, to make way before him, and to bee euer in redineſſe for execution of any project,

from whence likewiſe were vndoubtedly deryued the little Chariots with chaires of eſtate in them, wherein the Romaine Kings vſed to ride: their kirtles or robes which they wore vnder their mantles of eſtate, and all their other enſignes and ornaments of honour: Now Romulus the better to ſettle, ſecure and ſtrengthen the ſtate of this Citty, invented and deuiſed this honeſt pretence and ſtratagem following (intending it wholy to the honour of his Gods) for he erected and builded vp a Temple, or Church in a darke and ſhadowed place, into which if any ſtranger did fly and take ſanctuary hee would vndertake and ſecure them (in argument of the awe and reuerence he bore vnvnto his Gods) that their enemies ſhould not wronge, moleſt or diſturbe them, promiſing further that if they would ſtay with him hee would make them partakers of the priuileges of his Citty, and giue them a portion of the ground which hee had gotten by the warrs to liue vpon: Then did hee make an inſtitution that no citty gotten by the ſword, ſhould bee vtterly ruinated and deſtroyed, or brought into bondage and ſlavery, but that there ſhould bee colonies and competent companies of people ſent thither from Rome, anſwerable to the quantity of ground ſo gotten, there to inhabite and dwell, and that thoſe conquered Citties, ſhould bee accounted as vnder Citties vnto Rome, and within the compaſſe of the common-weale.
               But after the death of Titus Tatius (which whome Romulus raigned fiue yeares both ouer the Sabinians and 
                     
                        ••
                     wes made by Romulus. the Romaines who were then vnited together into one people) hee began to bee more religious, and inſtituted diuers new ſtatutes and decrees as well priuat as publike.

firſt hee made a law concerning Matrimony, that the wife ſhould haue equall power with her husband ouer all their mony and goods, and as much authority in their ſacrifices, VViues made equall to their husbands. and that ſhee ſhould liue in as good ſort as her husband and be called Miſtris ouer the houſe, as well as he Maiſter, and that if hee dyed without Iſſue his wife ſhould ſucceed him, and inherite all his goods and poſſeſſions, and if hee left children behinde him, yet ſhee ſhould haue an equall ſhare with them: That if ſhee were conuicted of adultery it ſhould bee lawfull for her husband or his kinſfolke to kill her, and that if ſhe drinke any wine at her owne houſe, ſhee ſhould bee puniſhed as an adultreſſe: by meanes of which inſtitution, aroſe this cuſtome amongſt the Romaines, that the husbands when they had beene a broade Jt was Death for a woman to drincke wine and came home to their houſes, ſhould imbrace and kiſſe their wiues and daughters, of purpoſe (as Fortius Cato interpreteth it) to ſmell whether they had drunke any wine, thereby approuing, that as corruption is the beginning of madneſſe, and frenzie, ſo is drunkenneſſe the forerunner of rottenneſſe and corruption.
               Then hee ordayned that parents ſhould haue full power ouer their children, to diſpoſe of them as they pleaſed, to reſtrayne and keepe them vnder, to beate them and bynde them and ſet them to all drudgery, yea it was lawfull for VVhat power parents had ouer their children. them to ſlay them, or ſell them for ſlaues, and if any were ſold by his father, and of him ſelfe regained his liberty, his father might ſell him againe, and againe after that, if hee were ſo diſpoſed; The contents of this law was three hundred yeares after the inſtitution thereof written in twelue tables, but yet the rigor and authority was firſt mitigated and abridged by Numa Pompilius, next King

to Romulus, for he ordained, that if the ſonne did marry by his fathers conſent, all the authority his father had ouer him before, was then extinct; from this ſeuere law Romulus proceeded to other ordinances, eſtabliſhing that no free-man ſhould exerciſe any arte or occupation, wherein his worke was done ſitting, as Taylers, Shoomakers, Scriueners, &c. and that the Cittizens ſhould practiſe themſelues in husbandry, as well as in martiall diſcipline, whereby in after-times it was a great commendation for one to be accounted both a good ſouldier and a good husbandman, for the King thought it a point of great imperfection, in any man, to be ignorant in either of theſe exerciſes, but that to be skilfull in manuring and tilling the ground, and expert in feats of armes, ſhould inſeperably go together, according to the law of the Lacedemonians, and in time of peace his will was that they ſhould wholy giue themſelues to husbandry, permitting them notwithſtanding to buy and make prouiſion of ſuch things they wanted, when neceſſity conſtrained them therevnto. And in argument that hee was not vnmindfull of matters of religion, hee ordained and made Temples, Altars, and Images of the gods; adding there-vnto feſtiuall dayes, and times of ſolemnity, oblations, ſacrifices, holydayes, fayres and martes, wherein as well to buy any thing they wanted, as alſo to vnderſtand their lawes and many other things, pertaining to the honor of their gods, excluding notwithſtanding out of the cittie all forraine and out-landiſh ſacrifices, and eſpecially thoſe which were ſolemnized after the ceremonies of the Greekes, thoſe onely excepted which were dedicated and celebrated in honour of Heroules, and were long ſince inſtituted in the dayes of Euander.
               
               
                  
                  Dionyſius Halicarnaſſeus, following the opinion of Varro herein, ſaith that Romulus ordained three ſcore prieſts to make publike ſacrifices, through euery tribe and euery ward, annexing vnto them as their aſſiſtants, the diuiners and ſouthſaiers: euery ward likewiſe had his proper Genius, or ſpirit, which they ſuppoſed did defend them, and their proper miniſters to doe ſacrifice vnto them: but the goddeſſe Veſta was generally worſhipped of all.
               And laſtly hee deuided and digeſted the yeere into tenne monthes, by all which ordinances and decrees it may eaſily bee gathered and plainely perceiued that Romulus was moſt skilfull and expert in all matters both diuine and humaine, and that they detract much from his glory and wiſdome, which report that the people of Rome liued without morality amongſt themſelues, or religion towards their gods, vntill the raigne of Numa Pompilius. And theſe were the ciuil inſtitutions ordained by Romulus.
               
               But Numa Pompilius that afterwards ſucceeded him in the Kingdome, in ſome part altered and in ſome part Numa Pompilius and his lawes.
                   added vnto his Statutes, and firſt in following the courſe of the Moone, hee diſpoſed the yeere into twelue monthes, whereas before Romulus made it to conſiſt but of tenne, and altering the order of the monethes, hee ſet Ianuary and February before March (whereas till that time March was the firſt month and the beginning of the yeere) and ſo hee made March for to bee the third in order and ranke: Next hee appointed ſome daies to bee feſtiuall and holy, and ſome other as diſmal, ominous and vnluckie, wherein he would not any way meddle with the people or beginne any buſineſſe.
               
                  
After this hee created one chiefe Flamin or Prieſt to doe ſacrifice to Iupiter, whom he called (Dialis) and honored him with a roabe of dignity and chaire of ſtate, hee then created two other prieſts, one to ſacrifice to Mars and the other to Romulus, and theſe were alſo called Flamines, for the caps of honour which they wore vpon their heads: moreouer he elected the Virgine Veſtals which for the firſt ten yeeres did nothing but learne the rites and manner of ſacrifiſing, the next ten yeeres they ſpent in doing ſacrifice themſelues, and the third ten yeeres they taught and inſtructed nouiſſes and freſh commers into that profeſſion, and then at the thirtith yeeres end it was in their choiſe, whether they would mary or continue ſtill in that courſe of life.
               And thoſe Virgin Veſtals were maintained at the common coſt of the City, and reuerenced with titles of perpetual virginity, and other ceremonies, but if any of them were conuicted of inceſt, her ſentence was ſorrowfully pronounced by the Cittizens, that ſhee ſhould bee ſet quicke in the ground, at the gate called Collina, which is in the hill Quirinalis and there couered with earth till ſhee were dead. Hee dedicated alſo vnto Mars twelue other prieſts which hee called Salij, whoſe office was vpon certaine daies in the month of March (which tooke his name of the god Mars) to lead a ſolemne dance in ſome of the principall places of the City, they were cloathed with coates of diuers collours, and their vppermoſt garments were red and changeable, they had ſwords by their ſides hanging in brazen belts, in their right hand they caried launces and rods, and brazen bucklers in their left, and vpon their heads they wore high hats waxing ſharpe towards the crowne.
               
                  
Theſe prieſts which for their ſolemne dancing the Romaines called Sallij (according to the opinion of Dionyſius) did little differ from the Coribantes or Sibilles prieſts, which the Greekes called Curetes: finally he created a Biſhop or high prieſt, to whom he gaue ſupreme authority ouer all infreior prieſts, and in him it lay to appoint what oblations ſhould bee offred, vpon what daies and in what Temples. Beſides all theſe holy orders of prieſts and religious perſons, hee ordained the Feciales or herraulds The Feciales ordained. to denounce warre or peace, and they were to haue a ſpeciall regard that the Romanes ſhould not make warres againſt any vniuſtly, and if the Romaines were iniured or robbed by any others, theſe Feciales were to require reſtitution of the goods wrongfully taken and detained, but if they denied to make reſtitution, then were they to denounce open war againſt them.
               Their power was likewiſe to deliuer offenders to bee puniſhed, to thoſe whoſe goods they had iniuriouſly taken, if wronge were offered to Legats or Ambaſſadors, they were to correct it, and if the cauſes were honeſt and iuſt, they might conclude a peace, and breake it againe if it appeared that the League was vnlawfully eſtabliſhed.
               And if either the captaine, or chiefe conductor of the army, or the whole army in generall, had done any thing contrary to their oths and alleagance, in them it reſted wholy to puniſh the offence.
               This done he limitted their times of mourning, commanding that the death of infants vnder three yeeres old, ſhould not bee lamented at all, and that for elder children they ſhould bewaile them as many monthes as they were yeeres old, ſo as it exceeded not ten monthes,

which was the vttermoſt time preſcribed for mourning for any ones death.
               When Numa Pompilius had eſtabliſhed theſe lawes, for the gouernment of the common-wealth, he then ſeuered and diſtributed the people into ſundry companies and ſocieties, according to their arts and profeſſion, as minſtrels, crafts-men, head-carpenters, dyers, ſhoomakers, tanners, maſons, potters, &c. making of diuers of thoſe arts one fraternitie or bodie politicke. Seruius Tullius 
                  The people deuided into ſunday bands called Claſſes, and centuries. deuided the whole multitude of citizens into ſundry orders, ranckes or armies, which he called Claſſes, and into centuries or bands conſiſting of a hundred men, the manner of his diſpoſition of them was thus.
               In the firſt order or degree he inroled thoſe who were The firſt Claſſis. taxed in their ſubſidie bookes at a hundred thouſand Aſſes, and of this order there was foureſcore centuries, conſiſting indifferently of young men and old, ſo as the old men ſhould euer remaine at home to ſaue and defend the city, and the youth were to try the fortune of warres abroad; he then commanded them both, to weare armor and weapons both of defence & of offence, as helmets, ſhields, priuie-coates and bootes to defend themſelues, and ſpeares and ſwords to offend the enemy: to this firſt ranke or degree hee added two centuries of workemen, or pioners, which were to caſt trenches, build rampiers, and to make all their engines and inſtruments of warre, and they euer went vnarmed, to bee alwaies in redineſſe for any labor.
               The ſecond order or degree conſiſted of twentie centuries, and were ſuch as were taxed betwixt ſeuentie The ſecond Claſſis. fiue and a hundred thouſand Aſſes, they were deuided into young and old as the former order, and tollerated

to weare the ſame armor and weapons the other did, ſaue onely the coate of fence which they might not weare.
               The third order was of ſuch as were taxed at fifty thouſand The third order or Claſſis. Aſſes, & they conſiſted of as many centuries as the other, and did nothing differ from them in their weapons, ſauing that they wore no bootes.
               The fourth order was taxed at fiue and twenty thouſand The fourth Claſſis. aſſes, and they wore no other weapons but little Iauelins or darts. And the fift and laſt degree conſiſted of thirty centuries, their warlike weapons were ſlings and The fift and laſt degree. ſtones, and they were valued at forty thouſand, and with theſe were ceſſed and taxed the cornetters and trumperters, which were three centuries in number, the reſt whoſe ſubſtance was but ſmall, hee both ſpared from the wars, by reaſon of their pouerty, and remitted their tribute.
               After this diuiſion he miniſtred an oth to the Citizens, that they ſhould make a iuſt eſtimation of their goods, and declare out of what family & ſtocke they were deſcended, what children they had, and of what age and by what names they were called, and whether any of them had wiues, and where euery of them dwelt: and if any of them dealt doubly with him, and falſifyed their othes and fidelity, all their goods were (ipſo facto) confiſcate and taken from them, and they themſelues firſt whipped and then ſold for ſlaues.
               The companies of footmen being thus diſtributed, hee elected out of the chiefeſt of the Citizens, nine orders of horſmen, ſo as the whole number of horſeme reckoning thoſe that were ordained by Romulus, and thoſe which were afterwards added by Tarquinius, were now two and twenty centuries: to euery centuary hee allowed ten thouſand peeces of money out of the common

treaſury, to buy them horſes, and two thouſand peeces a yeere to keepe them, beſides, all the widdowes of the city paide vnto the horſemen yeerely penſions towards their better maintainance, euery one according to her ability: And ſo all the whole number of horſmen and footemen were a hundred ninty and three centuries, and euery century kept their place and dignity in giuing their voices, & they that were beſt able bore the greateſt charge in the warres, and gaue their voices firſt. For Seruius thought it fitter that the centuries ſhould pay tribute according as they were valued, and not perticularly by the pole, as they did before.
               The centuries of horſemen were to mingle their voices, amongſt the centuries of the firſt ranke of footemen, which were foureſcore centuries as is ſaide before, and ſo Dionyſius reckoneth, that there were foureſcore and eighteene centuries, that had the firſt place in giuing their voices, which were more then all the centuries of the other orders, whereof inſues, that what euer was concluded by the ſuffrages of the firſt order, was immutable, but if the voices of the firſt degree were deuided, which happened but ſeldome, then the centuries of the ſecond order were called, and if they could not agree, then the others after them in their courſe, but it was very rare that euer it ſhould come to the centuries of the laſt order.
               And thus by the wiſdome of King Tullius, all the orders ſeemed to haue an equality of voices, but yet the priority was granted to thoſe which were at greateſt charge, and though none were excluded, yet was all in a manner done by the centuries of the firſt order, and the equites or horſmen: For they created magiſtrates whom they pleaſed, they eſtabliſhed lawes and denounced wars,

which three priuiledges and prerogatiues were before by Romulus giuen to the Plebeians or communalty.
               But when Taquin the laſt Romaine King, was depoſed and baniſhed Rome, the forme of this gouernment was cleane altered and changed: for in ſteed of Kings they created Conſuls, who had all the types and ornaments of honour giuen vnto them, that the Kings had before, ſauing onely the crowne, and the gowne wrought with palmes, which the Kings vſed to weare after they had atchiued any conqueſt: And when Brutus, the defender of their liberties, was by the voices of the centuries made The Kings put downe and Senators ordained. fellow Conſul with Collatinus, hee bound the Citizens by an oth, that they ſhould neuer after that ſuffer any one man to raigne ouer them as their King: Then hee ordained three hundred Senators, and one chiefe ruler ouer the ſacrifices, whoſe office was to performe all things belonging to ſacrifices, that the King before was wont to doe.
               
                  Valerius (who was the third Conſul) permitted it lawfull to appeale from the Conſuls to the comminalty, forbidding vnder paine of death that no one ſhould accept of any office, without the conſent of the commons, and that the Citizens ſhould bee eaſed of tribute, which made men more willing to fall to trading and other labours; adding therevnto an other law, whereby it was preſent death for any one to affect any kinde of gouernment for his owne priuate profit: Hee then appointed the Temple of Saturne to bee the common treaſury, wherein to keepe the reuenewes of the City, and ſuffered the people to create two Treaſurers, or Chamberlanes, to ſee the diſpoſing thereof: Not longe after this they agreed to haue ſuch a magiſtrate, as from whom

they might not appeale, and him they called a Dictator, (a dictando) by reaſon of the authority hee had to command, The Dictator elected. or rather (a dicende) becauſe he was not elected by the voices of the people, but by him onely that bore the chiefeſt ſway in the city.
               In ordayning this high office of Dictatorſhip, the Romanes may ſeeme to haue imitated the Greekes, who (as Theophraſtus writeth in his booke Deregno) were wont to make certaine chiefe officers whom they called Eſimnetes, to rule ouer them for a time limited. For the Dictator of Rome continued in his place and dignity but halfe a yeere, and was neuer created but in time of warre, or other imminent danger of the Citie, and then hee had power to elect new magiſtrates and officers vnder him, as the maiſter or captaine of the horſmen, who in authority was next vnto him, eſpecially ouer the horſemen and beſt ſouldiors, and was aſſiſtant to the Dictator as the Tribune was to the King: And when Spurius Caſſius, and Poſthumius Cominius were Conſuls, they gaue the people commiſſion, to chooſe them magiſtrates of great reuerence and authority, to bee their protectors againſt the violence of the Conſuls, expreſly forbidding that no Patritian Tribunes of the people ordained. ſhould take that office vpon him, and theſe high officers were called the Tribunes of the people.
               Theſe Tribunes grew in ſhort time ſo proude and inſolent, as they would caſſire and make voide the decrees of the Conſuls and Senate at their pleaſure, vnleſſe they agreed with their humors, and of them at the firſt (whether it were by general conſent, or foreſhewed by diuination, or whether religion mooued them) were but two in number created, ſhortly after there was an other added to them, and in the end they came to bee fiue.
               
                  
There was in Rome three ſorts of Parliaments, or ſocieties of people to chuſe officers: the firſt called Curiata, or aſſembly of the wards, which was euer ſummoned by the Lictors or Sergeants: the ſecond Centuriata, which was of ſuch as were diuided into ſundry Centuries or degrees, according to their age and abilitie, as is ſaid before: and to this they were called by a trumpeter or cornetter. And the third was of ſuch as dwelt in diuers parts of the country, & payd tribute vnto the cittie. By the Parliament or conuocation-houſe of the Centuries, where the Conſuls put downe, and the Decemviri created, to whom all the power The Decemviri created, and Conſuls put downe. and Empirie of the Senate deſcended, euen as the authority of the Conſuls was firſt deriued from the Kings: nor was it lawfull in any caſe, to appeale from them. Theſe Decemviri when they went about to make any new lawes, would do it in this manner: firſt, one of them had a whole day allowed him to conſider what was fitting to be don; in which day he bore the greateſt authority, and when hee had ſet downe his opinion in writing, the next day was allowed for another, and to haue the like prime place in gouernement: and ſo likewiſe the reſt euery one his ſeuerall day: and when euery one had had his day, and their opinions, and doings written in ſeuerall tables, and layd before them altogether, they then collected and confirmed what they thought good out of euery ones ſentence, and ſo calling them the lawes of the ten tables, they publiſhed them to the people.
               And there went euer before him, that had the chiefeſt Iuriſdiction, twelue men carrying bundels of roddes, and the other nine had euery one his Vſher going before him.
               But this kind of gouernement continued not long,

for euen as the power and authority of the Tribunes was vtterly baniſhed out of the citie by the Decemviri, ſo (vppon mature conſideration) it ſeemed good to the Patricians, that the Tribunes in requitall ſhould extinguiſh and put downe theirs. And then was there a law ordained, that whatſoeuer was decreed by the Plebeians, ſhould go currant through all the people: and if any one hindred or impeached the Tribunes or Aediles in their iudgements, his head ſhould be ſacrificed to Iupiter, and his whole family that were free, ſhould be ſold for ſlaues at the Temple of Ceres.
               
               After this there was another Councell created out of the Plebeians, and then was it made lawfull and tolerable for the Plebeians to marry, and enter into conſanguinitie with the Patricians. Beſides theſe, there were created two Cenſors, who had the charge ouer the Scribes, the keeping The two Cenſors created. of the tables, and the order and forme of taxing, and leuying of money, and muſtering ſouldiers committed vnto them.
               This pettie office beeing but meane at the firſt inſtitution, grew in proceſſe of time to an incredible height, in ſo much as the whole raines of correction and ciuill diſcipline, were in concluſion let looſe into their hands: for the gouernement of the Senate, the Equites and Centurians, were ſo curbed and reſtrained, as they had power only to decide controuerſies touching honour and reproch: and in the Cenſors conſiſted the chiefeſt ſoueraignty, as to view and ouerſee publike places, to giue penſions to the people, and againe to taxe them with exactions and tribute: to conſecrate ſacrifices euery fift yeare for the purgation of the cittie, to diſplace and thruſt the Senators out of the cittie, or to defame them: and theſe continued in

their office for fiue yeares, and then new were created in their roomes. Then was there another Magiſtrate created to heare and determine matters, whom they called a Praetor, and to him was committed power and authoritie, ouer A Praetor ordained. all publike and priuate dealings, and to conſtitute and ordaine new lawes and ſtatutes, and to abrogate and repeale the old: Of theſe Praetors there was firſt but one created, and he was called Vrbanus Praetor, becauſe he had the gouernement of the cittizens, to whome (he alone beeing not able to vndergo ſo great a burthen, by reaſon of the great acceſſe of ſtrangers that daily reſorted thither to dwell) there was afterwards another Praetor added, and him they called Praetor peregrinus, as hauing the charge ouer aliens and ſtrangers, and this kind of gouernement was called Ius honorarium, for the great honour and dignitie that belonged to the Magiſtrates: for they had all the enſignes and ornaments attributed vnto them, that before belonged to the Kings, and their apparel and furniture was almoſt equall to the Conſuls.
               In this ſtate did the cittie of Rome continue vntil Iulius Caeſars time, who reduced the gouernement into a Monarchie againe, by taking vppon him the name of Imperator, which kind of gouernement by Emperors did long after continue, and then began to be celebrated at Rome the 
                     The manner of celebration of the games called Ludi Circenſes. playes called Ludi Circenſes, the ſolemnitie whereof was thus: The whole traine of Players iſſuing orderly from out the Capitoll, paſſed by the forum, into a great circle or rundle of ground, like a theater, made for the Spectators to behold the games; And firſt went the ſonnes of the Equites, that for age, ſtrength, and agilitie were moſt fit for exerciſes, both on foote and horſebacke, riding vppon horſes, and diſtinguiſhed by their companies and Centuries,

to ſhew vnto ſtrangers and forrainers, the great hope the citty conceiued of her future happineſſe, by the exceeding aptnes and towardnes of their youth: after them followed the wagoners with chariots, ſome drawn with foure horſes, and ſome with two, and ſome others leading little low horſes, that would ſtand without the bridle.
               And after them followed the champions that were to try the maſteries, as wraſtling, running, and the whirleabout, called Caeſtus, which was done with plummets of lead, beeing all of them naked ſauing their priuities, then followed the troupe of dancers, leapers and vaulters in their companies, the men firſt, the young ſtriplings after, and then the children: in the next ranke vnto theſe followed the trumpetters and minſtrels, ſome playing vpon flutes, ſome vpon pipes, and ſome with a kind of Iuory harpes with 7. ſtrings called Dulcimers: the leapers and vaulters were apparelled in red coates, girded in the waſt with brazen belts, and ſwords at their ſides, and the mens ſwords were ſhorter then the others, they had alſo brazen helmets, & great plumes of fethers: before euery company went men that were skilfull in thoſe kind of exerciſes, to ſhew them the maner of that dancing and skipping, and other more violent and warlike motions, by words in meeter conſiſting of foure ſyllables. They practiſed alſo the Enoplian dancing, otherwiſe called the Pyrrhichian dauncing, inuented (as is ſuppoſed) by Pallas, though ſome of a contrarie opinion thinke, that the Curetes were the firſt authors of that kind of dancing. Then followed the troupe of the Satyriſci with an Enoplian dance: theſe Satyriſci were figured into Sileni and Satyres, and they vſed taunting and ſcoffing motions in their dancing, & had alſo a conſort of muſick following after them. Then went there a company with cenſors

in their hands, caſting round about them ſweet odors, amongſt whom were diuers that carried vpon their ſhoulders the images of their gods, all guilded with gold and ſiluer: and laſt of all followed the chiefe Magiſtrates of the city, attended with great troups, making ſhew by their eaſie pace, and demure lookes, of great deuotion & religion. The place or circuit of ground appointed for both theſe ſort of dancers to practiſe in, was three stadia and a halfe in length, and foure akres in breadth: ſo that whole compaſſe of ground lying betwixt Pallatinum and Auentinum, hauing gates in three ſeuerall places to go in and out, was able to hold an hundred & fifty thouſand ſpectators, which were orderly placed vpon Skaffolds round about the Theater: there were alſo acted within this Theater diuers Interludes, the beginning whereof at Rome was thus: there Jnterludes, & how they began were certaine fencers, or ſuch as could flouriſh a two hand ſword, ſent for from Hetruria, who dancing there after the ſtroke of the muſick, made diuers ſorts of motions after the Tuſcan manner: theſe fencers or dancers, the youth of Rome did afterwards imitate, pronouncing at the firſt their ieſts & deuiſes in harſh verſes, their motions alſo being as diſagreeable, as their voyces were vntuneable, but in tract of time, by much practiſe, they came to more perfection: ſo as they were as cunning in thoſe exerciſes, as the Hetrurians, and then the profeſſors thereof were called Hiſtriones; for Hiſter in the Tuſcan toung, is Ludio in Latine, which ſignifieth a player: and in time they vtterly abandoned thoſe diſorderly and confuſed kind of verſes, which they vſed at the beginning, as moſt ſcurrill and diſhoneſt, and beganne to ſettle themſelues to more ciuill & decent motions, pronouncing their ſpeeches & Satyrs with more harmony, and ſinging pricke-ſong to their inſtruments.
               
                  
                  Lucius Andronicus digreſſing ſomewhat from theſe Satyres, deuiſed fables vnto their arguments, and cauſed thē to be pronounced with a low voice, hee appointed a boy alſo to ſing before the minſtrell, and at his ſide hee ſet the players to act their parts, and ſo by little and little it grew from a ridiculous toy to be an art, and then the Romaine youth leauing off the dancing and mimicke actions, vſed by the Hiſtriones, or players, fell to acting of Comedies compoſed in good verſes, and this was the beginning of their fables and merry interludes, and theſe kind of playes being deriued from the people called Oſci in Campania, were euer after put in vſe, and the hiſtriones forbidden the practiſe of thoſe ſorts of playes.
               Now the manner how the Senate and people of Rome How the Romanes deified their Emperors. did conſecrate and deifie their dead Emperours, was thus: firſt (as Herodianus writeth) they placed in the portall or entrance into the Emperors pallace, an image made like vnto the dead Emperor, vppon a bed of iuorie decked and garniſhed with gold, ſo as the image lay vppon the bed pale and wan like one that were ſicke; and about the bed vppon the left hand, for the moſt part of the day, ſate all the Senate attired in blacke, and the Noble-mens wiues vpon the right hand in white, (for white was then vſed by women for mourning attire) and they then vſed no curioſitie at all in their apparell: and thus they did for ſeuen dayes together: the Phiſitians all that while viſiting the Image, as though it had life, and telling them that his death was neare approching: at the end of the ſeuen dayes (as though the Emperour had then died) all the youth of the Order of the Equeſtri and Senatours, carried the bed betwixt them, whereon the image lay, by the way called ſacra via, where none might paſſe but liuing Prieſts and

dead Emperors vnto the Forum, and there placing it in the pulpit, wherein they vſed to pleade and make orations, a great ſort of boyes and girles of the order of the Patricii, (the whole company being orderly placed on each ſide of the pulpit) did ſing in a mournefull and lamentable Ditty certaine hymnes in commendation of the dead Emperor. Then did they carry the Iuorie bed with the Image on it from the forum, to campus Martius, (which is a field nere Rome, wherin they vſed all manner of exerciſes) and there placed it vppon a high throne of eſtate made of wood, and foure ſquare, and riſing higher by degrees, and narrower towards the top, in manner of a watch-tower, all the troup being decked in gold and purple, and adorned with images and enſigns of iuorie, and diuers other pictures: within the hollowneſſe of which throne was ſet a great pile of dry wood: then was the image placed vpon the ſecond ſtep or degree of the throne, with all ſorts of odors and ſweet perfumes, which were brought thither from all parts of the cittie, and the nobleſt young men of the Order of the Equeſtri, clothed and attired in linnen garments, rode round about the throne with a Pyrrhichian motion, and ſolemne gate, and with them all the Nobility in chariots and coaches: and laſt of all the ſucceſſor of the deceaſed Emperor brought a torch readie light, and deliuered it to the people, who ſet the pile on fire at the bottome of the throne. And when the fire began to burne, they had a deuiſe, that an Eagle ſhould fly out frō the top of the building, which wilfully and fooliſhly they ſuppoſed to bee the ſoule of the Emperor, flying and aſcending into heauen, & all the Romane Emperors that were conſecrated by theſe abſurd ceremonies, they euer after ſuperſtitiouſly honored as gods: And thus much of the ſtate of the citty. All parts of Italy

be now perfect and religious Chriſtians, and obſeruers of the ceremonies of the Romane Church, ſome few excepted, which dwell in the vttermoſt part towards Greece, which indeed be more then halfe Grecians: no man may haue more wiues then one, from whom they may not bee diuorced, but by the permiſſion of the biſhop of Rome. The eldeſt ſons of Princes and Noble-men inherit their fathers poſſeſſions, but amongſt priuate men all the iſſue male do equally inherit, ſo as they be legitimate, (like our gauelkind in Kent:) The law of Italy is of three ſorts: firſt, the ſpirituall law, wherof the Biſhop is head, then the Emperors law, which is generall ouer all, and the particular lawes and orders of each ſeuerall city which particular cuſtomes do much differ one from another, & yet all concur for the good gouernment of their cities. In ſome cities the examination of all ciuill matters, is committed vnto certaine Iudges, and in ſome againe to the Magiſtrates of the ſame citty, for euery cittie hath not one & the ſame forme of gouernement. The chiefeſt of the Nobility of Italy addict themſelues vnto the wars, and the meaner ſort vnto learning: & to be a prieſt is a more venerable title, then to be a Nobleman: for of al learned men, the Diuines be beſt eſteemed, and next vnto them the Lawyers: the Phiſitions liue in greater wealth then admiration: & Mathematicians Logicians, Aſtronomers, and Poets, bee more famous amongſt themſelues, then amongſt the people, but Grammarians of all others be leſſe eſteemed, who only liue and dye among children. Merchants liue now in as great fame as euer they did, and painters, caruers of images, and bellfounders be better eſteemed then husbandmen; although husbandry in times paſt was preferred before al trades. The Romans of all the Italians be moſt giuen to breeding cattell,

and yet they buſie not themſelues therewithall, but haue them looked to and kept by ſtrangers and hirelings.
               Their faſhions in apparell are not euery where alike, for The apparel of the Italians. the Venetians go ſumptuouſly in long looſe garments, and the cittizens of Venice more rich then other citties of that ſtate. The Florentines and Hetrurians bee very neate and ciuill in their attire, but not ſo coſtly as the Venetians, but about Millain, and in Aemilia and Liguria, they go very gallant, but their garments be ſhorter then in Venice. And the Courtiers of Rome excell them all in length of their garments and variety of colours, but the cittizens of Rome be more ſparing and frugall, yet fine enough, and eſpecially the women: and in the Realme of Naples, they go neate but not ſo gorgeous, and ſtrange faſhions bee there in more requeſt then their owne. In all other partes of Italy their apparell is more ſimple and plaine, but of ſundry faſhions and altering euery day: In Aemilia and al Ciſalpine France the better ſort of women imitate the Spaniards in their apparel, and the Noblemen the French. The women of Rome of late do much affect the Tuſcane faſhion, and the Venetian Ladies were wont to lay open their breſts, armes, and ſhoulders, but now degenerating from their owne cuſtomes, and following the Spaniards, they couer all with looſe ſleeues: The auncient Romane coyne and images of mettall, do argue, that the Italians were wont to go euer bare headed, and bare legged, al but ſouldiers, and that in time of wars only, but now they vſe both hats and ſtockings, & the cuſtome of couering their heads may ſeeme to be deriued from ſome other country.
               In times paſt they vſed no placards, nor ſtomachers, as as by the proportions of their old ſtatutes and pictures may be gathered, but now that attire is much taken vppe

by the Romaine youth. The language now vſed in Italy is not the ſame it was heretofore, nor altogether differing from it, but growne more barbarous, and compoſed of diuers languages, according to the ſundry ſorts of people, that haue poſſeſſed the Prouinces: for they which dwell about the ſhore of Hiſtria, ſpeak the Venetian toung, which is very eloquent and graue, but compounded of ſundrie tongs (and ſo is euery ſeuerall ſpeech in Italy) yet heretofore it was more ſimple, and not ſo pleaſant to the eare, as now it is. In Corinth they haue a mixt language, and ſomwhat different from the Italian toung: but it is not ſo harſh in ſound, as the ſpeech vſed in Taruiſium, Patauium, Verona, Vicentia, Mantua, and Ferrara, and in all of them the citizens vſe finer termes than the country-men: but in Ciſalpine France they be almoſt meere ſtrangers to the Italian tong, though otherwiſe there is no gallanter a country in all Italy. Their ſpeech in Rauenna, Ariminum, Piſaurum, Fauentia, Bononia, Flaminia, and throughout all Aemilia, is very Rhetoricall, and the Tuſcans ſpeech is very conciſe, like as it is in Laconia, and ſoundeth better in ſtrangers mouths then their owne: moreouer, at Rome by reaſon of the great concourie of people, that flock thither daily from all parts, their language is well improued. The Piceni, the Sabines, and Marſi ſpeak thick & ſhort, & in Vmbria, Apulia, and Lucania, together with the Brutii and Samnites, and the reſt of Italy their ſpeech is more barbarous, and but little borrowing of ſtrange languages, ſauing that in the Realm of Naples they much affect the Spaniſh tong. And to conclude with the opinion of Antonius Sabellicus herein, in his 11. Aenead, and firſt booke: Search (ſaith he) throughout all Italy, and you ſhal find no one people, citty, nor Prouince, but they ſomewhat differ in language one from another.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of Liguria, and of the ancient manners of the Inhabitants of that country. CAP. 19.
               
                  LIGVRIA, a mountenous Prouince of Italy, is ſituated betwixt the riuers Varus and Macra, hauing on the one ſide the hill Appennine, and the riuer Po on the other, and ſo adioyneth vnto Tuſcia. The chiefe citty of this Prouince is Genoua: this contry was called Liguria, of Lygiſtus the ſonne of Phaeton, by turning Y into V, (as Fabius Pictor is of opinion.) The firſt inhabitants of this countrie (as Thucydides ſuppoſeth) were people called Siculi, who once inhabited a great part of Italy, and beeing thence expelled by thoſe people of Italy, called the Oenotrians, they ſeated themſelues in the ile of Sicily: The people of this Country liue very painefully and hardly, for their grounds be ouer-grown with thicke woods, the trees whereof be maruellous good timber for ſhippes, and of ſuch a thickneſſe, as they be eight foote ſquare at the leaſt, for which cauſe many be employed in felling of woods, and breaking of timber, and many others in ridding their grounds from ſtones, whereof they haue ſuch ſtore, as they can hardly plough or dig for them, by which meanes although they take great paines, yet receiue they but ſmal profit of their great labour, whereof it proceedeth, and from their ſparing diet, that their bodies be generally very leane, but ſtrong withall, and the women as well able, and as much accuſtomed to vndergo any labour, as the man: They be much giuen to hunting of wild beaſts, the fleſh whereof ſupplieth their wants of fruites and graine, & by

reaſon of their continuall ſnowes, and often hunting and running ouer craggie and ſteepe mountaines, they be both nimble and ſtrong: their chiefe diet is either the fleſh of wild beaſts, or home-bred cattell, and their drinke is for the moſt part water: many of them alſo liue vppon ſuch herbes and rootes as their country affords, being in a maner deſtitute both of bread and wine, the moſt neceſſarie nouriſhments, & profitableſt prouiſion for mankind: their beds for the moſt part is the bare ground, without couerture of either houſe or coate, vnles they repoſe themſelues in ſuch hollow caues, as nature hath prouided for them: & this is their maner of life which they haue euer vſed. Their women moreouer, be as ſtrong as other countrie men, & the ſtrength of their men is almoſt equall vnto beaſts. And the report is, that the gallant and luſty French-men haue bin often foiled in ſingle conflicts, by theſe leane and macilent Ligurians: their armor is more light then the Romanes, their fouldiers coates be ſhort, and their ſheelds long. Some of them alſo weare Beares skins, and Lyons skins, and arming ſwords, & ſome haue altered their weapons and armor to the faſhion of the Romaines, whome they haue imitated in that point. They be a cruell & ſtoute people, and exceeding ingenious, not onely in warlike affaires, but in all other buſineſſes: at this day they be much giuen to merchandize, and trauelling by ſea, wherein they be ſo expert and hardie, as they will ſaile by the maine ſea of Lybia and Sardinia, in hulkes or cockboates, ſo badly rigged and furniſhed, as in any mans iudgement, they are not able to brooke the ſea; willingly oppoſing thēſelues to all dangers of the ſea, which be ſo many as they bee oftentimes in extreame hazard in ſtormes and tempeſtuous wether to be caſt away.
               
                  
This people (as Sabellicus writeth in his firſt booke and 7. Aenead) is yet ſo proud, rebellious, and reuengefull, as they haue much exerciſed the Romanes in warres, to their no little preiudice. Their chiefe victuals at this day is fleſh, milke, and drinke made of barley.
            
            
               
                  Of Tuſcia, and of the ancient manners of the Tuſcans. CAP. 20.
               
                  TVSCIA, a famous country in Italy, was ſo called of their ſacrifices: (as ſome ſuppoſe) for the Greeke word Thuein doth ſignifie to ſacrifice, or elſe of the latine word Thus, which ſignifieth Frankincenſe, by reaſon that Frankincenſe is much vſed in ſacrifices. Other ancient Writers are of opinion, that it was called Tuſcia, of Tuſculus, the ſonne of Hercules. It was once called Tyrrhenia; but whether it was ſo called of Tyrrhenus, the ſonne of Atis, or of the ſonne of Hercules and Omphales, or (as ſome others affirme) of the ſonne of Telephus, who conducted Colonies into that country, it reſteth doubtfull and vncertaine. Dionyſius will needes haue it to be called Tuſcia, of thoſe circles made without the walles of citties, for men to ſolace themſelues in, called Tyrſes, which is a manner of building the Tuſcanes much vſe. The Romanes call the people of this nation, ſometimes Tuſcans, and ſometimes Hetruſcanes, but the Greekes call them Tyrrheni.
               The ancient wealth of this people is well declared by the name of their ſea, ſtretching all along by the ſide of Italie,

and alſo by the confines of their country, extending from the Tuuſcane to the Adriaticke ſea, and in a manner to the top of the Alpes: ſo that it is manifeſt, that all that compaſſe of ground that lyeth betwixt the Alpes and Appennine, was once inhabited by the Vmbri, who were thence eiected by the Tyrrheni, and the Tyrrheni by the French: the French were likewiſe diſplaced by the Romans; and the Romaines by the Longobards, who laſtly left their name vnto that nation: ſo as for as much as concerneth their name, all thoſe which were called Latini, Vmbri, and Auſones, were once called by the Greekes by this generall name Tyrrheni. There be ſome hold opinion, that the citty Tyrrhena, is that which is now called Rome. Theſe people of Tyrrhenia were of an exceeding ſtrength, & of large dominions, and erected many ſtately and rich citties: they were alſo very ſtrong by ſea, inſomuch as they were lords thereof ſo long, till the Italian ſea had loſt his name, and was by them called the Tyrrhen ſea. They be able likewiſe to make an infinit army of footmen fit for the warres, and they were the firſt that inuented the trumpet, which is ſo neceſſarie an inſtrument for the wars, and by them is called Tyrrhenum. They giue and aſcribe many honors and titles of dignity vnto their Captains, & conductors of their armies, as Lictors, or Sergeants to go before them, to do execution vpon offendors, litle drayes or carts made like chariots, with chaires of eſtate, which they called Praetextae, and Officers called Faſces, that carry bundels of rods before them, an Iuorie ſcepter; and many other things: beſides, they may haue porches or galleries annexed to their horſes, for their ſeruants and attendants to ſit and repoſe themſelues in, which kind of building was afterwards imitated by the Romanes, and by them bettered, & tranſlated

into they Common-wealth. The Tuſcans be great ſchollers, and much giuen to diuinity, but more to the ſtudie of naturall Philoſophie; wherein, and in the interpretation of the thunder and lightning, and in the art of Southſaying, they excell all others ſo farre, as at this day they be admired throughout all the world, and their wiſe-men much ſought vnto. Moreouer, they be very expert in their ſacrifices, inſomuch as the Romaines which haue euer beene very ſtudious and carefull, not onely to maintaine and vphold, but to increaſe and augment the true and ſincere Religion, did ſend yearely (by the decree of the Senate) vnto the Tuſcanes, ten of their chiefe Princes and Magiſtrates ſons, there to be inſtructed in their manner of ſacrificing.
               From thence came vnto the Romanes that vaine and idle talke of euill ſpirits: And from thence likewiſe came the celebration of the Feaſts of Bacchus, which by the conſent of all good men, & due puniſhmēt inflicted vpon the firſt authors and inuentors, is now vtterly rooted out of Italy, as a thing moſt pernitious and hurtfull. The ground in this countrie is ſufficient fruitfull, yet by their ſtudie or induſtrie it is much amended. They eate vſually twiſe a day, and then they fare very daintily, and feed liberally, vſing to couer their tables with curious carpets, and fine table cloths, diſtinguiſhed and ſet with flowers, cups of gold of ſundrie faſhions to drinke in, and great ſtore of miniſters and ſeruants to attend vppon them, which are not all ſlaues, but many of them free-men and cittizens: This people is generally more ſuperſtitious then warlike.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Galatia in Europe, and of the old cuſtomes of that country. CAP. 21.
               
                  GALATIA, a ſpatious countrie in Europe, lyeth (as Diodorus Siculus writeth) beyond that part of France called Celtica, and extendeth South-ward to the Ocean, and the ſhore adioyning, and to the hil of Hircinia in Germany, and from the bounds of Iſter or Danubius, vp vnto Scythia: It was ſo called of Galatis the ſonne of Hercules, and of a certaine woman of Celtica, it is inhabited of many ſorts of people, Galatia why ſo called. and lyeth very farre Northward, and therefore ſo cold in the winter, as all their waters be frozen ouer, and the ice ſo exceeding thicke, as whole armies with horſes, chariots, and munition may ſafely paſſe ouer the riuers without perill: Galatia hath many great riuers running through it, ſome taking their beginning from deepe ſtanding pooles, and ſome from ſprings iſſuing out of rockes and mountaines, whereof ſome disburthen themſelues into the Ocean, as the Rhene, and ſome into the ſea called Pontus, as Danubius, and ſome others into the Adriaticke ſea, as Eridanus, which is alſo called Padus or Po, and all theſe riuers be ſo congealed and frozen ouer all winter, as all paſſengers may ſecurely go ouer them, eſpecially if chaffe or ſtraw be throwne vpon the ice for ſlipping.
               By reaſon of this violent coldneſſe, the countrey is vtterly and altogether deſtitute both of oyle and wine, in ſtead whereof they make a certaine drinke of barley,

which they call Zitum, they vſe alſo to drinke a certaine water or meath wherein they waſh or ſteepe their honey combes.
               They take great delight in drinking wines, buying it of merchants, and drinking it without putting any water to it, and they be ſo weake brainde, that a little of it will ouercome them, and make them drunke, and then they be either lion drunke and fall a raging, or ſwine drunke and goe to ſleeping: This their inordinate deſire of wine maketh many Italians, in hope of gaine, to bring it vnto them both by water and by land, and they bee ſo greedie of it as for a meaſure of wine called Amphora, they will ſell one of there owne ſonnes to make a page or wayting boy of.
               Siluer there is none in Galatia, but gold in great aboundance, and that ſo naturally, as when the riuers that flow out of hils exceed their bankes, and ouer-flow the meadowes, they leaue behinde them vpon the graſſe, a golden ſand, or grauell, which beeing afterwardes tried and forged, and the pure gold ſeuered from the droſſe, both men and women vſe it to addorne themſelues withall, making thereof bracelets, ringes and chaines all of maſſie gold, whereof they weare great ſtore, guilding their breſt-plates, curets, and armor with gold alſo.
               The richer ſort obſerue a ceremony peculiar to themſelues, & withal very ſtrang, which is to skatter gold vpon the flowers and pauements of their Churches, which they offer as an oblation vnto their gods, and it is ſtrang to ſee, how that the common people (notwithſtanding they bee couetous and greedie of gold) bee ſo zealous and religious, as they will not once offer for to take

vp one peece of that gold ſo careleſly diſperced abroad, or ſo much as touch it.
               The people of Galatia be tall of ſtature, ſoft skind and pale of complexion, and though their haire be naturally red, yet will they ſeeke out meanes by art, to bring that naturall collour to a deeper die: they curle and friſzell their haire with a curling pin or criſping wire, caſting the lockes of their fore-heads behind them on their ſhoulders, ſo as at the firſt ſight, they looke like boies, Satires or wood gods, vſing ſuch art in making their lockes buſhy and thicke, as they differ but little from horſe-manes: ſome of them ſhaue their beards, and ſome ſuffer them to grow long, and eſpecially the nobility, who doe not ſo much as cut the haire of their eye-lids, and for their beards they ſuffer them to grow in ſuch a length and breadth, as the will almoſt couer their bodies, ſo as they can neither eate nor drinke, but that the meate will ſticke in their beards, and the drinke trickle downe as from a conduit pipe.
               They eate their meate ſitting, but not vpon ſtooles and formes, but vpon wolues skinnes, and dogges skinnes caſt on the ground, and they bee attended by little boies, hauing their fiers made cloſe by them, wherewith they boile and roſt their meate, and euer the beſt men eate the beſt meate, as the Poet writeth, that the greateſt honor was by the nobles attributed to Aiax, whē he ouercame Hector in ſingle combat. Such meate as they haue, they wil giue vnto their gueſts, but they will firſt know the cauſe of their comming. And their manner is when they haue filled bellies to fall a brabling, and oftentimes vpon light occaſations they will fight very deſperatly, for ſo naturall is their inclination to wrangling, as it is growne into a habit. This opinion of Pythagoras is crept in amongſt them, and

by moſt of them plainely maintained, that the ſoule is immortall, and that after a certaine time that it is departed out of the body, it goeth into an other, and therefore ſome of them will write letters, and caſt them into the pile of wood prepared to burne the dead body, as though they ſhould read them when they bee dead: When they trauell, and when they fight they bee carried in Chariots drawne with two horſes, hauing one to ſit before the waggon to guide the horſes, and an other to goe by to driue them; and when the battaile is begunne, they firſt incounter their enemies, by caſting darts from their Chariots, and when their darts be ſpent they alight from their Chariots and fight on foote: And ſome of them be ſo deſperate and careleſſe of death, as they will fight naked: Their watch-men and gard for their bodies be the poreſt ſort of freemen, which they vſe alſo for waggonners and to carry their ſhields, and their place is to goe in the fore-front of the battaile, prouoking and challenging the hardieſt and ſtouteſt of their enemies to fight with them hand to hand, euer ſhaking and brandiſhing their naked blades, the more to terrifie and daunt their foes: and when any captaine or common ſouldior behaueth himſelfe valiantly, and atchieueth any notable victory, they ceaſe not to extoll and commend both him and all his anceſtors, giuing vnto euery ſouldior commendations due for his valour and merits, and detracting from the acts of their enemies, as baſe and contemptible, though neuer ſo worthy of honour.
               They cut off the heads of their vanquiſhed enemies, and hange them about their horſe-neckes, beſprinckling and goring with bloud their ſpoiles, armor and furniture; and then giuing them to their ſeruants, who ſet them as

ſignes of conqueſt ouer their maiſters gates, with as much exultation and triumph, as many doe the skinnes and heads of wilde beaſts they haue taken in hunting: but if they happe to vanquiſh any noble men, they cut off their heads, and ſpice and ſeaſon them with ſweete ſpices, diligently preſeruing and keeping them in bags and caſes, to ſhew them for a vante to their gueſts and ſtrangers, and after ſell them for a trifle to their parents, children or other friends to keepe as a memorall.
               The Galatians garments (to make them ſeeme terrible) be of skins with the haire on & vnſhorne, theſe garments bee of ſundry collours, and by them called (Braccas) they weare alſo caſſockes or ſhort clokes, ſtripped or rayed either with gold, or ſome other thing and well lined, and thicke for winter, but againſt ſummer they haue them ſlender and thinne, they vſe alſo thicke earthen veſſels diſtinguiſhed with flowers.
               Their warlike weapons and armor be long ſhields, proportionable to the ſtature of their bodies, and trimmed according to euery ones ſeueral deuice, for ſome haue the ſhapes of beaſts figured in braſſe, and ſet on the tops of their ſhields, which is both an ornament to the ſhield and a defence for the bodie: their helmets bee all of braſſe decked with more brauery then their ſhields, vpon the creſt whereof ſtandeth either ſome hornes, or elſe the picture of ſome birde or beaſt: they haue trumpets in like manner, but very ill fauoured ones, and ſuch as yeeld a rude, harſh and vntuneable ſound: ſome of them weare iron breſt-plates, and ſome other againe no other armour but what nature affoordeth them, going naked and wearing long two-handed ſwords guirded to their right ſides with chaines or girdles of braſſe,

ſome weare ſhort coates trimmed with gold and ſome ſiluer girdles, and their dartes which they vſe in the wars and cal lances, haue iron pikes aboue a cubit long and two handful broad, and their ſwords bee almoſt as long and as big as hunting ſtaues, or bore-ſpeares, whereof ſome be ſtreight and ſome crooked, beeing very fit both to anoy their enemies, as alſo to dig & make holes in the ground. In countenance they bee terrible and auſtere, in ſpeech graue and ſeuere, their language is breefe and obſcure, and for the moſt part carrying a double ſence and doubtfull vnderſtanding: they be great boaſters of themſelues and diſpiſers of others, menacers, braggarts and detractors, proud and puft vp in their owne opinions, ſharpe-witted and learned withall: They haue a certaine manner of Poets or Muſitions which they call (Bardi) that ſing vnto Organs and winde Inſtruments, as others doe to the Harp or Lute, prayſing ſome in their ſongs and ſonnets and diſprayſing others: but thoſe that bee of greateſt eſtimation and honour amongſt them, bee the Philoſophers, which they call Saronidae: Diuyners and South-ſaiers bee alſo there in great requeſt, and highly honored and obeyed of the common people; theſe (by their ſorceries and ſacrifices) foretel things to come, vſing (when they conſult of any weighty affaires) a ceremony moſt horrible and execrable, and almoſt incredible, for they cut a mans throate with a ſword, and when he fainteth, they iudge of future euents, both by his falling and ſincking downe, as alſo by ripping vp his members, and opening his intrals and bowels, and by the effuſion of his bloud.
               And they will neuer offer ſacrifice without ſome one of theſe Philoſophers, ſuppoſing that no ſacrifice can bee acceptable, vnleſſe it bee offred by ſome of thoſe nature

ſerchers, beeing (in their opinions) men moſt neere to the Gods. And their Poets be of ſuch reuerence and eſtimation, as when the battaile is ſet in aray, their ſwords drawne, and their darts throwne, if any of theſe Poets aproach neere vnto the battaile, the whole hoaſt, yea and the enemy himſelfe, will at his comming abſtaine from fight: ſo as euen amongſt theſe rude and barbarous people, anger will yeeld to wiſdome, and Mars giue place to the Muſes.
               The Galatian women be equall vnto the men both in ſtrength and bigneſſe of body: there boies be for the moſt part white, and old men carry a very graue and fatherly aſpect: The Galatae that dwell vnder the North-pole and be neereſt vnto Scythia, and therefore more barbarous then the other, are ſaid to feed on mans fleſh; like vnto thoſe that inhabited that part of Britany called Iris. Theſe Northerne Galatians, through their courage and cruelty, are reported to be thoſe people, that once ouerrun almoſt all Aſia, and were called Cimmerij, and are thought to be the very ſame that afterwards by corruption of the name, for Cimmerij were called Cimbri: they liue after their old accuſtomed manner by rapine and ſtealth, little regarding ſuch things as they haue of their owne, for the great deſire they haue to ſteale and filch from others.
               And theſe Galatae be they, who (after they had ſacked Rome and ſpoiled the Temple of Appollo at Delphos) ſubdued and made tributary vnto them a great part both of Europ and Aſia, vtterly ruinating many Kingdomes, and poſſeſſing their lands: for thoſe that came into Greece, called that part of the country they inioyde there, Gallo-Gretia, or the Region of Galatia in Aſia the leſſe: It is

bounded on the Eaſt with Cappadocia, and the riuer Halis, with Aſia and Bythinia on the Weſt, on the South lieth Pamphilia, and Pontus Euxinus on the North: But thoſe Cimbri whereof now wee ſpeake, were people of an intollerable cruelty, vſing ſuch blaſphemous and impious ceremonies, in their ſacrifices of their gods, as is ſtrang and incredible, for they had euer following and attending vpon their hoaſtes, certaine women prieſts that were very skilful in diuinations, the haire of their heads was hoare and gray, and their garments white, and they had vnder thoſe white gownes yellow ſmockes made of fine linnen, and claſped together with brazen buttons or copper claſpes, they had girdles about their waſtes and went bare-footed: and if any captiues were taken and brought into the campe, they were incountred by theſe ſhe prieſts with their naked blades, and by them lug'd and drawne vpon the ground vnto a place where ſtood a brazen pot or kettle, conayning twenty Amphora's, ouer which ſtood a pulpit or high ſeate, where-into they would nimbly aſcend, and take the captiue vp with them, and there cut his throate ouer the caldron, and euer as the bloud diſtilled and ranne into the kettle, they would pronounce their propheſies: of ſome they would rippe the bellies and bowell them, propheſing by their intralls of their ſucceſſe in the warres: And euery fift yeere they would ſacrifice one of their owne people, that was guilty and condemned of ſome crime, by fixing him quicke vpon ſpeares or ſtakes: and all the beaſts and cattaile, that they tooke from their enemies, they would kill and ſlay as well as the captiues, and either burne them vpon piles of wood, or put them to death by ſome other kinde of torture, and the Cimbrian women as they were very

beautifull and goodly women, ſo were they maruelous luxurious and wanton: There beds were beaſts skinnes laide vpon the bare ground, vpon which when they ſlept, they would haue vpon each ſide of them, an excubitor or watchman: there carts alſo when they had any warres were couered with skinnes, whereon they would labour and ſtrike ſo hard, as they would make a horrible and ill fauored noyſe and clankering: But their impudency was of all things moſt admirable and odious, for they ſo far exceeded the bounds of modeſtic, as they would offer their naked bodies to men in the open ſtreetes, eſteeming it no fault, but rather condeming thoſe for daſtards and fainte-hearted cowards, that ſhould refuſe their offered fauours: Valerius Maximus reporteth, that the Cimbri and Celtiberi would exult and reioyce when they were in the warres, becauſe if they died there their ends were honourable and happie, but if they languiſhed in any diſeaſe, they would lament and bee ſorrowfull, accounting that kinde of death as baſe and reprochfull.
            
            
               
                  Of Gallia, and of the ancient cuſtomes and latter manners of the Frenchmen. CAP. 22.
               
                  GALLIA a broade Countrie of Europe, is ſcituated betwixt the inner The bounds of Gallia. French ſea and the Britaine Ocean, the riuer of Rhene, the Alpes and the Pyrenean hils. The Pyrenean hils include it in vpon the Weſt and the Britain

Ocean vpon the North: vpon the Eaſt lieth the riuer of Rhene, which inuironeth as much of France from the Alpes to the Ocean, as the Pyrenaean hils doe from the inmoſt to the vttermoſt ſea, and vpon the South it is incloſed with the Narbon ſea: It is called Gallia of the whiteneſſe of the people for (gala) in Greeke ſignifieth milke. Gallia why ſo called. All that part of France which is called tonſa or togata Gallia is alſo named Ciſalpina, and is comprehended within the limits of Italy, and all that part which is called Tranſalpina, or France beyond the Alpes, is ſurnamed Gallia Comata, and is by Hiſtoriographers deuided into three Prouinces, of the three ſorts of people that inhabite The diuiſion of France. therein (to wit) Belgica, Celtica and Aquitanica, which three Prouinces be thus bounded and limitted: Belgica is all that Country which lieth betwixt the riuers Scaldis and Sequana, from thence then to the riuer Garumna is the Prouince of Celtica, which is all that which is now the countrie of Lyons, and from that againe vnto the Pyrenaean hils, is the country of Aquitanica, once called Armorica: Auguſtus deuideth France into foure parts, by adding to thoſe three the Prouince of Lyons: And Ammianus maketh many ſubdiuiſions, by diſtributing the country of Lions into two parts, and Aquitanica into two parts. Braccata Gallia which is alſo called Narbon, was ſo called of a certaine faſhion of mantles or breeches The ſeuerall prouinces, of Gallia Belgica. called Braccae which by them were much worne: Gallia Belgica which adioyneth vnto Rhene, ſpeaketh for the moſt part the Almaine tongue, and comprehendeth many prouinces, as Heluetia, Alſatia, Lotharingia, Luxenburg, Burgundy, Brabant, Gelderland, Holland & Zeland, all which may bee more rightly accounted part of Germany then of France, but that the riuer of Rhene hath deuided

it from Germany: And ſurely I ſee no reaſon why hils & riuers ſhould limit & bound Kingdoms, but rather the language and gouernment, and that each Country ſhould extend as farre as his owne proper language is ſpoken. The Romanes called the people of Gallia by one generall name Celtae, after the name of their King, and Gallatae of Galata his mothers name: but they bee now called Franci and Gallia France, of thoſe people of Germanie ſo called by whom it was al ſubdued, as Baptiſta Mantuanus writeth in his booke intituled Dionyſius, and Anthonius Sabellicus in his third booke of the tenth Aeneade. The Dictator Caeſar ſaith that the French men doe differ much amongſt themſelues, both in language, lawes and inſtitutions, and that many things be common to moſt of them, as to bee factious, which is a general aſpertion not The French men a factions people. only vnto Citizens and Burgeſſes, but in priuate families alſo, for euery one as he excelleth others in wealth or wiſdome, contendeth to haue the ſouerainty, and to aduance his owne faction, coueting to haue all things done by his owne direction rather then by others, though as wiſe & wealthy as himſelf: an other inſtitution they haue very ancient and grounded vpon good reaſon, that is, that the common people ſhould liue in ſecurity and not bee iniured by the nobility, for but for that, there is no country in the world wherein the clownes liue in greater contempt and ſlauery then in France, for there was held little difference betwixt them and ſlaues, being neuer called to any publike councel but oppreſſed with tributes, or conſtrained to lend their money without ſecurity, in ſo much as they were content to retaine to noble men and gentlemen, yeelding themſelues as ſlaues and bondmen vnto them, only to bee freed from other mens extortions and

wrongs: There were two ſorts of men that caried moſt eſtimation amongſt them, which were the Equites and the The office of the Druides. Druides, ſome likewiſe did attribute as much honour to Poets and Prophets, as vnto the Druides, for that the Prophets bended their whole courſes to finde out the cauſes of natural things, & the Poets wholy imployed themſelues in praiſes and poems: and all theſe were by Caeſar called by the name of Druidae: Theſe Druidae had the charge and ouerſight of al ſacrifices both publike and priuate, their function was alſo to expound and interpret their religion, and to inſtruct and bring vp children and young men in learning and decipline, for the aſſemblies and troupes of ſuch youth were much accounted of; to them was committed likewiſe the diſciding of controuerſies, the bounding & limitting of mens grounds, & power to puniſh offendors by death, torments, or otherwiſe, and if either priuate perſon or Magiſtrate offred to withſtand or gainſay any of their decrees, or refuſed to ſtand to their awarde, they would interdict and forbid him to come to their ſacrifices, which amongſt that people was the greateſt puniſhment that could bee inflicted: The Druides ſhunned the communication and company of all men, leaſt they ſhould bee polluted, and no one could haue iuſtice, or bee honoured and reuerenced according to his place, dignity and deſerts, if any of theſe Druides were againſt it.
               They had one that was the gouernor and Arch-prieſt ouer them, who bore the chiefeſt ſway, as head of the whole order, and euer as one of thoſe prouoſts or gouernors died, an other was elected in his roome out of thoſe Druides, either by worthineſſe of perſon or plurality of voices. This councel or Senate of Druides aſſembled

at one time of the yeere at Lyons, which is about the middle of France, and there they kept their Seſſions for the hearing and determining of all controuerſies that were brought before them from al parts of the Country, which kinde of Iudgement, and eſtabliſhing of lawes and ſtatutes was afterwards receiued amongſt al the nobles & commons of France (the ſuperſtition beeing firſt brought out of Britany) and by them called the Parliament, of which I will ſpeake more hereafter. The Druides were exempted from the warres, and had immunity from tribute, and whoſoeuer addicted himſelfe to that kinde of profeſſion muſt learne by heart thouſands of verſes, yea ſo many as ſome of them ſpent twenty yeeres in conning verſes without booke, nor was it lawfull for them to commit any thing to writing, that belonged to the knowledge of that ſcience, for that they auoided all meanes that might either bee a helpe vnto their memories, or anywiſe concerne the authority of that diſcipline, and alſo that their idle ſuperſtitious rites might not bee laide open to the common people: and yet all other ſorts of Gaules and themſelues in all other matters, both publike & priuate, vſed at that time the Greeke character: The Druides beleeued and preached the immortality of the ſoule, & that after her departure out of one body, ſhee remooued into an other, by which means al feare of death being taken away, they were more hardy and venturous to vndergo al dangers.
               They would reaſon and diſpute much of the ſtars and of their motion, of the magnitude the worlde and ſytuation of the earth, and of the naturall cauſes of things, and power of their prophane gods, they held a poſition likewiſe that the world was eternall

and that the elements of fire and water preuailed one againſt The Equites, an other ſort of people. an other by turnes: An other ſort of religious perſons and which were moſt deuoute of all others, were thoſe they called Equites, and they, when they fell into any dangerous diſeaſe, or any other perill of their liues, would offer for the recouery of their health, or auoiding of imminent danger, a humaine ſacrifice, which ſacrifice muſt euer bee ſolemnized by the aſſiſtance of ſome one of the Druides: Some others of that ſect had great huge Images made hallow and couered with twigges, into the concauity whereof they would put men aliue, and then ſet fire about the Image vntill all were conſumed away.
               The puniſhment inflicted vpon theeues and offenders, they eſteemed moſt gratefull and acceptable to their gods, and all thoſe ancient Gaules held the god Mercury in great veneration, as firſt founder and inuentor of all arts and miſteries, the chiefe guide and conductor in all their trauels, and very propitions vnto them in trafficke and trading. All the ſpoiles they tooke in the warres, they vowed and conſecrated vnto Mars for their victory obtained, ſo as in many Cities you might ſee great heapes of warlike ſpoiles laide together, and if any one ſtole any part of the prey to his owne purſe, hee was ſeuerely puniſhed.
               The Gaules perſwaded themſelues that they were the of ſpring of Pluto the god of riches, and therefore they celebrated the beginning of their feaſts the night before the feaſt day, ſuppoſing that night to bee conſecrated vnto Dis: The men ſuffered not their children once to come into their ſights, before they were growne to mans eſtate, that they were able to manage armes, holding it

vnfitting and abſurde, that the ſonne while hee is a childe ſhould approach neere the preſence of his father: The husbands looke how much money they receiued with their wiues in portion, ſo much did they adde vnto it out of their owne ſtocke, and all the increaſe that came of that coyne, was reſerued and kept for him or her that was ſuruiuer.
               The husbands had power and authority of life and death, as well ouer their wiues as ouer their children: and Husbands had power to kil their wiues. if any mans wife were conuicted of witch-craft or ſorcery, ſhe was put to death by her husbands neighbours and friends, either by fire, or by ſome other greeuous torments: In their funerals, all thoſe things which the deceaſed perſon held deere vnto him in his life time, yea the beaſts he loued beſt, were burned with him: and not much before the Country was conquered by Iulius Caeſar, their ſeruants and retainers were burned with their Maiſters dead bodies.
               In their Cities (which were maruellous wel gouerned) a few of the moſt worthy and ſubſtantialeſt men amongſt them, ruled the reſt, hauing at the firſt one chiefe ruler ouer them, who continued his office for a yeere, and in warres they vſed likewiſe to appoint one to take the charge and command vpon him of al matters belonging to the warres.
               If any priuate perſon heard any thing ſpoken by ſtrangers touching the common-wealth, they were to make report thereof to the Magiſtrates, though ſome things they might conceale without danger. It was not lawfull for any one to mutter any thing in ſecret of the common-wealth but in publike places, and hee that came laſt into the councel-houſe was put to death. If any factious

fellow raiſed any tumult or mutiny, there was ſent vnto him an officer with a ſword in his hand ready drawne, to proclaime ſilence, and if hee deſiſted not at the ſecond or third proclamation, the officer would curtaile ſo much of his cloake or caſſocke (thereby to put him to diſgrace) as the remnant that was left would ſerue him to no purpoſe. The chiefe Magiſtrates had golden maces carried before them, they wore chaines about their neckes and bracelets on their armes. The common people wore ſhort cloakes, and in ſteed of coates a looſe garment ſlit on the one ſide, that would ſcarce couer halfe their buttocks: their wool is very rough, long and ſhaggy, ſo as their caſſockes they called (Lenae) were maruellous rugged and hairy.
               They tooke great delight in trimming & dreſſing their haire; They be tal of ſtature and for the moſt part pale of complexion, and their armor and weapons are anſwearable to the proportion of their bodies, for they wore long ſwords hanging at their right ſides, and long ſhields proportionable to their ſpeares, wherewith they might couer their thighes, ſome of them alſo had bowes and were very good archers, but yet they vſed ſhooting more in fowling and birding, then in the warres, and few of them would goe into the field either with ſlings or clubs.
               They lay vpon the ground and eate their meate ſitting vpon ſtraw, the ſubſtance of their meate was either milke or fleſh, and eſpecially hogs-fleſh, for they haue ſuch ſtore of ſwine feeding in their fields, and ſo large, ſo ſtrong, and ſo ſwift, that ſtrangers that know not their nature, are as fearefull of them, and in as much daunger as if they were wolues. They haue ſheepe in as great aboundance as ſwine, whereof when they bee fed and

powdred they ſend many to Rome and diuers other parts of Italy and there ſell them.
               Their buildings & dwelling houſes were made of wood in proportion of ſhels, beeing very large with many ſpars or rafters. They bee naturally cruell and ſimple withall, and in the warres more valiant then politike, and much more addicted to follow the warres then husbandry: The French women be exceeding fruitful, in ſo much as Gallia Belgica alone, ſent vnto the warres at one voyage, aboue three hundred thouſand fighting men: when they haue had any victory they bee wonderfull ioyfull, and as much amazed after an ouerthrow: Their cuſtome was when the battaile was ended and the ſouldiors departed the field, to cut off the heads of their vanquiſhed foes, and to hange them at there horſe neckes, and ſo to carry them home, and there to ſticke them vpon poles, for a ſpectacle vnto others. But the heads of worthy and renowned ſouldiors (if any ſuch were ſlaine) they would ſeaſon with odors of Cedar-tree, and keepe them for ſtrangers to looke vpon, not ſuffering them to bee ranſommed for their weight in gold: The ancient Country guiſe was to weare chaines of gold, bracelets and garments ſpangled with gold.
               In their Diuinations their manner was to ſtrike a man (ordained for that purpoſe) vpon the backe, and then by his impatience and manner of affliction in his death to Iudge of future euents. They had other ſorts of humaine ſacrifices alſo, for ſome they would ſhoot to death and then hang them vpon gibbets within their Temples, and ſome of them would make a great huge Image, and put therein men, wood, ſheepe and diuers other ſorts of cattaile, and ſo ſacrifice them altogether.
               
                  
The Frenchmen by reaſon of their continuall labour, and exerciſe, were wont to bee very macilent, leane and lanck bellyed, for they were ſo carefull to auoyde all pampering and exceſſe, that if any young mans belly did outgrow his girdle, he was openly puniſhed.
               But at this day the French-men by reaſon of their commerce, The latter cuſtomes of the French. conuerſation, and continuall acquaintance with the Romaines, are greatly altered from what they were, and their manners much bettered: for they bee now moſt ardent profeſſors of the true Religion, and all vnder the gouernement of one King. Their marriages be ſolemnized after the Italian rites: they be very ſtudious in all the liberall arts, and in diuinity eſpecially, which is well demonſtrated by the great multitude of Students in the citty of Paris, which is now the moſt famous and renownedſt Vniuerſitie in all Chriſtendome.
               The lawes in France be executed by Magiſtrates, but inſtituted by the kings: their horſmen in time of warres go al in compleat armor, and their footmen in light harneſſe: they haue many good archers that ſhoote well in long bowes, and their bowes be not made of Cornell trees like vnto their bowes in Scythia, and in all the Eaſt countrey, but of Yew, or ſome other hard wood: their Ordinance is caried along with their armies in carts, & they fight more rather in order, one ſeconding another, then in troupes, & with more courage & cruelty, then skil or policy, although their cunning be ſufficient to manage their military buſineſſes. Their Embaſſadors to denounce wars, or treate of peace, they call Heralds, who bee loyall ſubiects to their Soueraign. The French-men be very religious, their Biſhoppes of mighty power and dignitie, and all the Clergie in general of high reuerence & veneration: in their diuine

ceremonies they vſe much ſinging, by reaſon whereof the ſtudie of muſicke is in a manner peculiar to that nation: Their faſhions in their apparell and ſhooes be much altered in our age: for (ſayth Sabellicus) when I was a boy, all the Courtiers and Gentlemen of France (the Clergie only excepted) wore ſhort cloakes with ſleeues, that would hardly reach to their mid thighes, pleated from the top to the bottome, and ſtuffed or quilted about the ſhoulders. Their ſhooes were tipped on the ſnoutes with thin horns, halfe a foote long, ſuch as are pictured in arras and tapeſtrie: and their bonnets which they called (Bireta) were high and ſharpe towards the Crowne: but all theſe auncient faſhions be now laid away, and new fangles inuented: for the ſhooes they now weare be broad-noſed, (like a Beares foot) and narrow heeled, and their garments bee much more looſe & long then before they were, reaching down to the calues of their legges, with looſe ſleeues ſlit on one ſide, and laced all ouer with lace of diuers colours, ſet on lattiſe-wiſe: their hats bee for the moſt part redde and very large, but their bonnets called (Bireta) bee much bigger then their ordinary hats, and very vnfitting for their heads; butotherwiſe, were it not for theſe vnhandſome hats, no nation could compare with them for neatneſſe and gallantneſſe in apparell. And now of late yeares their maner of attire is much imitated by the Italians, who do wholly follow the French faſhion, manifeſtly preſaging thereby what afterwards came to paſſe. The women be not ſo variable & fickle in following euery new faſhion, as the men be, but keepe their old faſhion ſtill. Baptista Mantuanus in his booke intituled Dionyſius, maketh a deſcription of France to this effect:

                     
                     Of all the parts of th'Vniuerſe, faire France is not the leaſt,
                     A wide, a large, and ſpatious land, and equall to the beſt:
                     It eaſt-ward ioynes to Italy, and weſt-ward vnto Spaine,
                     And compaſſed vpon the South with the huge Ocean maine,
                     And wholly bounded on the north with famous riuer Rh
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        e.
                     With men, beaſts, and all ſorts of graine this land doth much abound.
                     The earth is fruitfull, and the ayre is whol ſome, ſweet, and ſound,
                     Not p
                           •
                        ſtred with ſuch poyſonous beaſts, as is the Lybian coaſt,
                     Nor like the Hyperborean hils ſtill mantled or'e with freſt:
                     It is not fryde like India pale, with Phoebus ſcorching beames,
                     Which barren makes the fatteſt fields, on whom he ſpreads his gleams,
                     Nor is there ſuch extream ſharpe cold, nor ſuch perpetuall night,
                     Like Iſland, and the frigid Zone, where Sol ſcarce ſhewes his light;
                     Nor doth their land lye ſoakt in fennes, like vnto Aegipts ſoyle,
                     But temperate heate and moyſt doth yeeld inc
                           •
                        eaſe with little toyle.
                  
And a litle after the ſame Author ſayth:

                     
                        The Gauls are of a fiery mind, and of complexion white,
                     
                     
                        Which is the cauſe they were ſo cald, as diuers Authors write:
                     
                     
                        Nature beheld the Paphian Queen when shee gaue them their hew,
                     
                     
                        Whereby of colours white and red a perfect vnion grew.
                     
                     
                        In dancing, playes, and pleaſant verſe conſiſt their chiefeſt ioyes,
                     
                     
                        Moſt pron
                              •
                            they are to banquetting, moſt prore to Venus toyes:
                     
                     
                        Yet be they zealous towards their God, and for they are free borne,
                     
                     
                        Tabaſe themſelues with ſeruitude, their haughty minds do ſcorne:
                     
                     
                        No lying, nor hypocriſie can harbor in their breſt,
                     
                     
                        But like free men, ſo free of ſpeech, all rudenes they deteſt.
                     
                     
                        To hunt fish, f
                              •
                           wle, the fields, and flouds, and hils they often haunt:
                     
                     
                        Long wars hath ſo inured them, no foes their minds can daunt.
                     
                     
                        Their chiefſt delight is barbed horſe, with yerking ſpur to gall,
                     
                     
                        Bowes ſpeares, shields ſwords, and Brigandines to them are naturall.
                     
                     
                        By day to ſuffer heate of Sunne, to watch in fields all night,
                     
                     
                        To beare huge armor on their backes, amid their foes to fight.
                     
                     
                        To run through dangers, ſwords and pikes, t'oppoſe themſelues to death
                     
                     
                        For king, or kin, or country deare, to ſpend their deareſt breath.
                     
                     
                        
                        They much delight, and there in thinke their honor moſt doth ſtand.
                     
                     
                        And for the Goate (if ſtars ſpeake truth) is ruler of their l
                              •
                           nd: 
                        Capricorne ruleth in France.
                        
                     
                     
                        From's influence (if we ſo may iud
                              •
                           e) this is th'effect inſues,
                     
                     
                        A wauering heart, vnconſtant breſt, mind greedy ſtill of newes.
                     
                  
               
               I thinke it not amiſſe in this place to make ſome deſcription The Parlament of France. of the Parlament of France, which is the worthieſt commendation, and greateſt ornament belonging to the Court of France: by whom, or from whence this court of Parlament was firſt inſtituted and deriued I can gather no more certaintie by writers than I haue ſignified before, that by all likelihood the Druides were the firſt authours thereof, and that it hath continued euer ſince, though now much differing from what it then was: for the Parlament (as the Councell of the Druides before) was held yearely at Lyons, at times appointed by the King in this manner:
               They aſſembled thither frō each ſeueral city of the Prouince, all ſuch as were skilfull in their lawes and cuſtoms, (beeing thereto choſen aforehand) to do equitie and iuſtice vnto all that would bring their cauſes before them by way of appeale: but becauſe this inſtitution was at the firſt vncertaine, and not well ſetled: the ſeate of this Court of Parlament was afterwards tranſlated from Lyons, and is now eſtabliſhed at Paris, and certaine Iudges appointed to heare, and finally to determine all appeales whatſoeuer: of theſe Iudges there be foure-ſcore which haue annuall ſtipends out of the Kings Exchequer, for their better maintenance. They be diuided into foure Courts, and euery Court aboue other, and each hath his proper Preſidents, or chiefe Iuſtices.
               
                  
In the firſt Court or Chamber (as they call it) ſit ſoure chiefe Iudges or Preſidents, and thirtie Councellors or Aſſiſtants, and theſe heare all complaints, controuerſies, and delayes, and ſet downe what is Law in euery caſe: and if the matters be light, or lately begun, they end and determine them. In the ſecond and third Court or Chamber ſit in each eighteene, whome they call Aequati, as hauing equall authoritie, and theſe be called Councellers of Inqueſts & Inquiſitions, becauſe they haue the chiefe ſtroke in Inquiſitions and verdicts; and of them, ſome be lay, and ſome Clergie-men, and each of theſe chambers or courts hath foure Preſidents: Theſe when they haue ſet downe their opinions touching any matter in queſtion, ſome one of the Preſidents at certaine times appointed, deliuereth their ſentence to the firſt Court of Parliament, which is there by them ſo ratified and confirmed, as no one can appeale from it; and he which is found guiltie before them, muſt pay vnto the Courts three-ſcore pounds of Tours weight; and ſome are adiudged to pay more, according to the quality of the offence: but if the party ſo condemned thinke, that his cauſe was not well vnderſtood and diſcuſſed, and that he had ſome iniurie done him, thereby receiuing ſome loſſe or hinderance, hee may bring the matter (thus crazed by miſinformation) againe into queſtion before the Iudges, but it ſhall not be heard, vnleſſe he pawne and put into their hands, an hundred and twenty pounds to ſtand to their cenſure.
               The fourth Court in the Court of Requeſts, and is kept by the Maſters of the Kings pallace, or Maſters of requeſts and ſupplications, and none ſhall haue their cauſes heard there, but only the kings ſeruāts, or ſuch as haue ſome priuiledges from the King, and they ſhall not be moleſted in

other Courts: of this Court there be onely ſixe Iudges, & it is lawfull to appeale from them to the Parlament. If in handling controuerſies any great difficulty ariſe, it muſt be decided by the aſſembly of all the Iudges and Councellors of euery Court together, which happeneth oftentimes in matters propoſed by the King, touching the gouernment of the Commonwealth: for no law can be throughly eſtabliſhed without the conſent of this Senate or Parlament-houſe.
               In this Parlament the Peeres of France, and other maſters of Requeſts that be the kings fauorites, may ſit as aſſiſtants vnto the Iudges, and their places be next vnto the Preſidents of the firſt Court or Chamber: but all matters touching the king, or any of the Peeres be defined and determined by the Peeres themſelues, and the Iudges of the firſt Court.
               There be twelue chiefe Peers elected out of all the Nobility 
                     The 12. Peeres of France.
                   of France, whereof ſixe be ſpirituall men, & ſix temporall: the ſpirituall Peeres be the Biſhop of Rhemes, the Biſhop of Lavdunum, and the Biſhop of Langres, (which be called Epiſcopi Duces, or chiefe Biſhops) the Biſhop of Beuvois, the Biſhop of Noyon, and the Biſhop of Challons, (which be Epiſcopi Comites, or ſecundarie Biſhops:) The ſixe ſecular Peeres be the Duke of Burgundie, the D. of Normandie, and the Duke of Aquitania, (which bee chiefe Princes or Arch-dukes) the Duke of Flanders, the Duke of Tholouſa, and the Duke of Campania, which be ſecundary Princes.) Theſe twelue (according to the opinion of Robertus) were firſt inſtituted by Charles the great, who taking them with him into the warres, called them his Peeres, as hauing equall power in aſſiſting of the King, and they were euer preſent at his coronation, and yeelded

obedience to no other Court but onely to the King, and his Court of Parliament.
               And theſe be the ancient and later maners of the Gauls and French-men, and their cuſtomes moſt worthie of memorie.
            
            
               
                  Of Spaine, and of the manners of the Spaniards. CAP. 23.
               
                  SPAINE, the greateſt country in Europe, The commendations and riches of Spain and her bounds is ſituated betwixt France and Affricke, and bounded with the Ocean ſea, and the Pirenaean hils: It is comparable to any other country, both for fertilitie of ſoyle, and aboundance of fruites and vines, and ſo ſufficiently ſtored with all kind of commodities, that be either neceſſarie or behoofull, as it affordeth great part of her ſuperfluitie to the city of Rome, and all Italy ouer. If you require gold, ſiluer, or pretious ſtones there they are in aboundance, if mynes of Iron, and ſundry other mettals, you ſhall find no defect; if wines, it giueth place to none; and as for oyles, it excelleth all other nations of Europe: beſides that, they haue ſuch ſtore of ſalt, as they neuer boyle it, but dig it out of the earth in full perfection. Yea there is no part of their ground (be it neuer ſo barren) but it yeeldeth increaſe of one thing or other the heate of the Sunne is not there ſo violent as in Affricke, nor be they toſſed with ſuch continuall ſtormes and tempeſtuous winds, as France is, but there is an equall temperature of the heauens, and wholeſomnes of the ayre ouer

all the Region, it beeing greatly waſted with marine winds, without ſuch foggie miſts and infectious exhalations as proceed from fennes and mooriſh grounds. There is great plenty of hempe, flaxe and broome, the pill or skin wherof ſerueth to tye vp their vines: and it affordeth more vermilion then any other countrie beſides. The currents of their riuers be not ſo ſwift and violent, as they thereby become hurtfull, but gentle and mild to water and manure their fields and medowes, and the armes of the Ocean ſea which adioyne vnto them, affoord great ſtore of fiſh: and yet for no one thing was Spaine more commended in times paſt, then for the ſwiftneſſe of their horſes, whereof grew this fiction, That the Spaniſh horſes were conceiued of the winds.
               Spaine taketh her beginning at the Pyrenaean hilles, and winding by Hercules pillars, extendeth to the Northerne Ocean, ſo as all places contained within that compaſſe, may iuſtly be ſaid to be of Spaine. The breadth of Spaine, (as Appianus writeth) is ten thouſand ſtadia, & the length much anſwerable to the breadth: it ioyneth vnto France only at the Pyrenaean hils, and on al other ſides it is incloſed with the ſea: it is diſtinguiſhed and knowne by three names, Tarragon, Bethica, and Luſitania: Tarragon (the chiefe citties whereof were called Pallantia, and Numantia, now called Soria) at the one end ioyneth vnto France, and vnto Bethica and Luſitania at the other: The Mediterranean ſea runneth by the South-ſide thereof, and vpon the North it lyeth oppoſite to the Ocean: the other two prouinces be diuided by the riuer Anas, ſo as Bethica (the chiefe citties whereof were Hiſpalis and Corduba) looketh Weſt-ward into the Atlanticke ſea, and into the Mediterranean vpon the South: Luſitania lyeth oppoſite onely to

the Ocean, the ſide of it vnto the Northerne Ocean, and vnto the Weſtern at the end: the city Emerita being once the chiefe Cittie of that Prouince.
               Spaine was firſt called Iberia, of the riuer Iberus, and after Spaine why ſo called. that Heſperia, of Heſperus the brother of Atlas, and laſtly, it was named Hiſpania, of Hiſpalis now called Sibilia. Their bodies bee very apt to indure both hunger and labour, and their minds euer prepared for death: they bee very ſparing and ſtrict both in their diet and euery thing elſe, and they be much more deſirous of warres then of peace. So much, as if warres be wanting abroade, they wil grow to ciuill diſſention and home-bred garboiles among themſelues: They will ſuffer torments euen vnto death, rather than reueile a thing committed to their ſecrecie, hauing more care of their credits, and truſt repoſed in them, then of their liues. They be maruellous nimble and ſwift of pace, and of an vnquiet and turbulent diſpoſition: their horſes be both ſpeedie and warlike, and their armes more deare vnto them then their bloud.
               They furniſh not their tables with daintie and delicate meates, vnleſſe vppon feſtiuall dayes, and they learned of the Romanes (after the ſecond Carthaginian warres) to waſh themſelues in cold water: but for all this in ſo many ages as haue paſſed ſince their firſt originall, they neuer had any notable or famous Captaine, that euer atchieued any great Conqueſt, but Viriatus onely, and hee indeed held the Romaines in play ſome ten yeares with variable ſucceſſe of fortune.
               The women diſpatch all buſineſſe both within dores and without, & the men imploy themſelues either in wars, or to purloyning & ſtealing from others: they weare ſhort black garments made of rough woll like goats haire: their ſhields

or bucklers which they vſe for their defence in the warres, be little ones made of nerues and ſinewes, which they will weeld with ſuch agilitie, as they auoid all dangers both of darts, arrowes, and hand-blowes. Their darts bee all of Iron and crooked, their helmets of braſſe and creſted, and their ſwords of Iron, and as broade as the palme of ones hand; wherewith in a troupe or croude, they will make great ſlaughter.
               They haue a deuiſe to make Iron very tough and ſtrong for weapons, which is, to beate and hammer it into thinne plates or ſheetes, and then to lay thoſe ſheetes in the ground ſo long, till the weakeſt of the Iron bee ruſted away, and none left but what is maruellous pure & ſtrong, and of this they make their ſwords, and other weapons for the warres, which be ſo ſubſtantiall and good, as neither ſhield nor helmet can withſtand them, but that they kill all before them: and of theſe ſwords euery one commonly carrieth two. Thoſe which haue any regiment in the camp, after they haue eſcaped the conflict on horſebacke, forſake their horſes, and helpe the footmen, they will fling their darts a great way from them, & that with great skil, & they will indure the fight a long time, & their bodies be ſo nimble and quicke, as they can eaſily fly from their foes, and ſet vpon them againe as occaſion is offered They be ſo deſirous of wars, that for the leaſt cauſe that is, they will ſwarme together by troupes, and ſing for ioy when they incounter their foes.
               In peaceable times they practiſe ſinging and dancing; for which exerciſe they be very light and actiue: towards their enemies and euil perſons they practiſe great cruelty, but to ſtrangers much bounty and humanity: for they bee ſo forward to intertaine ſtrangers and trauellers, as they

will euery one ſtriue to exceed other in courteſie, with a kind of emulation, eſteeming thoſe moſt worthy of honor and in greateſt fauour with God, that haue moſt ſtrangers to accompany them: The women weare yron chaines or iewels about their neckes, with crooked or bending creſts, that compaſſe the head from the necke behind ouer the crowne, and ſo hang downe vpon their fore-heads, vnto which they faſten their veiles when they pleaſe to maske their faces, which they account a great ornament vnto thē.
               In like manner in ſome part a little ſtrake of a wheele cō
                  paſſeth their heads, and is bound to the ſinewes in the hinder part of the head, and reacheth downe to the lappes of their eares, waxing, by little and litle, ſharper and narrower towards the top. Some ſhaue off all the haire of the forpart of their heades, and ſome others haue a pillar of a foot long, ſtanding vpright vpon their foreheads, to which they faſten their haire, and then couer it with a blacke cap or bonnet. They feed of diuers ſorts of fleſh, and make drinke of hony, whereof the country hath ſufficient ſtore, and ſuch wines as are wanting in their owne, are brought vnto them out of other countries: and although they bee very neate and cleanly in their diet, yet is it ſtrange to ſee, what a beaſtly and filthy cuſtome they generally obſerue, which is, to waſh their whole bodies, yea and to rub their teeth with vrine, accounting it very good and wholeſome for their bodies. But (to omit nothing that may bring vs to a perfect knowledge and vnderſtanding of the country) all the Region now called Spaine, was heretofore diuided into the further and nearer Spaine; the nearer Spaine is that which is now called Tarragon, extending to the Pyrenaean hils: & the further Spaine by reaſon of the length, is diuided into two Prouinces, Bethica, and Luſitania:

Spaine alſo was once diuided into fiue kingdomes, which were, Caſtile, Arragon, Portugall, Nauarre, and Granata.
            
            
               
                  Of Luſitania, and of the auncient manners of the Portugals. CAP. 24.
               
                  LVSITANIA, a Prouince in the furthermoſt part of Spaine, and at this day called The bounds of Portugall. Portugall, hath Bethica on the South, Tarragon on the Eaſt, and the Ocean ſea vppon the Weſt and North. It was firſt called Luſitania, (according to Pliny) of Luſus the father of Bacchus, and Lyſa his luxurious and diſſolute companion.
               Of all Spaniards, the Portugals bee moſt valiant, ſubtill, actiue and nimble, and through their extraordinarie skill in nauigation haue found out more ſtrange and vnknowne lands, than any people in the world againe: Their ſhields which they vſe in the warres be two foote broade, and made crooked towards the vpper end where they hold their hands, (for other handle they haue none) and theſe will they vſe with ſuch agility, as they will thereby eaſily auoide both arrowes, darts, and hand-blowes: They haue alſo ſhort ſwords or poynards hanging by their ſides, and ſome haue breſt-plates made of linnen cloth, and yet but few weare other priuie coats or creſted helmets, but onely ſuch as be made of nerues or ſinewes.
               They be very skilfull in darting, & can caſt them a great way from them, they continue the battell long, and by reaſon of their nimblenes, quicke agility, and lightneſſe,

they will eaſily flie from their enemie, and againe purſue him, as makes moſt for their aduantage: foot-men haue their legs harneſſed, and euery one a bundle of darts, and ſome carrie Iauelins pointed or headed with braſſe. There be ſome Portingals dwelling neere the riuer Durius, which are ſaid to liue like vnto the Spartanes: theſe vſe two kind of oyntments, and ſulphury or fierie ſtones to warm them withall, and all cold things are waſhed. They eate all one kind of meate, which is wholeſome, though it be homely: when they ſacrifice, they cut not the beaſt in peeces, but opening his belly, they looke into the bowels or garbage of the oblation, as alſo into the veines of his ſide, and by handling of them coniecture of things to come. Another kind of diuination they haue by mens intrals, and eſpecially captiues; in doing whereof they firſt couer the man ordained for that purpoſe, with a caſſocke, and then the Augur or Southſayer maketh an inciſion in the bottome of his belly, and by his fall propheſieth of future euents, which done, they cutte off the right hands, and offer them to their gods.
               Thoſe Portingals which inhabite on hils fare but meanly, they drinke water, and lye vpon the bare ground: They ſuffer their haire to grow long, and to hang downe about their ſhoulders dangling like women, and they fight with Myters vpon their heades, in ſtead of helmets. Their daintieſt meate is bucke goates, which they alſo ſacrifice to Mars, as they do captiues and horſes.
               They haue alſo (in imitation of the Greekes) their Hecatombes, which are ſacrifices made with an hundred beaſts of all ſorts, and (as Pindarus is of opinion) they ſacrifice and offer euery hundreth thing likewiſe. They haue their Gymnick playes, (which are ſo called, for that they be

done by naked men) and theſe playes are exerciſed with weapons, horſes, plummets of Leade, called the Whirle-about, running and diſordered fighting: and ſometimes they diuide themſelues into parts, and fight one ſide againſt another.
               Theſe mountainous Luſitanians feede two parts of the yeare vppon Acornes, which when they haue dried and ground into meale, they make bread thereof and ſo eat it. In ſtead of wine (wherof thoſe parts are barren) they haue drinke made of barley, and that they euer drinke new, aſſoone as it is brewed.
               When kinsfolke and friends are aſſembled together to banquet, in ſtead of oyle they vſe butter, and haue ſeates made in the walles for them to ſit in; where euery one taketh his ſeate according to his worth or grauitie, and euer in their drinking, they vſe to ſing and dance after muſicke; leaping and capering for ioy, as the women in Boetica do, when they ioyne all their hands together, and ſo fall a dauncing: Their apparell (for the moſt part) is black caſſockes, which they will wrap about them, and ſo lye themſelues downe to ſleepe vppon ſtraw or litter: They eate their meate in earthen platters, as the French men do, and women weare for the moſt part red garments.
               In ſteade of money they vſe thinne plates of ſiluer, or elſe exchange and barter one commoditie for another. Thoſe which are condemned to dye, are ſtoned to death, and Parricides are carried from out the confines of their hilles, or beyond ſome riuer, and there couered and ouer-whelmed with ſtones. They contract matrimonie after the manner of the Greekes, and (according to the cuſtome of the Aegyptians) bring thoſe which are ſick into the ſtreets, to the end that thoſe which haue beene troubled with the

like griefes themſelues, may ſhew them how they were cured. And theſe be the cuſtoms vſed in thoſe mountainous and northerne countries of Spaine.
               It is reported, that thoſe Spaniards which inhabite the vtmoſt parts of Portingall, when they be taken priſoners by their enemies, and readie to bee hanged, they will ſing for ioy: That the men there giue dowers to their wiues, and make their ſiſters their heires, who do alſo marrv their own brothers. And that they be ſo barbarous and bloudyminded, that mothers will murther their owne children, and children their parents, rather then that they ſhould fall into the hands of their enemies. They do ſacrifice to a god, whoſe name is vnknowne: when the Moone is in the full, they will watch all night euery one at his owne dore, dancing and skipping all the night long. The women haue as good part of all profits and increaſe as men haue, for they practiſe husbandry, and be obedient and ſeruiceable to men, when they themſelues are with child.
               The Spaniards make poyſon of a kind of herbe much like vnto Perſley, which offendeth not vppon a ſodaine, but by litle and litle, and this they alwaies haue in readineſſe for any one that wrongs them, in ſo much as it is ſayd to be proper to the Spaniards to be great poyſoners, and that their cuſtome is alſo to offer themſelues to bee ſlaine and ſacrificed for thoſe to whome they are newly reconciled.
            
            
               
               
                  Of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of many other Ilands, and of the manners and cuſtomes of the Inhabitants. CAP. 25.
               
                  ENGLAND, otherwiſe called great Brittaine, is the greateſt Iland contained England alſo called great Brittaine. within the boſome of the Ocean: It is in the forme of a triangle, much like vnto the Ile of Sicily, and is wholly imbraced and infolded within the armes of the Ocean, in no part touching, but altogether diuided frō 
                  England once called Albion. the continent. It was firſt called Albion, of the white cliffes or rockes that ſhew the country a far off vnto paſſengers. Some are of opinion, that after the deſtruction of Troy by the Greekes, the Troianes (guided by the Oracle of Pallas) rigged a nauie, betooke them to the ſeas, and (arriuing in this Iſland) fought many battels with the Gyants, which then inhabited the country, deſtroyed ſome, expelled the reſt, and poſſeſſed the ſoyle themſelues. Theſe alſo (continuing their poſſeſſion many yeares together) were afterwards driuen thence by the Saxons, a warlike people of Germany, vnder the conduct of Angla their Queene. The The Saxons once Lords of England. Inhabitants wholly vanquiſhed and expelled, and their ſoyle and ſubſtance ſhared amongſt ſouldiers, vtterly to extinguiſh and roote out all memorie of the former name and nation, they called the country Anglia, after the name of Angla their guide and gouerneſſe. Some others are of Anglia why ſo called. opinion, that it was called Anglia, as beeing an angle or corner of the world.
               
                  
Vpon the North it lieth oppoſite to France and Spaine, and the circuit or vtmoſt bounds of the whole Iſland, is about 1836. Engliſh miles. Their longeſt day conſiſteth The compaſſe of England. of ſeuenteene houres: their nights are light in the Sommer ſeaſon: the eyes of the Inhabitants are gray, their ſtature tall, and their naturall complexions ſo comely, ſo faire and ſo beautifull, as Saint Gregory ſeeing by chance certaine Engliſh boies in Rome, and demaunding of what Country they were, ſaid that they might well bee called, Angli, their faces and countenances reſembling the Angels, and lamenting that ſuch diuiliſh Idolatry ſhould harbor in ſuch diuine features, he ſhortly after effected, that the faith of Chriſt was planted in the Country.
               In warre they are vndaunted, and moſt expert Archers, their women bee maruelous comely and beautifull, their common ſort of people rude, barbarous and baſe, their nobility and gentrie, curteous, ciuill and of ſingular humanity. They ſalute one an other with cappe and knee, and incounter the women with kiſſes, leade them into Tauernes and there drinke together, which they deeme no touch to their reputations, if therein bee diſcouered no laſciuious intent.
               If they haue warres, they delight not in ſubuerting citties, deſtroying, burning, and conſuming, corne, cattaile or country, but bend their forces wholy to the deſtruction of their enemies, and he that is vanquiſher hath command of all.
               England of al other prouinces, was the firſt that imbraced England the firſt Chriſtian Iſland. the Chriſtian religion: The country aboundeth with cattaile and wool: wolues it breedeth none, nor noriſheth any that are brought thither, in ſo much that their flockes

may feed at liberty without feare or guide. The country is rich in mettals, as lead, copper eſpecially and ſome ſiluer, there is alſo the Magerite or pearle, and the ſtone Gagates (there called Iette) which burnoth in water and is extinguiſhed with oyle. In ſteed of wine (whereof the land is barren) they vſe a kinde of licor which they cal Ale and Beare, and they haue much wines brought them out of other countries.
               There bee many villages, borrowes and cities, whereof London is the chiefeſt of the nation, the Kings ſeat, and London the chiefe city. the moſt famous for trafficke and trading.
               Theſe are their cuſtomes and manners they vſe in this age, which are much differing from their cuſtomes they vſed the time of Iulius Caeſar, for at that time it was not lawfull for them to eate Hare, Hen or Gooſe, and yet The auncient manners of the Britans. would they noriſh and keepe them for their pleaſures. The people that inhabited the middle part of the country, liued (for the moſt part) vpon milke, and fleſh (beeing vtterly deſtitute of corne) and cloathed themſelues with skinnes. Their faces they would die with woad, to the end that in battaile they might breed a great terror to their enemies: They wore long haire hanging downe about their ſhoulders, and ſhaued all parts of their bodies but their heads: one woman would haue tenne or more husbands at one time, and it was lawfull for the brother to enioy his brothers wife, the father the ſonnes, and the ſonne the fathers, and the children were accounted children to them all: Strabo (diſſenting from the opinion of Caeſar) ſaith, that the Engliſh are farre taller then the Frenchmen, and of a ſhorter haire: Thicke woods ſerued them in ſteed of cities, wherein they builded them cabbines and cottages, harboring themſelues and their

cattaile vnder one roofe. The country is more ſubiect to raine then ſnow, and when the weather is faire, the earth is couered ſometimes with a blacke clowde, that for the ſpace of foure houres together you ſhall ſee no Sunne at high noone
               Scotland the vttermoſt part of Britan towards the Scotland denided from England. North, is deuided from the other part of the Iſland onely with a riuer or ſmall arme of the ſea.
               Not farre diſtant from Scotland lieth Ireland, the people whereof vſe one kinde of habite, in no point differing one from an other. They ſpeake all one language and vſe the ſelfe ſame cuſtomes. They haue nimble wits and are very apt to reuenge, vſing great cruelty in the warres, though otherwiſe they bee ſober and can indure all manner of wants with great facility. They are naturally faire, but nothing curious in their apparel.
               The Scots of whom I ſpake before (as ſome are of opinion) were ſo called of the paynting of their bodies, Of Scotland. for it was an vſual and auncient cuſtome there (and eſpecially amongſt the rudeſt and barbarous kinde of people) to paint and die their bodies, armes and legs with varniſh or vermillion, which cuſtome (if all bee true as is written by ancient authors) was practiſed by the Britans, eſpecially in time of warre, the more to terrifie the enemy as before is ſaid.
               
                  Aeneas Siluius ſaith, that the ſhorteſt day in winter there, is not aboue three houres long, and it is a thing worthy the noting to ſee how poore folkes there ſtand about the Temples of their gods, begging ſtones of paſſengers for them to burne, for the country affoordeth but ſmall ſtore of fuell, and the ſtones which they craue and get together in this manner, are of a fat and ſulphery

condition, and wil burne like coles: Aeneas ſaith that hee heard there was a tree in Scotland, that in Antumne whē the leaues were withered, they fell of the tree into a riuer, & by vertue of the water were turned into birds. This tree he ſaith hee ſought for in Scotland, but could not find it, and that laſtly it was told him, by ſome that knew the Country well, that this ſtrange miracle was to be ſeene in one of the Iſles of Orcades.
               
                  And thus farre mine Author, concerning the eſtate of this Iſland, by which appeareth the little acquaintance both hee and thoſe writers out of which hee frameth this collection had with it, for elſe would they not ſo ſleightly haue ſlipt ouer the commendation of ſo worthy a Country, and therefore I thought it not amiſſe, in this place to ſupply their defects with this ſhort addition of mine owne, wherein happely you may perceiue a more liuely deſcription of this our Realme of Great Britany, and the condition of the inhabitants then could well bee expected from meere ſtrangers.
               
               
                  BRITANNIA, ſometimes called Albion, the worthieſt and renownedſt Iſland of all the world, is in compaſſe as is ſaid before (according to the opinion of the beſt writers) about 1836. Engliſh miles: It is ſytuated in a moſt milde & temperate clymate, the ayre beeing neither too hot in Sommer, nor too cold in winter, through which temperature it aboundeth with all ſorts of graine, fruits and cattaile, that be either neceſſary or behoueful for mans life: for beſides that the Country

is wholeſome, pleaſant and delightſome, there bee ſuch ſtore of ponds, riuers and running waters for fiſh and foule, ſuch aboundance of forreſts and chaſes for timber and fuel, ſuch large fields & champion grounds for corne and graine, ſuch paſtures and meadowes for ſheepe and cattaile, ſuch orchards and gardens for pleaſure and profit, ſuch hunting and hawking in fields, fluds and forreſts, ſuch ſtrong caſtles, ſuch ſtately buildings, ſuch goodly cities and walled townes, ſuch beautifull houſes of the Nobility diſperced in all parts of the country, ſuch large territories, ſuch renowned vniuerſities for the aduancement of learning and good letters, ſuch practiſe of religiō, ſuch places for pleading, ſuch trafficke and trading, ſuch maintainance of Iuſtice, ſuch generous diſpoſitions in the nobles, ſuch ciuility amongſt citizens, ſuch intercourſe amongſt the commons, in a word ſuch is the pompe, riches & floriſhing ſtate of this Realme, vnder the gouernment of our moſt gratious Prince King Iames, that England at this day is ſo amply ſtored with natures richeſt guifts that ſhe is not onely furniſhed with things ſufficient to ſerue her ſelfe, but ſendeth forth ſundry of her ſuperfluous commodities into other countries alſo, and for al things may iuſtly bee compared, if not preferred to any country in Chriſtendome: who were the firſt inhabitants of this Iſland, and why it was ſo called, I finde it ſo diuerſly reported that I rather leaue euery man to his opinion, then by ſetting downe mine owne incurre the cenſure of ignorance and indiſcretion: but howſoeuer, although it hath bin inhabited by ſundry nations, and deuided into ſeuerall Kingdoms, yet doe I not finde that euer it admitted any other forme of gouernment but the Kingly authority only, no not when it was diſmembered into many Kingdomes,

but that then euery King had a perfect and abſolute command ouer his ſubiects, nor that any King of England, either then, or ſince it grew into a Monarchy, did euer receiue his authority from any other Prince as his ſupreme, but that euery King within the limits of his Kingdome was (next vnto God) ſole and abſolute gouernor, the idle example of King Iohn onely excepted, who without conſent of his commons, or eſtabliſhment by act of parliament, forced therevnto by the rebellion of his Nobles aided by the Dolphin of France, reſigned his crowne to the Popes Legate, and receiued it againe at his hands onely to appeaſe the Pope being then his enemy.
               To paſſe ouer the ſeuerall peoples that haue inhabited this Iſland, and the times of their continuance, as Britans, Romans, Danes and Saxons, and to come to times more nere vnto vs, for that my purpoſe is not to wade in vncertaine waters, but briefly to touch the preſent ſtate and condition of my country, too ſleightly ſlipt ouer by mine author.
               
                  William ſurnamed the Conqueror baſtard ſonne to Robert the ſixth Duke of Normandy, and couſin germaine vnto King Edward the Confeſſor by the mothers ſide, pretending a title vnto this Kingdome by the guift of Edward his kinſeman, and alſo by a couenant confirmed by oth betwixt Harrold and him, entred this land, ſlue King Harrold in battaile and obtained the crowne by conqueſt, vpon the fourteenth day of October 1066. Hee alterred the whole ſtate of the country, diſpoſſeſſed the Inhabitants, and diſtributed their lands by portions vnto his people that came in with him, he raigned twenty yeeres, eight monthes and ſixteene daies, and left the Kingdome to William his third ſonne, ſurnamed William Rufus, who was

flaine in hunting, after hee had raigned twelue yeeres, eleuen months and eighteene daies, and hauing no iſſue, left the gouernment to Henry his brother, and youngeſt ſonne to William the Conqueror.
               
                  Henry the firſt, ſurnamed Henry Beuclarke, raigned fiue and thirty yeeres, foure months and eleuen daies, and dying without iſſue male, left the crowne vnto Stephen Earle Morton and of Bologne, ſonne to the Earle of Bloys, and Adela, William Conquerors daughter, and nephew to King Henry the firſt.
               
                  Stephen raigned eighteene yeeres, eleuen months and eighteene daies, and Henry ſonne to Maude the Empreſſe, whoſe mother was Maude Queene of England, wife to King Henry the firſt and daughter to Margaret Queene of Scots, who was daughter to Edward the ſonne of Edmund, ſurnamed Ironſyde (by which meanes the Saxon line was againe reſtored) ſucceeded in his Kingdome.
               
                  Henry the ſecond raigned foure and thirty yeeres, nine months and two daies, and then departing this life left the managing of the eſtate vnto his third ſonne Richard ſurnamed Richard Ceur de Lyon.
               
               
                  Richard the firſt raigned nine yeeres, nine months and two and twenty daies, and dying without iſſue, his brother Iohn (diſinheriting Arthur and Eleanor, the right heires to the crowne, as being the iſſue of Ieffrey Duke of Britan his elder brother, who was fourth ſonne to Henry the ſecond, and died before his father) tooke vpon him the gouernment. Iohn raigned ſeuenteene yeeres, ſeuen monthes, and Henry his eldeſt ſonne raigned in his ſteed.
               
                  Henry the third raigned ſixe and fiftie yeeres, and one month, and left his ſonne Edward ſurnamed Long-ſhankes to rule after him.
               
                  
                  Edward the firſt raigned foure and thirty yeeres, eight monthes and nine daies, and exchanging his Kingdome, for the Kingdome of heauen, left the crowne to his ſonne Edward of Carnaruon ſo called becauſe hee was borne there.
               
                  Edward the ſecond raigned nineteene yeeres, ſeuen months and ſixe daies, and beeing then depoſed, the gouernment was committed to Edward his ſonne.
               
                  Edward the third raigned fifty yeeres, foure monthes and ſeuen daies, and left the Kingdome vnto Richard his grand-child, the ſonne of Edward the Black Prince, who died before his father.
               
                  Richard the ſecond was depoſed, when hee had raigned two and twenty yeeres, foureteene weekes and two daies, and Henry Plantagenet, ſonne to Iohn of Gante Duke of Lancaſter, fourth ſonne to Edward the third got poſſeſſion of the crown rather by force then by lawful ſucceſſion.
               
                  Henry the fourth raigned thirteene yeeres, ſix months, and foure daies, and his ſonne Henry ſucceeded him in the Kingdome.
               
                  Henry the fifth, whoſe valor France well knew, raigned nine yeeres, fiue months, and foure and twenty daies, and left the gouernment to his ſonne Henry likewiſe.
               
                  Henry the ſixth raigned eight and thirty yeeres, ſixe months and nineteene daies, and Edward Earle of March, eldeſt ſonne to Richard Duke of Yorke, clayming the crowne by liniall diſcent, from Lionel Duke of Clarence, third ſonne to Edward the third, and elder brother to Iohn of Gante Duke of Lancaſter, ſucceeded him in the gouernment.
               
                  Edward the fourth raigned two and twenty yeeres fiue weekes & one day & left the Kingdom to his ſon Edward.
               
               
                  
                  Edward the fifth was murthered by Richard Duke of Gloceſter, youngeſt ſonne to Richard Duke of Yorke, and youngeſt brother to Edward the fourth, when hee had raigned onely ten weekes and foure daies.
               
                  Richard the third hauing butchered his Nephewes, and vſurped the crowne of England, was ſlaine by Henry the Seuenth when hee had raigned two yeeres, two monthes and fiue daies, and left the Crowne vnto the ſaid Henry, who was next heire from the houſe of Lancaſter, and married Elizabeth, Daughter vnto Edward the Fourth, next heire from the houſe of Yorke, by which marriage hee revnited the two long deuided houſes of Yorke and Lancaſter.
               
                  Henry the Seuenth, raigned three and twenty yeeres, eight monthes and nineteene daies, and left the Kingdome to Henry his Second ſonne, for his eldeſt ſonne Arthur died before his father without iſſue.
               
                  Henry the Eight, raigned ſeuen and thirty yeeres, ten monthes and one day, and left the charge of the gouernment to Edward his ſonne.
               
                  Edward the Sixth, raigned ſixe yeeres, fiue monthes and nineteene daies, and Queene Mary his eldeſt ſiſter ſucceeded him.
               Queene Mary raigned fiue yeeres, fiue monthes and two and twenty daies, and her ſiſter Queene Elizabeth raigned after her.
               Queene Elizabeth raigned foure and forty yeeres foure monthes and foureteene daies. Shee was the mirrour of the world for Gouernment and (her ſex conſidered) beyond compare admirable, religious, prudent, magnanimous, mercifull, beloued, euill ſpoken of

by none but onely the wicked, neuer to bee remembred of any true hearted Engliſhman, but which reioycing for her birth, and ſorrowing for her death. Her Virgine life was ſuch, as that (for politique reſpects) beeing mooued to marry in the firſt yeere of her reigne, her anſwere was that that eſtate liked her beſt, wherein ſhe then liued with all concluding for ſatisfaction to her ſubiects with a Deus Prouidebit, God ſhall prouide an heire for this Kingdome, which bleſſed bee God therefore, our eyes haue after foure and forty yeeres of her gratious raigne now to our comfort ſeene. But for your better ſatisfaction, I will here ſet downe her words at large as they are penned by Maiſter Stow in his Annals of England.
               
                  AS I haue had good cauſe, ſo doe I giue you all my Stowes Annal Anno Eliz. primo. hearty thankes, for the good zeale and louing care you ſee me to haue, as well towardes mee, as the whole eſtate of your Country: your petition, I perceiue, conſiſteth of three partes, and mine anſwere to the ſame ſhall depend of two.
                  And to the firſt part, I may ſay vnto you, that from my yeeres of vnderſtanding, ſith I firſt had conſideration of my ſelfe, to bee borne a ſeruitor of almighty God, I happily choſe this kinde of life, in the which I yet liue, which I aſſure you, for my owne part, hath hitherto beſt contented my ſelfe, and, I truſt, hath beene moſt acceptable to God. From the which, if either ambition of high eſtate offered to mee in marriage by the pleaſure and appointment of my Prince, whereof I haue ſome records in this preſence (as you our Treaſurer well knew) or if the eſchewing the danger of

mine enemies, or the avoyding of the perrill of death, whoſe meſſinger, or rather a continuall watch-man, the Princes indignation was no little time daily before mine eyes, by whoſe meanes, although I know, or iuſtly may ſuſpect, yet I will not now vtter, or if the whole cauſe were in my ſiſter her ſelfe, I will not now burthen her therewith, becauſe I will not charge the dead: if any of theſe, I ſay, could haue drawne, or diſwaded mee from this kinde of life, I had not now remained in this eſtate wherein you ſee mee, but ſo conſtant haue I alwaies continued in this determination, although my youth and wordes may ſeeme to ſome hardly to agree together, yet is it moſt certaine and true, that at this day I doe ſtand free from any other meaning, that either I haue had in times paſt, or haue at this preſent, with which trade of life I am ſo throughly acquainted, that I truſt in God, who hath hitherto therein preſerued, and led mee by the hand, will not of his goodneſſe ſuffer mee to goe alone.
                  For the other part, the manner of your petition I doe well like, and take it in verie good part, becauſe that it is ſimple, and contayneth no lymitation of place or perſon: if it had beene otherwiſe, I muſt needs haue miſliked it verie much, and thought it in you a verie great preſumption, beeing vnfitting, and altogither vnmeete for you to require them that may commaunde, or thoſe to appoint, whoſe partes are to deſire, or ſuch to binde and limit, whoſe duties are to obey, or to take vpon you to drawe my loue to your likings, or to frame my will to your fantaſie: For a guerdon conſtrained, and a guift freely giuen, can

neuer agree together. Neuertheleſſe if any one of you bee in ſuſpect, that whenſoeuer it may pleaſe God to incline my heart to another kinde of life, you may well aſſure your ſelues, my meaning or reſolution is not to doe or determine any thing, wherewith the Realme may, or ſhall, haue iuſt cauſe to bee diſcontented, or complaine of impoſed iniurie. And therefore put that cleane out of your heads, and remooue ſuch doubtfull thoughts, for I doe aſſure you, what credit my aſſurance may haue with you I cannot tell, but what credit it ſhall deſerue to haue, the ſequell ſhall declare; I will neuer in that matter conclude any thing that ſhalbe preiudiciall to the Realme, for the benefit, weale, good and ſafetie whereof, I will neuer ſhunne to ſpend my life.
                  And whomſoeuer my chance ſhalbe to light vpon, I truſt he ſhalbe ſuch, as ſhalbe as carefull for the Realme, and you, I will not ſay as my ſelfe, becauſe I cannot ſo certainelie determine of any other, but at the leaſtwiſe, by my good will and deſire, hee ſhalbe ſuch, as ſhalbe as carefull for the preſeruation of the Realme, and you, as my ſelfe. And albeit it might pleaſe Almightie GOD to continue mee ſtill in this minde, to liue out of the eſtate of marriage, yet is it not to bee feared, but hee will ſo worke in my heart, and in your wiſdomes, as good prouiſion by his helpe may bee made in conuenient, whereby the Realme ſhall not remaine and ſtand deſtitute of an heire to ſucceed mee, that may bee a fit Gouernour, and peraduenture more beneficiall to the Realme and generality, then ſuch offſpring as may come of mee.
                  
                     
For though I bee neuer ſo carefull of your well doings, and minde euer ſo to bee, yet may iſſue growe out of kinde, and become perhaps vngratious. And in the end this ſhalbe for mee verie ſufficient, that a marble ſtone ſhall declare, that a maiden Queene hauing raigned and ruled ſuch a long time, liued, and died a virgine.
                  And heere I end, and take your comming vnto mee in good part, and giue vnto you all eft-ſomes my hearty thankes, more yet for your zeale and good meaning, then for your petition.
               
               
                  And thus farre Stowe.
               THIS good Queene ELIZABETH was the laſt of the Royall iſſue of King Henry the eight, ſhee died without any iſſue her ſelfe and left the Kingdome vnto Iames King of Scotland, and next heire to the crowne of England.
               King Iames the firſt of that name ſince the Conqueſt by the death of Queene Elizabeth, vnited the two famous Kingdomes of England and Scotland, which had beene long deuided, the crowne of England rightfully and linially deſcending vnto him from Margueret, eldeſt daughter to Henry the ſeuenth, and Elizabeth wife of the ſayd Henry, & eldeſt daughter to Edward the fourth, which Margueret was maried to Iames the fourth King of Scotland, who had iſſue Iames the fifth, father vnto Mary the laſt Queene of Scots, who was mother vnto

                  Iames the ſixth King of Scotland, and of great Britan France and Ireland the firſt.
               To omit Ireland an Iſland vnder our Kings dominion, the people wherof of late yeeres haue growne to more ciuility, by conuerſing with other nations, and to ſpeake ſomething more in perticular of this Iſland as now it is, wee may deuide the whole Iſland of Britanny into three partes, that is to ſay England, Wales and Scotland.
               Scotland the North of this Iſland, hauing for a long time beene a Kingdome of it ſelfe ſeuered and diſtinct from England, is now by this happy vnion (as I ſaid before) made one againe with England, and both of them gouerned by one King and Monarch.
               This Country in reſpect of England is very barren and mountanous, and the Inhabitants, eſpecially the vulgar ſort, farre more rude and barbarous: their language in effect is all one with the Engliſh, the Northerne Scots excepted, which ſpeake and liue after the Iriſh faſhion, nor is their any difference in their religion, but all cauſes and controuerſies bee there determined by the ciuill law, as in moſt other Countries, for with our common lawes of England they are little acquainted.
               Wales an other part of this Iſland, and the proper habitation of the Britans, expelled thither out of England by the Engliſhmen, was gouerned by Princes of their owne bloud vntil the raigne of Henry the third, who ſlue Lhewellen ap Griffith, the laſt Prince of the Britiſh race, vnited that Prouince vnto the Kingdome of England, and forced the Inhabitants to ſweare fealty and alleagiance vnto Edward of Carnaruan his eldeſt ſonne, whom hee made Prince of Wales: After the deceaſe of Edward
                  
the firſt, this title of Prince of Wales lay dormant during all the raigne of Edward the Second, and was againe reuiued by Edward the Third, who created his ſonne Edward ſurnamed the Blacke Prince, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Cheſter and Prince of Wales, and euer ſince hath this title beene duely conferred vnto the eldeſt ſons of the Kings of England, for the time being, and now laſtly, and but lately by our dread ſoueraigne Lord King Iames, vnto Henry Fredericke his eldeſt ſon, the hopefull iſſue of a happie father, borne certes (as euidently appeareth in his minority) to bee a perfect mirror of chiualry, for the aduancement of our country and common wealth, and the ſubuerſion of his enemies.
               The Inhabitants of Wales, though they bee much improued, yet do they not equall the Engliſh in ciuility, nor their ſoile in fertility: Their whole Country conſiſteth of twelue ſhires (that is to ſay) Angleſea, Brecknocke, Cardigan, Carmarden, Carnaruon, Denbigh, Flint, Glamorgan, Merionneth, Mongomerry, Pembroke, and Radnor-ſhire, and foure biſhops Seas (to wit) the Biſhopricke of Saint Dauids, the Biſhoppricke of Landaffe, the Biſhopprick of Bangor, and the Biſhoppricke of Saint Aſaphe. They haue a language peculiar to themſelues, yet do they liue vnder the ſelf ſame lawes the Engliſhmen do, but for becauſe that part of the Iſland is far remote from London, the Kings ſeat and chiefe tribunal of Iudgement, where the lawes are executed and pleas heard for all the Realme, and by reaſon of their different language, the King by his commiſſion maketh one of his nobles his deputy or lieutenant vnder him, to rule in thoſe parts and to ſee the peace maintained, and Iuſtice miniſtred indifferently vnto all. This gouernor is called the Lord preſident

of Wales, who for the eaſe and good of the country, aſſociate with one Iudge and diuers Iuſtices, holdeth there his Tearmes and Seſſions for the hearing and determining of cauſes within VVales and the Marches. This Court is called the Court of the councell of the Marches of VVales, the proceedings whereof are in a mixt manner betwixt our common law, and ciuill law.
               England, accounting Cornwall for one, though much differing in language, is deuided into 41. parts, which are called counties or ſhires, the ſeuerall names whereof are theſe following, viz.
               
               
                  Berck-ſhire.
                  Bedford-ſhire.
                  Buckingham-ſhire.
                  Biſhoppricke of Durham.
                  Cambridge-ſhire.
                  Cornwall.
                  Cumberland.
                  Cheſhire.
                  Devon-ſhire.
                  Dorcet-ſhire.
                  Darby-ſhire.
                  Eſſex.
                  Gloceſter-ſhire.
                  Huntingdon-ſhire.
                  Hertford-ſhire.
                  Hereford-ſhire.
                  Hampt-ſhire.
                  Kent.
                  Lincolne-ſhire.
                  Leceſter-ſhire.
                  Lancaſter-ſhire.
                  Middle-ſex.
                  Monmoth-ſhire.
                  Northumberland-ſhire.
                  North-folke.
                  Northampton-ſhire.
                  Nottingham-ſhire.
                  Oxford-ſhire.
                  Rutland-ſhire.
                  Richmond-ſhire.
                  Suſſex.
                  Surrey.
                  Suffolke.
                  Somerſet-ſhire.
                  Stafford-ſhire.
                  Shrop-ſhire.
                  Wilt-ſhire.
                  Weſtmore-land.
                  Worceſter-ſhire.
                  Warwicke-ſhire.
                  Yorke-ſhire.
               
               
                  
Euery ſhire is diuided either into Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes, or Wapentakes, and euery of thoſe into ſundry pariſhes, and Conſtable-weekes, and ouer euery ſhire is one principall gouernor, called the Lieutenant of the ſhire, and a Sheriffe to collect money due vnto the King, and to account for the ſame in the Exchequer; as alſo to execute his writs and proceſſes: and for the more particular peace of each ſeuerall part of the country, there be ordained in euery Countie, certaine of the worthieſt and wiſeſt ſort of Gentlemen, who are called Iuſtices or conſeruators of the peace; vnder whom high Conſtables, Coroners, petty cō
                  ſtables, headboroughs, and tything-men haue euery one their ſeuerall offices.
               England moreouer, is diuided into two eccleſiaſticall prouinces, which are gouerned by two ſpirituall perſons called Archb. to wit, the Archb. of Canterbury, (who is primate and Metrapolitan of all England,) and the Archb. of Yorke, and vnder theſe two Archb. are 26. Biſhops, that is to ſay, 22. vnder the Archb. of Canterbury, and 4. vnder the Archbiſhop of Yorke.
               
                  In the Prouince of Canterbury are theſe Dioceſses bounded as followeth.
                  1 & 2 The Dioceſſes of Canterbury and Rocheſter, which haue vnder them all the County of Kent:
                  3 The Dioceſſe of London, which hath Eſſex, Middleſex, and a part of Hartford ſhire.
                  4 The Dioceſſe of Chitcheſter, which hath Suſſex.
                  5 The Dioceſſe of Wincheſter, which hath Hamptſhire, Surrey, and the Iles of Wight, Gernſie and Ierſey.
                  6 The Dioceſſe of Salisbury, which hath Wiltſhire and Barkſhire.
                  
                     
7 The Dioceſſe of Exceſter, which hath Deuonſhire and Cornwall.
                  8 The Dioceſſe of Bath and Wels, which hath Somerſet ſhire onely.
                  9 The Dioceſſe of Gloceſter, which hath Gloceſterſhire.
                  10 The Dioceſſe of Worceſter, which hath Worceſter ſhire, and a part of Warwicke ſhire.
                  11 The Dioceſſe of Hereford, which hath Herefordſhire, and a part of Shropſhire.
                  12 The Dioceſſe of Couentrie and Liechfield, which hath Staffordſhire, Derbyſhire, and the reſt of Warwickeſhire, with ſome part of Shropſhire.
                  13 The Dioceſſe of Lincolne, which hath Lincolneſhire, Leiceſterſhire, Huntingtonſhire, Bedfordſhire, Buckinghamſhire, and the reſt of Hartfordſhire.
                  14 The Dioceſſe of Ely, which hath Cambridgeſhire, and the Ile of Ely.
                  15 The Dioceſſe of Norwich, which hath Northfolke and Suffolke.
                  16 The Dioceſſe of Oxford, which hath Oxfordſhire.
                  17 The Dioceſſe of Peterborow, which hath Northamptonſhire and Rutlandſhire,
                  18 The Dioceſſe of Briſtow, which hath Dorcetſhire.

               
               
                  
                     And to theſe are added the foure Biſhopprickes of WALES. viz.
                  19 The Biſhop of S. Dauids.
                  20 The Biſhop of Landaffe.
                  21 The Biſhop of Bangor.
                  22 The Biſhop of S. Aſaph.
               
               
                  
                  
                     In the Prouince of Yorke are theſe foure Dioceſſes comprehended within theſe limits following. viz.
                  1 The Dioceſſe of Yorke, which hath Yorkeſhire, and Nottinghamſhire.
                  2 The Dioceſſe of Weſtcheſter, which hath Cheſſhire, Richmondſhire, a part of Flintſhire, and Denbighſhire in Wales.
                  3 The Dioceſſe of Dureſme, which hath the Biſhoppricke of Dureſme and Northumberland.
                  4 The Dioceſſe of Carlile, which hath Cumberland, and Weſtmerland.
               
               And to theſe are added the Biſhoppricke of Sodor in the Ile Mona.
               The whole number of Pariſh Churches, and impropriations in all theſe ſeueral Dioceſſes are reckened about 131209.
               Hauing thus diuided the whole kingdome of England into ſhires and Biſhops ſeas; it reſteth, to ſay ſomething of the Citties and Corporations, whereof there be ſo many, and that ſo goodly and ſo well gouerned, by ſundry Orders of Officers, as I thinke but few countries in Chriſtendome go beyond it: of all which, London the Metrapolitan citty of the Iland, is moſt famous, both for the great concourſe of ſtrangers, that continually flocke thither from all parts of the world: ſome for merchandize, ſome for manners: as alſo for the conueniencie of the place, being ſituated vpon the famous riuer of Thames, beautified with rare & ſumptuous buildings, both of Prince and Peeres: (who for the moſt part keepe their reſiance in or neare vnto the ſame,

as being the only place of Parlament, and holding of pleas for the whole Realme.) And for the great multitude of Students and practitioners in the lawes, which there keepe their Termes of pleading foure times in the yeare, which ſet together, is about one quarter, during which time the Iudges and all other Courts keepe their Courts and Seſſions, and at other times is vacation and ceaſing from execution of the lawes: Theſe Iudges, Sergeants, and other Students and practitioners of all ſorts haue their lodgings, and dyets in 14. ſeuerall houſes, whereof two are only for Iudges and Sergeants, and are therefore called the Sergeants Innes: the next foure are the foure famous houſes of Innes of Court, the onely receptacle of Gentlemen, ſtudents and Councellors, & the other eight be inferior houſes to the Innes of Court, furniſhed with Atturneys, Solicitors, and young Gentlemen and Clerkes, that are to liue and ſtudy there for a ſpace as probationers, before they be thought fit to be admitted to the Innes of Court, which eight houſes be called the Innes of Chancery.
               This citty and ſuburbes is diuided into ſixe and twenty wards, and about an hundred and twenty Pariſhes: The chiefeſt Magiſtrate there vnder the King, is the Lord Maior, vnder whome are diuers inferior Officers ouer euery ſeuerall company and ward, who do all of them attend the Maior when he takes his oath in ſuch ſeemely maner, as he that beholds their ſtately Pageants and deuiſes, their paſſage by water to Weſtminſter and backe againe: their going to Paules, the infinit number of attendants of Aldermen, and all ſorts of people: their rare and coſtly banquets, and all their forme of gouernement, ſurely I ſuppoſe, he will hold opinion, that no citty of the world hath the like.
               
                  
This ſuperficiall commendation of this renowned citty of London ſhall ſuffice for all: and therefore I will paſſe ouer the reſt in ſilence, for that there is no one thing worthy memorie in any cittie or towne of the whole Realme, that the like or better is not to bee found in the citty of London: the Vniuerſities onely excepted, which are the nurſe-gardens, and Seminaries of all good arts and ſciences. And of theſe there be two, Oxford and Cambridge, which conſiſting of ſundry Colledges and Hals erected and founded by godly and deuout founders and benefactors, and endowed with large rents, and reuenewes, for the maintenance of poore ſchollers, who are there maintained, and inſtructed in learning of all ſorts: and beeing next vnto London, the two VVorthies of our kingdome; and in truth the moſt famous Vniuerſities in Chriſtendome. I thinke it not amiſſe (omitting to ſpeake any thing of the cittizens and townſ-men, or the diuided gouernement betwixt them & the Vniuerſities) to recite in particular the names of the Colledges and Hals in both Vniuerſities, their founders & benefactors, and the times of their ſeuerall foundations.
               Firſt therfore of Oxford, (without addition of ſuperiority, for that (as the Prouerbe is) As proud goes behind as before:) there be contained in that Vniuerſitie, (beſides nine hals, viz. Gloceſter hall, Broad-gate, S. Mary hall, Albaine hall, VVhite hall, New Inne, Edmund hall, Hart hall, and Magdalin hall; which differ from the Colledges, for that the Colledges haue lands to maintaine their Societies, which the hals in Oxford do want; and therefore though al ſcholer-like exerciſes bee there practiſed as well as in the Colledges, yet in reſpect of the want of maintainance they do in part reſemble the Ins in court) ſixteene Colledges, that is to ſay:
               
                  
                  1 Vniuerſitie Colledge founded by Alured king of the Saxons, in the yeare of our Lord, 872.
                  2 Baylyoll Colledge founded by Iohn Baylyoll, king of the Scots, in the yeare of our Lord, 1263.
                  3 Martin Colledge, founded by Walter Martin, biſh. of Rocheſter, in the yeare of our Lord, 1273.
                  4 Exceſter Colledge, and Hart hall founded by Staphel
                           •
                        n biſhop of Exceſter, in the yeare of our Lord, 1316. which ſaid Colledge was much augmented by Sir VVilliā Peeter, Secretary to king Henry the eight, in the yeare of our Lord, 1566.
                  5 Oriall Colledge, founded by Adam Browne, brought vp in the Vniuerſity of Oxford by king Edward the ſecond, in the yeare of our Lord, 1323.
                  6 Queenes Colledge, founded by Robert Egleſfield, Chaplin to Philippe, king Edward the thirds wife, in the yeare of our Lord, 1349.
                  7 New Colledge, founded by Willyam VVicham biſhop of VVincheſter, in the yeare of our Lord, 1375.
                  8 Lincolne Colledge, founded by Richard Flemming, Biſhop of Lincolne, and increaſed by Thomas Rotheram, Biſhop of the ſame Dioceſſe, in the yeare of our Lord, 1420.
                  9 All Soules Colledge, founded by Henry Chechelſey, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, in the yere of our Lord, 1437.
                  10 Magdalin Colledge, and Magdalin Hall, founded by VVillyam VVainflet, Biſhop of Wincheſter, and Chancelor of England, in the yeare of our Lord, 1456.
                  11 Brazen-noſe Colledge, founded by VVillyam Smith, Biſhop of Lincolne, in the yeare of our Lord, 1513 and lately increaſed by Doctor Nowell, Deane of Paules.
                  12 Corpus Chriſti Colledge, founded by Richard Fox
                     
Biſhop of Wincheſter, in the yeare of our Lord, 1516.
                  13 Chriſts Church, founded by Cardinall Wolſey, in the yeare of our Lord, 1526. and indowed with lands by king Henry the eight.
                  14 S. Iohns Colledge, founded by Sir Thomas White, Maior of London, in the yeare of our Lord, 1557.
                  15 Trinity Colledge, founded by Sir Thomas Pope Knight, in the yeare of our Lord, 1566.
                  16 Ieſus Colledge, founded by Hugh Price, Doctor of the ciuill Law.
               
               There is another Colledge now in building, the foundation wherof is alreadie laid by M. Waddam of Merryfield in Somerſetſhire.
               CAmbridge was firſt a common ſchoole, founded by Sigebert, king of the Eaſt Engliſh, in the yeare of our Lord God, 637. ſince which time it hath beene ſo increaſed and augmented, that at this day it is equall to Oxford: it conſiſteth (reckoning Michaell houſe, and Kings hall for two, which haue beene ſince added to Trinity Colledge) of eighteene Halles & Colledges, the Halls hauing lands belonging to them as well as the Colledges: for there is no difference there betwixt Halles and Colledges, but in name onely, ſauing that the Colledges haue more lands then the Hals, and therefore maintaine more Schollers then the hals do: the names of the houſes, and by whome and when they were founded and augmented, is as followeth:
               
                  1 Peter-houſe, founded by Hugh Biſhop of Ely, in the yeare of our Lord, 1280.
                  2 Michaell houſe, founded by Sir Henry Stanton Knight, one of the Iudges of the common Bench, in the yeare of our Lord, 1324.
                  
                     
3 Trinity hall, founded by William Bateman, in the yeare of our Lord, 1354.
                  4 Corpus Chriſti Colledge, founded by Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaſter, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1344.
                  5 Clare hall, was firſt called Scholer hall, and afterwards the Vniuerſitie hall, and being burnt with fire, was afterwards re-edified by Elizabeth, daughter of Gilbert Clare, Earle of Leiceſter, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1326. and by her called Clare hall.
                  6 Pembroke hal founded by Mary Counteſſe of Pembroke, in the yeare of our Lord, 1343.
                  7 Kings hall, repaired by king Edward the third, in the yeare of our Lord, 1376.
                  8 Kings Colledge, founded by king Henry the ſixt, in the yeare of our Lord, 1441.
                  9 Queenes Colledge, founded by Margaret wife to king Henry the ſixt, and finiſhed by Elizabeth, wife to K. Edward the fourth, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1448.
                  10 Katherine hall, founded by Doctor Woodlabe Prouoſt of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, in the yeare of our Lord, 1459.
                  11 Ieſus Colledge, founded by Iohn Alcocke, Biſhop of Ely, in the yeare of our Lord, 1504.
                  12 Chriſts Colledge, founded by Queene Margaret, Grandmother to King Henry the eight.
                  13 Saint Iohns Colledge, founded by the ſayd Queene Margaret, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1506.
                  14 Magdalin Colledge, founded by the Lord Audley, in the yeare of our Lord, 1509. and enlarged by Sir Chriſtopher Wrey, Lord chiefe Iuſtice of England.
                  
                     
15 Trinity Colledge founded by k. Henry the 8. for the inlarging whereof he added thereunto Michael houſe and Kings hall, and made therof one Colledge in the yeare of our Lord, 1546. ſo as now the names of Michaell houſe, and kings hall is almoſt worne out of memorie.
                  16 Gonvel and Caius Colledge, firſt founded by one Gonvell, about the yeare of our Lord, 1348. and perfected by Iohn Caius Doctor of Phiſicke, and by him called Gonuell and Caius Colledge, in the yeare of our Lord, 1557.
                  17 Emanuell Colledge, founded by Sir Walter Mildmay, in the yeare of our Lord, 1588.
                  18 Sidney-Suſſex Colledge, founded by Francis Sidney, Counteſſe of Suſſex, for the erecting whereof ſhe bequeathed at her death fiue thouſand pounds, it was begun in the yeare of our Lord, 1597.
               
               Now hauing thus farre ſpoken of the Country in particular, it reſteth to ſay ſomething with like breuity of the ſeuerall ſorts of people that inhabite the ſame, their proceedings in courſes of law, as well ſpirituall as temporall, and their ſeuerall Courts. The whole number of Engliſh men may therefore be diuided into theſe foure ranckes or degrees of people, that is to ſay, Gentlemen or Noblemen, Cittizens, Yeomen, and artificers or labourers.
               Of Gentlemen or Nobility there be two ſorts, to wit, the king himſelfe, the Prince, Dukes, Marqueſſes, Earles, Vicounts and Barons. And this ſort of Gentlemen are called Nobilitas maior, and the ſecond ſort of Gentlemen or Nobility, which are alſo called nobilitas minor, conſiſteth of Knights, Eſquires, and priuat Gentlemen, into which ranke of gentry are added Students of the lawes and ſchollers in the Vniuerſities: next vnto the Gentry are cittizens whoſe fame and authority (for the moſt part) extendeth no

further than their owne citties and boroughes wherin they liue, and beare rule, ſauing that ſome few of them haue voices in our high Senate of Parlament: The third order or degree are the Yeomanrie, which are men that liue in the country vppon competent liuings of their owne, haue ſeruants to do their buſineſſe for them, ſerue vpon Iuries and Inqueſts, and haue generally more employment in the gouernement of the common-wealth, then citizens haue. And the laſt and loweſt ſort of our people are artificers or labourers, which though they be rude and baſe in reſpect of our gentry, yet are they much improoued and bettered by conuerſing with Gentlemen, cittizens, and yeomen: ſo as if thoſe authors were now liuing, that haue written ſo contemptuouſly of all eſtates of our people vnder the degree of gentry, and ſaw the ciuilitie now generally practiſed amongſt moſt of vs, they would not for ſome few of the raſcalitie, cenſure and condemne all as baſe and ignoble.
               All theſe ſeuerall ſorts and degrees of people in our kingdome, may more briefly bee deuided into two Orders or ranckes, that is to ſay, the Nobilitie and the Commons: vnder the title of Nobilitie are comprehended all the Nobilitas maior, together with the Biſhops that haue place in the vpper houſe of Parlament: and by the commons are meant the nobilitas minor, cittizens, yeomen, and labourers, who by common conſent elect from amongſt them Knights and Burgeſſes to poſſeſſe the lower houſe of Parlament, who haue their voices there in the name of the whole multitude of commons, for the making and eſtabliſhing of lawes, ordonances, and ſtatutes.
               The Parlament therfore is the higheſt & moſt abſolute Seſſions or iudiciall Senate in the whole kingdome, conſiſting

of the King himſelfe: and the Lords ſpirituall and temporall in their own perſons, which is the higher houſe, and the whole body of the commons repreſented by the Knights and Burgeſſes lawfully elected, and thoſe are called the lower houſe.
               In this high Court of Parlament are ſuch new lawes made and ordained, and ſuch old ſtatutes abrogated and annihilated in part or in all, as are agre
                     ••
                   vppon by conſent of both houſes, and confirmed by the King, ſo as whatſoeuer is there decreed and conſtituted, is inuiolably to be obſerued, as eſtabliſhed by the generall aſſembly of the whole kingdome.
               There be three manner of wayes by one cuſtome of England, whereby definitiue iudgements are giuen, by act of Parlament, by battell, and by great aſſiſe. The manner of giuing Iudgement in the Parlament in matters depending betwixt Prince and ſubiect, or partie and party, concerning lands and inheritances, is by preferring of billes into the houſes of Parlament, and by the allowance or diſallowance thereof: but ſuch billes are ſeldome receiued, for that the Parlament is chiefly ſummoned and aſſembled, for the ſetling and eſtabliſhing of matters for the good of the King and common-wealth, & not to buſie themſelues in priuate quarrels.
               The triall by battell likewiſe, though it bee not vtterly abrogated, and altogether annihilated, yet is it quite growne out of vſe at this day.
               So as the moſt vſuall manner of Iudgement, is by the verdict of twelue men, lawfully impaneled and ſworne to giue a true verdict concerning the matter in queſtion, be it for life or land, or any thing tending to the hurt or good of any ſubiect whatſoeuer.
               
                  
Theſe twelue men ought to be Legales homines, as wee terme them, that is, men of good quality, fame, and abilitie, and they are to giue their verdict according to their euidence, before a lawfull Iudge, in their Seſſions, at termes and times vſually appointed for thoſe purpoſes. And for that there be many ſuites of diuers natures, therefore bee the trials therof in diuers courts and before diuers Iudges, whereof the chiefeſt bench or tribunall ſeate of Iudgement is the Kings bench; ſo called, for that the Kings of England haue ſat there thēſelues in perſon, and this Court is chiefly for pleas of the Crowne, the Iudges whereof bee called Iuſtices of the Kings bench, and they be commonly foure or fiue in number, whereof one is head, and therfore called the Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings bench, and by that place he is alſo Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of England.
               Next vnto the Kings bench, is the Court of Common pleas, which is for all matters touching lands and contracts betwixt partie and partie: and of this Court be likewiſe foure or fiue Iudges, the chiefeſt whereof is called the Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the Common-pleas, and this court may well be called the Common-pleas, as being the chiefeſt place for the exerciſe of the Common law. And there may none plead at the Common pleas barre, but Sergegeants at the law onely; wheras in all other Courts, councellors that be called to the barre may plead their Clyents cauſes, as well as Sergeants.
               The third Court for practiſe of the common law, is the Exchequer, where all cauſes are heard that belong to the Kings Treaſury. The Iudges of this Court are the Lord high Treaſurer of England, the Chancelor of the Exchequer, the Lord chiefe Baron, and three or foure other Barons, which be called Barons of the Exchequer.
               
                  
Beſides theſe three Courts of the common law, and the court of the Councell for the Marches of Wales, whereof I haue ſpoken before, there is a Court for the North part of England, which is likewiſe called the Councell, hauing a Preſident, Iuſtices and aſſiſtants, as in the Councell of Wales, and the ſame forme of proceeding. And for the more eaſe and quiet of the ſubiect, the King by his commiſſion ſendeth the Iudges and Barons of the Exchequer, twiſe a yeare into euery ſeuerall County of the countrie, as well to ſee the lawes executed againſt malefactors, as for the triall and determining of cauſes depending betwixt partie and party.
               Theſe two Seſſions are vſually called the Aſſiſes or Goale deliuery, and their manner of proceedings, is by Iurors who are to giue their verdicts according to euidēce.
               And for becauſe the time of theſe Iudges commiſſion, is ouer ſhort to determine all matters, that may ariſe in halfe a yeare, the Iuſtices of peace in their ſeuerall Counties, haue their Seſſions likewiſe, which be kept foure times in the yeare, and be therefore called the quarter Seſſions; in which Seſſions are heard and determined all pettie cauſes, for the more eaſe of the Iudges in their circuits.
               And for the better maintenance of peace in euery part of the Realm, there be diuers other petty Courts, as county Courts, hundred Courts, towne Courts, Leets, Court Barons, and ſuch like: all which hold plea according to the courſe of the common law.
               Next vnto theſe Courts of common law is the Court of Star-chamber, which is the court of the kings Councell: & therin ſit as Iudges the L. Chancelor as chiefe, the L. Treaſurer, and the reſt of the priuy Councel both ſpirituall and tēporall, to gether with the chiefe Iuſtices of both benches.

And in this court be cenſured all criminall cauſes, as periurie, forgerie, couſenage, ryots, maintenance, and ſuch like. The court of Wards and Liueries is next, which is a court of no long continuance, being firſt ordained by Henry the 8. the matters that are determinable in that court, are as touching wards and wardſhips: and the Iudges are the Maſter of the wards and liueries, the Atturney of the court of wards, and other officers and aſſiſtants.
               Then is there the Admirals court, which is only for puniſhment of miſdemeanors done at ſea, the Iudges of which court be the Lord high Admirall of England, and a Iudge, with other officers.
               The Duchie court, which is a court for the determining of matters depending within the Duchy of Lancaſter, wherein be Iudges, the Chancelor of the Duchie, and the Atturney.
               And a late erected court called the court of the Queens reuenues, for the deciding of controuerſies amongſt the Queenes tenants.
               Next vnto theſe, are the courts of Equity, which are, the Chancery, and the court of Requeſts. The court of Chancery, which is commonly called the court of conſcience, is chiefly for the mitigation of the rigor of the cōmon lawe, wherein the Lord high Chancelor of England is chiefeſt Iudge and moderator, to whom are ioyned as aſſiſtants, the M. of the Rolles, and certaine graue Doctors of the ciuill law, which are vſually called Maſters of the Chancery.
               The court of Requeſts is much like to the Chancery, and is chiefly for the kings ſeruants: the Iudges wherof, are the Maſters of Requeſts, which bee alwaies reuerent men, and well ſeen in the ciuill law: and one of them is euer attendant on the King to receiue ſupplications, and to anſwer

them according to the Kings pleaſure.
               Hauing thus paſſed ouer the ſeueral courts of common law, the courts of Equity, and thoſe which are of a mixt nature, betwixt the common & ciuill law, I wil only name the ſpirituall courts, the chiefeſt wherof are theſe:
               The firſt and moſt principal, is the conuocation of the Clergy, which is a Synod of the chiefeſt of the Clergie of the whole Realme, held only in Parlament time, in a place called the Conuocation houſe, where cannons are ordained for church-gouernment. And this court may be called a generall Councell: next vnto which are the particular Synods of both Prouinces, Canterbury and York, and are called prouinciall Synods. Then is there the Archb. of Cā
                  terburies court, called the Arches: the court of Audience: the Prerogatiue court: the court of Faculties: & the court of Peculiars; with many other courts in each ſeuerall Dioces. In all which courts, what matters are there handled, their Iudges and aſſiſtants, and all their whole manner of proceedings, I leaue to the report of ſuch, as are better acquainted in thoſe courts.
               
                  And thus much may ſuffice for the preſent eſtate of our country, as it is now in the ninth yeare of the raigne of our dread Soueraign Lord, K. Iames the firſt, whome God graunt long to rule and raigne ouer vs.
               
               
                  OF IRELAND.
                  HIBERNIA, an Iland bordering vpon Brittaine on the North and Weſt ſide, and much about halfe as big as Brittaine, was ſo called (according to ſome) ab hyberno tempore, that is to ſay, of the winter ſeaſon. The ground there is ſo exceeding rancke, and the graſſe ſo pleaſant and delicious withall, that their beaſts in Sommer time will

kill themſelues with feeding and ſuperſluoſly grazing, if they be not driuen from paſture ſome part of the day.
                  This Iſland breedeth neither ſpider nor toade, nor any other venimous or infectious creature, nor will any liue that are brought thither out of other Countries, but dye inſtantly as ſoone as they do but touch this Countries ſoyle.
                  Bees there be none, the aire is very temperate and the earth fruitfull, and yet be the people exceeding barbarous, vnciuill, and cruell. For thoſe which prooue vanquiſhers in their battels, ſwill and drinke vp the bloud of their ſlaine enemies, and then defile and gore their owne faces with it, And whether they do right or wrong, it is all one vnto them.
                  When a woman is deliuered of a male child, the firſt meate ſhe giueth him, ſhee putteth into his mouth with her husbands ſword point, ſignifying by that manner of feeding, (and alſo praying after her countrey faſhion) that the child may dye no other death, but in the field amongſt his enemies. Their greateſt gallants adorne the hilts and pummels of their ſwords, with beaſts teeth, which bee as white as Iuorie, and brought thither out of other countreys. And their chiefeſt delight and greateſt glorie is to be ſouldiers.
                  Thoſe which inhabite the hilly and mountainous part of the countrie, liue vppon milke and apples, and are more giuen to hunting and ſporting, then to husbandrie. The Sea betwixt England and Ireland is very raging, vnquiet, and troubleſome all the yeare long, and (but in ſummer) hardly nauigable: Yet do they ſayle ouer it in boates or whirries made of Ozier twigs, and couered with Oxe hides or buffe skins: they abſtaine from meate all the while they

are vpon the ſeas. And this ſea (according to the opinion of the beſt writers) is in breadth one hundred and twenty Engliſh miles. The inhabitants of the Ile of Sillura, retaine Syllura. as yet their old cuſtomes and courſe of life, money they haue none, nor no marketting, but giue and take one of an other, furniſhing themſelues rather by exchanging one thing for an other, then by buying and ſelling: They beleeue in the gods, and aſwell women as men, bee very skilful in predictions and ſooth-ſaying.
                  Thoſe which poſſeſſe the Iles called Eubudes (whereof there be fiue) liue altogether on milke and fiſh, not caring The Jſles called Eubudes. for corne nor any kinde of fruites. Theſe Iſlands are ſeperated one from an other onely by a little riuer, and are all vnder the gouernment of one King, who poſſeſſeth nothing in priuate to himſelfe, but occupieth all in commune with his ſubiects.
                  Their lawes inforce him to equity and right, and leaſt coueteouſneſſe ſhould diuert him from truth, hee learneth Iuſtice through pouerty, as being maintained at the publike charge, without hauing any thing proper to himſelfe, no not ſo much as a wife, in ſo much as enioying the company of women by turnes with his ſubiects, hee is vtterly depriued of all hope of iſſue, that hee may iuſtly ſay are his owne.
                  The vtmoſt Iſland in the Britiſh ſeas is Thyle, wherein, in the Sommer ſolſtice, when the Sunne is in Cancer, The Iſland called Thyle now called Jſland. there is almoſt no night, and as little day in the winter ſolſtice: The Inhabitants in the beginning of the ſpring liue amongſt their cattaile with herbes and milke, and in winter with fruites of trees, for the Iſland yeeldeth great ſtore of apples: They haue certaine mariages, but enioy their women in commune like the Inhabitants of the Eubudes.
                  
                     
There bee other Iſlands alſo in the Mediterranean ſea towards the Weſt, which of the Greekes bee called Gymneſiae, becauſe the people thereof goe naked, but of the The Gymneſiae or Baleares. Romans, and by the Inhabitants themſelues, they are called Baleares, of ſlinging or caſting of ſtones, becauſe they bee more expert in that excerciſe, then any other people. The biggeſt of theſe Iſlands, is the greateſt Iſland that is excepting ſeuen, which are Sicilia, Sardinia, Creta, Eubaea, Cyprus, Corſica and Lesbos: It is diſtant from Iberia now called Spaine one daies ſayling.
                  The leſſer of them lieth more Eaſt-ward, and aboundeth with all kinde of cattaile, and eſpecially mules, which bee greater then other country mules, and will bray lowder: both of theſe Iſlands are fertile and fruitfull, and well repleniſhed with people. They bee very greedy of wine (whereof their country yeeldeth none) and in ſteed of oyle (which is alſo wanting) they anoint their bodies with ſwines greaſe, and maſticke mingled together. Women there are in farre more eſtimation then men, in ſo much as if a woman bee taken priſoner, they will ranſome her with three or foure men.
                  Their dwellings are in hollow caues, made in ſteepe rockes, which are their onely couering and defence for their bodies: And they are ſo farre out of loue with gold and ſiluer, as they forbid it to bee brought into their Iſland, ſuppoſing that by wanting money, they are in ſecurity from all plots of treaſon: And therefore at ſuch time as they ſerued in the Carthaginian warres, they brought home nothing with them, but wine and women, which they bought with the money they receiued for pay. Their manner of marriages are both ſtrange and prodigious, for all the brides family and friends that are preſent

at the nuptials, lie with her one after an other according to their age, and the bride-groome laſt of all: the forme of burials alſo is proper to themſelues, and different from all other people, for they diſmember and cut the dead bodie into ſmall peeces, and put them into a veſſel and ſo couer the veſſel with ſtones.
                  Their weapons are euery one a ſling, and there budgets to put ſtones in, the one hee hangeth about his necke, an other hee guirdeth about his waſte, and the third hee carrieth in his hand, their ſtones are bigger then other men are well able to throw, and yet will throw them ſo ſtrongly that they flie with ſuch violence as if they were ſhot out of a pecce: And with theſe ſtones when they aſſault any citty, will they wound and kill their enemies that gard and defend the walles and bulwarkes of the cittie, and bre
                        ••
                      their ſhields and helmets, and all other kinde of armor: and they will leuell ſo rightly, as they will verie ſeldome miſſe the marke they aime at, for they bee trained vp in this kinde of excerciſe from their childhood, and therevnto conſtrained by their mothers, who will ſet a peece of bread vpon a ſtake for them to throw at, and giue them nothing to eate, before they haue ſtroke the bread off the ſtake with a ſtone.
                  Now hauing entred into the relation of Iſlands, opportunitie is offered to ſpeake ſomewhat of a new found Iſland ſytuated in the South part of the Ocean ſea, and 
                        Of the Jſland found out by Iambolus. of the ſtrange things that are reported to bee in that Iſland, as alſo of the cauſe and manner of the finding thereof, which was thus.
                  One Iambolus being in his youth trained vp as a ſcholler, after the death of his father (who was a merchant) betooke himſelfe to merchandize, and ſayling into Arabia

for ſpices, he with all his partners were ſurpriſed and taken by Pyrats and Robbers, and one of his fellowes and himſelfe beeing by thoſe theeues ſet into the fields to keepe ſheepe, were afterwards found and taken away by certaine maritine Aethiopians, and by them carried ouer into Aethiopia, where (for becauſe they were ſtrangers) they were aſſigned to bee a ſacrifice and expiation to the gods of that Country, for thoſe Aethiopians which liued vpon the ſea coaſt, had an ancient cuſtome of ſixe hundred yeares continuance, which they receiued by Oracle from their gods, to expiate and make ſatisfaction to their gods with two men: the manner whereof was this: They had a little barke or boate, prouided for that purpoſe, that was able to brooke the ſeas, and which two men were able to gouerne: and into this veſſel they put Iambolus and his companion, and victuals for ſixe monthes; commanding them that (according to their Oracle) they ſhould direct their ſhip and ſaile South ward, and that then they ſhould attaine to a fortunate Iſland, the people whereof were maruelous curteous and ciuil & floriſhed in great felicity: Into which Iſland if they arriued in ſafety, their owne Country ſhould for ſix hundred yeeres after enioy perfect peace and happineſſe: But if (through the terror or tediouſneſſe of the ſeas) they diuerted their courſe, that then (as impious and wicked varlets) they were cauſers of great calamities that ſhould fall vpon their region.
                  This done and the boate lanched out, thoſe maritine Aethiopians are ſaid to keepe that day holy, and to doe ſacrifice to the ſeas, praying for their good ſucceſſe, and that their expiation, may take good effect: When Iambolus and his companion were thus committed to the

mercy of the ſea, and had beene long toſſed in ſtormes and tempeſts, after foure monthes ſayling, they arriued into an Iſland in forme round, and in compaſſe about fiue thouſand ſtadia, into which when they were entred, ſome of the Inhabitants came to meete them, and ſome others runing towards them (being greatly amazed, and wondering at the comming of ſtrangers into their Iſland) receiued them very curteouſly, and bountifully offered them ſuch things as their country afforded.
                  The Inhabitants of that Iſland, are nothing like to vs, either in ſtature or manners, for though they carry the ſame proportion of body and members, yet bee they farre taller then wee are, the moſt of them being aboue foure cubits hie, and notwithſtanding their exceeding height, their bones bee not ſolid like ours, but flexible like nerues or ſinewes, by which meanes they exceed vs in agility and nimbleneſſe of body, and they are ſo ſtrong with al, as what euer they graſp with their hands can hardly bee wreſted from them. They be a very beautiful, comely and well featured people, and their skinnes ſo ſmooth and ſo ſlike, as you can hardly perceiue any wrinkle or haire vpon any part of their bodies.
                  The hollowneſſe of their eares is much wider then ours, and their tongues as farre different, for nature (aſſiſted with their ingenious wits and diſpoſitions) hath indued them with this extraordinary priuiledge, that their tongues are naturally ſo cleft and deuided from the roote to the tip, as they ſeeme to haue euery one two tongues, by which meanes they doe not onely ſpeake a humaine and intelligible voice, but they can truely imitate the chirping and ſinging of diuers birdes likewiſe, and that which is more ſtrange, they will talke and

conferre with two ſeuerall perſons, of ſeuerall matters, at one and the ſelfe ſame time, the one part of the tongue ſpeaking and giuing anſwere vnto one, and the other part to the other: The ayre is there very pure and wholeſome all the yeere long (according to the ſaying of the poet, that apples, peares and grapes will rotte and corrupt vpon the trees and vines) and the daies and nights are euer of an equall length, and when the Sunne is directly ouer their heads, there is no ſhadow of any thing towards the South.
                  All the people of one ſtocke or kindred liue together, ſo as they exceed not the number of foure hundred: their chiefeſt abode is in the fields, for the earth naturally produceth great ſtore of fruits, without tillage or trauell, in ſo much as through the vertue and quality of the Iſland, and temperature of the aire, they haue more then they are able to ſpend.
                  There be a kinde of reeds growing in that Iſland, which beare great ſtore of fruite like vnto white vetches, the fruite of theſe reedes they gather and ſprinkle with warme water, and then euery graine will bee as bigge as a Doues egge, which they afterwards grinde or beate into meale, and make thereof a kinde of bread, which in taſte is moſt pleaſant and delicious.
                  There bee many great ſprings, and fountaines of water, whereof ſome bee hot and ſerue for bathes, and to cure diſeaſes, and ſome cold, and withall maruelous ſweete and very phiſicall likewiſe.
                  They be a people very induſtrious and greedy of learning, and eſpecially of Aſtrology: Their letters which they vſe in ſence and ſignification, are eight and twentie, but their carecters are but ſeuen in number; for euery

caractar hath foure ſeuerall ſignifications or interpretations, and they write not from the left hand towards the right, as wee doe, but beginne at the top and write downewards.
                  They be very long of life, the moſt of them liuing the full age of a hundred and fifty yeeres, and (for the moſt They haue a time prefixed how long to liue. part) without any ſickneſſe at all: and if any hap to fall either into an ague or any other infirmity of body, they are compelled by their law to die forth-with: They are alſo appointed how long they ſhall liue, which age when they haue accompliſhed, they willingly procure their owne deathes, ſome by one meanes and ſome by an other: There is an herbe in that countrie, vpon which if any one lay his body, hee falleth into a ſweete and delectable An admirable herbe. ſlumber, and in that ſheepe departeth his life without paine.
                  Mariages they haue none, but women bee there common to all, & children equally loued of al and brought vp in common amongſt al, ſo as no man can ſay, this is my wife, or this is my child: yet oftentimes they take the children from their nurſes, leaſt mothers ſhould afterwards reknowledge their owne ſonnes: through which community it happeneth that (being voide of ambition and affectation, or curious deſire of that which nature denieth them) they liue quietly, and peaceably without ſedition or diſſention. There bee alſo in that Iſland certaine beaſts, which though they bee little of body, yet in reſpect A rare beaſt. of their nature and vertue of their bloud, they bee moſt rare and admirab, they bee of a round body like vnto a Tortoiſe or Seacrable, and haue two lines croſſing their middle, vpon euery end whereof ſtandeth an eare and an eye, ſo as they heare with foure eares and ſee with

foure eyes, and yet haue but one belly or paunch that receiueth their meate, and round about their body grow many feete, with which they can goe backward and forward at their pleaſure, the bloud of this beaſt is ſaid to be of a maruelous ſtrange efficacy, for if a body bee cut and mangled into peeces (ſo as it appeare to haue life in it): & be anointed with the bloud of this beaſt, euery part wil inſtantly grow to other, and the body will bee whole againe.
                  Euery family or company that liue together, doe likewiſe breed and noriſh vp great birds of a diuerſe nature, and by thoſe birds they make triall how their children will prooue afterwards, for they ſet them when they bee very young vpon the backes of the birds, and if they ſit faſt when the birds biginne to flutter and flie, without feare of falling, thoſe children they bring vp, but if they ſhew themſelues daſtardly and timerous, they are reiected and thruſt away, and ſuffered to liue no longer, as beeing vnprofitable for any excerciſe of the minde: And the eldeſt of euery kindred or company that ſo liue together is Lord, and commander ouer the reſt, to whom they yeeld obedience, as to their King, and when he accompliſheth the age of an hundred and fifty yeers, he depriueth himſelf of life (for ſo their law commands) and hee that is next vnto him in age taketh the gouernment vpon him: The ſea that incloſeth the Iſland is very boyſterous & rugged, yet is the water moſt pleaſant & delightſome in taſte, the North pole and many other ſtarres which are ſeene in our Horiſon appeare not in theirs.
                  There bee other ſeuen Iſlands of like quantitie, and of like diſtance one from an other, and indued with like Seuen other Jſlands. manners and lawes as this is: The Inhabitants of theſe

Ilands vſe the fruites of the earth (which ſhee bountifully affordeth of her owne accord) very ſparingly, for their dyet is ſimple, and they couet for nothing but to ſuffice nature, they eate fleſh ſome-times boylde and ſometimes broyld, and dreſſe their meate them-ſelues, reiecting the Arte of Cookery, and all ſeaſoning of their meates with ſalte or ſpices, as friuolous and vnneceſſary. They worſhip the Firmament, the Sunne, and the reſt of the celeſtiall bodyes, they catch diuerſe ſorts of fiſhes and birds, and they haue great ſtore of Olyue trees and Vines, which naturally hold their increaſe, ſo as they haue Oliues and Grapes in aboundance, without trauell or coſt.
                  Theſe Ilands alſo produce ſerpents that bee great ones, but nothing hurtfull, the fleſh whereof is maruelous ſweete and delicious. Their garments are of a ſine white Cotton or Downe, which groweth in the middle of Reedes, which being dyed with the Iuyſe of theſe ſea fiſhes that coloureth purple: they make themſelues purple garments thereof. There be alſo diuerſe ſorts of liuing creatures of ſtrange and almoſt incredible natures: They obſerue a certaine order and ſtrict courſe in their dyet, eating but onely one kinde of meate vppon one day, for ſome day they eate fiſhes, an other day fowles, an other fleſh of beaſts, and ſome-times Oyle, and the table where they eate theyr meate is very meane and ſimple.
                  They bee addicted to diuerſe exerciſes, for ſome ſerue and are ſerued in courſe, ſome are imployed in fiſhing, ſome in fowling, ſome in ſundry Artes and manuall occupations, and all of them in generall are buſied in ſome

one thing or other that redoundeth to their common good.
                  In their ſacred ceremonies, and vpon holy dayes, they ſing lawdes and himnes in honor of their gods, and eſpecially of the Sunne, to whome they dedicate themſelues and their Iſlands.
                  They bury their dead bodyes vpon the ſea coaſt, couering the carcaſſe with ſand, that by the flowing and inundation of the waters, there may bee a great heape of ſand in the place where the corpes are buryed.
                  The canes whereof they eate the fruite (as they ſay) doe increaſe and decreaſe according to the diſpoſition of the Moone: The water of their fountaines is both ſweet and holſome, alwayes hotte, vnleſſe it bee mingled either with wine or cold water.
                  When Iambolus and his companion had liued in that Iland ſeauen yeares, they were forced to depart, for the Ilanders held them to bee euill liuers, and of bad behauiour and conuerſation, and therefore prouiding their ſhippe ready, and victualling her, they ſet forward on their iourney, though fore againſt their wills, and at the foure months end they came to the King of India, by whome they were afterwards ſafely conducted through Perſia, and brought into Greece.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of the Iland called Taprobane and of the manners of the Inhabitants. CAP. 26.
               
                  TAPROBANE before mans venterouſneſſe (by exquiſit, ſearching into Of Taprobane. euery creeke and corner of the ſea) had truely and throughly diſcouered it, was held to be (as it were) an other world, & that wherein the Antipodes were ſuppoſed to dwell: But Alexander the great, by his proweſſe and valour, remooued the ignorance of this common error, which did much augment and increaſe the glory of his name: for Oneſicritus the praefect of his nauie, being by him ſent to ſearch out what manner of land it was, what commodities it yeelded, and how and by whom it was inhabited, made it moſt apparent and manifeſt vnto vs.
               The length of the Iland is ſeauen thouſand ſtadia, and fiue thouſand in breadth, and it hath a riuer running through the middle of it, that deuideth it into two parts: Some part of this Iland is wholy repleniſhed with beaſts, and Elephants, which be farre bigger then India breedeth any, and ſome part of it is well peopled: There bee great ſtore of Pearles and precious ſtones of diuerſe kindes: It is ſituated Eaſt and Weſt, and beginneth at the ſea called fretum Indioe: from Praſla a countrie in India into Taprobane, at the firſt diſcouery thereof, was the ſpace of 25. dayes ſayling, but it was with ſuch boates as the riuer of Nilus carried, that were made of reedes,

for at this day with our ſhippes it is not aboue ſeuen dayes ſayle.
               The ſea that deuideth the Iland in twaine, in many places is very ſhallow, being not aboue ſeuen foote deepe, but in ſome other places againe, the channell is ſo exceeding deepe that no anchor can reache the bottome: In ſayling they obſerue not the courſe of the ſtarres, for the North pole and the ſeauen ſtarres doe neuer appeare to their view, and the Moone is no longer ſeene in their Horizon, but from the ſixt day after his change to the ſixteenth, but the cleere and radiant ſtarre called Canopus ſhineth there very bright, and the Sunne riſeth vppon their right hands and ſetteth vppon their left. With coyne they were altogether vnacquainted, vntill the raigne of the Emperour Claudius, and it is reported that they were greatly amazed at the ſight of money, becauſe it was ſtamped with ſundry figures and ſimilitudes, and yet in weight and ſubſtance was all one: In ſtature and bigneſſe of body, they exceed all other men, of what nation ſo euer.
               They dye and coulour their hayre browne, their heires bee gray or blew, their viſage grimme and ſterne, and their voyce harſhe and terrible. Thoſe which dye an vntimely death, liue commonly till they bee a hundred yeare old, but thoſe which ſpend out the full courſe of nature, liue till they bee maruelous old, farte exceeding mans ordinary frayltie: They neuer ſleepe in the day time, and but part of the night neyther, for they riſ
                     •
                   exceeding early: Their buildings bee meane and lowe, and their victualls alwayes alike, they haue great ſtore of Apples, but no Vines.
               
                  
They honor Hercules as their God. Their Kings are elected as well by the voyces of the commons, as by the nobility, for the peoples care is to chooſe one of great clemencie, and vnprooueable manners, and ſuch a one as is well ſtriken in yeares, and withall that hath no children, for he which is a father, is not there admitted to be a King, be he neuer ſo good and vertuous: and if the King at any time during his raigne, hap to haue a child, he is therefore inſtantly depoſed, and depriued of all Princely iuriſdiction: and this they doe, for becauſe they will not haue their kingdome become hereditary: Moreouer, bee their King neuer ſo iuſt and vpright, yet will they not commit the abſolute gouernment wholy into his hands, for to the end he ſhould not be ſole Iudge in capitall cauſes, there be forty Rectors or Guides annexed vnto him as his aſſiſtants, and if the iudgement of the King, and his forty aſſiſtants ſeeme partiall or diſtaſtfull to any one, he may from them appeale to the people, who haue likewiſe ſeuenty Iudges allowed them for the determining of ſuch cauſes as come to them by way of appeale, and the ſentence that is pronounced by theſe ſeuenty Iudges muſt of neceſſity ſtand inuiolable.
               The King in his apparell differeth much from the people, and if he be found guilty of any offence, and thereof conuicted, he dyeth for it, yet not with ſuch a death as any one ſhould lay violent hands vpon him, but by common conſent hee is ſhut vp in ſome cloſe place from the ſight and company of all men, and there famiſhed to death.
               This people bee generally addicted to husbandry, and hunting of Tygers and Elephants, for other common beaſts they little regarde: and ſome delight in fiſhing for ſhell fiſhes, the ſhells weereof bee ſo bigge, as one ſhell

will make a houſe ſufficient to containe a whole family: The greater part of this Iland is burned with the heate of the Sunne, and is therefore deſert, vppon the ſide of the Iland beateth a ſea that is very greene. They eſteeme much of gold, whereof, and of all ſorts of precious ſtones, they garniſh and beautifie their pots. They haue great ſtore of Marbles and Margarites, and very bigge ones.
               And theſe bee the people, countries and nations, whoſe manners, cuſtomes and inſtitutions, are commended vnto The concluſion of the booke. vs by Hiſtoriographers, and which by any meanes I could collect out of them: yet I confeſſe there be many other, which I haue eyther wholy omitted, or lightly paſſed ouer, becauſe I could not write more of them, than I found in other Authors, hauing neuer by trauelling into thoſe parts, beene eye witneſſe of them my ſelfe, nor could otherwiſe attaine to the perfect knowledge thereof, neyther doe I thinke it poſſible for mee or any man elſe, to know and declare the manners of all nations, but God onely, to whom nothing is hidden, nor nothing vnpoſſible, for hee onely it is that firſt laide the foundation of the earth, it was hee that firſt founded the depth and bottome of the ſea, and pointed vnto vs the paſſages through the deepe, hee onely it is that ſo bountifully hath beſtowed vpon vs, wealth, dignities, honor and riches, and all other commodities neceſſary for our beeing, and hee it is that hath allotted vnto euery one his profeſſion and courſe of life wherein to imploy himſelfe, for ſome hee hath ordained to bee husbandmen, permitting then to growe wealthy by vnripping the bowels of the earth, to ſome others hee hath giuen the ſea, wiſhing them to prouide their liuings, ſome by fiſhing, and ſome by

merchandize, ſome others he hath addicted to the ſtudy of Sciences and Philoſophie, that thereby they may attaine to honor and eſtimation, and ſome others he hath put in places of authority to gouerne and praecede the reſt: And therefore it is no maruell, that all men are not of one condition, nor of one nature, nor yet indued with like manners, ſeeing wee perceiue ſuch difference and variety in kingdomes and countries, as that one country produceth white people, an other ſwaithy, an other tawny, and ſome cleane black, or like vnto flowers which grow in Aſſyria: and euen ſo hath God appointed, that people ſhould be of variable mindes and diſpoſitions, as other things are, and that euery one ſhould reſt contented with that courſe of life, that God hath appointed for him.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The manners of diuerſe nations, collected out of the workes of NICHOLAS DAMASCEN.
            
            
               THE Thyni (which bee a people of Of the Thyni. Thrace) receiue ſuch as haue ſuffered ſhipwracke, or fallen into pouerty by their owne defaults, very courteouſly and friendly, and all ſtrangers likewiſe which come willingly vnto them, are highly honored; but thoſe which come perforce, whether they will or no are as ſeuerely puniſhed.
            The Aritoni kill no kinde of beaſt, they haue their Oracles Of the Ariton
                     •
                  . written in lots, which they keepe in golden couers.
            The Dardani (a people of Illyrium) bee waſhed onely Of the Dardani. three times in all their liues, that is to ſay, when they bee borne, when they be marryed, and when they lye a dying.
            The Galactophagi (a people of Scythia) liue not in Of the Gelactophagi. houſes as moſt of the other Scythians doe, their ſuſtenance conſiſteth for the moſt part of Mares milke, which ſerueth them both for meat and drinke: They bee ſeldome ouer-come in battaile for that their prouiſion of victuals is in euery place and at all turnes in readineſſe. This people forced Darius to returne home without conqueſt: they bee maruellous iuſt one towards an other, as hauing both wiues and wealth in common to all: they ſalute old men by calling them their fathers, the yong men their children, and their equals brethren: of this people was Anacharſis, one of the ſeuen wiſe men, who came into Greece to learne the laws & ordinances of other nations:

               Homer remembreth this people, where he ſaith, the Myſi fight nigh at hand, the Agaui milke Mares, and the Galactophagi and Abij be moſt iuſt men. And the reaſon why he calleth them Abij, is, either becauſe they would not till the earth, or for that they liued without houſes, or elſe becauſe they onely vſed bowes in the warres (for a bow of the Poets is often called Bios: there is not one amongſt them all (as is reported) that is either ſtirred with enuy, ſwelled with hatred, or ſtriken with feare, by reaſon of their exceeding great Iuſtice, and communitie of all things. The women there be as warlike as the men, and go with them to the warres when need requireth, and therefore it may well be true, that the Amazons be women of ſuch valerous and generous ſpirits, as that they went forth with an army vnto Athens and Scicily, at ſuch time as their abode was about the poole of Maeotis.
            The women of Iberia do once euery yeare being their Of the Iberi. whole yeares worke, into an open and publicke place, in preſence of all the people where certaine men be elected by voyces, as Iudges to cenſure of their labours, and thoſe which by them are adiudged moſt laborious, are moſt honored, and in higheſt eſtimation: they haue alſo a girdle of a certaine meaſure, within the compaſſe wherof, if the belly of any will not bee comprehended, they be thereby much diſgraced.
            The Vmbrici in their battels againſt their enimies, Of the Vmbrici. hold it vnfitting for the vanquiſhed to ſuruiue, and that it is neceſſary eyther to ouer-come the enemy, or to bee ſlaine themſelues: This people when any controuerſie happeneth amongſt themſelues, fight armed, as if they made warre againſt their open enimies, and hee which

killeth his aduerſary in fight, is ſuppoſed to haue the iuſteſt cauſe.
            The Celtae (a people inhabiting neere the Ocean) account it a diſgrace for any one to withdraw himſelfe, or Of the Celtae. leane his body to a wall, or houſe: when any inundation commeth towards them from the ſea, they arme themſelues to meete the floud, and make reſiſtance vntill they be drowned, neuer retiring back, nor ſhewing the leaſt feare of death any manner of way: They weare their ſwords aſwell when they bee occupied in the affaires of their common-wealth, as in the warres, and a greater puniſhment is infllicted vpon thoſe which kill ſtrangers then Cittizens, for the firſt is puniſhed with death, the other with baniſhment: And thoſe aboue all others bee moſt honoured, which atchiuing any victory, haue thereby purchaſed any ground for their publicke vſe: the gates of their houſes be neuer ſhut but ſtand alwayes open.
            Amongſt the Pedalians (a people of India) not hee Of the Pedalij. which is cheefe in the ſacrifice, but hee that is moſt prudent of all thoſe which be preſent, deuineth, and they deſire nothing of the gods in their prayers but Iuſtice, onely the Prayſij or Phraſij ſuccour with ſuſtenance their neighbours afflicted by famine.
            The people called Telchines dwelled firſt in the Ile of Creete, and afterwards inhabited the Ile of Cyprus alſo: Of the Telchines. from whence they remooued into Rhodes, and inioyde that Iland, where they began to bee very malicious and enuious, and exerciſing themſelues in Mechanicall Artes and imitating the workes of their elders, they were the firſt that erected the Idoll of Telchinian Minerua, which

is as much to ſay, as enuious Minerua.
            It is not lawfull amongſt the Tarteſſians, for the younger to giue teſtimony againſt the elder. Of the Tarteſſij
            
            The people of Lucania excerciſe iudgement and inflict puniſhment as well for luxury and ſloth, as for any other Of the Lucani offence what-ſo-euer, and hee which is proved to lend any thing to a luxurious perſon, is fined at the value of the thing lent.
            Amongſt the Saunites or Samnites is once euery yeare a publike Iudgement pronounced, both of young men Of the Samnites. and maides, and which of the youngmen is adiudged beſt, by the cenſure of the Iudges, ſhall firſt make his choyſe which of the Virgins hee will haue to his wife, and the ſecond to him, chooſeth next, and ſo of all the reſt in order.
            The Limyrnij haue their wiues in common, their children be likewiſe brought vp at their common charge, vntill Of the Limyrnij they accompliſh the age of fiue yeares, and in the ſixt yeare they be brought together, into one place, where all the fathers be aſſembled to make coniecture whom euery childe doth moſt reſemble, which done they aſſigne vnto euery father the child that is likeſt vnto him, and by that meanes euery one acknowledgeth his owne child as neere as he can, and bringeth him vp as his owne, whether he be ſo or noe.
            The Sauromatae or Sarmatae pamper and gorge themſelues with meate for the ſpace of three daies together, Of the Sauromatae. that they may be throughly filled: they obey their wiues in all things, as their Ladies and Miſtreſſes, and noe maide there is admitted to marry, before ſhe hath beene the death of ſom enimy.
            
               
The Cercetae puniſh all offenders ſo ſeuerely, as they Of the Cercetae. prohibite them to ſacrifice: And if any marryner or gouernor of a boate, ſplit, or runne his ſhippe or boate vpon a rocke, all men that paſſe by him ſpit at him in contempt.
            The Moſyni keepe their Kings in ſtrong caſtles, and if Of the Moſyni any of them be adiudged careleſſe of the common-wealth hee is there famiſhed to death: The graine which the earth yeeldeth there, is equally diſtributed amongſt the people, ſauing ſome ſmall part thereof which is reſerued in common, to releeue ſtrangers.
            The Phryges or Pryges abſtaine from al ſwearing, ſo as they will neither ſweare themſelues, nor conſtraine others Of the Phryges to ſweare: And if any man amongſt them kill a labouring or draught oxe, or priuily taketh or ſtealeth any inſtrumēt of husbandry, he is puniſhed with death: They bury not their Prieſts when they bee dead in the ground, but place or ſet them vpright vpon pillers of ſtone of tenne cubits high.
            The Lycij attribute more honor to their women then Of the Lycij. to men, and all of them take their names after their mothers: In like manner they make their daughters their heires, and not their ſonnes, And if any freeman be conuicted of theft, hee is puniſhed with perpetuall ſeruitude: They giue not their teſtimony in deciding controuerſies at an inſtant, but alwaies at the Months end that they may haue time inough to delibrate what teſtimony to giue.
            The Piſidae at their bankets ſacrifice the firſt of their feaſts to their parents, as vnto the Gods, the protectors Of the Piſidae. of alliance and friendſhippe; Their ſentence for the miſuſing of things laid to gage is moſt ſeuere, for hee which is there conuicted deceytfully to put them to other vſe, then

taken in adultery, he together with the addultereſſe woman, are for a puniſhment led through the citty ſitting vpon an aſſe, and that for the ſpace of certaine dayes appoynted.
            The Aethiopians attribute the chiefeſt honour vnto their ſiſters, and the Kings leaue their ſiſters children to Of the Ethiopians. ſucceed them in their Kingdomes, and not their owne, but if there bee no ſuch children, to whome the right of ſucceſſion belongeth, then they chooſe for their King hee that is moſt indued with valour and comlineſſe of perſonage: piety and iuſtice are much practiſed amongſt them; dwelling houſes they haue none but liue altogether without doors, and when (as many times it happeneth) much of their goods lieth abroad in the common waies, yet they be ſo true as no one ſtealeth any thing from them.
            Amongſt the Buaei (a people of Libia or affricke) Of the Buaei. a man hath dominion ouer the men, and a woman ouer the women.
            The Baſuliei (a people of Lybia) when they make wars ioyne their battells in the night and keepe peace all the Of the Baſuliei day.
            The Dapſolybies aſſemble them-ſelues together into Of the Dapſolybies. one place, and marry at the ſame time they be ſo aſſembled after the ſetting of the ſeauen ſtarres: their manner of marrying is thus; after they haue banqueted a while their lights or torches (for their meetings for this purpoſe are in the night) are put forth and extinguiſhed, and then they go vnto the women ſitting by themſelues in the darke, and which of the women any man ſhal take at aduentures, her hee hath to his wife.
            Amongſt the Ialchleueians (a people of Libya, (when Of the Ialchleueians. many corriuals goe about to obtaine the loue of one

woman, they ſuppe all together with the father of the woman they deſire in mariage, where they ſpend the ſupper time in taunting and ſcoffing one another with pleaſant quippes and Ieſts, and hee whome the woman doth moſt arride, and beſt conceiue of hath her to his wife.
            The Sardolybies make no prouiſion of houſhold ſtuffe, but onely of a cuppe and a ſword. Of the Sardolibies.
            
            The Alytemij (a people of Libia) chooſe the moſt pernicious Kings, they can get, but for the reſt of the people hee Of the Alitemij which is moſt iuſt, is of greateſt dignity.
            The Nomades (a people of Libia alſo) in their computation Of the Nomades. of times, account by the nights and not by the dayes.
            The Apharantes (a people of Libia) are not diſtinguiſhed and knowne by proper names, as other people bee, Of the Apharantes. they reuyle the Sunne at his ryſing, becauſe hee produceth and bringeth all euills to light, and they account thoſe daughters the beſt, which keepe their virginity longeſt.
            When any of the Baeotians are become banckrupts, Of the Baeoti. and not able to pay their debts, they are brought into the common market place, and there conſtrayned to ſit together and be couered all ouer with a basket, and thoſe which haue this puniſhment inflicted vpon them, are accounted for euer after for infamous perſons, which puniſhment (as ſome thinke) was impoſed vpon the father of Euripydes, who had his beginning from the people of Baeotia.
            The Aſſiryans ſell their virgins in the open market to any that deſire to marry them, and thoſe which be moſt Of the Aſſirij. beautyfull, bee firſt ſould, and then the reſt, but when they come to the moſt deformed they make proclamation

by a common cryer how much mony any one will take to marry them; and ſo by this meanes that which is gotten for the ſaile of the faire virgins, is beſtowed in placing the foule, in like-manner they ioyne together thoſe that in their manners bee moſt like for grauity and humanity.
            With the Perſians that which is eſteemed diſhoneſt to bee done is held vnfitting to bee ſpoken, if any one kill his Of the Perſae. father they eſteeme him a changeling and not a naturall childe, if the King command any one to bee beaten or whipped, hee is as thankefull, as if he had receued a great benefit, becauſe the King remembred him: they which haue many children are for that cauſe regarded of the King, and they teach their children as well to ſpeake the truth as to learne any art whatſoeue
                  •
               .
            Amongſt the Indians when any one is deceiued or cozoned Of the Indi. of that which hee lent or left in truſt with an other, he bringeth not his action againſt him that deceiued him, but imputeth the fault to him ſelfe, becauſe he truſted him: if any one cut of the hand or pull out the eye of an artificer hee is puniſhed with death for it: hee which is guilty of any haynous offence, is by the Kings command ſhauen, which is the greateſt ignominy amongſt them that may bee: when an Indian man dyeth, one of his wiues which hee moſt loued in his life time is layde on the pyle and burned with him: And there is great controuerſie and ſtryfe amongſt them, (euery one hauing their friends to ſpeake and plead for them) who ſhall bee ſhee that ſhall bee burned, with her deceaſed husband, for each one deſireth it.
            The Lacedemonians thinke it not fitting nor honeſt Of the Lacedemonij.
               
to beſtow themſelues in learning any other arts then ſuch as belong to the warres: the men dyet all together in one place, they reuerence all old men as their parents: and as the men haue exerciſes proper to them-ſelues, ſo haue the maides likewiſe to themſelues: It is not lawfull for ſtrangers to dwell at Spatta, nor for a Spartane to trauell into other countries: they giue power and licence to their wiues to take the faireſt men they can finde to beget children of them, whether they be Cittizens or ſtrangers. It is vnſeemly for a Spartane to make any gaine of any thing: their money is made of Lether, and if any man haue either gold or ſiluer found in his houſe, hee dyeth for it: They account it the greateſt glory that may bee, to ſhew themſelues humble and obedient vnto Magiſtrates: and farre more happy are they accounted amongſt them, that dye an honourable death, then thoſe which liue in great proſperity: Their children (by a certaine cuſtome they vſe) are whipped round about a pillar, till moſt of them bee runne away, and thoſe which tarry ſtill vnder the whipps, haue Garlands giuen them for a reward, for they hold it vnhoneſt to take any daſtard for their companions ſchoole-fellowes or friends. Old men when they draw neere their deaths, bee cenſured who of them haue liued well, and who otherwiſe: when an armie is conducted without the limitts of their country, a certaine Prieſt which they call (Pirphorus) that is to ſay, a fire-bearer, maketh and kindleth a fire at the Altar of Iupiter their guide, which fire he carieth before the King, keeping it euer from going out. The King when he goeth to the warres is attended with Prophets and Soothſayers, Phiſitions and Minſtrils, and they vſe Pipes or Flutes in the warres in ſteed of trumpets, and thoſe which fight be adorned with

garlands. All men ariſe to the King to doe him reuerence, but the officers called Ephori: and the King is ſworn before he enter into his Kingdome, to gouerne according to the lawes of the common-wealth.
            The Cretenſes were the firſt of all the Grecians that obeyed Of the Cretenſes. the lawes ordained by King Minos, who was firſt that obtained dominion of the ſea: This Minos when hee inuented and framed thoſe lawes fained that hee learned them of Iupiter, and therefore for the ſpace of nine yeeres, together he would vſually goe vnto a certaine hil, wherein was a denne conſecrated to Iupiter, and euer when hee returned backe, hee brought ſome new lawes to the Cretenſes, as though hee had beene their inſtructed by Iupiter. Of this Minos and his fained conference with Iupiter, Homer ſpeaketh thus. Amongst them (ſaith hee) is the City called Gnoſſus, where Minos who had often conference with the great god Iupiter, raigned nine yeeres.
            
            The Cretenſian children be broght vp altogether in one publike place, and that very hardly and painefully, for they be much accuſtomed to hunting when they bee yong, and to run barefooted, as alſo to goe armed to the Pirrichan vawting or leaping (whereof Pyrrichicus, Cydoniates a Cretenſian born, is ſaid to be the inuentor) which is a very laborious & difficult exerciſe for youth: The men in like maner eate together in one publike place, & by reaſon of their ſuſtenance and prouiſion, all things be indifferently miniſtred vnto them: the gifts or preſents which amongſt them be in moſt requeſt, be weapons.
            The Autariatae, if any of there ſouldiors faint or ſick, by Of the Autariatae. the way, wil rather kil them, then leaue them liuing in a ſtrang place. The Triballi ſet their army in foure ſquadrons, or orders, the firſt ranke conſiſteth of thoſe which Of the Triballi. bee feeble and weake, the next vnto it of ſuch as bee

ſtronge and luſtie, the third of horſe-men, and the laſt of women, which (when all the reſt be put to flight) ſticke to their enemies, ſtill peſtring and afflicting them with their reuilings and skoldings.
            The Cuſiani bewaile thoſe which bee borne into the world, and account them happy and bleſſed that depart Of the Cuſiani. out of this life.
            The Cij whē they haue burned their dead bodies, gather Of the Cij. vp all their bones and beate them to poulder in a morter, and then taking ſhip, they lanch into the deepe, where putting the poulder into a ſiue, they ſcatter and diſperce it in the winde, till all be blowne away and conſumed.
            The Tauri (a people of Scythia) when their King is dead, Of the Tauri. bury with his body ſuch of his friends as hee loued beſt in his life time, and on the other ſide the King when any of his friends die, cutteth off part of the lap of his eare, either more or leſſe as his deceaſed friend was of deſerts.
            The Sindi, when they bury any one, looke how many Of the Sindi. enemies hee ſlew in his life time, iuſt ſo many fiſhes doe they caſt into his ſepulcher with him.
            The Colchi bury not their dead bodies in the ground, but hang them vp vpon trees. Of the Colchi.
            
            The Panebi (a people of Libya) when their King is dead, bury his whole body in the ground, but cut off his Of the Panebi. head, and reſerue it, guilding it with gold, and eſteeming it as a ſacred relicke.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Certaine things concerning America or Braſil, collected out of the Hiſtorie of IOHN LERIVS.
            
               THe Barbarous Americans that inhabite the land of Braſil, be called Tououpinambaltij: 
               The ſtature and diſpoſition of the Barbarians. their bodies bee neither prodigious nor monſtrous, but in ſtature much like vnto ours that liue in Europe: yet be they more luſty and ſtrong then we, ſounder and leſſe ſubiect to diſeaſes, few of them being either lame or blinde, ſo much as of one eye, neither bee any of them deformed, and although they liue vntill they be a hundred and twenty yeeres of age (reckoning their yeeres by the Moones, which computation they onely The age of the Barbarians. obſerue) yet doe few of them wax gray or hore, which argueth the country to bee of a maruellous temperature, which beeing neuer dried with any colds or froſts, hath both herbs, fields and trees euer greene and floriſhing. And the people themſelues being voide of all cares and The Barbarians neglect all world
                     •
                  y things. troubles, which age men before their times, ſeeme as the prouerbe is, as though they had drunk of the fountaine of youth: and for becauſe they goe not into muddy and vnholſome waters or peſtilēt ſprings, which be the cauſes of many diſeaſes, that conſume vs before our time, weaken and make feeble our bodies, excruciate and vexe our mindes, and in the end deſtroy both the one and the other, therefore be they free from all ſuch infirmities: Diſtruſt, coueteouſneſſe, ſtrife, enuy & ambition, haue no place amongſt them, their complexions bee not altogether blacke, but by reaſon of the vehement heate of the Sunne,

ſomewhat ſwarthy, like vnto the Spaniards: Both men, women and children goe altogether naked without couering any part of their bodies, as beeing aſhamed of All Barbarians go naked. their nakedneſſe, nor bee their bodies full of heares (as ſome are of opinion) but euen as any heares appeare vpon their bodies they plucke them off, either with their nailes, or elſe with certaine little pincers or nippers which they haue from the Chriſtians, their beards and the haires that doe grow vpon their eye liddes and eye-browes, they pull vppe by the rootes, the which is the cauſe that many of them bee purblinde and ſquinteyed, which ſame faſhion is vſed of the Peruerſes in the Iſle of Cumana.
            The haire of the hinder partes of their heads they let growe, and ſhaue all the fore part of the heades of their male children when they bee young, beginning at the crowne like vnto the religious order of Munkes, ſuffering it to grow long behinde downe to their neckes like old men.
            In that ſame country there bee certaine herbes of the breadth of two fingers, and ſome-what crooked, which doe grow vp long and rounde, like the reede that couereth the eare of that great millet, which the French men call Arabian wheate, and with two leaues of this herbe, ſtitched together with a cotton threede, ſome old men (but neither young men nor children, nor yet all old men neither) doe couer their priuy partes, and ſometimes alſo they hide them with little rags or clouts; wherin at the firſt ſight, may ſeeme to appeare ſome little ſparke of natural ſhamefaſtneſſe, if the did it for that cauſe, but it is more probable they doe it to hide ſome diſeaſe

or infirmity, where-with thoſe parts bee moleſted and greeued in their old age: Moreouer their cuſtome in that country, is to make a hole in the neither lip of euery child when hee is young, and to put into the hole a certaine bone, poliſhed and made ſmooth and as white as Iuory, in faſhion bigge and ſquare at the one end, and ſharpe at the other, this bone is placed in good and exact order, vpon the broder part of the grinding teeth, and there-with a deuiſe they haue, skrewed in and ſet faſt hauing the ſharpe end ſtanding an inch or two fingers breadth out of the lippe, and is ſo artificially faſtned to their goomes, as they will take it out and put it in againe at their pleaſure: And this ſharpe and white bone they weare onely when they be young, for when they grow in yeeres, that they bee called in their language (Coromi Ovaſſau) that is to ſay tall and well growne ſtripling, then in ſteed of this bone they put into the hole a certaine greene ſtone, beeing a kinde of counterfeit Emerald.
            The Tououpinambaultij will often times for their delight take theſe ſtones out of their lippes, and put their tongues through the holes, ſo as they may ſeeme to thoſe that behold them to haue two mouthes, but whether this ſtrang ſpectacle bee pleaſing, or whether it doth make them more deformed, it is eaſie for to bee iudged: Some of them alſo, not contented to carry theſe greene ſtones in their lips, make holes through both their cheekes, and put ſtones into them for the ſame purpoſe.
            As for their noſes, whereas the mid-wiues with vs, vſe when a child is new borne to ſtretch forth his noſe with their fingers, to make it more comely and ſharpe, the cuſtome of the people of America is cleane contrary,

for they account thoſe children moſt comely that haue the flatteſt noſes, and therefore as ſoone as an infant is borne, they preſſe his noſe downe flat to his face, with their thombes (much like as they vſe to doe, to certaine whelpes in France:) in this point thoſe people diſagree very much, from the Americans that dwell in a certaine country of the Kingdome of Paruania, who are ſaid to haue ſuch great noſes, as they vſe to hange at them, in golden threeds, Emeralds, Saphires, and other little ſtones both white and red.
            Theſe Braſilians die and varniſh their bodies with diuers paintings and collours, ſtayning their legges and theighes ſo blacke, with the iuiſe of a certaine fruite, which they call Genipat, as they ſeeme to ſuch as behold them a farre off, to weare blacke breeches like Churchmens ſloppes: and that iuiſe which is ſtrained or preſſed out of that blacke fruite called Genipat, entreth ſo deepe into their skinnes, as it will hardly be got out in ten or fifteene daies, though they waſh them neuer ſo often in that time.
            They weare alſo about their neckes a Iewell made of a kinde of bone that is very ſmooth and ſlike, and as white as Alablaſter, this bone they call Yaci (borrowing that name of the moone, which in their language is ſo called) it is aboue two handfull long, and is tied about their neckes with a cotten threed, and ſo hangeth downe vpon their breaſts.
            In like manner they poliſh and make ſmooth and euen with a ſtone they haue, diuers little peeces of ſhelles workeing them till they bee thinne and round like vnto a penny, and then boring a hole in the middle of them, they put a great many together vpon a cotton threede,

and weare them about their neckes like a chaine, theſe chaines in their language bee called (Bou-re) and they weare them in imitation of the little chaines of gold, which are vſually worne amongſt Chriſtians, and that which of many is called Buccinum, may very well bee the ſame, whereof wee ſee many women to weare girdles with vs. Theſe barbarous people likewiſe make theſe chaines, they call Bou re of a certaine kinde of wood that is blacke and harde, and namely, as Matheolus witneſeth of the tree called Sicomorus, which is much like vnto a wilde figge tree, and this tree is much vſed in thoſe chaines, becauſe in weight and brightneſſe it is very like vnto Iette.
            Furthermore the Americanes haue great ſtore of hennes, the breede whereof they firſt had from the Portingals, from theſe hennes they plucke all the white fethers, and with their inſtruments of iron (which now they haue) and before when they had none of thoſe inſtruments, then with ſharpe ſtones, they hacke and chappe into very ſmall peeces the ſofteſt of thoſe fethers, and putting them, when they bee chopped ſmall into hot and ſeething water, die them with a certaine red collour of Braſile, this being done they annoint their bodies with a clammie gum, for to make the fethers ſticke on, and then couer and decke themſelues all ouer both bodie, armes and legges with thoſe fethers, painting them alſo with diuers collours, ſo as they ſeeme to bee couered with a downe, or ſoft wooll like vnto young pigions, and other birds new hatched.
            Wherevpon it is verie likely, that when diuers of our Countrimen came firſt into thoſe coaſtes, and ſawe them ſo attired, and not ſearching out the reaſon

thereof, ſpread abroade this rumor, that the barbarous Americans were hairy all ouer their bodies, though the matter bee farre otherwiſe, for they bee not naturally ſo, but this rumor aroſe by the ignorance of the cauſe, and beeing once ſpred abroade was eaſily beleeued to bee true.
            There is one hath written that the Cumani vſe to annoint themſelues, with a certaine gumme or clammy ointment, and then trimme themſelues with fethers of diuers collours, like theſe Americans.
            The manner how the Tovovpinamkij (for ſo they bee alſo called) attire their heads is thus, beſides the ſhauing of the fore-part of their heads, in manner of a Monkes crowne, and the haires of the hinder partes, hanging downe long to their neckes (as is ſayd) their manner is to weare frontlets or ornaments for their fore-heads of fethers of ſundry collours, orderly diſpoſed and ſet together, theſe frontlets doe much reſemble the Periwigs, vſed to bee worne, by noble women, who may iuſtly bee ſaid to receiue that kinde of attire from the Barbarians: they be called in their language Yempenambi.
            
            They weare earings alſo made of very white bones, not much vnlike vnto thoſe bones which (as wee haue ſayd before) yong men put into the holes of their lips: In that country is a birde which they call Toucan, all her body is as blacke as a rauen, and about her gorge ſhe hath a ring of downy fethers that be yellow, and vnder that an other ring of vermillion collour, from this part of the birde that is yellow, they pull of the skinne (the birde beeing neuer the worſe) and drie it, and ſo lay a round peece thereof vpon each of their cheekes, making them for to ſticke on with a kinde of waxe that they had which they

call Trayetic: which beeing faſtened and made fit, one would thinke they had bridles in their mouthes, and that the yellow rounds were boſſes guilded with gold.
            Theſe people, if they either prepare themſelues to the warres, or (according to their cuſtome and ſollemne pompe) to kill any captiue, to be deuoured, to the end that nothing may bee wanting, to make them fine and braue, they put on their garments, ſettle on their cappes, put bracelets vpon their armes, of diuers coloured fethers, as greene, red, yellow, blew, and ſuch like, ſo artificially and cunningly compacted and ioyned together, with ſlender Canes, and cotton threedes, as I thinke there is ſcarce any imbroderer in all France, that can ſet in order, and make fit thoſe fethers, with more induſtrie and curioſitie then they do: in ſo much as the garments wouen and trimmed in this preciſe manner, may be thought to bee made of a hairie kind of ſilke: the ſame kind of trimming do they likewiſe beſtow vppon their woodden clubbes.
            The laſt kind of their garments are made of Eſtridge fethers, which in colour bee browne or ruſſet, and which they get from their borderers, (wherby we may gueſſe, that thoſe great birds be bred in thoſe parts) the garments be made in this manner:
            They ſow all the quilles of the fethers together in ranke one by another, diſpoſing of them ſo orderly, as no one fether ſtand out longer than another, which done, they put the one ſide to the other, and make it round like a roſe or canopie: and this ſtrange garment in their language is called Araroye.
            
            This bundell they put vppon their backes, binding it faſt with a cotton threede, and the ſtalkes neareſt vnto their skinnes, wherewith when they be decked & arrayed,

they ſeeme as though they carried vpon their backs, a cage or coupe to put young chickins in.
            Thoſe which would be accounted moſt warlike, (that they may better manifeſt their ſtrength, & ſhew that they haue ſlaine many enemies, and alſo for a vaunt how many captiues they haue killed, to be deuoured) cutte and gaſh their breaſts, armes, and thighes, and then ſtaine and color the wounds and gaſhes with a certaine blacke duſt, the prints of which gaſhes remain in their fleſh to their deaths, repreſenting to thoſe which behold them, breſt-plates and ſloppes cut after the Heluetian manner: When they giue themſelues to banquetting, carrouſing, and dauncing, (wherin they ſpend much time) the more to ſtirre vp their minds thereunto, beſides their horrible clamors, outcries, and houlings, they haue a certaine fruite that hath a hard ſhell, in forme and bigneſſe like vnto a Cheſnut: out of this ſhell they take the kernell, and put litle ſtones into the place where the kernell was, ſo tying a great many of them vpon a threed, put them vppon their legges, like vnto bels vſed here in England by morris dancers: no leſſe noiſe would they make in their hopping and skipping, if the ſhels of ſnayles were vſed in the ſame manner, which do not much differ from thoſe ratling inſtruments they vſe in dancing And in theſe things the barbarous people exceedingly delight, and take ſurpaſſing pleaſure in them when they be brought vnto them.
            In that Countrey alſo groweth a certaine kind of tree, the fruite whereof in faſhion and thickeneſſe is like vnto an Eſtridge egge, through which they bore a hole, in ſuch manner and faſhion as boyes with vs bore holes in nuttes to make Whirligigges, and put therein little ſtones, or the bigger cornes or graines of millet, or any other conuenient

thing, and then putting through the hole a ſticke of a foote and a halfe long, make thereof an inſtrument which they call Maraca, which will make a huge noyſe and rattle lowder than a ſwines bladder with peas in it: & therfore thoſe barbarous people carry them euer about with them in their hands.
            And thus farre haue I ſpoken in briefe, of the diſpoſition, manners, cuſtomes, apparell, and behauior vſed by the Tovovpinambaltii.
            
            There is brought vnto them from the Chriſtians a curled or wrinkled cloth, ſome red, ſome greene, and ſome yellow, whereof they make them all manner of garments, theſe the Chriſtians do giue vnto theſe barbarous people, and haue for them in exchange, victuals, marmoſets, munkies, Parrats, Braſile wood, cotton, Indian pepper, and many ſuch like things which are very good merchandize: And moſt of them weare looſe and flaggring breeches, & all the parts of their bodies elſe bare, ſome of them againe will weare no breeches, but a cote reaching downe to their buttockes, where with when they be clothed and readie to go abroade, they will behold themſelues oftentimes, and inſtantly put it off againe, and leaue it at home, vntill it be their humour to weare it again, which maketh all our people that behold them to laugh at them, and in like manner do they with their ſhirts and caps.
            But for as much as can be ſaid of the externall habit of their bodies, both of men and children, I ſuppoſe I haue ſpoken ſufficiently, and therefore if out of this my deſcription, any one deſire to repreſent vnto his mind one of theſe barbarous men, let him firſt imagine, that he beholds the ſhadow and reſemblance of a naked man, with all his members and lineamentall proportion fitly framed and

ſet together, the haires of his bodie plucked off with pincers, all the fore-part of his head ſhauen, with holes in his lippes and cheekes, in which be put either ſharpe bones or greene ſtones, eare rings thruſt through his eares, his bodie dyed with diuers colours, his thighes and legges ſtained and coloured with that blacke painting called by them Genipat, and about his necke a chaine made of the ſhell which they call Vygnoll, and then you ſhall ſee and eaſily diſcerne the perfect picture of thoſe that liue in that countrey.
            The Tovovpinambaltian women do vſually carry their little children in their armes, wrapped and ſwadled in a Cotton ſcarffe, who imbrace and wind about their mothers ſides with both their legges: They haue beddes alſo made of Cotton like nettes, and hanged vppe from the ground: Their beſt fruite is that which they call Ananas.
            
            But now if you will imagine in your mind, a barbarous man in another faſhion, he ſhall be diſrobed of that ridiculous attire and anticke habite, and his whole bodie dawbed with a glewiſh and ſlimie gumme, and their fethers chopped ſmall, ſhall be caſt vppon his bodie: and when he is attired with this artificiall Wooll, or Feather-downe, how fine a fellow hee will ſeeme vnto you, I neede not to ſhew.
            Moreouer, whether he retaine his naturall colour, or be diſguiſed in diuers colours, or in fethers: yet let him haue thoſe garments, cappe, and fether bracelets, which wee haue deſcribed, and then certainely he is arrayed in the beſt manner he can be: but if you pleaſe to giue him his garment made of that curled cloth, and (as we haue ſaid their cuſtome is) to cloath him with his cote, all the other parts

of his bodie being naked, and one ſleeue yellow, and the other greene: by theſe markes you may ſuppoſe him to be either an ideot, or an artificiall foole: To conclude, if you will adde to theſe, his inſtrument called Maraca, and his bundell of fethers, which they call Araroye, ſet handſomely vppon his backe, his ratling inſtruments alſo made of ſhelles, with ſtones in them bound vnto their legs, by this repreſentation you muſt imagin, hee is dancing and drinking.
            Many patternes and figures are not ſufficient to expreſſe the extraordinary care and induſtrie of thoſe barbarous people, in attiring their bodies, according to the whole deſcription which before we haue ſet foorth: for no ſimilitude can make a liuely repreſentation of the whole matter as it is, vnleſſe euery thing be in their proper colours, but the attyring of thoſe women, which they call Quoniam, and in ſome places where they haue acquaintance and commerce with the Portugals, they name them Maria, how much more excellent it is than the others, let vs diligently marke and conſider. For firſt of all, as we ſaid in the beginning of this chapter, the women goe naked as well as the men, and all of them plucke off their haires as men do, leauing not a haire vpon their eye-browes or eye-lids: but as concerning the haire of their heads, they differ much from men: for the men (as is ſaid) ſhaue all the foreparts of their heades, and let the hinder parts grow long, but women there do not onely nouriſh their haires on their heades, but (like our Country-women) vſe often to combe and waſh them, as alſo to bind and wrappe them vp, with Cotton head-laces dyed blacke, though for the moſt part they go with their hairs looſe and ſpred abroad, like vnto thoſe ancient mad-brained Bacchides of Rome:

for they much delight to haue them hanging downe, and flaggering about their ſhoulders.
            In another thing alſo the women differ from the men; for they make no holes in their lippes as men do, and therfore they adorne not, nor beautifie their faces with Iewels and ſtones, but they make ſuch great holes in their eares; as when their eare-rings bee foorth, they may put in their fingers: and their eare-rings bee made of that great ſhell, which they call Vignol, beeing in whiteneſſe and length, like vnto a midling candle, ſo as if you behold them afarre off hanging vppon their ſhoulders, and dangling vppon their breaſts, you would iudge them like the hanging eares of a hound.
            As for their faces, they trimme them in this faſhion, and in doing thereof, euery one helpeth other: firſt, they paynt with a pencill a circle in the middle of their cheekes, either redde, blew, or yellow, in forme of a cockle or ſnaylehouſe, ſterring them vntill their faces be varyed and diſtinguiſhed all ouer, with thoſe ſundry colours: in like manner do they paynt the place, where the haire of their eye-lidds and eye-browes did grow, (which faſhion I haue heard, is vſed of ſome light houſe-wiues in France.) They haue bracelets alſo made of peeces of bones, cutte like fiſhſcales, or Serpents ſcales, ioyned and made faſt with waxe mingled with gumme, ſo artificially and finely, as they cannot be amended by any artificiall skill or cunning, they be an hand-breadth in length, and do ſomewhat reſemble the bracelet or wriſt-band, which is vſed with vs in blowing of bellowes.
            They vſually alſo weare bright and exceeding white chaines, which they call Bou-re, but they weare them not about their neckes as men do, but about their armes in

ſtead of bracelets: and for this purpoſe they haue a great deſire of glaſſe-buttons, either yellow, blew, or greene, with holes in them, and put vpon a threede: theſe they cal (Maurobi) and whether we go into their villages or marches, or that they approch neere vnto our caſtels or bulwarkes, they vrgently ſeeeke to get of vs ſome of theſe buttons, offering vs their fruites, and other commodities in exchange: and oftentimes they will vrge vs for them with theſe glauering words: Mair Deagat-orem amabe mauroubi, that is to ſay, You are a good French-man, giue vs ſome bracelets of your glaſſe buttons. In like manner do they importunatly require of vs combes, which they call Guap or Kuap: glaſſes alſo which they call Araua, and other ſuch like trinckets, wherein they take great delight. But aboue all things, this ſeemeth moſt ſtrange, that although their bodies, armes, thighes, and legges, bee not diſtinguiſhed with diuers colors like men, and that they vſe not thoſe ornaments of fethers, yet could wee neuer intreate them, to put on any clothes made of that curled cloth, or ſmocks, though we oftentimes offered them: for they perſiſted in that ſtubborneneſſe, from the which I thinke they be not yet reclaimed, alledging for excuſe, the auncient receiued cuſtomes of all the borderers. For all of them vſe when they come neere any waters or riuers, to fall downe and to take vp water with their hands, to waſh their heads, and oftentimes (like duckes) they will plunge and diue into the water tenne times in one day, and then to put off their garments ſo oftentimes in the day, would bee very troubleſome vnto them: an excellent and goodly reaſon ſure, yet muſt wee needes allow it, for wee could nothing alter or diſſwade them by diſputing with them, for ſo great a delight is nakedneſſe vnto them, that not

onely the free Tovovpinambaltian women, which liued vppon the Continent, would thus ſtubbornely reiect all apparell, but the captiues alſo and ſlaues, which wee bought of them, and which we vſed as villaines, and drudges, to defend our caſtels, could not bee reſtrained, but would euery night before they ſlept, put off their ſmockes and all their other apparel, and wander naked vp and down the Iland.
            To conclude, if the power were in themſelues either to take or leaue their garments: (for wee could hardly force them to put them on by beating) they had rather indure the heate of the Sunne, and hurt their armes and ſholders with carrying ſtones and earth naked, then to put on any clothes. And thus much is ſufficient to ſpeake of the ornaments, bracelets, and all the other compleat attire of the American women, and therefore without any further Epilogue to my ſpeech: I leaue it for euery one to conceiue of, as to him ſeemeth good, & will in this place adde a word or two of the bigger ſort of children, thoſe which be three or foure yeares of age, and which they commonly call Canomi mitri: for in theſe we were much delighted: they be fatter of their bodies, & of a whiter bone then any children with holes in their lips, their haires of their heads ſhorne round, and their bodies oftentimes painted: And in this manner they would come dancing by flockes to meet vs, when we came to their villages. And for to haue vs giue them ſome things, they would often repeate theſe flattering words, Covtovaſſat amaebe pinda: that is, good fellow giue mee theſe hookes: and if they obtained of vs, what they deſired, as oftentimes they did, and that wee threw ſome tenne or twelue little hookes vppon the ſand, they would ſtriue and ſcramble for them, and greatly

exult and reioyce, and lying along vpon the ground, would ſcrape in the earth like Conneys, which was no little pleaſure vnto vs: Finally, although I diligently peruſed and marked thoſe barbarous people, for a whole yeare together, wherein I liued amongſt them, ſo as I might conceiue in my minde a certaine Idea, or proportion of them, yet I ſay, by reaſon of their diuerſe geſtures and behauiours, vtterly different from ours it is a very difficult matter to expreſſe their true proportion, either in writing or painting: but if any one couet to inioy the full pleaſure of them, I could wiſh him to goe into America himſelfe. But perhaps you will ſay it is more then one dayes iourney: that is truth indeed, and therefore I will not perſwade any one to enterpriſe the matter ouer raſhly.
            But before I conclude my ſpeach, I muſt ſay ſomething to anſwere thoſe that either thinke or write, that the often familiarity with thoſe barbarous naked people, and eſpecially with the women is a great prouocation to luſt and laſciuiouſneſſe, I ſay therefore, that although at the firſt ſight that nakedneſſe may iuſtly bee accounted the nouriſhment of concupiſcence, yet notwithſtanding as experience hath made manifeſt, it is moſt true, that men by that vnciuill and vncomely nakedneſſe, are not ſo much as ſtirred in their mindes to luſt, ſo as I dare preſume to affirme, that gallant and gorgeous attire, painted beauties, counterfeit haire, criſped and friſled lockes, thoſe great and coſtly rayles which women weare ſo artificially folded, and wreathed, thoſe lawne gorgets, looſe and flaggering garments, and ſuch other like, where-with our women doe ſo buſily

falſify and counterfet them-ſelues, are more hurtfull and dangerous, then the nakedneſſe of thoſe barbarous women, although in beauty they bee nothing inferiour vnto them, ſo as if it were lawfull for others, (obſeruing a decorum) to follow their faſhions, I could alledge very ſubſtantiall reaſons to make good my opinion, and refute all arguments that can bee obiected for proofe of the contrary.
            But not to dwell longer vpon this matter, I referre mee to the teſtimonie of thoſe which ſayled with mee into Braſilia, and which haue beheld both the one and the other, yet would I not haue my words wreſted to that ſence, as though I any wayes approoued that nakedneſſe, againſt the authority of the holy Scripture, which ſaith, that Adam and Eua perceiuing they were naked after their ſinne, were aſhamed, for I deteſt the hereſie of thoſe, which hauing violated the law of nature, (not well obſerued in this caſe, of thoſe wretched and miſerable Americans,) doe their vttermoſt indeuours, to bring in this wicked and beaſtly cuſtome.
            But what I haue ſayd touching theſe rude people, tendeth to no other end, but that it may appeare, that we are no leſſe faultie, who condemning them that goe naked without regarde of ſhamefaſtneſſe, doe our ſelues offend as greeuouſly in the contrary, to wit, in ſumptuous and gorgious apparell: And now hauing deſcribed the externall habit and trimming of the Barbarians, it will not breake ſquare or order to ſay ſome-thing in this place, of their manner of dyet: And this is chiefly to bee noted, that although they neither ſowe nor haue

any kinde of corne or graine, nor plant any Vines, yet notwithſtanding (as I haue often found true by experience) doe they liue moſt finely and daintily, though they bee vtterly deſtitute of bread and wine: for they haue two ſorts of rootes, the one called Aypi, the other Manyot both of which waxe ſo exceedingly within three or foure moneths, that they will bee a foote and an halfe long, and as thicke as a mans thigh: theſe the women (for men bee neuer troubled with the buſineſſe) plucke vppe and drye againſt the fire, mingling them with that which they call Boucano, ſome-times alſo they bruſe and breake them in peeces, when they bee greene and freſh, with ſharpe flint ſtones faſtned to a beame, as wee are wonte to grate Cheeſe and Nutmegs, and make thereof a very fine white meale or flower, ſo as that new meale beeing ſteeped in water, the whole Iuiſe which is preſſed out of it, (of which I will ſpeake by and by) doth taſte and ſauour like new and moyſte Wafers made of Wheate: inſomuch, as after my returne into France, euery place where I came ſmelled thereof; which renewed the memory of that where-with thoſe barbarous and rude peoples houſes or roomes bee vſually waſhed and ſprinckled, with ſo great hindrance and loſſe is that meale made of thoſe kinde of rootes.
            For the preparation of this meale, the women of Braſilia deuiſe great earthen Veſſels, very fitte for that vſe, containing euery one a buſhell, or thereabout, which beeing ſet vpon the fire, they put there-vnto the meale, and euer as it boyleth, the gourd being cut in the middle,

they take out that which is within, and vſe the vtmoſt rinde in ſteed of diſhes to eate pottage, and this when it is boyled is like vnto little comfits. Of this flower or dowe they make two ſorts, for one manner is throughly boyled and hard, which they call (Ouy-entan) and this they carry into the warres with them, becauſe it will keepe longeſt, the other ſort is leſſe boyld and ſofter, and that they call Ouy-pov, in this reſpect this is better then the former, becauſe it taſteth like the crummes of white bread, but that firſt ſauour whereof I ſpake before, becommeth more pleaſanter and ſweeter by boyling; And as this meate, eſpecially when it is new, is of an excellent ſauour and taſte, ſo is it very nouriſhing and eaſily concocted, yet notwithſtanding (as I haue tryed) they cannot by any meanes make bread thereof: but they will make it into a lumpe, which ſmelleth like a batch of wheat dowe, and is maruellous faire to looke vpon, and as white as fine wheate flower, yet in boyling it is ſo dryed and cruſted vpon the out-ſide, that it beeing cut or broken, the inner part thereof is maruelous drye, and like as it was before it was boyled. Whereby I am induced to thinke, that hee was much deceiued, which firſt reported (not well regarding my ſpeeches) that thoſe which dwell two or three degrees beyond the Aequinoctiall line (which people bee certainly the Tououpinambaltij) did eate bread made of rotten wood, which is to be vnderſtood of theſe rootes whereof wee ſpake. And both ſorts of meate in making a kinde of gruell which they call Myngant, eſpecially if it bee mingled with fat broth or liquor, is then like vnto Ryce, and beeing ſo ſeaſoned, it taſteth very well and delicately. But the Tououpinambaltij, both men, women and children, from theyr Cradles

vpwards, doe eate this kinde of drye meale or dowe inſteed of bread: wherevnto they are ſo apt by often vſe, that with the ends of their fingers they will take it out of their earthen veſſels, and throw it ſtedfaſtly into their mouthes, without looſing the leaſt crumme, and therein we often-times aſſaide to imitate them, but beeing little exerciſed, wee ſpilled it vpon our faces, and therefore vnleſſe wee would bee ridiculous, wee muſt needs vſe ſpoones. Moreouer thoſe rootes called Aypi and Manyot be ſome-times chopped when they bee greene into little gobbets, of the meale whereof being moyſte, the women make round balls, which being preſſed betwixt their hands, they wring out of them a certaine liquid white Iuiſe like vnto milke, and putting it into earthen veſſels, ſet it out in the ſunne, by the heate whereof it doth curde and creame ouer like milke, and when they eate it they powre it into diſhes made of ſhels, wherein it is boyled as wee are wont to boyle egges.
            Moreouer, the roote Aypi is not onely accuſtomed to bee made into meale, but it eateth alſo very well beeing roaſted in the Aſhes, whereby it will waxe tender and cleaue, and bee very like in taſte vnto Cheſnuts broyld vpon the coales, and being ſo ordered it is very good to eate, but the roote called (Manyot) is farre otherwiſe, for vnleſſe it bee made into dowe and boyled, it is a very dangerous meate; the ſtalkes of both thoſe rootes be like one vnto an other, and of the bigneſſe of lowe Iuniper, and the leaues bee like vnto an herbe called Peony or Pyony. But that which is moſt to bee wondred at in theſe rootes of Braſile called Aypi and Manyot, is the great aboundance of them, for the branches of them which be as brittle as hempe ſtalkes, how many ſo euer of them be broken

and put deepe into the earth, without any husbandry at all, within two or three moneths ſpace, will bring forth a great aboundance of rootes.
            The women in like manner doe plant that great Millet whereof we ſpake before, which we commonly call Sarraſins wheat, or Arabian wheate, and which thoſe barbarous people call Anati, and of that alſo they make a certaine meale which they boyle and eate, in the ſame manner, as I ſaid they do the other: And thus much ſufficeth to ſay of the manners, apparell and diet of the Americans: and he which deſireth to vnderſtand more, let him read the Indian hiſtory of Iohn Lerius, out of whom wee haue gathered that which we haue here ſet downe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            The faith, religion and manners. of the Aethiopians, Liuing within the dominion of Precious Ioan (commonly called Preſtor Iohn) together with a declaration of the league and friendſhip eſtabliſhed betwixt the Emperors of Aethiopia and the Kings of Portugall.
            
               Damianus a Goes a Portugall Knight, being Author and interpretor.
            Herevnto is added certaine Epiſtles of Helena, who was grandmother to Dauid Precious Joan, and from the ſame Dauid, to the Biſhop of Rome, and to Emanuell, and Iohn Kings of Portugall: very worthy the reading the ſame:
            
               Damianus a Goes and Paulus Jouius being interpretors.
            The deploration of the people of Lappia,
            collected by the ſame Damianus a Goes.
            
            
               
               Damianus a Goes, a Knight of Portugall,
               to Pope Paulus the third, health.
            
            
               THere is nothing wherein wee ought to be more carefull and vigilant, and more diligently to indeuour our ſelues, than that by our labour, coſt, puniſhment of our bodies, yea martirdome it ſelfe (if by other meanes it cannot be effected) all people of the world may bee brought and wonne to the faith of Chriſt, and being once wonne, may then be reduced to liue in an vniformity and one manner of liuing. The care and regard whereof doth more eſpecially belong to you (right reuerent Pope Paulus) than to all the reſt of vs, as being high Biſhop ouer all, the Vicar of Chriſt, and head of the vniuerſall Church vnder him; Wherefore it is your part (which with the great hope of all men you haue already begun) to cure the calamities where with the Church is dayly oppreſſed, and with your care and induſtrie ſo to effect it, that all the whole world may obey and beleeue in one onely Chriſt, and imbracing the true beleefe, may be obedient vnto you (as vnto Peters ſucceſſor) and to your admonitions in all things which pertaine to the ſaluation of their ſoules: which when you haue brought to paſſe, wee will ſay that by your meanes, the Propheſie of one ſheapheard, and one flock is fulfilled, the true commendations whereof when you haue obtained, which of the Popes may bee deemed ſo famous as your ſelf, either in honor, happineſſe or merit, or to whom with ſo much right may wee yeeld the triple Crownc, as to your ſelfe? For the obtaining whereof, although the times

be otherwiſe very vnfortunate, yet haue you many occaſions miniſtred vnto you. I call the times vnfortunate by reaſon of thoſe calamities, which in Europe are by your ſelfe to be cured, for of none be we more ſtrongly reſiſted, then of the enimie that liueth at our elbow, but let vs now omitte to ſpeake of thoſe troubleſome cares, which, (wee bee well aſſured), are euer in your minde, and come to other matters more calme and temperate, which carry great hope, that as it were an other new world imbracing the faith of Chriſt, may acknowledge your holineſſe, Maieſtie and Empire: Wherefore if you ſhall ſo handle theſe buſineſſes, that the Church both in Aethiopia, and Europe (hauing you her gouernour and protector) may eſcape and auoide all perill and ſhipwrack, and arriue into the hauen of ſaluation, wee ſhall then ſing in your praiſe that Propheticall Canticle contained in the Booke of Wiſdome, viz. I will paſſe through all lower parts of the earth, I will behold all thoſe that ſleepe, and illuminate all thoſe that truſt in the Lord, behold I haue not laboured for my ſelfe onely, but for all thoſe that ſeeke the truth. Now at length is the time wherein wee truſt, that this Propheſie will bee fulfilled by you, behold here the Aethiopians, a large and ſpacious nation, and moſt deſirous of Chriſt, whoſe Emperor a man of great ſanctitie, deſiring the amity and friendſhip of the Chriſtian Princes of Europe, hath ſent his Embaſſadors vnto you, and to the mighty and inuincible Kings of Portugall, by whom (as by his letters doth appeare) hee doth not onely couet Chriſtian friendſhip and charity betwixt him-ſelfe and the Princes of Europe, but alſo (perceiuing the bitter diſcords and diſſentions that continually raigne amongſt them) doth moſt deuoutly and feruently admoniſh

and exhort them to Chriſtian peace and concorde, a matter whereof all of vs may bee aſhamed, for now the Queene of Saba riſeth vp and calleth vs into iudgment, reprehending our faults, Chriſts Propheſies bee now fulfilled: And thoſe which hee elected are by little and little fallen out of his fellowſhip, and his commandements and promiſes are come vnto thoſe, which were teputed Ethnicks and ſtrangers vnto Chriſt: for the Emperour of Aethiopia with all the kingdomes vnder his dominion, as by this our declaration ſhall appeare, couet nor deſire nothing more, then to liue vnder your diſcipline, neither is hee ignorant by the doctrine of the Apoſtles, which hee hath deuided into eight bookes, that the gouernment and principallity of all the Biſhops of the world, belongeth and is due to the Biſhop of Rome, whom plainly and godlyly hee is willing to obey, deſiring of him to be well and holily inſtructed in the inſtitutions and ordinances of the Church of Chriſt, for which purpoſe he coueteth with great deſire, to haue learned mē ſent vnto him, and not contented there-with, to the end that the memory of his deſires may remaine to all poſterity, hee intreateth that the truth of this matter may bee recorded and regiſtred in the Popes Annals, that ſo his Epiſtles and moſt godly requeſts, may bee inlightned by the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtory, and that thoſe which ſhall bee borne hereafter, may know at what time and vnder what Pope theſe things were done: And I nothing doubt but that your holineſſe hath already ſent, or forthwith will ſend vnto him, learned men and skilfull in the Scriptures; and well inſtructed in other artes, by whoſe learning and induſtry, and alſo by the preaching and labour of many others, already ſent thither by the renowned Kings of

Portugall Emanuell and Iohn his ſonne, you will ſo handle the buſineſſe, that all the Chriſtians liuing in Aethiopia and India, may by little and little, yeeld obedience to the lawes of the Romaine Biſhops, whom they feare not already to confeſſe to bee the Vicars of Chriſt; and ſo they being once, by your indeuour, ioyned vnto vs by the true religion, and gathered together into one fold, vnder one ſhepheard Chriſt, we may perceiue that the mercy of our Lord is confirmed ouer vs, that his kingdome indureth for all ages, and that his power extendeth vnto all generations, and then all fleſh ſhall praiſe his holy name for euer and euer. But leaſt my exhortation may ſeeme more tedious then is needfull, eſpecially vnto him of whoſe life and doctrine, we are, and ought, all of vs to be imitators, I will proceed to my declaration, which I will ſet out more at large, that thereby I may more plainly ſhew vpon what grounds and principles, this ſacred league and amitie betwixt Preſtor Ioan and the Kings of Portugall was eſtabliſhed, hoping that in declaring thoſe things which bee true and lawfull, I may inflame the mindes of the Readers, and accite them to thoſe deſignements, whereby the faith of Chriſt may bee more aboundantly planted, preached, and reuerenced in all corners of the earth.
            In the yeare from the birth of our Sauiour and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, one thouſand, foure hundred thirty and three, Iohn the firſt King of Portugal, ſurnamed of famous memory, he which freed Portugall from the often incurſions and aſſaults of the Caſtilians, wherewith it was almoſt made vaſt & deſolate, departing out of this mortall life, of all his other ſonnes which hee left behind him, his

ſonne Henry excelled in learning, and eſpecially in the ſtudy of Mathematickes, who for the great deſire hee had to know the motion of the heauens, liued a ſingle life, and for that hee might more deepely and accurately meditate and conſider the courſe of the ſtarres, he liued in a holy promontory called Saint Vincents head, which place he choſe out, for that the heauens bee there for the moſt part calme and temperate, leaſt the clowds interpoſing themſelues betwixt the heauens and his inſtruments, his conſideration, and iudgment of the courſe of the heauens, might be thereby hindred.
            This Henry to the end he might receiue ſome fruite of his ſtudies, determined to ſeeke out with his owne ſhips, and at his owne charge, that which by often watchings he had found out to be ſo, to wit, that the Atlantick Ocean floweth into the Indian, and the Indian againe into the Atlanticke, and therevpon ſending ſhips thither diuerſe times, they entred into great part of the Atlantick ſhore, wherein many townes, citties, and Iſlands were diſcouered and found forth: in all which places by his meanes, the faith of Chriſt was made knowne, and Churches there erected, eſpecially in thoſe Iſlands which before lay deſart, the principall whereof was the Iland of Wood, commonly called Medeyra, now a moſt famous and fruitfull Iland. But in the end, (as there is no certaintie in mortal matters) in the yeare of our Sauiour Chriſt, one thouſand, foure hundred and three ſcore, this Henry was ſurpriſed by death, and for that he was neuer married, he had leſt al which he had got by his voiages & traueling by ſea vnto the crown of Portugal as his proper inheritance: which being giuen by his own hands, continued vnto the time

of Iohn the ſecond of that name, without enuy or emulation of other forraine kings or Princes, In which Kings daies Columbus a Genoan borne a very skilfull Sayler, being repulſed, vnregarded and diſmiſſed, by the ſame King Iohn, (to whome he promiſed to diſcouer the Weſt Indies,) by the ayde and furtherance of Ferdinand and Elizabeth King and Queene of Caſtile, he moſt fortunately attempted the voyage, and found out thoſe large and ample prouinces, to their great and vnſpeakeable profit, ſhewing alſo how they might come to them by ſhippes: This Iohn oftentimes reuoluing in his minde the affaires of the Eaſt Indies, of whoſe fruitfulneſſe many and ſundry things were deliuered by auncient writers
            Amongſt his other great labours and coſtes, whereof hee was no niggard, hee determined to ſend certaine men skillfull in the Arabian tongue vnto thoſe prouinces, and eſpecially vnto Preſtor Iohn, whereof two of them which hee ſent were Alfonſus of Payua borne at the white Caſtell, and another Iohn Peter of Couilham both Portingales. Theſe luckely began their iourney from Schalabiton, the ſeauenth day of May, in the yeare of our Sauiour Chriſt, one thouſand foure hundred foure-ſcore and ſix, and fayning them ſelues to be Marchants for their more quietter paſſage, they iournyed firſt to Barchiona, from thence to Naples and ſo to Rhodes: then taking their iourney from Alexandria, they arriued laſtly at Cayre, and their getting the company of ſome Marchants they tooke their iourny towards Thor: where taking ſhipping they arriued neere a certayne citty called Cuaquen, ſytuated on the Aethiopian ſhore, from thence they ſayled towards Adenes, where they agreed betwixt themſelues,

that Alphonſus ſhould returne againe into Aethiopia vnto Preſtor Iohn, and that Peter ſhould go forward into India, but Iohn hauing found out Calecut Goa, and the whole ſhore of the Malabars, ſayled to Zofala, and from thence againe to Adenes, & ſo went ſtraight to Caire, expecting to finde his companion there and that they might returne together into Portingale to their king (for they appointed when they went from Adene, to meete againe, at a time limited, at the ſame Cayre) whither when he was returned he receyued letters from King Iohn out of Portugale, by the hands of two Iewes, whereof one was called Rabbi Abraham a Bienſian, and the other Ioſeph a Lamacenſian, by which letters he was certified, that his fellow Alfonſus was there dead, and whereby hee was alſo commanded not to returne into his country before hee had vewed Ormuzia and ſaluted Preſtor Iohn, of whoſe ſtate the king did greatly deſire to be certified.
            Wherefore Iohn Peter not knowing what his companion Alphonſus had done in his life time, went backe againe to Adenes accompanied with the ſame Rabbi Abraham and ſent Ioſeph backe againe to the King with letters, ſignifiing his trauels and what he had done, & ſo taking water ſayled from Adenes to Oromuzia, where leauing Abraham the Iew and diſpatching him with more letters to the King, he determined to ſaile towards Mecha, which when hee had deſeryed he erneſtly deſired to ſee mount Synai, from thence hee departed to Thor, and againe taking ſhipping and paſſing ouer the ſtraights of the Erythrean ſea, hee came to Zeila and from thence went all the reſt of the way on foote, vnto the court of Preſtor Iohn, who was then called Alexander, of whome beeing very curteouſly receiued hee deliuered vnto him the letters which

hee had from King Iohn offerring into his hands alſo the Topography or Mappe, wherein he might ſee all our voyage. This Alexander determining to ſend him backe to his King, was preuented by death that hee could not doe it, who being dead his brother ſurnamed Nau, ſucceeded him in his place, of whome this Iohn Peter could neuer obtaine licence to depart into his country, and Nau dying likewiſe, his liberty to depart was in like manner denied him by Dauid the Sonne of Nau and next heire to his Kingdome, but ſeeing hee could by no meaues haue leaue to depart from that prouince, and to mitigate and aſſwage the exceeding deſire he had to returne home, the King beſtowed vpon him moſt ample and large gifts, and then he tooke to his wife a noble woman, of whome hee begot many children.
            This man our Embaſſadors found out in the court of Preſtor Iohn, and had conferrence with him, from whence when they departed in the yeare of our Lord one thouſand fiue hundred twenty and ſixe, they were very deſirous to take him with them into their country, and he himſelfe was as willing to depart, but they could neuer get leaue of king Dauid, for hee euer anſwered to their deſires, that hee receiued that man of his father Nau when he receiued his Kingdomes, and that hee would regard him with the like care and loue as he did his Kingdomes.
            And that there was noe cauſe why it ſhould bee irckeſome to him to liue amongſt the Aethiopians, where, both from his fathers liberality and his owne he had receiued great welth and riches: This Iohn Peter (as our Embaſſadors reported) was skilfull almoſt in all languages, for which cauſe, and more eſpecially for his wiſdome (which was very great,) was he ſo earneſtly retayned of the Aethiopian

Emperors, from whome they exactly underſtood the eſtate of Portugall and their nauigations, by the often recytall whereof, (as he was very learned and eloquent,) he purchaſed the loue and affections of the people of Aethiopia, both to him-ſelfe and to vs all, After Iohn the ſecond King of Portugall was dead, and Emanuell moſt happily ſucceeded him in his Kingdome, he ſent a nauy whereof Vaſcus a Gama was gouenor, in the yeare of our redemtion one thouſand foure hundred ninty and ſeauen, for Aethiopia, who diſankerring at Vlysbone, and recouering and eſcaping that dangerous poynt, called caput bonaeſpei at laſt arriued in Eaſt India, where by armes they reduced many prouinces and citties vnder our ſubiection, and gouernment; which newes being made knowne in Aethiopia by the borderers, as alſo by ſome Portugalls which at that time came out of India to Preſter Iohns Court, Helena the grand-mother of David, (who by reaſon of Dauids non age, had the adminiſtration and gouernment of his Kingdomes) ſent one Mathew Armenius a skilfull man and learned in many languages, into Portugale to King Emanuell, and (that his Embaſſage might carry more credit and authority) ſhe ſent with him a noble yong man called Abeſynus, which two I haue often met in our Court, and haue had familiar conference with them, This Mathew came by diuers iournies to Goa vnto Alphonſus Albuquercus viceroy there, of whome hee being receiued very curteouſly, and diſpached thence liberally rewarded, he arriued in our nauy at Vliſpone, in the yeare of Chriſt 1513. who ſhewing to the King the cauſe of his Ambaſſage, preſented him with a croſſe finely wrought, made of that tree whereof our Sauiour Chriſt was Crucified, which croſſe I haue oftentimes ſeene and worſhipped, while my brother

               Fructus a Goes was the Kings chamberlaine and had it in his cuſtody: the Queenes letters which hee brought vnto King Emanuell purported thus much.
            
               
                  A letter of Helena the grand-mother of Dauid Precious Iohn Emperor of Aethiopia, written vnto Emanuell King of Portugall in the yeare of our Lord. 1509.
               IN the name of God the Father the Sonne and Holy Ghoſt, one God in three preſons, the health grace and benediction of our Lord and Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, Sonne of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, borne in Bethlem, bee vpon our deere brother, the moſt Chriſtian King Emanuell, gouernor of the ſea, and conqueror of the Barbarous and incredulous Moores: Our Lord God proſper thee and giue thee victory ouer all thine enimies, and that your Kingdomes and dominions (by the deuout prayers of the Meſſengers of our Sauiour Chriſt, to witte the foure Euangeliſts S. Iohn, Luke, Marke and Mathew, whoſe ſanctity and prayers be euer thy defence, may extend and ſtretch them-ſelues wide and broad.
               Theſe are to certyfie you moſt deere brother, that there came vnto vs from your great and famous Court, two Meſſengers, whereof one was called Iohn, who affirmed him-ſelfe to be a Preeſt, and the other Iohn Gomez and deſired of vs ſouldiors and prouiſion for the warres, wherefore wee haue ſent vnto you our Embaſſador Mathew, the Brother of our ſeruice, with the lycence of Marke the Patriarch, who giueth vs his benediction, ſending vs Preeſts from Ieruſalem, hee is our father, and father of all our dominions, the piller of the faith of Chriſt, and of the Holy Trynitie, hee at our requeſt

ſent vnto your great Captaine and leader of thoſe Souldiers, which make warres in India for the faith of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, to ſignifie vnto him, that wee were ready and willing to ſend vnto him Souldiers and prouiſion for the warres, if neede required; and becauſe wee haue heard it reported that the Prince of Caire hath ſent forth a great Nauy againſt your Forces, to be reuenged (as we be well aſſured) of the loſſes and dammages which hee hath often receiued of the Captaines of your Armie which you haue in India, whom God of his great goodneſſe vouchſafe to aſſiſt, and ſo to proſper their proceedings euery day more and more, that all thoſe vnbeleeuers may once become ſubiect to your gouernment. We therefore to withſtand their aſſaults will forthwith ſend an Armie which ſhall ſtay at the ſea of Mecha, that is to ſay, at Babel mendell, or if you thinke it more fitting, at the hauen of Inda, or Thor: that ſo you may deſtroy, and roote out all thoſe Moores, and miſcreant vnbeleeuers from the face of the earth, ſo as the gifts and obiations which be brought and offered at the holy Sepulcher be no more deuoured of dogges: for now is come that time promiſed, which (as is ſaid) Chriſt and his mother Mary foretold, to wit, that in the latter daies a King ſhould ariſe from out ſome Chriſtian Region, that ſhould aboliſh and bring to nought the vniuerſall ſtocke of the Barbarians and Moores. And now certainely is that time come, which Chriſt promiſed to his bleſſed Mother. Moreouer, what euer our Embaſſador Mathew ſhall ſay vnto you, accept it, and giue credit vnto it, as that which proceedeth from our owne perſon, for he is one of the chiefeſt of our Court, and therefore haue wee ſent him vnto you: Wee would haue committed theſe things vnto your Meſſengers,

which you ſent hither, but that wee were afraide leſt our buſineſſes might bee taken otherwiſe then wee intended. We haue ſent vnto you by this Mathew our Embaſſador, a Croſſe made (vndoubtedly) of a peece of that Tree, whereupon our Sauiour Chriſt was crucified at Ieruſalem. Which peece of ſacred wood was brought to vs from Ieruſalem, and thereof wee made two Croſſes, whereof one remaineth with vs, the other we haue deliuered to our Embaſſador to be preſenred to you, the wood is of a blacke colour, and hangeth at a little ſiluer ring.
               Furthermore, if it ſhall ſeeme good vnto you, either to giue your daughters in marriage to our ſonnes, or that we ſhall giue oue our ſonnes to your daughters, it ſhall be very acceptable vnto me, and profitable to vs both, and the beginning of a brotherly league betwixt vs, which coniunction of matrimony, we ſhall euer deſire to enter into with you, as well hereafter, as for the preſent time.
               And thus wee end with our praier vnto God, that the ſaluation and grace of our redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, and of our bleſſed Lady the Virgin Mary, may extend and remaine both vpon you, your ſonnes and your daughters, and all your family. Amen.
               
               Moreouer, theſe are to certifie you, that if wee would make warres, and ioyne our Armies together, wee ſhould (by Gods helpe) be ſtrong inough, vtterly to deſtroy and root out all the enemies of the faith of Chriſt. But our kingdomes and dominions are ſo ſcituated in the middle of the land, as by no meanes wee can haue paſſage into the ſea. In the ſea therefore wee haue no power, wherein (praiſe be giuen to God) you bee the ſtrongeſt of all Princes. Ieſus Chriſt bee your guide, for your affaires,

which you haue done and atchieued heere in India, ſeeme rather to bee done by miracle, then by man; but if you would furniſh a Nauy of a thouſand ſhippes we will giue you prouiſion, and aboundantly miniſter vnto you all things neceſſary for ſuch a Nauy.
               This letter, with ſome other Articles of the Faith, religion, manners, and ſtate of the Ethiopians, which Mathew expreſſed before King Emanuell and his Councell, I haue by the intreaty of Iohn Magnus Gothus, Archbiſhop of Vpſalia in the kingdome of Suetia, with whom I had extraordinary familiarity and frindſhip in Pruſsia, tranſlated out of the Portingall language, wherein I found it written, into Lattine: which letter, together with the ſaid articles, were afterwards imprinted at Antwerp, without my priuity.
               Theſe things vnderſtood from the Aethiopian Embaſſadors, King Emanuell (as he was exceeding wiſe, and moſt deſirous to encreaſe the Chriſtian religion) inſtituted an Embaſſage ſufficiently furniſhed with very graue and reuerend men, the chiefeſt whereof were Edward Galuanus, a man well ſtricken in yeares, and of great wiſedome and experience. And Francis Aluarez, a Prieſt, and of very renowned authority with the King, who was alſo old, and of vnreproueable manners: both which I haue knowne by ſight. Theſe two, and Mathew the Ethiopian Embaſſador, ſayled towards India, vnder the conduct of Lupo Soarez the Viceroy, and after his death, vnder Viceroy Didaco Lupeza a Sequeira, who was Lupos ſucceſſor, with a Nauy well furniſhed, which hee had prepared againſt the Turkes, by whom they were brought to a hauen called Arquicum, ſituated vpon the Erythraean ſhore, & vnder the dominiō of Preſter Iohn, into which hauen the ſhip ariued

vpon the ſecond day of Aprill, in the yeare of Chriſt 1520. In which iourney Edward Galuanus dyed in Camara, an Iſland in the Erythraean ſea, & Rhodericus Limius was placed in his ſtead, who with his fellowes in Embaſſage ſet forwards on their iourney from the ſaid hauen of Arquicum, towards the Court of Preſter Iohn, hauing Mathew with them as their guide and companion (for that young man Abeſynus, whom I formerly mentioned, was dead before this time.) And in this iourney Mathew dyed likewiſe, and was buried in a famous Monaſtery called Biſayn, after whoſe funerals performed, they ſet forwards on their intended iourney, and after great trauels, infinite labours, and many dangers, they arriued at the Court of Prester Iohn, of whom, Rhodoricke with his aſſociates, were very honorably receiued, and he hauing perfected his buſineſſe, and receiued new meſſage, was ſent backe againe vnto King Emanuell: which done, hee went to the hauen of Arquicum, but found not the Nauy there of whom Ludouicus Meneſius was gouernour, and which came purpoſely thither to carry them backe againe: for they ſtayed ſo long, that the ſhip could no longer expect their comming, by reaſon of the outragious and vehement tempeſts within thoſe coaſts, by an admirable ſecret of nature, blow ſixe monethes together from one climate, and the other ſixe monethes from the other.
               At Arquicum hee found letters with the Gouernor of the towne, left there by Pretor Ludouicus, perporting the death of king Emanuell: wherefore he determined to returne againe to Preſtor Iohns Court, at whoſe returne Preſter Iohn writ letters vnto the Pope of Rome, committing them to Francis Aluarez, to bee carried to him at Rome.
               
               
                  
All theſe hauing remained in thoſe prouinces for the ſpace of ſixe yeares, in the the end, together with the Ethiopian Embaſſador, whom Preſter Iohn ſent anew vnto our King, entred into one of the Kings ſhips at Arquicum, which was there laid for the purpoſe, in the moneth of Aprill in the yeare of Chriſt 1526. and diſankering thence, ſailed towards India, and at length by tedious trauels at ſea, they returned to King Iohn at Lisbon, in the moneth of Iuly, in the yeare 1527. who retained the Ethiopian Embaſſador with him, touching certaine poynts of his Embaſſage, vnto the yeare 1539. and ſent Francis Aluarez vnto Pope Clement the ſeuenth, with letters from Preſter Iohn, from whom he came as Embaſſador. Which letters the Pope receiued at the hands of the ſaid Francis Aluarez, at Bononia, in the moneth of Ianuary 1533. In the preſence of the Emperour Charles the fift; of which letters, and of others written to Emanuell, and Iohn King of Portugall, Paulus Iouius, a very learned man was interpretor, who hath tranſlated them out of the Portingall language, wherein they were written, into Latine, as here you may ſee.
            
            
               
                  A letter from Dauid the moſt renowned Emperour of Aethithiopia, written to Emanuell, King of Portugall, in the yeare of our Lord 1521. Paulus Iouius being interpretor.
               
               IN the name of God the Father, as hee alwaies hath beene, voyd of all beginning: in the name of God his onely ſonne, who is like vnto him, and was before the ſtarres gaue light, and before hee laid the foundation of the Ocean, who at another time was conceiued in the

wombe of the bleſſed Virgin, without the ſeede of man, & without mariage, for in this maner was the knowledge of his dutie: in the name of the holy Ghoſt, the Spirit of ſanctity, who knoweth all ſecrets that be, where he was before, that is of al the altitudes of heauen, which is ſuſtained without any pillers or props, hee who amplified the earth, which before was not created nor knowne through all parts, from the eaſt to the weſt, & from the north to the ſouth. Neither is this the firſt or ſecond, but the vndiuided Trinity in the only eternall Creator of all things, of one only councell, and one word for euer and euer Amen.
               
               Theſe letters are ſent by Atani Thingil, that is to ſay, the incenſe of a virgin, which name was giuen him in baptiſme, but now at his firſt entrance into his kingdome, he tooke the name of Dauid, the beloued of God, the piller of faith, a kinſman of the tribe of Iuda, the ſon of Dauid, the ſon of Salomon, the ſon of the piller of Sion, the ſon of the ſeed of Iacob, a ſon of the hand of Mary, and the carnal ſon of Nav Emperour of great and high Ethiopia, and of great kingdoms, lands, and dominions, king of Xoa, Caffate, Fatigar, Angote, Boru, Baaligaze, Adea, Vangue, Goiame (where is the head of the riuer Nilus) of Damaraa, of Vaguemedri, Ambeaa, Vagne, Tigri Mahon, of Sabain, where Saba was Queene, and of Bermagaes, and Lord vnto Nobia the end of Egypt.
               
               Theſe letters I ſay, bee ſent from him, and directed to the high, mightie, and inuincible Lord Emanuell, who dwelleth in the loue of God, and remaineth firme in the Catholicke faith; the ſonne of the Apoſtles Peter and Paul, King of Portingall, and of the Algarbians, friend of Chriſtians, enemy, iudge, Emperour and vanquiſher of the Moores and of the people of Affricke and of Guiennea,
                  
from the Promontory and Iſland of the Moone, of the redde ſea of Arabia, Perſis and Armutia, of great India, and of all places, and of thoſe Iſlands and adiacent Countries: ſpoyler and ouerthrower of the Moores, and ſtrange Paganes, Lord of Caſtles, high Towers, and Walles, and increaſer of the faith of Chriſt. Peace be vnto you King Emanuell, who (by Gods aſſiſtance, deſtroyeſt the Moores, and with your Nauy, your Armie, and your Captaines, driueſt them vp and downe like vnbeleeuing dogges. Peace be vnto your wife the Queene, the friend of Ieſus Chriſt, hand-maide of the virgine Mary, the mother of the Sauiour of the world. Peace bee vnto your Sonnes, who bee as a Table well furniſhed with dainties, in a greene Garden amongſt the flouriſhing Lillies. Peace bee vnto your Daughters, who are attired with garments, and coſtly ornaments, as Princes Palaces bee garniſhed with Tapeſtry. Peace bee vnto your kinsfolkes, which bee procreated of the ſeede of the Saints, as the Scripture ſaith, the ſonnes of the Saints be bleſſed both within doores and without. Peace be vnto your Councellors & officers, your Magiſtrates & Lawyers. Peace be vnto the captains of your caſtles & borders, and of all matters of munition. Peace bee vnto all your Nation, and to all your inhabitants (Moores and Iewes excepted.) Peace be vnto all your pariſhes, and to all that be faithfull to Chriſt and to you. Amen.
               
               I vnderſtand my Lord, King, and Father, that when the report of my name was brought vnto you by Mathew our Embaſſador, you aſſembled a great number of your Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and Prelates, to giue thankes vnto Chriſt our God for that Embaſſage, and that the ſame Mathew was receiued very honorably, and ioyfully,

which thing did exceedingly reioice mee, and for which I in like manner, and all my people with me, praiſed God, with great deuotion. But it grieued mee when I vnderſtood that Mathew was dead in the Monaſtery of Biſain in his returne home, when hee ſhould haue entred into the limits of our Countrie, yet I my ſelfe ſent him not, becauſe I was then a childe of eleuen yeares of age, and had ſcarce taken vpon me the gouernment of my kingdome after the death of my father, but Helena the Queene, whom I did reuerence as my mother, and who gouerned the kingdome for me, ſhe ſent him. That Mathew was a Marchant, and his right name was Abraham, but he called himſelfe by another name, that he might trauell more ſecurely through the Moores, yet notwithſtanding he being knowne to be a Chriſtian by the Moores in Dabull, was there caſt into priſon, which when hee had ſignified vnto the Praefect of your Armie, the ſame praefect ſent diuers valiant men to deliuer this Chriſtian out of that vile priſon, which he did more willingly, vnderſtanding that he was my Embaſſador, and when he had deliuered him from the hands of his enemies, hee committed him to your ſhips, to be brought vnto your preſence. That Mathew declared his meſſage in my name vnto your King, and writ vnto me that hee was honourably receiued, and aboundantly rewarded with gifts of all ſorts, which is likewiſe affirmed by your meſſengers, which Didacus Lupez de Sequeira, chiefe Gouernour of your Fleete, ſent vnto vs, who preſented thoſe letters vnto vs which Edward Galuanus that died in the Iſle of Cameran, ſhould haue brought. Vpon view of which letters I greatly reioyced and praiſed God, conceiuing great pleaſure, when I beheld the breaſts of your Meſſengers marked with

Croſſes, and proued by enquiring of them, that they obſerued the Ceremonies of the Chriſtian Religion, which be moſt infallible true: and I was exceedingly ſtirred vp with a ſingular deuotion, when I vnderſtood that they founde their way into Ethiopia by miracle: for they told vs that the Captaine of the ſhip wandring long by the Arabicke ſea, and therefore diſpairing to finde our hauen, determined to leaue this buſines vndiſpatched, and to returne into India, the rather for the cruell tempeſts wherewith they were toſſed vpon the ſea, but in the ſame morning betimes that hee entended to retire, a red Croſſe appeared vnto him in heauen, which when he had worſhipped, hee commanded the Mariners to turne the foredeckes of their ſhippes that way as the Croſſe ſtood, and ſo by Gods appointment was our hauen diſcouered and found out, which thing I held to be miraculous. And ſurely the Gouernor of that Nauy is beloued of God, ſeeing he obteined ſo great felicity, as no man before him had obtained of God. This mutuall Embaſſage was formerly ſpoken of by the Prophet in the booke of the life and paſſion of S. Victor, and in the bookes of the holy Fathers, that a great Chriſtian King ſhould make peace with the King of Ethiopia: yet did I not thinke that this would haue come to paſſe in my dayes, but God knew the certainty, that his name might bee extolled, who directed the Meſſenger vnto me, that I might ſend the like vnto you againe, my Father, and friend in Chriſt, that wee may remaine in our Faith, ſeeing I neuer had any Meſſenger, nor certaine knowledge from any other Chriſtian King.
               Hitherto the Moores haue beene about mee the ſonnes of Mahomet and Gentiles, ſome of them bee ſlaues,

which know not God, ſome others worſhip the fire and blockes, ſome others adore the Sunne, and ſome ſuppoſe Serpents to bee Gods. With theſe I neuer had peace, becauſe they refuſe to come vnto the truth, and to theſe I preach the faith in vaine. But now I am at quiet, and God hath giuen mee reſt with all mine enemies, and yours, for when I march in Armes againſt them in the boundes of my Countrie, they turne their faces and flye from vs, and our Captaines and Souldiers haue the conqueſt of them and their Campes: neither is God angrie with me (as the Pſalmiſt ſaith) and God fulfilleth the deſires of thoſe Kings which require iuſt things, yet this belongeth not to our praiſe, but the praiſes are to bee giuen vnto God, for hee it is that hath giuen the world vnto you, and hath granted vnto you the lands of the Gentiles for euer, and the landes of other people from the limits of your owne Countrie, euen to the entrance into Ethiopia. Wherefore I giue inceſſant thankes vnto God, and declare his great and incomprehenſible power and maieſty, conceiuing great hope that the ſonnes of thoſe people which come vnder your dominion, ſhall vndoubtedly bee partakers of the truth of religion, and therefore I praiſe God, and hope that your ſonnes, and my ſelfe, and you alſo, ſhall exceedingly reioyce for the good ſucceſſe of theſe things. And you ought continually to pray vnto God, vntill hee giue you his grace to obtaine the holy Temple in Ieruſalem, which is now in the power of the enemies of Chriſt, the Moores, Gentiles, and Heretickes, which if you bring to paſſe, your eſtimation and renown ſhall be repleniſhed with all praiſe.
               But three of thoſe Embaſſadors which came vnto mee

with the ſaid Mathew, and the great Praefect of your Nauie came downe to Macua to commune with the King of Bernagaes, who is ſubiect to our gouernment, and forthwith ſent Embaſſadors vnto me, and great gifts which were moſt deere and acceptable vnto me: but yet your fame and renowne was more deere and precious vnto me then all iewels and treaſures whatſoeuer. But let vs omit theſe things, and conferre amongſt our ſelues how wee may inuade and take the infidels Countries, for which purpoſe I ſhal willingly giue one hundred thouſand thouſand drachmaes of gold, & as many fighting men, timber, yron, and copper likewiſe, for to build and furniſh a Nauie, beſides great ſtore of furniture and prouiſion for warres, and wee will accord and agree friendly together, and for becauſe it is not my cuſtome, nor fitting for my dignitie, to ſend embaſſadors to require peace, and ſeeeing you your ſelfe haue formerly required it, with great ſincerity (to confirme the ſayings of our Sauiour Chriſt, for it is written: Bleſsed bee the Teet which bring peace,) therefore I my ſelfe am moſt ready to embrace it, after the manner of the Apoſtles, which were of one conſent, and of one heart. O King, and my Father Emanuell, God who is only one, the God of heauen, and alwaies of one ſubſtance, neuer waxing yonger or older, preſerue and keepe thee in ſafety. He which brought the meſſage from you vnto vs was called Rhodericus Lima, hee was the head and chiefeſt man of that embaſſage, and with him was Francis Aluarez, whom for his honeſty of life, ſingular religion, and iuſtice, I haue held moſt deere, and eſpecially for that being demanded of his faith, he anſwered thereunto very fitly and truely. And therefore you ought to exalt him, and to call him maiſter, and to imploy him in conuerting

the people of Macua, and of Dalaca, of Zeila, and of all the Iſlands of the red ſea, becauſe they bee in the bounds of my kingdomes.
               And I haue granted vnto him a Croſſe, and a ſtaffe in token of his authority, and doe you commaunde that theſe things may be giuen vnto him, and that hee may bee made Biſhiop of thoſe Countries and Iſlands, becauſe hee well deſerueth it, and is very fitting to adminiſter that office, and God ſhall doe good unto thee that thou maieſt bee alwaies ſtrong againſt thy enemies, and conſtraine them to proſtrate themſelues at thy feet, I pray God prolong thy life, and make thee partake of the kingdome of heauen, in the beſt place, euen as I wiſh for my ſelfe, for with my eares haue I heard much good of you, and I ſee with mine eies that which I thought I ſhould neuer haue ſeene, and God will make all things to goe well with you, and your ſeate ſhall bee vpon the tree of life, which is the ſeate of the Saints. Amen.
               
               As a young child I haue done what euer you commanded mee, and will doe if your Embaſſadors come hither, that we may aid one another by our mutuall forces: & I ſhall giue, and cauſe to bee giuen vnto all your Embaſſadors which ſhal come hither, what euer you will ſignifie to be done, and as you did at Macna, at Dalaca, and at the ports in the ſtreights of the redde ſea, that wee may bee proſperouſly ioyned together, both in Councell and action, as I doe chiefly deſire: for when your Forces ſhall come to thoſe Coaſtes, I will ſpeedily bee with them with my Armie alſo, and becauſe there bee no Chriſtians in the Marches of my Countrie, nor any Churches for Chriſtians, I will giue vnto your people thoſe lands to dwell in, which be neereſt vnto the

dominion of the Moores, for it behoueth that you bring your beginnings to a good end. In the meane ſpace ſend to me learned men, and caruers of Images of gold and ſiluer, workers of copper likewiſe, and of Iron, of tinne, and of lead, and Artificers to imprint bookes for the Church in our language, and ſome that can make gold foyle, or thin plates, or raies of gold, and with the ſame can guild other mettals, theſe ſhall bee courteouſly entertained in my houſe, and if they ſhall deſire to depart, I will giue vnto them large & ample rewards for their labours. And I ſweare by God, Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, that I will freely ſuffer them to depart when they pleaſe. This I moſt boldly and confidently deſire, becauſe your vertue is apparant vnto me, and your goodneſſe well knowne. And for that I know you loue me well, whereof I am moſt aſſured, becauſe for my ſake you receiued Mathew very honourably, and liberally, and ſo ſent him backe againe: and therfore I couet to deſire thoſe things, neither be thou aſhamed of it, for I will truly accompliſh and performe all things. That which the Father deſireth of the Sonne, cannot bee denyed, and you are my Father, and I your Sonne, and wee bee coupled and ioyned together, and as one bricke is ioyned to another in a wall, ſo we being ſo to agree together, in one heart, and in the loue of Ieſus Chriſt, who is the head of the world, and thoſe which be with him be likened to brickes ioyned together in a wall.
            
            
               
               
                  Letters from the ſaid DAVID, Emperour of Aethiopia vnto Iohn the third of that name, King of Portugall, written in the yeare of our redemption 1524. and interpreted by Paulus Iouius.
               IN the name of God the Father almighty, maker of heauen and earth, and of all things that be made either viſible or inuiſible: in the name of God the ſonne Chriſt, who is the ſonne and Councell, and prophet of the Father: in the name of God the holy Ghoſt, the Aduocate of the liuing God, equall to the Father and the Sonne, who ſpake by the mouth of the Prophets, breathing vpon the Apoſtles, that they might giue thanks and praiſe vnto the holy Trinity, which is euer perfect in heauen, and in earth, in the ſea, and in the deepe. Amen.
               
               I ſurnamed Virgins Frankincenſe, which name was giuen me at my baptiſme, and now taking vpon me the gouernment of my kingdome, I haue alſo aſſumed the name of Dauid, the deerely beloued of God, the pillar of the faith, the iſsue or ſtocke of Iuda, the ſonne of Dauid, the ſonne of Salomon Kings of Iſraell, the ſonne of the columne, or piller of Sion, the ſonne of the ſeed of Iacob, the ſonne of the hand of Mary, and the ſon of Nav by the fleſh, ſend theſe letters and meſſage vnto Iohn the moſt high, mighty, and potent King of Portugall, and of the Algarbians, the ſonne of King Emanuell: Peace bee vnto you, and the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt remaine alwaies with you. Amen.
               
               At that time that the power of the King your father was reported vnto me, who made war againſt the Moores, the ſons of the abhominable & accurſed Mahomet, I gaue

great thankes vnto God for your increaſe & greatnes, and for the crown of your conuerſation in the houſe of Chriſtianitie. In like manner I tooke pleaſure by the comming of your Embaſſadors, which reported vnto me that kings ſpeeches, whereby a ſingular loue, knowledge, & friendſhip was eſtabliſhed betwixt vs, vtterly to extirpe & driue away thoſe wicked & accurſed Moores, and vnbeleeuing Gentiles, which dwell betweene your kingdomes & mine. But while I was thus ioyfull, I heard that your father and mine was departed out of this life, before I could diſpatch my Embaſſadors from hence vnto him: and therefore my ioy was ſuddenly turned into ſadnes, ſo that in the great ſorrow of my heart all the States and Noble men of my Court, and Eccleſiaſticall Prelates, and all which liue in Monaſteries, and all our ſubiects wholly, made great lamentaion with me, ſo as the pleaſure we conceiued of the firſt meſſage, was equalled and extinguiſhed with the ſorrow of the laſt.
               Sir, from my firſt entrance into my kingdomes vnto this preſent time, no meſſage nor meſſenger hath come vnto me either from the King or kingdome of Portugall; but in the life time of the King your Father, who ſent his Captaines and Gouernours vnto mee, with Clearkes and Deacons, which brought with them all ſolemne prouiſion and apparell for the Maſse, for which I reioyced greatly, and receiued them honourably, and ſhortly after diſmiſsed them, that they might returne with honour and peace. And after they came to a Hauen of the ſea, which is within my limits in the redde ſea, they found not the great Gouernour of the Nauie there, whom your father had ſent, for he expected not their comming, but certified mee that hee could not

ſtay their comming, for that your cuſtome is to create a new chiefe Gouernour of the Fleete once euery three yeares, in which meane time hee that was newly created, came thither, and this was the cauſe that the Embaſſadors ſtaied longer then was needfull. But now I ſend my Meſſages by Chriſtopher, the brother of Licontius, whoſe name at his baptiſme is Zoga Zabo, which is as much to ſay, as the grace of the Father, and hee ſhall manifeſt my deſires before you.
               In like manner I ſend Francis Aluarez vnto the Pope of Rome, who in my name ſhall yeeld my obedience vnto him, as is fitting.
               O Sir King, & my brother, giue eare and attend, & indeuor to embrace that friendſhip which your Father opened betwixt vs, and ſend your Meſſengers and Letters often vnto vs, for I greatly deſire to ſee them, as from my brother, for ſo it ſhould be, ſeeing wee are both Chriſtians. And ſeeing the Moores which be wicked and naught, accord and agree together in their ſect. And now I preteſt I will neuer hereafter admit any Embaſſadors from the Kings of Egypt, nor from other Kings, which ſend Embaſſadors vnto me, but from your highneſſe, which I much deſire ſhould often come: for the Kings of the Moores account me not their friend, by reaſon of our diſagreement, and diſparitie in religion: yet they faine friendſhip, that by that meanes they may more freely and ſafely exerciſe merchandiſe in our kingdomes, which is very profitable vnto them, for they carry great ſtore of gold (wherof they be very greedy) out of my kingdoms: though they be but hollow friends vnto me, and their commodities bring me but little pleaſure, but this hath beene tollerated, becauſe it hath been an ancient cuſtome

of our former Kings, and though I make no warres vpon them, nor vtterly ouerthrow them, and bring them to deſtruction, yet in this I am to be borne withall, leſt, if I did ſo, they ſhould violate and pull downe the holy Temple which is at Ieruſalem, wherein is the ſepulcher of our Sauiour Chriſt, which God hath ſuffered to be in the power of the wicked Moores, and alſo leaſt they ſhould make leuell with the ground other Churches which be in Egypt and Syria. And this is the cauſe why I doe not inwade and ſubdue them; which thing greatly irketh me, and I am the rather perſwaded ſo to doe, ſeeing I haue no bordering Chriſtian king to aſſiſt me, and to cheere and incourage my heart in that, or the like enterpriſe.
               And therefore my ſelfe (O King,) haue no great cauſe to reioyce of the Chriſtian Kings of Europe, vnderſtanding that they agree not together in one heart, but that warres bee very rife amongſt them. Bee you all of one Chriſtian-like minde, for you ought all of you to bee content of a firme peace amongſt you.
               And certainly, if any of my neighbouring Chriſtian Kings were ioyned with me in an amiable league (as they ought) I would neuer depart from him one houre. And of this I know not well what I ſhould ſay, or what I ſhould do, ſeeing they ſeeme to be ſo ordained by God.
               Sir, ſend your Meſſengers more often vnto mee, I beſeech you, for when I looke vpon your letters, then mee thinkes, I behold your countenance. And ſurely greater friendſhip ariſeth betwixt thoſe wich bee farre diſtant, then thoſe which dwell neere together, by reaſon of the great deſire wherewith they bee delighted,

for he which hath hidden treaſures, though he cannot ſee them with his eyes, yet in his heart hee euer loueth them moſt ardently, as our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt ſaith in the Goſpell, where thy treaſure is, there is thy heart alſo.
               And in like manner ought you to make mee your treaſure, and to cowple your heart ſincerely with mine. O my Lord and brother, keepe this word, for you bee moſt prudent, and (as I heare) much like vnto your Father in wiſe-dome, which when I vnderſtood, I forthwith gaue praiſe vnto God, and laying aſide all griefe, conceiued ioy and ſaid: Bleſſed is the wiſe ſonne, and of great eſtimation, the ſonne of King Emanuell, which ſitteth in the throne of his fathers kingdomes. My Lord beware then, faint not, ſeeing thou art as ſtrong as thy father was, nor ſhew thy forces to be weake againſt the Moores and Gentiles, for by the aſſiſtance of God, and thine owne vertue, thou ſhalt eaſily vanquiſh and deſtroy them, neither ſhalt thou ſay that thou hadſt ſmall power left thee by thy father, for truely it was great inough, and God ſhall euer bring thee helpe.
               I haue men, money, and munition, in aboundance, like the ſands of the ſea, and the ſtarres of heauen, and we ioyning our forces together, may eaſily deſtroy the rudenes and barbarouſnes of the Moores. And I deſire nothing elſe of you but skilfull men, which bee able to inſtruct my ſouldiers to keepe their orders and rankes in battell. And thou, O King, art a man of perfect age, King Salomon tooke vpon him the gouernment of his kingdome when he was but twelue yeares of age, yet of great power and more wiſe then his father. And my ſelfe likewiſe was but a childe of eleuen yeares of age when my father

                  Nav departed this life, and being entred into my Fathers ſeate, by Gods ordinance, I obtained greater wealth and forces then euer my Father had: for in my power bee all the borderers and Nations of the Kingdome. Wherefore both of vs ought to giue inceſſant thankes vnto God for ſo great benefites receiued.
               Giue care vnto mee my brother and Lord, for this at one word I deſire of you, that you will ſend vnto mee learned men, that can carue images, imprint bookes, and make Swordes, and and all kinde of weapons for the warres: head Maſons likewiſe, and Carpenters, and phyſitions that haue skill to make medicines and cure wounds.
               I would alſo haue ſuch as can drawe gold into thin plates, and bee able curiouſly to carue and ingraue gold and ſiluer, and ſuch likewiſe as haue knowledge to get gold and ſiluer from out the veines of the earth, and to worke in all manner of mettall mines. Beſides theſe, I ſhall much eſteeme of ſuch as can make couerings for houſes of leade, and will teach others how to make tiles of chalke or clay.
               To conclude, I ſhall haue vſe of all manner of Artificers, and eſpecially of ſuch as can make Gunnes. Helpe mee therefore, I pray you, in theſe things, as one brother ſhould helpe another, and ſo God will helpe you, and deliuer you from all euill, God will heare thy prayers and petitions, as hee hath receiued holy ſacrifices at all times, as firſt of all, the ſacrifices of Abell, and of Noe when hee was in the Arke, and that of Abraham when hee was in the land of Madian, and that of Iſaac when hee departed from the Ditch or Trench of the Oath, and that of Iocob in the houſe

of Bethlem, and of Moſes in Aegypt, and Aaron in the Mount, and of Ieſon the ſonne of Nav in Galgale, and of Gedeon in the Coaſt, and of Sampſon when hee was a thirſt in the land of drought, and of Samuell in Rhama, of the Prophet, and of Dauid in Nacira, and of Salomon in the Cittie of Gabeon, and of Helias in mount Carmell, when hee raiſed from death the Widdow womans ſonne, from Rhicha aboue the pit, and of Ioſaphat in battell, and of Manaſses when hee ſinned, and conuerted againe vnto God, and of Daniell in the Lyons Denne, and of the three brethren, Sydrach, Myſaach, and Abednago on the firy furnace, and of Anna before the Altar, and of Nehemias, which made walles with Zorababell, and of Mathathia with his ſonnes, ouer the fourth part of the world, and of Eſau vppon his bleſſing, euen ſo our Lord wil receiue your ſacrifices, and ſupplications, and will helpe you, and ſtand with you againſt all perſuerſnes, and ouerth wartnes at all ſeaſons, and euery day.
               Peace bee with you, and I embrace you with the armes of ſanctitie, and in like manner I embrace all thoſe which be of your Councell of the kingdome of Portugall, Archbiſhops likewiſe, and Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, and all men and women whatſoeuer. The grace of God, and bleſsing of the Virgine Mary the mother of God be with you, and with you all. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Letters from the ſame moſt renowned Dauid, Emperour of Ethiopia, vnto the Pope of Rome, written in the yeare of our Lord 1524. and tranſlated into Latine by Paulus Iouius.
               IN the name of God the Father Almighty, maker of heauen and earth, and of all things viſible and inuiſible: in the name of God the Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, which is the ſame with the Father from the beginning of the world, and is light of light, and true God of true God: in the name of the holy ſpirit of the liuing God, who proceeded from God Father.
               Theſe letters I the King doe ſend, whoſe name the Lyons doe worſhip, and by the grace of God, I am called Athani Tinghil, that is to ſay, the incenſe of a virgin, the Sonne of King Dauid, the ſonne of Solomon, the ſonne of a king by the hand of Mary, the ſon of Nav by the fleſh, the ſon of of the holy Apoſtles, S. Peter and S Paul by grace.
               Peace bee vnto you moſt iuſt Lord, holy, mighty, pure, and ſacred Father: vnto you, which are the head of all Princes, and feareſt no man, ſeeing no one can ſpeake euill of thee: vnto you, which are the moſt vigilant Curate and obſeruer of ſoules, and friend of ſtrangers and and peregrines.
               O holy maiſter, and preacher of the faith, enemy of all thoſe things which offend the conſcience, louer of good manners, ſanctified man, whom all men laud and praiſe.
               O happy and holy Father, I yeeld obedience vnto you with great reuerence, for you are the peace of all things, and deſerue all good, and therefore it is fitting

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
that all men ſhould ſhew their obedience vnto you, as the holy Apoſtles command to yeeld obedience to God. This truly belongeth vnto you; for ſo alſo they command vs to worſhip Biſhops, Archbiſhops, and Prelats. In like manner that we ſhould loue and reuerence you, as our father, feare you as our King, and haue confidence in you as in God. Wherefore I humbly confeſſe, and with my bending knees ſay vnto you, O holy father, that you are my father, and I your ſon. O holy & moſt mighty father, why did you neuer ſend any vnto vs, that you might better vnderſtand of my life and health, ſeeing you be the ſheepheard, and I your ſheepe? For a good ſheepeheard will neuer forget his flocke, neither ought you to thinke that I dwel ſo farre remote from your regions, that meſſengers cannot come vnto mee, ſeeing your ſonne Emanuell, the King of Portugall, hath ſent Embaſſadors vnto me, very conueniently, from his kingdome, which is the furtheſt from vs in the world, and if God had ſpared him life, and not incited him ſo ſuddenly to heauen, (without doubt) thoſe things which we then had in hand, had beene brought to a happy concluſion. But now I much deſire to bee certified by ſome truſty meſſengers, of your holineſſe health and happineſſe, for I neuer yet heard any meſſage from your holineſſe, but ſomething I heard of our owne people, who to performe their vows, went a pilgrimage into thoſe parts, but ſeeing they went not in my name, nor brought with them my letters from you, their reports are but an vncertaine beleefe: for I queſtioning with them, they ſaid they came from Ieruſalem, where hauing performed their vowes, they went to Rome to viſite the Churches of the Apoſtles, vnderſtanding that they might eaſily come to thoſe

places which bee inhabited by Chriſtians. And ſurely I take great pleaſure in their ſpeeches, becauſe in my ſweete cogitation, I doe behold the ſimilitude of thy holy countenance, which ſeemeth vnto mee like the countenance of an Angell. And I confeſſe, that I doe loue and reuerence that image as an Angellicall likeneſſe, but yet were it more acceptable and pleaſant vnto mee, deuoutely and diligently to conſider and view your words and Letters.
               And therefore I moſt humbly beſeech you to ſend Meſſengers vnto me with your benediction, thereby to cheere and exhilerate my heart, for ſeeing wee agree in faith and religion, before all things I deſire and intreate that you will ſet my loue and friendſhip in the principalleſt part of your heart, as the ring which you weare vpon your finger, and the chaine of gold which you put about your neck, that ſo the remembrance of me may neuer be blotted out of your memory: for with thankefull words & letters frendſhip is increaſed, it is embraced with ſacred peace, from whence all humane ioy ſpringeth & ariſeth, for euen as hee that is thirſty greatly deſireth cold water (as the ſcripture ſaith) ſo doth my heart conceiue an incredible ioy from the meſſengers & letters which come to me from the furtheſt parts of the world: neither ſhall I only reioice to heare from your holines, but alſo I ſhall be glad to heare certaine newes from all the Kings of Chriſtendome. And full as ioyfull as thoſe that in battell doe get the beſt ſpoyles. And this may bee done with great facility, ſeeing the King of Portugall hath made the whole iourney plaine vnto them, who long ſithence hath ſent his Embaſſadors vnto vs with ſtrong Armies: but neither when my father was liuing,

nor ſithence, haue wee receiued any Meſſage or Letters from any other Chriſtian King, or from the Pope himſelfe, although in our treaſuries of Monuments, and Charters of my great Grand father, is preſerued the memory of thoſe Letters which Pope Eugenius ſent into this Countrie, when the King of Kings, of all Ethiopia being the ſeede of Iacob, and a King to bee feared, had the gouernment of this kingdome.
               The forme of which letters were thus. Eugenius the Biſhop of Rome to our beloued ſonne the King of the ſeede of Iacob, the King of all the kings of Ethiopia, and chiefly to be feared, &c.
               And in the concluſion of the ſame letters is mentioned that his ſonne Iohn Paleologus, which dyed about two yeares before, the King of the Romaean Kings, was called to the celebration of the ſacred Synode. And that Ioſeph the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, came with him with a great number of Archbiſhops, and Biſhops, and Prelates of all ſorts, among whom were the Proctors or Factors of the Patriarckes of Antioch, Alexandria and Ieruſalem, who when they had ioyned themſelues together in loue of holy faith and religion, the vnity of the Church being ordained and eſtabliſhed, all the difficulties and troubles of ancient time, which ſeemed erronious, & contrary to religion, were (by Gods diuine aſſiſtance) vtterly taken away & aboliſhed: which things being rightly eſtabliſhed and ſet in order, the Pope himſelfe brought great ioy vnto them all.
               This booke of Pope Eugenius wee haue ſent vnto you, which wee haue kept vncorrupted, and wee would haue ſent vnto you the whole order and power of the Popes bleſſing, but that the volume of theſe things would ſeeme

too great, for it would exceed in bignes the whole booke of Paul to all the nations he writ vnto.
               The Legates which brought theſe things vnto vs from the Pope, were Theodorus, Peter, Didymus, and George, the ſeruants of Ieſus Chriſt, and you ſhall do well (moſt holy Father) to command your bookes to be looked ouer, where (I ſuppoſe) ſome memory of theſe things which we write of, may be found out. Wherefore holy father, if you will write any thing vnto vs beleeue it confidently, that we will moſt diligently commit it to our bookes, that the eternall memory of thoſe things may remaine to our poſterity, and ſurely I account him bleſſed whoſe memory is preſerued in writing in the ſacred citty of Rome, and in the ſeate of the Saints, S. Peter and S. Paul, for theſe bee Lords of the kingdome of heauen, & iudges of the whole world. And becauſe that this is my beliefe, I therfore ſend theſe letters, that I may obtaine grace of your holines, and your moſt ſacred Senate, that from thence may come vnto me a holy benediction, & increaſe of all good things. And I moſt earneſtly beſeech your holines to ſend vnto me ſome images & pictures of the Saints, & eſpecially of the virgin Mary, that your name may be often in my memory, & that I may take continuall pleaſure in your gifts. Furthermore I heartily intreate you to ſend vnto me men learned in the Scriptures, workmen likewiſe that can make images & ſwords, and all maner of weapons for the warre, grauers alſo of gold and ſiluer, and Carpenters, & Maſons, eſpecially which can build houſes of ſtone, and make couering for them of lead and copper, wherby the roofes of the houſes may be defended. And beſides theſe, ſuch as can make glaſſe & inſtruments of muſicke, and ſuch as be skilfull in muſicke, thoſe alſo that can play vpon Flutes,

Trumpets, and pſhalmes, ſhall be moſt welcome & deere vnto vs: and theſe workmen I much deſire ſhould bee ſent me from your Court: but if there be not ſufficicient ſtore in your court, your holines may command them of other Kings, who will obey your command moſt readily. When theſe ſhal come to me, they ſhall bee honorably eſteemed of according to their deſerts, & from my liberality ſhall be amply rewarded, and if any ſhall deſire to returne home, he ſhall depart with liberall gifts whither hee pleaſe: for I will not detaine any one againſt his will, though I ſhould haue great fruit and benefite by his induſtry.
               But I muſt now ſpeake of other matters, & demand of you (moſt holy father) why you exhort not the Chriſtian kings, your children, to lay aſide thir armes, and as becommeth brethren, to accord and agree amongſt themſelues, ſeeing they be thy ſheepe, and thou their ſheepheard? for your holines knoweth right well what the Goſpell commandeth, where it is ſaid: That euery kingdome diuided in it ſelfe ſhall be deſolated, and brought to ruine. And if the Kings would agree in their hearts, & conclude an aſſured league and peace together, they might eaſily vanquiſh all the Mahometans, and by their fortunate entrance, and ſudden irruption vtterly burſt, and throw downe the ſepulcher of that falſe Prophet Mahomet. For this cauſe (holy father) indeuour your ſelfe that a firme peace and aſſured league of friendſhip may bee concluded and eſtabliſhed amongſt them, & admoniſh them to be aſſiſtant & aiding vnto me, ſeeing in the confines of my kingdomes, I am on all ſides incloſed and incompaſſed about with thoſe moſt wicked men the Mahometane Moores, for thoſe Mahometane Moores yeeld mutual aid one to another, & the kings with kings, petty kings with petty kings, do ſincerely and conſtantly

aſſemble themſelues againſt vs. There is a Moore very neere neighbour vnto me, to whom the other bordering Moores miniſter weapons, horſes, and munition for the warres. Theſe be the kings of India, Perſis, Arabia, and Egypt, which things grieue and moleſt mee exceedingly euery day, when I behold the enemies of the Chriſtian religion ioyned together in brotherly loue, and to enioy peace, & to ſee the Chriſtian kings my brothers to be nothing at all moued by theſe iniuries, nor to yeeld mee any helpe, as aſſuredly behoueth Chriſtians to doe, ſeeing the impious brood of Mahomet do aid and aſſiſt one another: neither am I he, that for that purpoſe ſhould require Souldiers & prouiſion for warres of you, ſeeing I haue Souldiers left of mine owne: but onely I deſire your praiers and oriſons, wiſhing alſo fauour & grace with your holines, & with all Chriſtian Kings my brethren: for I muſt ſeeke to obtaine friendſhip of you, that I may bee fully inſtructed and furniſhed of thoſe things which I formerly deſired, to the terror of the Moores, & that my neigbours, the enemies of the Chriſtian faith may vnderſtand that the kings do fauor & aid me with a ſingular care & affection, which ſurely will redound to the praiſe of vs in common, ſeeing we agree together in one verity of religion and faith, and in this councell wee will conforme, which ſhall be firme and abſolute with that which ſhal fall out to be more profitable. God therfore fulfill all your deſires about the praiſes of Ieſus Chriſt, and of God our Father, to whom all men giue praiſes for euer and euer. And you moſt holy Lord and father imbrace me, I beſeech you, with all the Saints of Ieſus Chriſt which be at Rome, into which embracings let all the boderers of my kingdomes, and thoſe which dwell in Ethiopia be receiued, & giue thanks to our

Lord Ieſus Chriſt with your ſpirit. Theſe letters your holineſſe ſhall receiue at the hands of my brother Iohn King of Portugall, the ſonne of the moſt mighty King Emanuell, by our Embaſſador Francis Aluarez.
               
            
            
               
                  Other letters from the ſame Dauid, Emperour of Ethiopia, written to the Pope of Rome in the yeare of our Lord God 1524. and interpreted by Paulus Iouius.
               HAppy and holy father, which art ordained of God to be the conſecrator and ſanctifier of all nations, and the poſſeſſor of Saint Peters ſeate: to you bee giuen the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, and whatſoeuer you either binde or looſe vpon earth, ſhall be bound or looſed in heauen, as Chriſt himſelfe hath ſaid, and as S. Mathew hath written in his Goſpell.
               I the King, whoſe name the Lyons doe worſhip, by the grace of God, called Athani Tingil, that is to ſay, virgins incenſe, which name I receiued in baptiſme, but now, when I firſt tooke vpon mee the gouernment of the kingdome, I aſſumed vnto me the name of Dauid, the beloued of God, the piller of faith, the kinſman of the ſtock of Iuda, the ſon of Dauid, the ſon of Salomon, the ſon of the piller of faith, the ſon of the ſeed of Iacob, the ſon of the hand of Mary, the ſon of Nav by the fleſh, Emperour of great & high Ethiopia, and of great kingdomes, dominions & lands King of Xoa, of Caffate, of Fatigar, of Angote, of Baru, of Baaligaze, of Adea, of Vangue, of Goiame (where is the head of the riuer Nilus) of Damaraa, Vaguemedri, Ambeaa, Vague, Tigri Mahon, of Sabain, where Saba was Queene, & of Bernagaes, and Lord vnto Nobia in the end of Egypt. All theſe

Prouinces be within my power, and many other, which now I haue not reckoned: nor haue I expreſſed theſe kingdomes & prouinces in their proper names, for pride or vaine-glory, but for this cauſe onely, that God may be praiſed more and more, who of his ſingular benignity hath giuen vnto the kings, my predeceſſors, the gouernement of ſuch great and ample kingdomes of the Chriſtian religion, and yet ſurely hee hath made me worthy of a more excellent fauour and grace, then other Kings, that I might continually deuote my ſelfe to religion, becauſe he hath made me Adell, that is, the Lord and enemie of the Moores, and Gentiles which worſhip idols, I ſend vnto you to kiſſe your holines feete, after the manner of other Chriſtian Kings my brethren, to whom I am nothing inferior, neither in religion nor power, for I within mine owne kingdomes am the piller of faith, neither am I aided with any forreine helpe; for I repoſe my whole truſt and confidence in God alone, who gouerneth and ſuſtaineth me vp, from the time wherein the Angell of God ſpake vnto Phillip, that hee ſhould inſtruct in the true faith, the Eunuch of the mighty Queene Candace, the Queene of Ethiopia, as ſhee was going from Ieruſalem to Gaza. And Phillip did then baptize the Eunuch, as the Angell commaunded, and the Eunuch baptized the Queene, with a great part of her houſhold, and of her people, which hath euer ſithence continued Chriſtians, remaining for all times after that, firme and ſtable in the faith of Chriſt. And my predeceſſors hauing no other aid but onely Gods aſiſtance, haue planted the faith in very large kingdomes, which I my ſelfe doe likewiſe daily contend to effect. For I remaine in the great bounds of my kingdomes, like a Lyon incompaſſed about with a

mightie wood, and hedged and incloſed againſt the Moores that lye in waite for me, and other nations which bee enemies to the Chriſtian faith, and refuſe to heare the word of God, or my exhortations. But I my ſelfe being girded with my ſword, doe perſecute and expell them out by little & little, indeed by Gods diuine helpe, which I neuer found wanting, which happeneth otherwiſe to Chriſtian kings, for if the limits of their kingdoms be large, it may eaſily be obtained, for that one may aſſiſt & miniſter helpe vnto another, and receiue further helpe by your holines benediction, of which I am partaker, ſeeing in my bookes be contained certain letters, which long ſince Pope Eugenius ſent with his benediction, vnto the king of the ſeed of Iacob, which bleſſing giuen by his own hands, being accepted and taken, I do enioy, and thereof greatly reioyce. And I haue the holy temple, which is at Ieruſalem in great veneration, vnto which I oftentimes ſend oblations due by our pilgrimes, and many more and fatter I would haue ſent, but that the paſſages bee hindred by Moores and Infidels: for (beſides the taking away from our meſſengers our gifts and treaſures) they will not ſuffer them to paſſe freely, but if they would ſuffer vs to trauell, I would come into the familiarity & fellowſhip of the Romane Church, as other Chriſtian Kings do, to whom I am nothing inferior in the chriſtian religion, for euen as they belieue, I confeſſe one true faith, and one Church, and I moſt ſincerely beleeue in the holy Trinity, & in one God, and the virginity of our Lady the virgin Mary, and I hold and obſerue all the articles of the faith, as they were written by the Apoſtles. Now our good God hath by the hand of the moſt mighty and Chriſtian King Emanuell, made the paſſage open and plaine, that we may meete by

our Embaſſadors, and that we being Chriſtians ioyned in one faith, might ſerue God with other Chriſtians. But while his Embaſſadors were in my Court, it was reported vnto me that K. Emanuel was dead, & that his ſon my brother Iohn had the rule of his fathers kingdome, wherupon as I was ſorrowful for my fathers death, euen ſo I reioyced greatly at the happy entrance of my brother into his kingdome, ſo as I hope that we ioining our power and forces together, may make open the paſſages both by ſea and land, by the regions of the wicked Moores, and greatly terrifying them, vtterly expell them from their ſeates and kingdomes, that the way being made fit & peaceable, chriſtians may freelie come and go to the temple of Ieruſalem. And then ſhall I bee pertaker of his diuine loue in the Church of the Apoſtles S. Peter and S. Paul. And I couet greatly to obtaine the ſacred benediction of the Vicar of Chriſt, for without doubt your holineſſe is Gods Vicar, and when I heare many things of your holines by trauellers & pilgrimes, that go and come miraculouſly from our countries to Ieruſalem, & from thence to Rome, they breed in me an incredible ioy & pleaſure, but I ſhould bee more glad if my Embaſſadors could make a ſhorter cut in their iourneies to bring newes vnto me, as my hope is they will once do before I dye, by the grace of almighty God, who euer keepe you in health and holines, Amen.
               
               And I kiſſe your holines feet, and humbly beſeech you to ſend me your bleſſing. Theſe letters alſo your holines ſhall receiue at the hands of my brother Iohn King of Portugall, by our ſaid Embaſsador Francis Aluarez.
               
               Theſe Epiſtles tranſlated by Paulus Iouius I haue ioined to this worke, for the better knowledge of this hiſtorie, wherein we haue changed nor altered nothing (although

in many places they require alteration) ſome few excepted, which being badly tranſlated into Spaniſh, out of the Arabian and Abeſenicke language, did cleane alter the whole order of the Epiſtles. The ſame Iouius alſo in his declaration of theſe Epiſtles, hath promiſed to tranſlate into Latine the booke which Francis Aluarez compoſed, concerning the ſcituation, manners and behauiour of the Ethiopians, in which booke he expreſſeth and ſetteth forth his whole iourney or trauels. One coppy of which booke I my ſelfe haue in my keeping. But if Iouius ſurceaſe to tranſlate it, I would not bee ſtrange to take the matter in hand, although not willingly, vnleſſe (moſt holy father) it pleaſe you to command, and then ſhall I be more free and ſafe from all malitious detractors, who may happily ſuppoſe that I vndergoe the buſines not with a deſire to further the Chriſtian common-wealth, but rather in aemulation of Iouius glory. For the doing of which buſines effectually & faithfully, I ſuppoſe I am ſufficiently inſtructed, for when I had executed my embaſſage into Germany and Sarmatia, & was returned vnto my king, Iohn the third of that name, (of whoſe great courteſie and bountie in receiuing of me, I had ſufficient triall) I fell in conference with the Ethiopian Embaſſador at Lisbon, a man honoured, and indued with the dignity of a Biſhop, admirable for his credit, doctrine, and eloquence in the Chaldean and Arabian tongue, and in briefe, a man moſt fit to bee ſent from the moſt mighty Emperour of Ethiopia, vnto great and potent princes, for vrgent and weightie affaires, his name was Zaga Zabo, and after an aſſured and firme friendſhip was eſtabliſhed betwixt vs, I had often conference with him, and reaſoned and debated with him, eſpecially of the manners and Religion of the

Chriſtians of Aethiopia: for I deſired to know thoſe things, not by the bare narration of trauelling interpreters, but from a man borne in that Country; and that in his preſence, and receiuing it from his mouth. Amongſt other things, I ſhewed vnto him an Epiſtle ſent into Portugall by Mathew the Embaſſador, which Epiſtle together with the Articles which he propoſed before King Emmanuel, I tranſlated (as I haue ſayd) into the Latine tongue, and many things I haue corrected by his direction, where the interpretation obtained not ſufficient credit, nor likelihood, which he affirmed, did oftentimes happen both to me and to Iouius: for as then I had with me the Epiſtles of the ſame Iouius, which we conferred with great diligence, and after vnfained friendſhip and the true loue of Chriſt flouriſhed and was eſteemed amongſt vs, I was imboldened to require of him a plaine and ſincere declaration of the faith and religion of the Aethiopians, and to haue it penned downe with his owne hands, which hee graunted vnto me with great alacritie, and foorthwith beganne to make deſcription thereof, which relation of his, I haue faithfully tranſlated into Latin, as by the ſequele will appeare, wherein I went forward with greater deſire, my conſcience vrging me that I was not ignorant, that if theſe things ſhould haue periſhed with me, they, could neuer after that be publiſhed by any other man: for becauſe they were ſo framed and compoſed after the Chaldean and Aethiopian phraſe, as they could hardly of any man bee vnderſtood but of my ſelfe, who by much familiaritie, might attaine to the knowledge of all thoſe things, as well from the mouth, as from the writings of the ſayd Aethiopian Ambaſſadour.
            
            
               
               In the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, Amen.
               THeſe be the things which be vſed & obſerued amongſt vs Aethiopians, as touching our faith and religion:
               Firſt, we beleeue in the name of the holy Trinity, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt, who is one Lord, three in name but one in Diuinity, three repreſentations but one ſimilitude, the coniunction of the three perſons is equall; equall I ſay in Diuinitie, one Kingdome, one throne, one Iudge, one Charity, one Word, and one Spirit: but the word of the Father, and of the Sonne, the word of the holy Ghoſt and the Sonne, is the ſame word; and the word with God, and with the holy Ghoſt, and with himſelf without any defect or diuiſion, the Sonne of the Father, and the Sonne of the ſame Father, without beginning, to wit, firſt the Sonne of the Father without mother: For no one knoweth the ſecret and myſterie of his Natiuity, but the Father, Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, and the ſame in beginning was the Word, & the Word was the Word with God, and God was the Word, the Spirit of the Father, the holy Spirit, and the Spirit of the Sonne is the holy Spirit, but the holy Spirit of his Spirit, is without any diminution or augmentation: for that the holy Ghoſt, the Aduocate, or Comforter, the true God which proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne, ſpake by the mouth of the Prophets, and deſcended in the fierie flame vppon the Apoſtles in the porch of Syon, who declared and preached throughout the whole world, the Word of the Father, which Word was the Sonne himſelfe.
               Moreouer, the Father is not firſt, in that hee is Father, nor the Sonne laſt, in that he is the Sonne, euen ſo the

holy Ghoſt is neither firſt nor laſt; for they be three perſons, but one God, which ſeeth, and is ſeene of no man, and who by his onely counſell created all things: and after that, the Sonne of his owne accord, for our ſaluation, (the Father himſelfe being willing, and the holy Ghoſt conſenting thereunto,) deſcended from his high and heauenly habitation, and was incarnate by the holy Ghoſt of the Virgin Mary; which Mary was adorned with a double Virginity, the one ſpirituall, the other carnall: he was alſo borne without any corruption: the ſame Mary his mother after her child-bearing remaning a Virgin, & inſpired with great wonder, and hidden fire of Diuinity, brought foorth without bloud, paine, or dolors her Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, who was a man innocent, and without ſinne, perfect God, and perfect man, hauing one onely aſpect. As he was an infant he grew vp by little and little, ſucking the milk of his mother Mary the Virgin, and when he attained to the age of thirty yeares, he was baptized in Iordan; he walked like other men, he was wearie, he ſweat, he was both hungrie and thirſtie, and all theſe things he ſuffered freely and voluntarily, working many miracles, and by his Diuinitie he reſtored ſight to the blind, healed thoſe which were lame, cleanſed the leapers, and raiſed vp the dead, and laſt of all, he was willingly apprehended and taken, ſcourged, beaten with buffets, and crucified, he languiſhed and died for our offences, and by his death he ouercame death and the diuell, and by his ſorrow in his life time, hee diſſolued our ſinnes, and bare our griefes, and with the Baptiſme of his bloud, (which Baptiſme was his death) he baptized the Patriarchs and Prophets, and he deſcended into hell, where was the ſoule of Adam and his ſons, & the ſoule of Chriſt himſelfe which is of Adam; which ſoule of Adam Chriſt

himſelf took of the bleſſed Virgin Mary: and in the brightnes of his diuinity, and ſtrength of his croſſe, he brake the brazen gates of hell, binding Satan in chaines of yron, and redeeming thence Adam & his ſons. Al theſe things Chriſt did, wherfore he was repleniſhed with diuinity, and that diuinity was with his ſoule, & alſo with his moſt holy body: which diuinity gaue vertue to the croſſe, & which diuinity he euer had, & yet hath commune with the Father in Trinity & Vnity: nor did that Chriſt, while he walked vpō the earth, euer want his diuinity, for the leaſt twinckling of an eye. After this he was buried, and the third day the ſame Ieſus Chriſt, the Prince of reſurrection, Ieſus Chriſt the chiefe of the Prieſts, Ieſus Chriſt the King of Iſrael, aroſe againe with great power and fortitude, and after all things were fulfilled which the holy Prophets fore-ſhewed, hee aſcended with great glorie & triumph into heauen, and ſitteth on the right hand of the Father: and he ſhall come againe in glorie, carrying his croſſe before his face, and the ſword of Iuſtice in his hand, to iudge both the quicke and the dead; of whoſe kingdome ſhall be no end. I beleeue one holy Catholike and Apoſtolike Church: I beleeue one Baptiſme, which is the remiſſion of ſinnes, I hope for and beleeue the reſurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.
               
               I beleeue in our Ladie, the bleſſed Virgin Mary, a Virgin I ſay, both in ſpirit and fleſh, who (as the mother of Chriſt) is the charity of all people, the Saint of Saints, and Virgin of Virgins, whome I do worſhippe all manner of wayes. I beleeue the ſacred wood of the croſſe, to bee the bed of the ſorow of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the ſon of God; which Chriſt is our ſaluation, by whome wee be ſaued, a ſcandall to the Iewes, and fooliſhneſſe to the Gentils.
               
                  
But we preach and beleeue the ſtrength of the Croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, euen as S. Paul our Doctor hath taught vs. I beleeue S. Peter to be the rocke of the lawe; which law is founded vpon the holy Prophets, the foundation and head of the Catholike and Apoſtolike Church, both eaſt and weſt, where euer is the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: the power of which Church, Peter the Apoſtle hath, and the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, with which he can ſhut and open, looſe and bind, and hee ſhall ſit with the other Apoſtles his fellowes, vpon twelue ſeats (with honor and praiſe) with our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who in the day of Iudgement ſhall pronounce the ſentence vpon vs, which day to the Saints, ſhall be cauſe of ioy; but to the wicked, griefe and gnaſhing of teeth, when they ſhall bee caſt out into the burning flames of hell fire, with their father the Diuell. I beleeue that the holy Prophets and Apoſtles, Martyrs, and Confeſſors, were the right imitators of Chriſt, whom with the moſt bleſſed Angels of God, I worſhip & honor: & in like maner alſo do I imbrace, & affect as their followers. Alſo I beleeue that vocall and auricular confeſſion of all my ſinnes is to bee made to the prieſt, by whoſe prayers (through Chriſt our Lord) I hope to obtain ſaluation. Moreouer, I acknowledge the B. of Rome to bee the chiefPaſtor of the ſheep of Chriſt, yeelding obedience vnto all Patriarks, Cardinals, Archb. & Biſhops, of whom he is head, as vnto the Miniſters of Chriſt himſelfe. This is my faith and law, and of al the people of Aethiopia, that be vnder the power of Precious Iohn; which faith & the loue of Chriſt, be ſo confirmed amongſt vs, as (with the help of our Sauiour) I ſhall neuer deny it, neither by death, fire, nor ſword; which faith all we ſhall carry with vs in the day of iudgment, before the face of the ſame Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  
Now hauing gone thus farre, I will expreſſe the diſcipline, doctrine, and law, which the Apoſtles in their holy books of Councels and Canons, (which we call Manda & Abethylis) haue taught vs: and of thoſe bookes of the ordonances of the Church there be 8. all which were compiled by the Apoſtles when they were aſſembled together at Ieruſalem: wherof making great inquiry of many Doctours, after I came into Portugall, I found none that did remember them. The obſeruatiōs which the Apoſtles preſcribed vnto vs in theſe bookes, be theſe following: Firſt, that we ought to faſt euery wedneſday in remembrance of the Iewes Councell; for vpon that day they conſulted and decreed amongſt themſelues, that Chriſt ſhold be killed: and that we ſhold faſt euery Friday; vpon which day Chriſt Ieſus was crucified, and died for our ſins: and vpon theſe two dayes we are commanded to faſt till the Sun-ſetting. They alſo inioyned vs to faſt with bread & water the forty daies of Lent; and to pray ſeuen times in the day and night. By thoſe edicts alſo we be bound to celebrate our ſacrifice vppon Wedneſdayes and Fridayes in the euening, becauſe at that time our Lord Ieſus Chriſt yeelded vp the ghoſt vpon the holy Croſſe. They willed alſo, that vpon Sundaies we ſhould al aſſemble together in the holy church at the third houre of the day, from the Sun riſing, to reade and heare the bookes of the Prophets; and that after that we ſhould preach the Goſpell, and celebrate Maſſe. Moreouer, they appointed nine feſtiuall daies to be celebrated in memorie of Chriſt, to wit, the Annunciation, the Natiuity, the Circumciſion, the Purification or Candlemas, his Baptiſme, Palm ſunday vnto the octaues of good Friday, (as we term it) which be 12. dayes, the Aſcenſion alſo, and the Feaſt of Penticoſt, with their holy dayes. And by the precepts of

theſe bookes, we eate fleſh euery day without any exception, from the Feaſt of Eaſter vnto Penticoſt: neither bee we bound to faſt in all this time vnto the octaues of Penticoſt; which thing we do for the more honour & reuerence of the reſurrection of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. They will vs alſo to celebrate the day of the death & aſſumption of the Virgin Mary, with all honor. Moreouer, beſides the precepts of the Apoſtles, one of the Precious Iohns, ſurnamed, The ſeed of Iacob, ordained, that beſides theſe dayes euery thirtith yere, 3. dayes ſhould be celebrated in honor of the ſame bleſſed Virgin, he alſo commanded one day in euery moneth to be celebrated for the Natiuity of our Sauior Chriſt, which is euer the 25. day of the month: in like manner he appointed one day in euery moneth to be kept holy in honor of S. Michael. Furthermore, by the cōmandement of the Apoſtles Synods, wee celebrate the day of the Martyrdom of S. Stephen, and of other Martyrs. We he bound alſo (by the inſtitution of the Apoſtles) to ſollemnize two dayes, to wit, the Sabbath; and the Lords day, in which daies it is not lawfull for vs to do any manner of buſineſſe, no not the leaſt trifle. The Sabbath day we obſerue for this cauſe, for that God hauing perfected the Creation of the world, reſted vpon that day; which day, as it was his will it ſhould be called the Holy of Holies, ſo if that day ſhould not be reuerenced with great honor and religion, it would ſeeme to be done directly againſt the will and commandement of him, who had rather that heauen and earth ſhould periſh, then his word, eſpecially ſeeing Chriſt himſelfe came not to deſtroy the law, but to fulfill it: wherfore we obſerue that day not in imitation of the Iewes, but at the bidding of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, & his holy Apoſtles: the grace of which Iewes is tranſlated vnto vs Chriſtians.

And vpon this ſabbath day, Lent excepted, wee euer eate fleſh: which vſe is not obſerued in the kingdome of Bernagues and Tygri Mahon: the naturall people of which two kingdomes, by an ancient cuſtome, eat fleſh vpon the ſabbath daies and Sundaies in Lent: now wee celebrate the Lords day, as other Chriſtians do, in memory of Chriſts reſurrection, but we know that the Sabbath day is to be obſerued and kept holy by the books of the law, and not by the Goſpell: and yet notwithſtanding we be not ignorant that the Goſpel is the end of the Law, and of the Prophets: And vpon theſe two daies, we beleeue that the ſoules of the godly departed which remaine in Purgatorie, bee not there tormented, which reſt God hath granted vnto thoſe ſoules vpon theſe moſt holy daies: vntill (the end of their puniſhments due for their offences in this world being determined) they be deliuered thence: for the diminiſhing of which paines, and to extenuate & ſhorten the time of their puniſhments: we beleeue, that almes deedes done for the dead, be very profitable vnto thoſe ſouls which liue in purgatory. To the remiſſion of which ſoules the Patriarke giueth no Indulgence, for that we beleeue doth belong vnto God only, and to the conſtitution of the time of their puniſhment: neither doth the Patriark allow any daies for Indulgēces, By the reading of the Goſpel, we be only bound to keep 6. precepts, which Chriſt explaned with his owne mouth: I was an hungred (ſaith he) and you gaue me to eate, I was thirſtie, and you gaue me to drink: I was a ſtranger, & you tooke me in: naked, and you clothed me: ſicke, and you viſited me: I was in priſon, and you came vnto me: Which words Chriſt will onely pronounce in the day of Iudgement, becauſe the law (as Paul witneſſeth) ſheweth vnto vs our ſins; which law (Chriſt Ieſus excepted) no one can keepe.
               
               
                  
And Paul alſo ſaith, that we be all borne in ſinne for the tranſgreſſion of our mother Eua, and for her curſe and malediction: and the ſame Paul further ſaith, that wee die through Adam, and liue through Chriſt, which Chriſt of his aboundant mercy hath giuē vnto vs theſe ſix precepts, to the end that we might be ſaued, when hee ſhall come in his Maieſty, to Iudge both the quick & the dead, by which words and commandements in that fearefull and terrible day of Iudgment, hee will pronounce and ſhew vnto the good euerlaſting glory, and to the wicked fire and eternall damnation. And wee reckon but only fiue deadly ſinnes (as they terme them) which wee gather out of the laſt Chapter of the Reuelation; where it is ſayd, For without ſhalbe dogs, and inchanters, and whoremongers, and murtherers, and idolaters, and whoſoeuer loueth or maketh lies. It is ordained by the holy Apoſtles in their bookes of councels, that it is lawful for the Clergy to mary, after they haue attained to ſome knowledge in diuinity, and being once maried they be receiued into the order of prieſts, into the which order none is admitted before hee accompliſh the age of 30. yeeres, neithey bee any baſtards by any meanes allowed to enter into that moſt holy order: & theſe orders be giuen by no other but by the Patriarch onely, & where the firſt wife of a Biſhop or Clercke, or Deacon is dead, it is not lawful for them to mary an other, vnleſſe the Patriarch diſpence therewith (which ſometimes for a publike good is granted to great men) nor is it lawful for them to keepe a concubine, vnleſſe they wil refuſe and put themſelues frō ſaying ſeruice, which if they once do, they may neuer after meddle in miniſtring diuine matters: and this is obſerued ſo ſtrictly that thoſe prieſts which haue beene twiſe married, dare neuer take in their hands ſo much as a

candle that is conſecrated to the Church, and if any Biſhop or Deacon be found to haue any baſtard child, hee is depriued from all his benefices, and from his holy orders, & his gods (if he deceaſe without lawful heires) come vnto Preſtor Iohn, and not to the Patriarch: and the warrant that we haue that our prieſts may marry is taken out of Saint Paul, who had rather that both Clergy and Laity ſhould marry then burne: And he alſo ſaith that a biſhop ought to be the husband of one wife, and that he ſhould be ſober and irreprehenſible, and in like manner would he haue Deacons: and further, that Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhould haue their proper wiues by lawfull marriage, euen as ſecular people haue, but Munckes mary not at all, and both Lay men and Clergy haue but one wife a peece, and matrimony is not contracted before the gates of the holy Church, but in the priuate houſes of thoſe that beare moſt ſway at the bridall: wee haue haue alſo receiued from the ordinance of the Apoſtles, that if a prieſt bee found in addultery, or committing manſlaughter, or theft, or bearing falſe witneſſe, he ſhalbe depriued and put from his holy orders and puniſhed like other malefactors: againe by the inſtitution of thoſe Apoſtles, if any perſon, either Eccleſiaſtical or Lay, doe lie with his wife, or bee polluted in ſleepe, hee commeth not into the Church for the ſpace of foure and twenty houres after: nor is it lawfull for menſtruous women to come into the Church, vnleſſe vpon the ſeuenth day after their ſickneſſe, and then to haue all their garments throughly waſhed, which they wore during the time of their monthly diſeaſe, and they themſelues purged from all filth: A woman alſo that bringeth forth a man child, muſt not come into the Church till after the fortith day, and if ſhe brought forth a woman

child then ſhee muſt not come into the Church till after the eighteeth day: This is our cuſtome founded vpon the ancient law, and alſo vpon the Apoſtolicke law, which lawes, ordinances and precepts, wee obſerue as diligently in al points as poſſible may bee: Moreouer we bee prohibited, that neither ſwine nor dogs, nor other ſuch beaſts ſhall enter into our Churches: Alſo wee may not goe to the Church but bare footed, neither is it lawfull for vs to laugh, walke, or talke of prophane matters in the Church, nor once there to ſpit, hawke or him, becauſe the Churches of Aethiopia bee not like vnto that land, where the people of Iſraell did eate the Paſchall lambe departing from Egipt, in which place God commanded them to eate it with their ſhooes on, and girded with their girdles, by reaſon of the pollution of the earth, but they bee like vnto Mount Synai, where the Lord ſpake vnto Moyſes ſaying, Moyſes, Moyſes, put off thy ſhooes from thy feet, becauſe the ground wherevpon thou ſtandeſt is holy ground, and this Mount Synai is the mother of our Churches, from whom they tooke their beginning, as the Apoſtles did from the prophets, and the New Teſtament from the Old: Furthermore it is not lawfull for Lay-men or Clergy, or for any other perſon of what condition ſoeuer hee bee, after hee hath receiued the bleſſed Sacrament of the Altar to ſpit or caſt, from the morning till the ſunne ſetting, and if any doe ſpit hee is ſeuerely puniſhed: Alſo in memory of Chriſts Baptiſme, wee be all euery yeere baptiſed vpon the feaſt day of the Epiphanie of our Lord, and this we doe, not that we beleeue that it pertaineth to our ſaluation, but for the laude, praiſe and glory of our Sauiour: neither doe wee celebrate any other feaſt more ſolemly or bountifully, with ſhewes, plaies and ceremonies,

then wee doe this, becauſe vpon this day the holy Trinity did firſt manifeſtly appeare, when our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was baptiſed in the riuer of Iordan, when the holy Ghoſt deſcended vpon his head in forme of a Doue, and a voice proclayming from Heauen, This is my beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleaſed: which holy Ghoſt appearing in forme of a white Doue, appeared in ſhew and figure of the Father and Sonne in one Diuinity: In like manner Chriſt was ſeene of the holy Prophets in many ſimilitudes, formes and likeneſſes, firſt in forme of a white Ram for the preſeruation of Iſaack the Sonne of Abraham.
               
               And in like manner, hee named Iacob, Iſrael and Iacob: Iudas the Lions whelpe, to whom hee gaue power ouer his other brethren, ſaying, thou dideſt riſe vp my ſonne to the prey, and when thou dideſt reſt thou dideſt lie ſtill like a Lion and Lioneſſe: who ſhall raiſe him vp.
               Hee alſo manifeſted himſelfe to Moyſes in Mount Synai, in forme of a flame of fire, hee ſhewed himſelfe to the holy Prophet Daniel, in ſimilitude of a Rocke, hee appeared alſo to Ezechiell the Sonne of Man, and to Iſaias in likeneſſe of an infant, he declared himſelfe to King Dauid, and to Gedeon like a froſt vpon a fleeſe of wool, and beſides theſe ſimilitudes recited, hee was ſeene of his holy Prophets in many other formes, and notwithſtanding hee was ſeene in ſo many ſundrie formes, yet hee alwaies repreſented the ſimilitude of the Father and of the holy Ghoſt.
               And when GOD created the world hee ſaid, Let vs make man according to our ſimilitude and likeneſſe, and hee made Adam after his owne ſimilitude and likeneſſe, wherfore wee ſay that the Father, Sonne and holy Ghoſt are

three countenances in one ſimilitude and diuinity: Wee haue receiued circumciſion euer from the time of Queene Saba, which wee obſerue vntill this day.
               The proper name of this Queene Saba was Maqueda, who was a worſhipper of Idoles after the manner of her aunceſtors, into whoſe eares when the fame of the wiſdome of Solomon was entred, ſhee ſent a certaine wiſe man vnto Ieruſalem, to finde out the truth, and to certifie her of the wiſdome of that King, who beeing returned and ſhewing the truth vnto her, ſhee ſodainely prouided her ſelfe to take her iourney towardes Ieruſalem: and when ſhee was thither come, beſides many other things which King Solomon taught her, ſhee learned the law and the prophets, and returning into her country, hauing obtained libertie to depart, in her iourney, ſhee brought forth a ſonne, which was gotten by a King, whom ſhe called Meilech, and him the Queene brought vp with her ſelfe in Aethiopia, vntill hee was 20. yeers of age: and then ſent him back vnto Solomon his father, that of him he might learne vnderſtanding and wiſdom, deſiting by her letters, that he would conſecrate and make his Sonne Meilech King of Aethiopi a before the Arke of the couenant of the will, or teſtament of the Lord, and that from thence-forth women ſhould gouerne no more in Aethiopia, as then the cuſtome was, but that the male children, ſhould lineally ſucceed in the Kingdome.
               When Meilech came to Ieruſalem, he eaſily obtained of his father, his mothers requeſts, & for Meilech was called Dauid, whom (when he was ſufficiently inſtructed in the law, & in other diſciplines) his father Solomon determined to ſend him back to his mother decked in gallāt attire

and furniture fit for a King, and the more to ſhew his bounty he gaue vnto him noble followers & companions, and the ſonnes of great men, who ſhould ſerue him as their King, Moreouer he decreed to ſend with him Azarias the high prieſt, the ſonne of Zadoch the high prieſt likewiſe, which when Azarias vnderſtood, he exhorted Dauid that he would intreat liberty of his father for him to ſacrifice (for good ſucceſſe in their iourney) before the Arke of the couenant of the Lord: which beeing obtained of Solomon, Azarias as ſodainely and as ſecretly as he could, cauſed tables to be hewen and ſquared like vnto the tables of the Teſtament of the Lord, and when they were perfected, he went to ſacrifice, and in the time of ſacrifice hee priuily, and very cunningly ſtole the true tables of the couenant of the Lord from the Arke, and ſet in there places the counterfeit tables, which hee brought with him, without the priuity of any man butonly God and himſelf. This declaration wee Aethiopians receiue as moſt holy and moſt approued, as by the Hiſtory of the ſame King Dauid (which is moſt pleaſant to read) doth appeare: the volume of which Hiſtory is full as thicke as all Saint Paules Epiſtles.
               When Dauid was come into the borders of Aethiopia, Azarias entred into his tent, & diſcloſed and reuealed vnto him that which thetherto hee had kept ſecret to himſelf, that is to ſay, that he had the Tables of the couenāt of the Lord, which whē 
                  Dauid vnderſtood he ran haſtily to the tent where Azarias had the tables of the couenāt of the Lord, and there in imitation of King Dauid his grand-father, he began to daunce (for exceeding ioy) before the Arke wherein the tables were, which when the people ſaw, and vnderſtanding the matter, they all of them

in like manner exulted with mirth and great ioy: And then Dauid paſſing through much part of Aethiopia came laſtly to his mother, who forth-with yeelded vp into his hands the gouernment of all the prouinces, laying vpon his ſhoulders the whole care of the Kingdome: And from that time euen vntill this day (being almoſt the ſpace of two thouſand and ſixe hundred yeeres) the Kingdome of Aethiopia hath lineally deſcended from male heire to male heire, and ſince that time wee obſerue the law of the Lord and circumciſion as before is ſaid, and likewiſe ſince that time hitherto, the offices which Solomon ordained for his ſonne Dauid, for the guiding of his Court, are kept and obſerued in the ſame order and families as they were at that time, neither hath the Emperor himſelfe power to aſſigne others of other kinreds, to execute thoſe offices of the court: the women likewiſe by the commandement and decree of the ſame Maqueda, be circumciſed, ſhee being induced therevnto by this reaſon, that euen as men haue a fore-skinne that couereth their yards, in like manner haue women a certaine kernelly fleſh which is called Nympha, aryſing vp in the middle of their priuy partes, which is very fit to take the character of circumciſion: and this is done both to males and females vpon the eight day, and after circumciſion the men children be baptiſed vpon the fortieth day, and the women children vpon the eighteeth day, vnleſſe any ſickneſſe or infirmity hapneth, which may cauſe it to bee done ſooner, but if any children be baptiſed before the time appointed, it is not lawfull to giue them ſucke of their mothers milke, but onely of their nurſes, vntill their mothers bee purified, and the water wherein they bee baptiſed, is conſecrated and bleſſed with exorciſmes, and that very ſame day wherein children bee

baptiſed they receiue the bleſſed bodie of our Lord in a little forme of bread: wee receiued baptiſme almoſt before all other Chriſtians from the Eunuch of Candace Queene of Aethiopia, whoſe name was Indich, as it is ſaid in the Acts of the Apoſtles, which together with circumciſion (which wee had at that time as before is ſayd) wee obſerue moſt holily and Chriſtian like, and by Gods aſſiſtance euer ſhall obſerue, nor doe we obſerue or admit of any thing but of thoſe onely which are expreſſed in the law and the prophets, and in the Goſpell, and in the bookes of the councels of the Apoſtles, and if wee receiue any things beſides thoſe, they bee onely obſerued for the time, for that they ſeeme to appertaine to the gouernment and peace of the Church, and that without any bond of ſinne: Wherefore our circumciſion is not vncleane, but the law and grace is giuen to our father Abraham, which hee receiued of God as a ſigne, not that either he, or his children ſhould be ſaued through circumciſion, but that the children of Abraham ſhould be known from other nations: And that which is inwardly vnderſtood by the ſigne or miſtery of circumciſion wee doe highly obſerue, that is, that wee may bee circumciſed in our hearts: neither doe wee boaſt of circumciſion, nor therefore thinke our ſelues more noble then other Chriſtians, nor more acceptable vnto God, with whom is no acception of perſons, as Paul ſaith, who alſo ſheweth vs that wee bee not ſaued through circumciſion but by faith, becauſe in Chriſt Ieſus, neither circumciſion nor the cutting off the foreskinne preualeth, but the new creature, but Paul preached not to deſtroy the law, but to eſtabliſh it, who was alſo baptiſed, and beeing of the ſeed of Beniamin, hee alſo circumciſed Tymothy, who was become a

Chriſtian, his mother beeing an Hebrew and his father a Gentile, knowing that God doth iuſtifie circumciſion by faith, and the fore-skinne by faith: and as he himſelfe was made all to all that hee might ſaue all. To the Iewes hee was as a Iew, that thereby hee might winne the Iewes, and to thoſe which were vnder the law, hee was as one vnder the law, although hee was not vnder the law, to the end hee might gaine thoſe which were vnder the lawe, and to thoſe which were without the law, hee was as one without the law, although hee was not without the law of GOD, but vnder the law of Chriſt, that hee might get thoſe which were without the law: and hee became weake, that hee might gaine thoſe which were weake, which he did to ſhew that we bee ſaued not by circumciſion but by faith.
               And therefore when he preached to the Hebrewes hee ſpake vnto them in diuers ſpeeches, like an Hebrew, ſaying, God heretofore ſpake many waies and in many manners to our fathers in the prophets, ſhewing vnto them out of the ſame prophets, that Chriſt was of the ſeed of Dauid after the fleſh. Moreouer he preached vnto them that Chriſt was with our fathers in the tents in the Deſert, and that he led them into the Land of promiſe by the hand of Ioſua.
               
               And Paul alſo teſtifieth in the ſame place, that Chriſt was the chiefe of prieſts, and that hee entred into a new tent, which is the Sanctum ſanctorum, The holy of holies, and that with the ſacrifice of his bodie and bloud, hee aboliſhed the bloud of goates and bulles, whereby none that killeth them ſhall bee iuſtified: and ſo hee ſpake ſundry waies to the Iewes, and alſo ſuffering himſelfe to bee worſhipped of his people, by many ceremonies in a

holy and vncorrupted faith: Moreouer thoſe children with vs bee accounted halfe Chriſtians, which here I vnderſtand in the Romane Church bee called Paganes, who becauſe they die without baptiſme ought to bee called halfe Chriſtians, becauſe they be children of the ſanctified bloud of parents baptiſed, and of the holy Ghoſt, and of the bloud of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, by which three Teſtimonies all Chriſtians bee ſo reputed: becauſe there bee three things which giue teſtimony in earth, the ſpirite, water and bloud, as Saint Iohn witneſſeth in his firſt canonicall Epiſtle: the Goſpell alſo ſaith, a good tree bringeth forth good fruite, and an euill tree bringeth forth euill fruite, and therefore the children of Chriſtians are not like vnto the children of the Gentiles, and of the Iewes, and of the Moores, which bee withered trees without any fruit, but the Chriſtians bee elected in their mothers wombes, as holy Ieremias the prophet, and Saint Iohn Baptiſt were: Furthermore the children of Chriſtian women are elected and conſecrated by the communication and imparting of the body & bloud of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: for when women great with child do take the moſt bleſſed body of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, the infant in the wombe receiuing nutriment is thereby ſanctified, for euen as the child in the mothers wombe, conceiueth either ſorrow or ioy, according as the mother is affected, ſo alſo is it nouriſhed by the mothers noriſhment, and as our Lord ſaith in his holy Ghoſpell, if any one eate my body and drinke my bloud, hee ſhall not taſt of eternall death: and againe, if any one eate of my body and drinke my bloud hee ſhall remaine with mee: and Paul the teacher of the Gentiles ſaith, the vnbeleeuing husband is iuſtified by the beleeuing wife, & the vnbeleeuing wife is ſanctified

by the beleeuing husband, otherwiſe your children ſhould be vncleane, but now they bee ſanctified, which, if it bee ſo that the children of an vnbeleeuing mother bee ſanctified by the ſaithfulneſſe of the father, then be they much more holy that bee borne of faithfull fathers and mothers: for which cauſe it is farre more holy to call children before they bee chriſtned halfe Chriſtians, then Pagans: and the Apoſtles alſo haue ſaid in their bookes of councels, that al which beleeue and be not baptiſed, may iuſtly bee termed halfe Chriſtians, who alſo ſay in the ſaid bookes: if Iew, Moore, or Gentile will receiue the faith, hee is not forthwith to be admitted, but they will that hee firſt come vnto the gate of the Church, and there to heare Sermons, and the words of our Sauiour Chriſt, that before he be incited and brought, as it were, by ſtelth vnto the faith, hee may know the yoke of the law, which when hee hath done hee may be called halfe a Chriſtian, although he be not baptiſed, as the Ghoſpel teacheth, he that beleeueth, and is baptiſed ſhal bee ſaued, and hee which beleeueth not ſhall bee damned. And our cuſtome is that women with child before they be deliuered ſhould be confeſſed, and that then they ſhould receiue the Lords body, and thoſe which doe not this, as alſo the fathers of thoſe children which compel not their wiues to doe it, bee accounted wicked and euill Chriſtians: Moreouer you muſt vnderſtand that confirmation and chriſme, or extreame vnction of oyle, bee not accounted Sacraments, nor bee in any vſe with vs, as I ſee they bee heare by the cuſtome of the Romane Church. Alſo by Moyſes lawes and the ordinance of the Apoſtles it is not lawfull for vs to eate vncleane meates, and this wee doe for the full obſeruation of the law and the Scriptures, which conſiſt of one and foure ſcore bookes in

both Old and New Teſtament, that is to ſay forty and ſixe bookes of the Old Teſtament, and thirty fiue of the New, which expreſſe number of bookes of the Scriptures wee haue by computation from the Apoſtles themſelues, from which bookes of the Old and New Teſtament it is not lawful for vs to ad or diminiſh any thing, no though an Angell from heauen ſhould indeauour to perſwade vs therevnto. And hee which dare to attempt any ſuch thing ought to be reputed as accurſed: Wherefore neither the Patriarcke nor our Biſhops, by themſelues, nor in their councels, doe thinke or ſuppoſe that they can make any lawes thereby any one may bee bound to a mortall or deadly ſinne: for in thoſe bookes of councels it is ordained by the holy Apoſtles, that wee ſhould confeſſe our ſins, and what penance wee ought to take, according to the heinouſneſſe of each ſinne, is there ſet downe. They inſtruct vs alſo how we ſhould pray, faſt, and doe deedes of charity: and this is very familiar in vſe amongſt vs, that as ſoone as wee haue committed any ſinne, we forthwith, runne to the feete of the confeſſor, and this is vſed both of men and women, of what eſtate or condition ſoeuer they bee of: And as oft as wee bee confeſſed we receiue the bodie of our bleſſed LORD in both kindes, in ſweete or vnleauened wheaten bread: and if wee ſhould bee confeſſed euery day, wee ſhould likewiſe euery day receiue the moſt bleſſed and reuerent Sacrament, and this cuſtome is common as well to the Clergie as to Lay people: And the Sacrament of the Altar is not kept with vs in Churches, as it is heere amongſt the people of Europe. Neither doe thoſe which be ſick receiue the Lords body, vntill they begin to waxe ſtrong and recouer there helth: and this is done becauſe all men both Lay and

Clergy, doe vſually receiue it euery weeke twice, and all which bee willing ſo to doe come vnto the Church, for it is miniſtred to none but in the Church, not ſo much as to the Patriarch or to Preſtor Iohn himſelfe: We alwaies vſe one conſeſſor, and doe neuer take any other vnleſſe he bee abſent, and at his returne wee goe to him againe, and the confeſſors (by there power they haue from the Church) giue vs abſolution of all our ſinnes, reſeruing no caſe to the Biſhops or Patriarcke, though it bee neuer ſo heinous.
               Moreouer the Prieſts may not heere their confeſſions, to whom they bee confeſſed themſelues: Both prieſts alſo and Munkes, and all Eccleſiaſticall Miniſters with vs liue by their owne labour, for the Church neither hath nor receiueth any tithes. Yet it hath reuenewes and lands which both Clerkes and Monkes digge and till, either by there owne or other mens labour, and other almes haue the none but ſuch as bee freely offered in the Churches, for the buriall of the dead, and other Godly matters: neither is it lawfull for them to begge in the ſtreetes, nor to extorte or wreſt any almes from the people.
               In our Churches alſo is euery day onely one Maſſe celebrated, which we account as a ſacrifice, nor is it lawful (by our old ordinances) to ſolemnize more then one in a day; & for this Maſſe we take no hire nor reward: and in the miniſtery thereof, the Sacrament of the Altar is not ſhewed as heere I perceiue it is. And with vs, all Prieſts, Deacons and Sub-deacons, and thoſe which come vnto the Church, receiue the bodie of our Lord: and wee ſay no Maſſe for the remiſſion and forgiueneſſe of ſoules departed; but the dead bee buried with croſſes and

Orizons, in a certaine place, and ouer the dead bodies wee chiefly amongſt other praiers recite the beginning of Saint Iohns Ghoſpel, and the day following the buriall of the corpes, wee offer almes for him which wee doe vpon certaine daies after, vpon al which daies we keepe funerall bankets: and thus far I haue ſpoken of our faith and religion. But now, for that after our comming into Portingal, we had many and often diſputations and contentions with diuers Doctors, & eſpecially with our Maiſters Didacus Ortyſius Biſhop of Saint Thomas Iſle, and Deane of the Kings Chappel, and with Peter Margalhus, concerning the choiſe and difference of meates, it ſhal not be vnfitting to ſay ſomething of that matter.
               Firſt you muſt vnderſtand, that wee obſerue a difference of meates out of the Old Teſtament, which difference is appointed by the word of GOD it ſelfe, which word was afterwards borne of the Virgine Mary, and walked and was conuerſant with his Diſciples, and that word of God I haue alwaies accounted an euer liuing, whole and inuiolated word, neither did that mouth which heeretofore forbad to eate of vncleaneſſe, ſay afterwards in any part of his Goſpell, that wee ſhould eate.
               And whereas it is ſaid in the Goſpell, that which entereth in by the mouth defileth not the man, but ſuch things as proceed forth of the mouth, hee pronounced not this ſpeech, for becauſe hee would breake that which before hee had appointed, but that hee might refute the ſuperſtition of the Iewes, which taxed and blamed the Apoſtles, becauſe they did eate meate with vnwaſhed hands, for neither the Apoſtles at that time that they liued with our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, did euer vſe any vncleane things, or taſted of thoſe things which bee forbidden in

the law, nor yet did any of the Apoſtles tranſgreſſe the law, nor can it bee prooued by any of our writings, that the Apoſtles at thoſe times which followed our Lords paſſion when they beganne to preach the Goſpell, did either eate or kill any vncleane things, and yet it is true that Paul ſayd, eate of euery thing that commeth into the ſhambles making no queſtion for conſcience ſake, and after that, if an Infidell call you to ſupper, and that you will goe, eate of all things which be ſet before you, making no queſtion for conſcience ſake: and againe, if any one ſhall ſay, this is ſacrificed to Idols, eate not of it becauſe of him that ſhewed you, and for conſcience ſake &c.
               All theſe things Paul ſpeaketh to pleaſe thoſe which were not yet confirmed in the faith, becauſe there aroſe many diſputations and contentions betwixt thoſe and the Iewes, for the appeaſing whereof he did more eaſily yeeld vnto them, and conforme himſelfe vnto their will, which were not throughly confirmed in the faith. And this hee did not that he would breake the law, but that by gratifying others in releaſing them from ceremonies, hee might thereby winne them to the faith: The ſame Apoſtle ſaith, Let not him that eateth deſpice him that eateth not, & let not him that eateth not condemne him that eateth, becauſe hee which eateth, eateth to the Lord, and hee which eateth not, eateth not to the Lord, wherefore it is very vnworthily done to reprehend ſtrangers that bee Chriſtians ſo ſharply and bitterly, as I haue beene oftentimes reprehended my ſelfe, both for this matter and for other things which belonged not to the true faith: but it ſhal be better and more ſtanding with wiſdome, to ſuſtaine ſuch Chriſtians whether they bee Greekes, Americans, or Aethiopians,

or of any other of the ſeuen Chriſtian Churches in charity and imbracings of Chriſt, and to ſuffer them to liue and be conuerſant amongſt other Chriſtian brothers, without contumelies or reproches; for we bee al the ſons of baptiſme, and ioyne together in opinion concerning the true faith: and there is no cauſe why wee ſhould contend ſo bitterly touching ceremonies, but that each one ſhould obſerue his owne ceremonies, without the hatred rayling or inueighing of other: neither is he that hath trauelled into other nations, and obſerueth his owne country ceremonies therefore to be excluded from the ſociety of the Church. Moreouer that which we haue in the Acts of the Apoſtles, to wit, how Peter ſaw Heauen opened, & a certaine veſſel deſcending like vnto a great ſheet, bound or cloſed vp at the foure corners, wherein were all kind of foure footed beaſts and ſerpents of the earth, and foules of the aire, and a voice ſaid vnto Peter, ariſe Peter, kil and eate, to whom Peter ſaid, God forbid Lord, for I did neuer eate of any thing commune or vncleane, and the voice replied vnto him againe ſaying, that which God hath made cleane doe not thou cal commune or vncleane: which words being repeated three times, the veſſel was againe taken vp into Heauen: which done the ſpirit ſent him into Caeſaria vnto Cornelius a deu out man, and one that feared God, with whom when Peter ſpake, the holy Ghoſt fell vpon all thoſe which heard the word of God, and when they had receiued the holy Ghoſt, Peter commanded that all Cornelius houſhold ſhould be baptiſed: But when the other Apoſtles and brethren which were in Iudea, heard that Cornelius was baptiſed, they were diſpleaſed at Peter that hee had giuen Baptiſme, and the word of God to the Gentiles, ſaying, why wenteſt thou to men that be not circumciſed

and didſt eate with them, but when Peter had declared vnto them the whole viſion, they were pacified and gaue thankes vnto God, ſaying, And therefore hath hee giuen repentance vnto the Gentiles for their ſaluation. And they remembred the word of the Lord, which hee ſpake when he aſcended vp into heauen Go throughout all the world and preach the Goſpell vnto all creatures: he that beleeueth and is baptized, ſhall be ſaued, but hee which beleeueth not ſhall be damned.
               
               Then the Apoſtles began to preach the Goſpel through out all the world vnto euery creature, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt; and the ſound of them went throughout all the world. And this viſion wherein both cleane and vncleane things did appeare, we in Aethiopia expound thus: That by the cleane beaſts was meant the people of Iſrael: and by the vncleane beaſts the people of the Gentiles. And for this cauſe be the Gentiles called vncleane; for that they bee worſhippers of Idols, and willingly do the workes of the diuel, which be vncleane: and whereas the voyce ſayd vnto Peter, Kill, that we interpret in this manner, Peter, baptize: and when it is ſaid, Peter, eate; that is interpreted, as if he had ſayd, Teach and preach the lawe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to the people of Iſraell, and to the Gentiles.
               Moreouer, it is moſt certaine, that it cannot bee found in any place of the Scriptures, that either Peter or the other Apoſtles did kill or eate any vncleane beaſt, after this viſion.
               And alſo we muſt vnderſtand, when the Scripture ſpeaketh of bread, he meaneth not meate or corporal nouriſhment therby, but the explication and expoſition of Chriſt his doctrine, and of the Scriptures.
               
                  
And ſurely it were well done for all teachers and preachers of this ſheet, which was ſhewed vnto Peter, to teach high and great matters, and not pettie or light things, and ſuch as do ſeeme little to appertaine vnto ſaluation, nor thereby cunningly to hunt after this document, as though it ſhould be conuenient or lawfull for vs to eate vncleane things, ſeeing no ſuch thing can bee gathered out of the Scriptures: for what is the cauſe, that the Apoſtles in their bookes of Councels haue taught vs not to eate beaſts that be ſtrangled, ſuffocated, or killed' of other beaſts, or bloud, becauſe the Lord loueth cleannes and ſobriety, and hateth gluttony and vncleanneſſe. And our Lord alſo greatly loueth thoſe that abſtaine from fleſh, but much more thoſe that faſt with bread and water, and herbes, as Iohn Baptiſt the Eremite did beyond Iordane, who did euer eat herbes: and S. Paul the Eremite, who remained in the wilderneſſe foure ſcore yeares euer faſting: and S. Anthonie, and Saint Macarius, and many other their ſpirituall children, which did neuer taſt fleſh.
               Therefore my brethren we ought not to deſpiſe and inueigh againſt our neighbors, becauſe Iames ſaith, Hee which detracteth his brother, or condemneth his brother, detracteth the law, and condemneth the law: Paul alſo teacheth, That it were better for euery one to liue contented with their owne traditions, then to diſpute with his Chriſtian brother of the law: and againe, Not to know more than is behoofull, but to be wiſe vnto ſobrietie, and vnto euery one as God hath diuided the meaſure of faith: wherfore it is vndecent to diſpute with our brethren of the law, or of the difference of meates, becauſe the meate doth not commend vs to God, eſpecially ſeeing Paul the Apoſtle ſaith: We ſhall neither abound if we do eate; nor want, if

we do not eat. And therfore let vs ſeek thoſe things which be aboue, and the celeſtiall food, and leaue off theſe vaine diſputations. Al theſe things which I haue written concerning Traditions, I haue not done to breed diſputation, but that as much as in me lyeth, I may defend and protect my country-folkes againſt the bitter taunts and reprehenſions of many, who ſetting aſide all reuerence, will not ſtick to defame & reuile that moſt potent Prince precious Iohn and vs his ſubiects, with ſlanders and reproches, calling vs Iewes and Mahometans, becauſe we obſerue Circumciſion, and keepe holy the Sabbath day, like vnto the Iewes: and alſo for that like the Mahometans, wee faſt vntill the Sunne going downe, which they alledge is vnfit for a Chriſtian man to do: and this they obiect againſt vs moſt bitterly, that we allow and hold it as lawfull for Prieſts to marry, as for lay people: this alſo they omit not to ſpeake againſt vs, and that moſt nippingly; for that we, as it were, diſtruſting in our firſt Baptiſme, be re-baptized once euery yeare, & that women be circumciſed as well as men, which cuſtome was neuer vſed amongſt the Iewes.
               Furthermore, becauſe we hold, that a difference of meats is moſt religiouſly to be obſerued: and laſt of all, becauſe we call thoſe children halfe Chriſtians, which before Baptiſme be wont to be called Pagans: to which ſlanders and miſreports, I am inforced to ſay thus much; that I may purge our people from ſuch reproches and calumnies, & that I may make the Doctors of the holy Romane church more affable vnto vs, by whom (how holily I know not) I haue bin forbidden to receiue the body of our Lord euer ſince I came into Portugall, which is the ſpace of 7. yeares, and that (which I ſpeake with griefe and teares) I am reputed amongſt the Chriſtian brethren as an Ethnicke, and

one accurſed, which he that quickeneth and refreſheth all things, may ſee and diſcerne, to whoſe Iudgement I commit all theſe matters.
               And I am not ſent from my moſt mightie Lord the Emperour of Aethiopia, vnto the Biſhop of Rome, and vnto Iohn the moſt renowned king of Portugall, to mooue diſputations and contentions: But to begin friendſhip and felowſhip, and not either to increaſe or diminiſh humane traditions: but that I ſhould inquire and diligently vnderſtand, touching the Hereſies of Arrius, Prince of Heretickes: whether the Chriſtians of Europe would meete with vs to ouerthrow the opinions of this man, for the deſtroying of whoſe errors, there was a Councell aſſembled together at Nicea, vnder Pope Iulius, conſiſting of three hundred and eighteene Biſhops; and withall, that I might know, whether that be obſerued among the Chriſtians of Europe, which the Apoſtles teach in their bookes of Synods: that is, That a Councell ſhould be celebrated in the church of Chriſt twiſe euery yeare, to diſpute of matters of faith: the firſt of which Councels (by the Apoſtles deſire) ſhould be aſſembled at the feaſt of Penticoſt, the other the tenth of October: as alſo to vnderſtand, how we did agree together, touching the errors of Macedonius; for which cauſe there was a Councel of an hundred and fifty biſhops aſſembled together at Conſtantinople, vnder Pope Damaſus: and likewiſe of the errors of Neſtorius, for whome there was a Councell of two hundred Biſhops, aſſembled together in Epheſus vnder Pope Celeſtine. Laſtly, that I might alſo know of the fourth Chalcedonian councel; wherein, for the errors of Eutiches, were aſſembled 632. biſhops, at which time S. Leo was biſhop of Rome, from which Councell, after many diſputations, and nothing

concluded for the peace of the church, the matter beeing left as it was, they all departed home euery one remaining in his owne opinion: The bookes of which Councels and of others which were celebrated afterwards, our moſt mightie Lord the Emperour of Aethiopia hath in his keeping: and of this cockle which the enemy of truth, the diuel, hath ſowne amongſt Chriſtians, my Lord is much grieued and all his ſubiects which beleeue in Chriſt.
               Our countri-men euen from the beginning of the primitiue Church, haue acknowledged the biſhop of Rome to be the chiefe Biſhop, whome at this day wee obey as the Vicar of Chriſt: In whoſe court we would often bee, but that the iourney is ouer long, and many kingdomes of the Mahometanes betwixt vs, that may hinder our paſſage: ſo as, though you ſhould enter into all thoſe great dangers, yet you can effect nothing, although that moſt wiſe and inuincible King Emanuel, of happie memorie, who was the firſt that by his nauigations, (not without Gods celeſtiall aſſiſtance) made paſſage into Eaſt India, gaue great hope that it might afterwards be done more commodiouſly: for he hauing ouercome the Ocean with his nauie, brought the red ſea into his ſubiection, being no whit deterred with the greatneſſe of the coaſt, ſo as hee might increaſe the faith of Chriſt, and (as it were) make a way open to make vſe of our friendſhip.
               And ſeeing that is now done, and that each nation may receiue ayde from the other, wee hope that in ſhort time, by the Portugals forces and our owne, all the Mahometans, and other vnbeleeuing Ethnickes, ſhall be driuen and expelled from the whole Erithraean ſea, and from all Arabia, Perſis, and India.
               In like manner we truſt, by the power of Ieſus Chriſt,

that it will come to paſſe, that (peace beeing eſtabliſhed amongſt all the Chriſtians of Europe) the enemies of the croſſe ſhall bee expelled alſo from the mediterranean places, Pontus and other Prouinces, that according to the words of Chriſt, There may be vpon earth, one lawe, one fold, and one ſhepheard.
               Of which thing we haue two Oracles or predictions: one, out of the Prophecy of S. Ficator, the other of S. Synoda the Eremit, who was borne in the vttermoſt rock of Egypt: neither of which two differeth from other. And ſince the time that my moſt mighty Lord receiued the ambaſſadors of the moſt famous king Emanuel, the truth of theſe oracles doth ſeeme to haſten to an end; for truly our Prince thinks of nothing more, than of that: meditating alſo (both by his councell & forces) how he may root out all Mahometans from the face of the earth. For theſe cauſes, and for others which I haue layd open before the moſt famous King Iohn, the ſonne of Emanuel, was I ſent hither by my moſt mightie Lord as an Ambaſſadour, and not for friuolous and vaine diſputations: And I pray with an vnfained heart, that the great and mighty God may bring the decrees and indeauours of our Prince, for which I was ſent, to a happie end, and to his glorie. Amen.
               
               Hauing gone thus far, I will now briefly expound ſomthing by the way, of the ſtate of our Patriarke and Emperour. And firſt you muſt vnderſtand, that (by a ſollemne cuſtome) our Patriarke is created by the voyces of our Monkes of Hieruſalem, which remaine there about the ſepulcher of our Lord, his election & creation is in this maner: The Patriarke being dead, our Emperour Preſter Iohn 
                  
                     •
                  endeth foorthwith a ſpeedie meſſenger vnto Hieruſalem, vnto the Monkes there, (as is ſayd) who receiuing

the meſſage and the gifts which our Lord the Emperour ſendeth vnto the holy Sepulcher, they preſenrly, and with all poſſible expedition, elect another Patriarch by the moſt voyces: but it is not lawfull to elect any other, than one of Alexandria, and one of incorrupt manners, and vntainted conuerſation; who being created, they ſigne their ſuffrages, and giue them into the Legates hands that came for that purpoſe: he foorthwith goeth to Cayre, whither when he is come, he offereth that creation vnto the Patriarch of Alexandria, whoſe ſeate is alwaies there, to be read.
               And when he perceiueth which of the people of Alexandria they haue elected, he foorth-with ſendeth the man ordained to ſuch honors, with the Legate into Aethiopia, who by an old ordonance ought alwaies to be an Eremit, of the Order of S. Anthony: with whom the Ambaſſadour goeth ſtraight into Aethiopia, where he is receiued of all men with great ioy and honor: in which buſines ſomtimes is ſpent a yere or two; in al which time, precious Iohn doth diſpoſe of the reuenues of the Patriarke according to his pleaſure. Now the chiefeſt office of the Patriarch, is to giue orders; which none but he can either giue or take away, but he can beſtow vpon none, either Biſhopricke, or other Church-benefice: this onely belongeth to precious Iohn, who diſpenceth of all things according to his will. And the Patriarch beeing dead, he whoſe power and yerely reuenues is the largeſt, is made heire of the whole ſubſtance of all his goods. Moreouer, the office of the Patriarch is to proceed to excommunication againſt the ſtubborne, the obſeruation whereof is ſo ſtrict, as the puniſhment of perpetuall ſteruing to death is inflicted vpon the offenders.
               
                  
Indulgences he giueth nor granteth none, neither bee any interdicted the Sacraments of the church, for any offence whatſoeuer, be it neuer ſo hainous, but onely for homicide: the name of the Patriarchſhip in our ſpeech is called Abunna: but he which now executeth the office is called Marcus, which was the proper name giuen him in Baptiſme, he is a man of an hundred yeares of age or aboue.
               And you muſt note, that we begin our yeare in the Kalends of September, which day alwaies falleth vpon the vigill of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, the other feſtiuall dayes, as the Feaſt of the Natiuity of our Lord, Eaſter and the reſt, bee celebrated with vs at the ſame times they be in the Roman Church.
               And this I may not obſcurely paſſe ouer as though it were not ſo, that Saint Philip the Apoſtle did preach the Goſpell and faith of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt our Lord in our countrie.
               Now if you deſire to know of the name of our Emperour, he is fully perſwaded, that hee was euer called precious Iohn, and not Presbiter Iohn, as is falſly bruted abrode: for in one ſpeech it is written with characters, that ſignifie Ioannes Belull, that is as much to ſay, as precious or high Iohn: and in the chaldaean tongue it is Ioannes Encoe, which beeing interpreted, doth ſignifie precious or high Iohn. Neither is hee to be named Emperour of the Abyſſini, as Matheus hath vntruly declared, but Emperour of the Aethiopians: and Mathew beeing an Armenian, could not throughly vnderſtand our matters, eſpecially thoſe which appertained vnto faith and Chriſtian Religion: and therefore he related many things in the preſence of the moſt prudent and moſt potent king Emanuel of happy memory,

which with vs are nothing ſoe, and this hee did not with a deſire to ſpeake vntruths, for hee was a good man, but for that hee was not throughly inſtructed in matters concerning our religion: The ſucceſſion of his Kingdomes and Empire doth not alwaies deſcend vpon the eldeſt ſonne, but vnto him vpon whome the father pleaſeth to beſtow it, And hee which now gouerneth the Empire was his fathers third ſonne, which hee merited and obtayned by an awfull and holy reuerence to his father, for when his father lay a dying, he commanded all his ſonnes to ſit downe vpon his throne, which all the reſt of his children did ſauing he, and he refuſed, ſaying, God for bid that ſo much ſhould be attributed vnto me, that I ſhould ſit in my Lords chaire, whoſe deuotion when his father ſaw, hee indued him with all his Kingdomes & Empire, he is called Dauid, the power of whoſe Empire, as well ouer Chriſtians as Ethnickes, is large and ample, wherin be many Kings and petty Kings, Earles, Barons and Peeres, and much Nobility, all which be moſt obedient to his command: In all whoſe dominions there is no mony vſed, but ſuch as is brought from other places, for they giue and receiue ſiluer and gold by weight: wee haue many citties and great townes, but not ſuch as we ſee here in Portugall, the reaſon whereof (for the moſt part) is, that precious Ioan liueth alwaies in campes and tents, which cuſtome is vſed for this purpoſe, that the nobility may continually excerciſe themſelues in military affaires: And this I may not omit to tell you, that wee bee compaſled about on all ſides with the enimies of our faith, with whom we haue many and euer proſperous conflicts, which victories we attribute to gods diuine aſſiſtance: written lawes we haue none in vſe amongſt vs, neither be the complaints of thoſe which ſue others expreſſed

in libells or writings but by words, which is done leaſt by the couetuouſneſſe of Iudges and counſellors controuerſies ſhould be protracted. And this more I thinke ſit to ſhew you, that this Mathew was not ſent by Dauid our Emperor vnto the moſt inuincible and potent King Emanuell of happy memory, but by Queene Helena the Emperors wife, ſurnamed the hand of Mary, who at that time by reaſon of Dauids, nonage, tooke vpon her the gouernment of the Kingdomes, being a woman without doubt moſt prudent and holy: And the ſame Helen (as ſhee was excceeding well learned) writ two bookes in the Chaldean tongue, one of the which is called Enzera Chebaa that is to ſay, praiſe God vpon the Organes and inſtruments of Muſicke, in which booke ſhee diſputeth very learnedly of the Trinitie, and of the virginity of Mary the mother of Chriſt. The other booke is called Chedale Chaay, that is to ſay, the ſonne beame, contayning very acute diſputations of the law of God. All theſe things concerning our faith, religion and ſtate of our country, I Zaga Zabo, by interpretation the grace of the father, both Biſhop and Preeſt, and Bugana Raz that is Captaine, Knight and Veceroy of the Prouince, haue declared, which I could not deny at your requeſt my moſt deere Sonne in Chriſt Damianus, nor yet any other man deſiring to be inſtructed there in, neither is it lawfull to deny it for two cauſes, the firſt whereof is, for that I am commanded by my moſt mighty Lord Precious Iohn Emperor of the Aethiopians, to ſatiſfie euery one that demandeth of me, concerning our faith, religion, and prouinces, & that I ſhould conceale nothing, but faithfully declare vnto them the truth of al things both by words and writing; the other reaſon is, for that I deeme it very fitting and labour well ſpent, that our names, cuſtomes and ordinances, and the ſytuation of our countries ſhould bee publikely knowen, which matters I neuer writ

vnto any one till this time, nor yet declared in words, not that I was ſparing of my labour, but becauſe no Chriſtian, after my comming into portugall, deſired to know ſuch things of me, whereof I could not, nor cannot but greatly maruell. And ſeeing by many arguments I perceiue that you much deſire the knowledge of our affaires, I beeſeech you by the wounds of our Sauiour Chriſt and by his croſſe to put this my confeſſion of our faith and religion into the latine tongue, that by your meanes all the Godly Chriſtians of Europe, may vnderſtand our cuſtomes & the integrity of our maners. Moreouer if in your trauells you hap to goe to Rome, then let mee intreat you to ſalute in my name, the Pope & the moſt reuerent Cardinalls, Patriarches, Archbiſhops and Biſhops, and all other the true worſhippers of Chriſt, by Chriſt Ieſus in a kiſſe of peace, and that you will deſire of the Pope, that hee will ſend vnto me Francis Aluarez furniſhed ſuch letters, whereby he may anſwere my Lord the Emperor of Aethiopia, that after my long ſtay I may returne into mine owne country and viſit my owne manſion houſe, for I haue bin long here detained, that before my death (which by reaſon of my great age is at the dore) I may effect that which I am commāded. And that hauing furniſhed this Embaſſage I might dedicat the reſidue of my life vnto God, & only ſpēd my time in deuotion, moreouer I intreate you if you finde any thing in my writings not well penned, that you will frame it to the latine phraſe, but in ſuch manner as in no point you alter the ſēce: & laſtly I deſire you that in your tranſlatiō you wil ſearch the old & new teſtament, that you may know from what place I haue alleaged my authorities, that you may be more certain in your tranſlation: but if I haue not handled euery thing ſo happily as may ſatiſfie thoſe which bee curious, I am to be pardoned by reaſō of my want of Chaldean bookes whereof I haue none, for thoſe I had I loſt by

miſfortune in my iourny: wherefore being deſtitute of the vſe of all bookes, I could ſpeake of nothing but what was freſh in my memory, yet haue I deliuered all things moſt faithfuly.
               Farwel my deare beloued ſonne in Chriſt. Vliſpone the twenty foure day of Aprill, in the yeare of our Lord God 1534.
               When I had finiſhed this buſines I remembred my ſelfe of that place whereas I ſay that Chriſt deſcended into hel for the ſoule of Adam, and for the ſoule of Chriſt, which the ſame Chriſt receiued of his mother S. Mary the virgin.
               Of which thing wee haue an aſſured teſtimony in thoſe bookes which wee call the bookes of gouernance, which Chriſt Ieſus deliuered vnto his Apoſtles, in which bookes be expreſſed theſe words, which be called the miſteries of doctrines, by whoſe authority and teſtimony we all of vs continue in this opinion without doubting: but after I came into Portugall I found diuines teaching a contrary doctrine againſt all our opinions, which is ſo certaine, as wee doe not onely beleeue this, but alſo affirme that the ſoules of all men had their beginning from Adam, and that as our fleſh is of the ſeed of Adames fleſh ſo like-wiſe our ſoule being, as a candle, kindled by the ſoule of Adam, had her originall and nature from Adam, whereby it appeareth that we bee all the ſeede of Adam both of the fleſh and of the ſoule.
               All the relation aboue ſayd was written and ſubſcribed with the Embaſſadors owne proper hand with the Chaldean caracters.
            
            
               
               
                  The deploration of the people of Lappia by the ſame Damianus a Goes.
               
                  I Thinke it not vnfitting (moſt worthy Biſhop) to make ſome mention in the end of this treatiſe (becauſe this alſo appertaineth to faith and to the vnion of the Church) of Iohn Magnus Gothus Archbiſhoppe of Vpſalia in the Kingdome of Suetia, that by him we may be moued to take compaſſion of the people of Lappia: for this Iohn Magnus Gothus was borne of very good parents and rich, maruelous well ſeene in the Scriptures, and of an honeſt conuerſation, and ſo addicted to the Roman Church, that for the zeale therevnto, he loſt the great Archbiſhoppricke of Vpſalia with all the reuenewes thereunto belonging, amounting to forty thouſand crownes a yeare, and al his patrimony beſides, and hauing loſt both dignity and goods, and toſſed in the variable ſtreames of fortune he lay cloſe in Pruſſia, liuing poorely a long time at the Citty Daniz in Germany, where (while I was diſpatching my Kings affaires in thoſe parts of Germany) I grew into great familiarity and indiſſoluble friendſhip with him, and with Olaus Magnus Gothus his brother: which two I afterwards found vnlooked for, at Vecenza, in poorer eſtate then befor they wer, vnto which place they went purpoſly, by reaſon of a councel divulged, wherby they conceiued much hope for themſelues and redreſſe of their calamities: And when the councell was diſcontinued & adorned, thoſe good mē being vtterly depriued of al their goods, wherwith while they inioyed them they often in thoſe Northerne parts contended

much in defence of the Roman Church, and yet would haue contended (if matters had proſpered) remoued to Venice, there to get their liuing either vpon others liberality, or by their owne induſtry, and labour, which was cheefly in teaching and inſtructing others, for other ſuccor could they get none, but that they repoſed their whole cōfidence in Gods aſſiſtance: whither when they were come, they were very curteouſly intertained, only of Hieronymus Quirinus the Patriarke of Venice in his Patriarchſhip, and ther they remaine to this day expecting the divulging of that councel; vnder the Archbiſhoppricke of Vpſalia is contained a great part of that large and vaſt prouince of Lappia, the people wherof be ignorant of the laws of our Sauiour Chriſt, which (as I vnderſtand by many good and credible men) proceeded from the abhominable extortion and couetuouſneſſe of the prelates and nobles, for if they were Chriſtians they ſhould bee free from thoſe taxations and tributes, wherwith they as Ethnickes be puniſhed: on the other ſide the nobility and Biſhops wax rich and welthy, and therefore they forbid them to be Chriſtians, leaſt bearing the ſweet and delectable yoke of Chriſt, they might withdraw from there tirany, and extortion, ſome part of their gaines, and diminiſh ſome parte of their taxations, wherby that miſerable nation is moſt beaſtly and inſatiably vexed and oppreſſed by thoſe Monarches, bearing the burthen moſt impatiently, for if they were Chriſtians they ſhould pay no more tribute vnto them than other Chriſtians pay vnto their princes: And therefore nothing regarding the ſaluation of ſo many ſoules, they preferre their horrible & ſacrilegious gaine, before the true Faith and Chriſtian religion: ſo as they may rightly bee ſaid to carry the keies, and neither enter them-ſelues, nor ſuffer others to enter. Q inſatiable coueteouſnes and intollerable impiety, and

from Godly breſts to be expelled both by weapons, writings and all our forces: and without doubt it had beene quenched and buried by this time, if this good man were reſtored to his former dignity, for he deſireth nothing more, nor meditateth of any thing more earneſtly, than that this people may be reduced to the faith of Chriſt: nor doth he lament for any thing more, than that by his means (as he euer deſired in his hart) theſe miſerable beaſts (as yet by reaſon of their impious religion) be not made the flocke of Chriſt, by imbracing the Chriſtian faith: nether doth he complaine ſo much for the loſſe of his Archbiſhoppricke, nor that he was thruſt from his goods, left him by his anceſtors, as for that hee wanteth ſtrength, aid and ſubſtance where-with to cure this plague of Lappia, to bring them vnder the yoke of Chriſt, and to vnite them to the Roman Church: And this hee often-times confirmed by his letters ſent me: wherewith my ſelfe not fully contented made earneſt mention of this buſineſſe, in the end of that firſt Embaſſage of precious Ioan, which I dedicated to the ſame Iohn Magnus Gothus: neither did I then ſatiſfie my ſelfe in this buſineſſe, but by my letters dealt with Eraſmus Rothrodamus, that hee would commit the cauſe of this matter to writing. Afterwards liuing in his company (for I was with him at Friburg Briſgoia the ſpace of 5 months) I had ſpeaches with him of that buſines, by which meanes he was induced and appoynted to frame a iuſt volume of this matter, but being preuented by death, the ſubſtance of the buſines he had vndertakē was vtterly diſſolued, notwithſtanding vpon his death, he concealed not the wicked Eccleſiaſtical impiety, which truely he did, that he might accuſe al Chriſtians to whome God hath graunted power and learning, and cry for reuengement againſt them in the laſt iudgment before Chriſt the iuſt Iudge of all men.
               
                  
the Chriſtian Princes & Monarches may now ſee what account and reckoning of ſo many loſt ſoules they can make at the laſt day before the Tribunall ſeate of Chriſt, where is no place for pardon or grace, and where no excuſe nor faire ſpeaches will be receiued. And you, moſt reuerent Biſhop, are only he that can cure this infirmity, you only are hee that can ſhew vnto this people the waies of the Lord, and direct them, that they may walke rightly in the ſame: you onely are able to redeeme them from the loweſt hell: by you little children may come vnto Chriſt, and by the power of thy right hand bee deliuered from the bondage and deceits of the Diuell, and inioy the plentifull redemption of Chriſt, both in this world and in an other. Behold what reward thou ſhalt obtaine if by your labour that great harueſt may be carried into Chriſts barne, and no doubt you will carry it in, if once you begin.
               There be at this day with Goſtavus King of Suetia and Gothia ſome great peeres & ſtates that be fallen from the Romaine Church: there be ſome in thoſe Kingdomes alſo that do altogether diſſent and diſagree from the right Diameter and true courſe of religion, vnto theſe by your dignity & paſtoral function, may you direct your letters, requiring them by the woundes of our Sauiour Chriſt, (whome all men, though neuer ſo farre differring from the Roman Church, doe acknowledge to bee Gods ſonne and our Sauiour) that they will permit and ſuffer this Eaſt and Weſt Lappia, with thoſe large prouinces of Finmarchia Scrifinia and Biarmia (the greateſt part where of knoweth not Chriſt) to come and imbrace the ſweet yoke of Chriſt: and that they wil extort no more from them, then other Chriſtian Princes are accuſtomed to take from their ſubiects, either by courſe of law or by voluntary extorſions.
               
                  
And it were good, not onely to ſend letters, but learned men alſo, and men of approoued ſanctity and holyneſſe of life, that theſe Prouinces may be annexed to the Romaine Church by the faith of Chriſt: whom (together with the people of Aethiopia) being reduced to the right law of Chriſt, although the people be offended, yet the Lord ſhall raigne, ſitting vpon the Cherubins, and although the earth be mooued, it ſhall reioyce, and all Ilands ſhall bee ioyfull. Farewell right reuerend and high Biſhop in Chriſt Ieſus, Amen.
               
                  From Louaine, in the Calends of September, in the yeere of our Lord God 1540.
            
            
               Of the ſituation of Lappia, and of the inhabitants of that country: by the ſame DAMIANVS A GOES.
               
                  THE country of Lappia (through which runneth the Botnian ſea) is deuided into Eaſt and Weſt Lappia, the vtmoſt part of which ſea is Tornia, vpon the Eaſt part it ioyneth vnto the white lake, towards the North it compaſſeth diuers Prouinces, and ſo extendeth it ſelfe to a place vnknowne, and inclining Weſtwards towards Iſland, it ioyneth vnto part of Noruegia: vpon the South it is compaſſed about with the other part of Noruegia, with Suetia, Finland and both the Botnias.
               Eaſt Lappia hath in it a church dedicated to Saint Andrew, in the eighty fourth degree of the eleuation of the

pole, which is adorned and beautified with a magnificent and ſumptuous Sepulcher, and with men skilfull and learned in the holy Scriptures'. This Church is vnder the Archbiſhop of Vpſall, within whoſe Dioceſſe it is, and yet, notwithſtanding the neighbors round about that church, whether it be by the careleſneſſe & negligence, or through the couetouſneſſe of the Prelates, and great men, do not acknowledge Chriſt (as is reported). Lappia in the Latine toung is interpreted a fooliſh and ſottiſh or hartleſſe nation, which name (as I thinke) is impoſed vpon them, for that the ſoile by the continuall and binding cold, being as it were dull, is leſſe apt eyther to receiue or bring forth fruites: the naturall borne people of Lappia be very ſtrong ſet, and of a middle ſtature, they be mauelous nimble and dexterious in vſing their bowes and darts, which practiſe of throwing the dart they exerciſe euen from their infancy, in ſuch ſort, that if a boy ſhoote at a marke and miſſe it, he hath no meate giuen him vntill he haue hit the marke: inſteed of other garments they weare skins finely ſowed together, where-with they defend them-ſelues from the cold; which they be ſo accuſtomed to indure, that if need bee, they will ouer-come it without any defence at all of thoſe skinnes: their dwellings are in tents, for of houſes they haue no vſe, becauſe they often remooue out of one place into another: other courſe of life haue they none then hunting, fiſhing, and fowling, wherein they bee maruellous expert and skilfull, for in that Prouince is great aboundance of thoſe things. They vſe no tillage, and they haue ſhips made without any Iron nailes or pins, which being charged and burdened with fiſhes dried in the ayre, and with pelts, or skinnes, they tranſport them to their neighbours, and bordering people, and get for them in

exchange victuals and money, in dooing whereof they vſe no ſpeach but ſignes and becks, which onely hapneth through the barbarouſneſſe and harſhneſſe of their language, which their neighbours can by no meanes vnderſtand, for otherwiſe they bee very wiſe and cunning in their exchanges.
               The people be very valiant and warlike, in ſteed of horſes they vſe a kind of beaſts, which in their language bee called Raingi, beeing of the ſtature and coulor of Aſſes, hauing clouen hoofes: they be made & horned like Bucks, but that they be couered ouer with a kind of downe, & be not ſo long, nor haue ſo many branches as Bucks hornes haue (as we our ſelues haue ſeene:) theſe beaſts be of ſuch wonderfull ſwiftneſſe, that in the ſpace of twelue houres, they will draw a chariot thirty Germaine miles, and in their going, whether they go ſwift or ſoftly, by the ſtirring of the ioynts of their legges, you may heare a noyſe like vnto the cracking of nuts. The religion of this people is to worſhip the fire and pillers of ſtone for gods. They preſage and iudge the euent of the whole day, by euery liuing thing that meeteth them in the morning: they obſerue matrimony, and bee exceeding iealous: they bee ſo famous in inchantments, that amongſt many other very ſtrange and almoſt incredible things to bee reported, which I omit to ſpeake of, they will by their inchantments ſtay a ſhip vnder full ſaile, ſo ſtone ſtill as no force of windes can remooue her: which euill is cured with Virgins excrements, beeing layde vppon the hatches of the ſhippes, and vppon the benches where the rowers ſit to rowe, for theſe Virgins excrements (as I haue heard reported by the inhabitants) thoſe ſpirits doe naturally abhorre.
            
            
               
               
                  Certaine things concerning the Aethiopians, collected out of Ioſeph Scaliger his ſeuenth Booke: De emendatione temporum.
               
               
                  THis is not the firſt time that the name of the Chriſtian Aethiopians, hath beene heard amongſt vs, for their Churches be not onely at Ieruſalem and Conſtantinople, but for a ſpace it hath beene lawfull for them to ſolemnize and celebrate their ſacrifices at Rome and Venice, and many things may be vnderſtood of them and of their cuſtomes, both by the Portugals nauigations, and by the booke of Francis Aluarez trauels, who went himſelf into Aethiopia. For as yet wee haue onely heard of the name of Aethiopia, but it is ſtrange that the name of the Emperour of Aethiopia, in our great grand-fathers dayes, was firſt knowne to vs out of Aſia, not out of Aethiopia: for before theſe three hundred yeares the Aethiopian Kings had euer large dominions in Aſia, eſpecially in Drangiana in the confines of Suſiana, in India and in Sinus, vntill the Tartarian Emperours expelled them from their gouernment in Aſia: for the Abyſſini beeing vanquiſhed and expelled from the country of the people of Sinae, by Cingis King of Tartary, Vncan the great Emperour of Aethiopia being ſlaine, ſhortly after Cincan the ſonne of Cingis, and Cincanus ſonne Bathin can, did vtterly expell and driue out all the Abyſſini, from Moin and the kingdome of Sinae, and compelled them to flye into Affrick.
               Surely wee haue often wondred, that a nation at this day altogether ignorant in ſea-faring buſineſſe, ſhould be

ſo mighty and potent, both by ſea and land, that they haue inlarged their dominions from Aethiopia to the people of Sinae.
               In thoſe dayes the knowledge of that Emperor came vnto vs, but by the name of Preſtigian, which in the Perſian tongue (now vſed almoſt throughout all Aſia, as Latium is in the Weſt) ſignifieth Apoſtolicke, vnder which name is certainly vnderſtood, a rightfull and Chriſtian King.
               That the gouernment of the Aethiopians was great and large in Aſia, is ſignified by the Aethiopian croſſes which are in Giapan, Syna, and other places, as alſo by the Temple that is ſituated in the Region of Maabar, and dedicated to Saint Thomas, which hath croſſes, and many other things in it, as are in Aethiopia, and is builded after the Aethiopian faſhion, and (that which is more) retaineth as yet the Aethiopian name.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A Table of the Chapters conteined in the firſt Booke.
               THe true opinion of Diuines concerning mans originall. Chap. 1.
               
               The falſe opinion of the Ethnicks concerning mans originall. Chap. 2.
               
               Of the ſituation and perfection of the world. Chap. 3
               
               Of Aethiopia, and the ancient cuſtomes of that country. C. 4
               
               Of Aegipt, and the ancient cuſtomes of that country. chap. 5.
               
               Of the Carthaginians and other people of Affrick. Chap. 6.
               
            
            
               A Table of the Chapters contained in the 2. Booke.
               OF Aſia, and the moſt famous nations thereof. chap. 1
               
               Of Panchaia, and of the maners of the Panchaians. cha. 2
               
               Of Aſſyria and how the Aſſyrians liue. chap. 3
               
               Of Indaea, and of the cuſtomes, and inſtitutions of the Iews. c. 4
               
               Of Media, and of the manners of the Medes. chap. 5
               
               Of Parthia, and the maner of liuing of the Parthians. chap. 6
               
               Of Perſia, and of the manners, lawes and ordinances of the Perſians. chap. 7
               
               Of India, and of the monſtrous and prodigious cuſtomes and manner of liuing of the Indians. chap. 8
               
               Of Scythia, and of the barbarous manners of the Scythians. c. 9
               
               Of Tartaria, and of the cuſtomes and power of that people. c. 10
               
               Of Turcia, and of all the maners lawes and ordinances of the Turkes. chap. 11
               
               Of the Chriſtians, and of their originall, and cuſtomes. cha. 12
               
            
            
               A Table of the Chapters conteined in the 3 Booke.
               OF the moſt famous countries of Europe. chap. 1
               
               Of Greece, and of Solons lawes which he made for the Athenians, and which were after eſtabliſhed by the Princes of Greece. chap. 2
               
               Of Laconia, and of the cuſtomes and ordinance of the Laconians or Lacedemonians, ch. 3
               
               Of the Ile of Creete, and of the cuſtomes moſt commō amongſt the Cretenſians. chap. 4
               
               Of Thrace, and of the barbarous maners of the people of Thrace. chap. 5
               
               
               Of Ruſſia or Ruthenia, and of the the latter maners & cuſtomes of the Ruſſians. chap. 6
               
               Of Lithuani
                     •
                  , and of the manner of liuing of thoſe people. cha. 7
               
               Of Liuonia, Pruſſia, and of the Souldiers called Marciam in Spaine. chap. 8
               
               Of Polonia, and of the later cuſtomes of the Polonians. cha. 9
               
               Of Hungaria and of the Inſtitutions and maners of liuing of the Hungarians. chap. 10
               
               Of Boemia, and of the maners of the Boemians. chap. 11
               
               Of Germany and of the cuſtomes of the Germaines: chap. 12
               
               Of Saxonie, and how the Saxons liued in times paſt, and how they now liue. chap. 13
               
               Of Weſtphalia, and of the manner of Iudgments ordained for the Weſtphalians by Charles the Great. chap. 14
               
               Of Franconia, and of the nature and cuſtomes of that country. chap 15
               
               Of 
                     •
                  ueuia, and how the people of that country liued heretofore, and how they now liue. cha. 16
               
               Of Bauaria, and Carinthya, and of the lawes and cuſtomes of that people heretofore, & how they now liue. chap. 17
               
               Of Italy, and of the manners of the Italians: of Romulus alſo, and his ciuill inſtitutions. c. 18
               
               Of Lyguria, and of the ancient manners of the inhabitants of that country, chap. 19
               
               Of Tuſcia, and of the ancient maners of the Tuſcans. ch. 20
               
               Of Galalia in Europe, and of the old cuſtomes of that country, chap. 21
               
               Of Gallia, and of the ancient cuſtomes and later 
                     ••
                  nners of the Frenchmen, chap. 22
               
               Of Spaine, and of the manners of the Spaniards. chap. 28
               
               Of Luſitania, and of the manners of the Portugals. chap. 24
               
               Of England, Scotland and Ireland, and of many other Ilands and of the maners & cuſtomes of the Inhabitants. chap. 25
               
               Of the Ile of Taprohane, and the cuſtomes of that people. cha. 26
               
               FINIS. Lib. 3.
            
            
               
                  NIcholas Damaſcen of the manners and cuſtomes of ſundry nations. fol 472
               
               Certaine things of America or Braſill, gathered out of the writings of Iohannes Lerius. fol. 483
               
               The faith, religion and manners of the Aethiopians, and the deploration of the people of

Lappia, compiled by Damianus a Goes a Knight of Portugall, wherein is contained,
               A letter of Damianus a Goes, a Knight of Portugall to Pope Paul the third. fol. 503
               
               A letter of Helena the grandmother of Preſtor Iohn Emperor of Aethiopia, to Emanuell King of Portugall, written in the yeare 1509. fol. 512
               
               The letters of the most renowned Dauid Emperor of Aethiopia, to Emanuell King of Portugall, written in the yeare 1521. Paulus Iouius beeing Interpretor. fol. 517
               
               The letters of the ſame Dauid Emperor of Aethiopia to Iohn the third of that name King of Portugall, in the yeare 1524. fol. 526
               
               The letters of the ſame Emperor to the Pope of Rome, in the ſame yeare 1524. the ſame Paulus Iouius beeing Interpretor. fol. 533
               
               Other letters from the ſaid Emperor to the Pope, the ſame yeare. fol. 540
               
               The faith and religion that the Aethiopians hold and obſerue. fol. 546
               
               The depl
                     •
                  ration of Lappia. f. 581
               
               The ſi
                     •
                  uation of Lapp a. fol. 585
               
               A ſhort diſcourſe of the Aethiopians taken out of Scaligers ſeuenth booke, De emendatione temporum. fol. 588
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   