
      
         
            
               
               
               Boanerges.
            
            
               OR THE HVMBLE SVPPLICATION OF THE MINISTERS OF SCOTLAND, TO THE HIGH COVRT OF PARIAMENT IN ENGLAND.
            
               2. COR. 4. 13.
               We beleeue, and therefore haue we ſpoken.
            
            Printed in Edenburgh.
            1624.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               2. CHRON. 19. 6.
               Take heed what you doe: for you execute not the iudgement of man, but of the Lord, and he ſhall be with you in the cauſe and iudgement.
            
         
         
            
            A Preface or Introduction to the Supplication.
            
            THere is a common ſaying among ours and Gods enemies the Papiſts, that the Chriſtian Church muſt be knowne by theſe Characters, Viſibility, Antiquity, Vniuerſality, and Conſent: but the Spirit of God ſayes, that all theſe are the marks of the Beaſt; and perſecution and paucitie the infallible ſignes of the true Church: thus began the firſt propheſie, I will put enmity betweene thee and 
               Gen. 3. 15. 
               the woman, and betweene thy ſeed and her ſeed; thus it continued in Iohns Reuelation, Then the Dragon 
               Apoc. 12. 17. 
               was wroth with the Woman, and went and made warre with the remnant of her ſeed, which keep the commandements of God, and haue the teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt. And thus could we ſpread the teſtimonies of Scripture like a mantle expoſed to your view, full of delicate reſemblances, wherein you might behold how the true Church of God hath been euer without any ceſſation ſubiect to ſcornes, opprobry, the malignant circumſtances of time, or fearfull perſecution. But withall we pray you remember, that we make not our approches from Nebuchadnezars heating the oven ſeuen times hotter, but the Dragons Dan. 3. Apoc. 12. watching the Woman, the Man that ſitteth in the Temple of God as God, thoſe that be in Moſes chaire, ſuch as were inveſted with Aarons ornaments,

and in plaine termes the continued perſecution which we meane muſt ariſe out of the hate and malice of Chriſtians; yea Preachers themſelues, that are oppoſites to zealous profeſſors, and this we complaine of.
            Oh reade, reade for Gods ſake the ſtory of Ieremie, and marke his perſecutions, and who were his greateſt enemies? Shemaiah a falſe Prophet, and Zephaniah 
               Ch. 29. the chiefe Prieſt in ſtead of Iehoiada; yea if you ſtep a litle further you ſhal find, that the king Zedekiah durſt not iuſtifie his conference with Ieremie, 
               Ch. 38. 24. as being afraid of the Princes and Prieſts: ſo that in truth he had no friends but Baruch the Prophet, and Ebedmelech the Moore. And as it was with him, ſo it continued with all the reſt, vntill the comming of Chriſt, and then wherfore did he call them generation of Vipers? or who were thoſe hypocrites that Chriſt exprobrated, but the Scribes and Phariſes who ſat in Moſes chaire, and at laſt condemned the Sauiour of the world to an ignominious death: ſo that it is apparant, here was nothing but perſecution. And for viſibility, did not Eliah crie out, he was alone, and thoſe that were the true ſeruants of God, durſt not iuſtifie their profeſſion? And afterterward, he that was the Author of all truth, was reputed an impoſtor and deceiuer of the world.
            Oh marke what the Apoſtle ſaith: For I thinke that God hath ſet forth vs the laſt Apoſtles, as men appointed to death: for we are made a gazing-ſtocke vnto the 
               1. Cor. 4. 9. 
               world, vnto the Angels, and to men. Which place of Scripture driues vs to amaze, when we conſider the diſparitie betweene the flouriſhing Churches,

ambitious Prelacie, exalted Biſhops, and maieſticke glory of Clergie men in Europe, and the pouerty, perſecution and diſreputation of the true Church of God indeed, as either it was in the time of the Apoſtles, or muſt be (according to this propheſie) to the worlds end. Reconcile vs then (we pray you) whether the Apoſtle onely meant the preſent time, or from the Spirit of God by way of prediction had reference to after ages, yea the end of the world? but doe not come too neare our eyes to dim our ſight, or deafe our eares with the fearfull ſound of the prerogatiue of Princes, the high commanding voices of authoritie, or the ſeeming flouriſhes of the orders of a Church; but plainly out of coherence of Scripture, rectifie our vnderſtanding in this point. For if the Apoſtles haue prophetically ſet downe, and indefinitely concluded, that this muſt be the eſtate of the true Church of God; we ſhall neuer beleeue, but that outward pomp, pride, wealth, eminencie, and the ill ſounding accent of ſupereoritie ouer their brethren, can decipher any other thing then Antichriſt; and ſo muſt loue ſuch in our ſoules, as either out of Pauls humilitie content themſelues with that portion which God hath allotted, or Dauids patience endure the Micols of the world to call them fooles.
         
         
            
            THE SVPPLICATION OR PETITION IT SELFE.
            
               Moſt gracious Lords,
            
            WHen Paul came to preach at Epheſus, and bring as it were the Arke of God into the Temple of Dagon, that hee might breake his necke, it is ſaid, the whole Citie was moued, and Demetrius a ſiluer-ſmith, who got his liuing by making of Images, raiſed ſuch a hurliburly amongſt the people, that they would not endure any motiue for their conuerſion to Chriſtianitie, but cried out, Great is Diana of the Epheſians. Whereupon the Apoſtle afterward exclaimed vpon them, that he had fought with beaſts at Epheſus. Thus is it with all kingdomes and ſetled gouernments, though neuer ſo many thornes and thiſtles grow vp to choke the good ſeed, yet if there be a deſire to ſet a crowne of gold on the Prieſts head, and take away his rags and deformed garments, to bring ſome leprous offender to publicke view, that it may be diſcerned whether he be vnclean or no; to make the Prieſts to cleanſe the Temple of filth and pigeons dung, as you reade of Hercules who let in the riuer to cary away the ordure of Angens ſtable; to ſearch the vnſwept corners of vicious mens ſoules;

and in a word to reforme the abuſes of a Cōmonwealth; then ſhall ſome Amaſiah tell Amos, Bethel is the Kings Court, and the Kings Chappell, there is no preaching there: then ſhall ſome Prince or Lord tell Zedechiah that Ieremy weakens the kingdome, and disheartens the ſouldiers: then ſhall Sandolet and the reſt affright Nehemiah, when hee attempts the diſcouery of foule enormities: in a word, then ſhall your great men and officers, for feare ſome charming arme of Hecate turne their inſide outward, crie out of innouation, ſedition, turbulencie, or ſome hare-braind ſpirit.
            But, moſt gracious Lords, we beſeech you remember how worthily King Philip of Macedon entertained a petitioners preſumption, when a certaine woman kneeled before him to deliuer a ſupplication, he reiected her ſuite, and turned away in ſcorne from her: the woman amazed, yet boldly anſwered, Then ceaſe to be a King, if thou denieſt to heare thy ſubiects petitions. The King hearing her voice, but not vnderſtanding what ſhe ſaid, returned againe, and askt her what ſhe meant. The vndaunted woman repeated the words againe; and the magnanimous Prince, not onely pardoned her, but tooke her vp in his armes, and as you ſhall reade that Dauid bleſſed Abigail for keeping him from ſhedding of blood, ſo did King Philip bleſſe the woman for telling him his dutie, and chid all the reſt for being flatterers and paraſites.
            Thus doe we ſay to you, ſeeing our great and conſiderate Prince hath now condeſcended to call this high Court of Parliament to heare his ſubiects

grieuances, and redreſſe the enormities of the Commonwealth; either ceaſe to ſit, and come not there at all, or entertaine our petitions, and relieue our diſcontents. But becauſe we will not affright Iſrael, as the ten explorators of the land of Canaan did, with talking of Enachims and giants, of iron walls and high towers, that is, with medling with the Church and gouernment of the Clergie, either by finding fault with the ſetled ſtate, or propoſing vnto you our maner of diſcipline, according to other reformed Churches of Europe, the Confeſſion of Auſpurgh, the Harmonie of Confeſſion, or other fearfull petitions which in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth were preſented to the Councell; we will at this preſent contract ourſelues, and inſiſt onely vpon three things. 1. Firſt concerning Non-reſidents, and the ill example which the Clergie giue by their ill liues to weake and ignorant ſoules. 2. Concerning the mixtures of Papiſtrie in your kingdome, or conniuing at the impudencie of ſuch men, that with Bels prieſts eate vp the Kings prouiſion, and make him beleeue the Dragon did it. 3. Laſt of all, not to giue eare to the Syrens incantations, but tie yourſelues cloſe to the maſt of true Religion and Chriſtian policie, that you be not ſeduced and brought within the Panthers reach, whoſe ſweet ſauours and perſumes intoxicateth many innocents and ignorants.
            Firſt concerning Non-reſidents, Formaliſts, and other abuſes of the Clergie; if it pleaſe you to remember, in the Law of Moſes, the malefactor or delinquent in any kind, ſaued his life if he could once

take hold of the hornes of the Altar; yet when the caſe was againſt King Salomon, it could not ſerue Ioabs turne, but hee periſht immediatly: ſo is it amongſt you, if you can but name the orders of gouernment and conſtitutions of the Church, you are able to ſtop any diſputants mouth, to ſilence any Preacher; but this ſhall not ſerue your turne in any cauſe againſt the maieſtie of heauen, but the ſentence of our Sauiour ſhall be denounced againſt any hypocriticall Formaliſt vnder the Sunne, He that knowes his maſters will, and doth it not, ſhall be beaten with many ſtripes. If againe he be an ignorant, oh reade the propheſie; the flying booke came to one, and he could not open it, it was too faſt ſealed; it came to another opened, and hee could not reade it; and it came to a third, and hee could not vnderſtand it. Thus out of ignorance or wilfulneſſe you haue ſilenced many worthy ſpirituall ſtones of Gods building, and traduced thoſe that could not endure the prophane mixtures in religion, with the termes of heretiks, ſchiſmatiks and ſectaries, termes more affrighting then Iewes, Turks and Infidels: for their miſunderſtanding themſelues may be excuſed ex magno inſcitia bello, yet Coraſim and Bethſaida ſhall anſwer the matter more fearfully.
            But, moſt gracious Lords, notwithſtanding theſe calumniations, or the brand of malice by intemperate humours; the crime of hereſie is not to be imputed to any, whoſe faith doth wholy rely vpon the ſure rocke of Gods word; they are no Schiſmatiks who runne for ſhelter vnder the comfortable ſhade of the tree of the Church of God, ſuch as

the Prophets, Apoſtles, and primitiue Church deſcribe, or ſuch as all the Reformed Churches of Europe take vpon them to defend: nor are they to be reputed Sectaries which embrace the truth alwayes one and itſelfe, and ſo impregnable, that all the aſſaults of Satan ſhall not preuaile againſt it: and therefore, Right honorable Lords, we do here exhibite a petition vnto you, ſo to order the matter, that neither we be thus ſcandalized, nor any ſeruant of God put from his eſtate & maintenance, for making a conſcience againſt ſome friuolous ceremonies, which are not things indifferent (as now is the phraſe) if you compell men to the obſeruation; and therefore to affright them with loſſe of liuing, maintenance or impriſonment, is no brotherly puniſhment, nor charitable diſcipline, doe rather, as Auguſtus did by his Senator, we beſeech you.
            There was a Romane dwelling in the great city, named Ouidius Pollio, who determining to invite the Emperour to ſupper, made a great preparation; but in the waſhing of his chriſtall glaſſes, the ſlaue broke one of them; for which he was condemned the next day to be cut in peeces, and throwne into his fiſh-ponds. The Emperour comming to ſupper, and hearing of this moſt cruell doome for ſo triuial an offence, cōmanded all the glaſſes to be brought into his preſence, and ſo brake them to peeces: This I doe (quoth Auguſtus) to preuent further miſchiefe which may happen vpon ſo ſlight occaſions. Wee will not apply, but leaue all to be throughly ſearched and diſcuſſed, and that for two cauſes: 1. The one,

for that wee are confident, you are able in reſpect of your ſingular knowledge in the Scriptures, and hope you are willing in reſpect of your honours and ſincere pietie toward Religion, to convince our errors by Gods word, and diſcouer our wandrings, if in any thing we be out of the way. 2. Secondly, that if you find the teſtimony & confeſſion of faith of honeſt religious men agreeable with the word of truth, you will alſo agree either to convince vs by writing, or giue vs leaue to liue without obloquy or infamous characters in our poore and deſpiſed eſtates, or not to clog our conſciences (as we ſaid) with ceremonies and devices of men. For, what ſaid Stephen King of Poland, Princes might command the bodies and liues of their ſubiects, but not their ſoules and conſciences.
            
            And who, I pray you, are our greateſt enemies, but ſuch as liue in pomp, ſtate, glory, feaſting, with much aboundance and affluencie; ſuch as haue pluralitie of Benefices, are reſident at none of them, and ſcarce preach once in a yeare; ſuch as are Prebends in Cathedrall Churches, whoſe liuings are inordinatly ſpent vpon a number of Drones and deuouring panches, Singing-men, Organiſts, Queriſters, and diuers ſuperfluous officers, which otherwiſe might be extended toward the reliefe of poore ſchollers and the true ſeruants of God; and all this is the more lamentable, becauſe many times the place of preaching is vnſupplied, and when it is ſupplied, you ſhall finde at leaſt a dozen Miniſters walking in your moſt frequented Churches without hearing the word of God at all: to be briefe,

ſuch are our enemies, as neither know what true zeale or deuotion meanes, nor once thinke vpon the propagation of religiō, or purity of a ſincere life.
            Iudge, moſt gracious Lords, whether our ſoules are truly vexed or no, at the enormities and groſſe wickedneſſe of Clergie men; when amongſt you there are ſuch couetous and ambitious Preachers that retaine divers Benefices, offices and Churchliuings in their hands, and growing rich, are able to purchaſe Lordſhips and Mannors, when yet you reade the Levites might haue no lands, nor any ſordide commutations of rents, keep princely houſes and diet with ſong and minſtrelſie, their wiues and children coached in the ſtreetes, and equalling your beſt Ladies in habit and fantaſticall attire, feathers, friſled haire, masks, fans, bodkins, and in a maner vſing all thoſe faſhions for which Iſaiah reprehendeth Iſai. 3. the daughters of Zion in his time. We could name frequenting publicke aſſemblies, common Interludes, Ieſabels painting among the women, Herodias dancing, and all other fearfull cuſtomes of temptation, wherewith the diuel beguiles the wandring ſoules of Gods people, and bringeth poore innocents vnder the captiuitie of ſinne, who with Heuah dare adventure on the apple, becauſe it was faire to the eye.
            We could tell you, that when Cardinall Woolſey was made Legatus alatere, Lord Chancellor of England, Archbiſhop of Yorke, and had a Bull read in publicke of all his temporall and ſpirituall liuings, there was ſuch murmuring and repining among honeſt ciuill men, that they durſt publikly preſage his downfall,

and the Courtiers themſelues were amazed at his wealth. The like was ſpoken of Gardiner, and Cardinall Poole. And many in thoſe dayes ſhed teares againe to thinke that ſuch as had the cure of ſoules ſhould affect other offices, dignities and temporall honors; and wee pray God there be not the like corruptions ſtill. As for the vanities of the world, yea life it ſelfe, what are they but bubbles and balls raiſed out of a little niter and 
                  •
               ope, as boyes in their paſtimes blow vp with their quils, and ere they be toſſed three times, they burſt of themſelues. Wee muſt ſay yet further, that there are ſuch Formaliſts, Temporiſers, flatterers, and meere paraſites, in imitation of the Courtly prieſts in the times of Iſraels and Iudahs Kings, that ſundry Chaplins lie watching ouer Gods true Miniſters indeed, and if they preach according to their conſciences and the word of God, or be examined before hand how they meane to diſpoſe of themſelues, they ſhall be told to their faces that the text ſerueth not for the times; nor are men to be endured that dare put their rude hands vnto the raw wounds of the gouernment: but wee will be bold to ſay, that all this Courtly pomp, large reuenues, abundance of wealth, and maintaining of pleaſures, are the diuels clogs to preſſe their minds and meditation to the earth and corruptible droſſe, ſo that they cannot looke vp to heauen, nor affect ſuch things as are aboue.
            To end, leſt we neuer end, many of theſe temporiſing Clergie men are ſo curious, trim and neate in their apparel, with garters, roſes and ſhoo-ſtrings, with bootes and ſpurres, with velvet, ſattin and damask

caſſocks and tippets, with horſe and coach, and in a word with all worldly pomp and brauery, that except the colour, no man can diſcouer them from Knights and Gentlemen; when yet a Prophet was knowne in thoſe dayes by the habit of a Prophet; and he that reades ſhall finde that Eliahs leather girdle, Iſaiahs nakednes, Ieremies dungeon, Amos neat-heards ſtaffe, Iohn Baptiſts camels haire, Chriſts coate without a ſeame, Peters fiſhing net, and Pauls labouring with his hands, did far exceed the proud Prieſts miters, or the Phariſes philacteries. Here wee might adde the frequenting of publicke Theaters, vſing all maner of exerciſes, gaming, tauernes, wantonneſſe, and ſuch like, inſomuch that the Apoſtles, eſpecially Iude truly preſaged what maner of men they would be, and what corruptions ſhould creep into the Church; yea our Sauiour Chriſt propheſied, that for theſe and other groſſe impieties, at his ſecond comming hee ſhould ſcarce find faith vpon earth. And thus much for the corruptions of your Clergie, and our expoſtulation, that you will remember Iethro's counſell to Moſes: Moreouer, prouide thou among all the people, men of 
               Exod 18. 21. 
               courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating couetouſneſs.
            
            Secondly, concerning Papiſts, or the conniuencie at ſuperſtitious Popery, or coming ſo neare the chariot wheeles of the Strumpet, to be daſhed with the flingings of her dirt and filth; what is it but to bring in the Syrian idolatry to be mixed with Samarias 2. King. 17. 25. ſacrifices, for which the Lord ſent Lions out of the wilderneſſe to deuoure them: what is it, then

for Ahas to go to Damaſcus, and ſend word to Vrias 
               2. Kin. 16. 10. 17 2. Chron. 28. the Prieſt to make an altar like vnto that in Syria▪ and ſet it vp in Gods houſe; for which both he the Prieſt and the people were ſeuerely puniſhed: what is it but when a Prophet is ſent on Gods errand, 1. King. 20. 36. and maketh knowne the pleaſure of the Almighty, which is not obeyed, and ſo the offender is ſlaine and puniſhed. Marke, we beſeech you (moſt gracious Lords) how iealous God is of his honour, and will not endure any diſobedience, eſpecially the pollutions of idolatry, which are maintained in their prophane religion and ſophiſticate diſtinctions and deceits of equiuocation. When Rahel ſtole her fathers idols, ſhe made no more accoūt of them Gen. 35. then to tombe them in the ſtraw, and ſo ſat vpon them; but as ſoone as Iacob came to a reſting place, the text ſayes, he preſently cleanſed his houſe of ſuch filthineſſe and abomination: when Moſes detracted Exod. 4. 24. the time for circumciſing his ſon, the Lord had like to haue kild him in the way; and when it was done, his wife Zipporah reuiled him with the name of bloody husband. Oh how angry and incenſed was God at Aarons calfe, inſomuch that Moſes in a great rage broke the tables of ſtone all to fitters; and God himſelfe would haue deſtroyed Iſrael Exod. 32. in the wilderneſſe, & made a greater nation of him. And what are the idols and images of Papiſts, with their Roods and Crucifixes, and painted pictures, but Egypts calues; and Naamans going into the temple of Rimmon, which he knew was a ſin, and ſo craued mercie? Are not the Papiſts aſhamed of theſe things, when among their owne Doctors and

Schoole-men, it is doubtfull & diſputable, whether Salomon was ſaued or no, by reaſon of his apoſtacie?
            Would it not make a mans heart to tremble to heare the fearfull epithites and characters wherewith the holy Ghoſt hath branded Papiſtrie? and is not the Pope proued to be that Antichriſt, not one man, as the diuell would deceiue weake Chriſtians, but the Conclaue of Cardinals, and the gouernment of Rome, as it is now exalted. Oh reade, reade, reade for Gods ſake, There muſt come a departing, and that man of ſin be diſcloſed, euen the ſonne of perdition, which is an aduerſary, and exalteth himſelfe 
               2. Theſ. 2. 3. 4. 7 
               againſt all that is called God, ſo that he ſitteth in the temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God: and therefore neither Iew nor Turke, nor Idolater, but a meere Chriſtian Prelate, and ſhould be a Preacher of Gods word: then he followes with the myſtery of iniquitie, the reuealing of the wicked man, the conſuming of him with the ſpirit of Gods mouth, his comming by the working of Satan, with all power, and ſignes, and lying wonders, in all deceiueableneſse of vnrighteouſneſſe, with many other things to the end of the Chapter.
            What think you of Pauls inſtructions to Timothy, concerning the doctrines of diuels, ſpeaking through 
               1. Tim. 4. 
               hypocriſie, hauing their conſciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding meates and mariages, and giuing heed to the ſpirit of errors to be ſeduced: ſo that you ſee there muſt be a doctrine amongſt profeſſors of Gods word, preſcribing things abominable to the truth, and it ſhall be perſpicuous to the world, and plainly reuealed, and when it is diſcouered and

made knowne, the concluſion followes, without diſtinction or exception, that it is the doctrine of the diuel: anſwer then a Gods name, you that muſt anſwer before the throne of the Lambe; is not this Papiſtrie? and who would be thus defiled? Oh marke the goodnes of God when the gueſts made excuſes, and would not come to the feaſt, the Maſter ſent about into the high wayes and hedges for the poore, the blind, the halt and the lame; yea hee compelled ſome to come, that knew not what that hoſpitalitie meant; and yet for all this, when hee diſcouered a man in the bride-chamber that had not on his wedding garment, he caſt him forth, and his miniſters threw him into vtter deſolation: what then will become of Papiſts? can you conceiue that the Popes triple crowne, his veſtments embrodred with pearle and gold, the Cardinals bloody ſcarlet gownes, the Prieſts ſtately and pompous copes, the altar-hangings of rich arras, with all thoſe proud and pompous attires, are wedding garments fit to come into Chriſts bride-chamber? No, no. It is true humiliation and the waſhing of our ſins with his precious blood muſt make vs fit for admiſſion. What is Calamus, Benimmi, or Storax, ſays the Prophet, or a thouſand riuers of oile to make vs delicately cleane, and ſmell of perfumes, except the Lord purge and cleanſe vs, and by the operation of his holy Spirit wipe away our leprous ſpots of iniquitie, and purifie vs by a new ſanctification, not by the Purgatory of Papiſtry, the interceſſion of Saints, the Maſſes of Prieſts, the merits of works, the Indulgences of the Pope, the trentals & dirges

of cozening Friers, nor in a word the trumperies and fooleries of proceſſions and puppet playes.
            Now come to the hammer that ſtrikes all home, to the ſtone that puſhed the golden image in peeces, to the iron rod that bruiſeth Gods enemies to powder, the Apocalips I meane, and he that hath eares to heare, let him heare. I ſaw vnder the altar the ſoules of them that were killed for the word of God 
               Apoc. 6. 9. 
               and for the teſtimonie which they maintained. Oh the bloody maſſacres of France, and the crueltie of the Romane Biſhops! oh the tyrannie of the Inquiſition, and the ſearches of Ieſuites and Prieſts all ouer Europe! oh the fiery trials & perſecutions in Queen Maries dayes, and thoſe blood-thirſty enemies of God, Gardner and Bonner, with the reſt of Satans inſtruments, worſe then Adonibeſeck the tyrant, who cut off the hands and feet of 70 Kings. But vnderſtand what followes both to them and all the reſt that forget God: And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe Captaines, 
               15 
               and the mightie men, and the bond-man, and euery freeman hid themſelues in dens and among the rocks of the mountaines, and ſaid to the mountaines and rocks, Fall 
               16 
               on vs, and hide vs from the preſence of him that ſitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. And he opened the bottomleſse pit, and there aroſe the ſmoake of 
               9, 2 
               the pit, and the ſmoake of a great fornace, and the Sunne and the aire were darkned by the ſmoake of the pit; And there came out of the ſmoake Locuſts vpon the earth, and 
               3 
               vnto them was giuen power, as the Scorpions of the earth haue power. What is all this, and much more that followes, but Popiſh Prieſts, falſe teachers, hereticks

indeed, and ſuch as would eclipſe and darken the glory of Gods word, and peruert the doctrine of holy Scripture. Marke the reſt, we beſeech you: And when they haue finiſhed their teſtimonie, 
               Apoc. 11. 7. 
               the Beaſt that cometh out of the bottomleſſe pit ſhall make warre against them, and ſhall ouercome them and kill them: and their corpſe ſhall lie in the ſtreets of the great Citie, which ſpiritually is called Sodome and Egypt, 
               8 
               where our Lord alſo was crucified. And there appeared another great wonder in heauen, for behold a great red 
               12. 3 
               Dragon hauing ſeuen heads and ten hornes; and there 
               7 
               was a battell in heauen, Michael and his Angels fought againſt the Dragon; And the great Dragon that old Serpent, 
               9 
               called the Diuell and Satan, was caſt out, which deceiueth all the world. And I ſaw a Beaſt riſe out of the 
               13. 1 6 
               Sea, with ſeuen heads and ten hornes, and he opened his mouth vnto blaſphemy againſt God. And I ſaw three vnclean ſpirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, 
               13 
               and out of the mouth of the Beaſt, and out of the mouth of the falſe Prophet. And great Babylon came 
               16. 19 
               in remembrance before God, to giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fierceneſſe of his wrath. Come, I will 
               17. 1 
               ſhew thee the damnation of the great Whore that ſitteth vpon many waters, with whom haue committed fornication the Kings of the earth. And I ſaw a Woman ſit 
               2 
               vpon a ſcarlet coloured beaſt, full of names of blaſphemy. Oh reade the whole Chapter with all that followeth concerning Romes propheſie, and then conſider with your ſelues, who would either be a Papiſt or allow of Papiſtry in any Chriſtian gouernment: for either you muſt diſcredit this propheſie, or think the holy Ghoſt very vnmannerly in theſe epith
                  •
               tes

and titles, or be aſhamed of your profeſſion, and ſo turne to the Lord (if be poſſible) by true contrition and reformation of life.
            But, moſt gracious Lords, we will come nearer home to you, you know what letters haue paſſed from your Biſhops to inferiour Miniſters, concerning what and how they ſhall preach, with certaine limitation of handſome language toward the Papiſts, that none of theſe fearfull characters in Scriptures ſhall be once mentioned againſt them: you know how the Lord Keeper would faine haue moderated the charges of the Iudges of Aſſiſe at their ſolemne Seſſions and Aſſemblies, as if there were a full determination in the gouernment to repeale all the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, yea the King himſelfe againſt Papiſts, Prieſts and Ieſuites. You know how audacious they haue been euen of late dayes to iuſtifie their bad diſpoſitions toward the State, and make a publicke proteſtation of their inficious wilfulneſſe, inſomuch that ſome of them dared to ſay, when we reioyced with bonfires at the Princes returne, that they were ſory to ſee ſo much wood ſpent in vain, for there would not be fagots enough left to burne the Hereticks in London.
            What then hath our gracious Soueraigne gotten by this partiall charitie or conniuencie at Papiſts; but at home a generall feare leſt the Diuell ſhould lay hold vpon the latch of the doore, and ſo take aduantage of no bodies watching without; or their negligence within, and politikly enter, and then who knowes not, what a ſubtil Serpent, raging Lion and watching Dragon hee is? And abroad, iniurious

reports, that hee was afraid of the Popes and Spaines mightineſſe, or durſt not truſt his owne greatneſſe againſt the factious Papiſts of England, if they ſhould vnite themſelues to any forrein Prince; when yet he hath had experience of his owne preſeruation, and the many deliuerances of his predeceſſor that famous Queene of euerlaſting memory: for the hand of God is not ſhortned, and he hath ſtill a cloudy pillar by day, and a fiery pillar by night to conduct his Iſrael through the wilderneſſe. If there were no more to make you abhorre Papiſtrie, then the martyrdome of the Saints in Queene Maries dayes, it were ſufficient: Oh horrible crueltie to haue men and women burnt for ſaying the Lords prayer in the vulgar tongue, and inſtructing their families in the word of God. The bloody Biſhop Bonner in his owne perſon burnt a poore ſeruants hand with a flaming linke for ſaying a part of a Catechiſme: and to make the ſpectacle the more vgly, he whipped a man with rods in his garden, till his fury made his owne blood ſpurt out of his paunch. The reſt were not inferiour vnto him: for by a Biſhops commandement a woman with childe was put to death, and when the infant burſt out of her womb, one of the guard pitcht him backe againe into the fire vpon the point of a halbert. To name the reſt, were to write out the whole booke; but for this and the reſt, wee end with the Poet, Horreſco referente.
            
            Shall we ſtep into France, and remember thoſe fearfull times of Guiſean maſſacres, eſpecially Henry of Bourbons mariage, when the Admirall was ſlaine,

of which one writes, that there was more blood ſpilt then wine drank. Shall we name the Leagures Oligarchy, and holy conuention of Catholiks, when they had like to haue expeld their Prince out of the kingdome, and draue him to a nooke of Normandie, the towne of Deep, and onely becauſe he was or ſeemed a Proteſtant. In theſe warres and times of wickednes, ſo many outrages & cruell blood ſheddings were committed, that Nero's opening his mothers wombe was not comparable.
            You reade of a battell in heauen, betweene Michael and his Angels, and the Dragō; wherein at laſt the Diuell and all his complices were diſcomfited: if euer this might be rightly applied, it was to Queen Elizabeth, of whō it may well be ſaid with the Poet,
            
               —Namque haud tibi vultus
               Mortalis, nec vox hominem ſonat ô dea certe.
            
            For if euer the Cherubins ſpread their wings ouer the Arke, the God of heauen tooke a charge of her perſon; elſe could ſhe not haue eſcaped ſo many attempts, ſo many enemies, ſo many miſchiefes, piſtols, poniards, poiſons, threatnings, inſurrections, invaſions, curſes, excommunications, hate, & deadly malice, all which aroſe from the poiſoned ſpring of the Papiſts inventions, and flowed into ſtreames of monſtrous impietie, and Popiſh abſolutions for murder. If there were nothing in the world to be a motiue to the abhorrencie of their religion and actions, the Cataſtrophe of Henry the 4. of France, ſurnamed the Great, would diſſolue an heart of adamant, and make men wonder that ſome exorbitant vengeance did not fall vpon the contriuers: for

when was this done? when he had condeſcended to their owne conditions, the Popes Legat, and the Papiſts interceſſion; but Satan hath his inſtruments; and when the Lord giues vs ouer, or we giue ouer the Lord, we muſt endure a ſtrange alteration.
            Who can forget, or who can euer be reconciled to any adherents of Popery, when the Gun-powder plot ſhall be queſtioned, and the memory of that Satanicall machination be renewed, of which I wil ſay no more, but anſwer with Solon, when there was a motion made for a law againſt parricides, You ſee (ſaith he) how murder is to be puniſhed; but no man can beleeue that any dare attempt to kill his father: ſo treaſons, maſſacres, ſlaughters, and villanous attempts may be proiected, but it is impoſſible that there ſhould be ſuch a forge in hell it ſelf, to hammer out ſo vile a work, as the deſtruction of a whole kingdome at once, and the blowing into the aire the Nobilitie and principall wiſe men of a Cōmonwealth. Why Neros wiſh was not comparable to this, to haue all the Senators heads ſet on one necke, that he might diuide it aſunder at a ſtroke. If it be thus, moſt gracious Lords, be iudges your ſelues of our poore ſupplication, whether it is not high time to roote out Papiſtrie, and crie with Sara, that the ſonne of the bondwoman ſhould not dwell with Iſaac, and ſo neuer left till Hagar and Iſmael were thruſt out of doores; or to take that order, that Popery haue not any further footing in in the Land, nor that Man of ſin, that Antichriſt of Rome, that ſonne of perdition, that ſcarlet Strumpet, that painted Ieſabel, and that doctrine of diuels

be neuer admitted againe or taught in England, to impoſture ignorant ſoules, and ſeduce innocent people.
            Thirdly, concerning Spaniſh practiſes, and the hate that all the nations of the world beare vnto them: for the generall (moſt gracious Lords) wee refer you to the ſeuerall tractates of many Hiſtoriographers, and the great experience of iudicious trauellers; but eſpecially to Paragone and Nouita Pernaſſo written in Italian, to a letter to the Duke of Sauoy, and a treatiſe of Figuira a Portingal Gentleman concerning the conqueſt of Portingall, written in Spaniſh to the Figre of France, the Cheualier of France, the Leaguers Oligarchy, and the Spaniſh Monarchy compiled in French; and for our owne language, to Sir Francis Haſtings works, and a well compoſed treatiſe concerning Engliſh fugitiues, with diuers of this ſort, wherein you ſhall ſee, quaſi digito demonſtrata, as in a table well deliniated, the 1. pride, 2. irreligion, 3. tyrannie, 4. treaſons, 5. ingratitude, and 6. inhumanitie of the Spaniſh nation, wherein we hope one day to ſatisfie vnderſtanding men, and according to the prouerb of Dies dabit quod dies negat, make you partakers of ſuch truths, that the beſt friends which Spaine hath, ſhal confeſſe the Caſtilian comes of goatiſh barbarous blood, and all the reſt are polluted with Mahumetan mixture, and Mooriſh affinitie. And although it may be obiected againſt ſuch an attempter,
            Non tu plus cercis, ſed plus temerarius aeudes;
            yet iuuante Deo it may be performed, and we will rely on Mordechais anſwer to Heſter, that if ſhe will

not go in to the King to ſaue her people, God will raiſe them vp meanes of preſeruation from ſome other part of the earth. But to come nearer home, and to your ſelues, as the preſent ſtands; Who knowes not, ſince the treaty with Spaine, with what inſolency the Papiſts haue proceeded both at home and abroad; at home they haue dared to publiſh and copy deuiſed pardons, ſcorned the lawes of the Land concerning Recuſancie, boaſted of publicke aſſemblies, ſet vp printing Preſſes in priuate houſes, and iuſtified their idolatrous meetings, as if the Maſſe meant to outface the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt, frequented the Embaſſadours houſes with much immodeſt iuſtificatiō of their Conuenticles, threatned zealous Miniſters for their inuectiues againſt Antichriſt; continued priuate inhibitions that no man ſhould ſpeake, write, preach, or practiſe any thing againſt their deſignes, inſomuch that diuers haue beene impriſoned for diſcouering the Spaniards pride and hypocriſie, and many put out of countenance for inuectiues againſt the Kings friends, as the terme went. Abroad, I am aſhamed to name the ſundry pictures they haue publiſhed both in Antwerp and Bruſſels (for all the peace, and treaty with Spaine) againſt the King and his children, againſt our Countrey and Religion, againſt God and his Annointed; yea it is wonderfull to reade the infamous and ſcandalous lies they haue expoſed, as if his Maieſty had gone with his Councell to Maſſe to pleaſe the Pope and the King of Spaine, as is apparant in Gallo Belgico. What ſay you to 
                  
                     •
                  oron
                     •
                   Regi
                     •
                  , a booke printed in Bruſſels againſt

his Maieſties royall perſon; an Invectiue againſt Holland, by laughing at her neer noſſe vnto hell, as being low ground; and traducing the vertuous Queene Elizabeth moſt maliciouſly; Iohn Kings Legacle Biſhop of London; the Gag for the Goſpell; the vneaſing of hereſie, with diuers others, all which though they be helliſh and damnable, yet are ſold by the Diuels factor, or a Spaniſh Iohn, and in a maner winked at in the State; whereas other relations tending onely to the diſcouery of errors and abuſes in the Church, are not onely ſuppreſſed, but the authors puniſhed and impriſoned, to no other purpoſe, but to diſcouer our feare that wee ſhould be found guilty in Gods ſight: ſo that one hath beene impriſoned for writing a letter to the then Marquis of Buckingham againſt the Spaniſh march; another for making or publiſhing a booke, wherein Gondomar apprehended himſelfe mockt & derided; a third for preaching a Sermon, Be not vnequally yoked with Infidels; a fourth for diſcouering the inceſtuous mariages of the houſe of Auſtria; a fifth for reuealing the ſecrets of that tyrannous Inquiſition in Spaine; a ſixt for applying to the preſent Ezechias folly in ſhewing the Baby loniſh Embaſſadours the treaſures of the Temple and the riches of the Pallace; a ſeuenth for making a prayer to be deliuered from all infectious Spaniſh ſheep, by reaſon you had once a great rot of ſheep in England, by an infectious Ewe brought out of Spaine; and diuers others for putting the axe to the roote of the tree, and applying other texts contrary, to your Biſhops minds, and ſome other Lords who affected Spaines greatneſſe.
            
               
But ſuch is your misfortune (
                  〈…〉
                p
                  •
               o
                  •••
               nely abuſe Gods prouidence with ſuch 
                  •
                cha
                  ••
               cte
                  •
               ) or the malignitie of time, that hauing two fac
                  •
               t
                  •
                and befitting pictures, as your aduerſaries deſerued, they were both ſuppreſſed, the plates cut in p
                  •
               eces, and the ſellers impriſoned; one was of the Kings holding the Pope
                  •
                noſe to a grind ſtone▪ with the two Archbiſhops turning the ſame▪ another was made by Mr 
               Ward of Ipſwich, concerning 88. and the powder treaſon, and both for Gods glory and Englands honour; yet neither they nor any thing elſe againſt the Pope or Spaine would be to era
                  •
               ed: yea when your reuerend and honorable Archbiſhop▪ whoſe Statue deſerues to be ſet vp in gold, proued the Lords Champion againſt ſome Papiſticall motiues, and mixtures to be made amongſt you, ſome prophane tongue calld him Puritan Biſhop, and wicked ſtomacks belched contradiction in his face: but we will vrge this matter no further, onely pray that God will protect ſuch as protect true Religion; and aſſure your Honours, that the Spirit of God will make them of the ſynagogue of Satan, which call Reuel. 3. 9. themſelues Iewes, and are not; but ſuch as keep the word of his patience, ſhall be deliuered from the houre of temptation which muſt come vpon all the world.
            Wee could name other ſeuerall conferences and diſputations ſince this treaty with Spaine, of which with diuelliſh arrogancie they haue boaſted that Fiſher the Ieſuite ſo preuailed againſt Doctor White, that many hearers turned Catholicks; and how the illuminations of the Prieſts were diuine from heauen,

and the Papiſts Preachers had an Euangelicall ſpirit: oh horrible impudencie, and Spaniſh blaſphemie!
            Wee will not be preiudicate (moſt honorable Lords) and ſay, it was a iudgement of God in that fatall Voſper of the Blackfriers, to kill a hundred people with the fall of a loft, and giue you all warning, that God will not be mocked, that blaſphemies ſhall be reuenged, that there is no ſuch enemy to God and his Church as apoſtacie: but wee will be bold to tell you, that this diſaſter is turned vpon your owne heads; for at Rome there hath been ſolemne Proceſſion, and from Rome letters of diſcouery, that in England God hath beene ſo angrie with the hereticks, (meaning the Proteſtants) that Churches and lofts haue ouerwhelmed many of them in their ominous falls. If the diuell now be the father of lies, who could inuent ſuch vntruths?
            You had a tempeſt of lightning and thunder in Iuly laſt, and it ſpared not the gate-houſe in the Pallace of Saint Iames, we will not ſay, it was to chide you for building a Chappell to Idolatry, and ſwearing to ſtrange articles for the pleaſure of the Spaniard; but may affirme, that if any Biſhop was conſenting to ſuch a worke, is it any other then when the Leuite became Prieſt to Micha, and conſecrated his idoll. Come, come, be not deceiued; if God be God let him be God; if Baal be God, ſerue him: and if Spaine will match with England, let it be done without fearfull concluſions; and be not ouermatched with a prodigious treaty.
            We are the bolder (moſt gracious Lords) to enter

into theſe termes with you, and to proſtrate our ſelues before the throne of our dread Soueraigne, with teares in our eyes and drops of blood from our heart, becauſe we deſire that he would but conſider the many and ſundry inconveniences the Country hath endured ſince the peace with Spaine; and with what particulars of diſgraces and ſcorne, wee haue all been branded ſince this laſt treaty about a mariage: let vs then craue pardon, great Lords, if we make a mixture of triuiall and ſolid buſineſſe together, or are careleſſe of method, precedencie of time, or not ranking the moſt eminent things in the firſt place; ſhall wee begin with the complaints of the whole Land, the ſwarming and increaſe of the poore, the decay of trades, inſomuch that in London there are at leaſt a thouſand ſeuerall houſes to be let, and in the principal ſtreets inferiour occupations are intruded, to the diſgrace of that great and famous Citie; the exportation of our gold, the carying away of our ordnance, the anticipation of the benefit of our Virginia commodities, by ſelling vnderhand Spaniſh Tobacco, and ſuch like; and the ſlack eventing of our cloth and cottons, by reaſon Spaine and Italy haue proclaimed inhibitions for bringing in any Engliſh cloth or woollen clothes amongſt them? Shall wee follow with the loſſe of the Palatinate, the ſlighting of our Embaſſadours in Germany, the hazard of the Kings children in Prague, the bereauing them of their inheritance, the beſtowing the Electorſhip vpon Bauaria, and all thoſe perils and indignities wee haue endured about that warre, when yet we were made

to beleeue there ſhould be a more tractable compoſition or orderly courſe taken, if we would defiſt from the proſecution? Shall wee continue with your diſgraces at home? how euer many gracious things haue been publiſhed to reconcile the peoples opinion to the affecting the Spaniſh match, all which haue yet had the misfortune of diuerting them from it, either as diſallowing the pamphlets that haue been that way written, or eſteeming them too triuiall, and onely common tricks to get mony. With what ſcorne did a ſuppoſed Spaniſh mad man aduance himſelfe into the Chaire of Eſtate in the preſence at White-hall, and was onely diſmiſt with a ieſt from Gondomar, and a ſhipping out of England? Was there euer ſuch an abuſe offered to a Kings houſe, as the cutting of his pictures in the princely gallery, when certaine Spaniards were ſo kindly entertained to be admitted into ſuch priuat rooms? Who could haue had better welcome then that counterfet fugitiue the Archbiſhop of Spalato? and yet in requitall he preached publickly in the Mercers Chappell, that the Church of Rome was a true Church of God; and in priuate conference argued as if the Eccleſiaſticall gouernment of England was but a mongrell Papiſtry. How did Gondomar couzen our hoſpitalitie, and abuſe his Maieſties fauor? for after he and his Prieſts had been welcomed to many noble houſes in England, and diſcouered the Ladies humors or dotage vpon their Ieſuites, after he had fraughted himſelfe with the knowledge of our kingdome, and diued (as it were) into the arcana regni; after he had drawne on the net of political

enforcement, concerning the profit and honour of both Nations by this match, with the iocundity of the Princes in their vnion; and penſelled out the excellencies of the Infanta Maria: after, we ſay, that hee had as it were made a faction in England, and knew by name who were Hiſpaniolized, and for their priuate ends (as all temporiſers do) neglected the publicke good either of Church or Commonwealth. With what a iollitie did hee returne into Spaine, and boaſted there how eaſie it was to deceiue your ſimplicitie, inſomuch that wee in Scotland heard more particulars then you in England, that his arguments were but Elo
                     •
                  chi, and wiſhed in our hearts his wiſedom might proue Ahitophels, and his deuices like Perillus bull, of whom Phallaris for his inuention made the firſt triall.
            Shall we proſecute other matters? was it well done, thinke you, to compoſe that booke of Roſa Hiſpanioa, and Anglicum punicum, and expoſe it to publike view, with an idolatrous and blaſphemous frontiſpeece, Chriſt comming from heauen to marrie them, when he himſelfe had curſed Iſrael if they matched with the Canaanites, and Nehemiah with pulling their haire from their heads, made the people put away their idolatrous wiues; and for the booke it ſelfe, the wiſer and iudicious ſort not onely derided it for the phraſe and fantaſticall title vnto as fantaſticall a man, but for the ſubſtance and examples which might be euery way, and euery one retorted againſt the other: and for the frontiſpeece, the very women in Edenborugh haue made good ſport to heare of the ieſts that haue beene contriued

vpon it. At the firſt, when a certaine man demanded whom thoſe pictures did perſonate, and anſwer was made, that the one was Charles Prince of Wales, and the other, the Lady Maria Infanta of Spaine; and the third, Ieſus Chriſt come from heauen to marry them. Not too faſt, (replied the fellow) but yet I am glad that Chriſt is between them, for then ſure he wil neuer ſuffer them to ioyn together, except God giue her ſo much grace, which ſeldome happens to a Spaniard, to come out of Babilon, and not be partakers of her Idolatries. After this, the book lying long on their ſtalls, and the man ouen angred againe at ſuch lukewarme goſpellers and tradeſ-men, that care not by what for did meanes, and ſuperſtitious filthineſſe they enrich themſelues, he asked once againe what thoſe pictures meant? and they once againe anſwered, the Prince of Wales, and Princeſſe of Spaine, with Chriſt between them. Oh, ſaid he, thats impoſsible! For if Chriſt meant any ſuch matter, he would haue diſpatcht it before now: and queſtionleſſe there would neuer haue been ſuch delayes, and rediculous pride amongſt them.
            Then followed the Princes iorney into Spaine, with rigging out a Nauy, and ſelecting the Commanders to pleaſe the King of Spaine, as was interpred of ſome of the principall Catholike Lordes of England, who apparrelled their followers honorably, and did all things befitting the dignitie of the nation; but what followed vpon Brunſwicks ouerthrow? Spaine with Ixion boſted, he muſt lie with Iuno: and the houſe of Austria ſwelled ſo big, that if the tumor of pride be not pricked downe, it will

burſt with her own greatnes and preſumption, that they are not able to raiſe another Gigantomachia, and with Typhon caſt the mountaines againſt heauen: for preſently the noble Prince found a kind of remiſnes and relaxation concerning his firſt entertainment, & peraduenture being a pathick to ſome indignities, he and the Navy were all diſmiſt without the Lady or any diſpatch of the buſineſſe: ſo that we in Scotland did wonder how ſo great and ſo wiſe a King could either be misinformed, or rely on any Temporiſer to go forward with vncertainties; and yet for all this you in England printed more books of the Princes royall entertainment in Spaine, and like childrens wormſeed it was trimmed ouer with gold and put into candid ſtuffe, that is, it had braue phraſes and oratory, with ſome things that ſauored of impoſſibilitie. A ſecond booke told you of a ſecond entertainment which the Prince had in Spain, and for Spaniſh buſineſſe had ſuch an exotik phraſe, that when it came amongſt vs, we reputed it a very Rhomantidos indeed: for the author inuented words neuer in any author before, and beſtowed as much paines about killing of buls and beaſts, ioco de cuno, and other ſports, like our countrymen in times paſt, who ran at S. Quintine, as Homer did in deſcribing the Troian wars, Curtius in Alexanders conqueſts, and Lucan in his Pharſalia. Then followed a third booke of the Princes farewell, and reciprocall gifts beſtowed betweene Spaine and vs; and this was as vineger to the teeth and ſmoake to the eyes of the ſubiect: for had not their hearts been ſeaſoned with the ioy and gladnes for his returne, their mouthes

had curſed outright, and wiſhed ſuch deceiuers the womans reward, that for golde betrayed her countrey, and ſo had ſo much layd vpon her, that they preſſed her to death.
            Theſe collections (moſt gracious Lords) wee haue made, not to intercede againſt the will of our great King, or pleaſure of the Prince, if hee haue taken any pleaſure in his iourney to Spaine, but to put you in mind, what you muſt truſt vnto, if you merchandize for any Babyloniſh trumperies, or meane to trafficke with Spaine or Rome for mens traditions and policies: nor are wee preſumptuous in any aduice, but onely to remember you, how the blood of the Saints lies crying for vengeance, and mourning for their redemption before the throne of the Lambe, what Rome hath done to Gods ſeruants: wherefore Spaine hath abuſed moſt of the countries of Europe, and with what enforcements the whole world complaines of them all; and then no doubt the God that hath bin ſo merciful to you and vs in theſe diſcoueries, will be as mercifull in opening the doores of your hearts to preuent future miſchiefes, by expoſing vnto you preſent inconueniences, and aſſuring you according to that Machiuilian poſitiō of fides non eſt conſeruanda cum haereticis; the Pope and all that be his adherents and louers of his Holines, will take the firſt opportunitie and aduantage of any of your weakneſſes; but let them know from Gods owne mouth, there is a feaſt proclaimed for the birds of the aire and beaſts of the field to come and prey vpon the carkeiſes of Emperors and Kings, and gorge themſelues with the daintie food of the

fleſh of Princes.
            As for the ſuppoſed cauſes (gracious Lords) of your now Aſſembly, at this high Court of Parliament, we geſſe they may be to redreſſe the publike grieuances of the people, to reforme the enormities of the gouernner, to rectifie the diſordred liues of particular perſons, and to ſupply the Kings wants as is great reaſon; For as the honor of a King conſiſteth in the multitude of his ſubiects: ſo the glory of a nation appeareth in nothing more, then in the Maieſtie & Magnificence of a Prince, which cannot be done without contributions of the ſubiect: and ſo by conſequence, where the people are rich, the Prince cannot be poore; we pray the God of euerlaſting happineſſe ſo to direct and proſper all your proiects and conſultations, that they may extend to the glory of God, the honor of the Kings Maieſtie, the propagation of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, the benefit of the Common-wealth, the flouriſhing of this great and happie Iland, the reformation of ſin and enormitie, and the confuſion of Antichriſt with all his adherents.
            And the ſame God that gaue Lawes vnto his people, comming in power of feare, threatning & iudgment, when Mount Sinai did ſhake like an earthquake vnder him, ſpread his wings ouer your houſe, like the Cherubins ouer the Arke, & keepe you ſafe from any more Powder plots, eſpecially the Ar
                  •
               ados, and Spaniſh inuaſion of 88, which muſt neuer be forgotten: and would to God it would pleaſe his Maieſtie as he hath done by the 5 of No
                  •
               e
                  •
               be
                  •
               , to to make a feſtiuall of that day of their diſſipation,

and ſet vp a Pillar of braſſe vpon Dover peere, with inſculping the whole occurrences as they chanced, that the firſt worke which ſtrangers vndertook after their landing, might be to run to the monument, to vnderſtand how God protected you from the Spaniſh pride and oftentation.
            And the ſame God that appeared to Salomon with a bleſſed donation of wiſdome, whereby he proſtrated himſelfe before the Braſen Alter, praying both for himſelfe and the people, ſo gouerne, guide, and preſerue the heart of his Maieſtie, in finiſhing the worke he now begins, & opportunity ſets forward, 
                  ••
                at Europe it ſelfe take a pattern of great Brittaines Royalty, & be driuen to admiration, that true Maieſtie, religion, pietie, loue, vnion, peace, plentie, and ſtrength of men are met together in one Iſland, and corner of the world.
            And the ſame God that made the ſea his inſtrument of vengeance vpon Pharoah, the heauens to raine downe ſtones vpon the head of Siſera, the ſtars to fight in their order, the Angel to deſtroy the hoſt of the Aſsirians, the fire to conſume the Captaines of fifties, hell to open and ſwallow vp Corah and Abiram, the Lions to deſtroy the idolaters of Samaria, the Beares to tear in peeces the mockers of Eliah, and the inferior creatures to ſerue his turne vpon his enemies; keepe you from forreine and domeſticke aduerſaries, eſpecially outlandiſh women, who if they haue power to tempt Salomon to Idolatrie, are ſure to bring a fearefull iudgement vpon him, and his poſteritie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   