
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
               ❧ The ſeuerall Engines that Nichol
                     •
                  s Bloy Enginer profeſſeth, be Nyne in number; Theſe as followeth.
            
               THE firſt, is the perpetuall motion, commonly called the continuall Wheele, which Wheele goeth without Wind, Water, Man, or Horſe, or anything that breaths.
            
               The ſeuerall vſes be theſe.
It will grinde all kind of Corne, or oraine, as ſufficiently as euer was or can be either by Wind-mill, or Water-mill.
            It will ſerue for the drayning of Fends or Mariſh grounds.
            It ſerueth for drayning of Cole pits, Lead-mines, Cynne-mines, and all other Mynes of Mettals.
            It ſerueth for Oyle-milles, Iron milles, Smeltin of Lead, Sawing of Tymber, beating of Hempe, and many other good purpoſes.
            The Second, is the wheele Pro & Contra, which Wheele goeth by the labour of one man, by which wheele more ſtuffe may bee drawne out of the ground as Cole, Lead, Stone, Earth, Water, or any other mettal, then euer was yet done by the labour of Ten men.
            The Third, is the Attractiue Pegaſus, it ſerueth for the drayning of Cole pits, Lead-mines, Tynne-mynes, and all other Mynes of Mettals.
            The Fourth, is the High periticall Aſſiſtant, a very neceſſary Engine at the foot of Pegaſus, to ſend home the water to him, that he may raiſe it out at the day.
            The Fift, is the Lacune Rampant, it ſerueth to draine Fends & Mariſh groūds it will raiſe 300. Tons of water in an houre with the labour of one man, it will raiſe water out of a ſtanding poole to driue any Water-mill, and that with the labour of one man, beſides a very neceſſary Engine for ſhips at Sea.
            The Sixt, is the Ignipotent Carpim, for if there be a Seare-fire in a Towne, one man with that Engine ſhall doe more good for the ſtaking of the ſaid Fire, then can be done by Forty men any other way; it ſerueth alſo to water Gardens as raine from Heauen, it will beat Catterpillers from fruit trees and Arbours, and that in an excellent manner.
            The Seaueth, is the Saxipotent Engine, it ſerueth to pierce the ſtony Rockes for ſpeedy getting to the Cole, Lead, Tynne, or any other mettals.
            The Eight, is the Dampe Engine, for it driueth the dampe out of the groūd for the preſeruation of al that ſhal worke therin, & that with the labour of one man.
            The Nynth, is the Engine Triangula, it bringeth the water out of the very top of a pit, and it runneth in Pipes down the Hill ſide naturally after it be once ſet a worke, much after the maner of a perpetuall motion, for it neuer can ſtand (except it be ſtopped or ſtayed) ſo long as there is any water in the pit.
            All theſe Nyne Engines haue beene ſtudyed and practiſed by me Nicholas Bloy Enginer.
         
      
   