
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            Thirtene moſt pleſant
and delectable Queſtions,
entituled
A diſport of diuers
noble perſonages
Written in Italian by M.
IOHN BOCACE, Florentine
and Poet Laureate, in his
Booke named
PHILOCOPO.
            
               Engliſhed by H. G.
            
            
               Theſe bookes are to be ſolde at the
Corner ſhoppe, at the North-weaſt
dore of Paules.
(⸫)
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right worshipfull
M. VVilliam Rice Eſquier, H. G.
wiſheth a happy long life, with increaſe
of muche worſhip.
            
               IN HOVV MVCHE
the thankfull ſorte are
deſirous (as reſon vvilleth,
and experience
daylie teacheth) to
gratifie ſuch their dear
frends, as to vvhom for
ſundrie good turnes and receiued benefits
they are not a litle beholding, the ſundrie
dealing of thouſands dayly in vſe and apparant
to the vvorlde, to the great prayſe
and commendation both of the one and
the other, giueth a ſufficient teſtimonie:
So that, taking occaſion thereby to shevv
the good vvill I haue, to pay in parte the
debt many yeres due, for that your bountie
tovvards me (the leaſt ſparke vvhereof
I am vnable to ſatisfie:) I do giue vnto
you this ITLLIAN Diſport, the vvhich I
haue turned out of his natiue attyre into
this our ENGLISH habite, to the ende
the ſame may be no leſſe familiar to you,
and to ſuch other (for your ſake) as shall

vouchſafe thereof, than it is either to the
ITALIAN or the FRENCH: and deſire
that the ſame may march abroade vnder
your charge: to vvhom I recount the protection
therof. Not douting but as the reding
therof shal bring pleaſure and delite:
ſo the matter beeing therevvithall duely
conſidered, shal giue ſundry profitable leſſons
mete to be folovved. And bicauſe the
name of the author (being of no ſmal credit
vvith the learned, for thoſe his ſundry
vvel written vvorks) is of it ſelfe ſufficient
to carry greater commendation therwith,
than my pen is able to vvrite, I leaue to labor
therin, leſt my lack may be an occaſiō
to the leeſing of his due prayſe. And vntill
Fortune (the onely hope of the vnhappy)
shall make me better able, I shall deſire
you thankfully to accept this as a token
and pledge of the good vvil I haue to performe
that vvhervnto mine abilitie is vnable
to ſtretch. Thus taking my leaue, I
betake you to the tuitiō of almightie god,
vvho preſerue you in health to his pleſure,
and after this life make you poſſeſſor of
thoſe ioyes, vvhereof vve all hope to be
partakers. 6. Martij. 1566.
         
         
            
            The Booke to the
Reader.
            LOke ere thou leape, dome not by vievv of face,
            Leaſt haſt make vvaſt, in miſdoming the caſe,
            For I teach not to loue, ne yet his lore,
            Ne vvith vvhat ſalue is cured ſuche a ſore.
            But I the carke vvith cares that therby haps,
            The bliſſe vvith ioyes, the ſtormes vvith thunderclaps,
            The curteſies, vvhere moſt his force is ſhevvde,
            The choyce of beſt, be it of good or levvde,
            Compare them ſo, as doomed is the doubt
            Thereof, and ay the truth vvell fifted out:
            The vvhich to reade ſuch pleaſure thou shalt finde
            As may content a vvell diſpoſed minde.
         
      
      
         
            
            The argument to the .xiij
Queſtions, compoſed in Italian, by M.
John Bocace, Florentine, and
Poet Laureat:
And now turned into Engliſh
               by H. G.
            
            
               
                  FLORIO ſurnamed
Philocopo, accompanied
with the Duke
Montorio, Aſcalion,
Menedon, and Maſſalino,
in ſayling to
ſéeke his frend Biancofiore,
was thorow
a very obſcure and darke night, by the
fierce winds, driuen into great dangers,
but the perilles béeing once paſſed, they
were caſt into the Porte of the auncient
PARTHENOP
                     •
                  , wheras the Mariners
(eſpying them ſelues in Hauen) he rereiued
comfort, not knowing into what
coaſt Fortune had forced him, yelded
thankes to his Gods. And ſo taried the
new day, the which after it once appeared,
the place was of the Mariners deſcried,
ſo that they al glad of ſuretie, and
of ſo acceptable arriuall, came a ſhoare.

               Philocopo with his companions, who
rather ſéemed to come foorth new riſen
agayne out of their ſepultures, than diſbarked
from ſhippe, looked backe towardes
the waywarde waters, and repeating
in them ſelues the paſſed perils of
the ſpent night, could yet ſcarcely thinke
themſelues in ſuretie. They all then
with one voyce prayſed their gods, that
had guided them ſafe out of ſo crooked a
courſe, offred their pitifull Sacrifices,
and began to receiue comfort, and were
by a friende of Aſcalions honorably receiued
into the Citie, whereas they cauſed
their ſhip to be all new repaired and
decked, of Maſt, ſayle, and better ſterne,
than were the others whiche they had
loſt: and ſo tarying time for their further
voiage, the which was much longer
lengthened than they looked for: by occaſion
whereof Philocopo would many
times haue taken his iourney by lande,
but diſcouraged therein by Aſcalion,
ſtayde, in tarrying a more proſperous
houre in the aforeſayde place, where he
and his companions ſaw Phebea fiue
times round, & as many times horned,

before that Notus did abandon his violent
forces. And in ſo long a while, they
neuer almoſt ſaw time to be merry,
wherevpon Philocopo, who was very
deſirous to perfourme his deferred iourney,
one day called his companions vnto
him, and ſayde: Let vs go take the
pleaſaunt ayre, and paſſe the time vpon
the ſalte ſea ſhoare, in reaſoning and
prouiding for our future voyage. Thus
he, with the duke Parmenion, and the
reſt of his companions, directed their
walke with a mild pace (diſcourſing diuers
matters) towards that place wher
reſt the reuerende aſhes of the moſt renoumed
Poet Maro. They all thus talking
a good ſpace, were not gone farre
from the Citie, but that they came to
the ſide of a Gardeyn, wherein they
heard gracious and ioyous feaſting of
young Gentlemen, dames, and damſels:
There the ayre did all reſounde
with the noyſe of ſundrie inſtruments,
and as it were of Angelicall voyces,
entring with ſwéete delighte into the
hearts of them, to whoſe eares it came:
the whiche noyſe it pleaſed Philocopo
               
to ſtaye a while to heare, to the ende
his former Melancolie thoroughe the
ſwéeteneſſe thereof, mighte by little
and litle departe away. Then Aſcalion
reſtrayned theyr talke. And whyleſt
Fortune helde thus Philocopo and his
companions without the garden intentiuely
liſtening, a yong gentleman comming
foorth thereof, eſpied them, & forthwith
by ſighte, porte and viſage, knew
them to be noble gentlemen, & worthy
to be reuerenced. Wherfore he without
tariaunce, returned to his company, and
ſayde: Come, let vs goe welcome certayne
yong men, ſéeming to be gentlemen
of great calling, the whiche perhaps
baſhfull to enter herein, not being
bidden, ſtay without, giuing eare to our
dyſporte. The companions then of this
Gentleman lefte their Ladies at their
paſtime, and went foorth of the Garden,
and came to Philocopo, whome
by ſighte they knew too bée chiefe of
all the reſte, to whome they ſpake with
that reuerence their reaſon coulde deuiſe,
and that was moſt conuenient for
the welcoming of ſuch a gueſt, praying

him that in honour and increaſe of this
their Feaſt, it would pleaſe him and his
companions to enter with them the garden,
conſtrayning him through many
requeſts, that he ſhould in no wiſe denie
them this curteſy. Theſe ſwéete prayers
ſo pierced the gentle heart of Philocopo,
and no leſſe the hearts of his companions,
that he anſwered the intreators in
this ſort: Friends, of truth ſuch a Feaſt
was of vs neither ſoughte for, nor fled
from, but like weather beaten mates
caſt into your port, we to the ende to flée
drouſte thoughts, which ſpring of ydleneſſe,
didde in reciting our aduerſities,
paſſe by theſe ſea banks: But how fortune
hath allured vs to giue eare vnto
you I know not, vnleſſe as we thinke,
deſirous to remoue from vs all penſiueneſſe,
ſhe hath of you, in whom I know
to be infinite curteſie, made vs this offer:
and therfore we will ſatiſfie your
deſire, though peraduenture in part we
become ſomewhat laueſſe of the curteſie
which otherwiſe towards others ought
to procéede from vs. And thus talking,
they entred togither into the Garden,

wheras they founde many fayre Gentlewomen,
of whom they were very
graciouſly receiued, and by them welcomed
to their feaſt. After Philocopo had
a good while behelde this their feaſting,
and likewiſe had feaſted with them, he
thought it good to depart, and willing to
take his leaue of the yong Gentlemen,
and to giue them thanks for the honor
he had receiued, one Lady more honorable
than the reſt, indued with maruellous
beautie and vertue, came foorth
where he ſtode, and thus ſayd vnto him:
Moſt noble Syr, ye haue this morning
through this your great curteſie, ſhewed
no ſmal pleaſure to theſe yong Gentlemen,
for the which they ſhalbe alwayes
beholding vnto you, that is to wit, in
that you haue voucheſafed to come to
honor this our feaſt. May it pleaſe you
then, not to refuſe to ſhew vnto me, and
to theſe other Dames, that fauor that
I am ſecondarily to intreate you for:
To whome Philocopo with a ſwéete
voyce anſwered: Moſt gentle Lady, nothing
maye iuſtly be denied you, commaunde
therefore, for both I and theſe

my companions are all preſt at your
will: To whom the Lady ſayde in this
wyſe: Foraſmuche as this your comming
hath increaſed this our feaſting,
with a moſt noble and goodly companie,
I ſhal deſire you that you will not with
departure leſſen the ſame, but rather
helpe vs here to ſpende this day euen
to the laſte houre, to that ende we haue
already begonne the ſame. Philocopo
behelde hir in the face as ſhe thus ſpake,
and ſéeing hir eyes replete with burning
rayes to twinkle lyke vnto the
morning ſtarre, and hir face exceading
pleaſaunt and faire, thoughte neuer to
had ſéene (his Biancofiore excepted) ſo
faire a creature: to whoſe demaund he
thus made aunſwere: Madame I ſhall
diſpoſe my ſelf to ſatiſfie rather your deſire
than mine owne, wherefore ſo long
as it ſhall pleaſe you, ſo long will I abide
with you, and theſe my companions
alſo: The Ladye gaue him greate
thanks, and retourning to the others,
began togethers with them all to be very
merry. Philocopo abiding with them
in this ſorte, entred greate familiaritie

with a young Gentleman named Galeone,
adorned with good qualities, and
of a ſinguler eloquence, to whome in
talking he ſayde thus: Oh, how muche
are you more than any others beholding
to the immortall Gods, the whiche preſerue
you quiet in one will in this your
mirth making. We acknowledge vs
to be greatly bounden vnto them, anſwered
Galeone. But what occaſion
moueth you to ſay this? Philocopo anſwered:
Truely none other occaſion,
but that I ſée you all here aſſembled
in one will. Oh, ſayde Galeone, maruayle
not at all thereat, for this Lady
in whome all excellencie dothe reſte,
both moueth vs herevnto, and holdeth
vs herein. Then demaunded Philocopo:
And this Lady, who is ſhe? Galeone
aunſwered: It is ſhe that made
requeſt vnto you that ye woulde tarry
here, when as a while ſince ye woulde
haue departed. By ſight ſhe ſemeth vnto
vnto me (ſayd Philocopo) exceding faire,
and of a ſurmounting worthineſſe: but
yet if my demaund be not vnléefull, manifeſt
hir name vnto me, of whēce ſhe is,

and of what Parentes diſcended. To
whom Galeone anſwered: No wayes
maye your requeſt bée vniuſt, beſides
there is none publiquely talking of hir,
which doth not vouchſafe to publiſh the
renoume of ſo worthy a Lady, and therfore
I ſhall fully ſatiſfie your demaund.
Hir name is of vs here called Fiametta,
howbeit the greateſt part of the people
call hir by the name of hir, throughe
whom that wounde is ſhut vp, that the
preuarication of the firſt mother opened.
She is the daughter of a moſt high
Prince, vnder whoſe ſcepter theſe countreys
are quietly gouerned, ſhe is alſo
Lady to vs all: and briefly, there is no
vertue that ought to be in a noble heart,
that is not in hirs. And as I thinke, in
tarying this day with vs, you ſhall haue
good experience therof. That which you
ſay (ſayde Philocopo) can not be hidden
in hir ſemblance. The gods guide hir
to that ende that hir ſingular giftes do
merite, for aſſuredly I beléeue both that
and much more than you haue affirmed.
But theſe other dames, who are they?
Theſe Gentlewomen (ſayde Galeone)

ſome of them are of Parthenope, and other
ſome of places elſe where, commen
as are you your ſelues, hither into hir
company. And after they had thus helde
talke a good ſpace, Galeone ſayde: Ah
my ſwéete friende, if it mighte not diſpleaſe
you, it ſhould be very acceptable
vnto me to know further of your ſtate
and condition, than your outwarde appearance
repreſenteth, to the ende that
by knowing you, we maye do you that
honor you worthily merit, bicauſe ſometimes
want of knowledge bringeth lack
of duetie, to them that honour others in
not doing their due reuerēce. To whom
Philocopo aunſwered: no lacke in doing
me reuerence coulde any ways happen
on your behalfe, but rather ye haue
therin ſo far excéeded, as with exceſſe ye
haue paſſed the bounds & limits therof.
But ſince you deſire to know further of
my condition, it ſhould be vniuſt not to
ſatiſfie your deſire therein. And therfore
(in how muche it is lawfull for me to
diſcouer) I ſhall tell you: I am a poore
Pilgrim of Loue, and goe ſéeking as ye
ſée, a Lady of mine, taken away from

me by ſubtile cautele by my Parents▪
and theſe Gentlemen whom ye ſée with
me, of their curteſie kéepe me companye
in this my Pilgrimage: and my
name is Philocopo, of Nation a Spaniard,
driuen through tempeſtuous wether
(ſéeking for the Ilande of Cicilia)
into your Ports. But he knew not ſo
couertly to talke, as that the yong Gentleman
vnderſtoode not more of his condition,
than he willingly deſired he
ſhould: and hauing compaſſion of thoſe
his harde happes, ſomewhat comforted
him with woordes, whiche promiſed
him hereafter a more luckie life, and
from that time forwards to increaſe his
honour, willed that he ſhoulde be honored
of them all, not as a Pilgrim, or as
a bidden gueſt, but rather as the chiefe
and principall patrone of the feaſt. The
Lady, who vnderſtood his ſtate and condition,
through the report of Galeone,
estéeming derely of ſuch an happe, commaunded
ſpecially that ſo it ſhoulde be.
Apollo was now with his Chariot of
light mounted to the Meridian circle,
and did ſcarcely behold with leueled eye

the new apparelled earth, when as theſe
Dames, Damſels, and yong gentlemen
béeing thus aſſembled togither in that
place, (ſetting their feaſting aparte) ſéeking
forth by ſundry quarters of the garden
the delightfull ſhade, and fleing the
noyſome heat that might offend their delicate
bodies, toke by diuers companies,
diuers delightes. And the Ladie accompanied
with foure others, toke Philocopo
by the hand, ſaying: Sir, the heat doth
conſtraine vs to ſéeke out the freſh aire,
let vs therfore go to yonder medow you
ſée here before vs, and there with ſundry
diſcourſes, paſſe ouer the heat of the day.
Philocopo then greatly praiſed the Ladies
deuiſe, and folowed hir motion, and
with him his companions. Galeone alſo
with two others, wēt with them to the
appointed medow, which was excéeding
fair of graſſe and floures, and filled with
a ſwéete ſuauitie of ſmels, about ye which
grewe ſtore of yong trées very faire and
thicke of gréene leaues, wherewith the
place was defended from the parching
beames of the great planet. There was
in the middeſt of that medowe a propre

Fountain, very faire & cleare like Chriſtall,
about the which they all ſate them
downe, where ſome gaſing in ye water,
and other ſome gathering floures, they
began to talke of ſundry matters. But
bicauſe ſometimes at vnwares, the one
did interrupt the others Tale, the fayre
Ladie ſayd vnto them thus: To the ende
that this our diſcourſe may procéede in a
more better order, and ſo continue vntill
the freſhe coole houres, the which we attend
for our further feaſting. Let vs ordaine
one of vs in place of our king, to
whome eche one ſhal propound a queſtion
of Loue, and ſhall receiue from hint
an apt reſolution thereof: and truely (as
I think) we ſhal no ſooner haue made an
end of our Queſtions, but yt the heat (we
not knowing how) ſhall be paſt, and the
time ſpent to our profit and delite. This
deuiſe pleaſed them al, and among them
it was ſayd: Let ther be a king: and with
one voice they all choſe Aſchalion to
their king, for that he was ſomewhat
more growne in yeres, than was any of
the reſt: To whom he made anſwer, to
be altogither inſufficient for ſo great an

office, bicauſe he had ſpent more yeres in
the ſeruice of Mars, than of Venus. But
yet he prayed them all to leaue vnto him
the Election of ſuche a King. They that
thought him to be ſuche a one (knowing
ſo wel before hand the qualities of them
all) as would conſtitute one ſuche, as
ſhould yeld true anſwer to all theyr demaundes,
did then wholly conſent that
the Election ſhuld fréely be remitted vnto
him, ſince he would not take ſuche a
dignitie vpon himſelf.Fiametta choſen Queene to define the queſtions propounded. 
               Aſcalion thē roſe
him vp, and gathered certaine twigges
of a greene Laurel, the ſhade wherof did
ouerſpread the freſh fountaine, and therof
made a riche Coronet, the which he
brought in preſence of them all, and ſaid
in this wiſe: from the time that I in my
moſt youthful yeares began to haue vnderſtanding,
I ſwere by thoſe gods whō
I worſhip, that I do not remēber to haue
leen or hard named, a womā of like worthineſſe
to Fiametta, of whō loue holdeth
vs al heer in hir preſēce inflamed, and by
whō we haue this day bin honored ī ſuch
ſort, as we ought neuer to forget ye ſame.
And bicauſe ſhe (as wtout dout I know)

is plentifully endued wyth euery good
grace, adorned bothe with beautie & good
qualities, and endued with a flowing eloquence,
I therefore make choice of hir
to be our Quéene. For aſſuredly it is cō
               uenient
that the imperial crowne be beſtowed
vppon hir magnificence, being
diſcended from a ſtirpe royal, to whome
the ſecrete wayes of loue, being (as they
are all) open, it ſhall be an eaſie matter
for hir to content vs in theſe our Queſtions.
And this ſayd, he humbly knéeled
before this noble Ladie, ſaying: Moſt
curteous Ladie vouchſafe to decke your
head with this Crowne, the which is no
leſſe dearly to be eſtéemed of them, that
are worthy thorow their vertues to couer
their heades with the like, than if it
were of Golde. The Ladie with a newe
red bepainted hir white viſage, and ſaid:
Truely ye haue not in due ſorte prouided
a Quéene for this amorous people,
(yt haue more néede of a moſt able king)
for that of all you that are preſent, I am
the moſt ſimple and of leaſt vertue, neither
is there any one of you that is not
more meet to be inueſted of ſuch a croun

than am I. But ſince it thus pleſeth you,
I can not withſtand this your election: &
to the end I be not found cōtrary to our
made promiſſe, I will receiue it, and as
I hope, ſhal eke receiue from the Gods
with it, ye ſtomacke due to ſuch an office:
and thorowe the helpe of him to whome
theſe leaues were alwayes acceptable, I
ſhall anſwere you all, according to my
ſmall knowledge: Neuertheleſſe, I deuoutly
pray him that he will enter into
my breſt, and renue my voice with that
ſound wherewith he cauſed the valiant
vanquiſhed man Marſia, to deſerue to be
drawne forthe of the ſheath of his members.
I by way of mirthe ſhall giue you
light anſweres wythout ſifting to the
depthe of your propounded Queſtions,
the going about to ſerch forth the which,
ſhould rather bring tediouſneſſe than delight
to your mindes. And hauing thus
ſayd, ſhe toke with hir delicate hand the
offred Garland, and therwithal crouned
hir head, and commaunded that eche one
vppon paine to be depriued of the amorous
ioyes, ſhould prepare to put forthe
ſome queſtion, the which might be apte

and conuenient to the purpoſe whereof
they did intend to entreat, and ſuch a one
as ſhould rather be an increaſer of theyr
mirth, than through too great ſubtilty, or
otherwiſe, a deſtroyer of the ſame.
         
         
            The firſt Queſtion,
propoſed by PHILOCOPO.
            
               ON the right hand of
the Quéene ſate Philocopo,
to whome ſhée
ſayde: Noble Sir, you
ſhal begin to propoūd
your Queſtion,The Queene commaundeth Philocopo to propound. to the
end that ye reſt orderly,
as we are heere placed, may after you
with more ſuretie propound theirs alſo.
To whō 
               Philocopo thus made anſwer:
Moſt noble Ladie, without any forſlowing,
I ſhal obey your commaundement,
and thus ſaid: I remember that in the citie,
wherein I was borne, there was one
day made a bountiful great feaſt, wherat,

to honoure the ſame, were many gentlemen
and Gentlewomen:Tvvo Gentlemen enamored of one Gentlevvoman. And I that
was likewiſe there roming about, and
beholding them that were in the place,
eſpied among the reſt, two yong mē very
gratious to behold, that erneſtly eyed
an excéeding faire woman. Neither was
I any wayes able to diſcerne whither of
them hir beauty had moſt inflamed. And
as ſhe in like ſort had a good ſpace beheld
them, not making greater ſemblance to
the one, than to the other, they betwéene
themſelues, began to reaſon of hir: and
among the other wordes that I vnderſtoode
of their talke, was yt eche one ſaid,
that he was hir beſt beloued: and for
proofe thereof, either of them alleaged in
the furtherance of himſelfe, diuers geſtures
then before done by the yong woman.
And they thus remaining in this
contention a long time, being now thorowe
many woordes at daggers drawing,
they acknowledged that héerin they
did very euil, bicauſe in thus doing, they
wrought hurt and ſhame to themſelues,
and diſpleaſure to the woman. Wherefore
(moued of an equall agréement)

bothe two wente to the mother of the
mayd, who was alſo at the ſame feaſt,
and thus ſayd vnto hir: That forſomuch
as aboue all other women of the world,
either of them beſt liked hir daughter,
and that they were at contention whether
of them was beſt liked of hir, it
woulde therefore pleaſe hir to graunte
them this fauor, to the ende no greater
inconuenience might ſpring thereof, as
to will hir daughter, that ſhe either by
word or déede, would ſhew whether of
them ſhe beſt loued. The intreated gentlewoman
ſmiling, thus anſwered: willingly.
And ſo calling hir daughter to
hir, ſayd: My fayre daughter, eche one of
theſe preferreth the loue of thée, aboue
the loue of him ſelfe, and in this contention
they are: whether of them is beſt
beloued of thée: and they ſéeke of me this
ſauour, that thou either by ſignes or
words, reſolue them herein. Wheras loue is, there peace ought to be. And therefore
to the end that loue, from whom all
peace and goodneſſe oughte alwayes to
ſpring, brede not now the contrary, content
them in this, and with ſemblable
curteſie, ſhew towards which of thē thy

minde is moſt bent.The loued giueth cauſe of argument to hir louers. The yong damſell
ſayd: It liketh me right well. And ſo beholding
them bothe a while, ſhe ſaw the
one of thē to haue vpon his head a faire
garlande of freſh floures, and the other
to ſtande without any garlande at all.
Then ſhe that had likewiſe vppon hir
head a garlande of gréene leaues, firſte
tooke the ſame from hir head, and ſet it
vpon his, that ſtoode before hir without a
garlande. And after ſhe toke that whiche
the other yong man had vpon his head,
and ſet the ſame vpon hirs: and ſo leauing
them, ſhe returned to the feaſt, ſaying
that ſhe had both performed the commandement
of hir mother, and eke their
deſire. The yong men béeing thus lefte,
returned alſo to their former cōtention,
eche one affirming that ſhe loued him
beſt. And he whoſe garland ſhe toke and
ſet vpon hir head, ſayde: Aſſuredly ſhe
loueth me beſte, bicauſe ſhe hath taken
my garlande to none other ende, but for
that what mine is, pleaſeth hir, and to
giue occaſion to be beholding vnto me.
But to thée, ſhe hath giuen hirs, as it
were in place of hir laſt farewell: vnwilling

that (like a countrey girle) the
loue which thou beareſt hir, be without
requitall, and therfore laſtly ſhe giueth
thee that garlande thou haddeſt merited.
The other replying with the contrary,
thus anſwered: Truely ſhe loueth that
thine is, better than thée, and that may
be ſéene in taking therof. And me ſhe loueth
better than what mine is, in as
much as ſhe hath giuen me of hirs: And
therefore it is no token of hir laſt deſerued
gift, as thou affirmeſt, but rather a
beginning of amitie and loue. A gift maketh
the receiuer a ſubiect to the giuer:
and bicauſe ſhe peraduenture vncertane
of me, to the ende ſhe might be more certayne
to haue me hir ſubiect, will binde
me (if perhaps I were not bounde vnto
hir before) to be hirs by gift. But howe
mayſt thou thinke, if ſhe at the firſt take
away frō thée, that euer ſhe may vouchſafe
to giue thée. And thus they abode a
long time contending, and in the ende
departed without any definition at all.
Now ſay I, moſt puiſſant Quéene, yf
you ſhoulde be demaunded of the laſte
ſentence of ſuche a contention, what

would ye iudge? The faire Lady ſomewhat
ſmiling, turned towards Philocopo,
(hir eies ſparkling with an amorous
light) and after a ſoft ſigh, thus made anſwere:
Moſte noble youthe,The queenes iudgement vpon the queſtion. proper is
your Queſtion: And truely, as very
wiſely the young woman behaued hir
ſelfe, ſo eche one of the yong men right
well defended his cauſe. But bicauſe ye
require what we laſtly will iudge therof,
thus we make you aunſwere: It ſéemeth
vnto vs, and ſo it ought to ſéeme to
eche one that taketh good héede, that the
woman had in hate neither the one nor
the other: but to kéepe hir intent couert
did two contrary acts, as appeareth, and
not without occaſion. And to the end ſhe
might get more aſſured the loue of him
whom ſhe loued, as not to loſe the loue
of the other, whome ſhe hated not, it
was but wiſely doone. But to come to
our Queſtion, whiche is, to whether
of the two, greateſt loue was ſhewed.
We ſaye: that ſhe loued him beſt, and
he chiefeſt in hir fauour, to whome ſhe
gaue hir garland: and this ſemeth to be
the reaſon: Whatſoeuer man or woman

that loueth any perſon, ech one through
force of the loue they beare, is ſo ſtrongly
bound to the perſon loued, that abou
                  •
               
all other things they deſire to pleaſe the
ſame, neither to binde him or hir more
ſtrongly that thus loueth, néedeth either
gifts or ſeruices, and this is manyfeſt.
And yet we ſée, yt who ſo loueth, though
he endeuour him ſelfe ſundry wayes,
is not able to make the perſon loued, in
any ſorte benigne and ſubiect vnto him,
wherby he may bring it to his pleaſure,
and ſo with a more bolde face demaund
his deſire. And that this is in ſuche ſorte
as we ſay,Dido. the inflamed Dido with hir
doings, dothe very well manyfeſt the
ſame vnto vs, who burning in the loue
of Aeneas ſo long,Aeneas. as it ſéemed hir neither
with honours nor with gifts able
to winne him, had not the courage to attempt
the doubtfull way of aſking the
queſtion: So that then the yong woman
ſought to make him moſt beholding vnto
hir, whom ſhe beſt loued. And thus
we ſay, that he that receiued the gifte of
the garlande, was hir beſt beloued. As
the quéene became ſilent, Philocopo anſwered:

Diſcrete Lady,Philocopo replieth to the Queene. greatly is your
anſwere to be commended: but for all
that, you do bring me into a great admiration
of that ye haue defined, touching
the propounded queſtion, bicauſe I wold
haue iudged rather the contrary. For ſo
muche as generally among louers, this
was the wonted cuſtome, that is, to deſire
to beare vpon them ſome iewell, or
ſome other thing of the perſons loued, to
the end that moſt times they might glorie
them ſelues more therin, than in all
the remnant they had, & perceiuing the
ſame about them, therwith to glad their
minds,Paris. as ye haue heard. Paris ſeldome
times or neuer entred into the bloudie
battailes againſt the Greekes, without
bearing ſome token vpon him, that had
béen giuen him by his Helene,
               Helene. beléeuing
better to preuayle therewith, than if he
had gone without the ſame. And truely
in mine opinion, his thought was not
vayne: therefore I ſhoulde thus ſaye,
(that as you ſayde) the yong woman did
very wiſely, not defining it for all that
as you haue don, but in this maner: She
knowing that ſhe was very well loued

of two yong men, and that ſhe could not
loue mo than one; for that loue is an indiuiſible
thing, ſhe would rewarde the
one for the loue he bare hir, to the ende
that ſuche good will ſhould not be vnrewarded,
and ſo gaue him hir garlande in
requitall thereof. To the other whom
ſhe loued, ſhe thought ſhe woulde giue
courage and aſſured hope of hir loue, taking
his garlande, and decking hir ſelfe
therewith, in token wherof, ſhe playnly
ſhewed to be beholding vnto him for the
ſame. And therfore in my iudgement ſhe
loued better him from whom ſhe toke,
than him to whom ſhe gaue. To whom
the Quéene thus made anſwere:The queenes ſolution of this firſt queſtion. Your
argument ſhould haue pleaſed vs right
well, if your ſelfe in your tale had not
condemned the ſame Sée how pillage
and perfect loue can agrée togither? How
can ye ſhew me, that we loue him whom
we ſpoyle, better than him to whom we
giue? According to the Queſtion propounded,
to the one ſhe gaue a garlande,
and from the other ſhe toke a garlande:
neither had ſhe too whome ſhe gaue,
ought giuen hir: and that which we ſee

euery day for example may here ſuffiſe,
as is commonly ſayde: They are of gentlemen
farre better loued, on whom they
beſtow fauour and gifts, than thoſe that
are by them depriued of them. And for
that cauſe we laſtly holde opinion, concluding,
that he is better loued, to whom
is giuen, than he from whom is taken.
We know very wel, that in theſe our reaſonings
much might be obiected agaynſt
this our definition, & much alſo anſwered
to the contrary reaſons: But laſtly ſuch
determination ſhall remayne true. And
bicauſe time now ſerueth not, to ſtaye
with this our talke vpon one matter only
without moe, we will giue eare to the
reſt if it pleaſe you. To whom Philocopo
ſayd: That it pleaſed him right wel,
and that very well ſuffiſed ſuche
a reſolution to his demaunded
queſtion: and ſo helde
his peace.
         
         
            
            The ſecond Queſtion,
propoſed by LONGANO.
            
               NExte to Philocopo was
placed a curteous young
man, and gracious to beholde,
whoſe name was
Longano, who no ſooner
than Philocopo had left, thus beganne:
Moſt excellent Quéene, ſo trim hath ben
the firſt queſtion, that in my conceipte,
mine ſhall bring no delight at al. Yet to
the ende not to be ſeuered from ſo noble
a company, foorth it ſhall: and thus he
followed, ſaying: It is not many dayes
paſt, that I abiding all ſolitarie in my
chamber, wrapt in a heape of troubleſome
thoughts, ſprong frō an amorous
deſire, the which with a fierce battayle
had aſſaulted my heart,Tvvo ſiſters complayne them of being in loue. by happe heard a
piteous plaint, wherevnto (bicauſe I
iudged it by eſtimation néere vnto me)
intentiuely I layde mine eare, and therby
knew that they were women: by occaſion
whereof, I ſodaynly roſe to ſée
who, and where they were: and loking
forth at my chamber window, I heard
ouer agaynſt the ſame, in one other

chamber, two yong women, the ſame
being ſiſters, adorned with an ineſtimable
beautie, there abiding without any
other company, whom as I ſaw making
this ſorowfull plaint, I withdrew my
ſelfe into a ſecret place, without beeing
of them eſpied, and ſo behelde them
a long while, neither was I able for all
that, to vnderſtande all the words that
they through griefe vttred in teares, but
that the effect of ſuche plaint (according
to that I coulde comprehende) ſéemed to
me to be for loue: wherefore I through
pitie, and ſo ſwete an occaſion offred (being
thus cloſe as I was) began to ſhead
my trickling teres. And after that I had
in their gréefe perſeuered in the ſame a
good ſpace (forſomuch as I was their very
familiar, & alſo their kinſman) I purpoſed
to vnderſtand more certayne the occaſion
of their ſorow, and ſo went vnto
them, who had no ſooner eſpied me, but
all baſhfull they withhelde them from
teares, endeuoring them ſelues to do me
reuerence. To whom I ſayde: Gentlewomen,
trouble not your ſelues, neither
let this my comming moue you to reſtrain

your inward grief, for your tears
haue bin now a good ſpace apparant vnto
me. It ſhall be therefore needeleſſe to
hide you, either yet thorow baſhfulneſſe
to hide from me the cauſe of thys your
plaint. For I am come hither to vnderſtand
the ſame. And be you aſſured, that
ye ſhal not receiue by me either in word
or déede any euill requitall, but rather
helpe and comfort in what I may. The
women greatly excuſed themſelues, ſaying,
that they ſorrowed for nothing: but
yet after I had coniured them, and they
ſeing me deſirous to vnderſtand ye ſame,
the elder thus began to ſay: It is the
pleaſure of the Gods, that to thee our ſecretes
be diſcouered: thou therfore ſhalt
vnderſtand, that we, aboue al other women
haue alwayes reſiſted the ſharpe
darts of Cupide, who of a long ſeaſon in
caſting the ſame, was neuer yet able to
faſtē any one of them in our hearts. But
now laſtly being further inflamed, and
hauing determined to ouercome that his
childiſhe enterpriſe, tooke of newe with
his yong arme, of his beſt and deareſt
ſhaftes, and with ſo great force wounded

the heartes ſo ſore infeebled through the
ſundry blowes before receiued, as the
heades thereof pierced deepe, ſo as they
made a farre greater wound, than if reſiſtance
had not bene made (to the other
former) had like to haue bene. And thus
for the pleaſure of two moſt noble yong
Gentlemen, we are become ſubiectes to
his deitie, folowing his pleaſure wyth
more perfect faith, and ſeruent wil, than
euer any other women haue done. Now
hath Fortune, and the loue of them (as I
ſhall declare vnto you) left vs both comfortleſſe.
Firſt I,The firſt lamē
                  teth the loſte of hir enioyed louer. before my ſiſter héere,
was in loue, and through mine endeuor,
beléeuing wiſely to ende my deſire, ſo
wrought as I got the loued yong Gentleman
at my pleaſure, whome I found
as greatly enamored of me, as I of him.
But truely nowe hath not the amorous
flame through ſuch effect ceaſſed, neither
hathe the deſire leſſened, but eache one
more vehemently increaſeth: and more
than euer, I doe nowe burne in hys
fire. And what tyme, ſeeing howe I
might beſt mitigate & aſſuage the kindled
flame thereof, holding it inwardly

ſecrete, it after hapned, that the horned
Moone was no ſooner come to hir perfect
roundneſſe, but that he at vnwares committed
a fault, for the which was adiudged
him perpetuall exile from this citie,
whervpon he dreading death, is departed
hence without hope euer to returne.
I ſorowfull woman aboue all others,
more now enflamed thā euer, am without
him, left both dolefull and deſperate.
By occaſion whereof I ſorrow me, and
that thing that moſt increaſeth my ſorrow
is, that on euery ſide I ſee the way
barde from béeing able to follow him.
Thinke therfore now, whether I haue
cauſe to playne me or no. Then ſayd I:
and this other, why ſorroweth ſhe? And
ſhe anſwered:The ſeconde hindered by ielouſie, ſorovveth hir hap. This my ſiſter likewiſe
(as I) is enamoured of an other, and of
him agayne loued aboue meaſure. And
to the ende hir deſires ſhould not paſſe
the amorous pathes, without taking
ſome parte of delight, many times ſhe
hath endeuoured hir ſelfe to bring them
to effect, and contrary to hir deuiſe, iealouſie
hath always occupied and broken
the waye, and bicauſe ſhe coulde neuer

attayne thervnto neither ſaw how to be
able ſo to do, ſhe thus diſtreſſed, is thorough
feruent loue conſumed, as ye may
well thinke if euer ye were in loue. Séeing
we wer thē here al alone, we began
to reaſon of our miſfortunes, and knowing
the ſame farre greater than theſe of
other women, we coulde not withholde
from teares, but with wéeping ſorowed
our luckle
                  ••
               e lottes, as ye might well
perceiue. To heare this of them it gréeued
me greatly, ſo that I encountred
them with ſuche wordes as ſéemed me
moſt profitable for their comfort, and ſo
departed from them. Many times after
reuoluing in minde their griefes, and
ſometimes bethinking me whether of
the ſame ſhoulde be the greater, at one
time I agreed to that of the one, and at
another time, I yelded to that of the other:
and the ſundry reaſons wherwith
as it ſéemeth me, ech one hath to lament
hir, will not ſuffer me to ſtay vpon any
one, whervpon I remayn here in doubt.
May it therfore pleaſe you, that by you
may be opened this errour, in telling me
whether of theſe two infortunate louers

ſéemed to ſuſtayne the greateſt gréefe.
Great was the ſorow of either of them,The Queene decideth the queſtion.
anſwered the Quéene: But conſidering
aduerſitie to be moſt greuous to hir that
hath taſted proſperitie, we eſtéeme that
ſhée that hathe loſt hir loue, féeleth the
greateſt gréefe, and is of Fortune greatlieſt
offended. Fabritius.
               Fabritius neuer bewept
the chaunces of fortune: Pompey.But that Pompey
did, is a thing very manifeſt. If ſwéet
things were not taſted, the ſoure ſhould
be yet vnknowne. Medea.
               Medea neuer knewe
(according to hir own ſaying) what maner
a thing proſperitie was, whileſt ſhée
was in loue, Iaſon.but being forſakē of Iaſon,
bewayled hir aduerſitie. Who will euer
lament for that he hath not had: not one
but wil rather deſire it. It is demed therfore,
that of the two women, the one
wept for gréefe, the other for deſire. It is
very hard for me (gracious Ladie) to Longano of contrary opinion to the Queene.
thinke that which you affirme (ſayd the
yong Gentleman) forſomuche as who
that hath his deſire of any deſired thing,
ought much more to content his minde,
thā who that deſireth, and can not fulfil
his deſire. Further, nothing is more

light to loſe, than what hope promyſeth
not heereafter to yéelde. There ought to
be vnmeaſurable greefe, whereas the
not being able to bring egall willes to
effect doth hinder. From thence lamentations
take place, from thēce thoughtes
and troubles doe ſpring, bicauſe if the
willes were not egall, of force the deſire
ſhould want. But when as louers ſee
them ſelues in preſence of that they deſire,
and can not attaine thereunto, then
doe they kindle and ſorowe them muche
more, than if that they wold haue, were
farre from them. And who I pray you
torments Tantalus in Hel?Tantalus. but only the
apples, & the water, for that howe much
more neere they bend and ſwell to hys
mouth, ſo much the more (afterwards in
fléeing the ſame) they increaſe his hunger.
Truely I beléeue, that who hopeth
for a thing poſſible to be had and can not
attaine thereunto, thorow contrary reſiſting
impediments, féeleth more gréefe,
than who that bewaileth a thing loſte
& irrecuperable.The Queenes ſolution or the ij. queſtion. Then ſayd the Quéene,
your anſwere would haue followed very
well, where your demaunde ſhoulde

haue bene of an olde griefe, although to
that alſo might be ſayd: thus to be poſſible
throughe forgetting the griefe, to
ſhorten the deſire in the deſired things,
where as continual impediment is ſens
not to be able to attayn them, as in thoſe
loſt, wherein Hope dothe not ſhew vs,
that we ſhould euer haue them agayne.
But we do reaſon whether of them ſorrowed
moſt, whēn you ſaw them ſorrowing:
wherfore folowing the propounded
caſe, we will giue iudgement, that
ſhe felt greater griefe that had loſte hir
louer, without hope to haue him agayn,
(putting the caſe that it be an eaſie matter
to loſe a thing impoſſible to haue agayne:
neuertheleſſe it was to be ſayd:
who loueth well, forgetteth neuer) than
the other, who if we looke well, might
hope to fulfill that hereafter, that heretofore
ſhe was vnable to performe. For
a great leſſener of griefe is hope.
It had force to kéepe chaſte and to
diminiſh the ſorrowes of the
lingring long life of
Penelope.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The thirde Queſtion,
propoſed by a yong Gentlevvoman.
            
               ON the right ſide of Longano,
ſat an excellent faire
Gentlewoman, and very
pleaſant, who as ſhe perceiued
that Queſtion by
the Quéene determined, thus beganne
with a ſwéete talke to ſay: Moſt renoumed
quéene, your eares graunt hearing
to my words: And firſt by thoſe Gods
whom you worſhippe, and nexte by the
power of our paſtime, I pray you that
ye will giue to my demaund profitable
counſell. I, as you know, being deſcended
of noble Parents, was borne in this
Citie, and was named with a very gracious
name, although my ſurname (béeing
Cara) preſenteth me gratefull to the
hearers, and as by my face it may appeare,
I haue receiued from the Gods
and Nature a ſinguler gifte of beautie,
the whiche (in following my proper
name more than my ſurname) I haue
adorned with an infinite pleaſantneſſe,
ſhewing my ſelfe benigne to whom that
is delighted to beholde the ſame: by occaſion

whereof, many haue endeuoured
themſelues for their pleaſure to occupie
my eyes, agaynſt all whom I haue withſcode
with ſtrong reſiſtaunce, holding a
ſtable heart agaynſt their aſſaults: but
bicauſe it ſéemeth to me vnléefull that I
onely ſhoulde pretermit the lawes kept
and obſerued of all others, that is, not to
loue being loued of many, I haue determined
to become enamored, and ſetting
apart many ſeekers of ſuche loue, wherof
ſome do excell Midas in richeſſe, ſome other
paſſe Abſalon in beautie, and other
ſome in curteſie (according to the common
report of all) are more ſplendent
than any other. I haue of all theſe choſen
thrée: Of whome eche one pleaſeth
me alike.The gentlevvoman praieth to be reſolued vvhether oughte ſoneſt to be loued, either the ſtrong, the liberall, or the wiſe. Of the which thrée, the one of
bodily force (as I beléeue) would excell
the good Hector, he is at euery proofe ſo
vigorous and ſtrong. The curteſie and
liberalitie of the ſecond is ſuch, that (as I
thinke) his fame doth ſound through eche
pole. The third is all full of wiſdome, ſo
that he ſurmounteth all other wiſe men
aboue meaſure. But for that (as ye haue
heard) their qualities are diuers, I doubt

whether of them to take, finding in the
antique age eche one of theſe to haue diuerſlye
the courages of women, and of
yelding men: as of Dianira, Hercules, of
our Clitemneſtra, Aegiſtus, and of Lucretia,
Sextus. Counſell me therfore, to whether
of them ſooneſt with leaſt blame,
and greateſt ſuretie, I ought to giue my
ſelfe. The pleaſant Quene hauing heard
the purpoſe of this Gentlewoman,The queenes anſvvere. thus
made anſwere. There is neuer a one of
the thrée, that dothe not worthily merite
the loue of a faire and gracious Lady: but
bicauſe in this caſe I am not to fighte agaynſt
caſtles, or to giue away the kingdomes
of great Alexander, or the treaſures
of Ptholome, but that onely that
Loue and honour are with diſcretion a
long time to be kepte, the whiche are
mainteyned neither by force nor curteſy,
but only by wiſdome: we ſay, that both
you, and euery other woman ought rather
to giue hir loue to a wiſe man, than
to any of the reſt.The reply of the Gentlewoman. Oh how diuers is my
iudgement from yours, aunſwered the
propounding Gentlewoman. To me it
ſéemeth, that eche one of the others were

ſoner to be taken than the wiſe, and this
ſeemeth to be the reaſon: Loue as we
ſee) is of that nature, as multiplying his
force in one heart, euery other thing he
baniſheth out thence, retayning that for
his ſeate, and mouing it after according
to his pleaſure, wherevnto no foreſight
is able to reſiſt, but that it is conuenient
for them to follow him, by whom it is
(as I haue ſayde) gouerned. And who
doubteth that Biblis knew it not to be
euill to loue hir brother?Biblys. Who will
gayneſay, that it was not manyfeſt to
Leander,
               Leander. that he might drowne in Heleſpont,
in his fortunate time, yf he caſte
him ſelfe therein? And none will deny
that Paſiphe knew not a man to be more
faire than a Bul?Paſiphe. and yet they and eche
one ouercome with an amorous pleſure,
reiecting all knowledge, followed the
ſame. Then if it haue power to take
knowledge from the learned, taking away
the witte from the wiſe, they ſhall
haue nothing left: but if from the ſtrong
and curteous, it ſhall take away the little
witte they haue, it ſhall yet increaſe
them in their vertues, and ſo they ſhall

become more than the wiſe enamoured.
Further, loue hath this propertie, it is a
thing that can not long be hidde: and in
reueling him ſelf, he is wont oftentimes
to bring greuous perils, whervnto what
remedie ſhall the wiſe giue that hath
now loſt his witte? He ſhall giue none
at all, but the ſtrong that vſeth his force
can helpe in a perill bothe him ſelfe, and
others. The curteous through his curteſie,
ſhall wyth gratefull beneuolence
winne the minds of many, whereby he
may be bothe holpen and conſidered, and
others alſo for his ſake. Sée now what
it is to be of your iudgement. She was
by the Quéene anſwered vnto, thus:The queenes laſt ſentence to the thirde queſtion. If
there were ſuche a one as you ſpeake
of, who ſhoulde than be wiſe? not one.
But if he, whom you propound wiſe, and
enamored of you, ſhould be made a foole,
he is not to be taken. The Gods forbid,
that that whereof you ſpeake, ſhoulde
come to paſſe. And yet we will not deny,
but that the wiſe know the euill, and do
it: but for all that we will ſay, that they
thereby loſe not their witte, foraſmuche
as what time it pleaſeth them with the

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
reaſon they haue to dridle their willes,
they will reduce them ſelues to their
accuſtomed witte, guyding their motions
in a due and ſtrayght order. And in this
manner their loue ſhall bée altogither,
or at the leaſt, a long time kepte ſecrete,
and that withoute any doubtfull diligence,
the whiche ſhall not happen to
one of little witte, bée he neuer ſo ſtrong
or curteous. And yet if perhappes it do
happe, that ſuche loue bée diſcouered, a
wyſe manne will with a hundred foreſightes,
ſhut vp the eyes and vnderſtanding
of the tatlers thereof, and ſhall prouide
a ſafetie bothe for his owne honour,
as for the honour of his loued Lady? And
if néede of ſafetie bée, the helpe of the
wyſe can not fayle. That of the ſtrong
commeth leſſe. And the friendes that
are gotten by Liberalitie, are accuſtomed
in aduerſitie to ſhrinke awaye.
What is ſhe of ſo little diſcretion, that is
brought to ſuche a iumpe, as hath néede
of manyfeſte helpe? or that if hir loue
bée diſcloſed, ſéeketh fame in hauing loued
a ſtrong or Liberall man? I beléeue
there is none ſuche. Let the wyſe then

be ſooneſt loued, hoping that he muſte
be in eche cauſe more profitable than
any of the reſte.
         
         
            ¶The fourth Queſtion,
propoſed by MENEDON.
            
               THe Gentlewoman by hir
countenance ſeemed contēt
whē 
               Menedon ſitting next
vnto hir ſayd: Moſt highe
and noble Quéene, now is
it come to my turne to propounde my
queſtion here in your preſence.Firſt Menedon telleth a tale. Wherefore
by your liſence, if in my talke I ſhal
wade very long, yet during the ſame I
ſhall firſt of all of you, and nexte of the
ſtanders aboute, pray pardon: Bicauſe
ye can not be made fully to vnderſtande
that, whiche I intende to propounde, vnleſſe
a tale, that peraduenture ſhall not
be ſhort, do precede the ſame: and after
theſe words thus ſhe began to ſaye: In
the countrey where I was borne, I remember
thēre was a noble knyght, ſurmounting
riche, the which loued in moſt

loyall loue, a noble gentlewoman, borne
likewiſe there, whom he tooke to wife:
Of whom being as ſhe was, excéeding
faire:Tarolfo a knight was enamored of a Lady. an other knight called Tarolfo was
after enamoured, and with ſo great good
wil loued hir, as he ſaw nothing he more
deſired than hir: And in ſundry ſortes,
now with paſſing before hir houſe, now
iuſting, now at the barriers, now with
the often ſending hir meſſangers, peraduenture
promiſing hir great gifts, wherby
ſhe might know his intent, and now
with other like feats he endeuoured him
ſelfe to purchaſe hir loue. All which thinges
the Lady cloſely ſupported, without
giuing ſigne or good aunſwere to the
knight, ſaying to hir ſelfe: When as this
knight ſhall eſpie, that he can haue neither
anſwere, ne yet good countenaunce
of me, perhaps he will forbeare any further,
either to loue me, or to giue me
theſe allurements. Now for all this,
Tarolfo ſurceſſed not, following the precepts
of O
                     ••
                  d, who ſayth, that a man
muſte not throughe the hardneſſe of a
woman leaue to perſeuer, becauſe with
continuaunce the ſoft water pierceth the

imbrued with Romayne bloud: and hauing
trauailed a long while vpon the
ſame,Tarolfo found an olde manne called Theban. he ſodenly eſpied before him, at the
foote of a mountayn, a man not yong, nor
of to many yeres, bearded, ſmall and very
ſpare of perſon, whoſe attire ſhewed
him to be but poore, who romed hither &
thither gathering herbs, and with a little
knife digged vp ſundry rootes, wherof
he had filled one of the ſkirts of his
cote: whom as Tarolfo ſaw, he maruelled
not a little, and doubted greatly leaſt
it had ben ſome other thing, but after that
his ayme did certainly aſſure him to be a
man, he drew nere vnto him, ſaluted
him, and after aſked him who he was, of
whence, & what he made ther at ſo timely
an houre. To whom the old man anſwered:
I am of Thebes, and Thebane is
my name, and I go vp and downe this
playne, gathering of theſe herbes, to the
ende that with the iuyce therof, I make
diuers neceſſary & profitable things for
diuers infirmities, wherby I may haue
wherwithal to liue: And to come at this
houre, it is néede & not delight that conſtrayneth
me. But who are you, that in

countenaunce reſembleth noble, and
walke here al alone ſolitarie. To whom
Tarolfo anſwered: I am of the extremes
of the weſt, very riche, and vanquiſhed
of my conceipts, pricked forwards to an
enterpriſe, not being able hitherto to atchieue
the ſame, and therefore to be the
better able without impediment to ſorrow
my hap, I goe thus all alone wandring.
To whome Thebane ſayde: Do
you not know the qualitie of the place,
and what it is? Wherfore haue you rather
taken your way on the one ſide?
You might eaſily here be rebuked with
furious ſpirites. Tarolfo aunſwered:
God can doe héere, as elſe where, it is
he that hath my lyfe and honour in his
hands: lette him doe with me according
to his pleaſure: for aſſuredlye death
ſhould be to me a riche treaſure. Then
ſayd Thebane: What is that your enterpriſe,
for the whiche (not béeing able to
performe it) you abide thus ſorowfull?
To whome Tarolfo aunſwered: It is
ſuch as ſéemes vnto me impoſſible to be
able euer to attayne, ſince hitherto I
haue here found no counſell. Then ſayd

               Thebane: Dare ye vtter it? Tarolfo anſwered:
Yea. But what profiteth it? Peraduenture
nothing ſayde Thebane, but
what doth it hurt?Tarolfo reciteth to Thebane his promis made too his Lady, of a Garden full of floures in the moneth of Ianuary. Then ſayd Tarolfo:
I ſéeke counſell how may be hadde in
the coldeſt moneth, a Gardeyn full of
floures, fruites, and hearbs, as fayre as
yf it were in the moneth of May, neither
doe I fynde who can therein either
helpe me, or giue me encouragement
that it is poſſible to be hadde. Thebane
ſtayde a whyle in a muſe without aunſwere,
and after ſayde: You and many
others doe iudge the ſkill and vertue of
men according to their garments. If my
goods were ſuch as are yours, you wold
not haue lingered ſo long in diſcouering
your lacke: or if peraduenture you had
founde me néere to ſome riche Prince,
as you haue in gathering of hearbes.
But many times vnder the vyleſt veſture
are hidden the greateſt treaſures
of ſcience: and therefore no one concealeth
his lacke, to whome is proffered
counſel or helpe: And if therfore he open
the ſame, it can not preiudice him at all.
But what wold ye giue him that ſhould

come, he ſaw the hornes of the Moone
gathered into a perfect roundneſſe, and
to ſhine vpon the frequēted earth. Then
he went him all alone forthe of the citie,
leauing his apparell apart, bare legged,
and his diſſheueled locks hanging
vpon his naked ſhoulders. The reſtleſſe
degrées of the night did paſſe: birds, wild
beaſts, and men, without any noyſe dyd
take their reſt: the vnfallē leaues without
mouing did hang vpon the trées, and
the moyſt aire abode in milde peace:
Onely the ſtarres did ſhine, when as he
oftentimes went aboute the grounds,
and came to a place on a riuers ſide,
whiche it pleaſed him to choſe for his
Garden. There he ſtretched forthe his
arme thrée times towards the ſtarres,
and turning him ſelfe vnto them, he as
often bathed his white locks in the running
ſtreame, crauing as many times
with a moſt highe voyce their helpe, and
after ſetting his knées to the hard earth,The inuocation magical of Thebane
began thus to ſay: Oh night, moſt faithfull
ſecreſer of high things, and you, oh
ye ſtarres, the which togither with the
Moone, do ſuccede the ſplendent day: and

thou oh ſingular Hecates, become an helper
to this my begon enterpriſe, & thou
on holy Ceres, ye renuer of ye ample face
of the earth: And you whatſoeuer verſes
either artes, or herbes, and thou whatſoeuer
erth bringing forth vertuous plāts,
and thou oh atre, windes, mountaines,
riuers and lakes, and eche God of the
woods, and of the ſecrete night, by whoſe
helpe I haue heeretofore made the running
ſtreames to recule, inforcing them
to returne to their ſprings, and things
running, to become firme, & things firm
to become running, and that haſt alſo giuen
power to my verſes to drye vp the
ſeas, that I at my pleaſure might ſearch
the bottom therof, and to make the cloudie
times cleare, and (at my will) to fill
the cleare heauens with obſcure clouds,
to make the windes to ceaſſe, & to turne
as it ſéemed me beſt: breaking therwith
the hard iawes of the feareful dragons,
making alſo the ſtāding woods to moue,
and the hault mountaines to tremble, &
to returne to their bodies out of the lake
Stix thoſe their ſhadowes, and aliue to
come forth of their ſepultures: and ſometimes

thée O Moone to draw to thy perfect
roundneſſe: the attaining wherunto
a ring of Baſons was wont to be an
helpe, making alſo the cleare face of the
Sunne many times to become pale, be
ye all preſent, & aid me with your helpe.
I haue at thys inſtant néede of the ſappe
and iuyce of herbes, thorowe the which
I may make in parte, the dry earth faſtned
thorowe Autumne, and after thorow
the withering colde Winter, ſpoyled
of his Floures, Frutes, and hearbes,
to become flouring, and to ſpring before
the due terme. And hauing thus ſayde,
he ſayde after, many other things ſoftely,
which he added to his Prayers. And
thoſe being ended, and he a while ſilent,
the Starres gaue not theyr lyghte in
vayne.Theban vvas caried in the air in a chariot led by tvvo Dragons. For more ſwifter than the flyght
of the wyghteſt birde, there appeared before
hym a Chariot drawen by two dragons,
whereuppon he mounted, and taking
the raines of the bridles of the two
brideled Dragons in his hand, was caryed
into the air. He then leauing Spain,
and all Affrica, tooke his iorney by other
Regions, and firſt ſought for the Ile of

Crete, and from thence after with a ſhort
courſe he ſought Pelion, Othrys, & Oſſa,
the mount Nerium, Pachynus, Pelorus &
Appaennine. Vpon them al plucking vp,
& with a ſharp ſickle cutting downe ſuch
rootes & herbs as beſt liked him, neither
forgate he thoſe which he had before gathered
when as he was found by Tarolfo
in Theſſalia. He toke ſtones alſo vpon
the mount Cauſacus, and of the ſandes of
Ganges: and out of Libia he brought tōgs
of venemous ſerpentes. He ſearched the
watry bāks of Rodanus of Senna at Parys,
of the great Po, of Arnus, of the imperial
Tyber, of Niſeus, of Tana, & of Danuby:
vpon thoſe eke gathering ſuch herbs
as ſéemed to him moſt neceſſarie for his
purpoſe, putting theſe together with the
others, gathered on the tops of ye ſauage
moūtaines. He alſo ſought the Ilands of
Lesbos & Pathmos, & euery other, wherin
he perceiued any profitable thing to be
had for hys attempt: With all the which
things he came (the third day béeing not
yet paſt) to that place from whence he
departed, and the Dragons, that onely
had felt the odour of the gathered herbs,

did caſt of their old hides of many yeres,
and were with new renued and become
yong.The ceremonies vſed in making the garden. There he diſmounted frō his chariot,
and of the gréen earth he made two
altares: on his right hand that of Hecates:
and on the left that of the running
goddeſſe: Ceres. that being done, & deuout fires
kindled therupon, with locks diſperpled
vpon his olde ſhulders, he began wyth a
murmuring noiſe to goe about the ſame,
and with reached bloud oftentimes he
beſprēt the blaſing brands. After he placed
the ſame bloud vpon the altars, ſomtimes
ſoftning therwithall the ground,
appoynted for his garden: and after that,
he ſoftned again ye ſelf ſame thrée times,
with fire, water, and Sulpher, ſetting
after a great veſſell full of bloud, milke,
and water, vppon the burning brandes,
which he cauſed to boile a good ſpace, and
put thereto the herbes and rootes, gathered
in ſtraunge places, mingling therewith
alſo diuers ſéedes and flours of vnknown
herbs, he added therunto ſtones,
ſought in the extreame parts of the eaſt,
and dew gathered the nights paſt, together
with the fleſh of infamous witches,

the ſtones of a Wolfe, the hinder parte
of a fat Cinyphis, and the ſkin of a Chilinder.
And laſtly a liuer, with the whole
lungs of an excéeding old Hart: and herewithall
a thouſand other things, bothe
without name, and ſo ſtraunge, as my
memory can not againe tell them. After
he toke a dry bough of an Oliue trée, and
therwith begā to mingle al theſe things
together. In doing wherof, ye drie bough
begā to waxe gréene, and within a while
after to beare leaues, and not long after
the new apparelling therof, it was ladē
with blacke Oliues. As Thebane ſawe
this, he tooke the boyling licoures, and
began therwithal to ſprinkle and water
in euery place the choſen ſoyle, wherein
he had ſette ſlippes of ſo many woods, as
he would haue trées, & of as many ſortes
as could be found. The which licour the
earth had no ſooner taſted, but that it began
to ſpring: yelding floures and newe
herbes, and the dry ſettes became to become
all gréene and frutefull plants. All
this being done, Theban entring the citie,
returned to Tarolfo, whom he found
all in a muſe, fearing to be ſcorned thorowe

his long abode, to whome he ſayd,
Tarolfo, yt thing (thou requiredſt) is done
to thy liking.Tarolfe offereth his ladie the Garden vvhich ſhee demaunded. Theſe newes pleaſed Tarolfo
not a little, & hapning the day folowing
to be a great ſolemnitie in the Citie,
he wēt into the preſence of his loued
Lady, yt had not now ſéene him of a long
time paſt: and thus he ſayd vnto hir: Madame,
after a long and tedious trauaile,
I haue performed that which you haue
commaunded, and when as it ſhal pleaſe
you to ſee it, or to take it, it is readye at
your pleaſure. Shée in ſéeing him, maruelled
muche, & the more, hearing what
he ſayd, and not beléeuing the ſame to be
true, made him this anſwer: It pleaſeth
me right wel, ye ſhal let me ſee it to morowe.
The ſecond day was come, & Tarolfo
went againe to his Lady, and ſaid:
Madame, may it pleaſe you to walke to
the Garden, the which you required to
haue this colde moneth.The Ladie goeth to ſee the garden. Shée then being
accompanied with many others, was
moued to ſée the ſame. And they al being
come to the Garden, entred therein by a
fair portal: wheras they felt not the like
colde as abrode, but the ſame to haue a

of the Ladie, thus ſayd vnto hir: Go and
couertly keepe thine othe, and liberally
perform to Tarolfo what thou haſt promiſed.
For he hath with his great toyle
of right deſcrued the ſame. And hauing
thus ſayd, the Lady began to weepe, and
to ſay vnto him: The Gods ſeuer me far
from ſuche a fault. In no wiſe will I ſo
do: I will rather rid my ſelfe of life, than
do any thing diſpleaſant to you, or diſhonor
to your perſon. To whōe the knight
replyed, ſaying: Wife, for this matter I
will that ye doe no iniurie to your ſelfe,
neither yet conceiue any gréefe therfore,
for in no wiſe ſhall it diſpleaſe me, goe
therfore, and perform what ye haue promiſed:
for ye ſhall be neuer a whitte the
leſſe deare to me: But as ye haue performed
this your promiſe, ſo take ye better
héede héereafter of ſuche like, although a
demaunded gift may ſeeme vnto you impoſſible
to be had. As the Lady perceiued
the wil of hir huſbād, ſhe decked & trimmed
hir and made hir ſelf very fair, toke
company with hir, and ſo went to Tarolfos
lodging, and bepainted with baſhfulneſſe,
preſented hir ſelfe vnto hym.

               Tarolfo as ſoone as he ſawe hir,The Lady preſenteth hir ſelf to Tarolfo. all maruelling,
roſe from Thebane and encountred
hir wyth great gladneſſe, and very
honourably receyued hir, demaundyng
the cauſe of hir comming. To whome
ſhée aunſwered, I am come to be wholly
at your will, doe with me as it pleaſeth
you. Then ſayde Tarolfo, yée make
me to muſe aboue meaſure, conſideryng
the time and the companie wherewith
ye are come: Thys can not be wythout
ſome great alteration betwéene you and
your huſbande, tell me therefore I pray
you, howe the matter goeth. The Ladie
then ſhewed Tarolfo fully in order the
whole matter & how it went: the which
Tarolfo hearing,The liberalitie of Tarolfo tovvardes the Lady in releaſing hir of hir promiſſe. he began then to enter
into a farre greater admiration than he
had euer done before, and greatly to bethinke
him héereof, and ſo in the ende
to conceyue the great Liberalitie of the
Huſbande, that had ſent his Wyfe vnto
hym: whereuppon he ſayd to himſelfe:
Whatſoeuer he be, that ſhould ſo muche
as but thinke villanie towardes ſuche a
Knight, were ſurely worthy of great
blame: and ſo taking and talking wyth

the Lady, he thus ſayd vnto hir: Madam,
like a worthy Ladie, ye haue performed
that to me due is: For the which cauſe
I accompte that receiued of your hands,
that I haue of you deſired, and therefore
when it ſhall pleaſe you, you may
returne to your Huſbande, and thanke
him (I pray you) on my behalfe, for this
his ſo great a pleaſure done vnto mée,
and excuſe me of the follie I haue héeretofore
committed towardes hym, aſſuring
hym, that héereafter I ſhall neuer
putte the like in practiſe. The Ladie giuing
great thāks to Tarolfo for that his
ſo great curteſie, merily departed thence
& returned to hir huſband, to whome ſhe
recited in ordre all that had ben hapned.
But Theban, now comming to Tarolfo
demaunded how the caſe ſtoode. Tarolfo
declared vnto him the whole diſcourſe.
To whom Theban then ſayd: and I, ſhal
I then loſe yt which thou haſte promiſed
me? Tarolfo anſwered: no, but when it
pleaſeth thée, take thou half of all the caſtels
and treaſures I haue in ſort heertofore
promyſed thee. For I acknowledge,
that thou haſte fully ſerued my turne.

To whome Theban aunſwered:Liberalitie of Thebane tovvardes Tarolfo. It may
neuer pleaſe the Gods, ſince the Knight
was ſo liberall to thée of his wife, and
thou againe waſt not a villaine to hym
in that his offer, that I become leſſe than
curteous. For aboue all things in the
world it contenteth me, in that I haue
ſerued thy turne: and therefore I will,
that all that I ought to receiue in guerdon
of my trauaile remaine all thine, in
ſuch ſort as it hath euer bene heertofore:
neither would he take of that was Tarolfos
any thing at all.The concluſion of the propoſer. It is now douted,
in whether of theſe was the greateſt liberalitie,
either in the knight that had
giuen libertie to his wife to goe to Tarolfo,
either in Tarolfo, who ſent the Ladie
(whome he had alwayes deſired, and
for whoſe he had done ſo muche, to come
to that iumpe, whereunto he was commen,
when as ſhée came vnto him) back
to hir huſband frée: or in Thebane, who
hauing abandoned his Countrey (being
nowe olde) for to gayne the promyſed
rewardes, and being come thether, toyled
him ſelfe to bryng that to an ende,
which he hadde promyſed, whereby he

iuſtly deſerued the ſame, did now remit
the whole to Tarolfo, and remayned
poore as he was ar the firſt.The iudgement of the Queene vpon the fourthe queſtion. Very excellent
is bothe the tale and the demaund,
ſayde the Quéene. Of trouth eche one
was very liberall, conſidering the firſt
of his honoure, the ſecond of his laſciuious
deſire, and the third that of hys rewarded
riches, was very courteous.
Nowe if we will knowe which of them
vſed the greateſt liberalitie or curteſie:
It is méete we conſider whether of the
thrée déedes is moſte acceptable, the
which being well wayed, we ſhall manifeſtly
knowe the moſt liberal, bicauſe
who moſt giueth, is to be held moſt liberall:
of the which thrée, the one is deare,
that is Honoure, the which Paulus Aemilius
vanquiſhyng Perſes, king of Maycedonia,
rather deſired than the gayned
treaſures. The ſecond is to be fled, that
is, the wanton delightes of Venus, according
to the ſentence of Sophocles, and
of Xenocrates, ſaying: That luſt is to be
fledde as a furious gouernement. The
third is not to be deſired, that is ryches:
forſomuche as the moſte tymes they are

noyſome to a vertuous lyfe, and to ſuche
a one as can vertuouſly lyue with moderate
pouertie,Diuers Romaynes in tymes paſt pore, and yet vertuous. as liued Marcus Curtius,
Attilius Regulus, and Valerius Publicola,
as by their woorkes is manyfeſt.
If then of theſe thrée, only Honoure is
to be helde deare, and the others not, he
vſed the greateſt liberalitie that gaue
his wyfe to another, althoughe he dyd
leſſe than wiſely therein. He was alſo
the cheefeſt in liberalitie, wherein the others
followed him: therefore according
to our iudgement he that gaue hys wife
in whome conſiſted his honoure, was aboue
the reſt, the moſt liberall. I (ſayde
Menedon) agrée,The reply of Menedon. that in as muche as ye
haue thus ſayde, it be as you ſay: but yet
eche one of the other ſéemeth to me, to be
more liberall, and ye ſhall heare howe.
It is very true, that the firſt graunted
his wyfe, but he vſed therin not ſo great
a liberalitie as ye ſpeake of, bicauſe if he
wold haue denyed hir, he might not iuſtly
haue done it, by reaſon of the othe ſhe
made, the which was conuenient for hir
to kéep
                  •
               : and therefore who giueth that
he may not denie, dothe but well in making

himſelfe liberall therof, and it was
but a trifle he gaue: and therefore (as I
haue ſayde) eche one of the other was
more curteous. And for that (as it is already
ſayde) Tarolfo had nowe a long
time deſired this Ladie, and loued hir
farre aboue all others, he for to attayne
hir, had of long time abode great troubles,
offering himſelfe for to ſatiſfie hir
requeſt, to ſéeke forth things almoſt impoſſible
to be had, the which nowe obtained,
he deſerued (through hir promyſed
faythe) to obtaine hir alſo, whome (as
wee ſay) béeing obteyned, there is no
doubt but that the honoure of the Huſband,
and the releſe of that ſhée had promiſed
(the which he releaſed) was in his
hand. Then was he, to conclude, liberall
both of the honor of the huſbande, of the
othe of his Ladie, and of his owne long
deſire. It is a great matter to haue endured
long thirſt, and to come to a pleaſant
fountain, and not to drink, but to ſuffer
others to drynke. The thirde was alſo
very liberall, conſidering that pouertie
is one of the moſte lothſome things of
the world to bear, for ſo much as it is the

chaſer away bothe of mirthe and reſt, a
flyer of honours, a frequenter of vertue,
and the inducer of crabbed care, ſo that
euery one naturally endeuoure themſelues
with a fiery deſire to flie the ſame
the whych deſire is ſo kindled in many,Euery one flieth pouertie.
to the ende to liue very ſplendantly
in reſt, as they giue them ſelues no leſſe
to diſhoneſt gayne, than to diſordinate
ſpences, peraduenture not knowing,
or not otherwayes béeing able to feede
that theyr deſire: whych is cauſe many
times eyther of deathe or exile. Howe
muche then ought the riches to pleaſe
and to be acceptable to them that in due
ſorte doe bothe gaine and poſſeſſe them?
And who will doubt that Thebane was
not moſt poore if he behold how he abandoning
hys nyghtes reſt, went gathering
of herbes, and digging vp of rootes
in doubtful places for the better ſuſtētation
of his pore life. And yt this pouertie
did occupie his vertue, may be alſo beleued,
in hearing how Tarolfo did deme to
be by him diſceiued, when he beheld him
apparelled in vile veſture, & ſeeing him
deſirous to ſhake of yt miſerie to become

rich, knowing how he came as far as frō
               Theſſalia into Spayne, haſarding himſelf
to perillous chaunces through doubtfull
iourneys, and vncertayne ayre, to the
ende to perfourme the promiſſe he had
made, and to receiue the like from an other
Alſo it may be euidently ſéene, that
without doubt who giues him ſelfe-to
ſuche and ſo many miſeries, to the ende
to flée pouertie, knoweth the ſame to be
full of all griefe and troubles. And how
muche the more he hath ſhaken off the
greateſt pouertie, and is entred a riche
life, ſo much the more is the ſame life acceptable
vnto him. Then who that is
become of poore, rich, if therwith his lyfe
doth delight him, how great, and what
maner of liberalitie dothe he vſe, if he
giue the ſame away, and conſenteth to
returne to that ſtate, the whiche he hath
with ſo many troubles fled? Aſſuredly he
doth a thing excéeding great and liberal.
And this ſéemeth farre greater than the
reſt,Olde folkes commonlye couerous. conſidering alſo of the age of the
giuer, that was now olde: foraſmuche
as auarice was wont to be continually
of greter force in old men than in yong,

whervpon I gather, that eche one of the
two following, hath vſed a greater liberalitie
than hath the firſt, ſo much commended
by you, and the thirde far more
than either of the others. In how much
your reaſon mighte be well by any one
defended, ſo well is the ſame defended
by you (ſayde the Quéene) but we
minde to ſhew vnto you briefly how our
iudgement rather than yours ought to
take place.The queenes ſolution to the fourthe queſtion. Ye wil ſay, that he ſhewed no
Liberalitie at all, graunting the vſe of
his wife to an other, bicauſe of reaſon it
was conuenient through the othe made
by the lady, that he ſhould ſo do, ye which
ought to be in déede if the othe mighte
holde. But the wife forſomuch as ſhe is
a member of hir huſband, or rather one
body with him, coulde not iuſtly make
ſuch an oth without the will of hir huſbande:
and yet if ſhe did make ſuche an
othe, it was nothing, bicauſe the firſt oth
lawfully made, could not with reaſon be
derogate by any following, chiefly not
by thoſe that are not duly made for a neceſſary
cauſe. And the maner is in matrimonicall
vnitings the man to ſweare to

be content with the woman, and the
woman with the man, and neuer to
chaunge the one the other for an other.
Now then, the woman can not ſweare,
and if ſhe do ſweare (as we haue ſayde)
ſhe ſweareth for a thing vnlawfull, and
ſo contrary to the former othe, it ought
not to preuayle, and not preuayling otherwiſe
than for his pleaſure, he ought
not to commit his wife to Tarolfo, and if
he do commit hir to him, then is he liberall
of his honour, and not Tarolfo, as
you holde opinion. Neither could he be
liberall of his othe in releaſing it, for
as muche as the othe was nothing.
Then onely remayned Tarolfo liberall
of his wanton deſire: the which thing of
proper duetie is conuenient for euery
man to do, bicauſe we all through reaſon
are bounde to baniſhe vyce, and
to folow vertue. And who that doth that,
whervnto he is of reſon bound, is (as ye
haue ſayd) nothing at al liberal,Flee vice, and follow vertue. but that
whiche is done more than duetie requireth,
may well & iuſtly be termed liberalitie.
But bicauſe you peraduenture with
ſilence argue in your mind, what honour

may that be of a chaſt woman to hir huſbande,
which ought to be ſo deare: we
wil prolong ſomewhat our talke in ſhewing
you, to the ende that ye may the
more clearely ſée, that Tarolfo and Thebane,
of whom we intend next to ſpeak,
vſed no liberalitie at all in reſpect of the
knight. Ye ſhall know that chaſtitie togither
with the other vertues,Chaſtitie a vertue moſt excellent. yeld none
other rewarde to the poſſeſſours therof,
than honour, the whiche honour among
vertuous men, makes the leaſt vertuous,
the moſt excellent. This honour if
men with humilitie ſéeke to ſupport it,
it maketh them friends to god, and ſo by
conſequent to liue, and after death, to
poſſeſſe the goods eternall:The ioy of a man is to haue a good wife. the whiche if
the woman conſerueth for hir huſbande,
he may liue merily, and certayne of his
ofſpring, and frequent in open ſight among
the people content to ſée hir for
ſuche hir vertues honored among the
moſt high and chiefeſt dames, and in his
minde it is a manyfeſt token that ſhe is
good, feareth God, and loueth him, whiche
is no ſmall pleaſure, ſéeing ſhe is giuen
him for an euerlaſting companion

indiuiſible, ſauing by death: He through
this obtayned fauour is ſéene continually
to increaſe, bothe in ſpirituall and
worldly wealth.The grief of a mā hauing an euil wife. And ſo on the contrary,
he whoſe wife hath default of ſuche vertues,
can neuer paſſe one hour with true
conſolation, nothing is acceptable vnto
him, and continually the one deſireth the
death of the other, he perceiueth him
ſelfe through this diſordred vyce to be
caried in the mouthes of the verieſt miſers,
neither ſéemeth it vnto him, that
ſuch a fault ſhoulde not be beléeued, of
whom ſoeuer it is hearde: And yf ſhe
were largely endowed with all other
vertues, yet this vyce ſéemeth to haue
ſuch a force as to bring hir in contempt,
and to vtter ruine. Then is this honour
that maketh the woman bothe chaſte
and good to hir huſbande, a moſt great
gifte, and ſo is to be helde moſt dearely.
Bleſſed may he be called to whō throgh
grace is graunted ſuch a gifte, although
we beléeue they are but few, towards
whom is borne enuy for ſo great a benefite.
But to returne to our purpoſe, it
is to be ſéene how muche the knight did

giue. It is not fled our memory when as
ye ſaid, that Theban was of the reſt moſt
liberall, who being with trouble enriched,
hath not doubted to returne into
the miſerie of poore eſtate, in giuing away
that whiche he had gotten. It apparantly
appeareth, that ye are euill acquaynted
with pouertie, who if ſhe come
vnto vs mery, ſurmounteth all richeſſe.
Theban now peraduenture through the
attayned wealth,The care which riches bring. felte him ſelfe replete
of ſundry ſoure cares. He did now imagine,
that it ſéemed Tarolfo to haue done
very euill, and therfore would practiſe
by murdring him, to recouer agayn his
Caſtles. He abode in feare to be peraduenture
betrayed of his tenaunts. He
was entred into care touching the gouernement
of his lands. He now knew
all the prepared guiles to be done vnto
his coparteners. He ſaw him ſelfe gretly
enuied for his riches, and doubted leſt
théeues ſhould ſecretly ſpoyle him therof.
He was ſtuffed with ſo many ſuche
and ſundry thoughts and cares, as all
quietneſſe was fled from him. Through
the whiche occaſions, calling to minde

his former life, and that withoute ſo
many cares he paſſed the ſame merily,
ſayde to him ſelfe: I deſired to grow
riche, to the ende to attayne quiet reſt,
but I ſee it is the increaſer of troubles
and cogitations: ſo is it the flier of quietneſſe:
And therefore deſirous to be in
his former eſtate, he rendred them all to
him by whom they were giuen.Pouertie highly eſtemed in times paſt. Pouertie
is the refuſed richeſſe, a goodneſſe
vnknowen, a fire of prouocations, the
which was of Diogenes fully vnderſtod.
As muche ſuffiſeth pouertie, as Nature
requireth. He liueth ſafe from euery diſceite
that paciently approcheth therewith,
neither is he diſabled to attayne to
great honours, that (as we haue ſayde)
vertuouſly liueth therwith: and therefore
as Theban reiected this allurement
he was not liberal, but wiſe. So gracious
he was to Tarolfo, in that it pleaſed
him to giue the ſame rather to him than
to an other, whereas he mighte haue
beſtowed the ſame vpon many others.
Then to conclude, the Knighte was
more liberall that graunted his honour,
than any of the others: And thinke this

one thing, that the honour he gaue was
not to be agayne recouered, the whiche
happeneth not in many other things,
as of battayls, proweſſe, and others like:
For if they are at one time loſt, they are
recouered at an other, and the ſame is
poſſible. Therefore this may ſuffiſe for
anſwere vnto your demaund.
         
         
            ¶The fyfth Queſtion,
propoſed by CLONICO.
            
               AFter the Quéene became
ſilent, and Menedon ſatiſfied,
a worthy yong gentleman
called Clonico,
that ſat next to Menedon,
thus began to ſay: Moſt mightie quéene,
this Gentlewomans tale hath bene ſo
excellent, and therwithall ſo long, as I
in what I may, ſhall briefly ſhew vnto
you this my conceipt, to the end the reſt
may the better at their more leaſure ſay
theirs. Then for as much as I, although
very yong, know the life of the ſubiects
of our lorde Loue, to be replete with

many cares and ſundry pining prouocations,
yet with ſmal delight I haue long
time as I was able, fled the like, rather
eſchuing than commending them which
follow him: And although I was ſundry
times tempted, yet with a valiaunt
minde leauing the pitched ſnares I alwayes
reſiſted: But bicauſe I being not
ſtrong enough, could no ways reſiſt that
force, whervnto Phoebu was vnable to
gainſtande, Cupide hauing taken heart
to bring me into the number of his
thrals, was taken before I knew how.
For one day being allured abroade thorow
the freſh renued time, walking all
merry, and for my delight gathering of
ſhel fiſh vpon the ſalt ſea bankes, it happened
as I turned mine eyes towards
the glittering waues, I ſodenly ſaw a
little Barke comming towardes me,Foure yong damſels to a barke vpon the ſea.
wherein, with one onely mariner, were
foure yong Gentlewomen, ſo faire, as it
was a maruellous thing to beholde the
beautie they ſéemed to haue. They now
béeing approched ſomewhat néere vnto
me, and I not hauing as yet turned mine
eye frō them, ſaw in the middeſt of them

an excéeding great light, wherin, as my
eſtimation gaue me, me thought I ſaw
the figure of an Angell, very yong, and
ſo faire, as I neuer behelde thing more
fairer:Clonico at taynted of Loue. whō as I thus eyed, me thought
he ſayde vnto me with a voyce farre diſcrepant
from ours: O yong foole, perſecuter
of our power (and being therwith
arriued) I am come hither with foure
yong damſels, let thy eye make choyſe
of hir for thy maiſtreſſe, that beſt liketh
thée. I when I heard this voyce, abode
all appalled, and deuiſed both with eye
and heart to auoyde that which heretofore
I had many times fled: but al was
booteleſſe, for the ſtrength of my legges
fayled me, and byſide, he had bow and
wings to ouertake me quickly: wherevppon
I in gazing among them, eſpied
one ſo faire, ſo benigne of cheare, and ſo
piteous of ſemblaunce, as I imagined
to make choyſe of hir, as of a ſinguler
maiſtreſſe, ſaying to my ſelf: This damſell
preſenteth hir ſelfe ſo humble to my
eyes, as aſſuredly ſhe wil neuer become
enemy to my deſires, as many others
haue ben to them, whō I haue in beholding

ful of troubles always ſcorned, but
ſhe ſhall rather be a chaſer away of my
annoys: and hauing thus thought, I forth
with anſwered: The gracious beautie of
that yong damſel, that (O my lord) ſitteth
on your right hand, makes me me deſire
to be both to you and hir, a moſt faithfull
ſeruant. I am therfore redy to obey your
will, do with me as ſhall beſt like you. I
had not ended my tale, but that I felt my
lefte ſide wounded with a ſhining ſhafte
ſhot from the bow which he bare,The .ij. ſhafts of loue are different. as me
thought ye ſame was of gold. And aſſuredly,
I ſaw him as he turned towards hir,
to ſtrike hir with an other of leade. And
thus I being in this ſort taken, abode in
the ſnares I had of long time fled. This
yong damſel hath & doth ſo much content
mine eye, as all other pleſure is very
ſcarce in cōpariſon of this. Which ſhe eſpying,
of lōg time ſhewed hir ſelf contēt:
but after that ſhe knew me to be ſo taken
with this delight, as not to loue hir was
a thing impoſſible, incontinent ſhe diſcouered
hir guile towards me, with an vndeſerued
diſdayne, ſhewing hir ſelfe in
apparance a moſt cruel enemie, always

turning hir eye the contrary way, as ſhe
happened to eſpye me and with words,
on my parte vndeſerued, alwayes diſprayſing
me, by occaſion wherof, I haue
in ſundry ſortes endeuoured my ſelfe
both with prayers and humilitie to appeaſe
hir crueltie: but being vnable, I
oftentimes bewéepe and lament this my
hard fortune,Clonico an vnbeloued louer. neither can I any wayes
withdraw me from louing hir, but rather
how much the more I finde hir cruell,
ſo muche the more me thinketh the
flame of hir pleaſure doth ſet my ſorowful
heart on fire. As I through theſe occaſions,
one day being all ſolitarie in a
garden, bewayled my hap with infinite
ſighes, accompanied with many teares,
there came vpon me a ſinguler friend of
mine, to whō part of my griefs were diſcouered,
who with pitifull words began
to comfort me the beſt he could, but I giuing
thervnto no eare at all, anſwered
him, that my miſery excéeded all others.
Whervnto he made me this anſwere: A
man is ſo much the more miſerable (ſaid
he) as he either maketh or reputeth himſelfe
a miſer: but aſſured I haue greater

cauſe to lament than haſt thou. I then at
angry turned towards him with a diſdainful
loke, ſaying: And how? who can
haue greater cauſe than I? Do not I for
good ſeruice receiue euil recompence? Is
not my faithfull loue rewarded with hatred?
So that any may be as ſorowful as
I, but more he can not be.A louer infected vvith iealouſie reciteth to Clonico the good entertainment of his Lady. Truely ſayde
my friend) I haue greater cauſe of grief
than haſt thou, and heare how. It is not
vnknowen to thee, but that I haue of
long time, and yet vs loue a Gentlewoman
as thou knoweſt: neither was ther
euer any thing that I thought mighte
pleaſure hir, whiche I gaue not my ſelfe
with all my witte and power to bring
to effecte. And truely when ſhe vnderſtoode
the ſumme of that I deſired, ſhe
made me a gracious gifte, the which as
I had receiued, and receiuing it at what
time it pleaſed me, me thought none by
a great way to haue a life comparable to
myne in gladneſſe: only one thing pricked
me, that I could not make hir beleue
how perfectly I loued hir. Further than
this, ſhe perceiuing me to loue hir (as I
ſaid) paſſed lightly for me. But the gods

that will graunt no worldly good turne
without ſome bitternes,A godly ſentence. to the ende that
the heuenly may be the better knowen, &
by conſequent the more deſired, to this
they gaue me an other corſey without
cōpariſon noiſome, that is, that it hapned
one day, as I abode with hir al alone, in a
ſecret place, ſeing (without being againe
ſene) who paſſed by, eſpied a proper yong
man, & of a pleaſant coūtenance to come
along by vs, whom ſhe behelde as I perceiued,
with a fixed eye, and being paſt,
ſhe fette a pityfull ſighe, the whiche I
eſpying, ſayde: Alas, do you ſo ſoone repent,
as that ye now ſighe for the loue of
an other? She, whoſe face was throughe
this occaſion paynted with a new rudde,
ſwearing by the power of the high gods,
beganne with many excuſes to endeuor
hir ſelfe to make me beléeue the contrary
of that which I had conceiued through
the ſighe, but all was to no purpoſe, bicauſe
ſhe kindled my hert with an anger
ſo excéeding fierce, as ſhe made me then
almoſt ready to chide with hir, but yet I
withhelde me therefrom: And certainly
it will neuer out of my mynde, but that

ſhe loueth him or ſome other better than
me: and all thoſe perſwaſions, the whiche
at other times heretofore ſhe vſed for
my helpe, that was, that ſhe loued me
better than ſhe did any other, I now eſteme
them all in contrary, imagining
that ſhe hath fainedly ſayd, & done al that
ſhe hath heretofore wrought, whereby I
endure intollerable griefe, neither dothe
any comfort at all preuayle therein: but
bicauſe ſhame oftentimes doth bridle the
will, I haue rather to ſorrowe me than
glad me, I doe not continue my bitter
grief, ſo as I make any apparaunce therof:
but brieflye I am neuer withoute
cares and cogitations, the whiche bring
me far greater annoy than I willingly
would. Learne then to beare the leſſe
griefs, ſince thou ſéeſt the greteſt with a
valiaunt minde borne of me. To whom
I anſwered, that as it ſéemed to me, his
grief although it wer gret, was no ways
to be compared to mine. He anſwered
me the contrary, and thus we abode in
a long contention, and in the end parted
without any diffinition. Wherefore I
pray you yt you wil ſay your iudgement

hereof.The queenes iudgement vppon the fifte queſtion. Yong Gentleman, ſayde the
Quéene, great is that payne of yours,
and great wrong doth the damſell committe
in not louing you. But yet at all
times your griefe may by hope be eaſed,
the whiche happeneth not to your companion,
bicauſe that ſince he is once entred
in ſuſpecte, nothing is able to draw
it away. Therfore continually whileſt
loue laſteth, he ſoroweth without comfort:
So that in our iudgement greater
ſéemeth the griefe of the iealous, than
that of the vnloued louer.The contrary opinion of Clonico. Then ſayde
Clonico: Oh noble queene, ſince you ſay
ſo, it playnly appeareth that you haue
always ben loued agayne, of him whom
you haue loued, by occaſion whereof, ye
hardely know what my payne is. How
may it appeare that iealouſie bringeth
greater griefe than is that I feele, forſomuche
as the iealous poſſeſſeth that he
deſireth, and may in holding the ſame,
take more delight thereof in one houre,
than in a long time after to feele any
payne through want thereof: and neuertheleſſe
he may (through experience)
abandon ſuch iealouſie, if it happen that

this iudgement be found falſe: but I being
kindled wt a fiery deſire, howe much
the more I ſée my ſelfe farre off from the
attaining the ſame, ſo muche the more I
burne and conſume my ſelfe aſſaulted of
a thouſand inſtigations, neither is any
experiēce able to help me therin, bicauſe
thorow the often reprouing hir, and finding
hir euery houre more ſharpe, I liue
deſperate. Wherefore your anſwer ſéemeth
contrary to the truthe, bicauſe I
doubt not but that it is muche better to
holde with ſuſpition, than to deſire wyth
teares. That amorous flame that dothe
ſhine in our eyes, and that euery houre
dothe adorne our ſight with the greater
beautie,The Queene replieth. doeth neuer conſent (replied the
Quéene) that we loue in vain, as you affirme:
but for all that it is not vnknown
to vs, howe great and what manner of
paine that is, bothe of the one and the other:
and therfore as our anſwere hath
bene confirmable to the truth, one thing
we will ſhew to you. It is manifeſt that
thoſe things which moſte doe hinder the
quiet of the minde, are cares, the which
are ſome of them come to a merrie ende,

ſo ſome we ſée to end with great ſorow,
wherof, how much more the mind is repleat,
ſo much the more hath it of gréefe,
and chieflieſt, when as the ſame are noiſome:
and that ye iealous haue more ſtore
therof thā haue you, is manifeſt, bicauſe
you héede nothing elſe but only to gette
the good will of the dāſel whom ye loue,
the which not being able to attaine, is to
you a gréefe moſt gréeuous: but yet it is
certaine, that it may eaſly come to paſſe
to attaine the ſame at one inſtant, not
thinking therof (forſomuch as womens
heartes are inconſtant) biſides peraduē
               ture
ſhe loueth you not withſtanding (to
proue if you alſo loue hir) ſhée ſheweth
the contrary, and ſo perhappes wil ſhew
vntil ſuch time as ſhe ſhalbe wel aſſured
of your loue, ſo that with theſe thoughts,
hope can mitigate vnfained gréefe: but
the iealous hath his minde ful fraught of
infinite eares, againſt the which neither
hope nor other delight can bring cōfort,
or eaſe the paine.The effectes of iealouſie. For he ſtandeth intentiue
to giue a law to the wandring eyes,
the which his poſſeſſor can not giue. He
wil and doth endeuour hymſelfe to giue

a law to the féete, to the hands, and to euery
other acte of his Miſtreſſe. He will
be a circūſpect knower both of hir thoughtes,
& of hir myrth, interpreting euery
thing in euil part towardes himſelf, belèeuing
that eche one deſireth and loueth
hir whome hée loueth. Likewiſe he imagineth
euery woord that ſhée ſpeaketh to
be twaine, and full of diſceit. And if he euer
committed any detraction towardes
hir, it is death to him to remembre it, imagining
to be by the like means deceiued.
He wil with coniectures ſhut vp the
wayes of the aire, and of the earthe. And
briefly the heauens, the earthe, birdes,
beaſtes, and euery other creature that he
thinketh doth hinder his deuiſes. And to
remoue him from this, hope hathe no
place, bicauſe in this doing, if he find the
woman faithful, he thinketh that ſhée eſpyeth
that which he doth, and is therfore
héedefull therein. If he findeth that he
ſéeketh for, and that he would not finds,
who is more dolorous than hée? If peraduenture
ye thinke that the imbracing
hir in his armes be ſo great a delighte
vnto him as ſhuld mitigate theſe pangs,

your iudgemēt is then falſe, bicauſe ſuch
manner of colling bringeth him in choller,
in thinking that others as wel as he
hath imbraced hir in the like ſort: and if
the woman peraduenture doe louingly
entertaine him, he demeth that ſhée doth
it to the ende to remoue him from ſuche
his imaginations, & not for the true loue
ſhée beareth him. If he finde hir maliciouſly
diſpoſed, he thynketh that ſhée then
loueth an other, and is not content with
him. And thus we can ſhewe you an infinite
numbre of other ſuſpitions & cares
that are harbored in a iealous perſone.
What ſhall we then ſay of his lyfe, but
that it is farre more gréeuous than that
of any other liuing creature?The miſerie of a iealous life. He lyueth
beléeuing, and not beléeuing, and ſtil alluring
the woman: and moſte tymes it
hapneth, that theſe iealous perſons doe
end their liues thorow the ſelf ſame malice,
wherof they liue fearful, & not without
cauſe, for that with their reprehenſions,
they ſhewe the way to theyr owne
harmes.The concluſion of the Queene vpon the fift queſtion. Conſidering then the aforeſayd
reaſons, more cauſe hath your frend that
is iealous to ſorrow, than haue you, bicauſe

you may hope to get, and he liueth
in feare to loſe that which he ſcarſly holdeth
for his own. And therfore if he haue
more cauſe of gréefe than you, & yet comforts
him ſelfe the beſt he cā, much more
ought you to comfort your ſelf, and to ſet
aſide bewailings that are méete for faint
heartes: and hope, that the aſſured loue
which you beare towardes your Ladie,
ſhall not loſe his due deſert: For though
ſhe ſhew hir ſelfe ſharp towardes you at
this preſent, it can not be but that ſhee loueth
you, bicauſe that loue neuer pardoned
any loued to loue: and ye ſhal know,
that with the fierce vehement windes,
are ſooner broken the ſtubburne Okes,
than the conſenting réedes.
         
         
            The ſixt Queſtion,
propoſed by a yong Gentlevvoman.
            
               NExt vnto Clonico ſate a
faire Gentlewoman apparelled
in black veſture
vnder an honeſt veyle,
who as ſhe perceiued the

Quéen to haue made an end of hir wordes,
thus began to ſay: Moſte gracious
Quéene I remembre, that being a little
girle, howe one day I with my brother,
who was a propre yong man and of ripe
yeres, abode all alone in a garden, without
other company: and in tarying there
together, it happened that two yonge
Damſelles of noble bloud,Tvvo dāſels amorous of a gentleman he not knovving thereof: and that vvhich happened. abounding in
riches, and borne in this our Citie, who
loued this my Brother very well, and
perceiuyng him to be in the ſayde Garden,
came thyther, and began a farre off
to beholde hym that was altogether ignoraunt
of theyr purpoſe. And after a
while, ſéeing him al alone, ſauing for me
of whome they reckened not, bicauſe I
was but a little one, thus the one began
to ſay to the other. We loue this yong
Gentleman aboue all others, neither do
knowe whether he loueth vs or no, yet
is it méete that he loue vs bothe: ſo that
nowe it is léefull for vs to ſatiſfie our deſire:
and to knowe whether he loue eyther
of vs, or whether of vs he beſt loueth,
to the ende that ſhée, whom he ſhal
beſt like of, may after remaine his, without

being hindred of the other: wherfore
ſince he is all alone, and that we haue a
méet time offred, let vs runne vnto him,
and eche one imbrace and kiſſe hym,
that done, he ſhall take whether of vs
beſt pleaſeth him. Theſe two yong gentlewomen
being thus determined vpon
this reſolution, began to run their race
towardes my ſayd brother. Whereat he
maruelled greatly, eſpying them, and ſeing
in what ſort they came: but the one
of them or euer ſhée came at vs, by a good
way, ſtayed all bathful, and almoſt wéeping
ripe: the other runne thorowe, and
came vnto him, whom ſhe imbraced and
kiſſed, and ſo ſate hir downe by him, recommending
hir ſelfe vnto him. And he,
after y• admiration conceiued of hir boldneſſe,
was ſomewhat ceaſſed, prayed hir
as euer ſhée loued him, to tell him truely
what moued them thus to do? Shée concealed
nothing from him, the which hée
hearing, & examining wel in his mind yt
which ye one & other had done, knew not
how to perſuade himſelf, whether of thē
beſt loued hym, neither yet whether of
them he might beſt loue. And ſo hapning

at that time to depart from them, he after
prayed counſel of many of his frends
touching this matter: neither hath any
one euer ſatiſfied his deſire touching that
demaunde. For the which cauſe (I pray
you) from whome I aſſuredly beleeue to
haue a true definition of this my queſtion,
that ye will tell me whether of theſe
two damſels ought ſooneſt to be leued of
the yonge man.The anſvver of the Quene To this Gentlewoman
the Quéene thus made anſwer: Truely
of the two yong womē, ſhée as it ſéemeth
loued your brother beſt, & ſooneſt ought
to be loued of him again, that doubting)
baſhfully abode without imbracing him,
& why I thus thinke, this is the reaſon:
loue (as we know) maketh thoſe alwais
fearful in whom he doth abide:Loue is accompanyed vvith feare. and wher
he is of greateſt force, there is like wiſe
the greateſt feare: and this hapneth, bicauſe
the intent or conſent of the perſon
loued can not be fully knowne. And if it
could be knowne, many things ſhoulde
be done, that in fearing to offend are left
vndone, bicauſe the one knoweth that in
diſpleaſing, is taken away euery occaſion
to be loued: And with this feare and

loue, ſhamefaſtneſſe is alwayes accompanied,
& not without reaſon. Returning
then to our queſtion. We ſay, yt it was
an act of one vnfainedly enamored, that
of the Gentlewomans, wherby ſhée ſhewed
hir ſelfe both fearfull and baſhfull:
And that of the other, was rather ye part
of one both loud & licencious. And therefore
he being of hir beſt beloued, ought
the rather (according to our iudgement)
to loue hir beſt. Thē anſwered the gentlewoman:
Moſt curteous Quéene,The Gentlevvoman replyeth to the Queene. it is
true, that where loue abideth with moderation,
there feare and baſhfulneſſe
dothe altogether frequent, but where he
doth abound in ſuche quantitie as he taketh
away the ſight from the moſt wiſe
(as is alredy ſaid) I ſay, that feare hathe
there no place, but that the motions of
him yt feeleth the ſame, are according to
him that vrgeth them forwards, & therfore
that Gentlewoman ſéeing hir deſire
before hir eyes, was ſo hotly kindled, as
all ſhamfaſtneſſe abandoned, ſhée ranne
ſtraight to him, by whom ſhe was ſo vehemently
pricked forwards, as till then
vnable to abide. The other not ſo muche

inflamed, obſerued the amerous termes,
being baſhfull and remaining behind, as
you ſay. So that then ſhée that ran, loued
moſt, and moſt ought to be loued again.
Diſcrete gentlewomā (ſaid the Queene)
true it is,The Queene to the Gentlevvoman maketh anſvver. yt exceſſiue loue taketh away
the ſight, & euery other due perſeuerāce
in things that are ought of his nature,
but not in thoſe that belong vnto hym,
the which as he increaſeth, ſo grow they.
Then how greater quantitie of Loue is
found in any one, ſo much the more fear
(as we ſaid at the firſt) is there alſo foūd.
And that this is true, the cruell heart of
Biblis dothe manifeſt the ſame vnto vs,Biblis:
who howe much ſhée loued, was ſéene by
the ſequele therof. For ſhée ſéeing hir ſelf
abandoned and refuſed, had not the audacitie
to diſcouer hir ſelfe with hir propre
wordes, but wryting ſhée diſcloſed
hir vnfitting deſire.Phedra and Hippolito. Likewiſe Phedra
many times gaue the attempt to goe to
Hippolito, to whom ſhée thought boldly
to ſpeake, and to tel how much ſhe loued
him: but the wordes ſhée had to vtter, no
ſooner came into hir mouthe, but they
ſtayed vpon hir tong and there died. Oh

how fearfull is the perſone that loueth?
Who hath ben more mighty than Alcides,
               Alcides
to whome ſatiſfied not the victorie of
humain things, but alſo he gaue himſelf
to beare vp the heauens, and not wythſtanding
was laſtly ſo enamoured, not
of a womā, but of a yong wench, a ſlaue,
which he had gained, as fearing hir cō
               maundements,
did like an hūble ſubiect
or ſeruaunt, euen the very baſeſt things.
Alſo Paris in what he durſt not attempt
neither with eye nor tong,Paris. with his finger
in the preſence of his loue, wryting
firſt hir name with wine that had bene
ſpilt, wrote after, I loue thée. How farre
paſſing all theſe doth Paſiphe
               Paſiphe bring vs a
due example of feare, the which without
any reaſonable intendemēt, yea & without
vnderſtanding, durſt not ſo much as
expreſſe hir deſire to a beaſt, but wt hir
propre handes, gathering the ſoft graſſe,
endeuored hir ſelf to make him benigne
vnto hir, oftētimes decking hir ſelf at the
glaſſe for to pleſe him, & to kindle him in
the like deſire yt ſhe was in, to the end he
might attempt to ſéeke that which ſhée
durſt not demaund. It is not méete for a

womā enamored,Shame preſcribeth the honoure of Ladyes. neither for any other,
to be prompt and ready, foraſmuch as y•
great ſhame faſtneſſe onely which ought
to be in vs, doth remaine as the guarder
of our honor. We haue the voyce among
men, (and the trouth is ſo) to know better
how to hide the amorous flame than
they doe, & nothing elſe engendreth this
in vs, but the great feare, the which doth
rather occupie our forces than thoſe of
men. How many hath there ben of them
(& peraduenture we haue known ſome)
which many times haue cauſed themſelues,
to haue bene bidden, to the ende
therby they might haue atchéeued to the
amorous effectes, the which willingly
would rather haue bidden the bidder, before
he them, if due baſhfulneſſe and fear
had not detained them: and not only yt,
but euery time that No is ſcaped theyr
mouth, they haue had in theyr mindes a
thouſand repentings, ſaying from theyr
hearts a thouſand times Yea. There remaineth
then the like ſcelerate fire on ye
behalfe of Semiramis, and Cleopatra,
               Semiramis & Cleopatra. the
which loued not, but ſought to quiet the
rage of their wanton willes, & the ſame

being quieted, they after remēbred not
them ſelues the one of the other. Wiſe
marchaunts vnwillingly do aduenture
at one time all their treaſures to the hazarde
of Fortune, and yet notwithſtanding,
they care not to graunt hir ſome
ſmall portion, the which if they happen
to loſe, yet do they féele no gréefe of mind
at all for the ſame. The yong woman
therfore that embraced your brother,The concluſion of the Quene vpon the ſixt queſtion. loued
him but a little, & that little ſhe committed
to Fortune, ſaying: This gentleman
if I may héereby get him, it is wel:
but if he refuſe me, there ſhalbe no more
but lette him take an other. The other
that abode all baſhfull, foraſmuch as ſhe
loued him aboue all others, ſhee doubted
to put ſo great loue in aduenture, imagining
leaſt thys peraduenture ſhould
diſpleaſe hir, and he ſo refuſe hir, that
hir gréefe ſhould be then ſuche and
ſo much, as ſhe ſhould die therof.
Let therfore the ſecond
be loued before the
firſt.
         
         
            
            The ſeuenth Queſtion,
propoſed by GALEONE.
            
               A Cleare Sunne beam
                  •
               
piercing thorow amōgſt
the gréene leaues, did
ſtrike vpon the aforeſaid
Fountaine, and dyd rebound
the light therof vpon the fair face
of the adorned Quéene, who was therby
apparelled with that colour, wherof the
heauens maketh ſhewe, when as bothe
the children of Latona (from vs hidden)
with their ſtarres onely giueth vs light:
and beſides the ſplendoure it brought to
hir face, it did ſo lighten the place, as among
the freſh ſhade it yelded a maruellous
luſter to the whole company. Further
what time the reflected raye did extend
euen to that place wher the Laurel
crowne on hir head on the one ſide, and
the golden treſſes on the other, dyd determine:
It ſo entermingled there amōg
with twinings not artificiall, as at the
firſt fight one wold haue ſayd, that there
had iſſued forth among the gréene leaues
a cleare flame of a burning fire, whych
did ſpread in ſuch ſort, as the aburn hairs
were eaſily ſéene to the flanders about.

               Galeone that was peraduēture ſooner or
better awares of this maruellous ſight
than any of the reſt (being ſet in circle ouer
agaynſt the Queene deuided only wt
the water) did very intentiuely beholde
the ſame almoſte as though he cared for
nothing elſe: ſo yt he moued not his mouthe
to the queſtion yt was nowe come to
his turne: To whom the Quéene therefore
(hauing now both kept ſilēce a good
ſpace, as eke contēted the wittie gentlewoman)
thus ſayd: The only deſire peraduēture
of the thing which thou beholdeſt,
ſtayeth thée: Tel what is the occaſion
yt holdeth thée thus appalled, as in folowing
the order of the reſt thou ſpekeſt
not? It is only (as we beleue) the gazing
at our hed, as if ye had neuer ſéen ye ſame
before: Tell vs firſt, & after as the other
haue propounded, euen ſo propoūd you.
At this ſodaine voice Galeone lift vp his
mind replete with ſwéet thoughts, ſomwhat
comming to him ſelf, at what time
he is wont to doe, that thorow a ſodaine
fear doth breake his golden ſléepe, & thus
ſayd: Moſt noble & renoumed Quéene,
whoſe worthyneſſe it ſhoulde be impoſſible

for me to declare, my mind was
ſo wrapped in gracious thoughts (when
as I did ſo firmly loke at your hed) as in
beholding the bright ray, ſtreming into
the freſh fountaine, and rebounding vpō
your face, me thought there iſſued forthe
of the water, a little ſprite ſo gentle and
gracious to ſée vnto, as he plucked my
minde backe, to beholde that whych he
did, & perceiuing peraduenture, my eyes
altogither inſufficient to behold ſo great
a ioy, he mounted by the cleare ray into
your eyes, & there for a good ſpace made
maruellous myrth, adorning the ſame
with a new cleareneſſe: And after moū
               ting
more high, I ſawe how he aſcended
by this light (leauing his footeſteppes in
your eyes) vpon your crown, wheras he
together with the ray, kindled (as it ſéemed
vnto me) a new flame, ſuch a one as
was of yore ſéene by Tanaquil, to apéere
to Seruius Tullus a little boy whileſt he
ſlept, and ſo wēt about your crowne, leaping
from ſprigge to ſprigge, like a little
amorous birde, that finging dothe viſite
many leaues, mouing your hearte with
ſundry ieſtures, ſometimes wrapping &

hiding himſelfe therin, being more merrier
euery time he came forth thereof,
and therewith (as it ſeemed vnto me) ſo
iocunde in him ſelfe, as nothing more,
and that ſinging, or with a ſwéete voyce
he vttered theſe words:
            
               Of the third rolling Skie, the benigne babe deuine
               I am, enamoured ſo, to neast in theſe two eyne,
               That doubtleſſe dye I ſhould, were I of mortal routs
               From twig to twig I twine to feede this my delight.
               Theſe golden Treſſes whirling in and out:
               My ſelfe, inflaming my ſelfe, right
               So as with flame I ſhew, theffect, the potent might,
               Of my darts deuine, piercing where I goe,
               Eche one wounding, that with ſweete ſight,
               Doth gaze hir in the eyes: wheras eche houre loe,
               If ſuche hir pleaſure be, I there diſcend adowne,
               For of my kingdomes ſhe, quene is of great renowne.
            
            And herewith he ſayde muche more, going
about as at what time ye called me,
and ye had no ſooner ſpoken, but that he
ſodenly retired into your eyes, the whiche
ſparkling like to the morning ſtarre
gaue a new light that made al the place
to ſhine: ye haue now heard with what

ioy new thoughts haue ſtayed me for a
time. Philocopo and the reſt maruelled
not a litle hereat, and turning their eyes
towards their Quéene, ſaw that, whiche
to heare ſéemed to them impoſſible. And
ſhe that was attyred with humility, liſtued
to the words that were truely reported
of hir, and abode with a ſtable
countenaunce, making no anſwere at
all. And therefore Galeone ſpeaking in
this wiſe, followed with his queſtion:
Moſt gracious Quéene, I deſire to know
whether a man ought to be enamoured
for his delyght or no? And to demaunde
this, many things moue me, both ſéene,
heard, and helde, through the ſundry opinions
of many. The Quéene beheld Galeone
a good while in the face, and afterwards,
after a certayne ſigh, thus made
anſwere. It is conuenient we ſpeake
agaynſt that which with deſire we ſéeke
to follow. And truely that which you in
aſking, do propounde in doubt, ought to
be manifeſt vnto you. In anſwering you
therfore there ſhalbe kept the begon order.
And he whoſe ſubiects we are, pardon
vs the words, that we, as cōſt rained

through force of Iudgement, ſhall (more
ſooner than willing) ſay againſt his diuine
maieſtie, leaſt thereby his indignation
do fall vpon vs. And you that likewiſe
as well as we are his ſubiect, with
a bolde minde giue eare vnto them, neither
do you for all that chaunge your
purpoſe at all. And to the ende that ſo
much the better, and with a more apparant
intendment our words may be receiued,
we wil ſomwhat digreſſe frō our
matter, returning againe therevnto as
briefly as poſſible we may, and thus we
ſay: Loue is of thrée ſorts, thorow which
three al other things are loued, ſome thorow
the vertue of one, & ſome throw the
power of an other, according as is the
thing loued, and likewiſe the louer: The
firſt of the which .iij. is called honeſt loue:
This is the good, vpright, & loyall loue,
the which of all perſons ought to be receiued:
This, the high & firſt creator holdeth,
linked to his creatures, & them h
                  •
               
               tieth
therwith vnto him. Through this,
the heauens, the world, realmes, prouinces,
and cities do remaine in their ſtate:
thorow this we do merite to be eternall

poſſeſſors of the celeſtiall kingdome:
and without this is loſt al that we haue
in power of well doing. The ſeconde is
called loue for delight: And this is he,
whoſe ſubiectes we are: This is our
god, him we do worſhip, him we do pray
vnto, in him do we truſt, that he may be
our contentation, and that he may fully
bring our deſire to paſſe: Of this is put
the queſtion, whervnto we ſhall duely
anſwere. The thirde is loue for vtilitie,
of this loue the worlde is repleniſhed
more than of any of the other thinges.
This is coupled with Fortune, whileſt
ſhe tarieth, he likewiſe abideth: but if
they parte, he is then the waſter of many
goods. And to ſpeake reaſonably, he
oughte to be déemed rather hate than
loue. Now as touching the propounded
queſtion, we néede to ſpeake neither of
the firſt, nor of the laſt: we will ſpeake
of the ſecond, that is, of loue for delight,
to whom truely, no perſon that deſireth
to leade a vertuous life, oughte to ſubmit
him ſelfe, bicauſe he is the depriuer
of honours, the bringer of troubles, the
reueler of vices, the copious giuer of

vaine cares, and the vnworthy occupier
of the libertie of others, a thing aboue al
things to be helde moſt deare. What is
he then regarding his own wealth (being
wiſe) that will not flée ſuche a gouernment?
Let him that may, liue frée,
following thoſe things that doe euery
way increaſe his liberty, and let vicious
gouernours gouerne vicious vaſſals. I
did not thinke, ſayde Galeone then, to
giue occaſion through theſe my words
to the leſſening of this our diſport, nor
to diſquiet the regiment of our lorde
loue, neither yet to trouble the minds of
any others, but did rather imagine (you
defining it according to the intente of
me & many others) that ye might therby
confirme thoſe that are his ſubiects with
a valiaunt minde, and inuite thoſe whiche
are not, with a gréedy appetite: but
I ſée that your intent is all contrary to
mine, bicauſe you with your words do
ſhew to be thrée ſortes of loue, of the
which thrée, the firſt and the laſt I conſent
they be as you ſay. But the ſecond,
whiche anſwereth to my demaunde, ye
ſay it is as muche to be fled, as I holde

opinion, it is (as the increaſer of vertue)
to be folowed of him that deſireth a glorious
end, as I beleue to make apparant
vnto you by this that followeth. This
Loue, of whom we reaſon (as it may be
manyfeſt to all the worlde, bicauſe we
proue it) doth worke this propertie in
humayne hearts, that after that it hath
diſpoſed the mind to a thing which pleaſeth,
it ſpoyleth the ſame of all pride and
of al fierceneſſe, making them humble in
eche doing, as it is manyfeſt vnto vs by
Mars, whome we finde, that in louing
Venus, became of a fierce and ſharpe
Duke in battayle, a moſte humble and
pleaſaunt Louer. It makes the gréedie
and couetous, liberall and curteous. Medea
the moſt carefull hider of hir arte, after
ſhe felte his flames, liberally yelded
hir ſelf, hir honour, and hir arts to Iaſon.
Who makes men more diligent to high
attempts than he? And what he can do,
behold by Paris and Menelaus. Who furthereth
forwarde the angry fiers more
than doth he? He ſheweth vs how oftentimes
the anger of Achilles was quieted
thorowe the ſwéete prayer of Polixena.
            
            
               
He aboue all others maketh men couragious
and ſtrong. Neither know I what
greater example may be giuen vs, than
that of Perſeus, who for Andromaca
made a maruellous proofe of his vertuous
force. He decketh all them that are
by him aparelled, with excellent qualities,
with ornate talke, with magnificence,
and with pleaſantneſſe. He I ſay
beſtoweth vpon al his ſubiects fineneſſe
and gentleneſſe. Oh how many are the
good things whiche procéede from him?
Who moued Virgill? who Ouid? who
the other Poets to leaue of them ſelues
eternall fame in thoſe their holy verſes,
the which (if he had not ben) ſhold neuer
haue comen to our eares, but he? What
ſhall we ſay further of his vertues? but
that he was able to giue ſuche a ſwéeteneſſe
to Orpheus harpe, as after that he
had called to that ſounde all the woods,
ſtanders about, and made the running
ſtreames to ſtay, & to come into his preſence
in milde peace the fierce Lions togithers,
with the faint hearted Hartes,
and all other beaſts: he made likewiſe
the infernal furies quiet, & gaue reſt, and

ſwéeteneſſe to the troubled ſoules, and
after all this the ſound was of ſuch vertue,
as he attayned to haue agayne his
loſt wiſe. Then is he not the chaſer away
of honour as you ſay, neither the
giuer of vnſitting troubles, nor the prouoker
of vices, nor the diſpoſer of vayn
cares, nor the vnworthy vſer of the libertie
of others. So that euery one of
whom he maketh none accompt, and is
not as yet his ſeruaunt, ought with all
their wit and diligence, to endeuour and
to occupie them ſelues in the attayning
the fauour of ſuche a Lorde, and to become
his ſubiect, ſince throw him he becometh
vertuous. That which pleaſeth
the Gods, and men of greateſt ſtrength,
ought likewiſe to pleaſe vs. Let ſuche a
Lorde therfore be loued, ſerued, and liue
alwayes in our minds. Greatly deceyueth
thée thine opinion, ſayd the quéene,
and it is no maruell, bicauſe as farre as
we vnderſtande, thou art ſo farre enamoured,
as none the like, and without
doubt the iudgement of the enamoured
is méerely falſe, bicauſe as they haue
loſt the ſight of the eyes of their minde,

ſo haue they baniſhed reaſon as their vtter
enemie. And for this cauſe it ſhall be
conuenient, that we agaynſt our will
ſpeake of loue, the whiche gréeueth vs,
ſince we be his ſubiects. But yet to pluck
thée from thine error, we ſhall turne our
ſilence to a true report, and wil therfore
that thou know, that this loue is nothing
elſe, than an vnreaſonable will ſprong
of a paſſion entered the heart through a
wanton pleaſure, that is opened to the
eyes, nouriſhed with idleneſſe, by the
memorie and thoughts of fooliſh minds:
and many times in how much it multiplieth,
ſo much it taketh away the intent
of him in whom it abideth, from things
neceſſarie, and diſpoſeth the ſame to
things vnprofitable. But bicauſe that
thou through example giuing doſt endeuour
thy ſelfe to ſhew, that all goodneſſe
and all vertue doth procéede from him,
we will procéede to the diſprofes of thy
prooufes. It is no part of humilitie vniuſtly
to bring to a mans ſelfe, that whiche
belongeth to an other, but rather an
arrogancie and an vnſitting preſumption:
The whiche thing Mars (whome

thou makeſt throughe loue to become
humble) aſſuredly vſed in taking away
from Vulcan, Venus his moſte lawfull
wife. And without doubt this humilitie
that appeareth in the face of louers doth
not procéede of a benigne heart, but taketh
roote from guile and deceipt, neither
makes this loue the couetous liberal,
but when as ſuch abundance as thou
laieſt to haue ben in Medea, doth abound
in the heart, and doth depriue the ſame of
the ſight of the minde, and moſt fooliſhly
is become prodigall of things heretofore
duly eſtemed deare, and not giuing the
ſame with meaſure, but vnprofitably
caſting them away, beléeueth to pleaſe,
and diſpleaſeth. Medea nothing wiſe of
hir prodigalitie, in ſhort time repented
very muche without vtilitie, and knew
that if ſhe had modeſtly vſed thoſe hir
dere gifts, ſhe ſhould not haue comen to
ſo vile an ende. And that ſoliciting that
purchaſeth or worketh hurt to the ſoliciters,
as it ſeemeth to vs, ought not any
ways to be ſought for: for muſt better
it is to ſtand idle, than worke harme, although
that neither the one nor the other

is to be prayſed. Paris was a ſolicitour to
his own deſtruction, if he beheld the end
of his ſoliciting. Menelaus as reſon was,
became diligent, not for loue, but to recouer
his honor loſt, as eche diſcrete perſon
ought to doe. Neither yet is this loue
a meane to mitigate anger, but the benignitie
of minde, the brunt being paſte
that induceth it, makes it to become nothing,
and remitteth the offence agaynſt
whom it is angry. And yet louers and
diſcrete perſons were wont at the prayers
of the perſon loued, or of ſome friend
to forgiue offences, to ſhew them ſelues
curteous of that which coſt thē nothing,
and to make the crauers thereof beholding
vnto them. And in this ſort Achilles,
many times ſhewed himſelfe to expell
from him this congeled anger. Likewiſe
it ſéemes that this makes men couragious
and worthy: But therof I can
ſhew you the contrary. Who was a man
of greater valour than Hercules, and yet
béeing enamoured, became vile & forgetful
of his force, ſo that he did ſpin thréede
with the women of Iole? Aſſuredly in
things, wherein occurreth no daunger,

a moſt hardy people are the enamoured,
and wherin daunger hapneth, they ſhew
themſelues in apparaunce hardie, and
put themſelues forwarde, neither dothe
loue, but little wit allure them ſo to do,
to the ende they may after haue glory in
the ſight of their loues, although it hapneth
very ſeldome, bicauſe they doubt ſo
much the loſing of the perſon loued, that
they are rather content to be helde vyle
and of little courage, than to giue themſelues
to perill. And yet we doubt not,
but this loue repoſeth all ſwéeteneſſe in
Orpheus harpe. We agrée that it is true
that thou haſt ſhewed, that truly in generall
loue ladeth the tongs of his ſubiects
with ſuch a ſwéeteneſſe, and with ſo many
enticements, as they many tymes
would therby make the ſtones turne vp
ſide downe, ſo that to entice is not onely
the propertie of wauering and inconſtant
men, but of vile men. How ſhal we
ſay, that ſuche a lorde ought to be followed,
throughe the good propertie of the
follower? Aſſuredly he (in whom he abideth)
maketh wiſe and profitable counſels
to be deſpiſed. For it was euill with

the Troians that thoſe of Caſſandra, were
not heard of Paris. He maketh likewiſe
his ſubiects to forget and deſpiſe their
good fame, the which ought to remayne
to vs all on earth after our deathes, as
an eternall heire of our memorie. And
how much theſe aforeſayd did contemne,
the ſame Egiſtus may ſuffiſe for an example:
Although Scylla wrought no leſſe
hurt than Paſiphe. Is not he the occaſion
that breaketh ſacred bonds of the promiſed
pure faith? Yet truely what had
Ariadna done to duke Theſeus, whereby
contaminating the matrimonical bands,
and giuing himſelfe, and his promiſed
fayth to the winds, he ſhoulde abandon
hir poore miſer among the deſert rockes?
A little pleaſure in gaſing in the eyes of
Phedra, was occaſion to celerate ſo much
euill, and of ſuche requitall for the receiued
honor. In him alſo is found no law:
and that it is true, may be ſéene by the
doings of Tereus, who hauing receyued
Philomena, from hir pitifull father, and
carnally knowen hir, made no ſtaye to
contaminate the moſte holy lawes matrimonially
contracted betwéene hym

and Progne, the ſiſter of Philomena This
alſo calling and cauſing himſelfe to be
called a God, occupieth the reaſons of
the gods. Who coulde euer fully with
words ſhew the iniquitie of him? He to
ſpeake briefly, leadeth them that follow
him to all euilles: and if by happe his
followers do any vertuous acte (whiche
happeneth very ſeldome) with a vicious
beginning they beginne it, deſiring therby
to come very quickly to the deſired
ende of their lothſome willes, the which
may be rather ſayd vices, than vertues,
forſomuche as that is not to be héeded
onely whiche man dothe, but with what
minde it is doone, and ſo according to the
will of the worker, to repute the ſame
vicious or vertuous, bicauſe that neuer
of an euill roote ſprang a good trée, nor
from an euill trée good fruite. This loue
then is leude and naught: and if he be
naught, he is to be fledde. And who that
fleeth things euill, of conſequent followeth
the good, and ſo is bothe good and
vertuous. The beginning of this loue is
none other thing, than feare, the ſequels
is ſinne, and the ende is griefe and noy,

it ought then to be fled, and to be reproued,
and to feare you to haue him in you,
bicauſe he is violent, neither knoweth
he in any of his doings to kepe meaſure,
and is altogither voyde of reaſon. He
is without all doubt the deſtroyer of the
minds, the ſhame, anguiſhe, paſſion,
griefe, and plaint of the ſame, neuer conſenteth
that the hearte of whome that
lodgeth hym be withoute bitterneſſe,
who will than prayſe that he is to be
followed, but fooles. Truely if it were
lawfull we would willingly liue without
him, but of ſuche an harme we are
to late awares, and therefore it is
conuenient for vs, ſince we are
caught in his nettes to follow
his life vntil what
time as that light
which guided
Aeneas out of the darke wayes, fléeing
the perilous fiers, may appeare
to vs, and guide
vs to his pleaſures.
         
         
            
            ¶The eyght Queſtion,
propoſed by a fayre Gentlevvoman
named POLA.
            
               ON the right hande of Galeone,
was ſet a fayre gentlewoman,
whoſe name
was Pola, pleaſaunt, and
yet vnder an honeſt couerture,
who after the Quéene blent,
thus began to ſay: O noble Quéene, ye
haue domed at this preſent, that no perſon
ought to follow this our lord Loue,
and I for my part conſent thervnto: but
yet ſince it ſéemes to me impoſſible, that
the youthfull race both of men and women
ſhould be runne ouer without this
benigne Loue: I gather, at this preſent,
ſetting apart (by your leaue) your ſentence,
that to be enamoured is lefull, taking
the euill doing for due working:
And in following the ſame,Of vvhat degrees one ſhould choſe his louer. I deſire to
know of you, whether of theſe two women
ought rather to be loued of a yong
man, bothe two pleaſing him alike, either
ſhe that is of noble blood, and of able
kinſfolke, and copious of hauing muche
more than the yong man, or the other

that is nether noble nor rich, nor of kinſfolkes
ſo abounding as is the yong mā?
To whome the Queene thus made anſwere:
Faire Gentlewoman,The Quenes anſvvere. admitting
the caſe that both man and womā ought
to follow Loue as you haue before affirmed,
we giue iudgement, that in howe
much the woman is richer, greater, and
more noble than the yong mā, of whatſoeuer
degrée or dignitie he be of, euen
ſo ſhe ought to be rather preferred to the
loue of a yong man, than ought ſhée that
hath any thing leſſe thā he: bicauſe mans
mind was created to folow high things.
And therfore he muſt ſeeke rather to aduance,
than any ways to imbace himſelf.
Further there is a common Prouerbe,
which ſayth:

                  The good to couet better t'is,
                  Than to poſſeſſe that bad is.
               
Wherefore in our iudgement, thou art
better to loue the moſt noble, and wyth
good reſon to refuſe the leſſe noble. Thē
ſaid pleaſant Pola: noble Queen,The cōtrary opinion of Pola vvith hir reaſons. I wold
haue giuen an other iudgement (if it had
bene to me) of this Queſtion, as ye ſhall
heare. We all naturally doe rather deſire

ſhort and bréefe, than long and tedyous
troubles, and that it is a leſſe & more
bréefe trouble to get the loue of the leſſe
noble, thā of the more noble, is manifeſt.
Then the leſſe ought to be followed: for
as muchè as the loue of the leſſe may be
ſayd to be alredy won, the which of the
more is yet to get. Further, many perils
may folow to a man louing a woman of
a greater condition, than him ſelfe is of,
nether hath he laſtly therby any greater
delight, than of the leſſer. For we ſee a
great woman to haue many kinſfolks, &
a great family, and them all as diligent
héeders of hir honour, to haue an eye vnto
hir, ſo that if any one of them happē to
eſpie this loue, therof may folow (as we
haue already ſayd) great perill to the louer,
the which of the leſſe noble cā not ſo
lightly com to paſſe: and theſe perils ech
one (as he is able) ought to flée, for as
much as who y• receiueth harme is ſure
therof, and who that hath done it, laugheth
him after to ſcorn, ſaying he ſpéedeth
wel, where he liketh, there let him loue:
yet dyeth he more than once. But howe
that once happeneth, where, and for

what occaſion, beſides eche one ought to
take good heede: it is very credible that
a Gentlewoman will lightly eſteeme of
hym, for that ſhee will deſire to loue one
more Noble or greater than hir ſelfe,
and not one inferioure to hir ſelf: wherby
ſoldome or neuer, he ſhall attaine his
deſire. But of the leſſer ſhall happen the
contrary, bicauſe that ſhee will glory to
bée loued of ſuche a Louer, and will endeuour
hir ſelfe to pleaſe hym, to the
ende to nouriſhe Loue, and yet if this
were not, the power of the Louer onely
myght be able wythout feare to bryng
to paſſe to fulfill his deſire. Wherefore
I gather, that the leſſe Noble oughte to
bée preferred in loue before the more noble.
Your iudgement deceiueth you (ſaid
the Quéene) to the fair Gentlewoman,The Que
                     •••
                   ſolution vpon the eight queſtion.
bicauſe Loue is of thys nature, that
howe muche the more one Loueth, ſo
muche the more he deſireth to loue: And
this may be ſéene by them, that thorowe
loue féele ye greater gréefe, the which although
it trouble thē not a litle, yet loue
they continually the more: Neyther
doeth any one from his heart, althoughe

he make great apparance in wordes, deſire
thereof a ſpéedie end. Then as ſmall
troubles are ſought for of the ſlouthfull,
of the wiſe, things that are attained wt
moſt trouble, are helde moſt deare and
delightfull. And therefore in louing the
leſſe woman, to get hir, ſhould be (as you
ſay) little trouble, and the loue both litle
and ſhort, & ſhould be folowed as though
one in louing, would deſire to loue leſſe
and leſſe, which is contrary to the nature
of Loue, as we haue ſayd. But in louing
the greater, that is gotten wyth trouble,
happeneth the contrary: bicauſe, that as
in a thing dearely gotten, with trauaile,
is repoſed all diligēce to the wel héeding
of the gained Loue, euen ſo is ſhée euery
houre the more loued, and the lōger doth
continue the delight and pleaſure therof.
And yet if ye will ſay that all the doubt
is of theyr kinſmen, we wil not denie it,
for this is one of the occaſions. Wherefore,
it is a trouble to haue the loue of
one of theſe great women: but not withſtanding
the diſcrete in ſuche caſes procéede
by a ſecrete way. And we dout not
but that the honor bothe of the greateſt

and meaneſt woman is by ſome of their
kinſfolkes according to their power loked
vnto, in ſuch ſort, as a fole may come
to an euill aduenture, louing aſwell in a
baſe, as in a noble ſtocke. But what ſhal
he be that wil paſſe Piſiſtrato in crueltie,
hauing offended them which loued hysThe crueltie of Piſiſtratus.
without forethinking yt which he ſhould
afterwardes haue done to thoſe that had
had the ſame in heart? In ſaying alſo,
that louing a greater woman than himſelf,
he ſhall neuer be able to come to the
ende of his deſire, bicauſe the woman coueteth
to loue one greater than hir ſelfe,
and therefore will make of him no eſtimation
at all: ye ſhew your ſelf to be ignorant
that the meaneſt man (in what
belōgeth to naturall vertues) is of greater
and better condition,The meaneſt man of better condition than the nobleſt vvoman. thā the nobleſt
woman of the world. Whatſoeuer man
ſhee then deſireth, ſhée deſireth him that
is of greater and better condition than
hir ſelfe, bicauſe the vertuous or vicious
life maketh many times ye meane great,
and the great meane. In as much therefore
as any woman ſhall bée ſolicited by
any man in due ſorte, euen ſo wythout

doubt ſhée ſhall yeld to his deſire, though
the great wt more trouble thā the mean.
For we ſee the ſofte water with a continuall
fall to breake and pierce the harde
ſtone: and therefore let none deſpaire to
loue.The Queene concludeth that vve ſhould rather loue the more noble vvoman than the leſſe noble. For ſo muche goodneſſe ſhall folow
him that loueth a greater woman than
hymſelfe, as he ſhall endeuour him ſelfe
to pleaſe hir, to haue decent qualities,
the company of noble perſonages, to be
ornate of ſwéete talke, bold in enterpriſes,
and ſplendant in apparell, and if he
ſhall attaine to greater glory, the greater
delight ſhall he haue of minde, likewiſe
he ſhalbe exalted with the good
report of the people, and reputed
of a noble mind. Let
him therfore followe
the moſt noble, as
we haue alredy
ſayd.
         
         
            
            The ninthe Queſtion,
propoſed by FERAMONTE.
Duke of Montorio.
            
            
               NExte vnto pleaſante
Pola, ſate Feramonte
Duke of Montorio,
who after the Quene
had ſaid, thus began:
I conſent that it bée
conuenyent to loue,
that ye haue alredy fully anſwered this
Gentlewoman to hir Queſtion. And
that a man ought to loue rather a more
noble woman than a leſſe noble than
himſelfe, may very well be yelded vnto,
thorow the ſundry reſons by you ſhewed
touching the ſame.Whether is to be choſen in louing, either the vvife, the vvidovve, or the maide. But foraſmuch as
there are ſundry Gentlewomen of ſundry
ſortes attired with diuerſities of habites,
that (as it is thought) doe diuerſly
loue, ſome more, ſome leſſe, ſome more
hotly, & ſome others more luke warme.
I deſire to vnderſtād of you, whether of
theſe three, a yong mā to bring his deſire
to a moſt happy ende, ought ſooneſt to be
enamoured of, either of hir yt is maryed,

or of the maide, or of the widowe? To
whome the Queene made this anſwers:
Of the thrée,The Quenes anſvver. the one, that is the maryed
woman, ought in no wiſe to be deſired,
bicauſe ſhe is not hir owne, neither hath
libertie to giue hir ſelfe to any: and therfore
either to deſire hir, or to take hir, is
both to commit an offence againſt the diuine
lawes, as alſo againſt the lawes
naturall & poſitiue, the offending wherof,
is to heap vpon our ſelues, the diuine
anger, and by conſequent, heauie iudgement.
Howbeit, who that gropeth not
his conſcience ſo farre inwardly, dothe
oftentimes ſpéede better in louing hir,
than of any of the other two, either maid
or widowe, in as much as he (althoughe
ſuch loue ſomtimes be with great peril)
is to haue the effecte of his deſire. And
why this loue may diuers times bring
the louer to his deſire, ſooner thā the loue
of the others, this is the reſon: It is manifeſt,
that in how much more the fire is
blowne, ſo much the more it flameth, &
without blowing, it becommeth deade.
And as all other things thorowe muche
vſe do decay, ſo contrariwiſe luſt ye more

it is vſed, the more it increſeth. The widowe
in that ſhée hath bene a long tyme
without the like effect, doth fele the ſame
almoſt as though it had neuer bene, and
ſo is rather kindled with the memorie
thereof, than with any concupiſcence at
all. The maid that yet hath no ſkil therof,
neither knoweth the ſame but by imagination,
deſireth as it were one luke
warme: and therfore the maried woman
kindled in ſuch paſſions, doth more than
any of the others deſire ſuche effectes.
What time the maried are wont to receiue
from their huſbandes outragyous
woords or déedes, wherof willingly they
would take reuenge if they might, there
is no way left more readier vnto them,
than in deſpite of their huſbands to giue
their loue to him, by whome they are allured
to receiue the like. And althoughe
it be expedient that ſuche manner of reuenge
be very ſecrete, yt no ſhame grow
thereby, netheleſſe are they yet content
in their mindes. Further the alwayes vſing
of one kinde of meat is tedious: and
wée haue oftentimes ſéene the delycate
meates left for the groſſe, turning afterwardes

vnto the ſame again, what time
the appetite hath bene ſatiſfied of the others.
But bicauſe (as wée haue ſayd) it
is not lawfull thorowe any vniuſt occaſion
to deſire yt which is an other mans,
we will leaue the marryed to theyr huſbandes,
and take of the others, whereof
a copious numbre our Citie dothe ſette
before our eyes.The vvidovve is to be loued before the maide. And we would in beſtowing
our loue, rather ſeke the widowes
than the rude maides, groſſe for ſuche a
miſterie, and that are not without great
trouble (the which in widowes néedeth
not) made able to a mannes deſire. Further
if mayds loue, they know not what
they deſire, and therefore they doe not
followe with an intentiue mynde, the
ſteppes of the louer as do the widowes,
in whome nowe the antique fire taketh
force, and maketh them to deſire that
which thorowe long abuſe they had forgotten:
ſo that to come to ſuche effecte,
they (to late) bewéepe the loſt tymes,
and the ſolitarie long nightes, the which
they haue paſſed in their widowiſh beds.
Theſe are therefore (as it ſéemeth vnto
vs) rather to be loued of them in whom

is the libertie to ſubmitte them ſelues
to others, than any of the reſt. Then
aunſwered Faramonte:
               The contrary opinion of Feramonte. Moſte excellent
Quéene, what ye haue ſayde of the maryed,
I hadde determined in my minde
that ſo it ought to bée: and now hearing
the ſame from you, I am the rather aſſured
thereof. But touching the Maides
and Widowes, I am of the contrary opinion,
bicauſe (ſetting the maryed aparte,
for the reaſons by you alleaged)
it ſéemeth vnto me very good, that the
Maide rather than the Widowe, ought
to be deſired: For as muche as the loue
of the Maide ſéemeth more firme and aſſured
than that of the Widowe. For the
Widowe without doubt hathe alreadie
loued one other time before, and hathe
ſéene and felt many things of loue, and
knoweth what ſhame may folow thereof:
and therefore knowing theſe things
better than the Mayde, loueth faire and
ſoftely: and doubting and not louyng
firmly, deſireth now this and now that,
and knoweth not to whether for hir
moſt delight and greateſt honour to link
hir ſelfe, for ſometimes ſhée will neither

the one, nor the other: ſo that deliberation
dothe wauer in hir minde, neither is
the amorous paſſion able to take there
ſtabilitie: but to the mayde theſe things
are alltogether vnknowne.The conſtancie of maides in loue. And therefore
as ſhée perſuadeth hir ſelf with good
aduiſement, that of many yong men ſhée
greatly pleaſeth one, ſo wythout further
examination ſhée maketh choice of him
as of hir louer, and to him onely diſpoſeth
hir loue, not knowing howe for hir
pleaſure to ſhew any contrary acte, neither
is there for the more ſure tying of
the Louer, any newe deliberation by hir
ſought for the, touching hir loue, ſo that
ſhée is then pure at the wil and pleaſure
of him that ſimply pleaſeth hir, & quickly
diſpoſeth hir wounded heart, him only
to ſerue as Lorde. The which thyng
(as I haue already ſayd) happeneth not
of the widowe, and therfore is the other,
the rather to be followed. Further, with
more efficacie the mayde taryeth thoſe
things that neuer any one of hir ſorte
hath ſéene, heard or proued. And yet ſhée
deſireth more to ſée, hear and proue them
than who that ha the many times bothe

ſéene, heard and proued them, and this
is manyfeſt. Emong the other occaſions
for the which our life doeth greatly delight
vs, and is deſired to be long, is for
to ſée newe thyngs, ſuche as wée haue
yet neuer ſéene before. And alſo for to
ſée thyngs moſte newe we haue a great
delight to runne wyth a dilygent pace
to that, which we aboue all other things
doe endeuoure our ſelues to flée, that is
Deathe, the laſte ende of oure bodyes.
The maide knoweth not that delyghtfull
coniunction, thorowe the which wee
come into the world, and yet is it naturall
to euery creature thorowe a deſire
to be drawne thereunto. Further, ſhée
many times hath heard from them, that
know what manner a thing it is, howe
muche ſwéeteneſſe doth conſiſt therein,
the which wyth woordes haue giuen fire
to the deſire, and therefore drawne of
nature, and of a deſire to proue the thing,
of hir not as yet proued, dothe thorow
the woordes whych ſhée hathe hearde,
deſire boldly with a kindled heart thys
concourſe. And with whome is it preſumed
to be had but only with him, whom

ſhée hathe alreadie made Lorde of hir
minde? This heat ſhal not be in the widowe,
bycauſe hauing once proued and
felte what manner a thing it was, ſhée
is thereby prouoked thereunto: So that
the Mayde then ſhall loue more, and be
more diligent (thorowe the reaſons aforeſayde)
to the pleaſure of hir Louer,
than the widowe. To what ende ſhall
wée then wade any further in ſéeking
that the Maide ought not rather to be loued
than the Widowe? You, ſayde the
Quéene reaſon well,The Queenes ſolution vpon the nynthe queſtion. and very well you
defend your iudgement: But yet we wil
ſhewe you with apparant reaſon, howe
you likewiſe ought to holde the ſame opinion,
that we holde of thys contention,
if wyth a ſtraight eye ye looke to the
nature of Loue. Thus in the Mayde as
in the Widowe, and ſo in the Widowe
as in the Maide we ſée him to be firme,
ſtrong, and conſtant, and that thys is
true, Dido and Adriana with theyr doings
haue left vs an example. And wher
as thys Loue is neyther in the one nor
the other, none of the aforeſayde operations
will thereof followe. Then is it

conuenient that eche one of them doe
loue, if we wil haue that to folow, wherof
bothe you and I haue already talked.
And therfore in louing eyther maide or
widowe, without going about to ſéeke
whether of them is moſt diſcretely enamored
(as we are certain of the widow)
we ſhall ſhewe you how the widowe is
more diligent to the pleaſure of the louer,
than is the maide.Maides ought not to loue, but in reſpect of mariage. For doubtleſſe among
thoſe things, that a woman eſtéemeth
deare aboue the reſt, is her virginitie:
and this is the reaſon, bycauſe
therein conſiſteth all the honoure of hir
following life. And without doubt ſhee
ſhall neuer be ſo much vrged forwardes
to loue, as ſhe ſhal not willingly be courteous
thereof, but yet to him onely, to
whome ſhee beléeueth to be coupled as
wife thorowe the matrimoniall Lawe.
And therfore we go not about ſeking for
this: for there is no doubt but that who
will loue to marry, ought rather to loue
the maide than the widowe, bicauſe ſhée
ſhalbe ſlow and negligent in giuing hir
ſelfe to hym that loueth hir not (if ſhée
know it) to that effect. Further, maydes

are generally fearefull, neither are they
ſubtile enoughe to finde the wayes and
meanes, whereby they may take the
ſtolne delights: But the widow of theſe
things maketh no doubt at all, bicauſe
that ſhée already hathe honorably giuen
that which the other taryeth to giue, and
being without the ſame, doubteth not
in giuing hir ſelfe to an other, that token
which may accuſe: Whereby afterwardes,
ſhée becommeth the more aduenturous,
bicauſe (as is ſayd) the chéefeſt
occaſion that bringeth doubt, is not
in hir: beſides ſhée knoweth better the
ſecrete wayes, and ſo putteth them in effect.
In that which you ſay, that ye maide
as deſirous of a thing which ſhée neuer
proued, may be made more diligent to
this thā the widow, that knoweth what
maner a thing it is, therof the contrary.
Maides do not at the firſt time for their
delight, run to ſuche effect (although the
thing ye delighteth, the oftener it is ſene,
heard, or felt, the more it pleaſeth, and
the more carefull is euery one to folowe
the ſame (bicauſe it is then more noiſom
thā pleſant vnto thē. This thing wherof

we reaſon, doth not follow the order of
many other things, that once or twice
being ſéene, are afterwards no more deſired,
but rather the oftener it is putte
in effecte, with ſo muche the more affection
it coueteth to returne, and more
deſireth he the thing whom it pleaſeth,
than dothe he whom it ought to pleaſe,
and hath not as yet taſted therof. Wherfore
the widdow, foraſmuche as ſhe giueth
leaſt, and is beſt able to giue, ſhe
ſhall be the moſt liberall, and the more
ſooner than the mayde, that muſt giue
the deareſt thing ſhe hath. Alſo the
widow ſhal be ſooner drawen
(as we haue ſhewed)
than the mayde
to ſuche effects. For the which
occaſion, let the widow
be rather loued than
the maide.
(⸫)
         
         
            
            ¶The tenth Queſtion,
propoſed by ASCALIONE.
            
               IT was conuenient that
that Aſcalione, who in circle
ſat next vnto the duke
Feramonte, ſhoulde nowe
propound: and therefore
thus he ſayd: Moſt excellent
quéene, I remember that there was
heretofore in this our citie a faire & noble
gentlewoman lefte the widow of a
worthye huſbande, the whiche for that
hir maruellous beautie, was of many a
noble yong Gentleman beloued. And of
thoſe many, there were two gentlemen
coragious knights, eche one in what he
could did endeuor him ſelfe to attaine hir
loue. And whilſt this cōtinued, by chance
it hapned, that an vniuſt accuſation was
brought againſt hir, by certayne of hir
kinſfolks, before the Magiſtrate, & after
by falſe euidence proued, thorow whiche
vntrue proceſſe ſhe was condemned to
the fire. But bicauſe the conſcience of the
Iudge was perplexed, for that it ſéemed
him, as it wer to know the vniuſt profe,
he was willing to committe hir life to

the Gods, and to Fortunes happe, and ſo
tyed ſuche a condition to his giuen ſentence,
as after the Gentlewoman ſhould
be ledde to the fire, if any knight coulde
be founde the which would combate in
the defence of hir honour, agaynſt him
that would maintayne the contrary, and
ſhoulde happe to ouercome, ſhe ſhoulde
then be frée, and if the contrary, to be
burned according to the domed ſentence.
As the condition was vnderſtoode of
hir two louers,Tvvo knightes amorous of one gentle vvoman, did in ſundry vviſe ſhevve their loue. and by chaunce ſooner
knowen to the one than to the other: He
which knew the ſame ſooneſt, foorthwith
tooke him to his armour, mounted on
horſebacke, and came into the fielde,
gainſaying him that wold come & maintayne
the death of the Gentlewoman.
The other that ſomewhat later than the
firſt vnderſtod of this ſentence, and hearing
how that the knight was alredy in
field in hir defence, neither that ther was
then place for any other to go thither in
that enterpriſe, & therefore not knowing
herein what to do, became very ſorowfull,
imagining that through his ſtackeneſſe
he had loſt the loue of the loued

Gentlewoman, and that the other iuſtly
had deſerued the ſame: and whileſt he
thus ſorowed his miſſehap, he bethought
him, that if he before any other ſhoulde
go armed into the fielde, ſaying that the
Gentlewoman ought to dye, and ſo ſuffer
him ſelfe to be ouercome, he mighte
thereby cauſe hir to eſcape, and ſo according
to his deuice, he put the ſame in effect.
The gentlewoman hereby eſcaped,
and was deliuered from perill. So that
then after certayne days, the firſt knight
went vnto hir, and recommended him
ſelfe vnto hir, putting hir in remēbrance
how that he, to preſerue hir from death,
had a few days paſte offred him ſelfe to
the perill of death, and thanks be to the
Gods, and to his forces, he had deliuered
bothe hir and him ſelfe from ſo harde an
happe: Whervpon it would pleaſe hir,
according to his deſert to giue hir loue,
the whiche aboue all things he had always
deſired. Afterwards with the like
prayers came the ſeconde knight, ſaying
that for your ſake I haue hazarded my
lyfe, and bicauſe you ſhould not dye, ſuffred
my ſelfe to be ouercome, whervpon

I haue purchaſed to my ſelfe eternall infamie:
wheras I contrarywiſe with incountring
your ſuretie, and willing to
vſe my force, might haue bene able to
haue gottē the honor of the victorie. The
Gentlewoman thanked ech one of them
very benignely, promiſing them bothe
due recompence for the receiued ſeruice.
And now they being departed, ſhe abode
in great doubt to whether of them ſhe
ſhould the rather giue hir loue, to ye firſt,
or to the ſeconde, and thereof prayeth
counſell of you, on whether of them ye
would ſay, that ſhe ought ſooneſt to beſtowe
the ſame.The queenes iudgement vpon the contrary doings of the tvvo knights. We déeme (ſayde the
Quéene) that the firſt is to be loued, and
the laſt to be left: bicauſe the firſt vſed
force, and ſhewed his aſſured loue in diligent
ſort, giuing him ſelfe to euery perill,
that might happen through the future
battaile, euen vnto the death, wherby
it might very well haue folowed, foraſmuche
as if ſuche a battayle to be done
agaynſt him, had ben as lefull to any of
the enemies of the Gentlewoman, as it
was to the louer, he had bene in perill of
death for his defence: neither was it

manyfeſt to him, that one ſhould come agaynſt
him, that would ſuffer him ſelfe
to be ouercomen, as it happened. The
laſt truely went well aduiſed not to dye,
neither to ſuffer the Gentlewoman to
dye. Then, foraſmuche as he put leaſt in
aduenture, he meriteth to gayn the leſſe.
Let the firſt then haue the loue of the
faire gentlewoman, as the iuſt deſeruer
thereof.Aſcalion contrarieth the queene. 
               Aſcaleone ſayde: Omoſt prudent
Quéene, what is that you ſay? Doth
not not one time ſuffize to be rewarded
for well doing, without crauing further
deſert? Truely yes. The firſt is well requited,
with being of euery one honored
for the receiued victorie: and what greater
rewarde néedeth he than honour the
rewarde of vertue? the receiued honour
did ſuffiſe for a greater matter than he
did. And he that with all his witte came
well aduiſed, ought he to be vnrecompenced?
and further, he to be of euery
one euill ſpoken of, hauing nothing leſſe
than the firſt holpen the Gentlewoman
to eſcape? Is not the witte to to foreſée
euery bodyly force? How ſo? If this man
with all his witte came for the ſafetie of

the Gentlewoman, ought he for his deſert
to be reiected? God forbid it ſhould ſo
be. If he knew not the ſame ſo ſoone as
the other, this was not through negligence:
for if perhaps he had knowen it
before the other, he woulde haue runne
to that, whiche he tooke diſcretely for the
laſt remedie: whereof rewarde iuſtly
ought to follow, the which reward ought
to be the loue of the Gentlewoman, yf
rightly ſhe ſée vnto him: and yet you ſay
the contrary.The queenes ſolution of the tenth queſtion. God defende from your
minde (anſwered the Quéene) that vyce
come to a good ende, merite the ſame rewarde
that vertue done to the lyke end
meriteth: But rather in as muche as
vice deſerueth correction, ſo no worldly
deſerte can iuſtly ſatiſfie vertue. Who
ſhall denye vs to beléeue (although we
can not manifeſt the ſame with apparāt
reaſon) but that the laſt knight as enuious
of the good turn he ſaw prepared for
the other, was moued to ſuche an enterpriſe,
to the ende to diſturbe the ſame,
and not for the loue he bare to the Gentlewoman,
and yet his deuice failed him.
He is a foole, that vnder the coloure of an

enimie, doth endeuor himſelf (to the end
to receiue recompence) to helpe an other.
Infinite are the ways wherby it is poſſible
enough for vs to ſhewe at the firſt
with open frendſhip, the loue that one of
vs beareth towards the other, without
ſhewing our ſelues as enemies, and after
with coloured words to make ſhew
to haue profited. That whiche we haue
ſayd may now ſuffiſe you for anſwere,
whom old age more than any thing elſe,
ought to make diſcrete. And we beléeue,
that when your minde ſhall haue duely
digeſted theſe things, ye ſhal not find our
iudgement guilefull, but true, and to be
folowed. And ſo ſhe held hir peace.
         
         
            The eleuenth Queſtion,
propoſed by a Gentlevvoman,
named GARCE.
            
               THere followed after him
a gentlewoman of cheare
very milde, whoſe name
was Grace, and aſſuredly
the name was conſonant

to hir nature, who with an humble and
modeſt voyce began theſe words: It is
come to my tourne, O moſte vertuous
quene, to propound this my queſtion, the
which to the ende the time (that now approcheth
to our laſt feſting, may be ſwetened
with the new beginning thereof)
be only ſpent in talke, I ſhal briefly propound
that whiche willingly (if it were
lefull for me) I would paſſe ouer, but yet
not to pretermit the limits of your obedience,
neither the order of the reſt,Whether is greter pleaſure to a louer to ſee the preſent, or to think on the abſent. I ſhal
propound this: Whether is it great delight
to the louer to ſée his loue preſent,
or not ſéeing hir, to thinke amorouſly on
hir? My gracious Grace, ſayd the quéene,
we beléeue that muche more delight is
taken in thinking than in beholding: bicauſe
in thinking on the thing loued, all
the ſenſitiue ſpirites do then graciouſly
féele a maruellous ioy, and as it were, do
content their inflamed deſires, with the
delight onely of the thought. But this
happeneth not in the beholding, bicauſe
that onely the viſible ſpirite féeleth ioy,
and the others ar kindled with ſuch a deſire
that they are not able to endure, and

ſo remayne vanquiſhed: and that viſible
ſpirite ſometime taketh ſo great pleſure,The iudgement of the queene.
that of force he is conſtrayned to withdraw
himſelfe back, remayning vile and
altogether vanquiſhed. Then do we gather
hereof, that greater delighte is to
thinke than to beholde. That thing whiche
is loued, anſwered the Gentlewoman,
how muche the more it is ſéene, ſo
muche the more it delighteth: and therfore
I beléeue, that greater delight bringeth
the beholding, than dothe the thinking,
bicauſe euery beautie at the firſte,
pleaſeth thorowe the ſight therof: and ſo
after thorow the continuall ſight, ſuche
pleaſure is confirmed in the minde, as
therof is ingendred loue, and thoſe pleaſures
that ſpring from him. No beautie
is ſo muche loued, neither for any other
occaſion than to pleaſe the eyes, and to
content the ſame. Then in ſéeing they ar
contented, and in thinking to ſée, the deſire
increaſeth: ſo that more delight feeleth
he that is cōtented, than doth he that
deſireth to content himſelf.Laodomia and Protheſilaus. We may ſée
and know by Laodomia how much more
the preſent ſight than the abſent thought

doth delight, bicauſe we are to think that
hir Protheſilaus neuer departed from hir
thought, neither yet was ſhe euer ſéene
diſpoſed to other than to melancolie, refuſing
to decke and apparel hir ſelf with
hir coſtly garments: The whiche thing
in ſéeing him neuer happened: For what
time ſhe abode in his preſence, ſhe was
mery, gracious, and alwayes ioyful, and
trimly attired. What more manyfeſt teſtimonie
will we haue than this, that
the gladneſſe is not greater of the ſighte
than of the thought? Bicauſe that thorow
the exteriour doings, that may be
comprehended, whiche in the hearte is
hidden?The queenes ſolution of the xj. queſtion, defining that the thought is to be preferred before the looke. The Quéene then, thus made
anſwere: Thoſe things, bothe delightfull
and noyſome, that approche moſt
néere to the minde, bring more annoye,
and more ioye, than doe thoſe farre off
from the ſame. And who doubteth, but
that the thought abideth in the mind, and
that the minde is not from the eye? although
thorow the particuler vertue of
the minde they haue their fighte, and
that it is conuenient for them by ſundry
means to render their proportiōs to the

animate vnderſtanding. Hauing then in
the minde a ſwéete thought of the loued,
in that acte which the thought bringeth,
in that togither with the thing loued,
it ſéemes the louer to be. Then he ſéeth
the ſame with thoſe eyes, to whome nothing,
no not of a long diſtance may be
hidden. Then he ſpeaketh with hir whō
he loueth, and peraduenture with piteous
ſtile telleth the annoys ſuſtained for
hir ſake. Then it is lauful for him without
feare to embrace hir. Then dothe he
according to his deſire maruelouſly glad
himſelfe with hir. Then doth he hold hir
wholly at his pleaſure, the whiche in beholding
happeneth not, bicauſe that ſight
onely at firſt taketh pleaſure without
paſſing further. And as we ſay, Loue is
timorous and fearefull, and in beholding
dothe make the heart tremble in ſuche
ſorte, as it leaueth neither thought nor
ſpirite in his place. For many with the
long beholding of their ladies,The effects of fond amorous lookes. loſe thoſe
their naturall forcas, and remayne vanquiſhed:
and many not béeing able to
moue, ſtande like poſtes, other ſome, in
tangling and trauerſing their legs, fal to

the grounde. Others thereby loſe their
ſpeache: & by ſight we know many other
like things to haue happened, the which
all ſhoulde haue bene very acceptable to
them, to whom (as we haue ſayde) they
haue happened, if they had not happened
at all: how then bringeth that thing delight,
that ſhall willingly be fled? We
confeſſe, that if it were poſſible to behold
without feare, it ſhoulde be a great delight.
But yet little or nothing without
the thought, the which without the bodily
ſight, pleſeth very much. And that that
whereof we haue may ſpoken come to
paſſe through the thought, it is manifeſt,
that, yea, and muche more. For we finde
that men with thought haue paſſed the
heauens, and taſted of the eternal peace.
Then more delighteth the thought than
the ſighte. And if ye ſay that Laodomia
was melancolie with thinking, we doe
not denye it, but yet it was rather a dolorouſe
than an amorouſe thoughte,
that dyd trouble hir: She as it were a
diuiner to hir owne harme, alwayes
doubted the death of Protheſilaus, and ſtil
was thinking theron, contrary to thoſe

thoughts wherof we reaſon, which thorow
that doubt could not enter into hir,
but rather ſorowing through this occaſion
as reaſon was, ſhe ſhewed a troubleſome
and heauy looke.
         
         
            ¶The twelfth Queſtion,
propoſed by PARMENIO.
            
               
                  PArmenio ſat nexte to this
gentlewoman, and without
attending further, as
the Quéene had left, thus
beganne: Moſte mightie
Quéene, I was of long time companion
with a yong gentleman, to whom that
happened which I intend to ſhew. He as
much as any man could loue a woman,
loued a fayre yong gentlewoman of our
citie, gracious, gentle, and very rich, both
of wealth and parents, and ſhe eke loued
him for ought that I (to whom his loue
was diſcouered) could vnderſtand. This
gentleman thē louing hir in moſt ſecrete
ſort, fearing that if it ſhuld be bewrayd,
that he ſhould no ways be able to ſpeake

vnto hir: to the ende therfore yt he might
diſcouer his intent, and be certified likewiſe
of hirs, he truſted no one that ſhold
attempt to ſpeake of this matter: yet his
deſire inforcing him, he purpoſed ſince yt
he could not bewray him ſelf vnto hir, to
make hir vnderſtand by ſome other, that
whiche he ſuffered for hir ſake. And bethinking
him many dayes, by whom he
might moſt cloſely ſignifie vnto hir that
his intent, he ſaw one day a poore olde
woman, wrinkled, and of an Orenge
tawnie colour, ſo deſpitefull to beholde
as none the like, the whiche being entred
the houſe of the young woman to
aſke hir almeſſe, followed hir foorthe of
the doore, and many times after in lyke
ſort, and for like occaſion he ſaw hir returne
thither. In this woman his hearte
gaue him to repoſe his whole truſt, imagining
that he ſhould neuer be had in ſuſpicion,
and that ſhe might fully bring
his deſire to effect: therfore calling hir to
him, he promiſed hir greate gifts, yf ſhe
would helpe him in that which he ſhould
demaunde of hir: She ſware to do hir
endeuour, to whom this gentleman then

diſcouered his minde. The olde woman
departed, and after a while hauing certified
the yong woman of the loue that my
companion bare hir, and him likewiſe▪
how that ſhe aboue al other things of the
world did loue him, ſhe deuiſed how this
yong man ſhoulde be ſecretly one euening
with the deſired woman: and ſo he
going before hir,A gentleman, a gentlevvoman, and an old vvoman vvere taken by the brethren of the gentlevvoman. as ſhe had appoynted▪
ſhe guided him to this yong Gentlewomans
houſe, wherein he was no ſooner
entred, than through his miſfortune, the
yong woman, the olde, and he, were all
thrée found, and taken togithers, by the
brethren of the yong woman, & cōpelled
to tell the truth of that they made there,
who confeſſed the whole matter as it
was. Theſe brethren, for that they were
the friends of this yong gentleman, and
knowing that he as yet had attayned nothing
that might redound to their ſhame
woulde not doe him any harme as they
might haue done, but laughing ſayd vnto
him in this ſorte:The gentleman condemned to lye vvith the yong and olde vvoman eyther of them a yeare. Thou art now in our
hands, & haſt ſought to diſhonour vs, and
for that we may puniſh thée, yf we will,
of theſe two wayes ſée that thou take the

one, either that thou wilte we take thy
life from thée, or elſe that thou lie wyth
this olde woman, & this our ſiſter, either
of them one yeare, ſwearing faithfully,
that if thou ſhalt take vppon thée to lye
with either of them a yeare, and the firſt
yeare with the yong womā, that as many
times as thou ſhalt kiſſe or haue to do
with hir, as many times ſhalt thou kiſſe
and haue to do with the old woman the
ſeconde yeare. And if thou ſhalt take the
firſt yeare the olde woman, looke howe
many times thou ſhalt kiſſe and touche
hir, ſo many times likewiſe, and neither
more nor leſſe ſhalt thou doe the lyke to
the yong woman the ſeconde yeare.
The yong mā liſtening to the ſentence,
and deſirous to liue, ſayd, that he would
lie with theſe two, two yeares. It was
graunted him. But he remained in dout
with which of them he ſhuld firſt begin,
either with the yong, or with the olde.
Whether of them would you giue counſell
he ſhould firſt, for his moſte conſolation
begin withall?The Queene decideth the xij. queſtion. The Quéene, and
likewiſe the whole company ſomewhat
ſmiled at this tale, and after, ſhée thus

made anſwere: According to our iudgement
the yong gentleman ought rather
to take the faire yong woman, than the
fowle old, bycauſe no preſent good turne
ought to be left for the future, neither the
euil to be takē for the future good, bicauſe
we know that we are vncertain of thinges
to come: and in doing the contrary
hereof, many haue already ſorowed to
late, and if any haue prayſed him ſelfe
herein, not dutie, but fortune hath therin
holpen him. Let the faire therfore be firſt
taken.The contrary opinion of Parmenio. Ye make me greatly to maruell
(ſayd Parmenio) ſeing ye the preſent good
ought not to be left for ye future, to what
end then is it conuenient for vs with a
valiaunt mind to follow & beare worldly
troubles, wheras we may flée them, if
it were not thorow the future eternall
kingdoms promiſed to vs thorow hope?
It is a maruellous thing that ſuche a
ſhocke of people as are in the worlde, al
moyling to the ende at one time to taſt
of reſt, and béeing able to reſte before
trouble, ſhoulde remayne ſo long whyle
in ſuche an errour, as trouble after reſt
were better than before. It is a thing

verye iuſte (as it ſéemeth to me) after
troubles to ſéeke reſt, but to deſire to
reſt without trouble in my iudgement
ought not to be, neither can it bring delight.
Who then will giue counſell to
any, that he lye firſt with a fayre Gentlewoman
one yere, the whiche is the
onely reſt and ioye of him that muſt lye
with hir, in ſhewing him after that
there muſt follow ſo great annoy and
vnpleaſaunt lyfe, as he muſte in euery
acte wherein he abode with the young
woman, haue to do as long with a lothſome
olde woman? Nothing is ſo noyſome
to a delightfull lyfe, as to remember,
that after death we ſhall be founde
ſpotted. This death returning to our
memory as enime cōtrary to our being,
doth diſturbe vs of al goodnes & pleſure:
and whilſt this is remembred, there can
neuer be ioy taſted in worldly things.
Likewiſe no delight can be had with the
yong woman, that is not troubled or deſtroyed
in thinking & remembring that
it behoueth him to do as muche with a
moſt vile old womā, who ſhal alwais be
remayning before the eyes of his minde.

The time that flyeth with an ineſtimable
wing, ſhall ſéeme vnto him to ouerflie,
leſning eche day a great quantitie of
the due houres: and this mirth is not taſted,
where as infallible future ſorow is
taryed for. Wherefore I would iudge,
that the contrary were better counſell,
that is, that all trouble, wherof gracious
reſt is hoped for, is more delightfull, thā
the delight, whereof anoy is taryed for.
The colde waters ſéemed warme, and
the dreadfull time of the darke night ſéemed
cleare and ſound day, and turmoils
reſt to Leander, at what time he went to
Hero, ſwimming wyth the force of hys
armes, thorow the ſalt ſourges betwéen
Seſto and Abido, for the delight that he
conceyued to haue of hir tarrying his cō
               ming.
God forbid then, that a man ſhuld
couet reſt before trauaile, or reward before
the doing his ſeruice, or delight, before
he hath taſted tribulatiō: foraſmuch
as if that way (as we haue alredy ſayd)
ſhould be taken, the future annoy ſhould
ſo muche hinder the preſent ioy, that not
ioy, but rather annoy it might be ſayde.
What delight could the delicate meats,

and the inſtruments ſounded with cunning
hande, and the other maruellous
ioyes made to Dionyſius the tyrāt bring,Dionyſius.
when as he ſawe a ſharp pointed ſword
hang by a fine thréede ouer his heade?
Let then ſorowful occaſions be firſt fled,
that afterwards with pleaſure, and that
without ſuſpition, gracious delightes
may be followed.The Quenes ſolution of the .xij. queſtiō, defining that the yōg is to be lyen vvith before the olde. The Queen made him
anſwere, ſaying: You anſwer in part as
though we did reaſon of eternall ioyes,
for the purchaſing whereof, there is no
doubt but that all troubles oughte to be
taken in hand, and all worldly wealthe
and delight to be left aparte: but at this
inſtant we do not ſpeake of them, but do
moue a Queſtion of worldly delightes,
and of worldly annoyes. Wherunto we
anſwere as we ſayd before, that euery
worldly delight, that is followed wyth
worldly anoy, ought rather to be taken,
than the worldly annoye that taryeth
worldly delight: bicauſe who that hath
tyme, and tarieth time, loſeth time. Fortune
graunteth hir goodneſſe with ſundry
mutations, the which is rather to be
taken when as ſhe giueth, than to moile

to the ende after turmoyles to gette the
ſame. If hir whéele ſtoode firme and ſtable,
vntil that a man had toyled ſo much
as he ſhould nede to toyle no more, we
would then ſay, that it wer to be graunted
to take paynes firſt: but who is certayne
that after the euil, may not folow
the worſe, as well as the better that is
taried for? The times together with
worldly things are al tranſitorie, & therfore
in taking the old woman, before the
yere be complete, the which ſhall neuer
ſeeme to waxe leſſe, the young woman
may dye, and hir brethren repent them
of this they haue don, either elfe ſhe may
be giuen to ſome other, or peraduenture
ſtolne away, ſo that after one euil, there
ſhal follow a worſe to the taker. But cō
               trarywiſe,
if the yong woman ſhall be
taken, the taker ſhal therby haue his deſire
ſo long time of him deſired, neither
ſhall there after follow that annoy of
thought, that you ſay muſt follow thereby,
bicauſe that we muſt dye is infallible,
but to lye with an old woman is a
hap able enough with many remedies
to be of a wiſe man auoyded, & worldly

things ar to be taken of the diſcret with
this condition, that ech one whiiſt he holdeth
and enioyeth them, he diſpoſe himſelf
with a liberal mind, when he ſhalbe
required to reſtore or leaue them. Who
that buſieth himſelfe to the ende to reſt,
bringeth a manyfeſt example, that without
that he can not haue reſt: & ſince he
therefore taketh troubles to the ende to
haue reſt, how much more is it to be preſumed,
ye if reſt were as redy as if trouble,
but that he would ſooner take that
thā this? Neither is it to be thought that
Leander, if he had ben able to haue had
Hero without paſſing the tempeſtuous
arme of the ſea, wherin after he periſhed
wold not rather haue taken hir, thā haue
ſwom the ſame. It is conuenient to take
fortunes happes what time ſhe giueth
them.A ſmal gift
                     •
                   in hand is better than a promiſed greater. For no gift is ſo ſmall, that is not
better than a promiſed greater. And as
for future things, let remedies be taken,
and the preſent gouerned according to
their qualities. It is a naturall thing to
deſire rather the good than the euil, whē
as equally they concurre, and who that
dothe the contrarye followeth not naturall

reaſon, but his owne folly. We confeſſe,
that after troubles quietneſſe is
more gracious and better knowne than
before, but yet not that it is rather to be
taken than the other. It is poſſible for
wiſe men and fooles to vſe the Counſels
both of fooles and wiſemen accordyng to
their liking: but for all that the infallible
veritie is not altered, the which doth
giue vs leaue to ſée that rather the faire
yong woman than the lothſome olde is
to be taken of him, to whom was made
ſuche a choiſe.
         
         
            The thirtenth queſtion,
propoſed by MASSALINE.
            
               
                  MAſſaline the whiche ſate
on the right hande of the
Quéene, and next to Parmenio,
performing the
circle, ſayde in this wiſe:
It is méete that I laſtly
propound my queſtion: And therfore to
the ende that I may make the pleaſaunt
tolde tales, and the before propouned

Queſtions to ſéeme more ſwéete, I ſhall
tell you a ſhort tale worth the hearing,
wherein there falleth a Queſtion very
propre to make an ende withall. I haue
héeretofore heard ſay that there was in
this our Citie a Gentleman, who was
very rich, that had to wyfe an exceeding
faire yong Gentlewoman,A Gentlevvomā vvas loued of a Knight. whom he loued
aboue al worldly things. This gentlewoman
was intierly beloued of a
Knight of the fame Citie, but ſhée loued
him not at all, neither cared for hym, by
occaſion wherof, the Knight was neuer
able to get from hir, either good wordes
or curteous countenance: and while he
thus liued comfortleſſe of ſuche loue, It
happened that he was called to the regiment
of a Citie not farre diſtante from
this of oures: And accordingly he went
thither, hauing honorably gouerned the
ſame all the time of his abode there: during
the which it happened, that there
came a meſſanger vnto hym,The Knyght aduertiſed of the death of hir vvhom he loued. who after
other newes thus ſayd: Sir ye ſhal vnderſtand,
that the Gentlewoman of our
Citie, whom you ſo intierly loued aboue
all others, this morning labouring with

great griefe to be deliuered of child died,
not being deliuered, and was in my preſence,
of hir parents honourably buried.
The knight not without great ſorrow,
gaue 
                  •
               are to this tale, and with a ſtrong
heart endured the telling thereof, without
ſhewing any alteration of countenance
at all, and to himſelf thus ſaid: Hawretched
death, curſed be thy power,
thou haſt depryued me of hir, whom I
loued aboue all others, and whom I deſired
more to ſerue, although I knew hir
cruell vnto me, than any other worldly
wight. But ſince it is thus come to paſſe
that which loue in hir life time woulde
not vouchſafe to graunt me, now that
ſhe is deade, he can not deny me: That
aſſuredly if I ſhould dye therfore, I wil
now kiſſe the face of hir béeing deade,
that liuing I loued ſo well. And ſo ſtaying
vpon this determination, he taryed
vntill it was night, and then tooke one
of his ſeruants,The knighte ſeeketh his loued gentlevvoman in hir graue. whom he beſt truſted
with him, and trauayled the dreadfull
darke wayes, till at the laſt he came to
the Citie: And being entred the ſame, he
went ſtreight to the ſepulture, wherein

the gentlewoman was buried: and after
he had comforted his ſeruaunt, that he
without any feare ſhoulde attende him
there, he opened the ſame, & went thereinto,
wheras lamenting with a piteous
plaint, he kiſſed the gentlewoman, and
tooke hir in his armes, and not ſatiſfied
therwith, he began to féele hir here and
there, and to put his hand into hir frozen
breſt among the colde dugs. But afterwards
(being become more bolde than
was méete) to ſeke out vnder the rich attire
which ſhe had on, the ſecrete parts of
the body, going & féeling with a feareful
hand hither and thither, til at the laſt he
ſpred the ſame vpon hir ſtomack, where
as with a féeble motion he felt the weak
pulſes ſomewhat to moue. He then became
very fearefull, but yet loue made
him bolde, and therefore trying further
with a more aſſured héede, he knew that
ſhe was not dead: and firſt of all with a
ſwéete mutation he drew hir out of that
place, and after wrapping hir in a great
mantell (leauing the ſepulture open)
he and his ſeruant caried hir ſecretly to
his mothers houſe, whereas he coniured

his ſayd Mother,The Knight caryeth his Lady to his mothers houſe. thorow the power
of the Gods, that ſhée, neyther this, nor
any thing elſe ſhould manifeſt to any
perſon liuing. He cauſed great fires to
be made, to the ende to comfort the colde
membres, whereunto the loſt forces did
not therby returne in due ſort: by occaſion
wherof, as one peraduenture diſcrete
in ſuche a caſe, willed a ſolemne hotte
houſe to be prepared, wherein he cauſed
firſt to be ſtrowed many vertuous herbes,
and after placed the Gentlewoman
therein, cauſing hir as it was méete for
one in that plight, to be tenderly looked
vnto. In the which h
                  •
               tehouſe, after ſhée
had for a time made hir abode there, the
bloud coagulate about the heart, began
thorow the receyued heate to diſperſe by
the cold vaines, & the ſpirites halfe dead
began to returne to their places: whervpon
the Gentlewoman (no ſooner féeling
the ſame) begā to cal to hir mother,
& after to aſke wher ſhée was: to whome
the Knight in ſtéede of hir mother made
anſwer, ye ſhée was in a very good place,
and that ſhée ſhould comfort hir ſelf: ſhée
abiding in this ſorte, calling vppon the

womā 
               Lucina for help,Lucina, the goddeſſe of child bearing. was as it pleſed
the Gods (aboue all expectation) deliuered
of a faire ſonne, & therewith of great
trouble and perill: whereof remaining
diſburdened,The Gentlevvoman abiding vvith the Knight, vvas deliuered of childe. and being ioyful of hir new
born childe, there were out of hand prouided
nourſes, bothe for the charge of
hir, as alſo of hir ſonne. The Gentlewoman
now after all theſe heauie troubles,
returned to hir perfecte vnderſtanding,
and the new ſonne was alſo borne
to the world, before ſhée ſawe either the
Knight that thus loued hir, or his mother
who was preſt to doe hir ſeruyce,
neither did ſhe ſee any one of hir parents
or kinſfolkes about hir, for to looke vnto
hir: whereupon being come into a cogitable
admiration as it were all amazed,
ſayd: Where am I? what a wonder is
this? Who hath brought me hyther,
wheras I was neuer before? To whom
the Knight anſwered:The Knyght declareth to the gentlevvoman hovv ſhe vvas brought into his houſe. Gentlewoman,
maruell not, comfort your ſelfe, for that
which you ſée, hath bene the pleaſure of
the Gods, and I ſhall tell you how, and
ſo declaring from the beginning to the
ende all that which was happened hir,

concluded, that throughe him, ſhée and
hir ſonne were aliue: By occaſion wherof
they were alwayes bounden to be
at his pleaſure. The Gentlewoman
perceiuing this to be true, knowing aſſuredly
that ſhe could not by any other
meanes, but onely by this which he ſhewed
hir, be come to the hands of the
knight: firſt of all with a deuoute voyce,
rendred thanks to the immortall gods,
and after to him, offring hir ſelf to be always
at his pleaſure and ſeruice. Then
ſayd the knight: gentlewoman ſince you
know your ſelfe to be beholding vnto
me▪ I wil that in guerdon of my wel doing,
ye comforte your ſelfe here in this
place, vntill I returne from mine office,
wherevnto it is now ſo long ſince that I
was choſen, as the date hereof is almoſt
at an end. Beſides ye ſhall promiſſe me
faithfully, neuer to bewray your ſelfe
without my licence, either to your huſband,
or any other perſon. To whom
the Gentlewoman anſwered, that ſhée
was vnable to denye him eyther this,
or any other requeſt, and that aſſuredly
ſhe would comfort hir ſelfe: and ſo by

othe made vnto him, ſhe affirmed neuer
to cauſe hir ſelfe be knowen without his
pleaſure. The knight ſéeing the Gentlewoman
out of all perill to receiue comfort,
after he had abode two dayes in hir
ſeruice, recommended hir and hir childe
to his mothers charge, and ſo departed,
returning to the gouernment of his ſaid
office, the whiche after a little while he
honorably ended, and returned home to
his owne houſe and poſſeſſions: where
as of the Gentlewoman he was graciouſly
receyued.The knighte biddeth the husbande of the gentlevvoman to a banquet. Certayne days after his
returne, he cauſed to be prepared a great
banquet, wherevnto he inuited the huſbande
of this Gentlewoman, whom he
loued, hir brethren, and many others of
hir friendes and his: and the bydden
gueſtes beeing ſette downe at the table,
the Gentlewoman according to the
pleaſure of the knight, came apparelled
in thoſe garments, and decked with
that crowne, ring, and other precious
ornaments (as the vſe was then) wherwith
ſhe was buried. And by the commaundement
of the knighte placed hir
ſelfe on the one ſide by hir huſband, & on

the other ſide by himſelfe, where as ſhée
ſedde that morning, without ſpeaking
any worde at all. This Gentlewoman
was oftentimes behelde of hir huſband,
and hir attire and ornaments alſo: and
as it ſéemed vnto him, he knewe hir to
bée his wife, and thoſe to be the garmentes
wherein ſhée was buryed: But
yet for that he thought he had buried hir
dead into hir ſepulture, and not beleuing
that ſhée was ryſen againe, durſte not
once giue hir a word, doubting leaſt ſhée
had bene ſome other that did reſemble
his wife, imagining that it were more
eaſie to finde one woman, in attire and
ornamentes like to an other, than to
raiſe vp a dead body. But yet for all this,
he tourned many times towardes the
Knighte, and aſked him who ſhée was.
To whome the knight anſwered: Aſke
of hir, whome ſhée is, for I can not tell,
out of ſo vnpleſant a place I haue brought
hir. Then the huſband aſked ye wife
who ſhée was, to whome ſhée anſwered:
I was brought by this Knight by vnknowne
wayes inte this place, to that
gracious life that is of euery one deſired.

At theſe words there wanted no admiration
in the huſbande, but rather the
ſame increaſed, and ſo they remayned
vntill the banket was ended. Then the
knight ledde the huſbande of this gentlewoman
into a chamber, and with him
the Gentlewoman, and the other likewiſe
that banketted with them, where
as they found the Gentlewomans fayre
& gracious ſonne in the neurſes armes,
whome the knighte deliuered into the
fathers handes,The knight reſtoreth the gentlevvoman to hir huſbande. ſaying: This is thy
ſonne, and giuing him the right hande of
his wife, ſayde: This is thy wife, and
mother of this childe: ſhewing to him
and to the reſt, how it happened that ſhe
was brought thither. They al after gret
wonder, made great ioy, and chiefly the
huſbande of his wife, and the wife with
hir huſbande, of their ſonne. And ſo both
two thanking the knight, retourned merily
home to their houſe, many dayes after
making maruelous ioy. This knight
entreated this gentlewoman with that
tenderneſſe and that pure fayth, as if ſhe
had bene his ſiſter, and therefore it is
doubted whiche of theſe two was the

greter:The queſtiō is vvhether the loyaltye of the knighte, or the ioye of the husbande vvas the greater. either the loyaltie of the knight,The queenes iudgement.
or the ioy of the huſbande, that had now
gotten agayne his loſt wyfe, whome he
reputed as dead. I pray you to ſay your
opinion, and what you woulde iudge
hereof? Moſt great (as we beléeue) anſwered
the Quéene) was the ioy of the
agayne gotten wife, and of hir childe:
and likewiſe noble and very great was
the loyaltie of the knight. But for that
it is a naturall thing to be glad of the
getting agayne of things loſt (neither
could it otherwiſe be bicauſe it woulde
an other) and ſpecially in the getting agayne
of a thing before ſo gretly loued,
with a childe, wherof there could not be
made ſo gret ioy as was cōuenient. We
do not repute it to be ſo great a matter
as to do that wherevnto a man is of his
proper vertue conſtrayned to doe, the
which in béeing loyall cōmeth to paſſe,
bicauſe the béeing and not béeing loyal,
is a thing poſſible. We ſay then, that
from whom procedeth the being loyall
in a thing ſo greatly loued, that he doth
a moſt great and noble thing in keping
loyaltie, & that in a far greater quantity

layaltie doth increaſe in him, than dothe
ioy in the other,The contrary opiniō of Maſſani
                     ••
                  e. & thus we iudge. Truly
ſayde Maſſaline: Moſt renoumed quéene,
I beléeue it be as you ſay: but yet it
ſemes vnto me a great matter to think,
that with ſo great ioy as was in him
that had gotten agayne his wyfe, there
could be made compariſon of greatneſſe
in an other thing: foraſmuch as greater
griefe is not ſupported, than when as
thorow death a thing loued is loſt. Further,
if the knight were faythfull, as is
already ſayd, he did therin but his dutie,
bicauſe we are all bounden to the working
of vertue: and he that dothe that,
whervnto he is of duetie bounden, doth
but well, but yet it is not to be reputed
for ſo great a matter. Therfore I imagine,
that there may be iudged greater
ioy than loyaltie.The queenes ſolution vpō the laſt queſtion. You with your words
do contrary your ſelfe (ſayd the quéene)
bicauſe man ought as well to reioyce in
the goodneſſe of god in taking him away
as thorow the working of vertue: but
if the one could be in the one caſe, as ſorowful
as the other could be in the other

caſe diſloyall, it might be conſented to
your iudgement. To follow the laws of
nature, which can not be fled, is no great
matter, but to obey the poſitiue lawes, is
a vertue of the minde, and the vertues
of the minde bothe for greatneſſe as for
euery other reſpecte, are to be preferred
before bodily works. And if vertuous
workes (making due recompence)
do ſurmount in greatneſſe euery other
working, it may be ſayd, that the hauing
ben loyall, dureth always in béeing. Ioy
may be turned into ſodayn ſorow, either
elſe in a ſhorte ſpace of time become little
or nothing, loſing ye thing thorow the
whiche it is become mery. And therfore
let it be ſayde of him, that vprightly will
iudge, the knight to haue bene more loyall,
than the other mery. Not one there
was that followed Maſſaline, that had
any thing more to ſay, for that they all
had now propounded their Queſtions.
The ſunne now in ſetting, left the place
replete with a temperate aire. By reaſon
whereof, Fiametta, moſte reuerente
quene of this amorous people, raiſed hir

on foote, and thus fayd: Gentlemen and
gentlewomen, your queſtions are finiſhed:
whervnto (the Gods be thanked)
we haue according to our ſmall knowledge,
made anſwere, following rather
pleaſant reaſoning, than matter of contention.
And we know, that much more
might haue bene anſwered vnto the
ſame, yea and in farre better ſorte than
we haue done: But yet that whiche we
haue ſaid may ſuffize to our paſtime: and
for the reſt, let it remayne to the Philoſophers
of Athens. We ſée Phoebus now
not to beholde vs with a ſtraight aſpect,
we féele the ayre refreſhed, and knowe
this Feaſt, which we at our comming
hither left through the exceſſiue heate, to
be agayne begonne by our companions.
And therfore it ſéemeth vs good, that we
returne to the ſame: and this being ſayd,
ſhe toke with hir delicate hande, the laurell
crowne from hir heade, and in the
place where ſhe ſate, ſhe laide it downe,
ſaying: I leaue here the crowne of my
honour and yours, vntill that we ſhall
retourne hither to the like reaſoning.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
And hauing thus ſayde, ſhe toke Philocopo
by the hand, that now with the reſt
was riſen, and ſo returned with them al
to their Feaſt. Thence was heard of all
ſides the pleaſant inſtruments, and the
aire reſounding of amorous ſongs, no
part of the Garden was without banketting:
wherin they all abode merily
all that day, euen to the laſt houre: but
night béeing come vppon them, and the
ſtarres ſhewing foorth their light, it ſéemed
good to the lady, and to them all, to
depart, and to returne to the citie, wherin
bring entred, Philocopo taking his
leaue, thus ſayde vnto hir: Moſt noble
Fiametta, if the Gods ſhould euer graunt
me, that I were mine owne, as I am an
others, without doubt I ſhould be preſently
yours, but bicauſe mine owne I
am not, I can not giue my ſelfe to an
other: Howe be it for ſo muche as the
miſerable heart coulde receiue ſtraunge
fire, ſo muche the more it féeleth thorow
your ineſtimable worthyneſſe to
be kindeled, and ſhall feele alwayes
and inceſſantly, with more effecte ſhall

deſire neuer to be forgetfull of your
worthineſſe. She thanked Philocopo
greatly of this curteſie at his departure,
adding that it would pleaſe
the Gods quickely to bring
a gracious peace to
his deſire.
(⸪)
            FINIS▪
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London,
by Henry Bynneman, for Rycharde
Smyth.
            Anno. 1571.
            
               
               
                  IAMES POOLE
                  OMNIA TEMPUS HABENT.
               
            
            
         
      
   