
      
         
            
            
            ¶The history of kyng Boccus / & Sydracke how he confoundyd his lerned men / and in ye syght of them dronke stronge venym in the name of the Trinite & dyd hym no hurt. Also his diuynyte yt he lerned of the boke of Noe. Also his profycyes that he had by reuelacyō of the aungell. Also his answeris to the questions of wysdome / both morall and natural wyth moche worldly wysdome contayned in noumber. CCC. lxv. translatyd by Hugo of Caumpeden / out of frenche into Englysshe.
            
               
                  Sidrack
                  Kynge boccus.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Iohn̄ Twyne to the redar
            
               THe profyt and cōmodite of this boke (o gentyl and curteys redar) is so euydent & open / that it nedythe no settyng out nor praysyng / for dowtful thynges comenly be praysyd or despraysed / be cause trewe iugment may be takē of them. but thynges of opē goodnes nede no praysyng / for with theyr goodnes they prayse them selfe / as thou shalt fynd this boke / the whych to speke truly can not be suffycyently praysed. I had leuer therfore (as Salust sayth of Carthago) hold my pese and to speke lytel of yt / but shortly to knowe somwhat of his matters in effect / he showeth of goddys workes ryght as the old & new testament in many volumes declareth. Also natural phylosophy expressyng the causes with euydent ensamples of moch moralyte in geuyng good counsel and a delect betwyx good and bade & truly more euydēt than euer dyd Plato / Arystotyles / or Cicero ī theyr manyfold workes he shortly techeth moch knowlege of physyke the dyspocycyon of cōplexcyons the alteracyō of ages with moch secresy of the yere / greatly of astronomy / course of heuyn / & planets with theyr respectes / breuely and playnly that that ypocras / Galyen or Ptholomy comprehendyd in great or iuste volumes. Also moch worldly experyence. Abundaūt in prophesyes / how the maners of mē shal alter and the world shalbe ended / with his iugment meruelus exhortyng the people to eschew the fylthynesse of synne / what paynes are ordayned for yt / and the ioyes of heuyn. Than is this boke necessary to al men. For it exhortyth to wysdome / good maners / ensamples hystoryis. wherfore it may well be called a boke of philosofye / that is to say a stody of wysdome. Than I coūsayle euery mā to rede this boke / or that cannot rede to geue dylygent eere to the reder for they shal fynde therī great frute bothe to the soule and body.
         
         
            ¶Here begynneth the table of this boke.
            ¶Fyrst the hystory of Boccus & Sidracke / how by the power of god he dystroyed his ydols / and by the counsayle of the aungel shewed hym the vmbre of the trinite / wherby he conuerted hym and all his host. Than gaue he hym enstructions / and answeryd to dyuers questions that he demaundyd of hym.
            
               ¶The questyons.
               ¶Yf god be euer and euer shalbe? The fyrst questyon. 
               Where may it be that god of heuen may be sene ii.
               Yf god be ouer al and euery where iii.
               
                  Whiche was the fyrst thynge that god made iiii.
               The kyng asked whan aungel was wrought v.
               Wherfore serue the aungels that are in heuen vi.
               Do deuyls know al rhynge and may do al thyng vii.
               What shape are aungels and what can they do viii.
               Dyd god make Adam with his owne hand ix.
               In what place was Adam made x.
               Whether went Adam when he came out of paradise xi.
               Dyd Adam any other syn than that he the appul ete and goddes commaundment brake xii.
               What dyd Adam fro god take / and howe shal he amendys make. xiii.
               Why was not Adam streyght loste when he had that synne wrought xiiii.
               Why wold not god send an aungel or a man to amend Adā xv.
               Why shal god be borne of a mayden & she styll a mayden xvi.
               Why is deth called dethe and how many dethes there be xvii.
               Sendeth god man knowlege what deth he shal dye xviii.
               Whan the soule from the body departeth howe goth it to other place xix,
               Whether were the soule or body made fyrst xx.
               Whiche speketh in man the soule or the body xxi.
               The soule that is a goost & hathe nother flesshe nor bone howe may it fele well or wo xxii.
               Whiche is more lord the soule or the body xxiii.
               In what place of the body hath the sowle his dwellyng xxiiii.
               Why is the soule no lengar in the body than blode is left xxv.
               How may it be that the people so dye xxvi.
               How may man know that god made mā to his lykenes xxvii.
               Seyng man is made of goddes lykenes why may he not do as god dyd xxviii.
               Where becometh al the blode of man whan he dyeth xxix.
               Where becometh the fyre whan it is quenchyd xxx.
               Why dyethe not the body when he hathe loste halfe his blode or more xxxi
               Of what complexcion and nature is the body xxxii.
               Ware sowles made at the fyrst or be they made euery day xxxiii
               May they haue any excusyng that of god know nothīg. xxxiiii.
               Shal a man do more than god cōmaundyth hym xxxv.
               How many worldes be there & how do mē them call xxxvi.
               Dothe god greatly rewarde them that ryghtly hys seruys here do. xxxvii.
               The people that shallbe at the commyng of hym and that shall be after shall they byleue in hym stedfastly xxxviii.
               What cōmaundment shall goddes sone geue the people xxxix.
               The blesfulest / fayrest / & worthyest thyng what is it. xl.
               The fowlest and most perelous thyng to se which is it. xli.
               
                  Shal the good sowles sorowe for the wicked xlii.
               Which is bettar of helth or sycknesse to haue xliii.
               What poure hath god geuen to sowle here xliiii.
               Whan goddys sone is retorned to heuyn shall he leue eny gouerner here to rule the people xlv.
               Goddys hows who shal kepe it and haue it in holde. xlvi.
               He that doth no good but holdyth him styl doth he yl. xlvii.
               Lordshype / shal it be more of rygour or pyte xlviii.
               Shal aman do good to his kyn or frendes xlix.
               Wherof comyth gentylhed .l.
               How may it be cold whan the wether is fayr and clere li.
               May aman by eny tokyn know the good from the yl lii.
               The beleue of ydols shal it be aresed after my deeth liiii.
               Why was it not goddys wyll that man lyued not a weke with one mele of mete liiii.
               Dye the rych men as the pouer do lv.
               Shal men iuge the rych as they do the pouer lvi.
               May wecked men euer get goddys loue as the good haue. lvii.
               How may the child that ful of loue is come out of the mothers wombe lviii.
               May eny woman bere mo chyldren at onys than one lix.
               Which is the best thyng that may be or man may haue lx.
               What is the worst thyng that man may haue lxi
               How may aman be leel and trew lxii.
               Wherof comyth hardynesse and dred in man lxiii.
               Wherof comyth meselry or scalle lxiiii.
               Ware al thynges of goddys makyng made at the begynīg. lxv.
               Who noryssheth the trute in erth lxvi.
               The beastes that haue no wyt how wax they ragyus and mad lxvii.
               What beast leuyth longest in his kynde lxviii.
               Fedyth god al thyng that is in erth of his makyng lxix.
               Fysshes / foules / and beastes haue they soules or no lxx.
               They that shalbe after the incarnacyon shall they lyue as lōge as we do now lxxi.
               How long shal the world endure: lxxii.
               Lyue eny men mo out of the erth that we on go lxxiii.
               Why are some men whyt some broune and some blake. lxxiiii.
               Wherof comyth felony lxxv.
               Why are not al beastes of one colour lxxvi.
               They that ete or drīke more thā nede do they wel or no. lxxvii.
               Whiche is the best thyng / and the worst of the man. lxxviii.
               Whether is a man more apter to conyng in etyng of hote metis or of colde. lxxix
               How may aman fle felony / wrathe / and malencoly. lxxx.
               Is it better to haue hate of woman or loue. lxxxi.
               A man that is yonge / how angeryth he for a lytel thyng. lxxxii.
               
                  How may aman blamles be to loue a woman and hym not she lxxxiii.
               Wherof comyth fattnesse in a mannys body lxxxiiii.
               Shal aman chasten a woman with betyng whan she doth amys lxxxv.
               What thyng is gelousy and wherof comyth it lxxxvi,
               Shal aman loue his frend & open to hym all the secretes of his mynde lxxxvii.
               May aman do his profyt and labor not for it lxxxviii.
               Shal men do almes dedes to pouer that haue nede lxxxix.
               How shal he order hym selfe that is alday amonge the people lxxxx.
               Is a rych man lesse worthy that hath lost his good or the pouer that hath encresed lxxxxi.
               Wherof comyth the wicked custome of men or maner. lxxxxii.
               Seyng yron is so strong and harde wher with was fyrst made the hamer / tonges / and hyth lxxxxiii.
               Do they amys that swere by theyr god what so he be. lxxxxiiii.
               Shal aman in althynges be chair of his body lxxxxv.
               With whom shal aman loue to go and whos company shal he tie from lxxxxvi.
               Which is better to haue of ryehes or to be pouer lxxxxvii.
               Shal a mā honour a pouer mā as he do a rych mā lxxxxviii.
               Delyght the pouer men in theyr pouerte as the ryche men do in theyr ryches. lxxxxix
               Shal aman bost hym of that thyng that he doth c.
               Why are houndes raster in doyng of theyr kynd than other beastes are. c.i.
               He that coueyteth another mannes wyfe doth he wel or yl. c.ii.
               May not aman scape dethe by ryches / myght / or by some other meanes. c.iii.
               Is it good to answere them that speke foly. c.iiii.
               Whiche conyng of all is most greuoust to man. c.v.
               They that labour for to wyn & cānot why do they not leue c.vi
               Wherof may it come that men waxe foles and vnwyse c.vii.
               Is the soule and the body wo whan they shal depart c.viii.
               Whiche shall aman take for the more a yong mā or an old. c.ix.
               Why rayneth it more in one yere than in another c.x.
               Why made not god man so that he myght not haue synned. c.xi
               Is it good to haue entermetynges with all maner of men indyfferently. c.xii.
               Why wold god this world make c.xiii.
               How was this world made as it is nowe and how holdeth it as it is. c.xiiii.
               Is there any other than we that hathe the claryte or the lyght of the sonne. c.xv.
               
                  Howe longe is the worlde / how brode / and how thycke c.xvi.
               Why shall god this world clene vndo c.xvii.
               How are the fowles borne a hye that do flye. c.xviii.
               Whence cometh the rayne that falleth c.xix.
               Hayle stones wherof come they c.xx.
               Whereof come the tempestes c.xxi.
               Wherof cometh the thonder c.xxii.
               The wynde wherof comethe it c.xxiii.
               How issueth the water out of the hylles whiche hylles seme to be dry. c.xxiiii.
               The water that is in the see why is it salte c.xxv.
               Wherof cometh the lyghtenyng c.xxvi.
               The water that dothe ebbe and flowe wherof come they and whyther do they go. c.xxvii.
               Ware not hylles and roches made at the fyrste makynge of the worlde c.xxviii.
               Shall euer so great a flode come eny more as was in the tyme of Noe. c.xxix.
               Why dyd Noe take with hym into the arch venemous beastys as scorpion / edder / and snake. c.xxx.
               Wherof cometh golde. c.xxxi.
               How spryngeth some waters out of the erth hote c.xxxi.
               Wherof cometh the Brymstone c.xxxii.
               Wherof cometh carbouncles & other precyous stones. c.xxxiii.
               How many landys be in the world c.xxxiiii.
               May aman by drye lande go the world round about c.xxxv.
               Myght a man sayle so longe that his shyp came vnrent to the turnyng of the fyrmament c.xxxvi.
               Why made not god man to be euer yonge / iolyfe / and of powre ryche / and of longe lyfe / and at his deth to haue blys c.xxxvii.
               Whiche are the aungels that receyuethe mannes sowle into heuen. c.xxxviii.
               Which is better of thes two / good workes without chaslyte / or wycked workes / and chast to be. c.xxxix.
               What maketh the erthe quake c.xl.
               Wherof cometh the eclypse of the sonne and mone c.xli.
               Howe falle the sterres that men se fall / and from whens come they all. c.xlii.
               How many heuyns are there c.xliii.
               How hye is the heuyn aboue the erthe c.xliiii.
               Of what myght is the fyrmament c.xlv.
               Of what myght are the planettis & what be they called c.xlvi.
               How many maners of waters be there c.xlvii.
               How many sees be there c.xlviii.
               Why hathe god made the world rounde c.lxix.
               Why is the mone colde and the sonne hote c.l.
               
                  Whiche is the most thynge that is c.li.
               Is there more grauel in erth or dropes of water in the see. c.lii.
               Maye the grauell in erthe tolde be / or dropes of water in the see. c.liii.
               How many sterres are on the skye c.liiii.
               How many aungels dyd god make / howe many be lefte / and how many tell. c.lv.
               Whiche are most / of men / beastes / or fysshes c.lvi.
               Whiche is the delectablest place in all the world c.lvii.
               Whiche is the most prowes in towne or forest c.lviii.
               If a man haue an euyll wyfe / or a wemme in any of his lymmes shall aman cast it in his tethe c.lix.
               Shall men bothe worshyp men and do theyr wyll c.lx.
               Shall aman forget the seruyce of a good seruaunt that well hathe serued hym. c.lxi.
               May a man with holde hymselfe from a woman that he hath in kepyng / that he commyt no lechery. c.lxii.
               Whiche is the greatest delyght that is. c.lxiii.
               Shal a man ought delyght hym with a woman c.lxiiii.
               Whan two hoostes mete shall they streyght fyght c.lxv.
               Whiche of his membres myght a man worst forgo c.lxvi.
               Who made the fyrst instrument that euer was / and howe came it in his thought c.lxvii.
               He that is dumbe / defe / and can not se / what speche in his hert thynkethe he. c.lxviii.
               Why are some cloudes of the skye whyte & some blacke. c.lxix.
               May no creature knowe goddes wyll or thought c.lxx.
               Shall aman worshyp god all day c.lxxi.
               Wherof comethe bleryd eyen and why c.lxxii.
               What people shall men worshyp in this world c.lxxiii.
               Whiche is the largest man in the world c.lxxiiii.
               Shall a pouer man put hymselfe at any tyme before a reche man. c.lxxv.
               Is a man in any synne to ete all that he may get c.lxxvi.
               Shall a man geue gretynge to a man euery tyme of the daye whan he hym dothe mete c.lxxvii.
               How shall a man order his chyldren that he do not afterward repent hym. c.lxxviii.
               Whether shal a man loue better his wyfe or chyldren c.lxxix.
               If I had nother father nor mother howe shulde I haue bene borne c.lxxx.
               The chylde that hathe the full shape in the mother how maye it not somtyme be brought forthe a lyue. c.lxxxi
               Are all women in this world of one manere c.lxxxii.
               If thy neyghboures wyfe or seruauntes mys vse thēselfe shalt thou shewe thy neyghbour therof c.lxxxiii.
               
                  Shal aman hast hym to do that that he hath to do. c.lxxxiiii.
               Shall a man loue euery man c.lxxxv.
               Are all the people of the world comyn after one c.lxxxvi.
               Do men honour the ryche men in the other worlde and not the pouer at all. c.lxxxvii.
               Shall the father bere any burden for the sone / or the sone for the father c.lxxxviii.
               They that sle men / take they frō them theyr synne also. c.lxxxix.
               Whiche is most sorow of that a man hereth or seythe. c.lxx
                     •
                  x
               May ama fynd any that ete one another agayne kynd c.lxxxxi
               Which is worst of thes thre / mourder / thefte / or slāder c.lxxxxii.
               Forgeue god gladly al the synnes that mā doth here c.lxxxxiii.
               Why labour men in this world as they do c.lxxxxiiii.
               Whiche is the wickedest thyng that is c.lxxxxv
               The good werkes or wicked that men do / whether come they of god or of hymselfe. c.lxxxxvi.
               Where hydeth the daye hym from the nyght / and the nyght fro the day lyght. c.lxxxxvii.
               Who hold the planettes on the sky that they fall not c.lxxxxviii
               How may mē know the houres & poītes of day & night c.lxxxxix
               Turne all the sterres about on the skye cc.
               Whiche is the holsomest place in all the worlde cc.i.
               Tell me whiche is the worthyest day in the yere cc.i.
               Why was slepe made and wherfore cc.ii.
               Shall there be euer warre and stryfe in this world cc.iii.
               Wrathe not god for mannes dethe or his mysfortune what so euer it be. cc.iiii.
               Whiche are they that nowe most the world sustayneth cc.v.
               Whiche is heygher the kyng / or the law of the lande cc.vii
               May aman eny good haue here / that he may with hym bere / and greue hym nothyng cc.viii.
               If two men loue together & after be seperate / whan they come together shall they loue as they dyd before .cc.ix.
               How may aman loue a woman or she hym for the syght .cc.x.
               A man that hathe lyght conscyence / and swerethe falsly by his god for .x. false thīges is he any more forsworne thā ones cc.xi.
               They that haue knowlege to teche the folke shall they haue more grace than other men cc.xii.
               The thought that aman thynketh wherof cometh it cc.xiii.
               Why fall people of the fallyng euyl cc.xiiii.
               Whiche is the pereloust lymme that aman hathe cc.xv.
               Whiche is the sureest arte of all / and moste parayle may come of it. cc.xvi.
               How is a man iolyfe / and lyght of body cc.xvii.
               May aman not get a chylde as ofte as he knowethe his wyfe flesshely. cc.xviii.
               
                  Wherof is the kynd of man / and howe gatheryth it so whan it gothe hym fro. cc.xix.
               Is aman bound to loue his chyldren and do them good. cc.xx.
               Enchaūtmēt or socery / vayle they ought or are they foly. cc.xxi
               Whiche is the wyghtest beast & most of sauour cc.xxii.
               Whiche is hygher of land or see. cc.xxiii.
               Wherof come snayles / and how doth they holde themselfe so to the gras. cc.xxiiii.
               Why slepe thes old men as thes yong men do cc.xxv.
               Yf god had made so great a man as all the worlde / myght he haue resystyd god. cc.xxvi.
               What shulde this worlde haue bene yf god had not dyght it as is nowe cc.xxvii.
               Whether came aūgel of goddes onde as dyd the soule of Adam or not. cc.xxviii.
               What thyng is heuenly paradyse cc.xxix.
               Whiche is the fayrest thynge to loke on that god made in this worlde. cc.xxx.
               Whether arte thou bound to loue them more that loueth the / or them that thou louest. cc.xxxi.
               Whiche are worthyest wordes / erbes / or stones cc.xxxii.
               Shalt thou tel all thy counsayle to thy frynd. cc.xxxiii.
               Whiche women be tho that is moste profyte for men to do theyr delyght withal. cc.xxxiiii.
               Wherof comethe the trymbelyng or quakyng that a man hathe some tyme in his body. cc.xxxv.
               Whan a man seeth / dothe the eye geue it outwarde / or dothe it receyueth it inwarde. cc.xxxvi.
               How may a man by hymselfe say we. cc.xxxvii.
               Maye the see be demynysshed any thyng with takyng awaye any of the water. cc.xxxviii.
               Whether shall aman loue better the chylde that comethe of the syster / or of the brother. cc.xxxix.
               Whiche are the most perelous thyngis in man. cc.xl.
               Whiche is the holsomest flesshe that aman may ete cc.xli.
               How doparteth the mete in a mannes body cc.xlii.
               How shall a man do to get out aboue that stekethe faste in his throte cc.xliii.
               The mucke that cometh of man how stynketh it so. cc.xliiii.
               Why is mannes vryne so salt cc.xlv.
               Wherof brede wormes in man and how do they fede. cc.xlvi.
               Whiche craftes are tho that aman may worst forbere cc.xlvii.
               Whiche shall in heuen haue more ioy chyldren that neuer dyd a mys / or them that for goddes loue refrayned yll. cc.xlviii.
               How may aman ouercome the wyll of this world cc.xlix.
               Tho that go to helle or paradyse may they cō agayne cc.xlix.
               Why go not the good into erthly paradyse cc.l.
               
                  Why go not the good in to erthly paradyse cc.l.
               Whether is sowle heuy or lyght great or smale darke or bryght cc.lii.
               The good sowles that go frō the body whyther go they cc.liii.
               May no man go to heuyn but he se purgatory cc.liiii
               Seyng god sendyth some to heuyn & some to helle wherof shal than the dome be cc.lv
               Yong chyldren that haue no reson shal they be dampned tel me or no cc.lvi
               Is there eny hows / toune or cyte in the other world cc.lvii
               Shal the chyldren of hethen men be dampned cc.lviii.
               If Adam had no synne don shuld the people that of hym came haue fede with flesshe as they do now cc.lix.
               Dyd the flode droune paradyse cc.lx.
               Of what age made god Adam cc.lxi.
               Such as shal dey at the iugment and haue no tyme of purgacyon what shal become of them cc.lxii.
               Whā the sowle comyth to the body which part goith it ī. cc.lxiii.
               Who named fyrst althyng and taught them conyng cc.lxiiii.
               Wherof is it that some are lesse and some more cc.xv.
               Which is more perylous of hete or cold. cc.lxvi.
               Shal the chyld folow the yl condycions of the father. cclxvii.
               Whych is best / to speke or holde hym stylle cc.lxviii.
               Which ought to be wysar of a yong man or old cc.lxix.
               What thyng is delyte cc.lxx.
               What maner of appuls dyd Adam ete cc.lxxi.
               How lerne yong chyldren more than old men cc.lxxii.
               Which is the delectabelest thyng vnder the sonne cc.lxxiii.
               Why was heer made on mannys body cc.lxxiiii.
               How is it that some be borne doume and defe cc.lxxv.
               Profyteth men the almes dedes that they do cc.lxxvi.
               Synneth the iuge that iugeth or he that doth execute. cc.lxxvii.
               Tho that are fooles and doume borne and do yll shall they be dampned cc.lxxviii
               Kepe aungels mennes soules here cc.lxxix.
               Howe maye aungel shewe hymselfe openly to men seynge he hathe no body. cc.lxxx.
               Do deuyls espye that that people dothe cc.lxxxi.
               On what maner is the fyre of purgatary cc.lxxxii.
               What thyng is helle and how come soules thether cc.lxxxiii.
               Know soules any thyng that be in helle. cc.lxxxiiii.
               The good that be hens gone be they in parfite ioy cc.lxxxv.
               May soules shewe themselfe to theyr good frendes euery tyme whan they wyll. cc.lxxxvi.
               Wherof come dremys. cc.lxxxvii.
               Was the frute in the trees whā they were fyrst made cc.lxxxviii.
               What tyme and what day was Adam made cc.lxxxix.
               
                  Whan the flode was done made god new frute to mā .cc.lxxxx.
               Where set Noe shyp on land. cc.lxxxxi.
               Whā Noe cā out of the shyp cā he strāge to this world. cc.lxxxxii
               Wherof cometh petye in a mannes herte cc.lxxxxiii.
               Why haue not fowles nature in them to engendure as other beastes do. cc.lxxxxiiii.
               Shall men haue pytye of thos that be in wo and delyuer them yf they haue myght therto. cc.lxxxxv.
               Whiche is better to drynke wyne or water cc.lxxxxvi.
               Whan man is in great wyll to fyght how may he refrayne him of that passyon cc.lxxxxvii.
               Why haue wymen all the wo and the ioy also cc.lxxxxviii.
               Why are chyldren at theyr byrth as vnconyng as beastes that haue no reson cc.lxxxxix.
               Wherof comyth natural wyt in man ccc.
               Wherof comyth the nesyng ccci.
               Why dyeth the wynd for a showre of rayne ccc.ii.
               Whiche is stronger wynd or water ccc.iii.
               On what maner shall a man leue in this worlde ccc.iiii.
               Shall a man whan he is in a good place chaunge to seke abetter. ccc.v.
               Whiche is worthyer of ryche or pouer ccc.vi.
               Whiche is more semely to man fayre face or fayre body. ccc.vii.
               Howe shall a man lede his lyfe that fyndethe aman with his wyfe. ccc.viii.
               Shall men for theyr losse blame god ccc.ix.
               Whiche is the sauorest thyng that is ccc.x.
               Of what maner of bounte ought kynges to be ccc.xi.
               How cometh swete of a body / wherof / and why ccc.xii.
               Whiche are the best colours for mannes weryng ccc.xiii.
               Whiche is the grenest thyng that is ccc.xiiii.
               Whiche is the fattest thyng that is ccc.xv.
               Whiche is better to haue whan a man shal dye repentaunce or hope of ioye. ccc.xvi.
               Shall men be sory for them that dye ccc.xvii.
               Came euer any from the other worlde that tolde tydynges of heuyn or helle. ccc.xviii.
               Shal a man say any thyng whan he go to bed ccc.xix.
               Whiche is the strongest batayle that is ccc.xx.
               How lyeth the chyldren in the mothers wombe ccc.xxi.
               Why is some wyne whyte and some red ccc.xxii.
               Haue foules or beastes any vnderstandyng ccc.xxiii.
               Whiche helpethe the soule more / that a man dothe before he dye or after his dethe. ccc.xxiiii.
               Slepe the fysshes euer or no. ccc.xxv.
               Whiche is the fayrest fowle in the world ccc.xxvi.
               Which is the fayrest beast & that myght worst be myst. ccc.xxvii.
               
                  Whiche are the fayrest horses that be ccc.xxviii.
               Whiche be the beastes that haue most vnderstondyng. ccc.xxix:
               By what tokē may mē know that goddis sone is borne. ccc.xxx
               What sygnyfyeth tho tokens ccc.xxx.
               Shal he be a chyld more conyng then other ccc.xxxi.
               Where shal he most dwell ccc.xxxii.
               Shal goddes sone a fayre man be ccc.xxxiiii.
               Why wold god dye. ccc.xxxv
               Who shall hym kyl / and how long shal he be ded ccc.xxxvi.
               Shal he ascend without company. ccc.xxxvii.
               Shal goddes sone haue any house in erthe. ccc.xxxviii.
               Shal his body be euer dwellyng in erthe ccc.xxxix.
               Shall euery man haue power to make his body ccc.xl.
               They that haue myght to make his body shal they be more honoryd
before god than other. ccc.xli.
               Why shall they euery day make it. ccc.lxii.
               What thyng is synne / that men shalbe lost by ccc.xliii.
               By what sygne shal mē know that goddes son is ded. ccc xliiii.
               Of what vertu shall goddes sone be ccc.xlv.
               Shall his dyscypyls do myracles ccc.xlvi
               Shal they neuer haue wo nor ende that go to heuen. ccc.xlvii.
               Shall they neuer haue rest that be in helle ccc.xlviii.
               Shal they that be in heuyn be nakyd or clothed ccc.xlix.
               Whan god shall come to iugement and deme bothe quycke and
dede / who shalbe than alyue ccc.l.
               Where shalbe borne the antichryst ccc.li.
               What day shall the iugment be on ccc.lii.
               What tyme shall the dome be ccc.liii.
               On what maner shal he come to the iugment. ccc.liiii.
               Shal his crosse be there present ccc.liiii.
               How shall he showe hym selfe at the iugement ccc.lv.
               Shall his mynysters be with hym at the iugement. ccc.lvi.
               How shall he do the iugement and what shall he saye. ccc.lvii.
               Shall any man knowe what he hathe done ccc.lviii.
               What shalbe done after the dome. ccc.lix.
               What shalbe come of this worlde after the dome ccc.lx.
               Shall the good haue leue to do what they wyll ccc.lxi.
               Shall they remember them of theyr wyckednes ccc.lxii.
            
            FINIS
         
      
      
         
            
            MEn may fynde in olde bokys
            Who so the in lokys
            Actes worthy of memory
            Full of knowlege and mystery
            Wherof I shall shew a lytell ielle
            That be fell ons in the Eest
            Ther was a kynge that Boccus hyght
            And was a man of moche myght
            His lande lay by the greate ynde
            Bectorye hyght it as we fynde
            After the tyme of Noe euen
            Eyght hundred yere fourty and seuen
            The kynge Boccus hym be thought
            That he wolde haue a cytye wrought
            His enmyes ther with to fere
            ¶And agayn them to mayntayne his were
            Chefly for a kynge that was his foo
            That moche of ynde longed vnto
            His name was Garaab the kynge
            Boccus tho purueyed all thynge
            And shortly a towre began he
            There he wolde make a optye
            And was ryght in the incomynge
            Of Garabys lande the kynge
            The masons with grete laboure
            Began to worke on the towre
            And all that they wrought on the daye
            On nyght was it doone a waye
            On morowe whan Boccus it, herde
            He was wrouthe that it so fared
            And it all newe quykly begonne
            At nyght whan they shulde leue sone
            
               Of werke / and they wente to rest
            On the morowe all was downe kest
            Well vij. monethes thus they wrought
            And all myght a vayle nought
            ¶Boccus was wrothe wonderly
            He called his gentylls that was hym by
            Cownsell me lordynges / quod he
            How I may best make this cytye
            Syr they sayd sende you anone
            For your phylosophers euerychone
            And ye astronomers that in your countre is
            For of them can you no cownsell mys
            Kynge Boccus for them sent
            His messyngers to gather them went
            And whan they apperyd to gyther there
            Foure score and .ix. maysters there were
            The kynge receyuyd them with the best
            And thre dayes he dyd let them reste
            The fourth daye he dyd them caull
            And they before hym were come all
            ¶Lordynges he sayd I shall tell you now
            For what cause I haue sent for you
            I am the most kynge I wysse
            That vnder the sonne rysynge is
            All the kynges of this countrye
            At my cōmaundment truly be
            Excepte Garaab the kynge
            That in ynde is raynynge
            He contraryes my commaundment
            And not comys to my parlyament
            And hym wolde I fayne compell
            But howe in his lāde to enter I cannot tell
            
               But men haue cowselyd me
            For to make there a cytye
            Masons and stone I thyther brought
            And seuen moūthes there as they wrought
            Ryght in the entre of his lande
            For to meke hym to his hande
            And all that they on daye wrought
            At nyght turned all to nought
            And yf Garaab hath perauenture herde
            Of our worke how it farede
            He wyll saye I haue no myght
            A tower in his land for to dyght
            Therfore your wyttes here on laye
            Prayeng you that ye me saye
            How I maye after my wyll
            This tower and the cytye fulfyll
            For I had leuer a venged to be
            Of Garaab that despysyth me
            Than ye name of all the world to bere
            And by my god I you swere
            That I shall soone for your dede
            Quyte rychely your mede
            ¶Syr quod they we you promyse
            That tower suerly for to furnyshe
            So that ye shall a vengyd be
            And haue your mynde of the cytye
            And you vs respyte geue
            Fourty dayes by your leue
            Tyll we our arte haue ouer sene
            How your tower shall be made a gayne
            And we shall do our myght
            To make it stonde daye and nyght
            
               A place he causyd made redy to be
            With vernaunt flowers and many a tree
            And with freyshe water of the ryuer
            He commaundyd on all goodly maner
            That they were serued rychely
            That daye as his owne body
            Astronomers ther voare many one in fee
            That were the eldest men of that countryt
            And they wrought dylygently in theyr arte
            Euery one by hym selfe on his parte
            And whan the fourty dayes ware gone
            They came before the kynge anone
            He askyd them how they had wrought
            Syr quod they take you no thought
            Be you glade and mery also
            For you shall all your mynd come to
            Within a xiiij. nyghtes ye shall se
            Therfore let your masons redy be
            Suche atyme as we shall you saye
            Stones vppon the tower to laye
            And loke that they be than redy
            And we all wyll be there by
            Full greatly thanked them the kynge
            And moche ioye had he of theyr sayenge
            ¶Than came the daye that they had set
            The masons were all redy fet
            And the maysters wente with all
            To se them that worke shall
            With greate ioye they be gunne
            And wrought as longe as they had sonne
            Whan that the nyght came at the laste
            They wente home to make repaste
            
               And they lefte vpon the worke all nyght
            Great plenty truly of candell lyght
            They went all home at nyght tyme
            And came ageyne the nexte daye be pryme
            The kynge was the nexte daye wod
            Whan he sawe his worke not stode
            All the tresure that he had vp layed
            In ydylnesse it is consumyd he sayed
            And he anon cauled before hym the clerkes
            And sayed are thes your good werkes
            That you haue caused me for to do
            By the god that I beleue on and loue also
            Quyte I shall all your dede
            And for your werkes ye shall haue mede
            Bynde them fote and hande
            Thes wordis were spred a brode in his lāde
            And so they were in pryson cast
            Therin kepte without fauor fast
            ¶Ferof this towre the voyce rane
            And vnto Garaab at lenght it came
            Whan he it herde great ioye he had
            And in his herte he was full glade
            A letter he made to kyng Boccus
            And sent it by hym that spake thus
            I Garaab of ynde kynge
            To the Boccus sendes gretynge
            We haue vnderstondyng well
            Of thy worke and thy wyll euerydele
            Of the Cytye thou woldest dyght
            But thou hast theyrto no myght
            Neyther by arte nor by engyn
            For to brynge it to a fyne.
            
               But wylt thou sende me to my fere
            Thy doughter that to the is so dere
            And I shall gyue the leue thereto
            To make that thou desyrest so
            This came to Boccus the kynge
            All in skorne and in mockynge
            Boccus thought his herte shulde blede
            Whan he herde the letters rede
            And was so wode with that answere
            That by and by he slewe the messyngere
            Than dyd he in his lande crye
            Yf there ware eny lowe or hye
            That cowde hym cownsell of that thynge
            How he myhht brynge it to endynge
            That cytye with the tower
            He shulde with great honoure
            Gyue hym his doughter vnto wye
            With halfe his tresure in his lyfe
            Well two dayes after this crye
            The kynge sat full drerely
            For he wyste not what to do
            Than came an olde man hym to
            And sayd syr I shall not craue
            Your doughter nor your tresure to haue
            But yf you wyll do me good
            I shall wytsafe to amende your mode
            And shew who shall on hym take
            Your tower and cytye for to make
            ¶The kynge anon swore by his god
            That he loued and trusted in euer more
            He shulde so quyt his seruyse
            That it shulde lyke hym and all his
            
               Syr he sayed this is beste to do
            Sende the kynge Tractabar vnto
            And praye hym for your seruyse
            That he you lende in eny wyse
            The boke of Astronomye
            That Noe had with hym in balye
            By an Aungell was made that boke
            And Noe to one of his sonnes it toke
            And so hath it gone I tell you
            That Tractabar hath it now
            Praye hym also you to lende
            And with that boke hastely to sende
            His astronomer Sydrac
            Whiche shall vndo all the hole pac
            All your wyll shall sone be do
            Yf Sydrac come you ones to
            Anon the kynge dyd letters make
            And to a messynger he dede them take
            And vnto Tractabar them sent
            Withe a full ryche and good present
            Desyryng hym very curtesly
            His boke and Sydrac to sende shorty
            ¶Whan Tractabar that messengere
            Had receyued with louynge there
            Sayeng you are ryght welcome to me
            Grete ioye I haue that I nou se
            My lorde and my frende Boccus
            To sende me louyng letters thus
            A boke to sende hym he prayes me
            That in olde tyme had Noe
            That boke can fulfyll his wyll
            Of a thynge that lyes beryed in a hyll
            
               That who so myght come them to
            He myght an his wyll do
            My father wente vp to that hyll
            But he myght neuer come ther tyll
            But Boccus is of moche myght
            And he wyll with them fyght
            That vpon that hyll wonne
            He shall haue his wyll sone
            He sent hym his boke and Sydrac
            And a letter that thus spake
            Unto our lorde and frende
            The kynge Boccus vnto we sende
            Whom kynge Garaab getteth well
            And certyfyeth that we haue euery dele
            Accordyng your mynde we sende you to
            Our boke and our clarke also
            And thanke ye moche of your sendynge
            A glade man was Boccus tho
            Whan Sydrac before hym cam truly
            He toke hym by the hande ryght gladly
            And tolde hym euery dele of his case
            And how to hym it befallen was
            ¶Syr quod Sydrac that lande I wysse
            Euery dele be weched is
            There shall nere man spede
            Upon that lande to do no dede
            That therof shall come eny prosperyte
            Excepte theyr wychecrafte vndoune be
            And I shall it redely vnbynde
            ¶I thāk the quod the kyng for thy wordes
            ¶Syr kynge quod Sydrac we fynde
            In this 
                  •
               osse that was Noes 
                  •
               ynde
            
               That an aungel came hym to
            From his god that sent hym tho
            And tolde hym that he myght fynde
            An hyll fare in the lande of ynde
            That called is the grene rauens hyll
            And hath that name for this skyll
            Whan Noe the rauen sent
            Out of the arke verament
            To proue yf there apered eny grounde
            But he fell on careyn that he founde
            And wolde not truly come awaye
            The dowe vpon another daye
            Fownd lande and came ageyne blyue
            With a branche of grene olyue
            That hyll is of length as we rede
            Foure ioyrneys and thre of brede
            People ther dwelleth of strange chere
            Made of body as we are here
            But theyr vysages for to se on
            Are as houndes euerychon
            By the lawe of femynne as it tellys
            Lyes it there / no man in dwellys
            On that hyll such frutfulnese is
            That .xij. M. herbes there growys
            Foure thowsand may good do
            Foure thowsand are yuel to
            The thyrd thowsand who thē vnderstode
            May do nether yuell ne good
            Seuen maner waters there are on
            And all they gather in tyl one
            The dewes the herbes cause to sprynge
            And yf you wyll haue your entendynge
            
               Fynde menys the herbes to wynne
            And than may you neuer blynne
            To do all that your wyll is
            And ouercome your enemys
            The kynge made ioy whan he herde this
            And swore so euer haue I blys
            His tresure and goddes to lose all
            But thos herbes haue I shall
            ¶Redely on the thyrde daye
            He with great company went his waye
            Unto the hyll warde they made spede
            And Sydrac with them dyd lede
            The thyrtene daye come they tyll
            A vale at the fote of the hyll
            There taryed they thre dayes
            The fourth daye to ye hyll toke theyr wayes
            But the people that dwelled there
            Hard that they come were
            Anon agayne them went boldly
            And dyd bet them backe manfully
            Unto the vale ageyne they tourned
            And fyften dayes so they iourned
            And than went they to the hyll ageyne
            Truly with all theyr mayne
            And fought with them full hardely
            But they ware dyscomfortyd fouly
            Unto the dale ageyne they went
            And after great succoure they sent
            Whan they come they dyd them spede
            Ageyne that they ware at that dede
            And than they that on the hyll wore
            They dyd dyscomforte for euer more
            
               And viij. dayes they dwellyd styll
            Hauynge all the hyl at wyll
            ¶Boccus was hethen and knew nought
            God that heuyn wrought
            He beleuyd all in ydolatre
            And in false ymagere
            Sydrac beleuyd in the Trynyte
            Kepynge his cōmaundment with dylygēse
            The kynge where he yede
            His mammetes with hym dyd lede
            And vpon the eyghtene daye
            Upon the hyll where they lay
            Theyr warre clene don
            The kynge made redy a pauylyon
            And his goddes forth fet
            Eche one in his place was set
            There ware they set in molde
            Both of syluer and golde
            And amonge them there was one
            Rychest of them euerychone
            Of golde and syluer comly to se
            Hyest amonge them stode he
            Most had in honoure
            Amonge all that there wore
            Bestes the kynge forth gan call
            To make sacryfyce with all
            He toke Sydrac by the hande
            With other lordes of his lande
            To the pauylyon they went
            The bestes ware there present
            A shepe very fat he toke truly
            Kyllynge hym with his knyfe deuoutly
            
               Before hym that so hye stode
            And offeryd to hym the blode
            And euery one slewe at the last
            And aboute the pauylyon them cast
            ¶ Sydrac wondered in his thought
            And markyd sadly what they wrought
            ¶ Kynge Boccus sayd Sydrac vp ryse
            And vnto our god make sacryfyse
            ¶ Sydrac answeryd with great yre
            And sayd that shall I neuer syre
            Sacryfyse shall I make hym to
            Heuyn and erth that made also
            Both ayer / element / sonne and the se
            And all that therin be
            Also that made both Adam and Eue
            He is the god that I on beleue
            ¶ The kynge was wrothe there he stode
            And askyd hym in his mode
            What canyst thou by my goddes say
            Are they not good and all thynges may
            ¶Nay quod Sydrac trust me to
            They are wycked and false also
            And the deuyl in them dwellynge is
            Craftely that begyleth the I wys
            And all that honoure to them make
            But I cownsel you them forsake
            For a bad god I hym suppose
            That cannot amannys herte dysclose
            I had leuer to dethe be tourmentyd
            Or of me they shulde be honoryd
            ¶The kynge was wrothe of his sayeng
            And caused his goddes forth to bryng
            
               And whan they were before hym brought
            He sayd Sydrac dysdayne nought
            Sacryfyse to do anone
            Before so rych a god as this is one
            Syr he sayd my sacryfyce
            Shall be to god that hye iustyce
            That made man and man not hym
            But this is the deuelys lym
            The deuyl of them thanke takyth
            That vnto hym honour makyth
            Therfore they be refusyd of me
            All thes mahowndes that ye here se
            Now was the kynge moued sore
            That his goddes despysed wore
            And sayd to Sydrac tell thou me
            Thy god how callyd is he
            ¶Syr he sayd I shall tell ywys
            On god a goostly substance is
            And the aungels of heuyn lyght
            That are so noble and so bryght
            Passynge the sonne in manyfolde
            Hauynge great ioy on hym to beholde
            ¶The kynge than callyd two of his
            That ware in his lawe counted wyse
            For to dyspute with Sydrac
            But he cast them sone abacke
            And ouercome all theyr reson
            Ryght in opyn dysputacyon
            ¶Praye thou than quod they thy god vnto
            And we wyll to ours also
            Trustynge to haue tokenynge
            Who shall sonyst haue his askynge
            
               And loke how that we shall fare
            In this wylde countre where we are
            Anone they all forth wente
            And helde a great parleamente
            Than was there one that spake
            ¶I shall tel you this Sydrac
            That causyth ye kyng this werke to begyne
            And brought vs here it for to wyne
            Without hym may it nought
            Our purpose to ende be brought
            And through his enchauntmente
            Our god with fyre hath brente
            Neuerthelesse I rede that we
            Counsel that he delyuered be
            And whan we haue that we haue sought
            And in to our countre agayne brought
            Hauynge our purpose on our enemyes
            Than shall the kynge by my aduyse
            Cause hym hanged and drawen to be
            By cause to our god he hath do felone
            ¶All assentyd to that conclusyon
            And made to the kynge of it relacyon
            ¶Anone the kynge chose hym ten
            Of his most sagyest wyse men
            And byd them to Sydrac goo
            Sayenge that the kynge was woo
            That he shulde be prysonede
            And saye if he wyll my ioyrney spede
            I shall forgyue the trespas
            That done to my god was
            ¶Sydrac answered truly thus
            Grete wel the kynge Boccus
            
               And say also to hym so god me saue
            That I wyll no forgyfnes haue
            Of nothyng that I haue don amys
            But yf god that in heuyn is
            On his god hath shoyd power as he dyd se
            What? wyll he forgyue that me
            But say to hym yf it be his wyll
            That I shall his seruyse fulfyll
            In god of heuyn trust he shall
            And his commaundment do all
            Than his grace and mercy
            I shall hym shewe apertly
            ¶Anon the messyngers went
            Unto the kynge that them had sent
            And told hym what answere they had
            The kynge was wroth / and bad
            That he shuld other dayes nyne
            In pryson lye and there pyne
            Whan the .ix. day was come and go
            The kynge sent hym agayne vnto
            The same bodyes lesse nor more
            That he sent to hym before
            And he his answer on them layd
            As he had before sayd
            Whan the kynge sawe at the last
            That his ioyrne was ouer cast
            And that he was a comfortlese man
            That without hym nothyng can
            He set hym forth anon ryght
            And made hym all the ioy he myght
            Sydrac anon before the kynge
            ¶Seyd syr by god of all thynge
            
               The werke that thou hast to do
            Shall neuer endyng come vnto
            But thou wylt trust in god of lyght
            That all thyng made of his myght
            And yf that thou wylt hym se
            Apertly I shall shew hym the
            ¶ The kynge sayd than with wordes grym
            ¶Let it so be than / shew me hym
            And he be so good / as thou prechest
            I shall beleue as thou me techest
            ¶ Whan he that herd anon Sydrac
            And went from hym a lytel whyle bake
            And set on his knees at the last
            His syth vp to heuen dyd cast
            And this prayer made he
            Lord god full of pyte
            That heryst all that call the to
            And madest heuen and erth also
            And aungells full of claryte
            Of wisdom also for to be
            Lucyfer by his pryde had a fall
            For lorde wold he abyn of all
            And thou lorde hym castest downe
            Into hell that foule pryson
            Than madest of erth slym
            Adam our father and puttest hym in
            Of thy grace gost of lyf
            And madest Eue to be his wyf
            Lorde that werkyst so perfytly
            I besech the inwardly
            That thou thy grace downe me sende
            This wycked people for to amende
            
               So that I haue no blame
            And that they worshype thy holy name
            Whan he had made his oryson
            An aungell came from heuyn downe
            And Sydrac truly this certyfyed
            That god had herd all that he desyred
            And has grawnted the thy bone
            This kynge shalt thou conuert sone
            Thou shalt ouercome by goddes grace
            The deuyll and his wickyd trace
            God hath graunted the myght
            And his grace shall be thy lyght
            Thou shalt to morowe vpon a trowe
            Party of goddes myght hym showe
            How he the world fyrst began
            And why that he made man
            Of the commyng a goddes sonne
            That in erth shall with you wone
            And of the antecryst with all
            That the world ende shall
            An erthen pot thou cause to be fet
            And vpon thre stakys it set
            In the name of the Trynyte
            One god and persones thre
            Fyll that pot with water clere
            And than call the kynge the nere
            Goddes grace than shalt thou se
            And shewe it hym and so shall he
            The aungell anon went his way
            Sydrac markyd well what he dyd say
            And at that had great reioysynge
            Geuynge lawde to god for so cumfortynge
            
               ¶He callyd the kynge and sayd syr
            Wyll ye se that you desyre
            ¶He was full wrouth I wys
            And sayd shew we what a is
            Which is better that wyll I se
            Our god yt thou hast brent / or he
            Sydrac thre stakys toke anon
            And set an erthen pot thereon
            Than with water it dyd fyll
            He lokyd therein with good wyll
            Than callyd the kynge hym to
            And sayd behold here in / loo
            The kynge beheld and than sawe he
            The vmbre of the Trynyte
            That of myght is truly most
            Father and sonne and holygost
            In heuyn all they syttyng wore
            And the aungelles them before
            Syngyng all that there wone
            ¶Lo quod the father to the sonne
            The sonne to the holygost also
            And the holygost vnto them two
            Whan the kynge had sene that syght
            He was full ioyfull and full lyght
            He thought that he was in heuyn
            His blessydnes coud he not tell yt he had syn
            He told Sydrac how he fared
            And sayd vnto hym that all they herde
            I beleue in thy god I wys
            And in all thyng that of hym is
            Or euer was or euer shall be
            But I pray the tell now me
            
               That I the better beleue theron
            How than ar they thre in one
            ¶Syr he sayd I shall you sho
            On what maner ye shall hym knowe
            Syr yf ye vnderstand verely
            The sonne in the sky shynyng bryghtly
            Thre thynges ar there innate
            And noman can them separat
            One is the sonne properly
            That ye se vpon the say
            A nother is the claryte
            That it gyuys to you and me
            And the hete is the thyrd
            That wyde in the world is spred
            Be the sonne I vnderstande
            The father that all thyng hath in hande
            And the sonne by the claryte
            For of the father come is he
            The holygost by the hete
            Thes ar the thre that I grete
            And all thre ar god but one
            As you may se the sonne vpon
            ¶Boccus than is now in such gladnese
            That no man coud it exprese
            And on hye cryed and spake
            I beleue in thy god Sydrac
            Thre persones and one very god myghty
            To late I haue on hym be eued suerly
            The goddes that my fathers wore
            And my auncytors here before
            For sake I here for euer in say
            For his loue that all thyng may
            
               ¶Whan the people that vnderstode
            They were for it ny wode
            And swore that Sydrac shuld dey
            For ofte that eny man cowd sey
            Sume wente mornyng alone
            And for the kynge made gret morne
            And sayd alas that he was borne
            Our kynge hath his wytte forlorne
            There withall they came hym to
            And sayd syr thou hast mysdo
            Full wroght than ar thy meyne
            All that to the trusty shuld be
            That thou hast a wich beleued
            And thy good god renayed
            That thy father and forgoars all
            Had full dere and dyd on call
            Now hast thou hym by thy assent
            Confoundyd and in fyre brent
            ¶The kynge sayed vnto all them
            You wote neuer what ye mene
            Therfor I haue hym forsakyn
            And vnto a nother god me taken
            Longe I haue bene in the darke nyght
            I take me now to the sonne lyght
            Ye are of this thynge full lewde
            For Sydrac that had me shewed
            The vmbre of the trynyte
            And that our fathers and we
            Haue beleued in goddes fals & bad
            And a feble lyfe haue we had
            But now haue I hym in mynde
            That may bothe lose and tynde
            
               In his lawe soth to say
            Than wyll I both lyue and dey
            ¶The people drew themself bake
            All that were angre with Sydrac
            They chose fouer men of the host
            That wysest were and coude most
            For to hold dysputacyon
            Ageyne Sydrac and his reson
            Thes fouer before the kynge went
            And sayd to hym with one assent
            This wich with his wichcraft lewdly
            Hath you mouyd gretly
            Syr let hym come forth now
            And we shall dyspute with hym before you
            ¶So it come to pase at the last
            And to dyspute they began fast
            They shewed hym theyr fals lawe
            ¶And he vndyd it on a rawe
            He destroyed with good reson
            All theyr fals and peruert opynyon
            Wrothe a way than gan they tourne
            For agayne hym cowd they not spourne
            Whan they ouercome wore
            And they myght do no more
            They went anon forth and fet
            Of starke venom a gobet
            And came to Sydrac there he stode
            And sayd thou seyst thy god is good
            Daryst thou in the name of hym
            Drynke this gobet of venym
            For if he be trew and strong also
            To the it can no velony do
            
               ¶By god Sydrac that / that you wene
            May not a vayl you a bene
            ¶Uenom of adder nor of snake
            That eche in goddys name take
            May greue me ryght nought
            Gyue it hyther that ye haue brought
            ¶The venom in his hande toke he
            That all the people about myght se
            Ye that to my god trust not to
            Anon shall se what he can do
            He dranke that venom anon ryght
            And was hole sownde and lyght
            All the people that there gadered was
            Had great wonder at that caas
            ¶The kynge was full glad therefore
            And sayd to all that there wore
            Had Sydracis god not myghty byn
            He had brust that we had it syne
            And thes four that dyd hym spyte
            Thought he wold a be deed quyte
            ¶ Whan the deuyll was out lepyd
            Of his great god that he was in crepyd
            He and his felowes also
            In to other goddes dyd go
            And they all at the last
            Uppon the kynge a cry dyd cast
            And sayd Boccus thou had lost thy wyt
            To play now this folysh tyt
            To change thy old lawe
            And to trust in this withes sawe
            Us thou hast now forsakyn
            And to a wychcrafte the takyn
            
               And we shall forsake the
            None of vs thy frend wyll be
            Thy sacryfyce we shall forsake
            On thy goddes we shall do wrake
            All thy bestes we wyll slo
            And helpe ageyne the thy fo
            We shall also hast blyue
            Out of thy kyngdom the to dryue
            All thy chyldern sle we shall
            And other of thy kyne with all
            And thy self with soth to sey
            On euyl deth shall cause to dey
            But thou wilt slake all this
            And beleue styll in thy blys
            Reuoke all that thou hast sayd
            And all that thy hert is on layed
            And breke yender pot in two
            His wichcraft for to vndo
            And the water at the last
            Unto thy howndes thou cast
            Seyng that Sydrac doth not blynne
            This wo to bryng the in
            THe kynge & all that wer thore
            Of this thyng wonderyd sore
            And a masyd were sumdele
            ¶Sydrac that beheld full well
            And sayd syr dysmay ye noght
            On god of heuyn be thy thought
            Let the deuyll haue no intrese
            The with his engyn to refreshe
            For thou shalt se anon ryght
            That I shall destroy hym and his myght
            
               A betyll in his his hande he toke
            And to the false goddes he it shoke
            He stode and sayd all on hye
            In his name that is almyghty
            I shall you breke this uery day
            And the deuyll dryue away
            With his betyll he layd vpon
            And brake the ydols euerychone
            Whan the deuyll saw nomore
            That his dwellynge myght be thore
            He and all his company
            Began then from thens to hye
            And an hydyous cry they cast
            Whan the ydols were all to brast
            An erthquake dyd they make anone
            So that ye folke thought euerychone
            That the yerth sanke & downe went
            Thunder and lyghtenyng also they sent
            Hayle and rayne also there wore
            That made the folke abasshed sore
            And the kynge of all the host
            Was abasshed all the moost
            ¶Sydrac sawe the kynge in drede
            Anon he vnto hym dyd yede
            And sayd syr dyscomfort ye nought
            Goddys myght that all hath wroght
            Is stronger than the deuyl of hell
            And that thou shalt perseue well
            Therfore dred not but comfort the
            Ouer vs shall sone his grace be
            Downe came than an aungell bryght
            All abowt hym mych lyght
            
               ¶And sayd Sydrac take with thyn handys
            The water that in the pot standys
            On the fouer corners of the hows it cast
            As long as eny of it doth last
            In the name of the Trynyte
            Betokenyd of the stakys thre
            Bete together fast the two
            And the deuyll shall fle there fro
            ¶Sydrac dyd as he hym bad
            And fayer wether anon they had
            An other aungel they sawe commyng
            Beryng aswerd all brennyng
            And smot the deuyll and hym dyd shent
            And thos ydols all to brent
            All the folke that there wore
            And wold not be conuertyd before
            Whan they had sene that syght
            They turned vnto god anon ryght
            ¶Boccus the kynge whan he that sauh
            Alytel he began to lawgh
            In his hert he was full iocound
            And askyd Sydrac in that stound
            ¶Leue Sydrac / and tell now me
            What syngnyfy the stakes thre
            And the pot of erth also
            That thou the water dydyst put into
            And why thou so the water dyd cast
            And bet to gyther the stakes fast
            ¶Syr he sayd the stakes thre
            Do sygnyfye the Trynytye
            Father and sonne and holygoost
            That ar one god / as thou well knowest
            
               By the erthen pot I take
            This world that god of erth dyd make
            The thre Rakys the pot vp bar
            God it syngnyfyeth be thou well ware
            The water that in the pot was don
            Syngnyfyeth playnly goddys sonne
            That in this world shall borne be
            Of a fayr vyrgyn puer and fre
            And that sonne shall all with ryght
            Destroy the deuyll and his myght
            Uppon a crosse he shall be done
            And dye about the tyme of none
            In erth shall he buryed without fayl be
            And ryse vp within dayes thre
            Through that dede shall he call
            Adam and verely his frendes all
            Out of wo and of theyr mornfull care
            That now in the deuyllys handes are
            The water that I at the last
            About on the fouer corners dyd cast
            Betokenys fouer men that shall tho
            In fouer sydes of the world shall go
            That many a man shall suerly wyte
            Euery one his boke shall wryte
            By the whiche they confownde shall
            The deuyl and his power all
            The stakes that I together smot
            Made gret benne as ye it wot
            That was in tokyn of them tho
            That with goddys sonne shall go
            And shall his dyscypyls also be
            They shall preche the Trynyte
            
               And the noyse of them shall wende
            Ouer all to the worldes ende
            For they shall to the people preche
            And the ryght beleue them teche
            That man had better not be borne
            That it despysyth / for he is forlorne
            And thos that ar in ryght beleue
            Goddys sonne shall them forgyue
            All that they haue don amys
            And bryng them in to heuyn blys
            ¶Boccus lyked thos wordes well
            And is instructyd now sumdele
            By Sydracs trew informacyon
            In the fayth hath take a fundacyon
            And goddys name in honour had
            And of the fayth ryght glad
            Than desyred he for to here
            Many thynges that he wold requere
            Prayng that he tell wolde
            Thynges that he aske shulde
            Sydrac sayd full mekely
            Aske what ye wyll syr hardely
            The kynge asked hym anon
            These questyons by one and one
            That are wrytten in this boke
            And vnto them great hede he toke.
            ¶Here after begyn the questyons
         
         
            
            ¶Hic incipiunt questiones
            
               
                  The fyrst thyng than askyd he
                  Yf god was euer and euer shall be
               
               GOd had neuer begynnyng
               Nor neuer shall haue endyng
               Before he heuy nor erth wrought
               Or eny thyng to effect brought
               He knew well how them to dyght
               And all thorow his owne myght
               Or he made aungell to be
               The noumbre of them well wyst he
               Of man of beste of euery dell
               Of fowle of fyshe all knew be well
               And what dede echone shuld haue
               Also which shuld theyr sowles saue
               Which they were shuld be forlore
               All together knew he before
               And theyr wordes and also thought
               God had orels a be vnperfyt and nought
               For of all that were of his makyng
               There nedyd to be non amendyng
               Ne empeyred shuld he a be nought
               Al though they had not be wrought
               He was / is / and euer shall be
               Of one power I ensuer the
               Ouer all truly is his myght
               And thre heuyns he hath dyght
               The one is bodely that we se
               An other goostly where aungels be
               The thyrd there god hym self is
               Where is a ioyful blys
               
                  Where shall the ryght 
                     〈…〉
                   ende 
                     〈◊〉
                   dyd
                     •
                   on
               Whan this world is past and gone
            
            
               ¶The seconde questyon.
               
                  ¶The kynge askyd where it aryght ben
                  That god of heuyn myght be sen
               
               UIsybyl is god that warne I the
               And inuysybyl also is he
               For all thynges may he se
               And he may nor sene be
               For that / that is of bodely makyng
               May se no goostly thyng
               But goostly thyng that is in blys
               May se goostly thyng that is
               But whan goddys sonne so dere
               In to erth is come among vs here
               And the people shall walke bothe to
               Both he and his werke 
                     〈…〉
                   true
               That shall be moost of goddys myght
               And shall in a mayden lyght
               Body to take of that vyrgyne
               And shall be borne without syn
               And do truly as a man shall do
               Saue syne that may he not do
               And god almyghty shall he be
               Hym shall men / here fele and se
               And except he body toke
               There myght no man on hym loke
            
            
               
               ¶The thyrd questyon
               
                  ¶Than askyd the kynge hym more
                  Yf god be ouer all & euery whore.
               
               NEuer yet god made thyng
               That is / or hath of hym felyng
               For we / such as we ar now
               Fele hym and I shall show the how
               We lyue here / war and go
               That comys alwayes hym fro
               And by the frute one kynd hym felyth
               That euery yere newly spryngyth
               The heueunes than fele hym also
               They turne in orbis as he had them do
               Sonne and mone and sterre bryght
               All they fele hym and his myght
               For all they fast abowt go
               Untyll they come where they cam fro
               The erth also hym truly felys
               For euery yere his frute he geuys
               Wynde and the fe
                     •
                   fele hym I wis
               For whan the most tempest is
               At his byddyng and at his wyll
               Withdrawe they them and hold them styll
               The deed hym felys on lyke maner wyse
               For at his wyll they shall vp ryse
               The bestes that in erth both crepe and go
               They fele hym / for they do also
               As he gaue theyr kynd to be
               And ouer them all verely is he.
            
            
               
               ¶The .iiii. questyon.
               
                  ¶Which was the fyrst thynge
                  That god made askyd the kynge
               
               Syr quod Sydrac vnto me lyst
               A fayre paleys made he fyrst
               Full of blys and full of lyght
               That the kyngdom of heuyn hyght
               After made he the world thus
               And helle depe vnderneth vs
               In to heuyn his fryndes he dyd lett
               His foes in hell were subiecte
               Man made he than as was his wyll
               The vmbre of aungels to fulfyll
               In stede of them that fall wore
               And shuld in heuyn come no more
               Aungel and man shall felowes be
               For one god honorys both he and we
               That is god of myght most
               Father / sonne and holygoost
            
            
               ¶The .v. questyon
               
                  ¶The kynge thā Sydrac be sought
                  To tell wan aungel was wroght
               
               WHan god sayd worde but one
               Than aungel was made anon
               Lucyfer hym self dyd se
               That fayrest of all was he
               In pryde sone he dyd fall
               And despysed the other of his company all
               He was so good as hym thought
               As god hym self / that hym wroght
               
                  Sume of the aungels turned hym to
               And thought that it myght be so
               Maysteres to make than he them hyght
               Aboue other aungels bryght
               Out of that palays was he cast
               An howre myght he not therin last
               For it was no ryght that he
               That agayne his lorde wold be
               Shulde eny part haue in that blysse
               And for hym they fared all amysse
               Truly all that were of his assent
               Sume of them to hell went
               And sume in to the thyckest eyre
               That of ioye is none espeyre
               They may no mercy haue
               Ne for pryde they may none craue
            
            
               ¶The vj. questyon
               
                  ¶The kynge askyd wher of serue thay
                  The aungels that in heuyn ar ay
               
               
                  THe aungels ye now heuyn ar in
               Shall neuer haue wyll to syn
               By cause they refusyd Lucyfer
               In blysse they shall be euer
               To who god hath gyuyn ywysse
               Order and offyce in his blysse
               ¶Of aungels is there one maner
               That vnto folke tellyth here
               Both in water and in lande truly
               The gret thynges of god all myghty
               ¶Another maner there is also
               That tell
                     ••
                   comyng folkes vnto
               
                  Be it loude / be it styll
               The small bodys of goddys wyll
               The thyrd potestas callyd is
               That ar put in gret offys
               Lordshype ouer deuyls they haue
               And cōmaundes thē as a man his knaue
               That they ne may ought can
               Ouer moch euyll to do to man
               ¶A nother hyght pryncypates
               Maysters ouer good spyryts be thes
               And commaundes them to fulfyll
               Goddys seruyce vnto his wyll
               ¶Than is there one that virtutes hyght
               Which tech men to go aryght
               ¶Another is there gret of myght
               Dominaciones theyr name hyght
               Which be obedyent to the other before
               And in theyr subiectyon ar thore
               ¶Another / and throni callyd is he
               There vpon is goddys se
               By them vsys god on hy
               His iugementes full gryssely
               ¶An order is there chefe of all
               Which cherubyns we do call
               Many creatures of skyll
               Ar that order subiecte tyll
               For dylygently they beholde and se
               In the myrrour of goddys claryte
               And they knowe by theyr natures
               The preuytes of creatures
               ¶And yet is there Seraphyn aboue
               They ar brennynge in goddy 
                     ••
                  out
               
                  More than all the other be
               And they ar of suche dygnyte
               That no other spyryt certaynly is
               Betwyx them and god in eternall blys
            
            
               ¶The vij. questyon
               
                  ¶The kynge askyd yf deuyls also
                  All thyng knowe and all thyng may do
               
               UEryly syr quod Sydrac we do fynde
               That deuyls ar of aungels kynde
               And by cause they of theyr nature ware
               Of full grete conynge they ar
               And they ar more goostly
               Than man that hath body
               Therfore knowe they more than man
               By nature moche secrecy tell can
               Saue thynges that ar commy
                     •
                  ge
               Of that they know lytell or nothynge
               Thynges that I haue don or thou
               That knowe they well I now
               Of euyl wyll and euyl thought
               Thereof wote the deuyls nought
               Ne none but god alone I ensuer the
               Of a manys herte the preuyte
               The deuyls may well yuel do
               But good they ne haue wyll vnto
               And yet may they not fulfyll
               To do i
                     •
                   yuel all theyr wyll
               No more haue they myght vntyll
               Than good aungels them suffre wyll
            
            
               ¶The viij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶What shape ar aungels & what thyn
                        •
                     
                  
                  They can do a sayd the kynge
               
               ON owyse haue they euyn
               The lyknese of god of heuyn
               For bodylese they ar and h
                     •
                  yght
               Full of fayre bed and of lyght
               And there is nothyng in kynde
               That they ne wote and haue in my
                     •
                  de
               No wonder that they of knowlege be
               For all thynges in god they se
               And all that they haue wyll vnto
               Without greuaunce may they do
            
            
               ¶The ix. questyon
               
                  ¶The kynge than Sydrac askyd
                  Yf god Adam with his hande formyd
               
               MAn and all that god hym lent
               Was made of his comaundment
               And who so vnderstande can
               A feble nature is in man
               And of a fowle thynge god hym dyght
               To confounde the deuyl and his myght
               For man so feble to 
                     〈◊〉
                   yt he came fro
               That is to hym gret so
                     ••
                  w
                     •
                   and wo
               Of the fouer elements as 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
               Our parent Adam made be
               For his kynde 
                     〈◊〉
                   was goddis wyll
               Shulde 
                     •
                  oue 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the world fulfyll
               For god knewe 
                     •
                  e for 
                     〈◊〉
                   the shuld syn
               And l
                     •
                  se the vertu that he was 
                     •
                  reat in
               
                  And that he shulde as aman vnwysse
               Not longe lyue in paradyse
               All other thynges dyd he make
               To mannys behoue and for his sake
               And many wormes he made also
               As mees / freys and other mo
               Man to sorowe and byte s
                     •
                  ime tyde
               Be cause he shulde not fall in pryde
               And that he shulde remembre by this
               Howe feble a thynge that he is
               Whan so feble a thynge and so vyle
               Shall hym gretly wex and trobyll
               Of myre and rayne se men may
               How they ar trauelyd all day
               So besy shulde we of ryght
               God to serue with all our myght
               For vnto our delyte made he
               A
                     •
                  l thynges that we se
               And we and they were made also
               Unto god worshype to do
            
            
               ¶The .x questyon.
               
                  ¶The kynge askyd hym than
                  In what stede made god Adam
               
               IN Ebro
                     •
                   ar god 
                     •
                  olde it haue
               Where 
                     〈…〉
                   was put in graue
               But fyrst he was 
                     •
                  et in paradyse
               A fayer stede tha
                     •
                   in the est lyese
               There is ioy and gr
                     •
                  t de
                     •
                  yre
               And trees a many 
                     〈◊〉
                   of fruyte
               And euery frute 
                     〈◊〉
                   of myght
               As god hastyth 
                     〈◊〉
                   with vertu dyght
               
                  One frute there is that yf aman
               Had ones ete of it / neue
                     •
                   after than
               He shulde hounger eny more
               And another also groweth thore
               That is callyd the frute of lyf
               Both good for man and wyf
               For who so etys of that tree
               Shall neuer syke nor olde he
               Whan Adam was thether brought
               There was Eue than of hym wroght
               So were they made as we fynde
               Of one flesh and of o kynde
               Be cause they shuld be wher they went
               As of one fleshe / so of one assent
               God made them that they shulde not syn
               The more mercy after to wynne
               And whan that god had Adam makyd
               He and Eue were both nakyd
               But therof shamyd they noght
               Untyll they had synne wroght
               Whan they of the appull had byten abyte
               Eyther shamyd of other was tyte
               For they sawe them than vnclad
               Of clothyng a grace that they had
               And in paradyse they wore
               Seuen howers and no more
               The thyrde hower after his m
                     •
                  kyng
               Gaue Adam name to all thyng
               The syxth hower ete his wyfe
               The appull that made all the stryfe
               The seuenth hower Adam dyd of yt ete
               And was chasyd and streyth out hete
               
                  The aungel cam thyther anon ryght
               With a sworde of fyre very bryght
               And with the fyre be set he there
               The walles of paradyse that there were
               So that no man there in shuld wone
               Untyl the commynge of goddys sonne
               After his deth he shall vndo
               The fyre that it doth compase so
               And Adam and his frendes all
               Into heuyn conducte shall
            
            
               ¶The xj. questyon
               
                  ¶Thā as
                        •
                     yd he whyther went Adam
                  Out of paradyse whan he came
               
               AFter that / he went anon
               There he was made in Ebron
               A hundreth yere there lede his lyf
               And had chyldren by his wyf
               But at lenght Cayn that was fell
               Dyd kyll his brother Abel
               Adam therfore came his wyf not nere
               By the space of a hundreth yere
               Makyng grete sorow that Abel was slayne
               Than bade hym the aungel go agayne
               And know his wyf as he shulde do
               Sayeng that the wyll of god was so
               For cursed of god was Cayn
               And a
                     •
                  l the sede that cam of hym
               And of that cursed sede forlorne
               Goddys sonne wolde not be borne
               That fu
                     •
                  fyl
                     •
                  ed Adam and 
                     •
                  eth begot he
               Of whos sede goddys some borne shal
                     •
                   be
               
                  And wete thou syr that from Adam
               Unto the tyme that Noe came
               Neuer fell on erthe no rayne
               Ne none raynebowe was ne fayne
               Flesshe that tyme no man dyd ete
               No wynde than was / god none be lete
               The wether was all tymes there
               Fayer as somers day and clere
               And plenty was of all thynge
               Tyll mannys syn it made lettynge
            
            
               ¶The .xij. questyon
               
                  ¶Dyd Adam eny other syn than it
                  He broke goddys bode & ye appul byt
               
               NAy / he dyd none other synne
               But a greater myght he not begyn
               For he couetyd god to be
               And for that the appul ete he
               And shuld no creature of wyte
               His creatorys bode ouersyt
               Yf you before god now were
               And some aungel sayde to the there
               That thou behynde shuldest se
               Or the worlde shuld destroyed be
               And god the bade loke on hym fast
               And no where els thy eyen cast
               Goddys bode thou shuldyst fulfyll
               And let all the worlde spyll
               For that Adam couthe no good
               Before god somtyme he stode
               And behynde he lokyd as vnwyse
               Wherfore he lost paradyse
               
                  And in that one synne that he dyd
               Seuyn synnes were there hyd
               ¶Fyrst pryde / for that he
               Desyred goddys lyke to be
               ¶Inobedyence another also
               For he brake that god bade hym do
               ¶Couetyse the thyrd dyd hym greue
               For he couetyd more than god wold gyue
               ¶ Sacrylege was the fouerth synne
               That Adam was wrappyd in
               For he toke vpon hym thore
               That god had forbyden hym before
               ¶ The fyfte may be called by reason
               Goostly fornicacyon
               For his very spouse he forsoke
               And to the deuelys counsell hym toke
               Wherby his ryght sponsale he brake
               And in aduoutre he stake
               ¶ The syxth to manslawter he drewe
               For he by that hym self slewe
               ¶ Glotony the seuenth was
               Whan he put hym in that caas
               To ete the appul that his wyf bad
               And that god hym forbodden had
               Wherfore in that etynge vnwysly
               Was syn inoughe as me thynkyth truly
            
            
               ¶The .xiij. questyon
               
                  ¶What was ye Adam frō god dyd take
                  And how shall he amendys make
               
               FRom god Adam moch toke
               That tyme that he hym forsoke
               
                  All that he shuld there haue wrought
               That Adam shuld forthe haue brought
               That is that they shulde haue ouercomen
               The deuyll / and his myght haue nomen
               As the deuyll dyd Adam
               Bothe hym / and all that of hym came
               Bycause his syn was moche more
               Than was all the worlde / therfore
               It behouyd hym more agayne to yelde
               And this had he nought to welde
               Or fynde a man that shuld more be
               Than all the world / whiche was not he
               And therfore dyd he ete his brede
               In laboure and swete tyll he was dede
            
            
               ¶The .xiiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Forlorne for aye why was he nought
                  Whan he so great a syn had wrought
               
               
                  FOr it behoueth nedely to stande
               That god hathe ordeynyd before hād
               God ordeyned at ye begīyng
               That of Adam and his osprynge
               Shuld ye orders of goddis chosen
               Be fulfyllyd / and out losyn
               And after whan Adam forthought
               Was angryd that he had so wrought
               Mercy anone myght he none take
               For he myght not amendis make
               And yf god had forgeuen hym this
               And haue put hym agayne into blysse
               That aungell was cast fro before
               For a thought and for no more
               
                  Than had god bene vnryghtwyse
               Therfore in synne and wreke he lyse
               Yf a man founde anone
               In a sloughe a ryche stone
               That were fowle and nothynge clene
               He shuld wasshe it as I wene
               And in treasure it not laye
               Untyll the fylthe were awaye
               But goddes sone that more shalbe
               Than all the worlde / shall dye on tre
               Amendys for Adam to make
               And hym fro his penaunce take
               So shall he come out of helle
               And amonge goddes chosen dwelle
            
            
               ¶The .xv. questyon.
               
                  ¶Why wold not god an anngel send
                  Or a man Adam to amende
               
               ANd aūgel had bought mā & made hī fre
               His vnderlyne thā shuld he be
               Man in erthe was maked here
               For to bere aungell fere
               And yf aungell the kynde nam
               Of man / and a man becam
               Then were aungell of lesse posterite
               Than god hym made fyrst to be
               And man agayne myght man not wynne
               For all were they lockyd in one synne
               For this shall goddes sone of myght
               In a clene mayden lyght
               Our kynde shall he in her take
               And of two kyndys a man make
               
                  God and man bothe shall he be
               And of his manhed shal he
               Begyle the deuyll / for euermore
               As that he dyd man before
               And of mankynde shall he not twynne
               Saue that he shall neuer do synne
            
            
               ¶The .xvj. questyon.
               
                  ¶Why shall god be borne y• me tell
                  Of a maydē / and she amayden dwell
               
               Syr on thre maners we fynde
               That god in erth made mānes kynd
               Fyrst made he man and gaue hym lyfe
               That nother came of man nor wyfe
               Man of man onely than he name
               As Eue that he made of Adam
               The thyrde maner than shalbe
               Whan god of his powre I ensure the
               Shall lyght in erthe in a woman
               Without knowlegynge of any man
               And sethe the world fyrst began
               Euermore god lokyd vnto man
               That he shulde best do his wyll
               And his commaundementis fulfyll
               And of his kynde shall chosen be
               A clene mayden and a free
               That shalbe withouten synne
               And all vertues her within
               Her father shall her sonne be
               And of his dought his mother make shal he
               She inuyolate / shall be in her lyght
               And dwell in her .ix. monthes ryght
               
                  For the .ix orders shall he fulfyll
               Of aungels than in heuen are styll
               With mannes kynd that shall be borne
               And forthe haue comen here beforne
               He shall also throughe his myght
               Be borne of that mayden bryght
               And she after chylde berynge
               Shalbe wemmyd of nothynge
               For as the sonne his lyght casteth
               Throughe the glas that hole lasteth
               And cometh out as he fyrst was
               Without wemme of the glas
               So shall god in that mayden lende
               And out of her body wende
               And she styll left a mayden ryght
               As the glas fro the sonne lyght
            
            
               ¶The .xvij. questyon.
               
                  Why is dethe callyd dethe tel me
                  And how many dethes that therbe
               
               For bytternes is called dethe in dede
               And for Adam through euyl rede
               A bytter byte of the appul he bote
               That droue hym into laboure and swote
               And thre maner of dethes theris / 
               One that not rype is
               As of chylderne that are yonge
               They fele no paynes stronge
               Another dethe there is also
               That bytter is to come vnto
               As a yonge man whan hym lyketh best
               And the deth be on hym fest
               
                  Bytternes he feleth and wo
               Or the goost departe hym fro
               Goostly deth the thyrd it is
               There the foule is euer dede fro blys
               And all thre to man they came
               For the synne that dyd Adam
               And yf that synne ne had bene wrought
               Man ne shuld haue dyed nought
            
            
               ¶The .xviij. question.
               
                  ¶Sendeth god ought to man to saye
                  Of what deth that he shall dye
               
               NAye: he sendeth to no man
               But he that so moche can
               That he haueth no menyng of the dede
               And worketh after the best rede
               Sodayne deth shall he not dye
               For he shal go the redy waye
               And the good that byleueth aryght
               In god of heuen and his myght
               And worke as they ought to do
               To what deth that they go to
               Whether they be slayne wt sword or knyf
                     •
                  
               
               Or with wylde bestes lese theyr lyfe
               Or in water drowned be
               Or hangyd hye vpon a tre
               Or of some fowle aduenture
               Maye then the lyfe no lenger endure
               Wycked deth are none of these
               In the syght of god and hese
               For theyr good dedys more and lesse
               And goddes owne ryghtwysenesse
               
                  May not he forgottyn in thought
               For they cursyd fyltynes of syn nought
               And yf they had oft don amys
               Through febylnes that in them is
               Truly yt shall be forgyuen all
               By the sharpe paynes that they suffer shall
               But he that in god trowes nought
               Ne his cōmaundmentis hath not wroght
               What may it hym a vayle
               That he haueth gret trauayle
               And prouys longe or he dye
               And though men hym fortunat say
               What deth so euer he dyes I wys
               Wycked deth and short it is
            
            
               ¶The .xix. questyon.
               
                  ¶Whā sowle fro the body shal shede
                  How wendys the soule to other stede
               
               THe soule wendes fro the body
               Whan he dyeth full preuely
               But whan it is out gone
               Agayne to the body there cometh none
               A sorte of deuyls it take
               And moche ioye and dene therwith make
               And vnto helle they it bere
               With many paynes it to dere
               But after the tyme of goddes sone
               That he is comen in erthe to wone
               Of ledynge / shall be manners thre
               Soules to lede there they shall be
               ¶One is yf a man had here leuyd
               Trustynge as god hathe hym instructed
               
                  And his cōmaundmentes all hath wroght
               And from the ryght fayth erred nought
               Whan his lyfe in this world endys
               And his sowle from the body wendys
               Of aungels a great company
               Gaderys them with melody
               Untyl hym that his keper was
               Reioysyng greatly at that caas
               Takyng that sowle with play and songe
               And thankyng god euer amonge
               Untyl heuyn therwith they wende
               There to dwel without ende
               ¶Another maner of ledyng is
               Yf aman haue done amys
               And wyll not his lawe fulfyll
               But hath all his lyfe done yll
               And ageyne that he dye shall
               He repentys hym of all
               And vnto god for mercy cryes
               Whan that sowle from the body flyes
               A good aungell it taketh in hast
               And delyuer it to a wycked gost at last
               And he shall it forth lede
               Payne to suffer for his mysdede
               But whan he hathe bete it all
               And sufferyd that he suffer shall
               Then the good aungell hym taketh away
               And ledethe hym to ioye for aye
               ¶The thyrd maner yf man or wyfe
               In synne haue euer lad theyr lyfe
               And goddes byddyng wold not fulfyll
               But dyd all theyr hartes wyll
               
                  Deuyls kepe that sowle anon
               Whan it is out of the body gon
               And bere it to the payne of helle
               Without ende therin to dwelle
            
            
               ¶The .xx. questyon
               
                  ¶Now wolde I wyte whether wore
                  Sowle or body made before
               
               Fyrst the body is made fulfayre
               Of fyre / water / erth and ayre
               And the fower complexyons that are
               In man / of thes fower they are
               Whan the body is made also
               Goddys grace comyth therto
               And blowyth in hym the goost of lyfe
               And after of hym made a wyfe
               Lorde and Syr he made hym be
               Of all that he in erth myght se
               But whan he the appul chose
               Clothyng of grace than dyd he lose
               Which hym greuyd very sore
               As ye haue herde here before
            
            
               ¶The .xxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Which spekyth knowe wolde I
                  The sowle of man or body
               
               NO myght hath the body
               Of hym selfe syk erly
               To speke / to goo / ne ought els to do
               But that the sowle hym geuyth to
               Men se ofre it chaunsys
               That aman on ahorse ryd yse
               
                  And hym gydeth to and fro
               The way that he wyll go
               And the horse so compellede
               Goyth as the man wyll hym lede
               On lyke maner hath the body no myght
               Of spekyng / of goyng / ne of syght
               Nor of nought that he do shall
               But of the sowle it comyth all
               The body is of erth wrought
               And shall rote away to nought
               Therfore is he of feble ar nature
               Than the sowle that euer shall endure
               And the body ne is nothynge
               Unto the sowle but an hythynge
               Thou seyste well whan the sowle is gon
               A sowle caryn is the body on
               That speke ne store ought may
               Whan the sowle is gon away
               And by cause all thyng of the sowle is
               Therfore goyth she fyrst to ioy or blys
               And than felyth the sowle euerydele
               That the body doyth yll or well
            
            
               ¶The .xxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶The sowle that a goost is on
                  And hath nother flesshe ne bone
                  ¶Ne noght takys ne gyuys hym fro
                  How may it fele other wel or wo
               
               A Goost is the sowle the soth to sey
               And neuer more may it dey
               Ete ne drynke wyll it nought
               And it is as swyfte as thought
               
                  Felt ne sene may it not be
               Nor no stede may it occupe
               But whan the lyfe cometh to ende
               And the sowle shall fro the body wende
               Yf he helde goddes commaundement
               A clothe of grace to hym shalbe sent
               Haue he be wycked ouer all
               A clothe of sorowe come to hym shall
               Throughe whiche clothynge fele shal he
               Ioye or payne whether it be
            
            
               ¶The .xxiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Who is more lord of the twey
                  Sowle or body thou me say.
               
               THe body the more lorde is
               That ledeth the sowle oft amys
               But the more parell shuld abyde
               The sowle / yf that euyl betyde
               As yf there were now yong men tway
               Goynge in a parellous way
               And that one be bolde and hardy
               That other a coward that goeth hym by
               The coward thynketh as he goes
               Yf agayne vs come any fooes
               This hardy man shall me out bere
               So that me they shall not dere
               Thus goyth the cowarde hardely
               The hardy thynkyth what do shall I
               This is a coward that goyth by me
               Yf other than good come he wyll fle
               And I shall mys hym whan I haue nede
               Thus goyth the hardy man in drede
               
                  All thus farys it wyturly
               Betwyx the sowle and the body
               The body says I wyll haue quyte
               All my wyll and my delyte
               Whan I am ded erth shall I be
               What than shall I recke what is of me
               ¶The sowle says a felowe I lede
               That me beryth feble felowrede
               For if there come eny aduersyte
               I shall it fele and not be
               Thus is the sowl in peryll ay
               For that the body holdyth play
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Where hath ye sowle I the rede
                  In mannys body his wonnyng stede
               
               IN the body euerywhere
               Wonyth ye sowle if blode be there
               Blode is wessel for the sowle truly
               And of the blode is the body
               And where as blode raynyth nothyng
               There hath the sowle no dwellyng
               As in teth and heer also
               In nayles and in hyde therto
               Yf you say lyfe is in tho
               For they may fele who doth them wo
               Therto lyeth answere good
               For theyr rotys touchyth blode
               Pare them and clyp them who thou wylt
               And come theyr rotys not vntyl
               Shall they fele it neuer a dele
               Whether thou doyst them wo or wele
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Why doth the sowle no lengar rest
                  In the body / than ye blode doth lest
               
               
                  Lyke it faryth I the ensuer
               As fysshe in apond of water puer
               Yf aman a goter make
               The water of that ponde to slake
               The water rēnith small & small
               Untyl it be ronne out all
               Than lye the fysshe of that ponde
               Betynge them selfe ageyne the drye londe
               And whan the water is all awey
               Than most they nedys dey
               Of the sowle it fareth so
               Whan the blode it rennyth fro
               As the blode out yssueth treuly
               So doth the sowle there wex feble quyely
               And whan the blode is out euery dele
               The sowle no lenger lyketh wele
               In that body for to dwell
               But departeth al so suell
               For his nature hathe he lost tho
               As fysshe whan the water is therfro
            
            
               ¶The .xxvj. questyon.
               
                  ¶I praye the nowe that thou me saye
                  How it is that 
                        •
                     he folk
                        •
                      so deye
               
               AMan dyeth on many wayes
               Summe whan that his dayes
               That god hym set fulfylled are
               Than it behoueth hym nedely to fare
               
                  Somme of outrage that they do
               As of mete and drynke also
               And destroyeth theyr nature
               So that they maye not endure
               Understande that no man maye
               Ouer goddes terme leue one daye
               But with outrage maye he let
               The terme that god hym haue set
               Some dyeth in batayle and in fyght
               With staffe or swerde as falleth lyght
               And on many otherwyse also
               Mo than I can tell the vnto
            
            
               ¶The .xxvij. questyon.
               
                  ¶How may man wete that it so is
                  That god made man to his lykenes
               
               WE fynde of antiquite
               In bokes yt somtyme had Noye
               That whan god of heuen kyng
               Had made beest and all thyng
               Thā sayde one of ye parsons thre
               That are in the Trinite
               Nowe althynge are made more and les
               Make we man to our lykenes
               And bycause he sayd make we
               Is to vnderstand that there ar thre
               And that he sayd is no lesynge
               Than are we lyke hym in makynge
            
            
               ¶The .xxviij. questyon
               
                  Sethen we of goddes lykenes be
                  Why maye we not do as dyd he?
               
               
                  
                  TO goddis lykenes are we dyght
               And therfore hathe be geuen vs might
               Aboue al other creature
               That he made here for to dure
               And for that likenes so know we
               All thynges that in erthe be
               We can labour / worke and wynne
               And we knowe almes fro synne
               All creatures maye we take
               And our seruauntis of them make
               And al other thynges that ar nought
               Unto goddis lykenes wrought
               Haue no conynge ne myght therto
               To do thyngis that we do
               Ne commaunde vs they ne maye
               As we do them euery daye
               But thoughe we be of his lykenes
               We maye not neuertheles
               Be al so stronge and wyse as he
               For hys handworke all ar we
               He is maker of all thynge
               And we are of his makynge
               He is lord and we subiecte as a slaue
               And for the lykenes that we haue
               Yf that we do not yll
               Aungels nombre we shall fulfyll
               For other lykenes than his
               Were not worthy to that blys
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. question.
               
                  ¶Where becometh the blode all
                  Of man / whan he dye shall.
               
               
                  GOd made blode of water ryght
               And the body of erthe he dyght
               And as water in erthe synketh
               And the erthe the water drynketh
               For to mayntayne all thynge
               That waxeth and in erth sprynge
               Also mayntayneth trewly
               The blode / that is in the body
               And whan the sowle departe shall
               The blode he bereth with hym all
               And whan the harte is fro hym sent
               The blode is into the water went
               And the body that is drye
               And rype / may not longe lye
               That it ne drynketh the blode also
               As the erthe wyll the water do
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. questyon.
               
                  ¶Whan the fyre quenchyd is
                  Whether becometh it tell me this?
               
               OF the sonne the fyre is ryght
               Therof haueth he hete and lyght
               And he be quenchyd he shall go
               To the sonne there he came fro
               Thou seest the sonne that lyght maketh
               And hete also there it on taketh
               On nyght whan he fro vs is went
               All the hete that he to vs lent
               And thē lyght of hym also
               All dothe he take it hym vnto
               And ledeth with hym that he brought
               Fro hym departe ne maye it nought
               
                  Also whan fyre is slaked here
               He withdraweth hym on the same manere
               Unto the nature for to go
               Of the sonne there he came fro
            
            
               ¶The .xxxj. question.
               
                  ¶Why dyeth not the body thore
                  Whan he leseth halfe his blode & more
               
               THoughe the blode be halfe aweye
               The body may not yet deye
               For the hete of the soule I wys
               That the blode by mayntayned is
               Departeth not so lyghtly
               And I shall tel the for why
               The lytell blode that there is lefte
               Maketh that the sowle fro hym is not refte
               For it maynteyneth the sowle styffely
               And the sowle the blode and the body
               The weke that in a candel is
               Whan it begynneth for to mys
               The fyre slaketh and is a waye
               Euynso it is here to saye
               Of the blode the weke I make
               And by the fyre the sowle I take
               Whan the blode awaye is all
               The sowle no lenger dwell shall
               But the blode comforteth hym so
               Except some other euyll it forthe do
               Dyeth he not so lyghtly
               But holdeth hym on lyue contynually
            
            
               ¶The .xxxij. questyon.
               
                  
                  ¶Of what complexyon may it be
                  The body / and of what nature is he
               
               OF the nature of erth it is tolde
               And his complexyon is colde
               And than is he makyd yare
               Of the fowre elamentis that are
               Of the erthe is the flesshe
               And the blode of water nesshe
               Of ayre the sowle maked was
               And of fyre the hete he has
               Se thyn flesshe is of erthes kynde
               And blode of water as we fynde
               Bothe are they colde of kynde to fonde
               But sowle that is of goddis onde
               That ought to be clene and fayre
               And is hote of kynde of ayre
               That sowle abydeth in the blode
               And heteth it and doth it good
               And the blode heteth trewly
               All the lymmes of the body
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Were sowles made at the fyrst for aye
                  Or are they made yet euery daye
               
               
                  ALl thyng that god thought
               to make al were at ons wroght
               That is to say at ye begynnyng
               That he befor sawe all thynge
               And one cōmaundmēt made he
               All that was and that shalbe
               But I saye not that they were
               
                  In the lykenes that they now are
               All thynges in hym ware enclosyd verely
               Untyll they come to theyr beyng apertly
               Than he shapyd theyr fygure
               Euerychon after theyr nature
               But he cōmaunded all to be
               At ones / as we do se
               So at ones made he all thynge
               At his worde and his byddynge
            
            
               ¶The xxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶May they haue eny excusynge
                  That of god know nothyng?
               
               SUch as god knowe not here
               Nor hym to lerne wyll not endeuere
               At the daye of dome shall he
               Know them for none of his meyne
               And tho that byleue and wyll not do
               The werkes that belongeth them vnto
               That sympely them vnderstonde
               As symple men that are in londe
               Yf they dampned be therfore
               Turmentyd shuld they not be sore
               And they that haue good vnderstondyng
               Of god / and do not his byddyng
               Fro payne they may them not defende
               But yf that they do here amende
            
            
               ¶The .xxxv. questyon.
               
                  ¶Shall aman ought els do
                  But that god commaūdeth hym to?
               
               
                  
                  GOd hathe kyndly made man
               To serue hym in all that he can
               And his commaundmēt to do
               And the deuyl to hate also
               And as we lordshyp wyl craue
               Of all thynges / and theyr seruyce haue
               Euyn so wyll god on all wyse
               Aske and haue of vs seruyse
               And that we byleue on hym stedfastly
               And worshyp hym with our body
               And loue hym aboue all thynge
               For we are all of his makynge
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvj. questyon.
               
                  ¶How many worldes are of all
                  And how do men them call?
               
               THere are gostly worldes two
               And two bodely worldes also
               That one goostly heuen is
               There aungels are and all the blys
               And there the good generacyon
               Of Adam / shall hereafter wone
               That other goostly than is hell
               There the deuyls in paynes dwell
               ¶The two bodely is in our syght
               As sunne / and mone / daye / and nyght
               And other thynges that we se
               That vs geueth claryte
               The tother trewly we can nat want
               The chefe thynge that we do enhaunte
               As the erthe that all thynge taketh
               And our wombe that nought forsaketh
               
                  And fro the bodely that are
               Unto the goostly for to fare
               Whether it be lowe or hye
               Ne is it but a twynkelyng of an eye
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Is god of great yeldyng to tho
                  That ryght in his seruyce here go
               
               IN al the worlde ne is no man
               That maye thynke ne tell can
               The good / the honour in many wyse
               That god gyueth man for his seruyse
               That in hym ttusteth and in his myght
               And his cōmaundment doth aryght
               And short cōmaundment ordenyd hath he
               Do good and lete euyl be
               His sonne shall he send here doune
               To dye for mannys saluacyon
               And tho that his seruyse haue in mynde
               In his blys they shall it fynde
               For he shall them worshype more
               Than eny aungel that is thore
            
            
               ¶The .xxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶The people that in yt tyme shalbe
                  Of goddys sonne whan come is he
                  ¶And after shall they comenly
                  Beleue in hym stedfastly
               
               ALl shall they in hym theyr trewth ley
               His own folke that is to sey
               But all shall they gatherede be
               Of dyuers spech and sondre countre
               
                  But they shall not euerychon
               Haue cōmaundment after one
               Th
                     •
                   cōmaundment as men shall se
               Of goddys sonne shall truly one be
               After hym his mynisters twelue
               Shall cōmaund that selue
               But they that come after tho
               That in stede of mynisters shall go
               They shall well beholde and fynde
               The feblenes of mannes kynde
               And lyghter commaundment for that skyl
               Shall they make the folke vntyl
               And eche nacyon shall wene that he
               Be better than any other be
               But of them shalbe at the fyne
               As it dothe by a great gardyne
               Where in many trees standeth
               And eche of them frewte bereth
               The tre that best frewte berys
               Be they appulles or be they peres
               The plentuousest of berynge
               And of best sauour in etynge
               That tre shall the gardynere
               Most loue and serue in tyme of yere
               A
                     •
                  so they that shall best byleue
               In goddes sone and theyr harte hym geue
               And best shall here in erthe do
               Whan tyme cometh there vnto
               They shall most worshypped be
               In heuen before the Trinite
               A myrrour that they shall beholde and se
               Full of ioy / that of no tong may expressed be
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxxix. question.
               
                  ¶What cōmaundment by thy leue
                  Shall goddes sone his folke geue?
               
               IT shalbe loue and abstynence
               And charyte and pacyence
               And that no man other do
               Than he wolde were done hym to
               God hymselfe for mannes loue
               Shall sende his sone from aboue
               And shall fele here abstynence
               And sufferaunce and pacyence
               And bytter deth at the last
               His folke out of payne to cast
               And who so beholde these fowre thynges
               All goodnes out of them sprynges
               For he that good loue hathe in god
               Loue in hymselfe is not all odde
               And he that hathe abstynence
               And charyte and pacyence
               And haueth the loue of god with all
               No doute he shall haue the lyfe eternall
            
            
               ¶The .xl. questyon.
               
                  ¶The blesfulest thynge after thy wyt
                  And dygniest / and fayrest whiche is it?
               
               A Sowle that is good of man
               Of all thynges that I tell can
               Is the fayrest thynge that maye be
               For bryghter than the sonne is he
               And a worthyer thynge is there nought
               Of all that god in erthe hath wrought
               For of goddes owne onde it came
               
                  Whan god blewe on Adam
               Therfore are aungels set therto
               To kepe it in all that they maye do
               ¶Also the blysfullest it is
               For it is ordayned to that blys
               There neuer ende shalbe
               Of ioye and blysse and game and gle
               And god gaue cōmaundement to al thynge
               For to serue man his blyssynge
               Than is mannes sowle blysfulest tho
               And worthyest and fayrest also
            
            
               ¶The .xlj, questyon.
               
                  ¶The fowlest & ye ꝑelousest thynge to se
                  And most wyckedest which may that be
               
               
                  Wycked sowle of man I wysse
               Is the fowlest thyng that is
               So harde harted man is none
               And he a wycked sowle sawe one
               In the ryght lykenes of it
               That he ne shulde lese his wyt
               Also it is perelouse
               For it gothe to a velayne howse
               There parell is and moche wo
               Where it neuer shall come fro
               The most cursyd is it aye
               For goddes sone on domes daye
               Before all his aungels thore
               Shal curse it for euermore
               And of the payne that it shall to
               Aungels and Archangels also
               Shall haue bothe ioye and blysse
               
                  For that it had done amys
            
            
               ¶The .xlij. questyon
               
                  ¶The good sowles shal they ought
                  For ye wyckyd sorow or take thought
               
               
                  GOod men whan the wyckyd spyl
               Shalbe al of goddys wyl
               And whā they ye dome haue sene
               Of them yt agayn god hath bene
               They shalbe demt frō goddis face
               Which shulbe al theyr solace
               For the dome shalbe ryghtwyse
               That god shal gyue his enemyes
               And whan they are in al theyr paynes
               A monge the other hell hownes
               The good sowles shal glade be
               Them in theyr paynes on to se
               As we haue game to beholde
               Fysshe swyme in the water colde
            
            
               ¶The .xliij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is better so god ye saue
                  Helth or syknes for to haue
               
               HElth of sowle is good to wynne
               To kepe it out of dedly synne
               For whan it is hole and fayre
               Of heuyn blys it shalbe heyre
               And his dwellyng with god shalbe
               For his laboure and dylygence
               If thou haddyst now a knyght
               That ware strong and stowt in fyght
               And ware hold bolde and hardy
               
                  Hym thou woldyst holde the by
               And thou shuldyst in to fyght
               And ware he syke and of no myght
               No where woldyst thou with hym yede
               Wher thou shuldyst stonde in drede
               Lyke maner it is of sowles hele
               God wyl not with that sowle dele
               That feble is by the syknes of synne
               But he wyl therof blynne
               Ageyne the helth of the body
               To agood man saye I sykerly
               Is better hole than syke to be
               For in goodnes his helth vsyth he
               And they that lyue in synne and wo
               Sycknes is best for them tho
               Which for the payne of theyr sycknesse
               Shal they synne yet the lesse
               And withdrawe them therfro
               That in helth shuld not so do
            
            
               ¶The .xliiij. questyon
               
                  ¶What poure is it yt wold I lere
                  That god hath gyuen to sowle here
               
               GOd hath geuen sowle vnto
               Akyngdome for to rule also
               That yf he kepe it aryght
               His kynges sete shalbe dyght
               Before god in heuen blys
               And god shal saye to hym this
               Come my dere sone to me
               The kyngdome that I behyght the
               Thou hast it so kepte in all thynge
               
                  That thou art worthy to be a kyng
               Therfore shalte thou crowned be
               Before my fathers maieste
               The sowle for the kyng take I
               And for the kyngdome the body
               And the commaundment of eche good kyng
               In his land shuld be done aboue all thynge
               Therfore what so the sowle wyll
               The body shuld it do with skyll
               And but the body do also
               As the sowle counsaylethe hym to
               Bothe together they shuld be cast
               In fyre of hell at the last
            
            
               ¶The .xlv questyon.
               
                  ¶When goddes sone to ye erth is sent
                  And agayne to heuen is went
                  Shall he any gouernour leue here
                  In this world the folke to lere?
               
               AFter that goddes sone vp shall stye
               Into his fathers companye
               His .xii. mynysters leue he shall
               That in erth hym companyd with all
               A holy hous amonge them all
               Shall they make / that they shal call
               Goddes house and so shall it be
               For therin may men god se
               After them shall other come also
               That theyr commaundment shall do
               A whyle / tyl it last maye
               And they shall fro daye to daye
               Wax ryche and of great myght
               
                  And for theyr ryches anone ryght
               The lawe that goddes sone them lefte
               And his .xii. mynysters efte
               Febely than shall they it holde
               But for ryches shall all be solde
               And god shall then dystroye them tho
               For theyr synne and for theyr wo
               And than shall come great maystery
               Of the arte of astronomy
               And wyse men holde shall they be
               But coueytys shall shende all theyr gle
            
            
               ¶The xlvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Goddys hows that thou hast tolde
                  Who shal it kepe and haue in holde
               
               FOrsoth goddys sonne hym selue
               Shall amonge his dysciples twelue
               Commaunde one to kepe it ryght
               And stone of stonys shall he hyght
               He shall it kepe that it shall not spyll
               After mā shal succede mā according his wyl
               But after the tyme that goddys sonne
               Is come in erth for to wone
               A thowsand yere after than shal begynne
               In the worlde to sprynge synne
               Agaynst god and his lore
               And shalbe wors than before
               After that men shall se
               Two great douues shal borne be
               That goddys lawe forther shall
               And myschefe destroye all
               That one douue shalbe callyd mendar
               
                  And that other amonester
               In the world they shalbe bolde
               And pore men they shalbe tolde
               The good shall loue them inwardly
               The wycked shal drede them wonderly
               And worshyp them with drede and sawe
               For they shal haue of them great awe
               Champyons they shalbe stronge
               The faythe to holde and to fordo wronge
               Good kepars shall they be
               Of goddes house and his meyne
            
            
               ¶The .xlvij. questyon
               
                  ¶He yt no good doth but holdeth hī styll
                  Whether dothe he good or yll
               
               HE that no good dothe nor yl dedys
               The lyfe of beast ryght he ledys
               And that doth yl for he do 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               And he that of good wy
                     •
                   a
                     •
                  ynne
               And doth not there he maye it do
               He dothe yll and synne also
               ¶As yf a man were honger sted
               And gladly wold of mete be fed
               And he by an orchyarde were goynge
               There he moche freute sawe hangynge
               And dyeth for faute of mete
               And of the freute wyl not ete
               He doth euyll and amys
               For his owne defawte it is
            
            
               ¶The .xlviij. questyon.
               
                  
                  ¶Lordshyp whether shall it be
                  Stoute and sterne or of petye?
               
               
                  LOrdshyp is goddes wyll
               Lawe and iustyce to fulfyll
               And yf myght Iustyce fynde
               Men shuld be of fysshes kynde
               The stronge shuld the feble ete
               And great the small that they myght gete
               And lordshyp ought stowte to be
               And stalworthe and of potence
               With ryght and skyll the wycked to deme
               And peas amonge the folke to set clene
               Alytel goddes sone beforne
               A kyng shall in erthe be borne
               He shalbe profyte or he dye
               And in his prophesye he shall saye
               Blesyd be they god vnto
               That deme / and ryghtwysenes shal do
               Yf a wycked man be raynt
               And of his wyckednes be ataynt
               The lorde maye deme hym of his ryght
               And forgeue it of his myght
               But yf he afterward do amys
               Of the dome worthy he is
            
            
               ¶The .xlix. questyon.
               
                  ¶Shal any man good do
                  His kynde and his frendes vnto?
               
               YF thy kynde good men be
               And they haue defawte of the
               And haue lost by myschaunce
               
                  The good that shuld them auaunce
               Thou shalt them helpe and good them do
               And geue them good counsayle also
               Yf they be of wycked lyfe
               Be it man or be it wyfe
               And they be in wretchydnesse
               Throughe theyr owne wyckednesse
               As some that are of euyl mode
               He dothe yll that dothe them good
               That men putteth in all is lorne
               In a purs that is al to torne
               What helpeth it wax for to take
               And a serge therof make
               And before aman it lyght
               That is blynde and hathe no syght
               To suche aman helpeth it nought
               That lyght before hym be brought
               Also it is lost for to shewe
               Any goodnes to a shrewe
            
            
               ¶The .l. questyon.
               
                  Now I praye the tell me
                  Gentylhed what maye that be
               
               GEntylry that is powre
               And ryches that aman hath here
               Of lande and rent and of fee
               And cometh of antiquite
               And that in coste hath to mayntayne
               For most ientyll is he counted certayne
               But some are ryche men of good
               And are churles kynd of blode
               A ryche man men call hym one
               
                  But gentylman is he flone
               And he that ryche is wonderly
               A noble man of his body
               Curteys / wyse and holden fre
               A great gentylman is he
               And though he be a poure man
               And amonge men bere hym can
               As of norture in boure and halle
               A gentylman men shal hym calle
               But of poure men we al came
               As of Eue and adam
            
            
               ¶The .lj. questyon
               
                  ¶How may it be colde euery yere
                  Whan the wether is fayre and clere
               
               THe wether whan that it is fayre
               The hete comyth downe from ye ayre
               And in to the erth he dryueth thore
               The hete that hetyd the erth before
               And so is hete al awaye
               On wynters dayes that is to say
               And whan the wether is trobelus and thike
               The hete may not downe lyght
               From the sonne by his myght
               So may it here be warme tolde
               And sumtyme in fayre wether colde
            
            
               ¶The .lij. questyon
               
                  ¶May aman by eny trowe
                  The goodmen frō the wyckyd knowe
               
               GOod men them selfe declare ryght
               For of vysage they are bryght
               
                  And theyr eyen also are bryght
               And louely they are of syght
               For the good lyfe they are in
               And they are trewly out of syn
               And bycause they lyue so chastly
               Swete wordes haue they comenly
               The wycked of euyl wyll they be
               And lowrynge are they on to se
               Of stablenes haue they nothynge
               Out of mesure is theyr spekynge
               Smarte goynge they haue also
               And they are seldome in ro
               And the wyckednes of theyr harte
               In worde and warke they shewe all smarte
            
            
               ¶The .liij. questyon.
               
                  ¶The byleue that was here before
                  Of false ydols that here wore
                  Shal it euer raysed be
                  So sterke as was in tyme of me?
               
               CHyldren that shall come of the
               In god of heuen theyr byleue shalbe
               And theyr chyldren yet also
               But they that shal come of them tho
               Shal turne vnto the wycked lawe
               That was before by olde sawe
               And they shal make a cyte
               Therin shall a towre be
               And that towre shal haue thore
               Foure and forty stages before
               And therin shal raygne a kynge
               Of al the worlde most masterlynge
               
                  And an ymage he shall do dyght
               After his father and lyke hym ryght
               And all folke shall he make go to
               That ymage worshyp to do.
            
            
               ¶The .liiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Why was it not goddes wyl
                  That mā leuyd not a weke with one fyl
               
               HOnger one of the paynes is
               For syn that Adam dyd amys
               And man was made so (yf he wolde)
               That he euer leue shulde
               Without trauayle and without wo
               But whan he was fallen god fro
               Myght he not agayne come hym to
               Without trauayle and wo also
               And trauayle shulde hym not lyft
               But yf he had hunger and thyrst
               And honger / thyrst / keelth / and hete
               With other paynes that men with mete
               Shuld man nothynge of haue wyst
               Had the man not synned fyrst
               And with honger and thyrst maye
               Glotony be done awaye
               And for to mene in mannes thought
               The glotony that Adam wrought
               And that synne to wasshe a waye
               Kyndly hym hongereth euery daye
            
            
               ¶The .lv. questyon.
               
                  ¶The ryche men dye they also
                  Lyghtly as the poure men do?
               
               
                  Ryche and poure that men fynde
               All god made them of one kynde
               One whyle waxeth the poure ryche
               And somtyme made poure is the ryche
               Up and downe catel is brought
               But kynde of man ne changes nought
               Honger and thyrst hete and colde
               Ioye and sorowe many folde
               Slepe and wake etynge and drynkynge
               And many mo kyndes of lyuynge
               This hath the poure men as well
               As the rych of kynde euery dele
               But the poure by reson
               Are of strongar complexcyon
               Than the ryche that deyntely doth fede
               But they in trauayle theyr lyfe do lede
               But whan deth knocketh truly
               There is no nother remedy
               But both alyke shal fare
               Rych or poure whether they are
            
            
               ¶The .lvj questyon
               
                  ¶Shall men iuge the ryche also
                  As they the poure do
               
               
                  IUge they shal them of ryght
               Stryghter than ye poure wyght
               And euer the rycher that he be
               And he mysdo ageyne the
               The more payne shulde he bere
               Shulde no ryches hym out were
               And yf men deme the ryche sore
               The poure shall hym drede the more
               
                  But for the poure mannys dede
               Hath the rych no drede
               But god rewardys them than
               The rych more than the poure man
               And demyth both ryghtwysly
               After as they are worthy
               So shuld men deme the quycke
               Rych and poure al alyke
            
            
               ¶The .lvij. questyon
               
                  May the wycked as wel for ay
                  Haue goddys loue as the good may
               
               A Wycked man that hath do synne
               And of wyckydnes wyll blynne
               Cryēg god mercy wyllyng to do it no more
               He shalbe in goddys fauoure
               The good are goddys where they go
               The wycked are fall hym fro
               Yf aman athynge haue lore
               That he loued wel before
               And he may it after fynde
               That shal he more haue in mynde
               And more shall therof be glad
               Than of all the othere that he had
               By man faryth god euyn so
               Yf aman ageyne hym mys do
               And it dedly synne be
               Far fro god fallen is he
               But yf he wyll mercy craue
               Sykerly he shall it haue
               For therof is god fulfayne
               And than fyndeth he hym agayne
               
                  And of his fyndynge is he glad
               For the great loue that he to hym had
               Thus maye wycked aswell all daye
               Haue goddes loue as goodmen maye.
            
            
               ¶The .lviij. questyon.
               
                  ¶How may the chyld that ful of loue is
                  Come out of ye mothers wōbe tel me this
               
               GOd that all hath made of nought
               More wonders hathe he wrought
               And as he hath power therto
               The one body in that other to do
               So hath he myght it out to brynge
               For at his wyl are all thynge
               Whan tyme cometh that woman shall
               Be delyueryd of that she gothe withall
               All the ioyntes of her body
               Open and enlargeth them kyndly
               All one saue the chyn before
               And in that tyme the chylde is bore
               As a lykenes of dethe that ware
               But as sone as the body bare
               The ayre hath sauoryd that is here
               The bones that febely mowe stere
               Begynne for to drye anon
               And waxeth harde growyng to bon
               And all the lyghthes that ware open
               In the woman agayne are cropen
               Harken I shal tel the how
               If aman his fyngar drow
               The ioynt wyl open and vndo
               And after shet agayne to
               
                  So it faryth with woman after chyldynge
               Throughe the grace of the heuynly kynge
            
            
               ¶The .lix. questyon
               
                  ¶May eny woman bere mo
                  Chyldren in her at onys than two
               
               A Woman may bere kyndly
               Seuen at onys in her body
               For the matryce of woman
               If you vnderstande can
               Hath seuen chambres and no mo
               And eche one is separat other fro
               And she may haue in eche of tho
               A chylde / and so with seuen go
               If goddys wyl be fyrst therto
               And the kynde of woman also
               If hote of kynde be the woman
               And hath great lykyng to the man
               One chambre or two or thre
               Of them that in her matryce be
               Of great wyl open ther agayne
               That aman hath by her layne
               The sede falleth in them anone
               And they close agayne eche one
               And yf that sede acordaunt fynde
               It waxeth further in his kynde
               And yf that other chaumbers be
               Open / and it be that she
               Knowe man agayne that same nyght
               Or on the morowe by daye lyght
               Or the second daye / later nought
               And the sede be therin brought
               
                  They spere to and holde it fast
               And norysshe chyldren at the last
               And so longe they shulde be borne
               Latter than other are beforne
               As they ware gete sonderly
               But vnderstande not therby
               That euery tyme that aman
               Knowes flessly awoman
               That the seed in her rote take
               Many thynges may lettynge make
               But it behouyth that he and she
               Be both to gether atempre
               For yf aman alecheroure be
               And haunteth many as men do se
               The seed of hym is of no myght
               For feblenes of fowlynge ryght
               And yf aman holde hym fro
               That he no woman come to
               And than doeth as ye wotte
               The seed of hym is so hotte
               Whan it is to his chamber brought
               It brennyth and wastyth all to nought
               And yf the man be of tempre
               And yf the woman not so be
               But brennyng hote and of good wyll
               It shall the seed in her spylle
               And yf they both be of tempure
               Theyr seed shall in his chamber dure
               Fest there in and so ground fast
               That yt shall come to man at the last
               And yf theyr together comynge
               Be glade and mery in all thynge
               
                  Of glade semblant theyr chyld shalbe
               As they ware both at the assembly
               And yf they assemble them wrothly
               Tother shalbe the chyld truly
               If the one be glade the other nought
               And the chyld be bytwyx them wrought
               The chyld shalbe somtyme blythe
               And somtyme great felnes kythe
               And yf that it befall so
               That the one of them two
               Hath eny man greatly in thought
               Whan the seed is to his chambre brought
               That seed may lycknes take percaas
               Of hym that in theyr thought so was
            
            
               ¶The .lx. questyon
               
                  Which is the best thyng yt may be
                  Or man may haue tel it me
               
               HUmylyte is the best thynge
               That is vnder heuyn kynge
               For he that hath with hym humylyte
               He is indued with vertues thre
               Unto god and hymselfe also
               And his neyghbore vnto
               Al thynges are loued therby
               And god loueth it greatly
               The aungels that in heuyn are
               For humilyte myght not fall in care
               With the other that fell out
               For they ware vnleel and stout
               The great flode scapyd Noe
               By the goodnesse of humilyte
               
                  That hym made of nought also
               And at his wyl them shal for do
               Trustyng stedfastly that he
               Was euer and without end shalbe
               And kepe wel the commaundment
               That his sonne whan he doune is sent
               Shal in erth gyue man vnto
               Towarde god and man also
               To do good and wyckydnes let be
               And couetys and enuy fle
               And take vnto hym pacyence
               With charyte and abstynence
               For who so hath thes thre
               I wys aleel man is he
               And after for his humilyte
               In heuyn may he crowned be
               With aungels before god of myght
               Wher euer is day with out nyght
            
            
               ¶The .lxiij questyon
               
                  ¶Hardynes of man and drede
                  Wherof come they I the rede
               
               
                  BOldnes and drede of man
               Wherof they come tel I can
               They come of the complexcyon
               And I shal tel the areson
               Thou knouest yt mē made ware
               Of ye foure elementes that are
               Saue that god gaue hym goost
               And after aman hath in hym most
               Of wete of dryeth hete or colde
               Shal his complexcyon betolde
               
                  And thes foure euen be
               Raynynge in man / than shal he
               Be neyther coward ne hardy
               Lysten I shal tel the why
               If kelth not ouercome the hete
               Nor the drye ouercome the wete
               Equalyte than of hete / kylth / wete and dry
               The herte of man shal than lye
               For the euynhode of them tho
               And styre neyther to ne fro
               And yf the hete the kelthe ouer go
               And the hete the kylth also
               The body begynneth for to shake
               And the herte to styre and quake
               And for the hete is hardy anon
               And dredyth not that he lokyth on
               If the colde be mayster ouer the hete
               And ouer the drye be the wete
               The body waxeth colde at nede
               And the hert weke and ful of drede
            
            
               ¶The .lxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof may it be fall
                  Man to haue meselry or scall
               
               SCall and meselry also
               Of the woman come they tho
               A woman that is hote of kynde
               And aman her in her floures fynde
               The floures are both hote and drye
               And the man than by her lye
               And gete a chylde perauenture
               That chylde shalbe of nature
               
                  Other be scalled or mesel
               The nature it is so fell
               That it in the woman takes
               Of a blode that it all makys
               Menstruum that blode we call
               That bredyth meselry or scall
               Which raygnyng in woman
               It is but foly to come to man
               But aman shal knowe his wyfe
               In entent to get a lyfe
               To worshype god that hym wrought
               And whan she is with chylde brought
               He shulde come ny her no more
               Untyl the chylde ware bore
               Nor fourty dayes shulde nought
               Such precept to Noe ye aungel brought
            
            
               ¶The .lxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Ware althynges of goddys makynge
                  Made at the fyrst begynnynge
               
               GOd made of his myght althynge
               At his worde and byddynge
               But al the creatures that he forth brought
               At one tyme made he them nought
               For it ware agayne kynde by my thought
               A thynge that of matter is wrought
               But yf the matter ware before
               Or that thynge of it made wore
               For longe is stone or tre
               Or the hows made be
               Also fynde I many thynges yet
               As wormes comyng of mannys swet
               
                  As lees and other wormes mo
               And some of mannys flesshe also
               And of mannys flesshe them fede
               As wormes that in handes brede
               Scarbode is of fylt a neet
               A worme that is so gret
               Of howndes come howndflees to
               And wormes of wyckyd ayre also
               And yf thes thynges latter be
               Than that that they come of / thynkes me
               That god at the begynnynge
               Made not at ones al thynge
               And al thynges he made I wys
               Unto the lest worme that is
            
            
               ¶The .lxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now after thy wyt
                  The frute in erth who norysshys yt
               
               AL the frute that in erth growes
               And al that man therin sowes
               Al noryshys god of his myght
               And for that hath he them dyght
               The foure elamentes to fynde
               Eche one noryssheth in his kynd
               The erthe sustayneth whā he to hym taketh
               The ayre noryssheth and it maketh
               The water it fedeth and grene it maketh
               Of fyre / here and waxyng it taketh
               These foure make rype euery frute
               Wherof men suffyse theyr apetyte
               Ryght as who shuld sethe mete
               Foure thynges behoueth hym to gete
               
                  Fyre and water ayre and vessele
               Or els is it not sodden wele
            
            
               ¶The .lxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶The bestes that haue no wyte
                  How wax they ragyous tel me it
               
               GOd made ech beste as we fynde
               And gaue ech wyt after his kynde
               And ech kynd hath knoulegynge
               After his wyte of some thynge
               And that wyte may sone away
               In maner as I shal the say
               Aman may rekyn and fynde sone
               The .xxvii. daye of the mone
               In tyme of Iune ryght esterly
               A sterre hym sheweth on the skye
               And be it nyght or be it daye
               Yf a beast it beholde maye
               Or the vmbre in water on nyght
               It shal waxe ragyous anone ryght
               And yf it man or beast than byte
               It shal become rageous streyte
            
            
               ¶The .lxviii. questyon
               
                  ¶What beast is it that ye fynde
                  That lengest leueth in his kynde?
               
               AN Erne leueth longest as I trowe
               Of all the beastes that I knowe
               The erne euery daye wyl flye
               In to the ayre vp so hye
               Hygher than any man maye se
               And fresshe and newe becometh he
               
                  And in longe lyfe he contynueth
               That so oft hym selfe renueth
               The adder also hath longe lyfe
               And vnder erth he dwellyth ryfe
               And vnder stonys and in brynkes
               The kelyth of the erth drynkys
               His hyde he newyth euery yere
               And becomyth yonge and fayre
               Be he not slayned with beast or man
               A thowsand yere wel lyue he can
               And whan a thowsand yere is gon
               Horne his hede growyth on
               And shortly after begynneth he
               A fayr dragon for to be
               But al they fare not so
               Some dye or they come therto
               And some are slayned here and there
               Or els al to fell they were
            
            
               ¶The .lxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Fedyth god al thynge
                  That is in erth of his makynge
               
               GOd made althyng good
               And to al he sendyth lyues fode
               Frute on erth and flesshe on lande
               And fysshe in water and on sande
               To mannys fode is ordenyd all
               And therby he lyue shall
               Beastes so are fed also
               Of that the erth comyth fro
               Fowles some in erth are fed
               And some in water theyr lyfe is led
               
                  The fyssh lyueth by his mete
               And ech of them wyl other ete
               The worme in erth is fede also
               And thys sendyth god them vnto
               Unto al that he hath lyfe lent
               He hath mete to them sent
            
            
               ¶The .lxx. questyon
               
                  ¶Fysshe & fowle and beastes echone
                  Haue they sowles or haue they none
               
               Ryghtly sowles for to sey
               Is such that it may neuer dey
               For yf the body do wel here
               The sowle shalbe assocyat to aungel clere
               And that is callyd sowle of skyl
               That god gaue only man vntyl
               Wherfor euery other creature
               Is vnder man by ryght nature
               And for that shuld he
               Ouer al beastes mayster be
               Haue sowle that most wysdom can
               Or els ware beast lyke to man
               Beastes and foules and fysshes al
               Haue no sowl ryghtly to cal
               If thou say as some men do
               Al that lyueth hath sowle ther to
               Trough which sowl the body sterys
               Etyth / drynketh / seyth and herys
               It is no sowle it is but an onde
               That god hath lent thē here we haue fonde
               For no good ne can they do
               But that man them noryssheth to
               
                  Than haue they wyt of mannys techynge
               But of them selfe haue they nothynge
               If wyt of them selfe wore
               Theyr sowle ware of myght the more
               But theyr sowle that I a yeanyng cal
               Whan the body ded shal fall
               It faryth as an onde of thy mouth
               Whan it is gon no man it couth
               But vanysshys in the ayre awaye
               And no lengar ne dure may
            
            
               ¶The .lxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶They yt in tyme of goddis sonne be
                  Shal they lyue as longe as we
               
               OF body such as now are we
               But so great shal they not be
               And we are now of lengar lyfe
               Than shalbe than man or wyfe
               For the world is now stalworthyare
               Than shalbe than and myghtyare
               And the erth gyueth vs to
               More frute than it shal them do
               And the plenty that the erth yeldys
               Both in woddes and in feldys
               Is now of moch more myght
               Than it shalbe than with ryght
               And the wyne is strongar now
               Than shalbe than and to more prow
               Wherfore ought we by ryght nature
               Haue lengar lyfe and lengar to endure
               Than they that in thos dayes are
               And febleare so forth shal they fare
               
                  For he that may than the people amonge
               Lyue a .C. yere he lyueth longe
               And euer shal men dounwarde go
               Of lyfe and of strength also
               But in wyt wax they shal
               And in malyce with all
               And of theyr bodyes lessen shal
               Twyxen this and domys day
            
            
               ¶The .lxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now some ensure
                  How longe this world shal endure
               
               NO man in erth may veryly
               The preuyte know of goddys secresy
               It is so great that wyte it ne can
               Nother beast / aungel ne man
               Ne no thyng but it be he
               That with god be full preue
               And that he loueth alther most
               As his sone or the holy gost
               For they with hym are all one
               In godhed / or els wote it none
               For euery erthely man wyl nought
               Tel to euery man his thought
               Ne his wyl in preuyte
               But yf he preuy with hym be
               Also reserueth god hym to
               Many thynges that he wyl do
               That he wyl of no kowlegynge
               Geue to man / ne to nothynge
               But to his owne sone onely
               For he is next and most hym by
               
                  And that tyme that goddes sone
               Shal in erthe a man here wone
               Men shal hym aske yf the worlde here
               Shal endure seuen thousand yere
               And anone answere he shall
               And saye ye / and more withall
               For of the fathers preuyte
               Of the more / shal none the wyser be
               We fynde wele that god of heuen
               Hath made planettes seuen
               The world to kepe by daye and nyght
               And to eueryone geueth that is his myght
               And euery one is assyngned to
               A thousand yere to kepe also
               And whan euery one haueth on this wyse
               A thousand yere done his seruyse
               Than shal euer god fulfyll
               The world longer at his wyll
               For as al planettes gouernours be
               Euenso gouerneth them he
               And for he is aboue all
               Wote none but he what shal befall
            
            
               ¶The .lxxiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Leue ony men in the world mo
                  Out of the erthe that we on go
               
               Syr yles are many in the see
               A thousand & fourehōdred & two ther be
               Some are inhabyted men withall
               And some not / nor neuer shall
               There are some that men in dwell
               Of our lykenes euery dell
               
                  And of hyth but hanfulls thre
               And berdes hangyng to theyr kne
               Theyr here downe to theyr helys is
               Of flesshe they fede both of goose and gryce
               Theyr beastes are small euerychone
               A speche they haue by them alone
               ¶A nother yle is by the see
               And therin are smal meyne
               A spanne longe are they and nomore
               And all of fysshe lyue they thore
               In the water are they be lyght
               And vp on londe they are on nyght
               ¶Yet there other yles be
               With men al so great as we
               With one eye in the front no more
               And vs with two they drede ful sore
               They ete flesshe / and with the fellys
               Clothe they them / and with nothynge ellys
               ¶Yet there is a nother also
               The folke that longeth therto
               Are tayled ryght as shepe eche one
               And then lyue by fysshe alone
               ¶Yet is there one of oure shapnesse
               But they are moche lesse
               And they are euer in fyght and were
               Agayne a great maner of fowle is there
               In colde wynter tho fowles great
               Take they / and hold them for theyr mete
               ¶A nother is there yet nere hand
               There is a maner foule dweland
               Thoughe they were in fyre brought
               Brenne ne shuld theyr fethers nought
               
                  ¶A nother folke is there feyre and sounde
               That haue vysage lyke a hounde
               ¶Yet is there folke in a countre
               And feble and lene they be
               On sonne and on the mone they byleue
               And sacryfyce to them they geue
               But when they wyl sacrifyce make
               Sum wyl his best frendis take
               And praye hym company hym bere
               At the sacrifyce he shal do there
               Than shal he cause to be made a fyre
               And when it brenneth ful shyere
               Than shal he crye that al may here
               For loue of the sonne so dere
               Or the mone whether it be
               Or an ymage made of tre
               Lepe I in this fyre al hote
               For my meryte wel I wote
               Thus hym selfe there he brenneth
               And the deuyl his soule wynneth
               And tho that bere hym company
               Anone shal do the same foly
               The tother folke aboute bydene
               Syt tyl they be brenned ful clene
               And than shal they theyr asshes take
               And relykes shal they therof make
               ¶Another lande there is also
               That sacryfyce the deuyl vnto
               Of theyr bodyes / and are ful blythe
               They cause to be made a sharpe sythe
               In lykenes of a hors sho
               And that shal haue haftes two
               
                  By the heere than shall he hanged be
               Hye on lofte that men may se
               The sythe in his necke shal men laye
               The haftes in his handes twey
               And he shal crye as a man in a rage
               For the loue of his ymage
               That is my god this shal I do
               And kerue his owne necke in two
               The hede hangeth styll on hye
               The body falleth hastely
               That body shalbe with honoure takyn
               And done out all that is therin
               And salted as they wyl it haue
               And by that ymage do it graue
               Upon the graue shal wryten be
               His owne name / and howe that he
               Made to that ymage sacryfyce
               And on what daye and in what wyse
               ¶Another maner is there yet
               Of folke that are of lytell wyt
               Whan they sacrafyce shuld make
               A hye tree they do take
               And do styke it in a place
               With many about makyng solas
               And aboute that same tre
               Foure swerdis naked shal set be
               The poyntes vpward euerychone
               Than shal he betaken anone
               He that sacryfyce shall do
               Be bounden fote and hand also
               And vp drawen shal he be
               Into the ouermost ende of the tre
               
                  Ther shal he crye the folke vnto
               In the worshype of god this I do
               They slake the rope they hym with drow
               And he fallyth sharpe I now
               Upon the swerdes he doth lyght
               And goyth to the deuyl ryght
               Than shal men that body take
               And a fayr stede for it make
               Two dayes / and that whyl shalbe
               A crye made in al the cowntre
               That such a man made sacryfyce
               And yf eny are so wyse
               To come and aske eny bone
               Hast them and come thyther sone
               Or he to his graue be brought
               For of theyr bone want shal they nought
               Than come some vnto that stede
               And vnto hym make theyr bede
               And at theyr goddys fote shal he
               Afterward grauyn be
               ¶Yet is there a countre ferthermore
               Whan a man is dede thore
               Yf he haue a wyfe then shal she
               All quycke by hym grauen be
               And also the man by the wyfe
               Yf she or he forlese theyr lyfe
               ¶Another folke there is and that
               Wyll ete for deyntes hound and cat
               ¶Another is when he wyfe shal wed
               He dare not with her go to bed
               The fyrst nyght / but he causeth blythly
               Another gest to lye her by
               
                  For it is peryl a says to lyfe
               To touch fyrst a weddyd wyfe
               ¶Another maner ther is wel fedde
               But they wyl neuer wyfe wedde
               They say that one wyfe ne can
               Holde her euer to one man
               ¶Yet is there one that men do call
               Lande femynne that men call
               All of wymen and no men
               For therin lyue no man can
               That passyth fyue yere of age
               Ouer fyue dayes ther to haue herytage
               But in foure sesons of the yere
               Men and they gathere ful nere
               Hauynge with them felowrede
               Lokyng after no syburrede
               Viij. dayes fare they thus no mo
               Or the men depart them fro
               And yf any a chylde haue
               Be it so that it be a knawe
               They shal it kepe and norysshe wel
               Fyue yere / but more no dele
               And than shal they dryue it sone
               To the lande there men in wone
               They labour and tyl theyr met to wyne
               And ouer them they haue a quene
               That cōmaundyth them as quene shuld do
               Holdyng them in peas and ro
               Countres are there many mo
               But longe it ware to tel of tho
               But of thes some shal mere
               At the comyng of the false prophyte
               
                  But many shal there fyrst be lorne
               For a kynge that shalbe borne
               That shal the world seke valyently
               And shal do wryt them as men fynde truly
               And many of thos shal he spyll
               And with other theyr landes fyll
            
            
               ¶The .lxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why are some men blake in towne
                  Some whyt and some browne
               
               IN thre maners it comyth to
               That a man is colouryd so
               One is through kynde
               As we in our bokys fynde
               For yf the man broune be
               And the woman as wel as he
               And yf they to gether haue engendrure
               It ought to be broune of nature
               If the one be broune the other whyt
               And they assemble with great delyt
               Whos seed with most delyt festys
               Whan it in the chamber restys
               That seed shal the chyld be
               Lyckenyd most and shape of ble
               Another maner there yet is
               If a man be fedde amys
               And pourly lye and pourly go
               It makyth hym not colouryd so
               As he shuld be with ryght
               If he ware kept day and nyght
               The thyrd cause it is also
               The land and the ayre therto
               
                  For euer the hoter the londe is
               The browner is the folke Iwys
               The colder lande the whyter aye
               For theyr skyn is not brent al day
            
            
               ¶The .lxxv. questyon.
               
                  ¶Tell me nowe per company
                  Wherof cometh felony?
               
               Wycked humours make malēcolye
               And that engendereth felonye
               The wicked humours kīdel smert
               And gloweth sō whyle about the hert
               And chafeth it as a fyre
               And maketh it derke and blacke for Ire
               And that darkenes answereth than
               Up into the brayne panne
               And whan the braynes are derked so
               Great dele of wyt they for go
               And smyte anone in felony
               And that maketh the hart so drye
               But whan that the humours sease
               And of theyr glowyng do release
               The herte resteth and styll lyeth
               And the derkenes fro hym wendeth
               The lymmes lyghten euerychone
               And in good poynt becometh anone
            
            
               ¶The .lxxvi. questyon.
               
                  The beastes yt god ī erth hath wrought
                  Of one hewe why are they nought?
               
               FOr they of goddes lykenes not be
               Dyuers colours haue they perde
               
                  And by cause they on the ground frete
               Dyuers herbes to theyr mete
               Some are colde and some are hote
               And some are drye and some are wete
               And yf a beast / whan it great is
               Gothe etynge on the gras
               That most is hote and drye also
               The yonge shal blacke hewe come vnto
               And yf the most parte be hote
               Redde shal that yonge be god it wote
               And be they moyst it shalbe graye
               And be they colde whyte for aye
               And yf that a beast fynde
               In one place erbes of sondry kynde
               And she fede her of them all
               Of dyuers hew the yonge shal fall
               And after that she most of eteth
               Most of that hew the yong geteth
               And of all beastes fareth it so
               Wylde and tame where so it go
               And al hath god dyght this thyng
               At his wyl and his ordaynyng
            
            
               ¶The .lxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶They yt ete or drynke more thā nede is
                  Whether do they wel or amys?
               
               HE that eteth more than he shuld
               And more than his kynd wold
               He doth harme his body vnto
               And some vnto his soule also
               And dystruccyon of mete doth he
               That other withall myght fed be
               
                  A gayne god such aman is
               Wors than a beast I wys
               God ordayned man to fede
               After that his kynd hath nede
               And the remnaunt to saue
               Untyl after he nede haue
               And a man that is wyse
               Shal ete onys a day or twyse
               A man that etyth at meel
               Untyl hym thynkyth that he is wel
               And layth efte aboue more
               Or that be dygestyd before
               His stomacke encombres he
               And the hete that therin shuld be
               And so his kynde he bryngyth doune
               And hym selfe to corrupcyon
               And his wyt in that is lesse
               Than a beast that etyth gresse
               For there is nether hors ne kowe
               From that he hath etyn I nowe
               That wyl ete eny more
               Tyl after he hongar sore
               And seyng a brute beast doth yt
               More shuld a man that hath wyt
               Wherfore I say a mys they do
               That ete more than nede is to
            
            
               ¶The .lxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the best thyng of ye man
                  And ye worst that thou reckyn can
               
               THe best thyng of the man I wys
               And the worst the tonge it is
               
                  For by his tonge a man may get
               Syluer and golde drynke and mete
               Loue / worshype and fauoure
               And enhauntynge of honoure
               Also for the tonge he may
               Haue shame and bylony alday
               For such wordes may he say
               That perauenture may cause hym to dey
               The tonge hath nother gold ne fee
               But moch honoure makyth she
               And the tonge hath no bone
               But it doth breke many one
               And also wel / ware it the wyl
               Myght it speke the good as yl
            
            
               ¶The .lxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether hath aman more conyng
                  Of hot mets or of colde etyng
               
               A Man that vsyth hot metys
               He chasys his body whan he etys
               The senewes norysshys he therby
               And al the vaynes of his body
               He warmyth the brayne and the hert
               And makyth them of wyt smerte
               Colde metes dothe not therto
               But keleth senowes and vaynes also
               And styreth the humours wycked and yl
               That the het held styll
               And they kele a mannys wyt
               Wherfore necessaryly behouyth it
               Whan the wyttes are so colde
               That they the lesse conynge holde
            
            
               
               ¶The .lxxx questyon.
               
                  ¶How maye aman fle felony
                  And wrathe and malencoly?
               
               
                  Fyrst shal amā haue ī his thought
               Hym yt hī hathe made of nought
               And thanke it hym in al sake
               Yt he at his likenes wold hī make
               And he shuld hym bethynke also
               Of the deth that he shal to
               That no man may fro shrynke
               Also shal he hym bethynke
               How god hath geuen to many
               Mayme and sekenes of body
               And to some rotyng of lym
               And what helthe he gaue to hym
               Ete and drynke after skyll
               And slepe as that reason wyll
               That euyl well ouercome he shall
               That hym stereth to greue withall
               And so maye he felony
               Ouercome and malancoly
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxj questyon.
               
                  ¶Whether to haue is more bate
                  Loue of woman or her hate?
               
               A Good woman is good to loue
               And holde vnto mannes behoue
               For of good women comethe nought
               Neyther in warke nor in thought
               But good and worshyp where she goeth
               And euery man therfore her commendeth
               
                  For but good and trewth and lawe
               Doth she mene to her felawe
               And such a woman loue men shal
               And do worshyp and honour with all
               A wyckyd woman shal men hate
               And fle from her in the gate
               If men may not fle her styl
               Fynde menys to eschew her wyckyd wyl
               For men shal neuer haue but folye
               Of wyckyd womannys companye
               Moch peryl and great blame
               And amonge men eschap moch shame
               Her maners are ful of vyce
               Moch lyke to a cocatryce
               Whych is a beast as men of tellyth
               And in the water most he dwellyth
               He hath a great hed and a longe
               And many reth crokyd and wronge
               Twyes in the yere he is greued
               With wormes that in hys teth do bred
               And whan he felyth them so
               The lande doth he drawe to
               And lyeth agayne the sonne aldaye
               Gapynge as wyde as he maye
               Than comyth a foule that god wold make
               The wormes out of his teth to take
               Aprycke on his hed is dyght
               Shapen as an edyl ryght
               The fowle crepeth in al nyce
               In to the mouth of the Cocatryce
               And the wormes etyth echone
               The Cocatryce felyth anone
               
                  That the wormes destroyed be
               Anon her mouth closyth she
               And wold that fowle ete for his mede
               That hath don to hym that good dede
               The byrd felys her not wel
               And wotyth that she wyl hym spyl
               With his mouth that is sharpe before
               The Cocatryce smytyth thore
               In the mouth agayne the palat
               That she openyth her mouth wyth that
               The byrd fleyth out in haste
               And spedyth her awaye faste
               Such seruys yeldyth wyckyd wemen
               For al his good dede / vnto man
               Wherfore shal good men styl
               Fle from theyr wyckyd wyl
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶A man that is in helth and yonge
                  How angerys he for a lytel wronge
               
               I Shal tel the how and why
               The hert is lorde of the body
               The body is his wardeyn
               And his seruaunt with al his meyn
               For al that lyketh the hert vnto
               Lykes to the body also
               The eyne are gythers of the herte
               The erys messyngers smerte
               The tonge his aduocat is she
               And the fete his somers be
               The handes are his knyghtes ensured
               The hertys castel is the hed
               
                  The braynes so are castel as I haue sayn
               That of the hert reseuyth fayn
               If the hert a worde here veryly
               Be it scath or be it mery
               He may it not wyte ne know
               But his messyngers to hym it show
               And yf that the tydynges hym lyke
               He reioysys of it wonderlyke
               And al his men haue ioy and blys
               That the hert so mery is
               But whan ye messyngers tel hym eny thyng
               Wherto he hath no lykyng
               He styrreth and quakyth wrothfully
               And al his men are than sory
               Al are they wroth and quake also
               As the wote them selfe do
               His enemyes are glad therfore
               On his men waxyng glowyng sore
               If the hert be strong and wyes
               And loue the castel there he lyes
               And his men wyl se vntyl
               And theyr scath not norysshe wyl
               Blame / charge / and the wroth all
               Upon hym selfe take he shall
               Holdyng hym faste it agayne
               Than shal his men rest and be fayne
               And his foos ouercome be
               That haue reryd his meyne
               But yf the hert be feble and vayne
               His enmyes brennes hym agayne
               And yf he haue no myght in resestyng
               Theyr assaut hym assaylyng
               
                  And his men are as feble as he
               And remembres nought her aduersyte
               But to mysdo they styre them smerte
               And al the sorowe bydeth the herte
               Wherfor the body may take no scath
               But the herte felle it rath
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶How may a man blameles be
                  ¶To loue a woman & hym not she
               
               
                  LOue may they together wel
               As in god I the tel
               For god them together festyd louely
               Of both makyng one body
               By cause frute shuld be bytwyx them two
               To goddys name worshype to do
               Wherfor shuld eyther loue other in blys
               As the wyl of god is
               ¶Of loue ther is another maner
               After as the world vsyth here
               As a man to loue his wyfe
               For her fayrnes and her good lyfe
               For ryches and her lewte
               And wyt that in her may be
               Aman that a good wyfe hauys
               That hym bothe wynnys and sauys
               And is of good maner withall
               The world wyl that he her loue shall
               And for these skylles shal woman
               After the worlde agayne loue man
               But who so loueth other wele
               And of these vertues haue no dele
               
                  Moche to blame are they trewly
               For they loue vnskylfully.
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxiiij. questyon.
               
                  ¶Wherof comethe the fatnes & why
                  That aman hath in his body?
               
               OF flewmys that in the body renneth
               Cometh fathed who so them kenneth
               And yf the flewmys be swete
               Throughe the body they shete
               And the hete of other thynges
               Sle they / and themselfe sprynges
               And lordshyp they haue anone
               Ouer the humours euerychone
               And whan that they maysters are
               The swetnes of them turneth yare
               In to grece / than gather that
               And maketh so the body fat
               Yf the flewmes be salte within
               The flesshe and the body they brenne
               And company anone they take
               Unto colours yelowe and blake
               And whan they in lymmes & veynes sprede
               And tho colours with them lede
               So longe as they therin dure
               They let the body of norture
               And holdis it so lene alwaye
               That it no grece gather maye
               Therfore it is good to many one
               To let the flewmes out of hym gone
               For aman may be slaynyd therby
               Or make great scabbe on his body.
            
            
               
               ¶The .lxxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal a man awoman chastyse
                  With betyng whan she doth amyse
               
               GOod wymen to dele with al
               Theyr mysdedys shalbe but smal
               And yf she haue ought mysgon
               She repentys her anon
               Shonysshyng her mysdede
               Men shal than her chastyse and lede
               With fayr wordes and soft
               And shal noman morne her oft
               Whan a wickyd woman hath myswrought
               And shonysys it ryght nought
               But doth vse it al tyte
               And hath therin great delyte
               If man her blame that she dyd so
               Another tyme shal she wors do
               If men them vpbrede or bete
               The lesse she shal her folye lete
               Men shal her warne twyes or thryes
               With fayrewordes yf he be wyes
               And with gyfte and fayre hetyng
               Wyl not leue that thynge
               Man shal her let and fro her go
               For it helpyth man no nother to do
               Unto woman that wyckyd wyl be
               For of the deuyls wyl is she
               And the deuyl her dwellyth in
               That causyth that she cannot blyn
               Wherfore there is no better wone
               But let the deuyl and her alone
            
            
               
               ¶The .lxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶What thyng is gelousy to knowe
                  And why is man in gelousy so
               
               OF gelousy are maners mo
               For to tel of than one or two
               One gelousy of god it is
               Whan aman heryth spekyng amys
               Agayne god or agayne his lay
               As herytykes do al day
               There shuld aman be ryght gelous
               And to his lawe ware defyrus
               Yet shal aman gelous be
               Ouer his frende yf eny haue he
               And that gelouse is cōmaundment
               Of clene hert and louyng entent
               Yet is there a gelousye
               That comyth of fowle hert and folye
               And of wyckyd humours also
               That the hert gatherys vnto
               That gelousy comyth of woman suerly
               Enhauntyng them wyckydly
               The hert brennys of wyckyd thought
               Rest in the body may it nought
               Mete and drynke he forgettyth al quyte
               With al his ioy and his delyte
               If aman be in such a stryfe
               For her that is his owne wyfe
               Out of his thought he shal it late
               And thynke that it may hym not bate
               His borden from his backe he thro
               And cast it vnto grownd lowe
               
                  And thynke yf she good wolde be
               Shuld non her kepe so wel as she
               And thynke tyll he faryth so
               He sekyth after sorow and wo
               And yf he loue one wodly
               That not is his owne properdly
               He trauaylys in gelousye
               Of brennyng hert and great folye
               In angwysshe great lyue he sha
               And his tyme losyth al
               He is lyke that man I wys
               That nyght and daye fyghtyng is
               Agayne the wynd it for to take
               His owne at his wyl to make
               And euer the lengar he doth so
               The forther is the wynde hym fro
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal aman loue his frende
                  And opyn to hym al his mende
               
               HIs good frende aman loue shal
               With good hert and clene with al
               After his myght and with hym dele
               And of his charge bere somdele
               For yf he ryght good frende be
               No goodnes forgetyth he
               But of dyuers maners are they al
               Many that men frendes call
               Some ther are that wel can shake
               And aman fayre semblant make
               Sayeng that he is his frende
               Untyl he knowe ought of his mende
               
                  He proferys hym his wyl to do
               But there is no trust ther to
               What he doth he rekenyth not nor hew
               But that it be his owne prow
               For dyd he ought agayne hym
               He shuld fynde hym fell and grym
               And he loueth me lyghtly inbate
               That for a lytel wyl me hate
               He that loueth me for myne
               And not for me / that is venyme
               But he is frende to mannys behoue
               To trust in and to loue
               That nought assentyth to the wyl
               Of hys frend that may turne to yll
               And seruyth not glosyngly
               But chastyse hym of his foly
               And though he apertly hym mysdo
               He ne says hym no word vnto
               In that frend shal man haue fyaunce
               And loue hym and hym auaunce
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶May aman his profyt do
                  And no trauayl haue therto
               
               SIthen adā ete through wyckyd rede
               The appul that god forbede
               Fro that tyme vnto nowe
               Myght neuer adam do his prowe
               Ware he neuer so myghty
               Without trauayl of his body
               The worlde that men on affye
               Is but vanyte and folye
               
                  Therfore it behoueth pouer to trauel smere
               And ryche men in theyr hert
               As to thynke how they shal saue
               And multyplye that they haue
               And also thynke on heuyn kynge
               To make hym selfe a good endynge
               Better it is before to trauel hard
               So that the proue come afterward
               Than of trauayl here to slake
               And fowle endyng after to make
               For without some trauayl
               May no man in the world auayl
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal men do good & almes dede
                  Unto pouer that haue nede
               
               DO good / men shal to a pouer man
               That hym selfe helpe ne can
               And what befall ne rekyn shal
               But for goddys loue do all
               Unto the rych is lent rychesse
               To helpe the pouer that hath dystresse
               He shal thynke that pouer borne be
               Of adam and Eue as wel as he
               And to his lycknes are wrought
               And that he hath his ryches nought
               Of hym selfe but of goddys loue
               His body to kepe only
               But his sowle with al to tyle
               And thynke that after a whyle
               He shal dye and go hens somwhere
               And nothynge shal he with hym bere
               
                  But as he came so shal he fare
               Both pouer / nakyd and bare
               Therfore shal he pouer gyue vnto
               Gladly departyng therwith also
               For that he geuyth that shal he fynde
               And that he leuyth hym behynde
               Is the worldys and not his
               Whreof he shal haue lytel blys
            
            
               ¶ T
                     •
                  e .lxxxx. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal aman hym order me say
                  That is among the folke alday
               
               A Man shal hym contayne wysely
               Among men and curteslye
               And with fayre semblant euery whore
               Spekyng at mesure and nomore
               And here other speke whan they begynne
               Thoughe he haue no delyt therin
               For it is great curtesye
               To cast vnto hym his eye
               That he spekyth holde with al
               And to his wordes lysten he shal
               Yet shal he kepe hym euery a tyde
               With out bost and also pryde
               Thoughe he more rycher were
               Than eny other that are there
               For euer the myghtyare he be
               The better behauyour of shuld be he
               For to be curtys and meke
               If he wyl honoure seke
               And yf he shal speke eny whore
               He shal hym bethynke before
               
                  And cast than in his hert ryght wel
               Or that he speke eny dele
               And whan that he shal tel his wyl
               Gyue bold and fayre semblaunt there tyl
               And be abasshed of nothynge
               Whyl he is in tellynge
               Aman that shal a reason show
               A baysshyng as he doth it out throw
               His knowlege is then lost among
               For they wyl say that he sayth wrong
               Be he among foles brought
               There his wysdome helpyth nought
               Wherfore he hym contayne
               Untyl he be among wysmen agayne
               As foly among wysmen is wyke
               Wysdome among folys is lyke
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Is a ryche man lesse worthy
                  That he losyth his good holy
                  ¶Or a poure worthy the more
                  That ryches on hym encresyd wore
               
               AS longe as the rych hath his good
               He is regardyd as of noble blode
               He is callyd and herd ouer all
               And euery man hym trust shall
               If his good fall hym fro
               He losyth myght and honour also
               With corage and doutynesse
               And becomyth coward neuer the lesse
               At cownsel shal he be not regardyd
               His wordes shal nothyng be trustyd
               
                  No man shal his tales beleue
               No fayth shal men to hym gyue
               And the talkyng shalbe I wys
               That he was / and now not is
               ¶The poure whan he waxyth ryche
               His neybors shal theyr trust in hym pych
               He is holden wyse curteys and good
               Thoughe he be a churle of blode
               His word is hard and byleued wele
               Thoughe it be lesyng a great dele
               Frendys he fynd anone ryght
               That somtyme set of hym ful lyght
               Yf he come ony where to the mete
               He shalbe set amonge the grete
               To counsayle shal they cal hym gladly
               That before regarded hym lyghtly
               By the ryche it fareth euen so
               As men seeth by a marchaunt it do
               That boroweth great good al day
               Of ryche men that lend may
               And haue nought therof greatly
               But trauayleth and lyues therby
               And whan the ryche his good wyl haue
               Than is the marchaunt but a knaue
               And whyle he the reches occupyed
               He was of them ryche counted
               Of this world it fareth so
               Of al that men may gather them to
               Hath he nought but whyl he is here
               His lyuelode / and he be on bere
               Hath he nomore than he fyrst with began
               He cometh and goeth a poure man
               
                  But the pouer that rych was
               Is holden gentylare per caas
               Than he that nought hade
               Nor nought hath for he is bade
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶The wyckyd maner of men we se
                  And wickyd custome whereof may yt be
               
               
                  OF wickyd wyl and wickyd herte
               And of malyce yt gathers smerte
               For man hath the wyt
               To know his maner & reson it
               And to lete it yf he wyl
               And to change it from euyl
               He that wickyd custome hath also
               Good may he not thynke ne do
               Nor his herte in rest be
               For in vnclene thought trauayles he
               Through the which suerly
               His tyme he wastyth and body
               As he that goyth beastye
               That he myght sykerlye go by
               That goyth aboute without townes
               Both by dale and by downes
               And nedles trauaylys hym amys
               For al his owne folye it is
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Seyng yron is so hard and stronge
                  And for to werke it somwhat longe
                  ¶How was fyrst made & wherwith
                  Tonges hamour and the styth
               
               
                  GOd cōmaunded al thynge
               And al are of his makynge
               And wyst wherof man had nede
               For to do with eny dede
               To hym his messyngers he sent
               The aungel that to adam went
               He bade hym yron take in his hande
               And than was it as nesshe as sande
               And therof fyrst made a styth
               And hamour / tonges to worke with
               He went and shapyd them euerychone
               And they became harde anone
               And whan it to the dyluuy cam
               Noe of such lomes made than
               That ware forged after tho
               And kept them and after made mo
               And so to this tyme wrought are they
               And shalbe to domysday
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxiiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Do they amys that alday swere
                  By theyr god what so he were
               
               HE that swerys by his god falsly
               For he shuld trust in hym perfytly
               Whether he good or wicked is
               He doth euyl and amys
               For I trow there is no man quyke
               That his god holdyth wyke
               And falsly for couetys
               Swerys on hym by many wys
               He is deuyl and deuyls lyke
               And wors than an herytyke
               
                  For his god falseth he
               For thynge that lytel whyle shalbe
               And thoughe his god be false and wicke
               And he forswere hym by hym thycke
               His neyghbour for to begyle
               He synneth greatly I tel the treulye
               Lawe nor treuthe hath he none
               Nor amonge men shuld gone
               That by his god falsely wyl swere
               For he wold aman with falsed dere
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxv questyon.
               
                  Shal aman of his body
                  In althyng be chast treuly?
               
               CHastyte a man shal holde
               Of his body many folde
               Of false othes and of lechery
               And of al other velany
               Of euyl syght of euyl speke
               Of euyl goyng and of handelyng eke
               Not to slepe in euyl ne in euyl rede
               Nor ete nor drynke in euyl stede
               Ne none other thynge do
               But as ryght hym gydeth to
               Al that is euyl is to fle
               And of al that shal a man chast be
               Sethe god at his lykenes hath sent
               Shape to man / and wyt hym lent
               Euyl to knowe and it to forsake
               Than doth he amys yt therto wyl hym take
               And he that hym therfro holdeth al
               To goddes company he shal
               
                  And to his aungels also
               Whan tyme comes there vnto
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Whom shal amā loue wt al to go
                  And whos company fle fro
               
               IN fayre dewes that may them mete
               shal aman go and in herbes swete
               There may he go sykerly
               Without hurte of his body
               For who so in the fyre goos
               He brennyth both fote and toos
               By this shalt thou vnderstande
               With whom aman shal go company / and
               Go with the good to and fro
               So shalt thou not mysdo
               Nor noman shal to the say
               Wher thou goyst by the way
               But worshype / honour of the wyl talke
               And than in the dewe thou doyst walke
               But yf aman in hym selfe be good
               And he turne there to his mood
               To haunt folys company
               To hym therof shal come foly
               And euyl report and wyckyd name
               And vylony of folke and blame
               And they shal say he wold not go there
               But he of theyr maners were
               Ware he not of theyr assent
               Therfore in theyr company he went
               Euery good man wyl hym fle
               And thys vpon the fyre goyth he
               
                  Wherfore shuld men with good go
               And that are folys fle them fro
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is better so god the saue
                  Ryches or pouerte for to haue
               
               RIches are there bodyly
               And there are also goostly
               And who comyth the one vntyl
               May haue the other yf he wyl
               For he may haue that is nede
               The sowle and body both to fede
               He shal fynde how hym he serue shal
               And his cōmaundment do al
               Iche man shal fynd to do it wel
               And for his ryches the more euery dele
               If men worshype the pouer ought
               That is but wynde and turnyth to noght
               For of that honour that he had
               May he not be fede ne clad
               Wherfore to bodyly profyt
               Than is it more delyt
               Men say a rych chorle is he
               That pouer and worshyppyd men se
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal aman honour yt are ny don
                  Lyke a rych man and agrom
               
               THat man that deme wyl lelly
               He shal also debonarly
               Apouer ney do honour to
               As he shuld to a rych do
               
                  Thoughe the rych be hye set
               And the pouer stande on his feet
               But yf they both in lyke caas be
               Of iugment to here the sentence perde
               Nomore shal he be dysdaynyng
               To here the pouer mannys sayeng
               Than he shalbe of the rych mannys matter
               So as ye pouer mānys be as good or better
               Iugment came of god wherfore it shulde
               Be delyd euyn yf men wolde
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Delyt the pouer in pouerte also
                  As the rych in theyr ryches do
               
               
                  APouer man that hath no mete
               And to fyl the wombe he may gete
               He delyteth hym more therin
               Than ye rych wt al yt he doth wyn
               For yf the pouer haue his fylle
               Of mete and drynke he hath his wyl
               And the rych is hongre ay
               To gather more than he may
               And haue he neuer so great fee
               He may neuer fyllyd be
               For better at ese than is Iwys
               The ful man / than the hongre is
               The pouer so of his hongar sesyth
               The rych in his hongar contynuyth
               He that longe hath seke leyne
               Whan he is helyd he is feyne
               And in his hert reioysyth more
               Than they that euer in helth wore
               
                  Whan the syckenes of the pouer
               That hongre is may ought couer
               With mete and drynke that he hath gat
               More delyte he hath in that
               Than he that is in ryches sad
               That neuer no defaut had
            
            
               ¶The .C. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal aman ought make his roos
                  Of eny thyng that he doos
               
               THes wyse mē shuld bost them nought
               Of nothīg that they haue wrought
               For o
                     •
                  fence wa
                     •
                  e it god vnto
               And his owne dyshonour also
               Be he neuer so doughty
               Ne so valyaunt of his body
               And he bost hym of his dede
               Men shal scorne hym to his mede
               And though they say it not / they hym holde
               For a lyer of that he tolde
               But a coward of no bounte
               For men shal wene he doughty be
               Of moch more his bost wyl make
               Than euer durst he vnder take
               Than say some that by hym sat
               That he is a lyare in that
               He was neuer worth a torde
               But a bostar in worde
               And he that doughty man is tolde
               And a hardy and a bolde
               Kepyth his tonge where he doth resorte
               Sufferyng other of hym to reporte
               
                  That is moch more his honoure
               For it is an old auctoure
               He that hym selfe bostyth in towne
               With an horse tord men shal hym crowne
            
            
               ¶The .Cj. questyon
               
                  ¶Why are howndes faster ī theyr kynde
                  Than other beastes that men do fynde
               
               OF all the beastes that I wote
               Is none of nature so hote
               As is a hounde in his nature
               And whan he shal make engendure
               Of theyr hete the great glowyng
               Maketh them together fastenyng
               As two peces of Iron fare
               In the fyre whan they wellyd are
               Ley that one that other vpon
               And geue them a stroke anon
               Throughe hete they together bynde
               And so fare houndes in theyr kynd
            
            
               ¶The .C.ii. questyon
               
                  ¶He yt of a nother mānes wyfe couetis is
                  Or of his good doth he amys?
               
               HE that is couetous and wode
               After other mannes good
               Other his wyfe whether it be
               Great synne and amys doth he
               And suche aman as we of tel
               Is called the deuyls grype of hel
               For the deuyll coueth aye
               To drawe vnto hym that he maye
               
                  And for such a couetous is knowen
               That more wolde haue than his owne
               For a man shuld with another do
               As he wold men dyd hym to
               What man wold hym take fro
               His wyfe or his goodys mo
               I trowe it wold make hym loth
               And sone make hym wroth
               Wherfore shulde man hold hym euen
               As the aungels do in heuen
               There none couetyth others blys
               But holdyth hym content as he is
            
            
               ¶The .C.iij. questyon
               
                  ¶May no man eschape / but dye
                  By ryches / myght ne eny rede me sey
               
               EUery man is made as thou hast herd
               Of foure thynges in this mydelerd
               Of fyre / water / erth / ayre
               Both the fowle and also the fayre
               And thes foure ech one be
               Contrary to other in qualyte
               And the body may not blyn
               Where thes foure are gathered in
               But to gether haue they batayle
               Ey vnto one of them doth fayle
               And be the one downe clene brought
               The body lyueth lengar nought
               Therfore where so aman be
               Be it on land or on see
               The deth cleuyth euer by hym
               As it ware his owne lyme
               
                  His lyme myght he away cast
               But deth cleueth ouer fast
               So that powre ne rychesse
               Ne conyng ne doughtynesse
               No excusacyon may aman make
               Whan god wyl the deth hym to take
               For good and bade shrewe and wich
               Yonge and old pouer and ryche
               Strong and feble folys and wyse
               Great and smal may none scape thys
               The deth that he most to go
               Unto the erth there he came fro
            
            
               ¶The .C.iiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Syttyth god to aunswere ay
                  Them that folye speke alday
               
               Hym to ferforth aman strykys
               That answerys hym yt folysly spekys
               But yf his folye shuld hym dere
               Than is it good that he answere
               Somtyme spekyth a fole folye
               And noman wottyth of whom ne why
               And men aunswere hym nothynge
               Is none the wors of his sayenge
               But yf men aunswere hym thore
               They bold hym to speke the more
               And than is a fole al hot
               To speke more than he wot
               And his wordes wyl not lete
               To confyrme with wordes grete
               And so engendryth great folye
               And great hathred and enuye
               
                  And yf men hym answeryd nought
               His iangelyng were to ende brought
               Therfore he goth on the egge of a sword
               That answereth vnto a foles word
            
            
               ¶The .C.v. questyon
               
                  ¶What conyng of all that you tel can
                  Is most greuous vnto man?
               
               
                  OF all conyngis the greuosest
               That is clargy and eke the best
               The sotylest and the most of wyt
               And the moste worshyped is it
               And therfore is it called arte
               For it arteth on eche parte
               His herer vnto conyng
               And of al thyng knowlegyng
               And sonest may it auayle
               But art of the most trauayle
               Than is wrytynge of al that be
               For he that wryteth may not se
               A bought / whyle he is in wrytyng
               Nor here no speche nor other thyng
               Nor thynke / nor lysten / ne nought do
               B
                     •
                  t al onely there vnto
               Therfore of all trauayles thou wotest
               Than is wrytyng alther most
            
            
               ¶The .C.vj. questyon
               
                  ¶They that trauayle for to wyn
                  And can not lyue / why wyl they not blyn
               
               MEn that trauayle and ese them nought
               In great couetyse are they brought
               
                  And great traldam lyue they in
               And yet they cannot blyn
               But they shal trauayl and go ther fro
               And al that trauayle in such wo
               Shal another of it make hym blyth
               That lytel dyd for it / but labour lyght
               I say not yt is gottyn in hast
               Shal a man dyspend in wast
               Ne shal of that fele no dysese
               But he shal with that syt at ese
               And neuer the lesse at mesure spende
               Of such as god wyl sende
               Ese them that not haue
               And lyfe and sowle so may he saue
               But he that of trauayl can not late
               For couetys of wordly bare
               And hath I now without that
               He shal neuer man be fate
               But euer the more he may wyn
               The more care is he in
               Wherfore it is good in trauayl stronge
               Thoughe a man wyn / to rest among
            
            
               ¶The .C.vij. questyon
               
                  ¶On what maner may it ryse
                  That men wax soles and vnwyse
               
               ON many maners cometh it to
               That men foles wax also
               Some are symple as foles borne
               Some by euyl theyr wyttes haue lorne
               And some by lesyng of theyr blode
               Some for theyr braynes wax al wode
               
                  Some of wickyd humours begyn
               And some for the hete that they haue be in
               Some by cause theyr hert is of feble myght
               And some for euyl syght on nyght
               And some that wake ouer fast
               That dryeth the braynes at the last
               And many maners are there mo
               That workes vnto man great wo
            
            
               ¶The .C.viij. questyon
               
                  ¶Is the sowle or the body wo
                  Whan one shal depart another fro
               
               FOr soth it greuyth them fulsore
               And ful mornyng are therefore
               Felyng great ang
                     •
                  ysshe and wo
               Whan that one partyth the other fro
               And yf it at theyr wyl wore
               They depart wold neuer more
               If a yong man toke awyfe
               That he louyd as his lyfe
               And she hym more than althynge
               Who so betwyx them made departynge
               Departyng them agayne theyr wyl
               That shuld plese them both ful yll
               So is it betwyx the sowle and the body
               They are spoused to gether inwardly
               And so great loue together holde
               That they neuer depart wolde
               And yf they febely haue wrought
               Sythen they together ware brought
               Than chely is the sorow al
               Whan that they depart shal
               
                  For the body rottyh awaye
               The sowle goyth to payne for aye
               Than it is no wonder that they be wroth
               And dredyng of thyr departyng both
            
            
               ¶The .C.ix. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether shal men hold the more
                  A old man or a yong man that wore
               
               UNto neyther shal men holde
               There both are for fooles tolde
               For yf the yong a foole is
               And he be instructed amys
               The hote nature wyl in hym glowe
               And humours as a lowe
               Which hetyth his hert and his blode
               And makyth hym iolyfe and wode
               And whyle that hete lasteth so
               A short rede shuld he assent to
               But an old fool yf there be one
               That hath lytel hete or none
               And he be tangeled with iolyte
               A ryght kynde fool is he
               For his tyme he had before
               And now wold haue one more
               And that iolynesse men in hym fynde
               Is of force and of no kynde
               And so is he ioylyfe amys
               For he sheweth more than in hym is
               As he that flesshe wold sethe kyndly
               With the claryte of the sonne verely
               But to such fooles olde
               Shal no wyseman hym holde
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.x. questyon
               
                  ¶Why raynys it in one yere more
                  Than in a nother and wherfore
               
               SOmtyme that it raynyth so
               In one yere more than in a nother do
               Fyrst of goddys wyl I it fet
               And than of gouernal that he hath set
               As of mouyng a the planetys
               And of the sygnes that them metys
               After as they meue lowe or hye
               Make they the yeres were or drye
               And al comyth of goddys wyl
               Rayne it / snewe it / or be it styl
            
            
               ¶The .C.xi. questyon
               
                  ¶Why hath not god mā so wrought
                  That he ne had synned nought
               
               IF god had man fyrst so dyght
               That he after ne synned myght
               Of meryt ware no man worthy
               For no goodnes of his body
               Al the meryt agayne. shuld go
               Unto god there it came fro
               And of goddys blys no man worthy wore
               But he deseruyd it had before
               And ware man made on such manere
               That he myght no synne do here
               His goodnes of hym lefe ware nought
               But his that hym so hath wrought
               For of that that the behouyth nede
               Arte thou worthy to haue no mede
               
                  But the man that of his wyl
               May do both good and yl
               And doth the good / worthy he is
               For to come vnto that blys
               That god hath ordayned hym vnto
               And that the deuyl shuld also
               Shame hym / that god had man ordayned
               To haue the blys that he of myscaryed
               By the werkes of his owne wyl
               The good to take and fle the yl
            
            
               ¶The .C.xii. questyon
               
                  ¶Is it good to haue entormetyng
                  Agayne euery man of althyng
               
               AMan shal clyme on a tre
               That he thynketh esyest be
               The frute for to come vnto
               If he wyl his profyt do
               And he that on the sonne beme wyl clyme
               He may breke his necke some tyme
               For he that clymeth ouer hye
               May happe somtyme to wrye
               Euyn so it faryth with mannys demenar
               That entermetyth a boue his powar
               Late them that are rych and fers
               Entyrmet them with theyr pers
               And the pouer whare they fare
               With such other as they are
               But sometyme the pouer is pert perde
               To stryue with the rych in his pouerte
               But with the rych to entyrmet
               He may lose and nothyng gete
               
                  And yf that it so befall
               That arych hym to cownsel call
               Entyrmete hym of no more
               Than that he is called fore
               Late rych with the rych man
               Do the best that they can
               And worke they good worke they yl
               Euer the pouer hold hym styl
               With his lyke about he go
               And entyrmete hym as with the
               Whare he shal haue drede none
               To hurte his hede agayne astone
            
            
               ¶The .C.xiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now for what sake
                  That god wold yt world make
               
               GOd made ye world as was his wyl
               The palays of heuyn to fulfyl
               Of the which aungels fel out before
               For the pryde they in wore
               And for that the trynyte
               Was not worshypped as it shuld be
               Than made he man that blysse to wyn
               That aungel had lost by synne
               But al tho that here are wrought
               Shal not to that blys be brought
               None but tho that are worthy
               For the good dedes of theyr body
            
            
               ¶The .C.xiiii. questyon
               
                  ¶How was the world made as it is
                  And how holdys it tel me this
               
               
                  
                  WHan aungel had don amys
               And was fal out of blys
               God cōmaunded there vnto
               Be made the world & it was so
               Fyre & ayre thē hyest drew truly
               For they ware lyghtest sykerly
               Erth and water doune them drest
               And the water vpon the erth doth rest
               And al foure by and by
               Ware hangyng in the mydel of the sky
               And fastenyng haue they none
               But of goddys myght a lone
               God made the world of the lykenesse
               Of an egge more ny lesse
               Be the shelle take I shal
               The fyrmament that closyth al
               Be the whyte the water take I
               That is betwene the erth and the sky
               Be the yolke that is innermest
               Take I the erth that is lowest
               And whan the yolke is sodde harde
               Awhyt is in the mydwarde
               Wherby I take hel
               For it is fortherest from the shel
               And so is hel heuyn fro
               Ferrest put in sorow and wo
               And echone is as thou mayst se
               There god them ordayned fyrst to be
            
            
               ¶The .C.xv. questyon
               
                  ¶Is eny other folke than we
                  That of the sonne hath the claryte
               
               
                  Dyuers other the world are in
               And fer from vs they byn
               Under vs they are loo
               That theyr fete agayne owrs go
               And who so al the world myght se
               In one sonne both be we
               But somtyme whan here is nyght
               Than haue they the day lyght
               And here somtyme shynyth the sonne
               Whan that they none se cone
               For whan the sonne to rest goyth thore
               Halfe pryme is it to vs and more
               And the roundnesse I wys
               Of the world makyth this
               Our somer and our wynter also
               Is both on vs and them vnto
               But after the sonne drawyth to endyng
               Whan here is erly than there is mornyng
               And in other placys mo
               Of the word it faryth so
               That some haue somer very hot
               There other haue wynter cold and wot
               And god hath of the sonne I wys
               Made the way that makyth al this
            
            
               ¶The .C.xvj. questyon
               
                  ¶How longe may the world be
                  And how brode and thyke is he
               
               HE that the world beholdyth all
               It is rownd as a ball
               And for his roundnes it behoue thanede
               That al one lyke be long and brede
               
                  Bud the thycknes also
               Is euyn wyth them two
               And in caas it ware al playne lande
               As the palme of my hande
               Aman shuld euery daye
               Go certayne myles by the waye
               And shuld haue no lettyng
               Of water ne no nother thyng
               The world for to thorow fare
               He shuld not come there
               His purpose throughe to go
               By a thowsand dayes without mo
               And that same shal he fynd that doth yede
               The thycknes as wel as the brede
            
            
               ¶The .C.xvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why shal god clene also
                  The folke of this world vndo
               
               GOd shal thys world destroye I wys
               For a better than it is
               For ware it now that here stode
               A rych palays and a good
               And the man that it longyd to
               Another hows had also
               Wel sympler and lesse worthy
               And it fortuned than chaunceably
               That of the palays fel awalle
               And lose therof the stones and al
               And that walle myght he not make
               But he wold the stones take
               Of the lytel hows besyde
               I trow there shuld no nother betyde
               
                  But he wold his paleys dyght
               As shortly as he myght
               And of his hows haue lytel care
               But that his palays fulfylled ware
               He ware a fole that wold chese
               The better for the wors to lese
               So faryth god I warne the wele
               For of his palays fel agreat dele
               And of this world no nother careth he
               But that his palays fulfylled be
            
            
               ¶The .C.xviij. questyon
               
                  ¶The fowles that in the ayre flye
                  How are they borne on loft a hye
               
               THe thycknesse of the ayre ahye
               Is the chefe cause truly
               That the fowles a lofte are borne
               Els ware theyr flyght forlorne
               The ayre is thycke and moyst also
               And wyl dysclose and close agayne to
               And whan the fowle is a lofte
               His wynges styreth he ofte
               With the warpyng of his wynge
               He doth the ayre a sondre mynge
               Which waxeth thycke and he is lyght
               And that hym holdyth in his flyght
               And that the ayre is thycke aboue
               Aman may wel proue
               Who so in his hande wyl take
               A yarde and it smertly shake
               It shal bowe in the shakyng
               And that doth no nother thyng
               
                  But thycknes of the ayre withstandys
               The yard in shakyng of thy handys
               And so it withstandyth the fowles al
               In theyr fleyng that they ne fall
            
            
               ¶The C.xix. questyon
               
                  ¶Among al other tel me yet
                  The rayne yt fallyth whens comith it
               
               BAyne is water of the see
               And with blast of wynde mountys he
               And whan the wynde is on hye
               The sonne that is hote kyndly
               Draweth the water fast hym to
               The wynde puttyth fast after also
               As that men may se somtyme
               A dew lyeng tyl halfe the pryme
               But whan the sonne his hete yeldys
               That dew in towne and in feldys
               He takyth vp and draweth fast
               And cometh to the ayre at the last
               And is there thyckened in cloude
               Than comyth wynde and blowyth lowde
               And beryth it in the ayre euerywhore
               Tyl it be waxen thycke and more
               Than begynneth it to be heuy sone
               Aod may not longe a boue wone
               But fallyth in rayne hastely
               And whan the rayne is doune clenly
               The cloude becomyth whyte and fayre
               Which is a the keelth of the ayre
               And that wastyth the sonne there nere
               And so becomyth the sky clere
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.xx. questyon
               
                  ¶Hayle stones that fal also
                  From whence and wherof come the
               
               
                  OF water gathered vnder ye sky
               And of kylth of the ayre on hy
               As whan a cloude is but thyn
               Lytel poure hauyng hym in
               And aboue in the ayre flye
               Wyndes that are colde and drye
               And whan that cloud shuld in droppes fall
               With coldnesse are they frosen all
               And that yt shuld haue fall rayne to ground
               They fall than in stones round
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof are the tempestes al
                  That somtyme among vs fall
               
               IN that yere that somer is cold
               And the moysture manyfold
               That is in the ayre holdyth styl
               And may not clensyd be at wyl
               But gatheryth fast and holdyth thore
               And in wynter encresyth to more
               Than be fallyth in some partye
               That the erth cleueth for drye
               The spered wyndes than come out
               And spred them al about
               In to the ayre theyr waye they take
               And therof great tempest make
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxii. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now for it is wonder
                  Wherof cometh the thounder
               
               
                  'RIse out of the erth arecke truly
               As a smoke men may se perfitely
               And exalacyons they hyght
               Which ascende in to the ayre ryght
               Hote and drye are some of tho
               And some hote and moyst also
               Whan they al the hyest are
               Of the ayre the wynd that is thare
               He that / that is hote and drye
               May the hastlyar vp a hye
               And whan the wete cometh thore
               For moysture gatheryth wynd sore
               And waxyth colde therby
               And thyckeneth also wonderly
               And than is it in sondre cast
               And cloudes made with wyndes blast
               And the exalacyon that is drye
               Is cast a mong the cloudes hye
               From one to another as a balle
               But at the last out it shal
               And whan he brekyth it asonder
               Anoyse it makyth that we call the thonder
               For drye among the wete wyl nought
               Dwel whan the wete pressys hym ought
               And by ensample thou mayst se
               On what maner it may be
               Let a man his handful holde
               Of whet or syluer which he wolde
               The more he the hande togethtr prest
               The more wyl it out threst
               And so it is to vnderstande
               Of the tother before hande
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.xiij. questyon
               
                  ¶The wynde yt blowyth by lād & see
                  Wherof euer may it be
               
               I Haue tolde here before
               Evalacyons what they wore
               And he that is hote and drye
               As I sayd wyl vp a hye
               Now whan it comyth clowdes amonge
               If the clowdes be thycke and stronge
               They cast that exalacyon
               To and fro vp and doune
               And be cause it is drye at the last
               It turneth in to wyndes blast
               And ware that exalacyon hote
               It turneth in to rayne wote
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶How yssueth water of hylles hye
                  That semed rather to be drye
               
               ALso as the veynes lye
               In mannys body lowe or hye
               So the erth that we on go
               Is vnder ful of veynes also
               And open the hyde the veyne vpon
               The blode spryngeth out anon
               Euyn as wel vpon the crowne
               As on the fote beneth downe
               So the veynes that in the erth lye
               Haue water runnyng lowe and hye
               Up and doune to and fro
               As the veynes in erth go
               And there they the erth feble se
               
                  Hye or lowe whether it be
               It brestyth out and rennyth there
               Hylle or dale whether it be
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxv. questyon
               
                  ¶The water that is in the see
                  Why is it salt tel you me
               
               IN the mydel of the world a see is
               Where the sonne euer brennyng is
               And by that brennyng hete
               Are the waters that shuld be swete
               Become bytter and salt also
               Which see renneth the other vnto
               Wherof al salt it is
               And ye hete of ye sonne makyth moche of this
               Ware it that the see styl stode
               And ware the water fresshe and good
               The stynke therof so great shuld be
               That al the fysshes in the see
               Shuld dye anon both great and smal
               And that ware vnto man great bale
               And on the land shuld be such stynke
               More than I can expresse or thynke
               Which shuld on lande so be here
               That it shulde al the people dere
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxvi questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof euer may it be
                  The lyghtenyng that we here se
               
               CLowdes somtyme on the sky
               Renne to gether vp a hy
               With so great fyre and so kenne
               That fyre lyghtenyth them betwene
               
                  And that is that we lyghtnyng call
               And somtyme downe wyl it fall
               Somtyme slekenys it a lofte
               In the cloude and that is ofte
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶The waters that ebbe & flow also
                  Wherof come they & whyter do they go
               
               
                  ALl the waters that euer be
               Al they come out of the see
               And thyther agayne they go
               Unto the see wher they came fro
               The waters that fall in erth synkyth
               And as a spryng the erth them drynkyth
               And whan they are come thether
               In veynes gather they to gether
               And they that go in by one syde
               By another out they glyde
               The erth takyth and geuyth all
               The waters that are and on erth fall
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxviii. questyon
               
                  ¶Hylles and roches ware they nought
                  Made whan ye world was fyrst wrought
               
               FRom the fyrst tyme of adam
               Unto the tyme that Noe came
               Was neuer hyl ne rocke with al
               But as playne about as a ball
               Rayne fell than to erth none
               No tempest was nor storme
               But in the tyme of Noe
               For the great iniquyte
               
                  And for the synne that adam wrought
               God sent astode that sesyd nought
               Xl. dayes and xl. nyghtes
               Al the world destroyed he thore
               Saue them that in the arch wore
               And the course of the stode them among
               In his comyng was so strong
               That where it neysshe ground fonde
               It dyd fret away both erth and sonde
               Stone and rocke felde and towne
               Al was turned vp se downe
               But whan the flode began to slake
               And lytel stremes for to make
               Stones on hepes so with stode
               And turned no more for the flode
               And whan some with stode so
               Mo them gathered vnto
               The neysshe ground the water doth fret
               For no hardnes it doth let
               And afterward the sonnys hete
               With frost and snow to gether do mete
               Dryuyng the stones to gether harde
               And became rockes afterwarde
               Wherfore by the forsayd skyl
               That flode made both dale and hyll
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal the dyluuy come eny more
                  In the world that was before
               
               GOd hath hyght vnto man kynde
               As we in our bokes fynde
               That neuer shal come to destroy man
               Such a dyluuy as than ran
               
                  But yf of synne man not amende
               A sharpe scourge he shal them sende
               That scourge is a swerd of wrake
               That one shal agayne a nother take
               And o
                     •
                  e shal a nother for do
               And destroye the world also
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxx. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan Noe shuld to the arch go
                  And of ech beastes toke wt hym two
                  Why wold he euyl beastes take
                  As scorpyons / adder / and snake
               
               NOe dyd them in the arch ley
               For two thynges that I shal the sey
               That one for the cōmaundment
               That god hym be the aungel sent
               And that durst he not breke
               For he sawe moch wreke
               Of ech one two god byd hym take
               For he wold not them al new make
               Wherfore his precept dyd he
               And of them came / that now be
               ¶That other was for mannys hele
               For but yf venemous beastes fele
               Ware dwellyng in ech countre
               So ful of venom the erth shuld be
               That it shuld enuenym al thynge
               As frute and corne that in erth dyd sprynge
               And so shuld no man therof ete
               But he dyed by that mete
               And the beastes ne lyue I wys
               But of the venym that in erth is
               
                  And they clense the erth by kynde
               Of the venym they therin fynde
               And al theyr venym is truly
               Of the erth that they lyue by
               For take an adder for asay
               The venemost that men fynde may
               And in a vessel hym do
               That no erth come hym to
               With flesshe and bred kepe it thore
               Fyftene dayes and no more
               Al his venom shalbe gon
               And hurte may he do none
               For venom in hym none doth abyde
               Except he on the erth do slyde
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxj questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof euer comyth the gold
                  That man so precyous doth hold
               
               THe myne of gold without mys
               In veynes of ye erth waxyng is
               And syluer also with metals mo
               Which the erth come fro
               But gold and syluer men fynde betwene
               The erth there it is pure and clene
               Men gather it and dyght it so
               With arte that they haue therto
               But there men it most fynde
               Is a lande by the west Inde
               In gyse of brasse men fynde there
               By the banke of the see euerywhere
               But euery man can not it dyght
               For to brynge it to the ryght
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.xxxi. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now yf thou wote
                  How out of ye erth spryng waters hot
               
               
                  WAters that al hote so sprynge
               Haue it somwher in theyr rēnīg
               By brymstone hath his cours
               And not fare from his sours
               By ye hete of y• kynd of brimstone
               The water becomyth warme anon
               And warme spryngeth out also
               And who so leyd his nose therto
               He shuld anon fele ful wele
               Sauoure of brymstone somdele
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxii. questyon
               
                  ¶Among al other tel me one
                  Wherof comyth the brymstone
               
               QUycke brymstone that men call
               Cometh of lyghtenyng that doth fall
               Upon roches by the see
               Eyther on hylles whether it be
               And so hard downe are they cast
               With ayre aboue and wyndes blast
               That they fall the erth within
               And that erth they lye and 
                     •
                  ry
                     •
                  
               
               Which erth ex
                     •
                  st hyght therby
               For it is brente so wondersly
               And that turneth to brymstone
               Which wellyth vp somtyme anon
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Carboncles and other stones mo
                  Wherof may come al tho
               
               
                  OUt of Nygre that is a see
               Where cokyls are in great plente
               And hang to gether two and two
               Openyng in the water hangyng so
               The rayne falleth from aboue
               And entres in them there they houe
               Whā they haue receyued the rayne astound
               They close them and go to ground
               And at the ground / lye they thore
               Wel a .C. yere and more
               And they that are of that countre
               Whan they seke them in the see
               Theyr vysages to couar they begyn
               With netes blathers blowen thyn
               And in blacke sowe them also
               For the fysshe wyl fle them fro
               Than go they doune them to wyn
               And perlys fynde they them with in
               Whyte and rounde but neysshe they be
               But whan they come out of the see
               And the ayre haue them smyt vpon
               They become ryght hard anon
               But tho that are not in season
               Nor theyr tyme haue after they wēte doune
               To be fulfylled by the ground
               They stynke as a pyllyd hownd
               The Carboncles come also
               Of cokyls as perles do
               But Carboncles of smal hayle fall
               And in fresshe water be they all
               They by the grounde wylbe
               Two hundred wynter wel or thre
               
                  And they stynke and fare amys
               Whan theyr tyme not fulfylled is
               But al the rayne that doth fall
               Turne not to stones al
               The rayne that the fyrst day fallyth
               Of the mone in Ianuary / that men callyth
               And the mone be in that sygne
               That vnto that thynge be dygne
               If that rayne in the cokyl go
               Perles shal come of tho
               And hayle that to fal is wone
               The eyght daye of the mone
               In feueryere and the mone be ryght
               In a sygne that Cancer hyght
               And the cokyls that hayle in take
               Carboncles therof they make
               But that rayne and hayle ech dele
               Fall ful seldome wyte you wel
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Of this world now tel me
                  How many landes therein be
               
               
                  LAnde but one is there none
               Who so al hole myght se there on
               But for departynge of the see
               That departyth them in thre
               Thre landes are that we call
               With out smale yles all
               But al are one lande to gethere fest
               And al vpon one grounde they rest
               And who so myght the lande be holde
               That no water let hym sholde
               
                  Al hole and one he shulde it se
               And so made god it to be
               The water aboue in sonder it castys
               But vnder hole and fast it lastys
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Myght eny man on drye lande wel
                  Go ye world about euery dele
               
               IN erth no man myght go
               The world about to ne fro
               For he shuld fynde many lettynges
               And that of many thynges
               He shuld fynde wastenes ful great
               There nethere were drynke ne mere
               But wylde beastes many one
               Redy to tere hym as a bone
               Ware a hundreth men on one wrought
               And yf that ne let hym nought
               The open erth shuld lettynge be
               That swellyth and geuyth agayne the see
               And many lettynges other mo
               If he est and west wyl go
               And yf north and south go he
               Many other lettynges be
               For thre zones shal he fynde
               Where no man may lyue in one kynde
               One is hote and colde are two
               May no lyuyng thyng be in tho
               And goddys wyl it is also
               Sha
                     •
                   no man be myghty therto
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxvj. questyon
               
                  
                     ¶Myght eny man sayle nyght & day
                  That had the wynde with hym ay
                  ¶So long y• his shyppe came vnrēt
                  To the turnyng of the fyrmament
               
               A Man that in a shyppe wore
               Thoughe he sayled euer more
               Yet shuld he not come nere the sky
               And I shal tel the why
               The erth is rounde as a ball
               In the mydel / and the sky ouer al
               Is alyke fer there fro
               And the water also
               Al about on the erth doth stande
               And thoughe a man toke vnderhande
               To sayle an hundred yere
               He shuld the sky be al so nere
               Whan that he from home went
               As whan his hundred yere ar spent
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why made not god man to be
                  Ay yong / ioylyfe / and of pouste
                  ¶Rych and longe lyfe hym lent
                  And at his deth to blys haue went
               
               HAd god made man on that manere
               As that thou tellyst here
               God as I thynke in my thought
               Had the deuyl great wrong wrought
               Which for a thought fel to hell
               And mo with hym than I can tel
               Shuld aman than be of longe lyfe
               Rych / yonge / and ioylyfe
               
                  And haue here al his delyte
               And than fare to heuyn quyte
               Noman is worthy to come thore
               But yf he haue don wherfore
               God hath graunted vs vnto
               Be cause we shal here wel do
               Helth with out sycknesse
               Ioy and delyte and great rychesse
               And lyfe also without ende
               For the deth that men here to wende
               Than is it for to reken ryght
               No other but as a by
                     •
                  des flyght
               That flyeth here in / yonder out
               And be a man neuer so stout
               Nor so yonge / nor fayre to day
               To morow shal it al a way
               I wold not lyue a thowsand yere
               And al my delyte haue here
               And than vnto heuyn gon
               I had leuer be there a non
               For one delyte that is thore
               Is worth a thowsand here and more
               And therfore ware it moche scate
               Thether for to come so late
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whiche are the aungels tel me this
                  That receyueth mannys soule to blys
               
               EChe man an aungel hath hym to
               To kepe hym that he not mys do
               And whan the soule at the ende
               Shal out fro the body wende
               
                  And it vnto god be dere
               The aungel that was his kepare here
               Shal come with great melody
               And of aungels great company
               Receyuyng hym vnto mede
               And to ioye hym lede
               After the tyme that is to sey
               That goddys sonne shal dey
               But or he dey on the rode
               Al go to hel wycked and good
               But al alyke shal they nought
               Be payned / but as they haue wrought
               And some shalbe in fre pryson
               Tyl tyme of his passyon
               But whan the great dome shalbe
               Men shal agre at wonder se
               Sowle and body to gether go
               And to gether fele ioye or wo
               And the sowle that to hel shal went
               The deuyl that hym holpe to shent
               Shal receyue hym and sey hym to
               Thou hast don as I bad the do
               Thou withstodyst not my wyl
               Nor my techyng vnto yl
               Wherfore shalt thou go with me
               Euer more in payne to be
               Thus shal they be receyuyd thycke
               Good with good / and wicked with wicke
            
            
               ¶The .C.xxxix questyon
               
                  ¶I pray the mayster sey me now
                  Which is better of the two
                  
                     ¶Good werkes without chastyte
                  Or werkes wickyd / and chast to be
               
               GOod werkes wolde I chese
               Thoughe I chastyte forlese
               For be thou chast of thy body
               And thou worke wickydly
               What vertu than hast thou in the
               Percaas is than thy chastyte
               For sycknesse that thou may not dure
               Or for kelth of thy nature
               Or for age that thou may no more
               What meryt art thou worthy therfore
               And than for to go sle aman
               Or to robbe in wode or fen
               Or thy neyghbore to begyle sotelly
               Or his good to forlese falsly
               What is worth such chastyte
               Whan thou of othere hast no pyte
               But that vnchast lyfe ledys
               And he be good of al dedys
               His synne doth no man dere
               But al one he shal hym bere
               And god alone he synneth to
               And that may he sone fordo
               With almes dede or other thyng
               But he that is of wickyd beryng
               And of wickyd dedes blynne ne can
               He synneth both to god and man
               And lyghter is it for to wynne
               Forgyfnes of god of synne
               Than of god and man both
               
                  For the mo that are to hym wrought
               The more labour pees to make
               For the better caas than wold I it take
               For to leue chastyte
               Than wickyd worke / and chast to be
            
            
               ¶The .C.xl. questyon
               
                  ¶What thyng may it euer make
                  Erth dyn yt doth the erth quake
               
               EXalacyons hote and drye
               That are drawen vp ryght hye
               And there with cloudes dryuen fast
               And hard downe to erth cast
               Which in to the cleft of the erth go
               As the cloudes shones them fro
               Comyth than hote wether and rayne
               Which spereth ye cleftes of the erth agayne
               The exalacyons dwel therin
               Spered and may not out wynne
               To and fro they moue them thore
               But out may they no whore
               And yf the exalacyon be
               Gathered ther great quantyte
               So hard meue them they shal
               That the erth quakyth with al
               And somtyme more somtyme lesse
               After as it is of mykelnesse
            
            
               ¶The .C.xli. questyon
               
                  ¶ Tel me now yf thou cone
                  Wherof is ye eclyps of sonne & mone
               
               
                  
                  OF y• mone is eclyps no dowte
               In ful mone or there about
               & whā ye ful mone stādithe south
               The sonne is than north
               A shadow of the erth ryseth sone
               Ascendyng vp a boue the mone
               And houeth long whyle of the nyght
               Betwyx her and the sonnys lyght
               For lyght hath the mone none
               But that the sonne her smyteth on
               And so the mone her lyght leues
               For the shadowe it reues
               But as she goys and her pace makys
               Fro the shadow / lyght she takys
               Eclyps of the sonne comenly
               Is in the new mone or there by
               Whan the mone is new ryght
               She is darke with out lyght
               And that tyme the sonne and she
               Be one syde of the sky shalbe
               And the sonne beme as it is wone
               Shuld lyght doune on the mone
               But yf the mone vnder alyne fall
               Lyne of eclyps that we call
               Lyght she taketh nought anon
               Unto she before be gon
               But vnto that she there shal houe
               Be twyx vs and the sonne aboue
               Her derknes ronnyth from our syght
               Moch of the sonnys lyght
               This is the kyndest eclyps to se
               That may of the sonne be
               
                  Other eclyps thre we fynde
               Of the sonne agaynst kynde
               One came in tyme of Noe
               Agayne that the dyluny shuld be
               Another shalbe in soth to sey
               I
                     •
                   tyme that goddys sonne dey
               And in the byrth shalbe the thryde
               Of the antechryst as shalbe kydde
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlij. questyon
               
                  ¶Sterres that men se fall
                  How fall they & frō whēs cōe they all
               
               UNderstand syr vyturly
               That no sterres fall fro the sky
               But I shal tel the what it may be
               That the folke so fallyng se
               It is a fyre that is abydyng
               In the hyest of the ayre brennyng
               Next to the spere of fyre
               And whan the nyght somtyme is shyre
               Sparcles of that fyre clere
               That moch hane of theyr matere
               Falle and perce the ayre on nyght
               And come so vnto our syght
               And semyth as it were a sterre
               That by the sky dyd slyde there
               For a sparkel comyng from so hye
               Unto a sterre is ful lykely
            
            
               ¶The .xliij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now or we further fare
                  How many heuens that there are
               
               
                  
                  WE lay yt there are heuens thre
               Wherof the one is that we se
               Turnyng about and is the sky
               And that heuen is bodyly
               And to our syght it is blew
               As it ware of asur hewe
               The tother heuyn of to tel
               Is there good aungels dwel
               That is goostly / and is al
               Of hew as it ware crystal
               The thyrd is goddys se
               Where he sytteth in maieste
               Therin is moch blys
               And of the gold of hew it is
               Of seuen heuyns also we tel
               For seuen planetes that therin dwel
               But ryghtly of heuens to lere
               So are no mo but thes thre here
            
            
               ¶The .C.xliiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now how hye the heuyn
                  Aboue the erth is for to neuen
               
               SO hye is heuyn the erth fro
               That yf it were now also
               That a stone in heuyn wore
               And weyed a hundreth stone and more
               And it shuld from heuyn fall
               Unto ground among vs all
               It shuld be seuen yere
               Or it to ground came here
               And neuer thelesse so fare they are
               That a good sowle shuld fare
               
                  Fro erth in to heuen stye
               In the twynkelyng of an eye
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlv. questyon
               
                  ¶The fyrmament that we ouer vs se
                  Of what myght may it be?
               
               
                  WHo so knowe it al aryght
               The firmamēt is of great might
               Euer abought it turneth aye
               And resteth neuer nyght nor day
               For this world had no festenyng
               Ne ware his aboute turnyng
               Ware it that it styl stode
               There nys man ne fysshe in flode
               Foule ne beast ne nothyng here
               That lyfe hath that ought myght stere
               All that euer we stere or go
               Or flyt other to or fro
               Al together is vs lent
               Of the turnyng of the fyrmament
               Therfore may thou se Iwys
               That of moche myght it is
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlvi. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now of what myght
                  The planetes are & what they hyght
               
               PLanettes gouerneth al thyng
               That lyueth or hath in erth waxyng
               And eche planet of his kynde
               To norysshe and geue his mynd
               Of the chylde eche alyke
               Whyle the mother go therwith quyke
               
                  Ech one than shapyth his
               Of euery lyme that in hym is
               And of planetes are but seuen
               Whos names I shal to the reken
               ¶Saturnus the fyrst we cal
               He is hyest of them al
               Most and strongest is he
               And he passyth in his countre
               The .xii. sygnes be one and one
               And he dwellyth in ech one
               Or he passe halfe thre yere
               And his planet of power
               The man that is borne therin
               And he dounward go to begyn
               Dounward shal he go of myght with al
               And yf he regne regne he shal
               And this planet regnyth of power
               Onys in a thyrty yere
               And his regne and his myght
               Is in a sygne that Lybra hyght
               And dounward he rest takes
               To a sygne hyght aries
               ¶The secounde planet is Iupyter
               He is not from vs so fer
               Of great ryches planet is it
               Of marchaundyse and of great wyt
               And among men of good loos
               And be the .xii. sygnes he goos
               Dwellyng in ech one
               A yere or he about haue gon
               The man borne in hym that is
               Of .xii. yere best of state he is I wys
               
                  In canser he regnes harde
               In Caprycorne he goyth dounwarde
               ¶The thyrde planet Mars is hyght
               Planet of warre and fyght
               And of blode spyllyng there men dey
               By the .xii. sygnes lyeth his wey
               And in ech one truly dwellyth
               Fourty dayes or he passyth
               He that is borne in that planet
               Within a yere may he byete
               And foure and thyrty dayes therto
               His dedes and his wyl also
               His regne is in Caprycorne
               And in Canser his myght is lorne
               ¶The fourth planet is the sonne
               And yf you vnderstande conne
               It is the planet of great worshype
               Of kynges and of 
                     •
                  ordshype
               Kepar of erth we hym cal
               And by the sygnes he passyth al
               And in ech whan he comyth thore
               He dwelleth a moneth and no more
               That is borne in that he may euery yere
               Change his worke and his manere
               His regne so is in A
                     •
                  yes
               And in Lybra he hym restes
               ¶The fyfte planet venus is
               Planet of loue / delyte and blys
               He that therin borne shalbe
               Feble herte shal haue of vanyte
               But in foure hundreth and forthy dayes
               May he change al his wayes
               
                  His worke and thought holly
               The .xii. sygnes goyth he by
               And in ech one of tho shal he
               Seuen and twenty dayes be
               In piscibus rayneth he stabely
               And doune he goyth in Gemyny
               ¶The syxte planet Mercurius
               That arte and conyng geuyth vs
               By the .xii. sygnes lyeth his wayes
               Dwellyng in ech one seuentene dayes
               He that is borne in hym may
               Be two hundred and the fourth day
               Chaunge his corage and his thought
               And the workes that he wrought
               ¶The mone the seuenth planet we say
               Planet of water and of waye
               By the .xii. sygnes she goyth also
               Dwellyng in ech one dayes two
               He that is borne in this planet
               In a moneth may he byete
               And chaunge his worke and wyl
               Be it good be it yl
               In Taurus comyth her regne vnto
               And abesses her in Scorpyo
               And al the world is not I wys
               So great as one planet is
               Saue the thre that lowest wone
               Uenus / Mercurius / and the mone
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now this ones yet
                  ¶How many maner of waters is it
               
               
                  OF waters many maner there be
               Fyrst the water of the see
               That al other waters come fro
               Water of welles there is also
               That theyr hew and manere
               Foure tymes change in a yere
               Welles are spryngyng elles whore
               Foure dayes in the weke no more
               I stode theris that rennyth ay
               Al the weke saue saturdaye
               A stode is in the est see ryght
               Which rennyth euer on nyght
               And a daye it frosen is fast
               But on nyght may it not last
               Yet men may a welle fynde
               In the yles of the see of ynde
               That who so put a stafe therin
               As of a fyre it shuld bryn
               And it nothyng slekyn can
               But only the breyne of man
               Other welles are yet mo
               And who the water dronke of tho
               Of some good memory shuld he take
               And some forgetfulnesse shuld make
               Some amerous wyl make the men
               And some wyl bareyne make wymen
               Some wyl make yren and stele
               In the fyre to tempre wele
               A great wel yet is there one
               Standyng stylle as eny stone
               But who so makyth solace there by
               Anone it rennyth hastely
               
                  Some waters are hote of kynde
               And some colde as men do fynde
               And the kynde of the ground causyth al this
               Where eny water rennyng is
               And al is at goddys wyl
               Both rennyng and stondyng styll
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Now wold I wyt of the see
                  How many sees that there be
               
               SEes we fynde there are thre
               Wherof one hyght the see beter
               Al about the erth goyth she
               And is salt as men may se
               That other see the blacke see hyght
               And enuyrons that other ryght
               The thyrd is called the stynkyng see
               Therin may no man lyuyng be
               For the stynke that it cometh fro
               Enuyrous truly that other two
               And god hath made them so to be
               Of his wyl and his potence
            
            
               ¶The .C.xlix. questyon
               
                  ¶Why hath god the world made al
                  Rownde aboute as a balle
               
               THere are many skylles why
               But thre I fynde pryncypally
               For his owne lycknes is one
               There non ende ne is vpon
               For he ne had begynynge
               Nor neuer shal haue endynge
               
                  And seke ye world neuer so wt trauayle & mīd
               No endyng shal men therin fynde
               Another sayl is comodyte
               Why it behoueth so to be
               For al the formes that thou knowst
               Rownde contaynes aldermost
               Now is it so at the begynyng
               That the world contaynes althyng
               Wherfore it behoued therto
               That it shuld rownde be also
               The thyrde cause is for the sky
               And I shal tel the how and why
               Late with war here fyll a canne
               And whan it is ful breke it than
               The wax shalbe of that shapnes
               As was the canne more ne les
               Now is the saye rounde and fayre
               And conteyneth fyre and ayre
               Water and erth ferrest therfro
               And al behoueth rounde to be tho
               The round saye the fyre round maketh
               And ayre of fyre roundhed taketh
               Water within ayre also
               And erthe within all tho
               And bycause the skye as thou hast hard
               Is round and al are in hym sperd
               All behoueth them round tobe
               As thou ere on the waxe myght se
            
            
               ¶The .C.l. questyon
               
                  ¶Why is the mone colde of kynd
                  And the sonne hote as we fynde?
               
               
                  The sonne is welle of hete
               And the mone of waters wete
               Now is that one drye and hote
               And that other moyst and wote
               The hete of the sonne doth spryng
               That in erthe is al thynge
               But with that hete may they not dure
               But yf they haue withal moysture
               And that the sonne heteth on daye lyght
               The mone keleth vpon nyght
               And geueth it moysture there vnto
               Therfore al thynges spryngeth so
               Shuld the sonne geue vs for aye
               His here bothe nyght and daye
               Man nor beast shuld lyue no throwe
               Ne nothyng shuld in erth growe
               And yf the keelth of the mone
               Shuld euer amonge vs wone
               And of the hete haue ryg
                     •
                  t nought
               Shuld no leuyng thyng forthe be brought
               Therfore hath god ordayned so
               As the world hathe myster to
            
            
               ¶The .C.lj. questyon
               
                  ¶Now I praye the tel me this
                  Whiche is the most thyng that is?
               
               
                  OF al thynge that thou most
               Goddes marcy is the most
               For no mouthe may speke I wys
               No harte thynke how great it is
               Unto tho that wyl it craue
               And desyreth it to haue
               
                  It is greater than al erth may be
               Or al the water in the see
               It passyth al leues that sprynge
               Or herbes / or eny other thynge
               Ye / an hundreth thowsand folde
               It passys al that I haue tolde
            
            
               ¶The .C.lij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether may grauel of erth mo be
                  Or droppes of water of the see
               
               
                  GRauel of the erth is wel more
               Thā al water dropes yt euer wore
               For al that were or yet shalbe
               Al they come of the see
               And for an handfuf of grauel
               Behouyth of droppes a gooddele
               For wel smaller is one hope
               Of grauel / than a water drope
               And water may be no where
               But yf erth be vnder there
               And many myles may men gon
               Drye / where no water is on
               And the see was neuer so depe a flete
               That deper ne is vnder erth grete
               And yf water vpon roche stande
               Under roche is erth molde or sande
               Now is the erth apperyng smal
               And wyde strekes hym with al
               In many stedes whare water is scante
               Is fownde of erth good plente
               Wherfore grauel of erth say we
               Are mo than water droppes be
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.liij. questyon
               
                  ¶May the grauel ought tolde be
                  Or water droppes of the see
               
               ANd the word such a thowsand wore
               As it is and wel more
               And that it shuld last with all
               Such a thowsand as now shal
               Foure and twenty howres ryght
               Are in the daye and in the nyght
               And ech a noure for to rekyn
               Syxty poyntes are therein
               And thoughe it myght so befalle
               That in ech a poynt of all
               Were borne a thowsand men or mo
               And ful hore were ech of tho
               Yet shuld the dropes of the see
               Be mo than tho heres be
               And yet is gretnes of erth more
               Than al the dropes wore
               And goddys mercy most of al
               He that wyth hert to hym wyl call
            
            
               ¶The .C.liiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Now wold I wyt vyturly
                  How many sterres are on the sky
               
               IF al the men a lyue wore
               That haue be ded here before
               Sythen that adam was forlorne
               And al that euer shalbe borne
               Betwyx vs and the world be gon
               Ware euery one borne anon
               So mykel folke there shuld not ware
               
                  As sterres on the heuen are
               But for the heyght of the sky
               Ne may no man se them perfytly
               Al the sterres that ther be
               But some apertly may men se
               How aboue with the sky they go
               As it them beryth to and fro
               Whan some go doune / some vp are went
               With meuyng of the fyrmament
            
            
               ¶The .C.lv. questyon
               
                  ¶Canst thou of aungels tel me ought
                  How many god in heuyn wroght
                  And how many be left therin
                  And how many felle for synne
               
               GOd of his mercy and myght
               Of aungels .ix. ordres hath dyght
               And in ech order made he
               Many a legyon for to be
               And a legyon I wys
               Syxe thowsand and syxe hundreth is
               With fyfty and syxe therto
               And al hym worshype to do
               But there felle out of ech one
               Al so many as came to one
               And also many were they tho
               As halfedele the folke and mo
               That haue be borne and borne shalbe
               And whan fulfylled is ech a se
               Of aungels that fel away
               Than shal it be domesday
               That god shal deme both good and yl
               And that shalbe at goddys wyl
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.lvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Which are the most of beast or mā
                  
                  Or fowle / or fysshe that swyme can
               
               BEastes are mo than men
               And fowles mo than beastes such ten
               And for ech afowle also
               A thowsand fysshes are and mo
               For therof is the most plente
               Of al creatures that be
               God made man of erth and slyme
               And best of hete he made hym
               Fysshes of water / fowle of ayre
               And al that he made is fayre
               And yf god them al had wrought
               Of erth lyke / as he dyd nought
               They shuld haue rysen al also
               At domesday as man shal do
               But for erth is in them none
               Wherfore to nought they turne ech one
            
            
               ¶The .C.lvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Of al the world tel me yet
                  The delectabelest stede which is it
               
               
                  WHere amannys hert is fest
               And for to dwele were leuest
               There is the delectabelest stede
               To hym that he may on trede
               For were aman in acountre
               In the fayrest stede myght be
               And had al that he had nede
               Hym to clothe and to fede
               
                  And his hert loued els whore
               No delyte had he thore
               But there aman louyth wel
               Though it be fowle euery dele
               There is his ioy and his solace
               More than in eny other place
            
            
               ¶The .C.lviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is more prowes and best
                  That in towne or in forest
               
               PRowes in towne as I wene
               Ne was euer worth abent
               It is no prowe / it is folye
               And keytefnes and mysardry
               Some man to aman ful ryfe
               Wyl drawe vnto a man his knyfe
               That wold neuer do so
               And it ware betwyx them two
               But there are thynges thre
               That make hym hasty to be
               One therof is folye
               That makyth his hert skyp a hye
               Anothere that he hopyth wel
               That the folke elke adel
               Shal stert on hym and hym hold
               And let to do that he wold
               The thyrd for his braynes smale
               Are turned by wyne or ale
               And he that assayled is
               Holdyth hym styl in al this
               He dredyth that he shuld hym slo
               And lord
                     •
                  hype feryth he also
               
                  The thyrd hedredyth his enemy
               For he wortyth not yf he be dowghty
               His owne lostes he feryth eke
               Which maketh his hert meke
               But ware they both in the forest
               There myght men know the best
               There shuld no men on them wonder
               No man put them in sonder
               Ne no baylyfe ware thereto drede
               But the boldar hym forth bede
               Wherfore prowes in towne as men tellys
               Nys but bost and nothyng ellys
            
            
               ¶The .C.lix. questyon
               
                  ¶If aman haue an euyl wyfe
                  Or be poure or of feble lyfe
                  Or haue a wemme in a lym
                  Shal a man vpbreyde it hym
               
               NO man ought othere vpbreyde
               For no lacke that on hym is leyde
               If he haue an euyl fere
               So god may send to hym here
               If he in pouerte fallen be
               So may perauenture to morow he
               For the whele of auenture
               No whyle wyl endure
               And yf he haue eny lacke
               Eyther on body or on backe
               Or eny of his lymmes al
               Upbreyd hym nought what so befal
               For he that sent hym that euery dele
               May send it to the ryght wele
               
                  Wherfore ech man fayrely speke
               That of his spech god take no wreke
            
            
               ¶The .C.lx. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal men euery man worshype do
                  And al theyr wyl do also
               
               AMan shuld al this do with skyl
               If that he myght come there tyl
               But no man may / no man can
               Do the wyl of euery man
               Neuerthelesse do not amys
               Worshype euery man as he is
               And fulfyl euery mannys wyl
               That turne thy selfe vnto no yf
               Do with good chere that thou shalt do
               To them that prayes the vnto
               And for a lytel say not nay
               To do theyr wyl yf thou may
               That thou desyrest shalt thou fynde
               And ech man to serue the shalbe mynde
               Thy honoure shal wyde wende
               Euery man shal holde the good and kynde
               Wherby may no yl of the tyde
               Thy good worde goyth so wyde
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal he ought forgotten be
                  That to lykyng hath seruyd me
               
               IF aman do me seruyse
               Unto my wyl in al wyse
               I ought to forget it neuer more
               Thoughe the seruyse lytel wore
               
                  For he that doth me lykynge
               He gyueth me inoughe of his thynge
               And I ought his helpe to be
               If he haue nede of me
               For euery man that doth a good dede
               Is worthy to haue wel his mede
               And the good wyl of such one
               Ought I euer to thynke vpon
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxij. questyon
               
                  ¶May aman hym ought with holde
                  From her that he hath in holde
                  That he no lechery do
                  Whan he hath great wyl therto
               
               
                  FUl wel aman may holde hym styl
               And withstande his owne wyl
               Fro lechery yf that he wyl
               Though he great wyl haue thertyl
               Late hym cast in his thought
               How fayre that hym god hath wrought
               At his owne lykenes to be
               And that so fayre a thyng to se
               Shulde be kepte clenly also
               That no fylth ne came ther to
               Were it now syr that a kynge
               Gaue me a robe of his clothynge
               Ful clene I wold it kepe and bryght
               And worshype it at al my myght
               For moch worshype to me it were
               A kyngys clothyng for to bere
               Euyn so shuld it with vs befall
               Of goddys clothyng are we all
               
                  And yf we thynke to hold it clene
               Our fowle wyl that was so kene
               Shal twyne away and passe for nought
               And kendele no more in our thought
               The more that men a fyre leys in
               The more and hotter wyl it bryne
               And it wyl not leue brynnynge
               But men it sleken with some thynge
               Euyn so brenneth lechery
               In man that geueth hym to foly
               And yf he wyl that it be layde
               Thynke on god as I haue sayd
               Also shal in his thought be
               What mede cometh of chastyte
               And yf he be tane in synne
               What payne shal his soule be in
               And thus maye he kele shortly
               His brennyng wyl yt was so outragyously
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶The grettyst delyte that is
                  Which is it tel me this
               
               I Fynde there are delytes two
               Bodely and goostly also
               The bodely wyl not last
               That men doth there on is a waye cast
               It fareth as the candel lyght
               That now brenneth ferly bryght
               Now than is it out quyte
               So fareth bodely delyte
               Goostly delyte is on other wyse
               As delyte in god and his seruyse
               
                  And tho that delyte them therin
               For to kepe them out of synne
               Wyte you wel that they tho
               In the payne of the wo
               That they suffer theyr sowle to saue
               Ful great delyte therin they haue
               And who so is therin brought
               That delyte ne keelyth nought
               It waxeth ay from lesse to more
               Euer vntyl aman come thore
               There no ende may be
               Which is before the Trynyte
               And there shal his delyte betolde
               More than here a thowsand folde
               Wherfore the most delyte that is
               Is to delyte in god I wys
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now yf that aman
                  Shal ought delyt hym with a womā
                  
               
               DElyte with wymen are there twye
               And which they are I shal the seye
               That one is goostly with chast lyfe
               As aman with his owne wyfe
               Flesshely knowe her wel he may
               Chyldren to wyne to goddys pay
               And fro that tyme that he
               Wotyth that she with chylde be
               He shal hym hold from her holly
               Tyl it be borne of her body
               This is delyte of chastyte
               That dygne and honest ought to be
               
                  Bodely delyte there is also
               That no tyme hath reward vnto
               But euery tyme that wyl hym takys
               His fles
                     •
                  hly lust he not forsakys
               And that is purly lyfe of beast
               That nother is good ne honest
               And such a delyte with woman
               Shuld no man haue that good can
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxv. questyon
               
                  ¶If one hoost a nother mete
                  Shal he anon on hym shete
               
               CUm an hoost wt al theyr mayne
               And another come them agayne
               Smyte anōe ne shal they nought
               Theyr cheueteyne shal haue forthought
               And be wel aduysed and wyse
               And ouer se his enymes
               And yf he haue hope in his mode
               That his partye may be good
               He shal ordeyne his folke wysely
               And be vygorus and hardy
               And his enemes assayle
               As it fallyth to batayle
               And yf he aperceuyng is
               That the feblear syde be his
               He shal comfort his folke ycke dele
               And make good vysage and bere hym wele
               And fare a
                     •
                   he had no awe
               And in al that hym with drawe
               Holdyng them fast to gether so
               That none outraye other fro
               
                  Yf his fleynge may not auayle
               But that other hym assayle
               Uygorously he than withstande
               And harte his folke to be doand
               The feble syde parchaunce so may
               With lytel scathe scape away
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Which membres of the man are tho
                  That he worste myght forgo?
               
               
                  AMan myght no lym forbere
               But yf it hym greatly dere
               And some one myght he worse for go
               Than he myght other two
               For thoughe he forgo fote and hand
               Eere and eyen thoughe hym wante
               Yet maye he be ful hote of herte
               And leue many daye in quarte
               But ware teethe and tonge forgon
               Good lyfe after had he none
               For tho are the most hardely
               That helpe to sustayne the body
               The tonge the mete turneth al
               Under the tethe that chewe it shal
               And the tonge is made also
               Unto god worshyp to do
               The teethe gryndeth the mete small
               That the body leueth withall
               And for that aman may nought
               Without these be forth brought
               Therfore tothe and tonge are tho
               That aman may worst forgo
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.lxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶The fyrst instrument who made it
                  And how came it in his wyt
               
               OF the chyldren of Noe
               Iaphet the yongest of the thre
               He contryued it and wrought
               As god it sent in his thought
               And of the sounde he it toke
               Of trees that the wynde shoke
               And also of waters soune
               That ran harde from hylles doune
               Some soune was lowe and some hye
               And therof founde he melody
               An instrument he made anone
               That melody to worke vpon
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxviii. questyon
               
                  ¶He that is dome / defte & may not se
                  What spech in his hert thynkeh he
               
               
                  A Man that is borne to day
               Doum and defe that se ne may
               No langage ne may lere
               For that he may nought here
               Than behouyth hym of kynde
               Nedly in his he
                     •
                  te haue mynde
               Of the spech that Adam spake
               Or he goddys precept brake
               That is ebru that god gaue man
               Fyrst whan he to speke began
               For yf a tree a frute here
               Be it appul / be it pere
               
                  The frute must take kynde and hewe
               Of the rote that it on grewe
               But the kynde of the tree
               Sal chaunge yf it imped be
               And but aman haue impyng
               Of langage through some lernyng
               The fyrst speche haue he shal
               That man was fyrst lernyd with al
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Why are some cloudes of the sky
                  Whyte and some blake there by
               
               
                  CLoudes somtyme are ryght thyn
               For lytel water that there is in
               Than comys the lyght of the day
               And the sonne that shynes ay
               Which geuyth on the cloude lyght
               And the cloude that is of lytel myght
               Is throughe shyned ther with al
               Wherby whyte he shewe hym shal
               For throughe water may men se
               If that it not depe be
               The cloude that blake is to our syght
               Is thycke of water and of myght
               And for the thycknes that he haas
               May no lyght there thorow paas
               Wherfore holdys it odrye
               Not ful mykel vp on hye
               And be cause it is thycke and lowe
               Behouyth it blake to vs to showe
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxx. questyon
               
                  ¶May no creature that god wrought
                  Wyte goddys wyl nor his thought
               
               
                  GOd made neuer creature
               Aungel ne man nor other fygure
               That myght wyte goddys thought
               Nor his wyl tyl it was wrought
               Whan he eny thyng wyl do
               He says be made and it is so
               But or he it in werke fulfyl
               There may no man wyte his wyl
               God wottyth the thoughtes of ech one
               But his knoweth ryght none
               Saue the holy Trynyte
               For al one are they thre
               Somtyme wottyth man what god do wyl
               That is he that he sendyth vntyl
               By aungels to tel hym his thought
               Ellys none wote it nought
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Yet wold I wyte yf I may
                  If aman shal worshype god alday
               
               EUery man shuld with ryght do so
               But theyr myght is not therto
               For the body is feble of myght
               And behouyth somtyme rest with ryght
               And but he rest may haue
               Longe may he not the lyfe saue
               Wherfore god honoure he may
               At serteyne howres of the day
               And in serteyne tyme he shal
               Trauayle to hold the lyfe with all
               And somtyme rest shal he take
               The body stronge with to make
               
                  For after mete and drynke is rest
               To nature of the body best
               And whan he shal god worshype do
               Loke al his herte be therto
               For he that sayeth to god his bede
               And his thought be in other stede
               The tonge were as good be styll
               For it askys with no wyl
               Wherfore that god worshype shal
               Speke tonge / herte / thought and al
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof may it be and why
                  That eyne somtyme loke bleryly
               
               SOmtyme herys aman a thyng
               That is not to his lykyng
               Or a thyng of great pyte
               And he of tender herte be
               The herte mekys anone ryght
               And castyth wather to the syght
               So wepe the eyne also smert
               And al makyth the tendernes of the herte
               And of that herte shal seldom
               Euyl wyl of felnesse come
               And the eyne that wepe ofte
               Oldeth the herte and doth it softe
               For the hete that the herte felys
               With the teres greatly kelys
               But he that not wel 
                     〈◊〉
                   wepe
               Great felnesse in his herte can kepe
               And of hard herte than is he
               And of no mercy nor pyte
               
                  But he that to wepe is redy
               In hym is pyte and mercy
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶What maner of folke are mē hold to
                  In this world worshype to do
               
               EUery man shal pryncypaly
               Worshype god that is on hy
               That hym made and shal vnmake
               Whan that talent wyl hym take
               His wyfe shal man worshype also
               For one body are they two
               His lorde also worshype he shal
               That he seruys and dwellyth with al
               Father and mother also shal he
               Worshype before al that be
               Yet shal he worshype for theyr mede
               That hym good doth with worde or dede
               Suster and brother and his kynde
               Unto worshype shuld he haue in mynde
               And euery man yf that he myght
               Ought he to worshype with ryght
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxiiii. questyon
               
                  ¶The largest man which is he
                  That now in the world may be
               
               
                  A Large man that haue shal
               Thoughe he the world seke al
               Shal he none fynde ne se
               That of his owne may large be
               For of no largenes told it is
               Aman to gyue that not is his
               
                  For al the largesse that men telles
               Of god they are and no man elles
               And al that man is sent
               Of goddys loue it is hym lent
               For nakyd hyther is he brought
               And of hym selfe he hath nought
               And nakyd away shal he wende
               With hym he berys it not at the ende
               And yf it his owne were
               Than myght he it with hym bere
               And god hym lendyth good truly
               That he it spend worthely
               Hym selfe at mesure for to fede
               And helpe the pouer that hath nede
               And seyng he is bounde therto
               The pouer for to helpe also
               So may no man make his roos
               That it is largesse that he doos
               Wherfore wote I no large man
               That to hym selfe appropryat it can
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal a pouer man euery whore
                  Put hym arych man before
               
               IF it be so that they tweye
               Go to gether by the weye
               The pouer man shal euer more
               Put the rych man before
               And at one table be they
               The pouer set hym not to hye
               For yf arycher come than he
               Hym behouyth to flyte his se
               
                  And than better yt wore
               That he had set hym els whore
               But be they both in a batayle
               And shal theyr enymes assayle
               There the pouer with out drede
               Before the rych hym forth bede
               For a pouer may be also doughty
               As arych man of his body
               And with yt forth puttyng percaas he may
               Worshype more get than ye rych that day
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Is a man in eny synne to ete
                  Al thyng that he may gete
               
               UNto man god had such loue
               That he made to his behoue
               Fowle and fysshe in the see
               Beast and frute in erth to be
               And whan that he man had wrought
               And in to paradyse hym brought
               He made hym lorde of al thys
               Them to put in his seruys
               And for to vse them to his fode
               For god made al thynges good
               And seyng he gaue hym leue ther tyl
               He doth no synne me thynke with skyl
               That of al thyng etes
               At mesure whan he it gethes
               For what he etes with good wyl
               Ne may euer do hym yl
               Though it adder were or snake
               But yf he agayne herte it take
               
                  Though it be the best men fynde
               It doth no good to his kynde
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal aman another grete
                  Alday whan he may hym mete
               
               AMan so ofte nought grete thou shal
               As thou hym metyst aday with al
               But yf thou in thy hows be
               Among thy folke and thy meyne
               Gretyng shalt thou sey them thore
               Twyes vpon the day no more
               On morne whan thou comyst them amonge
               And on euyn at thy bede goynge
               And mete thou thy frende be the strete
               Ones in the day thou shalt hym grete
               And thou shalt say hym that gretyng
               After the tyme of your metyng
               At morne or euyn wether it be
               And yf that he fyrst grete the
               Grete hym agayne curtesly
               Men shal the say worshyp therby
               But thou hym shalt but onys grete
               On the day that thou hym ofte mete
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal aman his chyldren ordre
                  So that after repentyth not he
               
               IF you haue chyldren kepe them wel
               Tyl they be of age somedele
               And than yf thou haue them dere
               Cause them some crafte to lere
               
                  That in nede myster can
               His conyng is esy to bere
               It wyl helpe and nothyng dere
               There is no tresure therto
               For tresure wyl a way go
               And whan the tresure is gon al
               Conyng a gayne it bryng shal
               Daunt them not whyle they are yonge
               But sharpe wordes of thy tonge
               Sey vnto them euer amonge
               So shal they drede to do wronge
               With thy chyldren do thou shal
               As men doth a grene wand with al
               It may be wrethen whyle it is grene
               How so men wyl without tene
               Were it drye sone wold it crake
               A withe therof shuld no man make
               So shuld men chyldren chastyse in youth
               Tyl that they some good couth
               For that yougth takyth comenly
               In age he shal fynde it redely
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether shal amā more loue haue tyl
                  His wyfe or chyld with skyl
               
               AMan shal loue ouer al thynge
               God his maker heuyn kynge
               And next his owne body
               And than his wyfe pryncypaly
               His chyldren ought aman by kynde
               For to loue and haue in mynde
               But whan god fyrst made adam
               
                  And Eue of his body came
               He gaue hym her vnto fere
               And bade hym for to haue her dere
               Than in that geuyng made he
               Man and his wyfe one to be
               And yf thou and thy wyfe be one
               And that partyng is none
               Ne none other may forsake
               Unto deth the one take
               Thou ought thy wyfe to loue more
               Than al the chyldren that thyne more
               If thou forlese thy good wyfe
               Than lesyst thou the solace of thy lyfe
               And yf thou thy chyldren forgo
               Of thy wyfe may thou wyn mo
               Wherfore shalt thou thy wyfe loue more
               Than thy chyldren and hold in store
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxx. questyon
               
                  ¶If I had no father borne
                  Ne no mother me beforne
                  How shuld I haue borne be
                  In this world or here or se
               
               
                  LOnge or god the world wrought
               Or man or beast therin brought
               He knewe al that shuld be borne
               Which saued and which forlorne
               And al theyr names and thought
               God had bene elles nought
               Wherfore he wyst wel of the
               That thou shuldest borne be
               And seyng thou nedys shuldest be borne
               
                  Though thy father the beforne
               Ne thy mother that was also
               Had nother come this world vnto
               Another father thou shuldest haue had
               And mother that had the both fede and clad
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶The chyld that hath ful the shap
                  In the mother / by what hap
                  Is it somtyme brought to nought
                  And may alyue forth be brought
               
               BE thre causes may it come to
               Why it comyth to pas so
               One than may be goddys wyl
               That he wylleth that it shal spyl
               Another skyl also ther is
               Why it so fareth somtyme amys
               The feble norysshyng in the wyfe
               That it may not come to lyfe
               For the feblenesse of the which norture
               Makyth the seed not to dure
               Feblenes of raynes the thyrd
               As in woman is be tyde
               Some woman with chyld may be
               And so feble of rayns is she
               That she is not of the myght
               Of the chyld to suffer the weyght
               The mother sterys and turnes about
               So that the chyld fallyth out
               Whan it is out than is it lorne
               And so than is it ded borne
               And by the grace of goddys myght
               The mother sperys a non ryght
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.lxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wymen yt in this world are here
                  Are they al of one manere
               
               
                  WImen are made al after one
               In flesshe / blode / hyde and bone
               And al the lymes yu seyst one bere
               Euery one such lymes were
               And that men felys one vpon
               May men fele on euery one
               But of complexcyon are they sere
               Of word / wyl and of manere
               But al on one delyte men fynde
               Whan it comyth to dede of kynde
               Ofte of wathers may thou se
               That of dyuers hewes they be
               But in thy mouth yf thou them take
               Al as one water shal they smake
               So do wemen whare they fare
               Al of one sauyour they are
               But thynketh some man
               That swetar is some woman
               Than some other fyftene
               And of that may be thre thynges mene
               One is yf she be fayre and whyte
               For aman hath more delyte
               In her that is bryght on ble
               Than in a lothlyer on to se
               Another cause is noble wede
               For aman geuyth gladder mede
               To her that nobely is dyght
               Than to a pouer raggyd wyght
               The thyrd skyl is whan a man
               
                  So great loue hath to woman
               That hym thynkyth none so swete to hold
               For loue hath no lacke it is sayd of olde
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶If thy frend haue wyfe and meyne
                  And them mysdo thou se
                  Salt thou vnto thy frēde it sey
                  And his wyfe and meyne be wrey
               
               IF thy neyghbor haue a wyfe
               That be of euyl lyfe
               And thou may it vndertake
               That she wronge doth agayne her make
               Or dystroyer of his good be
               And thou maye it wete or se
               Warne hym so preuely and styl
               That he smyte in none euyl wyl
               But byd hym that he loke therto
               So that they nomore do so
               And make he hym wroth at the fyrst
               Whan that he the soth hathe wyst
               And throughe thy wordes he shal take hede
               And than shal he the better spede
               And saue his good that shuld away
               And yf thou hym no word dyd say
               For men sayne in olde sawes
               By good neyghbours god day men dawes
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Yf a man any thynge shal do
                  Shal he hym ought hast therto
               
               
                  IF thou thynke to do a good dede
               Hastly therto thou the spede
               For good dede shal haue no respyte
               He doth it twyes that doth it tyte
               But thynke thou euyl dede to do
               Haste the nothyng there vnto
               Be thynke the fyrst in thy herte
               That it the not after smerte
               For yf that thou take good hede
               Euyl haste is al vnspede
               In lytel tyme may befalle the
               That thy herte may chaunged be
               So that thou shalt the with holde
               Fro that thou fyrst don wolde
               And than shalt thou lyke wele
               That thou hasted to it no dele
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal he that eny good can
                  In this world loue euery man
               
               GOostly for god loue shalt thou
               Euery man and I shal tel the how
               Tyl his sowle no euyl wyl
               More than thou wylt thyne owne tyl
               But bodely thy loue shalbe
               To euery man as he loueth the
               Loue he the loue hym a geyne
               And of his company be feyne
               Hate he the / hate hym also
               And do with hym as he wold to the do
               Come thou to thy frendes hows
               There thy foes thou feryst not thus
               
                  He wyl receyue the with blys
               And for the the gladder he is
               If thou eny thyng hym craue
               With good wyl thou mayst it haue
               Such aman shalt thou loue ageyne
               And his wyl to do be feyne
               If thou come vnto thy foo
               That sawe the leuer hang than go
               Despyte of hym may thou gete
               Or eyther drynke or mete
               From such aman shalt thou fle
               And hate hym as he doth the
               For in old sawes says men that
               He that loues there he is hate
               Agayne the streme he rowes sore
               And to lese hath he no more
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶The folke of this world ech one
                  Are they comune after one
               
               BEtwyx them is comunaute
               In some thynges as thou may se
               For al are they borne in care
               And al shal they hens fare
               And al shal they rotte away
               And al aryse at domysday
               But betwyx them in some thyng
               Is dyuersyte / for some is kynge
               Some pouer and vyle is theyr mete
               Some lyue by that they may gete
               Some go clade and some bare
               And of dyuerse manere men are
               
                  Of dyuerse wyl of dyuerse thought
               Here in comune are they nought
               And as here is dyuersyte
               So shal there in other world be
               Some shal in to payne be brought
               To dole the werkes that he hath wrought
               And some shal in to payne of helle
               There with out ende to dwelle
               And some shal in to heuyn blys
               That nothyng here haue don amys
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Do men the rych honour ech one
                  And vnto the pouer eyhgt none
                  In the other world also
                  As men here in this do
               
               ARych man more honour shal haue
               In other world than he can craue
               And the pouer more shame suffer
               Than eny man here and greatter
               The rych there shal honour fynde
               And the pouer set behynde
               But they haue no man there dere
               After as he was rych here
               Understand now yf thou can
               Al the ryches of the man
               Is the sowle that hym is in
               And yf it be clene out of synne
               It is noble and rych
               Hym shal aungels of make mych
               And worshyp do to hym truly
               For the goodnes that he is rych by
               
                  The pouer sowle that synful is
               Shal nother haue honour ne blys
               The aungels turne theyr face therfro
               For it for pouert goyth to wo
               Worshyp gettyth it ryght none
               Ware it rych it had good wone
               But his ryches was al spent
               And from hym clenely it went
               Whan he goddys precept forsoke
               And to deedly synne hym toke
               Therfore after as his ryches wore
               Is he worthy to be honoured thore
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal the father bere eny bourthyn
                  For his sonne / or his sonne for hym
               
               THe father of the sonne shal bere
               No burthen that hym may dere
               Ne the sonne not charged is
               With that the father doth amys
               Ech man of his owne synne
               Is charged that he deyes in
               But for the sonne the father may
               Be charged oft and euery day
               As yf that the sonne mysdo
               And the father wote that it be so
               And chastyse hym not of his synne
               But sufferyth hym to be therin
               He synnes al so wel as he
               And for hym charged shalbe
               The sonne for his dede doyng
               And the father for his sufferyng
               
                  But the father is charged nought
               Of that that the sonne wrought
               But that he myght a hym corrected
               If he had to hym ought seyed
               But by sufferaunce ther is he in nede
               Charged for his sonnys mysdede
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶They that slee men and vndo
                  Take they theyr synne them vnto
               
               NAy / synne yt one man hath wrought
               May charge a nother nought
               No man with ryght may other slo
               For no mysdede ne for no wo
               But yf it by lordshyp be
               That of god hath the pouste
               Iustyce for to do the ryght
               Therto is hym geuen myght
               And yf aman for wrath or hate
               Sle another in the gate
               The synne of the ded chargys hym nought
               Hym that hym to ded brought
               But what he dyd euyl or wele
               Shal cleue by hymselfe euery dele
               Nought than may be of godys mercy
               That he that ys slayne wrongfully
               May of som synne releasyd be
               For the sharp dede that he
               Agaynst ryght was brought vnto
               And he that hym slew also
               Encresyth his synne where he goyth
               By also many as he sleyth
               
                  For greatter synne nought tel I can
               Than wylfully to slee a man
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxx. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is most sorow thynkyth the
                  That thou heryst or doest se
               
               SIght of eye wyl more dere
               Than that a man heres with ere
               For that a man sees with eye
               That may be no flatery
               For he sees al the dede doyng
               And al the sorowe of that thyng
               That moste go ryght nere the herte
               And doth it aldermost smert
               For olde men say / and it is newes
               That eyne ne se / herte ne rewes
               But that a man is told vnto
               He wottyth neuer yf it be so
               And though he trow he say aryght
               Yet deryth it nothyng the syght
               For the herte thynketh as it wold
               It is not perchaunce as it is tolde
               And thus conforteth he vyturly
               Al the wyttes of the body
               Syght of eye is bodely
               And heryng of ere is goostly
               Ryght as the wynde so is heryng
               That is herde and sene nothyng
               Wherfore more sorow is to se
               Than to here what so it be
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxj. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Myght men eny folke synde
                  That etyth other agayne kynde
               
               HE that trauayles day and nyght
               To hurte his neyghbor with vnryght
               To lese his good that he wan
               With trauayle or craft that he can
               And that he shuld his lyfe with lede
               For to clothe hym with and to fede
               Me thynke he byteth hym very sore
               And eteth hym as that it wore
               Yet is there another manere
               Aman to ete another here
               Yf he a lesyng on hym lye
               Wherfore he hathe great vylonye
               Or sayth of hym euyl behynd his backe
               Or before men maketh of hym alacke
               He eteth hym without methe
               Thoughe he not byte hym with his tethe
               And he that sleeth aman also
               And hath no cause ther vnto
               Or for gyft that hym is hyght
               Forsothe he than hym eteth ryght
               And more maners the
                     •
                  e is of mete
               That aman may another ete
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the worst thyng of thes thre
                  Morder / thefte / or a slanderer to be?
               
               TO be a slanderer is a wycked lyfe
               For he maketh ofte great stryfe
               He is aboute day and nyght
               To make debate vnto his myght
               
                  And so may he by wickyd rede
               Be encheson a man to be deed
               Wherfore it is great folye
               To haue such one in company
               Theft also is great synne
               For he that wyl neuer blynne
               To stele his neyghbor fro
               That he hath byde for moch wo
               And so doth he agayne hym dryue
               In wo and trauayl to lyue
               Or to begge for euer more
               Loke what synne he doys thore
               But the most synne of al tho
               Is man to murdre and slo
               For he destroyeth that stature
               That god made after his fygure
               And reues lyfe ther it shuld be
               And goddys seruyse so lettyth he
               Mannys lycknes slo shal he nought
               Ne none but god that hym hath wrought
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Forgeuyth god with good chere
                  Al the synnes that a man doth here
               
               IF al the droppes in the see
               And grasses that in erth may he
               And al the leues men can neuen
               And al the sterres of heuen
               And al the fysshes that swyme can
               And al the heres of beast and man
               Ware al on one synne brought
               The tenthdele ne were they nought
               
                  Of the mercy of god of heuen
               For that may no man sume ne reken
               Had aman done al the synne
               That al this world durst begyn
               And he had sorow in herte therfore
               And wold leue and do no more
               God wold on hym haue mercy
               And forgeue it hym redely
               Admyttyng hym among his meyne
               And of his turnyng glade be
               But he that leuyth not his synne
               Ne nought therof wyl blynne
               Nother mercy wyl craue
               He is worthy none to haue
               For who so askys vnworthely
               It may be denyed iustly
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why trauaylys aman so
                  In this world as men do
               
               
                  FOr two thynges pryncypaly
               The one to susteyne the body
               The other that it strong be
               To serue god in Trynyte
               As in prayer and almesdede
               For tho wyl the sowle fede
               And to gather haue in mynde
               To leue his chyldren and his frende
               Al his trauayle shuld be here
               To saue the sowle that god hath dere
               And to do as that we fynde
               As the myre doth in his kynde
               
                  By somers dayes he gaderys al
               That he in wynter by lyue shal
               He wyl not so long abyde
               That it come to the wynter tyde
               Euyn so shuld a man lere
               To tyl his sowle whyle he is here
               Abyde he tyl he hens fare
               Colde wynter he fyndys and care
               Wherfore shuld he so trauayle
               That it myght after hym a vayle
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now with out mys
                  Which is the wickest thyng that is
               
               
                  WIckydare thyng may none be
               Than wickyd man in pouste
               For the sowle that is in hym
               Is both myrke and dym
               And a wickyd mā myght se byn
               How darke his sowle is for synne
               So fowle a thyng shal he se it
               That he shuld forlese his wyt
               Wherfore is there no myrcknesse
               Agayne a man in wickydnesse
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶The good werkes and the yl
                  That a man doth of his wyl
                  Whether come they of god hym to
                  Or of hym selfe that doth them so
               
               UNderstand you wel I wys
               That of god no euyl is
               
                  Of hym is al holynesse
               And al fayrhed and goodnesse
               And for goodnes man he wrought
               To paradyse whan he hym brought
               He gaue hym wyt as was his wyl
               For to know both good and yl
               And whan aman had knowlegyng
               Of both / than was at his chosyng
               Whether he wold take vnto
               And than began he euyl to do
               Whan that he the good lete
               Bytyng the appul that he dyd ete
               And sythen he myght do whether he wold
               And he wold vnto the wyckyd hym hold
               Of hym selfe euery dele it is
               That he dyd so amys
               To helpe he had an enymy
               And so hath both thou and I
               Thre we haue euery day
               Us to tempt al that they may
               Our owne flesshe / the world / the sende
               Ech one wold vs truly shend
               But we knowe among al this
               Which is better and which wors is
               Than is that wickydnes euery dele
               Of hym that doth it and myght do wele
               If a man were wel be thought
               To thanke hym that made hym of nought
               He shuld haue grace wel to do
               And wickydnes hold hym fro
               Wherfore of god comyth vs goodnes in
               And of our selfe euyl and synne
            
            
               
               ¶The .C.lxxxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Where hydeth hym ye day fro nyght
                  And the nyght fro the day lyght
               
               THat tyme that god the world dyght
               Of his word and of his myght
               The elements were myxt ech one
               And lyght on erth was none
               Than departyd them god asonder
               And ech one dyd set other vnder
               Than made he sonne and mone to lyght
               That one on day that other on nyght
               The sonne aboute goes euer more
               To lyght here and elles whore
               Whan he vs lyghteth it is day
               And nyght whan it is a way
               And whan he departyth vs fro
               About the erth behoueth hym to go
               And the erth that is so rounde
               Reues vs in that stounde
               The lyght that we had of hym
               And than is the nyght to vs dym
               But whan the sonne is aboute went
               And agayne is to vs sent
               Sone so as he shewes eny thyng
               We se it is in the dawyng
               And as he ryses ay and ay
               So waxes vs the clere day
               Thus departyth day and nyght
               By reson of the sonne lyght
               And euer whan comyth that one
               The other departyth anone
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxviij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶How hold the planetes them al
                  On the sky that they ne falle
               
               
                  WHan god had dyght y• fyrmamēt
               And stabled euery element
               On the sky vnder the heuen
               Made he planets seuen
               And he made vp on hye
               Al the sterres of the sky
               And ech planet ther he is
               In his owne spere goyth I wys
               The mone so is lowest of al
               The hyest Saturnus we call
               And al haue they theyr steryng
               A gayne the sky in his goyng
               And euer the hyer that they be
               The more to go hath he
               Some as a yere and some two
               In his spere about to go
               And some about to go also
               Haue but a moneth therto
               And al they are of kynde
               Of the fyrmament as we fynde
               Hauyng to gether a fastenyng
               So that there may be no partyng
               And so god hath ordayned them al
               That none may from other falle
               So may none falle from other wel
               Tyl god vndo the world al ech dele
            
            
               ¶The .C.lxxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶How may mē yt howres know aryght
                  And the poyntes of day and nyght
               
               
                  IN what lande thou be
               Thou mayst esely know and se
               Sone so the sonne thou se may
               That is apoynt of the day
               And whan the sonne to rest is gon
               Thou knowest that it is nyght anon
               And the nyght with the day
               Haue but foure and twenty howrs ay
               And euery howre hath no more
               But a thousand poyntes and foure score
               And this thyng may thou wel
               Be a candel prowe ech dele
               Be the day short or longe with sayl
               The therbe shal not mysse yf thou wyl
               Reckyn the day after as it is
               And the nyght as rekenyd is
               And ech an howre know thou may
               Whan it comyth and passyth away
            
            
               ¶The .CC. questyon
               
                  ¶Al the sterres vp on hy
                  Turne they about on the sky
               
               TUrnyng are the sterres ay
               And as the sky goyth so go they
               And for the turnyng of the sky
               Is that they go so hastely
               But one ther is that semith nought
               Unto our syght that it goyth ought
               And yet is he euer steryng
               In a cyrcle about turnyng
               For ful in the ende stondyth he
               The one ende of the axeltre
               
                  That the world al turnes on
               For that semyth his steryng none
               And be cause he the axeltre is by
               Turneth he so narowly
               And so semyth he therfore
               Euer in one stede as it wore
               Wherby shypmen on the see
               In what stede so they be
               Be nyght haue great knolegeyng
               By hym and by his shewyng
               And for that the shypmen al
               Lodys sterre they hym call
            
            
               ¶The .CC.j. questyon
               
                  ¶The holsomest stede which is it
                  Of al the world after thy wyt
               
               HOlsomest stede vnto man
               Is ther he best gyde hym can
               That no sycknes by hym mete
               Ne none outrage of keelth ne hete
               Ne moch slepe ne ouer moch wakyng
               Of mete and drynke no outrage takyng
               In hote countre no hote mete
               Ne colde in colde shal he none ete
               And therfore who so hole wyl be
               Do as I shal teche the
               Ones ete on day and nyght
               And ones sporge the raynes in seuenyght
               And ones in a moneth let the blode
               And ones to purge hym in the yere is good
               Thus may he hym kepe in hele
               But of these men fynde not fele
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.j. questyon
               
                  ¶ Tel me for I am in dwere
                  The dygnyest day of the yere
               
               OF al the yere the dygnyest day
               So is holden the Saturday
               Whan god had heuen and erth wroght
               And al thyng therin brought
               And al them wrought he tho
               In syxe dayes and no mo
               On the sondaye he began
               And the syxte daye made he man
               Whan that of man was made ech lym
               The seuenth day god restyd hym
               For veryhed toke he no rest
               But for that he chose it day best
               And bade man that day he in pees
               And of al werkes to fees
               Wherfore the Saturday of al
               The dygnyest day we cal
               But a tyme shal men se
               Whan goddys sonne shal man be
               That he shal dye and after aryse
               The thyrd day on alwyse
               Which rysyng day men worshyp shal ay
               And that shalbe the Sonday
               And after shal men euer calle
               Sonday the best of al
            
            
               ¶The .CC.ij. questyon
               
                  ¶Yet wold I wyt more
                  Why slepe was made & wherfore
               
               
                  SLepe is made for mannys rest
               Of al thyng one of the best
               For it esyth the herte namely
               And myght geuyth to al the body
               As yf a lorde waken be
               Wakyd is al his meyne
               There ne may slepe non of al
               For to be redy yf he call
               Tyl he slepe / slepe al his
               Than are they the lyghter in seruys
               The herte of man the lord call I
               For it maysteryth al the body
               And whan it is a slepe anon
               The lymes rest them euerychon
               And than al the kyndly hete
               Of the body geuyth to mete
               Aboute the stomacke for to brynne
               And to dygest that ther is with in
               And than the kynde to hym takys
               That to hym shal or he wakys
               And purges hym of that other dele
               As kynde geuyth hym ful wele
               Thus gatheryth the body myght
               And is after stronge and lyght
               For to do that it shal do
               That ne ware / yf slepe ware not so
               Therfore hath god the nyght wrought
               To mannys rest and els nought
               For payne is none / ne no mornyng
               Unto man agayne wakyng
            
            
               ¶The .CC.iij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Shal euer in this word be
                  Warre and contecte as men now se
               
               AT the begynnyng whan there wore
               Foure men in the world no more
               Was there warre and enuy
               And mannys slawghter and felony
               And it shal neuer seas
               That the world be al in peas
               For were the world in peas holly
               Men myght calle it skylfully
               Paradyse and els nought
               For there was neuer no warre wrought
               But loue / peas / and charyte
               And tho may holly here not be
               But in this world are warres two
               Goostly and bodely also
               The goostly warre may no man se
               Which is of the deuyl and his meyne
               Nyght and day on man he warres
               And in al that he may men deres
               Bodely warre al fyrst began
               Which is betwyx man and man
               And that shal neuer to ende torne
               Untyl it be the day of dome
            
            
               ¶The .CC.iiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Wrathes god hī ough for mānis dede
                  What ded so he dye good or quede
               
               THough god sawe al the world brynne
               And al the folke dye that are therin
               And dryed euerydele the see
               In god shold no wreth be
               
                  In hym may be no euyl mode
               For nothyng of this worldes good
               Mannes dede deryth god no more
               What dede so he dyes no whore
               Than it doth the fyre to brynne
               A hylle that many auntes were in
               The payne that they fele in brennyng
               Ne derys them for no kynges thyng
               No more doth god soth to sey
               What tyme aman shal here dey
               No surar thyng than is the dede
               But of the tyme can no man rede
               And for that what tyme he dey shal
               God greuyth hym nothyng with al
               But sythen man wot no prow
               Whan he shal dey ne how
               Loke he be redy ay I rede
               Than shal hym not the dede drede
            
            
               ¶The .CC.v. questyon
               
                  ¶Which folke are it as thou wetes
                  That the world now most susteynes
               
               
                  FOure maner of folke there are
               That were it so that they ne ware
               The world myght not vp holden be
               Ne fare so wel as we now se
               One than are thes men of crafte
               That lerne other that are dafte
               Conyng theyr lyuelod for to wynne
               And god to serue without synne
               Another are tho that tyl the lande
               And wynne vs mete and drynke to hande
               
                  The thryde are lordes that peas kepe
               For in peas may men suerly slepe
               If peas were not there were great doute
               To lyue or eny wher walke aboute
               The fourth maner of folke than are
               Chapmen that about fare
               Fro feyre to feyre fro lande to lande
               And bryng that men do wande
               And shuld defaute haue of it also
               Dyd not chapmen gyue them therto
               Wherfore the world with out thys
               Mought be kept on none wyse
            
            
               ¶The .CC.vij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is hyer as yu doyst vndarstād
                  The kynge or the lawe of the lande
               
               
                  LAwe is of more antyquyte
               Than kyng or prynce may be
               And yf thou wylt wyt why
               I shal the tel apertly
               The name of kynge or emperour
               Is geuyn for worldly honour
               And it fallyth to his myght
               The lawe for to kepe aryght
               Than is kynge for lawe set
               To kepe that lawe be not let
               Than is lawe more than he
               For to do lawe hath he potence
               For a thyng yt ordayned is
               For another / than semys thys
               That he that it is dyght for
               Of them two is the more
               
                  And yf the kynge for lawe be
               Than is lawe more than he
               Yet shal I say the a nother sawe
               If the kynge do agayne the lawe
               Lawe shal hym deme with skyl and ryght
               Than is lawe aboue his myght
               And breke he lawe in eny thyng
               He is not worthy to be kynge
               Truly here after shal come one
               A kyng that shal hyght Salomon
               In his sawes say shal he
               Blessyd mote they al be
               That shal in this world rounde
               Do iustyce and ryght in euery stounde
            
            
               ¶The .CC.viij. questyon
               
                  ¶May man in ony manere
                  Ony worldly good haue here
                  That he ouer al may with hym bere
                  And the weyght hym not dere
               
               AMan in this world may haue
               Good hym eneywhere for to saue
               And helpe hym at his nede
               And euer he may it with hym lede
               That is conyng of some arte
               Which wyl not fro man parte
               Who so hath hym nedyth not to drede
               For it wyl hym both cloth and fede
               Bettar tresour neuer no man wan
               Than is conyng vn to man
               And whyther so aman wyl go
               He may it bere with out wo
               
                  And here vnto none of his
               Wherfore shal Salomon the wyse
               Say as aman wel be taught
               That wyt and wysdome is worldys aught
            
            
               The .CC.ix. questyon
               
                  ¶If two haue loue to gether stronge
                  And after are a sonder longe
                  And come to gether ought one whore
                  May they loue so as they dyd before
               
               
                  LOue betwyx frendes twey
               That onys is ne shuld not dey
               And yf that they in sonder be
               That eyther other longe not se
               And they to gether come efte
               The loue yt was before lefte
               Before that they in sondre wore
               May come agayne and ryght wel more
               As thou in a garden mayst se
               Standyng a wel lykyng tre
               And the gardynar behaue hym so
               That he take no hede therto
               To mucke and tyl and els it dyght
               It myscaryeth anon ryght
               Losyng his wel lykyng
               For it zemyd is nothyng
               But whan the gardynar it sees
               That it fayleth among other trees
               Hede agayne therto he takys
               And the erth about it bettar makys
               And than begynneth it to sprynge
               And take agayne to his lykynge
               
                  So it faryth of frendes two
               If that one fro the other go
               And after to gether come agayne
               Eyther wylbe of other feyne
               And the loue they had before
               Or that they a sondre wore
               For new may they them betwene
               As the tree that eft waxed grene
            
            
               ¶The .CC.x. questyon
               
                  ¶How may amā loue woman ryght
                  Or she hym for the syght
               
               SOmtyme fallyth aman to mete
               Afayre woman in the strete
               His eyen wyl he on her caste
               Beholdyng her ryght faste
               And the eyen a non present ryght
               Unto the braynes that same syght
               Braynes send the herte vnto
               And in delyte he fallyth also
               And as sone as he is in delyte
               He begynneth to loue tyte
               The brayne sendyth to the eye agayne
               That they of that syght are fayne
               Delytyng them to beholde more
               So that the herte therfore
               Fallyth in a fowle lykyng
               And so begynneth the loue to spryng
               But and the herte were of myght
               Stronge to hold hym in that syght
               And say lorde I thanke it the
               The syght that I yonder se
               
                  That thou woldest after thy fygure
               Make so fayre a creature
               Temptacyon shuld he none be in
               Ne falle in no delyte of synne
               Ne his herte shuld haue no menyng
               Another tyme to such a thyng
               No more shuld woman on her syde
               If she dyd thanke god euery tyde
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xj. questyon
               
                  ¶Aman that lyght conscyence berys
                  And by his god falsly swerys
                  Of .x. false thynges for the nonys
                  Is he ought for swore but onys
               
               HE that swerys an oth amys
               By his god what so he is
               For .x. false thynges al in one
               Soth as he swerys for ech one
               And yf ech of the .x. false be
               Tene tymes forsworne is he
               An hundreth thynges though it wore
               So ofte forsworne is he thore
               And who so assentys therto
               That he made that othe also
               Also ofte is he forsworne
               As he that made that oth beforne
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tho that any knowlege haue here
                  The folke for to lere
                  Shal eny grace come them vnto
                  More than it shal other men to
               
               
                  Ryght it is that euery man
               That trauayls in labour as he can
               That it be hym yeldyd so
               As his trauayle amountys to
               And he that trauayls here
               Ony good other to lere
               Or preches to them how they shal
               Heuynly blys wyn with al
               God shal them in heuyn saue
               And double mede shal they haue
               For that they haue techyd ryght
               The way vnto heuyn lyght
               But two maner of techers be
               In this world as thou mayst se
               Unto the sonne is lykened one
               That geuyth his lyght euer anon
               And euery lyke his lyght lastes
               For ought that he doune castes
               That are the good that teches here
               Doyng them selfe as they do lere
               But some are that tech wel
               And wickydly lyue them selfe euery dele
               Unto the candel lyght are tho
               That to other geuyth his lyght hym fro
               And wasteth hym selfe hastely
               He that is no grace worthy
               For yf aman were set to dele
               Tresour among feele
               And he myght pay them ech one wel
               And holde hym selfe a great dele
               If he dele so his delyng
               That hym selfe lefte nothyng
               
                  Or yf ought hym left wicked ware
               It is but ryght he euyl fare
               Skyl it is that he fare yl
               That wyl chose it of hys wyl
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Thought yt a man thynkes alday
                  Wherof euer come it may
               
               COmenly thought in herte wyl spryng
               Of clere herte and conyng
               For euer the more that aman
               Of arte in this world can
               The more thought he hath thefore
               And ymagynes more and more
               The wysdom that thes wyse haue so
               Of pure corage it comyth them to
               And that is of pure blode nought elles
               That about the herte dwelles
               And the puryte of that blode
               Cleres the braynes and makys them good
               And that claryte that in the braynes dure
               Geuyth to the corage moysture
               And vnto the eyen claryte
               And to al the lymes lyght to be
               The herte it geuyth vnto
               Blythnes and lykyng also
               Which makyth aman conyng
               And to haue thought of moch thyng
               But for his conyng shal he nought
               Smyte in to an euyl thought
               And his thought shalbe holly
               To worshyp god pryncypaly
               
                  And after to worke at his myght
               Thynges that be honest and ryght
            
            
               ¶The .CC xiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why than falle the folke also
                  Of the euyl as men se they do
               
               
                  FOr thre thynges pryncypaly
               Falles vmwhyle amannys body
               One is for colours & humors wyk
               That stere in the body thycke
               And the humors day and nyght
               With the good in the body fyght
               And yf the wicked maysters be
               The herte somtyme they tourne perde
               And ableese to the braynes cast
               That aman falles at the last
               And for that same vanyte
               With fote and hand trauayleth he
               And fome out of the mouth doth falle
               His wyttes so and doth lose al
               Another than is deedly synne
               That aman is combred in
               And goddys cōmaundment doth nought
               But in synne is al his thought
               Such powre hath the deuyl of hym
               That he hym shewes to hym ful grym
               The aungel that hath hym in kepyng
               Rekenys than of hym nothyng
               Wherfore the deuyl than fouly
               Turmentys hym this pytyously
               The thyrd cause than is fantasy
               That comyth to the herte vnwysly
               
                  Wherfore it fayles and cowarde is
               And waxes dredful and losys blys
               Wherfore somtyme he fallys smert
               And comyth a fantesy of the herte
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xv. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the perolousest lym
                  That mannys body hath in hym
               
               OF al the lymes of the body
               The perylousest than hold I
               The eyen that shuld the body wys
               That it not go amys
               For in peryl both put they
               Sowle and body euery dey
               The eyen shew the braynes anon
               The thyng that they se vpon
               And the braynes also smert
               Nuncyes it forth vnto the herte
               The herte hath lykyng in the syght
               And fallyth in synne anon ryght
               And had the eyen se no thynge
               The herte had falle in no lykynge
               Also perylouse they ere
               For they are tender and lyght to dere
               And pryde and yre and couetys
               With other synnes mo than this
               Which thynges had be vnsought
               And mannys eyen sawe ryght nought
               And for that of euerychone
               Perylouser lyme is none
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xvj. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Which is the sykerest arte of al
                  And there most peryl may in falle
               
               CLerkes that to the world preches
               And goddys wyl to do them teches
               And how they shal theyr sowles gyde
               And the deuyl from them cause to slyde
               The surest arte haue they tho
               And the perylousest also
               For of the world they are the lyght
               As to the body is eyen syght
               The eyen lyght the body
               And ledyth it by way and sty
               Without hurte there it wylbe
               Which hurte shuld take myght it not se
               Also tho that lerne this arte
               And thech forth therof some parte
               The ryght way the folke they lede
               And theyr sowles goostly they fede
               And yf they do as they say
               Theyr selfe goyth in the ryght way
               And yf they nought ne do
               As they other tech vnto
               Fouly they them selfe spyl
               And the candel lyke they are vntyl
               That lyghtes me and the ryghtwel
               But hym selfe wastes euery dele
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xvij. questyon
               
                  ¶How is a man somtyme iolyfe
                  And lyght of body al his lyfe
               
               SOmtyme begynneth iolyfte
               In mannys body to styre and be
               
                  And that comyth ryght kyndly
               Of a yong blode in the body
               That of his mother toke it than
               Or he to the world came
               But than after his beryng
               Gatheryth he of mete in fedyng
               Anew blode and that steryth hym
               Somtyme in euery a lyme
               And the yong blode therwith
               Steryth in to ech a lyght
               The herte reuerdysse with al
               As that it of kynde shal
               So come in iolynyte
               Ey to that blode so steryng be
               But whan it begynnes to sesse
               The herte quyckly hath relesse
               Of iolynyte and fallyth thore
               In a sadnes as it was before
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xviij. questyon
               
                  ¶May man achyld not get ryfe
                  Ech tyme that he touches his wyfe
               
               IN this world man is none
               That myght get his wyfe vpon
               Achyld ech tyme ay
               That he with her lay
               Ne so ofte may no woman
               Conceyue of the seed of man
               Achyld forth for to brynge
               As he myght get it in pleyeng
               For she is coldar of nature.
               And keelth to seed is no norture
               
                  A lecherous man somtyme also
               That goyth tha
                     •
                   worke moch vnto
               And trauayles hym euer ryght
               Of his reynes he lesyth myght
               Than is the seed feble and veyne
               And to engendure has no meyne
               As a woman seuen chaumbres has
               And in eche of tho parcas
               May she conceyue a chyld no mo
               And yet hathe she ynoughe of tho
               And were aman of suche powere
               To gete one whan he came her nere
               At eche tyme where shuld that wyfe
               Spere so many in her lyfe
               Also yf there be goten one
               The mother sperys vp an one
               And no more conceyueth she
               Untyl that same borne be
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xix. questyon.
               
                  ¶What is it and how gathers it so
                  Mannys kynd whan it goth hym fro
               
               
                  AMannes kynd that goth hym fro
               Gathers out of euery lym
               For when aman aboute his mynd
               With woman to done his kynd
               The hete of hym and the great wyl
               That he has his dede to fulfyl
               Causeth his body to swete witin
               Blode inward fro euery lym
               And that blode becometh al whyte
               And to the stones goth al tyte
               
                  And from thens it issueth so
               Whan it comyth there vnto
               Another cause than is frotyng
               Of man to wyfe with great lykyng
               Longe rest also a cause is why
               And ful fellyng of the body
               From aman somtyme / one of tho
               Doth it slepyng go hym fro
               But body trauaylyng and fastyng
               Wyl come to hym no such thyng
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xx. questyon
               
                  ¶Is aman bounde therto
                  To loue his chyldren & good them do
               
               
                  AMan shal loue ouer al thyng
               God that is of heuyn kyng
               And hym selfe after that
               And his chyldren that he gat
               For they are fruyte of his body
               And for that ought he to loue them truly
               But he shal not loue them so
               Folyshly as many do
               For some are theyr chyldren louyng
               More than them selfe in some thyng
               For yf thou leue now for no synne
               Worldly goodes for to wynne
               And caryst not wher thou it take
               Theyr chyldren with rych to make
               In also moch thou louest them more
               Than thy selfe harken wherfore
               Thy wrong takyng makyth the
               That thou shalt dampned be
               
                  And me thynke he louys yl
               That his sowle therfore wyl spyl
               Wherfore of thy labor dylygently
               Shalt thou fynde them mete truly
               And somwhat thou lerne them shal
               That they may after lyue with al
               And whan they can it let them go
               And purchase them with other mo
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxi. questyon
               
                  ¶Enchaunmentyng and socery
                  Uayle they ought or are they foly
               
               THe body may they somdele vayle
               But to ye soule they do great trauayle
               And he that them worke shal
               Thre thynges most haue with al
               Fyrst behouyth hym to knowe a ryght
               The howres & poyntes of day and nyght
               For go he ought there agayne
               Al his labour is in vayne
               The tother is he most of nede
               Geue great fayth vnto the dede
               And haue stedfast in his thought
               That the deuyl shal fayle hym nought
               Yet most he know astronomy
               Which shal helpe hym a great party
               But want he eny of thes thre
               His worke is nought but vanyte
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the wightest beast y• is
                  And most of sauyour tel me this
               
               
                  HOunde is the wyghtest beast of al
               And the trewest on to call
               Lyghter no beast renne ne can
               Nor none louyngare to man
               And the sauourest is he
               Saue yf it the myre be
               For of al beastes the myre I wys
               Sauours most after that it is
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether of the two may be
                  Hyer the lande or the see
               
               
                  LAnde is hyer of the two
               Els shuld the see it ouer go
               Lete a wessel with water fylle
               Euyn by the brynke standyng styll
               Yet shal the brynkes ye water hold
               But were it more vp / it wold
               Renne ouer the vessel quyckly
               And there spyl truly
               Eueyn so it fareth by the see
               But yf the erth myght hyare be
               The see shuld it ouer renne
               That al the world shuld wel kenne
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof snayles come wyt I wold
                  And why they to the gras them hold
               
               OF the hete and the swote
               Come they of gras that is hote
               And for moysture hold they them so
               Unto the gras as that they do
               
                  And al be it lothly to syght
               It is a worme of moch myght
               For who so knoueth wel the kynde
               Of great vertu he may it fynde
               Be encombred the brest of man
               That he his breth nought drawe can
               Who so toke the snayles than
               And fryed them wel in a panne
               With oyle of olyue where men it get
               And with hony gaue it hym to ete
               Tene dayes at euen and morowe
               It shuld delyuer hym of that sorowe
               And yf a whyte spote were
               In his eye the syght to dere
               And toke snayles and them dyd brynne
               Of that that is them with in
               And whan it is brent to cole also
               The tender parte so moch do thereto
               Of a roste leke / and so moch yet
               Ofybenus a tree as men call it
               And bray it al to gether wel
               And after sarce it euery dele
               And vse it twyes or thryes a day
               The whyte spote shal go a way
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxv. questyon
               
                  ¶How slepe thes old men also
                  As thes yong chyldren do
               
               CHyldren yong slepe for the grennesse
               Of theyr branes and the swetnesse
               For tender and lyght it ought to be
               As is the floure vpon a tre
               
                  If a wynde theron blowe truly
               It fallyth of lyghtly
               Also is it of a chyld I wys
               Whan it of mete fellyd is
               An ayre smyteth there vpon
               Wherby it enclynes vpon one
               And slepes than and restes so
               Which is norysshyng there vnto
               An old man also slepe wyl
               As a chyld but by other skyl
               For feblenes of braynes slepys he
               As a rype appul vpon a tree
               Whan a wynde it touches ought
               It fallyth vnto ground for nought
               The old man is in that caas
               A lytel ese whan that he has
               He fallyth a slepe quyte
               And that is greatly his delyte
               For feble reynes and heuy bonys
               That causyth hym to slepe for the nonys
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶If god had so great a mā wrought
                  As al the world / myght he ought
                  Haue stond agayne god ryght
                  Thrughe vertu of his myght
               
               HAd he made so great aman
               As any man recken can
               As al the world dale or doune
               Woode / water / feld / or toune
               Agayne god had he no mayne
               More than an aunte hath hym agayne
               
                  And yet a thowsand tymes lesse
               Than hath the aunte in his greatnesse
               For god with word euynly wrought
               Heuyn / erth and al of nought
               And wold he byd them synke
               It shuld be don as thou coudest thynke
               Seyng he erth and henyn may vndo
               Euyn with his word also
               And is but apoynt of his myght
               Moch more than with ryght
               Is the remnaunt of his pouste
               Wherfore to hym may nothyng be
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶What shuld this word haue be & how
                  Had god not dyght it as it is now
               
               IT shuld haue be more ne lesse
               Than a fowle dale of darknesse
               Or as a darke pryson pyt
               And nothyng shuld haue aluted it
               The elements that we now calle
               Shud haue be troblyd to gether al
               And god shuld neuer thelesse in blys
               Haue byn and rought nothyng of this
               But for the creaturs sake
               That god wold afterward make
               The elementes claryfyed he
               Settyng ech one ther they shuld be
               And dyghtyd al thynges to mannys prow
               Also as that they are now
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wether the aūgels of goddys onde cā
                  
                  As dyd the sowle fyrst of Adam
               
               
                  ADamys sowle so was wrought
               Of goddys flate but aungel nought
               They were of goddys worde alone
               He bad them be and they were echone
               But god blewe vpon Adam
               Goost of lyfe and he forth came
               Wherfore adam and his ospryng
               That stedfastly ouer al thyng
               Trust in god and beleue shal
               And his byddyng do with al
               Dygnyer before god shal be
               Than aungels be resons thre
               Fyrst he hathe lyfe that may not wonde
               Of the spririte of goddes onde
               And that was hygher to my thynkyng
               Than aungel that came ofspekyng
               Also aman has enemyes
               To tempte hym were he goth or lyes
               And aungel in no temptyng is
               Wherfore he may not do amys
               And he that the temptyng withstandis
               And cometh not in the deuyls handis
               He is more dignyer than he
               That in no temptyng may be
               The thyrd cause then is also
               That god hath set aungel therto
               To kepe man both fer and hende
               And fro al euyl hym to defende
               And from al encombrement
               But yf hym selfe therto assent
               And yf aungel mannys seruaunt be
               Than is agood man dygnyer than he
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.xxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Now wold I know I wys
                  What thyng is heuynly paradyse
               
               HEuynly paradyse than is
               Nothyng but that same blys
               That a man hath of the syght
               Of goddys face that is so bryght
               For he that sees hym face to face
               He hath al maner of grace
               Ioy and delyte endlesse to be
               Helth / fayrhed / strenght / and lewte
               Wyt and conyng with ryches also
               God for his myght send vs therto
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxx. questyon
               
                  ¶The fayrest thyng in this world to se
                  That god made which may it be
               
               
                  AMan than is the fayrest thyng
               That is in erth af goddys makyng
               And the louelyest of vysage
               For he hym made after his ymage
               And for man made sonne and mone
               With al thynges that vnder wone
               And also as he wold make
               Al thynges for mannys sake
               Seruyse vnto man to do
               So wil he man to hym shal do
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether oughtest thou to loue alday
                  That loue the / or that ye louest me say
               
               THou shalte loue that loueth the
               And that thou louest some lat be
               
                  For thou louest some parauenture
               That of the take ful lytel cure
               And but thou loue with al shy meyne
               Hym that loueth the agayne
               Than wyl I saye thou louyst nought
               God that at his lykenes the wrought
               And who so loueth synne here
               He loueth the deuyl to haue to fere
               And he ne loueth here no man
               But to shende al that he can
               And to put hym in payne and wo
               Lo / what wyse he loueth tho
               The good he hateth day and nyght
               But them to dere he hathe no myght
               For god defendes them with his myght
               And loueth al that loueth hym a ryght
               Therfore they that great loue hath the tyl
               Loue hym agayne for that is skyl
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxvii. questyon
               
                  ¶Which are the worthyest wordes yt be
                  And gras and stones as thynketh the?
               
               GOd gaue vnto thynges thre
               Moch vertu and potence
               And to mannes helpe eche one
               To worde / to gras / and to stone
               The worthyest word and most of myght
               For to saye day or nyght
               Is to worshyp heuen kyng
               And pray hym after good endyng
               For yf this word be worthely spoken
               It shalbe hard fro erth to heuen
               
                  Also grasses are there feele
               Made vnto mannys heele
               But of so many is there one
               That may werst be forgone
               That is where to fode of man
               Worthyar grasse not I tel can
               Also are ther many stones
               Of great vertu for the nones
               But mylle stones are they tho
               That man may not wel forgo
               For the gryndyng of the corne
               They may werst be forborne
               And seyng al haues of them nede
               That with brede shal them fede
               Worthyest stone I them call
               Among other stones al
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shalt thou thy counsel tel euery dele
                  To thy frend that thou louest wel
               
               COunsel ought to be tolde
               To hym that thou al haue wolde
               Which is god and man elles
               For he wyl hele that thou telles
               If thou thy frend tel it vnto
               It may after befalle so
               That that frendshyp may ouer go
               And thy frende becomyth thy fo
               Than may thou say yf the lyste
               Now wottyth my foo that my frynd wyst
               Or yf thou thy frende it sey
               And wenyst he shal the not wrey
               
                  And he tellys it preuely
               Unto another frend hym by
               And he the fourth as may welbe
               This may it not long be preuete
               For that many mouthes wote
               On some tonge it lyes ful hote
               Thus myght thou come in blame therfore
               Wherfore bettar vntolde it wore
               If thou a preuete haue wrought
               And thy herte may hele it nought
               Thynkyng it sadnes in the ryght
               Untyl thou haue told it to some wyght
               Go from the folke be the alone
               That no man here the make no mone
               And call it than thy selfe to
               As thou woldest to a nother do
               Whan thou hast told thy herte shal keel
               And no more anguyshe shalt thou fele
               If thou no wayes may it hold
               Tyl thou haue it a nother told
               Loke thou tel it to such one
               That thou may wel trust vpon
               That he wyl tel it on no syde
               For no wrath that may be tyde
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which are wymen of most profyte
                  For man to haue to his delyte
               
               UNtyl sowle profytes none
               But amanys wyfe alone
               But of the body yf thou sey
               In the yere are sesons twey
               
                  After which aman loke shal
               What woman he shal dele with al
               In wynter whan the ayre is colde
               And his keelth yeldes manyfolde
               A yong woman and broune also
               Profytes than man vnto
               For broune woman is of hote onde
               And of hote guttes fonde
               And her hete hetys man also
               And great profyt doys hym to
               In somer whan the ayre is hote
               And heteth both drye and wote
               Than is a yong whyte woman
               Best vnto profyt of man
               For she is colde of kynde to fele
               And man of great hete may she kele
               But an olde woman doth no profyte
               Unto man nother broune ne whyte
               For yl onde aboute she beres
               And moyst guttes that greatly deres
               She makys aman pure heuy
               And greuyth euery dele his body
               And doth chaunge his fayre colour
               Wherfore in her is no socour
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶The quakyng that aman is in
                  Somtyme wherof may it begyn
               
               QUakyng that sometyme lyghtly
               Falles aman in his body
               Cometh of flemes that are colde
               That the moysture in his body holde
               
                  For they ouer come of theyr 
                     •
                  ouste
               Al the colers that in hym be
               Whan the colers haue al in welde
               A great keelth in man they yelde
               That cold reykes forth ther with
               Unto synnes veynes and ech lyght
               Which causyth hym to quake begyn
               And the body shake within
               As the blast of a colde ayre wyl make
               A thynne clothyd man for to shake
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxvi. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan aman seyth a thynge
                  Whether geuyth the eye out in seyng
                  Or it receyuyth inward therto
                  The shape that it sees also
               
               NOthyng may come out owhore
               But there that it went in before
               Nor eye may nothyng geue outward
               But that it fyrst receyuyd inward
               Wherfore vnderstand a ryght
               Thre thynges go to the syght
               Fyrst that thyng that thou shalte se
               That other that it coloured be
               For of al thynges is seen nothyng
               But only the colouryng
               The thyrd are bemes of the syght
               Which vpon that thyng shal lyght
               That shalbe seen and after this
               Moysture that in the eyne is
               Drawes vnto hym the shapyng
               And the facyon of that thyng
               
                  And that shape yeldes it the branes vnto
               And the braynes to the herte also
               The herte sendys it to hym at the last
               And in memory holdes fast
               And for that sendyng wyl the herte
               Thynke a nother tyme ful smerte
               Of the thyng eyen had somwhore
               Seen truly therbefore
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶How may aman spekyng be
                  Be hym alone and say we
               
               
                  AMan is made more ne lesse
               But after goddys owne lycknesse
               And also as in the godhed be
               Rekened ryghtly persons thre
               So there are in euery man
               Thre thynges that I reken can
               Body / sowle / and the wyt
               Thes thre are together knyt
               The tong an instrument is ryght
               To speke the sowle geuyth myght
               The wyttes gouern aboue al
               What so the tong speke shal
               And seyng euery man hath thes thre
               In spech may he wel say we
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶May with takyng from the see
                  It in any thyng amenysshed be
               
               THyng that men alday of take
               Behouyth to menysshe and slake
               
                  Now is no water of al that be
               Fresshe nor salt but of the see
               And euery day men takys therto
               Both man and beast and fowle also
               And al that is taken euery day
               Ageyne to the see ne may
               There goyth of it to wast somdele
               As euery man may wyt wel
               But the erth yeldes waters her fro
               That vnto the see go
               And the see restores eft
               Of al that men hath it reft
               And it is so long and wyde
               And so greatly depe and syde
               That men may aperceue nothyng
               That therof goys to wastyng
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether shal man loue one or other
                  Chyld of the suster or of the brother
               
               BOth ought thou for to loue them euin
               After goddys ryght of heuyn
               But after the worldys lawe
               Some man were leuer to hym drawe
               The brothers chylde and loue hym more
               Than the susters / harken wherfore
               The chyld takys matter of the wyfe
               And of the father shape and lyfe
               And shape of al thyng I wys
               Is worthyare than the matter is
               Wherfore that some men wyl sey
               The brothers chyld is nere of twey
               
                  But gyle is on that other syde
               As men hath wyst it ofte betyde
               My brothers wyfe may be a wyle
               And may do her husbond gyle
               And wyt on hym achyld lyghtly
               That he no more gat than I
               But achyld that my suster bare
               Therof am I suer and ware
               That that behouyth to be kynne of nede
               But of my brothers chyld is drede
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xl. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now yf that thou can
                  The peryloust thynges that are in man
               
               FOure colours hath man hym in
               That of foure complexcyons begyn
               The fyrst is blode that may not mysse
               That other blacke coloure I wysse
               The thyrd is fleme whyte on to se
               And yelow coloure the fourth is he
               And want aman of thes thre
               His body were deed anon
               And ech one behouys to be
               At his seson in his pouste
               And yf any lacke them al
               Out of tyme that they shuld in hym fall
               In sycknes the body falles
               Perylous wherfore men them calles
               And ech one hath his power
               In dyuers quarters of the yere
               Thre thynges the fyrst quarter ches
               Capricorne / Aquarius / and pisses
               
                  And of flemes haue they myght
               And wete and colde is theyr ryght
               In December they begynne
               And in mydel of March they blynne
               Which is the coldest tyme of al
               For that is that we wynter call
               ¶The seconde quarter next therby
               Haue Aries / Taurus / Gemini
               Blode in man haue they myght to
               And are hote and moyst also
               In March is theyr begynyng
               And in Iune is theyr endyng
               Uer hyght that seson that I mene
               Al thynges therin waxe grene
               ¶The thyrd quarter hath hym vnto
               Cancer / Leo / and Uirgo
               And they are both hote and drye
               Of yelow colours is theyr maystrye
               In Iune is theyr begynyng ay
               And in September they wend away
               Which is the somer tyde
               The meryest tyme that men abyde
               ¶The fourth hath sygnes thus
               Libra / Scorpio / Sagittarius
               They are both colde and drye
               And of blacke colour haue sygnorye
               Whos begynyng is in September
               And theyr partyng in December
               And who so thes foure tymes obserues
               And his kynd wel in them gydes
               Fro perelles myght he kepe hym longe
               And in hele holde his lymmes stronge
            
            
               
               ¶The .xlj. questyon
               
                  ¶Of al the flesshes ye men may get
                  Which is the holsomest to ete
               
               THe flesshe that is of most substance
               And geuyth man most sustynaunce
               That flesshe is the holsomest
               And vnto mannys norysshyng best
               But who so a good stomacke myght get
               That myght wel dygest his mete
               To hym is best though it be grete
               Flesshe of bugle and of nete
               For great myght to man they geue
               But sycke men wyl they greue
               For a sycke man is feble ryght
               And his stomacke is of no myght
               Wherfore moton is best hym to
               And yong chykens are good also
               For tendernes that men in them fynde
               And greatly chargeth not the kynde
               For a sycke man may suffer no dele
               Of that a hole man may ryght wel
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlij. questyon
               
                  ¶The mete that aman shal lyue by
                  How departys it in his body
               
               SUstenaunce that aman take shal
               Gaderys vnto the stomacke al
               And with drynke synkes therin
               And than to seth wyl it begyn
               And whan it is soden wel
               And dygested euery dele
               In fyue partes deuyded it is
               
                  And euery party goys vnto his
               The fyrst parte wylbe fall
               To be clenest and purest of al
               And that parte also smerte
               Drawes hym lyghtly vnto the herte
               That other part drawes hym also
               The braynes / eyen / and hede vnto
               The thyrd vnto the lymes shal
               And vnto the blode with al
               The fourth goyth there it is not spylt
               To the longes / to the lyuer and to the milte
               The fyfte than is as brene of al
               Which wyl vnto the guttes fall
               And men cast it out therby
               That it helpyth not the body
               And dryuke departys also in man
               As I of mete to tel began
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xliij. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal aman of his throte wyn
                  Abone or a thorne styckyng therin
               
               By bred or lycour takyn fully
               And swelowed inward hastely
               And yf it synke not
               And wyl not throughe the throt
               Take of rawe flesshe a mossel
               And with a smale threde bynd it wel
               That mossel swalow with spede
               But in thy hande hold the threde
               Tyl it is doune hold fast
               And it shal that bone out cast
               If the thred breke do it efte
               Unto that it be out refte
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.xliiij. questyon
               
                  ¶The mucke that euery mā goyth fro
                  Tel me why it styncketh so
               
               STynkyng is it for causes twey
               And which they are I shal sey
               That one for speryng of the body
               So yt none ayre may come therby
               I shal the set ensample how
               If a man toke ryght now
               A pece of flesshe neuer so fayre
               And spered it there it had no ayre
               And it lye hote sone shalt thou se
               That it shuld stynckyng be
               For the humours is another skyl
               That the stomacke draw hym vntyl
               Which ful byttar are and soure
               Salt and of euyl sauoure
               With the mete they mynge them al
               Whan so aman ete shal
               Great stench the mete of them takys
               Wherby as aman lyes it smakys
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlv. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now I praye the this
                  Why mannys vryne so salt is
               
               BE thre thynges comys it to
               Why that it is salt also
               One is be cause aman that it drynkes
               In hym throughe the mete it synkes
               And stepes therin out to get
               Al the salt that was in the mete
               A nother cause also truly
               
                  Is for the swote of the body
               The body swetys inward for hete
               And kyndly salte is the swete
               And that swet mengeles with the pyss
                     •
                  
               
               Wherfore as salt it is
               The thyrd cause for the hete with in
               To seeth and boyle that wyl not blyn
               In the body both swete and drynke
               Or they may to the blader synke
               And for thes causes thre
               Behoueth vryne salt to be
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof euer wormes brede
                  In man and how that they fede
               
               
                  WOrmes are truly there brede
               And in mannys body fede
               Of the mucke of grossy metes
               That a man or woman etes
               And of the selfe lyue they wel
               Of the venomousest dele
               For as the adder and the pode
               And other wormes that in erth wode
               Fedyth the erth them verely
               Of the venom that therin doth ly
               Also thes wormes that in vs lye
               Clenses vs of great party
               Of euyls that shuld in vs make
               Uenemous metes that we take
               Neuerthelesse hurte they do
               There men hath them long also
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlvij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶How many craftes & which are tho
                  That man myght werst for go
               
               CRaftes foure in erth ere
               That men myght not wel for bere
               One is smyth another wryght
               That to men many thynges dyght
               The thyrd arte so is sowyng
               And the fourth so is weuyng
               After the tyme that made was adam
               Was smythyng the fyrst arte that cam
               Wherfore is it lorde of al
               For nothyng that to man shal fall
               Of werkyng lomes to worke with al
               That it through smythes handes ne shal
               Wryghtyng is also a conyng
               That myght not be foreborne be my iugyng
               For as for the yron steres the tre
               So most the tre helpe to the yron be
               For with out tre may no man wel
               Lyght nothyng with yron and stele
               Of sowyng as the world hathe nede
               With sowyng is dyght mannys wede
               Though man in lether shuld be clade
               Yet were it with out sowyng bade
               Also clouth is made ryght none
               But yf weuyng be there on
               Other many craftes there are
               But thes foure be the fyrst that ware
               And of al they are the best
               And to mannys lyfe of the surest
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxviij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Whether shal ī heuyn haue more blys
                  Chyldren that neuer dyd amys
                  Or they that for god of theyr wyl
                  Toke the good and left the yl
               
               
                  CHyldren yong that dyd no synne
               Great ioy shal in heuyn wynne
               Ye / theyr ioy shalbe moch more
               Thā they here haue dōe therfore
               But he that is of age perfyte
               And knoweth thys worldes delyte
               And myght take al to his behoue
               And leuyth al for goddys loue
               Takyng penaunce on his body
               There he myght lyue esely
               An hundreth fold shalbe his blys
               More than eny chyldes I wys
               For as achyld no yl can do
               So can it no good therto
               Mede is not ordayned alto tho
               That wickyd dedes are kept fro
               But that do of theyr wyl good dede
               To them so is ordayned mede
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlix. questyon
               
                  ¶How may aman on what manere
                  Ouer come ye wyl of this world here
               
               HE may wyl ouer come euery dele
               And that lyghtly and wele
               If athyng fall in his thought
               That he wotyth good is nought
               And he haue therto great wyl
               It in dede to fulfylle
               
                  Turne thy thought in that temptyng
               And begyn to thynke on other thyng
               Thy fyrst thought shal fal the fro
               And that wycked wyl thou shalt forgo
               But holde thou theron thy thought sore
               Thou delytes more and more
               And kyndeles euer as a glede
               Unto that thou come to dede
               And than falles thou in synne
               For thy thought coude not blynne
               But pyne the al that thou may
               For to turne thy thought away
               Anone shal it in the kele
               And no more therof shalt thou fele
            
            
               ¶The .CC.xlix. questyon
               
                  ¶Tho that to paradise or helle go
                  Shal they euer come out therfro?
               
               AL that are in paradise
               Wold gladly out that be thou wyse
               But the soules that are in helle
               Wolde neuer out but styl there dwelle
               And I shal tel the for why
               Yf a lorde dwellyd here by
               And had dwellyng in a cete
               Two seruauntes of his meyne
               That one serued hym so aryght
               That the lord wardayne hym hyght
               Sone wold he haue his lord come agayne
               The tother were a wycked swayne
               And for falshed taken wore
               And in pryson holden sore
               
                  And abode an euyl endyng
               At the lordes home comyng
               The good seruaunt wold he came tyte
               In trust of the more profyte
               The wycked wold he taryed lange
               For at his comyng shuld he hange
               And euer in pryson leuer were he
               Than come out and hanged be
               Also they that in paradyse wone
               Them longeth after goddes sone
               The very profyte that come shal
               That the world shal deme ouer al
               For than shal theyr blysse be more
               An hundreth folde than was before
               For than shal soule and body wende
               Into heuen withouten ende
               But soules that to hel go
               Wold goddes sone neuer came so
               For at his dome the body shal
               Come and dwell the soule withal
               And bothe into helle fare
               And an hondreth folde haue care
               More than that he had fyrst
               Therfore to dwell styl hym lyst
               For better with one care with inne
               Than to come out and haue twayne
            
            
               ¶The .CC.l. questyon
               
                  ¶Why go not the good that are wyse
                  Unto erthly paradyse?
               
               IT is not conuenyent dare I say
               That they thether toke the way
               
                  Erthly paradyse was wrought
               To body and to soule nought
               It is a place erthly
               Therfore when soule is fro the body
               It may no where haue dwellyng
               But it be in goostly thyng
               For goost reioyseth hym ryght nought
               In place that bodyly is wrought
               Goost to goost that is his ryght
               And body in bodyly thyng hath myght
               Sowle may no man fele ne se
               Wherfore in his kynd must he be
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is sowle heuy or lyght
                  Great or smal darke or bryght
               
               
                  WEre a thowsand sowles here
               Lyeng on alefe of papere
               Heuyar were ye papere nought
               For they are lyght & as thought
               Under thy nayle myght yu spere
               A thowsand and be neuer the werre
               Thy eyen and thy syght before
               Shuld neuer the lesse thy syght be
               To se the thyng that thou woldest se
               No more than thou hast lettyng
               Of the wynd to se a thyng
               And in the world is nought so whyte
               As is of hewe a good spyryte
               But a synful sowle synful and wycke
               Is also blacke as eny pycke
               Great lothly and heuy
               
                  And fallyth dounward redely
               There nys man ne woman none
               That a synful sowle sawe one
               But yf the more wonder ware
               Out of his wyt he shuld fare
            
            
               ¶The .CC.liij. questyon
               
                  ¶Good sowles that fro the body go
                        •
                     
                  
                  Whyther wend they anon
               
               ALl that euer to lyfe came
               Fro the fyrst tyme of adam
               Yong and old good and wicked
               Tyl goddys sonne on rode be deed
               Holly vnto helle flyed
               Some to the lowe and some to the hye
               But after his deeth on the rood
               So shal the sowles of the good
               Whan they fro the body shede
               Wende vnto the clensyng stede
               And whan they clensed are a ryght
               Unto the blys of heuyn lyght
               The wicked shal with out dwellyng
               Anone in to helle be synkyng
               And some shal here haue don so
               That great clensyng nedyth them not to
               But also sone as they dey
               Wende to heuyn the hye wey
               But neuer the lesse at theyr ende
               Be purgatory shal they wende
            
            
               ¶The .CC.liiij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶May no man in heuyn be
                  But he fyrst purgatory se
               
               NO man or woman shal euer be
               Ne was in tyme that is gon perde
               That shal to heuyn whan he shal dey
               But by purgatory be his wey
               Neuer thelesse ther shalbe two
               That ther by nede not to go
               The prophyt that shal man saue
               For of clensyng no nede shal he haue
               That other shalbe that mayden bryght
               That goddys sonne shal in lyght
               For ful clene shalbe of synne
               The body that he shal lyght in
               Wherfore shal she with out care
               With sowle and body to hym fare
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lv. questyon
               
                  ¶Sythen god sendys some to helle
                  And some to heuyn for to dwelle
                  Wherto shal the dome be
                  And what thyng than iuge shal he
               
               GOod sowles shuld in heuyn dwelle
               And wicked before the dome in helle
               And al at the aungels call
               Unto the dome come shal
               In sowle and body as they wore
               In thys world here before
               And both to gether shal they wende
               There they shalbe with out ende
               Gloryfyed shalbe the wyse
               Of hym that is the hye iustyse
               
                  And trobeled than shalbe theyr blys
               That men neuer ne shal mys
               And bryghter shal than the body be
               Than is the sonne in his claryte
               The wicked shal to helle go
               Sowle and body to dwele in wo
               The payne that he had fyrst in wold
               Shal than be encresed thre fold
               For ryght is the body that was here
               In yl and good the sowlys fere
               That it with the sowle fele also
               Ioy or payne where it goys to
               Wherfore shal the dome be set
               Eythere ioy or payne to get
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Yong chyldren that can not reson
                  Shal they ought fele dampnacyon
               
               SHal no man dampned be but he
               That grauntes wel he worthy be
               For agayne say may he nought
               Al the dedes that he hath wrought
               But cheldren that no good can
               Ne no wyt had of man
               Dampnacyon shal none come in
               For they dyd no deedly synne
               But yf ony be perchaunce
               That shuld haue come to creaunce
               And be deed or it be borne
               Ioy for euer it hath forlorne
               But payne it shal none dole
               Dwele it shal in a darke hole
               
                  Where they shal fele euery adele
               Nyther of wo ne of wele
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether in that other world may be
                  Ony hows toune or cete
               
               AFul fayre cete god fyrst dyght
               Of his conyng and his myght
               Both to aungel and to man
               Or that man to synne be gan
               But after the synne of adam
               Ech man vnto helle came
               And that is a ful wicked cete
               Made to the deuyl and his meyne
               But whan goddys sonne is come truly
               And deth hath suffered pityously
               Than shal men fynd weyes thre
               Ech one to a dyuers cete
               The good to heuyn the way shal take
               The wicked to helle to deuyls blake
               That repent them here shal be dene
               To purgatory to make them clene
               Wonyng stedes be there no mo
               Where man or woman shal to go
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal they be dampned canst yu me say
                  Chyldren of hethen men that dey
               
               CHyldren of hethen in yougth dyed
               And after theyr fathers lawe a lyued
               Al shal they dampned be
               No blys shal they euer se
               
                  But yong chyldren shal haue no awe
               That shuld haue be of goddys law
               In a darcknes shal they dwelle
               But of payne dare them none tell
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lix. questyon
               
                  ¶Yf no synne had done Adam
                  Shuld al the folke that of hym cam
                  With flesshe and fel as they are sene
                  Euer in paradise haue bene?
               
               HAd Adam so hym bethought
               That he had no synne wrought
               Of his ospryng shuld neuer none
               Out of paradyse haue gone
               But lyued there without torment
               And fro thens to heuen haue went
               Ryght as one of heuens meyne
               Without dethe or any payne
               Shuld no synne ne no lykyng
               Haue be than in chyld getyng
               Shuld no man haue thought velany
               Amonge other of his company
               Nomore than now is velanye
               For to loke a man in the eye
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lx. questyon
               
                  ¶Whā water hylled ye world euery dele
                  Hyllyd it paradyse as wele?
               
               THat flode in erth god sent also
               The most dele of the folke to fordo
               And for to wasshe the mekyl synne
               That the world that tyme was inne
               
                  But in paradyse came it nought
               For there was no synne in wrought
               But one that adam the appul ate
               And the synne lay not in that
               It lay in the brekyng
               Of the precept of heuyn kynge
               And for the synne that he dyd thore
               Myght he therin dwele no more
               With al his synne was he out cast
               Unto this world here at the last
               And whan no synne was there aboute
               In paradyse whan he was out
               What wold the flode than do therin
               Whare was left no synne
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Of what age made god adam
                  Whan he in to this world came
               
               
                  ADam god made and his fere
               At his licknes for they are to hī dere
               And yong ryght as aungels wyse
               For the loue that he and his
               Shuld the ordres of aungels fulfyl
               That Lucyfer began to spyl
               But whan they mysded at the last
               And of paradyse ware out cast
               Theyr here began to wax and sprede
               And to theyr heles doune it yede
               And after theyr here on to se
               Them semed of thyrty yere to be
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxij questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Tho that at the dome shal dey
                  And haue not serued to helle the wey
                  Nore tyme of purgacyon so sone may be
                  What shal come of them tel me
               
               THey that so long here lyue shal
               Untyl god the world deme al
               And them behouys on al wysse
               Unto the dome for to arysse
               And hath not seruyd here to dwele
               With wicked in the payne of helle
               Ne nought worthy so redely are
               In to heuyn for to fare
               Untyl theyr sowle clensed is
               Of that it here dyd amys
               God shal send them south to sey
               So sharpe a payne or they dey
               That shal clense them ouer all
               And for al the dayes stand them shal
               That they had be worthy to take
               In purgatory them clene to make
               Also in theyr vp takyng
               Shal come to them a sharpe clensyng
               And so shal they vp wende
               In to the blys with out ende
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan soule come to the body also
                  Whiche part gothe it in therto?
               
               GOddys wyl may not mys
               What so he wyl anone it is
               But when god asoule shal make
               To a body that it shal take
               
                  Of his myght he makys it al
               Within the body it haue shal
               As thou seyst vpon a tre
               Pere or appul whether it be
               Whan it to waxe shal begyn
               The carnel bredyth there with in
               And waxes in the frute holly
               So doth the sowle in the body
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Who named fyrst al thyng
                  And teched them theyr conyng
               
               
                  GOd whan he had made adam
               Gaue him strength beute & wisdō
               
               And he gaue vnto thynges al
               Names as men them call
               And he gaue man conyng also
               As behoued his lyfe vnto
               Of goddys grace and of his wyl
               And than be lefte they so al styl
               Fro the tyme that they begon to be
               Unto our seconde father Noe
               He newed and teched al thyng
               As adam dyd at the begynyng
               Our second father we hym cal
               For the dyluuy drouned al
               But Noe and his sonnes thre
               And theyr wyues / of them came we
               Neuerthelesse Noe came
               Of the gendure of adam
               But that tyme no men had lyues
               But they foure and theyr wyues
               
                  And or he dyed came of them two
               xxiiij. thowsand and mo
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Whereof it be and wherfore
                  That some men are lesse & some more
               
               COmenly a mannys waxyng
               Is after the tyme of his beryng
               And somwhyle man more or lesse is
               After the vessel he lay in I wys
               He that is planet of that yere
               Whan a chyld is borne so here
               If he in tyme of the byrth be
               Of his sygne in the entre
               That chyld so shalbe kyndly
               But lytel man of his body
               And yf he be the sygne amyde
               For the more man he shalbe kydde
               And yf it in the endyng falle
               Than is he more than the other al
               And by cause y• planets of more myght wore
               In the tyme here before
               Wherfore men than ware
               Of greattare myght than now are
               And euer more whyle the world shal stand
               The more shal al thynges be lesse and
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is perylousare to haue
                  Hete or cold thy selfe to saue
               
               HEte and colde ouer mesure
               Are ful hote to endure
               
                  If thou haue cold and clothles be
               Yet may thou somwyse helpe the
               For to styre and go fastly
               Or some wayes trauayle thy body
               Trauayle in keelth than is good
               It wyl sone enchafe thy blode
               And whan the blode in hete is brought
               Al the lymes eschafe for nought
               But yf thou haue an outrage hete
               It is euyl for to bete
               There may thou helpe thy selfe not so
               As thou in the cold may do
               The hete wyl gather more and more
               And greue aman al to sore
               But yf he eny drynke may fele
               Or with some other thyng hym kele
               Ful drye it wyl his body make
               And great euyl cause hym to take
               Wherfore than is more payne to haue
               Hete than keelth and surear to saue
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Doth the chyld folowe naturally
                  The wycked cōdycyōs of his parēt truly
               
               THoughe father and mother wicked be
               And the chyld may lyue and the
               And do as he ought to do
               Toward god and man also
               It shal hym nothyng dere
               That his forgoars wicked were
               No more than it dereth where to grow
               Though a thefe or wicked man it sow
               And be his father neuer so good
               
                  Ne his mother neuer so myld of mode
               And hym selfe be wicked truly
               Defyled with dedes wickedly
               It fareth as where that fyrst men brynne
               And after the erth sowes it in
               That shal neuer in erth spryng
               Ne frute shal it none forth bryng
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxvi. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is bettar and lesse to spyl
                  Aman to speke or hold hym styl
               
               SPeke and leue is both to do
               As aman sees tyme therto
               Thou may somtyme a word sey
               That may cause the for to dey
               A
                     •
                  d somtyme may thou hold the styl
               That may turne the vnto yl
               Wherfore yf thou shalt speke eny whore
               Auyse the on it before
               Also wel as thou can
               That it be scath to no man
               And that thy wordes may a vayle
               Or els losys thou thy trauayle
               If thou eny word say shal
               For to pay thy frend with al
               And it be a gayne two or thre
               Unsayd were it bettar be
               A man shuld haue in many poyntes
               A cranes hals with many ioyntes
               That he not speke to rath
               Wherof shuld turne scath
               But that he may his word with cal
               
                  Or it passe the ioyntes al
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether ought wysar to be
                  Yong man or old as thynkes the
               
               I Thynke it ware agayne kynde
               That men yong men shuld fynde
               That of al thyng wysar were
               Than old men and coude more
               
                  
                     •
                  or of the braynes of the man
               Is moch of the wyt that he can
               And the braynes of the olde
               Are sadder and more may holde
               Than of a yong man that are lyght
               And to hold are of no myght
               Also the eldar that aman is
               The more tyme of profe hath be his
               And the more aman may here and se
               The more most his conyng be
               In .xl. yere more can men
               Than in .viii. nyne or ten
               Wherfore ought old to be wysare
               Than eny yong man in fere
               The old may men ouer renne wel
               But ouer the other neuer a dele
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxviii. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now I pray the
                  What thyng delyte may be
               
               BOdely delyte is hele
               And for to haue ryches fele
               
                  And the body at ese to make
               And many gyftes for to take
               For yf that thou in hele be
               In some thyng thou delytes the
               Be thou rych and fast may wynne
               Thy delyte is than therin
               And he that wyl curteys be told
               And geuyth gyftes many folde
               For to get hym loos and pryese
               His delyte therin lyese
               A couytous man delytes hym sore
               For to gather more and more
               And that he to gather hath delyte
               Comes some tyme other to profyte
               Another delyte is there yet
               And goostly delyte hyght it
               Whan aman delytes hym nothyng
               But in the seruyse of heuyn kyng
               Neyther in catel chyld ne wyfe
               But in holynesse of lyfe
               Of al delytes the best that is
               For it geuyth the endlesse blys
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxi. questyon
               
                  ¶What kynde appul was that
                  That our father Adam ate
               
               ADam ete an appul ryght
               Such as we now se in syght
               And that appul for his synne
               Tokyn of deeth bare there with in
               For that yt was fyrst swetest of al
               Be came byttar as eny galle
               
                  In tokyn that he that fyrst had space
               Was put there fro and from grace
               And in to wo and sorow than
               Wherof the appul soure be came
               And the synne was not for that
               That he so the appul ate
               But by cause he brake the cōmaundment
               Of his maker / that made hym shent
               And al that euer came of them to
               For theyr synne went in to wo
            
            
               ¶The CC.lxxii. questyon
               
                  ¶Why lerne thes yong chyldren so
                  More than thes old men do
               
               
                  CHyldren are hottar of kynde
               Thā eny old man that mē fynde
               And curyous they are also
               To the thyng yt mē thē settis to
               Lyghtly takyng and holdyng
               For theyr wyt is euer waxing
               Cold man hath saddar wyt
               Wherfore harde takyng is it
               And of long tyme hath he seen
               Many thynges that hath bene
               Wherof he hath before
               Therfore he taketh not moch more
               And mannys wyt is more thynkyng
               In other thynges yt he hath in occapyeng
               And chyldren but of theyr lesson
               Haue no occupacyon
               Therfore theyr wyt is theron set
               And are of nought els let
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.lxii. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the dylectablest syght
                  That is vnder sunne lyght?
               
               THe delectabelest thyng that may be
               Than is to heuyn for to se
               And thynke on hym that al hath wroght
               Heuyn / erth / and al of nought
               Sonne / mone / and sterre bryght
               That is delectable goostly syght
               Delectable syght there is also
               That bodely thyng longes vnto
               As to se delytes hym many one
               That he loues and longes to se on
               For man delyteth hym to be hold
               Thyng that he loues and haue wold
               Though it lothly be and blacke
               For loue men say hath no lacke
               And be it so fayre as it ought
               And aman loue it nought
               In the syght hath he no lykyng
               Ne delytes hym therin nothyng
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why made god as thou mayst se
                  Heere on mannys body for to be
               
               MAter that man hath of eche lym
               Toke fyrst god of erthe slyme
               And comparyd to erth he is
               For as on erthe waxeth gris
               So waxeth heere vpon the man
               Other frute nought geue he can
               
                  And on the fyrst man heer gan spryng
               In the stede of his clothyng
               Whan he clothyng of grace had lorne
               For he hym to god had mysborne
               He sawe hym nakyd and shamed sore
               On al the lymes that on hym wore
               Than sent god heer on hym waxyng
               That to his heles was hangyng
               There with was his body clad
               And Eue no nother clothyng had
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Why come some this world vnto
                  Doumbe borne and defe also
               
               
                  LOng before that god began
               This world for to make or man
               Wyst he wel that man shuld sinne
               And goddys hest to breke begyn
               And stablest he forth by
               The turnyng about of the sky
               And the planets in theyr goyng
               For to gouerne al thyng
               And the sygnes there they in go
               For to worke both wel and wo
               And in some poynt of tho
               Are some borne defe and doume also
               Some croked and some blynd
               As men may many fynde
               And al for adamys synne is that
               Whan that he the appul ate
               And be cause he synned in his assent
               In al the wyttes that god hym lent
               
                  Wher by in ech wyt that man haas
               Fallyth this aueature percaas
               In tokyn that adam forsoke
               God in them al and the appul toke
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Profyteth the folke ought vnto
                  The almesdedes that they here do
               
               
                  AMan that doth here almesdede
               He is worthy of moch mede
               If he for god it do only
               And he trust in hym stedfastly
               
                  
                     •
                  o moch payne it wyl hym saue
               In purgatory that he shuld haue
               And he that beleuyth not in god truly
               But in ydols beleuyth sykerly
               No almes do he ne may
               Thoughe he the pouere gyue alday
               For almes dede may none it proue
               With out it be geuen for goddys loue
               And gyue for hym & beleue in hym nought
               This may not be to gether brought
               For yf a man now wore
               With a spere wounded sore
               Lechcrafte myght do no good to hym
               Whyle the yren styked therin
               Neuer thelesse aman is synne
               May soner haue grace for to blynne
               And throughe knowlegyng may he loos
               For almesdedes that he does
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxvij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶A iuge synnes he ought
                  That denies them y• yl hath wrought
                  Or synnes he ought also with al
                  That the iugment fulfyl shal
               
               BUt yf iuges were set
               The wicked somtyme for to let
               An euyl world shuld sone begyn
               And peryl were to lyue therin
               Wherfore is it good to be here
               Wicked dedes to correct and dere
               For he that workes here amys
               In so moch as in hym is
               He wrathes god of heuyn sore
               Than is iuge ordayned therfore
               Wreckar of goddys cause to be
               Wronge to denie in euery countre
               Now yf he deme hym that doth yl
               Me thynketh he doth goddys wyl
               And he that the iugment shal do
               Unto hym sha
                     •
                   dempt is so
               He hath no p
                     •
                  ryl therin
               But waysshes his hand in blode of synne
               Now than who so in iugment shal fyte
               Loke that he fro ryght not 
                     •
                  yte
               For gyft / fauour
                     •
                   / ne for made
               For he wrathes god so tha
                     •
                   dede
               But in 
                     〈◊〉
                   iuges ryght
               Synnes 
                     〈…〉
                   the plyght
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tho tha
                        •
                      are dom
                        •
                      & 
                        •
                     ooles borne
                  And doys 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  HOles that no good can
               Ne no wyt haue of man
               And are borne of theyr mother so
               Men tel of them what so they do
               As a chyld that hath no wyt
               But doth al that lyketh it
               And bettar do can it nought
               But as it falleth in the thought
               And by cause theyr wyt is no more
               Dampned be they not therfore
               But they that in wyt were borne
               And after it haue forlorne
               And dyd euyl there before
               Whyle that they in wyt wore
               And no mercy of god asked
               Of that dede whyle theyr wit lasted
               And after knew nother good nor yl
               Tho shalbe at goddys wyl
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Aungels that with god are dere
                  Kepe they mennys sowles here
               
               EUery man what so he be
               That beleuyth in the Trynyte
               Hath an aungel hym to zeme
               And to tech hym to good to lene
               And al his good thoughtes and dedes
               Puttys hym his aungel that ledys
               A wicked aungel he hath also
               Wicked dedes to put hym to
               And his wyt is lent hym fre
               And good and euyl knowes he
               
                  Whether aungel he folowe wyl
               And the good aungel is f
                     •
                  lwo
               Whan he sees his man mysgo
               And his ioy is wel the more
               Whan men doys after his lore
               For of hym selfe hath man ryght nought
               But wickydnes in dede and thought
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxx. questyon
               
                  ¶How may aungel yt hath no body
                  Shew hym selfe here to man openly
               
               
                  AUngel that is in goddys syght
               To se al thyng hath he myght
               But hym may no body se
               For a goostly thyng is he
               And throughe mannys pryson
               Is aungel somtyme sent here doune
               And he may come also smerte
               As eny thought in mannys herte
               Of the ayre he takyth a body
               And than is he sene openly
               And than aman here hym can
               And he hym as another man
               But were not that body truly
               Hym myght se no bodely eye
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Are deuyls spyers euer more
                  Of that the folke do euerywhore
               
               DEuyls are euer more redy
               Where so aman doth wickedly
               And many mynysters haue they
               That are walkyng nyght and day
               
                  And that neuer more blynne
               Men to tempt and brynge in synne
               And whan man hat
                     •
                   do
                     •
                   also
               Anone his mayster hete
                     ••
                  ys it to
               But yf that it so b
                     •
                  falle
               That eny of the deuyls all
               With some good man be doune cast
               His poure wyl no lengar last
               Among his felowes he shalbe she
                     ••
                  
               
               And be cast in great tourment
               So sore them 
                     ••
                  nes hesp
                     •
                  de nought
               Of the thyng that he after wrought
            
            
               ¶The .lxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶How is that fyre on what manere
                  Purgatorye that men calle here
               
               Fyre of purgatorye is
               There moch wo is and no blys
               Thethere shal face al tho
               That shalbe saued and no mo
               They that are here of repentaunce
               And do not fully here pr
                     ••
                  aunce
               There shal he it fulfyl be dene
               For to make hym fully clene
               But there shewes to them in that wo
               Aungels and other hallowes mo
               For whos loue they dyd 
                     〈◊〉
                   h
                     •
                  re
               And they amend them at theyr sh
                     •
                  re
               Syght of them and trust al so
               Of blys that they shal after to
               That shalbe the comforte all
               For they wote to blys they shal
               
                  But that shal after that goddys sonne be
               Deed truly vpon the rode tr
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶What thyng is it men calle helle
                  And how come sowles therin to dwell
               
               HElle is a stede of payne and wo
               And yet are there helles two
               The nether and the vppar helle
               And the nether the worse we 
                     •
                  el
               For ther is the great pyne
               And prync
                     •
                  paly are there in
               ¶The fyrst payne is I wot
               That aboue other fyre is hot
               As that our fyre is of nature
               Aboue fyre wrought of the paynture
               ¶That other payne than is great cold
               Such that no man yong ne old
               May suffer it so straynyng it is
               And there is nother ioy de blys
               ¶The thyrd payne that is in that helle
               Are dragons and adders felle
               That in the fyre lyue also
               As fysshes in the water do
               ¶The fourth is such stynke in that hole
               That nothyng may it th
                     ••
                  
               
               ¶The fyfte scourgears fowles to 
                     •
                  ete
               As smyth doth 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  mours great
               ¶The syxte payne that there is dyght
               Is great darknes without lyght
               ¶The seuente is the confusyone
               Of al the synnes aman b
                     •
                  e done
               
                  For euery man shal knowe and se
               His dede though hym loth be
               ¶The ryght payne shalbe the crye
               That the dragons so gryssely
               And the adders that there wone
               Shal crye vpon hym euer anon
               ¶The nynth is that he shal for go
               The syght of god and euer to be in wo
               A wicked shal haue al this pyne
               For he forsoke the ordres nyne
               Of aungels that in heuyn wore
               Ne wrought not after goddys lore
               But tho that now wend to helle
               Shal not al in the nether dwelle
               In the hyer shalbe theyr dwellyng
               As adam and his ospryng
               Unto the tyme of the prophete
               That theyr synne with his deeth shal bete
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶They y• in holle haue theyre dwellyng
                  Wote they or knowe they eny thyng
               
               Ryghtwyse sowles knowe wel
               Al men and th
                     •
                  yr dedes euery dele
               And they wore al that euer is
               Both in sorowe and in blys
               Wicked sowl
                     •
                   that is in helle
               Knowes al that with them dwelle
               But of heuyn wote they nought
               Ne of no good dede that is wrought
               The good pray euer more
               For them that dyd them good before
               
                  And they present to god also
               The good dedes that we do
               And the syght in the Trynyte
               Makyth them al thyng to know and se
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶The good that hens begon al tyte
                  Come they now to ioy perfyte
               
               UNto ioy thoughe they be brought
               Parfyt ioy haue they nought
               As they shal afterward come tyl
               And why I shal the say the skyl
               If thou come vnto a feste
               There rych metes are and honest
               And thou be set alone to mete
               The sadlyare shalt thou ete
               But yf a good felowe come to the shal
               That thou daryst to ete with al
               Thou etyst meryare than thou dedyst before
               And thy mete doth the good the more
               Euyn so the sowle that is in blys
               Hath moch ioy there that he is
               But perfyt ioy hath it nought
               Tyl his felowe be therto brought
               Which is the body that it in lay
               And that shalbe at domysday
               Whan they to gether shal come agayne
               Eyther of other shalbe fayne
               And haue of other great delyt
               Than shalbe theyr ioy perfyt
               And tho that shal to helle fare
               Shal than haue perfyt care
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.lxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶May sowles ought shew thē vntyl
                  Theyr frēdes ech tyme whā they wyl
               
               GOod sowles that are in blys
               May ech tyme that theyr wyl is
               Shew them to frendes that wold them se
               Slepyng or wakyng whether it be
               But the sowle that is in helle
               Behouyth euer more styl to dwelle
               Tho yt are in purgatory / are byleue
               That the good aungel may them geue
               So may they shew them theyr frendes vnto
               To pray them that they them good do
               Or that they prayer for them make
               That theyr paynes may sone slake
               But yf eny shew hym to the
               And seys that he dampned be
               Trust it nought neuer the lesse
               It is a deuel in his lycknesse
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Dremes that men dreme on nyght
                  Wherof come they to mannys syght
               
               SOme tyme of heuyn kyng
               For to tel man some thyng
               And of the deuyl they come somwhyle
               To be gyle that fayth geue them tyl
               Somtyme of humours steryng
               About the hert of man slepyng
               Somtyme the wombe fylled wyl it make
               Ouer moch mete and drynke to take
               Somtyme of that men sees on day
               
                  And can not cast it a way
               Or thyng that he hath of great thought
               In slepe is it before hym brought
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan god made fyrst trees for mā
                  
                  Was eny frute in them than
               
               AS god made adam fully man
               And Eue of hym fully woman
               Of theyr seed forth mo to bryng
               So dyd he of al other thyng
               Among al other trees he wrought
               That frute in theyr seson forth brought
               And euery tree that men fynde
               Hath his frute in hym by kynde
               And the seed of them also
               Brought forth frute as they now do
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶What tyme and what day was it
                  That adam was made tel me yet
               
               
                  ADam was made as old men told
               Whan the mone was .iij. dayes old
               And had lytel than of lyght
               Gnabrygab than it hyght
               The fyrst mone was it of the yere
               And on a fryday that was clere
               Adam sawe that same tyme
               And anon he called it pryme
               But after chaunged al Noe
               And the mones stablysshed he
               
                  On a fryday adam was wrought
               Noe that day of lyue was brought
               And on such a day shal borne be
               The very prophyt / and dye on tre
               And he shal as he wel may
               Worke many wonders on that day
            
            
               ¶The CC.lxxxx questyon
               
                  ¶Whan the flod ouer the world ran
                  Made god than new frute to man
               
               GOd made frute and al thyng
               To mannys mete at the begynyng
               Trees he made and frute theron
               And tho fel in the flod ech one
               The rotes stode in the erth styl
               And after the flod waxed to wyl
               A
                     •
                  d were so fayr as they fyrst wore
               Beryng frute as they dyd before
               So was no frute made new
               But the trees that fyrst grew
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Where set Noe shyp on land
                  Whan the flod was with drawand
               
               SOne so the flod was with droughe
               The arch was set safe I noughe
               Upon a great hylle and a hye
               That hyght the mount of Hermonye
               Also quyckly as Noe
               Was out gon with his mene
               And the beastes euerychone
               The trees toke rotes vp a non
               
                  That vpon the shyp wore
               And shal there stande euer more
               God set the lycknesse on the sky
               So that men shuld wyt there by
               That neuer more shuld be none
               Such a flod as that was one
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan Noe from the shyp went so
                  Came he this world straunge vnto?
               
               
                  GOd made neuer creature
               Ne neuer shal here for to dure
               That he ne shal that warne I the
               To this world ryght straunge be
               For porely we came and bare
               And pouere shal we hens fare
               To day borne to morowe on bere
               Our herytage is not here
               And haue we herytage none
               Than are we straunge euerychone
               And straunge was Noe also
               Whan of the arche he came the world vnto
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof euer may it be
                  That a man has in his harte petye?
               
               PEtye comes of a fre blode
               And a nesshe hart that is good
               Pyte to god may lyckened be
               For of hym is mercy and pyte
               And he that wyl no pyte haue
               Hym auayleth not pyte to craue
               
                  Pyte tendres mannys herte
               And causyth it to swet al smerte
               The herte there with in swete is brought
               And for no nother trauayleth nought
               Whan the herte hath pyte of a thyng
               Anon it fallyth in meltyng
               And to swete it wyl begyn
               For tendernesse that than is in
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why haue foules in thē no nature
                  As beastes to make engendure
               
               HAd foules kynd in them also
               As the other beastes do
               Yong to bere in theyr body
               They myght not than fly a hy
               The heuynes of theyr beryng
               So shuld let them of fleyng
               And than myght take them euery man
               Whan they great to waxe began
               And they are made by the ayre to flye
               And not euer by the ground to lye
               Wherfore they ordayned ware
               Of goddys wyl as they now are
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Sal men haue pyte of al tho
                  That lye in payne and in wo
                  And delyuer them also
                  If that men may come therto
               
               IF that thou in payne se
               Man or beast whether it be
               
                  Than shalt thou haue pyte of the syght
               And delyuer them yf thou myght
               Neuerthelesse men may wel slo
               Dyuers beastes and foules also
               Mannys mete of for to make
               Whan tyme comes them to take
               But shuld they do the no seruyse
               Nothere for mete ne other wyse
               Thoughe thou haue to it delyte
               Or serue not for thy appetyte
               But as it came so let it go
               Do it nother payne ne wo
               Be it a worme that venym berys
               And it the / nor non other derys
               Thou shalt no hurte it do
               For thou hast no cause therto
               God it made not for nought
               For thy lete hym that it wrought
               For to do with it at his owne wyl
               And do not thou with wrong it spyl
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is bettar as ye doyst thynke
                  Wyne or water for to drynke
               
               
                  WIne is a thyng ful precyous
               That many are after couetous
               And somtyme it helth makys
               Unto some man that it takys
               For it is nought to euery man
               To drynke I lyke that it drynke can
               
                  Wyse men drynke wyne oft
               At mesure and bere them soft
               They noman mys say ne mys do
               Them is wyne profyte vnto
               But folys that wyne drynke shal
               That drynke dronke therwithal
               And whan the wyt dronken is
               Then wyl they gladly do amys
               Men to bete or to slo
               Or vnto horedom for to go
               Unto men that vse it so comyn
               Were better the water than the wyne
               But he that mesurably
               Drynkys wyne and not for thy
               Leses his wyt / hym doth it good
               And maketh hym good body and blode
               Therfore shal wyne to good be prest
               And vnto foles is water best
            
            
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxvij. questyon.
               
                  ¶ Whan man is ardaunt for to fyght
                  With some that standis in his syght
                  How than may he holde hym styl
                  And ouercome that wycked wyl
               
               AMan may tempre hym yf he wyl
               And he wyl lede his wyt with skyl
               Yf that he in wreth be brought
               For some thyng that hym lykes nought
               Yf he be in wyl to fyght
               Withstand his wyl at his myght
               And vndertake to thynke els whore
               And may his blode not kele therfore
               
                  Out fro folke he drawe hym fast
               And alone in his herte he cast
               That man may do whan he is wroth
               That al his lyue may be hym loth
               And be hym alone so flyte and fyght
               As it ware in that others syght
               And with his breth that he lettes go
               Shal his great hete wend hym fro
               So guyeted shal he be
               And become al in a tempre
            
            
               ¶ The .CC.lxxxxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Why haue wymen al the wo
                  Of this world and the ioy also
               
               
                  LIghtly wo and lyghtly wele
               Haue thes wymen euery dele
               Ful lyghtly take they ioy them to
               And ful lyghtly wo also
               Lyghtnes of ye brayne mas this
               There no sadnesse in is
               Lesse they are than men of wyt
               Wherfore theyr thought lyghtly wyl flyt
               They fare as a lefe on the tre
               That turnes whare the wynd wylbe
               Ware theyr wyt sad as of man
               Men shuld of them / for that they can
               Domesmen and iustyce take
               But no lawe wyl it them now make
               Lyghtly they trust that men them say
               And also quycly it is a way
               And for that they now trust / &now let go
               Haue they so sone wel and wo
            
            
               
               ¶The .CC.lxxxxix. questyon
               
                  ¶Why are chyldrē whan they borne are
                  So vnconyng as beastes ware
               
               
                  A chyld yt tender is and a yonglyng
               May of this wo
                     ••
                  d know nothyng
               For he is both tendar and grene
               And of this world hath nothīg sene
               Unto he come to greatter age
               That he may hym selfe page
               Than may he se and vnderstand
               Of al thynges that be comyng / and
               Unconnyng is a chyld also
               Unto the deuyl shame to do
               That he that so lytel borne shal be
               And that a beaste can more than he
               That he shal haue the herytage
               That the deuyl for his outrage
               Fyrst lost / and for his pryde
               This is his sorow in euery tyde
               For feblenesse of nature is it
               Why chyldren yong haue no wyt
               Whan adam was made and his wyfe
               And god had gyuen hym goost of lyfe
               Redely knew they al thyng
               For they ware of goddys makyng
               But that father and mother hath here
               For feblenesse of the matere
               Whan it is borne it can no good
               Lesse than a beast lepyng in the wode
            
            
               ¶The .CCC. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now yf that thou can
                  Wherof comys natural wyt in man
               
               
                  
                  OF pure braynes it comyth vnto
               Pure blod & pure herte also
               And be ye two pure of thes thre
               And the thyrd nought be
               Right clere wyt may ne be there
               As that al thre to gether were
               For with one eye sees no man so
               As that he with two myght do
               Be herte and braynes neuer so good
               And darke be in hym the blode
               Herte and braynes it drynkes tyl
               And the wyt truly doth spyl
               Be the herte good and the blod bryght
               And the braynes myrke and lyght
               Greatly wyl lyght braynes greue
               Al that that other to wold gyue
               And the planets in theyr goyng
               Workes in man al this thyng
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.j. questyon
               
                  ¶Wherof may it come to
                  The nesyng that men nese so
               
               NEsyng falles soth to sey
               Unto man of thynges twey
               Fyrst of humours that are ascended
               In to the braynes of the hed
               The braynes refuse them gladly
               And castys them out hastely
               And in the doune fallyng of tho
               Unto the nostrels they go
               For tho are redy open ey
               Wherby go they so a wey
               
                  Another is to loke vp on hy
               Unto the sonne on the sky
               And the hete of the sonne anon
               Fylles the veynes of the hed echone
               Dryuyng out the keelth thore
               That in the braynes was before
               And yf thou wylt with hold nesyng
               Spere thy mouth at the begynyng
               And draw thy breth fast to and fro
               And nesyng shal the ouer go
               For the nose stoppys there with al
               And at the mouth it out go shal
            
            
               ¶The CCC.ij questyon
               
                  ¶Wynd blowyng with mayne
                  Why deyes it for a shoure of rayne
               
               
                  WAter and wynd to gether are
               As it mother & doughter ware
               Doughter of mother has feding
               And wynd of water begynyng
               & whā. ye cloud yt it has wrought
               Is hym selfe doune brought
               ¶The wynd is stylle anon ryght
               For his mattar hath lorne syght
               For knyfe shal no man make wele
               If he haue nother yren ne stele
            
            
               ¶The .CCCiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Whic is the strongar of thes twey
                  Wynd or water this me sey
               
               GRound of al thyng with ryght
               Is strongar and of more myght
               
                  Than the croppe aboue it cast
               Elles myght it no whyle last
               And strongar is that thyng I wys
               That sterys than that steryd is
               Now is wynd at the begynyng
               Stered ayre and no nother thyng
               And cours of water maketh it al
               That the ayre so sterre shal
               And yf wynd with water stered be
               Than is water strongar than he
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.iiii. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now on what manere
                  Aman shal lyue in this world here
               
               
                  AMan shal lyue in that manere
               So that whan he deyes here
               Afterwarde may ryse
               Boldly to go be fore iustyse
               That is to say yt al his thought
               Be on hym that hym hath wrought
               And worshyp hym al that he can
               And after in god loue euery man
               And of that truly he may wynne
               Of his trauayle with out synne
               Than shal he lyue with out pryde
               Enuye and couetys also let glyde
               This may he bothe lyue wel and deye
               And ryse and go to the blys the weye
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.v. questyon.
               
                  Shal aman that in good stede be
                  To seke a bettar raunge the countre
               
               
                  IF thou in a good place be
               Wher with thou mayst wel agre
               There thou good lyfe may lede
               The to cloth and to fede
               Hold the styl renne nought
               Ne for the bettar haue no thought
               To seke a bettar thou may be in mynd
               But thou wottyst not where it to fynde
               And there thou comyst percaas
               Shalbe wors than that other was
               Such wenys to fynde hym before
               Baken brede whan he comes thore
               He shal perauenture fynde the corne
               Standyng yet in the feld vnshorne
               Wherfore yf thou in good stede be
               Hold the therin by rede of me
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.vi. questyon
               
                  ¶Which are more worthy of ye twey
                  Rych or pouer thou me sey
               
               THere are worthynesse two
               Goostly and bodely also
               The bodely worthynesse
               That is nother more ne lesse
               But after as a man hath here
               So is he hold among men dere
               Therfore by so moch as thou hast now
               So moch worthy art thou
               Haue thou but a peny in al
               No more worthy men hold the shal
               Goostly worthynesse is not so
               But who toward god best may do
               
                  And serue hym here al the best
               He with god is worthyest
               Moch worthy here to be
               Is truly but a vanyte
               But that worthy is to god to wende
               That worthynesse hath no ende
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.vij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is to man more semely
                  Fayre vysage or fayre body
               
               A Fayre body to man I wys
               A ful semely thyng it is
               But what the nakyd body be
               No man may it wel se
               Be it shapenyl or wele
               The clothes couers it euery dele
               But that that is in syght
               And may not be hyd with ryght
               The vysage that man is knowen by
               If it be fayre and semely
               A fayre man men wyl hym call
               And leue his other lymmes all
               And in a fayre vysage and whyte
               Hath aman moch delyte
               Wherfore in al the man not lyeth truly
               So cōly a lym as is a fayre vysage verely
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.viij. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal aman lede hys lyfe
                  That fyndes ama hauntyng his wife
               
               Fynde thou aman with thy wyfe
               Loke thou make wt hym no stryfe
               
                  Preuely thou go thy way
               And nothyng vnto them say
               But afterward thou say her to
               That she no more do so
               Say she doth here selfe shame
               For in her lyeth al the blame
               There wold no man her come tyl
               But it were by her wyl
               Wherfore chastyse her courtesly
               And loke how she wyl do there by
               And she wyl not do after thy lore
               Of that vpbreyd her no more
               If thou smyte on the man a non
               Whan thou comest hym fyrst vpon
               And begyn to fyght also
               The deuyl procurys there vnto
               One of you may lyghtly the other slo
               And so encresyth sone thy wo
               Therfore thoughe it greues the sore
               Better the lasse scathe than the more
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.ix. questyon
               
                  Shal men for tene or for lesyng
                  Blame god of heuen in ony thyng?
               
               
                  GOd of heuen is so wyse
               That in hym no blame lyse
               But thākyng / worshyp / & honour
               As to hym that is our creatour
               And yf thou for thy foly
               Fal in any malencoly
               Blame thou god therfore nothyng
               Blame the and thyne vnconyng
               
                  Haue thou not as thy wyl wore
               Why shalt thou blame god therfore
               Thoughe thou pray god send me
               It may not at thy wyl be
               But yf thou trauayle for to lyue
               God shal helpe the for to thryue
               Were aman a water in
               That depe ware and coud swym
               And he cryed on god fast
               And ware perysshed at the last
               For defaute of steryng
               That he wold helpe hym selfe nothyng
               Wherfore blame god no man shuld
               He wold haue holpe yf hym selfe wold
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.x. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the sauourest thynge
                  Of al that are at thy wenynge
               
               OF al thynges that euer be
               Is there none so sauoure
               Unto man / beast / and foule also
               As slepe is whan tyme is therto
               There nis nother mete ne drynke
               That sauoryth aman I thynke
               As slepe. whan aman wold fayne
               No delyte is there agayne
               With out slepe may nothyng thryue
               Of al that euer are a lyue
               For that ordayned god the nyght
               Therein to rest and slepe euery wyght
               Slepe norysshes mannys kynde
               And beastes as that men fynde
               
                  Man / beast / ne foule is none
               So iolyfe nor so wel be gone
               Hold hym fro slepe agayne his wyl
               Thou mayst hym sone spyl
               And cause hym to lese both flesshe and blode
               Be he neuer so totter and wode
               Wherfore is slepe sykerly
               The sauorest thyng that I wot truly
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xj. questyon
               
                  ¶Of what maner & of what bounte
                  Ought kynges and lordes to be
               
               
                  LOrdes & kinges ought ryght wel
               To be trewe as eny stele
               In worde ī werke to their myght
               And with iustyce deme a ryght
               Uyse them wel also to be
               Curteys / meke and of pyte
               And to mysdoars neuerthelesse
               Stout to deme theyr wickydnesse
               For he may neuer god wel plese
               Nor his lordshyp in honour with ese
               That sparyth wickednesse to shent
               And god is not there with content
               They ought also to be doughty
               Wygrous and fers of theyr body
               Large and geuyng courtesly
               Theyr state may they maynteyne ther by
               To pouer they ought be mercyable
               And vnto the rych stable
               And aboue al thyng
               To worke the wyl of heuyn kyng
               
                  For he hath them lordes set
               Good to do and yī to let
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xij. questyon
               
                  ¶Swete that cometh of the body
                  How comes it wherof and why
               
               Swete kyndly cometh comenly
               Of wicked blod in the body
               That steryth somtyme and hath no roo
               And other humours hym mynges to
               And whan they to gether take
               Great hete in the body they make
               And that hete that is within
               Maketh the body as it shuld brynne
               And that body that is so hote
               Anon castes out the swote
               The kynd clensys ther with all
               But ouer moch hurte shall
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Which are the best hewes that ere
                  Of clothyng men for to were
               
               BEst hewes that may be
               To mannys clothyng are thre
               That are rede / whyte / and grene
               And for thes causes I it mene
               The red supposys regalyte
               And is colour of dygnyte
               It geuyth the werer moch blys
               And to the sonne lyckened it is
               Whyte wede is a worthy thyng
               And of aungels it is clothyng
               
                  Hyt makyth hym mylde that it weryth
               And hewe of the mone it beryth
               Grene is a precyons colour
               And shuld be hold in honour
               Of al other most is it borne
               For gras / tre / and also corne
               And al that waxyth in erth by dene
               Al is it clad in grene
               And that most thynges are clad with al
               Dygnyest hewe men hold shal
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Seyng men grene a good hew call
                  Which is the grenest thyng of al
               
               THe grenest thyng is water I wene
               For waters make al thyng grene
               And ware not of water the moystyng
               Shuld no grene thyng spryng
               Grasses that on hylles are standyng
               There no water is rennyng
               With rayne and dewes of the ayre
               Waxe they both grene and fayre
               And seyng grennesse is by watrys myght
               Than is it grenest with ryght
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xv. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now so haue thou blys
                  Which is the fattest thyng that is
               
               FAttest thyng that is of kynde
               Than is erth that men fynde
               For trees and al othere thynge
               Of the fatnesse of erth sprynge
               
                  And ware fattnesse of the erth no whore
               Shuld they neuer spryng more
               Of the fatnesse of erth comyth al
               That they spryng and waxe with al
               Of erth take they theyr nature
               And els myght they not endure
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether is bettar at the deth day
                  Repentaunce or hope of blys for ay
               
               BOth are good soth to say
               Unto man whan he shal deye
               Repentaunce is good to haue
               But good hope shal aman more saue
               For euery man that deye shal
               May not repent hym of al
               For thy behouyth hym nedly
               Trust hym al in goddys mercy
               But he that in no hope is
               For to come to heuyn blys
               Shal he neuer come therin
               Be he neuer so clene of synne
               But he that hath al his trust
               That god is of mercy most
               That trust shal saue hym at the last
               Whan other shalbe out cast
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal men greue & make euyl chere
                  For aman that deyes here
               
               By kynde men wepe and make care
               Whan theyr frendes fro them fare
               
                  Neuerthelesse the man that ay
               Hath kept goddys law / I say
               Of his deeth no sorow is
               For he goyth vnto blys
               There to be for euer more
               Hym shuld no man sorow sore
               But he that in god trustes nought
               Nor his cōmaundment hath not wrought
               And dyeth so in that entent
               And is so to helle went
               For hym is sorow to make
               That he such lyfe wold not for sake
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Came fro yt other world euer eni thīng
                  That of helle or heuyn told tydyng
               
               
                  MAny haue come ageyne here
               Good men that with god were
               The folke to counsel and telle
               Both of heuyn and of helle
               Yt ware good men here before
               Of whom that we yet haue lore
               They wrote in bokes what was wrought
               By cause men shulde for get it nought
               The great ioy that is in heuen
               That no tong in erth may reken
               And the great payne of helle
               That they haue that therin dwelle
               This told adamys sonne Abel
               Seth and Enocke also wel
               Noe and Melchysedech also
               And other prophytes set therto
               
                  Throughe goddys cōmaundment
               They are hyther ageyne sent
               That is to say theyr techyng
               Throughe which we haue knolegeyng
               Of heuyn and helle both
               Wel is he that they roth
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xix. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal aman eny thyng sey
                  Whan he shal to slepe hym ley
               
               
                  AMan that beleuyth in god aryght
               And kepyth his wyl at his myght
               Whā he to slepe doth lay hī doune
               He shal say this oryson
               Lord god of myght most
               To the be take I my goost
               Thou kepe it lord and it defende
               From encombrance of the fende
               From hym lord thou me clere
               That he me neuer dere
               Haue mercy on me heuyn kyng
               And graunt me lord my askyng
               And than slepe he hardely
               With out drede of thy enemy
            
            
               ¶The CCC.xx. questyon
               
                  ¶Of al batayle that is in lande
                  Which is the strongest to withstande
               
               BAtayle strongar wor I nought
               Whan that I haue al be thought
               Than is temptacyon of the deuyl
               None that doth aman more euyl
               
                  Other batayls sees some day
               But the deuyls fondyng lastyth ay
               Slepe man or wake he where so he be
               That batayle may he euyl fle
               And be he neuer so stedfast
               Yet wyl the deuyl hym cast a cast
               And man may not fle of the stede
               But with fastyng or some holyhede
               And be cause that warre is euer on one
               Therfore strengar wot I none
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxj. questyon
               
                  ¶How lyeth a chyld tel me this
                  ¶In the mothers wombe whan it is
               
               A chyld throughe goddys grace
               Hath in the mothers wombe aspace
               In a chambyr one of the seuen
               Of the matryce that of men be callen
               And the fystes soth to saye
               Lye be fore the eyen twaye
               And great ioy they haue and reioysyng
               There they lye and lykyng
               And they wold neuer more
               Come in other stede than thore
               But whan they are here comen
               And the ayre of this worlde haue taken
               Than wold they not be there agayne
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now of wynes tyte
                  Why some is rede and some whyte
               
               
                  NOe was the fyrst man
               That euer vyne to plant began
               Fourthy plantes he gathered and fette
               That ware in fourthy dayes sette
               Euery day two in erth he dyght
               One on day a nother on nyght
               Tho that the day ware sette vpon
               Unto the sonne on it shon
               For hete of sonne that shon than
               Of goddys grace tho rede becam
               And that in erth on nyght dyd lay
               Whan the sonne was a way
               For nyghtes keelth that felle theron
               Be came whyte euerychone
               Wherfore are the red hottar wele
               Than the whyte agreat dele
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Haue foules & beastes eny spekyng
                  Or vnderstandyng of eny thyng
               
               OF beast or foule shalt thou none fynde
               That hath language in his kynde
               Of al beastes men recken can
               Hath none language but man
               Foules and beastes crye by dene
               But they wot neuer what they mene
               Whan that one makyth a crye
               That other herys redely
               And cryeth ageyne by and by
               But what they mene wot not they
               Al that euer they cry and do
               Of kynd is and vsage also
               
                  Which kynde hath god them dyght
               For man shal ouer them haue myght
            
            
               ¶The .CCCxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whether helpeth the sowle more
                  That aman doth here before
                  Or that men after do for hym
                  Whan that he is deed and dym
               
               BOth helpes man in nede
               But both are not of one mede
               For yf a man goyng be
               In a da
                     •
                  knesse there he may not se
               And a 
                     •
                  anthorne go hym before
               Therof hath he lyght wel more
               Than thoughe be hynd folowed two
               For / for them myght he mysgo
               Also a man that doth good here
               As long as he may hym selfe stere
               Therof hath the sowle more mede
               Than for such two after dede
               Many men haue that rede
               To do for them whan they are deed
               Whan hym selfe may haue it no more
               The lesse thanke he is worthy therfore
               Wold he for goddys loue it dele
               Whyle that he ware in hele
               Than went before hym the lyght
               To lede hym the wey a ryght
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxv questyon
               
                  ¶Fysshes that swym here and thore
                  In water slepe they neuer more
               
               
                  FIsshes that are in the see
               Or in ryuer whether it be
               Haue theyr eyen bryght within
               And to and fro they euer swym
               It is not of theyr kynd the ryght
               That they slepe other day or nyght
               If they be wery they wyl rest
               A whyle where them thynketh best
               And yf they felt the ayre also
               As we or foules or beastes do
               That aboue erth wone
               Of kynd shuld they slepe ful sone
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Of al that in the world be
                  The fayrest foule which thynketh the
               
               
                  IF al the foules yt god hath wrought
               Wore in to one place brought
               And stode al vpon a flocke
               The fayrest of al were the cocke
               And he hath thynges thre
               That in none other may men se
               On his hede he beryth a crowne
               And spore vpon his shanke downe
               And god hath geuen hym the myght
               To know the howrs of day and nyght
               The cocke is gelous ouer his wyfe
               And oft for her makyth stryfe
               And he shuld haue defaut of mete
               Or his wyfe yf he myght ought gete
               And yf he dwelled in felde also
               Or in wod as other do
               
                  Al the foules that before hym wore
               Reuerence shuld here them thore
               And for his fayrnesse haue of hym awe
               Than is he fayrest with lawe
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxvii. questyon
               
                  ¶Which is the fayrest beast that is
                  And that aman myght not mys
               
               HOrs is the fayrest beast in lande
               Stalworthyest and made to hande
               With horses oft lordes gete
               Lande and lyfe / drynke and mete
               Horses in harow and in ploughe
               In cart and euerywhore good I noughe
               Horses bere men to and fro
               There they on fote myght not go
               Wherfore is he best and fayrest
               And vnto mannys behoue the best
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now yet thynges mo
                  The fayrest horses which are tho
               
               HOrses in the world are many one
               But not al shapen after one
               He that wel shapen shalbe
               Behouyth to haue this properte
               Foure thynges long / behouyth hym to
               And foure thynges short also
               And foure thynges large somedele
               Than is he horse shapen ful wele
               Longe shankes / and longe hals
               Long tayle and long rybbes als
               
                  Foure short thynges is no lake
               Hede / eres / pastors / and backe
               Foure large thynges come there nest
               Mouth / nostrels / croupe / and brest
               And great eyen falleth wele
               Than is he shapen wel euery a dele
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxjx. questyon
               
                  ¶Whiche are ye beastes so god ye saue
                  That most vnderstandyng haue
               
               
                  BEastes yt of vnderstandyng be
               Most of al other are thre
               Ape / bere / and hounde also
               Thes wylbe buxum man vnto
               Mannys techyng wyl they lere
               And vnderstand that they stere
               Whan Noe in the arch was in the flode
               Thes thre beastes nexte hym stode
               And of al the last went hym fro
               For none vnderstode so moch as tho
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxx. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan goddys sonne shal borne be
                  By what tokyn shal men it se
               
               TOkyns many shalbe falle
               Whan goddys sonne lorde of all
               Shalbe borne of her that hethes
               Ouer al the world shal than be pees
               Agreat ster
                     •
                  e shal shewe that day
               That al the worlde wel se may
               Asercle of gold purpred with al
               About the sonne shewe hym shal
               
                  A welle of oyle in great tokenyng
               Out of the erth than shal spryng
               And a descrypcyon shal taken be
               Ouer al the world in euery countre
               A dombe beast as that we fynd
               That day shal speke agayne kynd
               Beast / foule / and fysshe also
               That day shalbe in rest and ro
               And the deuyls in helle dwellyng
               Shalbe ful sory and mornyng
               The eyghtene day after he is borne
               He shalbe circumcised and shorne
               And that in tokenyng be shal
               That he is god and man with al
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxx. questoon
               
                  ¶Tel me now as shalbe falle
                  What sygnyfye tho tokyns al
               
               PEas shalbe ouer al
               For he is peas that man come shal
               The sterre that shal shew frelye
               His godhed shal sygnyfye
               About the sonne the golden thyng
               Shal betoken that he is kyng
               The purpre shalbe token also
               Of the passyon that he shal to
               The welle of oyle showyth byturly
               That he shalbe welle of mercy
               The descrypcyon that shal taken be
               Tokenes that ouer al lorde is he
               The doume be ast spekyng tokenes als
               That they that in the law were fals
               
                  And were but as beastes told
               Shal turne to hym and of hym hold
               Beast and foule shalbe in blys
               And they wot goddys sonne he is
               And the deuyls shalbe sory
               For they drede hym wonderly
               That he is that shal breke helle
               And take away that with hym dwelle
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxj. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan he is borne achyid shal he
                  Be conyng more thā another shalbe
               
               
                  SOne as he borne is / he can
               More than eny other man
               For thoughe he be thā a yonglyng
               The godhed in hym wot althyng
               The sonne of the trynyte
               The fathers wysdome truly
               So is sperd in hym only
               Wherfore shal he know wel more
               Than eny after or before
               Neuerthelesse for al that he can
               He wyl fulfyl the kynd of man
               In al thynges that falles hym to
               Saue synne that shal he neuer do
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan he is borne as that we tel
                  Wher shal he in hoost dwelle
               
               WIth his mother whyle he is yong
               So shalbe his dwellyng
               In to Egype she lede hym shall
               
                  And ther a whyle dwele hym with al
               After agayne shal he go
               Unto the lande that he came fro
               And begynne the folke to tech
               And openly for to prech
               And al his lyfe shalbe so
               As he teches there vnto
               To many synne he shal forgeue
               Such as vpon hym wyl beleue
               And cold water them crysten in
               In forgeuenesse of theyr synne
               For water as that men wel wot
               S
                     •
                  eckenes the fyre that is hot
               It clenses fylth and makyth clene
               And that is drye it makyth grene
               And it sleckeneth also thyrste
               Unto man that drynke lyst
               Wherfore in water baptyse shal he
               For vertu of thes myghtes thre
               Fyrst it sleckenes hete of synne
               And clenses fylthe that man is in
               And drye sowles grene shal he make
               Throughe the baptyme that they shal take
               And in this lyfe shal he dwelle
               Ey to he dey and breke helle
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxiiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Yet wold I wyt more of the
                  Shal goddys sonne afayre man be
               
               A Shal with ryght of nature
               Be the fayrest creature
               That euer was and euer shalbe
               
                  Shal none be so fayre as he
               And it is ryght that he be fayre
               That of heuyn is sonne and heyre
               And he shal vpon an hylle
               His dyscyples shewe hym tyl
               And he shal seme to theyr syght
               As it were the sonne lyght
               And his clothes whyte of hewe
               As it were newe fallen snewe
               Therfore is no man alyue
               That his fayrhed may descryue
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxv. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel yet yf that thou can me sey
                  Why it was that he wold dey
               
               FOr obedyence and for loue
               Heuyn to dyght to our behoue
               For obedyent shal he be
               Unto the deeth vpon the tre
               So that that was forlorne
               Throughe the tre ther beforne
               Shuld be wonne agayne also
               Throughe the tre that he shal to
               And for loue of man kynde
               That his seruyse wyl haue in mynde
               He had leuer deeth take
               Than he wold man kynde forsake
               His deeth shal aman agayne bye
               To reue the deuyl of his maystery
               The father shal to the sonne geue
               Poure for his seruaunts yt he wil here leue
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxvj. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Who shal him slo and by what rede
                  And how long shal he be dede
               
               A Maner of folke shal hym slo
               That hyght Iewes and none but tho
               Afalse counsele take they shal
               And afalse wyttnesse with al
               To brynge hym to the deeth also
               And knyghtes shal to deeth hym do
               In graue shal he be nyghtes two
               The whyls shal the godhed go
               To helle to fete al hyse
               And the thyrde day shal he aryse
               To paradyse than wend shal he
               Fourty dayes there to be
               In which tyme he shal bodely
               Ten tymes shew hym openly
               Fyrst he shal hym shew I sey
               To hym that hym in graue shal ley
               After to his mother dere
               For to glade her mornyng chere
               After he shal hym shew also
               The Mary Magdalene vnto
               And her synnes forgyue shal he
               The fourth tyme to maryes thre
               The fyfte to peter south to seye
               The syxte tyme to pylgryms twey
               That to a castel shal with hym wende
               And thore shal he with them send
               And the seuenth tyme in a halle
               Among his dyscypyls al
               There shal he byd them grope and se
               Wyturly that he it be
               
                  The eyghtene day to one that shal
               Grope his woundes and handes with al
               And to aful worthy hylle
               The nynth day shal he shew them tyl
               The tenth among the people openly
               Whan he ascendyth to heuyn on hye
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal he ascende to heuyn so hye
                  Alone with out companye
               
               
                  AL tho that with hym ryse shal
               To heuyn shal ascend hym with al
               And in that lyknesse shal he fare
               That he was in before his care
               But whan he is vp on hye
               Aboue the cloudes by the sky
               In that lyknesse he shal be thore
               That he dyd in hym shew before
               Unto his dyscypyls two
               Oo an hylle whare they shal go
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxviij. questyon
               
                  Shal goddys sonne that hym is dere
                  Ony hous in erth haue here
               
               IN erth a hows shal he haue
               That man afterward shal saue
               And that shal his spouse be
               For al shalbe on it and he
               By the sacrament of his body
               That he shal make solempnelye
               Unto his apostyls at the mete
               
                  And ech one shal therof ete
               And that sacrament that I the tel
               Shal in his hows deuoutly dwelle
               And al of good conuersacyon
               Shal come vnto saluacyon
               Throughe the vertu and the myght
               Of that sacrament so dyght
               And al tho that are outfous
               And are spered out of that hous
               In payne of helle shalbe shent
               But they come to amendment
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xxxix questyon
               
                  ¶Shal his body euer dwellyng be
                  In erth that men may it se
               
               HIs body shal euer be dwellyng
               In erth to the worldys endyng
               Upon a day as he shal
               His apostyls soupe with al
               He shal take the bred and blysse
               And say / ete / my body this ysse
               Than shal he take the cuppe in handys
               That with wyne before hym standys
               And blesse it and say them vnto
               Haue drynke this my blode also
               The selfe blode is it that I here make
               That shalbe shed for mannys sake
               And throughe the vertu and the myght
               Of his word is there anon ryght
               His very body god and man
               As that he to say began
               And yf that sacrament ne wore
               
                  His flesshe only and no more
               With out blod therto wrought
               His very body ware it nought
               Flesshe in leuyng man to be
               Without blode can no man se
               And there shal his dyscypyls take
               Myght that sacrament to make
               With word he shal them lerne thore
               That hym selfe sayd before
               And that body shal dwellyng be
               So that men eche day may it se
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xl. questyon
               
                  Shal euery man haue myght therto
                  His body for to make also?
               
               
                  NAy / shal none haue therto myght
               But that therto are ordayned right
               That of his holy hous shalbe
               Kepers / and haue the dyngnyte
               And thoughe that keper bere hym yl
               And wyl not fulfyl goddes wyl
               Neuerthewors is that flesshe and blode
               Ne neuer the better thoughe he be good
               And who so taketh it worthely
               His sowle hele he taketh therby
               And he that vnworthely it taketh
               His owne dampnacyon he maketh
               For he taketh not goddes body
               But bread he taketh al onely
               The godhed that there was in
               God takes it to hym for his syn
               For so worthy a thyng as he
               
                  In a foule vessel wyl not be
               And no more enpeyre ne can
               That same body a wicked man
               Than is enpeyred the sonnys lyght
               Of a warderobe that here is dyght
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlj. questyon
               
                  ¶Tho that haue myght therto
                  That body for to make also
                  Shal they before the trynyte
                  More than other worshypped be
               
               NO man shal there worshypped be
               For honour nor for dygnyte
               But with god he shal be dere
               After as he hath don here
               Thoughe goddys hows wold hym chose
               Her kepar to bynd and lose
               His worshyp shalbe neuer the more
               But yf he haue don wherfore
               And do he not aryght also
               As hym be comyth for to do
               He shal haue blame and payne withal
               Wel more than a nother shal
               For he that is made a hyrdar
               Of goddys hows to be kepar
               His shepe must he kepe wel and know
               And by his owne lyfe them showe
               How that they theyr lyfe shal lede
               And them kepe from mysdede
               Wherfore yf he mysdo
               So moch more payne shal he go to
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlij. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶Why shal they euery day be wone
                  To make the body of goddys sonne
               
               FOr thre thynges pryncypaly
               Shal a preest make goddys body
               For god and for hym selfe also
               And for the folke that se therto
               He that it sees hath mede therfore
               And that it takes moch more
               But he that receyuyth it vnworthely
               Hym selfe he dampneth suerly
               And the body ne doth it nought
               But hym that lewdly hath wrought
               In paradyse appyls many one
               Made god and wicked none
               And for an appyl that Adam dyd ete
               Was he out of that place bete
               And that was not for that
               That the appul was nought that he ate
               But for that that goddys bode brake he
               That hym defended had that thre
               So shal fare that Sacrament
               It shal cause no man be shent
               Agayne the deuyl strength shal it make
               Loke he be clene that it shal take
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xliij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tel me now what thyng is synne
                  That many shalbe lorne in
               
               SInne forsoth is ryght nought
               For that god neuer wrought
               God of heuyn made al thyng
               And al was good of his makyng
               
                  And for his werkes good wore
               Synne is none of them therfore
               And for he made it not sothely
               In substance it is nought truly
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xliiij questyon
               
                  ¶By what syngne shal men se
                  Whan goddes sone shal dede be?
               
               
                  AT his dethe shal befall
               Syngnes many one withall
               For the sonne shal lese his lyght
               And become darke as the nyght
               The erthe euerydele shal quake
               That to folke great drede shal make
               Dede bodyes shal ryse hym with al
               The thyrd day when he ryse shal
               An astronomer then shalbe
               In the boest and say shal he
               By the derkenes that he shal fynd
               That than dyes god of kynd
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlv. questyon
               
                  ¶When goddes sone in erth shal dwel
                  Of what vertue shal men hym tel
               
               
                  OF moche vertu shal he be
               By his workes that men shal se
               Of his vertue he shal with ryght
               Ouercome the deuyl and his might
               His Glotony / couetyse / and pryde
               That the deuyl had spred wyde
               And al his myght dystroy he shal
               That he Adam begyled withal
               
                  Fro feuere and other euyls fele
               Many men than shal he hele
               With fyue loues and fysshes two
               Fyue thowsand shal h
                     •
                   fede and mo
               And .xij. lepys men shal fylle
               Of the relefe there that shalbe stylle
               The prynce of his apostyls shal he
               Saue goyng vpon the see
               He shal cōmaund the wynd to lyth
               And it shalbe styl also swyth
               To blynd shal he geue syght
               The croked ofte to go ryght
               Awoman that shal with heer grete
               And with her teres waysshe his fete
               And with her heer them wype and drye
               He shal forgeue her / her folye
               A deed man that in graue hath leyn
               Foure dayes / he shal areyse ageyne
               One of his dyscypyls shal bere
               A swerd and reue amannys ere
               The ere in his hand shal he take
               And agayne it hole make
                     •
                  
               
               Al the prynces in helle that are
               Shal he cause to quake and eke care
               Whan he theyr gates shal come vnto
               And cōmaund them that they vndo
               That his are shal he take thore
               And sende them to blys for euer more
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal his dyscypyls ought also
                  Do myracles as he shal do
               
               
                  HIs dyscypyls throughe his grace
               Shal to many sycke do solace
               For he shal euer by them be
               They shal speke and worke shal he
               Many one with theyr techyng
               To goddys lawe shal they bryng
               A wicked man that tyme shalbe
               And say that goddys sonne is he
               And begyn to ascend a hye
               As he wold to heuyn flye
               One of the apostyls there by standyng
               And se where he is so flyeng
               He shal cōmaund hym throughe the myght
               Of goddys sonne that he doune lyght
               And he shal falle doune anon
               And breke his necke bone
               Of many a bale they shal do bote
               And many a syke bryng on fote
               And al shal of his myght be
               That shal gyue them that pouste
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlvij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal they neuer haue no ende
                  Nor no wo that to heuyn wende
               
               
                  SOules that are ī heuyn blys
               Shal neuer of ioy mys
               Wo ne shuld they neuer se
               Nor old shal they neuer be
               They shal euer be reioysing
               As a chyld in his best lyking
               And hool as fysshe in delyte
               Swyfte as wynd and snow whyte
               
                  Bryght as the shynyng sonne
               And know al that aungels conne
               Leel as ded in althyng
               And worshypped shal they be as kyng
               A thowsand yere in game and playe
               Thynketh them not an howre of the daye
               And that delyt they are with al
               With out end them last shal
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Tho that are in helle fest
                  Shal they no mercy haue ne rest
               
               THo that shal to helle wende
               They are dampned with out ende
               Rest shal they none haue ne mercy
               For of that they are not worthy
               He that lettys of his fre wyl
               The good / and takys hym to yl
               It is ryght that he haue also
               As that he hym chose vnto
               And t
                     •
                   pray for hym loude or styl
               Is al ageyne goddys wyl
               He that in purgatory is
               To clense and after shal to blys
               For hym is prayer to make
               Of his paynes for to slake
               But he that dampned is to helle
               He shal euer in sorowe dwelle
               With out rest with out ro
               And with out mercy also
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.xlix. questyon
               
                  
                  ¶They that in heuen shal haue theyr se
                  Shal they clad or naked be?
               
               THey shal be nakyd of enuye
               Of pryde and of lechery
               And clad also neuertheles
               With grace and blys and bryghtnes
               Shame of themselfe shal they thynke non
               Thoughe they haue no clothis on
               Nomore than Adam of hym thought
               Or that he the synne wrought
               When he had of the appul taken
               Than shamed hym a sawe his makyng
               No more than shamyth the
               That man vpon thy vysage se
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.l. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan god to deme come shal
                  Quyck / deed / and the world al
                  And al shalbe deed / which is than he
                  That shal alyue here be
               
               
                  LIfe and deeth of for to sey
               May be sayd on maners twey
               Deeth that body goys here to
               And deeth of sowle in payne also
               He that god hath serued here
               And his cōmaundments held dere
               He shal not be deed that day
               For he shal lyue in blys euer and ay
               And he that goddys wyl ne wrought
               And he that trowed on hym nought
               He shalbe deed with out ende
               And to the payne of helle wende
               
                  And that the Antechyrst shal turne
               Fro the fayth / they may wel morne
               Them ware bettar they ware vnborne
               For many shal by hym be lorne
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lj. questyon
               
                  ¶Where shalbe borne yt false prophyte
                  That al that wo in erth shal sete
               
               ANtechryst shal borne be
               In Babylon agreat cete
               A wicked woman hym bere shal
               And the deuyl shal entre hym with al
               And wicches shal norysshe hym
               In a
                     •
                  oune hyght corozaym
               Uery prophyt they shal hym call
               And many wondres shal of hym fall
               Al the folke shal he drawe
               To his assent and to his lawe
               The rych shal on hym beleue
               For the gyftes that he shal geue
               The pouer shal to hym turne also
               For great awe that he shal put them to
               And for that he wyse shalbe
               For al the clergye knowe shal he
               The clerkes shal he to hym alye
               Through wysdome of his clergye
               The good men and stedfast
               That in goddys lawe wold last
               Many shal he drawe hym to
               For myracles that he shal do
               He shal cause the fyre to falle
               Fro heuyn and his foos borne all
               
                  Deed men he shal cause aryse
               To bere wyttnesse of werkes his
               No dedman but the deuyl onely
               Shal ryse in dampned body
               And bere witnesse of his werkys
               Among lewd men and clerkys
               Moch people shal to hym drawe
               Namely folke of the fyrst lawe
               Thre yere and a halfe shal he
               Reygne with moch dygnyte
               Twelue apostyls chose he shal
               With hym to walke ouer al
               He shal feyne hym for to deye
               And two dayes shal he be a weye
               The thyrd day shal he come with blys
               And say that he vp rysen ys
               Than shal come Enocke and Elye
               And shal prech ageyne his folye
               Great folke shal they turne hym fro
               But he shal them bothe slo
               No lenger there than dwell he wyl
               But he shal drawe hym to a hyl
               For to folowe and to do shame
               Tho that wycked haue his name
               Sodeyne dethe shal he dye thore
               For god wyl that he regne 
                     •
                  omore
               And ful sore may agryse as 
                     •
                  yse
               Whan they shal to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   ryse
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lij. questyon
               
                  ¶What day shal it befall
                  That goddys sone shal deme vs al
               
               
                  ON suche aday shal he deme hyse
               As he fro deth to lyfe shal ryse
               That shalbe on a sonday
               That now is sabbat in our lay
               Of heuen than the orders nyne
               That neuermore shal heuen tene
               Shalbe fulfyllyd as they were al
               Or lucifer began to fal
               Lyuyng men shal then eueryone
               Dye for drede and ryse anone
               There shalbe none of so great mede
               That at that day he shal haue drede
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.liij. questyon
               
                  ¶What tyme shal he come therto
                  For to deme the world also?
               
               AT the mydnyght forsothe I tel
               Suche tyme as he shal harowe hel
               That eche tyme shal he lede out thore
               Al tho that his frendys wore
               And that tyme out shal he lede
               His of this world to geue them mede
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.liiii. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal he come & on what manere
                  When he shal come to deme vs here?
               
               
                  AS a kyng to a cytye
               That wyl haue his inentere
               And inen before hym shal bere
               His crowne his sheld and his spere
               Wherby men may haue knowlegyng
               That thether comyng is the kyng
               
                  So shal be come to the dome
               But nother with knyght ne with grome
               But with ordres of aungels all
               That bodyes out of theyr graue shal cal
               And they shal dele and set in twynne
               The good from thos that deyed in synne
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.liiij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal his crosse be there present
                  Whan he shal geue his iugment
               
               NAy his crosse shal not be there
               But the semblaunt as it were
               And that shalbe of more claryte
               Than men in the sonne se
               And whan the dome is don al
               With his to heuyn wend he shal
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lv. questyon
               
                  ¶Whan he the folke shal deme also
                  How shal he shew hym them vnto
               
               SO as he dyd his dyscypyls tyl
               Dysfygured vpon an hylle
               He shal shew hym vnto them
               Bryghter than eny sonne beme
               So shal he shew hym to the good
               And to the wicked hangyng on rode
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lvj. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal his mynystres with hym be
                  In the dome to here and se
               
               HIs mynysters shalbe thore
               Tho that with hym walked before
               
                  And al that lyued after hys 
                     •
                  ore
               And ke pars of his hous wore
               And al that lyue in chastyte
               Or that ded for his loue shal be
               Al shal they be of his wylte
               Synful wreches for to spylle
               For that shal they be there present
               To here and se the iugement
            
            
               The .CCC.lvij. questyon
               
                  ¶How shal he the dome do
                  And what shal he say them to
               
               GOod departed shal he se
               Fro the wicked that there shalbe
               Than shal he to the good say
               Ye in erth stode by me ay
               I houngred sore and ye me fedde
               I thursted and ye me drynke bede
               I was nakyd and ye me clad
               In sycknesse I helpe of you had
               I lay in pryson and myght not se
               Thether ye came to vyset me
               And by cause ye dyd this gladly
               Come to my fathers ioy heuynly
               And ye that of me not rought
               But al that ye lyked wrought
               With the deuyl and his ye go
               Unto payne for euer and od
               For ye nothyng dyd me fore
               Whan ye in your lykyng wore
               This shal euery man here and se
               Why he shal saued or dampnyd be
            
            
               
               ¶The .CCC.lviij. questyon
               
                  ¶Sal euery man than know wele
                  That he hath don here euery adele
               
               AL that euer aman hath wrought
               Good and yl in dede or thought
               Al shal on hym wryten be
               That al the world may it se
               But yf eny ware of repentaunce
               That toke his shryft here and penaunce
               Of his mysded with harte contryte
               That synne for geuen is al tyte
               The good than thanke god shal thore
               That they of such lyfe wore
               Wherfore that they shulde than wende
               To the blys with out ende
               And the wicked shal se eft
               What goodnesse they haue left
               And what wickednesse they toke
               Whan that they the good forsoke
               Ful▪ sory be they than in thought
               But al shal avayle them nought
               For they shal anon be shent
               With the deuyl in tourment
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lix. questyon.
               
                  ¶Whan al is don that dome so harde
                  What shal be don afterwarde
               
               
                  AFterwarde the deuyl shal
               Take tho that shal with hym al
               And wend to helle for euer more
               The wicked men to payne thore
               Goddys sonne shal his take
               
                  That here dyd wel for his sake
               And lede them to his fathers blys
               Where euer I lyke ioy is
               And al shal theyr blys be
               That they euer god shal se
               And neuer more shal deye
               For yf they shuld chose one of tweye
               They shuld leuer in helle be
               God euery day in blys to se
               Than be in heuyn and se hym nought
               For that ware nought worth them thought
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lx. questyon
               
                  ¶What shal than betyde and who
                  Of this world where we are now
               
               
                  AS water it fyrst fordyd also
               Shal it fyre than fordo
               Al to gether shal it brynne
               Shal nothyng beleft therin
               The elementes shal than slake
               Of theyr fygure and a newe take
               Sonne and mone shal bryghter be
               Seuen tymes than men now them se
               Erth / water / fyre / and ayre
               They shalbe than thre tymes so fayre
               Than they euer ware before
               And so shalbe left euer more
               Al trauayls in erth shal blynne
               Shal no payne after be therin
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lxj. questyon
               
                  Shal the good haue leue ther tyl
                  For to do al that they wyl
               
               
                  THe good shal than be of that wyl
               To do but good and nothyng yl
               For than shal they ech thyng do
               That theyr wyl standyth vnto
               And in what stede they wold they wore
               Anon as thought they shalbe thore
               And other worke shal they haue none
               But goddys vysage to se vpon
               And thanke hym that of al lord is
               That they are come to that hlys
            
            
               ¶The .CCC.lxij. questyon
               
                  ¶Shal they than remember ought
                  Of wickednesse yt they here wrought
               
               REmember them they shal euery dele
               Of that they wrought here yl and wel
               And great ioy haue they shal
               That they the wickednesse ouer came al
               As a knyght is blyth and glad
               That a stronge batayle hath had
               And hath bore the prayse away
               From al his enymyes that day
               Great ioy it is his frendes vnto
               That he that day bare hym so
               And al so sory are they tho
               That for theyr synne go than to wo
               ¶Here ende the questyons.
            
            
               
¶The ende of the hystory.
         
         
            
               Sydracke god yeld it the
               The techyng yt thou hast teched me
               From darknesse thou hast me brought
               Unto lyght that fayleth nought
               Now than wot I moch thyng
               That after Iesus haue great longyng
               And now wot I what god may do
               To lyfe and vnto soule also
               Wherfore it is good now
               Upon what maner and how
               That we shal our toure fulfyl
               Wherto we fyrst had great wyl
               For that was the cause why we
               Came fyrst vnto this countre
            
            
               FOr thy the kyng Boccus anon
               Toke hors and worthed there vpon
               And his mayster Sydracke before
               And al his folke be gan to raye thore
               They came in to the in comyng
               Of Garabys lande the kyng
               There they began the toure to dyght
               That sanke from them euery nyght
               The kyng caused to be brought lyme & stone
               And caused masons to come anon
               And Sydracke the kynge present
               Deuysed them the foundament
               In the name of the Trynyte
               One god and persons thre
               Boldly ther vpon they wrought
               And yt shuld hurt them found they nought
               
                  And in dayes syxe and twenty
               Was the toure made vp fully
               And al thyng that therto shuld
               After the kyng it ordayne wold
               ¶Whan that Garaab it herde
               Of the toune how it farede
               How it was to ende brought
               He was ful sory in his thought
               And foule abasshed he was also
               For he perseuyd it shuld hym vndo
               In harte myght haue no rest
               He counselyd hym what was best
               A messynger anon he sent
               That vnto kyng Boccus went
               And prayed hym purcharyte
               Of hym to haue mercy and pyte
               Kynge Boccus answered and spake
               By the counsel of Sydracke
               That yf Garaab wyl a good man be
               And beleue in the Trynyte
               That may both dampne and saue
               That he shal of hym mercy haue
               And Garaab sent to hym agayne
               That what he wyl I shal do fayne
               Kyng Garaab caused to be broken anon
               His false ydols euerychone
               And trusted in god of heuyn lyght
               Seruyng hym with al his myght
               And many landes there mo
               Causyd Boccus to serue god tho
               But whan kynge Boccus was deed
               And Sydracke / than was there no rede
               
                  But anon they god forsoke
               And to theyr false ydols they toke
               Throughe entysement of the wicked goost
               Now he that is of myght most
               Saue vs fro his wycked wyles
               For many one that shrew begyles
               And bryng vs into that blys
               Wherof that none ende is.
               AMEN
            
            
               PRay we now with al our myght
               Unto god of heuen lyght
               That he geue vs grace so to do
               That we heuen may come vnto
               That we shal al to I w
                     •••
                  
               
               And that Hughe of caumpeden
                     •
                  
               
               That this boke hath throughe sought
               And vnto Englysshe tyme brought
               Lyue in ioye without synne
               And that he god is loue here wynne
               So that he at his lyues ende
               Unto the blesse of heuen wende.
               FINIS
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Thus endeth the hystory and questyōs of kynge Boccus and Sydracke. Prynted at London by Thomas Godfray. At the coste and charge of dan Robert Saltwode mōke of faynt Austens at Cantorbury.
            ¶Cum priuilegio regali.
            
            
         
      
   