
      
         
            
            
            
               AN EPItome of the title that the kynges Maieſtie of Englande, hath to the ſouereigntie of Scotlande, continued vpon the auncient writers of both nacions, from the beginnyng.
            
               M. D. XLVIII.
            
            
               CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM
            
         
         
            
            
            To the moſte noble▪ and excellent prince, Edward the vi▪ by the grace of GOD k
                  •
               ng of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, defendor of the 
                  〈◊〉
                and vpon yearth ſupreme hed, of the Churche of Englande, and Irelande▪ your humble and obediēt ſubiecte Nicholas Bodrugan otherwiſe Adams, wiſſheth lōg life, and the ſame proſperous and happie.
            
               ALthough I knowe right well (mooſte noble Prince) that ther be diuerſe whiche bothe by their coūſaill and writyng, do to their vttermoſte powers ſwade the vnion of Scotlande vnto youre highnes, by the mariage of their Quene, a meane thereunto bothe honourable and Godly: Yet neuertheles, the ſame ſtudy and furder declaraciō of your maieſties

title to the ſuperioritie thereof, ſemeth vnto me to bee ſo indifferently perteinyng to all menne, whiche doo profeſſe obedience to youre highnes, that no mannes ſtudie ought to be taken as vain or vnthankefull, whiche humbly bryngeth furthe to that common vſe, whatſoeuer iudgement, profite, or knowlege, he ſuppoſeth to haue founde, either by ſtudie, or inquiſiciō: foreſeyng that in tempeſtious vpſwellynges of water or ſhipwracke, fire, or other like calamities of men, right acceptable vnto vs is the labor of thoſe and thankes worthie, which willyngly do runne to helpe vs, although in the meane tyme there be other ſufficient nombre, to deliuer vs from the perill obiected. Herefore moſte noble prince, perceiuyng

the auncient 
                  〈…〉
                this greate Britaigne, and 
                  •••
               
               ding ſuche plentie of writers cō
               feſſyng your ſuperioritie of Scotland, as could not by any entendement ſo fully conſent vpō any vntruth, I thought it my deutie to offre vp theſame vnto youre highnes▪ whiche hiſtories like as almightie God hath from tyme to time, in fauor of the truth and of your title preſerued: So hath his Godhed ſignified no leſſe fauour to your highnes, voucheſauyng to nobilitate theſame, in the perſone of your maieſtie conſerued vnto this youre tyme, the noble houſe of Seymour, whoſe aunceſter Eldulph de Samour beeyng then Erle of Glouceſter, many hundreth yeres a gone, in the tyme of Kyng Aurelie Ambroſe

lewe Hengeſt the Saxon, capitall enemy of the Briton nacion: 
                  •
               y whiche noble ſeruice like as this Realme was deliuered from the tyrany of Saxons, and reſtored to the whole Empire & name of greate Briteigne: ſo we youre obedient and louyng ſubiectes truſte, that the right noble duke of Somerſet, and the lorde Seimour of Sudeley, your graces high Admirall, youre Maieſties dere vncles, ſhall in the ſeruice of your highnes, for the like reſtitucion of the name and Empire of greate Briteigne vnto your highnes, ſhew thēſelfes the worthie ſucceſſors of ſuch an aū
               ceſter. Neither haue I purpoſed herin with opprobrious wordes to ſkolde with the Scottes, and thereby to wipe of one durt with

another. Neither 
                  〈…〉
                builde vpon our awne Eng
                  •••••
                auethors, but all my purpo
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               , by indifferent writers, with plain and euident truth (whiche thyng bothe time and maners do euermore require) to publiſhe youre maieſties right and their defence folowyng therein for the more part Veremūd, Camphil, Cornelius de Hibernia, and Boecius their awne auethors: whiche peines becauſe I haue aſſumed rather as a neceſſarie ſeruice to my coūtrey, then for mine awne glory, I truſte I ſhall offende none but ſuche, whom it ſhould bee aſhame to pleaſe. Myne inclinaciō is to haue the good worde of euery mā, but the diſeaſed malice of ſome cannot ſaie well of any. Albeit, touchyng the phraſe and

ſtile of this my writyng, if theſame to any man ſhall not ſatiſfie his expectacion, let hym conſider that in parte it behoueth to vſe the wordes of the hiſtorie, in whiche I am reſtrained by promiſe of an Epitome: and that in the reſidue it was not my mynde to triſle with the fiue flowers of Rethorike, but to bryng rather faithfull, then painted gliteryng ouerture, vnto thinges afflicted. The veritie of the Hiſtories I truſt ſhall ſo hereby appere, that both the good men of Scotlāde, by reaſon, and thenemies (if any ſuche bee) by their awne ſhame ſhalbe driuē, to cōfeſſe this myne aſſercion to be true, and theſame ſuche as thoug the mariage by the iniquitie of ſome take not effecte, yet to publiſhe to the world

ſufficient cauſe, for the 
                  〈…〉
                naunce of your majestie
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                againſt them, wherein the honor of a kyng may not geue place to their wilfull rebellion. And for recouery whereof, vndoubtedly almightie God for your ſyncere fauor to the auauncement of his holy woorde, will by his promiſe as he hath begon, continue your highnes in felicitie and victory, ouer all his and your enemies, wher vnto all youre true ſubiectes doo ſaie.
            AMEN.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               IF the veritie which auncient and indifferent writers haue made commō to all nacions, might aſwell perſwade the Nobles and Commons of Scotlande, as it hath reaſon, bothe to charge thē and diſproue all their obiecciōs, thei would right ſone laie doune their weapons, thus raſhely receiued, to fight againſt the mother of their awne naciō: I mean this realme now called Englāde the onely ſupreme ſeat of thēpire of greate Briteigne. In whoſe boſome caſt with vs, as bothe in one moulde, thei haue receiued the ſame toungue, lawe, and language: for aſmuche therefore, as nowe touchyng the mariage of their Quene, there is nothyng of

our part left vndoen, that ought to perſwade theim to concorde, and theſame by diuerſe of theim hetherto wholy neglected, thei ſhall of my parte eaſely perceiue that to increaſe their errour, approue their folly, or allowe their obſtinacie, I am not diſpoſed: but contrarily by ye veritie (wher in their awne writers ſhalbee no defence to theim, but meere condempnacion) to publiſhe to the world the ſtate of theſe contencions, our title & their defēce: purſuyng the which, I will folowe ye wordes of thiſtorie as foloweth.
            
               THE auncient writers of the Hiſtories of this whole Iſle of greate Briteigne, cōfeſſe that after our firſte progenitor Brutus, the yere from the beginnyng of the worlde .iiii. M. xxvii. had arriued

in this Iſle, and after his awne name had called it Briteigne, he had iſſue thre ſonnes, Locryne, Albanactus, and Camber, betwene whom, after his deathe thei agreed in this particiō, that Locryne had this firſt and worthieſt part, whiche now is called England, Albanactus the ſecond part, now by the Scottes poſſeſſed by hym called Albania, whiche their awne writers confeſſe: and to Camber chaūced the third part now called Wales: the two better partes to be holden of the firſte, as of the worthieſt of the bloud, accordyng to the Troyan lawe, from whence thei were diſcended, whiche ſuperiorite alſo by their different bearyng of the Armes of the father, leuyng the entier cote in the eldeſt brother,

is ſufficiētly teſtified vntill this daie. The particion in this wiſe eſtabliſhed, Albanactus poſſeſſyng Albania was by Humbre, his ſubiect miſerably ſlam, with out iſſue of his body: to puniſhe whiche traitery, Locrine and his brother Camber aſſembled their power and entered Albania, and there ſlewe this Humber, whoſe body thei threwe into a great riuer. Some write that this Humber beyng deſperate, threw hymſelf into this Riuer, but all confeſſe, that in this riuer his bodie was drouned, and that hereof toke the name of Humber, which it kepeth to this daie. This Locrine herupon ſeazed Albania into his awne hādes, as excheated wholy to hymſelf, not yeldyng any part therof vnto Camber his

brother, whereby alſo euidently appereth the entier ſeigniory ouer it to conſiſt in hymſelf, accordyng to whiche exāple, like lawe emong brethren euer ſince hath continued, preferryng the eldeſt brother to the onely benefite, of the collateral aſſencion from the youngeſt, aſwell in Scotlande as in Englande vnto this daie. Locryne reigned in this ſtate ouer them .xvii. yeres. Ebrāke the lineall heire frō the bodie of this Locryne, that is to ſaie the ſonne of Mempris, ſoonne of Madan, ſonne of the ſame Locryne, buylded in Albania the caſtle of Maidens, nowe called Edenbrough: and the Caſtle of Alcluth or Alclude, now called Dunbriton, as the Scottiſhe Hector Boecius confeſſeth: wherby moſte euidētly

appered: that this Ebranke was then therof ſeazed. This Ebranke reigned in this ſtate ouer them .lx. yeres, after whoſe death this Albania as annexed to the Empire of Briteigne, diſcended to the onely kyng of Britōs, vntil the diſcent to the twoo ſiſters ſonnes, Morgan and Conedage, lineall heires from theſaied Ebranke, who brotherly vpon the firſt example deuided the realme Morgan had Logres, and Conedage had Albania: but ſhortly after Morgan thelder brother ponderyng in his hed, the loue to his brother, with the loue to a kyngdome, excluded nature and gaue place to ambicion, and therupon denounced warr to his brother: in whiche warre as the rereward of his vntruthe, death miſerably

ended his life: wherby Condage obteined the whole Empire of al Briteigne, in whiche ſtate he remained .xxxiii. yeres.
            
               APTER whoſe time theſame lineally deſcēded to thonly kyng of Britōs, vntill after the reigne of Gorbodian, who had iſſue two ſonnes, Ferres, and Porres, whiche Porres requiryng like particion of the land, affirmyng the former particions to bee rather of lawe then fauour, was by the handes of his elder brother, both of his life and hoped kyngdome bereued at once: but their vnnaturall mother vſyng her natural malice, that for the deathe of her one ſonne, would bee reuenged by the loſyng of bothe, miſerably ſlewe the other.
            
               Cloten by all writers aſwell

Scottiſhe as other, was the next inheritor to the whole Empire, but lackyng power, the meane in thoſe daies to obteyne right, he was contēted to deuide the ſame emong .iii. of his kinſmen, ſo that Scater had Albania. But after the death of this Clotē
                his ſonne Dunuallo Moluncius made warr vpon theſe three Kynges, and at laſt ouercame them, and ſo recouered the whole dominion, in token of whiche victorie, he cauſed hymſelf to be crouned with a croune of gold, the firſt that was worne emong kinges of this nacion. This Dunuallo erected temples wherein the people ſhould aſſemble for Praier, to which tē
               ples he gaue benefit of Sanctuarie: he made the lawe for wager of battaill, in caſes of murder

and felonie, whereby a thefe that liued and made his arte of fightyng, ſhould for his purgacion fight with the true man whiche he had robbed: but he beleued that the Goddes (for then thei ſuppoſed many) would by miracle aſſigne victorie to the innocent partie, the priuilege of whiche firſt lawe and benefite of the latter, aſwel in Scotlande as in Englāde, be enioyed to this daie fewe cauſes by late poſitiue lawes emong vs excepted, wherein the benefite of wager o
                  •
                battaill is expelled: by whiche obedience to his lawes, it dooth manifeſtly appere, that this Dunuallo was then ſeazed of Albania now called Scotland: this Dū
                  uallo reigned in this ſtate ouer them .xl. yeres. Beline and Brenne
               
the ſonnes of this Dunuallo, did after their fathers death, fauourably deuide the lande betwene them: ſo that Belyne had Logres, and Brenne had Albania: but for that this Brenne a ſubiect, without the conſent of his eldre brother and lorde, auētured to mary with the daughter of the kyng of Denmarke. Belyne ſeazed Albania into his awne handes, and thereupon cauſed the notable wayes priuileged by Dunuallos, Lawes to be newly wrought by mennes handes, whiche for the lēgth was from the 
                  •
               urder parte of Cornewall, vnto the Sea by Northe Cathnes in Scotlande. For Religion in thoſe daies, he conſtituted miniſters called Archeflamines in their funccions moſte like the aucthoritie of Biſhoppes

               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
of all their awne writers, is ſixe hundred yeres lackyng .x. yeres. After that Brutus had reigned ouer the whole Iſlande, beeyng the ſame lande enioyed by hym and his poſteritie before their commyng, duryng diſcentes of kinges of this Briteigne, and this intruſion into a land ſo many hundred yeres before inhabited, and by ſo many diſcentes of Kynges quietly enioyed, is the beſt tule that all their awne writers allege for theim. This Fergus hereupon immediatly did deuide al Albania emong his capitaines and their people: wherby alſo moſte euidently appereth that there were no people of that nacion inhabityng there before, in proſſe whereof, the ſame particion ſhall folowe.
            
               
               THE landes of Cathnes liyng agaynſte Orknay, betwene Dummeſbey and the Water of Thane, was geuē vnto one Cornath a Capitaine & his people. The landes betwene the Water of Thane and Nes nowe called Roſſe, liyng in bredth from Cromart to the mouthe of the water of Lochte, wer geuen to Lutorke another Capitain & his people. The landes betwene Spay and Nes, from the Almayne ſeas to the Irelande Seas nowe called Murray land, wet geuen to one Vvarroche and his people. The lād of Thalia now called Boyn Aynze, Bogewall, Garyot, Formartyne, and Bowguhan, were geuen to one Thalis and his people. The landes of Matr▪ Badezenoche, and Lochquhaber, were

geuen to Martache and his people. The landes of Lorne and Kyntier, with the hilles & mountaynes thereof, liyng from Mar to the Irelande ſeas, wer geuen to capitain Nonaunce & his people. The landes of Athole were geuen to Atholus, another capitain & his people. The landes of Strabraun, and Brawdawane liyng Weſt from Dunkell, were geuē to Creones and Epidithes. ii Capitaines. The landes of Argile, were geuen to Argathelus a capitain. The landes of Linnox and Clidiſdale, were allotted to Lolgona a capitain. The landes of Siluria now called Kile, Car rike and Cunyngham, wer geuē to Silurche another Capitayne. The landes of Brigance nowe called Gallowaie, were geuen to

the compaignie called Brigandes whiche as their beſt menne, were appointed to dwell next the Britōs, who afterward expulſed the Britons from Annandale in Albany, wherby is confeſſed it to be before enhabited by Britōs. The reſidue of the lande nowe called Scotland, that is to ſaie: Meirnis, Angus, Steremōde, Gowry Strahern, Pirth, Fiffe, Striuelyng, Callender, Calderwoode, Lougthian, Mers Teuedale, with other the remēt Dales, and the Sherifdōe, of Berwicke wer then enioyed by a nacion myngeled in mariage with Britons, and in their obedience whoſe capitain called Berynger, buylded the caſtle and toune of Berwicke vpon Twede, and theſe people were called Pightes, vpō whom

by the death of this Coell, theſe Scottes had oportunitie to vſe warre, whereof thei ceaſſed not, vntill ſuche tyme as it pleaſed God to appoynt another Coell Kyng of Britons, againſt whoſe name, albeit thei hoped a like victorie to the firſte, yet he preuailed, and ceaſſed not his warr, vntil theſe Scottes wer vtterly expulſed out of all the boundes of Briteigne, in whiche thei neuer dared to reētre, vntill the raigne of Scicill Kyng of Britons, whiche was the .xiii. Kyng after this Coell. Duryng all whiche tyme theſame countrey was reenhabited by the Britons. And then the Scottes turnyng to Ciuil diſcord of this realme, betwene this Sycill and his brother Blede to their beſt auauntage, newly arriued

in Albania, & thereof made one Reuther their king: from the beginnyng of the worlde .iiii. M ix. C. lxxxxv. yeres, whiche from their firſt entry was .iii. Clxxiiii. yeres, vpon this their newe arriuall, newe warre was made vpō them, by this Sicill Kyng of Britons, in whiche warre Reuther their newe Kyng died, to whom Thereus ſucceded, againſt whom the warr of Britons ceaſſed not, vntil he frely ſubmitted hymſelf vnto ye ſaid Sicill kyng of Britōs at Ebranke that is Yorke, where ſhortly after the tenth yere of his reigne he died. Fynn
                     •
                  ne brother of Ioſine ſucceded by their eleccion to the kyngdom of Scottes who ſhortly after compelled by the warres of theſame Sicill, declared hymſelf ſubiecte, and for

the better aſſurance of his faithe and obeiſaunce to the Kyng of Britōs, deliuered his ſonne Durſtus, into the handes of this Sicill: who phanteſiyng the childe and hopyng by his awne ſucceſſion to alter the ſubtilitie (I will not ſay duplicitie) maried to him Agaſia his awne daughter, this Sicill reigned in this ſtate ouer theim twoo and twentie yeres.
            
               THIS Durſtus was their next kyng, but for y• he had maried a Britō woman, though ſhe a kynges daughter, the Scottes hated him for ye ſame cauſe ye thei ought to haue liked hym the better, and therefore not onely traiterouſſy ſlewe hym, but further to declare thende of their malice, diſhenherited aſmuche as in thē was, the iſſues of theſame Durſtus and Agaſia,
               
wherupon newe war ſprōg betwene theim and vs: whiche ceaſſed not vntill thei were contented to receiue Edeir to their kyng, the next in bloudde then liuyng, diſcended frō 
               Durſtus and Agaſia, and thereby the bloud of Britons of the parte of the mother, was reſtored to the croune of Albania: nature whoſe lawe is immutable, cauſed this bande of loue to holde. For ſhortly after this Eder attended vpon Caſſibelane kyng of Britons, for the repulſe of Iulius Caeſar, as their awne aucthor Boecius cōfeſſeth cōmaunded theſame as his ſubiecte, but Iulius Caeſar after his third arriuall by treaſon of Androgeus, preuailed againſt the Britons: and therupon purſued this Eder into Scotlande, and

as hymſelf ſaith in his Commē
               taries, ſubdued all the Iſſe of Briteigne: whiche, though the liuyng Scottes deny it, their ded writers confeſſe that he came beyond Callender woode, and caſt downe Camelon the principall citee of Pichtes, and in token of this victory not farre from Carron, buylded a round Temple of ſtone, whiche remaigned in ſome perfecciō vnto the reigne of our Kyng Edwarde called the firſte ſince the ſuppoſed Conqueſt, by whom it was ſubuerted, but the monument thereof remaineth to this daie. This Caſſibelane reigned in this ſtate▪ xvi yeres.
            
               Aruiragus Kyng of Wales, brother of Guyder .c. is and ſonne of Kymbalyne, deſcended from Androgeus the ſonne of Lud, an

auncient kyng of Britons, was by iuſſe ſucceſſion ſhortely after kyng of Britons, againſt whom Claudius then emperor made war but this Claudius at laſt gaue his daughter Genuiſſa or Geniſſa in mariage to this Aruiragus. This Claudius ſubdued Orknay, and all the remanent Iſles aboute Briteigne, whiche he gaue to his ſonne Aruiragus, and ſo left hym kyng of the whole Iſlande: this Aruiragus reigned in this ſtate ouer them .xxiiii. yeres.
            
               Marrius the ſoonne of Aruiragus and Geniſſa, was nexte kyng of all Briteigne, in his tyme one Roderycke a Scythian with a greate rable of vacabōdes, came to the water of Frithe in Scotlande, whiche is an arme of the ſea, deuidyng Pentlande from

Fiffe, againſt whom this Marrius aſſembled a power, by which he ſlewe this Rodericke, and diſcōfited his people in Weſtmerlande, of whiche victorie he was alſo after written, by the name of Weſtmer, but to thoſe that remained in life, he gaue to bee enhabited, the Countrey of Cathenes in Scotlande: whiche proueth it to be within his domintō, this Marrius reigned in this ſtate ouer theim .xxv. yeres.
            
               Coell the ſonne of this Marrius had iſſue Lucius, coumpted the firſt Chriſtian Kyng of this nacion: he created three Archeflamines, whoſe office is before declared, the firſt remained at Lō
               don, and his power extended frō the fartheſt parte of Cornewall to Humber water, the ſecond remained

at Yorke, and his power ſtretched frō Humber to the fardeſt part of all Scotlande. The third remained at Careleon vpō the riuer of Ooſe in Glamorgan in Wales, and his power extended from Seuerne through all Wales. Some write yt he made but two Archeflamyns, and turned their names to Archbiſhoppes, the one to remaigne at Cantorbury, the other at Yorke: but thei cōfeſſe that he of Yorke had iuriſdiccion through all Scotlande, either of whiche is ſufficient to proue Scotlande, to bee then vnder his dominion: This Coill reigned in this ſtate ouer theim .xi. yeres.
            
               Seuerus, by birthe a Romayne but in bloudde a Briton, and the lineall heire of the body of Androgius,
               
ſonne of Lud & nephew of Caſſibelaine, was ſhortly after Emperor and kyng of Britons, in whoſe tyme the people to whō his aunceſter Marrius gaue the lande of Cathenes in Scotland, conſpired with the Scottes and receiued them from the Iſles into Scotland: but hereupon this Seuerus came into Scotlande, & meting with their faith and falſe hartes together, droue theim all out of the mayne lande into iſles the vttermoſt bondes of al great Briteigne, but notwithſtandyng this glorious victorie, the Britons conſideryng their ſeruitude to ye Romaines, impoſed by treaſon of Androgius, aunceſter to this Seuerus began to hate hym, whom, yet thei had not tyme to loue, whereupō beſide Yorke thei

ſuffered hym to bee ſlain: After that he had for their defence and ſuretie, ſlain of the Scottes and their confederates in one battail xxx. thouſandes: but ſuche was the conſideracion of the vulger ſorte in thoſe daies, whoſe malice no tyme could deminiſhe, nor deſert appeaſe.
            
               Anthonius Baſſianus borne of a Britō woman, and Gera borne on a Romayne woman, were the ſonnes of this Seuerus, who after the death of their father, by the contrary voyces of their people, contended for the Croune, fewe Britons helde with Baſſianus, fewer Romaynes held with Geta: but the greater nombre with neither: thei fought, Geta was ſlain, and Baſſianus made Kyng, but hetherto the dayly memorie of

perpetuall ſeruitude in the Brutus, thought the death of the father no ſufficient reuenge, to the iniury dooen by the graundefather: and therefore thei depoſed this Baſſianus, and made Caraſſius a Briton their kyng, who vpō victory had againſt this Baſſianus, gaue vnto ye Scottes, Pichtes, and Scithians, the countrey of Cathenes in Scotlande, whiche thei after inhabited, whereby appereth his ſeaſon thereof.
            
               Coill diſcended of the bloudde of auncient kynges of Briteigne was ſhortly after kyng of Britons, whoſe onely daughter and heire called Helen, was maried vnto Conſtācius a Romayn, who daunted the rebellion of all partes of greate Briteigne, and after the death of this Coil, was in

the right of his wife kyng therof and reigned in his ſtate ouer thē xv. yeres.
            
               Conſtantyne the ſonne of this Conſtance and Helen, was nexte kyng of Britons, he paſſyng to Rome to receiue the Empire therof, deputed one Octauius king of Wales, and Duke of Gwiſſcop, which ſome expoūde to be Weſt ſex, ſome Cornewall, and ſome Windſore, to haue the gouernement of this dominion, but abuſyng this kynges innocent goodnes, this Octauius defrauded this truſt, and toke vpon himſelf the Croune, for whiche traytorie albeit he was once vanquiſhed by Leonyne Traherons, vncle to Conſtantyne: yet after the death of this Traherons, he preuailed again and reigned ouer all Briteigne.

               Conſtantyne beyng nowe Emperor, ſent to Maximius his kynſeman hether to deſtroy theſame Octauius, whom in ſinguler battaill diſcomfited this Octauius, whereupon this Maximius, as well by the conſent of great Cō
                  ſtantyne, as by the eleccion of all the Britons, for that he was a Britō in bloud, was made kyng of this Briteigne. This Maximius made war vpon the Scottes and Scythians within all Briteigne, & ceaſſed not vntill he had ſlain Eugenius their Kyng, expulſed and driuen them out of the whole boundes of Briteigne and newly inhabited all Scotland with Britons, no man woman or childe of the Scottiſhe naciō, ſuffered to remain within it, whiche as their Hector Boecius

ſaith: was for their rebelliō and rebellion properly could it not be, excepte thei had been ſubiectes, he ſuffered the Pychtes to remain his ſubiectes, who made ſolempne othes to hym after, neuer to erect any peculiar kyng of their awne nacion, but to remain vnder the old Empire, of thonely kyng of Britons: He reigned in the whole ſtate of this Briteigne .xxxiiii. yeres.
            
               ABOVT. xlv. yeres after this, beyng long tyme after the death of this Maximius, with the helpe of Gouuan or Gonan and Melga, the Scottes newly arriued in Albania, and thereof created one Fergus the ſeconde of that name to be their kyng, but becauſe thei wer before baniſhed the continēt lande, thei crouned hym kyng of

their auenture in Argile, in the fatall chater of Merble, the yere of our Lorde .CCCC. xxii.
            
               Maximian ſoonne of Leonyne Traherons, brother to kyng Coill and vncle to the holy Helen, was by liniall ſucceſſion next kyng of Britons: but to appeaſe the malice of Dyonothus kyng of Wales, who alſo claimed the kyngdome, he maried Othilia eldeſt daughter of this Dyonothus and afterward aſſembled a great power of Britons, and entered Albania, and inuaded Gallowaie, Mers, Annandale, Pentlande, Carrike, Kyll, and Cunyngham and in battaill ſlewe bothe this Fergus then kyng of Scottes, & Durſtus the king of Pichtes, and exiled all their people, out of the continent lande: whereupon the

few nombre of Scottes then remainyng on liue, went to Argila and made Eugenius their kyng.
            
               VVHEN this Maximian had thus obteigned quietnes in Briteigne, he departed with his coſyn Conan Meredecke into Armorica where thei ſubdued the kyng, & did depopulate the countrey, which he gaue to Conan his coſyn, to be afterward inhabited by Britons, by the name of Briteigne the leſſe: and hereof this realme tooke name of Briteigne the greate, whiche name by conſent of forein writers, it kepeth vnto this daie.
            
               AFTER the death of this Maximian, diſſencion beeyng betwene the nobles of greate Briteigne, the Scottes ſwarmed together again, & came to the wall

of Adrian, where this realme beyng deuided in many faſhions, thei ouer came one: and hereupō their Hector Boecius, as an hēne that for laiyng of one egge, will make a great cakelyng, ſolemply triumphyng of a conqueſt before the victorie, & allegeth that hereby the Britons were made tributaries to the Scottes, and yet he confeſſeth that thei wonne no more lande, by that ſuppoſed cōqueſt, but the ſamle porciō betwene theim and Humber, which in the old particions before, was annexed to Albania, it is hard to bee beleued, that ſuche a broken nacion as the Scottes at that tyme were returnyng from baniſhment within foure yeres before, & ſince in battaill loſt bothe their kynges, and the greate nō
               ber

of their beſt men, to bee thus ſodenly able to make a conqueſt of greate Briteigne, verie vnlikely if thei had conquered it, thei would haue left the whote ſonne of the Eaſte partes, to dwell in the cold Snowe of Scotlande. Incredible it is, that if thei had cōquered it, thei would not haue deputed offices in it, as in caſes of conqueſt behoueth. And it is beyond all belefe that great Briteigne or any other Countrey, ſhould be wonne without the cō
               myng of any enemie into it, as thei did not, but taried at ye ſame wall of Adryan: But what nede I ſpeake of theſe defences when theſame Boecius ſcātly truſteth his awne belife in this tale. For he ſaieth that Galfride and ſundery other Autentique writers,

ſōderly vary frō this part of his ſtory, wherein his awne thought accuſeth his cōſciēce of vntruth: Wherein he furder forgettyng, howe it behoueth a lyer to bee myndefull of his aſſercion in the fourth Chapiter next folowyng, wholy bewraieth hymſelf, ſaiyng that the, confederate Kynges of Scottes and Pychtes, vpon ciuil warres betwene the Britons whiche then was folowyng, hoped ſhortly to enioy all the land of great Briteigne, from beyond Humber vnto the freſh ſea, whiche hope had been vain, and not leſſe then voyde, if it had been their awne by ye conqueſt before.
            
               Conſtantine of litle Briteigne deſcended frō 
               Conan kyng therof, coſyn of Brutes bloud to this Maximiā, and his next heire was

next kyng of great Briteigne, he immediatly purſued the Scottes with warres, and ſhortely in battaill ſlewe their Kyng Dougard, the firſte yere of his reigne, and ſo recouered Scotlande out of their handes, and toke all the holdes therof into his awne cuſtodie.
            
               Vortiger ſhortly after obteyned the Croune of Briteigne, againſt whom the Scottes newly rebelled, for repreſſyng whereof, he miſtruſtyng the Britons, to hate him for ye treaſonable death of Kyng Conſtance, ſonne of this Conſtantyne: as one that to auoyde the ſmoke, dooth fall into the fire, receiued Hengeſt a Saxon, with a greate nombre of his nacion into this Realme, with whom and a few Britons, he entred

Scotlande and ouer came theim, whereupon thei tooke the Iſles their common refuge, he gaue muche of Scotlande, as Galloway, Pentlāde. Mers and Annandale, with ſundery other landes to this Hengeſt & his people to inhabite, whiche thei did accordyngly: but when this Hē
                  geſt afterward thurſted after the Kyngdom he was baniſhed, and yet afterward beyng reſtored, he conſpired with ye Scottes agaiſt Aurilambroſe the ſonne of Conſtantyne, the iuſt inheritor of this whole dominiō, but his vntruth and theirs bothe wer recompenſed together, for he was takē priſoner by Eldulph de Samor then Erle of Glouceſter, and his hed for his traitory, ſtriken of by the ſame Erle, by commaundemente

of the ſame kyng Aurilambros, in this felde the Scottes wer vanquiſhed: but Octa the ſoonne of Hengeſt was receiued to mercie, to whom and his people this Aurilambros gaue the countrey of Galloway in Scotlād, for whiche thei became his Subiectes: And hereby appereth that Scotlande was then agayne in his handes.
            
               Vter called alſo Pendragon, brother to this Aurilambros was nexte Kyng of Britons, agaynſt whom, theſe ſworne Saxōs new forſworne ſubiectes, confederate with the Scottes, newly rebelled: but by his power aſſembled againſt thē in Galloway in Scotlande, thei were diſcomfited, and all Albania recouered into his handes. This Vter reigned in

this ſtate ouer them .xviii. yeres.
            
               Arthur ye ſonne of this Vter begotten before ye mariage, but lawfully borne, after ſucceded next to the croune of greate Briteigne, whoſe notable actes though many vulger fables haue rather wondered at, then credited: yet all the Scottiſhe writers confeſſe that he ſubdued all greate Briteigne, and made it tributory to hym, and ſubdued the Saxons then ſcatered as farre as Cathenes in Scotlande, and in all his warres againſt theim, he had the ſeruice and obeiſaunce of Scottes and Pightes: but at the laſt ſettyng their feete in the guyle of their predeceſſours, thei newly rebelled, in the repreſſyng whereof he depoſed their Kyng, and conquered al the countreys,

of Scotlande, Iſlande and Orknay, and made one Anguſiā
                his kynſeman kyng of Scottes, Vrian kyng of Iſlāde, & Murefrēce kyng of Orknay, he made one Pyramium Archbiſhop of Yorke, whoſe auctoritie extēded through all Scotlāde: Thus Arthur reigned in this ſtate .xxii. yeres.
            
               Malgo ſhortly after ſucceded, to the whole kyngdom of greate Briteigne vpō new reſiſtaunce, he newly ſubdued Irelād, Iſlād Orkades, Norway & Dēmarke, & made Ethelfrede a Saxō kyng of Bernicia, that is: Northūberlād, Louthiā, & muche other lāde of Scotland, whiche Ethelfrede by the ſworde obteined at the hā
               des of the wilfull inhabitauntes and was true Subiecte to this Malgo.
            
            
               
               Cadvvā
                ſucceded to the kyngdom of greate Briteigne, who in defence of his ſubiectes the Scottes, made warre vpon this Ethelfrede, but at the laſte thei agreed and Cadvvan vpon their rebelliō gaue all Scotlande vnto this Ethelfrede, whiche he thereupon ſubdued and enioyed: but afterward in the reigne of Cadvvallo, that next ſucceded in great Briteigne he rebelled, wherupon the ſame Cadvvallo came into Scotlande, and vpon his treaſon reſeazed the coūtrey into his awne hādes, and hauyng with hym all the viceroys of Saxons whiche thē inhabited here his ſubiectes, in ſynguler battaill ſlewe theſame Ethelfrede.
            
            
               Oſvvald was ſhortly after by Cadvvallos gifte made Kyng of

               Bernicia, and he as ſubiect to Cadvvallo, and by his commaundement diſcōfited the Scottes and Pightes, and ſubdued al Scotlande. Oſvvy the brother of this Oſvvald was by the like gifte of Cadvvallo, made nexte Kyng of Bernicia, and he by like cōmaundemēt newly ſubdued the Scottes & Pightes, & held thē in that obeyſaūce to this Cadvvallo duryng .xxviii. yeres. Thus Cadvvallo reigned in the whole Monarchie or great Briteign xlviii yeres, hauyng al the vii. kynges therof, aſwel Saxons as others his ſubiectes: for albeit the nō
               ber of Saxons frō tyme to tyme greatly increaſed, yet were thei alwaies either expulſed, or els made tributory to the onely kynges of Britons, for the tyme beyng

all their awne writers confeſſe, & he died in the yere of our Lorde. 676. And ſo reigned in this ſtate ouer thē .xxviii. yeres.
            
               Cadvvallader was nexte kyng of the whole greate Briteigne, he reigned .xii. yeres ouer all the Kynges thereof in greate peace and tranquilitie: and then vpon the lamentable death of his ſubiectes, which died in ſundery deceaſſes innumerably, he departed into litle Briteigne, whoſe ſonne and coſyn Iuor and Iue beyng repulſed frō this Englande by the Saxſons, went into Wales, where emong the Britons thei and their poſteritie remayned Princes: vpon this greate alteraciō, warres being through the whole dominiō betwene Britons and Saxons, the Scottes

thought tyme to ſlip ye collor of obedience, & therupon entered in league with Charles then Kyng of Fraunce, in this wiſe.
            
               1 The iniurie of Engliſhemen doen to any of theſe people, ſhalbee perpetually holden commen to bothe.
               2 When Frenchemen be inuaded by Engliſhmen, ye Scottes ſhal ſend their army in defēce of Fraūce, ſo that thei be ſupported wt money & victailes of Fraūce.
               3 When Scottes bee inuaded by Engliſhemen, the Frenchmen ſhall come vpon their awne expences, to their ſupporte.
               4 None of theſe people ſhall take peace or truce wt Engliſhemē, wtout the aduiſe of other. &c.
            
            
               MANY ſufferable opinions maie be had of warr, without the

praiſyng of it, as onely admittible by inforced neceſſitie, and to be vſed for peace his ſake onely, where here the Scottes ſoughte warre for the loue of warre onely, for their league geueth no benefite to themſelfes, either in fre trafique of their awne commodities, or benefite of the Frēche, or other priuilege to the people of both: what diſcommoditie lofyng the entercourſe & exchaūge of our cōmodities, beeyng in neceſſaries more abundaunt then Fraunce, the Scottes feele and we perfectly know. What rewyn of their Tounes, deſtruccion of Countreys, ſlaughter of bothe our people, haue by reaſō of this bloudy league chaunced, the Hiſtories bee ſo lamentable, as bee to hortible emong chriſtian men

to be remembred: but God gaue the increaſe accordyng to their ſeede, for as thei did hereby ſowe diſcencion, ſo did thei ſhortly after repe ſlaughter. For Alpyne their Kyng poſſeſſyng a lighte mynde, that would be a loft with a litle wynd, hoped by this league ſhortly to ſubdue all greate Briteigne, and to that ende not onely rebelled in his awne kyngdō, but alſo vſurped the kyngdome of Pightes, whereupon Edvvyn kyng of Englāde, made one Brudeus Kyng of Pightes, whom he ſent into Scotlāde with a great power, where in battaill he toke this Alpyne Kyng of Scottes priſoner, & diſcōfited his people: and beeyng this Alpyne their kyng founde ſubiecte and rebel, his hed was ſtriken of at a place

in Scotlande, whiche thereof is to this day called Paſalpyne, that is to ſaie, the hedde of Alpyne, & this was the firſte Cropes of their Frenche league.
            
               Oſbright Kyng of Englande, with Ella his ſubiect, and a great nomber of Britons and Saxōs ſhortly after for yt the Scottes had of theimſelfes elected a new kyng, ſhortly after entered Scot lande, and ceaſſed not his warre againſt them vntill their kyng & people fled into the Iſles, Wt whō at the laſt vpō their ſubmiſſion, peace was made in this wiſe.
            
               THE water of Fryth ſhalbe Marche betwene Scottes and Engliſhmen in the Eſt partes, & ſhalbe named the Scottiſhe ſea.
            
               THE water of Clide to Dū briton, ſhalbee Marche in the

Weſt partes betwenethe Scottes and Britons, this caſtle was before called Alclude, and nowe Dunbriton, that is to ſaie: the caſtle of Britons, ſo the Britons had all landes from Sterlyng to the Irelande ſeas, and from the water of Fryth and Clide to Cumber, with all the ſtrengthes thereof. The Engliſhemen had the landes betwene Sterlyng & Nothūberland: thus was Clide Marche, betwene Scottes and Britons on the one ſide, and the water of Fryth named the Scottiſhe ſea, Marche betwene theim and Engliſhemen on the other ſide, & Sterlyng cōmon March to thre people, Britons, Engliſh men, & Scottes. Kyng Oſbright had the caſtle of Sterlyng, wher firſte he cauſed to bee Coyned

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Sterlyng money. The Engliſh men buylded a bridge of ſtone, for paſſage ouer▪ the Water of Frythe, in the middes whereof thei made a croſſe, vnder whiche wer written theſe verſes.
            
               I am free Marche, as paſsengers maie ken.
               To Scotes, to Britons, and to Englishemen.
            
            
               ABOVTE xvi. yeres after this, Hūger and Hubba Danes, with a great nōbre of people, arriued in Scotlande and ſlewe Conſtantine, whom Oſbright had before made kyng: wherupon Edulffe or Ethelvvulph then Kyng of Englande, aſſembled his power againſt Hunger and Hubba and in one battaill ſlewe theim both, but ſuche of their people as would remain and become chriſtians he ſuffered to tary, the reſt be baniſhed or put to death.
            
               
               THIS Ethelvvulph graunted the Peter pence, to which albeeit, Peter and Paule had litle mede and leſſe right: yet the paiment thereof continued in this realme euer after vntill now of late yeres, but the Scottes euer ſince vnto this day, haue, and yet dooe paie it, by reaſon of that graunt, whiche proueth theim to be then vnder his obeiſaunce.
            
               Alurede or Alfrede ſucceded to the kyngdome of England, he reigned peacebly ouer the whole Monarchie of great Briteigne: He made Lawes that perſones excomunicated, ſhould bee diſabled to ſewe or claime any propertie, whiche Lawe Gregour whom this Alurede had made kyng of Scottes obeyed, & the ſame law aſwel in Scotlād as in

England is holden to this daie, whiche alſo proueth hym to bee high lorde of Scotlande.
            
               THIS Alurede conſtreined this Gregour Kyng of Scottes, to breake is league with Fraūce for generally he concluded with hym, and ſerued hym in all his warres, aſwell againſt Danes as others, not reſeruyng the former league with Fraunce.
            
               THIS Alurede after ye death of Gregour, had the like ſeruice and obeiſaunce of Donald Kyng of Scottes, with fiue thouſande footemen, and twoo thouſande horſemen, againſt one Gurmond a Dane that then infeſted this realme, and this Donald died at this faithe and obeiſaunce with Alurede: This Alurede reigned in this ſtate ouer thē .xviii. yeres
            
               
               Edvvard the firſt of that name called Lou
                  •
               yll, ſonne of this Alurede ſucceded nexte kyng of Englād, againſt whom with Citrike a Dane the Scottes conſpired, but thei wer ſubdued, and Conſtantyne their kyng brought to obeiſaūce, and held the realme of Scotlande of this Kyng Edvvard, this dooth Marion their awne countrey manne a S
                  •
               cotte, confeſſe: this Edvvard reigned in this ſeigniorie ouer thē, and thei in his obeiſaunce .xxiii. yeres.
            
               Athelſtane ſoonne of this Edvvard was next kyng of Englād againſt whom Conſtantine kyng of Scottes, beyng as their writers confeſſe corrupted with money, ſold his faith and falce hart together to the Danes, and ayded theim againſt this kyng Athelſtane,
               
but he met with al their vntruthes together at Bronyng feld in Scotlande, where he diſcomfited the Danes, and flewe Malcolme depute in that behalfe to the kyng of Scottes, with .xx. thouſande Scottes: in whiche battaill the Scottes confeſſe to haue loſt more people, then were remembered in any age before: this Athelſtane folowed this his good lucke, throughout al Scotland and wholy ſubdued it, and beeyng in poſſeſſion of it, gaue lande there liyng in Annandale by his dede, the copie wherof foloweth.
            
               I kyng Athelſtane, geues vnto Paulan, Oddam and R
                     •
                  ddam, as good and as faire, as euer thei mine vv
                     •
                  re, and thereto vvitnes Maulde my vvife.
            
            
               
               BY whiche courſe wordes, not onely appereth the plain ſimplicitie of mennes doynges in thoſe daies: but alſo full proue that he was then ſeazed of Scotlande.
            
               THIS Athelſtane at the laſt receiued homage of this Malcolme king of Scottes, but this Malcolme for yt he could not bee reſtored to his whole kyngdome entered into Religion, and there ſhortly after died.
            
               This Athelſtane for his better aſſuraunce of that coūtrey there after, thought beſt to haue two ſtringes to the bowe of their obedience, & therfore notonely cōſtituted one Malcolme to bee their kyng, but alſo appointed one Indulph, ſonne of Conſtantyne the third, to be called prince of Scotlande, to whō he gaue muche of

Scotland: This Malcolme did homage to Athelſtane, & then did this Athelſtane Reigne in this ſtate ouer them .xxv. yeres.
            
               Edmūd brother of Athelſtane ſucceded next Kyng of England to whom this Indulph then king of Scottes, not onely did homage but alſo ſerued hym with ten thouſande Scottes, for the expulſion of the Danes out of this realme, this Edmūd reigned in this ſtate .vii. yeres.
            
               Edred or Eldred brother to this Edmunde ſucceded nexte kyng of Englande, he not onely receiued ye homage of Iriſe then kyng of Scottes, but alſo the homage of all the Barons of Scotland, this Eldred reigned in this ſtate .x. yeres.
            Edgar the ſonne of Edmund

brother of Athelſtane beyng now of ful age, was next king of England: he reigned onely ouer the whole Monarchie of great Briteigne, he receiued homage of Keneth or Kynald kyng of Scotland for the kyngdome of Scotland, and made Malcolme prince therof.
            This Edgar gaue vnto the ſame Keneth the coūtrey of Louthian in Scotlande, whiche was before ſeazed into the handes of Oſbright kyng of England for their rebellion as is before declared. This Edgar enioyned this Keneth there kyng ones in euery yere, to repaire vnto him into England for the makyng of lawes, whiche in thoſe daies was by the noble men or piers accordyng to the order of Fraūce at this daie:

to whiche ende this Edgar gaue him a piece of grounde liyng beſide the new palace of Weſtminſter, vpon whiche this Keneth builded a houſe, whiche by him and his poſteritie was enioyed vntill the reigne of kyng Henry the ſeconde, in whoſe tyme vpon rebelliō by Willyam then kyng of Scottes, it was reſumed into the kyng of Englādes handes, ye houſe is decayed, but the ground where it ſtode is called Scotlād to this day.
            This Edgar made this lawe, that no mā ſhould ſuccede to his patrimony or inheritaunce holden by the ſeruice of a mā called knightes ſeruice, vntil he accompliſhed the age of .xxi. yeres, becauſe by intendement vnder that age, he ſhould be hable in perſon

to ſerue his kyng & countrey according to the tenour of his dede and the cōdicion of his purchaſe. This lawe was receiued by the ſame Keneth in Scotlande, and aſwell there as in Englande is obſerued to this daie, whiche proueth alſo that Scotlande was then vnder his obeiſaūce. This Edgar reigned in this ſtate. xxvi yeres.
            Edward the ſonne of this Edgar was next kyng of England, in whoſe tyme this Keneth kyng of Scottes, cauſed Malcolme prince of Scotland to be treaſonably poyſoned; whervpon this Edwarde made warre vpō him, whiche ceaſſed not vntil this Keneth ſubmitted himſelf, & offered to receiue prince of Scotlande whom king Edward would appoint,

where vpon this Edward proclaymed one Malcolme to be prince of Scotlande, who immediatly came into England & here did homage to the ſame Kyng Edwarde. This Edwarde reigned in this ſtate by ſome writers xii. yeres, and by ſome others but ii. yeres.
            
               Etheldred brother of this Edwarde ſucceded next king of Englande, againſt whom Swayn kyng of Dēmarke cōſpired with this laſt Malcolme then kyng of Scottes: But ſhortly after this Malcolme ſorowfully ſubmitted himſelfe into the defēce of Etheldred, who conſideryng that that whiche could not be amended muſt onely be repēted, benignely receiued him, by helpe of whoſe ſeruice at laſt Etheldred recouered

his realme againe out of the hā
               des of Swayn, & reigned ouer ye whole Monarchy xxxviii. yeres.
            Edmund ſurnamed Ironſide ſonne of this Etheldred was next kyng of England, in whoſe tyme Canut a Dane inuaded ye realme with warres, but at laſt Canut maried with Eme ſomtyme wife of Etheldred and mother of this Edmund: this Eme as arbitrice betwene her naturall loue to the one & matrimoniall duetie to the other, procured ſuche amitee betwene theim, that Edmund was contented to deuide the realme with Canut & kepyng to himſelfe all England on thiſſide Humber gaue al the reſt beyond Humber with the ſeignorie of Scotland to this Canut: wherevpon Malcolme then kyng of Scottes after

a litle cuſtomable reſiſtence, did homage to ye ſame Canut for the kyngdom of Scotlād, & this Canut held the ſame ouer of this Edmund kyng of Englande by the like ſeruices.
            This Canut in memory of his victory & glorye of his ſeignorie ouer the Scottes, commaunded this Malcolme their kyng, to builde a churche in Buchquhan in Scotlande (where a fielde betwene him & theim was fought) to be dedicate to Olanus patron of Norway & Denmarke, which Churche was by the ſame Malcolme builded accordyngly.
            Edward called the confeſſourAn. M. lvi. ſoonne of Etheldred and brother to Edmund Ironſide was nexte kyng of al England, he receiued the homage of the ſame Malcolm
               
kyng of Scottes for the kyngdome of Scotlande.
            This Edwarde peruſed the olde lawes of the realme, & ſomewhat added to ſome of theim, as to the law of Edgar for ye wardſhip of the landes vntil the heire ſhould accōpliſhe the age of .xxi. yeres, he added that the mariage of ſuche heire, ſhuld alſo belong to the lord of whom the ſame lād ſhould be holden.
            Alſo that euery woman mariyng a freman, ſhould notwithſtā
               dyng ſhe had no children by that huſband, enioy the third parte of his inheritaunce duryng her life, with many other lawes whiche ye ſame Malcolme king of Scottes obeyed, & whiche aſwell by theim in Scotlande as by vs in Englande be obſerued to this daie,

whiche directly proueth ye whole to be then vnder his obeyſaūce. But here to make ſome digreſſiō, though ye more parte of theſe Eldredes lawes be both godly & politique, yet this addicion to Edgars law touchyng the mariage of the heire, except in caſes of prī
               ces, in whoſe perſons the commō weale of people and countreys depende, among men either ciuil or politique, ſemeth to depende more of lucre then godlynes: for that thereby, he to whoſe yeres nature doeth not geue diſcrecion to refuſe, muſt take & that a wife and ſhe peraduenture of the like age or vnder, in whiche choiſe euery of them muſt iudge by another mans affeccion, ſee with another mans iye, ſay yea with another mans tong, and finally cō
               ſent

with another mans heart, for none of theſe ſenſes be pertited to the parties in that minoritie, and ſo the eleccion beyng vnfree and the yeres vnripe, eche of thē almoſt of neceſſitee muſt hate other, whom yet they haue had no iudgement to loue. To declare what innumerable inconueniences, deuorces, yea and ſome murders haue of theſe vngodly mariages, or rather no mariages at all, proceded, the preſent tyme ſheweth ſo many examples as we may ſee ſufficient cauſe to bewaile the tyme preſent▪ but the greateſt iniury is to God, the redreſſe onely belongeth to a kyng in whom like as the ſame God hath cauſed more vertues to mete, then in any other kyng or creature at thoſe yeres, ſo we

doubt not but that his Godhed wyll voucheſafe to preſerue his highnes with then creaſe of knowlege to ye godly redreſſe of theſe and all other enormities and abuſes, to the comfort and reioyſe of vs his louyng and happye obedient ſubiectes: But I wil returne to the Scot.
            By reaſon of this lawe Malcolme the ſonne of Dunkayn next inheritor to the croune of Scotlande beyng within age, was by the nobles of Scotlād deliuered as warde to the cuſtodie of this kyng Edwarde, duryng whoſe minoritie one Makebeth a Scot trayterouſly vſurped the croune of Scotlād, againſt whom this kyng Edwarde made warre, in whiche the ſame Makebeth was ouercome and ſlayne, and therevpon

this Malcolme was crouned kyng of Scottes at Stone, in the .viii. yere of ye reigne of this kyng Edwarde.
            This Malcolme by tenor of the ſayd newe lawe of wardſhip was maried vnto Margaret, by the diſpoſicion of the ſame kyng Edwarde, and at his ful age didAn. M. lxi. homage to this kyng Edwarde for the kyngdome of Scotland.
            This Edwarde hauyng no iſſue of his bodye, & miſtruſtyng that Harold ye ſōne of Goodwyn diſcended of the doughter of Harold Harefoote the Dane would vſurp the croune if he ſhould leaue it to his coſyn Edgar Edling, beyng then within age, and partly by ye peticiō of his ſubiectes, who before had ſworne neuer to receiue any kynges ouer

theim of the Danes nacion, did by his ſubſtanciall wyll in writyng, deuiſe the croune of great Briteigne vnto Willyam then duke of Normandye and to his heires, cōſtitutyng him his heire teſtamentary. Alſo there was proximitee in bloud betwene thē for Eme doughter of Richarde duke of Normādy was wife vnto Etheldred, on whom he begat Alured and this Edward, & this Willyam was ſonne of Robert, ſonne of Richarde brother of the whole bloud to the ſame Eme: by this appeareth that this Willyā was heire by title and not by cō
               queſt. Albeit partely to extinguiſhe ye miſtruſt of other titles, partely for the glory of his victory, he chalēged ye name of a coqueror, & hath bene ſo written.
            
               This kyng Willyam called the cōqueror, to bring the Scottes to iuſt obeiſaunce after his coronacion as heire teſtamētary to Edwarde the confeſſor entred Scotland, where after a litle reſiſtēce made by the Scottes, the ſayd Malcolme then their kyng did homage to him at Abirnethy in Scotlande for the kyngdome of Scotlande: This Willyam reigned in this ſtate .xxii. yeres.
            Willyam ſurnamed Rufus ſōne of this Willyam called the conqueror, ſucceded nexte to the croune of England, to whom the ſayd Malcolme kyng of Scottes did like homage for ye kingdome of Scotland, but afterwarde he rebelled & was by this William Rufus ſlaine in the fielde, where vpō the Scottiſhmen did choſe

one Donal or Dunvval to be their kyng, but this Willyam Rufus depoſed him and created Dunkā ſoonne of Malcolme to bee their kyng, who did lyke homage to him: but this Dunkan was ſlaine by the Scottes and Dunvvall reſtitute, which ones again by this Willyam Rufus was depoſed, & Edgar ſoonne of Malcolme was by him made their king, who did like homage for Scotlād to this Willyam Rufus: This Willyā reigned in this ſtate ouer theim xiii. yeres.
            Henry called Beauclerke the ſonne of Willyam called the cō
               queror, after ye death of his brother Willyam Rufus, ſucceded to the croune of England to whō the ſame Edgar kyng of Scottes did homage for Scotlande,

This Hēry Beauclerke maried Mawde the doughter of Malcolme kyng of Scottes, and by her had iſſue Mawde afterward emprice. Alexandre the ſonne of Malcolme brother to this Mawd was nexte kyng of Scottes, he did like homage for ye kyngdome of Scotland to this Henry the firſt, This Henry reigned in this ſtate ouer them .xxxv. yeres.
            Mawde called the empriceAn. M. C. xxxvii. doughter and heire to this Hēry Beauclerke & Mawde his wife, receiued homage of Dauid brother to her and to this Alexandre next kyng of Scottes for ye kingdome of Scotlande.
            This Mawde the emprice gaue vnto this Dauid in mariage, Mawde the doughter and heire of Voldoſius earle of Huntyngdon

and Northunberlande, and herein their euaſion appeareth, by whiche they allege that their kynges homages wer made for the erledome of Huntingdon, for this Dauid was the firſt that of their kinges was erle of Hūtyngdon, whiche was ſince all the homages of their kinges before recited, and at the tyme of whiche mariage and long after the ſayd Alexander his brother was king of Scottes doyng the homage aforeſayd to Henry Bewclerke.
            Henry called Fitz Emprice the ſoonne of Mawde the emprice doughter of Mawde, doughter of Malcolme kyng of Scottes was next kyng of Englande, he receiued homage for Scotlande of Malcolme ſoonne of Henrye, ſoonne of the ſayd Dauid their

laſt king, whiche Malcolme after this homage, attended vpon the ſame kyng Henry in his warres againſt Lewes then kyng of Fraunce: whereby appereth that their Frenche league was neuer renued after the laſt deuiſion of their coūtrey by Oſbright kyng of Englād. But after theſe warres fynyſhed with the Frenche kyng, this Malcolme beyng again in Scotlād rebelled, whervpon this kyng Henry immediatly ſcazed Huntyngdon & Northumberland into his owne hā
               des by confiſcacion, and made warre vpon him in Scotland, in whiche theſame Malcolme dyed without iſſue of his body. Willyam brother of this Malcolme was next king of Scottes he wt al the nobles of Scotland

which could not be for any erledome did homage to the ſonne of this king Henry the ſecond with a reſeruacion of ye duetie to kyng Hēry the ſecond, his father: alſo therldome of Huntyngdon was as ye haue hearde before this, forfaited by Malcolme his brother, & neuer after reſtored to the croune of Scotland.
            This Willyā kyng of Scottes did afterwarde attende vpō the ſame kyng Henry the ſeconde in his warres in Normandy againſt the Frenche king, notwithſtandyng their Frenche league, & then did him homage for Scotland, and thervpon was licenſed to depart home into Scotlande, where immediatly he moued war againſt the ſame kyng Henry beyng yet in Normandy: but God

toke the defence on kyng Hēries part, & deliuered the ſame Williā kyng of Scottes into the hādes of a fewe Engliſhemenne, who brought him priſoner to this kyng Henry into Normandy the x. yere of his reigne, but at ye laſt at the ſuit of Dauid his brother, he was at this fine for the amendement of his treſpas, to paye .x. M. pounde ſterlyng▪ and to ſurrendre al his title of the erledom of Huntyngdon Cumberland, & Northumberlād, into the hādes of this kyng Henry, which he did in all thynges accordyngly, and here vpon he ones againe did homage to the ſame kyng Henrye whiche now could not be for the earledome of Huntyngdon, the right wherof was alredy by him ſurrendred, and for the better aſſuraunce

of this fayth the ſtrēgthes of Berwicke, Edenbrough, Roxbrough & Striuelyng were deliuered into the handes of this kyng Henry of England whiche their owne writters confeſſe: but Hector Boecius ſayeth that this treſpas was amended by fyne of xx. M. poundes ſterlyng & that therldome of Huntyngdon, Cū
               berland, and Northumberlande were deliuered as Morgage into the handes of this kyng Hēry vntill other .x. M. poundes ſterlyng ſhould be to him payed, but though that were true, yet proueth he not that that money was payed, nor the land otherwyſe redemed, or euer after came to any Scottiſhe kynges handes. And this it appeareth yt therldome of Hūtyngdon was neuer occaſion

of the homages of the Scottiſhe kynges to ye kinges of England either before this tyme or after.
            At this tyme Alexander biſhop of Rome ſuppoſed to haue generall iuriſdiccion eccleſiaſticall through chriſtendome, conferred the whole clergye of Scotlande accordyng to the olde lawes, vnder the iuriſdiccion of the Archebiſhop of Yorke. This Henrye reigned in this ſtate ouer theim xxxv. yeres.
            Richarde ſurnamed Cure de Lyon ſoonne of this Henry was next kyng of England, to whom the ſame Willyā kyng of Scottes did homage at Cantorburye for the kyngdome of Scotland, and in the 
                  •
               nde of the warres of this king Richard, did ſend Dauid his brother with .v. M. Scot

tiſhemen.
            This kyng Richarde was taken priſoner by the duke of Oſtriche, for whoſe redempcion the whole realme was taxed to great ſummes of money vnto the whiche this Willyā kyng of Scottes as a ſubiecte was contributory, and paied two M. markes ſterlyng, This Richard reigned in this 
                  ••
               ate ix. yeres.
            John the brother of this Richard was next king of Englād, to whom the ſame Willyā kyng of Scottes did like homage for the kyngdome of Scotland vpō a hill beſide Lyncolne, takyng his faith therfore vpon the croſſe of Hubert then ArchebiſhoppeAnno M. CC. iiii. of Cantorburye, a great nomber of people beyng there aſſembled for ye purpoſe. This Ihon reigned

in this ſtate ouer them .xvii. yeres.
            Henry the third of that name ſoonne of this kyng Ihon ſucceded nexte to the croune of Englande, to whom Alexandre kyng of Scottes did homage for Scotland at Yorke. This Alexandre dyed at this fayth wt this kyng Henry.
            After the death of this Alexander kyng of Scottes, Alexander his ſoonne beyng of .ix. yeres of age, was by the lawes of Edgar in ward to this king Henry, & by the nobles of Scotland brought to Yorke, and there deliuered to this kyng Henry, duryng whoſe minoritie this kyng Henrye gouerned Scotland, and to ſubdue a cōmocion in this realme, vſed the aide of .v. M. Scottiſhmen,

but kyng Henry dyed duryng ye nonage of this Alexander, wherby he receiued not his homage whiche by reaſon and lawe was reſpited vntyl his ful age of .xxi. yeres: this Henry reigned in this ſtate .lvii. yeres.
            Edwarde the firſt ſynce the ſuppoſed conqueſt ſonne of this Hēry was next kyng of Englād, immediatly after whoſe coronacion this Alexander kyng of Scottes beyng then of full age did homage to him for Scotlād at Weſtminſter.
            This Alexāder kyng of Scoties died, leuing one only doughter called Margarete his heire, who before had maried Hanygo ſoonne to Magnus kyng of Norway, whiche doughter alſo ſhortly after dyed, leauyng one onely

doughter her heire, of thage of .ii yeres whoſe cuſtodie & mariage by the lawes of king Edgar and Edward the cōfeſſour, belonged to this kyng Edwarde, whervpō the nobles of Scotland wer cō
               maunded by this king Edward, to ſende to Normandy to conuey this yong quene into Englande to him, whom he entēded to haue maried to his ſoonne Edwarde: as our kyng in his owne perſon entēdeth with their Quene now. Their nobles at that tyme conſideryng theſame tranquilitie, y• many of them now refuſe, ſtoode not vpon ſhiftes and delayes of minoritie nor cōtempt, but moſt gladly conſented, and thervpon ſent twoo noble menne of Scotlande into Norway for her to be brought to this kyng Edward,

but ſhe died before their cōming thether, they required nothyng but to enioy the lawfull liberties that they had in the laſt kyng Alexander his tyme: I beleue that the deade bodyes of theſe noble men & of all the kynges of Scotland would riſe from their ſepultures againſt the enemies of this godly vnion▪ if they knewe with what wilfull contempte they deface their doynges, & with what wicked obſtinacy thei deteigne ye people of Britaigne in perpetual warre, enmitie and diſcorde.
            After the death of this Margaret, the Scottes wer deſtitute of any heire to ye croune frō this Alexāder there laſt kyng, at whiche tyme this Edwarde diſcēded frō the body of Mawde doughter of Malcolme ſometyme kyng

of Scottes beyng then in the greateſt broil of his warres with Fraunce, mynded not to take the poſſeſſion of that kyngdome in his awne right, but was contented to eſtabliſh Balioll to be king thereof, the weake title betwene him Bruſe & Haſtynges beeyng by the humble peticion of all the realme of Scotland cōmitted to the determinacion of this kyng Edwarde, as by autentique writyng therof cōfeſſyng within the ſuperioritie of Scotlande to remaine in this kyng Edwarde, ſealed with the ſeales of .iiii. biſhoppes .vii. Earles and .xi. Barons of Scotlande, and whiche ſhortely after was by the whole aſſent of the thre eſtates of Scotland in their ſolemne Parliamēt cōfeſſed & enacted accordīgly as

moſt euidently doeth appeare.
            This Baliol in this wiſe made kyng of Scotlād, did immediatly make his homage and fealtie, to this kyng Edwarde for the kyngdome of Scotlande: but ſhortly after defraudyng the benigne goodnes of this king Edward he rebelled, whervpon this king Edward inuaded Scotlād, ſeazed into his hādes the greater part of the countrey, and toke al the ſtrengthes therof, wherupon this Baliol king of Scottes came vnto this kyng Edwarde at M
                  •
               untroſſe in Scotland with a white wande in his hand, & there reſigned the croune of Scotland with all his right, title, & entreſt to the ſame, into the hādes of this kyng Edwarde, & therfore made his Charter in writyng dated &

ſealed ye fourth yere of his reign, whervpon all the nobles & gētlemen of Scotlande repaired to Berwicke, and there did homage and fealtie to this king Edward becōmyng his ſubiectes. For the better aſſuraunce of whoſe othes this Edwarde kept all the ſtrēgthes and holdes of Scotland in his owne handes, and herevpon all their lawes, proces, al iudgement, all giftes of offices and others, paſſed vnder the name of authoritie of this king Edward, he reigned in this ſtate ouer thē xxx. yeres.
            Edward borne at Carnaruan ſonne of this Edward was nexte kyng of England, who from the beginnyng of his reigne enioyed Scotland peaceably, dooyng in all thynges as is aboue ſayd of

kyng Edward his father, vntyll towarde the latter ende of his reigne, about whiche Bruſe conſpired agaīſt this kyng Edward and with the helpe of a fewe forſworne Scottes, forſwore him ſelfe kyng of Scottes, whervpō this Edward made warre vpon him, but beyng infortunate in his firſt warres againſt him, he ſuffered Edwarde the ſoonne of Baliol to proclaime himſelf kyng of Scottes, & neuertheleſſe held foorth his warres againſt Bruſe, before the endyng of whiche he dyed.
            Edwarde borne at Wyndſore ſoonne of this Edward was next king of Scotlande at the age of xv. yeres, in whoſe minoritie the Scottes practiſed with Iſabell mother to this Edwarde & with

Roger Mortymer Earle of the Marche to haue their homages releaſed, whoſe good wyll therin thei obteined, ſo y• for the ſame releaſe they ſhuld pay to this king Edward .xxx. thouſand poundes ſterlyng in thre yeres nexte folowing, that is to ſay .x. thouſande pounde ſterlyng yerely: but becauſe the nobilitie and cōmons of this realme would not by parliament cōſent vnto it, their king beyng within age, ye ſame releaſe proceded not, albeit the Scottes ceaſed not their practiſes with this Quene and Erle, but before thoſe thre yeres in whiche their money (if that money had taken place) ſhuld haue been paied wer exſpired, this kyng Edward inuaded Scotland and ceaſed not warre vntill Dauid the ſonne of

               Robert le Bruſe then by their eleccion kyng of Scotlād abſolutely ſubmitted himſelfe vnto this kyng Edwarde, but for that this Dauid Bruſe had before by practiſe of the Quene and the Erle of Marche, maried Jane the ſiſter of this kyng Edward, he moued by natural zeale to his ſiſter, was contented to geue the realme of Scotlande to this Dauid Bruſe, & to theires that he ſhould begette of the body of the ſayd Jane, ſauyng the reuerſion and meane homages to this kyng Edward and to his owne children, wherewith theſame Dauid Bruſe was right well cōtented, & thervpon immediatly made his homage for Scotlande vnto this kyng Edward, but ſhortly after cauſeleſſe, cōceiuyng cauſe of diſpleaſure,

this Dauid procured to diſolue this ſame eſtate taily, and therevpon not onely rebelled in Scotland, but alſo inuaded Englād, this kyng Edward beyng then in his warres in Fraunce. But this Dauid was not onely expulſed Englād, but alſo ſuſpecting no place ſufficient defēce to his vntruth, fled out of Scotlād: & the coūtreys of Annādale, Gallovvay, Mars, Teuydale, Twedale, and Ethrike wer ſeaſed into the king of England his handes, & new Marches ſet betwene England & Scotlād at Cockeburnes pathe & Sowtry hedge, whiche when this Dauid went about to recouer againe his power, was diſcōfited, and himſelf by a fewe Engliſhemen taken & brought into England, where he

remained priſoner .xi. yeres: during whiche tyme, this king Edward enioyed Scotland peaceably, & then at the cōtēplacion of ye wery ſuite of his ſorowfull ſiſter wife of this Dauid, he was contented ones again to reſtore this Dauid to ye kyngdome of Scotland, whervpō it was cōcluded, that for this rebellion Dauid ſhould pay to this king Edward the ſumme of one C. M. markes ſterlyng, and ſhould alſo deſtroy all his holdes and fortreſſes ſtā
               dyng againſt the Engliſhe borders, and further ſhould aſſure the crowne of Scotlande to the childer of this kyng Edward for lacke of heire of his owne bodye, all whiche thynges he did accordyngly: and for the better aſſuraunce of his obeiſaunce afterward

he deliuered into the hādes of this kyng Edward ſondry noble men of Scotlād his pledges: this Edwarde reigned in this ſtate ouer theim .li. yeres.
            Richard the ſonne of Edward called the blacke prince ſoonne of this Edwarde kyng, was nexte kyng of Englande, who for that the ſayd Jane, ye wife of the ſayd kyng Dauid of Scotlande was deceaſſed without iſſue, & beyng enformed howe the Scottes deuiſed to their vttermoſt power to breake the limitacion of this inheritaunce touchyng ye croune of Scotlande, made foorthwith warre againſt theim, he brent Edenbrough, ſpoiled all their coū
               trey, toke al their holdes & maintained cōtinually warre againſt them vnto his death, whiche was

               Anno domini. M. CCC. xcix.
            
            Henry the fourth of that nameHector Bo
                     •
                  , lib. xvi. cap. xv. was next kyngof Englād, he cō
               tinued theſe warresbegon agaīſt them by kyng Richard, & ceaſſed not vntil Robert kyng of Scottes the third of that name, reſigned his croune by appointment of this king Henrye, and deliuered his ſonne James beyng then of thage of .ix. yeres, into the hā
               des of this king Hēry to remaine to his cuſtodie, wardſhip and diſpoſicion, as of his ſuperior lord accordyng to the olde lawes of kyng Edwarde the confeſſor, all this was done Anno domini M. CCCC. iiii. which was within v. yeres after the death of king Richard: This Henry the fourth reigned in this ſtate ouer theim xiiii. yeres.
            
               Henrye the fift of that name ſoonne of this kyng Henrye the forth was next king of England he had warres againſt the Frēch kyng, in all whiche, this James then kyng of Scottes attended vpon him as vpon his ſuperior lorde, with a conuenient nomber of Scottes, notwithſtandyng their league with Fraunce, but this Henry reigned but .ix. yeres whereby the homage of this James their king hauyng not fully accompliſhed ye age of .xxi. yeres was by reaſon & lawe reſpited.
            Henry the ſixt the ſonne of this Henrye the .v. was nexte kyng of England in whō the ſeignorie of Scotlande and cuſtodie of this James beyng by law and reaſon diſcēded, he maried the ſame James kyng of Scottes to the

doughter of Hēry Beauford then Earle of Somerſet, and toke for the value of this mariage the ſumme of one hundreth thouſād markes ſterlyng.
            This James kyng of Scottes at his ful age did homage to theſame kyng Henry the ſixt for the kyngdome of Scotlande at Wyndſore. This Henry the ſixt reigned in this ſtate quietly ſeazed of this ſeignorie ouer the Scottes without any chalenge or interrupcion by them .xlix. yeres, and ſo thereof quietly dyed ſeazed.
            Synce whiche tyme vnto the daies of Kyng Henrye the .vii. graundfather to our ſoueraigne lorde that nowe is, albeit this realme hath been moleſted with diuerſitie of titles, in whiche vnmete

time neither law nor reaſon admit preſcripcion to the preiudice of any right: yet did kyng Edwarde the forth next kyng of England by preparacion of war againſt the Scottes in the latter ende of his reigne ſufficiently by al lawes induce the cōtinuaunce of his claime to theſame ſuperioritie ouer theim.
            After whoſe death, vnto the beginnyng of the reigne of our late ſoueraigne lord kyng Henry the viii. exceded not the nomber of xxvii. yeres, aboute whiche tyme the impediment of our clayme chaunced of the Scottes part by the nonage of James their laſt kyng, whiche ſo continued the ſpace of .xxi. yeres, lyke as whoſe minoritie was by all lawe & reaſon impediment to him ſelfe to

make homage, ſo was theſame by like reaſon impediment to the kyng of this realme to demaund any, ſo that the whole time of intermiſſiō of our claime in ye tyme of the ſayd kyng Henry the viii. is deduced vnto the nomber of xiii. yeres.
            But what nede I to examyne the intermiſſion of our claime by any length of tyme, ſince this ſuperioritte paſſed the conſentes of all Scotlande by their ſolempne acte of Parliament, againſt whiche neither lawe nor reaſon can enhable theim to preſcribe.
            This haue I declared & proued vnto you how Brute our firſt progenitr, ohis people and their poſteritie enioyed the whole Iſle of great Britaigne in .xlii. diſcentes of kynges almoſt .vi. c. yeres

before any Scottiſheman came within it. I haue alſo proued vn to you how after their commyng into it, immediat war was made vpō theim by the kynges of this Briteigne, whiche ceaſed not vntill they wer expulſed, all the bondes of it, and albeit at diuers tymes they entred it again, yet did theſe warres neuer ceaſſe agaīſt them vntil they became ſubiectes in whiche ſtate they haue remained about, xvi. C. yeres. I haue alſo proued vnto you how from tyme to tyme ſynce ye beginnyng the Scottes receiued and obeyed the olde lawes and cuſtomes of this realme, mooſte of whiche remaine among theim to this day. I haue further proued how their kynges haue been contributorye to the redempcion of kynges of

this realme, whiche is the duetie of onely ſubiectes. I haue alſo proued vnto you howe the generall iuriſdiccion eccleſiaſtical of Scotland many hundreth yeres after ye beginnyng was ſubiected to ye dioſes and rule of tharchebiſhoppe of Yorke in Englande, whereby alſo appeareth the ſame to be then vnder this dominion. I haue likwiſe proued vnto you that Willyā called the Conqueror, of whom our king is linially diſcended, was heire teſtamētary of the whole dominion by the teſtament of kyng Edward the cō
               feſſor, & though whiche were not true, yet was ye obediēce of Scotlād from the beginnyng inſeperably appendaunt to the croune of this realme, and folowed the poſſeſſion of ye ſeignorie as thynges

annexed, lyke as the dignities of the Roman Empier folow the ſtate of Rome, according to whiche their homages and oure claymes haue been continued to this day. I haue proued vnto you alſo howe thearldome of Huntyngdon was only atteined but by one of their kynges, and that at the latter ende of his tyme long after ye kyng his brothers homage, done for ye croune of Scotland, and fortified & ſurrendred by the next, ſynce whiche time it neuer was reſtored again into any of their kynges hādes: and yet to ſatiſfie theim further therin, the tenor of all their kynges homages doeth folowe.
            
               I D. N. kyng of Scottes ſhalbe true and faythfull vnto you lorde E. by the grace of God kyng of
               
               Englande, the noble and ſuperior lord of the kyngdome of Scotland and vnto you I make my fidelitie for the ſame kingdome, the vvhich I hold and claime to holde of you, and I ſhall beare you my fayth and fidelitie of life and lymme and vvorldly honor againſt all menne, faythfully I ſhall knovvledge and ſhall do you ſeruice due vnto you of the kyngdome of Scotlād afore ſayd as God ſo help and theſe holy euangelies.
            
            I wyl not here plede the ſeueral reſignacions and ſurrenders of the mere poſſeſſion of ye kyngdome of Scotland made by their lawfull kynges, to our kynges Edwarde the firſt and Edwarde the third: nor yet allege our kynges pedugre from Mawde the the doughter of Malcolme their

kyng, nor yet argue the right of remainder of the kyngdome of Scotland in our kyng for lacke of iſſue of the bodyes of Dauid and Jane ſo entailed by the ſame Dauid then kyng thereof as is before declared: nor yet obeicet a forfaiture vpō their rebelliō, for our kinges maieſtie that now is doth farre otherwiſe by mariage require it at their handes. Now, becauſe ſome of the Scottes alledge that they diſagre to this mariage fearyng the ſeueritie of our lawes, I haue thought good to remember in this place one or two of theirs, ſufficient example wherby to iudge the nature of al the reſt.
            They haue a lawe that if the father (though by the kynges licence) infeffe or geue lādes to his

ſonne, yet if afterwarde the ſame father treſpas the law, his offēce ſhall forfeite this land, notwithſtandyng that the ſonne was by all ſolemne lawe aſſured of it before the offence of the father.
            Another, that if any man dye onely ſuſpected of treaſon wtout any other fact done, yet may this cauſe be examined after his deth and he ſomoned at his graue, & vpon condempnacion, his lādes and goodes cōfiſcat as if he wer yet liuyng, of bothe theſe lawes innocentes haue no leſſe cauſe to feare the malice, then treſpaſſors haue to drede the paine.
            I haue ſtudied a great while the lawes of this realme, & beit ſayd without arrogancie, haue red theim all bothe old and new and therfore I dare affirme that the mooſt wicked lawe that euer

was geuen in this realme, cōteineth not halfe ſomuche iniquitie as the beſt of bothe theſe do.
            Wherfore if they miſtruſt the ſeueritie of our lawes, chiefly as they bee mitigated at this day, none can better truſt, then they yt ſo do miſtruſt: but the likyng of their lawes ſtandeth to thē ſelfes in them there is none alteracion ſought: for policie in ſondry places muſt of neceſſitie require ſondry lawes, like as in diuers places of Englande to this daye be enioyed diuerſitie in cuſtomes & haue been wtout alteraciō offred ſince their beginnyng. Our title in this wiſe publiſhed, & their obieccions as ye haue heard anſwered, I will with your fauor in this wiſe turne my tale vnto the Scottiſhman. It wer an infinite worke (nobles and commons of

Scotlande) nor the tale ſhould 
                  •
               euer haue an ende to declare what an ineſtimable euill cōcord is, as that wherby all thinges in the world, yea and alſo the world it ſelfe ſtandeth and agreeth together, & wherby as the famous Saluſt ſayeth, ſmall thynges growe to ye greateſt welth: wherby diſcorde her cōtrary, all greateſt and beſt thynges come to diſtruccion and deſolaciō, as by the ciuill warres betwene Silla and Marius, ye ruine of Rome is ſufficient example to all the worlde. Wherfore I would nowe wiſhe & deſire, whiche is all that I am able to dooe, that theſe cruel and bloudy watres betwene vs may ſhortly ceaſe, which ſhal much ye ſoner come to paſſe if ye truſt not your owne wilful affecciō, which

beyng blynder then blyndnes it ſelfe hath cloſed vppe the lyes of your reaſon, and ledd your ſelfes into yt deſert of obſtinacie, wherin as your waye lyeth, ſo hath your foly extended.
            Nature the wiſe mother of all thynges, when ſhe ordeined all beaſtes with ſome natural municion, as horne, ſpurre, tothe or naile: ſhe wold not create mā either cruel or vengeable by any of this outward thinges, but gaue him reaſon, & ſo to rule without angre or armour: ſhe endowed you wt giftes to the maintenaūce of concorde, & will you vſe theim to diſcorde? is it warre that you thinke profitable? is it diſcorde & miſchiefe that beyng hatefull to other menne ſemeth to you pleaſaunt? what differeth warre from all

               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
commeth thende that it is mente for, but to the contrary, and that like as a while their fayth hath deceiued vs, ſo will it ſhortly beguile theim ſelfes, for nature neuer gaue like vertue to thinges counterfeicte, as to true in dede: all the wiſe writers of your owne nacion lament the wickednes of your clergie and condemne their vicious and prophane liues, but by hypocriſy thei alway had this gifte to ſhewe their vertue to the vttermoſt and hide their faultes to ye ſecreteſt, ſo that their vertue appeareth more then it is, & their vice leſſe: well, God is the onely wreker of ſecret iniuries, whom no mā may doubt ſhortely to open all your eyes, and he in the meane tyme I truſt will make your gouernor (beyng naturally

diſcended of an Engliſhe houſe in kyng Edwarde the ſecond his dayes as your owne writers cō
               feſſe) againe to become a good Engliſhmā, which vndoubtedly he ſhalbe, & a true Scottiſhmā alſo, whenſoeuer he ſhall depely cōſider the iuſtnes of our cauſe, his fayth, and your affliccion by the miſerye of this preſent warre betwene vs, to compare▪ whiche with a greater euiil, poſſibilitie ſuffereth not, to matche him with a like eiuil, his owne nature abhorreth to ſhew what is in degre of euils, vnder him ſhould ſeme ſufficient diſpraiſe, if ambicion, if malice, if glory, if enuy, do only driue thether men to warres, whether wyl temperaunce, godlynes, honeſtie, & wiſedome draw a chriſtian manne? And nowe me

thinketh I here our countrey the cōmon parent to vs all, ſay vnto you in this wyſe.
            An Scottiſhemen, how long ſhall I beare your vnnaturall cruelties, howe long will ye remaine rebellious children, when ſhal there be end of your malice? Alas what wickednes is it amōg chriſten men, and thoſe the neighbors in one kyngdome, that the greatter part cannot be cōtented with the beſt thyng, but by the light argument of euil, leaue the waye that leadeth to perpetuall tranquilitie. Al men would liue in beatitude, but to foreſee ye way how they may ſo do: ye goe farre awry. Knowe ye not how euil a maiſter he ſerueth of the twayne, diſcorde, or miſery of the whiche euermore the one foloweth the other,

be not diſcorde and miſerye of the ſame nature that other vices be? alway at diſcēcion within themſelfes, makyng the man vnmete for all other thynges, and at laſt vnmete for diſcord it ſelf, though nature to the obtainyng of foly gaue euery man to many giftes, and to the folowyng of vertue to fewe, yet ſhe neuer better deſerued towarde mankynd, then knowyng how many miſeries ſhe ordained him to dwel among, to teache him by reaſon remedy againſt them al, & wherby thei may receiue no leſſe ablenes to do well then before they had redynes to do euil: be not all men that be born to dye, the ſame alſo ordained to liue by reaſon? & who of you by reaſon or otherwiſe is able to deſiſt my perſuaſion

of this vnion, except he will ſay that the worſt warre is better then the beſt peace, malice meter for Chriſtian men then loue, and generally al diſcorde better then concorde, whiche thynges how different they be, God knoweth and I perfitely fele. Can Englād offre you more reaſonable, more honorable, more godly condicions of peace then ſhe doeth? except ſhe had that frō God which maketh all his Godhedde called perfeccion? can menne offre more then your lawfull libertie, peace, tranquilitie and amitie? do not theſe bryng forth wealth, ſecuritie, and perpetual concorde? and do not all thinges in the worlde, yea, and the worlde it ſelfe ſtand and agree together by concorde? where is your reaſon, where is ye
               
loue that Plato & Cicero require in you to be borne to me your countrey? Finally, where is the right knowledge of loue that ye ought to haue to your ſelues? is not my trāquilitie thaſſuraunce of your wealth, and my trouble thaſſuraūce of you miſerie? The wicked moath bred in the clothe deſtroyeth the ſame. The cruel Vipar in procreacion killeth his mother, and yet he that beleueth their ciuilitie to be leſſe then yours, litle cōſidereth their cauſe to be of nature, and yours of wilfull diſpoſicion. I did ſowe you the good ſeedes of concorde but there is ſprong vp among you cockle and fatche, the wedes of diſcorde, and thus your corrupcion of a good thyng hath engendred an euil, whervpon your

infelicitie is ye more, becauſe you ſee it not▪ but if you ſawe it with reaſon aſwell as reaſō ſeeth you, you would conſider the peril, for I ſay it is your owne cauſe, therfore neglect not my monicion.
            Spurne not againſt knowlege, rebell not againſt your wealth, more honor is offered vnto you then euer chaunced to the Scottiſhe nacion, the tyme ſerueth it, reaſon requireth it, the conſent of all good men deſire it, and God pitiyng my long affliccion hath offred the occaſion, which beyng of your partes thankefully receiued, bringeth wealthful ſecuritie to your ſelfes, your wyues, children, your goodes▪ & all your poſteritie▪ and wherby you ſhall auoid calamitie, miſery, exilemēt or death, whiche otherwiſe by the

iniuſtice of your cauſe, will vndoubtedly folow: therfore in this choiſe, let it be no harde thyng to make you conſent to your owne wealth. And on that condicion I do require the whole membres of all great Briteigne, that like as theſe many hundreth yeres ye haue proſecuted eche other with fyre, ſworde and ſlaughter, that ſo ye do frō henſfourth proſecute eche other with amitie▪ loue, and frendſhip, all olde and newe diſpleaſures betwene you to be here after none otherwyſe conſidered then if your hand offend the eye, or the to the the tong, in whiche caſe to puniſh, the reuenge ſhuld be againſt your ſelues. And finally, let your whole contencion hereafter be, whiche of you bothe ſhall with better wyll deſerue ye
               
frendſhippe of the other, to the glorye of God, the tranquilitie and wealth of your ſelues, and vtter diſcorage of my common enemies.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AE DIBVS RICHARDI GRAFTONI, TYPOGRAPHI REGII. M. D. XLVIII.
            
            CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM
         
      
   