
      
         
            
            
            
               Theatrum Mundi,
The Theator or rule
of the world, wherein
may be ſene the running
race and courſe of euerye
mans life, as touching miſerie and
felicity, wherin is contained wonderfull
examples, learned deuiſes, to the
ouerthrowe of vice, and exalting of
vertue. wherevnto is added a learned,
and maruellous worke of
the excellencie of mankinde.
Written in the Frenche
& Latin tongues by
Peter Boayſtuau,
and tranſlated
into Engliſh
by Iohn
Alday.
            ¶IMPRINTED AT LONdon
by H. D. for Thomas Hacket,
and are to be ſold at his ſhop
in Paules Churchyarde, at the
ſigne of the Key.
         
         
            
            ¶In prayſe of the Booke.
            LO here the braunches freſh and greene.
            Lo here deare Friend the race
            Lo here, the path is to be ſeene
            through which mankinde doth trace.
            The finall ſcope, the totall ende,
            the wandring ſteps wherein
            
               Humanum genus ſeemes to tende▪
            
            his pagent to begin.
            Moſt like a Theater, a game
            or gameplace if ye will,
            which royally doth beare the fame
            approude by learned ſkill.
            Through bliſſe, through ioy, through ſmiling fate
            commixt with care and woe,
            Now plaſte aloft in Princely ſtate,
            and ſtraight brought downe as lowe.
            By hap, miſhap, or hapleſſe happes,
            compared to a ſhade,
            Or flower of the fielde, which clappes,
            or heate doth cauſe to fade.
            For as the youthfull wightes aſſay
            their partes on ſtage a while,
            And lauiſh tongues from day to day
            with time doth them beguile,
            So that at laſt their pompe and pride
            their filed ſpeach hath ende,
            None otherwiſe away to ſlide
            our crooked limmes doe bende.
            The chiefeſt Lampe or gliſtring Starre
            whereof deſcribed plaine,
            Surmounting others all full farre,
            herein thou mayſt attaine.
            And thus with Tullies worke I fine,
            placing this learned Booke
            Condecorate with Muſes nine
            a Glaſſe whereon to looke.
         
         
            
            To the Right Worshipfull
Sir William Cheſter
Knight, Alderman of the
Citie of London, and Merchant
of the Staple, Iohn Alday
wiſheth health to the pleaſure
of God, with moſt happie and
proſperous ſucceſſe in
all your affaires.
            
               
                  AMONG
all the Learned
& worthy writers
of our age,
(worſhipful Sir)
there is none to
my iudgement
more worthy of
perpetual prayſe
than thoſe which
haue moſt learnedly
philoſophied on the miſerie of man (thoſe I
ſay which contemplating & beholding the calamities
of theſe dayes with the corruption of man

kind, haue not feared to ſet forth the liues & liuings
of al eſtates (to this end) that in reading &
hearing their miſerable life and wicked conuerſation,
they be the ſoner moued to deteſt and abhorre
the ſame, and crie out with the Prophete
Dauid ſaying, I haue ſinned Lord, and therevppon
amende their wicked wayes. Among the
which the Author hereof named Peter Boayſtuau,
hath moſt worthilye ſet foorth this
preſent worke, not only in the French tongue to
the profit of his Countrie, but firſt of all in the
Latin tongue to his perpetuall and due prayſe,
and to the profite of all Chriſtian Countries and
Nations. Wherein he hath moſte learnedly ſet
forth the corruption of all eſtates, ſo that thoſe
that reade this preſent booke, can no otherwiſe do
but be aſhamed of their vniuſt dealings. Moreouer
leaſt that man ſhould diſpaire of his ſaluatiō
in reading this pitiful Metamorphoſe or Tragedie
(knowing themſelues culpable) he hath
moſt worthily ſet forth the dignitie and excellencie
of man, ſhewing him how much more in
excellencie he doth excell all other creatures whō
GOD hath created and made. So that this is in
ſūme (Right Worſhipfull Sir) the effect of this
rude tranſlation, the which I thought good to

direct vnto your worſhip, and ſo much the rather
bicauſe of youre ripe iudgement and perfect
knowledge in the French tongue, the which as it
is well knowen to be vncomparable, ſo are the reſt
of your moſt godly vertues, wherewith nature
hath endued you as a worthie and graue counſeller
to this honorable Citie of London. Receyue
therefore I beſech you this my rude tranſlation,
and it accepting in good part excuſe my raſh enterpiſe,
eſteeming it as a zeale of my good
will, the which moſte worthilye
vnto your worſhip I
haue directed.
            
               Your daily Orator
Iohn Alday.
            
         
         
            
            To the Right Excellent
and Reuerende Lord and
Prelate, my Lord Iames of
Betoun, Archbiſhop of Glaſco,
and Ambaſſador of Scotland,
Peter Boayſtuau wiſheth
health, and perpetuall
obedience.
            
               MY good Lorde,
certaine auncient Philoſophers
haue made
maruellous complaints
againſt the ingratitude
and miſknowledge of man, for that he
neuer entreth into his owne conſcience,
and conſidereth not his owne proper nature,
althoughe that his induſtrie and
prouidence be ſo great, that it ſpreadeth
all abrode. In ſuch ſort, that neyther the
compaſſe and largeneſſe of the Earth,
the violence nor deepeneſſe of the Seas,
neyther the amplitude and ſpreading of

the Ayre, neyther the burning heate nor
diſtance of the Sunne, neyther yet the
courſe or reuolutiō aſwell of ye Clouds,
as of the Firmamēt, can retaine or hinder
the celerity of his Spirit, but that he
will ſéeke & know the nature & reſort of
al y• is contained in the vniuerſal world.
The furie and rage of y• wilde beaſts he
tameth and maiſtereth, and he only remaineth
without bridell or ſnaffle, by
his diligence and promptneſſe of wit, he
hath deſcribed the properties of herbes
and plants, the ſecret vertues of ſtones,
with the calcionating of mettels. And
notwithſtanding man is ſo maſked and
diſguiſed, that he knoweth not himſelfe.
He is the Heraulde, beginner and foreſhewer
of things contayned in the circute
of this worlde, and yet he is blinde
and dumbe in his owne doings. He foreſéeth
and diſcouereth the nature and propertie
of the Elementes, he reformeth,
ordeyneth, compaſſeth and weyeth that
which is ſéene vnder the concauits of the
Skies. And neuertheleſſe, man in himſelfe

is as one confoūded and ouercome.
In conſideration wherof (my good Lord)
I haue vnto him addreſſed this Rule, by
the which he may contemplate and aduiſe,
without being drawen beſide him
ſelfe, his infirmitie and miſerie, (to the
ende) that making an anotamie or foreſhewing
of all the partes of his life, he
be the ſooner moued to deteſt & abhorre
his vile and corrupt liuing. And if we
would be equitable Iudges of humaine
actions, what is this worlde, anye other
than a Rule, circle or compaſſe, where
as ſome play the handicraftes men, & of
baſe condicion, others repreſent Kings,
Dukes, Earles, Marqueſſes, Knights,
Barons and others conſtituted in dignities,
and notwithſtanding, aſſoone as
they haue layde downe their maſkings
and diſguiſings, and that death cōmeth,
which maketh an ende of this bloudie
Tragedie, then they knowe themſelues
to be all men, and wretched ſinners, and
then the Lorde God which is in heauen,
laugheth at their fooliſh enterpriſes, and

vanities, as witneſſeth ye Prophet Dauid,
yea with ſuch a dreadfull laughter,
that he maketh vs quake for feare, and
the earth to ſhake. Man then (in my
iudgement) is ſubiect to an infinit number
of miſeries and calamities, in the
which he is wrapped in from his birth euen
to his graue (wherefore) ſéeing this
pitiful Metamorphoſe, & alſo his excellēt
degrée of honor, which throughe his perfectneſſe
and inſolent life he ſhal obtain,
he is conſtrained to wiſh and deſier heauen,
yea to ſigh and crie out for it, as the
place of his firſte originall and birth.
Which is in ſumme (my good Lord) that
which at this preſent I doe offer, conſecrate
and dedicate vnto your Lordſhip.
Although that I muſt nedes confeſſe, as
the veritie is, that in conſideration of
your vertues, integritie of life, ſinceritie
of maners, to the knowledge that your
Lordſhip hath in all good diſciplines, as
well deuine as humain, to the rigorous
aſſaults of fortune, the which you haue
vanquiſhed and ouercome by your merites

as well in the publike weale of
Scotland, as in our Realme of Fraūce:
the memorie whereof is ſo great, that it
ſpreadeth all ouer Europia. It ſhoulde
therefore be more decent and comlie to
honor your Lordeſhip with a Rule of
triumph and honor with the which the
auncient Romains were accuſtomed to
celebrate and eliuate the memorie of
thoſe that had profited their natiue coū
               trie
than to preſent you a Rule of miſeries,
ſuch as I haue here entituled, with
the which your Lordſhip I truſt will be
contented, hoping for ſome other worke
of mine better labored and polliſhed.
Which I pretend by the help of God,
to treate on in another tongue,
and that ſhortly ſhal come to
light vnder the protection
and fauor of
your deuine
vertues.
         
         
            
            ¶Peter Boayſtuau to
the Reader health.
            
               GEntle Reader,
ſodenlye after
that I had made offer
to the traduction
of Chelidonius, and
wyth other fayre
treaties of mine inuention,
being aduertiſed how willingly
thou haſt receyued my workes. Therfore
I thought good to gratifie thée with
a greater thing (being pricked forward
by) I know not what néedle of vertue to
flie more higher, and to ſet forth ſome
certaine worke of more weight and labor.
So that after an infinite number of
diuers and ſundry things méete & neceſſary.The Author doth intraduct the Citie of GOD in our language.
There was none to my iudgement
more worthy for a Chriſtian weale, than
this chiefe or head worke of Sainct Auguſtine
in his Citie of God, wherein he
hath reared ſuch a furious combat or
fight againſt the Ethnickes, that with

their owne armors he hath vanquiſhed
and ouercome them. In conſideration
thereof, I haue boldened my ſelfe to lay
this fardell on my weake ſhoulders, hoping
by the grace of God to ſet it forth
& bring it to light in our vulgar tongue,
with ſuch a facilitie that it ſhal ſerue for
a buckeler, againſt the incurſions of an
infinite number of ſectes, that are ſpred
this day throughout the worlde. Nowe
therfore I leaue thée to iudge how many
Authors I haue turned ouer, Gréekes &
Latins for to bring this my enterpriſe to
his deſired effect, y• reading of which Authors
hath not ben ſtaked nor letted. For
beſides the great cōfort that I haue had
in thē, for to opē the meaning of my Author
(which of it ſelf is very dark and obſcure)
I haue drawen out an other fruit
and particuler profit, for of all their beſt
ſentences I haue founded (this Rule of
the world) which now I do preſēt to thée
(gentle and louing Reader) aſſuring thée
(to ye ende I wil not defraud none of his
glorie) that I haue left no Author ſacred

or prophane, Gréeke, Latin, or in our
vulgar tongue, but that I haue bereft
him of a leg or a wing, for the more ſoū
               der
decking and furniture of my worke.
In ſuch ſort that if thou wilt impoſe this
worke a rapſodie, collation or gathering
togither of diuers authorities, thou ſhalt
doe it no wrong. The which I haue enterpriſed
ſo much the more boulder than
ſuch matters (which are almoſt anotamies
& foreſhewings of vices.) It ſhould
the rather treat by graue ſentences and
examples of our Magiſtrates, than by
anie other ſtile. As touching the reaſt I
am aſſured that certaine daintie or delicate
worldlings, will auouch, that there
is in this worke, I know not what worthie
to be read, but that among theſe
ſwéete Roſes, there are manye other
things, ſowre, ſeuere and bitter: but ſuch
gald horſes that feare to be touched, and
that are ſo tickeliſh in their affections,
that they woulde faine haue libertie for
their wickedneſſe, and that defence
were made that none ſhoulde correct or

admoniſh them of their yll doings. I
beſeche them before paſſing further that
they will beholde with what authoritie
and rigor the auncient Fathers, as S.
Ambroſe, Sainct Ierome, Sainct Iohn,
Chriſoſtom, Sainct Auguſtine, Origen,
Tertulian, Euſebius and Lactantius,
haue reproued the vices that reigned in
their time, and with what boldeneſſe S.
Bernarde writ to Pope Eugenius, and
how he withſtoode the wicked Prelates
in the ſermon which he made at the Synode
of Paſtors, and in the .xxxi
                  •
               j. ſermon
of Canticles, when as he ſhewed them
their vices, cōplayning of their pompes,
and ſuperfluous deliciouſneſſe, and in
the meane time the poore ſhepe and flock
of Ieſus Chriſt remained deſart. What
thornes were theſe if they had heard the
malediction of S. Peter vpon Ananias
and Saphira, the which tempting the
holie ghoſt the ſpirit of God, died ſodenlye
for feare. Let them remember howe
Sainct Paule ſpake vnto the hie Prieſt
calling him filthye Sepulcher. Sainct

Iohn vnto the Publicans and ſinners,
calling them a generatiō of Vipers. Let
them conſider howe Epimenideus the
Gréeke ſpake to the Candians, calling
them cruell and abhominable beaſtes,
braineleſſe liers. Let them alſo conſider
with what ſharpe and poynted wordes
Helias and Eſaie did reproue the Babilonians,
though they were two ſage and
graue Prophetes.
            But what iuſt occaſion ſhould the holy
Fathers haue had, auncient Philoſophers,
Prophetes and Apoſtles, if they
had had ſuch a worlde as ours, which is
ſo depraued and broken in all kinde of
vices and abhominations, that it ſéemeth
to be a place that hath receyued all
the filthineſſe and purgings of all other
worlds and ages. But as for me I will
not make the office of cenſur or reformer
of vices, knowing my ſelfe to be a
man as others, although that ſomtimes
I cal them by their name: but with ſuch
modeſtie, that I onely rebuke the vices
and not the perſons. And I doe not only

diſcouer the abuſe of the world, to ye end
yt the ſimple & ignorant ſhould beware,
but incontinently I ſhewe the vſe and
remedy for things. And by this meanes,
thoſe that cannot ſupport libertie, and
compaſſe of writing. Let them hereafter
learne ſo well to reforme them ſelues,
and lead the eſtate of their life that they
be not a ieſting ſtocke to others, and to
themſelues for euer a reproch, knowing
that the time is come, that being in this
worlde, as in a fielde of libertie, we can
not ſo well cloke and diſſemble our vices,
but the ſmoke and ſmell thereof wil
breake out. Receyue therefore (louing
Reader) this preſent treatiſe, the which
I thought good to ſet forth in two languages,
Latin and French, for to make
thée vnderſtand that I will not lead
the reſt of my life, but that it
ſhall bring forth ſome
publicke profite.
            Farevvell.
         
      
      
         
            
            The rule of the Worlde,
wherin is contained an ample
diſcourſe of the miſeries of man, likewiſe
of many vices that raīgne at this
daye in all the eſtates of
the worlde.
            
               MAnye Auncient
Philoſophers, Greekes,
Latines, & Heathen,
after that they
had diligently diſcerned
all ſort of beaſts,
and curiouſly ſought
out their maner of liuing, and conferred
their condition and nature with ours,
haue written, that among all thoſe that
haue breath, that go & crepe vpon ye earth,
there is none more miſerable than man.
Some more rigorous cenſurs of the workes
of nature, haue begon to blaſpheme
againſt hir calling hir cruell ſtepmother,
in the ſteade of gracious mother. Others
haue bewailed their long daies, their life,
the humaine calamities, & haue followed

their ſteppes with teares, perſwading
with them ſelues (as an Heraclite) that
no other thing than a verie rule of miſerie,
worthye of continuall plaintes and
perpetuall compaſſion. Other by an vnmeaſurable
laughter (like a Democrite)
haue purſued the vices that raigne on
the earth: Who, if he were aliue at thys
preſent, and that he ſaw the diſorder and
confuſion, that is in our chriſtian weale,
ſhoulde haue iuſt occaſion to double hys
laughter, and to mocke with open throte.
There hath bene an other kinde, but naturally
more ſtraunge: which not contenting
themſelues to murmure againſt
nature, or to complaine of hir effects, but
with a particular hatred, haue cleaued to
man their like, thinking it a bootie or
gaine, againſt the which ſhe would looſe
all the arrowes of hir wrath & maledictiō.
Among the which, Timon a Philoſopher
of Athens, hath bene the moſt effectioned
Patriarke of his ſect, the which declared
himſelfe open and chiefe enimie to
men, & witneſſed the ſame in the preſence
of all, and alſo confirmed it by effect: for

he woulde not be conuerſant or communicate
with men, but remained al his life
alone in a wilderneſſe with the beaſtes,
far from neighbours, for feare to be ſene
or viſited of any, and being in this ſolicitude,
woulde ſpeake to no man, ſauing
ſometimes to a valiant Captaine of Athens
named Alcybiades, & yet he ſpake
not to him for anye good will he did beare
him, but for that he did foreſée that he
ſhould be a ſcourge and tormenter of mē:
and ſpecially bicauſe that his neighbors
the Athenians had much harme to ſuffer
by him. And not ſuffiſed to haue mē only
in horror and deteſtation, and to flie their
companie, as the companie of a fierce or
cruell beaſt, but in forſaking them, he
ſought their ruine, & inuented al the meanes
he could to deface humaine kinde. In
conſideration whereof, he cauſed manye
Gibets to be reared in his garden, to the
end that ye diſpaired, & thoſe that are wearie
of their liues, ſhoulde come thither to
hang them ſelues: So yt on a certain time
when he thought to amplifie & to enlarge
his place, he was conſtrained for to pull

downe thoſe Gibets, for the eaſier framing
and furniture of his worke. And
without great deliberation he went to
Athens, whereas diſpitefully he did congregate
the people like a Heraulde that
would declare ſome new thing, and whē
they vnderſtode the barbarous, a ſtraūge
voice of this feareful and vglye monſter,
and knowing of a long time his humor,
they ranne ſodenlye for to heare him, as
though it had bene ſome ſodeine miracle:
then he cried out ſaying: Citizens of Athens
if any of you haue any deuotion to
go hang him ſelfe, let him make haſt to
come quicklye, for I will cut downe my
Gibets, for certain neceſſitie that I haue:
ſo that hauing vſed this charitie towards
them, he returned to his place without
ſpeaking of any other thing, whereas he
liued manie yeares, without chaunging
his opinion, and ceaſed not to philoſophie
the reſt of his life vpon the miſerie of mā,
till ſuch time as the pangues of death
began to oppreſſe him, then deteſting our
humanitie, euen vntill the laſt gaſpe, ordeyned
expreſſiuely, that his bodie ſhould

not be buried in the earth, which is the
common eliment and buriall for all, for
feare that men ſhoulde ſée his bones and
aſhes, but he ſtreightly cōmaunded that
he might be buried vpon the ſea banke,
to the ende that the furor of the waues
might let the creatures to come néere: &
then he willed that this Epitaphe recited
by Plutarch, ſhoulde be graued on hys
Tombe.
            
               After my miſerable life
               I am buried vnder this ground:
               To know my name make no ſtrife
               O Reader, whom God confound.
            
            Behold how this poore Philoſopher, after
that he had long plunged himſelfe in
the contemplation of humaine miſeries,
had will neuer to haue bene borne, or elſe
to haue bene tranſformed into the ſhape
of ſome brute beaſt, for the great diſdaine
he had in mens vices.
            Leaue we this Philoſopher Thimon,
making his complaintes, and let vs harken
a little to this great Emperour of
Rome Marcus Aurelius, no leſſe cunning
in Philoſophie, than in gouerning of the

Empire: Who conſidering profoundlye,
the frailtie and miſerie in the which oure
poore life is continually beſieged, ſayde:
The battel of this world is ſo perillous,
the yſſue ſo terrible and fearfull, that I
am aſſured if an auncient man ſhoulde
come forth of his graue, and make a faith
full diſcourſe and ſhewe of his life, from
the houre of his birth vntill the houre of
his death, and that the bodie ſhould ſhew
all the dolours and griefes that it hath
ſuffered, and the heart diſcouer al the aſſaultes
of fortune, men would be amaſed
of the body which hath ſo much ſuſtained,
and of the heart that hath ſo languiſhed,
the which I haue proued in my ſelfe, and
will liberally confeſſe it, though it be to
my infamie, but it maye be profitable to
others in time to come. In fiftye yeares
that I haue liued, I thought to approue
all the vices of this life, for to ſée if mans
malice might be ſatiſfied in anie thing:
And after that I had all ſéene, I founde
that ye more I eat, the more I did hunger,
the more I did drinke, ye more I thirſted:
the more I ſlept, the more I would ſlepe:

the more I reſted, the more I breake: the
more I had, the more I did couet: ye more
I ſought, the leſſe I found: and finallye,
I neuer had thing in my poſſeſſion,
but that therein I found my ſelfe letted,
and incontinentlye after, I haue wiſhed
for another. The whiche things Sainct
Iohn Chryſoſtome hauing in admiratiō,
after that he had bewailed by great compaſſion
the calamities of men, and the
darkeneſſe wherein they were wrapped,
crieth out ſaying: I deſier to haue an eie
ſo cleare, that with the ſame I might ſée
all men, and ſuch a voice, that it might
be hearde in all the corners of the earth,
that all humaine creatures might heare,
to the ende, to declare with the Prophet
Dauid this crie: Children of men, howe
long ſhal your hearts be hardened? And
not withoute a cauſe, for he that woulde
conſider with a ſound iudgement, the eſtate
of the world, ſuch as it is at this preſent,
ſo many diſceytes, fraudes, blaſphemies,
adulteries, rapines, warres, effuſion
of bloud, violences, ambition, couetouſneſſe,
haired, rancor, & vengeance, wt
               
the which the earth is euen drunken. He
maye well ſaye that we approche nere to
the ſeaſon, of the which ſpeaketh the Prophet
Eſay with ſo great abhomination,
in the ninth Chapter, wherein he ſayth,
your iniquities haue made a deuiſiō betwéene
you and your God, your ſinnes
haue hid his face from you, to the ende
that he heare you not: for your handes
are full of bloud, your fingers with iniquitie,
your lips haue ſpoken lies, & your
tongue blaſphemie. No man doeth call vpon
iuſtice, there is not one that iudgeth
according to right, they conceiue in their
mindes Fellonie, and bring forth iniquitie.
They are encloſed with the edges of
adders, and haue weaued ſpiders threads,
they that eate of their egges ſhal die, and
if ye breake them, there ſhall come forth
a Baſiliſke, their féete runne to do euill,
and they make haſte to ſhedde innocent
bloud, their thoughts are wicked thoughtes.
Truth is throwne in the ſtretes, and
equitie can not enter in, oure iniquities
Are multiplied, and our ſinnes beare witneſſe
againſt vs. Sainct Bernard in a certaine

lamentation that he maketh vpon
the miſerie of our life, doth teach man to
knowe his infirmitie, without drawing
hym from himſelfe, to this ende, that by
the contemplation of himſelfe, he be the
ſooner moued to deteſt his vile life, when
that he ſayth: O man blinde and naked,
that arte made of humaine fleſhe, and of
a reaſonable ſoule, remember thy miſerable
eſtate aud condition, wherefore
goeſt thou out of thy owne pathes, and
doeſt muſe in externe things, & ſluggeſt
in the vanities of this worlde: and doeſt
plunge in the wicked delicateneſſe therof?
Doeſt thou not conſider that the nerer
thou draweſt therto, the farther thou
art from God, the more thou thinkeſt to
gaine outwardly, the more thou loſeſt inwardlye
of that whiche is precious, the
more curious thou arte in temporall
things, the more bigger thou art in ſpiritual
things? Thou ordayneſt ſo well al
things, and deſpiſeſt thy ſelfe, there is no
wilde beaſt but thou tameſt, and thou thy
ſelfe art without bit and bridle: thou art
waking in euery place, but in thine own

affaires thou art a ſlepe: ye deſier of earthlye
things boyle in thy heart, and in the
meane time heauenly things are cleane
defaced from thée, the nerer thou draweſt
to death, the farther art thou from thy
ſaluatiō, thou takeſt great paine to decke
and nouriſhe this body, which is nothing
but a verie veſſell of filth, and a ſepulcher
for wormes, & thou leaueſt thy poore ſoule
which is the image of God, famiſhed and
voyde. Theſe are the complaintes that
this holy man made, in his deſert againſt
the ingratitude of this worlde: All the
which things by vs being brought in, aſwell
of him as of others, tend to no other
ende, but to prouoke man to the contemplation
of himſelf, and to ſhewe him how
vile and abiect he is, to the ende that he
ſhould conſider euerie minute in the day,
that he is in the hād of God, as the chaffe,
and as the earthen veſſell is in the hande
of the potter, the which he may make, vnmake,
forme, breake, craſe, and repaire, as
to him ſéemeth beſt, without doing it any
wrong or iniurie. For, what is man elſe
but a ſimilitude or ſtatute in this worlde,

which is a verie ſhoppe of the workes of
God, who with one puſhe will fall, and
notwithſtanding in what miſerie ſo euer
he be wrapt in, yet he knoweth not himſelfe,
neither yet will bow vnder the yoke
of God.
            (Now therefore) hauing well conſidered
the vniuerſall ſtate of man, it is requiſite
to make a moſte ample diſcourſe
of this matter, and to contemplate man
more neare, to the ende that he learne to
humble himſelfe vnder the hande of hys
God. And therefore, that among all the
Heathen, Plinie, as me ſemeth, hath moſt
worthily philoſophied of our nature: We
wil bring him for witneſſe, to ye end that
Chriſtians to their great confuſion and
infamie may receiue inſtruction of a Painim,
which liued without the knowledge
of God, without law, without knowledge
of the heauenly and Euangelicall light.
Let vs conſider a little (ſayth he) howe it
behoueth man to couer his bodye, at the
diſpenſation of beaſtes, who being fauourable
of their natural libertie, bring euen
from the bellye of their dams, ſome feathers,

others heare, ſkin, ſkayles, and others
wooll. The like alſo in trées whiche
are prouided with barke, for to ſerue thē
againſt the cold, and againſt the extreme
heate. And therefore for the better knowledge
in what contemnation nature hath
man, ſhe hath brought him forth alone,
naked vpon the earth diſdainefully, as a
fruite out of time or ſeaſon, and at the
firſt houre of his death hath aſſigned him
teares for his heritage, which are as forerunners
and meſſengers of his calamities
to come. Beholde here the chiefe and
head of the worke of nature, and for whō
all other things are created, which is ſo
weake of himſelfe, that if he be left without
the helpe and ſuccour of others, he
ſhould be deuoured of wilde beaſtes, beholde
when that he cōmeth out of his mothers
wombe, how that he muſt be wrapped,
ſwaddeled, & kept warme: his lyms
and ioyntes ſtretched out, he is borne in
pride, and hath his beginning in ſinne:
but at what time can he ſtand? whē hath
he the vſe of ſpeache? when can he go, to
how manye diſeaſes is he ſubiect? The other

beaſtes can of nature helpe themſelues,
but man knoweth nothing if he be
not taught, but of his own proper nature
wepeth. Man only among the beaſtes is
ſubiect to paine, paſſion, pleaſure, ambition,
auarice, an vnmeaſurable appetite
to liue, borne only to ſuperſtition, onlye
in worldlye cares, that follow him: to be
ſhort, he is ſubiect to wrath and enimitie.
The beaſts liue in peace and amitie with
thoſe of their kinde, but man alone is enimy
to man. And yet for the more fauouring
and gratifiyng of beaſtes, nature
hath prouided them caues and holes, to
kepe them frō the rage of the tempeſts,
thunders and lightnings, as for ye greate
ones, they haue dennes and caues in the
ground: and the little ones, as Whelks,
Snayles, Torterels, and ſuch like, nature
hath ſo prouided, that they beare with thē
their houſes eaſely on their backes.
            Not only the ſéedes and corne, but that
ſhe hath couered with eares, the plantes
with ſkinne, nuttes with ſhell, péele and
rinde, and al for the conſeruation of their
kindes. But man hath nothing, vnleſſe he

ſéeke it with labor, and with the ſweate of
his browes. Furthermore if we do confer
the helth and valure of beaſts, with ours,
we ſhall finde that they haue a greate aduauntage
ouer vs, for nature hath endued
vs with a complectiō ſo wauering and
vnſtedfaſt, and ſubiect to ſo many kindes
of ſickneſſes and diſeaſes, that ſeldome
we are in perfect health: beſides this, ſhe
hath charged man with ſuche an vnſatiable
appetite, that he ceaſeth not continuallye
to ſéeke for newe and ſtraunge
kinde of meates, and hauing founde to
his appetite, with greate payne he can
abſtaine himſelfe, but that he wyll take
more than nedefull: after the whiche
commeth Surfets, Rheumes, Cancars,
and other infinite kindes of ſickeneſſes.
But as touching beaſtes, they content
themſelues with that, that nature hathe
prepared, without chaunging or forcing
their nature, for to pleaſe their appetite.
Moreouer nature hath giuē them a complection
ſo well ruled and gouerned, that
they neuer take more thā is requiſite for
their nouriſhment, neyther in drinke, nor

in meat. But as for man, al the fruites of
ye earth, thoſe of the trées, the fiſhes of the
ſea, and the Fowles of the aire, doe not
ſuffice him, but in all points turning hys
nature, he doth diſguiſe puffe vp, & change
the ſubſtance into exceſſe, and the nature
into arte, to the ende that by ſuch vnſatiableneſſe,
nature be angered, and almoſt
forced to take more than is nedefull: ſo
then, when that nature is ouercharged,
and that the ſtomacke is wel filled: all the
braynes are troubled in ſuch ſorte, that
there is neither of them that can execute
their office. And I am aſhamed that I
muſt nedes tell it, that the vnmeaſurable
delicateneſſe that raigneth among Chriſtians
this day, is the cauſe that there are
many, that are not aſhamed to giue their
bodies, and their members to al kinde of
vice and villanie, and to all kinds of wickedneſſe,
howe execrable ſo euer they be,
euen in committing many fornications,
theftes, fellonies. And I doe maruell that
the bellies of manye vnſatiable gluttons
do not rot and bruſte out by their greate

exceſſe, and in the meane time the poore
Lazarus ſtandeth at the gate redy to die
for hunger, and can not haue ſo much as
the crommes that fall from theyr table.
            And therfore ſuch Godbellies or Bellygods,
are called by the Prophetes, fatte
Calues, who by good reaſon may be compared
to brute beaſtes: for their ſoule
which is the chiefeſt part they haue (being
in the bodie ſo perfumed with meats and
drinkes) is captiue as in a darke priſon or
dungeon, where as it is almoſte ſtifled
and ſmuthered, and the wits whiche are
the inſtrumēts, with the which ſhe ought
to be ſerued, are buried therein as within
the bowels of a beaſt: and againſt ſuch
gluttons as make their belly their God,
the Prophet Eſay crieth out ſaying, Wo
be to you that riſe earlie to follow drunkenneſſe,
and to ſit drinking till the Euening,
to the ende that the wine heate
you: The which vice at this preſent day
is ſo familiar among men, that there is
not almoſt, neither Nation or prouince,
but that is infected, and that glorieth in
their great drinking. The Tartarians,

the Perſians, and the Gréekes haue celebrated
drūkenneſſe among their chiefeſt
triumphes, and conſtrained them that
were at their bankets to drinke or to goe
their wayes. The Macedonians were inſtructed
of their Emperor Alexander to
drinke without meaſure.Drunkē
                  neſſe of Alexāder. Plinie. But aboue all
Nations, Italie hath got the price: in the
which (as Plinie doth write) drunkenneſſe
in his time did ſo raigne, that they did
not only drink themſelues out of al meaſure,
but alſo they conſtrained their
Mares and Horſes to doe the like. Paulus
Diacrus in his Hiſtorie of Lumbardes,
doth rehearſe a thing almoſt monſtrous,
of the vice of drunkēneſſe, of foure old mē
that made a banket, in the whiche they
drunke the yeares of one another, after
the maner as followeth: they ordeyned
to drinke two to two, and counted theyr
age of yeares that they had, and he that
drunke to his companion, ſhould drinke
ſo many times as he had liued yeres, and
the yongeſt of theſe foure, was .lviij. yeres
olde: the ſeconde, ſixtye thrée: the thirde,
lxxxvij. and the fourth, lxxxxij. So that it

was not knowen what they did eate at
this banket either more or leſſe, but we
know that he that drunke leaſt, did drinke
lviij. taſters of wine, and the others ſo
many as they had liued yeares, in ſuche
ſorte that one of them did drinke .lxxxxij.
times. It is not therfore without a cauſe
that this great Philoſopher Plato knowyng
the harme that wine bringeth to
man, ſaide, that partly the Gods had ſent
wine for the puniſhment of man, and to
take vengeance of their ſinnes, cauſing
them when that they are drunke, to kyll
and murther one another, the which cō
               ſidered
of Cyneas Ambaſſadour of King
Pyrrhus, on a time when that he arriued
in Egypt, and that he had ſéene the exceſſe
height of the vineyards in that countrie,
did ſaye that by good right that mother
was hanged ſo highe, ſeing ſhe brought
forth ſo daungerous a childe as the wine.
For this cauſe Androcides did admoniſh
that great Monarch Alexāder, that wine
was the bloud of the earth: and therefore
he ſhoulde take héede howe to receyue it.
The which not being well obſerued by

him, in his intemperancie killed Clytus,
burned the Citie of Percepolis, and committed
manye other foule and deteſtable
crimes. It is not therefore in this our
age that theſe wicked vices of gluttonye
and drunkenneſſe haue made their laſte
ende vpon the earth, but it ſéemeth that
they haue nowe made almoſt their comming
in with man. The tranſgreſſion of
our firſt parents Adam and Eua was the
cauſe that the gate of Paradiſe was ſhut
againſt vs.
            
               Eſau ſolde hys birth right. The great
Prophet S. Iohn Baptiſt was cruellye
ſlaine and murthered after that the cruel
tyrant Kyng Herode had banke
                  •
               ed. The
wicked riche man was damned, for it is
expreſſiuely ſaide in the Text, that he fared
deliciouſly, and therfore was he buried
in hel. Noe being ouercome with wine
ſlept with his priuie parts vncouered, and
was mocked of his children. Loth being
ouercome with wine, did deflowre his
owne daughters.
            Nowe therfore we ſée how much more

                  •
               auor nature hath ſhewed vnto beaſtes,

than vnto vs, in that they do ſo moderate
their appetites, that they take no more
than is neceſſarie for the preſeruation of
their health, in ſuch ſort that they are not
vexed with an infinite number of diſeaſes
as we are. And if it happen that
they are afflicted with anye harmes, nature
hath inſtructed them proper remedies
without hauing refuge to Phiſicke
or Phiſicions, which vnder the colour of
receiue, chaunge R. into D. and make deceiue,
ſo that ſomtimes we buy full deare
the trauell of them which manye times
cauſe our death, for the moſt part of their
laxatiue medicines, are no other than
very hammers to beate downe men. But
if it happen that the beaſtes or fowles are
ſicke, nature doth ſhewe them remedies.
As the wood Doues,Ariſto. Plinie. Iayes, Merlings,
and Partriches, the which purge theyr
ſuperfluities with Bay leaues. The Pigeons,
Turtels, and Hennes, with the
herbe Helxine. The Torterels wil heale
their biting with Cegue. The Dogs and
Cats when their bellies are too full, will
purge them in eating dewed herbes or

graſſe. When the Deare are hurt, they
haue recourſe to Dictamum. When
the Weſell doeth pretende to fight againſt
the Rattes, ſhe prepareth and is
furniſhed with Rewe called Herbegrace,
to the ende to be the more ſtronger and
better diſpoſed. The wilde Boares doe
medicine themſelues with Cedria. The
Beares with Mandragoras.
               Ariſto. The Egles
knowyng that they are bounde, and that
they make their egges with great difficultie,
they ſéeke a ſtone named Aetites,
otherwiſe called ſtone Aquilin, the which
they bring to their neſtes to looſe themſelues,
and to make them lay more eaſie.
The which at this daye is vſed among
many Dames of Italy for to ſhortē their
trauelings. Alſo there are certain beaſts
that ſerue vs for medicines,Loriot. Ariſt. 22. ca
                     •
                   the. 9. boke, tr
                     •
                  
                  ting of beaſtes. as the Lorriot
named by Ariſtotell, Corios, of whō
it is ſpoken, that if a man hauing the
Iaunders doth beholde him, the Bird dyeth,
and the man receyueth health. Whē
the Swallowes perceyue that the eyes
of their yong ones are endomaged by
ſmoke proceding frō Chimneyes, where

as they make their neſtes, they doe heale
them with Celendine.
            The Adders and other Serpents in the
Spring time, to the end to caſt their ſkin
more eaſie, & perceyuing their eye ſight
to faile them, eate Fenell to ſolage theyr
infirmitie. The Pelican doth let himſelfe
bloud, and draweth the very bloud from
his bodie, for to heale his yong ones being
hurt with ſerpents.Polidorus of the in
                  
                     •
                  ention of things. The Storkes (as
all naturals confeſſe) hath taught Potecaries
the vſe of Gliſters.
            
               Plutarch almoſt rauiſhed in admiration
with the fauors that nature hath beſtowed
vpon beaſtes, more than on men,
durſt aſſure that the brute beaſtes knowe
the thrée kindes of Phiſick. For after that
he hath proued that they knowe the vertue
and propertie of manye herbes, as I
haue before ſhewed, addeth more that they
obſerue y• ſecond part, that we call Diet:
for whē they féele themſelues too ful, they
moderate their paſture, and make abſtinence:
as the Lions and Wolfes doe abſtaine
themſelues, and remaine couched
till they haue digeſted all. And as for the

thirde part, whiche is Chirurgerie, ſome
holde opinion that Eliphants do knowe
it, and vnderſtand it, for they wil pul out
the dartes and arrowes of thoſe that are
ſtricken without any daūger. The which
being liuelye conſidered by an auncient
Gréeke Philoſopher named Hirophilus,
dyd complaine on the miſerable conditiō
of man, who although he were elected aboue
all other creatures, yet he is in many
things diſciple to beaſts.Induſtrie of Svvallovves. This is true
ſayeth he, the Swallowes taught him to
build and edifie. But how is theyr maner
when they would coue? Firſte they put
ſtiffe and ſtrong ſticks to make the foundation
of their neſtes, and then the ſafte
ones aboue, then when that they can get
no durt, ye which they vſe in ſtede of morter
in their buildings, they flie to ſome
water or Riuer, and there bath themſelues
till that they be wette, then they take
duſt, which they temper with the water,
and then daube the ſtickes, and ſo make
their neſtes rounde compaſſe and euen,
not ſquared, knowing it better for to defend
their yong ones from the lurkings

of beaſtes. But what is the ſleight or cunning
in little beaſtes? is it not a wonderful
thing of nature, euen the working
of Spinners or Spiders, vnto whome,
women and maidens are diſciples, and
haue learned of them how to ſpinne, and
to Fiſhers to make their nets, but they
haue a much better grace, and more greater
aduantage in their induſtries, for
there is no knots in their workings, nor
waſt, for all procéedeth from their little
bodies, and they part their labor gentlye:
But women and maides, they ſpinne and
make threads for linnen and alſo wollen
cloth, & the huſband ſéeketh his and their
liuing otherwiſe, and is watching and folowing
the beaſtes for to catch them and
intrap them in his nets. But the Spider
although his bodie be little greater than
a Peaſe, notwithſtanding, he hath ſuche
induſtrie and liuelyneſſe, that ſometime
he taketh great flies and little Lezardes
in his nets, and alſo obſerueth ſo wel the
time to chaſe, that he ſéemeth to be an Aſtrologian.
He is contrary to vs that tary
for faire weather, but he chaſeth when

the time is darke and cloudie, which is
vnto vs a foreſhewing of raine,Ariſto. Plinie. as Ariſtotle
writeth in his hyſtorie of beaſtes.
But who maruelleth not at the miraculous
aduenture of a Crowe,Aelian of the crovv. the whiche
Plutarch writeth to haue ſéene in Aſia,
oppreſſed with thirſt, and ſéeking for water,
did perceyue a bucket in a Well, the
which he filled with ſtones to make the
water to riſe vp to the brimme, that he
might come by it.
            In like caſe a dog being in a ſhippe, being
oppreſſed with thirſt,Plutarch. in the abſence
of the Mariners did put ſtones in a potte
wherin was oyle, for to come by it more
eaſelye. But who had taught this beaſte
this ſecrete philoſophie, that the lighteſt
things will riſe vp when the weightieſt
things are vnder? If we wil conſider and
weigh the wiſedome and prudencie of humaines,
we ſhall finde that little beaſtes
that we dailye treade vnder our féete, in
ſuch matters, do ſurpaſſe men, and it ſéemeth
that eche of them hath ſome naturall
vertue in their affections, in wiſedome,
ſtrength, cowardiſe, clemencie, rigor,

diſcipline & erudition, for they know
one another, they diſcerne among them
ſelues, they prouide for things neceſſary,
flie euil, and eſchew daunger, they do many
times deceyue men, and hourdeth vp
that they liue by, the which being attentiuely
conſidered by many aūcient Philoſophers,
haue not bene aſhamed to diſpute,
& to ſtand in doubt whether brute
beaſtes be partakers of reaſon.
            Leaue we Phiſicke, Diet, Chirurgery,
and other Melancholike diſciplines, by
the which we haue proued, that beaſtes
haue knowledge, alſo in ſome pointes
they haue inſtructed men.Muſicke in beaſtes. And let vs ſeke
things more pleaſant, as is Muſicke, for
to ſatiſfie thoſe which will not reade the
works of others, if that there be not ſomwhat
that doeth flatter their ſenſes, and
reuiue their ſpirits, to the noyſe of vanitie.
But what man is there, be he neuer
ſo blockiſh or dull ſpirited, that doth not
maruel, and that is not rauiſhed with an
vnſpeakable delectation, hearing ye melodie
that procedeth from the Nightingale,
and 
                  •
               owe ſuche a ſhrill and harmonicall

voice may iſſue out of ſo little a trunke?
Furthermore he doeth perſeuer ſo obſtinately
in his ſong, that his life ſhal ſooner
fayle than his voyce, by ſuch ſorte that it
ſéemeth that he hath bene inſtructed of
ſome maſter Muſition to ſing in muſick:P. Belan in his Hiſtorie of Birdes.
for he counterfeiteth now the Meane, incontinent
the Baſe, then the Treble, and
then the Countertenor, and after being
wery with tuning, he counterfeiteth hys
voice and notes, and ſeemeth but another
birde that ſingeth a plaine ſong, then
ſodenlye he rowleth it out with ſuch an
infinite of melodious paſſages, that it rauiſheth
the ſpirites euen to the heauens,
not only of men, but alſo of other ſmall
birdes, the which he charmeth and ſtaieth
by his voyce, and cauſeth them by his
ſwéete voyce to harken to him, and to aſſaye
to counterfeite him, and to get part
of his melodie. And furthermore, the
Nightingale wil enſtruct his yong ones,
prouoking them to the like harmonie,
teaching them to obſerue the like tunes,

                  •
               o cōduct them with the like breath, ſome

                  •
               n length, other ſhorte, then to courbe the

notes whole, ſodenly to chaunge them

                  〈◊〉
                faintings, to tranſforme his voyce in 
                  〈◊〉
               
manye ſortes, that there is no humai
                  ••
               
creature that can counterfeite him, 
                  ••
               though
Ariſtophanes a Gréeke Autho
                  •
               
in his Comedie of the ſongs of birds, ha
                  ••
               
employed al the might of his ſpirit, th
                  ••
               king
to imitate him in certaine pointe
                  •
               
the which beyng maruelled at by Dem
                     •
                  
                  critus,
after that he had bene many ye
                  •
               
               res
auditor to the Nightingale, and to
                  •
               ther
birdes, confeſſeth publikely that 
                  〈◊〉
               
Swannes and the Nightingale ha
                  •
               
learned Muſicke to men, and that all 
                  〈◊〉
               
paſſages and tunes in Muſicke, are b
                  ••
               
certaine notes that men haue taken fro
                  •
               
birdes. For thys cauſe it is that the wy
                  ••
               
Salomon knowing how much beaſtes 
                  〈◊〉
               
paſſe vs in many things, hath ſent vs 
                  〈◊〉
               
their ſchooles & vniuerſities, when that 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſayth in his Prouerbes:Prouer. 13. There are fou
                  •
               
little things in the earth, notwithſtādin
                  •
               
they are wiſer thā ye wiſe. The Ant wh
                  •••
               
is a little kind, and yet prouideth foode 
                  〈◊〉
               
Sommer againſt Winter. The Cunni
                  ••
               
which is a kynde not greate, make the
                  ••
               
               
               
                  •
               ouſes in the earth. The Graſhoppers
which haue no king, and notwithſtāding
they go by bandes. The Spider or Flie,
whome you may take with your handes,
and yet remayneth in Kings places. It
is a thing almoſt incredible in theſe little
Antes,Ariſt. lib. 2. cap. 30. & Plinie. to carie ſo waightie a burthen,
with ſuche an extreme diligence, and to
obſerue ſuche an order among them, to
parte a corne in the middeſt, for to carie
it more eaſily into their caues, and if the
corne be wet wyth the raine, then they
drie it on a ſunnie daye in the ſunne. But
with what induſtrie do they make theyr
little holes, of the which the comming in
is not ſtraight, for feare that other beaſts
come not in, but is crooked with manye
turnings, and many darke pathes, which
render into thrée places: the one, whereas
they kepe their Parliament, and aſſē
               ble
in counſell, the other, whereas they
put their prouiſion for all the yeare, and
the thirde (as writeth Plutarch) is ye place
where as they burie the dead, for it is certaine,
as the learned haue written, that
they kepe ye right vſe of Funerals. Therfore

this Philoſophie of King Salomo
                  •
               
is not vnprofitable. By the which, vnd
                  ••
               
the ſimilitude and ſhew of theſe little be
                  ••
               ſtes,
he woulde haue vs to flie ydleneſſ
                  •
               
the mother and nouriſher of all other v
                  •
               
               ces.
The which hath alway bene obſerue
                  •
               
in the Primatiue Church: Where it wa
                  •
               
ordeined, that euerie one ſhoulde liue 
                  〈◊〉
               
their owne labor, for feare the fowles 
                  〈◊〉
               
the aire, and beaſtes ſhould conſume vn
                  •••
               
profitably the goods of ye earth. The whic
                  •
               
alſo the aunciēt Romanes kept ſtraightlye,
as writeth Cicero in hys booke 
                  〈◊〉
               
Lawes, wherein he affirmeth, yt in time
                  •
               
paſt, no Romane durſt go by the ſtréetes
if that he bare not a ſhew whereon he d
                  ••
               
liue, to the ende that it might be knowe
                  •
               
that he liued of his owne labor, and not b
                  •
               
the ſweate of others. In conſideration
therof the Conſul did carie a Battell a
                  ••
               
before him: the Prieſtes a hat, in ye maner
of a coyfe: the Tribunes a Mace: the Cu
                  ••
               lers
a ſworde: the Taylers a payre 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſhéeres: the Smithes a hammer: the O
                  •
               
               rators
a booke, not permitting that thoſ
                  •
               
that were maiſters of ſciences ſhould b
                  •
               
               
ſcholers of vices. In ſuch ſorte that Marcus
Aurelius in making mention of the
auncient diligence of the Romanes,A maruelous diligence of the Romanes. writeth
that they did alſo employ and wyth
ſuch a zeale their labors & trauailes, that
in Rome could not be found an ydle perſon,
to carie a letter ij. or .iij. dayes iourney.
The which maye make vs bluſhe for
ſhame, that profeſſe Chriſt, for if all the
vagabondes and ydle perſons were chaſed
and driuen out of townes and Cities,
we ſhoulde not haue ſo many as we now
haue. If we our ſelues would exactly conſider
al the things that God hath created,
we ſhall finde that man onely reſteth in
idleneſſe. For ſo much more as things are
created more excellent and perfect, ſo
hath GOD giuen them more greater
trauaile. Beholde the Sunne, whiche
moueth continually: and howe that the
Moone is neuer ſtayde. The Skie and the
Planets are euer mouing: the fier can
not be without making ſome worke. The
Cloudes neuer ceaſe remouing, the waters,
floudes and fountaines trauell continuallye,
the earth is neuer in reſt, ſhe

bringeth forth naturally, hearbes, plant
                  •
               
and other fruites, for to nouriſhe as well
men as beaſts. Therfore if we will conſider
all things, we ſhall find that nature
neuer ceaſeth traueling. Therfore to conclude,
there is nothing more peſtilent in
a common weale, than ydleneſſe, for ſh
                  •
               
alwaies inuenteth ſome miſchiefe for th
                  •
               
corruption of our humanitie, in ſuch ſor
                  •
               
that we maye eſteme theſe idle perſon
                  •
               
more miſerable than brute beaſts: of the
whych, ſome of them as the Oxen, gyue
their hydes to make ſhooes, their fleſh to
eate, & their ſtrength to labor the ground
and the innocent ſhéepe giueth his fléec
                  •
               
to make cloth, his fleſh for to nouriſh vs▪
his ſkinne profitable for to make manye
things, but man is idle, and profiteth nothing,
ſauing only to offende God, ſlaunder
the innocent, and eate the breade of
others labor. We maye then knowe by
th
                  •
               ſe things before written, what liberalitie
nature hath vſed towards beaſtes
whō ſhe hath ſo much fauored, yt men are
conſtrained to follow their maners, and
condicions and offices, ſo well ruled and

ordeined. But who is that murtherer
that is ſo muche enimie of nature, or ſo
gredy of humain bloud, that wil not moderate
hys ardent deſier (in ſtealing or
killing) whē that he conſidereth that there
is no beaſt how brutiſh ſoeuer he be, that
will kill or murther anye of his kinde?
Where is that childe ſo vngratefull towardes
his Parents, but that maye be
moued with pitie, when that he ſéeth that
the yong Storkes nouriſh their parents
in their age, and miniſter vnto them their
neceſſities, conſidering that good that
they haue receyued of them in their
youth, and that they are the Authors of
their being? And yet Aelian addeth
things more ſtraūger to read, but much
more harder to beleue: that the yong
ones beare ſuch a zelous loue towardes
their old parentes, that if ſo be that they
haue no foode readye for to ſuſtaine them
with, they will vomit that whiche they
haue eaten the daye before, to giue vnto
them, for feare they ſhoulde die, and ſuſtaine
them therewith, till that they haue
ſought foode. But where is that father or

mother ſo cruell, that dare caſt of their
fruite, or intreate them cruelly, conſidering
that ye Dolphin is ſuch a zelous protector
of hir yong ones, that if it chaunce
any of them to be takē of fiſhermen, they
will not forſake them, but followeth thē
ſo extremely, that they will let thēſelues
ye rather to be taken, than to forſake their
fruite: which is not onely peculiar in the
Dolphin, but alſo in another fiſh named
Glaucus, which are about Marcelis, the
which although ſhe be not ſo ſociable &
priuy to man as the other, yet ſhe hath hir
yong ones in ſuch fauor, yt when ſhe ſéeth
men or any other to effray thē, ſhe ſwalloweth
them down into hir belly aliue, &
when ſhe perceyueth y• daūger to be paſt,
ſhe doth vomit thē again whole & ſoūd in
ye water, without doing thē any harme, ye
which is a thing almoſt vncredible y• this
fiſh ſhuld ſo loue hir yong ones y• ſhe had
rather ſuffer harme, thā that they ſhould
be hurt. Who is it therfore that wold not
paciently endure pouertie, if ſhe chaunce
or happen to come, if he wil cōtemplate ye
nature of the fiſh called Polypus, whiche

is a drie kind, féeling hir ſelf oppreſſed wt 
hūger, & ſéeing that nouriſhment faileth,
wil eat ye brawn of hir armes, being aſſuredThe Polipus vvill eat hirſelf if ſhe wāt fode.
yt they wil grow againe. What mā is
he ſo fearful, that wil not be cōforted whē
he ſéeth ye pangs of death, although it be
terrible, if he diligently conſider how the
Swannes ſing, when they feele the laſte
ende, although they haue no hope of another
life to come. There is no father ſo
vnnaturall to his childe, that he will defraude
him of his right enheritance to aduauntage
a ſtraunger, if he take regarde
to the order that the Swallowe kepeth in
the nouriſhing of hir yong ones, who as
writeth Aelian in his Gréeke Hiſtorie,Aelian.
treating of beaſtes, obſerueth and kepeth
a iuſt order in the diſtribution of their
foode, and for that ſhe cannot bring all at
a time, ſhe goeth oftētimes to ſeke foode,
and violateth in no poynt the right of the
firſte borne, for he that is firſt borne, is
the firſt ſerued, the ſeconde borne, is ſecond
ſerued, and ſo following in order,
without defrauding any of them of their
right. Which is the occaſion that an Indian

Philoſoper named Diphileus, after
that he had weighed vprightly the maner
and facion of this little fowle, in giuing
meat to hir yong ones, crieth out ſaying:
yt this great work, maiſtres dame nature
had graued certaine lawes and orders in
beaſtes, whiche ought to be examples to
men, howe to conduct the eſtate of theyr
life. In like maner, there is no man, but
that maye receyue ſome doctrine of the
prudencie of the Cuckowe,Prudency of the Cuckow. the which is
reputed wiſe among all others (although
that we do abuſe and hate them) who by
a certaine naturall prudencie that they
haue, know their infirmitie, that by their
exceſſiue colde nature they can not coue
their egges, neyther yet they make them
any neſt, but they haue the induſtrie to
eſpie where other Birdes make their
neſtes, and there layth hir egges, and leaueth
them ſecretlye (knowing) for that
they be like others, they ſhall be hatched
and brought vp: the whyche is a verye
Myrror or glaſſe, ſayth Fulgentius, for fathers
being men of ſmall faculties, and
haue manye children, that they ſhoulde

prouide for them maiſters, to this ende,
that for default not to haue bene maintained
in their youth, be faine to begge
and to labor in their age, when as they
ſhould reſt. Moreouer, what ſeruaunt is
he,The excellencie & nobleneſſe of the horſe. be he neuer ſo ſturdie or ſtout, that is
not moued, conſidering the gentillitie
and nobleneſſe of the horſe, whoſe heart
is ſo highly ſet, that for to die he will not
leaue his maiſter in daunger, but hath
ſuch fierceneſſe, which prodigally nature
hath giuen him, by the which we may ſée
him like a thunder breake the preaſe of
the men of warre, murther and kill thoſe
that let him in his waye: and finally neuer
to ceaſe trauelling, till the victorie be
had. And if men may take example in the
fidelitie of a horſe, yet that is nothing in
regarde to that which we daily ſée in our
dogges (who knowing their maiſters) wil
flatter them, cheriſh and be ielous of thē,
following them through the world, knowing
aboue all others him that nouriſheth
them, and they are ſuch faithfull kepers
of their maiſters goods, that for to
die they will not let it be ſtollen. In confirmation

whereof I wil bring forth an
example recited by Plutarch, and manye
other Gréeke and Latine Authors worthy
of credence, which ſhalbe ſufficient to
giue feare to murtherers, bloudſhedders,
and others which make ſuch good cheape
of humaine bloude: whoſe doings, oure
Lorde God doeth ſo abhorre, that he permitteth
brute beaſtes to execute his iuſtice,
as it is moſt euidently manifeſted by
this Hiſtorie following.
            The Elders that haue written of the
nature of beaſtes, make mention of a
King named Pyrrhus, the whiche marching
on a daye with his armie,A ſtorie vvorthie of memorye, of a dogge. came by
a dog which ſtoode by his maiſters deade
bodie in a hie waye, and after that he had
behelde a while this pitifull ſpectacle, he
was aduertiſed by certain country men,
that that was the thirde daye, that this
poore beaſt had kept the dead bodie, without
any meate. For the which occaſion,
the King commaunded the dead bodie to
be buried, and that the dog for his faythfulneſſe
ſhoulde be nouriſhed and intertained
in his Court, and certaine dayes

after, he made inquiſition of the murther,
but he coulde know nothing therof.
It chaunced not long after, that his men
of warre made their muſ
                  •
               er before him,
that he might ſée their order. The dog of
whom was made mention, was alwayes
with the King, and remayned verie ſadde
and heauie, till thoſe paſſed by that had
ſtaine his maiſter: then with a maruellous
furie he ran againſt them, and wold
haue bitten them, howling moſt pitifully,
turning him to King Pyrrhus, and beholding
him moſt attentiuelye, ſéeming
as though he woulde haue aſked iuſtice:
which was the occaſion that the King and
all the aſſiſtants did ſuſpect the murther
to be committed by thoſe, in ſuch ſort that
by theſe coniectures, they were examined,
conuinced, and puniſhed according
to their deſertes. A thing miraculous,
wherin God doth ſhew himſelf a iuſt and
righteous Iudge in his iudgements, and
that he hath murtherers in ſo great deteſtation
that ſhed humaine bloud, that he
permitteth brute beaſtes to accuſe them
and ſhew them their vices. I might here

bring an infinite number of examples as
well Eccleſiaſticall as prophane, by the
which it is euidently ſhewed, that in the
contemplation of beaſtes, there maye be
found an harmonious Philoſophie, as
well morall as naturall. For conſidering
their maners and actions, ſo well ordeyned
according to the vſe of nature, theyr
iuſtice, temperature, fortitude and behauiour,
in the adminiſtration of their ſmal
publike weales, their continencie to the
workes of nature, wyth certaine other
partes of vertue that they exerciſe: by
the diligent conſideration of which, man
may enter into his owne conſcience and
aduiſe, as being ouercome of thoſe in
many things, and conſidering his miſerie
and pitifull Metamorphoſe, and howe he
doth degenerate from his excellency and
dignitie, he is moued to abhorre his life,
finding himſelfe inferior to thoſe whome
he ought to excell, as much as he paſſeth
thē in honor and dignitie. For this cauſe
our Sauiour Chriſte calleth the Scribes
and Phariſeys, in Sainct Mathewe, the
children of wrath. And that Eſaye reprouing

ye children of Iſraell of their ingratitude
towardes God, ſheweth them by
example, that the Oxe and the Aſſe know
their maſters Crib, but Iſraell knoweth
not his Lorde God. Alſo we are admoniſhed
by the hiſtory of the herde of Swine
(which by the permiſſion of God were
vexed of the Diuell) that thoſe that conſume
their life in deliciouſneſſe,Againſt the Epicurians. as a
great manye Belligods that raigne thys
daye in the world, and lead a corrupt life,
ſhall one day be made a pray for Diuels.
For ſeing they wil not be the temple and
houſe of God, and habitation of the holy
ghoſt, they muſte néedes be the manſion
of Diuels. Suche Hogges are thoſe that
make their Paradiſe in this worlde, and
that diſſemble their vices, the which they
ſée with their eyes, and touch with theyr
fingers, for feare that they haue to léeſe
the earthly richeſſe, their offices, benefices,
prebendaries and dignities, for feare
to be depriued from their carnall luſtes.
Suche Swine are flatterers, that all the
time of their liues do no other thing but
kéepe Princes in their error, and that

haue for the firſt article of their faith, that
there is no God but their bellye, for all
their religion is conuerted to carnall libertie.
As touching the lawe of Ieſus
Chriſt, it is too thorniſhe, they will none
of it, they will not drinke of his cup, the
drinke ſéemeth to them too bitter: they
muſt haue a Ieſus Chriſt arraied in veluet,
more ſwéete, more ſofte, more amiable,
and more delicate. They can not away
with the ſharpneſſe of S. Iohn Baptiſt,
they ſéeke for the Courtes of Kings,
and the pompes of the worlde, and they
haue no other pleaſures in this worlde,
but to thinke how they maye liue eaſily.
They maye well for a while cloke and
diſguiſe their iniquity, but one day it ſhal
be diſcouered, before the face and throne
of God,Pſal. 139. as Dauid doth well vnderſtand,
when he ſayth, whither ſhall I goe then
from thy ſpirite, or whither ſhall I go thē
from thy preſence, if I climbe vp to heauen,
thou art there, if I go downe to hell,
thou art there alſo, if I take the wings of
the morning, and remaine in the vttermoſt
parts of the ſea, euen there alſo ſhal

thy hand lead me, and thy right hand ſhal
holde me. If I ſay peraduenture the darkneſſe
ſhall couer me, then ſhall my night
be turned to daye, yea the darkneſſe is no
darkeneſſe with thée, but the night is as
cleare as the day, he that made the Eare,
ſhall not he heare? he that made the eye,
ſhall not he ſée and conſider? Therefore
to conclude, it is great horror and abhomination,
that man whiche is but a
miſerable worme of the earth, that maye
ſcant créepe, without the hope of eternall
life, and is the moſt miſerable of all creatures,
how that he dare repugne againſt
the order of nature, and his owne office,
in which al other creatures remaine, and
alſo how he dare riſe againſt God, which
in a moment maye conſume him. But
who is it that doth not maruell at the forgetfulneſſe
of man, that alone dare reſiſt
the Lord God, vnto whom all other creatures,
heauē, earth, ſea, ſtarres, planets,
all Elementes, beaſtes, fowles, fiſhes,
angels and diuels do obey.
            Thus endeth the first booke.
         
         
            
            The ſecond booke.
            
               WE haue here in thys
firſt booke conferred man
with the beaſts, and ſhewed
that he néede not magnifie
and exalte him ſelfe
aboue them, conſidering
that he is inferior to thē in many things.The Author beginneth to diſcouer more profoūdly the humaine miſeries.
Hauing therefore this light foundation,
and figured certaine things of the miſeries
of man, there reſteth following, our
diſcourſe, to penetrate more further,
and to continue this pitifull tragedie of
the life of man, beginning at his generation
and production, then diſcouering
throughout all ages, and particulars of
his life, till we haue brought him to his
ſepulcher, which is the ende of all things.
But firſt, let vs ſée of what ſéede he is ingendred,
only of corruption and infection.
What is the place of his birth, but
only a foule and filthy dungeon?Hippo. in his booke of infantments. Howe
long is he in the womb of his mother, before
he be like any thing than a vile lump
of fleſh, in ſuch ſort that when the wombe

hath retained and taken both ſéedes, and
heated by the naturall heate, it createth a
little thin ſkin, almoſt like to that which
is next to the ſhell of an egge, that it is
like nothing but an egge, layde out of
tyme, then certaine days after, the ſpirits
and the bloud mingled together, begin to
boyle in ſuch ſorte, that there riſeth thrée
bladders like to bowels that flote in a ryuer,
which are the places wherein is formed
the thrée moſt noble parts of this ſuperbious
beaſt, the Liuer, the Heart, and
the braynes,Praiſe of the brains Hippoc. which is the moſt excellenteſt
parte of this worke, the ſeidge of all
the functions, the true fountaine of féeling,
the mouing of the moſt mightieſt
pallace of intelligence and memorie, the
right arche of reaſon. If we conſider likewiſe
by their order, the creation of all other
parts, and how they be formed, and
howe the childe being in the mothers
wombe,N. Dehā
                  pas in the contemplation of nature. beginneth to make water by the
conduct of the Nauell, and how the water
is receiued in a little ſkin or bladder, ſeparated
from the childe, ordeyned of nature
to that office, and howe he hath no

purgings by the fundement, for that he
receiueth no ſuſtenance by the mouthe,
and that the bowels and ſtomacke doeth
not yet his office, by the whiche meanes
nothing is tranſported into the lower
partes. And howe that the ſixe firſt dayes
he is as milke, the nine dayes following,
bloude, the other twelue days after, fleſh,
and the eightene dayes that followe, the
ſoule is incloſed. I know not therefore ſo
Diamond a heart which is not moued &
rauiſhed with great admiration to contē
               plate
things ſo pitiful & ſtran̄ge. And yet
this that we haue ſpoken, is very littel,
if we wil conſider more neare the things
that follow, who is it that will not maruel,
cōſidering in what maner he is nouriſhed,
and with what guiding, without
hauing the vſe of the mouth, vntill he be
borne into the world, then how much his
nature is tender, frayle and weake, in
ſuche ſort, that if the mother be neuer ſo
little hurt or ſmitten, if ſhe ſmell ye ſmoke
of a candell ſnuffe, it is enough to kill the
fruit in hir wombe. The which hath cauſed
Plinie to be waile our humaine calamities,

ſaying, I am aſhamed to conſider
how fraile the beginning is of him that
tameth all beaſts, ſéeing that oftentimes
the ſmell of a ſnuffe of candell ouercommeth
the mother. But whilſt he is in
the wombe of his mother, with what
foode is he nouriſhed, what preſeruations
hath nature prepared for him? If that his
creation hath ſéemed vnto vs ſtraunge,
no doubt his ſuſtentation will rauiſh vs
in more greate admiration, ſeing that he
is a ſubſtance of bloud, and inſtrument of
his mother. The which is ſo deteſtable
and vncleane, that I can not withoute
great horror rehearſe that which the Philoſophers
and Phiſicions haue written,
that haue treated of the ſecrets of nature.
Thoſe therefore that are curious of ſuch
things, let them reade Plinie, which hath
written thereof in his naturall hiſtorie.7. booke.
And after that he hath bene long ſubſtance
of this venim, and that he is formed
& becommeth in quantity ſufficient,
ſéeking therefore for more greater nouriſhment,
& that he cannot receyue by the
Nauell ſo much as is néedefull, by greate

paine he doeth aſſay to ſeeke ſuſtenaunce,The violence that a chile doth to nature vvhen his nine monethes are accompliſhed.
which is the occaſion that he moueth and
breaketh the panicles & ſuſtainements,
that he hath alwayes had till that tyme,
then the wombe feeling it ſelf pained, wil
kéepe him no longer in, but ſéeketh meanes
to bring him forth, and therefore it
openeth, & by the ſaid opening, the childe
féeling the atre, followeth to come forth,
and ſtraineth more and more to draw into
the world, and to enter into the light
therof, not without great violent dolors
and offence of his tender and delicate bodie.
But during the nine monethes how
great paine and torment doeth the poore
mother ſuffer and beare? Without puttyng
in coumpt ſome that during the
time that they be great, léeſe their appetite,
and couet to eate humaine fleſhe, in
ſuch ſort that we reade in ſome hiſtoriesDiuerſe appetites of vvomē vvith childe.
that the poore huſbandes haue bene conſtrained
to depart and abſent thēſelues,
others haue deſired to eate aſhes, hotte
burning coales, and other like things according
as the humors broken and depraued,
abound in their bodies. Furthermore

what anguiſhe and paine the poore mothers
ſuffer in their childings,The miſerie of pore mothers in their childings. and what
daunger they are in, it is manifeſt, ſomtimes
there are children that come forth
their arms firſt, & others their fete firſt,
others their knées firſt, and others ouerthwart.
But that which is more cruell,
and that we cannot apprehend without
horror, is, that ſometimes it is force to
cal Chirurgians, Mediciners and Barbars,
in ſtede of wiſe Matrons and Midwiues,
to diſmember the children and
pull them out by pieces, and ſometime
it behoueth to open the poore innocent
mother aliue, and put yron tooles in hir
bodie, yea to murther hir for to haue hir
fruite: ſome children are borne ſo monſter
like and deformed, that they are not
like men, but abhominable monſters:
ſome are borne with .ij. heades, and foure
legges, as one which was ſéene in the
Citie of Paris, whilſt this booke was a
making, others cleping together, as
hath bene ſéene in Fraunce, and in other
places. Two women children were

borne ioyned together by the ſhoulders,
after the one had liued a certaine time,
died and infected the other. Polydorus
writeth,Mōſtrous childings. that before that Hannibal had
chaſed Marcellus, that a womā brought
forth a childe, hauing the heade like an
Eliphant, another hauing foure féete
like a beaſt. The ſage hiſtorians doe
write, that a Courtiſan of Rome, in the
yeare of grace, fiue hundreth and eightene,
bare a child halfe a beaſt & halfe a
man. Thoſe that haue written the Indian
hiſtories, do teſtifie for a ſuretie, that
there are at this preſent, children halfe
beaſtes, by the occaſion of certaine brutiſh
men that are there. Some there are
that are borne blinde, others deafe, others
dumbe, and others there are born
lame of their limmes, for whō their parents
are ſorowfull. In ſuch ſort that if
we conſider attentiuely all the miſery
of our natiuitie, we ſhall finde the olde
Prouerbe true, which ſayth, that we are
conceyued in filth & vnclenneſſe, borne
in ſinne and care, and nouriſhed wyth

paine and labor. Here therfore you may
ſée the firſt action of the tragedie of the
life of humaines. Here you may ſée his
life and gouernement, whilſt he is incloſed
in his mothers wombe. Well,
this priſoner being once come forth of
this his maternall priſon, let vs conſider
what he is, being vpon the earth.
What? is he any other thing than the
ſimilitude of a poore worme that cōmeth
out of the earth, with what clothing is
he couered, making his moſt glorious
entrie into the pallace of this world? only
with bloud, in the which he is bathed
and couered, whiche is nothing els but
the image and figure of ſinne, which by
the bloud is ſignified in Scripture. O
grieuous neceſſitie, O cruell and miſerable
condition, that before this creature
hath ſinned, he is bond and ſeruant of
ſin. This is the bitter grape, of ye which
ſpeaketh the Prophet Ieremie, that our
fathers did eate, and their children had
yet their téeth ſet on edge, by the which
is preſented the originall ſinne. What

is the firſt ſong that man ſingeth, commyng
into this worlde, onely wepings,
teares, and bewaylings, which are as
meſſengers and foreſhewers of his calamities
to come, the which bicauſe he cā
not ſhewe by wordes, he witneſſeth by
teares and cries. And notwithſtanding,
here is ye beginning of Monarchs, Kinges,
Princes, Emperors and others,
that riſe in dignities in this worlde. The
worme be he neuer ſo little, as ſoone as
nature hath brought it out of the earth,
beginneth to craule and créepe, and to
ſeke paſture. The little Chicke as ſoone
as he is out of the ſhell, is found cleane,
and néedeth not to be waſhed as man,
he runneth after the Hen, and knoweth
when he is called he pecketh and eateth,
he feareth the Kite, without prouing before
hir malice, he flieth the daunger, only
guided by nature. But conſider man,
aſſone as he is in the worlde, is a little
fearefull monſter, & lump of fleſh, which
will let himſelf be eaten of other beaſts,
if he be not ſéene too, or die for hunger

before he can gripe his mothers breaſt,
and will aſſoone eate poyſon as any good
meat, before he can diſcerne the good frō
the euill: if he be left in his cradell, he
will be ſtiffeled in his owne doung or
filth, and is ſo vnable, that he cannot
caſte out his owne doung, and yet the
little birdes of the aire, and beaſtes can
doe it. Beholde here the perfumes and
ſwéete ſauors, with the whiche nature
hath embalmed man, and decked him
that maketh ſo great brag of Hercules,
& that nameth himſelfe chiefe head of al
other creatures.The miſerie of man that is nouriſhed by another than his mother. This miſerable creature
being once plunged in the gulfe of
miſeries, it behoueth him to haue nouriſhment
and clothing, for to comforte
the infirmitie of his nature. This office
is appointed for mothers, in conſideration
whereof, nature hath giuen them
breaſts, which are like little bottels, very
proper to that effect.Miſery of man in his nouriture. But how manye
mothers are there at this preſent, or for
to ſpeake the truth, cruell ſtepmothers,
vnto whom it ſufficeth onely, to bring

the children into this world, and for that
they wil not take a little paines to nouriſh
them, they ſend them to ſorrowfull
villages, for to be nouriſhed of ſtraunge
and vnknowen nurſes, which often times
do chaunge them, and bring home
others. Alſo they will be leſſe aſhamed
to holde a little dog in their armes, than
the fruit that they haue ingendred. The
which practiſe is not in beaſtes, be they
neuer ſo brutiſh, for they neuer put their
yong ones, in the keeping of others,
though nature giue them neuer ſo many,
but they nouriſh them themſelues,
and are ſuche zelous protectors of theyr
yong ones, that they kéepe them always
in their armes, til ſuch time as they can
auoide daunger. And that which is more
to be maruelled at, there riſeth a certain
gelouſie betwene the male and the female,
who ſhalbe the kéeper, and for that
intent they quarrell together, and fight
one with another. The whiche maye be
ſéene not only in the Apes and others,
but alſo in Beares,The Apes whiche of their nature

are fierce and cruell, and yet they
haue ſo greate affection to their yong
ones, that they are not only content to
nouriſhe them with their milke, but ſo
ſoone as they are brought forth, hauing
almoſt no forme nor facion,An example for fathers and mothers. they licke
them and pullyſhe them to make them
more perfect. Likewiſe the little Birds,
who although they haue fiue or ſixe vnder
their wings, and hauyng neyther
milke, grayne, nor other ſéede for their
ſuſtenance, notwithſtanding they ſpare
neither Arte nor diligence, wherewyth
nature hath endued them for their nouriſhment.
It is therefore a true witneſſe
of humaine miſerie, ſooing that man beginneth
ſo ſoone to be depriued of that
which to him is due, by iuſt right of nature,
being forced to ſucke the milke of
a ſtraūge woman, yea, and many times
of ſuch a one, as maye be founde beſt
cheape, what corruption or deformitie
ſo euer ſhe haue. The which many times
is ſo contagious vnto the children, that
it were better for them to be nouriſhed

of ſome brute beaſt in the wilderneſſe,
than to be put into the mercie of ſuche
nurſes, for not onely the bodye remayneth
infected and marred, as by antiquitie,
the experience hathe bene in Titus,
ſonne to Veſpaſian, and many others,
the which as writeth Lampridus, was
all the dayes of his life ſubiect to infirmities
and ſickneſſes, for that he was
nourſed of one ſubiect to ſickneſſe. But
that worſe is, when that there remayneth
ſome ſpot or crime in the ſoules of
this vicious nourſing, as Dion ye greke
writeth, in the ſeconde booke of Ceſars,
when he maketh mention of Caligula,
the fourth Emperour of Rome, the cruelties
and infamies of whome, was not
imputed to father or mother, but to the
nurſe that gaue him ſucke, the which being
cruell or barbarous of hir ſelfe, rubbed
the endes of hir breaſts with bloud,
cauſing the childe, to whome ſhe gaue
milke, to ſucke them. The which thing
was afterward ſo well practiſed of him,
that he did not only commit an infinite

number of murthers,The vncredible crueltie of Caligula. but he lycked
hys ſworde and hys dagger wyth hys
toung, beyng bathed and ſtained with
bloud, and wiſhed that al the world had
but one head, to the ende that with one
blow he might beheads them and raigne
alone vpon the earth. Seing then that
the childe hath not felt or ſuffered ſorow
inough in his mothers wombe, as ſoone
as he is borne, there is prepared for him
new ſorrow, by the ingratitude of mothers,
which are ſo delicate and tender
themſelues, that they will not nouriſh
them, but cauſe them to ſucke the milke
of thoſe that oftentimes chaunge their
fruite, or els féede them with milke vicious
and depraued, by the which meanes
in proceſſe of time there riſeth a number
of diſeaſes, as the Poxe, the Leproſie,
and other like, as many Phiſitiōs haue
declared, to the great hurt of poore children,
and continuall infamie of their
mothers, for this is of a truth, that if the
nurſe be frowarde, or ſubiect to drunkenneſſe,
or otherwiſe of maners depraued,

the childe ſhall be frowarde, not by
the receiuing of the milke, but with oftē
looking vpon them, if ſhe be a drunkerd,
ſhe will cauſe the childe to be the like,
as it is read in the life of the Emperor
Tiberius, who was a great drunkerd,
for that the nurſe that gaue him ſucke,
did not only drinke vnmeaſurably, but
alſo ſhe gaue the childe ſoppes tempered
in wine.Cardan in his booke De ſubtilitate. Here you may ſée, that the
nurſes haue ſo muche power, as to reforme
the maners and bodie of ye childe.
So that if ſhe be ſickly, ſhe rendreth the
childe ſicklye, if ſhe be wicked, ſhe cauſeth
the childe alſo to be wicked. Leaue
we him therefore in the protection and
kéeping of his nurſe. In howe manye
daungers is he wrapped, whilſt that he
is a nurſing, what paine and diſpleaſure
haue they, which in the mean time haue
the charge of them, ſome will crie all
the night long, ſo that their nurſes can
take no reſt, ſome when they can ſcant
go, will fall and breake their faces, and
their lims, ſo that many times there is

ſéene manye woundes and ſores aboute
them, without putting in coumpt many
diſeaſes, which they take of the corruption
of their parents. But who is not aſtonied,
to ſée the fantaſtical workings
of this little childe, the which for ye moſt
part ceaſeth not to dabble in the water,
like a little frog, maketh little houſes of
earth, counterfeiteth the horſman in riding
on a little ſticke, runneth after
dogs and cats, wil be angry with ſome,
and pleaſed with others, who woulde
thinke that ſuch a miſerable creature ſo
vile and abiect, being couered with ſo
manye maledictions, by ſucceſſion
of time woulde be come ſo proude and
loftie. The which being profoundly conſidered
by the tragicall Poet Euripides
writeth after this ſort.
            
               The birth of children we may lament & weepe,
               For to be borne in miſerie ſo deepe.
               Which being deade, they muſt be laid in graue,
               With ſobs & teares, this doth our nature craue,
               Wherfore ſerueth life always poſſeſt with paine
               Or light to them, whom nature doth diſdaine?
            
            
               
But much more worthily,Roland Peter in the traduction of bookes of the nature of man. and with an
other zeale, the great celeſtiall Prophet
Iob made the like complaint, when he
had his rigorous combats or reaſonings
with God, ſaying:
            
               Remember Lord how thou haſt made me weak,
               Euen as a Potter hath made an earthen pot,
               The which he may transforme and alſo breake,
               And turned me to cruds like Cheeſe I wot,
               Thou haſt alſo turned me like to milke,
               Clade eke with ſkin, with members compaſſed,
               With bones and ſinewes, and fleſh as ſoft as ſilk,
               Repleniſhed with life, and wit eſtabliſhed,
               So that I liue vnder thy godly ſcope,
               where thou doeſt noriſh me to a more better hope.
            
            If then the great Prophet Ieremie
hath bewailed by great compaſſion the
common weale, being captiue in Babilon,
and if Anchiſes hath lamented the
deſtruction of Troie, the Conſull Marcellus
the citie of Siracuſa when he ſawe
it on fier, and Saluſt the corruption of
Rome: We may wel with ſo many men
of fame bewaile the miſerable entrie
that man maketh into this worlde, hys

aduauncement, and perillous conuerſation,
& his ſorowfull and ſtrong departure,
which being profoundly conſidered
by the Prophet Eſaye doth bewaile hys
birth,Eſay. ix. and murmureth againſt his knees
that helde him vp, and alſo the breaſtes
that gaue him ſuck. Likewiſe,Iere. xx. the Prophet
Ieremie being pricked with the
like ſpirite, and conſidering that man
is made of the moulde of the earth, conceyued
in ſinne, borne in payne, and at
the laſt made a praye for wormes, doeth
wiſhe that his mothers wombe had ſerued
for his tombe. But let vs take a little
héede at the moſt excellent anotamie
that the holie Prophet Ioh maketh, whē
he ſayth:Iob. xiii. Man that is born of a woman
hath but a ſhort time to liue, and is full
of miſerie, he commeth vp and is cutte
downe like a flower, he flieth as it were
a ſhadowe, and neuer continueth in one
ſtate. Now let vs gather ſomewhat out
of theſe wordes, and lay the weight and
authoritie to eche one of his ſentences,
and we ſhall find that all the heatheniſh

Philoſophie is but dreames and ſmoke,
to the regarde of that of the ſpirite of
God, when that he will enſtruct man to
humble and knowe himſelfe, as appeareth,
when that he calleth him (mā born
of a woman) hath he ſaide that without a
cauſe? no, for among all the creatures
whome God hath created, there is not
one more ſubiect to miſeries and infirmities
than a woman, eſpeciallye thoſe
that are fruitfull, for they haue ſcant a
monethes reſt in a whole yere, but that
they are continually ouercome with ſorow
and feare. Then he ſayth (hauing a
ſhort time to liue) what is more ſhorter
than the life of mā, vnto whom in ſtopping
his noſe and his mouth, the life is
gone, for his life is nothing but a little
blaſte of winde incloſed therein. The
which being conſidered by Theophraſtus,
               A complaint of Theophraſtus, for that the life of beaſtes is longer than the life of man.
and manye others, murmured againſt
nature, whiche had giuen the benefite
of long life to Hartes, Rauens,
and other foules, aud beaſtes, vnto whō
the life brought no profit, and vnto mā,

King of all things vpon earth, hath giuen
ſo ſhort life, althoughe he knoweth
howe to employe his time, and yet the
little time that he hath, is ſhortned by
ſléepes, dreams, angers, cares, and other
indignations, in ſuche ſorte that if we
ſhoulde recken al, there reſteth nothing
leſſe than life. Then the Prophet compareth
man to a ſhadowe, what is thys
ſhadow? anye other thing than an outwarde
ſhew, that deceiueth the ſight of
man, a phancie, a falſe figure, without
ſubſtance, the which ſometimes ſéemeth
to be greate, and incontinently little.
Euen ſo it is wyth man, the whiche
ſometimes ſéemeth to be ſomewhat, and
neuertheleſſe, of himſelfe is nothing.
For whē that he is elected moſt higheſt,
and when that he is in the higheſt degrée
of honor, then ſodenly he periſheth,
ſo that no man knoweth where he is become,
no more than a ſhadowe when the
night is come, and to him it chaunceth
as the Prophet Dauid ſayth: I haue ſéen
the wicked, mightie and flouriſhing as

the gréene Bay, and I haue paſſed by,
and he was gone. I haue ſought him,
but he was not to be found.
            We haue here ſhewed as much as is
poſſible, by howe many perillous daungers
man hath his firſt comming forth
into this worlde. Nowe therfore let vs
conſider a little, what he is when he
is ſprōg vp, let vs ſée whether that there
is any end of his miſeries. But if we be
equitable Iudges, we ſhal finde that rather
he doth encreaſe his miſeries, for it
is the ſeaſon wherein nature doth reare
agaynſte him a more furious combat,
his bloud beginneth to riſe, the fleſh prouoketh
him to his owne pleaſure, the
ſenſualitie doth lead him, the malicious
worlde eſpieth him, the diuell tempteth
him, ſo that it is impoſſible, but that he
which is aſſailed with ſo manye vices, &
ſuccoured of none, in the ende is diſcomfited
and ouercome, for in the bodye in
youth, riot, libertie, richeſſe, and deliciouſneſſe,
aboundeth all the vices in the
world, ſaith Marcus Aurelius, and there

plant their ſiege. It ſufficeth not onely
this miſerable creature, Man, to be noriſhed
with ſtraunge milke, but alſo he
muſt be conſtrained to receiue inſtructions
of others than of his parents.A complaint of fathers that commit their children to ignorant and vicious tutors. For
there are fewe Catoes that will take the
pains to inſtruct their children, they are
forced to proue the ſeueritie of maſters,
for to teach them the beginning of Arts
& ſciences, ſeing that there is no ground
be it neuer ſo fruitful & luckye, but will
be vnfruitfull, if it be not diligently laboured,
and the more fruitfull and fatter
it is, the more wéedes and Darnell
it will bring forth: Alſo the more that the
childe is wakened, the more peril there
is, leaſt he ſtraye, it behoueth when the
trées are yong to vpholde them, and to
cut the ouerweightie braunches, if that
afterwarde ye pretende to gather anye
fruit. Likewiſe it is neceſſarie to reform
and correct the vices that raigne in
youth, leaſt that afterwarde it returne
to the parents ignominie and reproch.
But there are at this day manie fathers

and mothers, which for defaulte not to
haue well inſtructed their children in
their youth, in ſteade of reſt and conſolation,
and eate their breade in theyr
age, with ſorrow. Moreouer there are
many mothers, whiche in ſteade of giuing
them good and godlye inſtructions
in their youth, intertaine and nouriſhe
them in volupteouſneſſe and deliciouſneſſe,
but though they are nouriſhers of
their bodies, yet are they deſtroyers of
their ſoules. And if Heli was grieuouſly
puniſhed with his children,An ill example of fathers tovvardes their children. for that he
did not chaſtice them ſo ſharply as their
offences did requier: what ſhal become
of thoſe fathers and mothers, which in
ſteade of correctors of their children, are
their corruptors? and theſe kinde of parents
are compared to Apes, which kyll
their yong ones by too muche ſtraining
them betwene their armes, and kéeping
them ſo deare, and this is the cauſe that
ſo many fall into the hands of the hang
man, which are to them reformers and
correctors. The auncient Romaines had

thoſe parentes in ſo greate deteſtation
which did not correct their children, that
they did ordein and ſtabliſh a law which
was called Fatidia. By the which it was
ordeined, that for the firſt attempt the
ſaid Law ſhould be ſhewed the child, for
the ſeconde time he ſhould be corrected,
and the thirde time hanged, and the father
to be baniſhed, as for default of giuing
chaſticement to their childrē, they
were partakers of their euill. But I
would gladly demaund what thoſe auncient
Romaines would doe, if they ſaw
the pitiful eſtate of many of oure common
weales, with what Irons, with
what bondes or torments woulde they
beate downe the fathers and mothers?
who in the ſteade of giuing good exhortations
to their familie, and to ſhew thē
ſelues the firſt examples of vertue to
their children, before that they ſend thē
to be inſtructed, they them ſelues doe
breake and depraue thē by their naughty
and wicked examples. For the firſte
precept that they giue them how to liue

well,Many mothers make the ropes vvherevvith their children are hanged. is to blaſpheme, crie, exerciſe gluttony
and drunkennes, to diſpiſe the ſubſtance
of their innocency, to be a fornicator?
and to kiſſe women and maidens
in their preſence. And manye mothers
there are this daye in the worlde, which
doe as Herodias did, that learne theyr
daughters to daunce, Rethoricke termes,
to haunt companies, ſcoffe & flout,
to paint and plaiſter their faces, to deck
their fingers with rings, & their neckes
with Iuels, as though they were Iuell
ſellers pretending to kéepe a ſhop. But
in the ende it will chaunce to them as it
chaunced to the Prophet Dauid, whoſe
ſinne was puniſhed by his children,
which were ſo wicked, that one of them
named Aman did deflowre his owne ſiſter
Thamar: and the other called Abſalon
did kill hys brother Aman. Afterwarde
he ſought the death of hys
owne father, and chaſed him out of hys
kingdome. The rule of the auncient
Philoſophers hath alwayes bene found
true, that many committe manye grieuous

crimes in this world, y• puniſhing
wherof, God kepeth in the other worlde,
except the ſinne that man committeth
in the bringing vp of his children, for
the whiche cuſtomablye he beareth the
paine and puniſhment in this worlde.
For the father can giue to the child but
fraile and mortall fleſhe, by the corruption
whereof, the life taketh end, but by
good learning and knowledge, the eternall
praiſe and memorie redoundeth.
Therefore to conclude, if that the children
haue hene in great perill and miſery,
being nouriſhed with ſpotted milk,
for the moſt part of ſtraūge nurſes, yet
the perill doubleth to thoſe that ſhoulde
cauſe them to be inſtructed, for that the
foode of the bodie is more vile than the
foode of the ſoule. But for bicauſe that
we haue not yet ſpoken of Plato who
hath more deuinelye philoſophied vpon
humaine calamities, than all the reſt of
the heathen, the whiche he hath ſo well
gathered together and ſet forth, that
many reading his booke of the immortalitie

of the ſoule, did caſt them ſelues
from the hie rockes and mountains into
the flouds and raging waues, to the
ende, that ending the thréede of their
ſpitefull life, they might haue the fruitiō
and ioye of the ſeconde life, which is the
true and aſſured place of reſt.
            This greate Philoſopher Plato, in a
Dialogue that he hath made of death,
and diſcourſe of this wicked world, writeth
to a certaine Philoſopher named
Socrates, and ſheweth by a maruellous
eloquence, the miſeries of our life, as
followeth. Knoweſt thou not (ſayth he)
that this humayne lyfe is as a pilgrimage,
the whiche the good and wiſe men
performe in ioye, ſinging with gladnes,
when that of neceſſitie they drawe to
their laſt end. Doeſt thou not know that
man conſiſteth of the ſoule, the which is
ſhut vp within, as in a tabernacle, with
the which nature hath incloſed vs, not
wythout great troubles and vexations:
and yet in the meane time, if ſhe deſtribute
vnto vs any part of hir goods, they

are hidden from vs, and are of a ſhorte
time, ioyned with ſorrowe and bitterneſſe,
at the occaſion whereof, the ſoule
féeling dolor and griefe, deſireth the celeſtiall
habitation, and wiſheth for the
benefites thereof. Conſider that the departure
out of this worlde, is no other
thing than a chaunging from euill to
good. But harken, ſayth he, from thy natiuitie
vnto thy graue what kinde of miſterie
is there but that thou haſt taſted,
eyther penurie, colde, heate, ſtripes. &c.
yea, before that man can ſhewe his cogitations
and thoughtes. What other
meſſenger or more certaine token can
he haue of his miſeries, than his wéepings,
wailings and complaintes, after
that he hath taſted ſo many euils, & that
he is come to the ſeauenth yeare of his
age: then it behoueth him to haue tutors
and ſcholemaiſters for to inſtruct him in
good learning: growing further in yeares,
and comming into his adoleſcency,
it behoueth him to haue more rigorous
reformers for to tame his wilde youth,

and to breake him to labor. This being
done, his beard beginneth to grow, and
then he becommeth man, and yet notwithſtanding,
it is then the time that he
entreth into déeper cogitations and trauaile
in the ſpirite: it is requiſite then
that he frequent publike places, that he
haunt the company of thoſe that are as
touchſtones for to knowe the good from
the euill. If he be come of a greate and
noble ſtocke, he muſt make many enterpriſes
of warre, to put himſelfe in infinite
perils, hazarde his life, to ſhed hys
bloud for to die in the bed of honor, or
els he ſhall be reputed a daſtardlye coward,
and deſpiſed of all men. If he be of
baſe eſtate, and that he be called to the
knowledge of Artes, for all that he leaueth
not to runne into a thouſand daū
               gers,
trauailes, paines, and lettings, aſwel
of the bodie as of the ſoule. He trauaileth
daye and night, and ſweateth
water and bloude, for to get againe that
which ſhall maintaine his eſtate during
his life, and oftentimes it is ſéene what

paine ſo euer man doth take for his liuing,
he can ſcant get to ſerue his neceſſitie.
It is not therefore without a
cauſe that Marcus Aurelius theA notable ſentence of Marcus Aurelius vpon humain miſeries. . xvij.
Emperour of Rome, conſidering the
miſerable condition of oure humanitie,
was wont to ſaye, I haue thought
in my ſelfe whether there myght be
founde any eſtate, anye age, any kingdome
or any worlde, wherin might be
founde anye one man, that dare vaunt
not to haue taſted in hys lyfe time aduerſitie,
and if there might be founde
one, it ſhoulde be ſuche a fearfull monſter
on the earth, that bothe the deade
& the liuing woulde be amaſed to behold
him, then he concludeth after this ſort,
ſaying: And in the ende I founde mine
owne account true, that he that was yeſterdaye
riche, was to day poore, he that
was yeſterday in helth, was to day ſick,
he that laughed yeſterday, to daye did
weepe, he that was yeſterday in proſperitie,
was to daye in aduerſitie, he that
was yeſterday aliue, was to day deade.

Let vs now return to our former wordes,
and deduct the great things by the
leſſe. Who is he among the humaines,
that hath giuen himſelfe to any ſcience,
or otherwiſe to liue, whoſe ſcience hath
not in the ende accuſed him, and with
the whiche he hath not bene diſpleaſed,
combered and werie? and for the better
triall therof, let vs conſider particularly
the principall eſtates.The miſerie of thoſe that ſaile on the ſea. Let vs beginne
with thoſe that occupie the water, and
ſayle on the ſeas, in howe many daungers
are they in day and night? what is
their habitation? any other than a foule
and filthy priſon, as alſo their maner of
liuing? what is their raiment but only
a verye ſmell of the wether? they are alwayes
vagabondes, and continually in
exile, without anye reſt, beaten with
windes, raine, haile, ſnowe, in feare of
Pirats and Rouers, rockes and tempeſtes,
and in hazarde to be buried in the
bellies of fiſhes. For this cauſe it is that
Bias ye wiſe Philoſopher Gréeke knewe
not whether he ſhould recken theſe kind

of people among the terreſtrial or aquitall
ſort, & doubted whether ye he ſhould
number them among the liuing or among
the deade. And another named Anacharſis,
ſayde that they were no further
from death than the bredth of .iij. or
ij. fingers, euen ſo much as the wood
contained in thicknes, in the which they
ſailed. And if that their life ſéemeth vnto
vs cruell,A praiſe of huſbā
                  drie for the better ſhevving of the miſeries that follovv. what greater ſwéeteneſſe
thinke we to finde in huſbandrie, and in
the labor of the ruſticall ſort, the whiche
at the firſt ſéemeth vnto vs ſwéete, lucky,
peaceable, ſimple and innocent, alſo
that many Patriarkes and Prophetes,
haue choſen this kind of liuing, as that
in which there is leaſt guile and deceit,
and alſo that many Romain Emperors
haue in times paſt left their Pallaces,
Capitols, Arkes, triumphes, glorious
and faire buildings, and Empires, with
all the reſt of their worldly maieſtie, for
to remaine in the fields, to til and labor
the earth, trées and gardens, as we read
of Diocleſian, Attallus, Cirus, Conſtantinus

Ceſar, and others, but thoſe that
will conſider theſe things more nearer,
they will ſaye that among theſe Roſes,
there are a great many thornes. This
being true, that God hauing driuen mā
out of Paradiſe, ſent him into the earth,
as to a place of exile, and ſaid vnto him,
the earth ſhalbe curſed for thy ſake, thou
ſhalt eate therof in trauel and paine all
the dayes of thy life. For ſhe ſhall bring
forth thornes, wéedes, and thiſtels, and
thou ſhalt eate the hearbes of the field,
in the ſweate of thy face ſhalt thou eate
thy bread till thou be turned againe to
earth, out of the which thou waſt taken.
But alas who hath more experimented
or taſted this which God hath ſpoken,
than the poore labourers or huſbandmen,
who manye times after that they
haue labored, ſowed, & tilled the ground,
trauelled all the daye long, endured extreme
heate of the ſunne, the rigor of
the colde, ſometimes bitings or ſtingings
of venemous ſerpentes or wormes,
ſweated bloude and water, all the

yeare long, for to dreſſe the earth theyr
nurſe, hoping to gather the fruites, and
ſodenly behold a haile, a froſt, a tempeſt,
a thunder or lightning, that will ſodenly
defraud thē of all their hope. To one,
his ſhéepe and Oxen die: to another,
whilſt that he is labouring in the fields,
the men of war and ſouldiers come and
rauiſh that which he hath, in ſuch ſorte
that when he returneth to his houſe, in
ſteade of receiuing conſolation and finding
reſt, his wife bewaileth, his children
crieth out, al his familie lamenteth
and crieth out for hunger, to be ſhort, it
is no other thing than a griefe and a
wounde, hauing a continuall cauſe of
dolor, which ſodenly complaineth of one
thing, incontinently of another, now of
the rain,Plato. then of ye great drith, alſo of the
winds and tempeſts, but aboue all, the
men of war, with a company of other
griefs, figured in forme of a complaint
by a (Da pacem) the which a friende o
                  •
               
mine made me this other day: the tennor
wherof hereafter followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        A complaint of the pore
huſbandmen in Meeter,
made vpon, Da pacem Domine
in diebus noſtris. &c.
                        
                           O God whom no man can gaine ſay,
                           thou knoweſt if that I lie,
                           That neither horſe nor mare is left
                           to whom then ſhal I crie?
                        
                        
                           DaGiue
                           
                           But vnto thée O Lord and King,
                           which doeſt bring things to paſſe,
                           The vengeance therfore that I craue
                           is to giue vs and them alas,
                        
                        
                           pacempeace
                           
                           The peace which is ſo neceſſarie
                           giue vs, this I thinke beſt,
                           Yet if thou wilt puniſh mankinde
                           thou haſt good cauſe and maiſt.
                        
                        
                           Domine,O Lorde,
                           
                           Our fathers that before haue bene
                           though in the worlde they were,
                           The like wickednes haue neuer ſéene
                           as we which now are here.
                        
                        
                        
                           in diebus noſtris,in our dayes,
                           
                           In labor and in trauell great
                           with face arayed with ſweate.
                           This thrée dayes haue I laboured,
                           yet I and mine want meate.
                        
                        
                           quia non eſtbicauſe ther is no
                           
                           I haue planted, ſowed, & cut my vines,
                           I haue hedged and dungde my land,
                           For to giue foode vnto my babes,
                           but who cā their furious foes weſtād?
                        
                        
                           aliusother
                           
                           Not one alone doth me moleſt,
                           but I am aſſailed-day by day:
                           As well of theeues as men of war
                           my goods to them are made a pray.
                        
                        
                           quithat
                           
                           Our ſhéepe and lambes they do deſtroy,
                           our calues they kill ech one,
                           Such men they are that vs annoy,
                           helpe thou O God alone.
                        
                        
                           pugnetfighteth
                           
                           Alas it is a wofull caſe
                           among vs men of huſbandrye
                           When ſouldiers that go to the warres,
                           rob vs as they go by.
                        
                        
                        
                           pro nobis,for vs,
                           
                           O my Creator, when I do thinke
                           on thy bountie, comfort I craue,
                           Knowing that of the wrong that I doé beare
                           of them no recōpence I haue.
                        
                        
                           niſi tubut onely thou
                           
                           In worldlings for to put my truſt,
                           no, there is no reliefe,
                           In them there is no helpe at all,
                           but in thée my hope moſt chiefe,
                        
                        
                           DeusO God.
                           
                           When pilferie ſhall ceaſe
                           when reaſon and good policie
                           In iuſtice ſhall take place,
                           then the good time ſhall be.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Leaue we theſe poore huſbandmen
with their miſeries and trauels,Miſerie of merchantes, vvith a plaine diſcourſe of their fraudes & deceites. and penitrate
more forward. Let vs ſee what is
done in the trade of merchandiſe, if we
doe conſider it externely or outwardly,
it ſéemeth voyde from miſeries, and a
promiſe of reſt, for the richeſſe in whiche
it aboundeth, alſo for that Plinie ſayth,
it was inuented for the neceſſitie of life,

and that many wiſe men, as one Thalus,
one Solon, & Hippocratus haue exerciſed
it, & alſo that it is an occaſion to
kéepe Princes in peace and vnity, tranſporting
from one citie to another, that
which aboundeth in the one, and lacketh
in the other, but we cannot ſo wel cloke
it, but that ye eye may wel ſée, how much
the life of Merchaunts is vnquiet, and
to how many daungers they are ſubiect
continually as well by lande as by ſea,
without putting in accompt, that for the
moſt part of their time they are as Fugitiues
and Vagabondes from their
townes and countries, and they ſéeme
litle to differ from baniſhed, ſauing that
their baniſhment is willingly, for that
they flie, runne aud burne by ſea and by
land, by fiers and flames, for a couetous
heate of an vnmeaſurable gaine, and
they are contented to be depriued of reſt
& eaſe that they ought to receiue of their
owne wines and children, lands, & poſſeſſions,
& to be at al times in hazard of
their liues by a thouſande meanes and

ways, that are for them prepared of Pirats
and others, and al for an vnſatiable
auarice, that doth daily torment them,
not forgetting how they do periure thē
               ſelues,
beguile and deceiue their neighbor,
in ſuch ſort, that with great payne
any vſing ye trade can be made rich, but
by beguiling of others,Corruption of the eſtate of Merchants. & haue in their
common prouerb, ȳ they néede but turn
their back a while to God, and enlarge
a little the entrie of their conſcience, for
to be riche, and ſurmount fortune, to the
which we maye adde many other euils
and maledictions, that depende theron,
when that they bring vnprofitable merchādiſe
out of ſtraunge coūtries, which
are not neceſſarie for our humaine life,
but only to entertaine women and children
in pride, pomp, and vaine glory, as
thoughe oure nature were not inough
ſubiect to wantonneſſe and delicateneſſe
of it ſelf, without pricking or prouoking
it any more, & in the meane tyme there
is no Realme nor Prouince, but that
they begger of monye with their newe

knacks, and that worſe is, hauing learned
the maners and orders of ſtraunge
countries, they vſe it in the ſale of their
merchandiſe, and therwith deceiue and
beguile vs. They make their aſſemblies,
counſels and aſſiſes, and haue Burſes,
wheras the Merchants and Brokers ſel
vnto the Retailers, yt which is naught,
and the Retailers vtter it to vs, & therewith
beguile and deceyue vs. Alſo ſometimes
the daunger is greate, for vnder
the colour of their trade and trafficke,
they haue intelligence wyth ſtraunge
and forren Princes, and vtter to them
our ſecrets, lend them monie, and in the
ende they betraye and ſell their natiue
countrie and commō weales, the which
we in Fraunce haue knowē and taſted,
within theſe few yeares, to the loſſe and
detriment of manye people. I leaue to
ſpeake of a thouſande other fraudes and
deceytes, when that they mingle and
chaunge their drugs, on the which many
times the life of men doeth depende.
Notwithſtanding, ſuch is the order of

their ſcience, and alſo they inſtruct their
ſeruāts & factors, in their youth to do the
like, and thoſe that haue the moſt ſubtilleſt
& ſharpeſt wit, they encreaſe their
wages, to thoſe ſpecially, yt can beſt forſweare
thēſelues, tell a faire tale with
their tongue, or counterfet y• Genoway,
the Italian, the Florentine, or ye Venetian,
and things are brought into ſo pitifull
eſtate, that one dare not go out of
a ſhop, after that he hath offred a certain
price, but when he retourneth, incontinently
he ſhall find the ware chaunged,
by theſe yong théeues which haue no cō
               ſcience
but gage their ſoule to the diuel,
for to enrich their maiſters. There
is yet another kinde of Merchantes, of
whome as yet we haue not ſpoken of,
the whych decke their ſhops with other
mens goods, and vnder the colour to
make ſome great trade of merchandiſe,
borowe here of one, & there of another,
beguiling their creditors, & after that by
ſuch meanes they haue gotten and robbed
frō other men a great ſum or value,

then become they bankroutes, and get
thē to ſome other land or country, wheras
they liue at their eaſe, of that whiche
they haue gotten by fraude and diſceite
of others, ſo that ſometimes they leaue
their creditors in ſuche pouertie, that
there hath bene ſome that haue hanged
themſelues with their owne handes, ſeing
themſelues fruſtrate of that whiche
they thought to haue bene as ſure of, as
if it had ben in their purſes. The which
things being déepelye conſidered by the
Athenians, woulde not permit nor ſuffer
that Merchants ſhould dwell among
other Citizens, but ordeyned them certaine
places, ſeparated from the Cities,
whereas they did vſe and occupye theyr
trade. Alſo there hath bene many auncient
common weales, wheras Merchantes
haue not bene elected into dignities
and offices, nor admitted into the counſell
of the Citizens, and other members
of the Citie, as in like caſe the Eccleſiaſtical
fathers haue oftentimes condemned
them in manye places of their writings,

as S. Iohn Chriſoſtome, and S.
Auguſtine that ſay that it is hard for thē
to pleaſe God, or to be penitent for their
ſinnes.
            Let vs conſider a little the tragicall
life and ſeruitude of thoſe that frequent
the warres,The miſerie of men of vvar. the whiche is ſo cruell and
ſtraunge, that brute beaſtes doe abhorre
it, for they reſt the night time in their
caues and dennes made in the earth, but
the ſouldiers waketh for the moſt part,
and endureth rayne, hayle, ſnowe, hunger,
colde and heate, and when that he
heareth the ſorowfull ſigne of battell,I haue treated of this more at large in a treatiſe the laſt yeare, of peace and vvar. he
muſt prepare him ſelfe either ſuddenlye
death, or els to kill & murther his neighbour,
ſo that for a Monethes wages, he
maketh his body a fence or bulwarke againſt
the ſhot of a gunne, in ſuch ſorte
that among all the miſeries in the world
there is none equall or like to the ſouldiers.
But wilt thou knowe how pitifull
the ſpectacle of the war is? haſte thou at
any time ſéene the conflict of the Liō and
of the Beare, or of anye other furious

beaſts together? What a crueltie it is to
ſée them rent and teare one another, but
how much more abhominable is it to ſée
man againſt mā, furious and woode, raging
like a brute beaſte, for to exerciſe
his rage againſt his neighbour, without
put in account an infinite number of
harmes that hang theron, it is the poore
people that hathe edefied and builded ſo
many faire Cities, it is they that haue
miniſtred vnto them by the ſweate of
their labor, and by their diligence hath
enriched, fortified and maintained thē.
But behold, euen in their preſence they
are ſpoyled and ouerthrowne, their cattell
taken away, their corne cut downe
out of time, the poore labourers killed
& murthered, townes and villages burned,
all is in feare and continuall torment,
there is no houſhold, but wéepeth
and lamenteth, their huſbandrie decays
and waxeth colde, the poore people that
are diſherited are conſtrayned to faſt
and to die for hunger, or els haue theyr
refuge to Artes vnlawful, and defended

for to ſuſtaine their poore life, virgins
are defloured, the chaſt matrons remain
barren in their houſes, good lawes decay,
humanity is defaced, equitie is ſuppreſſed,
the Region is left waſte, holye
places are prophaned, the poore old men
remaine captiues, and oftentimes they
ſée their childrē ſlaine before their faces,
there is found an infinit number of widowes,
as manye orphelins: Kings,
Princes and Monarchs are enuied for
the great ſubſidies and taxes, that they
leuell on their ſubiectes, nothing but
murmurings and hatreds, the ſtraunger
muſt be entertained to get hys good
will & fauor, there muſte be made great
diſpenſations, for thoſe that prepare thē
ſelues to the warre, be it by ſea or by
land, bulwarkes muſt be fortified, rampiers
made, dreſſing of tents, halling to
the camp, gunnes, armor, and charets,
filling of diches, keping of watche and
warde, with other like exerciſes of war.
Alas was it not inough, that nature had
created man ſo miſerable and abiect, and

ſubiect to ſo manye euils, but that ſhe
muſt adde vnto him the warre,The harmes that come by vvarre. which of
it ſelfe is an euill ſo ſtraunge and pernicious,
that it comprehendeth in it ſelf,
and ſurmounteth all other kinde of euils,
and alſo of it ſelfe is ſo peſtilent
and contagious, that it afflicteth not only
the wicked, but alſo, yea and moſt of
all, the poore and innocent? But if that
our rage and crueltie were extended vpon
the Heathen, and thoſe that knowe
not God, then might the victory be a cō
               tentation
to the victor. But good God,
ſhall we ſhewe wherein the glories and
triumphes of warres among Chriſtian
Princes doth conſiſt? Their health and
conſeruation is the decay and ruine of
their neighbor: their richeſſe is the ſpoylings
of the poore and others, their ioys
is the mournings and bewaylings of others,
and yet many times their victorie
can not be ſo happie, but that bothe the
vanquiſher and the ouercommed, maye
wepe and lamente. For there was neuer
battell ſo luckie, but that the vanquiſher

at the laſt doth repent, if he be
touched with any ſparke of humanitie.
The whiche the Heathen haue acknowledged
and confeſſed by their owne proper
witneſſing, as alſo the great Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, the which after
manye glorious victories obtained againſt
his enimies, as he receyued hys
triumphe at Rome, féeling in his hearte
the worng that he had don to his neighbor,
began to crie out when that he was
conducted to his chaire of triumph, ſaying:
what more greater follie or vanity
may an Emperor of Rome haue, for bicauſe
he hath conquered many townes,
ſtirred thoſe that were at reſt, deſtroyed
Cities, raſed ſtrong houlds, robbed the
poore, enriched tyrants, made an infinite
number of orphelines & widowes, and
in recompence of al theſe harmes, he is
receyued with triumphe and magnificence,
many are deade, and manye haue
trauelled and taken paines, but one alone
beareth the glorie. Then he addeth
theſe wordes: by the immortall Gods,

when I was brought to Rome in ſuch a
triumph, and ſaw the poore captiues in
yron bandes and chaines, I powred out
the widdowes lamentations, I ſawe an
infinite number of treaſure ill gotten,
then I remembred them deade, I reioyced
outwardlye, but inwardlye I wept
teares of bloud, & began to crie againſte
Rome after this ſort, come hither Rome
why reioyceſt thou at the wrongs of others?
art thou of more antiquitie than
Babilon, more fairer than Helena, more
richer thā 
               Carthage, more ſtronger thā
               Troie, better peopled than Thebes, better
compaſſed with ſhips than Corinth,
more delicious than Tyre, more happier
than Numantia,
               The chriſtian philoſophie of a heathen. all the whiche are periſhed,
clad with ſo many vertues, and kepers
of ſo many vertuous, yet thou hopeſt
to remaine for euer, ſtuffed vp with
ſo manye vices, and people ſo vilde and
vicious.A notable diſcourſe. Beleue one thing of a ſuretie,
that the glorie that is at this howre of
thee, hath firſt bene of thoſe, and the deſtruction
that hath come vpon them ſhal

likewiſe come vpon thée. O what philoſophie,
what holineſſe, what oracles,
and what prophecie is founde in a Heathen
man, which had no knowledge of
the Euangelicall light? May not we be
aſhamed that haue bene nouriſhed at a
better ſchole, and illuminated with the
grace of the holy ghoſt, that this Pagan
ſhall riſe at the daye of iudgement, and
condemne vs, that make ſuch hauock of
humaine bloud? ſéeing that the war hath
alredy for many yeres paſt diſquieted ye
Chriſtiā weale, ſo that with great pain
can be found at this day, any Region in
Europe, but that is ſtaind with humain
bloud, neither ſea nor riuer, but y• hath
bene chaūged red.The crueltie of ſouldiers. Gaudentius Meruleus murthered in the Churche. 
               Helericus King of the
Gothes, hauing in time paſte deſtroyed
Rome (as Paulus Oroſeus ſheweth, that
flouriſhed in his time) cauſed to be proclaimed
with the ſounde of a trumpet,
that they ſhoulde not moleſt nor hurre
thoſe that were fled into the temple of
S. Peter and S. Paule. But things are
come to ſuche deſolation in oure age,

that there is no ſanctuarie nor ſauegard
in temples nor holie places, but y• poore
maidēs and wiues haue bene violated,
and the poore ſhepe of Ieſus Chriſt haue
bene ſtaine and murthered, ſo mad are
men without ſparing aged kind or dignitie,
but they ſacrifice all, ſo that it ſeemeth
that they will fight to ouerthrowe
nature it ſelfe, ſo that in the ende it wil
come to paſſe (if that God prouide not
remedie) that the publicke weales ſhall
be peopled with wild beaſtes or trées, for
by littel and littel the world waxeth deſert.
But what is the cauſe that we are
ſo prompt and enclined to looſe and decay
thoſe, for the preſeruation of which,
our ſauiour Chriſt was willing to die:
but why are we ſo deſirous of their life
and bloud,A compariſon of the vvarre of men, and the vvar of beaſtes. ſeing Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhed
his for to preſerue and ſaue vs all. But
at the leaſt, why haue not we ſo muche
compaſſion one of another, as the brute
beaſtes haue, the which ſhew not theyr
rage and crueltie one againſt another,
or if by fortune they fight ſometimes,

it is when that they are oppreſſed with
hunger, or for the defence of their yong
ones, and yet they help themſelues with
thoſe armours that nature hath appointed
them, without adding to them other
kind of weapons inuented by the diuel,
for there is no earthly things, but that
may be ouercome with ye force of gūnes,
ſo that weying well this inuention, it
is not only more daungerous, than all
the cutting weapons of the worlde, but
alſo it is more pernicious and peſtilent,
than anye other venim or poyſon, yea
worſe than the thundrings and lightnings
that come from the aire, ye which
for that it is compoſed of foure ſtraūge
elementaries, being in the moſte parte
of his greateſt drith, caſting the fier in
the middeſt of the ſmoke, multiplieth of
the aire and of the fier, and mingleth
with the moyſture, in ſuch ſort that the
nature of euerye element fighting with
the other, conuerteth in humor and in
great thundering, bicauſe that the heate
with the moiſture cannot agrée, nor endure

together, but ſtraineth to come
forth, the aire addreſſeth to the aire, and
the fier draweth of his nature trauelling
to moūt hie, being an action ſuperior,
and exceding in power all the reſt,
the which he turneth into his nature
before comming out, by the which meanes
groweth ſuch a hurling noyſe, that
it is neceſſarie that the thing wherein
this poulder is, be put in pieces, or that
the moſt weakeſt, giue place to the ſtrō
               geſt.
And then of al this ſtuffe, commeth
Canons, double Canons, Serpentines,
Culuerines, Sakers, Faucons, Fauconnets,
and ſuche like. In the naming
whereof, the cunning maiſters haue
greatly failed, in impoſing to them the
names of birdes, the which ſerue to giue
and ſhewe vs melodie and pleaſure, they
ſhoulde rather appropriate to them the
names of the infernall diuelles, for as
thoſe engins ſerue to rent and diſmember
the bodies of men, ſo in like caſe doe
the diuelles beate and pame the ſoules
in hell.
            
               
We haue here ſhewed what is done
in the wars, & the recompence of thoſe
that frequent it. Now let vs ſee what is
done in the pallaces of Princes, & what
is ye felicitie of ye Courtiers, which make
a ſhewe of their delicateneſſe: ſéemeth
there any greater felicitie in the world,
than to haue the Princes fauor at al times,
to be cheriſhed, to diſtribute largely
to others, to take the beſt ſpoyles, to
vſe courtly maners, embracings, kiſſinges,
cōueyings, and other offices of humanitie,
with an infinite number of
ſuch kinde of dregs? There are of thys
ſort crafty and wilie, that do as the fiſher
man, who aſſone as he hath anye thing
in his net, draweth it vp, and ſo goeth away
withall: otherſome there are that
play all out: and others that remayne
vntill they are as full as ſpunges, and
in the ende they are made to reſtore all:
others alſo that doe nothing but inuent
ſubſidies, and ſéeke meanes to inlarge
or multiplie the treaſures of kings, and
ſo become riche, with ſpoyling of the

poore people. And Princes do by thē many
times as we do by our hogs: we let
them fatten, to the ende to eate and deuour
them afterwarde, ſo are they ſuffered
many times to enriche themſelues,
for to be deſpoyled after when that they
are ſo fat, and one that is new come ſhal
manytimes be preferred in their places,
here you may ſée how yt theſe poore courtiers
ſel their liberty for to become rich:
they muſt obey al commaundements be
they iuſt or vniuſt: they muſt frame thē
ſelues to laugh whē ye Prince laugheth,
to wéepe whē he wéepeth, approue y• whiche
he approueth, & cōdemne that which
he condemneth: they muſt obey to al, alter
and chaunge wholy his nature, to be
ſeuere with thoſe that are ſeuere, ſorowfull
with thoſe that are ſorowfull, and
in a maner tranſforme themſelues into
the nature of him whō they will pleaſe,
or els to get nothing. If the Prince be
impudent, they muſt be the like, if he be
cruell, they muſt delight in bloudſhed.
To be ſhorte, they muſt frame themſelues

to all ordinances and maners of the
Prince, or whom they will pleaſe, and
yet many times one little offence ſtayneth
all the ſeruice that one hath done
in his life time. The which thoſe that aſſiſted
y• Emperor Adrian did féele, who
when they were elected by him into hie
eſtates and dignities, by the reporte of
diuers flatterers, they had not only taken
from them that which before he had
giuen them, but alſo they were declared
to be his chiefe enimies. The which Plato
liuelye conſidering, and foreſéeing in
the Court of the Athenienſis, did prōptly
quit their deliciouſneſſe, and yet he
coulde not ſo well take heede to himſelfe
but that he returned to Dennis a tyrant
of Sicilie, who in the ende ſolde him to
Pirats of the ſea. But what happened
to Xenon that olde, ſage, & graue Philoſopher,
whom Phalaris in ſatiſfaction
of his ſeruice, cauſed moſt cruelly to be
put to death, as alſo did the King of Cyprus
Anacreō
                to the noble philoſopher
Anaxagoras: and Nero his tutor Seneca,
               
& Alexāder, Caliſtenus, for that he wo
                  ••
               
not worſhip him, cauſed his féete to be
cut of, his eares & his hāds, alſo his eyes
to be put out, and ſo left in the mercie of
a ſtraight priſon or dungeon, wherein
he finiſhed moſt miſerably his dayes.
Such hath bene many times the ende of
a great number of learned men, who bicauſe
they woulde not obey to the fearfull
affections of Monarchs, loſte their
liues,Execrable vices of the Court in recompence of their good ſeruice,
and wholeſome counſels: without
putting in account the vices that frequent
thoſe that followe the Courte,
whereas the moſt part of humain thinges
are aboliſhed. Many in ye Court put
of their cappes to thée, that woulde be
glad to ſée thy head from thy ſhoulders,
ſuch bow their knée to do thee reuerence,
which would that they had broken their
leg to cary thée to thy graue. Many haue
the name of Lord that meriteth ye name
of a hangman, there is alwayes I know
not what, nor how, or one, I vnderſtand
not who is the cauſe,) that inceſſantlye

one complayneth, altereth, or els deſpiſeth.
In the Courte if thou wilt be an adulterer,
thou ſhalt finde of thy complices,
if thou wilt quarrell, thou ſhalt find
to whom, if thou wilt lie, thou ſhalt find
thoſe that will approue thy lies, if thou
wilt ſteale, thou ſhalte finde them that
will ſhewe thée a thouſand wayes howe,
if thou wilte be a carder or a dicer, thou
ſhalt finde them that will cog and playe
with thée, if thou wilt ſweare and beare
falſe witneſſe, thou ſhalte finde there
thy like: to be ſhorte, if thou wylte giue
thy ſelfe to all kynde of wyckedneſſe
and vices, thou ſhalt find there the very
exāple giuers. Here may you ſée the life
of my maiſters the Courtiers, which is
no life, but a continuall death. Here you
may ſée wherin their youth is emploied,
whiche is not youth, but a tranſitorie
death. Whē y• they come to age, knoweſt
thou what they bring from thēce? their
gray heades, their legges full of gouts,
their mouth hauing a naughtie ſmell,
their backe ful of paine, their hearts ful

of ſorow and thought, and their ſoule
filled with ſin: to be ſhort, in the Court
there is very little to write, but muche
to murmure at, of the which things, yf
thou deſier a more ample knowledge,
reade the worke that Dom Anthonie
Guenera, biſhop of Mondouent, and the
Crowner of the Emperor: and Eneas
Siluius, otherwiſe called Pope Pius,
which haue compaſſed twoo moſt excellent
and perticular treatiſes of thys
matter, wherein they haue painted my
maiſters the Courtiers ſo in their coulors,
that they haue ſtayed the hope of
adding to thoſe, that will diſcouer after
them. Let vs leaue ſpeaking of ye Courtiers
with their life ſo vnquiet and miſerable,
and let vs contemplate a little
the eſtate of Kings, Princes, Monarchs
and Emperors, for whome onely it ſéemeth
that felicitie is created, for if we
conſider all that maye render the life of
man in tranquility, happy and content,
we ſhall finde that fortune among all other
mortall creatures, hathe prouided

for them prodigally. What maketh mā
more wonderfull in this worlde, but
goods, richeſſe, dignities, Empire, licēce
to do good or euill without correction,
powre to exerciſe liberalitie, all kind of
volupteouſneſſe aſwell of the ſpirite as
of the bodie. All that may be wiſhed for,
for the contentation of man, be it in apparell,
in meates or drinkes,Princes ſeeme to be voyde of miſeries. varietie
in meates, in magnificence, in ſeruices,
in veſtures, that which maye tickle the
memorie, and flatter the concupiſcence
of the fleſhe, is prepared for them, euen
from their cradell, for to conduct ye eſtate
of their life in more happe and felicitie.
The diſcourſe of which if we wil conſider
outwardlye, there is not one but
will confeſſe that they alone triumph oner
that, that others languiſh in. But if
that we will conſider things more nearer,
and examine and waye them in a
true ballance, we ſhall find that the ſelfe
ſame things, that we thinke degrées for
to attaine to felicitie, and to cauſe them
to be happie, are the verie inſtruments

of vice, that cauſe them to haue more
greater ſorowes, & that doth render thē
moſt vnfortunate: but wherfore ſerueth
their coſtlye ornaments and honorable
ſeruices, or delicate meates? when that
they are in continuall feare to be poyſoned,
ſeduced and beguiled by their ſeruitors,
haue not we had the experience
therof in our time? doeth not Platina
write of a certaine Pope that was poyſoned
by the ſiege, with a paper that his
ſeruant did preſent him? others with the
ſmoke of torches and flames. But thys
thing is moſt to be maruelled at, yea,
and moſt horrible to heare,A cruell and an abhominable act. that the humaine
malice ſhoulde be ſo greate, that
there hath ben ſome that haue mingled
poyſon with the water or ſinging cake,
and by this meanes hath cauſed to die
Henrie, the ſeuenth Emperor, as I haue
red in Fluſchius, in his firſt compoſition
of medcinable things. We maye reade
in Hiſtories, that certaine Emperors
durſt not lie downe to reſt in the night,
before y• they had cauſed their beds to be

viſited and lien on, and all the places of
their chambers to be ſearched, for feare
that they had to be murthred or ſtrangled
in their ſléepe, others woulde not
permit Barbers nor Chirurgions to
touch their face, for feare that in trimming
of their head or bearde, they wold
take from them their life. And yet at
this preſent daye they are in ſuch feare,
that they dare not put their meate into
their mouthes, before that one haue taſted
therof. Were it not better (ſaid Iulius
Ceſar) to die once, than to liue always
in ſuch feare and dread? But what
felicity can a king or a prince haue, that
hath vnder his gouernement ſo manye
thouſands of men, he muſt watch for al,
heare the plaintes and cries of euerie
one,The true office of a Prince. procure euery mans ſafegard, prouoke
ſome by liberall giftes to do well,
the others by terror and feare, he muſte
be no leſſe circumſpect to nouriſh peace
among his people, than to defende hys
Realme, againſt the inuaſion of the
ſtraunger: without putting in count

many other calamities that are vnder
the ſcepter. They commaunde all, and
and manye times one or two doeth gouerne
them. Pege the Florentine hathe
made a perticular diſcourſe of the infelicitie
of Princes, he meaneth of y• wicked,
where he ſayth, that for the moſte
part, thrée kindes of people are to them
moſt agreable and familiar: flatterers
kepe the firſt ranck, which are the chief
enimies of veritie, and that empoiſon
their ſoules with a poyſon ſo peſtiferous
and daungerous, that it is cōtagious
to all ye world: their follie and temeritie,
they call it prudencie, their cruelty
is iuſtice,Thre plages, from the which a Prince ought to bevvare of. their luxurious life, deſolutions
and fornications, are pleaſures and
paſtimes, they are couetous, which they
they call good huſbandrie, if they be prodigall,
they call it liberall, in ſuch ſorte
that there is no vice in a Prince, but
that they cloke it & hide it vnder ye protexetie
of ſome vertue. The ſeconde ſort
are theſe, inuentors of newe ſubſidies:
they reſte no night but that in the Morning

they bring ſome inuention or new
practiſe to the Prince, to drawe monye
from the poore people: they cauſe newe
ſtatutes to be erected: they break, forme,
reforme, diminiſhe and adde: they demaund
confiſcations and proſcriptiōs,
in ſuch ſorte that all their ſtudie is to
make themſelues rich on the calamities
and miſeries of the poore people. There
is yet another ſort, that vnder the ſhadowe
of honeſtie counterfeiting good
men, haue alwayes the eye on other
mens liuings, and make the office of
reformer of vices: they accuſe and eſpie
out other mens liues: they inuent wicked
and falſe deuiſes, yea, and not content
to get other mens goods, but alſo
ſéeke their death,The Elders made moſt dreadfull prayers for vvicked Princes. and by their meanes
they cauſe manye a one to be put to
death, whoſe life before God are innocent.
For this cauſe it is that the Elders
(as Herodianus writeth) if their Kinges
or Princes had behaued them ſelues
wickedlye in the adminiſtration of the
publicke affaire, they condemned them

for diuels after their death, and aſſembled
in the temples with the Prieſtes,
praying openlye to the Gods, not to receiue
them, but recommended them to
the infernall powers, to the ende that
they might be grieuouſlye tormented.
The which hath not bene onely obſerued
of the Elders before vs, but alſo of
certaine in our time, as witneſſeth Anthonius
Geuara, Crowner to the Emperor,
in a certaine Epiſtle wherein he
ſayeth that to the Viceroy of Sicilia, for
vengeance of the tyrannies that he had
exerciſed againſt his ſubiectes, after hys
death, they made this Epitaphe on hys
tombe that followeth.
            Qui propter nos homines, & propter
noſtram ſalutem deſcendit ad inferos.
            Here you may ſée the miſeries wherin
Princes are ſubiect. Here are the thorns
that they receiue in recompence of their
brightneſſe and royall dignitie, whiche
ought to be like a Lampe, that giueth
light to all the world. But when that it
is darkened with any vice, it is more reprochable

than in any other priuate perſon.
For they alone ſinne not (as Plato
writeth) by the fault that they commit,
but by the euill example that they giue:
if it be hard to be good (as Heſiodeus writeth)
yet with more greater difficultieKings depraued by deliciouſneſſe.
can Kings and Princes be, for the abū
               dance
of honors and deliciouſneſſe the
which they ſée that they enioye, ſerueth
them as a bayte to enduce them to euil,
and they are the verie lanternes of vices.
What was Saul before that he was
made King? his goodneſſe is ſhewed in
holy ſcripture, whō God only did elect,
but neuertheleſſe he made a ſodaine Eclipſe
or chaunging. Howe wonderfull
was the beginning of the raign of king
Salomon, the which being plunged in
royal delices, gaue himſelf incontinently
a praye to women. Of .xxij. Kings of
Iuda, there is founde but fiue or ſix that
haue continued in their vertue & bountie.
As touching the Kings of Iſrael, if
thou wilt cōſider their liues from Ieroboam
the ſonne of Nabath, euen to the

laſt, which were in nūber .xix. they haue
all in general, yll gouerned the affaires
of the kingdome. If thou do conſider the
eſtate of the Aſſirians, Perſians, Grecians,
and Egyptians, thou ſhalt finde
more wicked than good. Let vs conſider
what the Romane Emperors were,
which haue bene eſtéemed the moſt flouriſhing
common welth in the worlde,
thou ſhalt find them ſo ouercomed with
vices and all kinde of cruelties, that I
doe almoſte adhorre to read in Hiſtories
their liuings ſo corrupt & defiled. What
was the eſtate of their common wealth
before that Silla & Marius did chaunge
it, before that Catallina and Catulla did
perturbe it, before that Iulius Ceſar and
Pompeius did ſlaunder it, before that
Auguſtus and Marcus Antonius did deſtroy
it,Marcus Aurelius. before that Tiberius and Caligula
did defame it, before that Domitiā
               
and Nero did depraue it. For althoughe
that they had made it riche with manye
kingdomes and Lordſhips, notwithſtā
               ding
the vices that they brought with

them, are more greater than the kingdomes
that they haue gained, for the
goods and richeſſe are loſt, but the vices
remaine vnto this daye. But what memory
remaineth now of Romulus that
founded it, of Neuma Pompillius that erected
the Capitol ſo hie, of Ancus Martius
that compaſſed it with walles, of
Brutius that deliuered it from tyrants,
of Camillius that draue out the French
men. Did not they ſhew by their doings
what felicitie is in the principall, the
which is more ſubiect to the aſſaults of
fortune, than any other earthly things,
for manye times the threde of life breaketh
whē that they thinke leaſt of death,
an
                  •
                then the infamie of thoſe that are
wicked, is written in hiſtories for a perpetual
memory therof. The which thing
Kings, Princes, Emperors, and others
conſtituted in dignities, ought more to
feare a thouſande folde, than the toung
that ſpeaketh euill, the whiche can but
ſhame the liuing, but bookes ſlaunder &
defame the deade. All the which things

being liuely conſidered by Diocleſian,
and manye other Emperors, they forſooke
their Scepters and Empires, and
withdrew them into the fieldes, louing
much better to remaine the reſt of their
life in ſome deſert place, and to be content
with a little, that to enioy the crooked
honors of this world.
            Let vs leaue ſpeaking of Kings, and
come we to the Eccleſiaſtical ſort,The miſerie of Popes. begin
we with the heades, whiche are Popes,
and Pontificals, are not they happie
and fortunate in this worlde? their dignitie
is the moſt greateſt, and ſupreme
of al other. It is obtained without paine
and labor, without warre or effuſion of
bloud, it is kept without perill, they cō
               maund
all, Emperors and Kings do thē
reuerence and honor, they are riche, and
of great power, and all giuen to honors
and dignities, although thoſe that they
repreſent, were the true example giuers
of pouertie. But if thou do well conſider
the ende of the Tragedie, thou wilt not
count them happy, but abhorre their doings,

and alſo complaine and bewayle
their ſtate,Pope Florentine in his bookes of the infelicitie of Princes. for if they will follow ye ſteps
of S. Peter aright, according to Gods
commaundements, they muſt be as one
that will giue his life for the preſeruation
of his neighbour, they alone ſhould
wake, when that other ſlepe, they ſhould
watch for all the world, they ſhould haue
no reſt, but all the minutes of their life
ſhoulde be beſtowed for the health of the
publicke weale, for feare that Sathan
ſeduct not their flocke. For if it be ſo, as
S. Iohn Chriſoſtome writeth vpon the
Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, that he that is
the rector or gouernor of one onlye
Churche or congregation, maye with
great difficultie be ſaued, ſo great is his
charge. In what perill then are the Popes,
that are gardes, tutors, protectors
and heades of all Chriſtian Churches.
The which things the Pope Adrian, a
man learned and of a good life, hauing
many times waied and conſidered, was
accuſtomed to ſaye with teares to his
moſt priuieſt friendes, that among all

the eſtates of the worlde, there was
none that ſéemed to hym more miſerable,
and more perillous of condition,
than the eſtate of Popes and
Pontificalles. For although the throne
and ſeidge wherein he did ſit, was richly
decked with diuers pompes, yet was it
filled with many ſharp thornes, and the
precious cloke with y• whiche they were
couered,A notable ſentence of Pope Adrian on the miſerie of Popes. was full of ſharpe pointed nedels,
and ſo heauie to beare, that his
ſhoulders therewith was pained, and as
for the Miter that couered their heads,
it is a very flame that burned euen frō
the bottome of the ſoule: and if we will
cōſider the notable Philoſophie of Pope
Adrian, on the Popiſh ornamentes, we
ſhall finde it not vnprofitable: for although
many haue gaped for that dignitie,
yet if ye reade Platina and others
that haue written their liues, you ſhall
finde them ſo wicked, that ye will ſaye
that there are manye Wolues among
theſe paſtors. In conſideration thereof
S. Bernard lamenteth the condition of

Pope Eugenius, when that Rome was
leſſe depraued than it is at this day: but
what iuſt occaſion ſhoulde he haue to
complain, if he had ſene the diſorder and
confuſion that hath raigned ſince hys
time. Well let vs leaue the heades, and
come to the mēbers, and ſéeke the matter
more further,The miſerie of the Eccleſiaſtical eſtate. for that they are ſicke
with the ſame diſeaſe that others are.
Let vs conſider what were the Heathen
Prieſtes and the Gentiles, and conferre
them with ours, to the ende that thoſe
that are illuminated with the Euangelicall
light, that haue bene inſtructed at
a better ſchole, bluſhe for ſhame, and
learne of them to reforme their life. It
is of a truth, that the Prieſts of the Heathen
and Gentiles, were choſen among
the others,Clicthoreus. of a more ſingular doctrine
and manners leſſe depraued, as the
Prieſts of Egypt,The eſtate of the heathen Prieſtes. which being nouriſhed
of the publicke, had no other ſcience
nor occupation, after that they had finiſhed
their ceremonies, but to philoſophie
and contemplate diligent lye the ſecrets

and miracles of nature. And of ſuch honeſt
occupations came ſo great profite,
that they were (as Ariſtotel writeth) inuentors
of Mathematickes, and their
lifes were ſo well ruled, and their diſcipline
had in ſo great admiration, that
Ligurges, Pythagoras, Plato, Democrites,
and the moſt part of the renoumed
Philoſophers of Gréece did forſake their
countries and Prouinces to become diſciples
to the Prieſts of Egypt. The Babiloniās
haue vſed the like in ye chooſing
of their prieſts, which they called Chaldeys,
who as writeth Deodorus the Siciliā,
after that they had ſaid their praiers
and deuine ſeruice, ceaſed not al the
reſt of their life to philoſophie, and contemplate
the ſecretes of the firmament,
in ſuch ſorte, that we are detter to them
for many ſecrets of Aſtrologie,A compariſon of heathen Prieſtes vvith ours. the whiche
by their labor and diligence haue
bene diſcouered. The Perſians in like
caſe to their Prieſts, that haue bene called
Mages, which is as muche to ſaye as
ſage and wiſe, who aſwell for their excellencie

of learning, as their ſolitarie
life, they haue ſo reuerenced, that in
their moſte vrgent affaires, they made
their refuge to them as to their Gods.
The Indians in like maner to their
Prieſts, whō they call Gymnoſophiſtes,
being ſo prompt in doctrine, and ſo wel
ruled in good maners, that they alone
aboue other men by their eloquence cō
               futed
the greate tyrant Alexander,
which was minded to ſpoyle and waſte
their countrie, but he was ſo wel appeaſed,
after ye he had heard them (as Plutarchus
writeth, that he did not only leaue
them without harme, but hauing their
prudencie in admiration, left them in
liberties and fredomes, and honoured
them with an infinite number of treaſures
and magnificall preſents. Alſo the
auncient Gaules or Frenchmen, the
which at that time had no knowledge of
the Goſpell, had (as writeth Ceſar in his
Commentaries) their Prieſtes, whome
they called Druids, who were ſo ſtraight
of liuing, and of ſo great doctrine in ſo

great admiration, that they wondred at
them, as if they had bene Gods: who
after that they had beſtowed a certayne
time in their ceremonies and ſacrifices,
inſtructed youth, diſputed of the immortalitie
of the ſoule, of the mouings of the
firmament, of the greatneſſe of ye world,
and of the nature of things, and ſo lead
the eſtate of their life in vertuous occupations
and works, not letting one minute
of the time to ſlip without bearing
ſome profite to the commō weale. Here
is the ſtate, here is the life, here is the
maners and occupatiōs of Prieſts that
had no knowledge of God, without law,
without faith, without hope of a ſecond
life, and without feare of Gods puniſhmentes.
Let vs conferre the doctrine of
the moſt part of our Prieſts, their lyfe,
maners and conuerſation, and we ſhall
finde that theſe one day ſhal riſe againſt
them, euen at the daye of iudgement,
and ſhalbe the accuſers of their wicked
life: it is vnto the wicked to whome I
ſpeake, it is vnto the vices, and not vnto

the perſons. I know well that there are
a great number of good and learned paſtors
in manye Chriſtian Regions and
Prouinces, which are vigilant and carefull
for the flocke, to whome they preach
moſt worthily the word of God. I know
alſo that there are many excellent Doctors
in this uniuerſitie, and in other
places, by whoſe good erudition and doctrine
all Europe is at this daye illuminated.
But to the contrarie, how many
Prieſtes are there in the world, that are
drowned in ſuche ignorance, that wyth
great paine they can ſaye a Maſſe, but
muſt mumble it betwéene their téeth, for
feare that their faults be diſcouered, ſo
dull are they, without knowledge and
vnderſtāding of the dignitie, powre and
ſtrength of the ſacraments which they
miniſter. There are manye paſtors at
this day that haue better ſkil in Courtly
facions, or els in ſome other vanitie,
than in deſoluing the doubtes of Predeſtination,
of liberall arbitrement, and
others that are founde in the holy ſcripture.

They are thoſe of whom crieth the
Prophet Ezechiel that they ſerue for no
thing but to féede thēſelues,Ezechiel Cap. 3. Micheas Cap. 34. Eſa. ca. 56. & in ſtead of
feding their flock, they take y• flece, draw
the milke, kil ye fatteſt, eat the fleſh, break
the bones, they are dumb dogs, blind & a
ſléepe, that know nothing, dare not bark,
but are very curious to haue horſkepers
for their Palfreys, Fauconers for theyr
Haukes, Cookes for their paunches, and
they feare not to ordeyne and appointe
paſtors for ye poore flock of Ieſus Chriſt,
they which will one daye cauſe them to
render a count for the poore ſhéepe that
are periſhed by their default, the which
will be required at their handes: to be
ſhort, they are the very bloud ſuckers,
that ſerue for nothing els, but to draw
the bloud and ſubſtāce from poore ſheepe,
and beſtowe the goods of the Church in
delicious pomps and exceſſe, in ſtede of
maintaining the poore and intertaining
youth in liberall Arts, and other deuine
and humaine diſciplines. But oure God
which is iuſte in his iudgementes, will

cauſe them one daye to giue a count of
his goods ſo yll beſtowed. For this is of
a ſuretie, that there are paſtors that
haue this twentye yeares receyued the
fruites of their benefices, that haue not
thrée times viſited their flocke, but they
commit them to poore ignorant Chaplens,
and many times to thoſe that will
ſerue beſt cheape, who as they ſerue
God by credit, and by procurement, if
that the Lorde God haue not pitie of
them, they ſhalbe damned for euer. The
which being conſidered by the good
DoctorS. Bernard ſermon. 33 of cāticles S. Bernard, toward the ende of
the .33. ſermon of Canticles, is very ſore
offēded with them, complaining of their
pompes and ſuperduities, whereas he
painteth them out in their liuelye coulors,
as followeth: there is (ſayeth he) a
ſpot and plague corrupted, that raigneth
in the whole body of the Churche,
the Miniſters of Ieſus Chriſt ſerue Antichriſt,
they ſtande and goe in great honor
and pomp with ye Lords benefits, &
neuertheleſſe, they giue no honor to his

name, and it is the ornament of a harlot,
whom thou ſéeſt daily procede from
thence, ſo is the golde that they carie,
their ſaddels, bridels and ſpurres, the
ornament of their féete is more ſuperbious
and full of pomp than the temple
of God: their ſpurres are better gilded
than their altars, from thence procede
their ſumpteous table ſo wel garniſhed
with delicate meats, their goodly gilded
cups and goblets, from thence procede
their gredineſſe & drunkennes, frō thēce
their Muſticall harmonie, theyr Harps,
Lutes, uirginalles, Regals and ſuche
like, the delicate wine that the pre
                  ••
               ors
powre out, and the monie that they haue
in their purſes, commeth from thence,
(then he cōcludeth) and for to enioy and
cloke this their deliciouſneſſe,S. Bernardes words againſt the Eccleſiaſticals at the coū
                  ſel of Reimes. they ordeine
Prelates of Churches, Deacons,
Archdeacons, Biſhops, Archbiſhoppes:
moreouer being kindled with a meruelous
zeale in the ſermon that he made
at the Synode of Paſtors, he doeth not
dallie with thē, but crieth out with open

voyce, it is not the waye to decke the
ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, but to ſpoile hir,
it is not to kepe hir, but to looſe hir, it is
not to defend hir, but to let hir be a pray,
it is not to inſtitute, but to proſtitute, it
is not to inſtruct, but to prophane hir,
it is not féeding of the flocke of Chriſte,
but ſpoyling and de
                  ••
               uring of them.
Theſe are the remonſtrances and exhortations
that this holy man made to
the Prelates and other members of the
Church, whē that it was leſſe corrupted
thā it is at this preſent. But what wold
S. Peter and S. Iohn ſay, that had not
one pennie to giue to the poore lame mā
that ſat begging at the temple gate, if
they ſhould ſée theſe Pontificall Courtiers,
that vaunt to be their ſucceſſors
(but not followers) treading on ſilke,
with their perfumes, embaumentes,
mounted like S. George, lodged in the
ſuberbious and magnificall pallaces of
Kings, but ye others were manie times
lodged in Charters and priſons of tyrants,
but the Lorde God will one daye

come with a whip, and whip theſe Merchants
and choppers of benefices out of
his temple.
            If we wil curiouſly ſéeke out what is
done in the Ciuile life,The miſerie of thoſe that adminiſter iuſtice. and miniſtring
of the publicke affaires, to howe manye
miſeries it is ſubiect, although that it be
at this daye a degrée ſo noble and neceſſarie
for our humanitie: we ſhall finde
that it hath his part in the Cake aſwell
as others, and if that there be anye delectation
or pleaſure, for the honor that
hangeth thereon, it is tranſitorie and
vnconſtant, and cometh to them as an
inflammation that commeth to the humaine
bodie, knowing that it is neceſſarie
that all their actions paſſe before the
eies of the common people, the which although
they cannot perfectly render the
reaſon of things, yet notwithſtanding,
they haue a certaine ſmell and ſauor of
good and euill, wherefore thoſe that are
Iudges are ſubiect, as in a playe to be
hiſſed at, and chaſed awaye with ſhame
and cōfuſion. For the people being aſtonied.

               Plato calleth them a monſter with
many heads, and mutable, vncertaine,
deceitfull, readye to wrath, readye to
praiſe or diſpraiſe without prouidence
or diſcretion, variable in their talke, vnlearned,
obſtinate, and therefore it behoueth
that ye life of a Iudge be conformable
to their will, for as he iudgeth
opēly, ſo ſhal he be iudged of thē ſecretly,
not only in matters of weight & importance,
but in thoſe of ſmal conſequē
               cie.
For alwayes the people will finde
ſome fault, as Plutarchus writeth in his
pollicies. The Athenienſies murmured
at their Simonidus for yt he ſpake too hie:
ye Thebiās accuſed Paniculus, for that he
would ſpit oftentimes: the Lacedemonians
noted their Ligurges, for that he
went alwayes holding downe of hys
head: the Romanes founde a great vice
in Scipion, for that in ſléeping he ſnorted
too loude: the Vticences defamed the
good Cato in his eating: they founde
Pompeius vnciuile, for that he woulde
ſcratch with one finger onely: the Carthagians

blamed Hannibal, for that he
was alwayes vnlaced and open before
his ſtomacke: others murmured at Iulius
Ceſar, for that he caried the girdell
of euil grace. And yet this is but little in
compariſon of other good men, that this
people or common ſort haue perſecuted,
baniſhed, and in the ende put to death
in ſatiſfaction of their good ſeruices that
they had done in the common welth. If
that greate Orator Demoſthenes were
aliue, he could ſay ſomewhat, who after
that he had bene ſo iuſt and faithfull a
protector of his common wealth of Athens,
was in the ende vniuſtlye baniſhed,
as though he had committed ſome
notable crime. Socrates was alſo poyſoned.
Hannibal was ſo yll treated of his
that he was conſtrained to wander miſerably
in the world. The Romanes did
the like to Camilus: the Gréekes to Ligurges
and Solon: the one of them was
ſtoned, and the other hauing ye eye pulled
out, was baniſhed like a murtherer.
Moyſes and many other holy men haue

ſo manye times taſted the furie of the
people, that if they were this day liuing
they would poure out maruellous complaintes
againſt them. And as we haue
ſhewed and ſet forth the defauts and miſeries
that procede of the peoples parte,
ſo muſt we in like caſe put into the balance,
the errors and corruptions that
is found in wicked Iudges, of the which
ſorte,Againſt Iudges that are corrupted ſome (to be ſhort) are corrupted by
feare, for the feare that they haue to
diſpleaſe a Prince or a great Lord, they
violate iuſtice, and are as Pilate that
cōdemned Chriſt to death, for feare that
he had to diſpleaſe the Emperor Tiberius
Ceſar: other magiſtrates are corrupted
by loue, as was Herod the Tetrarch,
who for to pleaſe by fooliſhe loue
the Damſell that daunced, condemned
to death S. Iohn Baptiſt, although that
he knewe he was iuſt and innocent.
Some are many times corrupted by hatred,
as was the chiefe Prieſt, who of
malice condemned S. Paul to be ſmitten
and ſtoned, thoughe he deſerued it

not. Sometimes the Magiſtrates are
corrupted by golde and ſiluer, and other
giftes and preſentes, as were the children
of the Prophete and great Prieſte
Samuel, and this diſeaſe is ſo contagious,
that at this day it is commō among
many. They all loue (ſayth the Prophet)
preſents, they all ſéeke for gifts, they do
not right to the orphelin, and the widdowes
complaint commeth not before
them, and in another place, woe be to
you that are corrupted by mony, and by
prayers, by hatred or loue, and that iudgeth
the good to be euill, and the euill to
be good, making of light darkneſſe, and
of darkeneſſe light, woe be to you that
haue not reſpect to the merits of things,
but to the merits of men, that regardeth
not equitie, but gifts that are giuē, that
regardeth not iuſtice, bnt monye, which
regard not that which reaſon ordeineth,
but only to the affection whereas youre
deſiers doth guide you: you are diligent
in riche mens cauſes, but you defer the
cauſe of the poore, you are to them cruell

and rigorous, but to the riche, louing
and tractable. Thē Wiſdome following
the like matter, ſayeth, the poore crieth
and no man giueth eare, but one will
aſke what he is, the riche man ſpeaketh,
and all the world pleadeth his cauſe, and
lifteth vp his wordes with admiration
euē to ye ſkie, yet this is not enough, for
when that they are in the degrée of honor,
they haue another worme that
gnaweth them, they do with their childrē
as the mother of Zebede ſaide,Math. 20. Lord
graunt that my childrē may ſit, the one
on thy right hand, the other on thy lefte
hand in thy kingdome, after them they
aduaunce their children in their dignities,
being ſometimes ignorant and fooliſh.
Then the Prophet Ieremie ſayth,Ieremie.
they are magnified and become riche,
they are become fat, they haue lefte the
orphelin, and haue not done iuſtice for
the poore, ſhall not I therefore puniſhe
ſuch things (ſayeth the Lorde God) and
and my ſoule take vengeance on ſuche
maner of people? Heare alſo the ſentēce

that ſainct Iames pronounceth againſt
them at the day of iudgement:S. Iames Cap. 5. 
                     •
                  . you haue
condemned and killed the iuſt, you haue
liued in wantonneſſe in this worlde taken
your eaſe, you haue ſatiſfied youre
hearts: now therfore (ſayeth the Lorde
of hoſts) wéepe and howle in your wretchedneſſe
that ſhal come vpon you, your
garmentes are Moth eaten, your golde
and your ſiluer is cankred, and the ruſte
therof ſhalbe a witneſſe againſt you, and
you ſhall eate your fleſhe as it were fier,
for the complainte of widdowes is aſcended
vp to my throne. Theſe are the
complaintes that the Prophets and the
Apoſtles made againſt worldly Iudges,
here are the Cenſures that our good God
hath thundered againſt them.
            There reſteth now nothing more but
to know what is done in Matrimonie,
ſéeing that we haue ſought out in generall
the miſeries of all the eſtates of the
world. There is nothing more certaine,
if we will weye in our mindes the originall
of Matrimonie, excellent, and well

accompliſhed on both partes,A praiſe of mariage, to ſhevv the miſeries that follovv. as Plato
did his Commō weale, Cicero his Orator,
& S. Auguſtine in his Citie of God.
There is nothing in the worlde, whiche
may compare in pleaſures to mariage▪
be it true, the fortune aſwell proſperous
as aduerſe is common, and that more is,
there is ſo great Communaltie of bodie
and vnxion of ſpirites, that they ſéeme
two, tranſformed into one. And if the
pleaſures ſéeme to vs greate, to confer
our affaires and ſecrets with our friendes
and neighbors, how much is the delectation
more greater that we receiue,
to diſcouer our thoughtes to hir, that is
ioyned to vs by ſuch a place of charitie,
that we put our truſte in hir, as in oure
ſelues, making hir wholy treaſurer or
faithfull kéeper of many inwarde ſecretes
and cogitations of our ſoule. But
what may be more greater witneſſe of
feruent loue, than to forſake Father,
Mother, Siſters and Brothers, and generally
all the Conſanguinitie till they
become enimie of themſelues, for to follow

a huſband that doeth honor and reuerence
hir, and hauing all other things
in diſdaine, ſhe only cleaueth to him, if
he be riche, ſhe kéepeth his goods, if he be
poore, ſhe employeth all the Arte that nature
hath giuen hir for to compare with
him in his pouertie, if he be in proſperitie,
his felicitie is redoubled in hir, ſhe
ſéeing hir ſelfe partaker of his benefits,
if he be in aduerſitie, ſhe beareth but the
one halfe of the griefe, and furthermore
counterfeiteth him, aſſiſteth and ſerueth
him. If a man wyll remayne ſolitarie
in his houſe, his wife keepeth him cō
               panie,
doeth cheriſhe and comfort him,
and cauſeth him more eaſilye to digeſt
the incōmodity of his ſolicitude, if he wil
go to the fieldes, ſhe cōducteth him with
eye, ſo far as ſhe can ſée him, ſhe deſireth
and honoreth him, being abſent, ſhe cō
               plaineth
and ſigheth as if he were always
by hir, being come home, he is wel
receiued, cheriſhed and fauored, with the
beſt ſhewes and tokens of loue that nature
hath ſhewed, in ſuch ſort, that for

to ſpeake the truth, it ſéemeth that a wife
is a gift from heauen graunted to man,
as well for the contentation of youth,
as for the reſt and ſolace of age, nature
can giue vs but one father and one mother,
but mariage repreſenteth many in
our children, the which do reuerēce and
honor vs, who are more deare than our
own proper bowels, being yong & little
they play, laugh & ſhew vs many Apyſh
toyes, they prepare vs an infinite number
of pleaſures, in ſuche ſorte, that by
their toyes and paſtimes that nature
hath giuen vs for to deceiue and paſſe away
part of our miſerable life (if we be
beſieged with age, a thing common to
all) they ſolace the diſcommoditie of our
age, cloſe our eyes, bring vs to the earth
from whence we came: they are oure
bones, our fleſh and bloud, ſéeing them,
we ſée our ſelues, in ſuch ſort that the father
ſéeing his children, may be aſſured
that he ſéeth his liuelye youth renued in
the face of his children, in whom we are
regenerate and borne againe, in ſuche

ſort, that the age (being a heauy burthē)
is not grieuous vnto vs, beholding the
mirrors or ſimilitudes of our ſelues that
eliuate the memorie of vs, and make vs
almoſt immortal, in procreating and ingendring
others after vs, as the Ioynt
or ſlip being taken from a trée, of the
which groweth many others: the which
I haue treated more at large in a booke
that I brought to light the laſt yeare, of
the dignitie of Mariage, in the which I
thinke I did omit nothing of that that
pertayneth to the whole ornament
and decking of the coniunction of Matrimonie:
therefore, for feare to be accuſed
of vnconſtancie, or counted a turn
tippet, I will not nowe diſpraiſe that
which I haue ſo muche exalted. But for
that my ſubiect (that treateth of the miſeries
of all eſtates in our dayes) requireth
that I giue no more pardon of this,
than I did to the others, I will in fewe
words ſhew that which I haue reade in
manie Authors, the which confeſſe with
me, that there is much ſwéete and pleaſant

things in mariage. But if we doe
well conſider and weye in a iuſt ballāce
the great and vnſupportable déedes, we
ſhall finde among theſe Roſes, manye
thornes, and among theſe ſweete ſhoures
of raine, we ſhall find that there falleth
alwayes much haile,Lawes for to recōcile the man and the vvife. be it true, the Athenians
being a people much commended
for their prudencie and wiſdome, ſeeing
that the huſbands and wiues could not
agrée, bicauſe of an infinite number of
diſſentions and prouocations that chaū
               ſed
ordinarrly betwene them, were conſtrained
to ordeyne in their common
weale certaine magiſtrates, whom they
called reconcilers of maried ones, the office
of whom is to reduce, reconcile, and
ſet accord by all meanes. The Spartins
in their common weale had in like caſe
eſtabliſhed certain Magiſtrates named
Armoſins, who had the charge to correct
the inſolencie of womē, to reproue their
arrogancie and audacitie towards their
huſbands. The Romanes would not ordeyne
Magiſtrates, perſwading with

themſelues that men were not ſufficiēt
to bridle the raging temeritie of womē
that they did poure out, but they had
their refuge to the Gods, and dedicated
a temple to the Goddeſſe Vitiplaca,
where in the end they accorded of their
domeſticall quarrels. But who can (ſay
they) paciently beare the charges of Mariage,
the inſolency and arrogancye of
women,Miſeries and thornes in mariage. the yoke of a kinde vnperfect?
Who may accompliſhe their carnal appetite,
as alſo their vnſatiable pompes?
Doth not the olde Gréeke Prouerbe ſay
that women and ſhips, are neuer ſo wel
accompliſhed, but that alwayes they
want repairing? If thou takeſt hir poore
ſhe ſhalbe deſpiſed, and thy ſelfe leſſe eſtéemed,
if thou takeſt hir rich, thou makeſt
thy ſelfe a bond ſlaue, for thinking
to marie one equall to thée, thou marieſt
thy vnſupportable maiſtres, if yu takeſt
hir foule, thou canſt not loue hir, if thou
takeſt hir faire, it is a ymage at thy gate
for to bring thée companie, it is a tower
that is aſſailed of al the world, and therfore

that is verie hard to kepe that euery
one ſéeketh to haue the key, beholde
the hazard wherin thou art (ſayth William
de la Perriere) that thy round head
become not forked, which were a fearfull
ſight if it were viſible and apparēt,Beautie maketh a vvoman ſuſpected, deformitie hated, & riches proud.
this is the concluſion, riches cauſeth a
woman to be proud, beautie maketh hir
ſuſpected, and deformitie or fouleneſſe
cauſeth hir to be hated. Therefore Diponares
hauing taſed the martirdomes of
mariage, ſaid that there were but twoo
good dayes in all the life of mariage, the
one was the wedding day, and the other
the day that the woman dieth, for that on
the day of mariage, there is made good
cheare, the Bride is freſh and new, and
all new things are pleaſant, and of all
pleaſures the firſt is moſte delectable.
The other day that he ſayth is good, is
the daye wherein the woman dieth, for
that the beaſt being deade, deade is the
poiſon, and that by the death of the woman
the huſband is out of bondage. In
confirmation wherof, there is recited a

pretie hiſtorie of a noble Romane, who
the day after his mariage, after that he
had lien the firſt night with his wife,
was verye penſiue and ſorowfull, and
being demaunded of certaine of his familiar
friends, what was the occaſion
of his ſorrow, ſéeing that his wife was
ſo faire, riche, and come of a noble progenie:
ſhewing them his foote, he ſtretcheth
out his leg, ſaying, my friendes,
my ſhooe is newe, faire and well made,
but you know not where about it doeth
hurt and grieue me. Alſo is alleaged the
ſaying of Philemon, that ſaide that the
woman was to the man a neceſſarie euill,
ſéeing that there is nothing more
harder to finde in this woride, than a
good woman, following the auncient
Prouerb, that ſayth that a good woman,
a good Mule, and a good Goate, and thrée
daungerous beaſtes. Alſo is recited the
ſaying of Plutarchus, the which demaū
               deth
if there be any thing more lighter
than a womans tongue vnbridled, more
pricking than hir wordes, more to be

feared than hir boldnes, more execrable
than hir malice, more daungerous thā
hir furie, or more diſſembling than hir
teares, not putting in account manye
other things that he reciteth of the diſcō
               modities
of their worke, for that many
times men are conſtrained to nouriſhe
other mens children, or if by chaunce
they are the huſbands, he is in hazarde
to be the father of wicked children. The
which manie times are the deſolution
and diſhonor of their fathers houſe, and
a reproch and ſhame to all their kinred.
The which thing yt Emperor Auguſtus
fearing, wiſhed that his wife might neuer
haue childe,A notable ſentence of Marcus Aurelius. and oftentimes he called
his wife and his Niece two wormes
that did eate and deſtroye him with extreme
dolor. Marcus Aurelius one of the
worthieſt Emperors that euer bare
ſcepter, knowing what was done in mariage,
as he was dailie called on by certaine
of his Lords, that he ſhoulde marrie
his daughter, ſaide vnto them: vexe
me no more, for if all the counſell of the

wiſe were founded in one Fornace, they
woulde not be ſufficient for to giue good
counſell in making of a mariage, and
will ye that I giue hir alone & ſo lightly.
It is now ſix yeres ſince that Anthonius
Pius elected me for his ſon in lawe,Anthonius Pius.
and gaue me the Empire in mariage,
and yet haue we bene both deceiued, he
in taking me for his ſonne in lawe, and
I for taking hys daughter to wyfe.
He was called Pius, for that he was very
pitifull to eche one ſauing to me, to
whom he was cruell, for in a little fleſhe
he hath giuen me many bones, whiche
is in ſome the bitter gal that is mingled
among the ſwéete delicatenes of Matrimony,
the which for to ſpeake the truth,
we cannot ſo well cloke nor diſguiſe by
words, but y• at the laſt we are conſtrained
to confeſſe it, ſo that if we do weye
vprightlye the Eclipſes and miſeries,
with the pleaſures & paſtimes, we ſhall
find that y• one ſurpaſſeth not the other.
            An ende of the ſeconde booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The thirde boke.
            
               LEaue we now eche
eſtate, making their trafick,
and ſpreading their
nets, and let vs take our
way to humaine miſeries,
& treat of the other ſcourges, wherwith
nature doth torment this poore veſſell
of earth, for to make him ſtoupe, and
bring him to the knowledge of his God.The miſery of man for the diuerſitie of Religion.
It was not ſufficiēt that there is a corruption
in all eſtates, and in the lumpe
of man, which is but a filthie and foule
carcaſſe, but that he muſt areare battell
againſt God, in deuiding his Religion.
S. Ierome and S. Auguſtine do declare
that in their time, the word of God was
had in ſuch reuerence, that it was ſpred
in all the corners of the earth, euen in
the wilderneſſe, but nowe (vnthankfull
wretches that we are) the Lorde God
hath ſo takē away the light of his Goſpell
from vs for oure ſinnes, that it
ſhineth but in a little end and corner of

Europe. And yet that which ought to
giue vs moſt feare, are the diuerſitie of
opinions that are among vs, and the errors
wherein we are wrapped, for that
which one ſayth is white, another ſayth
is blacke, that which ſome call daye, others
call night, that which is light to
one, is darkneſſe to another, that which
ſome finde ſwéete, others iudge it bitter,
that which is Ieſus Chriſts veritie and
heauen to one, is Antichriſtes dreames
and hell to another. In the meane time
what ſhoulde the Ignorant thinke, in
what trouble, perplexitie and diſpayre
ought their poore conſciences to be in,
when they ſée that denied of one, which
the other approueth, ſeeing that thys is
certaine, that there is but one veritie amōg
ſo much varietie of opinions. We
may now well ſaye that the ſhéepeſolde
is open by the negligence of Paſtors,Iere. 12. Ezech. 34.
the Wolues are entred, and the ſhéepe
are diſperſed and gone forth, ſome of
them forſaken of their ſhéepheards, and
guided by others that care not for theyr

loſſe. Thoſe that are in the true flocke
are continually in daunger to be ſeduced
and drawen oute of the right path.
If it were poſſible to beholde with our
corporall eyes, the daunger wherein all
Chriſtendome hath bene, or if it were
poſſible to count or number the poore
ſoules that by the diſſentions of diuers
opinions periſh daily, there is none but
would quake for feare. But is there any
kinde of wrath or vengeaunce that we
haue not taſted in oure age, I will not
here recken the warres and effuſion of
bloud that we haue taſted within thys
fortie or fiftie yeares.In a treatiſe of peace and vvar. I haue written of
this more at large in other places, but
the memorie thereof is ſo newe that the
woundes bléede as yet vpon ye poore people,
that we ſée dailye ſtray about from
towne to towne, with the poore mothers
that beare their yong children in theyr
armes, ſaued from the middeſt of the fier,
from the bloudy glaiues, fleing the
vnmercifulneſſe of the enimie, finding
no place of refuge for to ſolace their calamitie,

can witneſſe yt ſame. But what
harde and ſtonie hearts haue thoſe that
ſée the ſtréetes and places couered with
theſe ſtraunge people, what countenāce
maye thoſe then haue, that ſtirre vp ſo
many tragedies on the earth, when that
they ſhall heare their cries and lamentatiōs,
knowing that the day wil come
wherein they ſhall render a count of all
the innocent bloud that they haue ſhed,
from the time of Abell that was firſte
ſlaine, vntill the laſt man, as the ſpirite
of God doeth teach vs in the holy ſcripture.
We haue bene afflicted with ye war
which is one of the forerunners & ſcourges
of Gods wrathe. Haue not we had
plagues in our time? behold ye afflictiōs,
how they ſuccéede by degrées. I haue red
maruelous contagions that haue bene
before our time,The miſerie of mā by contagion, as vvell in times paſt as in our age. the which we will confer
with ours, to the ende that we maye
know, that then when the wrath of God
is poured againſt vs, that thē all liuing
ſoules do féele it. Many Authors worthy
of credence, write that thoſe of Conſtantinople
               
haue bene perſecuted with a
plague ſo horrible, that thoſe that were
not ſicke, thought themſelnes to be killed
of other men, and being in this trouble
and feare, they furiouſlye thought
that they had bene killed. In the time of
Heraclius there chaūſed ſuch a contagious
plague or peſtilence in Romainie, yt
in a ſhort time there died manye thouſandes
of men, and the violence of the
ſickeneſſe was ſo grieuous, that manye
vnpacient in their paine, drowned them
ſelues in Tyber, to ſtaunch and quench
the extreme heate that burned their bodies
within, like a Cathar. Thucydides
a Gréeke Author,Thucydides in his ſecond booke of the vvars of the Peloponienſis. writeth that in his
time there was ſuch corruption of the
ayre in Greece, that there died an infinite
number of people, without finding
or inuenting remedie that might eaſe
their paine, and yet he addeth a thing
more wonderfull, that thoſe that were
healed of this poiſon, had loſt their memorie
and knowledge, in ſo muche that
one knewe not the other, no not the father

the ſonne.Marcus Aurelius. 
               Marcus Aurelius an Author
worthye of credence, aſſureth that
in his time, the mortalitie was ſo great
in Italie, that the Writers that woulde
haue wrytten thereof, hadde leſſe
paine to diſcouer and put in count the
little number of thoſe that remained aliue,
than the infinite number of thoſe
that died. The ſouldiers of Auidius Caſſius
that was Lieutenant to Marcus
Anthonius the Emperor, being in Selucia
a town of Babilonia, entred into the
great Temple of Apollo, whereas they
found a Coffer,The aire corrupted that proceded out of a coffer periſhed the third part of humaine kinde. the which they opened,
thinking that there had ben ſome great
treaſure, but the ayre that proceded out
therof, was ſo infectious, that it firſt infected
all the Region of Babilonia, and
then proceded into Grecia, and from
Gréece to Rome, whereas it moued ſo
many peſtilēces, that it cauſed to periſh
almoſt the third part of humaine kinde.
Let vs leaue the auncient hiſtories, and
treate of thoſe that haue paſſed vnder
our age, to the end that we (being Chriſtians)

may learne by the great miſeries
and afflictions, that God hath ſent vs,
the great fragilitie and miſerie of oure
humaine condition. For when that hys
wrath is kindled againſt our ſinnes, he
maketh vs to féele the darts of his rigorous
Iuſtice, there is no kinde of paine
nor torment, but that therwith he afflicteth
and perſecuteth his creatures, what
experience had we in the yeare a thouſand
fiue hundreth, twentie eight? when
that the plague was ſo grieuous in the
French Camp,A plage in the French campe at Naples. whilſt the ſiege was at
Naples, whereas the violence of the
paine was ſo prompt and ſodaine, that
they were ſooner dead thā they did think
to die. And this wicked and vnluckie diſeaſe
did not only afflict the vulgar ſort,
which were almoſt al conſumed, but alſo
the great Lordes felt it, the Lorde of
Lautr
                  ••
               , of Vaudemont de la Vall, de
Moleac, the Chaſtynery grand Mont,
and other notable perſonages, the memorie
therof can not be renued without
teares. The lyke chaunced to Engliſh

men in Bullen,A plage in Bullen. whereas the plage was
ſo greate, that there was not grounde
inough in the towne to burie the deade,
ſo that the King of England coulde not
finde men in Englande that would goe
thither, till that they were forced of violence
to go, for the more there went thither,
the more there died, in ſuch ſorte,
that the foure corners of the town were
putrified and corrupted with the ſmell
and vapor that proceded from the deade
bodies. The yeare before that the deceaſed
King Frauncis of good memorie, eſpouſed
the Quéene Elinor, Almaine
was aſſailed with a new kinde of ſickeneſſe,A contagion in Almaine.
wyth the which the parties that
were taken, died within. xxiiij. houres
with a ſweate, and this ſickneſſe hauing
taken his originall in the Occean, ſpred
in a moment all ouer Almaine, as an
embracing that conſumeth al, for before
that a remedie was founde, there died ſo
many thouſandes of men, that manye
Prouinces remained deſert and forſakē,
bicauſe of the putrifaction of the ayre,

that conſumed all that it touched, alſo
there where the aire was ſo infected, the
dwellers remained marked with a red
croſſe. Ioachim Scilerus writeth, that
when the peſtilence tormented ſo furiouſly
(and by ſo lōg ſpace of time) Englande,A maruelous contagion in England.
the powre of the venim was ſo
great, that the reaſonable creatures did
not onelye die, but that the birdes left
their neſts, egges, and yong ones, the
beaſts left their caues & dennes, the ſerpents
& mowles appered aboue groūd,
by heaps, and left their places, for feare
of the venemous vapor that was vnder
the earth, in ſuch ſorte that there were
found deade vnder the trées, and in the
fieldes, with puſhes and botches on
their poore members. The yere. 1546. the
laſt day of Maye, there did riſe a plage
that laſted nine Monethes, ſo great and
dreadfull at Aix,
               Contagiō in Aix. a Citie in Prouincia,
whereas the people of all ages died in
eating and drinking, in ſuch ſort, that
the Churchyardes were ſo full of deade
bodies, that there was founde no more

place to burie them, and the moſt parte
of the diſeaſed, fell into a franſie the ſecond
day, and would caſt themſelues into
Welles, others fell oute of their windowes
into ye ſtreetes. Some other were
vexed with a bloudie Flir by the noſe,
the which did runne day and night violently,
and with the loſſe of their bloude
they loſt their liues, and it came to ſuch
extremitie & deſolation, that womē with
childe brought forth the fruite of their
wombe out of time, they and their fruit
dying, the which afterward were chaū
               ged
to a violet or blewiſh colour, as if
the bloud had ben ſpred al ouer their bodies.
And to be ſhort, the deſolation was
ſo great, that the father kept no count of
his childe, nor the huſbande of his wife,
yea with monie in their handes, oftentimes
they died for default of a glaſſe of
water, or if by fortune they had for to
eate, the ſickneſſe was ſo cruel and ſhort
that they died many times with meat in
their mouthes, and the furie of this contagion
was ſo inflamed, and al the town

ſo infected, that with their looke that they
wold caſt vpon ſome, they woulde infect
them, and their winde and breath
was ſo venemous, that there would riſe
botches and ſores on the parties that
therewith were attainted. It is a fearful
and pitiful thing in nature, the which
a Phiſition left vs in writing, the which
was ordeined of the chiefe of the Citie,
to viſite the ſicke, that the euill was ſo
cruell, that no remedie might be found,
ſo that they that were taken therewith,
had no hope of health, but by the aſſault
of death. And they were ſo acquainted
therewith, that when they felt them
ſelues taken, they themſelues woulde
take a ſhéete, and lie downe aliue thereon,
looking for no other thing than the
violent departing that the ſoule hath,A maruelous act.
for to depart from the bodie, his mortall
habitacle: the whiche he ſayeth to haue
ſéene in many, and ſpecially in a womā
whome he called by a window, for to ordeine
hir ſome remedie and eaſe of hir
paine, whome alſo he perceiued by the

window, how ſhe lay downe hirſelfe in
hir winding ſhéete, ſo y• they that buried
y• infected, being entred into hir houſe,
ſhortly after found hir dead and lien in
the middeſt of hir houſe, with hir ſhéete
half ſowed.The miſery of man by famine There reſteth now nothing
but to treate of famine, which is one of
the ſcourges of Gods iuſtice, as he himſelfe
hath witneſſed to vs by his Prophetes
and Apoſtles,Leui. 26. ſometimes threatning
ſinners to giue them a heauen of
braſſe, and a earth of fier, that is to ſaye,
barren, that ſhall not bring forth fruite,
and for this cauſe our Lord God declaring
to his diſciples, the plagues that
ſhould come, ſhewing before that Nation
ſhal riſe againſt Natiō, & kingdome
againſt kingdome, he addeth euen after
that as thoughe one did depende on an
other.Math. 24. And there ſhall be peſtilence and
hunger in certain quarters of the earth.
For war, peſtilence and famine are the
iij. darts that he is wont to ſhoote againſt
the earth, when that he is angrie with
his creatures. Let vs nowe ſée whether

that we haue not ben grieued with this
dart, aſwel as with the others. I wil not
here ſhew the cōmon famines that haue
raigned diuers times in Aſia, Europa, &
Affrica, but I wyll only make mention
of them of moſt memorie, aſwell Prophanes,
as of thoſe in holie ſcripture, to
the end that thoſe that liue in this world
as in a pallace of volupteouſneſſe without
hauing taſted the miſeries and calamities
to the which we are ſubiect, when
that it pleaſeth the Lorde God to poure
doune vpon his creatures the arrowes
of his wrath and malediction, be prouoked
to acknowledge the ſouereigne and
mightie power of their Creator, and
the pitifull eſtate of humaine kinde, ſubiect
to ſo many miſeries. We will therfore
begin with thoſe of the Romaines.
After the great ruine of Italie, and that
Tottilleus the chiefe enimie of humaine
kinde, had beſieged Rome, they fell into
ſuch ſcarcitie of foode and ſuſtenance,
that they were faine to eate all kinde of
filthy beaſtes & vermin, as horſes, dogs,

cattes, rattes, miſe, and ſnch like, yea,
and in the ende they did eate one another,
a thing moſte fearfull to heare of,
that whē Gods iuſtice doth oppreſſe vs,
we are brought to ſuch neceſſitie, that
we ſpare not our like, yea, the mothers
their children.The mothers eate their children. The like befell in the deſtruction
of Ieruſalē, as Euſebius ſheweth
in his Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie. It is a
ſtraunge thing to heare, but more abhominable
and monſtrous to ſée, that
whē the great Scipio beſieged the great
Citie of Numantia, and that he had takē
awaye all the meanes for them to get
vittailes,A famine almoſt vncredible. they being preſſed with the
extreme rage of hunger, came forth euerie
daye to chaſe after the Romanes,
in ſuch ſort, that whē they tooke any one
they eate them without ſhame, & dranke
their bloud, with as good a ſtomack, and
ſo well diſgeſted, as if they had had eyther
Veale or Murton,A butcherie vvhere mās fleſhe vvas ſold. and being in this
rage, they tooke none to mercie, for ſo
ſoone as he was taken, he was killed,
fleyed, cut in pieces, and ſolde in the

Butcherie, ſo that a Romane was more
worth among them deade than liue, or
raunſomed. There is made mention in
the fourth booke of the Kings, the ſixth
Chapter, of a famine that chaunſed in
Samaria,
               4. Regū. 6. in the time of Heliſ
                  •
               us, which
paſſeth this before in deſolation and pitie,
for the hunger was ſo great, that the
head of an Aſſe was ſolde for foure ſcore
pieces of ſiluer, and the fourth part of a
meaſure of Pigeons dung, fiue pieces
of ſiluer, and yet that which is furtheſt
from our humanitie, after that all the
vittailes were conſumed, the mothers
did eate their owne children, in ſuch ſort
that a poore wife of the Citie made hir
complaint to the King of Iſraell, (ſéeing
him vpon the wall) for that hir neighbor
would not kéepe and performe the couenant
that was made betwéene them,
which was, that they ſhoulde eate hir
childe, and when that was eaten, the other
womās child ſhould be in like caſe
ſlaine, the whiche I haue (ſaide ſhe to
the King) done and accompliſhed, for we

haue ſodden and eaten my childe, and
nowe ſhe hath hidden hirs, for that it
ſhoulde not ſuſtaine me. And when the
King had heard that which the woman
had ſaide, his heart was vexed and troubled
with ſorrow, and rent his garments
and put on ſackcloth, ſaying, God do ſo
and ſo vnto me, and ſo forth in the texte.
Ioſephus, the ſeuenth booke and thirde
Chapter of the warres of the Iewes,
telleth a Hiſtorie almoſte conformable
to this before rehearſed, but executed after
a more ſtraūger and deteſtable maner.
He ſayeth that there was a woman
noble and riche,Ioſeph. the. 7. booke. 3. chapter, of the vvarres of the Iewes. when that Ieruſalem
was beſieged by Titus, Veſpaſians ſon,
the whiche had gathered together parte
of hir goods, that ſhe had had in times
paſt, and liued ſolitarilye of that little
that ſhe had, but the ſouldiers and men
of war did take all away frō hir, in ſuch
ſort that whē that ſhe had made ready a
morſell of meat for hir own eating, they
would take it away by force, ſo that ſhe
had nothing remayning. So that afterward

ſhe hirſelf was oppreſſed with verie
great hunger, ſo that ſhe wiſhed hirſelfe
out of the worlde, but hir houre
was not yet come. Wherefore that ſhe
might ſlake hir hunger, and ſuſtaine hir
life, ſhe armed hirſelf againſt the lawes
of nature, and tooke vpō hir an horrible
crueltie, for when ſhe hearde hir childe
crie, the whiche ſhe helde in hir armes,
ſhe ſaide vnto him, what ſhall I doe my
ſonne, for the wrath of God hath enuironed
this Citie,A hiſtorie of Ioſephus. in euery corner thereof,
famine ragineth, without the Citie the
ſworde killeth vp all, within we ſtande
in feare of the ſedicious, oure enimies
preuaile without, in the town are fiers,
burnings & ruines of houſes, famines,
peſtilence, ſpoyling and deſtroying, ſo
that I cannot féede thée my ſonne. Now
therefore my ſonne, if I ſhoulde die for
hunger, to whome ſhould I leaue thée,
being yet a childe, if I ſhoulde ſaue thy
life, thou ſhouldeſt be in perpetuall ſeruitude
and bondage to the Romanes,
come therfore my ſonne and be meate to

thy mother, a terror and ſhame to the
men of war that haue left me nothing,
and thy lot be in the Garden of Eden,
and Paradiſe. And after that ſhe had
ſpoken theſe wordes, ſhe killed him, cut
his bodie in pieces, & roſted ſome, & ſome
ſhe ſod, and when ſhe had eaten parte,
ſhe laide vp the reſt to kéepe: and after
that ſhe had plaide this pitifull Tragedie,
the ſouldiers came againe, and they
ſmelling the ſmell of the roſted childe,
began to threaten hir euen to die, if that
ſhe brought not forth the meat. But ſhe
being as it were in a rage, ſéeking meanes
to follow hir ſonnes ſteppes, being
nothing abaſhed, ſaid vnto them, be content
my friendes, I haue done you no
wrong, beholde I haue kept you your
parts: ſo ending hir wordes, ſhe brought
forth the reſt of hir childe, and ſet it on
the table, wherewith the ſouldiers being
amaſed and confounded, felt themſelues
ſo ſmitten to the heart, that they remained
dumbe and ouercome, but ſhe to the
contrarie, with a fearful looke, and ſtedfaſt

countenance, ſaid vnto them, what
my friends, be merie, it is my fruite, it
is my childe, it is my déede, why do you
not eate therof? I haue ſatiſfied my ſelfe
firſte therewith, be you more captious
therin than the mother that bare him?
thinke you ſcorne of my meate, of the
which I haue eatē before you? But they
which coulde not ſuffer or abide to ſée ſo
pitiful a ſpectacle, went their ways, and
left hir alone with yt reſt of hir child, the
which was in ſūme, ye reſt that was left
hir of al hir goods. Here haue I recited ye
ſaying of Ioſephus. But for y• there are
ſome that are nothing moued in reading
hiſtories, monuments, or the examples
of auncient writers, vnleſſe that they
haue knowē the like in their age, or ſéen
with their eyes, or as it were touched
with their finger, therefore I will ſhew
here howe that God doeth ſpare vs no
more, than he hath done our Elders before
vs, when that he is angrie for oure
ſinnes, as it ſhalbe plainely ſhewed by
this Hiſtorie that followeth, the whiche

               Willyam Paradin hath written,The miſerie of our age. a man
learned and wel ſéene in the knowledge
of Hiſtories or memoriall things done
in our time, where as he ſayth, that the
yeare a thouſand, fiue hundreth, twentie
eight, the world was giuen to ſo many
vices, and was ſo full of ſinne and iniquitie,
that it was not humbled and amended,
bicauſe of the furious aſſaultes
and great effuſion of bloud of the former
wars,The meruellous contagion of our time. but to the cōtrarie, it was become
worſe and wholy depraued, by the meanes
whereof the bonde of Gods wrathe
was ſprede out in this poore Realme of
Fraunce, after ſuch a ſorte, that it was
thought that all was brought to an end.
For there happened ſo great calamitie,
pouertie and miſerie, that there was neuer
the like knowen by memoriall of
time, of the like affliction, aſwell in humaine
bodies, as in fruties and reuenues
of the earth, for during the ſpace
of fiue whole yeares,A famine, the yere 1528. which beganne the
yeare. 1528. the time came into ſuche a
diſorder, that the foure ſeaſons left their

natural courſe, and ſhewed themſelues
chaunged and altered among themſelues:
the Spring time being Harueſt,
and the Harueſt the Spring time, the
Sommer in Winter, and the Winter
in Sommer, but aboue all, the Sommer
had ſuch powre, y• it occupied the raigne
and domination of the others, and ſpeciallye
againſt his nature contrarie, ſo
that in the déepeſt colde of Winter,
that is to wit, December, Ianuarie and
February, in y• which times they ought
to reſt, die, leaue the ground, and giue it
ouer to froſtes, ſnowes and cold, it was
ſo extreme whote, and the earth was ſo
heated and burned, that it was a fearefull
ſight to ſée. For in fiue yeares there
fell little froſt that remained aboue one
day or twain, ſo that by this vnaccuſtomed
great heat, maintained and nouriſhed
the vermine of the earth, as Todes,
Frogs, Graſhoppers, Caterpillers, and
ſuch like, in ſuch quantity, that the yong
and tender corne was no ſooner come
forth, and out of his blade, but that it

was eatē and deuoured, which was the
cauſe that the corne that ought to multiplie,
and haue many eares and ſtalks
of one roote, brought forth but one or
twoo, and yet very barren, beeing full of
Darnell and blaſtings, in ſuch ſort, that
when it was gathered, the moſte part
came not aboue the quantitie of the ſowed
ſéede, and manye times leſſe. And
this famine laſted fiue yeares without
ceaſing, a thing ſo pitifull and miſerable,
that it is not poſſible for man to ymagine
the like without ſeeing, whiche
was the cauſe that a quarter of Wheat
was ſold at Lyonnois, Foreſts, Auergny,
Bauionlois, Burgonny, Sauoye,
Dolphinye, and manye other places, for
the ſumme of .xiiij .xvi .xviii. poundes turnoys.
And the poore people were ſo afflicted,
with ſuche dearth and ſcarcitie ſo
long a time, that a number of miſchiefs
and maledictions did follow. For ye poore
people that liued well inoughe of theyr
rents and reuenues, were cōſtrained to
forſake all and aſke their bread for Gods

ſake, and the number of poore beggars
did ſo encreaſe, that it was a pitifull
ſight to ſée them in flockes harde
to ouercome, and more daungerous to
endure, for beſide the great feare that
men had to be robbed of them, the which
extreme neceſſitie did conſtraine, there
proceded a great ſtinking and infectious
ſmell out of their bodies, for that they
filled their bellies with all kindes of
hearbes, good, naught, helthfull and venemous,
ſo that there was no herbes left
in Gardens, that they might come by,
not ſo muche as the ſtalkes and rootes
of Coleworts (of the which) they founde
not the one halfe to ſuſtaine them. And
when that there was no more to be had
in Gardens, they had their refuge to
wilde herbes, not vſed, ſo that the moſt
part of them, woulde ſéeth great kettels
with Mallowes and other herbes, and
ſo ſatiſfied thēſelues as doe hogs. But it
was a greater wōder to ſée bread made
of chaffe, ackornes, and of haye ſéede, the
which the poore were forced to eate, by

impacience and rage of hunger, and alſo
remembring themſelues, howe that
hogs do delite to féede on Fearne rootes,
they made breade thereof, deceiuing or
beguiling the hogs of their foode and
ſuſtenāce. The which is inough to make
vs knowe how much oure Lord Gods
wrath was againſt y• filth of our ſinne,
ſéeing that he permitted that mē ſhould
be brought to ſuch neceſſitie, as to eate
with the hogges, by the which meanes
followed a number diſeaſes, and the
worlde fell into a greate feare, ſéeing
a great bande or companie of men and
women, yong and olde, goe ſhaking
or trembling in the ſtréetes, the others
hauing the ſkinne ſwollen lyke drummes,
others lying halfe deade on the
ground, drawing their laſt breath, and
of ſuch kind of people were ſtables and
barnes filled, others were ſo languiſhing,
that of great paine, they coulde tel
their neceſſitie, nor yet ſcant draw their
breath, but quiuered and ſhaked with
their legs, rather ſéeming like to fancies

and dreames, than men. Beſides al this
the great compaſſion was to ſee a great
company of poore mothers, bare, leane,
and diſfigured, compaſſed and charged
with many yong children, the which by
great diſtreſſe of famine, cried out vnto
their mothers for foode, the which beheld
them ſo pitifullye and dolefully, that it
ſéemed to me the greateſt pitie of al, hearing
the anguiſhe and diſtreſſe of heart
that they ſhewed, by ſhedding abundance
of teares, and pitifull looke. The
ſaide Paradin writeth, to haue ſéene at a
place called Louhans in Burgonie, a
poore woman, the which by great means
and importunitie had found the meanes
to get a piece of bread, the which was ſodenly
ſnatched out of hir hand, by a litle
childe of hirs, the which ſhe gaue ſucke
to, and held in hir armes, the which was
ſcant a yeare olde, the mother had neuer
ſéene it eate bread before, for y• which ſhe
maruelled greatly, beholding hir lyttell
childe, how it did eate this ſame browne
breade that was hard and drie, with ſo

great an appetite, that it was a ſtraūge
& maruellous thing to behold, for ye mother
woulde haue gathered togither the
crums that fell from his mouth, but the
child began to crie out, as though it had
ſuſtained ſome great wrong, for anger
that he ſaw his mother gather togither
the crums, as though he had ben afraied
not to haue had inough. O eternal & almightie
God, what image? what ſpectacle?
might there be founde anye heart ſo
void of humanity, that might not be moued
thereby with cōpaſſion & pitie? The
ſaid Author reciteth yet, that in an other
village (not far diſtant from the before
ſaide) were found two women, the which
not finding wherewithall to ſuſtaine
or ſlake their hunger, did eate and fill
themſelues with a venemous herbe named
Scyla, being like Onyons, or wilde
Lettiſe, and not knowing the vertue
nor propertie of the ſaide herbe, poyſoned
themſelues, in ſuch ſort and maner
that their féete and hands became gréen
like Lezardes ſkinnes, and the poyſon

came forth vnder their nayles of theyr
fingers, ſo that there was no remedie
but that they died ſoone after. Finallye,
this miſerie and calamitie being of a
long and an intollerable time, the good
huſbandmen of the countries hauing
lande, heritages and poſſeſſions, were
conſtrained to haue their refuge to rich
Merchantes, whereof ſome had hourded
vp whole barnes full of corne, for to bye
firſt of them, whilſt that their monie laſted,
and then afterwardes was landes,
and heritages laid to gage, & ſolde wholy
and at a ſmal price, of the which ſuch
was worth a hundreth pounds, for the
which they had not ten, ſo great was the
miſchiefe, and yll lucke of this curſed auarice
and vſurie, and yet it was not ynough
that men were afflicted & ſcourged
with the vehement yre and ſcourge
of Gods wrath, by coniuration of al the
elements, & almoſt of all the creatures,
but that men alſo (their like) did afflict
and perſecute them. For theſe couetous
rich men, ſéeing the time to ſuccéede, as

they did wiſh and deſier, for to fyll thier
cheſts & coffers, did not faile to their occaſion,
they had Factors for their purpoſe,
for to put to ſale y• poore mēs goods
at their price, and at the worde of thoſe
that had corne, for the bying wherof the
good people wold leaue nothing vnſold,
euen to lay to gage their clothing, for to
haue foode, and that which was worſe,
the moſt part ſawe not that meaſured
that they bought, and notwithſtanding
they were conſtrained to take it, ſuch as
pleaſed the ſeller, and to bye (as the prouerbe
goth) a pig in a poke. And I muſt
here tel, y• there hath bene ſuch a vſurer
that hath had a piece of grounde for leſſe
than the writings haue coſte at a Notaries
hands. Thoſe that haue made ſuche
rapines, know well that I ſpeak truth.
And after al theſe miſchiefs, you ſhould
ſée nothing but good people driuen out
of their houſes and goods, they, their
wiues and children, and then they died
in Hoſpitals, of the which, theſe falſe ſellers
are the murtherers, as if they had

cut their throtes, and they ſhall render
and giue account before him, vnto whō
nothing is hidden. We haue here made
a long declaratiō of thrée ſcourges, with
the which our God is wonted to waken
his creatures, when that he féeleth them
obſtinate and wallowing in their ſins,
but this before is little, to the regard of
other cruel diſeaſes, with the which our
life is threatned, and beſieged all oure
dayes.The diuerſitie of diſeaſes, vvherevvith mā is afflicted. 
               Plinie and manye other Phiſtions,
Gréekes and Arabians, haue written,
that ſince two thouſand yeare, they
haue diſcouered more than thrée hundreth
kinde of ſickneſſes, to the whiche
the humaine bodies are ſubiect, without
reckning thoſe that daylie encreaſe. Among
the which they make mention of
ſome ſo cruell, that I cannot refer them
 wtout ſhame. I will leaue here to ſpeake
of the vulgar and common ſort of diſeaſes,
where as it behoueth ſometimes to
burne the members with hote burning
catares, ſaw a ſunder bones, take oute
the paine in the head, pull bowels out

of their bodies, as though there ſhoulde
be made ſome Inuentarie & Anotamy.
Others that haue bene made to keepe
diets ſo ſtraight, bicauſe of the furie of
their diſeaſe (as Cornelius Celſus ſheweth)
that they haue bene conſtrained to
drinke their owne vrine to quench their
thirſt, eat their plaſters, for to moderate
their hunger. Others being perſwaded
that they haue ſwallowed downe ſerpents,
to the whiche there was no meanes
of helpe, vntill that there hath bene
liue ſerpents put into the Baſen wherin
they vomited, making them beleue
that they were come out of their bodies,
as Alexander Tralianus ſheweth, of
the damſell that he healed by this meanes,
y• which thought that ſhe had ſwallowed
downe a ſerpent in hir ſléepe. Others,
of the which their ſickneſſe is ſo
horrible and ſtraūge, that they thought
they were tranſformed into brute beaſtes,
as he whom Gallian maketh mention
of, that thought verilye that he had
bene tranſformed into a Cock, and that

he was among the Cockes daylie, and
when that he did heare them crowe, he
would counterfeit the like, and as they
flap their wings when that they begin
to ſing, ſo woulde he do with his armes.
Others that thought themſelues to be
turned into Wolues, and ceaſed not in
the nights to runne by hilles,Thoughe that abuſedly the common ſtate thinketh that this proceedeth of of ſome other thing dales, deſerts
places and fieldes, and counterfeited
their howlings, with other Woluiſh
ieſtes, and are tormented with this
maladie, vntil that the ſunne hath ſpred
his beames on the earth. The Gréekes
call this kind of maladie Lycantropeia,
the whiche thing I thinke ſhoulde not
ſéeme ſtraunge or fabellous to thoſe
that haue red in holy ſcripture the pitifull
Metamorphoſie of Nabuchodonoſor,
who was tranſformed into an Oxe,
the ſpace of ſeauen yeares, for to bring
him to the knowledge of his God. And
others, ſayth Galian, in the place before
alleaged, yt thought thēſelues to be turned
into earthen veſſels, and went not
out of the fields, & if that they ſaw a trée

or a wall, they ranne away, fearing leſt
that they ſhould ſtrike againſt it, and ſo
to be broken in pieces. Others that haue
bene thrée yeres togither without ſleepe
or cloſing their eyes, as it happened to
the good Mecenas. Others that are ſo oppreſſed
with paine, that they beate their
head againſt the walles, as it hath happened
to a cunning man in our time
named Angell Pollitian. Others that
are conſtrained to eate ſerpents in their
ſickneſſe, as the Leprous. Others, as it
happened to the Philoſopher Pherecides,
out of whoſe bodie proceded a great
quantity of Serpents. Others in whoſe
bodies there engēdreth a great quātitie
of lice, by y• which they are in the end deuoured,
without finding or inuēting remedie
therfore, the which the Medicins
cal,A louſie ſickneſ
                     •
                  e. y• louſie ſickneſſe. I could rehearſe among
all theſe euils, other miſeries
that man hath inuented of himſelfe for
to ſhorten his life & the life of hys neighbour,
as thoughe thoſe that nature hath
prepared for him, were not ſufficient,

ſuche are the venims and poyſons the
which he prepareth at this daye, ſo dexterlye,
that there is no more order of
ſafetie, but to flie and forſake the companie
of humaine creatures,Diuers inuentions of venims & poyſōs. and to goe
into the wilderneſſe among the brute
beaſtes, in whoſe companie it is more
ſure than in the company of him that is
yllwilling. Certaine auncient Authors
as Orpheus, Orus, Medeſius, Heliodorus
and Aratus, haue ſhewed the compoſition
of fiue hundreth ſortes of venims
and poyſons, and certaine others
ſince their time haue increaſed the nū
               ber:
but if they were liuing at this day,
they woulde be counted fooliſh Aſſes, ſo
much is our humaine malice burſt out,The poyſons and venims inuented by men.
during the olde time, they did helpe thē
               ſelues
with certaine Drugs, which are
of their nature venemous, as Ptholomeus
writeth, of that which he calleth
Marmacica, the which is ſo contagious
that the weight of a wheate corne maketh
a man die ſodenly, and it is ſolde a
hundreth crownes the ounce, and ſo

muche tribute payed he that bought
it, and yet they had this conſideration,
to make them ſweare that they ſhoulde
not vſe therof in their Prouince, nor agaynſt
their friendes, but only againſte
ſtraungers. But good God, the Diuell
hath ſo entred into men at this daye,
and hath made them ſo cunning, & apt
in euill and miſchiefe, that by the ſmell
therof men are poyſoned as the experience
was at Sienne. Another Florentine
knight, after that he had pulled of
his helmet for to take ayre,Ierome Cardan in his booke of ſubtilitate and to refreſh
him, an enimie of his rubbed him
with a certaine poyſon, which was the
occaſion that he died ſodenly. Alſo in flames
of torches, they can ſo wel corrupt
them, that their ſmell & ſmoke ſhal poyſon
men, in ſuch ſort, that many dare not
light torches a nights for to cōduct thē, if
yt they ſtand in feare of their enimie. As
cōcerning meats & drinks empoyſoned,Exclamation againſt the poiſoners
that is a common practiſe, and as they
ſaye, the reuenge of kitchen maides, but
I am aſhamed for that I nedes muſt tell

that which I haue red in a famous Author,
that they haue founde the meanes
in our age, to empoyſon the ſaddels of
horſes, bootes and ſpurs, alſo that which
cannot be pronounced without griefe,
for in touching the hands one of another
yea,A ſubtill inuention of poyſoning. euen in letters and writings that
are ſent, the which being vncloſed, there
is a little ſubtill vapor that riſeth hie,
and aſcēdeth by little into a mans braynes.
They knowe the practiſe whereof
Theophraſtus ſpeaketh, that the poyſon
is ſometimes prepared after ſuch a ſort,
that it killeth not but at the murtherers
intentiō, for if he wil, the party ſhal liue
iij. moneths .vi. moneths, a yere, in ſuch
ſort, that death commeth at the time of y•
collectiō and gathering of the medicine
or poyſon prepared. Furthermore, as I
haue vnderſtoode of men worthy of faith
and credence, that they haue the ſubtiltie
to make it after ſuch a ſorte, that it
ſhall not hurt but one mēber, one arme,
or one leg. The experience thereof hath
bene ſéene in a fountaine empoyſoned

beſide Rhine, neare to the ſea, the water
of the ſaide, cauſed the téeth to fall out
of all thoſe that drunke thereof in the
campe of Germanie. Alſo things are
come to ſuch deſolation, that they haue
foūd the meanes to mingle poyſon with
the Wafer or Communion bread,An Emperor empoyſoned vvith a vvafer cake. as I
haue writtē in other places. Is not this
a maruelous thing that Ierom Cardan
writeth of a certaine inuention of Gray
Friers that hath bene foūd in our yeares,
of a Coller or Carcan whiche if the
Creditor put it on the Debtors necke,
it can not be taken awaye, but of him
that put it on, and by ſuch miſchief, one
Zafarnus citizen of Millaine, being ouercome
by his Creditor, died, as Cardan
witneſſeth. There reſteth nowe to
ſhewe howe that man is afflicted by the
foure elements, which are as witneſſes
and miniſters of the vengeance and
wrath of God againſt our ſinnes. What
is there more neceſſarie for the life of
man than water? for there is neyther
mā nor beaſt that can liue without the

vſe thereof, there is neyther herbe nor
plant that can bring forth either ſéede or
fruite without water, without putting
in account the profit and cōmoditie that
it bringeth in this worlde, ſéeing alſo
that it is the moſt aunciēteſt and mightieſt
element of all, as Plinie and Iſidorus
writeth,Man afflicted by vvater. it ouerwhelmeth and decaieth
mountains, ſhe gouerneth the earth,
quencheth the fier, and conuerting into
vapors, ſurpaſſeth the Region of the
ayre, and afterwardes deſcendeth for to
engender and bring forth al things that
are hid in the earth. And yet notwithſtanding,
what chaſticements hath the
antiquitie or former age taſted of the rigor
of this element, when the great fall
of waters was,The deluge. Geneſis. 7. that couered all ye earth,
when that the vames of heauen were
opened, and that the water did ſurpaſſe
or ouerwhelmed the moſt hyeſt mountaines,
the heigth of fiftene fadome, as
Moyſes witneſſeth in Geneſis. How oftentimes
hath Egypt bene ouerflowen
when that Nille deriued from his chanel

how many thouſands of men haue loſte
their liues, and haue bene deuoured of
fiſhes. Gréeke lande hath felt the furie of
the waters, and can witneſſe the ſame,
when the greate floud or deluge of waters
did ouerrun the moſt part of Theſſalie,
the people being afrayed all to be
drowned. What loſſe and harme receyued
the Romaines, in the yeare a thouſand,
fiue hundreth,The foure elementes executors of Gods vvrath. thirtie? by the ſwelling
and ouerflowing of the floud of Tiber,
the which did riſe after ſuch a ſorte,
that it ouerwhelmed houſes, and hie
toures in their citie, and beſide the loſſe
of Bridges that were broken, the loſſe
of goods, golde, ſiluer, wine, corne, cloth
of ſilke, oyles, woolles, and other mouables,
to the value of thrée Mſllions of
golde: there died more than thrée hundreth
men, beſide women and children,
which were drowned by violence of the
waters of the ſaid floud, as the Elders
do write. Ieſpar Contarenus in his boks
of the foure elementes writeth, that in
our time, Vallencia a Citie in Spaine,

with al the Citizens, were almoſt drowned
by a violent & an vnknown water,
after ſuch ſorte, that if the Citizens had
not ſodainlye giuen ſuccor in rampairing
and fencing, there had bene no other
hope of ſafegard. Without making
mention of an infinite of other harmes
and domages, that we haue receyued,
ſince this fiue or ſixe thouſande yeares
that the worlde was created, of raynes,
hayles, froſtes, ſnowes, and other lyke
iniuries, that depend of the rigor of this
element.
            What is there more wonderfull in
nature than fier,Man afflicted by fier. by the benefite wherof
all our meates are ſeaſoned, the life of
many things is, Mettalles are mingled
and made flexible: iron is daunted, made
pliable and ouercōmed: the lime ſtones,
that we vſe for ye plaſtring & trimming
of our houſes and edifices, are burned
and ſoftned in the bellie or middeſt of
the earth, by his aide and help. And notwithſtanding,Gen. ca. 9.
how manye famous Cities
haue bene fiered, burned & brought

to aſhes by the vertue of this element,
the moſte auncienteſt witneſſe is in the
holie ſcripture, of Sodome and Gomor,
on the which our Lorde God poured or
rained downe fier and brimſtone, and
the laſt ſcourge and deſtruction of the
vniuerſall world ſhalbe executed by the
furie of this element, as it is written by
by the Prophets and Apoſtles. If that I
would ſet out at large and by order, the
proude Cities and Prouinces that haue
bene burned in diuers places of the
world, by the incurſiō and inſurrection
of the warre, but onely in our time, the
Tragedie would be exceſſiue. But thoſe
that are curious of ſuch things, let them
read Strabo in his twelfth booke, & Ruffinus
treating of Euſebius workes, and
Amianus Marcelinus, where they ſhall
finde alſo that the flames of fier proceading
from the tops of hilles or mountaines,
and other bowels of the earth,
haue burned manye townes with their
inhabitants. In the time of Lucius Marcus,
& Sextus Iulius the Conſuls, there

procéeded ſo great flame from two hilsPlinie.
or mountaines, that all the townes and
mountaines about them were burned,
and many inhabitants burned and conſumed
by the violence of the flames that
came forth by great violence.The miſerie of man by thunders lightninges and tempeſts. I can in
like caſe make mention of thunders and
lightnings, and how many noble perſonages
haue bene conſumed and killed
by this kinde of ſodaine death, as Zoraſtus,
King of the Bactrians, Captaine in
the warre of Thebes, Aiax after the deſtruction
of Troie, Anaſtatius the Emperor,
when he had raigned .xxvij. yeres,
Carius alſo and manye other Kings and
Emperors that haue taken their end by
this kind of death. The ayre is ſo requiſite,
for the preſeruation of our humanitie,
that there is no liuing beaſt that
can haue life without the vſe thereof.
And yet notwithſtāding, it is ſo pernicious
to humaine kinde when it putrifiethMen afflicted by the ayre.
and corrupteth, that the moſt part of
peſtilences before mencioned, take their
originall and beginning, as from their

verie Author. The earth that is the moſt
gentilleſt and tractableſt of all the elements,
which is our common mother of
all, receiuing vs whē that we are borne,
that nouriſheth vs and ſuſtaineth vs,
and in the end receyueth vs into hir bowels
as into a bed, and kéepeth vs vntil
the day that it pleaſeth God to call vs toMan afflicted by the earth.
appeare and come forth to his iudgement,
and notwithſtanding, it bringeth
forth all the venims and poyſons, with
the which our life is daily aſſaulted. And
ſometimes by theſe earthquakes and internall
agitations, many townes haue
bene weakened, and many thouſands of
men ſwallowed vp in theſe openings
and earthquakes. In the time that Mithridates
raigned, the earth beganne to
moue, and to ſhake with ſuche a rigor
and furie, that there was not only manye
townes raſed, but alſo there was aboue
a hundreth thouſande men ſwallowed
and ouerwhelmed. In the time or
raigne of Conſtantine, ſonne to ye Emperor
Conſtantine, there were ſuche a

number of townes ouerthrowne,Man afflicted by earthquakes. and
ſwallowed vp with their inhabitants in
Aſia by earthquakes, that the Hiſtoriographes
had much to do to number thē.
In the time of Iſocratus and Plato, the
concauits & bottoms of the earth, did open
in Europe, by ſuche vehemencie,
that two great Cities with their inhabitants
were ſwallowed vp in a moment.
There is not reade to our memorie, nor
to the memorie of man a more dreadfull
earthquake, than that which happened
in the raigne of Tiberius Ceſar, by the
which, in the ſpace of one night twelue
Cities were ſwallowed vp with their
goods and inhabitants, amōg the which
Apolonia, Epheſia, Ceſaria, Philadelphia,
and manye others numbred.The little beaſts war vpon mā and encreaſeth his miſeries. And
yet it is a thing more to be maruelled
at, and that turneth to more confuſion
the pride and loftineſſe of men, that the
earth bringeth forth certaine littel beaſtes,
that oppreſſe and make war vpon
him, yea, chaſe, excile and baniſhe him,
from his habitation and dwelling, the

which maye be thought vntrue and fabellous,
if it were not for the great nū
               ber
of Hiſtorians and Writers y• which
ſhew iuſt & true witneſſe thereof. Elian
writeth, yt there increaſed or multiplied
ſuch a nūber of Rates in certaine places
of Italie, that for the deſtructiō that they
made to rootes of trées and herbes (for
the which there was no remedie) canſed
ſuch a famine to be, that the inhabitants
were conſtrayned to forſake their countrie.
Marcus Varonus, one of the worthieſt
writers that euer writ in Latine,
ſayth, that in Spaine there was a great
Borough, ſituated on a ſandie ground,
that was ſo vndermined with Cunnies
that in the ende the inhabitants did forſake
it, for feare to haue ſunke into the
holes or dennes of theſe littel beaſtes, by
whoſe meane it was at the laſt ouerthrowne.
The ſame Author writeth, that
there was a town in Fraunce that was
left vninhabited, bicauſe of ye multitude
of frogs. In Affrica the like chaūce happened
by Graſhoppers. Theophraſtus
               
maketh mention of a certaine Prouince
that they cauſed the people to diſhabit.
Plinie reciteth that there is a Prouince
on the limits of Ethiopia, whereas the
Antes and Scorpions with other vermin
exiled the men that there did inhabit.
The Flies cauſed the Megarenſians
to depart out of their Countrie. The Aſpes
chaſed the Ethiopiās. Athenor writeth
that honie Bées and other flies chaſed
out of a towne all the inhabitantes
thereof, & made their hiues in their houſes.
What witneſſe of our humaine infirmitie
is here declared in al theſe thinges?
O what diſcipline or ſchoole is this,
for to teach man to know himſelfe? what
a maruell of the powre of God is thys
toward his creatures? of whom the iudgementes
are ſo terrible and fearfull,
that as ſoone as man thinketh to ſpread
out his horns, or to riſe againſt his god,
he can ſo well at the firſt bridle and pull
down his boldneſſe and proude lookes, &
ſo tame him, that not onely he doth ſend
Heraulds and forerūners of his wrath,

war, famine & peſtilence, but in abunding,
there is neither element, nor other
brutiſh creature, but that ſéeketh his decaye,
euen to the little beaſts, which are
as miniſters and executors of his diuine
iuſtice, ye which is manifeſt, not only by
the witneſſing of ye Heathen, but alſo by
holie Scripture, when that the Frogs &
Graſhoppers did forſake their places,Exod. 8. & 9. Cap.
for to aſcende and come vp to the chambers,
and euen to the bed of the obſtinate
Pharao. We haue here before ſhewed a
ſtraunge philoſophie of the miſerie of
man. For if man were of yron, or as
hard as a Diamond, it is maruel howe
he can endure the one halfe of his life,
without being bruſed and broken, ſéeing
the paynes, anguiſhes, trauels and paſſions,
that it behoueth him at all times
to ſuſtain. Notwithſtanding, what miſfortune
ſo euer happē him, what charge
or burthen y• nature doth lay vpon him,
yet he can not, nor wil not hūble himſelf
vnder y• mighty hand of God for to cary
his yoke, nor yet to know himſelfe to be

as he is. Therefore by good right doeth
the Lord God reproue him by his Prophet,
that he hath the forehead of braſſe,Eſay. 4.
and the necke of yron, the which things
being yll vnderſtanded of Plato and of
Plinie, ſéeing the great gulfe of miſeries
wherein man is plunged in, euen from
his birth, to his graue, hathe called nature
cruell and a vſureſſe, the whiche
cauſeth ſo many intereſts to be payd to
man, of his excellency and dignitie, that
they haue eſteemed ye brute beaſtes more
happier than man, but both the one and
the other vnder this name of nature
haue chalenged or complayned on God
of vniuſtice and crueltie. But to proue
the contrary, all the euils and this ſea of
miſerie, wherewith man is charged, cō
               meth
not of the hatred of God, but of
the malice and corruption of man who
is the very Author of all his afflictions
and calamities, for thinking to be equal
with his God, he hath begonne to fal frō
his nobleneſſe, and to efface the ymage
of God grauen in him, and to chaunge

it to the likeneſſe of a Diuell, and therfore
is happened to him that which the
Prophet Dauid ſayth,Pſal. 49. God hath called
man to honor, yet he doeth not conſider
it, and therefore is compared to the beaſtes
that periſh. Here you may ſée that
his proudneſſe, arrogancie and boldeneſſe,
hath bene the cauſe of all the ſores
and maledictions of humaine kind. For
yf it had not bene for the ambition and
deſier to be great (of the firſt man) we
had bene as the Aungels in heauen, ſuch
as we ſhall be at the reſurrection, and
crowned with honor and glorie. And yet
this is little, as touching the paines and
afflictions before mencioned, which are
as a leaning ſtock to our bodies, but the
diſeaſes of the ſpirite is much worſe, the
which are muche more perillous than
the afflictions of the bodie. For thoſe of
the bodie, ſayth Plutarchus, do manifeſt
and ſhew out of themſelues, eyther by
the yll colour of the face, or by the mouing
of the thumbe, or els by ſome other
meanes or griefe, and beyng knowen,

the remedies are incontinēt ſought for.Man afflicted by the maladies of the ſpirite.
But as touching the maladies of the
ſpirite, he that is ſicke, cannot iudge by
ſignes or otherwiſe his griefe, for it is
in the ſpirite, who can then giue iudgement?
& therfore the pacient not knowing
his diſeaſe, ſéeketh not alſo for remedie.
Furthermore there is a greater
abuſe, for thoſe that haue their bodies
afflicted, we call them by the name of
ſicke, the which doth torment them, as
if they were perſecuted with a franſie,
we name them franticke: if they be pained
in their ioyntes, we ſaye they haue
the Gout: if they ſhake, we ſay they haue
the Palſey. But O immortall God we
do the contrarie to the afflicted ſpirites,
for thoſe that are wrathfull, burne in
their paſſion: thoſe that wound one and
kill another, we call them hardie and
ſtrong, & we ſay that they eſteme much
honor and commendation: they that violate
women and virgins, we call that
bearing of loue: thoſe that are proude,
and that ſéeke by all vnlawfull meanes

to climbe vp to high dignities, we name
them graue, honorable, men of good demeanor
and ripe iudgement: thoſe that
are couetous, and that become riche in
ſhort times, & that beguile their neighbor
by many ſubtilties & inuētions, we
call this good huſbandrie, & ſo forth euen
of al the reſt. Here you may ſée how that
we cloke all theſe things. Here you may
ſée that this ſhadowing or cloking of
vice vnder ye mantell of vertue, is cauſe
of ſo many euils and miſchiefes, as continually
happen and fall vpon vs, making
by the onely name, worthie of honor,
the things that merite blame and
diſhonor, of the whiche the moſt part of
humaine ſpirits at this day are tormented
and vexed, as we haue done thoſe of
the bodie: what eloquence or dignitie of
worde might ſatiſfice? what maieſtie
of ſentences might comprehende them?
for ſeeing that the worlde wherein we
are, is at this daye drowned in ſo manie
kindes of vices, that it ſéemeth to be properly,
the ſinke whereas all the wickedneſſe

of the former age hath bene emptied
and poured. Beginne we of couetouſneſſe,
who is it that euer ſaw it déeper
rooted in all eſtates of the world, thā
at this preſent? but what other thing are
theſe Cities, Common welths, Prouinces
and kingdomes of this world, (if we
will well conſider it) but verie ſhoppes
and ſtorehouſes of auarice & couetouſneſſe?Eſay. 2.
This is the ſeaſon that the Prophet
Eſay ſpeaketh of,Againſt couetouſneſſe. their land is full
of ſiluer and golde, neither is there anye
ende of their treaſure. This is the world
that ye Prophet did foreſhew, they ioyne
houſe to houſe,Eſay. 5. and lande to lande, as
thoughe they themſelues woulde alone
dwell vpon the earth. And of this peſtilēt
roote of couetouſueſſe procedeth as from
their liuely Welſpring, an infinit number
of euils that are poured out on the
earth, and ſpred through all the partes
of the world. Of the original of the moſt
parte of warres, of the great effuſion of
bloud, with the which the earth is ouerflowen,
of the murthers, treaſons, ſacriledges,

thefts, pilfreys, vſuries, fraudes,
forſwearings, the corruption of witneſſes,
peruerting of iudgementes, from
thence the ſubtilties and practiſes procéede,
in corrupting one and poyſoning
another, from thence the immoralitie
and lingring of proces do procede: to be
ſhort, from thence commeth all kinde of
corruption and euill, and neuertheleſſe,
the vice and ſinne of men are ſo familiar,
that there can ſcant be found any eſtate,
but that therewith is polluted. Alſo
the Eccleſiaſticall ſort, Iudas, and
Simon Magus ſowed the firſte ſéede
therof, the which hath ſo fructified ſince,
that many others haue taſted and felt
therof. At ſuch time as the Church was
poore, néedye, perſecuted and ſcattered by
the Tyrants and Infidels, and that it
was gouerned by poore fiſhermen, they
nouriſhed theſe poore, and ſuffered not
that anye one ſhoulde want. But nowe
that it is at the higheſt degrée of riches,
and that it is gouerned by the greate
Prelates, ſhe hath no more care for the

members of Ieſus Chriſt, by ſuch ſorte,
that now we may ſée the ſtréetes full of
poore beggars, bare, naked, all clad with
pouertie, wyth an infinite number of
baniſhed women, and driuen out of their
countries, by the inſurrection of wars,
bearing their children in their armes.
And in the meane time theſe Prelates
kéepe cloſe the benefit of him that was
crucified for them, and are intertayned
in their pomp and deliciouſneſſe, the other
ſorte doe kéepe it, and hourde it vp
with ſuche curioſitie, that they make it
their God, and will rather let a poore bodie
die at their gates, than to refreſhe
him with a cup of water, in ſuch ſorte
that I am aſhamed to ſhew or declare a
hiſtorie almoſt monſtrous, of the couetouſneſſe
of an Italian Prelate,The mō
                  ſtrous couetouſnes of a Prelate. named
Angelot, which was a Cardinall, for he
was ſo empoiſoned with this curſed poiſon
of auarice, that when the horſkepers
had giuen toward the night Otes to his
horſes, he woulde come into the ſtable
by a priuy way alone, and without light

to ſteale or take awaye the Otes & Prouander
from his owne horſes, and ſo
continued manie nightes, till the horſekeper
perceiuing his horſes waxe leane
did hyde himſelfe in the ſtable, and taking
my Lord with the maner, did giue
him ſo many ſtrokes with ye Hay forke,
that he was faine to beare him into hys
Chamber, for condigne or iuſt recompence
of his wicked and burning couetouſneſſe.
The which ſhould ſéeme to be
a fable and ridiculous, but that Philelpheus
and Iouian Pontanus in his booke
of Liberality, and many other ſage writers
make mention. Behold the fruits,
beholde the rewardes of thys curſed riches,
the whiche is gathered togither
with many ſharpe & bitter cares, and is
kept with continual feare, & then is left
with many ſighes & teares: of the which
the auncient Romaines ſhoulde be good
and manifeſt witneſſes, if we woulde
bring in their Authors, the which when
that their Common weale was gouerned
by poore rulers, it hath always proſpered,

but ſince that ſhe was ſwelled &
puffed vp by the victories of hir Predeceſſors,
as of the deſtruction of Corinth,
of Achaia, of Antioche, of Fraunce, of
Greece, of Italie, of Egypt & of Spaine,
their Empire began to declyne: for
their victories, prayes and ſpoyles, were
the corrupting of good maners, and of
their auncient inſtitution & diſcipline,
the occaſion & original of cruel warres,
for that that coulde not be ouercommed
by violence and force of Armes, was vā
               quiſhed
by lecherie and ſuperfluitie, in
ſuch ſort that their riches are reuenged
againſt themſelues, and to them is happened
as to a clothe that engendreth his
Moth, and to the corne that engendreth
wormes that deuour it. The which the
great King Salomon hauing well conſidered
in himſelfe, when that he had heaped
and gathered togither ſo much treaſure,
that his riches excéeded the glory of
all other Kings of the Earth, and that
he had proued the benefits that procéede
of the goods of this worlde, he left vs his

iudgement and aduiſe by writing, as
followeth:Eccle. I (ſayth he) made gorgeous,
faire works, and builded me houſes, and
planted Vineyardes, I made me Orchardes
and Gardens of pleaſure, and
planted trées in thē of all maner fruits,
I made Pooles of water to water the
gréene and fruitfull trées withall, I
bought ſeruants and Maidens and had
a great houſhold, as for cattel and ſhéepe
I haue more ſubſtance of them than all
they that were before me in Ieruſalem,
I gathered ſiluer and golde togither, euen
a treaſure of Kings and Landes, I
prouided me ſingers and women which
could play of Inſtruments to make mē
mirth and paſtime, I gat me Pſalteries
and ſongs of Muſicke, and I was greater
and in more worſhippe than all my
predeceſſors in Ieruſalem, this my hart
reioyced in all that I did, and this was
the porcion of all my trauell. And when
I conſidered all the works that my hād
had wrought, & all the labor that I had
taken therein, loe all was but vanitie

and variation of minde, and nothing of
any value vnder the Sunne. Harken
now what the Prophet Baruch ſayeth,
whome we ſhall finde to be a more ſharper
Surgion againſt thoſe that are ſo
affectioned in their pompes and riches:
Where are (ſayth he) the Princes of the
Heathen become,Baruch. 3. and ſuch as ruled the
beaſtes on earth, they that had their paſtime
with the Fowles of the ayre, they
that hoorded vp ſiluer and golde (wherein
men truſt ſo much) and made no end
of their gathering, what is become of
them that coyned ſiluer and were ſo
carefull, and coulde not bring their
workes to paſſe, they be rooted oute and
gone down to hel, & other men are come
vp in their ſteades. Leaue we therefore
theſe old couetous mē, ydolaters of their
treaſures, with the Patrocleus of Ariſtophanus,
the Pigmalion of Virgil, the Polymneſtor
of Properceus, the Galeran
of Martiall, with the couetous rich man
mēcioned in holie Scripture: knowing
that the ſpirites of men which of nature

are diuine and celeſtiall, hath no porciō
with golde and ſiluer, which is no other
thing but the very mucke of the earth.
            Let vs ſpeake nowe of another vice
which is called Enuie, the which as Ariſtippus
doth affirme, is next parent to
the former,Enuy a maladie of the ſpirite. as the mother and the daughter,
for the one engendreth the other.
Howe manye afflicted ſoules are there
with this maladie. The ſeaſon is nowe
come, that all y• world is no other thing,
than a verie place of enuious, it is the
moſt auncienteſt and eldeſt of all, and
notwithſtanding it is the moſt practiſe
of our age, and ſéemeth to returne to his
firſt infancie, the experience of the firſte
age was in Adam and the Serpent, in
Abel and Caine, in Iacob and Eſau, in
Ioſeph and his brethren, in Saul and
Dauid, in Achitophell and Thuſi, in Aman
and Mardocheus, the whiche purſued
not one another for the riches that
they had, but for the enuy yt the one bare
to the other, but that was little to that
which daily is put in vre amōg the chriſtians

for our worlde is ſo farre out of
ſquare, that if there might be found one
man amongſt vs, that had the bewtie of
Abſalon, the ſtrength of Sampſon, the
wiſedome of Salomon, the agilitie of Azacl,
the riches of Creſſus, the liberalitie
of Alexander, the vigor and dexteritie of
Hector, the eloquence of Homer, the fortune
of Auguſtus, the iuſtice of Traianus,
the zeale of Cicero, he might be aſſured
that he ſhoulde not be orned with
ſo many graces, as purſued of a number
of enuious. And this wicked vice cleaueth
not onely to thoſe that enioy fortune
meaſurably, but vnto the higheſt,
and thoſe that are in the higheſt degrée,
for when they are at the moſte higheſt
degrée of Fortunes wheele, and when
they thinke to be in peaceable poſſeſſion
of the fauor of Kings and of Princes, in
the meane time the enimie ſhal conſpire
their death, and cauſe them to be diſdayued:
and therefore the wiſe Emperour
Marcus Aurelius ſaide that Enuie was
a Serpent ſo enuenimed, that there

was neuer mortall among the mortals,
but that of hir teeth haue bene bitten, of
hir clawes haue bene ſcratched, troden
vnder hir féete: and empoiſoned with hir
poyſō, I haue red (ſaith he) many bookes,
Gréekes, Latines, Hebrues & Chaldeys,
I haue conferred with many wiſe men
for to finde a remedie againſt the enuious
man, and for all this, I haue founde
no other meanes for to auoyde Enuie,
but to auoyd fortune being proſperous,
the reaſō is, for that we are the children
of Enuy, being born in Enuie, & he that
leaueth moſt goods, leaueth moſt Enuie,
& for this cauſe the Elders coūſelled the
rich y• they ſhoulde not kepe them neare
the poore, and the poore that they ſhoulde
not dwell neare the rich, for of the riches
of y• riche groweth vp the ſéede of Enuie
of the poore. I might here alſo make ā
long narration of the ambitiō and pride
that reigneth this day amongſt vs,Ambition a maladie of the ſpirite. for
who euer ſawe the exceſſiue pompes in
all eſtates, as we ſée at this preſent, ſo
that we may well name our worlde, a

worlde of Sattin, of Veluet, of Purple,
and of Silke, of the whiche we take ſo
much paine to decke this carin carcaſſe
ſo curiouſly, and in the meane time we
care not nor kéepe no count if our poore
Soule remain foule and ful of ſores and
woundes, and rent by a great many of
enormious and haynous ſinnes, with ye
which it is compaſſed, but let vs beware
after all theſe things that that happen
not to vs which the Prophete did write
againſt the women of Ieruſalem, who
after he had reproned their pryde, their
hie lookes vnſhamefaſt, the mouing or
rowling of their eyes, their rier of their
heades, the meaſure of their goings, footings
or trippings, their chayns, Iuels,
bracelets, girdels, eare rings & other faciōs
of their attier by too much vain glorie.
It ſhal happen to you, ſaith the Lord
of hoſtes, that in ſteade of perfumes and
ſwéete ſmell, you ſhall haue ſtinke, in
ſteade of a girdle, a rope, in ſteade of
curled haire, baldneſſe, and the fayreſt
yong men amōg you ſhal paſſe thorow ye
               
edge of the ſword, & the ſtrongeſt & hardieſt
ſhalbe ſlain and die in the warres.
            We may alſo adde another affliction
of the ſpirite to the former which is named
Loue,Loue is counted among the moſt grieuous maladies of the ſpirite. but so contagious that al the
eſtates of the worlde doe féele it, an euil
ſo peſtilent and venemous, that it plungeth
and intermedleth among all ages
indifferently, as all the diuels doe amōg
all the Elementes without excepting
perſons or qualitie of olde or yong, fooliſhe
or diſcrete, of féeble or ſtrong. And
the greateſt pain in this maladie is that
they become mad and out of their wits,
if they be not wel treated and medicined
at the firſt. And therefore it is that Paulus
Aeginetaus in his thirde booke ordeined
to al thoſe that are perſecuted of this
furor of euill, a rule howe to liue. The
which Ompercleus following the coūſel
of Plato, ordained alſo who made two
kindes of furies, of the whiche he called
one in Gréeke Exotikon, whych ſignifieth
in Latine Amatorium, and in Engliſhe
Loue. I haue ſéene thoſe opened,

that haue died of this maladie, that had
their bowels ſhronke, their poore heart
all burned, their Liuer and Lightes all
vades and conſumed, their Braines endomaged,
and I thynke that their poore
ſoule was burned by the vehement and
exceſſiue heate that they did indure, whē
that the rage of Loue had ouercomme
them, and euen as the cure of this maladie
is vncurable, alſo the originall is
very doubtful to thoſe that haue writtē.
The Phiſitions ſaye, that this rage of
Loue that preſſeth ſo ſore, and that is
ſpred through the worlde, proceedeth of
the correſpondent qualitie of bloude,
and that the complectiō engendreth the
ſame mutuall loue: the Aſtrologians in
like maner ſaye that Loue proceadeth
when that two metting haue one mind,
or that they be chaunged in ſome other
conſtellation, for they be conſtrained to
loue togither. Other Philoſophers haue
ſaide, that when we caſt our ſight vpon
that which we deſire, ſodenly certaine
ſpirits that are engendred of the moſte

perfecteſt part of bloud, proceding from
the heart of the partie which we do loue,
and promptly aſcendeth euen vp to the
eyes, and afterwarde conuerteth into
vapors inuiſible, and entreth into oure
eyes, which are bent to receyue them,
euen ſo as in looking in a glaſſe there remayneth
therein ſome ſpotte by breathing,
and ſo from the eyes it penetrateth
to the heart, and ſo by littell and
little it ſpreadeth all about, and therfore
the miſerable Louer being drawen to,
by the new ſpirites, the which deſire alwayes
to ioine and drawe neare, with
their principall and natural habitation,
is conſtreyned to mourne and lament
his loſt libertie. Others after that they
had ſtudied all that euer they could therin,
and not finding the ſpring and originall
of this ſo furious an euil, haue ſaid
that Loue was one, I know not what,
that came I know not how, and burned
I know not how, a thing verie certaine
and true, for he that doeth conſider, the
ieſtes, facions of doing, countenances,

furies and Eclipſes of theſe poore paſſioned,
he woulde confeſſe, that he neuer
ſawe a more ſtraunger Metamorphoſie,
or ſpectacle more ridiculous, ſodenlye
you ſhall ſée them drowned in teares,
making the aire to ſounde with their
cries, ſighes, plaints, murmurings and
imprecations, another time you ſhall ſée
them colde, frozen, & in a traunce, their
faces pale and chaunged, other times, if
y• they haue had any good lucke, or other
gentle entertainment of the thing that
they loue,Geſtes and countenances ridiculous of Louers. you ſhall ſee thē gay, chearfull
and pleaſant, ſo that you woulde iudge
that they were chaūged into ſome other
forme, ſomtimes they loue to be ſolitary
and ſeeke ſecrete places, to ſpeake and
reaſon with themſelues, and ſometimes
ye ſhall ſee them paſſe fiue or ſix times a
day through a ſtreat, for to ſpie whether
that they maye haue any looke of the eye
of hir whom they loue, and in the mean
time the poore Pages and Verlets haue
their legs bruſed with running, their
armes broken with rubbing, ſpunging,

bruſhing, trimming and making clean
the Gentleman. And if that he chaunce
to haue any ſparke of ieloſie, then they
begin to rage and the pacientes are in
extréeme perill, the force and violence of
the maladie ſtriueth againſt the nature,
it is a Catharre that burneth thē, there
is no liue nor ſenſible part within them
but that is grieued, and then if they be
fearfull, they become franticke and hardie,
there is neither Arte, inuētion, craft
or conſpiracie, but that cōmeth out: they
be come Lycantropes and goe all the
night like raging wolues. And although
the maladie of it ſelfe is fantaſticall ynough,
yet according to the humor that
ſhe méeteth, ſhe worketh maruellous effectes,
for if the Louer be poore, there is
no office of humanitie, but that he ſheweth
it, euen to ſacrifice, and to put him
ſelfe in peril, if néede ſhall require. If he
be rich, his purſe (as the Gréekes terme
it) is tied with a Léeke blade, thoughe he
be couetous, he becōmeth then prodigal,
there is no bagge that he will ſpare to

emptye, ſo great is the power of this
poyſon, the which hath moued Plautus
to ſay, that Loue was the firſt inuenter
of beggerie. If the Louer be learned,
& that his ſpirits be any thing weakned
you ſhall ſée him faigne a ſea of teares,
a Lake of miſeries, to double hys
plaintes, accuſe the heauen, make an
Anotomie of his hart, frieſe the Sōmer,
burne the Winter, worſhippe, playe the
Idolater, wonder, to faigne Paradiſe, to
forge Hel,Siſiphus that turned his rochet, Tantalus that died for thirſt neare the vvaters, Titius, of vvhome the famiſhed Rauen deuoured his heart. counterfet Siſiphus, play Tā
                  talus,
feigne Titius, with a thouſande
other toies. And if they be minded to exalt
ye which they loue, then what is ther
here but a bewtye, hir browes, arches,
hir eyes After gemells, hir lookes, lightnings,
hir mouth, Coral, hir téeth, pearls
of Orient, hir breath, balme, amber, and
muſke, hir throte of ſnowe, hir necke of
milke, the mountanes or dugs that ſhe
hath on hir breſt, balles or apples of Aliblaſter.
And generally al the reſt of the
bodie is no other but a prodigalitie and
treaſure of heauen and of nature, which

ſhe hath reſerued to pleaſe or agrée in al
perfection to the thing that they loue.
Here you maye ſée howe thys cruell
maladie of Loue tormenteth thoſe that
are attained of this mortall poyſon, and
notwithſtanding, there are ſo manye
people, Nations and Prouinces, ſo
charged with theſe furious aſſaultes,
that if there were an armie made of al y•
Louers that are in y• world, there is no
Emperor nor Monarch, but woulde be
afraide to ſée ſuche a number of fooles in
a companie. And neuertheleſſe this peſtilent
euill, by cuſtome it hath got ſo
much on humaine kinde, that there can
no remedie be founde althoughe that
many medicins,They that haue vvritten the remedies of Loue could not helpe themſelues. Gréekes and Arabians
haue employed all their wit and policie
for to remedy this paſſion. Samocraceus,
Nigideus, and Ouid haue written many
great volumes of the remedie of Loue,
by the whiche they ſhewe the remedies
for others, but they can find no remedy
for themſelues,An example of a furious Loue. for that all thrée died,
purſued & deſtroyed, not for the harmes

that they did at Rome, but for the Loues
that they inuented. The Emperor Marcus
Aurelius knowing that Fauſtine his
wife loued a Ruffian,The furious loue of Fauſtine, vvyfe to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, the childe had the like qualities. ſo that ſhe was
vnpacient, and was in perill of death
for ye furious deſier that ſhe had to haue
him in hir poſſeſſion, aſſembled a great
many people learned, and of al faculties
and ſciences, for to giùe him counſell to
quench the burning heat that conſumed
hir by little and little. But after manye
reſolutions, certayne of hys Nobles
counſelled him to kill him whome hys
wife loued, and that one ſhould giue hir
ſecretly of his bloud to drinke, the which
was promptlye executed. This remedie
was great, for hir affection was quenched.
And yet it was not of ſo great efficacie
as Iulìus Capitolin writeth, but
that Comodus whome they engendred
afterwardes, was bloudie and cruell,
and was more like in conditions to
the Ruffian,Entropeus in the life of Comodus. than to the father, and alſo
was daily conuerſant with the Ruffiās,
and delighted more in their companie

than in the companie of others, ſo that
it ſéemed that the Mothers paſſion was
tranſported to the childe. But this is
little to that whych I haue read in manye
Hiſtories, that things are come to
ſuch deſolation, that when this fooliſhe
frenſie doth take holde of vs, it rendreth
vs brutiſh and mad, as it hath bene manifeſtly
and euidently ſhewed and ſéene
in a yong Lad being of the higheſt kinred
in Athens, and well knowen of all
the Citizens of the Citie, the which hauing
many times beheld a faire ſtatute
of Marble very excellentlye wrought,
whiche was in a publicke place of Athens,
               The powre of Loue.
he was ſo ſtricken with the loue of it,
that he would neuer léeſe the ſight
of it, and alwayes remayned by it, embracing
and kiſſing it, as if it had bene
a liuing ſoule. And when that he was
out of hir ſight, he wept and lamented
ſo pitifully, that it woulde haue moued
the moſt conſtanteſt to pitie, and in the
ende this paſſion got ſo much powre on
him, & was brought to ſuch extremitie,

that he deſired the Senatours to ſell it
him at what price they woulde, to the
ende y• he might haue it to beare about
with him, the which thing they woulde
not graunt, for that it was a publicke
work, and that their powre or auctority
extended not ſo far: wherefore the yong,
man cauſed to be made a rich crowne of
gold with other ſumpteous ornaments,
and went to the Image, ſet the crowne
on hir heade, and decked hir with precious
veſtimentes, and then began to call
vpon hir and worſhippe hir with ſuch
obſtenation and partenacitie, that the
commō ſort were aſhamed of his fooliſh
and ridiculous loue, ſo that they defēded
him to approch or reſorte to the Image
anye more, ſo that the yongling ſéeing
himſelfe to be depriued and kept backe
from that which was more deare to him
than his life, killed himſelfe. For the
vertue of this paſſion is ſuch, that after
it hath entred into the heart of men, it
walketh vncurable by the moſt liuelieſt
and ſenſible partes of the bodie, and

being in ful poſſeſſion of vs, ſhe cauſeth
an infinit number of teares and ſighes
to be powred oute, ſo that oftentimes it
taketh awaye oure life. The which the
great philoſopher Apolonus Thianeus
confirmed to the King of Babilon,
               There is no martyrdome that may compare to Loue as Apolonus Thianeus vvitneſſeth who
moſt earneſtly praied him to ſhewe him
the moſt grieuous and cruelleſt tormēt
that he might inuent by all the ſecretes
of philoſophie, for to puniſh and chaſtice
a yong Gentleman whom he had found
a bed with one of his damſels whiche he
fauoured. The moſte greateſt torment,
ſayth the Philoſopher that I can ſhewe
thée, and inuent for to puniſhe him, is
that thou ſaue his life, for thou ſhalt ſee
by little and little, the burning heate of
loue to get ſo muche on him as it hathe
alredy begon, that the torment that he
ſhall endure wil be ſo great that he ſhal
not imagine nor find remedy therefore,
and he ſhall finde himſelfe ſo ſtirred and
prouoked with diuers cogitations and
thoughtes, that he ſhall burne and conſume
in this flame as ye Butterflie doth

in a candel, in ſuch ſort that his life ſhal
be no more life, but a verie death, more
crueller than if he paſſed throughe the
hands of al the tyrants and tormenters
of the worlde.Loue the corruption of youth in our time. Here is in ſome the cauſe
why I haue treated at large on this
paſſion of Loue, which is the whole decay
of the moſt part of youth in our age,
for haue they neuer ſo little ſet their foote
or mindes on y• pleaſures of this world,
they prepare themſelues to loue, then
youth, libertie, and riches, are the worſt
things in this world, and in thoſe wicked
occupations they lead without fruit
the beſt part of their life. Thē after this
great ſea of miſeries with the which mā
is as it were ouerwhelmed euē from hisDiſcourſe of the miſerie of the aged.
birth, age commeth on, and then when
we ought to reſt, the ſores and dolors
are renewed, we muſt pay the rigorous
vſuries and cruell intereſtes of all the
faults and exceſſe that we haue made in
our life, for the heart is afflicted, the
brayne is troubled, ye ſpirit languiſheth,
the breath ſtinketh, the face is withered,

the bodie is crooked, the noſe dropping,
the ſight is troubled, the haires fall, the
téeth are rotten,Great mutations in age. to be ſhort there is alwayes
ſome looſe nayle, and this bodie
is a ſimilitude of death, without putting
in count many diſeaſes of the ſpirit that
age is ſubiect to. They are prompte to
wrath, harde to appeaſe, light of beliefe,
forget oftentimes, praiſe their Elders,
and diſpraiſe the wiſe, they are ſadde,
melancholike, couetous, ſuſpitious, and
difficile: to be ſhorte, it is the retraite
whereas are emptied and purged al the
vices and vncleanneſſe of our age. The
whiche being well conſidered by the
Emperor Auguſtus ſaid, that whē men
had liued fiftie yeares, they ought to die
or deſier to be killed, bicauſe that till
that time was the pleaſure of mannes
felicity, and that which is more or aboue
that age paſſeth in ſorrow and grieuous
ſicknes vnſupportable, death of childrē,
loſſe of goods, to burie his friendes, ſuſtaine
proceſſe, paye debtes, and in other
infinit trauels, ſo that it were better to

haue the eyes cloſed wayting for theyr
graue, than to behold theſe things with
their eyes in this crooked age, the which
thing the Prophet foreſéeing, cried out
to God, ſaying, Lorde withdraw not thy
hand from me when I am olde, or when
that I am aſſailed of age. We haue now
to my iudgement ſufficientlye ſhewed
the maledictions and miſeries wherein
man is wrapped whilſt he playeth his
Tragedie in the circle of this world, but
if his entrie be maruellous, miſerable,
difficill, and perilous, no doubt his iſſue
and departing is not leſſe, and whereas
we haue ſhewed manye ſtraunge childings
and dreadfull: ſo is there alſo
ſtraunge ſortes of death muche more
horrible and wonderfull.The miſeries of death. This therfore
is the laſte ſeale and laſte confirmation
of all the actes & déedes of the infelicitie
of oure life: after that man hath ſighed
and ſorrowed all hys lyfe vnder the
vnſupportable déedes & heauie burthens
of all his euilles, he is forced to liue
always in feare, waiting for death, and

oftentimes by vncredible torments. At
the whiche the greate Doctor Sainct
Auguſtine maruelling,Auguſt. Soli loquicrum the firſt booke, cha. 2. ſetteth forth his
complaint to God after this ſorte, O
Lord after we haue ſuſtained ſo manye
miſeries and afflictiōs, the vntollerable
ſtroke of death commeth, that rauiſheth
thy creatures by infinite wayes and
meanes, ſome he ouercommeth with
Feuers or Agues, others by ſome
extréeme dolor, an other by hunger, an
other by thirſt, other by fier, others by
water, others by iron, others by poiſon,
others by feare, others are ſmothered,
others are choked, others are torne of
wilde beaſts, others deuoured of foules
of the ayre, others are made meate for
fiſhes, and others for wormes, and for al
this man knoweth not his end, & when
he thinketh himſelfe moſte at reſt, he falleth
and periſſheth. It is therefore the
moſt dreadfulleſt of all dreadfull, ye moſt
terribleſt of all terrible when that the
bodie ſeparateth frō the ſoule: but what
ſpectacle is it to ſée in a bed him that is

oppreſſed with the pangs of death, what
ſhaking,A ſtraunge ſpectacle to ſee man at the point of death. what feare, what alteration
and chaunging in all the bandes of nature,
the féete become colde, y• face pale,
the eyes bollow, the lips and the mouth
to retire, the thombe to deminiſhe, the
tongue waxeth blacke, the téeth doe
cloſe, the breath faileth, the ſweate colde
appeareth by violence of the ſickeneſſe,
which is a certain token that nature is
ouercome. Then whē it commeth to the
laſt gaſpe, or at the ſorrowful departure
that the ſoule maketh frō his habitacle,
all the veſſels and bandes of nature are
broken, withoute putting in count the
furious aſſaultes that the diuelles and
wicked ſpirites reare againſt vs when
y• they are aſſured of our end,Violent temptatìons in death. for there is
no inuention, craft, cōſpiracy or practiſe
but that is then wrought for to bring vs
into a preſumption to haue liued well, &
that oure might be fixed vpon that falſe
opinion, and not on the mercie of Ieſus
Chriſt, or els laying before vs an infinit
number of grieuous and enormeous

ſinnes that we haue committed in oure
life time, to the ende to bring vs in miſtruſt
or diſpaire of Gods mercie, it is
the howre, the moment and the poynt
whereas Sathan doeth his powre to
ſtriue againſt God, for to let or hinder
the ſaluation of mankinde: and he is
more buſier in theſe latter days for that
he knoweth that his time is but ſhort, &
that the end of his kingdom is at hād, &
therfore he is the more enflamed, ſo that
he doth practiſe that which he did when
he knew that our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt
drue neare to the poſſeſſed of diuels, for
he neuer rageth and tormenteth thoſe
more cruelly, whō he doth poſſeſſe, than
when he knoweth that he muſte depart.
For this cauſe it was,2. Kings. 28. cha. that the Prophet
Dauid did lament for his ſonne Abſalon
ſo bitterlye, ſaying, I woulde that I had
died for thée my childe, knowing that
he was wrapped with an infinite nūber
of grieuous and enormious vices and
ſinnes. Now when that they haue paſſed
that path, and diſgeſted this peare of anguiſhe,

where is become their glorie,
where are their pomps and triumphes,
where are now their volupteouſnes and
wantonneſſe, where are their maieſties,
their excellencies and holineſſe: they are
vaniſhed as the ſhadow, ſayth the Pſal.
It is chaunced to them as to the garmēt
that the wormes haue eaten, and as the
wooll that the Moth hath deuoured, ſaith
the Prophet Eſaye: they are become a
pray for wormes and ſerpents. But let
vs behold man when he is in his graue,
who euer ſaw a monſter more hideous,
what is there more horribe and vile thā
the deade creature, behold the holyneſſe,
excellencie, maieſtie and dignitiy, couered
with a lumpe of earth, here is hym
that was cheriſhed, reuerenced and honoured,
euen to kiſſe his féete & hands,
yet notwithſtanding by a ſodaine mutation
he is become ſo abhominable, that
all the faire and bewtifull Tombes of
Marble and Aliblaſter, all the faire ſtatutes
or Images, Epitaphes and other
funerall pompes, can not ſo well cloke

nor hide them, but that it is well knowē
that it is no other thing but a vile and
ſtinking carin carcaſſe, and to them it
happeneth as Salomon writeth in his
Wiſedome, what hath it profited them,
ſayth he, the pride and great abundance
of riches, all theſe things are paſſed as a
ſhadow, or as the Arrowe that is ſhot to
the white, or as the ſmoke that is diſperſed
with the wind, or as the remembrance
of an hoſt that paſſeth by that is
lodged for one day. Let vs leaue therfore
this bodie ſléeping and reſting in the
earth as in a bed for a ſeaſon, this is, the
moſte doubtfulleſt and perillouſt acte
of all the humaine tragedie. It is that
which Dauid feared ſo muche, that he
prayed God not to enter into iudgemēt
with his ſeruaunt.The miſerie of humaine cretures vvh that God shal appe in iudgement. It behoueth that this
creature appeare before the iudgement
ſeate of God with ſuch a terrour to thoſe
that conſider it well, that there is no
member but ſhaketh, it is the daye that
the Prophet Eſaye ſpeaketh of, that the
Lorde will come like a tempeſt, euerye

ones heart ſhall fayle them,Eſay. 13. and all the
world aſtonied, and then the paines ſhal
be like the paine of a woman that trauelleth,
this is the daye of the Lorde, he
ſhall come as one full of wrath and indignation
for to make the earth deſert,
and roote out from thence the ſinners,
the Sunne ſhall be darkened, and the
Planets ſhal bring forth no more light,
I will trouble (ſayth he) the firmament,
and the earth ſhal moue out of his place
bicauſe of the wroth & indignation of the
Lord God. Heare alſo ye words of our ſauiour
Ieſus Chriſt in Sainct Mathew,
euen as the lightning that riſeth in the
Eaſt and extendeth to the Weſt, ſo ſhal
the comming of the ſonne of man be, the
tribulation then ſhall be ſo great, as the
like hath not bene ſince the beginning
of the worlde vntill now, nor neuer ſhal
be the like, the Sunne ſhall be darkned,
and the Moone ſhall giue no more light,
the ſtarres ſhall fall from Heauen, and
the waues of the ſea ſhall rage, and men
ſhalbe amaſed with feare, and y• powres

of Heauen ſhall moue. Wo ſhall be in
thoſe dayes to them that are with child,
and to them that giue ſucke, but as the
time of Noe was, ſo ſhall the comming
of the ſonne of mā be, for as in the dayes
before the floud, they did eate and drink,
marry and were married, euen vnto the
daye that Noe entred into the Arke, and
knewe nothing till the floud came and
tooke them all away, ſo ſhall the cōming
of the ſonne of man be, and then ſhall al
kindreds of the earth mourne, and ſhall
hide themſelues in dennes and caues in
the mountains, and ſhal ſay vnto them,
fall vpon vs, and hide vs from the face
of him that ſitteth on the throne.
            Blow out the trumpet (ſaith the Prophet
Ioell)Ioel. 2. cha that all ſuch as dwell in the
lande may tremble at it, for the daye of
the Lord commeth, and is hard at hand,
a darke daye, a glouming day, a cloudie
day, yea and a ſtormie daye, before him
ſhalbe a conſuming fier, and behind him
a burning flame. His throne (ſayth Dauiell)
was like the firie flame,Dan. 7. cha and hys

whéeles as the burning fier, there drew
forth a fierie ſtreame and went out from
him, and then after this deuine executiō
of the wrathe and indignation of God,
the dead that are in their graues, ſepulchers,
tombes and monuments, vnderſtanding
his voyce,
                  
                     •
                  phraim 
                     •
                  nd his 
                     •
                  rayers. ſhall riſe and come
forth, the bones and other partes ſhall
finde out their ioints, for to ioine againe
togither with the bodie that the earth
hath putrified and corrupted. All thoſe
that the beaſtes and other birdes of the
aire haue deuoured, all thoſe that the ſea
hath ſwallowed vp, all thoſe that are inuapored
in the ayre, all thoſe that the fier
hath conſumed ſhalbe reduced & brought
to their former ſtate. All the bloude that
the théeues, pyrats, murtherers, tyrants
and falſe Iudges haue vniuſtly ſhedde,
ſhall then appeare before the maieſtie of
God, ſo that there ſhall not one drop of
bloud be loſt from the time of Abell that
was the firſt murthered of men, vntill
the laſt of all, ſo that there ſhall not one
haire periſhe. And if that were a cruell

ſpectacle or ſight, to ſée the beaſtes forſake
the earth, which is their proper element,
flying the wrath and diſpleaſure
of God, and to enter into the Arche of
Noe. How much more fearfull & dreadfull
ought it to be to miſerable ſinners,
to appeare before the deuine Iudge,
where the bookes ſhall be opened, that is
to ſay the enormious ſinnes and offēces
of our poore conſciences ſhalbe then manifeſted
and put in euidence.The terror of Gods iudgement, the vvhich S. Ierome feared ſo much, that he thought alvvays to vnderſtand this voyce, ariſe ye dead and come to your iudgement. If that the
vale of the temple did breake, the earth
quake, the ſunne darken and chaunge
his Eclipſe, for the wrong and iniurie
that was done to Ieſus Chriſt being on
the croſſe, althoughe in nothing he did
offend, what countenance may poore ſinners
holde that haue offended him, blaſphemed,
and prouoked him diuers and
innumerable times. If the only ſight of
an Aungell did ſo effray, that we could
not ſuffer him as Sainct Iohn doth witneſſe,
who bicauſe he coulde not endure
his brightneſſe, fell downe as dead. And
Eſay was conſtreined to ſay, after the

Angell had appeared to him that all the
bands of his body was looſed with feare.Apoc. 1.
Alſo the childrē of Iſraell had ſuch great
feare that they were conſtreyned to ſay
to Moyſes, ſpeake thou to vs, and we wil
heare thée, for we cannot abide this voice
that commeth from Heauen,Exodus. 20. the which
maketh vs almoſt die for feare, (and yet
the Aungell ſpake vnto them graciouſly.)
Howe ſhall then we poore ſinners endure
or abide the voice and ſhining of
Gods Maieſtie, being in his throne of
glory,Eſay. 1. cha. when he ſhal ſay that which Eſay
ſpeaketh. Ah, I muſt eaſe me of my enemies,
& auenge me on my aduerſaries,
my wrath ſhalbe accompliſhed, and my
furie ſhal ceaſe. They ſhall know that I
which am the Lorde haue ſpoken in my
zeale,Ezech. 5. and haue ceaſed my furie. I wyll
come vpon them as a ſhe Beare that is
robbed of all hir whelpes,Oſee. 13. and I will
breake the ſtubborne heart of theirs. I
haue helde my peace long and kept ſilence.
But beholde I will crie out as a
woman that trauelleth, I will waſt and

ſtrial,The prayſe of man by the vviſe men of Egypt. ſerue and obey. Of the which, certaine
wiſe men of Egypt haue preſumed
to call man God in earth, deuine and celeſtiall
meſſenger of the Gods, Lorde of
things inferior, familier of ſuperior, and
finally miracle of nature, and that more
is, for the better ſhewing of the nobleneſſe
of man, ſometimes his God deſcendeth
into him doyng miracles which
of himſelf he could not doe: as we haue
red in hiſtories of Clazonmeus and of
Ariſteus, the which oftentimes departed
out of their bodies and went here and
there, and being returned, they ſhewed
things vncredible, the whiche afterwards
by experience was founde true.
As one Cornelius a prieſt ſacred being
at Padoua, during y• war betweene Caeſar
and Pompel, was ſo rauiſhed that
he counted all the order of ye battell better
than thoſe that were preſent. Likewiſe
Apolonius being in Epheſus ſawe
and ſhewed that which happened to Nero
in Rome: Socrates was founde rauiſhed
talking with his ſpirite, not ſéeing

nor knowing that which was done hard
by him. In like maner Plato was euery
day in a traunce certaine houres, in the
which at the laſt he died. The Poets in
their furie did write and ſhew of things
more deuine and heauenly, than humain
and earthly, and after that this furie had
left them, and that their ſpirite was forſaken
of this deuinitie, they vnderſtoode
not what they had writtē, nor the others
alſo.A prayſe of Homer. The which maye be manifeſted in
Homer, the great Gréeke Poet, that
ſhall ſerue an example for all, who although
that frō his infancie was blind,
yet notwithſtanding he hath deſcribed
and ſhewed of things ſo profounde and
wonderfull, that ſome haue boldly written
of him, that if all the wiſedome of
Poets were layde togither, it would no
equall nor compare with that that ſhineth
in his workes, nor he himſelfe if he
were aliue could make again that which
he hath made. The whiche giueth vs to
vnderſtande that man is the verie chiefe
worke of God, who if we doe wel conſider,

we ſhall finde that he is paynted or
drawen out with another than a humaine
penſil. The which thing the moſt
part of ye auncient Philoſophers though
they were neuer ſo ſubtill haue not
knowen, or elſe haue bene founde ſo variable
in that that concerneth his creation,
that there is no holde to be taken of
their writings. But laying them a ſide
as they that doe but flote and wauer in
their ſayings, and as they that féede vs
with an infinite number of dreames
and illuſiōs vnder the pretexitie of their
deceitfull wordes & coloured language.
Who notwithſtanding are conſtrained
to wonder and maruel at the wiſedome
of the workmaiſter, if they will be equitable
Iudges, and caſt their ſight on the
wonderfull compoſition of our humain
bodie.An error of the Philoſophers in that that concerneth the creatiō of man. For what is he be he neuer ſo ignorāt,
that féeleth not ſhine ſome marke
or beame of deuinitie in a mans heade,
what excellencie and beautie is there in
the heade of this beaſt, the which is the
tower and rampier of reaſō and of ſapience,

of the which as of a fountaine proceadeth
diuers operations of the memorie,
the which bringeth forth ſo manye
and diuers commodities. But who doth
not maruell of the memorie? the which
as Plato writeth, is the atturney that
alwais remaineth within the towre, the
which kéepeth and retayneth the things
that ſodenly paſſe,Deſcriptiō of the beautie of mans head. the office of whome is
to cōſerue in his treaſures, and receyue
innumerable things, yea that differ,
without confounding them, but confirming
them in their puritie, for to ſerue
afterwarde, when that by a remēbrance
that which of long time it hath conceyued
and gathered togither, and then is
perceiued a knowledge of infinit things
all diſagréeing, the which are brought
forth in ſuch an order, that they giue no
let nor mutuall trouble. But what miracle
is there in the inexplicable ſubtiltie
of our eyes,A prayſe of the excellencie of the eyes. ye which are placed in the
moſt higheſt part of the tower for to be
beholders of things celeſtiall. The roūdneſſe
of which repreſēteth two precious

ſtones, to the ende that with a profound
memorie it ſhoulde penetrate the Images
of things ſet before ſhining as a
glaſſe, and they are moueable, to the end
that they might turne here and there,
being not conſtrayned to beholde that
which might diſpleaſe them, and they
are orned and decked with couers or
liddes which are as bulwarkes for to defend
them from euill or noyance, aboue
the which are the browes made like arches,A prayſe of the brovves
for to ſtop and let the ſweate and
other ſuperfluities that they ſhould not
offende nor hurt them. But what ſpectacle
worthie of admiration doe we finde
in the noſe,A prayſe of the noſe. is it not a little wall reared
for the defence of the eyes, and thoughe
it be little it hath thrée offices appointed:
one is to retire and looſe the winde and
breath:Lactantius Firmian in his booke of the praiſe of God. the other to ſmell: the other to
the ende that by the holes and openings
the ſuperfluities of the braine be clenſed
and pourged, and voide as a chanell
or ſinke doth the filth and water. But by
what maruellous ordinance are ye lips

placed, the which ſéeme to be ioined and
knit one to another, within the which
the tongue is incloſed, the which by his
mouings cōuerteth ye voyce into words,
interpreteth & ſheweth the intention of
the ſpirit. But who is it that maruelleth
not at this little morſell of fleſh that is
not aboue thrée fingars brode,A prayſe of the tongue. and that
is almoſt the leaſt member of man, yet
notwithſtanding it prayſeth God, and
ſheweth and manifeſteth the beauties
and perfections of that which God hath
created, it diſputeth of the heauen and of
the earth, and of that which is contayned
in the foure elements, notwithſtanding,
it can not alone fulfil the office of
ſpeaking,Praiſe and vſage of the teeth. if it haue no helpe of the téeth,
the which is manifeſt to vs by yōg children,
the which begin not to ſpeake before
they haue téeth, and olde men after
they haue loſt them, ſtammer and can
not bring forth their words, in ſuch ſort,
that it ſéemeth that they are returned to
their infancie, for they become childiſh.
Furthermore (as Lactantius ſayeth) he

hath created the chin, and ſet it out after
ſo honeſt a forme,Praiſe of the chin and of the bearde. and hath enriched it
with a bearde, for to cauſe vs to knowe
the fruitfulneſſe and maturitie of the
bodie, the difference of the kinde, and ornament
of the virilitie and ſtrength. As
touching the eares,Praiſe of the eares. they are not idell,
they are placed in a place hie & eminent
for to receyue the ſounde that naturally
is borne hie, they are open and not ſtopped,
to the ende that the voyce be caried
by the ſecret trunkes retained and ſtaid.
Alſo he hath cauſed therein ordures and
vncleanneſſe, that the little beaſtes or
flies that will offend the hearing, might
be therein ſnared and taken as in Birdlime.
And yet the maruellous worke of
all theſe partes is nothing to that which
followeth, if we will conſider in generall
all the proportion of the face, of the
which dependeth two maruels: the firſt
that among all the men the which are
almoſt infinit, all of them do ſo differ in
the face that among ſo many thouſande
millions of men there can not be founde

two like, but that they are blemiſhed by
ſome markes and notes: the ſecond that
nature hath made to humain creatures
in ſo littel a part as the face, a beautis ſo
great,A praiſe of beautie as vvell of men as of vvomen. that ſometimes we deſier to die of
our good wills, and gladly ſacrifice oure
ſelues for the beautie of ſome perſones,
and we are ſo ſtirred euen to become
out of our wits, by the prickings and
prouocations of this faire and beautiful
face. In witneſſe whereof I could bring
forth an infinite number of worthy perſonages,
as well auncient as moderne,
which ſéemed to haue ſpoyled the firmament
of his moſt richeſt treaſures, for
to paint out all the corners of the earth,
and to exalt the memorie of them and
their writings, vnder the only inuocation
of this beautie, as thoughe thereon
their whole glory and honor did depend.
For the beames that proceadeth of thys
reſplendiſhing beautie, penitrateth euē
to the moſt liuelieſt part of the ſoule,
and maketh there force to be felt exceſſiuely
to thoſe that beholde it, the which

is the cauſe why the poore paſſioned hath
brought their owne deſiers in ſeruitude,
and rendreth their poore ſoule martyrred,
obedient and handmaide,Beautie hath moued many to vvrite. and almoſt
trāſformeth thē (if it were poſſible)
in the ſame beautie that they admit and
loue. Moreouer, there is another miracle
in the face, the which although it be
not aboue the greatnes of halfe a foote,
notwithſtanding in the leaſt mutation
or chaunging thereof appeareth the difference
of men, ioyfull and ſorowfull, of
the hardie and the fearfull, of the angry
and of the pitiful, of the louer and of him
that hateth, of him that liueth in hope,
and he that is without hope,Ier. Cardan. of the hole
and of the ſicke, of the liuing and of the
dead, with other infinite affections aſwel
of the body as of the ſoule. For this cauſe
it is that this great Philoſopher Trimigiſteus,
after that he had profoundlye
plunged in the contemplation of humaine
worke, cried out ſaying: where
is the painter ſo wel ſorting his colours
that could paint theſe faire eyes that are

the windowes of all the bodie,Moſt learnedly tranſlated by Monſieur du Prean my friend, of vvhome I follovv the traduction as faithfull. and glaſſes
of the ſoule. Who hath formed the
lippes and the mouth, and knit togither
ſinewes? Who hath mingled the veines
like water brookes, deuided all ouer the
bodie, by the which, the humor and the
bloud rūning into diuers parts deweth
all the members wyth his iuces and liquors?
Who hath made the bones, who
hath knit and ioined them togither? the
which as gardes and ſtayes doe retaine
the thought. Who hath couered the fleſh
with ſo tender a ſkin, ſeparated the fingars
and their ioyntes one frō another?
Who hath ſpred the largeneſſe of oure
féete, which ſerueth for foundation to
all the bodie? Who hath opened ye pipes
and condits? Who hath placed the ſtomacke,
and imprinted in the heart thys
pearleſſe figure? who hath wouen togither
the thréedes and rootes of ye Lights,
and ingraued the Liuer? Who hath giuen
to ye belly ſo large a compaſſe? Who
is it that hath made y• moſt honorableſt
members to ſight, and the foule and filthie

ones hid and placed out of ſight.
Behold (ſaith he) how many deuine workes
are ſhewed in one only matter, what
beautie there is in euerie one of them,
how they are equally compaſſed, and differing
the one from the other in their
offices and actions. Whō thinkeſt thou
hath ſo formed and made them? who is
the father and the mother, only God inuiſible.
It ſéemeth now that we haue ſufficientlye
treated of humaine nature,
there reſteth nowe for the perfection of
mans honor to ſhew that there is no Art
nor ſcience but that men haue excelled
eche one in their degrée, more or leſſe according
to the influēces and fauors that
hath bene giuen them from heauen. I
will leaue to ſpeake here of liberall Arts
and generally of all diſciplines, for to
euitate prolixitie, the originall and inuentiō
of which is due to man,The Author prayſeth man by force of armes. as to his
ſouereigne Author. I will therfore ſhew
certaine particuler things. In euery one
of which I will expreſſe what the dignitie
and ſubtillitie of man is. How wonderful

ſhould ſéeme to vs the magnamitie
and noble heart of Alexander, the
which in his yong and tender yeares lamēted
and wept bitterly, knowing that
his father Philip had obtained victorie
of diuers and ſundrie battels, and after
that he was demaunded of his gouernors
from whence proceaded thoſe
teares, with ye which his face was dewed
and couered: for feare (ſaide he) that I
haue, that my father hauing ouercomed
ſo manye people and nations, there is
nothing left for me wherein I mightThe noble heart of Alexander in his youth
exerciſe this exceſſiue deſier that I haue
to fight and become partaker of his glorie.
O what Oracle of generoſitie and
manly courage was there in this childe,
to whome afterwarde fortune ſucceded
according to his deſier, for before he was
come to the age of thirtie yeares he had
ſubdued ſo many Nations, that he foūd
no more that did reſiſt him in the world,
ſo that he was conſtreyned to go or trauell
to the furthermoſt parts of Affrica
by the deſertes to trie his ſtrength againſt

wilde and brute beaſtes, for to ouercome
them aſwell as men: the Hiſtoriographes
write of him, that he ſéeing
himſelfe Monarche of all the world,
remembring with himſelfe that he hadAlexander cauſed the earth to be digged to vvarre againſt the Antipodes
heard ſay of a Philoſopher named Democrites,
that there was many worlds,
for the which cauſe he cauſed many Pioners
and Artificers to dig and vndermine
the ground, to the end that if there
were anye other people founde, they
might be brought vnder his obedience.
Likewiſe of Iulius Caeſar & Pompei one
of the which beſide the victories of ciuill
warres,A prayſe o Caeſar and Pompei. faught fiftie times in battell
ranged and flew aleuen hundreth fowre
ſcore and twelue thouſād men: the other
beſides nine hundreth and fortie ſhippes
that he had taken on the ſea, conquered
and had victory of eight hundreth ſeuentie
ſix townes from the Alpes to the furthermoſt
parte of Spaine.A prayſe Sergius al moſt vnc
                     •
                   dible. Let vs not
leaue out the glorie of Marcus Sergius,
who after he had loſt his right hand, and
receyued .xxiij. wounds at diuerſe times,

fought afterwarde foure ſundrie times
with his left hande, and after he coulde
not help himſelf therewith, he made him
an hande of Iron, with the whiche he
fought at the ſtege before Cremona, defended
Playſance, and tooke twelue places
in Gaule. Let vs leaue ſpeaking of
armes, and come to Artes and ſciences,
that ſéeme to vs more vile and abiect, as
painting, caruing, grauing, and ſuch
like.The excelencie of man in 
                     •
                  ainting. 
               Xeuxis a moſt excellent Painter
counterfetted by his Arte a vine full of
Grapes, ſo ſubtillye wrought that the
Birdes that did flie in the ayre, woulde
ſtrike againſt it thinking there to finde
foode. And Appelles for the ſpace of ten
yeares employed al his wit and pollicie,
to paint an Image of Venus, the which
was endewed with ſo excellent beautie
that the yong men that ſtoode beholding
of it became amorous, as though it had
bene ſome liue Image, and therefore by
publicke edict he was charged to kéepe
it ſecret, for feare to allure the youth to
corruptiō. Who is it that doth not maruell

of that whiche Pauſanias a Greeke
Hiſtoriographe writeth to haue bene
formed & made in Heraclia a Prouince
of Peloponenſia by a certaine artificer,The maruellous cunning of a man in facioning a braſen horſe.
the which compoſed a braſen Horſe, hauing
the tayle cut and deformed, and all
the other parts of the bodie perfect, to ye
which notwithſtanding the other horſes
ſought to ioyne and couple with ſuch an
ardent deſier and affection, that they
brake oftentimes their houes with their
often riding and horſing of him, and for
all that they were beaten and driuen a
way, yet woulde they not from thence,
but they would rage as if they had foūd
a proude Mare. But what ſecret thing,
what charme or what hid vertue was
there therein, which could conſtrain and
force the brutiſh beaſts to obey and loue
a trunke of mettell voyde of féeling or
vnderſtanding. Plutarch exalting the
excellencie of man, writeth that Archimedes
did draw with one hand and with
one corde or rope ouerthwart the market
place of Siracuſa, a great ſhip fraighted

with merchandiſe, as if it had bene a
horſe that had bene led by the neck, and
all by the ſcience of Methmaticke, the
which Baptiſt Leon one of the experteſt
men in our time, aſſured to doen, if anye
great Lorde woulde furniſh the thing.
What miracle in nature may be found
more greater than this deuiſe of glaſſe
that Sabot King of the Perſians cauſed
to be made? the which was ſo great, that
he was ſet in a corner of the ſame as in
the ſphere or compaſſe of the earth, ſéeing
vnder his féete the cloudes & ſtarres
that did riſe and lie downe, in ſuch ſorte
that thoughe he was mortall, he ſéemed
to be aboue the heigth and expectation
of immortality. What thing more greater
and deuiner maye be more maruellous,
ſpeciallye in a King that ruled
all the worlde,Cardanus. who after the poſſeſſion
of the earth and the Sea, he ſéemed to
poſſeſſe the cloudes, the heauen and the
habitatiō of God.A vvonderfull Image. But what Deitie or
celeſtiall ſpirite might be hid in the ſtatute
or Image of Memon, the whiche

euery time and neuertheleſſe man was
the Author or Inuenter as Strabo, and
Cornelius Tacitus ſheweth. Who is it
that woulde not be rauiſhed in admiration,
if at any time he haue read that
whiche the Hiſtories make mention
of a Doue of wood,Deuinitie of the ſpirit of certaine men. compoſed by Architas,
being made by certain figures and
proportions of Mathmaticke, did flie in
the ayre as other birdes: at the admiration
of which, Albert forged a braſen
heade, the which coulde ſpeake plainely
as if it had bene a liuing ſoule encloſed
therein. As in like caſe Galen an Author
worthie of credēce writeth, that Archimedes
forged a glaſſe that burned in the
Sea the ſhips of his enimies, the which
thing ſhoulde not ſeeme to vs ſtraunge
nor vncredible to thoſe that haue ſeene a
Spanyarde which was in our time, ſo
cunning in the compoſition of glaſſes,
that he made ſome repreſenting twoStraunge glaſſes.
phiſnomies or faces, the one aliue, the
other dead togither, a thing ſo ſtraunge
to contemplate, that many ſage Philoſophers

not finding nor knowing y• reaſon
could no otherwiſe chuſe but wonder
at the worke and at the workemaiſter.
There hath bene others as Ptolomeus
maketh mention that haue made
ſuch ſtraunge glaſſes that in looking
therein there woulde appeare ſo manye
faces as there be houres in a day. Beſides
an infinite number of other things
of mans inuention, the whiche for prolixitie
I leaue out. We haue ſufficiently
ſhewed (to my iudgement) y• things moſt
notable, that the antiquitie hath had in
great admiration in noble and cunning
perſonages, the which by their doings
haue ſhewed with what deuinitie and
excellencie of ſpirite man is endued.
Now there reſteth in few words to ſhew
and make mētion of things of our time
and of late yeares, to the ende that not
leauing their glorie buried in the darkneſſe
of obliuion, we giue not all the aduantage
and preheminence to others. Among
all the workes and doyngs of our
Elders and Aunceſters, I can finde nothing

that maye equall or compare to
the wonderfull Inuention,A prayſe of the inuention of men of our time. Vtilitie and
Dignitie of Printing, the which ſurmounteth
all that the Antiquitie maye
conceyue or imagine of excellent,
knowing that it conſerueth and kéepeth
all the conceptions of our ſoules, it is
the treaſurer that immortaliſeth the
monuments of our ſpirites, and eterniſeth
worlde without end, and alſo bringeth
to light the fruites of oure labors,
and although ſomewhat maye be added
to all other Artes and humaine inuentions,
yet this alone hath entred with
ſuch good hap and perfection into this
worlde, that there cannot be added nor
deminiſhed any thing that doth not render
it defectious and deformed: theſe effectes,
are ſo maruellous, and executed
with ſuch celeritie and diligence, that
one mā alone in one day wil Print more
letters, than the moſt prompteſt Scribe
or Scriuiner may write with pen in the
ſpace of one Moneth, who is it therefore
that doth not maruell at the barbarouſneſſe

and miſerie of the Elders, the
which as Strabo de ſitu orbis writeth,
firſt did write in aſhes, thē afterward in
barks of trées, after that in ſtones, thē afterwad
in leaues of Lawrel, thē in lead,
cōſequently in Parchment, and finally
in Paper. And as they were variable in
their maner of writing, ſo vſed they dyuers
inſtruments: for vpon ſtones they
did write with Iron, on leaues with
pincers, on aſhes with their fingar, on
barkes wyth kniues, on parchmēt with
canes, on paper with quilles. And firſte
theyr ynke was liquor of a certaine fiſh,
afterward with y• iuice of Mulberies, after
that with Chimney ſout, & thē with
Gaules, Gum and Coporas, the which
I thought good to ſet forth to manifeſt
and ſhew vnto you y• barbarous doings
in the former age. Of the which Polydorus
maketh mention, who in ye yere. 1453
founde out the right vſe of Printing. I
coulde in like caſe giue the ſecond degrée
of prayſe to thoſe that haue inuented
the vſe of Gunnes and Munitions for

war, were it not that I haue ſhewed in
my ſecond booke of the miſeries of man,
that it bringeth more harme and detriment,
then decoration and ornament to
our humaine kind. And yet this is more
miraculous, which Braſauolus hath
written, that an Artillerie man hath
founde in our time the muentiō to make
Gunpouder that maketh no noyſe in
goyng out of the Gunnes mouth. Leue
we therfore theſe thunders and rorings
of Iupiter inuented by the Diuell for to
ſpoyle humaine kinde, to the cunning
and liuelyneſſe of ſpirit, of men of oure
time, in the number of which we maye
put an Artificer of Italie that preſented
to the Prince of Vrbin a King for to put
on his fingar, in the whiche was ſet a
precious ſtone, wherein there was a
Diall, the which beſide the line that
ſhewed the houres, gaue warning with
a ſtroke vnto him that did weare it of
euerie houre. Who is it that doth not
maruell of that that Ierom Cardan,
               Cardan. a
man worthy of credence, being brought

vp in al crudition & learning, witneſſeth
to haue ſéene whilſt be wrote his bookes,Man vvaſheth his face vvith melted mettell.
that a man publickly at Millan waſhed
his face and his handes with molten
Leade, hauing firſt waſhed them with a
certaine other water: what miracle is
this, that man ſhoulde expoſe his fleſh,
which is ſo tender and delicate againſt
ye fury of a mettal ſo hote. Now therfore
there reſteth no more in mā but to make
himſelf immortal, ſéeing y• he hath found
the meanes to expoſe hys naked members
to the violence of fier. And if this
ſéeme to vs wonderfull how he might
reſiſt the heate, yet this is not leſſe
ſtraunge of that whych Alexander,
               Alexander ab Alexandro.
and more than fiftie other Hiſtoriographes
writeth that in their time in Cicilie
there was a man that euery one named
the fiſh Colas, the which from his infancie
frequented and dwelled in the Sea,
and there remained with ſuche obſtination
that he became aquitall,Man aquitall. and departed
not from thence the moſt part of h
                  •
               
life, and ſometimes he was the ſpace of

fiue or ſix houres hid betwéene two 
                  ••
               
               ters,
without that any might ſée or perceyue
him, euen like a fiſh, and woulde
remaine eight or ten days on the water,
and not come out, and would enter into
the veſſels that he found on the ſea, and
would liue and eate with the Manners,
and then caſt himſelfe againe into the
ſea, and ſometimes he woulde come a
ſhore, and he liued verie old leading this
aquitall life, and confeſſed himſelfe that
when he was out of the water, he felte a
great paine in the ſtomacke. Pontanus
hath alſo written it. There reſteth nowe
nothing to man but to penetrate y• aire
and the firmament to be come familier
with them.The Art of flying like the Birds inuented by man. And yet there was one Leonard
Vincius the which hath ſought out
the Art of flying, and had almoſt luckely
atchieued his effect, without putting in
count the Hiſtrians that we haue ſeene
in our time flie on a rope in ye ayre with
ſuch dexteritie and perill, that the verie
eyes of Princes and great Lordes that
beheld them were amaſed, and could not

abide to ſee them. It is not therfore with
out a cauſe that Mercuriꝰ Trimigiſteus
deſcribing the dignitie of man, and of
the deuine celeritie of ſpirite with the
which he is endued, ſaid vnto his ſonne
Tatius, what doſte thou think thou art,
what treaſure thinkeſt thou that thy
members contain and kepe, commaund
thy ſoule to paſſe the Ocean ſea, and it
ſhalbe as much as thou haſt commaunded,
without paſſing out of his place, cō
               maund
it to flie to heauen, and it ſhal flie
incontinently without the helpe of any
wings, & alſo there ſhall be nothing that
ſhall let or hinder his courſe, neither the
burning heate of the ſunne, neyther the
amplitude or ſpreading of the ayre, neyther
the courſe nor reuolution of the heauens,
nor of al the other clouds, but that
it ſhal penetrate & paſſe forth. Furthermore
if thou art minded to ſurpaſſe al ye
globes of the firmament, and ſée what is
there cōtained, it ſhalbe likewiſe lawful
for thée: ſée then how great is the ſodenrie
of ye ſoule, eſtéeme thy ſelf immortal,

and that thou mayeſt comprehende all
Arts and ſciences, exalt thy ſelfe aboue
all, and diſcend more déeper than the déepeſt,
gather togither all the meaning of
thy déedes, likewiſe of fier, of water, drineſſe
and moyſture, be thou ouer all the
partes of the world, in heauen, in earth,
& in the Sea, dwell or inhabit out of the
veſſell of this bodie. Man therefore is a
great miracle of nature, who althoughe
he be compoſed and made of a mortall
nature: neuertheleſſe the other is celeſtiall,
and remembreth the gifts of grace,
it deſpiſeth terreſtriall things, and wiſſheth
for heauenlye things, for bicauſe
that the better part féeleth to haue from
thence his proper affinitie, and naturall
aliaunce. But if the ſoule or the reaſon
which is a facultie and powre of ye ſame,
which can no more forſake it than the
light or brightneſſe doth ye ſunne,The maruellous beautie of the ſoule if it might be ſene openly might
be ſéene openly and viſibly, what miracle
or ſtraunge ſpectacle might we ſée of hir
maruellous effectes, but ſhe is letted by
ye bodie, and by the memorie, the which

               Mercurius nameth tyrants and murtherers
of the ſame, the which doe ſo let
and hinder that ſhe can not ſhew hir deuine
excellencie, vnleſſe that by contemplation
we ſeparate oure ſelues and ſequeſtrate
from them And thē when that
ſhe is ſeparated from this burthen of
the bodie, and almoſt putrified, it receyueth
heauenly gifts, flieth vp to heauen,
talketh with the Aungels, and penitrateth
euen before the throne of Gods maieſtie,
and being enflamed with a deuine
feruency, it bringeth forth things miraculous
& almoſt vncredible. As we reade
of Moyſes after y• he was ſeparated frō
men, and was certain time in the deſert
of Ethiopia, his face did ſo ſhine that the
children of Iſrael could not behold him.
S. Paule was rauiſhed to the third heauen.
In like caſe Socrates ſometimes as
tranſfigured did diligently and ſtedfaſtly
beholde the ſunne for the ſpace of an
houre.Alexander in his anger ſeemed to be all on fier, 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Alexander the great, being on
a time in extréeme perill of his life in a
certaine battell that he had in the Indies
               
being without help or ſuccor, he was in
ſuch an agonie that he ſwet pure bloude
from his face and his bodie, ſo that it ſéemed
to the Indians that he was all on a
fierie flame, the which cauſed among 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſuch feare that they were fai
                  •
                to 
                  〈◊〉
               
him and let him go. By this you maye
ſée then, that ſometimes the ſoule hath
ſo much powre ouer the bodie, the which
is but the ſepulcher wherin it is buried,
that it is at libertie, and ſurmounteth
our capacitie, and ſéeketh to ſée againe
his firſt home, which is heauen, in ſuche
ſort, that the body remaineth voyd of féeling
or mouing. As S. Auguſtine reherſeth
of a Prieſt, the which ſo often as he
would be in contemplation or praier, he
would fall down as dead or in a traunce
without breathing or anye féeling in
him, ſo that what paine ſo euer was
ſhewed him, he felt no harme at all, and
after he was returned to himſelfe, he
woulde tell ſuch ſtraunge things that
the aſſiſtantes would maruell to heare
him, Herodotus writeth the like of a

great Philoſopher that was named Atheus,
of whome he ſheweth for a truth
the ſoule many times to forſake his bodie,
& after it hath peregrinated or wandered
through diuers countries and Regions,
it ſhewed by order that which it
had ſeene, the which was approued to be
as true as thoughe it had bene preſent.
The death of Iulian the Emperour was
forſhewed him by a childe, who after he
had looked in a glaſſe ſhewed him of hys
deſtruction, and howe his enimies were
comming, & thoſe that ſhoulde kill him,
without hauing any knowledge or hearing
any ſpeake thereof. A certaine Philoſopher
did the like to Pompei, ye which
ſhewed him in a glaſſe the order of hys
enimies redie to march in battell. Theſe
are the effectes and powre of the ſoule,
the whiche ſometimes being vnbounde
from earthly bandes, is rauiſhed in the
contemplation of heauenly ſecrets, and
doth vncredible, miraculous, monſtruous
and maruellous things, and that
ſéeme almoſt to fight with the nature,

which is the cauſe that for the moſt part
y• vulgar ſort referreth many things to
the inuention of wicked ſpirits, ye which
they ought to attribute to man, as hys
owne & proper heritage. It is of a truth
that Leonard Piſtorienſis did ſo wel diet
himſelfe that by little and little he abſtayned
from eating,The maruellous die of man. but once a wéeke.
And yet this is but litle to that which other
writers do write of a man that was
in the time of Bochas in baſe Almayne,
that for y• ſpace of .xxx. yeres tooke no repaſt
nor refectiō by the mouth,Rondelet in his hiſtorie of fishes and many Elders. the which
thing ſhould ſéeme vnto vs vncredible,
without the confirmatiō that we haue of
an infinit nūber of witneſſes, of ye which
ſome of them haue written, and others
haue ſéene with their eyes. Brother Nicolas
of Saxonie a Swecian of Nation,
the which remained or dwelled .xxij. yeares
in the wilderneſſe, and continued in
his abſtinencie during his life,An vncredible abſtinencie. without
giuing or miniſtring any foode or ſuſtenance
to his body. The which Damaſcenus
proueth by many reaſons maye be

poſſible and according to nature, ſéeing
that manye beaſtes and wormes are in
the bowels of the earth, and remaine hid
many Monthes and yeres without food.
And at this daye it is ſaide that the Scithians
will continue twelue days without
meat being comforted with the vertue
of a certaine herbe that they kéepe
encloſed in their mouth. Now what ſhal
we ſéeke more in this creature of God
that is wonderful reſerued deuinitie, for
if we ſhould rehearſe and declare all the
ſingularities and excellencies that are
manifeſted and ſhewed in him, of the
which many writers make mention, I
ſhould occupy a large volume. Some by
a hid, ſecret and deuine miſterie coulde
not by no meanes be offēded or grieued
with any kinde of poyſon or venim, as a
king named Mithridates who after that
he was vanquiſhed and ouercome by
Pompei,
               lithrida
                  
                     •
                  s could 
                     ••
                  t die by 
                     ••
                  yſon. chuſed rather to die, than to fall
into the handes of his enimie, and for to
rid his life tooke diuers venims and poyſons,
but after that he had tried & taſted

al, he could find none of ſufficient ſtrēgth
to ouercome him, for his own proper nature
did kéepe and preſerue him againſt
their powre. So that ſeeing that by thys
meanes he could not diſpatch his life, he
was conſtreyned at the laſt to kill him
ſelfe with a dagger. Galen the Prince of
Medicins writeth that a Maide (named
Napellus)A maruell of man that reſiſted poyſon. was nouriſhed with poyſon in
hir yong yeares to the which ſhe was ſo
well accuſtomed that y• poyſon did turne
to hir nouriſhment, & did hir no harme,
and yet thoſe that lay with hir being only
infected with hir breath, receyued ſodaine
death. Auicen writeth that in hys
time he did ſée a man from whom all venemous
beaſts would flie, & if by chaūce
any one had bitten him or touched him
they ſhoulde ſtraight wayes die. Some
whom the Gréekes haue named Ophirgenes,
who with onely touching healed
the ſtinging of ſerpents, and laying the
hand on a bodie would draw out the venim.
As alſo do the Pſiles and Marciens
a people of Affrica the Ambaſſador of

which named Exagon,
               The Pſiles and Marcians did vaunt that they coulde not be hurt vvith Serpents, the vvhich the Romaines cauſed to be tried in an Ambaſſador of theirs. being come to
anunciate and ſhewe ſome thing to the
Romaines, was put naked in a tunne
full of Serpents, Vipers, Adders and other
venemous beaſtes, for to trie whether
that their ſayings were true. But
ſo ſoone as he was put therein, in ſteade
of offēding or hurting him, they did lick
and cheriſhe him, to be ſhort, there are
found things ſo fantaſticall and ſtraūge
in man, that many elders after they had
conſidered the meaning of all things,
and finding nothing equall or to compare
with the maruellous prouidence
and induſtrie of man, woulde be called
Gods and worſhipped and honored as a
Deitie. Some haue ben ſo conſtant that
they did neuer laugh, as Marcus Craſſus,
for this cauſe he was named Agelaſte
for that he was neuer ſéene laugh.
Some haue neuer ſnorted nor routed as
Pomponius. Some haue neuer ſpit, as
Antonius the ſecond. Some haue neuer
felt dolor nor paine in their bodie, as
Pontanus writeth of himſelf, who ſometimes

would let him ſelf fal, and yet felt
no harme. Some haue had ſuch a cleare
ſight, that they coulde ſée well fiftie or
thrée ſcore Leagues of, as Solin & Plinie
writeth, of one that was named Strabon
the which in the time of open warre ſaw
from a Promontorie of Cicill the ſhips
to ſayle from the Port of Carthage in
Affrica, althoughe it was aboue a hundreth
thouſand diſtance. Tiberius y• Emperour
waking a certaine houre in the
night,A maruell of the ſight of an Emperour. did ſée al things aſwell as by day.
There are certaine men as Plinie witneſſeth
in the country of Cardulius that
will run as ſwift as Dogges, and go ſo
faſt a pace that it is vnpoſſible to take
them, but only by ſickneſſe & age. Quintus
Curtius and many others write that
Alexander the great, was compoſed of
ſuch harmonie and temperance of humors
that his breath ſmelled naturally
like Balme, alſo his ſweat was ſo ſwéete
that when his Pipes were open, they
thought that he was all perfumed wyth
perfumes, and that which is more

ſtraunge and harde to beleue, his bodie
caſt ſuche a ſauor being deade, that one
woulde haue iudged it full of Aromatical
drugs or perfumes. Caius Caeſar was
ſo good on horſebacke that he cauſed hys
handes to be bound behind him, and it
was a monſtruous thing to ſée and vncredible
to heare, that holding his knées
cloſe to the horſe, without bridell and
ſaddell he woulde ſtay and turne a horſe
ſo lightly or nimblye as though he had
bene bridled, the which was in the time
when he fauored Marius againſt Sylla.
M. Paulus a Venetian reciteth that the
Tartarians haue ſo much powre ouer
ſpirits, and are ſo excellent in ſéeking
the ſecretes of nature that they cauſe
darkeneſſe to come when they will, and
that he being once cōpaſſed with théeues
by this Art, with great paine eſcaped.
Haitonus a man of ſinguler doctrine
and of great authoritie, is witneſſe of
this in his Hiſtory of Sarmates, that the
armie of the Tartarians almoſt ouercome
or deſtroyed, was againe reſtored

by the enchauntment of a Standarde
bearer, that cauſed darkeneſſe to come
vpon the campe of his enimies. I haue
red in many auncient Hiſtories that the
Ethiopians by the vertues and properties
of certain herbes gathered in ſeaſō,
do drie the floudes and Riuers, and doe
open all things that are ſhut What ſhal
we ſaye more of the excellencie of man,
there hath bene founde ſome ſo wonderfull
in Muſicke, that they chaunged the
affections of thoſe that did heare them,
their ieſts and mouings, cauſed them to
be ioyfull, ſorowfull and bold, according
as they would adulciate or harden their
noyſe. Terpander and Metimeus, Empedocleus,
Orpheus, & Emphion, haue
bene ſo excellent in this Arte, that they
healed in their time manye that were
franticke, mad, and poſſeſſed with ſpirits,
Pithagoras by the perfection of this
Arte ſo rauiſhed the memorie of a yong
man within few days that he made him
chaſte, and cauſed him to forget the louing
paſſions that tormented him continually.

All the Gréeke and Latin writers
that haue treated of the ieſtes of Alexander,
make mention of his Harper
Thimotheus, who when he was at a
banket, playd an Alarum or aſſault, cauſing
the King to forſake the banket, and
take his armor, ſo that his ſpirites remaining
vanquiſhed or ouercome, was
conſtrained to obey to the harmony that
proceaded from the inſtrument. Agamemnon
going to war againſt the Troians
not being verie ſure of the chaſtitie
of his wife Clitemneſtra, left hir in the
garde and kéeping of an excellent Harper,
who whē that he ſaw hir in hir amorous
toyes, mitigated hir burning heate
by the ſwéetneſſe of his inſtrument. In
ſuch ſort that Aegiſthus coulde not obtayne
his deſier before that he had ſlaine
the ſaid Muſition, which by his Art and
Harmonie was ſo faithfull a kéeper and
Protector. Among theſe we maye recite
the great King Dauid, who by the vertue
of his Hary did mollifie and appeaſe
the furie of King Saule when that the

wicked ſpirite did torment him, as it is
moſt plainly ſhewed in the ſecond booke
of the Kings. To be ſhort, and to ſet the
laſt ſeale to the dignitie and excellencye
of man, there is no part of him, but that
there may be ſome fruite gathered to the
vſe of Phiſicke, as Galen and many others
write. A mans faſting ſpittle ſerueth
againſt the biting of venemous
beaſtes,There is no part of man, but that there is ſome fruite dravvne out to the vſe of phiſicke. and alſo killeth them, it helpeth
the Ophthalmiſtes: the filth of a mans
eare called earewaxe being appliquated
to our noſtrels ſerue in ſteade of dormitories,
and prouoketh ſléepe: Mans vrine
or water is good againſt the dropſie, and
for manye other vſes of Phiſicke. The
ſweate of a man is excellent for to mitigate
the Goute: the bloud of a man being
drunke hote healeth the paſſion of
Loue,Edoardus. as Authors doe write of Fauſtine
wife to Marcus Aureſius. The fleſh embalmed
is verie ſoueraigne in many vſages
of Phiſick. Many auncient Phiſitions
of Graecia and Arabia haue vſed
the marrow of our bones, the braynes

of men, and their bowels, yea euen the
duſte and aſhes of mens bones, for to
drinke them and cauſe thē to ſerue with
maruellous effects to the vſage of Phiſicke.
Orpheus and Orchilaus healed the
quinancie with humaine bloud, yea the
filth of our nailes,Plinie. as Plinie witneſſeth
for to heale the Feuer, ſo that there is
no member of a mans bodie, but that it
is profitable, not ſo much as the ſweate
of a man, but that hath bene proued, as
Galen writeth, alſo the breath of a man
well tempered, comforteth greatlye the
Leprouſy as in like caſe the exerements
of man (the which can not be pronounced
without ſhame) the which as Xenocrates
ſayeth, was vſed to the vſe of auncient
Phiſicke, finding ſo many helthful
and excellent remedies in man, that the
antiquity pardoned no member, though
it were neuer ſo abiect and vile for to
draw out profit. Séeing then that man is
ſo worthy and ſo excellent, ſo wonderful
and celeſtial. Let vs therfore leaue hereafter
to compare him to brute beaſtes.

The which although God hath prouided
for thē all that for thē is néedefull for the
preſeruatiō of their life, giuing to ſome,
ſkin, others haire, aſwell for to ſuſtaine
and endure the violence of the colde as
other inclinencies of the ayre, and to others
munimentes and defences for to
repulſe the dexterior euilles, to other
lightneſſe and ſwiftneſſe to run & flie, to
others ſubtilty to hide thēſelues in dens
and caues of the earth, to others fethers
and wings that they maye hang in the
ayre, to the ende to euitate the furie and
rage of man, all the which things notwithſtanding
are of little value to the
regard of man. For although he be created
naked, and couered with ſo tender a
ſkin, that quickely he is hurt and receyueth
harme, yet neuertheleſſe that was
not done without great prouidence.An aunſvvere to the obiections of humaine miſeries. For
knowing that he had to exerciſe his fancie
and other interior ſenſes much more
diligently than the brute beaſts to ſerue
afterward to the Intelecke, it was therfore
neceſſarie that he ſingularly ſhould

haue his Organs and inſtruments,Baptiſt Gelo traducted by Pare. by
the whiche he doeth ſuch operations of
matter more delicate and light, and likewiſe
the bloud more ſubtill and hote,
knowing that the ſpirit followeth in his
complections the temperature of the bodie.
And if he had bene compoſed of rude
and thick ſkin, ſo ſhould he haue had the
vnderſtanding blunt and brutiſhe, but
man is created of a ſubtill and liuelye
fleſhe, bicauſe that the ſpirite which is
liuely and ſubtill, for the better & more
perfecter opening & knowing of things.
The workmaiſter therefore is wonderfull
which hath not attributed to man
certaine commodities as he hath done to
beaſtes, knowing that his ſapience and
wiſedome might render that which the
condition of nature had denied him. For
althoughe he commeth forth naked on
the earth, & without armour or defence,
(the which chaunceth not to beaſtes that
haue hornes, clawes, haire and ſhelles)
it is for his greate profit and aduauntage,
being armed with knowledge, and

endued with reaſon, not outwarde but
inwardly he hath put his munition and
defence, not in the bodie but in the ſpirite,
in ſuch ſort that there is neyther the
greatneſſe nor ſtrength of wilde beaſts,
neyther their defence in their hornes,
neither y
                  •
               t the great lumpe of fleſhe nor
bones with the which they are compoſed
and made, may let that they be not
tamed and made ſubiect vnder ye powre
and authoritie of man, for there is no
beaſt be he neuer ſo fierce, hardie or
ſtoute, but that trembleth ſodenly when
he ſéeth man although they had neuer
ſéene him before. And ſuch grace ſuccéedeth
them by the vertue of the ſignacle
and marke of God which is ingraued
in them, the which the aunciēt Cabaliſts
named Pahat in ye Hebrue tongue, with
the which Adam our firſt father fortified
liued being conuerſant with the beaſts,
to whom he gaue the names, ſo y• he had
got ſuch authority and empire ouer thē
that they knew him as their lord & ſouereign
maiſter, but after that he trāſgreſſed,

the deuine marke was effaced and
aboliſhed, not altogither, but for y• moſt
part. Of the traces and footeſteps thereof
we ſée yet certain ſparks and beames
ſhine in ſome vertuous men, who although
they be in the wilderneſſe & that
they lodge and lie in the dens & caues of
brute beaſts, they feare thē nothing, but
liue without feare with thē, as we reade
in the holie ſcripture of Sampſon, Dauid,
Daniell among the Lions. Heliſeus
with the Beares, and S. Paule with the
Vipers. There reſteth nowe in fewe
wordes to aunſwere to the allegations
that we haue made in our booke of humaine
miſeries, aſwell of the vileneſſe
of the nature (of the which mā was created)
as of the condicion that is ſo tender
and fraile, that in many things beaſtes
doe excell him.The cauſe of humaine miſeries. Shoulde we therefore be
ſo mad, or dare we cōfeſſe that God hath
ſhewed more fauor to other beaſts than
to man: no truly: for although he hath
created him vile and abiect, as of a lump
of earth, yet this in nothing doth derogate

his glory. For it is manifeſt that he
hath not created man corruptible for default
of a better, for by the creation of y•
Sunne, the Moone & the ſtarres, he hath
ſhewed how he might haue created man
of a thing more excellēt, but he hath created
him of the earth for to beate downe
his pride and arrogancy, the which hath
bene the cauſe of the ruine and deſtruction
of al his poſteritie, and that he muſt
not only ſtudie on earthly things as the
brute beaſtes doe that looke for no other
ſelicitie but in this miſerable world, but
he muſt lift vp his eies to Heauen, knowing
that there is his Father, his houſe
and habitation, his place of reſt, his heritage
& eternall felicitie. Now as touching
the miſeries with the which he is
charged and ſubiect, God in the beginning
created him not ſubiect to ſuch miſeries,
for God exalted him to the moſte
higheſt degrée of all the dignities of the
earth, and if he haue ſo many miſeries
as we haue before ſhewed, they are
chaunced to him ſince that he knew not

himſelfe, and ſince the time that he hath
ſtrayde from the obedience and vocation
to the which he was called, and if that he
coulde haue kept and retayned this excelent
treaſure,Theodoret bishop of Siria, in his 
                     •
                  ookes of 
                     ••
                  e nature of man. his God would haue preſerued
him in perpetual felicitie. Neuertheleſſe
though God hath made him ſubiect
to many miſeries, it is not for anye
hatred that he bare vnto him, for he hath
not pardoned his only ſonne, for ye great
loue he bare vnto man, but it is for
his great profit that he hath created him
ſuch, willing thereby to admoniſh him
of his ſinne, and to plucke out from his
heart that peſtilent roote of pride the
which the Deuill hath planted for to hū
               ble
and kéepe him vnder his feare. Therfore
this is the cauſe that man is ſubiect
to ſo many miſeries, and is become mortall
and corruptible. And if man therfore
ſéeing himſelfe ſo wicked and miſerable,
be ſo proude and hie minded, what wold
he be if he were immortall and incorruptible.
And therefore God hath here
ſhewed his wiſedome and ſapience in

y• he hath made him ſubiect to corruption.
Notwithſtanding in this corruptible
and mortall veſſell of earth he hath kept
ſo goodly a harmonie and countenance,
that it is not poſſible to imagine or conceyue
one more fairer.Concluſion To the ende therfore
that in few wordes we will make a
generall concluſion of our worke, if we
wil conſider man in the firſt eſtate that
God created him, it is ye chiefe & principal
of Gods worke, to y• end that in him
he might be glorified as in the moſt nobleſt
and excellēteſt of all his creatures.
But if we conſider him in the eſtate of
the generall corruption ſpred all ouer
the poſteritie of Adam, we ſhall ſée him
nooſeled in ſinne, monſtruous, fearfull,
deformed, ſubiect to a thouſande incommodities,
voide of beatitude, vnable, ignorant,
variable, and hypocrite. To be
ſhort, in ſteade of being Lord of all creatures,
is become ſlaue to ſinne in the
which he is borne and conceyued. But if
we will conſider afterwarde as being
made all new by the immortall ſéede of

Gods word, ye ſhall ſée him reſtored not
only in al his firſt honors and goods, but
muche more greater, for there where as
ſinne is poured out for to let and hinder
him, the grace of God is more abundātly
poured out for to ſuccor him, making
him a new creature, as Sainct Ambroſe
ſayth in the booke of the vocation & calling
of the Gentiles, the. 3. chap. And S.
Auguſtine in his booke of corruptiō and
of grace. cap. 10. And as concerning vs,
let vs doe as Plato knowing the goodnes
that God hath done to vs, let vs giue
him thankes in that we are borne men,
not beaſtes, and if that we finde anye
thornes in this crooked life that with eaſe
we cānot diſgeſt, & if we féele anye fight
in our ſoule, the which is hid in this body
as in a graue, let vs endeuor our ſelues
to go into the holie Citie of Ieruſalem,
whereas we ſhall be exempt of hunger,
colde, heate and thirſt, and generally
from all infirmities and teares, to the
which this poore bodie, the which is but
the Chariot wherevnto the Soule is

            
         
      
   