
      
         
            
            
            A Pronoſtication for diuers yeares, ryght vtyle and profytable to al ſortes of people, wherin is declared what perſons hath mooſte and leaſte dominacions ouer the ſtarres and elementes, whereby the iudgementes of the Aſtrologiens be ſcarſely true, geuynge together great conſolation to thoſe who muche fear the conſtellations. Alſo of the fourth and laſte Monarchie, the whiche Charles the .v. ryghte victorious Emperoure of the Romaynes, and Edwarde the .vi. mooſte noble Emperoure of great Bryttayne, by the grace of God, gouerneth, comprehendynge alſo brieflye ſome words of the laſt age of the world, gathered together by Maſter Arnold Bogarde doctour in medecyne, reſident in Bruxels And tranſlated into Englyſh oute of Frenche by Iohn Coke, clarcke of the Recognyſances, or vulgerly called clark of the Statutes.
            The yeare of oure Lorde God.
            M. D. LIII.
         
         
            
            Iohn Cooke to the Reader.
            
               IN ſemblable manner, as people beynge free of infirmities, cuſtomably are not deſyrous of Phiſicke, ſo thoſe as lyue proſperouſly ſeke ſcarcely remedies in tribulation. But if it be diſcretion among worldly people, in peace tyme to be in a redines for the battayle, and to exercyſe armours before the daunger approche, it is no leſſe neceſſary for all Chriſtians, beyng borne to haue no peace, but a dayly conflycte whyles they abi
                  ••
                in this fleſhe, to preuent in proſperitie, 
                  〈…〉
                ſuffre afflictions, and to put in a redines w
                  ••
               pon agaynſt aduerſitie, conſiderynge we be ſubiecte to aduerſitie, troubles, perſecutions, miſeries, in firmities, and death. And albeit in holy ſcripture haboundaunce is left to vs of ſuch furniture, yet our ſlouth and negligence is ſuche, that we reſte peaceably, as if we were in aſſuraunce, we take no ſorow, as thoughe we were cleare withoute daunger, and not mynded to ſearche and prouyde municions of warre for vs defenſible, whiche cauſeth vs in tyme of affliction or death (ſodenly approchynge) for the more parte to be founde ſlomberynge, naked, and out of a redines, & thus withoute reſiſtence conſtrayned ſhamefullye to yelde our ſelues vnto diſpayre. Agaynſt the whiche ſtormes, let vs fortifye our ſelues with holy ſcripture, and walke in the commaundementes of God, that by the grace of his holy ſpirite, we may he conforted in ſuche wyſe in our couraiges

that we may feare no daungers, perylles, nor yet death. Although thende of the worlde approche at hande, as by this mooſt neceſſarye and godlye pronoſtication, ſet forth by the worſhypful clark maiſter Arnolde Bogarde, doctour of Phiſicke reſident in Bruxelles maye appeare, which pronoſtication beyng in Latyn, Frenche, & Dutche was delyuered vnto me by a louynge frende of myne, to be tranſlated out of Frenche into Englyſh, whiche I haue gladlye done. Deſyringe the gentle reader to accepte my good wyll. And in the tranſlation, though I haue not curiouſly folowed the letter, I haue very litle or nothynge varied from the mynde of the aucthour.
            Fare you well. (?)
         
      
      
         
            
            
               LOnge tyme amiable reader. I thought howe I myght not onely heale the cōmon people (half blid) but alſo thoſe which haue knowlege, to take away theyr errors, deſyrynge that it may profyte al men, pryncipally to witnes, and ſhewe my good wyll towarde
                  •
                the magiſtrates and Senate of Bruxelles, ſeynge then that in theſe preſent tumultes, deſtructions of townes, robbyng of villages, and euyll reportes on all ſydes, all perſons (excepte ſuche as be madde) gladly truſt of better tyme, the which thing the cō
               mon people were wont to looke for in the yerely pronoſtications as of ye Oracles of Apollo, whervnto dyuers gaue more fayth, then in tymes paſt to ye ſayinges

of the Sibelles. Neuertheles of tentymes they varied farre frō the truth, as they maye knowe whiche wyll take payne to rede our opinion herein the fartilitie of the yere is deſired by the payſant or huſband man, Dyuers be curious to knowe yf the yeare ſhalbe ſubiect to many maladies or not, and principally the phiſitions and Apotecaries, the man of warre enquyreth whether the confederation of the peace ſhalbe kept or not. Of the ſucces of townes, and gouernemente of the ſame, enquyreth the Citezyn and handycraftman. Fynally by the pronoſticatours, ye fortunes and encombraunces of Emperours and kynges be loked for, but therin they ſpeake ſoberlye: for by experyence princes deſyre no euyll tydynges. All this is treated diuerſly of many, & that

coldly and doubteouſly, wytnes the yere precedent. M. D .lij. for of the great fluddes there chaū
               ſed two or thre tymes not without great damage of Selande & Brabant, no man declared. Neuertheleſſe it had ben profytable to haue knowen it, for thynges foreſene receaueth not ſo muche hurte, as thinges not foreſene. Of the warres not loked for, & ſo ſecretelye wroughte by the Frenche kynge agaynſt themperour, who aduertiſed his maieſtie? Of ye tumult of ye Iarmanes who pronoſticated? Of the laſte weat & rayny wether beyng ſom what damageable, no man made brute. If in theſe litle things (as dayly rayne and tempeſtes) men fayle, then by a more ſtronger reaſon, in thinges more ſecrete, Thaſtrologiens fayle.
            Cardanus ſayth how no man

can pronoſtike of thynges ſecret, whiche knoweth not the daylye diſpoſicions of the ayre. We conleſſe Aſtronomye as thother artes to be a gyfte of God, amongeſt whom Aſtronomye occupyeth not the leaſt place, for ſondry vtilities that they haue neceſſary to the life humayne. She diſpoſeth the meaſures, ordre, nombre of dayes, monethes and yeares by the circuyte and mouing of the Sonne, and the Mone, by the whiche we knowe that the worlde laſteth not alwayes, for if this good ordre of yeares were not knowen, thentendement rauyſhed from thyngs of time paſt ſhulde fall into innumerable errours and darckeneſſe. And ſhoulde not awayt after certayn yeares, thend of the generation humayne, nor alſo of the deade retourned to lyfe ſhalbe of God

ſeperated, nor his holye churche from other, and adourned with the rewardes perpetual. There is further in the hyſtories & dayly buſineſſes ryght great vtilite, of the whiche he that maketh no compte, diſprayſeth the common welth, and lykewyſe that whych to the lyfe of man is mooſt excellent. In the ſame Aſtrologie we haue aboundantly propoſed certayne great and true ſignes, ſignyfyinge many thynges, yet neuertheleſſe they be not to be feared, nor credited as goddes: but to thende that by deuyne ſignes we be admonyſhed to know our ſelues, and from euyll threteninges to kepe oure ſelues. Y et alwayes truſtynge in the goodnes of god, we ſlepe in pleaſures, and delites, which therby prouoketh his wrath towardes vs, yet he chaſtiſeth vs from our exceſſiue

euils by ſome diſcipline, as warres, ſterilitie, inuudation, ſicknes burninges, takyng our riches & goodes, and by theſe meanes, as by men of warre (as ſayth Theo philacte) diſtreſſeth vs of our puiſſances, to thende that recogniſyng our euyls, we ſhuld not peryſh, by the which chaſtiſemente, he wyll correcte vs. Dyuers by tharte of Aſtronomy, wold make certaine aduertiſementes, albeit that they know not the pleaſure of God. Eccleſiaſticus ſayth: I regarde all the worke of god, ſeyng that man cannot fynde anye reaſon of that which is done vnder the ſonne, and the more he trauayleth therein, the leſſe he ſhall fynde, and if the ſage ſaye that he knoweth, yet he cannot fynd it. And in Eccleſiaſtici, ſerch not thynges excedyng thy intendement, but to that whiche God

hath commaunded the, vpō that only thinke alwayes, for the inquiſitour of the maieſtie ſhall be thruſt downe from glory. Theſe thynges ſhalbe more clere, when we haue declared what men be leaſt gouerned by the conſtellations, as fyrſt Emperours and all kynges be not ſubiectes to ye ſtarres. Of themperour of Thaſſuri
               
                  •
               ns, Iulius Firmicus in the ſeconde boke, the .xxxiii. cha. ſayth that ſome Mathematicien can not ſay truth, nor diſcerne of the fortune of Emperours. Themperours ſayth he be not ſubiecte to the courſe of the ſtarres, for they be only of whom ye ſtarres hathe no maner of puiſſaunce, for to deſcerne theyr fortunes, forſomuch as they be lordes of al the world, theyr fatale fortunes are gouerned by the onlye iudgemente of God. Hitherto be the wordes of Firmicus.

Of the kynges the holy ſcripture teſtifieth, how theyr harts ben gouerned of the hand of god And in Prouer, xxv. the heauen is the heyght, and the erth is the lowe part, but the hart of a kyng is inſcrutable. All thynges then, onelye of kynges be made to vs, (yet though to our iudgemente they ſeme euyll) it is neceſſarye that they be good, for god indifferently vſyng kynges as inſtrumentes, for ye moſt parte geueth them to vs for oure ſynnes, and enormities, for there is no euyll in the citie whiche the lord hath not geuen, the which Citie if god kepe it not, they labour in vayne that kepeth it. Thys is a greate conſolation to all Chryſten men, to the ende that for mourmurynge and reſyſtynge the worde of God, there come not vppon vs thinges more greuous. This

opinion confyrmeth Firmicus, howe there is no man vnto thys preſente tyme hath ſayde other thinges then incertayne of them perour Charles the .v. and of other kynges: but we ſhal declare thynges veritable of the maieſty of this ſayde Emperoure, when we ſhall make mencion of the. iiij Monarchie. We maye ſaye ſome thinge by his reuolution, but for certayne reſpectes we wyll not touche it. The wyſe men not after this preſent world, (as ſome be, diſguiſing theyr vyſages and apparell reſemble wyſe) haue do mination ouer the ſtarres and elementes. Of this true wyſdom is the begynnynge of the fear of god, the whiche ſurmounteth in the heartes of them that trulye knoweth hym. The true knowledge is to embraſe hym, as beynge onely ye fountayne of truth,

wyſdome, bountie, iuſtice, iudgement, mercy, pitie, puiſſance, and helth, and that we ſhould do reuerence to his fatherly bountie, by a loue the whiche the Sonne ought to haue towardes his father, for to the louers of the lord all thinges turneth to goodnes. This knowledge thus aduaunſed enſtructeth vs in a true fear, and reuerēce, that he maketh vs beleue (and truth it is) howe all goodnes commeth from hym.
            They knowe alſoo (as we haue ſayde before) howe of God commeth peace, warre, lyfe, & death, lyghte and darckenes, peſte, famyne, haboundaunce, helth, and dyuers innumerable other thin ges, wherby he ſheweth vnto vs his wyll to our welth, or the ſeuerytye of his iuſt iudgementes with vengeannce. Thoſe be thei the whych nothyng ſo difficile or

be ſo maleheureux, that departe from the charitie of Ieſu Chriſt. Thoſe I ſaye, haue dominacion ouer thelementes, and haue armures, that is to ſay the buckler of fayth. The contrary, the debilitie of fayth maketh the courage ryght feble in tymes of afflyction, wythout remembryng God. Thempyres and dominations of kynges be thereby augmented and demynyſhed, he molifyeth our dolour, yfwe beleue S. Paule, the whyche admoniſheth vs of the perylles that ſhal come vpon vs at the laſte dayes, not onelye as to the bodye, but alſo to the ſpirite, to thende that we ſhall learne to defend our ſelues, and in ſo greate calamytye, all thynges to aſke of the onelye GOD, ayde and conſolation, and to obteyne the ſame lette vs not doubte.
            
               In this laſt age of the worlde we be fallen into ſuche time that one brother aryſeth agaynſte thother, one countrey agaynſte an other ſo that the geſte ſhall not be ſure of hys hooſt. Euerye man ſtudieth for his perticuler welth, one wyll take no payne for his brother, yet alwayes after the ſentence of Saynt Auguſtyne, he lyueth well and holylye, whiche the leaſte that he maye, lyueth for hym ſelfe. Lette vs not thynke that the fyrſte partes be premyſed to the loue of hym ſelfe, and the ſeconde to the charity of his neighbour. Saint Paule teacheth vs by thaffinitie compoſicion connexion, proportion, and beaultie of our members that whyche one member oweth to thother, here by the offices fraternelles be geuen to vs to knowe that we haue a father in

heuen, to whom all that we thinke to be ſecrete, is knowen. But alas our confidence is returned from vs, the whiche is fyxed in our rycheſſe, but the knowledge therof profiteth litle to thē whiche dayly attende affliction, as all Chriſten men do, which haue no warre with heauen, but with the worlde, the Deuyll, and the fleſhe, what more, all theyr lyfe is but warre. Lykewyſe alſo the ſaige falleth not here, for by dyuers ſciences, as Philoſophie, Theologie, the ſciences of the lawes, Phiſicke, Aſtrologie. &c. we be eleuated and come to the wyſdome of God, the whiche is profoundly reueyled in theſe artes and ſciences, to thende that we may be reduced to his knowlege For the heauens manyfeſte the glory of God, and the workes of his hande ſheweth the fyrmament.

Who ſhalbe he that regardyng man (the which of the philoſophers is called ye litle world) ſhal not be rauyſhed in great admiration of his maker and creator. If you looke on hyghe, you ſhall ſee the dyuers mouinges of the ſtarres and elementes, lykewyſe theyr ſituations, diſtaunce, propertie, and yet ſo manye lampes burnyng, & two greate lightes, as in the day the Sonne, in the nyght the Moone, the whyche ſhynynge and illuminynge ouer all the worlde, be created for the vſaige of man, and to manifeſte the glory of God. Theſe be creatures and inſtrumentes wherby God enſpireth his natural puyſſance accordyng to his wyll, and conuerteth to accions ſuche as he hath predeſtinate. We haue of no creature more greater and maruelous vertue

then o
                  •
                the ſonne, the which 
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               
               uers for that cauſe hath bene honored for a god, by reaſon wherof the Lorde (to thende that all prayſe redounde to his glorye) hath made the lyghte, and hathe fylled thearth with all kindes of herbes, before the creation of the Sonne. Man then (as ſayth Ariſtotle) maketh not the ſonne ye pryncipall and neceſſary cauſe of thynges that hath ben created before that, but it is an inſtrument wherewith God vſeth his pleaſure. For withoute that he myght worke by hym ſelf, this cō
               ſideration deliuereth vs of a ſuperſticious feare, and is made of the creatures, ye which we think is contrarye vnto vs, as amongeſte the planettes Mars and Saturne, the contrary retyreth vs from an euyll admyration of thynges ſemynge to vs wholeſome

and ſalutaire, and maketh vs turne to the Auctour of the ſame, whiche is onely God, this wytneſſeth Ieremy which ſaith, feare not the ſtarres and ſignes of heauen as in tyme paſt the wicked Ethnyckes and Paynyms dydde. The prophete condempneth not here all feare, but when thynfydeles tranſported the gouernement of the worlde, to the Starres and Elementes, they thoughte howe theyr felicitie or miſerye was in the iudgemente of them, and not in the wyll of God. Yf ſo be that the ſtarres & elementes threateneth any thinge (as apte to vices) euyl inclinations, and other lyke thynges, our maners ought to be gouerned with a dylygent and meane temperaunce, to the ende that the euyll inclynations be not vanquyſſhers.
            
               In aduerſites we muſt cloth our ſelues with force and magnanimitie. In thynges proſperous and equall the ſtarres geueth vs inclination to ſome vertue or good maners, enforce our ſelues to be aided by ſtudie and knowledge kepynge vs not to paſſe a meane in our courage, callyng al way aide of God to be gouerned by hym. Lette vs not glorifye in our gyftes, as the ſtronge man was wonte to do in his force, the ryche man in his ryches (yet in vayne) but let our reioyſynge be to vnderſtande and knowe that it is the Lorde that doth mercy, iudgemente, & iuſtice in thearth, the whiche in greate libertye by his wyſedome maketh that whiche he purpoſed to make from ye begynnyng of the worlde, and by his incomprehenſible and mightye puiſſaunce putteth in execution

that whiche he predeſtinated to make. It foloweth then, that by his prouydence not only the heauē, thearth, or creatures be gouerned (as aboue is ſayde) but alſo the wylles and councels of men, ben gouerned to come to thende to haue knowen hym before. To fortune or good aduenture we ought not to attribute any thynge, as the paynyms do. If good ſucces be bleſſynge of God, c
                  •
               lamitie and aduerſitie be contrary, theſe wordes be by for tune, or at aduenture, and agree to the pouidence of God: but for ſo muce that by thordre of reaſon, thnde and neceſſitie of thinges wiche commonlye cometh vpons, be hydden in the councell o God, and by humayne opinion incomprehenſible, menne calle
                  •
                them fortunes, albeit that they p
                  •
               ede from ye wyl of god.

Like reaſon is to be geuē of thinges to come, this is confyrmed by the holye Scripture, wherof all thoſe that trauayle and turment them ſelues in the thinges aboueſayde, maye take a remedye. Dauid ſayth in ye .liiij. pſal. Caſte your ſolicitude vppon the Lorde, and he wyll nouryſh you. And in the fyrſte of Saynt Peter the .v. Humble youre ſelues vnder the puyſſant hand of god, to thende that he exalte you in the tyme of viſitation, caſtyng all ſolicitude in him, for he ſoroweth for you. And Saynt Mathewe in the. vii, Chapiter, He ſoroweth for vs as the mother doth hyr chylde. Hereby it is euidente howe muche and howe great is the ſolicitude and beneuolence of God towardes vs. The Aſtrologiens make obiectiō, eſteminge howe the ſtarres and elementes

be ordeyned to infallible mouementes, as apparaunce, or riſing and goynge downe of the ſame elementes, coniunction of lumyres and planetes, appoſitions, and other aſpectes, Eclipſes, by the cognyſion, congreſſion, conſentment, diſcordant, and regreſſion of them, men maye predicte diuers accidentes commynge to the worlde, as warres, mortalities, famines, contagious ſickeneſſes, peace, haboundaunce of goodes, mutacions of realmes, and ſectes, death of Princes, tumultes of people, perturbations of publyque thynges, inundacions, earthquakes and lyke thinges, the whyche by the influence celeſtyall vertue of the Elementes, and puyſſance of the ſtarres we ſe folowe and fall on vs.
            Theſe thynges (as we confeſſe) be made, and depende

by the ſtable and conſtante mouynge of heauen, and the coning Aſtrologien in predeſtinatynge theſe thynges is only God. Let vs beleue, and we muſte confeſſe that God may by his mercy and pitie turne theſe ryghte horrible thretenynges of the ſtarres, and preſent euylles, and of his bountye, and by prayers of good people, chaunge & turne his ſentence from vs. We rede that this chaū
               ſed to the Niniuites, to whome was declared by Ionas the prophete, howe within fortye dayes they ſhoulde peryſhe. Lykewiſe the furnace of Babylon burnyng aboue the accuſtomed faſhion, by the commaundemente of kynge Nabuchodonoſor, coulde not burne the chyldren beinge putte therein. The death of Ezechie, pronounſed by the mouth of Ieſaie, was by compaſſion diuyne

prolonged bycauſe of his lamentation and prayers▪ God is not nowe abriged, what thyng ſhuld lette, but that the euylles which the ſtarres threateneth maye be chaunged by this remedye? We haue ſeen in yeares paſte ryghte cruell warres ſhortlye appayſed, agaynſt the opinion of dyuers. Nowe we muſte praye God to geue vs the ſame ſucces and fortunes in thoſe thynges that in this troubelous tyme they maye be profytable to his honour, and to the increaſe of his church▪ Finallye in thynges that be more worthy then the heauen, thaccion of the ſtarres is of no puiſſāce, as the ſoule reaſonable enſpired of God, and the which worke by his wyll is more noble then all other creatures, for ſhe beareth with hyr the ymage of God, and to the vtilitye of the ſame, by the

ryghte haboundaunte larges of God, the other creatures be geuen to vs, this confyrmeth Ptolomee in Centiloque, ye .viij. chapiter, the ſoule (ſayth he) of the wyſe man aydeth the celeſtiall vertue, as the good paiſaunt or huſbandman labouryng and culturynge ye earth, aydeth nature. Yf then the ſoul be cauſe, ayding to thynges celeſtiall, ſhe ſemeth to be free, ſeynge that ſhe is more noble then the heauen. Alſo the vertue of the ſtarres be muche ayded by the complexions of the people, the whiche be cauſes of maladies, for theſe complexions chaungeth by the diſpoſition of the ſtarres, and lykewyſe doth thynclinations, that by tharte medicine & grace of god, we eaſly vanquyſh, which to the Lucianiſtes, Atheiſtes and Epicuriens▪ is impoſſible, who maketh a confuſion

of the ſoule, and of the complexion of the body, & herin they be greate imitatours of Galien, whereof is the religion to eate, dryncke, play, and after this lyfe ther is no ioye, but let vs relynquyſh theſe foles which haue no god. And ſeyng the benefytes of God be ſo great, let vs demaund his ſuccoures and aide, he wyll geue it vnto vs oftentimes, as he ſhewed to Moſes in the readde ſea, and to Ioſue likewyſe, he retarded the ſonne manifeſtly, geuyng ayde againſt thumayne eſperāce. This honor perteineth & ought to be referred only to god to thend that we ſhulde beleue yt god may & wil ſuccor & aide vs, wtout lokīg for it. Alſo thaſtrologiē muſt regard ye cauſes vniuerſal, as warres, cōtagious maladies, ye which haue more ſtrēgthehē ye cauſes perticulers, as techeth Ptolomee

in the fyrſt Centiloque, hereby it is euident howe dyuers men be ſubiectes to the conſtellations, as thoſe be the whiche by ſtudye education, and inſtitution couenable, maye not ſurmounte, nor chaunge theyr affections and maners, And to thoſe herevnto contrary, as thoſe the whyche by ſtudye, education, diſciplyne, inſtitution, ſcience, or otherwayes may ſurmounte and vanquyſhe theyr affections, it is notarye that to them the ſtarres beareth lytle or no damnaige. Neuertheles we wyll not ſuſteyne with the Stoiciens, that men be without affections, for euery manne foloweth the nature of his ſeede: but thoſe whiche be more wyſe, may by induſtry, art, and maner of meates chaunge theyr complexions, for the natures and entendementes of ſome chaungeth more eaſelye

then thoſe of other: wherefore, this celeſtiall worde ſerueth, knowe thy ſelfe.
            This ſtudious prouidence is greatlye neceſſarye to oure lyfe, the mooſte parte of this philoſophye is comprehended in decent and couenable education, the whiche (as wytneſſeth Quintilien) muſte begynne in youth, by thys reaſon, it maketh that the mooſt noble, and thoſe which eateth beſte meate, be more ingenious then the other. The ayre is aſwell ryghte couenable to the prudence and induſtrye of man, as the bloude, wytneſſe Hyppocrates in the boke of thayre and waters. &c. To make couenable and decente education or nouryſhment, we muſte conſulte wyth the Phiſition, which knoweth a good part of Aſtronomye, beyng a parte of Phiſicke, for that is as

muche couenable to a Phiſicion, as neceſſary, as ſayth Hyppocrates in hys ſayde booke of thayre and waters. &c. For thereby the varyacions of tyme and mutacions of the ſtomacke is knowen. And after there muſte be conſidered the ryſynge and goynge downe of the Elementes, pryncypally of the Canycle, after Arctures, and thoccident of Pleiades or Porceletes, for the diſeaſes in theſe dayes commonlye make theyr Iugementes and ſhewynges, the other maketh the perſonnes to dye, and other chaunge into other kyndes of maladies, this ſayth Hyppocrates. Theſe ryſynges and occidentes of the Elementes, we haue putte in oure Almanackes, wherwithall euery man that wil may ayde hymſelfe: theſe thynges be almooſt forgotten of the

phiſicions, whiche neuertheleſſe wyll be of great eſtimacion, and not onely be forgetfull but dyſprayſers, whiche is worſe. I feare that the ignoraunce of diuers is cauſe of enuye whiche is alwayes hurtefull to al good artes: but of theſe thinges we ſhal ſpeake at an other tyme more amply. (?)
            
               
               ¶ Of the laſte Monarchie, whiche is of the Romaynes, preſentlye gouerned by the grace of God, by Charles the .v. Emperoure, ryght vyctorious.
               
                  DYuers haue preſcribed thynges muche variable of ye laſt Monarchie, and of Charles the fyft Lorde there of: but for that the moſt parte be fables, we let them paſſe, takynge onelye that which ſayde by Daniell the Prophet his prophecye, the whiche is e true cronicle of this worlde, ytynge of this Monarchye,

ſayth as herafter foloweth. The fyrſt is the mooſt noble of al thother, beynge of the Chaldeens, and Aſſiriens, the whiche is repreſented by the head of gold, of the ſtature of Nabuchodonoſor. And by the Lyons hauyng wynges of an Egle, the whiche amongeſt all other beaſtes is the moſt noble, ſo is this Monarchie, whervnto is ioyned for the nature of the beaſtes crueltie and rauyne. The ſeconde hath bene of the Mediens and Perſiens, lykened to the poictryne & arme of ſyluer of the ſtature aforeſayd like vnto a beare, and ſtode vpon the one ſyde. Amonge his teethe in his mouth he had thre greate longe tethe, and it was ſayd vnto hym, aryſe eate vp much fleſh. The thyrde was lyke vnto a leoparde, this hadde wynges as a fowle, euen foure vpon the back,

this beaſt had fowre heades, and there was power geuen hym, this was of the Grekes and Alexandre the great, kynge of ye Macedonians, by the nature of the beaſte this Monarchye is knowen, yf it be not ſufficiently knowen of al men, gentle reader loke on the hiſtorye of Geſnerus of fowre foted beaſtes, ſhe hath alſo ben likened to the bely and cuyſſes made of braſſe. Of ye fourth ſayth Daniel, that it is the laſt of the Romaynes, and of ours now preſent. After Daniell ſawe in a viſion by nyght, and beholde the fourth beaſte was grymme and horrible, and maruelous ſtrong, it had great yron teeth, it deuoured and deſtroyed and ſtamped the reſydue vnder his feete, it was farre vnlyke the other beaſtes that were before it, for it had tenne hornes. &c.
               
                  It is alſo compared to the legges of Iron in the ſtature of Na buchodonoſor, to the which partes of the feete, one was of yron and thother of earth. Of theſe Monarches reade Ioſephus, Sabelliq. Canon, Sebaſtian Munſtre. The hiſtorye of Alexandre the great, and Daniel the Prophete in the ſeconde and. vij Chap. of his Prophecie, & other Hiſtorigraphes worthy of fayth.
               By this is ſufficientlye knowen the ſhortenes of the world. To whom our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, the onelye Meſſias (ſo much deſyred) is borne, reigning Ceſar Auguſt, & there is comon yeares paſſed ſynce thincarnation. M .ccccc. lij. yet from ye houre of the Natiuitie, the ſayde Romayne Empyre hadde longe endured, that is to ſaye, XLVII yeres, when Iulius was made

Conſul. It is ſhewed vnto vs further, how god toke great cure and ſolicitude ouer vs, & that the mutatacions of Realmes been made and predicte dyuynelye, to thende that beynge admoniſhed by good counſayle, we maye auoyde euilles, further by thinter pretation of Daniel, it is euident that this Empire ſhalbe deuided and departed, whiche the tenne hornes ſheweth, diuers partes of hyr be ſeperated, as Englond, Fraunce, Denmarke, Eſpaigne, Pole, and other, Saynte Paule teſtifyeth that before the coming of the defection of the laſte tyme they ſhuld not come. And becauſe the ſame is paſſed longe tyme, it is lykewyſe true that the daye of the lorde approcheth, that the Empyre is come to ye Almains. Cardanus referreth the greate beare to the laſt ſtarre of the taile

when ſhe paſſeth (ſayth he) ouer Conſtantinople, ſhe geueth ouer thempyre. After ſhe is come vpō Fraunce to the Galles, and laſte ſhe is come to the Almaynes, to whom ſhe trāſported thempire. The tayle of the beare ſygnyfyeth force withoute compariſon, and ſhe is yet ſituate vpon the Almaynes, hitherto be the wordes of Cardanus. The nature of this ſtarre is like and ſemblable to the ſtrength of the beaſte, propoſed in the fourth Monarchie. The fortune of this Empyre ſhal not be alwayes vnanime, but ſometyme habound in puiſance, ſometyme weake and affeabled, whiche is ſhewed by the legges parte Iron and parte earth.
               This Romayne Empyre hathe hadde ſome magnifique and noble Emperours of greate vertue and felicitye, as Arthure, Maximian,

Conſtantyne the greate, Charlemayne, and at this preſent Charles the .v. Hitherto in ſome thynges victorious, other Emperours they haue had with out any vertue, and in feates of warre infortunate, and in dyuers batayles vanquyſſhed. By this it is euident and clere, that the victories come of God, and that the Romayne Monarchye ſhalbe the laſte, and ſhall not be vanquyſſhed, deſtroyed, nor reuerſed, then only of God, and by the Roialme of Ieſus Chriſt. Dyuers haue attempted to ſubuerte the ſame, pryncypallye the Turkes, the whiche (albeit they haue obteyned certayne vyctoryes agaynſte Themperoure) yet ſhall not this laſt Monarchi be put in ſubiection, nor broken, as by longe experyence it hath ben hytherto approued: but it

ſhall abide one tyme in greate augmentacion, and another time with diſcreſemente, vnto ſuche tyme as of the Mountayne is cutte a ſtoone withoute handes, and vntyll ſhe haue bruſed the ſtature of Nabuchodonoſor, the whiche repreſenteth the Monarchye of the worlde, and the face falle entierlye, and this ſtone become a greate mountayne, that is to ſaye the great Roylme durynge the worlde. This we haue wylled to putte to, to the ende that all Chryſten people ſhoulde knowe that the Monarchies be gouerned diuynely, and that they rule ouer the configurations celeſtialles. And thys laſte Monarchye (the whyche Charles the fyfte gouerneth at this preſente) ſhall not be bruſed nor affeabled by humayne puyſaunce, althoughe dyuers be

of the opinion and ſentence that the Roialme of Turques ſhulde abate it, but by the onelye ſtone whiche is Chryſte, it ſhal peryſh, when he ſhall come to iudge the quycke and the dead, but the day and howre when he ſhal returne to iudgemente, is not knowen of any creature nor of thaungelles, but it is in the only wyl and iudgement of the heauenlye father, the whiche clearelye rehearſeth S. Mathew in the .xxiiij. Chap Neuertheleſſe it is permytted by holye ſcripture to enforce by ſome coniectures & ſimilitudes, to attayne and come to the age or year of his comming (always the day and the houre abydyng vnknowen) Our Lorde hath inuited and drawen vs for to ſerch and obſerue by a couenable ſimilitude or parable of a fygge tre, when the braunch is tender, and

his leaues be out, you know that Somer is approchynge. You alſo lykewyſe when you ſe the thinges aboue ſayd in the .xxiiij. cha. Lyfte vp your heades, knowing that youre redemption and the kyngdome of God is next to the gates. By theſe wordes, and by the faſhyon of thynges, future & nowe preſente, whereof alſo many be paſt, he that diligently ſearcheth thē, may eaſely coniecture ſomethinge for vs, of this which dyuers auctours haue lytle reculed of the breuite and ſmall enduryng of this worlde, we ſhall briefely reſite. Fyrſte we wyll ſet forth the wordes of Elie, whereby the Iewes confounde them ſelues, which haue ſet fourth (as they ſaye) howe the worlde ſhall endure ſyxe thouſande yeares, that is to ſaye, two thouſande yeares without lawe, two thouſande

yeares with the lawe, and two thouſande yeares after the dayes of Chriſte. To theſe wordes it ſemeth Saynt Peter confyrmeth in his ſeconde epiſtle in the thyrd chapitre, ſayinge that one daye to the Lorde is as a M, yeres, and a thouſand yeres as one day. Of the lyke that foloweth, that as the Lorde in ſyx dayes created al, and the vij. day he repoſed him ſelf, lykewiſe ſixe m. yeres he gouerned this worlde, ſubiect to generations & corruptions, & in the. vii, M. he beganne repoſe perpetual, & as the ſyxt day was not in all permytted to worke and trauayle, but that a good part of the ſame day drawynge towardes euenynge was laide to the ſaboth, likewiſe the ſixte thouſande ſhall not be holye ſuffred nor graunted as it is wrytten in other paſſage that

the Lorde ſhall abrydge ye dayes for the choſen, as the ſixe firſt generations, that is to ſay, of Adā, Seth, Iared, Cainan, Malaleel & Iared, be treſpaſſed or departed, and the ſeuenth whiche is of Enoch, is immortall, Lykewyſe ſixe thouſande yeares ſhall regenerate death, & in ye ſeuenth ſhall haue the fortunate immortalitie, his vigour. Item in S. Math .xxiiij. S. Marke .xiij. ſayth the Lord, of this daye and houre no creature knoweth, nor yet thaū
                  gelles of heauen, but my father onlye. And as the dayes of Noe were, lykewyſe alſo ſhalbe the comynge of the ſonne of man, for as they were in the dayes before the deluge, eatynge, drynckynge maryinge and geuynge in mariage, vnto the daye that Noe entred in the arcke, they knewe nothyng, nor vnto the time yt the

deluge came & toke them awaye all, Lykewyſe ſhall be the commynge of the ſonne of man. By theſe wordes it ſemeth Ieſus Chryſt to haue taken not onlye the ſimilitude of the qualitie, but alſo of the quantitye of thynges, I call qualities manners of this corrupted worlde, wherof there is no doubte, for S. Luke confirmeth it in his. xvij, Chapter, the quantitie is called the nombre of yeares. The ſentence is ſomewhat more obſcure, but Saynt Mathewe declareth it, when he ſayth: Lykewiſe as the dayes of Noe were, ſo ſhalbe the cominge of the ſonne of man. And Saynt Paule to the Romaynes in the v. Chapter, affyrmeth how Adā was the fourme and figure of the commynge of Ieſu Chriſt. As alſo he ſayth in the fyrſt to the Corinthiens, the .xv. Chapt. The

fyrſt man Adam in ſoule 
                     〈…〉
                   and the laſt in ſpyryte 
                     〈…〉
                   the fyrſte man of thearth 
                     〈…〉
                  , the ſeconde manne that is to ſaye the Lorde, is of heauen. Yf then Ieſus Chryſte is the other Adam of whome the fyrſte hath ben the fygure, and that the cō
                  mynge of Ieſus Chriſt ſhalbe as the dayes of Noe before the deluge, who wyl not beleue that ſo longe tyme that is paſſed from Adam terreſtre, vnto the dayes of Noe & the deluge, that it ſhall not paſſe ſo muche from Adam celeſtiall, the whiche is our lorde Ieſus Chriſt, vnto thende of the worlde or deluge of fyre. Saynt Peter ſayth in his ſeconde Epiſtle in the thyrd chapter, the day of the Lord ſhall come as a thefe in the nyght, wherby the heuens ſhall paſſe in maner of a tempeſt, and the Elementes beynge chafed

                  
                     〈…〉
                   the earth ſhall founder, 
                     〈…〉
                   thonerages or workes 
                     〈…〉
                   in them ſhall burne, and by and by after the ſame ſayth, whereby the heauens beyng on fyre ſhalbe defayted, and the elementes beyng burned ſhal foundre. Nowe it is euydent oute of Geneſis, the .v. Chapyter, that from Adam vnto the deluge be paſſed. M. CCCCCC .lvi. yeares, it is lykewyſe true howe the ende of the world ſhalbe approchynge to like yeare of our lorde thouſande ſyxe hundred fyftye and ſyxe. It is nere at hande, for there remayneth nowe no more but. C. and foure yeares. Yet alwayes for ſo muche that none knoweth the abreuiation of the ſayde tyme, the whyche is purpoſed for the electe, for this reaſon it ſemeth ryght difficyle preciſely to knowe the tyme.
               
                  There is other that ſaye how the yeares of the Lord ought to be accompted, not from his Natyuytye: but from his reſurrection, Aſcencion, or ſendynge of his holye ſpyryte, whyche ſhoulde make greate variation and mutacion of the yeares. And as Noe knewe not the daye nor the howre of the deluge, (yet alwais of the yeare not ignoraunte) Lykewyſe to vs is permytted by the holye Scryptures to ſearche the yeare, albeit that the daye and howre remayne vnknowen. Some alſo coniecture the ende of the worlde, from ye birth of Chryſte vnto his paſſion and reſurrection whiche cometh to xxxiij. yeares and certayne dayes, whoſe nomber is vnknowen. And for euerye yeare of Ieſus Chriſte they accompte ſo manye great yeares Moſaiques, yt is to

ſay, Iubilaires, and make euery yeare fyfty yeares, the which iubiles ſemeth ryght wel to accord together, for .xxxiij. Iubiles be of our Ciuile yeares. M .cccccc. and. L. wherevnto adde certayne fewe yeares for the portion and reſt of the dayes yt Chryſt lyued amongeſt vs, more thenne the ſayde .xxxiii. yeares. It ſhulde be more euident yf euerye one of the ſayd yeares of the life of Ieſu Chriſte, we ſhulde make compariſon and ſimilitude to euery iubile of the churche then begynnynge. And if the ſymilitude of thynges make ſo many yeres of Chriſt, as of the Iubilaires of the churche, it ſhulde be the more to accoumpte of the ende of the world: but forſomuch that theſe thynges deuines, oughte to be more ſubtyly and at length treated, and that it pertaineth more

vnto Theologiens then to medecynes, we wyll make here no further mention. There is other thynges that would a litle ſerue to this purpoſe, as thaccompliſhment parfytte of the eſcriptures and Prophecies, inſomuche that one iote is not wrytten in the holy ſcrypture that ſhall not be▪ accomplyſſhed before thende of the worlde. By theſe wordes we maye certaynelye perſwade that the worlde is nowe lame, and very aūcient, and in maners and faſhions falleth, and greatly halteth.
               Nowe lette vs pray the eternall father of oure Lorde Ieſu Chriſt maker of thumayne gendre, that to this tyme ſo euil and daungerous (by whom merueylous ſygnes ſheweth vs greate calamyties) for the loue of hys ſayde sonne▪ oure ſauiour, whom

he woulde to be offered for oure ſynnes, that he kepe his church, and ſo by the vertue of the grace of his holye ſpirite, he confyrme, and conforte in ſuche wyſe oure couraiges, that we feare not any daungers or peryls, nor alſoo the death. Here we haue finiſhed our pronoſtication, yf the reader had not attended ſome thyng of the warres, peace, fruites of the earth, and ſuche lyke thynges as men were accuſtomed to put in pronoſtications. Our pronoſtication forſomuche as it is vtile and continuall of dyuers yeres maketh of ſuche thinges no mentiō, addynge neuertheleſſe that the warres whiche hathe happened in the churche in the laſte dayes of the worlde, that is to ſay, diſcentions, ſectes, dyuers factions and lyke thynges, be more to be had in horreur, then the diſcordes

of Emperours and kynges, and what is worſe, they be more hurtefull then ſhoulde be warre turquoyſe. Let vs praye to god that it wyl pleaſe him to be peace and accorde in his churche, and as he is the ſelfe ſame veritie, ſo to declare and manyfeſt the only verite, and in ſuche wyſe to accorde the hearts of prynces, that they maye with one minde reſiſt the cruell beaſt whiche alwayes is thurſty of the Chriſten bloud. The Lorde ſhall geue largelye the fruites of the earth, yf we folowe the counſayle of Moyſes, Deutero .xi. Chap. and Leuitic .xxvi. The Lorde ſayth: yf you walke in my ordinaunces, and kepe my commaundements, and do them, I wyll geue you the rayne in his tyme, the earth ſhall geue fruyte, the threſſhynge ſhall reache vnto the vyne harueſte, and

the vyne harueſt ſhall reache vnto the ſowynge tyme, & you ſhall eate your meate in plenteouſnes and dwell in your landepeaceably, and I wyllſende peace in the earth, and you ſhall ſlepe without any man to make you afeard Theſe thynges we muſt daylye remember to thend that GOD turne not his wrathe vpon vs, and ſhette the heauen. But lette euery man walke ſo in his vocacion, that he aſmuche as he may kepe hymſelfe from offendynge God, and lette vs at his hande, attende his greate munificence, the whiche to his owne he neuer denyed.
            
            
               ¶ Concluſion.
               ¶ Gentle Reader ſeynge that pronoſtications comonlye be not welcome, and that men call them the bokes of lyes, we wil aſmuch as i vs is poſſible, preſerue ours from

that vyce, and haue fortified it by holy ſcripture, and with the ſayinges of the good philoſophers, more then by the doubteous opinions of thaſtrologiens, this maner hath not ben longe vſed: but when it ſhalbe in vſaige, it ſhall haue the moore ſwetenes and grace, for euerye tyme hath his guyſe and vſe of his methode or practike what he wyll, we haue folowed oures, ſemynge to vs mooſte conformable and nereſte the trueth. And to thende that thoſe whiche haue almooſte loſte theyr corage, and be ouermoche fearefull, we maye delyuer from theyr feare, and that they ſhulde not fall (as dyuers dyd the year paſt) into deſperation. Fynallye, this calamitie and myſerye the whiche was wonte to come by pronoſtications, toke his begynnyng of the phiſicions, for leuing

the counterpois, they meddled thynges agaynſte the deuoir of Phiſicke. Reade and geue no more fayth to pronoſtications then they meryte, and confyrme your harte in ſuch ſorte agaynſt al thinges, that you may lyue ioyouſely, and in the ende dye in the fayth of Chriſt our Lorde.
               Amen,
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Paules churcheyarde by Myllyam Awen.
            
         
      
   