
      
         
            
            
            THE TRVE COPIES OF SVNDRIE LETTERS Concerning the Affaires of Bohemia, as they haue beene ſeuerally writen in High Dutch, Latine and French, to Princes, and other men of account.
            Newly tranſlated and printed, M. D. C. XX.
         
         
            
            
            The Contents of that which orderly followeth in this Booke.
            
               
                  1. A Letter from Prague, April. 1. 1620. concerning the Chriſtening of the young Prince borne there.
               
                  2. A Letter ſent into France, concerning the Emperour Ferdinand his Ambaſſage into France, to deſire ayde of the French King.
               
                  3. A Letter written by Chriſtian, Duke of Saxony, to the Emperor Matthias, by way of friendly admonition, not to beleeue the Ieſuites; ſhewing how hee ought to carrie himſelfe towards thoſe of Bohemia, and the other incorporate Prouinces.
               
                  4. A Letter from Gabriel Prince of Tranſiluania to the Emperour Ferdinand.
               
               
                  5. A Letter from Gabriel Prince of Tranſiluania, to Chriſtian Prince of Anhalt.
               
                  6. Another Letter from the ſaid Tranſiluanian Prince to the Prince of Anhalt.
               
                  7. A Letter from Gabriel Prince of Tranſiluania, to the Duke of Bauaria.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Letter written from Prague, the firſt of Aprill, 1620. concerning the Chriſtning of the Kings Sonne, borne at Chriſtmas laſt.
            AFTER the King by way of Embaſſie had intreated the Prince of Tranſiluania to Chriſten his Childe, the young Prince I meane borne, ſo auſpiciouſly in Prague about the end of December 1619. to the vnexpreſſable comfort of all the Kingdome, and confederate Prouinces: hee made a iourney to Proſlaw, the principall towne of Sileſia, the effect whereof tended to this purpoſe, that by his perſonall appearance amongſt them, he not onely corroborated their good opinions of him, but rectified certaine diſorders, and from that excellent diuiſion of Commutatiue and diſtributiue Iuſtice, opened a larger hand of bountie to ſuch as ſtood in need of his fauour, and ſhewed a ſtronger arme of Maieſtie to thoſe that neglected his power. But vnderſtanding that the Tranſiluanians were alreadie on the way toward Prague, hee haſted

thither; and by the middle of March was welcommed with many happie relations of ſeuerall victories, both in opening the paſſages, and defeating the Emperours armie; as if Philip of Macedon ſhould haue newes at an inſtant, that the Spartanes were ſubiugated: Olympia bare him a Sonne, and his ſeruants carried away the games of Hercules. So that to make him more way to his ioy, about the end of March, Count Henricus Turzo, with other Noble-men, in the name of Bethlem Gabor, came to bee God-father to the young Prince; there were diuers Lords of Hungarie in his companie, and thirtie Huſſaros, as they call them, exceedingly wel mounted, ſix Caroches, each of them drawne with ſixe Horſes, and an hundred horſes beſides, with good equipage, and well appointed. Notwithſtanding ſuch was the pleaſure of the King to keepe correſpondencie with his owne magnificence, that he ſent them twelue Coaches more, with diuers officers of the Crowne, among whom was principall the high great Steward the Baron of Lobcowitz, a man grateful vnto them, as hauing formerly been in Hungarie, and now of ſufficiencie to put an equall recompence in the other ſcale againſt many fauours by them extended toward him: In this manner they came to the great Citie, and the verie next day had audience, wherin as an ouer plus to their embaſſie, they aſſured his Maieſtie, that about the 1. of May, which was the Diet of Newſnak,

the Crowne of Hungarie would be determined, and thoſe forces he had requeſted, accelerated vnto him.
            When the day of ſolemnitie approached, wherein I paſſe ouer the concourſe of people, and many remarkable accidents tending to the expatiating the Bohemian glorie, his Maieſtie ſent his owne Caroch by the Baron of Buſlwitz, the better to accommodate the Earle to the Court; and ſo the King, with Count Turzo, the Duke of Wittenbergh, and the Prince of Orange his Ambaſſador, who were the other God-fathers, went to the Church with the Lords of the States of the Countrey, and the Ambaſſadors of the incorporated Prouinces: Doctor Scultetus did preach, taking his Text out of the 15. of Iohn, I am the Vine: And when the Sermon was finiſhed, other religious ceremonies began, the yong Prince being brought into a place of ſequeſtration, yet publique enough for the ſatisfaction of the people; by the greateſt Ladie in the Land, called Ouerburgrauen, who ſupplied the place of Godmother; and had on her right hand, his Maieſties brother; and on her left, the Duke of Weymar: The Lords and Officers went before them, and the Ladies and Gentlewomen followed behind: At euerie entrie or change of places, the trumpets ſounded, and the drummes beate, till they came vp to a ſtately marble table, whereon a bazon of Gold ſtood, ſeruing in ſteed of a Font to dip the

Child in. The Count Turzo held him in his armes all the Chriſtning time, and gaue him the name of Robert, as intimating, that the firſt Roman Emperor of his Maieſties Family was ſo called; but queſtionleſſe this was the direction of both the Councels, and a policie of the Prince of Tranſiluania, to induce the people to conceiue or apprehend, that there might once againe be Emperours from their now Bohemian King.
            After the Prince was named, he was deliuered to the reſt of the Ambaſſadors there preſent; and ſo the deputies of the three States of the Crown, the Lords of Sileſia, Morauia, the higher and lower Luſatia, with many other Ladies of eſtimation, had the ſight of him by turnes, and bleſſed him extraordinarily euen in his cradle.
            But time is the determiner of all things, and ſo in time, after ſome accompliſhment of ceremonie, they returned in order as they came, except the King, and ſome ſpeciall Lords and Ladies, who followed by themſelues, making as it were another ſhew of State: but it ſhould ſeeme the reaſon of the Kings protraction was to entertaine a preſent, which the Count Turzo offered at the going out of the Church, a verie faire and well ſhaped Turkiſh Horſe, richly capariſond; the ſaddle and all things appertaining, were pounced with floures of Gold-ſmiths worke, interlaced with many precious Stones, the verie couering was richly embroydered; and the Horſe, as if he had

knowne his owne glorie, grew want only proud againe, to ſhew his brauerie to the companie.
            The royall dinner was ſolemniſed in a great Hall builded on the Riuer for that purpoſe, ſome call it the Mew; ſome, Moldan; and ſome, Moldauia, as it maketh ſeuerall windings thorow the Cities. The Feaſt laſted ſo long, that that night they could doe no more, but retyre into a houſe of pleaſure, ſcituated in the priuie Garden, and for this purpoſe made as it were to ſhew a new countenance with great varietie of refreſhing, as guilding, painting, and vnvſuall pargetting: He's here. They paſſed the reſidue of the time with muſicke, dances, and another banquet. The next day, the States of Bohemia preſented a gift to the young Prince, of 2000. pounds in valuation, and the other Ambaſſadors and Lords offered verie largely: ſo that a man may well crie out of the warres, as a conſumer of Treaſure, and impoueriſher of Kingdomes. For I am ſure here was ſo great remonſtrance of abundance, that a man would ſweare they neyther wanted men, nor money.
            To morrow is a preparation to celebrate the Baron of Donaws marriage, and the next day an expectation of a Tilting, and euerie day an inuitation of iollitie. For in truth, they that ſaw the noble cuſtomes and princely iollity of King Frederick, his Queene, his Brother the Duke of Weymar, and the reſt of the Lords and Ladies,

(more then ſolemnitie of Prayers and giuing thankes vnto God) would little imagine, they had ſuch intanglements of affaires abroad, or at any time diſcomforts at home.
         
         
            A Letter written by a French Gentleman being in the Armie of the King of Bohemia:
            
            To a friend and neighbour of his in Poicton, vpon the occaſion of the Voyage of the Ambaſſadour of the Emperour Ferdinand ſent into France.
            
               SIR.
            
            I Haue receiued yours, wherein is contained the requeſt of ſuccour, propounded by the Ambaſſadour of the Emperour to our King: and hauing communicated it to thoſe of our Nation, which are here (as I am,) I doe here repreſent vnto you the iudgement which wee doe all make, of what may and ought to be anſwered, to thoſe who are of opinion to yeeld the ſuccour which is required, by an inueterate enemie to France, and to the Houſe of our Kings, againſt the King Frederick of Bohemia, one of our ancient Allies, and one whoſe Houſe hath deſerued ſo well and ſo often of the Houſe of our Kings and of France in generall.
            Wee ſay then, that if theſe Inducers are not

more Spaniſh then French, at the leaſt they doe heauily offend againſt the Principles of our State by a groſſe folly: by a remarkable baſeneſſe, and by a manifeſt iniuſtice.
            By folly, firſt in ſetting themſelues againſt thoſe who ſerue for a counterpoyſe for the State of France, to balance it againſt a power ſo great, as is alreadie become fearefull to all the States of Chriſtendome; particularly in this, that by the Inſtrumencie of the Ieſuites, it pretendeth to be erected into a fift Monarchie, by the ruine of other Kings and Princes.
            The ſecond follie were, to goe with ſuch facilitie to the ſuccour of them, who in the life time of Henry the fourth, did refuſe his interpoſition to accommodate the differences riſen betweene certaine Princes of the Empire, allied and confederated with France; one of the principall Officers of the Emperour Rodulph, hauing dared to ſay, that the King ſhould trouble himſelfe with the affaires of his own State, and in the difference now in queſtion, while it was yet in termes to bee accōmodated: my Lord the Duke of Neuers being then at Vienna, and hauing charge from our King to offer his interpoſition, it was neglected and contemned. And now after the Turke hath refuſed to giue them ſuccour, ſued for at his gate foure ſeuerall times, they come to our King and State, againſt which they haue continually practized, during theſe laſt fiftie yeares: which they

haue deuided by ciuill warres, and thereunto cō
               tributed their armes and practiſes, and made vſe of our miſeries as farre forth as they could. This is far from taking hold vpon the occaſion which is preſented, as it were by the hand and conduct of God to regaine Cambray, Nauarre, and other Demeſnes of France, vſurped by this Houſe; and to take from them the means to vſe the like courſes hereafter, and to ouercome the Allies of France.
            The third folly, were out of meere iollitie to intangle our ſelues in a quarrell, to reeſtabliſh that which it ſeemes the will of God is, that it ſhould not bee: whoſe workes doe appeare in the ſudden conſent of ſo many Nations, and the vnanimous cōciliation of ſo different inclinations, all ſwaying to caſt off the yoke of a domination violent and cruell; and tending to the ouerthrow of all right, both diuine and humane.
            The fourth folly were to drayne the reuennues of the King, to weaken him in Men, by the diminutions which ſuch warres doe bring, and to reduce the harts of the French to the affection of that Stranger, from whoſe faction the preceding Kings haue had pain enough to diuert them, and into which they had beene throwne by wicked inducements.
            The fifth were, in that our King taking a reſolution to beare his Armes againſt his Allies, in fauour of the common enemie, it might cauſe ſo

great an hatred againſt him, that they might grow to accord with this enemie, thruſt on by an indignation, which could not bee in this caſe but very forcible; ioyntly to turn their forces againſt the State of France, which they ſhould find drained of money, weakned in men, and no way prepared for ſuch an inconuenience. Whereas the true Counſell of State were, when the Neighbours are in warre, to make a ſtock of money, to furniſh the frontiers with men and munitions of warre, and to keepe our ſelues on our Gard more then euer.
            So ſhould it likewiſe be a great ingratitude and baſeneſſe, to perſwade a moſt Chriſtian King, to render euill for good, to thoſe Princes who haue ſo often, ſo readily, and ſo vſefully ſuccoured him with Men, Armes, and Money, for which hee is yet indebted in ſums of very great importance, employed for the conſeruation of the Houſe Royall and State of France, againſt the attempts and aſſaults of thoſe, who are not now aſhamed to demand ſuccour againſt our Benefactors.
            Herein likewiſe are they anſwered that would ſuccour the Emperor vnder hand: for that which is naught being done openly, is not better by being done in ſecret: and to commit a baſeneſſe in ſecret, is as much as to commit a theft without witneſſe. Beſides, that it is vnworthy of the dignitie of our King, to counſell him to ſuch actions which haue need to be concealed, and yet

cannot be, being ſubiect to diſaduow and reuocation when hee ſhall bee required thereto by his Allies.
            Finally, there ſhould bee a great wickedneſſe in ſuch a proceeding, and a great iniuſtice in the maine matter: for as to the firſt, who is it that can approue that one ſhould runne vpon his friends, vpon the ſimple report of his enemies? Muſt not both the parties be heard, and haue leiſure to informe the King of their actions, or if you will not belieue them, to ſend vnto the place to know the truth? And as for the maine cauſe, it will be found very good on the ſide of the Bohemians; For firſt, the Emperour Ferdinand was neuer choſen (neither could be) King of Bohemia; then when it is pretended that hee was choſen, hee was not choſen, becauſe the States of Morauia, Sileſia, and Luſatia, were not called vnto it, and the principall perſons of Bohemia had no voice in it: but this pretended Election was made by the ſurprize of certaine Penſioners of Spaine; who on the other ſide could not proceed to a new Election, during the life of the Emperour, who was alſo King of Bohemia: for hee that liues hath no Heire.
            But ſuppoſing the Election of Ferdinand, to be good, hauing after it, againſt his ſolemne Oath, violated the Lawes of his Countrey, endeuoured to aboliſh the Priuiledges, and ſo to make it of an electiue Kingdome, hereditary: failed in his faith

and word giuen to the States of the Countrey, not to meddle with the gouernment during the life of the Emperour Matthias: exerciſed all kinds of violences and cruelties againſt the Inhabitants; his domination being degenerated into Tyranny, thoſe whoſe had right to elect him King, might reiect him, hauing rendred himſelfe vnworthy.
            Now againſt all theſe reaſons, there are made fiue Obiections, to wit, that this war being made for the ſubiect of Religion, that the moſt Chriſtian King ought to vndertake it: that the Emperour Ferdinand is Vncle by the Mother to the Queene: that ſuccour in diſtreſſe is a mutuall office which Kings doe owe one to another: that the example of reuolt againſt the Prince ought to be repreſſed: and laſtly, that it is to be doubted that the Turke may make his vſe and benefit of theſe wars among the Chriſtians his neighbours. As for the firſt it may bee remembred, that when the houſe of Auſtria did inuade France, they did ſticke this calumnie vpon our Kings, that they were Heretikes or fauourers of Heretikes; And now to diſunite them from their friends and ancient Allies, they doe coniure them by the protection of the Church of Rome, which from all antiquitie they haue cheriſhed, and peraduenture would not ſtick to tell the King, with Saint Gregorie the firſt Pope of that name, that the Kings of France doe alone

deſerue the name of Catholike, which doth not belong to any elſe.
            But this pretext of Religion, is the ordinarie Maske of thoſe who would ouerrunne ſuch as are of a beliefe differing from them, and beg the aſſiſtance of them which are of their owne opinion. This is that olde Cloke of two ſides, which ſhewes on the one ſide the publike good of Chriſtendome, and ſets forth on the other ſide, a fayned zeale of Religion, thorow which notwithſtanding is nothing to be ſeene but ambition and hypocriſie.
            It is queſtion (ſay they) of Religion, but may not that bee preſerued but vnder the Empire of Auſtria? Will you beleeue the accuſers only? ſhall wee condemne our Allies without hearing them vpon this point? And if it were true, would not the Catholike inhabitants of the Countrey ſend to requeſt the Kings aſſiſtance? And yet in this caſe were it fit to thinke of the matter. For ſince euery King and Soueraigne in his Territorie is not accountable of his adminiſtration to his Neighbours, and that wee our ſelues would not approoue that others ſhould come to controll vs in this point, wee ought to feare the example of ſuch a proceeding in time to come.
            Secondly, if you pronounce a iudgement that it is a warre of Religion, you giue leaue thereby to the greateſt part of the Emperours Armie to

depart home, who are Proteſtants of the Countries of Stiria, Carinthia, Auſtria, &c. And you doe put the Duke of Saxe, and other Proteſtants out of doubt, who haue not hitherto taken this warre for other then a warre of State. Beſides there doe follow two inconueniences.
            Firſt, that you doe taxe of deſertion of the Catholike Religion, thoſe Princes and States Catholike, who doe aſſiſt the King of Bohemia.
            The ſecond, that you doe alarme, deuide, and put into euill agreement the Subiects of this State, the inclinations of whom cannot be too wel vnited, for the repoſe of this Kingdome.
            But to take away this Maske of Religion, you need but to conſider the matter how it hath paſſed: for at that inſtant that the Ieſuites were driuen out of Bohemia, by the aduice of the Catholikes themſelues, all the other Orders of Prieſts and Religious perſons, were receiued into the protection of the States of the Countrey. Since that, the King Frederick the firſt, both at the time of his Election and Coronation hath confirmed it, and hath moreouer publiſhed it in his Declaration: and laſtly hath written it to our King by his Letter of the 20 of October laſt. By which it followeth that this feare cannot fall into the conceit of any, but ſuch, as hauing no certainly in their faith and word, doe iudge of others by their owne proceeding.
            The ſecond perſwaſion of the Partiſans of the

Emperour is to ſay, that he is Vnkle by the mother to the Queene; but they leaue out that the alliance of State, doth extend farther then any perſonall alliance; as they could well ſay when it was contracted, that marriages were but particular contracts, to take away all ſhadowes from diuers who did enter into ielouſies at that time: and now they would haue it cleane contrary, that particular pactions ſhould preiudice the publique right of State, ſo as it may ſerue for their purpoſe.
            But when this alliance it ſelfe was in queſtion, the ſtipulations, renunciations, and other clauſes which they themſelues cauſed to bee inſerted, without any other occaſion, then through the ielouſie which they beare againſt the State of France, and the feare which they had that it might haue been augmented by this alliance, doe ſufficiently exclude the Queene, particularly not to intereſt her ſelfe in the quarrells of State betweene theſe two houſes.
            The third obiection, is taken from the common intereſt of Kings, and from the ſupport which the afflicted doe requeſt; which is a cleane contrarie Style from that which they did endite, during the warre of Piemont, during which they did purſue as criminals thoſe who did aſſiſt the Duke of Sauoy, whoſe State the King of Spaine did inuade, without any more apparent ſubiect, then for the alliance which he had treated, with the late King Henrie the Fourth.
            
               But theſe men doe now preach charitie for their owne profit, and yet doe they retaine Nauarre, of which they ſpoyled one of the Kings Anceſtors, who came to aſſiſt our King: nor will they yeeld vp the places which they vſurped during the league which they ſtirred vp, & entertained as long as they could.
            But if this argument to ſuccour the afflicted be good, were it not more to purpoſe to aſſiſt the King of Bohemia, whoſe Predeceſſors haue contracted alliance with our Kings, and haue aſſiſted them with men and money againſt the League, and the houſe of the Emperour? who haue this word by writing, in many of his Letters; and the Acts and Regiſters of his owne Chamber of Accounts, for proofe of their good deeds, and good offices towards our Kings and their States?
            Nor is it to any purpoſe here for them to alledge in the fourth place, the euill example of the reuolt of ſubiects againſt their Prince, who haue ſtirred vp and entertained the ſame amongſt vs, and who doe now receiue by the diuine chaſtiſement, and for a lawfull ſubiect, the experience in their owne Countries, of the diſorders which they haue produced in the States of their neighbours. And, on the other part, the Bohemians, both in regard of what is ſaid before, and of the reaſons layd downe in their Declaration, are ſufficiently iuſtified againſt this accuſation.
            Finally, To omit nothing which may carrie any ſpeciouſneſſe with it, there is propoſed the

feare, leſt the Turke may make vſe of this diuiſion. But on which ſide hath he beene alreadie inuited, but by the Emperour Ferdinand? who hath not onely cauſed the King of Spaine to ſue to him for peace, but hath cauſed his Ambaſſadour to make exceeding great inſtance foure ſeuerall times to the great Lord at his gate, to giue him ſuccour; which hauing beene refuſed him, he comes now to our King out of deſpaire of all other aſſiſtance. But if this apprehenſion be ſeriouſly taken, it is that that ſhould inuite the other Princes of Chriſtendome, to leaue Bohemia in Peace, and to order the grieuances done vnto the Empire: and vs not to exaſperate againſt France in all the allies, kindred, and friends of the King of Bohemia, who are neither ſo few, nor ſo weake, but that they ought to be taken into conſideration.
            See here Sir, What is our iudgement concerning this vndue requeſt made of ſuccour to our King, by his inueterated enemies, againſt the moſt certaine and vſefull allies of his Houſe and Crowne. Wherein we eſteeme that all his good and faithfull ſubiects will agree with vs, and that they will call to minde the meanes vpon which the State of France our common Countrey is founded, and hath ſubſiſted for ſo many yeares: not to permit that a new Counſail, which among the Ieſuites they call of Conſcience, ſhould not onely taxe all other Counſellers, as if they had no Conſcience, but vnder this pretence doth ouerthrow

all order, both diuine and humane. For (I pray) what would haue become of the State of France, during the warres of the League, when theſe Inducers of Counſels of Conſcience did rage againſt our Kings, & did purſue their ruine? Let them remember that by ſuch Counſels and Counſellers, there hath hitherto arriued all miſfortune to thoſe Princes, which haue hearkned to them, and beene ſerued by them. The King of Poland for his part could tell, how hee came to loſe Swethland; ſo could the houſe of Auſtria it ſelfe ſpeake of the Low-Countries, many yeares ſince; and that which is now to be ſeene in reſpect of the realmes of Bohemia, and Prouinces incorporated, Hungarie and Auſtria. This is enough to cauſe other Princes to beware, at the leaſt henceforward. And I pray God, with all other good French-men, to giue our King the grace both to teſtifie in the view of all Chriſtendome, which hath her eyes vpon him, the ſtedfaſtneſſe of his word to his good friends and allies againſt their common enemie, for their protection, and the repoſe of his ſubiects: and his iuſt indignation againſt thoſe who doe counſaile him to the contrarie. I am,
            
               SIR,
               
                  Your ſeruant, Neighbour, and faithfull friend, François de Saincte Foy. 
               From Prague 
                  this 20. of Ianuarie, 1620.
               
            
         
         
            
            An Aduertiſement written in forme of a Letter, by the late deceaſſed Prince, Chriſtian the Second, Elector of Saxony, to Matthias King of Hungarie, Archduke of Auſtria, and afterwards Romane Emperour.
            Tranſlated out of high Dutch into Latine, out of Latine into French; and lastly, out of French into Engliſh.
            
               CHristian, Elector of Saxonie, greeteth you happily: We receiued your Letters (moſt illuſtrious King) dated at Vienna the 27. of September of this yeare preſent. Wherein, according to your accuſtomed manner of friendly imparting your ſelfe vnto vs by Letters, you giue vs to vnderſtand, that the happie euent of cheerefull homage yeelded vnto you by the States of Morauia, the twentieth of Auguſt, in the Citie of Prin; putting you in liuely hope of the like ſucceſſe from the people of the lower Auſtria: you haue notwithſtanding found the quite contrarie: that is to ſay, you finde, there is no preſſing the States of this Countrie to any oath of fidelitie, before their iuſt complaints be heard, and their ancient rites and priuiledges confirmed: although your Maieſtie had many times promiſed to redreſſe their agrieuances, according to the equitie

of their cauſe, as the cuſtome in this caſe is. On which bare promiſe, the Inhabitants beyond the Ens would not relie, but perſeuered conſtantly in the former reſolution: And therfore you require, that wee would not giue credit to thoſe which go about to ſettle ſome ſiniſter opinion in our mind: but rather that we ſhould perſwade them to lay aſide their obſtinacie, and ſo to come vnder the obedience which they owe vnto you, with the ſurpluſage of all that which is further comprehended in the ſame Letters.
            Your Maieſtie certainely may be aſſured, that you are no waies deceiued in the good opinion you entertaine of our fidelitie towards you, in that from our firſt entrie made vpon the Electorſhip, we may confidently auerre, without any vaine boaſting, that all our Counſels aimed at the preſeruation of the greatneſſe, reputation, and authoritie of the houſe of Auſtria, in maintaining the ſecuritie thereof againſt all their enemies. And therefore we cannot without ſingular diſcontentment apprehend the diſcommoditie accrewing thereby to you, which daily augmenteth in euerie mans ſight; and other affaires proceeding continually with the ſame contrariety, ſeeme further to threaten you with worſer ſucceſſe.
            And though it no waies beſeemeth vs to preſcribe you, vnleſſe of an happie and fortunate reigne: notwithſtanding, you manifeſting daily the great amitie and confidence you repoſe in vs,

we will not feare, to deliuer vnto you freely our opinion and aduice touching this matter, humbly intreating you to take it in good part: whereof we aſſure our ſelues, from your accuſtomed humanitie and clemencie.
            And firſt of all, who knowes not how the houſe of Auſtria, hath hitherto beene eleuated aboue all other Princely Families vnder the ſacred Empire? with how many ſeuerall dignities it hath beene augmented to euerie mans ſatisfaction and contentment, ſo that many perſons, both of high and meane calling, haue voluntarily come vnder her tutelage and protection, being verie well entreated, and with all wiſhed clemencie?
            But there is no man, how faint a louer of truth ſoeuer he be, which muſt not needs confeſſe, how your Family of long time hath met with no more violent aduerſaries then the Court of Rome, and Sect of Ieſuites, together with thoſe that adhere vnto them, with their turbulent and immoderate Counſels, which the States of the Empire, neither could nor can any wayes ſupport. Your Serenitie otherwiſe conceiues, that no other reaſon mooued the ſo many goodly Prouinces of the Netherlands to ſhrinke from their hereditarie and naturall Lord, then theſe ſo intemperate and precipitant courſes, which haue planted ſuch irradicable defiance between Subiects and their Princes and Magiſtrates, that no Treaties can remoue or ſupplant the ſame: As in verie truth,

all thoſe conſulted Treaties could neuer confirme thoſe Eſtates in any ſetled peace. Furthermore, what hath ſo extenuated and diſhonoured ſo many renowned victories, obtained by the ſacred Imperiall Maieſtie againſt the Turke, as Belioyeuſe, by a ſecret inſtinct out of the Ieſuites Schooles? For the common enemie being ſeated in the nauell or center as it were of Hungarie, with mightie forces both of horſe & foot; at that verie inſtant it was, when fire was giuen to the moſt outragious perſequutions: nay, and in ſo many ſeuerall places, that his ſaid Imperall Maieſtie, by this means, loſt Strigonium, Tranſiluania, Hungarie, Valachia, and Moldauia: the recouery of which Prouinces, coſt our deare Germaine Countries many millions of men, and an infinite treaſure in Gold and Siluer. During this cruell warre, theſe tumultuous people were not ſatisfied, in partly diſhonouring, and making fruitleſſe the victories of his Imperiall Maieſtie: and partly, oppoſing and croſſing them; but the Ieſuites further, by all manner of wicked ſtratagems, wittingly perſeuered in their perſequutions, in Carinthia, Carmola, and Stiria, expoſing the principall Inhabitants of the ſaid Prouinces to cruell Proſcriptions, while the Turke, in the meane while, toooke in Camſa: For, what other cauſe was there, why the States of the Sacred Empire, after the laſt Dyet of Ratisbone, without any laudable effect, or any firme and mutuall reconciliation,

ſeparated themſelues, but onely the Ieſuites and their importunities? who did nothing but exclaime, that the moſt pious Conſtitution of the peace of the Religion, was nothing but a meere delay, a truce, an Interim, or tolleration, ſcandalizing in this caſe, euen the Counſell of Trent; and this they divulged all ouer, in their writings. From which, and many other occaſions, ſuperfluous here to write, many complots and practiſes being vndertaken, to the great preiudice of the houſe of Auſtria; your Highneſſe may euidently diſcerne the truth of what we produced; to wit, that your illuſtrious Family hath met with no more capitall and deadly enemies in all the world then the Court of Rome, the Ieſuites and their Societie. I ſpeake nothing of ſo many pernicious practiſes, and diſaſtrous aſſaults, which the Ieſuites haue attempted againſt other Kings and Monarkes in France, England, Poland, Sweden, Venice, and other places, without all remorſe or ſhame; that if God had not euen by way of miracle, preuented their diabolicall deſſignes, they had turned entire Kingdomes topſie turvie, whole Countries with their Inhabitants, and had reduced them for euer to a finall and abſolute ruine. For whereſoeuer this Sect, or rather inſect kind of Creatures plant, they bring with them all manner of diſaſters and miſeries.
            To conclude, if by their Counſells and inſtigations,

which (I muſt tell you) are no wayes grounded vpon any true politike foundation: but rather as Spiders, wouen out of themſelues, their venemous paſſions, and Scholaſticall Dreames, they haue excited Subiects, yea, and the entyre Prouinces of ſome Princes, to mutinie and reuolt; they can create no new Inhabitants or Subiects, themſelues flye away into Italy, or ſomewhere elſe, leauing behind them a mortiferous ſtinke, and the Impreſſions of an horrible, and vaſt deſolation.
            But admit your Maieſty, may haue beene perſwaded by ſome, that you are in no ſort tyed to ratifie and confirme vnto your Subiects their ancient Rights, and Priuiledges; aboue others, thoſe that concerne the free exerciſe and practice of the Confeſſion of Auſpurg, which were granted to the people by the Emperours of famous memorie, Ferdinand, and Maximilian, for no ſmall ſummes of money: and therefore vpon no beneficiall tearmes, but thoſe very burdenſome and chargeable; wee are willing to excuſe your Highneſſe innocence herein, and naked ſincerity: beleeuing rather that this was performed by the enemies formerly mentioned, who ſeeme to affect your Highneſſe ouerthrow, and to depriue you of your Prouinces: exciting, and drawing eyther by malice, or groſſe ſtupidity, the generall enemie of the Chriſtian name, into the heart of the Countrey, who, without any great difficulty,

is like to be Maſter of all theſe ſo renowned Regions, with whole Hungarie, the which (except preſent order bee taken to the contrarie) will bee enforced to come vnder the Turkiſh protection.
            For your Serenity knowes, that both the one and other Auſtria haue now contracted a verie firme League with the Kingdome of Hungarie, and other Prouinces: ſo as if you grant not fauourable permiſſions to the one, as well as to the other, they being equally intereſſed in the cauſe of offence, by vertue of the Confederation, by you approou'd; the other parts will yeeld them ayde and ſuccour. And though as Subiects, they are ready to expoſe their liues for their Soueraigne, their bloud, yea, euen their ſecond drops which is their goods, and prodigally to caſt away whatſoeuer they haue in their power: yet what can be imagined more deplorable and miſerable, then to racke and torment their ſoules by ſuch an extraordinary, and ſeruile Tyranny? That ſame Apothegme of Stephen King of Poland, was very prayſe-worthy; who talking of ſome perſecutions begun in his Kingdome; ſaid: That he was King ouer a people, but not of their conſciences. It ſeemes this good King well apprehended, that Religion was not to bee planted by the rigor of Fire and Sword: but leauing his ſubiects freely to build vpon that beleefe, by which they hope for eternall life, and no wayes herein diſturbing them. And your famous Predeceſſors,

Princes that were endued with admirable experience and wiſdome, plainly perceiued, that thoſe Princes of Germany and Eſtates of the Empire, which neuer gaue way to this oppreſſion of conſcience, haue beene wonderfully belou'd and obſeru'd of their Subiects, for this only cauſe, enioying hereby a moſt happie Reigne, and tranquillity.
            Our deuotion therefore, towards your Illuſtrious Family, being to euery one well knowne; and from whence this loyall & ſimple admonition proceeds: your Serenitie hauing not the leaſt ſurmiſe to thinke, that we were falſly aduertized by your Subiects: but on the contrarie let all the world duly obſerue, what hearts they carrie to you, and your thrice Illuſtrious Family, that inſtigate you to theſe prepoſterous courſes, which common experience, and the miſerable euent of preſent affaires, ſufficiently teſtifie. We therefore in all humble affection beſeech your Maieſtie, that conformable to the truſt you repoſe in vs, hauing peruſed theſe Letters to take them in good part, and according to the Lawes, to the Inhabitants both of the one and other Auſtria, ratifying thoſe Priuiledges which they haue dearely bought, you will permit them the free exerciſe of the Confeſſion of Ausburge, not putting hereafter their Conſciences to the Rack. And ſo relying on this Confirmation, as a member, and Elector of the Sacred Empire, beyond all comparison,

we did more truely labour your owne, and the greatnes of your Family, then the whole bodie of the Ieſuites, and their Followers; wherof ſufficient teſtimonie, hath beene giuen, during the ſixteene yeares of this Hungarian warre, and that your Illuſtrious Houſe, hath beene more ſincerely by vs affected then euer it either hath, or will be, by this peſtiferous Sect. Otherwiſe if you take this friendly aduertizement in good part, be ſure your Subiects will yeeld you abſolute obedience, neither ſparing their liues, nor goods, in your ſeruice; no wayes doubting of their fidelitie, or of any effect that can enſue. By this meanes you ſhall purchaſe immortall glorie, and endleſſe exaltations, both amongſt Strangers and the Princes of the Empire, obtayning further from God all bleſſings both of bodie, and ſoule; and the ſame God will daily amplifie you with new dignities, and moſt wiſhed euents. Contrariwiſe, if you ſuffer the Ieſuites and their Locuſts, ſo to abuſe your bountie and clemencie, (which will not ſincke into our perſwaſion:) Let it ſuffice, that we innocently proteſt, that all our reiterated Admonitions aymed at no other end, but to preuent the Houſe of Auſtria from thoſe perils and dangers which threaten it: and any vnexpected accidents falling out to the contrarie, we are exempted herein from fault & blame. And thus in ſincere equitie, we hope to be excuſed by God and Men: the which out of our affectionate

loue and zeale, wee did not thinke good to conceale from your Highneſſe.
            
               
                  
                     Dated the 6. of Octob. 1608. 
                  at Dreſden.
            
         
         
            To the Reader.
            THe late Elector of Saxonie, Chriſtian the ſecond by name, who was elder Brother to him that now poſſeſſeth the Electorſhip, and who in all times, held good correſpondence, and amitie, with Archduke Matthias, afterwardes King of Hungarie, and Bohemia, and not long ſince, late Emperour Defunct; ſeeing this good Prince much grieued, for the ill counſell and aduiſe, which hee had followed in the managing of his affaires, implicitely threatning himſelfe, and the Houſe of Auſtria, to loſe the ſaid Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungarie, with the Prouinces thereunto annexed; hee reſolued to write vnto Matthias this Letter in the Moneth of October, 1608. which is to ſay twelue yeares ſince: which being truly prophetical, in that which afterwards enſued; it hath beene thought of good importance, and ſufficiently deſeruing to bee tranſlated into Latine, French, and laſtly into Engliſh, for a Caueat and Inſtruction to all Princes, and States, that they neuer fall into the like inconuenience.
         
         
            
            To the Emperours moſt Sacred and Royall Maieſtie.
            
               Moſt gracious Lord:
            
            AT what time wee ſate in Counſell with our Princes and Nobilitie, moued by the vrgent occaſions of the renowned Kingdome of Hungarie, I did at once receiue one anſwer from your Maieſtie vnto both my Letters, ſent by the Illuſtrious Gentleman Stephen Haller; & as my Letters (occaſions ſo requiring) were two, ſo hauing obtained an anſwere which agreeable to the weight of the affaires conſiſted of two parts, the matter was maturely deliberated by the Counſell: and perceiuing preſent danger in delay, I would not deferre to ſollicite your Maieſtie the more earneſtly about the laſt declaration of your Highneſſe gracious pleaſure.
            And whereas I perceiue your Maieſtie doth ſimply and abſolutely vnderſtand my declaration of the truce, in this ſenſe; that during the time of League no ayde may be ſent by the Hungarians to the Bohemians, and the reſt of their Confederates: the retexing of which queſtion will much illuſtrate both parts of the preſent anſwere: your Royall Maieſtie may pleaſe to vnderſtand the whole courſe of the matter in this ſenſe and not otherwiſe.
            In the Polonian Aſſembly there haue beene

three contracts made with me only: and in thoſe, many tranſactions (and that for diuers reſpects) confirmed.
            Firſt, Truce and Conditions of Peace with your Imperiall Maieſtie.
            Secondly, with the Bohemians and the other Confederate Prouinces.
            Thirdly, with the Peeres and States of the Illuſtrions Kingdome of Hungarie.
            And I confeſſe, that I ſeemed in the opinion of many ſo entangled by that parley (contrarie almoſt and oppoſite in diuers paſſages vnto it ſelfe) that deſerued and promiſed equitie could not poſſibly bee obſerued towards both parties, but the one muſt either bee ſomething neglected or iniuried by me; which ſo ſiniſter conceit of mee that I may ſpeedily remooue from the mindes of men (eſpecially if your ſacred Maieſtie or Counſellors haue entertained it,) pleaſeth it you to be informed of the certaine truth and diuerſe concluſions.
            The Hungarian Nation hath confirmed a perpetuall league with the Bohemians: and we haue promiſed mutually by oath to liue and dye together in withſtanding all enemies: ſo as to make peace or warre with any, not aduertizing the other, is vnlawfull for either part. This agreement and couenant betwixt vs tooke place, when by notice giuen them, and their conſent, I ratified the peace which I now haue with your Maieſtie.

But ſince the ſecond Article, I being ſilent, doth oblige your Maieſtie expreſly to grant the ſame peace vpon demand, to our Complices and Confederates, the Bohemians and the other Prouinces, which you haue granted vs; and that your Maieſtie is bound to harken after my motions, which doe but ſeeke that the ceſſation of Armes vpon iuſt and equall conditions, ſhould bee on euery ſide granted; If I ſhall perceiue your Maieſtie to ſatisfie in no part this ſolemne proteſtation, but contrarily with renewed forces to ſound the alarme and put your Souldiers in Armes to ſuppreſſe vs: if I obſerue your Maieſtie, as daily complaints informe, contrary to the hope and expectation of all good men, to ſwerue alreadie (which be farre from you) from this agreement; who can bee ignorant that my ſelfe is no longer, neither the Hungarian Nation obliged to you? Nay, if wee aide not without delay our friends, whoſe protection we vndertake, we ſhall vnworthily bee accuſed, by them of diſloyaltie. I doe therefore abundantly ſatisfie the Bohemians and others, in ſoliciting your Maieſtie for their truce like our owne: which, if I obtayne of you as due by couenant, or if I diſcerne their ſuſpected and dangerous eſtate by vaine lingrings and delayes; neither your Maieſtie, nor any other ſhall euer accuſe mee or the Hungarian Nation of promiſe breaking, if wee finde our moſt bitter enemies, whom obligation tyed to league and peaceableneſſe.

Wherefore your Maieſtie is not otherwiſe to vnderſtand my declaration of the truce placed expreſſely in the ſecond Article, then the writing it ſelfe witneſſeth; that this our league with the Bohemians is not, neither can bee made ſimply common, as if together at the ſame time and in all kindes of league wee were tyed to each other. Neither are they ſo neglected and forſaken of vs that there is no profit procured vnto them by our confederacie. Moreouer I requiring it, and fauouring iuſt and equall conditions, your Maieſty is by couenant bound to grant like truce vnto them as to vs; which if you doe not, we are no further to contend in the matter with words and pen. Let truth ouer ſway all things. Since I labour and ſweate now the third time in ſolliciting your Maieſtie in our Confederates and Friends cauſe, and that with obteſtation.
            
               Thus much concerning the Intreaties had with your Maiestie and the Confederate Princes.
               COncerning the Articles concluded in the Conſultations paſt at Polonia, the diſtinction is manifeſt enough in them both of the truce confirmed with your Maieſtie, and the league eſtabliſhed and concluded by the Confederates. The inward adminiſtration and gouernment of the Subiects of the Kingdome, vntill the truce is

expired, or till the next following and proclaymed generall Aſſembly of State, howſoeuer preſcribed by the Princes and Lords, is (I ſuppoſe) ſo highly weighed that it ſhould not moleſt either your Maieſtie or others. Aſſuredly I thinke it fitter to giue place to ſo many complaints, and to mens diſturbed appetites in this ſtate of things, then hauing not yet laid hand vpon the toſſing bridle, diſcourage Subiects mindes a far off with too much ſecuritie; which hitherto, I confeſſe ingeniouſly, is ſo performed by your Maieſtie, that oppoſing by all means our ſtudies and endeuour, the induſtrie of the ſeditious hath more auailed (more is the griefe) then theirs whoſe labour is imployed in compoſing controuerſies. But I am ignorant being a ſtranger in that adminiſtration, where your Maieſties dignitie is impeached, or the libertie of the Kingdome ſo reſtrayned, ſince your Maieſtie in confirming the league did ſauourably conſent to my free and abſolute Gouernment. Neither for my part is it vrged, in what eſteeme and regard theſe preſent Articles and publike Conſtitutions are of, in thoſe places which belong to your Dominion But I ſee the preſcribers of thoſe Lawes doe indeuour to conforme my manner of Gouernment and Reigne to their owne pleaſure.
               From which it is manifeſt, that neither this adminiſtration according to the Articles, nor any thing elſe can violate the Peace and League with

your Maieſtie, and ſo with ſufficient diligence & plaineneſſe I haue declared the three concluſions. Neither at this time will I vndertake any thing beſides an earneſt ſolliciting, vrging and expecting of your Maieſties pleaſure and reſolution, concerning this my third and laſt, and moſt iuſt demand in behalfe of our Confederates. And whereas your Maieſtie deſigneth long time for the deliberating of this matter, and hath ſent vnto mee to intreat of it, doubtleſſe that cauſe will moue ſuſpicions in mens thoughts, not without ſome danger which cannot be remoued without certaine, reall, and deſired tydings of peace eſtabliſhed. God preſerue your Royall and Emperiall Maieſtie long, happie, and ſtudious of peace. Giuen in our free and Regall City Caſſouia, 15. Martij, 1620.
            
         
         
            A Letter written about the 18. of March, 1620. to the Illuſtrious Prince of Anhalt, by the renowned Prince of Hungary and Tranſiluania.
            
               Moſt Illuſtrious Prince and honored friend:
            
            NOtwithſtanding wee haue more diligently obſerued in the ternarie requeſt made to the Romane Emperour, on the behalfe of making League with the Confederates, how he conſtantly

determineth: and though wee ſhould expect his anſwere before our expedition of aide to the Confederate Lords, yet vnderſtanding to our great griefe the hoſtile proceedings of Caeſar and his partakers againſt them, wee thought by theſe preſents with all friendly ſpeed to ſignifie it vnto your Highneſſe, deſiring you would withdraw your forces, and not preſently, and hand to hand conflicting with the enemie hazard your Armie vntill this preſent day, our ſuccours which with deliberate counſell wee haue appointed for the Confederate Princes be ioyned with you. Yet in the interim, if Caeſars Armies ſhall make excurſion or ſpoyle in the Territories of Morauia, or Auſtria, or remouing his Tents ſhall pitch them in more fortified places, or ſhall ſeeme to hinder the meanes of procuring victuals and reliefe, wee deny becauſe of the diſtance of place that you are to depart vntill the comming of our Forces: in the ſpeedie furniſhing & diſpatching of whom we will vſe on our parts all diligence, to the end their ſpeedie arriuing may abundantly recompence delay. Which thing we thought fit not to conceale from your Illuſtrious Perſon: but recommending vnto you our ſincere endeuours, do wiſh the happie ſucceſſe and fortune of theſe attempts.
            
               From Caſſouia, 17. March 1620.
               
               
                  Your Highneſſe ſincere friend in all Offices, Simon Pectius, Chancellor to the Chriſtian Prince Gabriel.
            
         
         
            
            A Letter written the 19. of March 1620. To the illuſtrious Chriſtian Prince of Anhalt, by the renowned Gabriel, Prince of Hungary and Tranſiluania.
            
               Illuſtrious Prince and noble friend:
            
            WE vnderſtand by both your Letters ſent vnto vs, not only the vnfriendly but alſo hoſtile intentions of Caeſar towards vs: not without great admiration and griefe. Which thing happening contrarie to our hope and opinion, he may not maruell if in deferring our aides longer then neceſſity and our owne deſires require, we prouide for our ſelues. For hauing made ſuch League with Ferdinand, as hee was to grant the like vpon demand to our Friends and Confederates, it appeareth by the laſt Letters ſent by Caeſar, and alſo by the incloſed, in what manner wee haue ſollicited and vrged the granting thereof in Caeſars Court. Perceiuing therefore Caeſars ſo manifeſt hoſtilitie, and the truce to be broken and violated by him, and that hee hath not ſatisfied the agrements betwixt vs and him, wee will conuert by Gods helpe all our cogitations, ſtudies & forces to the aide of our Confederates, neither will wee make delay in an office ſo neceſſarie. Of which things by our Secretary (or Gentleman Vſher) we would more fully ſignifie vnto you. And

commending your Illuſtrious Lordſhip to the diuine protection, doe wiſh all felicitie againſt the common Enemie. Giuen in the free and kingly Citie Caſſouia, 16. March, 1620.
            
               Gabriel the Prince.
               
            
         
         
            A Letter written by the Prince of Tranſiluania, to the Duke of Bauare.
            
               Mightie Prince and Excellent friend:
            
            VVE doubt not but your Excellencie hath ſufficiently vnderſtood of the preſent troubles, and the ſucceſſe of them in the Noble Kingdome of Hungary: but concerning their cauſes and proper Reaſons, you haue not onely diuerſly and indirectly bin informed, but alſo our oppoſers haue delated vnto you vnmeet and vntrue rumours concerning both our purpoſes and perſon. Theſe we will in diſdaine paſſe by as the Fictions and Comments of giddie braines, rather then diſcouer them with tedious ambages. Your Grace ſhall now receiue the true deſcription of our deſignements. When as vnwittingly he preſſed the perſon of the moſt ſacred Emperour, and Kingly Maieſtie of Ferdinand, becauſe of the ancient perſecution of our Orthodox and ſound Religion, bearing it well in minde: So that

the Gouernment and Adminiſtration of his Maieſtie was not only ſuſpected but grudged at by all his Subiects, the couered and lurking fire in their minds beganne firſt in Bohemia to flame forth. Which in the beginning they might eaſily and with Clemencie (if they had ſo pleaſed) according to wiſedome and due office haue extinguiſhed, ere it had proceeded to ſuch combuſtion. But hauing now by many companies of people aggregated together from all the moſt remote parts of Europe, ſo ouer-ſpread and ouer-runne Bohemia & Morauia, that the Inhabitants were almoſt conſtrayned to ſurrender to the Enemie both life and goods, libertie and their Religion; they threatned with like tumultuous Armes and Forces, to inuade and oppreſſe preſently, publikely and reſolutely, Hungary and Tranſiluania, wee and the other Princes beeing vanquiſhed and ſurprized. Wherefore the Morauians and Bohemians with the Auſtrians and other Confederates, doe all of them proteſt vnto vs the perill of thoſe enſuing warres, and intreate vs by the right of our ancient league to ſuccour their afflicted and decaying State. Being therfore ſollicited by ſo many Kingdomes, and compelled by the authoritie of ancient league, we did (our condition ſo requiring) aide by counſell and approbation our Confederate friends: yet ſo as we determined neither to haue any forces of the Turke, neither to ſuppreſſe the Romane Catholikes,

or any other Religion, the Ieſuiticall Factionly excepted; but would maintayne the profeſſion of our Orthodoxe Faith, and free the liberties & impayred Eſtates of other Countries from violence and tyrannie. Wherefore our actions witneſſe that our intention hath bin no other hitherto▪ foraſmuch as we haue confirmed a league with his Imperiall and Royall Maieſtie in the Kingdome of Hungarie, ſo that hee would pleaſe after ſufficient demand to grant the ſame Articles to the Bohemians & the other our confederates, which wee haue not ceaſed by our Letters and Ambaſſages to ſolicite: to the intent the ruines of the Kingdomes, and the ſtreames of Chriſtian bloud might be diuerted. Moreouer, that Armes laid aſide, profitable intreaties and agreements might take place, and ſuch broyles might ceaſe▪ & peace bee obtayned by the attending of both parts to moſt iuſt and equal conditions. Our ſelues deſire rather to manifeſt our wiſhes to deſerue well and highly of all Chriſtian Princes and Kingdomes by practice rather then by wordes and Letters. Amongſt the which alſo attributing very much to your princely equanimitie in theſe troubleſome times of Chriſtian Kingdomes, doe commend with ſingular confidence our owne indeuours, and our Confederates vnto you; the principall ſcope whereof, being no other then the eſtabliſhing of peace & tranquillity, & the reſtoring vnto liberty our Countries, Lawes, & Religion,

it is meet your Excellence do promote and further amongſt thoſe with whom you ſhall conuerſe, this ſo holy and commendable ſtudie; and doe ſincerely fauour the rights and equitie of our Confederates, and conceite vs moſt reſpectfull of you in all things. But if (which wee ſuppoſe not) his Imperiall Maieſtie ſhall altogether deny to our Confederates the conditions of Peace being ſolemnely demanded, or (not vnderſtanding firſt by way of peaceable in treaty the iuſt and equall cauſe of both parts) ſhall by his owne enterpriſe or by other conuert his power to the vtter ruine of thoſe Kingdomes, wee cannot in any caſe ſo forſake our friends as not to ſhew our ſelues incontinently enemies vnto them whoſoeuer ſhall ſo inuade them and breake the Truce. Which thing being vnfit to be done among Chriſtians, ſo it behooueth your Highneſſe to prouide for the concord of Chriſtian Kingdomes rather then fauour wars and hoſtile enmities. Concerning all which we deſire to know your Highnes pleaſure and ſentence. We doe wiſh vnto your Excellence vnfainedly all proſperitie. Giuen in our Towne, Rima Zombath, 29. Ianuary 1620.
            
               
                  Your Excellencies aſſured, Gabriel the Prince.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   